This is an by copyright after embargo allowed publisher’s PDF of an article published in Geese , M . , Loureiro , J . J . , Bear , J . E . , Wehland , J . , Gertler , F . B . , Sechi , A . S . Contribution of Ena / VASP proteins to intracellular motility of Listeria requires phosphorylation and proline - rich core but not F - actin binding or multimerization ( 2002 ) Molecular Biology of the Cell , 13 ( 7 ) , pp . 2383 - 2396 . Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 13 , 2383 – 2396 , July 2002 Contribution of Ena / VASP Proteins to Intracellular Motility of Listeria Requires Phosphorylation and Proline - rich Core but Not F - Actin Binding or Multimerization Marcus Geese , * Joseph J . Loureiro , † James E . Bear , † Ju¨rgen Wehland , * Frank B . Gertler , † and Antonio S . Sechi * ‡ * Department of Cell Biology , Gesellschaft fu¨r Biotechnologische Forschung , D - 38124 Braunschweig , Germany ; and † Department of Biology , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge , Massachusetts 02139 Submitted January 30 , 2002 ; Revised March 11 , 2002 ; Accepted March 25 , 2002 Monitoring Editor : David Drubin The Listeria model system has been essential for the identiﬁcation and characterization of key regulators of the actin cytoskeleton such as the Arp2 / 3 complex and Ena / vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) proteins . Although the role of Ena / VASP proteins in Listeria motility has been extensively studied , little is known about the contributions of their domains and phosphor - ylation state to bacterial motility . To address these issues , we have generated a panel of Ena / VASP mutants and , upon expression in Ena / VASP - deﬁcient cells , evaluated their contribution to Ena / VASP function in Listeria motility . The proline - rich region , the putative G - actin binding site , and the Ser / Thr phosphorylation of Ena / VASP proteins are all required for efﬁcient Listeria motility . Surprisingly , the interaction of Ena / VASP proteins with F - actin and their potential ability to form multimers are both dispensable for their involvement in this process . Our data suggest that Ena / VASP proteins contribute to Listeria motility by regulating both the nucleation and elongation of actin ﬁlaments at the bacterial surface . INTRODUCTION A crucial step in the life cycle of intracellular pathogens such as the Gram positive bacterium Listeria monocytogenes is their ability to recruit components from the host actin cytoskele - ton to their surface . These components are then rearranged into phase - dense actin comet tails that are required for the intracellular motility of these parasites and confer on them the ability to directly invade neighboring cells . Because these pathogens use key cytoskeletal components that are essen - tial for actin - based processes such as cell motility , they have inadvertently provided us with a powerful model system to study the molecular mechanisms that control the dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton ( Cossart and Bierne , 2001 ; Frisch - knecht and Way , 2001 ) . L . monocytogenes ( simply referred to as Listeria in the fol - lowing sections of the text ) subvert the host cell actin cy - toskeleton through the expression of a single virulence fac - tor , the ActA protein ( Domann et al . , 1992 ; Kocks et al . , 1992 ) . ActA harbors three major regions that are required for its interaction with cytoskeletal proteins : an amino - terminal actin monomer - binding site , an adjacent positively charged motif , and a central proline - rich region . The positively charged motif binds to , and activates the Arp2 / 3 complex , a cytoskeletal component that can nucleate actin ﬁlaments and is essential for bacterial motility ( May et al . , 1999 ; Pistor et al . , 2000 ; Skoble et al . , 2000 , 2001 ; Zalevsky et al . , 2001 ) . The G - actin – binding site is not required for intracellular bacte - rial motility , although it plays a role in the Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin ﬁlament nucleation in vitro ( Pistor et al . , 2000 ; Skoble et al . , 2000 , 2001 ) . The central proline - rich domain , which in - cludes three to four copies of the E / DFPPPPXD / E motif ( Pistor et al . , 1995 ; Smith et al . , 1996 ; Niebuhr et al . , 1997 ) , binds to proteins of the Ena / VASP family ( Pistor et al . , 1995 ; Smith et al . , 1996 ; Niebuhr et al . , 1997 ; Machner et al . , 2001 ) , which includes the mammalian proteins vasodilator - stimu - lated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) , mammalian Enabled ( Mena ) , Ena - VASP - like ( EVL ) , and the Drosophila protein Ena ( Gertler et al . , 1990 , 1996 ; Halbrugge et al . , 1990 ) . Several lines of evidence support the notion that Ena / VASP proteins are key regulators of the dynamics of the Article published online ahead of print . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 . 1091 / mbc . E02 – 01 – 0058 . Article and publication date are at www . molbi - olcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E02 – 01 – 0058 . ‡ Corresponding author . E - mail address : ase @ gbf . de . © 2002 by The American Society for Cell Biology 2383 actin cytoskeleton . They associate with the surface of motile Listeria in an asymmetric manner ( Chakraborty et al . , 1995 ; Gertler et al . , 1996 ) and are necessary for efﬁcient Listeria motility in both infected cells and cell - free extracts ( Smith et al . , 1996 ; Niebuhr et al . , 1997 ; Laurent et al . , 1999 ; Loisel et al . , 1999 ) . Ena / VASP proteins localize at subcellular regions where remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton takes place , such as the front of spreading lamellipodia in motile cells ( Rottner et al . , 1999 ) , tips of growth cone ﬁlopodia , focal adhesions , and epithelial cell - cell junctions ( Reinhard et al . , 1992 ; Gertler et al . , 1996 ; Lanier et al . , 1999 ; Vasioukhin et al . , 2000 ) . In hematopoietic systems , Ena / VASP proteins localize at the immunological synapse in Jurkat T cells and at phagocytic cups during Fc (cid:1) receptor - mediated phagocytosis ( Krause et al . , 2000 ; Castellano et al . , 2001 ; Coppolino et al . , 2001 ) , where they colocalize with the Ena / VASP - binding protein Fyb / SLAP ( Krause et al . , 2000 ; Coppolino et al . , 2001 ) . In both systems , the displacement of Ena / VASP proteins from these sites inhibits the remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton that accompanies both the formation of immunological synapses and phagocytic cups , suggesting that they are essential for these processes ( Krause et al . , 2000 ; Coppolino et al . , 2001 ) . Finally , experiments with Ena / VASP - deﬁcient ﬁbroblasts and Rat2 cells in which Ena / VASP proteins were neutral - ized indicate that these proteins negatively inﬂuence ran - dom cell motility ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) . In addition , in vitro they stimulate actin polymerization by shortening the lag phase of actin ﬁlament formation ( Laurent et al . , 1999 ; Harbeck et al . 2000 ; Lambrechts et al . , 2000 ) . Ena / VASP proteins are characterized by a common tri - partite structure . Their N - terminal region , the EVH1 do - main , interacts with the motif E / DFPPPPXD / E , which is present in ActA and in the cytoskeletal proteins vinculin , zyxin , palladin , and Fyb / SLAP ( Brindle et al . , 1996 ; Niebuhr et al . , 1997 ; Carl et al . , 1999 ; Drees et al . , 2000 ; Krause et al . , 2000 ; Mykkanen et al . , 2001 ) . The central domain of the Ena / VASP proteins harbors a proline - rich region that binds to proﬁlin and , in addition , to SH3 and WW domains ( Re - inhard et al . , 1995 ; Gertler et al . , 1996 ; Ermekova et al . , 1997 ) . The C terminus of Ena / VASP proteins binds to F - actin in vitro and is thought to mediate the multimerization of these proteins ( Bachmann et al . , 1999 ) . The EVH1 domain is required for targeting Ena / VASP proteins to Listeria surface as well as to focal adhesions ( Gertler et al . , 1996 ; Niebuhr et al . , 1997 ; Carl et al . , 1999 ) . In contrast , little is known about the functions of the other domains and whether the phosphorylation state of Ena / VASP proteins plays a role in bacterial motility . To address these points , we have generated several Mena and VASP mutants that either lack one of these domains or carry mu - tated phosphorylation sites . We expressed these mutants in Ena / VASP - deﬁcient cells and analyzed their contribution to Listeria motility . In a parallel study , the ability of Mena mutants to rescue normal motile properties of this cell line was also evaluated ( Loureiro et al . , 2002 ) . Our results clearly indicate that the interaction of Ena / VASP proteins with F - actin and their potential ability to form multimers are both dispensable for their function in actin - based Listeria move - ment , whereas the proline - rich region , the putative G - actin binding site , and the Ser / Thr phosphorylation of Ena / VASP proteins are required for efﬁcient Listeria motility . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cloning of VASP , Mena , and Proﬁlin Constructs The cloning of all Mena constructs is described in Loureiro et al . ( 2002 ) . Enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein ( EGFP ) - tagged full - length VASP ( Carl et al . , 1999 ) was cloned into the pMSCV vector after introducing Eco RI and Cla I restriction sites by polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) by using the following primers : forward , CG - GAATTCGCCACCATGGTGAGCAAGGGC ; and reverse , GCATC - GATTCAGGGAGAACCCCGCTTCCTCAG . Mutagenesis of the VASP phosphorylation sites S157 , S239 , and T278 was done using the QuickChange site - directed mutagenesis kit ( Stratagene , La Jolla , CA ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . The following primers were used ( mutated codons are underlined ) : pMSCV (cid:1) EGFP - VASP AST ( S157A ) , forward , GCACATAGAGCGCCGGGTCGCCAATGCAGGAGGC ; and re - verse , GCCTCCTGCATTGGCGACCCGGCGCTCTATGTGC ; pMSCV (cid:1) EGFP - VASP DST ( S157D ) , forward , CATAGAGCGC - CGGGTCGACAATGCAGGAGGCC ; and reverse , GGCCTCCTG - CATTGTCGACCCGGCGCTCTATG ; pMSCV (cid:1) EGFP - VASP SAT ( S239A ) , forward , CTCAGGAAAGTCGCCAAGCAGGAGGAG - GCC ; and reverse , GGCCTCCTCCTGCTTGGCGACTTTCCT - GAG ; pMSCV (cid:1) EGFP - VASP SDT ( S239D ) , forward , CTCAG - GAAAGTCGACAAGCAGGAGGAGGCC ; and reverse , GGCCT - CCTCCTGCTTGTCGACTTTCCTGAG ; pMSCV (cid:1) EGFP - VASP SSA ( T278A ) , forward , GGAGAAGGAAAGCCGCGCAAGTT - GGGGAGAAAAC ; and reverse , GTTTTCTCCCCAACTTGCG - CGGCTTTCCTTCTCC ; and pMSCV (cid:1) EGFP - VASP SSD ( T278D ) , forward , GGAGAAGGAAAGCCGACCAAGTTGGGGAGAAA - AC ; and reverse , GTTTTCTCCCCAACTTGGTCGGCTTTCCTTCTCC . EGFP - VASP constructs harboring mutations of both S157 and S239 were generated as follows . EGFP - VASP constructs mutated at S157 or S239 were excised from the pMSCV vector , digested with Pst I , and recloned into the pMSCV vector to obtain the desired double mutations . The triple phosphorylation mutants S157A / S239A / T278A and S157D / S239D / T278D were generated from the corresponding dou - ble phosphorylation mutants by site - directed mutagenesis of T278 . Generation of VASP deletion mutants was done using the over - lap - extension PCR method using the following primers . First PCR reaction ( internal primers ; parts of the primers that do not hybridize are underlined ) : VASP (cid:2) GP 5 ( (cid:2) 162 – 186 ) , forward , CTCCAATG - CAGGAGGCGGTTTGCCCCCTTCG ; and reverse , CGAAGGG - GGCAAACCGCCTCCTGCATTGGAG ; VASP (cid:2) PRR ( (cid:2) 118 – 122 , 162 – 186 , 204 – 209 ) , forward , GTTGGAAGGAGGTGGGGC - ACTTCCCACCTGG ; and reverse , CCAGGTGGGAAGTGCCC - CACCTCCTTCCAAC ; forward , GGAGCAGGGGGAGGACTC - CCGGCAGCACAG ; and reverse , CTGTGCTGCCGGGAGTCCT - CCCCCTGCTCC ( to generate this mutant we used VASP (cid:2) GP 5 as the template ) ; VASP (cid:2) FAB ( (cid:2) 259 – 277 ) , forward , GAGAGTGGTC - GAAGCACGCAAGTTGGGGAG ; and reverse , CTCCCCAACTTGCGT - GCTTCGACCACTCTC ; and VASP (cid:2) Coco ( (cid:2) 352 – 373 ) , forward , GT - GAAACAGGAGCTTCTGAGGAAGCGGGG ; and reverse , CCCCGCT - TCCTCAGAAGCTCCTGTTTCAC . First PCR reaction ( external primers ; used for all deletion mu - tants ) was as follows : forward , GCTGTACAAGTCCGGCCGGACT - CAGATCTC ; and reverse , GTGGGGTCTTTCATTCCCCCCTTTT - TCTGG . Second PCR reaction was as follows : forward , GCTCAAGCT - TAGCAGCCATGAGCGAGACGG ; and reverse , CTAAATAAAA - TCTTTTATTTTATCGATTCAGG . All VASP deletion mutants were cloned into the pMSCV vector by using Hin dIII and Cla I . The correct molecular size of all mutants was veriﬁed by Western blotting after staining with a monoclonal antibody against green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) . Cyan ﬂuorescent protein ( CFP ) - tagged wild - type VASP and VASP - (cid:2) PRR and Proﬁlin II - yellow ﬂuorescent protein ( YFP ) were generated as follows . Enhanced cyan ﬂuorescent protein ( ECFP ) was ampliﬁed using the following primers : forward , CGGAAT - M . Geese et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2384 TCACCATGGTGAGCAAGGGCGAGG ; and reverse , TTC - GAAGCTTTGAGCTCGAGATCTGAGTCCG by using pECFP - C1 ( CLONTECH , Palo Alto , CA ) as the template . The PCR product was then digested with Eco RI and Hin dIII and cloned into the same restriction sites of pMSCV (cid:1) EGFP - VASP and pMSCV (cid:1) EGFP - VASP (cid:2) PRR . To generate proﬁlin II - YFP , we ﬁrst ampliﬁed proﬁlin II - GFP by using the following primers : forward , ACGCGGCCGCCCTTCCAT - GGCCGGTTGGCAGAGCTACG ; and reverse , CGCAAGCTTT - TACTTGTACAGCTCGTCCATGCC and proﬁlin II - EGFP as the template . The PCR product was then digested with Not I and Hin dIII and cloned into the same restriction sites of pML2X . pML2X (cid:1) proﬁlin II - EYFP was obtained after ampliﬁcation of EYFP ( forward primer , CCGGGATCCACCGGTCGCCACCATGGT - GAGC ; and reverse primer , CGCGGAAGCTTTACTTGTA - CAGCTCGTCCATGC ; template pEYFP - N1 ; CLONTECH ) , diges - tion with Bam HI and Hin dIII , and cloning into the same restriction sites of pML2X (cid:1) proﬁlin II - EGFP . Bacterial Culture The wild - type weakly hemolytic L . monocytogenes strain EGD ( sero - type 1 / 2 ) and its isogenic Listeria mutants ActA5 and ActA12 ( Domann et al . 1992 ; Niebuhr et al . , 1997 ; Pistor et al . , 2000 ) were grown in brain heart infusion broth ( Difco , Detroit , MI ) at 37°C with agitation . Cell Culture and Infection MV D7 cells and G7 mouse ﬁbroblasts were grown in DMEM sup - plemented with 15 % fetal calf serum , 2 mM l - glutamine , and 50 U / ml mouse interferon - (cid:1) at 32°C in the presence of 5 % CO 2 . All media and supplements were obtained from Invitrogen ( Carlsbad , CA ) . Infection of MV D7 cells with L . monocytogenes was done accord - ing to Sechi et al . ( 1997 ) by using a ﬁnal bacterial concentration of 10 9 – 10 10 colony - forming units / ml and an incubation time for bac - terial entry of 90 min at 37°C . Cell Transfection and Sorting MV D7 cells were transfected using a retroviral transfection system . Brieﬂy , pMSCV plasmids harboring the EGFP - VASP constructs and the helper plasmid pCL - Eco ( Imgenex , San Diego , CA ) were intro - duced into BOSC23 cells by using a calcium phosphate transfection procedure . Two days later , the cell medium containing the retrovi - ral particles released by the BOSC23 cells was collected and used to transfect MV D7 cells . Afterward , MV D7 cells were sorted according to low , medium , and high levels of EGFP expression using a ﬂuo - rescence - activated cell sorting ( FACS ) sorter ( MoFlo ; Cytomation , Ft . Collins , CO ) . After cell thawing , the correct expression levels of all GFP - tagged constructs were conﬁrmed using an FACS Calibur device ( BD Biosciences , San Jose , CA ) . Immunoﬂuorescence Microscopy Four hours after the beginning of the infection , cells were ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde in cytoskeleton buffer ( 10 mM MES , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM EGTA , 5 mM glucose , and 5 mM MgCl 2 , pH 6 . 1 ) for 20 min at room temperature and then extracted with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in cytoskeleton buffer for 1 min at room temperature . Bacteria were labeled with the polyclonal antibody K52 followed by Alexa 488 - conjugated goat anti - rabbit IgG ( Dianova , Hamburg , Germany ) . The actin cytoskeleton was labeled with Alexa 594 - conjugated phalloi - din ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) . Coverslips were mounted in Prolong ( Molecular Probes ) . Fluorescence Video Microscopy For ﬂuorescence video microscopy , cells were plated onto 40 - mm round coverslips . Four hours after beginning the infection , cover - slips carrying infected cells were mounted in a Focht Chamber System ( FCS2 ; Bioptechs , Butler , PA ) . An objective heater ( Bioptechs ) was used to eliminate the temperature gradient between chamber and objective . The cells were observed by phase contrast or epiﬂuorescence with an Axiovert 135 TV microscope ( Carl Zeiss , Thornwood , NY ) equipped with a Plan - Apochromat 100 (cid:3) / 1 . 40 numerical aperture oil immersion objective in combination with 1 . 6 (cid:3) or 2 . 5 (cid:3) optovar optics . Images were recorded with a cooled , back - illuminated charge - coupled device camera ( TE / CCD - 1000 TKB ; Princeton Instruments , Trenton , NJ ) driven by IPLab Spectrum software ( Scanalytics , Fairfax , VA ) . Digital handling of the images was done using IPLab Spectrum and Adobe Photoshop 5 . 0 ( Adobe Systems , Mountain View , CA ) . Analysis of Bacterial Speed All motile bacteria within a single cell were scored according to the following criteria : 1 ) they did not interact with other motile or stationary bacteria ; 2 ) they never stopped or started to move during the observation period ; and 3 ) they did not move within cellular extensions ( pseudopodia ) . Paths of motile bacteria ( observed in at least 20 infected cells ; 3 independent experiments ) were generated after marking the bacterial poles proximal to the actin tails using the Dynamic Imaging Analysis system ( Solltech , Oakdale , IA ) . To smooth out sudden speed oscillations , the instantaneous speed of the bacteria was calculated according to the central difference method . Analysis of the bacterial speed was done using MiniTab 10 . 5 ( MiniTab , State College , PA ) and DeltaGraph 3 . 5 ( Delta Point , SSPS Inc . , Chicago , IL ) . Because the measured values of Listeria speed were not normally distributed as determined using the Anderson - Darling test , we analyzed differences in bacterial speed using the Mann - Whitney nonparametric U test and rejected the null hypothesis ( the two groups have the same median value , i . e . , they are not different ) when p (cid:4) 0 . 05 . RESULTS Motility of Listeria monocytogenes Is Impaired in MV D7 Fibroblasts An essential prerequisite for studying the function of Ena / VASP protein domains in Listeria motility is the availability of a cell line that does not express any of the known Ena / VASP proteins to avoid any interference with the function of the ectopically expressed Mena and VASP mutants . We have recently isolated one clonal cell line ( MV D7 ﬁbroblasts ) from mena / vasp - null mouse embryos , which does not express de - tectable levels of EVL ( Bear et al . , 2000 ) . To test whether MV D7 cells are suitable for studying the intracellular motility of Listeria , we analyzed these cells after infection with the wild - type strain EGD of L . monocytogenes . Immunoﬂuorescence microscopy revealed that , in all cells analyzed , Listeria induced the formation of very short actin comet tails ( Figure 1A ) . To verify whether the formation of such short tails was due to the lack of Ena / VASP proteins , we infected a ﬁbroblast cell line ( G7 cells ; Lommel et al . , 2001 ) , which , like MV D7 ﬁbroblasts , was immortalized with a temperature - sensitive version of the simian virus 40 large - T antigen and grown under the same culture condi - tions ( see MATERIALS AND METHODS ) . In G7 mouse ﬁbroblasts , which express Ena / VASP proteins ( our unpub - lished data ) , wild - type Listeria were associated with normal actin tails ( Figure 1C ) . The same result was obtained using cell lines such as PtK2 and HeLa ( our unpublished data ) . Overall , these observations suggest that the formation of Ena / VASP Domains in Listeria Motility Vol . 13 , July 2002 2385 short tails in MV D7 is due to the deﬁciency in Ena / VASP proteins . To corroborate this result , we infected both MV D7 cells and G7 cells with the Listeria mutant (cid:2) 5 . This mutant ex - presses on its surface a mutated version of ActA that lacks the central proline - rich region and is , as a consequence , unable to interact with Ena / VASP proteins and therefore leads to the formation of short actin tails ( Niebuhr et al . , 1997 ) . As expected , Listeria (cid:2) 5 was associated with short actin tails in both normal G7 ﬁbroblasts and Ena / VASP - deﬁcient ﬁbroblasts ( Figure 1 , B and D ) . The visual impression that the intracellular motility of Listeria is impaired in MV D7 cells was further conﬁrmed by video microscopy . In particular , the average speed of wild - type Listeria in MV D7 cells was comparable with that of the Listeria mutant (cid:2) 5 in the same cell line ( Figure 2D ) and was 5 – 10 times lower than their average speed measured in G7 ﬁbroblasts and other cell lines ( our unpublished data ; Niebuhr et al . , 1997 ) . Thus , MV D7 cells represent a suitable system for analyzing the contribution of Ena / VASP protein domains to Listeria motility . Efﬁcient Motility of Listeria in MV D7 Cells Is Rescued by Full - Length Ena / VASP Proteins in a Concentration - dependent Manner Because the impaired movement of Listeria in MV D7 cells seems to be due to the lack of Ena / VASP proteins , we reasoned that normal bacterial motility could be rescued upon expression of Ena / VASP proteins . We therefore in - fected MV D7 cells with a retrovirus that drives the expres - sion of GFP - tagged full - length Mena or VASP and sorted them by FACS into three populations expressing low , me - dium , and high levels of the fusion proteins according to the intensity of GFP ﬂuorescence signal ( Figure 2A ) . The relative expression levels of GFP - Mena and GFP - VASP corre - sponded to 35 , 71 , and 100 % for the low , medium , and high populations , respectively , as calculated after setting the av - erage intensity of the high population to 100 % . These fusion proteins properly localized to subcellular regions in MV D7 cells ( our unpublished data ; Loureiro et al . , 2002 ) and at the surface of both nonmotile and motile bac - teria ( Figure 2 , B (cid:5) and C (cid:5) ) . Moreover , in MV D7 ﬁbroblasts expressing high levels of GFP - Mena or GFP - VASP Listeria induced the formation of normal actin tails that were indis - tinguishable from those induced by these bacteria in G7 cells ( Figure 2 , B and C ; compare with Figure 1C ) . We then analyzed the bacterial movement in MV D7 cells expressing low - to - high levels of the GFP fusion proteins by using video microscopy . As shown in Figure 2D , the en - hancement of Listeria motility directly correlated with the increase in the cellular levels of the ectopically expressed Ena / VASP proteins ( Figure 2D ) . The expression of high levels of GFP - Mena or GFP - VASP rescued Listeria motility equally well ( Figure 2D ) , suggesting that Mena and VASP are interchangeable in this process . Moreover , the average speed of Listeria in MV D7 ﬁbroblasts expressing high levels Figure 1 . Motility of L . monocyto - genes is impaired in MV D7 cells . MV D7 ﬁbroblasts ( A and B ) and G7 mouse ﬁbroblasts ( C and D ) were in - fected with wild - type Listeria ( A and C ) or the Listeria mutant (cid:2) 5 ( B and D ) , ﬁxed , and stained with antibodies against the bacteria ( red ) and ﬂuores - cent phalloidin ( green ) . In G7 mouse ﬁbroblasts wild - type Listeria induced the formation of long actin tails ( ar - rows in C ) . In contrast , the actin tails induced by these bacteria in MV D7 cells were much shorter ( arrows in A ) and closely resembled those induced by the Listeria mutant (cid:2) 5 in both cell types ( arrows in B and D ) . Bar , 2 (cid:2) m . M . Geese et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2386 of GFP - tagged Mena and VASP was similar to that mea - sured in G7 ﬁbroblasts ( our unpublished data ) . The rescue of Listeria motility in MV D7 cells clearly de - pends on the expression of Ena / VASP proteins as indicated by the observation that the speed of the Listeria mutant (cid:2) 5 in MV D7 cells expressing high levels of GFP - Mena was com - parable with its speed measured in G7 cells ( Figure 2D ; our unpublished data ) . However , despite the fact that this Liste - ria mutant is unable to recruit Ena / VASP proteins at its surface , its speed in MV D7 cells expressing high levels of GFP - Mena was signiﬁcantly higher than the speed of wild - type Listeria in the parental Ena / VASP - deﬁcient cells ( Mann - Whitney U test ; p (cid:4) 0 . 05 ; wild type , n (cid:6) 31 ; (cid:2) 5 , n (cid:6) 28 ) . Because GFP - tagged Ena / VASP proteins localized at the short actin tails induced by the Listeria mutant (cid:2) 5 ( Figure 2 , E and E (cid:5) ) , it may be that cytoplasmic Ena / VASP proteins can inﬂuence bacterial motility via an EVH1 - independent recruitment to actin tails , perhaps mediated by their ability to interact with actin ﬁlaments . Generation of Ena / VASP Mutants and Their Expression in MV D7 Cells Next , we generated a panel of GFP - tagged fusion proteins in which various domains and phosphorylation sites of Ena / VASP proteins were deleted or mutated , respectively ( Fig - ure 3A ) . The introduction of the GFP moiety at the NH 2 terminus in all these fusion proteins did not affect the ability of the EVH1 domain to interact with ActA as indicated by their proper localization at the Listeria surface ( Figure 2 , B (cid:5) and C (cid:5) ; Carl et al . , 1999 ) . In addition , Western blot analysis showed that all GFP - tagged constructs migrated at the ex - pected molecular size and that they were not degraded when expressed in MV D7 cells ( Figure 3B ) , suggesting that neither the presence of GFP nor the deletions or point mu - tations grossly affected the protein stability . We cannot ex - clude , however , that these deletions or point mutations may affect the overall folding of the proteins . As noted above , normal intracellular Listeria motility can be rescued by expressing high levels of Ena / VASP proteins . We therefore evaluated the inﬂuence of these Ena / VASP mutants on Listeria motility in MV D7 cells that expressed high levels of these mutant proteins . To this end , MV D7 ﬁbroblasts transfected with Ena / VASP mutants were sorted by FACS by using MV D7 cells expressing high levels of the corresponding wild - type Ena / VASP protein as reference . As shown in Figure 3C , the overlap between the different pairs of FACS scans clearly indicated that the expression levels of all Ena / VASP mutants were similar to those of the nonmutated counterparts . Figure 2 ( cont ) . tails ( arrows in B and C ; compare with Figure 1 ) . ( D ) Box and whiskers plots of bacterial speed . Dot indicates the mean , line in the middle of the box indicates the median , top of the box indicates the 75th quartile , whereas the bottom of the box indicates the 25th quartile , and whiskers indicates the 10th and 90th percentiles , respec - tively . ( E – E (cid:5) ) GFP - tagged wild - type Mena and VASP localize at the actin tails induced by the Listeria mutant (cid:2) 5 . MV D7 cells expressing high levels of wild - type GFP - Mena were infected with Listeria (cid:2) 5 , ﬁxed , and stained with ﬂuorescent phalloidin . This Listeria mutant typically induced the formation of short actin tails ( arrowhead in E ) , which were robustly stained with GFP - Mena ( arrowhead in E (cid:5) ) . Bar ( for B – C (cid:5) and E – E (cid:5) ) , 2 (cid:2) m . Figure 2 . ( A ) FACS analysis of MV D7 cells expressing low ( yellow line ) , medium ( red line ) , and high ( light brown line ) levels of GFP - tagged Mena and VASP constructs . The black - ﬁlled area indicates the background ﬂuorescence of untransfected MV D7 cells . ( B – C (cid:5) ) The ex - pression of wild - type GFP - Mena and GFP - VASP rescues Listeria mo - tility in MV D7 cells in a concentration - dependent manner . MV D7 cells expressing high levels of wild - type GFP - Mena or GFP - VASP were infected with Listeria , ﬁxed , and stained with ﬂuorescent phalloidin . In these cells , Listeria recruited GFP - Mena and GFP - VASP at their surface ( arrowheads in B (cid:5) and C (cid:5) ) and induced the formation of normal actin Ena / VASP Domains in Listeria Motility Vol . 13 , July 2002 2387 Proline - rich Region of Ena / VASP Proteins Is Essential for Efﬁcient Listeria Motility A combination of biochemical , genetic , and cell biological approaches suggests that the interaction between the pro - line - rich region of Ena / VASP proteins and proﬁlin serves to recruit polymerization - competent actin monomers to sites of actin assembly ( Reinhard et al . , 1995 ; Smith et al . , 1996 ; Lanier et al . , 1999 ; Geese et al . , 2000 ) . To study the contribution of this region to Listeria motility , we expressed GFP - Mena (cid:2) PRR ( for proline - rich region ) , GFP - VASP (cid:2) GP 5 , and GFP - VASP (cid:2) PRR in MV D7 cells . The GFP - VASP (cid:2) GP 5 construct lacks the central GP 5 motifs that Figure 3 . ( A ) Schematic dia - gram of Mena and VASP con - structs . Deletions ( thick lines ) and phosphorylation sites are shown at the bottom and top of Mena and VASP cartoons , re - spectively . EVH1 , Ena - VASP ho - mology 1 ; PRR , proline - rich re - gion ; QRR , glutamine - rich region ; EVH2 , Ena - VASP ho - mology 2 . ( B ) Western blot anal - ysis of GFP - tagged Mena and VASP fusion proteins . Cell ly - sates of MV D7 cells expressing high levels of all Mena , and VASP constructs were resolved by SDS - PAGE , blotted , and probed with an anti - GFP mono - clonal antibody . Numbers on the left side of each blot represent molecular weight markers in kilodaltons . ( C ) Comparison be - tween the expression levels of GFP - tagged wild - type Mena and VASP and their mutated fusion proteins . MV D7 cells expressing high levels of wild - type GFP - Mena and GFP - VASP ( black - ﬁlled areas ) were compared with MV D7 cells expressing high lev - els of each of the GFP - tagged Mena and VASP constructs ( red lines ) by FACS . The overlapping between the black - ﬁlled areas and the red lines in each FACS scan indicates that all cellular populations are equivalent with respect to the expression levels of all Ena / VASP constructs . M . Geese et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2388 has been shown to bind to proﬁlin ( Kang et al . , 1997 ) , whereas the GFP - VASP (cid:2) PRR construct includes two addi - tional small deletions ( also characterized by a GP 5 motif ) ﬂaking the triple GP 5 sequence ( Figure 3A ) . As appraised by ﬂuorescence microscopy , wild - type Listeria were associated with short actin comet tails that were morphologically sim - ilar to those induced by these bacteria in the parental MV D7 cells ( Figure 4 , A – A (cid:7) ) . Moreover , video microscopy analysis showed that the speed of Listeria was greatly reduced in cells expressing GFP - Mena (cid:2) PRR and GFP - VASP (cid:2) PRR com - pared with the full - length counterparts ( Figure 4B ) . The deletion of the proline - rich stretches in the GP 5 motif in VASP also resulted in an intermediate but still signiﬁcant reduction of bacterial motility ( Mann - Whitney U test , p (cid:4) 0 . 05 ; GFP - VASP , n (cid:6) 128 ; GFP - VASP (cid:2) PRR , n (cid:6) 111 ) that was characterized by the formation of actin tails slightly longer than those induced by wild - type Listeria in cells ex - pressing Ena / VASP (cid:2) PRR mutants ( Figure 4 , A (cid:7) and B ) . Because the effect of GFP - Mena (cid:2) PRR and GFP - VASP (cid:2) PRR on Listeria motility may be due to their inability to bind proﬁlin , we cotransfected MV D7 cells with CFP - tagged wild - type VASP or VASP (cid:2) PRR and proﬁlin II - YFP , infected them with Listeria and analyzed their localization at the bacterial surface by ﬂuorescence microscopy . As expected , both CFP - tagged VASP constructs properly localized at the Listeria surface ( Figure 4 , C and D ) . In agreement with previous ﬁndings ( Geese et al . , 2000 ) , proﬁlin - YFP localized at the bacterial surface of motile , but not stationary Listeria in cells expressing full - length CFP - VASP ( Figure 4 , C and C (cid:5) ) , whereas in cells expressing CFP - VASP (cid:2) PRR , proﬁlin - YFP Figure 4 . Proline - rich region of Ena / VASP proteins is essential for efﬁcient Listeria motility . ( A – A (cid:7) ) MV D7 cells expressing high levels of GFP - Mena (cid:2) PRR , GFP - VASP (cid:2) GP 5 , or GFP - VASP (cid:2) PRR were infected with wild - type Listeria , ﬁxed , and stained with ﬂuorescent phalloidin . In cell lines expressing GFP - Mena (cid:2) PRR and GFP - VASP (cid:2) PRR Listeria induced the formation of very short actin tails ( arrowheads in A and A (cid:5) ) , which were morphologically similar to those induced by this bacterium in the parental MV D7 cells ( compare with Figure 1A ) , whereas Listeria actin tails were signiﬁcantly longer in cells expressing GFP - VASP (cid:2) GP 5 ( arrowheads in A (cid:7) ) . Bar , 2 (cid:2) m . ( A ) Box and whiskers plots of bacterial speed . ( C – D (cid:5) ) Deletion of the proline - rich region of Mena and VASP inhibits the targeting of proﬁlin to the Listeria surface . MV D7 cells were transfected with CFP - tagged wild - type VASP or VASP (cid:2) PRR and proﬁlin II - YFP and then infected with wild - type Listeria . In cells expressing CFP - VASP , proﬁlin colocalized with VASP at the surface of motile bacteria ( arrowheads in C and C (cid:5) ) but not stationary ones ( arrows in C and C (cid:5) ) . In contrast , in cells expressing CFP - VASP (cid:2) PRR , proﬁlin was absent from the surface of both stationary ( arrow in D (cid:5) ) and motile Listeria ( arrowhead in D (cid:5) ) . Bar , 1 (cid:2) m . Ena / VASP Domains in Listeria Motility Vol . 13 , July 2002 2389 could be detected neither around motile nor stationary bac - teria ( Figure 4 , D and D (cid:5) ) . Overall , these results clearly indicate that the proline - rich region of Ena / VASP proteins is essential for efﬁcient Listeria motility and that the deletion of the PRR correlated with a lack of proﬁlin recruitment at the bacterial surface . Deletion of Thymosin (cid:1) 4 - like - Motif of Mena Reduces Listeria Motility The deletion of the proline - rich region in Ena / VASP pro - teins did not cause a reduction in speed to the values mea - sured in the parental MV D7 cells ( Figure 4B ) , suggesting that Ena / VASP proteins play additional roles in Listeria motility other than recruiting proﬁlin – G - actin complexes at the bac - terial surface and that other regions of Ena / VASP proteins contribute to Listeria motility . Therefore , we analyzed the contribution of three regions contained in the EVH2 domain to this process . The amino - terminal part of the EVH2 domain of VASP and Mena harbors a motif that is similar to the G - actin - binding site KLKR found in thymosin (cid:3) 4 ( Gertler et al . , 1996 ; van Troys et al . , 1996 ) . Similar sequences are also found in the headpiece of the actin - binding proteins villin and dema - tin ( van Troys et al . , 1996 ) . In MV D7 cells expressing GFP - Mena (cid:2) TLM ( for thymosin (cid:3) 4 - like - motif ) Listeria moved sig - niﬁcantly slower ( Mann - Whitney U test , p (cid:4) 0 . 05 ; GFP - Mena , n (cid:6) 93 ; GFP - Mena (cid:2) TLM , n (cid:6) 73 ) than in cells expressing full - length GFP - Mena and induced the formation of short actin comet tails ( Figure 5 , A and B ) . Based on these results and on the observation that VASP rescues the ability of an ActA mutant , which lacks the G - actin – binding site , to support both the actin - nucleating activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex and the accumulation of actin at the Listeria surface ( Skoble et al . , 2001 ) , we speculated that the TLM motif sub - stitutes for the activity of the G - actin – binding site of ActA in these events . To test this hypothesis , we infected MV D7 cells and MV D7 cells expressing GFP - Mena or GFP - Mena (cid:2) TLM with wild - type bacteria or with a Listeria mutant that expresses a mutated version of ActA that lacks the G - actin – binding site ( (cid:2) 12 ; deletion spanning amino acids 68 – 109 ; Pistor et al . , 2000 ) . In all these cell lines , wild - type bacteria induced a normal accumulation of actin at their surface as judged after labeling with ﬂuorescent phalloidin . In contrast , the ability of the (cid:2) 12 mutant to induce a normal actin accumulation at the bacterial surface was impaired only in MV D7 cells and in cells expressing GFP - Mena (cid:2) TLM ( our unpublished data ) . The number of (cid:2) 12 bacteria associated with deﬁcient actin accumulation was higher than that of wild - type Listeria in MV D7 cells and in MV D7 cells expressing GFP - Mena (cid:2) TLM ( Table 1 , compare with MV D7 cells expressing GFP - Mena ) . Because Ena / VASP proteins may rescue the ability of the (cid:2) 12 mutant to induce actin accumulation at its surface also via a PRR - dependent recruitment of G - actin , we infected with this mutant MV D7 cells expressing GFP - Mena or GFP - Mena (cid:2) PRR . As shown in Table 1 , the deﬁcient actin accu - mulation at the surface of the (cid:2) 12 mutant was much less pronounced in MV D7 cells expressing GFP - Mena (cid:2) PRR , in - dicating that the effect observed was mainly due to the deletion of the TLM motif . Thus , these results suggest that the TLM motif is implicated in the regulation of actin ﬁla - ment nucleation at the bacterial surface . Deletion of F - Actin – binding Site of Ena / VASP Proteins Enhances Listeria Motility The EVH2 domain of Ena / VASP proteins has also been implicated in the interaction of this protein family with F - actin in vitro ( Bachmann et al . , 1999 ; Hu¨ttelmaier et al . , 1999 ; Harbeck et al . , 2000 ) . Moreover , Ena / VASP proteins stimulate actin polymerization by shortening the lag phase of actin ﬁlament formation , an effect that can be reversed by adding a peptide ( corresponding to amino acids 261 – 283 of EVL ) that has been shown to interact with F - actin in sedi - mentation assays ( Laurent et al . , 1999 ; Harbeck et al . , 2000 ; Lambrechts et al . , 2000 ) . To test whether the binding of Ena / VASP proteins to F - actin is required for Listeria motil - ity , we expressed GFP - Mena (cid:2) FAB ( for F - actin binding ) or GFP - VASP (cid:2) FAB in MV D7 cells . These fusion proteins did not cause morphological changes in actin comet tails , as appraised by ﬂuorescence microscopy ( Figure 6 , A and B ) . Unexpectedly , the speed of Listeria in MV D7 cells expressing these fusion proteins was signiﬁcantly higher than that of bacteria in MV D7 cells expressing full - length Ena / VASP Figure 5 . ( A ) Deletion of the thymosin (cid:3) 4 - like motif of Mena causes a signiﬁcant decrease of Listeria motility . MV D7 cells express - ing high levels of GFP - Mena (cid:2) TLM were infected with wild - type Listeria , ﬁxed , and stained with ﬂuorescent phalloidin . In these cells , Listeria induced the formation of short actin tails ( arrowheads ) . Bar , 2 (cid:2) m . ( B ) Box and whiskers plots of bacterial speed . M . Geese et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2390 proteins ( Figure 6C ; Mann - Whitney U test , p (cid:4) 0 . 05 ; GFP - Mena , n (cid:6) 93 ; GFP - Mena (cid:2) FAB , n (cid:6) 78 ; GFP - VASP , n (cid:6) 128 ; GFP - VASP (cid:2) FAB , n (cid:6) 85 ) , indicating that the interaction between Ena / VASP proteins and actin ﬁlaments is not re - quired for intracellular Listeria motility . A Coiled - Coil Motif in EVH2 Domain of Ena / VASP Proteins Is Not Required for Listeria Motility Various experimental approaches indicate that the most C - terminal 35 amino acids in the EVH2 domain , which is predicted to form coiled - coil structures , can mediate the formation of Ena / VASP multimers ( Haffner et al . , 1995 ; Ahern - Djamali et al . , 1998 ; Bachmann et al . , 1999 ; Carl et al . , 1999 ) . In the Listeria context , it has been hypothesized that the formation of Ena / VASP multimers at the bacterial sur - face increases the recruitment of proﬁlin – G - actin complexes and , as a consequence , Listeria motility ( Kang et al . , 1997 ) . In MV D7 cells expressing GFP - Mena (cid:2) Co - Co ( for coiled - coil ) and GFP - VASP (cid:2) Co - Co Listeria induced the formation of normal actin comet tails ( Figure 7 , A and B ) . The visual impression that Listeria motility is not grossly altered in the presence of Ena / VASP (cid:2) Co - Co proteins was conﬁrmed by video microscopy analysis . The average speed of the bacte - ria in cells expressing GFP - Mena (cid:2) Co - Co was not different from that measured in cells expressing full - length Mena ( Figure 7C ; Mann - Whitney U test , p (cid:6) 0 . 24 ; GFP - Mena , n (cid:6) 93 ; GFP - Mena (cid:2) Co - Co , n (cid:6) 90 ) , whereas Listeria moved at a higher average speed in MV D7 cells expressing GFP - VASP (cid:2) Co - Co ( Figure 7B ; Mann - Whitney U test , p (cid:4) 0 . 05 ; GFP - VASP , n (cid:6) 128 ; GFP - VASP (cid:2) Co - Co , n (cid:6) 85 ) . Thus , the formation of Ena / VASP multimers is not required for Liste - ria motility . Phosphorylation of Serine and Threonine Residues of Ena / VASP Proteins Increases Listeria Motility VASP and Mena harbor three ( S157 , S239 , and T278 ) and two ( S236 and S376 ) phosphorylation sites , respectively , that can be phosphorylated in a cAMP - and cGMP - dependent manner ( Halbrugge et al . , 1990 ) . In vitro , the phosphoryla - tion state of Ena / VASP proteins inﬂuences their ability to interact with F - actin and some SH3 - containing proteins ( Laurent et al . , 1999 ; Harbeck et al . , 2000 ; Lambrechts et al . , 2000 ) . To assess whether the phosphorylation of Ena / VASP pro - teins plays a role in Listeria motility , we mutated all phos - phorylation sites of VASP and Mena to alanine to block phosphorylation or to aspartic acid to mimic the constitu - tively phosphorylated forms of these proteins , respectively ( Figure 3A ) . None of these phosphorylation mutants grossly affected the formation of actin comet tails as judged by ﬂuorescence microscopy ( our unpublished data ) . Compared with MV D7 cells expressing wild - type GFP - Mena , GFP - Mena AA caused a slight but signiﬁcant reduction in Listeria motility , whereas the speed of the bacteria in MV D7 cells expressing GFP - Mena DD was signiﬁcantly increased ( Fig - ure 8A ; Mann - Whitney U test , p (cid:6) 0 . 04 for WT vs . AA , p (cid:4) 0 . 05 for WT vs . DD ; GFP - Mena , n (cid:6) 93 ; GFP - Mena , AA , n (cid:6) 67 ; GFP - Mena DD , n (cid:6) 72 ) . The slight reduction in Listeria speed is mainly due to the ﬁrst Ser 3 Ala mutation as indicated by the observation that the speed of Listeria in MV D7 cells expressing GFP - Mena AS is not different from that measured in cells transfected with GFP - Mena AA ( Fig - ure 8A ; Mann - Whitney U test , p (cid:6) 0 . 058 for AS vs . AA ; GFP - Mena AS , n (cid:6) 126 ; GFP - Mena , AA , n (cid:6) 67 ) . Moreover , the increase in bacterial speed caused by GFP - Mena DD seems to be mostly dependent on the second Ser 3 Asp mutation as suggested by observation that there is no sig - niﬁcant difference between Listeria motility measured in GFP - Mena WT and GFP - Mena DS ( Figure 8A ; Mann - Whit - ney U test , p (cid:8) 0 . 05 for WT vs . DS ; GFP - Mena , n (cid:6) 93 ; GFP - Mena DS , n (cid:6) 69 ) . The effect of similar mutations in VASP was slightly dif - ferent . In particular , in MV D7 cells expressing GFP - VASP AAA the average bacterial speed was comparable with that measured in cells expressing wild - type GFP - VASP . Con - versely , the expression of GFP - VASP DDD caused a signif - icant enhancement of Listeria motility ( Figure 8B ; Mann - Whitney U test , p (cid:6) 0 . 48 for WT vs . AAA , p (cid:4) 0 . 05 for WT vs . DDD ; GFP - VASP , n (cid:6) 128 ; GFP - VASP AAA , n (cid:6) 88 ; GFP - VASP DDD , n (cid:6) 92 ) . Because the ﬁrst two Ser 3 Asp mutations mainly cause the enhancement of Listeria motility , these residues seems to be critical for this process ( Figure 8B ) . DISCUSSION In this study we have characterized the contributions of four Ena / VASP protein domains to the intracellular motility of L . monocytogenes . In particular , we showed that the interaction of Ena / VASP proteins with F - actin and their potential abil - ity to form multimers are both dispensable for their function in actin - based Listeria movement , whereas the proline - rich region , the putative G - actin binding site and the Ser / Thr phosphorylation of Ena / VASP proteins contribute to efﬁ - cient Listeria motility . Table 1 . TLM motif contributes to the regulation of actin ﬁlament nucleation at the bacterial surface Wild type (cid:2) 12 % bacteria with deﬁcient actin accumulation / ( total bacteria ) % bacteria with deﬁcient actin accumulation / ( total bacteria ) MV D7 38 ( 125 ) 96 ( 91 ) MV D7 (cid:1) Mena WT 9 ( 47 ) 13 ( 52 ) MV D7 (cid:1) Mena (cid:2) TLM 11 ( 55 ) 81 ( 48 ) MV D7 (cid:1) Mena (cid:2) PRR 9 ( 68 ) 16 ( 67 ) Ena / VASP Domains in Listeria Motility Vol . 13 , July 2002 2391 Ena / VASP proteins were originally thought to regulate actin ﬁlament remodeling through their ability to interact with the G - actin – binding protein proﬁlin ( Reinhard et al . , 1995 ; Gertler et al . , 1996 ; Lambrechts et al . , 2000 ) . This notion is clearly supported by genetic studies , which suggest a physiological role for the interaction between Mena and proﬁlin during the actin - based process of neurulation Figure 6 . ( A and B ) Deletion of the F - actin – binding site of Mena and VASP increases Listeria motility . MV D7 cells expressing high levels of GFP - Mena (cid:2) FAB ( A ) or GFP - VASP (cid:2) FAB ( B ) were infected with wild - type Listeria , ﬁxed , and stained with ﬂuorescent phalloi - din . In both cases , Listeria induced the formation of actin tails ( arrows in A and B ) that were not distinguishable from those induced by the same bacterium in MV D7 cells expressing wild - type Ena / VASP proteins ( compare to Figure 2 ) . Bar , 2 (cid:2) m . ( C ) . Box and whiskers plots of bacterial speed . Figure 7 . ( A and B ) Potential multimerization of Ena / VASP pro - teins is not required for Listeria motility . MV D7 cells expressing high levels of GFP - Mena (cid:2) Co - Co ( A ) or GFP - VASP (cid:2) Co - Co ( B ) were infected with wild - type Listeria , ﬁxed , and stained with ﬂuorescent phalloidin . In both cell lines , the bacteria induced the formation of actin tails ( arrows in A and B ) that were not distinguishable from those induced by the same bacterium in MV D7 cells expressing wild - type Ena / VASP proteins ( compare to Figure 2 ) . Bar , 2 (cid:2) m . ( B ) Box and whiskers plots of bacterial speed . M . Geese et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2392 ( Lanier et al . , 1999 ) . Moreover , the injection of the proline - rich region of VASP into Listeria - and Shigella - infected cells causes the arrest of bacterial movement ( Zeile et al . , 1996 ; Kang et al . , 1997 ) , whereas a similar VASP peptide favors the disassociation of proﬁlin – G - actin complexes leading to the enhancement of nucleation and elongation of actin ﬁla - ments , in vitro ( Jonckheere et al . , 1999 ) . On the other hand , Ena / VASP proteins enhance Listeria motility in cell - free sys - tems in absence of proﬁlin ( Loisel et al . , 1999 ) , and Ena / VASP - proﬁlin interaction is not required for the function of this protein family in whole cell motility ( Loureiro et al . , 2002 ) . Thus , although this study demonstrates that the in - teraction between Ena / VASP proteins and proﬁlin at the Listeria surface is important for supporting the efﬁcient bac - terial motility , it is possible that the binding of Ena / VASP proteins to proﬁlin is not required for , or plays a minor role in , the contribution of these proteins to other actin - based processes . Although none of the known proteins that con - tain SH3 and WW domains has been involved in Listeria motility , at present we cannot rule out that the reduced bacterial motility we observed in cells expressing Ena / VASP (cid:2) PRR is in part due to the lack of recruitment of these proteins . Ena / VASP proteins harbor a short sequence that is similar to the G - actin – binding motif of the actin - sequestering mol - ecule thymosin (cid:3) 4 ( van Troys et al . , 1996 ) . Although a direct binding between G - actin and Ena / VASP proteins has not yet been demonstrated , we show that the deletion of this site in Mena causes a small but still signiﬁcant reduction in Listeria motility . It has recently been shown that VASP exerts a weak actin nucleating activity in vitro ( Harbeck et al . , 2000 ) , suggesting that the deletion of the putative G - actin – binding site in Mena could result in a decrease in actin ﬁlament formation . This possibility seems unlikely in light of many observations demonstrating that Listeria mutants that are not able to bind to the Arp2 / 3 complex , but are still fully competent for interacting with Ena / VASP proteins , cannot induce the formation of actin clouds at their surface ( Lasa et al . , 1995 , 1997 ; Pistor et al . , 1995 , 2000 ; Smith et al . , 1996 ; Skoble et al . , 2000 ) . Although Ena / VASP proteins are not able to nucleate actin , recent data suggest that they may support the nucleation activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex . In particular , Skoble et al . ( 2001 ) showed that VASP can rescue the ability to activate the Arp2 / 3 complex of an ActA mu - tant that lacks the G - actin – binding site , and suggested that the F - actin - binding site of VASP is required for this process . In contrast with their conclusion and based on our data showing that the deletion of the F - actin – binding site of Ena / VASP proteins does not affect Listeria motility and that the deletion of the TLM site clearly impairs actin accumula - tion at the bacterial surface , we suggest that Ena / VASP proteins may stimulate actin ﬁlament nucleation at the bac - terial surface by supplying actin monomers to the Arp2 / 3 complex . Our hypothesis is consistent with the observation that stimulators of the Arp2 / 3 complex such as WASp / Scar proteins require binding to G - actin to activate this complex , and that Ena / VASP proteins enhance Listeria motility in cell - free systems in the absence of proﬁlin ( Loisel et al . , 1999 ; Machesky et al . , 1999 ) . It will be important to characterize the function of the TLM motif in detail and test whether it actually binds G - actin . The EVH2 domain of Ena / VASP proteins has been impli - cated in the interaction of this protein family with F - actin in vitro ( Bachmann et al . , 1999 ; Hu¨ttelmaier et al . , 1999 ) . Kuo and McGrath ( 2000 ) have recently demonstrated that Listeria are tightly linked to their own actin tails raising the possi - bility that this tight interaction limits bacterial motility . Ac - cordingly , we show herein that the deletion of the FAB site in Ena / VASP proteins seems to remove this physical con - straint and thereby increase bacterial speed . In vitro , VASP seems to protect actin ﬁlaments from the actin - severing ac - tivity of gelsolin ( Bearer et al . , 2000 ) . In addition , gelsolin , which localizes at the interfaces between bacteria and actin tails , enhances Listeria motility when overexpressed or in - jected in ﬁbroblasts ( Laine et al . , 1998 ) . The conclusion that could be made from these results is that the deletion of the FAB region of Ena / VASP proteins makes actin ﬁlaments more susceptible to gelsolin’s action , resulting in higher bacterial speed . Laurent et al . ( 1999 ) reported that a GST - tagged EVH2 domain inhibits Listeria motility in platelets Figure 8 . ( A and B ) Phosphorylation of the serine and threonine residues of Mena ( A ) and VASP ( B ) increases Listeria motility . Box and whiskers plots of Listeria speed showing the inﬂuence of Mena and VASP phosphorylation state on bacterial motility . Ena / VASP Domains in Listeria Motility Vol . 13 , July 2002 2393 extracts concluding that the interaction between F - actin and Ena / VASP proteins is essential for this process . We believe , however , that their interpretation was more likely to arise by the interference with both binding activities of thymosin (cid:3) 4 - like motif and F - actin - binding site of endogenous VASP . Alternatively , other regions within the EVH2 domain of hitherto unknown function could also be responsible for such effect . The binding of Ena / VASP proteins to F - actin in vitro seems to be dependent on their phosphorylation state ( Lau - rent et al . , 1999 ; Harbeck et al . , 2000 ; Lambrechts et al . , 2000 ) . We have shown that deletion of the F - actin – binding site of Mena and VASP results in an enhancement of Listeria mo - tility . Similarly , the expression of Ena / VASP mutants that mimics the full phosphorylation state of these proteins in - creases bacterial speed . Thus , it is possible that the phos - phorylation of Ena / VASP proteins weakens their binding to F - actin , resulting in faster Listeria motility . This possibility would be in agreement with the ﬁndings of Lambrechts et al . ( 2000 ) and Harbeck et al . , ( 2000 ) , who showed that fully phosphorylated EVL and VASP bind less efﬁciently to F - actin . The possibility that Ena / VASP phosphorylation plays a role in actin - based processes is supported by the observa - tion that VASP phosphorylation directly correlates with spreading of neutrophils ( Lawrence and Pryzwansky , 2001 ) . Moreover , Mena phosphorylation is required for its function as negative regulator of cell motility in ﬁbroblasts ( Loureiro et al . , 2002 ) . A number of studies indicate that the EVH2 domain can mediate the formation of Ena / VASP multimers and that they may be required for the function of this protein family in vivo ( Ahern - Djamali et al . , 1998 ; Bachmann et al . , 1999 ; Carl et al . , 1999 ) . In particular , Ena / VASP multimers seem to be required for the function of Ena / VASP pro - teins as suggested by the observation that a truncated form of Ena lacking the EVH2 domain caused lethality of Drosophila embryos ( Ahern - Djamali et al . , 1998 ) . More - over , the Mena mutant (cid:2) Co - Co is only partially able to rescue normal motile properties of MV D7 ﬁbroblasts ( Loureiro et al . , 2002 ) , suggesting that Ena / VASP multim - erization could play a role in this process . In the context of Listeria motility , the formation of Ena / VASP multimers at the bacterial surface has been proposed to increase the availability of polymerization - competent actin monomers and , as a consequence , bacterial motility . Therefore , we expected that the inhibition of Ena / VASP multimeriza - tion would result in the decrease of Listeria motility due to the limited availability of actin monomers . In contrast , we found that the expression of Ena / VASP (cid:2) Co - Co proteins did not reduce bacterial movement but , in VASP , in - creased it . Based on our results that deletion of FAB also causes an increase of bacterial motility , it is conceivable that the deletion of the multimerization site in VASP , by causing a reduction in the number of F - actin – binding sites , weakens the interaction of the bacteria with the actin tails and , as a consequence , augments bacterial speed . This hypothesis is consistent with the observation that the deletion of the multimerization motif from the EVH2 domain of VASP decreases its ability to interact with F - actin , in vitro ( Bachmann et al . , 1999 ) . CONCLUSION Our data clearly indicate that the proline - rich core , the pu - tative G - actin – binding site , and the phosphorylation state of Ena / VASP proteins are important for Listeria motility , whereas , in contrast with previous models for Listeria mo - tility , the F - actin – binding and multimerization regions of this protein family are dispensable for this actin - based pro - cess . Finally , in light of this study and that of Loureiro et al . ( 2002 ) , it is clear that Ena / VASP protein domains can con - tribute to different extents in distinct actin - based processes . How then , can Ena / VASP proteins inﬂuence the dynam - ics of the actin cytoskeleton ? Other than affecting the nucle - ation / elongation of actin ﬁlaments , Ena / VASP proteins may inﬂuence the architecture of the actin cytoskeleton . This view is consistent with the observation that VASP seems to inﬂuence the branching of actin ﬁlaments induced by the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Skoble et al . , 2001 ) and that the expression of Mena in the MV D7 background affects the organization of the actin ﬁlaments in lamellipodia ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) . Based on these and our study , we propose that Ena / VASP proteins act as multifunctional organizers of the actin cytoskeleton that regulate both the nucleation / elongation and the archi - tecture of actin networks . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank David A . Monner , Matthias Krause , and Adam Kwiat - kowski for critical reading of the manuscript and helpful discus - sions . We thank Petra Hagendorff and Maria Ho¨xter for excellent technical assistance . J . W . was supported by the DFG grant JO 55 / 15 - 3 and by the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie . J . J . L . was sup - ported by the Anna Fuller Molecular Oncology Fund . J . E . B . is supported by a Special Fellow award from the Leukemia and Lym - phoma Society ( 3476 - 02 ) . F . B . G . was supported by National Insti - tutes of Health grant GM - 58801 and by funds from the WM Keck Distinguished Young Scholar Award . REFERENCES Ahern - Djamali , S . M . , Comer , A . R . , Bachmann , C . , Kastenmeier , A . S . , Reddy , S . K . , Beckerle , M . C . , Walter , U . , and Hoffmann , F . M . ( 1998 ) . Mutations in Drosophila Enabled and rescue by human vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) indicate important functional roles for Ena / VASP homology domain 1 ( EVH1 ) and EVH2 domains . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 2157 – 2171 . Bachmann , C . , Fischer , L . , Walter , U . , and Reinhard , M . ( 1999 ) . The EVH2 domain of the vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein medi - ates tetramerization , F - actin binding , and actin bundle formation . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 23549 – 23557 . Bear , J . E . , Loureiro , J . J . , Libova , I . , Fassler , R . , Wehland , J . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2000 ) . Negative regulation of ﬁbroblast motility by Ena / VASP proteins . Cell 101 , 717 – 728 . Bear , J . E . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin ﬁlament capping regulates ﬁbroblast motility . Cell 109 , 509 – 521 . Bearer , E . L . , Prakash , J . M . , Manchester , R . D . , and Allen , P . G . ( 2000 ) . VASP protects actin ﬁlaments from gelsolin : an in vitro study with implications for platelet actin reorganizations . Cell Motil . Cytoskel - eton 47 , 351 – 364 . Brindle , N . P . , Holt , M . R . , Davies , J . E . , Price , C . J . , and Critchley , D . R . ( 1996 ) . The focal - adhesion vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) binds to the proline - rich domain in vinculin . Biochem . J . 318 , 753 – 757 . M . Geese et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2394 Carl , U . D . , Pollmann , M . , Orr , E . , Gertler , F . B . , Chakraborty , T . , and Wehland , J . ( 1999 ) . Aromatic and basic residues within the EVH1 domain of VASP specify its interaction with proline - rich ligands . Curr . Biol . 9 , 715 – 718 . Castellano , F . , Le Clainche , C . , Patin , D . , Carlier , M . F . , and Chavrier , P . ( 2001 ) . A WASp - VASP complex regulates actin polymerization at the plasma membrane . EMBO J . 20 , 5603 – 5614 . Chakraborty , T . , et al . ( 1995 ) . A focal adhesion factor directly linking intracellularly motile Listeria monocytogenes and Listeria ivanovii to the actin - based cytoskeleton of mammalian cells . EMBO J . 14 , 1314 – 1321 . Coppolino , M . G . , Krause , M . , Hagendorff , P . , Monner , D . A . , Trimble , W . , Grinstein , S . , Wehland , J . , and Sechi , A . S . ( 2001 ) . Evi - dence for a molecular complex consisting of Fyb / SLAP , SLP - 76 , Nck , VASP and WASP that links the actin cytoskeleton to Fc (cid:1) receptor signaling during phagocytosis . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 4307 – 4318 . Cossart , P . , and Bierne , H . ( 2001 ) . The use of host cell machinery in the pathogenesis of Listeria monocytogenes . Curr . Opin . Immunol . 13 , 96 – 103 . Domann , E . , Wehland , J . , Rohde , M . , Pistor , S . , Hartl , M . , Goebel , W . , Leimeister - Wachter , M . , Wuenscher , M . , and Chakraborty , T . ( 1992 ) . A novel bacterial virulence gene in Listeria monocytogenes required for host cell microﬁlament interaction with homology to the proline - rich region of vinculin . EMBO J . 11 , 1981 – 1990 . Drees , B . , Friederich , E . , Fradelizi , J . , Louvard , D . , Beckerle , M . C . , and Golsteyn , R . M . ( 2000 ) . Characterization of the interaction be - tween zyxin and members of the Ena / vasodilator - stimulated phos - phoprotein family of proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 22503 – 22511 . Ermekova , K . S . , Zambrano , N . , Linn , H . , Minopoli , G . , Gertler , F . , Russo , T . , and Sudol , M . ( 1997 ) . The WW domain of neural protein FE65 interacts with proline - rich motifs in Mena , the mammalian homolog of Drosophila Enabled . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 32869 – 32877 . Frischknecht , F . , and Way , M . ( 2001 ) . Surﬁng pathogens and the lessons learned for actin polymerization . Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 30 – 38 . Geese , M . , Schluter , K . , Rothkegel , M . , Jockusch , B . M . , Wehland , J . , and Sechi , A . S . ( 2000 ) . Accumulation of proﬁlin II at the surface of Listeria is concomitant with the onset of motility and correlates with bacterial speed . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 1415 – 1426 . Gertler , F . B . , Doctor , J . S . , and Hoffmann , F . M . ( 1990 ) . Genetic sup - pression of mutations in the Drosophila abl proto - oncogene ho - molog . Science 248 , 857 – 860 . Gertler , F . B . , Niebuhr , K . , Reinhard , M . , Wehland , J . , and Soriano , P . ( 1996 ) . Mena , a relative of VASP and Drosophila Enabled , is impli - cated in the control of microﬁlament dynamics . Cell 87 , 227 – 239 . Haffner , C . , Jarchau , T . , Reinhard , M . , Hoppe , J . , Lohmann , S . M . , and Walter , U . ( 1995 ) . Molecular cloning , structural analysis and functional expression of the proline - rich focal adhesion and micro - ﬁlament - associated protein VASP . EMBO J . 14 , 19 – 27 . Halbrugge , M . , Friedrich , C . , Eigenthaler , M . , Schanzenbacher , P . , and Walter , U . ( 1990 ) . Stoichiometric and reversible phosphoryla - tion of a 46 - kDa protein in human platelets in response to cGMP - and cAMP - elevating vasodilators . J . Biol . Chem . 265 , 3088 – 3093 . Harbeck , B . , Hu¨ttelmaier , S . , Schluter , K . , Jockusch , B . M . , and Illen - berger , S . ( 2000 ) . Phosphorylation of the vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein regulates its interaction with actin . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 30817 – 30825 . Hu¨ttelmaier , S . , Harbeck , B . , Steffens , O . , Messerschmidt , T . , Illen - berger , S . , and Jockusch , B . M . ( 1999 ) . Characterization of the actin binding properties of the vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein VASP . FEBS Lett . 451 , 68 – 74 . Jonckheere , V . , Lambrechts , A . , Vandekerckhove , J . , and Ampe , C . ( 1999 ) . Dimerization of proﬁlin II upon binding the ( GP5 ) 3 peptide from VASP overcomes the inhibition of actin nucleation by proﬁlin II and thymosin beta4 . FEBS Lett . 447 , 257 – 263 . Kang , F . , Laine , R . O . , Bubb , M . R . , Southwick , F . S . , and Purich , D . L . ( 1997 ) . Proﬁlin interacts with the Gly - Pro - Pro - Pro - Pro - Pro se - quences of vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) : implica - tions for actin - based Listeria motility . Biochemistry 36 , 8384 – 8392 . Kocks , C . , Gouin , E . , Tabouret , M . , Berche , P . , Ohayon , H . , and Cossart , P . ( 1992 ) . L . monocytogenes - induced actin assembly requires the actA gene product , a surface protein . Cell 68 , 521 – 531 . Krause , M . , Sechi , A . S . , Konradt , M . , Monner , D . , Gertler , F . B . , and Wehland , J . ( 2000 ) . Fyn - binding protein ( Fyb ) / SLP - 76 - associated protein ( SLAP ) , Ena / vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) proteins and the Arp2 / 3 complex link T cell receptor ( TCR ) signaling to the actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 181 – 194 . Kuo , S . C . , and McGrath , J . L . ( 2000 ) . Steps and ﬂuctuations of Listeria monocytogenes during actin - based motility . Nature 407 , 1026 – 1029 . Laine , R . O . , Phaneuf , K . L . , Cunningham , C . C . , Kwiatkowski , D . , Azuma , T . , and Southwick , F . S . ( 1998 ) . Gelsolin , a protein that caps the barbed ends and severs actin ﬁlaments , enhances the actin - based motility of Listeria monocytogenes in host cells . Infect . Immun . 66 , 3775 – 3782 . Lambrechts , A . , Kwiatkowski , A . V . , Lanier , L . M . , Bear , J . E . , Vandekerckhove , J . , Ampe , C . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2000 ) . cAMP - dependent protein kinase phosphorylation of EVL , a Mena / VASP relative , regulates its interaction with actin and SH3 domains . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 36143 – 36151 . Lanier , L . M . , Gates , M . A . , Witke , W . , Menzies , S . , Wehman , A . M . , Macklis , J . D . , Kwiatkowski , D . , Soriano , P . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 1999 ) . Mena is required for neurulation and commissure formation . Neu - ron 22 , 313 – 325 . Lasa , I . , David , V . , Gouin , E . , Marchand , J . B . , and Cossart , P . ( 1995 ) . The amino - terminal part of ActA is critical for the actin - based motility of Listeria monocytogenes ; the central proline - rich region acts as a stimulator . Mol . Microbiol . 18 , 425 – 436 . Lasa , I . , Gouin , E . , Goethals , M . , Vancompernolle , K . , David , V . , Vandekerckhove , J . , and Cossart . P . ( 1997 ) . Identiﬁcation of two regions in the N - terminal domain of ActA involved in the actin comet tail formation by Listeria monocytogenes . EMBO J . 16 , 1531 – 1540 . Laurent , V . , Loisel , T . P . , Harbeck , B . , Wehmann , A . , Gro¨be , L . , Jockusch , B . M . , Wehland , J . , Gertler , F . B . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 1999 ) . Role of proteins of the Ena / VASP family in actin based motility of Listeria monocytogenes . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 1245 – 1258 . Lawrence , D . W . , and Pryzwansky , K . B . ( 2001 ) . The vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein is regulated by cyclic GMP - dependent protein kinase during neutrophil spreading . J . Immunol . 166 , 5550 – 5556 . Loisel , T . P . , Boujemaa , R . , Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 1999 ) . Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 , 613 – 616 . Lommel , S . , Benesch , S . , Rottner , K . , Franz , T . , Wehland , J . , and Kuhn , R . ( 2001 ) . Actin pedestal formation by enteropathogenic Esch - erichia coli and intracellular motility of Shigella ﬂexneri are abolished in N - WASP - defective cells . EMBO Rep . 2 , 850 – 857 . Loureiro , J . J . , Rubinson , D . A . , Bear , J . E . , Baltus , G . A . , Kwiatkowski , A . V . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2002 ) . Critical roles of phosphorylation and actin - binding motﬁts but not the central proline - rich region , for Ena / VASP function during cell migration . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , in press . Machesky , L . M . , Mullins , R . D . , Higgs , H . N . , Kaiser , D . A . , Blan - choin , L . , May , R . C . , Hall , M . E . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) . Scar , a Ena / VASP Domains in Listeria Motility Vol . 13 , July 2002 2395 WASp - related protein , activates nucleation of actin ﬁlaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 3739 – 3744 . Machner , M . P . , Urbanke , C . , Barzik , M . , Otten , S . , Sechi , A . S . , Weh - land , J . , and Heinz , D . W . ( 2001 ) . ActA from Listeria monocytogenes can interact with up to four Ena / VASP homology 1 domains simul - taneously . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 40096 – 40103 . May , R . C . , Hall , M . E . , Higgs , H . N . , Pollard , T . D . , Chakraborty , T . , Wehland , J . , Machesky , L . M . , and Sechi , A . S . ( 1999 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex is essential for the actin - based motility of Listeria monocy - togenes . Curr . Biol . 9 , 759 – 762 . Mykkanen , O . M . , Gronholm , M . , Ronty , M . , Lalowski , M . , Salmi - kangas , P . , Suila , H . , and Carpen , O . ( 2001 ) . Characterization of human palladin , a microﬁlament - associated protein . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 3060 – 3073 . Niebuhr , K . , Ebel , F . , Frank , R . , Reinhard , R . , Domann , E . , Carl , U . D . , Walter , U . , Gertler , F . B . , Wehland , J . , and Chakraborty , T . ( 1997 ) . A novel proline - rich motif present in ActA of Listeria mono - cytogenes and cytoskeletal proteins is the ligand for the EVH1 do - main , a protein module present in the Ena / VASP family . EMBO J . 16 , 5433 – 5444 . Pistor , S . , Chakraborty , T . , Walter , U . , and Wehland , J . ( 1995 ) . The bacterial actin nucleator protein ActA of Listeria monocytogenes contains multiple binding sites for host microﬁlament proteins . Curr . Biol . 5 , 517 – 525 . Pistor , S . , Grobe , L . , Sechi , A . S . , Domann , E . , Gerstel , B . , Machesky , L . M . , Chakraborty , T . , and Wehland , J . ( 2000 ) . Mutations of arginine residues within the 146 - KKRRK - 150 motif of the ActA protein of Listeria monocytogenes abolish intracellular motility by interfering with the recruitment of the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 3277 – 3287 . Reinhard , M . , Halbrugge , M . , Scheer , U . , Wiegand , C . , Jockusch , B . M . , and Walter , U . ( 1992 ) . The 46 / 50 kDa phosphoprotein VASP puriﬁed from human platelets is a novel protein associated with actin ﬁlaments and focal contacts . EMBO J . 11 , 2063 – 2070 . Reinhard , M . , Giehl , K . , Abel , K . , Haffner , C . , Jarchau , T . , Hoppe , V . , Jockusch , B . M . , and Walter , U . ( 1995 ) . The proline - rich focal adhe - sion and microﬁlament protein VASP is a ligand for proﬁlins . EMBO J . 14 , 1583 – 1589 . Rottner , K . , Behrendt , B . , Small , J . V . , and Wehland , J . ( 1999 ) . VASP dynamics during lamellipodia protrusion . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 321 – 322 . Sechi , A . S . , Wehland , J . , and Small , J . V . ( 1997 ) . The isolated comet tail pseudopodium of Listeria monocytogenes : a tail of two actin ﬁlament populations , long and axial and short and random . J . Cell Biol . 137 , 155 – 167 . Skoble , J . , Portnoy , D . A . , and Welch , M . D . ( 2000 ) . Three regions within ActA promote Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin nucleation and Listeria monocytogenes motility . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 527 – 538 . Skoble , J . , Auerbuch , V . , Goley , E . D . , Welch , M . D . , and Portnoy , D . A . ( 2001 ) . Pivotal role of VASP in Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin nucleation , actin branch - formation , and Listeria monocytogenes mo - tility . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 89 – 100 . Smith , G . A . , Theriot , J . A . , and Portnoy , D . A . ( 1996 ) . The tandem repeat domain in the Listeria monocytogenes ActA protein controls the rate of actin based motility , the percentage of moving bacteria and the localization of VASP and proﬁlin . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 647 – 660 . van Troys , M . , Dewitte , D . , Goethals , M . , Carlier , M . F . , Vandekerck - hove , J . , and Ampe , C . ( 1996 ) . The actin binding site of thymosin beta 4 mapped by mutational analysis . EMBO J . 15 , 201 – 210 . Vasioukhin , V . , Bauer , C . , Yin , M . , and Fuchs , E . ( 2000 ) . Directed actin polymerization is the driving force for epithelial cell - cell ad - hesion . Cell 100 , 209 – 219 . Zalevsky , J . , Grigorova , I . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2001 ) . Activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex by the Listeria acta protein . Acta binds two actin monomers and three subunits of the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 3468 – 3475 . Zeile , W . L . , Purich , D . L . , and Southwick , F . S . ( 1996 ) . Recognition of two classes of oligoproline sequences in proﬁlin - mediated acceler - ation of actin - based Shigella motility . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 49 – 59 . M . Geese et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2396