Threats to objectivity in peer review : the case of gender Anna Kaatz 1 , Belinda Gutierrez 1 , 2 , and Molly Carnes 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 1 Center for Women’s Health Research University of Wisconsin – Madison , Madison , WI 53715 , USA 2 William S . Middleton Memorial Veterans Hospital , Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center , Madison , WI , USA 3 Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering , University of Wisconsin – Madison , Madison , WI 53715 , USA 4 Departments of Medicine and Psychiatry , University of Wisconsin – Madison , Madison , WI 53715 , USA Scientists strive to be objective in their peer review of grant applications and manuscript submissions . Nevertheless , all humans are susceptible to biases in decision - making . To illustrate how cognitive bias unrelated to the merit of the science could inﬂuence scientiﬁc peer review we describe the potential impact of applicant gender on the judgment of reviewers . Table 1 describes some different types of cogni - tive biases and Table 2 describes conditions that might facilitate the operation of cognitive biases in peer review . Despite the large number of women who have entered science since the passage by the US government , in 1972 , of Title IX legislation prohibiting gender discrimination in education , science remains a male gender - typed domain . A substantive body of theoretically sound , experimentally rigorous research demonstrates that pervasive cultural stereotypes depicting women as communal ( e . g . , dependent , relationship - oriented ) and men as agentic ( e . g . , logical , goal - oriented ) lead to the implicit assumption that women are less competent than men in male gender - typed domains , where competence is associated with agentic traits [ 1 ] . Although explicit gender bias still exists , implicit ( uncon - scious ) gender bias is particularly troubling because it can lead well - intentioned people to unwittingly perpetuate inequalities . Research conﬁrms the pervasive implicit association of science with male . In one study 70 % of (cid:2) 300 000 men and women , participants linked science words more quickly with male than female names in a timed dual - categoriza - tion task ( the Implicit Association Test ) that bypasses conscious decision - making [ 2 ] . Furthermore , gender stereotypes cause subtle adjustments of performance ex - pectations in a science setting . In one experiment , male and female faculty in science departments , randomized to evaluate a male or female applicant for a laboratory man - ager position , preferred to hire the male applicant , pay him a higher salary , and provide him with more career men - torship than the identical female applicant – whom they nevertheless deemed more likeable [ 3 ] . Congruent with previous research , the evaluative decisions in this study were driven primarily by the implicit assumption that the male applicant was more competent in the male gender - typed domain of science . Further experiments ﬁnd that , before women are deemed equivalently hirable , competent , or worthy of pro - motion in male gender - typed professions , they must dem - onstrate a higher level of achievement than identically credentialed men [ 4 ] . Paradoxically , raters may enthusi - astically praise a woman’s performance at an agentic task , even though she may not reach the higher standard needed to conﬁrm competence , because she is exceeding the lower performance expectations ‘for a woman’ [ 5 ] . Unfortunately , laboratory and ﬁeld studies conﬁrm that such praise may not translate into the same rewards or promotions for women as it does for men [ 1 , 4 ] . How might this research be relevant to scientiﬁc peer review ? When examined by age group , individuals of the same age as most scientiﬁc reviewers ( i . e . , 40 – 65 years ) held the strongest implicit association of male and science on the Implicit Association Test [ 2 ] . Because science is a male gender - typed domain , evaluators of individual scientists ﬁlter information through the type of cognitive framework that is predicted to advantage male and disadvantage female applicants . Consequently , one would predict that reviewers require more proof of ability ( e . g . , more papers , more prestigious awards ) to conﬁrm the competence of a female than a male scientist . Leadership is also a male gender - typed domain [ 6 ] , thus being evaluated for perfor - mance as a scientiﬁc leader would set the cognitive stage for a further burden of proof that a woman’s competence is equivalent to a man’s . This subtle adjustment of perfor - mance standards generally occurs inadvertently , uninten - tionally , and is usually in conﬂict with both data ( e . g . , men and women are equally effective leaders [ 7 ] ) and explicit beliefs about the abilities of men and women [ 2 ] . Although randomized , controlled experiments conﬁrm a negative bias against women in mock hiring settings for male - gender typed employment [ 8 ] , no such studies have simi - larly tested the extent to which women are disadvantaged in scientiﬁc peer review . If such bias in the evaluation of women scientists and their work were occurring , we would expect to see that manuscripts written by women scientists are less likely to be accepted for publication than those written by men , and that women applicants for scientiﬁc grants are less successful than their male counterparts . Is this the case ? Goldberg published the ﬁrst experimental study asses - sing the effect of manipulating author gender of scientiﬁc papers by randomly assigning students to read the same manuscript written by an author with either the ﬁrst name Science & Society 0165 - 6147 / (cid:2) 2014 Published by Elsevier Ltd . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tips . 2014 . 06 . 005 Corresponding author : Carnes , M . ( mlcarnes @ wisc . edu ) . Trends in Pharmacological Sciences , August 2014 , Vol . 35 , No . 8 371 ‘John’ or ‘Joan’ [ 9 ] . Participants , all of whom were female students , consistently gave higher ratings to the manu - scripts written by John than to the same paper written by Joan . Although ﬁeld studies of gender bias in scientiﬁc publication have given mixed results , and no ﬁrm conclu - sions could be drawn ( e . g . , [ 10 ] ) , women are generally found to have fewer but overall higher - quality peer - reviewed sci - entiﬁc publications than men [ 11 ] . Broadly , this aligns with research showing that women face a disadvantage and can be held to a higher performance standard than men in review processes in male - typed ﬁelds . Given the impact of gender stereotypes on judgment , one would also predict that grant reviewers may unknow - ingly and unintentionally adjust competence standards such that a female applicant would need to demonstrate more proof of ability to earn the same assessment of competence as a male applicant . Lending support to this is the classic study by Wenneras and Wold in which female applicants for a postdoctoral research fellowship needed more than twice as many publications to receive the same competence scores as comparable male applicants [ 12 ] . In the USA , awards from the National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) are the cornerstone of grant support for individual investigators in biomedical , behavioral , and clinical research . Overall , there is little difference in the success rates of male and female applicants for NIH grants [ 13 – 15 ] . If gender bias operates in grant peer review , one would expect that different evaluative standards for male and female investigators would be exaggerated when assump - tions of performance most strongly align with male gender stereotypes ; that is , where science and leadership conﬂate . This would occur in the review of highly prestigious scien - tiﬁc awards , large program proposals where the investiga - tor is a leader of other scientiﬁc leaders , and R01 ( NIH grant support for human health - related research ) renew - als from experienced investigators . Gender differences are Table 1 . Some types of cognitive bias and potential relevance to scientiﬁc peer review Cognitive bias Relevance to peer review Anchoring bias : over - reliance on one piece of information ( the anchor ) or a ‘ﬁrst impression’ when adjusting one’s opinion in response to subsequent information . If the reviewer likes the lab where the principal investigator ( PI ) trained or , for example , does not like the particular animal model being used , this will affect the processing of additional information in the proposal . Backﬁre effect : instead of adjusting an opinion in response to disconﬁrming information , one more strongly adheres to the original opinion . A reviewer might hold to an initial opinion or score despite compelling information to the contrary . Blind - spot bias : the ability to see cognitive bias in others but not in oneself . A reviewer is sincere in their belief that they are objective and without bias . Conﬁrmation bias : information is selectively marshaled to ﬁnd support for an existing impression or assumption . If a reviewer rates a proposal highly , weaknesses might be overlooked . Ecological fallacy : making an inference about an individual based on aggregate data or assumptions about a group ; making assumptions about individuals based on cultural stereotypes is a type of ecological fallacy . Because fewer women lead large center grants , making the assumption that an individual woman is less able to lead a large program ; because overall Black student achievement is lower than for White students , making the assumption that an individual Black student is less prepared . Halo effect : assuming , because someone is competent ( or incompetent ) in one area , that they are competent ( or incompetent ) in other areas . Individuals in high - status groups are assumed to be competent across a range of activities . May result in more ‘beneﬁt of the doubt’ for a PI at a prestigious institution and the need for a higher level of proof of competence for a PI at a lower - ranked school ; could also lead to more inﬂuence of a statement by a high - versus lower - status individual in a study section . In group / out group bias : it takes less information for positive judgments when the rater and target share even minimal afﬁnity than when they do not , and less information is required for a negative judgment when they share no afﬁnity . The alignment of discipline , social networks , previous interactions , age , gender , or race between reviewer and R01 applicant or author could inﬂuence the review of the grant or manuscript positively or negatively . Shifting standards of reference : cultural stereotypes set different mental frameworks for judging the work of individuals . For example , verbal skills were rated lower if raters thought an author was Black versus White . When the stereotype is of lower competence ( e . g . , women in mathematics , Blacks in academia ) , the performance needed for judgment of minimal competence is lower ( e . g . , good in mathematics – for a woman ) but higher to conﬁrm competence ( i . e . , there is empirical support for the adage that a member of a low - status group ‘needs to be twice as good’ to get ahead ) . It is possible that grants or manuscripts will be perceived as being less well written if the reviewer knows the PI is Black . The greatest differences in funding outcomes at NIH for low - versus high - status groups is not at the T - or K - award level ( minimal standard ) but at the R01 level ( conﬁrmatory standard ) : this is what the shifting - standards type of implicit bias would predict . It is also possible that highly positive descriptors for a low - status PI do not translate into a fundable score and that more negative descriptors for a high - status PI would not prevent a fundable score . Table 2 . Bias - enhancing conditions surrounding scientiﬁc peer review Condition promoting cognitive bias Potential relevance to R01 review Time pressure : because cognitive biases are efﬁcient , time pressure promotes their inﬂuence on decision - making . Reviewers have multiple demands on their time , and are frequently under time - constraints to ﬁnish reviews . Belief in one’s personal objectivity : in a constructed hiring setting , raters who were primed to believe they were objective gave more biased ratings than did non - primed controls . Being an NIH scientiﬁc reviewer may prime belief in one’s objectivity as a scientist . Semantic gender priming : exposure to words more strongly associated with male ( e . g . , aggressive , competitive ) or female ( e . g . , supportive , nurturing ) stereotypes affects subsequent evaluation of male or female targets . Emphasis on funding scientists willing to engage in ‘risk - taking’ or achieve ‘technological breakthrough’ would be predicted to enhance evaluations of male applicants . Science & Society Trends in Pharmacological Sciences August 2014 , Vol . 35 , No . 8 372 found in these situations [ 13 ] . Between 2003 and 2007 , experienced female investigators had signiﬁcantly lower R01 funding success rates than did equivalent male appli - cants [ 14 ] . Similarly , in 2008 , experienced female investi - gators who submitted Type 2 ( renewal ) R01 applications had signiﬁcantly lower funding success rates than did equiv - alent male applicants [ 15 ] . Data from the NIH website show persistently lower Type 2 R01 or R01 - equivalent success rates for women versus men , and there was no change after the 2009 change in scoring and critique structure ( range , 2 – 8 % lower ; average , 5 % ) [ 13 ] . We examined written critiques of R01 proposals and found signiﬁcant differences in those for applications submitted by male versus female investi - gators , despite similar scores or funding outcomes [ 16 ] . Consistent with implicitly lower performance expectations for women in science , peer reviewers offered more praise and acclamation for proposals from female investigators , and greater reference to competence and ability for funded proposals from experienced female investigators ( i . e . , this is amazing work for a woman scientist ; she must have exceptional ability ) . Critiques for male applicants contained signiﬁcantly more negative words . This is also consistent with stereotype - based assumptions causing a subtle adjust - ment of evaluative standards because it may require more proof of a man’s lack of competence in a male gender - typed domain for him to be deemed incompetent [ 1 ] . Although this is not an experimental study , the differences are those expected if gender stereotypes lead R01 reviewers to subtly adjust performance standards . After reviewing published research on grant peer re - view , the Cochrane Collaboration concluded that ‘Experi - mental studies assessing the effects of grant giving peer review on . . . funded research are urgently needed’ and that ‘Practices aimed to control and evaluate the poten - tially negative effects of peer review should be implemen - ted . . . ’ [ 17 ] . We agree . Extrapolating from experimental research on interventions that can reduce gender bias in other evaluative contexts ( reviewed in [ 8 , 18 ] ) , we recom - mend the following in the setting of scientiﬁc review for manuscripts or grants : ( i ) Instead of feeling conﬁdent in your objectivity , before engaging in peer review reﬂect on the susceptibility of all humans to bias in judgment . ( ii ) Allow sufﬁcient time and try to avoid ‘multi - tasking’ when reviewing a scientiﬁc work . ( iii ) Before engaging in peer review , imagine in detail a female scientiﬁc leader . ( iv ) As far as possible , undertake to review the assess - ment criteria before evaluating manuscripts or applications . ( v ) Challenge yourself with thought experiments : would your evaluation change if the investigator were of a different gender ( or race , or from a different institu - tion ) ? ( vi ) Journals and funding agencies should make sure that review criteria do not implicitly prime the selection of male over female scientists ( e . g . , avoid the use of male - typed terms such as ‘high - risk’ or ‘aggressive’ ) . Women have lower rates of publication and lower suc - cess rates for high - status research awards than do men . Theoretically supported experimental and ﬁeld research make a strong case that gender stereotypes operate in review processes in male - typed domains such as science . Future experimental studies will be necessary to examine the extent to which gender bias may operate in peer review despite the best intentions of reviewers , their personal commitment to egalitarian principles , and their goal of advancing the best and most innovative science . Acknowledgments This work was supported by NIH grant number R01 GM111002 . References 1 Biernat , M . ( 2012 ) Stereotypes and shifting standards : forming , communicating and translating person impressions . In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology ( Devine , P . , ed . ) , pp . 1 – 50 , Academic Press 2 Nosek , B . A . et al . ( 2007 ) Pervasiveness and correlates of implicit attitudes and stereotypes . Eur . Rev . Soc . Psychol . 18 , 36 – 88 3 Moss - Racusin , C . A . et al . ( 2012 ) Science faculty’s subtle gender biases favor male students . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 109 , 16474 – 16479 4 Heilman , M . E . and Haynes , M . C . ( 2008 ) Subjectivity in the appraisal process : a facilitator of gender bias in work settings . In Beyond Common Sense : Psychological Science in the Courtroom ( Borgida , E . and Fiske , S . T . , eds ) , pp . 127 – 155 , Blackwell Publishing 5 Biernat , M . and Vescio , T . K . ( 2002 ) She swings , she hits , she’s great , she’s benched : implications of gender - based shifting standards for judgment and behavior . Pers . Soc . Psychol . Bull . 28 , 66 – 77 6 Eagly , A . H . and Karau , S . J . ( 2002 ) Role congruity theory of prejudice toward female leaders . Psychol . Rev . 109 , 573 – 598 7 Eagly , A . H . et al . ( 2003 ) Transformational , transactional , and laissez - faire leadership styles : a meta - analysis comparing women and men . Psychol . Bull . 129 , 569 – 591 8 Isaac , C . et al . ( 2009 ) Interventions that affect gender bias in hiring : a systematic review . Acad . Med . 84 , 1440 – 1446 9 Goldberg , P . ( 1968 ) Are women prejudiced against women ? Transaction 5 , 316 – 322 10 Nakhaie , M . R . ( 2002 ) Gender differences in publication among university professors in Canada . Can . Rev . Sociol . Anthropol . 39 , 151 – 179 11 Symonds , M . R . E . et al . ( 2006 ) Gender differences in publication output : towards an unbiased metric of research performance . PLoS ONE 1 , e127 12 Wenneras , C . and Wold , A . ( 1997 ) Nepotism and sexism in peer - review . Nature 387 , 341 13 NIH Research Portfolio Online Reporting Tools ( RePORT ) ; NIH Data Book 14 Ley , T . J . and Hamilton , B . H . ( 2008 ) The gender gap in NIH grant applications . Science 322 , 1472 – 1474 15 Pohlhaus , J . R . et al . ( 2011 ) Sex differences in application , success , and funding rates for NIH extramural programs . Acad . Med . 86 , 759 – 767 16 Kaatz , A . et al . ( 2014 ) A quantitative linguistic analysis of NIH R01 application critiques from investigators at one institution . Acad . Med . ( in press ) 17 Demicheli , V . and Di Pietrantonj , C . ( 2007 ) Peer review for improving the quality of grant applications . Cochrane Database of Syst . Rev . 2007 , MR000003 18 Carnes , M . et al . ( 2012 ) Promoting institutional change through bias literacy . J . Divers . High . Educ . 5 , 63 – 77 Science & Society Trends in Pharmacological Sciences August 2014 , Vol . 35 , No . 8 373