Analyzing information resources that support the creative process Yuan Li University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill North Carolina , USA yuanli @ email . unc . edu Yinglong Zhang University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill North Carolina , USA yinglongz @ alumni . unc . com Rob Capra University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill North Carolina , USA rcapra @ unc . edu ABSTRACT As an important skill in many domains , creativity is understood to be a process that includes stages like finding goals , looking up information , exploring , creating ideas , combining ideas , selecting ideas , and executing plans [ 50 ] . However , little prior information retrieval research has considered how people use search tools and information resources to support their creative stages . To gain a better understanding of how and why users interact with information resources and tools during a creative process , we conducted a two - week diary study with 11 participants . We recorded their information seeking behavior through a combina - tion of diary entries , data logging , and reflective interviews . Our analysis identified five common reasons for how people use exist - ing information resources ( e . g . , search engines , video sites , image sites , Q & A sites , and other social sites ) to support their creative pro - cess . We also report on how different information resources were preferred for different purposes at different creative stages . For instance , participants often used images to help support ideation , Q & A sites to learn from other creators and to find tips and recom - mendations , and social media to select ideas and collect feedback on their creative projects . We also identified challenges participants faced when working on their creative projects . Our findings provide insights for the future design of search engines , improvement of search algorithms , and the development of novel tools to support users during different creative stages . CCS CONCEPTS • Information systems → Users and interactive retrieval . KEYWORDS Search engines , information search , creativity , creative process ACM Reference Format : Yuan Li , Yinglong Zhang , and Rob Capra . 2022 . Analyzing information resources that support the creative process . In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM SIGIR Conference on Human Information Interaction and Retrieval ( CHIIR ’22 ) , March 14 – 18 , 2022 , Regensburg , Germany . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 11 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3498366 . 3505817 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM mustbehonored . Abstractingwithcreditispermitted . Tocopyotherwise , orrepublish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHIIR ’22 , March 14 – 18 , 2022 , Regensburg , Germany © 2022 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9186 - 3 / 22 / 03 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3498366 . 3505817 1 INTRODUCTION Creativity and innovation are highly valued characteristics across a wide variety of fields , including science , commerce , education , and the arts [ 50 ] . Models of the creative process have been proposed that involve stages related to identifying goals , looking up information , exploring the goals , creating ideas , combining ideas , selecting ideas , and executing a plan to put the ideas into practice [ 50 ] . Over the past 20 years , researchers in HCI and related fields have explored ways to understand creativity and to design creativ - ity support tools ( CSTs ) [ 7 , 19 , 20 , 25 – 28 , 30 , 32 , 36 , 41 , 46 , 52 , 58 ] . However , based on an extensive literature review , Frich et al . and his colleagues note that much of the existing creativity - related HCI re - search has focused on new tools , often developed by the researchers themselves , and investigated in controlled experiments [ 23 ] . Frich et al . suggest that research should focus more effort on “studying in - vivo use of creativity support tools , not just the ones we build ourselves , but the ones that most creative practitioners employ in practice” [ 23 , p . 1243 ] . Our current research responds to this call . Search engines are one of the most used tools on the internet . Given their widespread use , they have the potential to be excellent platforms to support users’ creativity . Indeed , in recent survey study [ 62 ] , we found that search engines were the most frequently used tool in people’s everyday creative tasks , but that they had limitations and drawbacks for particular creative stages ( e . g . , during the ideation stage ) . In the area of information search and retrieval , only a few re - search projects have investigated how to design search systems and information tools to support creative tasks . For example , studies have been conducted to design methods to induce serendipity into search systems [ 8 , 44 , 54 ] . However , generating and developing ideas is just one part of users’ overall creative processes [ 50 ] . More recent studies have started to focus on how people use search en - gines to support their creative learning by gathering information online and gaining inspirations [ 43 ] . Researchers also developed scaffolding tools to support the ideation stage of creativity when people begin to design or form their creative ideas [ 37 ] . To better understand how people use search engines and other web resources when carrying out their creative processes and how we can improve existing information search systems to better sup - port their creative processes , we conducted a two - week - long diary study with 11 participants . We investigated their information search activities at different stages of creative tasks and the relationships between the information search activities and creative stages . Here we broadly define creative tasks as tasks in which people attempt to use information technology to create something original and meaningful for them , such as an idea or a project . In a previous 180 CHIIR ’22 , March 14 – 18 , 2022 , Regensburg , Germany Yuan Li , Yinglong Zhang , and Rob Capra paper [ 63 ] , we presented initial analyses of the data from this study and mainly focused on the relationships between information needs and creative processes . The current paper addresses the following questions : RQ1 : How do the types of resources that people use to support their information needs differ across creative task stages ? In our diary study , we investigated this by asking participants to indicate the types of information resources ( e . g . , search engines , video sites , image sites , social sites ) they used to support specific creative task stages ( e . g . , explore , create ideas , combine ideas , execute ) . We present Bayesian analysis of the patterns we observed . RQ2 : Why do people use particular information resources to support their creative processes ? We investigated this by asking participants to describe in their diary entries and interviews how information resources were helpful to their creative process . We present qualitative analyses of their responses . RQ3 : What kinds of problems do people encounter when they use information resources to support their creative processes ? In the diary entries and interviews , we asked participants to describe problems and challenges they encountered . We present qualitative analyses of their responses . The results presented here build on the findings presented in [ 63 ] . Specifically , RQ1 presents a quantitative analysis of how resources were used across different creative stages ; RQ2 focuses on the rea - sons why particular resources were used to support particular as - pects of participants’ creative projects ; RQ3 provides additional insights ( beyond those reported in [ 63 ] ) into the challenges that people encounter when using search to support creative projects . 2 RELATED WORK 2 . 1 Creativity and creative process The definitions of creativity are often classified into two brackets by the natural characteristics of creativity : the “big - C” group that refers to understanding the creative genius and identifying which creative works might last forever [ 53 ] , and the “little - C” group that focuses on individual creative approaches as central to human survival . While “big - C” assumes only certain people can be creative , “little - C” could be constructed as “everyday creativity” that can be operationally defined based on two crucial criteria : originality and meaningfulness [ 47 ] . In the work presented here , we focus on everyday creativity ( “little - C” ) . Despite the different definitions , a general agreement among them is that creativity is a dynamic process blended with a recursive process such as preparation , incubation / idea generation , illumina - tion , verification , assessment [ 1 , 56 ] . In the HCI area , Shneider - man [ 51 ] first defined the four - phase Genex framework ( i . e . , collect , relate , create , donate ) . Davis et al . [ 19 ] proposed three cognitive characteristics of creativity to describe how people cognitively uti - lize tools during the creative process and their interactions with the environments . More recently , Sawyer developed an eight - stage inte - grated framework based on creative stages identified across a long history of creative process models ( e . g . , Wallas’ model , IDEAL cycle model , IDEO , possibility thinking ) [ 50 , p . 89 ] . Sawyer’s eight - stages include : ( a ) find and format the problem , ( b ) acquire knowledge rel - evant to the problem , ( c ) gather a broad range of potentially related information , ( d ) take time off for incubation , ( e ) generate a large variety of ideas , ( f ) combine ideas in unexpected ways , ( g ) select the best ideas , applying relevant criteria , and ( h ) externalize the idea of using materials and representations [ 50 ] . These frameworks provide outlines for studying creative processes both in specific do - mains and for everyday creativity . However , many existing works about creativity mainly focus on generating creative ideas instead of considering all the stages of the creative process . 2 . 2 Information seeking related to creativity Finding and using information can facilitate individuals in gener - ating new ideas that can lead to creativity [ 30 , 31 ] . Prior research found that artists often use libraries , print materials , and interper - sonal resources to look for specific information such as inspiration information , visual information , technical information , or infor - mation about trends and events [ 15 ] . Medaille [ 40 ] identified six purposes that led theatre artists to look for information , including “understanding a work’s historical , cultural , and critical background , finding sources of inspiration , learning about contemporary or his - torical theatre productions , artists , and events , learning technical or process information , finding performance materials , and furthering career goals” [ p . 336 ] . Serendipity has been regarded as a valuable part of creativity , discovery , and innovation . Many efforts have been made to inves - tigate and design ways to deliberately induce serendipity , such as personalizing information and supporting reasoning to enhance the blind luck of random information [ 54 ] , using ambient intelli - gence to incorporate users’ web browsing interactions to support users exploring possible interesting results [ 8 ] , highlighting search results based on a secondary source ( e . g . likes on Facebook ) of potential relevance to ranking [ 44 ] . However , serendipity might not necessarily result in significant discoveries or support creativ - ity [ 4 ] due to its untrainable and unpredictable nature , whereas the creative process is more trainable since the fundamental domain knowledge and expertise can be obtained by learning and practice . In addition , as mentioned above , prior research mainly focused on information seeking behavior of artists and their needs instead of creative information seeking of a broader range of the population . 2 . 3 Tools for supporting creativity Research has found that using search engines is a common approach for supporting creative ideation during the design process . However , designers often have trouble formulating their information needs , cannot effectively constrain the search results to meet their goals , or omit key information when coming up with creative ideas [ 37 , 39 , 43 , 55 ] . Tohelpovercome thesechallenges , especiallyforcreativeideation , a variety of tools have been adopted or developed . For instance , to help to brainstorm with context stimuli and overcome the difficulty of updating and curating physical notes , researchers developed var - ious types of digital whiteboards and table - top systems to support creative ideation and collaboration ( e . g . , Idea Expander [ 57 ] , Inspi - rationWall [ 2 ] , Crowdboard [ 3 ] , the large wall brainstorming sys - tem [ 28 ] ) . Some researchers developed tools to leverage distributed 181 Analyzing information resources that support the creative process CHIIR ’22 , March 14 – 18 , 2022 , Regensburg , Germany creativity , such as CrowdCrit [ 36 ] , Mosaic [ 32 ] , Tele - Board [ 26 ] . Some other tools have also been proposed to support ideation and design process for specific groups of populations within certain areas ( e . g . , a novel programming language for children [ 46 ] , inter - active musical systems for non - musicans [ 59 ] , Emotion - Centric Timeline ( ECT ) for analysts and designers [ 58 ] , supporting problem framing with scaffolding [ 37 ] ) . Researchers also explored ways to support creative thinking / learning by using scaffolding , AI sys - tems , visualization , and multi - media technology [ 18 , 21 , 30 , 37 , 42 ] . Efforts have also been made to investigate ways to enhance the positive effects of feedback on creative work [ 35 , 60 ] . Not discounting the importance of these previous results – many of these studies involved limited samples of design - related groups , limitationsofthedatacollectionundercontrolledexperiments . Frich et al . [ 23 ] noted that to address the issue , future research should “shift our efforts to studying in - vivo use of creativity support tools , not just the ones we build ourselves , but the ones that most creative practitioners employ in practice” [ 23 , p . 1243 ] . In our preliminary results from a survey study [ 62 ] , we found that participants seek - ing information from both search engines and other information resources to facilitate their creative process and the different stages of the creative process could influence their use of the resources . In initial analysis of the data from the current diary study data [ 63 ] , we identified different types of information that were essential to design - related creative projects , such as procedural information , domain information , finished examples , tips / opinions / motivating information . In the current paper , we present findings based on fur - ther investigation of our diary study data to explore people’s usage of information resources for their design - related creative tasks and their intentions that lead them to choose certain resources over others through the creative process . 3 METHOD To investigate our research questions ( RQ1 - 3 ) , we conducted a diary study with participants who were focused on design - related projects . We chose to conduct a diary study because we wanted to gain insights into participants’ in - situ experiences . Diary studies are known for their high ecological value and to help gain a good understanding of the events that are important to participants [ 12 , 17 ] . Our diary study format asked participants to record their experiences close in time to when the events occurred to help reduce “recall” bias [ 45 ] . In this section , we will describe our participants and recruitment process , data collection , and data analysis methods . The method information in this section is also described in a CHIIR 2020 paper that presents our initial analyses of the study [ 63 ] . 3 . 1 Participants and recruitment We had several goals in recruiting our participants . First , we wanted to recruit participants who had some design experience and were working on a new creative project . We also established several selection criteria in advance of our recruiting : ( 1 ) participants should be familiar with creative pro - cesses , ( 2 ) their project should involve at least the ideation and test stages of the creative process , and ideally would involve additional stages , ( 3 ) the project should be flexible ( e . g . , no school assignments that needed to meet certain requirements ) , ( 4 ) the project should involve looking for information on the Web , and ( 5 ) participants should be able to provide good written descriptions of their work . We used a two - stage recruitment process that involved a screen - ing questionnaire and an in - person interview . In April 2019 , we sent out a recruitment email to an opt - in university - wide listserv with a link to our screening questionnaire . The screening question - naire asked participants questions about their background and to describe a creative project that they planned to work on in the near future . We received 33 responses and selected 16 candidates based on the selection criteria . We invited the 16 candidates to a one - on - one interview to ask questions about their selected project , their timeline , and how they thought they might use online information resources as part of their work . Each participant was compensated USD $ 15 for completing the 20 - minute screening interview . Then the research team discussed each of the 16 candidates and selected 15 to participate in the two - week diary study . Next , each partici - pant selected a two - week period that fit their schedule and ours to complete their participation . Eleven participants completed the entire study ( four dropped out ) . As shown in Table 1 , our participants had a variety of back - grounds , but many were art or media majors . A large majority of the creative projects chosen for the study involved creating and making ( Table 1 ) . Creating and making are among the highest levels of everyday creativity [ 48 ] , so these projects were well - suited to our study goals . Table1 : Participantsandtheirprojects P # Major Project 2 Arts Making digital collages about a city after hurricane . 3 Arts Making a multiple color and layered woodblock print . 4 Arts Creating a custom typography and a poster . 5 Arts Creating abstract art work using re - used technology . 6 Arts Creating abstract portrait of a family as a gift . 9 Media Internship projects in a creative agency . 10 Media Writing nonfiction stories about sea level rise . 11 Biology Creating and selling her art works . 12 Psych . Writing a manuscript for a historical fiction novel . 13 Psych . Designing a board game based on family member’s life . 14 Arts Designing animations using Photoshop and Illustrator . 3 . 2 Diary study and data collection Before each participant started their diary period , we scheduled a meeting to introduce them to the process and tools to log their diary entries . After the introductory meeting , the study included two parts : a two - week diary recording period , and an in - depth retrospective interview . To facilitate data collection and protect participants’ privacy , we set up a new , empty , cloud - based Firefox account for each participant . Participants were asked to use this account when they were working on their project for the study . We asked participants to work on their projects for at least six days during the two - week study period . Any day that they worked on their project , we asked them to complete : ( 1 ) a useful information form any time they found information that helped their project ; ( 2 ) a trouble form any time they encountered difficulties finding information related to their project ; and ( 3 ) a daily review form at the end of each work day . 182 CHIIR ’22 , March 14 – 18 , 2022 , Regensburg , Germany Yuan Li , Yinglong Zhang , and Rob Capra The useful information form included questions about URL ( s ) of the information found , the creative stage the participant was at ( e . g . , explore , create ideas , combine ideas , execute ) , the infor - mation resource used to find information , why the information was helpful , and how satisfied they were with using the informa - tion resource they reported . The trouble form asked participants to describe the problem / difficulty , and included questions about the creative stage ( s ) when the problem happened , participants’ strategies to solve the problem , the platform and information re - sources where the problem happened , and how satisfied they were with using the reported information resource . The daily review form asked questions about their work process , the platforms and information resources they used during the day , all the creative stages they engaged in and the tools that were used to support each stage , reasons for not using search engines to support a re - ported creative stage , and about the challenges they encountered that day while working on the project . The full text of all three forms ( useful information , trouble , and daily review ) are available at : https : / / ils . unc . edu / searchstructures / resources / chiir2020 _ creative . pdf In addition to the diary forms , we were able to save and monitor participants’ search histories in the assigned Firefox accounts dur - ing the diary study period . We extracted their search history ( e . g . , queries , web page titles , URLs ) and formatted it for review in the final interview with each participant . After completing the two - week diary logging period , we sched - uled an in - depth interview with each participant . During the inter - view , we asked participants to answer questions about what they did in their projects , how they used different tools and resources to support their creative processes , and what problems they en - countered . The interview lasted from 90 to 120 minutes . Finally , participants were thanked and offered $ 120 as compensation for completing the study . 3 . 3 Creative stages and resources used As part of the daily review form , we asked participants to indicate what creative stages they engaged in for their project . To oper - ationalize this , we adopted Sawyer’s [ 50 ] eight - stage creativity framework ( see Section 2 . 1 ) 1 . The daily review form included a question ( Q3 ) that asked participants to indicate which of the seven creative stages they had engaged in that day . Multiple selections were allowed if they worked on more than one stage that day . “Q3 : Which of the following activities did you engage in for your project today ? ” • Find goals : figure out my goal ( what to create / design ; what problem to address / solve ) ; • Look up : look up information relevant to my goal ; • Explore : explore ( gather a broad range of potentially related information ) about my goal ; • Create ideas : create a large variety of ideas that may achieve my goal ; • Combine ideas : combine some ideas that I have already had ; • Select ideas : select the best ideas from all the new ideas that I have created ; 1 Since we focused on information encounters , we omitted Sawyer’s “take time off for incubation” stage , leaving seven stages . • Execute : figure out how to put my ideas into practice to achieve my goal • Other : please specify Based on their responses to Q3 , we used a looping feature in the survey software to dynamically ask a set of follow - up questions about the resources / tools they used to support each stage . We included two follow - up questions : ( a ) a multiple selection question 2 about what information resources / tools they used to support that stage today , and ( b ) an open - response question to describe how they used each selected resources / tool to support the stage . The five categories of tools / resources ( search engines , videos , images , etc . ) had helped us gain insights in our previous survey study [ 62 ] , so we used the same categories here . Thus , if in Q3 a participant indicated that they had worked on creating ideas and figuring out how to put their ideas into practice ( execute ) , they would have seen two sets of follow - up questions ( a & b ) , one set asking about the resources they used to support creating ideas , and another set asking about the resources they used to put their ideas into practice . 3 . 4 Data analysis We conducted quantitative and qualitative analysis with the col - lected data . 3 . 4 . 1 Quantitative analysis . To investigate the relationships be - tween the used resources / tools and the creative stages , we devel - oped seven Bayesian logistic regression models , one for each cre - ative stage – for understanding our participants’ strategies of choos - ing and using the resources to support a certain creative stage . In each model , we included five dummy variables corresponding to the resource as predictors . The predicted ( binary ) outcome for each model was whether that particular stage was included in the task ( 1 ) or not ( 0 ) 3 . 3 . 4 . 2 Qualitative analysis . Qualitative content analysis was used to analyze participants’ responses to the open - ended questions in their diary entries and during the in - depth interview . One author created a coding guide by following Berg’s [ 9 ] six - step coding workflow . Using a deductive approach , the author developed lower - level codes based on the unit of response to each open - ended question . Then an inductive approach was used to collapse similar lower - level codes into broader higher - order themes . Then the research team met for multiple rounds to discuss and finalize the codes . Two of the authors then coded all the diary entries independently and resolved disagreement through discussions . 4 RESULTS 4 . 1 Online resources and creative process RQ1 asks , “How do the types of resources that people use to sup - port their information needs differ across creative task stages ? ” To explore RQ1 , we analyzed participants’ responses to a series 2 Options include : ( 1 ) Search engines ( Google , Bing , Yahoo , etc . ) ; ( 2 ) Videos ( Youtube , Viemo , etc . ) ; ( 3 ) Images ( Pinterest , Instagram , Tumblr , Flickr , etc . ) ; and ( 4 ) Other ( please specify ) 3 We used Cauchy distributions as the default weakly informative priors for intercept and coefficients . The half - Cauchy distribution is used as the default prior for scale parameters . Normal distribution is used as the priors for random effects . 183 Analyzing information resources that support the creative process CHIIR ’22 , March 14 – 18 , 2022 , Regensburg , Germany of questions on the daily review form about what creative stages they had engaged in that day and what resources they had used to support each stage . Table 2 shows the results of the random effects Bayesian logistic regression model . In the table , each column shows results for one of the models . The resources that had an effect in a model are shown in bold and marked with a “ * ” . For each model ( creative stage ) , the highlighted resources are the ones that were more predictive of that stage 4 . The results in Table 2 suggest that participants used particular resources to meet the information needs of different creative stages : ( 1 ) when participants used Q & A sites , they were more likely to be in the " find goals " stage ; ( 2 ) when participants used search engines , they were more likely to be in the “look up” stage , and less likely to be in the “combine ideas” stage ; and ( 3 ) when participants used images , they were less likely to be in the “execute” stage ( trying to put their ideas into practice ) . 4 . 2 Use intentions and online resources RQ2 asks , “Why do people use particular information resources to support their creative processes ? ” To address this question , we conducted qualitative analysis using deductive coding ( as described in Section 3 . 4 . 2 ) on participants’ open - ended responses to questions in the daily review form and their comments during the end of study in - depth interview . Across the responses , we identified five common reasons that participants described for using information resources to support their creative tasks : • Look for specific information – Participants described using information resources to look for specific information ( e . g . , about specific people , places , products , tools , and companies , organizations ) to help with their creative task . • Support creative processes – Participants described using in - formation resources to support different aspects of their cre - ativeprocess ( e . g . , create ideas , combineideas , select / evaluate ideas , look for inspiration ) . • Learn domain knowledge – Participants also described using tools and resources to support learning domain knowledge they needed for their projects . • Learn procedural knowledge – Participants also had needs to learn procedural knowledge about how to do something . • Manage found information – Participants described using information resources such as Pinterest to help organize the information they found . We also identified several specific reasons that participants de - scribed for using particular resources ( e . g . , participants described using images to see finished examples ) . In the following subsections , we discuss participants’ reasons for using each type of resource in more detail . 4 . 2 . 1 Reasons for using search engines . Search engines are ubiq - uitous tools that are useful in many types of tasks . Participants described several main reasons for using search engines in their creative projects : 4 In Bayesian regression , when the HDI of a coefficient does not include zero , we have high confidence that this variable has an effect on the model . The estimated potential scale reduction factors ( ˆR ) of all the models were less than 1 . 1 for all the parameters , which indicates that the Bayesian models converged well [ 11 ] . To look for specific information – Search engines are designed to help people find specific information ( e . g . , known item look - up tasks ) . Not surprisingly , many of our participants ( n = 10 ) de - scribed using search engines to look for specific information . In their creative projects , these searches often focused on specific people / places / organizations and were often motivated by a need to ground their creative project in the real - world context . For example , P10 described that “I used the search engines to call up . . . information about the people and places” that were important to the nonfiction story they were writing about sea level rise . In the context of a project to paint a picture of a deceased family member , P6 looked for sheet music of the family member’s favorite composer so that they could “ space the sunflowers to mimic a piece of [ the famous composer’s ] music ” . To support creative processes – Many of our participants ( n = 10 ) also described using search engines to specifically support creative processes . For example , P3 described how they combined infor - mation found from a search engine with their prior knowledge to execute their ideas : “From the information that I found on google , I combined that with what I learned to make the initial block of my print . ” P10 talked about using a search engine to explore potential information related to their creative topic : “ [ using the search en - gine ] I could do these broad topics and take different avenues and . . . then use that as a search term to find next specific thing . ” And P12 described how using a search engine helped them find their goals : “It’s very much like I start very broad in scope and then I just get more specific as I figure out what exactly [ I needed ] . ” To learn domain / procedural knowledge – Participants also discussed using search engines to learn about domain knowledge ( n = 6 ) and procedural knowledge ( n = 3 ) . For instance , P12 used search engines to learn about domain knowledge about the “ history of Greece ” so that they could write an “ accurate piece of fiction ” . P2 described using search engines to find procedural information about “ how to write a short artist bio ” . 4 . 2 . 2 Reasons for using videos sites . Video sites such as YouTube provide a great resource for people engaged in creative projects . Youtube hosts a variety of channels from a diverse group of creators , makers , and designers . To learn procedural knowledge – One of the primary reasons our participants described for using video sites in their creative projects was to support learning procedural knowledge ( n = 7 ) . Dur - ing their creative process , participants watched videos to look for information that describe steps in a process , how to make some - thing work , and how to apply a tool or technique . For example , P3 found a video about “ how to make a gradient for a block print ” that “ will be helpful when executing the same technique ” on their own print . Compared to textual procedural information ( e . g . , articles , manuals ) , videos could often provide a large number of details that has been collected and synthesized in one spot . For example , P12 said that “ I can get a lot of different kinds of artistic interpretation [ voice , paintings , movies ] in one go . Whereas in Google it’s like article , PDF , and encyclopedia . ” In addition , videos also can help people more easily learn “how - to” knowledge in a visual way . For example , P9 described that “Youtube videos are more helpful because of the accompanying visuals it provides ” . 184 CHIIR ’22 , March 14 – 18 , 2022 , Regensburg , Germany Yuan Li , Yinglong Zhang , and Rob Capra Table 2 : Strategies of using resources in a creative stage . Each column shows results for one Bayesian logistic regression model with the five resources as predictor variables . The predicted outcomeisabinaryvariablethatindicateswhetherthestagewasincludedinthetaskornot . Cellsmarked ( * ) inboldshowdomainsthathadaneffectinthatmodel . Themodevaluesshow thelogoddsincrease / decrease . ˆRofallthemodelswerelessthan1 . 1foralltheparameters . Model 1 : Find goals Model 2 : Look up Model 3 : Explore Model 4 : Createideas Model 5 : Combineideas Model 6 : Selectideas Model 7 : Execute Intercept Mode - 2 . 95 * - 1 . 39 * - 2 . 17 * - 2 . 79 * - 3 . 85 * - 3 . 95 * - 0 . 98 * HDI [ - 7 . 63 , - 1 . 79 ] [ - 1 . 94 , - 0 . 87 ] [ - 5 . 06 , - 1 . 31 ] [ - 4 . 54 , - 1 . 88 ] [ - 9 . 38 , - 2 . 31 ] [ - 10 . 15 , - 2 . 36 ] [ - 1 . 56 , - 0 . 43 ] Search Mode 3 . 05 1 . 56 * - 0 . 36 - 0 . 81 - 2 . 09 * - 0 . 79 - 0 . 72 HDI [ - 0 . 32 , 27 . 74 ] [ 0 . 17 , 3 . 24 ] [ - 1 . 73 , 1 . 40 ] [ - 2 . 41 , 1 . 04 ] [ - 4 . 10 , - 0 . 31 ] [ - 2 . 88 , 1 . 30 ] [ - 1 . 81 , 0 . 46 ] Images Mode 0 . 80 - 0 . 39 0 . 13 1 . 12 0 . 17 0 . 03 - 1 . 10 * HDI [ - 0 . 73 , 2 . 19 ] [ - 1 . 56 , 0 . 73 ] [ - 1 . 09 , 1 . 32 ] [ - 0 . 52 , 3 . 21 ] [ - 1 . 77 , 2 . 11 ] [ - 1 . 78 , 1 . 70 ] [ - 2 . 49 , - 0 . 02 ] Q & A Mode 1 . 81 * - 0 . 54 - 2 . 10 - 0 . 14 - 1 . 48 - 0 . 98 0 . 28 HDI [ 0 . 18 , 3 . 38 ] [ - 2 . 14 , 0 . 80 ] [ - 29 . 33 , 0 . 80 ] [ - 2 . 62 , 1 . 84 ] [ - 25 . 18 , 1 . 83 ] [ - 21 . 72 , 2 . 72 ] [ - 1 . 00 , 1 . 54 ] Social sites Mode - 0 . 13 - 0 . 37 - 0 . 88 - 0 . 16 0 . 70 1 . 07 - 0 . 27 HDI [ - 2 . 62 , 1 . 72 ] [ - 2 . 19 , 1 . 01 ] [ - 3 . 44 , 0 . 72 ] [ - 2 . 66 , 1 . 66 ] [ - 1 . 55 , 2 . 75 ] [ - 0 . 70 , 2 . 92 ] [ - 1 . 58 , 1 . 02 ] Videos Mode 1 . 15 0 . 99 - 0 . 82 0 . 26 - 0 . 41 - 2 . 33 - 0 . 61 HDI [ - 0 . 29 , 2 . 58 ] [ - 0 . 03 , 2 . 17 ] [ - 2 . 49 , 0 . 59 ] [ - 1 . 61 , 2 . 07 ] [ - 2 . 57 , 1 . 48 ] [ - 20 . 47 , 1 . 04 ] [ - 1 . 80 , 0 . 43 ] σ Mode 0 . 25 * 0 . 1 * 0 . 09 * 0 . 3 * 0 . 49 * 0 . 77 * 0 . 39 * HDI [ 0 . 01 , 1 . 37 ] [ 0 . 01 , 0 . 87 ] [ 0 . 01 , 0 . 9 ] [ 0 . 04 , 2 . 66 ] [ 0 . 02 , 2 . 74 ] [ 0 . 02 , 3 . 2 ] [ 0 . 01 , 1 . 17 ] To support creative processes – Participants described how videos and video sites helped to support their creative processes ( n = 3 ) . For example , participants noted that video resources helped them evaluate , select ideas / methods , and plan their creative projects . Watching videos showing how someone else worked on a similar project allowed participants to predict and estimate outcomes of the methods in their own projects . For example , in order to make a canvas smoother , P18 found “ videos online that show how artists prep their canvas” from which they also found “ not only the tool and medium to use , but also the technique . ” In another example , P3 wrote that “ I knew hand burnishing was ideal for thinner papers from prior knowledge , but found in this video that it can be just as successful on thicker weight paper . This is helpful to my project as I select a paper to use for the printing process . ” To gain first - hand , personal knowledge – Participants also reported that video sites helped them find information from indi - viduals who have similar backgrounds or interests that can provide the “personal touch of human being” and help them easily evaluate the quality of the information . For example , as P11 described , “ it’s so personal to hear someone talk about it . . . I just enjoy watching and listening to someone’s work because you get to see people’s personali - ties and you get to see their entire thought process . . . it has more to do with [ what ] I wanted to see . ” 4 . 2 . 3 Reasons for using images . Images often play an important role in creative projects , especially in crafts and visual arts tasks . In this section , we analyze participants’ use of image sites ( e . g . , Pinterest , Instagram , Tumblr , Flickr ) and image search features provided by search engines . To support ideation and other creative processes – The most frequently mentioned reason by our participants for using images was to support creative processes ( n = 6 ) . During their creative pro - cess , users often search for images to look for inspiration to facilitate their ideation process , and to create , evaluate and select ideas . For example , P9 “ used Pinterest as a source to gain inspiration and browse the types of projects that have already been done ” , which helped them refine ideas , figure out the information types they preferred , and formed a more specific goal for the project . To see finished examples – Images also were sought to provide tangible illustrations of other peoples’ finished work to help inform their own creative project . For instance , P3 described collecting examples on Pinterest that centered around botanical or wildlife imagery , which “ helped narrow my intent on making several blocks on either moths or botanical . ” To see what they liked / disliked – Images helped participants see , evaluate , and select ideas from two perspectives – things they liked , and things they didn’t like . For instance , P13 described using images to help collect and select appropriate ideas by using Google to search for board game examples that “ might inspire me in order to pick the best design to create . ” On the other hand , images also helped participants to rule out options that they didn’t like or didn’t want to reproduce . For instance , P6 described using the images found about watercolor people to “ rule out what I thought might be the design choice . ” Image sites versus search engine image search – Participants distinguished their use of image sites such as Pinterest and Insta - gram compared to image search using search engines such as Bing and Google . Image search ( e . g . , using Bing or Google ) was often used to look for a broad range of images . However , image sites , particularly Pinterest and Instagram , were often used to browse for higher - quality images created by specific artists or professionals . For instance , P3 pointed out that “ when [ I ] look at Google images , there are a lot of people that don’t make good art or good prints . . . versus Pinterest , there are people with talent ” . P9 also described that they would start with Google image to get a broader idea , and then switch to Pinterest or Instagram to learn more about layout and design since “ they are more like a personalized search engine . . . I know what kind of accounts I want to go to draw inspiration from . ” Managing found information – Another reason that partici - pants mentioned using image sites such as Pinterest was to manage information . Many image sites allow users to build their own collec - tions by uploading their own materials , saving interesting images within the sites , tagging and following interested content creators for future information . For example , both P11 and P2 commented on using Pinterest to save and organize the ideas they collected from other people’s work . P11 noted , “ I used Pinterest to save some ideas to my page in order to look back on later . Like set up ideas and other useful things . ” . 4 . 2 . 4 Reasons of using Q & A and social media sites . Question an - swering sites ( e . g . , Quora , Stack Overflow , Tool / software Q & A sites , and Q & A forums ) and social media sites ( e . g . , Facebook , blogs ) pro - vide a rich environment for creative people to post and exchange 185 Analyzing information resources that support the creative process CHIIR ’22 , March 14 – 18 , 2022 , Regensburg , Germany ideas . In this section , we examine the reasons that our participants mentioned for using these two types of resources . To support creative processes – Many participants described using social ( n = 6 ) and Q & A sites ( n = 3 ) to support creative processes , including : to seek inspiration , to figure out how to do something , and to gain feedback to help evaluate and select ideas via direct or indirect interactions . Asking questions , finding existing answers , and reading comments from both professionals and people that have similar experiences helped creators evaluate their design ideas and choose the appropriate methods for their projects . For instance , P13 described that “ The expert responses on Quora also offered a lot of examples and suggestions which I was able to start sifting through and noting my favorites that might be possibilities . ” And P6 found advice about how to make watercolor trees in the background from answers posted by artists on Stack Overflow . To get feedback – Participants used social media sites such as Facebook to share their in - progress thoughts , communicate with team members or clients to select ideas , and gather feedback directly from their social network ( e . g . , families , friends , colleagues ) on their creative projects . For example , P10 described that “ I had some ideas in place about my final story , so I used social sites . . . to get feedback . ” And P9 mentioned using social media sites to “ communicate with clients and team to select the best idea . ” To learn knowledge – Q & A sites and social media sites also provided information that our participants used to learn about procedural knowledge , domain knowledge , and other specific infor - mation that was hard to find from other information resources . For instance , many posts on these platforms often contain subjective in - sights ( e . g . , tips , opinions , and recommendations ) written by people based on their experiences and reflections . These types of shared first - hand knowledge were very useful . For example , from blog posts , P14 learned how to do keyboard shortcuts more easily be - cause “ [ the post ] had step by step instructions on how to use a tool in Illustrator . ” Forums and social sites also provide portals for creators to understand broad information about a domain . For instance , P13 used a discussion forum to learn about board game mechanics and described that “ I am very much at the place where I need at least a rough sketch of some rules I’d like to implement . ” “On - the - ground” knowledge is another type of first - hand information people can find from social media sites . This is important when the creators need the information to help achieve realism in their projects , such as writing nonfiction stories . For instance , P10 described used Face - book to reach out to people who live in the communities to find information about “ hydrogreography and planning for the city of [ name ] ” to help plan their writing because it’s “ what people are talking about to their neighbors and what matters to them . ” To stay motivated – Information found from social media sites also helped keep some participants motivated to complete their cre - ative projects by learning lessons from others’ work . For example , P6 found that reading the blogs wrote by other artists helped them realized “art is for yourself and it helped to motivate me [ when I was feeling uneasy ] . ” 4 . 3 Challenges during creative processes In RQ3 , we investigate the challenges and problems that participants encountered during their creative process . Participants were asked to use the trouble form and the daily review questionnaire to log both technical and nontechnical challenges they encountered as they searched online and worked on their projects each day . Based on their descriptions , we identified the following challenges . 4 . 3 . 1 Challenges for searching for needed information . As described above , our participants sought various types of information for their creative projects ( e . g . , procedural knowledge , finished examples , and tips , opinions and recommendations ) . When looking for those kinds of information , participants experienced different problems across different resources . Search engines – Participants mentioned that they often felt overwhelmed by the information provided by search engines and could not find the exact information in need . For example , P14 wrote that “ there’s so much that was related to what I wanted , but maybe not so much about the exact things I was hoping to find ” . Video sites – For video sites , participants often found it is diffi - cult to make a quick relevant judgment about a video because they cannot “scan” the video efficiently to figure out whether it contains the information they need . For instance , P11 mentioned that “ there was a couple of videos . . . like 20 , 30 minutes long . . . If I have a very very specific question . . . I don’t want to spend my time [ watching videos ] ” . Quality of information – Another reason that caused people to fail in finding their needed information is related to the quality of the information resources , including lack of professional resources , unreliable resources , and broken links . For instance , P2 mentioned that “ Resources on writing a good artist biography are typically scarce . . . I had to rely on a website called [ name of site ] , . . . [ which is ] not exactly the best source . ” And P4 described that “ I was worried about the reliability of the information . . . it’s based on the algorithm and what people tag , and sometimes people will be wrong about what they tag and so , it will show up completely irrelevant images when it’s not at all what you’re looking for . ” These challenges often led to problems that hindered participants’ progress when they needed to figure out design options , make sense of the found information across multiple sources , or needed to make decisions to externalize the design plans . 4 . 3 . 2 Challenges for tracking , organizing and synthesize the found information . Participants reported that existing information re - sources did not provide much support to help save , track , orga - nize , and synthesize the information they found for their creative projects , especially when the information was collected from dif - ferent resources . We note two manifestations of this : Firstly , dur - ing their creative processes , participants often transitioned back and forth across different creative stages . For example , a creator might move among searching for examples for inspiration ( create ideas ) , considering different ways to combine their ideas , looking for information that would help them determine how to implement ideas , and re - defining their project goals . Switching among differ - ent stages often required them to re - find and review information they had seen previously . Existing resources did not support this well , especially when the creative stages spread over time . Sec - ondly , within a specific creative stage , participants often need to search for information from multiple resources and cross - reference the information they found across the different resources . This of - ten required extra effort and time to re - locate what they had seen earlier and to bring the information together . For example , when 186 CHIIR ’22 , March 14 – 18 , 2022 , Regensburg , Germany Yuan Li , Yinglong Zhang , and Rob Capra P11 needed to synthesize the information collected from different resources , he described : “ I don’t think I could ever find everything that I really wanted and put all into one spot [ by ] just using a search engine . ” Another participant P6 described that “ [ my challenge is ] keeping track of images in one place and remembering what I had explored on previous days . . . some images are in one folder and some are in another folder . ” 4 . 3 . 3 Creative challenges . Participants also described the creative challenges they faced . These were non - technical problems regard - ing the most creative aspects of their projects , such as figuring out design options , making decisions about alternative ideas , ex - ternalizing ideas , and constructing prototypes to help evaluation . For instance , when writing scenes for a historical fiction story , P12 described : “ A lot of my challenges come down to . . . how do I want the emotional beats of this moment to play out ? Is this in line with the character that I have been developing ? ” In their project to design a board game , P13 described a challenge in “ figuring out how to quickly make a lot of different representations of components to be able to test out different rules . ” Another participant ( P4 ) mentioned that “ [ I was unable ] to properly envision / sketch out my ideas because . . . so it’s hard to see what the final composition would be like . ” Other participants described that search systems were not always a source they expected to help with certain types of creative decisions . For example , P4 described : “ Search engines really didn’t have much to do with determining the best ideas I had , since that was a decision I had to make with input from others . ” Future information and search systems could consider ways to provide support for these types of creative challenges and to help facilitate creators’ mental process , such as providing assistant tools for inspiring design ideas , and visualizing components . 5 DISCUSSION In this section , we summarize and discuss our findings in the context of related work . In RQ1 we identified how participants used different information resources to support specific creative stages . Prior work mainly focused on the use of information resources during the “create ideas” stage [ 8 , 37 , 43 , 54 ] . Our study extends this prior work to consider how information resources are used across seven stages of Sawyer’s creativity framework [ 50 ] ( i . e . , find goals , look up , explore , create ideas , combine ideas , select ideas , execute ) . Quantitative analysis of our participants’ data showed trends in how they used different types of information resources . For example , search engines were often used in the “look up” stage , Q & A sites were more likely to be used during the “find goals” stage , and image sites were less likely to be used during the “execute” stage ( see Table 2 ) . In RQ2 , we examined the reasons that participants chose partic - ular information resources to support their creative processes . Our results here not only support the findings of prior research findings regarding the types of information creators looked for by using search engines [ 43 , 44 ] , but we also distinguished users’ intentions of why they chose particular information resources at specific cre - ative stages . Our qualitative analysis revealed five common reasons that participants described for using the different information re - sources : 1 ) to look for specific information , 2 ) to support creative processes , 3 ) to learn domain knowledge , 4 ) to learn procedural knowledge , and 5 ) to manage found information . Our analysis of participants’ responses gives further insights into the reasons they used particular resources . Our results reveal several interesting trends . First , search engines were used for sev - eral reasons : to look for specific information , to support creative processes , and to learn domain knowledge . Second , video sites were often used to support learning procedural knowledge and to gain personal , first - hand accounts . Participants described that videos could often provide more synthesized information in one spot , and that videos can make it easier to learn “how - to” do things visually with “a personal touch” that can help evaluate the information qual - ity . Third , images search and image sites were used to help support creative processes such as creating ideas . Participants described that image sites not only provide higher - quality images that are hard to find using search engine image search ( e . g . , Google ) , people also used those sites to help save and organize the information found over time . Fourth , we found that social sites such as Q & A sites and blogs were often used to help gain insights from experienced users about procedural knowledge , including tips and recommendations . RQ3 examined the reported challenges when participants inter - act with the information resources during creative progress . Our results show three main challenges of using information resources : First , it was hard to find the exact information in need due to too much information or lack of high - quality information . This chal - lenge echos previous research which found that users often have trouble formulating their information needs or effectively constrain the search results to find what they need [ 38 , 43 , 55 ] . Meanwhile , it also indicates that despite users’ limited search skills , there is still space for improving the quality of information from various resources . Furthermore , we noticed that it was challenging for cre - ators to track , organize , and synthesize the information collected across different information resource ; meanwhile the existing in - formation tools provide little support for assisting creative stages especially when participants need to figure out their design options , evaluate and select ideas to make design decision and gain feedback as their tasks progress . We note that one limitation of our study is that our sample size in our diary study is smaller than the broad survey studies . However , using the diary study approach allowed us to gather in - situ data about multi - stage , design - focused creative projects . 6 IMPLICATIONS Our findings provide insights for improving search engines , search algorithms , and developing assisting tools to support users’ creative behavior at different stages across the creative process : Stage - aware creative search tools – Our participants had different information needs while working in different creative stages . Be - cause of this , they reported using different information resources and tools during different stages . These results illustrate an oppor - tunity for search systems to allow users to indicate to the system what creative stage they are working on so that the system could tailor results that are relevant to that stage . For example , if a user indicated that they were in the “find goals” stage , the system could prioritize results related to Q & A sites ( since our findings showed that participants used Q & A sites more during that stage ) . If the 187 Analyzing information resources that support the creative process CHIIR ’22 , March 14 – 18 , 2022 , Regensburg , Germany system knew the user was in the “create ideas” stage , it could use a different retrieval model that could present divergent result sets that included degrees of randomness . Faceted relevance controls – Our participants described ways that situational relevance changed depending on their creative stage and specific goals . For example , during the “create ideas” stage , their goal might be to see a broad range of divergent results , whereas in the “execute” stage , they might prefer a more focused set of results with how - to knowledge . Relevance has long been understood to be a multi - faceted concept [ 49 ] . Based on our participants’ cre - ative information seeking needs , we see opportunities for search interfaces to provide users with controls to adjust how different facets of relevance influence the retrieval model . For example , a search system could provide interface sliders to adjust : the amount of divergence in the results ; a level of preference for results focused on procedural or domain knowledge ; to what extent the results describe comparisons of different options ; or the extent to which results focus on ways to combine ideas . Based on our analyses , these controls could be extremely beneficial to users working on creative tasks . Visually Combining ideas – Our participants described using image sites to support creative processes such as generating ideas and to see how different ideas might look when combined into a finished product . However , this ability to see how ideas might combine is limited by searching across artifacts that already exist . While it may seem outside the scope of traditional search engines , we envision tools that could help creators search for and combine different concepts and ideas . For example , a creator might search for different styles of chairs and different types of fabric . An integrated tool could help them visualize what a particular piece of fabric would look like when used to re - upholster a specific chair . Conceptually Combining ideas – Another way that search engines could help users to combine ideas is to support searches based on conceptually combining two or more ideas . We envision systems that would go beyond simple combinations of multi - concept queries . For example , a writer of historical fiction might be writing a story about a vegetarian living during World War II . A system to support combining ideas could return results related not just to the terms “vegetarian” and “World War II” , but also results that included re - lated concepts such as how food production was affected by the war and how populations with special needs dealt with the effects . Managing found information – Our participants described many situations where they needed to re - find information they had seen before . While there is a large amount of prior work on re - finding , we observed that these creative contexts included special types of re - finding needs . For example , during the “create ideas” stage ( ideation ) , participants talked about searching for and looking at lots of images for to get ideas . They needed ways to unobtrusively mark images of interest and return to them at later points in their process . Some participants used tools such as Pinterest for this , but these types of features could be integrated into the search system . Redesigning Search Engine Result Pages ( SERPs ) . Our results show that participants used search engines for many stages of their cre - ative projects . However , we see several opportunities for informa - tion presented on SERPs to help support users in creative tasks . First , SERPs could present tabs or other controls to allow users to change the orientation of the results for the query . For example , in a creative project , a creator might issue the query " Eiffel Tower " . In addition to displaying a default set of results , the system could present options to orient the results toward : history of , construc - tion of , stories about , paintings of , and other monuments . Previous work has investigated the effect of different results displays ( e . g . , blending specialized search engines’ results with the general search results v . s . non - blended results ) in aggregated search interfaces and found that users’ characteristics , task types and stages can affect their preferences of display layouts [ 6 , 10 ] . Second , future research could explore ways that SERPs could present and group information to facilitate creative activities such as ideation , sense - making , and synthesis . For instance , our results showed that participants often use specialized search engines ( e . g . , video sites , particularly Youtube ) to get a variety of information that has been synthesized by the video creators . Future research can examine how to mine the video contents and use the extracted information to inform ways to synthesize search results . Greater interaction . Previous research suggests that novice de - signers often have difficulties in expressing and finding the infor - mation they need to create ideas [ 37 ] . Our findings extend this work to show that even experienced creators can be challenged by finding specific types of information , especially when the needs are related to specific topics or particular techniques or methods . One reason for this may be that search algorithms are often trained based on data with little context or feedback . Prior research has ex - plored ways of collecting additional feedback from users [ 14 , 22 , 33 ] . Future systems could further explore methods to allow creators to provide the search system with feedback about the results pre - sented and the context of their task . For example , search systems need to learn how to do analogy mining and provide “analogical results” ( not just relevant ) to users . For instance , in the area of HCI , some related work has been done to explore ways to design and implement models that can support people to find useful analogies in large datasets [ 13 , 24 , 29 , 34 , 61 ] . Support creative process and creative task completion . Many pre - vious studies have focused on developing novel tools to support creative idea generation ( e . g . , [ 2 ] , [ 3 ] , [ 37 ] , [ 57 ] ) . Our findings sug - gests that creators still rely on the existing information tools and resources across all different stages of the creative process . Besides using these tools to look for information , users utilize the func - tions provided by information tools to help organize information , combine ideas , evaluate different design options through visual - ization technology ( e . g . , create Youtube video prototypes ) . Future information systems could consider to develop more convenient , light - wight assistance tools that can collaborate with the existing in - formation resources . Some recent efforts have been made to provide scaffolding , matrix tools to support synthesize and organize infor - mation during the exploratory information search process [ 5 , 16 ] , which could also be used to support creative tasks in the future . 7 CONCLUSION In this paper , we present an in - situ diary study with 11 participants to learn about how people use different information resources to support their creative process . Our analysis found that participants searched for information across all creative stages . We observed five common purposes , including : looking for specific information , 188 CHIIR ’22 , March 14 – 18 , 2022 , Regensburg , Germany Yuan Li , Yinglong Zhang , and Rob Capra supporting specific creative processes , learning domain informa - tion , learning procedural information , and managing information . Different information resources were used to support the goals of different creative stages . For example , search engines were more likely to be used at “look up” stage to find specific information , learn about domain knowledge , and procedural knowledge . Videos were often used for finding procedural knowledge synthesized in one spot from other people with first - hand experience . General image search was used to help explore examples and facilitate ideation , whereas specialized image sites were often used to find high - quality examples of finished products created by professionals . Q & A sites were often preferred at “find goals” stage , allowing creators to share and exchange ideas with others and to gain feedback on their ideas that can help them learn from others’ lessons . We also identified common challenges faced by participants : searching for needed information ; tracking , organizing and synthesizing the found infor - mation ; and executing the creative process to complete the tasks . Lastly , we outlined specific design ideas for how future information systems can better support users engaged in creative processes . Our findings have implications for improving search systems and developing information assisting tools to support creative tasks . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No . 1552587 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Teresa M Amabile . 1988 . A model of creativity and innovation in organizations . Research in organizational behavior 10 , 1 ( 1988 ) , 123 – 167 . [ 2 ] Salvatore Andolina , Khalil Klouche , Diogo Cabral , Tuukka Ruotsalo , and Giulio Jacucci . 2015 . InspirationWall : supporting idea generation through automatic information exploration . In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition . ACM , 103 – 106 . [ 3 ] Salvatore Andolina , Hendrik Schneider , Joel Chan , Khalil Klouche , Giulio Jacucci , and Steven Dow . 2017 . Crowdboard : Augmenting In - Person Idea Generation with Real - Time Crowds . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition . ACM , 106 – 118 . [ 4 ] Paul André , m . c . Schraefel , Jaime Teevan , and Susan T Dumais . 2009 . Discovery is Never by Chance : Designing for ( Un ) Serendipity . In Proceedings of the Seventh ACM Conference on Creativity and Cognition ( C & # 38 ; C ’09 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 305 – 314 . [ 5 ] Jaime Arguello and Robert Capra . 2020 . Sources of Evidence for Interactive Table Completion . In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Human Information Interaction and Retrieval ( Vancouver BC , Canada ) ( CHIIR ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 343 – 347 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3343413 . 3377995 [ 6 ] Jaime Arguello , Wan - Ching Wu , Diane Kelly , and Ashlee Edwards . 2012 . Task complexity , vertical display and user interaction in aggregated search . In Proceed - ings of the 35th international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval . 435 – 444 . [ 7 ] SharonBailin . 2012 . Achievingextraordinaryends : Anessayoncreativity . Springer Science & Business Media . [ 8 ] Russell Beale . 2007 . Supporting serendipity : Using ambient intelligence to aug - ment user exploration for data mining and web browsing . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 65 , 5 ( 2007 ) , 421 – 433 . [ 9 ] Bruce Berg . 2001 . Qualitative research methods for the social sciences . Pearson Boston , Boston , MA , USA . [ 10 ] Marc Bron , Jasmijn Van Gorp , Frank Nack , Lotte Belice Baltussen , and Maarten de Rijke . 2013 . Aggregated search interface preferences in multi - session search tasks . In Proceedings of the 36th international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval . 123 – 132 . [ 11 ] Stephen P Brooks and Andrew Gelman . 1998 . General methods for monitoring convergence of iterative simulations . J . computational and graphical stats . 7 , 4 ( 1998 ) , 434 – 455 . [ 12 ] Scott Carter and Jennifer Mankoff . 2005 . When participants do the capturing : the role of media in diary studies . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . ACM , 899 – 908 . [ 13 ] Joel Chan , Joseph Chee Chang , Tom Hope , Dafna Shahaf , and Aniket Kittur . 2018 . SOLVENT : A Mixed Initiative System for Finding Analogies between Research Papers . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 2 , CSCW ( 2018 ) , 31 . [ 14 ] Mark Claypool , Phong Le , Makoto Wased , and David Brown . 2001 . Implicit interest indicators . In Proceedings of the 6th international conference on Intelligent user interfaces . ACM , 33 – 40 . [ 15 ] Susie Cobbledick . 1996 . The information - seeking behavior of artists : Exploratory interviews . The Library Quarterly 66 , 4 ( 1996 ) , 343 – 372 . [ 16 ] Anita Crescenzi , Austin R . Ward , Yuan Li , and Rob Capra . 2021 . Supporting Metacognition during Exploratory Search with the OrgBox . In Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Infor - mation Retrieval ( Virtual Event , Canada ) ( SIGIR ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1197 – 1207 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3404835 . 3462955 [ 17 ] Mary Czerwinski , Eric Horvitz , and Susan Wilhite . 2004 . A diary study of task switching and interruptions . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . ACM , 175 – 182 . [ 18 ] Nicholas Davis , Ellen Yi - Luen Do , Pramod Gupta , and Shruti Gupta . 2011 . Com - puting harmony with PerLogicArt : perceptual logic inspired collaborative art . In Proceedingsofthe8thACMconferenceonCreativityandcognition . ACM , 185 – 194 . [ 19 ] Nicholas Davis , Holger Winnemöller , Mira Dontcheva , and Ellen Yi - Luen Do . 2013 . Toward a cognitive theory of creativity support . In Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Creativity & Cognition . ACM , 13 – 22 . [ 20 ] Alwin de Rooij , Philip J Corr , and Sara Jones . 2015 . Emotion and creativity : Hacking into cognitive appraisal processes to augment creative ideation . In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition . ACM , 265 – 274 . [ 21 ] Graham Dove and Sara Jones . 2014 . Using data to stimulate creative thinking in the design of new products and services . In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Designing interactive systems . ACM , 443 – 452 . [ 22 ] Steve Fox , Kuldeep Karnawat , Mark Mydland , Susan Dumais , and Thomas White . 2005 . Evaluating implicit measures to improve web search . ACM Transactions on Information Systems ( TOIS ) 23 , 2 ( 2005 ) , 147 – 168 . [ 23 ] Jonas Frich , Michael Mose Biskjaer , and Peter Dalsgaard . 2018 . Twenty Years of Creativity Research in Human - Computer Interaction : Current State and Future Directions . In Proceedings of the 2018 Designing Interactive Systems Conference . ACM , 1235 – 1257 . [ 24 ] KarniGilon , JoelChan , FeliciaYNg , HilaLiifshitz - Assaf , AniketKittur , andDafna Shahaf . 2018 . Analogy mining for specific design needs . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 121 . [ 25 ] François Guimbretière , Maureen Stone , and Terry Winograd . 2001 . Fluid inter - action with high - resolution wall - size displays . In Proceedings of the 14th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology . ACM , 21 – 30 . [ 26 ] RajaGumienny , LutzGericke , MatthiasWenzel , andChristophMeinel . 2013 . Sup - porting creative collaboration in globally distributed companies . In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer supported cooperative work . ACM , 995 – 1007 . [ 27 ] Joshua Hailpern , Erik Hinterbichler , Caryn Leppert , Damon Cook , and Brian P Bailey . 2007 . TEAM STORM : demonstrating an interaction model for working with multiple ideas during creative group work . In Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity & Cognition . ACM , 193 – 202 . [ 28 ] Otmar Hilliges , Lucia Terrenghi , Sebastian Boring , David Kim , Hendrik Richter , and Andreas Butz . 2007 . Designing for collaborative creative problem solving . In Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI conference on Creativity & cognition . ACM , 137 – 146 . [ 29 ] Tom Hope , Joel Chan , Aniket Kittur , and Dafna Shahaf . 2017 . Accelerating innovation through analogy mining . In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining . ACM , 235 – 243 . [ 30 ] Andruid Kerne , Nic Lupfer , Rhema Linder , Yin Qu , Alyssa Valdez , Ajit Jain , Kade Keith , MatthewCarrasco , JorgeVanegas , andAndrewBillingsley . 2017 . Strategies of Free - Form Web Curation : Processes of Creative Engagement with Prior Work . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition . ACM , 380 – 392 . [ 31 ] Andruid Kerne , Steven M Smith , Eunyee Koh , Hyun Choi , and Ross Graeber . 2008 . An experimental method for measuring the emergence of new ideas in information discovery . Intl . Journal of Human – Computer Interaction 24 , 5 ( 2008 ) , 460 – 477 . [ 32 ] Joy Kim , Maneesh Agrawala , and Michael S Bernstein . 2017 . Mosaic : Designing Online Creative Communities for Sharing Works - in - Progress . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . ACM , 246 – 258 . [ 33 ] Jin Young Kim , Jaime Teevan , and Nick Craswell . 2016 . Explicit in situ user feedback for web search results . In Proceedings of the 39th International ACM SIGIR conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval . ACM , 829 – 832 . 189 Analyzing information resources that support the creative process CHIIR ’22 , March 14 – 18 , 2022 , Regensburg , Germany [ 34 ] Aniket Kittur , Lixiu Yu , Tom Hope , Joel Chan , Hila Lifshitz - Assaf , Karni Gilon , Felicia Ng , Robert E Kraut , and Dafna Shahaf . 2019 . Scaling up analogical inno - vation with crowds and AI . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116 , 6 ( 2019 ) , 1870 – 1877 . [ 35 ] Gareth Loudon and Dimitrios Zampelis . 2017 . Technology Demo of using Real - time Biofeedback of Heart Rate Variability Measures to Track and Help Improve Levels of Attention and Relaxation . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition . ACM , 257 – 259 . [ 36 ] Kurt Luther , Jari - Lee Tolentino , Wei Wu , Amy Pavel , Brian P Bailey , Maneesh Agrawala , Björn Hartmann , and Steven P Dow . 2015 . Structuring , aggregating , and evaluating crowdsourced design critique . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing . ACM , 473 – 485 . [ 37 ] Stephen MacNeil , Zijian Ding , Kexin Quan , Thomas j Parashos , Yajie Sun , and Steven P . Dow . 2021 . Framing Creative Work : Helping Novices Frame Better Problems through Interactive Scaffolding . ( 2021 ) , 1 – 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3450741 . 3465261 [ 38 ] Stephann Makri , Tsui - Ling Hsueh , and Sara Jones . 2018 . Ideation as an Intellec - tual Information Acquisition and Use Context : Investigating Game Designers’ Information - Based Ideation Behavior . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology 70 , 8 ( 2018 ) , 775 – 787 . [ 39 ] Stephann Makri and Claire Warwick . 2010 . Information for inspiration : Under - standing architects’ information seeking and use behaviors to inform design . JournaloftheAmericanSocietyforInformationScienceandTechnology 61 , 9 ( 2010 ) , 1745 – 1770 . [ 40 ] Ann Medaille . 2010 . Creativity and craft : the information - seeking behavior of theatre artists . Journal of Documentation 66 , 3 ( 2010 ) , 327 – 347 . [ 41 ] Kumiyo Nakakoji , Yasuhiro Yamamoto , and Atsushi Aoki . 2002 . Interaction design as a collective creative process . In Proceedings of the 4th conference on Creativity & cognition . ACM , 103 – 110 . [ 42 ] David Norton , Derrall Heath , and Dan Ventura . 2011 . An artistic dialogue with the artificial . In Proceedings of the 8th ACM conference on Creativity and Cognition . ACM , 31 – 40 . [ 43 ] SrishtiPalani , ZijianDing , StephenMacNeil , andStevenPDow . 2021 . The " active Search " Hypothesis : How Search Strategies Relate to Creative Learning . In CHIIR 2021 - Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Human Information Interaction and Retrieval . ACM , 325 – 329 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3406522 . 3446046 [ 44 ] Ataur Rahman and Max L Wilson . 2015 . Exploring opportunities to facilitate serendipity in search . In Proceedings of the 38th International ACM SIGIR Confer - ence on Research and Development in Information Retrieval . ACM , 939 – 942 . [ 45 ] Harry T Reis , Shelly L Gable , and Michael R Maniaci . 2014 . Methods for Studying Everyday Experience in Its Natural Context . In Handbook of Research Meth - ods in Social and Personality Psychology . 373 – 403 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / cbo9780511996481 . 019 [ 46 ] Mitchel Resnick . 2007 . All I really need to know ( about creative thinking ) I learned ( by studying how children learn ) in kindergarten . In Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI conference on Creativity & cognition . ACM , 1 – 6 . [ 47 ] Ruth Richards . 2010 . Everyday creativity : Process and way of life—Four key issues . In The Cambridge handbook of creativity . Cambridge University Press , New York , NY , US , 189 – 215 . [ 48 ] Liz Sanders and Pieter Jan Stappers . 2012 . Convivial design toolbox : Generative research for the front end of design . BIS , Amsterdam . [ 49 ] Tefko Saracevic . 2016 . The Notion of Relevance in Information Science : Ev - erybody knows what relevance is . But , what is it really ? Synthesis Lectures on Information Concepts , Retrieval , and Services 8 , 3 ( 2016 ) , i – 109 . [ 50 ] R Keith Sawyer . 2011 . Explaining creativity : The science of human innovation . Oxford University Press , New York , NY , US . [ 51 ] BenShneiderman . 1999 . Userinterfacesforcreativitysupporttools . In Proceedings of the 3rd conference on Creativity & cognition . ACM , 15 – 22 . [ 52 ] Ben Shneiderman . 2007 . Creativity support tools : Accelerating discovery and innovation . Commun . ACM 50 , 12 ( 2007 ) , 20 – 32 . [ 53 ] D K Simonton . 2000 . Creativity . Cognitive , personal , developmental , and social aspects . Am Psychol 55 , 1 ( 2000 ) , 151 – 158 . [ 54 ] Elaine G Toms . 2000 . Serendipitous Information Retrieval . In Proceedings of DELOSWorkshop : InformationSeeking , SearchingandQueryinginDigitalLibraries , 2000 , Vol . 1968 . [ 55 ] Cristen Torrey , Elizabeth F Churchill , and David W McDonald . 2009 . Learning how : the search for craft knowledge on the internet . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 1371 – 1380 . [ 56 ] G Wallas . 1926 . The art of thought . J . Cape , London . [ 57 ] Hao - ChuanWang , DanCosley , andSusanRFussell . 2010 . Ideaexpander : support - ing group brainstorming with conversationally triggered visual thinking stimuli . In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work . ACM , 103 – 106 . [ 58 ] Huaxin Wei and Betty Durango . 2017 . Beyond Level Blueprints : Visualizing the Progression of Emotion and Narrative Driven Games . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition . ACM , 171 – 183 . [ 59 ] YongmengWuandNickBryan - Kinns . 2017 . SupportingNon - Musicians ? Creative Engagement with Musical Interfaces . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition . ACM , 275 – 286 . [ 60 ] Y Wayne Wu and Brian P Bailey . 2016 . Novices Who Focused or Experts Who Didn’T ? . In Proceedingsofthe2016CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 4086 – 4097 . [ 61 ] Lixiu Yu , Robert E Kraut , and Aniket Kittur . 2016 . Distributed analogical idea generation with multiple constraints . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing . ACM , 1236 – 1245 . [ 62 ] Yinglong Zhang and Robert Capra . 2019 . Understanding How People Use Search to Support Their Everyday Creative Tasks . In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Human Information Interaction and Retrieval ( Glasgow , Scotland UK ) ( CHIIR ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 153 – 162 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3295750 . 3298936 [ 63 ] Yinglong Zhang , Rob Capra , and Yuan Li . 2020 . An in - situ study of information needs in design - related creative projects . In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Human Information Interaction and Retrieval . 113 – 123 . 190