Accumulation of Actin in Subsets of Pioneer Growth Cone Filopodia in Response to Neural and Epithelial Guidance Cues In Situ Timothy P . O ' Connor and David Bentley Division of Neurobiology , Department of Molecular and Cell Biology , University of California , Berkeley , California 94720 Abstract . Directed outgrowth of neural processes must involve transmission of signals from the tips of filopodia to the central region of the growth cone . Here , we report on the distribution and dynamics of one possible element in this process , actin , in live growth cones which are reorienting in response to in situ guidance cues . In grasshopper embryonic limbs , pioneer growth cones respond to at least three types of guidance cues : a limb axis cue , intermediate target cells , and a circumferential band of epithelial cells . With time - lapse imaging of intracellularly injected rhodamine - phalloidin and rhodamine - actin , we moni - tored the distribution of actin during growth cone responses to these cues . In distal limb regions , accumulation of actin in filopodia and growth cone branches accompanies continued growth , while reduc - tion of actin accompanies withdrawal . Where growth cones are reorienting to intermediate target cells , or along the circumferential epithelial band , actin selec - tively accumulates in the proximal regions of those filopodia that have contacted target cells or are extend - ing along the band . Actin accumulations can be retro - gradely transported along filopodia , and can extend into the central region of the growth cone . These results suggest that regulation and translocation of actin may be a significant element in growth cone steering . URING development of the nervous system , the estab - lishment of correct connectivity is based in part upon the ability of extending nerve fibers to be di - rected by extracellular guidance information . Interactions between the molecules that constitute guidance information and receptors on the growth cone surface must transmit sig - nals to the interior of the growth cone that locally effect the organization and consolidation of the cytoskeleton ( Mitchi - son and Kirschner , 1988 ) . In the results reported here , we have used time - lapse imaging to monitor the distribution of one cytoskeletal element , actin , during migration and turn - ing of growth cones in response to their normal , in situ , guidance cues . The interfaces between an extending nerve fiber and its embryonic environment are the leading edges of filopodia and lamellipodia that protrude from the growth cone . Filopodia are tubular actin - based structures ( Letourneau , 1983 ; Bridgman and Dailey , 1989 ) , whose core is a bundle of 15 or more actin filaments ( Lewis and Bridgman , 1992 ) . The filaments , comprised of two strands of polymer ar - ranged in an a - helix , are polarized , with their barbed ends Address all correspondence to Dr . T . P . O ' Connor , Life Sciences Addition , Department of Molecular and Cell Biology , University of California , Berkeley , CA 94720 . usually oriented distally in the filopodium ( Pollard , 1990 ; Cooper , 1991 , Lewis and Bridgman , 1992 ) . Immuno - elec - tron microscopy , photo - bleaching , photo - activation , and high - resolution ~ , ideo - imaging in combination with cyto - chalasin treatment , show that actin filaments polymerize at the tips of filopodia and at the leading edges of lamellipodia ( Wang , 1985 ; Forscher and Smith , 1988 ; Smith , 1988 ; Okabe and Hirokawa , 1989 , 1991 ; Theriot and Mitchison , 1992a , b ) , and are retrogradely transported toward the cen - tral region of the growth cone . Some actin filament bundles have been observed to extend into the central region of the growth cone ( Letourneau , 1983 ; Bridgman and Dailey , 1989 ; Lewis and Bridgman , 1992 ) and even to enter the na - scent axon ( Gordon - Weeks , 1987 ) , while others predomi - nantly terminate at the transition between the peripheral do - main and the central domain ( Forscher and Smith , 1988 ) . Measurements of actin filament stability in the lamellae of fibroblasts and keratocytes suggest that many short , cross - linked actin filaments are moving as a unit , and undergo rapid turnover ( Theriot and Mitchison , 1992a , b ) . To investigate the distribution of actin during growth cone migration and turning , we studied Til pioneer growth cones migrating in grasshopper embryo limb buds ( Bate , 1976 ; Bentley and O ' Connor , 1992 ) . The pair of sibling Til neu - rons arise from a mother cell at the tip of the limb bud at 30 % of embryogenesis and extend axons proximally through © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 93 / 11 / 935 / 14 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 123 , Number 4 , November 1993 935 - 948 935 the limb along a stereotyped route to the CNS ( see Fig . 1 ) . The growth cones migrate between the basal lamina and the basal surfaces of the epithelial cells ( Anderson and Tucker , 1988 ) . Although growth cones normally adhere to the basal lamina , microdissection and enzymatic treatment experi - ments have shown that adequate guidance information can be provided by the epithelium and a small set of pre - axono - genesis neurons , termed guidepost cells , derived from it ( Lefcort and Bentley , 1987 ; Condic and Bentley , 1989a , b ) . The pioneer growth cones and the guidepost cells both ex - press , fasciclin I ( Bastiani et al . , 1987 ) , a glycosylphospha - tidylinositol ( GPW - anchored homophilic adhesion protein ( Elkins et al . , 1990 ) , that appears to mediate fasciculation between the two Til axons ( Jay and Keshishian , 1990 ) , as well as lachesin , a GPI - anchored member of the immuno - globin superfamily ( Karlstrom et al . , 1993 ) . Treatment of limbs with phosphatidylinositol - specific phospholipase C , which should remove fasciclin I , lachesin , and other GPI - anchored molecules , disrupts guidance ( Chang et al . , 1992 ) . The limb epithelium is partitioned into a set of segmentally iterated , circumferential bands that express different mem - brane - associated molecules . A distal band in each limb seg - ment expresses annulin , a putative membrane - associated transglutaminase ( Bastiani et al . , 1992 ; Singer et al . , 1992 ) and , in cockroach embryos , the DSS - 8 antigen , a 164 - kD transmembrane glycoprotein ( Norbeck and Denburg , 1991 ) . An intrasegmental band expresses fasciclin IV ( Kolodkin et al . , 1992 ) , a transmembrane glycoprotein , and an interseg - mental band expresses epithelial alkaline phosphatase , an - other GPI - anchored molecule ( Chang et al . , 1993 ) . Fas - ciclin IV has been shown to be necessary for normal guidance . Finally , at least three distal - proximal molecular gradients are expressed during Til pioneer growth cone migration in embryonic cockroach limb buds ( Norbeck et al . , 1992 ) . They may mediate guidance , possibly involving proteoglycans ( Wang and Denburg , 1992 ) , along the limb axis . Til pioneer growth cones project numerous lengthy filopo - dia which typically extend 30 # m or more from the growth cone ( Caudy and Bentley , 1986 ) . These filopodia are not re - quired for growth cone migration , but are required for nor - mal guidance ( Bentley and Toroian - Raymond , 1986 ) . Video - imaging of growth cones labeled with lipophilic fluorescent dyes during migration on the limb epithelium shows ihat the form of the growth cone during migration and turning varies considerably , depending upon the limb region being tra - versed ( O ' Connor et al . , 1990 ) . At some locations growth cones turn by dilation of a single filopodium which has con - tacted a high affinity substrate . Similar filopodial dilation turning events have been described in grasshopper ( Myers and Bastiani , 1993 ) , and mammalian ( Mason and Gode - merit , 1992 ) central nervous systems ( CNSs ) . During migra - tion and turning , the disposition and behavior of micro - tubules has been imaged in live Til growth cones by intracellular injection of rhodaminated bovine tubulin ( Sabry et al . , 1991 ) . Depending upon the limb region being traversed , microtubule disposition within the growth cone 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : CNS , central nervous system ; GPI , glycosylphosphatidylinositol ; r - phalloidin , rhodamine - phalloidin ; r - actin , rhodaminated actin . can become restricted to one location either by selective retention of microtubules in branches that have been ex - tended in the preferred direction , or by selective intrusion of microtubules into a branch forming from a dilating filopo - dium . Particularly in the latter case , it is clear that the branch dilates in advance of microtubule intrusion , rather than be - ing caused to dilate by the arrival of microtubules . The clear existence of this earlier morphological event in filopodial di - lation motivated our examination of actin distribution during growth cone turning . Materials and Methods Actin Preparation and Fluorescent Labeling Actin was prepared from rabbit muscle acetone powder ( Sigma Chemical Co . , St . Louis , MO ) as outlined by Pardee and Spudieh ( 1982 ) . Briefly , G - actin was extracted by adding five grams of acetone powder to 100 ml of G buffer ( G buffer ; 5 mM Tris - HCl pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 2 mM CaCI2 , 0 . 2 mM ATE 0 . 2 mM DTI ' ) and stirring for 30 rain at 4 " C . The solution of hydrated powder was filtered through several layers of cheesecloth . The solid residue was resusponded in 50 ml of G buffer and filtered a second time . The filtrates were combined and centrifuged in a SA - 600 rotor at 10 , 000 rpm for 1 h at 4°C . After discarding the supernatnnt , the G - actin was polymer - ized by adding F buffer ( F buffer , final concentration : 1 mM ATE pH 8 . 0 , 2 mM MgC12 , and 50 mM KC1 ) , covered and left at 4 " C for 2 h . To re - move tropomyosin , solid KC1 was slowly added to a final concentration of 0 . 6 M KCI , and the solution was stirred vigorously for 1 h at 4 " C . F - actin was retrieved by centrifuging for 1 . 5 h at 40 , 000 rpm in a 50 . 2 Ti rotor at 4°C . The pellet was homogenized and resuspended in G buffer and dialyzed against three changes of one liter of G buffer over 2 d . After a final centrifu - gation for 1 . 5 h at 40 , 000 rpm in a 50 . 2 Ti rotor at 4°C , the supernatant was aliquoted into Eppendorf tubes , frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at - 80 * C . To verify the isolation of aetin and its purity , samples from the pre - pared actin were run on a 10 % polyacrylamide gel . Actin concentration was determined using a micro bicinchoninic acid ( BCA ) protein assay kit ( Pierce , Rockford , IL ) . The prepared actin was labeled with N - hydroxy suecinimidyl 5 - carboxy - tetramethyl rhodamine ( NHSR ; Molecular Probes , Inc . , Eugene , OR ) fol - lowing the protocol in Kellog et al . ( 1988 ) . Slight modifications included the sonication of filamentous actin between cycling procedures to aid disas - sembly , and a final dialysis step of labeled G - actin against Hepes injection buffer ( 1 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 2 , 0 . 2 mM MgCI2 , and 0 . 2 mM ATP ) . To test for polymerization and visualization of labeled actin , 10 / ~ M of G - actin was polymeriznd in F buffer , and then further diluted 1 : 50 in F buffer . The sam - ple was transferred to a slide , covered with a coverslip and imaged as out - lined below . To prepare phalloidin , a stock solution ( 0 . 5 mM ) of rhodamine - phal - loidin ( Molecular Probes , Inc . ) in DMSO was diluted with buffer ( 50 mM K glutamate , 0 . 5 mM MgCI2 , pH 6 . 5 ) to a final concentration of 0 . 1 mM and spun for 5 rain in a Beckman microfuge before injection . In some ex - periments , injected Til neuron cell bodies were also contact - labeled with 3 , 3 ' - dioctadecyloxacarbocyanine perehlorate ( DiO ; Molecular Probes , Inc . ) as previously described ( O ' Connor et al . , 1990 ) . In addition , some rhodamine - phalloidin injected cells were bathed in cytochaiasin D ( Sigma Chemical Co . ; 0 . 01 - 0 . 1 tLg / ml ) containing culture medium . Embryo Culture and Image Analysis Schistocerca americana embryos were obtained from a grasshopper colony at the University of California at Berkeley . Eggs were sterilized , dissected , and staged as previously described ( Bentley et al . , 1979 ; Caudy and Bent - Icy , 1986 ) . Limb buds of 31 - 34 % stage embryos were placed on a poly - L - lysine - coated coverslip ( 5 mg / ml ) , opened lengthwise , and unrolled flat to expose the pioneer pathway . Mesodermal cells occupying the lumen of the limb were removed with a suction pipette , exposing the Til neurons located on the basal surface of the epithelium . The Til neurons and guidepost neu - rons were viewed with differential interference contrast optics using a Nikon inverted compound microscope ( Lefcort and Bentley , 1987 ; O ' Connor et al . , 1990 ) . A Til neuron cell body was injected with either rhodamine - phalloidin ( 0 . 1 mM ) , rhodamine - actin ( 0 . 1 mM ) or a mixture of rhodamine - actin and The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 123 , 1993 936 ( Photometrics Ltd . , Tucson , AZ ) . Images were processed ( Perceptics soft - ware ) on a Mac ILx computer ( Apple Computers ) and stored on a digital optical disk ( Pinnacle ) . For each group of images , several optical sections were taken through the growth cone . The National Institutes of Health im - age software also was used for some image analysis and montaging . After image collection , preparations were fixed , and the Til neurons and guidepost cells ( pre - axonogenesis neurons ) were labeled with neuron - specific antibodies ( / an and Jan , 1982 ) to confirm their positions ( see Fig . 1 B ) . The results are based on the observation of 36 growth cones in 28 em - bryos that continued to migrate and steer normally during imaging of injected fluorophores . Of these growth cones , 13 were labeled with rhoda - mine - phalloidin , 15 with rhodamine - actin , and 8 with both rhodamine - actin and fluorescein - dextran . Growth cones were about equally distributed in the different limb regions . Figure 1 . The Til pioneer growth cone pathway in the embryonic grasshopper limb bud . ( A ) A schematic representation of the limb at the 33 - 35 % stage of development showing the Til pioneer growth cone pathway , the ectodermal epithelium on which the growth cones migrate and the guidepost cells ( Fel , Trl , and Cxl ) . The sibling pioneer neurons arise in the tibia ( Ti ) and extend axons along a stereotyped route to the CNS . At three locations , the growth cones make turns mediated by filopodial contact with guidepost cells . Within the trochanter ( Tr ) , the growth cones turn and migrate ventrally along a narrow band of epithelial cells that express fas - ciclin IV ( filled circles ) . The numbers ( 1 , 2 , and 3 ) beside the filled growth cones indicate the locations of the in situ steering events dis - cussed in the text . Ta , tarsus ; Fe , femur ; Cx , coxa ; CNS , border of central nervous system ; distal , left ; dorsal , up . ( B ) An interfer - ence contrast photomicrograph of a limb fillet preparation that has been cultured , fixed and labeled with a neuron - specific antibody ( anti - HRP ; lan and Jan , 1982 ) . The Til growth cones have con - tacted the Fel and Trl guidepost cells , have completed their ventral migration along the fasciclin IV - expressing band of epithelial ceils ( between black triangles ) , and have made filopodial contact ( / arge arrow ) with the Cxl guidepost cells . A row of epithelial cells , indi - cating cell size and spacing , is marked ( small arrows ) . Bar , 50 # m . fluorescein - dextran ( 0 . 3 mM , 10 kD ; Molecular Probes , Inc . ) . Injections were made using a pico - spritzer ( Narishige USA , Inc . , Greenvale , NY ) and pulled , beveled borosilicate micropipettes . Before each injection , a slow constant flow of the injection solution from the electrode tip was estab - lished . Cell bodies were impaled briefly and the injection solution was al - lowed to diffuse throughout the cell . Limb preparations were bathed in a modified RPMI medium ( Lefcort and Bentley , 1987 ; O ' Connor et al . , 1990 ) at 32 - 33°C in a heated stage chamber ( Medical Instruments , Greenvale , NY ) on a Nikon inverted microscope , and imaged with a 1 , 320 x 1 , 024 pixel CCD chip ( Eastman Kodak Co . , Rochester , NY ) in a cooled camera Results To observe actin distribution and dynamics in growth cones in situ , 32 - 34 % stage grasshopper embryo limb bud epithe - lia were cut open longitudinally along the posterior aspect and unrolled onto an adhesive substrate . With interference contrast optics , the two Til pioneer neurons , the epithelial substrate , and intermediate target cells ( guidepost cells ) were readily observed in this " fillet " preparation ( Fig . 1 ; O ' Connor et al . , 1990 ) . On the fillet , growth cones migrated along their normal route , contacting and orienting to normal guidance cues as they proceeded ( Lefcort and Bentley , 1987 ; O ' Connor et al . , 1990 ) . Rhodamine - PhaUoidin Injection Initially , pioneer cell bodies were microinjected with 0 . 1 mM rhodamine - phalloidin ( r - phalloidin ) . Although the two sib - ling pioneer cell bodies are coupled by gap - junctions , little rhodamine labeling transferred into the uninjected sibling . After a period of 10 - 30 min , r - phalloidin diffused to the dis - tal ends of the nascent axons ( 50 - 250 # m ) , and into the growth cones . With the ( low ) quantities of r - phaUoidin that were injected , labeled growth cones continued to migrate at normal rates , r ~ 5 - 10 # m / h , and responded normally to prox - imal and circumferential guidance cues , and to guidepost cells . Image stacks of 50 - 100 - ms exposures at 3 - 6 different focal planes were taken at intervals down to about one every 10 min without disrupting growth cone migration . r - phalloidin labeling of live growth cones revealed a largely conventional distribution of F - actin ( Fig . 2 ) . The na - scent axon shaft and the central region of the growth cone contained relatively low levels of F - actin . A bright , thin shell of F - actin occurred in sub - cortical regions , and a core of F - actin occupied the interiors of filopodia . Two aspects of labeling were notable . First , most filopodia in regions of the growth cone perimeter that were extending appeared to con - tain higher levels of F - actin than other locations around the growth cone perimeter ( Fig . 2 , A and C ) . Second , in some growth cones , bundles of F - actin could be seen extending from the leading edge of the growth cone into central regions and even as far as the shaft of the nascent axon ( Fig . 2 C ) . To confirm that r - phalloidin was selectively labeling F - actin ( Forscher and Smith , 1988 ; Cooper , 1991 ; Prakash and Pollard , 1991 ; Ohmori et al . , 1992 ) , the culture medium was exchanged for medium containing 0 . 01 - 0 . 1 # g / ml cyto - chalasin D . Within 1 - 3 rain , the r - phalloidin - labeled mate - rial underwent collapse . Collapsing material was retro - O ' Connor and Bentley Actin Accumulation in Guiding Filopodia 937 Figure 2 . Frames from time - lapse image sequences show - ing rhodamine - phalloidin la - beling of F - actin distribu - tion in live Til growth cones migrating in situ on the limb epithelium before ( A and C ) and after ( B and D ) addition of cytochalasin D to the culture medium . ( A ) A growth cone in the mid - femur ( Fig . 1 A , loca - tion 1 ) : F - actin is concen - trated in the sub - membrane cortex ( open arrow ) , in lead - ing branches ( black arrows ) and in filopodia ( arrowhead ) . ( B ) The same growth cone 5 min after the addition of cytochalasin D : some filopo - dia ( arrowhead ) have col - lapsed back into the growth cone ; F - actin in the cortex ( open arrow ) and in small branches ( black arrows ) has collapsed into a series of local accumulations . ( C ) A growth cone migrating ventrally along the fasciclin IV express - ing band of epithelial cells ( black triangle ) in the tro - chanter ( Fig . 1 A , location 3 ) : F - actin is concentrated in leading filopodia and the lead - ing edge of the growth cone ( open arrow ) . Several F - actin bundles , one of which is la - beled by the arrows , extend from the leading edge back through the growth cone into the nascent axon shaft . ( D ) The same growth cone 8 rain after the addition of cyto - chalasin D : the most promi - nent F - actin bundle ( arrows ) and other bundles have col - lapsed into a series of labeled aggregates . C and D are mon - tages of images from two focal planes . Bars , 5 # m . gradely transported from some filopodia and small branches . Usually , the linear arrays of labeling material , including those that extended through the central region of the growth cone ( Fig . 2 C ) , became redistributed into a string of small dots and clumps ( Fig . 2 , B and D ) . In some cases , these dots were retrogradely transported into the growth cone , but in other cases they remained in distal locations . While some filopodia withdrew with the loss of r - phaUoidin - labeled ma - terial ( Fig . 2 B ) , other filopodia remained extended for sev - eral tens of minutes . Over a period of hours , they gradually withdrew into the growth cone . Replacement of the cyto - chalasin medium with normal culture medium resulted in re - extension of filopodia and a resumption of growth cone mo - tility . These results support the conclusion that r - phaUoidin is revealing the disposition of F - actin . Figure 3 . Rhodamine - labeled actin . ( A ) A silver stained 10 % polyacrylamide gel show - ing the degree of purity of the actin that was labeled with rhodamine and injected into the Til cells . ( B ) An image of rhodamine - labeled actin fila - ments polymerized in vitro . Bar , 10 # m . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 123 , 1993 938 Figure 4 . Distribution of rho - damine - actin in pioneer growth cones . ( A and B ) A live Til growth cone that has been doubled - labeled with DiO and rhodamine - phalloi - din , and is migrating ventrally along the fasciclin IV - express - ing epithelial band ( black tri - angle ; all panels ) in the tro - chanter ( Fig . 1 A , location 3 ) . ( , 4 ) DiO label : the overall morphology of the growth cone , nascent axon , and filo - podia are revealed ( the arrow - head and arrow refer to the corresponding sites in B ) . ( B ) Rhodamine - phalloidin label : F - actin is concentrated in bun - dles that occupy the cores of leading filopodia and extend into the growth cone . F - actin concentration is much lower in laterally extending filopo - dia ( arrowheads ) . ( C - E ) A different Til growth cone at the same location that has been double - labeled with rhodamine - actin and fluores - cein - dextran ( 10 kD ) . ( C ) Rhodamine - actin labeling is relatively intense in the cen - tral region of the growth cone ( open arrow ) and in leading filopodia ( black arrows ) . ( D ) The same growth cone viewed as a ratioed image : for each pixel , the ratio of the intensity collected through rhodamine filters ( rhodamine - actin ) to the intensity collected through fluorescein filters ( fluorescein - - dextran ) is computed and displayed along a full - range gray scale ( high ratios are displayed as white , low ratios as black ) . The decreased intensity ( low ratio ) of the central region ( open arrow ) indicates that rhodamine - actin is relatively unconcentrated in this area ; in contrast , the maintained intensity ( high ratio ) in the proximal regions of filopodia ( arrows ) , in - dicates a relatively high concentration of rhodamine - actin , probably in the form of F - actin . Note the similarity of the F - actin localization revealed by this process to the localization imaged with rhodamine - phalloidin ( B ) . ( E ) Fluorescein - dextran labeling of the same growth cone is relatively intense in the central region ( open arrow ) , but relatively dim in filopodia ( black arrows ) . Bar , 5 / ~ m . Rhodamine - Actin Injection Because of the possibility that r - phalloidin interaction with actin polymer might influence actin dynamics , we examined actin dynamics directly with rhodaminated actin ( r - actin ) . Rabbit skeletal muscle actin was labeled with rhodamine and cycled twice through polymerization and depolymerization steps to select for assembly competent labeled actin mono - mer ( Kellogg et al . , 1988 ) . The labeled actin product ap - peared to be quite pure ( Fig . 3 A ) , and readily polymerized into filaments under in vitro conditions ( Fig . 3 B ) . In general , growth cones labeled with r - actin ( and imaged in several focal planes ) appeared similar to those labeled with r - phalloidin ( see Figs . 5 A , 6 A , and 8 B ) . Label was not observed in the uninjected sibling ( see Fig . 6 A ) , indicat - ing that little unbound rhodamine was present in the injected material . Labeling intensity was relatively low in the axon shaft ( Figs . 4 C , 5 D , 6 A , and see Fig . 8 , A and B ) , and was O ' Connor and Bentley Actin Accumulation in Guiding Filopodia 939 Figure 5 . Shift in actin distribution during a Til growth cone steering decision in the mid - femur ( see text ) . Frames are from a time - lapse image sequence of a rhodamine - actin labeled Til neuron extending an axon proximally in the mid - femur ( Fig . 1 A , location 1 ) . The axon has bifurcated and is extending one growth cone in a dorsal ( less preferred ) direction , and the other in the proximal ( preferred ) direction . Initially , the dorsal branch is more robust and grows more rapidly than the ventral branch . However , during the period shown ( A - D ) , the dorsal growth cone is withdrawn and the ventral growth cone advances . Actin labeling initially is bright in leading branches of the dorsal growth cone ( A , arrowhead ) , but subsequently is reduced ( B , arrowhead ) , and eventually is barely detectable as the branch is withdrawn ( D , large arrowhead ) . In the ventral growth cone , lightly labeling actin cores initially are seen in processes at the front of the growth cone ( A , arrows ) ; these subsequently become much more robust ( B and C , arrows ) , and one becomes the core of a leading branehlet ( C , arrow ~ head ) . Eventually , bright patches of actin occupy the leading edge of the ventral growth cone ( D , arrows ) , and actin accumulates in the proximal regions of some leading filopodia ( D , arrowhead ) . Time 0a : min , upper right of panels ) : elapsed time between images in successive panels . Panels are montages of images from two focal planes . Bar , 10 # m . brightest at the leading edge of the growth cone ( Figs . 5 D , 6 A , and see Fig . 8 B ) . In some images taken through a 60x objective ( Fig . 4 C ) , and in many images taken through 100x objectives ( Fig . 6 , B - E ) , the central region of the growth cone appeared relatively bright . To evaluate whether this labeling was due to F - actin or to a large amount of actin monomer in the larger volume of the central region of the growth cone , pioneer neurons were co - injected with fluores - cein - dextran ( Fig . 4 E ) and with r - actin ( Fig . 4 C ) . Fluores - cein - dextran ( 10 kD ) should distribute relatively uniformly throughout the available intracellular volume ( Luby - Phelps et al . , 1988 ) , and was used as a monitor of local intracellular The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 123 , 1993 940 Figure 6 . Selective actin accumu - lation in the proximal regions of filopodia that have contacted a guidepost cell ( see text ) . Panels show frames from an image se - quence of a live Til growth cone injected with rhodamine - actin and migrating in situ on the limb epithelium . ( A ) The growth cone ( arrow ) is migrating dorsally and proximally in the femur ( Fig . 1 A , location 2 ) . ( B ) Several filopo - dia , with similar actin density , project toward the Trl guidepost cell ( C , large asterisk ; the posi - tion of Trl was confirmed with in - terference contrast optics and , af - ter imaging , by labeling the fixed limb with neuron - specific anti - bodies ; see text ) . Of the five num - bered filopodia , 1 and 3 extend ventrally , do not contact cell Trl , and do not accumulate actin . Filopodia 2 , 4 , and 5 extend ven - trally and proximally , contact cell Trl , and accumulate a denser core of actin . The positions of the tips of these five filopodia are shown in E . ( C ) Actin has accumulated in the proximal region of filopo - dium 4 ( curved arrow ) ; lamellae ( between arrow and base of filo - podium ) are extending laterally from the shaft . ( Large asterisk ) position of cell Trl ; ( small aster - isk ) a lamella or , possibly , filopodial anastomosis . Filopo - dium number 4 bypasses this lamella . ( D ) Actin has accumu - lated in the proximal region of filopodium 5 ( curved arrow ) . ( E ) Actin has accumulated in the proximal region of filopodium 2 ( curved arrow ) . Ventrally extend - ing filopodia 1 and 3 remain un - changed . Numbered arrows , po - sitions of the tips of the five filopodia . ( F ) Detail of ( E ) ( ro - tated , ' o45 ° clockwise ) , indicat - ing the line ( between arrowheads ) of pixel intensity measurement and the enumeration of filopodia shown in Fig . 7 A ( and 6 B ) . Time ( h : min , on upper right of B - E ) : elapsed time between images in successive panels . Bars : ( A ) 20 # m ; ( B - E ) 5 # m ( on D ) ; ( F ) 2 . 5 # m ( on D ) . cell volume . Migrating growth cones of eight double - labeled neurons were analyzed . Images were computed which dis - played the ratio of r - actin fluorescence to fluorescein - dex - tran fluorescence in each region of the growth cone ( Fig . 4 D ) . In the ratio image , the area of brightness seen in the cen - tral region of the growth cone was reduced relative to the brightness of leading filopodia ( Fig . 4 D , smallarrows ) , indi - cating that actin is more concentrated in leading filopo - dia . Since no mechanism for local intracellular concentra - tion of actin has been described other than polymerization , O ' Connor and Bentley Actin Accumulation in Guiding Filopodia 941 this local increase in actin concentration suggests that the filopodia contain a higher ratio of F - actin to G - actin than the central region of the growth cone . The increased concentra - tion of F - actin indicates that more actin filaments , or longer actin filaments , are present per unit volume . This is likely to be achieved by increasing the packing density of actin fila - ments through bundling . These areas also correspond well to the pattern of F - actin revealed by r - phalloidin labeling of growth cones in the same location in the limb ( Fig . 4 B ) . These results suggest that r - actin accumulation is an indica - tor of the probable location of F - actin within filopodia . Actin Distribution during Growth Cone Steering in the Distal Femur Til pioneer neurons arise at the tibia / femur boundary and their growth cones initially migrate through the distal region of the femur ( Fig . 1 , location 1 ) . The growth cones are migrating on the alkaline - phosphatase expressing domain of epithelial cells ( Chang , et al . , 1993 ) , and may be oriented by a substrate - bound molecular gradient ( Norbeck et al . , 1992 ; Wang and Denburg , 1992 ) . Growth cone behavior suggests that the guidance information in this region is rela - tively ambiguous ; numerous course - correcting turns are made , and multiple branches can arise which extend in off - axis directions ( O ' Connor et al . , 1990 ) . Steering in this re - gion primarily occurs by selective retention of processes which have been extended in the axial direction . We imaged 11 growth cones migrating in the distal femur , six labeled with r - actin and five labeled with r - phalloidin . The distribution of actin in filopodia was similar when viewed with either label . During growth cone migration in this region , redistributions of actin were observed which were correlated with the success of a process in sustaining growth . This was most evident where a growth cone bifur - cated and extended two similar sized branches in different directions . Fig . 5 shows a case where a single Til neuron has established two growth cones extending proximally in the fe - mur . At the beginning of the series of images , the dorsal growth cone had extended farther than the ventral growth cone . The extension of the dorsal growth cone was correlated with an increase in the amount of actin at the leading edge and in the leading filopodia . Subsequently , there was a sub - stantial shift in the amount of actin observed in each growth cone ( Fig . 5 , B - D ) . Actin concentrations , likely to be F - actin bundles , began to build - up in the proximal regions of the majority of filopodia extended from the ventral growth cone ( Fig . 5 A ) ; these bundles eventually became cores oflamellar processes with a leading fringe of short filopodia ( Fig . 5 , B and C ) . The increase in actin in the ventral growth cone was followed by the extension of the growth cone to and beyond the axial position of the dorsal growth cone ( Fig . 5 , C and D ) . Concomitant with the increase of actin in the ventral growth cone , there was a decrease in the actin concentration in the dorsal growth cone . As the amount of actin deceased in the dorsal growth cone , it started to retract ( Fig . 5 D ) . These local changes in actin concentration were detectable before the large - scale withdrawal or substantial advance of the growth cones . Actin Distribution during Turns Toward Guidepost Cells At three locations in the limb , pioneer growth cones are re - oriented by guidepost cells , and turn to contact them ( Fig . 1 ) . The nature of these turns is different from growth cone steering in the distal femur . Although a few filopodia often contact these cells , a single filopodial contact is sufficient to mediate the turn ( O ' Connor et al . , 1990 ) . In the latter situa - tion , the single filopodium dilates at its base to form a small branch , which gradually is converted into the axon . We observed actin distribution in nine growth cones which were interacting with the Trl ( 4 ) or Cxl ( 5 ) guidepost ceils . Five growth cones were labeled with r - actin , and four with r - phalloidin . The distribution of actin as seen with either la - bel was similar . Four of these growth cones were observed undergoing filopodial dilation as they turned toward the guidepost cells . We observed a selective accumulation of ac - tin in filopodia that were contacting the guidepost cell . A lo - cal patch of actin arose in the tips of these filopodia , and a continuous core of actin began to build up in the proximal regions of the filopodia . Fig . 6 shows an example of these events . A Til growth cone labeled with r - actin has contacted and passed cell Fel , and is extending proximally and dorsally in the proximal femur ( Fig . 1 , location 2 ) . Patches of r - actin labeling are arrayed along the leading edge ( Fig . 6 A ) . Filopodia , averaging 20 - 30 # m in length , are protruded around the growth cone ( Fig . 6 B ) . Some of these are directed proximally and ven - trally , approximately perpendicular to the shaft of the growth cone , and extend toward the Trl guidepost cell ( Fig . 1 , A and B ) . At the stage shown in Fig . 6 B , five lateral filopodia , numbered 1 - 5 , are about equivalent in r - actin intensity . Filopodium number 4 , and possibly 5 , ( Fig . 6 B , numbers ) , have established contact with cell Trl . Filopodium number 2 is extending toward cell Trl , and filopodia numbers 1 and 3 are extending distal and ventral to cell Trl ( cell Trl is not labeled but is identifiable as follows : in the fillet , the mesodermal cells on the luminal side of the basal lamina have been removed with a suction pipette ; the Trl cell , and other neurons , are distinguished from epithelial cells be - cause they have about four times the cross - sectional area of epithelial cells , see Fig . 1 B ; Trl is the only neuron in the trochanter at this stage of development ; therefore , the single , large , adepithelial cell observed with interference contrast optics in the trochanter is Trl ; also , the locations of the guidepost cells , including Trl , were confirmed after each ex - periment by fixation and labeling with neuron - specific anti - bodies ; see also , O ' Connor et al . , 1990 ) . In the ensuing period ( Fig . 6 C ) , filopodium number 4 has changed . It has accrued a denser core of actin , which extends , , 020 # m distally within the filopodium , starting at its base . In addition , lameUae have spread laterally from about the first 15 # m of the filopodial shaft . The r - actin intensity in filopodia numbers 1 - 3 and 5 has not changed substantially . In the next period shown ( Fig . 6 D ) , filopodium number 5 ( in contact with cell Trl ) also has accrued a denser core of r - actin , which extends about 10 - 15 # m distally from its base . The r - actin intensity has not changed in filopodia numbers 1 - 3 . During the last period shown ( Fig . 6 E ) , filopodium number 2 ( in contact with cell Trl ) has accrued a core of r - actin label which extends (cid:127)15 # m distally from its base . Filopodia numbers 1 and 3 , whose ventrally located tips can be seen in this image , have not contacted cell Trl , and have not accrued a dense core of r - actin . To quantify these observations we measured peak pixel in - tensity along the lengths of individual filopodia at successive The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 123 , 1993 942 A lOO [ . . - 4 I 40 B t3 L A 2 1 , 4 5 10 lS ~ " Distance ( pin ) Figure 7 . Quantification of actin accumulation in filopodia . ( A ) A sample transect showing peak pixel intensities ( arrows ) for the five filopodia shown in Fig . 6 E ( B ) For each filopodium , the peak pixel intensity above background was plotted every 2 # m from the base toward the tip ( e . g . , B , 1 , tl ) . Background intensities were mea - sured about one filopodial diameter lateral to each transect . This procedure was repeated for images taken at four times : t ~ , t2 ( q + 55 min ) , t3 ( t2 + 143 min ) , t4 ( t3 + 15 min ) . Plots are shown for two filopodia ( 1 and 3 ) which do not contact cell Trl , and for two filopodia ( 2 and 4 ) which do contact Trl . Filopodia which contact Trl accumulate higher concentrations of actin . The actin concentra - tion builds up in the proximal region of the filopodium ( 2 , t4 ; 4 , t2 - 4 ) . Within a filopodium , the discontinuity between the prox - imal region of higher actin concentration , and the distal region of lower actin concentration can be quite abrupt ( arrows : 2 , 4 ) . times during the growth cone turn to Trl . First , a transect of pixel intensities was taken across the set of five filopodia which were under observation . The location of the transect is shown in Fig . 6 F , and the pixel intensities are shown in Fig . 7 A . The transect confirmed that r - actin intensity was higher in filopodia numbers 2 , 4 , and 5 than in 1 and 3 . The brighter filopodia ( 2 , 4 , and 5 ) do not appear to be broader , suggesting that the increased brightness is not due to an in - crease in diameter ( volume ) . Peak pixel intensities were recorded and plotted against the length of the filopodium at 2 - / ~ m intervals from the base toward the tip . In Fig . 7 B , r - actin intensity profiles are shown for filopodia 1 - - 4 . Finally , these profiles were plotted at four stages during the period in which the r - actin core was developing in filopodia 2 and 4 ( Fig . 7 B , tz - t ~ ) . At the onset of these measurements , filopodia 1 - 4 were all 15 - 20 / ~ m long and had similar , somewhat variable , r - actin intensities . In filopodia 1 and 3 , which did not contact cell Trl , r - actin intensity fluctuated within a low range , and did not build - up during the course of observations . By contrast , in filopodia 2 and 4 , which did contact cell Trl , there was a two to four - fold increase in average r - actin intensity . This increase occurred first in filopodium 4 ( between tt and t2 ) , and later in filopodium 2 ( between t3 and t4 ) . In both filopo - dia , the continuous build - up in actin concentration occurred from the base outwards . The distal end of the r - actin core within filopodia had a quite abrupt distal edge ( Fig . 7 B , ar - rows ) . The quantitative measurements of actin distribution confirmed the impressions from the images . Actin Distribution during Turns along an Epithelial Cell Band The interior of the trochanter at the 33 % stage comprises a circumferential band of epithelial cells , about three cell di - ameters in width , that express fasciclin IV ( Kolodkin et al . , 1992 ) . Upon encountering this band , the pioneer growth cones , cease proximal growth , initially extend circumferen - tial branches both dorsally and ventrally , and finally turn and migrate ventrally along the fasciclin IV band toward the Cxl guidepost cells ( Fig . 1 , location 3 ) . During this circumferen - Figure 8 . Actin distribution in Til growth cones turning and extending ventrally along the fas - ciclin IV - expressing epithelial band ( between black triangles ) in the trochanter . ( A ) Frame from a time - lapse image sequence of a growth cone , labeled with rhodamine - actin , that is just completing the turn onto the fasciclin IV band ( Fig . 1 A , location 3 ) . Most leading filopodia ( arrows ) have denser actin cores in their prox - imal regions . Dorsally and proximally extend - ing filopodia and branches ( arrowheads ) , that are not being followed by the growth cone , do not have denser actin cores . ( B ) A different growth cone just completing the ventral migra - tion also has denser actin cores in the proximal regions of leading filopodia ( arrows ) . Actin concentrations are lower along the nascent axon and in lateral branches ( arrowhead ) that are not being followed by the growth cone . Bars , 10 / ~ m . O ' Connor and Bentley Actin Accumulation in Guiding Filopodia 943 Figure 9 . Retrograde transport of actin in leading filopodia . ( A - H ) Frames from a time - lapse image sequence of a rhodamine - actin labeled Til growth cone beginning ventral migration along the fasciclin IV - expressing epithelial band in the trochanter ( Fig . 1 A , location 3 ) . ( A - C ) Two long , leading filopodia extend ahead of the growth cone . An aggregation of labeled actin ( arrow ) arises at the tip of one filopodium and is retrogradely transported toward the base ( B and C , arrows ) . ( D - H ) A dense core of actin ( arrows ) with an abrupt proximal boundary ( F and H , arrows ) accumulates in the proximal region of the filopodium . This core , which is likely to be a bundle of F - actin , eventually becomes (cid:127)13 # m long ( H , between arrows ) , has a quite sharp distal boundary ( H , lower arrow ) , and is slowly retrogradely transported into the central region of the growth cone ( F - H , arrows ) . A similar dense core of actin ( F , arrowhead ) also accumulates in the proximal region of the other leading filopodium . Time ( h : min , lower right of panels ) : elapsed time between images in successive panels . Bar , 5 / ~ m . tial migration , we monitored actin distribution in eight growth cones , four injected with r - actin , and four injected with r - phalloidin . Actin distribution appeared to be similar in both classes of growth cones . As observed in growth cones in other regions of the limb , actin labeling was higher in most leading filopodia , and lower in filopodia and branches extended in other directions ( Fig . 8 ) . Both in growth cones that were commencing ventral growth ( Figs . 8 A and 9 F ) , and in those that were complet - ing the ventral migration ( Fig . 8 B ) , cores of labeling actin were observed in the proximal regions of filopodia extending ventrally along the fasciclin IV band . Several possible mechanisms could result in the accumula - tion of actin in the proximal regions of leading filopodia . One of these is an increase in the retrograde transport of actin . As noted earlier , retrograde transport of r - phalloidin labeled F - actin was seen in filopodia after application of cytochala - sin D ( Fig . 2 ) . Retrograde transport of small clumps of r - actin along filopodia also was observed . An example of this phenomenon is illustrated in Fig . 9 . Here , an r - actin labeled growth cone has turned ventrally along the fasciclin IV ex - pressing band of epithelium . Two leading filopodia , ~ 25 / ~ m in length , extend ventrally along the band . In one of these , a large aggregation of actin labeling appears at the tip and is retrogradely transported , at a rate of 0 . 25 - 1 . 0 / ~ m / min , to the base ( Fig . 9 , A - C ) . At the base , it accumulates into a con - tinuous core of actin , which eventually reaches a length of - - 13 ~ m ( Fig . 9 , D - G ) . This solid core of actin is retro - gradely transported into the central region of the growth cone ( Fig . 9 , F - H ) , until it extends at least 6 / ~ m centrally from the base of the filopodium . The rate of retrograde trans - port of this actin core is slower than the rate of transport dis - tally in filopodia . A similar core of actin is seen in the other leading filopodium ( Fig . 9 F ) , and it also is retrogradely transported into the central region of the growth cone . Simi - lar structures are seen in another growth cone at the same location labeled with r - phalloidin ( Fig . 2 C ) , and these structures are disassembled by cytochalasin ( Fig . 2 D ) . These structures appear likely to be F - actin bundles . Discussion Actin Distribution in Neuronal Growth Cones In Situ We report here the first observations of actin distribution and dynamics in neuronal growth cones migrating in situ . Actin distribution was imaged in live growth cones with intracellu - larly injected rhodaminated - phalloidin and with rhodami - nated rabbit muscle actin , r - phalloidin labels F - actin with relatively high affinity ; labeled structures were confirmed as F - actin by rapid disassembly in the presence of cytochalasin D ( Fig . 2 ; Forscher and Smith , 1988 ; Cooper , 1991 ; Prakesh and Pollard , 1991 ; Ohmori et al . , 1992 ) . r - actin occurs both as monomer and polymer . In most preparations , r - actin labeling ( Figs . 5 A , 6 A , and Fig . 8 , A and B ) was similar to r - phalloidin labeling ( Figs . 2 and 4 B ) , with light labeling in the axon and relatively intense labeling in the growth cone . This suggests that much of the labeling seen with r - actin probably was F - actin , which should be concentrated in the growth cone , rather than monomeric actin , which should be relatively uniformly distributed throughout the cell . Within r - actin - labeled growth cones , the central growth cone do - main sometimes appeared as bright as the filopodia ( Figs . 4 C , 5 D , and 6 B ) . Ratio imaging with fluorescein - dextran ( Fig . 4 E ) and r - actin ( Fig . 4 C ) demonstrated that labeling in the central region is not due to high actin concentration , but rather to the increased volume of the growth cone in this region ( Fig . 4 D ) . Ratio imaging also confirmed the presence of concentrated actin , likely to be F - actin , within filopodia . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 123 , 1993 944 Thus , r - actin labeling appears to be an indicator of the prob - able distribution of F - actin within filopodia . The distribution of F - actin in Til growth cones migrating in situ generally was similar to that described in growth cones in vitro ( Letourneau , 1983 ; Bridgman and Dailey , 1989 ; Lewis and Bridgman , 1992 ) . As observed with r - phaUoidin and r - actin , a shell of cortical F - actin sur - rounded the nascent axon and growth cone . The interior of the axon and the base of the growth cone were relatively de - void of F - actin . Bright labeling occurred in the growth cone perimeter and the proximal regions of filopodia . In some cases , actin cores extending proximally from filopodia ap - peared to terminate in peripheral lamellae extending from the growth cone ( Fig . 6 , E and F , filopodium 4 ) , or near the central domain of the growth cone ( Fig . 4 , B and D , and Figs . 8 and 9 H ) . But in other cells , multiple F - actin bundles ap - peared to traverse the central region of the growth cone ( Fig . 2 C ) , and continue into the nascent axon . In neurons exam - ined in vitro , considerable variation in F - actin bundle termi - nation sites within growth cones also has been observed . In Aplysia bag cell growth cones in vitro , the distribution of microtubules and of F - actin bundles is virtually complemen - tary , with peripheral F - actin bundles ending at the interface between the central and peripheral domains ( Forscher and Smith , 1988 ) . In rat SCG neurons , F - actin bundles often ended near the bases of filopodia , or at the intersection with the central domain , but other bundles could extend deep into the growth cone ( Lewis and Bridgman , 1992 ) . Growth Cone Steering and Actin Distribution We observed actin distribution during growth cone steering in several regions of the limb . In distal regions , growth cones steer along the longitudinal axis of the limb by sustaining and expanding branches extended along the limb axis in prefer - ence to branches extended in more off - axis directions ( O ' Connor et al . , 1990 ) . Where growth cones encounter guidepost cells , they extend toward them by expanding filopodia which have contacted the cell surface . When growth cones reach the trochanter , they abruptly cease proximal growth and extend branches in both directions along the limb circumference . Subsequently , the ventrally directed branches are selected for further growth . We observe that in each of these regions , selective growth is accompanied by the ac - cumulation of actin in most of the leading filopodia . This oc - curs in processes extending along the limb axis ( Fig . 5 ) , in processes contacting guidepost cells ( Fig . 6 ) , and in pro - cesses extending ventrally within the trochanter ( Figs . 2 C , 4 , 8 , and 9 ) . On a relatively large spatial scale , where a bifur - cated axon transiently establishes multiple growth cones , ac - tin can be seen to erode in branches that are not maintained , and to accumulate in branches that are sustained ( Fig . 5 ) . On a finer scale , adjacent filopodia protruding from the margin of a growth cone can have cores containing very different amounts of actin : most of those whose tips contact high affinity guidance cues have higher levels of actin , whereas neighboring filopodia whose tips extend in other directions do not ( Figs . 6 and 7 ) . Thus actin accumulation in a particu - lar region of the growth cone perimeter accompanies growth cone turning in that direction . This relationship is similar to that reported for Aplysia bag cell growth cones that have con - tacted other bag cells in vitro ( Lin and Forscher , 1993 ) . A complementary situation may occur where growth cones are stalling , collapsing , or retracting . In branches of bifurcated Til axons , substantial erosion of actin from growth cones ac - companies branch withdrawal ( Fig . 5 ) . Actin concentration is similarly depleted in chick DRG growth cones that have been exposed to a growth cone collapsing factor ( Fan et al . , 1993 ) . These results suggest that regulation of actin may be a significant element in both positive ( attractive ) and nega - tive ( repulsive ) growth cone steering events . Actin does not accumulate uniformly within leading filo - podia . Actin cores with relatively sharp distal and proximal boundaries can build - up in the proximal regions of filopodia ( Figs . 4 and 6 - 9 ) . These cores , which appear likely to be F - actin bundles , secondarily can extend both distally ( Fig . 7 B ) and proximally ( Fig . 9 , F - H ) . This accumulation ofac - tin corresponds to changes observed with video - imaging of growth cones labeled with lipophilic dyes ( O ' Connor et al . , 1990 ) : when a dye - labeled filopodiurn contacts the surface of a guidepost cell , the tip expands into a palmate configura - tion , most of the distal shaft of the filopodium retains its ini - tial diameter , and the proximal region of the filopodium pro - gressively enlarges in a proximal to distal progression . This proximal enlargement is at the location of the actin core , sug - gesting that the dilation of the filopodium may be caused by the accumulation of F - actin . Within the growth cone , proximal ends of actin filament bundles may interact with and influence the distribution of microtubules . In fixed material , microtubules regularly are aligned with actin filament bundles ( Letourneau , 1983 ; Gordon - Weeks , 1991 ; Lewis and Bridgman , 1992 ) , and mol - ecules have been identified that appear to interact both with microtubules and actin filaments ( Goslin et al . , 1989 ) . Ten - sion generated within actin filament arrays may influence the position and polymerization of microtubules ( Heideman et al . , 1990 ; Lamoureux et al . , 1992 ) . Recent video observa - tions have demonstrated a rapid translocation of microtu - bules to sites of F - actin accumulation in Aplysia growth cones in vitro ( Lin and Forscher , 1993 ) . Video - imaging of migrating Til growth cones labeled with rhodaminated bo - vine brain tubulin revealed that microtubules selectively en - tered the bases of dilated filopodia that are in contact with guidepost cells ( Sabry et al . , 1991 ) . This region is the loca - tion of actin accumulation . Therefore , in these growth cones , the initiation of microtubule intrusion into branchlets form - ing from filopodia appears to be associated with regions of actin concentration . Several aspects of actin dynamics , including number of nucleation sites , polymerization rate , transport rate , stability , local contraction , and disassembly rate , could contribute to the accumulation of actin in the proximal regions of leading filopodia ( Southwick et al . , 1989 ; Maciver et al . , 1991 ; Bearer , 1992 ; Theriot et al . , 1992 ; Zigmond et al . , 1992 ) . While our results do not distinguish among these possibili - ties , we do observe that aggregations of actin can be retro - gradely transported along filopodia in which actin is ac - cumulating ( Fig . 9 ) . That filopodia in which accumulation is occurring can extend from the same location at the margin of the growth cone as filopodia in which actin is not ac - cumulating ( Fig . 6 ) supports the idea that accumulation ultimately is due to events occurring at the filopodial tip ( Fig . 10 ) . Distally , actin filament bundles are contiguous with spe - cializations at the tips of filopodia and the leading edges of lamellipodia ( Lewis and Bridgman , 1992 ) . At these loca - O ' Connor and Bentley Actin Accumulation in Guiding Filopodia 945 Figure 10 . Schematic dia - grams of steering by pioneer growth cones responding to in situ guidance cues . ( A ) A growth cone that is turning and orienting along a pre - ferred guidance substrate ( darker background ) , such as the fasciclin IV expressing epithelial band . Proximal re - gions of guiding filopodia ex - pand ( O ' Connor et al . , 1990 ) , and microtubules ( light stip - ple ) selectively invade the proximal regions of expanding filopodia ( Sabry et al . , 1991 ) . These expanded proximal re - gions are the sites of dense cores of actin ( arrows ; dark stipple ) , likely to be F - actin , which are not present in other filopodia that are not being followed by the growth cone . ( B ) Det ~ from A ( inset ) show - ing a possible model of intra - cellular events : interactions ( open arrowhead ) at the tip of the filopodium between recep - tors and ligands that mediate guidance may be " encoded " through transmembrane sig - naling into the generation of more , or more stable , F - actin ( herringbone ) . The F - actin may be retrogradely trans - ported , sometimes in large aggregations ( small arrows ) to the proximal region of the filopodium . In the proximal region , dense cores ( large arrow ) of F - actin accumulate ( by retrograde transport and perhaps other mechanisms , see text ) , where they may distinguish filopodia that are interacting with preferred guidance substrates . By a variety of possible mechanisms ( see text ) these dense cores may selectively accrue microtubules ( stipple ) , and thereby influence the direction of consolidation of the forming axon . tions , interactions with extracellular molecules that effect ac - tin filament nucleation , polymerization , and stability are likely to occur ( Southwick et al . , 1989 ; Luna , 1991 ; Stossel , 1993 ; Wang et al . , 1993 ) . Contact with extracellular fea - tures , such as polycationic beads , can initiate local genera - tion of dense bundles of actin filaments ( Forscher et al . , 1992 ) . Adhesion to a variety of substrates can effect F - actin polymerization and organization ( Southwick et al . , 1989 ; Abosch and Lagenaur , 1993 ) . Local alteration of calcium ion concentration can initiate protrusion of filopodia ( Daven - port and Kater , 1992 ; Rehder and Kater , 1992 ; Davenport et al . , 1993 ) , presumably a consequence of a local change in actin dynamics ( Lankford and Letourneau , 1991 ) . Trans - membrane molecules that promote outgrowth , such as L1 , N - CAM , and N - cadherin , effect intracellular calcium ion con - centration and other second messenger systems ( Bixby , 1989 ; Schuch et al . , 1989 ; Williams et al . , 1993 ) . Through such interactions , reception of extracellular guidance infor - mation by receptors on filopodia and lamellipodia may regu - late actin dynamics . The build - up of actin in the proximal regions of guiding filopodia prompts speculation about its function . An issue in steering of Til growth cones , and other growth cones with long filopodia ( Myers and Bastiani , 1993 ) , is how guidance information detected at the tips of filopodia is effectively con - veyed to the base . An interesting possibility is that the amount or stabilization - state of F - actin retrogradely trans - ported to the base of the filopodium could be an element of this message . Transmembrane receptors and associated sec - ond messenger systems at the tip could be viewed as " encod - ing " information about the extracellular environment into more , or more stable , F - actin which could then engage the retrograde transport system at the filopodium tip for translo - cation to the base ( Fig . 10 ) . Accumulation of more , or more stable ~ F - actin at the base of a filopodium could distinguish its base from the bases of other filopodia contacting less preferred substrates . The presence of this F - actin could be " decoded " by mechanisms , including generation of tension ( Heideman et al . , 1990 ; Lamoreux et al . , 1992 ) , cross - linking to microtubules ( Goslin et al . , 1989 ) , or contraction of the local actin meshwork ( Yamura and Kitanishi - Yumura , 1992 ) , that selectively accrue microtubules , thereby deter - mining where the nascent axon will be consolidated within the growth cone perimeter . The specific molecular interactions that mediate pioneer growth cone steering in each limb region are largely undeter - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 123 , 1993 946 mined . However , each region does express a quite different set of substrate molecules ( see introduction ) . The hierarchi - cal choices made by the Til growth cones , as well as the demonstrated differences in substrate adhesion and molecu - lar expression , suggest that the growth cones are being guided by different molecular interactions in the different limb regions . The observation that growth cone interactions with each of these substrates results in selective accumula - tion of actin is consistent with the notion that regulation of actin may be a common signaling path that is downstream from a variety of cell surface molecular interactions mediat - ing guidance . We thank David Drubin and Michael Ignatius for criticizing a version of the manuscript . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grant NS09074 - 22 and National Science Foundation grant IBN 91 - 20904 . Received for publication 9 July 1993 and in revised form 31 August 1993 . References Abosch , A . , and C . Lagenaur . 1993 . Sensitivity of neurite outgrowth to mi - crofilament disruption varies with adhesion molecule substrate . J . Neu - robiol . 24 : 344 - 355 . Anderson , H . , and R . P . Tucker . 1988 . Pioneer neurons use basal lamina as a substratum for outgrowth in the embryonic grasshopper limb . Development ( Camb . ) . 104 : 601 - 608 . Bastiani , M . J . , A . L . Harrelson , P . M . Snow , and C . S . Goodman . 1987 . Ex - pression of fasciclin I and H glycoproteins on subsets of axon pathways dur - ing neural development in the grasshopper . Cell . 48 : 745 - 755 . Bastiani , M . J . , H . G . de Couet , J . M . A . Quinn , R . O . Karlstrom , K . Kotrla , C . S . Goodman , and E . E . Ball . 1992 . Position - specific expression of the annulin protein during grasshopper embryogenesis . Dev . Biol . 154 : 129 - 142 . Bate , C . M . 1976 . Pioneer neurons in an insect embryo . Nature ( Land . ) . 260 : 54 - 56 . Bearer , E . L . 1992 . An actin - associated protein present in the microtubule or - ganizing center and the growth cones of PC - 12 cells . J . Neurosci . 12 : 750 - 761 . Bentley , D . , and T . P . O ' Connor . 1992 . Guidance and steering of peripheral pioneer growth cones in grasshopper embryos . In The Nerve Growth Cone . P . C . Letourneau , S . B . Kater , and E . R . Macagno , editors . Raven Press LUt . , New York . 265 - 282 . Bentley , D . , and A . Toroian - Raymond . 1986 . Disoriented pathfinding by pi - oneer neurone growth cones deprived of filopodia by cytochalasin treatment . Nature ( Lond . ) . 323 : 712 - 715 . Bentley , D . , H . Keshishian , M . Shankland , and A . Toroian - Raymond . 1979 . Quantitative staging of embryonic development of the grasshopper , Schistocerca nitens . J . Embryol . Exp . Morphol . 54 : 47 - 74 . Bixby , J . L . 1989 . Protein kinase C is involved in laminin stimulation of neurite outgrowth . Neuron . 2 : 287 - 297 . Bridgman , P . C . , and M . E . Dailey 1989 . The organization of myosin and actin in rapid frozen nerve growth cones . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 95 - 109 . Candy , M . , and D . Bentley . 1986 . Pioneer growth cone steering along a series of neuronal and non - neuronal cues of different affinities . J . Neurosci . 6 : 1781 - 1795 . Chang , W . S . , K . Serikawa , K . Allen , and D . Bentley . 1992 . Disruption of pi - oneer growth cone guidance in vivo by removal of glycosyl - phosphatidyl - inositol - anchored cell surface proteins . Development ( Camb . ) . 114 : 507 - 519 . Chang , W . S . , K . R . Zachow , and D . Bentley . 1993 . Expression of epithelial alkaline phosphalase in segmentally iterated bands during grasshopper limb morphogenesis . Development ( Camb . ) . 118 : 651 - 663 . Condic M . L . , and D . Bentley . 1989a . Pioneer neuron pathfinding from normal and ectopic locations in vivo after removal of the basal lamina . Neuron . 3 : 427 - 439 . Condic , M . L . , and D . Bentley . 1989b . Pioneer growth cone adhesion in vivo to boundary cell and neurons after enzymatic removal of basal lamina in grasshopper embryos . J . Neurosci . 9 : 2687 - 2696 . Cooper , J . A . 1991 . The role of actin polymerization in cell motility . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 53 : 585 - 605 . Davenport , R . W . , and S . B . Kater . 1992 . Local increases in intracellular cal - cium elicit local filopodial responses in Helisoma neuronal growth cones . Neuron . 9 : 405 - 416 . Davenport , R . W . , P . Dou , V . Rehder , and S . B . Kater . 1993 . A sensory role for neuronal growth cone filopodia . Nature ( Lond . ) . 361 : 721 - 724 . Elkins , T . , M . Hortsch , A . J . Bieber , P . M . Snow , andC . S . Goodman . 1990 . Drosophila fasciclin I is a novel homophilic adhesion molecule that along with fasciclin HI can mediate cell sorting . J . Cell Biol . 110 : 1825 - 1832 . Fan , J . , S . G . Mansfield , R . Redmond , P . R . Gordon - Weeks , and J . A . Raper . 1993 . The organization of F - actin and microtubules in growth cones exposed to a brain - derived collapsing factor . J . Cell Biol . 121 : 867 - 878 . Forscher , P . , and S . J . Smith 1988 . Actions of cytochalasins on the organization of actin filaments and microtubules in a neuronal growth cone . J . Cell BioL 107 : 1505 - 1516 . Forscher , P . , C . - H . Lin , and C . Thompson . 1992 . Novel form of growth cone motility involving site - directed actin filament assembly . Nature ( Lond . ) . 357 : 515 - 518 . Gordon - Weeks , P . R . 1987 . The cytoskeletons of isolated neuronal growth cones . Neuroscience . 21 : 977 - 989 . Gordon - Weeks , P . R . 1991 . Evidence for microtubule capture by filopodial ac - tin filaments in growth cones . NeuroReport . 2 : 573 - 576 . Goslin , K . , E . Birgbauer , G . Banker , and F . Solomon 1989 . The role of cytoskeleton in organizing growth cones : a microfilament - associated growth cone component depends upon microtuhules for its localization . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 1621 - 1631 . Heideman , S . R . , P . Lamoureux , and R . E . Buxbanm . 1990 . Growth cone be - havior and production of traction force . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 1949 - 1957 . Jan , L . Y . , and Y . N . Jan . 1982 . Antibodies to horseradish peroxidase as specific neural markers in Drosophila and grasshopper embryos . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 79 : 2700 - 2704 . Jay , D . J . , and H . Keshishian . 1990 . Laser inactivation of fasciclin I disrupts axon adhesion of grasshopper pioneer neurons . Nature ( Lond . ) . 348 : 548 - 551 . Karlstrom , R . O . , L . P . Wilder , and M . J . Bastiani . 1993 . Lachesin : an im - munoglobin superfamily protein whose expression correlates with neurogen - esis in grasshopper embryos . Development ( Camb . ) . 118 : 509 - 552 . Kellogg , D . R . , T . J . Mitchison , and B . Alberts . 1988 . Behavior of microtu - bules and actin filaments in living Drosophila embryos . Development ( Camb . ) . 103 : 675 - 686 . Kolodkin , A . L . , D . J . Matthes , T . P . O ' Connor , N . H . Patel , A . Admon , D . Bentley , and C . S . Goodman . 1992 . Fasciclin IV : sequence , expression and function during growth cone guidance in the grasshopper embryo . Neuron . 9 : 831 - 845 . Lamoureux , P . , J . Zheng , R . Buxbaum , and S . R . Heidemann . 1992 . A cytomechanicai investigation of neurite growth on different culture surfaces . J . Cell Biol . 118 : 655 - 661 . Lankford , K . L . , and P . C . Letourneau . 1991 . Roles of actin filaments and three second - messenger systems in short - term regulation of chick dorsal root gan - glion neurite outgrowth . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 20 : 7 - 29 . Lefcort , F . , and D . Bentley . 1987 . Pathfinding by pioneer neurons in isolated , opened and mesoderm - free limb buds of embryonic grasshopper . Dev . Biol . 119 : 446 - - 480 . Letournean , P . C . 1983 . Differences in the organization of actin in the growth cones compared with the neurites of cultured neurons from chick embryos . J . Cell Biol . 97 : 963 - 973 . Lewis , A . K . , and P . C . Bridgman . 1992 . Nerve growth cone lamellipodia con - lain two populations ofactin filaments that differ in organization and polarity . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 1219 - 1243 . Lin , C . - H . , and P . Forscber , P . 1993 . Cytoskeletal remodeling during growth cone larget - interactions . J . Cell Biol . 121 : 1369 - 1384 . Luby - Phelps , K . , F . Lanni , and D . L . Taylor . 1988 . The submicroscopic prop - erties of cytoplasm as a determinant of cellular function . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biophys . Chem . 17 : 369 - 396 . Luna , E . J . 1991 . Molecular links between the cytoskeleton and membranes . Curt . Opin . Cell Biol . 3 : 120 - 126 . Maciver , S . K . , D . H . Wachsstock , W . H . Schwarz , and T . D . Pollard . 1991 . The actin filament severing protein actophorin promotes the formation of rigid bundles of actin filaments cross - linked with tx - actinin . J . Cell Biol . 115 : 1621 - 1628 . Mason , C . A . , and P . Godement . 1992 . Growth cone form reflects interactions in visual pathways and cerebellar targets . In The Nerve Growth Cone . P . C . Letourneau , S . B . Kater , and E . R . Macagno editors . Raven Press Ltd . , New York . 402 - - 423 . Mitchison , T . , and M . Kirschner . 1988 . Cytoskeletal dynamics and nerve growth . Neuron . 1 : 761 - 772 . Myers , P . Z . , and M . J . Bastiani . 1993 . Growth cone dynamics during the migration of an identified commissural growth cone . J . Neurosci . 13 : 127 - 143 . Norbeck , B . A . , and J . L . Denburg . 1991 . A molecular marker for epithelial morphogenesis in the cockroach . Roux ' s Arch . Dev . Biol . 198 : 395 - - 401 . Norbeck , B . A . , Y . Feng , and J . L . Denburg . 1992 . Molecular gradients along the proximo - dislal axis of embryonic insect legs : possible guidance cues of pioneer axon growth . Development ( Camb . ) . 116 : 467 - - 479 . O ' Connor T . P . , J . S . Duerr , and D . Bentley . 1990 . Pioneer growth cone steer - ing decisions mediated by single filopodial contacts in situ . J . Neurosci . 10 : 3935 - 3946 . Ohmori , H . , S . Toyama , and S . Toyama . 1992 . Direct proof that the primary site of action of cytochalasin on cell motility processes is actin . J . Cell Biol . 116 : 933 - 941 . Okabe , S . , and N . Hirokawa . 1989 . Incorporation and turnover of biotin - labeled aetin microinjected into fibroblastic cells : and immunoelectron mi - croscopic study . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 1581 - 1595 . O ' Connor and Bentley Actin Accumulation in Guiding Filopodia 947 Okabe , S . , and N . Hirokawa . 1991 . Actin dynamics in growth cones . J . Neu - rosci . 11 : 1918 - 1929 . Pardee , J . D . , and J . A . Spudich . 1982 . Purification of muscle actin . Methods Enzymol . 85 : 164 - 181 . Pollard , T . D . 1990 . Actin . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 2 : 33 - 40 . Prakash , S . , and T . D . Pollard . 1991 . Effects of cytochalasin , phalloidin and pH on the elongation of actin filaments . Biochemistry . 30 : 1973 - 1980 . Rehder , V . , and S . B . Kater . 1992 . Regulation of neuronal growth cone filopo - dia by intracellular calcium . J . Neurosci . 12 : 3175 - 3186 . Sabry , J . H . , T . P . O ' Connor , L . E . Evans , A . Toroian - Raymond , M . Kirsch - ner , and D . Bentley 1991 . Microtubule behavior during guidance of pioneer neuron growth cones in situ . J . Cell Biol . 115 : 381 - 395 . Schuch , U . , M . J . Lohse , and M . Schachner . 1989 . Neural cell adhesion mole - cules influence second messenger systems . Neuron . 3 : 13 - 20 . Singer , M . A . , M . Hortsch , C . S . Goodman , and D . Bentley . 1992 . Annulin , a protein expressed at limb segment boundaries in the grasshopper embryo , is homologous to protein cross - linking transglutaminases . Dev . Biol . 154 : 143 - 159 . Smith , S . J . 1988 . Neuronal cytomechanics : The actin - based motility of growth cones . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 242 : 708 - 714 . Southwick , F . S . , G . A . Dabiri , M . Paschetto , and S . Zigmond . 1989 . Poly - morphonuclear leukocyte adherence induces actin polymerization by a trans - duction pathway which differs from that used by chemoattractants . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 1561 - 1569 . Stossel , T . P . 1993 . On the crawling of animal cells . Science ( wash . DC ) . 260 : 1086 - 1094 . Theriot , J . A . , and T . J . Mitchison . 1992 . Comparison of actin and cell surface dynamics in motile fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 367 - 377 . Tberiot , J . A . , and T . J . Mitchison . 1992 . The nucleation - release model of actin filament dynamics in cell motility . Trends Cell Biol . 2 : 219 - 222 . Theriot , J . A . , T . J . Mitchison , L . G . Tilney , and D . A . Portnoy . 1992 . The rate of actin - based motility of intracellular Listeria monocytogenes equals the rate of actin polymerization . Nature ( Lond . ) . 357 : 257 - 260 . Wang , Y . - L . 1985 . Exchange of actin subunits at the leading edge of living fibroblasts : possible role of treadmilling . J . Cell Biol . 101 : 597 - 602 . Wang . L . , and J . L . Denburg . 1992 . A role for proteoglycans in the guidance of a subset of pioneer axons in cultured embryos of the cockroach . Neuron . 8 : 701 - 714 . Wang , N . , J . P . Butler , and D . E . Ingber . 1993 . Mechanntransduction across the cell surface and through the cytoskeleton . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 260 : 1124 - 1127 . Williams , E . J . , P . Doherty , G . Turner , R . A . Reid , J . J . Hemperly , and F . S . Walsh . 1993 . Calcium influx into neurons can solely account for cell contact - dependent neurite outgrowth stimulated by transfected L1 . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 883 - 892 . Yumura , S . , and T . Kitanishi - Yumura . 1992 . Release of myosin II from the membrane - cytoskeleton for Dictyostelium discoideura mediated by heavy - chain phosphorylation at the loci within the cortical actin network . J . Cell Biol . 117 : 1231 - 1239 . Zigmond , S . H . , R . Furukawa , and M . Fechheimer . 1992 . Inhibition of actin filament depolymerization by the Dictyostelium 30 , 000 D actin - bundling protein . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 559 - 567 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 123 , 1993 948