How cells respond to external signals is a central question in biology . Following the identification of cell - surface receptors capable of perceiving external signals such as growth factors , research rapidly focused on elucidating the intracellular mechanisms allowing the transduction of receptor - emitted signals . During the 1980s , the acti - vation of receptors such as those for epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) or insulin was shown to induce the phos - phorylation of intracellular proteins , including some proteins with kinase activity , hence possibly acting as signalling mediators . The biochemical purification of one such enzymatic activity identified protein kinases with molecular masses averaging 42 – 45 kDa ( refs 1 , 2 ) . Shortly thereafter , cDNAs encoding the first representa - tives of these enzymes were cloned and called extracellu - lar signal - regulated kinase 1 ( ERK1 ) and ERK2 ( refs 3 , 4 ) . These growth factor - stimulated kinases are abundant , widely expressed across tissues and conserved across species . Thirty years of research has generated a vast amount of literature on ERK1 and ERK2 , owing to their central roles in normal development and in pathological conditions . In this Review , we discuss the current under - standing of the activity and most vital cellular functions of these enzymes . ERK1 and ERK2 are part of a family of structur - ally related kinases , called mitogen - activated protein kinases ( MAPKs ) , the signalling mechanism of which depends on an activating phosphorylation cascade that involves two upstream kinases generically referred to as MAPK kinases ( MAPKKs ) and MAPKK kinases ( MAPKKKs ) 5 ( Box 1 ) . The different three - tiered MAPK modules integrate upstream signals and transmit them downstream to a series of effector substrates ( Box 1 ) . MAPK family members have nonetheless evolutionarily diverged from one another to respond to an exclusive set of upstream signals 5 . In the case of the ERK subfam - ily , the cues largely consist of growth factor - induced and mitogen - induced signals , which are transduced by RAS GTPases and convey their activity by triggering a phos - phorylation cascade down to ERK1 and ERK2 ( fig . 1a ) . Unless otherwise specified , for simplicity , the term ‘ERK’ is used hereafter to designate both ERK1 and ERK2 . We apply the same simplification to other proteins that have multiple isoforms , such as RAS , MEK , ribosomal protein S6 kinase ( RSK ) , mitogen - and stress - activated pro - tein kinase ( MSK ) and MAPK - interacting kinase ( MNK ) . The core RAS – ERK pathway is typically initiated at the plasma membrane , where guanosine triphos - phate ( GTP ) - loaded RAS directly contacts the RAF kinases and induces catalytic activity through a multi - step process that involves the dimerization of the RAF kinase domain 6 . Acting as a MAPKKK , RAF then sets off the activity of the dual - specificity kinase MEK ( the MAPKK ) by phosphorylating its activation segment . In turn , MEK relays the signal by phosphorylating the acti - vation segment of ERK ( the MAPK ) 7 . Ultimately , active ERK relocates to various subcellular compartments and modulates by phosphorylation the activity of a large set of substrates , leading to cell - specific responses according to the developmental origin and state of the cell ( fig . 1a ) . Importantly , the range of substrates affected by the core RAS – ERK pathway is considerably expanded by a ERK signalling : a master regulator of cell behaviour , life and fate Hugo Lavoie 1 , 3 , Jessica Gagnon 1 , 3 and Marc Therrien 1 , 2 ✉ Abstract | The proteins extracellular signal - regulated kinase 1 ( ERK1 ) and ERK2 are the down - stream components of a phosphorelay pathway that conveys growth and mitogenic signals largely channelled by the small RAS GTPases . By phosphorylating widely diverse substrates , ERK proteins govern a variety of evolutionarily conserved cellular processes in metazoans , the dysregulation of which contributes to the cause of distinct human diseases . The mechanisms underlying the regulation of ERK1 and ERK2 , their mode of action and their impact on the develop - ment and homeostasis of various organisms have been the focus of much attention for nearly three decades . In this Review , we discuss the current understanding of this important class of kinases . We begin with a brief overview of the structure , regulation , substrate recognition and subcellular localization of ERK1 and ERK2 . We then systematically discuss how ERK signalling regulates six fundamental cellular processes in response to extracellular cues . These processes are cell proliferation , cell survival , cell growth , cell metabolism , cell migration and cell differentiation . 1 Laboratory of Intracellular Signalling , Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer , Université de Montréal , Montreal , QC , Canada . 2 Department of Pathology and Cellular Biology , Université de Montréal , Montreal , QC , Canada . 3 These authors contributed equally : Hugo Lavoie , Jessica Gagnon ✉ e - mail : marc . therrien @ umontreal . ca https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41580 - 020 - 0255 - 7 REVIEWS Nature reviews | Molecular cell Biology number of kinases directly activated by ERK - mediated phosphorylation , most notably RSKs and MSKs 5 . ERKs are central regulators of an array of cellular processes . To induce diverse responses , ERKs have an extensive repertoire of substrates comprising several hundred direct phosphorylation sites 8 . These substrates cover a range of molecular functions and are often expressed in a context - dependent manner , thereby instigating cell - specific outcomes . The characterization of ERK1 and ERK2 has revealed how they control essen - tial cellular functions . Following a general description of the structure , regulation and mechanism of action of Box 1 | The MaPK family Mitogen - activated protein kinases ( MaPKs ) are expressed across eukaryotes , where they integrate extracellular cues that impinge on diverse fundamental cellular behaviours . Mammalian genomes encode 14 distinct MaPKs , which are classified as conventional or atypical on the basis of their sequence and mode of activation 5 . Conventional MaPKs comprise the extracellular signal - regulated kinase 1 ( erK1 ) and erK2 , JuN amino - terminal kinase ( JNK ) , p38 and erK5 subfamilies ( see the figure ) . they all have a tXY motif in their activation segment , which requires dual phospho rylation by upstream MaPK kinases ( MaPKKs ) for catalytic activation . except for erK5 , which contains a long carboxy ( C ) - terminal domain , the conventional MaPKs consist of a single kinase domain ( KD ) with short amino ( N ) and C terminals . atypical MaPKs include erK3 , erK4 , erK7 and Nemo - like kinase ( NLK ) . they have long N - terminal or C - terminal sequences that may serve regulatory purposes and , except for erK7 , their phospho - activating motif diverges from the tXY consensus sequence . the activation mechanism and downstream functions of conventional MaPKs have been extensively studied . they relay signals as part of three - tiered kinase cascades that comprise also upstream MaPKKs and MaPKK kinases ( MaPKKKs ) , which receive signals from membrane - bound receptors . each pathway differs from the others in its sensitivity to external stimuli . For instance , growth factor stimulation can lead to erK , JNK and / or p38 activation . JNK and p38 are additionally activated by a spectrum of environmental stress signals , including proinflammatory cytokines , oxidative stress and DNa damage . erK5 , the least studied of the conventional MaPKs , is also activated by mitogens , growth factors and specific stress conditions such as oxidative and osmotic stresses . Differences in expression , subcellular compartmentalization , scaffolding partners and substrate - targeting mechanisms contribute to the differential dynamics , substrate selectivity and range of action of conventional MaPK subfamilies . aHQ , ala - His - Glu - rich region ; C34 , conserved region in erK3 and erK4 ; GPCrs , G protein - coupled receptors ; NLs , nuclear localization signal ; PaK , p21 - activated kinase ; taD , transactivation domain . KD TEY PAK MEK1 , 2 ( MAP2K1 , 2 ) KD ? KD TEY TAD NLS NLS MEK5 ( MAP2K5 ) TPL2 / COT MEKK2 , 3 KD TPY MKK4 , 7 ( MAP2K4 , 7 ) KD TGY MKK3 , 4 , 6 ( MAP2K3 , 4 , 6 ) TAK1 HIPK2 ? ARAF , BRAF , RAF1 KSR1 , KSR2 , TPL2 , MOS MEKK1 - 4 , TAOK1 , 2 , TAK1 , DLK1 , MLK2 , 3 , ASK1 , 2 , TLP2 / COT ERK1 , 2 ( MAPK3 , 1 ) JNK1 , 2 , 3 ( MAPK8 , 9 , 10 ) p38 α / β / γ / δ ( MAPK14 , 11 , 12 , 13 ) ERK5 ( MAPK7 ) ERK3 , 4 ( MAPK4 , 6 ) ERK7 ( MAPK15 ) NLK AHQ C34 SEG TEY TQE KD KD Conventional MAPKs MAPKKK Stimuli MAPKK MAPK Mitogens Serum , growth factors Cytokines Stress GPCRs , Ca 2 + Proliferation Survival Growth Metabolism Migration , morphogenesis Differentiation , development Apoptosis Inﬂammation Starvation , autophagy Response Atypical MAPKs Auto - phospho - rylation www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s ERKs , we discuss selected examples of ERK substrates and their molecular underpinnings within the context of six representative ERK - induced cellular responses : these responses are cell proliferation , cell survival , cell growth , cell metabolism , cell migration and cell differentiation . For readability , we limited the listing of specific phos - phorylated residues in the main text and figures . Instead , the reader is referred to Supplementary Table 1 , which presents all the substrates and phosphorylation sites that are relevant to this Review . ERK structure , regulation and activity Upon RAS activation , a series of biochemical and struc - tural events lead to ERK activation , trigger its cellular redistribution and promote its selective association with substrates . These events are key for implementing ERK cellular functions . In this section , we briefly describe our current understanding of these regulatory processes . Mechanism of ERK activation The catalytic domain of ERK follows a bilobed structure shared by most eukaryotic protein kinases , consisting of an amino - terminal ( N ) lobe and a larger carboxy - terminal ( C ) lobe connected by a short hinge 9 ( fig . 1b ) . The MAPK structure also includes two distinctive features : a stretch of ~ 30 amino acids ( the MAPK insert ) located between helix αG and helix αH , which folds back on the C lobe , and a C - terminal extension that assembles with the N lobe ( fig . 1b ) . Like for many other protein kinases , ERK activation is mediated by phosphorylation of residues Thr185 and Tyr187 ( human numbering is used through - out the text and figures unless otherwise stated ) , which are situated within a flexible loop that defines the activa - tion segment 10 ( fig . 1b ) . This MEK - mediated phospho - rylation displaces the activation segment and leads to the rearrangement of several polar contacts , which translates into conformational changes in neighbouring structural elements 11 , 12 . Briefly , Thr185 phosphorylation slightly shifts the C - terminal extension , which allows helix αC to adopt its active position , thereby locking catalytic resi - dues in a productive conformation . For its part , phospho - rylated Tyr187 ( pTyr187 ) participates in forming the P + 1 specificity pocket , which enables the binding of proline - containing substrates in the active site ; it addi - tionally influences the conformation of the MAPK insert , which contributes to substrate binding ( fig . 1b ) . Receptor tyrosine kinase ( RTK ) - induced ERK acti - vity can span timescales ranging from a few minutes to several hours , depending on various factors such as the types and abundance of ligands and their associated receptors 13 . In addition to specific mechanisms dedi - cated to reversion of RAS – ERK signalling to the ground state , such as ligand - induced receptor internal ization or RAS - GTP hydrolysis induced by a RAS GTPase - activating protein 13 , the timing of the signal is also largely controlled by ERK - induced negative feedback loops ( Box 2 ) . Subcellular localization The plasma membrane is a predominant ERK activation site 14 , although endomembranes of the Golgi apparatus , the endoplasmic reticulum and endosomes also support RAS – ERK signalling owing to the ability of RAS proteins to partition into these intracellular compartments 15 . Our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of ERK tar - geting to any of these locations remains limited . Several scaffolding proteins have been proposed to bridge ERK with several pathway components and to target them to specific compartments . In mammals , candidate scaffolds identified to date include KSR1 , KSR2 , MORG1 ( also known as WD repeat domain - containing protein 83 ) , IQGAP1 , IQGAP3 , SEF , FHL1 , GIT1 , CAVIN4 , paxillin , β - arrestins and the MP1 ( also known as LAMTOR3 ) – P14 – P18 complex 16 – 18 ( fig . 1c ) . They will not be further detailed here , but it is worth mentioning that the scaf - folding role of several of these proteins in ERK signalling remains to be established . Moreover , it remains unclear whether they uniquely serve as nucleating platforms at specific subcellular locations or whether they can also allosterically control kinase activity and / or substrate rec - ognition , as demonstrated for the yeast MAPK scaffold Ste5 ( ref . 19 ) . Lastly , in some cases , their scaffolding prop - erty has been challenged . For example , a recent study has suggested that the RAF - related KSR pseudokinases do not function as scaffolds but instead are allosteric acti - vators of RAF family kinases through the ability of their pseudokinase domain to dimerize with and activate the kinase domain of RAF isoforms 20 . Nuclear import is key to providing activated ERK access to its nuclear targets . In quiescent cells , ERK is maintained in the cytoplasm by the activity of a lim - ited number of proteins , including MEK1 ( ref . 21 ) , the ERK inhibitor PEA - 15 ( ref . 22 ) and the phosphatase MKP3 ( ref . 23 ) . These proteins contain a nuclear export signal and , by associating with ERK , mediate expor - tin 1 - dependent nuclear export 21 – 23 ( fig . 1d ) . Despite its importance , the mechanism underlying the nuclear translocation of activated ERK is not fully understood . Early studies indicated that ERK shuttles into the nucleus by facilitated diffusion as well as by a RAN - dependent and importin 7 - mediated process 24 – 26 ( fig . 1e ) . Facilitated diffusion was proposed to be mediated by the direct interaction of ERK with Phe - Gly dipeptide repeats of nucleoporins 27 . Phe - Gly repeats are present in nucleo - porins and contribute to the formation of a gel - like barrier within the nuclear pore complex to control nucle - ocytoplasmic transport 28 . Phe - Gly repeats frequently include sequences related to one of the two characterized ERK docking sites on substrates , known as the F - motif ( see later ) , which possibly explains the close relation - ship between ERK and the nuclear pore complex . This hypothesis is further supported by the large number of nuclear pore subunits that are phosphorylated by ERK 29 . The oligomer status of ERK , namely its monomer versus dimer status , appears to determine its nucleocyto - plasmic distribution . Although some confusion initially reigned , later reports demonstrated that ERK monomers are preferentially associated with nuclear substrates , whereas ERK dimers mostly interact with cytoplasmic substrates 30 . This preference was substantiated with use of an inhibitor of ERK dimerization , which blocked ERK cytoplasmic , but not nuclear , signalling 31 . ERK dimerization has also been linked with autophospho - rylation . Three conserved activation segment residues Nature reviews | Molecular cell Biology R e v i e w s ( Thr181 , Thr190 and Tyr193 ) in ERK2 are phospho - rylated autocatalytically 32 , 33 . In particular , phosphoryl - ated Thr190 ( Thr188 in mice ) was reported to occur on ERK dimerization in the cytoplasm and was proposed to increase ERK nuclear localization and nuclear - target phosphorylation 32 ( fig . 1e ) . Whether ERK dimers dis - sociate on Thr190 phosphorylation but before nuclear shuttling has , however , not been determined . Some evidence also suggests an inhibitory function of ERK1 autophosphorylation at other residues 33 . More work is needed to clarify the link between ERK oligomer status , autophosphorylation and nuclear shuttling . A number of mechanisms reinforce ERK colocal - ization with a subset of nuclear targets . Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments have revealed signalling - dependent association of ERK with promoters of RAS – ERK pathway target genes in conjunction with RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) and specific transcription factors 34 , 35 . Mounting evidence also suggests a direct association between ERK and GC - rich DNA elements through an atypical DNA - binding motif situated within the MAPK insert ( residues 259 – 277 ) 34 , 36 . These excit - ing observations indicate that ERK has a direct role in transcription regulation . ERK substrate targeting ERK phosphorylation sites conform to a short Pro - X - Ser / Thr - Pro consensus motif ( X represents any residue ) . Interactions with auxiliary docking sites on substrates are thus crucial for achieving specificity . Two docking RAF MEK RAS b a Cytoplasm Nucleus N lobe C lobe MAPK insert C - terminal extension C - terminal extension MAPK insert FRS FRS not accessible RTKs Plasmamembrane Ligand Overlay • RSK1 ( RPS6KA1 ) • RSK2 ( RPS6KA3 ) • RSK3 ( RPS6KA2 ) • RSK4 ( RPS6KA6 ) • MSK1 ( RPS6KA5 ) • MSK2 ( RPS6KA4 ) • MNK1 ( MKNK1 ) • MNK2 ( MKNK2 ) Helix α G Helix α C Helix α H ERK pS pS pY pT Core RAS – ERK pathway InactiveERK2 ActivatedERK2 M E K D U S P s DRS DRS N lobe C lobe pTyr185 ( human Tyr187 ) pThr183 ( human Thr185 ) pThr183 ( humanThr185 ) pTyr185 ( humanTyr187 ) Inactive ERK2 ( PDB 1ERK ) Activated ERK2 ( PDB 2ERK ) • HRAS • KRAS • NRAS • ARAF • BRAF • CRAF ( RAF1 ) • MEK1 ( MAP2K1 ) • MEK2 ( MAP2K2 ) • ERK1 ( MAPK3 ) • ERK2 ( MAPK1 ) c RAN – GTP RAN – GDP XPO1 XPO1 MKP3 N E S N E S PEA - 15 N E S ERK PEA - 15 N E S ERK ERK ERK MKP3 N E S ERK N E S ERK XPO1 Cytoplasmic retention or nuclear export of inactive ERK Cytoplasm Nucleus NPC NPC P Active transport Passive diﬀusion P Nuclearsubstrates ERK Cytoplasm Nucleus RAN – GTP RAN – GDP ERK ERK ERK ERK ERK monomer ERK dimer Imp7 Impb Cytoplasmicsubstrates Focal adhesions • Paxillin • FHL1 • GIT1 • PAK1 Endomembranes • MORG1 • MP1 – P14 – P18 GPCR signaling • CAVIN4 ( muscle ) • β - arrestins Plasmamembrane IQGAP1 - 3 d S u r v i v a l M e t a b o l i s m M i g r a t i o n D i ﬀ e r e n t i a t i o n P r o l i f e r a t i o n G r o w t h Substrates RSK MSK MNK Activationsegment ( lip ) movement Subcellular localization of activated ERK e Change in subcellularlocalization MEK1 MEK1 Activatoryphosphorylation by ERK P www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s motifs have been described to date , namely the D - motifs and F - motifs 37 ( fig . 1b ) . The D - motif recruitment site on ERK consists of a negatively charged region and a hydrophobic groove located at the interface of the kinase domain lobes . Conversely , the F - motif recruitment site is formed of the MAPK insert and pTyr187 of activated ERK ( fig . 1b ) . In the inactive state , the F - motif recruit - ment site is occluded by the unphosphorylated activa - tion segment 38 . F - motifs on target proteins are hence exclusively recognized by active ERK and are there - fore involved only in substrate targeting . By contrast , D - motifs are recognized by active and inactive ERK , which enables ERK interactions with substrates and with regulators 37 . D - motifs and F - motifs can cooperate to increase the substrate affinity of ERK and to dictate phosphorylation kinetics 39 . They may also influence ERK activity by allosterically modulating the kinase con formation 40 . The presence of D - motifs and F - motifs is not observed near every ERK phosphorylation site , suggesting that alternative recognition modes exist , such as interactions with unstructured sequences or with folded domains . This possibility is supported by recent structural data on the interaction of ERK2 with different partners such as PEA - 15 and ETS1 ( refs 41 , 42 ) . Cellular functions of ERK signalling Although our understanding of the molecular roles of ERK substrates is far from complete , their character - ization over the past 30 years has provided us with an ever - clearer picture of how ERK activity controls funda - mental aspects of metazoan cell behaviours in response to specific cues . Outstanding examples of prominent cellular responses to ERK signalling are discussed hereafter . ERK signalling in cell proliferation In proliferating cells , RAS - induced ERK signalling pri - marily controls the G1 / S - phase transition of the cell cycle . Notably , deletion of the three Ras genes or loss of Erk1 and Erk2 in mouse embryonic fibroblasts ( MEFs ) induces a cell cycle arrest in G1 phase ( refs 43 , 44 ) . Likewise , blocking RAS – ERK signalling by serum starvation , growth factor withdrawal or pharmacological inhi - bition also arrests a variety of cell lines in G1 phase 45 . Expression of activated RAS suffices to stimulate the entry of quiescent cells into S phase 46 . However , this is not the case when activated core downstream kinases of the pathway are used , as they require signals from other RAS - induced pathways 47 , 48 . Other phases of the cell cycle are also modulated by ERK ( for example , the G2 / M tran - sition ) , albeit to a lesser extent , and ERK hyper activation can conversely induce cell cycle exit , leading to cell senescence 49 , 50 . In this section , we focus on ERK - induced G1 / S transition . A hallmark of the response to mitogens is the rapid and transient induction of several mRNAs , which is largely induced by ERK activity . The genes within this regulon are commonly called immediate early genes ( IEGs ) and do not necessitate de novo protein synthe - sis to be transcriptionally induced 51 . Serum response fac - tor ( SRF ) is the central DNA - binding transcription factor that promotes IEG transcription by interacting with serum response elements present in IEG regulatory regions 51 . SRF does not receive inputs directly from ERK . Instead , ERK - activated RSK phosphorylates SRF , thereby enhancing its DNA - binding activity 52 . To fully respond to ERK signals , SRF must bind promoters in association with three ternary complex factors ( TCFs ) , a group of ETS domain - containing proteins named Elk - 1 ( ELK1 ) , ELK3 and ELK4 53 . Upon RAS activation , the TCFs are phosphorylated by ERK on multiple sites within their transactivation domain 54 ( fig . 2a ) . The phospho - rylated TCFs directly recruit the Mediator complex sub - unit MED23 to IEG promoters in a gradual manner , which correlates with the level of ERK - mediated ELK1 phosphorylation 55 ( fig . 2b ) . In addition to MED23 recruitment , TCF phosphorylation induces chromatin modifications near the transcription start sites of target genes . The first histone post - translational modification to occur is the phosphorylation of histone H3 Ser10 , which is mediated by TCF - dependent recruitment of a histone H3 kinase 56 . Then , on loading of the trans - cription machinery , a series of histone H3 acetylation and methylation events follow , which , in turn , leads to transcription initiation at IEGs 56 ( fig . 2b ) . Apart from TCFs , the eTs family comprises several other subfamilies of transcription factors ( for exam - ple , PEA3 , ERG and ERF ) , which recognize the same ETS DNA - binding motif 53 . Some of these transcription factors are involved in cell proliferation , and the genes encoding the PEA3 and ERG subfamilies recently emer - ged as potent oncogenes in Ewing sarcomas and prostate cancer 57 , 58 . The overexpression of PEA3 and ERG factors induces a RAS – ERK - like transcriptional programme Regulon group of genes that are regulated as a single unit , generally under the control of a common regulatory transcription factor that acts as a repressor or activator of gene expression . Mediator complex Multiprotein transcription co - activator conserved in all eukaryotes that transmits signals between transcription factors and the rNA polymerase ii machinery through direct physical interactions . ETS family Transcription activators and inhibitors that share the e26 transformation - specific DNA - binding domain , which associates with DNA motifs encompassing the consensus sequence ggA ( A / T ) . Fig . 1 | erK activation and subcellular localization . a | Receptor tyrosine kinase ( RTK ) – RAS - induced extracellular signal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) activation leads to regulation through phosphorylation of a large repertoire of substrates involved in cell proliferation , survival , growth , metabolism , migration and differentiation . The distinct isoforms com - prising the core RAS – ERK pathway in mammals are indicated . ERK - activated kinases of the ribosomal protein S6 kinase ( RSK ) , mitogen - and stress - activated protein kinase ( MSK ) and MAPK - interacting kinase ( MNK ) families significantly expand the repertoire of effectors of the core pathway by targeting additional substrates . b | ERK2 ( here mouse ERK2 ; Protein Data Bank ( PDB ) identifier 1ERK ) is activated by MEKs through phosphoryl - ation of the activation segment residues Thr183 ( human Thr185 ) and Tyr185 ( human Tyr187 ) . This activity is commonly reversed by dual - specificity phosphatases ( DUSPs ) acting on phosphorylated Thr183 ( pThr183 ) and pTyr185 . The right panel overlays the inactive and active ERK2 conformations ( PDB identifiers 1ERK and 2ERK , respectively ) with emphasis on the structural elements affected by activation segment phosphoryl - ation . The main transition is the drastic change in activation segment position between the inactive state and the active state . Substrate recognition often involves specific con - tacts with the D - motif recruitment site ( DRS ) and / or the F - motif recruitment site ( FRS ) . c | ERK localization in the cell membrane and endomembranes is dictated by interactions with various scaffolding proteins , but the mechanisms of ERK recruitment onto these scaffolds are poorly characterized . d | Inactive ERK is thought to be excluded from the nucleus and retained in the cytoplasm through interactions with factors that are them - selves actively exported from the nucleus , such as PEA - 15 , MEK1 and MKP3 . This process is dependent on RAN GTPase activity . e | ERK activation triggers rapid nuclear entry . ERK can passively diffuse through its interaction with nuclear pore complex ( NPC ) sub­ units . ERK can also be actively transported by a RAN – importin - 7 ( Imp7 ) - dependent mech - anism . ERK autophosphorylation of the activation segment residue Thr188 ( human Thr190 ) in the cytoplasm was also proposed to promote its nuclear localization . Nuclear ERK phosphorylates a variety of nuclear targets . Activated ERK is also thought to form homodimers in the cytoplasm , which are primarily involved in the phosphorylation of cytoplasmic substrates . C lobe , carboxy­ terminal lobe ; N lobe , amino­ terminal lobe ; NES , nuclear export signal ; XPO1 , exportin 1 . ◀ Nature reviews | Molecular cell Biology R e v i e w s Box 2 | Switching off erK proteins three extracellular signal - regulated kinase ( erK ) - induced retro - inhibitory modes have been discerned to date . First , erK - mediated phosphorylation directly attenuates the activity of upstream components of the ras – erK pathway , not exhaustively including receptor tyrosine kinases ( such as eGFr , erBB2 , erBB3 , fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 ( FGFr1 ) and iNsr ) , adaptor proteins ( such as GaB2 , Frs2 , irs1 and irs2 ) , the ras guanine exchange factor sOs1 , raF kinases ( such as BraF , CraF and Ksr1 ) and MeKs 291 ( see the figure ) . in the second mode , erK activates kinases that suppress pathway signalling . For example , upon erK activation , ribosomal protein s6 kinase 1 ( rsK1 ) and rsK2 phosphorylate and inhibit upstream signalling components , including sOs1 and GaB2 . therefore , it appears that rsKs and erK act in concert to suppress ras – erK signalling , a redundancy that may ensure robustness in pathway shutdown . the third level of feedback inhibition entails the transcription of a variety of inhibitory factors following erK activation . For example , mrNas encoding DusP1 , DusP2 , DusP4 , DusP5 , DusP6 , DusP7 , DusP9 and PtPN7 as well as sPrY4 and sPreD proteins are rapidly transcribed in response to erK signalling . DusPs selectively dephosphorylate and inactivate erK , whereas sPrY4 and sPreD proteins reduce the pool of GtP - loaded ras by recruiting the ras GtPase - activating protein neurofibromin at the plasma membrane . erK - phosphorylated and rsK - phosphorylated residues are indicated . Mouse numbering is used for Ksr1 residues . FGF , fibroblast growth factor ; PaK1 , p21 - activated kinase 1 ; Pi3K , phosphoinositide 3 - kinase . ERK - dependent phosphorylation RSK - dependent phosphorylation IRS1 IRS2 Adaptorproteins RTKs GAB2 FRS2 GAB1 SOS1 S1132S1167S1178 S1193S1197 S1134S1161 S29S289S296S301S642 S151T401S750T753T793 BRAF KSR1 CRAF MEKs T286T292T386 Core RAS – ERK pathway T185Y187 RAS ↓ Dimerization + kinase activity ↑ Inhibitory 14 - 3 - 3 binding ↓ Plasma membrane localization ↓ GRB2 association Transcription - dependent feedback S616S636S639 S388S391T657S679 T132T135T138T376 T452T455T458T463 S736S1162S1203 T693 T701 S777 S789 S160S211S631 S469S591 S612S614 ↓ SHP2 recruitment ↓ Recruitment of PI3K subunit p85 ↓ Autophosphorylation , activation ↓ FGF responsiveness ↓ FGF - induced phosphorylation ↓ GRB2 and SHP2 engagement ↓ RAS – GTP ↑ ERK dephosphorylation ↑ Transcription of inhibitory factors T476 T260T274S443 ↓ Association with RAS ↓ Dimerization ↓ Heterodimerization with BRAF ↓ Plasma membrane anchoring ↓ Association with RAS ↓ Association with ERK ↓ PAK1 phosphorylation ( by MEK1 ) DUSP4 , 5 , 6 SPRY4SPRED1 , 2 , 3 ERBB2 EGFR ERBB3 FGFR1 ERK RSKs www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s that is independent of upstream signalling and leads to the malignant transformation of normal prostate cells 59 . This suggests that PEA3 and ERG factors possess high basal transcriptional activity 59 . Another reason for their high oncogenic potential could be their propensity to co - occupy target promoters with the transcription factor AP - 1 ( refs 59 , 60 ) ( see later ) . Of note , mounting evidence positions PEA3 downstream of the ERK - inhibited tran - scriptional repressor CIC . For instance , heterozygous CIC loss - of - function mutations promote the onset of cancers such as Ewing - like sarcomas and oligodendro - gliomas , which are associated with overexpression of PEA3 factors 61 – 63 ( fig . 2a ) . By contrast , the ETS transcriptional repressor ERF inhibits cell proliferation and tumorigenesis downstream of ERK 64 , 65 . In resting cells , ERF localizes to the nucleus and represses the transcription of target genes ( fig . 2a ) . Upon ERK activation , it is phosphorylated and expor - ted to the cytoplasm , thereby relieving transcription inhi bition 66 . ERF phosphorylation by ERK is cell cycle regulated , and expression of a phosphorylation - defective mutant blocks cells in G1 phase 64 , 65 . ERF loss - of - function mutations have recently been identified in prostate neoplasias 67 . In this context , ERF depletion replicates transcriptomic features of ERG gain of function . The similarity between both gene expression signatures likely results from a competition between the ERF transcription repressor and the ERG transcription acti - vator for the same DNA elements . Accordingly , ERF antagonizes the ability of ERG to drive tumour growth 67 . The early growth response ( EGR ) , FOS , JUN and MYC families of transcription factors are the main IEG products involved in cell proliferation that are robustly induced by ERK - regulated SRF – TCF transcription factor complexes 51 , 68 , 69 ( fig . 2a ) . A recent transcriptomics study showed that TCF gene triple knockout ( Elk1 − / − ; Elk3 − / − ; Elk4 − / − ) blocks the expression of more than 60 % of TPA - inducible transcriptional targets in MEFs , including the EGR , FOS , JUN and MYC IEGs , thereby support - ing the idea that they are primary targets of the SRF – TCF complex 70 . Continuous or repetitive spikes of mitogen stimulation are required for cells arrested in G1 phase to enter S phase , after which cell cycle progression becomes growth factor independent 48 , 71 – 74 ( fig . 2c ) . The mechanism underlying this requirement is partly understood , and IEG transcription factors themselves were attributed a prominent role in discerning transient versus sustained ERK signalling 71 , 75 . Indeed , following the initial wave of transcription induction by ERK , a series of phospho - rylation events and autoregulatory loops consolidate the accumulation and activation of IEG transcription factors , which allows discrimination between sustained and recurrent signals , which enable G1 / S transition , and noisy , unproductive signals ( fig . 2a , c ) . For instance , ERK directly phosphorylates FOS and JUN family mem - bers as well as ATF2 , which blocks their proteasomal degradation , increases their DNA - binding activity and unleashes their transactivation potential 68 ( fig . 2a ) . A transcriptional autoregulatory loop involving func - tional TPA response element and cAMP response element sequences in regulatory regions of JUN and FOS also con - tributes to ERK - induced AP - 1 ( JUN – FOS ) activation 68 . Furthermore , ERK - activated RSK and MSK promote AP - 1 activity by phosphorylating , respectively , FOS and the bZIP factors ATF1 and CREB1 , which further stimulate the transcriptional induction of JUN and FOS 76 – 78 ( fig . 2a ) . The oncoprotein MYC is also directly phosphorylated by ERK , which blocks its proteasomal degradation 75 , 79 , 80 . Lastly , EGR1 accumulation similarly requires sustained ERK signalling 75 . The mechanism by which ERK - regulated IEGs stim - ulate G1 / S transition involves transcriptional regulation of secondary response genes , among which G1 - specific cyclin D1 ( encoded by CCND1 ) has a central role . ERK signalling is both necessary and sufficient for transcrip - tional induction of CCND1 ( refs 81 , 82 ) . Accordingly , the promoter region of CCND1 comprises binding sites for various IEG transcription factors , including TPA response elements , cAMP response elements and ETS and EGR binding sites 83 ( fig . 2a ) . On cyclin D accumu - lation in early G1 phase , the cyclin D – cyclin - dependent kinase 4 ( CDK4 ) and cyclin D – CDK6 complexes phos - phorylate retinoblastoma - associated protein ( RB ) and thus derepresses E2F transcription factors , which , in turn , induces cyclin E expression ( fig . 2a ) . The late G1 phase cyclin E – CDK2 complex further phosphorylates RB , fully derepresses E2F and induces feedforward loops that contribute to the irreversibility of S phase entry 84 . Several lines of evidence support the existence of an ERK – TCF – IEG – cyclin D pathway . Pharmacological inhibition of the RAS – ERK pathway in serum - stimulated MEFs impedes cyclin D1 expression , which correlates with a G1 arrest 85 . S phase progression in these cells is rescued by forced cyclin D1 expression 85 . Likewise , fast inhibition of the pathway was also reported to trigger G1 arrest and to prevent cyclin D1 expression 48 . Moreover , MEFs lacking the Fos and Fosb genes exhibit G1 arrest , owing in part to a failure to induce cyclin D1 . This G1 arrest is also rescued by ectopic cyclin D1 expression 86 . Intriguingly , RASless MEFs express normal levels of cyclin D1 despite ERK inactivity 44 . Although the under - lying cause of the apparent RAS - independent cyclin D1 expression is not known , it was proposed to involve cell adaptation during the 12 - day period that was required to deplete RAS ; indeed , a faster inhibition of RAS activity did block mitogen - induced cyclin D1 accumulation 48 . MEFs with triple knockout of the three cyclin D genes ( Ccnd1 − / − ; Ccnd − / − ; Ccnd3 − / − — also known as cyclin D gene triple knockout ) display much - reduced sensitivity to RAS - induced transformation 87 . However , although they also show delayed G1 / S transition and increased requirement for mitogenic stimulation , they still prolifer - ate in the presence of growth factors 87 . This indicates that cyclin D level reduction on ERK inhibition is not suffi - cient to block cell cycle progression . Ectopic expression of the CDK inhibitor ( CDKI ) p27 ( encoded by CDKN1B ) or reduction of CDK2 levels are sufficient to block cyclin D gene triple knockout cells in G1 phase 87 . Consistent with these results , a recent study showed that a stoichiometric competition between D - type cyclins and the CDKIs p21 ( encoded by CDKN1A ) and p27 for CDK4 binding and activation determines whether cells undergo prolifera - tion or become quiescent 88 ( fig . 2a ) . It is thus likely that the increased expression of p21 and / or p27 observed in TPA response element DNA motif with the consensus sequence TgA ( g / C ) TCA that serves as a binding site for the AP - 1 transcription factor dimers JUN – JUN and JUN – fos . cAMP response element DNA motif with the consensus sequence TgACgTCA that serves as a binding site for the AP - 1 transcription factor dimers JUN – ATf2 and ATf2 – ATf2 and for ATf1 and CreB family dimers . Nature reviews | Molecular cell Biology R e v i e w s several cell types following ERK inhibition is also crucial for cell cycle arrest . However , the exact mechanism of the observed increased CDKI expression is still unknown . One possibility is that ERK inhibition relieves CDKIs of MYC - induced repression 89 . A not - mutually - exclusive possibility is that increased CDKI expression results from reduced ERK - mediated and RSK - mediated inhibitory phosphorylation 90 , 91 ( fig . 2a ) . Roles of ERK signalling in cell survival Apoptosis is a form of programmed cell death that is crucial for tissue homeostasis to eliminate supernumer - ary cells during development or cells that have been irreversibly damaged . Dysregulation of apoptosis has a major role in the cause of various diseases , including neurodegenerative diseases , autoimmune disorders and cancer 92 . Genetic and pharmacological evidence suggest that ERK signalling mostly provides prosurvival cues in response to serum and RTK activation 93 . ERK - mediated inhibition of apoptosis appears to be predominantly integrated by the intrinsic apoptosis pathway ( also known as the mitochondrial pathway ) . Regulation of extrinsic apoptosis pathways by ERK is pos - sible but lacks supportive evidence . The intrinsic cell death cascade is controlled by the B cell lymphoma 2 ( BCL - 2 ) family of proteins , which comprises IEG IEG IEG P P MSK MYC ERK E - box ( CACGTG ) MXD1 MAX RSK RB E2F RBPP P P P EGR1 EGR4 EGR2 MYC Cyclin E TRE CRE ETS ETS : CCGGAAGTG SRE IEG ETS MSK CDKN1B Cyclin E CDK2 CIC TGAATG ( G / A ) Ataxin 1 P P JUN FOS FOSL1 FOSL2 FOSB JUNB JUND P P P P P P P P P P AP - 1 dimers EGR SRE : CArG CDK4 or CDK6 CDK4 or CDK6 E2F Activation of IEG transcription factors Or T r a n s i e n t ( ‘ n o i s y ’ ) E R K s i g n a ll i n g M u l t i p l e E R K s i g n a ll i n g p e a k s Su s t a i n e d E R K s i g n a ll i n g Biological response ( e . g . G1 to S transition ) Transcriptionof IEGs RapidIntermediateSlow SRF MED23 SRF MED23 PPP ELK1 ELK1 SRF ELK1 MED23 a b c Transcription induction Transcription inhibition Activatory phosphorylation by ERK Inhibitory phosphorylation by ERK Activatory phosphorylation by RSK or MSK Inhibitory phosphorylation by RSK or MSK ETS transcription factor IEG SRG Other regulator of proliferation Cell cycle regulator P CDKN1A ATF2 SRGs Transcriptionof IEGs SRGs P P PP CRE : TGACGTCA ETS : CCGGAAGTG TRE : TGA ( C / G ) TCA EGR : CGCCCACGC G2 G1 M S Stoichiometriccompetition ERF ETV3 ELK1 ELK3 ELK4 TCFs ERF CREB ATF1 SRF ETV1 ETV4 ETV5 PEA3 ERG FLI1 ERG P P P P P P P P P E L K 1 p h o s p h o r y l a t i o n M E D 23 b i n d i n g I E G t r a n s c r i p t i o n SRF MED23 ELK1 pSer10 Kme P Transcriptionmachinery ? IEG transcriptionfactors Kac Activation threshold SRG ( e . g . cyclin D1 ) Cyclin D Cyclin D H3 H4 P P EGR3 JUN JUN ATF2 JUN JUN FOS P Intrinsic apoptosis pathway signalling pathway activated by environmental stresses and sensed by BCL - 2 family proteins ; leads to apoptosis through mitochondrial membrane permeabilization and release of cytochrome c . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s anti apoptotic members ( BCL - 2 , BCL - xL , MCL1 , BCL - W and A1 ) that bind the BH3 domain of the proap - optotic members BAX and BAK and sequester them 94 ( fig . 3a ) . Cellular insults such as DNA damage , osmotic stress or growth factor withdrawal activate or enhance the expression of BH3 - only proteins ( BOP ) — BIM , BAD , BMF , BID and PUMA — that associate with the BH3 domain - binding groove of antiapoptotic BCL - 2 family members and thus induce the release of BAX and BAK 95 . The proapoptotic factors can then oligomerize to form pores that permeabilize the outer mitochondrial membrane ( fig . 3a ) . This , in turn , leads to uncoupling of the electron transport chain and release of apoptogenic factors , of which cytochrome c is the best characterized . Cytoplasmic cytochrome c stimulates the apoptosome complex , which successively activates caspase 9 and its effector caspases , caspase 3 and caspase 7 , to commit the cell to apoptosis . Importantly , disruption of the ratio between antiapoptotic and proapoptotic proteins towards a higher abundance of unbound proapoptotic factors can lead to cell death 95 . Several studies have identified ERK as an inhibitor of BIM , which is considered the most potent proapop - totic BOP . BIM has the ability to associate with each of the antiapoptotic proteins , whereas other BOPs appear to be more selective 96 . Alternative splicing of the BIM pre - mRNA gives rise to short ( BIM S ) , long ( BIM L ) and extralong ( BIM EL ) BIM proteins . Following serum stim - ulation , BIM EL , the most abundant isoform , is phospho - rylated by ERK on at least four residues , three of which are encoded by its unique alternatively spliced exon 97 . These phosphorylation events regulate BIM by at least two means . First , they increase the turnover of BIM EL by promoting its proteasomal degradation 97 ; second , they induce the dissociation of BIM EL from the antiapoptotic factors BCL - xL and MCL1 ( ref . 98 ) ( fig . 3b ) . In addition , ERK negatively controls the transcription of the BIM encoding gene BCL2L11 by phosphorylating the trans - cription activator FOXO3A ; phosphorylation promotes the nuclear exclusion of FOXO3A and its targeting for proteasomal degradation 99 ( fig . 3b ) . ERK signalling inhibits the proapoptotic functions of other BOPs besides BIM . For instance , ERK phospho - rylates BIK to stimulate its proteasomal degradation 100 , whereas BMF phosphorylation by ERK blocks its activity by an unknown mechanism 101 . Moreover , ERK - activated RSK inhibits BAD by phosphorylating it on two serine residues , thereby creating a binding site for 14 - 3 - 3 , which enables the translocation of BAD from the mito - chondrial membrane to the cytosol and blocks its inter - action with the antiapoptotic factors BCL - xL and BCL - 2 ( refs 102 , 103 ) ( fig . 3b ) . Downstream of the mitochondrial pathway , cyto - chrome c release from mitochondria induces the formation of the apoptosome , which stimulates the clea - vage and activation of caspase 9 . ERK phosphorylates caspase 9 , which prevents its processing and activation . It thus appears that ERK activity also blocks commitment to apoptosis downstream of the intrinsic pathway 104 ( fig . 3b ) . Besides suppressing proapoptotic factors , ERK also stimulates antiapoptotic proteins . ERK phosphorylates MCL1 , which slows down its turnover and thus promotes cell viability 105 . Furthermore , ERK signalling regulates the expression of BCL2 , BCL2L1 ( which encodes BCL - xL ) and MCL1 in various cellular contexts 102 , 106 , 107 . Finally , ERK and phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) – AKT signalling were recently shown to stimulate cap - dependent translation of the apoptosis inhibitor BIRC5 ( also known as survivin ) 108 ( fig . 3b ) . Roles of ERK signalling in cell growth Cell size regulation in response to growth signals is of paramount importance for both proliferating and postmitotic cells 109 . Signalling pathways that sense growth - promoting cues convey them to anabolic machineries . In proliferating cells , the G1 / S transition is often likened to a cell size checkpoint , whereby the decision to proceed to S phase depends on the capacity of the cell to accumulate enough biomass , as dictated by its developmental origin and by the type and abundance of extracellular factors 109 . The ERK cascade also has important roles in regu - lating biosynthetic pathways , although in this regard its roles are secondary to PI3K – AKT – mTOR signalling . Among its key functions , ERK upregulates transcription of ribosomal DNA ( rDNA ) by Pol I and of tRNA genes by Pol III ( ref . 110 ) ( fig . 4 ) . In particular , Pol I processivity Extrinsic apoptosis pathways signalling pathways activated by agonists of cell death receptors such as fAs , tumour necrosis factor ( TNf ) - related apoptosis - inducing ligand ( TrAiL ) and TNf , which lead to apoptosis through formation of death - inducing signalling complexes . 12 - O - Tetradecanoylphorbol - 13 - acetate ( TPA ) . synthetic phorbol ester analogue with potent oncogenic properties that stimulates protein kinase C and multiple downstream events , including hyperactivation of the rAs – erK signalling cascade . Fig . 2 | erK regulation of cell proliferation . a | Extracellular signal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) activation triggers a large transcriptional programme that supports cell prolifer - ation . First , ERK activates the E26 transformation - specific ( ETS ) transcription factors known as the ternary complex factors ( TCFs ) , comprising ETS domain­ containing protein Elk­1 ( ELK1 ) , ELK3 and ELK4 . The TCFs bind ETS motifs located in target promoters in close proximity to a serum response element ( SRE ) , which is bound by serum response factor ( SRF ) . Transcription factors of other ETS subfamilies — ERF , ERG and PEA3 — are regulated by ERK and also bind ETS motifs . TCF phosphorylation induces transcription of immediate early genes ( IEGs ) , including the JUN , FOS , MYC and EGR families , which encode transcription factors . JUN and FOS ( and in some cases ATF2 ) form different AP - 1 dimers that can recognize either the 12 - O - tetradecanoylphorbol - 13 - acetate ( TPA ) response element ( TRE ) or the cAMP response element ( CRE ) . The MYC proteins form heterodimers with MAX , bind E - box DNA sequences and are antagonized by MXD1 . Early growth response ( EGR ) transcription factors interact with the EGR recognition motif . IEG proteins are often directly phosphorylated by ERK , which can lead to their accumulation through reduced proteasomal degradation . Functional IEG transcription factors stimulate the transcription of several secondary response genes ( SRGs ) , thereby implementing diverse cellular responses . One of these SRGs , cyclin D1 , stimulates the activity of the early­G1 phase cyclin­ dependent kinase 4 ( CDK4 ) and CDK6 , which phospho rylate the retinoblastoma - associated protein ( RB ) to derepress E2F transcription factors and induce transcription of late G1 genes such as the cyclin E gene , which activates CDK2 and further drives RB phosphorylation , E2F derepression and irreversible S phase entry . b | The extent of ELK1 phosphorylation serves as a rheostat for ERK - dependent trans criptional output through phosphorylation - dependent recruitment of the Mediator subunit MED23 . ELK1 phosphorylation sites that are rapidly phosphorylated by ERK upon its activation induce weak MED23 recruitment and transcriptional output , whereas inter - mediate phosphorylation strongly stimulates MED23 recruitment and IEG transcription . Later phosphorylation events induce MED23 displacement and reduce transcriptional output . IEG transcription is induced by chromatin modifications , including phosphoryl - ation of histone H3 Ser10 and acetylation ( ac ) and methylation ( me ) of histones H3 and H4 , which occur following recruitment of the transcription machinery . c | Sustained ERK acti - vation is required for driving the G1 / S cell cycle transition . A short pulse of ERK activity promotes the transcription of IEGs , but is insufficient to induce phosphorylation and accu - mulation of IEG transcription factors . However , multiple pulses or sustained activity of ERK can induce IEG transcription , IEG protein accumulation and SRG transcription , leading to S phase entry . CREB , cAMP response element­ binding protein ; MSK , mitogen­ and stress - activated protein kinase ; RSK , ribosomal protein S6 kinase . ◀ Nature reviews | Molecular cell Biology R e v i e w s at the rDNA loci rapidly increases on growth factor stim - ulation — a response that occurs on the same timescale as IEG transcription and that involves ERK phosphoryl - ation of the nucleolar transcription factor UBF1 ( ref . 111 ) ( fig . 4 ) . UBF1 phosphorylation modifies its interac - tion with DNA , leading to chromatin remodelling and enhanced rDNA transcription 112 . ERK also phosphoryl - ates the Pol I transcription initiation factor RRN3 , which further stimulates Pol I processivity 113 . ERK enhances the function of Pol III by activating the transcription factor BRF1 ( ref . 114 ) ; in Drosophila melanogaster , ERK also inhibits the Pol III transcriptional repressor Maf1 , but the evolutionarily conservation of this mechanism remains to be established 115 ( fig . 4 ) . The oncoprotein MYC is another crucial cell growth effector of RAS – ERK signalling . Early studies in flies demonstrated the importance of Myc in regulating cell growth and cell size during development 116 . These effects were later attributed in part to RAS – ERK signalling , which induces Tif - 1A ( the Drosophila homologue of BCL - 2 BCL - xL MCL1 BCL - W A1 BIK BIM BAD BMF BID PUMA BAX BAK Cytochrome c a b MDM2 ↑ Proteasomaldegradation 14 - 3 - 3 BAD BAD BCL - xL MCL1 ERK BIM EL BIM EL FOXO3A UbUbUb FOXO3A RSK P Procaspase 9 P Caspase 9 Caspase 3 , 7 ? P BOP Antiapoptotic Proapoptotic Outer mitochondrial membrane permeabilization • BCL2L11 • PUMA • BCL2 • BCL2L1 • MCL1 FOXO3A Cell death PI3K – AKT Cytoplasm Plasmamembrane Mitochondrion Mitochondrion BIRC5 Nucleus Ub Antiapoptotic BCL - 2 factor Proapoptotic BCL - 2 factor or caspase BOP Other regulator of cell survival Cytochrome c Ubiquitin Change in subcellular localization P Activatory phosphorylation by ERK Inhibitory phosphorylation by ERK P BMFP MCL1P P P P P P P P BIM EL P BIK P Inhibitory phosphorylation by RSK P ↑ Cap - dependent translation Cellular insults ( e . g . growth factor withdrawal , DNA damage , osmotic stress ) www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s RRN3 ) in a Myc - dependent manner 117 ( fig . 4 ) . A num - ber of observations suggest that these functions are conserved in mammals . In particular , MYC expression enhances protein synthesis and cell size independently of the cell cycle 118 . Conversely , depletion of the MYC repressor MXD1 increases cell volume and rDNA tran - scription , whereas MXD1 overexpression reduces cell size 119 , 120 . Lastly , MYC controls the transcription of sev - eral components of the Pol I machinery , including RRN3 and UBF1 ( refs 120 , 121 ) ( fig . 4 ) . Several studies support a global role for MYC in the transcriptional regulation of a large ribosome biogenesis regulon . MYC indeed directly interacts with and acti - vates the promoters of genes encoding nucleolar factors , ribosomal proteins , the 45S and 5S ribosomal RNAs and tRNAs , and therefore acts as a transcriptional activator of the three RNA polymerases 122 – 124 ( fig . 4 ) . The regulation of mRNA translation is another means by which ERK signalling influences biomass accumulation in cells . One mechanism of translation regulation is ERK - mediated phosphorylation and activation of MNKs , the best characterized substrate of which is Ser209 of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E ( eIF4E ) 125 , which is an integral component of the eIF4F cap - binding complex that is responsible for recruiting ribosomes onto mRNAs and supporting their processivity 126 ( fig . 4 ) . Although it is not crucial for global translation and cell viability , MNK - induced eIF4E Ser209 phosphorylation likely has a role in controlling the translation of a subset of transcripts 127 – 129 . An important channel by which ERK activity modulates mRNA translation is by regulating mTOR com plex 1 ( mTORC1 ) , which is a master regulator of cell size and cell proliferation 130 ( fig . 4 ) . This complex integrates cellular energy and nutrient cues by inter - facing with a series of specialized metabolic sensors on the lysosomal membrane , including the complexes Ragulator , GATOR1 , GATOR2 and CASTOR , and the protein sestrin 2 ( ref . 130 ) . In addition , mTORC1 receives cues from ligand - activated RTKs , which are transduced through PI3K – AKT and RAS – ERK signalling ( fig . 4 ) . These two pathways impinge on the tuberous sclerosis complex ( TSC ) comprising TSC1 – TSC2 – TBC1D7 , the GTPase activating protein function of which inhibits the GTPase RHEB , which is a key activator of mTORC1 ( ref . 130 ) . Mechanistically , AKT , ERK and ERK - activated RSK phosphorylate TSC2 to inhibit its activity 131 – 133 ( fig . 4 ) . These phosphorylation events were proposed to mimic TSC2 loss - of - function mutations identified in individuals with tuberous sclerosis 133 . Unlike PI3K – AKT signalling , ERK and RSK were also shown to activate mTORC1 by phosphorylating RAPTOR 134 , 135 ( fig . 4 ) . More work is needed to ascertain whether these ERK signalling events are context dependent or common to several RTKs . Upon its activation , mTORC1 induces multiple events leading to increased protein synthe - sis . Some of the most prominent mTORC1 targets involved in the regulation of mRNA translation are the eIF4E - binding proteins EIF4EBP1 and EIF4EBP2 , the S6 kinases ( S6Ks ) RPS6KB1 and RPS6KB2 , and La - related protein 1 ( LARP1 ) 130 ( fig . 4 ) . Lastly , by promoting RSK activity , ERK also stimu - lates cap - dependent mRNA translation through a dual action on eIF4A — the RNA helicase component of eIF4F ( fig . 4 ) . First , RSK inhibits the tumour suppressor PDCD4 , which is a repressor of the RNA - binding activity of eIF4A 136 ( fig . 4 ) . RSK activity also overlaps with that of S6Ks and AKT to mediate phosphorylation events that are conducive to PDCD4 degradation 136 , 137 . Second , RSK phosphorylates eIF4B along with S6K , which stimulates the mRNA unwinding activity of eIF4A 138 ( fig . 4 ) . ERK signalling in cell metabolism Most cancer cells have a clear bias towards using glycolysis in conditions of normoxia as their main energy - producing pathway , which is a process known as aerobic glycolysis 139 . This use of glycolysis by default at the expense of oxidative phosphorylation ( OXPHOS ) was originally noted by Otto Warburg , who reported enhanced glycolysis and lactate production in cancer cells despite the presence of oxygen 140 . This phenome - non , now known as the Warburg effect , is not unique to cancer cells . Glycolysis is indeed generally preferred by rapidly proliferating and undifferentiated cells , whereas OXPHOS is associated with reduced proliferation rates and terminally differentiated cells 141 . Oncogenic activation of RAS – ERK signalling is closely linked with the Warburg effect . Indeed , several studies have reported increased glucose uptake and gly - colysis dependence in cancer cells with BRAF - activating or KRAS - activating mutations , which largely corre - lated with increased lactate production and decreased OXPHOS 142 – 146 ( fig . 5 ) . Conversely , pharmacological inhibition of ERK signalling in these cells reduced glucose uptake and consumption , reduced lactate pro - duction and promoted OXPHOS 147 , 148 . Mechanistically , induction of glycolytic flux in BRAF - mutant cells and KRAS - mutant cells is associated with transcriptional upregulation of glucose transporters and glycolysis enzymes and is blunted by treatment with RAF or MEK Fig . 3 | erK regulation of cell survival . a | The main effectors of the intrinsic apoptosis pathway . The B cell lymphoma 2 ( BCL­2 ) family of proteins includes the antiapoptotic factors BCL­2 , BCL­ xL , MCL1 , BCL­ W and A1 and the proapoptotic factors BAX and BAK . Antiapoptotic BCL­2 factors normally bind to and sequester proapoptotic members of the family . Cellular insults such as growth factor withdrawal , DNA damage or osmotic stress activate or enhance the expression of BH3 - only proteins ( BOPs ) , which include BIM , BAD , BID , BIK , BMF and PUMA . BOPs interact with the BH3 domain - binding groove of antiapoptotic BCL­2 factors , causing the release of BAX and BAK . In turn , BAX and BAK oligomerize to form pores that induce outer mitochondrial membrane permeabilization , which leads to the uncoupling of the electron transport chain and to the release of apoptogenic factors such as cytochrome c . b | Extracellular signal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) provides several prosurvival signals upon its activation . ERK phosphorylates and inactivates the BOPs BMF , extralong BIM ( BIM EL ) and BIK . It also blocks the degradation of the antiapoptotic protein MCL1 and promotes its mitochondrial localization . Conversely , ERK phosphorylation of BIM EL induces its dissociation from BCL­ xL , thereby activating this important antiapoptotic factor . ERK also induces the nuclear export , ubiquitylation and degradation of the transcription factor FOXO3A , which is involved in the expression of several BOPs following cellular insults . ERK additionally promotes transcription of antiapoptotic factors through an unclear mechanism . ERK - activated ribosomal protein S6 kinase ( RSK ) phosphorylates and inactivates the BOP BAD by inducing its sequestration by 14 - 3 - 3 . Downstream of the intrinsic apoptosis pathway , ERK blocks the self - activation of procaspase 9 . Furthermore , ERK and phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) – AKT signalling collaborate to stimulate cap - dependent translation of the apoptosis inhibitor BIRC5 . Oxidative phosphorylation ( oxPHos ) . Metabolic process by which an electron transport chain in the inner membrane of mitochondria generates ATP through oxidation of tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediates ( NADH or fADH 2 ) . Glycolytic flux series of ten metabolic reactions within the glycolysis pathway that lead to the conversion of glucose into pyruvate and that generate the free energy required to form the high - energy molecules ATP and NADH . ◀ Nature reviews | Molecular cell Biology R e v i e w s inhibitors 143 , 144 , 147 , 149 . Although relevant ERK glycolysis targets remain to be identified , key suspects include MYC and the transcription factor hypoxia - inducible factor 1α ( HIF1α ) 147 , 149 , 150 . Like MYC , HIF1α is directly phosphorylated by ERK , which promotes its nuclear accumulation and transcriptional activity 151 , 152 . MYC and HIF1α individually and cooperatively modulate the tran - scription of several target genes involved in respiration and glucose metabolism 143 , 150 , 153 – 156 ( fig . 5 ) . In addition , MYC and HIF1α have a role in preventing pyruvate from entering the tricarboxylic acid ( TCA ) cycle by synergis - tically enhancing the expression of pyruvate dehydro - genase kinase 1 ( PDHK1 ) , which suppresses pyruvate dehydrogenase and thereby blocks the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl - CoA 150 , 157 ( fig . 5 ) . RAS – ERK signalling also directly impinges on gly - colysis enzymes . Pyruvate kinases are responsible for the initial step of pyruvate conversion to lactate . In mammals , the switch to aerobic glycolysis in rapidly proliferating cells is partly dictated by re - expression of RTKs Ligand ERK MXD1 MAX RSK MYC P P P P P RAPTOR LST8 TSC1TBC1D7TSC2 Lysosomemembrane mTORC1 eIF4E eIF4G eIF4A P eIF4F complex P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P RPS6 P P P P P P P PI3K – AKT P Activation of translation Inhibition of translation Transcription induction Transcription inhibition ERK , RSK or MNK target involved in translation Immediate early gene Other regulator of translation • Ragulator • GATOR1 , 2 • CASTOR • Sestrin 2 UBF1 RRN3 BRF1 MAF1 mTOR EIF4EBP1 , 2 PDCD4 MNK LARP1 eIF4B S6K ↑ Ribosome biogenesis rDNA tRNA genes Ribosomal protein genes Activatory phosphorylation by ERK Inhibitory phosphorylation by ERK Activatory phosphorylation by RSK Inhibitory phosphorylation by RSK Activatory phosphorylation by AKT , mTOR or S6K Inhibitory phosphorylation by AKT , mTOR or S6K P Fruit ﬂies mRNA 80S P RHEB m 7 G cap Pol I Pol III Pol II Fig . 4 | erK regulation of cell growth . Extracellular signal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) affects cell growth by controlling many proteins involved in translation regulation . ERK directly phosphorylates and activates the RNA polymerase I ( Pol I ) and Pol III transcription factors UBF1 , RRN3 and BRF1 . In Drosophila melanogaster , ERK also represses the Pol III transcriptional repressor MAF1 . ERK phosphorylation of MYC and the ensuing MYC accumulation also stimulate protein synthesis and cell growth , because MYC directly activates the transcription of ribosomal DNA ( rDNA ) , tRNA genes and ribosomal protein genes . MYC additionally controls the transcription of UBF1 and RRN3 . Together , these functions increase ribosome biogenesis and translation following growth factor treatment . ERK also influences translation by regulating components of the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4F ( eIF4F ) cap - binding complex . ERK - activated MAPK - interacting kinase ( MNK ) phosphorylates eIF4E Ser109 . This event does not globally affect protein translation , but rather appears to influence the translation of specific sets of transcripts . ERK activates mTOR complex 1 ( mTORC1 ) by phosphorylating and inactivating its negative regulator TSC2 and by activating the mTORC1 subunit RAPTOR . In turn , mTORC1 phosphorylates several proteins — RRN3 , MAF1 , S6 kinase ( S6K ) , eIF4E - binding protein 1 ( EIF4EBP1 ) , EIF4EBP2 and LARP1 — that have profound effects on the translation machinery . In turn , S6K regulates translation by phosphorylating RPS6 , eIF4B and PDCD4 . ERK­activated ribosomal protein S6 kinase ( RSK ) feeds into mTORC1 signalling by concomitantly phosphorylating and inactivating TSC2 and activating RAPTOR . RSK additionally inactivates the tumour suppressor PDCD4 and activates eIF4B , thereby stimulating the mRNA unwinding activity of eIF4A . RTKs , receptor tyrosine kinases . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s RTKs Ligand MYC ERK ↑ Glycolysis ( 2 ATP / glucose ) HIF1 α PGC1 α HK2 GLUT1 TCA cycle Acetyl - CoA PDH Citrate Isocitrate α - KG OAA Fumarate Malate Succinyl - CoA LDHA F - 2 - 6 - P PKM2 PDHK1 Purine and pyrimidine synthesis Ribose - 5 - P ↑ PPP mTORC1 E R K C A D Ribulose - 5 - P Glucose m T O R C 1 P P P P P P Glutamine LKB1 P AMPK α AMPK β AMPK γ PFKFB2 P P P S6K P P P P P DRP1 ↑ Mitochondrial ﬁssion BRAF GLS1 RSKP P Fructose - 6 - P Glyceraldehyde - 3 - P PEP Glyceraldehyde - 2 - P ↑ Glutaminolysis ↑ Pyrimidine ↑ Glucose ↑ Lactate ↑ Glucose - 6 - P ↑ Pyruvate ↑ Lactate ↑ AMP : ATP ratio ↑ Glutamine ↑ Glutamate MITF NAD + NAD + NAD + NADH NADH NADH Succinate FADH2 FAD ↓ OXPHOS ( 36 ATP / glucose ) Mitochondrion Activatory phosphorylation by a metabolic regulator Inhibitory phosphorylation by a metabolic regulator P P P P P Transcription induction Transcription inhibition Activatory phosphorylation by ERK Inhibitory phosphorylation by ERK Activatory phosphorylation by RSK Inhibitory phosphorylation by RSK Activatory phosphorylation by mTOR or S6K Inhibitory phosphorylation by mTOR or S6K P ERK or RSK target involved in metabolism Upregulated metabolic enzyme or regulator Other regulator of metabolism Immediate early gene P P P P Mitochondrialbiogenesis P Fig . 5 | erK regulation of cell metabolism . Extracellular signal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) activation modifies cellular metabolism by diverse means . Glycolysis oxidizes glucose to pyruvate , thereby producing two ATP molecules per glucose molecule . In normoxic conditions , pyruvate is transported into mitochondria and transformed into acetyl­ CoA , which is oxidized to carbon dioxide through the tricarboxylic acid ( TCA ) cycle , which produces 36 ATP molecules per glucose molecule . In hypoxic conditions , pyruvate is converted to lactate through anaerobic glycolysis . In normoxia , ERK activation correlates with increased aerobic glycolysis and decreased oxidative phosphorylation ( OXPHOS ) , a phenomenon known as the Warburg effect . The ERK­ activated transcription factors MYC and hypoxia - inducible factor 1 α ( HIF1 α ) jointly stimulate the expression of glucose transporters and glycolysis enzymes , thus increasing intracellular glucose levels , glycolytic flux and lactate production in cancer cells . In addition , ERK phosphorylates the metabolic enzyme pyruvate kinase M2 ( PKM2 ) and promotes its conversion into a transcription coactivator ( not shown ) , which leads to MYC upregulation . ERK - activated ribosomal protein S6 kinase ( RSK ) phosphorylates the glycolytic enzyme 6 - phosphofructo - 2 - kinase / fructose 2 , 6 - bisphosphatase 2 ( PFKFB2 ) , thereby stimulating its activity and increasing glycolytic flux . MYC and HIF1 α also stimulate expression of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 1 ( PDHK1 ) , which blocks pyruvate entry into mitochondria by phosphorylating and inactivating pyruvate dehydrogenase ( PDH ) . This reduces influx of glycolytic carbon in the TCA cycle . Cancer cells compensate by increasing glutaminolysis , which is in part driven by MYC­ dependent expression of the glutaminase GLS1 . In melanoma cells , ERK and RSK concomitantly phosphorylate and inhibit microphthalmia - associated transcription factor ( MITF ) , which induces the expression of peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor - γ coactivator 1 α ( PGC1 α ) , a key driver of mitochondrial biogenesis . Inhibition of the MITF – PGC1 α pathway in BRAF - activated or KRAS - activated cancer cells decreases OXPHOS . RAS and ERK also modify mitochondrial morphology through phosphorylation and activation of dynamin - related protein 1 ( DRP1 ) , which is a key effector of mitochondrial fission . Increased aerobic glycolysis and decreased OXPHOS alters the rate of ATP production per molecule of glucose , leading to AMP : ATP ratio imbalances , which are sensed by AMP kinase ( AMPK ) . Increases in the AMP : ATP ratio leads to phosphorylation and allosteric activation of AMPK by LKB1 . ERK and RSK interfere with AMPK activation by inhibiting LKB1 and thus suppress PGC1 α - dependent mitochondrial biogenesis . Conversely , AMPK inhibits ERK signalling by phosphorylating and inhibiting BRAF . Finally , cancer cell growth necessitates the synthesis of building blocks through anabolic pathways . RAS – ERK pathway activation stimulates pyrimidine synthesis by inducing MYC­ dependent expression of pentose phosphate pathway ( PPP ) enzymes and by phosphorylating and activating carbamoyl phosphate synthetase ( CAD ) . S6 kinase ( S6K ) activated by mTOR complex 1 ( mTORC1 ) also phosphorylates and activates CAD . α - KG , α - ketoglutarate ; F - 2 - 6 - P , fructose 2 , 6 bisphosphate ; OAA , oxaloacetic acid ; PEP , phosphoenolpyruvate ; RTKs , receptor tyrosine kinases . Nature reviews | Molecular cell Biology R e v i e w s the embryonic pyruvate kinase M2 ( PKM2 ) isoform 139 . EGFR - activated ERK2 phosphorylates PKM2 and pro - motes its conversion into a transcription co - activator , leading to MYC expression 158 . Moreover , ERK - activated RSK phosphorylates another glycolysis enzyme , 6 - phosphofructo - 2 - kinase / fructose 2 , 6 - bisphosphatase 2 ( PFKFB2 ) , thereby stimulating its activity and increasing glycolytic flux in melanoma cells 159 ( fig . 5 ) . ERK hyperactivation also promotes the Warburg effect in a subset of BRAF V600E - driven melanomas by dampen - ing the expression of peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor - γ co - activator 1α ( PGC1α ) , which is a key tran - scription factor involved in mitochondrial biogenesis 160 , 161 . PGC1α drives OXPHOS levels and detoxification of reactive oxygen species in melanoma cells 161 , 162 . Reduced PGC1α expression by hyperactivated ERK appears to result from the decreased expression of its upstream transcriptional activator microphthalmia - associated transcription factor ( MITF ) 161 , 162 . MITF is essential for the melanocytic lineage , where it induces a differenti - ation programme downstream of the KIT – RAS – ERK and cAMP signalling axes 163 . MITF is a direct ERK and RSK target , and its phosphorylation paradoxically pro - motes both its transcriptional activity and proteasomal degradation 163 – 165 ( fig . 5 ) . Pharmacological inhibition of ERK signalling or ectopic expression of MITF in mela - noma cells restores PGC1α expression , which , in turn , shifts ATP production from glycolysis to OXPHOS , thereby reprogramming cells towards a normal melano - cyte phenotype and preventing metastasis 161 , 166 , 167 . A con - ceptually similar pathway was reported in a pancreatic cancer model , in which PGC1α expression was restored after ablation of the KRAS oncogene 168 . RAS signalling also modifies mitochondrial morphol - ogy through ERK - dependent activation of dynamin - related protein 1 ( DRP1 ; also known as dynamin 1 - like protein ) , which is a key mediator of mitochondrial fission 169 , 170 ( fig . 5 ) . DRP1 phosphorylation is required for the tumorigenicity of RAS - mutant cancer cells and may also play a role during ERK - dependent reprogramming of somatic cells to pluripotency 171 . An important consequence of the preference of pyruvate conversion into lactate in aerobic glycolysis is the reduced entry of carbon into the TCA cycle . As several TCA intermediates are essential for the synthe - sis of cellular building blocks — lipids , amino acids and nucleotides — cancer cells use glutamine as an alter - native carbon source 172 ( fig . 5 ) . This was also demon - strated in KRAS - mutant cells and BRAF - mutant cells , where glutamine consumption for anabolic synthesis is increased 142 , 143 , 172 – 174 . However , as in the case of gly - colysis , increased carbon entry into the TCA cycle through glutaminolysis is disconnected from OXPHOS , and glutamine dependency of KRAS - mutant cells and BRAF - mutant cells can be therapeutically exploited 175 , 176 . MYC is again one of the main suspects in driving this alternative carbon utilization programme 143 , although the connection to ERK signalling remains to be formally demonstrated . MYC - transformed cells show increased glutamine uptake and glutaminolysis , which favours reduction in glucose - derived metabolite entry into the TCA cycle and a reduced contribution of glucose to lipid synthesis 177 ( fig . 5 ) . Recent work showed that glutamine dependency of EGFR - mutant glioblastoma was caused by transcriptional induction of glutamate dehydro genase 1 ( GDH1 ) through ERK phosphorylation of ELK1 ( ref . 178 ) . The Warburg effect is increasingly viewed as a meta - bolic adaptation of rapidly dividing cells , which alters the flux of metabolic intermediates to supply building blocks for the synthesis of new macromolecules 139 . Not surprisingly , ERK signalling also stimulates the flux of anabolic pathways connected with glycolysis . A prime example is the induction of the non - oxidative pentose phosphate pathway in tumours with KRAS - activating or BRAF - activating mutations 143 , 145 , 179 . Transcription induction by MYC appears to be central for pentose phosphate pathway activation 143 , 179 ; in parallel , ERK activity stimulates de novo synthesis of pyrimidine by directly phosphorylating carbamoyl phosphate synthase ( CAD ) 180 ( fig . 5 ) . RAS – ERK signalling also interfaces with various mechanisms that control ATP production . A notable example is the AMP - dependent kinase ( AMPK ) signal - ling pathway . AMPK is a vital sensor of cellular energy status , which detects imbalances in adenosine nucleo - tide ratios ( mostly in the AMP : ATP ratio ) and stimulates ATP production when ATP pools are low 181 . AMPK is regulated by AMP binding , which promotes its catalytic activity by allosterically enabling its phosphorylation and activation by LKB1 ( ref . 181 ) . Upon its activation , AMPK blocks anabolic pathways and stimulates cata - bolic pathways as well as mitochondrial biogenesis and OXPHOS ( fig . 5 ) . Consistent with their ability to promote bio synthetic pathways , ERK and RSK also antagonize AMPK signalling by directly phosphorylating LKB1 , thereby leading to its dissociation from AMPK 182 . In turn , AMPK activity also opposes RAS – ERK signalling by phosphorylating and inhibiting BRAF 183 ( fig . 5 ) . ERK signalling in cell motility ERK signalling is crucial for regulating cell shape and motility during physiological processes such as devel - opment and wound healing , and in disease ( for exam - ple , in cancer cell invasion ) . Activation of the RAS – ERK pathway can initiate a motility programme in response to mechanotransduction cues or cell stimulation by serum or growth factors 184 . Activation of motility occurs in sin - gle cells , during collective cell migration and in com - plex tissues , where waves of ERK activity propagating across cells support their coordinated movement 185 , 186 . Accordingly , genetic or pharmacological inhibition of the ERK cascade severely hampers cell motility 44 , 187 – 189 . Cell migration can be summarized as a three - step process : ( 1 ) protrusion of the cell leading edge ( lamel - lipodium ) ; ( 2 ) attachment of the lamellipodium to the substrate through focal adhesions ; and ( 3 ) contraction of the cell trailing edge concomitantly with dissolution of rear - end focal adhesions 190 . These events are mainly orchestrated by the cyclic activation of RHO family GTPases ( RHO , RAC1 and CDC42 ) , which regulate the formation of actin and actomyosin filaments and focal adhesion dynamics 191 . ERK phosphorylates key compo - nents of this machinery , thereby providing cues that are vital to the migration process 192 . Mechanotransduction Process by which cells sense and transmit mechanical cues from their immediate environment through a series of signalling relays that trigger biological responses . Focal adhesions Adhesive contacts between the cell and the extracellular matrix that sense and transmit mechanical forces between integrins and the actin cytoskeleton on engagement of the cell with the extracellular matrix . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s Formation of lamellipodia depends on reorganization of the actomyosin cytoskeleton : actin polymer ization is in part responsible for pushing the leading edge for - ward as well as for generating and transmitting forces to the extracellular matrix through direct attachment to focal adhesions 193 . ERK modulates the formation of lamellipodia by regulating the rate and polarity of actin poly merization . For instance , growth factor - activated ERK phosphorylates WASF2 and ABI1 — two compo - nents of the WAVE2 regulatory complex ( WRC ) , which is a key effector of RAC1 ( refs 194 , 195 ) ( fig . 6a ) . WASF2 and ABI1 phosphorylation increases the interactions of the WAVE2 regulatory complex with actin and the actin nucleator complex ARP2 – ARP3 at the leading edge , RSK P P P P P CDC42 C o r t a c t i n P P C o r t a c t i n ERK MLC MLC MLC MLCK MYPT1 ↑ NMII ATPase activity Actomyosin contraction ROCK SH3P2 MYO1E SH3P2 MYO1E P P P P P RSK ROCK P Leading edge extension Rear end retraction P ERK ERK ERK InactiveWRC Active WRC ABI1 a Formation of lamellipodia and F - actin polymerization b Actomyosin contractility G - actin F - actin F - actin Filamin A c P P Ligand Ligand RTKs RAC1 ABI1 WASP , N - WASP Contraction ↑ Cell tension NMIIactivation Scaﬀolding role for IQGAP1 and FHL1 ? Regulation by FAK and SRC ? ARP2 – ARP3 WASF2 P P P P P Activatory phosphorylation by ERK Inhibitory phosphorylation by ERK Activatory phosphorylation by RSK Inhibitory phosphorylation by RSK P Activatory phosphorylation by MLCK or ROCK Inhibitory phosphorylation by MLCK or ROCK Change in subcellular localization ERK or RSK target involved in cell migration Other regulator or eﬀector of cell migration ↑ WRC recruitment to the membrane ↑ Recruitment of cortactin to WASP and N - WASP complexes ↑ Crosslinking of actin ﬁlaments by ﬁlamin A ERK • Recruitment to lamellipodia • Contraction • Leading edge extension Heavy chain head NMII dimer Heavy chain tail MYO1E sequestration in the cytoplasm Fig . 6 | erK regulation of cell motility through formation of lamellipodia and actomyosin contractility . a | Top : extracellular signal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) controls the formation of lamellipodia by promoting polarized polymerization of actin filaments at the cell leading edge . ERK phosphorylates ABI1 and WASF2 , two factors of the WAVE2 regulatory complex ( WRC ) , thereby promoting its interaction with actin and the actin­ related protein 2 ( ARP2 ) – ARP3 complex . RAC1 activation promotes WRC recruitment to the leading edge and ARP2 – ARP3 polarization of actin filaments . Middle : phosphorylation of cortactin by ERK increases its interaction with the CDC42 effector WASP or its neuronal counterpart N - WASP . This phosphorylation also stimulates actin nucleation by ARP2 – ARP3 and actin polymerization at the leading edge . Bottom : activation of ribosomal protein S6 kinase ( RSK ) by ERK promotes filamin A phosphorylation by RSK , which increases its actin crosslinking activity at the cell cortex and supports the formation of lamellipodia . b | Contractile forces involved in cell migration are largely generated by non - muscle myosin II ( NMII ) , which is regulated by phosphorylation of residues Thr18 and Ser19 of its myosin light chain ( MLC ) subunits by MLC kinase ( MLCK ) and RHO­ activated kinase ( ROCK ) . Phosphorylation of MLC triggers NMII assembly into actin filament bundles and stimulates its force - generating ATPase activity . Whereas MLCK is mostly activated at the leading edge of the cell , ROCK­ mediated phosphorylation of MLC is mainly associated with retraction of the rear end . MLC dephosphorylation is mainly mediated by MLC phosphatase 1 ( MYPT1 ) and leads to actomyosin bundle disassembly and relaxation of the cell cortex . ERK promotes extension of lamellipodia by directly activating MLCK , and by activating RSK , which promotes contraction by inhibiting MYPT1 and by releasing myosin 1E ( MYO1E ) from sequestration by SH3P2 . c | Actomyosin bundles can serve as recruitment platforms for ERK activation in response to cellular tension and MLC phosphorylation . The mechanism by which ERK is targeted to stress fibres is unknown , but may involve the scaffolding proteins IQGAP1 and FHL1 and the kinases focal adhesion kinase 1 ( FAK ) and SRC . RTKs , receptor tyrosine kinases . Nature reviews | Molecular cell Biology R e v i e w s which stimulates polarized actin filamentation and for - ward motion 187 , 196 . ERK also phosphorylates cortactin and induces its binding to the CDC42 effectors WASP and N - WASP , which in turn promotes ARP2 – ARP3 activity 197 ( fig . 6a ) . Finally , ERK - activated RSK phosphorylates filamin A , which increases the mechanical stability of the cell cortex by simultaneously crosslinking actin filaments and binding to integrins 198 ( fig . 6a ) . Actomyosin contractility is essential for the for - mation of stress fibres and focal adhesions at the leading edge , which produce forces that sustain cell movement . Most actomyosin contractility originates from actin crosslinking with non - muscle myosin II ( NMII ) , the activity of which is regulated by phospho - rylation of Thr18 and Ser19 of the myosin light chain ( MLC ) subunit 199 ( fig . 6b ) . Phosphorylation of these sites triggers NMII assembly into actin filament bun - dles and stimulates its force - generating ATPase acti - vity , which triggers actin contraction and leading - edge extension . Monophosphorylation and diphosphoryl - ation of MLCs is driven by MLC kinase ( MLCK ) and by RHO - associated protein kinase ( ROCK ) 199 . ERK directly phosphorylates MLCK , which stimulates NMII contractility 188 , 200 , 201 ( fig . 6b ) . Whereas ERK - activated MLCK is required for extension of lamellipodia at the leading edge , ROCK activity is involved in rear - end retraction 188 . MLCs are dephosphorylated by MLC phos - phatase 1 ( MYPT1 ) . ERK - activated RSK phosphorylates MYPT1 and enhances MYPT1 inhibition by ROCK phosphorylation 202 . RSK also promotes leading - edge extension by enabling myosin 1E ( MYO1E ) localiza - tion to lamellipodia through SH3P2 phosphorylation , which releases the sequestration of MYO1E by SH3P2 in the cytoplasm 203 ( fig . 6b ) . It is of note that acto myosin bundles can serve as recruitment platforms for ERK activation in response to cellular tension and MLC phosphorylation . However , the mechanism by which ERK is targeted to stress fibres is unknown ( fig . 6c ) . Productive cell migration depends on the cyclical assembly , maturation and turnover of focal adhesions 204 . These dynamic structures are composed of transmem - brane integrins attached to the extracellular matrix , structural components such as talin , vinculin and zyxin connected to the actin cytoskeleton , and a series of sig - nalling and scaffolding molecules such as focal adhesion kinase 1 ( FAK ) and paxillin . Short - lived , nascent focal adhesions assemble at the leading edge of a migrating cell . A fraction of these focal adhesions become mature focal adhesions and later disassemble within the cell body as migration proceeds 193 . ERK activity mostly pro - motes focal adhesion turnover 44 , 189 , 205 . The formation of focal adhesions is initiated by integrin clustering and by recruitment of talin and paxillin , which trigger actin polymerization and a series of signalling events . FAK joins nascent focal adhesions by interacting with talin and paxillin and undergoes autophosphorylation on Tyr397 , which recruits the tyrosine kinase SRC ; in turn , SRC fully activates FAK by phosphorylating its activation segment ( fig . 7a ) . Activated FAK and SRC then phospho - rylate a number of focal adhesion proteins , including talin and paxillin , which promotes the association of additional structural components and further stimulates actin polymerization . ERK is recruited to nascent focal adhesions by SRC - phosphorylated paxillin 192 , 206 , 207 . This leads to ERK - dependent phospho rylation of paxillin and FAK — two events that seemingly serve opposite functions ( fig . 7a ) . On the one hand , paxillin phospho - rylation by ERK stimulates FAK recruitment and locally stimulates RAC1 activity , which promotes actin filament extension and focal adhesion turnover at the leading edge 208 , 209 . On the other hand , ERK phosphorylation of FAK on Ser910 induces FAK dephosphorylation and inhibition by the phosphatase PTP - PEST 210 ( fig . 7a ) . This dual effect of ERK is thought to maintain labile adhe - sions required for rapid cell migration . Accordingly , paxillin - mediated recruitment of ERK reduces the lifetime of adhesions by increasing local tension in the actomyosin 201 . The p21 - activated kinases ( PAKs ) are crucial regu - lators of actin dynamics and cell migration downstream of RAC1 and CDC42 . Activated PAK induces ERK sig - nalling in the context of cell – extracellular matrix inter - actions in part by phosphorylating CRAF and MEK1 ( refs 207 , 211 – 213 ) ( fig . 7a ) . As for ERK , PAK regulates focal adhesion turnover and protrusion dynamics through phosphorylation of paxillin on Ser273 , which recruits a complex comprising GIT1 ( a GTPase - activating protein ) , PIX ( the guanine nucleotide exchange factor of RAC1 ) and PAK near the leading edge and locally drives RAC1 activation to promote adhesion turnover and cell motility 214 . Conversely , cell adhesions induce ERK - mediated PAK1 phosphorylation on Thr212 , which likely serves as a negative feedback mechanism 215 ( fig . 7a ) . Of note , several focal adhesion proteins were proposed to harbour an ERK - cascade scaffolding func - tion . For example , paxillin , PAK1 , FHL1 and GIT1 were proposed to bridge ERK pathway factors at focal adhesions 16 , 17 , 215 ( fig . 1c ) . Several RHO family guanine nucleotide exchange factors and GTPase - activating proteins are phospho - rylated on ERK activation 216 . Several of the phosphoryl - ation sites were found to impinge on the activity of their cognate proteins 217 – 219 , indicating that ERK activity has a widespread effect on the actin cytoskeleton through its systemic regulation of RHO family GTPases . Moreover , ERK signalling transcriptionally controls the expression of cytoskeleton factors . For instance , the transcription factor SRF is an important regulator of cytoskeleton genes when bound to its co - activators myocardin - related transcription factor A ( MRTFA ) and MRTFB 220 . Notably , MRTFs are controlled by actin - dependent nucleocyto - plasmic shuttling . In the absence of serum , MRTFs are sequestered in the cytoplasm through direct binding of G - actin to their N - terminal RPEL repeats , which masks their nuclear localization signal ( NLS ) 221 ( fig . 7b ) . On serum stimulation , RHO triggers actin polymeri - zation , which reduces the pool of G - actin and thereby exposes the NLS of MRTFs . ERK also directly phos - phorylates the MRTF RPEL repeats 220 , which reduces MRTF affinity for G - actin and further promotes NLS exposure , nuclear import and transcription activation by SRF 222 ( fig . 7b ) . Conversely , ERK feedback phospho - rylation on other MRTF residues stimulates nuclear export and cytoplasmic retention of MRTFs 222 , 223 ( fig . 7b ) . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s Thus , ERK appears to positively and negatively con - trol MRTF function . Nuclear MRTFs associate with SRF - bound promoters and activate a transcriptional programme primarily involved in actin cytoskeleton homeostasis 224 . This includes hundreds of target genes involved in controlling the structure and dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton , including actin itself , vinculin , zyxin and integrin 70 , 224 , 225 . ERK in differentiation and development ERK signalling is renowned for its extensive impact on cell differentiation and development . Excellent recent reviews on the topic highlight the diversity of ERK - mediated mechanisms that enable cell - fate and tissue - fate decisions 226 – 228 . Here we focus on examples of early and late cell - fate decisions during development . Early decisions are exemplified by stem cell self - renewal a Regulation of focal adhesion turnover by ERK ERK SRC Paxillin FAK Thr212 ERK ERK P a x i ll i n P P P P P RAC1 RAC1 PAK CRAF MEK ERK Paxillin ERK activation by PAK and feedback inhibition Cytosol Nucleus F - actin R P E L MRTFA , B R P E L MRTFA , B ERK P P P P RHO S e r 98 ? Activatory phosphorylation by ERK Inhibitory phosphorylation by ERK Activatory phosphorylation by FAK or PAK ERK target involved in migration Other regulator or eﬀector of migration RAS – ERK pathway component Integrins RTKs Ligand Cytosol ECM P P P P P P P P P PTP - PEST Paxillin Ser910 Ser33 P P P b Transcription control by the MRTF – SRF axis Plasmamembrane G - actin Paxillin phosphorylation and FAK recruitment FAK phosphorylation and inactivation by ERK SRF • Actin • Vinculin • Zyxin • Integrin α 5 • Tropomyosin ERK recruitment at focal adhesions SRF Ser98 phosphorylation interferes with G­actin binding PTP - PEST dephosphorylation of FAK P P Focal adhesion substrates ERK Plasma membrane Change in subcellular localization FAK FAK FAK P FAK P N E S MRTFA , B Fig . 7 | erK regulation of cell motility through focal adhesion turnover and transcriptional control . a | Extracellular signal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) controls the turnover of focal adhesions through distinct mechanisms . Engagement of integrins with the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) triggers the assembly of a signalling platform that includes paxillin , focal adhesion kinase 1 ( FAK ) and the kinase SRC . SRC­ mediated phosphorylation of paxillin recruits ERK to nascent focal adhesions . ERK - mediated paxillin phosphorylation can promote FAK recruitment to focal adhesions and locally stimulates RAC1 , which is essential for focal adhesion function . Conversely , FAK phosphorylation at Ser910 by ERK leads to the dephosphorylation of its activation loop residue Tyr397 by the phosphatase PTP­ PEST , which promotes focal adhesion disassembly . RAC1­ activated p21 - activated kinase ( PAK ) additionally facilitates ERK signalling at focal adhesions via recruitment and activation of CRAF and MEK1 . This leads to ERK activation and feedback inhibition of PAK by ERK - dependent phosphorylation of Thr212 . Whether ERK has other substrates in this context is unknown . b | ERK regulates cytoskeleton dynamics at the transcriptional level by influencing the nuclear shuttling of myocardin - related transcription factor A ( MRTFA ) and MRTFB . In the absence of serum , MRTFs bind to G - actin through their RPEL repeats , which masks a nuclear localization signal ( NLS ) required for their nuclear import . Following serum stimulation , RHO GTPases promote the polymerization of F - actin and consequently , a reduction in the pool of G - actin . This leads to unmasking of the NLS embedded in the RPEL repeats and to the nuclear import of MRTFs . ERK positively regulates MRTF nuclear import by directly phosphorylating the Ser98 residue within the RPEL sequence . This phosphorylation event reduces MRTF affinity for G - actin and thus increases NLS exposure and promotes nuclear import . Inversely , binding of G - actin to the RPEL motif occludes Ser98 and prevents its phosphorylation by ERK . ERK also negatively regulates MRTFA through direct phosphorylation of several residues . For instance , Ser33 phosphorylation reveals an amino - terminal nuclear export sequence ( NES ) and thus promotes nuclear export . RSK , ribosomal protein S6 kinase . RTKs , receptor tyrosine kinases ; SRF , serum response factor . Nature reviews | Molecular cell Biology R e v i e w s and differentiation . For late developmental decisions , we present those underlying disease phenotypes driven by ERK pathway imbalances . ERK function in embryonic stem cells . Embryonic stem cells ( ESCs ) are a key in vitro model of pluripotency that enables maintenance of a basal proliferative state with self - renewal capacity 229 . ESC derivation originally depended on the use of tailored culture media that provided self - renewal promoting factors — the most important being leukaemia inhibitory factor ( LIF ) and bone morphogenetic protein 4 ( BMP4 ) — and that concomitantly inhibited the prodifferentiation effect of fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) - induced ERK signalling 230 , 231 ( fig . 8a ) . A simplified formulation known as 2iL , which combines a MEK inhibitor and a glyco - gen synthase kinase 3 ( GSK3 ) inhibitor in the presence of LIF , facilitates the isolation and clonal expansion of self - renewing mouse ESCs 232 ( fig . 8a ) . Inhibition of ERK signalling by the 2iL formulation is assumed to be essential for self - renewal of mouse ESCs by prevent - ing ERK - driven differentiation 232 . Intriguingly , recent work challenged this conclusion , showing that deletion of the Erk1 and Erk2 genes in mouse ESCs induced G1 arrest and apoptosis 233 . Similar observations were made with RASless mouse ESCs 234 . These results suggest that MEK inhibition by 2iL has ERK - independent effects , or that 2iL treatment does not completely block ERK acti - vity . Consistent with the second hypothesis , 2iL - treated mouse ESCs were found to oscillate between complete Blastocyst Pluripotent cells Diﬀerentiation • Embryonic tissues ( e . g . endoderm ) • Extraembryonictissues ( e . g . trophoblast ) Wnt – β - catenin Commitment LIF GSK3 ERK KLF4P NANOGP Proteasomaldegradation SOX2OCT4 KLF4P XPO1 KLF2P ? KLF2 Ras – / – phenotype rescued Ras – / – phenotype rescued Ras – / – phenotype rescued Mouse ESC BMP ERK LIF STAT3 SMADP P DUSP9 MEKi Serum - free + 2i MEKi a b c GSK3i P Transcription induction Transcription inhibition Ubiquitin ERK target involved in mouse ES cell diﬀerentiation Other regulator Culture medium supplements LIF Self - renewal P P KLF4 P Ground - state pluripotency Proliferation and self - renewal Formation of embrioid bodies Teratomaformation BMP4 Ras – / – Ras – / – Erf – / – 2iL 2iL Rsk – / – RSK FGF4 FGF4 Cytoplasm Nucleus ↓ ↓ ↑ ↑ ↓ ↑ ↓ ↓ ↓ P Activatory phosphorylation by ERK Inhibitory phosphorylation by ERK P UbUbUb Ub Change in subcellular localization Ub Fig . 8 | erK regulation of embryonic stem cell self - renewal and differentiation . a | Extracellular signal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) is a master regulator of embryonic stem cell ( ESC ) differentiation . Self­ renewal of mouse ESCs is limited by paracrine fibroblast growth factor 4 ( FGF4 ) – ERK signalling , which drives differentiation from ground - state pluripotency towards a more differentiated yet pluripotent state . Similarly , glycogen synthase kinase 3 ( GSK3 ) signalling is a negative regulator of self - renewal . By contrast , leukaemia inhibitory factor ( LIF ) is a key cytokine that promotes self - renewal and , together with bone morphogenetic protein ( BMP ) signalling , inhibits the commitment of ESCs to differentiation . Concomitant blockade of the FGF4 – ERK and GSK3 axes with pharmaco - logical inhibitors , known as the serum - free + 2i regimen , maintains ground - state pluripotency and self - renewal in mouse ESCs . b | ERK signalling impedes the activity or stability of several factors involved in maintenance of ground - state pluripotency . ERK phosphorylates the central pluripotency factors NANOG , Krüppel - like factor 4 ( KLF4 ) and KLF2 . The exact effect of ERK phosphorylation on NANOG is still uncharacterized ( question mark ) . ERK phospho rylation of KLF4 and KLF2 induces their nuclear export , ubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation . ERK also antagonizes LIF and BMP signalling by phospho - rylating the transcription factors STAT3 and SMAD , res - pectively . Conversely , BMP – SMAD signalling negatively regulates ERK by transcriptionally inducing the phos - phatase DUSP9 . Finally , ERK activation of ribosomal S6 kinases ( RSK ) establishes a negative feedback loop that pro - motes self­ renewal of mouse ESCs . c | Knockout of all three Ras genes in mouse ESCs limits their capacity for self­ renewal and for the formation of embryoid bodies and teratomas . ERF deletion in these Ras − / − cells rescues the phenotypes induced by the removal of the Ras genes , suggesting that the transcriptional repressor ERF has a major role in self­ renewal and differentiation of mouse ESCs down - stream of the RAS – ERK cascade . Treatment with 2iL increases the proliferation and self­ renewal of mouse ESCs and improves their capacity to form embryoid bodies and terato - mas , effects that are impeded by the pharmacological or genetic disruption of RSK isoforms . GSKi , glycogen synthase kinase 3 inhibitor ; MEKi , MEK inhibitor ; XPO1 , exportin 1 . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s ERK inhibition and partial signalling recovery 233 . More work is required to settle the issue . Mechanistically , FGF – ERK signalling rapidly and directly downregulates the transcription of key pluri - potency transcription factors , such as NANOG , Krüppel - like factor 4 ( KLF4 ) and KLF2 ( ref . 235 ) , by driving almost instantaneous changes in Pol II association with enhancer regions 236 . ERK also directly phosphorylates and inhibits OCT4 ( another key pluripotency transcription factor ) , NANOG , KLF4 and KLF2 ( refs 237 – 241 ) . In particular , phosphorylation of KLF2 and KLF4 by ERK induces their nuclear export and degradation 238 , 241 ( fig . 8b ) . ERF and RSK also regulate ESC differentiation downstream of RAS – ERK signalling . On the one hand , ablation of Ras genes in mouse ESCs incapacitates their differentiation but also greatly reduces their proliferation rate . This contrasts with the 2iL treatment , which blocks differentiation but maintains the proliferation potential of mouse ESCs , a difference that likely stems from the multifaceted role of RAS in cellular signalling ( for exam - ple , activation of the downstream PI3K – AKT axis versus the downstream RAF – MEK – ERK axis ) . Mouse ESCs lacking RAS activity show increased nuclear retention of ERF , which binds to and represses the enhancers of pluripotency factors 234 . Deletion of Erf in RASless cells restored their ESC characteristics , namely the ability to proliferate , to differentiate and to form embryoid bod - ies in vitro and teratomas in vivo , demonstrating that the inhibition of gene transcription by ERF is a central factor underlying the effect of the RAS – ERK cascade in self - renewal and differentiation of ESCs 234 ( fig . 8c ) . On the other hand , pharmacological inhibition of RSK or inactivation of Rsk genes enhanced ERK signalling and accelerated mouse ESC differentiation 242 ( fig . 8c ) . This outcome likely originates from the loss of RSK - mediated feedback inhibition of ERK activation 242 ( fig . 8b ; Box 2 ) . Importantly , the ERK cascade also undergoes cross - talk with LIF and BMP signalling , which may partly account for the mechanism of action of the 2iL regimen . Several studies demonstrated that ERK directly phos - phorylates the LIF - induced transcription factor STAT3 in response to growth factors 243 , 244 . ERK - mediated phos - phorylation reduces STAT3 phosphorylation by Janus kinases , thereby suppressing its nuclear localization and DNA binding ( fig . 8b ) . Consequently , inhibiting ERK - mediated STAT3 phosphorylation enhances the ability of LIF to reprogramme stem cells towards naive pluripotency 245 . Furthermore , FGF4 - activated ERK antagonizes BMP signalling by phosphorylating the SMAD transcription factors in their linker region , which induces their cytoplasmic retention and degradation 246 , 247 ( fig . 8b ) . The ERK and GSK3 signalling axes that limit self - renewal of mouse ESCs were found to collaborate in inducing SMAD1 degradation during development , thus attenuating BMP signalling 248 . Conversely , BMP4 reduces ERK signalling to support self - renewal of ESCs through SMAD - dependent induction of the ERK phosphatase DUSP9 ( refs 249 , 250 ) ( fig . 8b ) . ERK signalling in developmental syndromes . Consistent with the central role of RAS – ERK signalling in devel - opment , a group of rare developmental syndromes termed ‘RASopathies’ — including neurofibromato - sis type 1 , Noonan syndrome , LEOPARD syndrome and cardioaciocutaneous syndrome — are invariably caused by mutations in genes encoding RAS – ERK pathway proteins such as NF1 , SOS1 , PTPN11 , HRAS , NRAS , KRAS , RAF1 , BRAF , MAP2K1 and MAP2K2 ( ref . 251 ) . RASopathies are generally associated with hyperactive ERK signalling . However , a cohort of indi - viduals with MEK2 haploinsufficiency were found to share RASopathy - overlapping features 252 , suggesting that increased or decreased ERK signalling can impair a common set of developmental processes . Although each RASopathy is a specific clinical entity , RASopathies often share similar traits , including facial dysmorphism , cardiac malformations , cutaneous and musculoskeletal anomalies , cognitive impairment and increased cancer susceptibility 251 . Several RASopathy phenotypes are indicative of defects in the neural crest cell lineage , which normally contributes to the formation of the nervous system , cranial structures , heart , bones and melanocytes 253 ( fig . 9a ) . Accordingly , expression in the neural crest cell lineage of a gain - of - function allele of the PTPN11 gene , which encodes a phosphatase required for full RAS activation , leads to facial and heart anomalies that can be ameliorated by inhibition of the ERK pathway 254 . Conversely , limiting ERK signalling in neural crest cells by conditionally inactivating RAS – ERK pathway genes also induces craniofacial and cardiovascular malformations 255 , 256 . ERK signalling in the neural crest is primarily driven by FGF and platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) signalling , and its key effectors are SRF and its cofactors TCF and MRTF , which , respectively , induce a typical IEG signature and a cytoskeletal expres - sion programme 257 ( fig . 9a ) . Thus , the role of ERK in the neural crest probably extends beyond cell differentiation and likely involves cell proliferation and migration . ERK signalling in bone development . Individuals with RASopathies exhibit several skull defects , which include facial malformations 251 . After populating the facial region , neural crest cells receive FGF cues , which are important for general skull development and for closure of cranial sutures 258 . FGF receptor 1 ( FGFR1 ) , FGFR2 and FGFR3 gene gain - of - function mutations are found in human developmental syndromes such as Pfeiffer syndrome , Apert syndrome and Crouzon syndrome , which lead to skeletal defects and premature closure of cranial sutures ( craniosynostosis ) ( fig . 9b ) . In a mouse model of Apert syndrome , craniosynostosis can be alleviated by phar - macological suppression of ERK activity 259 . Importantly , craniosynostosis is also observed in a subset of individ - uals with RASopathies 260 . The transcriptional repressor ERF ( discussed earlier ) is a candidate for mediating this phenotype , as ERF haploinsufficiency induces craniosyn - ostosis that mimics FGFR2 gain - of - function - associated defects observed in Crouzon syndrome 261 ( fig . 9b ) . This advocates a role for an FGF – ERK – ERF signalling axis in cranial osteogenesis . In this context , ERF was shown to bind gene regulatory regions in association with runt - related transcription factor 2 ( RUNX2 ) , which is involved in cranial bone sutures 261 , 262 ( fig . 9b ) . Several studies Nature reviews | Molecular cell Biology R e v i e w s reported that ERK phosphorylates and activates RUNX2 in osteoblasts 263 , 264 . ERK may thus induce an osteogenic gene expression programme by simultaneously activating RUNX2 and repressing ERF ( fig . 9b ) . ERK signalling in the heart . Individuals with RASo - pathies exhibit an array of heart malformations that include valvuloseptal defects and hypertrophic cardio - myopathy ( HCM ) 251 . Neural crest cells importantly Dysregulation : Premature cranial sutures ( craniosynostosis ) ERK ERK FGFR1 – 3 ERF RUNX2 MRTF GATA4 SRF CYFIP1 FMR1 TCF BDNF ERK TRKB CNS neuron Synapse­speciﬁc t ranslation Osteoblast SRF CIC MED23 ERK Cardiomyocyte d Osteogenicprogramme Cardiogenicprogramme Dysregulation : Hypertrophiccardiomyopathy Dysregulation : Intellectual disability , ASD , ADHD eIF4E P CYFIP1 FMR1 RHO • JUN • FOS • EGR1 PEA3 P P P P P P P Transcription induction Transcription inhibition ETS transcription factor Other regulator ERK or MNK target involved in cell diﬀerentiation Regulator of cell migration Neuraltube Migratingneural crest cell ERK FGF PDGF SRF TCF MRTF a RHO P P e b c ELK1 Ataxin 1 MNKP eIF4E Neural crest cells Promoter P Activatory phosphorylation by ERK Inhibitory phosphorylation by ERK P Neural crest derivatives aﬀected in RASopathies : • Cephalic • Cardiac • Trunk Fig . 9 | erK regulation of cell differentiation and development . a | Imbalances in RAS – extracellular signal - regulated kinase ( ERK ) signalling cause defective migration and / or differentiation of the neural crest cell lineage . Cells of the cephalic , cardiac and trunk neural crests contribute to the formation of facial structures , heart valves and septa , and melanocytes , respectively , and are affected in individuals with different RASopathies . Migration and differentiation of neural crest cells relies on ERK and RHO GTPase signalling through ternary complex factors ( TCFs ) and myocardin­ related transcription factors ( MRTFs ) , two groups of essential cofactors of the transcription factor serum response factor ( SRF ) . b | ERK contributes to osteoblast differentiation downstream of fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) signalling by phosphorylating the transcriptional repressor ERF and runt - related transcription factor 2 ( RUNX2 ) , which , respectively , repress and induce an osteogenic gene expression programme . Notably , ERF and RUNX2 were shown to jointly associate with promoter regions . Dysregulation of ERK signalling and of ERF and RUNX2 leads to malformations of cranial and facial bones , with premature cranial sutures ( craniosynostosis ) being frequently observed . c | ERK regulates the activity of GATA4 , TCFs and MRTFs , which are all involved in cardiomyocyte development . Dysregulation of these pathways may contribute to the cause of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy observed in a subset of individuals with RASopathies . d | ERK - activated ELK1 and its cofactor mediator of RNA polymerase II transcription subunit 23 ( MED23 ) regulate the transcription of the immediate early genes JUN , FOS and early growth response 1 ( EGR1 ) , which are involved in neuronal development . Furthermore , ERK represses the interaction of the transcriptional repressor CIC , which is a central regulator of brain development and neuronal homeostasis , with its partner ataxin 1 . Dysregulation of these transcriptional inputs has been associated with intellectual disability , autism spectrum disorder ( ASD ) and attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder ( ADHD ) . e | Brain - derived neurotrophic factor ( BDNF ) triggers activation of ERK and downstream MAPK - interacting kinases ( MNKs ) , which drives phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E ( eIF4E ) and dissociation of the repressor complex fragile X mental retardation protein 1 ( FMR1 ) – cytoplasmic FMR1­ interacting protein 1 ( CYFIP1 ) . This dissociation enables eIF4E cap­ dependent translation of synaptic transcripts . Dysregulation of this ERK - dependent mechanism is linked with fragile X mental retardation . CNS , central nervous system ; FGFR , fibroblast growth factor receptor ; PDGF , platelet­ derived growth factor . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s contribute to the formation of aortic walls and valves and heart septa , and dysregulation of ERK signalling in neural crest cells perturbs the formation of these structures 256 . Whereas valvuloseptal defects may have a strong neural crest contribution , HCM likely has another origin , as it is found in a subset of individuals with Noonan syndrome that harbour hyperactivating RAF1 mutations 265 and is also recurrent in BRAF - mutated and MEK - mutated cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome 266 . HCM was reproduced in mouse RASopathy models by expression of hyperac - tive alleles of RAS – ERK pathway factors specifically in endocardial cells 267 , 268 . Cardiomyocyte hypertrophy appears to be mediated in part by a non - cell - autonomous mechanism induced by neighbouring endocardial cells 267 . However , cardiomyocytes derived in vitro from induced pluripotent stem cells obtained from individuals with LEOPARD syndrome were larger than wild - type coun - terparts and had a higher degree of sarcomeric organ - ization , suggesting that cell - autonomous mechanisms also contribute to HCM 269 . It thus appears that the cardiac defects observed in RASopathies emerge from complex interactions between neural crest - derived cells , cardiomyocytes and other cardiac cell types . Mechanistically , ERK - dependent cardiac hypertro - phy was proposed to correlate with enhanced ERK auto - phosphorylation on Thr190 ( Thr188 in mice ) , which induced ERK nuclear retention in cardiomyocytes and increased transcription of target genes 32 . Accordingly , interfering with Thr190 phosphorylation attenuated cardiomyocyte hypertrophic responses 270 . However , the downstream effectors of ERK in inducing cardiac defects remain poorly understood . One candidate is SRF , which is widely involved in cardiac development as its cofactors TCF ( ELK1 and ELK4 ) and MRTF are embedded in the cardiac gene regulatory network 271 , 272 ( fig . 9c ) . Of note , phosphorylation of the transcription factor GATA4 by ERK was also shown to have a role in stress - induced cardiac hypertrophy 273 , 274 . ERK signalling in the brain . Other characteristics of RASopathies include mild to severe cognitive disabil - ities , autism spectrum disorder and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder . RAS – ERK signalling is essen - tial for normal development of many brain regions and was associated early on with cognition and behavioural plasticity through modulation of long - term potentiation ( LTP ) and memory formation 275 , 276 . Mouse models of RASopathies show brain anomalies and learning defi - cit , owing either to defective fate specification of neural progenitor cells or to faulty hippocampal LTP , or both . Both defects were rescued by ERK inhibition 277 , 278 . Several downstream factors likely explain the effect of ERK signalling impairment on brain devel - opment and activity . A prime candidate effector is the Mediator complex subunit MED23 — a transcrip - tional co - activator of Pol II - dependent genes , which is involved in non - syndromic mental retardation 279 . This Mediator complex subunit is recruited to the promoter regions of IEGs following ELK1 phosphorylation by ERK ( figs 2a , 9d ) . MED23 mutations impede its binding of ELK1 and dysregulate the expression of the IEGs JUN and FOS 279 . Another ELK1 - dependent IEG , EGR1 , is involved in memory consolidation 280 , 281 . The ERK - inhibited tran - scriptional repressor CIC is also crucially involved in brain development and homeostasis . Perturbation of the interaction of CIC with ataxin 1 in mice leads to numer - ous behavioural abnormalities , and CIC loss - of - function mutations were identified in individuals with neuro - behavioral disorders that span intellectual disability , autism spectrum disorder and attention deficit hyper - activity disorder 282 ( fig . 9d ) . Markedly , individuals with CIC haploinsufficiency also show a series of developmen tal delays , and some have cardiac and vascular abnormalities reminiscent of RASopathy phenotypes 282 , 283 . Lastly , ERK - induced MNK1 and MNK2 also have a key role in LTP and memory formation by controlling the translation of specific mRNAs encoding proteins involved in synaptic plasticity . Activation of the RTK TRKB by brain - derived neurotrophic factor ( BDNF ) drives MNK activation by ERK . MNK phosphorylates eIF4E , which then dissociates from the inhibitory com - plex fragile X mental retardation protein 1 ( FMR1 ) – cytoplasmic FMR1 - interacting protein 1 ( CYFIP1 ) , thereby enabling translation at synapses 284 , 285 ( fig . 9e ) . This mechanism alters LTP across the central nervous system and more specifically in hippocampal neurons . Its impairment might explain pathogenic features of fragile X syndrome caused by FMR1 mutations 286 , 287 . Concluding remarks RAS - induced ERK signalling is crucial for the regulation of cellular homeostasis and organismal development . Dysregulation of RAS – ERK signalling is associated with a spectrum of human afflictions , including cancer , developmental disorders , neurodegeneration , obesity and ageing . Because of their pivotal role , ERKs have been intensively studied since their discovery more than 30 years ago . These studies showed that the complexity and pleiotropism of ERK signalling are in large part a reflection of the broad repertoire of effector substrates . Only a small proportion of these effectors have been thoroughly characterized , which suggests that more sur - prises are yet to come . In this regard , we note two areas where our limited knowledge warrants a closer look . First , we lack a systems - level understanding of how the distinct ERK - mediated cell responses are coordinated . In the same vein , it will be important to address how other signalling pathways systemically interact with RAS – ERK signalling . A second area of future investi - gation relates to the spatial and temporal regulation of RAS – ERK signalling . The development of optogenetic switches and biosensors capable of , respectively , manip - ulating and reporting on RAS – ERK activity in real time with spatial resolution is currently in full swing 288 – 290 . Coupled with other time - resolved single - cell quanti - tative measurements , for example of post - translational modifications , transcriptional signatures and subcellular localizations , we foresee that the coming years will usher in a renewed comprehension of how ERK activity shapes cell responses within an organism . Ultimately , this infor - mation will strongly influence our ability to develop new therapeutic solutions to various human diseases . Published online xx xx xxxx Nature reviews | Molecular cell Biology R e v i e w s 1 . Hoshi , M . , Nishida , E . & Sakai , H . Activation of a Ca 2 + - inhibitable protein kinase that phosphorylates microtubule - associated protein 2 in vitro by growth factors , phorbol esters , and serum in quiescent cultured human fibroblasts . J . Biol . Chem . 263 , 5396 – 5401 ( 1988 ) . 2 . Ray , L . B . & Sturgill , T . W . Rapid stimulation by insulin of a serine / threonine kinase in 3T3 - L1 adipocytes that phosphorylates microtubule - associated protein 2 in vitro . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 84 , 1502 – 1506 ( 1987 ) . 3 . Boulton , T . G . et al . ERKs : a family of protein - serine / threonine kinases that are activated and tyrosine phosphorylated in response to insulin and NGF . Cell 65 , 663 – 675 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 91 ) 90098 - j ( 1991 ) . 4 . Boulton , T . G . et al . An insulin - stimulated protein kinase similar to yeast kinases involved in cell cycle control . Science 249 , 64 – 67 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 2164259 ( 1990 ) . 5 . Cargnello , M . & Roux , P . P . Activation and function of the MAPKs and their substrates , the MAPK - activated protein kinases . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 75 , 50 – 83 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MMBR . 00031 - 10 ( 2011 ) . 6 . Lavoie , H . & Therrien , M . Regulation of RAF protein kinases in ERK signalling . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 16 , 281 – 298 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm3979 ( 2015 ) . 7 . Crews , C . M . & Erikson , R . L . Purification of a murine protein - tyrosine / threonine kinase that phosphorylates and activates the Erk - 1 gene product : relationship to the fission yeast byr1 gene product . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 89 , 8205 – 8209 ( 1992 ) . 8 . Unal , E . B . , Uhlitz , F . & Bluthgen , N . A compendium of ERK targets . FEBS Lett . 591 , 2607 – 2615 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / 1873 - 3468 . 12740 ( 2017 ) . 9 . Taylor , S . S . & Kornev , A . P . Protein kinases : evolution of dynamic regulatory proteins . Trends Biochem . Sci . 36 , 65 – 77 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tibs . 2010 . 09 . 006 ( 2011 ) . 10 . Zhang , J . , Zhang , F . , Ebert , D . , Cobb , M . H . & Goldsmith , E . J . Activity of the MAP kinase ERK2 is controlled by a flexible surface loop . Structure 3 , 299 – 307 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / s0969 - 2126 ( 01 ) 00160 - 5 ( 1995 ) . 11 . Canagarajah , B . J . , Khokhlatchev , A . , Cobb , M . H . & Goldsmith , E . J . Activation mechanism of the MAP kinase ERK2 by dual phosphorylation . Cell 90 , 859 – 869 ( 1997 ) . 12 . Zhang , F . , Strand , A . , Robbins , D . , Cobb , M . H . & Goldsmith , E . J . Atomic structure of the MAP kinase ERK2 at 2 . 3 Å resolution . Nature 367 , 704 – 711 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 367704a0 ( 1994 ) . 13 . Bergeron , J . J . , Di Guglielmo , G . M . , Dahan , S . , Dominguez , M . & Posner , B . I . Spatial and temporal regulation of receptor tyrosine kinase activation and intracellular signal transduction . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 85 , 573 – 597 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - biochem - 060815 - 014659 ( 2016 ) . 14 . Harding , A . , Tian , T . , Westbury , E . , Frische , E . & Hancock , J . F . Subcellular localization determines MAP kinase signal output . Curr . Biol . 15 , 869 – 873 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2005 . 04 . 020 ( 2005 ) . 15 . Prior , I . A . & Hancock , J . F . Ras trafficking , localization and compartmentalized signalling . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 23 , 145 – 153 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . semcdb . 2011 . 09 . 002 ( 2012 ) . 16 . Casar , B . & Crespo , P . ERK signals : scaffolding scaffolds ? Front . Cell Dev . Biol . 4 , 49 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fcell . 2016 . 00049 ( 2016 ) . 17 . Sheikh , F . et al . An FHL1 - containing complex within the cardiomyocyte sarcomere mediates hypertrophic biomechanical stress responses in mice . J . Clin . Invest . 118 , 3870 – 3880 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1172 / JCI34472 ( 2008 ) . 18 . Ogata , T . et al . MURC / Cavin - 4 facilitates recruitment of ERK to caveolae and concentric cardiac hypertrophy induced by alpha1 - adrenergic receptors . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 111 , 3811 – 3816 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1315359111 ( 2014 ) . 19 . Good , M . , Tang , G . , Singleton , J . , Remenyi , A . & Lim , W . A . The Ste5 scaffold directs mating signaling by catalytically unlocking the Fus3 MAP kinase for activation . Cell 136 , 1085 – 1097 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2009 . 01 . 049 ( 2009 ) . 20 . Lavoie , H . et al . MEK drives BRAF activation through allosteric control of KSR proteins . Nature 554 , 549 – 553 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature25478 ( 2018 ) . 21 . Adachi , M . , Fukuda , M . & Nishida , E . Nuclear export of MAP kinase ( ERK ) involves a MAP kinase kinase ( MEK ) - dependent active transport mechanism . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 849 – 856 ( 2000 ) . 22 . Formstecher , E . et al . PEA - 15 mediates cytoplasmic sequestration of ERK MAP kinase . Dev . Cell 1 , 239 – 250 ( 2001 ) . 23 . Karlsson , M . , Mathers , J . , Dickinson , R . J . , Mandl , M . & Keyse , S . M . Both nuclear - cytoplasmic shuttling of the dual specificity phosphatase MKP - 3 and its ability to anchor MAP kinase in the cytoplasm are mediated by a conserved nuclear export signal . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 41882 – 41891 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M406720200 ( 2004 ) . 24 . Adachi , M . , Fukuda , M . & Nishida , E . Two co - existing mechanisms for nuclear import of MAP kinase : passive diffusion of a monomer and active transport of a dimer . EMBO J . 18 , 5347 – 5358 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / emboj / 18 . 19 . 5347 ( 1999 ) . 25 . Ranganathan , A . , Yazicioglu , M . N . & Cobb , M . H . The nuclear localization of ERK2 occurs by mechanisms both independent of and dependent on energy . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 15645 – 15652 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M513866200 ( 2006 ) . 26 . Lorenzen , J . A . et al . Nuclear import of activated D - ERK by DIM - 7 , an importin family member encoded by the gene moleskin . Development 128 , 1403 – 1414 ( 2001 ) . 27 . Whitehurst , A . W . et al . ERK2 enters the nucleus by a carrier - independent mechanism . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 7496 – 7501 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 112495999 ( 2002 ) . 28 . Peleg , O . & Lim , R . Y . Converging on the function of intrinsically disordered nucleoporins in the nuclear pore complex . Biol . Chem . 391 , 719 – 730 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / BC . 2010 . 092 ( 2010 ) . 29 . Kosako , H . et al . Phosphoproteomics reveals new ERK MAP kinase targets and links ERK to nucleoporin - mediated nuclear transport . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 16 , 1026 – 1035 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nsmb . 1656 ( 2009 ) . 30 . Casar , B . , Pinto , A . & Crespo , P . Essential role of ERK dimers in the activation of cytoplasmic but not nuclear substrates by ERK - scaffold complexes . Mol . Cell 31 , 708 – 721 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2008 . 07 . 024 ( 2008 ) . 31 . Herrero , A . et al . Small molecule inhibition of ERK dimerization prevents tumorigenesis by RAS - ERK pathway oncogenes . Cancer Cell 28 , 170 – 182 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ccell . 2015 . 07 . 001 ( 2015 ) . 32 . Lorenz , K . , Schmitt , J . P . , Schmitteckert , E . M . & Lohse , M . J . A new type of ERK1 / 2 autophosphorylation causes cardiac hypertrophy . Nat . Med . 15 , 75 – 83 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nm . 1893 ( 2009 ) . 33 . Lai , S . & Pelech , S . Regulatory roles of conserved phosphorylation sites in the activation T - loop of the MAP kinase ERK1 . Mol . Biol . Cell 27 , 1040 – 1050 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E15 - 07 - 0527 ( 2016 ) . 34 . Tee , W . W . , Shen , S . S . , Oksuz , O . , Narendra , V . & Reinberg , D . Erk1 / 2 activity promotes chromatin features and RNAPII phosphorylation at developmental promoters in mouse ESCs . Cell 156 , 678 – 690 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 01 . 009 ( 2014 ) . 35 . Goke , J . , Chan , Y . S . , Yan , J . , Vingron , M . & Ng , H . H . Genome - wide kinase - chromatin interactions reveal the regulatory network of ERK signaling in human embryonic stem cells . Mol . Cell 50 , 844 – 855 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2013 . 04 . 030 ( 2013 ) . 36 . Hu , S . et al . Profiling the human protein - DNA interactome reveals ERK2 as a transcriptional repressor of interferon signaling . Cell 139 , 610 – 622 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2009 . 08 . 037 ( 2009 ) . 37 . Peti , W . & Page , R . Molecular basis of MAP kinase regulation . Protein Sci . 22 , 1698 – 1710 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / pro . 2374 ( 2013 ) . 38 . Lee , T . et al . Docking motif interactions in MAP kinases revealed by hydrogen exchange mass spectrometry . Mol . Cell 14 , 43 – 55 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / s1097 - 2765 ( 04 ) 00161 - 3 ( 2004 ) . 39 . Jacobs , D . , Glossip , D . , Xing , H . , Muslin , A . J . & Kornfeld , K . Multiple docking sites on substrate proteins form a modular system that mediates recognition by ERK MAP kinase . Genes Dev . 13 , 163 – 175 ( 1999 ) . 40 . Piserchio , A . et al . Solution NMR insights into docking interactions involving inactive ERK2 . Biochemistry 50 , 3660 – 3672 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / bi2000559 ( 2011 ) . 41 . Mace , P . D . et al . Structure of ERK2 bound to PEA - 15 reveals a mechanism for rapid release of activated MAPK . Nat . Commun . 4 , 1681 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms2687 ( 2013 ) . 42 . Piserchio , A . et al . Local destabilization , rigid body , and fuzzy docking facilitate the phosphorylation of the transcription factor Ets - 1 by the mitogen - activated protein kinase ERK2 . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 114 , E6287 – E6296 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1702973114 ( 2017 ) . 43 . Voisin , L . , Saba - El - Leil , M . K . , Julien , C . , Fremin , C . & Meloche , S . Genetic demonstration of a redundant role of extracellular signal - regulated kinase 1 ( ERK1 ) and ERK2 mitogen - activated protein kinases in promoting fibroblast proliferation . Mol . Cell Biol . 30 , 2918 – 2932 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MCB . 00131 - 10 ( 2010 ) . 44 . Drosten , M . et al . Genetic analysis of Ras signalling pathways in cell proliferation , migration and survival . EMBO J . 29 , 1091 – 1104 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2010 . 7 ( 2010 ) . 45 . Squires , M . S . , Nixon , P . M . & Cook , S . J . Cell - cycle arrest by PD184352 requires inhibition of extracellular signal - regulated kinases ( ERK ) 1 / 2 but not ERK5 / BMK1 . Biochem . J . 366 , 673 – 680 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1042 / BJ20020372 ( 2002 ) . 46 . Stacey , D . W . & Kung , H . F . Transformation of NIH 3T3 cells by microinjection of Ha - ras p21 protein . Nature 310 , 508 – 511 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 310508a0 ( 1984 ) . 47 . Jones , S . M . & Kazlauskas , A . Growth - factor - dependent mitogenesis requires two distinct phases of signalling . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 165 – 172 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 35055073 ( 2001 ) . 48 . Vasjari , L . , Bresan , S . , Biskup , C . , Pai , G . & Rubio , I . Ras signals principally via Erk in G1 but cooperates with PI3K / Akt for cyclin D induction and S - phase entry . Cell Cycle 18 , 204 – 225 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15384101 . 2018 . 1560205 ( 2019 ) . 49 . Chambard , J . C . , Lefloch , R . , Pouyssegur , J . & Lenormand , P . ERK implication in cell cycle regulation . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1773 , 1299 – 1310 ( 2007 ) . 50 . Deschenes - Simard , X . , Kottakis , F . , Meloche , S . & Ferbeyre , G . ERKs in cancer : friends or foes ? Cancer Res . 74 , 412 – 419 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 13 - 2381 ( 2014 ) . 51 . Fowler , T . , Sen , R . & Roy , A . L . Regulation of primary response genes . Mol . Cell 44 , 348 – 360 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2011 . 09 . 014 ( 2011 ) . 52 . Rivera , V . M . et al . A growth factor - induced kinase phosphorylates the serum response factor at a site that regulates its DNA - binding activity . Mol . Cell Biol . 13 , 6260 – 6273 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / mcb . 13 . 10 . 6260 ( 1993 ) . 53 . Hollenhorst , P . C . , McIntosh , L . P . & Graves , B . J . Genomic and biochemical insights into the specificity of ETS transcription factors . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 80 , 437 – 471 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . biochem . 79 . 081507 . 103945 ( 2011 ) . 54 . Janknecht , R . , Ernst , W . H . , Pingoud , V . & Nordheim , A . Activation of ternary complex factor Elk - 1 by MAP kinases . EMBO J . 12 , 5097 – 5104 ( 1993 ) . 55 . Mylona , A . et al . Opposing effects of Elk - 1 multisite phosphorylation shape its response to ERK activation . Science 354 , 233 – 237 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . aad1872 ( 2016 ) . 56 . Esnault , C . et al . ERK - induced activation of TCF family of SRF cofactors initiates a chromatin modification cascade associated with transcription . Mol . Cell 65 , 1081 – 1095 e1085 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2017 . 02 . 005 ( 2017 ) . 57 . Clark , J . P . & Cooper , C . S . ETS gene fusions in prostate cancer . Nat . Rev . Urol . 6 , 429 – 439 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrurol . 2009 . 127 ( 2009 ) . 58 . Renzi , S . , Anderson , N . D . , Light , N . & Gupta , A . Ewing - like sarcoma : An emerging family of round cell sarcomas . J . Cell . Physiol . 234 , 7999 – 8007 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jcp . 27558 ( 2019 ) . 59 . Hollenhorst , P . C . et al . Oncogenic ETS proteins mimic activated RAS / MAPK signaling in prostate cells . Genes Dev . 25 , 2147 – 2157 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gad . 17546311 ( 2011 ) . 60 . Verger , A . et al . Identification of amino acid residues in the ETS transcription factor Erg that mediate Erg - Jun / Fos - DNA ternary complex formation . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 17181 – 17189 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M010208200 ( 2001 ) . 61 . Bettegowda , C . et al . Mutations in CIC and FUBP1 contribute to human oligodendroglioma . Science 333 , 1453 – 1455 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1210557 ( 2011 ) . 62 . Kawamura - Saito , M . et al . Fusion between CIC and DUX4 up - regulates PEA3 family genes in Ewing - like sarcomas with t ( 4 ; 19 ) ( q35 ; q13 ) translocation . Hum . Mol . Genet . 15 , 2125 – 2137 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / hmg / ddl136 ( 2006 ) . 63 . Padul , V . , Epari , S . , Moiyadi , A . , Shetty , P . & Shirsat , N . V . ETV / Pea3 family transcription factor - encoding genes are overexpressed in CIC - mutant oligodendrogliomas . Genes Chromosomes Cancer 54 , www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 725 – 733 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / gcc . 22283 ( 2015 ) . 64 . Le Gallic , L . , Sgouras , D . , Beal , G . Jr . & Mavrothalassitis , G . Transcriptional repressor ERF is a Ras / mitogen - activated protein kinase target that regulates cellular proliferation . Mol . Cell Biol . 19 , 4121 – 4133 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / mcb . 19 . 6 . 4121 ( 1999 ) . 65 . Sgouras , D . N . et al . ERF : an ETS domain protein with strong transcriptional repressor activity , can suppress ets - associated tumorigenesis and is regulated by phosphorylation during cell cycle and mitogenic stimulation . EMBO J . 14 , 4781 – 4793 ( 1995 ) . 66 . Le Gallic , L . , Virgilio , L . , Cohen , P . , Biteau , B . & Mavrothalassitis , G . ERF nuclear shuttling , a continuous monitor of Erk activity that links it to cell cycle progression . Mol . Cell Biol . 24 , 1206 – 1218 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / mcb . 24 . 3 . 1206 - 1218 . 2004 ( 2004 ) . 67 . Bose , R . et al . ERF mutations reveal a balance of ETS factors controlling prostate oncogenesis . Nature 546 , 671 – 675 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature22820 ( 2017 ) . 68 . Lopez - Bergami , P . , Lau , E . & Ronai , Z . Emerging roles of ATF2 and the dynamic AP1 network in cancer . Nat . Rev . Cancer 10 , 65 – 76 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrc2681 ( 2010 ) . 69 . Dang , C . V . MYC on the path to cancer . Cell 149 , 22 – 35 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 03 . 003 ( 2012 ) . 70 . Gualdrini , F . et al . SRF Co - factors control the balance between cell proliferation and contractility . Mol . Cell 64 , 1048 – 1061 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2016 . 10 . 016 ( 2016 ) . 71 . Zwang , Y . et al . Two phases of mitogenic signaling unveil roles for p53 and EGR1 in elimination of inconsistent growth signals . Mol . Cell 42 , 524 – 535 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2011 . 04 . 017 ( 2011 ) . 72 . Bugaj , L . J . et al . Cancer mutations and targeted drugs can disrupt dynamic signal encoding by the Ras - Erk pathway . Science 361 , eaao3048 ( 2018 ) . 73 . Albeck , J . G . , Mills , G . B . & Brugge , J . S . Frequency - modulated pulses of ERK activity transmit quantitative proliferation signals . Mol . Cell 49 , 249 – 261 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2012 . 11 . 002 ( 2013 ) . 74 . Nakakuki , T . et al . Ligand - specific c - Fos expression emerges from the spatiotemporal control of ErbB network dynamics . Cell 141 , 884 – 896 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2010 . 03 . 054 ( 2010 ) . 75 . Murphy , L . O . , MacKeigan , J . P . & Blenis , J . A network of immediate early gene products propagates subtle differences in mitogen - activated protein kinase signal amplitude and duration . Mol . Cell Biol . 24 , 144 – 153 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / mcb . 24 . 1 . 144 - 153 . 2004 ( 2004 ) . 76 . Chen , R . H . , Abate , C . & Blenis , J . Phosphorylation of the c - Fos transrepression domain by mitogen - activated protein kinase and 90 - kDa ribosomal S6 kinase . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 90 , 10952 – 10956 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 90 . 23 . 10952 ( 1993 ) . 77 . Murphy , L . O . , Smith , S . , Chen , R . H . , Fingar , D . C . & Blenis , J . Molecular interpretation of ERK signal duration by immediate early gene products . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 556 – 564 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb822 ( 2002 ) . 78 . Wiggin , G . R . et al . MSK1 and MSK2 are required for the mitogen - and stress - induced phosphorylation of CREB and ATF1 in fibroblasts . Mol . Cell Biol . 22 , 2871 – 2881 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / mcb . 22 . 8 . 2871 - 2881 . 2002 ( 2002 ) . 79 . Sears , R . et al . Multiple Ras - dependent phosphorylation pathways regulate Myc protein stability . Genes Dev . 14 , 2501 – 2514 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gad . 836800 ( 2000 ) . 80 . Yeh , E . et al . A signalling pathway controlling c - Myc degradation that impacts oncogenic transformation of human cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 , 308 – 318 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb1110 ( 2004 ) . 81 . Albanese , C . et al . Transforming p21ras mutants and c - Ets - 2 activate the cyclin D1 promoter through distinguishable regions . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 23589 – 23597 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . 270 . 40 . 23589 ( 1995 ) . 82 . Lavoie , J . N . , L’Allemain , G . , Brunet , A . , Muller , R . & Pouyssegur , J . Cyclin D1 expression is regulated positively by the p42 / p44MAPK and negatively by the p38 / HOGMAPK pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 20608 – 20616 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . 271 . 34 . 20608 ( 1996 ) . 83 . Klein , E . A . & Assoian , R . K . Transcriptional regulation of the cyclin D1 gene at a glance . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 3853 – 3857 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 039131 ( 2008 ) . 84 . Bertoli , C . , Skotheim , J . M . & de Bruin , R . A . Control of cell cycle transcription during G1 and S phases . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 14 , 518 – 528 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm3629 ( 2013 ) . 85 . Villanueva , J . , Yung , Y . , Walker , J . L . & Assoian , R . K . ERK activity and G1 phase progression : identifying dispensable versus essential activities and primary versus secondary targets . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 1457 – 1463 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . e06 - 10 - 0908 ( 2007 ) . 86 . Brown , J . R . et al . Fos family members induce cell cycle entry by activating cyclin D1 . Mol . Cell Biol . 18 , 5609 – 5619 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / mcb . 18 . 9 . 5609 ( 1998 ) . 87 . Kozar , K . et al . Mouse development and cell proliferation in the absence of D - cyclins . Cell 118 , 477 – 491 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2004 . 07 . 025 ( 2004 ) . 88 . Yang , H . W . , Chung , M . , Kudo , T . & Meyer , T . Competing memories of mitogen and p53 signalling control cell - cycle entry . Nature 549 , 404 – 408 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature23880 ( 2017 ) . 89 . Garcia - Gutierrez , L . , Delgado , M . D . & Leon , J . MYC oncogene contributions to release of cell cycle brakes . Genes https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / genes10030244 ( 2019 ) . 90 . Fujita , N . , Sato , S . & Tsuruo , T . Phosphorylation of p27Kip1 at threonine 198 by p90 ribosomal protein S6 kinases promotes its binding to 14 - 3 - 3 and cytoplasmic localization . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 49254 – 49260 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M306614200 ( 2003 ) . 91 . Hwang , C . Y . , Lee , C . & Kwon , K . S . Extracellular signal - regulated kinase 2 - dependent phosphorylation induces cytoplasmic localization and degradation of p21Cip1 . Mol . Cell Biol . 29 , 3379 – 3389 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MCB . 01758 - 08 ( 2009 ) . 92 . Singh , R . , Letai , A . & Sarosiek , K . Regulation of apoptosis in health and disease : the balancing act of BCL - 2 family proteins . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 20 , 175 – 193 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41580 - 018 - 0089 - 8 ( 2019 ) . 93 . Berra , E . , Diaz - Meco , M . T . & Moscat , J . The activation of p38 and apoptosis by the inhibition of Erk is antagonized by the phosphoinositide 3 - kinase / Akt pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 10792 – 10797 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . 273 . 17 . 10792 ( 1998 ) . 94 . Edlich , F . BCL - 2 proteins and apoptosis : Recent insights and unknowns . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 500 , 26 – 34 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2017 . 06 . 190 ( 2018 ) . 95 . Kale , J . , Osterlund , E . J . & Andrews , D . W . BCL - 2 family proteins : changing partners in the dance towards death . Cell Death Differ . 25 , 65 – 80 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / cdd . 2017 . 186 ( 2018 ) . 96 . Chen , L . et al . Differential targeting of prosurvival Bcl - 2 proteins by their BH3 - only ligands allows complementary apoptotic function . Mol . Cell 17 , 393 – 403 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2004 . 12 . 030 ( 2005 ) . 97 . Hubner , A . , Barrett , T . , Flavell , R . A . & Davis , R . J . Multisite phosphorylation regulates Bim stability and apoptotic activity . Mol . Cell 30 , 415 – 425 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2008 . 03 . 025 ( 2008 ) . 98 . Ewings , K . E . et al . ERK1 / 2 - dependent phosphorylation of BimEL promotes its rapid dissociation from Mcl - 1 and Bcl - xL . EMBO J . 26 , 2856 – 2867 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / sj . emboj . 7601723 ( 2007 ) . 99 . Yang , J . Y . et al . ERK promotes tumorigenesis by inhibiting FOXO3a via MDM2 - mediated degradation . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 138 – 148 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb1676 ( 2008 ) . 100 . Lopez , J . et al . Src tyrosine kinase inhibits apoptosis through the Erk1 / 2 - dependent degradation of the death accelerator Bik . Cell Death Differ . 19 , 1459 – 1469 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / cdd . 2012 . 21 ( 2012 ) . 101 . Shao , Y . & Aplin , A . E . ERK2 phosphorylation of serine 77 regulates Bmf pro - apoptotic activity . Cell Death Dis . 3 , e253 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / cddis . 2011 . 137 ( 2012 ) . 102 . Bonni , A . et al . Cell survival promoted by the Ras - MAPK signaling pathway by transcription - dependent and - independent mechanisms . Science 286 , 1358 – 1362 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 286 . 5443 . 1358 ( 1999 ) . 103 . Shimamura , A . , Ballif , B . A . , Richards , S . A . & Blenis , J . Rsk1 mediates a MEK - MAP kinase cell survival signal . Curr . Biol . 10 , 127 – 135 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / s0960 - 9822 ( 00 ) 00310 - 9 ( 2000 ) . 104 . Allan , L . A . et al . Inhibition of caspase - 9 through phosphorylation at Thr 125 by ERK MAPK . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 647 – 654 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb1005 ( 2003 ) . 105 . Domina , A . M . , Vrana , J . A . , Gregory , M . A . , Hann , S . R . & Craig , R . W . MCL1 is phosphorylated in the PEST region and stabilized upon ERK activation in viable cells , and at additional sites with cytotoxic okadaic acid or taxol . Oncogene 23 , 5301 – 5315 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / sj . onc . 1207692 ( 2004 ) . 106 . Boucher , M . J . et al . MEK / ERK signaling pathway regulates the expression of Bcl - 2 , Bcl - X ( L ) , and Mcl - 1 and promotes survival of human pancreatic cancer cells . J . Cell Biochem . 79 , 355 – 369 ( 2000 ) . 107 . Subramanian , M . & Shaha , C . Up - regulation of Bcl - 2 through ERK phosphorylation is associated with human macrophage survival in an estrogen microenvironment . J . Immunol . 179 , 2330 – 2338 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 179 . 4 . 2330 ( 2007 ) . 108 . Ye , Q . , Cai , W . , Zheng , Y . , Evers , B . M . & She , Q . B . ERK and AKT signaling cooperate to translationally regulate survivin expression for metastatic progression of colorectal cancer . Oncogene 33 , 1828 – 1839 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / onc . 2013 . 122 ( 2014 ) . 109 . Ginzberg , M . B . , Kafri , R . & Kirschner , M . Cell biology . On being right size . Science 348 , 1245075 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1245075 ( 2015 ) . 110 . Bywater , M . J . , Pearson , R . B . , McArthur , G . A . & Hannan , R . D . Dysregulation of the basal RNA polymerase transcription apparatus in cancer . Nat . Rev . Cancer 13 , 299 – 314 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrc3496 ( 2013 ) . 111 . Stefanovsky , V . Y . et al . An immediate response of ribosomal transcription to growth factor stimulation in mammals is mediated by ERK phosphorylation of UBF . Mol . Cell 8 , 1063 – 1073 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / s1097 - 2765 ( 01 ) 00384 - 7 ( 2001 ) . 112 . Stefanovsky , V . , Langlois , F . , Gagnon - Kugler , T . , Rothblum , L . I . & Moss , T . Growth factor signaling regulates elongation of RNA polymerase I transcription in mammals via UBF phosphorylation and r - chromatin remodeling . Mol . Cell 21 , 629 – 639 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2006 . 01 . 023 ( 2006 ) . 113 . Zhao , J . , Yuan , X . , Frodin , M . & Grummt , I . ERK - dependent phosphorylation of the transcription initiation factor TIF - IA is required for RNA polymerase I transcription and cell growth . Mol . Cell 11 , 405 – 413 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / s1097 - 2765 ( 03 ) 00036 - 4 ( 2003 ) . 114 . Felton - Edkins , Z . A . et al . The mitogen - activated protein ( MAP ) kinase ERK induces tRNA synthesis by phosphorylating TFIIIB . EMBO J . 22 , 2422 – 2432 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / emboj / cdg240 ( 2003 ) . 115 . Sriskanthadevan - Pirahas , S . , Deshpande , R . , Lee , B . & Grewal , S . S . Ras / ERK - signalling promotes tRNA synthesis and growth via the RNA polymerase III repressor Maf1 in Drosophila . PLoS Genet . 14 , e1007202 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pgen . 1007202 ( 2018 ) . 116 . Johnston , L . A . , Prober , D . A . , Edgar , B . A . , Eisenman , R . N . & Gallant , P . Drosophila myc regulates cellular growth during development . Cell 98 , 779 – 790 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / s0092 - 8674 ( 00 ) 81512 - 3 ( 1999 ) . 117 . Sriskanthadevan - Pirahas , S . , Lee , J . & Grewal , S . S . The EGF / Ras pathway controls growth in Drosophila via ribosomal RNA synthesis . Dev . Biol . 439 , 19 – 29 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ydbio . 2018 . 04 . 006 ( 2018 ) . 118 . Iritani , B . M . & Eisenman , R . N . c - Myc enhances protein synthesis and cell size during B lymphocyte development . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 13180 – 13185 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 96 . 23 . 13180 ( 1999 ) . 119 . Iritani , B . M . et al . Modulation of T - lymphocyte development , growth and cell size by the Myc antagonist and transcriptional repressor Mad1 . EMBO J . 21 , 4820 – 4830 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / emboj / cdf492 ( 2002 ) . 120 . Poortinga , G . et al . MAD1 and c - MYC regulate UBF and rDNA transcription during granulocyte differentiation . EMBO J . 23 , 3325 – 3335 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / sj . emboj . 7600335 ( 2004 ) . 121 . Poortinga , G . et al . c - MYC coordinately regulates ribosomal gene chromatin remodeling and Pol I availability during granulocyte differentiation . Nucleic Acids Res . 39 , 3267 – 3281 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / nar / gkq1205 ( 2011 ) . 122 . Arabi , A . et al . c - Myc associates with ribosomal DNA and activates RNA polymerase I transcription . Nature reviews | Molecular cell Biology R e v i e w s Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 303 – 310 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb1225 ( 2005 ) . 123 . Grandori , C . et al . c - Myc binds to human ribosomal DNA and stimulates transcription of rRNA genes by RNA polymerase I . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 311 – 318 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb1224 ( 2005 ) . 124 . Grewal , S . S . , Li , L . , Orian , A . , Eisenman , R . N . & Edgar , B . A . Myc - dependent regulation of ribosomal RNA synthesis during Drosophila development . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 295 – 302 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb1223 ( 2005 ) . 125 . Ueda , T . , Watanabe - Fukunaga , R . , Fukuyama , H . , Nagata , S . & Fukunaga , R . Mnk2 and Mnk1 are essential for constitutive and inducible phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 4E but not for cell growth or development . Mol . Cell Biol . 24 , 6539 – 6549 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MCB . 24 . 15 . 6539 - 6549 . 2004 ( 2004 ) . 126 . Pelletier , J . , Graff , J . , Ruggero , D . & Sonenberg , N . Targeting the eIF4F translation initiation complex : a critical nexus for cancer development . Cancer Res . 75 , 250 – 263 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 14 - 2789 ( 2015 ) . 127 . Ueda , T . et al . Combined deficiency for MAP kinase - interacting kinase 1 and 2 ( Mnk1 and Mnk2 ) delays tumor development . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 13984 – 13990 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1008136107 ( 2010 ) . 128 . Furic , L . et al . eIF4E phosphorylation promotes tumorigenesis and is associated with prostate cancer progression . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 14134 – 14139 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1005320107 ( 2010 ) . 129 . Aguilar - Valles , A . et al . Translational control of depression - like behavior via phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E . Nat . Commun . 9 , 2459 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 04883 - 5 ( 2018 ) . 130 . Saxton , R . A . & Sabatini , D . M . mTOR signaling in growth , metabolism , and disease . Cell 168 , 960 – 976 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2017 . 02 . 004 ( 2017 ) . 131 . Ma , L . , Chen , Z . , Erdjument - Bromage , H . , Tempst , P . & Pandolfi , P . P . Phosphorylation and functional inactivation of TSC2 by Erk implications for tuberous sclerosis and cancer pathogenesis . Cell 121 , 179 – 193 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2005 . 02 . 031 ( 2005 ) . 132 . Roux , P . P . , Ballif , B . A . , Anjum , R . , Gygi , S . P . & Blenis , J . Tumor - promoting phorbol esters and activated Ras inactivate the tuberous sclerosis tumor suppressor complex via p90 ribosomal S6 kinase . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 13489 – 13494 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0405659101 ( 2004 ) . 133 . Inoki , K . , Li , Y . , Zhu , T . , Wu , J . & Guan , K . L . TSC2 is phosphorylated and inhibited by Akt and suppresses mTOR signalling . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 648 – 657 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb839 ( 2002 ) . 134 . Carriere , A . et al . ERK1 / 2 phosphorylate Raptor to promote Ras - dependent activation of mTOR complex 1 ( mTORC1 ) . J . Biol . Chem . 286 , 567 – 577 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M110 . 159046 ( 2011 ) . 135 . Carriere , A . et al . Oncogenic MAPK signaling stimulates mTORC1 activity by promoting RSK - mediated raptor phosphorylation . Curr . Biol . 18 , 1269 – 1277 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2008 . 07 . 078 ( 2008 ) . 136 . Galan , J . A . et al . Phosphoproteomic analysis identifies the tumor suppressor PDCD4 as a RSK substrate negatively regulated by 14 - 3 - 3 . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . U S A 111 , E2918 – E2927 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1405601111 ( 2014 ) . 137 . Dorrello , N . V . et al . S6K1 - and betaTRCP - mediated degradation of PDCD4 promotes protein translation and cell growth . Science 314 , 467 – 471 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1130276 ( 2006 ) . 138 . Shahbazian , D . et al . The mTOR / PI3K and MAPK pathways converge on eIF4B to control its phosphorylation and activity . EMBO J . 25 , 2781 – 2791 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / sj . emboj . 7601166 ( 2006 ) . 139 . Dayton , T . L . , Jacks , T . & Vander Heiden , M . G . PKM2 , cancer metabolism , and the road ahead . EMBO Rep . 17 , 1721 – 1730 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 15252 / embr . 201643300 ( 2016 ) . 140 . Warburg , O . On the origin of cancer cells . Science 123 , 309 – 314 ( 1956 ) . 141 . Ito , K . & Suda , T . Metabolic requirements for the maintenance of self - renewing stem cells . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 15 , 243 – 256 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm3772 ( 2014 ) . 142 . Scott , D . A . et al . Comparative metabolic flux profiling of melanoma cell lines : beyond the Warburg effect . J . Biol . Chem . 286 , 42626 – 42634 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M111 . 282046 ( 2011 ) . 143 . Ying , H . et al . Oncogenic Kras maintains pancreatic tumors through regulation of anabolic glucose metabolism . Cell 149 , 656 – 670 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 01 . 058 ( 2012 ) . 144 . Kerr , E . M . , Gaude , E . , Turrell , F . K . , Frezza , C . & Martins , C . P . Mutant Kras copy number defines metabolic reprogramming and therapeutic susceptibilities . Nature 531 , 110 – 113 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature16967 ( 2016 ) . 145 . Hall , A . et al . Dysfunctional oxidative phosphorylation makes malignant melanoma cells addicted to glycolysis driven by the V600E BRAF oncogene . Oncotarget 4 , 584 – 599 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 18632 / oncotarget . 965 ( 2013 ) . 146 . Tanner , L . B . et al . Four key steps control glycolytic flux in mammalian cells . Cell Syst . 7 , 49 – 62 e48 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cels . 2018 . 06 . 003 ( 2018 ) . 147 . Falck Miniotis , M . et al . MEK1 / 2 inhibition decreases lactate in BRAF - driven human cancer cells . Cancer Res . 73 , 4039 – 4049 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 12 - 1969 ( 2013 ) . 148 . Theodosakis , N . et al . BRAF inhibition decreases cellular glucose uptake in melanoma in association with reduction in cell volume . Mol . Cancer Ther . 14 , 1680 – 1692 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1158 / 1535 - 7163 . MCT - 15 - 0080 ( 2015 ) . 149 . Parmenter , T . J . et al . Response of BRAF - mutant melanoma to BRAF inhibition is mediated by a network of transcriptional regulators of glycolysis . Cancer Discov . 4 , 423 – 433 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1158 / 2159 - 8290 . CD - 13 - 0440 ( 2014 ) . 150 . Kim , J . W . , Gao , P . , Liu , Y . C . , Semenza , G . L . & Dang , C . V . Hypoxia - inducible factor 1 and dysregulated c - Myc cooperatively induce vascular endothelial growth factor and metabolic switches hexokinase 2 and pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 1 . Mol . Cell Biol . 27 , 7381 – 7393 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MCB . 00440 - 07 ( 2007 ) . 151 . Richard , D . E . , Berra , E . , Gothie , E . , Roux , D . & Pouyssegur , J . p42 / p44 mitogen - activated protein kinases phosphorylate hypoxia - inducible factor 1 alpha ( HIF - 1alpha ) and enhance the transcriptional activity of HIF - 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 32631 – 32637 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . 274 . 46 . 32631 ( 1999 ) . 152 . Mylonis , I . et al . Identification of MAPK phosphorylation sites and their role in the localization and activity of hypoxia - inducible factor - 1alpha . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 33095 – 33106 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M605058200 ( 2006 ) . 153 . Shim , H . et al . c - Myc transactivation of LDH - A : implications for tumor metabolism and growth . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 6658 – 6663 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 94 . 13 . 6658 ( 1997 ) . 154 . Schodel , J . et al . High - resolution genome - wide mapping of HIF - binding sites by ChIP - seq . Blood 117 , e207 – e217 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1182 / blood - 2010 - 10 - 314427 ( 2011 ) . 155 . Osthus , R . C . et al . Deregulation of glucose transporter 1 and glycolytic gene expression by c - Myc . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 21797 – 21800 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . C000023200 ( 2000 ) . 156 . Papandreou , I . , Cairns , R . A . , Fontana , L . , Lim , A . L . & Denko , N . C . HIF - 1 mediates adaptation to hypoxia by actively downregulating mitochondrial oxygen consumption . Cell Metab . 3 , 187 – 197 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cmet . 2006 . 01 . 012 ( 2006 ) . 157 . Kim , J . W . , Tchernyshyov , I . , Semenza , G . L . & Dang , C . V . HIF - 1 - mediated expression of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase : a metabolic switch required for cellular adaptation to hypoxia . Cell Metab . 3 , 177 – 185 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cmet . 2006 . 02 . 002 ( 2006 ) . 158 . Yang , W . et al . ERK1 / 2 - dependent phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of PKM2 promotes the Warburg effect . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 1295 – 1304 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb2629 ( 2012 ) . 159 . Houles , T . et al . RSK Regulates PFK - 2 Activity to Promote Metabolic Rewiring in Melanoma . Cancer Res . 78 , 2191 – 2204 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 17 - 2215 ( 2018 ) . 160 . Austin , S . & St - Pierre , J . PGC1alpha and mitochondrial metabolism - emerging concepts and relevance in ageing and neurodegenerative disorders . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 4963 – 4971 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 113662 ( 2012 ) . 161 . Haq , R . et al . Oncogenic BRAF regulates oxidative metabolism via PGC1alpha and MITF . Cancer Cell 23 , 302 – 315 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ccr . 2013 . 02 . 003 ( 2013 ) . 162 . Vazquez , F . et al . PGC1alpha expression defines a subset of human melanoma tumors with increased mitochondrial capacity and resistance to oxidative stress . Cancer Cell 23 , 287 – 301 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ccr . 2012 . 11 . 020 ( 2013 ) . 163 . Wellbrock , C . & Arozarena , I . Microphthalmia - associated transcription factor in melanoma development and MAP - kinase pathway targeted therapy . Pigment Cell Melanoma Res . 28 , 390 – 406 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / pcmr . 12370 ( 2015 ) . 164 . Wu , M . et al . c - Kit triggers dual phosphorylations , which couple activation and degradation of the essential melanocyte factor Mi . Genes Dev . 14 , 301 – 312 ( 2000 ) . 165 . Hemesath , T . J . , Price , E . R . , Takemoto , C . , Badalian , T . & Fisher , D . E . MAP kinase links the transcription factor microphthalmia to c - Kit signalling in melanocytes . Nature 391 , 298 – 301 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 34681 ( 1998 ) . 166 . Luo , C . et al . A PGC1alpha - mediated transcriptional axis suppresses melanoma metastasis . Nature 537 , 422 – 426 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature19347 ( 2016 ) . 167 . Frederick , D . T . et al . BRAF inhibition is associated with enhanced melanoma antigen expression and a more favorable tumor microenvironment in patients with metastatic melanoma . Clin . Cancer Res . 19 , 1225 – 1231 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1158 / 1078 - 0432 . CCR - 12 - 1630 ( 2013 ) . 168 . Viale , A . et al . Oncogene ablation - resistant pancreatic cancer cells depend on mitochondrial function . Nature 514 , 628 – 632 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature13611 ( 2014 ) . 169 . Serasinghe , M . N . et al . Mitochondrial division is requisite to RAS - induced transformation and targeted by oncogenic MAPK pathway inhibitors . Mol . Cell 57 , 521 – 536 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2015 . 01 . 003 ( 2015 ) . 170 . Kashatus , J . A . et al . Erk2 phosphorylation of Drp1 promotes mitochondrial fission and MAPK - driven tumor growth . Mol . Cell 57 , 537 – 551 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2015 . 01 . 002 ( 2015 ) . 171 . Prieto , J . et al . Early ERK1 / 2 activation promotes DRP1 - dependent mitochondrial fission necessary for cell reprogramming . Nat . Commun . 7 , 11124 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms11124 ( 2016 ) . 172 . Smith , B . et al . Addiction to coupling of the Warburg effect with glutamine catabolism in Cancer Cells . Cell Rep . 17 , 821 – 836 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2016 . 09 . 045 ( 2016 ) . 173 . Son , J . et al . Glutamine supports pancreatic cancer growth through a KRAS - regulated metabolic pathway . Nature 496 , 101 – 105 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature12040 ( 2013 ) . 174 . Gaglio , D . et al . Oncogenic K - Ras decouples glucose and glutamine metabolism to support cancer cell growth . Mol . Syst . Biol . 7 , 523 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / msb . 2011 . 56 ( 2011 ) . 175 . Romero , R . et al . Keap1 loss promotes Kras - driven lung cancer and results in dependence on glutaminolysis . Nat . Med . 23 , 1362 – 1368 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nm . 4407 ( 2017 ) . 176 . Hernandez - Davies , J . E . et al . Vemurafenib resistance reprograms melanoma cells towards glutamine dependence . J . Transl . Med . 13 , 210 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s12967 - 015 - 0581 - 2 ( 2015 ) . 177 . Wise , D . R . et al . Myc regulates a transcriptional program that stimulates mitochondrial glutaminolysis and leads to glutamine addiction . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 18782 – 18787 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0810199105 ( 2008 ) . 178 . Yang , R . et al . EGFR activates GDH1 transcription to promote glutamine metabolism through MEK / ERK / ELK1 pathway in glioblastoma . Oncogene 39 , 2975 – 2986 ( 2020 ) . 179 . Santana - Codina , N . et al . Oncogenic KRAS supports pancreatic cancer through regulation of nucleotide synthesis . Nat . Commun . 9 , 4945 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 07472 - 8 ( 2018 ) . 180 . Graves , L . M . et al . Regulation of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase by MAP kinase . Nature 403 , 328 – 332 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 35002111 ( 2000 ) . 181 . Herzig , S . & Shaw , R . J . AMPK : guardian of metabolism and mitochondrial homeostasis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 19 , 121 – 135 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm . 2017 . 95 ( 2018 ) . 182 . Zheng , B . et al . Oncogenic B - RAF negatively regulates the tumor suppressor LKB1 to promote melanoma cell proliferation . Mol . Cell 33 , 237 – 247 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2008 . 12 . 026 ( 2009 ) . www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s 183 . Shen , C . H . et al . Phosphorylation of BRAF by AMPK impairs BRAF - KSR1 association and cell proliferation . Mol . Cell 52 , 161 – 172 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2013 . 08 . 044 ( 2013 ) . 184 . Tanimura , S . & Takeda , K . ERK signalling as a regulator of cell motility . J . Biochem . 162 , 145 – 154 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / jb / mvx048 ( 2017 ) . 185 . Hiratsuka , T . et al . Intercellular propagation of extracellular signal - regulated kinase activation revealed by in vivo imaging of mouse skin . eLife 4 , e05178 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 05178 ( 2015 ) . 186 . Aoki , K . et al . Propagating wave of ERK activation orients collective cell migration . Dev . Cell 43 , 305 – 317 e305 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2017 . 10 . 016 ( 2017 ) . 187 . Mendoza , M . C . , Vilela , M . , Juarez , J . E . , Blenis , J . & Danuser , G . ERK reinforces actin polymerization to power persistent edge protrusion during motility . Sci . Signal . 8 , ra47 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / scisignal . aaa8859 ( 2015 ) . 188 . Brahmbhatt , A . A . & Klemke , R . L . ERK and RhoA differentially regulate pseudopodia growth and retraction during chemotaxis . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 13016 – 13025 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M211873200 ( 2003 ) . 189 . Choi , C . & Helfman , D . M . The Ras - ERK pathway modulates cytoskeleton organization , cell motility and lung metastasis signature genes in MDA - MB - 231 LM2 . Oncogene 33 , 3668 – 3676 ( 2014 ) . 190 . Te Boekhorst , V . , Preziosi , L . & Friedl , P . Plasticity of cell migration in vivo and in silico . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 32 , 491 – 526 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - cellbio - 111315 - 125201 ( 2016 ) . 191 . Lawson , C . D . & Ridley , A . J . Rho GTPase signaling complexes in cell migration and invasion . J . Cell Biol . 217 , 447 – 457 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201612069 ( 2018 ) . 192 . Fincham , V . J . , James , M . , Frame , M . C . & Winder , S . J . Active ERK / MAP kinase is targeted to newly forming cell - matrix adhesions by integrin engagement and v - Src . EMBO J . 19 , 2911 – 2923 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / emboj / 19 . 12 . 2911 ( 2000 ) . 193 . Case , L . B . & Waterman , C . M . Integration of actin dynamics and cell adhesion by a three - dimensional , mechanosensitive molecular clutch . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 955 – 963 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb3191 ( 2015 ) . 194 . Miki , H . , Fukuda , M . , Nishida , E . & Takenawa , T . Phosphorylation of WAVE downstream of mitogen - activated protein kinase signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 27605 – 27609 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . 274 . 39 . 27605 ( 1999 ) . 195 . Mendoza , M . C . et al . ERK - MAPK drives lamellipodia protrusion by activating the WAVE2 regulatory complex . Mol . Cell 41 , 661 – 671 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2011 . 02 . 031 ( 2011 ) . 196 . Danson , C . M . , Pocha , S . M . , Bloomberg , G . B . & Cory , G . O . Phosphorylation of WAVE2 by MAP kinases regulates persistent cell migration and polarity . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 4144 – 4154 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 013714 ( 2007 ) . 197 . Martinez - Quiles , N . , Ho , H . Y . , Kirschner , M . W . , Ramesh , N . & Geha , R . S . Erk / Src phosphorylation of cortactin acts as a switch on - switch off mechanism that controls its ability to activate N - WASP . Mol . Cell Biol . 24 , 5269 – 5280 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MCB . 24 . 12 . 5269 - 5280 . 2004 ( 2004 ) . 198 . Woo , M . S . , Ohta , Y . , Rabinovitz , I . , Stossel , T . P . & Blenis , J . Ribosomal S6 kinase ( RSK ) regulates phosphorylation of filamin A on an important regulatory site . Mol . Cell Biol . 24 , 3025 – 3035 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / mcb . 24 . 7 . 3025 - 3035 . 2004 ( 2004 ) . 199 . Vicente - Manzanares , M . , Ma , X . , Adelstein , R . S . & Horwitz , A . R . Non - muscle myosin II takes centre stage in cell adhesion and migration . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 778 – 790 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm2786 ( 2009 ) . 200 . Klemke , R . L . et al . Regulation of cell motility by mitogen - activated protein kinase . J . Cell Biol . 137 , 481 – 492 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 137 . 2 . 481 ( 1997 ) . 201 . Webb , D . J . et al . FAK - Src signalling through paxillin , ERK and MLCK regulates adhesion disassembly . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 , 154 – 161 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb1094 ( 2004 ) . 202 . Samson , S . C . et al . p90 ribosomal S6 kinase ( RSK ) phosphorylates myosin phosphatase and thereby controls edge dynamics during cell migration . J . Biol . Chem . 294 , 10846 – 10862 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . RA119 . 007431 ( 2019 ) . 203 . Tanimura , S . et al . ERK signaling promotes cell motility by inducing the localization of myosin 1E to lamellipodial tips . J . Cell Biol . 214 , 475 – 489 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201503123 ( 2016 ) . 204 . Parsons , J . T . , Horwitz , A . R . & Schwartz , M . A . Cell adhesion : integrating cytoskeletal dynamics and cellular tension . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 633 – 643 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm2957 ( 2010 ) . 205 . Klein , R . M . , Spofford , L . S . , Abel , E . V . , Ortiz , A . & Aplin , A . E . B - RAF regulation of Rnd3 participates in actin cytoskeletal and focal adhesion organization . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 498 – 508 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E07 - 09 - 0895 ( 2008 ) . 206 . Ishibe , S . , Joly , D . , Zhu , X . & Cantley , L . G . Phosphorylation - dependent paxillin - ERK association mediates hepatocyte growth factor - stimulated epithelial morphogenesis . Mol . Cell 12 , 1275 – 1285 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / s1097 - 2765 ( 03 ) 00406 - 4 ( 2003 ) . 207 . Slack - Davis , J . K . et al . PAK1 phosphorylation of MEK1 regulates fibronectin - stimulated MAPK activation . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 281 – 291 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200212141 ( 2003 ) . 208 . Ishibe , S . , Joly , D . , Liu , Z . X . & Cantley , L . G . Paxillin serves as an ERK - regulated scaffold for coordinating FAK and Rac activation in epithelial morphogenesis . Mol . Cell 16 , 257 – 267 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2004 . 10 . 006 ( 2004 ) . 209 . Woodrow , M . A . , Woods , D . , Cherwinski , H . M . , Stokoe , D . & McMahon , M . Ras - induced serine phosphorylation of the focal adhesion protein paxillin is mediated by the Raf – > MEK – > ERK pathway . Exp . Cell Res . 287 , 325 – 338 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / s0014 - 4827 ( 03 ) 00122 - 8 ( 2003 ) . 210 . Zheng , Y . et al . FAK phosphorylation by ERK primes ras - induced tyrosine dephosphorylation of FAK mediated by PIN1 and PTP - PEST . Mol . Cell 35 , 11 – 25 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2009 . 06 . 013 ( 2009 ) . 211 . Eblen , S . T . et al . Mitogen - activated protein kinase feedback phosphorylation regulates MEK1 complex formation and activation during cellular adhesion . Mol . Cell Biol . 24 , 2308 – 2317 ( 2004 ) . 212 . Coles , L . C . & Shaw , P . E . PAK1 primes MEK1 for phosphorylation by Raf - 1 kinase during cross - cascade activation of the ERK pathway . Oncogene 21 , 2236 – 2244 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / sj . onc . 1205302 ( 2002 ) . 213 . King , A . J . et al . The protein kinase Pak3 positively regulates Raf - 1 activity through phosphorylation of serine 338 . Nature 396 , 180 – 183 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 24184 ( 1998 ) . 214 . Nayal , A . et al . Paxillin phosphorylation at Ser273 localizes a GIT1 - PIX - PAK complex and regulates adhesion and protrusion dynamics . J . Cell Biol . 173 , 587 – 589 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200509075 ( 2006 ) . 215 . Sundberg - Smith , L . J . , Doherty , J . T . , Mack , C . P . & Taylor , J . M . Adhesion stimulates direct PAK1 / ERK2 association and leads to ERK - dependent PAK1 Thr212 phosphorylation . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 2055 – 2064 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M406013200 ( 2005 ) . 216 . Kubiniok , P . , Lavoie , H . , Therrien , M . & Thibault , P . Time - resolved phosphoproteome analysis of paradoxical RAF activation reveals novel targets of ERK . Mol . Cell Proteom . 16 , 663 – 679 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / mcp . M116 . 065128 ( 2017 ) . 217 . Pullikuth , A . K . & Catling , A . D . Extracellular signal - regulated kinase promotes Rho - dependent focal adhesion formation by suppressing p190A RhoGAP . Mol . Cell Biol . 30 , 3233 – 3248 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MCB . 01178 - 09 ( 2010 ) . 218 . Shi , G . X . , Yang , W . S . , Jin , L . , Matter , M . L . & Ramos , J . W . RSK2 drives cell motility by serine phosphorylation of LARG and activation of Rho GTPases . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 115 , E190 – E199 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1708584115 ( 2018 ) . 219 . Fujishiro , S . H . et al . ERK1 / 2 phosphorylate GEF - H1 to enhance its guanine nucleotide exchange activity toward RhoA . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 368 , 162 – 167 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2008 . 01 . 066 ( 2008 ) . 220 . Olson , E . N . & Nordheim , A . Linking actin dynamics and gene transcription to drive cellular motile functions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 353 – 365 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm2890 ( 2010 ) . 221 . Mouilleron , S . , Guettler , S . , Langer , C . A . , Treisman , R . & McDonald , N . Q . Molecular basis for G - actin binding to RPEL motifs from the serum response factor coactivator MAL . EMBO J . 27 , 3198 – 3208 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2008 . 235 ( 2008 ) . 222 . Panayiotou , R . et al . Phosphorylation acts positively and negatively to regulate MRTF - A subcellular localisation and activity . eLife 5 , e15460 ( 2016 ) . 223 . Muehlich , S . et al . Serum - induced phosphorylation of the serum response factor coactivator MKL1 by the extracellular signal - regulated kinase 1 / 2 pathway inhibits its nuclear localization . Mol . Cell Biol . 28 , 6302 – 6313 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MCB . 00427 - 08 ( 2008 ) . 224 . Salvany , L . , Muller , J . , Guccione , E . & Rorth , P . The core and conserved role of MAL is homeostatic regulation of actin levels . Genes Dev . 28 , 1048 – 1053 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gad . 237743 . 114 ( 2014 ) . 225 . Esnault , C . et al . Rho - actin signaling to the MRTF coactivators dominates the immediate transcriptional response to serum in fibroblasts . Genes Dev . 28 , 943 – 958 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gad . 239327 . 114 ( 2014 ) . 226 . Patel , A . L . & Shvartsman , S . Y . Outstanding questions in developmental ERK signaling . Development 145 , dev143818 ( 2018 ) . 227 . Busca , R . , Pouyssegur , J . & Lenormand , P . ERK1 and ERK2 map kinases : specific roles or functional redundancy ? Front . Cell Dev . Biol . 4 , 53 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fcell . 2016 . 00053 ( 2016 ) . 228 . Saba - El - Leil , M . K . , Fremin , C . & Meloche , S . Redundancy in the world of MAP kinases : all for one . Front . Cell Dev . Biol . 4 , 67 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fcell . 2016 . 00067 ( 2016 ) . 229 . Martello , G . & Smith , A . The nature of embryonic stem cells . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 30 , 647 – 675 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - cellbio - 100913 - 013116 ( 2014 ) . 230 . Kunath , T . et al . FGF stimulation of the Erk1 / 2 signalling cascade triggers transition of pluripotent embryonic stem cells from self - renewal to lineage commitment . Development 134 , 2895 – 2902 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / dev . 02880 ( 2007 ) . 231 . Burdon , T . , Stracey , C . , Chambers , I . , Nichols , J . & Smith , A . Suppression of SHP - 2 and ERK signalling promotes self - renewal of mouse embryonic stem cells . Dev . Biol . 210 , 30 – 43 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1006 / dbio . 1999 . 9265 ( 1999 ) . 232 . Ying , Q . L . et al . The ground state of embryonic stem cell self - renewal . Nature 453 , 519 – 523 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature06968 ( 2008 ) . 233 . Chen , H . et al . Erk signaling is indispensable for genomic stability and self - renewal of mouse embryonic stem cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 112 , E5936 – E5943 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1516319112 ( 2015 ) . 234 . Mayor - Ruiz , C . et al . ERF deletion rescues RAS deficiency in mouse embryonic stem cells . Genes Dev . 32 , 568 – 576 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gad . 310086 . 117 ( 2018 ) . 235 . Ng , H . H . & Surani , M . A . The transcriptional and signalling networks of pluripotency . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 490 – 496 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb0511 - 490 ( 2011 ) . 236 . Hamilton , W . B . et al . Dynamic lineage priming is driven via direct enhancer regulation by ERK . Nature 575 , 355 – 360 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 019 - 1732 - z ( 2019 ) . 237 . Brumbaugh , J . et al . NANOG is multiply phosphorylated and directly modified by ERK2 and CDK1 in vitro . Stem Cell Rep . 2 , 18 – 25 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . stemcr . 2013 . 12 . 005 ( 2014 ) . 238 . Dhaliwal , N . K . , Miri , K . , Davidson , S . , Tamim El Jarkass , H . & Mitchell , J . A . KLF4 nuclear export requires ERK activation and initiates exit from naive pluripotency . Stem Cell Rep . 10 , 1308 – 1323 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . stemcr . 2018 . 02 . 007 ( 2018 ) . 239 . Kim , M . O . et al . ERK1 and ERK2 regulate embryonic stem cell self - renewal through phosphorylation of Klf4 . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 19 , 283 – 290 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nsmb . 2217 ( 2012 ) . 240 . Spelat , R . , Ferro , F . & Curcio , F . Serine 111 phosphorylation regulates OCT4A protein subcellular distribution and degradation . J . Biol . Chem . 287 , 38279 – 38288 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M112 . 386755 ( 2012 ) . 241 . Yeo , J . C . et al . Klf2 is an essential factor that sustains ground state pluripotency . Cell Stem Cell 14 , 864 – 872 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . stem . 2014 . 04 . 015 ( 2014 ) . 242 . Nett , I . R . , Mulas , C . , Gatto , L . , Lilley , K . S . & Smith , A . Negative feedback via RSK modulates Erk - dependent progression from naive pluripotency . EMBO Rep . 19 , e45642 ( 2018 ) . 243 . Chung , J . , Uchida , E . , Grammer , T . C . & Blenis , J . STAT3 serine phosphorylation by ERK - dependent and - independent pathways negatively modulates its tyrosine phosphorylation . Mol . Cell Biol . 17 , 6508 – 6516 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / mcb . 17 . 11 . 6508 ( 1997 ) . 244 . Sengupta , T . K . , Talbot , E . S . , Scherle , P . A . & Ivashkiv , L . B . Rapid inhibition of interleukin - 6 Nature reviews | Molecular cell Biology R e v i e w s signaling and Stat3 activation mediated by mitogen - activated protein kinases . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 11107 – 11112 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 95 . 19 . 11107 ( 1998 ) . 245 . Huang , G . , Yan , H . , Ye , S . , Tong , C . & Ying , Q . L . STAT3 phosphorylation at tyrosine 705 and serine 727 differentially regulates mouse ESC fates . Stem Cell 32 , 1149 – 1160 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / stem . 1609 ( 2014 ) . 246 . Kretzschmar , M . , Doody , J . & Massague , J . Opposing BMP and EGF signalling pathways converge on the TGF - beta family mediator Smad1 . Nature 389 , 618 – 622 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 39348 ( 1997 ) . 247 . Sapkota , G . et al . Signaling through integrated inputs into the Smad1 linker . Mol . Cell 25 , 441 – 454 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2007 . 01 . 006 ( 2007 ) . 248 . Fuentealba , L . C . et al . Integrating patterning signals : Wnt / GSK3 regulates the duration of the BMP / Smad1 signal . Cell 131 , 980 – 993 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2007 . 09 . 027 ( 2007 ) . 249 . Li , Z . et al . BMP4 signaling acts via dual - specificity phosphatase 9 to control ERK activity in mouse embryonic stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 10 , 171 – 182 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . stem . 2011 . 12 . 016 ( 2012 ) . 250 . Qi , X . et al . BMP4 supports self - renewal of embryonic stem cells by inhibiting mitogen - activated protein kinase pathways . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 6027 – 6032 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0401367101 ( 2004 ) . 251 . Rauen , K . A . The RASopathies . Annu . Rev . Genomics Hum . Genet . 14 , 355 – 369 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - genom - 091212 - 153523 ( 2013 ) . 252 . Nowaczyk , M . J . et al . Deletion of MAP2K2 / MEK2 : a novel mechanism for a RASopathy ? Clin . Genet . 85 , 138 – 146 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / cge . 12116 ( 2014 ) . 253 . Dinsmore , C . J . & Soriano , P . MAPK and PI3K signaling : at the crossroads of neural crest development . Dev . Biol . 444 , S79 – S97 ( 2018 ) . 254 . Nakamura , T . , Gulick , J . , Pratt , R . & Robbins , J . Noonan syndrome is associated with enhanced pERK activity , the repression of which can prevent craniofacial malformations . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 15436 – 15441 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0903302106 ( 2009 ) . 255 . Newbern , J . et al . Mouse and human phenotypes indicate a critical conserved role for ERK2 signaling in neural crest development . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 17115 – 17120 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0805239105 ( 2008 ) . 256 . Nakamura , T . , Gulick , J . , Colbert , M . C . & Robbins , J . Protein tyrosine phosphatase activity in the neural crest is essential for normal heart and skull development . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 11270 – 11275 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0902230106 ( 2009 ) . 257 . Vasudevan , H . N . & Soriano , P . SRF regulates craniofacial development through selective recruitment of MRTF cofactors by PDGF signaling . Dev . Cell 31 , 332 – 344 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 10 . 005 ( 2014 ) . 258 . Minoux , M . & Rijli , F . M . Molecular mechanisms of cranial neural crest cell migration and patterning in craniofacial development . Development 137 , 2605 – 2621 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / dev . 040048 ( 2010 ) . 259 . Shukla , V . , Coumoul , X . , Wang , R . H . , Kim , H . S . & Deng , C . X . RNA interference and inhibition of MEK - ERK signaling prevent abnormal skeletal phenotypes in a mouse model of craniosynostosis . Nat . Genet . 39 , 1145 – 1150 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ng2096 ( 2007 ) . 260 . Ueda , K . , Yaoita , M . , Niihori , T . , Aoki , Y . & Okamoto , N . Craniosynostosis in patients with RASopathies : accumulating clinical evidence for expanding the phenotype . Am . J . Med . Genet . A 173 , 2346 – 2352 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / ajmg . a . 38337 ( 2017 ) . 261 . Twigg , S . R . et al . Reduced dosage of ERF causes complex craniosynostosis in humans and mice and links ERK1 / 2 signaling to regulation of osteogenesis . Nat . Genet . 45 , 308 – 313 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ng . 2539 ( 2013 ) . 262 . Lee , B . et al . Missense mutations abolishing DNA binding of the osteoblast - specific transcription factor OSF2 / CBFA1 in cleidocranial dysplasia . Nat . Genet . 16 , 307 – 310 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ng0797 - 307 ( 1997 ) . 263 . Xiao , G . et al . MAPK pathways activate and phosphorylate the osteoblast - specific transcription factor , Cbfa1 . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 4453 – 4459 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . 275 . 6 . 4453 ( 2000 ) . 264 . Ge , C . et al . Identification and functional characterization of ERK / MAPK phosphorylation sites in the Runx2 transcription factor . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 32533 – 32543 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M109 . 040980 ( 2009 ) . 265 . Pandit , B . et al . Gain - of - function RAF1 mutations cause Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy . Nat . Genet . 39 , 1007 – 1012 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ng2073 ( 2007 ) . 266 . Pierpont , M . E . et al . Cardio - facio - cutaneous syndrome : clinical features , diagnosis , and management guidelines . Pediatrics 134 , e1149 – e1162 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1542 / peds . 2013 - 3189 ( 2014 ) . 267 . Yin , J . C . et al . Cellular interplay via cytokine hierarchy causes pathological cardiac hypertrophy in RAF1 - mutant Noonan syndrome . Nat . Commun . 8 , 15518 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms15518 ( 2017 ) . 268 . Lauriol , J . et al . Developmental SHP2 dysfunction underlies cardiac hypertrophy in Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines . J . Clin . Invest . 126 , 2989 – 3005 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1172 / JCI80396 ( 2016 ) . 269 . Carvajal - Vergara , X . et al . Patient - specific induced pluripotent stem - cell - derived models of LEOPARD syndrome . Nature 465 , 808 – 812 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature09005 ( 2010 ) . 270 . Ruppert , C . et al . Interference with ERK ( Thr188 ) phosphorylation impairs pathological but not physiological cardiac hypertrophy . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 7440 – 7445 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1221999110 ( 2013 ) . 271 . Bouveret , R . et al . NKX2 - 5 mutations causative for congenital heart disease retain functionality and are directed to hundreds of targets . eLife 4 , e06942 ( 2015 ) . 272 . Dorn , T . et al . Interplay of cell - cell contacts and RhoA / MRTF - A signaling regulates cardiomyocyte identity . EMBO J . 37 , e98133 ( 2018 ) . 273 . Liang , Q . et al . The transcription factor GATA4 is activated by extracellular signal - regulated kinase 1 - and 2 - mediated phosphorylation of serine 105 in cardiomyocytes . Mol . Cell Biol . 21 , 7460 – 7469 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MCB . 21 . 21 . 7460 - 7469 . 2001 ( 2001 ) . 274 . van Berlo , J . H . , Elrod , J . W . , Aronow , B . J . , Pu , W . T . & Molkentin , J . D . Serine 105 phosphorylation of transcription factor GATA4 is necessary for stress - induced cardiac hypertrophy in vivo . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 12331 – 12336 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1104499108 ( 2011 ) . 275 . Atkins , C . M . , Selcher , J . C . , Petraitis , J . J . , Trzaskos , J . M . & Sweatt , J . D . The MAPK cascade is required for mammalian associative learning . Nat . Neurosci . 1 , 602 – 609 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 2836 ( 1998 ) . 276 . Brambilla , R . et al . A role for the Ras signalling pathway in synaptic transmission and long - term memory . Nature 390 , 281 – 286 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 36849 ( 1997 ) . 277 . Cui , Y . et al . Neurofibromin regulation of ERK signaling modulates GABA release and learning . Cell 135 , 549 – 560 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2008 . 09 . 060 ( 2008 ) . 278 . Wang , Y . et al . ERK inhibition rescues defects in fate specification of Nf1 - deficient neural progenitors and brain abnormalities . Cell 150 , 816 – 830 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 06 . 034 ( 2012 ) . 279 . Hashimoto , S . et al . MED23 mutation links intellectual disability to dysregulation of immediate early gene expression . Science 333 , 1161 – 1163 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1206638 ( 2011 ) . 280 . Bozon , B . , Davis , S . & Laroche , S . A requirement for the immediate early gene zif268 in reconsolidation of recognition memory after retrieval . Neuron 40 , 695 – 701 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / s0896 - 6273 ( 03 ) 00674 - 3 ( 2003 ) . 281 . Jones , M . W . et al . A requirement for the immediate early gene Zif268 in the expression of late LTP and long - term memories . Nat . Neurosci . 4 , 289 – 296 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 85138 ( 2001 ) . 282 . Lu , H . C . et al . Disruption of the ATXN1 - CIC complex causes a spectrum of neurobehavioral phenotypes in mice and humans . Nat . Genet . 49 , 527 – 536 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ng . 3808 ( 2017 ) . 283 . Tan , Q . et al . Loss of capicua alters early T cell development and predisposes mice to T cell lymphoblastic leukemia / lymphoma . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 115 , E1511 – E1519 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1716452115 ( 2018 ) . 284 . Napoli , I . et al . The fragile X syndrome protein represses activity - dependent translation through CYFIP1 , a new 4E - BP . Cell 134 , 1042 – 1054 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2008 . 07 . 031 ( 2008 ) . 285 . Panja , D . et al . Two - stage translational control of dentate gyrus LTP consolidation is mediated by sustained BDNF - TrkB signaling to MNK . Cell Rep . 9 , 1430 – 1445 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2014 . 10 . 016 ( 2014 ) . 286 . Darnell , J . C . et al . FMRP stalls ribosomal translocation on mRNAs linked to synaptic function and autism . Cell 146 , 247 – 261 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 06 . 013 ( 2011 ) . 287 . Zalfa , F . et al . The fragile X syndrome protein FMRP associates with BC1 RNA and regulates the translation of specific mRNAs at synapses . Cell 112 , 317 – 327 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / s0092 - 8674 ( 03 ) 00079 - 5 ( 2003 ) . 288 . McCormick , J . W . , Pincus , D . , Resnekov , O . & Reynolds , K . A . Strategies for engineering and rewiring kinase regulation . Trends Biochem . Sci . 45 , 259 – 271 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tibs . 2019 . 11 . 005 ( 2020 ) . 289 . Muhlhauser , W . W . , Fischer , A . , Weber , W . & Radziwill , G . Optogenetics - bringing light into the darkness of mammalian signal transduction . Biochim . Biophys . Acta Mol . Cell Res . 1864 , 280 – 292 ( 2017 ) . 290 . Pargett , M . , Gillies , T . E . , Teragawa , C . K . , Sparta , B . & Albeck , J . G . Single - cell imaging of ERK signaling using fluorescent biosensors . Methods Mol . Biol . 1636 , 35 – 59 ( 2017 ) . 291 . Lake , D . , Correa , S . A . & Muller , J . Negative feedback regulation of the ERK1 / 2 MAPK pathway . Cell Mol . Life Sci . 73 , 4397 – 4413 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00018 - 016 - 2297 - 8 ( 2016 ) . Acknowledgements The authors thank C . Baril and D . Kachaner for critical read - ing of the manuscript . J . G . was supported by a scholarship from the Fonds de Recherche du Québec – Santé . M . T holds an Impact Grant from the Canadian Cancer Society ( 706165 ) , a Foundation Grant from the Canadian Institutes for Health Research ( FDN388023 ) and a Canada Research Chair in Intracellular Signalling . Author contributions The authors contributed equally to all aspects of the article . Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . Peer review information Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology thanks Piero Crespo , Benjamin Turk and the other , anonymous , reviewer ( s ) for their contribution to the peer review of this work . Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . Supplementary information Supplementary information is available for this paper at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41580 - 020 - 0255 - 7 . © Springer Nature Limited 2020 www . nature . com / nrm R e v i e w s