Cytoscape : A Software Environment for Integrated Models of Biomolecular Interaction Networks Paul Shannon , 1 Andrew Markiel , 1 Owen Ozier , 2 Nitin S . Baliga , 1 Jonathan T . Wang , 2 Daniel Ramage , 2 Nada Amin , 2 Benno Schwikowski , 1 , 5 and Trey Ideker 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 1 Institute for Systems Biology , Seattle , Washington 98103 , USA ; 2 Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research , Cambridge , Massachusetts 02142 , USA ; 3 Department of Bioengineering , University of California – San Diego , La Jolla , California 92093 , USA Cytoscape is an open source software project for integrating biomolecular interaction networks with high - throughput expression data and other molecular states into a unified conceptual framework . Although applicable to any system of molecular components and interactions , Cytoscape is most powerful when used in conjunction with large databases of protein – protein , protein – DNA , and genetic interactions that are increasingly available for humans and model organisms . Cytoscape’s software Core provides basic functionality to layout and query the network ; to visually integrate the network with expression profiles , phenotypes , and other molecular states ; and to link the network to databases of functional annotations . The Core is extensible through a straightforward plug - in architecture , allowing rapid development of additional computational analyses and features . Several case studies of Cytoscape plug - ins are surveyed , including a search for interaction pathways correlating with changes in gene expression , a study of protein complexes involved in cellular recovery to DNA damage , inference of a combined physical / functional interaction network for Halobacterium , and an interface to detailed stochastic / kinetic gene regulatory models . [ The Cytoscape v1 . 1 Core runs on all major operating systems and is freely available for download from http : / / www . cytoscape . org / as an open source Java application . ] Computer - aided models of biological networks are a cornerstone of systems biology . A variety of modeling environments have been developed to simulate biochemical reactions and gene tran - scription kinetics ( Endy and Brent 2001 ) , cellular physiology ( Loew and Schaff 2001 ) , and metabolic control ( Mendes 1997 ) . Such models promise to transform biological research by provid - ing a framework to ( 1 ) systematically interrogate and experimen - tally verify knowledge of a pathway ; ( 2 ) manage the immense complexity of hundreds or potentially thousands of cellular com - ponents and interactions ; and ( 3 ) reveal emergent properties and unanticipated consequences of different pathway configurations . Typically , models are directed toward a cellular process or disease pathway of interest ( Gilman and Arkin 2002 ) and are built by formulating existing literature as a system of differential and / or stochastic equations . However , pathway - specific models are now being supplemented with global data gathered for an entire cell or organism , by use of two complementary ap - proaches . First , recent technological developments have made it feasible to measure pathway structure systematically , using high - throughput screens for protein – protein ( Ito et al . 2001 ; von Me - ring et al . 2002 ) , protein – DNA ( Lee et al . 2002 ) , and genetic in - teractions ( Tong et al . 2001 ) . To complement these data , a second set of high - throughput methods are available to characterize the molecular and cellular states induced by pathway interactions under different experimental conditions . For instance , global changes in gene expression are measured with DNA microarrays ( DeRisi et al . 1997 ) , whereas changes in protein abundance ( Gygi et al . 1999 ) , protein phosphorylation state ( Zhou et al . 2001 ) , and metabolite concentrations ( Griffin et al . 2001 ) may be quantified with mass spectrometry , NMR , and other advanced techniques . High - throughput data pertaining to molecular interactions and states are well matched , in that both data types are global ( pro - viding information for all components or interactions in an or - ganism ) ; high - level ( outlining relationships among pathway components without detailed information on reaction rates , binding constants , or diffusion coefficients ) ; and coarse - grained ( yielding qualitative data , such as the presence or absence of an interaction or the direction of an expression change , more readily than precise quantitative readouts ) . Motivated by the explosion in experimental technologies for characterizing molecular interactions and states , researchers have turned to a variety of software tools to process and analyze the resulting large - scale data . For molecular interactions , general - purpose graph viewers such as Pajek ( Batagelj and Mrvar 1998 ) , Graphlet ( www . infosun . fmi . uni - passau . de / Graphlet / ) , and da - Vinci ( www . informatik . uni - bremen . de / daVinci / ) are available to organize and display the data as a two - dimensional network ; spe - cialized tools such as Osprey ( http : / / biodata . mshri . on . ca ) and PIMrider ( pim . hybrigenics . com ) provide these capabilities and also link the network to molecular interaction and functional databases such as BIND ( Bader et al . 2001 ) , DIP ( Xenarios and Eisenberg 2001 ) , or TRANSFAC ( Wingender et al . 2001 ) . Simi - larly , for gene expression profiles and other molecular states , nu - merous programs such as GeneCluster ( Tamayo et al . 1999 ) , Tree - View ( Eisen et al . 1998 ) , and GeneSpring ( www . silicongenetics . com ) are available for clustering , classification , and visualization . However , a pressing need remains for software that is able to integrate both molecular interactions and state measurements together in a common framework , and to then bridge these data with a wide assortment of model parameters and other biological attributes . Moreover , a flexible and open system will be required to facilitate general and extensible computations on the interac - tion network ( Karp 2001 ) . It is through these compu - 4 Present address : University of California , San Diego , Department of Bioengineering , La Jolla , California 92093 , USA . 5 Corresponding authors . E - MAIL trey @ bioeng . ucsd . edu ; FAX ( 858 ) 534 - 5722 . E - MAIL benno @ systemsbiology . org ; FAX ( 206 ) 732 - 1299 Article and publication are at http : / / www . genome . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1101 / gr . 1239303 . Resource 2498 Genome Research 13 : 2498 – 2504 ©2003 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ISSN 1088 - 9051 / 03 $ 5 . 00 ; www . genome . org www . genome . org tations that high - level interaction data may ultimately interface with , and drive development of , low - level physico - chemical models . To address these needs , we have developed Cytoscape , a general - purpose modeling environment for integrating biomo - lecular interaction networks and states . We first provide an over - view of Cytoscape’s core functionality for representation and in - tegration of biomolecular network models . We then describe three case studies of existing research projects in which the Cy - toscape platform is applied to concrete biological problems or extended to implement new algorithms and network computa - tions . METHODS AND RESULTS Cytoscape Core Functionality and Architecture The central organizing metaphor of Cytoscape is a network graph , with molecular species represented as nodes and intermo - lecular interactions represented as links , that is , edges , between nodes . Cytoscape’s Core software component provides basic functionality for integrating arbitrary data on the graph , a visual representation of the graph and integrated data , selection and filtering tools , and an interface to external methods imple - mented as plug - ins . Figure 1 illustrates key features through screenshots , whereas Figure 2 provides a schematic of their in - terrelationships . Data Integration Data are integrated with the graph model using Attributes . These are ( name , value ) pairs that map node or edge names to specific data values . For example , the node named “GAL4” may have an attribute named “expression ratio” whose value is 3 . 41 . Attribute values may assume any type ( e . g . , text strings , discrete or con - tinuous numbers , URLs , or lists ) and are either loaded from a data repository or generated dynamically within a session . Graphical browsers allow the user to examine all attributes on the currently selected nodes and edges ( Fig . 1c ) . Transfer of Annotations Whereas an attribute is a single predicate of a node or edge , an Annotation represents a hierarchical classification ( i . e . , an ontol - Figure 1 Tour of Cytoscape core functionality . ( a ) Available network layout algorithms are accessed via the menu system ; an example hierarchical layout is shown . ( b ) The data attribute - to - visual mapping control is used to integrate a variety of heterogenous data types on the network . Here , gene expression data are mapped to node color for the condition named “gal80R , ” in which color is interpolated between green ( negative values ) and red ( positive values ) through gray as the midpoint . Node colors in a are derived using this mapping . ( c ) Attributes are displayed for selected nodes and edges in a browser window . As shown , multiple attributes and genes may be displayed in a custom tabular format . ( d ) Annotations are transferred to node and edge attributes by choosing the desired ontology and hierarchical level from a list of those available . Integrating Molecular Networks With Cytoscape Genome Research 2499 www . genome . org ogy , formally , a directed acyclic graph ) of progressively more specific descriptions of groups of nodes or edges . Annotations typically correspond to an existing repository of knowledge that is large , complex , and relatively static , such as the Gene Ontol - ogy database ( GO Consortium 2001 ) . For example , the term “hexose metabolism , ” defined at level 6 of the GO Biological Process Ontology , spans several more specific processes at level 7 , such as galactose metabolism and glucose metabolism . Cytos - cape integrates annotations with other network data types by transferring the desired levels of annotation onto node or edge attributes . Using the Annotation controller ( Fig . 1d ) , it is possible to have many levels of annotation all active and on display at the same time , each as a different attribute on the nodes or edges of interest . Graph Layout One of the most fundamental tools for interpreting molecular interaction data is visualization of nodes and edges as a two - dimensional network ( Tollis et al . 1999 ) . Cytoscape supports a variety of automated network layout algorithms , including spring - embedded layout , hierarchical layout , and circular layout . Among these , the spring embedder is the most widely used method for arranging general two - dimensional graphs ( Eades 1984 ) . It models a mechanical system in which edges of the graph corre - spond to springs , creating an attractive force between nodes that are far apart , and a repulsive force between nodes that are close together . Network layout for Figure 1a was performed using a hierarchical layout algorithm , and for Figures 3 and 4 using a spring embedder . Attribute - to - Visual Mapping Whereas layout determines the location of the nodes and edges in the window , an attribute - to - visual mapping allows data at - tributes to control the appearance of their associated nodes and edges . Cytoscape supports a wide variety of visual properties , such as node color , shape , and size ; node border color and thick - ness ; and edge color , thickness , and style ; a data attribute is mapped to a visual property using either a lookup table or inter - polation , depending on whether the attribute is discrete valued or continuous . Figure 1b shows an example in which expression ratio attributes are mapped to node colors . By visually superim - posing molecular states on the interaction pathways hypoth - esized to regulate those states , attribute - to - visual mappings di - rectly connect observed data to an underlying model . Graph Selection and Filtering To reduce the complexity of a large molecular interaction net - work , it is necessary to selectively display subsets of nodes and Figure 2 Schematic overview of the Cytoscape Core architecture . The Cytoscape window is the primary visual and programmatic interface to Cytoscape and contains the network graph and attribute data structures . Core methods that operate on these structures are graph editing , graph layout , attribute - to - visual mapping , and graph filtering . Annotations are available through a separate server . Figure 3 Screening DNA - damage phenotypes against a scaffold of molecular interactions . A large molecular interaction network was integrated with 1615 yeast deletion phenotypes gathered systematically in response to MMS exposure . ( a ) Cytoscape’s filter toolbox was first used to show only those proteins required for viable growth in MMS ( i . e . , MMS - essential proteins ) and their immediate network neighbors . ( b ) The filtered network was then searched using the ActiveModules plug - in to identify interaction complexes containing significant numbers of MMS - essential proteins . One such region is shown , along with its corresponding p - value . Dark gray nodes represent MMS - essential proteins . Shannon et al . 2500 Genome Research www . genome . org edges . Nodes and edges may be selected according to a wide variety of criteria , including selection by name , by a list of names , or on the basis of an attribute . More complex network selection queries are supported by a filtering toolbox that includes a Mini - mum Neighbors filter , which selects nodes having a minimum number of neighbors within a specified distance in the network ; a Local Distance filter , which selects nodes within a specified distance of a group of preselected nodes ; a Differential Expression filter , which selects nodes according to their associated expres - sion data ; and a Combination filter , which selects nodes by ar - bitrary and / or combinations of other filters . The Cytoscape Core is written in Java and has been released under an LGPL Open Source license ; graph structures and some layout algorithms ( hierarchical and circular ) are implemented using the yFiles Graph Library ( www . yworks . de ) . Customizing Cytoscape Through Plug - ins Plug - in modules provide a powerful means of extending the Core to implement new algorithms , additional network analyses , and / or biological semantics . 6 Plug - ins are given access to the Core network model and can also control the network display . Al - though the Cytoscape Core is Open Source , plug - ins are sepa - rable software that may be protected under any license the plug - in authors desire . To illustrate the power of this architecture to address differ - ent biological problems within the Cytoscape environment , we explore three case studies of existing plug - ins : a plug - in that ex - amines the overlap between node attribute values and the struc - ture of molecular interaction network to identify significant in - teraction pathways ( Fig . 3 , explored in Case Study 1 ) ; a plug - in that organizes the network layout according to putative func - tional attributes of genes ( Fig . 4 , explored in Case Study 2 ) ; and a plug - in that uses the Systems Biology Markup Language ( Hucka et al . 2002 ) to enable lower - level stochastic simulation of net - work models ( Fig . 5 , also explored in greater detail at http : / / www . cytoscape . org / plugins / SBW / ) . The first plug - in has been in - strumental in two previously published research projects ( Begley et al . 2002 ; Ideker et al . 2002 ) , whereas the second and third plug - ins are at earlier stages of research and development . Case Study 1 : Using the ActiveModules Plug - in to Map Cellular Pathways Responding to Genetic Perturbations and Environmental Stimuli Active modules are connected subnetworks within the molecular interaction network whose genes show significant coordinated changes in mRNA - expression ( or other ) state over particular ex - perimental conditions . Determining active modules reduces net - work complexity by pinpointing just those regions whose states are perturbed by the conditions of interest , while removing false – positive interactions and interactions not involved in the pertur - bation response . The remaining subnetworks represent concrete hypotheses as to the underlying signaling and regulatory mecha - nisms in the cell . This approach has been implemented as the ActiveModules plug - in to Cytoscape ( implemented in C + + and 6 Biological semantics vary widely within the biological community as well as from project to project . If biological semantics were in the Cytoscape Core , we would be faced with a difficult question ; which semantics should we use ? Cytoscape avoids this problem by leaving it to plug - in writers to adopt seman - tics adequate to the problem at hand . Of course , there is often substantial biological significance associated with data in the Core . For example , the core may represent a node ( an abstract concept free of biological semantics ) whose label is GCN4 ( a text string with significance to yeast biologists as an important transcription factor ) or we might use the Core to define node attributes en - titled “expression ratio” or “cellular compartment . ” In this way , great freedom and flexibility—the ability to accommodate new biological problems—is gained by not inscribing the notion of specific biological entities directly into the semantics of Cytoscape’s Core . Figure 4 Function - guided layout of the Halobacterium inferred protein network facilitates simultaneous exploration of large discrete databases . ( a ) The largest connected component of the Halobacterium network is shown ; red , green , and blue edges indicate phylogenetic interactions , protein – protein interactions inferred from yeast , and domain - fusion events , respectively ( see text ) . Node colors indicate mRNA expression changes in a phototrophy deficient strain relative to the parent , in which red is induced and green is repressed . ( b ) Attribute - based layout was used to organize the network according to major functional classes . The cluster predominantly involved with amino - acid metabolism is selected for fur - ther exploration ( shaded nodes ) , with edges hidden for clarity . ( c ) A highly connected subnetwork within the amino - acid metabolism cluster reveals the effect of suppression of phototrophy on amino - acid metabo - lism and highlights interactions with nucleotide metabolism and other pathways . Integrating Molecular Networks With Cytoscape Genome Research 2501 www . genome . org linked to Java through a JNI bridge ) and is available at www . cytoscape . org . The approach is described in full in Ideker et al . ( 2002 ) , where it is applied to identify network modules associated with gene expression changes in galactose - induced yeast cul - tures . The ActiveModules plug - in has also been used to screen for pathways and protein complexes important for cellular re - covery to DNA damage—see Figure 3 and Begley et al . ( 2002 ) for more details . Both applications demonstrate how Cyto - scape’s integrated modeling environment may be used to map transcriptional and signaling pathways in a systematic , top - down fashion . Case Study 2 : Using an Attribute - Based Layout Algorithm to Construct and Analyze a Combined Functional / Physical Network for Halobacterium Halobacterium NRC - 1 is an extremely halophilic archaeon with a fully sequenced genome . The hallmark of Halobacterium is its ability to effectively switch from aerobic to anaerobic growth . During the anaerobic period , it derives energy from two major sources , phototrophy—that is , energy from light ( Oesterhelt and Stoeckenius 1973 ) , and fermentation of arginine ( Ruepp and Soppa 1996 ) . To better define the systems - level relationships between these important energy transduction pathways , Cytoscape was used to construct a global Halobacterium protein interaction net - work integrated with functional attributes and expression pro - files ( Fig . 4a ; Baliga et al . 2002 ) . Interactions in this network were inferred from three sources : 1 . Domain - fusion interactions . A domain - fusion interaction ( En - right et al . 1999 ) was inferred from the observation that the orthologs of two separate proteins in Halobacterium were co - valently fused as domains within a single protein in the ge - nome of another species . Domain - fusion data spanning 44 genomes were obtained from the Predictome Web site ( http : / / predictome . bu . edu ) , resulting in 1460 interactions of this type among 526 halobacterial proteins . 2 . Phylogenetic interactions . Proteins with the same pattern of presence / absence in the genomes of many sequenced organ - isms often have similar functions ( Pellegrini et al . 1999 ) ; this phylogenetic interaction implies functional association but not necessarily physical interaction . Phylogenetic interaction data were also obtained from the Predictome Web site , con - necting a total of 276 proteins with 486 interactions of this type . 3 . Inferred protein – protein interactions . The yeast two - hybrid protein – protein inter - action network was mapped onto halo - bacterial orthologs of yeast proteins as defined by the COG database ( Tatusov et al . 2001 ) to infer 2169 putative protein – protein interactions among 406 Halobac - terium proteins . In total , 929 of the 2413 proteins en - coded in the Halobacterium genome could be connected with 5022 interactions of these three types . This global network was then annotated with two sets of node at - tributes , representing functional classifica - tions and gene expression ratios . Functional classification attributes were taken from the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes ( KEGG ) database ( Kanehisa et al . 2002 ) , whereas mRNA expression ratios were drawn from data measured in response to knockout of the bat gene , a transcriptional regulator of phototrophy ( Baliga et al . 2002 ) . To better understand the relationship between network interactions and protein functions , we used an attribute - based lay - out algorithm to visually organize proteins in the network into tightly connected clus - ters on the basis of their functional at - tributes ( Fig . 4b ) . This algorithm , originally implemented as a plug - in 7 , invokes the ba - sic spring - embedder algorithm ( see Cytos - cape Core Functionality and Architecture ) , but uses additional attractive forces be - tween nodes having the same value of a se - lected attribute . The overall effect is to par - tition the graph into high - level regions on the basis of attribute value , then to group nodes in each region on the basis of edge connectivity . For example , the nodes la - Figure 5 Cytoscape and the Systems Biology Workbench stochastically simulating gene regula - tion . In collaboration with the ERATO Systems Biology Workbench ( SBW ) project ( Hucka et al . 2002 ) , we developed a plug - in that allows Cytoscape to read and simulate SBML - encoded bio - chemical models . A Cytoscape network view of the SBML model is shown ( left ) , accompanied by a user interface to the simulator ( top , right ) and an x - y plot of stochastic simulation results ( bottom , right ) . In the x - y plot , the top curve shows the concentration of the N protein , which regulates genes expressed early in (cid:1) phage life cycle . Details are available at http : / / www . cytoscape . org / plugins / SBW / . Shannon et al . 2502 Genome Research www . genome . org beled gatA and gatB2 ( Fig . 4c ) are associated with the attribute “Translation , ” and thus appear together as a module in the same region of the network . Because attributes can represent a wide variety of biological data , attribute - based layout also makes it possible to visually organize the network according to subcellular localization , gene expression ratio , or any other desired biologi - cal attribute . By superimposing expression ratios on the network , it becomes clear that the proteins associated with Amino Acid Metabolism not only have the largest number of network inter - connections , but are also the most differentially expressed in a bat knockout . Case Study 3 : Stochastic Simulation of (cid:1) Phage Life Cycle Using the Systems Biology Workbench In collaboration with members of the ERATO Systems Biology Workbench ( SBW ) project , we implemented a plug - in that allows Cytoscape users to read biochemical models encoded in the Sys - tems Biology Markup Language ( Hucka et al . 2002 ) and to run simulations through SBW . This makes low - level biochemical models and simulators accessible through Cytoscape . Figure 5 shows a model of gene regulation of (cid:1) phage ( Gibson and Bruck 2001 ) displayed in Cytoscape , with controls and results plotted from the Gibson simulator . Details of the simulation are available at http : / / www . cytoscape . org / plugins / SBW / . DISCUSSION Cytoscape is a general - purpose , open - source software environ - ment for the large scale integration of molecular interaction net - work data . Dynamic states on molecules and molecular interac - tions are handled as attributes on nodes and edges , whereas static hierarchical data , such as protein - functional ontologies , are sup - ported by use of annotations . The Cytoscape Core handles basic features such as network layout and mapping of data attributes to visual display properties . Cytoscape plug - ins extend this core functionality and may be released under separate license agree - ments if desired . We have described several projects that Cyto - scape has supported to - date : ● Use of the ActiveModules plug - in to identify pathways and protein complexes activated by galactose gene knockouts and by DNA damage ● Inference and attribute - based layout of a combined physical / functional interaction network for Halobacterium ● Access to stochastic / kinetic simulation tools through SBML An immediate future priority is to establish direct connec - tions between Cytoscape and interaction databases such as DIP ( Xenarios and Eisenberg 2001 ) , expression databases such as GEO ( www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / geo ) , and annotation ontologies such as GO ( GO Consortium 2001 ) . Currently , these data must be exter - nally parsed into annotations or attributes . One solution to this problem is data federation , in which a relational database man - agement system serves as middleware providing transparent ac - cess to a number of heterogenous data sources . A second , longer - term direction is to further explore mecha - nisms for bridging high - level interaction networks with lower - level , physico - chemical models of specific biological processes . Whereas Cytoscape focuses on high - level representation of com - ponents and interactions , low - level models are addressed by on - going software development projects such as Ecell ( Tomita et al . 1999 ) , VirtualCell ( Loew and Schaff 2001 ) , Gepasi ( Mendes 1997 ) , and the Systems Biology Workbench ( Hucka et al . 2002 ) . We have illustrated one strategy for transitioning from high - to low - level models , in which a large molecular interaction network is screened to identify subnetworks of interest using either gene expression or genomic phenotyping ( Case Study 1 ) . These top - down pathway mapping approaches greatly reduce the size and scope of the modeling problem to a single subnetwork , providing an entry point for lower - level modeling efforts . Subnetworks of interest may then be developed into lower - level models , as shown in Figure 5 for the Systems Biology Workbench . Perhaps most importantly , Cytoscape’s future directions will ultimately depend on the needs and efforts of an active re - search community . Whereas Cytoscape will continue to be sup - ported and developed by our own research groups , it will also be driven by an active community of users and developers who contribute functionality and expertise through plug - ins , core im - provements , and parallel versions . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS While this work was in review , the Cytoscape core development team expanded to include the laboratory of Dr . Chris Sander at the Memorial Sloan - Kettering Cancer Research Center . We are particularly indebted to Gary Bader and Ethan Cerami in that lab for their recent efforts . Many thanks also go to Iliana Avila - Campillo , Andrew Finney , Mike Hucka , and Vesteinn Thorsson . T . I . is the David Baltimore Whitehead Fellow and was funded through a grant from Pfizer ; A . M . , P . S . , and B . S . were funded through NIH Grant P20 GM64361 ; N . B . was funded through NSF Grant 0220153 . Lastly , we gratefully acknowledge the MIT UROP office for support of J . W . , N . A . , and D . R . The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by payment of page charges . This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 USC section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . REFERENCES Bader , G . D . , Donaldson , I . , Wolting , C . , Ouellette , B . F . , Pawson , T . , and Hogue , C . W . 2001 . BIND—The biomolecular interaction network database . Nucleic Acids Res . 29 : 242 – 245 . Baliga , N . S . , Pan , M . , Goo , Y . A . , Yi , E . C . , Goodlett , D . R . , Dimitrov , K . , Shannon , P . , Aebersold , R . , Ng , W . V . , and Hood , L . 2002 . Coordinate regulation of energy transduction modules in Halobacterium sp . analyzed by a global systems approach . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 99 : 14913 – 14918 . Batagelj , V . and Mrvar , A . 1998 . Pajek—Program for large network analysis . Connections 21 : 47 – 57 . Begley , T . J . , Rosenbach , A . S . , Ideker , T . , and Samson , L . D . 2002 . Damage recovery pathways in Saccharomyces cerevisiae revealed by genomic phenotyping and interactome mapping . Mol . Cancer Res . 1 : 103 – 112 . DeRisi , J . L . , Iyer , V . R . , and Brown , P . O . 1997 . Exploring the metabolic and genetic control of gene expression on a genomic scale . Science 278 : 680 – 686 . Eades , P . 1984 . A heuristic for graph drawing . Congressus Numerantium 42 : 142 – 160 . Eisen , M . B . , Spellman , P . T . , Brown , P . O . , and Botstein , D . 1998 . Cluster analysis and display of genome - wide expression patterns . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 95 : 14863 – 14868 . Endy , D . and Brent , R . 2001 . Modelling cellular behaviour . Nature 409 : 391 – 395 . Enright , A . J . , Iliopoulos , I . , Kyrpides , N . C . , and Ouzounis , C . A . 1999 . Protein interaction maps for complete genomes based on gene fusion events . Nature 402 : 86 – 90 . Gibson , M . A . and Bruck , J . 2001 . A probabilistic model of a prokaryotic gene and its regulation in computational modeling of genetic and biochemical networks ( eds . J . M . Bouer and H . Boluri ) . MIT Press , Cambridge . Gilman , A . and Arkin , A . P . 2002 . GENETIC “CODE” : Representations and dynamical models of genetic components and networks . Annu . Rev . Genomics Hum . Genet . 3 : 341 – 369 . GO Consortium . 2001 . Creating the gene ontology resource : Design and implementation . Genome Res . 11 : 1425 – 1433 . Griffin , J . L . , Mann , C . J . , Scott , J . , Shoulders , C . C . , and Nicholson , J . K . 7 Although attribute - based layout was initially implemented as a plug - in , its general applicability and tight integration with several of Cytoscape’s core features ( graph layout and node attribute mapping ) ultimately led us to in - corporate it into the Cytoscape Core platform . Thus , plug - ins also provide a general means of introducing and testing new features . Integrating Molecular Networks With Cytoscape Genome Research 2503 www . genome . org 2001 . Choline containing metabolites during cell transfection : An insight into magnetic resonance spectroscopy detectable changes . FEBS Lett . 509 : 263 – 266 . Gygi , S . P . , Rist , B . , Gerber , S . A . , Turecek , F . , Gelb , M . H . , and Aebersold , R . 1999 . Quantitative analysis of complex protein mixtures using isotope - coded affinity tags . Nat . Biotechnol . 17 : 994 – 999 . Hucka , M . , Finney , A . , Sauro , H . M . , Bolouri , H . , Doyle , J . , and Kitano , H . 2002 . The ERATO Systems Biology Workbench : Enabling interaction and exchange between software tools for computational biology . Pac . Symp . Biocomput . 450 – 461 . Ideker , T . , Ozier , O . , Schwikowski , B . , and Siegel , A . F . 2002 . Discovering regulatory and signalling circuits in molecular interaction networks . Bioinformatics 18 : S233 – S240 . Ito , T . , Chiba , T . , and Yoshida , M . 2001 . Exploring the protein interactome using comprehensive two - hybrid projects . Trends Biotechnol . 19 : S23 – S27 . Kanehisa , M . , Goto , S . , Kawashima , S . , and Nakaya , A . 2002 . The KEGG databases at GenomeNet . Nucleic Acids Res . 30 : 42 – 46 . Karp , P . D . 2001 . Pathway databases : A case study in computational symbolic theories . Science 293 : 2040 – 2044 . Lee , T . I . , Rinaldi , N . J . , Robert , F . , Odom , D . T . , Bar - Joseph , Z . , Gerber , G . K . , Hannett , N . M . , Harbison , C . T . , Thompson , C . M . , Simon , I . , et al . 2002 . Transcriptional regulatory networks in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Science 298 : 799 – 804 . Loew , L . M . and Schaff , J . C . 2001 . The Virtual Cell : A software environment for computational cell biology . Trends Biotechnol . 19 : 401 – 406 . Mendes , P . 1997 . Biochemistry by numbers : Simulation of biochemical pathways with Gepasi 3 . Trends Biochem . Sci . 22 : 361 – 363 . Oesterhelt , D . and Stoeckenius , W . 1973 . Functions of a new photoreceptor membrane . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 70 : 2853 – 2857 . Pellegrini , M . , Marcotte , E . M . , Thompson , M . J . , Eisenberg , D . , and Yeates , T . O . 1999 . Assigning protein functions by comparative genome analysis : Protein phylogenetic profiles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 96 : 4285 – 4288 . Ruepp , A . and Soppa , J . 1996 . Fermentative arginine degradation in Halobacterium salinarium ( formerly Halobacterium halobium ) : Genes , gene products , and transcripts of the arcRACB gene cluster . J . Bacteriol . 178 : 4942 – 4947 . Tamayo , P . , Slonim , D . , Mesirov , J . , Zhu , Q . , Kitareewan , S . , Dmitrovsky , E . , Lander , E . S . , and Golub , T . R . 1999 . Interpreting patterns of gene expression with self - organizing maps : Methods and application to hematopoietic differentiation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 96 : 2907 – 2912 . Tatusov , R . L . , Natale , D . A . , Garkavtsev , I . V . , Tatusova , T . A . , Shankavaram , U . T . , Rao , B . S . , Kiryutin , B . , Galperin , M . Y . , Fedorova , N . D . , and Koonin , E . V . 2001 . The COG database : New developments in phylogenetic classification of proteins from complete genomes . Nucleic Acids Res . 29 : 22 – 28 . Tollis , I . G . , Battista , G . D . , Eades , P . , and Tamassia , R . 1999 . Graph drawing—Algorithms for the visualization of graphs . Prentice Hall , Upper Saddle River , NJ . Tomita , M . , Hashimoto , K . , Takahashi , K . , Shimizu , T . S . , Matsuzaki , Y . , Miyoshi , F . , Saito , K . , Tanida , S . , Yugi , K . , Venter , J . C . , et al . 1999 . E - CELL : Software environment for whole - cell simulation . Bioinformatics 15 : 72 – 84 . Tong , A . H . , Evangelista , M . , Parsons , A . B . , Xu , H . , Bader , G . D . , Page , N . , Robinson , M . , Raghibizadeh , S . , Hogue , C . W . , Bussey , H . , et al . 2001 . Systematic genetic analysis with ordered arrays of yeast deletion mutants . Science 294 : 2364 – 2368 . von Mering , C . , Krause , R . , Snel , B . , Cornell , M . , Oliver , S . G . , Fields , S . , and Bork , P . 2002 . Comparative assessment of large - scale data sets of protein – protein interactions . Nature 417 : 399 – 403 . Wingender , E . , Chen , X . , Fricke , E . , Geffers , R . , Hehl , R . , Liebich , I . , Krull , M . , Matys , V . , Michael , H . , Ohnhauser , R . , et al . 2001 . The TRANSFAC system on gene expression regulation . Nucleic Acids Res . 29 : 281 – 283 . Xenarios , I . and Eisenberg , D . 2001 . Protein interaction databases . Curr . Opin . Biotechnol . 12 : 334 – 339 . Zhou , H . , Watts , J . D . , and Aebersold , R . 2001 . A systematic approach to the analysis of protein phosphorylation . Nat . Biotechnol . 19 : 375 – 378 . WEB SITE REFERENCES http : / / biodata . mshri . on . ca / ; Osprey Network Visualization System http : / / pim . hybrigenics . com / ; PIMRider http : / / predictome . bu . edu / ; Predictome Project http : / / www . cytoscape . org / ; Cytoscape v1 . 1 Home Page http : / / www . cytoscape . org / plugins / SBW / ; Supplementary data on model exchange via SBML http : / / www . informatik . uni - bremen . de / daVinci / ; daVinci V2 . 1 http : / / www . infosun . fmi . uni - passau . de / Graphlet / ; Graphlet Toolkit 5 . 0 . 1 http : / / www . silicongenetics . com / ; GeneSpring 5 . 0 http : / / www . yworks . de / ; yFiles Graph Library http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / geo ; GEO Received February 1 , 2003 ; accepted in revised form August 22 , 2003 . Shannon et al . 2504 Genome Research www . genome . org