Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID - 19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID - 19 . The COVID - 19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect , the company ' s public news and information website . Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID - 19 - related research that is available on the COVID - 19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories , such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re - use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source . These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID - 19 resource centre remains active . Journal Pre - proof Targeting drug delivery in the vascular system : Focus on endothelium Patrick M . Glassman , Jacob W . Myerson , Laura T . Ferguson , Raisa Y . Kiseleva , Vladimir V . Shuvaev , Jacob S . Brenner , Vladimir R . Muzykantov PII : S0169 - 409X ( 20 ) 30059 - 4 DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . addr . 2020 . 06 . 013 Reference : ADR 13580 To appear in : Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews Received date : 5 May 2020 Revised date : 12 June 2020 Accepted date : 13 June 2020 Please cite this article as : P . M . Glassman , J . W . Myerson , L . T . Ferguson , et al . , Targeting drug delivery in the vascular system : Focus on endothelium , Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews ( 2020 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . addr . 2020 . 06 . 013 This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance , such as the addition of a cover page and metadata , and formatting for readability , but it is not yet the definitive version of record . This version will undergo additional copyediting , typesetting and review before it is published in its final form , but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article . Please note that , during the production process , errors may be discovered which could affect the content , and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain . © 2020 Published by Elsevier . ADDR Special Issue 2020 Targeting drug delivery in the vascular system : focus on endothelium Patrick M . Glassman a , * pglas @ pennmedicine . upenn . edu , Jacob W . Myerson a , Laura T . Ferguson a , b , Raisa Y . Kiseleva a , Vladimir V . Shuvaev a , Jacob S . Brenner a , b , and Vladimir R . Muzykantov a , * muzykant @ pennmedicine . upenn . edu a Department of Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics ; Center for Targeted Therapeutics and Translational Nanomedicine of the Institute for Translational Medicine and Therapeutics , Perelman School of Medicine , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA 19104 b Department of Medicine , Division of Pulmonary , Allergy , and Critical Care Medicine , Perelman School of Medicine , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA 19104 * Corresponding authors at : Translational Research Center , University of Pennsylvania , 3400 Civic Center Blvd . , Bldg 421 , TRC 10 - 125 , Philadelphia , PA 19104 - 5158 . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof Abstract The bloodstream is the main transporting pathway for drug delivery systems ( DDS ) from the site of administration to the intended site of action . In many cases , components of the vascular system represent therapeutic targets . Endothelial cells , which line the luminal surface of the vasculature , play a tripartite role of the key target , barrier , or victim of nanomedicines in the bloodstream . Circulating DDS may accumulate in the vascular areas of interest and in off - target areas via mechanisms bypassing specific molecular recognition , but using ligands of specific vascular determinant molecules enables a degree of precision , efficacy , and specificity of delivery unattainable by non - affinity DDS . Three decades of research efforts have focused on specific vascular targeting , which have yielded a multitude of DDS , many of which are currently undergoing a translational phase of development for biomedical applications , including interventions in the cardiovascular , pulmonary , and central nervous systems , regulation of endothelial functions , host defense , and permeation of vascular barriers . We discuss the design of endothelial - targeted nanocarriers , factors underlying their interactions with cells and tissues , and describe examples of their investigational use in models of acute vascular inflammation with an eye on translational challenges . Key words : Vascular system , endothelium , nanocarriers , inflammation J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof 1 . Introduction : vascular endothelium and drug delivery . Circulation of blood through the vascular system represents the main mechanism for distribution of pharmacological formulations administered via intravascular , intramuscular , and other types of injections , and delivered via oral , pulmonary , nasal , sublingual , and other routes . Blood flow transports drugs and drug delivery systems ( DDS ) . The rapidly growing roster of DDS devised to improve pharmacokinetics ( PK ) , tissue distribution , and effects of drugs includes molecular carriers ( e . g . , antibodies , peptides , sugars , polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) ) , multimolecular carriers ( e . g . , liposomes and other nanocarriers ) , cells , and fragments derived from cells . The endothelium exists as a lining surrounding the lumen of all blood vessels – arteries , arterioles , capillaries , venules , and veins separating blood from tissues . The degree of restriction of access to extravascular sites depends on the permeability characteristics of endothelial cells typical of a given vascular area under conditions of a specific pathology , as well as PK and other features of circulating agents , such as size . Generally , endothelium less effectively restricts diffusion to tissues of small drugs vs . large DDS . Yet , even large , micron - sized , long - circulating DDS having favorable PK enter some extravascular sites normally ( e . g . hepatic sinuses ) or in pathology ( e . g . sites of edema and hemorrhage ) . Furthermore , endothelium , which represents an enormously extended surface area accessible to blood ( 3000 - 6000 m 2 , Figure 1 ) [ 1 ] , is the key target for therapeutic interventions in many conditions . Figure 1 : The endothelium provides an extremely large surface area for drug delivery . Endothelial cells are the primary component of the endothelial lining of the circulatory systems ( blood and lymphatic ) , heart ( chambers and valves ) , and cavities in the central nervous system ( brain ventricles ) . These highly specialized cells function in concert with other components of the barrier to form the endothelium . The tunica intima consists of endothelial cells and a basal membrane , which is the only component of the endothelium in capillaries . However , in larger vessels ( e . g . veins and arteries ) , the tunica intima is surrounded by a layer known as the tunica media , which consists of smooth muscle cells , which regulate features such as vascular compliance . In different portions of the vasculature , the tunica media has different compositions . Finally , the tunica adventitia is a layer that consists of microvasculature within the vessel wall , such as the vasa vasorum [ 2 ] . The phenotype of endothelial cells is different within organs and larger vessels . For example , in tissues such as liver and spleen , the endothelium has large openings ( hundreds of J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof nanometers – microns in size ) permitting movement of larger objects out of the bloodstream . Another specialized endothelium is that found in the glomerulus , where fenestrae are found that permit small solutes to be filtered into the renal tubules , while excluding proteins and cells larger than 5 - 10 nm in diameter [ 3 ] . A feature of endothelial cells within the lung and heart is the presence of a large number of caveolae ( “little caves” ) , which seem to play a role in transendothelial transport . In certain tissues , such as the brain , the endothelium forms an integral part of a very tight barrier , evolved to restrict passage of all but necessary substances , and , as such , lacks features such as fenestrae [ 4 ] . Results of recent studies indicate that , contrary to the previous conventional notion that the CNS vasculature lacks caveolae , the arterioles in the brain do contain abundant caveolae [ 5 ] . It is important to keep in mind , however , that caveolae have multiple functions , which likely vary in specific vascular areas , organs and endothelial phenotypes . These functions , in addition to the transport into and across the endothelial monolayer , include sensing of hydrodynamic and other physical forces , regulation of numerous signaling pathways . Thus , caveolae in the CNS arterioles seem to exert sensor rather than transport functions , consistent with the notion of restrictive transport across the BBB . The endothelium is central in supporting the transport functions of the circulatory system , such as : tissue delivery of nutrients / oxygen , waste removal , and immune surveillance . It also controls vascular permeability , adhesiveness , contractility and angiogenesis , blood clotting and fluidity , and blood / tissue exchanges [ 6 ] . As the endothelium is the critical interface between the bloodstream and extravascular sites in tissues , it serves as a key site for pharmacological interventions in inflammation , sepsis , acute respiratory distress syndrome ( ARDS ) , blood clotting disorders , ischemia - reperfusion ( I / R ) , hypertension , atherosclerosis , restenosis , diabetes , arthritis , tumor growth , and many others . Targeted drug delivery to endothelial cells has great potential in improving clinical outcomes in these severe pathologies [ 7 - 9 ] . 2 . Non - affinity - based targeting . Two distinct strategies to accumulate DDS in certain parts of the circulatory system employ either non - affinity - or affinity - based targeting ( Table 1 ) . DDS may accumulate both in sites of interest and in off - target counterparts via binding or retention mediated by mechanisms with variable degrees of specificity . DDS endowed with specific affinity bind to components selectively or preferentially expressed in the target cell , tissue , or organ . This is essentially “active” ( affinity - based ) targeting , the subject of this paper . Conjugation to such affinity ligands using chemical or recombinant techniques yields DDS with targeting characteristics determined by the features of the binding epitope ( surface density , accessibility , etc . ) , ligand ( affinity , specificity , etc . ) , DDS ( size , rigidity , etc . ) and configuration of the conjugate ( ligand density , spatial freedom , etc . ) . Alternative approaches bypass the need for cognizant molecular recognition of specific target determinants . For example , large particles ( diameter > 10 - 30 μm ) will lodge in the first microvascular bed encountered following injection ( capillaries have a diameter of just a few μm ) . Mechanical retention also underlies uptake of nanoparticles aggregating in blood or forming large complexes with blood components after injection . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof Some DDS have a relatively promiscuous affinity to a wide spectra of tissue counterparts . Cationic DDS bind to the glycocalyx and other anionic components of the plasma membrane of both endothelial and blood cells . DDS that are surface - decorated with Annexin V bind to membranes of apoptotic cells via exposed phosphatidylserine . While these approaches do have some specific affinity to components of the tissue , they have relatively little selectivity , hence we define these as non - affinity targeting strategies [ 10 , 11 ] . DDS may accumulate in some vascular areas via interactions with components of blood having natural affinity to these sites . For example , uptake of lipid nanoparticles ( LNP ) by hepatocytes occurs via a fortuitous interaction with apolipoprotein E ( apoE ) , delivering LNP to the corresponding apoE receptors [ 12 ] . Opsonization , i . e . , interaction of DDS with complement and IgG , favors clearance by cells comprising the reticuloendothelial system ( RES ) [ 13 ] . Further , reversible binding to blood cells ( RBC , WBC ) favors delivery of nanoparticles and other DDS to some vascular areas , organs , and pathological sites [ 14 - 16 ] . Understanding of regulation of these fortuitous hitchhiking mechanisms may enable one to employ this type of drug delivery in a more cognizant and controlled fashion . Due to unpredictable scenarios of retention , delivery , and uptake of DDS in the vasculature , several groups have introduced and are currently in pursuit of methodologies that utilize in vivo screening of libraries of carrier formulations [ 17 - 19 ] . The outcomes , dependent on the screening approach ( e . g . detection of biological activity of cargo or directly tracing a labeled component of the DDS ) , may yield exciting formulation variants displaying unusual tropisms to either normal or pathologically - altered organs . These discovery - driven approaches yield intriguing and often enigmatic results . However , the DDS discussed above afford relatively limited , if any , control over addressing cargoes to specific vascular areas , cells , or cellular compartments of interest . DDS relying on size - and charge - mediated retention in the lumen of the first pass vascular areas are unlikely to enable control over cellular distribution and uptake vs . release of cargoes [ 20 ] . Engaging unknown components of the target might lead to unintended side effects . The utility of DDS evolving from discovery - driven , fortuitous , and non - specific methods for vascular drug delivery is hanging on the results of the ensuing efforts to identify target molecules and cells , as well as pharmacokinetics , biodistribution , toxicity , mechanism of delivery , and other parameters that may or may not permit emerging carriers to achieve their envisioned clinical applications . 3 . Use of specific affinity ligands for targeting . Alternatively , to achieve efficient , selective targeting , one can employ ligands of surface determinants specific to or enriched in the area of interest [ 6 , 21 - 25 ] . Conjugation of DDS to affinity ligands using chemical or recombinant techniques is a common approach used to achieve specific targeting . Immunostaining , flow cytometry , Western blotting , PCR , phage display , functional genomics , and proteomics are useful approaches used to detect proteins enriched in the tissues of interest . Many moieties ( e . g . , antibody - derived , natural ligands , peptides , etc . ) provide mechanisms for target recognition and have been used as ligands for vascular DDS [ 26 - 30 ] . The selection criteria of target determinants for drug delivery include : A ) sufficient selectivity , specificity , and surface density of target epitopes in the desired site of action ; B ) J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof accessibility of target epitopes to the intended carrier ; C ) engagement of target by the carrier must not induce any adverse effects ; D ) the target must provide the appropriate sub - cellular addressing of the carrier ; and , E ) the target should be useful in providing the appropriate kinetics of onset and duration and magnitude of effect to achieve the desired therapeutic outcomes . 3 . 1 . Approaches for target identification . The hypothesis - driven approach focuses on target molecules meeting the criteria of utility in a given pathology , based on their location in the body , cell surface density , specificity for the pathologically - altered region , function , membrane dynamics ( clustering , internalization and shedding ) , and so on . This knowledge provides investigators with a rationale for choosing the target , targeting ligand , and configuration of the DDS . The first two published reports of vascular targeting provide examples of the two primary approaches for target selection – hypothesis - and discovery - driven . Kennel , Huang , and co - workers obtained a monoclonal antibody from mice following immunization with rat lung homogenate that provided pulmonary targeting of immunoliposomes after IV injection [ 31 , 32 ] . Further research identified the target as thrombomodulin ( TM ) , an endothelial transmembrane glycoprotein that converts thrombin [ 33 ] to exert anti - inflammatory and anti - thrombotic functions [ 34 ] . In clinical scenarios , meddling with TM is likely to be dangerous and produce severe adverse effects [ 35 , 36 ] . Meanwhile , Sergei Danilov obtained monoclonal antibodies to ACE ( angiotensin - converting enzyme , an endothelial transmembrane glycoprotein that cleaves Ang I into a vasoconstricting and pro - inflammatory peptide Ang II ) to test the hypothesis that ACE can be used for endothelial targeting . Indeed , anti - ACE antibodies accumulated in lungs after IV injection . Targeting to ACE , reported by Danilov and co - workers concomitantly with the Kennel and Huang paper , enabled delivery of drugs , carriers , imaging probes , and gene therapies to the pulmonary endothelium of multiple animal species , ranging from mice to humans , consistent with the high expression of ACE in the pulmonary vasculature [ 37 - 47 ] . It was observed that interaction of some anti - ACE antibodies with ACE lead to its shedding from the cell surface [ 47 , 48 ] . Extensive clinical use of ACE inhibitors implies that this effect may be tolerable or possibly beneficial in both hypertension and inflammation , and related conditions [ 21 , 49 , 50 ] . Anti - ACE mAbs were used for gene delivery in treatment of spontaneous [ 51 ] and hypoxic pulmonary hypertension [ 52 ] . In translational studies , no obvious adverse effects were observed following injection of anti - ACE in animals and humans [ 44 , 47 ] . 3 . 2 . Target determinants for vascular targeting . Three decades of research efforts pursuing both hypothesis - and discovery - driven approaches have yielded the roster of endothelial surface molecules that might serve as targets for drug delivery . These surface determinants include enzymes , cell adhesion molecules ( CAM ) , integrins , receptors , transporting molecules , and other molecules , may localize to different regions of the endothelial cell membrane and to different areas of the vasculature ( Table 2 ) . Ideal target determinants would be selectively expressed and accessible in the target site . However , there is no specific conventionally accepted gradation of the surface density of cellular J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof epitopes , for many reasons including rather relative character of the results provided by many methods ( FACS , immunostaining , ELISA ) and mostly enigmatic clustering of the epitopes . It seems reasonable to categorize epitope density based on the B max ( maximal number of binding sites per cell determined using directly radiolabeled ligands ) , as high ( 10 5 and above ) , intermediate ( 10 3 - 10 5 sites per cell ) and low ( less than few thousands per cell ) . 3 . 2 . 1 . Constitutive vs . inducible determinants . Under pathological conditions , endothelial cells undergo many changes that could impact targeting . Some constitutive surface molecules , such as TM , are shed from the endothelium in pathologies . For example , following acute lung injury , delivery of anti - TM mAbs to the lung was reduced by 50 % [ 53 ] . This observation is in agreement with the notion that TM is shed by pulmonary endothelial cells following an inflammatory insult [ 54 ] . Another classical endothelial target , ACE , is also shed by the endothelium in pathologies [ 55 ] . This process has been shown to be mediated by several agents , including pro - inflammatory cytokines and oxidants , resulting in reduced uptake of ACE - targeted agents [ 56 , 57 ] . In thoracic imaging studies , it was revealed that sarcoidosis led to reduced pulmonary uptake of anti - ACE in patients [ 44 ] . Animal studies have revealed a similar reduction in lung targeting of anti - ACE in several models , including pulmonary edema , ischemia - reperfusion , and endotoxemia [ 57 - 59 ] . Disappearance of endothelial determinants in pathologies occurs via multiple mechanisms . They include activation on the cell surface specific proteases and peptidases that cleave off transmembrane glycoproteins such as ACE and TM [ 48 , 60 , 61 ] . In addition , enzymes cleaving chondroitin sulfate , heparan sulfate , and other sugar moieties from ACE , TM , and many other endothelial surface glycoproteins shed these components of glycocalyx , which unmasks new binding sites on normally hidden epitopes . Reactive oxygen species , proteases , and other highly aggressive entities , including hypochlorous acid ( bleach ) , released by activated leukocytes modify endothelial membrane components directly and via damage to endothelial cells themselves [ 62 - 64 ] . Stable constitutive molecules , such as Platelet - Endothelial Cell Adhesion Molecule ( PECAM ) , can be used for prophylactic and / or therapeutic delivery [ 39 , 49 ] . Inflammation enhances Intercellular Adhesion Molecule 1 ( ICAM - 1 ) level in many cell types , including endothelia [ 65 , 66 ] . Pathological endothelia commonly express inducible markers including Aminopeptidase N ( APN ) , Tumor Endothelial Marker 1 ( TEM - 1 ) , Vascular Cell Adhesion Molecule 1 ( VCAM - 1 ) , and E - and P - selectins [ 25 , 67 ] . These determinants are preferable for diagnostic imaging and therapeutic interventions due to their specificity for pathologically - altered endothelium [ 6 , 23 , 68 - 70 ] . Selectins exposed by pathological endothelium facilitate adhesion of WBC and platelets [ 71 ] . The kinetics of upregulation of surface epitopes are dependent on the mechanism of increased surface exposure . For example , P - selectin is mobilized from intracellular stores within 10 - 30 min [ 72 ] . However , E - selectin [ 73 ] and VCAM - 1 [ 74 ] surface expression requires hours to increase due to the requirement for de novo protein synthesis ( Figure 2 ) . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof In massive hemorrhage , sepsis , severe sterile tissue injury , such as reperfusion or cytokine release syndrome , and other pathological conditions , endothelial cells cease their quiescent phenotype . Instead of maintaining blood fluidity and confinement to the vascular space , pathological endothelium aggravates thrombosis and inflammation . It promotes blood clotting via exposure of phosphatidylserine and exteriorization of von Willebrand Factor and P - selectin [ 75 ] . Activated endothelial cells release chemoattractants and cytokines luring migrating host defense cells and the luminal surface becomes pro - adhesive to leukocytes and blood components and the monolayer loses the barrier function as endothelial cells contract and the VE - cadherin " zipper " opens up [ 76 , 77 ] . These changes , concomitant with loss of anti - thrombotic and anti - inflammatory mechanisms , including TM / APC , CD39 , and nitric oxide ( converted into dangerous peroxinitrite ONOO - by elevated influx of reactive oxygen species ) ignite and propagate the vicious cycle of acute vascular damage , multi - organ failure , and demise [ 78 - 80 ] . Rapidly emerging pathological and clinical data implicate this transformation in the pathogenesis of COVID - 19 , in particular contributing to severe morbidity and mortality ensuing from the pulmonary microvascular injury [ 81 - 83 ] . Figure 2 : Inflammation affects surface expression and cellular localization of endothelial targets . Upper panel : Receptor expression on quiescent endothelium . Certain proteins are localized to specific cell surface microdomains , such as tetraspanin - rich ( ICAM - 1 ) , cell - cell junctions ( PECAM - 1 , VE - Cadherin ) , and caveolae ( APP2 , PLVAP ) , while others may be found throughout the cell surface ( ACE , thrombomodulin , TfR ) . Lower panel : Receptor expression , localization , and accessibility change upon endothelial activation . ICAM - 1 and VCAM - 1 expression in the tetraspanin domains is increased , largely via de novo synthesis . Accessibility to endothelial junction proteins PECAM - 1 and VE - Cadherin may change due to reduced cell - cell interactions . P - selectin is upregulated on the membrane through mobilization of intracellular stores found in Weibel - Palade Bodies . Other proteins such as ACE and thrombomodulin are lost from the cell surface through a shedding mechanism . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof Beyond the endothelium , activated platelets also serve as a target for P - selectin binding agents [ 84 ] . In general , both selectins ( e . g . , P - selectin , E - selectin ) and molecules such as VCAM - 1 have a low and transient surface expression on endothelium . Because of this , targeting to these epitopes could provide excellent specificity in diagnostic imaging using radioisotopes [ 68 ] or ultrasound contrasts [ 84 , 85 ] to visualize pathologically activated endothelium . In general , these molecules are more closely associated with activated endothelia , in tissues such as the skin [ 86 ] . VCAM - 1 is expressed relatively selectively in the inflamed cerebrovascular endothelium and VCAM - targeted DDS selectively and effectively target drugs , including mRNA , to the blood - brain barrier and normalize its pathological alterations in mouse models [ 87 ] ( Figure 3 ) . Figure 3 : Targeting to VCAM - 1 enables selective delivery to the inflamed cerebral vasculature . Left panel : Absolute uptake of anti - VCAM - 1 mAb in the brain of mice injured via an intrastriatal injection of TNF - α exceeds that of the ‘gold standard’ for brain delivery , Transferrin Receptor ( TfR ) , by an order of magnitude . Middle panel : Flow cytometry on brain homogenates reveals that over 50 % of endothelial cells are positive for VCAM - targeted agents ( either mAb or liposome ) following IV injection . Following IV injection of fluorescently labeled mAbs and liposomes under the same conditions as in the left panel , brains were disaggregated and stained to determine mAb / liposome association with leukocytes and endothelial cells . Inset : Typical dot plot showing cell types identified via this approach . Right panel : SPECT imaging of VCAM - targeted liposomes labeled with 111 In demonstrates selective uptake in the injured hemisphere of the brain . Units in the scale bar are presented as arbitrary intensity units . Figures adapted from [ 87 ] . Colors are consistent across panels . Hydrodynamic conditions may also modulate endothelial processing of targeted carriers [ 88 , 89 ] . It was observed that nanoparticles targeted to either ICAM or PECAM had reduced uptake by endothelial cells following flow adaptation [ 90 , 91 ] , and their uptake in endothelium in vivo appears to be inferior in arterioles vs . capillaries [ 91 ] . In contrast , acute increses in shear stress stimulates endocytosis of PECAM - targeted nanocarriers [ 90 ] . Activation of endothelial cells using cytokines ( e . g . TNF - α ) leads to enhanced internalization of ICAM - 1 - targeted nanoparticles , compared to naïve , quiescent cells [ 91 ] . 3 . 2 . 2 . Cellular localization of ligands and ligand - coated DDS . Endothelial surface determinants localize to diverse domains of the plasmalemma . Proteins such as PECAM and VE - cadherin function to maintain the endothelial barrier , and , as such , are often found at inter - endothelial junctions [ 92 , 93 ] . On the other hand , VCAM - 1 and ICAM - 1 , which function in J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof leukocyte adhesion and migration , are largely found on the apical surface of the membrane within specific micro - domains [ 94 - 96 ] , or ‘rafts’ [ 97 ] . Within the pulmonary endothelium , GP85 is found on the luminal surface within an organelle - free portion of the cell [ 98 , 99 ] . Various forms of endocytosis ( e . g . clathrin , etc . ) are used by endothelial cells to internalize ligands bound to selectins [ 100 - 102 ] . This process allows entry of a variety of E - selectin targeted agents , such as liposomes [ 103 ] , drugs [ 103 , 104 ] , and nucleic acids [ 105 ] . However , not all endothelial surface epitopes are internalized as efficiently . Studies revealed that anti - PECAM mAbs are not internalized and that anti - ICAM - 1 mAbs are internalized , but are subsequently recycled back to the cell surface [ 106 ] . This feature of CAMs is desirable for therapeutics that require prolonged exposure in the vessel lumen , such as anti - thrombotics [ 107 ] . It should be noted that this process can be modulated by the avidity of the drug carrier , as multivalent protein conjugates and nanoparticles targeted to PECAM and ICAM - 1 are able to enter endothelial cells via an inducible CAM - mediated endocytosis mechanism [ 108 ] . By tuning the valency of a DDS , sub - cellular delivery of CAM - targeted agents can be controlled , to a certain extent . Accessibility of particles to specific endothelial epitopes is dependent on the localization of the epitope within the membrane and vascular conditions [ 109 ] . Epitopes that may not be suitable for affinity targeting include those that are masked by the glycocalyx , located deep within cell - cell junctions , or are inside membrane invaginations [ 110 ] . Pathological changes in tissues can alter the accessibility of target epitopes . A feature of certain pathologies is the shedding of the endothelial glycocalyx , which may increase accessibility of certain target epitopes , such as ICAM - 1 [ 111 ] . However , the endothelial surface may become coated with leukocytes and thrombi , which would reduce accessibility to target determinants [ 58 ] . Recent advances in techniques such as proteomics [ 112 ] in vivo phage display [ 113 - 115 ] have provided additional insights into accessibility of membrane targets . As carrier size increases , accessibility to epitopes becomes increasingly more important ( e . g . , accessibility is less of a concern for peptides than for immunoliposomes ) . Proteins located within caveolae , such as Aminopeptidase P ( APP ) and Plasmalemma Vesicle Associated Protein - 1 ( PLVAP ) [ 116 ] , are accessible only to relatively small drug carriers . This is due to the nature of the flask - shaped membrane invaginations that are characteristic of caveolae . It is generally thought that the caveolar mouth has a diameter of about 50 nm [ 117 , 118 ] . Functions of caveolae include endothelial trafficking and cellular signaling [ 119 - 124 ] . A key feature of caveolae that distinguishes them from other cholesterol - rich domains ( e . g . , lipid rafts ) is the presence of the protein caveolin - 1 . Caveolar pathway ( s ) transport ligands including albumin [ 125 ] and chemically - modified albumin [ 126 ] across the endothelium [ 127 ] . In rats , mAbs directed against several caveolar antigens are able to efficiently target and transmigrate across the pulmonary vasculature , consistent with the large number of caveolae present in the pulmonary endothelium [ 6 ] . However , conjugation of APP and PLVAP antibodies with nanoparticles larger than 50 - 70nm obliterates targeting , due to the presence of the caveolar neck [ 128 ] . It has been reported that caveolae are able to merge , forming “caveolosomes” , which are capable of internalizing large particles . However , these experiments were perfomed in vitro using static cell culture J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof systems , which may not be reflective of true in vivo endothelial physiology [ 116 , 129 , 130 ] . The spatial accessibility of caveolar targets to circulating nanocarriers is a hot topic . For example , flexible anti - PLVAP nanogels with a diameter of 150 - 300 nm enter caveolae and accumulate in the lungs , whereas their rigid nanoparticle counterparts do not [ 131 ] . Ferritin - based nanocarriers have been investigated as a DDS that can be used in a modular and stimuli - responsive manner [ 132 ] . Ferritin particles conjugated with anti - PLVAP accumulate in the lungs after intravenous injection and enter caveolae , since their size does not exceed 20 nm . Since the ferritin carriers are so small , conjugation of the ligand and enzymatic cargo to external and internal facets of ferritin nanocages , respectively , improves targeting [ 133 ] . Interestingly , ferritin nanocarriers targeted to ICAM also appear to have greater access to the endothelial surface in the pulmonary vasculature compared to larger carriers [ 134 , 135 ] . 3 . 3 . Intracellular endothelial delivery . A conventional approach to achieve intracellular delivery utilize affinity ligands capable of anchoring DDS to epitopes that are permissive of endocytosis . Diverse endothelial determinants have been implicated in internalization [ 50 , 136 - 138 ] . In general , identification and selection of affinity ligands is empirical in nature [ 139 , 140 ] . Approaches such as phage display facilitate selection of internalizable ligands [ 141 - 143 ] . In one example , phage display was used to select several VCAM - 1 - binding peptides [ 144 ] . Peptides that were rapidly endocytosed were used for molecular imaging of vascular inflammation [ 86 , 144 ] . Antibodies to APP , PLVAP or GP90 enter caveolae [ 6 ] and those to E - selectin or VCAM - 1 [ 103 , 104 ] enter clathrin - mediated endocytosis [ 101 , 102 ] . In some cases , coating carriers with affinity ligands permits internalization to occur at least as efficiently as monovalent ligands , if not more efficiently . This may occur due to multivalent carriers eliciting strong cell signaling and actin rearrangement [ 145 ] . Both VCAM - 1 antibodies [ 104 , 146 ] and VCAM - 1 targeted DDS have been reported to enter endothelial clathrin - mediated endocytosis [ 86 , 144 ] . Anti - transferrin receptor ( TfR ) mAbs bound to TfR and free transferrin also enter endothelial cells via clathrin - mediated endocytosis [ 147 , 148 ] . However , coupling ligands to carriers may actually reduce cellular uptake due to their exceeding size limits of endocytosis . Caveolar and clathrin - mediated endocytosis have size limits of 50 - 70 [ 149 ] and 200 - 300 nm [ 70 ] , respectively . Findings made using in vitro , static systems should be taken with a grain of salt , as they may use non - physiologically - relevant endocytic pathways that have not been confirmed in vivo thus far [ 127 ] . The uptake and trafficking of ICAM - targeted DDS vary . Endothelial cells are not effective in internalizing monovalent fusion proteins that do not initiate clustering of epitopes , whereas bivalent anti - ICAM and anti - ICAM conjugates recycle rapidly to the luminal surface , unlike multivalent nanoparticles targeted to ICAM , which traffic to the lysosomes [ 91 , 106 , 108 , 150 - 154 ] . Binding to different epitopes may also change the efficiency of entrance into cells [ 110 ] . Nanocarrier geometry may also affect uptake and subcellular trafficking [ 108 , 155 ] . For example , disk shaped particles targeted to ICAM - 1 have a lower rate of endocytosis compared to spheres of a similar size . Once inside the cell , the rate of lysosomal trafficking is inversely related to size ( e . g . , small particles traffick more quickly ) [ 155 ] . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof Silvia Muro , whose studies greatly advanced the field of endothelial intracellular delivery , devised a novel DDS platform for ICAM - 1 targeted delivery of nanocarriers loaded with enzyme replacement therapies for lysosomal storage diseases ( LSD ) [ 153 , 156 ] . LSDs are morbid conditions caused by mutation of lysosomal enzymes [ 157 ] . In LSD , enzyme replacement therapy ( ERT ) is the standard of care . Clinically , this approach is applied by chronic injections of recombinant forms of the deficient lysosomal enzyme [ 158 ] . The systemically injected proteins are then internalized by cells in a manner dependent on mannosylation of proteins , via either mannose receptor and / or mannose - 6 - phosphate receptor [ 159 ] . Currently approved therapies for treatment of LSD include ERT , substrate reduction inhibitors , and small molecule chaperones [ 160 - 162 ] . Type B Niemann - Pick disease ( NPD ) is caused by deficiency / malfunction of the protein acid sphingomyelinase ( ASM ) . Deficiency of ASM results in increased deposition of sphingomyelin and cholesterol enzymes [ 157 ] . In LSD , endothelial cells are often a key pharmacologic target [ 156 ] , but endothelial delivery of ERT is not very effective [ 161 , 163 ] . It has been reported that endothelial cells have increased ICAM - 1 expression in many LSD , which may provide a route for improved delivery of recombinant enzymes [ 164 , 165 ] . Delivery of ERT using ICAM - 1 - targeted nanoparticles has been shown to improve endothelial targeting and pharmacologic effects in several animal models of LSD [ 153 , 166 , 167 ] . In a mouse model of Pömpe disease , an ~ 600 - fold improvement in lung delivery was observed for ICAM - 1 - targeted acid α - glucosidase ( the enzyme deficient in this disease ) , relative to untargeted enzyme [ 168 ] . By adjusting geometric features of the carrier , delivery via ICAM - 1 targeting can be optimized . Use of relatively small ( 100 - 200 nm ) , spherical carriers provided maximal delivery to the lysosomes as compared to particles with other features ( e . g . , discoidal , micron - sized / spherical ) [ 169 ] . The Muro group has also identified that interactions between nanocarriers and endothelial ICAM - 1 results in activation of enzymes responsible for sphingomyelin metabolism in the membrane and endocytosis of a wide range of sizes of targeted particles [ 170 ] . However , this pathway is dependent on sphingomyelinase expression and coating of particles with both anti - ICAM - 1 and ASM permits internalization in NPD [ 166 ] . Additionally , it was shown that larger carriers ( > 200 nm ) coated with ASM and anti - TfR were also internalized [ 171 ] . CAM - mediated endocytosis achieved via targeting to ICAM - 1 has been shown to be more efficient than clathrin - mediated endocytosis via TfR targeting in delivery of enzymes to the lysosome [ 154 ] . However , dual targeting to ICAM - 1 and TfR provided a different tissue distribution than either mono - or non - targeted carriers [ 171 ] . The utility and significance of these findings represent an area of active investigations [ 156 ] . 4 . Interaction of DDS with endothelial targets : vascular targeting modulation . Nanocarriers can be decorated by ligands in many ways . Interplay between features of the carrier ( e . g . , size , shape , flexibility , etc . ) , the ligand ( e . g . , affinity , density , etc . ) , and the target epitope ( e . g . , accessibility , density , etc . ) creates a complex matrix of parameters controlling interactions between a DDS and its target . 4 . 1 . Dual targeting . Carriers co - coated by antibodies to both inducible and stable high - density molecules can , in theory , selectively bind to pathological cells [ 172 , 173 ] . Dual P - J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof selectin / ICAM - 1 targeted particles carrying equimolar ratios of both ligands were reported to bind to the inflamed endothelium better than mono - targeted particles [ 172 , 174 , 175 ] . This dual targeting approach improved imaging in mouse models of inflammation using contrast enhancing particles targeted to either P - selectin and VCAM [ 176 ] or P - selectin and ICAM - 1 [ 177 ] . Dual targeting of anti - ICAM / anti - TfR nanoparticles has shown that individual ligands could promote targeting to a specific tissue vasculature ( ICAM - 1 : inflamed lungs , TfR : brain ) [ 171 ] . 4 . 2 . Collaborative endothelial targeting . Dual therapeutic targeting to vascular lumen can be achieved by utilizing a recently discovered phenomenon where distinct monoclonal antibodies directed to adjacent epitopes in the extracellular region of PECAM stimulate binding of each other [ 178 ] . The effect was dubbed Collaborative Enhancement of Paired Affinity Ligands , or CEPAL , and is dissimilar to generally observed binding patterns of ligands to same target molecule inhibiting binding of each other [ 48 , 179 , 180 ] . This unusual finding can be explained by increased accessibility of an epitope to its ligand due to conformational changes in the PECAM molecule induced by binding of a paired “stimulatory” ligand [ 181 ] . In - depth investigation of mechanisms underlying this effect revealed several findings : CEPAL is independent of PECAM - PECAM homophilic interactions in the plasma membrane and can be observed with recombinant PECAM protein [ 181 ] . Given the known roles of PECAM - 1 in promoting endothelial quiescence and in maintaining cell junction integrity [ 182 ] , investigations of possible unintended effects of CEPAL on vascular function have shown only modest or insignificant effects . Interestingly , these effects were observed in response to antibodies to PECAM - 1 , whether given solo or in pairs [ 183 ] . CEPAL was applied to achieve enhanced effects of protein therapeutics using anti - PECAM scFv fusion proteins [ 178 ] . A key advantage of this dual targeting strategy was demonstrated by co - delivery of thrombomodulin ( TM ) and its natural endothelial binding partner , endothelial protein C receptor ( EPCR ) using paired anti - PECAM scFv fusions . Co - administered scFv / TM and scFv / EPCR partnered in activation of protein C ( PC ) and reduced markers of lung inflammation in a model of acute lung injury [ 184 ] . Interestingly , the CEPAL effect also increased delivery of PECAM - targeted nanocarriers , a finding that opens up a new avenue for the field of nanomedicine in optimizing and enhancing delivery of diverse therapeutic cargoes encapsulated in endothelial - targeted nanocarriers [ 185 ] . The CEPAL mechanism , occurring by exposure of partially occult epitopes on PECAM protein , may be a generalizable phenomenon and is likely to occur for other molecules and antibody pairs . 4 . 3 . Ligand surface density . A key parameter controlling targeted nanocarrier delivery is the surface density of the affinity ligand . However , selection of the optimal density is not a straightforward process , as this value is dependent on features of the carrier , the affinity ligand , and the target epitope . In other words , selection of the maximal surface density may not be the optimal strategy for achieving the maximal selectivity and magnitude of drug delivery . For example , an intermediate ligand density has been shown to provide enhanced selectivity of targeting [ 186 , 187 ] . An excessive ligand density ( “ligand overcrowding” ) impedes congruency of ligand and target molecules [ 186 , 188 ] . Selectivity of both delivery and imaging of vascular inflammation has been shown to be improved via reduction of surface density to an optimal value [ 128 , 189 ] . Recent studies have shown that ligand density can play a role not only in selectivity of delivery , but also in sub - cellular trafficking . Delivery of ICAM - 1 - targeted nanocarriers across the blood - brain barrier J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof was demonstrated to be optimal at an intermediate ligand density , which balanced efficient uptake and detachment from target following transport [ 150 ] . 4 . 4 . Carrier geometry and flexibility . In addition to a carrier ' s affinity , its geometry and flexibility regulate pharmacokinetics , circulation , tissue permeation , and interactions with cells [ 190 - 194 ] . Carrier size is a factor in route of administration , target access , and pharmacokinetics . Carriers smaller than 20 - 30 nm can be administered via diverse routes , while larger carriers generally require vascular injection for systemic administration [ 193 , 195 - 198 ] . Once in circulation , carriers of small ( < 10 nm ) diameter are prone to rapid renal clearance [ 199 ] . A size range of ~ 100 - 200 nm generally avoids filtration to the space of Disse in the liver and entrapment in the splenic sinusoids , giving longer circulation and more opportunities for target engagement [ 200 ] . For instance , it has been noted that larger ICAM - and PECAM - targeted particles have enhanced uptake in the RES , and a reduction of specificity of vascular delivery relative to untargeted carriers [ 155 , 201 ] . Indeed , at larger extremes of injectable particle size ( > 1 - 3 µm ) , both greater splenic retention and non - specific entrapment in lung capillaries is observed [ 202 - 204 ] . Larger carriers generally have lesser access to targets and adhered carriers may experience greater dragging force from blood , leading to target detachment [ 198 , 205 , 206 ] . For instance , larger carriers were shown to be incapable of targeting PLVAP , expressed in caveolae in lung endothelium [ 128 ] . However , in studies of targeting to PECAM , increasing carrier size from 40 nm to 300 nm increased specific adhesion in the lungs , implying that greater engagement with accessible endothelial targets may be achieved for larger carriers [ 201 ] . Nanocarrier shape , and interplay between shape and size , is also an important factor in targeting behavior [ 192 , 207 ] . Carriers that are non - spherical in nature may circulate longer than similarly sized spheres due to reduced recognition by host defense cells [ 109 , 208 ] . Discoid , ellipsoid , and filamentous carriers have prolonged circulation relative to spheres [ 155 , 209 , 210 ] , in part due to reduced uptake by macrophages [ 211 ] . Rods and discoid particles avoid side effects associated with engagement with host defense cells in the lungs , unlike spherical carriers [ 210 ] . Eluding clearance from circulation and non - specific uptake may lead to non - spherical nanocarriers with more specific targeting to vascular endothelium . ICAM - targeted disks adhered to the pulmonary vascular endothelium more specifically than spherical counterparts [ 155 ] . Non - spherical and spherical particles have distinct propensity for margination in flow [ 212 , 213 ] , modulating their affinity interactions under flow [ 214 - 216 ] and facilitating efficient non - spherical particle targeting to endothelial cells in the lungs and brain [ 217 ] . However , at an extreme of carrier elongation , worm - like filomicelles align with flow and avoid binding to vascular cells [ 218 ] . Filomicelles targeted to ICAM - 1 had similar specificity of targeting as spheres , but a lower magnitude of uptake in the lung [ 209 ] . The above discussion of shape and size largely presumes rigid particle geometry , but many nanocarriers are capable of dynamic changes in shape and size . Methods for adjusting the flexibility of nanocarriers have been described for a variety of materials , with specific focus on lipid and polymeric vesicles [ 195 , 219 - 222 ] . Mechanical flexibility has a clear impact on systemic and target - specific behaviors of nanoparticles . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof Generally , greater flexibility correlates to prolonged circulation of nanocarriers [ 195 , 218 , 219 ] . In part , prolonged circulation of soft nanoparticles may be attributable to reduced non - specific uptake in phagocytic cells [ 223 , 224 ] . In macrophages and other immune cells , harder particles are internalized more readily than soft particles [ 195 , 219 , 224 , 225 ] . A relationship between particle flexibility and ease of particle uptake may also be emerging in results with endothelial cells , where in vitro and in silico studies show passive and affinity - mediated nanoparticle uptake being impeded in softer particles [ 195 , 219 , 226 ] . Further , recent results show that harder ( GPa bulk modulus ) non - targeted 200 nm spheres associated with and transported across brain endothelium in a microfluidic model to a greater degree than softer ( MPa bulk modulus ) spheres [ 227 ] . Changes in the mechanical properties of nanoparticles have yielded changes in affinity - directed targeting behavior . For PEG hydrogel nanoparticles , softer nanoparticles outperformed similar rigid particles in targeting to ICAM in the lungs [ 195 ] . However , in vivo observations with soft nanoparticles must consider the impact of prolonged circulation times on the extent of engagement with target molecules . The softer PEG nanoparticles also maintained higher circulating concentrations , meaning the lung to blood localization ratio was largely unaffected by flexibility of the ICAM - targeted particles in this case . Controlling for this factor , a microfluidic study showed that soft disc nanoparticles outperform rigid counterpart discs in adhesion to a target surface under flow [ 216 ] . It is hypothesized that this result may reflect the capacity of soft particles for increased target engagement and for resistance to target disengagement via fluid forces on the nanoparticles . A specific application for soft particles in endothelial targeting was noted in studies of nanoparticles targeted to PLVAP . As noted above , PLVAP localizes to caveolae in the lungs and targeting to caveolae is limited for particles larger than the caveolar neck ( > 50 - 100nm ) [ 128 ] . However , soft ( ~ 50 kPa ) dextran nanogels of 150 - 300 nm diameter successfully targeted to PLVAP in the lungs ( Figure 4 ) , where analogous rigid polystyrene particles , functionalized with the same antibody , did not [ 131 ] . Further , tuning the modulus of the dextran nanogels via crosslinking resulted in abrogation of PLVAP targeting in inverse proportion to Young’s modulus of the crosslinked particles [ 228 ] ( Figure 4D ) . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof Therefore , engineering of nanoparticle softness may affect particle access to caveolae , representing an important route for internalization in endothelial cells and possibly for transcytosis . Figure 4 . Carrier flexibility modulates engagement of targeted carriers with caveolar plasmalemma vesicle associated protein ( PLVAP ) in lung endothelium . Carrier mechanical properties can affect how well carriers access targets ( e . g . by soft particles “squeezing” into small spaces , as depicted in ( a ) ) . PLVAP is located in a sterically concealed position , the caveolar neck , in lung endothelial cells . Soft dextran particles ( a ) were able to target PLVAP more effectively than crosslinked dextran particles ( b ) or rigid polystyrene particles ( c ) of similar size . As evaluated in radioisotope tracing ( d ) and fluorescence ( e ) studies , PLVAP targeting efficacy in the lungs decreased as nanoparticle Young’s modulus ( as determined by AFM ) increased ( d ) . Adapted from [ 131 , 228 ] . 5 . Modulating vascular targeting via control of route and PK . 5 . 1 . Local infusion . Compared to other routes of administration , the intravenous route has a distinct advantage in pulmonary delivery , as the lungs receive the entire first pass of venous blood [ 229 ] . In addition to first pass benefits , delivery to the pulmonary endothelium is particularly attractive , as it comprises ¼ of the entire surface area of endothelium . Because of the high perfusion of lungs and large endothelial surface area , delivery to endothelial antigens ( e . g . ICAM - 1 , PECAM ) is pharmacokinetically favored in the pulmonary vasculature . An infusion via vascular catheters in conduit vessels favors uptake in the microvasculature immediately downstream of the injection site . This principle was successfully employed for PECAM and ICAM - targeted DDS : local infusion enhanced uptake in the vasculature in the brain , mesentery , and heart in several species , including mice , rats , dogs , and pigs [ 229 - 231 ] ( Figure 5a ) . Further , infusion in the isolated organs bypasses numerous factors impeding targeting and boosts local delivery , providing mechanistic insights and potential utility of vascular targeting for improving grafts for organ transplantation . 5 . 2 . RBC Hitchhiking . The intravascular route can be further manipulated by using red blood cells ( RBC ) as a transport vehicle for DDS that are both actively and passively targeted [ 232 , 233 ] . Nanocarrier DDS can massively increase the mass of drug delivered to the target organ , but are not without their inherent problems , such as short half - life due to rapid clearance by the reticuloendothelial system [ 234 ] . The liver , spleen , and intravascular leukocytes , aided by the complement cascade , all contribute to this rapid clearance . Red blood cell hitchhiking ( RBC - H ) was devised to evade this rapid clearance by the RES . Early studies used passive adsorption to non - covalently attach polystyrene nanoparticles onto RBCs and found that the half - life of RBC - adsorbed nanocarriers was longer than that of free nanoparticles . Additionally , the lung - to - clearing organ ( liver & spleen ) ratios were significantly improved using RBC - H [ 232 ] . This landmark work ; however , was limited to rigid nanoparticles having no drug delivery utility , nonspecific attachment to RBC , and a circulation time of less than 24 hours . Notably , increased delivery to the target tissue was achieved by injecting RBC - coupled nanoparticles immediately upstream of target organ , thus increasing first - pass delivery ( Figure 5b ) . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof Upon careful loading that does not compromise RBC biocompatibility , RBC carrying surface - bound cargoes do not accumulate in any organ , including the reticuloendothelial system . However , the surface - bound cargoes that are loaded on RBC in a reversible fashion detach from RBC and transfer to the microvascular bed encountered by RBC . In the case of intravascular injections of RBC carrying such cargoes , the first major microvascular bed downstream injection site , i . e . , first pass . In IV injection this is the pulmonary vasculature . Additional studies incorporated biocompatible nanocarriers into RBC - H using liposomes , polymeric nanocarriers , and adeno - associated virus ( AAV ) . The first pass effect was again amplified using RBC - H with 40 - fold increase in lung targeting compared to free nanocarrier after intravenous injection . Importantly , this effect was also observed after intra - arterial injection via the carotid artery and measuring uptake in the immediate downstream organ , the brain , achieving brain uptake 143 - fold than that of free nanocarriers [ 232 ] . Studies have shown therapeutic benefit using this technique in vivo in mouse models of acute pulmonary embolism and lung metastasis [ 232 , 233 ] . RBC - H has shown many advantages over intravenous delivery of free nanocarriers , but is not without room for improvement . The initial work focused largely on first - pass delivery to the immediate downstream organ , relying on the interaction of RBCs with the endothelium to encourage mechanical dissociation of nanoparticle from RBC vehicle . The promise of RBC - H as a drug delivery system that successfully evades the RES will likely need to incorporate better control over the RBC - nanoparticle association ( and thus dissociation ) and effect on the carrier RBC . One method to increase control of RBC - nanocarrier interaction is the use of targeted binding rather than passive adsorption . The interaction of RBC with RBC membrane targeting moieties has been characterized using drug - coupled fusion proteins . Specifically , anti - RBC - membrane scFv fused to thrombomodulin were evaluated in vitro in a microfluidic system . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof While some targeting to certain RBC surface epitopes caused pathologic increases in membrane rigidity ( Band 3 / Glycophorin A ) , targeting to others ( RhCE ) did not . Importantly , therapeutic efficacy of fusion - TM was retained when compared to soluble TM [ 235 ] . Future generations of RBC - H may utilize nanocarriers targeted to the RBC membrane to improve control of RBC - nanocarrier association , dissociation , and ultimately prolong time in circulation beyond the first pass effect . Figure 5 : Utility of the first - pass effect in tissue targeting . A : Intravenous ( IV ) infusion of ICAM - targeted nanocarriers ( NC ) results in a large portion of the dose being deposited in the lungs . On the other hand , infusion into the internal carotid artery bypasses the lung first pass and permits delivery to the brain . B : Ex vivo adsorption of untargeted NC onto RBC , termed RBC hitchhiking ( RBC - H ) , allows transfer of NC to endothelium in the first capillary downstream of the injection site . This technology has been shown to increase delivery to several tissues by varying the injection site . Additional abbreviations used in figure : ICA ( internal carotid artery ) , CCA ( common carotid artery ) . Figures adapted from [ 231 , 232 ] . 5 . 3 . Molecular engineering of targeting ligands . Many groups utilize antibody fragments ( e . g . Fab , scFv , nanobody , etc . ) as affinity ligands to achieve targeted drug delivery . Despite many advantages , such as ease of production in microbial systems and lack of Fc fragment - induced toxicities , these fragments are often inferior to full mAbs as isolated targeting ligands due to rapid blood clearance and poor stability of binding due to their monovalent nature . Additionally , commonly used amine - based conjugation strategies often inhibit the function of these small affinity ligands [ 236 ] . As such , there have been a myriad of protein engineering strategies proposed to improve the drug delivery properties of antibody fragments . Improving circulation time of affinity ligands can be critical in conferring them with favorable biodistribution properties for therapeutic applications . This has been achieved in many ways , including fusion to long - circulating proteins ( IgG and albumin ) [ 237 - 240 ] or attachment of hydrophilic polymers ( PEG ) [ 241 , 242 ] to reduce renal elimination . Fusion to proteins such as albumin or albumin - binding molecules confers a long half - life , in part , due to interactions with the neonatal Fc receptor ( FcRn ) , which serves as a salvage receptor preventing the intracellular catabolism of albumin [ 243 ] and IgG [ 244 - 246 ] . We have recently reported that fusion of a VCAM - 1 - targeting nanobody to an albumin - binding nanobody leads to 25 - 40 - fold improvements in uptake in target tissues over a 24 hour period , relative to the anti - VCAM - 1 nanobody alone [ 247 ] . To overcome challenges in coupling of therapeutic cargoes to small affinity ligands , site - specific conjugation strategies are becoming more prevalent . These typically involve building in motifs for conjugation near the C - terminus of the antibody fragment . Some of the more common strategies for site - specific conjugation of antibodies and fragments include Sortase A transpeptidation ( recognizing the sequence LPXTG ) [ 248 ] and conjugation to unpaired cysteines introduced into the molecule . These strategies have been successfully used to attach therapeutic cargoes and radiolabels to targeting ligands without adverse effects on their function [ 236 , 249 - 253 ] . In addition to engineering of antibody fragments , our group has recently reported a strategy for engineering full - length mAbs for site - specific modification by Sortase A via CRISPR / Cas9 - mediated engineering of hybridoma cells [ 254 , 255 ] . The use of site - specific bioconjugation strategies permits oriented coupling of targeting ligands on the surface of J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof nanoparticles , which has been demonstrated to improve their specificity for endothelial targets [ 252 , 256 ] . Nucleic acid aptamers are a recently developed class of affinity ligands that selectively bind to targets with high affinity via unique three - dimensional structures [ 257 ] . Aptamers are short , single - stranded DNA oligonucleotides that can be developed for a variety of target molecules using techniques analogous to phage display for antibody selection [ 258 ] . Aptamers directed against TfR have been used to deliver therapeutics both to [ 259 ] and across [ 260 ] the blood - brain barrier in animal models . This presents another potential approach for selective delivery to the endothelium . 6 . Envisioned biomedical utility in acute vascular pathologies . Investigations in both animal models and in patients [ 6 , 19 , 41 , 44 , 45 , 69 , 138 , 261 - 263 ] have demonstrated affinity targeting to both normal and pathologically altered endothelium [ 40 , 264 - 266 ] . The delivery of enzyme replacement therapies to improve lysosome storage disease treatment was discussed above in the section on intracellular endothelial delivery . Here we provide a brief overview of a few areas of potential medical utility of this approach , with a focus on thrombosis , acute vascular inflammation , and ischemia ( Figure 6 ) . Applications of endothelial targeting in select pathologies are summarized in Table 3 . Endothelial targeted DDS can deliver a great variety of anti - thrombotic agents , with different mechanisms for release and or activation at the intended site . They include plasminogen activators [ 230 , 267 - 269 ] and thrombomodulin [ 64 , 270 - 272 ] fused with scFv binding to surface endothelial epitopes and exert their activities in the lumen directly . Alternatively , DDS targeted to the same epitopes carrying encapsulated small drug molecules such as anti - inflammatory drugs ( which have both direct and indirect anti - thrombotic effects ) employ release of drugs from the cell - bound DDS either in blood or in endothelial cells [ 205 , 273 ] . Further , delivery of mRNA for TM ( and likely other anti - thrombotic proteins ) deliver their cargo into the cytosol of endothelial cells enabling synthesis and luminal exposure of the therapeutic transgene [ 87 ] . 6 . 1 . Acute thrombosis . In many pathologies , affected blood vessels have an increased propensity for thrombosis , in no small part due to suppression of the endothelium’s natural anti - thrombotic mechanisms [ 274 ] . Delivery of ATA , such as TM or plasminogen activators ( tissue type , tPA , or urokinase , uPA ) to the luminal surface of the endothelium may help to subside some pro - thrombotic states . These results have been supplemented by nucleic acid - based delivery of these proteins [ 275 ] . In cell - based models , targeting anticoagulants to activated endothelium using anti - E - selectin mAbs was shown to inhibit thrombin expression , providing proof - of - principle of this approach [ 67 ] . As investigations moved into rodent studies , both tPA and uPA were shown to be concentrated within the lungs by targeting to ACE ; however , there were limited pharmacologic benefits due to rapid endocytosis [ 99 , 276 ] . However , delivery of ATA to non - internalizing endothelial epitopes ( e . g . , ICAM - 1 , PECAM ) permitted not only efficient targeting of the lung , but also clot dissolution [ 269 ] . Fusion proteins between anti - PECAM scFv and ATA were able to provide thromboprophylaxis due to prolonged residence in the pulmonary lumen [ 267 , 277 , 278 ] . Local infusion of scFv / uPA via the carotid artery prevented cerebrovascular thrombosis [ 230 ] . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof Fusions containing uPA mutant activated by thrombin [ 279 - 281 ] had similar high degree of lung uptake and thromboprophylaxis , with additional improvements in reductions of fibrin deposition and improvement of arterial oxygen tension relative to a non - thrombin - dependent scFv / uPA [ 268 ] . Figure 6 . Endothelial receptors for conjugate targeting in acute vascular pathology . Shown is a small vessel or capillary in cross - section , lined by endothelial cells ( blue ) . Receptors ( orange ) are bound by drug conjugate ( green circle ) plus targeting moiety / nanocarrier ( green rectangle ) . Many receptors including PECAM and ICAM enable both intravascular and extravascular drug targeting . Factors that promote intracellular uptake ( with retention of drug conjugate and recycling of receptor ) include multivalent targeting moieties and low - flow state . Factors that modify uptake include ligand density , carrier geometry , and size . Ischemia / reperfusion injury ( A ) and acute vascular inflammation ( B ) both result in increased leukocyte recruitment and leaky tight junctions between endothelial cells . Treatment requires drug to be delivered intracellularly to the endothelium and to the interstitial space . Drug targeting to the specific receptors shown has resulted in treatment effect in animal models of these pathologies . ( C ) Shown is a blood clot within the lumen . Thrombosis and embolism both require the drug to remain in the vessel lumen to achieve direct therapeutic effect . Drug targeting to the receptors shown has resulted in treatment effect in animal models of thrombosis . In rat models , pharmacologic benefits have been observed using both recombinant soluble TM [ 34 ] and tissue factor - targeted TM [ 282 ] , but this fusion rapidly disappeared from the vascular lumen . PECAM - targeted scFv / TM fusion accumulated in the pulmonary vasculature , and reduced both thrombosis and other tissue damage in mice , without causing bleeding [ 270 ] . By fusing TM with scFvs directed against PECAM and ICAM , the antithrombotic and anti - inflammatory effects of J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof untargeted soluble TM are dwarfed , due to prolonged endothelial anchoring of TM [ 268 ] . Targeting scFv / TM fusions to ICAM afforded more potent protection than to PECAM , consistent with the notion of ICAM localization close to the TM cofactor EPCR in the plasmalemma [ 271 ] . As discussed above , by taking advantage of the CEPAL effect observed for PECAM - targeted ligands , TM and EPCR were able to be co - delivered , providing a substantially increased pharmacologic effect . This benefit was likely due to enhanced targeting ( CEPAL effect ) and optimal special arrangement of TM and EPCR , allowing enhanced interactions between the partner molecules [ 184 ] . Thrombin - activated , targeted ATA have the potential to provide a safe thrombophrophlyactic option in patients at high risk of acute thrombosis . 6 . 2 . Inflammation . Thrombosis and inflammation are closely intertwined . Endothelium controls vascular permeability of leukocytes in response to tissue damage and infection , but also become a victim of injurious inflammatory mediators . Targeting anti - inflammatory drugs to protect the endothelium from friendly fire without impeding host defense is an attractive strategy . Inducible and constitutive endothelial determinants involved in inflammation appear to be good targets for this approach . The use of liposomes targeted to E - selectin has shown utility in delivering dexamethasone ( DEX ) to a variety of tissues in animal models of chronic inflammation . For example , these particles showed accumulation in skin and kidneys in models of dermal [ 283 ] and renal [ 284 ] inflammation . In the latter model , this treatment conferred anti - inflammatory effects in mice [ 284 ] and in rats [ 285 ] . Within minutes of injection , similar formulations accumulated in the inflamed eye and reduced the level of inflammatory markers [ 286 ] . Similar DDS were used for nucleic acid delivery to the kidney and tumors [ 287 , 288 ] . Both E - selectin and ICAM - 1 have been used as target molecules for delivery of siRNA in vitro [ 289 , 290 ] . Coupling of an E - selectin targeting ligand to adenovirus allowed targeting to the kidneys and displayed functional activity in a glomerulonephritis model [ 289 ] . Delivery of DEX liposomes to integrins was achieved in a rat arthritis model , using RGD peptides . These particles provided improved protection when compared to untargeted particles [ 291 ] . A similar strategy was also used to delivery anti - inflammatory siRNA in animals [ 292 ] . Delivery of the anti - inflammatory prostaglandin , PGE 2 , was achieved by targeting to VCAM - 1 . Chronic administration of VCAM - 1 - targeted particles provided improved PGE 2 delivery and therapeutic benefits in a mouse model of ‘atherosclerosis’ [ 293 ] . Targeting dexamethasone - loaded liposomes and nanogels to ICAM , PECAM and PLVAP supersedes protective effects of untargeted counterparts in a mouse model of ARDS [ 273 , 294 ] . 6 . 3 . Inflammatory signaling and reactive oxygen species . A plethora of recent findings have revealed close links between endocytosis and signaling pathways that have changed our understanding of the role that endocytosis plays in a cell’s make - up [ 295 , 296 ] . Traditionally , endocytosis and signaling were considered as distinct processes . However , it has now become clear that receptor - regulated endocytosis is critical for modulation of numerous signaling pathways , including attenuation of signal , its prolongation , activation , signal distinction from several possible paths , etc . [ 297 ] . This is also the case for many cytokine receptors , including TNFR1 and IL - 1R [ 298 ] . TNFR1 activated by interaction with TNF co - localizes with caveolin in lipid raft and receptor complex internalization may modulate TNF signaling outcome [ 299 - 301 ] . Similarly , IL - 1R J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof translocates to caveolae upon activation and receptor internalization is required for complete NF - κB signaling processes [ 302 , 303 ] . Redox - active endosomes ( i . e . containing reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) ) may play an important role in pro - inflammatory signaling [ 304 , 305 ] indicating potential therapeutic applications of antioxidant drug delivery [ 306 ] . PECAM - and ICAM - targeted delivery of SOD is able to considerably block the inflammatory response caused by cytokines and by TLR activation [ 307 - 309 ] . In addition , caveolar targeting of nanocarriers may have significant potential , particularly for endothelial and trans - endothelial delivery , due to the abundance of caveolae in endothelial cells [ 310 ] . Effective caveolar targeting has been demonstrated using albumin - coated nanocarriers [ 130 ] . The profound involvement of caveolae in cellular signaling [ 311 ] should be of particular interest for the drug delivery field ( Figure 7 ) . Figure 7 . Role of ROS in cytokine - and TLR - induced signaling and potential use of intracellular antioxidant delivery for anti - inflammatory protection . Cytokine or PAMP binds to counterpart receptor , causing NOX activation and the complex internalization forming redox - active endosome . Generated ROS transfers into cytosol via CLC3 channel and stimulates proinflammatory NFκB cascade . Delivery of antioxidant to the endosome or overexpression of cytosolic SOD can reduce the inflammatory signaling and attenuate cellular injury [ 307 , 308 ] . Inset shows SOD - loaded nanoparticles ( green ) enter endosomes ( red ) , SOD - containing endosomes seen as yellow . Cell nuclei are shown blue . The role of localization and receptor trafficking of TLRs ( and particularly TLR4 as the best characterized TLR ) was clarified from recent works [ 312 , 313 ] . However , the mechanisms of TLRs endocytosis and its exact role in cellular response to pro - inflammatory signals still require more studies for our understanding . Moreover , it may be cell - specific . Indeed , TLR4 endocytosis in macrophages is not required for their response . In contrast , astrocytes internalized activated TLR4 by both caveolae and clathrin endocytosis , and caveolar endocytosis is required for both MyD88 - and J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof TRIF - dependent signaling pathways [ 314 ] , while epithelial cells are characterized by intracellular localization of TLR4 at Golgi apparatus and CD14 - dependent trafficking of LPS via clathrin - dependent endocytosis [ 315 , 316 ] . Interestingly , the proinflammatory effects of LPS are significantly attenuated in caveolin - 1 knockout mice . NF - κB activation by LPS is decreased ; ICAM expression is lower as well as PMN accumulation in lungs , while NO level is higher in Cav - 1 - / - mice compared to wild type [ 317 ] suggesting an important role of caveolae in LPS - induced response in vivo . Indeed , caveolar targeting and delivery of SOD using PLVAP has a significant advantage compared to less specific delivery via PECAM and ICAM [ 133 , 318 ] . Caveolar targeting potentially can deliver SOD right to the signaling endosomes responsible for activation of NFκB signal transduction pathway . 6 . 4 . Ischemia - reperfusion and acute oxidative stress . Endothelial involvement in oxidative mechanisms of inflammation and other conditions is not limited to mediation of pro - inflammatory signaling via endosomal pathways discussed above . Endothelial cells are common victims of ROS in ischemia - reperfusion injury , acute inflammation , and infections . ROS - quenching enzymes , catalase and SOD , conjugated with mAbs directed against several endothelial targets ( PECAM , ICAM - 1 , ACE ) improved protection in several models of acute oxidative stress compared to untargeted formulations [ 263 , 277 , 278 , 319 - 329 ] . PECAM - and ICAM - targeted catalase protected against H 2 O 2 - induced vascular leak [ 330 ] , alleviated vascular [ 331 ] and oxidative stresses [ 332 ] , and pulmonary ischemia - reperfusion injuries [ 278 , 321 ] . These results include lung transplantation in multiple animal models [ 324 , 325 ] . Targeting to PECAM and ICAM of SOD , liposomal SOD , and liposomal SOD / catalase mimetic , as well as inhibitors of ROS - producing enzymes , reduced ROS toxicities in endothelial cells [ 205 , 306 , 326 ] , normalized vasoconstriction in mice [ 321 ] , attenuated VEGF - induced endothelial leakage [ 330 ] , and endotoxin - induced acute pulmonary inflammation in animals [ 333 ] . Pharmacological agents decelerating vesicular trafficking prolong endothelial antioxidant protection conferred by ICAM - and PECAM - targeted catalase and SOD via delaying their lysosomal degradation [ 106 , 152 ] . Targeting to PECAM of catalase loaded into nanocarriers selectively permeable for ROS provided prolonged protection [ 334 - 337 ] . Overall , delivery of both antioxidants and anti - inflammatories to the endothelium provides a variety of mechanistically precise , spatiotemporally controlled protective effects in the variety of animal models emulating pathological pathways typical of acute human diseases and conditions associated with or driven by vascular oxidative stress , ischemia - reperfusion and inflammation . 7 . Current challenges and perspectives . 7 . 1 . Modeling of vascular targeting . Many reasons drive attempts to minimize in vivo investigations by pursuing in vitro models , despite the fact that no in vitro system fully recapitulates the situation in vivo and most , if not all , lack effects of an organism on behavior of a drug or DDS systemically ( PK , clearance , effect of pathology , as well as humoral , nervous and defense factors ) and locally ( cellular microenvironment , histological , and pathological factors ) . In case of vascular targeting , these challenges are aggravated by rapid phenotypic bastardization of cultivated endothelial cells , which quickly lose specific markers like ACE [ 338 ] . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof The introduction of HUVEC ( human umbilical vein endothelial cells ) as an in vitro endothelial model by Eric Jaffe , Michael Gimbrone , Jordan Pober and colleagues nearly half a century ago was a truly major breakthrough [ 339 ] . Further advances , such as adaptation of the Boyden ' s chamber to study endothelial permeability , upgrades of static cell cultures to flow - adapted and flow - exposed cell cultures , microfluidic systems and flow chambers with cells grown on semi - permeable supports , and recent advent of the " organ on the chip " , including exquisite 3D multichannel models of vascular segments have yielded significant results [ 91 , 272 , 340 - 343 ] . In vitro models are useful to address specific questions , such as analysis of hydrodynamic parameters and effects of flow adaptation on binding , uptake , vesicular transport , and effects of DDS targeted to endothelium . Static 2D cultures are useful to determine specificity and other parameters of binding DDS to target vs . non - target cells ( K d , B max , kinetics of binding and dissociation ) . Sometimes , there is no choice but to retreat to in vitro models , since our methods do not work in vivo . Thus , parameters of resolution , dynamics , objectivity , and attribution to histological and cellular structures of current methods afford rather limited information on DDS sub - cellular addressing and intracellular transport . Here , endothelial cell culture seems to be a reasonable resolution . More technically challenging models of perfusion of isolated vessels and organs provide a valuable resource , permitting real - time direct measurements of the uptake , tissue localization , and activity of a DDS in conditions maximally close to in vivo [ 39 , 319 ] . Computational modeling and systems biology represent further interesting in silico approaches . Major challenges in this area include variable compatibility and quality of the feed data , oversimplification of conditions , parameters , and margins , and relatively arbitrary selection of the focus and readouts . Yet , mutually enriching collaboration of computational researchers with experimentalists and physicians may enable modeling with high predictive value that allows for a reduction of in vivo experimentation [ 344 - 347 ] . 7 . 2 . Characterization and analysis of PK / BD . A key consideration in development of a DDS is selection of appropriate methodologies for characterization of blood and tissue pharmacokinetics . An ideal bioassay would have the capacity to reliably quantify DDS in all relevant matrices ( e . g . whole blood , plasma , tissues , etc . ) in an unbiased and highly precise manner . There are several methods that are often utilized to describe PK / biodistribution of DDS , each with their own unique strengths and weaknesses . Measurement of radioisotope - labeled DDS can be considered as the ‘gold standard’ for assessment of blood and tissue PK [ 348 , 349 ] . Radioisotope - based measurements do not require tissue processing , have no background signal , and can be directly related to the injected dose , allowing calculation of key PK parameters with no intrinsic bias . However , a key drawback of radioisotope labeling is the potential introduction of artifacts due to the labeling process , including , but not limited to , changes in PK due to introduction of the label and loss of the label from the DDS . By labeling and tracing multiple components of the DDS , these artifacts can be minimized . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof A second approach that is often reported in the literature is optical tracing of fluorescent components of a DDS . While fluorescent labels are often useful for visualizing distribution on a sub - tissue level , the presence of high ( and variable ) background signals in biological matrices and non - linear signal vs . concentration relationships reduces their utility in measuring PK / BD . Finally , mass spectrometry ( MS ) is being used frequently for PK measurements in both preclinical and clinical investigations [ 350 - 352 ] . Due to the complex nature of many DDS , it would be challenging to validate an assay for direct measurement of unlabeled DDS . However , MS should be considered as the gold standard for assessment of PK / BD of small molecule cargo drugs , as it is able to make highly precise measurements in both blood and tissues . Collection of high quality PK / BD data permits development of mathematical models that can be used to guide further development and optimization of DDS . The types of models that can be developed range in terms of complexity and degree of mechanistic information , from empirical models that simply describe the concentration vs . time curve , to physiologically - based models that are able to predict drug behavior . At the preclinical academic level , more mechanistic models are often useful as tools to predict the impact of DDS properties and pathology on behavior , permitting optimization of a delivery strategy early in development . Additionally , physiologically - based models have the potential for relatively straightforward scaling to higher species , permitting prediction of clinical PK / PD profiles [ 353 - 355 ] . Once a DDS moves into the clinical domain , modeling often shifts to simpler models , with the goal of identifying patient - specific factors , termed covariates that may impact drug behavior and patient outcomes . This application of population PK is then used to identify special patient populations ( e . g . renal failure , pediatrics , obesity , etc . ) that may require dose adjustments from the ‘standard’ dose [ 356 , 357 ] . 7 . 3 . Benefit / risk ratio appraisal : Omnes viae Romam ducunt . Ultimately , preclinical studies culminate in analysis of the beneficial vs . unintended and adverse effects of the devised DDS in animal models . Admittedly , no animal model fully recapitulates human diseases , but , as physicians know , no individual patient ' s condition fully recapitulates another patient ' s condition . Of course , the closer to human the species is and the closer the pathogenesis is to the relevant human condition , the greater the confidence in the translatability of results . Parameters of the amplitude , timing of the onset , and duration of the desirable vs . unintended effects are the key readouts deciding the fate of a DDS . Statistics are necessary , but not always sufficient to prove the therapeutic significance . The rigor and scrutiny of characterization of DDS effects are painstaking . These studies , performed in healthy and sick animals in an obligatory double - blinded manner , must include direct comparison of experimental groups with controls including healthy and sick animals treated with : A ) Untargeted agents - free and loaded in untargeted DDS ; B ) A mixture of targeted DDS and free drug ; C ) Drugless targeted and untargeted DDS . Not all , but many studies appraising benefit / risk ratio of vascular targeting in fact meet these draconian criteria , giving a certain level of comfort and confidence that this drug delivery approach will inevitably reach the clinical utility . 8 . Conclusions . The wealth of knowledge garnered in three decades of studies of vascular targeting is enormous . These studies yielded diverse endothelial target molecules for drug delivery , J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof multitudes of ligands , nanocarriers , and methodologies for their conjugation and assembly . These means provide specific and effective targeting of drugs to , into and across of the endothelia in several important organs and vascular areas of significant biomedical interest . It seems safe to state that the general progress in this area of the drug delivery field is impressive , encouraging and brings us to the brink of industrial development and clinical translation . These studies have also advanced our understanding of physiological and pathological processes localized in or involving endothelial interface , especially in the lungs and brain . Targeted pharmacological interventions designed to yield functional responses in the specific components and compartments of vascular system and blood represent valuable investigational tools . Indeed , both positive and negative outcomes of such interventions may give mechanistic insight about the role of implicated molecules and cells , on the sine qua none condition that delivery , localization and activity of the targeted pharmacological agent are confirmed “beyond any reasonable doubt” , and therefore , the lack of the effect is attributable to the intricacies of the pathophysiological mechanism , not failure of delivery . Notwithstanding , the main biomedical purpose of drug delivery is , of course , advancement of the treatment of patients - diagnostic , prophylaxis and therapy . The pressure to come up with the winning formulations is palpable , but it would be a mistake to put on the back burner , suspend or abandon devising and research of new DDS , especially in academia , for the sake of concentrating efforts on the industrial development and clinical testing of DDS showing favorable profile in experimental settings . It is unpredictable which specific DDS iterations will emerge as new therapeutic options . Yet , focus on promising candidates seems timely and necessary . Selection of these lead candidates is a complex and multifaceted interdisciplinary affair that must involve basic scientists , clinical investigators , industrial , and regulatory counterparts . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof Table 1 . Comparison of targeting characteristics between passive vs . active approaches . Passive targeting may be reached by mechanical entrapment or non - specific features of DDS surface , while active delivery may be systemic ( ubiquitous target expression ) or local ( tissue - specific target enrichment ) . Non - Affinity Affinity Carrier size or aggregation Carrier surface features Systemic Delivery Site - Specific Mechanism Mechanical uptake in microvasculature down - stream injection ( first pass ) Charge , Glycocalyx , ECM , PS , integrins Binding to EC surface determinant epitopes Using ligands of locally enriched epitopes or / and first pass Addressing to vascular areas and EC types Pre - capillary arterioles Limited if any Pan - endothelial or first pass in an organ Diverse Sub - cellular addressing None None or non - specific internalization Cell surface and interior As in systemic Specificity Low Low Variable to very high High to very high Abbreviations used in table : ECM : extracellular matrix , PS : phosphatidylserine , EC : endothelial cell , DDS : drug delivery systems J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof Table 2 . Target determinants for drug delivery to the endothelium Protein Status , organ & vessel type Cellular localization Function ( s ) Surface density Internalization pathway Changes in inflammation ACE / CD143 Constitutive Pulmonary microvasculature Apical surface Peptidase , converts Ang I into Ang II , cleaves bradykinin Intermediate Yes . Clathrin endocytosis ? Suppressed PECAM / CD31 Constitutive Systemic Pan - endothelial Intercellular borders Signaling Adhesion & migration of WBC Very high ( up to 10 6 / cell ) Not free ligands . DDS induce CAM - endocytosis Stable ICAM - 1 / CD54 Constitutive Lungs Lipid rafts & tetraspanin microdomains on cell surface As above Immunologic synapse formation . Ligand of LFA - 1 , MAC - 1 High Similar to above Elevated in inflammation VCAM - 1 / CD106 Inducible CNS , skin , kidney Apical surface As above Low Clathrin endocytosis Highly elevated in inflammation E - selectin / CD62E Strictly inducible Microvasculature Apical surface Signaling . WBC rolling , blood clotting Intermediate Clathrin endocytosis P - selectin / CD62P Strictly inducible Microvasculature Weibel - Palade bodies of EC , alpha - granules of platelets Blood clotting , binding platelets , signaling , WBC rolling As above Unclear De - encrypted & Inducible in inflammation & clotting APP2 / XPNPEP2 Constitutive Lung , heart , kidneys Alveolar & cardiac microvasculature Caveolae Peptidase Decays substance P Transcytosis High Constitutive caveolar endocytosis Unclear PLVAP / PV1 As above Caveolae and fenestrae Structure aperture ; signaling As above and spleen & kidney Constitutive caveolar endocytosis TfR / CD71 Ubiquitously distributed Cell surface Cellular uptake of iron into specialized endosomes Regulated by cellular iron Receptor - mediated endocytosis ; transcytosis regulator Stable APN / CD13 [ 358 ] Vasculature upon angiogenesis in tissue remodeling and tumors Apical surface Peptidase of Ang III and IV , peptides , chemokines Unclear Clathrin - and / or caveola - dependent [ 358 ] Increased , shedded Integrins [ 359 , 360 ] α v β 3 , α v β 5 , α 5 β 1 Enriched in tumor vessels and other types of angiogenesis Cell surface Adhesion receptors for extracellular ligands ; signaling ; angiogenesis . Variable Type - specific ( i . e . caveolin - dependent for α 5 β 1 , etc . ) [ 361 ] Activated VE - cadherin / Constitutive , Intercellular junctions Cohesion and High Clathrin - mediated Decreased , causing high vessel permeability J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Journal Pre - proof Abbreviations used in table : ACE : angiotensin - converting enzyme , Ang I : angiotensin I , Ang II , angiotensin II , PECAM : platelet - endothelial cell adhesion molecule , WBC : white blood cell , DDS : drug delivery system , CAM : cell adhesion molecule , ICAM - 1 : intercellular adhesion molecule 1 , LFA - 1 : lymphocyte function - associated antigen 1 , MAC - 1 : macrophage - 1 antigen , VCAM - 1 : vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 , CNS : central nervous system , EC : endothelial cell , APP2 / XPNPEP2 : aminopeptidase P , PLVAP : plasmalemma vesicle - associated protein , TfR : transferrin receptor , APN : aminopeptidase N , VE - cadherin : vascular endothelial cadherin , TEM1 : tumor endothelial marker 1 CD144 [ 362 ] exclusively endothelial organization of the intercellular junctions ; signaling ; vascular permeability regulation endocytosis ( p120 - catenin - or phosphorylation - induced ) TEM1 / CD248 [ 363 ] Constitutive in stromal fibroblasts . Expressed in tumor endothelial cells , but not in normal endothelium Cell surface Tumor angiogenesis Variable Unclear Unclear GP90 / CD44 [ 364 ] Most epithelial and lymphoid tissues . Avesicular zone of pulmonary endothelium [ 99 ] Cell surface Cell adhesion and migration ; immune response ; tumor angiogenesis . Hyalorunan receptor Variable Non - classical CD44 - mediated endocytosis of hyalorunan [ 365 ] Increased J o u r n a l P r e - p r o o f Journal Pre - proof Table 3 : Examples of Endothelial - Targeted Drug Delivery in Non - Oncology Settings Abbreviations used in table : ACE : angiotensin - converting enzyme , ICAM - 1 : intercellular adhesion molecule - 1 , LNP : lipid nanocarrier , NPD : Neimann - Pick disease , PECAM - 1 : platelet - endothelial cell adhesion molecule - 1 , PGE 2 : prostaglandin E2 , PLVAP : plasmalemma vesicle - associated protein , RBC - H : red blood cell hitchhiking , scuPA : single chain urokinase - like plasminogen activator , SOD : superoxide dismutase , tPA : tissue - type plasminogen activator Pathology Target Epitope ( s ) Drug ( s ) DDS Ref Pulmonary Embolism PECAM - 1 ICAM - 1 N / A scuPA tPA Reteplase Fusion Protein Protein Conjugate RBC - H [ 267 , 268 ] [ 269 ] [ 232 ] Ischemic Stroke PECAM - 1 scuPA Fusion Protein [ 230 ] Lung Transplant ACE PECAM - 1 Catalase Catalase Protein Conjugate Protein Conjugate [ 324 ] [ 278 , 366 ] Acute Lung Injury PECAM - 1 ICAM - 1 PLVAP Catalase Thrombomodulin MJ33 EUK - 134 SOD / Catalase Thrombomodulin Dexamethasone SOD Protein Conjugate Fusion Protein Liposomes Liposomes Nanoparticles Fusion Protein Nanogel Protein Conjugate [ 321 , 332 ] [ 270 ] [ 333 ] [ 205 ] [ 367 ] [ 271 ] [ 273 ] [ 318 ] Type B NPD ICAM - 1 Acid Sphingomyelinase Nanocarrier [ 166 ] Neurovascular Inflammation VCAM - 1 Thrombomodulin mRNA LNP [ 87 ] Fabry Disease ICAM - 1 α - Galactosidase A Nanocarriers [ 167 ] Glomerulonephritis E - Selectin Dexamethasone DnlκB Transgene Liposome Adenovirus [ 284 , 285 ] [ 289 ] Arthritis Integrin Dexamethasone Liposome [ 291 ] Atherosclerosis VCAM - 1 Prostaglandins Liposome [ 293 ] Pulmonary Hypertension ACE Tph1 shRNA Adenovirus [ 323 ] Pulmonary Ischemia - Reperfusion ACE Catalase Protein Conjugate [ 325 ] Endotoxemia ( IP LPS ) VCAM - 1 Dexamethasone SAINT - O - Somes [ 368 ] Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis PLVAP PGE 2 Protein Conjugate [ 369 ] J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof Acknowledgements Funding : This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health [ grant numbers 1R01HL126874 - 01A1 ( VRM ) , 1R01HL125462 - 02 ( VRM ) , 1R01HL128398 - 02 ( VRM ) , 1R01HL143806 - 01 ( VRM ) , 5T32HL007586 - 34 ( LTF ) , and 5T32HL007971 - 19 ( RYK ) ] . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof References [ 1 ] H . Wolinsky , A proposal linking clearance of circulating lipoproteins to tissue metabolic activity as a basis for understanding atherogenesis , Circ Res , 47 ( 1980 ) 301 - 311 . [ 2 ] W . C . Aird , Endothelium and haemostasis , Hamostaseologie , 35 ( 2015 ) 11 - 16 . [ 3 ] G . Molema , W . C . Aird , Vascular heterogeneity in the kidney , Semin Nephrol , 32 ( 2012 ) 145 - 155 . [ 4 ] W . C . Aird , Phenotypic heterogeneity of the endothelium : I . Structure , function , and mechanisms , Circ Res , 100 ( 2007 ) 158 - 173 . [ 5 ] B . W . Chow , V . Nunez , L . Kaplan , A . J . Granger , K . Bistrong , H . L . Zucker , P . Kumar , B . L . Sabatini , C . Gu , Caveolae in CNS arterioles mediate neurovascular coupling , Nature , 579 ( 2020 ) 106 - 110 . [ 6 ] D . P . McIntosh , X . Y . Tan , P . Oh , J . E . Schnitzer , Targeting endothelium and its dynamic caveolae for tissue - specific transcytosis in vivo : a pathway to overcome cell barriers to drug and gene delivery , Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 99 ( 2002 ) 1996 - 2001 . [ 7 ] M . I . Cybulsky , M . A . Gimbrone , Jr . , Endothelial expression of a mononuclear leukocyte adhesion molecule during atherogenesis , Science , 251 ( 1991 ) 788 - 791 . [ 8 ] R . Y . Kiseleva , P . M . Glassman , C . F . Greineder , E . D . Hood , V . V . Shuvaev , V . R . Muzykantov , Targeting therapeutics to endothelium : are we there yet ? , Drug Deliv Transl Res , 8 ( 2018 ) 883 - 902 . [ 9 ] Y . Sakurai , H . Akita , H . Harashima , Targeting Tumor Endothelial Cells with Nanoparticles , Int J Mol Sci , 20 ( 2019 ) . [ 10 ] M . Farshbaf , S . Davaran , A . Zarebkohan , N . Annabi , A . Akbarzadeh , R . Salehi , Significant role of cationic polymers in drug delivery systems , Artif Cells Nanomed Biotechnol , 46 ( 2018 ) 1872 - 1891 . [ 11 ] F . D . Kolodgie , A . Petrov , R . Virmani , N . Narula , J . W . Verjans , D . K . Weber , D . Hartung , N . Steinmetz , J . L . Vanderheyden , M . A . Vannan , H . K . Gold , C . P . Reutelingsperger , L . Hofstra , J . Narula , Targeting of apoptotic macrophages and experimental atheroma with radiolabeled annexin V : a technique with potential for noninvasive imaging of vulnerable plaque , Circulation , 108 ( 2003 ) 3134 - 3139 . [ 12 ] A . Akinc , W . Querbes , S . De , J . Qin , M . Frank - Kamenetsky , K . N . Jayaprakash , M . Jayaraman , K . G . Rajeev , W . L . Cantley , J . R . Dorkin , J . S . Butler , L . Qin , T . Racie , A . Sprague , E . Fava , A . Zeigerer , M . J . Hope , M . Zerial , D . W . Sah , K . Fitzgerald , M . A . Tracy , M . Manoharan , V . Koteliansky , A . Fougerolles , M . A . Maier , Targeted delivery of RNAi therapeutics with endogenous and exogenous ligand - based mechanisms , Mol Ther , 18 ( 2010 ) 1357 - 1364 . [ 13 ] D . Liu , Q . Hu , Y . K . Song , Liposome clearance from blood : different animal species have different mechanisms , Biochim Biophys Acta , 1240 ( 1995 ) 277 - 284 . [ 14 ] A . C . Anselmo , V . Gupta , B . J . Zern , D . Pan , M . Zakrewsky , V . Muzykantov , S . Mitragotri , Delivering nanoparticles to lungs while avoiding liver and spleen through adsorption on red blood cells , ACS Nano , 7 ( 2013 ) 11129 - 11137 . [ 15 ] V . Naumenko , A . Nikitin , A . Garanina , P . Melnikov , S . Vodopyanov , K . Kapitanova , D . Potashnikova , D . Vishnevskiy , I . Alieva , A . Ilyasov , B . Z . Eletskaya , M . Abakumov , V . Chekhonin , A . Majouga , Neutrophil - mediated transport is crucial for delivery of short - circulating magnetic nanoparticles to tumors , Acta Biomater , 104 ( 2020 ) 176 - 187 . [ 16 ] J . Hao , J . Chen , M . Wang , J . Zhao , J . Wang , X . Wang , Y . Li , H . Tang , Neutrophils , as " Trojan horses " , participate in the delivery of therapeutical PLGA nanoparticles into a tumor based on the chemotactic effect , Drug Deliv , 27 ( 2020 ) 1 - 14 . [ 17 ] Y . Dong , K . T . Love , J . R . Dorkin , S . Sirirungruang , Y . Zhang , D . Chen , R . L . Bogorad , H . Yin , Y . Chen , A . J . Vegas , C . A . Alabi , G . Sahay , K . T . Olejnik , W . Wang , A . Schroeder , A . K . Lytton - Jean , D . J . Siegwart , A . Akinc , C . Barnes , S . A . Barros , M . Carioto , K . Fitzgerald , J . Hettinger , V . Kumar , T . I . Novobrantseva , J . Qin , W . Querbes , V . Koteliansky , R . Langer , D . G . Anderson , Lipopeptide nanoparticles for potent and s elective siRNA delivery in rodents and nonhuman primates , Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 111 ( 2014 ) 3955 - 3960 . [ 18 ] P . P . G . Guimaraes , R . Zhang , R . Spektor , M . Tan , A . Chung , M . M . Billingsley , R . El - Mayta , R . S . Riley , L . Wang , J . M . Wilson , M . J . Mitchell , Ionizable lipid nanoparticles encapsulating barcoded mRNA for accelerated in vivo delivery screening , J Control Release , 316 ( 2019 ) 404 - 417 . [ 19 ] D . Rajotte , W . Arap , M . Hagedorn , E . Koivunen , R . Pasqualini , E . Ruoslahti , Molecular heterogeneity of the vascular endothelium revealed by in vivo phage display , J Clin Invest , 102 ( 1998 ) 430 - 437 . [ 20 ] F . Danhier , O . Feron , V . Preat , To exploit the tumor microenvironment : Passive and active tumor targeting of nanocarriers for anti - cancer drug delivery , J Control Release , 148 ( 2010 ) 135 - 146 . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof [ 21 ] V . R . Muzykantov , Immunotargeting of drugs to the pulmonary vascular endothelium as a therapeutic strategy . , Pathophysiology , 5 ( 1998 ) 15 - 33 . [ 22 ] P . Oh , Y . Li , J . Yu , E . Durr , K . M . Krasinska , L . A . Carver , J . E . Testa , J . E . Schnitzer , Subtractive proteomic mapping of the endothelial surface in lung and solid tumours for tissue - specific therapy , Nature , 429 ( 2004 ) 629 - 635 . [ 23 ] J . E . Schnitzer , Vascular targeting as a strategy for cancer therapy , N Engl J Med , 339 ( 1998 ) 472 - 474 . [ 24 ] S . J . Kennel , R . Lee , S . Bultman , G . Kabalka , Rat monoclonal antibody distribution in mice : an epitope inside the lung vascular space mediates very efficient localization , Int J Rad Appl Instrum B , 17 ( 1990 ) 193 - 200 . [ 25 ] D . D . Spragg , D . R . Alford , R . Greferath , C . E . Larsen , K . D . Lee , G . C . Gurtner , M . I . Cybulsky , P . F . Tosi , C . Nicolau , M . A . Gimbrone , Jr . , Immunotargeting of liposomes to activated vascular endothelial cells : a strategy for site - selective delivery in the cardiovascular system , Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 94 ( 1997 ) 8795 - 8800 . [ 26 ] R . B . Huang , S . Mocherla , M . J . Heslinga , P . Charoenphol , O . Eniola - Adefeso , Dynamic and cellular interactions of nanoparticles in vascular - targeted drug delivery , Molecular membrane biology , 27 ( 2010 ) 312 - 327 . [ 27 ] A . Corti , F . Pastorino , F . Curnis , W . Arap , M . Ponzoni , R . Pasqualini , Targeted drug delivery and penetration into solid tumors , Med Res Rev , 32 ( 2012 ) 1078 - 1091 . [ 28 ] S . A . Wickline , A . M . Neubauer , P . M . Winter , S . D . Caruthers , G . M . Lanza , Molecular imaging and therapy of atherosclerosis with targeted nanoparticles , J Magn Reson Imaging , 25 ( 2007 ) 667 - 680 . [ 29 ] C . O . Noble , D . B . Kirpotin , M . E . Hayes , C . Mamot , K . Hong , J . W . Park , C . C . Benz , J . D . Marks , D . C . Drummond , Development of ligand - targeted liposomes for cancer therapy , Expert Opin Ther Targets , 8 ( 2004 ) 335 - 353 . [ 30 ] W . Xia , P . S . Low , Folate - targeted therapies for cancer , J Med Chem , 53 ( 2010 ) 6811 - 6824 . [ 31 ] B . J . Hughes , S . Kennel , R . Lee , L . Huang , Monoclonal antibody targeting of liposomes to mouse lung in vivo , Cancer Res , 49 ( 1989 ) 6214 - 6220 . [ 32 ] K . Maruyama , S . J . Kennel , L . Huang , Lipid composition is important for highly efficient target binding and retention of immunoliposomes , Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 87 ( 1990 ) 5744 - 5748 . [ 33 ] F . A . Martin , R . P . Murphy , P . M . Cummins , Thrombomodulin and the vascular endothelium : insights into functional , regulatory , and therapeutic aspects , Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol , 304 ( 2013 ) H1585 - 1597 . [ 34 ] C . T . Esmon , Inflammation and the activated protein C anticoagulant pathway , Seminars in thrombosis and hemostasis , 32 Suppl 1 ( 2006 ) 49 - 60 . [ 35 ] C . Brisson , G . Archipoff , M . L . Hartmann , D . Hanau , A . Beretz , J . M . Freyssinet , J . P . Cazenave , Antibodies to thrombomodulin induce receptor - mediated endocytosis in human saphenous vein endothelial cells , Thromb Haemost , 68 ( 1992 ) 737 - 743 . [ 36 ] S . Guermazi , F . Mellouli , S . Trabelsi , M . Bejaoui , K . Dellagi , Anti - thrombomodulin antibodies and venous thrombosis , Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis , 15 ( 2004 ) 553 - 558 . [ 37 ] I . V . Balyasnikova , R . Metzger , D . J . Visintine , V . Dimasius , Z . L . Sun , Y . V . Berestetskaya , T . D . McDonald , D . T . Curiel , R . D . Minshall , S . M . Danilov , Selective rat lung endothelial targeting with a new set of monoclonal antibodies to angiotensin I - converting enzyme , Pulm Pharmacol Ther , 18 ( 2005 ) 251 - 267 . [ 38 ] I . V . Balyasnikova , Z . L . Sun , R . Metzger , P . R . Taylor , E . Vicini , B . Muciaccia , D . J . Visintine , Y . V . Berestetskaya , T . D . McDonald , S . M . Danilov , Monoclonal antibodies to native mouse angiotensin - converting enzyme ( CD143 ) : ACE expression quantification , lung endothelial cell targeting and gene delivery , Tissue Antigens , 67 ( 2006 ) 10 - 29 . [ 39 ] S . M . Danilov , V . D . Gavrilyuk , F . E . Franke , K . Pauls , D . W . Harshaw , T . D . McDonald , D . J . Miletich , V . R . Muzykantov , Lung uptake of antibodies to endothelial antigens : key determinants of vascular immunotargeting , Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol , 280 ( 2001 ) L1335 - 1347 . [ 40 ] S . M . Danilov , A . V . Martynov , A . L . Klibanov , M . A . Slinkin , I . Sakharov , A . G . Malov , V . B . Sergienko , A . Vedernikov , V . R . Muzykantov , V . P . Torchilin , Radioimmunoimaging of lung vessels : an approach using indium - 111 - labeled monoclonal antibody to angiotensin - converting enzyme , J Nucl Med , 30 ( 1989 ) 1686 - 1692 . [ 41 ] S . M . Danilov , V . R . Muzykantov , A . V . Martynov , E . N . Atochina , I . Sakharov , I . N . Trakht , V . N . Smirnov , Lung is the target organ for a monoclonal antibody to angiotensin - converting enzyme , Lab Invest , 64 ( 1991 ) 118 - 124 . [ 42 ] E . G . Erdos , Angiotensin I converting enzyme and the changes in our concepts through the years . Lewis K . Dahl memorial lecture , Hypertension , 16 ( 1990 ) 363 - 370 . [ 43 ] H . Heitsch , S . Brovkovych , T . Malinski , G . Wiemer , Angiotensin - ( 1 - 7 ) - Stimulated Nitric Oxide and Superoxide Release From Endothelial Cells , Hypertension , 37 ( 2001 ) 72 - 76 . [ 44 ] V . R . Muzykantov , Danilov , SM . , Targeting of radiolabeled monoclonal antibody against ACE to the pulmonary endothelium . , in : V . Torchilin ( Ed . ) Targeted Delivery of Imaging Agents , CRC Press , Roca Baton , Florida , 1995 , pp . 465 - 485 . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof [ 45 ] P . N . Reynolds , S . A . Nicklin , L . Kaliberova , B . G . Boatman , W . E . Grizzle , I . V . Balyasnikova , A . H . Baker , S . M . Danilov , D . T . Curiel , Combined transductional and transcriptional targeting improves the specificity of transgene expression in vivo , Nat Biotechnol , 19 ( 2001 ) 838 - 842 . [ 46 ] P . N . Reynolds , K . R . Zinn , V . D . Gavrilyuk , I . V . Balyasnikova , B . E . Rogers , D . J . Buchsbaum , M . H . Wang , D . J . Miletich , W . E . Grizzle , J . T . Douglas , S . M . Danilov , D . T . Curiel , A targetable , injectable adenoviral vector for selective gene delivery to pulmonary endothelium in vivo , Mol Ther , 2 ( 2000 ) 562 - 578 . [ 47 ] S . Danilov , E . Atochina , H . Hiemisch , T . Churak - ova , A . Moldobayeva , I . Sakharov , G . Deichman , U . Ryan , V . R . Muzykantov , Interaction of mAb to angiotensin - converting enzyme ( ACE ) with antigen in vitro and in vivo : antibody targeting to the lung induces ACE antigenic modulation , Int Immunol , 6 ( 1994 ) 1153 - 1160 . [ 48 ] I . V . Balyasnikova , E . H . Karran , R . F . Albrecht , 2nd , S . M . Danilov , Epitope - specific antibody - induced cleavage of angiotensin - converting enzyme from the cell surface , Biochem J , 362 ( 2002 ) 585 - 595 . [ 49 ] M . Christofidou - Solomidou , S . Kennel , A . Scherpereel , R . Wiewrodt , C . C . Solomides , G . G . Pietra , J . C . Murciano , S . A . Shah , H . Ischiropoulos , S . M . Albelda , V . R . Muzykantov , Vascular immunotargeting of glucos e oxidase to the endothelial antigens induces distinct forms of oxidant acute lung injury : targeting to thrombomodulin , but not to PECAM - 1 , causes pulmonary thrombosis and neutrophil transmigration , Am J Pathol , 160 ( 2002 ) 1155 - 1169 . [ 50 ] V . R . Muzykantov , Targeting of superoxide dismutase and catalase to vascular endothelium , J Control Release , 71 ( 2001 ) 1 - 21 . [ 51 ] W . H . Miller , M . J . Brosnan , D . Graham , C . G . Nicol , I . Morecroft , K . M . Channon , S . M . Danilov , P . N . Reynolds , A . H . Baker , A . F . Dominiczak , Targeting endothelial cells with adenovirus expressing nitric oxide synthase prevents elevation of blood pressure in stroke - prone spontaneously hypertensive rats , Mol Ther , 12 ( 2005 ) 321 - 327 . [ 52 ] A . M . Reynolds , W . Xia , M . D . Holmes , S . J . Hodge , S . Danilov , D . T . Curiel , N . W . Morrell , P . N . Reynolds , Bone morphogenetic protein type 2 receptor gene therapy attenuates hypoxic pulmonary hypertension , Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol , 292 ( 2007 ) L1182 - 1192 . [ 53 ] V . V . Shuvaev , M . Christofidou - Solomidou , A . Scherpereel , E . Simone , E . Arguiri , S . Tliba , J . Pick , S . Kennel , S . M . Albelda , V . R . Muzykantov , Factors modulating the delivery and effect of enzymatic cargo conjugated with antibodies targeted to the pulmonary endothelium , J Control Release , 118 ( 2007 ) 235 - 244 . [ 54 ] S . Perkowski , J . Sun , S . Singhal , J . Santiago , G . D . Leikauf , S . M . Albelda , Gene expression profiling of the early pulmonary response to hyperoxia in mice , American journal of respiratory cell and molecular biology , 28 ( 2003 ) 682 - 696 . [ 55 ] B . Beneteau - Burnat , B . Baudin , Angiotensin - converting enzyme : clinical applications and laboratory investigations on serum and other biological fluids , Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci , 28 ( 1991 ) 337 - 356 . [ 56 ] K . Watanabe , G . Lam , R . S . Keresztes , E . A . Jaffe , Lipopolysaccharides decrease angiotensin converting enzyme activity expressed by cultured human endothelial cells , J Cell Physiol , 150 ( 1992 ) 433 - 439 . [ 57 ] E . N . Atochina , H . H . Hiemisch , V . R . Muzykantov , S . M . Danilov , Systemic administration of platelet - activating factor in rat reduces specific pulmonary uptake of circulating monoclonal antibody to angiotensin - converting enzyme , Lung , 170 ( 1992 ) 349 - 358 . [ 58 ] V . R . Muzykantov , E . A . Puchnina , E . N . Atochina , H . Hiemish , M . A . Slinkin , F . E . Meertsuk , S . M . Danilov , Endotoxin reduces specific pulmonary uptake of radiolabeled monoclonal antibody to angiotensin - converting enzyme , J Nucl Med , 32 ( 1991 ) 453 - 460 . [ 59 ] E . N . Atochina , V . R . Muzykantov , A . B . Al - Mehdi , S . M . Danilov , A . B . Fisher , Normoxic lung ischemia / reperfusion accelerates shedding of angiotensin converting enzyme from the pulmonary endothelium , Am J Respir Crit Care Med , 156 ( 1997 ) 1114 - 1119 . [ 60 ] S . M . Danilov , M . S . Wade , S . L . Schwager , R . G . Douglas , A . B . Nesterovitch , I . A . Popova , K . D . Hogarth , N . Bhardwaj , D . E . Schwartz , E . D . Sturrock , J . G . Garcia , A novel angiotensin I - converting enzyme mutation ( S333W ) impairs N - domain enzymatic cleavage of the anti - fibrotic peptide , AcSDKP , PLoS One , 9 ( 2014 ) e88001 . [ 61 ] S . C . Christiaans , B . M . Wagener , C . T . Esmon , J . F . Pittet , Protein C and acute inflammation : a clinical and biological perspective , Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol , 305 ( 2013 ) L455 - 466 . [ 62 ] H . H . Lipowsky , A . Lescanic , Inhibition of inflammation induced shedding of the endothelial glycocalyx with low molecular weight heparin , Microvasc Res , 112 ( 2017 ) 72 - 78 . [ 63 ] H . H . Lipowsky , Relative shedding of glycosaminoglycans from the endothelial glycocalyx during inflammation and their contribution to stiffness of the glycocalyx , Biorheology , 56 ( 2019 ) 191 - 205 . [ 64 ] R . Carnemolla , C . F . Greineder , A . M . Chacko , K . R . Patel , B . S . Ding , S . Zaitsev , C . T . Esmon , V . R . Muzykantov , Platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule targeted oxidant - resistant mutant thrombomodulin fusion protein with enhanced potency in vitro and in vivo , J Pharmacol Exp Ther , 347 ( 2013 ) 339 - 345 . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof [ 65 ] S . Muro , V . R . Muzykantov , Targeting of antioxidant and anti - thrombotic drugs to endothelial cell adhesion molecules , Curr Pharm Des , 11 ( 2005 ) 2383 - 2401 . [ 66 ] G . A . Koning , R . M . Schiffelers , G . Storm , Endothelial cells at inflammatory sites as target for therapeutic intervention , Endothelium , 9 ( 2002 ) 161 - 171 . [ 67 ] J . M . Kiely , M . I . Cybulsky , F . W . Luscinskas , M . A . Gimbrone , Jr . , Immunoselective targeting of an anti - thrombin agent to the surface of cytokine - activated vascular endothelial cells , Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol , 15 ( 1995 ) 1211 - 1218 . [ 68 ] E . T . Keelan , A . A . Harrison , P . T . Chapman , R . M . Binns , A . M . Peters , D . O . Haskard , Imaging vascular endothelial activation : an approach using radiolabeled monoclonal antibodies against the endothelial cell adhesion molecule E - selectin , J Nucl Med , 35 ( 1994 ) 276 - 281 . [ 69 ] X . Huang , G . Molema , S . King , L . Watkins , T . S . Edgington , P . E . Thorpe , Tumor infarction in mice by antibody - directed targeting of tissue factor to tumor vasculature , Science , 275 ( 1997 ) 547 - 550 . [ 70 ] S . Muro , M . Koval , V . Muzykantov , Endothelial endocytic pathways : gates for vascular drug delivery , Curr Vasc Pharmacol , 2 ( 2004 ) 281 - 299 . [ 71 ] T . A . Springer , Adhesion receptors of the immune system , Nature , 346 ( 1990 ) 425 - 434 . [ 72 ] C . M . Doerschuk , W . M . Quinlan , N . A . Doyle , D . C . Bullard , D . Vestweber , M . L . Jones , F . Takei , P . A . Ward , A . L . Beaudet , The role of P - selectin and ICAM - 1 in acute lung injury as determined using blocking antibodies and mutant mice , J Immunol , 157 ( 1996 ) 4609 - 4614 . [ 73 ] T . K . Kishimoto , R . Rothlein , Integrins , ICAMs , and selectins : role and regulation of adhesion molecules in neutrophil recruitment to inflammatory sites , Adv Pharmacol , 25 ( 1994 ) 117 - 169 . [ 74 ] S . M . Albelda , Endothelial and epithelial cell adhesion molecules , American journal of respiratory cell and molecular biology , 4 ( 1991 ) 195 - 203 . [ 75 ] S . Strukova , Blood coagulation - dependent inflammation . Coagulation - dependent inflammation and inflammation - dependent thrombosis , Front Biosci , 11 ( 2006 ) 59 - 80 . [ 76 ] H . F . Langer , T . Chavakis , Leukocyte - endothelial interactions in inflammation , J Cell Mol Med , 13 ( 2009 ) 1211 - 1220 . [ 77 ] N . Reglero - Real , B . Colom , J . V . Bodkin , S . Nourshargh , Endothelial Cell Junctional Adhesion Molecules : Role and Regulation of Expression in Inflammation , Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol , 36 ( 2016 ) 2048 - 2057 . [ 78 ] A . Daiber , S . Steven , A . Weber , V . V . Shuvaev , V . R . Muzykantov , I . Laher , H . Li , S . Lamas , T . Munzel , Targeting vascular ( endothelial ) dysfunction , Br J Pharmacol , 174 ( 2017 ) 1591 - 1619 . [ 79 ] C . Ince , P . R . Mayeux , T . Nguyen , H . Gomez , J . A . Kellum , G . A . Ospina - Tascon , G . Hernandez , P . Murray , D . De Backer , A . X . Workgroup , The Endothelium in Sepsis , Shock , 45 ( 2016 ) 259 - 270 . [ 80 ] P . Rajendran , T . Rengarajan , J . Thangavel , Y . Nishigaki , D . Sakthisekaran , G . Sethi , I . Nishigaki , The vascular endothelium and human diseases , Int J Biol Sci , 9 ( 2013 ) 1057 - 1069 . [ 81 ] L . A . Teuwen , V . Geldhof , A . Pasut , P . Carmeliet , COVID - 19 : the vasculature unleashed , Nat Rev Immunol , ( 2020 ) . [ 82 ] D . Gustafson , S . Raju , R . Wu , C . Ching , S . Veitch , K . Rathnakumar , E . Boudreau , K . L . Howe , J . E . Fish , Overcoming Barriers : The Endothelium As a Linchpin of Coronavirus Disease 2019 Pathogenesis ? , Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol , ( 2020 ) ATVBAHA120314558 . [ 83 ] H . Li , L . Liu , D . Zhang , J . Xu , H . Dai , N . Tang , X . Su , B . Cao , SARS - CoV - 2 and viral sepsis : observations and hypotheses , Lancet , 395 ( 2020 ) 1517 - 1520 . [ 84 ] J . R . Lindner , J . Song , J . Christiansen , A . L . Klibanov , F . Xu , K . Ley , Ultrasound assessment of inflammation and renal tissue injury with microbubbles targeted to P - selectin , Circulation , 104 ( 2001 ) 2107 - 2112 . [ 85 ] J . R . Lindner , A . L . Klibanov , K . Ley , Targeting inflammation , in : V . R . Muzykantov , V . P . Torchilin ( Eds . ) Biomedical aspects of drug targeting , Kluwer Academic Pub . , Boston , 2003 , pp . 149 - 172 . [ 86 ] A . Tsourkas , V . R . Shinde - Patil , K . A . Kelly , P . Patel , A . Wolley , J . R . Allport , R . Weissleder , In vivo imaging of activated endothelium using an anti - VCAM - 1 magnetooptical probe , Bioconjug Chem , 16 ( 2005 ) 576 - 581 . [ 87 ] O . A . Marcos - Contreras , C . F . Greineder , R . Y . Kiseleva , H . Parhiz , L . R . Walsh , V . Zuluaga - Ramirez , J . W . Myerson , E . D . Hood , C . H . Villa , I . Tombacz , N . Pardi , A . Seliga , B . L . Mui , Y . K . Tam , P . M . Glassman , V . V . Shuvaev , J . Nong , J . S . Brenner , M . Khoshnejad , T . Madden , D . Weissmann , Y . Persidsky , V . R . Muzykantov , Selective targeting of nanomedicine to inflamed cerebral vasculature to enhance the blood - brain barrier , Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 117 ( 2020 ) 3405 - 3414 . [ 88 ] S . P . Samuel , N . Jain , F . O ' Dowd , T . Paul , D . Kashanin , V . A . Gerard , Y . K . Gun ' ko , A . Prina - Mello , Y . Volkov , Multifactorial determinants that govern nanoparticle uptake by human endothelial cells under flow , Int J Nanomedicine , 7 ( 2012 ) 2943 - 2956 . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof [ 89 ] A . D . Terrisse , N . Puech , S . Allart , P . Gourdy , J . M . Xuereb , B . Payrastre , P . Sie , Internalization of microparticles by endothelial cells promotes platelet / endothelial cell interaction under flow , J Thromb Haemost , 8 ( 2010 ) 2810 - 2819 . [ 90 ] J . Han , B . J . Zern , V . V . Shuvaev , P . F . Davies , S . Muro , V . Muzykantov , Acute and Chronic Shear Stress Differently Regulate Endothelial Internalization of Nanocarriers Targeted to Platelet - Endothelial Cell Adhesion Molecule - 1 , ACS Nano , 6 ( 2012 ) 8824 - 8836 . [ 91 ] T . Bhowmick , E . Berk , X . Cui , V . R . Muzykantov , S . Muro , Effect of flow on endothelial endocytosis of nanocarriers targeted to ICAM - 1 , Journal of Controlled Release , 157 ( 2012 ) 485 - 492 . [ 92 ] P . J . Newman , S . M . Albelda , Cellular and molecular aspects of PECAM - 1 , Nouv Rev Fr Hematol , 34 Suppl ( 1992 ) S9 - 13 . [ 93 ] M . Giannotta , M . Trani , E . Dejana , VE - cadherin and endothelial adherens junctions : active guardians of vascular integrity , Dev Cell , 26 ( 2013 ) 441 - 454 . [ 94 ] O . Barreiro , M . Yanez - Mo , M . Sala - Valdes , M . D . Gutierrez - Lopez , S . Ovalle , A . Higginbottom , P . N . Monk , C . Cabanas , F . Sanchez - Madrid , Endothelial tetraspanin microdomains regulate leukocyte firm adhesion during extravasation , Blood , 105 ( 2005 ) 2852 - 2861 . [ 95 ] J . M . Cook - Mills , M . E . Marchese , H . Abdala - Valencia , Vascular cell adhesion molecule - 1 expression and signaling during disease : regulation by reactive oxygen species and antioxidants , Antioxid Redox Signal , 15 ( 2011 ) 1607 - 1638 . [ 96 ] A . Almenar - Queralt , A . Duperray , L . A . Miles , J . Felez , D . C . Altieri , Apical topography and modulation of ICAM - 1 expression on activated endothelium , Am J Pathol , 147 ( 1995 ) 1278 - 1288 . [ 97 ] M . D . Wright , G . W . Moseley , A . B . van Spriel , Tetraspanin microdomains in immune cell signalling and malignant disease , Tissue Antigens , 64 ( 2004 ) 533 - 542 . [ 98 ] L . Ghitescu , B . S . Jacobson , P . Crine , A novel , 85 kDa endothelial antigen differentiates plasma membrane macrodomains in lung alveolar capillaries , Endothelium , 6 ( 1999 ) 241 - 250 . [ 99 ] J . C . Murciano , D . W . Harshaw , L . Ghitescu , S . M . Danilov , V . R . Muzykantov , Vascular immunotargeting to endothelial surface in a specific macrodomain in alveolar capillaries , Am J Respir Crit Care Med , 164 ( 2001 ) 1295 - 1302 . [ 100 ] T . W . Kuijpers , M . Raleigh , T . Kavanagh , H . Janssen , J . Calafat , D . Roos , J . M . Harlan , Cytokine - activated endothelial cells internalize E - selectin into a lysosomal compartment of vesiculotubular shape . A tubulin - driven process , J Immunol , 152 ( 1994 ) 5060 - 5069 . [ 101 ] K . S . Straley , S . A . Green , Rapid transport of internalized P - selectin to late endosomes and the TGN : roles in regulating cell surface expression and recycling to secretory granules , J Cell Biol , 151 ( 2000 ) 107 - 116 . [ 102 ] E . J . von Asmuth , E . F . Smeets , L . A . Ginsel , J . J . Onderwater , J . F . Leeuwenberg , W . A . Buurman , Evidence for endocytosis of E - selectin in human endothelial cells , Eur J Immunol , 22 ( 1992 ) 2519 - 2526 . [ 103 ] S . Kessner , A . Krause , U . Rothe , G . Bendas , Investigation of the cellular uptake of E - Selectin - targeted immunoliposomes by activated human endothelial cells , Biochim Biophys Acta , 1514 ( 2001 ) 177 - 190 . [ 104 ] M . Everts , R . J . Kok , S . A . Asgeirsdottir , B . N . Melgert , T . J . Moolenaar , G . A . Koning , M . J . van Luyn , D . K . Meijer , G . Molema , Selective intracellular delivery of dexamethasone into activated endothelial cells using an E - selectin - directed immunoconjugate , J Immunol , 168 ( 2002 ) 883 - 889 . [ 105 ] O . A . Harari , T . J . Wickham , C . J . Stocker , I . Kovesdi , D . M . Segal , T . Y . Huehns , C . Sarraf , D . O . Haskard , Targeting an adenoviral gene vector to cytokine - activated vascular endothelium via E - selectin , Gene Ther , 6 ( 1999 ) 801 - 807 . [ 106 ] S . Muro , C . Gajewski , M . Koval , V . R . Muzykantov , ICAM - 1 recycling in endothelial cells : a novel pathway for sustained intracellular delivery and prolonged effects of drugs , Blood , 105 ( 2005 ) 650 - 658 . [ 107 ] B . S . Ding , T . Dziubla , V . V . Shuvaev , S . Muro , V . R . Muzykantov , Advanced drug delivery systems that target the vascular endothelium , Mol Interv , 6 ( 2006 ) 98 - 112 . [ 108 ] S . Muro , R . Wiewrodt , A . Thomas , L . Koniaris , S . M . Albelda , V . R . Muzykantov , M . Koval , A novel endocytic pathway induced by clustering endothelial ICAM - 1 or PECAM - 1 , J Cell Sci , 116 ( 2003 ) 1599 - 1609 . [ 109 ] M . Howard , B . J . Zern , A . C . Anselmo , V . V . Shuvaev , S . Mitragotri , V . Muzykantov , Vascular targeting of nanocarriers : perplexing aspects of the seemingly straightforward paradigm , ACS Nano , 8 ( 2014 ) 4100 - 4132 . [ 110 ] C . Garnacho , S . M . Albelda , V . R . Muzykantov , S . Muro , Differential intra - endothelial delivery of polymer nanocarriers targeted to distinct PECAM - 1 epitopes , J Control Release , 130 ( 2008 ) 226 - 233 . [ 111 ] A . W . Mulivor , H . H . Lipowsky , Role of glycocalyx in leukocyte - endothelial cell adhesion , Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol , 283 ( 2002 ) H1282 - 1291 . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof [ 112 ] E . Durr , J . Yu , K . M . Krasinska , L . A . Carver , J . R . Yates , J . E . Testa , P . Oh , J . E . Schnitzer , Direct proteomic mapping of the lung microvascular endothelial cell surface in vivo and in cell culture , Nat Biotechnol , 22 ( 2004 ) 985 - 992 . [ 113 ] A . Tradonsky , T . Rubin , R . Beck , B . Ring , R . Seitz , S . Mair , A search for reliable molecular markers of prognosis in prostate cancer : a study of 240 cases , Am J Clin Pathol , 137 ( 2012 ) 918 - 930 . [ 114 ] K . C . Wood , S . M . Azarin , W . Arap , R . Pasqualini , R . Langer , P . T . Hammond , Tumor - targeted gene delivery using molecularly engineered hybrid polymers functionalized with a tumor - homing peptide , Bioconjug Chem , 19 ( 2008 ) 403 - 405 . [ 115 ] P . Valadon , J . D . Garnett , J . E . Testa , M . Bauerle , P . Oh , J . E . Schnitzer , Screening phage display libraries for organ - specific vascular immunotargeting in vivo , Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 103 ( 2006 ) 407 - 412 . [ 116 ] P . Oh , P . Borgstrom , H . Witkiewicz , Y . Li , B . J . Borgstrom , A . Chrastina , K . Iwata , K . R . Zinn , R . Baldwin , J . E . Testa , J . E . Schnitzer , Live dynamic imaging of caveolae pumping targeted antibody rapidly and specifically across endothelium in the lung , Nat Biotech , 25 ( 2007 ) 327 - 337 . [ 117 ] R . D . Minshall , C . Tiruppathi , S . M . Vogel , W . D . Niles , A . Gilchrist , H . E . Hamm , A . B . Malik , Endothelial cell - surface gp60 activates vesicle formation and trafficking via G ( i ) - coupled Src kinase signaling pathway , J Cell Biol , 150 ( 2000 ) 1057 - 1070 . [ 118 ] S . M . Vogel , C . R . Easington , R . D . Minshall , W . D . Niles , C . Tiruppathi , S . M . Hollenberg , J . E . Parrillo , A . B . Malik , Evidence of transcellular permeability pathway in microvessels , Microvasc Res , 61 ( 2001 ) 87 - 101 . [ 119 ] H . Riezman , P . G . Woodman , G . van Meer , M . Marsh , Molecular mechanisms of endocytosis , Cell , 91 ( 1997 ) 731 - 738 . [ 120 ] D . Predescu , G . E . Palade , Plasmalemmal vesicles represent the large pore system of continuous microvascular endothelium , Am J Physiol , 265 ( 1993 ) H725 - 733 . [ 121 ] R . V . Stan , Structure and function of endothelial caveolae , Microsc Res Tech , 57 ( 2002 ) 350 - 364 . [ 122 ] R . D . Minshall , C . Tiruppathi , S . M . Vogel , A . B . Malik , Vesicle formation and trafficking in endothelial cells and regulation of endothelial barrier function , Histochem Cell Biol , 117 ( 2002 ) 105 - 112 . [ 123 ] J . E . Schnitzer , Caveolae : from basic trafficking mechanisms to targeting transcytosis for tissue - specific drug and gene delivery in vivo , Advanced drug delivery reviews , 49 ( 2001 ) 265 - 280 . [ 124 ] J . E . Schnitzer , D . P . McIntosh , A . M . Dvorak , J . Liu , P . Oh , Separation of caveolae from associated microdomains of GPI - anchored proteins , Science , 269 ( 1995 ) 1435 - 1439 . [ 125 ] T . A . John , S . M . Vogel , C . Tiruppathi , A . B . Malik , R . D . Minshall , Quantitative analysis of albumin uptake and transport in the rat microvessel endothelial monolayer , Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol , 284 ( 2003 ) L187 - 196 . [ 126 ] D . Predescu , S . Predescu , A . B . Malik , Transport of nitrated albumin across continuous vascular endothelium , Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 99 ( 2002 ) 13932 - 13937 . [ 127 ] R . G . Parton , K . Simons , The multiple faces of caveolae , Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol , 8 ( 2007 ) 185 - 194 . [ 128 ] E . A . Simone , B . J . Zern , A . M . Chacko , J . L . Mikitsh , E . R . Blankemeyer , S . Muro , R . V . Stan , V . R . Muzykantov , Endothelial targeting of polymeric nanoparticles stably labeled with the PET imaging radioisotope iodine - 124 , Biomaterials , 33 ( 2012 ) 5406 - 5413 . [ 129 ] T . G . Iversen , N . Frerker , K . Sandvig , Uptake of ricinB - quantum dot nanoparticles by a macropinocytosis - like mechanism , Journal of nanobiotechnology , 10 ( 2012 ) 33 . [ 130 ] Z . Wang , C . Tiruppathi , R . D . Minshall , A . B . Malik , Size and dynamics of caveolae studied using nanoparticles in living endothelial cells , ACS Nano , 3 ( 2009 ) 4110 - 4116 . [ 131 ] J . W . Myerson , B . Braender , O . McPherson , P . M . Glassman , R . Y . Kiseleva , V . V . Shuvaev , O . Marcos - Contreras , M . E . Grady , H . S . Lee , C . F . Greineder , R . V . Stan , R . J . Composto , D . M . Eckmann , V . R . Muzykantov , Flexible Nanoparticles Reach Sterically Obscured Endothelial Targets Inaccessible to Rigid Nanoparticles , Adv Mater , 30 ( 2018 ) e1802373 . [ 132 ] M . Khoshnejad , H . Parhiz , V . V . Shuvaev , I . J . Dmochowski , V . R . Muzykantov , Ferritin - based drug delivery systems : Hybrid nanocarriers for vascular immunotargeting , J Control Release , 282 ( 2018 ) 13 - 24 . [ 133 ] V . V . Shuvaev , M . Khoshnejad , K . W . Pulsipher , R . Y . Kiseleva , E . Arguiri , J . C . Cheung - Lau , K . M . LeFort , M . Christofidou - Solomidou , R . V . Stan , I . J . Dmochowski , V . R . Muzykantov , Spatially controlled assembly of affinity ligand and enzyme cargo enables targeting ferritin nanocarriers to caveolae , Biomaterials , 185 ( 2018 ) 348 - 359 . [ 134 ] M . Khoshnejad , C . F . Greineder , K . W . Pulsipher , C . H . Villa , B . Altun , D . C . Pan , A . Tsourkas , I . J . Dmochowski , V . R . Muzykantov , Ferritin Nanocages with Biologically Orthogonal Conjugation for Vascular Targeting and Imaging , Bioconjug Chem , 29 ( 2018 ) 1209 - 1218 . [ 135 ] M . Khoshnejad , V . V . Shuvaev , K . W . Pulsipher , C . Dai , E . D . Hood , E . Arguiri , M . Christofidou - Solomidou , I . J . Dmochowski , C . F . Greineder , V . R . Muzykantov , Vascular Accessibility of Endothelial Targeted Ferritin Nanoparticles , Bioconjug Chem , 27 ( 2016 ) 628 - 637 . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof [ 136 ] M . Christofidou - Solomidou , V . R . Muzykantov , Antioxidant strategies in respiratory medicine , Treat Respir Med , 5 ( 2006 ) 47 - 78 . [ 137 ] R . Pasqualini , W . Arap , D . M . McDonald , Probing the structural and molecular diversity of tumor vasculature , Trends Mol Med , 8 ( 2002 ) 563 - 571 . [ 138 ] R . Pasqualini , D . M . McDonald , W . Arap , Vascular targeting and antigen presentation , Nat Immunol , 2 ( 2001 ) 567 - 568 . [ 139 ] E . Tagliabue , F . Centis , M . Campiglio , A . Mastroianni , S . Martignone , R . Pellegrini , P . Casalini , C . Lanzi , S . Menard , M . I . Colnaghi , Selection of monoclonal antibodies which induce internalization and phosphorylation of p185HER2 and growth inhibition of cells with HER2 / NEU gene amplification , International journal of cancer . Journal international du cancer , 47 ( 1991 ) 933 - 937 . [ 140 ] W . G . Feero , S . Li , J . D . Rosenblatt , N . Sirianni , J . E . Morgan , T . A . Partridge , L . Huang , E . P . Hoffman , Selection and use of ligands for receptor - mediated gene delivery to myogenic cells , Gene Ther , 4 ( 1997 ) 664 - 674 . [ 141 ] Y . Zhou , L . Zhao , J . D . Marks , Selection and characterization of cell binding and internalizing phage antibodies , Archives of biochemistry and biophysics , 526 ( 2012 ) 107 - 113 . [ 142 ] Y . Zhou , H . Zou , S . Zhang , J . D . Marks , Internalizing cancer antibodies from phage libraries selected on tumor cells and yeast - displayed tumor antigens , Journal of molecular biology , 404 ( 2010 ) 88 - 99 . [ 143 ] T . Heitner , A . Moor , J . L . Garrison , C . Marks , T . Hasan , J . D . Marks , Selection of cell binding and internalizing epidermal growth factor receptor antibodies from a phage display library , Journal of immunological methods , 248 ( 2001 ) 17 - 30 . [ 144 ] K . A . Kelly , J . R . Allport , A . Tsourkas , V . R . Shinde - Patil , L . Josephson , R . Weissleder , Detection of vascular adhesion molecule - 1 expression using a novel multimodal nanoparticle , Circ Res , 96 ( 2005 ) 327 - 336 . [ 145 ] S . Muro , Challenges in design and characterization of ligand - targeted drug delivery systems , J Control Release , 164 ( 2012 ) 125 - 137 . [ 146 ] I . Ricard , M . D . Payet , G . Dupuis , VCAM - 1 is internalized by a clathrin - related pathway in human endothelial cells but its alpha 4 beta 1 integrin counter - receptor remains associated with the plasma membrane in human T lymphocytes , Eur J Immunol , 28 ( 1998 ) 1708 - 1718 . [ 147 ] J . A . Hanover , M . C . Willingham , I . Pastan , Kinetics of transit of transferrin and epidermal growth factor through clathrin - coated membranes , Cell , 39 ( 1984 ) 283 - 293 . [ 148 ] I . Cabezon , G . Manich , R . Martin - Venegas , A . Camins , C . Pelegri , J . Vilaplana , Trafficking of Gold Nanoparticles Coated with the 8D3 Anti - Transferrin Receptor Antibody at the Mouse Blood - Brain Barrier , Mol Pharm , 12 ( 2015 ) 4137 - 4145 . [ 149 ] L . A . Carver , J . E . Schnitzer , Caveolae : mining little caves for new cancer targets , Nat Rev Cancer , 3 ( 2003 ) 571 - 581 . [ 150 ] R . L . Manthe , M . Loeck , T . Bhowmick , M . Solomon , S . Muro , Intertwined mechanisms define transport of anti - ICAM nanocarriers across the endothelium and brain delivery of a therapeutic enzyme , J Control Release , 324 ( 2020 ) 181 - 193 . [ 151 ] S . Muro , X . Cui , C . Gajewski , J . C . Murciano , V . R . Muzykantov , M . Koval , Slow intracellular trafficking of catalase nanoparticles targeted to ICAM - 1 protects endothelial cells from oxidative stress , Am J Physiol Cell Physiol , 285 ( 2003 ) C1339 - 1347 . [ 152 ] S . Muro , M . Mateescu , C . Gajewski , M . Robinson , V . R . Muzykantov , M . Koval , Control of intracellular trafficking of ICAM - 1 - targeted nanocarriers by endothelial Na + / H + exchanger proteins , Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol , 290 ( 2006 ) L809 - 817 . [ 153 ] S . Muro , E . H . Schuchman , V . R . Muzykantov , Lysosomal enzyme delivery by ICAM - 1 - targeted nanocarriers bypassing glycosylation - and clathrin - dependent endocytosis , Mol Ther , 13 ( 2006 ) 135 - 141 . [ 154 ] J . Papademetriou , C . Garnacho , D . Serrano , T . Bhowmick , E . H . Schuchman , S . Muro , Comparative binding , endocytosis , and biodistribution of antibodies and antibody - coated carriers for targeted delivery of lysosomal enzymes to ICAM - 1 versus transferrin receptor , Journal of inherited metabolic disease , ( 2012 ) . [ 155 ] S . Muro , C . Garnacho , J . A . Champion , J . Leferovich , C . Gajewski , E . H . Schuchman , S . Mitragotri , V . R . Muzykantov , Control of Endothelial Targeting and Intracellular Delivery of Therapeutic Enzymes by Modulating the Size and Shape of ICAM - 1 - targeted Carriers , Mol Ther , 16 ( 2008 ) 1450 - 1458 . [ 156 ] S . Muro , New biotechnological and nanomedicine strategies for treatment of lysosomal storage disorders , Wiley interdisciplinary reviews . Nanomedicine and nanobiotechnology , 2 ( 2010 ) 189 - 204 . [ 157 ] E . Beutler , Lysosomal storage diseases : natural history and ethical and economic aspects , Mol Genet Metab , 88 ( 2006 ) 208 - 215 . [ 158 ] G . A . Grabowski , Delivery of lysosomal enzymes for therapeutic use : glucocerebrosidase as an example , Expert Opin Drug Deliv , 3 ( 2006 ) 771 - 782 . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof [ 159 ] H . Du , M . Levine , C . Ganesa , D . P . Witte , E . S . Cole , G . A . Grabowski , The role of mannosylated enzyme and the mannose receptor in enzyme replacement therapy , Am J Hum Genet , 77 ( 2005 ) 1061 - 1074 . [ 160 ] R . J . Desnick , E . H . Schuchman , Enzyme replacement and enhancement therapies : lessons from lysosomal disorders , Nat Rev Genet , 3 ( 2002 ) 954 - 966 . [ 161 ] S . R . Miranda , X . He , C . M . Simonaro , S . Gatt , A . Dagan , R . J . Desnick , E . H . Schuchman , Infusion of recombinant human acid sphingomyelinase into niemann - pick disease mice leads to visceral , but not neurological , correction of the pathophysiology , Faseb J , 14 ( 2000 ) 1988 - 1995 . [ 162 ] S . F . Garbade , M . Zielonka , K . Mechler , S . Kolker , G . F . Hoffmann , C . Staufner , E . Mengel , M . Ries , FDA orphan drug designations for lysosomal storage disorders - a cross - sectional analysis , PLoS One , 15 ( 2020 ) e0230898 . [ 163 ] J . S . Bae , K . H . Jang , T . R . Schuchman , H . K . Jin , Comparative effects of recombinant acid sphingomyelinase administration by different routes in niemann - pick disease mice , Exp Anim , 53 ( 2004 ) 417 - 421 . [ 164 ] S . Muro , VCAM - 1 and ICAM - 1 , in : W . C . Aird ( Ed . ) Endothelial Biomedicine . , Cambridge University Press . 2007 , pp . 1058 - 1070 . [ 165 ] T . DeGraba , S . Azhar , F . Dignat - George , E . Brown , B . Boutiere , G . Altarescu , R . McCarron , R . Schiffmann , Profile of endothelial and leukocyte activation in Fabry patients , Ann Neurol , 47 ( 2000 ) 229 - 233 . [ 166 ] C . Garnacho , R . Dhami , E . Simone , T . Dziubla , J . Leferovich , E . H . Schuchman , V . Muzykantov , S . Muro , Delivery of acid sphingomyelinase in normal and niemann - pick disease mice using intercellular adhesion molecule - 1 - targeted polymer nanocarriers , J Pharmacol Exp Ther , 325 ( 2008 ) 400 - 408 . [ 167 ] J . Hsu , D . Serrano , T . Bhowmick , K . Kumar , Y . Shen , Y . C . Kuo , C . Garnacho , S . Muro , Enhanced endothelial delivery and biochemical effects of α - galactosidase by ICAM - 1 - targeted nanocarriers for Fabry disease , Journal of Controlled Release , 149 ( 2011 ) 323 - 331 . [ 168 ] J . Hsu , L . Northrup , T . Bhowmick , S . Muro , Enhanced delivery of α - glucosidase for Pompe disease by ICAM - 1 - targeted nanocarriers : comparative performance of a strategy for three distinct lysosomal storage disorders , Nanomedicine : Nanotechnology , Biology and Medicine , 8 ( 2012 ) 731 - 739 . [ 169 ] M . Solomon , S . Muro , Lysosomal enzyme replacement therapies : Historical development , clinical outcomes , and future perspectives , Advanced drug delivery reviews , 118 ( 2017 ) 109 - 134 . [ 170 ] D . Serrano , T . Bhowmick , R . Chadha , C . Garnacho , S . Muro , Intercellular adhesion molecule 1 engagement modulates sphingomyelinase and ceramide , supporting uptake of drug carriers by the vascular endothelium , Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol , 32 ( 2012 ) 1178 - 1185 . [ 171 ] M . Ansar , D . Serrano , I . Papademetriou , T . K . Bhowmick , S . Muro , Biological Functionalization of Drug Delivery Carriers To Bypass Size Restrictions of Receptor - Mediated Endocytosis Independently from Receptor Targeting , ACS Nano , 7 ( 2013 ) 10597 - 10611 . [ 172 ] A . Omolola Eniola , D . A . Hammer , In vitro characterization of leukocyte mimetic for targeting therapeutics to the endothelium using two receptors , Biomaterials , 26 ( 2005 ) 7136 - 7144 . [ 173 ] I . T . Papademetriou , C . Garnacho , E . H . Schuchman , S . Muro , In vivo performance of polymer nanocarriers dually - targeted to epitopes of the same or different receptors , Biomaterials , 34 ( 2013 ) 3459 - 3466 . [ 174 ] D . Sun , S . Nakao , F . Xie , S . Zandi , A . Schering , A . Hafezi - Moghadam , Superior sensitivity of novel molecular imaging probe : simultaneously targeting two types of endothelial injury markers , FASEB J , 24 ( 2010 ) 1532 - 1540 . [ 175 ] A . O . Eniola , P . J . Willcox , D . A . Hammer , Interplay between rolling and firm adhesion elucidated with a cell - free system engineered with two distinct receptor - ligand pairs , Biophys J , 85 ( 2003 ) 2720 - 2731 . [ 176 ] M . A . McAteer , J . E . Schneider , Z . A . Ali , N . Warrick , C . A . Bursill , C . von zur Muhlen , D . R . Greaves , S . Neubauer , K . M . Channon , R . P . Choudhury , Magnetic resonance imaging of endothelial adhesion molecules in mouse atherosclerosis using dual - targeted microparticles of iron oxide , Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol , 28 ( 2008 ) 77 - 83 . [ 177 ] G . E . Weller , F . S . Villanueva , E . M . Tom , W . R . Wagner , Targeted ultrasound contrast agents : in vitro assessment of endothelial dysfunction and multi - targeting to ICAM - 1 and sialyl Lewisx , Biotechnol Bioeng , 92 ( 2005 ) 780 - 788 . [ 178 ] A . M . Chacko , M . Nayak , C . F . Greineder , H . M . Delisser , V . R . Muzykantov , Collaborative enhancement of antibody binding to distinct PECAM - 1 epitopes modulates endothelial targeting , PLoS One , 7 ( 2012 ) e34958 . [ 179 ] S . Danilov , E . Jaspard , T . Churakova , H . Towbin , F . Savoie , L . Wei , F . Alhenc - Gelas , Structure - function analysis of angiotensin I - converting enzyme using monoclonal antibodies . Selective inhibition of the amino - terminal active site , J Biol Chem , 269 ( 1994 ) 26806 - 26814 . [ 180 ] K . Gordon , I . V . Balyasnikova , A . B . Nesterovitch , D . E . Schwartz , E . D . Sturrock , S . M . Danilov , Fine epitope mapping of monoclonal antibodies 9B9 and 3G8 to the N domain of angiotensin - converting enzyme ( CD143 ) J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof defines a region involved in regulating angiotensin - converting enzyme dimerization and shedding , Tissue Antigens , 75 ( 2010 ) 136 - 150 . [ 181 ] R . Kiseleva , C . F . Greineder , C . H . Villa , E . D . Hood , V . V . Shuvaev , J . Sun , A . - M . Chacko , V . Abraham , H . M . DeLisser , V . R . Muzykantov , Mechanism of Collaborative Enhancement of Binding of Paired Antibodies to Distinct Epitopes of Platelet Endothelial Cell Adhesion Molecule - 1 . , PloS one , 12 ( 2017 ) e0169537 . [ 182 ] P . J . Newman , The role of PECAM - 1 in vascular cell biology , Ann N Y Acad Sci , 714 ( 1994 ) 165 - 174 . [ 183 ] R . Y . Kiseleva , C . F . Greineder , C . H . Villa , O . A . Marcos - Contreras , E . D . Hood , V . V . Shuvaev , H . M . DeLisser , V . R . Muzykantov , Vascular endothelial effects of collaborative binding to platelet / endothelial cell adhesio n molecule - 1 ( PECAM - 1 ) , Scientific Reports , 8 ( 2018 ) 1510 . [ 184 ] C . F . Greineder , J . B . Brenza , R . Carnemolla , S . Zaitsev , E . D . Hood , D . C . Pan , B . S . Ding , C . T . Esmon , A . M . Chacko , V . R . Muzykantov , Dual targeting of therapeutics to endothelial cells : collaborative enhancement of delivery and effect , FASEB J , 29 ( 2015 ) 3483 - 3492 . [ 185 ] A . M . Chacko , J . Han , C . F . Greineder , B . J . Zern , J . L . Mikitsh , M . Nayak , D . Menon , I . H . Johnston , M . Poncz , D . M . Eckmann , P . F . Davies , V . R . Muzykantov , Collaborative Enhancement of Endothelial Targeting of Nanocarriers by Modulating Platelet - Endothelial Cell Adhesion Molecule - 1 / CD31 Epitope Engagement , ACS Nano , 9 ( 2015 ) 6785 - - 6793 . [ 186 ] D . R . Elias , A . Poloukhtine , V . Popik , A . Tsourkas , Effect of ligand density , receptor density , and nanoparticle size on cell targeting , Nanomedicine , 9 ( 2013 ) 194 - 201 . [ 187 ] F . Gu , L . Zhang , B . A . Teply , N . Mann , A . Wang , A . F . Radovic - Moreno , R . Langer , O . C . Farokhzad , Precise engineering of targeted nanoparticles by using self - assembled biointegrated block copolymers , Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 105 ( 2008 ) 2586 - 2591 . [ 188 ] A . Fakhari , A . Baoum , T . J . Siahaan , K . B . Le , C . Berkland , Controlling ligand surface density optimizes nanoparticle binding to ICAM - 1 , J Pharm Sci , 100 ( 2011 ) 1045 - 1056 . [ 189 ] B . J . Zern , A . - M . Chacko , J . Liu , C . F . Greineder , E . R . Blankemeyer , R . Radhakrishnan , V . Muzykantov , Reduction of Nanoparticle Avidity Enhances the Selectivity of Vascular Targeting and PET Detection of Pulmonary Inflammation , ACS Nano , 7 ( 2013 ) 2461 - 2469 . [ 190 ] P . Decuzzi , R . Pasqualini , W . Arap , M . Ferrari , Intravascular delivery of particulate systems : does geometry really matter ? , Pharm Res , 26 ( 2009 ) 235 - 243 . [ 191 ] D . Ma , S . Tian , J . Baryza , J . C . Luft , J . M . DeSimone , Reductively Responsive Hydrogel Nanoparticles with Uniform Size , Shape , and Tunable Composition for Systemic siRNA Delivery in Vivo , Mol Pharm , ( 2015 ) . [ 192 ] J . W . Myerson , A . C . Anselmo , Y . Liu , S . Mitragotri , D . M . Eckmann , V . R . Muzykantov , Non - affinity factors modulating vascular targeting of nano - and microcarriers , Advanced drug delivery reviews , 99 ( 2016 ) 97 - 112 . [ 193 ] J . L . Perry , M . P . Kai , K . G . Reuter , C . Bowerman , J . Christopher Luft , J . M . DeSimone , Calibration - quality cancer nanotherapeutics , Cancer Treat Res , 166 ( 2015 ) 275 - 291 . [ 194 ] R . A . Roberts , T . K . Eitas , J . D . Byrne , B . M . Johnson , P . J . Short , K . P . McKinnon , S . Reisdorf , J . C . Luft , J . M . DeSimone , J . P . Ting , Towards programming immune tolerance through geometric manipulation of phosphatidylserine , Biomaterials , 72 ( 2015 ) 1 - 10 . [ 195 ] A . C . Anselmo , M . Zhang , S . Kumar , D . R . Vogus , S . Menegatti , M . E . Helgeson , S . Mitragotri , Elasticity of nanoparticles influences their blood circulation , phagocytosis , endocytosis , and targeting , ACS Nano , 9 ( 2015 ) 3169 - 3177 . [ 196 ] A . Mahmud , D . E . Discher , Lung vascular targeting through inhalation delivery : insight from filamentous viruses and other shapes , IUBMB Life , 63 ( 2011 ) 607 - 612 . [ 197 ] N . S . Oltra , P . Nair , D . E . Discher , From stealthy polymersomes and filomicelles to " self " Peptide - nanoparticles for cancer therapy , Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng , 5 ( 2014 ) 281 - 299 . [ 198 ] J . D . Pillai , S . S . Dunn , M . E . Napier , J . M . DeSimone , Novel platforms for vascular carriers with controlled geometry , IUBMB Life , 63 ( 2011 ) 596 - 606 . [ 199 ] H . S . Choi , W . Liu , P . Misra , E . Tanaka , J . P . Zimmer , B . Itty Ipe , M . G . Bawendi , J . V . Frangioni , Renal clearance of quantum dots , Nat Biotechnol , 25 ( 2007 ) 1165 - 1170 . [ 200 ] R . A . Petros , J . M . DeSimone , Strategies in the design of nanoparticles for therapeutic applications , Nat Rev Drug Discov , 9 ( 2010 ) 615 - 627 . [ 201 ] V . V . Shuvaev , M . A . Ilies , E . Simone , S . Zaitsev , Y . Kim , S . Cai , A . Mahmud , T . Dziubla , S . Muro , D . E . Discher , V . R . Muzykantov , Endothelial Targeting of Antibody - Decorated Polymeric Filomicelles , ACS Nano , 5 ( 2011 ) 6991 - 6999 . [ 202 ] L . T . Chen , Microcirculation of the spleen : and open or closed circulation ? , Science , 201 ( 1978 ) 157 - 159 . [ 203 ] J . D . Slack , M . Kanke , G . H . Simmons , P . P . DeLuca , Acute hemodynamic effects and blood pool kinetics of polystyrene microspheres following intravenous administration , J Pharm Sci , 70 ( 1981 ) 660 - 664 . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof [ 204 ] L . Illum , S . S . Davis , The targeting of drugs parenterally by use of microspheres , J Parenter Sci Technol , 36 ( 1982 ) 242 - 248 . [ 205 ] M . D . Howard , C . F . Greineder , E . D . Hood , V . R . Muzykantov , Endothelial targeting of liposomes encapsulating SOD / catalase mimetic EUK - 134 alleviates acute pulmonary inflammation , J Control Release , 177 ( 2014 ) 34 - 41 . [ 206 ] A . C . Anselmo , S . Mitragotri , Cell - mediated delivery of nanoparticles : taking advantage of circulatory cells to target nanoparticles , J Control Release , 190 ( 2014 ) 531 - 541 . [ 207 ] Y . Liu , J . Tan , A . Thomas , D . Ou - Yang , V . R . Muzykantov , The shape of things to come : importance of design in nanotechnology for drug delivery , Ther Deliv , 3 ( 2012 ) 181 - 194 . [ 208 ] S . Mitragotri , J . Lahann , Materials for drug delivery : innovative solutions to address complex biological hurdles , Adv Mater , 24 ( 2012 ) 3717 - 3723 . [ 209 ] V . V . Shuvaev , M . A . Ilies , E . Simone , S . Zaitsev , Y . Kim , S . Cai , A . Mahmud , T . Dziubla , S . Muro , D . E . Discher , V . R . Muzykantov , Endothelial targeting of antibody - decorated polymeric filomicelles , ACS Nano , 5 ( 2011 ) 6991 - 6999 . [ 210 ] P . P . Wibroe , A . C . Anselmo , P . H . Nilsson , A . Sarode , V . Gupta , R . Urbanics , J . Szebeni , A . C . Hunter , S . Mitragotri , T . E . Mollnes , S . M . Moghimi , Bypassing adverse injection reactions to nanoparticles through shape modification and attachment to erythrocytes , Nat Nanotechnol , 12 ( 2017 ) 589 - 594 . [ 211 ] G . Sharma , D . T . Valenta , Y . Altman , S . Harvey , H . Xie , S . Mitragotri , J . W . Smith , Polymer particle shape independently influences binding and internalization by macrophages , J Control Release , 147 ( 2010 ) 408 - 412 . [ 212 ] T . N . Swaminathan , K . Mukundakrishnan , H . H . Hu , Sedimentation of an ellipsoid inside an infinitely long tube at low and intermediate Reynolds numbers , Journal of Fluid Mechanics , 551 ( 2006 ) 357 - 385 . [ 213 ] S . Shah , Y . Liu , W . Hu , J . Gao , Modeling particle shape - dependent dynamics in nanomedicine , J Nanosci Nanotechnol , 11 ( 2011 ) 919 - 928 . [ 214 ] N . Doshi , B . Prabhakarpandian , A . Rea - Ramsey , K . Pant , S . Sundaram , S . Mitragotri , Flow and adhesion of drug carriers in blood vessels depend on their shape : a study using model synthetic microvascular networks , J Control Release , 146 ( 2010 ) 196 - 200 . [ 215 ] N . Doshi , J . N . Orje , B . Molins , J . W . Smith , S . Mitragotri , Z . M . Ruggeri , Platelet mimetic particles for targeting thrombi in flowing blood , Adv Mater , 24 ( 2012 ) 3864 - 3869 . [ 216 ] A . C . Anselmo , C . L . Modery - Pawlowski , S . Menegatti , S . Kumar , D . R . Vogus , L . L . Tian , M . Chen , T . M . Squires , A . Sen Gupta , S . Mitragotri , Platelet - like nanoparticles : mimicking shape , flexibility , and surface biology of platelets to target vascular injuries , ACS Nano , 8 ( 2014 ) 11243 - 11253 . [ 217 ] P . Kolhar , A . C . Anselmo , V . Gupta , K . Pant , B . Prabhakarpandian , E . Ruoslahti , S . Mitragotri , Using shape effects to target antibody - coated nanoparticles to lung and brain endothelium , Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 110 ( 2013 ) 10753 - 10758 . [ 218 ] Y . Geng , P . Dalhaimer , S . Cai , R . Tsai , M . Tewari , T . Minko , D . E . Discher , Shape effects of filaments versus spherical particles in flow and drug delivery , Nat Nanotechnol , 2 ( 2007 ) 249 - 255 . [ 219 ] A . C . Anselmo , S . Mitragotri , Impact of particle elasticity on particle - based drug delivery systems , Advanced drug delivery reviews , 108 ( 2017 ) 51 - 67 . [ 220 ] R . C . Gunawan , D . T . Auguste , The role of antibody synergy and membrane fluidity in the vascular targeting of immunoliposomes , Biomaterials , 31 ( 2010 ) 900 - 907 . [ 221 ] P . Guo , D . Liu , K . Subramanyam , B . Wang , J . Yang , J . Huang , D . T . Auguste , M . A . Moses , Nanoparticle elasticity directs tumor uptake , Nat Commun , 9 ( 2018 ) 130 . [ 222 ] D . M . Eckmann , R . J . Composto , A . Tsourkas , V . R . Muzykantov , Nanogel Carrier Design for Targeted Drug Delivery , J Mater Chem B , 2 ( 2014 ) 8085 - 8097 . [ 223 ] J . Key , A . L . Palange , F . Gentile , S . Aryal , C . Stigliano , D . Di Mascolo , E . De Rosa , M . Cho , Y . Lee , J . Singh , P . Decuzzi , Soft Discoidal Polymeric Nanoconstructs Resist Macrophage Uptake and Enhance Vascular Targeting in Tumors , ACS Nano , 9 ( 2015 ) 11628 - 11641 . [ 224 ] X . Banquy , F . Suarez , A . Argaw , J . - M . Rabanel , P . Grutter , J . - F . Bouchard , P . Hildgen , S . Giasson , Effect of mechanical properties of hydrogel nanoparticles on macrophage cell uptake , Soft Matter , 5 ( 2009 ) 3984 - 3991 . [ 225 ] K . A . Beningo , Y . L . Wang , Fc - receptor - mediated phagocytosis is regulated by mechanical properties of the target , J Cell Sci , 115 ( 2002 ) 849 - 856 . [ 226 ] J . Sun , L . Zhang , J . Wang , Q . Feng , D . Liu , Q . Yin , D . Xu , Y . Wei , B . Ding , X . Shi , X . Jiang , Tunable rigidity of ( polymeric core ) - ( lipid shell ) nanoparticles for regulated cellular uptake , Adv Mater , 27 ( 2015 ) 1402 - 1407 . [ 227 ] M . Nowak , T . D . Brown , A . Graham , M . E . Helgeson , S . Mitragotri , Size , shape , and flexibility influence nanoparticle transport across brain endothelium under flow , Bioengineering & Translational Medicine , n / a e10153 . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof [ 228 ] J . W . Myerson , O . McPherson , K . G . DeFrates , J . H . Towslee , O . A . Marcos - Contreras , V . V . Shuvaev , B . Braender , R . J . Composto , V . R . Muzykantov , D . M . Eckmann , Cross - linker - Modulated Nanogel Flexibility Correlates with Tunable Targeting to a Sterically Impeded Endothelial Marker , ACS Nano , 13 ( 2019 ) 11409 - 11421 . [ 229 ] A . Scherpereel , J . J . Rome , R . Wiewrodt , S . C . Watkins , D . W . Harshaw , S . Alder , M . Christofidou - Solomidou , E . Haut , J . C . Murciano , M . Nakada , S . M . Albelda , V . R . Muzykantov , Platelet - endothelial cell adhesion molecule - 1 - directed immunotargeting to cardiopulmonary vasculature , J Pharmacol Exp Ther , 300 ( 2002 ) 777 - 786 . [ 230 ] K . Danielyan , B . S . Ding , C . Gottstein , D . B . Cines , V . R . Muzykantov , Delivery of anti - platelet - endothelial cell adhesion molecule single - chain variable fragment - urokinase fusion protein to the cerebral vasculature lyses arterial clots and attenuates postischemic brain edema , J Pharmacol Exp Ther , 321 ( 2007 ) 947 - 952 . [ 231 ] O . A . Marcos - Contreras , J . S . Brenner , R . Y . Kiseleva , V . Zuluaga - Ramirez , C . F . Greineder , C . H . Villa , E . D . Hood , J . W . Myerson , S . Muro , Y . Persidsky , V . R . Muzykantov , Combining vascular targeting and the local first pass provides 100 - fold higher uptake of ICAM - 1 - targeted vs untargeted nanocarriers in the inflamed brain , J Control Release , 301 ( 2019 ) 54 - 61 . [ 232 ] J . S . Brenner , D . C . Pan , J . W . Myerson , O . A . Marcos - Contreras , C . H . Villa , P . Patel , H . Hekierski , S . Chatterjee , J . Q . Tao , H . Parhiz , K . Bhamidipati , T . G . Uhler , E . D . Hood , R . Y . Kiseleva , V . S . Shuvaev , T . Shuvaeva , M . Khoshnejad , I . Johnston , J . V . Gregory , J . Lahann , T . Wang , E . Cantu , W . M . Armstead , S . Mitragotri , V . Muzykantov , Red blood cell - hitchhiking boosts delivery of nanocarriers to chosen organs by orders of magnitude , Nat Commun , 9 ( 2018 ) 2684 . [ 233 ] Z . Zhao , A . Ukidve , Y . Gao , J . Kim , S . Mitragotri , Erythrocyte leveraged chemotherapy ( ELeCt ) : Nanoparticle assembly on erythrocyte surface to combat lung metastasis , Sci Adv , 5 ( 2019 ) eaax9250 . [ 234 ] P . M . Glassman , V . R . Muzykantov , Pharmacokinetic and Pharmacodynamic Properties of Drug Delivery Systems , J Pharmacol Exp Ther , 370 ( 2019 ) 570 - 580 . [ 235 ] C . H . Villa , D . C . Pan , I . H . Johnston , C . F . Greineder , L . R . Walsh , E . D . Hood , D . B . Cines , M . Poncz , D . L . Siegel , V . R . Muzykantov , Biocompatible coupling of therapeutic fusion proteins to human erythrocytes , Blood Adv , 2 ( 2018 ) 165 - 176 . [ 236 ] C . F . Greineder , C . H . Villa , L . R . Walsh , R . Y . Kiseleva , E . D . Hood , M . Khoshnejad , R . Warden - Rothman , A . Tsourkas , V . R . Muzykantov , Site - Specific Modification of Single - Chain Antibody Fragments for Bioconjugation and Vascular Immunotargeting , Bioconjug Chem , 29 ( 2018 ) 56 - 66 . [ 237 ] S . Schulte , Half - life extension through albumin fusion technologies , Thromb Res , 124 Suppl 2 ( 2009 ) S6 - 8 . [ 238 ] D . Sleep , J . Cameron , L . R . Evans , Albumin as a versatile platform for drug half - life extension , Biochim Biophys Acta , 1830 ( 2013 ) 5526 - 5534 . [ 239 ] C . Sung , B . Nardelli , D . W . LaFleur , E . Blatter , M . Corcoran , H . S . Olsen , C . E . Birse , O . K . Pickeral , J . Zhang , D . Shah , G . Moody , S . Gentz , L . Beebe , P . A . Moore , An IFN - beta - albumin fusion protein that displays improved pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties in nonhuman primates , J Interferon Cytokine Res , 23 ( 2003 ) 25 - 36 . [ 240 ] G . N . Cox , D . J . Smith , S . J . Carlson , A . M . Bendele , E . A . Chlipala , D . H . Doherty , Enhanced circulating half - life and hematopoietic properties of a human granulocyte colony - stimulating factor / immunoglobulin fusion protein , Exp Hematol , 32 ( 2004 ) 441 - 449 . [ 241 ] M . Chinol , P . Casalini , M . Maggiolo , S . Canevari , E . S . Omodeo , P . Caliceti , F . M . Veronese , M . Cremonesi , F . Chiolerio , E . Nardone , A . G . Siccardi , G . Paganelli , Biochemical modifications of avidin improve pharmacokinetics and biodistribution , and reduce immunogenicity , Br J Cancer , 78 ( 1998 ) 189 - 197 . [ 242 ] J . M . Harris , N . E . Martin , M . Modi , Pegylation : a novel process for modifying pharmacokinetics , Clin Pharmacokinet , 40 ( 2001 ) 539 - 551 . [ 243 ] C . Chaudhury , S . Mehnaz , J . M . Robinson , W . L . Hayton , D . K . Pearl , D . C . Roopenian , C . L . Anderson , The major histocompatibility complex - related Fc receptor for IgG ( FcRn ) binds albumin and prolongs its lifespan , J Exp Med , 197 ( 2003 ) 315 - 322 . [ 244 ] V . Ghetie , J . G . Hubbard , J . K . Kim , M . F . Tsen , Y . Lee , E . S . Ward , Abnormally short serum half - lives of IgG in beta 2 - microglobulin - deficient mice , Eur J Immunol , 26 ( 1996 ) 690 - 696 . [ 245 ] R . P . Junghans , C . L . Anderson , The protection receptor for IgG catabolism is the beta2 - microglobulin - containing neonatal intestinal transport receptor , Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 93 ( 1996 ) 5512 - 5516 . [ 246 ] E . J . Israel , D . F . Wilsker , K . C . Hayes , D . Schoenfeld , N . E . Simister , Increased clearance of IgG in mice that lack beta 2 - microglobulin : possible protective role of FcRn , Immunology , 89 ( 1996 ) 573 - 578 . [ 247 ] P . M . Glassman , L . R . Walsh , C . H . Villa , O . A . Marcos - Contreras , E . D . Hood , V . R . Muzykantov , C . F . Greineder , Molecularly Engineered Nanobodies for Tunable Pharmacokinetics and Drug Delivery , Bioconjug Chem , 31 ( 2020 ) 1144 - 1155 . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof [ 248 ] H . Mao , S . A . Hart , A . Schink , B . A . Pollok , Sortase - mediated protein ligation : a new method for protein engineering , J Am Chem Soc , 126 ( 2004 ) 2670 - 2671 . [ 249 ] R . R . Beerli , T . Hell , A . S . Merkel , U . Grawunder , Sortase Enzyme - Mediated Generation of Site - Specifically Conjugated Antibody Drug Conjugates with High In Vitro and In Vivo Potency , PLoS One , 10 ( 2015 ) e0131177 . [ 250 ] S . Massa , N . Vikani , C . Betti , S . Ballet , S . Vanderhaegen , J . Steyaert , B . Descamps , C . Vanhove , A . Bunschoten , F . W . van Leeuwen , S . Hernot , V . Caveliers , T . Lahoutte , S . Muyldermans , C . Xavier , N . Devoogdt , Sortase A - mediated site - specific labeling of camelid single - domain antibody - fragments : a versatile strategy for multiple molecular imaging modalities , Contrast Media Mol Imaging , 11 ( 2016 ) 328 - 339 . [ 251 ] S . A . van Lith , S . M . van Duijnhoven , A . C . Navis , W . P . Leenders , E . Dolk , J . W . Wennink , C . F . van Nostrum , J . C . van Hest , Legomedicine - A Versatile Chemo - Enzymatic Approach for the Preparation of Targeted Dual - Labeled Llama Antibody - Nanoparticle Conjugates , Bioconjug Chem , 28 ( 2017 ) 539 - 548 . [ 252 ] E . D . Hood , C . F . Greineder , T . Shuvaeva , L . Walsh , C . H . Villa , V . R . Muzykantov , Vascular Targeting of Radiolabeled Liposomes with Bio - Orthogonally Conjugated Ligands : Single Chain Fragments Provide Higher Specificity than Antibodies , Bioconjug Chem , 29 ( 2018 ) 3626 - 3637 . [ 253 ] S . Massa , C . Xavier , J . De Vos , V . Caveliers , T . Lahoutte , S . Muyldermans , N . Devoogdt , Site - specific labeling of cysteine - tagged camelid single - domain antibody - fragments for use in molecular imaging , Bioconjug Chem , 25 ( 2014 ) 979 - 988 . [ 254 ] M . Khoshnejad , J . S . Brenner , W . Motley , H . Parhiz , C . F . Greineder , C . H . Villa , O . A . Marcos - Contreras , A . Tsourkas , V . R . Muzykantov , Molecular engineering of antibodies for site - specific covalent conjugation using CRISPR / Cas9 , Sci Rep , 8 ( 2018 ) 1760 . [ 255 ] M . Khoshnejad , J . S . Brenner , H . Parhiz , V . R . Muzykantov , CRISPR / Cas9 - Mediated Genetic Engineering of Hybridomas for Creation of Antibodies that Allow for Site - Specific Conjugation , Methods Mol Biol , 2033 ( 2019 ) 81 - 93 . [ 256 ] N . Roki , Z . Tsinas , M . Solomon , J . Bowers , R . C . Getts , S . Muro , Unprecedently high targeting specificity toward lung ICAM - 1 using 3DNA nanocarriers , J Control Release , 305 ( 2019 ) 41 - 49 . [ 257 ] R . Stoltenburg , C . Reinemann , B . Strehlitz , SELEX - - a ( r ) evolutionary method to generate high - affinity nucleic acid ligands , Biomol Eng , 24 ( 2007 ) 381 - 403 . [ 258 ] T . H . Ku , T . Zhang , H . Luo , T . M . Yen , P . W . Chen , Y . Han , Y . H . Lo , Nucleic Acid Aptamers : An Emerging Tool for Biotechnology and Biomedical Sensing , Sensors ( Basel ) , 15 ( 2015 ) 16281 - 16313 . [ 259 ] J . Hu , D . Al - Waili , A . Hassan , G . C . Fan , M . Xin , J . Hao , Inhibition of cerebral vascular inflammation by brain endothelium - targeted oligodeoxynucleotide complex , Neuroscience , 329 ( 2016 ) 30 - 42 . [ 260 ] J . Macdonald , D . Denoyer , J . Henri , A . Jamieson , I . J . G . Burvenich , N . Pouliot , S . Shigdar , Bifunctional Aptamer - Doxorubicin Conjugate Crosses the Blood - Brain Barrier and Selectively Delivers Its Payload to EpCAM - Positive Tumor Cells , Nucleic Acid Ther , 30 ( 2020 ) 117 - 128 . [ 261 ] D . J . Goetz , M . E . el - Sabban , D . A . Hammer , B . U . Pauli , Lu - ECAM - 1 - mediated adhesion of melanoma cells to endothelium under conditions of flow , International journal of cancer . Journal international du cancer , 65 ( 1996 ) 192 - 199 . [ 262 ] R . V . Stan , L . Ghitescu , B . S . Jacobson , G . E . Palade , Isolation , cloning , and localization of rat PV - 1 , a novel endothelial caveolar protein , J Cell Biol , 145 ( 1999 ) 1189 - 1198 . [ 263 ] V . R . Muzykantov , E . N . Atochina , H . Ischiropoulos , S . M . Danilov , A . B . Fisher , Immunotargeting of antioxidant enzyme to the pulmonary endothelium , Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 93 ( 1996 ) 5213 - 5218 . [ 264 ] R . Langer , Drug delivery and targeting , Nature , 392 ( 1998 ) 5 - 10 . [ 265 ] V . S . Trubetskoy , V . P . Torchilin , S . Kennel , L . Huang , Cationic liposomes enhance targeted delivery and expression of exogenous DNA mediated by N - terminal modified poly ( L - lysine ) - antibody conjugate in mouse lung endothelial cells , Biochim Biophys Acta , 1131 ( 1992 ) 311 - 313 . [ 266 ] K . Maruyama , T . Takizawa , T . Yuda , S . J . Kennel , L . Huang , M . Iwatsuru , Targetability of novel immunoliposomes modified with amphipathic poly ( ethylene glycol ) s conjugated at their distal terminals to monoclonal antibodies , Biochim Biophys Acta , 1234 ( 1995 ) 74 - 80 . [ 267 ] B . S . Ding , C . Gottstein , A . Grunow , A . Kuo , K . Ganguly , S . M . Albelda , D . B . Cines , V . R . Muzykantov , Endothelial targeting of a recombinant construct fusing a PECAM - 1 single - chain variable antibody fragment ( scFv ) with prourokinase facilitates prophylactic thrombolysis in the pulmonary vasculature , Blood , 106 ( 2005 ) 4191 - 4198 . [ 268 ] B . S . Ding , N . Hong , J . C . Murciano , K . Ganguly , C . Gottstein , M . Christofidou - Solomidou , S . M . Albelda , A . B . Fisher , D . B . Cines , V . R . Muzykantov , Prophylactic thrombolysis by thrombin - activated latent prourokinase targeted to PECAM - 1 in the pulmonary vasculature , Blood , 111 ( 2008 ) 1999 - 2006 . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof [ 269 ] J . C . Murciano , S . Muro , L . Koniaris , M . Christofidou - Solomidou , D . W . Harshaw , S . M . Albelda , D . N . Granger , D . B . Cines , V . R . Muzykantov , ICAM - directed vascular immunotargeting of antithrombotic agents to the endothelial luminal surface , Blood , 101 ( 2003 ) 3977 - 3984 . [ 270 ] B . S . Ding , N . Hong , M . Christofidou - Solomidou , C . Gottstein , S . M . Albelda , D . B . Cines , A . B . Fisher , V . R . Muzykantov , Anchoring fusion thrombomodulin to the endothelial lumen protects against injury - induced lung thrombosis and inflammation , Am J Respir Crit Care Med , 180 ( 2009 ) 247 - 256 . [ 271 ] C . F . Greineder , A . M . Chacko , S . Zaytsev , B . J . Zern , R . Carnemolla , E . D . Hood , J . Han , B . S . Ding , C . T . Esmon , V . R . Muzykantov , Vascular immunotargeting to endothelial determinant ICAM - 1 enables optimal partnering of recombinant scFv - thrombomodulin fusion with endogenous cofactor , PLoS One , 8 ( 2013 ) e80110 . [ 272 ] C . F . Greineder , I . H . Johnston , C . H . Villa , K . Gollomp , C . T . Esmon , D . B . Cines , M . Poncz , V . R . Muzykantov , ICAM - 1 - targeted thrombomodulin mitigates tissue factor - driven inflammatory thrombosis in a human endothelialized microfluidic model , Blood Adv , 1 ( 2017 ) 1452 - 1465 . [ 273 ] M . C . Ferrer , V . V . Shuvaev , B . J . Zern , R . J . Composto , V . R . Muzykantov , D . M . Eckmann , Icam - 1 targeted nanogels loaded with dexamethasone alleviate pulmonary inflammation , PLoS One , 9 ( 2014 ) e102329 . [ 274 ] C . T . Esmon , Inflammation and thrombosis , J Thromb Haemost , 1 ( 2003 ) 1343 - 1348 . [ 275 ] D . A . Dichek , J . Anderson , A . B . Kelly , S . R . Hanson , L . A . Harker , Enhanced in vivo antithrombotic effects of endothelial cells expressing recombinant plasminogen activators transduced with retroviral vectors , Circulation , 93 ( 1996 ) 301 - 309 . [ 276 ] V . R . Muzykantov , E . S . Barnathan , E . N . Atochina , A . Kuo , S . M . Danilov , A . B . Fisher , Targeting of antibody - conjugated plasminogen activators to the pulmonary vasculature , J Pharmacol Exp Ther , 279 ( 1996 ) 1026 - 1034 . [ 277 ] V . R . Muzykantov , M . Christofidou - Solomidou , I . Balyasnikova , D . W . Harshaw , L . Schultz , A . B . Fisher , S . M . Albelda , Streptavidin facilitates internalization and pulmonary targeting of an anti - endothelial cell antibody ( platelet - endothelial cell adhesion molecule 1 ) : a strategy for vascular immunotargeting of drugs , Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 96 ( 1999 ) 2379 - 2384 . [ 278 ] B . D . Kozower , M . Christofidou - Solomidou , T . D . Sweitzer , S . Muro , D . G . Buerk , C . C . Solomides , S . M . Albelda , G . A . Patterson , V . R . Muzykantov , Immunotargeting of catalase to the pulmonary endothelium alleviates oxidative stress and reduces acute lung transplantation injury , Nat Biotechnol , 21 ( 2003 ) 392 - 398 . [ 279 ] S . S . Husain , Single - chain urokinase - type plasminogen activator does not possess measurable intrinsic amidolytic or plasminogen activator activities , Biochemistry , 30 ( 1991 ) 5797 - 5805 . [ 280 ] A . Ichinose , K . Fujikawa , T . Suyama , The activation of pro - urokinase by plasma kallikrein and its inactivation by thrombin , J Biol Chem , 261 ( 1986 ) 3486 - 3489 . [ 281 ] W . P . Yang , J . Goldstein , R . Procyk , G . R . Matsueda , S . Y . Shaw , Design and evaluation of a thrombin - activable plasminogen activator , Biochemistry , 33 ( 1994 ) p606 - 612 . [ 282 ] Y . X . Wang , C . Wu , J . Vincelette , B . Martin - McNulty , S . Alexander , B . Larsen , D . R . Light , K . McLean , Amplified anticoagulant activity of tissue factor - targeted thrombomodulin : in - vivo validation of a tissue factor - neutralizing antibody fused to soluble thrombomodulin , Thromb Haemost , 96 ( 2006 ) 317 - 324 . [ 283 ] M . Everts , G . Koning , R . Kok , S . Ásgeirsdóttir , D . Vestweber , D . F . Meijer , G . Storm , G . Molema , In Vitro Cellular Handling and in Vivo Targeting of E - Selectin - Directed Immunoconjugates and Immunoliposomes Used for Drug Delivery to Inflamed Endothelium , Pharmaceutical Research , 20 ( 2003 ) 64 - 72 . [ 284 ] S . A . Asgeirsdottir , J . A . Kamps , H . I . Bakker , P . J . Zwiers , P . Heeringa , K . van der Weide , H . van Goor , A . H . Petersen , H . Morselt , H . E . Moorlag , E . Steenbergen , C . G . Kallenberg , G . Molema , Site - Specific Inhibition of Glomerulonephritis Progression by Targeted Delivery of Dexamethasone to Glomerular Endothelium , M ol Pharmacol , 72 ( 2007 ) 121 - 131 . [ 285 ] S . A . Asgeirsdottir , P . J . Zwiers , H . W . Morselt , H . E . Moorlag , H . I . Bakker , P . Heeringa , J . W . Kok , C . G . Kallenberg , G . Molema , J . A . Kamps , Inhibition of proinflammatory genes in anti - GBM glomerulonephritis by targeted dexamethasone - loaded AbEsel liposomes , Am J Physiol Renal Physiol , 294 ( 2008 ) F554 - 561 . [ 286 ] N . Hashida , N . Ohguro , N . Yamazaki , Y . Arakawa , E . Oiki , H . Mashimo , N . Kurokawa , Y . Tano , High - efficacy site - directed drug delivery system using sialyl - Lewis X conjugated liposome , Exp Eye Res , 86 ( 2008 ) 138 - 149 . [ 287 ] J . E . Zuckerman , C . H . J . Choi , H . Han , M . E . Davis , Polycation - siRNA nanoparticles can disassemble at the kidney glomerular basement membrane , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 109 ( 2012 ) 3137 - 3142 . [ 288 ] J . B . Lee , K . Zhang , Y . Y . C . Tam , Y . K . Tam , N . M . Belliveau , V . Y . C . Sung , P . J . C . Lin , E . LeBlanc , M . A . Ciufolini , P . S . Rennie , P . R . Cullis , Lipid nanoparticle siRNA systems for silencing the androgen receptor in human prostate cancer in vivo , International Journal of Cancer , 131 ( 2012 ) E781 - E790 . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof [ 289 ] J . M . Kuldo , S . A . Asgeirsdottir , P . J . Zwiers , A . R . Bellu , M . G . Rots , J . A . Schalk , K . I . Ogawara , C . Trautwein , B . Banas , H . J . Haisma , G . Molema , J . A . Kamps , Targeted adenovirus mediated inhibition of NF - kappaB - dependent inflammatory gene expression in endothelial cells in vitro and in vivo , J Control Release , 166 ( 2013 ) 57 - 65 . [ 290 ] S . A . Asgeirsdottir , E . G . Talman , I . A . de Graaf , J . A . Kamps , S . C . Satchell , P . W . Mathieson , M . H . Ruiters , G . Molema , Targeted transfection increases siRNA uptake and gene silencing of primary endothelial cells in vitro - - a quantitative study , J Control Release , 141 ( 2010 ) 241 - 251 . [ 291 ] G . A . Koning , R . M . Schiffelers , M . H . M . Wauben , R . J . Kok , E . Mastrobattista , G . Molema , T . L . M . ten Hagen , G . Storm , Targeting of angiogenic endothelial cells at sites of inflammation by dexamethasone phosphate – containing RGD peptide liposomes inhibits experimental arthritis , Arthritis & Rheumatism , 54 ( 2006 ) 1198 - 1208 . [ 292 ] P . Vader , B . J . Crielaard , S . M . van Dommelen , R . van der Meel , G . Storm , R . M . Schiffelers , Targeted delivery of small interfering RNA to angiogenic endothelial cells with liposome - polycation - DNA particles , J Control Release , 160 ( 2012 ) 211 - 216 . [ 293 ] P . I . Homem de Bittencourt , Jr . , D . J . Lagranha , A . Maslinkiewicz , S . M . Senna , A . M . Tavares , L . P . Baldissera , D . R . Janner , J . S . Peralta , P . M . Bock , L . L . Gutierrez , G . Scola , T . G . Heck , M . S . Krause , L . A . Cruz , D . S . Abdalla , C . J . Lagranha , T . Lima , R . Curi , LipoCardium : endothelium - directed cyclopentenone prostaglandin - based liposome formulation that completely reverses atherosclerotic lesions , Atherosclerosis , 193 ( 2007 ) 245 - 258 . [ 294 ] M . A . Hegeman , P . M . Cobelens , J . Kamps , M . P . Hennus , N . J . G . Jansen , M . J . Schultz , A . J . van Vught , G . Molema , C . J . Heijnen , Liposome - encapsulated dexamethasone attenuates ventilator - induced lung inflammation , British Journal of Pharmacology , 163 ( 2011 ) 1048 - 1058 . [ 295 ] G . Scita , P . P . Di Fiore , The endocytic matrix , Nature , 463 ( 2010 ) 464 - 473 . [ 296 ] S . Sigismund , S . Confalonieri , A . Ciliberto , S . Polo , G . Scita , P . P . Di Fiore , Endocytosis and signaling : cell logistics shape the eukaryotic cell plan , Physiol Rev , 92 ( 2012 ) 273 - 366 . [ 297 ] A . Sorkin , M . von Zastrow , Endocytosis and signalling : intertwining molecular networks , Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol , 10 ( 2009 ) 609 - 622 . [ 298 ] J . Cendrowski , A . Maminska , M . Miaczynska , Endocytic regulation of cytokine receptor signaling , Cytokine Growth Factor Rev , ( 2016 ) . [ 299 ] A . D ' Alessio , R . S . Al - Lamki , J . R . Bradley , J . S . Pober , Caveolae participate in tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 signaling and internalization in a human endothelial cell line , Am J Pathol , 166 ( 2005 ) 1273 - 1282 . [ 300 ] A . D ' Alessio , M . S . Kluger , J . H . Li , R . Al - Lamki , J . R . Bradley , J . S . Pober , Targeting of tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 to low density plasma membrane domains in human endothelial cells , J Biol Chem , 285 ( 2010 ) 23868 - 23879 . [ 301 ] D . F . Legler , O . Micheau , M . A . Doucey , J . Tschopp , C . Bron , Recruitment of TNF receptor 1 to lipid rafts is essential for TNFalpha - mediated NF - kappaB activation , Immunity , 18 ( 2003 ) 655 - 664 . [ 302 ] A . M . Blanco , A . Perez - Arago , S . Fernandez - Lizarbe , C . Guerri , Ethanol mimics ligand - mediated activation and endocytosis of IL - 1RI / TLR4 receptors via lipid rafts caveolae in astroglial cells , J Neurochem , 106 ( 2008 ) 625 - 639 . [ 303 ] B . Hansen , O . Dittrich - Breiholz , M . Kracht , M . Windheim , Regulation of NF - kappaB - dependent gene expression by ligand - induced endocytosis of the interleukin - 1 receptor , Cell Signal , 25 ( 2013 ) 214 - 228 . [ 304 ] N . Y . Spencer , J . F . Engelhardt , The basic biology of redoxosomes in cytokine - mediated signal transduction and implications for disease - specific therapies , Biochemistry , 53 ( 2014 ) 1551 - 1564 . [ 305 ] M . Ushio - Fukai , Compartmentalization of Redox Signaling through NADPH Oxidase - derived ROS , Antioxid Redox Signal , 11 ( 2009 ) 1289 - 1299 . [ 306 ] V . V . Shuvaev , V . R . Muzykantov , Targeted modulation of reactive oxygen species in the vascular endothelium , J Control Release , 153 ( 2011 ) 56 - 63 . [ 307 ] V . V . Shuvaev , J . Han , S . Tliba , E . Arguiri , M . Christofidou - Solomidou , S . H . Ramirez , H . Dykstra , Y . Persidsky , D . N . Atochin , P . L . Huang , V . R . Muzykantov , Anti - inflammatory effect of targeted delivery of SOD to endothelium : mechanism , synergism with NO donors and protective effects in vitro and in vivo , PLoS ONE , 8 ( 2013 ) e77002 . [ 308 ] V . V . Shuvaev , J . Han , K . J . Yu , S . Huang , B . J . Hawkins , M . Madesh , M . Nakada , V . R . Muzykantov , PECAM - targeted delivery of SOD inhibits endothelial inflammatory response , FASEB J , 25 ( 2011 ) 348 - 357 . [ 309 ] V . V . Shuvaev , S . Muro , E . Arguiri , M . Khoshnejad , S . Tliba , M . Christofidou - Solomidou , V . R . Muzykantov , Size and targeting to PECAM vs ICAM control endothelial delivery , internalization and protective effect of multimolecular SOD conjugates , J Control Release , 234 ( 2016 ) 115 - 123 . [ 310 ] Z . Wang , C . Tiruppathi , J . Cho , R . D . Minshall , A . B . Malik , Delivery of nanoparticle : complexed drugs across the vascular endothelial barrier via caveolae , IUBMB Life , 63 ( 2011 ) 659 - 667 . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof [ 311 ] R . G . Parton , M . A . del Pozo , Caveolae as plasma membrane sensors , protectors and organizers , Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol , 14 ( 2013 ) 98 - 112 . [ 312 ] A . F . McGettrick , L . A . O ' Neill , Localisation and trafficking of Toll - like receptors : an important mode of regulation , Curr Opin Immunol , 22 ( 2010 ) 20 - 27 . [ 313 ] M . W . Hornef , B . Henriques - Normark , S . Normark , The function and biological role of toll - like receptors in infectious diseases : an update , Curr Opin Infect Dis , 21 ( 2008 ) 304 - 312 . [ 314 ] M . Pascual - Lucas , S . Fernandez - Lizarbe , J . Montesinos , C . Guerri , LPS or ethanol triggers clathrin - and rafts / caveolae - dependent endocytosis of TLR4 in cortical astrocytes , J Neurochem , 129 ( 2014 ) 448 - 462 . [ 315 ] L . Guillot , S . Medjane , K . Le - Barillec , V . Balloy , C . Danel , M . Chignard , M . Si - Tahar , Response of human pulmonary epithelial cells to lipopolysaccharide involves Toll - like receptor 4 ( TLR4 ) - dependent signaling pathways : evidence for an intracellular compartmentalization of TLR4 , J Biol Chem , 279 ( 2004 ) 2712 - 2718 . [ 316 ] M . W . Hornef , B . H . Normark , A . Vandewalle , S . Normark , Intracellular recognition of lipopolysaccharide by toll - like receptor 4 in intestinal epithelial cells , J Exp Med , 198 ( 2003 ) 1225 - 1235 . [ 317 ] S . Garrean , X . P . Gao , V . Brovkovych , J . Shimizu , Y . Y . Zhao , S . M . Vogel , A . B . Malik , Caveolin - 1 regulates NF - kappaB activation and lung inflammatory response to sepsis induced by lipopolysaccharide , J Immunol , 177 ( 2006 ) 4853 - 4860 . [ 318 ] V . V . Shuvaev , R . Y . Kiseleva , E . Arguiri , C . H . Villa , S . Muro , M . Christofidou - Solomidou , R . V . Stan , V . R . Muzykantov , Targeting superoxide dismutase to endothelial caveolae profoundly alleviates inflammation caused by endotoxin , J Control Release , 272 ( 2018 ) 1 - 8 . [ 319 ] E . N . Atochina , I . V . Balyasnikova , S . M . Danilov , D . N . Granger , A . B . Fisher , V . R . Muzykantov , Immunotargeting of catalase to ACE or ICAM - 1 protects perfused rat lungs against oxidative stress , Am J Physiol , 275 ( 1998 ) L806 - 817 . [ 320 ] A . Scherpereel , R . Wiewrodt , M . Christofidou - Solomidou , R . Gervais , J . C . Murciano , S . M . Albelda , V . R . Muzykantov , Cell - selective intracellular delivery of a foreign enzyme to endothelium in vivo using vascular immunotargeting , Faseb J , 15 ( 2001 ) 416 - 426 . [ 321 ] V . V . Shuvaev , M . Christofidou - Solomidou , F . Bhora , K . Laude , H . Cai , S . Dikalov , E . Arguiri , C . C . Solomides , S . M . Albelda , D . G . Harrison , V . R . Muzykantov , Targeted detoxification of selected reactive oxygen species in the vascular endothelium , J Pharmacol Exp Ther , 331 ( 2009 ) 404 - 411 . [ 322 ] K . Nowak , H . C . Kolbel , R . P . Metzger , C . Hanusch , M . Frohnmeyer , P . Hohenberger , S . M . Danilov , Immunotargeting of the pulmonary endothelium via angiotensin - converting - enzyme in isolated ventilated and perfused human lung , Adv Exp Med Biol , 756 ( 2013 ) 203 - 212 . [ 323 ] I . Morecroft , K . White , P . Caruso , M . Nilsen , L . Loughlin , R . Alba , P . N . Reynolds , S . M . Danilov , A . H . Baker , M . R . Maclean , Gene therapy by targeted adenovirus - mediated knockdown of pulmonary endothelial Tph1 attenuates hypoxia - induced pulmonary hypertension , Mol Ther , 20 ( 2012 ) 1516 - 1528 . [ 324 ] K . Nowak , C . Hanusch , K . Nicksch , R . P . Metzger , G . Beck , M . M . Gebhard , P . Hohenberger , S . M . Danilov , Pre - ischaemic conditioning of the pulmonary endothelium by immunotargeting of catalase via angiotensin - converting - enzyme antibodies , Eur J Cardiothorac Surg , 37 ( 2010 ) 859 - 863 . [ 325 ] K . Nowak , S . Weih , R . Metzger , R . F . Albrecht , 2nd , S . Post , P . Hohenberger , M . M . Gebhard , S . M . Danilov , Immunotargeting of catalase to lung endothelium via anti - angiotensin - converting enzyme antibodies attenuates ischemia - reperfusion injury of the lung in vivo , Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol , 293 ( 2007 ) L162 - 169 . [ 326 ] V . V . Shuvaev , S . Tliba , M . Nakada , S . M . Albelda , V . R . Muzykantov , Platelet - endothelial cell adhesion molecule - 1 - directed endothelial targeting of superoxide dismutase alleviates oxidative stress caused by either extracellular or intracellular superoxide , J Pharmacol Exp Ther , 323 ( 2007 ) 450 - 457 . [ 327 ] V . R . Muzykantov , D . V . Sakharov , S . P . Domogatsky , N . V . Goncharov , S . M . Danilov , Directed targeting of immunoerythrocytes provides local protection of endothelial cells from damage by hydrogen peroxide , Am J Pathol , 128 ( 1987 ) 276 - 285 . [ 328 ] D . V . Sakharov , V . R . Muzykantov , S . P . Domogatsky , S . M . Danilov , Protection of cultured endothelial cells from hydrogen peroxide - induced injury by antibody - conjugated catalase , Biochim Biophys Acta , 930 ( 1987 ) 140 - 144 . [ 329 ] T . D . Sweitzer , A . P . Thomas , R . Wiewrodt , M . T . Nakada , F . Branco , V . R . Muzykantov , PECAM - directed immunotargeting of catalase : specific , rapid and transient protection against hydrogen peroxide , Free Radic Biol Med , 34 ( 2003 ) 1035 - 1046 . [ 330 ] J . Han , V . V . Shuvaev , V . R . Muzykantov , Catalase and superoxide dismutase conjugated with platelet - endothelial cell adhesion molecule antibody distinctly alleviate abnormal endothelial permeability caused by exogenous reactive oxygen species and vascular endothelial growth factor , J Pharmacol Exp Ther , 338 ( 2011 ) 82 - 91 . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof [ 331 ] V . R . Muzykantov , E . N . Atochina , A . Kuo , E . S . Barnathan , K . Notarfrancesco , H . Shuman , C . Dodia , A . B . Fisher , Endothelial cells internalize monoclonal antibody to angiotensin - converting enzyme , Am J Physiol , 270 ( 1996 ) L704 - 713 . [ 332 ] M . Christofidou - Solomidou , A . Scherpereel , R . Wiewrodt , K . Ng , T . Sweitzer , E . Arguiri , V . Shuvaev , C . C . Solomides , S . M . Albelda , V . R . Muzykantov , PECAM - directed delivery of catalase to endothelium protects against pulmonary vascular oxidative stress , Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol , 285 ( 2003 ) L283 - 292 . [ 333 ] E . D . Hood , C . F . Greineder , C . Dodia , J . Han , C . Mesaros , V . V . Shuvaev , I . A . Blair , A . B . Fis her , V . R . Muzykantov , Antioxidant protection by PECAM - targeted delivery of a novel NADPH - oxidase inhibitor to the endothelium in vitro and in vivo , J Control Release , ( 2012 ) . [ 334 ] T . D . Dziubla , A . Karim , V . R . Muzykantov , Polymer nanocarriers protecting active enzyme cargo against proteolysis , J Control Release , 102 ( 2005 ) 427 - 439 . [ 335 ] E . A . Simone , T . D . Dziubla , E . Arguiri , V . Vardon , V . V . Shuvaev , M . Christofidou - Solomidou , V . R . Muzykantov , Loading PEG - catalase into filamentous and spherical polymer nanocarriers , Pharm Res , 26 ( 2009 ) 250 - 260 . [ 336 ] E . A . Simone , T . D . Dziubla , D . E . Discher , V . R . Muzykantov , Filamentous Polymer Nanocarriers of Tunable Stiffness that Encapsulate the Therapeutic Enzyme Catalase , Biomacromolecules , ( 2009 ) . [ 337 ] T . D . Dziubla , V . V . Shuvaev , N . K . Hong , B . J . Hawkins , M . Madesh , H . Takano , E . Simone , M . T . Nakada , A . Fisher , S . M . Albelda , V . R . Muzykantov , Endothelial targeting of semi - permeable polymer nanocarriers for enzyme therapies , Biomaterials , 29 ( 2008 ) 215 - 227 . [ 338 ] I . V . Balyasnikova , S . M . Danilov , V . R . Muzykantov , A . B . Fisher , Modulation of angiotensin - converting enzyme in cultured human vascular endothelial cells , In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim , 34 ( 1998 ) 545 - 554 . [ 339 ] E . A . Jaffe , R . L . Nachman , C . G . Becker , C . R . Minick , Culture of human endothelial cells derived from umbilical veins . Identification by morphologic and immunologic criteria , J Clin Invest , 52 ( 1973 ) 2745 - 2756 . [ 340 ] J . Han , B . J . Zern , V . V . Shuvaev , P . F . Davies , S . Muro , V . Muzykantov , Acute and chronic shear stress differently regulate endothelial internalization of nanocarriers targeted to platelet - endothelial cell adhesion molecule - 1 , ACS Nano , 6 ( 2012 ) 8824 - 8836 . [ 341 ] A . Thomas , H . Daniel Ou - Yang , L . Lowe - Krentz , V . R . Muzykantov , Y . Liu , Biomimetic channel modeling local vascular dynamics of pro - inflammatory endothelial changes , Biomicrofluidics , 10 ( 2016 ) 014101 . [ 342 ] C . G . Uhl , V . R . Muzykantov , Y . Liu , Biomimetic microfluidic platform for the quantification of transient endothelial monolayer permeability and therapeutic transport under mimicked cancerous conditions , Biomicrofluidics , 12 ( 2018 ) 014101 . [ 343 ] J . Paek , S . E . Park , Q . Lu , K . T . Park , M . Cho , J . M . Oh , K . W . Kwon , Y . S . Yi , J . W . Song , H . I . Edelstein , J . Ishibashi , W . Yang , J . W . Myerson , R . Y . Kiseleva , P . Aprelev , E . D . Hood , D . Stambolian , P . Seale , V . R . Muzykantov , D . Huh , Microphysiological Engineering of Self - Assembled and Perfusable Microvascular Beds for the Production of Vascularized Three - Dimensional Human Microtissues , ACS Nano , 13 ( 2019 ) 7627 - 7643 . [ 344 ] J . Liu , G . E . Weller , B . Zern , P . S . Ayyaswamy , D . M . Eckmann , V . R . Muzykantov , R . Radhakrishnan , Computational model for nanocarrier binding to endothelium validated using in vivo , in vitro , and atomic force microscopy experiments , Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 107 ( 2010 ) 16530 - 16535 . [ 345 ] P . S . Ayyaswamy , V . Muzykantov , D . M . Eckmann , R . Radhakrishnan , Nanocarrier Hydrodynamics and Binding in Targeted Drug Delivery : Challenges in Numerical Modeling and Experimental Validation , J Nanotechnol Eng Med , 4 ( 2013 ) 101011 - 1010115 . [ 346 ] N . Ramakrishnan , R . W . Tourdot , D . M . Eckmann , P . S . Ayyaswamy , V . R . Muzykantov , R . Radhakrishnan , Biophysically inspired model for functionalized nanocarrier adhesion to cell surface : roles of protein expression and mechanical factors , R Soc Open Sci , 3 ( 2016 ) 160260 . [ 347 ] A . Ranganathan , J . Campo , J . Myerson , V . Shuvaev , B . Zern , V . Muzykantov , D . M . Eckmann , Fluorescence Microscopy Imaging Calibration for Quantifying Nanocarrier Binding to Cells During Shear Flow Exposure , J Biomed Nanotechnol , 13 ( 2017 ) 737 - 745 . [ 348 ] H . Pan , J . W . Myerson , L . Hu , J . N . Marsh , K . Hou , M . J . Scott , J . S . Allen , G . Hu , S . San Roman , G . M . Lanza , R . D . Schreiber , P . H . Schlesinger , S . A . Wickline , Programmable nanoparticle functionalization for in vivo targeting , FASEB J , 27 ( 2013 ) 255 - 264 . [ 349 ] H . Deng , C . J . Konopka , T . L . Cross , K . S . Swanson , L . W . Dobrucki , A . M . Smith , Multimodal Nanocarrier Probes Reveal Superior Biodistribution Quantification by Isotopic Analysis over Fluorescence , ACS Nano , 14 ( 2020 ) 509 - 523 . [ 350 ] F . Cuyckens , Mass spectrometry in drug metabolism and pharmacokinetics : Current trends and future perspectives , Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom , 33 Suppl 3 ( 2019 ) 90 - 95 . J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof [ 351 ] S . Mou , Y . Huang , A . I . Rosenbaum , ADME Considerations and Bioanalytical Strategies for Pharmacokinetic Assessments of Antibody - Drug Conjugates , Antibodies ( Basel ) , 7 ( 2018 ) . [ 352 ] J . S . de Maar , A . M . Sofias , T . Porta Siegel , R . J . Vreeken , C . Moonen , C . Bos , R . Deckers , Spatial heterogeneity of nanomedicine investigated by multiscale imaging of the drug , the nanoparticle and the tumour environment , Theranostics , 10 ( 2020 ) 1884 - 1909 . [ 353 ] P . M . Glassman , Y . Chen , J . P . Balthasar , Scale - up of a physiologically - based pharmacokinetic model to predict the disposition of monoclonal antibodies in monkeys , J Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn , 42 ( 2015 ) 527 - 540 . [ 354 ] P . M . Glassman , J . P . Balthasar , Physiologically - based pharmacokinetic modeling to predict the clinical pharmacokinetics of monoclonal antibodies , J Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn , 43 ( 2016 ) 427 - 446 . [ 355 ] L . Kagan , P . Gershkovich , K . M . Wasan , D . E . Mager , Dual physiologically based pharmacokinetic model of liposomal and nonliposomal amphotericin B disposition , Pharm Res , 31 ( 2014 ) 35 - 45 . [ 356 ] H . Sun , E . O . Fadiran , C . D . Jones , L . Lesko , S . M . Huang , K . Higgins , C . Hu , S . Machado , S . Maldonado , R . Williams , M . Hossain , E . I . Ette , Population pharmacokinetics . A regulatory perspective , Clin Pharmacokinet , 37 ( 1999 ) 41 - 58 . [ 357 ] M . Joerger , Covariate pharmacokinetic model building in oncology and its potential clinical relevance , AAPS J , 14 ( 2012 ) 119 - 132 . [ 358 ] T . Miki , Y . Takegami , K . Okawa , T . Muraguchi , M . Noda , C . Takahashi , The reversion - inducing cysteine - rich protein with Kazal motifs ( RECK ) interacts with membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase and CD13 / aminopeptidase N and modulates their endocytic pathways , J Biol Chem , 282 ( 2007 ) 12341 - 12352 . [ 359 ] D . S . Harburger , D . A . Calderwood , Integrin signalling at a glance , J Cell Sci , 122 ( 2009 ) 159 - 163 . [ 360 ] R . O . Hynes , Integrins : bidirectional , allosteric signaling machines , Cell , 110 ( 2002 ) 673 - 687 . [ 361 ] P . Moreno - Layseca , J . Icha , H . Hamidi , J . Ivaska , Integrin trafficking in cells and tissues , Nat Cell Biol , 21 ( 2019 ) 122 - 132 . [ 362 ] J . Gavard , Endothelial permeability and VE - cadherin : a wacky comradeship , Cell Adh Migr , 8 ( 2014 ) 158 - 164 . [ 363 ] S . Fujii , A . Fujihara , K . Natori , A . Abe , Y . Kuboki , Y . Higuchi , M . Aizawa , T . Kuwata , T . Kinoshita , W . Yasui , A . Ochiai , TEM1 expression in cancer - associated fibroblasts is correlated with a poor prognosis in patients with gastric cancer , Cancer Med , 4 ( 2015 ) 1667 - 1678 . [ 364 ] L . T . Senbanjo , M . A . Chellaiah , CD44 : A Multifunctional Cell Surface Adhesion Receptor Is a Regulator of Progression and Metastasis of Cancer Cells , Front Cell Dev Biol , 5 ( 2017 ) 18 . [ 365 ] H . Jiang , R . S . Peterson , W . Wang , E . Bartnik , C . B . Knudson , W . Knudson , A requirement for the CD44 cytoplasmic domain for hyaluronan binding , pericellular matrix assembly , and receptor - mediated endocytosis in COS - 7 cells , J Biol Chem , 277 ( 2002 ) 10531 - 10538 . [ 366 ] G . Preissler , F . Loehe , I . V . Huff , U . Ebersberger , V . V . Shuvaev , I . Bittmann , I . Hermanns , J . C . Kirkpatrick , K . Fischer , M . E . Eichhorn , H . Winter , K . W . Jauch , S . M . Albelda , V . R . Muzykantov , R . Wiewrodt , Targeted endothelial delivery of nanosized catalase immunoconjugates protects lung grafts donated after cardiac death , Transplantation , 92 ( 2011 ) 380 - 387 . [ 367 ] E . D . Hood , M . Chorny , C . F . Greineder , S . A . I , R . J . Levy , V . R . Muzykantov , Endothelial targeting of nanocarriers loaded with antioxidant enzymes for protection against vascular oxidative stress and inflammation , Biomaterials , 35 ( 2014 ) 3708 - 3715 . [ 368 ] R . Li , P . S . Kowalski , H . W . M . Morselt , I . Schepel , R . M . Jongman , A . Aslan , M . H . J . Ruiters , J . G . Zijlstra , G . Molema , M . van Meurs , J . Kamps , Endothelium - targeted delivery of dexamethasone by anti - VCAM - 1 SAINT - O - Somes in mouse endotoxemia , PLoS One , 13 ( 2018 ) e0196976 . [ 369 ] G . M . Marchetti , T . J . Burwell , N . C . Peterson , J . A . Cann , R . N . Hanna , Q . Li , E . L . Ongstad , J . T . Boyd , M . A . Kennedy , W . Zhao , K . W . Rickert , J . S . Grimsby , W . F . Dall ' Acqua , H . Wu , P . Tsui , M . J . Borrok , R . Gupta , Targeted drug delivery via caveolae - associated protein PV1 improves lung fibrosis , Commun Biol , 2 ( 2019 ) 92 . Graphical abstract J ou r na l P r e - p r oo f Journal Pre - proof