ORIGINAL PAPER Intracellular Mechanics and Activity of Breast Cancer Cells Correlate with Metastatic Potential Naama Gal • Daphne Weihs Published online : 4 May 2012 (cid:2) Springer Science + Business Media , LLC 2012 Abstract Mechanics of cancer cells are directly linked to their metastatic potential , or ability to produce a secondary tumor at a distant site . Metastatic cells survive in the cir - culatory system in a non - adherent state , and can squeeze through barriers in the body . Such considerable structural changes in cells rely on rapid remodeling of internal structure and mechanics . While external mechanical mea - surements have demonstrated enhanced pliability of cancer cells with increased metastatic potential , little is known about dynamics of their interior and we expect that to change signiﬁcantly in metastatic cells . We perform a comparative study , using particle - tracking to evaluate the intracellular mechanics of living epithelial breast cells with varying invasiveness . Particles in all examined cell lines exhibit super - diffusion with a scaling exponent of 1 . 4 at short lag times , likely related to active transport by ﬂuc - tuating microtubules and their associated molecular motors . Speciﬁcs of probe - particle transport differ between the cell types , depending on the cytoskeleton network - structure and interactions with it . Our study shows that the internal microenvironment of the highly metastatic cells evaluated here is more pliable and their cytoskeleton is less dense than the poorly metastatic and benign cells . We thus reveal intracellular structure and mechanics that can sup - port the unique function and invasive capabilities of highly metastatic cells . Keywords Particle tracking (cid:2) Cell mechanics (cid:2) Real time imaging in living cells Introduction The normal function of a cell requires constant generation of forces and precise regulation of internal and external stiff - ness on short time scales [ 1 ] . Those abilities are often altered in diseased cells , as has been shown for asthma , sickle cell anemia , malaria , and cancer [ 2 – 4 ] . Speciﬁcally , malignant cells with varying aggressiveness exhibit changes in rigidity , as well as in morphology , motility , and proliferation [ 5 , 6 ] . Such alterations are hardly surprising in metastatic cells . The metastatic process involves detachment from the ori - ginal tumor , survival in the blood or lymph system in a non - adherent state , attachment to a vessel wall and penetration as part of the process for creating a new tumor . To complete the process , a cell is therefore required to undergo severe changes in shape thus demonstrating great ﬂexibility . We have performed a study to evaluate intracellular mechanics and explain differences between cancer cells of varying metastatic potential , or invasiveness . Identifying internal mechanical imprints of metastatic cells , can reveal targets for treatment , as well as provide a diagnostic tool and a platform for testing treatments . Most mechanical measurements on tumors are currently performed at the tissue level or on the exterior of single cells . Malignant tissue has been shown to be stiffer than normal tissue by 10 - fold and more . That is attributed to changes in the extracellular matrix , as well as cell density in tumor tissue [ 7 – 9 ] . Notwithstanding , measurements performed externally on single cells by optical stretching [ 10 ] , mechanical microplate stretching [ 3 , 11 ] and atomic force microscopy [ 12 ] have shown that single malignant Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article ( doi : 10 . 1007 / s12013 - 012 - 9356 - z ) contains supplementary material , which is available to authorized users . N . Gal (cid:2) D . Weihs ( & ) Technion - Israel Institute of Technology , Haifa , Israel e - mail : daphnew @ tx . technion . ac . il 123 Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2012 ) 63 : 199 – 209 DOI 10 . 1007 / s12013 - 012 - 9356 - z and metastatic cells are softer than non - cancerous cells . Those studies also reveal that metastatic cancer cells are softer than non - metastatic cancer cells [ 10 ] . However , external softening likely does not provide cells with enough ﬂexibility to push through small pores , and we expect metastatic cells to be softer internally as well . Changes in cell stiffness , as well as many changes in function , originate from remodeling of the cytoskeleton structure . The cytoskeleton is a complex , highly dynamic network composed of actin , microtubules , and intermediate ﬁlaments , together with numerous chaperon proteins . Softening of malignant cells as measured externally is likely linked to changes in cortical actin [ 13 ] , albeit such methods are not sensitive to mechanical changes deep inside the cell . Intra - and extra - cellular mechanics can exhibit markedly different responses to the same condi - tions , revealing important features and responses . For example , disruption of microtubules in mouse ﬁbroblasts induced a rapid decrease in membrane stiffness [ 14 ] con - current with enhanced stiffening of the intracellular envi - ronment [ 15 ] . Thus , intracellular measurements can reveal biomechanical aspects inaccessible by external methods . Over the last decade , particle tracking in living cells has provided insight to intracellular dynamics and structure , as well as to active - transport processes [ 16 , 17 ] . Spontaneous motion of internalized [ 18 – 20 ] and endogenous particles [ 21 – 23 ] , or externally driven particle motion [ 20 , 24 ] , has been used to evaluate intracellular mechanics . In a recent work , Li and coworkers [ 25 ] have shown that the intra - cellular cortical regions of malignant cells are softer than in benign cells . However , no systematic evaluation of the internal mechanics of cancer cells as a function of their metastatic potential has been presented to date . In our study , we evaluate the internal dynamics and mechanics of three closely related breast - cancer cell models with varying metastatic potential . Spontaneous particle motions in the different cell types are quantita - tively evaluated and contrasted . We apply conventional statistical measures , e . g . , time - dependent mean square displacement ( MSD ) , combined with advanced trajectory - analysis techniques . We ﬁnd that particles in all cell types exhibit active transport at short lag times , likely driven by the active cytoskeletal network and its associated molec - ular motors . While particles are non - thermally driven in all the cells , their motions indicate different microenviron - ments . Those correlate with cell structure and dynamics as well as particle interactions with the network . Interiors of metastatic cells appear signiﬁcantly softer , sparser , and more dynamic than non - metastatic and benign cells . That is in agreement with the ability of these cells to undergo extensive morphological changes during metastasis . Non - metastatic cells , both benign and malignant , are stiffer and with denser networks . Methods Cell Culture We have used three human , epithelial , breast cell lines to test intracellular mechanics as a function of cancer meta - static potential . Speciﬁcally , we used the highly - metastatic breast cancer cell - line , MDA - MB - 231 ( HTB - 26 , ATCC Manassas , VA ) the low metastatic - potential breast - cancer cell line , MDA - MB - 468 ( HTB - 132 , ATCC ) , and as con - trol , the benign cell line MCF - 10A ( CRL - 10317 , ATCC ) . Benign MCF10A cells , ATCC origin , were kindly provided by Prof . Israel Vlodavsky from the Faculty of Medicine , Technion - Israel Institute of Technology . For simplicity , cells will be referred to from here on : as high metastatic potential ( high MP ) for the MDA - MB - 231 , low MP for the MDA - MB - 468 , and a benign for the MCF - 10A . Cells were cultured and maintained in a humidiﬁed incubator at 37 (cid:3) C , 5 % CO 2 and were used at passages 10 – 30 form stock . The high and low MP cell lines , MDA - MB - 231 and MDA - MB - 468 , were routinely cultured in DMEM ( Gibco , Carlsbad , CA ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( Hyclone , ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc , Waltham , MA ) and 1 % vol . of L - glutamine , sodium pyruvate , and penicillin – streptomycin ( Biological Indus - tries , Kibbutz Beit Haemek , Israel ) . The benign , MCF - 10A cells were cultured in DMEM / Ham’s F - 12 medium sup - plemented with 5 % horse serum ( Hyclone , ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc , Waltham , MA ) , 1 % vol . of L - glutamine and penicillin / streptomycin , 10 l g / ml insulin , 10 ng / ml epi - dermal growth factor , 0 . 5 l g / ml hydrocortisone , and 100 ng / ml cholera toxin . Sample Preparation Experiments were run in a custom - made 6 - well plate with cover - glass - bottom for high magniﬁcation [ 26 ] . A 30 mm diameter , # 1 . 5 glass ( Menzel - Gla¨ser , Germany ) was used as the bottom of the dish and cell adherence substrate . Fluorescent , carboxyl - coated polystyrene particles , 200 nm in diameter ( Molecular Probes , Invitrogen Life Technolo - gies , Carlsbad , CA ) , were used as probes for intracellular measurements . Probe particles were introduced into the cells one day after plating , after cells adhered to the sur - face . For both malignant lines , particles were added to media into the wells directly for natural uptake . For MCF - 10A cells , direct addition of particles resulted in large aggregates . For this reason , cell culture media was replaced with fresh media which contained fetal bovine serum instead of horse serum , and the particles . All samples were incubated overnight to allow particle uptake by endocyto - sis , and imaged 24 h following particle introduction . While endocytosis may leave particles membrane - encapsulated , 200 Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2012 ) 63 : 199 – 209 123 we have observed that there is no correlation between particle encapsulation in the cancer cells and their motion ( unpublished work ) . To minimize perturbations cell media was not changed before imaging . Microscopy and Image Acquisition Imaging was done on an inverted , epi - ﬂuorescence microscope ( IX81 Olympus , Japan ) , using a 100x DIC oil - immersion objective ( numerical aperture 1 . 4 ) . An incuba - tor surrounding the microscope ( LIS , Switzerland ) was used to maintain cell - culture optimal 37 (cid:3) C , 5 % CO 2 , and high humidity against evaporation . Particle motion within cells was recorded at 60 . 45 frames - per - second using a XR / TURBO - 120EX CCD camera ( Stanford Photonics , Palo Alto , CA ) , at a ﬁnal magniﬁcation of 99 nm / pixel . Sixty - second videos were recorded at several ﬁelds - of - view for each sample , in at least 3 different samples . Overall , 10 – 15 particles were recorded within each cell , in a total of over 100 cells . Particle Tracking Algorithm Particle trajectories inside cells were obtained through frame - by - frame analysis of particle motion using MAT - LAB 2010b ( The Mathworks , Natick , MA ) . Our centroid - localization algorithm is based on the one suggested by Crocker and Grier [ 27 ] , with signiﬁcant modiﬁcations . We apply the base ﬁlters provided by Crocker and Grier , i . e . , Gaussian for the features ( particles ) and Boxcar for back - ground ﬁltration . We also link locations of particles in each frame into time - dependent trajectories as described in [ 27 ] . The main novelty of our approach is in the way potential features are identiﬁed , where only distinct , single particles are retained . In the Crocker - Grier algorithm , the brightest pixels in each frame are identiﬁed as potential particle centers , and a circle of a user - deﬁned size is constructed around that pixel . The centroid is then determined to sub - pixel resolution by ﬁnding the intensity - weighted center of mass of the circle . Real features are discriminated from noise using cutoffs of brightness , eccentricity , and radius of gyration , all applied to the intensity distribution within the constructed circle . In our study , we apply ‘‘blob analysis’’ approaches in MATLAB , using functions in the Image Processing Toolbox to locate groups of adjacent bright pixels , which are considered as potential particles . Spe - ciﬁcally , we label each bright blob on dark background and then apply ﬁlters to those . We initially apply a ﬁlter to keep only pixels above a user - deﬁned brightness minimum ; the brightness serves as an indication of whether a particle is in focus , where dark particles are less in focus . Then , we apply ﬁlters on size and eccentricity , both provided by the user . The size is given as a range or expected areas ( in pixels ) and the eccentricity is given as a maximally allowed cutoff ; eccentricity of zero is a perfect circle while values close to 1 are a line . Thus , we only keep blobs that are bright enough , are within the speciﬁed size range , and exhibit a minimal eccentricity . The centroid of each of those blobs is determined to sub - pixel resolution by cal - culating its intensity - weighted center of mass . Both approaches identify the centers of well - separated , rounded objects , with great precision and in agreement . However , we ﬁnd that our approach is more effective in excluding irregularly shaped particles . Irregular shapes can for example be observed when two particles are in close proximity , or their projections in the x – y plane overlap . Those are likely not particle aggregates in the cells , as aggregates are not generally visualized and typically no more than 2 particles are closely situated . Figure 1a shows that for well - separated , circular objects the centers deter - mined by blob analysis are in good agreement with those detected by the Crocker - Grier algorithm . For particles identiﬁed by both algorithms , less than 1 % of centroids varied by more than 5 nm , the typical noise ﬂoor for tracking systems . Initially , the Crocker - Grier algorithm ﬁnds a larger number of features overall , albeit some of those are aggregates that should be excluded from the analysis . When all features are rounded , well - separated particles , the Crocker - Grier algorithm may still be superior to ours at times . However , when particles are introduced into cells they are often close , effectively like small aggregates , as demonstrated in Fig . 1b . Using the Crocker - Grier algorithm , centers of those aggregates are often inaccurately determined , and an attempt to exclude them by using stricter parameters resulted in loss of wanted features . In contrast , those aggregates are easily excluded by our approach , where a blob is always treated as a single feature , and user - deﬁned cutoffs for size , eccentricity , and minimal intensity are applied to it . Hence , our approach effectively provides the same centroid positions when particles are well - separated and more easily discards inaccurately identiﬁed particles . Trajectory Analysis We have performed different evaluations on particle tra - jectories , to reveal motions and their underlying mecha - nisms . Particle motion was initially quantiﬁed by the second moment of the displacement , or the lag time - dependent MSD : D r 2 s ð Þ (cid:2) (cid:3) ¼ r t þ s ð Þ (cid:3) r t ð Þ j j 2 D E ¼ 4 D 0 s a ð 1 Þ The MSD is a statistical measure commonly used to describe particle motion . Here , the angular brackets indicate time - and ensemble - averages . The pre - factor 4D 0 Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2012 ) 63 : 199 – 209 201 123 is the amplitude of the MSD plot , which is inversely related to stiffness of the probe surroundings [ 20 , 28 ] . The diffusive exponent a is the MSD scaling exponent [ 16 , 29 , 30 ] , which can suggest modes - of - motion of particle transport . However , it cannot reveal underlying mechanisms leading to the observed exponents [ 31 , 32 ] , without additional information on the particle microenvironment . Both parameters are determined by ﬁtting the logarithm of the MSD to a straight line at appropriate lag - time ranges . Fits were applied on linearly spaced log – log MSD data , to reduce biasing toward longer lag times , where measurement points are denser albeit with reduced statistics . Static noise of * 30 nm 2 was estimated by monitoring particles glued to a cover - glass , and was subtracted from the data [ 33 ] . For each particle , an average time - dependent speed was calculated . All displacements travelled by a particle over a certain lag time were averaged and divided that by that time lag . Probability density functions of averaged single particle speeds were asymmetrical , and were thus ﬁtted to a lognormal distribution : f x ð Þ ¼ 1 x r ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 2 p p exp ln x (cid:3) l ð Þ 2 . 2 r 2 h i ; ð 2 Þ where the geometric average of the distribution is then given by e l . Expanding on the second moment , other moments of the displacement can provide additional characterization of active - transport mechanisms [ 34 , 35 ] , as we have recently demonstrated in living cells [ 18 ] . Speciﬁcally , higher moments of the displacement emphasize larger , rare steps which can average out in the MSD . Thus , we deﬁne the time - dependence of the q th moment of the displacement by a scaling exponent k ( q ) , where r t þ s ð Þ (cid:3) r t ð Þ j j q h i (cid:4) s k q ð Þ ð 3 Þ Moments of ensemble - averaged displacements were plotted for various moment orders q ; e . g . q = 2 is the MSD . In regions where the log - scale displacement plots were linear , the log - slope provided the scaling exponent for each moment order . The corresponding moment of the static - noise particle displacement was subtracted . The scaling exponents were then plotted as a function of the moment order . In pure diffusion , for example , the scaling exponents would be linear with the moment order and have a slope of 0 . 5 , while purely ballistic motion will have a slope of unity . Non - linear dependence of scaling exponents on moment order indicates that the process is not scale invariant , and is associated with more than one transport mechanism [ 34 , 35 ] . Fluorescent Staining and Imaging To compare the structure of the microtubule network in the different cell lines , cells were ﬁxed and their cytoskeleton stained . The samples were ﬁxed in 3 . 2 % paraformalde - hyde ( Electron Microscopy Sciences , Hatﬁeld , PA ) , for 20 min at 4 (cid:3) C , and permeabilized with 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 ( A . R . , Bio Lab , Israel ) for 5 min at room temper - ature . To minimize non - speciﬁc binding , blocking was performed with 3 % FBS ( Hyclone , ThermoFisher Scien - tiﬁc , Waltham , MA ) for 20 min at room temperature . Microtubules were labeled with mouse anti - a - tubulin monoclonal antibody ( Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) and second - ary cy3 - labeled goat anti - mouse IgG antibody ( Jackson Immuno Research , West Grove , PA ) . In parallel with the secondary antibody , cell nuclei were labeled with 4 0 - 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ( DAPI , Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) . Fig . 1 Fluorescent particle centroids identiﬁed by our blob - identi - ﬁcation algorithm ( green triangles ) and Crocker - Grier algorithm ( red circles ) . a When features are circular and well - separated , both algorithms locate their centers with excellent agreement ; note overlap of circles and triangles . b When particles aggregate they are immediately excluded by our approach based on the shape of the blob , albeit are sometimes more difﬁcult to exclude by Crocker - Grier algorithm ( Color ﬁgure online ) 202 Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2012 ) 63 : 199 – 209 123 Imaging was performed with a spectral - imaging Zeiss LSM700 confocal system , mounted on a motorized Axio Observer Z1 microscope , using a x63 / 1 . 4 NA oil objective . Results In each cell line , single particles demonstrate a variety of motions , characterized by a range of amplitudes and log - arithmic exponents . Indiscriminately averaging the MSD of all particles may be misleading , as different MSD scaling likely correlates to different driving mechanisms [ 17 ] . That has been noted before and , where possible researchers have separated particles into groups by setting an amplitude cutoff [ 36 ] or a scaling exponent cutoff [ 37 ] . In addition , several models have been suggested to describe MSD dynamics in living cells in terms of power laws [ 38 – 41 ] . However , application of those models and approaches require the MSD to be at least qualitatively uniform , and do not allow for a combination of different behaviors ; e . g . , different exponents with similar amplitudes are difﬁcult to separate . To group qualitatively similar MSD plots , single tra - jectories were characterized by their MSD scaling expo - nents . Only trajectories with at least 300 frames , or 5 s long , were considered . We have utilized a new automated power - law determination algorithm [ 42 ] , to automatically detect regions where a single power law can be ﬁt to the data ; those are linear regions in the log – log plot of the MSD . Our algorithm locates high - curvature points in the MSD ( s ) log – log plot and detects any log - linear regions between them . In short , we ﬁnd the two highest - curvature points in a 6th degree polynomial applied to smooth the data . Then , we determine if lines may be accurately ﬁt within the regions surrounding those points ; for more details see Ref . [ 42 ] . Using the determined exponents we then separate trajectories into groups according to exponent cutoffs . Some trajectories do not have any appropriate regions , and so no power laws are ﬁt ; those are less than 5 % of all the particle trajectories . Power laws were ﬁt separately for each particle , and the exponents at short lag times were used to categorize trajectories . At short lag times , most of the trajectories demonstrated a power law above unity , indicating dominant active motion . We have thus deﬁned a cutoff exponent of 0 . 9 for power laws ﬁt at short range lag times , from 1 / frame rate and up to a few sec . To demonstrate the differences between groups , ensemble - averaged MSDs of the deter - mined groups for one cell type are presented in Fig . 2a . The group with short lag - time exponents below 0 . 9 is a small one in all our cells , consisting of 2 – 8 % of the tra - jectories ﬁt . It is important to note that the long lag - time behavior of the two groups is qualitatively different in the cancer cells ; that served as a test for the correct positioning of the cutoff . Particles with large exponents at short times exhibit lower exponents at longer times and vice versa ; both behaviors have previously been observed in living cells [ 21 , 38 ] . In the benign cells , long lag - time exponents were the same in all populations , indicating that the het - erogeneous distribution of exponents observed at short lag Fig . 2 Time - and ensemble - averaged mean square displacements . a MSD of the categorized particles in low MP cells . Most trajectories ( 92 % of all ﬁt lines ) exhibited a [ 0 . 9 at short lag times , with a * 1 at longer lag times ( solid line ) . Few trajectories ( 8 % ) exhibited a \ 0 . 9 at short lag times and those had higher a at longer lag times ( dashed line ) . Inset distribution of scaling exponents within the group was continuous and had a single peak . b MSD , of [ 1 ] high MP cells [ 2 ] low MP cells , and [ 3 ] benign cells . Super - diffusion with a * 1 . 4 is observed at short lag times , and scaling exponents reduce at longer lag times , see supplementary information for values . Solid lines are guides to the eye Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2012 ) 63 : 199 – 209 203 123 times likely results from the same driving mechanism . Hence , trajectories in these cells may not require such categorization , albeit for uniformity between the cell lines , we apply the same cutoff . We focus on the trajectories exhibiting dominant active transport ( a [ 0 . 9 ) at short time - scales from here on throughout the paper . Single particle MSDs and their exponents that were included in this group exhibit a continuous and symmetric distribution . Thus , the distribution is reliably represented by its average ( inset of Fig . 2a and Figure S1 ) . Ensemble - averaged MSDs of particles in each cell - line are presented in Fig . 2b and ﬁt parameters are provided in Table S1 . Each curve is a time and ensemble average of 800 – 1 , 200 particles , recorded in over 100 cells . At short lag times of up to 1 s super - diffusion was observed in the ensemble MSD ( Fig . 2b ) . The MSD scaling exponents of the ensemble - averaged MSD in all cell lines were determined to be about 1 . 4 . Similarly , when averaging all the exponents obtained with our automatic power law determination algorithm for single - particle MSD at short times , we have obtained a * 1 . 4 ± 0 . 2 ( standard devia - tion ) , for all evaluated cell types ( Fig . S1 ) . That type of super - diffusion at short lag times was reported in cells in several previous studies [ 20 , 21 , 23 , 24 , 43 – 45 ] , and is typ - ically attributed to non - thermal processes in the cell . At longer lag times , above 5 s , a decrease in scaling exponent is observed . The two cancer cell lines exhibit a close to unity and the benign cells exhibit a * 0 . 78 . A transition from super - diffusion to diffusion or sub - diffusion at time scale of a few seconds has been observed before by us [ 26 ] and others [ 21 , 23 , 45 ] . A major difference between cell types is in the MSD amplitude ( 4 D’ in Eq . 2 ) , which is about 6 - fold higher for the high MP cells than for the other two cell lines . Particle speeds provide a possible indication to the transport mechanisms at different time scales . Figure 3 provides the histograms of averaged speeds for all parti - cles , at representative lag times of 0 . 1 and 10 s . The qualitative shape of the distribution in Fig . 3 is also con - sistent at all other lag times . As the histograms are asym - metric , they were ﬁt with lognormal distributions , where e l provides a geometrical mean . Despite the general similarity between cell lines , the high MP cells exhibited broader distributions with higher means and a long tail , corre - sponding to the differences in MSD amplitudes . At lag time of 0 . 1 s , distribution averages are close to 200 nm / sec for the high MP cells and 100 nm / sec for the other two cell lines . Those speeds are on the lower - end of the range of molecular motor speeds [ 19 , 45 ] . Consistent with the two regimes in the MSD curve , speeds also decreased at longer lag times . At 10 s , the averages are about 30 nm / sec for high MP cells and 10 nm / sec for the other two cell lines . To further illuminate the transport mechanisms in the different cells we applied a displacement moment analysis , where different moments of the displacement are consid - ered in addition to the second moment ( MSD ) [ 18 ] . In short , scaling exponents were determined as a function of different moments , q : \ D r q [ * s k ( q ) . For each moment order , the corresponding moment , time - and ensemble - averaged displacement for all the particles is plotted as a function of lag time , and a logarithmic slope , or a scaling exponent is extracted . In Fig . 4 , the scaling exponents at short lag times ( \ 1 s ) are plotted as a function of moment order . In self - similar motion , this plot should be linear , as observed for the low MP and benign cells . For those cells , a single slope of * 0 . 65 is observed at all moment orders ( Table S2 ) , indicating super - diffusive , sub - ballistic motion . However , in the high MP cells , a second slope of 0 . 85 emerges at high q values . Hence , we observe a phenome - non called strong anomalous diffusion [ 18 , 34 , 35 ] , where Fig . 3 Singleparticlespeeddistributionsatrepresentativelagtimesof 0 . 1 s ( a ) and 10 s ( b ) . Solid lines are log - normal ﬁts according to Eq . 2 , where geometric means of the distributions are denoted by e l . a At lag time 0 . 1 s : [ 1 ] high MP cells with mean speed of 198 nm / sec , [ 2 ] low MP cells with 88 nm / sec , and [ 3 ] benign cells with 99 nm / sec . b At lag times10 s : [ 1 ] highMPcellswithmeanspeedof30 nm / sec , [ 2 ] lowMP cells with 12 nm / sec , and [ 3 ] benign cells with 11 nm / sec 204 Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2012 ) 63 : 199 – 209 123 the slope of k ( q ) at higher moment orders is larger than the slope at lower orders . That phenomenon is associated with rare events of large steps ( about 2 % of all steps ) , which are averaged out at small moments , albeit accentuated at higher ones . The strongly anomalous motion could result from local trapping or diffusion regimes punctuated by rare , transient , active - transport events . Discussion In this study , we have evaluated the transport of intracel - lular particles inside benign and malignant living , breast epithelial cells as a measure for mechanics and activity . We have found that particle motion in high MP cells is enhanced as compared to low MP and benign cells . Parti - cles in high MP cells exhibit greater MSD amplitudes , larger speeds , and a phenomenon called strong anomalous diffusion , indicating a combination of concurrent active processes [ 18 ] . We suggest that the enhanced motion observed here in high MP cells is associated with a sparse , highly dynamic cytoskeletal network , further observed by microtubule ( MT ) staining in those cells ( see Fig . 5 ) , and leading to a softer intracellular microenvironment . Those structural and mechanical properties can aid the high metastatic potential cells in performing invasive processes involving large changes in morphology that require great ﬂexibility [ 5 , 6 ] . The intracellular data presented here accentuates the role of mechanics in cancer , in agreement with extracellular measurements [ 10 , 12 , 46 ] . However , while external measurements relate to cancer , our data indicates that internal softening may correlate speciﬁcally with ability to metastasize . The larger MSD amplitudes at all lag times ( Fig . 2b ) and higher speeds ( Fig . 3 ) in the high MP cells indicate that they are softer than the low MP cell and the benign cells . In active , living cells , the violation of the ﬂuctuation dissipa - tion theorem prevents direct correlation of the MSD to the creep compliance or shear modulus of the intracellular Fig . 4 Scaling exponents of the displacements at each moment order in high MP ( 1 , green ) , low MP ( 2 , red ) , and benign ( 3 , blue ) cells . Logarithmic slopes were linear up to lag times of 1 – 2 s at all moment orders . At low moment orders q B 2 a slope of * 0 . 65 was observed in all cell lines . At higher moment orders q C 2 a second slope of 0 . 85 was observed in high MP cells alone ( Color ﬁgure online ) Fig . 5 Microtubule staining in high MP ( a ) , low MP ( b ) , and benign ( c ) cells . A sparser network is observed in high MP cells as compared to the other two cell lines . Scale bar : 10 l m Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2012 ) 63 : 199 – 209 205 123 microenvironment [ 44 , 47 , 48 ] . Nevertheless , even in the presence of non - thermal driving forces the MSD amplitude has been shown to be inversely proportional to the stiffness of the microenvironment [ 20 , 28 ] . Thus , the higher MSD amplitude in the high MP cells , concurrent with the same short time exponent as the other cells , likely indicate a more pliable intracellular microenvironment in the high MP , invasive cells . Correspondingly , staining shows that the MT network is sparser in these cells than in the other two cell lines ( Fig . 5 ) . In accordance , trajectories indicate that par - ticles explore a larger area within a given time ( Fig . S2 ) , strengthening the notion of a softer environment related to the sparser network . Interestingly , our intracellular mea - surements in low MP cells exhibited MSD amplitudes and speeds similar to those of the benign cells , both being sig - niﬁcantly reduced relative to the high MP cells . The observed exponents at short lag times result from active processes related to the motor - containing cytoskel - eton and the microtubule network in particular . Our probe - particles are deep within the cells and within the microtubule network , as observed in several studies with different cell types [ 19 – 21 , 24 ] . We have recently shown by targeted disruptions of the cytoskeleton that particles are more affected by changes to the MT network , indicating their localization in that region and interactions with MT and their motors ( unpublished work ) . Mechanics of living cells and reconstituted biopolymer networks containing motors differ from those measured in thermally driven biopolymer networks . Measurements in non - active MT networks have shown elasticity over a wide range of lag times [ 49 , 50 ] or viscoelasticity with MSD scaling expo - nents of 3 / 4 at short times [ 51 ] . In living cells , however , super - diffusion with exponents of * 1 . 5 was reported in a variety of cell types and probe sizes [ 20 , 24 , 43 – 45 ] . Caspi et al . [ 21 , 40 ] have shown that a generalized Einstein relation with a time - dependent friction gives rise to MSD scaling exponents of 1 . 5 and 0 . 5 at short and long lag times , respectively . The concept underlying that derivation was that particles larger than the mesh network are driven by several microtubule associated motor proteins in a non - active , non - Newtonian network . However , growing evi - dence of active networks has been reported in reconstituted bioﬁlaments [ 32 , 47 ] and cells [ 43 , 52 ] , where ﬁlament ﬂuctuations are driven by non - thermal mechanisms . A recent study by Kulic et al . [ 45 ] in drosophila has dem - onstrated that motor proteins generate longitudinal stress ﬂuctuations in the microtubule network . The MSD of peroxisomes which were directly coupled to the microtu - bules scaled as s 1 . 5 . Additional motor transport along the ﬁlaments can increase this scaling toward s 2 , or ballistic motion . Reduction in exponents below 1 . 5 , as observed at short lag times here , may be explained by a number of reasons : diffusive motion on the same time scale as active transport , rapid motor binding and unbinding , and increased network conﬁnement [ 21 , 23 , 45 ] . At lag times s [ 5 , a reduction in MSD scaling exponent is observed in all three cell lines . In accordance , particle speeds at 10 s are on the order of tens of nm / sec , well below speeds associated with molecular motor transport . Both cancer cell lines reduce to a diffusive - like a * 1 , while control cells exhibit a * 0 . 8 . A possible explanation for a diffusive - like scaling exponent is repetitive binding to and unbinding from ﬁlaments or similarly frequent motor switching [ 21 , 32 , 45 ] ; in the high and low MP cells , respectively . The timescale of the transition to reduced exponents corresponds to typical binding and unbinding rates of MT associated molecular motors [ 53 ] . Thus , at those longer lag times , particle motion is likely composed of several uncorrelated active - transport events , which resemble random motion with a scaling exponent of 1 . Furthermore , the transition to diffusive - like exponent can reﬂect remodeling of the network itself [ 28 ] . For benign cells , a * 0 . 8 is observed , suggesting that the particles in those cells may also be subjected to network conﬁnement and friction . Our interest lies in the active transport at short times - scales and its differences between the cells . While the average exponents are the same in all the cells at short lag times , we observe differences in single particle motion likely relating to the network structure and mech - anisms of transport . In all the evaluated cells , MSD scaling exponents are distributed around a * 1 . 4 ± 0 . 2 at lag times up to 1 s ( Fig . 2a and Table S1 ) . Particle speeds in that time - scale are on the order of hundreds of nm / sec ( Fig . 3 ) , within the range of molecular motor mediated motion [ 19 , 52 ] . In the low MP cells , the distribution of scaling exponents at short lag times is ﬂatter than in the other two cell lines ( see Figure S1 ) , indicating a wider diversity of driving mechanisms or probed microenviron - ments . That diversity is also apparent in single particle trajectories ( see Figure S2 ) , where many trajectories are directional on long time - scales while others are more conﬁned . Moreover , high directional persistence [ 38 ] was observed in trajectories of low MP cells at long lag times ( see Figure S3 ) , indicating enhanced directionality in those cells as compared to high MP and benign cells . Despite being directionally persistent , the overall distance covered by the particles remains small with respect to the high MP cells ( Fig . 2b and Figure S2 ) likely due to the dense net - work ( Fig . 5 ) . The other two cell lines , high MP and benign , demonstrate more uniform trajectories , and corre - spondingly exponent distributions are narrower . The variations observed in single particle motion in the different cell lines can be associated with microscopic particle - network interactions . We suggest that in low MP cells motors directly drive particle motion , giving rise to a wide range of a ’s . Particles persistently carried on a single 206 Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2012 ) 63 : 199 – 209 123 ﬁlament result in a values approaching 2 , while frequent motor switching results in a values closer to unity [ 54 ] . We further suggest that in the other cells ( high MP and benign ) particle motion primarily reﬂects network ﬂuctuations , induced by molecular motors , in a non - directional manner . The active transport in the high MP and benign cells can result from direct interaction with the cytoskeleton , or can be indirectly affected by longer range cytoplasmic stirring caused by network ﬂuctuations [ 20 , 32 ] . Despite the similar mechanisms driving particles in high MP and benign cells , the network structure determines the overall distance travelled by the particles ; in benign cells , trajectories are much more conﬁned , again indicating a denser surrounding as compared to high MP cells . The high MP cells exhibit a phenomenon called strong anomalous diffusion , which the other two cell lines do not ( Fig . 4 ) , indicating combined , enhanced active processes . At low moment orders q all three cells demonstrate a slope of * 0 . 65 ( Table S2 ) , consistent with the super - diffusive motion observed in the MSD . However , at higher q values , a second slope of * 0 . 85 is observed only in the high MP cells , indicating strong anomalous diffusion [ 18 , 34 , 35 ] . Strong anomalous diffusion has been reported in ( theoret - ical ) systems where regions of conﬁned or diffusive motion were separated by rare , large ballistic steps [ 34 , 35 ] . As a result of those ballistic steps , scaling exponents k ( q ) of the displacements exhibit a slope of unity at high moment orders q , while in the high MP cells the slope of k ( q [ 2 ) was 0 . 8 ( Table S2 ) . We have recently proposed that strong anomalous diffusion in living cells originates from sub - ballistic ﬂights with signiﬁcant diffusion [ 18 ] , hence the slope reduces from 1 to * 0 . 8 . The sub - ballistic nature of those ﬂights is associated with the network properties : large pore sizes allow the particles to diffuse in addition to being actively transported [ 18 , 23 ] , making the ﬂights sub - ballistic . A similar mechanism , termed ‘‘stalling and hop - ping , ’’ has been suggested for particles externally bound to cell membranes , where regimes of conﬁned motion are punctuated by hops [ 48 ] . Those were associated with heavy tail step - size distributions , similar to the speed distribution observed here for the high MP cells . Hence , the existence of the rare , large ﬂights in the high MP cells alone can be associated with their soft interior and sparse network , which allows long - range active steps , or possibly rapid network rearrangements . In summary , we have evaluated and contrasted the internal mechanics and activity of cancerous and non - cancerous epithelial breast cells . Active transport of probe particles in all the evaluated cells is related to active motion of microtubules and their associated motors . Dif - ferences in transport relate to interactions of the probe particles with the cytoskeleton and motors as well as local cell structure and mechanics . The low MP and benign cells exhibit similar MSDs and speeds , no anomalous diffusion , and a dense MT network . That indicates their internal structure and mechanics are similar while particle inter - actions with it may not be . On the other hand , the high MP cells are softer , and the cytoskeleton mesh is sparser . Particles move larger distances , and demonstrate rare large steps giving rise to strong anomalous diffusion . Our observations relate internal mechanics and structure to cell function , revealing changes speciﬁcally related to the highly metastatic cells . The invasive cells evaluated here , exhibited a more pliable interior , providing ﬂexibil - ity required for large - scale deformations , while the non - metastatic cells exhibit similar mechanics to benign cells . Our results suggest that intracellular mechanics of cancer cells are only modiﬁed when a cell is metastatic , albeit not when it is cancerous . In contrast , external measurements probing the actin rich cortex have indicated that ﬂexibility increases in cancerous , non - metastatic cells as compared to non - cancerous ones . Hence , our study underscores the importance of considering internal mechanics alongside external , when establishing the mechanics of a clinical state . The generality of these conclusions should be veriﬁed with in vitro primary , tumor cells as well as test their persistence and implications in vivo . It is important to note that this local , internal softening does not prevent the same cells from being able to apply contractile and thrust forces when moving in 3D , even stronger than the non - metastatic cells ( unpublished work ) . The enhanced pliability observed in the metastatic cells originates with the microtubule network , suggesting microtubule hyper - stabilization as a target for blocking metastasis , an approach also used to treat cancer in general . Acknowledgments The study was partially funded by Israeli Min - istry of Science and Technology and by the Technion Russel Berrie Nanotechnology Institute . Confocal imaging was performed at the facilities of the Lorry I . Lokey Interdisciplinary Center for Life Sci - ences and Engineering . References 1 . Discher , D . E . , Janmey , P . , & Wang , Y . L . ( 2005 ) . Tissue cells feel and respond to the stiffness of their substrate . Science , 310 , 1139 – 1143 . 2 . An , S . S . , Fabry , B . , Trepat , X . , Wang , N . , & Fredberg , J . J . ( 2006 ) . Do biophysical properties of the airway smooth muscle in culture predict airway hyperresponsiveness ? American Journal of Respiratory Cell and Molecular Biology , 35 , 55 – 64 . 3 . Suresh , S . , Spatz , J . , Mills , J . P . , Micoulet , A . , Dao , M . , Lim , C . T . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Connections between single - cell biomechanics and human disease states : gastrointestinal cancer and malaria . Acta Biomaterialia , 1 , 15 – 30 . 4 . Shaked , N . T . , Satterwhite , L . L . , Telen , M . J . , Truskey , G . A . , and Wax , A . ( 2011 ) . Quantitative microscopy and nanoscopy of sickle red blood cells performed by wide ﬁeld digital interfer - ometry . Journal of Biomedical Optics 16 . Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2012 ) 63 : 199 – 209 207 123 5 . Kumar , S . , & Weaver , V . ( 2009 ) . Mechanics , malignancy , and metastasis : The force journey of a tumor cell . Cancer and Metastasis Reviews , 28 , 113 – 127 . 6 . Suresh , S . ( 2007 ) . Biomechanics and biophysics of cancer cells . Acta Biomaterialia , 3 , 413 – 438 . 7 . Paszek , M . J . , Zahir , N . , Johnson , K . R . , Lakins , J . N . , Rozenberg , G . I . , Gefen , A . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell , 8 , 241 – 254 . 8 . Janmey , P . A . , & Miller , R . T . ( 2011 ) . Mechanisms of mechanical signaling in development and disease . Journal of Cell Science , 124 , 9 – 18 . 9 . Wirtz , D . , Konstantopoulos , K . , & Searson , P . C . ( 2011 ) . The physics of cancer : the role of physical interactions and mechanical forces in metastasis . Nature Reviews Cancer , 11 , 512 – 522 . 10 . Guck , J . , Schinkinger , S . , Lincoln , B . , Wottawah , F . , Ebert , S . , Romeyke , M . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Optical deformability as an inherent cell marker for testing malignant transformation and metastatic competence . Biophysical Journal , 88 , 3689 – 3698 . 11 . Asnacios , A . , Desprat , N . , and Guiroy , A . ( 2006 ) . Microplates - based rheometer for a single living cell . Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 77 . 12 . Cross , S . E . , Jin , Y . S . , Rao , J . , & Gimzewski , J . K . ( 2007 ) . Nanomechanical analysis of cells from cancer patients . Nature Nanotechnology , 2 , 780 – 783 . 13 . Fritsch , A . , Hockel , M . , Kiessling , T . , Nnetu , K . D . , Wetzel , F . , Zink , M . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Are biomechanical changes necessary for tumour progression ? Nature Physics , 6 , 730 – 732 . 14 . Pelling , A . E . , Dawson , D . W . , Carreon , D . M . , Christiansen , J . J . , Shen , R . R . , Teitell , M . A . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Distinct contributions of microtubule subtypes to cell membrane shape and stability . Nanomed - Nanotechnol , 3 , 43 – 52 . 15 . Weihs , D . , Mason , T . G . , and Teitell , M . A . ( 2007 ) . Effects of cytoskeletal disruption on transport , structure , and rheology within mammalian cells . Physics Fluids 19 . 16 . Weihs , D . , Mason , T . G . , & Teitell , M . A . ( 2006 ) . Bio - micro - rheology : A frontier in microrheology . Biophysical Journal , 91 , 4296 – 4305 . 17 . Hoffman , B . D . , & Crocker , J . C . ( 2009 ) . Cell mechanics : dis - secting the physical responses of cells to force . Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering , 11 , 259 – 288 . 18 . Gal , N . , and Weihs , D . ( 2010 ) . Experimental evidence of strong anomalous diffusion in living cells . Physical Review E 81 , 020903 ( R ) . 19 . Arcizet , D . , Meier , B . , Sackmann , E . , Radler , J . O . , and Heinrich , D . ( 2008 ) . Temporal analysis of active and passive transport in living cells . Physical Review Letter 101 . 20 . Hoffman , B . D . , Massiera , G . , Van Citters , K . M . , & Crocker , J . C . ( 2006 ) . The consensus mechanics of cultured mammalian cells . Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences USA , 103 , 10259 – 10264 . 21 . Caspi , A . , Granek , R . , & Elbaum , M . ( 2000 ) . Enhanced diffusion in active intracellular transport . Physical Review Letters , 85 , 5655 – 5658 . 22 . Yamada , S . , Wirtz , D . , & Kuo , S . C . ( 2000 ) . Mechanics of living cells measured by laser tracking microrheology . Biophysical Journal , 78 , 1736 – 1747 . 23 . Kulkarni , R . P . , Castelino , K . , Majumdar , A . , & Fraser , S . E . ( 2006 ) . Intracellular transport dynamics of endosomes containing DNA polyplexes along the microtubule network . Biophysical Journal , 90 , L42 – L44 . 24 . Robert , D . , Nguyen , T . H . , Gallet , F . , and Wilhelm , C . ( 2010 ) . In vivo determination of ﬂuctuating forces during endosome trafﬁcking using a combination of active and passive microrhe - ology . PLoS ONE 5 . 25 . Li , Y . X . , Schnekenburger , J . , and Duits , M . H . G . ( 2009 ) . Intracellular particle tracking as a tool for tumor cell character - ization . Journal of Biomedical Optics 14 . 26 . Yizraeli , M . L . , and Weihs , D . ( 2011 ) . Time - dependent micro - mechanical responses of breast cancer cells and adjacent ﬁbro - blasts to electric treatment . Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics ( in press ) . 27 . Crocker , J . C . , & Grier , D . G . ( 1996 ) . Methods of digital video microscopy for colloidal studies . Journal of Colloid and Interface Science , 179 , 298 – 310 . 28 . Brangwynne , C . P . , Koenderink , G . H . , Weitz , D . A . , & MacKintosh , F . C . ( 2009 ) . Intracellular transport by active dif - fusion . Trends in Cell Biology , 19 , 423 – 427 . 29 . Saxton , M . J . , & Jacobson , K . ( 1997 ) . Single - particle tracking : Applications to membrane dynamics . Annual Review of Bio - physics and Biomolecular Structure , 26 , 373 – 399 . 30 . Metzler , R . , & Klafter , J . ( 2000 ) . The random walk’s guide to anomalous diffusion : a fractional dynamics approach . Physics Reports , 339 , 1 – 77 . 31 . Burov , S . , Jeon , J . H . , Metzler , R . , & Barkai , E . ( 2011 ) . Single particle tracking in systems showing anomalous diffusion : the role of weak ergodicity breaking . Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics : PCCP , 13 , 1800 – 1812 . 32 . Brangwynne , C . P . , Koenderink , G . H . , MacKintosh , F . C . , and Weitz , D . A . ( 2008 ) . Nonequilibrium microtubule ﬂuctuations in a model cytoskeleton . Physical Review Letter 100 . 33 . Savin , T . , & Doyle , P . S . ( 2005 ) . Static and dynamic errors in particle tracking microrheology . Biophysical Journal , 88 , 623 – 638 . 34 . Castiglione , P . , Mazzino , A . , Muratore - Ginanneschi , P . , & Vulpiani , A . ( 1999 ) . On strong anomalous diffusion . Physica D : Nonlinear Phenomena , 134 , 75 – 93 . 35 . Ferrari , R . , Manfroi , A . J . , & Young , W . R . ( 2001 ) . Strongly and weakly self - similar diffusion . Physica D : Nonlinear Phenomena , 154 , 111 – 137 . 36 . Oppong , F . K . , & de Bruyn , J . R . ( 2007 ) . Diffusion of micro - scopic tracer particles in a yield - stress ﬂuid . J Non - Newton Fluid , 142 , 104 – 111 . 37 . Girard , K . D . , Kuo , S . C . , & Robinson , D . N . ( 2006 ) . Dictyos - telium myosin II mechanochemistry promotes active behavior of the cortex on long time scales . Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences USA , 103 , 2103 – 2108 . 38 . Raupach , C . , Zitterbart , D . P . , Mierke , C . T . , Metzner , C . , Muller , F . A . , and Fabry , B . ( 2007 ) . Stress ﬂuctuations and motion of cytoskeletal - bound markers . Physical Review E 76 . 39 . Bronstein , I . , Israel , Y . , Kepten , E . , Mai , S . , Shav - Tal , Y . , Barkai , E . , and Garini , Y . ( 2009 ) . Transient anomalous diffusion of telomeres in the nucleus of mammalian cells . Physical Review Letter 103 . 40 . Caspi , A . , Granek , R . , and Elbaum , M . ( 2002 ) . Diffusion and directed motion in cellular transport . Physical Review E Statis - tical , Nonlinear , and Soft Matter Physics 66 , 011916 . 41 . Snider , J . , Lin , F . , Zahedi , N . , Rodionov , V . , Yu , C . C . , & Gross , S . P . ( 2004 ) . Intracellular actin - based transport : How far you go depends on how often you switch . Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences USA , 101 , 13204 – 13209 . 42 . Umansky , M . , and Weihs , D . ( 2012 ) . Novel algorithm and MATLAB - based program for automated power law analysis of single particle . Time - dependent mean - square displacement . Computer Physics Communications ( in press ) . 43 . Lau , A . W . C . , Hoffman , B . D . , Davies , A . , Crocker , J . C . , and Lubensky , T . C . ( 2003 ) . Microrheology , stress ﬂuctuations , and active behavior of living cells . Physical Review Letter 91 . 44 . Wilhelm , C . ( 2008 ) . Out - of - equilibrium microrheology inside living cells . Physical Review Letter 101 . 208 Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2012 ) 63 : 199 – 209 123 45 . Kulic , I . M . , Brown , A . E . , Kim , H . , Kural , C . , Blehm , B . , Selvin , P . R . , et al . ( 2008 ) . The role of microtubule movement in bidi - rectional organelle transport . Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences USA , 105 , 10011 – 10016 . 46 . Li , Q . S . , Lee , G . Y . H . , Ong , C . N . , & Lim , C . T . ( 2008 ) . AFM indentation study of breast cancer cells . Biochemical and Bio - physical Research Communications , 374 , 609 – 613 . 47 . Mizuno , D . , Tardin , C . , Schmidt , C . F . , & MacKintosh , F . C . ( 2007 ) . Nonequilibrium mechanics of active cytoskeletal net - works . Science , 315 , 370 – 373 . 48 . Bursac , P . , Lenormand , G . , Fabry , B . , Oliver , M . , Weitz , D . A . , Viasnoff , V . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Cytoskeletal remodelling and slow dynamics in the living cell . Nature Materials , 4 , 557 – 561 . 49 . Lin , Y . C . , Koenderink , G . H . , MacKintosh , F . C . , & Weitz , D . A . ( 2007 ) . Viscoelastic properties of microtubule networks . Macromolecules , 40 , 7714 – 7720 . 50 . Pelletier , V . , Gal , N . , Fournier , P . , and Kilfoil , M . L . ( 2009 ) . Microrheology of Microtubule Solutions and actin - microtubule composite networks . Physical Review Letter 102 . 51 . Caspi , A . , Granek , R . , Lachish , A . , Zbaida , D . , & Elbaum , M . ( 1998 ) . Semiﬂexible polymer network : A view from inside . Physical Review Letters , 80 , 1106 – 1109 . 52 . Kural , C . , Kim , H . , Syed , S . , Goshima , G . , Gelfand , V . I . , & Selvin , P . R . ( 2005 ) . Kinesinanddyneinmoveaperoxisomeinvivo : Atug - of - war or coordinated movement ? Science , 308 , 1469 – 1472 . 53 . Lipowsky , R . , Klumpp , S . , & Nieuwenhuizen , T . M . ( 2001 ) . Random walks of cytoskeletal motors in open and closed com - partments . Physical Review Letters , 87 , 108101 . 54 . Kahana , A . , Kenan , G . , Feingold , M . , Elbaum , M . , and Granek , R . ( 2008 ) . Active transport on disordered microtubule networks : The generalized random velocity model . Physical Review E Statistical Nonlinear Soft Matter Physics 78 , 051912 . Cell Biochem Biophys ( 2012 ) 63 : 199 – 209 209 123