Current Biology , Vol . 12 , 79 – 84 , January 8 , 2002 ,  2002 Elsevier Science Ltd . All rights reserved . PII S0960 - 9822 ( 01 ) 00629 - 7 Cofilin Produces Newly Polymerized Actin Filaments that Are Preferred for Dendritic Nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 Complex same cells inhibited barbed end generation , indicating that cofilin activity is the other pathway responsible [ 2 ] . Together , these results suggest that cofilin and Arp2 / 3 complex act together to produce the actin - based push - ing force at the leading edge . Ilia Ichetovkin , 1 Wayne Grant , 2 and John Condeelis 1 , 3 1 Department of Anatomy and Structural Biology Albert Einstein College of Medicine 1300 Morris Park Avenue Bronx , New York 10461 There are several ways in which cofilin and Arp2 / 3 complex may function together . First , Arp2 / 3 complex 2 Department of Orthopedics Yale University School of Medicine may be capable of capping the pointed ends of the cofilin - produced short filaments . That prevents their 333 Cedar Street SHM IE34 New Haven , Connecticut 06510 complete depolymerization , salvaging extra barbed ends for actin polymerization [ 6 ] . Second , cofilin may produce an extra mass of F - actin , leading to the in - creased binding of Arp2 / 3 complex to the sides of fila - Summary ments and thereby nucleation [ 7 ] . Third , Arp2 / 3 complex may bind directly to the cofilin - produced barbed ends One of the earliest events in the process of cell motility to nucleate filament branches [ 8 ] . Finally , a direct inter - is the massive generation of free actin barbed ends , action between Arp2 / 3 complex and cofilin may lead to which elongate to form filaments adjacent to the increased activity of either one of them . plasma membrane at the tip of the leading edge . Both Since there are certain assumptions required in order cofilin and Arp2 / 3 complex have been proposed to todiscernthesepossibilitieskinetically , weusedadirect contributeto barbedendformationduring cellmotility . method for visualization of actin polymerization in the Attempts to assess the functions of cofilin and Arp 2 / 3 light microscope . F - actin seeds containing 5 % of biotin - complex in vivo indicate that both cofilin and Arp2 / 3 actin were prepolymerized from 2 (cid:1) M actin in the pres - complex contribute to actin polymerization : cofilin by ence of 0 . 1 (cid:1) M phalloidin - Alexa488 , so as to label the severing and Arp2 / 3 by nucleating and branching . In filaments at a final molar ratio of 1 phalloidin to 20 actin order to determine if the activities of cofilin and Arp2 / 3 subunits . Perfusion chambers were covered with antibi - complex interact , we employed a light microscope - otin IgG so as to tether the Alexa - labeled filaments in based assay to visualize actin polymerization directly place for imaging as described previously [ 9 ] . Rhoda - in the presence of both proteins . The results indicate mine - labeled actin was then polymerized from these that cofilin generates barbed ends to increase the tethered Alexa - labeled seeds under several conditions . mass of freshly polymerized F - actin but does not di - As shown in Figure 1A , in the absence of additional rectly affect the activity of Arp2 / 3 complex . However , components , rhodamine - actin polymerized exclusively while ADP , ADP - Pi , and newly polymerized ATP - fila - from the barbed ends of the Alexa488 - labeled seeds . ments are all capable of supporting Arp2 / 3 - mediated Introduction of cofilin into the system led to the appear - branching , newly polymerized F - actin supports most ance of small “gaps” in the Alexa488 - labeled actin fila - of the Arp2 / 3 - induced branch formation . The results ment seeds due to severing , where newly generated suggest that , in vivo , cofilin contributes to barbed end barbed ends nucleated extra “extensions” of freshly formationbyinducingtheinitialincreaseinthenumber polymerized filaments . Tethering actin filaments with of barbed ends leading to increased ATP - F - actin , antibodies to the solid substrate increased the severing which in turn supports higher levels of dendritic nucle - activity of cofilin by more than 100 - fold ( with half - maxi - ation by active Arp2 / 3 complex . mal activity of 9 nM ) compared to experiments with cofilin in solution where half - maximal activity is (cid:1) 1 (cid:1) M Results and Discussion [ 9 ] . This is expected since cofilin changes the twist of the actin filament , causing tension that cannot be re - Earlier experiments in which ADF / cofilin ( hereafter leavedaseasilyinatetheredorcrosslinkedfilament [ 10 ] . called “cofilin” ) was inhibited in vivo demonstrate the We suspect that the increased level of cofilin severing direct involvement of cofilin severing in the generation activity observed toward tethered filaments in vitro bet - of barbed ends and actin polymerization during cell mo - ter represents the severing activity of cofilin toward the tility [ 1 , 2 ] . Theseresults areconsistent withexperiments crosslinked network of actin filaments found near the in which cofilin overexpression results in increases in leading edge in vivo [ 2 , 11 ] where filaments appear to actin filament number and cell motility [ 3 , 4 ] . Microinjec - be crosslinked every 100 – 200 nm [ 6 ] . tion of antibodies into cells that block Arp2 / 3 (cid:2) s nucle - Addition of Arp2 / 3 complex activated with N - WASP ation activity in vitro inhibited stimulated protrusion of VCA fragment in the absence of cofilin led to the forma - lamellipodia but did not inhibit the appearance of free tion of branches on the sides of rhodamine - labeled actin barbed ends , indicating that other pathways contribute filaments newly polymerized from the ends of Alexa488 - to barbed end generation in vivo [ 5 ] . Microinjection of labeled F - actin seeds . Only occasionally were branches function - blocking antibodies against cofilin into the observed growing directly from the sides of Alexa488 - labeled F - actin seeds . Introduction of both cofilin and activated Arp2 / 3 complex at the same time led to the 3 Correspondence : condeeli @ aecom . yu . edu Current Biology 80 Figure 1 . Synergy between Arp2 / 3 and Cofi - lin in the Light Microscope ( A ) Alexa488 - labeled actin seeds ( 2 (cid:1) M ) ( green ) were perfused with a mixture of 2 (cid:1) M rhodamine - labeled actin ( red ) , Arp2 / 3 , GST - VCA , and / or rat recombinant cofilin in actin polymerization buffer . ( B ) Filaments of both colors were traced sep - arately , and total lengths of rhodamine and Alexa488 filaments per field were quantified . Bars represent mean ratios of the mass of newly polymerized filaments to the amount of seeds for eight randomly chosen fields ( (cid:1) 50 (cid:3) 50 (cid:1) m ) (cid:4) SEM . Dotted line indicates theoretical“synergylimit”andwascalculatedasthesumofeffectsofcofilinandArp2 / 3 acting separately . ( C ) Branches formed by Alexa488 - labeled and rhodamine - labeled filaments were quan - tified separately ( number of branches per 50 (cid:3) 50 (cid:1) m field ) . Number of branches was convertedintothefrequencyofbranchingpermicrometeroftheseedsorfreshlypolymer - ized filaments . Typical filaments polymerized in the presence of Arp2 / 3 shown in the inset ( left ) . Some “branch - like” structures were counted on the slides containing no Arp2 / 3 , leading to the non - zero background . These could be the product of partial filament bundling . Bars represent mean values for eight randomly chosen fields (cid:4) SEM . significantly increased production of newly polymerized our visual observation ( Figure 1C , left inset ) that the frequency of the Arp2 / 3 - generated branches growing rhodamine - F - actin from cofilin severed seed filaments as complex three dimensional structures ( Figure 1A ) . off of the freshly polymerized rhodamine - labeled fila - ments is several fold higher than the frequency of the In order to quantify these images , we traced preex - isting Alexa488 - labeled F - actin seeds and freshly poly - branches growing off the hours - old Alexa488 - labeled filament seeds . These results suggest that the amount merized rhodamine - F - actin , converted tracings into val - ues of micrometers of actin length per field of view , of Arp2 / 3 - nucleated branching depends more on the quantity of newly polymerized F - actin ( which in turn de - average length of the filament , and branches per mi - crometer of filament length . The total amount of rhoda - pends on the number of the barbed ends caused by cofilin severing ) rather than the total mass of F - actin . mine - F - actin was significantly increased when both Arp2 / 3 complex and cofilin were present together ( Fig - To consider the possibility that increased dendritic nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex on freshly polymerized ures 1A and 1B ) . In fact , the mass of newly polymerized rhodamine - actin filaments increased when both pro - filaments may be caused by the presence of chemically modified ( rhodamine ) actin , we evaluated the ability of teins were present beyond the sum of the mass of fila - ments obtained with either Arp2 / 3 complex or cofilin 80 % rhodamine actin filaments ( 1 % phalloidin - Alexa488 - labeled ) polymerized overnight to nucleate branches as separately ( Figure 1B ) . The increase shown in Figure 1B is an underestimate of the effect , because the filaments compared to 1 % phalloidin - Alexa488 - labeled actin fila - mentscontainingnorhodaminemodifications . Therewere could be traced only in two dimensions , whereas the cofilin and Arp2 / 3 - induced filament complex was three no significant differences between these two popula - tions , with rhodamine - actin - containing filaments being dimensional , and the out of focus part was not scored . Comparison of the number of branches growing off slightly ( 5 % – 10 % ) less effective in forming branches ( data not shown ) . theAlexa488 - labeledF - actinseedsandfreshlypolymer - ized rhodamine - actin filaments demonstrates that cofi - While some biochemical data and direct side binding experiments suggest that branching occurs as a result lin by itself does not affect the number of branches from either type of filament ( Figure 1C ) . However , it confirmed of the binding of Arp2 / 3 complex along the side of a Brief Communication 81 Figure 2 . Real - Time Observation of Arp2 / 3 - Nucleated Branching ( A – C ) Alexa488 - phalloidin actin seeds were perfused with rhodamine - actin , Arp2 / 3 , and GST - VCA in antibleaching actin polymerization buffer and time - lapse imaged in a single optical plane . Arrows indicate branching events relatively far away from the growing end of the filament . However , most branches are very close to the fast growing ends . Drawings below each image indicate the pattern of filament growth after image processing as described in the Supplementary Material . ( Inset ) Model of actin nucleotide composition at the same scale as actin filaments in the images ( A ) – ( C ) [ 17 ] . filament [ 5 , 7 , 12 , 13 ] , analysis of the filament lengths ity that newly added ATP monomers ( i . e . , the ATP - cap ) support the most efficient nucleation of branches by in the electron microscope and kinetic analysis suggest that Arp2 / 3 complex may branch filaments by incorpo - Arp2 / 3 complex rather than inhibiting debranching . However , given the resolution of the light microscope rating into the free barbed end [ 8 ] . Analysis of the Arp2 / 3 - polymerized actin filaments in our study suggests that relative to the size of the ATP cap on the growing actin filament ( Figure 2 , inset ) , thereis not sufficient resolution there is a strong correlation between the lengths of fila - ments extending past branch points ( Figure 1C ) . That to clearly rule out direct involvement of the barbed ends in at least some of the branching events . isindicativeofthenucleation eventoccurringeitherright at or in the close proximity to the barbed end of the The results shown in Figures 1 and 2 suggest that the nucleotide state of the filament on which branches form filament . End - stage light microscope assays employed by previous studies [ 8 , 14 , 15 ] could not determine if the may influence the efficiency of branch formation , with the ATP - containing filament contributing most to the barbed end is directly involved in the Arp2 / 3 - mediated nucleation event . Using confocal microscopy in combi - Arp2 / 3 - mediated branching . In order to investigate this possibilityfurther , weusedtheassaydescribedinFigure nation with the above mentioned methods , we were able to monitor the nucleation activity of Arp2 / 3 in real time , 1 , with actin filaments artificially “locked” in various nu - cleotide - bound states . without removing rhodamine - G - actin firstso as to watch where new branches form relative to fast growing ends . AMPPNP is a nonhydrolysable analog of ATP , which , unlike ATP or ATP (cid:5) S , is cleaved extremely slowly once Following the polymerization of rhodamine - actin in real time ( Figures 2A – 2C ) demonstrates that the filament it is incorporated into the ATP binding site of actin . We converted monomeric ATP actin into the AMPPNP form branches originate anywhere along the sides as well as nearthefastgrowingends . Theresultsoftheseobserva - by exhaustive dialysis against multiple changes of AMPPNP - actin storage buffer and polymerized it in the tions , although not strictly quantitative , led us to the conclusion that , while regions of the filament closest to presence of 1 % phalloidin overnight . These filaments were at least 2 - fold more effective in forming Arp2 / 3 - the growing barbed end are more potent in supporting dendritic nucleation , there is a significant amount of nucleated branches than either ADP - or ADP - Pi fila - ments ( Figures 3D and 3E ) . branch formation at distances up to 3 – 4 (cid:1) m behind the fast growing barbed end ( Figures 2A – 2C ; see also the As shown previously , ADP - actinfilaments can be con - verted back into ADP - Pi filaments in the presence of movies in the Supplementary Material available with this article online ) . The large proportion of branches forming high concentrations of inorganic phosphate [ 16 , 17 ] . We converted actin filaments into ADP - Pi form ( 2 mM PO 4 , near the fast growing end is consistent with the possibil - Current Biology 82 Figure 3 . AMPPNP - Actin Filaments Facili - tate Dendritic Nucleation ( A – C ) Actin seeds ( 2 (cid:1) M ) were prepared ( A ) with no further addition , ( B ) in the presence of 2mM phosphate , ( C ) in200 (cid:1) M BeF 2 / 2mM NaF . ( D ) Actin was exhaustively dialyzed for 48 hr against several changes of 1000 (cid:3) volume of AMPPNP - buffer and polymerized overnight on ice in the AMPPNP - containing buffer to make seeds . According to data from Cooke ( 1975 ) [ 32 ] , suchextensive dialysisshould re - sult in filaments containing less than 0 . 1 % of ADP / ADPPi / ATP . Seeds were diluted , per - fused into the anti - biotin - coated chambers and washed ( see Supplementary Material ) . Rhodamine - labeledG - actinwasperfusedto - gether with Arp2 / 3 and GST - VCA in anti - bleaching buffer , incubated for 300 s , and washedwiththesamebuffercontainingphal - loidin . Two fields are shown for each con - dition . ( E ) The number of rhodamine actin branches per micron of the seed filament length was scored as in Figure 1 . ( F ) The effect of phalloidin . Actin filaments containing 25 % rhodamine actin were poly - merized in the absence ( top panel ) or pres - ence of Alexa488 - phalloidin ( bottom panel ) . Filaments were positioned into the perfusion chamber ; unbound F - actin was flushed with the polymerization buffer . Arp2 / 3 , VCA , and 2 (cid:1) MrhodamineG - actinwereintroducedinto the chamber in polymerization buffer for 300 s . Unpolymerized rhodamine G - actin was washed away with antibleaching buffer containing 1 mM phalloidin . Green channel represents images of seed filaments taken before perfusion with Arp2 / 3 , VCA , and Rhodamine - G - actin . Red channel : same field after exposure to the Arp2 / 3 , VCA , and actin . 8 hr ) . These filaments were no more active in forming lease of Pi from the monomers of the F - actin seed , and ADP - Pi and ATP containing seed filaments were branches than the conventionally polymerized filaments that were not exposed to inorganic phosphate ( Figures postulated to have a lower debranching rate [ 19 ] . When we used phalloidin in the filament seeds ( in the form of 3B and 3E ) . BeF 3 (cid:6) / BeF 2 OH (cid:6) ion was reported to take the place either free phalloidin or Alexa - 488 - phalloidin dye ) , there was a 1 . 5 - fold increase in the number of branches all of PO 4 (cid:6) in ADP - F - actin with the K d of 2 (cid:1) M [ 18 ] . This interaction is thought to force actin monomers to as - along the length of the phalloidin - containing filaments ( Figure 3F ) . Removing phalloidin abolished the in - sume a conformation resembling the transition state between ATP and ADP - Pi - containing actin molecules . creased branching by Arp2 / 3 complex . This is consis - tent with our results , because Orlova and Egelman [ 20 ] However , there is no direct proof of these ADP - BeF 3 (cid:6) actin filaments being structurally indistinguishable from have shown that adding phalloidin to filaments caused a significant change in the interstrand connectivity that freshly polymerized ATP actin . In our experiment , as wellas inthe experimentsby Carlieret al . [ 8 ] , the number is correlated with increased stability of the filament . Since both AMPPNP - containing and phalloidin - con - of Arp2 / 3 - mediated branches formed on BeF 3 (cid:6) - satu - rated filaments ( 200 (cid:1) M BeF 2 / 2 mM NaF , 8 hr ) was the taining filaments are reported to be more resistant to depolymerization by either ADF / cofilin family members same as that on the ADP - or ADP - Pi filaments ( Figures 3C and 3E ) . [ 21 , 22 ] orgelsolin [ 23 ] , P . A . Janmey , personalcommuni - cation ] , the structure of filaments with bound phalloidin We conclude that the ATP - actin containing cap at the fast growing end of the actin filament is more efficient may be more analogous to that of ATP - F - actin . Another possible explanation for our observation could be that in supporting Arp2 / 3 - mediated branching than either ADP - or ADP - Pi - actin . a certain portion of the actin monomers within the fila - ment did not hydrolyze ATP when phalloidin was pres - The above results are generally consistent with previ - ous studies using prepolymerized F - actin seeds where ent . According to Wendel and Dancker [ 24 ] , 15 % – 20 % of monomer - associated ATP remained unhydrolyzed some newly polymerized filaments were observed to give rise to further generationsof filaments and the num - within the phalloidin - treated filaments for up to several hours . Our results demonstrate that ADP - Pi filaments ber of branches depended on the nucleotide state of the seed filament [ 14 , 15 ] . However , branching was re - do not support branching as well as ATP filaments and that phalloidin is not required for the increased branching ported to be maximal when phalloidin was present , a result ascribed to the inhibition by phalloidin of the re - seen on newly polymerized filaments , since there was Brief Communication 83 no free phalloidin present during polymerization in our by the binding of complex anywhere along the side of a preexisting filament [ 28 ] . Alternatively , in the barbed experiments . In addition , our results indicate that the rate of new branch formation—not debranching—is reg - end branching model it is proposed that activated Arp2 / 3 complex binds to and branches the barbed ends ulated by the ATP state of the seed filament . The ADF / cofilin family has been long known for its of filaments by incorporating into the filament’s barbed end [ 8 ] . Imaging the polymerization reaction in real time actin depolymerization activity , with severing of actin filaments considered to be an integral part of the de - demonstrates that branch formation at distances up to 3 – 4 (cid:1) m behind the fast growing barbed end occurs polymerization process [ 22 ] . However , recent reports indicatethattheseveringactivityofcofilincanbeuncou - frequently , as consistent with the dendritic nucleation model [ 28 ] . However , most of the branches are immedi - pled both structurally and functionally from the ability of cofilin to depolymerize actin [ 25 , 26 ] . In vitro , in the ately adjacent to the barbed end . The simplest interpre - tation of our results is that all branching occurs from presence of ATP - G - actin at polymerizable concentra - tions , cofilin leads to enhanced polymerization of actin filament sides , with the ATP - cap region of a filament dominating the reaction . This single mechanism can ex - by creating barbed ends by severing ( reviewed in [ 27 ] ) , an activity increased by crosslinking of filaments as plain both the dependence of Arp2 / 3 - mediated nucle - ation on the number of ends [ 8 ] and the absence of shown here . Under the conditions commonly encoun - tered in vivo , that is , (cid:1) M ATP - G - actin and a network of inhibition of Arp2 / 3 nucleation by capping protein [ 15 ] . PreferenceoftheATP - capforArp2 / 3 - nucleatedbranching crosslinked filaments , activation of cofilin is likely to produce numerous barbed ends and rapid polymeriza - could be very important in vivo because constraining branching near the fast growing end would bias the tion of actin from them . Therefore , cofilin may play an important role in vivo in the initiation of actin polymeriza - Arp2 / 3 - generatedbranchpatterninonedirection—age - ometry ideal for pushing . Additional factors such as cor - tion at the leading edge by severing . This hypothesis is supported byincreases inprotrusion of theleading edge tactin may regulate the binding of Arp2 / 3 complex to the sides of actin filaments tomodify the effect of nucleotide in neuronal [ 3 ] and Dictyostelium cells [ 4 ] that overex - press cofilin and the localization of cofilin to the leading state of the seed filament on the dendritic nucleation activity of Arp2 / 3 complex [ 30 , 31 ] . edge during cell motility [ 2 , 11 ] . Most relevant to this hypothesis are observations that microinjection into cells of function - blocking antibodies against cofilin in - Conclusions hibits barbed end formation in vivo [ 2 ] and the ability Our results indicate that the nucleotide state of the fila - of expression of a the nonphosphorylatable mutant of ment seed determines the efficiency of dendritic nucle - cofilin , S3A , to rescue barbed end formation and leading ation , with regions of the ATP - containing filament edge protrusion in cells overexpressing LIM - kinase [ 1 ] . contributing most to Arp2 / 3 - generated branching . By Based on a large body of in vitro biochemistry , the increasing the number of barbed ends in a crosslinked function of Arp2 / 3 complex in vivo is hypothesized to network of actin filaments , cofilin would amplify the be the de novo formation of a barbed end on a preex - number of newly polymerized ATP - containing filaments isting actin filament , leading to obligatory filament to support dendritic nucleation . This model is consistent branching during nucleation [ 8 , 28 ] . However , the limited with in vivo results indicating a requirement for both numbers of experiments performed in cells to date to cofilin - induced severing and Arp2 / 3 - mediated branching test this hypothesis suggest that Arp2 / 3 complex ac - in protrusive force . It also reconciles data supporting counts for only a small fraction of the barbed ends pro - both the barbed end branching [ 8 ] and dendritic nucle - duced in vivo [ 29 ] . Furthermore , microinjecting antibod - ation [ 15 ] models . It is also consistent with the other ies into carcinoma cells that inhibit the nucleation and major function of cofilin—the severing and depolymeri - side binding activities of the Arp2 / 3 complex fails to zation of ADP - containing filaments to recycle actin inhibit barbed end production , even though protrusion monomers and Arp2 / 3 complex for further cycles of is completely stopped [ 5 ] . These studies suggest that dendritic nucleation . both barbed end formation and protrusion involve multi - ple pathways that are synergistic . The results reported Supplementary Material Supplementary material including additional biochemical data , Ex - in this study demonstrate that cofilin and Arp2 / 3 com - perimental Procedures , and video files of real - time observation of plex can exhibit a synergistic interaction where cofilin - Arp2 / 3nucleatedbranchingcanbefoundathttp : / / images . cellpress . mediated severing produces more newly polymerized com / supmat / supmatin . htm . filaments thatare preferred substrates forthe nucleation and branching activities of activated Arp2 / 3 complex . Acknowledgments This mechanism for synergy is in agreement with kinetic results where the extent of Arp2 / 3 - mediated nucleation TheauthorswishtothankMikeCammer , JeffWyckoff , andmembers is dependent on the number of barbed ends supplied of the Analytic Imaging Facility for help in imaging ; and Corina Sor - mientofordouble - blindcountingoffilaments . Wealsowishtothank by spectrin - actin seeds [ 8 ] . Our results may also explain Dr . Paul Janmey ( University of Pennsylvania ) for advise about the the requirement for both cofilin and Arp2 / 3 activities in preparation of AMPPNP - actin . This work was supported by grants the same cell type for barbed end formation and lamelli - from the National Institutes of Health . pod extension [ 5 , 2 ] . The mechanism by which the Arp2 / 3 complex nucle - Received : August 27 , 2001 ates actin polymerization is controversial . It is proposed Revised : November 9 , 2001 in the dendritic nucleation model that the nucleation Accepted : November 9 , 2001 Published : January 8 , 2002 activityofWASP - activatedArp2 / 3complexisstimulated Current Biology 84 References remodeling of branched actin filament networks . Curr . Biol . 10 , 1273 – 1282 . 20 . Orlova , A . , Prochniewicz , E . , and Egelman , E . H . ( 1995 ) . Struc - 1 . Zebda , N . , Bernard , O . , Bailly , M . , Welti , S . , Lawrence , D . S . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2000 ) . PhosphorylationofADF / cofilinabolishes tural dynamics of F - actin . II . Cooperativity in structural transi - tions . J . Mol . Biol . 245 , 598 – 607 . EGF - induced actin nucleation at the leading edge and subse - quent lamellipod extension . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 1119 – 1128 . 21 . Rosenblatt , J . , Agnew , B . J . , Abe , H . , Bamburg , J . R . , and Mitchi - son , T . J . ( 1997 ) . Xenopus actin depolymerizing factor / cofilin 2 . Chan , A . Y . , Bailly , M . , Zebda , N . , Segall , J . E . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2000 ) . Roleof cofilinin epidermalgrowth factor - stimulated ( XAC ) isresponsiblefortheturnoverofactinfilamentsinListeria monocytogenes tails . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 1323 – 1332 . actin polymerizationand lamellipod protrusion . J . CellBiol . 148 , 531 – 542 . 22 . Bamburg , J . R . ( 1999 ) . ProteinsoftheADF / cofilinfamily : essential regulators of actin dynamics . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 15 , 3 . Meberg , P . J . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2000 ) . Increase in neurite outgrowth mediated by overexpression of actin depolymerizing 185 – 230 . 23 . Allen , P . G . , Laham , L . E . , Way , M . , and Janmey , P . A . ( 1996 ) . factor . J . Neurosci . 20 , 2459 – 2469 . 4 . Aizawa , H . , Sutoh , K . , and Yahara , I . ( 1996 ) . Overexpression of Binding of phosphate , aluminum fluoride , or beryllium fluoride toF - actininhibitsseveringbygelsolin . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 4665 – cofilinstimulatesbundlingofactinfilaments , membraneruffling , and cell movement in Dictyostelium . J . Cell Biol . 132 , 335 – 344 . 4670 . 24 . Wendel , H . , and Dancker , P . ( 1987 ) . Influence of phalloidin on 5 . Bailly , M . , Ichetovkin , I . , Grant , W . , Zebda , N . , Machesky , L . M . , Segall , J . E . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2001 ) . The F - actin side binding ATP hydrolysis during actin polymerization . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 915 , 205 – 209 . activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex is essential for actin nucleation and lamellipod extension . Curr . Biol . 11 , 620 – 625 . 25 . Moriyama , K . , and Yahara , I . ( 1999 ) . Two activities of cofilin , severing and accelerating directional depolymerization of actin 6 . Bailly , M . , Macaluso , F . , Cammer , M . , Chan , A . , Segall , J . E . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 1999 ) . Relationship between Arp2 / 3 complex filaments , are affected differentially by mutations around the actin - binding helix . EMBO J . 18 , 6752 – 6761 . and the barbed ends of actin filaments at the leading edge of carcinoma cells after epidermal growth factor stimulation . J . 26 . Pope , B . J . , Gonsior , S . M . , Yeoh , S . , McGough , A . , and Weeds , A . G . ( 2000 ) . Uncoupling actin filament fragmentation from in - Cell Biol . 145 , 331 – 345 . 7 . Machesky , L . M . , Mullins , R . D . , Higgs , H . N . , Kaiser , D . A . , Blan - creased subunit turnover . J . Mol . Biol . 298 , 649 – 661 . 27 . Condeelis , J . ( 2001 ) . How is actin polymerization nucleated in choin , L . , May , R . C . , Hall , M . E . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) . Scar , a WASp - related protein , activates nucleation of actin filaments vivo ? Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 288 – 293 . 28 . Pollard , T . D . , Blanchoin , L . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2000 ) . Molecular by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 3739 – 3744 . mechanisms controlling actin filament dynamics in nonmuscle cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 29 , 545 – 576 . 8 . Pantaloni , D . , Boujemaa , R . , Didry , D . , Gounon , P . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2000 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex branches filament barbed 29 . Glogauer , M . , Hartwig , J . , and Stossel , T . ( 2000 ) . Two pathways through Cdc42 couple the N - formyl receptor to actin nucleation ends : functional antagonism with capping proteins . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , 385 – 391 . in permeabilized human neutrophils . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 785 – 796 . 30 . Weaver , A . M . , Karginov , A . V . , Kinley , A . W . , Weed , S . A . , Li , Y . , 9 . Ichetovkin , I . , Han , J . , Pang , K . M . , Knecht , D . A . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2000 ) . Actin filaments are severed by both native and re - Parsons , J . T . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2001 ) . Cortactin promotes and stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin filament network formation . combinant dictyostelium cofilin but to different extents . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 45 , 293 – 306 . Curr . Biol . 11 , 370 – 374 . 31 . Uruno , T . , Liu , J . , Zhang , P . , Fan , Y . x . , Egile , C . , Li , R . , Mueller , 10 . McGough , A . , Pope , B . , Chiu , W . , and Weeds , A . ( 1997 ) . Cofilin changes the twist of F - actin : implications for actin filament dy - S . C . , and Zhan , X . ( 2000 ) . Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex - medi - atedactinpolymerizationbycortactin . Nat . CellBiol . 3 , 259 – 266 . namics and cellular function . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 771 – 781 . 11 . Svitkina , T . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 1999 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex and 32 . Cooke , R . ( 1975 ) . The role of the bound nucleotide in the poly - merization of actin . Biochemistry 14 , 3250 – 3256 . actin depolymerizing factor / cofilin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin filament array in lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 1009 – 1026 . 12 . Volkmann , N . , Amann , K . J . , Stoilova - McPhie , S . , Egile , C . , Win - ter , D . C . , Hazelwood , L . , Heuser , J . E . , Li , R . , Pollard , T . D . , and Hanein , D . ( 2001 ) . Structure of Arp2 / 3 complex in its activated state and in actin filamentbranch junctions . Science 293 , 2456 – 2459 . 13 . Mullins , R . D . , Stafford , W . F . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1997 ) . Structure , subunit topology , and actin - binding activity of the Arp2 / 3 com - plex from Acanthamoeba . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 331 – 343 . 14 . Blanchoin , L . , Amann , K . J . , Higgs , H . N . , Marchand , J . B . , Kaiser , D . A . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2000 ) . Direct observation of dendritic actin filament networks nucleated by Arp2 / 3 complex and WASP / Scar proteins . Nature 404 , 1007 – 1011 . 15 . Amann , K . J . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2001 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex nu - cleates actin filament branches from the sides of pre - existing filaments . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 306 – 310 . 16 . Rickard , J . E . , and Sheterline , P . ( 1986 ) . Cytoplasmic concentra - tions of inorganic phosphate affect the critical concentration for assembly of actin in the presence of cytochalasin D or ADP . J . Mol . Biol . 191 , 273 – 280 . 17 . Carlier , M . F . , and Pantaloni , D . ( 1988 ) . Binding of phosphate to F - ADP - actin and role of F - ADP - Pi - actin in ATP - actin polymer - ization . J . Biol . Chem . 263 , 817 – 825 . 18 . Combeau , C . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 1988 ) . Probing the mechanism of ATP hydrolysis on F - actin using vanadate and the structural analogs of phosphate BeF - 3 and A1F – 4 . J . Biol . Chem . 263 , 17429 – 17436 . 19 . Blanchoin , L . , Pollard , T . D . , andMullins , R . D . ( 2000 ) . Interactions of ADF / cofilin , Arp2 / 3 complex , capping protein and profilin in