Co - Design Beyond Words : ‘Moments of Interaction’ with Minimally - Verbal Children on the Autism Spectrum Cara Wilson Queensland University of Technology Brisbane , Queensland cara . wilson @ qut . edu . au Margot Brereton Queensland University of Technology Brisbane , Queensland m . brereton @ qut . edu . au Bernd Ploderer Queensland University of Technology Brisbane , Queensland b . ploderer @ qut . edu . au Laurianne Sitbon Queensland University of Technology Brisbane , Queensland l . sitbon @ qut . edu . au ABSTRACT Existing co - design methods support verbal children on the autism spectrum in the design process , while their minimally - verbal peers are overlooked . We describe Co - Design Beyond Words ( CDBW ) , an approach which merges existing co - design methods with practice - based methods from Speech and Language Therapy which are child - led and interests - based . These emphasise the rich detail that can be conveyed in the moment , through recognising occurrences of , for exam - ple , Joint Attention , Turn Taking and Imitation . We worked in an autism - specific primary school over 20 weeks with ten children , aged 5 to 8 . We co - designed a playful prototype , the TangiBall , using the three iterative phases of CDBW ; the Foundation Phase ( preparation for interaction ) , the Inter - action Phase ( designing - and - reflecting in the moment ) and the Reflection Phase ( reflection - on - action ) . We contribute a novel co - design approach and present moments of inter - action , the micro instances in design in which minimally - verbal children on the spectrum can convey meaning beyond words , through their actions , interactions , and attentional foci . These moments of interaction provide design insight , shape design direction , and reveal unique strengths , inter - ests , and abilities . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland UK © 2019 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5970 - 2 / 19 / 05 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300251 CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → HCI design and eval - uation methods . KEYWORDS Co - Design , Participatory Design , Autism , Child - led interac - tion , Minimally - verbal , Non - verbal , Speech and Language Therapy ACM Reference Format : Cara Wilson , Margot Brereton , Bernd Ploderer , and Laurianne Sit - bon . 2019 . Co - Design Beyond Words : ‘Moments of Interaction’ with Minimally - Verbal Children on the Autism Spectrum . In CHI Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Proceedings ( CHI 2019 ) , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland UK . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 15 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300251 1 INTRODUCTION Both the concept of ‘having a voice’ and the concept of ‘being verbal’ are heavily relied upon in the design process but , we question , how does one have a voice in design if one is not verbal [ 1 , 43 ] ? It is estimated that around 30 % of children on the autism spectrum 1 are minimally - verbal , which means they communicate with ; no spoken language at all ; atypical non - speech sounds only ; some words or phrases in limited contexts ; or echolalic language ( repeating the language of others but not generating it ) [ 60 ] . Despite the high proportion of children on the autism spectrum who are minimally - verbal , these children are sel - dom catered to in existing co - design approaches . Many clas - sic co - design techniques ( e . g . Cooperative Inquiry [ 11 , 23 ] ) rely heavily on activities that require verbal communication , 1 Here we use the terms child on the autism spectrum or child on the spec - trum as these are most commonly used in the community of our study participants . CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 21 Page 1 high cognitive load ( such as brainstorming and group dis - cussion ) , and fine motor skills ( such as detailed drawing ) . Successful participation also requires broad metacognitive and social skills and the ability to attend to design activities for long periods . This is often beyond the current skillset of minimally - verbal children on the autism spectrum . Design work which does focus on minimally - verbal in - dividuals ( such as Augmentative and Alternative Commu - nication ) often has the focus of increasing verbal ability or monitoring progress [ 1 , 36 , 44 , 64 ] . While this is valuable , there is little work that supports the child’s existing commu - nicative abilities [ 40 ] during co - design and / or seeks to build on their existing strengths and interests . We argue that this highlights a fundamental need to re - think our approach to design with this group – moving away from an expectation that children should fit within neat , ex - isting methods , and taking responsibility for the possibility that our existing methods may not be inclusive enough . We argue that the onus is on designers and researchers to adapt methods which can support minimally - verbal children on the spectrum to be fully included in the design process as they are [ 68 , 69 ] i . e . through understanding existing abilities and building on these . We ask , how can we support and un - derstand existing communicative competencies , as opposed to focusing on the negating of perceived limitations ? Further , how do we move towards ensuring that ‘having a voice’ in design is not solely for the verbal ? We turned to the fields of Education and Speech and Lan - guage Therapy , where there are many effective existing prac - tices which provide approaches to understanding and sup - porting children as they are . These include approaches like More Than Words [ 59 ] and the Floortime Approach [ 20 ] , which are widely implemented techniques for interacting with children with complex communication needs [ 46 , 50 ] . They focus on following the child’s lead ( their existing in - terests and attentions ) in order to better understand their actions and interactions . However , there currently exists no translation of these tried - and - tested methods from special needs practice into Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) . Working in an autism - specific primary school over two school terms ( 20 weeks ) with ten children aged 5 to 8 , we un - dertook design sessions in which prototypes were developed using Co - Design Beyond Words , an approach which draws upon techniques from Speech and Language Therapy and utilises them in design . The approach has three phases ; the Foundation Phase ( where we prepare for interaction ) , the Interaction Phase ( where we interact and reflect - in - action ) and the Reflection Phase ( where we reflect - on - action ) . Central to this approach are moments of interaction – mi - cro instances of Joint Attention ( JA ) , Turn Taking ( TT ) and Imitation ( IM ) – which result in an interaction with another person . We have observed that these moments of interaction arise when children are supported to follow their interests and utilise their strengths in a design setting . These moments can provide design insights , which , in our experience , have been inaccessible through existing co - design methods . We contribute Co - Design Beyond Words , a new approach to co - design with minimally - verbal children on the spectrum which follows their interests , builds on their abilities , and supports their interaction . Through this approach , we are able to build a cumulative picture of a child’s design needs and elicit new design directions . 2 RELATED WORK Current landscape : Autism and HCI Individuals on the spectrum may typically have challenges in social communication and interaction , as well as restricted , repetitive patterns of behaviours , interests or activities [ 2 ] . We suggest that it is critical to design with children on the spectrum because , as Ringland et al . [ 49 , p . 39 ] assert , “chil - dren with autism are doubly disempowered , both as children and as people living with disabilities” . Spiel et al . [ 56 , 57 ] identify important ethical considerations pertaining to the skewed power relations [ 15 ] between researcher and child . Recent thinking on Neurodiversity positions autism not as a neurological disorder but as a natural neurological varia - tion [ 30 ] , moving away from the idea of causation and cure , and instead towards the “celebration of autism as an insepa - rable aspect of identity” [ 32 , p . 59 ] . Researchers in HCI have begun to emphasise the importance of this paradigm shift in thinking [ 39 ] ; from the biomedical model of disability , which is limitation - centric , focussing on perceived deficits of individuals , to the social model of disability , whereby our societal structures ( e . g . access to services ) are held account - able for the way in which individuals experience disability . Ability - Based Design [ 69 ] reflects this , representing a shift from deficit - focused design to design which allows , and in - deed encourages , people of all abilities to remain as they are [ 68 ] while technology is shaped by and with them . In design , the child’s role has evolved from design infor - mant to design partner [ 12 ] , with recent research explor - ing how children can initiate design processes [ 70 ] and be - come full design protagonists [ 29 ] and participatory evalua - tors [ 58 ] . While involving children with special educational needs and disabilities in design is an increasing priority in Child - Computer Interaction ( CCI ) e . g . [ 4 , 5 , 12 , 16 – 18 ] , the progressive approaches to participation in this field are not yet fully inclusive of minimally - verbal children on the spec - trum . As Read et al . [ 48 ] suggest , the core aim of Partici - patory Design ( PD ) with children is ensuring their active engagement in the design process . However , existing co - design approaches involve e . g . sustaining attention for long CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 21 Page 2 periods , group interaction , and processing numerous ver - bal cues , which present barriers to active engagement for minimally - verbal children on the spectrum . We suggest there is an opportunity to extend current co - design approaches to address this gap . Our work draws on the traditions of Co - Design and Partic - ipatory Design . Here , we explain our use of these terms and our choice of the term “Co - Design Beyond Words” to describe our approach . Participatory Design [ 9 ] has two fundamental tenets – pragmatic and moral . First , from a pragmatic per - spective , people for whom the design is intended are experts in their own lives and have vital knowledge to contribute . Second , from a moral perspective , people should have a say in design that affects their lives . That is , PD concerns issues of power and working out how power in design is shared [ 3 ] . Co - Design [ 54 ] is a more recent formulation of Participa - tory Design [ 55 ] that focuses on aspects of collaboration of stakeholders in design , but it is not in essence different from Participatory Design , if designers ensure the fundamental tenets of Participatory Design and power sharing are upheld . We choose to use the expression Co - Design here , because , to many , the term Participatory Design suggests that partici - pants are informants that do not have a significant input in design . This was never the intention of Participatory Design , however , we feel that the term Co - Design , emphasising col - laboration , is simply more fitting . There may be debate as to whether minimally - verbal children can participate as equals and leaders in Co - Design . We argue that this can be the case , if designers are willing to offer sufficient choices and open - ended opportunities , and pay attention to children’s responses . We return to this in the discussion section . Existing Co - Design Approaches in CCI Cooperative Inquiry is a PD approach tailored to support children to become full design partners in an intergenera - tional design team [ 11 , 23 ] . It utilises techniques such as brainstorming , prototyping , Big Paper ( group drawing of ideas on a large sheet of paper ) , Sticky Noting , Bags of Stuff ( bags full of craft materials ) , stand - up meetings ( delivering design ideas to the group ) , Mixing Ideas [ 21 ] , and Layered Elaboration [ 63 ] . These techniques are undertaken typically with children aged 7 to 11 . This seminal work and other approaches ( e . g . Fictional In - quiry [ 10 ] and Comicboarding [ 24 ] ) , have provided a strong foundation in addressing the power imbalances at play in design with children . There is also a wealth of motivat - ing work extending techniques for children on the spec - trum [ 13 , 18 , 19 , 25 – 27 , 37 , 38 , 57 , 65 , 66 ] . Some use Coop - erative Inquiry approaches [ 14 , 22 ] , re - interpret these ap - proaches [ 18 ] , or build novel techniques for involving chil - dren on the spectrum during co - design [ 6 , 17 , 19 , 37 ] . However , it seems that the children participating in these studies have the verbal and cognitive abilities to design along - side neurotypical peers , individually , or based on verbal inter - action . Almost all co - design is done by giving children a task that requires metacognition and meta - analysis on their part , such as brainstorming , group discussion , or design ideation . During these activities , children are given direction and are able to sustain this direction for several minutes , while also interacting with other children or proxies . Typically , these approaches do not align well with our participants’ abilities . We note a need for methods to engage children for whom communicating design goals and insights may not be a simple dialogical exercise . Recent research has investigated ways to design through concrete actions , images , and art activities with adults and children [ 7 , 34 , 47 , 66 , 67 ] . In this work we pay particular attention to the interactions and strategies for interaction in such activities . Benton et al . ’s Diversity for Design framework [ 6 ] is an approach to developing PD methods with neurodiverse chil - dren , built on an existing framework from the field of Edu - cation and extended for use in a design context . Brown et al . [ 8 ] also address interdisciplinary methods in work with children on the spectrum . We take inspiration from this work and from Frauenberger et al . [ 19 , p . 39 ] who suggest “there is a constant need to adapt and re - interpret existing methods” when working with children on the spectrum , arguing for making the methodological choices in design more trans - parent to others . This paper thus attempts to articulate an approach for co - design through translation of techniques from other disciplines . Interdisciplinary Interaction Approaches Mason and Danby [ 40 ] assert that children are experts in their own forms of communication and , consequently , we suggest that each child’s existing communication styles are just as valid as more common and verbal forms of communi - cation . Through the lens of multimodal analysis , Malinverni et al . [ 38 , p . 55 ] suggest a move towards “overcom [ ing ] the limitation of frameworks that focus only on intentional lan - guage communication prompts , such as written or spoken language” . How can we work towards understanding these ? Video Interaction Analysis ( VIA ) [ 31 ] is a common ap - proach to examining both verbal and non - verbal interac - tion . It is described as “an interdisciplinary method for the empirical investigation of the interaction of human beings with each other and with objects in their environment” [ 31 , p . 39 ] . In this approach , researchers use observation and video recordings to allow for collaborative analyses by multiple researchers . The focus can be on subtle , non - verbal inter - actions e . g . gestures , looks , body positioning . These can be interpreted differently by each researcher who watches the recording . CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 21 Page 3 Speech and Language Therapy Approaches . Through our experience working in an autism - specific primary school , we expound the importance of practice - based interaction approaches from Speech and Language Therapy . These ap - proaches focus not only on verbal interaction , but also on non - verbal , physical , embodied , and playful interactions which exist prior to and alongside verbal interaction . Such approaches have been found to have a positive impact on receptive and expressive language skills [ 46 , 50 ] and come from a practice - based , rather than research - based , perspec - tive , where they have been used for over 20 years by practi - tioners and educators [ 20 , 50 , 59 ] . Importantly though , we do not seek to increase language ability , rather to use these in - teractional approaches in the service of understanding more about each child in the moment and in the context of design . The Floortime Approach . Greenspan et al . [ 20 ] highlight the importance of floor - time interactions with a child with special needs , an approach which encourages parents to get down on the floor with their child and interact and play , following the child’s interests and motivations . The key here is to follow the child’s lead and play at whatever captures their interest , but to do so in a way that encourages the child to interact with you , such as flapping your arms if the child is flapping theirs . They encourage the adult to find ways to turn all of the child’s actions or seeming non - actions into in - teractions . The Floor - Time Approach describes its four goals as the encouragement of ; attention and intimacy , two - way communication , logical thought , and the expression and use of feelings and ideas . By encouraging cycles of interaction with the child , more meaning can be exchanged . Within this approach , Greenspan et al . [ 20 ] suggest we can enable atten - tion , engagement and intimacy through , for example , finding mutual pleasure ( “join him in the myriad of little things that give him pleasure” p . 134 ) , holding attention through senses , and exploring the child’s interests together . Joint Attention , Turn - Taking and Imitation . Greenspan et al . [ 20 ] suggest there are three pillars to communication with a child with special needs . Joint Attention ( JA ) involves sharing a common focus with someone by looking at and sending messages about the same object or event [ 46 , 62 ] . Children can respond to or initiate Joint Attention . Turn Taking ( TT ) is when the adult and the child each have a turn at participating in the interaction e . g . through body move - ment , eye contact , facial expressions or sounds in physical and sensory play [ 59 , p . 59 ] . A ‘turn’ refers to any of the inter - actions the child may do – a look , a gesture , a sound , a word . Imitation ( IM ) is the ability to copy other people’s sounds , facial movements , body movements , and actions with ob - jects [ 46 , 62 ] . All of the above can be explored through ‘toy play’ , where the best way to help children in these pillars is to explore their interests with them , be on their physical level ( e . g . play on the floor together ) and imitate what the child is doing [ 46 , 62 ] . The More Than Words ( MTW ) Approach . Similarly , The MTW approach [ 59 ] is a socio - interactionalist program devel - oped for interaction with children on the spectrum who also have speech and language delays . The key here is that adults can enhance the child’s social participation in interaction by interpreting and responding to the child’s communicative attempts as if each were intentional . This means following the child’s lead to create communicative interactions around the child’s interests or focus of attention , where “discovering what has captured your child’s interest will help you share the moment with them” [ 59 , p . 17 ] . We explain three of the many techniques in detail . The ‘Observe , Wait , Listen’ ( OWL ) approach advises adults to , first , observe what the child is interested in . For example , notice what the child is looking at or the thing they are pointing at or reaching to . Second , waiting gives us time to observe a child’s interests by ; stopping talking , leaning forward , and looking at the child expectantly . Third , listening is described as paying close attention to all of your child’s words and sounds . In our case , the words were very few . They advise that , even if figuring out the child’s message is difficult , to try to imitate their actions or sounds to show you are listening , and then watch closely for any additional information . The Four ‘I’s tell us how to follow the child’s lead dur - ing play , through ; 1 ) Interests – include what the child is showing they are interested in , 2 ) Interpreting – say aloud what you interpret the child to mean , 3 ) Intruding – on the child’s individual play in order to create an interaction , and 4 ) Imitating – copy what the child is doing [ 59 , p . 421 ] . R . O . C . K . is an acronym which stands for R ( repeat – your question or action ) , O ( offer opportunities ) , C ( cue your child ) , K ( keep it going ) . This is a useful technique to employ when interactions become stilted or the child is disengaged . While the above approaches are commonly employed in the service of learning how to verbally communicate , we suggest there is scope to extend these into an exploratory co - design setting where focus is not on quantifying and increasing communication , but on understanding minimally - verbal children’s interaction in design and how this can and must be elicited and read by the researcher . 3 METHOD Context , Participants and Design Concept This work is embedded in an ongoing exploratory project at an autism - specific primary school in Brisbane , Australia . The broad research goal of this project is to co - design technolo - gies which support social interaction , engagement , and self - expression with minimally - verbal children on the spectrum . CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 21 Page 4 Within this , we investigate which methods can best help us achieve this goal . A design brief emerged through on - going discussions with researchers , teachers , and speech therapists , building on observations from our field work and ideas from child - led approaches . The design brief was to explore how a tangible technology might support the self - expression , engage - ment , and social interaction of minimally - verbal children on the autism spectrum . Our participants were ten children aged between 5 - 8 years old , from four classes at the specialist school . In line with Ibrahim et al . [ 28 ] and Wilson et al . [ 66 , 67 ] , we focus on the strengths of our participants , deliberately steering away from defining them in diagnostic terms . Further details on participants can be found in the examples to follow . Other participants in the study include the children’s class teach - ers ( 4 ) , speech therapists ( 2 ) , and occupational therapist ( 1 ) . Based on 2 . 5 years of field work at the school , the first au - thor has been able to develop relationships with children and teachers as a participant observer [ 33 ] . We conducted one - to - one and researcher - to - group sessions over 20 weeks ( 2 terms ) to engage with children through co - design , explore the child’s personal interests , and work towards low - fidelity prototypes that communicate and support these interests . We present our method by using examples of children collaborating in the design of a new kind of interactive ball . The idea of a ball emerged through earlier work with tablet - based technologies [ 66 , 67 ] where we could see the potential for more shareable and tangible designs . Through undertak - ing participant observations and craft - inspired activities to address our design brief , we saw that children were engaged by ball - based activities when playing in the playground with peers , and that balls were integrated into many activities used by teachers and therapists . Design activities , involving drawing , collaging and crafting , inspired by Druin et al . [ 11 ] , began to include the use and collaborative decoration of a simple polystyrene ball . We continued to explore a new kind of ball design in our co - design sessions , conceptualising a ball - like technology , which is inherently shareable , passable , supports turn taking , facilitates embodied use , is used in mul - tiple ways in many kinds of children’s games , and develops coordination and gross motor skills . Based on these initial sessions , the co - design sessions be - gan to explore the design concept of a recordable ball , the TangiBall . Crucially , our co - design work revealed that the ball should enable children to record and share their own voices , sounds , and noises , as will be discussed . The proto - type is a simple polystyrene ball bought from an art store , with a cheap , widely available button speaker attached to it with tape . It took roughly five minutes to create . However , it was very informative in providing design feedback e . g . how the children held the ball , interacted with each other’s sounds , and moved spatially . The TangiBall prototype is one of several different design artefacts which were conceptualised during the co - design process . For example , we also observed children’s fascination with Velcro and their teachers’ integration of this material into classroom strategies . In - keeping with one of our aims , to support children to self - express , we developed a process of ‘Velcro - Collaging’ , where children would create collages by securing e . g . photos , stickers , textured materials with Velcro to a large felt board . Therefore , although we focus on one thread of co - design in this paper ( the ball prototype ) , it is important to note that we base our approach on a much broader scope and wider set of design sessions , which have provided us with multiple avenues for exploration in future design work . Data Collection and Analytic Approach Rich qualitative data was collected during the 20 - week period through ; video recordings and photos taken during co - design sessions , field notes created by the first author to reflect on the approach and the outcomes of each session , and inter - views with teachers and therapists who participated in these activities . Overall , we collected 791 photographs and 267 videos . Our analytic approach was based on the pillars of communication ( JA , TT , IM ) as described by Greenspan [ 20 ] and the principles of Video Interaction Analysis [ 31 ] . These helped us understand how these pillars of communication were enacted through verbal and non - verbal interaction , and through engagement with design materials and the TangiBall . In watching the videos as a research team , we asked ques - tions such as : How are the children transitioning spatially ? What are the rhythms and actions being repeated ? What are the small manoeuvres at play ? How are they interacting with other artefacts ? Where does their attentional focus lie ? What are they engaged with / disengaged with ? What are the disrup - tions to the normal stream of activity ? Why ? Through this analysis we arrived at the concept of mo - ments of interaction , which we use as the unit of analysis to enable us to evaluate the approach . As Light [ 35 , p . 186 ] proposes , there is a need to consider different scales of in - teraction in our design endeavours in order to understand “the highly situated micro - dynamics from which behaviour , methods , planning , networks and participation are all con - stituted . ” Children on the spectrum can find JA , TT , and IM challenging and thus , we use these as analytic lenses in the process of identifying engagement in the co - design process . For example , a child who typically does not make eye con - tact during social interaction may be observed looking the researcher in the eye when attended to through a child - led approach . This will be explained in the following section . We utilise the data presentation style of Jordan and Hen - derson’s Interaction Analysis [ 31 ] , while also sketching the CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 21 Page 5 interactions , noting reflections - in - action of the researcher , and coding for instances of JA , TT , and IM . 4 THE CO - DESIGN BEYOND WORDS ( CDBW ) APPROACH This section details what we mean by a moment of interac - tion and outlines the three phases of CDBW which enable us to better understand and leverage these moments in co - design contexts with individuals who may not communicate verbally . Moments of Interaction A moment of interaction is an instance of social connection , communication , or understanding between people , in this case , between child - participant and researcher - participant . In our research context , moments of interaction are the cul - mination of micro instances of Joint Attention ( JA ) , Turn Taking ( TT ) and Imitation ( IM ) which result in an identifiable interaction with another person . Thus , CDBW works at a detailed level of granularity , with socially observable aspects of children’s action . These lead to greater insight into how interaction occurs in co - design sessions . Current co - design techniques , such as brainstorming , group discussion , and creative activities require children to ; a ) work in groups interacting with other children , b ) retain socioemo - tional information , c ) maintain concentration over several minutes , and / or d ) engage in high - level reasoning . By con - trast , attention of a minimally - verbal child on the spectrum to a task may last only a few seconds or minutes , and their ability to jointly attend and interact with another person may be fleeting , lasting perhaps only seconds or a fraction of a second . Often this means engagement solely occurs at partic - ular times of high motivation and interest . Therefore , a child who has challenges in maintaining JA , TT , IM ( which typi - cally results in speech delays ) may need an attentive adult or therapist facilitating interaction at the moment - to - moment level , as is typically done in speech therapy . Inspired by seminal work by Jordan and Henderson [ 31 ] on Interaction Analysis , we pay attention to changes in engage - ment , spatial transitions , beginnings , endings , and disrup - tions . Drawing on practice - based approaches for minimally - verbal children on the spectrum or with other special needs , we extend these micro - interactions to include instances of JA , TT , and IM . We examine when these occur , between peers or between child and researcher . For example , changes in engagement are micro - interactions , as are instances of turning to look the researcher in the eye , paying attention to the same object as another , turning away from the activity , showing disinterest in an artefact , responding to social cues , attempts at words and sounds etc . We use adaptations of the kits of materials proposed by e . g . Cooperative Inquiry [ 11 ] , as these appeal to sensory needs and interests , but the meth - ods of using these are insufficient at present for this group . In particular we are guided by pivotal moments in which we can observe a shift in the focus and attention of the child which is different from their typical behaviour . The Phases of Co - Design Beyond Words This section outlines the three phases of Co - Design Be - yond Words ( CDBW ) ; the Foundation Phase , the Interac - tion Phase , and the Reflection Phase . The CDBW approach emerged based on reflecting upon and combining the afore - mentioned child - led approaches [ 20 , 59 ] and current co - design approaches in designing with children [ 11 , 23 ] . CDBW then continued to evolve during the co - design sessions . Foundation Phase : Preparation for Interaction . The aim of this phase is to build an understanding of who the child is as they are . The researcher’s role in the Foundation Phase is that of a playful participant observer [ 33 ] who builds a deep understanding of the child and their context . It is also a space for the researcher to begin using practice - based tech - niques with the child in their daily setting i . e . in a classroom context . Preparation for interaction occurs on two levels ; interper - sonal and pragmatic . Interpersonal preparation considers the socio - emotional context of the child , and should consider their sensory preferences , their experiences , their strengths , their interests , their triggers , and their challenges . This phase influences both the interaction and the reflection phases , as knowledge of the child can shape understanding in the mo - ment as we observe and interact with the child in their typical context . On this interpersonal level , children on the spec - trum often have very unique sensory preferences , which can impact interactions with others . This level of detail about a child is difficult to convey through case notes or reports , as they may have many contextually specific sensory prefer - ences , which are best observed and understood 1 ) over time and 2 ) in person . On a pragmatic level , as we prepare for interaction , we con - sider the materials , resources , and tangible artefacts needed to replicate and extend existing co - design techniques . In this phase , we prepare to use sets of materials that appeal to sensory preferences . For example , we use ‘bags of stuff’ as de - scribed by Druin and colleagues [ 11 ] including pens , stickers , sticky tape , felt , glue , and glitter , as an approach to crafting low - fi prototypes . In the TangiBall example , we used crafting and collaging techniques to turn a simple polystyrene ball into a personal prototype . Interaction Phase : Designing and Reflecting in the Mo - ment . Here , we move out of educator - defined classroom activities and into child - defined one - to - one or group co - design work . This phase consists of two intertwined and CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 21 Page 6 co - dependent parts ; interaction and reflection - in - action , each of which is critical in understanding and supporting moments of interaction . Interaction : In a co - design session with one or two chil - dren , we utilise a child - led technique in order to follow and build upon the interests and sensory preferences of each child . For example , we may present a low - fi prototype to the child and then use the Four I’s technique ( interest , intrude , interpret , imitate ) to investigate their response to it . Or per - haps we will OWL ( observe , wait , listen ) if it seems a child is overwhelmed by the environment . These are the action - based approaches that everything else pivots on . Here we ask , what is happening in the moment ? Are there instances of Joint Attention , Turn Taking and Imitation ? Our focus is on moment - to - moment interaction on a micro - level – turning to face a peer , smiling , pointing at an object , turning away from the researcher , pushing an artefact away – in order to both follow and influence the attention of the child . Being agile and responsive to the child’s lead enables the researcher to adapt their interactional turn to the child’s preferences or environmental influences . Importantly , the interactions we seek to identify and support are at a different level of granularity from existing co - design methods , and the scope and scale is therefore different . We distinguish between interactions and actions as being with and without people respectively , although we recognise that this is not clear cut . The grey area arises because a response to another person might be , for example , an action with an object . We make this distinction , because for most children on the spectrum , interaction with people is typically more challenging than with objects due to the need to attend , listen , process and respond . Reflection - in - action : As Schon [ 53 ] defines it , reflection - in - action is about experimenting in action ( p . 133 ) , “bringing past experience to bear in a unique situation” ( p . 137 ) , and “construct [ ing ] an understanding of the situation as we find it” ( p . 129 ) . It is a kind of experimenting ( p . 133 ) , whereby the practitioner reflects in action through “a web of moves , discovered consequences , implications , appreciation and fur - ther moves” . Here , we reflect in the moment about the in - teractions occurring . This process helps us to address the questions which arise during interaction , such as ; How is the child responding ? Why are they responding in this way ? How might I shape or modify this interaction based on my knowledge of the child ? What might I try next ? Based on our understanding of each child , we can look for subtle changes in their behaviours and interactions . We can watch to see what they do with resources at hand and how they engage . Opportunities are given to interact with mate - rials or resources , while looking at where is fun and playful to go next . Thus , reflection - in - action occurs instantaneously and improvisationally , enabling us to shape and modify our next actions to align more with the design goal or , in our case , the child’s lead . This reflection is also based on our understanding of each child as built in the Foundation Phase , and applying this knowledge in - situ to the ‘unique case’ as Schon [ 53 ] puts it . Reflection - in - action means stepping back to reflect in the moment and , if necessary , finding another ‘way in’ . It can help lead to moments of interaction and to design information being conveyed at these critical , pivotal , interactional points . Reflection Phase : Reflection - on - Action . Reflection - on - action occurs after the design session has finished and the researcher is reflecting on the session as a whole . Again , this is best described by Schon [ 53 , p . 62 ] who suggests that reflection on one’s practice may involve “reflect [ ion ] on [ . . . ] the feeling for a situation which has led [ the researcher ] to adopt a particular course of action , on the way in which he has framed the problem he is trying to solve , or on the role he has constructed for himself” . This is space to think about what the previous phases mean for design . The researcher here can ask strategic questions , such as ; What opportunities were identified ? What are the existing strategies at play ? What do we know about the child as a result of this process ? What does what we have learnt mean for design ? It both looks at what we have observed during the interaction phase and also how we move forward with design work . Video Interaction Analysis can support reflection by en - abling researchers to check back and replay co - design ses - sions , identifying and analysing moments of interaction , with an interdisciplinary team . Here , collecting video data of typ - ical actions and interactions will provide a benchmark for understanding changes and differences in the way the chil - dren engage and interact during co - design . Thus , the reflex - ive process of designing the technology is a combination of reflection - in - action ( which affects how all vignettes play out ) and then reflection - on - action ( which asks how do we put all the situations together to see what can we best do to design ) . This can help us determine the features of a de - sign – what is engaging and what is not , trial and error with reflection - in - action . Moments of interaction are important because we see what the children’s competencies are , how they navigate situations , and how they interact . By reading , interpreting , and making moves based on these interactions , we garner a deeper understanding of design needs . We reflect on what the children have shown us to be their strengths and capabilities , and then on what this means for design . 5 FINDINGS AND ANALYSIS : CDBW IN ACTION The following examples will be used to illustrate the CDBW approach . First we describe the Foundation Phase , which pro - vides a summary of our understanding of each child based on our initial observations . Next , in the Interaction Phase , CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 21 Page 7 we describe a moment of interaction with each child , either with no technology or low - tech prototypes , revealing how the situation plays out and the actions of the children and the researcher that constitute the interaction . In the Reflection Phase , reflecting on this goes a long way to building an un - derstanding of the child , which is the crux of this approach . Then we discuss how design evolves as a consequence of un - derstanding these abilities and interests . The examples below are derived from the design development of the TangiBall . Figure 1 : Bob ( left ) and Ann jointly attending to the design prototype and turn taking during creative collaboration Example 1 : Ann , Bob and the Ball Prototype Foundation : From initial classroom activities we have ob - served that Bob ( age 8 ) is very good at maths , but drawing is his main interest – particularly drawing houses and cities . His receptive language is excellent and he can generate and speak a few words and phrases , mainly relying on echolalic language ( i . e . repeating scripts or dialogue from media ) . Ann ( age 7 ) loves crafting and sparkly things . In the first phase , she often gestured for the researcher to remove her shoes so she could check what colour of nail varnish the researcher had on her toes , becoming especially animated when they were blue and matching with her own . She responds to direc - tion after a period of processing , and generates and speaks a few words which are mainly directive , such as “ask mummy” and “want off” ( e . g . the swing ) . Ann makes an arm - over - head movement when excited . Context , Setting and Participants : The classroom has desks pushed back with chairs on top to clear a floor space . There is a polystyrene ball and craft materials on the floor . The actors are Ann , Bob , and Ros ( the Researcher ) . Bob and Ann are sitting on the floor together , in the same posture but both turned slightly away from the other . Ros stands and also sits with the children . They have mirrored body posture , but no interaction . Interaction : Ros says “OK guys , let’s decorate the ball” . Ros then Observe - Wait - Listens to see if they are interested in working collaboratively or independently . To begin with , both engage in parallel play but do not pay joint attention to the task – Ann peels off stickers from a sticker sheet while Bob draws lots of multi - coloured lines all over the ball ( as per his main interest as revealed in the Foundation Phase ) . Ann puts a small sticker on top of a bigger sticker and colours it in . Ros says : “Oh you’re putting a sticker on top of a sticker” . Ann does arm - over - head movement that she does when excited as Ros acknowledges her sticker modification . Reflection - in - action : Seeing Ann’s excitement about the sticker she has created , Ros recognises an opportunity for Joint Attention and Turn Taking , hoping to integrate Ann’s work with Bob’s work on the ball . Bob is still drawing on the ball , eyes on his task , disengaged from Ann and Ros’s interaction . Interaction : Ros says to Ann : “Do you want to stick it on now ? ” ( pause ) “You can put it on the ball” . Ann hesitates . She flicks her eyes to Bob [ JA ] This is the beginning of interaction with each other , but Bob doesn’t pass Ann the ball . Reflection - in - action : Ros reflects that even though she in - tended her instruction to encourage Bob to pass the ball , she may need to be more explicit in her request to Bob . This is shown by Ann turning to look at the researcher quizzically – she is trying to do the task but is not met with coopera - tion . The researcher reflects and rephrases the question – a moment of interaction occurs between the two children . Moment of Interaction : Ros says “Bob can you pass the ball to Ann so she can put on her sticker ? ” Bob puts the ball on the floor between them , holding on with two hands [ TT ] , still reluctant to let go of the ball , but showing he has understood the request and complying with it . Ann reaches over and places her modified sticker on the ball , putting her hand over her head while she does so – her excitement move [ TT ] ( Fig . 1 ) . This is the change in interaction , the notable shift , the moment of collaboration and insight – the moment of interaction . Moment of interaction : Bob exclaims and giggles , gets very animated , he turns to look at Ann [ JA ] . Then continues staring at Ann’s sticker and touching it , picking the ball up and admiring it . He pushes the sticker down to make sure it is well stuck on and rolls the ball around [ IM ] . Ann moves her hand back to her lap , looks at Bob and then looks at Ros . Ros is laughing and Ann smiles at her , flicking eyes to ball and Bob [ JA ] . Reflection - on - action : We have witnessed many of the chil - dren’s abilities in this short encounter that used a polystyrene ball and craft materials . Bob has shown us that he is en - grossed by drawing and finds it extremely motivating . He is also good at listening when words are directed to him explic - itly . Ann shows her creativity in layering one sticker on top of another to create her own unique sticker and that she is keen to do things asked of her correctly . Both children show CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 21 Page 8 they are motivated by interaction with each other through the medium of crafting the ball . We see this through changes in their JA , TT , and IM . Ann’s arm waving and noises , and Bob’s expressive exclamations , each signalled excitement at the other’s activities . Design insights : Through CDBW , it became clear that the next iteration of the prototype should include ways for the children to exhibit their creativity , utilise the fine and gross motor skills that they demonstrate , and support their per - sonal forms of exclamation and expression , while enabling so - cial interaction and sharing . Moreover , the prototype should be customisable by each child that uses it , giving opportunity to collaborate and get excited about each other’s creativity . A design that is open to appropriation and creates a safe space for children to use their competencies may work better than a finished unambiguous design that gives clear instruction . A safe activity can be a stepping stone to one that is more challenging – interaction . Based on the insights , the next iteration became the TangiBall , a low - fi prototype which added a button speaker ( and recorder ) to the polystyrene ball ( Fig . 2 ) to enhance the children’s opportunities for sharing utterances and noises . Example 2 : Sam , Chris and the TangiBall Foundation : From initial classroom activities we observed that Chris ( aged 5 ) communicates through an AAC device and can say three words – ‘mum , door , no’ . His favourite game is to touch his communication partner’s cheek and to push it so they face the other way . He likes to make loud utterances while he does this , grinning . Sam ( aged 5 ) is moti - vated by certain words , including his own name . He speaks the words “hello” “goodbye” and counts aloud from 1 to 10 . He has good receptive language but does not often display Joint Attention . Context , Setting and Participants : Trialling a low - fi pro - totype . This is the simple polystyrene ball with a button recorder / speaker added to it with sticky tape ; it has a little record switch . When you push the main button it records and when you push it again , it plays the recording ( Fig . 2 ) . The setting is the large open floorspace of the gym . Alice , the occupational therapist , is present . This session is running during what is usually her social play and interaction session with the children . Interaction : We begin the session by trying to engage both children’s interest in the ball , through verbally encouraging them to catch and throw to each other . Both are disinterested , Sam moving around the room and Chris flicking the light switches . Alice picks Sam up and brings him to the centre of the room . His stature is floppy , eyes moving around the room , clearly uninterested in the ball beside him on the floor . Reflection - in - action : Ros reflects on the possibility there were too many verbal cues used by both adult participants which may have been overwhelming . Ros realises Sam may need an explicit cue . Ros moves to a corner of the gym and records “Hello Sam” in the speaker . As discovered in the Foundation Phase , Sam is very motivated by hearing his own name , and this helps to draw his attention . Interaction : Ros comes back to where Alice and Sam are and gives the ball to Sam , saying nothing and signalling with a finger to her lips to Alice to also remain silent . Alice helps Sam hold the ball and Ros uses the hand - over - hand technique to take his finger and push the speaker with it . It says “Hello Sam” . Figure 2 : The early TangiBall prototype with speaker ( left ) and customised by the children ( right ) Moment of interaction : Sam’s posture immediately changes as he becomes alert and interested in the ball – his eyes fixed on it , holding onto it independently [ JA ] . He laughs and pushes the button again , this time without support . It says “Hello Sam” and he laughs again , looking at Ros [ JA ] . Moment of Interaction : Chris now enters the video , en - gaged by Sam’s laughter and comes straight over to the ball , reaching out for it [ TT ] . “Does Chris want a go ? ” asks Ros . Chris and Sam both press the speaker button simultaneously [ JA , IM ] . “Well done Chris ! ” exclaims Alice . Sam giggles as the ball says “Hello Sam” again and again . Chris looks at Sam in the eyes [ JA ] . Chris then turns away quickly and exits the shot . Sam looks upset that Chris has left . Sam presses the button again and says ”Saaaaaaam” [ IM ] , while looking at Chris on the other side of the room , by the climbing wall . He repeats his own name [ IM ] , using it as if a call to ask Chris to come back . Reflection - in - action : Ros wonders if this is a good opportu - nity to use the R . O . C . K approach – Repeat , Offer opportuni - ties , Cue , Keep it Going . Interaction : “Sam , where has Chris gone ? Shall we record something for him ? ” Sam keeps looking at Chris’s back . Ros repeats “Let’s record for Chris” and waits . Sam looks at Ros . Ros cues him , saying “Ready ? Let’s record for Chris . 1 , 2 , 3 . . . . ” Sam says loudly into the ball “BYE SAM ! ” , using his own name but clearly looking at Chris’s back . CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 21 Page 9 Reflection - on - action : We have again witnessed many of the children’s abilities in this short encounter . Sam shows us that he can attend and listen when his interests are engaged . Chris shows us that he is interested in what other children are interested in . This level of Joint Attention is unusual for Chris , especially with a peer instead of an adult , and so suggests high engagement . Chris looking Sam in the eyes and pressing the button with him are signs of engagement beyond what is characteristic of him . Design insights : One example which illustrates how CDBW can influence design decisions is that of button placement and ball size . We know from Phase 1 that Sam has chal - lenges with fine motor skills ( e . g . pressing a small button ) as well as gross motor skills ( e . g . holding a large ball ) . When co - designing with Sam , he showed Joint Attention when interacting with the ball , and was excited to push the button speaker independently . While his attention was occupied by the pushing of the relatively small button , and his en - gagement in the interaction with the voice of his peer was piqued , it meant he was less able to attend to holding the ball itself ( gross motor skill ) , resulting in several instances of the ball being dropped . Further , the polystyrene of the ball was white in colour and so was the speaker , and this resulted in moments of uncertainty for Sam as to where to push , which he indicated by looking at the researcher and making what had previously been observed as his noise of frustration , a low ‘hmmmph’ sound . This process of CDBW provided two design insights . Firstly , the ball should be small enough that it can be held , for example , securely in one arm by a young child so that the other hand is free to push the button , while also large enough that it is still possible for children with gross motor challenges to catch ( larger objects are often easier to catch ) . Secondly , the button placement should be clearer and obvious to the child as these instances of Joint Attention can be fleeting and anything which proves to high a barrier to participation is likely to be quickly abandoned . CDBW therefore informed detailed design decisions for our next prototype on aspects such as ; button placement , tactile qualities to meet various needs of fine and gross mo - tor skills , the need to be customisable , bouncy , shareable , squeezable , visual , textured , a suitable volume and so on . We learned that children are motivated by voices ( especially those of peers ) , that spatial transitioning i . e . moving around in between interactions is important , and that behavioural challenges can potentially be mitigated with engaging tangi - ble designs . 6 DISCUSSION The findings from this work suggest that the Co - Design Beyond Words approach can provide a useful approach to understanding and supporting minimally - verbal children on the autism spectrum in design , particularly through detailed attention to – and deep analysis of – the fine - grained mo - ments of interaction that occur in co - design contexts . We argue that it is a co - design context because the researcher is attempting to engage the children , to understand what motivates their attention , and the conditions that they need for successful interaction , such that the child leads and takes control in many aspects of the activity . Paying close atten - tion to detail in micro - interactions can unveil design insights conveyed beyond words . The Foundation Phase reveals interests , and some compe - tencies and strengths in the everyday context . The Interaction Phase reveals competencies in the moment . Both child and researcher are attending directly to a task and the researcher can learn a great deal when the child makes a purposeful interaction . Moments of interaction create a palpable sense of excitement for everyone in the room and they are memorable because they are a shared , felt experience . The Reflection Phase synthesises what the interactions were , the abilities displayed by the children , and how the activities unfolded . We can then reflect on what this means for design . CDBW yielded both broad design approaches ( i . e . mo - ments of interaction and the three stages described above ) , as well as specific and technical design details ( e . g . squeezable , bouncy etc . ) . The CDBW approach is potentially transfer - able and of benefit to researchers in other design contexts , for example , work on health conditions which impact verbal communication ( e . g . aphasia [ 51 ] , Parkinson’s [ 42 ] , stammer - ing [ 41 ] , stroke [ 45 ] ) or supporting people with pervasive mental health conditions ( e . g . [ 61 ] ) . As mentioned , our ana - lytical focus was on moments of interaction which occurred around instances of Joint Attention , Turn Taking and Imita - tion . These were our lenses , as informed by our synthesis of techniques and literature across disciplines , as well as by our experience . Other researchers and practitioners may substi - tute these lenses for different concepts which are important to their own specific design context and based on their own knowledge and experience . While the design process is generalizable and applicable to other contexts , the extent to which the designs themselves are individualized or general to more than one person de - pends upon the design choices made . By observing abilities and interests of a number of children in a collaborative con - text , we could understand how to design to meet a spectrum of abilities , ranging from a very particular design for one child to a design that might be interesting and usable for a broader range of children . Supporting the child as they are In line with Ability - Based Design thinking [ 69 ] , CDBW strives to support children as they are . As current theories in HCI move towards proposing the child to be a design protago - nist [ 29 ] , we must be mindful of the diversity of children . CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 21 Page 10 That is , we must be mindful that it is not solely children who can verbally contribute to design who should be sup - ported to do so . We highlight a need to work towards ways of including , supporting , and potentially enabling the pro - tagonisation of and with those who are minimally - verbal and on the autism spectrum in design . The CDBW approach seeks not only to develop designs but also to understand who the child is as they are – what are their strengths , interests , triggers , needs , challenges and de - sires ? This is important as it builds up an ever - more detailed picture of the child . In a field where rapid co - design over a day - long session can be the norm , CDBW shows that de - sign with minimally - verbal children must be done differently , over time , and with patience . It solidifies the importance of the foundations that we build our interactions upon . We do not suggest that children should always remain as they are [ 68 , 69 ] , rather that we should support them to de - velop based on their existing interests , abilities and strengths , rather than beginning from a deficit perspective [ 39 ] . We acknowledge the tension between supporting children as they are and the application of methods from Speech and Language Therapy , a field which could be seen as teaching people how to fit into a specific societal template which ex - pects that a child should speak and interact in a certain way . While inspired by the child - led approaches described in other fields , CDBW does not necessarily hold the same goals e . g . to increase the number of words a child can say . Rather , it looks at established methods for understanding children’s current abilities and following their lead , applying these within a co - design context . While our analysis yields many instances of e . g . increased eye contact , increased sociality etc . , we ac - knowledge that for any one child , supporting them as they are and designing to support how they want to live and be may not involve these specific goals . Their goals may be different and may emerge within an exploratory co - design process such as CDBW . We do not presume to ‘give’ a voice through this ap - proach [ 1 ] , but rather we seek to support other ways of expressing design needs to come to the fore , beyond relying upon verbal ability . Like Mallinverni et al . [ 38 ] , we value embodied , multimodal expression and the nuanced under - standings that can be found here . We reflect and emphasise that you do not need to be verbal to have a voice in design – there are other ways to express oneself [ 43 ] . Guha et al . [ 23 , p . 19 ] argue that children have the “skills and tools necessary to communicate their wants and needs as designers and as a part of a team with the power to cre - ate technology” and we argue further that minimally - verbal children on the spectrum also have these skills . We , as re - searchers and designers , must apply ourselves to developing ways and means in which to understand their contributions fully . Designs as Interactional Tools We suggest that our designs and early design prototypes can be used , as outlined by Frauenberger et al . [ 17 , p . 2383 ] , as transactional tools , whereby “change is supported by trans - actional objects , providing clear structure and predictability” . Indeed in CDBW , we propose our designs may be further considered as interactional tools , where the prototype is a vehicle and a scaffold for interaction , a technology which gives us insight into the child . For example , through using the TangiBall in a design session , we saw Sam change from disengaged , to alert and engaged , when the ball speaker said his name . The prototype provided a vehicle to motivate and scaffold interaction . However , we note that when we design with minimally - verbal children on the spectrum , we do not solely design technology . Instead , surrounding structures must also be carefully considered , designed and iteratively developed , be - fore , during and after what would be considered traditional co - design sessions . For example , we design ; spaces , environ - ments , prototyping materials and resources , opportunities for social interaction , opportunities for Joint Attention , Turn Taking and Imitation , games for use with and through our designs , ways to incorporate proxies if desired , and overar - ching design sessions themselves . All of these surrounding resources can be understood and modified to align with children’s needs , interests and abilities through the CDBW process . So , we highlight that we are not only designing the prototype but also the situations of use of the prototype . As per Makhaeva et al . [ 37 ] we use our reflections - on - action to inform reconfiguration of future design sessions . The role of the CDBW Researcher - Participant The role of the researcher here is predominantly about flexi - bility in - situ . It is about being attentive , adaptive and agile to changing needs and circumstances . It is about using every glimpse into a child’s interests and lifeworld as a potential bridge to design , while keeping it fun and fluid and build - ing up interactivity , and while working towards a design outcome . It is in part support work , moving with evolving socio - emotional connections and needs . It is not only about which designs arose from the process , but also about how the children communicated their design needs and how these were put into action and turned into reality . Flexibility and re - sponsiveness are key , as is a solid understanding of each child and their needs , before embarking on this process . Under - standing the significance of minuscule changes in behaviour – how actions differ from an individual’s norm – is central to understanding the impact a particular scenario , design , or interaction is having on a minimally - verbal child . In line with our child - led practice - based techniques , CDBW underlines the requirement for constant responsiveness to CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 21 Page 11 children’s interactive attempts and also flexibility in follow - ing the child’s lead , wherever that may lead , spatially but also socio - emotionally . It is also in line with work in HCI which champions openness to other forms of communication of design needs which are beyond verbal , such as bodily , visual , audio , i . e . multimodal [ 34 ] . After putting our methods into practice , it became clear that in CDBW we do not specifically seek to increase the number of interactive exchanges , but rather to enhance the quality of these exchanges and the opportunity for children to express themselves and interact . In line with Frauenberger et al . [ 19 ] we ‘blended’ techniques and tools from existing co - design practices in a fluid , agile and responsive way throughout each design session , based on what we found in each moment of interaction . Tensions and Challenges The process of CDBW is not always linear . Although we may have planned a co - design session and had broadly precon - ceived ideas about how it would proceed , in reality , disrup - tions , changes in room availability or changes in behaviour often resulted in intended co - design sessions being impos - sible . This required rapid , in - situ re - imagination or modifi - cation of the activities we had planned . A useful technique was to carry with us all of the basic equipment and resources which could be used to turn any space into a design space . Here , we see that , as a researcher - participant , one’s role is often seen differently by various stakeholders . To the chil - dren , we are playful partners engaged in joint discovery and the sharing of interests , providing play things [ 52 ] . To teachers , we are responsible professionals in a support role tasked with keeping children safe and supporting the broad school aims and approaches . To our funding bodies , we are researching with the goal of designing and building technolo - gies . To ourselves , we are investigators of a complex context , in which we must be responsive but also responsible , always with design goals to attend to . There is a difficulty here then , for the designer must be both improvisational as well as structured , responsible as well as playful , engaging in the moment as well as reflecting on the moment , at any one given time . This is something which takes time and which is honed through practice . In balancing this interplay of assumptions and roles , we note that the daily needs of the children ( e . g . safety , structure , learning ) cannot be eschewed in favour of attending to their every whim . Indeed , this is certainly not what the term ‘child - led’ means . It is instead an enabling of children’s attentional and motivational directions to be followed by the adults around them but also to be productively engaging them in social interaction and turn taking etc . Further , children on the spectrum can require varied levels of support , instruction , interaction , independence and flexibility , depending entirely on the individual child . In line with Makhaeva et al . [ 37 ] who suggest Participatory Design can be about balancing structures and freedoms , we suggest that structured flexibility is needed in the process of supporting moments of interaction . For other researchers and practitioners , this approach may help us think about how to observe , understand , engage , and assess designs from this fine - grained perspective . We suggest this work may be of interest to researchers and practitioners in adjacent communities who strive to support those who do not communicate verbally . We emphasise that each child is an expert in their own form of communication [ 40 ] and that we have a responsibility as designers and researchers to understand how best to support these communicative competencies in the process of design . Perhaps we are in need of a new methodological paradigm , based on nuance , detail , and child - led insight . 7 CONCLUSION This work contributes Co - Design Beyond Words , a child - led approach to co - design with minimally - verbal children on the autism spectrum . This approach values moments of interaction – social instances of connection , communication , or understanding between individuals ( such as children and facilitating adults ) . We suggest that moments of interaction are important during the co - design process , as current co - design approaches operate at high cognitive and social levels , often misaligned with the existing skills and motivations of minimally - verbal children on the autism spectrum . This paper identifies an opportunity , and perhaps an obligation , for HCI researchers to address this imbalance . We highlight the importance of working towards methods , designs , and mind - sets that are inclusive , supportive , and empowering of minimally - verbal children on the autism spectrum and other communities who communicate differently , as we work towards answering the question : how does one have a voice in design if one is not verbal ? ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We extend our warmest thanks to this project’s child and adult collaborators for their on - going insights and enthu - siasm . We also thank the anonymous reviewers for their contributions . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Meryl Alper . 2017 . Giving voice : Mobile communication , disability , and inequality . MIT Press . [ 2 ] American Psychiatric Association . 2013 . Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders : DSM - 5 ( 5th ed . ed . ) . American Psychiatric Association Arlington , VA . [ 3 ] Eevi Beck . 2002 . P for Political - Participation is Not Enough . Scandi - navian J . Inf . Systems 14 ( 01 2002 ) , 77 – 92 . https : / / aisel . aisnet . org / sjis / vol14 / iss1 / 1 CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 21 Page 12 [ 4 ] Laura Benton and Hilary Johnson . 2014 . Structured approaches to participatory design for children : can targeting the needs of chil - dren with autism provide benefits for a broader child population ? Instructional Science 42 , 1 ( 01 Jan 2014 ) , 47 – 65 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11251 - 013 - 9297 - y [ 5 ] Laura Benton and Hilary Johnson . 2015 . Widening participation in technology design : A review of the involvement of children with special educational needs and disabilities . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 3 - 4 ( 2015 ) , 23 – 40 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2015 . 07 . 001 [ 6 ] Laura Benton , Asimina Vasalou , Rilla Khaled , Hilary Johnson , and Daniel Gooch . 2014 . Diversity for Design : A Framework for Involv - ing Neurodiverse Children in the Technology Design Process . In Pro - ceedings of the 32Nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3747 – 3756 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557244 [ 7 ] Margot Brereton , Laurianne Sitbon , Muhammad Haziq Lim Abdullah , Mark Vanderberg , and Stewart Koplick . 2015 . Design after design to bridge between people living with cognitive or sensory impairments , their friends and proxies . CoDesign 11 , 1 ( 2015 ) , 4 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2015 . 1009471 [ 8 ] Scott Andrew Brown , David Silvera - Tawil , Petra Gemeinboeck , and John McGhee . 2016 . The Case for Conversation : A Design Research Framework for Participatory Feedback from Autistic Children . In Pro - ceedings of the 28th Australian Conference on Computer - Human In - teraction ( OzCHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 605 – 613 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3010915 . 3010934 [ 9 ] John M Carroll and Mary Beth Rosson . 2007 . Participatory design in community informatics . Design Studies 28 , 3 ( 2007 ) , 243 – 261 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2007 . 02 . 007 [ 10 ] Christian Dindler and Ole Sejer Iversen . 2007 . Fictional In - quiry : design collaboration in a shared narrative space . CoDesign 3 , 4 ( 2007 ) , 213 – 234 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710880701500187 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710880701500187 [ 11 ] Allison Druin . 1999 . Cooperative Inquiry : Developing New Technolo - giesforChildrenwithChildren . In ProceedingsoftheSIGCHIConference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’99 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 592 – 599 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 302979 . 303166 [ 12 ] Allison Druin , Jerry A . Fails , and Mona Leigh Guha . 2014 . Including Children in Technology Design Processes : Techniques and Practices . In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the 32Nd Annual ACM Confer - ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1021 – 1022 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2559206 . 2567819 [ 13 ] Abigail Durrant , Jonathan Hook , Roisin McNaney , Keir Williams , Thomas Smith , Mathew Kipling , Tony Stockman , and Patrick Olivier . 2013 . Design to Support Interpersonal Communication in the Special Educational Needs Classroom . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 46 – 55 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2485760 . 2485778 [ 14 ] Elizabeth Foss , Mona Leigh Guha , Panagis Papadatos , Tamara Clegg , Jason Yip , and Greg Walsh . 2013 . Cooperative Inquiry Ex - tended : Creating Technology with Middle School Students with Learning Differences . Journal of Special Education Technology 28 , 3 ( 2013 ) , 33 – 46 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 016264341302800303 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 016264341302800303 [ 15 ] Christopher Frauenberger . 2015 . Rethinking Autism and Technology . interactions 22 , 2 ( Feb . 2015 ) , 57 – 59 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2728604 [ 16 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Judith Good , Alyssa Alcorn , and Helen Pain . 2012 . Supporting the Design Contributions of Children with Autism Spectrum Conditions . In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 134 – 143 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2307096 . 2307112 [ 17 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Judith Good , Wendy Keay - Bright , and He - len Pain . 2012 . Interpreting Input from Children : A Designerly Ap - proach . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2377 – 2386 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208399 [ 18 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Julia Makhaeva , and Katharina Spiel . 2016 . Designing Smart Objects with Autistic Children : Four Design Ex - posès . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 130 – 139 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858050 [ 19 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Julia Makhaeva , and Katharina Spiel . 2017 . Blending Methods : Developing Participatory Design Sessions for Autistic Children . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interac - tion Design and Children ( IDC ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 39 – 49 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3079727 [ 20 ] Stanley Greenspan , Serena Wieder , and Robin Simons . 1998 . The child with special needs : Encouraging intellectual and emotional growth . Addison - Wesley / Addison Wesley Longman , Reading , MA , US . [ 21 ] Mona Leigh Guha , Allison Druin , Gene Chipman , Jerry Alan Fails , Sante Simms , and Allison Farber . 2004 . Mixing Ideas : A New Technique for Working with Young Children As Design Partners . In Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on Interaction Design and Children : Building a Community ( IDC ’04 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 35 – 42 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1017833 . 1017838 [ 22 ] Mona Leigh Guha , Allison Druin , and Jerry Alan Fails . 2008 . Designing with and for Children with Special Needs : An Inclusionary Model . In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’08 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 61 – 64 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1463689 . 1463719 [ 23 ] Mona Leigh Guha , Allison Druin , and Jerry Alan Fails . 2013 . Cooper - ative Inquiry revisited : Reflections of the past and guidelines for the future of intergenerational co - design . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 1 , 1 ( 2013 ) , 14 – 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2012 . 08 . 003 [ 24 ] Alexis Hiniker , Kiley Sobel , and Bongshin Lee . 2017 . Co - Designing with Preschoolers Using Fictional Inquiry and Comicboarding . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com - puting Systems ( CHI ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 5767 – 5772 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025588 [ 25 ] SenH . Hirano , MichaelT . Yeganyan , GabrielaMarcu , DavidH . Nguyen , Lou Anne Boyd , and Gillian R . Hayes . 2010 . vSked : Evaluation of a System to Support Classroom Activities for Children with Autism . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1633 – 1642 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753569 [ 26 ] Samantha Holt and Nicola Yuill . 2017 . Tablets for two : How dual tablets can facilitate other - awareness and communication in learning disabled children with autism . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 11 ( 2017 ) , 72 – 82 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2016 . 10 . 005 Designing with and for Children with Special Needs . [ 27 ] Juan Pablo Hourcade , Stacy R . Williams , Ellen A . Miller , Kelsey E . Huebner , and Lucas J . Liang . 2013 . Evaluation of Tablet Apps to Encourage Social Interaction in Children with Autism Spectrum Dis - orders . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3197 – 3206 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2466438 [ 28 ] Seray B . Ibrahim , Asimina Vasalou , and Michael Clarke . 2018 . Design Opportunities for AAC and Children with Severe Speech and Physical Impairments . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 227 , 13 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173801 CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 21 Page 13 [ 29 ] Ole Sejer Iversen , Rachel Charlotte Smith , and Christian Dindler . 2017 . Child As Protagonist : Expanding the Role of Children in Participatory Design . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 27 – 37 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3078072 . 3079725 [ 30 ] Pier Jaarsma and Stellan Welin . 2012 . Autism as a Natural Human Variation : Reflections on the Claims of the Neurodiversity Movement . Health Care Analysis 20 , 1 ( 01 Mar 2012 ) , 20 – 30 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10728 - 011 - 0169 - 9 [ 31 ] Brigitte Jordan and Austin Henderson . 1995 . Interaction Analy - sis : Foundations and Practice . Journal of the Learning Sciences 4 , 1 ( 1995 ) , 39 – 103 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15327809jls0401 _ 2 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15327809jls0401 _ 2 [ 32 ] Steven K Kapp , Kristen Gillespie - Lynch , Lauren E Sherman , and Ted Hutman . 2013 . Deficit , difference , or both ? Autism and neurodiversity . , 59 – 71 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0028353 [ 33 ] Barbara Kawulich . 2005 . Participant Observation as a Data Collection Method . Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum : Qualitative Social Research 6 , 2 ( 2005 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 17169 / fqs - 6 . 2 . 466 [ 34 ] Amanda Lazar , Jessica L . Feuston , Caroline Edasis , and Anne Marie Piper . 2018 . Making As Expression : Informing Design with People with Complex Communication Needs Through Art Therapy . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 351 , 16 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173925 [ 35 ] Ann Light . 2010 . The Unit of Analysis in Understanding the Politics of Participatory Practice . In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference ( PDC ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 183 – 186 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1900441 . 1900473 [ 36 ] Janice Light and David McNaughton . 2013 . Putting People First : Re - Thinking the Role of Technology in Augmentative and Alternative Communication Intervention . Augmentative and Alternative Commu - nication 29 , 4 ( 2013 ) , 299 – 309 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3109 / 07434618 . 2013 . 848935 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3109 / 07434618 . 2013 . 848935 [ 37 ] Julia Makhaeva , Christopher Frauenberger , and Katharina Spiel . 2016 . Creating Creative Spaces for Co - designing with Autistic Children : The Concept of a " Handlungsspielraum " . In Proceedings of the 14th Participatory Design Conference : Full Papers - Volume 1 ( PDC ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 51 – 60 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2940299 . 2940306 [ 38 ] Laura Malinverni , Joan Mora - Guiard , and Narcis Pares . 2016 . Towards methods for evaluating and communicating participatory design : A multimodal approach . International Journal of Human - Computer Stud - ies 94 ( 2016 ) , 53 – 63 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2016 . 03 . 004 [ 39 ] Jennifer Mankoff , Gillian R . Hayes , and Devva Kasnitz . 2010 . Disabil - ity Studies As a Source of Critical Inquiry for the Field of Assistive Technology . In Proceedings of the 12th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ( ASSETS ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3 – 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1878803 . 1878807 [ 40 ] Jan Mason and Susan Danby . 2011 . Children as Experts in Their Lives : Child Inclusive Research . Child Indicators Research 4 , 2 ( 01 Apr 2011 ) , 185 – 189 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s12187 - 011 - 9108 - 4 [ 41 ] Roisin McNaney , Christopher Bull , Lynne Mackie , Floriane Dahman , Helen Stringer , Dan Richardson , and Daniel Welsh . 2018 . Stammer - App : Designing a Mobile Application to Support Self - Reflection and Goal Setting for People Who Stammer . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 267 , 12 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173841 [ 42 ] Roisin McNaney , John Vines , Andy Dow , Harry Robinson , Heather Robinson , Kate McDonald , Leslie Brown , Peter Santer , Don Murray , Janice Murray , David Green , and Peter Wright . 2018 . Enabling the Participation of People with Parkinson’s and Their Caregivers in Co - Inquiry Around Collectivist Health Technologies . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 491 , 14 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174065 [ 43 ] Roisin McNaney , Cara Wilson , Jayne Wallace , Margot Brereton , Abi Roper , Stephanie Wilson , and Miriam Sturdee . 2018 . Giving a Voice Through Design : Adapting Design Methods to Enhance the Partici - pation of People with Communication Difficulties . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Situated Actions , Workshops and Tutorial - Volume 2 ( PDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 40 , 3 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210604 . 3210648 [ 44 ] Narcis Pares , Paul Masri , Gerard van Wolferen , and Chris Creed . 2005 . Achieving dialogue with children with severe autism in an adaptive multisensory interaction : the " MEDIATE " project . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 11 , 6 ( Nov 2005 ) , 734 – 743 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2005 . 88 [ 45 ] Bernd Ploderer , Jonathon Stuart , Vivian Tran , Theresa L . Green , and Jennifer Muller . 2017 . The Transition of Stroke Survivors from Hos - pital to Home : Understanding Work and Design Opportunities . In Proceedings of the 29th Australian Conference on Computer - Human Interaction ( OZCHI ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3152771 . 3152772 [ 46 ] Kenneth K . Poon , Linda R . Watson , Grace T . Baranek , and Michele D . Poe . 2012 . To What Extent Do Joint Attention , Imitation , and Object Play Behaviors in Infancy Predict Later Communication and Intel - lectual Functioning in ASD ? Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 42 , 6 ( 01 Jun 2012 ) , 1064 – 1074 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10803 - 011 - 1349 - z [ 47 ] Ravihansa Rajapakse , Margot Brereton , and Laurianne Sitbon . 2018 . Design Artefacts to Support People with a Disability to Build Personal Infrastructures . In Proceedings of the 2018 Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 277 – 288 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3196709 . 3196749 [ 48 ] Janet Read , Peggy Gregory , Stuart Macfarlane , Barbara Mcmanus , Peter Gray , and Raj Patel . 2002 . An Investigation of Participatory Design with Children – Informant , Balanced and Facilitated Design . In Proceedings of Interaction Design and Children International Workshop . Shaker Publishing , 53 – 64 . [ 49 ] Kathryn E . Ringland , Christine T . Wolf , LouAnne E . Boyd , Mark S . Baldwin , and Gillian R . Hayes . 2016 . Would You Be Mine : Appropriat - ing Minecraft As an Assistive Technology for Youth with Autism . In Proceedings of the 18th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ( ASSETS ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 33 – 41 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2982142 . 2982172 [ 50 ] Megan Y . Roberts and Ann P . Kaiser . 2011 . The Effective - ness of Parent - Implemented Language Interventions : A Meta - Analysis . American Journal of Speech - Language Pathology 20 , 3 ( 2011 ) , 180 – 199 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1044 / 1058 - 0360 ( 2011 / 10 - 0055 ) arXiv : https : / / pubs . asha . org / doi / pdf / 10 . 1044 / 1058 - 0360 % 282011 / 10 - 0055 % 29 [ 51 ] Abi Roper . 2014 . Accessibility of Computer Therapy and Technology for People with Aphasia . SIGACCESS Access . Comput . 108 ( Jan . 2014 ) , 50 – 53 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2591357 . 2591366 [ 52 ] Laura Scheepmaker , Christopher Frauenberger , and Katta Spiel . 2018 . The Things We Play with Roles of Technology in Social Play . In Pro - ceedings of the 2018 Annual Symposium on Computer - Human Inter - action in Play ( CHI PLAY ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 451 – 462 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3242671 . 3242695 [ 53 ] Donald A Schon . 1983 . The reflective practitioner how professionals think in action . Basic Books , New York . [ 54 ] Stephen Scrivener . 2005 . Editorial . CoDesign 1 , 1 ( 2005 ) , 1 – 4 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710880412331289935 CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 21 Page 14 arXiv : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710880412331289935 [ 55 ] Jesper . Simonsen and Toni . Robertson ( Eds . ) . 2013 . Routledge interna - tional handbook of participatory design . Routledge , New York . [ 56 ] Katta Spiel , Emeline Brulé , Christopher Frauenberger , Gilles Bailly , and Geraldine Fitzpatrick . 2018 . Micro - ethics for Participatory Design with Marginalised Children . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Full Papers - Volume 1 ( PDC ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 17 , 12 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210586 . 3210603 [ 57 ] Katharina Spiel , Julia Makhaeva , and Christopher Frauenberger . 2016 . Embodied Companion Technologies for Autistic Children . In Proceed - ingsoftheTEI’16 : TenthInternationalConferenceonTangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 245 – 252 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2839462 . 2839495 [ 58 ] Katharina Spiel , Laura Malinverni , Judith Good , and Christopher Frauenberger . 2017 . Participatory Evaluation with Autistic Chil - dren . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 5755 – 5766 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025851 [ 59 ] Fern Sussman and Centre Hanen . 1999 . More than words : a guide to helping parents promote communication and social skills in children with Autism spectrum disorder . Toronto , Ontario : Hanen Centre . [ 60 ] Helen Tager - Flusberg and Connie Kasari . 2013 . Minimally Verbal School – Aged Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder : The Neglected EndoftheSpectrum . , 468 – 478pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / aur . 1329 [ 61 ] MaleneTerp , BirgitteSchantzLaursen , RikkeJørgensen , JanMainz , and Charlotte D Bjørnes . 2016 . A room for design : Through participatory design young adults with schizophrenia become strong collaborators . International Journal of Mental Health Nursing 25 , 6 ( 2016 ) , 496 – 506 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / inm . 12231 [ 62 ] Karen Toth , Jeffrey Munson , Andrew N Meltzoff , and Geraldine Daw - son . 2006 . Early Predictors of Communication Development in Young Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder : Joint Attention , Imitation , and Toy Play . Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 36 , 8 ( 2006 ) , 993 – 1005 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10803 - 006 - 0137 - 7 [ 63 ] Greg Walsh , Alison Druin , Mona Leigh Guha , Elizabeth Foss , Evan Golub , Leshell Hatley , Elizabeth Bonsignore , and Sonia Franckel . 2010 . Layered elaboration : a new technique for co - design with children . , 1237 – 1240 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753512 [ 64 ] Tracy Westeyn , Gregory Abowd , Thad Starner , Jeremy Johnson , Pe - ter Presti , and Kimberly Weaver . 2012 . Monitoring children’s devel - opmental progress using augmented toys and activity recognition . Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 16 , 2 ( 2012 ) , 169 – 191 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00779 - 011 - 0386 - 0 [ 65 ] Cara Wilson , Margot Brereton , Bernd Ploderer , and Laurianne Sit - bon . 2018 . MyWord : Enhancing Engagement , Interaction and Self - expression with Minimally - verbal Children on the Autism Spectrum Through a Personal Audio - visual Dictionary . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’18 ) . ACM , NewYork , NY , USA , 106 – 118 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202755 [ 66 ] Cara Wilson , Margot Brereton , Bernd Ploderer , Laurianne Sitbon , and Beth Saggers . 2017 . Digital Strategies for Supporting Strengths - and Interests - based Learning with Children with Autism . In Proceedings of the 19th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ( ASSETS ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 52 – 61 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3132525 . 3132553 [ 67 ] Cara Wilson , Laurianne Sitbon , Margot Brereton , Daniel Johnson , and Stewart Koplick . 2016 . ’Put Yourself in the Picture’ : Designing for FutureswithYoungAdultswithIntellectualDisability . In Proceedingsof the 28th Australian Conference on Computer - Human Interaction ( OzCHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 271 – 281 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3010915 . 3010924 [ 68 ] Jacob O . Wobbrock . 2017 . SIGCHI Social Impact Award Talk – Ability - Based Design : Elevating Ability over Disability in Accessible Comput - ing . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 5 – 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3027063 . 3058588 [ 69 ] JacobO . Wobbrock , ShaunK . Kane , KrzysztofZ . Gajos , SusumuHarada , and Jon Froehlich . 2011 . Ability - Based Design : Concept , Principles and Examples . ACM Trans . Access . Comput . 3 , 3 , Article 9 ( April 2011 ) , 27 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1952383 . 1952384 [ 70 ] Jason C . Yip , Elizabeth Foss , Elizabeth Bonsignore , Mona Leigh Guha , Leyla Norooz , Emily Rhodes , Brenna McNally , Panagis Papadatos , Evan Golub , and Allison Druin . 2013 . Children Initiating and Leading Cooperative Inquiry Sessions . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 293 – 296 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2485760 . 2485796 CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019 , May 4 – 9 , 2019 , Glasgow , Scotland , UK Paper 21 Page 15