Collins English Dictionary ' Adorkable ' makes awkward debut in Collins English Dictionary . The only dictionary you need – the largest single - volume English dictionary in print with over 50 , 000 newly added words and a total of 722 , 000 words , meanings . Collins Dictionaries Always Free Online . Download Collins English Free Dictionary 4 . 3 . 136 for Android Mumpreneur leads Collins English Dictionary entries Home News . 5 Nov 2015 . A dramatic change in TV viewing habits has seen binge - watch named word of the year by UK - based dictionary Collins . French English dictionary translation French English Reverso Collins English Dictionary on Amazon . com . * FREE * shipping on qualifying offers . English Collins Pro Dictionary Ultralingua Collins English Free Dictionary free download . Get the latest version now . The premier English language dictionary from Collins now available as a FREE app . Collins English Dictionary 22 Oct 2011 . Arab Spring and mumpreneur are among the new words which have entered the latest edition of a major dictionary . 13 Oct 2011 - 3 min - Uploaded by WaterstonesUpdated with the latest terms to enter the language , the new Collins English Dictionary is not . Collins English Dictionary names ' binge - watch ' word of the year . The new 2014 Collins English Dictionary app is fast , easy - to - use , has all the latest words and is the most comprehensive and trustworthy English dictionary . COLLINS ENGLISH DICTIONARY iFinger International The Collins English Dictionary is a printed and online dictionary of English . It is published by HarperCollins in Glasgow . The first edition of the dictionary , in 1979 Collins English Dictionary English Language Books at The Works Kewl definition at Dictionary . com , a free online dictionary with pronunciation , Collins English Dictionary - Complete & Unabridged 2012 Digital Edition Collins English Dictionary and Thesaurus 2010 Complete and . Kewl Define Kewl at Dictionary . com Buy Collins English Dictionary by Collins Dictionaries ISBN : 9780007437863 from Amazon ' s Book Store . Free UK delivery on eligible orders . I am absolutely thrilled to have a copy of the Collins English Dictionary . If I am ever cast off on a desert island , this is the book I want to have with me . What a Collins English Dictionary Always Free Online 22 Oct 2014 . Photobomb , ” “selfie , ” “twerking” and “meme” are the latest additions to the print edition of the Collins English Dictionary . According t . Collins English Dictionary TR - Android Apps on Google Play Download Collins Pro English Dictionary Software by Ultralingua for Mac , Windows , iPhone , and iPod Touch . ? Twitter selects ' Adorkable ' as first entry into Collins English . 10 Jun 2014 . The word ' adorkable ' , popularised by Zooey Deschanel pictured , has won Glasgow - based Collins English Dictionary to enter a new word in Collins English Dictionary : Amazon . co . uk : Collins Dictionaries The official online dictionary from Collins with over 1 million entries . View word definitions Collins Dictionary homepage link English Dictionary . English Amazon . com : Collins English Dictionary . 9780007437863 : Collins I am absolutely thrilled to have a copy of the Collins English Dictionary . If I am ever cast off on a desert island , this is the book I want to have with me . What a Collins English Dictionary : Complete and Unabridged - Amazon . co . uk 5 Nov 2015 . Collins English Dictionary has chosen binge - watch as its 2015 Word of the Year . Meaning to watch a large number of television programmes Collins English Dictionary – Complete and Unabridged - The Free . ? collins english dictionary free download - Collins English Thesaurus 1 . 03 : Complete English dictionary of synonyms , and much more programs . Collins Cobuild Student ' s Dictionary free download , 100 safe and virus free download from Softonic . Collins full version english dictionary free download Adorkable new words make new Collins dictionary - BBC News The official Collins English Dictionary online . Comprehensive and authoritative , rely on Collins for up - to - date English with insights into language trends and Binge - watch is Collins ' dictionary ' s Word of the Year - BBC News Buy Collins English Dictionary : Complete and Unabridged by Collins Dictionaries , Mark Forsyth ISBN : 9780007522743 from Amazon ' s Book Store . Free UK ' Adorkable , ' ' Twerking ' Are Now In The Print Edition Of The ' Collins . Reverso French - English dictionary : discover hundreds of thousands of words and phrases . translation of words and expressions , definition , synonyms . Collins Collins English Dictionary : Amazon . de : Collins Dictionaries Over 405 000 entries . To mark the 30th anniversary of the publication of the first edition , Collins is proud to announce a major new edition of its flagship WordReference . com Dictionary of English 23 Oct 2014 . The latest print edition of the Collins English dictionary contains 50000 newly - added words , including selfie , onesie and adorkable . Download Collins Cobuild Student ' s Dictionary Pocket PC The Collins English Dictionary 2010 Complete & Unabridged and the Collins Thesaurus of the English Language 2010 in a software bundle offering a complete . Collins English Dictionary - Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia WordReference is proud to offer two English dictionaries - - the WordReference Random House Learner ' s Dictionary of American English and the Collins Concise . Collins English Dictionary : 9780007228997 : Amazon . com : Books Collins English Dictionary The Bookseller Buy Collins English Dictionary online from The Works . Visit now to browse our huge range of products at great prices . Collins English Dictionary - YouTube 10 Jun 2014 . Following in the honourable footsteps of Samuel Johnson , Twitter users have voted the word adorkable into the next edition of the Collins collins english dictionary free download - Softonic Photobomb has triumphed as Collins ' word of the year , as the publisher launches the latest edition of the Collins English Dictionary . The word , which means .