Re - thinking Traceability : A Prototype to Record and Revisit the Evolution of Design Artefacts Marisela Gutierrez Lopez , Gustavo Rovelo Ruiz , Kris Luyten , Mieke Haesen , Karin Coninx Hasselt University – tUL – imec Expertise centre for Digital Media Hasselt , Belgium firstname . lastname @ uhasselt . be ABSTRACT Keeping track of design processes is a cumbersome task due to the apparently unconstrained and unstructured nature of creative work . Traceability is fundamental to revisit and reflect on the design narratives that describe artefact evolution . In this paper , we aim to identify what characteristics are necessary to facilitate traceability of creative design processes . For this end , we use a functional prototype to connect artefacts , design rationale , and decisions in a shared workspace . We evaluated this prototype for 15 weeks with six pairs of students engaged in a user - centered design project . Our findings show that having a lean repository of artefacts annotated with design rationale can facilitate tracking progress in different phases of the process . We found that creating a record of the participants’ design work is useful to reflect on and for team agreement , ensure consistency of evolving artefacts , and help in planning future steps in the design project . Author Keywords Traceability ; user - centered design ; design artefacts . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION Artefacts are “almost anything that provides a visual and spatial forum for design ideas” [ 35 ] . They are used by design teams to ground communication , boost creativity , and justify design decisions [ 26 , 35 ] . Nevertheless , artefacts provide only a partial representation of design work . The turning points taken by design teams to evolve artefacts in an iterative way is what contains the most valuable information about the design process [ 5 ] . Keeping track of artefact evolution helps to create a project memory [ 17 ] , which contains the experiences and knowledge gained during the process . Many design practitioners are reluctant to adopt tools that track the evolution of artefacts , since they tend to formalize design activities in a specific way . Constraining the design activities can potentially have a negative impact on design thinking [ 12 ] , which is essential for finding creative , innovative solutions . Nevertheless , keeping track of the evolution of artefacts is useful in many ways . First , it can create a shared representation and understanding of the experiences acquired during a project [ 17 ] . Furthermore , it can improve the design process in three ways [ 20 , 25 ] : ( 1 ) by ensuring consistency of artefacts since results from one phase of the process are connected to the next phase , ( 2 ) by promoting reusability of previously generated knowledge , and ( 3 ) by providing a means for design teams to reflect on their approach and progress . Existing tools that capture the evolution of design artefacts emerge largely from the engineering domain . These tools focus on supporting traceability of the design process , a term that is rarely used for creative design practices . Traceability enables design teams to pinpoint where a certain element was introduced into the process , and explore the reasons for its ultimate adoption or rejection [ 17 ] , which in turn can help to reflect on the co - evolution of design problems and solutions [ 5 ] . In this paper , we adopt the concept of traceability for creative design activities . We frame this concept in user - centered design processes , and adapt it according to the needs and working style related to design activities . We explore our solution in a longitudinal study with students that work on a design project with external stakeholders . User - centered design ( UCD ) approaches involve an iterative process to design and develop interactive systems . Teams working in UCD adopt multidisciplinary perspectives , where communication is based on a variety of artefacts [ 13 ] . However , the strengths of this process also introduce associated drawbacks . These limitations include keeping track of the evolution of design artefacts and their rationale , and for multidisciplinary teams , getting the same understanding about these artefacts [ 9 , 28 ] . When it comes to traceability of UCD processes , there is a tension to retain a Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . GROUP 2018 , January 7 – 10 , 2018 , Sanibel Island , FL , USA © 2018 Association of Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5562 - 9 / 18 / 01 . . . $ 15 . 00 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3148330 . 3148334 Paper Session : Knowledge Sharing in ( Online ) Communities GROUP 2018 , Jan . 7 – 10 , 2018 , Sanibel Island , FL , USA 196 degree of formalism and at the same time offer enough flexibility for creativity [ 9 ] . In our research , we investigate how design teams document and retrieve information about artefact evolution during a user - centered design process . We explore how the concept of traceability can be used into a creative design process . Our goal is twofold : ( 1 ) understand how teams document and retrieve their ongoing work , and ( 2 ) identify what characteristics are necessary in an application in order to facilitate traceability in creative design . Achieving these goals requires understanding how teams generate , communicate , and retrieve their ideas over the duration of a project . Thus , we framed a study around a design task that follows the lifecycle of user - centered design , from initial idea generation to high - fidelity prototype . Our study consisted of a 15 - week longitudinal study involving six pairs of students whose assignment was to redesign an interactive application for tax calculations . This project had the involvement of the external stakeholders in several stages . To investigate how teams document and retrieve their ongoing work , we asked them to record their collaborative design process using a functional prototype named Helaba . This tool supports recording design rationale and decisions in a shared workspace . We designed and developed Helaba following the guidelines described in our previous research [ 10 ] to address the need of designers to keep track of their design rationale in a simple and flexible way . Using this tool , we gathered the artefacts , communications , and decisions produced by the participants during the design process . Additionally , we periodically collected the feedback of participants to gather information about their experiences . This procedure allowed us to create an extensive picture of the design process followed by each team , thus allowing us to explore traceability . Findings of our study revealed that documenting UCD processes in Helaba was useful to support progress of the different stages in a flexible way . More specifically , it helped participants to keep track of their process by providing a ( 1 ) lean structured repository and ( 2 ) a shared workspace to keep annotated artefacts and design decisions in a common workspace . We extend previous research by using traceability as a mean to bridge creative and engineering design perspectives . Furthermore , we contribute with a longitudinal evaluation on how design rationale and traceability can be used in UCD processes . FRAMING TRACEABILITY IN UCD PROCESSES Conceptualizing User - centered Design Design is better considered as a process rather than a set of isolated activities or outcomes . Swan et al . [ 31 ] describe design as processional given its “unfolding and contingent” nature . The design problems co - evolve together with solutions [ 5 ] . During this co - evolution , wicked design problems – to which there is no clear solution – are explored and refined [ 1 ] . Artefacts are valuable since they embody this processional nature , being refined in an incremental manner and shaped by what was done before [ 31 ] . However , the most useful information is found not in the artefacts themselves , but on the discussion that led to their creation [ 35 ] and the knowledge that they reflect [ 29 ] . In this way , artefacts portray a partial picture , that serve the purpose of making ideas visible , and providing a space to communicate and refine those ideas [ 35 ] . Artefacts and the narrative of their evolution serve to understand the design process . Thus , it is valuable to capture and reflect upon the way artefacts are created and refined [ 3 ] . There is an ongoing discussion to the degree in which artefacts and creative design processes can be articulated and made explicit to others [ 8 , 9 , 35 ] . Fallman [ 8 ] proposes three opposing accounts for positioning design : romantic ( artistic process ) , conservative ( much as in scientific or engineering domains ) , and pragmatic ( ill - defined process creative by nature ) . Each of these accounts provide valuable interpretations of how to conceptualize the design process , and how it can be articulated and made explicit to others . In HCI , part of this discussion is oriented towards the differences in positioning user - centered design as mostly an engineering or a creative design endeavor [ 23 , 35 ] . The former implies that design can be formal and systematized ; while in the latter , it is considered a loosely defined process that does not constrain design thinking . While there is a tendency to position UCD as part of the conservative account [ 2 , 9 , 35 ] , there is limited evidence that structured design processes capture or support the work practices of designers successfully [ 9 , 35 ] . Accordingly , it has been suggested that the focus in UCD practice should be shifted from engineering towards a more creative one [ 2 , 9 , 23 ] . However , UCD projects often require producing an interactive application that can be deployed and tested with end - users [ 13 ] . This implies that tools to support UCD processes should provide a balance between supporting “good practices” in engineering and accommodating the unconstrained nature of creativity . Bridging Design Accounts to Support Traceability The Oxford Dictionary defines traceable as something that is “able to be found or discovered” or “able to be followed on its course or to its origin” [ 36 ] . Being able to “trace every step along the way of how a problem is transformed into a solution , including intermediate results and findings” is important for both science and engineering [ 7 ] . In engineering design , traceability relates to the history of a design , as it enables identification of where certain information was introduced into the process [ 25 ] . According to Neven et al . [ 20 ] , traceability is useful as guidance to look forward and frame the process , and backtracking to follow the origin of design elements . According to Tang et al . [ 32 ] , being able to trace back design rationale is relevant for the design process as it involves artefacts in constant evolution . Design rationale captures the ideas behind why an artefact is the way it is [ 12 ] . Thus , traceability and design rational are concepts often associated Paper Session : Knowledge Sharing in ( Online ) Communities GROUP 2018 , Jan . 7 – 10 , 2018 , Sanibel Island , FL , USA 197 to facilitate capturing and revisiting design knowledge . However , a single final design rationale is not enough for traceability , as there should exist a link between the rationale and progression of artefacts over time [ 25 ] . This is especially relevant for the early stages of design , where a large amount of ideas and artefacts are explored and defined [ 29 ] . Engineering Design and Traceability The concept of traceability has been widely explored in engineering design . Solutions emerging from this perspective focus on formalizing models and steps for recording the design process [ 17 ] . Some of the explored solutions include :  Requirement modelling to track the evolution of requirements and their integration into development and maintenance tasks [ 22 ] .  Design rationale to structure design argumentations using formal models to surface the connections between discourses and artefacts [ 15 , 25 , 32 , 33 ] .  Group decision support to identify knowledge that needs to be integrated and traced , and handle the links to support decisions [ 19 ] . Some reported benefits from these solutions are [ 20 , 27 ] : ( 1 ) early detection of potential conflicts or discrepancies in the design process , ( 2 ) communicate and justify design decisions to team members from different disciplines , and ( 3 ) facilitate reuse and analysis of design knowledge . Limitations are related to the fact that these solutions assume that design discourse can be made uniform and standardized [ 25 , 32 ] . However , there is little empirical evidence to support how this approach works in practice [ 9 , 12 ] . Creative Design and Traceability Traceability has not been explicitly explored within creative design . However , previous research reports the potential value / benefits of tools to keep track of design evolution over time [ 3 ] . Therefore , there are a number of solutions proposed to support reusing , documenting , and inspiring the design process . Some relevant solutions include :  Open spaces to document ongoing design processes , which act as a source of collective creativity and inspiration , promoting free exchange of ideas and feedback between designers [ 18 , 31 ] .  Shared workspaces between teams to ground communication and to document design knowledge for facilitating its reuse [ 3 , 14 , 21 ] .  Typical design artefacts such as sketches [ 16 , 24 ] and storyboards [ 34 ] to collect , share , and access previous ideas , supporting reuse and inspiration . The value of these solutions is that they integrate the creative , progressive nature of design , and avoid constraining the thinking process of designers . As with these solutions , we aim to explore design work in consideration of the existing practices of designers , and avoid imposing a structure to it . We extend these solutions by exploring how the concept of traceability could be fitted into creative practices , and used to bridge these to engineering design practices . Off - the - Shelf Tools to Support Traceability A number of ( commercial ) off - the - shelf solutions have some kind of useful support for traceability . These tools are adapted to the needs of design teams working in commercial , fast - paced projects , where design outcomes are communicated to a large number of actors . We reviewed 16 of these tools in order to understand what is available for designers in terms of traceability . It is not our intention to create an exhaustive list of available tools , but to explore what commercial applications for designers support traceability . Thus , we reviewed applications that support traceability based on the reports of tools used by professional designers and evaluated them according to the design guidelines proposed by [ 10 ] : support artefact - based communication , gather feedback in a shared workspace , and enable awareness of artefact evolution . See Appendix A for a summary of the assessment we did from the 16 commercial tools and their URL . All these applications highlight the need of supporting remote , multidisciplinary design work . Ten out of sixteen tools include a shared workspace that can be used to trace back the history of artefacts . However , none of these applications explicitly target traceability or reuse of designs because they do not make the link between pieces of knowledge evident . Conversely , the focus is on supporting ongoing conversations , feedback , and reduce “approval times” of design proposals . The tools that include a shared repository also support teams to organize their files in different ways , such grouping files into projects . Nine tools include team or task management features , such as the possibility to create Kanban boards , or to assign tasks to different team members . Eight tools offer the possibility to be linked with third - party tools to support project management and team communication . While these off - the - shelf solutions offer interesting and seemingly beneficial features , it is not clear how they support ongoing design processes . Furthermore , there is no evidence in literature of their proven efficiency for supporting design work , or how ( and if ) they could be optimized for traceability . EXPLORING TRACEABILITY WITH HELABA In order to investigate traceability , we use a solution named Helaba . The target users of our system are designers from different levels of experience , as well as other stakeholders of the UCD process ( e . g . managers , clients , etc . ) . This tool is a functional prototype that allows design teams to connect artefacts , design rationale , decisions , and feedback in a shared workspace . Online shared workspaces facilitate being aware of the activities of others and contextualizing individual activities [ 6 , 14 ] . In the early stages of design , artefacts are essential to generate and refine conceptual ideas [ 28 ] . Therefore , shared workspaces in design help to capture and revisit ideas generated , and to improve team collaboration [ 14 ] . We contextualize the functionalities of Helaba with the guidelines that were used to inform its Paper Session : Knowledge Sharing in ( Online ) Communities GROUP 2018 , Jan . 7 – 10 , 2018 , Sanibel Island , FL , USA 198 design and development [ 10 ] . A rough relation between the guidelines and core elements of Helaba is shown in Table 1 . Design guidelines Core elements G1 Support artefact - based communication Notes G2 Gather feedback in a shared workspace Lean repository , Notes G3 Enable awareness of artefact evolution Decision cards and Lean repository Table 1 : Design guidelines and core elements of Helaba . Notes Helaba supports artefact - based communications with Notes . The Notes are annotations that can be attached to an artefact , in analogy with traditional post - it notes . The goal of this feature is to support designers to externalize ideas and comments that can be related to a specific part of an artefact . This link between artefacts and annotations can promote engagement with artefacts [ 16 ] , and serve to document design rationale [ 25 ] . Individual Notes can also be used to start a conversation thread , where team members can discuss about the artefact at hand . Figure 1 presents an artefact and its attached Notes ( top ) , and a zoom - in of a conversation thread ( below ) . Figure 1 : Artefact annotated with Notes ( top ) and conversation thread ( below ) . Decision Cards Decision cards , depicted in Figure 2 , are meant to externalize individual or collective ideas and otherwise tacit knowledge about decisions . This includes information on why a decision was taken and who was involved in taking the decision . Each given visual artefact can have any number of Decision cards . The granularity of the decisions is determined by the designer , and can range from conceptual or preliminary ideas to concrete technical requirements . Decision cards do not constrain how or what to externalize as a design decision to ensure maximum freedom . For early stages in the process , this is essential as many ideas and concepts are still not well developed , and to minimize the threshold for designers to use the system . Figure 2 : Decision cards include information about why a decision was taken and who was involved in taking the decision . Lean Artefact Repository Another feature to help design teams to be aware of artefact evolution is the Lean artefact repository , illustrated in Figure 3 . A repository for documenting the design work provides access to insights into ongoing processes [ 31 ] . Figure 3 : Overview of the Lean artefact repository . Helaba provides a space for storing and organizing artefacts in a hierarchical structure . With this structure , we aim to offer design teams tools to organize files in a more intuitive way . The principle we use in the Lean repository is that Paper Session : Knowledge Sharing in ( Online ) Communities GROUP 2018 , Jan . 7 – 10 , 2018 , Sanibel Island , FL , USA 199 design work can be divided in four levels : projects , tasks , artefacts , and versions . Each project contains one or more tasks , each task contains one or more artefacts , and each artefact contains one or more versions or elements of the same artefact . For instance , the overview in Figure 3 illustrates a high - fidelity prototype task of a project , together with different screens as versions . METHOD Participants and Assignment A total of 12 participants between 21 and 25 years old joined our study ( 10 male , 2 female ) . Participants were computer science students ( Master level ) , enrolled in an academic course where the goal was to create an application while following a UCD approach . For this academic course , six teams of two students were formed . The assignment was to re - design an interactive application for tax calculations . A group of six members of the Federal Ministry of Finance was involved as external stakeholders ( i . e . clients ) for this project . This group of clients included experts from both computer science and finances . The students had to go through five phases that characterize some of the typical steps taken in a UCD project ( see Table 2 ) . Notice that Helaba is designed for supporting UCD processes , but implies no restrictions on the way the UCD process is executed in practice ( e . g . phases to follow , artefacts to add… ) . Phase Activities User analysis Interview end - users and clients ; Analyze and define initial requirements ; Create personas and scenarios Task analysis Explore existing application ; Create task and dialog models Low - fidelity prototype Create early prototypes to explore alternative solutions ; Usability evaluation of prototypes ( involving UX experts ) ; Present a preliminary solution to clients High - fidelity prototype Workshop to generate new ideas ; Create an interactive prototype of the chosen solution ; Usability evaluation of the prototype ( involving end - users ) Final system Prepare a deliverable of prototype to client ; Create final reports ( both team and individual ) Table 2 : Phases of the assignment , mapped with activities followed and artefacts created by students . We selected this project as a basis for our study as it involves : ( 1 ) a real - life design case , ( 2 ) external stakeholders ( i . e . end - users , clients , and UX experts ) , ( 3 ) collaborative design work , and ( 4 ) follows the life - cycle of the UCD process , from initial exploration to final solution . Experimental Design At the start of the academic course , we invited the participants to join voluntarily our study , which required them use Helaba to document their design activities . We explained the system functionalities , and asked them to use it for their collaborative activities “in the best way possible” . To promote neutrality and encourage participants to record as much content as possible , it was agreed that the content uploaded to the system would not be evaluated in any form unless explicitly stated . As an incentive , we offered an extra point in the project’s grade for participating in the study . The study had a duration of 15 weeks , which is the length of an academic semester and aforementioned course . In addition , two weeks of holidays between semesters were included , but no tasks were assigned during this period . During this time , we gathered information of the process followed by each team by monitoring the content they uploaded to the system . In addition , we collected participants’ feedback at regular intervals to learn about their experiences during the study . After each phase of the UCD process , students either participated in an interview or filled - in an online survey . Figure 4 presents the monitoring techniques used throughout our study : interviews , online surveys , and focus groups . We alternated between monitoring techniques to collect information on different levels . However , we asked similar questions in each phase of the study in order to draw comparisons , such as frequency and purpose of use of Helaba , and other tools used . Figure 4 . Monitoring techniques used in each UCD phase . The interviews were used in key phases of the project to explore in - depth the practices of the participants . For instance , interviews held during the user analysis and low - fidelity prototype were in pairs , as we wanted to contextualize their collaborative design work . The final interview was individual to explore the perception of each participant about how Helaba facilitated teamwork and self - reflection . Furthermore , we interviewed the three UX experts who performed usability evaluations during the low - fidelity prototype phase . The UX experts were experienced HCI researchers , with an average of seven years of experience . The interviews with the UX experts talked about their experiences using Helaba during the usability evaluation process . Additionally , we conducted first a workshop and then a focus group during the high - fidelity prototype phase . In the workshop , participants used Helaba to revisit previously explored , but discarded ideas to generate new features for their prototypes . The focus group involved all students , and was used to gather their opinions and experiences during the workshop . Online surveys were used to collect the same information as in the interviews , but in a more concise way during the task analysis and high - fidelity prototype phases ( see Figure 4 ) . The online surveys were taken undertaken individually or as Paper Session : Knowledge Sharing in ( Online ) Communities GROUP 2018 , Jan . 7 – 10 , 2018 , Sanibel Island , FL , USA 200 a team . We asked teams to fill - in one survey per team , but some teams found easier to fill them individually . In 4 instances ( 11 % of responses ) , we detected a discrepancy between the answers of teams who filled - in the survey individually . For instance , one team member reported to “upload all artefacts” while the other reported to “upload some artefacts” . For these instances , we took a conservative approach and reported the least positive answer . Our experimental design allowed us to monitor key aspects of the design processes followed by participants ( e . g . goals of the project , deliverables produced , and timing ) . Since all teams received the same instructions and worked under the same conditions , this approach enables us to compare results across teams regardless of the amount , type , and quality of content they recorded . This experimental design would be very difficult – if not impossible – to achieve in an “in - the - wild” design project ( e . g . with professional designers in a design consultancy ) due to the highly unpredictable nature of design projects [ 30 ] . Furthermore , the selected project and population allow us to explore a full cycle of UCD project with novice designers , which we believe can benefit from traceability of their processes . Data Gathering and Analysis We gathered data by recording audio and video of the interviews conducted through the study . The workshop and focus group were also audio and video recorded , and two observers took notes . We completed our dataset with the responses given by participants to the surveys . We compiled the data gathered to create a matrix of responses according to the UCD phase in which they were captured . We did a thematic analysis looking for similarities and differences in the responses of participants across different teams for each phase of the process . This analysis allowed us to find patterns in the work style of each team , and to understand how they used Helaba throughout the study . We describe the findings of this analysis in the sections below . DOCUMENTING A UCD PROCESS WITH HELABA The assignment guided participants through the typical phases of a user - centered design process . While all teams had similar tasks , each team used a particular tactic and set of tools to facilitate teamwork . For instance , when remotely located , one team used either Skype or Facebook chat to communicate , while another team only used Slack for their conversations . All teams reported to use a similar tactic and set of tools in similar ways through the process . For instance , the team who used Slack as a remote communication tool used it as such through the entire project . This means that a particular tactic for communication was followed regardless of the differences in the activities of each phase . The participants selected the tools they use according to their needs , instead of adopting new tools according to the phase of the project . This finding is consistent with how professional designers select and adopt tools in commercial design settings [ 11 ] . Unlike other tools mentioned by the participants , the reported uses of Helaba changed during the study . During the first half of the project , participants reported to use it mostly as a repository of artefacts , adding a limited number of annotations to them ( i . e . Notes and Decision cards ) . The total number of artefacts and annotations added in Helaba supported these comments from the participants . As illustrated in Figure 5 , more content was added in the second half of the project , when the core design tasks and bulk of discussion took place . This evolved for all teams in a similar manner . Figure 5 . Artefacts uploaded and annotations added to Helaba in the different stages of the UCD process . Regardless of the work style that each team used , the two core strengths of Helaba for all teams were : ( 1 ) keep a record of previous and future work and ( 2 ) create a space to access the work of others . The specific work style of each team was accommodated in Helaba . The tool supported teamwork in different ways during different stages , according to the tasks and priorities of each stage . To answer the question of what characteristics are required in a system to facilitate traceability , we discuss our findings based on the design guidelines that were used to create Helaba ( see Table 1 ) . G1 : SUPPORT ARTEFACT - BASED COMMUNICATION The first guideline indicates the need to have a visual connection between artefacts and communication related to the artefact . We explored this guideline with the Notes feature of Helaba . Notes are digital post - its pinpointed to a specific part of an artefact . We found that the Notes were used to build a narrative of their design process , especially in relation to how artefacts linked to each other . The value of the Notes for participants was to record the content generated during their design work . The content included information about design alternatives and choices . Information regarding the process associated to their design work was recorded to a lesser extent , for instance with tasks to be undertaken by each team member . Recording the content and process helped participants to build a narrative of their project . This narrative was easy to record , since the Notes did not impose a structure nor constrained their way of thinking . The participants used Notes to record :  Agreements reached  Rationale of design choices  Next steps to iterate an artefact  Discarded design alternatives Paper Session : Knowledge Sharing in ( Online ) Communities GROUP 2018 , Jan . 7 – 10 , 2018 , Sanibel Island , FL , USA 201 When it comes to traceability , the narrative built using Notes facilitated to document the rationale of their design work ( e . g . what was done and why ) . The content recorded by the teams in the Notes reveals mostly convergence moments . Similarly , participants did not use Helaba to discuss their designs directly , but to record the topics and outcomes of their discussion . We illustrate this finding with a quote by T1 : “We selected [ to record ] the discussions that we thought that were important for the further design and the progress of the project” . [ T1 ; Task analysis ] . Divergent ideas were discussed either face - to - face or using synchronous communication tools , such as Facebook chat or Skype . Moreover , even though Notes are enabled as conversation hotspots ( e . g . for asynchronous communication ) , we found a limited amount of conversations – only 24 % of Notes had a conversation attached . Participants preferred using familiar communication tools ( e . g . Slack , Facebook chat ) , and recording the outcome of their conversations into Helaba . This tactic relates to the well - documented fact that recording design rationale can be overwhelming [ 12 ] , as reported by T4 : “We recorded some [ discussions ] on Helaba . However , since we discussed a great amount of it through Skype and face - to - face , it would be double work to add all what was said to Helaba . . . ” [ T4 ; Task analysis ] . To evaluate the utility of Helaba to capture design discussions , we asked participants about the type of information they registered in the system , how they registered it , and how often they recorded their team discussions . Participants reported that most of these discussions were recorded as Notes , and included a mixture between design alternatives , decisions , and upcoming tasks . The answers of participants , illustrated in Figure 6 , reflect on the proportion of discussions that students perceived to record ( as Notes ) across the different phases of the study . Figure 6 . Responses to the question : “How much of your team discussions during [ phase ] were recorded in Helaba ? ” mapped to the different phases of the UCD process . During the user analysis phase , four teams did not record any Note . The reason given by these teams for not creating Notes was that their conversations took place in a different setting ( e . g . face - to - face or other tool ) , and it seemed redundant to add their discussions to Helaba . However , there was a shift in the usage during the task analysis and low - fidelity prototype phases , as most teams added Notes actively . This finding shows that Notes were especially useful during convergence moments . In other words , where more dialog was required to create an artefact , more Notes were included , and more convergence moments were recorded . G2 : GATHER FEEDBACK IN A SHARED WORKSPACE The second guideline points out the need for sharing and receiving feedback from team members and stakeholders of the project in a shared workspace . We explored how Helaba facilitates traceability with a shared workspace organized around artefacts . Through the shared workspace , we found that teams used the system to gather feedback at two levels : internal feedback and external feedback . Participants reported using Helaba to record feedback when working in remote , asynchronous setting . This type of content was added to clarify or give feedback about the work done by the other team member . Thus , we refer to it as internal feedback . Notes were mostly used to record internal feedback , as they allowed pinpointing a comment to specific elements of the artefacts . For example , Student A uploaded a new version of an artefact , and added Notes to let Student B know what changes were made and where . In response , Student B added comments to these Notes to either accept the changes or give feedback about them ( see conversation threads in Figure 1 ) . Teams used the shared workspace actively to receive or record external feedback from clients , UX experts , and end - users . All teams reported discussing the feedback from external sources , and recording the outcomes that were used to guide the next iterations . Having a centralized space for capturing feedback from externals was especially relevant in the late stages of the project , when feedback gathered was used to retrospectively describe design choices ( e . g . write final report , defend choices with clients ) . Making decisions in line with previous knowledge generated during the project was facilitated by having information about previous stages and a log of “what others say” . For instance , this log was used to reflect on how the contribution of the stakeholders influenced the design process , as illustrated by T2 : “The discussions we had [ with the client ] were added to the artefact” [ T2 ; Lo - Fi Prototype ] We used the shared workspace for gathering feedback by asking the UX experts to use the tool for conducting their usability evaluations . A total of 465 Notes were created in the scope of these evaluations . Around 10 % of these Notes included a direct conversation between the teams and the UX experts to either clarify feedback or ask follow - up questions . This is more Notes and conversations than in any of the phases of the design process ( see Figure 5 ) . They focused on documenting enough information to make the evaluation as complete and useful as possible . The UX experts thought Helaba is a useful tool to understand the rationale of design Paper Session : Knowledge Sharing in ( Online ) Communities GROUP 2018 , Jan . 7 – 10 , 2018 , Sanibel Island , FL , USA 202 choices when contextualized by other explored alternatives . This information helped the UX experts to grasp the struggles of the participants and come up with meaningful feedback . After the usability evaluations took place , all teams reported to access frequently the comments of the UX experts to guide their work . This reflects on traceability for externals of the design process , who can be informed in an easy way of previous design choices using the system . G3 : ENABLE AWARENESS OVER ARTEFACT EVOLUTION The third guideline specifies that teams need to maintain awareness over artefact evolution and previous design decisions . We explored this guideline with the Lean repository and Decision cards features as they enabled participants to capture , retrieve , and revisit information from key points of the design process . For instance , as illustrated in a quote by T3 , participants used the information recorded to inform the next steps of their design work : “ [ We used Helaba to ] check on decisions / notes on low fidelity prototypes and use it to make decisions on how to create / design the high fidelity prototypes . ” [ T3 ; Hi - Fi prototype ] . Lean Repository for Coherence and Consistency All teams consistently mentioned that Helaba was useful as a repository to overview their project evolution . One of the strong points of our tool for participants was being able to organize different artefacts and versions together with annotations and decisions . This facilitated traceability as it enabled participants to retrieve artefacts and their rationale , make connections between different artefacts , and iterate them in a coherent way . The structure used to organize artefacts within Helaba was similar for all teams . For instance , the tasks created by participants were consistent with the stages of the UCD process : all teams had a specific task for each of the phases , with the exception of two groups who did not uploaded their high - fidelity prototype . The pre - defined structure ( i . e . projects , tasks , artefacts … ) allowed participants to organize files in a more intuitive and useful way than with other file storage services , such as Google Drive . The reason for this increased usefulness was that uploading artefacts together with annotations facilitated to be aware of the changes done by others , as mentioned by T4 : “If it was useful to put [ an artefact ] on Helaba for the team partner . Especially if not all changes were discussed or approved by the other” . [ T4 , Hi - Fi prototype ] To find out how participants selected what artefacts to upload ( or exclude ) from Helaba and why , we asked them to report the proportion of artefacts that they uploaded in each phase . As illustrated in Figure 7 , the participants uploaded to a considerable proportion of artefacts created during the different phases of the design process . This reflects on the fact that students became more proficient in using our tool , but also on that more artefacts were created during these phases . Figure 7 . Responses to the question : “How many of the artefacts you created for [ phase ] were recorded in Helaba ? ” mapped to the different phases of the UCD process . The participants defined a version as : ( 1 ) a new screen in the system , ( 2 ) a milestone where they reworked a screen thoroughly , ( 3 ) an artefact whose direction changed in a significant way , or ( 4 ) a finalized deliverable . Keeping record of a variety of versions facilitated to keep track of changes and their rationale over time . Decision Cards for Consensus and Milestones The Decision cards were useful to externalize team consensus in an explicit way . One core strength of Decision cards is that they supported teams to capture the agreements that emerged from their discussions , without influencing the reasoning process . In comparison to the Notes , participants felt compelled to reflect upon their design choices before creating a Decision card . In this way , while participants did not felt “forced” to record or address each of the decisions , they were cautious of what content they externalized as a decision . A reason for this is that consensus is not simple nor easy to articulate . Thus , participants created Decision cards only to capture what they perceived as a milestone in the process , as mentioned by T6 : “ We only made a Decision card of the hardest problem” [ T6 , Task analysis ] . When prompted to explain what information was recorded as a decision , participants mentioned that they captured in Decision cards those decisions that :  Were perceived as major and difficult  Involved several steps to be executed  Involved reworking large parts of the artefacts , such as entire screens  Documented intensive discussions  Included ideas to be explored in the next versions of the artefact  Resolved external feedback ( i . e . comments from UX experts or clients )  Had a larger impact in the overall design We asked participants to report the proportion of decisions recorded in Decision cards during each phase of the UCD Paper Session : Knowledge Sharing in ( Online ) Communities GROUP 2018 , Jan . 7 – 10 , 2018 , Sanibel Island , FL , USA 203 process . The responses to this question , depicted in Figure 8 , confirm that participants recorded a conservative proportion of decisions . For instance , four teams did not create any Decision card for the user analysis phase . However , these responses also show an increased interest in the Decision cards for design activities were team consensus is required to create a determinative artefact , such as in early prototyping phases . Figure 8 . Responses to the question : “How much of your decisions [ per phase ] were recorded in Helaba ? ” mapped to the different phases of the UCD process . What teams perceived as minor decisions remained implicit or were kept as Notes . Thus , the decisions included in the Decision cards are conscious reflections about the challenges and milestones of the ongoing design process . Having a combination of features to record annotations ( Notes and Decision cards ) led the participants to consider Helaba as a “repository of decisions” . What is more , the participants felt motivated to keep “good track” of decisions for traceability , as illustrated by T6 : “We wanted Helaba to be an extensive database of all our decisions [ for this phase ] , so we recorded all of them” . [ Hi - Fi prototype , T6 ] CORE ASPECTS TO SUPPORT TRACEABILITY IN CREATIVE DESIGN The way participants engaged with Helaba helped us to identify three core aspects to facilitate traceability in creative design : make and revisit a design narrative , display curated design artefacts , and integrate team contributions . Make and Revisit a Design Narrative Consistent guideline G1 , we introduced a flexible , artefact - based approach to document design rationale . Participants include narratives for the artefacts , “telling their story” throughout the different steps of the UCD process . The narratives situated the artefact with respect to the content that is captured by the artefact , as well as the process of design activities that lead to the artefact [ 30 ] . Consequently , all narratives included information about the design knowledge ( e . g . design rationale , decisions ) and teamwork coordination ( e . g . to do lists ) . The flexibility of Helaba helped participants to implement their own workflow within the UCD process , such as we intended to when designing the system . All teams applied an incremental and iterative working style , as is suggested by the UCD process . Helaba was used to structure and capture the subsequent iterations of their work , and helped them to refine gradually subsequent evolutions of the artefacts . The collection of previously documented knowledge became increasingly more valuable for the participants towards the end of the project . Especially when they had to motivate their decisions to both the stakeholders and the educational team . Two features were used for creating the narrative : Notes and Decision cards . The Notes served as diary for the project to document design knowledge associated with artefacts and convergence moments . As described by Lindley et al . [ 16 ] , annotated artefacts were used as a team memory . The participants considered the Notes as the core feature to make and contextualize the narrative of their design process . The reason for this was the strong association between Notes and artefacts , and the level of freedom that they provided to record information . The Decision cards were considered more suitable to record milestones in the project , but were less essential than Notes to build the narrative . Decision cards were also useful to reflect and articulate team consensus : teams often used them to capture important steps that have a significant influence on the evolution of the artefacts . The narratives created by the participants acted as emergent boundary objects , as proposed by Dalsgaard et al . [ 4 ] . In contrast to the original conception of boundary objects , the emergent characteristic of boundary objects indicates that they are “dynamically being transformed in collaborative practices” [ 4 ] . In this sense , the narratives were transformed across the different phases of the UCD process . Furthermore , the narratives aided to record temporary ideas , which helped concrete concepts to emerge in collaboration with others ( i . e . team members , clients , UX experts ) . Recording and being able to trace these emergent boundary objects was used to reflect on the process ( why a decision was taken , when a concept emerged… ) and justify decisions during and at the end of the project . Display Curated Design Artefacts Design activities typically produce a large quantity of artefacts , which has only increased because it has become so easy to create digital ones [ 29 ] . We found that instead of just uploading every source of inspiration and artefact created to Helaba , participants selected those that they considered meaningful to represent their process . In this way , all teams used the shared workspace to display a “curated” selection of the artefacts , which represented milestones shaped by team interactions . The lean repository of Helaba served as a canvas to organize the artefacts that were representative for the design process . Accordingly , participants used this feature to populate a coherent , albeit simplified , visual narrative of their process . As previous research [ 29 ] , we found that participants were more interested in reviewing the work of others to become Paper Session : Knowledge Sharing in ( Online ) Communities GROUP 2018 , Jan . 7 – 10 , 2018 , Sanibel Island , FL , USA 204 aware of their actions , than in revisiting their own work . Having a curated selection of artefacts was useful to ensure consistency and coherence in the process . Participants knew that the content in Helaba was relevant for both their team member and the process . In combination with the narrative , these artefacts helped to build a cohesive story of the project milestones over time . In this sense , as stated by design guideline G3 , it was vital for the success of the projects to enable awareness of the artefacts evolution among the team members . We believe that having a designated space to record the relevant “turns and twists” of the design process is useful to visualize the co - evolution of problems and solutions [ 5 ] . Being able to select those moments to record ( e . g . not enforcing the kind of artefacts or content to record ) , helped participants to record the “bursts of development” [ 5 ] and milestones of the project ( e . g . Decision cards ) , which is vital knowledge to produce and record when it comes to traceability [ 17 ] . Integrate Team Contributions Design guideline G2 highlights the importance of gathering feedback in a shared workspace . Including the point of view of different team members in a single workspace was a key aspect to support traceability during the study . We did not design Helaba to replace existing established communication tools , and as such , day - to - day communication happened in channels other than Helaba . Discussions happened most of the time in a face - to - face setting , with team members being present in the same location , or discussing issues using tools such as Slack or Skype when collaborating remotely . The shared artefact - centered workspace offered each team the tools to stay up - to - date with the work of each other . Participants collaborated in the system more actively in those phases where more dialog was required to reach a solution , where the problem spaces were larger , and where more unknowns required to be explored . By reviewing the work of others , participants engaged in an ongoing reflection , which helped them to think on solutions based on the content recorded in Helaba . Furthermore , the design knowledge they recorded helped participants to frame their activities to reflect on previous agreements and ideas ( e . g . retrospective thinking ) , and for finding new courses of action ( e . g . prospective thinking ) . The limited amount of discussions and conversations recorded puts forward the question of whether Helaba should include different sorts of communication channels ( e . g . chat , video ) . We argue that in a tool like ours , recording the design process must remain pivotal . The strength of the system was not that all conversations took place in there , but that it brought together different actors in one “designated” space to discuss crucial aspects about the design . This finding reflects on the commercial , off - the - shelf tools to support remote , multidisciplinary design work described earlier in the paper ( summarized in Appendix A ) . We believe these tools would benefit of features that help to record and scaffold the design process , instead of being comprehensive communication suits . Furthermore , forcing users to use one single communication tool instead of those already familiar and highly specialized , could result in reduced acceptance of the system . Traceability is better supported with communication based on artefacts , in a shared workspace where relevant design knowledge is easily accessible . We suggest that it would be interesting to let the user import information from different tools in a seamless way to avoid “double work” . For example , importing a decision that happen in an external chat application into Helaba , rather than copying or typing ( again ) an entire conversation . This will allow designers to create a curated information flow . LESSONS LEARNT ABOUT HELABA AND FUTURE WORK Recording design rationale is a particularly controversial task given the extra effort that it requires [ 12 ] . The minimal structure imposed by Helaba facilitated to create this record . However , the flexibility in systems such as ours also requires a strong support to warrant that user can add , organize , and retrieve content in an efficient way . In our study , participants decided freely when to record information in the system and the type of information to record in a curated manner . The flexibility and openness enabled by Helaba was fundamental for the participants of our study . Participants captured their design work with the granularity they felt appropriate , and felt free to change directions as required . This reflects of the fact that participants were able to adapt the tool to their own processes , rather than being limited to strict rules imposed by the system . Assessing the quality or creativeness in the outcomes of the participants’ projects was out of the scope of our study . However , we believe that the freedom offered by Helaba allowed participants of the study to focus on the creative aspects of the process , rather than on managing the process itself . Considering this context when discussing our results , it is worth to highlight the logic next step : validate the findings we present here with different design teams working in projects of diverse duration and level of complexity . We believe this study is a necessary first step towards understanding how to integrate traceability into the design process in professional settings , where teams have variable sizes and composition . We are certain that Helaba allowed each team to create a narrative of their process that was relevant and valuable for them , both visually and conceptually . Finally , we demonstrated that it is not required to have a systematic or formal approach to support traceability . Thus , we believe this is a first step towards offering tools that balance formal and creative approaches in user - centered design . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This research was supported by the COnCEPT project , funded by the European Commission 7th Framework ICT Research project ( no . 610725 ) . We would like to thank Gilbert Cockton for the insightful discussions and feedback on early drafts of this paper . Paper Session : Knowledge Sharing in ( Online ) Communities GROUP 2018 , Jan . 7 – 10 , 2018 , Sanibel Island , FL , USA 205 APPENDIX A REFERENCES 1 . Richard Buchanan . 1992 . Wicked Problems in Design Thinking . Design Issues 8 , 2 : 5 – 21 . 2 . Gilbert Cockton . 2014 . A Critical , Creative UX Community : CLUF . Journal of Usability Studies 10 , 1 : 1 – 16 . 3 . Peter Dalsgaard and Kim Halskov . 2012 . Reflective Design Documentation . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ' 12 ) , 428 – 437 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2318020 4 . Peter Dalsgaard , Kim Halskov , and Ditte Amund Basballe . 2014 . Emergent boundary objects and boundary zones in collaborative design research projects . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ' 14 ) , 745 – 754 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2598510 . 2600878 5 . Kees Dorst and Nigel Cross . 2001 . Creativity in the design process : co - evolution of problem - solution . Design Studies 22 , 5 : 425 – 437 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / s0142 - 694x ( 01 ) 00009 - 6 6 . Paul Dourish and Victoria Bellotti . 1992 . Awareness and Coordination in Shared Workspaces . In Proceedings of the ACM conference on Computer - Suported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ' 92 ) , 107 – 114 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 143457 . 143468 7 . Alexander Egyed . A scenario - driven approach to traceability . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Software Engineering ( ICSE ’01 ) , 123 – 132 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ICSE . 2001 . 919087 8 . Daniel Fallman . 2003 . Design - oriented human - computer interaction . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 03 ) , 225 – 232 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 642651 . 642652 9 . Bengt Göransson , Jan Gulliksen , and Inger Boivie . 2003 . The usability design process - integrating user - centered systems design in the software development process . Software Process Improvement and Practice 8 , 2 : 111 – 131 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / spip . 174 10 . Marisela Gutierrez Lopez , Mieke Haesen , Kris Luyten , and Karin Coninx . 2015 . Helaba : A system to highlight design rationale in collaborative design processes . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Cooperative Design , Visualization , and Engineering ( CDVE ' 15 ) 175 – 184 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 24132 - 6 _ 21 11 . Marisela Gutierrez Lopez , Mieke Haesen , Kris Luyten , and Karin Coninx . 2015 . Study and analysis of collaborative design practices . In Proceedings of the 4th Participatory Innovation Conference ( PIN - C ' 15 ) , 176 – 183 . 12 . John Horner and Michael E Atwood . 2006 . Design Rationale : The Rationale and the Barriers . In Proceedings of the Nordic conference on Human - https : / / www . conceptshare . com https : / / www . designdrop . io https : / / realtimeboard . com https : / / prevue . it http : / / notableapp . com http : / / www . govisually . com https : / / www . invisionapp . com http : / / www . useapollo . com https : / / www . fireflyapp . com http : / / conceptinbox . com https : / / wake . com http : / / redmark . com http : / / skwibl . com https : / / redpen . io https : / / conceptboard . com http : / / www . bounceapp . com Shared workspace Connected with external tools Track recent activities of the team Team and task management Annotations in artefact Synchronous / asynchronous communication File structure Version control / management Record decisions explicitly ConceptShare Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Notable No No Yes No Yes Yes Not clear No No Firefly No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Skwibl Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Designdrop No No Not clear No Yes Yes No Yes No Govisually Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Concept inbox Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Redpen Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes No Realtime board Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No InVision Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Wake Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Conceptboard Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Prevue Yes No Not clear Not clear Yes Yes Yes Not clear No Apollo No No No No Yes Yes No Yes No Redmark No No No No Yes Yes No Yes No Bounce No No No No Yes Yes No No No Shared workspace Artefact - based communication Awareness of artefact evolution Appendix A : Summary of ( commercial ) off - the - shelf design tools that have some kind of useful support for traceability . Paper Session : Knowledge Sharing in ( Online ) Communities GROUP 2018 , Jan . 7 – 10 , 2018 , Sanibel Island , FL , USA 206 computer interaction ( NordiCHI ' 06 ) , 341 – 350 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1182475 . 1182511 13 . Wendy Ju , Arna Ionescu , Lawrence Neeley , and Terry Winograd . 2004 . Where the wild things work : capturing shared phsyical design workspaces . In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ' 04 ) , 533 – 541 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1031607 . 1031696 14 . Xavier Lacaze and Philippe Palanque . 2007 . DREAM & TEAM : A tool and a notation supporting exploration of options and traceability of choices for safety critical interactive systems . In Proceedings of the 11th IFIP TC 13 International Conference On Human - Computer Interaction ( INTERACT ' 07 ) , 525 – 540 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 540 - 74800 - 7 _ 48 15 . Siân Lindley , Xiang Cao , John Helmes , Richard Morris , and Sam Meek . 2013 . Towards a tool for design ideation : insights from use of SketchStorm . Proceedings of theInternational BCS Human Computer Interaction Conference ( BCS - HCI ' 13 ) , Article 14 . 16 . Nada Matta , Myriam Ribière , Olivier Corby , Myriam Lewkowicz , and Manuel Zacklad . 2001 . Project memory in design . In Industrial Knowledge Management , Rajkumar Roy ( ed . ) . Springer , London , 147 – 162 . 17 . Mark Meagher , Kate Bielaczyc , and Jeffrey Huang . 2005 . OpenD : supporting parallel development of digital designs . In Proceedings of the Conference on Designing for User eXperience ( DUX ' 05 ) , Article 25 . 18 . Kannan Mohan and Balasubramaniam Ramesh . 2007 . Traceability - based knowledge integration in group decision and negotiation activities . Decision Support Systems 43 , 3 : 968 – 989 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . dss . 2005 . 05 . 026 19 . Pavković Neven , Štorga Mario , Bojčetić Nenad , and Dorian Marjanović . 2013 . Facilitating design communication through engineering information traceability . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering , Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 27 , 2 : 91 – 105 . 20 . Lora Oehlberg , Kyu Simm , Jasmine Jones , Alice Agogino , and Björn Hartmann . 2012 . Showing is sharing : building shared understanding in human - centered design teams with Dazzle . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ' 12 ) , 669 – 678 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2318057 21 . International Standards Organization . 2010 . ISO 13407 . Human Centred Design Process for Interactive Systems . Geneva , Swiss . 22 . Ipek Ozkaya and Omer Akin . 2007 . Tool support for computer - aided requirement traceability in architectural design : The case of DesignTrack . Automation in Construction 16 , 5 : 674 – 684 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . autcon . 2006 . 11 . 006 23 . James Pierce , Phoebe Sengers , Tad Hirsch , Tom Jenkins , William Gaver , and Carl DiSalvo . 2015 . Expanding and refining design and criticality in HCI . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 15 ) , 2083 – 2092 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702438 24 . Cecil Piya , Vinayak , Senthil Chandrasegaran , Niklas Elmqvist , and Karthik Ramani . 2017 . Co - 3Deator : A team - first collaborative 3D design ideation tool . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 17 ) , 6581 – 6592 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025825 25 . Colin Potts and Glenn Bruns . 1988 . Recording the Reasons for Design Decisions . In Proceedings of the International Conference On Software Engineering ( ICSE ' 88 ) , 418 – 427 . 26 . Donald A . Schön . 1983 . The Reflective Practitioner . Temple Smith , London . 27 . Jami J Shah , Dae K Jeon , Susan D Urban , Plamen Bliznakov , and Mary Rogers . 1996 . Database infrastructure for supporting engineering design histories . Computer - Aided Design 28 , 5 : 347 – 360 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0010 - 4485 ( 95 ) 00054 - 2 28 . Moushumi Sharmin and Brian P . Bailey . 2011 . Making sense of communication associated with artifacts during early design activity . In Proceedings of the 13th IFIP 13 TC International Conference on Human - computer Interaction ( INTERACT ' 11 ) . 181 – 198 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 23774 - 4 _ 17 29 . Moushumi Sharmin , Brian P Bailey , Cole Coats , and Kevin Hamilton . 2009 . Understanding knowledge management practices for early design activity and its implications for reuse . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 09 ) , 2367 – 2376 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1519064 30 . Joachim Stempfle and Petra Badke - Schaub . 2002 . Thinking in design teams - an analysis of team communication . Design Studies 23 , 5 : 473 – 496 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0142 - 694X ( 02 ) 00004 - 2 31 . Laurel Swan , Diana Tanase , and Alex S Taylor . 2010 . Design’s processional character . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ' 10 ) , 65 – 74 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1858171 . 1858186 32 . Antony Tang , Yan Jin , and Jun Han . 2007 . A rationale - based architecture model for design traceability and reasoning . Journal of Systems and Software 80 , 6 : 918 – 934 . 33 . Antony Tang , Peng Liang , Viktor Clerc , and Hans Van Vliet . 2011 . Traceability in the co - evolution of architectural requirements and design . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 21001 - 3 _ 4 34 . Shahtab Wahid , Stacy M Branham , Lauren Cairco , D Scott McCrickard , and Steve Harrison . 2009 . Picking Paper Session : Knowledge Sharing in ( Online ) Communities GROUP 2018 , Jan . 7 – 10 , 2018 , Sanibel Island , FL , USA 207 up artifacts : storyboarding as a gateway to reuse . In Proceedings of the 12th IFIP TC 13 International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction ( INTERACT ' 09 ) , 528 – 541 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 03658 - 3 _ 57 35 . Tracee Vetting Wolf , Jennifer A Rode , Jeremy Sussman , and Wendy A Kellogg . 2006 . Dispelling design as the “black art” of CHI . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ' 06 ) , 521 – 530 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1124772 . 1124853 36 . Oxford English Dictionary . 2017 . Traceable . Retrieved July 1 , 2017 from https : / / en . oxforddictionaries . com / definition / traceable Paper Session : Knowledge Sharing in ( Online ) Communities GROUP 2018 , Jan . 7 – 10 , 2018 , Sanibel Island , FL , USA 208