Associate editor : B . Teicher The Met receptor tyrosine kinase : A key player in oncogenesis and drug resistance Christiane R . Maroun ⁎ , Tracey Rowlands Mirati Therapeutics , 7150 Frederick - Banting , Suite 200 , Montreal , Quebec H4S 2A1 , Canada a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f o Keywords : Met HGF Biomarker Drug resistance Precision medicine Targeted therapy The Metreceptor tyrosine kinase ( RTK ) isanattractive oncologytherapeutictarget . Met and its ligand , HGF , play a central role in signaling pathways that are exploited during the oncogenic process , including regulation of cell proliferation , invasion , angiogenesis , and cancer stemcellregulation . Elevated Metand HGF aswellasnumerous Met genetic alterations have been reported in human cancers and correlate with poor outcome . Alterations of pathways that regulate Met , such as the ubiquitin ligase c - Cbl are also likely to activate Met in the oncogenic setting . Moreover , interactivecrosstalkbetweenMetandother receptors suchasEGFR , HER2andVEGFR , under - lies a key role for Met in resistance to other RTK - targeted therapies . A large body of preclinical and clinical data exists that supports the use of either antibodies or small molecule inhibitors that target Met or HGF as oncology therapeutics . The prognostic potential of Met expression has been suggested from studies in numerous cancers including lung , renal , liver , head and neck , stomach , and breast . Clinical trials using Met inhibitors indicate that thelevelofMetexpressionisadeterminantoftrialoutcome , a ﬁ ndingthatisactivelyunderinvestigationinmul - tipleclinicalscenarios . Research inMet prognostics and predictors of drug response isnow shifting toward more sophisticated methodologies suitable for development as validated and effective biomarkers that can be partnered with therapeutics to improve patient survival . © 2014 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Contents 1 . Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 2 . Biology of the Met receptor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 3 . Met in cancer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 4 . Drug development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 5 . Met biomarkers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 6 . Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 Con ﬂ ict of interest statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 Pharmacology & Therapeutics xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Abbreviations : ALK , Anaplasticlymphomakinase ; AML , Acutemyeloidleukemia ; Bid , Twicedaily ; CI , Con ﬁ denceinterval ; CRPC , Castration - resistantprostatecancer ; CSC , Cancerstem cell ; DCR , Diseasecontrolrate ; EGFR , Epidermalgrowthfactorreceptor ; EMT , Epithelial – mesenchymaltransition ; ERK / MAPK , Extracellularsignal - regulatedkinase / Mitogen - activatedpro - tein kinase ; FGFR , Fibroblast growth factor receptor ; FISH , Fluorescent in situ hybridization ; Gab1 , Grb2 - associated binding protein ; Grb2 , Growth factor receptor - bound protein ; HCC , Hepatocellular carcinoma ; HER2 , Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 ; HGF / SF , Hepatocyte growth factor / scatter factor ; HNSCC , Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma ; HR , Hazard ratio ; IHC , Immunohistochemistry ; MIT , Microphthalmia transcription factor - associated tumor ; MITF , Microphthalmia transcription factor ; MTC , Medullary thyroid carcinoma ; NSCLC , Non - smallcelllungcancer ; ORR , Overallresponse rate ; OS , Overallsurvival ; PCR , Polymerasechainreaction ; PDGFR , Platelet - derivedgrowthfactorreceptor ; PET , Positron emis - siontomography ; PFS , Progression - free survival ; PI3K , Phosphatidylinositol3 ′ kinase ; PR , Partialresponse ; PTP1B , Proteintyrosinephosphatase 1B ; Qd , Oncedaily ; RCC , Renalcellcarci - noma ; RNA , Ribonucleicacid ; RTK , Receptortyrosinekinase ; SD , Stabledisease ; SEMA , Semaphorin ; TPR , Translocatedpromoterregion ; VEGF , Vascularendothelialgrowthfactor ; VEGFR , Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor . ⁎ Corresponding author . Tel . : + 1 514 337 3333x352 . E - mail address : marounc @ MIRATI . COM ( C . R . Maroun ) . JPT - 06646 ; No of Pages 23 0163 - 7258 / $ – see front matter © 2014 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2013 . 12 . 014 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Pharmacology & Therapeutics journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / pharmthera Please cite this article as : Maroun , C . R . , & Rowlands , T . , The Met receptor tyrosine kinase : A key player in oncogenesis and drug resistance , Pharmacol . Ther . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2013 . 12 . 014 1 . Introduction The practice of oncology is undergoing a paradigm shift toward pre - cision medicine . Understanding of the molecular pathways involved in cancer has been exploited to develop treatments tailored to the molec - ular pro ﬁ le of the individual patient . Receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) are ideal targets for this approach as they are frequently key drivers of tumorigenesis . Of particular interest is the Met RTK which plays a cen - tral role in epithelial tissue remodeling and morphogenesis and is deregulated in cancer . Met was identi ﬁ ed as a prognostic marker in many cancers including lung , renal , liver , head and neck , stomach and breast , and elucidation of the oncogenic potential of Met led to the development of therapeutic agents targeting receptor activation , there - by delaying tumor progression and improving clinical outcomes in pa - tients . However , challenges remain as to the identi ﬁ cation of tumors most likely to respond to Met activity blockade . Thus , focusing on the development of validated biomarkers to drive utilization and effective - ness of Met - based interventions in cancer management is an unmet need . This review discusses the current status of Met prognostic and therapeutic research in oncology . 2 . Biology of the Met receptor 2 . 1 . Structure and expression patterns in normal state Met belongs to a family of RTKs that share sequence and structural homology and includes Ron , the receptor for macrophage stimulating protein , and Sea , a Ron homologue expressed in chicken tissues ( Huff et al . , 1993 ; Gaudino et al . , 1994 ) . The high af ﬁ nity ligand of Met is the hepatocyte growth factor / scatter factor ( HGF / SF ) , a plasminogen - related growth factor involved in epithelial tissue remodeling and cell migration ( Bottaro , 1991 ; Naldini et al . , 1991a , b ) . While HGF is expressed by cells of mesenchymal origin , Met is predominantly expressed in cells of epithelialorigin , aswell asin endothelial cells , neu - ronalcells , melanocytes , hematopoieticprogenitors , and alsoB cells and antigen - presenting dendritic cells ( Beilmann et al . , 1997 ; van der Voort et al . , 1997 ; Organ & Tsao , 2011 ) . The Met receptor is a 190 kDa glycoprotein heterodimer consisting of an amino - terminal extracellular 45 kDa α - chain and a membrane spanning 145 kDa β subunit ( Fig . 1 ) . The β subunit is composed of extracellular semaphorin ( SEMA ) and immunoglobulin - like ( Ig - like ) domains separated by a Plexin , Semaphorin and Integrin cysteine - rich ( PSI ) domain ( Gherardi et al . , 2012 ) . The SEMA – PSI domain was shown to provide a binding site for the α - chain of the ligand HGF ( Merchant et al . , 2013 ) . The Met transmembrane domain is followed by a juxtamembrane domain containing a key tyrosine residue ( Y1003 ) involved in Met downregulation and an intracellular portion containing the catalytic kinase domain ( Peschard et al . , 2001 ) . A carboxy - terminal multisubstrate docking site recruits signaling adap - tors and effectors following receptor activation ( Gherardi et al . , 2012 ) . 2 . 2 . Hepatocyte growth factor / Met mediated signaling 2 . 2 . 1 . Met signaling Met - mediated signaling has recently been reviewed in detail ( Trusolino et al . , 2010 ; Organ & Tsao , 2011 ) . Brie ﬂ y , under normal cir - cumstances ligand - mediated homodimerization / oligomerization results in autophosphorylation of kinase domain tyrosine residues Y1234 and Plasma membrane HGF Met Shc PI3K Cbl PLC γ Crk STAT3 SHP2 PP PP PP PP P P Y1234 Y1235 Y1349Y1356 Y1003 Gab1 P P P P Grb2 Angiogenesis Met negative regulation Cell Survival Transformation Invasion Migration Branching Morphogenesis Proliferation Akt / PKB Erk / MAPK Ras Met negative regulation Grb2 Sema PSI Ig - like 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 JM TK TK MBD Motility Branching Morphogenesis Fig . 1 . HGF / Met mediated signaling and biological activities . Following HGF - mediated dimerization and autophosphorylation of the Met receptor , signaling proteins are recruited to the carboxy - terminal docking site , either directly or indirectly through Grb2 and Gab 1 . This leads to activation of downstream pathways such as Erk / MAPK and Akt / PKB , and translates into biological responses such as cell transformation , survival , migration , dispersal , proliferation , and angiogenesis . Cbl : ( Casitas B - lineage Lymphoma ) E3 ubiquitin - protein ligase ; Crk : ( CT10 regulator of kinase ) adaptor protein ; Gab1 : Grb2 - associated binding protein ; Grb2 : growth factor receptor - bound protein 2 ; PI3K : phosphatidylinositol 3 ′ kinase ; PLC γ : phospho - lipase C γ ; Ras : ( Rat sarcoma ) small GTPase ; SHIP1 : Src homology 2 - containing inositol 5 - phosphatase 1 ; Shc : Src homology 2 domain - containing protein ; SHP2 : Src homology domain 2 ( SH2 ) - containing tyrosine phosphatase ; Src : tyrosine - protein kinase CSK ; STAT3 : signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 . Ig - like 1 – 4 : immunoglobulin - like domains 1 – 4 . 2 C . R . Maroun , T . Rowlands / Pharmacology & Therapeutics xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Maroun , C . R . , & Rowlands , T . , The Met receptor tyrosine kinase : A key player in oncogenesis and drug resistance , Pharmacol . Ther . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2013 . 12 . 014 Y1235 ( Fig . 1 ) , followed by phosphorylation of carboxy - terminal tyro - sines , mainly Y1349and Y1356 , providingdockingsitesforsignalingpro - teins that are essential for Met - mediated biological activities ( Rodrigues & Park , 1994 ; Zhu et al . , 1994 ; Kamikura et al . , 1996 ; Organ & Tsao , 2011 ; Gherardi et al . , 2012 ) . Signaling proteins directly or indirectly recruited to the phosphorylated docking site include the growth factor receptor - bound protein 2 ( Grb2 ) adaptor , the non - receptor tyrosine ki - nase Src , Src homology 2 domain - containing ( Shc ) adaptor protein , the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3 ′ kinase ( PI3K ) , phospholipase C γ ( PLC γ ) , tyrosine phosphatase SHP2 , Src homology 2 - containing inositol 5 - phosphatase 1 ( SHIP1 ) , signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 ( STAT3 ) and the multisubstrate docking protein Grb2 - associated bind - ingprotein ( Gab1 ) ( Ponzettoet al . , 1993 , 1994 ; Fixmanetal . , 1995 , 1996 ; Boccaccio et al . , 1998 ; Stefan et al . , 2001 ) . When phosphorylated , Gab1 links Met to signaling proteins such as SHP2 , p85 - PI3K , PLC γ and the adaptor protein Crk , and promotes the activation of the Erk / MAPK and Akt / PKB pathways ( Holgado - Madruga et al . , 1996 ; Maroun et al . , 1999 , 2000 ; Lamorte et al . , 2002 ) . Although Gab1 also signals downstream from other RTKs , its interaction with Met is unique in terms of mode of recruitment and phosphorylation kinetics . In addition to its indirect re - cruitment to Met through Grb2 , Gab1 can directly bind to docking site Y1349 ( Lock et al . , 2000 , 2003 ) . Thus , unlike the transient Gab1 signals generated following epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) activation and leading to proliferation , Met activation induces prolonged and sustained Gab1 phosphorylation required for Met - induced branching tubulogenesis , an inherent morphogenic program of kidney , breast , and lung epithelia ( Maroun et al . , 2000 ; Lock , Maroun et al . , 2002 ) . In non - tumorigenic cells , HGF - mediated Met activation is a tightly controlled process . Met is internalized by endocytosis , leading to locali - zation to multivesicular bodies and degradation . This process involves ubiquitination of Met which is mediated by the E3 ubiquitin ligase c - Cbl . c - Cbl is recruited to Met - Y1003 in the juxtamembrane domain and mediates ubiquitin transfer to Met . This provides ubiquitin recogni - tion motifs for the recruitment of Met to multivesicular bodies and ef ﬁ - cient signal termination following Met degradation ( Peschard & Park , 2003 ) . Met signaling is also attenuated by tyrosine - speci ﬁ c phospha - tases , including protein - tyrosine phosphatase 1B ( PTP1B , known as PTPN1 ) , T - cell phosphatase ( TCPTP / PTPN2 ) , and density enhanced pro - tein tyrosine phosphatase - 1 ( DEP - 1 ) ( Palka et al . , 2003 ; Sangwan , Paliouras et al . , 2008 ) . Deregulation of these pathways occurs in cancers and has been shown to contribute to the oncogenic potential of Met ( further discussed below ) . 2 . 2 . 2 . Interactions of Met with other partners SignalingthroughMetrarelyoccursinisolation . Multipleinteractions with other cell membrane proteins serve to adapt signaling amplitude and duration . Moreover , these interactions could diversify signals to achieve distinct biological outputs . Cooperation with integrins , class B Plexins and CD44 variants have recently been reviewed ( Lai et al . , 2009 ; Organ & Tsao , 2011 ) ( Fig . 2A ) . Both HGF - dependent and indepen - dent mechanisms have been invoked . Integrin clustering at the cell sur - face results in HGF - independent Met phosphorylation ( Wang et al . , 1996 ) . Furthermore , Met has been shown to interact with integrin α 6 β 4 inaHGF - dependentmanner , resultinginintegrinphosphorylation and enhanced invasion . The synergy between certain integrins and Met can be mediated in part by the focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) upon phos - phorylation by Met ( Chen & Chen , 2006 ) . Another signi ﬁ cant partner that regulates Met biological responses is the CD44 family which bridges extracellular matrix components to cytoskeletal reorganization ( Fig . 2b ) . CD44 bound to extracellular a ) b ) c ) d ) Fig . 2 . Interactions between Met and other membrane receptors . a ) HGF - dependent association of Met with integrin α 6 β 4 leads to phosphorylation of the β 4 cytoplasmic domain and enhancedinvasion . b ) CD44boundtoextracellularheparin sulfate acts asa co - receptor to present HGFtoMet leadingto Metphosphorylation . ActivatedMet leadsto downstream acti - vation ofthe Raspathwayvia recruitment of theactin - bindingproteinsezrin , radixin , moesinto the CD44intracellular domain and enhancedmigration and proliferation . c ) Interaction betweenthesemaphorin - like domainson MetandclassBplexinsleadsto semaphorin - dependent , butHGF - independentactivationofbothMetandplexin . d ) Transactivationalcooper - ationbetweenMetandreceptortyrosinekinasesincludingHER2 , Axl , Ron , ErbB3andEGFRcontributestothedevelopmentofresistancetotargetedtherapiesbyenhancementofdown - stream pathways such as Akt and ERK / MAP kinase . In addition , HGF - independent synergistic activation is observed between Met and EGFR and indirecttransactivation of EGFR by Met occursvia theupregulationofEGFR ligandsbyMet - drivenpathways . PI3K : phosphatidylinositol3 ′ kinase ; Shc : Srchomology2domain - containingprotein ; ERM ; ezrin , radixin , moesin ; Sema : semaphorin - like domain ; EGF : epidermal growth factor ; TGF : transforming growth factor . 3 C . R . Maroun , T . Rowlands / Pharmacology & Therapeutics xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Maroun , C . R . , & Rowlands , T . , The Met receptor tyrosine kinase : A key player in oncogenesis and drug resistance , Pharmacol . Ther . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2013 . 12 . 014 heparinsulfate can act as aco - receptor presentingHGF to Met ( Lai etal . , 2009 ) . Following Met activation a CD44 variant ( CD44v6 ) promotes in - tracellular complex formation between Met binding partners and ezrin , radixin and moesin resulting in ef ﬁ cient downstream activation of the Ras pathway ( Orian - Rousseau , Morrison et al . , 2007 ) . The collaboration of Met and CD44 is thought to support the metastatic process in cancer cell lines , and functional signi ﬁ cance of this interaction was demon - strated in synaptogenesis in vivo in mouse models ( Matzke et al . , 2007 ) . Met has been shown to associate with the class B Plexin family of transmembrane proteins leading to semaphorin - dependent activa - tion / phosphorylation of both Met and Plexin and resulting in enhanced migration and invasion ( Lai et al . , 2009 ; Trusolino et al . , 2010 ) . This HGF - independent function has been attributed to the presence of a SEMA domain in the extracellular portion of Met which is homologous to the SEMA domain in plexins and provides a means of association of thesecollaborators . UndercertaincircumstancesligandbindingtoPlexin B ( SEMA4D binding to Plexin B1 ) leads to Met phosphorylation andacti - vation of small GTPases like Rac , to enhance invasion ( Giordano et al . , 2002 ) ( Fig . 2c ) . Key functional interactions occur between Met and other RTKs ( Fig . 2d ) . Met and EGFR are frequently co - expressed and have been shown to functionally cooperate during kidney development ( Ishibe et al . , 2009 ) . Met can be transactivated following EGFR activation , in the absence of HGF , and simultaneous activation of Met and EGFR is synergistic ( Puri & Salgia , 2008 ) . The interaction of Met with other RTKs including Ron , Axl and members of the EGFR and VEGFR families has been revealed in multiple systems and is involved in the regulation of oncogenic pathways and the manifestation of resistance to targeted therapies ( Sections 3 . 3 and 3 . 4 below ) . 2 . 3 . Hepatocyte growth factor / Met biological activities During normal development , HGF / Met signaling is central to tissue remodeling and morphogenic differentiation . Multiple genetic ablation models including conditional knock outs revealed that Met is essential for placental and liver development as well as migration of myogenic precursor cells ( Schmidt et al . , 1995 ; Uehara et al . , 1995 ; Ebens et al . , 1996 ) . The Met pathway also plays a critical role in organ regeneration and wound healing as supported by increased HGF levels in patients with liver or renal failure , or following tissue damage such as liver cir - rhosis and renal ﬁ brosis ( Tsubouchi et al . , 1991 ; Kawaida et al . , 1994 ; Nakamura et al . , 2000 ) . An underlying Met - driven mechanism in the processes of tissue remodeling and morphogenic differentiation is the transient epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) . This process is characterized by loss of epithelial differentiation , cell dispersal and mi - gration as well as the degradation of extracellular matrix . In the context of Met - driven cancer , tight regulation of these events is lost leading to invasion and metastasis ( Baum et al . , 2008 ; Lim & Thiery , 2012 ) . Met is also implicated in angiogenesis and the regulation of endothelial cell function . In multiple models , activation of Met resulted in the induction of pro - angiogenic factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) , and the cooperation with VEGFR2 pathways correlated with early onset of tumor formation ( Dong et al . , 2001 ; Saucier et al . , 2004 ) . Met is expressed in cells of hematopoietic origin and dendritic cells , and plays a role in the regulation of immune functions . In B cells , Met is implicated in cell homing to lymph nodes , and in monocytes , in trigger - ing an invasion program ( Beilmann et al . , 1997 ; van der Voort et al . , 1997 ; Galimi et al . , 2001 ) . Met activation was associated with downreg - ulationofdendriticcell ( DC ) functionsandimmuneresponsesinseveral models including allergic airway in ﬂ ammation , collagen - induced ar - thritis and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis . In these stud - ies , Met activation caused inhibition of antigen presentation by DCs , decreases inin ﬁ ltratingin ﬂ ammatory cells and Tcell activationmarkers along with increases in Tregs and IL - 10 production ( Okunishi et al . , 2005 ; Benkhoucha et al . , 2010 ) . However , in other studies , activation of Met in skin - resident DCs was necessary for the migration of DCs to draining lymph nodes , consistent with the roles of Met in cell motility and invasion ( Baek et al . , 2012 ) . It is possible that the role of Met and HGF in the regulation of immune functions is distinct in different dis - ease / circumstance settings and further studies are required to reconcile these observations . 3 . Met in cancer 3 . 1 . Met alterations associated with cancer HGF / Met alterations leading to deregulation of downstream signal - ing are major contributors to tumorigenesis and cancer progression ( Christensen et al . , 2005 ) . Met was discovered as the TPR – MET onco - gene resulting from chromosomal rearrangement between sequences encoding the translocated promoter region ( tpr ) and the MET kinase domain in chemically transformed human osteogenic sarcoma cells ( Cooper et al . , 1984 ) and subsequently identi ﬁ ed in gastric tumor cell lines and biopsy samples ( Soman et al . , 1991 ) . Since then , numerous Met alterations including driver mutations have been reported in human cancers , and are suggested to contribute to oncogenic progres - sion ( Christensen et al . , 2005 ; Sattler & Salgia , 2009 ; Van Andel Institute , 2013 ) ( Table 1 ) . 3 . 1 . 1 . Met mutations Met mutations , although rare , are detected across the different Met domains . Present in all hereditary papillary renal cell carcinoma ( RCC ) , mutations are also detected in a subset of sporadic papillary RCC , child - hood hepatocellular carcinoma ( HCC ) , gastric , head and neck , breast , and ovarian carcinomas , in addition to non - small cell lung cancer ( NSCLC ) ( Schmidt et al . , 1997 , 1999 ; Park et al . , 1999 ; Lee et al . , 2000 ; Ma et al . , 2005 , 2008 ; Seiwert et al . , 2009a , b ; Ludovini et al . , 2012 ) . 3 . 1 . 1 . 1 . Kinase domain mutations . Germline and somatic missense muta - tions ( including Y1230C / H / D , Y1235D , M1268T ) were the ﬁ rst identi - ﬁ ed in papillary RCC ( Schmidt et al . , 1997 , 1999 ) . These mutations were linked with the development of hereditary papillary RCC and have been functionally characterized in multiple cellular settings ( reviewed in Goetsch & Caussanel , 2010 ) . While kinase domain muta - tions could stabilize Met in an active conformation , leading to constitu - tively elevated kinase activity , the activation of these mutants was also shown to be HGF - dependent ( Michieli et al . , 1999 ) . More recently , kinasedomain mutations ( D1246N , M1268T ) were related to enhanced Met traf ﬁ cking in papillary RCC cell lines , increased accumulation of Met in the recycling endosomal compartments and avoidance of lyso - somal degradation which resulted in enhanced Met signaling and cell migration ( Joffre et al . , 2011 ) . Distinct kinase domain mutants drive different signaling pathways ( Giordano et al . , 2000 ) . These observations were corroborated in in vivo ﬁ ndings demonstrating that expression of the M1248T kinase mutant in C57BL / 6J mice led to carcinomas and lymphomas whereas expression of D1226N , Y1228C , and combined M1248T / L1993V was as - sociated mainly with sarcomas and lymphomas ( Graveel et al . , 2004 ) . More recently , expression of the highly active M1248T / L1993V in the FVB / N murine background led to aggressive mammary carcinoma with similar features to basal breast cancer , whereas expression of the same mutations in the C57BL / 6J background did not cause mammary tumors , suggesting not only that different mutations can drive the de - velopment of distinct cancers but also can be in ﬂ uenced by genetic modi ﬁ ers ( Graveel et al . , 2010 ) . Tyrosine kinase domain mutations were also described in childhood HCC and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma ( HNSCC ) ( Park et al . , 1999 ; Di Renzo et al . , 2000 ) , where the Y1253D activating point mutation was associated with shorter metastasis - free survival ( Ghadjar et al . , 2009 ) . 3 . 1 . 1 . 2 . Juxtamembrane domain mutations . Mutations in the Met juxtamembrane domain have been reported in lung cancer , HNSCC , 4 C . R . Maroun , T . Rowlands / Pharmacology & Therapeutics xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Maroun , C . R . , & Rowlands , T . , The Met receptor tyrosine kinase : A key player in oncogenesis and drug resistance , Pharmacol . Ther . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2013 . 12 . 014 gastric cancer , and melanoma ( Lee et al . , 2000 ; Ma et al . , 2003 ; Ma et al . , 2005 ; Puri et al . , 2007 ; Maet al . , 2008 ; Seiwert et al . , 2009a , b ) . Mutation of Y1003 , the binding site for c - Cbl involved in the downregulation of Met signaling , was associated with increased Met phosphorylation in NSCLC and melanoma tumor tissue and a cytoplasmic expression pat - tern suggestive of constitutive activation ( Ma et al . , 2005 ; Tretiakova , Salama et al . , 2011 ) . Another mutation is R988C - Met which induced morphological changes when expressed in ﬁ broblasts , concomitant with increased phosphorylation of Met downstream targets ( Ma et al . , 2003 ) . In addition , a Met alternative splice variant resulting in the deletion of exon 14 within the juxtamembrane domain was detected in approximately 3 % of NSCLC patients and resulted in the loss of the juxtamembrane c - Cbl binding site ( Seo et al . , 2012 ) . Although insuf ﬁ - cient to drive transformation , these alterations cause functional gains in Met signaling . 3 . 1 . 1 . 3 . Extracellular domain mutations . Mutations in the extracellular domain were reported in a number of tumors , including melanoma , lung , breast , and ovarian cancers ( Ma et al . , 2008 ) . Mutations in the SEMAdomain were described in lungcancer . Of these , the N375S muta - tion was most frequently detected in squamous cell carcinoma , male smokers and East Asian patients . This mutation , believed to be a germline polymorphism , is associated with decreased af ﬁ nity for HGF and sensitivity to small - molecule inhibitors ( Krishnaswamy et al . , 2009 ) . No difference in postoperative survival was observed between patients with or without the N375S mutation in a recent prognosis study . However , since a decrease in the sensitivity of the N375S to Met inhibition was observed , further analyses in clinical settings are needed ( Shieh et al . , 2013 ) . 3 . 1 . 2 . Gene ampli ﬁ cation and high gene copy number In preclinical models , MET ampli ﬁ cation is one of the most sensitiz - ing alterations to Met blockade strategies ( Smolen et al . , 2006 ; Lutterbach et al . , 2007 ) . MET ampli ﬁ cation was detected in NSCLC , gas - tric carcinoma , esophageal carcinoma , medulloblastoma , and glioblas - toma ( Table 1 ) . In lung adenocarcinoma , multiple studies indicate a correlationbetween MET ampli ﬁ cationand poor prognosisandsurvival , although MET ampli ﬁ cation in the absence of resistance to EGFR inhibi - tion is a rare event ( reviewed in Cappuzzo et al . , 2009 ; Go et al . , 2010 ; Toschi & Cappuzzo , 2010 ; Chen et al . , 2011 ; Tanaka et al . , 2012 ) . Addi - tionally , high MET gene copy number ( polysomy ) is also associated with poor outcome in NSCLC ( Beau - Faller et al . , 2008 ; Okuda et al . , 2008 ; Park et al . , 2012 ) . A correlation between increased MET gene copy number and high protein expression was observed supporting ligand - independentMetactivation ( Dziadziuszkoetal . , 2012 ) . Ingastric cancer , MET ampli ﬁ cationisreported with frequencies rangingbetween 2 % and 24 % ( Table 1 ) , and there was a lower survival rate for patients with elevated MET copy number ( Christensen et al . , 2005 ; Smolen et al . , 2006 ; Lennerz et al . , 2011 ; Lee et al . , 2012 ; Kawakami et al . , 2013 ) and in colorectal cancer , the frequency of MET ampli ﬁ cation in - creased signi ﬁ cantly following progression to metastatic disease , sug - gesting a role for gene ampli ﬁ cation in the induction of invasive phenotype ( Di Renzo et al . , 1995 ) . It is noticeable that studies to date have reported a variable rate of MET ampli ﬁ cationintumorspecimens . This maybedueinpart todiffer - ences in genetic background , but is likely also related to the different methods used to detect ampli ﬁ cation ( FISH versus PCR for example ) , and / or the lack of consistentcriteria for de ﬁ ninga high degree of ampli - ﬁ cation . Itis noteworthy that onestudyshowed a lack of MET ampli ﬁ ca - tion in tumors from 38 patients analyzed by ﬂ uorescent in situ hybridization ( FISH ) , although 29 % ( 11 / 30 ) of tumor specimens did demonstrate high MET polysomy , high levels of Met mRNA and protein expression ( Janjigian et al . , 2011 ) . Differing ratio cutoffs have been used for MET copies to Chromosome 7 controls such as CEP7 , and in some studies MET polysomy is used as an indication for high MET copy num - bers ( Ou et al . , 2011b ) . Thus , a MET / CEP7 ratio N 2 . 2 indicating “ true ” MET ampli ﬁ cation may be predictive of clinical responses , but not MET polysomy in the absence of homogenously staining regions ( HSR ) . This is supported by preclinical and early clinical studies suggesting that sensitivity to Met agents ( PF - 2341066 and PHA - 665752 ) is depen - dent on the level of MET ampli ﬁ cation ( Smolen et al . , 2006 ; Lennerz et al . , 2011 ; Barretina et al . , 2012 ) . Table 1 Most common Met alterations in selected human cancers . Cancer Met alterations Met protein overexpression HighHGF expression Point mutations Gene ampli ﬁ cation / highcopy number Lung 14 % – 61 % NSCLC ( Ma et al . , 2005 , 2008 ; Park et al . , 2012 ) 25 % – 67 % adenocarcinoma ; 57 % SCC ( Christensen et al . , 2005 ; Ma et al . , 2005 ) NSCLC ( Christensenetal . , 2005 ; Van Andel Institute , 2013 ) 4 % NSCLC ( Ludovini et al . , 2012 ) JuxtamembraneandSemadomain — NSCLC ( Sadiq & Salgia , 2013 ) 2 % – 21 % gene ampli ﬁ cation , 9 % polysomy in NSCLC ( Beau - Faller et al . , 2008 ; Okuda et al . , 2008 ; Cappuzzo et al . , 2009 ; Toschi & Cappuzzo , 2010 ; Park et al . , 2012 ) Head and neck 52 % – 68 % HNSCC ( Christensen et al . , 2005 ) HNSCC ( Kim et al . , 2007 ) Kinase domain — 3 % HNSCC ( Seiwert et al . , 2009a ) ; 26 % – 50 % HNSCC metastases ( Di Renzo et al . , 2000 ; Lorenzato et al . , 2002 ) Juxtamembrane and Sema domain — 9 % ( Seiwert et al . , 2009a ) Gastric 24 % – 46 % gastric carcinoma ( Christensen et al . , 2005 ; Lee et al . , 2012 ) 87 % intestinal type gastric carcinoma ( Wu et al . , 1998 ) Juxtamembrane domain — gastric carcinoma ( Lee et al . , 2000 ) 2 % – 24 % ( 38 % type IV ) gastric carcinoma ( Christensen et al . , 2005 ; Lennerzet al . , 2011 ; Lee et al . , 2012 ; Kawakami et al . , 2013 ) 16 % high chromosome 7 polysomy gastric carcinoma ( Lee et al . , 2012 ) Colorectal 50 % colorectal cancer ; 70 % metastases ( Di Renzo et al . , 1995 ; Christensen et al . , 2005 ) 10 % colorectal cancer ; 89 % metastases ( Di Renzo et al . , 1995 ; Christensen et al . , 2005 ) Kidney 90 % – 100 % papillary , 100 % collectingduct , 92 % urothelial , 78 % clear cell ( Christensen et al . , 2005 ; Choi et al . , 2006 ) Clear cell RCC ( Tanimoto et al . , 2008 ) Kinase domain — 100 % hereditary papillary RCC ( Schmidt et al . , 1997 ) 13 % sporadicpapillaryRCC ( Schmidtetal . , 1999 ) Chromosome7trisomy ( Christensenetal . , 2005 ) 20 % carcinoma ( Christensen et al . , 2005 ) Kinase domain — 30 % childhood HCC ( Park et al . , 1999 ) HCC : hepatocellular carcinoma ; HGF : hepatocyte growth factor ; HNSCC : head and necksquamous cell cancer ; NSCLC : non - small cell lung cancer ; RCC : renal cell carcinoma . 5 C . R . Maroun , T . Rowlands / Pharmacology & Therapeutics xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Maroun , C . R . , & Rowlands , T . , The Met receptor tyrosine kinase : A key player in oncogenesis and drug resistance , Pharmacol . Ther . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2013 . 12 . 014 3 . 1 . 3 . Increased protein expression Increased Met expression is reported in many human tumors in - cluding NSCLC and hepatocellular carcinoma ( HCC ) and correlates with poor prognosis ( short overall and disease - free survival ) . Elevated Met levels were associated with tumor aggressiveness in basal breast tumors and estrogen receptor / progesterone receptor / human EGFR re - ceptor 2 ( HER2 ) - negative ( triple - negative ) tumors ( Graveel et al . , 2009 ; Ponzo et al . , 2009 ) . High levels of Met expression were also de - tected in HER2 positive cancers ( Paulson et al . , 2013 ) . Consistently , in colorectal cancer , Met was overexpressed in 50 % of primary tumors , and in 70 % of metastases , suggesting a selection process in favor of an invasive and highly proliferative phenotype associated with Met over - expression ( Di Renzo et al . , 1995 ; Christensen et al . , 2005 ) . The direct consequence of Met overexpression was assessed in a cell culture model , where Met overexpression induced malignant transformation of primary human osteoblasts into osteosarcoma , potentially due to ligand - independent receptor clustering leading to receptor dimeriza - tion / oligomerization , and activation ( Patane et al . , 2006 ) . In the absence of gene ampli ﬁ cation , Met overexpression can be me - diatedbytranscriptionalregulation . Thisisobservedduringhypoxiafol - lowing induction by hypoxia inducible factor ( HIF - 1 α ) and alterations in transcription factors such as Ets and Sp1 , or repressors such as micro RNAs including miR - 1 , miR - 34 , and miR - 449a promote enhanced cell invasion ( Gambarotta et al . , 1996 ; Boon et al . , 2002 ; Pennacchietti et al . , 2003 ; Migliore et al . , 2012 ) . The wnt / β catenin pathway was also shown to affect Met expression in colorectal cancer models ( Boon et al . , 2002 ) . While elevated Met expression has been consistently shown to be prognostic in many settings and indications , there is more limited data to support the predictive value of elevated Met ex - pression . Ongoing late - phase clinical investigations with Met - targeted agents will provide insight into the clinical relevance and functional value of high levels of Met expression . 3 . 1 . 4 . Increased ligand expression Highlevels of HGF were detected in plasmaand tumors of cancers of various origins including NSCLC , HNSCC , gastric , and clear cell RCC , in addition to breast cancer , acute myeloid leukemia ( AML ) , osteosarco - ma , melanoma , and glioma and have been associated with poor patient outcome and resistance to targeted therapy ( Jin et al . , 1997 ; Kentsis et al . , 2012 ; Van Andel Institute , 2013 ) . In mammary epithelial cells , it was shown that increased HGF expression was mediated by transcrip - tional activation involving STAT3 and c - Src ( Wojcik et al . , 2006 ) . HGF can also be co - expressed with Met in cancer cells forming an autocrine receptor activation loop . Co - expression of HGF and Met has been de - scribed in 50 % of AML tumor samples , and also in breast carcinoma , os - teosarcoma and melanoma ( Kentsis et al . , 2012 ; Van Andel Institute , 2013 ) . Autocrine activation of Met can drive the metastatic process as demonstrated when HGF and Met co - overexpressing NSCLC cells were implanted orthotopically in nude rats leading to development of sponta - neous metastases to the bone , brain and kidney ( Navab et al . , 2009 ) . HGF isfrequentlyco - expressedwithMetinglioblastoma ( GBM ) andininvivo GBMmodels , autocrineMetactivationprecludedsensitivitytoMetinhib - itors ( Koochekpour et al . , 1997 ; Xie et al . , 2012 ) . Thus , the levels of HGF expression in tumor tissues may be relevant for predicting clinical responsestoMet - targetedagents . Thisissupportedinareportwhereret - rospectivedemonstrationofstromalHGFexpressionwaslinkedwithim - proved clinical responses in patients treated with ﬁ clatuzumab , an anti - HGF in development ( discussed in Section 4 . 1 . 2 ) . 3 . 1 . 5 . Met activation gene signatures To further understand the mechanisms through which Met activa - tion regulates cancer development and progression , gene expression pro ﬁ les were analyzed in multiple settings . In HCC , gene expression pro ﬁ les were compared between primary wild - type Met - expressing and Met - de ﬁ cient hepatocytes . This signature of Met transcriptional targets was consistent with roles in oxidative stress response , cytoskeletal reorganization , motility , and angiogenesis and was linked through comparative functional genomics to a cohort of HCC samples including liver metastases specimens ( Kaposi - Novak et al . , 2006 ) . Clus - ter analyses showed that a subset of the samples sharing this signature corresponded to patients with increased vascular invasion and microvessel density , decreased mean survival and presence of liver me - tastases ( Kaposi - Novak et al . , 2006 ) . Interestingly , this activation signa - ture was recently applied to a dataset from patients with breast cancer , and segregated signi ﬁ cantly with tumors corresponding to the basal subtype , identifying patients with poor outcome . The signi ﬁ cance of Met in basal subtype breast cancer was further supported by immuno - histochemistry analyses showing increased levels of Met expression and activation as detected using phospho - speci ﬁ c Met antibodies . Furthermore , coexpression of Met with the EMT regulator , SNAIL , was a predictor of poor outcome ( Ponzo etal . , 2009 ) . Ina differenttransgen - ic mouse model with a breast - targeted activated Met variant ( M1248T , Y1003F / M1248T ) and conditional loss of p53 , the gene expression sig - nature corresponded to a subset of triple - negative breast cancers with a “ claudin - low ” signature consistent with EMT . Met inhibition in this model reversed the EMT phenotype , restored claudin expression and cell – cell junctions and reduced metastatic tumor growth suggesting that Met activity was associated with an aggressive phenotype . These studieswerecorroboratedinbreastcancerpatientswherecoexpression of Met and missense TP53 in ER / PR negative patients was associated withpoorpatientoutcome ( Knightetal . , 2013 ) . Inadditiontoproviding insights into Met - dependent oncogenic pathways and disease progres - sion such studies supported the development of Met - targeted agents in selected indications . 3 . 1 . 6 . Alterations of other pathways affecting Met activation MolecularalterationsinothercomponentsmayadditionallyaffectMet activation status . As described above , Met phosphorylation / activation is regulated by phosphatases ( Palka et al . , 2003 ; Sangwan et al . , 2008 ) . Therefore , loss - of - function of Met - targeted phosphatases may lead to en - hanced Met activation as has been demonstrated for the tyrosine kinases EGFR and HER2 in a recent study where loss of PTPN12 was associated with mammary epithelial cell proliferation and transformation and RTK activation ( Sun et al . , 2011 ) . In the case of PTP1B , it was also shown that lossofthisphosphatasealteredMettraf ﬁ ckingtothelateendosomalcom - partment , and delayed Met degradation resulting in sustained Met activa - tion and downstream MAP kinase signaling pathway ( Sangwan et al . , 2011 ) . Met activation was also shown to be regulated by glycosylation . Overexpression of the core 1 β 1 , 3 - galactosyltransferase ( C1GALT1 ) result - edinenhancedHGF - mediatedcellproliferationbyamechanisminvolving enhanced Met - dimerization which was reversed by Met blockade using a small molecule Met inhibitor . C1GALT1 was frequently found to be overexpressed in HCC , correlated with advanced disease stage and pre - dicted poor survival . Such studies suggest that RTKs including Met may be mediating oncogenic functions of C1GALT1 ( Wu et al . , 2013 ) . Mutations within the E3 ubiquitin ligase c - Cbl have been character - ized in lung cancer and may be signi ﬁ cant for the regulation of Met ac - tivity . As mentioned above , Met signaling can be sustained in the absence of downregulation and degradation through c - Cbl . Eight so - matic mutations were discovered upon sequencing coding regions of c - CBL , three were located with the tyrosine kinase binding domain and the remaining distributed in the RING ﬁ nger , the proline rich and the c - terminal domains ( Tan et al . , 2010 ) . These mutations were not mutually exclusive with Met mutations and when tested ( for example Q249E ) , conferred increased cell viability and motility , consistent with results observed upon c - Cbl knockdown . Loss of heterozygosity ( LOH ) at the c - CBL locus on chromosome 11 was also detected in several tumor samples ( Tan et al . , 2010 ) . Since multiple alternate pathways can directly affect the status of Met activation , it will be intriguing to monitor these pathways , such as the loss of relevant phosphatases or mutations in c - Cbl , in clinical trials to evaluate a potential for predicting response to Met - targeted agents . 6 C . R . Maroun , T . Rowlands / Pharmacology & Therapeutics xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Maroun , C . R . , & Rowlands , T . , The Met receptor tyrosine kinase : A key player in oncogenesis and drug resistance , Pharmacol . Ther . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2013 . 12 . 014 3 . 2 . Met in cancer stem cells Consistent with its involvement in tumorigenesis , Met is activated and overexpressed in cancer stem cells ( CSCs ) , a highly clonogenic and invasive subset of cancer cells involved in cancer initiation and progression ( Boccaccio & Comoglio , 2006 ) . In prostate cancer , immuno ﬂ urescence staining revealed that Met was co - expressed with stem - like markers in the invasive cell front ( van Leenders et al . , 2011 ) . Furthermore , high HGF and Met expression levels were detected in stem - likecellsand promoted cell proliferation inanautocrineand para - crine manner which was inhibited using anti - HGF antibody ( Nishida et al . , 2013 ) . In another study , HGF stimulation of prostate cancer cells induced the expression of a stem - like signature and a stem cell pheno - type whichwasblocked by Met small - molecule inhibitors SU11274and PHA665752 ( van Leenders et al . , 2011 ) . A similar association between Met expression and cancer stem cells phenotype was observed in a mousemodel of basal - like breastcancer , where constitutive Met activa - tion resulted in the loss of differentiation of mammary luminal progen - itor cells and acquisition of a stem cell - like phenotype ( Gastaldi et al . , 2013 ) . Met is highly expressed in pancreatic CSCs and co - expression of Met and CD44 promoted tumor formation in a mouse model , a response thatwasblocked by Met inhibitors ( Liet al . , 2011 ) . In glioblas - toma - isolated CSCs , studies using short hairpin RNA demonstrated a role for co - expressed Met and HGF in the maintenance of stemness and an invasive phenotype ( Joo et al . , 2012 ) . Moreover , in in vivo GBM xenograft models , inhibition of Met either using an anti - HGF anti - body or the Met - targeted small molecule inhibitor , crizotinib , resulted in a decrease in the expression of stem cell markers such as CD133 , Sox2 and Nanog . Along with a decrease in tumor growth , treatments with these anti - Met agents also resulted in the depletion of tumor cells with self - renewal and sphere - forming ability ( Rath et al . , 2013 ) . Thus , given the involvement of Met in cancer stem cell self - renewal and propagation , and the contribution of these cells to tumor heteroge - neity and resilience to multiple therapies including radiotherapy , targeting Met may offer a therapeutic avenue in this indication , and identi ﬁ cation of Met alterations , diagnostic indicators of patients most likely to respond ( Boccaccio & Comoglio , 2013 ) . 3 . 3 . Met involvement in resistance to cancer treatments In addition to its role as an oncogenic driver , increasing evidence implicates Met as a common mechanism of resistance to targeted therapies including approved EGFR and VEGFR inhibitors . MechanismsofresistancetoEGFRinhibitortherapieshavebeenwell characterizedparticularly in NSCLCpatients ( Lin & Bivona , 2012 ) . While the T790M “ gatekeeper ” mutation in the EGFR kinase domain is a pre - dominant mechanism of resistance , activation of alternate pathways play key roles in a subset of patients ( 20 % for upregulation of Met path - way ) ( D ' Arcangelo & Cappuzzo , 2013 ) . TheactivationofMet - dependent signaling pathways as a consequence of MET ampli ﬁ cation or upregula - tion of HGF expression was coupled with resistance to EGFR inhibitors ( Beanet al . , 2007 ; Engelmanetal . , 2007 ; Yano et al . , 2008 , 2011 ) . Mech - anisms mediating this resistance involve transactivation of HER3 and downstream PI3K / Akt , and could be reversed upon Met inhibition ( Bean et al . , 2007 ; Engelman et al . , 2007 ; Tang et al . , 2008 ) . In other studies , HGFcontributedtoresistancetoEGFRtherapiesviarecruitment to the EGFR complex of other metastasis promoting RTKs such as Axl and EphA2 , thus bypassing EGFR inhibition and leading to enhanced survival ( Gusenbauer et al . , 2013 ) . HGF - mediated Met activation was also shown to play a role in resistance to irreversible EGFR inhibitors ( Yamada et al . , 2010 ) . These data provide a rationale for treatment of patients who progress on EGFR therapies and display MET ampli ﬁ cation or increased HGF expression , with anti - Met agents . Interestingly , it was demonstrated that a MET - ampli ﬁ ed subpopulation of cells existed prior to anti - EGFR therapy supporting upfront co - treatment of patients with Met and EGFR therapies ( Turke et al . , 2010 ) . Further support comes from preclinical experiments showing that co - treatment with anti - Met and EGFR inhibitors signi ﬁ cantly enhanced tumor growth inhibi - tion and caused regression ( Bon ﬁ ls et al . , 2012 ; Wang et al . , 2012 ) . The involvement of Met in resistance to EGFR inhibition has recently been extended to colorectal carcinoma where MET ampli ﬁ cation was associated with resistance to cetuximab and panitumumab ( Bardelli et al . , 2013 ) . Taken together these results provide a strong rationale for the use of Met inhibitors to overcome drug - resistance to EGFR therapies . A role for Met in resistance to anti - HER2 therapies was suggested in multiple models . High gene copy number of MET and HGF correlated strongly with poor outcome and resistance to trastuzumab in HER2 - positive metastatic breast cancer ( Minuti et al . , 2012 ) . Preclinical exper - iments indicated that trastuzumab - resistant HER2 - positive breast cancer cell lines and primary tumors also exhibit elevated expression of Met and HGF ( Shattuck et al . , 2008 ) . Furthermore , Met blockade using RNA interference or small - molecule inhibitor SU11274 inhibited phosphorylation / activation of Erk and Akt and sensitized cells to anti - HER2 treatment , suggesting that activated Erk and Akt were involved in Met - mediated resistance to trastuzumab ( Shattuck et al . , 2008 ) . Ad - ditional evidence from gastric cancer models further indicate Met and ensuing Erk and Akt activation as a mechanism of resistance to the EGFR / HER2 inhibitor lapatinib ( Chen et al . , 2012 ) . It is now well established that crosstalk between the Met and VEGFR pathways supports tumor vascularization and progression . Met interacts with VEGFR2 to promote robust endothelial branching tubulogenesis , as well as growth and survival in in vitro and in vivo models . This process involves the upregulation of multiple genes including cytokines , chemokines and other signal transduction effectors ( Gerritsen et al . , 2003 ) . Additionally , stimulation of Met and VEGFR2 synergistically acti - vates the Erk and p38 pathways . However , while Met and VEGFR2 both activate FAK , the kinetics as well as cytoskeletal remodeling medi - ated by small GTPases Rho and Rac is distinct ( Sulpice et al . , 2009 ) . Im - portantly , Met – VEGFR pathway interactions are implicated in the emergence of resistance to anti - VEGFR2 therapies . In glioblastoma , an initial response to the VEGF antibody bevacizumab is transient and often followed by radiographic progression attributed to resistance to this anti - angiogenic therapy ( Bergers & Hanahan , 2008 ) . Gene expres - sion studies comparing primary glioblastoma to bevacizumab - treated tumors revealed MET as one of the most upregulated genes . Moreover , in a bevacizumab - resistant glioblastoma model genetic ablation of Met reversed resistance and reduced tumor cell invasion and survival ( Jahangiri et al . , 2013 ) . Thus , Met activation is implicated in the upregu - lation of alternate pathways that help evade VEGFR2 inhibition and re - sult in increased vascularization , invasiveness and metastasis ( Ebos et al . , 2009 ; Paez - Ribes et al . , 2009 ) . Data from several preclinical models suggestedthatMetupregulationbothintumorcellsandendothelialcells is related to vascular pruning , hypoxia and elevation of hypoxia - inducible factor Hif1a . In these models , dual blockade of Met and VEGFR2 using small molecule inhibitors or antibodies reduced metasta - sis and improved survival compared to single pathway blockade ( You et al . , 2011 ; Sennino et al . , 2012 ) . The upregulation of Met as a consequence of VEGFR2 inhibition was also observed in lymphatics in RIP - Tag2 transgenic mice , driving lymphangiogenesis and providing a mechanism for lymph node metastases . Combined inhibition of Met and VEGFR2 with selective agents reversed lymph node metastasis in this model ( Sennino et al . , 2013 ) . Interestingly , a novel hypoxia - independent but anti - VEGF - dependent pathway leading to Met activa - tion was recently described ( Lu et al . , 2012 ) . In this model , PTP1B ( PTPN1 ) was recruited to a Met / VEGFR2 complex in a VEGF - dependent manner resulting in the inhibition of Met phosphorylation , and theabro - gation of Met - dependent activities including tumor cell migration . In contrast , Met activationresulted as aconsequence of VEGF ablationlead - ing to increased invasiveness , along with corresponding changes in markers of EMT . This response was reversed upon Met knockdown ( Lu et al . , 2012 ) . Importantly , in clinical samples from GBM patients treated 7 C . R . Maroun , T . Rowlands / Pharmacology & Therapeutics xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Maroun , C . R . , & Rowlands , T . , The Met receptor tyrosine kinase : A key player in oncogenesis and drug resistance , Pharmacol . Ther . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2013 . 12 . 014 with bevacizumab , Met phosphorylation correlated with mesenchymal markers such as vimentin and CD44 and moreover , signi ﬁ cantly higher levels of mesenchymal markers were associated with bevacizumab - resistant tumors ( Lu et al . , 2012 ) . Together these results suggested that targeting simultaneously the Met and VEGFR pathways represents a promising approach to cancer treatment by directly targeting multiple pathways involved in angiogenesis , tumor survival and metastasis . Met activation was identi ﬁ ed as one of the alternate pathways asso - ciated with resistance to the BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib , which targets the BRAF activating mutant V600E , in melanoma ( Chapman et al . , 2011 ) . Exogenous stimulation of melanoma cells with HGF resulted in resistance to vemurafenib in vitro and in vivo ( Straussman et al . , 2012 ; Wilson et al . , 2012 ) . Furthermore , in patient - derived melanoma cell lines in which MET ampli ﬁ cation and activation is an underlying mechanism of primary resistance to vemurafenib , genetic ablation of MET together with BRAF inhibition ef ﬁ ciently reduced cell growth and invasion ( Vergani et al . , 2011 ) . Importantly , stromal HGF expression in patients with mutant BRAF correlated with Met phosphorylation / activation and primary resistance to vemurafenib ( Straussman et al . , 2012 ) . Themechanismsinvolved inprimary resistancetoBRAF inhibition include Erk / MAPK and PI3K / Akt activation and were described both in cancer cell lines and patient - derived melanoma cells ( Straussman et al . , 2012 ; Wilson et al . , 2012 ) . It has become clear that RTK activation drives alternate pathways as a common mechanism of resistance to targeted therapies . While activa - tion can be achieved through gene ampli ﬁ cation or increased protein expression , recent studies have further dissected the role of ligand - mediated activation of RTKs in the emergence of drug resistance ( Harbinski et al . , 2012 ; Wilson et al . , 2012 ) . Using high - throughput screening of a cDNA library for secreted proteins , it was shown that Met , HER family receptors , and ﬁ broblast growthfactor family receptors ( FGFR ) compensate for each other through ligand - mediated activation of redundant downstream pathways regulating cancer cell growth and survival ( Harbinskietal . , 2012 ) ( Fig . 2d ) . Consistentwiththese ﬁ ndings , Met and HER2 were found to contribute to emerging resistance to the FGFR inhibitor AZ8010 in HNSCC ( Singleton et al . , 2013 ) . Thus , knock - down or drug inhibition of Met and HER2 resulted in sensitization of cells to AZ8010 ; further , optimal inhibition of cancer cell growth was obtained with triple combination of Met , HER2 , and FGFR inhibitors ( Singleton et al . , 2013 ) . In additiontoits role in resistance totargeted therapies , Methas also been implicated in resistance to systemic chemotherapy ( Guryanova & Bao , 2011 ) . For example , Metexpression waselevated in HNSCC tumors following cisplatin treatment , and Met - positive HNSCC cells demon - strated increased metastasis ( Sun & Wang , 2011 ) . In cervical cancer cell lines , cisplatin - induced Met expression was observed and mediated by platelet - derived growth factor α ( PDGFR α ) activation ( Kina et al . , 2013 ) . Alternatively , in ovarian cancer cells , increased Met expression mediated through downmodulation of the Met repressor miR - 31 induced resistancetotaxanes ( Mitamuraet al . , 2013 ) . Metis also thought to play a role in resistance to radiation therapy ( Ganapathipillai et al . , 2008 ) . In ﬁ broblast cultures , activation of Met resulted in DNA repair signaling . In cancer cell lines radiation induced the upregulation of Met transcription , Met overexpression and activation , radioresistance and in - creased invasiveness . In this context , Met inhibition with small molecule inhibitors ( PHA665752 or JNJ - 38877605 ) reestablished cell sensitivity to radiation ( De Bacco et al . , 2011 ) . 3 . 4 . Mechanisms of resistance to Met inhibitors Met - targeted agents are currently undergoing clinical trials with early evidence of activity , which will undoubtedly be accompanied by an increased interest in mechanisms of resistance to these agents . Potential mechanisms of resistance to Met - targeted agents have been identi ﬁ ed in preclinical assessments . In gastric carcinoma cells ( Met - dependent GTL16 cells ) exposed to increasing doses of Met - selective inhibitors ( PHA - 665752 or JNJ38877605 ) the underlying mechanism of resistance was ascribed to MET ampli ﬁ cation with subsequent ampli - ﬁ cation and overexpression of KRAS ( Cepero et al . , 2010 ) . Met mutation in the activation loop ( Y1230H ) has been associated with resistance to Met inhibitors ( PHA - 665752 and PF - 2341066 ) ( Qi et al . , 2011 ) . This mutation causes a conformational change to destabilize the Met auto - inhibitory conformation , leading to persistent Met phosphorylation , and preventing Met interaction with inhibitors . Overexpression of this mutant in carcinoma cells was suf ﬁ cient to drive resistance to Met in - hibitors ( Qi et al . , 2011 ) . In the same study , an alternate mechanism of resistance to Met inhibition involved the activation of EGFR following an elevation in the expression of its ligand , transforming growth factor α ( TGF α ) . In this context , inhibition of both Met and EGFR was required for ef ﬁ cient inhibition of cell viability ( Qi et al . , 2011 ) . Increased HGF expression resulting in Met activation via an auto - crine or paracrine loop may create a compensatory effect leading to Met - targeted drug resistance . In AML cells , drug resistance to a Met - selective inhibitor ( crizotinib ) was linked to upregulation of HGF expression and restoration of Met signaling ( Kentsis et al . , 2012 ) . In cells where Met was co - expressed with an altered FGFR , knockdown of FGFR1 prevented HGF upregulation in response to chronic crizotinib treatment , and combinationof Met and FGFRinhibition ( withcrizotinib and PD173074 , respectively ) synergized to overcome crizotinib resis - tance ( Kentsis et al . , 2012 ) . Taken together , these data suggest that re - sistance to Met inhibition involves multiple mechanisms including upregulation of Met - mediated signals , mutations in the Met kinase do - main , and upregulation of alternative pathways involving other RTKs such as EGFR and FGFRs , the latter providing potential for combination of targeted therapies for improved clinical responses . Although clinical data on mechanisms of resistance to Met therapies is scarce , a recent case report documented disease recurrence in a meta - static gastric cancer patient treated with onartuzumab after an initial complete response that lasted two years ( Catenacci et al . , 2011 ) . This pa - tient exhibited MET polysomy and a particularly high level of circulating HGF which signi ﬁ cantly diminished upon treatment with onartuzumab . Analyses aimed at the identi ﬁ cation of a mechanism for the recurrence revealed a lack of MET ampli ﬁ cation , and evidence for a potential in - crease in Met expression ( Catenacci et al . , 2011 ) . Additional studies showed transient KRAS ampli ﬁ cation which was not sustained at the time of recurrence ( Catenacci et al . , 2011 ) . Thus , the molecular mecha - nismforresistancetotheMettherapyinthispatientremainstobedeter - mined . However , as clinical trials with Met agents progress , it will be critical to ensure collection of tumor samples at the time of progression to investigate molecular basis of resistance , to help design future trials aiming for success . 4 . Drug development Several drugs that target HGF / Met , including both antibodies and small molecule inhibitors have reached clinical evaluation or shown promise in preclinical models ( Table 2 ) . Antibodies targeting either HGF or Met prevent the ligand – receptor interaction and consequently impact downstream Met signaling . Small molecule inhibitors are generally designed to target the active site of the receptor , inhibiting phosphorylation and recruitment of signaling effectors . Sub - classes were suggested based on the small molecule chemotype and binding mode to the Met kinase ( Dussault & Bellon , 2009 ) . Class I inhibitors are believed to be ATP - competitive inhibitors of the activated kinase , interact with Y1230 and as a consequence are generally weak inhibitors of Met Y1230 mutants . Class II inhibitors are also ATP - competitive but interact in a more extended conformation engaging additional residues in the ki - nase domain available upon conformational changes ( Dussault & Bellon , 2009 ; Underiner et al . , 2010 ) . A third unique mode of action was identi - ﬁ ed for the non - ATP competitive inhibitor tivantinib ( ARQ197 ) that binds to an inactive Met conformation , favoring stabilization of the recep - tor in an auto - inhibited conformation ( Eathiraj et al . , 2011 ) . 8 C . R . Maroun , T . Rowlands / Pharmacology & Therapeutics xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Maroun , C . R . , & Rowlands , T . , The Met receptor tyrosine kinase : A key player in oncogenesis and drug resistance , Pharmacol . Ther . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2013 . 12 . 014 4 . 1 . Ef ﬁ cacy and safety results from Phase II and III clinical trials 4 . 1 . 1 . Small - molecule inhibitors 4 . 1 . 1 . 1 . Crizotinib . Crizotinib is a multi - targeted receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor that inhibits Met , anaplastic lymphoma kinase ( ALK ) and ROS1 . This drug was approved for treatment of NSCLC patients who express an altered form of ALK ( EML4 - ALK ) , after a rapid and focused development path , culminating in a Phase III trial that showed marked improvements in ef ﬁ cacy outcomes for patients on crizotinib mono - therapy , as compared with standard second - line chemotherapy ( Shaw etal . , 2013 ) ( Table3 ) . Patientswhoreceivedcrizotinibhadasigni ﬁ cant - ly longer median progression - free survival ( PFS ) ( 7 . 7 months vs 3 . 0 months chemotherapy ; P b . 001 ) , and higher overall response rate ( 65 % vs 20 % ; P b . 001 ) ( Shaw et al . , 2013 ) . Crizotinib maintained supe - riority versus each cytotoxic agent in separate subgroup analyses ( Solomon et al . , 2013 ) and signi ﬁ cantly greater improvement in quality of life measures were observed among patients treated with crizotinib versus those treated with chemotherapy ( Hirsh et al . , 2013 ) . Common side effects among patients who received crizotinib were mild vision disorders , diarrhea and nausea ( Shaw et al . , 2013 ) , although cases of asymptomatic profound sinus bradycardia have also been documented ( Ou et al . , 2011 ) . In addition , there is a case report of a patient who de - veloped fatal severe acute interstitial lung disease after crizotinib thera - py ( Tamiya et al . , 2013 ) . Although the primary focus of crizotinib has been on the ALK target , substantial data supports its role as a Met - targeted agent . In preclinical studies , crizotinibselectivelyinhibitedMet , andpotentlyinhibitedHGF - stimulated endothelial cell survival or invasion in vitro ( Zou et al . , 2007 ) . In vivo , the drug also reduced tumor burden and survival in a xe - nograft model of ovarian cancer metastasis ( Zillhardt et al . , 2010 ) . Re - cently it was reported that a patient with advanced squamous cell carcinoma ( SCC ) experienced a major partial response on crizotinib monotherapy regime ( Schwab et al . , 2013 ) . This tumor was Met - ampli ﬁ ed in the absence of ALK or ROS1 expression , supporting the po - tential of crizotinib as a Met - targeted therapeutic in this indication . Ret - rospective analyses in clinical samples from patients with NSCLC and GBM also support the clinical activity of crizotinib in MET - ampli ﬁ ed patients ( see Section 5 . 1 ) . Ongoing trials including the Phase II CREATE trialwillassessbothALKandMetmutationsinothertumortypesinclud - ing anaplastic large cell lymphoma , papillary RCC and soft tissue sarco - mas . Crizotinib is also in development for treatment of NSCLC expressing the target ROS1 ( U . S . National Institutes of Health , 2013 ) . 4 . 1 . 1 . 2 . Cabozantinib . Cabozantinib is an orally bioavailable tyrosine kinase inhibitor targeting Met , VEGFR2 , RET , Kit and Flt3 , currently approved for the treatment of patients with progressive , metastatic medullary thyroid carcinoma ( MTC ) ( Exelixis Inc . , 2013 ) . The ef ﬁ cacy of cabozantinib was ﬁ rst demonstrated in a Phase I trial in patients with metastatic differentiated thyroid cancer ( Cabanillas et al . , 2012 ) and a subsequent Phase III trial showed signi ﬁ cant anti - tumor ef ﬁ cacy of cabozantinib in a subset of thyroid carcinomas characterized by fre - quent RET mutations ( Schoffski et al . , 2012 ; Sherman et al . , 2013 ) . In pa - tients with radiographically progressive MTC , cabozantinib monotherapy signi ﬁ cantly prolonged PFS compared to placebo ( 11 . 2 - months vs 4 . 0 months ; hazard ratio [ HR ] 0 . 28 ; P b . 001 ) ( Table 3 ) , and PFS improvement was reported for all RET mutation subgroups ( heredi - tary or sporadic ) ( Elisei et al . , 2013 ) . Overall tumor response was report - ed in 28 % of patients ( 0 % in placebo group ) , over a median duration of 14 . 6 months ( Elisei et al . , 2013 ) and the most frequent adverse events were diarrhea , hand – foot syndrome , decreased weight , decreased appe - tite , nausea and fatigue ( Schoffski et al . , 2012 ) . While RET is a known driver in MTC , cabozantinib is also under in - vestigation in other tumor types where coverageof Met may bea signif - icant determinant of ef ﬁ cacy . Interestingly , signi ﬁ cant tumor regression and resolution of bone metastases was demonstrated in multiple tumor types in a Phase II randomized discontinuation trial of cabozantinib 100 mg monotherapy including a cohort of patients with metastatic castration - resistant prostate cancer ( CRPC ) . In this cohort , cabozantinib treatment resulted in partial response in 5 % of patients at the end of the 12 - week lead - in phase , and disease control rate ( DCR ) was 66 % ( Smith et al . , 2013 ) ( Table 3 ) . Median PFS was 23 . 9 weeks ( 95 % CI : 10 . 7 – 62 . 4 ) for 14 patients subsequently assigned to cabozantinib , compared with 5 . 9 weeks ( 95 % CI : 5 . 4 – 6 . 6 ) for placebo patients ( Smith et al . , 2013 ) . Follow - up analyses reported median overall survival ( OS ) of 10 . 8months ( 95 % CI : 9 . 1 – 13 . 0 ) for all CRPC patients treated with cabozantinib and Table 2 Drugs targeting HGF / Met . Drug Company Molecular targets Small molecule inhibitors Crizotinib ( Xalkori ; PF - 02341066 ) P ﬁ zer Met , ALK , ROS1 Cabozantinib ( Cometriq , XL184 ) Exelixis Met ; VEGFR2 , VEGFR - 1 , and - 3 , RET , KIT , TRKB , FLT - 3 , AXL , and TIE - 2 Tivantinib ( ARQ197 ) Arqule Inactive or unphosphorylated c - Met Foretinib ( GSK1363089 ; XL880 ) GSK / Exelixis Met ; VEGFR2 ; KIT , Flt - 3 , PDGFR β , Tie - 2 INC280 ( formerlyINCB28060 ) Novartis Met Golvatinib ( E7050 ) Eisai c - Met , VEGFR - 2 MGCD265 MethylGene Met , VEGFR 1 , 2 , 3 , Axl LY - 2801653 Eli Lilly Met , MST1R , FLT3 , AXL , MERTK , TEK , ROS1 , DDR1 / 2 , MKNK1 / 2 AMG 208 Amgen Met AMG 337 Amgen Met EMD 1214063 Merck Serono Met MK - 8033 Merck Met ; Ron ASLAN002 ( BMS - 777607 ) ASLAN Pharmaceuticals Met , Axl , Ron , Tyro3 Volitinib ( HMPL - 504 ) Hutchison Medipharma Limited Met MK - 2461 Merck Met , FGFR , PDGFR MSC2156119J Merck Met Sar125844 Sano ﬁ Met Tas 115 Taiho Met / VEGFR Antibodies Onartuzumab ( MetMab ) Genentech ( Roche ) Met Rilotumumab ( AMG102 ) Amgen HGF Ficlatuzumab ( AV - 299 ) Aveo HGF TAK - 701 Takeda Pharmaceuticals Co HGF LY - 2875358 Eli Lilly Met ABT - 700 AbbVie Met ARGX111 arGEN - x Met 9 C . R . Maroun , T . Rowlands / Pharmacology & Therapeutics xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Maroun , C . R . , & Rowlands , T . , The Met receptor tyrosine kinase : A key player in oncogenesis and drug resistance , Pharmacol . Ther . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2013 . 12 . 014 Table 3 Targeted Met inhibitors — results of Phase II and III clinical trials . Drug Phase Population Intervention Ef ﬁ cacy outcomes Main adverse events Progression - free survival , median ( 95 % CI ) Overall survival , median ( 95 % CI ) Response rate , % Crizotinib III Locally advanced or metastatic ALK - positive lung cancer ( Shaw et al . , 2013 ) Crizotinib 250 mg oral bid vs chemotherapy ( pemetrexed or docetaxel ) Months : Crizotinib : 7 . 7 Chemotherapy 3 . 0 Crizotinib : HR for death : 1 . 02 ( 0 . 68 – 1 . 54 ) ; P = . 54 Crizotinib : 65 % ( 58 – 72 ) Chemotherapy : 20 % ( 14 – 26 ) ; P b . 001 Visual disorder , gastrointestinal side effects , and elevated liver aminotransferase levels Cabozantinib III MTC with documented radiographic disease progression ( Elisei et al . , 2013 ) Cabozantinib 140 mg oral qd vs placebo Months : Cabozantinib : 11 . 2 Placebo : 4 . 0 HR : 0 . 28 ( 0 . 19 – 0 . 40 ) ; P b . 001 ( 1 - year PFS rate : 47 . 3 % vs 7 . 2 % placebo ) Data not mature ORR Cabozantinib : 28 % Placebo : 0 % ; P b . 001 ( median duration of response 14 . 6 months ) Diarrhea , hand – foot syndrome , decreased weight , decreased appetite , nausea , fatigue , dysgeusia , hair color changes Cabozantinib II Metastatic CRPC ( Scher et al . , 2013 ; Smith et al . , 2013 ) Cabozantinib 100 mg oral qd vs placebo Weeks : Cabozantinib : 23 . 9 ( 10 . 7 – 62 . 4 ) Placebo : 5 . 9 ( 5 . 4 – 6 . 6 ) HR : 0 . 12 ; P b . 001 10 . 8 ( 95 % CI : 9 . 1 – 13 . 0 ) PR : 5 % SD : 75 % DCR ( week 12 ) : 66 % Fatigue , decreased appetite , diarrhea , nausea , weight loss , hand – foot syndrome , taste alterations Metastatic NSCLC ( Hellerstedt et al . , 2012 ) Overall : 4 . 2 months PR : 10 % SD : 48 % DCR ( week 12 ) : 38 % Metastatic refractory RCC ( Choueiri et al . , 2012 ) Overall : 14 . 7 months Not reached at median follow - up of 14 . 7 - months PR : 28 % SD : 52 % DCR ( week 12 ) : 72 % HCC ( Verslype et al . , 2012 ) Overall : 4 . 4 months 15 . 1 ( 8 . 9 – 18 . 3 ) PR : 5 % SD : 78 % DCR ( week 12 ) : 66 % Metastatic breast cancer ( Winer et al . , 2012 ) Overall : 4 . 3 months PR : 14 % SD : 57 % DCR ( week 12 ) : 48 % Metastatic uveal melanoma ( Daud et al . , 2013 ) Overall : 4 . 8 months 12 . 6 Metastatic melanoma ( Gordon et al . , 2012 ) Overall : 4 . 2 months PR : 5 % SD : 57 % DCR ( week 12 ) : 46 % Ovarian cancer ( Buckanovich et al . , 2011 ) Not reached ( median follow - up 4 months ( range : 1 – 11 ) ORR ( week 12 ) : 24 % Hand – foot syndrome ( 10 % ) , diarrhea ( 8 % ) , fatigue ( 4 % ) DCR ( week 12 ) : 58 % Foretinib II Metastatic gastric cancer ( Shah et al . , 2013 ) Foretinib 240 mg oral qd for 5 days then every 2 weeks ( intermittentcohort ) orforetinib 80 mg oral qd ( daily cohort ) Months : Overall : 1 . 7 ( 1 . 6 – 1 . 8 ) ; Intermittent cohort : 1 . 6 ; Daily cohort : 1 . 8 Months : Intermittent cohort : 7 . 4 Daily cohort : 4 . 3 ORR : Intermittent cohort : 0 % ( 0 . 0 – 8 . 0 ) Daily cohort : 0 % ( 0 . 0 – 13 . 7 ) Intermittent cohort : fatigue ( 43 . 8 % ) , hypertension ( 35 . 4 % ) , nausea ( 27 . 1 % ) , diarrhea ( 27 . 1 % ) Daily cohort : fatigue ( 46 . 2 % ) , hypertension ( 15 . 4 % ) , nausea ( 26 . 9 % ) , diarrhea ( 11 . 5 % ) 10 C . R . M a r o un , T . R o w l a n d s / P h a r m a c o l o g y & T h e r a p e u t i c s xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx P l e a s e c i t e t h i s a r t i c l e a s : M a r o u n , C . R . , & R o w l a n d s , T . , T h e M e t r e c e p t o r t y r o s i n e k i n a s e : A k e y p l a y e r i n o n c o g e n e s i s a n d d r u g r e s i s t a n c e , P h a r m a c o l . T h e r . ( 2014 ) , h tt p : / / d x . d o i . o r g / 10 . 1016 / j . p h a r m t h e r a . 2013 . 12 . 014 Foretinib II Papillary RCC ( Choueiri et al . , 2013 ) Foretinib240 mgoralqdondays 1 – 5 every 14 days ( intermittent cohort ) or foretinib 80 mg oral qd ( daily cohort ) Months : Overall : 9 . 3 ( 6 . 9 – 12 . 9 ) ; Intermittent cohort : 11 . 6 ( 5 . 8 – 17 . 0 ) ; Daily cohort : 9 . 1 ( 5 . 78 – 10 . 91 ) Median OS not reached 1 - Yr survival : 70 % over - all ( 64 % intermittent co - hort , 76 % daily cohort ) 13 . 5 % ( 6 . 7 – 23 . 5 ) Hypertension ( 81 % ) , fatigue ( 73 % ) , diarrhea ( 55 % ) High rate of non - fatal pulmonary embolism Foretinib II Triple - negative breast cancer ( Rayson et al . , 2012 ) Foretinib 60 mg oral qd Fatigue ( 64 % ) , nausea ( 55 % ) , diarrhea ( 41 % ) , hypertension ( 32 % ) , vomiting ( 27 % ) , anorexia ( 23 % ) and rash ( 14 % ) Foretinib II Advanced HCC ( Yau et al . , 2012 ) Foretinib45 mgor30 mgoralqd TTP , median : 4 . 2 months ( 2 . 7 – 7 . 5 ) ORR : 24 % ( 11 – 40 ) Hypertension ( 36 % ) , decreased appetite ( 23 % ) , and pyrexia ( 21 % ) Foretinib II Recurrent or metastatic HNSCC ( Seiwertetal . , 2009b ) Foretinib 240 mg oral qd 3 . 65 months ( 3 . 42 – 5 . 32 ) 5 . 59 months ( 3 . 71 – not reported ) Best response : SD ( median duration 4 . 11 months ) Fatigue ( 50 % ) , constipation ( 36 % ) , hypertension ( 36 % ) , anorexia ( 29 % ) , dysphagia ( 29 % ) , weight loss ( 29 % ) , increased alanine transaminase ( 29 % ) , increased aspartate transaminase ( 29 % ) , dyspnea ( 29 % ) , headache ( 29 % ) , and mucosal in ﬂ ammation ( 29 % ) Tivantinib III Non - squamous NSCLC with wt EGFR ( Kyowa Hakko Kirin Co Ltd , 2012 ) Tivantinib in combination with erlotinib Trial discontinued due to high frequency of interstitial lung disease Tivantinib III Non - squamous NSCLC with wt EGFR ( ArQule Inc . , 2012 ) Tivantinib in combination with erlotinib Statistically signi ﬁ cant improvement Tivantinib II HCC ( Santoro et al . , 2013a ) Tivantinib 240 mg or 360 mg oral bid , or placebo TTP , median months : Tivantinib : 1 . 6 ( 1 . 4 – 2 . 8 ) Placebo : 1 . 4 ( 1 . 4 – 1 . 5 ) HR 0 . 64 ( 0 . 43 – 0 . 94 ) P = . 04 Met - high subgroup : TTP , median months : Tivantinib : 2 . 7 ( 1 . 4 – 8 . 5 ) Placebo : 1 . 4 ( 1 . 4 – 1 . 6 ) HR 0 . 43 ( 0 . 19 – 0 . 97 ) P = . 03 PFS , median months : Tivantinib : 2 . 2 ( 1 . 4 – 4 . 6 ) Placebo : 1 . 4 ( 1 . 4 – 1 . 4 ) HR 0 . 45 ( 0 . 21 – 0 . 95 ) P = . 02 Months : Tivantinib : 6 . 6 ( 4 . 6 – 9 . 0 ) Placebo : 6 . 2 ( 3 . 8 – 9 . 4 ) HR : 0 . 90 ( 0 . 57 – 1 . 40 ) ; P = . 63 Met - high subgroup : Tivantinib : 7 . 2 ( 3 . 9 – 14 . 6 ) Placebo : 3 . 8 ( 2 . 1 – 6 . 8 ) HR 0 . 38 ( 0 . 18 – 0 . 81 ) P = . 01 DCR : 44 % tivantinib , 31 % placebo Met - high subgroup : 50 % tivantinib , 20 % placebo 240 mg : neutropenia ( 21 % ) , asthenia ( 18 % ) , anemia ( 15 % ) , decreased appetite ( 9 % ) , thrombocytopenia ( 9 % ) , bradycardia ( 9 % ) 360 mg : neutropenia ( 29 % ) , anemia ( 16 % ) , fatigue ( 16 % ) , decreased appetite ( 11 % ) , diarrhea ( 11 % ) , thrombocytopenia ( 8 % ) , leukopenia ( 8 % ) , vomiting ( 8 % ) Tivantinib II Metastatic colorectal cancer expressing wild - type KRas ( Eng et al . , 2013 ) Tivantinib 360 mg bid plus irinotecan and cetuximab Months : 8 . 3 ( tivantinib ) 7 . 3 ( control ) ORR : 45 % tivantinib arm , 33 % control arm Elevated neutropenia in tivantinib arm Tivantinib II Advancedorrecurrentgastric cancer ( Muro et al . , 2012 ) Tivantinib 360 mg bid 43 days ( 29 – 92 ) No ORR Well tolerated Tivantinib II Microphthalmia transcription factor - associated ( MiT ) tumors ( Wagner et al . , 2012 ) Tivantinib 120 mg oral bid , then 360 mg bid Months : 3 . 6 ( 1 . 9 – 5 . 6 ) Months : 21 . 4 ( 14 . 2 – 29 . 2 ) PR : 2 . 1 % ; SD : 57 % ; ORR ( PR + SD ) : 60 % Fatigue ( 49 % ) , nausea ( 43 % ) , vomiting ( 28 % ) , anemia ( 17 % ) , neutropenia ( 13 % ) and leukopenia ( 13 % ) bid : twicedaily ; CI : con ﬁ denceinterval ; CRPC : castration - resistantprostatecancer ; DCR : disease controlrate ; HCC : hepatocellularcarcinoma ; HR : hazardratio ; MTC : medullarythyroidcarcinoma ; NR : notreported ; ORR : overallresponse rate ; OS : overall survival ; PFS : progression - free survival ; PR : partial response ; qd : once daily ; RCC : renal cell carcinoma ; SD : stable disease . 11 C . R . M a r o un , T . R o w l a n d s / P h a r m a c o l o g y & T h e r a p e u t i c s xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx P l e a s e c i t e t h i s a r t i c l e a s : M a r o u n , C . R . , & R o w l a n d s , T . , T h e M e t r e c e p t o r t y r o s i n e k i n a s e : A k e y p l a y e r i n o n c o g e n e s i s a n d d r u g r e s i s t a n c e , P h a r m a c o l . T h e r . ( 2014 ) , h tt p : / / d x . d o i . o r g / 10 . 1016 / j . p h a r m t h e r a . 2013 . 12 . 014 approximately half of these patients had improvements in bone disease andrelatedpain ( Scheretal . , 2013 ) . Inpatientswithmetastaticrefractory RCC , overall PFS was 14 . 7 months , and DCR was 72 % ( Choueiri et al . , 2012 ) . DCR rates in other populations in this trial ranged from 38 % for metastatic NSCLC to 66 % for HCC ( Gordon et al . , 2012 ; Hellerstedt et al . , 2012 ; Verslype et al . , 2012 ; Winer et al . , 2012 ) . In all patient populations , the most frequent adverse events during the lead - in stage of this Phase II discontinuation trial included fatigue , decreased appetite , diarrhea , nausea , and weight loss and common grade 3 adverse events were fa - tigue , hypertension , and hand – foot syndrome ( Smith et al . , 2013 ) . Given the known roles of the Met receptor in processes fundamental tometastasis , aMet - targeted therapeutic would bepredicted toimpede this process , which is a signi ﬁ cant complication for the majority of ad - vanced prostate cancer patients . Thus far the data available in prostate cancer from other Met - targeted agents is too limited to determine whether the potential effects observed in cabozantinib studies are re - ﬂ ective of targeting Met . 4 . 1 . 1 . 3 . Foretinib . Early investigation of foretinib , an oral multikinase in - hibitor targeting Met , RON , Axl and VEGFR , revealed an acceptable safe - ty pro ﬁ le and evidence of clinical ef ﬁ cacy in patients with metastatic or unresectable solid tumors ( Eder et al . , 2010 ) . However , a Phase II study of single - agent foretinib for metastatic gastric cancer found minimal anti - tumor activity ( Shah et al . , 2013 ) . Overall , patients treated with foretinib had a median PFS of 1 . 7 months ( 95 % CI : 1 . 6 – 1 . 8 ) ; PFS for those administered foretinib daily was 1 . 8 months , and 1 . 6 months for patients treated according to an intermittent schedule ( Shah et al . , 2013 ) . The intermittent cohort had an estimated median OS of 7 . 4 months , compared with 4 . 3 months in the daily cohort . No patient treated with either dosing schedule achieved a complete or partial re - sponse ( Shah et al . , 2013 ) . Treatment - related adverse events occurred in 91 % of patients ; most commonly fatigue , hypertension , and diarrhea ( Shah et al . , 2013 ) . Another Phase II study reported activity of foretinib among patients with advanced papillary RCC ( Choueiri et al . , 2013 ) . Foretinib was administered either daily or according to an intermittent dosing schedule ; the overall median PFS was 9 . 3 months ( 95 % CI : 6 . 9 – 12 . 9 ) , 9 . 1 months ( 95 % CI : 5 . 78 – 10 . 91 ) for the daily administration cohort and 11 . 6 months ( 95 % CI : 5 . 8 – 17 . 0 ) for the intermittent dosing cohort . The overall response rate was 13 . 5 % ( 95 % CI : 6 . 7 – 23 . 5 ) , and median OS was not reached . However , the presence of a germline MET mutation was highly predictive of a response . The most frequently encountered adverse events were hypertension , fatigue and diarrhea ( Choueiriet al . , 2013 ) . Foretinib is also undergoingevaluationin combi - nation with the anti - HER2 lapatinib in HER2 + metastatic breast cancer ( Phase 1b ) . Preclinical data on the respective biologicalfunctions ofMet and HER2 as well as the role of Met in mediating resistance to HER2 - targeted therapy support a complementary ef ﬁ cacy pro ﬁ le for such a combination approach . However , combination therapy may lead to an expanded side effect pro ﬁ le . Recent reports indicate that foretinib is also a potent inhibitor of ROS1 fusions , including a crizotinib - sensitive ROS1 mutant ( Davare et al . , 2013 ) . Patient enrichment strategies may hold the advantage of directing focus on tumors with targeted MET and / or ROS1 mutations to improve outcome , while reducing risks of toxicity . 4 . 1 . 1 . 4 . Tivantinib . The small molecule non - ATP competitive inhibitor tivantinib has been shown to possess weak Met inhibitor activities ( Munshi et al . , 2010 ) but was also shown to alter microtubule functions thereby regulating anti - tumor responses ( Basilico et al . , 2013 ; Katayama et al . , 2013 ) . More recently , glycogen synthase 3 ( GSK3 ) α and β were re - vealed as novel targets of tivantinib in cancer cells , and blocking of these targets may contribute to the tivantinib anti - tumor responses ( Remsing Rix et al . , 2013 ) . As such , the relative contribution of these targets to the antitumor activity of tivantinib is not yet clari ﬁ ed . Nonetheless , tivantinib hasbeenthesubjectofinvestigationinseverallatestageclinicaltrials . Ina Phase II trial for patients with HCC refractory to previous treatment , tivantinib monotherapy prolonged time to progression ( TTP ) and PFS compared to placebo ( Table 3 ; TTP : 1 . 6 months vs 1 . 4 months ; HR 0 . 64 ; P = . 04 ) , but did not improve OS signi ﬁ cantly in the overall intent - to - treat population ( Santoro et al . , 2013a ) . Subgroup analyses revealed signi ﬁ cant survival advantage in tivantinib - treated patients that express high Met levels ( Table 3 ; OS 7 . 2 vs 3 . 8 months , HR : 0 . 38 , P = . 01 ; TTP 2 . 7 monthsvs1 . 4 months ; HR0 . 43 ; P = . 03 ) . APhaseIIItrialoftivantinib in HCC was initiated in 2013 . Tivantinib monotherapy also resulted in modest anti - tumor effects in microphthalmia transcription factor ( MITF ) - associated ( MiT ) tumors in a multicenter Phase II trial ( Wagner et al . , 2012 ) ( Table 3 ) . Among 47 patients with MITF - associated MiT tumors who were treated with tivantinib , median PFS was 3 . 6 months ( 95 % : 1 . 9 – 5 . 6 ) and OS was 21 . 4 months ( 95 % CI : 14 . 2 – 29 . 2 ) . The overall DCR was 60 % , comprising 2 . 1 % of patients who achieved a partial response , and 57 % who had stable disease ( Wagner et al . , 2012 ) . In a Phase II study of tivantinib monotherapy in advanced or recurrent gastric cancer , only marginal ef ﬁ cacy was achieved ( Muro et al . , 2012 ) . Further investigation of tivantinib ef ﬁ cacy was conducted in a Phase I / II placebo - controlled trial in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer expressingwild - type KRAS ( Enget al . , 2013 ) . Preclinical and clinical ob - servations provide a strongrationale for thecombination of EGFR inhib - itors and Met inhibitors in CRC where Met has been identi ﬁ ed as central to resistance to anti - EGFR therapy via a number of mechanisms includ - ing MET geneampli ﬁ cationand bypass mechanisms ( see Section3 . 3 ) . In this trial , tivantinib in combination with the anti - EGFR cetuximab and antiproliferative drug irinotecan showed a trend toward improvement of PFS and OS . In addition , two randomized Phase III trials of tivantinib in combination with the EGFR inhibitor erlotinib in non - squamous NSCLC with wild type EGFR were initiated but both were halted early . In one case due to a high incidence of interstitial lung disease , and in the other because interim analysis indicated that the primary endpoint of improved overall survival would not be met ( ArQule Inc . , 2012 ; Kyowa Hakko Kirin Co Ltd , 2012 ) . However , a statistically signi ﬁ cant improvement in PFS was reported from this trial ( ArQule Inc . , 2012 ) . Overall , the most common adverse events reported for tivantinib were asthenia , fatigue , vomiting , anemia , decreased appetite , neutropenia , thrombocytopenia and leukopenia ( Wagner et al . , 2012 ; Santoro et al . , 2013a , b ) . As noted above , tivantinib has recently been identi ﬁ ed as a microtubule - targeted agent . This target coverage is also supported by the safety pro ﬁ le of the agent in clinical trials to date as the high fre - quencyof hematologic side effects may be re ﬂ ective of a predominantly cytotoxic product pro ﬁ le , rather than a Met - targeted agent . In this con - text , the limited ef ﬁ cacy of tivantinib observed in the majority of trials may not be re ﬂ ective of the Met - targeted agents as a class . 4 . 1 . 2 . Antibodies 4 . 1 . 2 . 1 . Onartuzumab . Onartuzumab ( MetMAb ) is a chimeric , human - ized , monovalent monoclonal antibody directed against Met that in - hibits the binding of HGF to the Met ligand binding site ( Martens et al . , 2006 ; Merchant et al . , 2013 ) . In NSCLC , anti - EGFR therapies such as erlotinib and ge ﬁ tinib are effective for patients expressing activating EGFR mutations . However , these patients eventually develop resistance . GiventheroleofMetinresistancetoanti - EGFRtherapy ( Section3 . 3 ) , syn - ergistic inhibition of Met and EGFR is a promising approach in this indica - tion . Results from a randomized Phase II trial comparing onartuzumab plus erlotinib to erlotinib plus placebo in second and third line NSCLC were very promising . Among the patients with tumors expressing high Metlevels ( assessedbyimmunohistochemistry ) , combinationtherapyre - sulted in clinically signi ﬁ cant improvements of PFS and OS . In this patient subset , PFS was prolonged by two - fold in the onartuzumab plus erlotinib arm compared with erlotinib plus placebo ( 2 . 9 months vs 1 . 5 months ; HR : 0 . 53 [ 0 . 28 – 0 . 99 ] ; P = . 04 ) and OS was increased by three - fold ( 12 . 6 months vs 3 . 8 months ; HR : 0 . 37 [ 0 . 19 – 0 . 72 ] ; P = . 002 ) ( Spigel et al . , 2013 ) . This data was strikingly distinct from the intent to treat 12 C . R . Maroun , T . Rowlands / Pharmacology & Therapeutics xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Maroun , C . R . , & Rowlands , T . , The Met receptor tyrosine kinase : A key player in oncogenesis and drug resistance , Pharmacol . Ther . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2013 . 12 . 014 population , where no increased bene ﬁ t was noted for the onartuzumab / erlotinib combination ( see Section 5 . 1 below ) . These results are consis - tent with the well documented cooperation between the Met and EGFR pathways , and a signi ﬁ cant role of Met in EGFR - inhibitor resis - tance . Theseobservationsarealsoastrongindictmentforprospectivese - lection of patients with high Met expression as is the case in an ongoing Phase III study of patients with advanced Met - positive NSCLC ( Spigel etal . , 2012 ) . Ofnote , despitetheimprovedPFSandOSintheMetpositive population , the overall response rate in this subset was not different be - tween treatment groups , which may suggest that in this context Met did not serve as an independent oncogenic driver . A separate randomized Phase II study in lung cancer is assessing onartuzumab in combination with paclitaxel plus cisplatin or carboplatin as ﬁ rst line treatment for squamous NSCLC ( U . S . National Institutes of Health , 2013 ) . Preclinical data implicating Met in the development of chemotherapy - induced re - sistance support this trial rationale ( Section 3 . 3 ) , although the molecular mechanisms involved are not fully understood . Beyond NSCLC , a Phase II trial in triple - negative breast cancer evaluating a combination of onartuzumab , anti - VEGF bevacizumab and paclitaxel did not meet the primary endpoint of PFS ( U . S . National Institutes of Health , 2013 ) . Onartuzumab is also under investigation in a Phase III study of patients with metastatic HER2 - negative , Met - positive gastroesophageal cancer , and Phase II trials in metastatic colo - rectal cancer and glioblastoma ( Bendell et al . , 2013 ; Cunningham et al . , 2013b ; U . S . National Institutes of Health , 2013 ) . 4 . 1 . 2 . 2 . Rilotumumab . The ef ﬁ cacy and safety of rilotumumab , a human monoclonal antibody against HGF / SF , in combination with cytotoxic agents epirubicin , cisplatin , and capecitabine were assessed in a Phase I / II trial of patients with gastric or gastroesophageal junction ( G / GEJ ) adenocarcinoma ( Davidenko et al . , 2012 ) . Rilotumumab was given at either 15 mg / kg or 7 . 5 mg / kg . In these patients , rilotumumab combina - tionwithchemotherapy prolonged PFSandOSmodestly . When data for the two rilotumumab arms was combined , PFS was 5 . 7 months versus 4 . 2 months ( HR 0 . 60 ) , and OS was 10 . 6 months versus 8 . 9 months ( HR 0 . 70 ) for rilotumumab plus chemotherapy compared to placebo plus chemotherapy , respectively . However , the treatment effect was found to be more pronounced in Met - positive patients ( Oliner et al . , 2012 ) . In this population , PFS was 6 . 9 months versus 4 . 6 months ( HR 0 . 44 ) , and OS was 11 . 5 months versus 5 . 7 months ( HR 0 . 70 ) for rilotumumabpluschemotherapycompared to placebo plus chemother - apy , respectively . These data suggest that prospectively selecting for Met - positive patients may be important for optimal useof rilotumumab in this indication and a PhaseIII trialof ﬁ rst - line rilotumumab in combi - nation with epirubicin / cisplatin / capecitabine is underway for patients with advanced Met - positive G / GEJ adenocarcinoma ( Cunningham et al . , 2013 ) . Rilotumumab has also been assessed in other indications . In a Phase IIstudyofrilotumumabincombinationwithpanitumumabincolorectal cancer expressingwild type KRAS the response rate forthe combination was found to be 31 % compared to 21 % for panitumumab alone ( Eng et al . , 2011 ) ( Table 4 ) . A Phase II trial of rilotumumab monotherapy for advanced or metastatic RCC showed ef ﬁ cacy results that were equivocal ( Schoffski et al . , 2011 ) ( Table 4 ) . PFS among patients who were administered low dose ( 10 mg / kg ) rilotumumab every two weeks had a PFS of 3 . 7 months ( 95 % CI : 1 . 8 – 7 . 6 ) compared with only 2 . 0 months ( 95 % CI : 1 . 8 – 3 . 7 ) among those who received a higher dose ( 20 mg / kg ) . However , median OS was 14 . 9 months ( 95 % CI : 9 . 4 – not evaluable ) in the low dose cohort , and 17 . 6 months ( 95 % CI : 7 . 1 – not evaluable ) for the patients treated with higher doses . Those treated with low dose rilotumumab had an overall response rate of 2 . 5 % , com - pared with 0 % at higher dose . Differences between the low and high dose cohortsmaystemfrom an imbalanceof patientbaselinecharacter - istics ( Schoffski et al . , 2011 ) . Phase II studies in glioblastoma and in taxane - refractory CRPC in combination with mitoxantrone did not show signi ﬁ cant clinical activity for rilotumumab ( Wen et al . , 2011 ; Ryan et al . , 2013 ) ( Table 4 ) . Edema was the most frequent adverse event , followed by fatigue and nausea ( Schoffski et al . , 2011 ) . 4 . 1 . 2 . 3 . Ficlatuzumab . Ficlatuzumab is a humanized antibody directed against HGF . This antibody was shown to inhibit tumor growth in multiple preclinical models including NSCLC and HNSCC as well as Met phosphorylation and Akt activation in tumor tissues . In addition , combination with EGFR inhibitors also demonstrated enhanced anti - tumor activities compared to treatment with either agent alone ( Meetze et al . , 2009 , 2012 ) . In clinical studies , ﬁ clatuzumab demonstrat - ed a potential bene ﬁ t for the treatment of lung adenocarcinoma in a Phase II investigation of 188 Asian treatment - naïve patients ( Mok et al . , 2012 ) ( Table 4 ) . Patients unselected for EGFR mutational status were treated with ﬁ clatuzumab in combination with the anti - EGFR , ge ﬁ tinib or ge ﬁ tinib alone . The treatment groups did not show a statistically signi ﬁ cant difference in response rate or PFS . Interestingly , despite the small number of patients in subgroup analyses , a trend toward prolonged OS in patients with stromal HGF expression was reported as well as a trend for improved overall response rate and PFS for a subset of patients who received combination therapy and who had low Met expression and EGFR - sensitizing mutations . This suggested the possibility that Met inhibitiondelayedtheonsetofresistancetotheEGFRtherapyanddisease progression . However , in this trial there was no increased clinical response in the subgroup of patients expressing high Met protein , in con - trast to the ﬁ ndings with onartuzumab and erlotinib combination treat - ment ( see above ) ( Mok et al . , 2012 ; D ' Arcangelo & Cappuzzo , 2013 ) . The molecular basis for this discrepancy is yet to be con ﬁ rmed , and may reside in the distinct anti - EGFR agents used or mechanistic differences inblockingtheMetreceptorwithonartuzumabincombinationwitherlo - tinib compared to HGF with ﬁ clatuzumab in combination with ge ﬁ tinib . However , treatment with the anti - HGF rilotumumab did demonstrate improved clinical outcomes in Met high patients albeit in combination with epirubicin , cisplatin and capecitabine in unresectable locally advanced or metastatic gastric esophagogastric junction carcinoma pa - tients ( seeabove ) . Thus , thedifferenceinMetlevelsdependencebetween anti - Met / onartuzumab and anti - HGF / ﬁ clatuzumab cannot simply be accounted for by targeting Met or HGF , respectively . These results high - light the complexity in understanding the difference between targeting the receptor versus the ligand , the distinct predictive potential of expres - sion of high / low Met levels which may be indication - speci ﬁ c and rely on the combination regimens . 4 . 2 . Met inhibitors in early - stage development Several Phase I studies of drug candidates targeting HGF / Met have been completed ( Cecchi et al . , 2012 ) . These include INC280 , a small moleculeselectiveMetinhibitor , whichhadafavorable pharmacokinet - ic pro ﬁ le and manageable toxicity in patients with treatment - refractory neoplastic disease . Another highly selective Met inhibitor , EMD 1214063 , showed antitumor activity in preclinical models and in a Phase I dose - escalation trial in patients with advanced solid tumors , where two patients showed an uncon ﬁ rmed partial response and one patientprolongedstabledisease . Inaddition , inhibitionofMetphosphor - ylation was revealed in pre - and on - treatment tumor biopsies ( Falchook etal . , 2013 ) . EarlyresultsfromPhaseIevaluationofTAK - 701 , amonoclo - nalanti - HGFantibody , showedthatitwaswell - toleratedupto20 mg / kg bi - weekly ; more serious treatment - related adverse events included ileus , muscular weakness , asthenia , urinary tract infection and dehydra - tion . LY - 2875358 is a novel humanized bivalent antibody to Met that blocks HGF binding and leads to Met internalization and degradation , thus targeting both HGF - dependent and - independent Met functions ( Wortinger et al . , 2012 ; Zeng et al . , 2012 ) . In preclinical studies LY - 2875358 showed promising activity , including against Met mutants that were unresponsive to onartuzumab ( Zeng et al . , 2013 ) . This anti - body is in Phase I combination studies with erlotinib ( Goldman et al . , 2013 ) . 13 C . R . Maroun , T . Rowlands / Pharmacology & Therapeutics xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Maroun , C . R . , & Rowlands , T . , The Met receptor tyrosine kinase : A key player in oncogenesis and drug resistance , Pharmacol . Ther . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2013 . 12 . 014 Table 4 HGF / Met antibodies — results of Phase II clinical trials . Drug Phase Population Intervention Ef ﬁ cacy outcomes Main adverse events Progression - free survival , median ( 95 % CI ) Overall survival , median ( 95 % CI ) Response rate , % Onartuzumab II NSCLC ( Spigel et al . , 2013 ) Onartuzumab + erlotinib vs erlotinib plus placebo Met - high subset , months : combination : 2 . 9 Erlotinib + placebo : 1 . 5 HR : 0 . 53 ( 0 . 28 – 0 . 99 ) ; P = . 04 Met - high subset , months : combination : 12 . 6 Erlotinib + placebo : 3 . 8 HR : 0 . 37 ( 0 . 19 – 0 . 72 ) ; P = . 002 Met - high subset : combination : 8 . 6 % Erlotinib + placebo : 3 . 2 % rash , diarrhea , fatigue , nausea , decreased appetite , peripheral edema Rilotumumab II Gastric or gastroesphageal junction adenocarcinoma ( Davidenko et al . , 2012 ; Oliner et al . , 2012 ) Rilotumumab 15 mg / kg or 7 . 5 mg / kg + epirubicin / cisplatin / capecitabine vs placebo Months : Rilutumumab arms combined : 5 . 7 Placebo : 4 . 2 HR 0 . 60 ( 0 . 39 – 0 . 91 ) Met high subset months : Rilutumumab arms combined : 6 . 9 Placebo : 4 . 6 HR 0 . 44 ( 0 . 20 – 0 . 96 ) Months : Rilotumumab arms combined : 10 . 6 Placebo : 8 . 9 HR 0 . 70 ( 0 . 45 – 1 . 09 ) Met high subset months : Rilutumumab arms combined : 11 . 5 Placebo : 5 . 7 HR 0 . 34 ( 0 . 15 – 0 . 78 ) Neutropenia , thrombocytopenia , deep vein thrombosis grade 3 / 4 / 5 AEs in all arms Rilotumumab II Wild type KRAS - positive colorectal cancer ( Eng et al . , 2011 ) Rilotumumab + panitumumab vs panitumumab alone Combination : 5 . 2 ( 3 . 6 – 5 . 4 ) Panitumumab alone : 3 . 7 ( 2 . 5 – 5 . 3 ) PR : 31 % vs 21 % SD : 40 % vs 35 % Rilotumumab II CRPC ( Ryan et al . , 2013 ) Rilotumumab 15 mg / kg + mitoxantrone + prednisone vs rilotumumab 7 . 5 mg / kg vs placebo Months : Combination : 3 . 0 Placebo : 2 . 9 HR 1 . 02 ( 80 % CI : 0 . 79 – 1 . 31 ) Months : Combination : 12 . 2 Placebo : 11 . 1 HR 1 . 10 ( 80 % CI : 0 . 82 – 1 . 48 ) NR Peripheral edema ( 24 % ) Rilotumumab II Glioblastoma or gliosarcoma ( Wen et al . , 2011 ) Rilotumumab 10 mg / kg vs rilotumumab 20 mg / kg iv . every 2 weeks Weeks : 10 mg / kg : 4 . 1 ( 4 . 0 – 4 . 1 ) 20 mg / kg : 4 . 3 ( 4 . 1 – 8 . 1 ) Months : 10 mg / kg : 6 . 5 ( 4 . 1 – 9 . 8 ) 20 mg / kg : 5 . 4 ( 3 . 4 – 11 . 4 ) CR : 0 % either cohort ; PR : 0 % either cohort ; SD : 10 mg / kg : 10 % 20 mg / kg : 15 % Fatigue ( 38 % ) , headache ( 33 % ) , and peripheral edema ( 23 % ) Rilotumumab II Advanced or metastatic RCC ( Schoffski et al . , 2011 ) Rilotumumab 10 mg / kg vs rilotumumab 20 mg / kg iv . every 2 weeks Months : 10 mg / kg : 3 . 7 ( 1 . 8 – 7 . 6 ) 20 mg / kg : 2 . 0 ( 1 . 8 – 3 . 7 ) Months : 10 mg / kg : 14 . 9 ( 9 . 4 – not evaluable ) ; 20 mg / kg : 17 . 6 ( 7 . 1 – not evaluable ) 10 mg / kg : 2 . 5 % ; 20 mg / kg : 0 % Edema ( 45 . 9 % ) , fatigue ( 37 . 7 % ) and nausea ( 27 . 9 % ) Ficlatuzumab II Lung adenocarcinoma ( Mok et al . , 2012 ) Combination ( Ficlatuzumab 20 mg / kg + ge ﬁ tinib 250 mg qd ) vs ge ﬁ tinib 250 mg qd Months : Combination : 5 . 6 ; Ge ﬁ tinib : 4 . 7 HR 0 . 89 ( 0 . 64 – 1 . 23 ) ; P = . 47 OS data : not yet fully mature HR 0 . 84 ( 0 . 52 – 1 . 37 ) Combination : 43 % ( 32 – 53 ) ; Ge ﬁ tinib : 40 % ( 30 – 51 ) Paronychia ( 47 % ) , peripheral edema ( 38 % ) , acne ( 27 % ) , hypoalbuminuria ( 20 % ) , dizziness ( 19 % ) , eczema ( 17 % ) , gingival bleeding ( 12 % ) AE : adverse event ; CI : con ﬁ dence interval ; CR : complete response ; CRPC : castration - resistant prostate cancer ; HR : hazard ratio ; iv : intravenous ; ORR : overall response rate ; OS : overallsurvival ; PFS : progression - free survival ; PR : partialresponse ; RCC : renal cell carcinoma ; SD : stable disease . 14 C . R . M a r o un , T . R o w l a n d s / P h a r m a c o l o g y & T h e r a p e u t i c s xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx P l e a s e c i t e t h i s a r t i c l e a s : M a r o u n , C . R . , & R o w l a n d s , T . , T h e M e t r e c e p t o r t y r o s i n e k i n a s e : A k e y p l a y e r i n o n c o g e n e s i s a n d d r u g r e s i s t a n c e , P h a r m a c o l . T h e r . ( 2014 ) , h tt p : / / d x . d o i . o r g / 10 . 1016 / j . p h a r m t h e r a . 2013 . 12 . 014 MGCD265 is a multi - targeted kinase inhibitor which potently inhibits key pathways including Met , Axl and VEGFR1 - 3 that is being developed by Mirati Therapeutics . In preclinical Met - driven tumor models MGCD265 exhibited anti - tumorigenic activity that correlated with inhibition of Met phosphorylation , cell proliferation and increased apoptosis ( Fournel et al . , 2012 ) . Combination of MGCD265 with the EGFR inhibitor erlotinib led to increased antitumor activity , in keeping with the synergism predicted from the crosstalk between the EGFR and Met - dependent signaling pathways ( Bon ﬁ ls et al . , 2012 ) . MGCD265 has an acceptable safety and tolerability pro ﬁ le to date with over 200 pa - tients treated in Phase I and I / II trials ( Mirati Therapeutics , 2013 ) . MGCD265 is being assessed both as monotherapy and in combination with docetaxel or erlotinib ; development will include patient selection strategies for tumors exhibiting deregulated Met and / or Axl , in order to target the population most likely to be responsive to therapy . The ability of MGCD265 to simultaneouslyinhibit bothMetand Axl may confer spe - ci ﬁ c advantages in situations where resistance to EGFR inhibitors is com - mon , such as NSCLC and HNSCC ; likewise , the anti - VEGFR activity may address or circumvent resistance to angiogenesis inhibitors . MK - 2461 is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor of Met , Ron and Flt1 . This mol - eculeinhibited phosphorylationsites intheMet juxtamembrane ( Y1003 ) and carboxy - terminal domain ( Y1349 and Y1365 ) as opposed to tyrosine sites within the activation loop ( Y1234 / Y1235 ) suggesting preferential binding of the molecule to activation - loop phosphorylated Met ( Pan et al . , 2010 ) . In Phase I / II studies , MK - 2461 had a half - life of ~ 6 h and was well - tolerated with few adverse events above grade 1 ( Cecchi et al . , 2012 ) . Golvatinib is a Met and VEGFR - 2 tyrosine kinase inhibitor that has reached Phase I / II trials in solid tumors and HCC ( U . S . National Institutes of Health , 2013 ) . In mouse xenograft and peritoneal dissemina - tion models , golvatinib promoted tumor regression and prolonged sur - vival of treated mice ( Nakagawa et al . , 2010 ) . The drug was well tolerated and the most common treatment - related adverse events were nausea , vomiting and diarrhea ( Daniele et al . , 2012 ; Doi et al . , 2012 ) . Anti - Met drugs in experimental and preclinical development include MGCD516 ( Mirati Therapeutics ) , a small molecule with potent activity against Met , Axl , Trk , Ret , VEGFR , DDR and Eph receptor fami - lies . MGCD516 inhibits proliferation and vascularization of tumor xeno - graft models including those driven by Met , Ret or Axl ( Beaulieu et al . , 2013 ) . BAY - 853474 ( Bayer Pharma AG ) is a speci ﬁ c inhibitor that blocks Met phosphorylation , and T - 1840383 ( Takeda Pharmaceuticals Compa - ny ) is a small - molecule kinase inhibitor against Met and VEGFR family . Both of these agents have been ef ﬁ cacious in tumor models ( Klotz et al . , 2012 ; Awazu et al . , 2013 ) . KRC - 408 ( Department of Biomedical Sci - ences and NCEED , Inha University , Korea ) inhibits Met phosphorylation and downstream signaling , and has shown activity in gastric cancer and colorectal carcinoma xenograft models ( Gao et al . , 2013 ; Hong et al . , 2013 ) . TAS - 115 ( Taiho Pharmaceuticals Co . ) is a dual Met / VEGFR inhibitorthatshowedpromisinganti - proliferativeef ﬁ cacyandtolerable safety pro ﬁ le ( Fujita et al . , 2011b , a ) . 4 . 3 . Met - targeted agents summary In summary , there is a great degree of activity in the area of Met - targetedcancertherapeutics . Themostadvancedsmallmoleculein - hibitors of Met also cover other targets . The speci ﬁ c contribution of Met inhibition to the overall activity of these agents may be dif ﬁ cult to isolate within the available clinical data , although results suggest that targeting Met alterations provides a clinical bene ﬁ t ( see Section 5 ) . Therapeutic antibodies target speci ﬁ cally the Met / HGF axis and in contrast to small molecule inhibitors , the consequences of inhibiting the ligand – receptor interaction may be more readily elucidated . One shortcoming of this approach is the inability of therapeutic antibodies to block ligand - independent Met activation , but the design of novel anti - Met antibodies may overcome this limitation . Although clinical results with Met - targeted agents have not shown overwhelming results as single agents in unselected populations , improved outcomes in patients with Met alterations have been observed , supporting biomarker - driven strat - egies and the incorporation of patient selection moving forward ( further discussed in Section 5 ) . To date the most promising clinical data comes from combination therapies in which Met is believed to play a role in mechanisms of drug resistance . Current combination trials with Met agents were re - cently highlighted ( Cecchiet al . , 2012 ) . Approaches that combineinhibi - tion of Met with other EGFR family inhibitors are likely to be more effective than Met - targeted monotherapy due to overcoming primary resistance and / or avoiding acquired resistance as well as the potential to address alteration of multiple activated pathways and tumor hetero - geneity . As described in Section 3 . 3 , Met and EGFR family are frequently co - expressed , functionally collaborate and Met / HGF have consistently been found altered in patients resistant to EGFR therapies , providing a strong rationale for combining agents targeting these pathways . There are currently ongoing trials assessing the combination of erlotinib with onartuzumab in NSCLC and cabozantinib in NSCLC . There are also clinical investigations of the dual mode Met - targeted antibody LY2875358 with erlotinib in NSCLC , the small molecule Met inhibitors INC280 in combination withge ﬁ tinib in NSCLCand MGCD265incombi - nation with erlotinib in solid tumors including NSCLC . In addition , foretinib is in clinical evaluation in combination with the anti - HER2 lapatinib in HER2 + metastatic breast cancer and golvatinib in combina - tion with cetuximab is in trials for head and neck cancer . The inhibition of Met and VEGFR pathway is likewise promising given the wealth of preclinical translational data supporting the advantages of blocking both pathways ( Section 3 . 3 above ) . Several clinical trials are underway with anti - angiogenic combinations such as onartuzumab plus bevacizumab inGBM , onartuzumab plus bevacizumaband FOLFOXche - motherapy in ﬁ rst line metastatic CRC and onartuzumab plus the anti - angiogenic multi - kinase inhibitor sorafenib in advanced HCC . Additionalcombinationswithchemotherapymayalsobepromising , given the reports of elevated Met expression in response to chemother - apy ( Section 3 . 3 ) and including onartuzumab plus FOLFOX and rilotumumab plus epirubicin / cisplatin / capecitabine in GE cancers . Met - targeted agents in general have been shown to be relatively well tolerated with Met and HGF - targeted antibodies demonstrating a clean - ersafetypro ﬁ le . Todate , themostcommonlyreportedadverseeventsre - lated to Met pathway blockade included peripheral edema which was detected for both Met - targeted onartuzumab and HGF - targeted agents . The use of small molecule inhibitors was accompanied by a larger safety signal . However , since these agents inhibit additional non - Met targets , toxicitiesmayberelatedtotheblockingofalternatepathways . Forexam - ple , among the noticeable events were vascular toxicities such as hyper - tension potentially resulting from coverage of VEGFR2 . Other side effects present a complex etiology as is the case for tivantinib where toxicities may derive from microtubule - targeted activity . Nevertheless , some re - ported toxicities are signi ﬁ cant . Of note , cabozantinib prescribing infor - mation includes a boxed warning describing risks of perforations and ﬁ stulas and severe sometimes fatal hemorrhage and a trial of tivantinib in NSCLC was halted due to interstitial lung disease . 5 . Met biomarkers The frequency of Met alterations and their prognostic potential as well as the involvement of Met activation in drug resistance collectively support the development and use of Met - related biomarkers in clinical development of Met - targeted agents . High levels of Met protein and / or RNA expression were shown to be prognostic in multiple indications and the ability to predict sensitivity of cancer patients to Met - targeted agents could have signi ﬁ cant bene ﬁ t . 5 . 1 . Clinical and preclinical research ﬁ ndings Whether Met alterations are predictive of responses to Met inhibiting agents is a fundamental question under investigation in 15 C . R . Maroun , T . Rowlands / Pharmacology & Therapeutics xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Maroun , C . R . , & Rowlands , T . , The Met receptor tyrosine kinase : A key player in oncogenesis and drug resistance , Pharmacol . Ther . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2013 . 12 . 014 multiple clinical scenarios . Early results indicate improved responses in patients with high level MET ampli ﬁ cation and protein expression in certain indications , suggesting that MET ampli ﬁ cation and / or high level of protein expression could serve as biomarker for prospective pa - tient selection . MET ampli ﬁ cation predicted sensitivity to multiple Met - targeted agents including crizotinib in preclinical studies as well as in several clinical case reports ( Lennerz et al . , 2011 ; Ou et al . , 2011b ; Tanizaki et al . , 2011 ) . In a subset of esophagogastric adenocarcinoma patients , high level MET ampli ﬁ cation was detected by FISH and corre - lated with responsiveness to crizotinib , although this response was transient ( Okuda et al . , 2008 ; Lennerz et al . , 2011 ) . Similar results were obtained in a case report of recurrent glioblastoma ( Chi et al . , 2012 ) . A durable response tocrizotinib wasobserved in a NSCLCpatient with de novo MET ampli ﬁ cation ( Ou et al . , 2011 ) . Also a prolonged re - sponse to onartuzumab was described in a gastric cancer patient with evidence of MET polysomy and elevated HGF suggesting Met activation through an autocrine loop ( Catenacci et al . , 2011 ) . Multiple trials with Met - targeted agents included retrospective analysis of Met protein expression in relation with clinical responses . Of these , a single agent tivantinib study , in patients with advanced HCC expressing high Met levels ( immunohistochemistry [ IHC ] score 2 + in ≥ 50 % cells ) , tivantinib treatment resulted in statistically signi ﬁ - cant survival bene ﬁ ts compared to placebo ( TTP HR : 0 . 43 , P = . 03 ; OS HR : 0 . 38 , P = . 01 ) ( Table 3 ) , whereas no differences were reported be - tween treatment groups of patients expressing low Met levels ( Santoro et al . , 2013a ) . Using the same assessment criteria , a retrospective analy - sis of NSCLC tumors treated with tivantinib plus erlotinib failed to dem - onstrate a predictive value for Met expression ( Zahir et al . , 2012 ) . In subgroup analyses , it was shown that Met expression could have pre - dictive potential only in Met - positive patients with nonsquamous his - tology , suggesting that the clinical relevance of Met biomarker for tivantinib may vary among tumor types ( Rodig et al . , 2012 ) . An ongoing Phase III trial of onartuzumab in combination with erloti - nib in NSCLC is selecting for Met diagnostic - positive patients , as deter - mined by scoring criteria established in a Phase II trial of this agent ( Spigel et al . , 2012 , 2013 ) . Speci ﬁ cally , Met - positive patients were de - ﬁ ned as those for whom at least 50 % of tumor cells stained positive for Met with IHC intensity of 2 + / 3 + ( Spigel et al . , 2012 ) . The Phase II trial did not show signi ﬁ cant clinical activity in unselected patients , but sub - group analyses demonstrated a bene ﬁ t in PFS and OS in patients that were diagnostic - positive ( see Section 4 . 1 . 2 ; Spigel et al . , 2013 ) . Patients who expressed low levels of Met demonstrated worse outcome than placebo and the reason for this remains unclear . Another intriguing trial is that of ﬁ clatuzumab in combination with ge ﬁ tinib , where the combination failed to signi ﬁ cantly improve clinical outcomes in previ - ously untreated lung adenocarcinoma patients ( Mok et al . , 2012 ) . How - ever , subgroup analyses showed that patients with low levels of Met protein ( IHC intensity score 1 in ≤ 25 % cells ) showed a trend toward improvement of OS / PFS and response rate in the combination , this trend was not maintained in patients with higher Met expression . These results did not replicate the results observed with onartuzumab , and reasons for this discrepancy remain unknown ( Mok et al . , 2012 ) . In a rilotumumab combination trial with epirubicin / cisplatin / capecita - bine in patients with G / GEJ adenocarcinoma , the subset of tumors with high Met expression ( IHC score ≥ 1 + in N 50 % cells ) showed signi ﬁ cant OS and PFS improvement for the combination compared to chemother - apy alone ( see Section 4 . 1 . 2 ) , suggesting that Met expression could be used as a predictive marker for response to rilotumumab in this setting ( Oliner et al . , 2012 ) . While several Phase II trials support the concept that high level Met expression predicts responsesto Metagents , the question remainsopen as to whether patient selection based on Met mutations will drive clin - ical responses . Hints of responses come from a retrospective analysis of a Phase II trial of foretinib in papillary RCC where germline mutations of Met were predictive of clinical response ( Choueiri et al . , 2013 ) . Patients carrying a MET germline mutation experienced partial response ( 5 / 10 ) or stable disease ( 5 / 10 ) , compared to only 9 % ( 5 / 57 ) of patients with no Met mutations ( Choueiri et al . , 2013 ) . While these results are en - couraging , con ﬁ rmation is awaited from prospective trials . The extent of target inhibition is central to the development strategies of target - precise agents . Potent inhibition of Met activity at drug expo - sures that are attainable and safe in humans is highly desirable , therefore pharmacodynamic endpoints that indicate the degree of Met inhibition are critical . Met activation can be judged by the phosphorylation status of tyrosine residues in the kinase domainor carboxy - terminal tail as a de - creaseinactivationisassociatedwithareductioninMetphosphorylation . In multiple preclinical xenograft models the inhibition of Met phosphory - lation was associated with tumor growth inhibition by Met - targeted agents . In foretinib studies , decreased levels of phosphorylation of down - stream effectors Gab1 and Erkwere used as pharmacodynamicindicators ( Huynh et al . , 2012 ) . Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic modeling based on readouts of Met phosphorylation / activation were used in xenograft models testing crizotinib , to establish the required level of drugexposuretoreachmaximalMetinhibitionandguideclinicaltrialde - signs ( Yamazaki et al . , 2012 ) . Importantly , in clinical pre / post treatment patient biopsies , changesinMetphosphorylationandactivationof down - stream signaling effectors were observed in response to several anti - Met agents ( Eder et al . , 2010 ; Yap et al . , 2011 ; Klotz et al . , 2012 ) . For example , treatment with foretinib or tivantinib led to a decrease in the level of Met phosphorylation and activation of Erk and Akt pathways in post - treatment biopsies . However , it remains unclear whether changes in these markers are predictive of clinical responses ( Eder et al . , 2010 ; Feldman et al . , 2013 ; Santoro et al . , 2013b , a ) . Additional proof of target coverage comes from evaluation of Met - related biomarkers in plasma including HGF and shed - Met , as well as an - giogeniccytokinesandreceptorssuchasVEGF , soluble - VEGFR2andinter - leukinIL - 8foragentsco - targetingVEGFRs . Severalclinicaltrialsevaluated changesinthesecirculatingmarkers . Notably , inPhaseIandIItrialsofpa - tients treated either with single agent onartuzumab or in combination with erlotinib , the median level of plasma HGF increased from baseline over two - fold ( Penuel et al . , 2013 ) . In the absence of correlation with drug exposure , it was suggested that the increase in HGF was due to the abilityofonartuzumabtodisplaceHGFbyinterferingwithitsMetbinding ( Penuel et al . , 2013 ) . In these same trials and consistent with earlier data , baseline levels of HGF in cancer patients were over two - fold higher than in healthy donors . However , no correlation was observed between the levels of HGF at baseline ( or upon treatment ) and tumor Met expression ( Penuel et al . , 2013 ) . Interestingly , in a case report of a gastric cancer pa - tient with complete response to single agent onartuzumab , the high level of HGF signi ﬁ cantly dropped , suggesting that this patient demonstrated autocrine Met activation resulting from increased levels of stromal HGF , contributing to the circulating pool of HGF ( Catenacci et al . , 2011 ) . This pharmacodynamic effect warrants further study to con ﬁ rm validity . The HGF - antibody rilotumumab also induced a signi ﬁ cant increase in HGF suggested to be related to the augmentation of the HGF half - life as a consequence of antibody binding , and / or to a compensation mechanism increasing level of HGF expression ( Gordon et al . , 2010 ) . SheddingoftheMet extracellulardomainwasassessed asapharma - codynamic marker in multiple trials . A trend towards an increase in shed - Met was observed upon treatment with Met - targeted agents ( Penuel et al . , 2013 ) . In the case of onartuzumab this increase was explained by altered clearance of antibody - Met complexes . Shed - Met has previously been associated with malignancy ( Athauda et al . , 2006 ) . However , no trend with clinical outcome was observed ( Penuel et al . , 2013 ) . Despite the lack of correlation with drug exposure or clin - ical outcome , taken together , these markers establish a proof of concept for drug activity and target inhibition in patients . 5 . 2 . Challenges in biomarker development Selection of patients most likely to respond to Met - targeted agents requires validated diagnostic tests that are accurate , dependable and 16 C . R . Maroun , T . Rowlands / Pharmacology & Therapeutics xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Maroun , C . R . , & Rowlands , T . , The Met receptor tyrosine kinase : A key player in oncogenesis and drug resistance , Pharmacol . Ther . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2013 . 12 . 014 reproducible . Similarly , in prognostic studies , determination of Met as a biomarker by statistical association between expression and disease prognosis and / or tumor response depends on the availability of validat - ed diagnostics ( de Bono & Ashworth , 2010 ) . Clinical studies are current - ly ongoing to validate the use of Met markers including Met , P - Met and HGF in clinical practice . A range of diagnostic reagents are available to detect baseline expression and alterations in levels of these biomarkers . However , limitations such as differences in the antibodies used for IHC , inter - observer variability and differences in cut - offs , have limited consistency and reproducibility between evaluations , with additional variables related to differences in methods of tissue procurement and conservation . Differences in sensitivity and speci ﬁ city of diagnostic an - tibodies limit reproducibility and may lead to distinct clinical results . For example , a study of IHC staining of tumor cells showed varying levels of Met expression when different anti - Met antibodies were used ( Cousens et al . , 2009 ) . Speci ﬁ cally , the proportion of Met - positive cells variedbetween44 % and83 % withanti - MetSC - 10andEpitomicsreagents , respectively . There is currently no consensus on scoringcriteria for Met assays . For example inone study , highMet levels have been de ﬁ ned as IHC intensity score of at least 2 when more than 75 % of tumor cells were positive for Met ( Mok et al . , 2012 ) and in a different study , using SP44 anti - Met ( Ventana ) , the scoring criteria were de ﬁ ned for Met - diagnostic positive as at least 50 % of positive tumor cells with an intensity of 2 + / 3 + ( Spigel et al . , 2012 , 2013 ) . Due to the wide variability of results across tumor types , drug classes , and different Met antibodies used for IHC as - says , distinct assay conditions may be required in different indications . The majority of retrospective biomarker studies to date have evalu - ated the levels of total Met , although considering phosphorylated - Met may offer further advantages due to the potential for indicating the activation status of Met . However , establishing reagents and assay sys - tems for the recognition of phosphorylated forms of Met has been not surprisingly challenging . On the one hand most antibodies used to date cross - react with additional phosphorylated RTKs given the high degree of conservation of the tyrosine kinase domains and on the other hand , phosphorylated tyrosine residues are particularly labile , af - fected by tissue procurement , ﬁ xation and conservation . Tissue snap freezing may offer an alternative but presents its own challenges . Novel techonologies exploring alternatives include a “ proximity ” assay that detects HGF – Met complexes as a surrogate for activated receptor ( Dua et al . , 2011 ) . Consistent criteria and validated tests are also needed for the de ﬁ ni - tion and evaluation of MET ampli ﬁ cation . To date FISH and other methods ( PCR or comparative genomic hybridization [ CGH ] ) used variouscriteriafor determining MET ampli ﬁ cation “ positivity ” ( summa - rized in Ou et al . , 2011b ) . It was suggested that high level MET ampli ﬁ - cation is de ﬁ ned by the presence of homogeneously staining regions , and scoring of MET / CEP7 ratio N 2 . 2 , however , optimization of these methodsand validation ofthe scoringcriteria inclinical trials are neces - sary to establish the use of MET ampli ﬁ cation as a prospective selection biomarker . Another challenge in biomarker development is related to the dif ﬁ - culty to access tumor tissues for stringent validation of marker expres - sion pro ﬁ les . Frequent / repeat tumor biopsy pre / post treatment and ideally at time of progression may not be feasible in some indications . Furthermore , increasing efforts in molecular pro ﬁ ling to match speci ﬁ c genetic alterations with appropriate therapeutic agents , and patients maintained on successive biomarker - dependent trials , limit the avail - ability of archival biopsies . Circulating markers and surrogate tissues ( blood , plucked hair ) may offer alternate strategies but are subject to similar limitations involving assay validation . 5 . 3 . Novel biomarker strategies Key challenges in biomarker development relate to the nature of cancer itself . Molecular heterogeneity exists among patients within an indication as well as intra - patient heterogeneity due to molecular changes occurring throughout the disease process , in response to treat - ment and as a consequence of resistance to therapy . While protein markers are often used to assess and predict disease progression and drug response , gene expression markers may provide more reliable re - sults , especially when these genotypic changes are within oncogenic drivers and could mediate drug effects . Therefore multiplex genotyping to simultaneously evaluate multiple targets and alterations thereof , using the same tissue specimen , will be critical moving forward ( Giampieri et al . , 2013 ) . These technologies will eliminate the need for sequential testing and may provide a much needed contraction of turn - around time and costs . As discussed above , Met alterations ( mutations , exon - 14 - skipping , high copy number ) are of signi ﬁ cance if considered collectively within a given indication , supporting the simultaneous evaluation of these genetic alterations . Emerging technologies to identify such actionable alterations are in development , but use of such methodologies in prospective clinical settings will require robust validation in line with regulatory recommendations and guidelines . Novel technologies with potential in this area include PCR - based assays that evaluate multiple mutations simultaneously in a selected set of oncogenic drivers from ge - nomic DNA isolated from formalin - ﬁ xed , paraf ﬁ n - embedded ( FFPE ) tumortissuesections , mass spectrometry - basedsystems ( e . g . Sequenom OncoCarta ) or capillary electrophoresis analyses ( SNaPshot platform from Applied Biosystems ) ( Thomas et al . , 2007 ; Sequist et al . , 2011 ; Li et al . , 2013 ) . More recently , next generation sequencing combined with an exon - targeted approach has enabled the identi ﬁ cation of speci ﬁ c al - terationsofinterestincludingmutations , fusionsandgenecopynumbers ( Chmielecki et al . , 2010 ; Wagle et al . , 2012 ) . Together with the develop - ment of powerful bioinformatic tools this opens avenues for future diag - nostics . These novel “ high - depth ” sequencing technologies will enable ef ﬁ cient and reliable genotyping for the development of Met - targeted agents . Other strategies that complement Met - targeted therapeutic strate - gies are being explored . Among these , a number of imaging techniques including magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) and positron emission to - mography ( PET ) have been assessed . A MRI anti - Met antibody probe was designed to detect Met expression levels in vivo in an experimental rodent model of C6 glioma ( Towner et al . , 2010 ) . PET tracers 3 ′ - deoxy - 3 ′ [ 18 F ] - ﬂ uorothymidine and [ 18 F ] - 2 - ﬂ uoro - 2 - deoxy - D - glucose were used assurrogatemarkerstoassesstumorresponsetoMetinhibitorscrizotin - ib and rilotumumab ( Cullinane et al . , 2011 ; Rex et al . , 2013 ) . A PET imag - ing agent using onartuzumab ( 89 Zr - df - onartuzumab ) was recently developed and its utility was assessed in gastric carcinoma xenografts ( Wright et al . , 2013 ) . While these technologies offer some advantages , challenges related to test availability and costs may be limiting . MicroRNAs may also represent novel markers of Met activity . Three candidate microRNAs that are involved in the modulation of Met expression , miR - 449a , miR - 340 , and miR - 409 - 3p are downregulated inNSCLC , aggressivebreastcancercelllines , andbladdercancercells , re - spectively ( Wu et al . , 2011 ; Lee et al . , 2013 ; Luo et al . , 2013 ) . In breast cancercelllines , expressionof miR - 340wasfound to be inverselycorre - lated with Metexpression ( Wu et al . , 2011 ) . Additionally , the identi ﬁ ca - tion of small sets of gene signatures based on mRNA expression pro ﬁ les can be helpful in predicting drug response . In a recent preclinical study , a Met gene signature ( including Met and 4 proximal genes in the same chromosome ) was found to be signi ﬁ cantly more accurate in predicting sensitivity to the Met inhibitor TAS - 115 than Met expression alone ( Itadani et al . , 2012 ) . 6 . Conclusions Being a key oncogenic driver and contributor to drug resistance , Met is an attractive therapeutic and predictive target . Clinical trials of Met - targeted drug monotherapy have shown promising results in terms of anti - tumor ef ﬁ cacy and improvement of clinical outcomes in various 17 C . R . Maroun , T . Rowlands / Pharmacology & Therapeutics xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Maroun , C . R . , & Rowlands , T . , The Met receptor tyrosine kinase : A key player in oncogenesis and drug resistance , Pharmacol . Ther . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2013 . 12 . 014 types of previously treated advanced cancers . Met - targeted treatments provide new options to cancer patients for whom other therapies have not been successful . However , the greatest potential of Met - targeted agents may reside in combined approaches whereby multiple molecular drivers and mechanisms of resistance are simultaneously inhibited , either via multi - targeted small molecule inhibitors , or by combination therapy approaches . In preclinical studies using Met - targeted agents in combination therapy , drug sensitivity was restored in resistant tumors . These observations are promising in the context of drug resistance , a factor which frequently challenges treatment success . Synergistic inhibition of Met and EGFR are of particular importance for patients with lung and colorectal cancer where Met has been shown to be involved in anti - EGFR resistance . Further , biomarker development studies have helped identify several markers in the HGF / Met axis that have prognostic and predictive value . Future progress in the area of Met targeted therapies will focus on incorporation of markers to opti - mize patient selection and treatment strategies . Thus , precisely targeting patient populations with most chance of responding will help improve clinical outcomes thereby delaying or preventing disease progression . The HGF / Met axis has signi ﬁ cant clinical potential , which will be realized in the context of the development and validation of bio - markers and rational mechanism - based treatment combinations . Con ﬂ ict of interest statement This review was funded by Mirati Therapeutics . Christiane Maroun and Tracey Rowlands are full time employees of Mirati Therapeutics . Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank Drs . James Christensen and Charles Baum for their thoughtful comments on this manuscript . This article was prepared with the assistance of LASER Analytica , Montréal , Québec , Canada . References ArQule Inc . ( ) . ArQule and Daiichi Sankyo Announce Discontinuation of Phase 3 MARQUEE Clinical Trial in Non - small Cell Lung Cancer . Retrieved Sept . 24 , 2013 , from . http : / / investors . arqule . com / releasedetail . cfm ? ReleaseID = 710618 Athauda , G . , Giubellino , A . , Coleman , J . A . , Horak , C . , Steeg , P . S . , Lee , M . J . , et al . ( 2006 ) . c - Met ectodomain shedding rate correlates with malignant potential . Clin Cancer Res 12 ( 14 Pt 1 ) , 4154 – 4162 . Awazu , Y . , Nakamura , K . , Mizutani , A . , Kakoi , Y . , Iwata , H . , Yamasaki , S . , et al . ( 2013 ) . A novel inhibitor of c - Met and VEGF receptor tyrosine kinases with a broad spectrum of in vivo antitumor activities . Mol Cancer Ther 12 ( 6 ) , 913 – 924 . Baek , J . H . , Birchmeier , C . , Zenke , M . , & Hieronymus , T . ( 2012 ) . The HGF receptor / Met tyrosine kinase is a key regulator of dendritic cell migration in skin immunity . J Immunol 189 ( 4 ) , 1699 – 1707 . Bardelli , A . , Corso , S . , Bertotti , A . , Hobor , S . , Valtorta , E . , Siravegna , G . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Ampli - ﬁ cation of the MET receptor drives resistance to anti - EGFR therapies in colorectal cancer . Cancer Discov 3 ( 6 ) , 658 – 673 . Barretina , J . , Caponigro , G . , Stransky , N . , Venkatesan , K . , Margolin , A . A . , Kim , S . , et al . ( 2012 ) . The CancerCellLineEncyclopedia enablespredictive modellingofanticancer drug sensitivity . Nature 483 ( 7391 ) , 603 – 607 . Basilico , C . , Pennacchietti , S . , Vigna , E . , Chiriaco , C . , Arena , S . , Bardelli , A . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Tivantinib ( ARQ197 ) displays cytotoxic activity that is independent of its ability to bind MET . Clin Cancer Res 19 ( 9 ) , 2381 – 2392 . Baum , B . , Settleman , J . , & Quinlan , M . P . ( 2008 ) . Transitions between epithelial and mesenchymal states in development and disease . Semin Cell Dev Biol 19 ( 3 ) , 294 – 308 . Bean , J . , Brennan , C . , Shih , J . Y . , Riely , G . , Viale , A . , Wang , L . , etal . ( 2007 ) . METampli ﬁ cation occurs withorwithoutT790MmutationsinEGFR mutant lungtumors withacquired resistance to ge ﬁ tinib or erlotinib . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 ( 52 ) , 20932 – 20937 . Beau - Faller , M . , Ruppert , A . M . , Voegeli , A . C . , Neuville , A . , Meyer , N . , Guerin , E . , et al . ( 2008 ) . MET gene copy number in non - small cell lung cancer : molecular analysis in a targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor naive cohort . J Thorac Oncol 3 ( 4 ) , 331 – 339 . Beaulieu , N . , Sainte - Croix , H . , Bon ﬁ ls , C . , & Mannion , M . ( 2013 ) . Preclinical characteriza - tion of MG516 , a novel inhibitor of receptor tyrosine kinases involved in resistance to targeted therapies . Poster Presented at AACR 2013 ; 2013 Apr 6 – 10 , Washington , DC . Beilmann , M . , Odenthal , M . , Jung , W . , Vande Woude , G . F . , Dienes , H . P . , & Schirmacher , P . ( 1997 ) . Neoexpression of the c - met / hepatocyte growth factor - scatterfactorreceptor gene in activated monocytes . Blood 90 ( 11 ) , 4450 – 4458 . Bendell , J . C . , Ervin , T . J . , Gallinson , D . , Singh , J . , Wallace , J . A . , Saleh , M . N . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Treatment rationale and study design for a randomized , double - blind , placebo - controlled phase II study evaluating onartuzumab ( MetMAb ) in combination with bevacizumab plus mFOLFOX - 6 in patients with previously untreated metastatic colorectal cancer . Clin Colorectal Cancer 12 ( 3 ) , 218 – 222 . Benkhoucha , M . , Santiago - Raber , M . L . , Schneiter , G . , Chof ﬂ on , M . , Funakoshi , H . , Nakamura , T . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Hepatocyte growth factor inhibits CNS autoimmunity by inducing tolerogenic dendritic cells and CD25 + Foxp3 + regulatory T cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107 ( 14 ) , 6424 – 6429 . Bergers , G . , & Hanahan , D . ( 2008 ) . Modesofresistancetoanti - angiogenictherapy . NatRev Cancer 8 ( 8 ) , 592 – 603 . Boccaccio , C . , Ando , M . , Tamagnone , L . , Bardelli , A . , Michieli , P . , Battistini , C . , et al . ( 1998 ) . Induction of epithelial tubules by growth factor HGF depends on the STAT pathway . Nature 391 ( 6664 ) , 285 – 288 . Boccaccio , C . , & Comoglio , P . M . ( 2006 ) . Invasive growth : a MET - driven genetic programme for cancer and stem cells . Nat Rev Cancer 6 ( 8 ) , 637 – 645 . Boccaccio , C . , & Comoglio , P . M . ( 2013 ) . The MET oncogene in glioblastoma stem cells : implications as a diagnostic marker and a therapeutic target . Cancer Res 73 ( 11 ) , 3193 – 3199 . Bon ﬁ ls , C . , Beaulieu , N . , Fournel , M . , & Ste - Croix , H . ( 2012 ) . ThecombinationofMGCD265 , a Met / VEGFR inhibitor in clinical development , and erlotinib potently inhibits tumor growth by altering multiple pathways including glycolysis . Poster Presented at the AACR Annual Meeting ; 2012 Mar 31 – Apr 4 , Chicago . Boon , E . M . , van der Neut , R . , van de Wetering , M . , Clevers , H . , & Pals , S . T . ( 2002 ) . Wnt signaling regulates expression of the receptor tyrosine kinase met in colorectal cancer . Cancer Res 62 ( 18 ) , 5126 – 5128 . Bottaro , D . P . , Rubin , J . S . , Faletto , D . L . , Chan , A . M . , Kmiecik , T . E . , VandeWoude , G . F . , etal . ( 1991 ) . Identi ﬁ cation of the hepatocyte growth factor receptor as the c - met proto - oncogene product . Science 251 ( 4995 ) , 802 – 804 . Buckanovich , R . J . , Berger , R . , Sella , A . , & Sikic , B . I . ( 2011 ) . Activityofcabozantinib ( XL184 ) in advanced ovarian cancer patients ( pts ) : results from a phase II randomized discontinuation trial ( RDT ) . J Clin Oncol 29 ( Suppl . , Abstract 5008 ) . Cabanillas , M . E . , Brose , M . S . , Ramies , D . A . , Lee , Y . , & Miles , D . ( 2012 ) . Antitumor activity of cabozantinib ( XL184 ) in a cohort of patients with differentiated thyroid cancer ( DTC ) . Poster Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology ; 2012 June 1 – 5 , Chicago . Cappuzzo , F . , Marchetti , A . , Skokan , M . , Rossi , E . , Gajapathy , S . , Felicioni , L . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Increased MET gene copy number negatively affects survival of surgically resected non - small - cell lung cancer patients . J Clin Oncol 27 ( 10 ) , 1667 – 1674 . Catenacci , D . V . , Henderson , L . , Xiao , S . Y . , Patel , P . , Yauch , R . L . , Hegde , P . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Durable complete response of metastatic gastric cancer with anti - Met therapy followed by resistance at recurrence . Cancer Discov 1 ( 7 ) , 573 – 579 . Cecchi , F . , Rabe , D . C . , & Bottaro , D . P . ( 2012 ) . TargetingtheHGF / Metsignalingpathwayin cancer therapy . Expert Opin Ther Targets 16 ( 6 ) , 553 – 572 . Cepero , V . , Sierra , J . R . , Corso , S . , Ghiso , E . , Casorzo , L . , Perera , T . , et al . ( 2010 ) . MET and KRAS gene ampli ﬁ cation mediates acquired resistance to MET tyrosine kinase inhib - itors . Cancer Res 70 ( 19 ) , 7580 – 7590 . Chapman , P . B . , Hauschild , A . , Robert , C . , Haanen , J . B . , Ascierto , P . , Larkin , J . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Improved survival with vemurafenib in melanoma with BRAF V600E mutation . N Engl J Med 364 ( 26 ) , 2507 – 2516 . Chen , Y . T . , Chang , J . W . , Liu , H . P . , Yu , T . F . , Chiu , Y . T . , Hsieh , J . J . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Clinical implications of highMET gene dosage innon - small cell lungcancer patients without previous tyrosine kinase inhibitor treatment . J Thorac Oncol 6 ( 12 ) , 2027 – 2035 . Chen , S . Y . , & Chen , H . C . ( 2006 ) . Direct interaction of focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) with Met is required for FAK to promote hepatocyte growth factor - induced cell invasion . Mol Cell Biol 26 ( 13 ) , 5155 – 5167 . Chen , C . T . , Kim , H . , Liska , D . , Gao , S . , Christensen , J . G . , & Weiser , M . R . ( 2012 ) . MET acti - vation mediates resistance to lapatinib inhibition of HER2 - ampli ﬁ ed gastric cancer cells . Mol Cancer Ther 11 ( 3 ) , 660 – 669 . Chi , A . S . , Batchelor , T . T . , Kwak , E . L . , Clark , J . W . , Wang , D . L . , Wilner , K . D . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Rapid radiographic and clinical improvement after treatment of a MET - ampli ﬁ ed re - current glioblastoma with a mesenchymal – epithelial transition inhibitor . J Clin Oncol 30 ( 3 ) , e30 – e33 . Chmielecki , J . , Peifer , M . , Jia , P . , Socci , N . D . , Hutchinson , K . , Viale , A . , etal . ( 2010 ) . Targeted next - generationsequencingofDNAregionsproximaltoaconservedGXGXXGsignaling motifenablessystematicdiscoveryoftyrosinekinasefusionsincancer . NucleicAcidsRes 38 ( 20 ) , 6985 – 6996 . Choi , J . S . , Kim , M . K . , Seo , J . W . , Choi , Y . L . , Kim , D . H . , Chun , Y . K . , et al . ( 2006 ) . MET expression in sporadic renal cell carcinomas . J Korean Med Sci 21 ( 4 ) , 672 – 677 . Choueiri , T . K . , Pal , S . K . , McDermott , D . F . , & Ramies , D . A . ( 2012 ) . Ef ﬁ cacyof cabozantinib ( XL184 ) in patients with metastatic , refractory renal cell carcinoma . Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology ; 2012 June 1 – 5 , Chicago . Choueiri , T . K . , Vaishampayan , U . , Rosenberg , J . E . , Logan , T . F . , Harzstark , A . L . , Bukowski , R . M . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Phase II and biomarker study of the dual MET / VEGFR2 inhibitor foretinib in patients with papillary renal cell carcinoma . J Clin Oncol 31 ( 2 ) , 181 – 186 . Christensen , J . G . , Burrows , J . , & Salgia , R . ( 2005 ) . c - Met as a target for human cancer and characterization of inhibitors for therapeutic intervention . Cancer Lett 225 ( 1 ) , 1 – 26 . Cooper , C . S . , Park , M . , Blair , D . G . , Tainsky , M . A . , Huebner , K . , Croce , C . M . , etal . ( 1984 ) . Mo - lecular cloning of a new transforming gene from a chemically transformed human cell line . Nature 311 ( 5981 ) , 29 – 33 . Cousens , L . , Waghorne , C . , Rodig , S . , Gu , X . , Zhao , X . , Yu , Y . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Expression of c - MET and related oncogenic signals in formalin - ﬁ xed paraf ﬁ n - embedded human tumors . Mol Cancer Ther 8 ( 12 Suppl . 1 ) ( Abstract B117 ) . Cullinane , C . , Dorow , D . S . , Jackson , S . , Solomon , B . , Bogatyreva , E . , Binns , D . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Differential 18 F - FDG and 3 ′ - deoxy - 3 ′ - 18 F - ﬂ uorothymidine PET responses to 18 C . R . Maroun , T . Rowlands / Pharmacology & Therapeutics xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Maroun , C . R . , & Rowlands , T . , The Met receptor tyrosine kinase : A key player in oncogenesis and drug resistance , Pharmacol . Ther . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2013 . 12 . 014 pharmacologic inhibition of the c - MET receptor in preclinical tumor models . J Nucl Med 52 ( 8 ) , 1261 – 1267 . Cunningham , D . , Al - Batran , S . - E . , Davidenko , I . , & Ilson , D . H . ( 2013 ) . RILOMET - 1 : an in - ternational phase 3 multicenter , randomized , double - blind , placebo - controlled trial ofrilotumumabplusepirubicin , cisplatin , andcapecitabine ( ECX ) as ﬁ rst - linetherapy in patients with advanced MET - positive gastic or gastroesophageal junction ( G / GEJ ) adenocarcinoma . Poster presented at American Society of Clinical Oncology Annual Meeting ; 2013 May 31 – June 4 , Chicago . Cunningham , D . , Bang , Y . - J . , Tabernero , J . , & Shah , M . ( 2013 ) . METGastric : a randomized phase III study of onartuzumab ( MetMAb ) in combination with mFOLFOX6 in pa - tientswithmetastaticHER2 - negativeandMET - positiveadenocarcinomaofthestom - ach or gastroesophageal junction . Poster Presented at American Society of Clinical Oncology Annual Meeting ; 2013 May 31 – June 4 , Chicago . Daniele , G . , Ranson , M . , Blanco - Codesido , M . , & Dean , E . ( 2012 ) . Phase I dose - ﬁ nding study of golvatinib ( E7050 ) , a c - Met and EPH receptor targeted multi - kinase inhibi - tor , administered orally QD to patients with advanced solid tumors . Poster Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology ; 2012 June 1 – 5 , Chicago . D ' Arcangelo , M . , & Cappuzzo , F . ( 2013 ) . Focusonthepotential role of ﬁ clatuzumabinthe treatment of non - small cell lung cancer . Biologics 7 , 61 – 68 . Daud , A . , Kluger , H . M . , Edelman , G . , & Gordon , M . S . ( 2013 ) . Activity of cabozantinib in metastatic uveal melanoma : updated results from a phase IIrandomized discontinu - ation trial ( RDT ) . J Clin Oncol 31 ( 15 Suppl . ) ( Abstract 9094 ) . Davare , M . A . , Sabrowski , A . , Eide , C . A . , Tognon , C . , Smith , R . L . , Elferich , J . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Foretinib is a potent inhibitor of oncogenic ROS1 fusion proteins . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110 , 19519 – 19524 . Davidenko , I . , Ivenson , T . , Donehower , R . C . , Tjulandin , S . , & Deptala , A . ( 2012 ) . Updated ef ﬁ cacy , biomarker , and exposure – response data from a phase 2 study of rilotumumabplusepirubicin , cisplatin , andcapecitabineingastricoresophagogastric junction cancer . Poster Presented at the European Society for Medical Oncology Congress ; 2012 Sept 28 – Oct 2 , Vienna . De Bacco , F . , Luraghi , P . , Medico , E . , Reato , G . , Girolami , F . , Perera , T . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Induc - tion of MET by ionizing radiation and its role in radioresistance and invasive growth of cancer . J Natl Cancer Inst 103 ( 8 ) , 645 – 661 . de Bono , J . S . , & Ashworth , A . ( 2010 ) . Translatingcancerresearch into targetedtherapeutics . Nature 467 ( 7315 ) , 543 – 549 . Di Renzo , M . F . , Olivero , M . , Giacomini , A . , Porte , H . , Chastre , E . , Mirossay , L . , et al . ( 1995 ) . Overexpression and ampli ﬁ cation of the met / HGF receptor gene during the progres - sion of colorectal cancer . Clin Cancer Res 1 ( 2 ) , 147 – 154 . DiRenzo , M . F . , Olivero , M . , Martone , T . , Maffe , A . , Maggiora , P . , Stefani , A . D . , etal . ( 2000 ) . Somatic mutations of the MET oncogene are selected during metastatic spread of human HNSC carcinomas . Oncogene 19 ( 12 ) , 1547 – 1555 . Doi , T . , Yoshino , N . , Fuse , N . , & Bando , H . ( 2012 ) . Phase I dose - ﬁ nding study of golvatinib ( t = 7050 ) , a c - Met andEPH receptor targetedmulti - kinaseinhibitor , administrated orally bid to patients with advanced solid tumors . Poster Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology ; 2012 June 1 – 5 , Chicago . Dong , G . , Chen , Z . , Li , Z . Y . , Yeh , N . T . , Bancroft , C . C . , & Van , W . C . ( 2001 ) . Hepatocyte growth factor / scatter factor - induced activation of MEK and PI3K signal pathways contributes to expression of proangiogenic cytokines interleukin - 8 and vascular endothelial growth factor in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma . Cancer Res 61 ( 15 ) , 5911 – 5918 . Dua , R . , Zhang , J . , Parry , G . , & Penuel , E . ( 2011 ) . Detection of hepatocyte growth factot ( HGF ) ligand - c - Met receptor activation in formalin - ﬁ xed paraf ﬁ n embedded speci - mens by a novel proximity assay . PLoS One 6 ( 1 ) , e15932 . Dussault , I . , & Bellon , S . F . ( 2009 ) . Fromconcepttoreality : thelongroadtoc - MetandRON receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitorsforthe treatment of cancer . Anticancer AgentsMed Chem 9 ( 2 ) , 221 – 229 . Dziadziuszko , R . , Wynes , M . W . , Singh , S . , Asuncion , B . R . , Ranger - Moore , J . , Konopa , K . , etal . ( 2012 ) . Correlationbetween METgenecopynumberbysilverinsituhybridiza - tion andprotein expression by immunohistochemistry innon - small celllungcancer . J Thorac Oncol 7 ( 2 ) , 340 – 347 . Eathiraj , S . , Palma , R . , Volckova , E . , Hirschi , M . , France , D . S . , Ashwell , M . A . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Discovery of a novel mode of protein kinase inhibition characterized by the mechanism of inhibition of human mesenchymal – epithelial transition factor ( c - Met ) protein autophosphorylation by ARQ 197 . J Biol Chem 286 ( 23 ) , 20666 – 20676 . Ebens , A . , Brose , K . , Leonardo , E . D . , Hanson , M . G . , Jr . , Bladt , F . , Birchmeier , C . , etal . ( 1996 ) . Hepatocyte growth factor / scatter factor is an axonal chemoattractant and a neuro - trophic factor for spinal motor neurons . Neuron 17 ( 6 ) , 1157 – 1172 . Ebos , J . M . , Lee , C . R . , Cruz - Munoz , W . , Bjarnason , G . A . , Christensen , J . G . , & Kerbel , R . S . ( 2009 ) . Accelerated metastasis after short - term treatment with a potent inhibitor of tumor angiogenesis . Cancer Cell 15 ( 3 ) , 232 – 239 . Eder , J . P . , Shapiro , G . I . , Appleman , L . J . , Zhu , A . X . , Miles , D . , Keer , H . , etal . ( 2010 ) . Aphase I study of foretinib , a multi - targeted inhibitor of c - Met and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 . Clin Cancer Res 16 ( 13 ) , 3507 – 3516 . Elisei , R . , Schlumberger , M . J . , Muller , S . P . , Schoffski , P . , Brose , M . S . , Shah , M . H . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Cabozantinib in progressive medullary thyroid cancer . J Clin Oncol 31 ( 29 ) , 3639 – 3646 . Eng , C . , Hart , L . L . , Severtsev , A . , & Gladkov , O . ( 2013 ) . A randomized , placebo - controlled , phase I / II study of tivantinib ( ARQ 197 ) in combination with cetuximab and irinotecan in patients ( pts ) with KRAS wild - type ( WT ) metastatic colorectal cancer ( CRC ) who had received previous front - line systemic therapy . J Clin Oncol 31 ( 15 Suppl . ) ( Abstract 3508 ) . Eng , C . , Van Cutsem , E . , Nowara , E . , & Swieboda - Sadlej , A . ( 2011 ) . A randomized , phase Ib / II trial of rilotumumab ( AMG 102 ; ril ) or ganitumab ( AMG 479 ; gan ) with panitumumab ( pmab ) versus pmab alone in patients ( pts ) with wild - type ( WT ) KRAS metastatic colorectal cancer ( mCRC ) : primary and biomarker analyses . J Clin Oncol 29 ( Suppl . , Abstract 3500 ) . Engelman , J . A . , Zejnullahu , K . , Mitsudomi , T . , Song , Y . , Hyland , C . , Park , J . O . , et al . ( 2007 ) . MET ampli ﬁ cation leads to ge ﬁ tinib resistance in lung cancer by activating ERBB3 signaling . Science 316 ( 5827 ) , 1039 – 1043 . Exelixis Inc . , PrescribingInformation , Cometriq , Retrieved Sept . 24 , 2013 from http : / / www . cometriq . com / . Falchook , G . S . , Hong , D . S . , Amin , H . M . , Fu , S . , & Piha - Paul , S . A . ( 2013 ) . Phase I study of oral selective c - Met inhibitor EMD 1214063 in pts with advanced solid tumors . J Clin Oncol 31 ( Suppl . , Abstract 2506 ) . Feldman , D . R . , Einhorn , L . H . , Quinn , D . I . , Loriot , Y . , Joffe , J . K . , Vaughn , D . J . , etal . ( 2013 ) . A phase 2 multicenter study of tivantinib ( ARQ 197 ) monotherapy in patients with re - lapsed or refractory germ cell tumors . Invest New Drugs 31 ( 4 ) , 1016 – 1022 . Fixman , E . D . , Fournier , T . M . , Kamikura , D . M . , Naujokas , M . A . , & Park , M . ( 1996 ) . Pathways downstream of Shc and Grb2 are required for cell transformation by the tpr - Met oncoprotein . J Biol Chem 271 ( 22 ) , 13116 – 13122 . Fixman , E . D . , Naujokas , M . A . , Rodrigues , G . A . , Moran , M . F . , & Park , M . ( 1995 ) . Ef ﬁ cient cell transformation by the Tpr - Met oncoprotein is dependent upon tyrosine 489 in the carboxy - terminus . Oncogene 10 ( 2 ) , 237 – 249 . Fournel , M . , Wang , J . , Beaulieu , N . , Bon ﬁ ls , C . , & Hurwitz , H . ( 2012 ) . A novel , ex vivoassay for quantifying met inhibitory activity of MGCD265 , a Met / VEGF oral tyrosine kinase inhibitor , incancerpatients . PresentedattheEORTC - NCI - AACRSymposiumon Molecular Targets and Cancer Therapeutics ; 2011 Nov 12 – 16 , Dublin . Fujita , H . , Kato , M . , Miyadera , K . , Fujioka , Y . , & Sato , T . ( 2011 ) . MET / VEGFR dual inhibition and prominent safety pro ﬁ le of TAS - 115 are favorable for the combination with chemotherapeutic drugs . Poster Presentated at the AACR 102nd Annual Meeting 2011 ; 2011 Apr 2 – 6 , Orlando . Fujita , H . , Miyadera , K . , Kato , M . , Fujioka , Y . , & Sato , T . ( 2011 ) . TAS - 115 : a highly potent c - Met + VEGFRs dual inhibitor with prominently safer pro ﬁ le . Poster Presentated at the AACR 102nd Annual Meeting 2011 ; 2011 Apr 2 – 6 , Orlando . Galimi , F . , Cottone , E . , Vigna , E . , Arena , N . , Boccaccio , C . , Giordano , S . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Hepa - tocyte growth factor is a regulator of monocyte - macrophage function . J Immunol 166 ( 2 ) , 1241 – 1247 . Gambarotta , G . , Boccaccio , C . , Giordano , S . , Ando , M . , Stella , M . C . , & Comoglio , P . M . ( 1996 ) . Ets up - regulates MET transcription . Oncogene 13 ( 9 ) , 1911 – 1917 . Ganapathipillai , S . S . , Medova , M . , Aebersold , D . M . , Manley , P . W . , Berthou , S . , Streit , B . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Coupling of mutated Met variants to DNA repair via Abl and Rad51 . Cancer Res 68 ( 14 ) , 5769 – 5777 . Gao , W . , Bing , X . , Li , M . , Yang , Z . , Li , Y . , & Chen , H . ( 2013 ) . Studyofcriticalroleofc - Metand its inhibitor SU11274 in colorectal carcinoma . Med Oncol 30 ( 2 ) , 546 . Gastaldi , S . , Sassi , F . , Accornero , P . , Torti , D . , Galimi , F . , Migliardi , G . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Met sig - naling regulates growth , repopulating potential and basal cell - fate commitment of mammary luminal progenitors : implications for basal - like breast cancer . Oncogene 32 ( 11 ) , 1428 – 1440 . Gaudino , G . , Follenzi , A . , Naldini , L . , Collesi , C . , Santoro , M . , Gallo , K . A . , etal . ( 1994 ) . RONis a heterodimeric tyrosine kinase receptor activated by the HGF homologue MSP . EMBO J 13 ( 15 ) , 3524 – 3532 . Gerritsen , M . E . , Tomlinson , J . E . , Zlot , C . , Ziman , M . , & Hwang , S . ( 2003 ) . Using gene ex - pression pro ﬁ lingto identify the molecular basis of the synergisticactionsof hepato - cytegrowthfactorandvascularendothelialgrowthfactorinhumanendothelialcells . Br J Pharmacol 140 ( 4 ) , 595 – 610 . Ghadjar , P . , Blank - Liss , W . , Simcock , M . , Hegyi , I . , Beer , K . T . , Moch , H . , et al . ( 2009 ) . MET Y1253D - activating point mutation and development of distant metastasis in advanced head and neck cancers . Clin Exp Metastasis 26 ( 7 ) , 809 – 815 . Gherardi , E . , Birchmeier , W . , Birchmeier , C . , & Vande , W . G . ( 2012 ) . TargetingMETincancer : rationale and progress . Nat Rev Cancer 12 ( 2 ) , 89 – 103 . Giampieri , R . , Scartozzi , M . , Del , P . M . , Maccaroni , E . , Bittoni , A . , Faloppi , L . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Molecular biomarkers of resistance to anti - EGFR treatment in metastatic colorectal cancer , from classical to innovation . Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 88 ( 2 ) , 272 – 283 . Giordano , S . , Corso , S . , Conrotto , P . , Artigiani , S . , Gilestro , G . , Barberis , D . , etal . ( 2002 ) . The semaphorin 4D receptor controlsinvasive growth by couplingwith Met . Nat Cell Biol 4 ( 9 ) , 720 – 724 . Giordano , S . , Maffe , A . , Williams , T . A . , Artigiani , S . , Gual , P . , Bardelli , A . , et al . ( 2000 ) . Dif - ferentpointmutationsinthemetoncogeneelicitdistinctbiologicalproperties . FASEB J 14 ( 2 ) , 399 – 406 . Go , H . , Jeon , Y . K . , Park , H . J . , Sung , S . W . , Seo , J . W . , & Chung , D . H . ( 2010 ) . HighMET gene copy number leads to shorter survival in patients with non - small cell lung cancer . J Thorac Oncol 5 ( 3 ) , 305 – 313 . Goetsch , L . , & Caussanel , V . ( 2010 ) . Selection criteria for c - Met - targeted therapies : emerging evidence for biomarkers . Biomark Med 4 ( 1 ) , 149 – 170 . Goldman , J . W . , Rosen , L . S . , Algazi , P . A . , Turner , P . K . , Wacheck , V . , Tuttle , J . , et al . ( 2013 ) . First - in - humandose escalationstudyofLY2875358 ( LY ) , abivalentMETantibody , as monotherapy and in combination with erlotinib ( E ) in patients with advanced cancer . J Clin Oncol 31 ( Suppl . , abstract 8093 ) . Gordon , M . S . , Kluger , H . M . , Shapiro , G . , Kurzrock , R . , & Edelman , G . ( 2012 ) . Activity of cabozantinib ( XL184 ) in metastatic melanoma : results from a phase 2 randomized discontinuation trial ( RDT ) . Poster Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology ; 2012 June 1 – 5 , Chicago . Gordon , M . S . , Sweeney , C . S . , Mendelson , D . S . , Eckhardt , S . G . , Anderson , A . , Beaupre , D . M . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Safety , pharmacokinetics , and pharmacodynamics of AMG 102 , a fully human hepatocyte growth factor - neutralizing monoclonal antibody , in a ﬁ rst - in - human study of patients with advanced solid tumors . Clin Cancer Res 16 ( 2 ) , 699 – 710 . Graveel , C . R . , DeGroot , J . D . , Sigler , R . E . , & Vande Woude , G . F . ( 2010 ) . Germline met mu - tations in mice reveal mutation - and background - associated differences in tumor pro ﬁ les . PLoS One 5 ( 10 ) , e13586 . 19 C . R . Maroun , T . Rowlands / Pharmacology & Therapeutics xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Maroun , C . R . , & Rowlands , T . , The Met receptor tyrosine kinase : A key player in oncogenesis and drug resistance , Pharmacol . Ther . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2013 . 12 . 014 Graveel , C . R . , DeGroot , J . D . , Su , Y . , Koeman , J . , Dykema , K . , Leung , S . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Met in - duces diverse mammary carcinomas in mice and is associated with human basal breast cancer . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 ( 31 ) , 12909 – 12914 . Graveel , C . , Su , Y . , Koeman , J . , Wang , L . M . , Tessarollo , L . , Fiscella , M . , etal . ( 2004 ) . Activating Metmutationsproduceuniquetumorpro ﬁ lesinmicewithselectiveduplicationofthe mutant allele . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 ( 49 ) , 17198 – 17203 . Guryanova , O . A . , & Bao , S . ( 2011 ) . How scatter factor receptor c - MET contributes to tumor radioresistance : ready , set , scatter ! J Natl Cancer Inst 103 ( 8 ) , 617 – 619 . Gusenbauer , S . , Vlaicu , P . , & Ullrich , A . ( 2013 ) . HGF induces novel EGFR functions involved in resistance formation to tyrosine kinase inhibitors . Oncogene 32 ( 33 ) , 3846 – 3856 . Harbinski , F . , Craig , V . J . , Sanghavi , S . , Jeffery , D . , Liu , L . , Sheppard , K . A . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Rescue screens with secreted proteins reveal compensatory potential of receptor tyrosine kinases in driving cancer growth . Cancer Discov 2 ( 10 ) , 948 – 959 . Hellerstedt , B . A . , Edelman , G . , Vogelzang , N . J . , & Kluger , H . M . ( 2012 ) . Activity of cabozantinib ( XL184 ) in metastatic NSCLC : results from a phase 2 randomized dis - continuationtrial ( RDT ) . PosterPresentedattheAnnualMeetingoftheAmericanSociety of Clinical Oncology ; 2012 June 1 – 5 , Chicago . Hirsh , V . , Blackhall , F . H . , Kim , D . - W . , & Besse , B . ( 2013 ) . Impact of crizotinib on patient - reported symptoms and quality of life ( QOL ) compared with single - agent chemotherapy in a phase III study of advanced ALK + non - small cell lung cancer ( NSCLC ) . J Clin Oncol 31 ( 15 Suppl . ) ( Abstract 8108 ) . Holgado - Madruga , M . , Emlet , D . R . , Moscatello , D . K . , Godwin , A . K . , & Wong , A . J . ( 1996 ) . A Grb2 - associated docking protein in EGF - and insulin - receptor signalling . Nature 379 ( 6565 ) , 560 – 564 . Hong , S . W . , Jung , K . H . , Park , B . H . , Zheng , H . M . , Lee , H . S . , Choi , M . J . , et al . ( 2013 ) . KRC - 408 , a novel c - Met inhibitor , suppresses cell proliferation and angiogenesis of gastric cancer . Cancer Lett 332 ( 1 ) , 74 – 82 . Huff , J . L . , Jelinek , M . A . , Borgman , C . A . , Lansing , T . J . , & Parsons , J . T . ( 1993 ) . The protooncogene c - sea encodes a transmembrane protein - tyrosine kinase related to the Met / hepatocyte growth factor / scatter factor receptor . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 90 ( 13 ) , 6140 – 6144 . Huynh , H . , Ong , R . , & Soo , K . C . ( 2012 ) . Foretinibdemonstratesanti - tumoractivityandim - proves overall survival in preclinical models of hepatocellular carcinoma . Angiogenesis 15 ( 1 ) , 59 – 70 . Ishibe , S . , Karihaloo , A . , Ma , M . , Zhang , J . , Marlier , A . , Mitobe , M . , etal . ( 2009 ) . Metandthe epidermalgrowthfactorreceptoractcooperativelytoregulate ﬁ nalnephronnumber and maintain collecting duct morphology . Development 136 ( 2 ) , 337 – 345 . Itadani , H . , Hasako , S . , Yonekura , K . , Ooyama , A . , & Fujita , H . ( 2012 ) . Identi ﬁ cation of gene expressionsignaturetopredictanti - tumoref ﬁ cacyofMET / VEGFRinhibitor , TAS - 115 . Poster Presented at the 24th EORTC - NCI - AACR Symposium on Molecular Targets and Cancer Therapeutics ; 2012 Nov 6 – 9 , Dublin . Jahangiri , A . , De , L . M . , Miller , L . M . , Carbonell , W . S . , Hu , Y . L . , Lu , K . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Gene expression pro ﬁ le identi ﬁ es tyrosine kinase c - Met as a targetable mediator of antiangiogenic therapy resistance . Clin Cancer Res 19 ( 7 ) , 1773 – 1783 . Janjigian , Y . Y . , Tang , L . H . , Coit , D . G . , Kelsen , D . P . , Francone , T . D . , Weiser , M . R . , et al . ( 2011 ) . MET expression and ampli ﬁ cation in patients with localized gastric cancer . Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 20 ( 5 ) , 1021 – 1027 . Jin , L . , Fuchs , A . , Schnitt , S . J . , Yao , Y . , Joseph , A . , Lamszus , K . , et al . ( 1997 ) . Expression of scatter factor and c - met receptor in benign and malignant breast tissue . Cancer 79 ( 4 ) , 749 – 760 . Joffre , C . , Barrow , R . , Menard , L . , Calleja , V . , Hart , I . R . , & Kermorgant , S . ( 2011 ) . A direct role for Met endocytosis in tumorigenesis . Nat Cell Biol 13 ( 7 ) , 827 – 837 . Joo , K . M . , Jin , J . , Kim , E . , Ho , K . K . , Kim , Y . , Gu , K . B . , et al . ( 2012 ) . MET signaling regulates glioblastoma stem cells . Cancer Res 72 ( 15 ) , 3828 – 3838 . Kamikura , D . M . , Naujokas , M . A . , & Park , M . ( 1996 ) . Identi ﬁ cation of tyrosine 489 in the carboxyterminusof theTpr - Metoncoproteinasamajorsite of autophosphorylation . Biochemistry 35 ( 3 ) , 1010 – 1017 . Kaposi - Novak , P . , Lee , J . S . , Gomez - Quiroz , L . , Coulouarn , C . , Factor , V . M . , & Thorgeirsson , S . S . ( 2006 ) . Met - regulated expression signature de ﬁ nes a subset of human hepato - cellular carcinomas with poor prognosis and aggressive phenotype . J Clin Invest 116 ( 6 ) , 1582 – 1595 . Katayama , R . , Aoyama , A . , Yamori , T . , Qi , J . , Oh - hara , T . , Song , Y . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Cytotoxic activity of tivantinib ( ARQ 197 ) is not due solely to c - MET inhibition . Cancer Res 73 ( 10 ) , 3087 – 3096 . Kawaida , K . , Matsumoto , K . , Shimazu , H . , & Nakamura , T . ( 1994 ) . Hepatocyte growth fac - tor prevents acute renal failure and accelerates renal regeneration in mice . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 91 ( 10 ) , 4357 – 4361 . Kawakami , H . , Okamoto , I . , Arao , T . , Okamoto , W . , Matsumoto , K . , Taniguchi , H . , et al . ( 2013 ) . MET ampli ﬁ cation as a potential therapeutic target in gastric cancer . Oncotarget 4 ( 1 ) , 9 – 17 . Kentsis , A . , Reed , C . , Rice , K . L . , Sanda , T . , Rodig , S . J . , Tholouli , E . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Autocrine activation of the MET receptor tyrosine kinase in acute myeloid leukemia . Nat Med 18 ( 7 ) , 1118 – 1122 . Kim , C . H . , Lee , J . S . , Kang , S . O . , Bae , J . H . , Hong , S . P . , & Kahng , H . ( 2007 ) . Serumhepatocyte growth factor as a marker of tumor activity in head and neck squamous cell carcino - ma . Oral Oncol 43 ( 10 ) , 1021 – 1025 . Kina , S . , Phonaphonh , T . , Liang , F . , Kuang , H . , Arasaki , A . , Arakaki , K . , et al . ( 2013 ) . PDGF alpha receptor is a mediator for Cisplatin - induced Met expression . Eur J Pharmacol 699 ( 1 – 3 ) , 227 – 232 . Klotz , M . , Schmid , E . , Steiner - Hahn , K . , Rose , T . , Laube , J . , Roese , L . , etal . ( 2012 ) . Preclinical evaluation of biomarkers for response monitoring to the MET inhibitor BAY - 853474 . Biomarkers 17 ( 4 ) , 325 – 335 . Knight , J . F . , Lesurf , R . , Zhao , H . , Pinnaduwage , D . , Davis , R . R . , Saleh , S . M . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Met synergizes with p53 loss to induce mammary tumors that possess features of claudin - low breast cancer . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110 ( 14 ) , E1301 – E1310 . Koochekpour , S . , Jeffers , M . , Rulong , S . , Taylor , G . , Klineberg , E . , Hudson , E . A . , etal . ( 1997 ) . Met and hepatocyte growth factor / scatter factor expression in human gliomas . Cancer Res 57 ( 23 ) , 5391 – 5398 . Krishnaswamy , S . , Kanteti , R . , Duke - Cohan , J . S . , Loganathan , S . , Liu , W . , Ma , P . C . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Ethnic differences and functional analysis of MET mutations in lung cancer . Clin Cancer Res 15 ( 18 ) , 5714 – 5723 . Kyowa Hakko Kirin Co Ltd ( ) . Kyowa Hakko Kirin Co Ltd Announces Discontinuation of Phase 3 Clinical Trial for ARQ 197 ( Tivantinib ) in Combination with Eroltinib in Non - small - cell Lung Cancer Patients . Retrieved Sept . 24 , 2013 , from . http : / / www . kyowa - kirin . com / news _ releases / 2012 / pdf / e20121030 _ 01 . pdf Lai , A . Z . , Abella , J . V . , & Park , M . ( 2009 ) . CrosstalkinMetreceptoroncogenesis . TrendsCell Biol 19 ( 10 ) , 542 – 551 . Lamorte , L . , Rodrigues , S . , Naujokas , M . , & Park , M . ( 2002 ) . Crk synergizeswith epidermal growth factor for epithelial invasion and morphogenesis and is required for the met morphogenic program . J Biol Chem 277 ( 40 ) , 37904 – 37911 . Lee , J . H . , Han , S . U . , Cho , H . , Jennings , B . , Gerrard , B . , Dean , M . , et al . ( 2000 ) . A novel germ line juxtamembrane Met mutation in human gastric cancer . Oncogene 19 ( 43 ) , 4947 – 4953 . Lee , H . E . , Kim , M . A . , Lee , H . S . , Jung , E . J . , Yang , H . K . , Lee , B . L . , et al . ( 2012 ) . MET ingastric carcinomas : comparisonbetweenproteinexpressionandgenecopynumberandim - pact on clinical outcome . Br J Cancer 107 ( 2 ) , 325 – 333 . Lee , J . M . , Yoo , J . K . , Yoo , H . , Jung , H . Y . , Lee , D . R . , Jeong , H . C . , et al . ( 2013 ) . The novel miR - 7515 decreases the proliferation and migration of human lung cancer cells by targeting c - Met . Mol Cancer Res 11 ( 1 ) , 43 – 53 . Lennerz , J . K . , Kwak , E . L . , Ackerman , A . , Michael , M . , Fox , S . B . , Bergethon , K . , etal . ( 2011 ) . MET ampli ﬁ cation identi ﬁ es a small and aggressive subgroup of esophagogastric ad - enocarcinoma with evidence of responsiveness to crizotinib . J Clin Oncol 29 ( 36 ) , 4803 – 4810 . Li , T . , Kung , H . J . , Mack , P . C . , & Gandara , D . R . ( 2013 ) . Genotypingandgenomicpro ﬁ lingof non - small - cell lung cancer : implicationsfor current and future therapies . J Clin Oncol 31 ( 8 ) , 1039 – 1049 . Li , C . , Wu , J . J . , Hynes , M . , Dosch , J . , Sarkar , B . , Welling , T . H . , etal . ( 2011 ) . c - Metisamarker of pancreatic cancer stem cells and therapeutic target . Gastroenterology 141 ( 6 ) , 2218 – 2227 . Lim , J . , & Thiery , J . P . ( 2012 ) . Epithelial – mesenchymal transitions : insights from develop - ment . Development 139 ( 19 ) , 3471 – 3486 . Lin , L . , & Bivona , T . G . ( 2012 ) . Mechanismsofresistancetoepidermalgrowthfactorrecep - tor inhibitors and novel therapeutic strategies to overcome resistance in NSCLC patients . Chemother Res Pract 2012 , 817297 . Lock , L . S . , Frigault , M . M . , Saucier , C . , & Park , M . ( 2003 ) . Grb2 - independentrecruitmentof Gab1requiresthe C - terminal lobeand structuralintegrity of the Met receptor kinase domain . J Biol Chem 278 ( 32 ) , 30083 – 30090 . Lock , L . S . , Maroun , C . R . , Naujokas , M . A . , & Park , M . ( 2002 ) . Distinctrecruitmentandfunc - tion of Gab1 and Gab2 in Met receptor - mediated epithelial morphogenesis . Mol Biol Cell 13 ( 6 ) , 2132 – 2146 . Lock , L . S . , Royal , I . , Naujokas , M . A . , & Park , M . ( 2000 ) . Identi ﬁ cation of an atypical Grb2 carboxyl - terminal SH3 domain binding site in Gab docking proteins reveals Grb2 - dependentand - independentrecruitment ofGab1 to receptortyrosine kinases . J Biol Chem 275 ( 40 ) , 31536 – 31545 . Lorenzato , A . , Olivero , M . , Patane , S . , Rosso , E . , Oliaro , A . , Comoglio , P . M . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Novel somatic mutations of the MET oncogene inhuman carcinoma metastases acti - vating cell motility and invasion . Cancer Res 62 ( 23 ) , 7025 – 7030 . Lu , K . V . , Chang , J . P . , Parachoniak , C . A . , Pandika , M . M . , Aghi , M . K . , Meyronet , D . , et al . ( 2012 ) . VEGF inhibits tumor cell invasion and mesenchymal transition through a MET / VEGFR2 complex . Cancer Cell 22 ( 1 ) , 21 – 35 . Ludovini , V . , Bianconi , F . , Pistola , L . , Pistola , V . , Chiari , R . , Colella , R . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Optimi - zation of patient selection for EGFR - TKIs in advanced non - small cell lung cancer by combined analysis of KRAS , PIK3CA , MET , and non - sensitizing EGFR mutations . Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 69 ( 5 ) , 1289 – 1299 . Luo , W . , Huang , B . , Li , Z . , Li , H . , Sun , L . , Zhang , Q . , et al . ( 2013 ) . MicroRNA - 449a is down - regulated in non - small cell lung cancer and inhibits migration and invasion by targeting c - Met . PLoS One 8 ( 5 ) , e64759 . Lutterbach , B . , Zeng , Q . , Davis , L . J . , Hatch , H . , Hang , G . , Kohl , N . E . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Lungcan - cercelllinesharboringMETgeneampli ﬁ cationaredependentonMetforgrowthand survival . Cancer Res 67 ( 5 ) , 2081 – 2088 . Ma , P . C . , Jagadeeswaran , R . , Jagadeesh , S . , Tretiakova , M . S . , Nallasura , V . , Fox , E . A . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Functional expression and mutations of c - Met and its therapeutic inhibition with SU11274 and small interfering RNA in non - small cell lung cancer . Cancer Res 65 ( 4 ) , 1479 – 1488 . Ma , P . C . , Kijima , T . , Maulik , G . , Fox , E . A . , Sattler , M . , Grif ﬁ n , J . D . , et al . ( 2003 ) . c - MET mu - tational analysis in small cell lung cancer : novel juxtamembrane domain mutations regulating cytoskeletal functions . Cancer Res 63 ( 19 ) , 6272 – 6281 . Ma , P . C . , Tretiakova , M . S . , MacKinnon , A . C . , Ramnath , N . , Johnson , C . , Dietrich , S . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Expression and mutational analysis of MET in human solid cancers . Genes Chromosomes Cancer 47 ( 12 ) , 1025 – 1037 . Maroun , C . R . , Holgado - Madruga , M . , Royal , I . , Naujokas , M . A . , Fournier , T . M . , Wong , A . J . , etal . ( 1999 ) . TheGab1PHdomain isrequired for localization ofGab1atsitesof cell – cell contact and epithelial morphogenesis downstream from the met receptor tyro - sine kinase . Mol Cell Biol 19 ( 3 ) , 1784 – 1799 . Maroun , C . R . , Naujokas , M . A . , Holgado - Madruga , M . , Wong , A . J . , & Park , M . ( 2000 ) . The tyrosine phosphatase SHP - 2 is required for sustained activation of extracellular signal - regulated kinase and epithelial morphogenesis downstream from the met re - ceptor tyrosine kinase . Mol Cell Biol 20 ( 22 ) , 8513 – 8525 . Martens , T . , Schmidt , N . O . , Eckerich , C . , Fillbrandt , R . , Merchant , M . , Schwall , R . , et al . ( 2006 ) . A novel one - armed anti - c - Met antibody inhibits glioblastoma growth in vivo . Clin Cancer Res 12 ( 20 Pt 1 ) , 6144 – 6152 . 20 C . R . Maroun , T . Rowlands / Pharmacology & Therapeutics xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Maroun , C . R . , & Rowlands , T . , The Met receptor tyrosine kinase : A key player in oncogenesis and drug resistance , Pharmacol . Ther . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2013 . 12 . 014 Matzke , A . , Sargsyan , V . , Holtmann , B . , Aramuni , G . , Asan , E . , Sendtner , M . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Haploinsuf ﬁ ciency of c - Met in cd44 − / − mice identi ﬁ es a collaboration of CD44 and c - Met in vivo . Mol Cell Biol 27 ( 24 ) , 8797 – 8806 . Meetze , K . A . , Boudrow , A . , Connolly , K . , & Huang , R . ( 2009 ) . Anti - tumor activity of Sch 900105 ( AV299 ) , an anti - HGF antibody , in non - small cell lung cancer models . Mol Cancer Ther 8 ( 12 Suppl . 1 ) ( Abstract C173 ) . Meetze , K . , Connolly , K . , Zi , T . , & Heyer , J . ( 2012 ) . Antitumor activity of ﬁ clatuzumab in combination with cetuximab on squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck . Poster Presented at Molecular Targets and Cancer Therapeutics ; 2012 Nov 6 – 9 , Dublin . Merchant , M . , Ma , X . , Maun , H . R . , Zheng , Z . , Peng , J . , Romero , M . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Monova - lent antibody design and mechanism of action of onartuzumab , a MET antagonist with anti - tumor activity as a therapeutic agent . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110 ( 32 ) , E2987 – E2996 . Michieli , P . , Basilico , C . , Pennacchietti , S . , Maffe , A . , Tamagnone , L . , Giordano , S . , et al . ( 1999 ) . Mutant Met - mediated transformation is ligand - dependent and can be inhibited by HGF antagonists . Oncogene 18 ( 37 ) , 5221 – 5231 . Migliore , C . , Martin , V . , Leoni , V . P . , Restivo , A . , Atzori , L . , Petrelli , A . , et al . ( 2012 ) . MiR - 1 downregulation cooperates with MACC1 in promoting MET overexpression in human colon cancer . Clin Cancer Res 18 ( 3 ) , 737 – 747 . Minuti , G . , Cappuzzo , F . , Duchnowska , R . , Jassem , J . , Fabi , A . , O ' Brien , T . , et al . ( 2012 ) . In - creased MET and HGF gene copy numbers are associated with trastuzumab failure in HER2 - positive metastatic breast cancer . Br J Cancer 107 ( 5 ) , 793 – 799 . MiratiTherapeutics ( ) . MGCD265Overview . RetrievedSept . 24 , 2013 , from . http : / / mirati . com / lead - oncology - assets / mgcd265 Mitamura , T . , Watari , H . , Wang , L . , Kanno , H . , Hassan , M . K . , Miyazaki , M . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Downregulation of miRNA - 31 induces taxane resistance in ovarian cancer cells through increase of receptor tyrosine kinase MET . Oncogenesis 2 , e40 . Mok , T . S . K . , Park , K . , Geater , S . L . , Agarwal , S . , & Han , M . ( 2012 ) . A randomized phase 2 study with exploratory biomarker analysis of ﬁ clatuzumab , a humanized hepatocyte growth factor ( HGF ) inhibitory monoclonal antibody , in combination with ge ﬁ tinib versus ge ﬁ tinib alone in Asian patients with lung adenocarcinoma . Poster Presented at the European Society of Medical Oncology ( ESMO ) Annual Meeting ; 2012 Sept 28 – Oct 2 , Vienna . Munshi , N . , Jeay , S . , Li , Y . , Chen , C . R . , France , D . S . , Ashwell , M . A . , et al . ( 2010 ) . ARQ197 , a novel and selective inhibitor of the human c - Met receptor tyrosine kinase with anti - tumor activity . Mol Cancer Ther 9 ( 6 ) , 1544 – 1553 . Muro , K . , Ryu , H . - E . , Yasui , H . , & Nishina , T . ( 2012 ) . A phase II study of tivantinib mono - therapy in patients with previously treated advanced or recurrent gastric cancer . J Clin Oncol 30 ( Suppl . , Abstract 4082 ) . Nakagawa , T . , Tohyama , O . , Yamaguchi , A . , Matsushima , T . , Takahashi , K . , Funasaka , S . , et al . ( 2010 ) . E7050 : a dual c - Met and VEGFR - 2 tyrosine kinase inhibitor promotes tumor regression and prolongs survival in mouse xenograft models . Cancer Sci 101 ( 1 ) , 210 – 215 . Nakamura , T . , Mizuno , S . , Matsumoto , K . , Sawa , Y . , Matsuda , H . , & Nakamura , T . ( 2000 ) . Myocardial protection from ischemia / reperfusion injury by endogenous and exoge - nous HGF . J Clin Invest 106 ( 12 ) , 1511 – 1519 . Naldini , L . , Vigna , E . , Narsimhan , R . P . , Gaudino , G . , Zarnegar , R . , Michalopoulos , G . K . , etal . ( 1991 ) . Hepatocytegrowthfactor ( HGF ) stimulatesthetyrosinekinaseactivityofthe receptor encoded by the proto - oncogene c - MET . Oncogene 6 ( 4 ) , 501 – 504 . Naldini , L . , Weidner , K . M . , Vigna , E . , Gaudino , G . , Bardelli , A . , Ponzetto , C . , et al . ( 1991 ) . Scatter factor and hepatocyte growth factor are indistinguishable ligands for the MET receptor . EMBO J 10 ( 10 ) , 2867 – 2878 . U . S . National Institutes of Health ( ) . Clinicaltrials . gov . Retrieved Sept . 24 , 2013 , from . http : / / clinicaltrials . gov / Navab , R . , Liu , J . , Seiden - Long , I . , Shih , W . , Li , M . , Bandarchi , B . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Co - overexpressionofMetandhepatocyte growth factorpromotes systemicmetasta - sis in NCI - H460 non - small cell lung carcinoma cells . Neoplasia 11 ( 12 ) , 1292 – 1300 . Nishida , S . , Hirohashi , Y . , Torigoe , T . , Inoue , R . , Kitamura , H . , Tanaka , T . , etal . ( 2013 ) . Pros - tatecancerstem - likecells / cancer - initiatingcellshaveanautocrinesystemofhepato - cyte growth factor . Cancer Sci 104 ( 4 ) , 431 – 436 . Okuda , K . , Sasaki , H . , Yukiue , H . , Yano , M . , & Fujii , Y . ( 2008 ) . Met gene copy number pre - dicts the prognosis for completely resected non - small cell lung cancer . Cancer Sci 99 ( 11 ) , 2280 – 2285 . Okunishi , K . , Dohi , M . , Nakagome , K . , Tanaka , R . , Mizuno , S . , Matsumoto , K . , etal . ( 2005 ) . A novel role of hepatocyte growth factor as an immune regulator through suppressing dendritic cell function . J Immunol 175 ( 7 ) , 4745 – 4753 . Oliner , K . S . , Tang , R . , Anderson , A . , Lan , Y . , & Ivenson , T . ( 2012 ) . Evaluation of MET path - way biomarkers in a phase 2 study of rilotumumab or placebo in combination with epirubicin / cisplatin / capecitabine inpatients with locally advanced or metastatic gas - tric or esophagogastric junction cancer . Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology ; 2012 June 1 – 5 , Chicago . Organ , S . L . , & Tsao , M . S . ( 2011 ) . An overview of the c - MET signaling pathway . Ther Adv Med Oncol 3 ( 1 Suppl . ) , S7 – S19 . Orian - Rousseau , V . , Morrison , H . , Matzke , A . , Kastilan , T . , Pace , G . , Herrlich , P . , etal . ( 2007 ) . Hepatocyte growth factor - induced Ras activation requires ERM proteins linked to both CD44v6 and F - actin . Mol Biol Cell 18 ( 1 ) , 76 – 83 . Ou , S . H . , Kwak , E . L . , Siwak - Tapp , C . , Dy , J . , Bergethon , K . , Clark , J . W . , etal . ( 2011 ) . Activity of crizotinib ( PF02341066 ) , a dualmesenchymal – epithelialtransition ( MET ) and an - aplastic lymphoma kinase ( ALK ) inhibitor , in a non - small cell lung cancer patient with de novo MET ampli ﬁ cation . J Thorac Oncol 6 ( 5 ) , 942 – 946 . Paez - Ribes , M . , Allen , E . , Hudock , J . , Takeda , T . , Okuyama , H . , Vinals , F . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Antiangiogenic therapy elicits malignant progression of tumors to increased local invasion and distant metastasis . Cancer Cell 15 ( 3 ) , 220 – 231 . Palka , H . L . , Park , M . , & Tonks , N . K . ( 2003 ) . Hepatocyte growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase met is a substrate of the receptor protein - tyrosine phosphatase DEP - 1 . J Biol Chem 278 ( 8 ) , 5728 – 5735 . Pan , B . S . , Chan , G . K . , Chenard , M . , Chi , A . , Davis , L . J . , Deshmukh , S . V . , et al . ( 2010 ) . MK - 2461 , a novel multitargeted kinase inhibitor , preferentially inhibits the activated c - Met receptor . Cancer Res 70 ( 4 ) , 1524 – 1533 . Park , S . , Choi , Y . L . , Sung , C . O . , An , J . , Seo , J . , Ahn , M . J . , et al . ( 2012 ) . High MET copy num - ber and MET overexpression : poor outcome in non - small cell lung cancer patients . Histol Histopathol 27 ( 2 ) , 197 – 207 . Park , W . S . , Dong , S . M . , Kim , S . Y . , Na , E . Y . , Shin , M . S . , Pi , J . H . , et al . ( 1999 ) . Somatic mutations in the kinase domain of the Met / hepatocyte growth factor receptor gene in childhood hepatocellular carcinomas . Cancer Res 59 ( 2 ) , 307 – 310 . Patane , S . , Avnet , S . , Coltella , N . , Costa , B . , Sponza , S . , Olivero , M . , et al . ( 2006 ) . MET over - expression turns human primary osteoblasts into osteosarcomas . Cancer Res 66 ( 9 ) , 4750 – 4757 . Paulson , A . K . , Linklater , E . S . , Berghuis , B . D . , App , C . A . , Oostendorp , L . D . , Paulson , J . E . , etal . ( 2013 ) . METandERBB2areco - expressedinERBB2 + breastcancersandcontrib - ute to innate resistance . Mol . Cancer Res 11 ( 9 ) , 1112 – 1121 . Pennacchietti , S . , Michieli , P . , Galluzzo , M . , Mazzone , M . , Giordano , S . , & Comoglio , P . M . ( 2003 ) . Hypoxia promotes invasive growth by transcriptional activation of the met protooncogene . Cancer Cell 3 ( 4 ) , 347 – 361 . Penuel , E . , Li , C . , Parab , V . , Burton , L . , Cowan , K . J . , Merchant , M . , et al . ( 2013 ) . HGF as a circulating biomarker of onartuzumab treatment in patients with advanced solid tumors . Mol Cancer Ther 12 ( 6 ) , 1122 – 1130 . Peschard , P . , Fournier , T . M . , Lamorte , L . , Naujokas , M . A . , Band , H . , Langdon , W . Y . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Mutation of the c - Cbl TKB domain binding site on the Met receptor tyrosine kinase converts it into a transforming protein . Mol Cell 8 ( 5 ) , 995 – 1004 . Peschard , P . , & Park , M . ( 2003 ) . Escape from Cbl - mediated downregulation : a recurrent theme for oncogenic deregulation of receptor tyrosine kinases . Cancer Cell 3 ( 6 ) , 519 – 523 . Ponzetto , C . , Bardelli , A . , Maina , F . , Longati , P . , Panayotou , G . , Dhand , R . , et al . ( 1993 ) . A novel recognition motif for phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase binding mediates its asso - ciation with the hepatocyte growth factor / scatter factor receptor . Mol Cell Biol 13 ( 8 ) , 4600 – 4608 . Ponzetto , C . , Bardelli , A . , Zhen , Z . , Maina , F . , dalla , Z . P . , Giordano , S . , et al . ( 1994 ) . A mul - tifunctional docking site mediates signaling and transformation by the hepatocyte growth factor / scatter factor receptor family . Cell 77 ( 2 ) , 261 – 271 . Ponzo , M . G . , Lesurf , R . , Petkiewicz , S . , O ' Malley , F . P . , Pinnaduwage , D . , Andrulis , I . L . , etal . ( 2009 ) . Met induces mammary tumors with diverse histologies and is associated with poor outcome and human basal breast cancer . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 ( 31 ) , 12903 – 12908 . Puri , N . , Ahmed , S . , Janamanchi , V . , Tretiakova , M . , Zumba , O . , Krausz , T . , et al . ( 2007 ) . c - Met is a potentially new therapeutic target for treatment of human melanoma . Clin . Cancer Res 13 ( 7 ) , 2246 – 2253 . Puri , N . , & Salgia , R . ( 2008 ) . Synergism of EGFR and c - Met pathways , cross - talk and inhibition , in non - small cell lung cancer . J Carcinog 7 , 9 . Qi , J . , McTigue , M . A . , Rogers , A . , Lifshits , E . , Christensen , J . G . , Janne , P . A . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Multiple mutations and bypass mechanisms can contribute to development of acquired resistance to MET inhibitors . Cancer Res 71 ( 3 ) , 1081 – 1091 . Rath , P . , Lal , B . , Ajala , O . , Li , Y . , Xia , S . , Kim , J . , et al . ( 2013 ) . In vivo c - Met pathway inhibi - tion depletes human glioma xenografts of tumor - propagating stem - like cells . Transl Oncol 6 ( 2 ) , 104 – 111 . Rayson , D . , Lupichuk , S . M . , Chia , S . K . L . , & Potvin , K . R . ( 2012 ) . AphaseIIstudyofforetinib in triple - negative , recurrent / metastatic breast cancer : NCIC CTG trial IND . 197 ( NCT01147484 ) . J Clin Oncol 30 ( Suppl . , Abstract 1036 ) . RemsingRix , L . L . , Kuenzi , B . M . , Luo , Y . , Remily - Wood , E . , Kinose , F . , Wright , G . , etal . ( 2013 Nov 20 ) . GSK3 alpha and beta are new functionally relevant targets of tivantinib in lung cancer cells . ACS Chem Biol ( Epub ahead of print ) . Rex , K . , Lewis , X . Z . , Gobalakrishnan , S . , Glaus , C . , Silva , M . D . , Radinsky , R . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Evaluation of the antitumor effects of rilotumumab by PET imaging in a U - 87 MG mouse xenograft model . Nucl Med Biol 40 ( 4 ) , 458 – 463 . Rodig , S . , Sequist , L . , Schiller , J . H . , & Chen , Y . ( 2012 ) . An exploratory biomarker analysis evaluating the effect of the c - Met inhibitor tivantinib ( ARQ 197 ) and erlotinib in NSCLC patients in a randomized , double - blinded phase 2 study . Poster Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research ; 2012 March 31 – April 4 , Chicago . Rodrigues , G . A . , & Park , M . ( 1994 ) . Autophosphorylation modulates the kinase activity and oncogenic potential of the Met receptor tyrosine kinase . Oncogene 9 ( 7 ) , 2019 – 2027 . Ryan , C . J . , Rosenthal , M . , Ng , S . , Alumkal , J . , Picus , J . , Gravis , G . , etal . ( 2013 ) . TargetedMET inhibition in castration - resistant prostate cancer : a randomized phase II study and biomarker analysis with rilotumumab plus mitoxantrone and prednisone . Clin Cancer Res 19 ( 1 ) , 215 – 224 . Sadiq , A . A . , & Salgia , R . ( 2013 ) . MET as a possible target for non - small - cell lung cancer . J Clin Oncol 31 ( 8 ) , 1089 – 1096 . Sangwan , V . , Abella , J . , Lai , A . , Bertos , N . , Stuible , M . , Tremblay , M . L . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Protein - tyrosine phosphatase 1B modulates early endosome fusion and traf ﬁ ck - ing of Met and epidermal growth factor receptors . J Biol Chem 286 ( 52 ) , 45000 – 45013 . Sangwan , V . , Paliouras , G . N . , Abella , J . V . , Dube , N . , Monast , A . , Tremblay , M . L . , et al . ( 2008 ) . RegulationoftheMetreceptor - tyrosine kinasebytheprotein - tyrosine phos - phatase 1B and T - cell phosphatase . J Biol Chem 283 ( 49 ) , 34374 – 34383 . Santoro , A . , Rimassa , L . , Borbath , I . , Daniele , B . , Salvagni , S . , Van Laethem , J . L . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Tivantinib for second - line treatment of advanced hepatocellular carci - noma : a randomised , placebo - controlled phase 2 study . Lancet Oncol 14 ( 1 ) , 55 – 63 . Santoro , A . , Simonelli , M . , Rodriguez - Lope , C . , Zucali , P . , Camacho , L . H . , Granito , A . , et al . ( 2013 ) . APhase - 1bstudyoftivantinib ( ARQ197 ) inadultpatientswithhepatocellular carcinoma and cirrhosis . Br J Cancer 108 ( 1 ) , 21 – 24 . 21 C . R . Maroun , T . Rowlands / Pharmacology & Therapeutics xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Maroun , C . R . , & Rowlands , T . , The Met receptor tyrosine kinase : A key player in oncogenesis and drug resistance , Pharmacol . Ther . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2013 . 12 . 014 Sattler , M . , & Salgia , R . ( 2009 ) . The MET axis as a therapeutic target . Update Cancer Ther 3 ( 3 ) , 109 – 118 . Saucier , C . , Khoury , H . , Lai , K . M . , Peschard , P . , Dankort , D . , Naujokas , M . A . , et al . ( 2004 ) . The Shc adaptor protein is criticalforVEGF induction by Met / HGF andErbB2 receptors and for early onset of tumor angiogenesis . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 ( 8 ) , 2345 – 2350 . Scher , H . I . , Smith , M . R . , Sweeney , C . , & Corn , P . G . ( 2013 ) . Anexploratoryanalysisofbone scan lesion area ( BSLA ) , circulating tumor cell ( CTC ) change , pain reduction , and overall survival ( OS ) in patients ( pts ) with castration - resistant prostate cancer ( CRPC ) treated with cabozantinib ( cabo ) : updated results of a phase II nonrandomized expansion ( NRE ) cohort . J Clin Oncol 31 ( 15 Suppl . ) , 5026 . Schmidt , C . , Bladt , F . , Goedecke , S . , Brinkmann , V . , Zschiesche , W . , Sharpe , M . , etal . ( 1995 ) . Scatter factor / hepatocyte growth factor is essential for liver development . Nature 373 ( 6516 ) , 699 – 702 . Schmidt , L . , Duh , F . M . , Chen , F . , Kishida , T . , Glenn , G . , Choyke , P . , et al . ( 1997 ) . Germline and somatic mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of the MET proto - oncogene in papillary renal carcinomas . Nat Genet 16 ( 1 ) , 68 – 73 . Schmidt , L . , Junker , K . , Nakaigawa , N . , Kinjerski , T . , Weirich , G . , Miller , M . , et al . ( 1999 ) . Novel mutations of the MET proto - oncogene in papillary renal carcinomas . Oncogene 18 ( 14 ) , 2343 – 2350 . Schoffski , P . , Elisei , R . , Muller , S . , Brose , M . , & Shah , M . ( 2012 ) . An international , double - blind , randomized , placebo - controlled Phase 3 trial ( EXAM ) of Cabozantinib ( XL184 ) in medullary thyroid carcinoma ( MTC ) patients with documented RECIST progression at baseline . Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology ; 2012 June 1 – 5 , Chicago . Schoffski , P . , Garcia , J . A . , Stadler , W . M . , Gil , T . , Jonasch , E . , Tagawa , S . T . , et al . ( 2011 ) . A phase II study of the ef ﬁ cacy and safety of AMG 102 in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma . BJU Int 108 ( 5 ) , 679 – 686 . Schwab , R . , Petak , I . , Kollar , M . , Pinter , F . , Varkondi , E . , Kohanka , A . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Major partial response to crizotinib , a dual MET / ALK inhibitor , in a squamous cell lung ( SCC ) carcinoma patient with de novo c - MET ampli ﬁ cation inthe absence of ALK re - arrangement . Lung Cancer 19 , 2013 ( epub Oct 19 2013 ) . Seiwert , T . Y . , Jagadeeswaran , R . , Faoro , L . , Janamanchi , V . , Nallasura , V . , El , D . M . , et al . ( 2009 ) . The MET receptor tyrosine kinase is a potential novel therapeutic target for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma . Cancer Res 69 ( 7 ) , 3021 – 3031 . Seiwert , T . , Swann , S . , Kurz , H . , & Bonate , P . ( 2009 ) . AphaseIIstudyoftheef ﬁ cacyandsafety of foretinib , a novel receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor , given on an intermittent 5 - days - on / 9 - days - off ( 5 / 9 ) schedule in patients with recurrent or metastatic squamous cell cancer of the head and neck . Mol Cancer Ther 8 ( 12 Suppl . 1 ) ( Abstract B6 ) . Sennino , B . , Ishiguro - Oonuma , T . , Schriver , B . J . , Christensen , J . G . , & McDonald , D . M . ( 2013 ) . Inhibition of c - Met reduces lymphatic metastasis in RIP - Tag2 transgenic mice . Cancer Res 73 ( 12 ) , 3692 – 3703 . Sennino , B . , Ishiguro - Oonuma , T . , Wei , Y . , Naylor , R . M . , Williamson , C . W . , Bhagwandin , V . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Suppression of tumor invasion and metastasis by concurrent inhibi - tionofc - MetandVEGFsignalinginpancreaticneuroendocrinetumors . CancerDiscov 2 ( 3 ) , 270 – 287 . Seo , J . S . , Ju , Y . S . , Lee , W . C . , Shin , J . Y . , Lee , J . K . , Bleazard , T . , et al . ( 2012 ) . The transcrip - tional landscape and mutational pro ﬁ le of lung adenocarcinoma . Genome Res 22 ( 11 ) , 2109 – 2119 . Sequist , L . V . , Heist , R . S . , Shaw , A . T . , Fidias , P . , Rosovsky , R . , Temel , J . S . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Implementing multiplexed genotyping of non - small - cell lung cancers into routine clinical practice . Ann Oncol 22 ( 12 ) , 2616 – 2624 . Shah , M . A . , Wainberg , Z . A . , Catenacci , D . V . , Hochster , H . S . , Ford , J . , Kunz , P . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Phase II study evaluating 2 dosing schedules of oral foretinib ( GSK1363089 ) , cMET / VEGFR2 inhibitor , in patients with metastatic gastric cancer . PLoS One 8 ( 3 ) , e54014 . Shattuck , D . L . , Miller , J . K . , Carraway , K . L . , III , & Sweeney , C . ( 2008 ) . Metreceptorcontrib - utesto trastuzumabresistanceofHer2 - overexpressingbreastcancercells . CancerRes 68 ( 5 ) , 1471 – 1477 . Shaw , A . T . , Kim , D . W . , Nakagawa , K . , Seto , T . , Crino , L . , Ahn , M . J . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Crizotinib versus chemotherapy in advanced ALK - positive lung cancer . N Engl J Med 368 ( 25 ) , 2385 – 2394 . Sherman , S . I . , Cohen , E . E . W . , Schoffski , P . , & Elisei , R . ( 2013 ) . Ef ﬁ cacy of cabozantinib ( Cabo ) in medullary thyroid cancer ( MTC ) patients with RAS or RET mutations : results from a phase III study . J Clin Oncol 31 ( 15 Suppl . ) ( Abstract 6000 ) . Shieh , J . M . , Tang , Y . A . , Yang , T . H . , Chen , C . Y . , Hsu , H . S . , Tan , Y . H . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Lack of association of C - Met - N375S sequence variant with lung cancer susceptibility and prognosis . Int J Med Sci 10 ( 8 ) , 988 – 994 . Singleton , K . R . , Kim , J . , Hinz , T . K . , Marek , L . A . , Casas - Selves , M . , Hatheway , C . , etal . ( 2013 ) . A receptor tyrosine kinase network composed of ﬁ broblast growth factor receptors , epidermalgrowthfactorreceptor , v - erb - b2erythroblasticleukemiaviraloncogeneho - molog 2 , and hepatocyte growth factor receptor drives growth and survival of head and neck squamous carcinoma cell lines . Mol Pharmacol 83 ( 4 ) , 882 – 893 . Smith , D . C . , Smith , M . R . , Sweeney , C . , El ﬁ ky , A . A . , Logothetis , C . , Corn , P . G . , etal . ( 2013 ) . Cabozantinibinpatientswithadvancedprostatecancer : resultsofaphaseIIrandom - ized discontinuation trial . J Clin Oncol 31 ( 4 ) , 412 – 419 . Smolen , G . A . , Sordella , R . , Muir , B . , Mohapatra , G . , Barmettler , A . , Archibald , H . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Ampli ﬁ cationofMETmayidentifyasubsetofcancerswithextremesensitivitytothese - lectivetyrosinekinaseinhibitorPHA - 665752 . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA103 ( 7 ) , 2316 – 2321 . Solomon , B . J . , Gettinger , S . N . , Riely , G . J . , & Gadgeel , S . M . ( 2013 ) . Subgroup analysis of crizotinib versus either pemetrexed ( PEM ) or docetaxel ( DOC ) in the phase III study ( PROFILE 1007 ) of advanced ALK - positive non - small cell lung cancer ( NSCLC ) . J Clin Oncol 31 ( 15 Suppl . ) , 8105 ( 15 Suppl . ) . Soman , N . R . , Correa , P . , Ruiz , B . A . , & Wogan , G . N . ( 1991 ) . The TPR - MET oncogenic rearrangement is present and expressed in human gastric carcinoma and precursor lesions . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 88 ( 11 ) , 4892 – 4896 . Spigel , D . R . , Edelman , M . J . , Mok , T . , & O ' Byrne , K . J . ( 2012 ) . The MetLUNG study : a randomized , double - blind , phase III study of onartuzumab ( MetMAb ) plus erlotinib versus placebo plus erlotinib in patients with advanced , MET - positive non - small cell lung cancer ( NSCLC ) . J Clin Oncol 30 ( Suppl . , Abstract TPS7616 ) . Spigel , D . R . , Ervin , T . J . , Ramlau , R . , Daniel , D . B . , Goldschmidt , J . H . , Blumenschein , G . R . , etal . ( 2013 ) . RandomizedphaseIItrialofonartuzumabincombinationwitherlotinib inpatientswithadvancednon - small - celllungcancer . JClinOncol31 ( 32 ) , 4105 – 4114 . Stefan , M . , Koch , A . , Mancini , A . , Mohr , A . , Weidner , K . M . , Niemann , H . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Src homology 2 - containing inositol 5 - phosphatase 1 binds to the multifunctional docking site of c - Met and potentiates hepatocyte growth factor - induced branching tubulogenesis . J Biol Chem 276 ( 5 ) , 3017 – 3023 . Straussman , R . , Morikawa , T . , Shee , K . , Barzily - Rokni , M . , Qian , Z . R . , Du , J . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Tumour micro - environment elicits innate resistance to RAF inhibitors through HGF secretion . Nature 487 ( 7408 ) , 500 – 504 . Sulpice , E . , Ding , S . , Muscatelli - Groux , B . , Berge , M . , Han , Z . C . , Plouet , J . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Cross - talk between the VEGF - A and HGF signalling pathways in endothelial cells . Biol Cell 101 ( 9 ) , 525 – 539 . Sun , T . , Aceto , N . , Meerbrey , K . L . , Kessler , J . D . , Zhou , C . , Migliaccio , I . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Activation of multiple proto - oncogenic tyrosine kinases in breast cancer via loss of the PTPN12 phosphatase . Cell 44 ( 5 ) , 703 – 718 . Sun , S . , & Wang , Z . ( 2011 ) . Head neck squamous cell carcinoma c - Met + cells display cancerstemcellpropertiesandare responsible forcisplatin - resistance andmetastasis . Int J Cancer 129 ( 10 ) , 2337 – 2348 . Tamiya , A . , Okamoto , I . , Miyazaki , M . , Shimizu , S . , Kitaichi , M . , & Nakagawa , K . ( 2013 ) . Severe acute interstitial lung disease after crizotinib therapy in a patient with EML4 - ALK - positive non - small - cell lung cancer . J Clin Oncol 31 ( 1 ) , e15 – e17 . Tan , Y . H . , Krishnaswamy , S . , Nandi , S . , Kanteti , R . , Vora , S . , Onel , K . , et al . ( 2010 ) . CBL is frequently altered in lung cancers : its relationship to mutations in MET and EGFR tyrosine kinases . PLoS One 5 ( 1 ) , e8972 . Tanaka , A . , Sueoka - Aragane , N . , Nakamura , T . , Takeda , Y . , Mitsuoka , M . , Yamasaki , F . , etal . ( 2012 ) . Co - existence of positive MET FISH status with EGFR mutations signi ﬁ es poor prognosis in lung adenocarcinoma patients . Lung Cancer 75 ( 1 ) , 89 – 94 . Tang , Z . , Du , R . , Jiang , S . , Wu , C . , Barkauskas , D . S . , Richey , J . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Dual MET - EGFR combinatorial inhibition against T790M - EGFR - mediated erlotinib - resistant lungcan - cer . Br J Cancer 99 ( 6 ) , 911 – 922 . Tanimoto , S . , Fukumori , T . , El - Moula , G . , Shiirevnyamba , A . , Kinouchi , S . , Koizumi , T . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Prognostic signi ﬁ cance of serum hepatocyte growth factor in clear cell renal cell carcinoma : comparison with serum vascular endothelial growth factor . J Med Invest 55 ( 1 – 2 ) , 106 – 111 . Tanizaki , J . , Okamoto , I . , Okamoto , K . , Takezawa , K . , Kuwata , K . , Yamaguchi , H . , et al . ( 2011 ) . MET tyrosine kinase inhibitor crizotinib ( PF - 02341066 ) shows differential antitumor effects in non - small cell lung cancer according to MET alterations . J Thorac Oncol 6 ( 10 ) , 1624 – 1631 . Thomas , R . K . , Baker , A . C . , Debiasi , R . M . , Winckler , W . , LaFramboise , T . , Lin , W . M . , et al . ( 2007 ) . High - throughput oncogene mutation pro ﬁ ling in human cancer . Nat Genet 39 ( 3 ) , 347 – 351 . Toschi , L . , & Cappuzzo , F . ( 2010 ) . Clinical implications of MET gene copy number in lung cancer . Future Oncol 6 ( 2 ) , 239 – 247 . Towner , R . A . , Smith , N . , Asano , Y . , Doblas , S . , Saunders , D . , Silasi - Mansat , R . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Molecular magnetic resonance imagingapproaches used to aid inthe understanding of the tissue regeneration marker Met in vivo : implications for tissue engineering . Tissue Eng Part A 16 ( 2 ) , 365 – 371 . Tretiakova , M . , Salama , A . K . , Karrison , T . , Ferguson , M . K . , Husain , A . N . , Vokes , E . E . , et al . ( 2011 ) . MET and phosphorylated MET as potential biomarkers in lung cancer . J Environ Pathol Toxicol Oncol 30 ( 4 ) , 341 – 354 . Trusolino , L . , Bertotti , A . , & Comoglio , P . M . ( 2010 ) . METsignalling : principlesandfunctionsin development , organ regeneration and cancer . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 ( 12 ) , 834 – 848 . Tsubouchi , H . , Niitani , Y . , Hirono , S . , Nakayama , H . , Gohda , E . , Arakaki , N . , etal . ( 1991 ) . Levels of the human hepatocyte growth factor in serum of patients with various liver diseases determined by an enzyme - linked immunosorbent assay . Hepatology 13 ( 1 ) , 1 – 5 . Turke , A . B . , Zejnullahu , K . , Wu , Y . L . , Song , Y . , Dias - Santagata , D . , Lifshits , E . , et al . ( 2010 ) . PreexistenceandclonalselectionofMETampli ﬁ cationinEGFRmutantNSCLC . Cancer Cell 17 ( 1 ) , 77 – 88 . Uehara , Y . , Minowa , O . , Mori , C . , Shiota , K . , Kuno , J . , Noda , T . , etal . ( 1995 ) . Placentaldefect and embryonic lethality in mice lacking hepatocyte growth factor / scatter factor . Nature 373 ( 6516 ) , 702 – 705 . Underiner , T . L . , Herbertz , T . , & Miknyoczki , S . J . ( 2010 ) . Discoveryofsmallmoleculec - Met inhibitors : evolution and pro ﬁ les of clinical candidates . Anticancer Agents Med Chem 10 ( 1 ) , 7 – 27 . Van Andel Institute ( ) . Hepatocyte Growth Factor / Scatter Factor ( HGF / SF ) , MET and Can - cer References . Retrieved Sept . 24 , 2013 , from . http : / / www . vai . org / Met / Index . aspx van der Voort , R . , Taher , T . E . , Keehnen , R . M . , Smit , L . , Groenink , M . , & Pals , S . T . ( 1997 ) . Paracrine regulation of germinal center B cell adhesion through the c - met - hepatocyte growth factor / scatter factor pathway . J Exp Med 185 ( 12 ) , 2121 – 2131 . van Leenders , G . J . , Sookhlall , R . , Teubel , W . J . , de Ridder , C . M . , Reneman , S . , Sacchetti , A . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Activation of c - MET induces a stem - like phenotype in human prostate cancer . PLoS One 6 ( 11 ) , e26753 . Vergani , E . , Vallacchi , V . , Frigerio , S . , Deho , P . , Mondellini , P . , Perego , P . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Identi ﬁ cation of MET and SRC activation in melanoma cell lines showing primary resistance to PLX4032 . Neoplasia 13 ( 12 ) , 1132 – 1142 . Verslype , C . , Cohn , A . L . , Kelley , R . K . , Yang , T . - S . , & Su , W . - C . ( 2012 ) . Activity of cabozantinib ( XL184 ) in hepatocellular carcinoma : results from a phase 2 random - izeddiscontinuation trial ( RDT ) . Presented attheAnnualMeeting oftheAmericanSoci - ety of Clinical Oncology ; 2012 June 1 – 5 , Chicago . Wagle , N . , Berger , M . F . , Davis , M . J . , Blumenstiel , B . , Defelice , M . , Pochanard , P . , et al . ( 2012 ) . High - throughput detection of actionable genomic alterations in clinical 22 C . R . Maroun , T . Rowlands / Pharmacology & Therapeutics xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Maroun , C . R . , & Rowlands , T . , The Met receptor tyrosine kinase : A key player in oncogenesis and drug resistance , Pharmacol . Ther . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2013 . 12 . 014 tumor samples by targeted , massively parallel sequencing . Cancer Discov 2 ( 1 ) , 82 – 93 . Wagner , A . J . , Goldberg , J . M . , Dubois , S . G . , Choy , E . , Rosen , L . , Pappo , A . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Tivantinib ( ARQ 197 ) , a selective inhibitor of MET , in patients with microphthalmia transcription factor - associated tumors : results of a multicenter phase 2 trial . Cancer 118 ( 23 ) , 5894 – 5902 . Wang , R . , Kobayashi , R . , & Bishop , J . M . ( 1996 ) . Cellular Adherence elicits ligand - independent activation of the Met cell - surface receptor . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93 ( 16 ) , 8425 – 8430 . Wang , W . , Li , Q . , Takeuchi , S . , Yamada , T . , Koizumi , H . , Nakamura , T . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Met ki - nase inhibitor E7050 reverses three different mechanisms of hepatocyte growth factor - induces tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance in EGFR mutant lung cancer . Clin Cancer Res 18 ( 6 ) , 1663 – 1671 . Wen , P . Y . , Schiff , D . , Cloughesy , T . F . , Raizer , J . J . , Laterra , J . , Smitt , M . , etal . ( 2011 ) . Aphase II study evaluating the ef ﬁ cacy and safety of AMG 102 ( rilotumumab ) in patients with recurrent glioblastoma . Neuro Oncol 13 ( 4 ) , 437 – 446 . Wilson , T . R . , Fridlyand , J . , Yan , Y . , Penuel , E . , Burton , L . , Chan , E . , etal . ( 2012 ) . Widespread potential for growth - factor - driven resistance to anticancer kinase inhibitors . Nature 487 ( 7408 ) , 505 – 509 . Winer , E . P . , Nechushtan , H . , Berger , R . , & Kurzrock , R . ( 2012 ) . Activity of cabozantinib ( XL184 ) in metastatic breast cancer ( MBC ) : results from a phase 2 randomized dis - continuationtrial ( RDT ) . PosterPresentedattheAnnualMeetingoftheAmericanSociety of Clinical Oncology ; 2012 June 1 – 5 , Chicago . Wojcik , E . J . , Sharifpoor , S . , Miller , N . A . , Wright , T . G . , Watering , R . , Tremblay , E . A . , et al . ( 2006 ) . A novel activating function of c - Src and Stat3 on HGF transcription in mammary carcinoma cells . Oncogene 25 ( 19 ) , 2773 – 2784 . Wortinger , M . A . , Peek , V . , Zeng , W . , Yan , L . , Tetreault , J . , Xia , J . , et al . ( 2012 ) . c - Met anti - body LY2875358 ( LA480 ) has pre - clinical enhanced ef ﬁ cacy with gastric cancer standard - of - care in vitro and in vivo . Cancer Res 72 ( 8 Suppl . ) ( Abstract 2738 ) . Wright , C . E . , Jagoda , E . , Cecchi , F . , & Bhadrasetty , V . ( 2013 ) . Developing a molecular imaging agent for Met using onartuzumab ( MetMAb ) . J Clin Oncol 31 ( 15 Suppl . ) ( Abstract 11083 ) . Wu , C . W . , Li , A . F . , Chi , C . W . , Chung , W . W . , Liu , T . Y . , Lui , W . Y . , et al . ( 1998 ) . Hepatocyte growth factorand Met / HGFreceptors inpatients withgastricadenocarcinoma . Oncol Rep 5 ( 4 ) , 817 – 822 . Wu , Y . M . , Liu , C . H . , Huang , M . J . , Lai , H . S . , Lee , P . H . , Hu , R . H . , et al . ( 2013 ) . C1GALT1 enhances proliferation of hepatocellular carcinoma cells via modulating MET glycosylation and dimerization . Cancer Res 73 ( 17 ) , 5580 – 5590 . Wu , Z . S . , Wu , Q . , Wang , C . Q . , Wang , X . N . , Huang , J . , Zhao , J . J . , et al . ( 2011 ) . miR - 340 in - hibitionofbreastcancercellmigrationandinvasionthroughtargetingofoncoproteinc - Met . Cancer 117 ( 13 ) , 2842 – 2852 . Xie , Q . , Bradley , R . , Kang , L . , Koeman , J . , Ascierto , M . L . , Worschech , A . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Hepa - tocytegrowthfactor ( HGF ) autocrineactivationpredictssensitivitytoMETinhibition in glioblastoma . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109 ( 2 ) , 570 – 575 . Yamada , T . , Matsumoto , K . , Wang , W . , Li , Q . , Nishioka , Y . , Sekido , Y . , etal . ( 2010 ) . Hepato - cyte growth factor reduces susceptibility to an irreversible epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor in EGFR - T790M mutant lung cancer . Clin Cancer Res 16 ( 1 ) , 174 – 183 . Yamazaki , S . , Vicini , P . , Shen , Z . , Zou , H . Y . , Lee , J . , Li , Q . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Pharmacokinetic / pharmacodynamic modeling of crizotinib for anaplastic lymphoma kinase inhibition and antitumor ef ﬁ cacy in human tumor xenograft mouse models . J Pharmacol Exp Ther 340 ( 3 ) , 549 – 557 . Yano , S . , Wang , W . , Li , Q . , Matsumoto , K . , Sakurama , H . , Nakamura , T . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Hepatocyte growth factor induces ge ﬁ tinib resistance of lung adenocarcinoma with epidermal growth factor receptor - activating mutations . Cancer Res 68 ( 22 ) , 9479 – 9487 . Yano , S . , Yamada , T . , Takeuchi , S . , Tachibana , K . , Minami , Y . , Yatabe , Y . , etal . ( 2011 ) . Hepa - tocyte growth factor expression in EGFR mutant lung cancer with intrinsic and ac - quired resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors in a Japanese cohort . J Thorac Oncol 6 ( 12 ) , 2011 – 2017 . Yap , T . A . , Olmos , D . , Brunetto , A . T . , Tunariu , N . , Barriuso , J . , Riisnaes , R . , et al . ( 2011 ) . PhaseItrialofaselectivec - METinhibitorARQ197incorporatingproofofmechanism pharmacodynamic studies . J Clin Oncol 29 ( 10 ) , 1271 – 1279 . Yau , T . C . , Sukeepaisarnjaroen , W . , Chao , Y . , & Yen , C . - J . ( 2012 ) . A phase I / II study of foretinib , an oral multikinase inhibitor targeting MET , RON , AXL , TIE - 2 , and VEGFR in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma ( HCC ) . J Clin Oncol 30 ( Suppl . , Ab - stract 4108 ) . You , W . K . , Sennino , B . , Williamson , C . W . , Falcon , B . , Hashizume , H . , Yao , L . C . , et al . ( 2011 ) . VEGF and c - Met blockade amplify angiogenesis inhibition in pancreatic islet cancer . Cancer Res 71 ( 14 ) , 4758 – 4768 . Zahir , H . , Rodig , S . , Sequist , L . , Rimassa , L . , & Eng , C . ( 2012 ) . Relationship between tumor MET expression and clinical outcomes in cancer patients treated with tivantinib . Poster Presented at the 24th EORTC - NCI - AACR Symposium on Molecular Targets and Cancer Therapeutics ; 2012 Nov 6 – 9 , Dublin . Zeng , W . , Peek , V . , Wortinger , M . A . , Tetreault , J . , Xia , J . , Stephens , J . R . , et al . ( 2013 ) . LY2875358 , a bivalent antibody with anti - tumor activity through blocking HGF as well asinducingdegradation of MET , differentiatesfrom a one - armed5D5 METanti - body . Cancer Res 73 ( 8 Suppl . ) ( Abstract 5465 ) . Zeng , W . , Yan , L . , Peek , V . , Wortinger , M . A . , Tetreault , J . , Xia , J . , et al . ( 2012 ) . c - Met anti - body LY2875358 ( LA480 ) shows differential antitumor effects in non - small cell lung cancer . Cancer Res 72 ( 8 Suppl . ) ( Abstract 2734 ) . Zhu , H . , Naujokas , M . A . , Fixman , E . D . , Torossian , K . , & Park , M . ( 1994 ) . Tyrosine 1356 in the carboxyl - terminal tail of the HGF / SF receptor is essential for the transduc - tion of signals for cell motility and morphogenesis . J Biol Chem 269 ( 47 ) , 29943 – 29948 . Zillhardt , M . , Christensen , J . G . , & Lengyel , E . ( 2010 ) . Anorallyavailablesmall - moleculein - hibitor of c - Met , PF - 2341066 , reduces tumor burden and metastasis in a preclinical model of ovarian cancer metastasis . Neoplasia 12 ( 1 ) , 1 – 10 . Zou , H . Y . , Li , Q . , Lee , J . H . , Arango , M . E . , McDonnell , S . R . , Yamazaki , S . , et al . ( 2007 ) . An orally available small - molecule inhibitor of c - Met , PF - 2341066 , exhibits cytoreductive antitumor ef ﬁ cacy through antiproliferative and antiangiogenic mech - anisms . Cancer Res 67 ( 9 ) , 4408 – 4417 . 23 C . R . Maroun , T . Rowlands / Pharmacology & Therapeutics xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Maroun , C . R . , & Rowlands , T . , The Met receptor tyrosine kinase : A key player in oncogenesis and drug resistance , Pharmacol . Ther . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pharmthera . 2013 . 12 . 014