Diversity of endocytic mechanisms 256 npg Cell Research | Vol 20 No 3 | March 2010 REVIEW Endocytosis unplugged : multiple ways to enter the cell Sudha Kumari 1 , 2 , Swetha MG 1 , Satyajit Mayor 1 1 National Centre for Biological Science ( TIFR ) , Bellary Road , Bangalore 560 065 , Karnataka , India Correspondence : Satyajit Mayor Tel : + 91 - 80 - 2366 - 6420 ; Fax : + 91 - 80 - 2363 - 6662 E - mail : mayor @ ncbs . res . in 2 current address : Molecular Pathogenesis , Marty and Helen Kimmel Center for Biology and Medicine of the Skirball Institute for Biomolecular Medi - cine , New York University School of Medicine , New York , NY 10016 npg Cell Research ( 2010 ) 20 : 256 - 275 . © 2010 IBCB , SIBS , CAS All rights reserved 1001 - 0602 / 10 $ 32 . 00 www . nature . com / cr Endocytosis occurs at the cell surface and involves internalization of the plasma membrane ( PM ) along with its constituent membrane proteins and lipids . Endocytosis is involved in sampling of the extracellular milieu and also serves to regulate various processes initiated at the cell surface . These include nutrient uptake , signaling from cell - surface receptors , and many other processes essential for cell and tissue functioning in metazoans . It is also central to the maintenance of PM lipid and protein homeostasis . There are multiple means of internalization that operate concurrently , at the cell surface . With advancement in high - resolution visualization techniques , it is now possible to track multiple endocytic cargo at the same time , revealing a remarkable diversity of endocytic processes in a single cell . A combination of live cell imaging and efficient genetic manipulations has also aided in understanding the func - tional hierarchy of molecular players in these mechanisms of internalization . Here we provide an account of various endocytic routes , their mechanisms of operation and occurrence across phyla . Keywords : endocytosis , trafficking , membrane , clathrin , dynamin , actin Cell Research ( 2010 ) 20 : 256 - 275 . doi : 10 . 1038 / cr . 2010 . 19 ; published online 2 February 2010 Introduction Over the years , numerous modes of vesicular endo - cytic trafficking have been discovered that coexist in the same cell type and operate concurrently . The operation of an internalization route and its cargo specificity is deter - mined by factors that vary in a context - dependent man - ner . These factors include one or more underlying prin - ciple in cargo enrichment , necessitating specific coat and coat - associated protein assembly , a scission mechanism , and a means to integrate these steps ; several molecules and membrane parameters can influence and diversify an endocytic process . In this review , with the intention of summarizing present understanding of principles of en - docytosis , we have surveyed different types of endocytic processes , focusing on their molecular attributes and mechanism of vesicle formation at the cell surface . The physical and chemical properties of cargo mol - ecules usually dictate the nature of the primary vesicular structures that participate in their internalization ; the physical process of membrane deformation at initial en - try is likely to dictate the mechanism necessary for endo - cytosis . At first glance , the scale of this initial membrane invagination provides a natural means of classifying dif - ferent pathways of endocytosis ( Figures 1 and 2 ) . Inges - tion of particles larger than 500 nm size typically occurs via triggered processes called ‘phagocytosis or macropi - nocytosis’ ( Figure 1 ) whereas cargo below this size limit is often internalized by any of the other diverse endocytic processes available at the cell surface ( Figure 2 ) . These include the well - characterized receptor - mediated clath - rin - dependent as well as the less understood panoply of clathrin - independent ‘pinocytic’ pathways . Macroscale endocytosis : phagocytosis and macrop - inocytosis There are endocytic processes that involve the in - ternalization of large - sized particles or a large volume fraction of the extracellular bulk phase relative to the cell volume . These are termed phagocytosis and macro - pinocytosis , respectively ( Figure 1 ) . These processes are tightly regulated , distinct internalization events often resulting in phase - lucent structures inside cells when viewed in a light microscope [ 1 ] . They involve long - range remodeling of membrane and the cytoskeleton lying beneath it , and have been focus of some recent re - www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Sudha Kumari et al . 257 npg views [ 1 - 9 ] and are therefore described here only briefly . Phagocytosis : ingestion of large particulates Classically defined , phagocytosis is a stepwise process that involves uptake of large particles into triggered cell - surface membrane deformations that usually encircle the particle , resulting in phagosomes [ 10 ] . In a metazoan system , cargoes for phagosomes range from non - self - particles and microbial organisms to self - entities such as apoptotic cells and cellular debris . The process is initi - ated by cell - surface recognition of the particle , and pro - ceeds via sequential engagement of receptors , generating Figure1 Macroscale endocytic processes . ( A ) A simplified schematic representing molecular and membrane events occurring during macroscale endocytic processes . During phagocytic cup formation ( left panel ) , sequential engagement of Fc - receptor initiates a zipper - like arrangement in opposition with bacterial surface . The process is orchestrated by stepwise involvement of GTPases and involves actin polymerization . Membrane remodeling during phagocytosis is accompanied with membrane addition to PM , in an AP1 - dependent vesicular process . In trigger - type particle entry ( right panel ) , the process involves injec - tion of soluble effectors into cell , which , among other events , can activate Rho GTase effectors , and hence culminating in actin polymerization at the site of bacterial entry . Variations that exhibit intermediate forms , also exist , but have not been in - cluded here . ( B ) EGF - induced macropinocytosis – a most extensively studied example of macropinocytosis . Binding of EGF to EGF receptor triggers the intracellular signaling cascade and activation of downstream proteins , as indicated , eventually leading to actin - rich membrane ruffle formation . Collapse of ruffle on membrane is followed with macropinosome formation . ARF6 / Rac1 ARF1 / Cdc42 PI3 Kinase PAK1Arp2 / 3 , N - WASP Zipper type Trigger type ARF - 1 AP1 PI3 Kinase PAK1Arp2 / 3 , N - WASP Rho PI4 , 5P2 F - actin Extracellularmedium PM EGF EGFR F - actin Src , Ras PAK1 , Rac1 / Cdc42 N - WASP , Arp2 / 3 F - actin CtBP / BARS A B Diversity of endocytic mechanisms 258 npg Cell Research | Vol 20 No 3 | March 2010 a cup - shaped membrane distortion around the particle , culminating in a phagosome . Two well - described types of phagocytic entry are : ( i ) Ig receptor , FcR - mediated engulfment of immunoglobulin G - opsonized particles and ( ii ) complement receptor CR3 - mediated ingestion of C3bi - coated particles . Both the means of phagocytic entry form morphologically distinct phagocytic cups and represent different types of phagocytic mechanisms ( Figure 1A ) . Thus the morphology of forming invagina - tion and resultant compartment is a crucial parameter for classifying these processes . In FcR - mediated phagocytosis ( termed ‘zipper like’ ) , bound FcR receptors elicit local signaling responses mediated by cytosolic immunoreceptor tyrosine - based activation motifs . This leads to localized actin rearrange - ment , membrane extension around ligand , and thereby further engagement of receptors with ligand in a pro - truding cup with zipper - lock arrangement . In CR3 - type phagocytosis ( termed ‘trigger - like’ ) , on the other hand , the process is triggered by treatment with either phorbol esters or extracellular agonists [ 10 , 11 ] and the particle is loosely encased in a large membrane vesicle . The site of phagocytosis has discrete patch - like distribution of F - actin , and occurs by a regulated and triggered depres - sion in the cell surface . There are instances , for example , engulfment of necrotic cells , where the morphology is in between the two [ 1 ] . In either case formation of phagosomes is achieved by spatiotemporally controlled sequential action of various small actin - remodeling GT - Pases [ 12 ] . The two modes also differ in their require - ments for Rho - GTPases , in that FcR - mediated phagocy - tosis relies on Rac1 and Cdc42 activities , whereas CR3 - mediated entry is specifically dependent on RhoA [ 12 , 13 ] . The host phagocytic machinery can also be manipu - lated by bacterial pathogens to facilitate their own in - ternalization . Here too , two general models have been described that outline bacterial entry into cells : the ‘trig - ger’ or ‘zipper’ models . Salmonella and Shigella are examples of ‘triggering’ bacteria ; Salmonella injects its effector , SopB , into cells , which activates an exchange factor for RhoG , leading to actin remodeling that causes internalization of the bacterium [ 14 ] . The ‘zippering’ model of entry of the bacteria is similar to FcR - mediated internalization , as it involves engagement of cell - surface receptors all around the particle being internalized . A good example of this ‘zippering’ kind of bacterium is Listeria Monocytogenes , where the bacterium interacts with host epithelial cells through its adhesins , InlA and InlB , that bind host cell receptors E - cadherin and Met , respec - tively [ 15 ] . Live cell imaging using RAW264 . 7 macrophages , a phagocyte model system , and Forster’s Resonance En - ergy Transfer sensor for the small , activated GTPases , ADP ribosylation factors ( ARFs ) showed that FcR - me - diated phagocytosis accompanies dynamic and stepwise activation of ARF6 and ARF1 [ 16 ] . This correlated with activation of Cdc42 and Rac1 [ 17 ] . Activity of the Rho GTPases is presumably required for regulation of actin polymerization during phagocytic cup formation ; simul - taneous inhibition of both Cdc42 and Rac1 abolishes this . Inhibition of these GTPases individually however only partially inhibits phagocytosis , suggesting they act in tandem during the process . These Rho GTPases upon activation , recruit WASP and thereby the Arp2 / 3 complex for actin nucleation and polymerization [ 18 ] . The action of GTPases is probably regulated by the composition of polyphosphoinositides ( PIPs ) of the phagosomal mem - brane . PIPs are also intimately linked to actin dynamics [ 19 ] . During early stages of cup formation , PI4 , 5P2 is en - riched at the inner leaflet of the cup ; during phagosome closure , rapid disappearance of F - actin at the base of the cup is correlated with the reduction in local concentra - tion of PI4 , 5P2 . Consistent with this , overexpression of the PI - kinase ( PIPKI ) , which converts PI4P into PI4 , 5P2 or inhibition of PLC and phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase ( PI3K , enzymes that produce IP3 , DAG , and PI3 , 4 , 5P3 , respectively ) abrogates phagosome closure [ 2 , 20 ] . The shape of the phagocytic cup is usually dictated by the nature of ligand . Macrophages , when subjected to an opsonized flat surface , exhibit pseudopod extension and abortive attempts to phagocytose the surface [ 21 ] . Since the phagocytic cargo is large , sometimes as large as an apoptotic cell , internalization involves vesicular addition of membrane in the vicinity of cup . Although the origin of this membrane remains controversial , the delivery of new membrane is dependent on the adaptor protein com - plex , AP1 , and small GTPase , ARF1 [ 22 ] , suggesting a secretory origin . The composition of phagosomal membranes has been extensively characterized . A proteomics approach helped identify more than 140 molecules present in or on la - tex bead - induced phagosomes in J774 cells [ 23 ] . These include , lysosomal proteins , LAMP1 , LAMP2 , lgp110 , LIMPII ; mitochondrial VDAC1 ; several members of the Ras superfamily of small GTPases , Rabs ( 2 , 3c , 5 , 7 , 11 , and 14 ) ; as well as proteins found in late - endosomes , alix and flotillin - 1 . Once formed , phagosomes are gradually acidified and the cargo is destined for degradation . This feature of phagosomes is sometimes manipulated by pathogens , prominently by bacteria [ 3 ] to evade degradation and gain intracellular access . Further knowledge of the mo - lecular machinery involved in phagosome formation will increase our understanding of the process as well as how www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Sudha Kumari et al . 259 npg it is manipulated by pathogens in a given context . Macropinocytosis – cell drinking Macropinocytosis is another process whereby a rela - tively large amount of the fluid phase is engulfed with respect to the cell volume , in some instances along with particles such as bacteria . First described by Lewis [ 6 , 24 ] as large phase - bright organelles originating from plasma membrane ( PM ) ruffles , macropinosomes were initially thought to occur via non - selective membrane uptake . This view has changed with increased under - standing of this process . Owing to its specific charac - teristics such as its inhibition with Na + / H + exchanger inhibitor , amiloride [ 25 ] , and dependence on growth factor ( GF ) receptor ( GFR ) signaling , macropinocytosis is now defined as a highly coordinated , triggered process with distinct molecular regulators . In a study performed using soil ameba , Dictyostelium discoideum , an active phagocytic and macropinocytic organism , it was shown that during macropinosome formation , some membrane proteins were selectively depleted from the site at the PM [ 26 ] . It is now clear that there is sorting of membrane components during the formation of macropinosomes . Macropinosomes are variable in size and can range from 0 . 2 to 10 µm in diameter [ 1 ] . The size and mor - phology of macropinosomes are typically independent of ligand , although their formation can be stimulated by agents such as phorbol esters , some pathogens , and GFs [ 25 , 27 - 29 ] . In professional antigen - presenting cells , macropinocytosis operates constitutively in quiescent circulating cells such as immature dendritic cells and is downregulated after these cells begin to mature [ 6 , 30 ] , suggesting a role in immune surveillance . As noted above , intracellular pathogens also exploit macropino - cytosis as a means of entry into cells . Pathogens such as Shigella and Salmonella inject virulence factors that modulate the cytoskeleton , induce ruffling and subse - quently , macropinocytosis . Infection rates of bacteria such as Sphingomona [ 31 ] and viruses such as HIV type I [ 32 ] are reduced upon inhibiting macropinocytosis us - ing amiloride . A common feature of macropinocytosis and phagocy - tosis is the dependence on actin - polymerization machin - ery . An archetypal example of GF - induced macropino - cytosis is the upregulated fluid uptake in cells stimulated with epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) [ 33 ] ( Figure 1B ) . Activation of EGFR signaling leads to an increase in general actin polymerization and cell ruffling . EGF bind - ing results in activation of Rac1 GTPase as well as gen - eration of the phosphoinositide , PI4 , 5P2 , both of which together activate WASP / SCAR proteins . These in turn bind to the Arp2 / 3 complex , hence modulating actin po - lymerization . Most instances of macropinocytosis , with few exceptions ( for example , bone marrow dendritic cells , where Cdc42 is implicated [ 34 ] ) , are dependent on Rac1 activation ) . Another molecular regulator of macropinosome for - mation is PAK1 ( p21 - activated kinase ) ; manipulation of PAK1 activity correlates with macropinocytic extent in NIH3T3 cells [ 35 ] . While PAK1 is capable of phos - phorylating and therefore activating Cdc42 / Rac1 , it also phosphorylates CtBP1 / BARS proteins . CtBP1 / BARS ( C - terminal - binding protein - 1 / brefeldin A ribosylation substrate ) proteins were originally demonstrated to regu - late dynamin - independent fluid uptake in a variety of cell lines , and were later reported to localize to the site of and affect macropinosome membrane closure in a phospho - rylation - dependent manner [ 36 ] . It is possible that BARS proteins represent a link between dynamin - independent fluid endocytosis and macropinocytosis ( see below ) . The nature of fission machinery involved in macro - pinosome scission from the PM is not yet clear . There is evidence that implicates isoforms of dynamin in specific contexts . Although EGF or serum - repletion - induced macropinocytosis in epithelial cell lines is insensitive to dynamin inhibition [ 37 ] , macropinocytosis is severely impaired in PDGF - stimulated dynamin - null embryonic stem cells [ 38 ] . In these embryonic stem cells , fluid - phase tracer uptake , as an indicator of stimulated macro - pinocytosis , was rescued by reintroduction of dynamin - 1 or 2 [ 38 ] , suggesting that dynamin is crucial for this form of macropinocytosis . However , at this stage it is not clear whether dynamin could serve as a scissoring protein for specific cases of macropinocytosis , or has other regula - tory functions for endocytosis . Dynamin is known to regulate cellular distribution of Rac1 [ 39 ] , and therefore can indirectly influence macropinocytosis by regulating the availability of Rac1 , necessary for actin remodeling . Even though phagocytosis and macropinocytosis dif - fer in their nature of induction and detailed mechanisms , these processes share multiple operational similarities , pointing toward similar membrane remodeling pathways during internalization . Both have slow kinetics , which incidentally enables the study of the formation of these vesicles in live cells . Multiple studies have demonstrated localization of regulatory proteins to phagocytic cups and macropinosomes [ 16 , 36 ] as well as the local and distinctive membrane composition during their formation [ 40 ] . Both processes employ molecules such as the PI3K and other actin polymerization effectors , and are typi - cally initiated by phosphoinositide - dependent processes . Since dependence for endosome formation on the actin machinery is also exhibited by many other endocytic pathways , the distinctive feature of phagocytosis and Diversity of endocytic mechanisms 260 npg Cell Research | Vol 20 No 3 | March 2010 macropinocytosis still remains their large size . Microscale endocytic processes Endocytosis at a scale smaller than 200 nm poses spe - cific demands on membrane machinery needed to bend membrane at this scale [ 41 ] . The eukaryotic cell appears to have resolved this in many ways . There are several modes of endocytic processes , distinguished by specific sets of molecular regulators and functional modules that are associated with their optimal operation . Molecules involved in the generation of a vesicle can be part of a module assisting coat assembly , or involved in the pinch - ing process , or may represent specific membrane lipids and lipid - modifying proteins . Here we discuss these at - tributes and the endocytic processes that have come to be defined by the combinations of them . A convenient way of classifying some of the modes of microscale endocy - tosis is by the nature of the coat proteins that are associ - ated with a specific process ( Table 1 , Figure 2 ) . Coat protein - mediated pathways Clathrin - mediated endocytosis Initially identified in electron micrographs used to study yolk protein uptake in mosquito Aedes aegypti , clathrin was one of the first endocytic coat proteins to be discovered as a major com - ponent of ‘bristled vesicles’ [ 42 , 43 ] . Studies on clathrin - mediated endocytosis have dominated and defined the paradigm for endocytosis . Morphological studies with clathrin indicated that it is capable of coating vesicles 100 - 200 nm in diameter . Clathrin functions as a trimer of heterodimers , each unit consisting of one heavy and one light chain forming a triskeleton [ 44 ] . These triskelia can assemble into a lattice - like structure around the vesicles . Adaptor proteins function to link up specific cargo with the clathrin coat [ 45 ] . Simply put , clathrin - pit - mediated endocytosis involves cargo recognition and coat assem - bly , followed by membrane invagination , and finally pinching off of the dimpled deformation . Although it was believed for a long time that clathrin - mediated endocytosis is a cargo - induced process , it is now known that clathrin coats can spontaneously assem - ble at the PM and are stabilized by interactions with car - go [ 46 ] ; the presence of sorting motifs YXXF , DEXXX - LLI , FXNPXY , and polyubiquitination in transmembrane proteins that can bind to adaptor proteins often couple productive coat formation to capture of cargo [ 47 ] . Clathrin - coated vesicle ( CCV ) formation and its regulation have been reported to be associated with ~ 150 proteins , however , at this stage , with the exception of a few , their precise sequence of action during CCV forma - tion remains unexplored . In a study carried out in live T a b l e 1 S u mm a r y o f e ndo c y ti c m ec h a n i s m s E ndo c y ti c P h a go c y t o s i s M ac r op i no c y t o s i s C l a t h r i n - m e d i a t e d C a v e o l ae - m e d i a t e d I L - 2 R β G EE C F l o tilli n - d e p e nd e n t A rf 6 - m ec h a n i s m e ndo c y t o s i s d e p e nd e n t M o r pho l ogy a nd C a r go - d e p e nd e n t L i g a nd - d e p e nd e n t V e s i c u l a r F l a s k - s h a p e d , V e s i c u l a r , T ubu l a r V e s i c u l a r T ubu l a r s i ze 0 . 2 - 10 μ m 150 - 200 n m ~ 120 n m 50 - 100 n m I m p li ca t e d c o a t — — C l a t h r i n C a v e o li n N on e N on e N on e N on e a s y e t D yn - d e p e nd e n ce — Y e s ( i n s p ec i fi c Y e s Y e s Y e s N o N o N o i n s t a n ce s ) S m a ll G T P a s e s R ac 1 , R ho A R ac 1 , C d c 4 2 R a b5 N o t w e ll e s t a b li s h e d R ho A , R ac 1 A R F 1 , C d c 42 — A rf 6 i nvo l v e d C d c 42 O t h e r a ss o c i a t e d A c ti n , A r p2 / 3 A c ti n , P I 3 K , P AK 1 A P 2 , E p s 15 , E p s i n P T R F , s r c , S D P R P AK 1 a nd 2 A c ti n , G R A F 1 F l o tilli n s - 1 a nd 2 — p r o t e i n s W A SP , P I 3 K R a s , S r c A m ph i phy s i n A c ti n G B F 1 C t B P 1 / B A R S A R HGA P 10 C a r go ( e x a m p l e s ) B ac t e r i a l p a t hog e n s F l u i d ( und e r T r a n s f e rr i n r ece p t o r A l bu m i n , A M F I L - 2 R β F l u i d , C T x B P r o t e og l y ca n s M H C I , s p ec i fi c s ti m u li ) , E G F ( a t l o w C ho l e r a t ox i n γ c - c y t ok i n e V ac A t ox i n C a r boxy - A pop t o ti c ce ll s a l s o e xp l o it e d by c on ce n t r a ti on s ) T e t a nu s t ox i n , S V 40 r ece p t o r G P I - a n c ho r e d p e p ti d a s e ce r t a i n b ac t e r i a G P CR s , R T K s P o l yo m a v i r u s e s p r o t e i n s E E bo l a , S A R S , a nd s o m e o t h e r v i r u s e s www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Sudha Kumari et al . 261 npg cells using clathrin - GFP and TIR - FM , Merrifield et al . [ 48 ] uncovered the chronology of a few effector protein dynamics during the formation of a mature coat . More of such investigations will shed light on dynamics of criti - cal molecular events that occur during CCV formation . Imaging of clathrin - coat nucleation at PM suggests that it assembles randomly , mediated by cargo protein , AP , and accessory proteins [ 46 ] . In neurons , APs direct lattice formation to specific sites at PM via interaction with PI4 , 5P2 and synaptotagmin I and clathrin . This as - sembly can be further stabilized by epsin and AP180 / CALM , which bind to AP2 , PIP2 , and clathrin [ 49 ] . Subsequent to this , stabilization of the clathrin - coated pit ( CCP ) requires cargo acquisition via subunits of AP2 and Figure 2 Microscale endocytic processes . Microscale endocytic processes can be broadly classified according to the require - ment for dynamin for pinching . ( A ) Pathways that are dependent on dynamin activity for vesicle formation , ( B ) Pathways that are independent of dynamin function . Most examples in ( B ) are less - explored in terms of their molecular mechanisms , and their specificity for particular cargo is less well defined . For example , CD59 is endocytosed by both the ARF6 - associated pathway and the flotillin - mediated endocytic route . The routes illustrated here represent pathways that have been shown to be distinct from one another . Clathrin - IL2 - receptor Caveolar mediated endocytosis endocytosis Receptor sorting motifs Adaptors and associated proteins Clathrin lattice Dynamin Rho A Rac1 Receptor sorting motlfs Caveolar coat cholesterol Dynamin Adaptor , AP2 Clathrin triskelion Caveolin GEEC / CLIC ARF6 - associated Flotillin pathway pathway pathway ARF1Cdc42CholesterolN - WASP GRAF1 ARF6 F - actin Cholesterol / sphingolipids Flotillin 1 / 2 PIP2 - enriched membrane A B Diversity of endocytic mechanisms 262 npg Cell Research | Vol 20 No 3 | March 2010 clathrin [ 46 , 50 ] . This step proceeds via the recruitment of various AP2 - binding partners that facilitate cargo binding , optimal clathrin polymerization , and membrane bending . The process of membrane bending is brought about in part by BAR ( Bin Amphiphysin Rvs ) domain - containing proteins [ 9 ] , such as endophilin and amph - iphysin , and is further facilitated by epsin and inherent curvature properties of assembled clathrin structures [ 51 , 52 ] . Mature clathrin - coated vesicle , while still attached to the PM , contains amphiphysin and recruits the pinch - ing module that contains the protein dynamin . Dynamin eventually promotes the scission of the vesicle ( see later section for details ) . The prevalent view of clathrin assembly is of a ho - mogenous , symmetric polygonal lattice [ 53 ] , the size of individual vesicle varying depending on the cell type of origin . CCPs at the cell surface are of diverse composi - tion with respect to the usage of adaptor and associated proteins [ 54 , 55 ] , and offer distinct microenvironments for the regulated entry of specific combinations of car - goes [ 56 ] . Interestingly , ligand concentration also affects the mode of this endocytic route : for example , EGF , at low concentrations , is internalized by a clathrin - depen - dent endocytic route [ 57 ] , but at higher concentrations , seems to enter cells through clathrin - independent routes with consequences for signaling via the EGFR [ 58 ] . How such fine - tuning and discrimination are regulated is a subject of current investigation [ 56 ] . Several viral pathogens such as Ebola virus , SARS coronavirus , and some nonenveloped mammalian reo - viruses enter cells by receptor - mediated endocytosis , targeting receptors internalized by the clathrin - dependent pathway [ 59 ] . For some viruses this route is obligatory , and for others the clathrin pathway is one of a few that support infection . Studies on the entry of influenza virus in epithelial cells have indicated that a large fraction is endocytosed into CCPs ; viral particles are also endocy - tosed by non - clathrin pathway operating in parallel [ 60 ] . Viruses that take a clathrin - dependent route more often induce formation of clathrin pit at the site of binding at the PM rather than entering a preassembled clathrin structure [ 59 ] . This suggests a flexibility in regulation of clathrin - coated vesicle formation . Similarly , in case of bacterial uptake , the entry of the bacterium , L . mono - cytogenes , into HeLa cells was sensitive to depletion of clathrin heavy chain and other endocytic proteins such as dynamin , Eps15 , but not the adaptor AP2 . This was unexpected because it suggests that cargo 20 times larger than a normal endocytic cargo could use the clathrin - based machinery to enter a non - phagocytic mammalian cell , reiterating the flexibility in clathrin - mediated endo - cytic processes , both in terms of size and associated machinery [ 61 ] . Caveolin and the caveolar endocytic process Anoth - er membrane coat at the cell surface is caveolin . Cave - olae were originally described as flask - shaped structures in ultrastructure of blood capillaries by Palade in 1953 [ 62 ] , but it was not until much later that the coat compo - nent , caveolin , was identified [ 63 ] . Caveolae are formed by assembly of caveolins , integral membrane proteins that bind directly to membrane cholesterol . There are three subtypes of caveolin proteins , caveolin - 1 , caveo - lin - 2 , and caveolin - 3 , the former two being responsible for caveolae formation in non - muscle cells and latter in muscle cells [ 64 ] . A recent study demonstrated that while morphological features of caveolae are widely conserved , the functions of individual caveolin proteins may be di - verse [ 65 ] . Many mammalian cell lines such as human colorectal adenocarcinoma cells , Caco2 [ 66 ] , or tissues ( e . g . many blood cell lineages ) do not have detectable levels of caveolin , pointing toward the specialized tissue - specific function of caveolins . Overexpression of caveo - lins in the cells lacking them induces de novo formation of caveolae [ 67 , 68 ] . The precise function and regulation of caveolar as - sembly have been a matter of intense investigation . Caveolins have a predicted hydrophobic stretch of po - tential hairpin structure composed of α - helices . Insertion of transmembrane amphipathic helices in a wedge - like manner such that inner leaflet lipids are displaced more than outer leaflet lipids could induce membrane curvature [ 69 ] . Moreover , caveolins are capable of oligomerization ( caveolin - 1 and caveolin - 2 ) on membranes , which could further potentiate membrane curvature . Consistent with this idea , the density and number of caveolae generally correlate with cellular caveolin expression [ 70 ] . Cave - olae formation is cholesterol dependent and loss in mem - brane cholesterol leads to disassembly of the caveolar structures . Recent investigations have identified additional fac - tors for the coat component of caveolae , polymerase I and transcript release factor ( PTRF ) , and serum depriva - tion protein response ( SDPR ) [ 8 , 65 ] . These molecules appear to be both part of the coat and necessary for the assembly of caveolae from distributed caveolins at the PM . Loss of PTRF in mammalian cells as well as in ze - brafish correlates with lack of caveolar structures [ 71 ] ; PTRF possibly acts by modulating relative amounts of caveolae - bound caveolin to free caveolin in the PM [ 71 ] , whereas SDPR is likely to be a protein that is required at the sites of caveolar assembly . The caveolar pathway is responsible for the endocy - tosis of ligands such as albumin [ 72 ] , autocrine motility factor [ 73 ] , tetanus toxin [ 74 ] , cholera toxin [ 75 ] , and www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Sudha Kumari et al . 263 npg viruses such as polyoma and simian 40 ( SV40 ) [ 76 , 77 ] ; to name a few . In many of these cases the receptors for specific cargoes have also been identified but the mecha - nism by which cargo is concentrated in caveolae is not understood . In addition , endocytosis via caveolae also remains poorly characterized . It is not clear if caveolar endocytosis is constitutive , albeit occurring at a low rate , and is massively up - regulated on specific induc - tion . Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching studies has indicated caveolae to be relatively stable structures on PM [ 78 ] , which can however be made to bud off by the interaction of pathogens such as SV40 virus [ 79 ] or can also be induced by incorporation of fluorescent analogues of sphingolipids , namely , lactosyl ceramide [ 80 - 82 ] . During integrin - dependent cell adhesion , de - adherence induces removal of caveolin - coated membrane from the cell surface , and it has been shown that caveolin is required for this process [ 83 ] . This results in altered PM lipid composition , due to the loss of many lipids and proteins that partition into detergent - resistant membrane ( DRM ) domains . This has significant functional conse - quences foremost of which is loss of Rac1 activity at the cell surface , and consequently remodeling of the corti - cal cytoskeleton , and activation of anoikisis , a form of apoptosis induced by the loss of cell anchorage [ 83 , 84 ] . Caveolin knockout mice have proven to be useful genetic tools for studying the function of caveolin and ascertaining caveolar cargo specificity [ 85 ] . In mouse embryonic fibroblasts ( MEFs ) obtained from caveolin - 1 knockout mice , albumin uptake was found to be defec - tive [ 86 ] , but the entry of SV40 [ 87 ] and cholera toxin B subunit ( CTxB ) [ 88 ] , two typical cargoes of caveolae , was not compromised . This could be explained by the possibility that caveolin , when present , induces forma - tion of caveolae , but is dispensable for internalization of some caveolar cargoes . In addition , there is evidence that caveolins can negatively regulate entry of certain cell - surface proteins , including CTxB [ 89 , 90 ] , where over - expression of caveolins prevents their internalization , suggesting that apart from their direct role in endocyto - sis , caveolins can indirectly influence other endocytic pathways . A novel role for caveolin - 1 has been reported , in regulation of Cdc42 activity during membrane traf - ficking events . Caveolin - 1 binds preferentially to Cdc42 in its GDP - bound form and functions as a guanine nucle - otide dissociation inhibitor ( GDI ) for Cdc42 . Thus , by maintaining Cdc42 in an inactive state , caveolin - 1 regu - lates basal secretion in the absence of stimuli in pancre - atic β - cells [ 91 ] . It is possible that caveolin - 1 has similar indirect regulatory roles at PM via inhibitory interactions with mediators of other endocytic pathways . Endocyto - sis of SV40 virus has been reported to increase in cells lacking caveolin - 1 [ 87 ] , indicating an inhibitory role for caveolin - 1 in this process . However in this study it was not clear whether this effect is due to squelching of effec - tor molecules or due to sequestration of a specific kind of membrane components . Studies exploring redundant endocytic roles of caveolin will be invaluable in under - standing the regulatory cross - talk between caveolar and non - caveolar internalization pathways . Dynamin - mediated endocytic vesicle scission Once a coated patch of membrane has been generated , the formation of an endocytic vesicle requires fission of the budded membrane from the parent membrane . A large GTPase , dynamin , has been implicated in multiple fission processes in eukaryotic cells [ 92 - 94 ] . There are three dynamin genes identified in mammalian cells , each gene expressing at least four multiply spliced forms ( iso - forms ) . Dyn1 is restricted to neuronal cells ; Dyn2 is ubiq - uitously expressed ; and Dyn3 may be limited to brain , lung , and testis tissues [ 95 ] . A wide variety of endocytic processes , including clathrin - dependent receptor - mediated endocytosis , re - quire dynamin for the scission of endocytic intermediates to generate vesicles ( Figure 2A ) . Originally , dynamin was identified as a microtubule - binding protein and was found to be homologous to the Drosophila shibire gene [ 96 , 97 ] , mutations in which were shown to cause a temperature - sensitive paralysis . Insights into dynamin function came primarily from morphological analysis of synapses in the shibire ts1 mutant . Cycling of mutants through restrictive and permissive temperatures , Koenig and Ikeda observed a reversible loss of synaptic vesicles at neuromuscular synaptic junctions , implicating dy - namin in synaptic vesicle endocytosis [ 16 ] . Overexpres - sion of dominant negative , GTP - binding mutants of dynamin also blocked receptor - mediated endocytosis in various cells , suggesting a role for the GTPase activity of dynamin in the clathrin - dependent endocytic process out - side the nervous system . Dynamin was found to localize to CCPs at the PM and in isolated synaptosomal prepara - tion [ 98 , 99 ] , providing further evidence of a direct role for dynamin in endocytosis . Dynamin is likely to be recruited during clathrin - pit assembly , a process where N - BAR domain - containing proteins , such as amphiphysin , which can directly inter - act with dynamin [ 100 ] , are also recruited . At the mo - lecular level , dynamins contain a Pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain , a GTPase effector domain ( GED ) , and a C - terminal proline / arginine - rich domain ( PRD ) . GED can interact with the GTPase domain of an adjacent dynamin molecule thus causing oligomerization of the protein [ 101 ] , and concomitant activation of the GTPase activity . Diversity of endocytic mechanisms 264 npg Cell Research | Vol 20 No 3 | March 2010 The PRD of dynamin can interact with a variety of pro - teins , including the ones that contain Src homology SH3 domain , and PH domain binds to PI4 , 5P2 phosphoinosit - ides . Wide range of interaction partners for dynamin en - ables it to recruit and bind proteins during coated vesicle formation . At high local concentrations , dynamin is also capable of forming multimers and spirals on membranes . Dy - namin oligomerization and dynamics lead to constriction and eventually budding of the vesicle . The exact function of dynamin at the level of vesicle fission has been a sub - ject of controversy . There are various hypotheses regard - ing the GTP - dependent mechanism of dynamin action for vesicle pinching . First is the conformational change in dynamin brought about by GTP loading ( switch model ) , which can cause scission by recruiting other molecules that will fuse membranes and acts essentially as a timer for this reaction , whereas the other relies on the actual mechanical force generated at the vesicle neck ( pinchase model ) . While there is evidence for both the GTP switch and mechanoenzyme functions of dynamin [ 102 ] , recent studies support a mechanoenzyme or motor - like function of dynamin . The in vitro demonstration of dynamin - coat - ed lipid tubules twisting in response to supply of GTP was a direct evidence supporting a mechano - enzyme be - havior where the authors argue that in addition to mem - brane tension , torsional strain generated at the neck of the vesicle can lead to pinching [ 103 ] . Two other studies demonstrated that it is the kinetics of dynamin depo - lymerization and polymerization on ‘tension - free’ mem - branes that brings about changes in membrane curvature , necessary for fission [ 104 , 105 ] . At this point both these possibilities have distinct implications on the dynamics of dynamin action during pinching as discussed [ 106 ] . Apart from acting as a part of the scission machinery for the clathrin - dependent pathway , dynamin function is also implicated in vesicle formation in a set of clathrin - independent pathways , including caveolar endocytosis [ 107 ] and a class of macropinocytosis [ 38 , 108 ] . Other clathrin - independent pathways that utilize dynamin are the RhoA - dependent IL - 2 receptor endocytic route [ 109 ] and APP endocytosis in primary neurons [ 110 ] . Although ultrastructural studies indicate that IL - 2 receptors are not recruited to CCPs , they were internalized by small uniform - sized invaginations . The uniform and small size ( 50 - 100 nm ) of the forming endocytic pit at the surface that appears to concentrate the cargo suggests the pres - ence of a protein coat that could aid in the recruitment of these proteins to the site of endocytosis . A lot more information is necessary to uncover the mechanism of operation of this type of endocytosis . Similarly , there exists an unusual mode of endocytic clearance of EGFR from dorsal surface of migratory epi - thelial cells . Here , cells on stimulation with EGF gener - ate circular wave - like ruffles that on concentric closure internalize ~ 50 % of cell - surface EGFR . This process employs dynamin 2 but is independent of clathrin or caveolins [ 111 ] . Overall , the function of dynamin seems neither to be strictly dependent on the presence of clath - rin on buds , nor is limited by the size of invaginations . As indicated above , the mechanism by which dynamin is recruited to these endocytic sites at PM is unclear , and ought to be the subject of further investigations . Howev - er , a general theme that emerges is that most coat - depen - dent mechanisms of endocytosis use dynamin to assist in scission of the membrane deformation from the cell surface . On the other hand there are a number of coat - independent endocytic processes that appear to function in the absence of dynamin ( Table 1 ) . Clathrin - and dynamin - indepenent endocytosis At this time there are a number of endocytic path - ways where neither specific coat proteins nor a particular pinching system have been identified ( Figure 2B ) . In fact , the existence of a coat - independent route for endo - cytic uptake has taken a long time to be well accepted ; careful experimentation coupled with genetic manipula - tions provided the necessary evidence . For example , the acceptance of clathrin - independent endocytosis was built on a number of studies : ( i ) injection of African green monkey kidney cells ( CV1 ) with anti - clathrin antibod - ies abolished receptor - mediated uptake completely , but inhibited the uptake of a bulk phase marker ( lucifer yellow ) by only 40 % [ 112 ] , and ( ii ) clathrin - dependent endocytosis could also be inhibited by hypotonic shock , cytosolic potassium depletion , or acidification of cytosol while under all these conditions , endocytosis of the plant toxin ricin continued to take place [ 113 , 114 ] . Together , these and other experiments paved the way to the idea that cells could exhibit one or more clathrin - independent endocytic routes . In some instances , ultrastructural visualization of en - docytic intermediates did not reveal electron - dense coats [ 88 ] , suggesting that either these pathways do not have a proteinaceous coat or the coat assembly , if any , is too transient to be captured by current methodologies of cell fixation and processing . It is also possible , however , that lipid or protein accretions could initiate membrane defor - mation ( vesicle formation ) without defined coat proteins . While the pathways that require coats also have their specific lipid requirements [ 115 , 116 ] , in some instances , lipid organization alone has proven to be sufficient for membrane invagination . Shiga toxin entry is one such example where binding of toxin to the ganglioside , Gb3 , www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Sudha Kumari et al . 265 npg induces invaginations in cells as well as model mem - branes [ 117 ] . This was specific to toxin binding , since simply cross - linking Gb3 with antibodies failed to result in invaginations . These studies provide evidence for the requirement of a specific lipid - binding architecture for this process . A lipid - compaction model was proposed for the segregation and membrane budding induced by the toxin . This process was inhibited by increasing mem - brane tension , indicating that membrane properties , ten - sion , and bending rigidity might play a crucial role in the regulation of lipid - based invaginations . Endocytosis of the lipid - anchored proteins such as glycosylphosphati - dylinositol - anchored proteins ( GPI - APs ) also does not appear to require any of the well - characterized coat pro - teins [ 64 , 88 , 118 , 119 ] . This pathway could be another example where the foundation for membrane deforma - tion is laid by membrane lipids ( see the CLIC / GEEC pathway below ) . An example where a protein platform suffices to support endocytosis is the process of human papillomavirus 16 ( HPV16 ) virus infection , where tetras - panin - enriched domains are required for virus entry [ 120 ] . It was widely accepted that dynamin would be indis - pensable for all endocytic activities in the cell . In part this notion had been fuelled by the existence of a number of dynamin genes , and isoforms / splice variants [ 95 , 121 , 122 ] . However , this notion was difficult to reconcile with a few key observations : ( i ) overexpression of dominant - negative mutant form of dynamin - 2 in HeLa cells [ 98 ] inhibited clathrin - dependent endocytosis but could not completely block fluid phase uptake , and ( ii ) hemocytes derived from the temperature - sensitive shibire mutants of Drosophila exhibited a complete block in clathrin - dependent endocytosis of scavenger receptors , whereas fluid - phase and GPI - AP uptake remained unaffected [ 123 ] . The dynamin gene mutation in Drosophila renders all dynamin splice forms mutant since the mutation lies in the common exon encoding the GTPase domain [ 124 ] . To assess a role for dynamin in a pathway , most stud - ies have used dominant - negative inhibition of dynamin to test concomitant quantitative defects in endocytic cargo uptake . Interpretation of such experiments is how - ever , complex . It is difficult to ascertain whether lack of defect is due to lack of involvement of dynamin , or due to an alternative internalization pathway that is induced by inhibition of dynamin . Alternatively , the ability of dynamin mutants to interfere with the activity of Rac [ 39 ] suggests that inhibition of a particular pathway may not reflect a direct role for dynamin . From the existing examples under the canopy of dynamin - independent pathways , there are also specific requirements for small GTPases such as the ARF family proteins , and the Rho family proteins ( Table 1 ) . These GTPases could function as timers for regulation of the assembly and disassembly of actin - based endocytic mechanism or as scaffold to recruit other regulatory proteins . However , it is evident that while these GTPases can be utilized in combination , they have a diversity of functions not solely restricted to endocytosis [ 109 , 125 ] . Endocytosis mediated by the actin cytoskeleton There is a growing understanding of the molecular mechanism involved in the operation of different endo - cytic pathways and the role for the actin cytoskeleton in its regulation [ 126 ] ( see Table 1 and the following sections ) . This necessitates a new understanding of the role that actin and its associated molecular network may play in different aspects of the endocytic process . Actin - meshwork could function as a coat and / or help in the recruitment of adaptor proteins , thus allowing for cargo concentration and membrane deformation , leading to the formation of membrane buds . In addition , coupled with motor protein activity and dynamic polymerization , it could play a role in the generation of a scission force . In this context , extensive genetic , biochemical , and morphological studies in budding yeast have provided valuable insights . In a mutant screen for endocytic de - fects in yeast , a large number of identified genes were related to actin and its regulators [ 127 ] ; subsequently , the recruitment of actin to the sites of endocytosis was el - egantly demonstrated in live cells [ 128 ] . One of the first identified genes involved in α - factor uptake was act1 ( end7 ) , the yeast actin gene . Nearly a third of endocytic proteins identified in yeast bind actin or regulate its as - sembly . A specific kind of actin structure , called ‘cortical actin patches’ has been observed to be associated with endocytic sites . Using real - time fluorescence microscopy and particle tracking , Drubin and colleagues [ 129 ] dem - onstrated that there are different cortical actin patches - with distinct protein composition and motility properties ; and these were intermediates in the endocytic process . Subsequently , using a live imaging screen of deletion mutants , where they dissected defects in coat dynam - ics and actin assembly , they provided evidence for the existence of distinct protein modules for coat formation , membrane invagination , actin - meshwork assembly , and vesicle scission during clathrin - or actin - mediated endo - cytosis [ 130 ] . In the same study , they also demonstrated that , in yeast , while clathrin facilitates endocytic site assembly , it is not required for membrane invagination or vesicle formation . Based on these studies , a fission mechanism for such a pathway has been recently pro - posed [ 131 ] . This model suggests that endocytosis can be initiated at a site where the membrane invaginates , and then elongates into a tube through the encasement by ac - Diversity of endocytic mechanisms 266 npg Cell Research | Vol 20 No 3 | March 2010 tive polymerization of actin , culminating in the scission of a membrane bud of different membrane and protein compositions via traction by myosin motors [ 132 ] . Con - sidering that clathrin and its effectors also associate with these vesicles , it is not yet established if actin alone acts as the coat [ 133 ] . In mammalian cells , specifically NIH3T3 cells , actin and cortactin are asymmetrically associated with highly dynamic early endocytic structures and move correla - tively with these vesicles , supporting the notion that actin could generate the force required for vesicle movement and thus fission [ 134 ] . Disruption of the actin cytoskele - ton also causes a reduction in endocytosis in a number of clathrin - independent pathways [ 64 , 135 ] . Large vesicles formed as a result of compensatory endocytosis in Xe - nopus oocytes also have been shown to have actin coats around them , although the precise function of actin there has not been addressed [ 136 ] . It should be , however , noted that actin is a multifunctional structural protein and perturbation in actin and actin nanomachinery can also result in non - specific and indirect defects in endocytosis ; nevertheless colocalization of F - actin with endosomes indicates a more direct role in endocytosis . In the follow - ing sections we discuss some of the pathways that utilize actin and its regulators , in further detail . The CLIC / GEEC pathway As discussed above , endocytosis of GPI - APs represents a clathrin - and dy - namin - independent internalization route . GPI - APs are outer leaflet membrane proteins that lack cytosolic exten - sions and thus are unable to directly bind cytosolic adap - tors . These proteins belong to a family of proteins with diverse functions and have been shown to be internalized by a dynamin - independent endocytic route , into a spe - cialized early endosomal compartment , where a majority of the internalized fluid phase is also detected in many cell types [ 119 ] . Endocytic structures containing nascent endocytosed GPI - APs are named GPI - AP enriched early endosomal compartments ( GEECs ) . GEECs are proposed to result from fusion of uncoated tubulovesicular CLICs ( clathrin - independent carriers ) directly derived from the cell surface [ 88 ] . CLICs / GEECs are selectively enriched for GPI - APs [ 119 ] although at this stage the sorting determinants at PM are not clear . It could potentially be lipid - based sort - ing , as alterations in cholesterol and sphingolipid levels as well as perturbation of the nanocluster state of the GPI - AP affect endocytosis through this pathway [ 64 , 119 , 137 ] . However , a recent study shows the size of extracellular moiety attached to the lipid tail as an ad - ditional determinant for inclusion into GEECs [ 138 ] . It will be interesting to investigate the size range of pro - teins that allows them to be endocytosed via GEECs and also , how the size - based regulation crosstalks to lipid - mediated sorting into the GEEC pathway . Another fea - ture of endocytosis via CLICs / GEECs is its dependence on the actin polymerization machinery [ 64 ] ; maintenance of dynamic cortical actin architecture appears to be re - quired for GEEC endocytosis . This is brought about by the cycling of the Rho family GTPase Cdc42 and down - stream activation of the WASP protein , since locking of Cdc42 in GDP or the GTP state leads to inhibition of the GEEC pathway [ 135 ] . Cdc42 dynamics on PM is regu - lated by ARF1 ; activation of ARF1 leads to recruitment of a Rho - GAP domain - containing protein , ARHGAP10 , and inactivates Cdc42 , thus maintaining its cycling [ 135 ] . Another recently reported effector of GEEC formation is a BAR domain - containing protein , GTPase regulator associated with focal adhesion kinase - 1 ( GRAF1 ) . En - dogenous GRAF1 localizes to CLIC / GEEC carriers in HeLa cells and silencing its expression results in reduced GEEC marker uptake [ 139 ] . GRAF1 colocalizes with ac - tive Cdc42 and contains a Rho - GAP domain , so it may be involved in regulating Cdc42 dynamics apart from its other functions . GRAF1 also contains a BAR domain , which could aid in membrane curvature and an SH3 domain , capable of interacting with dynamin GTPase . It is interesting to note that while GEEC formation is dy - namin - independent , dynamin appears to be recruited to GEECs post internalization [ 88 ] ; this could potentially be mediated by GEEC - associated proteins such as GRAF1 , which has been shown to interact with dynamin . Although there is increasing information about the molecular regulation of GEECs , the functional relevance of this pathway remains unexplored . Since a variety of GPI - APs are internalized by the GEEC pathway , and in some cases endocytosis via GEECs specifically aids in accomplishing their cellular function [ 140 ] , this pathway could be of vital importance for this whole family of proteins . Considering its constitutive nature , fast kinet - ics and heterogeneous resultant vesicle size , the GEEC pathway could mediate the regulation of PM homeosta - sis . There are an increasing number of proteins internal - ized by pathways that bear a resemblance to the GEECs . Endocytosis of cholera toxin [ 88 ] , internalization of VacA toxin , and sorting nexin 9 ( SNX9 ) - regulated GPI - AP internalization routes are examples similar to GEECs [ 141 , 142 ] . Another cargo for a GEEC - like pathway is dysferlin , a muscle repair protein , mutations in which are associated with several myopathies . In MEFs devoid of caveolin - 1 , dysferlin is endocytosed into compartments containing GPI - APs and its cellular entry is independent of dynamin activity , indicating that internalization could potentially be carried out via the GEEC pathway [ 89 ] . ARF6 - dependent pathway Cell - surface proteins such www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Sudha Kumari et al . 267 npg as MHC I and Tac ( the IL - 2 receptor α - subunit ) are inter - nalized in a dynamin ( and clathrin ) - independent manner into an ARF6 - positive tubular endosomal system . These are distinct from the clathrin - dependent cargo - containing endosomes [ 143 ] . Overexpression of constitutively ac - tive form of ARF6 was shown to increase endocytosis of Tac ; however , inhibition of ARF6 via overexpression of a GTP - exchange defective form does not perturb endo - cytosis [ 143 ] . There have been several additions to the cargoes and effectors of this pathway , recently reviewed [ 144 ] . Endosomes - containing cargo internalized via this pathway , remain associated with activated ARF6 [ 145 ] ; hyperactivation of ARF6 traps a PIP2 - enriched early en - dosomes of a vacuolated morphology , while its constitu - tive inactivation blocks the process of recycling back to PM from tubular compartments . Recently , candidates for cargoes endocytosed via the ARF6 - pathway were iden - tified using hyperactivated ARF6 - trapped endosomes [ 146 ] . While ARF6 associates with endosomes contain - ing a specific set of cargoes , it is not clear whether it is involved directly at the internalization level or the recycling step or both . The localization of ARF6 on en - dosomes can result both from stable association during endocytosis and acquisition on endosomal membrane post - internalization . While ARF6 regulates dynamin - dependent endocytosis of the herpes simplex protein vp22 [ 147 ] , it has also been demonstrated to control the recycling of membrane [ 148 ] . It will of interest to visual - ize the localization of ARF6 in the context of cargo en - docytosis at PMA . Although the ARF6 pathway bears a resemblance to the GEEC pathway , it is likely that these two processes are distinct modes of endocytic trafficking . Perturbation of GRAF1 in HeLa cells causes inhibition of fluid uptake ( a GEEC marker which is internalized into tubular endo - somes as well ) , but it neither affects MHC I internaliza - tion nor does it associate with MHC I - positive structures [ 139 ] . An important function of this pathway may be to regulate membrane availability for migratory cells , and recycle activated small GTPases to the PM [ 149 ] . It is also responsible for recycling of a prohormone sorting receptor , carboxypeptidase E , to the Golgi [ 150 ] . Other dynamin - independent endocytic pathways Role of flotillins Flotillins appear to outline a dynamin - and clathrin - independent endocytic process , since car - goes including fluid phase and a GPI - AP , CD59 , in HeLa cells are endocytosed via this pathway [ 151 ] . In the cells depleted of flotillin - 1 , there is a defect in uptake of GPI anchor protein CD59 , and CTxB internalization is shifted to a dynamin - dependent mode . However , the relationship of this pathway to the GEEC / CLIC pathway in other cell types is not yet established ; a role for cholesterol and specific RhoGTPases remains as yet unaddressed . There are two flotillin genes , flotillin - 1 and flotillin - 2 ( identical to reggie - 2 and 1 , respectively ) [ 152 ] . In live cells , flotillins are localized to small puncta . Flotillin - 1 and 2 are both required for induction of membrane in - vaginations in a dose - dependent manner [ 153 ] . Similar to the caveolins , flotillins are associated with DRMs [ 23 ] . While flotillins were shown to form heteromeric complexes with caveolins , as demonstrated by co - im - munoprecipitation experiments , it is yet unknown if this interaction is functional in the context of caveolae forma - tion [ 154 ] . In MEFs lacking caveolin - 1 , while majority of flask - shaped invaginations are absent , there are some structures that remain . This suggests a role for other molecules in the formation of caveolae ( flask ) - shaped in - vaginations [ 155 ] . By EM and immunogold labeling , flo - tillin appears to decorate small membrane invaginations distinct from clathrin - or caveolin - 1 - labeled pits . How - ever , in a recent study in fibroblasts lacking caveolin - 1 , overexpression of flotillin isoforms , flotillin - 1 and 2 could not induce flask - shaped invaginations , suggesting that factors more than flotillins may be necessary for the generation of the flotillin - decorated invaginations [ 156 ] . A recent study has implicated flotillin - 1 in CXCR4 recruitment to DRMs and signaling [ 157 ] . It is possible that flotillins generate specialized surface platforms that aid in the regulation of signaling of immunoreceptors and their endocytosis . The trigger ( if any ) for flotillin - medi - ated endocytosis has recently been shown to be initiated by Fyn - mediated phosphorylation , suggesting that this endocytic process is regulated by non - receptor tyrosine kinase activation [ 158 ] . In summary , while flotillins may define a dynamin - independent endocytic process , the studies thus far raise interesting questions regarding the function of endogenous flotillins , their means of inter - acting with specific cargo and the mechanism of vesicle generation . Role of tetraspanins Another protein platform that supports endocytosis is the family of tetraspanins . Dy - namin - independent endocytosis of HPV16 is localized to tetraspanin domains ( CD63 , CD151 ) of the PM and CD151 knockdown in cells blocked HPV16 entry [ 120 ] . This mode of endocytosis is distinct from other dynamin - independent routes in that , it is not inhibited by pertur - bation of cholesterol levels in the cell [ 120 ] , nor does it rely on cellular levels of clathrin , caveolin , and flotillin . However , exact steps in this endocytic mechanism , as well as the associated molecular players , are still unclear . Recently , it was demonstrated that endocytosis of a tet - raspanin , CD82 , is dynamin - independent and occurs via Diversity of endocytic mechanisms 268 npg Cell Research | Vol 20 No 3 | March 2010 a Cdc42 - dependent GEEC - like pinocytic pathway [ 159 ] . It raises an interesting possibility that while tetraspanins regulate a distinct cholesterol - independent internalization route , they may utilize a different endocytic pathway for their own cellular entry [ 159 ] . Another such example , where inhibition of dynamin and cholesterol depletion does not affect uptake is the antagonist - induced internalization of nicotinic acetyl - choline receptor [ 160 ] . Binding of the antagonist α bun - garotoxin causes slow internalization of nAChR , which proceeds via activation of Rac1 GTPase ; inhibition of Rac1 activity or actin polymerization impairs the pro - cess [ 135 ] . These observations suggest that specialized protein - centric molecular platforms could assemble in the membrane to aid in this form of endocytosis . There are now numerous examples of dynamin - inde - pendent endocytic systems [ 9 , 114 , 161 , 162 ] that offer ample variety in terms of molecules employed and cargo endocytosed . Further study will enrich our understanding of principles behind mechanisms of endocytosis . Endocytic systems across phyla Undoubtedly , there are a variety of endocytic path - ways available at the PM . Based on the environmental adaptations and molecular divergence , different king - doms seem to have evolved specializations in endocyto - sis . In prokaryotes , evidence for a well - defined endocytic system is missing . A recent report using cryoelectron tomography showed various stages of the potential for - mation of membrane buds , including magnetosomes with inner membrane in Magnetospirillum magneticum [ 163 ] . These structures are reminiscent of endocytic membrane buds in higher organisms [ 163 ] . In unicellular eukary - otes , some subgroups have been shown to have spatially defined distribution of endocytic proteins , and special - ized structures for endocytosis . For example , in Parame - cium , endocytosis is confined to the cytopharynx , in Try - panosoma , assembly of endocytic machinery is restricted to flagellar pocket and in euglenoids , the ingestion tubule serves as the site of endocytosis [ 164 ] . In unicellular eukaryotes such as fungi , owing to the availability of genetic , pharmacological and biochemical tools , endocytosis ( especially in the budding yeast , Sac - charomyces cerevisiae ) has been dissected in great detail [ 128 ] , as discussed earlier . Riezman and colleagues had identified several endocytic mutants ( end mutants ) that were defective in internalization of the α - factor [ 165 ] . Emr and colleagues had isolated dim ( defective in inter - nalization ) mutants , defective in internalizing FM464 dye [ 166 ] . A quantitative genome - wide screen performed in yeast recently , examined the internalization of the VAMP homologue , Snc1 [ 167 ] . The screen uncovered novel regulators of endocytosis . It also uncovered phenotypes for predicted endocytosis genes for which no defects had previously been reported . Apart from these fairly extensive studies in S . cer - evisiae , initial ultrastructural studies in Neurospora and membrane dye uptake assays in Pisolithus tinctorius yielded no recognizable endocytic structures [ 168 ] . However , different species of Ustilago were found to contain homologs of endocytic proteins in their genome and could internalize lucifer yellow and the membrane marker FM4 - 64 , suggesting the operation of endocytic pathways . These studies were carried out in cells after re - moval of the cell wall , and were therefore subject to vali - dation in hyphae with an intact cell wall [ 169 ] . Similarly in Aspergillus nidulans , a cluster of vesicular structures at the tip of hyphae called Spitzenkörper were identified [ 170 ] . There seem to be differences in endocytic machin - ery in filamentous fungi and budding yeast . For example , internalization relies on ARF6 activity in A . nidulans , whereas in yeast , ARF6 is involved in polarity and bud growth but not in endocytosis [ 170 , 171 ] . In invertebrates , Drosophila has been most extensively used to study endocytosis . A limited variety of endocytic routes are reported to operate in Drosophila , typically demonstrated in cultured hemocytes , isolated wing disc , oocyte nurse cells , and cultured neurons and pericardial cells for selected cell - surface proteins , primarily signal - ing receptors and bulk volume components [ 123 , 172 , 173 ] . Recently , increased usage of cultured cell lines de - rived from Drosophila , and advancement in techniques of genetic manipulation using dsRNA , have made it fea - sible to study endocytosis and other membrane - traffick - ing processes on a genome - wide scale [ 85 , 174 ] . In nematodes , typified by C . elegans , a plethora of genes involved in yolk protein endocytosis and traffick - ing were uncovered in a genome - wide screen [ 175 ] . The function of these genes was further validated in mam - malian cells , where mutation in some of these genes rep - licated transport defects as were observed in C . elegans . These studies also indicated that components of the molecular machinery underlying membrane trafficking may be conserved across systems . In a study that carried out extensive phylogenetic analysis of caveolin genes in metazoan ( which provided evidence of extensive gene duplication ) , it was observed that vertebrate caveolin - 1 and caveolin - 3 isoforms and an invertebrate caveolin ( Apis mellifera ) were able to form morphologically iden - tical caveolae in caveolin - 1 null mouse cells , while the C . elegans caveolin could not . This indicates diversity of function in the caveolin gene family [ 156 ] . Primary and immortalized mammalian cell lines have www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Sudha Kumari et al . 269 npg proven to be an invaluable system to study endocytosis . While some internalization routes seem to be conserved in primary and immortalized cell lines , it is not certain whether their kinetics is conserved and if immortaliza - tion has consequences on overall endocytic activity of a cell type . Genetic knockout of known endocytic proteins in mice allows for the derivation of primary fibroblasts that are now routinely used to dissect the process [ 86 ] . These fibroblasts serve as excellent tools to study the involvement of candidate proteins in endocytosis – this approach not only avoids complexities associated with overexpression of their dominant - negative isoforms and off - target effects , but also can reflect on the functional redundancy of a given protein in the system . In plants , taking into account the cell wall as a physi - cal barrier to PM accessibility , and the high intracellular vacuolar pressure that builds up turgor pressure , the very existence of endocytosis was debated for a long time . In a study using electron microscopy , PM - associated invaginations containing electron - dense tracer and clath - rin coats were visualized [ 176 ] . More recently , uptake of FM dyes was demonstrated in plant cells [ 177 ] , fol - lowing which many studies reported endocytosis of membrane markers and specific proteins in plant root hair cells , pollen tube , and cultured tobacco cells [ 178 ] . Now there is accumulating evidence about the diversity of endosomal pathways and endocytic compartments in plants . Although most of the studies used FM dyes to monitor internalization in plants , advancements in prob - ing techniques are revealing a diversity of endocytic routes in this kingdom . Apart from clathrin - dependent receptor - mediated endocytosis , actin - sensitive fluid - phase endocytosis in inner cortex cells of maize root [ 179 ] and PI3K - dependent bulk phase sucrose endocytosis in suspension culture cells of sycamore have been reported [ 180 ] . Blockade of clathrin - mediated endocytosis using ikarugamycin ( Ika ) did not inhibit uptake of positively charged nanogold particles , suggesting the operation of a clathrin - independent pathway [ 181 ] . However , in another study , Dhonukshe et al . , showed that total membrane uptake in BY - 2 tobacco cells could be inhibited by inhib - iting clathrin using clathrin hub dominant negative form , suggesting that clathrin is absolutely required for any form of endocytosis [ 182 ] . It is possible that a diversity of endocytic portals are conserved in plant and animal systems , and several modes of endocytosis operate in plant cells in a cell type - and tissue - specific manner . Perspective Given the diversity and complexity of endocytic routes available in different cellular context , we provide here only a simplified overview of these pathways . De - tailed understanding of the functioning of an individual pathway is complex in terms of its associated molecules and mechanism , and will require an individual focus . It is likely that there are many different biochemical and physical principles behind the formation of vesicles in cell membrane . For example , cell - surface proteins such as the GPI - APs , which lack cytosolic extensions , cannot directly associate with cytosolic coat and adaptor proteins . These proteins therefore need to utilize radi - cally different principles for sorting , membrane deforma - tion , and vesicle generation at PM . Similarly , much less is known about endocytosis of membrane lipids . Dissec - tion of the endocytic process of lipids will give insights into a novel way of vesicle formation . Also considering the multiplicity of functions of proteins , it will be inter - esting to investigate the overlapping functions of mol - ecules known to be associated with specific trafficking pathways . The identification of an endocytic pathway as distinct has been primarily based on associated cargo proteins or lipids , and molecular regulators ; the contribution of kinetics and detailed physical mechanism to such catego - rization is not generally available except in some well - characterized situations , namely clathrin - pit endocyto - sis or endocytosis by actin - dependent forces in yeast . Considering the limited knowledge and vast diversity in molecular players that are employed for efficient func - tioning of endocytic trafficking pathways , it is difficult to clearly demarcate these mechanisms from one another . On a cautionary note , it should be recognized that numerous cell lines have been utilized to study different types of endocytosis . These studies have helped uncover complex endocytic networks in a given cell system . The extent to which observations in one cell system may be extrapolated to another , or whether basic components of specific endocytic pathway are conserved across cell lines , is not completely clear . The possibility that modes of immortalization of cell lines itself could have conse - quences on how the endocytic pathways are configured in these cells has not been addressed . Extensive work has been carried out to understand and elucidate the mechanism of endocytosis in some eukary - otes , and a considerable amount of information is avail - able in some free - living eukaryotes and pathogens [ 183 ] . The integration of known information from complex en - docytic systems in metazoan and comparison with uptake mechanisms in other eukaryotes could provide a means of understanding the scope of evolution , conservation , and redundancy in the internalization process across phyla . Furthermore , whether specific endocytic modes are Diversity of endocytic mechanisms 270 npg Cell Research | Vol 20 No 3 | March 2010 conserved in their entirety across phyla is also a subject of lively debate [ 183 ] . What is clear is that cells have many ways to endocytose material from the extracel - lular milieu , and perhaps as many reasons to do it by a particular mode . Until we understand the basic principles behind cargo concentration , membrane deformation , and scission in each of these modes it will be difficult to provide any rationale for the proliferation of the mecha - nisms of entry . Regardless , the endocytic process , in addition to its role in uptake of nutrients and fluid , influences diverse key processes in metazoans , such as establishment of cellular asymmetry and modulation of signaling . In ad - dition to its physiological roles , the endocytic process is also exploited by various pathogens . Insights into the underlying mechanisms will reveal new targets for drug design , and selective employment of these entry routes for drug delivery will also allow for the manipulation of cellular endocytic pathways to alleviate effects of spe - cific diseases . References 1 Swanson JA . Shaping cups into phagosomes and macropino - somes . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2008 ; 9 : 639 - 649 . 2 Groves E , Dart AE , Covarelli V , Caron E . Molecular mecha - nisms of phagocytic uptake in mammalian cells . Cell Mol Life Sci 2008 ; 65 : 1957 - 1976 . 3 Kinchen JM , Ravichandran KS . Phagosome maturation : going through the acid test . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2008 ; 9 : 781 - 795 . 4 Huynh KK , Kay JG , Stow JL , Grinstein S . Fusion , fission , and secretion during phagocytosis . Physiology ( Bethesda ) 2007 ; 22 : 366 - 372 . 5 Haas A . The phagosome : compartment with a license to kill . Traffic 2007 ; 8 : 311 - 330 . 6 Kerr MC , Teasdale RD . Defining macropinocytosis . Traffic 2009 ; 10 : 364 - 371 . 7 Falcone S , Cocucci E , Podini P , Kirchhausen T , Clementi E , Meldolesi J . Macropinocytosis : regulated coordination of en - docytic and exocytic membrane traffic events . J Cell Sci 2006 ; 119 ( Pt 22 ) : 4758 - 4769 . 8 Hansen CG , Bright NA , Howard G , Nichols BJ . SDPR in - duces membrane curvature and functions in the formation of caveolae . Nat Cell Biol 2009 ; 11 : 807 - 814 . 9 Doherty GJ , McMahon HT . Mechanisms of endocytosis . Annu Rev Biochem 2009 ; 78 : 857 – 902 10 Bianco C , Griffin FM Jr , Silverstein SC . Studies of the mac - rophage complement receptor . Alteration of receptor function upon macrophage activation . J Exp Med 1975 ; 141 : 1278 - 1290 . 11 Wright SD , Meyer BC . Phorbol esters cause sequential activa - tion and deactivation of complement receptors on polymor - phonuclear leukocytes . J Immunol 1986 ; 136 : 1759 - 1764 . 12 Caron E , Hall A . Identification of two distinct mechanisms of phagocytosis controlled by different Rho GTPases . Science 1998 ; 282 : 1717 - 1721 . 13 Allen LA , Aderem A . Molecular definition of distinct cytoskel - etal structures involved in complement - and Fc receptor - medi - ated phagocytosis in macrophages . J Exp Med 1996 ; 184 : 627 - 637 . 14 Patel JC , Galan JE . Differential activation and function of Rho GTPases during Salmonella - host cell interactions . J Cell Biol 2006 ; 175 : 453 - 463 . 15 Pizarro - Cerda J , Cossart P . Subversion of cellular functions by Listeria monocytogenes . J Pathol 2006 ; 208 : 215 - 223 . 16 Beemiller P , Hoppe AD , Swanson JA . A phosphatidylinositol - 3 - kinase - dependent signal transition regulates ARF1 and ARF6 during Fcgamma receptor - mediated phagocytosis . PLoS Biol 2006 ; 4 : e162 . 17 Hoppe AD , Swanson JA . Cdc42 , Rac1 , and Rac2 display dis - tinct patterns of activation during phagocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 2004 ; 15 : 3509 - 3519 . 18 Park H , Cox D . Cdc42 regulates Fc { gamma } receptor - mediat - ed phagocytosis through the activation and phosphorylation of WASP and N - WASP . Mol Biol Cell 2009 ; 20 : 4500 - 4508 . 19 Bittner MA , Holz RW . Phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate : actin dynamics and the regulation of ATP - dependent and - in - dependent secretion . Mol Pharmacol 2005 ; 67 : 1089 - 1098 . 20 Scott CC , Dobson W , Botelho RJ , et al . Phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate hydrolysis directs actin remodeling during phagocytosis . J Cell Biol 2005 ; 169 : 139 - 149 . 21 Cox D , Tseng CC , Bjekic G , Greenberg S . A requirement for phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase in pseudopod extension . J Biol Chem 1999 ; 274 : 1240 - 1247 . 22 Braun V , Deschamps C , Raposo G , et al . AP - 1 and ARF1 con - trol endosomal dynamics at sites of FcR mediated phagocyto - sis . Mol Biol Cell 2007 ; 18 : 4921 - 4931 . 23 Garin J , Diez R , Kieffer S , et al . The phagosome proteome : insight into phagosome functions . J Cell Biol 2001 ; 152 : 165 - 180 . 24 Policard A , Bessis M . [ Pinocytosis ( Lewis’ phenomenon and its history ) . ] Rev Hematol 1959 ; 14 : 487 - 495 . 25 West MA , Bretscher MS , Watts C . Distinct endocytotic path - ways in epidermal growth factor - stimulated human carcinoma A431 cells . J Cell Biol 1989 ; 109 ( 6 Pt 1 ) : 2731 - 2739 . 26 Mercanti V , Charette SJ , Bennett N , Ryckewaert JJ , Letourneur F , Cosson P . Selective membrane exclusion in phagocytic and macropinocytic cups . J Cell Sci 2006 ; 119 ( Pt 19 ) : 4079 - 4087 . 27 Swanson JA . Phorbol esters stimulate macropinocytosis and solute flow through macrophages . J Cell Sci 1989 ; 94 ( Pt 1 ) : 135 - 142 . 28 Keller HU . Diacylglycerols and PMA are particularly effective stimulators of fluid pinocytosis in human neutrophils . J Cell Physiol 1990 ; 145 : 465 - 471 . 29 Mercer J , Helenius A . Virus entry by macropinocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 2009 ; 11 : 510 - 520 . 30 Sallusto F , Cella M , Danieli C , Lanzavecchia A . Dendritic cells use macropinocytosis and the mannose receptor to concentrate macromolecules in the major histocompatibility complex class II compartment : downregulation by cytokines and bacterial products . J Exp Med 1995 ; 182 : 389 - 400 . 31 Ammendolia MG , Bertuccini L , Minelli F , Meschini S , Bal - dassarri L . A Sphingomonas bacterium interacting with epithe - lial cells . Res Microbiol 2004 ; 155 : 636 - 646 . 32 Liu NQ , Lossinsky AS , Popik W , et al . Human immunodefi - ciency virus type 1 enters brain microvascular endothelia by www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Sudha Kumari et al . 271 npg macropinocytosis dependent on lipid rafts and the mitogen - activated protein kinase signaling pathway . J Virol 2002 ; 76 : 6689 - 6700 . 33 Hewlett LJ , Prescott AR , Watts C . The coated pit and macropi - nocytic pathways serve distinct endosome populations . J Cell Biol 1994 ; 124 : 689 - 703 . 34 Garrett WS , Chen LM , Kroschewski R , et al . Developmental control of endocytosis in dendritic cells by Cdc42 . Cell 2000 ; 102 : 325 - 334 . 35 Dharmawardhane S , Schürmann A , Sells MA , Chernoff J , Schmid SL , Bokoch GM . Regulation of macropinocytosis by p21 - activated kinase - 1 . Mol Biol Cell 2000 ; 11 : 3341 - 3352 . 36 Liberali P , Kakkonen E , Turacchio G , et al . The closure of Pak1 - dependent macropinosomes requires the phosphorylation of CtBP1 / BARS . EMBO J 2008 ; 27 : 970 - 981 . 37 Cao H , Chen J , Awoniyi M , Henley JR , McNiven MA . Dy - namin 2 mediates fluid - phase micropinocytosis in epithelial cells . J Cell Sci 2007 ; 120 ( Pt 23 ) : 4167 - 4177 . 38 Liu YW , Surka MC , Schroeter T , Lukiyanchuk V , Schmid SL . Isoform and splice - variant specific functions of dynamin - 2 revealed by analysis of conditional knock - out cells . Mol Biol Cell 2008 ; 19 : 5347 - 5359 . 39 Schlunck G , Damke H , Kiosses WB , et al . Modulation of Rac localization and function by dynamin . Mol Biol Cell 2004 ; 15 : 256 - 267 . 40 Yeung T , Gilbert GE , Shi J , Silvius J , Kapus A , Grinstein S . Membrane phosphatidylserine regulates surface charge and protein localization . Science 2008 ; 319 : 210 - 213 . 41 Sarasij RC , Mayor S , Rao M . Chirality - induced budding : a raft - mediated mechanism for endocytosis and morphology of caveolae ? Biophys J 2007 ; 92 : 3140 - 3158 . 42 Pearse BM . Clathrin : a unique protein associated with intracel - lular transfer of membrane by coated vesicles . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1976 ; 73 : 1255 - 1259 . 43 Roth TF , Porter KR . Yolk protein uptake in the oocyte of the mosquito Aedes Aegypti . L . J Cell Biol 1964 ; 20 : 313 - 332 . 44 Kirchhausen , T , Clathrin . Annu Rev Biochem 2000 ; 69 : 699 - 727 . 45 Marsh M , McMahon HT . The structural era of endocytosis . Science 1999 ; 285 : 215 - 220 . 46 Ehrlich M , Boll W , Van Oijen A , et al . Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 2004 ; 118 : 591 - 605 . 47 Ungewickell EJ , Hinrichsen L . Endocytosis : clathrin - mediated membrane budding . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2007 ; 19 : 417 - 425 . 48 Merrifield CJ , Perrais D , Zenisek D . Coupling between clath - rin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and mem - brane scission observed in live cells . Cell 2005 ; 121 : 593 - 606 . 49 Young A . Structural insights into the clathrin coat . Semin Cell Dev Biol 2007 ; 18 : 448 - 458 . 50 Kirchhausen T . Adaptors for clathrin - mediated traffic . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1999 ; 15 : 705 - 732 . 51 Habermann B . The BAR - domain family of proteins : a case of bending and binding ? EMBO Rep 2004 ; 5 : 250 - 255 . 52 Blood PD , Voth GA . Direct observation of Bin / amphiphysin / Rvs ( BAR ) domain - induced membrane curvature by means of molecular dynamics simulations . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006 ; 103 : 15068 - 15072 . 53 Kanaseki T , Kadota K . The ‘vesicle in a basket’ . A morpholog - ical study of the coated vesicle isolated from the nerve endings of the guinea pig brain , with special reference to the mecha - nism of membrane movements . J Cell Biol 1969 ; 42 : 202 - 220 . 54 Puthenveedu MA , von Zastrow M . Cargo regulates clathrin - coated pit dynamics . Cell 2006 ; 127 : 113 - 124 . 55 Wolfe BL , Trejo J . Clathrin - dependent mechanisms of G pro - tein - coupled receptor endocytosis . Traffic 2007 ; 8 : 462 - 470 . 56 Benmerah A , Lamaze C . Clathrin - coated pits : vive la differ - ence ? Traffic 2007 ; 8 : 970 - 982 . 57 Carpenter G , Cohen S . Epidermal growth factor . Annu Rev Biochem 1979 ; 48 : 193 - 216 . 58 Sigismund S , Woelk T , Puri C , et al . Clathrin - independent endocytosis of ubiquitinated cargos . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005 ; 102 : 2760 - 2765 . 59 Marsh M , Helenius A . Virus entry : open sesame . Cell 2006 ; 124 : 729 - 740 . 60 Rust MJ , Lakadamyali M , Zhang F , Zhuang X . Assembly of endocytic machinery around individual influenza viruses dur - ing viral entry . Nat Struct Mol Biol 2004 ; 11 : 567 - 573 . 61 Veiga E , Cossart P . Listeria hijacks the clathrin - dependent en - docytic machinery to invade mammalian cells . Nat Cell Biol 2005 ; 7 : 894 - 900 . 62 Palade GE . Fine structure of blood capillaries . J Appl Phys 1953 ; 24 : 1424 . 63 Rothberg KG , Heuser JE , Donzell WC , Ying YS , Glenney JR , Anderson RG . Caveolin , a protein component of caveolae membrane coats . Cell 1992 ; 68 : 673 - 682 . 64 Chadda R , Howes MT , Plowman SJ , Hancock JF , Parton RG , Mayor S . Cholesterol - sensitive Cdc42 activation regulates actin polymerization for endocytosis via the GEEC pathway . Traffic 2007 ; 8 : 702 - 717 . 65 Hill MM , Bastiani M , Luetterforst R , et al . PTRF - Cavin , a conserved cytoplasmic protein required for caveola formation and function . Cell 2008 ; 132 : 113 - 24 . 66 Mirre C , Monlauzeur L , Garcia M , Delgrossi MH , Le Bivic A . Detergent - resistant membrane microdomains from Caco - 2 cells do not contain caveolin . Am J Physiol 1996 ; 271 ( 3 Pt 1 ) : C887 - 894 . 67 Vogel U , Sandvig K , van Deurs B . Expression of caveolin - 1 and polarized formation of invaginated caveolae in Caco - 2 and MDCK II cells . J Cell Sci 1998 ; 111 ( Pt 6 ) : 825 - 832 . 68 Fra AM , Williamson E , Simons K , Parton RG . De novo for - mation of caveolae in lymphocytes by expression of VIP21 - caveolin . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995 ; 92 : 8655 - 8659 . 69 McMahon HT , Gallop JL . Membrane curvature and mecha - nisms of dynamic cell membrane remodelling . Nature 2005 ; 438 : 590 - 596 . 70 Kalia M , Kumari S , Chadda R , Hill MM , Parton RG , Mayor S . Arf6 - independent GPI - anchored protein - enriched early endo - somal compartments fuse with sorting endosomes via a Rab5 / phosphatidylinositol - 3 ' - kinase - dependent machinery . Mol Biol Cell 2006 ; 17 : 3689 - 3704 . 71 Chadda R , Mayor S . PTRF triggers a cave in . Cell 2008 ; 132 : 23 - 24 . 72 Schnitzer JE , Oh P , Pinney E , Allard J . Filipin - sensitive cave - olae - mediated transport in endothelium : reduced transcytosis , scavenger endocytosis , and capillary permeability of select macromolecules . J Cell Biol 1994 ; 127 : 1217 - 1232 . 73 Benlimame N , Le PU , Nabi IR . Localization of autocrine Diversity of endocytic mechanisms 272 npg Cell Research | Vol 20 No 3 | March 2010 motility factor receptor to caveolae and clathrin - independent internalization of its ligand to smooth endoplasmic reticulum . Mol Biol Cell 1998 ; 9 : 1773 - 1786 . 74 Herreros J , Ng T , Schiavo G . Lipid rafts act as specialized domains for tetanus toxin binding and internalization into neu - rons . Mol Biol Cell 2001 ; 12 : 2947 - 2960 . 75 Shogomori H , Futerman AH . Cholera toxin is found in deter - gent - insoluble rafts / domains at the cell surface of hippocampal neurons but is internalized via a raft - independent mechanism . J Biol Chem 2001 ; 276 : 9182 - 9188 . 76 Anderson HA , Chen Y , Norkin LC . Bound simian virus 40 translocates to caveolin - enriched membrane domains , and its entry is inhibited by drugs that selectively disrupt caveolae . Mol Biol Cell 1996 ; 7 : 1825 - 1834 . 77 Pelkmans L , Helenius A . Endocytosis via caveolae . Traffic 2002 ; 3 : 311 - 320 . 78 Thomsen P , Roepstorff K , Stahlhut M , van Deurs B . Caveolae are highly immobile plasma membrane microdomains , which are not involved in constitutive endocytic trafficking . Mol Biol Cell 2002 ; 13 : 238 - 250 . 79 Pelkmans L , Kartenbeck J , Helenius A . Caveolar endocytosis of simian virus 40 reveals a new two - step vesicular - transport pathway to the ER . Nat Cell Biol 2001 ; 3 : 473 - 483 . 80 Singh RD , Puri V , Valiyaveettil JT , Marks DL , Bittman R , Pagano RE . Selective caveolin - 1 - dependent endocytosis of glycosphingolipids . Mol Biol Cell 2003 ; 14 : 3254 - 3265 . 81 Sharma DK , Brown JC , Cheng Z , Holicky EL , Marks DL , Pa - gano RE . The glycosphingolipid , lactosylceramide , regulates beta1 - integrin clustering and endocytosis . Cancer Res 2005 ; 65 : 8233 - 8241 . 82 Sharma DK , Brown JC , Choudhury A , et al . Selective stimula - tion of caveolar endocytosis by glycosphingolipids and choles - terol . Mol Biol Cell 2004 ; 15 : 3114 - 3122 . 83 del Pozo MA , Balasubramanian N , Alderson NB , et al . Phos - pho - caveolin - 1 mediates integrin - regulated membrane domain internalization . Nat Cell Biol 2005 ; 7 : 901 - 908 . 84 del Pozo MA , Alderson NB , Kiosses WB , Chiang HH , An - derson RG , Schwartz MA . Integrins regulate Rac targeting by internalization of membrane domains . Science 2004 ; 303 : 839 - 842 . 85 Agaisse H , Burrack LS , Philips JA , Rubin EJ , Perrimon N , Higgins DE . Genome - wide RNAi screen for host factors required for intracellular bacterial infection . Science 2005 ; 309 : 1248 - 1251 . 86 Razani B , Engelman JA , Wang XB , et al . Caveolin - 1 null mice are viable but show evidence of hyperproliferative and vascu - lar abnormalities . J Biol Chem 2001 ; 276 : 38121 - 38138 . 87 Damm EM , Pelkmans L , Kartenbeck J , Mezzacasa A , Kurzchalia T , Helenius A . Clathrin - and caveolin - 1 - indepen - dent endocytosis : entry of simian virus 40 into cells devoid of caveolae . J Cell Biol 2005 ; 168 : 477 - 488 . 88 Kirkham M , Fujita A , Chadda R , et al . Ultrastructural iden - tification of uncoated caveolin - independent early endocytic vehicles . J Cell Biol 2005 ; 168 : 465 - 476 . 89 Hernández - Deviez DJ , Howes MT , Laval SH , Bushby K , Hancock JF , Parton RG . Caveolin regulates endocytosis of the muscle repair protein , dysferlin . J Biol Chem 2008 ; 283 : 6476 - 6488 . 90 Lajoie P , Kojic LD , Nim S , Li L , Dennis JW , Nabi IR . Ca - veolin - 1 regulation of dynamin - dependent , raft - mediated endocytosis of cholera toxin b - subunit occurs independently of caveolae . J Cell Mol Med 2009 Mar 6 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1582 - 4934 . 2009 . 00732 . x 91 Nevins AK , Thurmond DC , Caveolin - 1 functions as a novel Cdc42 guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor in pancreatic beta - cells . J Biol Chem 2006 ; 281 : 18961 - 18972 . 92 Koenig JH , Ikeda K . Disappearance and reformation of synap - tic vesicle membrane upon transmitter release observed under reversible blockage of membrane retrieval . J Neurosci 1989 ; 9 : 3844 - 3860 . 93 Kosaka T , Ikeda K . Reversible blockage of membrane retrieval and endocytosis in the garland cell of the temperature - sensitive mutant of Drosophila melanogaster , shibire ts1 . J Cell Biol 1983 ; 97 : 499 - 507 . 94 van der Bliek AM , Redelmeier TE , Damke H , Tisdale EJ , Meyerowitz EM , Schmid SL . Mutations in human dynamin block an intermediate stage in coated vesicle formation . J Cell Biol 1993 ; 122 : 553 - 563 . 95 Cao H , Garcia F , McNiven MA . Differential distribution of dynamin isoforms in mammalian cells . Mol Biol Cell 1998 ; 9 : 2595 - 2609 . 96 Shpetner HS , Vallee RB . Identification of dynamin , a novel mechanochemical enzyme that mediates interactions between microtubules . Cell 1989 ; 59 : 421 - 432 . 97 Chen MS , Obar RA , Schroeder CC , et al . Multiple forms of dynamin are encoded by shibire , a Drosophila gene involved in endocytosis . Nature 1991 ; 351 : 583 - 586 . 98 Damke H , Baba T , Warnock DE , Schmid SL . Induction of mutant dynamin specifically blocks endocytic coated vesicle formation . J Cell Biol 1994 ; 127 : 915 - 934 . 99 Takei K , McPherson PS , Schmid SL , De Camilli P . Tubular membrane invaginations coated by dynamin rings are induced by GTP - gamma S in nerve terminals . Nature 1995 ; 374 : 186 - 190 . 100 Slepnev VI , Ochoa GC , Butler MH , De Camilli P . Tandem arrangement of the clathrin and AP - 2 binding domains in am - phiphysin 1 and disruption of clathrin coat function by amph - iphysin fragments comprising these sites . J Biol Chem 2000 ; 275 : 17583 - 17589 . 101 Takei K , Yoshida Y , Yamada H . Regulatory mechanisms of dynamin - dependent endocytosis . J Biochem 2005 ; 137 : 243 - 247 . 102 Thompson HM , and McNiven MA . Dynamin : switch or pin - chase ? Curr Biol 2001 ; 11 : R850 . 103 Roux A , Uyhazi K , Frost A , De Camilli P . GTP - dependent twisting of dynamin implicates constriction and tension in membrane fission . Nature 2006 ; 441 : 528 - 531 . 104 Pucadyil TJ , Schmid SL . Real - time visualization of dynamin - catalyzed membrane fission and vesicle release . Cell 2008 ; 135 : 1263 - 1275 . 105 Bashkirov PV , Akimov SA , Evseev AI , Schmid SL , Zimmer - berg J , Frolov VA . GTPase cycle of dynamin is coupled to membrane squeeze and release , leading to spontaneous fission . Cell 2008 ; 135 : 1276 - 1286 . 106 Roux A , Antonny B , The long and short of membrane fission . Cell 2008 ; 135 : 3 . 107 Henley JR , Krueger EW , Oswald BJ , McNiven MA . Dynamin - mediated internalization of caveolae . J Cell Biol 1998 ; 141 : 85 - www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Sudha Kumari et al . 273 npg 99 . 108 Kolpak AL , Jiang J , Guo D , et al . Negative guidance factor - induced macropinocytosis in the growth cone plays a critical role in repulsive axon turning . J Neurosci 2009 ; 29 : 10488 - 10498 . 109 Lamaze C , Dujeancourt A , Baba T , Lo CG , Benmerah A , Dautry - Varsat A . Interleukin 2 receptors and detergent - resis - tant membrane domains define a clathrin - independent endo - cytic pathway . Mol Cell 2001 ; 7 : 661 - 671 . 110 Saavedra L , Mohamed A , Ma V , Kar S , de Chaves EP . Inter - nalization of beta - amyloid peptide by primary neurons in the absence of apolipoprotein E . J Biol Chem 2007 ; 282 : 35722 - 35732 . 111 Orth JD , Krueger EW , Weller SG , McNiven MA . A novel endocytic mechanism of epidermal growth factor receptor sequestration and internalization . Cancer Res 2006 ; 66 : 3603 - 3610 . 112 Doxsey SJ , Brodsky FM , Blank GS , Helenius A . Inhibition of endocytosis by anti - clathrin antibodies . Cell 1987 ; 50 : 453 - 463 . 113 Moya M , Dautry - Varsat A , Goud B , Louvard D , Boquet P . Inhibition of coated pit formation in Hep2 cells blocks the cy - totoxicity of diphtheria toxin but not that of ricin toxin . J Cell Biol 1985 ; 101 : 548 - 559 . 114 Conner SD , Schmid SL . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 2003 ; 422 : 37 - 44 . 115 Cheng ZJ , Singh RD , Sharma DK , et al . Distinct mechanisms of clathrin - independent endocytosis have unique sphingolipid requirements . Mol Biol Cell 2006 ; 17 : 3197 - 3210 . 116 Zoncu R , Perera RM , Sebastian R , et al . Loss of endocytic clathrin - coated pits upon acute depletion of phosphatidylinosi - tol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007 ; 104 : 3793 - 3798 . 117 Römer W , Berland L , Chambon V , et al . Shiga toxin induces tubular membrane invaginations for its uptake into cells . Na - ture 2007 ; 450 : 670 - 675 . 118 Sabharanjak S , Mayor S . Folate receptor endocytosis and traf - ficking . Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2004 ; 56 : 1099 - 1109 . 119 Sabharanjak S , Sharma P , Parton RG , Mayor S . GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endosomes via a distinct cdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway . Dev Cell 2002 ; 2 : 411 - 423 . 120 Spoden G , Freitag K , Husmann M , et al . Clathrin - and cave - olin - independent entry of human papillomavirus type 16 – involvement of tetraspanin - enriched microdomains ( TEMs ) . PLoS ONE 2008 ; 3 : e3313 . 121 Faire K , Trent F , Tepper JM , Bonder EM . Analysis of dynamin isoforms in mammalian brain : dynamin - 1 expression is spa - tially and temporally regulated during postnatal development . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992 ; 89 : 8376 - 8380 . 122 Cook T , Mesa K , Urrutia R . Three dynamin - encoding genes are differentially expressed in developing rat brain . J Neuro - chem 1996 ; 67 : 927 - 931 . 123 Guha A , Sriram V , Krishnan KS , Mayor S . Shibire mutations reveal distinct dynamin - independent and - dependent endocytic pathways in primary cultures of Drosophila hemocytes . J Cell Sci 2003 ; 116 ( Pt 16 ) : 3373 - 3386 . 124 Grant D , Unadkat S , Katzen A , Krishnan KS , Ramaswami M . Probable mechanisms underlying interallelic complementation and temperature - sensitivity of mutations at the shibire locus of Drosophila melanogaster . Genetics 1998 ; 149 : 1019 - 1030 . 125 Grassart A , Dujeancourt A , Lazarow PB , Dautry - Varsat A , Sauvonnet N . Clathrin - independent endocytosis used by the IL - 2 receptor is regulated by Rac1 , Pak1 and Pak2 . EMBO Rep 2008 ; 9 : 356 - 362 . 126 Galletta BJ , Cooper JA . Actin and endocytosis : mechanisms and phylogeny . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2009 ; 21 : 20 - 27 . 127 Munn AL , Stevenson BJ , Geli MI , Riezman H . end5 , end6 , and end7 : mutations that cause actin delocalization and block the internalization step of endocytosis in Saccharomyces cer - evisiae . Mol Biol Cell 1995 ; 6 : 1721 - 1742 . 128 Toret CP , Drubin DG . The budding yeast endocytic pathway . J Cell Sci 2006 ; 119 ( Pt 22 ) : 4585 - 4587 . 129 Kaksonen M , Sun Y , Drubin DG . A pathway for association of receptors , adaptors , and actin during endocytic internalization . Cell 2003 ; 115 : 475 - 487 . 130 Kaksonen M , Toret CP , Drubin DG . A modular design for the clathrin - and actin - mediated endocytosis machinery . Cell 2005 ; 123 : 305 - 320 . 131 Liu J , Kaksonen M , Drubin DG , Oster G . Endocytic vesicle scission by lipid phase boundary forces . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006 ; 103 : 10277 - 10282 . 132 Geli MI , Riezman H . Role of type I myosins in receptor - medi - ated endocytosis in yeast . Science 1996 ; 272 : 533 - 535 . 133 Girao H , Geli MI , Idrissi FZ . Actin in the endocytic pathway : from yeast to mammals . FEBS Lett 2008 ; 582 : 2112 - 2119 . 134 Kaksonen M , Peng HB , Rauvala H . Association of cortactin with dynamic actin in lamellipodia and on endosomal vesicles . J Cell Sci 2000 ; 113 ( Pt 24 ) : 4421 - 4426 . 135 Kumari S , Borroni V , Chaudhry A , et al . Nicotinic acetylcho - line receptor is internalized via a Rac - dependent , dynamin - independent endocytic pathway . J Cell Biol 2008 ; 181 : 1179 - 1193 . 136 Sokac AM , Co C , Taunton J , Bement W . Cdc42 - dependent actin polymerization during compensatory endocytosis in Xe - nopus eggs . Nat Cell Biol 2003 ; 5 : 727 - 732 . 137 Sharma P , Varma R , Sarasij RC , et al . Nanoscale organization of multiple GPI - anchored proteins in living cell membranes . Cell 2004 ; 116 : 577 - 589 . 138 Bhagatji P , Leventis R , Comeau J , Refaei M , Silvius JR . Steric and not structure - specific factors dictate the endocytic mecha - nism of glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins . J Cell Biol 2009 ; 186 : 615 - 628 . 139 Lundmark R , Doherty GJ , Howes MT , et al . The GTPase - ac - tivating protein GRAF1 regulates the CLIC / GEEC endocytic pathway . Curr Biol 2008 ; 18 : 1802 - 1808 . 140 Ritter TE , Fajardo O , Matsue H , Anderson RG , Lacey SW . Folate receptors targeted to clathrin - coated pits cannot regulate vitamin uptake . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995 ; 92 : 3824 - 3828 . 141 Gauthier NC , Monzo P , Kaddai V , Doye A , Ricci V , Boquet P . Helicobacter pylori VacA cytotoxin : a probe for a clathrin - independent and Cdc42 - dependent pinocytic pathway routed to late endosomes . Mol Biol Cell 2005 ; 16 : 4852 - 4866 . 142 Yarar D , Waterman - Storer CM , Schmid SL . SNX9 couples actin assembly to phosphoinositide signals and is required for membrane remodeling during endocytosis . Dev Cell 2007 ; 13 : 43 - 56 . 143 Naslavsky N , Weigert R , Donaldson JG . Convergence of non - clathrin - and clathrin - derived endosomes involves Arf6 inacti - Diversity of endocytic mechanisms 274 npg Cell Research | Vol 20 No 3 | March 2010 vation and changes in phosphoinositides . Mol Biol Cell 2003 ; 14 : 417 - 431 . 144 Donaldson JG , Porat - Shliom N , Cohen LA . Clathrin - indepen - dent endocytosis : a unique platform for cell signaling and PM remodeling . Cell Signal 2009 ; 21 : 1 - 6 . 145 Radhakrishna H , Donaldson JG . ADP - ribosylation factor 6 regulates a novel plasma membrane recycling pathway . J Cell Biol 1997 ; 139 : 49 - 61 . 146 Eyster CA , Higginson JD , Huebner R , et al . Discovery of new cargo proteins that enter cells through clathrin - independent endocytosis . Traffic 2009 ; 10 : 590 - 599 . 147 Nishi K , Saigo K . Cellular internalization of green fluorescent protein fused with herpes simplex virus protein VP22 via a lipid raft - mediated endocytic pathway independent of caveolae and Rho family GTPases but dependent on dynamin and Arf6 . J Biol Chem 2007 ; 282 : 15 . 148 Balasubramanian N , Scott D , Castle JD , Casanova JE , Schwartz MA . Arf6 and microtubules in adhesion - dependent trafficking of lipid rafts . Nat Cell Biol 2007 ; 9 : 11 . 149 Santy LC , Casanova JE . Activation of ARF6 by ARNO stimu - lates epithelial cell migration through downstream activation of both Rac1 and phospholipase D . J Cell Biol 2001 ; 154 : 599 - 610 . 150 Arnaoutova I , Jackson CL , Al - Awar OS , Donaldson JG , Loh YP . Recycling of Raft - associated prohormone sorting receptor carboxypeptidase E requires interaction with ARF6 . Mol Biol Cell 2003 ; 14 : 4448 - 4457 . 151 Glebov OO , Bright NA , Nichols BJ . Flotillin - 1 defines a clath - rin - independent endocytic pathway in mammalian cells . Nat Cell Biol 2006 ; 8 : 46 - 54 . 152 Babuke T , Tikkanen R . Dissecting the molecular function of reggie / flotillin proteins . Eur J Cell Biol 2007 ; 86 : 525 - 532 . 153 Frick M , Bright NA , Riento K , Bray A , Merrified C , Nichols BJ . Coassembly of flotillins induces formation of membrane microdomains , membrane curvature , and vesicle budding . Curr Biol 2007 ; 17 : 1151 - 1156 . 154 Volonte D , Galbiati F , Li S , Nishiyama K , Okamoto T , Lisanti MP . Flotillins / cavatellins are differentially expressed in cells and tissues and form a hetero - oligomeric complex with caveo - lins in vivo . Characterization and epitope - mapping of a novel flotillin - 1 monoclonal antibody probe . J Biol Chem 1999 ; 274 : 12702 - 12709 . 155 Hansen CG , Nichols BJ . Molecular mechanisms of clathrin - independent endocytosis . J Cell Sci 2009 ; 122 ( Pt 11 ) : 1713 - 1721 . 156 Kirkham M , Nixon SJ , Howes MT , et al . Evolutionary analy - sis and molecular dissection of caveola biogenesis . J Cell Sci 2008 ; 121 ( Pt 12 ) : 2075 - 2086 . 157 Giri B , Dixit VD , Ghosh MC , et al . CXCL12 - induced par - titioning of flotillin - 1 with lipid rafts plays a role in CXCR4 function . Eur J Immunol 2007 ; 37 : 2104 - 2116 . 158 Riento K , Frick M , Schafer I , Nichols BJ . Endocytosis of flotillin - 1 and flotillin - 2 is regulated by Fyn kinase . J Cell Sci 2009 ; 122 ( Pt 7 ) : 912 - 918 . 159 Xu C , Zhang YH , Thangavel M , et al . CD82 endocytosis and cholesterol - dependent reorganization of tetraspanin webs and lipid rafts . FASEB J 2009 ; 23 : 3273 - 3288 . 160 Borroni V , Baier CJ , Lang T , et al . Cholesterol depletion ac - tivates rapid internalization of submicron - sized acetylcholine receptor domains at the cell membrane . Mol Membr Biol 2007 ; 24 : 1 - 15 . 161 Mayor S , Pagano RE . Pathways of clathrin - independent endo - cytosis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007 ; 8 : 603 - 612 . 162 Sandvig K , Torgersen ML , Raa HA , van Deurs B . Clathrin - in - dependent endocytosis : from nonexisting to an extreme degree of complexity . Histochem Cell Biol 2008 ; 129 : 267 - 276 . 163 Komeili A , Li Z , Newman DK , Jensen GJ . Magnetosomes are cell membrane invaginations organized by the actin - like pro - tein MamK . Science 2006 ; 311 : 242 - 245 . 164 Field MC , Gabernet - Castello C , Dacks JB . Reconstructing the evolution of the endocytic system : insights from genomics and molecular cell biology . Adv Exp Med Biol 2007 ; 607 : 84 - 96 . 165 D’Hondt K , Heese - Peck A , Riezman H . Protein and lipid re - quirements for endocytosis . Annu Rev Genet 2000 ; 34 : 255 - 295 . 166 Wendland B , McCaffery JM , Xiao Q , Emr SD . A novel fluo - rescence - activated cell sorter - based screen for yeast endocyto - sis mutants identifies a yeast homologue of mammalian eps15 . J Cell Biol 1996 ; 135 : 16 . 167 Burston HE , Maldonado - Báez L , Davey M , et al . Regula - tors of yeast endocytosis identified by systematic quantitative analysis . J Cell Biol 2009 ; 185 : 1097 - 1110 . 168 Fuchs U , Steinberg G . Endocytosis in the plant - pathogenic fungus Ustilago maydis . Protoplasma 2005 ; 226 : 75 - 80 . 169 Steinberg G , Schliwa M , Lehmler C , Bölker M , Kahmann R , McIntosh JR . Kinesin from the plant pathogenic fungus Usti - lago maydis is involved in vacuole formation and cytoplasmic migration . J Cell Sci 1998 ; 111 ( Pt 15 ) : 2235 - 2246 . 170 Lee SC , Schmidtke SN , Dangott LJ , Shaw BD . Aspergil - lus nidulans ArfB plays a role in endocytosis and polarized growth . Eukaryot Cell 2008 ; 7 : 1278 - 1288 . 171 Huang CF , Liu YW , Tung L , Lin CH , Lee FJ . Role for Arf3p in development of polarity , but not endocytosis , in Saccharo - myces cerevisiae . Mol Biol Cell 2003 ; 14 : 3834 - 3847 . 172 Fischer JA , Eun SH , Doolan BT . Endocytosis , endosome traf - ficking , and the regulation of Drosophila development . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2006 ; 22 : 181 - 206 . 173 Das D , Aradhya R , Ashoka D , Inamdar M . Macromolecular uptake in Drosophila pericardial cells requires rudhira func - tion . Exp Cell Res 2008 ; 314 : 1804 - 1810 . 174 Stroschein - Stevenson SL , Foley E , O ' Farrell PH , Johnson AD . Phagocytosis of Candida albicans by RNAi - treated Droso - phila S2 cells . Methods Mol Biol 2009 ; 470 : 347 - 358 . 175 Balklava Z , Pant S , Fares H , Grant BD . Genome - wide analysis identifies a general requirement for polarity proteins in endo - cytic traffic . Nat Cell Biol 2007 ; 9 : 1066 - 1073 . 176 Saxton MJ , Breidenbach RW . Receptor - mediated endocytosis in plants is energetically possible . Plant Physiol 1988 ; 86 : 993 - 995 . 177 Emans N , Zimmermann S , Fischer R . Uptake of a fluorescent marker in plant cells is sensitive to brefeldin A and wortman - nin . Plant Cell 2002 ; 14 : 71 - 86 . 178 Müller J , Mettbach U , Menzel D , Samaj J . Molecular dissec - tion of endosomal compartments in plants . Plant Physiol 2007 ; 145 : 293 - 304 . 179 Baluska F , Samaj J , Hlavacka A , Kendrick - Jones J , Volkmann D . Actin - dependent fluid - phase endocytosis in inner cortex cells of maize root apices . J Exp Bot 2004 ; 55 : 463 - 473 . www . cell - research . com | Cell Research Sudha Kumari et al . 275 npg 180 Etxeberria E , Baroja - Fernandez E , Muñoz FJ , Pozueta - Romero J . Sucrose - inducible endocytosis as a mechanism for nutrient uptake in heterotrophic plant cells . Plant Cell Physiol 2005 ; 46 : 474 - 481 . 181 Moscatelli A , Ciampolini F , Rodighiero S , et al . Distinct endo - cytic pathways identified in tobacco pollen tubes using charged nanogold . J Cell Sci 2007 ; 120 ( Pt 21 ) : 3804 - 3819 . 182 Dhonukshe P , Aniento F , Hwang I , et al . Clathrin - mediated constitutive endocytosis of PIN auxin efflux carriers in Arabi - dopsis . Curr Biol 2007 ; 17 : 520 - 527 . 183 Dacks JB , Poon PP , Field MC . Phylogeny of endocytic com - ponents yields insight into the process of nonendosymbiotic organelle evolution . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008 ; 105 : 588 - 593 .