Washington University School of Medicine Digital Commons @ Becker Open Access Publications 2018 Improving single - cell cloning workflow for gene editing in human pluripotent stem cells Yi - Hsien Chen Washington University School of Medicine in St . Louis Shondra M . Pruett - Miller St . Jude Children ' s Research Hospital Follow this and additional works at : https : / / digitalcommons . wustl . edu / open _ access _ pubs This Open Access Publication is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Becker . It has been accepted for inclusion in Open Access Publications by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Becker . For more information , please contact engeszer @ wustl . edu . Recommended Citation Chen , Yi - Hsien and Pruett - Miller , Shondra M . , , " Improving single - cell cloning workflow for gene editing in human pluripotent stem cells . " Stem Cell Research . 31 , . 186 - 192 . ( 2018 ) . https : / / digitalcommons . wustl . edu / open _ access _ pubs / 7023 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Stem Cell Research journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / scr Improving single - cell cloning work ﬂ ow for gene editing in human pluripotent stem cells Yi - Hsien Chen a , b , ⁎ , Shondra M . Pruett - Miller c , d , ⁎ a Washington University School of Medicine , Department of Genetics , St . Louis 63110 , USA b Genome Engineering and iPSC Center , USA c St . Jude Children ' s Research Hospital , Department of Cell & Molecular Biology , Memphis 38105 , USA d Center for Advanced Genome Engineering , USA A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords : Human pluripotent stem cells Embryonic stem cells Single - cell cloning Induced pluripotent stem cells hPSCs hESCs Genome engineering CRISPR - Cas9 A B S T R A C T The availability of human pluripotent stem cells ( hPSCs ) and progress in genome engineering technology have altered the way we approach scienti ﬁ c research and drug development screens . Unfortunately , the procedures for genome editing of hPSCs often subject cells to harsh conditions that compromise viability : a major problem that is compounded by the innate challenge of single - cell culture . Here we describe a generally applicable work ﬂ ow that supports single - cell cloning and expansion of hPSCs after genome editing and single - cell sorting . Stem - Flex and RevitaCell supplement , in combination with Geltrex or Vitronectin ( VN ) , promote reliable single - cell growth in a feeder - free and de ﬁ ned environment . Characterization of ﬁ nal genome - edited clones reveals that pluripotency and normal karyotype are retained following this single - cell culture protocol . This time - e ﬃ cient and simpli ﬁ ed culture method paves the way for high - throughput hPSC culture and will be valuable for both basic research and clinical applications . 1 . Introduction Human pluripotent stem cells , including induced pluripotent stem cells ( hiPSCs ) and human embryonic stem cells ( hESCs ) , hold great promise for cell research and clinical applications ( Kiskinis and Eggan , 2010 ; Park et al . , 2008 ; Saha and Jaenisch , 2009 ) . Recent advances in genome engineering and speci ﬁ cally the clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat ( CRISPR ) and CRISPR associated 9 ( Cas9 ) endonuclease system makes the human genome more amenable than ever to genetic research . By combining these two technologies , scien - tists are now able to correct disease - associated mutations in patient - derived iPSCs enabling researchers to avoid confounding , complex ge - netic background e ﬀ ects via the creation of isogeneic control iPSCs . Alternatively , genome engineering allows the introduction of disease - associated mutations into ‘ normal ’ iPSC lines such that genetic dis - orders can be modeled without the need to obtain patient cells har - boring the speci ﬁ c disease - causing mutations . Additionally , genome engineering can be used to modify endogenous loci such that en - dogenous proteins can be tagged with ﬂ uorescent or other protein do - mains , creating reporter lines that can be used for high throughput screening of small molecule libraries to search for therapeutic compounds or for cell tracing experiments ( Doudna and Charpentier , 2014 ; Hsu et al . , 2014 ) . Traditional hPSC expansion requires feeder cells and serum - con - taining media to maintain the “ stemness ” of the hPSCs ( Stojkovic et al . , 2004 ) . Recently , the need for pharmacological and medical applications has driven the development of fully de ﬁ ned and xeno - free media for hPSC culture with improved surface matrices to achieve feeder - free culture conditions ( Braam et al . , 2008 ; Chen et al . , 2011 ; Ludwig et al . , 2006a , b ; Rodin et al . , 2014 ) . Routine expansion of hPSCs involves passaging of cells as small aggregates or clumps to avoid unwanted selective pressure on cell populations and cell death associated with single - cell dissociation . It is generally not recommended to passage hPSCs as single cells as it can lead to genetic aberrations in the culture ( Buzzard et al . , 2004 ) . However , for the practice of transfection or identifying singe - cell derived genome edited clones , it is important to dissociate cells in a single - cell manner . Although recent improved chemically de ﬁ ned media have shown excellent performance for rou - tine hPSC culture , poor cell viability and clonogenicity of cultured single hPSCs remains as a major bottleneck after single - cell passaging . Di ﬀ erent approaches including extracellular matrices ( Higuchi et al . , 2015 ; Rodin et al . , 2014 ) , protein inhibitors ( Valamehr et al . , 2012 ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . scr . 2018 . 08 . 003 Received 13 February 2018 ; Received in revised form 27 July 2018 ; Accepted 2 August 2018 ⁎ Corresponding authors at : Washington University School of Medicine , Department of Genetics , St . Louis 63110 , USA and St . Jude Children ' s Research Hospital , Department of Cell & Molecular Biology , Memphis 38105 , USA . E - mail addresses : ychen @ genetics . wustl . edu ( Y . - H . Chen ) , shondra . miller @ stjude . org ( S . M . Pruett - Miller ) . Stem Cell Research 31 ( 2018 ) 186 – 192 Available online 04 August 2018 1873 - 5061 / © 2018 Published by Elsevier B . V . This is an open access article under the CC BY - NC - ND license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / BY - NC - ND / 4 . 0 / ) . T Watanabe et al . , 2007 ) , irradiated mouse embryonic ﬁ broblasts ( MEFs ) ( Yang et al . , 2013 ) and human serum - derive protein ( Pijuan - Galito et al . , 2016 ) have shown improved survival of single - cell derived hPSC clones . However , these methods have not been widely implemented , being either too expensive , lacking commercial availability , the need for MEFs or poor reproducibility . Such systems are particular laborious and ine ﬃ cient for genetically modifying hPSCs with CRISPR - Cas9 ; especially with low editing rates observed for knock - in modi ﬁ cations . Thus , there is a great need to develop a simpli ﬁ ed and robust protocol that can support high - throughput and reliable single - cell derived clonal growth of stable hPSCs . In the present study , we demonstrate that Stem - Flex media with RevitaCell supplement is ideal for single - cell culture of hPSCs . We also perform an unbiased comparison among di ﬀ erent commercially avail - able feeder - free culture systems and supplements on their performance with single - cell cloning and expansion of cloned hPSCs . Herein , we describe a simpli ﬁ ed and time - e ﬃ cient cell culture system for single - cell cloning , supporting expansion of clones while undergoing genome editing and maintaining pluripotency . 2 . Material and methods Several hPSC lines were used in this study including H9 and H1 hESCs ( WiCell ) , WTC11 ( Coriell institute ) , BJFF . 6 and other iPSCs ( GEiC or collaborators ) . hPSCs were maintained on Matrigel ( Corning ) coated plate in E8 - Flex / Stem - Flex medium ( ThermoFisher ) unless otherwise noted . FACS was conducted on a MoFlo cell sorter ( Beckman Coulter ) . hPSCs karyotype ( G - banding ) analysis was performed by Cell Line Genetics and Cytogenetics core at Washington University in St . Louis . Pluripotency of hPSCs were characterized for SSEA4 , OCT4 , SOX2 , and TRA - 1 - 61 . hPSCs di ﬀ erentiation was assessed for AFP , SMA and TUJ1 . Immuno ﬂ uorescent images of the stained cells were captured using the Nikon ﬂ uorescence microscope and CCD camera . Statistical analysis was performed using Prism GraphPad 6 . 0 . A p value of < 0 . 05 was considered statistically signi ﬁ cant . Comprehensive information on the experimental procedures is described in the Supplemental Information . 3 . Results 3 . 1 . TrypLE - Select and ROCK inhibitor support cell survival and expansion after single - cell passage Both enzymatic and enzyme - free reagents have been commonly used for routine hPSC passaging . Many dissociation reagents have been designed to gently separate multicellular colonies from the substrate into small cell aggregates , and single - cell suspension can be further achieved by adjusting the dissociation conditions ( Fig . 1A ) . To de - termine which dissociation reagents can be used to support single - cell culture , single cells were dissociated and maintained in E8 - Flex de ﬁ ned media . Three di ﬀ erent hPSC lines cells were plated at 10 , 000 cells / well in 6 - well plates ( Fig . S1A ) . After 7 days in culture , wells with surviving cells were counted . While non - enzymatic cell dissociation reagent is reported to be gentler on cells ( Beers et al . , 2012 ) , it showed poor support on cell survival following single - cell passaging for three dif - ferent hPSC lines ( Fig . 1B ) . In contrast , a recombinant protease based TrypLE - Select ( TrypLE - S ) reagent supported nearly 3 - fold higher cell survival in single - cell culture conditions for the BJFF . 6 hPSC line . In addition , 0 . 75× TrypLE - S showed the best survival rate following single - cell dissociation compared to other passaging reagents for the BJFF . 6 hPSC line . Similar results were obtained using crystal violet staining ( Fig . 1C and Fig . S1B ) . Therefore , 0 . 75× TrypLE - S was used for single cell dissociation for our subsequent studies . Small molecular inhibitors of speci ﬁ c signaling pathways have been used in iPSC generation and maintenance ( Valamehr et al . , 2012 ; Watanabe et al . , 2007 ) . To determine whether small molecule inhibitors further support hPSC single - cell survival and growth ; BJFF . 6 cells were dissociated into single cells and then seeded in Matrigel - coated plates with E8 - Flex plus Y - 27632 ( traditional ROCK inhibitor : ROCKi ) , RevitaCell ( supplement containing a proprietary ROCKi ) or SMC4 ( small molecule cocktail of 4 inhibitors , consisting SB431542 ( TGF - β ) , PD0325901 ( MEK ) , CHIR99021 ( GSK ) and Thiazovivin ( ROCK ) ) supplementation . Viability of cells was evaluated at day 4 , 5 and 6 after single - cell dissociation . While TrypLE - S can support cell survival of single cell passage , the addition of ROCK inhibitors en - hanced cell viability as previously reported ( Watanabe et al . , 2007 ) ( Fig . 1D ) . Cells seeded in Y - 27632 or RevitaCell supplemented medium ( E8 - Flex ) exhibited similar viability levels , whereas seeding into SMC4 showed poor survival , in contrast to the previous studies with con - ventional or mTeSR1 medium ( Valamehr et al . , 2012 ; Yang et al . , 2013 ) . Moreover , the cells with SMC4 supplement showed ﬂ at and scattered morphology as compared to ROCKi containing supplements ( Fig . S1C ) . While Y - 27632 and RevitaCell showed similar viability le - vels in BJFF . 6 cells , higher cell survival was observed in H9 and WTC cells using RevitaCell compared to Y - 27632 ( Fig . S1D ) . Together , these ﬁ ndings establish 0 . 75× TrypLE - S support cell survival in single - cell dissociation culture and the addition of ROCK inhibitors enhanced adaption e ﬃ ciency of single - cell growth . 3 . 2 . RevitaCell and Geltrex / VN support single - cell cloning after sorting by ﬂ ow cytometry While both ROCKi - containing additives , Y - 27632 and RevitaCell , can enhance single - cell viability after passaging , RevitaCell has been shown to be a more selective ROCK inhibitor ( SCIENTIFIC , 2015 ) . To test whether either supplement could support single - cell growth after ﬂ ow cytometry based cell sorting , various cell densities of BJFF . 6 cells were sorted into Matrigel coated 96 - well plates and the cloning e ﬃ - ciency was assessed at day 8 . Interestingly , the addition of Y - 27632 did not support single - cell growth whereas RevitaCell was able to support single cell growth with 12 % and 17 % clonability in 1 cell / well and 3 cells / well , respectively ( Fig . 2A ) . RevitaCell was therefore used for single - cell sorting in our subsequent studies . While various times of ROCKi pre - treatment of hPSCs have been shown to improve single - cell clonal growth ( Pijuan - Galito et al . , 2016 ; Watanabe et al . , 2007 ) , we found that at least 1 h pre - treatment with ROCKi is su ﬃ cient for single - cell splitting and sorting procedure ( data not shown ) . Many extracellular matrices have been developed for feeder - free culture of hPSCs ( Fig . 2B ) . In addition , some xeno - free and chemically de ﬁ ned substrates such as VN and COAT - 1 can be applied to support xeno - free culture conditions for clinical applications . To determine whether di ﬀ erent coating matrices could support clonal growth of single hPSCs , four di ﬀ erent hPSC lines were pre - treated with RevitaCell and single cells were sorted into plates coated with di ﬀ erent coating reagents . Increased clonal e ﬃ ciency was observed in COAT - 1 , Geltrex , VN and Laminin - 521 groups as compared to Matrigel across di ﬀ erent hPSC lines with Geltrex and VN groups showing up to 40 % clonal ex - pansion ( Fig . 2C ) . Similar to BJFF . 6 , both H1 and H9 hESCs showed coating reagent - dependent e ﬀ ect on clonal e ﬃ ciency while WTC11 was less sensitive to di ﬀ erent matrices ( Fig . 2C ) . While similar clonability was observed in Laminin - 521 across di ﬀ erent hPSC lines , we continued on with Geltrex and VN since there was no dramatic increase in clon - ability and the cost was prohibitive . A number of di ﬀ erent culture conditions or additives have been shown to enhance hPSC clonal growth , such as low physiological oxygen condition ( Forsyth et al . , 2006 ) , the addition of ﬁ bronectin ( Valamehr et al . , 2012 ) and the usage of conditioned medium ( Yumlu et al . , 2017 ) . Additionally , keeping cells chilled on ice should slow down cellular activities and could mitigate the stress following single - cell dissociation or ﬂ ow cytometry - based sorting . To test the e ﬀ ects of these culture conditions on single - cell survival after ﬂ ow cytometry based sorting , Three di ﬀ erent hPSC lines were sorted into Geltrex - Y . - H . Chen , S . M . Pruett - Miller Stem Cell Research 31 ( 2018 ) 186 – 192 187 coated plates with de ﬁ ned culture media ( E8 - Flex : RevitaCell ) . Keeping cells chilled during the cell dissociation and ﬂ ow sorting process did not increase clonal survival of BJFF . 6 or H9 cells , but a decrease in clon - ability was observed in WTC11 cells ( Fig . 2D ) . While a subtle increase ( 5 % increase ) in clonal e ﬃ ciency was observed using 50 % conditioned medium in BJFF . 6 cells , there was no signi ﬁ cant clonal survival dif - ference between controls and ﬁ bronectin - supplemented or conditioned medium ( Fig . 2D ) . However , in contrast to normoxia ( 20 % O 2 ) , phy - siological oxygen ( 2 . 5 % O 2 ) reduced hPSC clonal growth in BJFF . 6 , WTC11 , and H9 lines . ( Fig . 2D ) . Together , these ﬁ ndings demonstrate that the combination of RevitaCell with Geltrex or VN signi ﬁ cantly increased clonal e ﬃ ciency following our single cell sorting work ﬂ ow . 3 . 3 . Easy adaption of single - cell cloning work ﬂ ow The advantages of the RevitaCell and Geltrex / VN were combined to develop a high - throughput method for obtaining clonally derived hPSCs following a genome - engineering work ﬂ ow ( Fig . 3A ) . Colony formation could be seen as early as 3 days post - sorting , and colonies could be harvested for the downstream analysis as early as 11 or 12 days post - sorting ( Movie S1 ) . To test whether our single - cell cloning work ﬂ ow can support robust clonal e ﬃ ciency using di ﬀ erent culture systems , we compared the work ﬂ ow using E8 - Flex with four other media . RevitaCell supplement was used in E8 - Flex , Stem - Flex and DEF - CS culture systems . For mTeSR1 and TeSR - E8 , CloneR was used per manufacturer ' s instructions . While the addition of ROCKi was not re - commended by the manufacturer for the DEF - CS culture system , we found that clonal e ﬃ ciency was almost 4 - fold higher when RevitaCell was added ( Fig . S2A ) . RevitaCell was therefore used in DEF - CS culture medium in our subsequent comparison for single - cell clonal e ﬃ ciency . We assessed the clonal e ﬃ ciency for 4 di ﬀ erent hPSC lines . Cloning rates up to 55 % were achieved with Stem - Flex : Geltrex , and the cloning e ﬃ ciency was consistently higher using E8 - Flex or Stem - Flex ( Fig . 3B ) . To further compare the clonal e ﬃ ciency of di ﬀ erent culture sys - tems , three iPS cell lines with low clonability ( < 25 % ) using E8 - Flex : Geltrex were chosen . The Stem - Flex : Geltrex culture system showed better overall clonal e ﬃ ciency ( Fig . 3C ) . It should be noted that the dramatic di ﬀ erence on clonal e ﬃ ciency was observed in F10336 . 3 and HT112F when using E8 - Flex , mTeSR1 , TeSR - E8 or DEF - CS systems , underscoring the importance of culture medium on single cell cloning . Together , these data demonstrate that single - cell clones can be isolated using our single - cell work ﬂ ow , albeit at di ﬀ erent e ﬃ ciencies , in all tested culture systems , and that consistent and high clonal e ﬃ ciency can be achieved in the Stem - Flex culture system . 3 . 4 . Single cell cloning protocol does not increase genetic abnormalities Over 100 genome engineering projects have been completed using a variety of hPSC lines in our center ( Table S1 and S2 ) . Clonal e ﬃ ciency for each project was conducted at day 11 – 12 following single cell sorting and projects were grouped by basal culture medium ( E8 - Flex and Stem - Flex ) and type of modi ﬁ cations ( Fig . 4A ) . Karyotype analysis was routinely performed in selected ﬁ nal edited clones to assess the chromosomal integrity . A representative karyogram of a selected clone demonstrates that hPSCs retained a normal karyotype ( Fig . 4B ) . Moreover , hPSCs maintain expression of pluripotency markers , SSEA4 , OCT4 , SOX2 and TRA - 1 - 60 ( Fig . 4C ) after single - cell cloning and ex - pansion processes in E8 - or Stem - Flex culture medium . Final edited Fig . 1 . TrypLE - Select supports faster recovery of hPSCs growth following single - cell dissociation . ( A ) Comparison of di ﬀ erent hPSC passaging reagents for single - cell dissociation . hPSCs dissociated with TrypLE - Select showed the best recovery from single - cell dissociation in ( B ) cell number and in ( C ) the number and size of hPSC colonies ( crystal violet staining ) without addition of ROCKi ( n = 3 ) . ( D ) Improved cell survival and growth was observed in E8 - Flex : Matrigel supplemented with ROCK inhibitor ( Y - 27632 or RevitaCell ) , but not SMC4 after single - cell passaging ( n = 3 ) . Error bars denote the mean ± SEM . ( * ) p < 0 . 05 , ( * * ) p < 0 . 01 . ( For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁ gure legend , the reader is referred to the web version of this article . ) Y . - H . Chen , S . M . Pruett - Miller Stem Cell Research 31 ( 2018 ) 186 – 192 188 clones were routinely subjected to spontaneous di ﬀ erentiation by em - bryoid body formation and subsequently plating on Matrigel with serum - containing medium . After 4 weeks , hPSCs showed successful di ﬀ erentiation into all three germ layers as assessed by immuno - ﬂ uorescence staining for speci ﬁ c markers for three somatic lineages ( Fig . 4D ) . Taken together , the robustness of this single - cell cloning method can support screening , hPSC maintenance and expansion fol - lowing genome - engineering processes . 4 . Discussion The recent development of site - speci ﬁ c nucleases and speci ﬁ cally CRISPR - Cas9 to provide precise genome manipulation in hPSCs has created new opportunities for studying human genetics and diseases . However , genome editing in hPSCs remains di ﬃ cult because of their intrinsically poor capacity to grow in single or very low cell densities . While several de ﬁ ned matrices and additives have been shown to improve hPSCs single - cell survival and expansion ( Emre et al . , 2010 ; Pijuan - Galito et al . , 2016 ; Rodin et al . , 2014 ; Valamehr et al . , 2012 ; Watanabe et al . , 2007 ) , none of the currently available methods ful ﬁ ll the need for a simple , robust , and cost - e ﬃ cient method for single - cell expansion and cloning . In addition , traditional clonal isolation of edited hPSCs involves limiting dilution and manual picking processes , which often leads to mosaicism and are ine ﬃ cient and labor intensive ( Li et al . , 2016 ; Yumlu et al . , 2017 ) . Therefore , a standardized method for high - throughput hPSC clonal expansion following genome engineering is needed . While several studies have successfully demonstrated a work ﬂ ow for genome editing using hPSCs , these protocols rely heavily on FACS enrichment , drug selection and manual colony picking ( Byrne et al . , 2014 ; Santos et al . , 2016 ; Yumlu et al . , 2017 ) . Additionally , some im - provements for single - cell cloning have been reported , but with only modest improvements in e ﬃ ciency ( between 5 and 20 % ) ( Pijuan - Galito et al . , 2016 ; Valamehr et al . , 2012 ) . Here , we present a simple and Fig . 2 . RevitaCell and Geltrex / VN support cell survival after single cell sorting . ( A ) RevitaCell - supplemented medium ( E8 - Flex ) exhibited increased single cell cloning e ﬃ ciency on surface coated with Matrigel compared to traditional ROCKi controls ( n = 3 ) . ( B ) Comparison of di ﬀ erent coating matrices for hPSC culture . ( C ) Single - Cell cloning e ﬃ ciencies of di ﬀ erent hPSC lines on di ﬀ erent coating matrices ( n = 3 ) . ( D ) Di ﬀ erent culture conditions ( cold , ﬁ bronectin and conditioned medium ) did not improve single cell cloning e ﬃ ciency , low oxygen tension ( 2 . 5 % ) decreased single clonal recovery relative to controls ( n = 3 ) . Error bars denote the mean ± SEM . Scale bar , 100 μ m . ( * ) p < 0 . 05 , ( * * ) p < 0 . 01 . Y . - H . Chen , S . M . Pruett - Miller Stem Cell Research 31 ( 2018 ) 186 – 192 189 robust protocol to enhance hPSC single - cell survival and cloning with e ﬃ ciencies as high as 60 % that also yields genomically stable hPSC clones . We evaluated di ﬀ erent passaging reagents , cell matrices , additives and media to develop a robust protocol for selection and feeder free single - cell cloning following genome editing . We found that 0 . 75× TrypLE - S showed the best recovery rate for hPSCs following single cell dissociation , consistent to previous ﬁ ndings ( Nishishita et al . , 2015 ) . Prior reports demonstrate that TrypLE - S is gentler on the cell surface ( Ellerstrom et al . , 2007 ) . Moreover , ROCK inhibitors , Y - 27632 and RevitaCell showed signi ﬁ cant improvement on single - cell survival . In contrast , the SMC4 inhibitor cocktail did not improve single - cell sur - vival , revealing ROCK inhibition is bene ﬁ cial for single - cell survival . To establish a robust platform for single - cell cloning , we ﬂ ow - sorted hPSCs as single cells into Matrigel - coated plates . While both Y - 27632 and RevitaCell supported single - cell survival when plating pools of single - cell clones , single - cell derived clones were only observed in medium supplemented with RevitaCell . Additionally , we found that the coating matrix used also in ﬂ uenced the clonal e ﬃ ciency . This is the ﬁ rst time that hPSCs have been shown to have di ﬀ erent responses to the cell matrices for single - cell cloning . Surprisingly , the most commonly used matrix , Matrigel , showed the worst performance on single - cell cloning . In contrast , Geltrex , VN and Laminin - 521 demonstrated much more consistent and higher cloning e ﬃ ciencies . While many hPSC culture systems have been shown to support single - cell culture , expansion and maintenance of pluripotency , stan - dard culture system may perform di ﬀ erently during single - cell cloning . The reported clonal e ﬃ ciencies for each medium are E8 - Flex : < 5 % ; Stem - Flex : 20 to 25 % ( SCIENTIFIC , 2017 ) ; mTeSR1 and TeSR - E8 : ~ 20 % ( TECHNOLOGIES , 2017 ) ; DEF - CS : 25 to 30 % ( TakaRa , 2017 ) . In this study , we ﬁ rst established the single - cell cloning work ﬂ ow based on E8 - Flex culture system , and then applied it to di ﬀ erent culture sys - tems with minor modi ﬁ cations to ﬁ t the work ﬂ ow . E8 - Flex and Stem - Flex showed overall higher cloning e ﬃ ciency compared to other sys - tems with Stem - Flex out - performing even E8 - Flex in more di ﬃ cult hPSC lines . While similar results were observed in Stem - Flex in re - sponse to single cell dissociation ( Fig . S2B vs . Fig . 1B ) , Stem - Flex showed improved cell survival in SMC4 compared to E8 - Flex ( Fig . S2C Fig . 3 . E8 - Flex and Stem - Flex demonstrate robust clonal expansion following single - cell sorting work ﬂ ow . ( A ) A schematic work ﬂ ow of single - cell sorting meth - odologies for high e ﬃ cient single cell clonal expansion . ( ! ) Fresh DEF - CS medium was prepared with additives ( GF - 1 , GF - 2 and GF - 3 ) on the day of intended use . ( * ) Pretreatment is not required for the use of CloneR . ( B ) Unbiased comparison of di ﬀ erent commercial hPSC culture systems for single - cell cloning e ﬃ ciency ( n = 3 ) . ( C ) Stem - Flex shows consistently higher clonal e ﬃ ciency in di ﬃ cult iPSCs ( n = 3 ) . Error bars denote the mean ± SEM . Scale bar , 50 μ m . ( * ) p < 0 . 05 , ( * * ) p < 0 . 01 . Y . - H . Chen , S . M . Pruett - Miller Stem Cell Research 31 ( 2018 ) 186 – 192 190 vs . Fig . 1D ) . More importantly , overall clonal e ﬃ ciency was higher following our work ﬂ ow ( E8 - Flex : 30 to 50 % ; Stem - Flex : 37 to 58 % ; mTeSR1 : 22 to 30 % ; TeSR - E8 : 22 to 35 % and DEF - CS : 20 to 45 % ) , regardless of the culture system . In contrast to the typical hPSC mor - phology , cells in DEF - CS culture medium showed less packed , but much more scattered monolayer morphology ( Fig . S2D ) . It should be noted that CloneR supplement made a signi ﬁ cant improvement in single - cell cloning following ﬂ ow sorting for both mTeSR1 and TeSR - E8 culture systems as cloning e ﬃ ciencies without CloneR in these two medium was close to zero ( data not shown ) . Additionally , we found more Fig . 4 . Genome edited clones maintains normal hPSC properties . ( A ) Summary of single clonal e ﬃ ciency in di ﬀ erent genome engineering projects . ( B ) Representative karyogram of a ﬁ nal edited clone showing a normal karyotype . ( C ) Immuno ﬂ uorescence staining for pluripotency markers , SSEA4 , OCT4 , SOX2 and TRA - 1 - 60 . ( D ) Immuno ﬂ uorescence staining for markers of three germ layers , endoderm with AFP ( green ) , mesoderm with SMA ( red ) and ectoderm with TUJ1 ( green ) , after 4weeks of di ﬀ erentiation . Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI . Scale bar , 100 μ m . ( For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁ gure legend , the reader is referred to the web version of this article . ) Y . - H . Chen , S . M . Pruett - Miller Stem Cell Research 31 ( 2018 ) 186 – 192 191 consistent results following single - cell cloning by gradually reducing CloneR concentrations as cells expanded rather than performing com - plete media changes as per manufacturer ' s instructions ( data not shown ) . While the use of Laminin - 521 as cellular substrata has shown to improve single - cell growth of hPSCs under xeno - free and chemically de ﬁ ned conditions ( Rodin et al . , 2014 ) , the current use of laminin for high - throughput hPSC maintenance and expansion is limited due to the high cost . In this study , we did not observe a signi ﬁ cant increase in clonability across di ﬀ erent hPSCs using Laminin - 521 ( Fig . 2C , 3B and S2E ) compared with Geltrex or VN . In this report , we summarize over 100 genome engineering projects including parental cells , culture medium , modi ﬁ cation , type of donor , and clonabiity following the single - cell cloning method ( Table S1 and S2 ) . Interestingly , we found that type of modi ﬁ cation or donor was not associated with single cell cloning e ﬃ ciency ( Fig . 4A ) , whereas some particular patient iPSC lines show poor clonability . Additionally , most knockout genes or deletion mutations have no signi ﬁ cant impact on hPSC single cell cloning e ﬃ ciency indicating that the defect on gene function could be cell - type dependent . The presence of genetic varia - tions in iPSCs could be the actual factor for adverse e ﬀ ects on single cell growth , moreover hampering the process of genome engineering . Stressful single - cell dissociation under suboptimal conditions may lead to selection of abnormal cells or to an in vitro - adapted cell line ( Draper et al . , 2004 ; Imreh et al . , 2006 ; Mitalipova et al . , 2005 ) . Interestingly , there doesn ' t appear to be a correlation between reprogramming method and clonability . Moreover , passage number is unlikely to a ﬀ ect clonability as we try to maintain hPSCs at low passage numbers and it in general takes < 8 passages post nucleofection to identify a single cell derived clone . While the causes for genetic changes of hPSCs are poorly understood , we have not observed any karyotypic abnormalities post single - cell enzymatic dissociation in any of the 41 hPSC genome editing projects and total 92 modi ﬁ ed clones that have been karyotyped . Single - cell propagation and characterization of randomly selected edited clones further support that this work ﬂ ow is reliable and robust . 5 . Conclusions We have successfully leveraged di ﬀ erent culture methods to develop a simple work ﬂ ow that o ﬀ ers a reliable and cost - e ﬃ cient solution to the current need for hPSC single - cell cloning . This method can be combined with the CRISPR - Cas9 technology to scarlessly generate engineered hPSCs and further facilitate stem cell research . Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . scr . 2018 . 08 . 003 . Acknowledgements We acknowledge the hard work of Amber Neilson , Patrick Connelly , Monica Sentmanat , Samuel Peters , Colin Florian , Zhihong Zhang , Elena Artimovich , Monika Minner , and Yong Miao in creating many of the custom edited hPSC lines included in this study . We especially thank Patrick Connelly and Amber Neilson for training in iPSC culturing and for technical advice . We thank Dr . Joseph Ippolito for use of the hy - poxia chamber . We thank the Siteman Flow Cytometry Core which provided single - cell sorting services . The Siteman Cancer Center is supported in part by an NCI Cancer Center Support Grant # P30 CA091842 . We also thank the American Lebanese Syrian Associated Charities for ﬁ nancial support . References Beers , J . , Gulbranson , D . R . , George , N . , Siniscalchi , L . I . , Jones , J . , Thomson , J . A . , Chen , G . , 2012 . Passaging and colony expansion of human pluripotent stem cells by en - zyme - free dissociation in chemically de ﬁ ned culture conditions . Nat . Protoc . 7 , 2029 – 2040 . Braam , S . R . , Zeinstra , L . , Litjens , S . , Ward - Van Oostwaard , D . , van den Brink , S . , van Laake , L . , Lebrin , F . , Kats , P . , Hochstenbach , R . , Passier , R . , et al . , 2008 . Recombinant vitronectin is a functionally de ﬁ ned substrate that supports human embryonic stem cell self - renewal via alphavbeta5 integrin . Stem Cells 26 , 2257 – 2265 . Buzzard , J . J . , Gough , N . M . , Crook , J . M . , Colman , A . , 2004 . Karyotype of human ES cells during extended culture . Nat . Biotechnol . 22 , 381 – 382 ( author reply 382 ) . Byrne , S . M . , Mali , P . , Church , G . M . , 2014 . Genome editing in human stem cells . Methods Enzymol . 546 , 119 – 138 . Chen , G . , Gulbranson , D . R . , Hou , Z . , Bolin , J . M . , Ruotti , V . , Probasco , M . D . , Smuga - Otto , K . , Howden , S . E . , Diol , N . R . , Propson , N . E . , et al . , 2011 . Chemically de ﬁ ned condi - tions for human iPSC derivation and culture . Nat . Methods 8 , 424 – 429 . Doudna , J . A . , Charpentier , E . , 2014 . Genome editing . The new frontier of genome en - gineering with CRISPR - Cas9 . Science 346 , 1258096 . Draper , J . S . , Smith , K . , Gokhale , P . , Moore , H . D . , Maltby , E . , Johnson , J . , Meisner , L . , Zwaka , T . P . , Thomson , J . A . , Andrews , P . W . , 2004 . Recurrent gain of chromosomes 17q and 12 in cultured human embryonic stem cells . Nat . Biotechnol . 22 , 53 – 54 . Ellerstrom , C . , Strehl , R . , Noaksson , K . , Hyllner , J . , Semb , H . , 2007 . Facilitated expansion of human embryonic stem cells by single - cell enzymatic dissociation . Stem Cells 25 , 1690 – 1696 . Emre , N . , Vidal , J . G . , Elia , J . , O ' Connor , E . D . , Paramban , R . I . , He ﬀ eran , M . P . , Navarro , R . , Goldberg , D . S . , Varki , N . M . , Marsala , M . , et al . , 2010 . The ROCK inhibitor Y - 27632 improves recovery of human embryonic stem cells after ﬂ uorescence - activated cell sorting with multiple cell surface markers . PLoS One 5 , e12148 . Forsyth , N . R . , Musio , A . , Vezzoni , P . , Simpson , A . H . , Noble , B . S . , McWhir , J . , 2006 . Physiologic oxygen enhances human embryonic stem cell clonal recovery and re - duces chromosomal abnormalities . Cloning Stem Cells 8 , 16 – 23 . Higuchi , A . , Kao , S . H . , Ling , Q . D . , Chen , Y . M . , Li , H . F . , Alarfaj , A . A . , Munusamy , M . A . , Murugan , K . , Chang , S . C . , Lee , H . C . , et al . , 2015 . Long - term xeno - free culture of human pluripotent stem cells onhydrogels with optimal elasticity . Sci . Rep . 5 , 18136 . Hsu , P . D . , Lander , E . S . , Zhang , F . , 2014 . Development and applications of CRISPR - Cas9 for genome engineering . Cell 157 , 1262 – 1278 . Imreh , M . P . , Gertow , K . , Cedervall , J . , Unger , C . , Holmberg , K . , Szoke , K . , Csoregh , L . , Fried , G . , Dilber , S . , Blennow , E . , et al . , 2006 . In vitro culture conditions favoring selection of chromosomal abnormalities in human ES cells . J . Cell . Biochem . 99 , 508 – 516 . Kiskinis , E . , Eggan , K . , 2010 . Progress toward the clinical application of patient - speci ﬁ c pluripotent stem cells . J . Clin . Invest . 120 , 51 – 59 . Li , H . L . , Gee , P . , Ishida , K . , Hotta , A . , 2016 . E ﬃ cient genomic correction methods in human iPS cells using CRISPR - Cas9 system . Methods 101 , 27 – 35 . Ludwig , T . E . , Bergendahl , V . , Levenstein , M . E . , Yu , J . , Probasco , M . D . , Thomson , J . A . , 2006a . Feeder - independent culture of human embryonic stem cells . Nat . Methods 3 , 637 – 646 . Ludwig , T . E . , Levenstein , M . E . , Jones , J . M . , Berggren , W . T . , Mitchen , E . R . , Frane , J . L . , Crandall , L . J . , Daigh , C . A . , Conard , K . R . , Piekarczyk , M . S . , et al . , 2006b . Derivation of human embryonic stem cells in de ﬁ ned conditions . Nat . Biotechnol . 24 , 185 – 187 . Mitalipova , M . M . , Rao , R . R . , Hoyer , D . M . , Johnson , J . A . , Meisner , L . F . , Jones , K . L . , Dalton , S . , Stice , S . L . , 2005 . Preserving the genetic integrity of human embryonic stem cells . Nat . Biotechnol . 23 , 19 – 20 . Nishishita , N . , Muramatsu , M . , Kawamata , S . , 2015 . An e ﬀ ective freezing / thawing method for human pluripotent stem cells cultured in chemically - de ﬁ ned and feeder - free conditions . Am . J . Stem Cells 4 , 38 – 49 . Park , I . H . , Arora , N . , Huo , H . , Maherali , N . , Ahfeldt , T . , Shimamura , A . , Lensch , M . W . , Cowan , C . , Hochedlinger , K . , Daley , G . Q . , 2008 . Disease - speci ﬁ c induced pluripotent stem cells . Cell 134 , 877 – 886 . Pijuan - Galito , S . , Tamm , C . , Schuster , J . , 2016 . Human Serum - Derived Protein Removes the Need for Coating in De ﬁ ned Human Pluripotent Stem Cell Culture . vol . 7 . pp . 12170 . Rodin , S . , Antonsson , L . , Hovatta , O . , Tryggvason , K . , 2014 . Monolayer culturing and cloning of human pluripotent stem cells on laminin - 521 - based matrices under xeno - free and chemically de ﬁ ned conditions . Nat . Protoc . 9 , 2354 – 2368 . Saha , K . , Jaenisch , R . , 2009 . Technical challenges in using human induced pluripotent stem cells to model disease . Cell Stem Cell 5 , 584 – 595 . Santos , D . P . , Kiskinis , E . , Eggan , K . , Merkle , F . T . , 2016 . Comprehensive protocols for CRISPR / Cas9 - based gene editing in human pluripotent stem cells . Curr . Protoc . Stem Cell Biol . 38 5b . 6 . 1 – 5b . 6 . 60 . Scienti ﬁ c , T , 2015 . Single Cell Passaging Methods ( ThermoFisher SCIENTIFIC ) . Scienti ﬁ c , T , 2017 . StemFlex Medium for Robust Feeder - Free PSC Culture . Stojkovic , M . , Lako , M . , Stojkovic , P . , Stewart , R . , Przyborski , S . , Armstrong , L . , Evans , J . , Herbert , M . , Hyslop , L . , Ahmad , S . , et al . , 2004 . Derivation of human embryonic stem cells from day - 8 blastocysts recovered after three - step in vitro culture . Stem Cells 22 , 790 – 797 . TakaRa , 2017 . Superior Single - Cell Cloning of iPS Cells with the Cellartis iPSC Single - Cell Cloning DEF - CS Culture Media Kit . Technologies , S , 2017 . De ﬁ ned Supplement for Single - cell Cloning of Human ES and iPS Cells . Valamehr , B . , Abujarour , R . , Robinson , M . , Le , T . , Robbins , D . , Shoemaker , D . , Flynn , P . , 2012 . A novel platform to enable the high - throughput derivation and characteriza - tion of feeder - free human iPSCs . Sci . Rep . 2 , 213 . Watanabe , K . , Ueno , M . , Kamiya , D . , Nishiyama , A . , Matsumura , M . , Wataya , T . , Takahashi , J . B . , Nishikawa , S . , Nishikawa , S . , Muguruma , K . , et al . , 2007 . A ROCK inhibitor permits survival of dissociated human embryonic stem cells . Nat . Biotechnol . 25 , 681 – 686 . Yang , L . , Guell , M . , Byrne , S . , Yang , J . L . , De Los Angeles , A . , Mali , P . , Aach , J . , Kim - Kiselak , C . , Briggs , A . W . , Rios , X . , et al . , 2013 . Optimization of scarless human stem cell genome editing . Nucleic Acids Res . 41 , 9049 – 9061 . Yumlu , S . , Stumm , J . , Bashir , S . , Dreyer , A . K . , Lisowski , P . , Danner , E . , Kuhn , R . , 2017 . Gene editing and clonal isolation of human induced pluripotent stem cells using CRISPR / Cas9 . Methods 121 - 122 , 29 – 44 . Y . - H . Chen , S . M . Pruett - Miller Stem Cell Research 31 ( 2018 ) 186 – 192 192