Participatory Design Goes to School : Co - Teaching as a Form of Co - Design for Educational Technology Rebecca Nicholson r . nicholson5 @ newcastle . ac . uk Open Lab , Newcastle University Newcastle upon Tyne , UK Tom Bartindale Action Lab , Monash University Melbourne , Australia Ahmed Kharrufa Open Lab , Newcastle University Newcastle upon Tyne , UK David Kirk Open Lab , Newcastle University Newcastle upon Tyne , UK Caroline Walker - Gleaves School of Education , Communication & Language Science , Newcastle University Newcastle upon Tyne , UK ABSTRACT Educational technologies offer benefits in the classroom but there are barriers to their successful integration , including teachers’ peda - gogical beliefs and their skills and experience . Participatory Design ( PD ) approaches offer one way in which teachers can be directly involved in the design of classroom technologies , however PD pro - cesses alone fail to address the challenges of integrating technology within existing practices . In this paper we propose co - teaching as a novel form of co - design practice . We describe a two year lon - gitudinal Co - Teaching project resulting in the development and use of three digital designs for the classroom . Using the TPACK model to guide our reflections we offer insights into the ways that co - teaching can support the design and integration of educational technologies . We suggest that co - teaching as a form of co - design practice offers a way to move teachers from passive adopters of technology to active participants in the design and integration of educational technologies . CCS CONCEPTS • Applied computing → Education ; • Human - centered com - puting → HCI design and evaluation methods . KEYWORDS EducationalTechnology , ParticipatoryDesign , Co - Design , Co - Teaching ACM Reference Format : Rebecca Nicholson , Tom Bartindale , Ahmed Kharrufa , David Kirk , and Caro - lineWalker - Gleaves . 2022 . ParticipatoryDesignGoestoSchool : Co - Teaching as a Form of Co - Design for Educational Technology . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’22 ) , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 17 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517667 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspecificpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA © 2022 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9157 - 3 / 22 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517667 1 INTRODUCTION The use of educational technology in the classroom offers many benefits , from improving students’ engagement and confidence [ 8 ] to supporting more authentic learning experiences [ 27 ] , as well as increases in achievement generally [ 109 ] . It particularly supports student - centered constructivist approaches to teaching and learn - ing such as ‘deep learning’ [ 25 ] and higher - order thinking [ 65 , 107 ] . Despite the possible benefits of using educational technology in the classroom , successfully integrating it into teachers’ practices long term remains an ongoing challenge [ 66 ] . It is thought that there are a number of barriers to successful integration , both ex - trinsic barriers such as access to technology and training , as well as intrinsic barriers such as teachers’ pedagogical beliefs and es - tablished classroom practices [ 22 , 73 ] . Tondeur et al . suggest one of the biggest challenges is understanding the interaction between teachers’ pedagogical beliefs and their use of digital technology [ 73 ] . Understanding teachers’ pedagogical beliefs , however , is chal - lenging as they are complex and ever - changing [ 26 , 28 ] and vary by discipline , with many teachers exhibiting discipline specific or ‘signature pedagogies’ [ 90 ] . One way of supporting the successful integration of digital tech - nologies is to make sure that teachers have control over any changes in their day - to - day practice [ 93 ] , something that can be achieved by ensuring that teachers have real ownership of technological innovations [ 64 ] . Approaches in HCI such as design research that focus on the active involvement of the user in the design of sys - tems offer ways to engage teachers in the design of educational technologies that better align with their practices and beliefs . Par - ticipatory , and co - design , approaches specifically ensure teachers are involved [ 80 ] and have been shown to have substantial effects on the adoption of tools designed [ 20 ] as well as encouraging cur - riculum innovation and technology implementation [ 70 ] . There are , however , relatively few instances in HCI literature of teachers participating in co - design processes , with literature more often reporting engagement with students or parents [ 51 ] . Studies that do use co - design methodologies with teachers , often primarily con - sider their involvement in the early stages of the research to gather ideas through workshops and other ideation activities rather than throughout the process , e . g . , [ 51 , 99 ] , or more commonly report on evaluations of the artefact created rather than the process , e . g . , CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Nicholson et al . [ 3 , 53 , 55 , 74 , 98 ] . As a result , case studies often do not offer de - tailed insights into ways researchers can support the teacher to take ownership of these technologies and integrate them into their practices . Another way of supporting successful integration is to consider the skills and knowledges teachers need to confidently integrate technology long term [ 21 , 73 ] . One such model that considers this is Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge ( TPACK ) [ 59 ] which aims to conceptualize the different kinds of knowledges teachers need . Teachers with well - developed TPACK competence have been shown to be more effective in their planning and enacting of tech - nology enhanced instruction [ 30 ] . Voogt et al . [ 102 ] suggest that both technological and pedagogical beliefs were reflected in the forms of teachers’ TPACK , and as such TPACK has been suggested as an ‘orientation’ towards using technology in the classroom [ 7 ] . As an orientation it can be used as a lens in design processes to consider both how teachers’ beliefs and knowledge affect their ori - entation to implement educational technology in the classroom and how these design processes could support them to gain the necessary knowledge and confidence to integrate technology long term . This paper reports a longitudinal co - teaching project in which the lead author co - taught a project with the Head of Performing Arts in a UK secondary school resulting in the design , deployment , and implementation of three different digital tools to support the teacher’s pedagogy . We conceptualize the use of co - teaching as a design practice ( a form of co - design ) that is specifically aimed at designing educational technologies . Co - teaching sees the researcher and teacher involved in all aspects of the design process from initial ideation to final evaluation , focusing specifically on the benefits for both the teacher and the researcher of engaging in co - teaching with the designed tool in the classroom , so that it is fully integrated into classroom practices . The contributions of the paper are twofold : Firstly , a methodolog - ical contribution aimed at HCI educational technology researchers where we conceptualize co - teaching as a new form of educational - technology design practice , report on how this was carried out in practice and reflect on the opportunities and barriers of this method - ology . Secondly , an empirical contribution where we used the TPACK model to guide the reporting of the findings from a longitudi - nal case study using this methodology . Our empirical findings show how co - teaching not only led to improved pedagogically - aligned and context - centered technology designs , but that the process ex - panded the teacher’s technological , technological - pedagogical , and technological - content knowledge . Through these reflections , we demonstrate how it led to an evidenced change in the teacher’s attitudes and beliefs , describing how co - teaching as a design prac - tice can result in reciprocal alignment between the co - designed educational technology and teachers’ attitudes and beliefs , thus addressing the technological and social barriers to technology adop - tion in the classroom . 2 LITERATURE REVIEW The literature review considers three main areas relevant to this paper . Firstly , it considers common barriers to educational tech - nology adoption in the classroom , finding that two of the main barriers are teachers’ technical competency and their practices and beliefs about the integration of technology into their pedagogies . Secondly , it considers specific frameworks for technology adoption , suggesting that TPACK offers a framework that considers both of these challenges . Finally , it considers prior work in educational technology that uses co - design methodologies and suggests that co - design is one possible way of supporting teachers’ development of TPACK as well as designing technologies that suit the classroom , although there are known tensions in the process . 2 . 1 Educational Technology Adoption in the Classroom Technology adoption and integration in the classroom is a known challenge in educational technology and one that the wider educa - tional technology community has regularly explored identifying a range of barriers [ 22 , 23 , 33 ] . One popular conceptualization of these barriers is as first and second - order barriers . First - order bar - riers are extrinsic concerns such as access to digital technology resources as well as factors found at an institutional level such as the curriculum or assessment policies [ 22 , 24 ] , as well as the context of the school including its social background [ 34 ] . Second order bar - riers are intrinsic concerns such as teachers’ attitudes and beliefs , their technological skill , and their established routines and vision [ 21 , 92 ] . These barriers present challenges for long - term adoption of technology in the classroom as they suggest a range of complex factors that have the potential to clash with the introduction of educational technology even when first order barriers have been overcome [ 6 , 94 ] . Professional development has been a popular consideration in the field [ 41 ] such as the ‘train the teacher model’ [ 78 ] or ‘flipped PD’ model [ 108 ] . As a result , teachers’ technological skills and how to improve them are often the focus of much of the literature con - sidering how to integrate educational technologies into teachers’ practices , e . g . , [ 4 , 21 , 30 , 38 ] . Developing this knowledge , however , can be time - consuming and does not fully take into account the complexity of the challenge [ 44 ] , not least because of the chang - ing nature of digital technologies [ 69 ] . While the affordances of digital technology do influence its use [ 4 ] , it has been suggested that second - order barriers ( teachers’ attitudes and beliefs ) are the ‘true gatekeepers’ , particularly once first order barriers of access have been overcome [ 22 ] . These attitudes and beliefs are known to affect teachers’ technology use [ 95 ] and are often linked to teach - ers’ perceptions about the value of digital technology in learning environments [ 9 , 101 ] as well as their confidence and self - efficacy [ 21 , 73 ] . In order to successfully integrate educational technology into the classroom , it is clear that any approach needs to support 1 . The development of teachers’ technical competency , and 2 . An understanding of and confidence in how to integrate the use of educational technology into their pedagogy . 2 . 2 Frameworks for Acceptance and Integration In the educational technology field , there are various frameworks that consider how to successfully integrate educational technol - ogy into the classroom . Two specific frameworks are discussed Participatory Design Goes to School : Co - Teaching as a Form of Co - Design for Educational Technology CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA in this section : the Technology Acceptance Model ( TAM ) and the Technology Pedagogy And Content Knowledge ( TPACK ) model . The Technology Acceptance Model ( TAM ) [ 15 ] was designed to consider technology acceptance more widely but has been applied quite regularly to education contexts [ 12 , 68 ] . TAM suggests that two factors influence the acceptance of a new technology ; perceived ease of use , and perceived usefulness , but it has been extended and modified to suit specific settings including to understand teachers’ acceptance of digital educational games [ 16 ] . Although used within educational technology , TAM does not consider the pedagogical use specifically , which is known to present specific challenges to the integration of technology in the classroom . One framework that does consider pedagogy and has been used when identifying successful integration in the classroom is Techno - logical Pedagogical Content Knowledge ( TPACK ) [ 44 ] . It seeks to understand the nature of knowledge required by teachers to inte - grate technology into their practices and is an extension of Shul - man’s Pedagogical Content Knowledge [ 89 ] . Koehler et al . ( 2007 ) suggested that TPACK development is “a multigenerational process , involving the development of deeper understandings of the complex web of relationships between content , pedagogy , and technology and the contexts in which they function” [ 46 ] . Figure 1 : TPACK model ( from http : / / tpack . org ) TPACK suggests there are several types of knowledge required ; ( 1 ) Technological Knowledge – knowledge of the ways digi - tal technology can be used as well as their potential advan - tages and disadvantages . ( 2 ) Pedagogical Knowledge – knowledge of how to teach in - cluding taking into account teachers’ beliefs , theory , teach - ing and learning strategies , and reflection on the potential advantages and disadvantages of given pedagogies ( 3 ) Content Knowledge – knowledge of the central subject specificconcepts , subjectmatter , andcurriculathataretaught to students . Where these domains of knowledge intersect , the intersection has been conceptualized as a separate domain of knowledge ; ( 1 ) Pedagogical Content Knowledge ( PCK ) – understanding how the subject specific concepts can be taught , how they might best be organized , as well as any common misconcep - tions . ( 2 ) Technological Pedagogical Knowledge ( TPK ) – under - standing how technology can impact on pedagogical prac - tices , both how it can support and constrain pedagogies . ( 3 ) Technological Content Knowledge ( TCK ) – knowledge of the way content and technology knowledge might be intertwined and defined . It has been suggested that some of TPACK is domain - generic where others are domain - specific [ 32 ] . As such , there have been calls for more research that considers TPACK with subject disci - plines , focusing on discipline - specific practices [ 81 ] . There have been some considerations of TPACK applied to various disciplines including computer science [ 100 ] , science [ 38 ] , as well as music [ 5 ] . Teachers’ understanding of how to integrate content , pedagogy and technology is linked to experience of using digital technologies in specific curriculum areas [ 36 , 65 ] and it has been shown that teach - ers with well - developed TPACK competence are more effective in their planning and enacting of technology enhanced instruction [ 30 ] . Rosenberg suggests TPACK is embedded in the social context [ 81 ] and as such recently it has been conceptualized as a distributed form of knowledge shared by members of a teaching community [ 10 , 17 , 39 ] . One popular approach used to engage teachers in de - veloping their TPACK knowledge for technology integration is “Learning by Design” ( LBD ) [ 45 , 46 ] . This approach engages teach - ers in collaborative design with each other enabling them to share knowledge with colleagues who have other specialist expertise [ 4 , 91 ] and to work on authentic design problems related to tech - nology integration [ 46 ] . Voogt et al . go further and suggest that TPACK can best be developed through learning by design [ 104 ] . TPACK as a model can offer a useful way of conceptualizing the variety of knowledges that teachers need to develop in order to successfully integrate technology into the classroom . As such it provides a useful framework within which to consider how to support the integration of educational technology and support the knowledge development of teachers . 2 . 3 Co - design with Teachers Participatory and co - design approaches have a long history in HCI [ 83 , 84 ] given its particular focus on the role of human - centered design practices . Participatory Action Research ( PAR ) is one partic - ipatory approach to research that specifically seeks to bring about change [ 50 ] . It is deeply rooted in practice and is often seen as a commitment to observe and problematize social enquiry through practice [ 57 ] , one which is ‘democratic , collaborative , and interdis - ciplinary’ [ 31 ] . Although sharing several of the same commitments CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Nicholson et al . to including participants in the research process , co - design dif - fers in its specific focus on design - led practices with the aim of co - designing an artefact . Co - design as an approach is one that could support educational technology integration as research suggests that encouraging teach - ers to gain design thinking skills might support them to harness educational technology in the classroom . For example , Tsai and Chi [ 97 ] suggest that a lack of design thinking skills poses a third - order barrier to integrating technology into their practices . Considering technology in a more ‘designerly’ way [ 14 ] , then , might encourage teachers to appropriate it into their practices [ 41 ] , something sup - ported by McKenney et al . who suggest that co - design can be used as a way of supporting teachers to develop design skills [ 56 ] . Co - design has been suggested as a way of democratizing innova - tion and increasing teacher capacity through teachers engaging in professional development activities alongside design activities [ 70 ] . Penuel et al specifically suggest that co - designing with teachers can support and encourage curriculum innovation as well as tech - nology implementation [ 70 ] . In the learning sciences more widely , this has been demonstrated as co - design processes have led to the development of curriculum materials including in science [ 76 , 88 ] , and mathematics [ 79 ] . Although there are a number of reported benefits to including teachers in the co - design process , there are relatively few instances in HCI literature of teachers participating in co - design processes , with literature more often reporting engagement with students or parents [ 51 ] . Where co - design with teachers is reported in HCI , this has been used in a number of contexts such as in the creation of a layered story - telling approach to analytics [ 55 ] , in exploring wear - ables for classroom orchestration [ 74 ] , the co - design of computing curricula at K - 12 [ 98 ] , as well as for the creation of immersive ex - periences for collective inquiry [ 53 ] . While these papers all report on studies that resulted in artefacts that were successfully aligned with classroom practices as a result of co - design processes , the papers themselves primarily focus on the evaluation of these arte - facts within their given context . As such , there is less of a focus on specific insights into ways researchers can support the teacher to take ownership of these technologies and integrate them into their practices . Where co - design has been conducted with teachers in the wider educational technology domain , researchers have demonstrated that co - designing new science curricula with teachers offers benefits including a substantial effect on the adoption of the technologi - cal tools and the curriculum [ 20 ] , while other researchers recog - nized the value of including teachers’ expertise in the process [ 87 ] . Roschelle et al . suggest that key considerations for co - designing with teachers include creating a “concrete , tangible innovation chal - lenge” , investigating “current practice and classroom contexts” , and involving “central accountability for the quality of the products of the co - design” [ 80 ] . One area where co - design with teachers is becoming more prevalent and methods are often discussed explic - itly is in the learning analytics field , specifically with a renewed interest in the application of human - centered design approaches to the design of learning analytics tools , e . g . , [ 2 , 35 , 58 , 99 ] . Co - design approaches in the educational technology field have more commonly been employed in the design requirements stages of the process rather than in the evaluation . It is known , how - ever , that teachers’ pedagogical practices and beliefs can often vary between their espoused beliefs and enacted practices [ 22 , 54 ] , high - lighting the critical need to explore both teachers’ espoused and enacted beliefs and practices . Longitudinal co - design processes that include teachers in the design and evaluation of educational tech - nologies in the classroom are one way that this could be explored . There are however some well - reported tensions in the co - design process when used in an educational setting . For example , teach - ers and designers often have different criteria for evaluating the success of co - design processes [ 88 ] . Teachers often see researchers’ solutions as too theoretical and not suited to real life classrooms [ 22 , 54 ] while researchers often view teachers’ limited knowledge of technology as a barrier to effectively contributing to design pro - cesses [ 88 ] , which points to a need for more engaged and embedded design practices . It is clear from previous literature that successful co - design requires teachers to feel their ideas are respected and that there is an " atmosphere of trust and inclusion " in co - design partnerships [ 13 ] . The use of ‘traditional’ co - design in educational technology , despite careful consideration of teachers’ pedagogies and the design of the resulting artefact , has still not been able to address all of the challenges of long - term integration of educational technology in the classroom . This paper then addresses two specific research questions : ( 1 ) What are the potential opportunities and challenges of uti - lizing co - teaching as a form of co - design ? ( 2 ) How can co - teaching be used as a tool to help develop teach - ers’ TPACK ? 3 CO - TEACHING METHOD In this paper we conceptualize co - teaching as a form of design practice and suggest it as a suitable method for the design of educa - tional technology . Co - teaching , through its embedded and situated approach to design and evaluation , offers the potential to reduce some of the known tensions within co - design practices in the class - room . It offers a method of design practice specifically for use in the educational technology field and as such is a suitable method to consider the unique challenges of designing technology for the classroom . Alongside ensuring teachers remain active in the design process , we suggest it also offers a potential way of supporting the development of teachers’ ( and arguably designers’ ) TPACK , something known to support integration of educational technology in the classroom [ 30 ] . Co - design as a design practice specifically encourages collab - oration between stakeholders with a particular emphasis on the sharing of relevant expertise . The user is positioned as an expert of their experience while the researcher or designer offers tools for ideation as well as technological knowledge [ 83 ] . Co - teaching , meanwhile is traditionally a term used to define the practice of two teachers working collaboratively to teach a class and is often used as a method of teacher training e . g . [ 37 , 77 ] . It facilitates the creation of student - centered environments as well as supporting successful school improvement programs through its focus on col - laborative reflection and action [ 61 ] . Roth & Tobin suggest that co - teaching as a practice offers the opportunity for ‘co - generative dialogue’ , a term to define the collaborative reflection on praxis Participatory Design Goes to School : Co - Teaching as a Form of Co - Design for Educational Technology CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Table 1 : Comparison of design science stages Design Teach Process Scoping Curriculum Familiarization Understanding the parameters of the context and the specific aims . Planning / Designing Planning Planning and designing technologies and activities to meet the aims . Implementing Teaching Implementing the design in the context . Evaluating Reflecting Evaluating the success of the designs . [ 82 ] . Co - teaching is similar in nature to learning by design as de - fined by Voogt et al . [ 103 ] , where teachers collaboratively engage in designing technology enhanced curricula through iterative cycles of design , redesign and reflective practice . Engaging in this design process repositions teachers from passive receivers of technology to creators within their own contexts [ 67 , 103 ] . Teaching and co - design are both heavily influenced by reflection - in - action cycles [ 86 ] . Typically , design cycles can be broadly defined as scoping , planning / designing , implementing , and evaluating . Comparatively , teaching includes 4 phases ; curriculum familiariza - tion , planning , teaching , and reflecting [ 19 ] . These similarities have led teaching to be considered a form of ‘design science’ [ 48 ] . When compared , these stages share many similarities ( see Table 1 ) . We suggest that a co - teaching model where a design - researcher and a teacher co - teach offers a form of co - design suited to the development of educational technology . Where previous forms of co - teaching , or learning by design , have focused on teachers working together , we suggest that design - researchers and teachers engaged in the process of co - teaching together offers opportunities for ‘co - generative dialogue’ [ 82 ] which would support both the design and implementation of educational technologies . Having both teachers and design - researchers engage in co - teaching means they are both actively engaged and positioned as equals throughout the co - design process from initial prototype creation through to the evaluation . This equal participation has the potential to lead to benefits for both the teacher in their TPACK and for the researcher in their understanding of the context , particularly the realities of a complex classroom environment . In our conceptualization co - teaching consists of four stages ( see Figure 2 ) ; ( 1 ) Scoping This stage defines clear goals for the project , both for teachers and design - researchers and should ensure that expectations are made clear . ( 2 ) Planning This stage encompasses using a variety of meth - ods to : ( a ) Plan the curriculum , and ( b ) Create initial proto - types of digital technologies ( 3 ) Implementation in the classroom This stage sees both the teacher and the design - researcher co - teach using the technology designs in the classroom , iterating and reflecting on the design throughout . ( 4 ) Evaluation & Reflection The final stage is an evaluation and reflection on the design to inform both future teaching and future educational technology designs . 4 CASE STUDY Our study was guided by two specific research questions : Figure 2 : Diagram of the Co - Teaching Process CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Nicholson et al . ( 1 ) What are the potential opportunities and challenges of uti - lizing co - teaching as a form of co - design ? ( 2 ) How can co - teaching be used as a tool to help develop teach - ers’ TPACK ? To ground and evaluate our concept of co - teaching as a form of design practice , this paper reports findings from a longitudinal co - teaching project in which the lead author used co - teaching methods resulting in three digital technologies ; a socio - digital orchestration tool , a learning analytics tool and a set of proxies to teach stage lighting . In the sections below we describe our research context for the case study , our methods of engagement , and provide detail on how data was collected and analyzed over the project . 4 . 1 Context The lead author worked together with Amy ( a pseudonym ) , the Head of Performing Arts in a UK Secondary School ( ages 11 - 18 ) from July 2018 to January 2020 . The lead author is a qualified sec - ondary teacher and had three years prior experience of teaching in a secondary school setting . Before undertaking this project , they last taught in a secondary school in 2017 . They are currently a design - researcher and teach in Higher Education settings alongside their research . The lead author’s research focusses on design - led ex - plorations of educational technology in the classroom , particularly the performing arts classroom . There was no relationship between Amy and the lead researcher prior to the project , Amy answered a call for participation sent through a network that supports sec - ondary music teachers in one local authority in the UK . The call for participation sought teachers who were interested in exploring how technology could support their pedagogy in the secondary music classroom . The joint aim of the research project , once Amy and the lead author were working together , was specifically to explore ways in which technology could be used to support the delivery of one unit of a Level 2 BTEC qualification 1 ( a formal qualification taken at age 16 in the UK ) . This unit required students to plan and deliver a ‘music product’ , in this case a live music gig for a professional band . This encompasses students’ understanding all aspects of running live music performances from how to book artists , to how to mix sound in a live performance as well as how to operate stage lighting and organize the front of house ( audience facing roles such as the box office ) . The aim is that by the end of the unit students demonstrate a working understanding of standard operating practices within the music industry . 4 . 2 Methodology and Data Collection The project had ethical approval from the first authors’ institution before commencement and ran for 26 months in total . The project followed the co - teaching stages as outlined in the previous section : Scoping , Planning , Implementation in the classroom , and Evaluation & Reflection 4 . 2 . 1 Scoping . The scoping stage of the project took place in the initial recruitment and introductions phase . The initial call for re - cruitment was sent via a local organization that supports Perform - ing Arts teachers primarily through networking meetings . This 1 https : / / qualifications . pearson . com / en / qualifications / btec - firsts / music - 2013 - nqf . html call for participation outlined the researcher’s intended aims of the project : to explore ways in which technology could be used to support pedagogy in the performing arts classroom . In the initial scoping phase , the aims were renegotiated through discussion and initial high - level planning so that we agreed the following aims for both the teacher and us as researchers . The teacher had two specific aims for this project : ( 1 ) Make her curriculum more vocational and student - centered so students gained a better understanding of industry stan - dard practices , and ( 2 ) Ensure students still met the criteria for their qualification . As educational technology - focused design - researchers we were interested in understanding how we could develop new classroom orchestration tools [ 18 ] that could be used by teachers and inte - grated into their practices . 4 . 2 . 2 Planning . The first planning stage lasted for six months from July 2018 to January 2019 where the curriculum and intended peda - gogies were co - designed so that they met the aims of the BTEC and the teacher’s desired practices . During this planning phase , both the researcher and the teacher contributed to the curriculum plan , meeting fortnightly to discuss both the plan and the initial technol - ogy designs and how they might be successfully implemented in the classroom and curriculum . During this period , initial prototypes of two of the orchestration tools ; the socio - digital orchestration system and the Micro : bit lights were co - designed with the teacher to suit the delivery of the curriculum . Fieldnotes were taken by the lead researcher throughout the planning meetings , alongside copies of all the emails . Notes and shared reflections on the specific designs were kept together with the relevant curriculum planning documents that were created such as lesson plans as well as outline curriculum plans . 4 . 2 . 3 Implementation in the Classroom . The next stage was a pe - riod of co - teaching in the classroom . This took place over seven months from January 2019 to July 2019 . For the duration of this stage , sessions happened 3 times a week and lasted for between 50 and 60 minutes ( the school timetable had variable length lessons ) . These sessions were co - taught and were intended to be delivered in the same way as the teacher would deliver them alone . Both the teacher and the researcher were present at all times in the class - room and as such , both introduced tasks and answered student questions . All lesson planning was done jointly and who took the lead in the classroom was decided on a lesson - by - lesson basis de - pending on the specific topic . In the initial stages of the project , the lead researcher often took the lead regarding the implementation of the technology whereas the teacher dealt with the curriculum specific aspects such as what evidence students needed to generate for their portfolio . This changed as the project went on and the teacher took the lead more frequently with tasks that used tech - nology . The benefit of explicitly co - teaching in this instance was that this was dynamic and fluid and decisions often changed in the moment to respond to student queries , draw on specific expertise or to facilitate changes to the lesson plan where necessary . The three orchestration tools were used throughout this period . Students were subject to all the same school rules and guidelines and regular behavior and school rules were upheld in the classroom . Participatory Design Goes to School : Co - Teaching as a Form of Co - Design for Educational Technology CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Each of the three designed artefacts were evaluated using multiple data sources ; field notes , interviews , and student work . Field notes were kept throughout the project , both in the classroom as well as writing up reflective notes on the process and the project after each session . These notes were augmented with a variety of photographs and videos taken during the sessions by the researcher and the students involved in the project . With permission , students’ work was kept to support the fieldnotes and the teacher’s observations . Interviews were carried out with both the teacher and the students after the conclusion of the project and were audio recorded . Finally , documentation from the BTEC external moderator was kept to understand how well the curriculum had met the BTEC aims . For the scope of this paper , the findings reported are taken from the interviews with the teacher done during the evaluation of each of the digital orchestration tools as well as the fieldnotes kept throughout the project by the lead author . Only these are used as the specific focus is on the co - teaching process which was only reflected on by the teacher and the design - researcher ( i . e . , other sources such as students’ interviews and students’ work are not included in this analysis as they were carried out to specifically inform the evaluation of the designed artefacts , something not reported in this paper ) . 4 . 2 . 4 Evaluation & Reflection . Evaluation and reflection were on - going throughout the implementation in the classroom as it was a longitudinal project , there were many iterations of the technology designs as part of this . Alongside the reflections and evaluations carried out while implementing the designs in the classroom , the final stage was two formal reflective interviews with the teacher , one carried out in January 2020 and the other in September 2020 . The interview in January 2020 was carried out in person and the final interview in September 2020 was done over Zoom ( as a re - sult of social distancing guidelines ) . These interviews were both audio recorded and transcribed and notes were taken alongside the recording . 4 . 3 Data Analysis The observational data was analyzed through a process broadly fol - lowing Carspecken’s five stages of critical qualitative research [ 11 ] . These five stages are ; building a primary etic record , researcher in - terpretation , dialogic data generation , describing systems relations to a broader context , and explaining relational systems . The primary etic record was built through ongoing observa - tional notes . This is where the analysis began as these were both descriptive notes of what was observed in the classroom as well as reflections on these observed practices . These reflections , while not reported explicitly in the findings , formed part of the initial stages of analysis as observations were compared and reflected on to continue to build a picture of the teacher’s experiences of using digital technology to support her classroom practices . Once the co - teaching period concluded , researcher interpreta - tion was done through analyzing the notes in a preliminary recon - structive analysis . This analysis sought to offer a ‘praxeological account’ of what was happening in the classroom . The aim was to understand the practices that happened in the classroom and how this worked in the context . Given the embedded nature of the work , it was key to arrive at an account that the teacher accepted and recognized [ 75 ] . To do this , the notes were broken down into manageable units , each of which described a distinct practice in the classroom . These were then analyzed by reflecting on how that action came about and why it worked ( or did not work ) in that con - text . These reflections were then compared to each other to build thick descriptions of the teacher’s practices and the co - teaching methodology . The dialogic data generation was done alongside the teacher , in an interview soon after the end of the project ( Jan 2020 ) and a fur - ther interview nine months after the conclusion of the project ( Sept 2020 ) . These interviews served as both data collection to understand how the teacher had continued to use the designed tools , and also as part of the analytic process as the findings from the reconstruc - tive analysis were presented to the teacher and discussed . This was done to ensure that the descriptions were ones she recognized and accepted as true accounts of her practices and experiences . These accounts and the interviews were then thematically analyzed by the research team , using both deductive and inductive thematic analysis . The deductive analysis used constructs from TPACK as a way of understanding the potential benefits of co - teaching as an al - ternative design practice in the classroom context . Combining this with inductive analysis allowed the research team to also include other themes that were outside the scope of the TPACK constructs if they were deemed central to explaining how this related to a broader context . TPACK was used as a way to frame this deductive analysis as it is known that improving teachers’ TPACK can support the integration of technology in the classroom [ 30 ] . Other design - led practices such as ‘Learning by Design’ have been used to develop teachers’ TPACK knowledge [ 45 , 46 , 104 ] . In this same way , we sought to understand how co - teaching as a method could support teachers to develop TPACK as a route to better embedding technology use in the classroom . As such , the findings below are discussed in relation to aspects of the TPACK model , particularly TK , TPK and PCK . TK was highlighted as teachers’ lack of technological knowledge and confidence is known to be a barrier to integrating educational technology [ 21 , 73 ] . TK is discussed in the findings in relation to confidence as it is suggested that TK is not improved by technology knowledge alone but rather influenced by the other factors including self - efficacy about their technology knowledge [ 1 ] . One way in which surveys have measured self - efficacy is to consider confidence as a way of understanding teachers’ applied self - efficacy in the classroom [ 40 ] . Confidence , specifically , has previously been discussed in relation to TPACK [ 47 ] . A teachers’ lack of confidence in their technological capability is also a key barrier in integrating technology in the classroom [ 21 , 73 ] . TPK was considered as we have seen concerns raised by teachers that co - designed ‘solutions’ were not suitable for use in the class - room [ 71 , 88 ] , and PCK was reflected on primarily in relation to the design - researcher as understanding the intersection of pedagogy and content knowledge is key to successful co - design for educa - tional technology [ 70 ] . TPK and PCK are discussed particularly with respect to the opportunities co - teaching offered for knowl - edge exchange between the teacher and the design - researcher . As increased TPACK is known to be an indicator for successful tech - nology integration , we reflected on how the teachers’ technological pedagogical knowledge and pedagogical content knowledge were CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Nicholson et al . Figure 3 : Example screens from the socio - digital orchestration tool supported and strengthened as a result of the co - teaching process . These were considered specifically because they were the intersec - tions of constructs where the teacher and the design - researcher were engaged in knowledge exchange supported by the co - teaching process . 5 FINDINGS 5 . 1 The Research Project and the Digital Tools As part of the project , and as a result of the co - teaching , three digital tools were designed in response to particular challenges faced by Amy in enacting her intended pedagogies . The three tools were , a socio - digital orchestration tool , a learning analytics tool [ 62 ] , and a set of lighting proxies [ 63 ] . The socio - digital orchestration tool was initially suggested by the lead researcher as something that would support Amy ( the teacher ) to orchestrate more complex pedagogies in the classroom . This was refined and iterated on throughout the co - teaching process until it was something that she felt she could use within her pedagogy . The learning analytics tool was suggested and asked for by Amy as a way of gathering data and evidence that she could use to underpin her assessment decisions . The lighting proxies were co - designed in response to Amy feeling unable to teach stage lighting in the classroom . These three tools were used and evaluated in the classroom throughout the co - teaching process . For the purpose of this paper , the tools served as a means to explore the co - teaching method , thus the reporting of their details and evaluation is only to support the readers’ understanding of the methodology . Overall the research project itself was a success and Amy was clear that she ‘would never have done something on such a big scale which I think is really good for the kids to do something on such a big scale’ . Using the digital technology tools supported Amy’s en - actment of the project allowing her to develop her confidence with technology and therefore its use in the classroom . Although not all three digital tools were integrated into her practice , Amy demon - strated much more willingness to experiment with technology in her practices going forward after the end of the project . 5 . 1 . 1 Socio - Digital Orchestration Tool . The first educational tech - nology designed as part of this project was a socio - digital orches - tration tool used to support the teacher to deliver the curriculum in in a way more in line with professional practices of live music producers . We used Basecamp 2 – an existing project management tool as a classroom orchestration tool that allowed the teacher to more readily enact complex and constructivist pedagogies in the classroom ( see Figure 3 ) . For the duration of the project , students were split into specialist groups relevant to planning a music gig ( for example lighting engineers or front of house ) and the orches - tration tool was designed to allow the teacher to co - ordinate the teaching and to monitor students’ progress and engagement . This was done through the use of the orchestration tool by creating group areas for each of the specialist groups where students could use the tool to communicate with each other , keep e - portfolios , and coordinate tasks , while the teacher was able to monitor these interactions as well as upload example documents , set deadlines and offer feedback . This ultimately allowed the students to remain autonomous in their planning of the music gig , while allowing the teacher to retain enough control to feel comfortable enacting the curriculum in this way . Amy was positive about the use of the tool listing multiple as - pects she relied on throughout the project such as ‘access from anywhere , lots of formats acceptable ( e . g . take photos of notes ) , easy to see at a glance , could see what each other had done’ and in a follow up interview conducted a year after the project had ended , Amy said that she intended to use it in the new school year . She is now running a new updated BTEC course and has designed the use of the socio - digital orchestration tool into multiple unit plans , setting up new projects for her current class . 5 . 1 . 2 Learning Analytics . The second was a learning analytics tool designed to use trace data available through the API of the digital orchestration tool . This data was metadata taken from the interac - tions students had made with the orchestration tool and included ( but was not limited to ) the number of messages sent , when and to whom , the number of documents uploaded and edited , as well as 2 https : / / basecamp . com Participatory Design Goes to School : Co - Teaching as a Form of Co - Design for Educational Technology CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Figure 4 : Example screens from the Learning Analytics Tool tasks that were assigned or completed by given students . The unit required Amy to assess whether students had made a significant and sustained contribution to the planning of the music gig and so the learning analytics tool aimed to make the data from the orchestration tool visible to her in order to support her to provide feedback and make assessment decisions ( see Figure 4 ) . In this case , the tool was not received well in the initial evaluation phase as the use of quantitative data clashed with her epistemic beliefs and further iterations were not developed [ 62 ] . The teacher voiced an ongoing tension between her desire for a learning analytics system that could offer a clear cut and accurate system for offering data about their pupils and her own beliefs about the nature of music assessment , In maths they did this exam and they got 7 / 10 on the Pythagoras questions , they got only 3 / 10 on the algebra questions so algebra’s an area that they need to develop . Great . If you could get me something that was that clear cut and accurate in music , I would definitely be able to see the value in it I just don’t know how it could be that clear cut because I just don’t see how the subject nature is that clear cut . 5 . 1 . 3 Lighting Proxies . The third was the design of a set of proxies that supported the teacher to teach stage lighting in the classroom , something that was not possible previously . The proxies were cre - ated out of micro : bits with 3D printed cases and LEDs so that they modelled the main properties of stage lamps ( see Figure 5 ) . These were used together with a broker ( see Figure 5 ) created from a Raspberry Pi which acted as a bridge between industry standard lighting desks ( both digital and physical ) so that students to develop their practice - based skills , using industry standard lighting desks to control the proxy lamps . These proxies supported students to get familiar with the lighting software or desk and allowed them to understand ways in which they would organize the lighting rig on the night of the gig . The teacher was positive saying , [ The lights were ] much easier as I knew where they were and had less running around the school . . . They probably did get more practice time and it also added Figure 5 : Images of the lighting proxies . Left is the Lighting Proxies . Right shows the broker unit with lid removed : 1 . Micro : bit , 2 . WiFi router , 3 . Enttec DMX Pro devices , 4 . RaspberryPi , 5 . DMX connectors CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Nicholson et al . a ‘stepped’ approach to using equipment that they found quite scary . The use of the lighting proxies ultimately improved the teachers’ confidence in teaching stage lighting as well as offering the ability to support new collaborative pedagogies [ 63 ] . 5 . 2 Confidence With Technology ( TK ) The subsequent sections of the findings focus on the design pro - cess specifically , using the TPACK model to inform reflections on the process . The TPACK model focusses on teachers’ knowledge of technology , pedagogy and content and how these intersect to support integration of technology . We use TPACK here to also consider the researchers’ TPACK knowledge suggesting that the intersections of technology and pedagogy as well as technology and content offer ’third spaces’ [ 60 ] - opportunities for knowledge exchange and challenging assumptions between the teacher and researcher . Co - teachingin theclassroomultimatelyled totheteacher demon - strating an increased technological knowledge which is discussed here in terms of confidence as an indication of applied self - efficacy relating to TK . Amy was positive about the possibilities of tech - nology and what it offered when integrated into her pedagogy and recognized the expertise of those who designed and developed technology . Amy welcomed participating in the project and the opportunity to potentially improve her practices saying , It might be great if , you know , we were given time in a computer room with year nines to do a music tech project using some newfangled thing that you guys have come up with , which I wouldn’t even be able to think about . She was keen to integrate technology into her classroom but was worried about it saying she was put off for two main reasons , Partly the time - do I have time to learn a complete new way of doing things ? . . . And then sometimes the confidence as well . So I’m not , I don’t feel confident with tech . The co - teaching approach in this instance was able to address both these concerns as ‘learning new ways of doing things’ was integrated into teaching time and the presence of the researcher while she was trying these out provided her with the confidence needed to try new technologies . Amy had expressed interest in going on teacher training courses to improve her music technology knowledge , however because she was not confident in her own understanding of technology , a short teacher training course did not feel like enough support for her to feel she had the self - efficacy to use it in the classroom and not embarrass herself in front of her students . I think having had a training course on it wouldn’t have been enough for me to feel confident . I think having you there in the classroom with me for like , what was it six months or something ? Is what it took for me to feel confident with it and understand it . Co - teaching in this instance offered the structured support to en - sure that Amy gained a deep understanding and confidence in her own TK and therefore was able to reflect on the pedagogical consequences . This led to her demonstrating an increased use of educational technology beyond the scope of the project as she continued to redesign her curriculum to include the use of tech - nology in various ways . In the interview 6 months after the end of the project , Amy reported that she was considering integrating technology in various ways . Actually you will be very proud of me because I have been thinking about . . . a one off lesson on the iPad where they plug in the 12 bar blues on the guitar then they can put in the walking bass line and improvise over the top on a keyboard and record it and be like ‘woah I did all three of them’ so it is something I’ve been thinking about . Although a one - off lesson might not seem like much , the confidence to plan something like that herself and consider integrating it into the classroom was a big step for Amy . Reflecting on the co - teaching and working together throughout the project she said , You know I feel like it’s kind of a stepping stone for me trying different stuff like I said the kids liked it I need to move with the times really and stuff that the kids quite like . 5 . 3 Ongoing Support and Challenge ( TPK and TCK ) The process of co - teaching supported and encouraged Amy to use technology within her pedagogies , scaffolding ongoing support to enable her to understand the different ways technology could be integrated into her practices . There was a clear transfer of knowl - edge at the intersection of technology and pedagogy as well as the intersection of technology and content . Within this , the re - searcher supported the teachers’ technological development while the teacher supported the researchers’ understanding of suitable pedagogies and content knowledge for the given context and dis - cipline . The co - teaching process was ultimately supportive and allowed Amy the time and space to work with the technology in an environment where she knew there was another experienced per - son in the classroom with her . Initially Amy appreciated the support provided by someone else in the classroom with her demonstrating the potential of technology within classroom pedagogy , reporting that ’the guidance from someone who does know what they’re doing showing you how to do it’ was a large part of her continued use of technology and therefore development of her own TPK , par - ticularly her understanding of the possibilities at the intersection between technology and pedagogy . This support allowed Amy to push herself out of her comfort zone , saying , It’s just I think being brave enough to do it but having the opportunity to do it with somebody who knows what they’re doing supporting you through it . Although ultimately supportive , the process also offered a level of challenge to Amy who felt that having the researcher turn up to her classroom for every lesson initially meant that there was a social pressure preventing her from reverting to old ways of teaching because it was easier and more comfortable . The longitudinal nature of the project specifically was something that Amy credited with Participatory Design Goes to School : Co - Teaching as a Form of Co - Design for Educational Technology CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA encouraging her to continue using technology within the classroom . She reported that in shorter - term projects , If I only had to use it for a couple of days , I would go back into old habits . . . because it’s what you know , when it’s what you’re comfortable with . For Amy , getting over this initial discomfort about using technol - ogy was difficult and something that previously , without the right support and challenge , had led to her giving up and not continuing to integrate technology saying , It’s very easy to give up in the early days if you don’t keep at it . And then I think and that’s , that’s me with technology . The lead researcher similarly reflected that ultimately , part of the researcher’s role when co - teaching becomes prompting the teacher to keep going , to keep challenging them to work with a digital tool and keep testing ideas and trying new things . The lead researcher also reflected that the knowledge sharing worked the other way too and they felt it was important for the researcher to also show their vulnerabilities . They felt that co - teaching together specifically meant you had to ask questions about the best approach for that particular student or the way it would work best in that context , and these had to be asked in the moment and unguarded because the aim was to teach the students in the best way possible . This two - way exchange of knowledge then gave the teacher confidence to keep asking questions of her own . Amy was staunchly student - focused in her pedagogies and she was clear that for her , the ongoing challenge to use the technology in the classroom had meant the opportunity to see how the students reacted to it . In this case , the students were incredibly positive about the integration of the technology in the classroom which had a large effect on Amy’s attitudes towards the use of it in the future saying , I think if you asked teachers , the thing that we need to think about more is rather than some adult standing up telling us it’s good and we like it , is the kids saying that actually , we like this . Longitudinal approaches in this case allowed Amy to see how stu - dents responded to the use of technology in the classroom and the resulting impact on their learning . For Amy , being able to see the technology being used in her classroom meant that she could imag - ine how she might integrate it longer term into her own practices . She said , It’s very different to again , like going on a training course and seeing it in a conference suite to actually see it in your classroom , with your kids , with the limitations of your school network or you know , your computers . While training courses offer the ability to improve TK for teachers , the benefit of the co - teaching method in this instance was the ability to support Amy to scrutinize the intersection of pedagogy and her newly developed TK something she gained by reflecting on this intersection within her own classroom . The lead researcher felt that alongside the teacher seeing the tool used in their own context , there was more support for experimentation as there became almost an understanding that the other person would be able to pick up the pieces if something went wrong . They reflected that as there was another co - teaching adult who was equally responsible in the room there is the opportunity afterwards to reflect and discuss , even if that starts with ‘well , this went completely wrong , how do we fix it ? ’ . This sense of safety was reinforced by the other person having a complimentary set of knowledges ; the researcher bringing the knowledge of the technology and the teacher bringing the pedagogical and content knowledge . In this way the intersection of the design - researcher’s TK and the teachers’ PK and CK meant that there was also a two - way exchange of knowledge when reflecting on aspects of the implementation of technology that had not worked as well . As a result of the ongoing support and challenge throughout the project , Amy said she now regularly considers ways of using technology in the classroom as ’now it doesn’t feel like it’s a big imposition to use it with a new plan’ . This ongoing consideration of using technology in the classroom demonstrates not only Amy’s newly developed TK but also knowledge gained at the intersection of TK and PK as she implements technology into new curriculum plans . 5 . 4 Centering Teachers’ Expertise ( PCK ) The co - teaching method allowed the teachers’ pedagogical , content , and context knowledge and expertise to be utilized throughout the design process , both in the initial designs and in the evaluation . This was particularly true when it came to subject - specific knowledge . Amy is Head of Performing Arts , and as such the most senior person in her school with specific subject expertise in the Performing Arts , so for her top - down approaches ignored this expertise . There’s nobody more senior in this school who knows anything about music you know so I certainly would not want our headteacher ( who I don’t know what he taught ) or our deputy heads who were a humanities and a science and another humanities and an English – I certainly wouldn’t want them telling me what was going to look like good music teaching Throughout the project , despite her lack of confidence with the technology specifically , Amy was clear that she felt teachers should be included in the design process of new technology as she felt that teachers’ expertise was often forgotten or overlooked . Amy felt this was a missed opportunity as she felt that often technology was developed without teachers and as a result they were far less likely to use it saying , At the end of the day if they’re not consulted and it doesn’t work they’re probably not going to use it so then the whole thing’s a waste of time in terms of developing it . The co - teaching process in this instance allowed the researcher to understand the complexities of the classroom and as we saw in the previous section this offered a chance to improve their own pedagogical and content knowledge but also gave them an under - standing of the overarching context in which the digital tools might be used . Although Amy looked for support in understanding what was possible with technology , she did demonstrate some skepticism of newly developed technologies , particularly those she felt were fads , CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Nicholson et al . So often you get these new things coming out that you should be doing or ways of teaching or programs to use and actually they just become a bloody hindrance in the end because it’s just like using a new buzzword for a while , then everyone gets sick of using them . Amy found co - teaching a more valuable experience as she found it frustrating when teachers and their expertise were ignored , which risked the technology not being suitable , saying , It devalues the profession and the skill set and the un - derstanding doesn’t it of what we do ? . . . You wouldn’t have somebody try and implement new surgical ways of doing things without consulting with the surgeons . Co - teaching in this instance specifically considered the teachers expertise and worked at the intersection of technology and peda - gogy and technology and context with both the teacher and the researcher reflecting together on the implementation of technology in the classroom . 5 . 5 Beyond TPACK : Co - teaching means co - designing in a classroom The lead researcher felt that spending so much time in the classroom and being treated like another teacher by the students in the class gave them a real and unfiltered view of what life in the classroom and the wider school context is actually like . The lead researcher reflected that there were several times when , if they had not been in the classroom with the teacher and able to ask specific and targeted questions , they would never have known there was a problem . For example , on one occasion the teacher was printing off to do lists that were also digitally available . In conversations after the lesson she said it was because having it on paper meant it was ‘fixed’ and the students could not change the state of the list . The lead - researcher reflected that their first reaction was to offer to change the digital tool and make it so that the teacher could stop students changing it , however , what the teacher wanted was support in future lessons to ensure her pedagogy and classroom management could allow students to still have autonomy over the lists of tasks . This was only really possible through co - teaching when both were in the classroom to jointly consider practice alongside the technology design . The context of the classroom is complex and Amy was concerned that it was often not fully understood by researchers and developers . For her , the constraints of the classroom and day - to - day life in school were aspects that were central to the success of a technology design . Although excited by the possibilities technology can offer in the classroom , the reality of the constraints meant Amy was less positive about whether technologies designed outside of the classroom and then implemented would ever be integrated . if [ you’ve designed it and then ] the following year , they say , ‘Oh , well you can’t be in the computer room every time because everyone else needs a computer room , you should be in the music room’ . Then , you know , you’re putting all this time and effort into a new scheme of work , you plan things , you change things , but then actually it just doesn’t sustain . The lead researcher felt that co - teaching encouraged constant mo - ments of joint reflection , even for small things . They reflected that after every lesson there was a debrief and even if everything had gone as expected , there was still a moment where the lead - researcher and the teacher checked in and reflected on what had happened that lesson and what was happening next lesson . The technology almost faded into the background of this process , with the reflections being focused on the activities in the next lesson that the students needed to complete . This meant that as time went on the use of the technology became much more natural and the conversations changed from ‘how do I do x with the tool’ to ‘next lesson we need to make sure students have uploaded their work – can we send them a reminder before tomorrow’ . In this way , the conversations turned to an understanding at the intersection of pedagogy and technology in a way that was facilitated by both the researcher and the teacher developing a situated understanding of both . This meant that the observations and subsequent design iterations of the digital tool felt like they were guided by a much more situated and contextual understanding of the classroom and the teachers’ pedagogies . 6 DISCUSSION Our research prompted reflections on the ways in which we as edu - cational technology - focused design - researchers support the design and implementation of technologies within the K - 12 classroom . In this section , we discuss our reflections on the co - teaching process , as a way to understand how co - teaching could support the long - term implementation of educational technology in the classroom by offering a reciprocal process that both results in pedagogically aligned technology while also improving teachers’ TPACK . We outline the ways co - teaching led to teachers gaining TK , and how co - teaching created support for experimentation within TPK and TCK , before finally considering the potential knowledge exchange benefits for design - researchers and how it can support them to de - sign educational technologies that align with teachers’ pedagogies . 6 . 1 Long Term Support in Implementation Co - teaching meant the teacher had long - term and embedded sup - port to build up their technological knowledge ( TK ) , particularly their understanding of the capabilities and limitations of digital technology at the intersection with pedagogy ( TPK ) . The result of this continued use is that the teacher has formed habits which have since been adapted and reused in the design of new teaching units . We therefore suggest co - teaching as a method offers new ways of considering the design of educational technologies with a view to supporting sustained longer - term changes in teachers’ practices . Teachers’ integration of technology into the classroom is highly dependent on both their attitudes and beliefs , and their own con - fidence with technology [ 22 ] . In this case , taking a co - teaching approach to the design and implementation meant that the teacher was encouraged to keep working with the technology in the class - room over a six - month period , building up familiarity and confi - dence with it and therefore offering time and support to build their technological capacity . This study is an empirical example that supports existing work suggesting that professional development could be an important Participatory Design Goes to School : Co - Teaching as a Form of Co - Design for Educational Technology CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA way of integrating digital technologies into the classroom . Ways of integrating off - the - shelf digital technologies in the classroom have been explored at length in the educational technology com - munity with professional development suggested as one of the most important aspects that leads to greater acceptance and use of technology in the classroom , particularly that which enhances a teacher’s self - efficacy [ 85 ] . Various models exist that offer ways to consider offering professional development for teachers such as the ‘train the teacher model’ or the ‘flipped PD’ model [ 78 , 108 ] . Both these models separate research and professional development en - couraging professional development as a route to embedding tech - nology created as part of theory - driven processes . Rather than see professional development as a hurdle to overcome to ensure effec - tive technology integration within the classroom , we saw research and professional development happening alongside one another throughout the development and evaluation of digital technologies . Such co - teaching practices allow us to more readily explore theory - driven but practice - oriented approaches to educational technology research , something that has been called for in the educational technology field [ 72 ] . They also allow us to consider ways in which theoretical , pedagogic and technological development can be inte - grated , something that has been shown to improve both learning and teaching [ 29 ] . What is clear , however , is that the use of these practices needs to be carefully scaffolded and supported in order to be effective and if these practices are to be utilized within the classroom to enable technology development it is key to explore how we can support such embedded longitudinal practices . 6 . 2 Creating Support for Experimentation Co - teaching offers a way of creating a supported space for exper - imentation with a view to offering opportunities for teachers to develop technological pedagogical knowledge ( TPK ) . This study demonstrated the value of design interventions that create scaf - folded socio - digital spaces in which teachers feel sufficiently sup - ported in exploring techno - pedagogical experimentation . It became clear that in this case offering long - term embedded support through co - teaching as well as working within the teacher’s own context was key to building their confidence in experimentation and ulti - mately their continued use of technology to support their practice , something that remains an ongoing challenge in the educational technology field [ 43 ] . Utilizing co - teaching methodologies remi - niscent of teacher training practices [ 52 ] means teachers are more likely to be familiar with the method and therefore more comfort - able or trusting of the co - teaching and subsequent support . It was clear that scaffolded support was valuable in encouraging experimentation . Using co - teaching as a method offered embedded one - to - one support in the classroom throughout the project , while also allowing for an element of supported risk - taking , pushing the teacher out of their comfort zone and encouraging them to try new forms of technology mediated pedagogy . Co - teaching allowed the teacher to observe new practices within her own context be - fore undertaking them herself , a form of modelling , reminiscent of the ways in which typical teacher training is often conducted [ 52 ] . The longitudinal and iterative nature of co - teaching allowed the teacher repeated opportunities to experiment with digital tech - nology integration specifically within her own context . Despite pointing out that they had little time and energy to implement new digital technologies , in this case regular support from a ‘more - knowledgeable other’ [ 105 ] motivated their continued engagement offering them scaffolded support which in turn improved their sense of self - efficacy regarding their TK as well as development of their TK by experimenting with and reflecting on the pedagogical use of such technologies . It is known that teachers practices are not easily changed which can present challenges in the integration of technology in the class - room [ 22 ] . By supporting the teacher to engage in experimentation in this way , however , it could open up possibilities for new and novel forms of pedagogy , ones not initially imagined by the re - searcher . In this case one of the main benefits to using co - teaching as a form of design and evaluation of technology was that it was embedded in the teacher’s own context , allowing them to reflect on these technological implementations within their own classroom . While the teacher is not going to use our design in exactly the same format , co - teaching as a method supported the teacher to reflect on her own beliefs and knowledge about the use of technology . This reflection led to them re - purposing our original design in order to integrate it into their ongoing classroom practices , something they had been reluctant to do previously . 6 . 3 Value of Co - teaching for Researchers The successful integration of technology in the classroom presents a perennial challenge in the educational technology field [ 66 ] partly as the classroom context presents a complex scenario of use . Evalu - ating technology ‘in - the - wild’ presents numerous challenges [ 42 ] and as such we are often working at arm’s length from the class - room . Co - teaching as a method , specifically offers opportunities for educational technology researchers to deepen our understanding of the complex reality of the classroom context . The co - teaching process offers us the ability to gain a much deeper understanding of TPK ( the intersection of technology and pedagogy ) in a specific discipline , benefitting from situated forms of learning [ 49 ] . We are also able to learn from a ‘more knowledgeable other’ [ 105 ] in much the same way that the teacher learned from us . This then enables a better understanding of pedagogies of both the specific disciplines we are designing for as well as the teachers’ pedagogical practices , allowing us as researchers to ensure they are reflected in our designs . There are challenges for educational technology designers when designing technology to support teachers pedagogies . Firstly , teach - ers’ espoused and enacted pedagogical practices often differ due to the impact of policy and the context [ 22 , 54 ] and secondly , disci - plines are known to have unique , or ‘signature’ , pedagogies [ 90 ] , and therefore the way pedagogical knowledge intersects with tech - nological and content knowledge differs depending on the subject [ 5 ] . Utilizing co - teaching as a method in this project allowed the researcher to understand the impact of context on teachers’ enacted practices and how these differed from the ones described at the beginning of the design process . This was similarly the case in offering the researcher the ability to gain a situated and contextual understanding of discipline specific pedagogies . CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Nicholson et al . Finally , we know that teachers form communities of practice ( CoP ) often sharing both pedagogical approaches and resources [ 106 ] . Co - teaching and the continuous interactions between the teacher and the researcher offers opportunities for the researcher to move from legitimate peripheral participation ( LPP ) towards full membership if that CoP . This shift in the way we are perceived in the community has the potential to allow us to gain more au - thentic data when designing and evaluating technologies . It also offers the potential opportunity to respond live to changing policy landscapes , both central government - imposed and emergent intra - school changes , giving a responsive and contingent quality to the development which might not be possible otherwise . Finally , it also has the potential to offer a stronger sense of legitimacy when shar - ing our own good practice regarding the integration of technology with other members of the CoP . Ultimately , the potential to gain a deeper understanding of the context through co - teaching can lead to more nuanced and likely better conceived and designed tech - nology interventions and to better dissemination of our findings , moving us towards designing technologies that are more likely to be integrated into practice . 6 . 4 Pedagogically Aligned Technology Design Co - teaching ultimately supported the design of educational tech - nologies that were aligned with teachers’ pedagogical beliefs , some - thing that has been demonstrated as important in the integration of technology into teachers’ practices [ 95 ] . The use of co - teaching as a method in this case resulted in two designs that were accepted and integrated into the teacher’s practices and one that was not . The learning analytics tool was not accepted nor integrated , and supported previous work that demonstrates the complexity of teach - ers’ pedagogical beliefs and enacted practices [ 26 , 28 ] . Pedagogical beliefs are often tacit and as such are often complex to discern [ 22 ] . In this case , these beliefs were not evident until the tool was used within the classroom context with current student data . Although the tool was not integrated into their practice , the environment created by the co - teaching allowed for supported experimentation with the tool that may not have otherwise happened . As a result , in this case , using co - teaching offered the researcher significant insights into the use of learning analytics in specific disciplinary practices . Where co - teaching resulted in the successful integration ( the socio - digital orchestration system and the lighting proxies ) , the resulting designs were those that aligned with both teachers’ peda - gogical beliefs and the context of the classroom . This was achieved through the co - teaching process as it allowed for ‘co - generative dialogue’ [ 82 ] an ongoing and open dialogue based on praxis . In this way we as researchers could ensure that the designs were suited to use in real life classrooms , something that is key to the success of educational technologies [ 96 ] . In this paper , we suggest that co - teaching as a form of design practice offers significant opportunities not only to ensure that the resulting designs are better aligned with teachers’ beliefs and classroom contexts , but also to directly observe the frictions and failures of designs which do not work , so as to better inform future designs . We firstly offer a methodological contribution where co - teaching is presented as a form of co - design practice , and thus this work has the potential to help equip design researchers with a new context and user - focused design method . Moreover , the empirical findings offered insights into the practical implications , opportunities , and challenges of co - teaching and are thus are of significant value to educational technology researchers who want to design , deploy and evaluate innovative educational technology in real - world settings and to ensure implementation and impact beyond the duration of the study . Beyond the field of education , this approach shows the value of design researchers embedding themselves in real world settings not just as passive observers or ethnographic researchers , but as active collaborators who bring technology and possible content knowledge to domain experts . 7 LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK This paper reports on one case study with one teacher and future work will seek to explore this methodology with other teachers in other contexts . The clear value of the scaffolded support in encour - aging experimentation and in this case integration of technology into their pedagogical practice , highlights a strong requirement to explore exactly how the kind of scaffolding seen here through this design intervention could be delivered in more contexts and how this could be adapted to other teachers and other domains outside of the Performing Arts . Future work will also consider ways in which this method could support working with more than one teacher . In seeking to work with more than one teacher , it is important to consider that the co - teaching method reported here requires a long - term commitment from the teacher and the design - researcher to both to the project and to the students in the class being co - taught . This is therefore time intensive for all parties involved and although it is clear that there are benefits from such longitudinal and inten - sive co - teaching , it can be challenging given other commitments and time constraints . Building relationships in this environment is key and we see the possibility of communities of practice developed with teachers who have taken part in the co - teaching going on to support future iterations of co - teaching . This development of com - munities of practice open up the possibility of design - researchers working with more than one teacher at a time as some of the scaf - folded support later in the project could come from the community of practice . Inthisreportedcase , thedesign - researcherwasaqualifiedteacher and so had some existing pedagogical expertise which supported the co - teaching process . Although educational technology researchers may not also be qualified teachers , it is likely that many will have pedagogical expertise , either through their research or through their own teaching in another context such as higher education and as such we suggest they are well placed to undertake co - teaching projects . Future work , however , would seek to understand how such a co - teaching project would need to be scaffolded to ensure both the teacher and the design - researcher were supported successfully . 8 CONCLUSION In this paper we presented reflections on a longitudinal co - teaching project that led to the design of three educational technology de - signs . We suggest that co - teaching , when conceptualized as a novel form of co - design practice , offers a suitable methodology for the Participatory Design Goes to School : Co - Teaching as a Form of Co - Design for Educational Technology CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA design of educational technologies . Using the TPACK model to guide our reflections , we offered insights into the ways that co - teaching can support the design and integration of educational technologies . We describe that co - teaching ultimately led to more pedagogically aligned and context - centered technology designs , while also expanding the teacher’s technological , technological - pedagogical , and technological - content knowledge . In doing so we demonstrated how co - teaching led to an evidenced change in the teacher’s attitudes and beliefs , describing how co - teaching as a design practice can result in reciprocal alignment between the co - designed educational technology and teachers’ attitudes and beliefs , thus addressing the technological and social barriers to technology adoption in the classroom . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research was funded by the EPSRC CDT in Digital Civics ( EP / L016176 / 1 ) . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Jason T Abbitt . 2011 . An investigation of the relationship between self - efficacy beliefs about technology integration and technological pedagogical content knowledge ( TPACK ) among preservice teachers . Journal of digital learning in teacher education 27 , 4 ( 2011 ) , 134 – 143 . [ 2 ] Carlos Prieto Alvarez , Roberto Martinez - Maldonado , and Simon Buckingham Shum . 2020 . LA - DECK : A Card - Based Learning Analytics Co - Design Tool . In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Learning Analytics & amp ; Knowledge ( LAK ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 63 – 72 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3375462 . 3375476 [ 3 ] Pengcheng An , Kenneth Holstein , Bernice d’Anjou , Berry Eggen , and Saskia Bakker . 2020 . The TA Framework : Designing real - time teaching augmentation for K - 12 classrooms . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 17 . [ 4 ] CharoulaAngeliandNicosValanides . 2009 . Epistemologicalandmethodological issues for the conceptualization , development , and assessment of ICT – TPCK : Advances in technological pedagogical content knowledge ( TPCK ) . Computers & education 52 , 1 ( 2009 ) , 154 – 168 . [ 5 ] William I Bauer . 2012 . The Acquisition of Musical Technological Pedagogical and Content Knowledge . Journal of Music Teacher Education 22 , 2 ( 2012 ) , 51 – 64 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1057083712457881 [ 6 ] Christopher Blundell , Kar - Tin Lee , and Shaun Nykvist . 2016 . Digital learning in schools : Conceptualizing the challenges and influences on teacher practice . Journal of Information Technology Education : Research 15 ( 2016 ) , 535 – 560 . [ 7 ] Janet S Bowers and Becky Stephens . 2011 . Using technology to explore math - ematical relationships : A framework for orienting mathematics courses for prospective teachers . Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education 14 , 4 ( 2011 ) , 285 – 304 . [ 8 ] Aibhín Bray and Brendan Tangney . 2016 . Enhancing student engagement through the affordances of mobile technology : a 21st century learning per - spective on Realistic Mathematics Education . Mathematics Education Research Journal 28 , 1 ( 2016 ) , 173 – 197 . [ 9 ] Charles Buabeng - Andoh . 2012 . Factors influencing teachers’ adoption and integration of information and communication technology into teaching : A review of the literature ( EJ1084227 ) . ERIC . [ 10 ] Jeffrey P Carpenter , Joshua M Rosenberg , Tonia A Dousay , Enilda Romero - Hall , Torrey Trust , Aaron Kessler , Michael Phillips , Scott A Morrison , Christian Fischer , and Daniel G Krutka . 2020 . What should teacher educators know about technology ? Perspectives and self - assessments . Teaching and Teacher Education 95 ( 2020 ) , 103124 . [ 11 ] Francis Phil Carspecken . 2013 . Critical ethnography in educational research : A theoretical and practical guide . Routledge . [ 12 ] Ronnie Cheung and Doug Vogel . 2013 . Predicting user acceptance of collab - orative technologies : An extension of the technology acceptance model for e - learning . Computers & education 63 ( 2013 ) , 160 – 175 . [ 13 ] RebeccaCober , EstherTan , JimSlotta , Hyo - JeongSo , andKarenDKönings . 2015 . Teachersasparticipatorydesigners : Twocasestudieswithtechnology - enhanced learning environments . Instructional Science 43 , 2 ( 2015 ) , 203 – 228 . [ 14 ] Nigel Cross . 1982 . Designerly ways of knowing . Design studies 3 , 4 ( 1982 ) , 221 – 227 . [ 15 ] Fred D Davis . 1989 . Perceived usefulness , perceived ease of use , and user acceptance of information technology . MIS quarterly ( 1989 ) , 319 – 340 . [ 16 ] OpeyemiDele - Ajayi , RebeccaStrachan , JonathanSanderson , andAlisonPickard . 2017 . A modified TAM for predicting acceptance of digital educational games by teachers . In 2017 IEEE Global Engineering Education Conference ( EDUCON ) . IEEE , 961 – 968 . [ 17 ] Nicoletta Di Blas and Paolo Paolini . 2016 . Distributed and dynamic tpack : evidences from a ( large ) case study . In Society for Information Technology & Teacher Education International Conference . Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education ( AACE ) , 2815 – 2821 . [ 18 ] Pierre Dillenbourg and Patrick Jermann . 2010 . Technology for classroom or - chestration . In New science of learning . Springer , 525 – 552 . [ 19 ] Todd Dinkelman . 2000 . An inquiry into the development of critical reflection in secondary student teachers . Teaching and Teacher Education 16 , 2 ( 2000 ) , 195 – 222 . [ 20 ] Eva Durall , Merja Bauters , Iida Hietala , Teemu Leinonen , and Evangelos Kapros . 2019 . Co - creation and co - design in technology - enhanced learning : Innovating science learning outside the classroom . IxD & A 42 ( 2019 ) , 202 – 226 . [ 21 ] Peggy A Ertmer and Anne T Ottenbreit - Leftwich . 2010 . Teacher technology change : How knowledge , confidence , beliefs , and culture intersect . Journal of research on Technology in Education 42 , 3 ( 2010 ) , 255 – 284 . [ 22 ] Peggy A Ertmer , Anne T Ottenbreit - Leftwich , Olgun Sadik , Emine Sendurur , and Polat Sendurur . 2012 . Teacher beliefs and technology integration practices : A critical relationship . Computers & education 59 , 2 ( 2012 ) , 423 – 435 . [ 23 ] Gregory M Francom . 2020 . Barriers to technology integration : A time - series survey study . Journal of Research on Technology in Education 52 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 16 . [ 24 ] Jo Fu . 2013 . Complexity of ICT in education : A critical literature review and its implications . International Journal of education and Development using ICT 9 , 1 ( 2013 ) , 112 – 125 . [ 25 ] Michael Fullan , Joanne Quinn , and Joanne McEachen . 2017 . Deep learning : Engage the world change the world . Corwin Press . [ 26 ] Héctor Alejandro Galvis . 2012 . Understanding beliefs , teachers’ beliefs and their impact on the use of computer technology . Profile Issues in TeachersProfessional Development 14 , 2 ( 2012 ) , 95 – 112 . [ 27 ] Ruth Geer , Bruce White , Yvonne Zeegers , Wing Au , and Alan Barnes . 2017 . Emerging pedagogies for the use of iPads in schools . British Journal of Educa - tional Technology 48 , 2 ( 2017 ) , 490 – 498 . [ 28 ] Kelly Glassett and Lynne Schrum . 2009 . Teacher Beliefs and Student Achieve - ment in Technology - Rich Classroom Environments . International Journal of Technology in Teaching & Learning 5 , 2 ( 2009 ) . [ 29 ] Raija Hämäläinen and Katja Vähäsantanen . 2011 . Theoretical and pedagogical perspectives on orchestrating creativity and collaborative learning . Educational Research Review 6 , 3 ( 2011 ) , 169 – 184 . [ 30 ] Judith Harris and M Hofer . 2011 . Technological Pedagogical Content Knowl - edge in Action : A Descriptive Study of Secondary Teachers’ Curriculum - Based , Technology - Related Instructional Planning . ournal of Research on Technology in Education ( 2011 ) , 211 – 229 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15391523 . 2011 . 10782570 [ 31 ] Gillian R . Hayes . 2011 . The relationship of action research to human - computer interaction . In ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 18 . 1 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1993060 . 1993065 [ 32 ] Mary C Herring , Matthew J Koehler , and Punya Mishra . 2016 . Handbook of technological pedagogical content knowledge ( TPACK ) for educators . Routledge . [ 33 ] Khe Foon Hew and Thomas Brush . 2007 . Integrating technology into K - 12 teachingandlearning : Currentknowledgegapsandrecommendationsforfuture research . Educationaltechnologyresearchanddevelopment 55 , 3 ( 2007 ) , 223 – 252 . [ 34 ] Lara Hoareau , Aude Thomas , Youssef Tazouti , Jérôme Dinet , Christophe Lux - embourger , and Annette Jarlégan . 2021 . Beliefs about digital technologies and teachers’ acceptance of an educational app for preschoolers . Computers & Education ( 2021 ) , 104264 . [ 35 ] Kenneth Holstein , Bruce M McLaren , and Vincent Aleven . 2019 . Co - designing a real - time classroom orchestration tool to support teacher – AI complementarity . Journal of Learning Analytics 6 , 2 ( 2019 ) , 27 – 52 . [ 36 ] Sarah K Howard , Amy Chan , Adrian Mozejko , and Peter Caputi . 2015 . Tech - nology practices : Confirmatory factor analysis and exploration of teachers’ technology integration in subject areas . Computers & Education 90 ( 2015 ) , 24 – 35 . [ 37 ] Jill V Jeffery and Jody N Polleck . 2010 . Reciprocity through co - instructed site - based courses : Perceived benefit and challenge overlap in an urban school - university partnership . Teacher Education Quarterly 37 , 3 ( 2010 ) , 81 – 99 . [ 38 ] Athanassios Jimoyiannis . 2010 . Designing and implementing an integrated technological pedagogical science knowledge framework for science teachers professional development . Computers & Education 55 , 3 ( 2010 ) , 1259 – 1269 . [ 39 ] David Jones , Amanda Heffernan , and Peter Albion . 2015 . TPACK as shared practice : Toward a research agenda . In Society for Information Technology & Teacher Education International Conference . Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education ( AACE ) , 3287 – 3294 . [ 40 ] Chia - PinKao , Chin - ChungTsai , andMeilunShih . 2014 . Developmentofasurvey to measure self - efficacy and attitudes toward web - based professional develop - ment among elementary school teachers . Journal of Educational Technology & Society 17 , 4 ( 2014 ) , 302 – 315 . CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA Nicholson et al . [ 41 ] Arafeh Karimi , Peter Worthy , Paul McInnes , Marie Bodén , Ben Matthews , and Stephen Viller . 2017 . The community garden hack : Participatory experiments in facilitatingprimaryschoolteacher’sappropriationoftechnology . In Proceedings of the 29th Australian Conference on Computer - Human Interaction . 143 – 151 . [ 42 ] Ahmed Kharrufa , Madeline Balaam , Phil Heslop , David Leat , Paul Dolan , and Patrick Olivier . 2013 . Tables in the Wild : Lessons Learned from a Large - Scale Multi - Tabletop Deployment . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1021 – 1030 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2466130 [ 43 ] Paul Kirschner , Theo Wubbels , and Mieke Brekelmans . 2008 . Benchmarks for teacher education programs in the pedagogical use of ICT . In International handbookofinformationtechnologyinprimaryandsecondaryeducation . Springer , 435 – 447 . [ 44 ] Matthew Koehler and Punya Mishra . 2009 . What is technological pedagogical content knowledge ( TPACK ) ? Contemporary issues in technology and teacher education 9 , 1 ( 2009 ) , 60 – 70 . [ 45 ] Matthew J Koehler , Punyashloke Mishra , Kathryn Hershey , and Lisa Peruski . 2004 . Withalittlehelpfromyourstudents : Anewmodelforfacultydevelopment and online course design . Journal of Technology and Teacher Education 12 , 1 ( 2004 ) , 25 – 55 . [ 46 ] Matthew J Koehler , Punya Mishra , and Kurnia Yahya . 2007 . Tracing the develop - ment of teacher knowledge in a design seminar : Integrating content , pedagogy and technology . Computers & Education 49 , 3 ( 2007 ) , 740 – 762 . [ 47 ] Joyce Hwee Ling Koh and Ching Sing Chai . 2014 . Teacher clusters and their per - ceptionsoftechnologicalpedagogicalcontentknowledge ( TPACK ) development through ICT lesson design . Computers & Education 70 ( 2014 ) , 222 – 232 . [ 48 ] DianaLaurillard . 2013 . Teachingasadesignscience : Buildingpedagogicalpatterns for learning and technology . Routledge . [ 49 ] Jean Lave and Etienne Wenger . 1991 . Situated Learning : Legitimate Peripheral Participation . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . [ 50 ] Kurt Lewin . 1948 . Action research and minority problems . In Resolving Social Conflicts ( harper & b ed . ) , Gertrud Weiss Lewin ( Ed . ) . [ 51 ] Phoebe Lin and Jessica Van Brummelen . 2021 . Engaging Teachers to Co - Design Integrated AI Curriculum for K - 12 Classrooms . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445377 [ 52 ] John Loughran and Amanda Berry . 2005 . Modelling by teacher educators . Teaching and teacher education 21 , 2 ( 2005 ) , 193 – 203 . [ 53 ] Michelle Lui , Alex C Kuhn , Alisa Acosta , Chris Quintana , and James D Slotta . 2014 . Supporting learners in collecting and exploring data from immersive simulations in collective inquiry . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2103 – 2112 . [ 54 ] Maria Mama and Sara Hennessy . 2013 . Developing a typology of teacher beliefs and practices concerning classroom use of ICT . Computers & Education 68 ( 2013 ) , 380 – 387 . [ 55 ] Roberto Martinez - Maldonado , Vanessa Echeverria , Gloria Fernandez Nieto , and Simon Buckingham Shum . 2020 . From data to insights : A layered storytelling approach for multimodal learning analytics . In Proceedings of the 2020 chi con - ference on human factors in computing systems . 1 – 15 . [ 56 ] Susan McKenney , Yael Kali , Lina Markauskaite , and Joke Voogt . 2015 . Teacher design knowledge for technology enhanced learning : an ecological framework for investigating assets and needs . Instructional science 43 , 2 ( 2015 ) , 181 – 202 . [ 57 ] Robin McTaggart . 2003 . Issues for participatory action researchers . In New directions in action research . Routledge , 213 – 223 . [ 58 ] Konstantinos Michos , Charles Lang , Davinia Hernández - Leo , and Detra Price - Dennis . 2020 . Involving teachers in learning analytics design : Lessons learned from two case studies . In Proceedings of the Tenth international conference on learning analytics & knowledge . 94 – 99 . [ 59 ] Punya Mishra and Matthew J Koehler . 2006 . Technological pedagogical content knowledge : A framework for teacher knowledge . Teachers college record 108 , 6 ( 2006 ) , 1017 – 1054 . [ 60 ] Michael J Muller and A Druin . 2007 . Participatory design : The third space in HCI ( revised ) . Handbook of HCI 2nd Edition . Mahway NJ USA : Erlbaum ( 2007 ) . [ 61 ] Roberta Murata . 2002 . What does team teaching mean ? A case study of inter - disciplinary teaming . The Journal of educational research 96 , 2 ( 2002 ) , 67 – 77 . [ 62 ] Rebecca Nicholson , Colin Bone Dodds , Ahmed Kharrufa , and Tom Bartindale . 2021 . Learning Analytics , Performing Arts , and Teachers’ Epistemic Beliefs : A Case Study of a Co - Design Process . In Companion Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Learning Analytics & Knowledge LAK21 . 46 – 48 . [ 63 ] Rebecca Nicholson , David Kirk , and Tom Bartindale . 2021 . Tangible Lighting Proxies : Brokering the Transition from Classroom to Stage . In Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction . 1 – 13 . [ 64 ] Jon Ogborn . 2002 . Ownership and transformation : Teachers using curriculum innovations . Physics Education 37 , 2 ( 2002 ) , 142 . [ 65 ] JoanneOrlando . 2013 . ICT - mediatedpracticeandconstructivistpractices : isthis still the best plan for teachers’ uses of ICT ? Technology , Pedagogy and Education 22 , 2 ( 2013 ) , 231 – 246 . [ 66 ] Viktoria Pammer - Schindler , Erik Harpstead , Benjamin Xie , Betsy DiSalvo , Ahmed Kharrufa , Petr Slovak , Amy Ogan , Joseph Jay Williams , and Michael J Lee . 2020 . Learning and Education in HCI : A Reflection on the SIG at CHI 2019 . Interactions 27 , 5 ( 2020 ) , 6 – 7 . [ 67 ] Kyparisia Papanikolaou , Katerina Makri , and Petros Roussos . 2017 . Learning design as a vehicle for developing TPACK in blended teacher training on tech - nology enhanced learning . International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education 14 , 1 ( 2017 ) , 1 – 14 . [ 68 ] Sung Hee Park and Peggy A Ertmer . 2008 . Examining barriers in technology - enhanced problem - based learning : Using a performance support systems ap - proach . British Journal of Educational Technology 39 , 4 ( 2008 ) , 631 – 643 . [ 69 ] Karen Pegler , Joan Kollewyn , and SuSan CriChton . 2010 . Generational attitudes and teacher ICT use . Journal of Technology and Teacher Education 18 , 3 ( 2010 ) , 443 – 458 . [ 70 ] William R Penuel . 2019 . Co - design as infrastructuring with attention to power : Building collective capacity for equitable teaching and learning through design - based implementation research . In Collaborative curriculum design for sustain - able innovation and teacher learning . Springer , Cham , 387 – 401 . [ 71 ] William R Penuel , Jeremy Roschelle , and Nicole Shechtman . 2007 . Designing formative assessment software with teachers : An analysis of the co - design process . Research and practice in technology enhanced learning 2 , 01 ( 2007 ) , 51 – 74 . [ 72 ] IngridPramlingSamuelssonandNiklasPramling . 2013 . Orchestratingandstudy - ing children’s and teachers’ learning : Reflections on developmental research approaches . Education Inquiry 4 , 3 ( 2013 ) , 22624 . [ 73 ] Sarah Prestridge . 2012 . The beliefs behind the teacher that influences their ICT practices . Computers & education 58 , 1 ( 2012 ) , 449 – 458 . [ 74 ] Rebecca Quintana , Chris Quintana , Cheryl Madeira , and James D Slotta . 2016 . Keeping watch : Exploring wearable technology designs for k - 12 teachers . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2272 – 2278 . [ 75 ] DavidRandall , RichardHarper , andMarkRouncefield . 2007 . Fieldworkfordesign : theory and practice . Springer Science & Business Media . [ 76 ] Brian J Reiser , James P Spillane , Franci Steinmuller , Don Sorsa , Karen Carney , and Eleni Kyza . 2000 . Investigating the mutual adaptation process in teachers’ design of technology - infused curricula . In Fourth international conference of the learning sciences . Erlbaum Mahwah , NJ , 342 – 349 . [ 77 ] Byron Richard and Christa J Treichel . 2013 . Increasing secondary teachers’ capacity to integrate the arts . The Clearing House : A Journal of Educational Strategies , Issues and Ideas 86 , 6 ( 2013 ) , 224 – 228 . [ 78 ] Judy Robertson , Andrew Macvean , and Katy Howland . 2012 . Embedding tech - nology in the classroom : the train the teacher model . In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children . 20 – 29 . [ 79 ] Jeremy Roschelle , Chris DiGiano , Manolis Koutlis , Alexander Repenning , Jonathan Phillips , Nickolas Jackiw , and Dan Suthers . 1999 . Developing ed - ucational software components . Computer 32 , 9 ( 1999 ) , 50 – 58 . [ 80 ] Jeremy Roschelle , William Penuel , and Nicole Shechtman . 2006 . Co - design of innovations with teachers : Definition and dynamics . ( 2006 ) . [ 81 ] Joshua M Rosenberg and Matthew J Koehler . 2015 . Context and technological pedagogical content knowledge ( TPACK ) : A systematic review . Journal of Research on Technology in Education 47 , 3 ( 2015 ) , 186 – 210 . [ 82 ] Wolff - Michael Roth and Kenneth Tobin . 2004 . Co - generative dialoguing and metaloguing : Reflexivity of processes and genres . In Forum Qualitative Sozial - forschung / Forum : Qualitative Social Research , Vol . 5 . [ 83 ] Elizabeth B - N Sanders and Pieter Jan Stappers . 2008 . Co - creation and the new landscapes of design . Co - design 4 , 1 ( 2008 ) , 5 – 18 . [ 84 ] Michael Scaife , Yvonne Rogers , Frances Aldrich , and Matt Davies . 1997 . De - signing for or designing with ? Informant design for interactive learning en - vironments . Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ) ( 1997 ) , 343 – 350 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 258549 . 258789 [ 85 ] Ronny Scherer , Fazilat Siddiq , and Jo Tondeur . 2019 . The technology acceptance model ( TAM ) : A meta - analytic structural equation modeling approach to ex - plaining teachers’ adoption of digital technology in education . Computers & Education 128 ( 2019 ) , 13 – 35 . [ 86 ] Donald A Schön . 1987 . Educating the reflective practitioner : Toward a new design for teaching and learning in the professions . Jossey - Bass . [ 87 ] Samuel Severance , William R Penuel , Tamara Sumner , and Heather Leary . 2016 . Organizing for teacher agency in curricular co - design . Journal of the Learning Sciences 25 , 4 ( 2016 ) , 531 – 564 . [ 88 ] Gregory Shrader , Kimberly Williams , Judith Lachance - Whitcomb , Lou - Ellen Finn , and Louis Gomez . 2001 . Participatory design of science curricula : The case for research for practice . In Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association , Seattle , WA . [ 89 ] Lee S Shulman . 1986 . Those who understand : Knowledge growth in teaching . Educational researcher 15 , 2 ( 1986 ) , 4 – 14 . [ 90 ] Lee S Shulman . 2005 . Signature pedagogies in the professions . Daedalus 134 , 3 ( 2005 ) , 52 – 59 . Participatory Design Goes to School : Co - Teaching as a Form of Co - Design for Educational Technology CHI ’22 , April 29 - May 5 , 2022 , New Orleans , LA , USA [ 91 ] Hyo - Jeong So and Bosung Kim . 2009 . Learning about problem based learning : Student teachers integrating technology , pedagogy and content knowledge . Australasian Journal of educational technology 25 , 1 ( 2009 ) . [ 92 ] Bridget Somekh . 2007 . Pedagogy and learning with ICT : Researching the art of innovation . Routledge . [ 93 ] Iris Tabak . 2004 . Reconstructing context : Negotiating the tension between exogenous and endogenous educational design . Educational Psychologist 39 , 4 ( 2004 ) , 225 – 233 . [ 94 ] Lee Yong Tay , Siew Khiaw Lim , and Cher Ping Lim . 2013 . Factors affecting the ICT integration and implementation of one - to - one computing learning environment in a primary school – A sociocultural perspective . In Creating holistic technology - enhanced learning experiences . Brill Sense , 19 – 37 . [ 95 ] Jo Tondeur , Johan van Braak , Peggy A . Ertmer , and Anne Ottenbreit - Leftwich . 2017 . Understanding the relationship between teachers’ pedagogical beliefs and technology use in education : a systematic review of qualitative evidence . Educational Technology Research and Development 65 , 3 ( 2017 ) , 555 – 575 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11423 - 016 - 9481 - 2 [ 96 ] Rochelle E . Tractenberg , Jason G . Umans , and Robert J . McCarter . 2010 . A Mastery Rubric : Guiding curriculum design , admissions and development of course objectives . Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education 35 , 1 ( 2010 ) , 15 – 32 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 02602930802474169 [ 97 ] Chin - Chung Tsai and Ching Sing Chai . 2012 . The " third " - order barrier for technology - integration instruction : Implications for teacher education . Aus - tralasian Journal of Educational Technology 28 , 6 ( 2012 ) . [ 98 ] Megan Venn - Wycherley , Christine Bennett , and Ahmed Kharrufa . 2020 . Design Studios for K - 12 Computing Education . In Proceedings of the 51st ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education . Association for Computing Machin - ery , New York , NY , USA , 1227 – 1233 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3328778 . 3366923 [ 99 ] Yvonne Vezzoli , Manolis Mavrikis , and Asimina Vasalou . 2020 . Inspiration Cards Workshops with Primary Teachers in the Early Co - Design Stages of Learning Analytics . In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Learning Analytics & amp ; Knowledge ( LAK ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , NewYork , NY , USA , 73 – 82 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3375462 . 3375537 [ 100 ] Rebecca Vivian and Katrina Falkner . 2019 . Identifying Teachers’ Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge for Computer Science in the Primary Years . In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM conference on international computing education research . 147 – 155 . [ 101 ] Vanessa W Vongkulluksn , Kui Xie , and Margaret A Bowman . 2018 . The role of value on teachers’ internalization of external barriers and externalization of personal beliefs for classroom technology integration . Computers & Education 118 ( 2018 ) , 70 – 81 . [ 102 ] Joke Voogt , Petra Fisser , Natalie Pareja Roblin , Jo Tondeur , and Johan van Braak . 2013 . Technological pedagogical content knowledge – a review of the literature . Journal of computer assisted learning 29 , 2 ( 2013 ) , 109 – 121 . [ 103 ] JokeVoogt , ThereseLaferriere , AlainBreuleux , RebeccaCItow , DanielTHickey , and Susan McKenney . 2015 . Collaborative design as a form of professional development . Instructional science 43 , 2 ( 2015 ) , 259 – 282 . [ 104 ] Joke M Voogt , Jules M Pieters , and Adam Handelzalts . 2016 . Teacher col - laboration in curriculum design teams : Effects , mechanisms , and conditions . Educational Research and Evaluation 22 , 3 - 4 ( 2016 ) , 121 – 140 . [ 105 ] Lev Vygotsky . 1978 . Mind in Society : The Development of Higher Psychological Processes . Harvard University Press . [ 106 ] Etienne Wenger . 1998 . Communities of Practice . Learning , Meaning and Identity . Cambridge University Press . [ 107 ] Hao Yang . 2012 . ICT in English schools : transforming education ? Technology , pedagogy and education 21 , 1 ( 2012 ) , 101 – 118 . [ 108 ] Zeynep Yurtseven Avci , Laura M O’Dwyer , and Jordan Lawson . 2020 . Designing effectiveprofessionaldevelopmentfortechnologyintegrationinschools . Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 36 , 2 ( 2020 ) , 160 – 177 . [ 109 ] Xiaoming Zhai , Meilan Zhang , Min Li , and Xuejie Zhang . 2019 . Understanding the relationship between levels of mobile technology use in high school physics classrooms and the learning outcome . British journal of educational technology 50 , 2 ( 2019 ) , 750 – 766 .