Original Articles When pumpkin is closer to onion than to squash : The structure of the second language lexicon Katy Borodkin a , ⇑ , Yoed N . Kenett b , 1 , Miriam Faust a , b , Nira Mashal b , c a Department of Psychology , Bar - Ilan University , Ramat - Gan 52900 , Israel b The Leslie and Susan Gonda ( Goldschmied ) Multidisciplinary Gonda Brain Research Center , Bar - Ilan University , Ramat - Gan 52900 , Israel c School of Education , Bar - Ilan University , Ramat - Gan 52900 , Israel a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 15 February 2015 Revised 25 July 2016 Accepted 29 July 2016 Available online 8 August 2016 Keywords : Bilingualism Mental lexicon Semantic ﬂuency Small - world network Modularity a b s t r a c t The current research investigated the organization of the second language mental lexicon . Twenty - seven English - Hebrew bilingual speakers ( who spoke Hebrew as their second language ) completed a semantic ﬂuency task in each of their languages , and 24 native Hebrew speakers completed the task in Hebrew . Responses were compared within and across groups , using computational tools . The analyses indicated that the lexical network of the second language displayed greater local connectivity and less modular community structure than the network in the native language , both in the entire sample and in a sub - sample of bilinguals whose Hebrew vocabulary was matched to that of the native Hebrew speakers . These ﬁndings suggest that the lexical network of the second language is not as well - organized as is the network of the ﬁrst language , even in highly proﬁcient bilinguals . The structural characteristics of the second language lexicon might be affected by factors related to language learning history , including age of acquisition and language use . (cid:1) 2016 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction To know a word is to know its spelling and pronunciation , its grammatical class and syntactic constraints , as well as its meaning ( Nation , 2001 ) . Word knowledge also refers to usage and associa - tions with other words . A word may have semantic links ( e . g . , pumpkin is likely linked with zucchini or with squash ) as well as associative links with other words with which it tends to co - occur ( e . g . , pumpkin may be linked with pie , orange , or Halloween ) . Although the structural characteristics of this lexical network have been extensively investigated in monolinguals ( e . g . , McRae , de Sa , & Seidenberg , 1997 ; Plaut , 1997 ) , far less is known about the orga - nization of the mental lexicon of bilingual speakers who acquired their languages consecutively . In such individuals , connections are often established ﬁrst between words in their native language ( L1 ) . Second language ( L2 ) words are initially connected only to their L1 translation equivalents ; however , they become associated with other L2 words later on , as the L2 vocabulary is acquired , thus giving rise to an autonomous L2 lexical network ( Frenck - Mestre & Prince , 1997 ; Kroll & Stewart , 1994 ) . The current study focuses on the organization of this L2 network in relation to L1 network and explores it with advanced network tools . Existing research on meaning representation in bilinguals has been largely dedicated to studying cross - linguistic connections through diverse experimental methods , such as cross - language semantic and translation priming , picture naming or Stroop ( reviewed in Altarriba & Basnight - Brown , 2009 ; de Groot , 2011 ) . This line of research is less informative with regard to the connec - tions within the L2 lexical network and the principles governing the organization of this network . Studies addressing the topic more directly have often applied the word association task , in which par - ticipants are asked to generate one ( or more ) associative responses that come to their mind upon presentation of a target word ( Kruse , Pankhurst , & Smith , 1987 ; S ӧ derman , 1993 ) . Responses in this task can be categorized as syntagmatic ( words that belong to different lexical classes , such as pumpkin - orange ) , phonological ( words that resemble the target word in form but not in meaning , such as pumpkin - napkin ) , and paradigmatic ( words that belong to the same lexical class as the target word , such as pumpkin - squash ) . Although there is evidence suggesting that adult L2 speakers , like children in L1 ( Ervin , 1961 ) , produce more syntagmatic and phonological responses relative to adult L1 speakers ( Meara , 1978 ; Namei , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2016 . 07 . 014 0010 - 0277 / (cid:1) 2016 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . ⇑ Corresponding author currently at : Department of Communication Disorders , Sackler Faculty of Medicine , Tel Aviv University , Tel Aviv 69978 , Israel . E - mail addresses : katyborodkin @ tauex . tau . ac . il ( K . Borodkin ) , yoedk @ sas . upenn . edu ( Y . N . Kenett ) , Miriam . Faust @ biu . ac . il ( M . Faust ) , Nira . Mashal @ biu . ac . il ( N . Mashal ) . 1 Present address : Department of Psychology , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA 19104 , USA . Cognition 156 ( 2016 ) 60 – 70 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Cognition journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / COGNIT