The Reflective Practitioner A one - day interactive workshop event combining theoretical background knowledge and practical application skills Tuesday 25 June , Cheltenham Tuesday 10 September , Leeds Overview This activity and discussion based workshop is an introduction to ‘Reflective Practice’ , which is a key element of continuous professional development . The workshop will form a basis to help participants in delivery and / or coordination functions to develop the strategies and skills of the Reflective Practitioner The day is designed to help individuals think , write and deliver the range of information , advice and guidance provision in a more Reflective Style For those individuals working towards accredited qualifications in CIAG , the workshop will also provide valuable underpinning skills and knowledge . ‘Reflect on and improve professional practice’ is one of the three units required to upgrade from Level 4 to Level 6 . Target Audience  Newly Qualified & Experienced Career Practitioners  Adult Guidance Advisers  Teachers and Careers Coordinators  Careers Advisers undertaking a Level 6 qualification or topping up from Level 4  Leaders and Managers Objectives To enable you to :  Define the concept , skills and components of ‘Reflective Practice’  Undertake self awareness exercises that help facilitate Reflective Practice  Differentiate between Reflective processes and levels of Reflection  Consider how Reflective Practice can be an effective strategy for learning  Compare and practice ‘Reflective’ writing approaches  Evaluate ‘Reflective frameworks and models’ Reflective Models to be evaluated :  The ERA cycle of Reflective Practice  Kolb’s Experiential Learning Cycle  Boud et al – ‘7 levels of Reflection’  Bolton ‘Reflective Practice : Writing and Professional Development’  Gibbs’s Reflective Cycle  Goodman’s levels of Reflection  Johns’s model of Structured Reflection  Borton’s Developmental Framework  Schon The Programme : 9 . 30 Registration / coffee 10 . 00 Introduction to the event 10 . 10 Session One : What is meant by Reflective Practice ? The Reflective Cycle - Introduction Why and how do we reflect ? 10 . 40 Session Two : Personal Learning Styles exercise The Skills of Reflection 11 . 10 Break 11 . 30 Session Three : Reflective Processes – a ‘6 stage’ approach Reflective Writing Exercise Reflecting with Others 12 . 15 Session Four : The ‘7 levels’ of Reflection 12 . 45 Lunch 13 . 30 Session Five : Reflective Models – Overview Research Activity 15 . 00 Break 15 . 30 Session Six : Reflective Models - Feedback Session 16 . 15 Summary and Evaluation What worked today and how will we apply ? 16 . 30 Finish Booking information Please book through the website : http : / / www . icg - uk . org / Skills - Training - Events Price : £135 + VAT Members £185 + VAT Non - Members Students £60 + VAT ( 3 places only ) Course Leader : David Richardson of Richardson Associates ( UK ) Limited A professionally qualified teacher , trainer , tutor , assessor , internal verifier , psychometrician , career and professional development coach . David has over 20 years experience working within the ' career guidance and development ' sector . Specialisms include design , delivery , development and evaluation of accredited and non - accredited learning and development programmes working to national standards and organisational bespoke demands . He has gained leadership and management experience gained through theoretical and ' hands on ' business development of his own training consultancy currently leading a team of associates working to demanding quality standards . David has extensive experience of working nationally across the public , private and third sectors with a recognised and recommended capability of working with challenging groups and individuals to ensure objectives and learning outcomes are achieved