Incentive - compatible Intelligence Collaboration Analysis Framework Based on Blockchain and Evolutionary Game 1 st Zhigang Xu * School of Computer Science Hubei University of Technology Wuhan , China xzg @ hbut . edu . cn 2 nd Qi Li School of Computer Science Hubei University of Technology Wuhan , China 102010971 @ hbut . edu . cn 3 rd Xinhua Dong School of Computer Science Hubei University of Technology Wuhan , China xhdong @ hbut . edu . cn 4 th Hongmu Han School of Computer Science Hubei University of Technology Wuhan , China hanhongmu @ hbut . edu . cn 5 th Zhongzhen Yan Narcotics Control Bureau Public Security of Guangdong Province Guangzhou , China 12339207 @ qq . com 6 th Haitao Wang Narcotics Control Bureau Public Security of Guangdong Province Guangzhou , China 13925088659 @ 139 . com Abstract —Collaborative intelligence data analysis can effec - tively dig out valuable information from massive data to support decision - making . Ensuring data credibility in collaboration under the background of big data is a crucial problem to be solved . In addition , the low willingness of analysts to share results in low efﬁciency of collaborative tasks . To solve the above problems , this paper proposes a blockchain - based intelligence collaborative analysis and sharing framework , ICASChain , which contains a highly trusted intelligence collaboration mechanism and a dynamically adjustable incentive mechanism . Based on Evolutionary Game Theory , this paper analyzes the evolutionary stability strategy of intelligence sharing willingness of analysts by constructing a replication dynamic equation . We use a smart contract incentive algorithm including ICASToken to dynamically regulate them to increase the proportion of users participating in intelligence sharing . Finally , the inﬂuencing factors of information sharing and the incentive effect of the incentive model are discussed through simulation experiments . The simulation results show that the proposed ICASChain has essential application value in improving the analysts’ willingness to collaborate and share intelligence and the correctness of the analysis results . Index Terms —intelligence collaboration , data sharing , blockchain , evolutionary game , incentive mechanism I . I NTRODUCTION Decision - making on essential issues requires the support of intelligence . If the data is incomplete and inaccurate , the decision gained by intelligence analysis may have serious consequences [ 1 ] . Intelligence analysis tasks are often very complex , and it is easy to produce prejudice due to the limitation of cognition [ 2 ] . Some researchers pointed out that integrating the viewpoints of multiple analysts can help im - prove data credibility and eliminate personal bias by analyzing data from different perspectives [ 3 ] , [ 4 ] . The development of * Zhigang Xu is corresponding author . science and technology has broken through the difﬁculty of the cross - domain interaction of data . However , there are many problems in intelligence collaborative analysis work . First , it is challenging to realize real - time sharing between multiple terminals due to the multi - source and heterogeneity of Spatio - temporal data . Secondly , in data circulation , the integrity and authenticity of data are easy to be destroyed , and it is difﬁcult to ensure the credibility of data [ 5 ] . In addition , rewards for analysis tasks are often result - oriented , and the analysis process is non - transparent . It is difﬁcult to reﬂect the value of those who provide contributions indirectly , resulting in unreasonable and unfair rewards distribution . This means that sharing intelligence comes with risks that the costs outweigh the rewards , thus leading to the phenomenon of “pocket data” . Finally , due to the lack of incentive , analysts have insufﬁcient motivation to participate in intelligence sharing and analysis , making it difﬁcult for collaborative intelligence analysis . We consider adopting evolutionary game theory and blockchain technology to solve these critical problems . Thanks to the chain structure of the blockchain , the data cannot be tampered with once it is on the chain , and the entire transaction process can be traced back , which can not only ensure data credibility but also trace the contribution back to individuals to ensure personal interests . Evolutionary game theory com - bines game theory with biological evolution . Unlike traditional games , where participants are entirely rational , evolutionary games allow limited rationality of participants . In dynamic evolution , participants constantly learn from others to make up for their own mistakes to maximize their interests . By applying evolutionary game theory to intelligence data sharing , we can study the dynamic evolution process of the selection of participant groups to carry out the targeted , dynamic incentive . 1990 2022 IEEE Smartworld , Ubiquitous Intelligence & Computing , Scalable Computing & Communications , Digital Twin , Privacy Computing , Metaverse , Autonomous & Trusted Vehicles ( SmartWorld / UIC / ScalCom / DigitalTwin / PriComp / Metaverse ) 979 - 8 - 3503 - 4655 - 8 / 22 / $ 31 . 00 ©2022 IEEE DOI 10 . 1109 / SmartWorld - UIC - ATC - ScalCom - DigitalTwin - PriComp - Metaverse56740 . 2022 . 00288 2022 I EEE S m a r t w o r l d , U b i qu it ou s I n t e lli g e n ce & C o m pu ti n g , S ca l a b l e C o m pu ti ng & C o mm un i ca ti on s , D i g it a l T w i n , P r i v ac y C o m pu ti ng , M e t a v e r s e , A u t ono m ou s & T r u s t e d V e h i c l e s ( S m a r t W o r l d / U I C / S ca l C o m / D i g it a l T w i n / P r i C o m p / M e t a ) | 979 - 8 - 3 5 03 - 4655 - 8 / 22 / $ 31 . 00 © 2022 I EEE | DO I : 10 . 1109 / S m a r t W o r l d - U I C - A T C - S ca l C o m - D i g it a l T w i n - P r i C o m p - M e t a v e r s e 56740 . 2022 . 00288 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . Researchers have done a lot of research on intelligence coordination . In terms of ensuring the access and transmission security of data sharing , the mode based on ”blockchain + data sharing” has attracted wide attention in various ﬁelds . Mahmud et al . [ 6 ] proposed a secure network framework based on blockchain and used BigchainDB and IPFS to improve blockchain’s scalability , ensuring that patients share data anonymously while retaining ownership of their medical data . To ensure the security of data sharing and exchange between intelligent mobile terminals in the Industrial Internet of Things , Liu et al . [ 7 ] combined deep reinforcement learning ( DRL ) with blockchain and proposed an efﬁcient and secure data sharing scheme . Lu et al . [ 8 ] applied federated learning to the blockchain consensus mechanism and constructed a blockchain - sharing architecture based on privacy protection to solve security and privacy problems such as data leakage of data sharing in a wireless network . Although the “blockchain + data sharing” model solves problems such as data over - centralization and hidden security risks , the low willingness of analysts to share is also worth paying attention to . Cai et al . [ 9 ] proposed an efﬁcient incentive framework for data sharing , ShareBC , based on sharding technology and blockchain consensus to improve users’ sharing willingness in IoT . Reijsbergen et al . [ 10 ] proposed a threat model containing an incentive and punishment mechanism for the deﬁciency of the existing threat model , which encouraged operators to share data and urged operators to maintain data security . As an interdisciplinary subject of economics and management , Game Theory is a good incentive method to explore the inﬂuencing factors and predict the behavior of data sharing . Wang et al . [ 11 ] constructed a safe , efﬁcient , and dynamically adjustable smart contract incentive mechanism through evolutionary game theory . Based on their research , Zhang et al . [ 12 ] introduced the user grade factor further to improve the speed of user participation in data sharing . Shen et al . [ 13 ] established a Shapley value model of participants from simple to complex to achieve a fair distribution of multi - party cooperation beneﬁts . Aggelos Kiayias et al . [ 14 ] applied the theories of game theory to propose an alliance security equilibrium model , which provides a general method to describe various utility functions based on the rewards recorded in the ledger . The method proposed in this paper is based on the mode of “blockchain + data sharing + incentive” , providing a secure , real - time , efﬁcient , and incentive - compatible solution for in - telligence collaboration and sharing under the background of intelligence analysis . The model and framework proposed in this paper can promote the willingness of researchers to share data while ensuring the security of data sharing and providing support for intelligence analysis . II . A RCHITECTURE D ESIGN This section proposes a blockchain - based system frame - work for intelligence collaborative analysis and shar - ing——ICASChain . To address the problems in intelligence collaboration and sharing discussed in section I , we propose a framework , ICASChain , as shown in Fig . 1 . An introduction to the parts contained in the framework and their relationships are described below : Fig . 1 . The framework of ICASChain A . Blockchain Network We adopt Hyperledger Fabric in ICASChain , an authorized consortium blockchain with channel settings , allowing users to do collaborative tasks privately and securely under different terminals [ 15 ] . Fig . 2 . Collaboration model B . Analysts Analysts share or obtain intelligence data through the blockchain interface . Fig . 2 depicts the intelligence collabora - tion model among multiple analysts . Analysts must pass strict access control and identity authentication before joining the network . Different analysis tasks or institutions are isolated through the channel mechanism in Hyperledger Fabric . The process of intelligence analysis forms a huge network . The low - level intelligence is merged upward into a higher level of intelligence by being analyzed , and the generated new 1991 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . intelligence is analyzed together with other intelligence into a higher level of intelligence until the goal of the research task is achieved . C . Intelligence Database To reduce the pressure of transmission and storage on the blockchain and improve the throughput , the data shared by analysts is encrypted and stored in the intelligence database through the blockchain network . Only the data ﬁngerprint of intelligence is stored on the chain . Analysts obtain the required information through authorization and token exchange . When analysts need to get complete intelligence , the complete data can be located according to the data ﬁngerprint . Asymmetric encryption technology can guarantee the security of data access during this process . D . Smart Contract System Smart contract system is one of the core mechanisms of the blockchain network . Smart contracts create protocols for blockchain networks by presetting triggering events and corre - sponding rules and can be veriﬁed and executed automatically , ensuring that each work runs safely and independently [ 16 ] . In Hyperledger Fabric , smart contracts are customizable and can be used as incentives in blockchain networks . E . Incentive mechanism One of the great features of blockchain is the Token mecha - nism . We propose an ICASToken speciﬁcally for collaborative intelligence analysis and sharing in the blockchain network . Fig . 3 depicts the life cycle of ICASToken . The intelligence - sharing behavior of analysts will trigger the smart contract to assign ICASToken to them . ICASToken can be used to obtain intelligence from an intelligence database or upgrade privileges , and it can also be exchanged for currency . Based on the evolutionary game theory , the preset trigger events of smart contracts can regulate the circulation and distribution of ICASToken in the blockchain network , to better manage ICASToken . The token mechanism and the smart contract system combined with evolutionary game theory form an incentive mechanism for intelligence cooperation and sharing architecture to encourage analysts to participate in intelligence analysis and sharing . III . I NCENTIVE M ODEL FOR I NTELLIGENCE S HARING In this section , we build an evolutionary game model of intelligence sharing , analyze the model through the payoff matrix and replication dynamic equation , and build an incentive mechanism for intelligence sharing based on smart contracts . A . Evolutionary Game Game theory , as a mathematical theory and method of the phenomenon of competition , mainly studies the incentive structure , and gives the optimal strategy according to the individual behavior in the game . Evolutionary game theory is a branch of game theory that originally evolved from biological evolution [ 17 ] . Different individuals have different behaviors Fig . 3 . life cycle of ICASToken in society , but over time , individuals who break away from social traditions will eventually be eliminated by society . The evolutionary game theory combines game theory analysis with dynamic evolutionary process analysis to analyze the beneﬁts of different strategy options for players , and what strategies each side tends to adopt to maximize its own beneﬁts . The goal is to adjust the course of the game to achieve the desired steady state . Two important concepts are involved here : evolutionary equilibrium [ 22 ] and replication dynamic equation [ 18 ] . Given a two - part game Let G = (cid:2) { A , B } , ( r i ) (cid:3) , which is a symmetric strategy game . Suppose that (cid:2) > 0 is an arbitrarily small positive number . in the group , x percent of the population chose b behavior , a mutant behavior . In contrast , most of the rest choose b ∗ behavior , which is a non - mutant behavior . The choices of each individual in the group do not affect each other . The beneﬁt obtained by the individual who chooses the mutant behavior is : ( 1 − (cid:2) ) r ( b , b ∗ ) + (cid:2)r ( b , b ) ( 1 ) In the formula , r ( b , b ∗ ) is the beneﬁt of the individual who chooses mutated behavior when others choose non - mutated behavior . r ( b , b ) is the beneﬁt of the individual who chooses mutated behavior when others prefer the mutant behavior . ( 1 − (cid:2) ) and (cid:2) are the probability that others choose non - mutated and mutated behaviors when the individual decides on mutated behavior , respectively . Similarly , the beneﬁt obtained by the individual who chooses non - mutant behavior is : ( 1 − (cid:2) ) r ( b ∗ , b ∗ ) + (cid:2)r ( b ∗ , b ) ( 2 ) The condition of stable equilibrium of evolution is that when the proportion of individuals who choose mutant behavior is tiny , the income of individuals selecting non - mutant behavior should be strictly higher than that of individuals selecting mutant behavior . That is : ( 1 − (cid:2) ) r ( b , b ∗ ) + (cid:2)r ( b , b ) < ( 1 − (cid:2) ) r ( b ∗ , b ∗ ) + (cid:2)r ( b ∗ , b ) ( 3 ) Replication dynamics is a continuous deterministic equation about game dynamics , proposed by Taylor and Jonker [ 18 ] in 1978 to describe the evolution of population strategy over 1992 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . time . For the evolutionary game of a single group , it is assumed that the proportion of individuals who adapt strategy a in the group at time t is x , and the ﬁtness of strategy a is r ( a , x ) , the average ﬁtness of the group is r ( x , x ) . How fast the proportion of participants choosing different strategies changes over time often depends on the number of participants with the same strategy and the strength of the advantage of holding the strategy . The growth rate of the proportion of individuals using strategy a can be described by the following differential equation ( i . e . , the replication dynamics equation of the population ) : dx a dt = x a [ r ( a , x ) − r ( x , x ) ] ( 4 ) B . Model Construction ( 1 ) Model assumes In intelligence collaborative analysis and sharing , the sub - jects of both parties of the evolutionary game are analysts and they have the same strategic space , that is , S = ( S 1 , S 2 ) = ( participate in intelligence sharing , do not participate in intel - ligence sharing ) . It is assumed that all analysts are bounded rational . Hypothesis 1 : The analyst’s analysis cost is C ( C > 0 ) . C includes the corresponding token that analysts need to pay to obtain intelligence from the intelligence database and the time and labor costs generated in the analysis process . Hypothesis 2 : The choice of different strategies of another party in the game will have a certain inﬂuence on the analysis cost of this game party . Let c 1 ( c 1 > 0 ) be the cost adjustment coefﬁcient . Normally , the analysis cost is C . Suppose another game party chooses strategy S 1 . In this case , analysts can enrich current information through clues or intelligence shared by others . Thus the time and effort spent in the analysis process can be reduced , the analysis cost becomes ( C − c 1 ) . On the contrary , if another player chooses strategy S 2 , the analysis work becomes time - consuming and laborious . In this case , the analysis cost becomes ( C + c 1 ) . Hypothesis 3 : When analysts share the clues in hand , the blockchain smart contract will give the uploaders a certain amount of token as sharing incentive , denoted as θ ( θ > 0 ) . Hypothesis 4 : After the whole task is over , the blockchain will backtrack the entire analysis process . Suppose the trace - back reward obtained by an analyst is E , which is related to the analysis cost C . Let E = α ( C ) 2 , E > 0 . Where α is the proﬁt coefﬁcient , and the size of α depends on the difﬁculty of the overall research and analysis task . Hypothesis 5 : In this game model , suppose the proportion of analysts who choose the strategy of participating in intelligence sharing is x ( x(cid:2) [ 0 , 1 ] ) , and the proportion who choose the strategy of not participating in intelligence sharing is 1 − x . ( 2 ) Payoff matrix Based on the above assumptions , the payoff matrix of analysts is constructed , as shown in Table I . ( a ) Both party A and party B choose strategy S 1 . According to the aforementioned hypothesis , the analysis cost is reduced to ( C − c 1 ) , and the traceback reward is α ( C − c 1 ) 2 . In TABLE I T HE PAYOFF MATRIX FOR BOTH SIDES OF THE GAME A B S1 S2 S 1 α ( C − c 1 ) 2 − ( C − c 1 ) + θ α ( C − c 1 ) 2 − ( C − c 1 ) + θ α ( C + c 1 ) 2 − ( C + c 1 ) + θ α ( C − c 1 ) 2 − ( C − c 1 ) S 2 α ( C − c 1 ) 2 − ( C − c 1 ) α ( C + c 1 ) 2 − ( C + c 1 ) + θ 00 addition , the blockchain smart contract will automatically issue tokens to the user account , which in this model is θ . In the end , the payoff for both parties in the game is α ( C − c 1 ) 2 − ( C − c 1 ) + θ . ( b ) One party chooses strategy S 1 , while another party chooses strategy S 2 . In this case , the party that chooses strategy S 1 will get sharing incentive θ . The analysis cost increases to ( C + c 1 ) . Because of participating in the research , this game party will obtain the traceback reward α ( C + c 1 ) 2 . For the party that chooses strategy S 2 , the analysis cost reduces to ( C − c 1 ) , traceback reward is α ( C − c 1 ) 2 . In the end , the payoff for the party choosing strategy S 1 is α ( C + c 1 ) 2 − ( C + c 1 ) + θ , and the payoff for the party choosing strategy S 2 is α ( C − c 1 ) 2 − ( C − c 1 ) . ( c ) Both party A and party B choose strategy S 2 . An overall analysis task needs to be completed jointly by the analysts involved in the research . If no one shares intelligence , the ﬁnal result of the general analysis task cannot be delivered . Neither party in the game can get the traceback reward , and the beneﬁt of both parties is recorded as 0 . C . Model Analysis Before analyzing the evolutionary stability strategy of the model , it is necessary to construct the replication dynamic equation to describe the variation rule of the proportion of players choosing a certain strategy with time in the game group . According to equations ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) , it can be obtained that the expected income of participants who choose strategy S 1 at the moment t is : I = x (cid:2) α ( C − c 1 ) 2 − ( C − c 1 ) + θ (cid:3) + ( 1 − x ) (cid:2) α ( C + c 1 ) 2 − ( C + c 1 ) + θ (cid:3) ( 5 ) At moment t , the expected income of the participant who chooses strategy S 2 is : I (cid:2) = x (cid:2) α ( C − c 1 ) 2 − ( C − c 1 ) (cid:3) + ( 1 − x ) · θ (cid:3) ( 6 ) At moment t , the average expected income of the group is : − I = x · I + ( 1 − x ) · I (cid:2) ( 7 ) Substitute the equations ( 5 ) , ( 6 ) , and ( 7 ) into Equation ( 4 ) , and obtain the dynamic replication equation of the game subject in the evolutionary game model of intelligence collab - oration and sharing : f ( x ) = x ( 1 − x ) (cid:4)(cid:2) − α ( C + c 1 ) 2 + ( C + c 1 ) (cid:3) x + α ( C + c 1 ) 2 − ( C + c 1 ) + θ ( 8 ) 1993 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . Let f = 0 , the three equilibrium points of the replication dynamic equation are obtained , that is : x 1 = 0 ( 9 ) x 2 = 1 ( 10 ) x 3 = α ( C + c 1 ) 2 − ( C + c 1 ) + θ α ( C + c 1 ) 2 − ( C + c 1 ) ( 11 ) Only meet the formula f (cid:2) ( x ) < 0 , the equilibrium point is the evolutionary stable strategy of this game [ 22 ] . The following cases are discussed . Sharing strategy 1 : when θ > 0 and α ( C + c 1 ) 2 − ( C + c 1 ) + θ > 0 , only x 2 = 1 is the evolutionary stable state of intelligence sharing game . At this point , the beneﬁt obtained is greater than the analysis cost . As the return is greater than the effort , analysts participating in collaborative intelligence research are willing to share their data . Sharing strategy 2 : when θ < 0 and α ( C + c 1 ) 2 − ( C + c 1 ) + θ < 0 , only x 1 = 0 is the evolutionary stable state of intelligence sharing game . At this point , the sharing incentive is negative , and the gain is less than the analysis cost . As the effort is greater than the return , the sharing intention of the analysts participating in collaborative tasks is low . Sharing strategy 3 : when θ > 0 and α ( C + c 1 ) 2 − ( C + c 1 ) + θ < 0 , both x 1 = 0 and x 2 = 1 are evolutionary stable states of intelligence sharing game . In this case , the game’s result depends on the initial value of x . When the value range of x is ( 0 , x 3 ) , the evolution ﬁnally tends to x 1 = 0 . When the value range of x is ( x 3 , 1 ) , the evolution eventually tends to x 2 = 1 . Sharing strategy 4 : when θ < 0 and α ( C + c 1 ) 2 − ( C + c 1 ) + θ > 0 , only x 3 = α ( C + c 1 ) 2 − ( C + c 1 ) + θ α ( C + c 1 ) 2 − ( C + c 1 ) is the evolutionary stable state of intelligence sharing game . In this case , the sharing incentive is negative , but the beneﬁt is greater than the cost of research . In this case , evolution results tend to be a ﬁxed proportion . D . Smart Contract Incentive Algorithm Since blockchain smart contract has the characteristic of automatic execution and veriﬁcation , when a game round starts , the smart contract can be automatically triggered to dynamically regulate the parameters to promote the willingness of analysts to share information . According to the analysis in part C , when the sharing incen - tive is negative , the results of the evolutionary game tend to two situations : the proportion of analysts willing to participate in intelligence sharing tends to be 0 or a ﬁxed ratio , neither of which is the desired effect of this model . Sharing incentives should be increased to avoid this possibility . According to sharing strategy 3 , one of the critical factors affecting the willingness to share intelligence is the initial proportion of analysts involved in intelligence sharing . Therefore , the smart contract incentive algorithm is designed to regulate the group sharing trend with x 3 as the critical value . See Algorithm 1 for a detailed description of the algorithm . Algorithm 1 Dynamic Incentive Algorithm Input : proﬁt coefﬁcient , α ; analysis cost , C ; cost adjustment coefﬁcient , c 1 ; sharing incentive , θ ; regulation parameter of θ , Δ θ ; regulation parameter of game time , Δ t ; current game time , t ; Output : current sharing incentive after being adjusted , θ ; 1 : x Δ = getPresentSharingNum ( ) ; / / Calculate the cur - rent proportion of people involved in intelligence sharing 2 : if θ < 0 then 3 : repeat 4 : θ + Δ θ 5 : until θ > 0 6 : if x Δ = 1 then 7 : return θ ; / / Return the ﬁnal θ and end the algorithm ; 8 : else 9 : Arithmetic 1 ( θ ) ; / / The algorithm is iterated with the current θ as the parameter 10 : end if 11 : end if 12 : if α ( C + c 1 ) 2 − ( C + c 1 ) + θ > 0 then 13 : if x Δ = 1 then 14 : θ + Δ θ ; 15 : Arithmetic 1 ( θ ) ; 16 : end if 17 : t + Δ t ; / / Keep the current parameter state in Δ t for dynamic evolution 18 : Arithmetic 1 ( θ , t ) ; / / The algorithm is iterated with the current θ and t as parameters 19 : else 20 : x 3 = (cid:2) α ( C + c 1 ) 2 − ( C + c 1 ) + θ (cid:3) ÷ (cid:2) α ( C + c 1 ) 2 − ( C + c 1 ) (cid:3) ; / / Calculate the threshold 21 : if x Δ < x 3 then 22 : θ + Δ θ ; 23 : Arithmetic 1 ( θ + Δ θ , t ) ; 24 : else 25 : θ + Δ θ ; 26 : Arithmetic 1 ( θ − Δ θ , t ) ; 27 : end if 28 : end if IV . E XPERIMENT AND A NALYSIS In this section , we use MATLAB to conduct simulation experiments on the intelligence sharing incentive model in Section III . A . Evolution Stability Strategy Validation Aiming at the four sharing strategies proposed in Section III , we will analyze the trend of participating in sharing of analysts under the conditions of different initial sharing ratios for each sharing strategy . See Table II for parameter Settings . The experimental results are shown in Fig . 4 . As shown in Fig . 4 . ( a ) , under the condition of sharing strategy 1 , no matter what the initial proportion of people participating in intelligence sharing is , the ﬁnal evolutionary 1994 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . TABLE II E VOLUTION STABILITY POLICY VALIDATION PARAMETERS SETTINGS sharing parameters settings strategy α C c 1 θ sharing strategy 1 0 . 2 2 1 3 sharing strategy 2 0 . 2 2 1 - 1 sharing strategy 3 0 . 2 2 1 1 sharing strategy 4 0 . 2 4 2 - 1 result tends to participate in data sharing . On the contrary , under sharing strategy 2 , the ﬁnal evolutionary result tends not to participate in data sharing , as shown in Fig . 4 . ( b ) . When sharing strategy 3 is met , as shown in Fig . 4 . ( c ) , there is a critical value x 3 ≈ 0 . 17 . When x < x 3 , analysts share data negatively . When x > x 3 , analysts share data actively . When sharing strategy 4 is satisﬁed , as shown in Fig . 4 . ( d ) , at this point , x 3 ≈ 0 . 17 , about 17 % of analysts tend to participate in data sharing in the ﬁnal . According to the simulation results , in the process of participating in intelligence sharing , sharing strategy 1 should be adopted , and sharing strategy 3 should be regulated and controlled to achieve positive sharing . On the contrary , sharing strategy 2 should not be adopted , and the situation of sharing strategy 4 should be avoided . 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 00 . 10 . 20 . 30 . 40 . 50 . 60 . 70 . 80 . 911 . 1 initial x = 0 . 1 initial x = 0 . 3 initial x = 0 . 5 initial x = 0 . 7 initial x = 0 . 9 ( a ) Simulation of sharing trend under sharing strategy 1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 00 . 10 . 20 . 30 . 40 . 50 . 60 . 70 . 80 . 91 initial x = 0 . 1 initial x = 0 . 3 initial x = 0 . 5 initial x = 0 . 7 initial x = 0 . 9 ( b ) Simulation of sharing trend under sharing strategy 2 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 initial x = 0 . 1 initial x = 0 . 3 initial x = 0 . 5 initial x = 0 . 7 initial x = 0 . 9 ( c ) Simulation of sharing trend under sharing strategy 3 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 initial x = 0 . 1 initial x = 0 . 3 initial x = 0 . 5 initial x = 0 . 7 initial x = 0 . 9 ( d ) Simulation of sharing trend under sharing strategy 4 Fig . 4 . Evolution Stability Strategy Validation B . Analysis of Inﬂuencing Factors of Intelligence Sharing In the payoff matrix corresponding to the incentive model in this paper , the returns of both parties of the game are mainly related to analysis cost C and sharing incentive θ . We use the method of control variables to explore the inﬂuence of C and θ on data sharing under the condition of sharing strategy 1 . The simulation result is shown in Fig . 5 . As shown in Fig . 5 . ( a ) , when sharing strategy 1 is satisﬁed , the higher the analysis cost C is , the faster the proportion of participants in intelligence sharing tends to 1 . It means that in collaborative intelligence analysis , generally , the more you pay , the more you will get in the end . The situation is similar for inﬂuencing factor θ , as shown in Fig . 5 . ( b ) . It means that stimulating sharing behavior has a positive incentive effect on improving the proportion of the group participating in data sharing . 0 1 2 3 4 5 00 . 10 . 20 . 30 . 40 . 50 . 60 . 70 . 80 . 911 . 1 C = 3 C = 5 C = 7 ( a ) Simulation of the impact of C on sharing trend 0 1 2 3 4 5 00 . 10 . 20 . 30 . 40 . 50 . 60 . 70 . 80 . 911 . 1 ( b ) Simulation of the impact of θ on sharing trend Fig . 5 . The impact of inﬂuencing factors on sharing trend C . Veriﬁcation of incentive effect of incentive model ( 1 ) The incentive effect of sharing incentive To verify the incentive effect and degree of sharing incentive in the incentive model , a simulation experiment is carried out under the conditions of different incentives and different initial participation ratios of intelligence sharing for sharing strategy 3 . The simulation result is shown in Fig . 6 . 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 Fig . 6 . Sharing incentive curve From the curves tending to 1 in Fig . 6 , it can be clearly seen that when θ = 1 , the growth rate of participants participating in intelligence sharing is greater than that when θ = 0 . 5 . Even in the case where the evolutionary result tends to 0 , the proportion tends to 0 more slowly when θ = 1 than when θ = 0 . 5 . When θ = 1 , the threshold is 0 . 17 . When the initial proportion of participants participating in sharing is more than 17 % , the group tends to share data in the end . When θ = 0 . 5 , the threshold is 0 . 58 , and the group tends to share data only when the initial proportion is greater than 58 % . It can be seen that the greater the sharing incentive is , the easier it is to achieve the condition that the game group tends to actively share . 1995 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply . ( 2 ) Sharing trend under smart contract regulation According to Algorithm 1 , We set the ﬁxed parameters α = 0 . 2 , C = 2 , c 1 = 1 , t starts at zero , the initial θ = 0 . 5 , take Δ θ = 0 . 5 , assume that x Δ = 0 . 3 is the initial proportion of people involved in intelligence sharing . The simulation of the dynamic evolution process of information sharing is shown in Fig . 7 . In the beginning , the sharing trend tends to be 0 . After several iterations , by increasing the value of θ , the proportion reaches 1 . To avoid excitation saturation , θ needs to be reduced . Finally , the smart contract algorithm keeps θ as the smallest positive integer to achieve the purpose of promoting participants’ active sharing at the lowest cost . As is shown in the ﬁgure , the whole network ﬁnally reaches a stable state where the proportion of people participating in sharing remains at 1 . 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 1 . 1 Fig . 7 . Dynamic evolution curve under smart contract regulation V . C ONCLUTION Aiming at the problem of data security and the low share willingness of analysts in collaborative analysis , this paper proposes a blockchain - based intelligence collaboration and sharing system framework . The solution will run on Hyper - ledger fabric , ensuring the traceability of the whole process and the credibility and immutability of data . Based on this framework , we introduce the idea of evolutionary game and propose an incentive model . The application of Token mecha - nism and smart contracts form a dynamic cycle incentive . The ICASChain proposed in this paper can help constrain analysts to share and analyze intelligence honestly , and at the same time provide them with a guarantee of interest , which has practical signiﬁcance for improving the willingness of analysts to share and the correctness of analysis results . We should pay attention to the important supporting role of intelligence data sharing in collaborative analysis , which can provide support for analysis tasks . In future research , we will focus on the accounting of the contribution of intelligence collaborative analysis and sharing platforms , and quantify the contribution of analysts to pursue a high degree of fairness in collaborative tasks . A CKNOWLEDGMENT This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No . 61772180 , the Key - Area Research and Development Program of Guangdong Province 2020B1111420002 , the Key - Area Research and Development Program of Hubei Province 2022BAA040 , the Science and Technology Project of Department of Transport of Hubei Province 2022 - 11 - 4 - 3 , and the Innovation Fund of Hubei University of Technology BSQD2019027 , BSQD2019020 and BSQD2016019 . We sincerely thank the anonymous reviewers for their very comprehensive and constructive comments . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] M . Saletta , A . Kruger , T . Primoratz , A . Barnett , T . van Gelder , and R . E . Horn , “The role of narrative in collaborative reasoning and intelligence analysis : A case study , ” Plos one , vol . 15 , no . 1 , p . e0226981 , 2020 . [ 2 ] G . Convertino , D . Billman , P . Pirolli , J . Massar , and J . Shrager , “The cache study : Group effects in computer - supported collaborative analysis , ” Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , vol . 17 , no . 4 , pp . 353 – 393 , 2008 . [ 3 ] M . Q . Patton , Qualitative research & evaluation methods : Integrating theory and practice . Sage publications , 2014 . [ 4 ] J . D . Olson , C . McAllister , L . D . Grinnell , K . G . Walters , and F . Appunn , “Applying constant comparative method with multiple investigators and inter - coder reliability , ” The Qualitative Report , vol . 21 , no . 1 , p . 26 , 2016 . [ 5 ] M . Rizwan , M . N . Sohail , A . Asheralieva , A . Anjum , and P . An - gin , “Said : Ecc - based secure authentication and incentive distribution mechanism for blockchain - enabled data sharing system , ” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain ( Blockchain ) . IEEE , 2021 , pp . 530 – 537 . [ 6 ] H . Mahmud and T . Rahman , “An application of blockchain to securely acquire , diagnose and share clinical data through smartphone , ” Peer - to - Peer Networking and Applications , vol . 14 , no . 6 , pp . 3758 – 3777 , 2021 . [ 7 ] C . H . Liu , Q . Lin , and S . Wen , “Blockchain - enabled data collection and sharing for industrial iot with deep reinforcement learning , ” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics , vol . 15 , no . 6 , pp . 3516 – 3526 , 2018 . [ 8 ] Y . Lu , X . Huang , Y . Dai , S . Maharjan , and Y . Zhang , “Blockchain and federated learning for privacy - preserved data sharing in industrial iot , ” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics , vol . 16 , no . 6 , pp . 4177 – 4186 , 2019 . [ 9 ] T . Cai , H . Lin , W . Chen , Z . Zheng , and Y . Yu , “Efﬁcient blockchain - empowered data sharing incentive scheme for internet of things . ” Inter - national Journal of Software & Informatics , vol . 11 , no . 3 , 2021 . [ 10 ] D . Reijsbergen , A . Maw , T . T . A . Dinh , W . - T . Li , and C . Yuen , “Securing smart grids through an incentive mechanism for blockchain - based data sharing , ” in Proceedings of the Twelveth ACM Conference on Data and Application Security and Privacy , 2022 , pp . 191 – 202 . [ 11 ] Q . Wang , S . Xu , D . Chen , and Y . Tang , “Research on smart contract incentive mechanism oriented to sci - tech services data sharing strategy , ” Journal of Intelligence , vol . 40 , no . 10 , pp . 157 – 165 , 2021 . [ 12 ] B . Zhang , Y . Guo , Z . Wang , and K . Hu , “Research on data sharing mechanism based on smart contract , ” Computer Engineering , pp . 1 – 15 , 2022 . [ 13 ] M . Shen , J . Duan , L . Zhu , J . Zhang , X . Du , and M . Guizani , “Blockchain - based incentives for secure and collaborative data sharing in multiple clouds , ” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications , vol . 38 , no . 6 , pp . 1229 – 1241 , 2020 . [ 14 ] A . Kiayias and A . - P . Stouka , “Coalition - safe equilibria with virtual payoffs , ” in Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Conference on Advances in Financial Technologies , 2021 , pp . 71 – 85 . [ 15 ] A . Vera - Rivera , A . Refaey , and E . Hossain , “Blockchain - based collabo - rative task ofﬂoading in mec : A hyperledger fabric framework , ” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops ( ICC Workshops ) . IEEE , 2021 , pp . 1 – 6 . [ 16 ] M . S . Safaei , S . Ghanbari , Z . Umarova , and Z . Iztayev , “A security model based on blockchain smart contracts for improve authentication on the internet of things , ” 2020 . [ 17 ] J . Smith and G . R . Price , “The logic of animal conﬂict , ” Nature , vol . 246 , no . 5427 , pp . 15 – 18 , 1973 . [ 18 ] P . D . Taylor and L . B . Jonker , “Evolutionary stable strategies and game dynamics , ” Mathematical biosciences , vol . 40 , no . 1 - 2 , pp . 145 – 156 , 1978 . 1996 Authorized licensed use limited to the terms of the applicable license agreement with IEEE . Restrictions apply .