The Design and Realisation of the myExperiment Virtual Research Environment for Social Sharing of Workﬂows David De Roure a Carole Goble b Robert Stevens b a University of Southampton , UK b The University of Manchester , UK Abstract Many scientiﬁc workﬂow systems have been developed and are serving to beneﬁt science . Here we look beyond individual systems and suggest that the full scientiﬁc potential of workﬂows will be achieved through mechanisms for sharing and col - laboration empowering the scientist to spread their experimental protocols and to beneﬁt from the protocols of others . To facilitate this process we have designed and built the my Experiment Virtual Research Environment for collaboration and shar - ing of workﬂows and experiments . my Experiment is distinctive in that it supports workﬂow sharing for multiple workﬂow systems and adopts a social web approach . Key words : Scientiﬁc Workﬂow , Workﬂow Management , Virtual Research Environment , Collaborative Computing , Taverna Workﬂow Workbench 1 Introduction Scientiﬁc workﬂows are attracting considerable attention in the community . In - creasingly they support scientists in advancing research through in silico exper - imentation , while the workﬂow systems themselves are the subject of ongoing research and development [ 19 ] . The National Science Foundation Workshop on the Challenges of Scientiﬁc Workﬂows identiﬁed the potential for scientiﬁc advance as workﬂow systems address more sophisticated requirements and as workﬂows are created through collaborative design processes involving many scientists across disciplines [ 3 ] . Rather than looking at the application or ma - chinery of workﬂow systems , it is the dimension of collaboration and sharing that is the focus of this paper . Understanding the whole lifecycle of the workﬂow design , prototyping , pro - duction , management , publication and discovery is fundamental to developing Preprint submitted to Elsevier 13 November 2007 systems that support the scientists work and not just the workﬂows execution . Supporting that lifecycle can be the factor that means a workﬂow approach is adopted or not . Workﬂow design is challenging and labour - intensive , and reusing a body of prior designs through registries or catalogues is highly de - sirable [ 4 , 11 , 20 ] . Reuse is a particular challenge when scientists are outside a predeﬁned Virtual Organisation or enterprise . These are individuals or small groups , decoupled from each other and acting independently , who are seek - ing workﬂows that cover processes outside their expertise from a common pool of components . This latter point arises when workﬂows are shared across discipline boundaries and when inexperienced scientists need to leverage the expertise of others . In this paper we present the design of the my Experiment Virtual Research En - vironment for collaboration and sharing of experiments [ 12 ] , which aims to pro - vide a workﬂow bazaar for any workﬂow management system , and we describe the realisation of the design using a Web 2 . 0 approach . While individual work - ﬂow systems may provide workﬂow repository mechanisms , my Experiment is distinctive in that it supports sharing of workﬂows from multiple systems and addresses this from a social perspective . In Section 2 we discuss the use of workﬂows for science , the power of workﬂows as ﬁrst class citizens , and the requirements for sharing . This is followed in Section 3 by a discussion of the my Experiment design . Section 4 discusses the construction of my Experiment . We close in Section 5 with discussion . 2 Scientiﬁc Workﬂows There are many workﬂow systems available we found over 75 after conducting an informal search . These systems vary in many respects : e . g . who uses them , what resources they operate over , whether the systems are open or closed , how workﬂows are expressed ( e . g . how control ﬂow is handled ) , how interactive they are , when and how tasks are allocated to resources , and how exceptions are handled ; see [ 19 ] for a comprehensive discussion . Our focus here is on scientiﬁc workﬂows which are near the application level rather than those further down in the infrastructure ; i . e . we are interested in composing scientiﬁc applications and components using workﬂows , over a service oriented infrastructure ( which may include Grid services ) . These are the workﬂows which are close to the scientist , or indeed the researcher whatever their domain . We also note the distinction between workﬂow templates and workﬂow instances : the former describes the steps and order of the process without identifying particular end points of services ( or codes ) , while the workﬂow instance binds in the concrete executions [ 4 ] . In this paper , workﬂow refers to both . 2 2 . 1 The workﬂow as a ﬁrst class citizen One immediate attraction of workﬂows which encourages their uptake is the easing of the burden of repetitive manual work . However , we suggest that the key feature for scientiﬁc advancement is reuse . Workﬂow descriptions are not simply digital data objects like many other assets of e - Science , but rather they actually capture pieces of scientiﬁc process they are valuable knowledge assets in their own right , capturing valuable know - how that is otherwise often tacit [ 21 ] . Reuse is eﬀective at multiple levels : the scientist reuses a workﬂow with diﬀerent parameters and data , and may modify the workﬂow , as part of the routine of their daily scientiﬁc work ; workﬂows can be shared with other scientists conducting similar work , so they provide a means of codifying , sharing and thus spreading the workﬂow designers practice ; and workﬂows , workﬂow fragments and workﬂow patterns can be reused to support science outside their initial application . The latter point illustrates the tremendous potential for new scientiﬁc ad - vance . An example of this is a workﬂow used to help identify genes involved in tolerance to Trypanosomiasis in east African cattle [ 7 ] . The same workﬂow was reused over a new dataset to identify the biological pathways implicated in the ability for mice to expel the Trichuris muris parasite ( a parasite model of the human parasite Trichuris trichuria ) . This reuse was made easier by the explicit , high - level nature of the workﬂow that describes the analytical protocol . Workﬂows bring challenges too . Realistic workﬂows require skill to produce so they can be diﬃcult and expensive to develop . Consequently , workﬂow developers need development assistance , and prefer not to start from scratch . Furthermore it is easy for the reuse of a workﬂow to be conﬁned to the project in which it was conceived . In the Trypanosomiasis example , the barrier to this reuse was how the knowledge about the workﬂow could be spread to the scientists with the potential need . In this case it was word of mouth within one institution ; this barrier needs to be overcome . So , we have a situation of workﬂows as reusable knowledge commodities , but with potential barriers to the exchange and propagation of those scientiﬁc ideas that are captured as workﬂows [ 8 ] . Signiﬁcantly , there is more to a workﬂow than a declaration of a process . An individual workﬂow description may take the form of an XML ﬁle , but these do not sit in isolation . We identify a range of properties that are factors in guiding workﬂow reuse , including : descriptions of its function and purpose ; documentation about the services with which it has been used , with example input and output data , and design explanations ; provenance , including its ver - sion history and origins ; reputation and use within the community ; ownership 3 and permissions constraints ; quality , whether it is reviewed and still works ; and dependencies on other workﬂows , components and data types . Workﬂows also enable us to record the provenance of the data resulting from their en - actment , and logs of service invocations from workﬂow runs can inform later decisions about service use . By binding workﬂows with this kind of information , we provide a basis for workﬂows to be trusted , interpreted unambiguously and reused accurately . But like the workﬂows themselves , the associated information is currently often conﬁned to the system from which it originated and thus is not reusable as a useful commodity in its own right . 2 . 2 Sharing workﬂows It is apparent then that we can view workﬂows as potential commodities , as valuable ﬁrst class assets in their own right , to be pooled and shared , traded and reused , within communities and across communities , to propagate like memes . Workﬂows themselves can be the subject of peer review . Furthermore we can conceive of packs of workﬂows for certain topics , and of workﬂow pat - tern books new structures above the level of the individual workﬂow . We call this perspective of the interacting data , services , workﬂow and their metadata within a scientiﬁc environment the workﬂow ecosystem and we suggest that by understanding and enabling this we can unlock the broader scientiﬁc potential of workﬂow systems . Workﬂow management systems already provide basic sharing mechanisms , through repository stores for workﬂows developed as part of projects or com - munities . For example , the Kepler Actor Repository is an LDAP - based direc - tory for the remote storage , query and retrieval of actors ( processes ) and other workﬂow components [ 11 ] and the SCEC / CME workﬂow system has compo - nent and workﬂow libraries annotated with ontologies [ 13 ] . These follow the tradition of cataloguing scripting libraries and codes . Inforsenses online Cus - tomer Hub [ 10 ] is a repository for their users to share best practices and leverage community knowledge potentially across projects . We are taking a more social approach : we believe that the key to sharing is to recognise the use of workﬂows by a community of scientists . This acknowl - edges a central fact , sometimes neglected , that the lifecycle of the workﬂows is coupled with the process of science that the human system of workﬂow use is coupled to the digital system of workﬂows . The more workﬂows , the more users and the more invocations then the more evidence there is to assist in selecting a workﬂow . The rise of harnessing the Collective Intelligence of the Web , the so - called Socio - Web and now the Social Grid [ 9 ] , has dramatically reminded us 4 that it is people who generate and share knowledge and resources , and people who create network eﬀects in communities . Blogs and wikis , shared tagging services , instant messaging , social networks and semantic descriptions of data relationships are ﬂourishing . Within the Scientiﬁc community we have exam - ples : OpenWetWare , Connotea , PLoS on Facebook , etc . ( see corresponding . org Web Sites and facebook . com ) . By mining the sharing behaviour between users within such a community we can provide recommendations for use . By using the structure and interactions between users and workﬂow tools we can identify what is considered to be of greater value to users . Provenance information helps track down workﬂows through their use in content syndication and aggregation . 2 . 3 Workﬂow Systems and Communities Scientiﬁc workﬂow systems with signiﬁcant deployment include the Taverna workﬂow workbench [ 17 ] , Kepler [ 11 ] , Triana [ 19 ] and Pegasus [ 4 ] . Taverna is the exemplar workﬂow system in this paper . Developed by the my Grid project [ 14 ] , Taverna is used extensively across a range of Life Science problems : gene and protein annotation ; proteomics , phylogeny and phenotypical studies ; mi - croarray data analysis and medical image analysis ; high throughput screening of chemical compounds and clinical statistical analysis . Importantly , Taverna has been designed to operate in the open wild world of bioinformatics . Rather than large scale , closed collaborations which own resources , Taverna is used to enable individual scientists to access the many open resources available in the cloud , i . e . out on the Web and not necessarily within their enterprise . Many of the services are expected to be owned by parties other than those using them in a workﬂow . In practice they are volatile , weakly described and there is no contract in place to ensure quality of service ; they have not been designed to work together , and they adhere to no common type system . Consequently , they are highly heterogeneous . By compensating for these demands [ 21 ] , Taverna has made , at the time of writing , over 3500 bioinformatics orientated operations available to its users . This has been a major incentive to adoption . This openness also means that Taverna is not tied exclusively to the bioinformatics domain any services can be incorporated into its workﬂows . By way of comparison , the lifecycle of workﬂows in the Pegasus system has also been the subject of study [ 4 ] . Pegasus has more of a computational and Grid emphasis . It maps from workﬂow instances to executable workﬂows , au - tomatically identifying physical locations for workﬂow components and data and ﬁnding appropriate resources to execute the components ; it reuses exist - 5 ing data products where applicable . Pegasus is used within large scale col - laborations and big projects and is perhaps more typical of e - Science and grid activities , while Taverna gives an interesting insight into another part of the scientiﬁc workﬂow ecosystem it is being used by many scientists on their personal projects , constituting a distributed , disconnected community of users who are also the developers of the workﬂows . While e - Science has often focused on specialist early - adopter scientists and large scale collabora - tive projects , Taverna is used by the long tail of researchers doing everyday science . Taverna provides a signiﬁcant case study for our work because its distributed , decoupled community is already beginning to ﬁnd new mechanisms for sharing workﬂows , including for example Websites and Wikis . Through Taverna we can address the decoupled community of one workﬂow system , and from this learn how to work with other workﬂow systems and their communities in a similar way we plan to do this next with Triana and Kepler . Ultimately we envisage that scientists will transcend individual systems , ﬁnding workﬂows and experiments that they can run across multiple systems . 2 . 4 Sharing issues Intuitively , the sharing we propose is about scientists giving away their know - how . Why would a scientist release such valuable commodities to the wider community ? Why would scientists share ? However , this is the nature of the established scholarly knowledge cycle . The eﬃcient unfolding of new knowl - edge in science rests on a set of idealised institutional norms , one of which is the sharing of knowledge among scientists [ 22 ] . The citing of published mate - rial is a form of reuse . Citing a scientists paper is almost as valuable as the publication itself . By sharing or publishing a workﬂow , with the appropriate attribution , a scientist can allow their work to be reused with the concomitant spread of their scientiﬁc reputation their workﬂow is , in eﬀect , being cited . It is clear then that a scientist must be allowed entry at any point in the exper - imental or scholarly lifecycle , over and above de novo workﬂow construction . Furthermore there are two sets of social issues to be addressed : The individual : Attribution of scholarly workif scientists are to share intel - lectual property then the commodity needs to carry appropriate attribution . This is the means by which reputation is propagated through the commu - nity . The community : Recommendation of workﬂow , services , etc . is a vital part of enabling sharing through discovery by other scientists ; the ability to re - view and comment is an inherent part of recommendation ; communication 6 of know - how about running or using an experiment is part of establishing and disseminating best practice . 3 The design of my Experiment To address and explore these issues , and to support a growing and distributed user base of workﬂow developers , we have designed and developed a Virtual Research Environment to support scientists using workﬂows , letting them con - centrate on being scientists and not programmers . We call this my Experiment [ 12 ] . We envisage : a gossip shop to share and discuss workﬂows and their related scientiﬁc objects , regardless of the workﬂow system ; a bazaar for shar - ing , re - using and repurposing workﬂows ; a gateway to other established en - vironments , for example : depositing into data repositories and journals ; and a platform to launch workﬂows , whatever their system . We hope that our scientists will use whatever workﬂow is appropriate for their applications a kind of workﬂow mashing . In comparison with existing workﬂow repositories , my Experiment goes the next step : it aims to cross project , community and product boundaries ; it emphasises social networking around the workﬂows ; it gateways to other environments ; and it forms the foundation of a personal or laboratory workbench . 3 . 1 Design approach As a strategy for addressing the social issues , inspiration is drawn from the Web 2 . 0 community , from systems such as Facebook , MySpace and Amazon ( see the corresponding . com sites ) , rather than one of conventional scientiﬁc portals this is a deliberate step into the world of the next generation of scien - tists . The Web 2 . 0 design patterns [ 16 ] apply as follows : • The Long Tail our target users are not just the specialist e - Scientists har - nessing computing resources to tackle major scientiﬁc breakthroughs , but also the large number of scientists conducting the routine processes of sci - ence on a daily basis . • Data is the Next Intel Inside our users are focused on data , and workﬂows themselves are the data of my Experiment and provide its unique value ; de - velopers too can access our data through simple APIs . • Users Add Value it must be easy to ﬁnd workﬂows and also useful and straightforward to share workﬂows and add workﬂows and other scientiﬁc assets to the pool . • Network Eﬀects by Default aggregating data as a side - eﬀect of using the Virtual Research Environment , for example the numbers of times workﬂows 7 and services are used , enables the community to beneﬁt from usage without explicitly uploading new content . • Some Rights Reserved users require protection as well as sharing , but the environment must be designed for maximum ease of sharing to achieve col - lective beneﬁts workﬂows are “hackable” and “remixable” . Initiatives such as Science Commons provide a useful context for this . This has proved to be one of the more challenging aspects of the design . • The Perpetual Beta we are building a collection of online services which will continually evolve through the actions of , and in response to , its users . • Cooperate , Don’t Control by providing a network of cooperating data ser - vices with simple interfaces which make it easy to work with content , we are both providing services and reusing the service of others . We aim to support lightweight programming models for ease of integration in loosely coupled systems . • Software Above the Level of a Single Device The current model of a workﬂow client running on the scientists desktop PC or laptop is evolving into a web - based environment being available through a variety of interfaces and supporting workﬂow execution . 3 . 2 Key design decisions my Experiment was designed through a series of design and scoping workshops with end - users , starting with life sciences and chemists , and by embedding engieners within the work environment of users . The outcomes of our discus - sion on key dimensions are presented in [ 2 ] . Below we summarise three of the dimensions to illustrate our design approach in action . Federation . We have chosen to build a Web site which can store workﬂows , thus providing a standalone solution , and which can also participate in a federated repository model . This is achieved through metadata harvesting and repository interoperability protocols such as the Open Archives Initia - tive ( OAI ) [ 18 ] , and builds on the experience of the publishing ethos of the CombeChem project [ 20 ] and using OAI with scientiﬁc data in eBank - UK [ 6 ] ( metadata and publishing ) . Individuals and labs are free to install their own my Experiment instances and link them up into the federation model as they wish . By providing a public site we support everyday science and provide community focus , and others can use our services . Scientists gain immediate beneﬁt from available workﬂows . Interface . As well as federating the back end of my Experiment , we break out my Experiment functionality through simple APIs so that it can be brought to the user through existing interfaces . For example , people who are already using Wikis can access my Experiment functions through plugins a workﬂow on a Wiki page can be executed and new pages generated to record this . In 8 another example the interface might not make the workﬂows visible at all but simple provide a control panel for executing pre - installed workﬂows . We also envisage my Experiment add - ons for sites such as Facebook , and Google Gadgets . Experiment objects . We have focused on workﬂows , but we know there is an immediate need also to work with collections of workﬂows and to asso - ciate workﬂows with other information . More generally , the my Experiment concept is also about sharing other digital objects in order to share experi - ments , which include data , results , provenance information , tags , associated documentation , etc . To address this we have designed a simple way of com - posing dispersed items into an Encapsulated my Experiment Object ( EMO ) by encapsulated we refer to the snapshotting of a particular set of resources . We aim to adopt a model which is consistent with scientiﬁc practice and also with the linked data model of the Web . The my Experiment environment then becomes a way of working with EMOs and of providing experiment object services for others to use . 4 Realisation The realisation of my Experiment has adopted a highly user - centric approach consistent with the notion of perpetual beta . Rather than a single progres - sion of requirements capture , design , build and test , we delivered an early system which provided the mechanism for requirements capture , followed by a continuous cycle of evolution in response to user needs . As a principle , the my Experiment development team makes no decisions about the user interac - tion model without direct user consultation . The closed beta system was released three months from the project start and provided basic social networking facilities , serving an important role in cap - turing both community attention and requirements . While this was in use , the development team designed a new codebase which would be suﬃciently general to support future trials . The RESTful API was released at six months and immediately attracted developers ( soon outnumbering the my Experiment development team ) and the creation of Google Gadgets . With particular em - phasis on support of ownership , attribution and sharing , the open beta was released at eight months into the project after user trials . Both systems use Ruby on Rails . The development team then moved onto workﬂow enactment and EMO support . A combination of methods is in use for ongoing requirements gathering and evaluation . These have been selected for their complementary strengths and include : heuristic evaluation [ 15 ] for early and rapid detection of basic us - ability problems ; questionnaires to proﬁle the user population , solicit their 9 requirements and feedback ; semi - structured interviews to probe more deeply user attitudes towards , and experiences of , my Experiment ; and ethnographic studies [ 1 ] to observe my Experiment in everyday use to reveal whether and how people actually ﬁnd a role for it in their work . User feedback on the closed beta was positive and brought to the fore the diﬀerent requirements of a social web site supporting scientists . The distinctive features of the open beta which have taken it beyond other sites are the sharing and attribution model , and of course the ability for anyone to download and use it . EMOs are being implemented as a highly grounded version of the emerging OAI - ORE ( Object Reuse and Exchange ) standard . At some stage in their lifecycle the constituent parts of an EMO may all be web - based and can be represented as a map of web resources , but we also need to support oﬄine working , intermittent availability and versioning . This is reﬂected in the re - source maps ( or manifests ) represented in EMO ﬁles . A standalone enactor has been developed for Taverna workﬂows , enabling users in a laboratory to execute workﬂows through the my Experiment interface or other interfaces built upon it . Triana is also being integrated . Increasingly we anticipate the use of Web - based interfaces as the front end to workﬂow systems . my Experiment is currently in use by life scientists and chemists . The closed beta generated signiﬁcant interest in the community , and the user interaction model has evolved signiﬁcantly since that release , particularly with respect to attribution , ownership and sharing exactly the areas that were identiﬁed as issues . Over the coming months we will be working with new communities including social sciences and music , and integrating my Experiment behind a variety of new interfaces . 5 Discussion We have made the case for a mechanism for sharing workﬂows in order to realise their scientiﬁc potential , and have identiﬁed the issues in achieving this . Enabling incentive models for sharing within a community of practice and supporting an emergent model of sharing is a challenge . The Virtual Or - ganisations of Grid computing often attempt to achieve a similar objective , although they are typically centred on a common technically deﬁned prob - lem and do not focus on social aspects that might involve diﬀerent incentive structures . To rise to this challenge we have created my Experiment , which enables sharing of workﬂows in multiple workﬂow systems and approaches this from a social 10 perspective , adopting Web 2 . 0 techniques . Fundamentally it is the simplicity of Web 2 . 0 for users and developers which is attractive . e - Science is diﬃcult workﬂows and Web 2 . 0 both make it easier . Through creating my Experiment we are eﬀectively conducting our own experi - ment we are exploring the social issues introduced in section 2 , and the sharing behaviours of research communities across multiple domains . my Experiment demonstrates a new way of facilitating science by reuse of scientiﬁc assets through community participation . Acknowledgements Thanks to the my Experiment , my Grid and CombeChem teams , the Taverna user community ( especially Andy Brass , Paul Fisher and Marco Roos ) , Bertram Ludascher , Ian Taylor and Ewa Deelman . This work is funded by JISC VRE2 ( 04 / 06 ) with additional support through EPSRC grants EP / D044324 / 1 , EP / C536444 / 1 and EP / C008863 / 1 and the assistance of the National Centre for e - Social Sci - ence . References ( 1 ) Anderson , R . J . ( 1994 ) . Representations and requirements : The value of ethnography in system design . Human - Computer Interaction , 9 , 2 , 151 - 182 . ( 2 ) De Roure , D . and Goble , C . A . myExperiment - A Web 2 . 0 Virtual Re - search Environment . In International Workshop on Virtual Research En - vironments and Collaborative Work Environments , NeSC , Edinburgh , UK . May 2007 . ( 3 ) Deelman , E . and Gil , Y . ( eds ) NSF Workshop on the Workshop on the Challenges of Scientiﬁc Workﬂows , May 2006 . See http : / / www . isi . edu / nsf . workﬂows06 ( 4 ) Deelman E , Gil Y . ( 2006 ) ) Managing Large - Scale Scientiﬁc Workﬂows in Distributed Environments : Experiences and Challenges , Workﬂows in e - Science , e - Science 2006 , Amsterdam , Dec 2006 ( 5 ) Deelman , E . , Singh , G . et al . Pegasus : a Framework for Mapping Complex Scientiﬁc Workﬂows onto Distributed Systems , Scientiﬁc Programming Journal , Vol 13 ( 3 ) , 2005 , Pages 219 - 237 ( 6 ) Duke , M . Day , M . , Heery , R . , Carr , L . A . and Coles , S . J . Enhancing ac - cess to research data : the challenge of crystallography , JCDL 2005 Digital Libraries : Cyberinfrastructure for Research and Education , Denver , Col - orado , USA June 7 - 11 , 2005 . ( 7 ) Fisher , P . , Hedeler , C . , Wolstencroft , K . , Hulme , H . , Noyes , H . , Kemp , S . , 11 Stevens , R . , Brass , A . ( 2007 ) A systematic strategy for large - scale analy - sis of genotype phenotype correlations : identiﬁcation of candidate genes involved in African trypanosomiasis . Nucleic Acids Res . 35 ( 16 ) : 5625 - 33 . ( 8 ) Goderis , A . , Sattler , U . , Lord , P . and Goble , C . A . Seven bottlenecks to workﬂow reuse and repurposing . In Fourth International Semantic Web Conference ( ISWC 2005 ) , volume 3792 , pages 323 - 337 , Galway , Ireland , 2005 . ( 9 ) Hey , A . J . G . The Social Grid , Presentation at Open Grid forum 20 , Manch - ester UK , May 2007 . ( 10 ) Inforsense Web Site http : / / www . chub . inforsense . com ( 11 ) Kepler Web Site http : / / kepler - project . org / ( 12 ) Goble , C . A . and De Roure , D . myExperiment : social networking for workﬂow - using e - scientists , WORKS ’07 : Proceedings of the 2nd work - shop on Workﬂows in support of large - scale science ( 2007 ) pp : 1 - 2 ( 13 ) Maechling , P . et al , / Simplifying Construction of Complex Workﬂows for Non - Expert Users of the Southern California Earthquake Center Com - munity Modeling Environment / SIGMOD Record , Vol . 34 , No . 3 , Sept . 2005 pp 24 - 30 . ( 14 ) myGrid Web Site http : / / www . mygrid . org . uk / ( 15 ) Nielsen , J . ( 1994 ) . Heuristic Evaluation . In Jakob Nielsen and Robert L . Mack , editors , Usability Inspection Methods . John Wiley and Sons , Inc . ( 16 ) O’Reilly , T . What Is Web 2 . 0 . Design Patterns and Business Models for the Next Generation of Software . http : / / www . oreillynet . com / pub / a / oreilly / tim / news / 2005 / 09 / 30 / what - is - web - 20 . html ( 17 ) Oinn , T et al . ( 2006 ) . Taverna : lessons in creating a workﬂow environ - ment for the life sciences . Concurrency and Computation : Practice & Experience 18 , 1067 - 1100 . ( 18 ) Open Archives Initiative Web Site http : / / www . openarchives . org / ( 19 ) Taylor I , Deelman E , Gannon D , and Shield M ( Eds . ) Workﬂows for e - Science , Springer 2006 ( 20 ) Taylor , K . , Gledhill , R . , Essex , J . W . , Frey , J . G . , Harris , S . W . and De Roure , D . ( 2005 ) A Semantic Datagrid for Combinatorial Chemistry . In Proceedings of The 6th IEEE / ACM International Workshop on Grid Computing , pp . 148 - 155 , Seattle . ( 21 ) Wroe C , Goble CA , Goderis A et al Recycling workﬂows and services through discovery and reuse Concurrency and Computation : Practice and Experience 19 ( 2 ) pp : 181 - 194 , February 2007 ( 22 ) Ziman , J . M . ( 1968 ) Public knowledge : An essay concerning the social dimensions of science . ( London : Cambridge University Press ) . 12