tm ~ - " S ' z ~ ELSEVIER Information & Management 30 ( 1996 ) 281 - 289 Research The effects of a group decision support system on culturally diverse and culturally homogeneous group decision making Bonnie Daily a ' * , Art Whatley b , Steven R . Ash c and Robert L . Steiner a aDepartment of Management , New Mexico State University , Las Cruces , NM 88003 - 0001 , USA bSchool of Business , Hawaii Pacific University , Honolulu , HI 96813 - 2713 , USA CDepartment of Business Administration , Sul Ross State University , Uvalede , TX 78801 - 6907 , USA dDepartment of Economics ~ International Business and University Statistics Center , New Mexico State University , Las Cruces , NM 88003 - 0001 , USA Abstract Considerable research has been conducted over the last decade on the effects of using Group Decision Support Systems ( GDSS ) in group decision making . Studies have examined the influence of GDSS on such variables as group task , size , quality of decision , and satisfaction with the process . However , only a few studies have focused on the use of GDSS and its interaction with group composition . This study compared the effects of group decision making , both with and without GDSS technology , on culturally diverse and homogeneous groups . Group performance was measured by the number of non - redundant , realistic ideas and the quality of solution produced in response to posed problems . The GDSS used in the study was Vision Quest . Groups using it , regardless of cultural make up , developed a significantly higher number of non - redundant , realistic ideas than groups that did not . Furthermore , among groups using the GDSS , culturally diverse groups produced a significantly higher number of non - redundant , realistic ideas than homogeneous groups that used the GDSS . Implications for diversity management and group support research are suggested . Keywords : Cultural diversity ; Electronic meetings ; Ethnic groups ; Group decision making ; Group problem solving ; Group decision support systems ; GDSS ; Multi cultural groups ; Small groups 1 . Introduction Cultural diversity is a growing phenomenon in American businesses and organizations . Recent immigrants as well as growing ethnic populations are increasing cultural diversity in the workforce * Corresponding author : Dr . Bonnie Daily , Department of Manage - ment , Box 3DJ , New Mexico State University , Las Cruces , New Mexico , 88003 - 0001 . Voice : ( 505 ) 646 - 2015 ; Fax : ( 505 ) 646 - 1372 ; e - mail : bdaily @ nmsu . edu . 0378 - 7206 / 96 / $ 15 . 00 © 1996 Elsevier Science B . V . All rights reserved PII S0378 - 7206 ( 96 ) 01062 - 2 6 , 16 and research has suggested there is a corresponding effect on the workplace environment 7 , 15 , 20 . In addition , many organizations are restructuring in response to economic demands and greater competi - tion . Thus , the role of groups and teams in businesses is assuming greater significance as organizations downsize and flatten their hierarchial structure 4 . With the growing need for teams , it is imperative that researchers address how decision making processes can be improved in both culturally homogeneous and diverse groups . 282 B . Daily et al . / lnformation & Management 30 ( 1996 ) 281 - 289 However , few empirical studies have been con - ducted on how to improve the dynamics associated with a diverse workforce ; in particular , little research has been done on the decision making performance of diverse groups . In the papers that are available , there is considerable debate over whether cultural diversity improves group performance 25 or suppresses it 10 , 261 . Culturally diverse groups are often hindered by behavioral constraints posed by racial discrimination , different cultural norms , and language barriers . These hindrances may lead to group process losses , includ - ing difficulty in communication , increased time for decision and reduction in individual participation 1 . Diverse groups might be assisted by Group Decision Support Systems ( GDSS ) , computer - based systems that facilitate group interaction , and decision making through individual idea generation and structured group idea evaluation . Many GDSS allow for simultaneous comment production , automated recording of comments , and anonymity . Additionally , a few recently developed GDSS provide multilingual interfaces that automatically translate comments to an individual ' s native language 2 . Research on GDSS has suggested that the anonymity and structure of these systems generally promote a positive effect on the number of ideas 12 , 18 and quality of solutions achieved in group decision making 21 , 36 . Therefore a GDSS may be a suitable tool to promote performance in groups of varying cultural composition . This paper presents empirical research on the effects of group decision making , both with and without GDSS technology , on culturally diverse and homogeneous groups . The GDSS used in the study was Vision Quest 33 . It pro - vides group members anonymity , parallel commu - nication , automated recording of meeting comments , and various idea rating and ranking capabilities . 2 . Culturally diverse groups issues , greater interpersonal conflicts , and miscom - munication in the workplace . Yet , many researchers have hypothesized that culturally diverse groups may produce greater innovation , creativity and higher quality solutions than homogeneous groups on tasks that require a range of thought and critical analysis . However , reaping these benefits requires overcoming the existing cultural barriers 1 , 7 . Successful multicultural interaction requires sig - nificant management , training and time to induce the process skills necessary for group decision making 8 . Two recent studies on cultural diversity examine how diverse group performance can be enhanced . Watson et al . 34 studied culturally diverse and homogeneous group performance over a period of 17 weeks ( performance was specified in terms of quality of group solutions to complex problem - solving tasks ) . After each group session group members were given feedback on performance and decision making training . The study concluded that , in initial group interactions , culturally diverse groups suffered in performance when compared to homogeneous groups ; but over time with aid through training and feedback , diverse groups developed process skills that produced performance equivalent to homoge - neous groups . Additionally , diverse groups over time surpassed homogenous groups in the number of alternatives generated . In another study by Kirch - meyer and Cohen 19 constructive conflict was used to improve diverse group performance . While the research found that ethnic minorities contributed considerably less to decisions , they also noted that an increasing use of constructive conflict led to more contributions . These studies suggest that it is possible to structure diverse groups in ways that will promote perfor - mance . Current research on the management of culturally diverse groups points towards developing ways to improve heterogenous group skills , pro - cesses , and performance . Cultural barriers between individuals may actually amplify ambiguity , complexity , and confusion in group decision making . Diverse groups are particu - larly weak in convergent processes thus making it difficult to reach a single agreement . These problems often lead to greater costs in employee attendance 3 . GDSS Research GDSS have been defined as interactive computer integrated systems that bring together decision science techniques with computer communication to promote group interaction structure and enhance B . Daily et al . / Information & Management 30 ( 1996 ) 281 - 289 283 solutions to groups problems 9 . Many GDSS include structured formats that allow for group discussion through a series of networked PCS with facilities for alternative idea generation and voting procedures . GDSS are specifically structured to ease group decision making and have been described as " . . designed to minimize or overcome process losses of manual meetings , while seeking to enhance process gains . " 30 . Most GDSS provide electronic brainstorming which allows participants to concurrently enter ideas into a networked computer system with instantaneous viewing of all the ideas from each of the participants ' monitors . Many GDSS also provide some form of idea evaluation through voting , ranking or weighted scoring . These activities are often conducted in an anonymous fashion , with participants viewing ideas and evaluations without being able to associate a person with a comment or vote . Considerable research has been conducted on GDSS and their impact on group performance . As noted by Rao and Jarvenpaa 24 the findings of these studies range from affirmative evaluations of the technology ' s impact 13 , 22 to the achievement of only moderate gains from GDSS in groups 3 , 14 , and with little , none or negative effects of GDSS 17 , 31 , 35 . Poole et al 23 give possible reasons for these discrepancies in the research on GDSS : ( 1 ) different physical setups of the technology ( i . e . , computer conferencing at a distance as opposed to a GDSS room where participants sit face - to - face ) ( 2 ) the different features of different GDSS packages and , ( 3 ) how the computer systems are used by the participants . Accordingly , the significance of a GDSS system resides in how it is used by participants and which features are accessed to promote the decision making process . Features of a GDSS that might be used by diverse groups include a structured agenda that focuses the group on the task and other anonymity features that allow the merit of one ' s idea to be evaluated independent of the person presenting the idea . 3 . 1 . Effects of GDDS on culturally diverse groups Much of the relevant research attempts to compare group processes and outcomes with and without technology . Some of the group factors cited as interacting with the GDSS technology include : the effects of anonymity , rate of idea generation , degree of member participation , and need for conflict management . Effects of anonymity on traditional group interac - tion have been well documented and include a sense of de - individuation or a losing of oneself in the group 11 . This use of anonymity often leads to a reduction of social and behavioral constraints which , in a traditional group setting may include a fear of social disapproval from group members concern for the presence of authority figures and a tendency for copying or agreeing with ideas of high status members 24 . In addition , culturally diverse groups also suffer from inter - ethnic tension 32 , miscom - munication via low predictability and low attraction 28 , and the presence of cultural biases 27 . Thus , it is not surprising that such groups would have more difficulty in group decision making . A GDSS system may therefore help provide a conducive environment by allowing anonymity and reducing behavioral constraints . Once freed from these , culturally diverse groups should be more productive than before . Research indicates that , generally , individuals in GDSS groups participate more than those in groups without GDSS support . If the GDSS can help reduce behavioral constraints in diverse groups , members should feel freer to participate without fear of criticism or reprisal , which would be heightened due to ingrained defense mechanisms from cultural attitudes , biases , and discrimination . Lessening of these fears should help participants achieve more equal participation . Hypothesis la : Groups that use a GDSS will generate a greater number of ideas than groups that do not use a GDSS . Hypothesis lb : Culturally diverse groups that use a GDSS will generate a greater number of ideas than culturally homogeneous groups that use a GDSS . Research on inter - group conflict ( interpersonal friction and tension ) suggests that conflict increases as communication and cohesiveness decline , particu - larly between group members that are dissimilar . A GDSS may help produce more productive conflict management . In 23 GDSS groups were found less likely to be caught up in high conflict than non - GDSS groups . The GDSS was capable of diffusing difficult 284 B . Daily et al . / Information & Management 30 ( 1996 ) 281 - 289 conflict situations by focusing the group ' s attention on the decision making process . It provided greater structure in two ways . First , groups put greater emphasis on written , as opposed to verbal , commu - nication which tends to de - politicize the process . Also , the technology kept the group focused on the task to be accomplished . If a GDSS can help diffuse inter - group conflict in culturally diverse groups , their productivity should increase . According to Triandis , Hall and Ewen 29 , when a process is implemented in a heterogenous group to reduce stress and communication problems , they are more creative than homogeneous groups . In a productive hetero - genous group a greater range of ideas will be provided with a wider critical base 5 . This should create a higher quality solution . Hypothesis 2a : Groups that use a GDSS will generate a higher quality solution to a posed problem than groups that do not use a GDSS . Hypothesis 2b : Culturally diverse groups that use a GDSS will generate a higher quality solution to a posed problem than culturally homogeneous groups that use a GDSS . 4 . Method 4 . 1 . Subjects The study involved participation of 53 subjects ( 29 women , 24 men ) . They consisted of undergraduate business students and MBA level students in a southwestern US university . Participant ages ranged from 21 to 56 , with a mean of 28 . Of these 94 % had some work experience , with a mean of 9 . 8 years . Classification of the subjects was as follows Hispa - nic - 17 , Anglo - - 33 and others which included non - English speaking countries - 3 . Of the Hispanic and other participants , 8 were raised outside the USA in non - English speaking countries . 4 . 2 . Procedure Students enrolled in a Work Groups in Organiza - tions and a Comparative International Management course were invited to join in a group decision making experiment for a participation grade . Students were assigned to groups based on their ethnic classification ; otherwise selection was random . Sub - jects were not aware that ethnicity was a factor in the experiments . There were 12 groups of 4 - 5 partici - pants . Six groups were culturally heterogenous . Two of the heterogenous groups were structured with 3 Hispanics and 2 Anglos . Three of the heterogenous groups were structured with 3 Hispanics and 1 other and 1 Anglo ; and one of the heterogenous groups was structured with 2 Hispanics and 2 Anglos . Six groups were culturally homogeneous and consisted solely of 4 Anglos per group . Each of the 12 groups participated in three experimental sessions , with each session held a month apart . All 12 groups remained intact with the same participants over the three experimental ses - sions . Half of the sessions used GDSS technology and half of the sessions did not use GDSS technology . Each group received a case problem to solve during each session . The cases involved three distinct campus problems including ; ( 1 ) expansion of campus parking , ( 2 ) expansion of the campus activities center , and ( 3 ) reduction of on - campus crime . The groups were instructed to take the position of a team of campus administrators and to brainstorm ideas on how to solve the problem and then evaluate the ideas to produce a realistic solution . Each session lasted one hour . The first five minutes were devoted to individually reading the general case instructions ; the next five minutes were devoted to individually reading the case problem . The following 45 minutes were dedicated to brainstorming ideas as a group and evaluating those ideas to reach a solution . The last five minutes were reserved for individually answering a post - experiment survey . Facilitators were present for all sessions , although interaction was limited . Facilitators were responsible for handing out instructions and cases and answering only questions concerning instructions , however , if a participant had difficulty in using the GDSS he / she could request assistance . Otherwise the facilitator was outside the decision making process . Two rooms were used for GDSS sessions . Each room had five PCS networked in a U - shaped setup . GDSS groups participated , primarily , by interacting through the software ; however , some groups simulta - neously used a combination of verbal discussion and computer interaction . Participants used the GDSS to rate their ideas . If a group decided to rate their ideas , B . Daily et al . / lnformation & Management 30 ( 1996 ) 281 - 289 285 the facilitator was called upon to activate the rating exercise . In the rating exercise an instruction screen prompted participants to rate their ideas on a scale of 1 - 10 , with 1 being a poor idea and 10 being a great idea . After participants individually rated all ideas , the mean and range for each idea were generated . Non - GDSS groups met in empty classrooms and participated primarily through discussion ; usually one person was delegated to list ideas presented on paper or a chalk board . Some non - GDSS groups also chose to rank ideas manually . of 0 . 86 on raw variables and an alpha of 0 . 92 on standardized variables . The inter - rater reliability for quality of final solution had an alpha of 0 . 71 on raw variables and 0 . 73 on standardized variables . These inter - rater reliabilities suggest reasonable levels of agreement , thus evaluators ' ratings were averaged for final measures on number of ideas and quality of solution . 5 . Results 4 . 3 . Measures 5 . 1 . Experimental Design Dependent variables examined in the experiment included : ( 1 ) number of non - redundant , realistic ideas produced for each case , and ( 2 ) quality of the final group solution produced for each case . The number of ideas and the final solution of all groups were typed in identical format for coding purposes . Four raters ( two management professors and two management Ph . D . candidates ) independently rated each groups ' number of ideas and final solution in a blind assessment . Raters first listed the number of non - redundant , realistic ideas each group produced . Then the raters assessed the quality of the final solution for each case for each group . The scale for quality of solution ranged from 1 = poor quality to 5 = high quality . The inter - rater reliability for the number of non - redundant , realistic ideas had an alpha Student groups were blocked according to section and month . Table 1 summarizes the application of " treatments " to the groups of students . Each section of students was composed of four experimental units ( two diverse work groups and two homogeneous work groups ) . Section 1 groups were given Case Study One during month one , Case Study Two during month two , and Case Study Three during month three . Students in section 2 were given the cases in order of two , three , and one . The case order for section 3 students was three , one , and two . The sequence of case studies was permuted over the sections , so that the order effect could be tested . An ANOVA on the order effect showed no statistical significance . Each section and month was composed of two groups receiving GDSS and two groups who did not . Table 1 Design of experiment Section Ethnic Group Month 1 Month 2 Month3 Case GDSS Case GDSS Case GDSS Dive ~ e A 1 Yes Homo B 1 No Diverse C 1 No Homo D 1 Yes 2 No 3 Yes 2 Yes 3 No 2 Yes 3 No 2 No 3 Yes Diverse E 2 Yes Homo F 2 No Dive ~ e G 2 No Homo H 2 Yes 3 No 1 Yes 3 Yes 1 No 3 Yes 1 No 3 No 1 Yes Diverse I 3 No Homo J 3 Yes Diverse K 3 Yes Homo L 3 No 1 Yes 2 No 1 No 2 Yes 1 No 2 Yes 1 Yes 2 No 286 B . Daily et al . / lnformation & Management 30 ( 1996 ) 281 - 289 Table 2 Analysis of variance on number of ideas and quality of solution Variable Mean S . D F Number of ideas Group Composition 5 . I a Homogenous 8 . 36 2 . 47 Diverse 10 . 76 5 . 37 Medium 19 b GDSS 11 . 81 4 . 25 non - GDSS 7 . 07 2 . 68 Group Composition a Medium 2 . 9 Quality of solution Group Composition 0 . 32 Homogenous 3 . 03 0 . 907 Diverse 2 . 88 0 . 523 Medium 0 . 07 GDSS 2 . 92 0 . 804 non - GDSS 2 . 98 0 . 677 Group composition a Medium 1 . 68 a p < 0 . 05 b p < 0 . 001 Also one homogeneous group and one diverse group received non - GDSS , and one homogeneous group and diverse group received GDSS . The design was therefore arranged so that the number of observations per treatment combination would be balanced . 5 . 2 . Analysis of Variance Table 3 Analysis of variance for differences between GDSS and non - GDSS groups by culture on number of ideas Variable Mean S . D F GDSS 9 . 6 a Homogenous 9 . 72 1 . 91 Diverse 13 . 90 4 . 99 non - GDSS 0 . 02 Homogenous 6 . 91 2 . 22 Diverse 7 . 25 3 . 28 a p < 0 . 01 An ANOVA on the quality of solution showed that none of the effects were statistically significant . Experimental design variables including month , section , and case were also tested for significance including interactions . Month and section were not statistically significant ; however , case was significant . The third case study regarding on - campus crime produced a significantly higher number of ideas than the two other cases ( F : 4 . 2 , p < 0 . 05 ) . However , this effect did not interact with any other factors and as such did not compromise the other significant findings . Table 2 summarizes the results of an ANOVA on the number of ideas and quality of solution . An ANOVA on the number of non - redundant , realistic ideas showed that two effects were statistically significant . In the use of the medium , as predicted , GDSS groups outperformed traditional groups on the number of ideas ( F = 19 , p < 0 . 001 ) , replicating pre - vious research findings 12 , 18 . On group composi - tion we also found that culturally diverse groups significantly outperformed culturally homogeneous groups on the number of ideas generated ( F : 5 . 1 , p < 0 . 05 ) . An interaction between the effects of cultural composition and medium was also noted ( F : 2 . 9 , p = 0 . 10 ) . Further analysis of this interaction revealed that culturally diverse groups using a GDSS produced a significantly higher number of ideas than culturally homogeneous groups that used a GDSS ( F : 9 . 6 , p < 0 . 05 ) . Table 3 lists the results for differ - ences between GDSS and non - GDSS groups by culture on number of ideas . 6 . Discussion The results suggest that a GDSS may offer a conducive environment for improving group decision making in both culturally homogeneous and diverse groups . We found that groups that used a GDSS produced a significantly higher number of non - redundant , realistic ideas than groups that did not use a GDSS , confirming hypothesis la . This finding is consistent with previous GDSS research and suggests that the structure and level of anonymity provided by a GDSS helps reduce behavioral constraints in groups and elicits a greater number of non - redundant , realistic ideas from participants . Apparently culturally diverse groups can provide a wider range of thought and greater number of alternatives to a posed problem than culturally homogeneous groups . In our study , culturally diverse groups significantly outperformed homogeneous groups on number of ideas generated . Further B . Daily et al . / lnformation & Management 30 ( 1996 ) 281 - 289 287 analysis of this outcome suggested culturally diverse groups produced a significantly higher number of ideas when using a GDSS than homogeneous groups . These findings confirmed hypothesis lb . In our study the impact of using a GDSS gave structure and increased participation in much the same way training and feedback improved alternative idea generation in the Watson et al research . The difference being that a GDSS may have immediate benefits to real - time group decision making . While previous experiments with GDSS have led to higher quality solutions we could not find any support for this hypothesis . The use of undergraduate and graduate business students does , to a degree , limit the scope of this research . Students cannot fully represent individuals in an ongoing work environment , although , the control achieved in a student study is greater than what can be achieved in a busy organizational setting . Additionally , the group results obtained from the simulations cannot actually be implemented and , as such , commitment to the decision process may have been weakened . However , 94 % of our student subjects had significant work experience , with a mean of 9 . 8 years . The small sample size of the study is also a limitation . Thus , implications drawn from this research should be viewed with caution . Further research with a larger sample size is necessary . Another limitation of the study was our inability to test the hypotheses on different GDSS programs . Different GDSS features provided by different packages may affect groups interactions to a greater or lesser degree than the program we used . In conclusion , the results of this study suggest that a GDSS may provide a level of anonymity and structure to group decision making that favorably affects both culturally homogeneous and culturally diverse groups . In addition , our findings suggest that culturally diverse groups using a GDSS surpassed the number of ideas generated by culturally homoge - neous groups also using a GDSS . American managers are leading an increasingly diverse workforce with a greater emphasis on teams and group decision making . Our study suggests that there is reason to believe that , if carefully managed , the benefits of a culturally diverse workforce can heavily outweigh the disadvantages . Acknowledgements This research was supported by a grant from Sandia National Laboratories , Quality Improvements Division , Albuquerque , New Mexico ; the Hewlett Packard Company ; and Collaborative Technologies Inc . , Dallas , Texas . We would also like to personally acknowledge the assistance and support of Charles Tapp , Director of Ethics , Sandia National Labs , New Mexico . References 1 Adler , N . J . , International Dimensions of Organizational Behavior , ( 2nd edn . ) PWS - Kent , Boston , MA . , 1991 . 2 Aiken , M . W . , Martin , J . S . , Paolillo , J . G . P . and Shirani , A . I . , " A group decision support system for multilingual groups " , Information and Management 26 , 1994 , 155 - 161 . 3 Applegate , L . M . , Konsynski , B . R . and Nunamaker , J . F . , " A group decision support system for idea generation and issue analysis in organization planning " , Proceedings of the 19th annual Hawaii international conference on system sciences , 1986 . 4 Barry , E . , " Managing the bossless team : Lessons in distributed leadership " , Organizational Dynamics 20 ( 1 ) , 1991 , 31 - - 47 . 5 Collins , B . E . and Guetzkow , H . A . , Social Psychology of Group Processes for Decision Making , Wiley , New York , N . Y . , 1964 . 6 Copeland , L . , " Learning to manage a multicultural workforce " , Training 25 ( 5 ) , 1988 , 48 - 56 . 7 Cox , T . , " The multicultural organization " , Academy of Management Executive 5 ( 2 ) , 1991 , 34 - 47 . 8 Cox , T . , " Managing cultural diversity implications for organizational competitiveness " , Academy of Management Executive 5 ( 3 ) , 1991 , 45 - 56 . 9 DeSanctis , G . and Gallupe , B . , " A foundation for the study of group decision support systems " , Management Science 33 ( 5 ) , 1987 , 589 - 609 . 10 Fenelon , J . R . and Megaree , E . I . , " Influence of race on the manifestation of leadership " , Journal of Applied Psychology 55 , 197l , 353 - 358 . 11 Festinger , L . , Pepitone , A . and Newcomb , T . , " Some consequences of de - individuation in a group " , Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 47 , 1952 , 382 - 389 . 12 Gallupe , R . B . , Bastianutti , L . and Cooper , W . H . , " Unlocking Brainstorming " , Journal of Applied Psychology 76 , 1991 , 137 - 142 . 13 Gallupe , R . B . , Dennis , A . R . , Cooper , W . H . , Valacich , J . S . , Bastianutti , L . M . and Nunamaker , J . F . , " Electronic brain - storming and group size " , Academy of Management Journal 35 ( 2 ) , 1992 , 350 - 369 . 288 B . Daily et al . / Information & Management 30 ( 1996 ) 281 - 289 14 Gallupe , R . B . , DeSanctis , G . and Dickson , G . W . , " The impact of computer - based support on the processes and outcomes of group decision making " , MIS Quarterly 12 ( 2 ) , 1988 , 277 - 296 . 15 Hofstede , G . , " The cultural relativity of the quality of life concept " , Academy of Management Review 9 , 1984 , 389 - 398 . 16 Hopkins , S . A . and Hopkins , W . E . , " Organizational produc - tivity 2000 : A work force perspective " , SAM Advanced Management Journal 56 , 1991 , 44 - - 48 . 17 Jarvenpaa , S . L . , Rao , V . S . and Huber , G . P . , " Computer support for meetings of groups working on unstructured problems : A field experiment " , MIS Quarterly 12 ( 4 ) , 1988 , 645 - - 666 . 18 Jessup , L . M . , Connolly , T . and Galegher , J . , " The effects of anonymity on GDSS group process with an idea generating task " , MIS Quarterly 14 , 1990 , 313 - 321 . 19 Kirchmeyer , C . and Cohen , A . , " Multicultural groups , their performance and reactions with constructive conflict " , Group and organization management 17 ( 2 ) , 1992 , 153 - 170 . 20 McCarrey , M . , " Work and personal values for Canadian Anglophobes and Francophobes " , Canadian Psychology 29 , 1988 , 69 - 83 . 21 McLeod , P . L . , " An assessment of the experimental literature on electronic support of group work : Results of a meta - analysis " , Human - Computer Interaction 7 , 1992 , 251 - 280 . 22 Nunamaker , J . D . , Vogel , A . , Jeminger , B . , Martz , R . , Grokowski , X . and McGoff , C . , " Group support systems in practice : Experiences at IBM " , Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences , 1989 , 344 - 352 . 23 Poole , M . S . , Holmes , M . and DeSanctis , G . , " Conflict management in a computer - support meeting environment " , Management Science 37 ( 8 ) , 1991 , 926 - 953 . 24 Rao , S . R . and Jarvenpaa , S . L . , " Computer support of groups : Theory - based models for GDSS research " , Management Science 37 ( 10 ) , 1991 , 1347 - 1362 . 25 Ruhe , J . A . and Eatman , J . , " Effects of racial composition on small work groups " , Small Group Behavior 8 , 1977 , 479 - 486 . 26 Ruhe , J . A . and Allen , W . R . , " Differences and similarities between Black and White leaders " , Proceedings of the American Institute of Decision Sciences , Northeast Division , 1977 , 30 - 35 . 27 Tang , S . E and Kirkbride , P . S . , " Developing conflict skills in Hong Kong : An analysis of some cross - cultural implications " , Management Education and Development 17 , 1986 , 287 - 301 . 28 Triandis , H . C . , " Cognitive similarity and communication in a dyad " , Human Relations 13 , 1960 , 175 - 183 . 29 Triandis , H . C . , Hall , E . R . and Ewen , R . B . , " Member heterogeneity and dyadic creativity " , Human Relations 18 , 1965 , 33 - 35 . 30 Tung , L . L . and Heminger , A . R . , " The effects of dialectical inquiry , devil ' s advocacy , and consensus inquiry methods in a GSS environment " , Information and Management 25 , 1993 , 33 - 41 . 31 Turoff , M . and Hiltz , S . R . , " Computer Support for Group Versus Individual Decisions " , IEEE Trans . Communications 20 , 1982 , 82 - 90 . 32 Vaid - Raizada , V . K . , " Management of interethnic conflict in an Indian manufacturing organization " , Psychological Reports 56 , 1985 , 731 - 738 . 33 Vision Quest for Dos , Version 2 . 2 , Collaborative Technol - ogies , 3373 Towerwood Drive , Dallas , TX . , 75234 , 1985 . 34 Watson , W . E . , Kumar , K . and Michaelsen , L . K . , " Cultural diversity ' s impact on interaction process and performance : Comparing homogeneous and diverse task groups " , Acad - emy of Management Journal 36 ( 3 ) , 1993 , 590 - - 602 . 35 Watson , R . , DeSanctis , G . and Poole , M . S . , " Using a GDSS to facilitate group consensus : Some intended and unintended consequences " , MIS Quarterly 12 ( 3 ) , 1988 , 463 - 477 . 36 Zigurs , I . , Poole , M . S . and DeSanctis , G . , " A study of influence in computer - mediated group decision making " , MIS Quarterly 12 ( 4 ) , 1988 , 625 - - 644 . Bonnie Daily is an assistant professor in the Management De - partment at New Mex - ico State University . She received her Ph . D , in engineering management from the University of Missouri Rolla in 1991 . Her research interests in - clude human - compu - ter interactions and group decision support systems . Art Whatley is a professor of Man - agement in the School of Business at Hawaii Pacific University . He re - ceived his Ph . D . in personnel and in - dustrial relations from the University of North Texas . His : research interests include antecedents and consequences of work - related stress , cross cultural work values , and group decision making . B . Daily et al . / lnformation & Management 30 ( 1996 ) 281 - 289 289 Steven Ash was formerly a Ph . D . candidate in the Management Department at New Mexico State Uni - versity . He is currently an assistant professor at Sul Ross State University ( Texas ) . His research in - terests include diversity in organizations and human resource management is - sues . Robert L . Steiner received his Ph . D . in statistics from Okla - homa State University in 1993 . He is now an assistant professor in the Department of Econom - ics / International Business and University Statistics Center at New Mexico State University . His research interests are like - lihood based estimation meth - ods , categorical data analysis , and statistical computing algo - rithms .