Alpha band frequency differences between low - trait and high - trait anxious individuals Richard T . Ward a , Shelby L . Smith a , Brian T . Kraus b , Anna V . Allen a , Michael A . Moses a and Stephanie L . Simon - Dack a Trait anxiety has been shown to cause significant impairments on attentional tasks . Current research has identified alpha band frequency differences between low - trait and high - trait anxious individuals . Here , we further investigated the underlying alpha band frequency differences between low - trait and high - trait anxious individuals during their resting state and the completion of an inhibition executive functioning task . Using human participants and quantitative electroencephalographic recordings , we measured alpha band frequency in individuals both high and low in trait anxiety during their resting state , and while they completed an Eriksen Flanker Task . Results indicated that high - trait anxious individuals exhibit a desynchronization in alpha band frequency from a resting state to when they complete the Eriksen Flanker Task . This suggests that high - trait anxious individuals maintain fewer attentional resources at rest and must martial resources for task performance as compared with low - trait anxious individuals , who appear to maintain stable cognitive resources between rest and task performance . These findings add to the cognitive neuroscience literature surrounding the role of alpha band frequency in low - trait and high - trait anxious individuals . NeuroReport 29 : 79 – 83 Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . All rights reserved . NeuroReport 2018 , 29 : 79 – 83 Keywords : alpha band frequency , attention , Eriksen Flanker Task , executive functioning tasks , trait anxiety a Department of Psychological Science , Ball State University Muncie , Indiana and b Department of Psychology , Institute for Social Research , University of Michigan Ann Arbor , Michigan , USA Correspondence to Richard T . Ward , MA , Department of Psychological Science , Ball State University , Muncie , IN 47306 , USA Tel : + 1 859 536 0507 ; e - mail : rtward @ bsu . edu Received 1 August 2017 accepted 5 September 2017 Introduction Trait anxiety involves the persistent experience of intense feelings of apprehension and tension for an excessive per - iod of time [ 1 ] . Individuals categorized as high - trait anxious often experience excessive worry and the avoidance of potential threats due to their induction of negative emo - tionality [ 2 ] . Trait anxiety differs from state anxiety , which involves the adverse emotionality experienced within a specific context for a temporary duration . Both constructs are viewed in a dimensional nature , with maladaptive extremes at both ends of their respective spectrums [ 3 ] . Maladaptive high levels of trait anxiety are a primary factor associated with the diagnoses of various anxiety disorders [ 4 ] and result in the profound impairment of multiple domains , such as attention [ 5 ] . Attention is closely related to working memory functions , which are negatively affected by high levels of trait anxiety [ 6 ] . Specifically , it is believed that high - trait anxiety results in the impairment in proces - sing efficiency for executive functioning tasks requiring heavy attentional demands , such as inhibition [ 7 , 8 ] and shifting set [ 7 ] executive functions . Despite the abundance of behavioral evidence demonstrating differences between low - trait and high - trait anxious indivi - duals , there exists a paucity of cognitive neuroscience litera - ture examining the specific neural frequencies underlying this phenomenon . Alpha band frequency activity ( 8 – 12 Hz ) is currently one of the most studied and understood neural frequencies of brain activity in human participants , and is associated with attentional processes [ 9 ] . Specifically , higher alpha activity reflects a relaxed mental state , and lower alpha activity represents attentional and cognitive engagement . Current work suggests that individuals high in trait anxiety display higher levels of alpha activity compared with indivi - duals low in trait anxiety during their resting state [ 10 – 12 ] . In addition , researchers have examined the alpha band frequency changes that occur for tasks involving the use of cortical resources , which are implicated in attentional pro - cessing . Gevins et al . [ 13 ] reported alpha activity decreases for tasks requiring heavy cognitive load . Other research has supported this inverse relationship between alpha activity and increased cognitive load [ 14 , 15 ] . This creates the implication that cognitive tasks requiring externally oriented attentional processes ( e . g . Eriksen Flanker Task ) are likely to reflect in decreases in alpha activity for their completion . Because high - trait anxiety impacts executive functioning tasks requiring attentional processes , the present study aimed to investigate the underlying neural alpha band frequency differences between high - trait and low - trait anxious individuals during their resting state compared with during the completion of an inhibition task . Participants and methods Participants Participants were selected from a sample of 413 partici - pants recruited from an introductory psychology course Clinical neuroscience 79 0959 - 4965 Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . All rights reserved . DOI : 10 . 1097 / WNR . 0000000000000915 Copyright r 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . All rights reserved . subject pool at a large Midwestern University . These participants completed an online Qualtrics ( Provo , Utah , USA ) survey to determine their individual level of trait anxiety . Individuals meeting the cutoff criteria for low - trait and high - trait anxiety were contacted to enter the laboratory for the study . These cutoff scores were set at 1 SD above sex - normed means for high - trait anxiety , and 1 SD below sex - normed means for low - trait anxiety as assessed by the Spielberger ’ s State - Trait Anxiety Inventory Form - Y [ 16 ] . This criterion was based on the normative data for male and female college students provided in the State - Trait Anxiety Inventory Form - Y manual . Thirty - four participants ( age : mean = 19 . 28 , SD = 1 . 39 ) came to the laboratory to complete this portion of the study . Low - trait and high - trait anxiety conditions were not matched in terms of age . Each partici - pant was screened for any prior neurological issues or use of medications . Concussions , history of seizures , and medi - cations affecting serotonin ( selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor and serotonin – norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor ) and benzodiazepines resulted in exclusion from the study . Postcleaning of the electroencephalographic ( EEG ) files resulted in 16 ( six male and 10 female ) participants in the high - anxiety condition , and 14 ( six male and eight female ) participants in the low - anxiety condition to be used for data analysis . Materials The study utilized Spielberger ’ s State - Trait Anxiety Inventory Form - Y [ 16 ] . The State - Trait Anxiety Inventory ( STAI ) is a self - report screening measure for state and trait anxiety [ 16 ] . The STAI is comprised of 40 total items : 20 items assessing level of state anxiety , and 20 items asses - sing level of trait anxiety . Only the trait anxiety items were utilized for scoring . These items assess the chronic psy - chological trait of anxiety using questions such as , ‘ I feel that difficulties are piling up so that I cannot overcome them ’ , ‘ I worry too much over something that doesn ’ t really matter ’ , and ‘ I am a steady person ’ . STAI items are weighted and specific items are reverse scored to obtain a total score ranging from 20 – 80 , with higher scores reflecting greater anxiety . Individual inhibition executive functioning abilities were measured using the Eriksen Flanker Task [ 17 ] . A target stimulus arrow ( pointing left or right ) was central to surrounding flanker arrows that either congruently or incongruently aligned with the target stimulus . Participants were required to indicate the direction of the target arrow while inhibiting the competing information from presented flankers . Correct responses were calculated from partici - pants ’ accuracy in selecting the direction of the target arrow amidst the flankers . Procedures All research procedures were approved by the Institutional Review Board at a large Midwestern University . Participants were first asked to complete an informed consent for the study and a brief medical questionnaire to assess their his - tory of medications and seizures . Next , participants com - pleted the State - Trait Anxiety Inventory to assess individual levels of trait anxiety . These questionnaires were adminis - tered online through Qualtrics . Participants meeting a designated cutoff score ( ± 1 SD from their respective sex - normed means ) were contacted and asked to enter the laboratory for the study . Upon entry to the laboratory , participants completed a second informed consent for the study . Next , EEG was recorded to assess their respective brain frequency and activity patterns . After ensuring proper electrode readings through BIOSemi ( BioSemi B . V , Amsterdam , Netherlands ) reading software , participants were instructed to remain as still as possible during the recording to prevent interference . Participants were first asked to remain still for a period of 3 min to record resting baseline frequencies . Next , par - ticipants were asked to complete the Eriksen Flanker Task to assess for individual executive functioning ability regarding inhibiting attentional resources towards irrele - vant stimuli and information . After completion of the Eriksen Flanker Task participants were uncapped and given a brief debriefing of the experiment . Apparatus and stimuli Participants performed the Eriksen Flanker Task [ 17 ] paradigm ( 16 practice trails in two blocks and 150 test trials in one block ) on a Viewsonic Aurora R _ 4 computer running Windows 7 . The monitor was a 17 ′ - LCD screen with a 60 Hz refresh rate . The Eriksen Flanker Task paradigm was programmed using E - Prime 2 . 0 software ( Psychology Software Tools ; Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , USA ) [ 18 ] . Participants were held at a viewing distance of 57 cm from the monitor . The EEG recording was taken with 64 - recording channels using silver chloride electrodes with a BioSemi Active Two system ( http : / / www . biosemi . com ; BioSemi B . V . , Amsterdam , The Netherlands ) configured to the 10 – 20 system . Participants responded to targets via a standard keyboard ( ‘ z ’ for left target stimuli and ‘ / ’ for right target stimuli ) . All EEG data were collected by an Alienware × 51 _ R2 that was synchronized to receive behavioral response from the computer running the task . Electrooculography was recorded using two additional electrodes at lateral and subocular locations to the right eye . Electroencephalographic recording For the data collection interval , EEG was recorded at a 1024 Hz sample rate and down sampled to 512 Hz for analyses . Initial BIOSemi files for the two conditions ( resting baseline and the Eriksen Flanker Task ) were converted into MATLAB files for individual electrode readings . Data were filtered between 0 . 5 – 55 Hz using a fifth - order Butterworth filter and offline referenced digitally to the averaged left and right mastoids . Data files were visually inspected and hand cleaned for artifact rejection and cleaning based on any electrical interference 80 NeuroReport 2018 , Vol 29 No 2 Copyright r 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . All rights reserved . or ocular artifacts . Electrodes that demonstrated excessive sweat or artifact were interpolated for estimated activity . Spectral analyses A 3 s Hanning tapered window with a 75 % overlap was applied to extract continuous artifact - free EEG data and a Fast Fourier Transformation was used to calculate the average spectral power of the alpha band EEG frequency [ 18 ] . A total of 2048 linear spaced frequencies were extracted from 0 . 125 to 256 Hz . As a result , 33 frequencies were extracted and averaged together in 8 – 12 Hz range for alpha band activity [ 9 ] . The average power of the alpha band in microvolts squared ( μ V 2 ) was extracted and these values were log transformed . To examine any potential topographic differences in the distribution of alpha power , electrodes were clustered to represent the anterior left ( Fp1 , AF7 , AF3 , F7 , F5 , F3 , F1 , FT7 , FC5 , FC3 , FC1 ) , anterior right ( Fp2 , AF4 , AF8 , F2 , F4 , F6 , F8 , FC2 , FC4 , FC6 , FT8 ) , posterior left ( TP7 , CP5 , CP3 , CP1 , P9 , P7 , P5 , P3 , P1 , PO7 , PO3 , O1 ) , and posterior right ( CP2 , CP4 , CP6 , TP8 , P2 , P4 , P6 , P8 , P10 , PO4 , PO8 , O2 ) brain regions . Statistical analyses A 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 mixed analysis of variance examining task ( baseline , Eriksen Flanker Task ) by topographical region ( anterior , posterior ) by hemisphere ( left , right ) by anxiety level ( low anxiety , high anxiety ) was conducted to appropriately interpret the data across the resting state and the Eriksen Flanker Task spectral power in the alpha band frequency was compared between high - trait and low - trait anxious participants within anterior left , anterior right , posterior left , and posterior right brain regions . Results The results demonstrated a significant interaction in alpha activity for task by anxiety type [ F ( 1 , 28 ) = 6 . 322 , P < 0 . 05 , η 2 p = 0 . 681 ] ( Fig . 1 ) . Post - hoc simple effects tests ( P < 0 . 05 ) showed that individuals high in trait anxiety demonstrated significantly higher alpha power during their resting state ( M = − 2 . 92 , SE = 0 . 08 ) than during the Eriksen Flanker Task ( M = − 3 . 00 , SE = 0 . 07 ) . However , individuals low in trait anxiety showed no significant differences between resting alpha power ( M = − 3 . 07 , SE = 0 . 08 ) and alpha power during comple - tion of the Eriksen Flanker Task ( M = − 3 . 05 , SE = 0 . 08 ) . A significant main effect for hemisphere was also found [ F ( 1 , 28 ) = 8 . 252 , P < 0 . 01 , η 2 p = 0 . 792 ] . Individuals experienced significantly less alpha activity in the left hemisphere ( M = − 3 . 03 , SE = 0 . 06 ) than the right hemisphere ( M = − 2 . 99 , SE = 0 . 05 ) across both resting state and the Eriksen Flanker Task . Discussion Our results demonstrate that high - trait anxious individuals displayed greater alpha activity during their resting state compared with during performance of the Eriksen Flanker Task . This implies that high - trait anxious individuals experience the same level of alertness as low - trait anxious individuals during the completion of an inhibition execu - tive functioning task , but are likely to be less alert during their resting state than during completion of such a task . In addition , the equivalent resting state level of alpha in low - trait anxious individuals at rest and at task suggests that these individuals may contain a more stable attentional state overall . This may indicate that low - trait anxious individuals may be more prepared to engage in a task from ‘ at rest ’ than high - trait anxious individuals . In addition , our results indi - cated a difference between left and right hemispheric regions for both the resting state and the inhibition task , regardless of the level of trait anxiety . Specifically , the right hemisphere displayed higher alpha activity than the left hemisphere regardless of condition or anxiety level . This result was unexpected , as prior work shows that such asymmetrical differences are exclusive to high - trait anxious individuals [ 19 ] . However , some research has demonstrated that individual differences and environmental context can influence differences in hemispheric alpha activation . For instance , increased alpha right / left asymmetries at rest are linked to overall higher negative affect in a population [ 20 , 21 ] . Young adults , such as those in our sample , tend to experience higher mood variability than older adults , which may in part explain our findings [ 22 ] . Future research should further examine the specific hemispheric functions of alpha power both during rest and task performance . The observed differences in alpha activity between resting state and the Eriksen Flanker Task between high - trait and low - trait anxious individuals in the current study is consistent with prior work showing alpha activity differences between low - trait and high - trait anxious individuals at rest [ 6 , 11 , 12 ] . This higher alpha activity present within high - trait anxious individuals in their resting state as compared with during task performance may reflect a lower degree of attentional resources to use Fig . 1 Line graph of alpha band frequency differences between individuals low and high in trait anxiety for the resting state and Eriksen Flanker Task [ F ( 1 , 28 ) = 6 . 322 , P < 0 . 05 , η 2 p = 0 . 681 ] . Alpha differences in trait anxiety Ward et al . 81 Copyright r 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . All rights reserved . compared with low - trait anxious individuals . Specifically , higher alpha activity correlates with increased suppres - sion of external sensory information ; or in other words , it correlates with fewer cognitive resources devoted toward incoming external stimuli [ 23 ] . Furthermore , this higher alpha activity in high - trait anxious individuals may reflect underlying activity between the thalamus and reticular activating system [ 24 , 25 ] . Specifically , this would indi - cate differences in arousal state and sensory processing in high - trait anxious individuals compared with low - trait anxious individuals . It may be likely that high - trait anxious individuals are experiencing a lower arousal state compared with low - trait anxious individuals , possi - bly due to an internal focus , and therefore must martial their resources when presented with an inhibition task . Therefore , high - trait anxious individuals are likely to experience a lack of cortical excitation during their rest - ing state , as well as decreased cognitive alertness as compared with when they perform such a task . This pattern of neural activity represents differences in arousal and inhibition between high - trait anxious individuals and low - trait anxious individuals . Interestingly , only high - trait anxiety individuals dis - played a significant decrease in overall alpha activity between the resting state and Eriksen Flanker Task . These results are inconsistent with prior work demon - strating that increased cognitive load , which is observed during the completion of attentional tasks , such as the Eriksen Flanker Task , results in the decrease of alpha band activity regardless of anxiety level [ 13 – 15 ] . It is possible that the Eriksen Flanker Task may not have recruited the same degree of cognitive load as other inhibition tasks used in previous work . However , high - trait anxious individuals did experience an overall change in alpha band activity , specifically showing a decrease in overall alpha activity . Alpha desynchroni - zation is an important indicator for overall alertness and activation processes , indicating that high - trait anxious individuals may have experienced cognitive changes as they began to engage in the task . Specifically , these cognitive changes experienced likely involved an increase in attentional processing in high - trait anxious individuals as they shifted from their resting state to completion of the Eriksen Flanker Task . In addition , this indicates that high - trait anxious individuals were experiencing a greater cognitive load at rest , which likely resulted in them having to martial attentional resources to allocate to the inhibition task . Future directions These results provide several useful implications for future research , and therapeutic techniques involving neurofeedback . Specifically , we have demonstrated alpha band frequency differences between low - trait and high - trait anxious individuals between their resting state and completion of an inhibition executive functioning task . This could indicate that high - trait anxious individuals may have fewer online attentional resources for attentional engagement compared with low - trait anxious individuals . This may provide useful differential information describing the presence of anxiety in therapeutic treatments , and pro - vide a physiological measurement for the degree of anxiety an individual may be experiencing . In addition , it can also provide the framework for future physiological measure - ments in determining the effectiveness of different ther - apeutic treatments of anxiety disorders in addition to acting as a neural marker for individual differences in high - trait and low - trait anxiety individuals . Because EEG is limited in the spatial representation of subcortical structures , future work should address the specifics of this association . Specifically , researchers should utilize techniques that demonstrate greater spatial mapping abilities , such as functional MRI , to examine the differences in activity within subcortical struc - tures between individuals low and high in trait anxiety . These findings could help increase the understanding of the role of alpha band frequency and the possible differences in attentional processing between low - trait and high - trait anxious individuals . Conclusion Our findings provide a framework for future neurocognitive research underlying the differences between low - trait and high - trait anxiety . In addition , this may serve as a useful indicator to the presence of anxiety in therapeutic treat - ments . Results indicated that high - trait anxious individuals exhibit a desynchronization in alpha band frequency from a resting state to when they complete the Eriksen Flanker Task . This implies individuals high in trait anxiety must martial attentional resources when completing inhibition executive functioning tasks , such as the Eriksen Flanker Task , versus low - trait anxious individuals . It should also be noted that both high - trait and low - trait anxious individuals appeared to display a similar level of overall alpha activity during the completion of the Eriksen Flanker Task of inhibition . These results provide useful insights into the nature of the underlying alpha band frequency differences between low - trait and high - trait anxiety . Acknowledgements Conflicts of interest There are no conflicts of interest . References 1 Spielberger CD . Anxiety and Behavior . New York , NY : Academic Press ; 1966 . 2 Sylvers P , Lilienfield SO , L LJ . Differences between trait fear and trait anxiety : implications for psychopathology . Clin Psychol Rev 2011 ; 31 : 122 – 137 . 3 Endler NS , Kocovski NL . State and trait anxiety revisited . J Anxiety Disord 2001 ; 15 : 231 – 245 . 4 Kennedy BL , Schwab JJ , Morris RL , Beldia G . Assessment of state and trait anxiety in subjects with anxiety and depressive disorders . Psychiatr Q 2001 ; 72 : 263 – 276 . 5 Najmi S , Kuckertz JM , Amir N . Attentional impairment in anxiety : inefficiency in expanding the scope of attention . Depress Anxiety 2012 ; 29 : 243 – 249 . 6 Moran TP . Anxiety and working memory capacity : a meta - analysis and narrative review . Psychol Bull 2016 ; 142 : 831 – 864 . 82 NeuroReport 2018 , Vol 29 No 2 Copyright r 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . All rights reserved . 7 Derakshan N , Eysenck MW . Anxiety , processing efficiency , and cognitive performance : new developments from attentional control theory . Eur Psychologist 2009 ; 14 : 168 – 178 . 8 Ansari TL , Derakshan N . Anxiety impairs inhibitory control but not volitional action control . Cogn Emot 2010 ; 24 : 241 – 254 . 9 Hammond DC . What is neurofeedback : an update . J Neurotherapy 2011 ; 15 : 305 – 336 . 10 Knyazev GG , Slobodskaya HR , Wilson GD . Psychophysiological correlates of behavioural inhibition and activation . Pers Individ Dif 2002 ; 33 : 647 – 660 . 11 Knyazev GG , Slobodskaya HR . Personality trait of behavioral inhibition is associated with oscillatory systems reciprocal relationships . Int J Psychophysiol 2003 ; 48 : 247 – 261 . 12 Knyazev GG , Savostyanov AN , Levin EA . Alpha oscillations as a correlate of trait anxiety . Int J Psychophysiol 2004 ; 53 : 147 – 160 . 13 Gevins A , Smith ME , McEvoy L , Yu D . High - resolution EEG mapping of cortical activation related to working memory : effects of task difficulty , type of processing , and practice . Cereb Cortex 1997 ; 7 : 374 – 385 . 14 Stipacek A , Grabner RH , Neuper C , Fink A , Neubauer AC . Sensitivity of human EEG alpha band desynchronization to different working memory components and increasing levels of memory load . Neurosci Lett 2003 ; 353 : 193 – 196 . 15 Fink A , Grabner RH , Neuper C , Neubauer AC . EEG alpha band dissociation with increasing task demands . Cogn Brain Res 2005 ; 24 : 252 – 259 . 16 Spielberger CC , Gorsuch RL , Lushene R , Vagg PR , Jacobs GA . Manual for the state – trait anxiety inventory . Palo Alto , CA : Consulting Psychologists Press ; 1983 . 17 Eriksen BA , Eriksen CW . Effects of noise letters upon the identification of a target letter in a nonsearch task . Percept Psychophys 1974 ; 16 : 143 – 149 . 18 Psychology Software Tools Inc . E - Prime 2 . 0 ; 2012 . Available at : http : / / www . pstnet . com . [ Accessed 15 August 2016 ] . 19 Avram J , Baltes FR , Miclea M , Miu AC . Frontal EEG activation asymmetry reflects cognitive biases in anxiety : evidence from an emotional face stroop task . Appl Psychophysiol Biofeedback 2010 ; 35 : 285 – 292 . 20 Tomarken AJ , Davidson RJ , Wheeler RE , Kinney L . Psychometric properties of resting anterior EEG asymmetry : temporal stability and internal consistency . Psychophysiology 1992 ; 29 : 576 – 592 . 21 Thibodeau R , Jorgensen RS , Kim S . Depression , anxiety , and resting frontal EEG asymmetry : a meta - analytic review . J Abnorm Psychol 2006 ; 115 : 715 – 729 . 22 Röcke C , Li SC , Smith J . Intraindividual variability in positive and negative affect over 45 days : do older adults fluctuate less than young adults ? Psychol Aging 2009 ; 24 : 863 – 878 . 23 Foxe JJ , Snyder AC . The role of alpha - band brain oscillations as a sensory suppression mechanism during selective attention . Front Psychol 2011 ; 2 : 154 . 24 Robinson DL . The technical , neurological , and psychological significance of ‘ alpha ’ , ‘ delta ’ and ‘ theta ’ waves confounded in EEG evoked potentials : a study of peak amplitudes . Pers Individ Dif 2000 ; 28 : 673 – 693 . 25 Robinson DL . How brain arousal systems determine different temperament types and the major dimensions of personality . Pers Individ Dif 2001 ; 31 : 1233 – 1259 . Alpha differences in trait anxiety Ward et al . 83 Copyright r 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . All rights reserved .