Rac negative feedback links local PIP 3 rate - of - change to dynamic control of neutrophil guidance Jason Town 1 , 2 and Orion Weiner 1 , 2 , (cid:0) 1 Cardiovascular Research Institute , University of California , San Francisco , San Francisco , CA , USA 2 Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics , University of California , San Francisco , San Francisco , CA , USA To migrate efﬁciently , neutrophils must polarize their cytoskele - tal regulators along a single axis of motion . This polarization process is thought to be mediated through local positive feed - back that ampliﬁes leading edge signals and global negative feedback that enables sites of positive feedback to compete for dominance . Though this two - component model efﬁciently estab - lishes cell polarity , it has potential limitations , including a ten - dency to “lock” onto a particular direction , limiting the ability of cells to reorient . We use spatially - deﬁned optogenetic control of a leading edge organizer ( PI3K ) to probe how cells balance “decisiveness” needed to polarize in a single direction with the ﬂexibility needed to respond to new cues . Underlying this bal - ancing act is a local Rac inhibitor that destabilizes the leading edge to promote exploration . We show that this local inhibitor enables cells to process input signal dynamics , linking front sta - bility and orientation to local temporal increases in input sig - nals . Correspondence : orion . weiner @ ucsf . edu Introduction Neutrophils ﬁnd and kill invading pathogens by dynamically aligning their front - back polarity axis with subtle external gradients of chemoattractants that indicate injury or infec - tion . One of the fundamental problems these cells need to solve is the consolidation of the biochemical signals that drive protrusions to a small portion of the cell surface . To navigate their complex environments efﬁciently , migrating cells must balance this " decisive " consolidation process with the " ﬂexibility " needed to continuously update the direction of this polarity axis . Cells consolidate protrusive activity through a reaction - diffusion Turing system ( 1 ) that combines local positive and global negative feedback ( 2 – 6 ) . In neutrophils , the positive feedback loop is linked to protrusion signaling and involves phospholipids such as PIP 3 , small GTPases such as Rac , and f - actin ( 7 – 9 ) . These protrusions push on the membrane , gen - erating increases in tension that rapidly equilibrate through - out the cell ( 10 ) and stimulate global inhibition of Rac ac - tivation and actin polymerization ( 5 , 11 ) . This model ex - plains several key cell behaviors , including the consolidation of protrusive activity into a single front and the ability to de - tect chemoattractant gradients over a wide range of ambient concentrations . However , this model has a fundamental lim - itation : Although simulated cells can properly orient to an initial gradient , they tend to “lock” and have difﬁculty reori - enting their polarity when correcting errors in orientation or when the external gradient changes ( 3 ) . To resolve this limitation , Meinhardt proposed the existence of an additional factor , a local inhibitor , that slowly desta - bilizes fronts of migrating cells , preventing " front - locking " ( 3 ) . Modeling approaches have made use of local inhibi - tion to produce realistic simulated chemotactic behaviors , such as pseudopod - splitting in Dictyostelium ( 12 ) . Modeling can be used to show how these signaling topologies could function even without knowledge of the speciﬁc molecular components . With suitable inputs , the action of a local in - hibitor can be demonstrated experimentally even if the spe - ciﬁc molecular candidate is not known ( 13 ) . Experimental studies have advanced our understanding of several poten - tial molecular candidates of a Meinhardt - style local inhibitor ( 14 – 18 ) . However , it is unclear whether these candidates act locally due to possible confounding effects from other glob - ally acting inhibitors . To formally demonstrate the existence of a local inhibitor , these confounding effects would need to be removed from the system ( 19 ) , but this typically disrupts the organization of the front signals ( 20 – 22 ) . Here we overcome this challenge by using an optogenetic ap - proach to control the production of PIP 3 , a key protrusion - activating signal in migrating neutrophil - like HL - 60 cells ( 7 , 8 , 23 , 24 ) . Using this approach in combination with dy - namic , computer - controlled spatial stimulation and pharma - cological perturbations , we demonstrate the existence of a local negative feedback loop operating on Rac at the leading edge of migrating neutrophils . We show that this local nega - tive feedback loop allows cells to detect the local rate of sig - nal increase , consistent with the pilot pseudopod model for cell guidance ﬁrst described by Gerisch ( 25 ) . We modify the basic pilot pseudopod model , accounting for insensitivity at the backs of cells ( 21 , 23 , 26 – 29 ) and for the basally - higher levels of PIP 3 at the fronts of migrating cells . These two mod - iﬁcations explain the particular sensitivity of the lateral edges of migrating cells to PIP 3 signals . The edges are within the sensitive region and have more " room to grow " compared to the center of the front . This “peripheral attention” model de - scribes how cells use temporal features of internal signals to continuously steer their fronts and balance decisiveness and ﬂexibility during navigation . Town et al . | bioR χ iv | December 30 , 2022 | 1 – 21 . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license available under a ( which was not certified by peer review ) is the author / funder , who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted January 3 , 2023 . ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 12 . 30 . 521706 doi : bioRxiv preprint Spatial Inputs Input Dynamics Cell Behavioral Response ? CELL - RIGHT GLOBAL OptoPI3K activation . . . T i m e e . g . T i m e Directional Choices Signaling Dynamics T i m e PIP3 Biosensor Rac - GTP Biosensor m e a n P I P 3 Time m e a n R a c - G T P Time I n p u t Time I n p u t Time e . g . I n p u t Time Chemoattractant Receptor PI3K Rac F - actin Membrane Tension MIGRATION LOCAL NEGATIVE REGULATION ? GLOBAL NEGATIVE FEEDBACK LOCAL POSITIVE FEEDBACK A N D ? Migrating Cells limit positive feedback - driven fronts to be " decisive " spatially Known Network : Proposed Network : Synthetic control of a front - activating signal A B C temporally to be " flexible " Decisive ? Flexible ? ✔ ✔ Decisive ? Flexible ? ✔ . . . . . . Fig . 1 . Approach for probing how rapidly migrating cells balance decisiveness and ﬂexibility . A ) Migrating cells use positive feedback to polarize and build fronts . This positive feedback must be constrained by negative feedback to enable generation of a singular front that can be reoriented . B ) Previous work has established a central role for local positive feedback and global negative feedback in cell polarity and movement . Models that include only these two feedback loops tend to have “front - locking” behaviors where they become insensitive to new stimuli once polarized . Thus they are decisive in their ability to polarize , but inﬂexible . One potential solution to the front - locking behavior is the addition of local negative feedback to destabilize the front . Systems including local positive feedback and both local and global negative feedback have the potential to be both decisive and ﬂexible . C ) Direct spatiotemporal control over a front - activating signal provides a powerful strategy for better understanding how positive and negative feedback modules interact to regulate decision - making in migration . Results Local opto - PI3K stimulation steers migrating HL - 60 cells . Previous work has found that local activation of PI3K signaling induces the generation of actin - based protrusions such as pseudopodia and growth cones ( 10 , 24 , 30 ) . Since polarized cells differ in the biochemical compositions of their fronts and backs , we ﬁrst sought to understand whether the response to local PI3K activation spatially varied in migrat - ing HL - 60 cells . Towards this end , we used an optogenetic approach to control PI3K signaling ( opto - PI3K ) in time and space . This enabled us to probe migrating cells’ biochemical and directional responses to user - deﬁned changes in PIP 3 at different subcellular locations . Our opto - PI3K approach uses an iLID system ( 31 ) to recruit endogenous PI3K to the plasma membrane of HL - 60 cells in response to blue light ( Fig . 2A ) . We veriﬁed the effectiveness of our optogenetic system using spatially patterned blue light stimulation ( 470 nm ) and PHAkt - Halo , a live - cell biosensor for PIP 3 production ( 32 – 34 ) ( Fig . S1 ; Movie S1 ) . Upon lo - cal activation of PIP 3 production , we observe a rapid local increase in the localization of Pak - PBD - mCherry . This live - cell biosensor predominantly recognizes active Rac in HL - 60 2 | bioR χ iv Town et al . | Rac negative feedback links local PIP 3 rate - of - change to dynamic control of neutrophil guidance . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license available under a ( which was not certified by peer review ) is the author / funder , who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted January 3 , 2023 . ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 12 . 30 . 521706 doi : bioRxiv preprint cells ( 35 ) and typically localizes to the fronts of migrating cells . Inspired by previous work in smart microscopy control systems ( 36 – 40 ) , we implemented a computer - vision - based feedback system that tracks the dynamic features of migrat - ing cells ( primarily location , polarity , and visibility in TIRF ) and delivers automatically updated , spatially - patterned opto - genetic stimuli ( Fig . 2B ) . Using this system , we can repro - ducibly track and perturb PIP 3 signals in time and space in moving cells . Local opto - PI3K stimulation at a given subcellular location ( front , side , back ) caused reproducible behaviors across mi - grating cells ( Fig . 2C ; Movie S2 ) . Local activation at the fronts of cells caused highly directed movement in the direc - tion of stimulation , and this motion was more directed than either unexposed control or globally stimulated cells . Local activation at the lateral edges of cells caused cells to turn to - ward and persistently migrate in the direction of the optoge - netic stimulus . Local activation at the backs of cells caused them to either perform a “u - turn” ( 41 ) or depolarize , in which case the cell footprint disappeared from the TIRF plane . The directional stimuli generally caused continuous turning responses as opposed to a depolarization / repolarization re - sponse . We could even cause cells to turn continuously by updating the position of the stimulus to continuously target one edge of the cell ( Movie S3 ) . With this controllable per - turbation , we now had the ability to ask which spatial and temporal features of PIP 3 signaling contributed to these cell behaviors . Sensitivity to local PIP 3 stimulation is spatially biased to the lateral edges in polarized cells . We next sought to determine whether cell responsiveness to optogenetic stimu - lation and downstream activation varied spatially in polarized cells , which are known to differ in the biochemical compo - sitions of their fronts and backs . As other researchers have observed with various signaling inputs ( 21 , 23 , 26 – 29 ) , we found the backs of cells to be relatively insensitive to stim - ulation via opto - PI3K . Cells took longer to reorient in the direction of the stimulus and displayed u - turn behaviors in response to stimulation at the back . Restricting signaling competency to the fronts of cells could be one mechanism to ensure persistent movement , though , at an extreme , this strategy could cause polarity locking ( 3 ) . To quantify the spatial extent of this bias in cells moving in an approxi - mately two - dimensional environment , we took advantage of our ability to simultaneously stimulate multiple locations in moving cells using our computer - vision - driven system ( Fig . 2D ) . This allowed us to expand upon results from previous work on back - insensitivity that constrained cell movement in one - dimensional channels ( 28 , 29 ) . When we activated both lateral edges of a migrating cell in a 180° - opposed fashion , cells stably turned toward only one of the two stimuli ( Fig . 2G , Left ; Movie S4 , Left ; Fig . S2 , Left ) . When the opposed stimuli were oriented perpendic - ularly relative to the initial direction of motion , cells broke symmetry evenly , with half of the cells migrating to the left and the other half migrating to the right . By varying the an - gle of these opposed competing signals relative to the initial polarity axis , we found that cells were more likely to turn toward stimuli closer to the existing front ( Fig . 2D ) . At the extreme , all cells stimulated simultaneously at their front and back continued moving in their initial direction . These re - sults support the notion that the back of the cell responds less strongly to our optogenetic input . Cells stably moved toward only one of the two optogenetic stimuli , indicating that this assay created a winner - take - all scenario . Surprisingly , however , the frontward advantage was gradual . In a straightforward winner - take - all system , such as one made from coupled local positive feedback and global negative feedback , any slight initial advantage should be ampliﬁed , leading to switch - like advantages . Thus , we might have expected cells to reliably turn toward more front - oriented signals , even for small angles . We sought to resolve this apparent contradiction by further exploring the winner - take - all nature of two - spot competition assays . Fronts of polarized cells show behaviors consistent with local negative regulation . The observed stability of migration decisions in response to 180° - opposed stimuli could represent an intrinsic ability of cells to commit to one site of PIP 3 stimulation by suppressing signaling elsewhere . Alternatively , it could represent an initial commitment that becomes stable due to the insensitivity of the back of the cell to stimulation . To differentiate between these possibilities , we altered the stimulation assay to ensure that both stimu - lation sites would be continuously near the fronts of cells . We accomplished this by placing activation spots at the cell edges + / - 45 degrees from the polarity axis ( Fig . 2G , Right ; Movie S4 , Right ; Fig . S2 , Right ) . In this assay , if cells were to direct their fronts toward one stimulus , the other stimu - lus would be located at the lateral edge of the cell ( which should be sensitive to stimulation ) . During the 5 minutes of frontward - oriented opposed - stimulus exposure , 48 % of cells showed some degree of reversal between the two orientations ( compared to 6 % in the 180° - opposed stimuli ) . This result suggests that the insensitivity of the backs of cells drives the previously observed stability in the opposed spot competition assay . The long - term stability is not due to an intrinsic ability to suppress signaling at a distance . On the contrary , the ori - entation switching suggests that some factor locally inhibits front signaling , destabilizing fronts on a slow timescale and making them less able to suppress signaling at distant sites over time . One additional piece of evidence in support of a local front inhibitor is the difference in directional responses of the cells to local front stimulation and global stimulation assays ( Fig . 2E ) . In the global stimulation assay , cells tend to deviate from their initial direction signiﬁcantly more than cells driven to migrate forward via local optogenetic stimulation . Local in - hibition at the center of the fronts of cells could explain this behavior by resulting in larger responses at regions just out - side this area . This front - localized negative regulation is also supported by measuring the local biochemical responses to global stimula - tion ( Fig . 2F ) . By quantifying the increases in PIP 3 and Rac biosensor recruitment to the TIRF plane in cells in response Town et al . | Rac negative feedback links local PIP 3 rate - of - change to dynamic control of neutrophil guidance bioR χ iv | 3 . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license available under a ( which was not certified by peer review ) is the author / funder , who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted January 3 , 2023 . ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 12 . 30 . 521706 doi : bioRxiv preprint AsLov2 - SsrA - BFP - CAAX ISH2 - EGFP - SspBµ PI3Kinase ( closed conformation ) Dark Image Cell Biosensors Calculate Cell " State " Update Stimulus Patterns ▢ Polarized ▢ Moving ▢ Trackable ✓✓✓ A B PIP 3 ProtrusionSignaling PIP 2 Lit ( 470nm ) 1 - X X Δθ C D 0 . 5 0 . 5 θ , Angle ( Degrees ) X , P r o p o r t i o n T u r n i n g T o w a r d F r o n t w a r d S t i m u l u s T i m e s i n c e s t i m u l u s ( s ) Stimulate Measure F o l d - c h a n g e P o s t - S t i m u l a t i o n E F G P r o p o r t i o n o f R e v e r s i n g C e ll s Distance from Front ( μ m ) P r o p o r t i o n o f R e v e r s i n g C e ll s Final Lateral Position ( μ m ) F r e q u e n c y PIP3 Biosensor ( PHAkt - Halo ) Rac Biosensor ( PakPBD - mCherry ) P P PrestimulusDirectionality Location of Stimulus Initiation Fig . 2 . Optogenetic control of PI3K signaling in migrating cells reveals spatial differences in responsiveness to input signals A ) Schematic of the optogenetic system for controlling PIP 3 generation . B ) Computer - vision - based strategy for automatically updating optogenetic input for moving cells . C ) Local opto - PI3K stimulation at the fronts , sides , or backs of migrating cells causes corresponding changes in cell directionality . See Movie S2 for an animated version of this data . Scale bars : 50 µm . D ) When cells are stimulated at two opposing sites of opto - PI3K activation , they break symmetry and decisively move toward one of the two inputs . When the angle of these opposed sites of stimulation is varied relative to the initial polarity of the cell , a preference for the frontward - directed input is revealed . E ) The frontward - bias shown in D does not cause globally - stimulated cells to persist in their current direction of movement . Scale bars : 50 µm . F ) Fold - change in biosensor recruitment as a function of font - to - back distance in response to global stimulation shows a peak response for Rac activation 3 to 4 microns away from the leading edge of the cell in response to opto - PI3K input . G ) Cells stimulated with 180° - opposed sites of opto - PI3K activation show stable symmetry breaking , but cells stimulated with two 90° - opposed , frontward - oriented sites of opto - PI3K activation show frequent switching between the two directions . See Movie S4 for an animated version of this data . Scale bars : 50 µm . 4 | bioR χ iv Town et al . | Rac negative feedback links local PIP 3 rate - of - change to dynamic control of neutrophil guidance . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license available under a ( which was not certified by peer review ) is the author / funder , who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted January 3 , 2023 . ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 12 . 30 . 521706 doi : bioRxiv preprint Expected effect of Latrunculin on Proposed Network : Proposed Network : A B C PIP3 Biosensor ( PHAkt - Halo ) Rac - GTP Biosensor ( Pak - PBD - mCherry ) Time ( s ) T o w a r d L o c a l S t i m u l u s A w a y F r o m L o c a l S t i m u l u s Time ( s ) R a c B i o s e n s o r P o l a r i z a t i o n Local p = 0 . 42 p = 2 . 1E - 6 p = 0 . 019 N o r m a li z e d F l u o r e sc e n c e R a c B i o s e n s o r P o l a r i z a t i o n R a c B i o s e n s o r F l u o r e sc e n c e Local Global Prestimulus Global Fig . 3 . Shadow experiment provides direct evidence of local inhibition of Rac activation A ) Inhibiting actin assembly with latrunculin treatment is expected to interrupt both local positive and global negative feedback . This disrupts front signal organization , but this organization can be restored with optogenetic activation of a leading edge signal like PI3K . This approach can be used to test for the presence of a PIP 3 - activated local inhibitor of Rac activation . B ) Local recruitment of PI3K on one side of a latrunculin - treated cell shows local and transient Rac activation . This suggests that an actin - independent inhibition process is present in this context . C ) To test the spatial range of this inhibition , we ﬁrst stimulated one side of the cell to elicit a local transient Rac response , then brieﬂy removed the input before globally activating PI3K . This revealed a shadow in which the pre - stimulated portion of the cell showed a weaker response than the naive portion of the cell , demonstrating local Rac inhibition at the site of ﬁrst stimulation . See Movie S5 for an animated version of this data . to global stimulation , we observe that the largest fold - change for both PIP 3 and Rac biosensor recruitment occurs 3 - 5 µm away from the point at the center of the leading edge of the cell . The combination of insensitivity at the backs of cells ( 21 , 23 , 26 – 29 ) and local - inhibition - based insensitivity at the extreme fronts of cells could explain this peak . Our data suggest the existence of local inhibition at the fronts of cells , as predicted by Meinhardt ( 3 ) . This front - based in - hibition is separate from previously observed inhibition ( or lack of responsiveness ) at the backs of cells and is instead expected to enable directional plasticity . To directly demon - strate local negative regulation at the fronts of cells , we next sought to remove confounding effects from global negative feedback . Direct demonstration of local negative feedback for Rac activation . In HL - 60 cells with an intact cytoskele - ton , protrusion generation causes rapid actin - dependent in - creases in membrane tension throughout the cell ( 10 ) ; thus , we expect cells to limit protrusion growth via mechanically - mediated global negative feedback ( 5 , 11 , 42 , 43 ) . Since both global and local inhibition act on and are acted on by similar Town et al . | Rac negative feedback links local PIP 3 rate - of - change to dynamic control of neutrophil guidance bioR χ iv | 5 . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license available under a ( which was not certified by peer review ) is the author / funder , who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted January 3 , 2023 . ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 12 . 30 . 521706 doi : bioRxiv preprint cues , they are difﬁcult to disambiguate . To isolate the ef - fects of local inhibition , we blocked actin - based protrusions with latrunculin , preventing activation of mechanically - gated global inhibition . Inhibiting this particular node is also ex - pected to interrupt positive feedback ( 8 ) ( Fig . 1B ) , leaving only the putative inﬂuence of local negative regulation ( Fig . 3A ) . To avoid previously observed oscillatory dynamics of Rac ac - tivity in latrunculin - treated differentiated HL - 60 cells ( 20 – 22 ) , we elected to use undifferentiated HL - 60 cells , which retain the ability to generate protrusions ( 10 ) in response to opto - PI3K stimulation , but are basally quiescent . Latrunculin treatment did not interfere with the ability of our optogenetic tool to generate PIP 3 and subsequently activate Rac in this context ( Fig . 3B ) . Upon continued , constant local activation of PIP 3 , as read out by our PIP 3 reporter PH - Akt , we ob - served a transient activation and then a decline in Rac activ - ity as read out by our Rac biosensor Pak - PBD . We conﬁrmed this transient Rac activation using an ELISA - like Rac acti - vation assay ( Rac 1 , 2 , 3 GLISA assay , Cytoskeleton Inc ) in latrunculin - treated cells ( Fig . S3 ) . The transient Rac response in latrunculin - treated cells sug - gests a mode of actin - independent inhibition . To determine the spatial range of this inhibition , we subjected cells to a secondary global stimulus following local activation . When we stimulated a small portion of the cell , we observed a tran - sient increase in the localization of the Rac biosensor . When we next allowed the cell to recover brieﬂy in the absence of optogenetic input , a subsequent global stimulation elicited an asymmetric Rac response that was stronger on the previously unstimulated side of the cell compared to the pre - stimulated side ( Fig . 3C ; Movie S5 ) . Though the timing of the pulses differed slightly between experiments , we consistently ob - served a spatial reversal in the direction of the Rac response following global stimulation . Furthermore , by applying tem - porally spaced global pulses , we identiﬁed a 90s recovery half - time of the response ( Fig . S4 ) . Together these data sug - gest that local PIP 3 generation leads to recruitment of a re - versible , locally acting , moderately persistent Rac inhibitor . Local inhibition operates through negative feedback , linking front signaling to input rates . Beyond its potential role in avoiding the locking of cell polarity decisions , we ex - amined how local Rac inhibition could inﬂuence the interpre - tation of guidance cues . Bacteria chemotax by using integral negative feedback to temporally sense spatial signal gradi - ents while they move through them ( 46 , 47 ) . The internally - measured rate of change of the external signal is used to bias tumbling frequency and accomplish a biased random walk ( 48 ) . We wondered whether the local front - based inhibition we had identiﬁed in neutrophils might play an analogous role in their interpretation of guidance cues by enabling local tem - poral sensing . To investigate this possibility , we took advan - tage of the titratability and controllability of our system to un - derstand how PIP 3 input dynamics regulate the Rac response . If Rac operates through an integral negative feedback circuit , it should respond to the rate of change in PIP 3 ( analogously to ( 49 , 50 ) ) ; A rapid increase in PIP 3 should generate a sig - niﬁcant transient increase in Rac activation , whereas a slow ramp of PIP 3 to the same concentration should generate little to no Rac activation , and this is precisely what we observe ( Fig . 4A ) . Rate - sensitive responses are a general feature of negative - feedback - based adaptive systems , and the Rac activity re - sponse to differing PIP 3 input dynamics is consistent with adaptation through negative feedback rather than through an - other mechanism like incoherent feedforward ( 44 , 45 , 51 – 53 ) . To further evaluate whether our system is operating through negative feedback , we tested the effect of mild Rac inhibition on the dynamics of the response . If the system op - erates through a Rac - dependent negative feedback loop , then mild inhibition of Rac should disrupt that negative feedback and impair adaptation . By partially inhibiting the ability of Rac to signal to its downstream effectors with mild EHT1864 treatment ( 54 ) , we observed a dose - dependent shift from transient to sustained Rac activation following an opto - PI3K step input ( Fig . 4B ) . These data suggest that Rac activity is required for Rac inhibition , consistent with Rac - dependent negative feedback . By operating through adaptive negative feedback , a Meinhardt - style local inhibitor could use rates of local in - put signal changes ( as opposed to the absolute magnitude of input signals ) to regulate protrusion lifetimes . This rate dependence is closely related to the pilot pseudopod model for gradient interpretation , as initially proposed by Gerisch ( 25 ) . This model proposes that migrating cells can navigate chemoattractant gradients across many orders of magnitude by maintaining ( randomly initiated ) pseudopodia that experi - ence a temporal increase in signal as they extend up a gradient at the expense of those that experience a temporal decrease in signal when extending down a gradient . We next sought to investigate whether local changes in PIP 3 levels regulate cell guidance , even in the absence of PIP 3 gradients across the front . Fronts of polarized cells respond to input signal rates , consistent with a pilot pseudopod model . Our work demonstrates that local negative feedback makes biochemical front signals in cells sensitive to temporal changes in signal - ing inputs , consistent with a pilot pseudopod model of gradi - ent interpretation . We returned to using our computer - vision - based stimulation assays in moving cells to extend our bio - chemical signaling observations to cell guidance decisions . We sought to disambiguate the role of temporal changes in input signals from their absolute levels by performing an ex - periment analogous to our shadow experiment ( Fig . 3 ) . Since the backs of cells are relatively insensitive to stimulation , we focused on stimulation of the lateral edges of migrating cells . When we persistently activate cells with local opto - PI3K stimulation at one lateral edge , we can direct them to contin - uously turn clockwise ( for right edge stimulation ) or counter - clockwise ( for left edge stimulation , see Movie S3 ) . By switching cells from local to global activation , both edges of the cell attain the same ﬁnal level of signaling but through dif - ferent histories . The pre - stimulated edge will have a smaller increase than the stimulus - naive edge ( Fig . 5A ) . If cells re - 6 | bioR χ iv Town et al . | Rac negative feedback links local PIP 3 rate - of - change to dynamic control of neutrophil guidance . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license available under a ( which was not certified by peer review ) is the author / funder , who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted January 3 , 2023 . ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 12 . 30 . 521706 doi : bioRxiv preprint Control25 uM EHT1864 50 uM EHT1864 Time Time A B t 1 / 2 = 103 s , Smax = 1 . 24 PIP3 Biosensor ( PHAkt - Halo ) Rac - GTP Biosensor ( Pak - PBD - mCherry ) t 1 / 2 = 10 . 9 s , Smax = 1 . 27 PIP3 Biosensor ( PHAkt - Halo ) Rac - GTP Biosensor ( Pak - PBD - mCherry ) Expected effect of Latrunculin : Latrunculin & disrupted negative regulation : R a c A c t i v i t y R a c A c t i v i t y Time ( s ) Time ( s ) M e a n N o r m a li z e d F l u o r e sc e n c e M e a n N o r m a li z e d F l u o r e sc e n c e Time ( s ) M e a n N o r m a li z e d F l u o r e sc e n c e Fig . 4 . Local inhibition sensitizes cells to temporal changes in input signals via Rac - dependent negative feedback A ) Exposing opto - PI3K cells to a sudden increase in blue light causes transient Rac activation despite sustained PIP 3 generation . In contrast , a slowly increasing ramp of PIP 3 fails to elicit a strong Rac response even when similar PIP 3 levels are generated to the step input protocol ( left ) . The difference in responses to the rate - of - change of the input is consistent with adaptation via a negative feedback loop . ( 44 , 45 ) S max and t 1 / 2 refer to the saturation and half - times to saturation respectively for the ﬁt PIP 3 curves . B ) Pharmacologically inhibiting the ability of Rac to signal to downstream signaling partners shifts the dynamics of the Rac response toward a less adaptive and more linear response regime . These data suggest a Rac - dependent negative feedback loop . spond to signaling levels without history dependence , they should respond to the global stimulus as they did previously ( Fig . 2E , blue traces ) . In contrast , if cells respond to tem - poral changes in input signals ( such as through the local Rac negative feedback loop we have demonstrated ) , we expect cells to reverse directionality due to the larger increase on their stimulus - naive sides . Our experiments conﬁrm the lo - cal temporal interpretation of PIP 3 inputs ( Fig . 5B ; Movie S6 ) in a manner analogous to our shadow experiments in latrunculin - treated cells ( Fig . 3C ; Movie S5 ) . We estimated the average angular velocity ( in rotations per minute ) of cells during each of the three phases of the as - say across replicates of this assay ( Fig . 5C ; Movie S7 ) . We found statistically signiﬁcant changes in these velocities ( Fig . 5D ) . The p values shown indicate the likelihood of observing these distributions under the null hypothesis of an average angular velocity of zero . We veriﬁed that the PIP 3 biosensor matched the expected temporal proﬁle in Fig . 5A on the pop - ulation level ( Fig . 5E ) . Though the left and right sides of mi - grating cells reach the same steady state , the rates of change differ between the two sides . Turning behaviors of the cells coincide with the temporal changes in the input signal rather than the absolute levels of the signal . As further validation , we measured initial rates of PIP 3 accumulation ( as assayed via PHAkt recruitment ) on each side for individual cells dur - ing the assay . In most cases , the initial rates matched the expected behavior ( Fig . S5 ) . By performing an experiment where we subject cells to local temporal changes in PIP 3 in the absence of absolute differ - ences in PIP 3 across the cell , we demonstrate the sensitivity of cells to local signaling changes for cell guidance , consis - tent with a pilot pseudopod model of gradient interpretation . Discussion To navigate toward sites of injury and inﬂammation , neu - trophils must balance the decisiveness required to move in a single direction with the ﬂexibility required to dynamically update this direction when appropriate . Previous work has shown that cells use local positive feedback ( 7 – 9 , 55 ) and global negative feedback ( 5 , 10 , 11 , 42 , 43 ) to consolidate protrusive activity in a single direction , but these mechanisms alone do not account for the ﬂexibility of directional orien - tation ( 3 ) . Our current work suggests that a Rac - dependent local inhibitor plays a key role in neutrophil guidance by en - Town et al . | Rac negative feedback links local PIP 3 rate - of - change to dynamic control of neutrophil guidance bioR χ iv | 7 . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license available under a ( which was not certified by peer review ) is the author / funder , who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted January 3 , 2023 . ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 12 . 30 . 521706 doi : bioRxiv preprint Time L o c a l P I P 3 I II III I II III A B C CCW CW p = 3 . 7E - 4 p = 3 . 4E - 8 p = 0 . 46 D E I III II Novelty / Rate Advantage " Running Start " Advantage No History Dependence E s t i m a t e d A n g u l a r V e l o c i t y ( R P M ) P I P 3 B i o s e n s o r I n t e n s i t y d / d t ( P I P 3 B i o s e n s o r I n t e n s i t y ) ( A U / m i n ) Time ( s ) Directionality at beginning of III Location at beginning of III Prestimulated Side Naive Side Prestimulated Side ( fit ) Naive Side ( fit ) Fig . 5 . Cell fronts respond to local temporal changes in input signals A ) To probe how cells decode the spatial and temporal features of input signals , we designed a test of the pilot pseudopod model by providing cells with different rates of change on their left and right sides despite the same absolute amount of signal on both sides . Cells are ﬁrst tracked in I , then continuously stimulated ( via opto - PI3K ) at their left edge in II , and ﬁnally exposed to global illumination at III . This is expected to cause both sides of the cell to arrive at the same level of PIP 3 signals with different histories . B ) A tracked and stimulated cell responding to the stimulus scheme described in A . See Movie S6 for an animated version of this subpanel . Scale bars : 50 µm . C ) Tracks of many cells responding to the stimulus scheme described in A show a net bias towards reversal following global stimulation . See Movie S7 for an animated demonstration of this behavior . Scale bars : 50 µm . D ) Angular velocities were estimated for cells at the beginning of each of the phases described in A . p values shown describe a t - test for whether the mean of each distribution is zero . Cells transition from counterclockwise motion to clockwise motion following the switch from local stimulation ( phase II ) to global stimulation ( phase III ) . E ) The PIP 3 signal on the left and right sides of migrating cells was calculated and ﬁt with a time - delayed saturable function . As expected , both sides approach the same steady state at the end of phase III , but their histories differ . The changes in cell directionality correlate with the local derivative of input signals rather than the absolute levels of the input signal , consistent with the pilot pseudopod model of gradient interpretation . abling this ﬂexibility . We leverage our ability to direct cell migration with optoge - netically controlled PI3K to compare the relative responsive - ness of different regions of polarized cells and to ask which spatiotemporal features of PIP 3 signals inform cell orienta - tion in a two - dimensional environment . Inhibiting both the global negative and local positive feedback loops that orga - nize cell polarity , we use our optogenetic approach to provide direct evidence of a local inhibitor of Rac activation ( as seen in our “shadow” experiments , Fig . 3 ) . The activity of this in - hibitor could explain how migrating cells avoid the polarity - locking behavior expected from local positive feedback and global inhibition alone ( 3 ) . By controlling the dynamics of PIP 3 accumulation in this same context , we demonstrate that a Rac - dependent negative feedback loop enables cells to de - tect the local rate of change of PIP 3 ( Fig . 4 ) . Taking into ac - count reduced local responsiveness at the backs of cells ( Fig . 2 ) ( consistent with earlier studies ( 21 , 23 , 26 – 29 ) ) , we lever - 8 | bioR χ iv Town et al . | Rac negative feedback links local PIP 3 rate - of - change to dynamic control of neutrophil guidance . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license available under a ( which was not certified by peer review ) is the author / funder , who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted January 3 , 2023 . ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 12 . 30 . 521706 doi : bioRxiv preprint + - Meinhardt Local Inhibition < 0 dSdt ( e . g . in stationarygradients ) " this way ! " " try again ! " > 0 dSdt Pilot Pseudopod Model InsensitiveFronts InsensitiveBacks Sensitivesides Capacityfor PIP 3 increase ? Capacityfor Rac signaling ? ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ Peripheral Attention Model Local inhibition operates through adaptive negative feedback Basal front signal is high & Backs of cells are insensitive Fig . 6 . Cells interpret gradients using a modiﬁed pilot pseudopod program In this work , we have found direct evidence for Meinhardt - style local inhibition operating on the PI3K to Rac signaling axis . Furthermore , we have presented evidence that this local Rac negative feedback loop links the rate of change of input signals like PI3K signaling to the magnitude of Rac activation . This rate sensitivity is an expectation of the pilot pseudopod model . In the more complex case of a migrating cell , we ﬁnd that the principles of the pilot pseudopod model apply with two modiﬁcations : the ﬁrst being that the backs of cells are relatively insensitive to stimulation ( as previously observed Arrieumerlou and Meyer 2005 ; Yoo et al . 2010 ; Nakajima et al . 2014 ; Hadjitheodorou et al . 2021 ) ; the second being that there exists a basal front - to - back gradient of PIP 3 in migrating cells . Taken together , these two modiﬁcations make the lateral edges of migrating cells highly sensitive to increases in PIP 3 , implicating local inhibition in the ability of cells to turn and reﬁne their direction during chemotaxis . age our optogenetic inputs and an imaging - based control sys - tem to present cells with inputs that generate local changes in PIP 3 in the absence of spatial differences in PIP 3 ( Fig . 5 ) . These experiments demonstrate that cells can decode the lo - cal rate of stimulus change for cell guidance . Our observations are consistent with the classic pilot pseu - dopod model , in which the rate of change of stimulus ( rather than the absolute concentration of stimulus ) is used to inﬂu - ence pseudopod lifetimes for cell guidance during chemo - taxis ( 25 ) . We extend this model to account for our observa - tions of polarized signal sensitivity ( similar to ( 26 ) ) . Since Rac responds to changes in PIP 3 , high basal signal at the fronts of cells renders them less sensitive than adjacent re - gions that have a larger capacity for increases in PIP 3 . The local negative feedback at the fronts of cells keeps the front from locking and enables cells to turn toward lateral edges experiencing temporal increases in signal . In much the same way that signals in peripheral vision direct the center of visual attention ( 56 – 58 ) , temporal changes in signal at the periphery of the cell front alter its directionality . The sensitivity to temporal input cues however does not ex - tend to the backs of cells ( Fig . 2 ) ( 21 , 23 , 26 – 29 ) . Func - tionally , this insensitivity may help cells to integrate direc - tional choices from the front over time through contractility and actin ﬂow - dependent mechanisms ( 59 , 60 ) . This inte - gration may be particularly important in shallow or changing gradients that may be too “noisy” for cells to accurately inter - pret instantaneously . For example , in shallow gradients , Dic - tyostelium ( 61 ) and zebraﬁsh neutrophils ( 60 ) tend to orient themselves through gradient - biased left and right adjustments rather than through more dramatic reversals . In these con - texts and in our work , cells maintain a rough heading while also retaining the ability to ﬁne - tune directionality through these left - right “peripheral” adjustments . The hybrid spatiotemporal guidance strategy we have de - scribed stands in contrast to systems of gradient interpreta - tion that rely on only temporal cues , like those of bacteria . Because of their small size and rapid movement , bacteria use a purely temporal mechanism to migrate towards chemoat - tractants ( 48 ) . Eukaryotic cells are larger and slower and take advantage of spatial signal processing to interpret guidance cues ( 62 ) . However , eukaryotic cells do not solely decode gradients spatially but appear to also incorporate temporal information in their guidance ( 25 ) . Importantly , the tempo - ral information could either come from cells moving up ﬁxed spatial gradients , or could come from dynamically evolving or even self - generated gradients ( 63 – 65 ) . Experiments di - rectly manipulating the spatiotemporal features of soluble chemoattractant gradients have shown that neutrophils re - verse direction when they experience a temporal decrease in chemoattractant ( 66 ) and that cells require temporal increases in overall signaling during chemotaxis for efﬁcient guidance ( 67 ) . Our results suggest that these behaviors could be ex - plained by the presence of a local Rac inhibitor at the fronts of cells and that studies examining cell behaviors in stable , dy - namic , or self - generated gradients should consider both spa - tial and temporal features of these gradients as cells navigate them . Materials and Methods Cell culture . HL - 60 cells were grown in RPMI 1640 me - dia supplemented with l - glutamine and 25 mM Hepes ( Me - diatech ) and containing 10 % ( vol / vol ) heat - inactivated fetal bovine serum ( Gibco ) . Cultures were maintained at a density Town et al . | Rac negative feedback links local PIP 3 rate - of - change to dynamic control of neutrophil guidance bioR χ iv | 9 . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license available under a ( which was not certified by peer review ) is the author / funder , who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted January 3 , 2023 . ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 12 . 30 . 521706 doi : bioRxiv preprint of 0 . 2 – 1 . 0 million cells / ml at 37°C / 5 % CO2 . HL - 60 cells were differentiated by adding 1 . 5 % ( vol / vol ) DMSO ( Sigma - Aldrich ) to actively growing cells and incubated for 5 days . HEK293T cells ( used to generate lentivirus for transduction of HL - 60 cells ) were grown in DMEM ( Mediatech ) contain - ing 10 % ( vol / vol ) heat - inactivated fetal bovine serum and maintained at 37°C / 5 % CO2 . Plasmids . Plasmids were assembled using a Golden - Gate - based modular cloning toolkit ( 68 , 69 ) . The two key constructs for opto - PI3K system are based on the iLID system ( 31 ) and include a mTagBFP2 - tagged , membrane localized , light sensitive component : AsLov2 - SsrA - mTagBFP2 - CAAX and an EGFP - tagged translocatable PI3K - binding component : ISH2 - EGFP - SspBMicro . Upon 470 nm light exposure , the translocatable component local - izes to the plasma membrane and the ISH2 domain recruits endogenous PI3K to the plasma membrane ( 8 , 37 ) . Biosensors for PIP 3 ( 32 – 34 ) and active Rac ( 35 ) were also created using the modular cloning kit and were designed to be continuously imaged during experiments without activat - ing the blue - light - sensitive optogenetic system . For experi - ments shown in this paper , PIP 3 was detected using a Halo - tagged ( 70 ) PH domain from Akt labeled with Janelia Fluor 646 ( 71 ) , and active Rac was detected using an mCherry - tagged Pak - PBD domain from Pak1 . Transduction of HL - 60 cells . HEK293T cells were seeded into six - well plates and grown until about 80 % conﬂuent . For each well , 1 . 5 µg pHR vector ( containing the appropri - ate transgene ) , 0 . 167 µg vesicular stomatitis virus – G vector , and 1 . 2 µg cytomegalovirus 8 . 91 vector were mixed and pre - pared for transfection using TransIT - 293 transfection reagent ( Mirus Bio ) per the manufacturer’s instructions . After trans - fection , cells were grown for an additional 3 d , after which virus - containing supernatants were harvested and concen - trated 20 - fold using a Lenti - X Concentrator ( Takara Bio Inc . ) per the manufacturer’s instructions . Concentrated viruses were frozen and stored at - 80°C until needed . For all trans - ductions , the thawed virus was mixed with about 0 . 3 million cells in growth media supplemented with polybrene ( 8 µg / ml ) and incubated overnight . Cells expressing desired transgenes were isolated by FACS . Preparation of cells for microscopy . Cells expressing Halo fusion proteins were stained with 10 nM JF646 ( Janelia ) for 10 - 15 minutes at 37°C in complete media and then rinsed once with complete media ( RPMI with 10 % FBS ) before placing cells in reduced - serum media for migration assays . We used an under - agarose preparation ( 72 ) with reduced serum ( RPMI with 2 % serum ) to keep cells adjacent to the coverglass for TIRF imaging and optogenetic stimulation . This preparation involved layering 2 - 2 . 5 % low melting point agarose onto cells after they had been allowed to attach to the glass for 10 - 15 minutes . Microscopy Hardware . Hardware used for the experiments included an Eclipse Ti inverted microscope equipped with a motorized laser TIRF illumination unit , a Borealis beam - conditioning unit ( Andor Technology ) , a 60× Plan Apochro - mat TIRF 1 . 49 NA objective ( Nikon ) , an iXon Ultra electron - multiplying charge - coupled device camera , and a laser merge module ( LMM5 ; Spectral Applied Research ) equipped with 405 - , 488 - , 561 - , and 640 - nm laser lines . All hardware was controlled using Micro - Manager ( 36 , 38 ) ( University of Cal - ifornia , San Francisco ) , and all experiments were performed at 37°C and 5 % CO2 . Activity of opto - PI3K was controlled via a 470 - nm ( blue ) LED ( Lightspeed Technologies ) that transmitted light through a custom DMD ( Andor Technology ) at varying in - tensities by connecting the LEDs to the analog outputs of a digital - to - analogue converter and setting the LED voltages using serial commands via custom Python code . Our micro - scope is equipped with two stacked dichroic turrets such that samples can be simultaneously illuminated with LEDs us - ing a 488 - nm longpass dichroic ﬁlter ( Chroma Technology Corp . ) in the upper turret while also placing the appropriate dichroic ( Chroma Technology Corp . ) in the lower turret for TIRF microscopy . Automated microscopy and light - activation pipeline . Images were collected , and light was spatially patterned us - ing customized tracking and light - patterning code written in python and making use of Pycromanager ( 40 ) . The code we used for our experiments and analysis is available on GitHub ( https : / / github . com / weinerlab ) . In brief , a program scanned locations in a prepared well while running a segmentation algorithm at each location . If a seg - mented object was found to be an appropriate size and inten - sity , the program would then image that object for 30 seconds to test whether it was moving at a speed appropriate for a mi - grating cell . If so , it moved that object into the center of the ﬁeld of view and initiated a tracking and stimulus protocol to track the cell over time and deliver programmed stimuli described in this paper . Image and Data Analysis . Segmentation and background correction . Collected TIRF images were segmented based on ﬂuorescence intensity from the PHAkt channel . Background corrections were accom - plished for each channel by ﬁrst segmenting the backgrounds of images , then ﬁtting either a plane z = ax + by + c ( 1 ) ( for 400px - 400px cropped images ) or a two - dimensional quadratic equation z = ax 2 + by 2 + cxy + dx + ey + f ( 2 ) ( for full size 1024px - 1024px images ) to the selected back - ground pixel intensities . After background subtraction , if a cell’s average intensity was less than 200 units , it was ex - cluded from analysis due to unreliable baseline normaliza - tion . 10 | bioR χ iv Town et al . | Rac negative feedback links local PIP 3 rate - of - change to dynamic control of neutrophil guidance . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license available under a ( which was not certified by peer review ) is the author / funder , who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted January 3 , 2023 . ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 12 . 30 . 521706 doi : bioRxiv preprint Global biosensor quantiﬁcation . For quantiﬁcation of biosensor dynamics in single cells , we ﬁrst segmented single cells and background - subtracted the images . In some cases , cells were too dense to segment accurately , so we instead estimated the centers of cells by blurring the image and using a peak ﬁnding algorithm . We then used a 20 by 20 pixel ( 4 . 3 by 4 . 3 µm ) square centered at those locations as a sampled approximation of whole - cell dynamics . We next took background - subtracted single cell average traces and divided each one by the baseline pre - stimulus intensity ( we excluded cells with a baseline background - subtracted ﬂuorescence below 100 units to avoid errors from dividing by small numbers ) . These normalized traces were then averaged together . Corresponding timestamps were extracted from Micromanager data . Classiﬁcation of movement toward frontward stimuli in two - spot assays . The distance traveled toward each potential site was calculated and classiﬁed as going toward either the frontward stimulus , the rearward stimulus , or neither if the cell did not move more than 20 µm in either direction . These “neither” cells were frequently nonresponders that appeared to have lost expression of one or both of the optogenetic com - ponents . Fold - change in biosensor recruitment as function of dis - tance from front . The front of the cell was deﬁned as the point on the boundary of the segmented region that intersected with the vector describing the direction of motion of the cell . After background correction , all pixels were binned based on their distance from this point and averaged . Shown in Fig . 2F is data from 39 cells . The initial front - back pre - stimulus dis - tributions were calculated and compared to the post - stimulus distribution to generate this data . Detection of reversals in two - spot assays . To detect rever - sals in directionality during the two - spot assays shown in Fig . 2G , we ﬁrst slightly smoothed the cell trajectories in x and y using a Savitzky - Golay ﬁlter ( window length of 9 and polynomial order 3 ) and then calculated the angle and dis - placement between successive frames . We disregarded an - gles from timepoints where the displacement was less than 2 µm / min as these were unreliable measurements . Instead , we assume these values were unchanged from the last conﬁ - dently measured angle . Finally , we “unwrapped” the values , which accounts for the periodicity of angular measurements , converting the values into accumulative measurements by adding or subtracting multiples of 2 π where necessary . For each cell , we then classiﬁed movement as being aligned with a stimulus if it was within 0 . 4 radians of the angle of that stimulus ( in either direction ) . If cells spent any time classi - ﬁed as being aligned with one stimulus and the other during the same continuous period of stimulation , they were consid - ered reversers . Rac biosensor polarization metric . As a metric for calculat - ing the directionality of the Rac biosensor distribution in Fig . 3 , we found the vector given by the difference between the unweighted center of mass of the segmented cell and the cen - ter of mass weighted by the ﬂuorescence signal in each frame during the local to global stimulation protocol . We then took the magnitude of the component of this vector in the direc - tion of optogenetic stimulation and subtracted the average pre - stimulus values to account for differences in illumination or coverslip proximity . Values shown in the graph are ap - proximately when directional signals peaked on average ( 50 s post - stimulus ) . Fitting curves to PIP 3 accumulation dynamics . To estimate half - times for PIP 3 accumulation , we ﬁt a piecewise dynamic model to the population - averaged , background - subtracted , and baseline - normalized ﬂuorescence data using scipy’s curve ﬁt function . The equation was f ( t ) = ( 1 , if t < τ s − ( s − 1 ) e b ( t − τ ) , if t ≥ τ ( 3 ) where s is the saturation value , tau represents an adjustable delay , and b is related to the half - time : t 1 / 2 = − ln ( 2 ) b ( 4 ) Similarly , for the curves shown in Fig . 5 , we used a two - stage saturable function : f ( t ) =   1 , if t < τ 1 s 1 − ( s 1 − 1 ) e b 1 ( t − τ 1 ) , if τ 1 ≥ t ≥ τ 2 s 2 − ( s 2 − v ) e b 2 ( t − τ 2 ) , if t > τ 2 ( 5 ) where v = s 1 − ( s 1 − 1 ) e b 1 ( τ 2 − τ 1 ) ( 6 ) Estimation of angular velocity . To estimate angular velocity of continuously - turning cells shown in Fig . 5D , we processed the angular movement of cells as described above for de - tection of reversals in two - spot assays . We then ﬁt a line to the angle values as functions of time , recorded the slope values , and converted them into revolutions per minute . For pre - stimulus velocities ( I ) , the entire one - minute pre - stimulus time period was used . For the local stimulus velocities ( II ) , the two minute period immediately preceding the switch to global stimulation was used . For the global stimulus veloc - ities ( III ) , the two minute period immediately following the switch to global stimulation was used . Spatial dynamics of PHAkt dynamics and estimation of ini - tial rates . To estimate the PIP 3 dynamics on the left and right sides of cells as they were stimulated according to the schematic in Fig . 5A , we calculated the cell direction and used that as an axis to deﬁne the left and right sides of the cells . We calculated the background - corrected mean ﬂuores - cence signals on each side over time and averaged the global - baseline - corrected dynamics to produce Fig . 5E . We ﬁt an equation to these dynamics to better estimate the rates of ac - cumulation on each side . We estimated rates for individual cells on their left and right halves by ﬁtting a line to the sig - nal during the ﬁrst 30 s of stimulus response . Town et al . | Rac negative feedback links local PIP 3 rate - of - change to dynamic control of neutrophil guidance bioR χ iv | 11 . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license available under a ( which was not certified by peer review ) is the author / funder , who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted January 3 , 2023 . ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 12 . 30 . 521706 doi : bioRxiv preprint Measurement of Rac - GTP by GLISA . For biochemical veriﬁcation of Rac - GTP dynamics in response to acute opto - genetic activation of PIP 3 , we used a colorimetric Rac 1 , 2 , 3 - GLISA ( Cytoskeleton Inc ) . After testing several cell densities to determine the linear range of the assay , we settled on using 2E5 undifferentiated HL - 60 cells per sample . Following this , 2E5 cells in 10 uL DPBS were placed in centrifuge tubes and exposed to a sat - urating dose of blue LED light for varying amounts of time . Cells were lysed in 120 µL ice cold GL36 buffer and 100 µL lysate was transferred into ice - cold tubes and immediately snap - frozen in liquid nitrogen . The remaining 20 µL were used to verify that each of the samples had similar protein concentrations ( of approximately 0 . 16 mg / mL ) . Once all samples were collected , the 100 uL aliquots were thawed in a room temperature water bath and processed ac - cording to the manufacturer’s instructions . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS WethankAnnePipathsoukandBrianGrazianoforhelpfuldiscussion , KirstinMeyer , Ben Winer , and Tamas Nagy for a critical reading of the manuscript , and all mem - bers of the Weiner lab for their support . The JF646 HaloTag dye was kindly pro - vided by Dr . Luke Lavis . This work was supported by an NSF Predoctoral Fel - lowship ( JT ) , National Institutes of Health grant GM118167 ( ODW ) , National Sci - ence Foundation / Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council grant 2019598 ( ODW ) , the National Science Foundation Center for Cellular Construction ( DBI - 1548297 , ODW ) , and a Novo Nordisk Foundation grant for the Center for Geometrically Engineered Cellular Systems ( NNF17OC0028176 , ODW ) . References 1 . Alan Mathison Turing . The chemical basis of morphogen - esis . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . , 237 ( 641 ) : 37 – 72 , August 1952 . 2 . H Meinhardt and A Gierer . Applications of a theory of bio - logical pattern formation based on lateral inhibition . J . Cell Sci . , 15 ( 2 ) : 321 – 346 , 1974 . 3 . Hans Meinhardt . Orientation of chemotactic cells and growth cones : Models and mechanisms . J . Cell Sci . , 112 ( 17 ) : 2867 – 2874 , 1999 . 4 . Yuan Xiong , Chuan - Hsiang Huang , Pablo A Iglesias , and Peter N Devreotes . Cells navigate with a local - excitation , global - inhibition - biased excitable network . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . , 107 ( 40 ) : 17079 – 17086 , 2010 . 5 . Andrew R Houk , Alexandra Jilkine , Cecile O Mejean , Ros - tislav Boltyanskiy , Eric R Dufresne , Sigurd B Angenent , Steven J Altschuler , Lani F Wu , and Orion D Weiner . Mem - brane tension maintains cell polarity by conﬁning signals to the leading edge during neutrophil migration . Cell , 148 ( 1 - 2 ) : 175 – 188 , 2012 . 6 . Peter J M van Haastert , Ineke Keizer - Gunnink , and Arjan Kortholt . Coupled excitable ras and f - actin activation me - diates spontaneous pseudopod formation and directed cell movement . Mol . Biol . Cell , 28 ( 7 ) : 922 – 934 , 2017 . 7 . Orion D Weiner , Paul O Neilsen , Glenn D Prestwich , Marc W Kirschner , Lewis C Cantley , and Henry R Bourne . A PtdInsP ( 3 ) - and rho GTPase - mediated positive feedback loop regulates neutrophil polarity . Nat . Cell Biol . , 4 ( 7 ) : 509 – 513 , 2002 . 8 . Takanari Inoue and Tobias Meyer . Synthetic activation of endogenous PI3K and rac identiﬁes an AND - gate switch for cell polarization and migration . PLoS One , 3 ( 8 ) , 2008 . 9 . Andres M Lebensohn and Marc W Kirschner . Activation of the WAVE complex by coincident signals controls actin as - sembly . Mol . Cell , 36 ( 3 ) : 512 – 524 , November 2009 . 10 . Henry De Belly , Shannon Yan , Hudson Borja da Rocha , Sacha Ichbiah , Jason P Town , Hervé Turlier , Carlos Bus - tamante , and Orion D Weiner . Actin - driven protrusions gen - erate rapid long - range membrane tension propagation in cells . September 2022 . 11 . Alba Diz - Muñoz , Kevin Thurley , Sana Chintamen , Steven J Altschuler , Lani F Wu , Daniel A Fletcher , and Orion D Weiner . Membrane tension acts through PLD2 and mTORC2 to limit actin network assembly during neutrophil migration . PLoS Biol . , 14 ( 6 ) : e1002474 , June 2016 . 12 . Matthew P Neilson , Douwe M Veltman , Peter J M van Haastert , Steven D Webb , John A Mackenzie , and Robert H Insall . Chemotaxis : A feedback - based computational model robustly predicts multiple aspects of real cell behaviour . PLoS Biol . , 9 ( 5 ) : 1 – 11 , 2011 . 13 . Xuehua Xu , Martin Meier - Schellersheim , Jianshe Yan , and Tian Jin . Locally controlled inhibitory mechanisms are in - volved in eukaryotic GPCR - mediated chemosensing . J . Cell Biol . , 178 ( 1 ) : 141 – 153 , July 2007 . 14 . Yasutaka Ohta , John H Hartwig , and Thomas P Stossel . Fil - GAP , a rho - and ROCK - regulated GAP for rac binds ﬁlamin a to control actin remodelling . Nat . Cell Biol . , 8 ( 8 ) : 803 – 814 , August 2006 . 15 . Maria Carla Parrini , Amel Sadou - Dubourgnoux , Kazuhiro Aoki , Katsuyuki Kunida , Marco Biondini , Anastassia Hat - zoglou , Patrick Poullet , Etienne Formstecher , Charles Yea - man , Michiyuki Matsuda , Carine Rossé , and Jacques Ca - monis . SH3BP1 , an exocyst - associated RhoGAP , inacti - vates rac1 at the front to drive cell motility . Mol . Cell , 42 ( 5 ) : 650 – 661 , June 2011 . 16 . S de Beco , K Vaidžiulyt˙e , J Manzi , F Dalier , F di Federico , G Cornilleau , M Dahan , and M Coppey . Optogenetic dis - section of rac1 and cdc42 gradient shaping . Nat . Commun . , 9 ( 1 ) : 4816 , 2018 . 17 . Loic Fort , José Miguel Batista , Peter A Thomason , Heather J Spence , Jamie A Whitelaw , Luke Tweedy , Jen - nifer Greaves , Kirsty J Martin , Kurt I Anderson , Peter Brown , Sergio Lilla , Matthew P Neilson , Petra Tafelmeyer , Sara Zanivan , Shehab Ismail , David M Bryant , Nicholas C O Tomkinson , Luke H Chamberlain , Grant S Mastick , Robert H Insall , and Laura M Machesky . Fam49 / CYRI in - teracts with rac1 and locally suppresses protrusions . Nat . Cell Biol . , 20 ( 10 ) : 1159 – 1171 , 2018 . 18 . Jessica Diring , Stephane Mouilleron , Neil Q McDonald , and Richard Treisman . RPEL - family rhoGAPs link Rac / Cdc42 GTP loading to g - actin availability . Nat . Cell Biol . , 21 ( 7 ) : 845 – 855 , July 2019 . 19 . Xuehua Xu , Xi Wen , Douwe M Veltman , Ineke Keizer - Gunnink , Henderikus Pots , Arjan Kortholt , and Tian Jin . GPCR - controlled membrane recruitment of negative regula - tor C2GAP1 locally inhibits ras signaling for adaptation and long - range chemotaxis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . , 114 12 | bioR χ iv Town et al . | Rac negative feedback links local PIP 3 rate - of - change to dynamic control of neutrophil guidance . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license available under a ( which was not certified by peer review ) is the author / funder , who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted January 3 , 2023 . ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 12 . 30 . 521706 doi : bioRxiv preprint ( 47 ) : E10092 – E10101 , November 2017 . 20 . Grace E Peng , Sarah R Wilson , and Orion D Weiner . A pharmacological cocktail for arresting actin dynamics in liv - ing cells . Mol . Biol . Cell , 22 ( 21 ) : 3986 – 3994 , November 2011 . 21 . Ming Jie Wang , Yulia Artemenko , Wen Jie Cai , Pablo A Igle - sias , and Peter N Devreotes . The directional response of chemotactic cells depends on a balance between cytoskele - tal architecture and the external gradient . Cell Rep . , 9 ( 3 ) : 1110 – 1121 , 2014 . 22 . Hee Won Yang , Sean Collins , and Tobias Meyer . Locally excitable cdc42 signals steer cells during chemotaxis . Nat . Cell Biol . , 18 ( 2 ) : 191 – 201 , February 2016 . 23 . Sa Kan Yoo , Qing Deng , Peter J Cavnar , Yi I Wu , Klaus M Hahn , and Anna Huttenlocher . Differential regulation of pro - trusion and polarity by PI ( 3 ) K during neutrophil motility in live zebraﬁsh . Dev . Cell , 18 ( 2 ) : 226 – 236 , 2010 . 24 . Brian R Graziano , Delquin Gong , Karen E Anderson , Anne Pipathsouk , Anna R Goldberg , and Orion D Weiner . A mod - ule for rac temporal signal integration revealed with optoge - netics . J . Cell Biol . , 216 ( 8 ) : 2515 – 2531 , 2017 . 25 . G Gerisch , D Hülser , D Malchow , and U Wick . Cell commu - nication by periodic cyclic - AMP pulses . Philosophical Trans - actions of the Royal Society of London , 272 ( 915 ) : 181 – 192 , November 1975 . 26 . Cécile Arrieumerlou and Tobias Meyer . A local coupling model and compass parameter for eukaryotic chemotaxis . Dev . Cell , 8 ( 2 ) : 215 – 227 , 2005 . 27 . Akihiko Nakajima , Shuji Ishihara , Daisuke Imoto , and Satoshi Sawai . Rectiﬁed directional sensing in long - range cell migration . Nat . Commun . , 5 : 5367 , 2014 . 28 . Harrison V Prentice - Mott , Yasmine Meroz , Andreas Carl - son , Michael A Levine , Michael W Davidson , Daniel Ir - imia , Guillaume T Charras , L Mahadevan , and Jagesh V Shah . Directional memory arises from long - lived cytoskele - tal asymmetries in polarized chemotactic cells . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 113 ( 5 ) : 1267 – 1272 , 2016 . 29 . Amalia Hadjitheodorou , George R R Bell , Felix Ellett , Shashank Shastry , Daniel Irimia , Sean R Collins , and Julie A Theriot . Directional reorientation of migrating neu - trophils is limited by suppression of receptor input signaling at the cell rear through myosin II activity . Nat . Commun . , 12 ( 1 ) : 6619 , November 2021 . 30 . Toshiyuki Kakumoto and Takao Nakata . Optogenetic control of PIP3 : PIP3 is sufﬁcient to induce the Actin - Based active part of growth cones and is regulated via endocytosis . PLoS One , 8 ( 8 ) : 1 – 17 , 2013 . 31 . Gurkan Guntas , Ryan a Hallett , Seth P Zimmerman , Tishan Williams , Hayretin Yumerefendi , James E Bear , and Brian Kuhlman . Engineering an improved light - induced dimer ( iLID ) for controlling the localization and activity of signaling proteins . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 112 ( 1 ) : 112 – 117 , 2015 . 32 . M Frech , M Andjelkovic , E Ingley , K K Reddy , J R Falck , and B A Hemmings . High afﬁnity binding of inositol phosphates and phosphoinositides to the pleckstrin homology domain of RAC / protein kinase B and their inﬂuence on kinase activity . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 ( 13 ) : 8474 – 8481 , March 1997 . 33 . S J Watton and J Downward . Akt / PKB localisation and 3’ phosphoinositide generation at sites of epithelial cell - matrix and cell - cell interaction . Curr . Biol . , 9 ( 8 ) : 433 – 436 , April 1999 . 34 . Debasis Manna , Alexandra Albanese , Sun Park Wei , and Wonhwa Cho . Mechanistic basis of differential cellular responses of phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 - bisphosphate - and phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate - binding pleckstrin homology domains . J . Biol . Chem . , 282 ( 44 ) : 32093 – 32105 , 2007 . 35 . Supriya Srinivasan , Fei Wang , Suzana Glavas , Alexander Ott , Fred Hofmann , Klaus Aktories , Daniel Kalman , and Henry R Bourne . Rac and cdc42 play distinct roles in regu - lating PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 and polarity during neutrophil chemotaxis . J . Cell Biol . , 160 ( 3 ) : 375 – 385 , 2003 . 36 . Arthur Edelstein , Nenad Amodaj , Karl Hoover , Ron Vale , and Nico Stuurman . Computer control of microscopes using µmanager . Curr . Protoc . Mol . Biol . , Chapter 14 : Unit14 . 20 , October 2010 . 37 . Jared E Toettcher , Delquin Gong , Wendell A Lim , and Orion D Weiner . Light - based feedback for controlling intra - cellular signaling dynamics . Nat . Methods , 8 ( 10 ) : 837 – 839 , 2011 . 38 . Arthur D Edelstein , Mark A Tsuchida , Nenad Amodaj , Henry Pinkard , Ronald D Vale , and Nico Stuurman . Ad - vanced methods of microscope control using µ Manager software . J Biol Methods , 1 ( 2 ) , 2014 . 39 . Andreas Milias - Argeitis , Marc Rullan , Stephanie K Aoki , Pe - ter Buchmann , and Mustafa Khammash . Automated opto - genetic feedback control for precise and robust regulation of gene expression and cell growth . Nat . Commun . , 7 ( May ) : 12546 , 2016 . 40 . Henry Pinkard , Nico Stuurman , Ivan E Ivanov , Nicholas M Anthony , Wei Ouyang , Bin Li , Bin Yang , Mark A Tsuchida , Bryant Chhun , Grace Zhang , Ryan Mei , Michael Anderson , Douglas P Shepherd , Ian Hunt - Isaak , Raymond L Dunn , Wiebke Jahr , Saul Kato , Loïc A Royer , Jay R Thiagara - jah , Kevin W Eliceiri , Emma Lundberg , Shalin B Mehta , and Laura Waller . Pycro - Manager : open - source software for customized and reproducible microscope control . Nat . Methods , 18 ( 3 ) : 226 – 228 , March 2021 . 41 . G Gerisch and H U Keller . Chemotactic reorientation of granulocytes stimulated with micropipettes containing fMet - Leu - Phe . J . Cell Sci . , 10 : 1 – 10 , 1981 . 42 . Arnon D Lieber , Shlomit Yehudai - Resheff , Erin L Barnhart , Julie A Theriot , and Kinneret Keren . Membrane tension in rapidly moving cells is determined by cytoskeletal forces . Curr . Biol . , 23 ( 15 ) : 1409 – 1417 , 2013 . 43 . Jan Mueller , Gregory Szep , Maria Nemethova , Ingrid de Vries , Arnon D Lieber , Christoph Winkler , Karsten Kruse , J Victor Small , Christian Schmeiser , Kinneret Keren , Robert Hauschild , and Michael Sixt . Load adaptation of lamellipo - dial actin networks . Cell , 171 ( 1 ) : 188 – 200 . e16 , September 2017 . 44 . Hao Chang and Andre Levchenko . Adaptive molecular net - Town et al . | Rac negative feedback links local PIP 3 rate - of - change to dynamic control of neutrophil guidance bioR χ iv | 13 . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license available under a ( which was not certified by peer review ) is the author / funder , who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted January 3 , 2023 . ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 12 . 30 . 521706 doi : bioRxiv preprint works controlling chemotactic migration : Dynamic inputs and selection of the network architecture . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . , 368 ( 1629 ) , 2013 . 45 . Oliver Hoeller , Delquin Gong , and Orion D Weiner . How to understand and outwit adaptation . Dev . Cell , 28 ( 6 ) : 607 – 616 , 2014 . 46 . N Barkai and S Leibler . Robustness in simple biochemical networks . Nature , 387 ( 6636 ) : 913 – 917 , 1997 . 47 . T M Yi , Y Huang , M I Simon , and J Doyle . Robust perfect adaptation in bacterial chemotaxis through integral feed - back control . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . , 97 ( 9 ) : 4649 – 4653 , April 2000 . 48 . Howard C Berg and Douglas A Brown . Chemotaxis in es - cherichia coli analysed by three - dimensional tracking . Na - ture , 239 ( 5374 ) : 500 – 504 , October 1972 . 49 . Yuhai Tu , Thomas S Shimizu , and Howard C Berg . Mod - eling the chemotactic response of escherichia coli to time - varying stimuli . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . , 105 ( 39 ) : 14855 – 14860 , 2008 . 50 . Thomas S Shimizu , Yuhai Tu , and Howard C Berg . A mod - ular gradient - sensing network for chemotaxis in escherichia coli revealed by responses to time - varying stimuli . Mol . Syst . Biol . , 6 ( 382 ) : 1 – 14 , 2010 . 51 . Wenzhe Ma , Ala Trusina , Hana El - Samad , Wendell A Lim , and Chao Tang . Deﬁning network topologies that can achieve biochemical adaptation . Cell , 138 ( 4 ) : 760 – 773 , 2009 . 52 . C Joanne Wang , Adriel Bergmann , Benjamin Lin , Kyuri Kim , and Andre Levchenko . Diverse sensitivity thresholds in dy - namic signaling responses by social amoebae . Sci . Signal . , 5 ( 213 ) : 1 – 12 , 2012 . 53 . James E Ferrell . Perfect and near - perfect adaptation in cell signaling . Cell Systems , 2 ( 2 ) : 62 – 67 , 2016 . 54 . Cercina Onesto , Adam Shutes , Virginie Picard , Fabien Schweighoffer , and Channing J Der . Characterization of EHT 1864 , a novel small molecule inhibitor of rac family small GTPases . Methods Enzymol . , 439 : 111 – 129 , 2008 . 55 . Atsuo T Sasaki , Chris Janetopoulos , Susan Lee , Pascale G Charest , Kosuke Takeda , Lauren W Sundheimer , Ruedi Meili , Peter N Devreotes , and Richard A Firtel . G protein - independent Ras / PI3K / F - actin circuit regulates basic cell motility . J . Cell Biol . , 178 ( 2 ) : 185 – 191 , 2007 . 56 . M I Posner . Orienting of attention . Q . J . Exp . Psychol . , 32 ( 1 ) : 3 – 25 , February 1980 . 57 . Marisa Carrasco . Visual attention : the past 25 years . Vision Res . , 51 ( 13 ) : 1484 – 1525 , July 2011 . 58 . Tirin Moore and Marc Zirnsak . Neural mechanisms of se - lective visual attention . Annu . Rev . Psychol . , 68 : 47 – 72 , Jan - uary 2017 . 59 . Paolo Maiuri , Jean - François Rupprecht , Stefan Wieser , Ver - ena Ruprecht , Olivier Bénichou , Nicolas Carpi , Mathieu Coppey , Simon De Beco , Nir Gov , Carl - Philipp Heisen - berg , Carolina Lage Crespo , Franziska Lautenschlaeger , Maël Le Berre , Ana - Maria Lennon - Dumenil , Matthew Raab , Hawa - Racine Thiam , Matthieu Piel , Michael Sixt , and Raphaël Voituriez . Actin ﬂows mediate a universal coupling between cell speed and cell persistence . Cell , 161 ( 2 ) : 374 – 386 , April 2015 . 60 . Antonios Georgantzoglou , Hugo Poplimont , Hazel A Walker , Tim Lämmermann , and Milka Sarris . A two - step search and run response to gradients shapes leukocyte navigation in vivo . J . Cell Biol . , 221 ( 8 ) , August 2022 . 61 . Natalie Andrew and Robert H Insall . Chemotaxis in shallow gradients is mediated independently of PtdIns 3 - kinase by biased choices between random protrusions . Nat . Cell Biol . , 9 ( 2 ) : 193 – 200 , 2007 . 62 . Howard C Berg and Edward M Purcell . Physics of chemore - ception . Biophys . J . , 20 ( 2 ) : 193 – 219 , 1977 . 63 . Philippe V Afonso , Mirkka Janka - Junttila , Young Jong Lee , Colin P McCann , Charlotte M Oliver , Khaled A Aamer , Wolf - gang Losert , Marcus T Cicerone , and Carole A Parent . LTB4 is a signal - relay molecule during neutrophil chemo - taxis . Dev . Cell , 22 ( 5 ) : 1079 – 1091 , May 2012 . 64 . Tim Lämmermann , Philippe V Afonso , Bastian R Anger - mann , Ji Ming Wang , Wolfgang Kastenmüller , Carole A Par - ent , and Ronald N Germain . Neutrophil swarms require LTB4 and integrins at sites of cell death in vivo . Nature , 498 ( 7454 ) : 371 – 375 , June 2013 . 65 . Luke Tweedy , David A Knecht , Gillian M Mackay , and Robert H Insall . Self - Generated chemoattractant gradients : Attractant depletion extends the range and robustness of chemotaxis . PLoS Biol . , 14 ( 3 ) : e1002404 , March 2016 . 66 . E Albrecht and H R Petty . Cellular memory : neutrophil orientation reverses during temporally decreasing chemoat - tractant concentrations . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . , 95 ( 9 ) : 5039 – 5044 , April 1998 . 67 . Alexander J Aranyosi , Elisabeth A Wong , and Daniel Irimia . A neutrophil treadmill to decouple spatial and temporal sig - nals during chemotaxis . Lab Chip , 15 ( 2 ) : 549 – 556 , 2015 . 68 . Michael E Lee , William C DeLoache , Bernardo Cervantes , and John E Dueber . A highly characterized yeast toolkit for modular , multipart assembly . ACS Synth . Biol . , 4 ( 9 ) : 975 – 986 , 2015 . 69 . João Pedro Fonseca , Alain R Bonny , G Renuka Kumar , An - drew H Ng , Jason Town , Qiu Chang Wu , Elham Aslankoohi , Susan Y Chen , Galen Dods , Patrick Harrigan , Lindsey C Osimiri , Amy L Kistler , and Hana El - Samad . A toolkit for rapid modular construction of biological circuits in mam - malian cells . ACS Synth . Biol . , 8 ( 11 ) : 2593 – 2606 , November 2019 . 70 . Georgyi V Los , Lance P Encell , M G McDougall , Danette D Hartzell , Natasha Karassina , Chad Zimprich , M G Wood , Randy Learish , R F Ohane , Marjeta Urh , Dan Simpson , Jacqui Mendez , Kris Zimmerman , Paul Otto , Gediminas Vidugiris , Ji Zhu , Aldis Darzins , Dieter H Klaubert , Robert F Bulleit , and Keith V Wood . HatoTag : A novel protein label - ing technology for cell imaging and protein analysis . ACS Chem . Biol . , 3 ( 6 ) : 373 – 382 , 2008 . 71 . Jonathan B Grimm , Anand K Muthusamy , Yajie Liang , Tim - othy A Brown , William C Lemon , Ronak Patel , Rongwen Lu , John J Macklin , Philipp J Keller , Na Ji , and Luke D Lavis . A general method to ﬁne - tune ﬂuorophores for live - cell and in vivo imaging . Nat . Methods , 14 ( 10 ) : 987 – 994 , October 2017 . 14 | bioR χ iv Town et al . | Rac negative feedback links local PIP 3 rate - of - change to dynamic control of neutrophil guidance . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license available under a ( which was not certified by peer review ) is the author / funder , who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted January 3 , 2023 . ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 12 . 30 . 521706 doi : bioRxiv preprint 72 . Sean R Collins , Hee Won Yang , Kimberly M Bonger , Em - manuel G Guignet , Thomas J Wandless , and Tobias Meyer . Using light to shape chemical gradients for parallel and au - tomated analysis of chemotaxis . Mol . Syst . Biol . , 11 ( 4 ) : 804 , 2015 . Town et al . | Rac negative feedback links local PIP 3 rate - of - change to dynamic control of neutrophil guidance bioR χ iv | 15 . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license available under a ( which was not certified by peer review ) is the author / funder , who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted January 3 , 2023 . ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 12 . 30 . 521706 doi : bioRxiv preprint Supplementary Information Movie S1 : PIP 3 and Rac biosensors are locally recruited in response to local blue light stimulation . Movie S2 : Migrating cells respond to single - spot assays by altering their directionality . The live - cell ﬂuorescent Rac biosensor ( Pak - PBD - mCherry ) is shown . Scale bars are 50 µm . Movie S3 : Computer - controlled local activation can continuously turn migrating cells . The live - cell ﬂuorescent Rac biosensor ( Pak - PBD - mCherry ) is shown . X and Y axes units are µm . Movie S4 : Migrating cells respond to two - spot assays differently depending on the positioning of the spots . 180° - opposed spots create a winner - take - all scenario , while 90° - opposed , frontward - oriented spots cause cells to switch between the two directions . The live - cell ﬂuorescent Rac biosensor ( Pak - PBD - mCherry ) is shown . Scale bars are 50 µm . Movie S5 : A local - to - global stimulation assay shows direct evidence of local inhibition of Rac . The live - cell ﬂuorescent Rac biosensor ( Pak - PBD - mCherry ) is shown in latrunculin - treated cells ( 10 µM ) . Movie S6 : Migrating cell responding to local temporal changes in input signal . The live - cell ﬂuorescent Rac biosensor ( Pak - PBD - mCherry ) is shown . Scale bar is 50 µm . Movie S7 : Multiple migrating cells responding to local temporal changes in input signal . The live - cell ﬂuorescent Rac biosensor ( Pak - PBD - mCherry ) is shown . X and Y axes units are µm . 16 | bioR χ iv Town et al . | Rac negative feedback links local PIP 3 rate - of - change to dynamic control of neutrophil guidance . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license available under a ( which was not certified by peer review ) is the author / funder , who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted January 3 , 2023 . ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 12 . 30 . 521706 doi : bioRxiv preprint A v e r a g e F o l d - C h a n g e P o s t - S t i m u l a t i o n Distance from Front ( µm ) No Stimulation Front Stimulation Global Stimulation B A Lateral Coordinate ( µm ) T i m e ( s ) PIP 3 Biosensor Spatiotemporal Dynamics Fig . S1 : Spatial control of PIP 3 production using opto - PI3K . A ) TIRF microscopy of a latrunculin - treated ( 10 µM ) cell that was exposed to blue light , ﬁrst on its left side and then on its right . Shown on the right is a depiction of the PIP 3 biosensor ﬂuorescence signal ( PHAkt - Halo ( JF646 ) ) as a function of time and the lateral position of pixels . The ﬂuorescence signal closely corresponds in time and space to the blue - light activation regions , shown with the blue outline . See textbfMovie S1 for an animated version . B ) The average fold - change in PIP 3 biosensor distributions along the front - back axis in migrating differentiated cells following blue light stimulation . Front - localized blue light stimulation ( orange line ) elicits local increases in the biosensor speciﬁcally at the fronts of cells . Town et al . | Rac negative feedback links local PIP 3 rate - of - change to dynamic control of neutrophil guidance bioR χ iv | 17 . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license available under a ( which was not certified by peer review ) is the author / funder , who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted January 3 , 2023 . ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 12 . 30 . 521706 doi : bioRxiv preprint A B Fig . S2 : Cell paths in two - spot assays A ) Cells stimulated simultaneously at opposite lateral edges stably move in only one of the two directions separated by 180° . B ) Cells stimulated simultaneously at two sites near the front ( separated by 90° ) , sometimes show switching behaviors , ﬁrst following one site of opto - PI3K activation and then the other . 18 | bioR χ iv Town et al . | Rac negative feedback links local PIP 3 rate - of - change to dynamic control of neutrophil guidance . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license available under a ( which was not certified by peer review ) is the author / funder , who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted January 3 , 2023 . ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 12 . 30 . 521706 doi : bioRxiv preprint A B HRP Rac Ab Rac - GTP Pak - PBD Bottom of well of 96 well plate Time ( s ) N o r m a li z e d [ R a c - G T P ] Fig . S3 : Conﬁrmation of live - cell Rac biosensor dynamics with a Rac GLISA . A ) Schematic of the ELISA - like mechanism used in the assay . Plate - bound Pak - PBD binds only the active form of Rac ( Rac - GTP ) . This can then be detected and quantiﬁed through a colorimetric assay using an HRP - conjugated Rac antibody . B ) GLISA - based measurements of relative Rac - GTP in blue - light - exposed opto - PI3K cells closely matches the dynamics observed using the live - cell Rac biosensor , Pak - PBD - mCherry ( compare with Fig . 4A , Left ) Town et al . | Rac negative feedback links local PIP 3 rate - of - change to dynamic control of neutrophil guidance bioR χ iv | 19 . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license available under a ( which was not certified by peer review ) is the author / funder , who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted January 3 , 2023 . ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 12 . 30 . 521706 doi : bioRxiv preprint Δ t H 1 H 2 F l u o r e sc e n t S i g n a l Time t 1 / 2 = 89 s A B C Δ t , Recovery Time ( s ) H 2 / H 1 , R e c o v e r y Time ( s ) Time ( s ) F l u o r e sc e n t S i g n a l F l u o r e sc e n t S i g n a l PIP 3 Biosensor ( PHAkt - Halo ) Rac Biosensor ( PakPBD - mCherry ) Light Input On Fig . S4 : Timescale of reversibility of Rac inhibition . A ) Experimental schematic : Latrunculin - treated ( 10 µM ) cells were exposed to two pulses of blue light separated by a variable amount of recovery time . We then calculated the ratio of the heights of the peaks of the ﬁrst and second Rac responses . B ) Two example curves showing the response of the PIP 3 and Rac biosensors to two pulses of blue - light activation with recovery times of 60 seconds ( top ) and 240 seconds ( bottom ) . C ) Degree of recovery as a function of recovery time . The response has a recovery half - time of 89 seconds . 20 | bioR χ iv Town et al . | Rac negative feedback links local PIP 3 rate - of - change to dynamic control of neutrophil guidance . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license available under a ( which was not certified by peer review ) is the author / funder , who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted January 3 , 2023 . ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 12 . 30 . 521706 doi : bioRxiv preprint I II III E s t i m a t e d I n i t i a l R a t e P H A k t A cc u m u l a t i o n ( A U / m i n ) Fig . S5 : Local PIP 3 dynamics in single migrating cells during reversal assay : Differences in the estimated initial rates of PHAkt - Halo accumulation on the left and right sides of cells during the reversal assay ( Fig . 5 ) . As expected , the majority of cells show similar dynamics on their left and right sides pre - stimulation ( phase I ) . However , cells show higher rates of increase in PIP 3 on the left side during the local stimulation phase of the assay ( phase II ) and on their right sides during the subsequent global stimulation phase of the assay ( phase III ) . Town et al . | Rac negative feedback links local PIP 3 rate - of - change to dynamic control of neutrophil guidance bioR χ iv | 21 . CC - BY - NC - ND 4 . 0 International license available under a ( which was not certified by peer review ) is the author / funder , who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity . It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted January 3 , 2023 . ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 12 . 30 . 521706 doi : bioRxiv preprint