Does Science Advance One Funeral at a Time ? By Pierre Azoulay , Christian Fons - Rosen , and Joshua S . Graff Zivin ∗ We examine how the premature death of eminent life scientists alters the vitality of their ﬁelds . While the ﬂow of articles by col - laborators into aﬀected ﬁelds decreases after the death of a star sci - entist , the ﬂow of articles by non - collaborators increases markedly . This surge in contributions from outsiders draws upon a diﬀerent scientiﬁc corpus and is disproportionately likely to be highly cited . While outsiders appear reluctant to challenge leadership within a ﬁeld when the star is alive , the loss of a luminary provides an op - portunity for ﬁelds to evolve in new directions that advance the frontier of knowledge . JEL : I23 , J24 , O31 . Keywords : economics of science , scientiﬁc ﬁelds , superstars , in - visible college , cumulative knowledge production . “A new scientiﬁc truth does not triumph by convincing its opponents and making them see the light , but rather because its opponents eventually die , and a new generation grows up that is familiar with it . ” Max Planck Scientiﬁc Autobiography and Other Papers Whether manna from heaven or the result of the purposeful application of research and development , technological advances play a foundational role in all modern theories of economic growth ( Solow 1957 , Romer 1990 , Aghion and Howitt 1992 ) . Only in the latter part of the nineteenth century , however , did techno - logical progress start to systematically build upon scientiﬁc foundations ( Mokyr ∗ Azoulay : MIT Sloan School of Management and NBER , 100 Main Steet—E62 - 487 , Cambridge , MA 02142 ( e - mail : pazoulay @ mit . edu ) ; Fons - Rosen : UC Merced and CEPR , Department of Economics , 5200 N . Lake Road , Merced , CA 95343 ( e - mail : cfons - rosen @ ucmerced . edu ) ; Graﬀ Zivin : UCSD and NBER , School of Global Policy & Strategy , 9500 Gilman Drive , La Jolla , CA 92093 ( e - mail : jgraffzivin @ ucsd . edu ) . Azoulay and Graﬀ Zivin acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of the National Science Foundation through its SciSIP Program ( Award SBE - 1460344 ) . Fons - Rosen acknowledges ﬁnan - cial support from the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness through a grant ( ECO - 2014 - 55555 - P ) and through the Severo Ochoa Programme for Centres of Excellence in R & D ( SEV - 2015 - 0563 ) . The project would not have been possible without Andrew Stellman’s extraordinary programming skills ( www . stellman - greene . com ) . Mikka Rokkanen provided additional research assistance . We thank Heidi Williams , Xavier Jaravel , Danielle Li , Sameer Srivastava , Scott Stern , Bruce Weinberg , and seminar au - diences at the NBER , UC Berkeley , National University of Singapore , and Stanford University for useful discussions . The authors declare that they have no relevant or material ﬁnancial interests that relate to the research described in this paper . The usual disclaimer applies . 1 Copyright & Permissions Copyright © 1998 , 1999 , 2000 , 2001 , 2002 , 2003 , 2004 , 2005 , 2006 , 2007 , 2008 , 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , 2012 , 2013 , 2014 , 2015 , 2016 , 2017 , 2018 , 2019 by the American Economic Association . Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of American Economic Association publications for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not distributed for profit or direct commercial advantage and that copies show this notice on the first page or initial screen of a display along with the full citation , including the name of the author . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than AEA must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . The author has the right to republish , post on servers , redistribute to lists and use any component of this work in other works . For others to do so requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Permissions may be requested from the American Economic Association Administrative Office by going to the Contact Us form and choosing " Copyright / Permissions Request " from the menu . Copyright © 2019 AEA " Does Science Advance One Funeral at a Time ? " Azoulay , Pierre , Christian Fons - Rosen , and Joshua S . Graff Zivin . American Economic Review , Vol . 109 , No . 8 ( 2889 - 2920 ) . DOI : 10 . 1257 / aer . 20161574 2 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW JANUARY 2019 1992 , 2002 ) . Economists—in contrast to philosophers , historians , and sociologists ( Kuhn 1962 , Shapin 1996 , Merton 1973 ) —have devoted surprisingly little eﬀort to understanding the processes and institutions that shape the evolution of sci - ence . 1 How do researchers identify problems worthy of study and choose among potential approaches to investigate them ? Presumably these choices are driven by a quest for recognition and scientiﬁc glory , but the view that scientiﬁc advances are the result of a pure competition of ideas—one where the highest quality insights inevitably emerge as victori - ous—has long been considered a Panglossian but useful foil ( Kuhn 1962 ; Akerlof and Michaillat 2017 ) . Indeed , the provocative quote from Max Planck in the epigraph of this paper underscores that even the most celebrated scientist of his era understood that the pragmatic success of a scientiﬁc theory does not entirely determine how quickly it gains adherents , or its longevity . Can the idiosyncratic stances of individual scientists do much to alter , or at least delay , the course of scientiﬁc advance ? Perhaps for the sort of scientiﬁc revolutions that Planck—the pioneer of quantum mechanics—likely had in mind , but the proposition that established scientists are slower than novices in accept - ing paradigm - shifting ideas has received little empirical support whenever it has been put to the test ( Hull , Tessner , and Diamond 1978 ; Gorham 1991 ; Levin , Stephan , and Walker 1995 ) . Paradigm shifts are rare , however , and their very nature suggests that once they emerge , it is exceedingly costly to resist or ignore them . In contrast , “normal” scientiﬁc advance—the regular work of scientists theorizing , observing , and experimenting within a settled paradigm or explana - tory framework—may be more susceptible to political jousting . The absence of new self - evident and far - reaching truths means that scientists must compete in a crowded intellectual landscape , sometimes savagely , for the supremacy of their ideas ( Bourdieu 1975 ) . In this paper , we use a diﬀerence - in - diﬀerences setup to test “Planck’s Princi - ple” in the context of academic biomedical research , an enormous domain which has been the province of normal scientiﬁc change ever since the “central dogma” of molecular biology ( Crick 1970 ) emerged as a unifying description of the infor - mation ﬂow in biological systems . Speciﬁcally , we examine how the premature death of 452 eminent scientists alter the vitality ( measured by publication rates and funding ﬂows ) of subﬁelds in which they actively published in the years im - mediately preceding their passing , compared to matched control subﬁelds . In contrast with prior work that focused on collaborators ( Azoulay , Graﬀ Zivin , and Wang 2010 ; Oettl 2012 ; Jaravel , Petkova , and Bell 2018 ; Mohnen 2018 ) , our work leverages new tools to deﬁne scientiﬁc subﬁelds which allows us to expand our focus to the response by scientists who may have similar intellectual interests with the deceased stars without ever collaborating with them . To our surprise , it is not competitors from within a subﬁeld that assume the 1 A notable exception is the theoretical model of scientiﬁc revolutions developed by Bramoull´e and Saint - Paul ( 2010 ) . VOL . 109 NO . 1 DOES SCIENCE ADVANCE ONE FUNERAL AT A TIME ? 3 mantle of leadership , but rather entrants from other ﬁelds that step in to ﬁll the void created by a star’s absence . Importantly , this surge in contributions from outsiders draws upon a diﬀerent scientiﬁc corpus and is disproportionately likely to be highly cited . Thus , consistent with the contention by Planck , the loss of a luminary provides an opportunity for ﬁelds to evolve in novel directions that advance the scientiﬁc frontier . The rest of the manuscript is dedicated to elucidating the mechanisms responsible for this phenomenon . It does not appear to be the case that stars use their inﬂuence over ﬁnancial or editorial resources to block entry into their ﬁelds , but rather that the very prospect of challenging a luminary in the ﬁeld serves as a deterrent for entry by outsiders . Indeed , most of the entry we see occurs in those ﬁelds that lost a star who was especially accomplished . Even in those ﬁelds that have lost a particularly bright star , entry can still be regulated by key collaborators left behind . We ﬁnd suggestive evidence that this is true in ﬁelds that have coalesced around a narrow set of techniques or ideas or where collaboration networks are particularly tight - knit . We also ﬁnd that entry is more anemic when key collaborators of the star are in positions that allow them to limit access to funding or publication outlets to those outside the club that once nucleated around the star . To our knowledge , this manuscript is the ﬁrst to examine the dynamics of scientiﬁc evolution using the standard empirical tools of applied microeconomics . 2 We conceptualize the death of eminent scientists as shocks to the structure of the intellectual neighborhoods in which they worked several years prior to their death , and implement a procedure to delineate the boundaries of these neighborhoods in a way that is scalable , transparent , and does not rely on ad hoc human judgment . The construction of our dataset relies heavily on the PubMed Related Citations Algorithm [ PMRA ] , which groups scientiﬁc articles into subﬁelds based on their intellectual content using abstract words , title words , and very detailed keywords drawn from a controlled vocabulary thesaurus curated by the National Library of Medicine . As such , we are able to delineate circumscribed areas of scientiﬁc inquiry whose boundaries are not deﬁned by shared training , collaboration , or citation relationships . In addition to providing evidence regarding a central question for scholars study - ing the scientiﬁc process , our paper is among the very few economic studies that attend to the ways in which scientists position themselves in intellectual space ( cf . Borjas and Doran [ 2015a , 2015b ] and Myers [ 2018 ] for other notable examples ) . As such , our work can be understood as integrating the traditional concerns of economists—understanding how incentives and institutions inﬂuence the rate of 2 Considerable work outside of economics has examined the evolution of scientiﬁc ﬁelds through net - work and community detection techniques ( e . g . , Rosvall & Bergstrom 2008 ; B¨orner , Chen , and Boyack 2003 ; cf . Fortunato and Hric ( 2016 ) for a review of this fast - evolving research area ) . These approaches rely on collaboration or citation links to deﬁne the vertices of the knowledge network used to partition a scientiﬁc space into subﬁelds . While social scientists have utilized these techniques to explain a wide range of phenomena ( e . g . , Foster , Rzhetsky , and Evans 2015 ) , these approaches are less well - suited to our setting where citation and collaboration are among the primary outcomes of interest . 4 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW JANUARY 2019 knowledge production or diﬀusion—with those of cognate disciplines such as so - ciology and philosophy , who have traditionally taken the direction of scientiﬁc change as the central problem to be explained . The rest of the paper proceeds as follows . In the next section , we examine the institutional context and lay out our broad empirical strategy . In section II , we then turn to data , methods and descriptive statistics . We report the results in section III . Section IV concludes by outlining the implications of our ﬁndings for future work . I . Institutional Context and Empirical Design Our empirical analyses are centered on the academic life sciences . The merits of this focus are several fold . First , the ﬁeld has been an important source of scientiﬁc discovery over the past half century . Many modern medical therapies can trace their origins to research conducted in academic laboratories ( Sampat and Lichtenberg 2011 ; Azoulay , Li , and Sampat 2017 ) . These discoveries , in turn , have generated enormous health and welfare gains for economies around the world . Second , the life science research workforce is large and specialized . The Faculty Roster of the Association of American Medical Colleges lists more than 200 , 000 faculty members employed in U . S . medical schools and academic medical cen - ters in 2015 . 3 Moreover , scientiﬁc discoveries over the past half - century have greatly expanded the knowledge frontier , necessitating increasing specialization by researchers and a greater role for collaboration ( Jones 2009 ) . If knowledge and techniques remain at least partially tacit long after their initial discovery , tightly - knit research teams may be able to eﬀectively control entry into intellec - tual domains . The size and maturity of this sector , including its extensive variety of narrowly - deﬁned subﬁelds , makes it an ideal candidate for an inquiry into the determinants of the direction of scientiﬁc eﬀort in general , and how it is inﬂuenced by elite scientists in particular . Third , the academic research setting also oﬀers the practical beneﬁts of an extensive paper trail of research inputs , outputs , and collaboration histories . On the input side , reliance of researchers on one agency for the majority of their funding raises the possibility that ﬁnancial gatekeeping by elite scientists could be used to regulate entry into scientiﬁc ﬁelds . Data on NIH funding at the individual level , as well as membership in “study sections” ( the peer - review panels that evaluate the scientiﬁc merits of grant applications ) will allow us to examine such concerns directly . Most importantly for our study , the principal output of researchers—publications—are all tagged by a controlled vocabulary of keywords managed by the National Library of Medicine . This provides the raw material that helps delineate scientiﬁc subﬁelds without appealing to citation linkages or 3 This ﬁgure excludes life science academics employed in graduate schools of arts and science or other non - medical school settings such as MIT , Rockefeller University , The Salk Institute , UC Berkeley , the intramural campuses of NIH , etc . VOL . 109 NO . 1 DOES SCIENCE ADVANCE ONE FUNERAL AT A TIME ? 5 collaborative relationships ( the speciﬁcs of this process are described in detail in Section II . B and Appendix C in the supplementary online material ) . These many virtues , however , may come at the expense of generalizability . While the life sciences span a wide range of research styles—from small - team data - driven epidemiology , to medium - size laboratories under the helm of a single prin - cipal investigator , to large - scale multi - institution clinical trials—most biomedical researchers cluster topically and socially in small , quasi - independent subﬁelds . This broad domain seldom features exceedingly small research teams ( as in pure mathematics ) or “big science” eﬀorts where capital needs are so extensive and specialized as to fully consolidate the ﬁeld into a single or a handful of large authorship teams ( as in high - energy particle physics , e . g . , Aad et al . 2015 ) . As such , one should refrain from applying our ﬁndings to other ﬁelds of science where the structure of collaborative eﬀorts and the degree of intellectual clustering are likely to generate diﬀerent patterns of succession , compared to those observed in the life sciences . Accounts by practicing scientists indicate that collaboration plays a large role in both the creation and diﬀusion of new ideas ( Reese 2004 ) , and historians of science have long debated the role of controversies and competition in shaping the direction of scientiﬁc progress and the process through which new subﬁelds within the same broad scientiﬁc paradigm are born and grow over time ( Hull 1988 ; Morange 1998 ; Shwed and Bearman 2010 ) . Our study presents a unique opportunity to test some of their insights in a way that is more systematic and can yield generalizable insights on the dynamics of ﬁeld evolution . II . Empirical Design , Data , and Descriptive Statistics Below , we provide a detailed description of the process through which the matched scientist / subﬁeld dataset used in the econometric analysis was assem - bled . We begin by describing the criteria used to select our sample of superstar academics , with a particular focus on “extinction events” ; the set of subﬁelds in which these scientists were active prior to their death and the procedure followed to delineate their boundaries . Finally , we discuss the matching procedure imple - mented to identify control subﬁelds associated with eminent scientists who did not pass away but are otherwise similar to our treatment group . A . Superstar sample Our basic approach is to rely on the death of “superstar” scientists as a lever to estimate the extent to which the production of knowledge in the ﬁelds in which they were active changes after their passing . The study’s focus on the scientiﬁc elite can be justiﬁed both on substantive and pragmatic grounds . The distribution of publications , funding , and citations at the individual level is extremely skewed ( Lotka 1926 ; de Solla Price 1963 ) and only a tiny minority of scientists contribute , through their published research , to the advancement of science ( Cole and Cole 6 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW JANUARY 2019 1972 ) . Stars also leave behind a corpus of work and colleagues with a stake in the preservation of their legacy , making it possible to trace back their careers , from humble beginnings to wide recognition and acclaim . The elite academic life scientist sample includes 12 , 935 individuals , which cor - responds to roughly 5 % of the entire relevant labor market . In our framework , a scientist is deemed elite if they satisfy at least one of the following criteria for cumulative scientiﬁc achievement : ( 1 ) highly funded scientists ; ( 2 ) highly cited scientists ; ( 3 ) top patenters ; and ( 4 ) members of the National Academy of Sci - ences or of ( 5 ) the National Academy of Medicine . Since these criteria are based on extraordinary achievement over an entire scientiﬁc career , we augment this sample using additional criteria to capture individuals who show great promise at the early and middle stages of their scientiﬁc careers ( so - called “shooting stars” ) . These include : ( 6 ) NIH MERIT awardees ; ( 7 ) Howard Hughes Medical Investiga - tors ; and ( 8 ) early career prize winners . Appendix A provides additional details regarding these metrics of “superstardom” and explores the sensitivity of our core set of results to the type of scientists ( “cumulative stars” vs . “shooting stars” ) included in the sample . For each scientist , we reconstruct their career from the time they obtained their ﬁrst position as independent investigators ( typically after a postdoctoral fellowship ) until 2006 . Our dataset includes employment history , degree held , date of degree , gender , and department aﬃliations as well as complete list of publications , patents and NIH funding obtained in each year by each scientist . 4 The 452 scientists who pass away prematurely , and who are the particular focus of this paper , constitute a subset of this larger pool of 12 , 935 . To be included in our sample , their deaths must intervene between 1975 and 2003 ( this allows us to observe at least three years’ worth of scientiﬁc output for every subﬁeld after the death of a superstar scientist ) . Although we do not impose any age cutoﬀ , the median and mean age at death is 61 with 85 % of these scientists having passed away before the age of 70 ( we explore the sensitivity of our results to the age at death in Appendix E ) . We also require evidence , in the form of published articles and / or NIH grants , that these scholars were still in a scientiﬁcally active phase of their career in the period just preceding their death ( this is the narrow sense in which we deem their deaths to have occurred prematurely ) . Within this sample , 229 ( 51 % ) of these scientists pass away after a protracted illness , whereas 185 ( 41 % ) die suddenly and unexpectedly . We were unable to ascertain the particular circumstances of 37 ( 8 . 20 % ) death events . 5 Table 1 pro - vides descriptive statistics for the deceased superstar sample . The median star received her degree in 1957 and died at the age of 61 . 40 % of the stars hold an 4 Appendix B details the steps taken to ensure that the list of publications is complete and accurate , even in the case of stars with frequent last names . Though we apply the term of “star” or “superstar” to the entire group , there is substantial heterogeneity in intellectual stature within the sample ( see Table 1 ) . 5 Table A3 in Appendix A provides the full list of deceased superstars , together with their year of birth and death , cause of death , institutional aﬃliation at the time of their passing , and a short description of their research expertise . VOL . 109 NO . 1 DOES SCIENCE ADVANCE ONE FUNERAL AT A TIME ? 7 MD degree ( as opposed to a PhD or MD / PhD ) , and 90 % of them are male . On the output side , the stars each received an average of roughly 16 . 6 million dollars in NIH grants , and published 138 papers that garnered 8 , 341 citations over the course of their careers ( as of 2015 ) . B . Delineating Research Fields The source of the publication data is PubMed , an online resource from the National Library of Medicine that provides fast , free , and reliable access to the biomedical research literature . PubMed indexes more than 40 , 000 journals within the life sciences . To delineate the boundaries of the research ﬁelds in which each deceased star was active , we develop an approach based on topic similarity between each article where the star appeared as a last author in a window of ﬁve years prior to her death , and the rest of the scientiﬁc literature . 6 Speciﬁcally , we use the PubMed Related Citations Algorithm ( Lin and Wilbur 2007 ) which relies heavily on Med - ical Subject Headings ( MeSH ) , but not in any way on citation or collaboration linkages . MeSH terms constitute a controlled vocabulary maintained by the National Li - brary of Medicine that provides a very ﬁne - grained partition of the intellectual space spanned by the biomedical research literature . Importantly for our pur - poses , MeSH keywords are assigned to each publication by professional indexers who focus solely on their scientiﬁc content . That said , the PubMed Related Ci - tations Algorithm ( hereafter PMRA ) also uses title and abstract words as inputs , which are selected by the authors , and may reﬂect their aspirations . While this raises the possibility that our subﬁeld deﬁnitions are not impervious to social inﬂuences , it does oﬀer one advantage , namely that our subﬁeld boundaries can quickly reﬂect the emergence of new terms whose inclusion in the oﬃcial MeSH thesaurus will occur with some lag . 7 Regardless , as will become clear in the next section , our diﬀerence - in - diﬀerences design alleviates the concern that idiosyn - cratic features of PMRA might aﬀect our conclusions , since these would inﬂuence treatment and control subﬁelds in a symmetric fashion . We then use the “Related Articles” function in PubMed to harvest journal articles that are intellectually proximate to the star scientists’ own papers in the last ﬁve years of her life . 8 Appendix C describes the algorithm in more detail and 6 A robust social norm in the life sciences systematically assigns last authorship to the principal investigator , ﬁrst authorship to the junior author who was responsible for the conduct of the investigation , and apportions the remaining credit to authors in the middle of the authorship list , generally as a decreasing function of the distance from the extremities ( Zuckerman 1968 ; Nagaoka and Owan 2014 ) . Only in the case of last authorship can we unambiguously associate the star with a subﬁeld . 7 Importantly , deﬁning subﬁelds as isomorphic to the set of articles related ( in a PMRA - sense ) to a source article does not imply a ﬁxed number of articles per subﬁeld . On the contrary , PMRA - generated subﬁelds can be of arbitrary large size . In Appendix C , we document the variation in subﬁeld size and explore the sensitivity of our results to alternate subﬁeld deﬁnitions , including those that exclude potentially endogenous intellectual linkages . 8 To facilitate the harvesting of PubMed - related records on a large scale , we have developed an 8 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW JANUARY 2019 performs extensive robustness checks . In particular , we verify that the cutoﬀ rules used by PMRA to generate a set of intellectual neighbors for a given source article do not induce treated subﬁelds to exhibit idiosyncratic truncation patterns—from above or from below—compared to control subﬁelds . Using a tunable version of PMRA , we also assess the robustness of our core results to manipulations of these cutoﬀ rules . Reassuringly , our results are qualitatively similar regardless of the rule employed . To ﬁx ideas , consider “The transcriptional program of sporulation in budding yeast” [ PubMed ID 9784122 ] , an article published in the journal Science in 1998 originating from the laboratory of Ira Herskowitz , an eminent UCSF biologist who died in 2003 from pancreatic cancer . As can be seen in Appendix Figure C4 , PMRA returns 72 original related journal articles for this source publication . Some of these intellectual neighbors will have appeared before the source to which they are related , whereas others will have only been published after the source . Some will represent the work of collaborators , past or present , of Herskowitz’s , whereas others will represent the work of scientists he may never have come in contact with during his life , much less collaborated with . The salient point is that nothing in the process through which these related articles are identiﬁed biases us towards ( or away from ) articles by collaborators , frequent citers of Herskowitz’s work , or co - located researchers . Consider now the second most - related article to Herskowitz’s Science paper listed in Figure C4 , “Phosphorylation and maximal activity of Saccharomyces cerevisiae meiosis - speciﬁc transcription factor Ndt80 is dependent on Ime2 . ” Fig - ure C5 in Appendix C displays the MeSH terms that tag this article along with its source . As a byproduct , PMRA also provides a cardinal dyadic measure of in - tellectual proximity between each related article and its associated source article . In this particular instance , the relatedness score of “Phosphorylation . . . ” is 94 % , whereas the relatedness score for the most distant related article in Figure C4 , “Catalytic roles of yeast . . . ” is only 62 % . In the ﬁve years prior to his death ( 1998 - 2002 ) , Herskowitz was the last author on 12 publications , the publications most closely associated with his position as head of a laboratory . For each of these source publications , we treat the set of publications returned by PMRA as constituting a distinct subﬁeld , and we create a subﬁeld panel dataset by counting the number of related articles in each of these subﬁelds in each year between 1975 and 2006 . An important implication of this data construction procedure is that the subﬁelds we delineate are quite limited in scope . One window into the degree of intellectual breadth for subﬁelds is to gauge the overlap between the articles that constitute any pair of subﬁelds associated with the same star . In the sample , the 452 deceased stars account for 3 , 076 subﬁelds , and 21 , 661 pairwise combination of subﬁelds ( we are only considering open - source software tool that queries PubMed and PMRA and stores the retrieved data in a MySQL database . The software is available for download at http : / / www . stellman - greene . com / FindRelated / . Prior research leveraging the intellectual linkages between articles generated by PMRA include Azoulay et al . ( 2015 ) , Azoulay et al . ( 2019 ) , and Myers ( 2018 ) . VOL . 109 NO . 1 DOES SCIENCE ADVANCE ONE FUNERAL AT A TIME ? 9 pairs of subﬁelds associated with the same individual star ) . Appendix Figure C6 displays the histogram for the distribution of overlap , which is extremely skewed . A full half of these pairs exhibit exactly zero overlap , whereas the mean of the distribution is 0 . 06 . To ﬁnd pairs of subﬁelds that display substantial amounts of overlap ( for example , half of the articles in subﬁeld 1 also belong in subﬁeld 2 ) , one must reach far into the right tail of the distribution , speciﬁcally , above the 98 th percentile . As such , the subﬁelds we delineate are relatively self - contained . Performing the analysis at the level of the subﬁeld—rather than lumping together all the subﬁelds of an individual star—will provide us with an opportunity to exploit variation in the extent of participation of the star within each of her subﬁelds . We will also check the validity of the main results when rolling the data up from the subﬁeld level to the star level in Appendix F . Finally , since even modest amounts of overlap entail that the observations corresponding to the subﬁelds of individual stars will not be independent in a statistical sense , we will cluster standard errors at the level of the star scientist . 9 C . Identiﬁcation Strategy Given our interests in the eﬀect of superstar death on entry into scientiﬁc sub - ﬁelds , our empirical strategy is focused on changes in published research output after the superstar passes away , relative to when she was still alive . To ensure that we are estimating the eﬀect of interest and not some other inﬂuence that is correlated with the passage of time , our speciﬁcations include age and period eﬀects , as is the norm in studies of scientiﬁc productivity ( Levin and Stephan 1991 ) . These temporal controls are tantamount to using subﬁelds that lost a superstar in earlier or later periods as an implicit control group when estimating entry into subﬁelds that currently experienced the death of a superstar . If the death of a superstar only represented a one - time shift in the level of entry into the relevant subﬁelds , this would not be problematic . But if these unfortunate events aﬀect trends—and not simply levels—of scientiﬁc activity , this approach may not suﬃce to ﬁlter out the eﬀect of time - varying omitted variables , even when ﬂexible age and calendar time controls are included in the econometric speciﬁcation . One tangible concern about time - varying eﬀects relates to the life cycle of subﬁelds , where productive potential may initially increase over time before peaking and then slowly declining . To mitigate this threat to identiﬁcation , our preferred empirical strategy relies on the selection of a matched scientist / subﬁeld for each treated scientist / subﬁeld . These control observations are culled from the universe of subﬁelds in which su - perstars who do not die are active ( see Section II . A and Appendix D ) . Combining the treated and control samples enables us to estimate the eﬀect of superstar death 9 The compactness of these subﬁelds likely reﬂect the technology of research within the life sciences , a similar exercise performed in a diﬀerent domain of science , particularly those characterized by large collaborative projects , might well result in subﬁelds with substantially more overlap . 10 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW JANUARY 2019 in a diﬀerence - in - diﬀerences framework . Appendix Figure D1 illustrates the pro - cedure used to identify control subﬁelds in the particular case of the Herskowitz publication highlighted above . We begin by looking at all the articles that appeared in the same journal and in the same year as the treated source articles . From this set of articles , we keep only those that have one of the still - living superstars in the last author - ship position . Then , using a “coarsened exact matching” procedure detailed in Appendix D , the control source articles are selected such that ( 1 ) the number of authors in the treated and control are approximately similar ; ( 2 ) the age of the treated and control superstars diﬀer by no more than ﬁve years ; and ( 3 ) the number of citations received by the treated and source article are similar . For the Herskowitz / “sporulation in budding yeast” pair , we can select 10 control articles in this way . All of these controls were also published in Science in 1998 , and have between ﬁve and seven authors . One of these controls is “Hepatitis C Viral Dynamics in Vivo . . . , ” whose last author is Alan Perelson , a biophysicist at Los Alamos National Lab . Perelson and Herskowitz obtained their PhD only a year apart . The two papers had received 514 and 344 citations respectively by the end 2003 . Though this is a large diﬀerence , this places both well above the 99 th percentile of the citation distribution for 5 - year old articles published in 1998 . One potential concern with the addition of this “explicit” control group is that control subﬁelds could be aﬀected by the treatment of interest . What if , for instance , a control source article happens to be related ( in a PMRA sense ) with the treated source ? Because the subﬁelds identiﬁed by PMRA are narrow , this turns out to be very infrequent . Nonetheless , we remove all such instances from the data . We then ﬁnd all the intellectual neighbors for these control source articles using PMRA ; a control subﬁeld is deﬁned by the set of related articles returned by PMRA , in a manner that is exactly symmetric to the procedure used to delineate treated subﬁelds . When these related articles are parsed below to distinguish between those published by collaborators and non - collaborators of the star , or between those by intellectual outsiders and insiders , covariates for treated and control observations will always be deﬁned with perfect symmetry . D . Descriptive Statistics The procedure described above yields a total of 34 , 218 distinct subﬁelds ; 3 , 076 subﬁelds correspond to one of the 452 dead scientists , whereas 31 , 142 subﬁelds correspond to one of 5 , 809 still - living scientists . Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for control and treated subﬁelds in the baseline year , i . e . , the year of death for the deceased scientist . 10 Covariate balance . In the list of variables displayed in Table 2 , a number of covariates are balanced between treated and control subﬁelds solely by virtue of 10 We can assign a counterfactual year of death for each control subﬁeld , since each control subﬁeld is associated with a particular treated subﬁeld through the matching procedure described above . VOL . 109 NO . 1 DOES SCIENCE ADVANCE ONE FUNERAL AT A TIME ? 11 the coarsened exact matching procedure—for instance , ( star ) investigator year of degree , the source article number of authors , or the source article number of citations at baseline . However , there is nothing mechanical to explain the balance between treated and control subsamples with respect to the stock of our main outcome variable : the number of articles in the star’s ﬁeld . Figure 1 compares the distributions of the cumulative number of articles published in our sample of subﬁelds up to the year of death , broken down by treatment status . Overall , one can observe a great deal of overlap between the two histograms ; the means and medians are virtually identical . Of course , balance in the levels of the outcome variable is not technically required for the validity of the empirical exercise . 11 Yet , given the ad hoc nature of the procedure used to identify control subﬁelds , this degree of balance is reassuring . Another happy byproduct of our matching procedure is that treated and control scientists also appear quite similar in the extent of their eminence at the time of ( counterfactual ) death , whether such eminence is measured through NIH funding , the number of articles published , or the number of citations these articles received . Collaborators vs . non - collaborators . One critical aspect of the empirical analysis is to distinguish between collaborators and non - collaborators of the star when measuring publishing activity in a subﬁeld . It is therefore crucial to describe how this distinction can be made in our data . Information about the superstars’ colleagues stems from the Faculty Roster of the Association of American Medical Colleges ( AAMC ) , to which we secured licensed access for the years 1975 through 2006 , and which we augmented using NIH grantee information ( cf . Azoulay , Graﬀ Zivin , and Wang [ 2010 ] for more details ) . An important implication of our reliance on these sources of data is that we can only identify authors who are faculty members in U . S . medical schools , or recipients of NIH funding . We cannot systematically identify scientists working for industrial ﬁrms , or scientists employed in foreign academic institutions . 12 The great beneﬁt of using AAMC data , however , is that they ensure we have at our disposal both demographic and employment information for every individual in the relevant labor market : their ( career ) age , type of degree awarded , place of employment , gender , and research output , whether measured by publications or NIH grants . To identify authors , we match the authorship roster of each related article in one of our subﬁelds with the AAMC roster . 13 We tag as a collaborator any author who appeared as a co - author of the star associated with the subﬁeld on any publication prior to the death . Each related article is therefore assigned to 11 What is required is that the trends in publication activity be comparable between treated and control subﬁelds up until the death of the treated scientist . We verify that this is the case below . 12 We can identify trainees who later go on to secure a faculty position , but not those who do not stay in academia . 13 We limit ourselves to authors with relatively infrequent names . Though this may create some measurement error , there is no reason to suspect that the wrongful attribution of articles to authors will impact treated and control subﬁelds in a diﬀerential way . 12 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW JANUARY 2019 one of two mutually - exclusive bins : the “collaborator” bin comprises the set of publications with at least one identiﬁed author who coauthored with the star prior to the year of death ( or counterfactual death ) ; the “non - collaborator” bin comprises the set of publications with no identiﬁed author who coauthored with the star prior to the year of death ( or counterfactual death ) . 14 As can be seen in Table 2 , roughly 11 % of the publication activity at baseline can be accounted for by collaborators . Moreover , this proportion is very similar for control and treated subﬁelds . 15 A ﬁrst look at subﬁeld activity . Figure E1 in Appendix E conﬁrms that the treated and control subﬁelds are on similar trajectories in publication activity up to the time of superstar death ( though they diverge after the death event ) . This provides suggestive evidence for the validity of our research design , and is notable since the coarsened exact matching procedure that generated the sample of control subﬁelds did not make any use of these outcomes . Moreover , the absence of diﬀerential trends can be observed for overall activity , for activity restricted to collaborators of the star , and for the publishing activity of non - collaborators . More boldly , we can use these averages in the raw data to examine changes in outcomes after the death . For both treated and control subﬁelds , the curves exhibit a pronounced inverted U - shaped pattern , with activity ﬁrst increasing until it reaches a peak roughly two years before the death of the star ( or counter - factual death for the control subﬁelds and their associated stars ) . Activity then decreases steadily , but the slope of the decrease appears more pronounced for control subﬁelds , relative to treated subﬁelds ( Panel A ) . This pattern is ﬂipped when examining activity due to collaborators ( Panel B ) : the relative decline is much more pronounced for treated subﬁelds , which is consistent with the results in Azoulay , Graﬀ Zivin , and Wang ( 2010 ) . Panel C , which focuses on subﬁeld activity limited to non - collaborators , provides the ﬁrst non - parametric evidence that the downward - sloping part of the activity curve is less steep for treated subﬁelds . Figure E1 provides a transparent illustration of subﬁeld publication activity over time , which proceeds directly from averaging the raw data , but the evidence it provides should be handled with an abundance of caution . First , it conﬂates cal - endar time and experimental time , when in actuality the death events in the data occur at varying frequencies between the years 1975 and 2003 . Second , covariates like ﬁeld age are not perfectly balanced across the treated and control groups , since the number of control subﬁelds is not identical across treated subﬁelds . Fi - nally , it abstracts away from robust inference , and particularly from clustering : one would expect the subﬁeld outcomes associated with an identical star to be 14 We identify the publications in the subﬁeld for which the superstar is an author and eliminate them from these calculations . As a result , any decrease in activity within the subﬁeld cannot be ascribed to the mechanical eﬀect of its star passing away . 15 We deﬁne collaboration status by looking at the authorship roster for the entire corpus of work published by the star before or in the year of death , and not only with respect to the articles of the star that belong to the focal subﬁeld . VOL . 109 NO . 1 DOES SCIENCE ADVANCE ONE FUNERAL AT A TIME ? 13 correlated . Our econometric framework , described below , addresses these limita - tions and as a result provides a more solid foundation for the estimation of the causal eﬀect of star death on the dynamics of subﬁeld activity . III . Results The exposition of the econometric results proceeds in stages . After a review of methodological issues , we provide results that pertain to the main eﬀect of superstar death on subﬁeld growth , measured by publication rates and funding ﬂows . Next , we attempt to elucidate the mechanism ( or set of mechanisms ) at work to explain our most robust ﬁnding , that of relative subﬁeld growth in the wake of a star’s passing , a growth entirely accounted for by contributions from non - collaborators . We do so by examining the characteristics of the articles pub - lished by non - collaborators , before turning to the characteristics of their authors . We also explore heterogeneity in the treatment eﬀect through the interaction of the post - death indicator variable with various attributes of the stars and the subﬁelds . A . Econometric Considerations Our estimating equation relates publication or funding activity in subﬁeld i in year t to the treatment eﬀect of losing a superstar : E [ y it | X it ] = exp (cid:104) β 0 + β 1 AF T ER DEAT H it + β 2 AF T ER DEAT H it × T REAT i + f ( AGE it ) + δ t + γ i (cid:105) ( 1 ) where y is a measure of subﬁeld activity , AF T ER DEAT H denotes an indicator variable that switches to one in the year after the superstar associated with i passes away , T REAT is an indicator variable for treated subﬁelds , f ( AGE it ) corresponds to a ﬂexible function of the ﬁeld’s age , the δ t ’s stand for a full set of calendar year indicator variables , and the γ i ’s correspond to subﬁeld ﬁxed eﬀects , consistent with our approach to analyze changes in activity within subﬁeld i following the passing of a superstar . 16 The subﬁeld ﬁxed eﬀects control for many time - invariant characteristics that could inﬂuence research activity , such as the need for capital equipment or the extent of disease burden ( e . g . , for clinical ﬁelds ) . A pregnant metaphor for the growth of scientiﬁc knowledge has been that of biological evolution ( Hull 1988 ; Chavalarias and Cointet 2013 ) : a ﬁeld is born when new concepts are introduced , resulting in an accelerating production of “oﬀspring” ( articles ) , until the underly - ing scientiﬁc community loses its thematic coherence , ushering in an era of decline 16 To avoid confusion , we have suppressed any subscript for the superstars . This is without loss of generality , since each subﬁeld is uniquely associated with a single star . 14 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW JANUARY 2019 ( or alternatively , splitting or merging events ) . To ﬂexibly account for such life cycle eﬀects , we include subﬁeld age indicator variables ( where subﬁeld age is computed as the number of years since the year of publication for the source arti - cle ) . The calendar year eﬀects ﬁlter out the eﬀects of the general expansion of the scientiﬁc enterprise as measured by the number of journals and articles published each year . 17 We follow Jaravel et al . ( 2018 ) in including in our speciﬁcation an indicator for the timing of death that is common to treated and control subﬁelds ( whose eﬀect will be identiﬁed by the coeﬃcient β 1 ) in addition to the eﬀect of inter - est , an interaction between AF T ER DEAT H and T REAT ( whose eﬀect will be identiﬁed by the coeﬃcient β 2 ) . The eﬀects of these two variables are sep - arately identiﬁed because ( i ) death events are staggered across our observation period and ( ii ) control subﬁelds inherit a counterfactual date of death because they are uniquely associated with a treated subﬁeld through the matching proce - dure described in section II . C . The inclusion of the common term addresses the concern that age , calendar year , and subﬁeld ﬁxed eﬀects may not fully account for shifts in subﬁeld activity around the time of the star’s passing . If this is the case , AF T ER DEAT H will capture the corresponding transitory dynamics , while AF T ER DEAT H × T REAT will isolate the causal eﬀect of interest . Em - pirically , we ﬁnd that in some speciﬁcations , the common term has substantial explanatory power , though its inclusion does not radically alter the magnitude of the treatment eﬀect . Estimation . The dependent variables of interest , including publication counts and NIH grants awarded , are skewed and non - negative . For example , 31 . 40 % of the subﬁeld / year observations in the data correspond to years of no publication activity ; the ﬁgure climbs to 56 . 70 % if one focuses on the count of NIH grants awarded . Following a long - standing tradition in the study of scientiﬁc and tech - nical change , we present quasi - maximum likelihood ( hereafter QML ) estimates based on the conditional ﬁxed eﬀects Poisson model developed by Hausman , Hall , and Griliches ( 1984 ) . Because the Poisson model is in the linear expo - nential family , the coeﬃcient estimates remain consistent as long as the mean of the dependent variable is correctly speciﬁed ( Gouri´eroux , Monfort , and Trognon 1984 ) . Inference . QML ( i . e . , “robust” ) standard errors are consistent even if the under - lying data generating process is not Poisson . In fact the Hausman et al . estimator can be used for any non - negative dependent variables , whether integer or contin - uous ( Santos Silva and Tenreyro 2006 ) , as long as the variance / covariance matrix is computed using the outer product of the gradient vector ( and therefore does 17 It is not possible to separately identify calendar year eﬀects from age eﬀects in the “within subﬁeld” dimension of a panel in a completely ﬂexible fashion , because one cannot observe two subﬁelds at the same point in time that have the same age but were born in diﬀerent years ( Hall , Mairesse , and Turner 2007 ) . VOL . 109 NO . 1 DOES SCIENCE ADVANCE ONE FUNERAL AT A TIME ? 15 not rely on the Poisson variance assumption ) . Further , QML standard errors are robust to arbitrary patterns of serial correlation ( Wooldridge 1997 ) , and hence immune to the issues highlighted by Bertrand , Duﬂo , and Mullainathan ( 2004 ) concerning inference in DD estimation . We cluster the standard errors around superstar scientists in the results presented below . 18 Dependent Variables . Our primary outcome variable is publication activity in a subﬁeld . However , we go beyond this raw measure by assigning the related articles that together constitute the subﬁeld into a variety of bins . For instance , we can decompose publication activity in the subﬁeld into two mutually exclusive subﬁelds : articles with a superstar on the authorship roster vs . articles without a superstar ; etc . Articles in each bin can then be counted and aggregated up to the subﬁeld / year level . Capturing funding ﬂows at the ﬁeld level is slightly more involved . PubMed systematically records NIH grant acknowledgements using grant numbers . Un - fortunately , these grant numbers are often truncated and omit the grant cycle information that could enable us to pin down unambiguously the particular year in which the grant was awarded . When it is missing , we impute the award year using the following rule : for each related publication that acknowledges NIH funding , we identify the latest year in the three - year window that precedes the publication during which funding was awarded through either a new award or a competitive renewal . To measure funding activity in a subﬁeld , we create a count variable that sums all the awards received in particular year , where these awards ultimately generate publications in the focal subﬁeld . B . Main eﬀect of superstar death Table 3 and Figure 2 present our core results . Overall , we ﬁnd that publica - tion activity increases slightly following the death of a star scientist who was an active contributor to it , but the magnitude of the eﬀect is modest ( about 5 . 2 % ) and imprecisely estimated ( column 1 ) . Yet , this result conceals a striking pattern that is uncovered when we distinguish between publications by collaborators and non - collaborators . The decline in publication activity accounted for by previous collaborators of the star is large , on the order of 20 . 7 % ( column 2 ) . This evidence is consistent with previous ﬁndings , which showed that coauthors of superstar scientists who die suﬀer a drop in output , particularly if their non - collaborative work exhibited strong keyword overlap with the star , i . e . , if they were intellectu - ally connected in addition to being coauthors ( Azoulay , Graﬀ Zivin , and Wang 2010 , Table VI , column 2 ) . 18 Knowledge spillovers and scientiﬁc breakthroughs , including the adoption of research tools , could encourage innovation across related ﬁelds . This possibility is not entirely dealt with by clustering inference at the star level , since spatial dependence in knowledge space could occur between any pair of subﬁelds , whereas clustering only allows for dependence among the subﬁelds associated with the same star . As it turns out , the Poisson conditional ﬁxed eﬀects estimator also provides a consistent estimator of the variance in the presence of time - invariant patterns of spatial auto - correlation ( Bertanha and Moser 2016 ) . 16 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW JANUARY 2019 A limitation of the previous work focusing on the fate of collaborators after the loss of an eminent scientist always lied in the failure to distinguish between social and intellectual channels of inﬂuence , since every treated scientist was by deﬁnition a collaborator , even if merely a casual one . In this study , we can relax this constraint , and when we do , we ﬁnd that relative publication activity by non - collaborators in the subﬁeld increases by a statistically signiﬁcant 100 × ( e 0 . 082 − 1 ) = 8 . 6 % ( column 3 ) . 19 We also explore the dynamics of the eﬀects uncovered in Table 3 . We do so by estimating a speciﬁcation in which the treatment eﬀect is interacted with a set of indicator variables corresponding to a particular year relative to the superstar’s death , and then graphing the eﬀects and the 95 % conﬁdence interval around them ( Panels A , B , and C of Figure 2 correspond to columns 1 , 2 , and 3 in Table 3 ) . 20 Two features of the ﬁgure are worthy of note . First , the dynamics amplify the previous results in the sense that we see the eﬀects increasing ( in absolute value ) monotonically over time—there is no indication that the eﬀects we estimated in Table 3 are merely transitory . Five years after a star’s death , the relative increase in publication activity by non - collaborators is large enough in magnitude to fully oﬀset the decline in activity by collaborators . Second , there is no discernible evidence of an eﬀect in the years leading up to the death , a ﬁnding that validates ex post our identiﬁcation strategy . Nevertheless , the case for the exogeneity of death events with respect to the course of knowledge growth and decline within a subﬁeld is stronger for sudden causes of deaths than for anticipated causes of death . Figure E2 in Appendix E provides a version of Figure 2 , Panel C ( event study graphs for non - collaborators ) broken down by causes of death ( anticipated vs . sudden ) . While there is more variability in the estimated path of outcomes in the years leading up to the death event in the anticipated case ( Panel A ) than in the sudden case ( Panel B ) , it is imprecisely estimated and non - monotonic . In both panels , however , one can observe a slow but steady increase after the event in the rate of contributions by non - collaborators in treated subﬁelds , relative to control subﬁelds . The distinc - tion between sudden and anticipated events is explored further in section III . D . The last three columns of Table 3 focus on funding ﬂows from the National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) rather than publication ﬂows . More precisely , the outcome variable in columns 4 , 5 , and 6 is the number of distinct NIH awards that acknowledge a publication in the subﬁeld in the three - year window before the year of publication for the related article ( summing the ﬁnancial total of grant amounts , as opposed to the number of grants , yields similar results ) . The patterns are very similar to those obtained in the case of publication activity , 19 The number of observations varies ever so slightly across columns because the conditional ﬁxed eﬀects speciﬁcation drops observations corresponding to subﬁelds for which there is no variation in activity over the entire observation period . This is true as well for the results reported in Tables 4 through 7 . 20 In these speciﬁcations , the AFTER DEATH term which is common to treated and control subﬁelds is also interacted with a complete series of lags and leads relative to the year of death or counterfactual death . VOL . 109 NO . 1 DOES SCIENCE ADVANCE ONE FUNERAL AT A TIME ? 17 both in terms of magnitudes and in terms of statistical signiﬁcance . C . Subﬁeld growth patterns In the remainder of the manuscript , we seek to characterize the kind of contribu - tion , and the type of investigators that give rise to the novel empirical regularity we uncovered : that of relative growth for subﬁelds following the death of their superstar anchor , a phenomenon entirely accounted for by research activity un - dertaken by scientists who never collaborated with the star while alive . As a consequence , all the results below pertain to contributions by non - collaborators ; any article with even one author who collaborated with the star is excluded from the count of articles that constitute the dependent variable . The impact and direction of new research . What characterizes the addi - tional contributions that together lead to increased activity in a subﬁeld after a star has passed on ? Are these in fact important contributions to the subﬁeld ? Do they continue to focus on mainstream topics within the subﬁeld , or should they be understood as taking the intellectual domain in a novel direction ? Tables 4 and 5 explore these issues . In Table 4 , we parse every related article in the subﬁelds to assign them into one of six mutually exclusive bins , based on their vintage - speciﬁc long - run cita - tion impact : articles that fall in the bottom quartile of the citation distribution ; in the second quartile ; in the third quartile ; articles that fall above the 75 th per - centile , but below the 95 th percentile ; articles that fall above the 95 th percentile , but below the 99 th percentile ; articles that fall above the 99 th percentile of the citation distribution . 21 Each column in Table 4 ( with the exception of the ﬁrst which simply replicates the eﬀect for all papers , regardless of impact , that was previously displayed in Table 3 , column 3 ) reports the corresponding estimates . A startling result is that the magnitude of the treatment eﬀect increases sharply and monotonically as we focus on the rate of contributions with higher impact . In contrast , the number of lower - impact articles contributed by non - collaborators contracts slightly , though the eﬀect is not precisely estimated . 22 21 A vintage is comprised of all the articles published in a given year . When we are referring to the vintage - speciﬁc , article - level distribution of citations , the relevant universe to compute quantiles is not limited to the articles that constitute the subﬁelds in our data . Rather , the relevant universe includes the entire set of 17 , 312 , 059 articles that can be cross - linked between PubMed and the Web of Science . As a result , there is no reason to suspect that individual stars , or even our entire set of stars , could ever alter the shape of these distributions . For example , the article by Sopko et al . highlighted on Figure C5 ( in Appendix C ) received 40 citations from other articles in PubMed by 2015 . This puts this article above the 79 th percentile of the citation distribution for articles published in 2002 . 22 Table E3 and Figure E3 in Appendix E break down these results further by examining separately the growth of subﬁelds by cause of death ( anticipated vs . sudden ) . As mentioned earlier , the case for exogeneity is stronger for sudden death , since when the death is anticipated , it would be theoretically possible for the star to engage in “intellectual estate planning , ” whereby particular scientists ( presumably close collaborators ) are anointed as representing the next generation of leaders in the subﬁeld . Our core results continue to hold when analyzed separately by cause of death . However , we gain statistical power from pooling these observations , and some empirical patterns would be estimated less precisely if we chose to focus solely on observations corresponding to subﬁelds for which the star died suddenly and 18 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW JANUARY 2019 Table 5 parses the related articles in each subﬁeld to ascertain whether contribu - tions by non - collaborators constitute a genuine change in intellectual direction . Panel A distinguishes between contributions that are proximate in intellectual space to the source article from those that are more distant ( though still part of the subﬁeld as construed by PMRA ) . Because we have at our disposal both a cardinal and an ordinal measure of intellectual proximity , we present two sets of estimates . In both cases , the magnitude of the treatment eﬀect pertaining to PMRA - proximate publication activity is larger , and more precisely estimated than the magnitude corresponding to PMRA - distant publication activity ( relative to the same patterns for the control group of subﬁelds ) . We can certainly rule out the conjecture that non - collaborators enter the ﬁeld from the periphery . Rather , their contributions appear to tackle mainstream topics within the subﬁeld . Panel B sheds light on the intellectual direction of the ﬁeld , by examining the cited references contained in each related article . The ﬁrst two columns separate related articles in two groups : publications that cite at least some work which belongs to the subﬁeld identiﬁed by PMRA for the corresponding source and publications that cite exclusively out of the PMRA subﬁeld . Only articles in the second group appear to experience growth in the post - death era . The next two columns proceed similarly , except that the list of references is now parsed to highlight the presence of articles authored by the star ( Column 3 ) , as opposed to all other authors ( Column 4 ) . We ﬁnd that subﬁeld growth can be mostly accounted for by articles from non - collaborators who do not build on the work of the star . Whereas Panel B highlighted the extent to which contributors were bringing new sources of inspiration into the subﬁeld , Panel C focuses on the extent to which the treated subﬁelds move closer to the scientiﬁc frontier in the wake of the superstar’s passing . The ﬁrst two columns do so by distinguishing between contributions that draw on recent versus more dated references . This exercise is repeated in Columns 3 and 4 , with a focus on the vintage of the MeSH term combinations for each article in the subﬁeld . 23 Both sets of results indicate that these new contributions are more likely to build on science of a more recent vintage . Taken together , the results presented in Table 5 paint a nuanced picture of directional change in the wake of superstar passing . The new contributions do not represent a radical departure from the subﬁeld’s traditional concerns ( Panel A ) . At the same time , the citation and MeSH evidence ( Panels B and C ) make it clear that these additional contributions are more likely to draw on new - to - the - subﬁeld as well as new - to - the - world ideas . In short , they both rejuvenate the subﬁeld , and alter its angular velocity by shifting its intellectual center of gravity away from its pre - death position . unexpectedly . 23 A two - way MeSH term combination is born in the year where an article is annotated by the keyword pair for the ﬁrst time . VOL . 109 NO . 1 DOES SCIENCE ADVANCE ONE FUNERAL AT A TIME ? 19 It is important to note , however , that the ﬁndings above do not imply that the published results of entrants necessarily contradict or overturn the prevailing scientiﬁc understanding and assumptions within a subﬁeld . We provide indirect evidence regarding these contributions’ disruptive impact by leveraging a measure recently proposed by Funk and Owen - Smith ( 2017 ) . Their index captures the de - gree to which an idea consolidates or destabilizes the status quo , by measuring whether the future ideas that build on the focal idea also rely on its acknowledged predecessors . The results in Table E4 of Appendix E suggest that these contri - butions do not radically disrupt the subﬁeld . Rather , they appear to reﬂect the impact of a myriad “small r , ” permanent revolutions whereby new ideas come to the fore without necessarily eclipsing prior approaches . Outsiders vs . competitors . The next step of the analysis is to investigate the type of scientists who publish the articles that account for subﬁeld growth in the wake of a star’s death . We examine the proximity in intellectual space between non - collaborators in the subﬁeld and the deceased superstar . One possibility is that non - collaborators are competitors of the star , with much of their publication activity falling into the subﬁeld when the star was alive . Another possibility is that they are recent entrants into the subﬁeld—intellectual outsiders . To distin - guish these diﬀerent types of authors empirically , we create a metric of intellectual proximity for each related author we can match to the AAMC Faculty Roster , by computing the fraction of their publications that belongs to the star’s subﬁelds up to the publication year for each related article . 24 The distribution of this ﬁeld overlap measure is displayed on Panel A of Figure 3 . The distribution is skewed , with a pronounced mass point at the origin : approximately 50 % of the related articles turn out to have authors with exactly zero intellectual overlap with the star’s subﬁeld , and another 1 . 24 % are authored by new scientists for whom this publication within the subﬁeld is also their ﬁrst publication overall . We now use this metric to gauge the extent to which the post - death publication activity by non - collaborators ( relative to the control group ) can be attributed to related authors whose outsider status falls into one of twelve separate bins . This includes one bin for new scientists , one bin for the bottom half of the overlap distribution , one bin for every ﬁve percentiles above the median ( 50 th to 55 th percentile , 55 th to 60 th percentile , . . . , 95 th to 99 th percentile ) , as well as a top percentile bin . We then compute the corresponding measures of subﬁeld activity by aggregating the data up to the subﬁeld / year level . These results are presented graphically in Panel B of Figure 3 . Each dot corresponds to the magnitude of the treatment eﬀect in a separate regression with the outcome variable being the number of articles in each subﬁeld that belong to the corresponding bin . A striking pattern emerges . The authors driving the growth in relative publi - 24 Whenever we match more than one author on a related article , we assign to that article the highest proximity score for any of the matched authors . Appendix E , Table E9 deﬁnes overlap with respect to all the subﬁelds associated with a given star , rather than simply the focal subﬁeld . This does not alter our conclusions . 20 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW JANUARY 2019 cation activity following a star’s death are largely outsiders . They do not appear to have been substantially active in the subﬁeld when the star was alive . In other words , they are predominantly new entrants into these subﬁelds , though not necessarily novice scientists . D . The Nature of Entry Barriers The evidence so far points to ﬁelds of deceased stars enjoying bursts of activity after the death event . The inﬂux of outsiders documented above suggests that stars may be able to regulate entry into their ﬁeld while alive . In this section , we attempt to uncover the precise nature of barriers to entry into the subﬁelds where the stars were prominent prior to their untimely demise . Methodologically , we do so by splitting the sample of ﬁelds across the median for a series of relevant covariates . Because there is no presumption that death events are exogenous with respect to subﬁeld growth and decline within the strata delineated by these covariates , it should be clear that we will only be able to document conditional correlations , and not causal eﬀects in what follows . 25 While it is tempting to envisage conscious eﬀort by the stars to block entry through the explicit control of key resources , such as funding and / or editorial goodwill ( Brogaard , Engelberg , and Parsons 2014 ; Li 2017 ) , this explanation ap - pears inconsistent with the facts on the ground . In the ﬁve - year window before death , only three of our stars ( out of 452 ) were sitting on study sections , the fund - ing panels that evaluate the scientiﬁc merits of NIH grant applications . Another three were journal editors in the same time window . This handful of individuals could not possibly drive the robust eﬀects we have uncovered . 26 If barriers to entry are not the result of explicit control by stars , what is discouraging entry ? Goliath’s shadow . One possibility is that outsiders are simply deterred by the prospect of challenging a luminary in the ﬁeld . The existence of a towering ﬁgure may skew the cost - beneﬁt calculations from entry by outside scholars toward delay or alternative activities . Table 6 examines this role of implicit barriers to entry by focusing on the eminence of the star . Eminence is measured through the star’s publication count , the star’s cumulative number of citations garnered up to the year of death , and the star’s cumulative amount of NIH funding . We also have a “local” measure of eminence : the star’s importance to the ﬁeld , which is deﬁned as the fraction of papers in the subﬁeld that have the star as an author . Splitting the sample at the median of these measures reveals a consistent pattern of results . Stars that were especially accomplished appear to be an important deterrent to entry , with their passing creating a larger void for non - collaborators 25 Instead of interacting the treatment eﬀect with covariates , we prefer to estimate our benchmark speciﬁcations on subsamples corresponding to below and above the median of these covariates . For these two approaches to yield comparable results , one would need to also saturate the speciﬁcation with interaction terms between the covariates and year / ﬁeld age eﬀects . In practice , we have found that the ﬁxed eﬀects Poisson models fail to converge with this full set of interactions . 26 We veriﬁed that omitting these scientists from the sample hardly change the core results . VOL . 109 NO . 1 DOES SCIENCE ADVANCE ONE FUNERAL AT A TIME ? 21 to ﬁll . Rather than directly thwarting the eﬀorts of potential entrants , it appears that the mere presence of a preeminent scholar is suﬃcient to dissuade intellectual outsiders from engaging with the ﬁeld . Of course , the accomplishment of the star alone may not be the only factor inﬂuencing entry . We next turn our attention to how the characteristics of the ﬁeld and the star’s coauthors may also modulate this relationship . Since entry is largely conﬁned to those ﬁelds that have lost an eminent star , the analysis that follows limits attention to those subﬁelds in which the most eminent among the stars were active , as measured by our citation metric in Table 6 . 27 Subﬁeld coherence . Entry into a ﬁeld , even after it has lost its star , may be deterred if the subﬁeld appears unusually coherent to outsiders . A subﬁeld is likely to be perceived as intellectually coherent , when the researchers active in it agree on the set of questions , approaches , and methodologies that propel the ﬁeld forward . Alternatively , a ﬁeld might be perceived as socially coherent , when the researchers active in it form a tightly - knit clique , often collaborating with each other , and perhaps also reviewing each other’s manuscripts . To explore these purported barriers to subﬁeld entry , we develop two alternative measures of intellectual coherence , and one measure of social coherence . Our ﬁrst index of intellectual coherence leverages PMRA to capture the extent to which articles in the subﬁeld pack themselves into a crowded scientiﬁc neigh - borhood . Recall that for each article in a subﬁeld , we have at our disposal both a cardinal and an ordinal measure of intellectual proximity with the source article from which all other articles in the subﬁeld radiate . Focusing only on the set of articles published in the subﬁeld before the year of death , we measure intellectual coherence as the cardinal ranking ( expressed as a real number between zero and one ) for the 25 th most related article in the subﬁeld . 28 According to this metric , subﬁelds exhibit wide variation in their degree of intellectual coherence , with a mean and median equal to 0 . 60 ( sd = 0 . 13 ) . The second index of intellectual coherence exploits the list of references cited in each article in the subﬁeld before the star’s death . In the spirit of Funk and Owen - Smith ( 2017 ) , for all related articles published in the ﬁve years prior to the star’s death , we compute the frac - tion of references that fall within the subﬁeld . Our contention is that subﬁelds that are more self - referential will tend to dissuade outsiders from entering . Once again , we observe meaningful variation across subﬁelds using this second index ( mean = 0 . 05 ; sd = 0 . 04 ) . Our measure of social coherence summarizes the degree of “cliquishness” within 27 More precisely , Table 7 below drops from the sample subﬁelds associated with stars who fall below the median of cumulative citations garnered by the year of death . Results are qualitatively similar when focusing on the most eminent stars as deﬁned by publications or NIH funding . Table F6 in Appendix F presents the results corresponding to the subsample of less - eminent stars . 28 The choice of the twenty ﬁfth - ranked article is arbitrary , and also convenient . After purging from each subﬁeld reviews , editorials , and articles appearing in journals not indexed by WoS , 95 % of the subﬁelds contain 25 articles or more in the period that precedes the star’s death . In those rare cases where the number of articles is less than twenty - ﬁve , we choose as our measure of coherence the cardinal measure for the least - proximate article in the subﬁeld . 22 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW JANUARY 2019 a subﬁeld by computing the clustering coeﬃcient in its coauthorship network . The clustering coeﬃcient is simply the proportion of closed triplets within the network , an intuitive way to measure the propensity of scientists in the ﬁeld to choose insiders as collaborators . 29 Panel A of Table 7 investigates the role of these intellectual and social barri - ers in modulating the post - death expansion of ﬁelds . We ﬁnd tentative evidence of a role for both types of barriers , in that the magnitude of the treatment ef - fect for coherent ﬁelds is always smaller than the magnitude for less coherent ﬁelds , regardless of how coherence is measured . The diﬀerence between the es - timates for more or less coherent subﬁelds does not reach statistical signiﬁcance at conventional levels . What seems notable , however , is that the magnitudes are consistently ordered across the three measures . Incumbent resource control . While we noted earlier that stars do not appear especially well positioned to directly block entry through the control of key re - sources , it is possible that those resources can be controlled indirectly through the inﬂuence of collaborators . If incumbent scholars within a ﬁeld serve as gate - keepers of funding and journal access , they may be able to eﬀectively stave oﬀ threats of entry from outsiders . The same may be implicitly true if collaborators are the recipients of the lion’s share of funding within the ﬁeld . To assess ﬁnancial gatekeeping , we use information regarding the composition of NIH funding pan - els , to tabulate , for each star , the number of collaborators who were members of at least one of these committees in the ﬁve years preceding the death of the star . We would like to proceed in a similar fashion using the composition of editorial boards , but these data are not easily available for the set of PubMed - indexed journals and the thirty - year time period covered by our sample . As an alterna - tive , we develop a proxy for editorial position based on the number of editorials or comments written by every collaborator of the star . 30 We then sum the number of editorials written by coauthors in the ﬁve years before the death . Together , the editorial and study section information allow us to distinguish between the stars whose coauthors were in a position to channel resources towards preferred individuals or intellectual approaches from those stars whose important coauthors had no such power . Panel B of Table 7 presents the evidence on the role of indirect control . The results paint a consistent , if not always statistically signiﬁcant , picture . While subﬁeld expansion is the rule , it appears more pronounced when stars have rela - 29 The clustering coeﬃcient is based on triplets of nodes ( authors ) . A triplet consists of three authors that are connected by either two ( open triplet ) or three ( closed triplet ) undirected ties . The clustering coeﬃcient is the number of closed triplets over the total number of triplets ( both open and closed , cf . Luce and Perry [ 1949 ] ) . 30 We investigated the validity of this proxy as follows . In the sample of deceased superstars , every individual with ﬁve editorials or more was an editor . In a random sample of 50 superstars with no editorials published , only one was an editor ( for a ﬁeld journal ) . Finally , among the sixteen superstars who wrote between one and four editorials over their career , we found two whose CV indicate they were in fact editors for a key journal in their ﬁeld . We conclude that there appears to be a meaningful correlation between the number of editorials written and the propensity to be an editor . VOL . 109 NO . 1 DOES SCIENCE ADVANCE ONE FUNERAL AT A TIME ? 23 tively few collaborators in inﬂuential positions , or collectively capture a smaller portion of the funding that supported research in the subﬁeld . Indirect control therefore appears to be a potential mechanism through which superstars can exert inﬂuence on the evolution of their ﬁelds , even from beyond the grave . Coauthors , either through their direct eﬀort to keep the star’s intellectual ﬂame alive or sim - ply by their sheer ( ﬁnancial ) dominance in the ﬁeld , appear to erect barriers to entry into those ﬁelds that prevent its rejuvenation by outsiders . Taken together , these results suggest that outsiders are reluctant to challenge hegemonic leadership within a ﬁeld when the star is alive . They also highlight a number of factors that may constrain entry even after she is gone . Intellectual , social , and resource barriers all seem to play a role in impeding entry , with out - siders only entering subﬁelds whose topology oﬀers a less hostile landscape for the support and acceptance of “foreign” ideas . E . Reallocation and Welfare What are the implications of our results for welfare ? We approach this question with a great deal of caution , since much of the evidence presented thus far pertains to changes in the direction , rather than the rate , of scientiﬁc progress . Making welfare statements in this context is tantamount to valuing the importance of the new directions in which related authors take their ﬁelds ( compared to the prior agenda inherited from the superstar ) , as well as ascertaining the fate of ﬁelds that the new entrants departed , and the agenda they otherwise might have pursued had the star remained alive . Such an exercise is fraught with peril . Below we synthesize the results that already speak to these questions , and provide a few additional suggestive pieces of evidence . Our earlier evidence suggests that entrants bring diﬀerent and more recent ideas into the subﬁelds they enter to create highly impactful output ( Tables 4 and 5 ) . In Appendix E we further show that the subﬁelds that experience the largest post - death boost in activity are those in which the star was presiding over an empire that was losing momentum in the years immediately preceding the star’s death ( Tables E5 and E8 ) . These subﬁelds are also those in which the star’s close collaborators were less able to regulate entry ( Table 7B ) . It is important to note , however , that the additional output by entrants in treated subﬁelds is largely oﬀset by commensurate declines in output by the star’s collaborators ( Table 3 ) . Moreover , these new contributions appear to come at the expense of the entrants’ prior agenda . In Appendix G , we examine changes in total output at the related author level , using a diﬀerence - in - diﬀerences set - up that parallels our analyses at the subﬁeld level . The results in Table G1 show that non - collaborators do not increase their overall output , measured in terms of publications and NIH grants awarded . Since we know from our main analysis that related authors are contributing more within the subﬁelds of dead superstars , the absence of changes in total output imply that this additional work is displacing work they were doing in other subﬁelds . Their new output replaces , at least in 24 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW JANUARY 2019 part , articles that these authors would have written in other intellectual domains had the star remained alive . 31 As a whole , these results imply that entrants are moving subﬁelds in productive directions relative to the period immediately preceding the passing of the star , but without increasing scientiﬁc output in the aggregate . However , the impacts in the ﬁnal years of a star’s life are not necessarily indicative of their contributions writ large . Indeed , the lofty accomplishments which earned them superstar status suggest that their net contribution to society is likely positive . A longer view would also recognize that the scientiﬁc journeymen of today may well become the stars of tomorrow ( as shown in Table E10 of Appendix E ) with a career that slowly builds to an apex of socially valuable accomplishments , that will someday experience a similar decline ( see Figure E4 in Appendix E ) . F . Extensions and robustness Appendix E presents results pertaining to extensions of the main analyses . Appendix F provides a number of robustness checks . In the interest of space , we only call out a subset of the analyses presented therein , but we have written these appendices as stand - alone documents , such that the interested reader can consult them for additional details . Impact of research infrastructure needs . Our analysis is limited to the life sciences . Though this area accounts for a large fraction of publicly funded , civilian research funding in the United States , it is not necessarily representative of all ﬁelds of science . In particular , some domains of research require access to expensive and specialized capital equipment . When capital needs are large and lumpy , the evolution of subﬁelds in the wake of an eminent scientist’s death will likely depend on the institutions that govern access to the scarce capital equipment . Within biomedical research , large - scale clinical trials most closely—albeit im - perfectly—resemble the characteristics of capital - intensive scientiﬁc ﬁelds . These require a large infrastructure of data collection , monitoring , and management , which is why these activities are often consolidated in large cooperative groups such as the AIDS Clinical Trials Group , the Children’s Oncology Group , or the Framingham Heart Study . PubMed has a “publication type” ﬁeld which allows us to identify the subﬁelds that are clinical - trial intensive ( 10 % of the subﬁelds ) versus those that are not ( the remaining 90 % ) . Table E6 replicates the results of Table 3 separately for these two subsamples . Although our ability to estimate statistically signiﬁcant eﬀects is limited by sample size , the magnitudes are very similar . Impact of star age and experience . As explained earlier , we do not impose 31 We also estimate a dynamic version of these speciﬁcations and display the corresponding event study - style graphs in Figure G1 ( publication output ) and Figure G2 ( grant output ) . In general , it appears from these ﬁgures that the total output of related authors neither expands nor contracts in the wake of a star’s passing . VOL . 109 NO . 1 DOES SCIENCE ADVANCE ONE FUNERAL AT A TIME ? 25 a strict age cutoﬀ for the deceased star , we merely insist that they exhibit tangi - ble signs of research activity , such as publishing original articles , obtaining NIH grants , and training students . Among our 452 departed superstars , the median age at death is 61 , the seventy - ﬁfth percentile 67 , and the top decile 73 . How do the core results change when the scientists who passed away at an advanced age are excluded from the sample ? As can be observed in Table E7 , the subﬁelds of stars who passed away more prematurely are responsible for most of the eﬀect . The eﬀect for the ﬁelds associated with older stars is small in magnitude and imprecisely estimated . We chose to keep these older stars in the sample because a larger sample aﬀords us opportunities to explore mechanisms without losing power to detect nuanced eﬀects statistically . Star level analyses . In Table F1 , we probe the robustness of the core results presented in Table 3 after rolling up the data to the level of the star scientist ( deceased or control ) . Recall that the treatment variable exhibits variation at the level of the star scientist , and not at the level of a single subﬁeld . In this robustness check , we lump all related articles for each star together as if they belonged to a single subﬁeld . The results in Table F1 are quite similar to those in Table 3 , both in terms of magnitude and statistical signiﬁcance . One exception is the coeﬃcient on the eﬀect of entry by collaborators , which is negative as expected , but smaller in magnitude , relative to the corresponding coeﬃcient in Table 3 . The corresponding event - study graphs , displayed in Figure F3 , also display patterns fully consistent with those observed for our benchmark set of results . As explained in Section II . B , we strongly prefer performing the analyses at the the subﬁeld level , for two reasons . First , the subﬁelds delineated by PMRA exhibit limited overlap ( see Figure C6 in Appendix C ) , and as a result the within - star , between subﬁeld variation in publication activity can be exploited meaningfully . Second , we can track the diﬀerential position of the star across the subﬁelds in which she was active . The covariates that leverage these diﬀerences help us shed light on mechanisms , as in Tables 7 , E5 , and E8 . Alternate functional forms . In Table F2 , we examine the sensitivity of our benchmark set of results to the choice of alternative functional forms . In the three columns to the left , we simply use the “raw” number of articles in the sub - ﬁeld as the outcome , and perform estimation by OLS . Of course , the estimates are not directly interpretable in terms of elasticities . At the mean of the data , however , the treatment eﬀect in the third column implies that subﬁeld entry by non - collaborating authors expands by 0 . 409 / 3 . 335 = 12 . 26 % , which is not all that diﬀerent from the 8 . 2 % reported in Table 3 . In the three columns to the right , we report results corresponding to OLS estimation , but this time with the out - come variables transformed using the inverse hyperbolic sine function ( Burbidge , Magee , and Robb 1988 ) . In this case , coeﬃcient estimates can be interpreted as elasticities , as an approximation . They are quite similar once again to those re - ported in Table 3 , except for the eﬀect on entry by collaborators , which is smaller 26 THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW JANUARY 2019 in magnitude . IV . Conclusion In this paper , we leverage the applied economist’s toolkit , together with a novel approach to delineate the boundaries of scientiﬁc ﬁelds , to explore the eﬀect that the passing of an eminent life scientist exerts on the dynamics of growth—or de - cline—for the ﬁelds in which she was active while alive . We ﬁnd that publications and grants by scientists that never collaborated with the star surge within the subﬁeld , absent the star . Interestingly , this surge is not driven by a reshuﬄing of leadership within the ﬁeld , but rather by new entrants that are drawn from outside of it . Our rich data on individual researchers and the nature of their scholarship allows us provide a deeper understanding of this dynamic . In particular , this increase in contributions by outsiders appears to tackle the mainstream questions within the ﬁeld but by leveraging newer ideas that arise in other domains . This intellectual arbitrage is quite successful—the new articles represent substantial contributions , at least as measured by long - run citation impact . Together , these results paint a picture of scientiﬁc ﬁelds as scholarly guilds to which elite scientists can regulate access , providing them with outsized opportunities to shape the direction of scientiﬁc advance in that space . We also provide evidence regarding the mechanisms that may enable the regula - tion of entry . While stars are alive , entry appears to be eﬀectively deterred where the shadow they cast over the ﬁelds in which they were active looms particularly large . After their passing , we ﬁnd evidence for inﬂuence from beyond the grave , exercised through a tightly - knit “invisible college” of collaborators ( de Solla Price and Beaver 1966 ; Crane 1972 ) . The loss of an elite scientist central to the ﬁeld appears to signal to those on the outside that the cost / beneﬁt calculations on the avant - garde ideas they might bring to the table has changed , thus encouraging them to engage . But this appears to occur only when the topology of the ﬁeld oﬀers a less hostile landscape for the support and acceptance of “foreign” ideas , for instance when the star’s network of close collaborators is insuﬃciently robust to stave oﬀ threats from intellectual outsiders . In the end , our results lend credence to Planck’s infamous quip that provides the title for this manuscript . Yet its implications for social welfare are ambiguous . While we can document that eminent scientists restrict the entry of new ideas and scholars into a ﬁeld , gatekeeping activities could have beneﬁcial properties when the ﬁeld is in its inception ; it might allow cumulative progress through shared assumptions and methodologies , and the ability to control the intellectual evolu - tion of a scientiﬁc domain might , in itself , be a prize that spurs much ex ante risk taking . Because our empirical exercise cannot shed light on these countervailing tendencies , we must refrain from drawing concrete policy conclusions from our results . All of the evidence we have presented pertains to the academic life sciences . It is unclear how the lessons from that setting might apply to other ﬁelds inside the VOL . 109 NO . 1 DOES SCIENCE ADVANCE ONE FUNERAL AT A TIME ? 27 academy . In particular , when frontier research requires access to expensive and highly - specialized capital equipment—as is sometimes the case in the physical sci - ences—the rules governing access to that capital are likely to favor succession by insiders . At the other end of the spectrum , more atomistic ﬁelds where scientists generally work alone or in very small groups may evolve in a more frictionless man - ner . Whether our ﬁndings apply to industrial research and development is also an open question . In that setting , the choice of problem - solving approaches is guided by market signals ( however imperfectly , cf . Acemoglu [ 2012 ] ) , and thus likely to diﬀer from those selected under the more nuanced system of pecuniary and non - pecuniary incentives that characterizes academic research ( Feynman 1999 ; Aghion , Dewatripont , and Stein 2008 ) . Assessing the degree to which our results extend to other settings , and the reasons they might diﬀer , represents a fruitful area for future research . 28 R EFERENCES Aad , Georges et al . 2015 . “Combined Measurement of the Higgs Boson Mass in Pp Collisions at S = 7 and 8 Tev with the Atlas and Cms Experiments . ” Physical Review Letters , 114 ( 191803 ) , 1 - 33 . Acemoglu , Daron . 2012 . “Diversity and Technological Progress , ” J . Lerner and S . Stern , The Rate & Direction of Inventive Activity Revisited . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press , 319 - 56 . Aghion , Philippe ; Mathias Dewatripont and Jeremy C . Stein . 2008 . “Academic Freedom , Private Sector Focus , and the Process of Innovation . ” RAND Journal of Economics , 39 ( 3 ) , 617 - 35 . Aghion , Philippe and Peter Howitt . 1992 . “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction . ” Econometrica , 60 ( 2 ) , 323 - 51 . Akerlof , George and Pascal Michaillat . 2017 . “Beetles : Biased Promotion and Persistence of False Belief , ” NBER Working Paper # 23523 . Azoulay , Pierre ; Jeffrey L . Furman ; Joshua L . Krieger and Fiona Murray . 2015 . “Retractions . ” Review of Economics and Statistics , 97 ( 5 ) , 1118 - 36 . Azoulay , Pierre ; Joshua Graff Zivin and Jialan Wang . 2010 . “Superstar Extinction . ” Quarterly Journal of Economics , 125 ( 2 ) , 549 - 89 . Azoulay , Pierre ; Danielle Li ; Joshua S . Graff Zivin and Bhaven N . Sampat . 2019 . “Public R & D Investment and Private Sector Patenting : Evidence from NIH Funding Rules . ” Review of Economic Studies , 86 ( 1 ) , 117 - 52 . Bertanha , Marinho and Petra Moser . 2016 . “Spatial Errors in Count Data Regressions . ” Journal of Econometric Methods , 5 ( 1 ) , 49 - 69 . Bertrand , Marianne ; Esther Duflo and Sendhil Mullainathan . 2004 . “How Much Should We Trust Differences - in - Differences Estimates ? ” Quarterly Journal of Economics , 119 ( 1 ) , 249 - 75 . Borjas , George J . and Kirk B . Doran . 2015b . “Cognitive Mobility : Labor Market Responses to Supply Shocks in the Space of Ideas . ” Journal of Labor Economics , 33 ( S1 ) , S109 - S45 . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ . 2015a . “Which Peers Matter ? The Relative Impacts of Collaborators , Colleagues , and Competitors . ” Review of Economics and Statistics , 97 ( 5 ) , 1104 - 17 . Börner , Katy ; Chen , Chaomei and Kevin W . Boyack . 2003 . “Visualizing Knowledge Domains . ” Annual Review of Information Science and Technology , 37 ( 1 ) , 179 - 255 . Bourdieu , Pierre . 1975 . “La Spécificité du Champ Scientifique et les Conditions Sociales du Progrès de laa Raison . ” Sociologie et Sociétés , 7 ( 1 ) , 91 - 118 . Bramoullé , Yann and Gilles Saint - Paul . 2010 . “Research Cycles . ” Journal of Economic Theory , 145 ( 5 ) , 1890 - 920 . Brogaard , Jonathan ; Joseph Engelberg and Christopher Parsons . 2014 . “Network Position and Productivity : Evidence from Journal Editor Rotations . ” Journal of Financial Economics , 111 ( 1 ) , 251 - 70 . Burbidge , John B . ; Lonnie Magee and A . Leslie Robb . 1988 . “Alternative Transformations to Handle Extreme Values of the Dependent Variable . ” Journal of the American Statistical Association , 83 ( 401 ) , 123 - 27 . Chavalarias , David and Jean - Philippe Cointet . 2013 . “Phylomemetic Patterns in Science Evolution—the Rise and Fall of Scientific Fields . ” PLoS one , 8 ( 2 ) , e54847 . 29 Cole , Jonathan R . and Stephen Cole . 1972 . “The Ortega Hypothesis . ” Science , 178 ( 4059 ) , 368 - 75 . Crane , Diana . 1969 . “Social Structure in a Group of Scientists : A Test of the ‘Invisible College’ Hypothesis . ” American Sociological Review , 34 ( 3 ) , 335 - 52 . Crick , Francis . 1970 . “Central Dogma of Molecular Biology . ” Nature , 227 ( 5258 ) , 561 . de Solla Price , Derek J . 1963 . Little Science , Big Science . New York : Columbia University Press . de Solla Price , Derek J . and Donald D . Beaver . 1966 . “Collaboration in an Invisible College . ” American Psychologist , 21 ( 11 ) , 1011 - 8 . Feynman , Richard P . 1999 . The Pleasure of Finding Things Out . New York : Basic Books . Fortunato , Santo and Darko Hric . 2016 . “Community Detection in Networks : A User Guide . ” Physics Reports , 659 , 1 - 44 . Foster , Jacob G . ; Andrey Rzhetsky and James A . Evans . 2015 . “Tradition and Innovation in Scientists’ Research Strategies . ” American Sociological Review , 80 ( 5 ) , 875 - 908 . Funk , Russell J . and Jason Owen - Smith . 2017 . “A Dynamic Network Measure of Technological Change . ” Management Science , 63 ( 3 ) , 791 - 817 . Gorham , Geoffrey . 1991 . “Planck’s Principle and Jeans’s Conversion . ” Studies in History & Philosophy of Science , 22 ( 3 ) , 471 - 97 . Gouriéroux , Christian ; Alain Montfort and Alain Trognon . 1984 . “Pseudo Maximum Likelihood Methods : Applications to Poisson Models . ” Econometrica , 53 ( 3 ) , 701 - 20 . Hall , Bronwyn H . ; Jacques Mairesse and Laure Turner . 2007 . “Identifying Age , Cohort and Period Effects in Scientific Research Productivity : Discussion and Illustration Using Simulated and Actual Data on French Physicists . ” Economics of Innovation and New Technology , 16 ( 2 ) , 159 - 77 . Hausman , Jerry ; Bronwyn H . Hall and Zvi Griliches . 1984 . “Econometric Models for Count Data with an Application to the Patents - R & D Relationship . ” Econometrica , 52 ( 4 ) , 909 - 38 . Hull , David L . 1988 . Science as a Process . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Hull , David L . ; Peter D . Tessner and Arthur M . Diamond . 1978 . “Planck’s Principle . ” Science , 202 ( 4369 ) , 717 - 23 . Jaravel , Xavier ; Neviana Petkova and Alex Bell . 2018 . “Team - Specific Capital and Innovation . ” American Economic Review , 108 ( 4 - 5 ) , 1034 - 73 . Jones , Benjamin F . 2009 . “The Burden of Knowledge and the ‛Death of the Renaissance Man’ : Is Innovation Getting Harder ? ” Review of Economic Studies , 76 ( 1 ) , 283 - 317 . Kuhn , Thomas S . 1970 . The Structure of Scientific Revolutions . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Levin , Sharon G . and Paula E . Stephan . 1991 . “Research Productivity over the Life Cycle : Evidence for Academic Scientists . ” American Economic Review , 81 ( 1 ) , 114 - 32 . Levin , Sharon G . ; Paula E . Stephan and Mary Beth Walker . 1995 . “Planck’s Principle Revisited : A Note . ” Social Studies of Science , 25 ( 2 ) , 275 - 83 . Li , Danielle . 2017 . “Expertise vs . Bias in Evaluation : Evidence from the NIH . ” American Economic Journal : Applied Economics , 9 ( 2 ) , 60 - 92 . Li , Danielle ; Pierre Azoulay and Bhaven N . Sampat . 2017 . “The Applied Value of Public Investments in Biomedical Research . ” Science , 356 ( 6333 ) , 78 - 81 . Lin , Jimmy and W . John Wilbur . 2007 . “Pubmed Related Articles : A Probabilistic Topic - Based Model for Content Similarity . ” BMC Bioinformatics , 8 ( 423 ) , 1 - 14 . 30 Lotka , Alfred J . 1926 . “The Frequency Distribution of Scientific Productivity . ” Journal of the Washington Academy of Sciences , 16 ( 12 ) , 317 - 23 . Luce , R . Duncan and Albert D . Perry . 1949 . “A Method of Matrix Analysis of Group Structure . ” Psychometrika , 14 ( 2 ) , 95 - 116 . Merton , Robert K . 1973 . The Sociology of Science : Theoretical and Empirical Investigation . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Mohnen , Myra . 2018 . “Stars and Brokers : Knowledge Spillovers among Medical Scientists , ” Working Paper . Working Paper , University of Essex . Mokyr , Joel . 2002 . The Gifts of Athena : Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ . 1992 . The Lever of Riches : Technological Creativity and Economic Progress . New York : Oxford University Press . Morange , Michel . 1998 . A History of Molecular Biology . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Myers , Kyle . 2018 . “The Elasticity of Science . ” Working Paper , Harvard University . Available at SSRN : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2139 / ssrn . 3176991 . Nagaoka , Sadao and Hideo Owan . 2014 . “Author Ordering in Scientific Research : Evidence from Scientists Surveyed in the US and Japan , ” IIR Working Paper # 13 - 23 . Hitotsubashi University , Institute of Innovation Research , Oettl , Alexander . 2012 . “Reconceptualizing Stars : Scientist Helpfulness and Peer Performance . ” Management Science , 58 ( 6 ) , 1122 - 40 . Reese , Thomas S . 2004 . “My Collaboration with John Heuser . ” European Journal of Cell Biology , 83 ( 6 ) , 243 - 44 . Romer , Paul M . 1990 . “Endogenous Technological Change . ” Journal of Political Economy , 98 ( 5 ) , S71 - S102 . Rosvall , Martin and Carl T . Bergstrom . 2008 . “Maps of Random Walks on Complex Networks Reveal Community Structure . ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 105 ( 4 ) , 1118 - 23 . Sampat , Bhaven N . and Frank R . Lichtenberg . 2011 . “What Are the Respective Roles of the Public and Private Sectors in Pharmaceutical Innovation ? ” Health Affairs , 30 ( 2 ) , 332 - 39 . Santos Silva , João M . C . and Silvanna Tenreyro . 2006 . “The Log of Gravity . ” Review of Economics and Statistics , 88 ( 4 ) , 641 - 58 . Shapin , Steven . 1996 . The Scientific Revolution . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Shwed , Uri and Peter S . Bearman . 2010 . “The Temporal Structure of Scientific Consensus Formation . ” American Sociological Review , 75 ( 6 ) , 817 - 40 . Solow , Robert M . 1957 . “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function . ” Review of Economics and Statistics , 39 ( 3 ) , 312 - 20 . Wooldridge , Jeffrey M . 1997 . “Quasi - Likelihood Methods for Count Data , ” M . H . Pesaran and P . Schmidt , Handbook of Applied Econometrics . Oxford : Blackwell , 352 - 406 . Zuckerman , Harriet A . 1968 . “Patterns of Name Ordering among Authors of Scientific Papers : A Study of Social Symbolism and Its Ambiguity . ” American Journal of Sociology , 74 ( 3 ) , 276 - 91 . 31 Figure 1 : Cumulative Stock of Publications at Time of Death Note : We compute the cumulative number of publications , up to the year that immediately precedes the year of death ( or counterfactual year of death ) , between 3 , 076 treated subfields and 31 , 142 control subfields . 32 Figure 2 Effect of Star Scientist Death on Subfield Growth and Decline A . All Authors B . Collaborators C . Non - Collaborators Note : The dark dots in the above plots correspond to coefficient estimates stemming from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications in which publication flows in subfields are regressed onto year effects , subfield age effects , as well as 20 interaction terms between treatment status and the number of years before / after the death event ( the indicator variable for treatment status interacted with the year of death is omitted ) . The specifications also include a full set of lead and lag terms common to both the treated and control subfields to fully account for transitory trends in subfield activity around the time of the death . The 95 % confidence interval ( corresponding to robust standard errors , clustered at the level of the star scientist ) around these estimates is plotted with vertical light grey lines ; Panel A corresponds to a dynamic version of the specification in column ( 1 ) of Table 3 ; Panel B corresponds to a dynamic version of the specification in column ( 2 ) of Table 3 ; Panel C corresponds to a dynamic version of the specification in column ( 3 ) of Table 3 . 33 Figure 3 Characteristics of Related Authors : Competitors or Outsiders ? A . Distribution of Intellectual Proximity B . Entering Authors & Field Overlap Note : Panel A displays the distribution of overlap between the past output of related authors and each star’s subfield . For each author on a related article matched to the AAMC Faculty Roster , we create a metric of intellectual proximity by computing the fraction of their publications that belongs to the star’s subfield . Slightly more than half of related articles have authors with zero overlap , i . e . , this related article is their first contribution to the star’s subfield . 1 . 24 % of related articles are authored by new scientists for whom this publication within the subfield is also their first publication overall . Using this information , we aggregate the number of related articles in a particular subfield and in a particular year , e . g . , “the number of articles in the subfield in year t that have authors above the 95 th percentile in our measure of field overlap . ” In Panel B , each dot corresponds to the magnitude of the treatment effect in a separate regression where the dependent variable is the number of articles in each subfield authored by scientists who belong to a particular bin of intellectual proximity , as measured by field overlap above . 34 Table 1 : Summary Statistics — Deceased Superstar Scientists ( N = 452 ) Mean Median Std . Dev . Min . Max . Year of Birth 1930 . 157 1930 11 . 011 1899 1959 Degree Year 1957 . 633 1957 11 . 426 1928 1986 Year of Death 1991 . 128 1992 8 . 055 1975 2003 Age at Death 60 . 971 61 9 . 778 34 91 Female 0 . 102 0 0 . 303 0 1 MD Degree 0 . 403 0 0 . 491 0 1 PhD Degree 0 . 489 0 0 . 500 0 1 MD / PhD Degree 0 . 108 0 0 . 311 0 1 Sudden Death 0 . 409 0 0 . 492 0 1 Nb . of Subfields 6 . 805 4 7 . 308 1 57 Career Nb . of Pubs . 138 . 221 112 115 . 704 12 1 , 380 Career Nb . of Citations 8 , 341 5 , 907 8 , 562 120 72 , 122 Career NIH Funding $ 16 , 637 , 919 $ 10 , 899 , 139 $ 25 , 441 , 933 0 $ 329 , 968 , 960 Sits on NIH Study Section 0 . 007 0 0 . 081 0 1 Career Nb . of Editorials 0 . 131 0 0 . 996 0 17 Note : Sample consists of 452 superstar life scientists who died while still actively engaged in research . See Appendix A for more details on sample construction . 35 Table 2 : Summary Statistics — Control & Treated Subfields at Baseline Mean Median Std . Dev . Min . Max . Control Subfields ( N = 31 , 142 ) Baseline Stock of Related Articles in the Field 76 . 995 59 64 . 714 0 384 Baseline Stock of Related Articles in the Field , Non - Collaborators 68 . 390 51 60 . 222 0 381 Baseline Stock of Related Articles in the Field , Collaborators 8 . 604 5 10 . 358 0 125 Source Article Nb . of Authors 3 . 970 4 1 . 901 1 15 Source Article Citations at Baseline 16 . 331 8 30 . 305 0 770 Source Article Long - run Citations 70 . 427 38 116 . 108 1 4495 Investigator Gender 0 . 067 0 0 . 249 0 1 Investigator Year of Degree 1960 . 546 1962 10 . 998 1926 1991 Death Year 1991 . 125 1991 7 . 968 1975 2003 Age at Death 58 . 100 58 8 . 795 34 91 Investigator Cumulative Nb . of Publications 164 131 123 1 1 , 109 Investigator Cumulative NIH Funding at Baseline $ 18 , 784 , 517 $ 11 , 904 , 846 $ 25 , 160 , 518 0 $ 387 , 558 , 656 Investigator Cumulative Nb . of Citations 12 , 141 8 , 010 12 , 938 9 157 , 581 Treated Subfields ( N = 3 , 076 ) Baseline Stock of Related Articles in the Field 76 . 284 58 64 . 046 0 368 Baseline Stock of Related Articles in the Field , Non - Collaborators 67 . 752 51 59 . 725 0 357 Baseline Stock of Related Articles in the Field , Collaborators 8 . 532 5 9 . 841 0 86 Source Article Nb . of Authors 3 . 987 4 1 . 907 1 14 Source Article Citations at Baseline 16 . 694 8 36 . 334 0 920 Source Article Long - run Citations 70 . 432 35 180 . 528 1 6598 Investigator Gender 0 . 099 0 0 . 299 0 1 Investigator Year of Degree 1960 . 141 1961 10 . 898 1928 1986 Death Year 1991 . 125 1991 7 . 970 1975 2003 Age at Death 58 . 100 58 8 . 796 34 91 Investigator Cumulative Nb . of Publications 170 143 118 12 1 , 380 Investigator Cumulative NIH Funding at Baseline $ 17 , 637 , 726 $ 12 , 049 , 690 $ 24 , 873 , 018 0 $ 329 , 968 , 960 Investigator Cumulative Nb . of Citations 11 , 580 8 , 726 10 , 212 120 72 , 122 Note : The sample consists of subfields for 452 deceased superstar life scientists and their matched control subfields . See Appendix D for details on the matching procedure . All time - varying covariates are measured in the year of superstar death . 36 Table 3 : Effect of Superstar Death on Subfield Entry Rates Publication Flows NIH Funding Flows ( Nb . of Awards ) All Authors Collaborators Only Non - Collaborators Only All Authors Collaborators Only Non - Collaborators Only ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) After Death 0 . 051 † - 0 . 232 * * 0 . 082 * * 0 . 046 - 0 . 265 * * 0 . 110 * * ( 0 . 029 ) ( 0 . 057 ) ( 0 . 029 ) ( 0 . 035 ) ( 0 . 076 ) ( 0 . 033 ) Nb . of Investigators 6 , 260 6 , 124 6 , 260 6 , 215 5 , 678 6 , 202 Nb . of Fields 34 , 218 33 , 096 34 , 218 33 , 912 29 , 163 33 , 806 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 1 , 259 , 176 1 , 217 , 905 1 , 259 , 176 1 , 049 , 942 902 , 873 1 , 046 , 678 Log Likelihood - 2 , 891 , 110 - 729 , 521 - 2 , 768 , 252 - 1 , 350 , 204 - 472 , 329 - 1 , 223 , 913 Note : Estimates stem from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications . The dependent variable is the total number of publications in a subfield in a particular year ( columns 1 , 2 , and 3 ) , or the total number of NIH grants that acknowledge a publication in a subfield ( columns 4 , 5 , and 6 ) . All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects , as well as a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star , to address the concern that age , year and individual fixed effects may not fully account for trends in subfield entry around the time of death . Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities . For example , the estimates in column ( 3 ) imply that treated subfields see an increase in the number of contributions by non - collaborators after the superstar passes away—a statistically significant 100× ( exp [ 0 . 082 ] - 1 ) = 8 . 55 % . The number of observations varies slightly across columns because the conditional fixed effects specification drops observations corresponding to subfields for which there is no variation in activity over the entire observation period . Robust standard errors in parentheses , clustered at the level of the star scientist . † p < 0 . 10 , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . 37 Table 4 : Scientific Impact of Entry Vintage - specific long - run citation quantile All Pubs Bttm . Quartile 2 nd Quartile 3 rd Quartile Btw . 75 th and 95 th pctl . Btw . 95 th and 99 th pctl . Above 99 th pctl . After Death 0 . 082 * * - 0 . 028 0 . 008 0 . 031 0 . 125 * * 0 . 232 * * 0 . 320 * * ( 0 . 029 ) ( 0 . 036 ) ( 0 . 033 ) ( 0 . 032 ) ( 0 . 035 ) ( 0 . 049 ) ( 0 . 081 ) Nb . of Investigators 6 , 260 6 , 222 6 , 260 6 , 257 6 , 255 6 , 161 5 , 283 Nb . of Fields 34 , 218 33 , 714 34 , 206 34 , 212 34 , 210 33 , 207 21 , 852 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 1 , 259 , 176 1 , 240 , 802 1 , 258 , 738 1 , 258 , 954 1 , 258 , 880 1 , 221 , 952 804 , 122 Log Likelihood - 2 , 768 , 252 - 689 , 465 - 1 , 125 , 555 - 1 , 432 , 223 - 1 , 469 , 096 - 542 , 735 - 156 , 519 Note : Estimates stem from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications . The dependent variable is the total number of publications by non - collaborators in a subfield in a particular year , where these publications fall in a particular quantile bin of the long - run , vintage - adjusted citation distribution for the universe of journal articles in PubMed . All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects , as well as a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star . Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities . For example , the estimates in column ( 1 ) , Panel A , imply that treated subfields see an increase in the number of contributions by non - collaborators after the superstar passes away—a statistically significant 100× ( exp [ 0 . 082 ] - 1 ) = 8 . 55 % . Robust standard errors in parentheses , clustered at the level of the star scientist . † p < 0 . 10 , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . 38 Table 5 : Entry and Research Direction Panel A Cardinal Measure Ordinal Measure Intllct . Proximate Articles Intllct . Distant Articles Intllct . Proximate Articles Intllct . Distant Articles After Death 0 . 091 * * 0 . 028 0 . 117 * * - 0 . 024 ( 0 . 030 ) ( 0 . 035 ) ( 0 . 028 ) ( 0 . 037 ) Nb . of Investigators 6 , 228 6 , 099 6 , 260 6 , 017 Nb . of Fields 33 , 375 32 , 232 34 , 218 31 , 712 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 1 , 228 , 157 1 , 186 , 589 1 , 259 , 176 1 , 167 , 423 Log Likelihood - 1 , 628 , 374 - 1 , 816 , 449 - 1 , 893 , 982 - 1 , 628 , 170 Panel B In - field vs . Out - of - field References Backward Citations to the Star’s Bibliome w / in - field references w / o in - field references w / references to the star w / o references to the star After Death - 0 . 023 0 . 128 * * 0 . 078 * 0 . 152 * * ( 0 . 041 ) ( 0 . 031 ) ( 0 . 036 ) ( 0 . 034 ) Nb . of Investigators 6 , 195 6 , 260 6 , 247 6 , 259 Nb . of Fields 32 , 721 34 , 218 34 , 179 34 , 147 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 1 , 204 , 315 1 , 259 , 176 1 , 257 , 747 1 , 256 , 576 Log Likelihood - 792 , 795 - 2 , 510 , 344 - 1 , 914 , 448 - 1 , 767 , 571 Panel C Vintage of Cited References Vintage of 2 - way MeSH Term Combinations Young Old Young Old After Death 0 . 071 * - 0 . 010 0 . 090 * * 0 . 029 ( 0 . 035 ) ( 0 . 034 ) ( 0 . 033 ) ( 0 . 036 ) Nb . of Investigators 6 , 260 6 , 260 6 , 258 6 , 260 Nb . of Fields 34 , 218 34 , 214 34 , 206 34 , 210 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 1 , 259 , 176 1 , 259 , 044 1 , 258 , 732 1 , 258 , 906 Log Likelihood - 2 , 124 , 598 - 1 , 613 , 457 - 1 , 853 , 062 - 1 , 784 , 275 Note : Estimates stem from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications . In Panel A , the dependent variable is the total number of publications by non - collaborators in a subfield in a particular year , where these publications can either be proximate in intellectual space to the star’s source publication , or more distant ( in the PMRA sense ) . Since PMRA generates both a cardinal and an ordinal measure of intellectual proximity , we parse the related articles using both measures , yielding a total of four different specifications . For the cardinal measure , a related article is deemed proximate if its similarity score is above . 58 , which corresponds to the median of relatedness in the sample . For the ordinal measure , a related article is deemed proximate if its similarity rank is below 90 , which also corresponds to the median of similarity in the sample . In Panel B , we focus on whether the content of entrants’ contributions in the subfield change after the superstar passes away . Each cited reference in a related article can either belong to the subfield , or fall outside of it ; it can cite a publication of the star scientist associated with the subfield , or fail to cite any of the star’s past contributions . In Panel C , the dependent variable is the total number of publications by non - collaborators in a subfield in a particular year , where these publications can either be “fresh” ( citing young references , or being annotated by MeSH terms of recent vintage ) or stale ( citing old references , or being annotated by MeSH terms of distant vintage ) . All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects , as well as a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star . Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities . For example , the estimates in the first column of Panel A imply that treated subfields see an increase in the number of PMRA - proximate contributions by non - collaborators after the superstar passes away—a statistically significant 100× ( exp [ 0 . 091 ] - 1 ) = 9 . 53 % . Robust standard errors in parentheses , clustered at the level of the star scientist . † p < 0 . 10 , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . 39 Table 6 : Breakdown by Star Scientist Characteristics Publications Citations Funding Importance to the Field Below Median Above Median Below Median Above Median Below Median Above Median Below Median Above Median After Death 0 . 059 0 . 116 * 0 . 036 0 . 125 * * 0 . 014 0 . 162 * * 0 . 063 * 0 . 123 * * ( 0 . 037 ) ( 0 . 050 ) ( 0 . 042 ) ( 0 . 040 ) ( 0 . 040 ) ( 0 . 052 ) ( 0 . 031 ) ( 0 . 045 ) Nb . of Investigators 2 , 901 4 , 836 2 , 792 4 , 619 3 , 048 4 , 287 5 , 019 4 , 493 Nb . of Fields 17 , 210 17 , 008 17 , 328 16 , 890 15 , 731 15 , 487 16 , 985 17 , 233 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 632 , 089 627 , 087 636 , 750 622 , 426 578 , 277 570 , 665 625 , 140 634 , 036 Log Likelihood - 1 , 377 , 727 - 1 , 387 , 650 - 1 , 367 , 335 - 1 , 396 , 652 - 1 , 268 , 559 - 1 , 252 , 952 - 1 , 462 , 538 - 1 , 257 , 973 Note : Estimates stem from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications . The dependent variable is the total number of publications by non - collaborators in a subfield in a particular year . Each pair of columns splits the sample across the median of a particular covariate for the sample of fields ( treated and control ) in the baseline year . The table examines differences in the extent to which the eminence of the star at death ( respectively counterfactual year of death for controls ) influences the rate at which non - collaborators enter the field after the star passes away . Eminence is measured through the star’s cumulative number of publications , the star’s cumulative number of citations garnered up to the year of death , and the star’s cumulative amount of NIH funding . We also have a “local” measure of eminence : the star’s importance to the field , which is defined as the proportion of articles in the subfield up to the year of death for which the star is an author . All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects , as well as a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star . Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities . For example , the estimate in the second column implies that treated subfields see an increase in the number of contributions by non - collaborators after the superstar passes away—a statistically significant 100× ( exp [ 0 . 116 ] - 1 ) = 12 . 30 % . Robust standard errors in parentheses , clustered at the level of the star scientist . † p < 0 . 10 , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . 40 Table 7 : The Nature of Entry Barriers Panel A Subfield Coherence PMRA - based definition Citation - based definition Cliquishness Below Median Above Median Below Median Above Median Below Median Above Median After Death 0 . 202 * * 0 . 067 0 . 161 * * 0 . 096 * 0 . 129 * * 0 . 064 ( 0 . 038 ) ( 0 . 048 ) ( 0 . 053 ) ( 0 . 041 ) ( 0 . 049 ) ( 0 . 052 ) Nb . of Investigators 3 , 353 3 , 203 3 , 422 3 , 157 2 , 865 3 , 561 Nb . of Fields 9 , 062 7 , 828 8 , 731 8 , 159 8 , 044 8 , 846 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 334 , 142 288 , 284 321 , 826 300 , 600 296 , 704 325 , 722 Log Likelihood - 711 , 335 - 664 , 170 - 760 , 842 - 631 , 287 - 692 , 330 - 685 , 682 Panel B Indirect Control through Collaborators Editorial Channel NIH Study Section Channel Fraction of Subfield NIH Funding Below Median Above Median Below Median Above Median Below Median Above Median After Death 0 . 147 * * 0 . 086 † 0 . 134 * * - 0 . 078 0 . 174 * * 0 . 084 ( 0 . 056 ) ( 0 . 048 ) ( 0 . 043 ) ( 0 . 095 ) ( 0 . 051 ) ( 0 . 051 ) Nb . of Investigators 3 , 452 2 , 068 4 , 385 664 3 , 559 2 , 525 Nb . of Fields 11 , 110 5 , 780 15 , 338 1 , 552 9 , 863 7 , 027 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 410 , 025 212 , 401 565 , 219 57 , 207 363 , 690 258 , 736 Log Likelihood - 951 , 705 - 461 , 769 - 1 , 293 , 997 - 125 , 950 - 840 , 777 - 545 , 782 Note : Estimates stem from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications . The dependent variable is the total number of publications by non - collaborators in a subfield in a particular year . The sample is limited to the subfields in which the most eminent among the stars were active ( specifically , above the median of the “cumulative citations up to the year of death” metric ) . Each pair of columns splits the sample across the median of a particular covariate for the sample of subfields ( treated and control ) in the baseline year . For example , the first two columns of Panel B compare the magnitude of the treatment effect for stars whose collaborators have written an above - median number of editorials in the five years preceding the superstar’s death , vs . a below - median number of editorials . All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects , as well as a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star . Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities . For example , the estimates in the first column of Panel B imply that treated subfields see an increase in the number of contributions by non - collaborators after the superstar passes away—a statistically significant 100× ( exp [ 0 . 147 ] - 1 ) = 15 . 84 % . Robust standard errors in parentheses , clustered at the level of the star scientist . † p < 0 . 10 , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . Online Appendix Does Science One Funeral at a Time ? by Pierre Azoulay , Christian Fons - Rosen , and Joshua S . Graﬀ Zivin Appendix A : Criteria for Delineating the Set of 12 , 935 “Superstars” Highly Funded Scientists . Our ﬁrst data source is the Consolidated Grant / Applicant File ( CGAF ) from the U . S . National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) . This dataset records information about grants awarded to extramural researchers funded by the NIH since 1938 . Using the CGAF and focusing only on direct costs associated with research grants , we compute individual cumulative totals for the decades 1977 - 1986 , 1987 - 1996 , and 1997 - 2006 , deﬂating the earlier years by the Biomedical Research Producer Price Index . We also recompute these totals excluding large center grants that usually fund groups of investigators ( M01 and P01 grants ) . Scientists whose totals lie above the 95 th percentile of e‘ither distribution constitute our ﬁrst group of superstars . In this group , the least well - funded investigator garnered $ 10 . 5 million in career NIH funding and the most well - funded $ 462 . 6 million . i Highly Cited Scientists . Despite the preeminent role of the NIH in the funding of public biomedical research , the above indicator of “superstardom” biases the sample towards scientists conducting relatively expensive research . We complement this ﬁrst group with a second composed of highly cited scientists identiﬁed by the Institute for Scientiﬁc Information . A Highly Cited listing means that an individual was among the 250 most cited researchers for their published articles between 1981 and 1999 , within a broad scientiﬁc ﬁeld . ii Top Patenters . We add to these groups academic life scientists who belong in the top percentile of the patent distribution among academics—those who were granted 17 patents or more between 1976 and 2004 . Members of the National Academy of Science and of the Institute of Medicine . We add to these groups academic life scientists who were elected to the National Academy of Science or the Institute of Medicine between 1970 and 2013 . MERIT Awardees of the NIH . Initiated in the mid - 1980s , the MERIT Award program extends fund - ing for up to 5 years ( but typically 3 years ) to a select number of NIH - funded investigators “who have demonstrated superior competence , outstanding productivity during their previous research endeavors and are leaders in their ﬁeld with paradigm - shifting ideas . ” The speciﬁc details governing selection vary across the component institutes of the NIH , but the essential feature of the program is that only researchers holding an R01 grant in its second or later cycle are eligible . Further , the application must be scored in the top percentile in a given funding cycle . We add to this category the NIH Director’s Pioneer Awardees . Part of the “High - Risk , High - Reward Research” program , since 2004 the award has supported “scientists with i We perform a similar exercise for scientists employed by the intramural campus of the NIH . These scientists are not eligible to receive extramural funds , but the NIH keeps records of the number of “internal projects” each intramural scientist leads . We include in the elite sample the top ﬁve percentiles of intramural scientists according to this metric . ii The relevant scientiﬁc ﬁelds in the life sciences are microbiology , biochemistry , psychiatry / psychology , neuroscience , molec - ular biology & genetics , immunology , pharmacology , and clinical medicine . i outstanding records of creativity pursuing new research directions to develop pioneering approaches to major challenges in biomedical and behavioral research . ” Former and current Howard Hughes Medical Investigators ( HHMIs ) . Every three years , the Howard Hughes Medical Institute selects a small cohort of mid - career biomedical scientists with the potential to revolutionize their respective subﬁelds . Once selected , HHMIs continue to be based at their institutions , typically leading a research group of 10 to 25 students , postdoctoral associates and technicians . Their appointment is reviewed every ﬁve years , based solely on their most important contributions during the cycle . iii Early career prize winners . We also included winners of the Pew , Searle , Beckman , Rita Allen , and Packard scholarships for the years 1981 through 2000 . Every year , these charitable foundations provide seed funding to between 20 and 40 young academic life scientists . These scholarships are the most prestigious accolades that young researchers can receive in the ﬁrst two years of their careers as independent investigators . Consolidated categories . Why use 8 diﬀerent criteria to delineate the set of stars ? There are two reasons to do so . First , there is of course no agreed - upon deﬁnition of stardom in academic science , and choosing an eclectic set of metric makes it less likely that our analysis will be biased by the idiosyncrasies of any particular metric . For example , the funding metric will tend to bias the set of stars towards scientists doing relatively expensive research ( e . g . , clinical research , or research on monkeys / other mammals vs . research on invertebrates such as the nematode worm c . elegans ) . Table A1 documents the overlap between each of the eight metrics . Some metrics are highly negatively correlated ( e . g . , ECPW and high NIH funding ) while most correlations between individual metrics are modest in magnitude . Second , if we focused on a single , incontrovertible metric such as election to the National Academy of Sciences , we would not have enough statistical power to identify the main eﬀect of death on subﬁeld growth . To examine the eﬀect of star death across stars of diﬀerent types , we consolidate the eight metrics into three mutually exclusive categories : ( i ) “Cumulative stars , ” who enter the sample on the basis of cumulative achievement ( high NIH grant re - ceipt , highly cited scientists , top patenters , and members of the National Academy of Science / Medicine ( N = 6 , 858 or 53 % ) ; ( ii ) “Shooting stars , ” who enter the sample on the basis of a speciﬁc contribution ( appointment as a Howard Hughes Medical Investigator ; NIH MERIT / Director Pioneer awardees ; Early career prize winners ) , with no presumption that this mark of elevated status will endure over the entire career ( N = 3 , 859 or 30 % ) ; ( iii ) “Cumulative ⊕ Shooting stars , ” who enter the sample based on at least one cumulative metric , and at least one “burst” metric ( N = 2 , 218 or 17 % ) . We also create a subsample limited to the members of the National Academies of Science / Medicine and Investigators of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute . One can think of this rareﬁed subset ( which de facto subsumes Nobel prize winners and Lasker awardees ) as “the elite within the elite” of academic biomedical research ( N = 3 , 325 or 26 % of the total ) . In Table A2 , we run our benchmark speciﬁcation ( number of papers in the ﬁeld by non - collaborators , as in the third column of Table 3 ) separately on these four subsamples . All the coeﬃcients are positive in magnitude , but some of them are imprecisely estimated . Table A3 lists all of the 452 extinct stars in the sample , along with basic demographic information , cause of death , institutional aﬃliation , and a short description of their research expertise . iii See Azoulay et al . ( 2011 ) for more details and an evaluation of this program . ii iii Table A1 : Star Decomposition Highly Funded Highly Cited Top Patenter NAS NAM MERIT HHMI ECPW Highly Funded 7 , 822 886 189 942 1 , 033 1 , 540 221 128 Highly Cited 886 1 , 921 96 385 355 442 141 58 Top Patenter 189 96 606 88 55 86 29 14 NAS 942 385 88 1 , 843 430 561 295 151 NAM 1 , 033 355 55 430 1 , 933 368 176 68 MERIT 1 , 540 442 86 561 368 2 , 898 196 145 HHMI 221 141 29 295 176 196 866 179 ECPW 128 58 14 151 68 145 179 1 , 114 Note : Metrics of stardom and their distribution in the sample of 12 , 935 eminent scientists . NAS = National Academy of Sciences ; NAM = National Academy of Medicine ; MERIT = Method to Extend Research In Time , an exceptional NIH grant category ; HHMI = Howard Hughes Medical Investigator ; ECPW = Early Career Prize Winners . Table A2 : Impacts by Type of Star Shooting Stars Cumulative Stars Shooting & Cumulative Stars “Elite of the Elite” After Death 0 . 047 0 . 079 * 0 . 154 * 0 . 032 ( 0 . 056 ) ( 0 . 038 ) ( 0 . 069 ) ( 0 . 052 ) Nb . of Investigators 1 , 551 3 , 164 1 , 545 1 , 708 Nb . of Fields 6 , 584 16 , 095 11 , 539 11 , 855 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 242 , 409 592 , 030 424 , 737 436 , 081 Log Likelihood - 535 , 715 - 1 , 345 , 402 - 938 , 102 - 952 , 496 Note : Estimates stem from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications . The dependent variable is the total number of publications by non - collaborators in a subfield in a particular year , contributed by non - collaborators . All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects , as well as a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star , to address the concern that age , year and individual fixed effects may not fully account for trends in subfield entry around the time of death for the deceased star . Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities . Robust standard errors in parentheses , clustered at the level of the star scientist . † p < 0 . 10 , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . Investigator Name Cause of death if known Institution at the time of death Scientific domain Richard C . Parker [ 1952 - 1986 ] PhD , 1979 lymphoma Columbia University properties of cellular and viral src genes Richard E . Weitzman [ 1943 - 1980 ] MD , 1968 cancer Harbor - UCLA Medical Center arginine vasopressin metabolism Eva U . J . Paucha [ 1949 - 1988 ] PhD , 1976 cancer Dana Farber Cancer Institute mechanism of transformation by SV40 large T antigen Kiertisin Dharmsathaphorn [ 1950 - 1990 ] MD , 1972 AIDS University of California — San Diego intestinal secretory mechanisms and antidiarrheal drugs Ernest G . Peralta [ 1959 - 1999 ] PhD , 1986 brain cancer Harvard University signal transduction mechanisms of muscarinic receptors Roderich Walter [ 1937 - 1979 ] PhD , 1964 malignant melanoma University of Illinois solid - phase peptide synthesis JoAnn E . Franck [ 1950 - 1992 ] PhD , 1981 cancer University of Washington School of Medicine hippocampal damage as a cause of epilepsy Thomas K . Tatemichi [ 1952 - 1995 ] MD , 1978 non hodgkin’s lymphoma Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons mechanisms and syndromes of dementia related to stroke Bruce S . Schoenberg [ 1942 - 1987 ] MD , 1968 cancer NIH prevention and control of neurological disorders George Khoury [ 1943 - 1987 ] MD , 1970 lymphoma NIH genetics of simian virus 40 , human papovavirus and HIV Leonard N . Horowitz [ 1947 - 1992 ] MD , 1972 cancer University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine diagnosing and treatment of ventricular arrythmia W . Alden Spencer [ 1931 - 1977 ] MD , 1956 long illness Columbia University plasticity of the simplest neuronal pathways Jerome T . Pearlman [ 1933 - 1979 ] MD , 1957 prolonged illness UCLA laboratory studies of retinal degenerations Joram Heller [ 1934 - 1980 ] MD / PhD , 1965 brain cancer UCLA biochemical and biophysical investigation of rhodopsin B . Frank Polk [ 1942 - 1988 ] MD , 1967 brain cancer Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine epidemiology of HIV infection Ronald D . Fairshter [ 1942 - 1988 ] MD , 1968 rapidly metastatic melanoma University of California — Irvine clinical studies in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Cornelia P . Channing [ 1938 - 1985 ] PhD , 1966 breast cancer University of Maryland School of Medicine mechanism of luteinization in vitro and in vivo Joel D . Meyers [ 1944 - 1991 ] MD , 1970 colon cancer University of Washington / FHCRC infections caused by suppression of the immune system in organ transplant and AIDS patients Richard L . Lyman [ 1927 - 1975 ] PhD , 1957 terminal illness for months University of California — Berkeley protein , trypsin inhibitors and pancreatic secretion James N . Gilliam [ 1936 - 1984 ] MD , 1964 cancer University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas cutaneous lupus erythematosus pathogenesis mechanisms Gordon M . Tomkins [ 1926 - 1975 ] MD / PhD , 1953 brain surgery to remove a tumor University of California — San Francisco pleiotypic response in regulation of cell growth Muriel R . Steele [ 1930 - 1979 ] MD , 1957 metastatic disease University of California — San Francisco surgical treatment of liver trauma Allastair M . Karmody [ 1937 - 1986 ] MD , 1963 gastric cancer Albany Medical College novel procedures for difficult vascular surgical problems Chaviva Isersky [ 1937 - 1986 ] PhD , 1967 cancer NIH / NIDDK Characterization of the protein responsible for amyloidosis Melvin L . Marcus [ 1940 - 1989 ] MD , 1966 colon cancer UMASS cardiology , heart disease , coronary vascular adaptations to myocardial hypertrophy Alan S . Morrison [ 1943 - 1992 ] PhD , 1972 cancer Brown University Medical School hormones in the epidemiology of prostatic hyperplasia Sidney Futterman [ 1929 - 1979 ] PhD , 1954 prolonged illness University of Washington School of Medicine biochemistry of the retina and pigment epithelium Loretta L . Leive [ 1936 - 1986 ] PhD , 1963 cancer NIH / NIDDK role of bacterial cell surface in microbial physiology and pathogenesis Philip G . Weiler [ 1941 - 1991 ] MD , 1965 terminal illness University of California — Davis coronary heart disease & stroke in the elderly Ira M . Goldstein [ 1942 - 1992 ] MD , 1966 metastatic lung cancer University of California — San Francisco pancreatitis , complement and lung injury Harold Weintraub [ 1945 - 1995 ] MD / PhD , 1973 brain cancer University of Washington / FHCRC characterization and function of MyoD gene Richard K . Gershon [ 1932 - 1983 ] MD , 1959 lung cancer Yale University immunologic responses to tumor grafts Edward J . Sachar [ 1933 - 1984 ] MD , 1956 stroke three years ago Columbia University psychoendocrine studies of schizophrenic reactions Catherine Cole - Beuglet [ 1936 - 1987 ] MD , 1962 colon cancer University of California — Irvine ultrasonography of the breast Theodore S . Zimmerman [ 1937 - 1988 ] MD , 1963 lung cancer Scripps Research Institute platelet / plasma protein interaction in blood coagulation Markku Linnoila [ 1947 - 1998 ] MD / PhD , 1974 cancer NIH studies on the biological bases of impulsivity and aggression William J . Mellman [ 1928 - 1980 ] MD , 1952 lymphoma University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine human genetics and pediatrics Dennis Slone [ 1930 - 1982 ] MD , 1956 long illness Boston University School of Medicine intensive inpatient psychiatric monitoring program Roger O . Eckert [ 1934 - 1986 ] PhD , 1960 melanoma UCLA ionic and metabolic mechanisms in neuronal excitability Michael Solursh [ 1942 - 1994 ] PhD , 1968 AIDS University of Iowa School of Medicine extracellular matrix and cell migration Larry C . Clark [ 1948 - 2000 ] PhD , 1981 prostate cancer University of Arizona nutritional prevention of cancer Robert F . Spencer [ 1949 - 2001 ] PhD , 1974 gastric carcinoma Medical College of Virginia neuroanatomy of the oculomotor system Carl C . Levy [ 1928 - 1981 ] PhD , 1957 leukemia NIH / NCI regulation of intracellular messenger RNA Marshall H . Becker [ 1940 - 1993 ] PhD , 1968 intractable illness University of Michigan , Ann Arbor elaboration of the health belief model Samuel W . Perry , 3rd [ 1941 - 1994 ] MD , 1967 pancreatic cancer Cornell University — Weill Medical College psychological course of prolonged infection among AIDS patients Michael A . Kirschenbaum [ 1944 - 1997 ] MD , 1969 long illness University of California — Irvine prostaglandins and kidney medicine Janis V . Giorgi [ 1947 - 2000 ] PhD , 1977 uterine cancer UCLA cellular immunology of resistance to HIV Herbert F . Hasenclever [ 1924 - 1978 ] PhD , 1953 cancer NIH / NIAID mannan polysaccharides of pathogenic fungi Edward C . Franklin [ 1928 - 1982 ] MD , 1950 brain cancer New York University School of Medicine structure and properties of rheumatoid antibodies Robert M . Joy [ 1941 - 1995 ] PhD , 1969 cancer University of California — Davis pesticide induced changes in central nervous function Lois K . Miller [ 1945 - 1999 ] PhD , 1972 melanoma University of Georgia genetics and molecular biology of baculoviruses Gerald T . Babcock [ 1946 - 2000 ] PhD , 1973 cancer Michigan State University bioenergetic mechanisms in multicenter enzymes John G . Gambertoglio [ 1947 - 2001 ] PharmD , 1972 multiple sclerosis University of California — San Francisco pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers and subjects with renal insufficiency and on hemodialysis John C . Cassel [ 1921 - 1976 ] MD , 1946 University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Contribution of the social environment to host resistance Ernst A . Noltmann [ 1931 - 1986 ] MD , 1956 severe health problems University of California — Riverside biochemical and physical characterization of phosphoglucose isomerase Edward A . Smuckler [ 1931 - 1986 ] MD / PhD , 1963 barrett’s disease / oesophagal cancer University of California — San Francisco cytochemical studies in liver injury Joseph W . St . Geme , Jr . [ 1931 - 1986 ] MD , 1956 cardiac myopathy University of Colorado Health Sciences Center studies of cellular resistance to virus infection Edwin H . Beachey [ 1934 - 1989 ] MD , 1962 cancer University of Tennessee chemistry and immunology of streptococcal m proteins Ora M . Rosen [ 1935 - 1990 ] MD , 1960 breast cancer Sloan Kettering Institute for Cancer Research Cloning and characterization of gene for human insulin receptor Tai - Shun Lin [ 1939 - 1994 ] PhD , 1970 non hodgkin’s lymphoma Yale University synthesis and development of nucleoside analogs as antiviral and anticancer compounds Judith G . Pool [ 1919 - 1975 ] PhD , 1946 brain tumor Stanford University pathophysiology of hemophilia Ardie Lubin [ 1920 - 1976 ] PhD , 1951 serious illness for months Naval Health Research Center repeated measurement design in psychopharmacology William H . Hildemann [ 1927 - 1983 ] PhD , 1956 amyotrophic lateral sclerosis UCLA mechanisms of immunoblocking versus tumor immunity Murray Rabinowitz [ 1927 - 1983 ] MD , 1950 muscular dystrophy University of Chicago mitochondrial assembly and replication Paul A . Obrist [ 1931 - 1987 ] PhD , 1958 3 year illness University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill blood pressure control : relation to behavioral stress C . Richard Taylor [ 1939 - 1995 ] PhD , 1963 heart failure Harvard University locomotion – idling metabolism and gait dynamics Helene S . Smith [ 1941 - 1997 ] PhD , 1967 breast cancer University of California — San Francisco malignant progression of the human breast / predictors of breast cancer prognosis Bruce W . Erickson [ 1942 - 1998 ] PhD , 1970 cancer University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill engineering of nongenetic beta proteins Norton B . Gilula [ 1944 - 2000 ] PhD , 1971 lymphoma Scripps Research Institute cell junction biosynthesis and biogenesis / cell - cell communication John M . Eisenberg [ 1946 - 2002 ] MD , 1972 high - grade malignant glioma Georgetown University Medical Center health services research Elizabeth A . Bates [ 1947 - 2003 ] PhD , 1974 pancreatic cancer University of California — San Diego cross - linguistic studies of language development , processing and breakdown in aphasia Ira Herskowitz [ 1946 - 2003 ] PhD , 1971 pancreatic cancer University of California — San Francisco genetics of yeast mating type Wallace P . Rowe [ 1926 - 1983 ] MD , 1948 colon cancer NIH genetic basis of disease in murine leukemia viruses J . Weldon Bellville [ 1926 - 1983 ] MD , 1952 cancer UCLA dynamic isolation studies of control of respiration Peter W . Lampert [ 1929 - 1986 ] MD , 1955 lymphoma University of California — San Diego pathogenesis of virus - induced brain disease Sheldon D . Murphy [ 1933 - 1990 ] PhD , 1958 cancer University of Washington School of Medicine biochemical and physiologic response to toxic stress Allan C . Wilson [ 1934 - 1991 ] PhD , 1961 leukemia University of California — Berkeley use of molecular approaches to understand evolutionary change Bernard N . Fields [ 1938 - 1995 ] MD , 1962 pancreatic cancer Harvard Medical School / Brigham & Women’s Hospital genetic and molecular basis of viral injury to the nervous system Priscilla A . Campbell [ 1940 - 1998 ] PhD , 1968 cervical cancer University of Colorado Health Sciences Center / Natl . Jewish Center cell biology of the immune response to bacteria Ethan R . Nadel [ 1941 - 1998 ] PhD , 1969 cancer Yale University thermoregulation during exercise and heat exposure Peter A . Kollman [ 1944 - 2001 ] PhD , 1970 cancer University of California — San Francisco free energy perturbation calculations and their application to macromolecules Table A3 : List of 452 Extinct Superstars iv Investigator Name Cause of death if known Institution at the time of death Scientific domain David Tapper [ 1945 - 2002 ] MD , 1970 long battle with renal cell carcinoma University of Washington School of Medicine determination of a new growth factor in breast milk Cyril S . Stulberg [ 1919 - 1977 ] PhD , 1947 multiple sclerosis Wayne State University School of Medicine characterization and preservation of cell strains Dorothy T . Krieger [ 1927 - 1985 ] MD , 1949 breast cancer Mount Sinai School of Medicine CNS - pituitary - adrenal interactions Aaron Janoff [ 1930 - 1988 ] PhD , 1959 long illness SUNY HSC at Stony Brook pathology of smoking and emphysema Wylie J . Dodds [ 1934 - 1992 ] MD , 1960 brain cancer Medical College of Wisconsin esophageal motor function in health and disease Oscar A . Kletzky [ 1936 - 1994 ] MD , 1961 lung cancer UCLA ameliorating effects of estrogen replacement therapy on cerebral blood flow and sleep Nelson Butters [ 1937 - 1995 ] PhD , 1964 Lou Gehrig’s disease University of California — San Diego cognitive deficits related to chronic alcoholism Elizabeth M . Smith [ 1939 - 1997 ] PhD , 1978 cancer Washington University in St . Louis psychiatric problems among disaster survivors David G . Marsh [ 1940 - 1998 ] PhD , 1964 glioblastoma Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine genetics of allergy and asthma George C . Cotzias [ 1918 - 1977 ] MD , 1944 lung cancer Cornell University Medical College studies of extrapyramidal & related behavioral disorders Robert D . Allen [ 1927 - 1986 ] PhD , 1953 pancreatic cancer Dartmouth Medical School cytoplasmic rheology of motile cells Marilyn Bergner [ 1933 - 1992 ] PhD , 1970 ovarian cancer Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health cost and efficacy of home care for COPD patients G . Harrison Echols , Jr . [ 1933 - 1993 ] PhD , 1959 lung cancer University of California — Berkeley Genetic and chemical studies of phage lambda development Milton H . Stetson [ 1943 - 2002 ] PhD , 1970 prolonged and courageous fight with illness University of Delaware environmental regulation of reproduction and the onset of puberty Nicholas R . DiLuzio [ 1926 - 1986 ] PhD , 1954 extended illness Tulane University School of Medicine role recognition factors and macrophages in neoplasia Lauran D . Harris [ 1927 - 1987 ] MD , 1947 long illness Boston University School of Medicine sphincter strength – its measurement and control Charles W . Mays [ 1930 - 1990 ] PhD , 1958 cancer National Cancer Institute reducing cancer risk by radionuclide chelation Lawrence H . Piette [ 1932 - 1992 ] PhD , 1957 cancer Utah State University electron spin resonance spectroscopy Mehdi Tavassoli [ 1933 - 1993 ] MD , 1961 heart failure University of Mississippi Medical Center hematopoietic stem cell purification and biology Howard M . Temin [ 1934 - 1994 ] PhD , 1959 lung cancer University of Wisconsin molecular biology and genetics of tumor viruses Mette Strand [ 1937 - 1997 ] PhD , 1964 cancer Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine parasite immunochemistry and vaccine development William L . Chick [ 1938 - 1998 ] MD , 1963 diabetes complications UMASS studies of islet and beta cells in pancreatic transplantation Robert A . Mendelson , Jr . [ 1941 - 2001 ] PhD , 1968 lung cancer University of California — San Francisco molecular mechanism of muscle contraction Susan M . Sieber [ 1942 - 2002 ] PhD , 1971 breast cancer National Cancer Institute biochemical epidemiology and cancer Joachim G . Liehr [ 1942 - 2003 ] PhD , 1968 pancreatic cancer University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston mechanism of estrogen - induced carcinogenesis Charles A . Janeway , Jr . [ 1943 - 2003 ] MD , 1969 B - cell lymphoma Yale University innate immunity and T lymphocyte biology Edward Herbert [ 1926 - 1987 ] PhD , 1953 pancreatic cancer Oregon Health & Science University regulation of expression of opioid peptides and receptors Thomas W . Smith [ 1936 - 1997 ] MD , 1965 mesothelioma Harvard Medical School / Brigham & Women’s Hospital Mechanism and reversal studies of digitalis Roy H . Steinberg [ 1935 - 1997 ] MD / PhD , 1965 multiple myeloma University of California — San Francisco pigment epithelium interactions with neural retina David W . Fulker [ 1937 - 1998 ] PhD , 1967 pancreatic cancer University of Colorado at Boulder adoption studies of development in middle childhood Donald J . Cohen [ 1940 - 2001 ] MD , 1966 ocular melanoma Yale University Tourette’s syndrome and autism in children Harvey D . Preisler [ 1941 - 2002 ] MD , 1965 lymphoma Rush Medical College clinical and biological studies of myeloid leukemias Carl M . Pearson [ 1919 - 1981 ] MD , 1946 cancer UCLA studies in adjuvant - induced arthritis Morton I . Grossman [ 1919 - 1981 ] MD / PhD , 1944 esophageal cancer UCLA studies on the etiology of peptic ulcer Mones Berman [ 1920 - 1982 ] PhD , 1957 cancer National Cancer Institute quantitative , model - based problems in metabolism and endocrinology Henry R . Mahler [ 1921 - 1983 ] PhD , 1948 heart failure Indiana University respiratory enzymes – structure , function , & biosynthesis Milton Kern [ 1925 - 1987 ] PhD , 1954 lung cancer NIH ribonucleic acids of specifically isolated ribosomes Thoralf M . Sundt , Jr . [ 1930 - 1992 ] MD , 1959 bone marrow cancer Mayo Clinic surgical techniques for intracranial aneurysms John C . Liebeskind [ 1935 - 1997 ] PhD , 1962 cancer UCLA behavioral and electrophysiological studies of pain Marian W . Fischman [ 1939 - 2001 ] PhD , 1972 colon cancer Columbia University behavioral pharmacology of cocaine David S . Sigman [ 1939 - 2001 ] PhD , 1965 brain cancer UCLA enzymology and gene targeting Charles D . Heidelberger [ 1920 - 1983 ] PhD , 1946 carcinoma of nasal sinus University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine effects of fluorinated pyrimidines on tumors Sidney H . Ingbar [ 1925 - 1988 ] MD , 1947 lung cancer Harvard Medical School / Beth Israel Medical Center physiology of the thyroid gland and its clinical diseases Kiichi Sagawa [ 1926 - 1989 ] MD / PhD , 1958 cancer Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine modelling the mechanics of cardiac chamber contraction Sydney E . Salmon [ 1936 - 1999 ] MD , 1962 pancreatic cancer University of Arizona quantitative method for evaluating changes in myeloma tumor mass Eva J . Neer [ 1937 - 2000 ] MD , 1963 breast cancer Harvard Medical School / Brigham & Women’s Hospital regulation and cellular levels of G protein subunits Lawrence D . Jacobs [ 1938 - 2001 ] MD , 1965 cancer SUNY Buffalo recombinant b interferon as treatment for Multiple Sclerosis Richard J . Wyatt [ 1939 - 2002 ] MD , 1964 lung cancer NIH biochemistry of schizophrenia Robert J . Fass [ 1939 - 2002 ] MD , 1964 lung cancer Ohio State University In vitro methods to test antimicrobial susceptibility of infectious agents Michael Doudoroff [ 1911 - 1975 ] PhD , 1939 cancer University of California — Berkeley taxonomy and phylogeny of pseudomonads Arnold M . Seligman [ 1912 - 1976 ] MD , 1937 prolonged terminal illness Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine drug development for prostatic carcinoma Frederick H . Carpenter [ 1918 - 1982 ] PhD , 1944 University of California — Berkeley mechanism of leucine aminopeptidase Harvey M . Patt [ 1918 - 1982 ] PhD , 1942 University of California — San Francisco ultra - high dose rates in experimental radiotherapy Teruzo Konishi [ 1920 - 1984 ] MD / PhD , 1955 cancer NIEHS physiological and biophysical functions of the inner ear Mortimer B . Lipsett [ 1921 - 1985 ] MD , 1951 brain tumor NIH steroid metabolic conversions in human subjects Andrew C . Peacock [ 1921 - 1985 ] PhD , 1949 cancer NIH / NCI materials and methods for polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis Harold Edelhoch [ 1922 - 1986 ] PhD , 1947 cancer NIH / NIDDK fluorescence methods for the study of protein structures Gerald L . Klerman [ 1928 - 1992 ] MD , 1954 diabetes Cornell University — Weill Medical College phsychological studies of depression , schizophrenia and panic and other anxiety disorders Nina S . Braunwald [ 1928 - 1992 ] MD , 1952 cancer Harvard Medical School / Brigham & Women’s Hospital development of prosthetic heart valves for children Amico Bignami [ 1930 - 1994 ] MD , 1954 brain cancer Harvard Medical School brain specific protein in astrocytes Frank A . Oski [ 1932 - 1996 ] MD , 1958 prostate cancer Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine erythrocyte metabolism in the newborn infant Richard P . Bunge [ 1932 - 1996 ] MD , 1960 esophageal cancer University of Miami schwann cell biology and human spinal cord injury Harold C . Neu [ 1934 - 1998 ] MD , 1960 glioblastoma Columbia University surface enzymes in bacteria Jiri Palek [ 1934 - 1998 ] MD , 1958 2 year illness Tufts University membrane properties of abnormal red cells Irving Kupfermann [ 1938 - 2002 ] PhD , 1964 Creutzfeldt - Jacob’s disease Columbia University Behavioral and neural analysis of learning in aplaysia Merton Bernfield [ 1938 - 2002 ] MD , 1961 Parkinson’s Disease Harvard Medical School / Children’s Hospital nature and interactions of cell surface proteoglycans during morphogenesis Eleanor M . Saffran [ 1938 - 2002 ] PhD , 1968 amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Temple University School of Medicine cognitive deficits in brain - damaged patients Barbara J . Lowery [ 1938 - 2002 ] PhD , 1973 ovarian cancer University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine understanding stress responses of people who were physically ill Elizabeth Stern [ 1915 - 1980 ] MD , 1940 cancer UCLA effects of steroid contraception on the ovary Joseph Stokes , 3rd [ 1924 - 1989 ] MD , 1949 cancer Boston University School of Medicine epidemiological studies of coronary heart disease W . Dean Warren [ 1924 - 1989 ] MD , 1950 cancer Emory University cirrhosis , shunt surgery , and nitrogen metabolism Edward W . Purnell [ 1928 - 1993 ] MD , 1957 lung cancer Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine study of eye physiology and disease by ultrasound Leo J . Neuringer [ 1928 - 1993 ] PhD , 1957 cancer MIT NMR studies of normal and transformed cell membranes Frank Lilly [ 1930 - 1995 ] PhD , 1965 prostate cancer Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University role of hereditary factors in governing susceptibility to cancer - causing agents Edwin L . Bierman [ 1930 - 1995 ] MD , 1955 bone cancer University of Washington School of Medicine Metabolism of particulate fat in diabetes and atherosclerosis Kenneth W . Sell [ 1931 - 1996 ] MD / PhD , 1968 complications from diabetes Emory University School of Medicine human tissue banking and transplantation Edgar Haber [ 1932 - 1997 ] MD , 1956 multiple myeloma Harvard University School of Public Health biological regulation of the renin - angiotensin system J . Christian Gillin [ 1938 - 2003 ] MD , 1966 esophageal cancer University of California — San Diego serotenergic mechanisms in sleep and depression Albert Dorfman [ 1916 - 1982 ] MD / PhD , 1944 kidney failure University of Chicago biochemistry of connective tissues Henry S . Kaplan [ 1918 - 1984 ] MD , 1940 lung cancer Stanford University radiation - induced leukemia in the C57BL mouse Charlotte Friend [ 1921 - 1987 ] PhD , 1950 lymphoma Mount Sinai School of Medicine tissue studies of murine virus - induced leukemia William H . Tooley [ 1925 - 1992 ] MD , 1949 long illness University of California — San Francisco prevention and treatment of respiratory distress in neonates Charles G . Moertel [ 1927 - 1994 ] MD , 1953 Hodgkin’s Disease Mayo Clinic clinical treatments of gastrointestinal cancer Barbara H . Bowman [ 1930 - 1996 ] PhD , 1959 cancer University of Texas HSC at San Antonio genetic control of the structure of human proteins J . Calvin Giddings [ 1930 - 1996 ] PhD , 1955 prolonged battle with cancer University of Utah biomedical separations : field - flow fractionation v Investigator Name Cause of death if known Institution at the time of death Scientific domain John R . Williamson [ 1934 - 2000 ] PhD , 1959 cancer University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine molecular mechanisms of hormonal signal transduction John S . O’Brien [ 1934 - 2001 ] MD , 1960 postpolio complications University of California — San Diego discovery of the gene responsible for Tay - Sachs disease Jon I . Isenberg [ 1937 - 2003 ] MD , 1963 cancer University of California — San Diego duodenal mucosal bicarbonate secretion in human George G . Glenner [ 1927 - 1995 ] MD , 1953 systemic senile amyloidosis University of California — San Diego molecular structure of the amyloid protein J . Kiffin Penry [ 1929 - 1996 ] MD , 1955 complications of diabetes Bowman Gray School of Medicine at Wake Forest University controlled clinical trials of anticonvulsant and anti - epileptic drugs Paul C . MacDonald [ 1930 - 1997 ] MD , 1955 cancer University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas origin and interconversion of gonadal and adrenal streoid hormones John Gibbon [ 1934 - 2001 ] PhD , 1967 cancer Columbia University CNS functions underlying the interval time sense in animals and humans Donald F . Summers [ 1934 - 2001 ] MD , 1959 cancer NIH composition , assembly and replication of RNA viruses R . Gordon Gould [ 1910 - 1978 ] PhD , 1933 cancer Stanford University internal medicine and cardiology Sol Spiegelman [ 1914 - 1983 ] PhD , 1944 pancreatic cancer Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons nucleic acid hybridization Frederick S . Philips [ 1916 - 1984 ] PhD , 1940 cancer Sloan Kettering Institute for Cancer Research pharmacological properties of chemotherapeutic agents and chemical carcinogenesis Cyrus Levinthal [ 1922 - 1990 ] PhD , 1951 lung cancer Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons colinearity of genes and proteins , and the nature of messenger RNA Sidney Leskowitz [ 1923 - 1991 ] PhD , 1950 brain tumor Tufts University cellular aspects of tolerance & delayed hypersensitivity Kenneth M . Moser [ 1929 - 1997 ] MD , 1954 cancer University of California — San Diego clinical outcomes after pulmonary thromboendarterectomy Donald A . Pious [ 1930 - 1998 ] MD , 1956 cancer University of Washington School of Medicine somatic cell genetic analysis of human immune response genes Louis V . Avioli [ 1931 - 1999 ] MD , 1957 cancer Washington University in St . Louis mineral and skeletal metabolism in diabetes , kidney , and gastrointestinal disorders Joseph E . Coleman [ 1930 - 1999 ] MD / PhD , 1963 cancer Yale University structure and function of metalloenzyme synthesis Harvey C . Knowles , Jr . [ 1915 - 1984 ] MD , 1942 cancer University of Cincinnati / Children’s Hospital clinical studies of gestational diabetes Joseph Cochin [ 1916 - 1985 ] MD / PhD , 1955 leukemia Boston University School of Medicine factors in tolerance to the narcotic analgesics Albert L . Lehninger [ 1917 - 1986 ] PhD , 1942 complications from asthma Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine structure and function of mitochondria Charles W . Todd [ 1918 - 1987 ] PhD , 1943 long illness City of Hope Medical Center immunology & immunochemistry of tumor antigens David H . Blankenhorn [ 1924 - 1993 ] MD , 1947 prostate cancer University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine control of risk factors in atherosclerosis Paul M . Gallop [ 1927 - 1996 ] PhD , 1953 cancer Harvard Medical School / Children’s Hospital Protein structure and collagen maturation David J . L . Luck [ 1929 - 1998 ] MD / PhD , 1962 lymphoma Rockefeller University microtubular systems in human cells Edward W . Moore [ 1930 - 1999 ] MD , 1955 aspergillosis Medical College of Virginia Pathophysiology of the billiary tract and gallbladder Donald J . Reis [ 1931 - 2000 ] MD , 1956 hepatic cancer Cornell University — Weill Medical College neural control of blood circulation Julius Marmur [ 1926 - 1996 ] PhD , 1951 lymphoma Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University genetics and biochemistry of cellular regulation Nemat O . Borhani [ 1926 - 1996 ] MD , 1949 acute leukemia University of Nevada at Reno multicenter clinical studies of hypertension and cardiovascular disease Russell Ross [ 1929 - 1999 ] DDS / PhD , 1962 cancer University of Washington School of Medicine response - to - injury origins of atherosclerosis Richard A . Carleton [ 1931 - 2001 ] MD , 1955 cancer Brown University Medical School clinical studies of diet and smoking as cardiovascular disease risk factors Gilda H . Loew [ 1931 - 2001 ] PhD , 1957 breast cancer Molecular Research Institute computational investigation of the structural and functional aspects of heme proteins and enzymes N . Raphael Shulman [ 1925 - 1996 ] MD , 1947 cancer NIH / NIDDK mechanisms of autoimmune , alloimmune , and drug - dependent cytopenias George Winokur [ 1925 - 1996 ] MD , 1947 pancreatic cancer University of Iowa School of Medicine genetics of bipolar disease , mania , alcoholism and other psychiatric diseases Giovanni Di Chiro [ 1926 - 1997 ] MD , 1949 lung cancer NIH interventional neuroradiology Norman P . Salzman [ 1926 - 1997 ] PhD , 1953 pancreatic cancer NIH glycosylation of SIV gp120 – role in the immune response Fritz E . Dreifuss [ 1926 - 1997 ] MD , 1950 lung cancer University of Virginia School of Medicine clinical investigations of childhood epilepsy Dante G . Scarpelli [ 1927 - 1998 ] MD / PhD , 1960 esophageal adenocarcinoma Northwestern University metabolism of pancreatic carcinogens Hans J . Müller - Eberhard [ 1927 - 1998 ] MD , 1953 cancer Scripps Research Institute identification of proteins and reaction mechanisms of the complement system Miriam M . Salpeter [ 1929 - 2000 ] PhD , 1953 thyroid cancer Cornell University neurobiology of myasthenia gravis Gerald Cohen [ 1930 - 2001 ] PhD , 1955 cancer Mount Sinai School of Medicine H2O2 and oxy - radical stress in catecholamine neurons James K . McDougall [ 1931 - 2003 ] PhD , 1971 gastric cancer University of Washington / FHCRC role of DNA viruses in cancer Edward H . Kass [ 1917 - 1990 ] MD / PhD , 1947 lung cancer Harvard Medical School / Brigham & Women’s Hospital mechanism of toxic shock syndrome Norman Kretchmer [ 1923 - 1995 ] MD / PhD , 1952 kidney cancer University of California — Berkeley regulation of metabolism during developement Adolph I . Cohen [ 1924 - 1996 ] PhD , 1954 leukemia Washington University in St . Louis biochemistry and pharmacology of the retina John L . Doppman [ 1928 - 2000 ] MD , 1953 cancer NIH flow dynamics in anterior spinal artery David E . Green [ 1910 - 1983 ] PhD , 1934 cancer University of Wisconsin molecular biology of membrane systems Alton Meister [ 1922 - 1995 ] MD , 1945 complications from a stroke Cornell University — Weill Medical College amino acid and glutathione biochemistry Gisela Mosig [ 1930 - 2003 ] PhD , 1959 undergoing cancer treatment for two years Vanderbilt University dna replication and recombination in bacteriophages Choh Hao Li [ 1913 - 1987 ] PhD , 1938 cancer of the pharynx University of California — San Francisco isolation and synthesis the human pituitary growth hormone Robert H . Abeles [ 1926 - 2000 ] PhD , 1955 Parkinson’s disease Brandeis University rational design of small - molecule inhibitors of enzymes Alfred P . Wolf [ 1923 - 1998 ] PhD , 1953 lengthy illness Brookhaven National Laboratory synthesis of simple molecules in pure form and high specific activity for PET Marian E . Koshland [ 1921 - 1997 ] PhD , 1949 lung cancer University of California — Berkeley biochemical methods to examine the immune response Timothy J . Regan [ 1924 - 2001 ] MD , 1952 colon cancer UMDNJ Newark myocardial function and metabolism in chronic disease Thomas C . Chalmers [ 1917 - 1995 ] MD , 1943 prostate cancer Mount Sinai School of Medicine inter - hospital cooperative studies of cirrhosis Mortimer M . Elkind [ 1922 - 2000 ] PhD , 1953 long illness Colorado State University cell radiation response of cultured mammalian cells Hamish N . Munro [ 1915 - 1994 ] MD / PhD , 1956 died in a nursing home . Parkinson Tufts University nutritional regulation of protein metabolism Ruth Sager [ 1916 - 1997 ] PhD , 1948 bladder cancer Harvard Medical School / DFCI role of tumor suppressor genes in breast cancer David M . Maurice [ 1922 - 2002 ] PhD , 1951 liver cancer Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons interference theory of corneal transparency Robert A . Good [ 1922 - 2003 ] MD / PhD , 1947 esophageal cancer University of South Florida College of Medicine role of the thymus in immune system development Harland G . Wood [ 1907 - 1991 ] PhD , 1935 lymphoma Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine heterotrophic carbon dioxide fixation Hans Popper [ 1903 - 1988 ] MD / PhD , 1944 pancreatic cancer Mount Sinai School of Medicine correlation of structure and function in liver disease Fritz A . Lipmann [ 1899 - 1986 ] MD / PhD , 1928 natural reasons Rockefeller University glucose transport in normal and malignant cells Paul J . Scheuer [ 1915 - 2003 ] PhD , 1950 leukemia University of Hawaii structure and properties of spinochromes Berta V . Scharrer [ 1906 - 1995 ] PhD , 1930 natural causes Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University immunocytochemical study of invertebrate nervous system Michael W . Pozen [ 1945 - 1981 ] MD / PhD , 1974 heart attack Boston University School of Medicine confirmation parameters to assess EMT’s decisions Ronald E . Talcott [ 1947 - 1984 ] PhD , 1973 automobile accident University of California — San Francisco carboxylesterases of toxicologic significance Nathaniel A . Young [ 1939 - 1979 ] MD , 1962 drowned in British Virgin Islands National Cancer Institute oncology and molecular pathology Ahmad I . Bukhari [ 1943 - 1983 ] PhD , 1971 heart attack Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory life cycle of mutator phage μ Alan P . Wolffe [ 1959 - 2001 ] PhD , 1984 car accident NIH role of DNA methylation in regulating gene expression in normal and pathological states Shu - Ren Lin [ 1936 - 1979 ] MD , 1962 plane crash University of Rochester imaging studies of cerebral blood flow after cardiac arrest William D . Nunn [ 1943 - 1986 ] PhD , 1972 sudden cardiac arrest University of California — Irvine regulation of fatty acid / acetate metabolism in e . coli John L . Kemink [ 1949 - 1992 ] MD , 1975 murder University of Michigan , Ann Arbor vestibular diagnosis and surgery , acoustic neuromas , and cochlear implants Stanley R . Kay [ 1946 - 1990 ] PhD , 1980 heart attack Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University symptoms and diagnostic tests of schizophrenia Roberta D . Shahin [ 1953 - 1997 ] PhD , 1985 sudden accute illness Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research mouse model of respiratory B . pertussis infection in mice Robert M . Pratt , Jr . [ 1942 - 1987 ] PhD , 1970 died in his sleep NIEHS / University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill craniofacial development of the fetus Howard J . Eisen [ 1942 - 1987 ] MD , 1969 suicide NIH / NICHD mechanism of action of cortisol and related glucocorticoid hormones Joaquim Puig - Antich [ 1944 - 1989 ] MD , 1967 asthma attack University of Pittsburgh psychobiology and treatment of child depression Elizabeth A . Rich [ 1952 - 1998 ] MD , 1977 traffic accident Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine natural history of lymphocytic alveolitis in hiv disease Jeffrey M . Hoeg [ 1952 - 1998 ] MD , 1977 renal cancer NIH / NHLBI lipoprotein metabolism and its connection to cardiovascular disease Matthew L . Thomas [ 1953 - 1999 ] PhD , 1981 died while travelling Washington University in St . Louis function and regulation of leukocyte surface glycoproteins Mu - En Lee [ 1954 - 2000 ] MD / PhD , 1984 complications from routine surgery Harvard Medical School / MGH characterization of vascular smooth muscle LIM protein Tsunao Saitoh [ 1949 - 1996 ] PhD , 1977 murdered University of California — San Diego altered protein kinases in alzheimer’s disease James W . Prahl [ 1931 - 1979 ] MD / PhD , 1964 rock climing accident University of Utah structural basis of the functions of human complement Pokar M . Kabra [ 1942 - 1990 ] PhD , 1972 plane crash University of California — San Francisco application of liquid chromatography to therapeutic drug monitoring Harold A . Menkes [ 1938 - 1987 ] MD , 1963 car accident Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine occupational and environmental lung disease vi Investigator Name Cause of death if known Institution at the time of death Scientific domain Richard E . Heikkila [ 1942 - 1991 ] PhD , 1969 murder UMDNJ Robert Wood Johnson Medical School oxidation - reduction reactions and the dopamine receptor system Howard S . Tager [ 1945 - 1994 ] PhD , 1971 heart attack University of Chicago biochemical structure , action , regulation and degradation of the insulin and glucagon molecules Sukdeb Mukherjee [ 1946 - 1995 ] MD , 1971 short illness Medical College of Georgia neuroleptic effects on regional cerebral blood flow John J . Wasmuth [ 1946 - 1995 ] PhD , 1973 heart attack University of California — Irvine human - hamster somatic cell hybrids / localization of Hnyington’s disease gene Richard P . Nordan [ 1949 - 1998 ] PhD , 1983 cerebral aneurysm NIH immunologist and molecular biologist Roland L . Phillips [ 1937 - 1987 ] MD / PhD , 1971 glider plane accident Loma Linda University School of Medicine role of lifestyle in cancer and cardiovascular disease among Adventists Samuel A . Latt [ 1938 - 1988 ] MD / PhD , 1971 heart attack Harvard Medical School / Children’s Hospital genetic and cytogenetic studies of mental retardation Emil T . Kaiser [ 1938 - 1988 ] PhD , 1959 complications from kidney transplant Rockefeller University mechanism of carboxypeptidase action D . Michael Gill [ 1940 - 1990 ] PhD , 1967 heart attack Tufts University biochemistry of cholera toxin and other pathogenic toxins John P . Merlie [ 1945 - 1995 ] PhD , 1973 heart failure Washington University in St . Louis molecular genetics of the acetylcholine receptor Robert S . Krooth [ 1929 - 1980 ] MD / PhD , 1957 suicide / self - inflicted gunshot wound Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons biochemical deffects in inherited metabolic disorders Takeo Kakunaga [ 1937 - 1988 ] PhD , 1966 lung cancer with a brain metastasis NIH / NCI malignant transformation of mammalian cells by chemical carcinogens Abraham Worcel [ 1938 - 1989 ] MD , 1963 suicide University of Rochester structure of interphase and metaphase chromosomes Roland D . Ciaranello [ 1943 - 1994 ] MD , 1970 heart attack Stanford University molecular neurobiology and developmental disorders Gary J . Miller [ 1950 - 2001 ] MD / PhD , 1978 heart attack University of Colorado Health Sciences Center vitamin D receptors in the growth regulation of prostate cancer cells William B . Reed [ 1924 - 1976 ] MD , 1952 University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine cutaneous genetic disorders James R . Neely [ 1936 - 1988 ] PhD , 1966 heart attack Penn State University effects of diabetes and oxygen deficiency in regulation of metabolism in the heart Mary Lou Clements [ 1946 - 1998 ] MD , 1972 airplane crash Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine development of AIDS vaccines John B . Penney , Jr . [ 1947 - 1999 ] MD , 1973 heart attack Harvard Medical School / MGH receptor mechanisms in movement disorder pathophysiology Lynn M . Wiley [ 1947 - 1999 ] PhD , 1975 plane crash University of California — Davis morphogenesis in early mammalian embryos Trudy L . Bush [ 1949 - 2001 ] PhD , 1977 heart attack University of Maryland School of Medicine postmenopausal estrogen / progestins interventions Arend Bouhuys [ 1926 - 1979 ] MD / PhD , 1956 heart attack Yale University community studies of obstructive lung disease Erhard Gross [ 1928 - 1981 ] PhD , 1958 automobile collision NIH / NICHD structural analysis of naturally - occuring peptide antibiotics Richard C . Lillehei [ 1928 - 1981 ] MD / PhD , 1960 died while jogging University of Minnesota mechanisms of RES stimulation in experimental shock Hymie L . Nossel [ 1930 - 1983 ] MD / PhD , 1962 heart attack Columbia University causes of thrombosis and the nature of hemostasis James C . Steigerwald [ 1935 - 1988 ] MD , 1961 University of Colorado Health Sciences Center internal medicine / rheumatology Simon J . Pilkis [ 1942 - 1995 ] MD / PhD , 1971 heart attack University of Minnesota carbohydrate metabolism and diabetes James Olds [ 1922 - 1976 ] PhD , 1952 swimming accident California Institute of Technology pharmacology of motivational mechanisms Peter W . Neurath [ 1923 - 1977 ] PhD , 1950 heart attack Tufts University chromosomal variants of cells converted by viruses Emanuel M . Bogdanove [ 1925 - 1979 ] PhD , 1953 killed in an accident Medical College of Virginia endocrine - influencing centers in the hypothalamus Harold A . Baltaxe [ 1931 - 1985 ] MD , 1960 heart attack University of California — Davis development of new coronary angiographic techniques Roy D . Schmickel [ 1936 - 1990 ] MD , 1961 died tragically University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine isolation and characterization of human ribosomal DNA Fredric S . Fay [ 1943 - 1997 ] PhD , 1969 heart attack UMASS generation and regulation of force in smooth muscle Roger R . Williams [ 1944 - 1998 ] MD , 1971 airplane crash University of Utah genetics and epidemiology of coronary artery diseases Jeffrey M . Isner [ 1947 - 2001 ] MD , 1973 heart attack Tufts University therapeutic angiogenesis in vascular medicine , cardiovascular laser phototherapy Gustavo Cudkowicz [ 1927 - 1982 ] MD , 1952 brief illness SUNY Buffalo controls of proliferation specific for leukemias John C . Seidel [ 1933 - 1988 ] PhD , 1961 heart attack Boston Biomedical Research Institute actin - myosin interaction in pulmonary smooth muscle William L . McGuire [ 1937 - 1992 ] MD , 1964 scuba - diving accident University of Texas HSC at San Antonio mechanisms of hormonal control and growth and regression of mammary carcinoma Eric Holtzman [ 1939 - 1994 ] PhD , 1964 ingestion of potassium cyanide , self - administered Columbia University dynamic of cell membranes Julio V . Santiago [ 1942 - 1997 ] MD , 1967 heart attack Washington University in St . Louis role of social factors , lifestyle practices , and medication in the onset of type II diabetes John J . Pisano [ 1929 - 1985 ] PhD , 1955 heart attack NIH / NHLBI isolation of active peptides Dale E . McFarlin [ 1936 - 1992 ] MD , 1961 heart attack NIH neuroimmunological studies of multiple sclerosis Walter F . Heiligenberg [ 1938 - 1994 ] PhD , 1964 plane crash University of California — San Diego neuroethological studies of electrolocation George J . Schroepfer , Jr . [ 1932 - 1998 ] MD / PhD , 1961 heart attack Rice University regulation of the formation and metabolism of cholesterol Thomas A . McMahon [ 1943 - 1999 ] PhD , 1970 complications from routine surgery Harvard University orthopedic biomechanics Joseph F . Foster [ 1918 - 1975 ] PhD , 1943 heart attack Purdue University configurational changes in protein molecules Gerald P . Rodnan [ 1927 - 1983 ] MD , 1949 complications after vascular surgery University of Pittsburgh renal transport if uric acid and protein George Streisinger [ 1927 - 1984 ] PhD , 1953 scuba - diving accident University of Oregon genetic mutations and the nervous system development in lower vertebrates Lucien B . Guze [ 1928 - 1985 ] MD , 1951 sudden cardiac arrest UCLA pathogenesis of experimental pyelonephritis Lubomir S . Hnilica [ 1929 - 1986 ] PhD , 1952 automobile accident Vanderbilt University nuclear antigens in human colorectal cancer Charles L . Wittenberger [ 1930 - 1987 ] PhD , 1959 motorcycle accident NIH / NINDR regulation of the pathways of intermediary metabolism D . Martin Carter [ 1936 - 1993 ] MD / PhD , 1971 dissecting aortic aneurysm Rockefeller University susceptibility of pigment and cutaneous cells to DNA injury by UV Verne M . Chapman [ 1938 - 1995 ] PhD , 1965 died suddenly while attending meeting Roswell Park Cancer Institute / SUNY Buffalo development of cumulative multilocus map of mouse chromosomes Dolph O . Adams [ 1939 - 1996 ] MD / PhD , 1969 unexpected Duke University development and regulation of macrophage activation Lee A . Lillard [ 1943 - 2000 ] PhD , 1972 heart attack University of Michigan , Ann Arbor aging and retirement studies Don C . Wiley [ 1944 - 2001 ] PhD , 1971 accidental fall Harvard University viral membrane and glycoprotein structure Lonnie D . Russell , Jr . [ 1944 - 2001 ] PhD , 1974 swimming accident Southern Illinois University School of Medicine filament regulation of spermatogenesis Herbert J . Rapp [ 1923 - 1981 ] PhD , 1955 National Cancer Institute immunologist and cancer research Eugene C . Jorgensen [ 1923 - 1981 ] PhD , 1953 murdered University of California — San Francisco structure / activity relationships of compounds related to thyroxin Margaret O . Dayhoff [ 1925 - 1983 ] PhD , 1948 heart attack Georgetown University Medical Center computer study of sequences of amino acids in proteins Norman Geschwind [ 1926 - 1984 ] MD , 1951 heart attack Harvard Medical School / Beth Israel Medical Center relationship between the anatomy of the brain and behavior Laurence M . Sandler [ 1929 - 1987 ] PhD , 1956 heart attack University of Washington School of Medicine cytogenetics of meiosis and development in drosophila L . Rao Chervu [ 1930 - 1988 ] PhD , 1962 brutally murdered Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University improved radiopharmaceuticals for nephrology and urology Peter M . Steinert [ 1945 - 2003 ] PhD , 1972 heart attack NIH structures and interactions of the proteins characteristic of epithelial cells Arnold Lazarow [ 1916 - 1975 ] MD / PhD , 1941 brief illness University of Minnesota fetal endocrinology and study of diabetes & pregnancy Edward V . Evarts [ 1926 - 1985 ] MD , 1948 heart attack NIH electrophysiological activity of in vivo neurons in waking and sleeping states Anthony Dipple [ 1940 - 1999 ] PhD , 1964 heart attack NIH metabolic activation and DNA interactions of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon carcinogens Gerald L . Stoner [ 1943 - 2002 ] PhD , 1974 complications following a fall NIH / NINDS neuropathology and molecular epidemiology of the human polyomavirus G . Scott Giebink [ 1944 - 2003 ] MD , 1969 heart attack University of Minnesota pathogenesis of otitis media and immunizations Daniel A . Brody [ 1915 - 1975 ] MD , 1940 heart attack University of Tennessee generator properties of isolated mammalian hearts Michelangelo G . F . Fuortes [ 1917 - 1977 ] MD , 1941 NIH / NINDS study of the peripheral visual system in vertebrate animals Sidney Riegelman [ 1921 - 1981 ] PhD , 1948 drowned while scuba diving University of California — San Francisco intersubject variation in first pass effect of drugs Lewis W . Wannamaker [ 1923 - 1983 ] MD , 1948 heart attack University of Mississippi Medical Center clinical and epidemiologic aspects of streptococcal infections Donald J . Magilligan , Jr . [ 1929 - 1989 ] MD , 1965 short illness Henry Ford Health Sciences Center natural history and limitations of porcine heart valves Ronald G . Thurman [ 1941 - 2001 ] PhD , 1967 massive heart attack University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill hepatic metabolism , alcoholic liver injury and toxicology F . Brantley Scott , Jr . [ 1930 - 1991 ] MD , 1955 plane crash Baylor University College of Medicine / St . Luke’s Episcopal Hospital development of the penile prosthesis DeWitt S . Goodman [ 1930 - 1991 ] MD , 1955 pulmonary embolism Columbia University lipid metabolism and its role in the development of heart and artery disease Donald C . Shreffler [ 1933 - 1994 ] PhD , 1961 heart attack Washington University in St . Louis organization and functions of H - 2 gene complex A . Arthur Gottlieb [ 1937 - 1998 ] MD , 1961 pulmonary embolus following surgery Tulane University School of Medicine role of macrophage nucleic acid in antibody production John N . Whitaker [ 1940 - 2001 ] MD , 1965 injuries following a bycicle race University of Alabama at Birmingham molecular immunopathogenesis of demyelinating disease Christopher A . Dawson [ 1942 - 2003 ] PhD , 1969 suddenly Medical College of Wisconsin pulmonary hemodynamics Maurice S . Raben [ 1915 - 1977 ] MD , 1939 Tufts University humoral and metabolic aspects of cardiac function Josiah Brown [ 1923 - 1985 ] MD , 1947 tragic accident UCLA biochemical studies of lipid and carbohydrate metabolism John H . Walsh [ 1938 - 2000 ] MD , 1963 heart attack UCLA gastrointestinal hormones , gastric acid production and peptic ulcer disease Jerome R . Vinograd [ 1913 - 1976 ] PhD , 1940 California Institute of Technology biochemistry and molecular biology vii Investigator Name Cause of death if known Institution at the time of death Scientific domain Merton F . Utter [ 1917 - 1980 ] PhD , 1942 Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine structure and function of pep carboxykinase isozymes E . Jack Wylie [ 1918 - 1982 ] MD , 1943 heart attack University of California — San Francisco development of techniques for the treatment and management of chronic visceral ischemia Kwan C . Tsou [ 1922 - 1985 ] PhD , 1950 heart attack University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine development of serum nuclease isozyme test for cancer Norbert Freinkel [ 1926 - 1989 ] MD , 1949 heart attack Northwestern University metabolic regulation in normal and diabetic pregnancies Edgar C . Henshaw [ 1929 - 1992 ] MD , 1956 complications from early - stage cancer treatment University of Rochester intermediary metabolism in animals and in man Donald T . Witiak [ 1935 - 1998 ] PhD , 1961 stroke University of Wisconsin stereochemical studies of hypocholesterolemic agents Thomas P . Dousa [ 1937 - 2000 ] MD / PhD , 1968 heart attack Mayo Clinic cellular action of vasopressin in the kidney Thomas F . Burks , II [ 1938 - 2001 ] PhD , 1967 heart attack University of Texas HSC at Houston central and peripheral neuropeptide pharmacology Robert M . Macnab [ 1940 - 2003 ] PhD , 1969 accidental fall Yale University sequence analysis and function of bacterial flagellar motor David Pressman [ 1916 - 1980 ] PhD , 1940 Roswell Park Cancer Institute / SUNY Buffalo structure and function of antibody molecules and tissue antigens of the HLA system Abraham M . Lilienfeld [ 1920 - 1984 ] MD , 1944 heart attack Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health epidemiological methods for the study of chronic diseases Marion I . Barnhart [ 1921 - 1985 ] PhD , 1950 traffic accident Wayne State University School of Medicine cellular sites for synthesis of blood proteins Thomas R . Johns , 2nd [ 1924 - 1988 ] MD , 1948 refractory arrhythmia University of Virginia School of Medicine physiological studies of myasthenia gravis Gerald D . Aurbach [ 1927 - 1991 ] MD , 1954 hit in a head by a stone NIH bone metabolism and calcium homeostasis Demetrios Papahadjopoulos [ 1934 - 1998 ] PhD , 1963 adverse drug reaction / multi - organ failure University of California — San Francisco phospholipid - protein interactions , lipid vesicles , and membrane function Takis S . Papas [ 1935 - 1999 ] PhD , 1970 unexpected and sudden Medical University of South Carolina characterization of ETS genes and retroviral onc genes John J . Jeffrey , Jr . [ 1937 - 2001 ] PhD , 1965 stroke Albany Medical College mechanism of action and the physiologic regulation of mammalian collagenases Victor J . Ferrans [ 1937 - 2001 ] MD / PhD , 1963 complications from diabetes NIH myocardial and vascular pathobiology James N . Davis [ 1939 - 2003 ] MD , 1965 airplane crash SUNY HSC at Stony Brook mechanisms underlying neuronal injury after brain ischemia Frederick B . Bang [ 1916 - 1981 ] MD , 1939 heart attack Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine cell virus relationships in respiratory mucosae James M . Felts [ 1923 - 1988 ] PhD , 1955 heart failure University of California — San Francisco synthesis and processing of plasma lipoproteins Ernst Freese [ 1925 - 1990 ] PhD , 1954 cerebral hemorrhage NIH / NINDS studies of environmental mutagenesis Lucien J . Rubinstein [ 1924 - 1990 ] MD , 1948 ruptured intracranial aneurysm University of Virginia School of Medicine differentiation and stroma - induction in neural tumors George B . Craig , Jr . [ 1930 - 1995 ] PhD , 1956 heart attack University of Notre Dame genetics and reproductive biology of aedes mosquitoes James R . Klinenberg [ 1934 - 1999 ] MD , 1959 intracerebral hemorrhage UCLA pathophysiology of gout and hyperuricemia Paul B . Sigler [ 1934 - 2000 ] MD / PhD , 1967 heart attack Yale University structural analysis of biological macromolecules Sandy C . Marks , Jr . [ 1937 - 2002 ] DDS / PhD , 1968 heart attack UMASS vitamin D and bone modeling Albert H . Coons [ 1912 - 1978 ] MD , 1937 coronary disease and congestive heart failure Harvard Medical School studies on antibody formation Henry G . Kunkel [ 1916 - 1983 ] MD , 1942 complications after vascular surgery Rockefeller University identification of MHC Class II molecules Edgar E . Ribi [ 1920 - 1986 ] PhD , 1948 plane crash NIH / NIAID fine structure of immunologically - active cell constituents for the development of vaccines Bertram Sacktor [ 1922 - 1988 ] PhD , 1949 heart attack National Institute on Aging in Baltimore mechanisms of hormonal regulation of cellular pH and mineral metabolism in the kidney Lucille S . Hurley [ 1922 - 1988 ] PhD , 1950 complications from open heart surgery University of California — Davis genetic and nutritional interactions in development Paul Margolin [ 1923 - 1989 ] PhD , 1956 heart attack City College of New York mutation and suppressor studies of a bacterial gene Zanvil A . Cohn [ 1926 - 1993 ] MD , 1953 aortic dissection Rockefeller University macrophage in cell biology and resistance to infectious disease Carl Monder [ 1928 - 1995 ] PhD , 1956 brief illness , acute fulminating leukemia Population Council corticosteroid metabolism in juvenile hypertension Gordon Guroff [ 1933 - 1999 ] PhD , 1959 car accident NIH / NICHD biochemical and molecular biological studies of nerve growth factor Gerald P . Murphy [ 1934 - 2000 ] MD , 1959 heart attack Roswell Park Cancer Institute / SUNY Buffalo detection , immunotherapy , and prognostic indicators of prostate cancer Alvito P . Alvares [ 1935 - 2001 ] PhD , 1966 killed by a car Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences biochemical manifestations of toxicity in gold therapy Patricia S . Goldman - Rakic [ 1937 - 2003 ] PhD , 1963 struck by a car Yale University development and plasticity of the primate frontal lobe Stephen W . Kuffler [ 1913 - 1980 ] MD , 1937 heart attack Harvard University microphysiology of synaptic transmission John P . Merrill [ 1917 - 1984 ] MD , 1942 drowned Harvard Medical School / Brigham & Women’s Hospital role of the immune system in kidney transplantation Abraham I . Braude [ 1917 - 1984 ] MD / PhD , 1950 heart attack University of California — San Diego pathogenesis and treatment of life - threatening septic shock Susumu Hagiwara [ 1922 - 1989 ] PhD , 1951 bacterial infection UCLA evolutionary and developmental properties of calcium channels in cell membranes Daniel Rudman [ 1927 - 1994 ] MD , 1949 complications from brain surgery Medical College of Wisconsin adipokinetic substances of the pituitary gland Thomas G . Smith , Jr . [ 1931 - 1998 ] MD , 1960 heart attack NIH / NINDS fractal analysis of central nervous system neuron and glial cell morphology Richard N . Lolley [ 1933 - 2000 ] PhD , 1961 heart attack University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine maturation of metabolism in normal & dystrophic retina Joseph H . Ogura [ 1915 - 1983 ] MD , 1941 heart attack Washington University in St . Louis physiology of the larynx analog Manfred M . Mayer [ 1916 - 1984 ] PhD , 1946 heart attack Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine immunochemistry of the complement system Albert Segaloff [ 1917 - 1985 ] MD , 1942 brief illness Tulane University School of Medicine hormonal treatment of advanced breast cancer F . Blair Simmons [ 1930 - 1998 ] MD , 1956 heart attack Stanford University development of a cochlear prothesis system for hearing loss Henryk M . Wisniewski [ 1931 - 1999 ] MD / PhD , 1960 heart failure SUNY Downstate Medical Center College of Medicine pathogenesis of inflammatory demyelinating diseases V . Everett Kinsey [ 1909 - 1978 ] PhD , 1937 stroke Institute of Biological Sciences at Oakland University intraocular fluid dynamics Frederic C . Bartter [ 1914 - 1983 ] MD , 1940 stroke University of Texas HSC at San Antonio interaction between the kidney and various endocrine systems Nathan O . Kaplan [ 1917 - 1986 ] PhD , 1943 University of California — San Diego isolation and structure determination of coenzyme A David T . Imagawa [ 1922 - 1991 ] PhD , 1950 heart attack Harbor - UCLA Medical Center morphological conversion with leukemia viruses Robert H . Williams [ 1909 - 1979 ] MD , 1934 on an airline en route to Philadelphia University of Washington School of Medicine diabetes etiology , pathogenesis , and management Toichiro Kuwabara [ 1920 - 1991 ] MD / PhD , 1952 heart failure Harvard Medical School ultrastructure of retina and retinal disease William F . Harrington [ 1920 - 1992 ] PhD , 1952 heart failure Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine myosin thick filament structure and assembly G . Jeanette Thorbecke [ 1929 - 2001 ] MD / PhD , 1954 stung by a Portuguese man - of - war jellyfish New York University School of Medicine histologic and functional aspects of lymphoid tissue development Felix T . Rapaport [ 1929 - 2001 ] MD , 1954 coronary heart disease SUNY HSC at Stony Brook induction of unresponsiveness to allografts Marian W . Kies [ 1915 - 1988 ] PhD , 1944 pancreatitis NIH / MIMH study of experimental allergic encephalomyelitis Menek Goldstein [ 1924 - 1997 ] PhD , 1955 stroke New York University School of Medicine purification of enzymes in the catecholamine synthetic pathway Andrew P . Somlyo [ 1930 - 2003 ] MD , 1956 heart attack University of Virginia School of Medicine vasomotor function of smooth muscle and their relation to heart disease Koloman Laki [ 1909 - 1983 ] PhD , 1936 heart attack NIH / NIDDK purification of fibrinogen Paul A . Srere [ 1925 - 1999 ] PhD , 1951 complications from liver surgery University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas cell metabolism and the krebs tca cycle D . Eugene Strandness , Jr . [ 1928 - 2002 ] MD , 1954 pulmonary failure University of Washington School of Medicine ultrasonic duplex scanner for noninvasive vascular disease diagnosis Vincent Massey [ 1926 - 2002 ] PhD , 1953 heart attack University of Michigan , Ann Arbor biological oxidation mechanisms of proteins that contain riboflavin Murray B . Bornstein [ 1918 - 1995 ] MD , 1952 cardiac aneurysm Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University copolymer as a protective treatment for the exacerbation of multiple sclerosis Clarence J . Gibbs , Jr . [ 1924 - 2001 ] PhD , 1962 cardiac disease NIH / NINDS infectuous diseases of the nervous system Russell L . De Valois [ 1926 - 2003 ] PhD , 1952 automobile accident University of California — Berkeley brain mechanisms underlying color vision Efraim Racker [ 1913 - 1991 ] MD , 1938 stroke Cornell University identifying and purifying Factor 1 , the first part of the ATP synthase enzyme Walsh McDermott [ 1901 - 1981 ] MD , 1934 heart attack Cornell University Medical College latent and dormant microbial infections Jonas E . Salk [ 1914 - 1995 ] MD , 1939 heart failure Salk Institute effective vaccine for polio Lawrence Bogorad [ 1921 - 2003 ] PhD , 1949 stroke while on vacation Harvard University determinants of transcript longevity Herman M . Kalckar [ 1908 - 1991 ] MD / PhD , 1939 pneumonia Boston University School of Medicine genes , enzymes , nucleotides , and carbohydrate patterns Eugene M . Farber [ 1917 - 2000 ] MD , 1943 brief illness Stanford University biologic effects of photochemotherapy in psoriasis Henry Rapoport [ 1918 - 2002 ] PhD , 1943 pneumonia University of California — Berkeley total synthesis of heterocyclic drugs Norman R . Davidson [ 1916 - 2002 ] PhD , 1939 brief illness California Institute of Technology physical chemistry of nucleic acids Karl A . Folkers [ 1906 - 1997 ] PhD , 1931 heart failure University of Texas at Austin peptide antagonists of LHRH as gonadotropin inhibitors Margaret J . Sullivan [ 1957 - 2001 ] PhD , 1986 University of Missouri at Columbia role of peptide neurotransmitters in body fluid homeostasis Leonard R . Axelrod [ 1927 - 1975 ] PhD , 1952 Environmental Protection Agency studies in steroid intermediate metabolism Sidney R . Cooperband [ 1931 - 1979 ] MD , 1956 Boston University School of Medicine lymphocyte proliferation inhibitory factor James L . Lehr [ 1940 - 1989 ] MD , 1968 University of Chicago modular computer - mediated radiology system Alberto DiMascio [ 1928 - 1978 ] PhD , 1966 Tufts University follow - up of maintenance treatment for depression William B . Kinter [ 1926 - 1978 ] PhD , 1955 Mount Desert Island Biological Lab membrane toxicity theory and environmental pollutants viii Investigator Name Cause of death if known Institution at the time of death Scientific domain Alfred A . Smith [ 1928 - 1980 ] MD , 1956 New York Medical College respiratory - depressive effects of ethanol Leah M . Lowenstein [ 1931 - 1984 ] MD / PhD , 1958 Thomas Jefferson University Medical College regulation of renal compensatory adaptation S . Morris Kupchan [ 1922 - 1976 ] PhD , 1945 University of Virginia School of Medicine chemistry of tumor - inhibitory natural products Edward C . Heath [ 1930 - 1985 ] PhD , 1955 University of Iowa School of Medicine molecular biology of tumor cells Arnold F . Brodie [ 1923 - 1981 ] PhD , 1952 University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine mechanisms of oxidative energy generation in bacteria Alvin Nason [ 1919 - 1978 ] PhD , 1952 Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine enzymology of nitrate respiration and assimilation Andrew G . Morrow [ 1923 - 1982 ] MD , 1946 NIH / NHLBI surgical correction of obstructive subaortic hypertrophy Elijah Adams [ 1918 - 1979 ] MD , 1942 University of Maryland School of Medicine tyrosinases and tyrosine hydroxylases Myron L . Bender [ 1924 - 1988 ] PhD , 1948 Northwestern University mechanism of action of proteases Kenneth J . W . Taylor [ 1939 - 2003 ] MD / PhD , 1975 Yale University diagnostic ultrasound imaging Brigitte A . Prusoff [ 1926 - 1991 ] PhD , 1978 Yale University follow - up of maintenance treatment for depression Edwin D . Murphy [ 1917 - 1984 ] MD , 1943 NIH / NCI gene mechanisms in autoimmunity and lymphoproliferation Henry Kamin [ 1920 - 1988 ] PhD , 1948 Duke University biological oxidations in mitochondria and microsomes Henry A . Schroeder [ 1906 - 1975 ] MD , 1933 Dartmouth Medical School abnormal trace metals in cardiovascular diseases Carl L . Larson [ 1909 - 1978 ] MD , 1939 University of Montana at Missoula specific and nonspecific resistance caused by t . bacilli David F . Waugh [ 1915 - 1984 ] PhD , 1940 MIT protein interactions and physico - chemical properties John W . Porter [ 1915 - 1984 ] PhD , 1942 University of Wisconsin regulation of lipogenesis by insulin and glucagon Thomas F . Gallagher [ 1905 - 1975 ] PhD , 1931 Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University metabolic transformation of steroid hormones Benjamin Alexander [ 1908 - 1978 ] MD , 1934 NY Blood Center coagulation , hemorrhage , and thrombosis Bernard Saltzberg [ 1919 - 1989 ] PhD , 1972 University of Houston electrophysiological analysis of learning disabilities Georges Ungar [ 1906 - 1977 ] MD , 1939 University of Tennessee chemical transfer of drug tolerance and learned behavior Harold Koenig [ 1921 - 1992 ] MD / PhD , 1949 Northwestern University molecular mechanisms of blood - brain barrier dysfunction Albert S . Kaplan [ 1917 - 1989 ] PhD , 1952 Vanderbilt University metabolism of cells infected with nuclear DNA viruses Tsoo E . King [ 1917 - 1990 ] PhD , 1949 University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine bioenergetic apparatus in heart mitochondria Arthur Cherkin [ 1913 - 1987 ] PhD , 1953 Sepulveda VA Medical Center role of cholinergic drugs in reducing the memory loss Peter D . Klein [ 1927 - 2001 ] PhD , 1954 Baylor College of Medicine metabolism of 13C compounds in digestive diseases Alex B . Novikoff [ 1913 - 1987 ] PhD , 1938 Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University histochemical studies of the Golgi apparatus Walter E . Brown [ 1918 - 1993 ] PhD , 1949 American Dental Association Health Foundation chemistry of calcium phosphates C . Clark Cockerham [ 1921 - 1996 ] PhD , 1952 North Carolina State University the statistics of genetic systems Leo T . Samuels [ 1899 - 1978 ] PhD , 1930 University of Utah steroid hormone metabolism and tumorogenic action Peter N . Magee [ 1921 - 2000 ] MD , 1945 Thomas Jefferson University Medical College genetic basis of carconogenesis ix Appendix B : Linking Scientists with their Journal Articles The source of our publication data is PubMed , a bibliographic database maintained by the U . S . National Library of Medicine that is searchable on the web at no cost . iv PubMed contains over 14 million citations from 4 , 800 journals published in the United States and more than 70 other countries from 1950 to the present . The subject scope of this database is biomedicine and health , broadly deﬁned to encompass those areas of the life sciences , behavioral sciences , chemical sciences , and bioengineering that inform research in health - related ﬁelds . In order to eﬀectively mine this publicly - available data source , we designed PubHarvester , an open - source software tool that automates the process of gathering publication information for individual life scientists ( see Azoulay et al . 2006 for a complete description of the software ) . PubHarvester is fast , simple to use , and reliable . Its output consists of a series of reports that can be easily imported by statistical software packages . This software tool does not obviate the two challenges faced by empirical researchers when attempting to accurately link individual scientists with their published output . The ﬁrst relates to what one might term “Type I Error , ” whereby we mistakenly attribute to a scientist a journal article actually authored by a namesake ; The second relates to “Type II error , ” whereby we conservatively exclude from a scientist’s publication roster legitimate articles : Namesakes and popular names . PubMed does not assign unique identiﬁers to the authors of the publications they index . They identify authors simply by their last name , up to two initials , and an optional suﬃx . This makes it diﬃcult to unambiguously assign publication output to individual scientists , especially when their last name is relatively common . Inconsistent publication names . The opposite danger , that of recording too few publications , also looms large , since scientists are often inconsistent in the choice of names they choose to publish under . By far the most common source of error is the haphazard use of a middle initial . Other errors stem from inconsistent use of suﬃxes ( Jr . , Sr . , 2nd , etc . ) , or from multiple patronyms due to changes in spousal status . To deal with these serious measurement problems , we opted for a labor - intensive approach : the design of individual search queries that relies on relevant scientiﬁc keywords , the names of frequent collaborators , journal names , as well as institutional aﬃliations . We are aided in the time - consuming process of query design by the availability of a reliable archival data source , namely , these scientists’ CVs and biosketches . PubHarvester provides the option to use such custom queries in lieu of a completely generic query ( e . g , " azoulay p " [ au ] or " graff zivin js " [ au ] ) . As an example , one can examine the publications of Scott A . Waldman , an eminent pharmacologist located in Philadelphia , PA at Thomas Jeﬀerson University . Waldman is a relatively frequent name in the United States ( with 208 researchers with an identical patronym in the AAMC faculty roster ) ; the combination " waldman s " is common to 3 researchers in the same database . A simple search query for " waldman sa " [ au ] OR " waldman s " [ au ] returns 377 publications at the time of this writing . However , a more reﬁned query , based on Professor Waldman’s biosketch returns only 256 publications . v The above example also makes clear how we deal with the issue of inconsistent publication names . Pub - Harvester gives the end - user the option to choose up to four PubMed - formatted names under which publications can be found for a given researcher . For example , Louis J . Tobian , Jr . publishes under " tobian l " , " tobian l jr " , and " tobian lj " , and all three names need to be provided as inputs to generate a complete publication listing . Furthermore , even though Tobian is a relatively rare name , the search query needs to be modiﬁed to account for these name variations , as in ( " tobian l " [ au ] OR " tobian lj " [ au ] ) . iv http : / / www . pubmed . gov / v ( ( ( ( " waldman sa " [ au ] NOT ( ether OR anesthesia ) ) OR ( " waldman s " [ au ] AND ( murad OR philadelphia [ ad ] OR west point [ ad ] OR wong p [ au ] OR lasseter kc [ au ] OR colorectal ) ) ) AND 1980 : 2013 [ dp ] ) x Appendix C : PubMed Related Citations Algorithm [ PMRA ] Algorithm overview . The PubMed Related Citations Algorithm [ PMRA ] underlies the “related articles” search feature in PubMed . Lin and Wilbur ( 2007 ) develop a topic - based similarity model designed to help a typical user search through the literature by presenting a set of records topically related to a focal article returned by a PubMed search query . Speciﬁcally , PMRA relies on Bayes’ Theorem to estimates the probability that an individual is interested in document a given expressed interest in document b . They focus on the following relationship : Pr ( a | b ) ∝ N (cid:88) j = 1 Pr ( a | s j ) Pr ( b | s j ) Pr ( s j ) , where { s 1 , . . . , s N } denotes the entire set of mutually exclusive topics that could possibly be contained within a , b , or any other document of interest . Lin and Wilbur ( 2007 ) then make assumptions about the underlying arrival rates of terms within documents and how likely the occurrence of a term within a document actually reﬂects the true nature of that document . From these assumptions , the authors arrive at a topic weighting function , w j , x , that describes how important a topic s j is to any document x , and a document scoring function , Sim ( a , b ) , that quantiﬁes the similarity between a and b , given by : w j , x = λ j , x × (cid:115) 1 f j Sim ( a , b ) = N (cid:88) j = 1 w j , a × w j , b , where f j is the frequency of topic s j in the entire corpus and λ j , x is based on a series of Poisson arrival rate parameters and the number of times topic s j occurs within document x . Intuitively , two documents are more likely to be similar when they both use topics that are rare ( f j is low ) many times ( λ j , x is high ) . The authors estimate , optimize and experimentally conﬁrm parameters to align with human assessments . They also report that one ﬁfth of “non - trivial” browser sessions in PubMed invoke PMRA at least once , providing some “ground truth” for the view that the algorithm captures meaningful intellectual linkages between documents . Deﬁning topics . The algorithm relies on three types of text information to derive a list of potential topics : MeSH terms , abstract words , and title words . MeSH is the National Library of Medicine’s [ NLM ] controlled vocabulary thesaurus . It consists of terms arranged in a hierarchical structure that permit searching at various levels of speciﬁcity ( there are over 28 , 000 descriptors in the 2018 edition of MeSH ) . Almost every publication in PubMed is tagged with a set of MeSH terms ( between 1 and 103 in the current edition of PubMed , with both the mean and median approximately equal to 11 ) . NLM’s professional indexers are trained to select indexing terms from MeSH according to a speciﬁc protocol , and consider each article in the context of the entire collection ( Bachrach and Charen 1978 ; N´ev´eol et al . 2010 ) . The presence of MeSH terms is crucial for the performance of the PMRA algorithm in two separate respects . Directly , because the MeSH terms are appended to the list of abstract words and title words to form the set of topics present in a PubMed record . Indirectly , because PMRA uses MeSH terms as informative markers to separate “elite” from “non - elite” topics in each record , and relies on a mixture of two Poisson distributions ( one for elite terms , one for non - elite terms ) to estimate the probability that a document is about a topic , given that we observe its corresponding term ( abstract word , title word , MeSH term ) a certain number of times in the document . The reliance of PMRA on MeSH terms oﬀers both advantages and disadvantages from the standpoint of our study . On the positive side of the ledger , professional indexers with domain expertise annotate articles with xi MeSH terms—the authors are not involved . Professional annotators are probably less subject than authors to demand eﬀects , whereby keywords are chosen endogenously to appeal to an audience of potential readers , referees , and journal editors . As such , they are relatively more stripped of “social baggage” than author - chosen keywords would be . vi Research in information science backs up the claim that MeSH terms can be seen as representing standardized and high - quality summaries of a particular publication ( Bhattacharya et al . 2011 ) . On the negative side of the ledger , two features of the MeSH annotation process deserve mention . First , MeSH terms suﬀer from a keyword vintage problem as well as a left - censoring problem ; these two problems are inextricably linked . Indexers may have available a lexicon of permitted keywords which is itself out of date . NLM continually revises and updates the MeSH vocabulary in an attempt to neutralize keyword vintage eﬀects , but articles are not systematically backward - annotated . Take , for example the paper by Emmanuelle Charpentier and Jennifer Doudna which appeared in Science in June 2012 ( Jinek et al . , “A programmable dual - RNA - guided DNA endonuclease in adaptive bacterial immunity” ) and established the viability of the CRISPR - Cas9 system for genome editing . The article is tagged by 11 unique MeSH terms , but CRISPR is not one them . This is of course because the CRISPR keyword was not part of the controlled MeSH thesaurus in 2012—it was “born” as a keyword in 2013 ! Second , human indexers are not necessarily impervious to scientiﬁc fads and fashions . In their eﬀorts to be helpful to PubMed users , they may use combinations of keywords that reﬂect the conventional views of the ﬁeld . Probabilistic topic models such as PMRA assume that the scientiﬁc corpus has been correctly indexed . But what if the indexers who chose the keywords brought their own “conceptual baggage” to the indexing task , so that the pictures that emerge from this process are more akin to their conceptualization than to those of the scientists whose work it was intended to study ? In our view , “indexer eﬀects” ( in the parlance of Whittaker 1989 ) present a more benign challenge . A number of studies have asked authors to validate ex post the quality of the keywords selected by independent indexers , with generally encouraging results ( Law and Whittaker 1992 ) . Inter - indexer reliability is also very high ( Wilbur 1998 ) . There is an additional reason why these challenges deserve less emphasis than might appear at ﬁrst blush , at least from the standpoint of accurately capturing intellectual relatedness . PMRA relies on abstract words and title words as well as MeSH terms . Going back to the Jinek et al . ( 2012 ) article , the word “CRISPR” appears four separate times in the abstract . PMRA can therefore link this foundational paper to 218 other articles , which will often be annotated with CRISPR - relevant MeSH terms ( e . g . , “CRISPR - Associated Proteins” or “CRISPR - Cas Systems . ” ) In other words , the inclusion of title / abstract words help remedy unpleasant features of the MeSH annotation process . In so doing , however , they weaken our initial claim that the linkages revealed by PMRA are purely intellectual , devoid of “social baggage . ” For this reason , below we will explicitly look at the extent to which omitting abstract and title words from the input used by PMRA to generate the list of intellectual neighbors alters our benchmark set of results . Figure C1 depicts how the multiplier of the unconditional probability that two articles are related through PMRA is aﬀected by the number of MeSH terms that overlap between the two records . For example , two articles picked at random are 255 times more likely to be related if they share 5 MeSH terms instead of only one . Note that the baseline unconditional probability that two articles are related when they share only one MeSH term is quite low , on the order of 1 ÷ 1 , 000 , 000 . Implementation details . Using the MeSH keywords as input , PMRA essentially deﬁnes a distance concept in idea space such that the proximity between a source article and any other PubMed - indexed publication can be assessed . The following paragraphs were extracted from a brief description of PMRA : The neighbors of a document are those documents in the database that are the most similar to it . The simi - larity between documents is measured by the words they have in common , with some adjustment for document lengths . To carry out such a program , one must ﬁrst deﬁne what a word is . For us , a word is basically an vi Importantly , the assignment of MeSH keywords does NOT take into account references cited in the publication . xii unbroken string of letters and numerals with at least one letter of the alphabet in it . Words end at hyphens , spaces , new lines , and punctuation . A list of 310 common , but uninformative , words ( also known as stopwords ) are eliminated from processing at this stage . Next , a limited amount of stemming of words is done , but no thesaurus is used in processing . Words from the abstract of a document are classiﬁed as text words . Words from titles are also classiﬁed as text words , but words from titles are added in a second time to give them a small advantage in the local weighting scheme . MeSH terms are placed in a third category , and a MeSH term with a subheading qualiﬁer is entered twice , once without the qualiﬁer and once with it . If a MeSH term is starred ( indicating a major concept in a document ) , the star is ignored . These three categories of words ( or phrases in the case of MeSH ) comprise the representation of a document . No other ﬁelds , such as Author or Journal , enter into the calculations . Having obtained the set of terms that represent each document , the next step is to recognize that not all words are of equal value . Each time a word is used , it is assigned a numerical weight . This numerical weight is based on information that the computer can obtain by automatic processing . Automatic processing is important because the number of diﬀerent terms that have to be assigned weights is close to two million for this system . The weight or value of a term is dependent on three types of information : 1 ) the number of diﬀerent documents in the database that contain the term ; 2 ) the number of times the term occurs in a particular document ; and 3 ) the number of term occurrences in the document . The ﬁrst of these pieces of information is used to produce a number called the global weight of the term . The global weight is used in weighting the term throughout the database . The second and third pieces of information pertain only to a particular document and are used to produce a number called the local weight of the term in that speciﬁc document . When a word occurs in two documents , its weight is computed as the product of the global weight times the two local weights ( one pertaining to each of the documents ) . The global weight of a term is greater for the less frequent terms . This is reasonable because the presence of a term that occurred in most of the documents would really tell one very little about a document . On the other hand , a term that occurred in only 100 documents of one million would be very helpful in limiting the set of documents of interest . A word that occurred in only 10 documents is likely to be even more informative and will receive an even higher weight . The local weight of a term is the measure of its importance in a particular document . Generally , the more frequent a term is within a document , the more important it is in representing the content of that document . However , this relationship is saturating , i . e . , as the frequency continues to go up , the importance of the word increases less rapidly and ﬁnally comes to a ﬁnite limit . In addition , we do not want a longer document to be considered more important just because it is longer ; therefore , a length correction is applied . The similarity between two documents is computed by adding up the weights of all of the terms the two docu - ments have in common . Once the similarity score of a document in relation to each of the other documents in the database has been computed , that document’s neighbors are identiﬁed as the most similar ( highest scoring ) documents found . These closely related documents are pre - computed for each document in PubMed so that when one selects Related Articles , the system has only to retrieve this list . This enables a fast response time for such queries . vii For a given source article , PMRA yields the following output : ( i ) an ordered list of intellectually related articles with a ﬁxed length ; ( ii ) a cardinal measure of distance between the source and each related article , which we have normalized such that a source is always 100 % related to itself , and relatedness decreases as one goes down the ranking of the ordered list of neighbors . Cutoﬀ Rules . The algorithm uses a cutoﬀ rule to determine the number of related articles associated with a given source article . First , the 100 most related records by similarity score are returned . Second , a reciprocity rule is applied to this list of 100 records : if publication x is related to publication y , publication y must also be related to publication x . As a result , there is no ﬁxed number of related articles for a source article . On the contrary , the total number of related articles can be of arbitrary large size , and certainly much higher than 100 . Figure C2 , Panel A displays the histogram for the distribution of the number of related articles for the 35 , 409 source articles in our main sample . The mean number of articles is 153 and the median 119 . Surprisingly , however , 25 % or so of the source articles have less than 100 related articles associated with them . In part , this is an artefact of some data construction choices , as we eliminate related articles outside the [ 1965 ; 2006 ] date range , or related articles that are not original articles ( reviews , editorials , etc . ) , or related articles in journals not indexed by the Web of Science . And yet , even after accounting for these vii Available at http : / / ii . nlm . nih . gov / MTI / related . shtml xiii factors , slightly more than 10 % of the source articles have less than 100 intellectual neighbors , which is surprising given the documented cutoﬀ rule whereby PMRA supposedly always starts from a list of 100 neighbors , and then possibly add to this list via symmetry . We investigated this peculiar feature of the data ; PMRA appears to have a second cutoﬀ rule based on the cardinal relatedness score . For each source article , we computed the minimum relatedness score , and graphed the resulting distribution ( Figure C2 , Panel B ) . One can observe a mass point around 0 . 10 ( corresponding to 3 % of the source articles ) , meaning that PMRA will fail to expand the set of neighbors all the way up to 100 articles if it ﬁnds out that doing so would mean including related articles with relatedness < 0 . 10 . viii The presence of this second cutoﬀ is in an important respect a welcome ( if idiosyncratic and poorly docu - mented ) feature of the algorithm . If the cutoﬀ was downward - rigid at 100 , then after a star scientist had passed away , PMRA would need to reach into a set of articles that are in fact quite intellectually distant from the source to ﬁll the void mechanically induced by the fact that the deceased star cannot contribute to his own subﬁelds . Figure C2 , Panel C conﬁrms that it is not the case . It depicts , for both treated and control source articles , the distribution of relatedness score for the least related article associated with each source article , only taking into account the articles written after the death ( or counterfactual death ) of the star . The two distributions are quite close to one another ; if anything , there are slightly more control source articles that lie at the cardinal cutoﬀ value of 0 . 10 , relative to treated source articles . In other words , we ﬁnd no evidence of “overexpansion” in less proximate intellectual domains for treated ﬁelds , relative to control ﬁelds , in the period that follows the death of an eminent scientist . One ﬁnal check is to look for stability over time , both for the ordinal cutoﬀ and the cardinal cutoﬀ . A maintained assumption for our research design is that these cutoﬀs do not vary over time diﬀerentially for treated and control ﬁelds . We investigate cutoﬀ stability by running a regression of each subﬁeld’s log size ( respectively , each subﬁeld’s log odds of the lowest relatedness score ) onto journal eﬀects , number of authors eﬀects , 36 source publication year eﬀects ( from 1967 to 2002 , 1966 is the omitted variable ) , and 36 source publication year by treatment status interaction terms . We graph the coeﬃcient estimates corresponding to these interaction eﬀects on Figure C3 , which are for the most part imprecisely estimated zeros , and do not exhibit any speciﬁc upward or downward trend . From all these analysis , we conclude that there is no reason to suspect that PMRA’s cutoﬀ rules impact treated and control source articles in a diﬀerential way . From source article to subﬁeld : An Example . Given our set of source articles , we delineate the scientiﬁc ﬁelds to which they belong by focusing on the set of articles returned by PMRA that satisfy three additional constraints : ( i ) they are original articles ( as opposed to editorials , comments , reviews , etc . ) ; ( ii ) they were published in or before 2006 ( the end of our observation period ) ; and ( iii ) they appear in journals indexed by the Web of Science ( so that follow - on citation information can be collected ) . In Figure C4 , we illustrate the use of PMRA with an example taken from our sample . Consider “The transcriptional program of sporulation in budding yeast” ( PubMed ID # 9784122 ) , an article published in the journal Science in 1998 originating from the laboratory of Ira Herskowitz , an eminent UCSF biologist who died in 2003 from pancreatic cancer . PMRA returns 72 original related journal articles for this source publication . ix Some of these intellectual neighbors appeared before the source to which they are related , whereas others were published after the source . Some represent the work of collaborators , past or present , of Herskowitz’s , whereas others represent the work of scientists in his ﬁeld he may never have come in contact with during his life , much less collaborated with . The salient point is that nothing in the process through which these related articles are identiﬁed biases us towards ( or away from ) articles by collaborators , frequent citers of viii There is a smattering of source articles for which the minimum relatedness is below 0 . 10 . Upon closer examination , these source articles have no abstracts in PubMed , or do not have MeSH terms available . We investigated the sensitivity of our main results to dropping these subﬁelds from the analysis ( Appendix F , Table F5 ) . ix Why exactly 72 ? In fact , PMRA lists 152 “intellectual neighbors” for PubMed ID 9784122 . But once we exclude articles published after 2006 ( the end of our observation period ) , purge from the list reviews , editorials and other miscellaneous “non - original” content , and drop a handful of articles that appeared in minor journals not indexed in Thomson - Reuter’s Web of Science , the number of publications associated with this source article indeed drops to 72 . xiv Herskowitz’s work , or co - located researchers . Rather , the only determinants of relatedness are to be found in the overlap in MeSH keywords between the source and its potential neighbors . PubMed ID # 9784122 appeared in the October 23 rd 1998 issue of the journal Science and lists 15 MeSH terms and 5 substances . Consider now its second most - related ( listed in Figure C1 ) , PubMed ID # 12242283 “Phos - phorylation and maximal activity of Saccharomyces cerevisiae meiosis - speciﬁc transcription factor Ndt80 is dependent on Ime2” by Sopko et al . It appeared in Molecular and Cell Biology in October of 2002 and has 24 MeSH terms ( resp . 11 substances ) . Figure C5 displays the MeSH terms that tag this article along with its source PubMed ID # 9784122 . The keywords that overlap exactly have been highlighted in dark blue ; those whose close ancestors in the MeSH keyword hierarchical tree overlap have been highlighted in light blue . These terms include common terms such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Transcription Factors as well as more speciﬁc keywords including NDT80 protein , S cerevisiae and Gene Expression Regulation , Fungal . PMRA also provides a cardinal dyadic measure of intellectual proximity between each related article and its associated source article . In this particular instance , the relatedness score of “Phosphorylation . . . ” is 94 % , whereas the relatedness score for the most distant related article in Figure C4 , “Catalytic roles of yeast . . . ” is only 62 % . Delineating subﬁelds . In the ﬁve years prior to his death ( 1998 - 2002 ) , Herskowitz was the last author on 12 publications , the publications most closely associate with his position as head of a laboratory . For each of these source publications , we treat the set of publications returned by PMRA as constituting a distinct subﬁeld , and we create a subﬁeld panel dataset by counting the number of related articles in each of these subﬁelds in each year between 1975 and 2006 . An important characteristic of the subﬁelds subﬁelds generated by this procedure is that they correspond to quite compact intellectual neighborhoods . One window into the extent of intellectual breadth for PMRA - generated subﬁelds is to gauge the overlap between the articles that constitute any pair of subﬁelds associated with the same star . In the sample , the 452 deceased stars account for 3 , 076 subﬁelds , and 21 , 661 pairwise combination of subﬁelds ( we are only considering pairs of subﬁelds associated with the same individual star ) . Figure C6 displays the histogram for the distribution of overlap , which is extremely skewed . A full half of these pairs exhibit exactly zero overlap , whereas the mean of the distribution is 0 . 06 . To ﬁnd pairs of subﬁelds that display substantial amounts of overlap ( for example , half of the articles in subﬁeld 1 also belong in subﬁeld 2 ) , one must reach far into the right tail of the distribution , speciﬁcally , above the 98 th percentile . Given a source article published in year t , PMRA will tend to ﬁnd the largest number of neighbors contem - poraneously , slightly fewer neighbors – but still a large proportion of them all – during years t − 1 and t + 1 , a slightly lower number still in years t − 2 and t + 2 , etc . In other words , PMRA creates lists of intellectual neighbors such that , when rolled up at the year level , will generate subﬁelds whose life cycle has an inverted U - shape , with the peak of the U corresponding to the year of publication for the source . This does not strike us as an implausible feature of the scientiﬁc process : papers related to a focal one will be more likely to appear in close temporal proximity with it . Importantly , this feature of PMRA aﬀects treated and control subﬁelds in a precisely symmetric fashion . To illustrate this empirically , we took a random sample of 5 , 000 articles in PubMed ( original articles , in journals indexed by web of science , that appeared between 1965 and 2003 – the same range of years as for our source articles ) and computed the average number of articles entering those subﬁelds in a range of [ − 10 ; + 10 ] years after the publication of the source . This yields a pronounced inverted - U shape , as seen on Figure C7 . Interestingly , the decay in the outer years is not symmetric : PMRA ﬁnds more neighbors in the future than in the past . This may reﬂect the steadily expanding universe of publications , such that there will mechanically be more candidates to be included as related neighbors going forward in time , relative to going backward in time . The same tendency would of course apply equally to control and treated subﬁelds . xv Robustness checks . The production version of PMRA is used by thousands of scientists every day to assist their search of the biomedical literature . The foregoing discussion has shown that some idiosyncrasies baked into the algorithm are not necessarily desirable from a research standpoint . How would our benchmark set of results change , for instance , if the subﬁelds were expanded in size ? Or if a cardinal cutoﬀ rule determined the boundary of a subﬁeld ? Or if only MeSH terms , rather than the combination of MeSH terms and abstract / title words , were used to assess the similarity between the documents in a subﬁeld ? Below , we avail ourselves to an oﬀ - line version of PMRA that was explicitly built to allow some limited experimentation with featured of the PMRA algorithm . x Using this software tool , we can generate the relatedness score between a source article in PubMed and a string of text . We manipulate that string of text to generate relatedness scores between our source articles and an expanded set of candidate related articles under diﬀerent scenarios . Before doing so , however , we need to create an expanded list of “candidate” related articles , because we lack the computing power to check each source article against the entire PubMed corpus . xi Our approach is to combine the related articles ( denoted PMRA 1 articles below ) with the related articles of the related articles ( denoted PMRA 2 articles below ) as the candidate set . Using the cardinal relatedness score generated by the oﬀ - line , tunable version of the software , we then use a simple cutoﬀ rule to delineate the expanded subﬁelds : we retain only those articles with cardinal relatedness score greater than 0 . 20 ( the median ) . In addition , as is the case for the benchmark set of subﬁelds , we also eliminate non - original articles , articles that fall outside of our date range , articles not written in English , and articles that appear in journals not indexed by the Web of Science . We repeat this exercise , except that we set loose the tunable version of PMRA on candidate related articles that are summarized solely by their MeSH terms ( i . e . , abstract / title words are not taken into account ) . Figure C8 displays the histogram of the distribution for subﬁelds constructed using this novel set of rules . The mean stands at 891 articles , the median at 625 articles , with a maximum value of 7 , 112 . These subﬁelds are therefore much larger than those generated by the production version of PMRA . Table C1 replicates our benchmark set of speciﬁcations ( columns 1 , 2 , and 3 of Table 3 ) on these new data . The leftmost three columns correspond to the version where abstract / title words and MeSH terms are used to calculate relatedness score ; the rightmost three columns correspond to the version where the input into the calculation of relatedness is limited to the MeSH terms . The magnitudes of the eﬀects are a bit larger than those observed in Table 3 ; the coeﬃcients are also more precisely estimated . Figure C9 replicates Panel C of Figure 2 on the new data . Panel A of Figure C9 corresponds to a dynamic version of the speciﬁcation in column ( 3 ) of Table C1 , whereas Panel B of Figure C9 corresponds to a dynamic version of the speciﬁcation in column ( 6 ) of Table C1 . In both of these pictures , there appear to be a slight pre - trend in that activity in the ﬁeld picks up slightly before the death of the star scientist . The magnitudes , however , are very small , marginally signiﬁcant , and substantially smaller than those found in the post - death period , providing reassurance regarding the robustness of our core results . x We thank Kyle Myers from the NBER for graciously allowing us access to this software , which forms the basis of his manuscript entitled “The Elasticity of Science” ( Myers 2018 ) . Note that it relies on a version of PubMed that is not complete— about 10 % of the online version of the database have no counterparts in the oﬀ - line version , but these articles appear to be missing at random . xi There would be close to half a trillion article pairs to check , even after eliminating articles outside of our date range , non - original content , articles in other languages , etc . xvi xvii Table C1 : Alternate Subfield Definitions Expanded Neighborhoods Expanded Neighborhoods , MeSH Terms Only All Authors Collabs . Only Non - Collabs . Only All Authors Collabs . Only Non - Collabs . Only After Death 0 . 098 * * - 0 . 321 * * 0 . 120 * * 0 . 071 * * - 0 . 327 * * 0 . 089 * * ( 0 . 026 ) ( 0 . 047 ) ( 0 . 026 ) ( 0 . 022 ) ( 0 . 045 ) ( 0 . 022 ) Nb . of Investigators 6 , 237 6 , 194 6 , 237 6 , 226 6 , 189 6 , 226 Nb . of Fields 33 , 987 33 , 732 33 , 981 33 , 928 33 , 761 33 , 928 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 1 , 390 , 415 1 , 380 , 078 1 , 390 , 169 1 , 398 , 549 1 , 391 , 664 1 , 398 , 549 Log Likelihood - 5 , 918 , 924 - 1 , 508 , 675 - 5 , 704 , 068 - 8 , 106 , 163 - 1 , 818 , 687 - 7 , 895 , 247 Note : Estimates stem from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications . The dependent variable is the total number of publications in a subfield in a particular year ( similar to Table 3 , columns 1 through 3 ) . All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects , as well as a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star , to address the concern that age , year and individual fixed effects may not fully account for trends in subfield entry around the time of death for the deceased star . The first three columns use subfields that comprise both PMRA 1 and PMRA 2 articles , but where the input data includes abstract / title words plus MeSH terms , just as in the production version of the algorithm . In contrast , in the second set of three columns , subfields have been constructed while ignoring abstract / title words for the candidate related articles . Robust standard errors in parentheses , clustered at the level of the star scientist . † p < 0 . 10 , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . Figure C1 : MeSH Term Overlap & Relatedness Note : This figure depicts the relationship between MESH term overlap and being classified as related by PMRA based on a random sample of approximately 130 million article pairs in PubMed ( formed from a random sample of 15 , 400 individual articles ) . With exactly one MeSH term in common , the base probability of being related is on the order of 1 / 1 , 000 , 000 . That probability increases extremely steeply as the number of MeSH terms shared between any two random articles moves beyond 4 terms in common . xviii Figure C2 Subfield Size and PMRA Cutoff Rules A . Ordinal Cutoff B . Cardinal Cutoff C . Cardinal Cutoff , by Treatment Status , Post - Death Period Only Note : We document the rules that govern the cutoff in the number of related articles associated with each source . Panel A depicts the histogram for the distribution of related articles after filtering out “undesirable” publications ( such as reviews and other non - original material , non - English publications , etc . ) . Panel B depicts the distribution of the relatedness score for the least related article associated with each source article in our data . There is a mass point at 0 . 10 that corresponds to an additional cutoff rule in PMRA . A smattering of source publications have some related articles with relatedness score below 0 . 10 , but the overwhelming majority of those are incomplete records : missing abstract , missing MeSH terms , or both . These account for less than 0 . 5 % of the source articles . Finally , Panel C compares the relatedness of the least related article for each source , by treatment status , and solely for the related articles that appeared after the death ( respectively counterfactual death ) of a star . F r equen cy ( P r opo r t i on o f A ll S ou r c e A r t i c l e s ) xix Figure C3 Temporal Stability of Cutoff Rules A . Ordinal Cutoff ( Subfield Size ) B . Cardinal Cutoff ( Lowest Relatedness Score ) Note : We regress the log of pre - death subfield size ( Panel A ) and the log odds of the relatedness score for the least related article ( Panel B ) onto ( i ) journal fixed effects ; ( ii ) a suite of indicator variables for the source article’s number of authors ; ( iii ) source article year of publication effects ; and ( iv ) interaction terms between each year of publication and a treatment status indicator . The graphs report the coefficient estimates , along with their associated 95 % confidence interval ( corresponding to robust standard errors , clustered at the level of the star ) for these 36 interaction terms . 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 xx Figure C4 : From Source to Related Articles Note : We illustrate the process of identifying the related articles through the use of an example . Ira Herskowitz , a superstar scientist in our sample , died in 2003 . In the five years prior to his death ( 1998 - 2002 ) , Herskowitz was the last author on 12 publications . One of these publications is “The transcriptional program of sporulation in budding yeast , ” an article published in the journal Science in 1998 . On the right - hand side panel , one sees that PMRA identifies 72 related articles related to this source publication . Each of these related articles can then be parsed in a variety of ways . In particular , their authorship list can be matched to the AAMC Faculty Roster , which allows us to distinguish between collaborators of Herskowitz’s and non - collaborators , as well as between the subfield’s insiders vs . outsiders . Eight out of the 72 articles have a former or current collaborator on the authorship roster . Twenty two of the 72 articles in the subfield cite the source article , while the source articles references eight of the articles in the subfield . xxi Figure C5 : PMRA and MeSH Term Overlap—An Example Source Article PMRA - Linked Article Chu et al . , “The transcriptional program of sporulation in budding yeast . ” Science , 1998 . Sopko et al . , “Phosphorylation and maximal activity of Saccharomyces cerevisiae meiosis - specific transcription factor Ndt80 is dependent on Ime2 . ” MCB , 2002 . PMID # 9784122 PMID # 12242283 MeSH Terms MeSH Terms Animals Active Transport , Cell Nucleus Chromosomes , Fungal Binding Sites DNA - Binding Proteins * Cell Cycle Proteins * Fungal Proteins Cell Nucleus Gene Expression Regulation , Fungal * DNA - Binding Proteins * Genes , Fungal Fungal Proteins * Genome , Fungal Gene Expression Regulation , Fungal * Humans Genes , Fungal Meiosis Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins Morphogenesis Meiosis * Organelles Phosphorylation Saccharomyces cerevisiae * Promoter Regions , Genetic Spores , Fungal Protein Kinases * Transcription Factors Protein - Serine - Threonine Kinases Transcription , Genetic * Recombinant Fusion Proteins Saccharomyces cerevisiae Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins * Spores , Fungal Substrate Specificity Transcription Factors * Transcriptional Activation Substances Substances DNA - Binding Proteins Cell Cycle Proteins Fungal Proteins DNA - Binding Proteins NDT80 protein , S cerevisiae Fungal Proteins Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins Transcription Factors NDT80 protein , S cerevisiae Recombinant Fusion Proteins Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins Transcription Factors Protein Kinases IME2 protein , S cerevisiae Protein - Serine - Threonine Kinases Note : We compare the MeSH terms for the number of MeSH terms for the source article in Figure C4 , along with those of its most proximate intellectual neighbor according to PMRA . xxii Figure C6 Article Overlap Between Subfield Pairs Note : We compute the share of related articles that are shared between pairs of PMRA - delineated subfields . To be conservative , we focus the analysis on 21 , 661 subfield pairs where a deceased superstar was the last author on both of the associated source articles . Figure C7 Distribution of Activity in Subfields Over Time Note : This figure illustrates the timing of articles entering the subfields for a random sample of 5 , 000 articles in PubMed ( original articles , in journals indexed by Web of Science , that appeared between 1965 and 2003—the same range of years as for the source articles in our analytic sample ) , and we run them through PMRA , rolling up the count of articles up to the subfield - year level ( as in our regressions ) . xxiii Figure C8 Distribution of Expanded Neighborhood Subfield Size Note : The articles that are candidate for membership in each subfield satisfy the following conditions : PMRA 1 or PMRA 2 . We then compute relatedness in this expanded neighborhood using the tunable version of PMRA . We discard every article with new relatedness score less than 0 . 20 ( the median in the sample ) . As a result , there is a cardinal cutoff , but no ordinal cutoff that delineates subfield boundaries . 35 ( 0 . 1 % ) of the fields are outliers with more than 5 , 000 articles . In the histogram above , we make use of abstract & title words , in addition to MeSH terms , to assess relatedness through PMRA . xxiv Figure C9 Dynamics of Subfield Entry—Non Collaborators Alternate Subfield Definitions A . Expanded Neighborhoods B . Expanded Neighborhoods , MeSH Terms Only Note : The dark blue dots in the above plots correspond to coefficient estimates stemming from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications in which publication flows in subfields are regressed onto year effects , subfield age effects , as well as 20 interaction terms between treatment status and the number of years before / after the death event ( the indicator variable for treatment status interacted with the year of death is omitted ) . The specifications also include a full set of lead and lag terms common to both the treated and control subfields to fully account for transitory trends in subfield activity around the time of the death . The 95 % confidence interval ( corresponding to robust standard errors , clustered around star scientist ) around these estimates is plotted with vertical light blue lines ; Panel A corresponds to a dynamic version of the specification in the third column of Table C1 ; Panel B corresponds to a dynamic version of the specification in the sixth column of Table C1 . Appendix D : Construction of the Control Group We detail the procedure implemented to identify the control subﬁelds that help pin down the life - cycle and secular time eﬀects in our diﬀerence - in - diﬀerences ( DD ) speciﬁcation . Happenstance might yield a sample of stars clustered in decaying scientiﬁc ﬁelds . More plausibly , activity in the typical subﬁeld might be subject to idiosyncratic life - cycle patterns , with their productive potential ﬁrst increasing over time , eventually peaking , and thereafter slowly declining . Relying solely on subﬁelds treated earlier or later as an implicit control group raises the worry that these time - varying omitted variables will not be fully captured by subﬁeld age controls , particularly since dating the birth of a subﬁeld is a process fraught with hazards . To address this concern , we create an additional level of diﬀerence by selecting control subﬁelds . Recall that selecting a subﬁeld in our framework is akin to ﬁrst selecting a source article and then using PMRA to harvest all the related articles to this source in intellectual space . Since the second step is fully automated , only the ﬁrst step is really of concern . Practically , we will recruit control source articles from the set of articles authored by star scientists who do not die prematurely . But what makes a satisfactory control group ? It is important to distinguish between ex ante vs . ex post criteria . Ex ante , one would like control source articles to have the following properties : 1 . to be published contemporaneously with the source article for the treated subﬁeld ; 2 . to be unrelated ( in both an intellectual and a social sense ) to the source article for the treated subﬁeld ; 3 . to be of similar expected impact and fruitfulness , relative to the source article for the treated subﬁeld ; 4 . to have a similar number of authors as the source article for the treated subﬁeld ; 5 . to have a superstar author in the same authorship position and of approximately the same age as that occupied by the deceased superstar on the authorship roster of the source article for the treated subﬁeld . Ex post , it will be important for the control subﬁelds to satisfy an additional condition : the treated and control subﬁelds should exhibit very similar trends in publication activity and funding ﬂows up to the year of treatment ( i . e . , the year of death for the treated superstar ) . Coarsened Exact Matching . To meet these goals , we implement a “Coarsened Exact Matching” ( CEM ) procedure ( Blackwell et al . 2009 ) . The ﬁrst step is to select a relatively small set of covariates on which we need to guarantee balance ex ante . This choice entails judgement , but is strongly guided by the set of criteria listed above . The second step is to create a large number of strata to cover the entire support of the joint distribution of the covariates selected in the previous step . In a third step , each observation is allocated to a unique strata , and for each observation in the treated group , control observations are selected from the same strata . The procedure is coarse because we do not attempt to precisely match on covariate values ; rather , we coarsen the support of the joint distribution of the covariates into a ﬁnite number of strata , and we match a treated observation if and only if a control observation can be recruited from this strata . An important advantage of CEM is that the analyst can guarantee the degree of covariate balance ex ante , but this comes at a cost : the more ﬁne - grained the partition of the support for the joint distribution ( i . e . , the higher the number of strata ) , the larger the number of unmatched treated observations . Implementation . We identify controls based on the following set of covariates ( t denotes the year of death ) : star scientist career age ; citations received by the article up to year t ; number of authors ; position of the star author on the authorship roster ( only last authorship position is considered ) ; journal ; and year xxv of publication . The ﬁrst three covariates only need to match within relatively coarse bins . For instance , we create nine career age categories : less than 10 years ; between 10 and 20 years ; between 20 and 25 years ; between 25 and 30 years ; between 30 and 35 years ; between 35 and 40 years ; between 40 and 45 years ; between 45 and 50 years , over 50 years of career age . Similarly , we coarsen the distribution of citations at baseline into ﬁve mutually exclusive bins : zero citations ; between one and 10 citations ; between 10 and 50 citations ; between 50 and 120 citations ; and more than 120 citations . In contrast , we impose an exact match on journal , publication year , and the star’s authorship position . We match approximately 75 % of the treated source articles in this way . Some further trimming of the control articles is needed . First , we eliminate any control that shares any author with the treated source . Second , we eliminate any control article with a dead star scientist on its authorship roster , even if he appears in an intermediate position in the authorship list . Third , we drop every control that also happens to be related intellectually to its source as per PMRA . Finally , we drop from the data any source article that ﬁnds itself an orphan ( i . e . , not paired with any control ) at the conclusion of this process . Figure D1 provides an illustrative example . The ﬁnal sample has 3 , 074 treated source articles and 31 , 142 control source articles . As can be seen in Figure D2 , the distribution of activity levels , measured by cumulative publications up to the baseline year , is very similar between treated and control subﬁelds . As well , there is no evidence of preexisting trends in activity , as demonstrated by the coeﬃcient estimates graphed in Figure 1 and E1 . In Table 2 , treated and control subﬁelds are very well - balanced on the covariates that formed the basis of the CEM matching procedure . This is true almost by construction . What is more surprising ( and also welcome ) is that the procedure balances a number of covariates that were not used as inputs for matching , such as various metrics of star eminence . For other covariates , we can detect statistically signiﬁcant mean diﬀerences , though they do not appear to be substantively meaningful ( e . g . , 6 . 7 % of control stars vs . 9 . 9 % of treated stars are female ) . Sensitivity Analyses . Human judgement matters for the outcome of the CEM procedure insofar as one must draw a list of “reasonable” covariates to match on , as well as decide on the degree of coarsening to impose . We have veriﬁed that slight variations in the implementation ( e . g . , varying slightly the number of cutoﬀ points for the stock of baseline citations for the source ; focusing on birth age as opposed to career age for the stars ) have little impact on the main results . xxvi xxvii Figure D1 : Matching Procedure to Identify Controls for the Source Articles Note : The two articles above illustrate the Coarsened Exact Matching ( CEM ) procedure . These two articles appeared in the journal Science in 1998 . They received a similar number of citations up to the end of the baseline year ( 2002 , one year before Herskowitz’s death ) : 514 citations for Chu et al . , 344 citations for Neumann et al . Note that Alan Perelson and Ira Herskowitz are both in last authorship position . They also obtained their PhD within a year of each other . Appendix E : Extensions Extended descriptive statistics . For space reasons , Table 2 provided descriptive statistics at baseline for only a selected set of right - hand side covariates and outcome variables . In Tables E1 and E2 , we present descriptive statistics and correlation matrices for all the covariates and outcome variables that appear either in the main body of the manuscript , or in Appendixes E and F . Table E1a highlights balance between control and treated subﬁelds at baseline for a simple transformation of the outcome variables . Recall that our outcome variables are of the form “number of articles in subﬁeld i and year t that satisfy some condition , ” where examples of such conditions include , inter alia , “by non - collaborators only , where these related authors had no prior participation in the subﬁeld” or “by non - collaborators only , where the focal star is not cited in the list of references . ” We transform these ﬂow variables into cumulative stock variables , taking into account the years between the birth of the subﬁeld and the year of death ( or counterfactual death ) . So , for example , at baseline , the stock or related articles by non - collaborators that list references only outside the subﬁeld are balanced between control and treated subﬁelds ( 13 . 764 vs . 13 . 789 ) . xii Table E1b provides descriptive statistics for star - level ( e . g . , cumulative NIH funding at baseline ) and subﬁeld - level ( e . g . , commitment of the star to the subﬁeld ) covariates . These covariates are used to realize sample splits around their medians in Tables 6 and 7 of the manuscript , and in Tables E5 , E7 , and E8 of Appendix E . In Table E2 , we also display correlation matrices for these variables . To make the matrix legible , we place correlations for subﬁeld - level covariates and star - level covariates in separate tables ( E2a and E2b ) . The correlations are typically reassuringly high across measures within a construct ( e . g . , , but low across constructs . Event study graphs using the raw data . Figure E1 provides graphical evidence of the eﬀect of star death on subﬁeld entry using raw data . This involves an important simpliﬁcation—anchoring the comparison between control and treated subﬁelds on “experimental time” ( the number of years elapsed since treatment ) , ignoring the fact that our death events are staggered over a long time period ( 1975 to 2003 ) . Yet , these graphs provide visual evidence that the main eﬀects of death on subﬁeld growth or decline we document in regression speciﬁcations saturated with calendar year and age eﬀects ( Figure 2 ) are also apparent in the raw data . The graphs in Figure E1 also make vivid the life - cycle of subﬁelds . Given a particular source article , PMRA creates a list of intellectual neighbors that , when added together at the year level , generate subﬁelds whose evolution over time follows an inverted U - shape , with the peak of the U corresponding to the year of publication for the source . xiii Of course , these life cycle patterns are a reﬂection of design choices for PMRA . That being said , a plausible feature of the scientiﬁc process is that papers related to a focal one will be more likely to appear in close temporal proximity with it . Sudden vs . Anticipated Death Events . To gain statistical power , our main results pool the subﬁelds of stars who died suddenly with those of stars whose untimely passing was anticipated . Yet , the case for the exogeneity of a death event is stronger when it is sudden ; when the death can be anticipated , it is theoretically possible for the star to engage in “intellectual estate planning , ” whereby particular scientists ( presumably close collaborators ) are anointed as exemplars of the next generation of leaders in the subﬁeld . Table E3 breaks down our core set of results by cause of death , focusing on entry by non - collaborators only . Contrasting the coeﬃcient estimates across Panel A and Panel B in the ﬁrst column of Table E1 , relative subﬁeld growth appears to be driven by stars whose death was anticipated . The eﬀect in the case of sudden death is small in magnitude and imprecisely estimated . xii Note that the variables in Table E1a pertain to subﬁeld entry by non - collaborators only , except the ﬁrst three , which correspond to the outcome variables in the right - most three columns of Table 3 ( number of NIH grants acknowledged by articles in the subﬁeld , in total , by collaborators only , and by non - collaborators only ) . xiii On Figures E1 , Panels A , B , and C , the peak appears roughly two to three years before the death , and not in the year of death . But recall that the source articles that generate the subﬁelds in our data appeared in the window [ t yr death − 5 ; t yr death − 1 ] . As such , the peak observed in these ﬁgures is an average of the peaks for subﬁelds associated with sources published in the years t yr death − 5 , t yr death − 4 , . . . , t yr death − 1 . xxviii As in Table 4 , we parse every related article in the subﬁeld to assign them into one of six mutually exclusive bins , based on their vintage - speciﬁc long - run citation impact : articles that fall in the bottom quartile of the citation distribution ; in the second quartile ; in the third quartile ; articles that fall above the 75 th percentile , but below the 95 th percentile ; articles that fall above the 95 th percentile , but below the 99 th percentile ; and articles that fall above the 99 th percentile of the citation distribution . Decomposing this eﬀect across the quantile bins as above reveals that the diﬀerences between the cases of sudden and anticipated death can be accounted for by shifts in activity for low - impact contributions . In the right tail of the distribution , there is very little evidence that the manner of superstar death matters at all for the fate of their subﬁelds . In both cases , non - collaborators increase their relative contribution sharply—on the order of 40 % . Figure E2 and E3 display event study - style graphs in the spirit of Figure 2 , Panel C . When using all publications ( regardless of impact ) as the metric of activity in a subﬁeld ( Figure E2 ) , we can see that the upward trend is more pronounced ( as well as statistically signiﬁcant ) in the case of anticipated events . When using only “top publications” ( speciﬁcally , those in the upper 5 percentiles of the citation distribution , adjusted for each year of publication ) , the diﬀerences are less stark . Consistent with a dearth of statistical power , our ability to estimate these eﬀects precisely is also limited . This convergence of the eﬀect of death when focused on the upper tail of the impact distribution legitimates our choice to pool the data for sudden and anticipated events . Consolidating vs . disruptive entry . The ﬁndings above do not imply that the published results of entrants necessarily contradict or overturn the prevailing scientiﬁc understanding and assumptions within a subﬁeld . Direct evidence of these contributions’ disruptive impact is elusive . To provide indirect evidence , we use the “disruptiveness” index ( hereafter denoted d ) recently proposed by Funk and Owen - Smith ( 2017 ) , which seeks to capture whether an idea consolidates or destabilizes the status quo . d measures the extent to which the future ideas that build on the focal idea also rely on its acknowledged predecessors . In practice , for article i , it is deﬁned as : d i = 1 n i n (cid:88) j = 1 [ 1 ( j ∨ K i ) − 1 ( j ∧ K i ) ] where j indexes the forward citing articles ( j = 1 , . . . , n ) , K i is the set of articles { k 1 , k 2 , . . . , k p } that are ( backwards ) referenced within i , n i is the number of forward citations to article i , 1 ( j ∨ K i ) is equal to one if forward citing article j does not reference any of the articles in K i , and 1 ( j ∧ K i ) is equal to one if forward citing article j does reference at least one of the articles in K i . d = 1 for articles that are “maximally destabilizing , ” in the sense that there is no overlap between the articles referenced by the focal article and the references listed in the papers that cite it . In contrast , d = − 1 for articles that are “maximally consolidating , ” in the sense that every citing article and the source have at least one reference in common . We compute the d index for all related articles in our data ( mean = − . 39 , median = − . 49 , s . d . = . 47 ) . We count the number of related articles that belong to a particular quantile bin of d . We create six non - overlapping bins : below the 10 th percentile of d , between the 10 th and the 25 th percentile , between the 25 th and the 50 th percentile , between the 50 th and the 75 th percentile , between the 75 th and the 95 th percentile , and above the 95 th percentile of d . In a ﬁnal step , we roll up the outcome at the subﬁeld - year level . We then run a separate regression with each of these six outcome measures , using the research design outlined in Section III . A . As can be observed in Table E4 , the relationship between star death and subﬁeld entry by non - collaborators is non - monotonic in the extent to which it entails disrupting the paradigms of the treated subﬁelds . The relationship is strongest for related articles that fall in the intermediate range of the “disruptiveness” metric . In contrast , the eﬀect is zero and noisy when focusing on entry by both the most disruptive and the most consolidating articles . Taken together , the results in Tables 5 and E4 paint a nuanced picture of directional change in the wake of superstar death . The new contributions do not represent a departure from the subﬁeld’s concerns . At the same time , the citation evidence makes it clear that these additional contributions often draw from more recent and diﬀerent sources of knowledge for inspiration . Moreover , rather than to view these contributions xxix as the expression of a Kuhnian paradigm shift within the subﬁeld , it seems more appropriate to interpret them as reﬂecting the impact of a myriad “small r , ” permanent revolutions whereby new ideas come to the fore without necessarily eclipsing prior approaches . Subﬁeld characteristics . Table E5 examines how three diﬀerent characteristics of subﬁelds inﬂuence the magnitude of the treatment eﬀect . We ﬁrst inquire whether post - death entry by non - collaborators is more pronounced is subﬁelds with forward momentum , relative to those where activity is relatively more subdued in the years leading up to the star’s death . To create a metric of subﬁeld “hotness , ” we compute the fraction of all papers in the subﬁeld that were published in the window of ﬁve years before the star’s death ( or counterfactual death for the control subﬁelds ) . xiv We then contrast the magnitude of the treatment eﬀect in the subsamples of “hot” and “cold” subﬁelds , respectively , by splitting the data across the median of the hotness covariate . Interestingly , the subﬁelds with relatively less intense activity are driving the post - death entry eﬀect . The treatment eﬀect for hot subﬁelds is half as small in magnitude , relative to that for cold subﬁelds , and not statistically signiﬁcant . Next , we focus on the number of scientists trained by the star that had been active in the subﬁeld before his death . We conjecture that the subﬁelds of stars who produced many intellectual “oﬀsprings” may be less welcoming to outsiders than those in which the stars did not train many graduate students or postdoctoral fellows . Of course , we do not have evidence that these individuals , once trained , remained intellectually beholden to the star . To identify trainees , we focus on the subset of collaborators who occupy the ﬁrst author position in articles where the star occupies the last position ; with the added stipulation that the coauthored publication appears in a window of ± three years around the year in which the collaborator’s highest degree was received . We then count of the number of investigators trained by the star before his ( possibly counterfactual ) death . The results in Table E5 indicate that subﬁelds that are relatively more endogamous ( more than two trainees , the median of this covariate ) experience elevated rates of entry after the star’s death , relative to before . However , the diﬀerence between the coeﬃcients corresponding to subﬁeld with an above median of number of trainees versus below median number of trainees is not itself statistically signiﬁcant . Finally , we examine whether a star’s level of commitment to a subﬁeld moderates the extent of the post - death entry boost . Recall from Table 6 that the subﬁelds where stars are relatively more important experience more entry following the star’s death . A star could be important to a subﬁeld , while not being fully committed to it , in the sense that his presence in the subﬁeld represents only a small part of his overall published output . Empirically , we compute commitment as the fraction of a star’s publications that fall into the focal subﬁeld , and we split the data according to the median of this measure ( which is equal to 0 . 14 in the data ) . The magnitudes of the treatment eﬀects are very similar . What appears to be associated with the post - death entry boost is the star’s importance to the subﬁeld while alive , and not the extent of his commitment to it . Impact of research infrastructure needs . Our analysis is limited to the life sciences and biomedical research . Though this area accounts for a large fraction of publicly funded , civilian research funding in the United States , it is not necessarily representative of all ﬁelds of science . In particular , some domains of research , like high - energy particle physics for example , require access to expensive and lumpy capital equipment , such as the Large Hadron Collider that came on line in 2009 at the cost $ 8 billion dollars ( Stephan 2012 ) . In contrast to the “big science , ” hypercollaborative projects that are emerging as the norm in these ﬁelds ( e . g . , Aad et al . 2015 ) , academic life scientists require funding in sizable , but more modest amounts to do frontier research . In scientiﬁc domains where capital needs are lumpy , the phenomenon of entry in the wake of the passing of an eminent scientists may play out very diﬀerently , depending on the institutions that govern access to the scarce capital equipment . xiv Only the articles in the subﬁeld that were published before the death are taking into account when computing this ratio . The mean hotness across subﬁelds is 0 . 61 ( very similar to the median ) , with a standard deviation equal to 0 . 21 . xxx Within biomedical research , large - scale clinical trials most closely resemble the characteristics of those other capital - intensive science ﬁelds . These necessitate a large infrastructure of data collection , monitoring , and management , which is why these activities are often consolidated in large cooperative groups such as the AIDS Clinical Trials Group , the Children’s Oncology Group , or the Framingham Heart Study . PubMed has a “publication type” ﬁeld which allows us to identify the subﬁelds that are clinical - trial intensive ( 10 % of the subﬁelds ) versus those that are not ( the remaining 90 % ) . Table E6 replicates the results of Table 3 separately for these two subsamples . Unsurprisingly , our ability to estimate statistically signiﬁcant eﬀects is limited to the much larger set of non clinical trial - intensive subﬁelds . That said , the magnitudes for the clinical trial - intensive subﬁelds are very similar . Star characteristics . We saw in Table 6 that the passing of stars that shone brighter while they were alive ( measured by citations , publications or funding at death ) appear to be driving much of the eﬀect on non - collaborator entry . Tables E7 and E8 focus on other star characteristics that might moderate the core ﬁnding . The ﬁrst two columns of Table E7 show that the subﬁelds of relatively younger stars ( those aged 60 and below at the time of their deaths , the median in our sample ) account for much of the overall impact of death—the magnitude of the eﬀect for older stars is very small and imprecisely estimated . However , there is potentially a distinction between being “young in the ﬁeld” and simply being young . We measure experience in a subﬁeld by capturing the year in which the star ﬁrst published within it . Subﬁeld experience varies from 1 to 38 years , with a median of seven and a mean of 8 . 36 . The last two columns of Table E7 imply that the stars who are above median in subﬁeld experience are associated with slightly more post - death entry , but the diﬀerence is very slight . Table E8 brings more nuance to the analysis by focusing on the extent to which the star was leading vs . lagging the frontier of his subﬁelds at the time of death . We develop two alternative measures of “distance to the frontier . ” We assume that frontier work will be more likely to reference more recent science , and alternatively will tend to be tagged by MeSH keyword combinations that are of more recent vintage . In a window of ﬁve years before the death , we then contrast the diﬀerence in reference vintage ( respectively MeSH term combination vintage ) for articles written by the star vs . articles written by all other authors . We then split subﬁelds according to the median of this diﬀerence . Across all measures , the results in Table E8 tend to show that the eﬀect of post - death entry are larger for those subﬁelds where the star was leading when he passed , relative to those where his lead may have been slight or his research even staler than that of other researchers in the subﬁeld . Outsiders vs . competitors : A reprise . Recall that Figure 3 focused on the extent to which related authors were outsiders vs . previous incumbents in the subﬁelds that expand in the wake of a star’s death . For every related article , we matched their authorship roster to the Faculty Roster of the AAMC . Using the matched authors’ past publication record , we can then ascertain the fraction of each related author’s output that fall in the focal subﬁeld . We then sorted each related article into 11 mutually exclusive bins : zero overlap ( which corresponds to the bottom two quartiles of the overlap distribution ) , and a separate bin for every ﬁve percentiles above the median ( 50 th to 55 th percentile , 55 th to 60 th percentile , . . . , 95 th to 99 th percentile ) , as well as a top percentile bin . We then computed the corresponding measures of subﬁeld activity by aggregating the data up to the subﬁeld / year level . We presented the results graphically in Figure 3 , Panel B , where each dot corresponds to the magnitude of the treatment eﬀect in a separate regression with the outcome variable being the number of articles in each subﬁeld that belong to the corresponding bins . In Table E9 , we provide , in regression table form this time , a variant of Table 3 where overlap is measured not just with respect to the focal subﬁeld , but rather with respect to the combined subﬁelds of a given star . We also simplify the number of bins , with only ﬁve : related articles by new scientists , related articles by scientists with zero overlap who have published in the past in other subﬁelds , related articles by scientists in the third quartile of overlap , related articles by scientists whose past publication record puts them between the 75 th and 95 th percentile of the overlap distribution , and ﬁnally related articles by scientists whose past publication record puts them above the 95 th percentile of the overlap distribution . With this “global” xxxi measure of overlap , one can observe that the post - death entry boost is driven by scientists with no , or only limited past participation in the subﬁelds where the star was active . The lifecycle of stardom . The results in our manuscript naturally raise implications for welfare . We expound the view that once securely ensconced at the helm of their ﬁeld , stars leverage their power for longer than a benevolent social planner might prefer . This argument would be less tenable if stars were able to remain at the peak of their intellectual abilities until the very twilight of their careers . To shed light on the career life cycle for superstars , we focus on the 5 , 878 control stars in our analytic sample , and construct a panel dataset of publications at the star scientist - year level . xv Using Poisson speciﬁcations , we then regress publication output onto year eﬀects , indicator variables for degree ( MD , PhD , MD / PhD ) , an indicator variable for female scientists , indicator variable for departmental aﬃliation ( medicine vs . surgery vs . cell biology , etc . ) , indicator variables for the year in which the highest degree was received as well as 52 indicator variables for age eﬀects ( from age 29 to age 80 , with ages below 29 absorbed in the omitted category ) . Panel A of Figure E4 displays the estimates corresponding to the age eﬀects when then outcome in the speciﬁcation is the overall number of publications in a given year . Panel B restricts the outcome measure to publications whose number of long - run citations lies above the 95 th percentile of the vintage - speciﬁc citation distribution at the article level . Panel C proceeds in the same spirit , but focuses on even more impactful publications , those whose number of long - run citations lie above the 99 th percentile of the vintage - speciﬁc citation distribution at the article level . As can be observed in all three panels , the productive life cycle of stars follows an inverted U - shaped pattern , with a peak occurring earlier for highly cited publications , followed by a steeper drop oﬀ . The circle of scientiﬁc life . The impacts in the ﬁnal years of a star’s life are not necessarily indicative of their contributions writ large . Indeed , the lofty accomplishments which earned them superstar status suggest that their net contribution to society is likely positive . A longer view would also recognize that the scientiﬁc journeymen of today may well become the stars of tomorrow . One lens into this phenomenon is to examine the status of scientists that produce new contributions in a subﬁeld . In the ﬁrst two columns of Table E10 , we parse every article by non - collaborators , distinguishing between those that have a star author from those for which none of the authors are stars . We ﬁnd that the eﬀect is driven by related articles where none of the authors is particularly famous . One limitation of this dichotomy is that it fails to take into account long - run career trajectories , since it lumps together mediocre scientists with those that have not yet made their mark , but will do so in the future . We can explore this dynamic by taking advantage of the fact that roughly 20 % of the eminent life scientists in our sample have a clear date attached to their accession to star status : the year of appointment as a Howard Hughes Medical Investigator , or the year of election to the National Academy of Science or the National Academy of Medicine . These events mark their recipients as among the most celebrated within the superstar sample . With this more rareﬁed deﬁnition of stardom , we can now distinguish between related authors who are “never stars , ” “current stars , ” and “future stars . ” The next three columns of Table E10 show that future star authors are disproportionately likely to contribute to treated subﬁelds after the star has passed away , consistent with the idea that the outsiders of today can sometimes turn into the stars of tomorrow—a phenomenon we refer to as the circle of academic life . xv We eliminate the 452 extinct stars from the sample since their life cycle was interrupted prematurely . xxxii xxxiii Table E1a : Extended Descriptive Statistics , Subfield - level outcome variables Control Subfields Treated Subfields Mean Median Std . Dev . Mean Median Std . Dev . Baseline stock of related NIH grants , total 23 . 824 17 25 . 570 22 . 449 17 23 . 566 Baseline stock of related NIH grants , collaborators 4 . 876 2 6 . 952 4 . 446 2 6 . 011 Baseline stock of related NIH grants , non - collaborators 19 . 301 13 22 . 170 18 . 306 13 20 . 659 Baseline stock of related articles , bottom quartile of citation impact 6 . 614 4 8 . 322 6 . 741 4 8 . 611 Baseline stock of related articles , 2 nd quartile of citation impact 13 . 423 9 13 . 983 13 . 356 9 14 . 057 Baseline stock of related articles , 3 rd quartile of citation impact 20 . 100 14 19 . 051 19 . 996 14 18 . 937 Baseline stock of related articles , 75 th < citation impact < 95 th pctl . 21 . 762 16 19 . 810 21 . 271 16 19 . 289 Baseline stock of related articles , 95 th < citation impact < 99 th pctl . 5 . 233 3 5 . 933 5 . 108 3 5 . 844 Baseline stock of related articles , citation impact > 99 th pctl . 1 . 257 1 2 . 129 1 . 280 0 2 . 360 Baseline stock of related articles , outsiders 25 . 167 19 21 . 966 23 . 046 17 21 . 194 Baseline stock of related articles , incumbents 16 . 000 9 19 . 960 17 . 056 11 19 . 908 Baseline stock of related articles , proximate to source ( cardinal measure ) 31 . 353 24 31 . 179 32 . 022 25 31 . 854 Baseline stock of related articles , distant from source ( cardinal measure ) 37 . 037 19 49 . 598 35 . 730 18 48 . 119 Baseline stock of related articles , proximate to source ( ordinal measure ) 32 . 730 31 17 . 223 32 . 786 31 17 . 000 Baseline stock of related articles , distant from source ( ordinal measure ) 35 . 661 15 51 . 796 34 . 966 14 51 . 735 Baseline stock of related articles , references within subfield 54 . 627 42 48 . 492 53 . 963 41 47 . 581 Baseline stock of related articles , references outside subfield 13 . 764 7 19 . 080 13 . 789 7 19 . 159 Baseline stock of related articles , cites the star 32 . 332 22 34 . 199 31 . 076 22 32 . 141 Baseline stock of related articles , does not cite the star 36 . 058 24 37 . 875 36 . 677 24 39 . 633 Baseline stock of related articles , recent references 25 . 390 16 29 . 948 25 . 300 16 29 . 643 Baseline stock of related articles , old references 43 . 000 32 39 . 830 42 . 453 32 39 . 545 Baseline stock of related articles , recent MeSH terms ( individual ) 47 . 225 34 44 . 565 46 . 781 34 43 . 835 Baseline stock of related articles , old MeSH terms ( individual ) 20 . 465 7 32 . 090 20 . 318 7 30 . 955 Baseline stock of related articles , recent MeSH terms ( combinations ) 34 . 242 23 36 . 401 33 . 941 23 35 . 964 Baseline stock of related articles , old MeSH terms ( combinations ) 30 . 569 20 34 . 234 30 . 179 20 33 . 176 Baseline stock of related articles , with no star author 50 . 222 36 45 . 708 50 . 241 36 46 . 113 Baseline stock of related articles , with at least one star author 18 . 168 12 19 . 281 17 . 512 12 18 . 411 Baseline stock of related articles , with current elite author 62 . 275 46 55 . 514 61 . 728 45 55 . 169 Baseline stock of related articles , with no current or future elite author 2 . 699 1 4 . 855 2 . 657 1 4 . 715 Baseline stock of related articles , with future elite author 3 . 416 2 5 . 079 3 . 367 2 4 . 916 Note : All variables are limited to subfield activity by non - collaborators , unless otherwise specified . xxxiv Table E1b : Extended descriptive statistics , key covariates Control Subfields Treated Subfields Mean Median Std . Dev . Mean Median Std . Dev . Star - level Age at Death 58 . 100 58 8 . 795 58 . 100 58 8 . 796 Investigator Cumulative Nb . of Publications 164 131 123 170 143 118 Investigator Cumulative Nb . of Citations 12 , 141 8 , 010 12 , 938 11 , 580 8 , 726 10 , 212 Investigator Cumulative NIH Funding at Baseline $ 18 , 784 , 517 $ 11 , 904 , 846 $ 25 , 160 , 518 $ 17 , 637 , 726 $ 12 , 049 , 690 $ 24 , 873 , 018 Star’s number of past trainees ( overall ) 8 . 665 6 8 . 991 8 . 379 7 7 . 661 Subfield - level Importance of the star to the subfield 0 . 152 0 0 . 134 0 . 151 0 0 . 132 Commitment of the star to the subfield 0 . 160 0 0 . 149 0 . 157 0 0 . 149 Subfield coherence [ PMRA - based measure ] 0 . 602 1 0 . 131 0 . 603 1 0 . 128 Subfield coherence [ citation - based measure ] - 0 . 003 0 0 . 019 - 0 . 003 0 0 . 023 Subfield cliquishness [ Clustering Coefficient ] 0 . 774 1 0 . 140 0 . 774 1 0 . 137 Cumulative Nb . of editorials by coauthors 122 . 453 35 217 . 358 118 . 844 39 201 . 803 Nb . of coauthors in study sections 0 . 324 0 0 . 846 0 . 369 0 0 . 971 % of subfield NIH funding controlled by the star’s collaborators 0 . 285 0 0 . 315 0 . 269 0 0 . 307 Subfield “hotness” 0 . 597 1 0 . 212 0 . 596 1 0 . 217 Star’s number of past trainees in the subfield 1 . 917 1 2 . 450 1 . 803 1 2 . 171 Years of experience in the subfield 8 . 277 7 5 . 750 8 . 493 7 6 . 078 Relative lead of the star in subfield [ Individual MeSH measure ] 0 . 045 - 0 1 . 879 0 . 036 - 0 1 . 741 Relative lead of the star in subfield [ 2 - way combo MeSH measure ] - 0 . 028 0 4 . 447 - 0 . 089 0 4 . 334 Relative lead of the star in subfield [ backward reference measure ] 0 . 053 - 0 6 . 902 0 . 227 - 0 6 . 833 Note : This table reports summary statistics for all of the key covariates that we interact with the treatment effect in order to explore the underlying mechanisms of star death . xxxv Table E2a : Correlation matrix , Subfield - level covariates ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 1 ) Importance of the star to the subfield 1 . 00 ( 2 ) Commitment of the star to the subfield 0 . 34 * * 1 . 00 ( 3 ) Star’s number of past trainees in the subfield 0 . 23 * * 0 . 24 * * 1 . 00 ( 4 ) Subfield coherence [ PMRA - based measure ] - 0 . 34 * * - 0 . 07 * * 0 . 04 * * 1 . 00 ( 5 ) Subfield coherence [ citation - based measure ] - 0 . 05 * * - 0 . 03 * * - 0 . 01 0 . 00 1 . 00 ( 6 ) Subfield cliquishness [ clustering coefficient ] - 0 . 25 * * - 0 . 37 * * - 0 . 40 * * - 0 . 10 * * 0 . 12 * * 1 . 00 ( 7 ) Cumulative nb . of editorials by coauthors - 0 . 06 * * - 0 . 20 * * 0 . 01 * 0 . 07 * * - 0 . 03 * * - 0 . 00 1 . 00 ( 8 ) Nb . of coauthors in study sections - 0 . 02 * * - 0 . 11 * * 0 . 13 * * 0 . 05 * * - 0 . 02 * * - 0 . 04 * * 0 . 48 * * ( 9 ) % of subfield NIH funding controlled by the star’s collaborators 0 . 36 * * 0 . 15 * * 0 . 24 * * - 0 . 12 * * - 0 . 09 * * - 0 . 25 * * 0 . 10 * * ( 10 ) Subfield “hotness” - 0 . 03 * * - 0 . 07 * * - 0 . 10 * * - 0 . 05 * * - 0 . 09 * * 0 . 24 * * - 0 . 04 * * ( 11 ) Years of experience in the subfield 0 . 12 * * 0 . 30 * * 0 . 38 * * 0 . 07 * * 0 . 02 * * - 0 . 44 * * 0 . 09 * * ( 12 ) Relative lead of the star in subfield [ individual MeSH measure ] 0 . 01 * 0 . 01 - 0 . 00 - 0 . 04 * * 0 . 01 0 . 02 * * - 0 . 01 * * ( 13 ) Relative lead of the star in subfield [ 2 - way combo MeSH measure ] - 0 . 00 0 . 01 - 0 . 00 0 . 01 * * 0 . 01 - 0 . 00 - 0 . 01 * ( 14 ) Relative lead of the star in subfield [ backward reference measure ] - 0 . 08 * * - 0 . 00 - 0 . 04 * * 0 . 02 * * 0 . 02 * * 0 . 04 * * - 0 . 04 * * ( 8 ) ( 9 ) ( 10 ) ( 11 ) ( 12 ) ( 13 ) ( 14 ) ( 8 ) Nb . of coauthors in study sections 1 . 00 ( 9 ) % of subfield NIH funding controlled by the star’s collaborators 0 . 12 * * 1 . 00 ( 10 ) Subfield “hotness” - 0 . 02 * * - 0 . 05 * * 1 . 00 ( 11 ) Years of experience in the subfield 0 . 09 * * 0 . 22 * * - 0 . 49 * * 1 . 00 ( 12 ) Relative lead of the star in subfield [ individual MeSH measure ] 0 . 00 0 . 00 - 0 . 01 † - 0 . 01 † 1 . 00 ( 13 ) Relative lead of the star in subfield [ 2 - way combo MeSH measure ] - 0 . 01 * * 0 . 00 - 0 . 05 * * 0 . 03 * * 0 . 29 * * 1 . 00 ( 14 ) Relative lead of the star in subfield [ backward reference measure ] - 0 . 03 * * - 0 . 06 * * - 0 . 10 * * 0 . 02 * * 0 . 05 * * 0 . 09 * * 1 . 00 Table E2b : Correlation matrix , Star - level covariates ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 1 ) Age at Death 1 . 00 ( 2 ) Investigator Cumulative Nb . of Publications 0 . 40 * * 1 . 00 ( 3 ) Investigator Cumulative Nb . of Citations 0 . 21 * * 0 . 74 * * 1 . 00 ( 4 ) Investigator Cumulative NIH Funding at Baseline 0 . 38 * * 0 . 45 * * 0 . 34 * * 1 . 00 ( 5 ) Star’s number of past trainees ( overall ) 0 . 33 * * 0 . 54 * * 0 . 56 * * 0 . 36 * * 1 . 00 † p < 0 . 10 , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 xxxvi Table E3 : Scientific Impact of Entry by Non - Collaborators All Pubs Bttm . Quartile 2 nd Quartile 3 rd Quartile Btw . 75 th & 95 th pctl . Btw . 95 th & 99 th pctl . Above 99 th pctl . Panel A : Anticipated Death Events After Death 0 . 128 * * 0 . 043 0 . 082 * 0 . 093 * 0 . 151 * * 0 . 214 * * 0 . 333 * * ( 0 . 038 ) ( 0 . 045 ) ( 0 . 041 ) ( 0 . 041 ) ( 0 . 048 ) ( 0 . 069 ) ( 0 . 115 ) Nb . of Investigators 4 , 018 3 , 982 4 , 018 4 , 016 4 , 013 3 , 946 3 , 214 Nb . of Fields 15 , 084 14 , 885 15 , 082 15 , 082 15 , 076 14 , 623 9 , 586 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 554 , 869 547 , 637 554 , 795 554 , 795 554 , 573 537 , 883 352 , 571 Log Likelihood - 1 , 234 , 030 - 315 , 200 - 504 , 577 - 633 , 777 - 643 , 787 - 234 , 637 - 67 , 585 Panel B : Sudden Death Events After Death 0 . 026 - 0 . 102 † - 0 . 069 - 0 . 040 0 . 090 0 . 243 * * 0 . 310 * * ( 0 . 048 ) ( 0 . 057 ) ( 0 . 055 ) ( 0 . 054 ) ( 0 . 057 ) ( 0 . 075 ) ( 0 . 116 ) Nb . of Investigators 4 , 656 4 , 615 4 , 656 4 , 655 4 , 656 4 , 592 3 , 777 Nb . of Fields 17 , 549 17 , 253 17 , 539 17 , 545 17 , 549 17 , 063 11 , 331 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 645 , 771 634 , 958 645 , 407 645 , 623 645 , 771 627 , 898 417 , 017 Log Likelihood - 1 , 396 , 961 - 338 , 628 - 563 , 370 - 726 , 799 - 756 , 820 - 285 , 678 - 83 , 118 Note : Estimates stem from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications . Like in Table 4 in the manuscript , the dependent variable is the total number of publications by non - collaborators in a subfield in a particular year , where these publications fall in a particular quantile bin of the long - run , vintage - adjusted citation distribution for the universe of journal articles in PubMed . In Panel A , the sample is limited to 1 , 576 subfields associated with 229 stars whose death is anticipated ( along with the corresponding control subfields ) ; and in Panel B , the sample is limited to 1 , 342 subfields associated with 185 stars whose death is sudden and unexpected ( along with the corresponding control subfields ) . All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects , as well as a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star . Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities . For example , the estimates in the first column of Panel A , imply that treated subfields see an increase in the number of contributions by non - collaborators after the superstar passes away—a statistically significant 100× ( exp [ 0 . 128 ] - 1 ) = 13 . 66 % . Robust standard errors in parentheses , clustered at the level of the star scientist . † p < 0 . 10 , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . xxxvii Table E4 : Disruptive vs . Consolidating Entry Below 10 th pctl . Btw . 10 th & 25 th pctl . Btw . 25 th and 50 th pctl . Btw . 50 th and 75 th pctl . Btw . 75 th and 95 th pctl . Above 95 th pctl . Disruption Index d d = - 1 - 1 < d < - . 74 - . 74 < d < - . 50 - . 50 < d < - . 14 - . 14 < d < 0 . 53 d > 0 . 53 After Death 0 . 005 0 . 071 0 . 139 * * * 0 . 154 * * * 0 . 121 * * * 0 . 002 ( 0 . 041 ) ( 0 . 041 ) ( 0 . 034 ) ( 0 . 031 ) ( 0 . 034 ) ( 0 . 041 ) Nb . of Investigators 6 , 189 6 , 184 6 , 247 6 , 254 6 , 253 6 , 077 Nb . of Fields 33 , 610 33 , 868 34 , 183 34 , 205 34 , 147 30 , 889 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 1 , 237 , 024 1 , 246 , 410 1 , 257 , 883 1 , 258 , 695 1 , 256 , 557 1 , 136 , 914 Log Likelihood - 670 , 691 - 837 , 488 - 1 , 218 , 093 - 1 , 268 , 501 - 1 , 134 , 304 - 448 , 029 Note : Estimates stem from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications . The dependent variable is the total number of publications by non - collaborators in a subfield in a particular year , where these publications fall within a particular quantile bin of the Funk & Owen - Smith ( 2017 ) disruptiveness index , denoted by d . All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects , as well as a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star . Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities . Robust standard errors in parentheses , clustered at the level of the star scientist . † p < 0 . 10 , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . Table E5 : Post - death entry and subfield characteristics Metric of field Momentum “Hotness” Number of Trainees Commitment to the Field Below Median Above Median Below Median Above Median Below Median Above Median After Death 0 . 130 * * 0 . 066 0 . 100 * 0 . 059 † 0 . 059 † 0 . 069 ( 0 . 028 ) ( 0 . 044 ) ( 0 . 041 ) ( 0 . 035 ) ( 0 . 032 ) ( 0 . 046 ) Nb . of Investigators 4 , 870 4 , 694 3 , 566 4 , 881 4 , 477 4 , 520 Nb . of Fields 17 , 427 16 , 791 8 , 652 25 , 566 17 , 072 17 , 146 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 642 , 219 616 , 957 317 , 813 941 , 363 627 , 355 631 , 821 Log Likelihood - 1 , 453 , 789 - 1 , 137 , 226 - 677 , 372 - 2 , 085 , 856 - 1 , 345 , 958 - 1 , 413 , 964 Note : Estimates stem from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications . The dependent variable is the total number of publications by non - collaborators within a subfield in a particular year . Each pair of columns splits the sample across the median of a particular covariate for the sample of subfields ( treated and control ) in the baseline year . The first set of two columns examines differences in the extent to which the “hotness” of the subfield—defined as the fraction of the subfield’s activity that falls within the time window of five years before the star’s death—influences the rate at which non - collaborators enter the field after the star passes away . The second set of columns examines the impact of having former trainees of the star in the subfield . The final set of columns splits the sample according to the degree of commitment of the star to the subfield ( i . e . , the fraction of his / her output that falls within the subfield ) . All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects , as well as a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star . Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities . Robust standard errors in parentheses , clustered at the level of the star scientist . † p < 0 . 10 , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . xxxviii Table E6 : Impact of Research Infrastructure Needs Clinical Trial - intensive Other All Authors Collabs . Only Non - Collabs . Only All Authors Collabs . Only Non - Collabs . Only After Death 0 . 061 - 0 . 147 0 . 086 † 0 . 060 † - 0 . 262 * * 0 . 095 * * ( 0 . 051 ) ( 0 . 102 ) ( 0 . 052 ) ( 0 . 031 ) ( 0 . 065 ) ( 0 . 032 ) Nb . of Investigators 1 , 739 1 , 666 1 , 739 5 , 753 5 , 630 5 , 753 Nb . of Fields 3 , 437 3 , 309 3 , 437 30 , 781 29 , 787 30 , 781 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 125 , 919 121 , 230 125 , 919 1 , 133 , 257 1 , 096 , 675 1 , 133 , 257 Log Likelihood - 315 , 048 - 77 , 390 - 302 , 267 - 2 , 628 , 821 - 660 , 968 - 2 , 510 , 273 Note : Estimates stem from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications . The dependent variable is the total number of publications in a subfield in a particular year . The first set of three columns replicate our benchmark specifications ( Table 3 , columns 1 , 2 , and 3 ) on the sample of subfields where research often entails performing large scale clinical trials . The second set of three columns replicate the benchmark specifications on the sample of subfields where research seldom entails performing large - scale clinical trials . Clinical trial publications were identified using the publication type field in PubMed . All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects , as well as a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star , to address the concern that age , year and individual fixed effects may not fully account for trends in subfield entry around the time of death for the deceased star . Robust standard errors in parentheses , clustered at the level of the star scientist . † p < 0 . 10 , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . Table E7 : Influence of star age and in - field experience Star Birth Age at Time of Death Star Experience in the Field at Time of Death Younger than 61 61 or Older Recent ( less than 7 years ) Established ( more than 7 years ) After Death 0 . 108 * * 0 . 009 0 . 061 † 0 . 092 * ( 0 . 041 ) ( 0 . 041 ) ( 0 . 037 ) ( 0 . 036 ) Nb . of Investigators 5 , 542 1 , 936 5 , 166 4 , 257 Nb . of Fields 27 , 022 7 , 196 17 , 933 16 , 285 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 995 , 153 264 , 023 659 , 252 599 , 924 Log Likelihood - 2 , 178 , 601 - 581 , 832 - 1 , 376 , 994 - 1 , 348 , 968 Note : Estimates stem from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications . The dependent variable is the total number of publications by non - collaborators within a subfield in a particular year . All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects , as well as a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star , to address the concern that age , year and individual fixed effects may not fully account for trends in subfield entry around the time of death for the deceased star . Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities . Robust standard errors in parentheses , clustered at the level of the star scientist . † p < 0 . 10 , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . xxxix Table E8 : Star’s leadership relative to the frontier in his / her subfield Metric of distance to the subfield frontier Vintage of cited references Vintage of MeSH terms Individual 2 - way combinations Lagging Leading Lagging Leading Lagging Leading After Death 0 . 117 * * 0 . 154 * 0 . 063 0 . 192 * * 0 . 094 † 0 . 167 * * ( 0 . 037 ) ( 0 . 072 ) ( 0 . 047 ) ( 0 . 049 ) ( 0 . 057 ) ( 0 . 041 ) Nb . of Investigators 3 , 373 3 , 075 3 , 328 3 , 210 3 , 333 3 , 216 Nb . of Fields 9 , 226 7 , 664 8 , 647 8 , 243 8 , 762 8 , 128 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 339 , 900 282 , 526 318 , 626 303 , 800 322 , 838 299 , 588 Log Likelihood - 775 , 180 - 618 , 943 - 713 , 539 - 682 , 532 - 729 , 341 - 666 , 577 Note : Estimates stem from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications . The dependent variable is the total number of publications by non - collaborators within a subfield in a particular year . We develop two alternative measures of “distance to the frontier . ” We assume that frontier work will be more likely to reference more recent science , and alternatively will tend to be tagged by MeSH keyword combinations that are of more recent vintage . In a window of five years before the death , we then contrast the difference in reference vintage ( respectively MeSH term combination vintage ) for articles written by the star vs . articles written by all other authors . We then split subfields according to the median of this difference . All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects , as well as a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star , to address the concern that age , year and individual fixed effects may not fully account for trends in subfield entry around the time of death for the deceased star . Robust standard errors in parentheses , clustered at the level of the star scientist . † p < 0 . 10 , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . Table E9 : Influence of field overlap between related authors and the stars on the rate of entry into subfields New Scientists Below Median Btw . 50 th and 75 th pctl . Btw . 75 th and 95 th pctl . Above 95 th pctl . Intellectual Overlap x Not Defined x = 0 0 < x < 6 . 35 % 6 . 35 % < x < 36 . 70 % x > 36 . 70 % After Death 0 . 081 0 . 113 * * 0 . 096 * - 0 . 000 - 0 . 075 ( 0 . 082 ) ( 0 . 028 ) ( 0 . 038 ) ( 0 . 061 ) ( 0 . 128 ) Nb . of Investigators 4 , 724 6 , 260 6 , 167 5 , 638 3 , 622 Nb . of Fields 16 , 961 34 , 216 33 , 688 29 , 845 15 , 241 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 625 , 066 1 , 259 , 102 1 , 239 , 873 1 , 098 , 754 561 , 888 Log Likelihood - 88 , 890 - 1 , 508 , 995 - 970 , 344 - 633 , 095 - 149 , 524 Note : This table displays a variation of the results depicted in Figure 3 , Panel B in regression form . Estimates stem from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications . The dependent variable is the total number of publications by non - collaborators within a subfield in a particular year , broken into five bins : publications by new scientists ; publications that fall below the median of our measure of field overlap between the star and the related investigators identified on these articles’ authorship roster ; publications that fall in the third quartile of the field overlap measure ; publications that fall in the fourth quartile but below the top ventile of the field overlap measure ; and finally publications that fall in the top ventile of the measure . In contrast to Figure 3 , in this case overlap has been defined with respect to the “global” subfield that encompasses all the subfields of a given star in the data , as opposed to the “local” measure where overlap with the focal subfield determines the extent of overlap . All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects , as well as a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star , to address the concern that age , year and individual fixed effects may not fully account for trends in subfield entry around the time of death for the deceased star . Robust standard errors in parentheses , clustered at the level of the star scientist . † p < 0 . 10 , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . xl Table E10 : The Eminence of Entrants—The Circle of Life Star Related Author Elite Related Author No Yes Never Current Future After Death 0 . 103 * * 0 . 055 † 0 . 066 * 0 . 077 0 . 205 * * ( 0 . 036 ) ( 0 . 030 ) ( 0 . 029 ) ( 0 . 052 ) ( 0 . 074 ) Nb . of Investigators 6 , 254 6 , 260 6 , 260 5 , 721 5 , 886 Nb . of Fields 34 , 160 34 , 218 34 , 218 28 , 992 29 , 650 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 1 , 257 , 053 1 , 259 , 176 1 , 259 , 176 1 , 067 , 107 1 , 091 , 439 Log Likelihood - 1 , 287 , 272 - 2 , 324 , 369 - 2 , 615 , 424 - 373 , 036 - 377 , 540 Note : Estimates stem from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications . The dependent variable is the total number of publications by non - collaborators in a subfield in a particular year , where these publications have scientists on their authorship roster with certain demographic characteristics . The first two columns examine the differential effect of the publications in the subfield having a star author vs . no star author . We rely on our home - grown definition of star—a fixed universe of 12 , 935 individuals that are in some sense “born” as stars . In the next two columns , we focus on two of our metrics of stardom : becoming a Howard Hughes Medical Investigator and or becoming a member of the National Academy of Science / Medicine . At a given point of time , every related author either ( i ) is already a member of this rarefied elite ; ( ii ) will be member of it in the future ; or ( iii ) will never become a member of it , and this taxonomy provides a basis to split the output of each subfield into three non - overlapping categories in each year . All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects , as well as a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star . Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities . For example , the estimates in the first column imply that treated subfields see an increase in the number of contributions by non - stars after the superstar passes away—100× ( exp [ 0 . 103 ] - 1 ) = 10 . 85 % . Robust standard errors in parentheses , clustered at the level of the star scientist . † p < 0 . 10 , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . xli Figure E1 Subfield Growth and Decline—Raw Data A . All Authors B . Collaborators C . Non - Collaborators Note : Panels A , B , and C show the path of mean publication activity for treated and control subfields around the year of star death , broken down by total number of publications in the subfield ( Panel A ) , number of publications in the subfield with a coauthor of the star ( Panel B ) , and number of publications in the subfield without any coauthor of the star ( Panel C ) . A v e r age F l o w o f A r t i c l e s i n t o S ub f i e l d s A v e r age F l o w o f A r t i c l e s i n t o S ub f i e l d s A v e r age F l o w o f A r t i c l e s i n t o S ub f i e l d s xlii Figure E2 : Effect of Star Scientist Death on Subfield Growth and Decline Non - collaborator Activity Only—All Publications A . Anticipated Death B . Sudden Death Note : The graphs in this figure are patterned after Panel C in Figure 2 in the main body of the manuscript . The dark blue dots correspond to coefficient estimates stemming from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications in which publication flows by non - collaborators within a subfield are regressed onto year effects , subfield age effects , as well as 20 interaction terms between treatment status and the number of years before / after the death event ( the indicator variable for treatment status interacted with the year of death is omitted ) . The specifications also include a full set of lead and lag terms common to both the treated and control subfields to fully account for transitory trends in subfield activity around the time of the death . These regressions are run separately on the subsample of subfields associated with stars whose death was anticipated ( and their controls—Panel A ) , and on the subsample of subfields associated with stars whose death was sudden ( and their controls—Panel B ) . The 95 % confidence interval ( corresponding to robust standard errors , clustered around star scientist ) around these estimates is plotted with the vertical light blue lines . xliii Figure E3 : Effect of Star Scientist Death on Subfield Growth and Decline Non - collaborator Activity Only—Top 5 % publications by citation A . Anticipated Death B . Sudden Death Note : The graphs in this figure are patterned after Panel C in Figure 2 in the main body of the manuscript . The dark blue dots correspond to coefficient estimates stemming from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications in which the flows of highly - cited publications ( top 5 % of the vintage - specific citation distribution ) by non - collaborators within a subfield are regressed onto year effects , subfield age effects , as well as 20 interaction terms between treatment status and the number of years before / after the death event ( the indicator variable for treatment status interacted with the year of death is omitted ) . The specifications also include a full set of lead and lag terms common to both the treated and control subfields to fully account for transitory trends in subfield activity around the time of the death . These regressions are run separately on the subsample of subfields associated with stars whose death was anticipated ( and their controls— Panel A ) , and on the subsample of subfields associated with stars whose death was sudden ( and their controls—Panel B ) . The 95 % confidence interval ( corresponding to robust standard errors , clustered around star scientist ) around these estimates is plotted with the vertical light blue lines . xliv Figure E4 The Life Cycle of Stardom A . All Publications B . Highly - cited Publications ( Top 5 % ) C . Highly - cited Publications ( Top 1 % ) Note : For the sample of 5 , 878 control superstars , we create a panel dataset at the scientist - year level . We regress ( i ) publication output in a given year ( Panel A ) and ( ii ) highly - cited publications in a given year ( Panels B and C ) onto year effects , indicator variables for degree ( MD , PhD , MD / PhD ) , an indicator variable for female scientists , indicator variable for departmental affiliation ( medicine vs . surgery vs . cell biology , etc . ) , indicator variables for the year in which the highest degree was received as well as 52 indicator variables for age effects ( from age 29 to age 80 , with ages below 29 absorbed in the omitted category ) . In Panel B , a publication is deemed to be highly cited if it falls above the 95 th percentile of the vintage - specific citation distribution at the article level . In Panel C , a publication is deemed to be highly cited if it falls above the 99 th percentile of the vintage - specific citation distribution at the article level . The above plots display the estimates for the age indicator variables up to the age of 70 ( to preserve the same scale across the three figures ) , together with their associated 95 % confidence interval . The list of covariates is strictly identical across the three panels . Appendix F : Robustness Checks Balanced panel . With treatment events staggered over time , a concern with the dynamic speciﬁcations summarized in Figure 2 is that the magnitude of the treatment eﬀect might not be stable over time . Because our observation period stops in 2006 , the lead terms far away from death are identiﬁed by only a subsample of the data ( see Figure F1 ) . Could such heterogeneity confound the true dynamics , for example if deaths that occurred earlier in the sample have a bigger eﬀect ? To address this concern , we extend the observation period used to generate the event study graphs in Figure 2 from 2006 to 2012 , resulting in a sample that is almost perfectly balanced in a window of ten years before to ten years after the death of a superstar . As can be seen in Figure F2 , which replicates Figure 2 in all respects except the length of the analytic sample , the results change very little . This ﬁgure begs another question : why not simply use this longer observation period as the default through - out the paper ? There are two reasons . First , we cannot identify collaborator status reliably after 2006 because this is the last year of the data in our version of the AAMC Faculty Roster . Second , whereas we can account precisely for the employment status of the control superstars up to 2006 ( the year during which we coded their CVs ) , some may retire , or even die in the years that follow , raising the specter that their subﬁelds are not adequate controls during the 2007 - 2012 time period . As a result , we quickly revert back to the observation window 1965 - 2006 in all that follows . Main results , rolled up to the scientist - level of analysis . The treatment variable exhibits variation at the level of the star scientist , and not at the level of the subﬁeld - star pair . Of course , we cluster the standard errors at the star level , and we exploit the diﬀerential position of a star across his subﬁelds to shed light on mechanisms . But do our main results survive when the data is “rolled up” to the star - year level of the analysis ? To probe the robustness of our benchmark set of results , we lump all related articles for each star together as if they belonged to a single subﬁeld . Nevertheless , the results in Table F1 and Figure F3 are very similar to those in Table 3 and Figure 2 , both in terms of magnitude and statistical signiﬁcance . One exception is the coeﬃcient on the eﬀect of entry by collaborators in Table F1 , which is negative as expected , but smaller in magnitude , relative to the corresponding coeﬃcient in Table 3 . Alternate functional forms . Despite its robustness and appropriateness for the analysis of skewed positive outcomes , the conditional ﬁxed eﬀects Poisson model of Hausman et al . ( 1984 ) has an important shortcoming : subﬁelds for which there is no variation in the outcome during the observation period ( for example , because the outcome is uniformly zero ) drop out of the sample . This is why the number of observations in many tables varies slightly from column to column . Fixed - eﬀects OLS models do not suﬀer from this limitation . In Table F2 and Figure F4 , we examine the sensitivity of our benchmark set of results to the choice of alternative functional forms . In the three columns to the left , we simply use the “raw” number of articles in the subﬁeld as the outcome , and perform estimation by OLS . Of course , the estimates are not directly interpretable in terms of elasticities . At the mean of the data , however , the treatment eﬀect in the third column implies that subﬁeld entry by non - collaborating authors expands by 0 . 409 / 3 . 335 = 12 . 26 % , which is not all that diﬀerent from the 8 . 2 % reported in Table 3 . In the three columns to the right , Table F2 reports results corresponding to OLS estimation , but this time with the outcome variables transformed using the inverse hyperbolic sine function ( Burbidge et al . 1988 ) . xvi In this case , coeﬃcient estimates can be interpreted as elasticities , as an approximation . They are quite similar once again to those reported in Table 3 , except for the eﬀect on entry by collaborators , which is smaller in magnitude . xvi sinh − 1 ( x ) = ln ( x + √ x 2 + 1 ) . Unlike the log of x , the inverse hyperbolic sine is deﬁned at zero , which is attractive here because a substantial proportion of the subﬁelds in the data display no activity in a particular year . For example , all subﬁelds obviously see entry over the entire observation period , and yet in 31 . 33 % of the subﬁeld - year observations , the number of articles entering is zero . xlv Figure F4 presents dynamic analogs of the results in the the third column ( Panel A ) and sixth column ( Panel B ) of Table F2 . In the case of the raw outcomes ( Panel A ) , one can detect a trend in outcome before the event , though it is not estimated precisely . The results using the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation ( Panel B ) exhibit no evidence of a pre - trend . Size of the control group . The ﬁrst three columns in Table F3 drop from the sample all the control subﬁelds , but are otherwise analogous to the core results presented in Table 3 , Panel A . In these speciﬁcations , subﬁelds who were treated in the past or will be treated in the future serve as implicit controls for the subﬁelds currently experiencing the death of their associated star . The results are qualitatively similar to those displayed in Table 3 . However , the corresponding event study graphs ( Figure F5 ) clearly show that dropping the control group from the estimation sample produces pre - event trends that cast doubt on a research design based on a single level of diﬀerence . This provides a clear rationale for our preferred research design , which adds an additional level of diﬀerence to the data—that provided by control subﬁelds . The second set of three columns in Table F3 attempt to replicate the results of Table 3 in a sample such that for each treated subﬁeld , there is exactly one control subﬁeld ( selected at random from the set of control subﬁelds for each treated source ) . The magnitudes are qualitatively similar to those observed in Table 3 , but the standard errors are larger . We conclude that the approximate 1 : 10 ratio of treated to control subﬁelds is important insofar as it provides the statistical power to estimate the post - death term that is common between treated and control subﬁelds , and to do so net of the subﬁeld age and calendar year dynamics . Are death events exogenous ? Could some of the deaths in our sample be caused by stress as others are seeking to break a stars’ hold on a ﬁeld ? Chronic stress can lead to a wide range of adverse health conditions . Most of these conditions diminish quality of life but not mortality per se . The most notable link between stress and death is through heart disease . Thus one possibility is that stress increases the risk of a heart attack . 14 % of the extinct superstars ( who account for 16 . 75 % of the treated subﬁelds ) die of a heart attack . In Table F4 ( three leftmost columns ) , we replicate the results of Table 3 while excluding these subﬁelds . The point estimates are slightly larger in magnitude , and also slightly more precisely estimated when excluding the subﬁelds associated with heart attack events . Of course , there may be other more indirect channels through which stress can precipitate death . From a study design perspective , we would be more concerned with this threat to identiﬁcation if subﬁeld growth was trending upward before the death . But from the event study - type ﬁgures we present ( Figure 2 , as well as numerous variations in Appendices E and F ) , this does not appear to be the case . Multi - disciplinary source articles and the validity of the control group . Multi - disciplinary journals such as PNAS , Science , or Nature account for 10 % of the subﬁelds in our data . xvii This could be problematic insofar as these prestigious outlets publish articles in all scientiﬁc ﬁelds , and we recruit control source articles from the same journal and year as that of the treated source article . Take the source paper by Chu et al . ( 1998 ) —already used as an example in Appendix D—which appeared in the issue of Science dated October 23 rd of that year . The same issue includes a paper with the title “Climate and groundwater recharge during the last glaciation in an ice - covered region” and another called “Self - organized growth of three - dimensional quantum - Dot crystals with fcc - like stacking and a tunable lattice constant . ” It would not seem advisable to use one of these as the source for a control subﬁeld , since they do not pertain to the life sciences , even under the most expansive deﬁnition of this term . This is not an issue in practice , since to qualify as a control , it is not suﬃcient for a candidate source article to appear in the same journal and year as its treated counterpart . In addition , we impose the requirement that one of our 12 , 000 + still alive superstars is in last authorship position . This will ﬁlter out of the set of potential controls any non - biomedical articles that appear in these outlets since all the stars in our data xvii Note that PLoS One , a very large multidisciplinary journal , does not contribute any source article in our sample . This is because it was founded in 2006 , and the latest year of publication for one of the source articles ( treated or control ) is 2002 ( one year before the latest year of death , which is 2003 ) . xlvi ( deceased or not ) are life scientists . We have also replicated the benchmark results excluding the subﬁelds that are associated with a source article published in either Science , Nature , or PNAS . The results are displayed in the three rightmost columns in Table F4 . The point estimates are very similar to those we obtain in our benchmark set of analyses ( columns 1 , 2 , and 3 of Table 3 ) . Source articles , with and without abstracts . In Table F5 , we perform one analysis that ( imperfectly ) tries to assess the sensitivity of our results to the use of author - chosen information to delineate the set of intellectual neighbors in a subﬁeld . Ten percent of the subﬁelds in the data radiate from source articles for which PubMed does not have an abstract . For these subﬁelds , PMRA must therefore make do without abstract words ( i . e . , relying solely on title words and MeSH terms ) to return a set of neighbors . We reproduce our benchmark set of speciﬁcations ( the ﬁrst panel of Table 3 ) on the set of subﬁelds radiating from source articles with and without abstract information . As can be seen above , the estimates for the sample restricted to abstractless source articles are less precisely estimated than for the sample restricted to the much larger number of subﬁelds associated with source articles that have an abstract . The magnitudes in both cases , however , are quite similar , which we ﬁnd reassuring . Table 7 estimated on the subsample of less - well cited stars . Table 7 provides evidence that subﬁeld entry is more pronounced after the death of an eminent scientist when the subﬁeld can be perceived as less coherent , or when the colleagues of the star are less able to exert control over critical resources after he has passed away . However , the sample for these results was limited to the subﬁelds of well - cited stars ( those above the median by cumulative citations in the sample , in the year of death ) . For completeness , Table F6 provides an exact analog to Table 7 , except that in this case the sample is limited to the subﬁelds of less well - cited stars ( those below the median by cumulative citations in the sample , in the year of death ) . The results in this subsample are less consistent across measures than was the case for the more eminent stars . Many pairs of columns do not show notable diﬀerences between more coherent and less coherent subﬁelds , or between more indirectly controlled vs . less indirectly controlled subﬁelds . In two instances , however , the direction of the results is opposite to that observed in Table 7 . First , subﬁelds that were relatively less consolidated according to the metric of Funk and Owen - Smith ( 2017 ) see increased entry after the passing of a less eminent star ( second and third columns of Panel A ) . Second , subﬁelds in which the less eminent star had important coauthors sitting on NIH study sections in the last ﬁve years of his life also experience elevated rated of entry post - death ( second and third columns of Panel B ) . xlvii xlviii Table F1 : Impacts at the level of the star scientist Publication Flows NIH Funding Flows ( Nb . of Awards ) All Authors Collabs . Only Non - Collabs . Only All Authors Collabs . Only Non - Collabs Only ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) After Death 0 . 227 * * - 0 . 121 0 . 249 * * 0 . 248 * * - 0 . 092 0 . 272 * * ( 0 . 056 ) ( 0 . 088 ) ( 0 . 055 ) ( 0 . 059 ) ( 0 . 098 ) ( 0 . 058 ) Nb . of Stars 6 , 369 6 , 369 6 , 369 5 , 440 5 , 172 5 , 427 Nb . of Star - Year Obs . 801 , 654 801 , 654 801 , 654 15 , 469 14 , 589 15 , 436 Log Likelihood - 2 , 444 , 982 - 663 , 888 - 2 , 262 , 127 479 , 539 452 , 259 478 , 516 Note : Estimates stem from conditional ( star ) fixed effects Poisson specifications . The dependent variable is the total number of publications in the collection of subfields in which the star ( deceased or not ) was active in a particular year . All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and star career age effects , as well as term common to both treated and control stars that switches from zero to one after the ( possibly counterfactual ) death of the star . Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities . For example , the estimates in column ( 3 ) imply that treated stars see an increase in the number of contributions by non - collaborators in their fields—a statistically significant 100× ( exp [ 0 . 249 ] - 1 ) = 28 . 27 % . Robust standard errors in parentheses , clustered at the level of the star scientist . † p < 0 . 10 , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . Table F2 : Alternate Functional Forms OLS ( in levels ) OLS ( inverse hyperbolic sine ) All Authors Collabs . Only Non - Collabs . Only All Authors Collabs . Only Non - Collabs . Only After Death 0 . 334 * * - 0 . 145 * * 0 . 409 * * 0 . 032 - 0 . 054 * * 0 . 065 * * ( 0 . 108 ) ( 0 . 032 ) ( 0 . 100 ) ( 0 . 025 ) ( 0 . 014 ) ( 0 . 024 ) Nb . of Investigators 6 , 260 6 , 260 6 , 260 6 , 260 6 , 260 6 , 260 Nb . of Fields 34 , 218 34 , 218 34 , 218 34 , 218 34 , 218 34 , 218 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 1 , 259 , 176 1 , 259 , 176 1 , 259 , 176 1 , 259 , 176 1 , 259 , 176 1 , 259 , 176 Mean of the Depndt . Var . 3 . 757 0 . 606 3 . 335 1 . 407 0 . 289 1 . 315 Adjusted R 2 0 . 428 0 . 380 0 . 400 0 . 555 0 . 329 0 . 523 Note : Estimates stem from ( subfield ) fixed effects OLS specifications . In columns 1 , 2 , and 3 , the dependent variable is the number of publications in a subfield in a particular year . In columns 4 , 5 , and 6 , the dependent variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine of the number of publications in a subfield in a particular year . All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects , as well as a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star , to address the concern that age , year and individual fixed effects may not fully account for trends in subfield entry around the time of death for the deceased star . Robust standard errors in parentheses , clustered at the level of the star scientist . † p < 0 . 10 , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . xlix Table F3 : Alternate Control Groups No Controls 1 : 1 Ratio Treated to Control Subfields All Authors Collabs . Only Non - Collabs . Only All Authors Collabs . Only Non - Collabs . Only After Death 0 . 052 - 0 . 312 * * 0 . 058 † 0 . 023 - 0 . 205 * * 0 . 049 ( 0 . 033 ) ( 0 . 045 ) ( 0 . 034 ) ( 0 . 033 ) ( 0 . 061 ) ( 0 . 034 ) Nb . of Investigators 452 430 452 2 , 557 2 , 439 2 , 557 Nb . of Fields 3 , 076 2 , 885 3 , 076 6 , 152 5 , 800 6 , 152 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 111 , 708 104 , 705 111 , 708 223 , 416 210 , 502 223 , 416 Log Likelihood - 255 , 523 - 57 , 768 - 245 , 596 - 520 , 195 - 118 , 841 - 498 , 256 Note : Estimates stem from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications . The dependent variable is the total number of publications in a subfield in a particular year . All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects . Columns 4 , 5 , and 6 also include a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star , to address the concern that age , year and individual fixed effects may not fully account for trends in subfield entry around the time of death for the deceased star . Robust standard errors in parentheses , clustered at the level of the star scientist . † p < 0 . 10 , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . Table F4 : Additional Robustness Checks Excluding Heart Attacks Excluding Multi - disciplinary Journals All Authors Collabs . Only Non - Collabs . Only All Authors Collabs . Only Non - Collabs . Only After Death 0 . 060 * - 0 . 235 * * 0 . 093 * * 0 . 074 * - 0 . 212 * * 0 . 105 * * ( 0 . 030 ) ( 0 . 063 ) ( 0 . 030 ) ( 0 . 029 ) ( 0 . 058 ) ( 0 . 030 ) Nb . of Investigators 5 , 817 5 , 685 5 , 817 5 , 811 5 , 670 5 , 811 Nb . of Fields 26 , 728 25 , 793 26 , 728 28 , 707 27 , 741 28 , 707 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 983 , 372 948 , 973 983 , 372 1 , 056 , 127 1 , 020 , 609 1 , 056 , 127 Log Likelihood - 2 , 243 , 461 - 562 , 978 - 2 , 147 , 307 - 2 , 455 , 832 - 616 , 652 - 2 , 355 , 142 Note : Estimates stem from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications . The dependent variable is the total number of publications by non - collaborators in a subfield in a particular year . All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects , as well as a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star , to address the concern that age , year and individual fixed effects may not fully account for trends in subfield entry around the time of death for the deceased star . Robust standard errors in parentheses , clustered at the level of the star scientist . † p < 0 . 10 , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . l Table F5 : Additional Robustness Checks ( cont’d ) Only source with abstracts Only source without abstracts All Authors Collabs . Only Non - Collabs . Only All Authors Collabs . Only Non - Collabs . Only After Death 0 . 055 * - 0 . 234 * * 0 . 089 * * 0 . 129 - 0 . 224 † 0 . 148 † ( 0 . 028 ) ( 0 . 061 ) ( 0 . 028 ) ( 0 . 081 ) ( 0 . 118 ) ( 0 . 083 ) Nb . of Investigators 6 , 009 5 , 905 6 , 009 1 , 549 1 , 399 1 , 549 Nb . of Fields 30 , 787 30 , 052 30 , 787 3 , 431 3 , 044 3 , 431 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 1 , 132 , 555 1 , 105 , 538 1 , 132 , 555 126 , 621 112 , 367 126 , 621 Log Likelihood - 2 , 621 , 169 - 689 , 447 - 2 , 502 , 613 - 276 , 654 - 46 , 146 - 266 , 293 Note : Estimates stem from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications . The dependent variable is the total number of publications by non - collaborators in a subfield in a particular year . All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects , as well as a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star , to address the concern that age , year and individual fixed effects may not fully account for trends in subfield entry around the time of death for the deceased star . Robust standard errors in parentheses , clustered at the level of the star scientist . † p < 0 . 10 , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . li Table F6 : The Nature of Entry Barriers for Less Cited Stars Panel A Subfield Coherence PMRA - based definition Citation - based definition Cliquishness Below Median Above Median Below Median Above Median Below Median Above Median After Death 0 . 044 0 . 024 - 0 . 021 0 . 128 * * - 0 . 018 0 . 052 ( 0 . 052 ) ( 0 . 047 ) ( 0 . 047 ) ( 0 . 045 ) ( 0 . 053 ) ( 0 . 040 ) Nb . of Investigators 2 , 131 2 , 257 2 , 118 2 , 232 2 , 087 2 , 263 Nb . of Fields 8 , 068 9 , 260 8 , 191 9 , 137 9 , 181 8 , 147 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 296 , 675 340 , 075 301 , 130 335 , 620 337 , 770 298 , 980 Log Likelihood - 604 , 994 - 746 , 571 - 690 , 078 - 673 , 587 - 749 , 640 - 595 , 838 Panel B Indirect Control through Collaborators Editorial Channel NIH Study Section Channel Fraction of Subfield NIH Funding Below Median Above Median Below Median Above Median Below Median Above Median After Death - 0 . 041 0 . 072 - 0 . 003 0 . 149 † 0 . 029 0 . 055 ( 0 . 063 ) ( 0 . 052 ) ( 0 . 050 ) ( 0 . 083 ) ( 0 . 049 ) ( 0 . 059 ) Nb . of Investigators 1 , 024 2 , 455 2 , 279 1 , 367 1 , 997 2 , 135 Nb . of Fields 5 , 719 11 , 609 12 , 153 5 , 175 7 , 806 9 , 522 Nb . of Field - Year Obs . 210 , 920 425 , 830 446 , 939 189 , 811 287 , 089 349 , 661 Log Likelihood - 495 , 980 - 892 , 355 - 1 , 000 , 972 - 393 , 326 - 646 , 673 - 713 , 420 Note : Estimates stem from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications . The dependent variable is the total number of publications by non - collaborators in a subfield in a particular year . The sample is limited to the subfields in which the least eminent among the stars were active ( specifically , below the median of the “cumulative citations up to the year of death” metric ) . Each pair of columns splits the sample across the median of a particular covariate for the sample of fields ( treated and control ) in the baseline year . For example , the first two columns of Panel B compare the magnitude of the treatment effect for stars whose collaborators have written an above - median number of editorials in the five years preceding the superstar’s death , vs . a below - median number of editorials . All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and subfield age effects , as well as a term common to both treated and control subfields that switches from zero to one after the death of the star . Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities . Robust standard errors in parentheses , clustered at the level of the star scientist . † p < 0 . 10 , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . lii Figure F1 Timing of Death Events 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 liii Figure F2 Effect of Star Scientist Death on Subfield Growth and Decline Balanced Panel A . All Authors B . Collaborators C . Non - Collaborators Note : The graphs in this figure are patterned after Figure 2 in the main body of the manuscript . The dark blue dots correspond to coefficient estimates stemming from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications in which publication flows in subfields are regressed onto year effects , subfield age effects , as well as 20 interaction terms between treatment status and the number of years before / after the death event ( the indicator variable for treatment status interacted with the year of death is omitted ) . The specifications also include a full set of lead and lag terms common to both the treated and control subfields to fully account for transitory trends in subfield activity around the time of the death . The sample used to estimate these specifications differs in one respect from our main sample : it has been extended from 2006 to 2012 , which entails that at least nine years of data are available to identify the treatment effects far away from death ( the latest date of death in our sample is 2003 ) . The 95 % confidence interval ( corresponding to robust standard errors , clustered around star scientist ) around these estimates is plotted with the vertical light blue lines . liv Figure F3 : Effect of Star Scientist Death on Subfield Growth and Decline Aggregated up to the level of the star scientist A . Non - collaborators B . Collaborators Note : The graphs in this figure are patterned after Panel B and C in Figure 2 in the main body of the manuscript . The dark blue dots correspond to coefficient estimates stemming conditional ( star scientist ) fixed effects Poisson specifications in which publication flows within the composite - subfield ( comprising all the distinct related articles associated with a star’s source articles ) are regressed onto year effects , subfield age effects , as well as 15 interaction terms between treatment status and the number of years before / after the death event ( the indicator variable for treatment status interacted with the year of death is omitted ) . The specifications also include a full set of lead and lag terms common to both the treated and control subfields to fully account for transitory trends in subfield activity around the time of the death . The 95 % confidence interval ( corresponding to robust standard errors , clustered around star scientist ) around these estimates is plotted with the vertical light blue lines . lv Figure F4 : Effect of Star Scientist Death on Subfield Growth and Decline Non - Collaborators—Alternate Functional Forms A . OLS ( in levels ) B . OLS ( inverse hyperbolic sine ) Note : The graphs in this figure are patterned after Panel C in Figure 2 in the main body of the manuscript . The dark blue dots correspond to coefficient estimates stemming from subfield fixed effects OLS specifications in which publication flows by non - collaborators within a subfield are regressed onto year effects , subfield age effects , as well as 20 interaction terms between treatment status and the number of years before / after the death event ( the indicator variable for treatment status interacted with the year of death is omitted ) . The specifications also include a full set of lead and lag terms common to both the treated and control subfields to fully account for transitory trends in subfield activity around the time of the death . In Panel A , the dependent variable is the “raw” count of articles in a subfield - year ; In Panel B , these counts have been transformed using the inverse hyperbolic sine . The 95 % confidence interval ( corresponding to robust standard errors , clustered around star scientist ) around these estimates is plotted with the vertical light blue lines . lvi Figure F5 : Effect of Star Scientist Death on Subfield Growth and Decline No Control Subfields A . Non - collaborators B . Collaborators Note : The graphs in this figure are patterned after Panel B and C in Figure 2 in the main body of the manuscript . The dark blue dots correspond to coefficient estimates stemming from conditional ( subfield ) fixed effects Poisson specifications in which publication flows within a subfield are regressed onto year effects , subfield age effects , as well as 20 interaction terms between treatment status and the number of years before / after the death event ( the indicator variable for treatment status interacted with the year of death is omitted ) . These regressions are run with subfield activity limited to non - collaborators of the star ( Panel A ) , and with subfield activity limited to collaborators of the star ( Panel B ) . The 95 % confidence interval ( corresponding to robust standard errors , clustered around star scientist ) around these estimates is plotted with the vertical light blue lines Appendix G : Displacement Eﬀects Conceptual challenges . We ﬁnd that activity by non - collaborators of the star increases in the ﬁelds in which the superstar was active prior to his death . In principle , it is possible that commensurate declines can be observed in the ﬁelds where these related authors were active but the star was not . However , these displacement eﬀects might be very diﬀuse—spread out over many subﬁelds , and thus diﬃcult to detect in our subﬁeld - level of analysis . To examine this possibility more directly , we shift the level of analysis away from the subﬁeld to that of the related author . It is important to note however , that the panel dataset at the related author level is not simply the mirror image of the subﬁeld panel dataset using an alternative way to aggregate the data . In particular , an author can only be represented in the sample if he was active in one of the star’s subﬁelds prior to his untimely death . But we have seen in Figure 3 and Table E9 that the bulk of the eﬀect of death can be traced to new entrants in the subﬁeld . We do not include these authors in the author - level analysis , because doing so would imply that the individuals are part of the sample because of an event that is itself a result of the treatment . As a consequence , there should be no presumption that the magnitudes of the eﬀect of star death at the author level and at the subﬁeld level match . Since the author - level analysis necessarily excludes entrants , a reasonable conjecture is that the author - level eﬀects will be smaller . Author - level sample . In building up a sample of related authors , we face an important practical hurdle . A related author is frequently related to more than a single eminent scientist . Around which star should we anchor the analysis ? In order to pin down a single year of treatment for each related author , we use two diﬀerent metrics . The ﬁrst is simply the number of related articles before the star’s death—we associate to a related author the star with the highest count . The second metric is based on the cardinal relatedness score—we select the star that has the most highly related article among all the stars to whom the author is intellectually related . We proceed in a rigorously symmetric fashion for the related authors of control stars . Since we are now choosing a focal star on which to anchor our analysis , but we know that authors are related to several distinct stars , we no longer maintain the distinction between those publications that are related and unrelated to a particular star . Rather , we turn our attention to the eﬀect of superstar death on the total output of related authors ( in terms of publications and NIH grants awarded ) . Recall that non - collaborators are contributing more within the subﬁelds of the dead superstars with whom they are intellectually related ( Table 3 ) . Therefore , the absence of changes in total output would imply that this additional work is displacing work they were doing in other subﬁelds , at least in part . Results . We are now ready to proceed with a related author - level analysis whose structure parallels that of our main speciﬁcations at the subﬁeld level . We investigate the eﬀect of star death on related authors’ ( i ) NIH grants awarded ; ( ii ) publication output ; and ( iii ) publication output split between “PI articles” and “non - PI articles . ” xviii The results are displayed in Table G1 . When looking at either publication or grant output , we do not ﬁnd evidence of sustained increases after the death of a superstar . When focusing on authors associated with stars because of the number of related articles between the two , the eﬀect of death tends to be small in magnitude and statistically indistinguishable from zero ( the four leftmost columns of Table G1 ) . These results change slightly when we focus on authors whose research was , at least in part , very closely related to xviii PI articles—those where the focal author appears in ﬁrst or last position on the authorship roster—are most intimately identiﬁed with his laboratory ( Zuckerman 1968 ; Nagaoka and Owan 2014 ) . In contrast , the articles where the related author appears in the middle of the authorship list correspond to research projects for which the author’s substantive contribution might have been marginal . lvii that of the star . Here the magnitude of the eﬀects are positive and relatively large in magnitude , but also imprecisely estimated . We estimate a dynamic version of these speciﬁcations and display the corresponding event study - style graphs in Figure G1 ( publication output ) and Figure G2 ( grant output ) . In general , it appears from these ﬁgures that the total output of related authors neither expands nor contracts in the wake of a star’s passing . Therefore , the related articles contributed to the star’s subﬁelds after they pass away most likely replace , at least in part , articles that these authors would have written in other intellectual domains had the star remained alive . Our results are therefore consistent with star extinction driving changes in the direction of scientiﬁc research , rather than shifting the overall level of scientiﬁc activity . lviii lix Table G1 : Related Authors’ Publication and Grant Output Nb . of Related Articles Highest Relatedness Score Nb . of NIH Grants All Pubs . PI Pubs . Middle - Author Pubs . Nb . of NIH Grants All Pubs . PI Pubs . Middle - Author Pubs . After Death - 0 . 020 0 . 003 0 . 014 - 0 . 019 - 0 . 019 0 . 092 0 . 087 0 . 072 ( 0 . 022 ) ( 0 . 060 ) ( 0 . 083 ) ( 0 . 055 ) ( 0 . 053 ) ( 0 . 228 ) ( 0 . 319 ) ( 0 . 172 ) Nb . of Star Investigators 5 , 459 5 , 802 5 , 766 5 , 784 1 , 784 2 , 017 2 , 008 2 , 015 Nb . of Related Authors 26 , 728 44 , 649 42 , 654 43 , 483 2 , 944 3 , 850 3 , 811 3 , 840 Nb . of Star / Related Author Pairs 39 , 770 67 , 740 64 , 823 66 , 036 3 , 542 4 , 642 4 , 599 4 , 632 Nb . of Author - Year Obs . 888 , 746 1 , 402 , 293 1 , 357 , 179 1 , 382 , 976 94 , 132 120 , 918 120 , 249 120 , 822 Log Likelihood - 362 , 087 - 772 , 285 - 468 , 162 - 595 , 167 - 54 , 512 - 86 , 098 - 53 , 633 - 71 , 209 Note : Estimates stem from conditional ( related author ) fixed effects Poisson specifications . The dependent variable is either the publication output for a related , non - collaborating author in a particular year , or the number of distinct NIH grants awarded to that author awarded in a particular year . In the four leftmost columns , each author is paired with the star with whom s / he had the highest number of related articles . In the four rightmost columns , each author is paired with the star with whom s / he had the related article with the highest relatedness score . All models incorporate a full suite of year effects and investigator age effects , as well as a term common to both treated and control authors that switches from zero to one after the death of the star . Exponentiating the coefficients and differencing from one yield numbers interpretable as elasticities . Robust standard errors in parentheses double - clustered at the level of the star & related authors . † p < 0 . 10 , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 . lx Figure G1 : Effect of Star Scientist Death on Related Authors’ Publication Output A . Nb . of Related Articles B . Highest Relatedness Score Note : The dark blue dots in the above plots correspond to coefficient estimates stemming from conditional fixed effects specifications in which publication output for a related , non - collaborating author in a given year is regressed onto year effects , author age effects , as well as 20 interaction terms between treatment status and the number of years before / after the death event ( the indicator variable for treatment status interacted with the year of death is omitted ) . The specifications also include a full set of lead and lag terms common to both treated and control authors . The 95 % confidence intervals ( corresponding to robust standard errors , clustered at the level of the associated star ) around these estimates is plotted with the light - blue vertical lines ; Panel A corresponds to a dynamic version of the specification in the second column of Table G1 ; Panel B corresponds to a dynamic version of the specification in the sixth column of Table G1 . lxi Figure G2 : Effect of Star Scientist Death on Related Authors’ NIH Grants A . Nb . of Related Articles B . Highest Relatedness Score Note : The dark blue dots in the above plots correspond to coefficient estimates stemming from conditional fixed effects specifications in which the number of NIH grants awarded to a related , non - collaborating author in a given year is regressed onto year effects , author age effects , as well as 20 interaction terms between treatment status and the number of years before / after the death event ( the indicator variable for treatment status interacted with the year of death is omitted ) . The specifications also include a full set of lead and lag terms common to both treated and control authors . The 95 % confidence intervals ( corresponding to robust standard errors , clustered at the level of the associated star ) around these estimates is plotted with the light - blue vertical lines ; Panel A corresponds to a dynamic version of the specification in the first column of Table G1 ; Panel B corresponds to a dynamic version of the specification in the fifth column of Table G1 . lxii References Aad , Georges et al . 2015 . “Combined Measurement of the Higgs Boson Mass in pp Collisions at √s = 7 and 8 TeV with the ATLAS and CMS Experiments . ” Physical Review Letters 114 ( 191803 ) : 1 - 33 . Azoulay , Pierre , Andrew Stellman , and Joshua Graff Zivin . 2006 . “PublicationHarvester : An Open - source Software Tool for Science Policy Research . ” Research Policy 35 ( 7 ) : 970 - 974 . Azoulay , Pierre , Joshua Graff Zivin , and Gustavo Manso . 2011 . “Incentives and Creativity : Evidence from the Academic Life Sciences . ” RAND Journal of Economics 42 ( 3 ) : 527 - 554 . Bachrach , C . A . , and Thelma Charen . 1978 . “Selection of MEDLINE Contents , the Development of its Thesaurus , and the Indexing Process . ” Medical Informatics ( London ) 3 ( 3 ) : 237 - 254 . Bhattacharya , Sanmitra , Viet Ha - Thuc , and Padmini Srinivasan . 2011 . “MeSH : A Window Into Full Text for Document Summarization . ” Bioinformatics 27 ( 13 ) : i120 - i128 . Burbidge , John B . , Lonnie Magee and A . Leslie Robb , 1988 . “Alternative Transformations to Handle Extreme Values of the Dependent Variable . ” Journal of the American Statistical Association 83 ( 401 ) : 123 - 127 . Blackwell , Matthew , Stefano Iacus , Gary King , and Giuseppe Porro . 2009 . “ cem : Coarsened Exact Matching in Stata . ” The Stata Journal 9 ( 4 ) : 524 - 546 . Chu , S . , J . DeRisi , M . Eisen , J . Mulholland , D . Botstein , P . O . Brown , and I . Herskowitz . 1998 . “The Transcriptional Program of Sporulation in Budding Yeast . ” Science 282 ( 5389 ) : 699 - 705 . Funk , Russell J . , and Jason Owen - Smith . 2017 . “A Dynamic Network Measure of Technological Change . ” Management Science 63 ( 3 ) : 791 - 817 . Hausman , Jerry , Bronwyn H . Hall , and Zvi Griliches . 1984 . “Econometric Models for Count Data with an Application to the Patents - R & D Relationship . ” Econometrica 52 ( 4 ) : 909 - 938 . Jinek , Martin , Krzysztof Chylinski , Ines Fonfara , Michael Hauer , Jennifer A . Doudna , and Emmanuelle Charpentier . 2012 . “A Programmable Dual - RNA - guided DNA Endonuclease in Adaptive Bacterial Immunity . ” Science 337 ( 6096 ) : 816 - 821 . Law , John , and John Whittaker . 1992 . “Mapping Acidification Research : A Test of the Co - word Method . ” Scientometrics 23 ( 3 ) : 417 - 461 . Lin , Jimmy , and W . John Wilbur . 2007 . “PubMed Related Articles : A Probabilistic Topic - based Model for Content Similarity . ” BMC Bioinformatics 8 ( 423 ) : 1 - 14 . Myers , Kyle . 2018 . “The Elasticity of Science . ” Working Paper , National Bureau of Economic Research . Névéol , Aurélie , Rezarta Islamaj Dogan , and Zhiyong Lu . 2010 . “Author Keywords in Biomedical Journal Articles . ” AMIA Symposium Proceedings 537 - 541 . Nagaoka , Sadao , and Hideo Owan . 2014 . “Author Ordering in Scientifice Research : Evidence from Scientists Survey in the US and Japan . ” IIR Working Paper # 13 - 23 , Hitotsubashi University , Institute of Innovation Research . Sopko , Richelle , Sheetal Raithatha , and David Stuart . 2002 . “Phosphorylation and Maximal Activity of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Meiosis - Specific Transcription Factor Ndt80 Is Dependent on Ime2 . ” Molecular and Cellular Biology 22 ( 20 ) : 7024 - 7040 . Stephan , Paula E . 2012 . How Economics Shapes Science . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Whittaker , John . 1989 . “Creativity and Conformity in Science : Titles , Keywords and Co - Word Analysis . ” Social Studies of Science 19 ( 3 ) : 473 - 496 . Wilbur , W . John . 1998 . “The Knowledge in Multiple Human Relevance Judgments . ” ACM Transactions on Information Systems 16 ( 2 ) : 101 - 126 . Zuckerman , Harriet A . 1968 . “Patterns of Name Ordering Among Authors of Scientific Papers : A Study of Social Symbolism and Its Ambiguity . ” American Journal of Sociology 74 ( 3 ) : 276 - 291 .