Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Business Venturing Insights journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / jbvi Do response rates matter in entrepreneurship research ? Matthew W . Rutherford a , ⁎ , 1 , Ernest H . O ’ Boyle , JR . b , 1 , Chao Miao c , Daniel Goering d , Joseph E . Coombs e a School of Entrepreneurship , Spears School of Business , Oklahoma State University , Stillwater , OK 74078 , United States b Department of Management and Organizations , Henry B . Tippie College of Business , University of Iowa , Iowa City , IA 52242 , United States c Finance , Accounting and Management Department , Jay S . Sidhu School of Business & Leadership , Wilkes University , Wilkes - Barre , PA 18766 , United States d Department of Management and Organizations , Henry B . Tippie College of Business , University of Iowa , Iowa City , IA 52242 , United States e Department of Management , School of Business , Virginia Commonwealth University , Richmond , VA 23284 , United States A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords : Meta - analysis Response rates Non - response bias A B S T R A C T For many scienti ﬁ c disciplines that rely on surveys and voluntary participation ( e . g . , organiza - tional behavior , psychology ) , nonresponse bias ( NRB ) has been shown to bias estimates , create range restriction , and lead to both Type I and Type II errors . The present research endeavors to ﬁ ll a methodological gap in the entrepreneurship literature by presenting the following ﬁ ndings : ( a ) response rates in entrepreneurship research ( 39 % ) are higher than ﬁ rm - level research in management , but lower than individual - level management research , ( b ) there is virtually no evidence that response rate has any meaningful or consistent in ﬂ uence on relationships in en - trepreneurship , and ( c ) there is little evidence of selective reporting when response rates are low . These promising ﬁ ndings should give entrepreneurship researchers cautious optimism that at least in the aggregate , NRB has limited impact . 1 . Introduction Empirical research in entrepreneurship is becoming more rigorous , but may still lag our sister ﬁ elds in some areas , e . g . human resource management , strategic management ( Connelly et al . , 2010 ; Crook et al . , 2010 ; Ireland et al . , 2005 ; Short et al . , 2010 ) . At least , that is the perception . Whether this is perception or truth is largely beside the point , as we should be continually working to enhance the rigor of our research and build legitimacy for our ﬁ eld ( Ireland et al . , 2005 ; Rynes , 2002 ) . One key to legitimacy development is empirical clarity . In particular , a discipline can gain legitimacy by adhering to methodological norms and conventions in place within more well - established ﬁ elds ( Cole , 1983 ) . To this end , this study examines one fundamental characteristic of en - trepreneurship research — response rates from surveys . Survey response rates are a persistent concern in all disciplines that rely on survey research , including entrepreneurship , and can be de ﬁ ned as the number of completed surveys with responding units divided by the number of eligible responding units in the sample ( Wiseman and Billington , 1984 ) . While widely discussed as a methodological issue in the broader area of management and related disciplines such as marketing , medicine , and political science ( Baruch , 1999 ; Baruch and Holtom , 2008 ; Cycyota and Harrison , 2006 ; Dillman , 1991 ; Roth and BeVier , 1998 ) , response rate e ﬀ ects have not been as rigorously studied in entrepreneurship . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbvi . 2017 . 07 . 003 Received 29 March 2017 ; Received in revised form 9 July 2017 ; Accepted 11 July 2017 ⁎ Corresponding author . 1 The ﬁ rst two authors contributed equally to this research . E - mail addresses : matthew . rutherford @ okstate . edu ( M . W . Rutherford ) , ernest - oboyle @ uiowa . edu ( E . H . O ’ Boyle ) , chao . miao @ wilkes . edu ( C . Miao ) , daniel - goering @ uiowa . edu ( D . Goering ) , jecoombs2 @ vcu . edu ( J . E . Coombs ) . Journal of Business Venturing Insights 8 ( 2017 ) 93 – 98 2352 - 6734 / © 2017 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . MARK This is disconcerting , since it is possible that survey samples drawn from entrepreneurs will have lower response rates than surveys of other individuals ( Bartholomew and Smith , 2006 ; Dennis , 2003 ) . How empirically problematic is it when response rates are lower than suggested thresholds ? The purpose of this research is to seek a partial answer to this question by examining the moderating in ﬂ uence of response rate on commonly studied relations in the entrepreneurship literature . To assess the impact of NRB in entrepreneurship research , we test whether response rate moderates the relation between 27 commonly studied variables in entrepreneurship research proposed to relate to venture creation and ﬁ rm performance including personality , entrepreneurial status , business planning , and e ﬀ ectuation . 2 . Literature review 2 . 1 . Response rates and non - response bias Low response rates hamper any research project by decreasing sample size , limiting analytical techniques , challenging perceived legitimacy , and reducing generalizability ( Luong and Rogelberg , 1998 ; Rogelberg and Stanton , 2007 ) . Though far from perfectly correlated ( Groves , 2006 ; Micklewright et al . , 2012 ) , NRB can be exacerbated by low response rates ( Groves and Peytcheva , 2008 ) . The resulting e ﬀ ects of NRB extend beyond reduced power or increased reviewer skepticism . Point estimates such as standardized di ﬀ erences , correlations , regression slopes , and model ﬁ t indices are in ﬂ uenced by NRB in unpredictable directions ( Berk , 1983 ) , although the most common result is an attenuation of e ﬀ ect sizes . 2 . 2 . Non - response bias in entrepreneurship research Surveys are the dominant form of data collection among entrepreneurship researchers . Bartholomew and Smith ( 2006 ) found that 47 % of the empirical studies published in Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice and Journal of Small Business Management used mail surveys . This can be contrasted with 7 % in Academy of Management Journal , Administrative Science Quarterly , and Journal of Man - agement . Dennis ( 2003 ) , looking at peer - reviewed entrepreneurship journals , found that approximately 30 % of all articles used surveys . Further analyzing these studies , Bartholomew and Smith ( 2006 ) found a mean 27 % response rate , while Dennis ( 2003 ) reports a mean response rate of 30 % . Providing support to these ﬁ ndings , Aldrich and Baker ( 1997 ) found that the majority of entrepreneurship articles using surveys report a response rate of less than 50 % and a third have response rates under 25 % . These numbers can be contrasted with Baruch and Holtom ' s ( 2008 ) ﬁ ndings that across the entirety of the ﬁ eld of management the average response rate was 48 % . When divided along the micro - macro divide , individual - level research reported a mean response rate of 53 % , and ﬁ rm - level research reported on average a response rate of 35 % . This fact is not surprising given that the population under consideration is generally time and cash starved and may simply lack the motivation to complete a survey , particularly in rapidly growing and larger ﬁ rms ( Newby et al . , 2003 ; Wiklund and Shepherd , 2011 ) . An additional reason given for the low rate is that top managers are less likely than other employees to complete surveys ( Baruch and Holtom , 2008 ) , and in small ﬁ rms the CEO is generally listed as the contact person . It has also been noted that en - trepreneurs are secretive ( Hsu , 2004 ) , and distrust attempts to acquire information regardless of anonymity guarantees ( Sapienza et al . , 1988 ) . Additionally , response rates have fallen over time suggesting that newer ﬁ elds such as entrepreneurship may be subject to lower historical response rates ( Curtin et al . , 2005 ; Cycyota and Harrison , 2006 ) . As a discipline with low paradigm development ﬁ ghting to enhance rigor and legitimacy , increased understanding of our primary subjects and their survey response characteristics is highly desirable ( Short et al . , 2010 ) . Regardless of the cause , low response rates in entrepreneurship research may be leading to a systematic underestimation of e ﬀ ect sizes , statistical signi ﬁ cance , and directionality in key relationships . The relative youth of the ﬁ eld only serves to exacerbate the problem , because there has simply been less time to build a foundation of primary studies , conduct meta - analyses , and validate results ( Gartner , 2001 ; Bruyat and Julien , 2001 ) . However , without an empirical test , we cannot know whether these relations exist or are simply perception - based . This works seeks to provide such a test . Accordingly our omnibus contention is that NRB is likely problematic in entrepreneurship research . To assess the degree and directionality of the problem , we look at 27 di ﬀ erent relationships to venture creation and ﬁ rm performance published in existing meta - analyses and examine the e ﬀ ect of response rate on the magnitude and direction of NRB . 3 . Materials and methods 3 . 1 . Selection of meta - analyses In order to locate existing meta - analyses of entrepreneurship topics , we used various combinations of the following keywords : new venture , entrepreneur , meta - analysis , and systematic review to identify all meta - analyses related to entrepreneurship published in the past 20 years . We searched ABI / Inform and Google Scholar as well as recent proceedings of the Academy of Management and Southern Management Association . Our search ended January 1 , 2015 . In all , we identi ﬁ ed 65 potential meta - analyses for inclusion . 3 . 2 . Inclusion criteria and study coding In order for a meta - analysis to be included it ﬁ rst must address a topic directly related to entrepreneurship or be based solely on M . W . Rutherford et al . Journal of Business Venturing Insights 8 ( 2017 ) 93 – 98 94