Comprehensive Summaries of Uppsala Dissertations from the Faculty of Medicine 1282 RICH - 1 , a Multi - functional RhoGAP Domain - containing Protein , Involved in Regulation of the Actin Filament System and Membrane - trafficking BY NINNA RICHNAU ACTA UNIVERSITATIS UPSALIENSIS UPPSALA 2003 Dissertation to be publicly examined in room B42 , Biomedical Center , on September 25 , 2003 , at 13 . 15 , for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy ( Faculty of Medicine ) in Molecular Cell Biology presented at Uppsala University from the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research . The discussion will be conducted in English . ABSTRACT Richnau , N . 2003 . RICH - 1 , a multi - functional RhoGAP domain - containing protein , involved in regulation of the actin filament system and membrane - trafficking . Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis . Comprehensive Summaries of Uppsala Dissertations from the Faculty of Medicine 1282 . 75 pp . Uppsala . ISBN 91 - 554 - 5716 - 9 The Rho GTPases , which are related to the Ras family of proto - oncogenes , have been found to have important roles in regulating the morphogenic and migratory properties of eukaryotic cells . In addition , these proteins have been shown to regulate aspects of cell signaling , cell growth , cell division and cell survival . The Rho GTPases cycle between inactive GDP - bound - and active GTP - bound states . In resting cells , Rho GTPases are sequestered in the cytoplasm by forming an inactive complex with guanine dissociation inhibitors ( GDIs ) , and are , thus , unable to exchange guanine nucleotides . Rho GTPases exchange guanine nucleotides at slow rates in vivo , and these reactions can be catalyzed by two different classes of proteins . Upon cell activation , guanine exchange factors ( GEFs ) stimulate the exchange of GTP for GDP and thereby activate the Rho GTPases , whereas the GTPase activating proteins ( GAPs ) turn off the Rho GTPase by stimulating their inherent GTP - hydrolysis activity . The active Rho GTPase associates with so - called effector proteins , which in turn mediate a plethora of responses . In recent years a great number of Rho GTPase effectors have been identified . The Cdc42 - interacting protein 4 ( CIP4 ) is one such protein , and this thesis has focused on elucidating the role of this protein in Rho GTPase regulated activities resulting in changes in the organization of the actin filament system . Changes in actin dynamics are required for many cellular activities , such as cell migration , cytokinesis and membrane - trafficking . CIP4 is a member of the Pombe Cdc15 homology ( PCH ) family of proteins . Many PCH proteins been proposed to cooperate with so - called formin homology proteins to induce changes in actin dynamics resulting in cytokinesis . We show that CIP4 interacts with the diaphanous - related formin DAAM1 ( Disheveled associated activator of morphogenesis 1 ) . DAAM1 appeared to influence both changes in actin dynamics and microtubule dynamics , possibly by integrating signals from CIP4 , Src and the Rho GTPases Rac , Cdc42 . The RhoGAP domain - containing protein RICH - 1 ( RhoGAP interacting with CIP4 homologoues - 1 ) was isolated in a yeast two - hybrid screen for proteins binding to CIP4 . RICH - 1 was shown to down - regulate the Rho GTPases Cdc42 and Rac1 . In addition to the RhoGAP domain , RICH - 1 possesses proline - rich motifs which confer binding to a variety of Src homology 3 ( SH3 ) domain - containing proteins including CIP4 , FBP17 , Src , Abl and CIN85 . Furthermore , RICH - 1 exhibits a BIN / amphiphysin / Rvsp ( BAR ) domain which associates with membrane lipids , and in addition this domain was shown to deform liposomes in an in vitro assay , which is thought to mimic the deformation of cellular lipid bilayers , for example the invagination of the plasma membrane during endocytosis . Our results suggest a role for RICH - 1 in intracellular membrane - trafficking events . RICH - 1 was in addition shown to interact with the SH3 domains of two BAR domain - containing proteins , endophilin A1 and amphiphysin , which induce deformation of the plasma membrane during the specialized clathrin - mediated endocytosis . In conclusion , our data supports the notion that RhoGAPs are multi - functional proteins , fulfilling not only the role as down - regulators of Rho GTPase activity , but also as signal transducers of numerous vital cellular processes . Ninna Richnau , Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research , Biomedical Center , Box 595 , SE - 751 24 , Uppsala , Sweden © Ninna Richnau 2003 ISBN 0282 - 7476 ISBN 91 - 554 - 5716 - 9 Printed in Sweden by Eklundshofs Grafiska , Uppsala 2003 To my family This thesis is based on the following papers , which will be referred to in the text by their Roman numerals : I . Johansson A . - S . , Richnau N . , Aspenström P . ( 2003 ) . The diaphanous - related formin DAAM1 is a CIP4 - binding protein with a role in regulating assembly of actin filaments and microtubules . Manuscript . II . Richnau N . , Aspenström P . ( 2001 ) . RICH , a Rho GTPase - activating protein domain - containing protein involved in signaling by Cdc42 and Rac1 . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 35060 - 70 . III . Richnau N . , Farsad K . , Aspenström P . ( 2003 ) . The RhoGAP RICH - 1 has a BAR ( BIN / Amphiphysin / Rvsp ) domain responsible for binding and tubulation of liposomes . Manuscript . IV . Richnau N . , Husnjak K . , Dikic I . , Aspenström P . ( 2003 ) . The RhoGAP RICH - 1 interacts with Abelson tyrosine kinase , and the scaffolding proteins NHERF - 2 and CIN85 . Manuscript . Reprints were made with permission from the publisher . TABLE OF CONTENTS Abbreviations Introduction 1 . Cell motility 2 . The cytoskeleton A . The actin filament system Regulation of the actin filament system De novo nucleation The dendritic nucleation model B . Cell adhesion 3 . The Ras superfamily of proteins A . The Ras family of proteins as molecular switches B . The Rho GTPase subfamily C . Cellular responses mediated by Rho GTPases D . Rho GTPase effector proteins The formin homology family of proteins Cdc42 - interacting protein 4 E . Rho GTPases in pathological conditions F . Regulation of Rho GTPase activity Signals leading to the activation of Rho GTPases The Rho GTPase cycle G . Rho GTPase activating proteins ( RhoGAPs ) The mechanism of GAP - stimulated GTP hydrolysis Substrate specificity Regulation of GAP activity H . Rho guanine exchange factors ( RhoGEFs ) I . Rho guanine dissociation inhibitors ( RhoGDIs ) 4 . Conserved protein domains 5 . Endocytosis A . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis Dynamin Amphiphysin Endophilin B . Mechanisms for membrane invagination C . Actin reorganization in clathrin - mediated endocytosis 6 . Rho GTPases and membrane - trafficking Present investigations Aim Introduction The diaphanous - related formin DAAM1 is a CIP4 - binding protein with a role in regulating assembly of actin filaments and microtubules ( Paper I ) RICH , a Rho GTPase - activating protein domain - containing protein involved in signaling by Cdc42 and Rac1 ( Paper II ) The RhoGAP RICH - 1 has a BAR ( BIN / Amphiphysin / Rvsp ) domain responsible for binding and tubulation of liposomes ( Paper III ) The RhoGAP RICH - 1 interacts with Abelson tyrosine kinase , and the scaffolding proteins NHERF - 2 and CIN85 ( Paper IV ) Future perspectives Acknowledgements References ABBREVIATIONS ( Additional abbreviations are explained in Table 3 ) Abl Abelson tyrosine kinase Abp1 Actin - binding protein 1 Acinus Apoptotic chromatin condensation inducer in the nucleus ACK Activated Cdc42 - associated kinase AP Adaptor ( or assembly ) protein BAR BIN / Amphiphysin / Rvsp Bni1 Bud neck involved 1 Bnr1 Bni1 - related Cbl Casitas B - lineage lymphoma CCV Clathrin - coated vesicle CIN85 Cbl - interacting protein of 85 kDa CIP4 Cdc42 - interacting protein 4 CME Clathrin - mediated endocytosis CMS / CD2AP p130Cas ligand with multiple SH3 domains / CD2 associated protein CRIB Cdc42 / Rac interactive binding DAAM1 Disheveled associated activator of morphogenesis 1 DAD Dia - auto - regulatory domain Dbl Diffuse B - cell lymphoma DH Dbl homology Dia Diaphanous DOCK180 Downstream of CRK , 180kDa DRF Diaphanous related formin EBP50 ERM - binding phosphoprotein 50 ECM Extracellular matrix EGF Epidermal growth factor EH Eps15 homology E3KARP NHE3 kinase A regulatory protein Ena / VASP Drosophila Enabled / Vasodilator - Stimulated Phosphoprotein ENTH Epsin N - terminal homology Eps Epidermal growth factor receptor pathway substrate ER Endoplasmic reticulum ERM Ezrin - radixin - moesin EVH Ena - VASP - homology FA Focal adhesion FAK Focal adhesion kinase FBP17 Formin binding protein 17 FCH FER - CIP4 homology FGD1 Faciogenital dysplasia protein 1 FH Formin homology FYVE Fab1p / YOTB / Vac1p / EEA1 GAP GTPase activating protein GDI Guanine dissociation inhibitor GDP Guanosine diphosphate GEF Guanine nucleotide exchange factor GPCR G - protein coupled receptors GTP Guanosine 5 ' - triphosphate GTPase Guanosine triphosphatase HD Huntington’s disease HIP1 Huntingtin interacting protein 1 IRSp53 Insulin receptor substrate protein 53 JNK Jun kinase ; c - jun N - terminal kinase LARG Leukemia - associated RhoGEF LPA Lysophosphatidic acid LPAAT Lysophosphatidic acid acyl transferase MAP Mitogen - activated protein MLC Myosin light chain MRCK Myotonic dystrophy kinase - related Cdc42 - binding protein NGF Nerve growth factor NHE Na + / H + exchange protein NHERF Na + / H + exchanger - regulatory factor N - WASP Neuronal - WASP PACSIN PKC and CK2 substrate in neurons PAE / PDGFR (cid:69) Porcine aortic endothelial cells stably expressing the PDGF - (cid:69) receptor PAK p21 - activated kinase PCH Pombe Cdc15 homology PDGF Platelet derived growth factor PDZ PSD - 95 / DlgA / ZO - 1 - like PEST Sequences rich in proline - , glutamic acid - , serine - , and threonine residues PH Pleckstrin homology PI Phosphatidyl inositol PI 3 - kinase Phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase PIP 5 - kinase Phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase PIP 2 Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate PIP 3 Phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate PIPs Phosphoinositides ( phosphorylated derivatives of PI ) PIX PAK - interacting exchange factor PKA Protein kinase A PKC Protein kinase C PX Phox homology PYK2 Proline - rich tyrosine kinase RBD Rho GTPase - binding domain ROCK Rho - associated coiled - coil - containing protein kinase RTK Receptor tyrosine kinase SCAR Suppressor of cAMP receptor SH Src homology Sos Son of sevenless Src Rous sarcoma virus oncogene SRF Serum response factor Syndapin Synaptic , dynamin - associated protein TIAM T - lymphoma invasion and metastasis WASP Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein WAVE WASP - like verprolin - homologous WIP WASP - interating protein WW domain Contains two signature tryptophan ( W ) residues spaced 20 - 23 residues apart XMR X - chromosome linked forms of mental retardation 1 INTRODUCTION The different cell types that constitute the human body are in constant communication with the extracellular environment , such as the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , and with neighboring cells , via a vast variety of cell surface receptors . These receptors transduce extracellular signals to the cell interior via different cascades of signaling proteins , ultimately leading to distinct cellular responses , such as cell growth , division , proliferation , migration and death . Disturbance of these signaling cascades can result in pathological conditions such as cancer . In a process referred to as endocytosis , cells can internalize material from the surrounding environment by invagination of the plasma membrane to form vesicles enclosing this material . In this way cells can take up fluid , nutrients , remove dead cells , recycle synaptic vesicles and regulate the number and activity of cell surface receptors . In the reverse process , exocytosis , a vesicle fuses with the plasma membrane whereby the cell can release substances , such as hormones or neurotransmitters to the extracellular milieu . The Rho guanosine triphosphatases ( GTPases ) are key transducers of signals emerging from a wide variety of plasma membrane receptors leading to the reorganization of the actin filament system , which is the main engine for cell migration as well as other cellular processes including endocytosis and exocytosis . The activity of Rho GTPases can be turned off by a multi - functional group of proteins called Rho GTPase activating proteins ( RhoGAPs ) . The dysregulation of Rho GTPase activity have been shown to cause cancer and mental disorders . The scope of this thesis was to investigate the role of the RhoGAP RICH - 1 ( RhoGAP interacting with CIP4 homologues ) in the regulation of actin dynamics and membrane - trafficking processes . 1 . Cell motility In multicellular organisms , cell migration is central to many biological processes ( reviewed in Lauffenburger & Horwitz 1996 ; Mitchison & Cramer 1996 ; Stossel 1993 ) . During embryogenesis , cells migrate to form the different parts of the emerging organism , for example , neurons migrate to form the nervous system . In the adult organism , cell migration remains prominent in both normal physiology and during pathological conditions . Under normal conditions cells within the tissue do not move much , however , cell migration is stimulated during wound healing or oncogenic transformation . Fibroblasts and epithelial cells migrate to assist in wound healing , the locomotion of leukocytes and macrophages is required for a proper immune response , and cancer cells migrate from the initial tumor mass into the circulatory system in order to metastasize and invade new tissues . An increased understanding of the molecular mechanisms behind the process of cell migration is likely to lead to new therapeutic strategies for a variety of pathological conditions , including cancer , atherosclerosis , and chronic inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis ( reviewed in Ridley 2001b ; Webb et al 2002 ) . 2 Although the molecular mechanisms for cell migration are complex , the basis for the process is simple ; extracellular cues ( diffusible factors , signals from neighboring cells , and / or signals from the ECM ) stimulate transmembrane receptors to initiate intracellular signaling ( Ridley 2001b ) . In response to these signals the cell sends out several protrusions , or filopods ( Mitchison & Cramer 1996 ; Ridley 2001b ; Stossel 1993 ) . Then , if the conditions are favorable , some of these protrusions make stable attachments or adhesions to the underlying surface and form a leading edge or leading lamella . The stable attachment is used to drive the cell forward , and as the cell proceeds to move , adhesions are released and the cell rear retracts . Hence , cell locomotion requires the coordinated activity of the systems controlling the cytoskeleton , membranes , and adhesions ( Mitchison & Cramer 1996 ) . Moreover , a polarized morphology , or a clear distinction between the cell front and the rear parts of the cell , is required for cell migration to occur ( Lauffenburger & Horwitz 1996 ) . 2 . The cytoskeleton The cytoskeleton is formed by three distinct , yet interconnected types of filaments ; microfilaments formed by actin , the microtubules formed by (cid:68) / (cid:69) - tubulin heterodimers , and the intermediate filament system made from fibrous proteins encoded by a multigene family consisting of more than 50 members ( reviewed in Coulombe et al 2000 ; Insall & Machesky 2001 ) . The actin filament system is involved in regulating a broad variety of cellular responses , such as cell motility and changes in cell shape , cell polarity , cell adhesion , membrane - trafficking and cell division ( cytokinesis ) ( Schmidt & Hall 1998 ; Stossel 1993 ) . The microtubule system is essential for cell division , cell migration , intracellular vesicle transport , and cell polarity ( Gundersen 2002 ) . In addition , the microtubule system and actin filament system cooperate in a variety of processes , including vesicle and organelle transport , directed cell migration , spindle rotation , cleavage furrow placement during cytokinesis , and nuclear migration ( Goode et al 2000 ) . Several proteins serve to bridge the two networks , including diaphanous - related formins ( DRFs ) and members of the ERM ( ezrin - radixin - moesin ) family of proteins . The major function of intermediate filaments is to stabilize the cellular architecture against physical stress ( Coulombe et al 2000 ) . 2 . A . The actin filament system Reorganization of the cortical actin cytoskeleton in response to extracellular stimuli is a key event in cell migration . The three major structures formed by the cortical actin cytoskeleton consist of spike - like surface protrusions , so - called filopodia , consisting of thin bundles of actin , a mesh - work of branched actin filaments at the cell periphery referred to as lamellipodia , and bundles of contractile actin - myosin filaments called stress - fibers , which are linked to the ECM through focal adhesions ( reviewed in Hall 1998 ; Van Aelst & D ' Souza - Schorey 1997 ) . Veil - like membrane ruffles form when lamellipodia at the leading edge release from the substrate and fold backward . The contractile stress - fibers possess the ability to contract and exert tension , for example in the migrating cell or during cytokinesis , by virtue of a group of proteins called myosins ( Mitchison & Cramer 1996 ; Schmidt & Hall 1998 ) . 3 Regulation of the actin filament system Actin filaments are helical protein polymers formed by the polymerization of monomeric subunits ( G - actin ) into filaments ( F - actin ) ( reviewed in Pollard et al 2000 ; Schmidt & Hall 1998 ; Welch & Mullins 2002 ) . Actin filaments are formed in an asymmetric fashion resulting in a fast - growing or barbed end ( + ) and a slow - growing or pointed end ( - ) . The dynamic functions of the actin cytoskeleton make it necessary that the actin polymerization is both spatially and temporally regulated . Actin assembly can be initiated by three general mechanisms : by de novo nucleation of actin monomers , by extension of pre - existing filaments by uncapping of the barbed ends , or by creation of new ends by filament severing ( Pollard et al 2000 ; Welch & Mullins 2002 ) . In resting cells , the barbed ends of actin filaments are blocked in order to prevent spontaneous elongation of the filament . When the cell receives a signal to migrate , the barbed ends will become exposed to trigger a rapid actin assembly . A tight control of actin assembly is achieved by a multitude of actin - regulatory proteins . These proteins either bind actin monomers , or regulate the length of the filaments by capping and severing , or bundle actin filaments into various supramolecular structures . De novo nucleation Two main mechanisms for de novo nucleation have so far been identified ; one employing the Arp2 / 3 ( actin - related proteins 2 and 3 ) complex , resulting in branched filaments , and another employing DRFs forming unbranched filaments ( reviewed in Evangelista et al 2003 ; Pollard et al 2000 ; Welch & Mullins 2002 ) . The latter has only been shown for Bni1 ( Bud neck involved 1 ) and Bnr1 ( Bni1 - related ) in yeast , and remains to be demonstrated in vertebrates . Processes that require branched actin filaments include the extension of membrane protrusions during cell migration , and the intracellular motility of pathogens such as Listeria monocytogenes ( Chang & Peter 2002 ) . Linear actin filaments are found in microvilli , stress - fibers , contractile rings and the linear structures ( actin cables ) that enable directional transport of vesicles in yeast . The Arp2 / 3 complex consists of seven subunits , including the actin related proteins Arp2 and Arp3 , and was initially identified on the basis of its affinity for profilin ( Machesky et al 1994 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex binds to the side of pre - existing actin filaments and nucleates a new filament as a Y - shaped branch on the side of the older filament ( Pollard et al 2000 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex by itself is inactive and requires the interaction with nuclear promoting factors ( reviewed in Weaver et al 2003 ; Welch & Mullins 2002 ) . The major activators are the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein / suppressor of cAMP receptor ( WASP / SCAR ) family of proteins and the cortactin family of proteins . WASPs bring actin monomers to the Arp2 / 3 complex , thereby promoting nucleation of a new filament , whereas cortactin binds filamentous actin and is hence proposed to stabilize branched filaments . Recently , a report by Hudson et al . revealed that , in Drosophila , the nucleation of unbranched filaments into parallel actin bundles did not require the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Hudson & Cooley 2002 ) . In support of this notion , reports from other groups showed that the yeast Bni1 and Bnr1 nucleated the elongation of unbranched actin cables in a manner dependent on stimulation by profilin , but independently of the Arp2 / 3 4 complex ( Evangelista et al 2002 ; Pruyne et al 2002 ; Sagot et al 2002a ; Sagot et al 2002b ) . Thus , distinct actin nucleation mechanisms appear to be used for the assembly of different actin networks . The formation of stress - fibers via Rho also involves the activity of DRFs , but occurs primarily through bundling of pre - existing filaments rather than de novo polymerization ( Machesky & Hall 1997 ; reviewed in Chang & Peter 2002 ) . The dendritic nucleation model Using fluorescent actin , Glacy et al . showed that the lamellipodia are the primary site of actin incorporation ( reviewed in Small et al 2002 ) . Along with providing the cell with protrusive activity , lamellipodia are involved in macropinocytosis and phagocytosis and in the formation of adhesions to the substrate . The dendritic nucleation hypothesis , based on nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex , has been a widely used model for explaining actin assembly at the leading edge of motile cells ( Pollard et al 2000 ) . In resting cells , the monomer - binding proteins profilin and thymosin - (cid:69) 4 when present ( thymosin - (cid:69) 4 is not present in protozoa , slime molds or fungi , and hence not in S . cerevisiae ) maintain a pool of monomeric actin ready to participate in elongation of the barbed ends of the filaments . Extracellular ligands bind to plasma membrane receptors and initiate signaling cascades in the cell , activating a variety of intracellular molecules , including the Rho GTPases . The Rho GTPases bind to and activate the WASPs , thereby causing activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex , resulting in de novo nucleation of branched actin filaments . The barbed ends of the growing filaments are directed toward the leading edge of the cell , pushing the membrane forward as they grow . Profilin : actin complexes are rapidly incorporated into the forming branch . At some point , elongation is terminated by capping proteins , such as CapZ and the heterodimeric capping protein , which block the free barbed ends . Actin cross - linking proteins , such as (cid:68) - actinin , filamin , fimbrin , spectrin , coronin , myosin II and villin aid in the assembly of higher order actin networks ( Schmidt & Hall 1998 ; Small et al 2002 ; Stossel 1993 ) . Disassembly of actin filaments is thought to be achieved by the ADF / cofilin family of proteins , together with severing proteins , such as gelsolin and fascin , which act by severing existing fragments where after they also cap the barbed ends . ADF / cofilin extracts actin monomers from the interior of the filaments and thereafter sequesters the released monomers . The phosphorylated membrane phospholipid phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 or PIP 2 ) binds to several actin binding proteins and thereby regulate their function , resulting in actin polymerization ( reviewed in Takenawa & Itoh 2001 ) . For example , PIP 2 interacts with monomer - binding proteins , such as profilin , causing the release of free monomers ready for actin nucleation and subsequent actin polymerization ( Takenawa & Itoh 2001 ) . In addition , PIP 2 binds to capping proteins such as CapZ and gelsolin resulting in uncapping of barbed ends , and thereby initiates actin polymerization . Furthermore , PIP 2 promotes cross - linking of filaments by binding to actin cross - linking proteins . 5 2 . B . Cell adhesion The cell can adhere to the substrate by different types of contact sites such as focal adhesions , focal complexes and podosomes ( Webb et al 2002 ) . Cell adhesions at the leading edge of motile cells are initiated upon ligand binding and clustering of integrin family of cell adhesion molecules ( Brakebusch & Fassler 2003 ) . Focal complexes are small transient adhesions at the base of the leading edge that drive a rapid cell migration ; these structures are formed in response to Rac activation , but are also found in association with filopodia formed via Cdc42 ( Nobes & Hall 1995 ; Rottner et al 1999 ) . These focal complexes can be either disassembled as the cell lamellae move over them or , in slowly migrating cells such as fibroblasts , mature into larger and more stable Rho - dependent adhesions , referred to as focal adhesions ( FAs ) at the termini of stress - fibers . A high - level of integrin - mediated adhesion inhibits cell migration , thus , a dynamic turnover of focal complexes / adhesions is necessary ( reviewed in Ridley 2001b ; Webb et al 2002 ) . Many of the FA proteins appear to be tyrosine phosphorylated , and inhibition of tyrosine phosphorylation diminish cell migration and spreading ( reviewed in Burridge et al 1992 ; Lauffenburger & Horwitz 1996 ) . The FAK ( focal adhesion kinase ) is only present in FAs , and is activated either by tyrosine phosphorylation via integrin clustering , or by Src ( Rous sarcoma virus oncogene ) tyrosine kinase ( Brakebusch & Fassler 2003 ) . Activated FAK , in turn , recruits a range of adaptors and signaling molecules , such as the RhoGAP GRAF ( GTPase regulator associated with FAK ) , the cytoskeletal proteins paxillin and talin and p130Cas . Moreover , integrins stimulate the activity of Rho GTPases , mainly via FAK and Src - like kinases ( Brakebusch & Fassler 2003 ) . Studies on cells from knock - out mice have implicated FAK and Src , as well as the tyrosine phosphatases calcineurin , SHP - 2 ( Src homology containing phosphatase - 2 ) and protein tyrosine phosphatase ( PTP ) - PEST , as regulators of adhesion turnover ( Webb et al 2002 ) . Podosomes are tubular invaginations of the ventral plasma membrane . These invaginations are composed of columnar arrays of F - actin surrounded by ring structures , containing proteins such as vinculin and talin ( reviewed in Linder & Aepfelbacher 2003 ) . In fact , most of the proteins found in the podosome rings are also found in FAs and other cell - substrate contacts . Podosomes were first observed in fibroblasts transformed with oncogenic protein tyrosine kinases such as v - Src ( Linder & Aepfelbacher 2003 ; Tarone et al 1985 ) . In similarity to FAs , podosomes are enriched in tyrosine - phosphorylated proteins , and the regulators of podosome formation include Src and its substrates , Rho GTPases , WASP / SCAR family members , lipids and microtubules ( Linder & Aepfelbacher 2003 ) . Podosomes are typically found in cells that have to cross boundaries , such as monocyte - derived cells ( macrophages , osteoclasts and dendritic cells ) , certain transformed fibroblasts and carcinoma cells ( Kanehisa et al 1990 ; Linder & Aepfelbacher 2003 ; Linder et al 1999 ) . Podosomes are thought to contribute to tissue invasion and matrix remodeling . In addition , cells form contact sites linking one cell to another via contact sites termed adherens junctions , which are composed of clusters of cadherins and associated protein complexes consisting of vinculin , (cid:68) - actinin , catenin , ERM proteins and filamin ( Schmidt & Hall 1998 ) . Focal adhesions and adherens junctions serve in 6 addition to being contact sites , also to restrict generation of actin filaments to discrete nucleation sites or ‘hot spots’ for nucleation . 3 . The Ras superfamily of proteins The Ras superfamily of small monomeric 20 - 40 kDa GTP - binding proteins can be divided into five major groups based on sequence and functional differences , Ras , Rho , Rab , Sar1 / Arf , and Ran ( reviewed in Takai et al 2001 ) . The three Ras genes , H - Ras , K - Ras and N - Ras were first discovered as oncogenes in rat sarcoma viruses and in neuroblastoma ( reviewed in Downward 1990 ) . The Ras proteins are activated upon ligand engagement of membrane receptors and mainly regulate gene expression influencing cell growth , morphology , differentiation and apoptosis ( reviewed in Shields et al 2000 ; Takai et al 2001 ) . The first signaling pathway found to involve Ras was the Raf / MEK / Erk cascade leading to transcriptional activation ( reviewed in Vojtek & Der 1998 ) . Other effectors for Ras include p120GAP , Ral guanine nucleotide dissociation stimulator ( RalGDS ) , phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase ( PI 3 - kinase ) and Ras interaction / interference ( RIN ) . Rho proteins are key regulators in reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton , thereby influencing cellular functions such as cell shape , cell growth , motility and adhesion ( reviewed in Takai et al 2001 ) . The Rab and the Sar1 / Arf proteins regulate intracellular vesicle trafficking , and the members of the Ran subfamily of proteins regulate nucleocytoplasmatic transport of RNA and , furthermore , regulate microtubule organization ( Takai et al 2001 ) . The main focus of this thesis is on the Rho subfamily , thus , the Ras , Rab , Arf and Ran subfamilies will not be discussed further . 3 . A . The Ras family of proteins as molecular switches Most Ras proteins cycle between an inactive , guanosine diphosphate ( GDP ) - bound form and an active , guanosine 5 ' - triphosphate ( GTP ) - bound form ( Takai et al 2001 ) . When bound to GTP the Rho GTPase interacts with a unique group of proteins ( effector proteins ) to elicit specific cellular responses . Figure 1 depicts the tertiary structure of Ras , comprising a hydrophobic core of six - strands of (cid:69) - sheet connected by five hydrophilic loops and five (cid:68) - helices ( Bourne et al 1991 ) . The five loops ( designated G - 1 to G - 5 ) , which form the guanine nucleotide - binding site , are the most highly conserved elements in this domain . Amino acid residues critical for Mg (cid:21)(cid:14) - binding , GTP - binding and hydrolysis are conserved in all members of the Ras superfamily ( Takai et al 2001 ) . The overall domain structure of Ras proteins comprises an N - terminal conserved region known as the diphosphate - binding loop ( P - loop or G - 1 region ; residues 10 - 17 in Ras ) , which encloses the (cid:68) - and (cid:69) - phosphate groups of the nucleotide and provides a serine / threonine residue to the magnesium ion ( Figure 1 and Figure 2 ) ( Bourne et al 1991 ; Gamblin & Smerdon 1998 ; Sprang 1997a ; Sprang 1997b ; Valencia et al 1991 ) . The switch I region ( effector loop ; residues 30 - 40 in Ras ; G - 2 region ) , contributes to the Mg 2 + binding site and confers binding to downstream effector molecules . The switch II region ( residues 60 - 67 in Ras ; G - 3 region ) , binds the (cid:74) - phosphate of the nucleotide and contains a catalytic glutamine ( Gln61 in Ras ) ; the guanine ring is recognized in part by the G - 4 region and the G - 5 region buttresses the guanine base recognition site . Further , the C - terminal CAAX ( C = cysteine residue , A = aliphatic residue , X = any amino acid 7 residue ) - box confers membrane targeting , and Rho GTPases , but not Ras , contain an ‘insert region’ , which is required for interaction with some targets . The switch I and II regions adopt different conformations in the GDP - and the GTP - bound forms of the Rho GTPase . Mutations in residues Gly12 or Gln61 in Ras result in an overactive protein , unable to hydrolyze GTP , with transformation as a consequence ( Valencia et al 1991 ) . Based on their analogy with the original mutants in the Ras protein , two types of point - mutants have been widely used to study Rho GTPase function : an active mutant constitutively bound to GTP ( for example , G12V and Q61L in Rac and Ras ) due to inhibition of GTPase activity , and a dominant - negative Rho GTPase mutant ( For example , T17N in Rac and Ras ) , which cannot become activated because it has reduced affinity for nucleotides and competes with the endogenous Rho GTPase for binding to guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) ( Figure 2 ) . The latter results in a complex unable to generate downstream responses ( Bishop & Hall 2000 ; Feig 1999 ; Ridley 2001c ) . The TTF family of Rho proteins do not contain a Gly and Gln at positions 12 and 61 , respectively , and hence appear to be constitutively bound to GTP ( Bishop & Hall 2000 ) . Figure 1 . The three - dimensional structure of Ras in complex with a non - hydrolyzable GTP - analogue ( top ) , and a GDP - molecule ( bottom ) , respectively . Adapted from Sprang , 1997 . 8 Switch ISwitch II DXXG NKXD EXSAX GXXXXGK ( S / T ) G1 G2 G3 G4 G5 P - loop Effector - loop ( G12V ) ( F28L ) ( T17N ) ( Q61L ) activating mutations ’Fast - cycling’ mutation dominant negative mutation CAAX - box Figure 2 . A schematic representation of Ras , depicting the regions described in the text . Adapted and changed from Sprang , 1997 , Takai , 2001 , Ridley , 2001 , Bourne et al . , 1991 and Valencia et al . , 1991 . In addition , members of the Rho family of proteins are targets of various bacterial toxins , which act to covalently modify them , resulting either in activation ( deamidation and transglutamination ) or inactivation [ adenosine diphosphate ( ADP ) - ribosylation or glycosylation ] of the GTPases ( reviewed in Lerm et al 2000 ) . For example , E . coli CNF1 ( cytotoxic necrotising factor 1 ) and 2 deamidate Rho GTPases at Gln63 / Gln61 and thereby inhibit the intrinsic and GAP stimulated GTP - hydrolysis of Rho GTPases . Moreover , the inactivation of Rho by C3 ADP - ribosyltransferase at Asn41 , inhibits the activation by GEFs , and increases the affinity of Rho for GDI . Recently , several injected toxins , which are delivered into target cells by the type III - secretion system , have been shown to manipulate the GTPase cycle by acting as GAPs ( ExoS and YopE ) or GEFs ( SopE ) . Toxins are widely used in studies to unravel the signaling pathways involving Rho family proteins . 3 . B . The Rho GTPase subfamily The first Rho gene was identified in 1985 and showed homology to Ras ( R as ho mologous ) ( Madaule & Axel 1985 ) . Since then the Rho GTPase subfamily in human has expanded to include 22 members , divided into eight subgroups as shown in Table 1 ( Fransson et al 2003 ; Ridley 2001b ; Wherlock & Mellor 2002 ) . 9 Table 1 . The Rho GTPase subfamily . Rho GTPase subgroup Members Cdc42 Rac Rho Rnd RhoD RhoH / TTF Miro ( mitochondrial Rho ) RhoBTB ( BTB = Broad Complex , Tram track , Bric á Brac ) Cdc42 , TC10 , TCL , Chp and Wrch - 1 Rac1 , Rac2 , Rac3 and RhoG RhoA , RhoB and RhoC Rnd1 , Rnd2 and Rnd3 RhoD and Rif RhoH / TTF Miro1 and Miro2 RhoBTB1 and RhoBTB2 The most extensively characterized of all Rho GTPases are Cdc42 ( cell division cycle 42 ) , Rac1 ( Ras - related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 1 ) and RhoA ( Ras homologous member A ) . Initially , Cdc42 was shown to be an important regulator of cell polarity in budding yeast , Rac1 was implicated in regulating superoxide formation via NADPH - oxidase in phagocytic cells and RhoA was implicated in the formation of stress fibers ( Abo et al 1991 ; Adams et al 1990 ; Ridley & Hall 1992 ) . The anchoring of Ras proteins to various cellular membranes is critical for their proper function and is regulated by prenyl transferases ( reviewed in Seabra 1998 ) . In general , Rho GTPase membrane targeting is achieved by a post - translational lipid - modification in the carboxy terminal CAAX - box , and involves the prenylation of a conserved cysteine residue , followed by removal of AAX and methylation of the cysteine residue ( Seabra 1998 ) . Of note , Rac1 and RhoA are hereafter also referred to as Rac and Rho in this thesis work . When other members of the Rac or Rho subgroups are discussed I use their full names . 3 . C . Cellular responses mediated by Rho GTPases Members of the Rho GTPase family are the key regulatory proteins that link plasma membrane receptors to the assembly of distinct filamentous actin structures ( reviewed in Hall 1998 ) . In Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts , Rho was shown to be activated through G - protein coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) leading to the formation of stress fibers and focal adhesions ( Ridley & Hall 1992 ) , whereas Rac was activated through tyrosine - kinase receptors ( RTKs ) resulting in the assembly of lamellipodia and membrane ruffles ( Ridley et al 1992 ) . Activation of Cdc42 by GPCRs gave rise to filopodia ( Kozma et al 1995 ; Nobes & Hall 1995 ) . Consistent with these observations microinjection of dominant - negative mutants of Rac , Cdc42 or Rho prior to stimulation inhibited the formation of these structures . All of the structures formed were also associated with integrin - based focal adhesion complexes , although the ones formed by Rac and Cdc42 were distinct from the classical Rho - induced focal adhesions ( Nobes & Hall 1995 ) . Rho GTPase - mediated actin reorganization has been confirmed in other mammalian cell types , as well as in yeast , flies and worms ( reviewed in Etienne - Manneville & Hall 2002 ; Hall 1998 ) . Initial studies in Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts showed that Cdc42 , Rac and Rho are organized in a hierarchical cascade ; activation of Cdc42 leads to a localized activation of Rac , hence , filopodia are often associated with lamellipodia , and in turn , 10 activation of Rac leads to a weak and delayed activation of Rho to produce stress fibers ( Nobes & Hall 1995 ; Ridley et al 1992 ; reviewed in Hall 1998 ) . Moreover , a Cdc42 - independent cascade also exists where Ras can activate Rac and subsequently Rho . However , the hierarchical Cdc42 / Rac / Rho cascade seen in Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts has been challenged by observations in other cell lines , for example , Cdc42 and Rac inhibit stress - fiber formation in a variety of cell types ( Hirose et al 1998 ; Leeuwen et al 1997 ) . Further , Rho was shown to inhibit the activity of Rac and Cdc42 in N1E - 115 neuroblastoma cells ( Sander et al 1999 ) . Rho , Rac and Cdc42 are involved in several processes that require the reorganization of actin , for example cell migration , cytokinesis , cell polarity , cell morphology , cell adhesion and membrane - trafficking processes ( Bishop & Hall 2000 ; Etienne - Manneville & Hall 2002 ; Van Aelst & D ' Souza - Schorey 1997 ) . In addition , these Rho GTPases are involved in transcriptional control and cell cycle progression ( Van Aelst & D ' Souza - Schorey 1997 ) . During cell migration , for example , Rac promotes actin polymerization at the leading edge of the lamellipodia , providing the driving force for forward movement , whereas Cdc42 defines the polarity of the cell and reorients the Golgi in the direction of movement ( Allen et al 1998 ; Hall & Nobes 2000 ) . Stress fibers are not needed for the migration , but Rho is required for formation of focal adhesions , whereas Ras appears to be required for focal adhesion turnover ( Hall & Nobes 2000 ) . Actin reorganization mediated by Rac , Cdc42 and Rho has been implicated in neuronal morphogenesis involving neuronal migration and polarization , axon guidance and dendrite formation , synaptic organization and plasticity ( reviewed in Luo 2000 ; Luo 2002 ) . Developing neurons extend two types of processes ( axons and dendrites , which are developed from neurites ) which are led by a specialized end known as a growth - cone , but otherwise morphologically and functionally distinct ( Luo 2002 ) . Once a neuron has reached its target , the growth - cones in the axon ends are converted to presynaptic terminals , whereas the growth - cones in the dendritic ends form postsynaptic specializations upon proper contact with axons . Developing neurons often make more connections than required , which can be removed in a process called axon - or dendrite retraction ( pruning ) , an event that occurs also in mature neurons . Studies in N1E - 115 cells have shown that Rac and Cdc42 promote neurite outgrowth , by regulating the formation of filopodia and lamellipodia in growth - cones ( Kozma et al 1997 ) . By contrast , Rho was shown to promote neurite retraction in N1E - 115 cells , presumably by generating actin - myosin - based contractility ( neuronal cells cannot form stress - fibers ) ( Hirose et al 1998 ; Ridley 1999 ) . Many RhoGAPs have been implicated in neuronal morphogenesis , as regulators and / or as downstream effectors of Rho GTPases ( see Table 3 ) . For example , a splice variant of nadrin ( the rat orthologue of the RhoGAP RICH - 1 ) has been shown to inhibit nerve - growth factor ( NGF ) - dependent neurite - outgrowth in PC12 rat adrenal pheochromocytoma cells by virtue of its GAP domain ( Harada et al 2000 ) . Other RhoGAPs implicated in processes involved in neuronal morphogenesis include ; p200RhoGAP , GRAF , oligophrenin , p190 - A , (cid:68) 2 - chimaerin and MEGAP ( Mental disorder associated GAP protein ) ( Table 3 ) . The involvement of Rho GTPases in membrane - trafficking events will be elaborated on in Chapter 6 . The microtubule system is another postulated target for Rho GTPases , with Rho having a dual role in 11 stabilizing / destabilizing microtubules , whereas Rac and Cdc42 increase microtubule growth ( Wittmann & Waterman - Storer 2001 ) . 3 . D . Rho GTPase effector proteins The ability of the Rho GTPases to induce such a variety of cellular responses relies on their interactions with a plethora of downstream targets or effector proteins . Effector proteins have commonly been identified by the yeast two - hybrid system and affinity chromatography , based on their specific interactions with the GTP - bound form of the Rho GTPase ( reviewed in Bishop & Hall 2000 ) . Many of the targets for Rac and Cdc42 contain a conserved CRIB ( Cdc42 / Rac interactive binding ) motif which confers binding to the effector loop in the GTPase , and is present in , for example , WASP , N - WASP ( neuronal - WASP ) , MRCK ( myotonic dystrophy kinase - related Cdc42 - binding protein ) and ACK ( activated Cdc42 - associated kinase ) ( Bishop & Hall 2000 ; Burbelo et al 1995a ) . However , several targets lack CRIB motifs and interact with Rho GTPases through other motifs , for example the Cdc42 - interacting protein 4 ( CIP4 ) ( Aspenström 1997 ) . A common mechanism for effector activation by Rho GTPases is the disruption of an intramolecular autoinhibitory interaction within the effector protein ( Bishop & Hall 2000 ) . For example , WASP and N - WASP , and DRFs display an inhibitory intramolecular interaction which is disrupted by the binding of a GTPase . Most progress has been made in identifying effector proteins involved in actin reorganization , only a few of these will be described below , whereas Figure 3 gives a more complete picture of the actual diversity of target proteins and the biological responses they mediate ( for extensive reviews on effector proteins see Aspenström 1999 ; Bishop & Hall 2000 ; Schmitz et al 2000 ; Van Aelst & D ' Souza - Schorey 1997 ) . 12 Figure 3 . Signaling pathways involving Rho GTPases . Modified and expanded from Schmidt et al . , 1998 . The Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome ( WAS ) is an X - linked immunodeficiency disease caused by a defect in the gene encoding the WAS protein ( WASP ) , resulting in severe defects in platelets and cells of the immune system in the patients ( Derry et al 1994 ; reviewed in Kirchhausen & Rosen 1996 ) . The WASP / SCAR family of proteins includes the hematopoetic WASP , the ubiquitous but neuronally enriched N - WASP and SCAR1 - 3 [ also known as WASP - like verprolin - homologous protein 1 - 3 ( WAVE1 - 3 ) ] ( Aspenström et al 1996 ; reviewed in Caron 2002 ; Kolluri et al 1996 ; Symons et al 1996 ) . Initially , filopodium formation via Cdc42 was thought to require the ubiquitous N - WASP ( Machesky & Insall 1998 ; Miki et al 1996 ; Miki et al 1998 ; Rohatgi et al 1999 ) . In this process , Cdc42 and PIP 2 bind N - WASP and co - operatively release the inhibitory intramolecular interaction in N - WASP , allowing for its interaction with the Arp2 / 3 complex . Moreover , N - WASP binds actin monomers as well as the actin monomer - binding protein profilin ( Miki & Takenawa 1998 ) . However , recent reports proposed that N - WASP is dispensable for de novo formation of filopodia ( Lommel et al 2001 ; Snapper et al 2001 ) . Moreover , the Arp2 / 3 complex appears to be excluded from filopodia and microspikes ( Small et al 2002 ) . Instead , de novo formation of linear actin structures ( actin cables ) in yeast was proposed to involve the co - operativity of the DRF Bni1 and profilin , suggesting a potential role for formins in the formation of filopodia ( Sagot et al 2002b ) . Moreover , Cdc42 - mediated filopodium formation from pre - existing filaments could involve the binding of the insulin receptor substrate protein 53 ( IRSp53 ) to the Drosophila Enabled / Vasodilator - Stimulated Phosphoprotein ( Ena / VASP ) family protein mammalian Enabled ( Mena ) ( Krugmann et al 2001 ) . The Mena / VASP proteins can reduce branching by competing with capping proteins and Arp2 / 3 complex for binding to barbed ends , resulting in the formation of the long unbranched filament bundles characteristic for Bradykinin Cytokines ( TNF (cid:68) and IL - 1 ) EGF , PDGF , Insulin ECM proteins LPA , bombesin , FCS GPCR Cytokine receptor Integrin Adhesion receptor RTKs Integrin Adhesion receptor Ras PI 3 - kinaseVavSos Cdc42 Rac Rho WASPN - WASP PAR - 6 ACKCIP4 MRCK MLK2 , 3 MSE55 P70 S6 PAK MEKK MKK4 SRF JNK FilopodiaPeripheral actin microspikes p67 PHOX WAVE / SCAR IRSp53 LamellipodiaMembrane ruffles POR1 PIP 5 - kinase PIP 2 ProfilinGelsolinVinculin PI 3 - kinase mDia1 Profilin ROCK MLCphosphatase PKNRhotekinRhophilinPLD kinectin Stress - fibers Focal adhesions SRF PRK2Citron Ligand Cell membrane GPCR Receptor ECM proteins FAKSrc Cas / Crk DOCK Tiam1 P A R - 3 aPKC HGF , SF NADPH - oxidase Cell - cell contactspolarity POSH MLC MLC - P IQGAP 13 filopodia ( Machesky 2002 ) . Nonetheless , in hematopoetic cells , Cdc42 - mediated filopodium formation is thought to occur via WASP , binding to actin monomers , the Arp2 / 3 complex and an indirect interaction with profilin via the WIP ( WASP interacting protein ) ( Miki et al 1998 ; Ramesh et al 1997 ) . Interestingly , WIP has also been shown to enhance actin polymerization by the Arp2 / 3 nuclear promoting factor cortactin ( Kinley et al 2003 ) . The Rho GTPase TC10 has also been shown to mediate the formation of filopodia ( Neudauer et al 1998 ) . In addition , Rac interacts with IRSp53 , which binds WAVE and induces Arp2 / 3 - induced actin polymerization leading to lamellipodia formation ( Miki et al 2000 ) . Thus , IRSp53 provides a link between Rac and Cdc42 and an explanation to how Cdc42 can induce Rac - mediated ruffling ( Govind et al 2001 ; Nobes & Hall 1995 ; Ridley et al 1992 ) . IRSp53 can also bind the Rho target mouse Diaphanous 1 ( mDia1 , also known as p140mDia ) but the physiological role of this interaction is not known ( Fujiwara et al 2000 ) . Evidently , lamellipodia formation can occur independently of Rac under some circumstances ; Rab5 induced lamellipodia formation independently of Ras , Cdc42 , Rac or Rho in Swiss 3T3 cells ( Spaargaren & Bos 1999 ) , membrane - ruffling in immature dendritic cells occurs independently of Rac ( West et al 2000 ) , and lamellipodia extension in colon carcinoma cells is Rho - dependent ( O ' Connor et al 2000 ) . Phosphoinositides ( PIPs ) are produced by phosphorylation of single or multiple sites of the inositol head group in the membrane phospholipid phosphatidylinositol ( PI ) ( reviewed in Takenawa & Itoh 2001 ) . The role of PIPs in signaling is well - established , for example , the hydrolysis of PIP 2 generates the second messengers IP 3 ( inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - triphosphate ) and DAG ( diacylglycerol ) resulting in a variety of cellular responses ( Toker & Cantley 1997 ) . In addition , PIPs , and PIP 2 in particular , have emerged as prominent regulators of membrane - trafficking as well as of actin organization ( Takenawa & Itoh 2001 ) . Accordingly , inositol lipid kinases and phosphatases , regulating the turnover of PIPs , play pivotal roles in these events , and act to induce temporal and spatial changes in the availability of PIPs . There are several lines of evidence for a co - operation between Rho GTPases and PIPs in mediating actin reorganization . Phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate 5 - kinases ( PIP 5 - kinases ; there are three subtypes : (cid:68) , (cid:69) and (cid:74) ) induce the formation of PIP 2 , which then binds to capping proteins and dissociates them from the barbed ends of actin filaments resulting in the polymerization of actin ( reviewed in Kanaho & Suzuki 2002 ; Takenawa & Itoh 2001 ) . Activated Rac and Rho have been reported to induce the formation of PIP 2 via stimulation of PIP 5 - kinase activity ( Chong et al 1994 ; Hartwig et al 1995 ; Ren & Schwartz 1998 ; Tolias et al 1995 ; Tolias et al 2000 ) . It is not clear , however , whether the interaction between Rho and PIP 5 - kinase is direct or indirect . Recent studies show that the Rho - binding serine / threonine protein kinase ROCK ( Rho - associated coiled - coil - containing protein kinase ) stimulates the activity of PIP 5 - kinase , which may provide an explanation for how Rho regulates PIP 2 levels ( Oude Weernink et al 2000 ) . Moreover , microinjections of antibodies against PIP 2 inhibited lysophosphatidic acid ( LPA ) / Rho - induced formation of stress - fibers and focal adhesions , thus , demonstrating a role for PIP 2 also in the regulation of focal adhesions ( Gilmore & Burridge 1996 ; Takenawa & Itoh 2001 ) . Rac is also implicated in the hydrolysis of PIP 2 14 by directly interacting with the endocytic PIP 2 - hydrolyzing enzyme synaptojanin 2 ( a polyphosphoinositide phosphatase ) ( Malecz et al 2000 ) . The Rho targets ROCK and the DRF mDia1 were shown to act co - operatively to mediate Rho - induced stress fibers and focal contacts in mammalian cells ( Nakano et al 1999 ; reviewed in Ridley 1999 ; Watanabe et al 1999 ) . Whereas ROCK appears to induce the formation of thick actin fibers , mDia1 stimulates the formation of thin actin fibers , and together they cause the formation of stress - fibers like those induced by activated Rho ( Ishizaki et al 1997 ; Nakano et al 1999 ; Tominaga et al 2000 ; Watanabe et al 1999 ) . ROCK can enhance the formation of contractile - actomyosin filaments in at least two ways : first , ROCK phosphorylates the myosin light chain ( MLC ) , and , second , prevents its dephosphorylation by phosphorylating ( and inactivating ) the MLC phosphatase ( Amano et al 1996 ; Kimura et al 1996 ) . Furthermore , ROCK phosphorylates LIM - kinase , which inhibits the actin depolymerizing protein cofilin by phosphorylation , with a resulting stabilization of actin filaments ( reviewed in Bishop & Hall 2000 ) . Other targets for ROCK include the ERM family of actin cytoskeleton membrane linking proteins , the Na + / H + exchange ( NHE ) protein 1 , and the actin - binding protein adducin ( Bishop & Hall 2000 ) . In addition , ROCK and mDia1 are involved in Rho - induced formation of adherens junctions , where ROCK acts inhibitory by generating contractile force and mDia1 acts as a stabilisator by acting on both the actin filament system and the microtubule system ( Sahai & Marshall 2002b ) . Moreover , RhoD has been shown to activate the DRF hDia2C and Src to induce changes in the actin cytoskeleton and thereby regulate the motility of early endosomes ( Gasman et al 2003 ) . The formin homology family of proteins The founding member of the formin homology ( FH ) family of proteins is the mouse protein formin - 1 , which was identified as a gene , which if mutated results in limb deformities ( reviewed in Evangelista et al 2003 ; Tanaka 2000 ) . The common feature of FH proteins are the two FH domains ( FH1 and FH2 ) ( Castrillon & Wasserman 1994 ; reviewed in Evangelista et al 2003 ; Wasserman 1998 ) . The proline - rich FH1 domain binds to profilin and , in addition , confers binding to proteins containing Src homology 3 ( SH3 ) - and WW [ contains two signature tryptophan ( W ) residues , spaced 20 - 23 amino acid residues apart ] domains , perhaps linking the FH proteins to the cytoskeleton and / or regulating the interaction of the FH1 domain with profilin ( Wasserman 1998 ) . For example , mDia1 and mDia2 interact with the SH3 domain of Src , and DAAM1 ( disheveled associated activator of morphogenesis 1 ) binds to the SH3 domains of several proteins including Src , Abl and CIP4 ( Tominaga et al 2000 ; Paper I ) . Some FH proteins contain a conserved FH3 motif which might determine subcellular localization ( Evangelista et al 2003 ) . The diaphanous - related formins ( DRFs ) constitute a distinct subfamily of the FH proteins , by possessing a conserved N - terminal Rho GTPase - binding ( RBD ) and C - terminal Dia - auto - regulatory ( DAD ) domains ( Table 2 ; Figure 4 ; reviewed in Alberts 2002 ; Evangelista et al 2003 ) . DRFs have been implicated in a variety of cellular processes , including cytokinesis , cell polarization , intracellular mRNA trafficking , serum response factor ( SRF ) - regulated gene expression , sperm acrosome formation and hair cell stereocilia formation ( Alberts 2002 ; Evangelista et al 2003 ) . 15 Table 2 . Diaphanous related formins ( DRFs ) . Protein Organism DFNA1 HDia DAAM1 FHOS mDia1 mDia2 Diaphanous SepA Bni1p Bnr1p Human “ “ “ mouse “ Drosophila A . Nidulans S . cerevisiae “ Figure 4 . Schematic representation of DRFs . Rho - GTP binding to the RBD is thought to relieve the auto - inhibition by the DAD domain . Adapted from Evangelista et al . 2003 . DRFs are involved in the assembly of actin - based structures , such as the contractile ring , actin cables , and stress fibers ( Chang & Peter 2002 ) . Pruyne et al . and Sagot et al . showed that a fragment of the yeast DRF Bni1 containing the FH1 and FH2 domains was sufficient to nucleate actin filaments in vitro ( Pruyne et al 2002 ; Sagot et al 2002b ) . The FH1 and the FH2 domains are thought to control actin assembly and nucleation ( Evangelista et al 2003 ) . Profilin stimulates DRF - dependent actin nucleation in vitro , most likely through the recruitment of actin monomers ( Sagot et al 2002b ) . In addition , DRFs are regulators of microtubule function and organization ( Ishizaki et al 2001 ; Kato et al 2001 ; Palazzo et al 2001 ) , and it is likely that the effects DRFs have on cell polarity involves both the actin filament system and the microtubule system ( Chang & Peter 2002 ) . The human orthologue of mouse mDia1 , DFNA1 was identified as a gene responsible for non - syndromic deafness , and it has been speculated that actin filaments are not properly organized in hair cells in DFNA1 patients ( Lynch et al 1997 ) . Cdc42 - interacting protein 4 ( CIP4 ) The initial purpose of this thesis work was to characterize the Cdc42 effector protein CIP4 and its effects on the actin cytoskeleton organization . Initial studies showed that over - expression of CIP4 in Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts had various effects on the actin cytoskeleton ( Aspenström 1997 ) . One effect was a decrease in stress - fiber content , which was proposed to rely on either an ability of CIP4 to sequester actin monomers , or FH3 FH1 DAD FH2 Rho GTP RBD Diaphanous - related formins 16 to activate actin - depolymerizing factors which could disassemble pre - existing actin filaments . Moreover , these cells appeared to have an elevated membrane - ruffling activity , and CIP4 localized to those areas that ruffled . In addition , clustering of CIP4 into foci on the dorsal side of the cells was induced upon co - expression with Cdc42 or Rac , or by stimulation with PDGF - BB or bradykinin . The foci were proposed to represent an initial stage in the formation of filopodia ( Aspenström 1997 ) . CIP4 belongs to the Pombe Cdc15 homology ( PCH ) family of proteins , whose domain structure comprises an N - terminal FER - CIP4 homology ( FCH ) domain , a putative coiled - coil region , sequences rich in proline - , glutamic acid - , serine - , and threonine ( PEST ) residues , and a C - terminal SH3 domain ( Aspenström 1997 ; reviewed in Lippincott & Li 2000 ) . The function of PCH proteins in actin - based processes such as cytokinesis has been suggested to rely on an interaction with FH proteins ( Lippincott & Li 2000 ) . The SH3 domain of CIP4 was shown to bind to WASP , the RhoGAP RICH - 1 , the FH1 domain in the DRF DAAM1 , and the proto - oncogene Cbl ( Casitas B - lineage lymphoma ) ( Aspenström 1997 ; Dombrosky - Ferlan et al 2003 ; Paper I ; Paper II ; Tian et al 2000 ) . In addition , the Src kinase Lyn interacts with the proline - rich regions in CIP4 ( Dombrosky - Ferlan et al 2003 ) . Two proteins with high similarity to CIP4 are the formin binding protein 17 ( FBP17 ; mouse and human ) and rapostlin ( rat ) ( Aspenström 1997 ; Fujita et al 2002 ) . Rapostlin is an effector for Rnd2 , and induces Rnd2 - dependent reorganization of F - actin in HeLa cells , as well as neurite branching in PC12 cells ( Fujita et al 2002 ) . The human FBP17 was shown to interact with sorting - nexin 2 , a protein implicated in receptor - trafficking ( Fuchs et al 2001 ) . The FCH domains of CIP4 and rapostlin confer binding to microtubules , and these proteins were proposed to act as linkers between the actin cytoskeleton and microtubules ( Fujita et al 2002 ; Tian et al 2000 ) . The formation of podosomes in primary human macrophages appears to require microtubules , WASP and CIP4 ( Linder et al 1999 ) . CIP4 and / or DAAM1 could act to mediate the Cdc42 - induced polarization of the microtubule system in migrating cells ( Paper I ; Linder et al 1999 ; Nobes & Hall 1999 ; Tian et al 2000 ) . The CIP4 gene is thought to be spliced into four transcripts , where the nomenclature CIP4a ( CIP4 ) , CIP4b ( also known as Felic ; Fes - related , with homology to ezrin , Lyn interactor with Cdc42 ) , CIP4c and CIP4h ( also referred to as CIP4 / 2 or CIP4 - long isoform ) has been proposed ( Dombrosky - Ferlan et al 2003 ; Wang et al 2002 ) . CIP4b and CIP4c do not contain any SH3 domain . The Rho GTPase TC10 is activated by insulin in a cascade downstream of c - Cbl , and is required for the translocation of vesicles containing the GLUT4 ( glucose transporter 4 ) protein to the plasma membrane , and the subsequent uptake of glucose ( Chiang et al 2001 ) . TC10 regulates the organization of the cortical actin cytoskeleton at the site of GLUT4 vesicle fusion and secretion ( reviewed in Qualmann & Mellor 2003 ) . The mouse orthologue of CIP4h ( CIP4 / 2 ) was proposed to be an effector for TC10 in regulating glucose uptake ( Chang et al 2002 ) . CIP4 / 2 translocated to the plasma membrane upon either insulin stimulation or co - expression with constitutively active TC10 . Another protein proposed to act as an effector for TC10 is the RhoGAP TCGAP ( TC10 / Cdc42 - GTPase activating protein ) ( Chiang et al 2003 ) . CIP4b interacts with activated Cdc42 , as well as the Src kinase Lyn ( Dombrosky - Ferlan et al 2003 ) . CIP4b and Lyn co - localize to phagocytic cups , an early stage of phagosome formation , thereby integrating Src and Cdc42 pathways . Moreover , 17 over - expression of CIP4 ( and CIP4b ) was shown to inhibit NIH3T3 cell migration ( Dombrosky - Ferlan et al 2003 ) . Three separate studies have implicated CIP4 in apoptosis ; first , a microarray - approach identified CIP4 as a gene upregulated during apoptosis in human breast cancer cells ( Yuan et al 2001 ) . Second , our work shows that CIP4 interacts with acinus ( apoptotic chromatin condensation inducer in the nucleus ) , a protein implicated in the condensation of chromatin during apoptosis ( Paper I ) . Third , CIP4 accumulates in Huntington’s disease ( HD ) brain tissue , and induces cell death when over - expressed in striatal neurons ( Holbert et al 2003 ) . The pathological neurodegenerative HD is caused by an expansion of a polyglutamine ( polyQ ) tract in the protein huntingtin , leading to specific neuronal cell death , with symptoms such as motoric disturbances and psychiatric changes ( Gusella & MacDonald 1998 ) . The pathogenesis of HD may involve the accumulation of huntingtin aggregates in neuronal inclusions , as well as an altered interaction of huntingtin with other proteins resulting in an abnormal regulation of transcription and signal transduction . Interestingly , CIP4 , and the related PACSIN 1 ( PKC and CK2 substrate in neurons 1 ) , both interact with huntingtin and are implicated in HD ( Holbert et al 2003 ; Modregger et al 2002 ) . Taken together , these observations suggest that CIP4 proteins and their homologues act as scaffolds , integrating Src kinase pathways , actin and microtubule systems . It will be of great interest to investigate further the involvement of CIP4 in HD and cell survival . 3 . E . Rho GTPases in pathological conditions Signaling by Rho GTPases is crucial for a variety of biological responses , thus , the dysregulation of their activities can result in diverse aberrant phenotypes such as cancer progression , mental disabilities and a group of diverse unrelated disorders ( reviewed in Boettner & Van Aelst 2002 ; Sahai & Marshall 2002a ) . Importantly , mutations in genes encoding GEFs , GAPs or effector proteins may present the most prominent cause of dysregulation of Rho GTPase mediated activities . The Ras genes are frequently mutated in human cancers , with the highest prevalence in pancreatic carcinomas ( reviewed in Bos 1989 ; Downward 1990 ; Takai et al 2001 ) . By contrast , only a single Rho gene ( RhoH / TTF ) has so far been found to be either rearranged or mutated , and have been proposed to have a role in the development of multiple myeloma , non - Hodgkin’s lymphoma , and diffuse large B - cell lymphoma ( Sahai & Marshall 2002a ) . Several Rho genes have been found to be over - expressed in different types of cancers ( Sahai & Marshall 2002a ) . For example , Rac1 and Cdc42 were over - expressed in breast tumors , and the Rac1 splice variant Rac1B is over - expressed in breast - and colorectal tumors ( Jordan et al 1999 ; Sahai & Marshall 2002a ) . Several RhoGEFs were initially characterized as oncoproteins , harboring gain - of - function mutations , for example , diffuse B - cell lymphoma ( Dbl ; implicated in B - cell lymphoma ) , leukemia - associated RhoGEF ( LARG ; involved in acute myeloid leukemia ) and T - cell lymphoma invasion and metastasis 1 ( Tiam 1 ; an invasion promoting gene in T - cells ) ( Habets et al 1994 ; Kourlas et al 2000 ; Srivastava et al 1986 ) . Many genes encoding RhoGAPs have been found upregulated , deleted or translocated in several types of cancer , for example oligophrenin is over - expressed in colon cancer and glial tumors , Bcr ( break point cluster region ) is fused with the Abl ( Abelson tyrosine kinase ) 18 oncogene in leukemias , Abr ( active Bcr - related ) is deleted in some cases of medulloblastoma and DLC - 1 ( deleted in liver cancer 1 ) is frequently deleted in liver cancer ( Table 3 ; Ljubimova et al 2001 ; McDonald et al 1994 ; Pinheiro et al 2001 ; Shtivelman et al 1985 ; Yuan et al 2003 ) . The dysregulation of Rho GTPase activities has recently been shown to result in diverse neurodegenerative disorders . The RhoGAP oligophrenin is deleted in the neuropathological disorder X - chromosome linked forms of mental retardation ( XMR ) ( Billuart et al 1998 ) . In addition , the RhoGEF (cid:68) PIX ( PAK - interacting exchange factor (cid:68) ; also known as ARHGEF or Cool - 2 ) and the Rac1 / Cdc42 effector p21 - activated kinase ( PAK ) are mutated in XMR ( Boettner & Van Aelst 2002 ; Kutsche et al 2000 ) . The gene encoding the RhoGEF intersectin is situated on chromosome 21 , and has been speculated to contribute to the malignant aspects of Down’s syndrome ( Boettner & Van Aelst 2002 ) . A loss - of - function mutation in the RhoGEF alsin has been proposed to be the cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( ALS ) ( Boettner & Van Aelst 2002 ) . The characteristics of ALS is the progressive degeneration of motor neurons successively leading to respiratory failure . 3 . F . Regulation of RhoGTPase activity Signals leading to the activation of Rho GTPases Although the mechanism by which receptors activate Rho GTPases are far from clear , it is believed to rely on the activation of GEFs ( reviewed in Kjøller & Hall 1999 ) . PI 3 - kinases have been implicated in the regulation of cell proliferation , survival , metabolism , cytoskeletal organization and membrane - trafficking ( reviewed in Leevers et al 1999 ) . The role of PI 3 - kinase as a link between RTKs [ e . g . receptors for platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) , insulin and insulin - like growth factor ( IGF ) ] and Rac - mediated membrane ruffling ( and a subsequent Rho - mediated stress - fiber formation ) became evident from studies using PI 3 - kinase inhibitors ( Wortmannin or LY294002 ) , PI 3 - kinase mutants , and receptor mutants unable to bind PI 3 - kinase ( Hawkins et al 1995 ; Kotani et al 1994 ; Nobes et al 1995 ; Reif et al 1996 ; reviewed in Van Aelst & D ' Souza - Schorey 1997 ; Wennström et al 1994 ) . Moreover , there exist a pathway where Ras acts through PI 3 - kinase to induce membrane ruffling by Rac ( Rodriguez - Viciana et al 1997 ) . PI 3 - kinases catalyze the conversion of PIP 2 into phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 or PIP 3 ) , which in turn binds to the PH ( pleckstrin - homology ) domain of the RacGEFs , such as Vav , Son of sevenless 1 ( Sos1 ) and Tiam 1 , and thereby regulates their activity ( reviewed in Kjøller & Hall 1999 ; Scita et al 2000 ) . Another route to Rac activation involves the co - operation of the Crk and DOCK180 ( downstream of Crk , 180 kDa ) and Cas adaptor proteins , possibly through recruitment of the RacGEF Sos ( reviewed in Ridley 2001b ) . Interestingly , microtubule growth has been shown to activate Rac in fibroblasts , resulting in lamellipodia formation ( Waterman - Storer et al 1999 ) . Apart form being activated via GPCRs , Rho can be activated via cytokine receptors and RTKs , involving the activity of Cdc42 and Rac , respectively ( Kjøller & Hall 1999 ) . The mechanism whereby LPA activates Rho appears to involve a tyrosine kinase ( Nobes et al 1995 ) . Cdc42 can be activated via GPCRs , cytokine receptors and adhesion receptors , although the mechanisms are not known ( Kjøller & Hall 1999 ) . In 19 addition , Rac and Cdc42 appear also to be upstream of PI 3 - kinase , since Rac and Cdc42 bind to PI 3 - kinase and activate the enzyme in PDGF - stimulated fibroblasts ( Bokoch et al 1996 ; Tolias et al 1995 ; Zheng et al 1994 ) . Moreover , Rho appears to be upstream of PI 3 - kinase ( Kumagai et al 1993 ; Zhang et al 1993 ) . However , studies regarding the placement of PI 3 - kinase upstream or downstream of the Rho GTPases have gained different results depending upon which model system is used ( Ren & Schwartz 1998 ) . Rho GTPases have been shown to interact with enzymes that affect the turnover of PIPs . One possibility is that Rho GTPases might target inositol lipid kinases and phosphatases to specific intracellular locations or vice versa . Moreover , Rho GTPases could be implicated in positive and / or negative feed - back loops , where they stimulate the generation of PIPs , which in turn could bind to and regulate the activity of RhoGEFs and RhoGAPs ( by membrane - recruitment and / or changes in the structure ) . Regulation of GEF activity by binding of the PH domain to PIP 3 is well established . Moreover , many RhoGAPs possess PH domains and other phosphoinositide - binding domains , which could present for regulation in a similar manner . The Rho GTPase cycle In resting cells , Rho GTPases are cytosolic and exist in their inactive GDP - bound state , complexed with guanine dissociation inhibitors ( GDIs ) ( see Figure 5 ; reviewed in Olofsson 1999 ; Zalcman et al 1999 ) . RhoGDIs mask the prenyl - group of some Rho GTPases and thereby prevent their interaction with membranes and inhibit nucleotide - exchange . Upon activation of plasma membrane receptors , the Rho GTPase / RhoGDI complex is recruited to the plasma membrane , whereby the Rho GTPase is released and , thus , can attach to the plasma membrane ( Kjøller & Hall 1999 ) . Rho GTPases can exchange nucleotides and hydrolyze GTP at slow rates in vivo . These reactions are accelerated by guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) ( reviewed in Schmidt & Hall 2002 ; Zheng 2001 ) , which activate the Rho GTPase by catalyzing the exchange of GTP for GDP , and GTPase activating proteins ( GAPs ) ( reviewed in Lamarche & Hall 1994 ; Moon & Zheng 2003 ; Peck et al 2002 ) , which inactivate the Rho GTPase by stimulating the intrinsic hydrolysis ( Figure 5 ) . 20 Figure 5 . Regulation of Rho GTPase activity . I . In the resting cell , a GDI sequesters the inactive GDP - bound Rho GTPase in the cytosol , inhibiting the interaction of the Rho GTPase with membranes . II . Upon activation of certain plasma membrane receptors , different factors cause the release of the Rho GTPase from the GDI and the subsequent translocation of the Rho GTPase to the plasma membrane , where a RhoGEF substitutes the GDP with a GTP , thus , activating the Rho GTPase . III . In the active GTP - bound state , the Rho GTPase can interact with a variety of downstream targets which mediate a plethora of biological responses . IV . A GAP then hydrolyzes the GTP , whereby the Rho GTPase is inactivated and can be sequestered by a GDI again . Importantly , GDIs can also sequester GTP - bound Rho GTPases , and inhibit the GTP - hydrolysis stimulated by a GAP ( see text ) . 3 . G . Rho GTPase activating proteins ( RhoGAPs ) The first realization that Ras proteins required GTPase activating proteins for their down - regulation came from studies employing microinjection of recombinant GTP - bound Ras into living cells , resulting in an GTP - hydrolysis several times faster than that in vitro ( Trahey & McCormick 1987 ) . This led to the purification of the first GAP for Ras proteins , p120RasGAP ( Trahey et al 1988 ) . The first RhoGAP identified was p50RhoGAP , and since then more than 30 RhoGAPs have been reported in eukaryotes , ranging from yeast to human ( Barfod et al 1993 ; Garrett et al 1989 ; Lancaster et al 1994 ; reviewed in Moon & Zheng 2003 ) . Genome analysis revealed the presence of around 80 human genes containing RhoGAP domains ( reviewed in Moon & Zheng 2003 ; Peck et al 2002 ) . However , many of the genes containing RhoGAP domains were present as duplicate database entries , from partial sequences and as splice variants , thereby decreasing the number to 53 , some of which are presented in Table 3 . RhoGAP domain - containing proteins are present 21 throughout the genome and rarely cluster in specific chromosomal regions ( Peck et al 2002 ) . Table 3 . Selected Rho GTPase activating proteins . Lipid - binding domains are noted if present , and the following abbreviations are used for these ; BAR ( BIN / Amphiphysin / Rvsp ) , C1 ( cysteine - rich phorbol ester binding ) , C2 ( calcium - dependent lipid binding ) , PH ( pleckstrin homology ) , PX ( Phox homology ) and sec14 ( lipid - binding domain with homology to the yeast PI - transfer protein Sec14p ) . Chr . locus denotes the chromosomal locus in human . Adapted and changed from Moon , 2003 and Peck 2002 . RhoGAP GAP specificity in vitro in vivo Tissue distribu - tion and Chr . locus Notes References p50RhoGAP or Cdc42GAP ( human ) Cdc42 > RhoA , Rac1 RhoA ( Cdc42 not tested ) Ubiquitous Chr 11 The first RhoGAP identified . Binds PIP 3 through sec14 domain . 3D - structure determined . ( Barfod et al 1993 ; Barrett et al 1997 ; Diekmann et al 1991 ; Garrett et al 1991 ; Garrett et al 1989 ; Krugmann et al 2002 ; Lancaster et al 1994 ; Nassar et al 1998 ; Ridley et al 1993 ; Rittinger et al 1997a ; Rittinger et al 1997b ) Bcr [ break point cluster region ] ( human ) Rac1 = Rac2 > Cdc42 Rac1 ( Cdc42 not tested ) Brain Chr 22q11 Bcr - Abl oncoprotein in leukemias . Down - regulator of Rac - mediated NADPH oxidase - activity in neutrophils . Abr [ active Bcr - related ] ( human ) Rac1 = Rac2 > Cdc42 ND Brain Chr 17p13 . 3 Abr is deleted in seven of eight cases of medulloblastoma . Bcr and Abr are also GEFs for Cdc42 > RhoA > Rac1 = Rac2 . Bcr and Abr are implicated in glial cell and vestibular morphogenesis . Bcr and Abr contain C2 domains . ( Chuang et al 1995 ; Diekmann et al 1991 ; Heisterkamp et al 1993 ; Kaartinen et al 2001 ; Kaartinen et al 2002 ; McDonald et al 1994 ; Ridley et al 1993 ; Shtivelman et al 1985 ; Tan et al 1993 ; Voncken et al 1995 ) 22 RhoGAP GAP specificity in vitro in vivo Tissuedistribu - tion and Chr . locus Notes References N ( (cid:68) 1 ) chimaerin / alternatively spliced SH2 domain - containing (cid:68) 2 - chimaerin ( human and rat ) Rac1 > Cdc42 Rac1 Brain / Brain , testis Chr 2q31 (cid:68) 1 putative effector for Cdc42 and Rac during actin reorganization . (cid:68) 2 is involved in neuritogenesis in N1E - 115 cells . Receptor for phorbol esters via C1 domain . ( Ahmed et al 1990 ; Diekmann et al 1991 ; Hall et al 2001 ; Hall et al 1990 ; Kozma et al 1996 ; Manser et al 1992 ) (cid:69) 1 - chimaerin / alternativelyspliced SH2 domain - containing (cid:69) 2 - chimaerin ( human and rat ) Rac1 ND Testis / Brain Chr 7p15 . 3 (cid:69) 1 involved in spermatogenesis . (cid:69) 2 expression downregulated in malignant gliomas compared to normal and low - grade astrocytoma . Receptor for phorbol esters and DAG via C1 domain . ( Caloca et al 1997 ; Caloca et al 1999 ; Leung et al 1993 ; Leung et al 1994 ; Yuan et al 1995 ) P190 - A ( human and rat ) RhoA > Rac1 , Cdc42 RhoA Ubiquitous Chr19q13 . 3 Src - substrate . Putative mediator of Src - dependent adhesion signals for neural development and neuritogenesis . Over - expression promotes neurite outgrowth in neuroblastoma cells . Tumor suppressor . Deleted in some gliomas . ( Bouton et al 1991 ; Brouns et al 2000 ; Brouns et al 2001 ; Ellis et al 1990 ; Ridley et al 1993 ; Settleman et al 1992a ; Tatsis et al 1998 ; Tikoo et al 2000 ; Wang et al 1997 ) P190 - B ( human ) RhoA , Rac1 , Cdc42 ND Ubiquitous Chr 14q12 Induced to cluster after integrin cross - linking . Regulates Rho which modulates CREB ( Cyclic AMP response element binding ) factor activity and thereby cell and organism size . P190 - A and p190 - B contain a GTPase domain , might regulate GAP activity . ( Burbelo et al 1995b ; Sordella et al 2002 ) p85 (cid:68) and p85 (cid:69) ( human ) No activity ND Ubiquitous Chr 5q12 / Chr19q13 . 2 Adaptor subunit of PI 3 - kinase . Interacts with Cdc42 and Rac , putative target for these proteins . 3D - structure determined . ( Bokoch et al 1996 ; Musacchio et al 1996 ; Otsu et al 1991 ; Skolnik et al 1991 ; Zheng et al 1994 ; Zheng et al 1993 ) Oligophrenin - 1 ( human ) Rac1 , Cdc42 , RhoA ND Brain Chr Xq12 Deleted in XMR . Possibly involved in neuritogenesis . Overexpressed in colon cancer and glial tumors . Has a PH domain . ( Billuart et al 1998 ; Ljubimova et al 2001 ; Pinheiro et al 2001 ) 23 RhoGAP GAP specificity in vitro in vitro Tissuedistribu - tion and Chr . locus Notes References GRAF [ GTPase regulator associated with FAK ] ( human ) / GRAF ( chicken ) ND / Cdc42 , RhoA ND / RhoA Ubiquitous / Highlyexpressed in brain , liver Chr 5q31 Fused to the mixed - lineage leukemia gene ( human ) . Interacts with protein kinase N ( PKN ) - (cid:69) and is phosphorylated by this kinase ( human ) . Binds FAK . Putative effector for Rho through enhancing neurite retraction in NGF - differentiated PC12 cells ( chicken ) . 3D - structure determined . Has a BAR - and a PH domain . ( Borkhardt et al 2000 ; Hildebrand et al 1996 ; Longenecker et al 2000 ; Shibata et al 2001 ; Taylor et al 1999 ) GRAF2 ( human ) / PSGAP [ PH - and SH3 domain - containingRhoGAPprotein ] ( mouse ) Cdc42 , RhoA / RhoA > Cdc42 ND / Cdc42 > RhoA Ubiquitous , enriched in skeletal muscle / Ubiquitous Chr4q31 . 22 GRAF2 interacts with PKN - (cid:69) and is phosphorylated by this kinase . PSGAP interacts with proline - rich tyrosine kinase 2 ( PYK2 ) and FAK . PYK2 inhibits PSGAP activity on Cdc42 . Has a PH domain . ( Ren et al 2001 ; Shibata et al 2001 ) 3BP - 1 [ SH3 - domain binding protein - 1 ] ( mouse ) Rac1 , Rac2 , Cdc42 , RhoG Rac1 Ubiquitous , enriched in spleen and brain Chr22q13 . 1 Binds the SH3 domain in Abl . Has a BAR domain . ( Cicchetti et al 1992 ; Cicchetti et al 1995 ) RICH - 1 [ RhoGAP interacting with CIP4homologues ] ( human ) / Nadrin [ Neuron - associateddevelopmentally regulatedprotein ] ( rat ) Rac1 , Cdc42 / Rac1 , Cdc42 , RhoA Rac , Cdc42 / Rac , Cdc42 Ubiquitous , enriched in heart and placenta / Brain Chr16p12 . 2 RICH - 1 binds CIP4 and several other SH3 domain - containing proteins . Nadrin is involved in exocytosis and inhibits NGF dependent neurite outgrowth in PC12 cells , both effects proposed to rely on its GAP activity . Both RICH - 1 and nadrin have BAR domains implicated in membrane - trafficking . ( Furuta et al 2002 ; Harada et al 2000 ; Richnau & Aspenström 2001 ) RICH - 2 ( KIAA0672 ) ( human ) Rac1 , Cdc42 ND Ubiquitous , enriched in brain Chr17p11 . 2 Has a BAR domain . ( Richnau & Aspenström 2001 ) PARG [ PTPL1 - associatedRhoGAP ] ( human ) RhoA > Rac1 , Cdc42 ND Ubiquitous , enriched in skeletalmuscle and heartChr 1p21 . 3 Binds PDZ ( PSD - 95 / DlgA / ZO - 1 - like ) domain of protein tyrosine phosphatase PTPL1 . Has a C1 domain . ( Saras et al 1997 ) 24 RhoGAP GAP specificity in vitro in vivo Tissuedistribu - tion and Chr . locus Notes References Myosin - IXb ( human ) / Myr5 ( rat ) / Myo9B ( mouse ) ( Myosin - IXa less well characterized ) RhoA RhoA Ubiquitous , enriched in peripheral bloodleukocytes Chr1q13 . 1 / Chr 15q22 Unconventional class IX myosin . Proposed to inhibit Rho at early stages of leukocyte spreading . Have C1 domains . ( Muller et al 1997 ; Post et al 1998 ; Reinhard et al 1995 ; Wirth et al 1996 ) MgcRacGAP [ male germ cell RacGAP ] ( human ) / MgcRacGAP ( mouse ) / CYK - 4 ( C . elegans ) / RotundRacGAP ( Drosophila ) Rac1 , Cdc42 > RhoA ND Testis ( human ) / Brain and testis ( mouse ) Chr12p13 . 2 Binds microtubules . GAP activity required for cytokinesis . CYK - 4 cooperates with a kinesin - like protein to assemble central spindle for cytokinesis . Deletion results in male sterility in fruit fly . Has a C1 domain . ( Agnel et al 1992 ; Hirose et al 2001 ; Jantsch - Plunger et al 2000 ; Mishima et al 2002 ; Toure et al 1998 ) RLIP1 [ Ral - interactingprotein1 / RLIP76 ] ( human ) / RIP1 ( mouse ) / RALBP1 [ Ral binding protein 1 ] ( rat ) Cdc42 > Rac1 ND Ubiquitous Chr18p11 . 3 Ral GTPase effector . Interacts with clathrin - adaptor AP2 , EH domain - containing proteins POB ( partner of RalBP1 ) and Reps1 ( RalBP1 associated Eps - homology domain protein 1 ) , and is implicated in endocytosis . Implicated in multidrug resistance as a transporter of glutathione conjugates and xenobiotics ; interacts with stress - responsive heat shock factor ( HSF ) 1 . ( Awasthi et al 2000 ; Cantor et al 1995 ; Hu & Mivechi 2003 ; Ikeda et al 1998 ; Jullien - Flores et al 1995 ; Jullien - Flores et al 2000 ; Park & Weinberg 1995 ; Yamaguchi et al 1997 ) ARHGAP6 ( human and mouse ) RhoA RhoA Ubiquitous Chr Xp22 . 3 Deleted in male - lethal disorder microphthalmia with linear skin defects ( MLS ) . N - terminus localizes to actin . Can in addition regulate actin dynamics independent of its GAP domain . ( Prakash et al 2000 ; Schaefer et al 1997 ) ARHGAP8 ( human and mouse ) ND ND Ubiquitous ( mouse ) Chr 22q13 . 31 Particularly strong expression in kidney suggests a role in kidney development ( mouse ) . Has a sec14 domain . ( Shan et al 2003 ) ARHGAP9 ( human ) Cdc42 , Rac1 > RhoA ND Restricted to hemato - poetictissuesChr 12q14 Involved in regulating adhesion of hematopoetic cells to the ECM . Has a PH domain . ( Furukawa et al 2001 ) ARHGAP12 ( human ) ND ND Ubiquitous Chr 10p12 Strongly expressed in breast carcinomas . Has a PH domain . ( Zhang et al 2002 ) 25 RhoGAP GAP specificity in vitro in vivo Tissuedistribu - tion and Chr . locus Notes References ARHGAP15 ( human ) Rac1 Rac1 Spleen , lung , liver andlymphoid cellsChr 2q22 . 3 In vitro substrate for Rac1 effector kinases (cid:68) PAK and MRCK (cid:68) . Has a PH domain . ( Seoh et al 2003 ) KIAA1204 ( human ) / CdGAP [ Cdc42 GTPaseactivatingprotein ] ( mouse ) ND / Rac1 , Cdc42 ND / Rac1 , Cdc42 ND / Ubiqui - tous , enriched in heart and lungChr3q13 . 32 CdGAP interacts with and is inhibited by the endocytic scaffold protein intersectin . ( Jenna et al 2002 ; Lamarche - Vane & Hall 1998 ) P200RhoGAP [ also known as Gab - associated Cdc42 / RacGAP ( GCGAP ) or RhoGAPinvolved in the (cid:69) - catenin - N - cadherin and NMDA receptor signaling ( RICS ) ] ( human and mouse ) / GRIT ( rat ) Rac1 , RhoA ( p200Rho - GAP ) / Cdc42 > Rac1 , RhoA ( GCGAP ) / Cdc42 , Rac , RhoA ( RICS ) / Cdc42 > RhoA , Rac ( GRIT ) Rac1 , RhoA ( p200 - Rho - GAP ) / Rac1 , Cdc42 ( GC - GAP ) / / Cdc42 , Rac ( RICS ) / Cdc42 , Rac ( GRIT ) Brain Chr 11q24 - q25 Interacts with Gab1 ( Grb2 - associated binder - 1 ) , Gab2 , Crk , n - Shc , Nck , p130Cas , c - Src , phospholipase ( PLC ) (cid:74) , (cid:69) - catenin and TrkA ( receptor for NGF ) . Putative regulator of neurite outgrowth . ( Moon et al 2003 ; Nakamura et al 2002 ; Okabe et al 2003 ; Zhao et al 2003 ) ARAP1 [ Arf - GAP , RhoGAP , ankyrin repeat , and PH domains - containingprotein 1 ] / ( ARAP2 ; not extensively characterized , lacks catalytic Arg ) / ARAP3 ( human ) RhoA > Cdc42 / ND / Rac1 , RhoA , Cdc42 RhoA / ND / ND Ubiquitous ( ARAP1 andARAP2 ) / Highlyexpressed in leuko - cytes and spleen ( ARAP3 ) Chr11q13 . 1 / Chr 4p14 / Chr5q31 . 3 Contains both RhoGAP and ArfGAP domains . Possible link between Rho - Arf - phosphoinositide - mediated signaling . PIP 3 - dependent Arf GAP activity . Over - expression of ARAP1 slows cell spreading , and causes activation of Cdc42 ( independently of its GAP domain ) . Contain PH domains which bind PIP 2 and PIP 3 . ( Krugmann et al 2002 ; Miura et al 2002 ) DLC1 [ deleted in liver cancer1 ] ( human ) / p122 ( rat ) ND / RhoA RhoA Ubiquitous / ND Chr 8p22 - p21 . 3 DLC1 is mutated in liver and breast cancers . Candidate tumor suppressor gene . p122 interacts with PLC (cid:71) 1 and stimulates its PIP 2 - hydrolyzing activity . ( Homma & Emori 1995 ; Sekimata et al 1999 ; Yuan et al 1998 ; Yuan et al 2003 ) 26 RhoGAP GAP specificity in vitro in vivo Tissuedistribu - tion and Chr . locus Notes References DLC2 ( human ) Cdc42 , RhoA RhoA Ubiquitous Chr13q12 . 3 Under - expressed in liver cancer . Suppresses Ras signaling and counteracts Ras - mediated cellular transformation . ( Ching et al 2003 ) Sorting nexin 26 ( human ) / TCGAP [ TC10 / Cdc42 GTPaseactivatingprotein ] ( mouse ) ND / Rac1 , Cdc42 > RhoA , TC10 ND / noactivity ND Chr19q13 . 1 TCGAP is a putative effector for TC10 in the regulation of insulin - stimulated glucose transport . Has a PX domain which interacts with PIP 2 . ( Chiang et al 2003 ) KIAA1304 ; KIAA0456 ; KIAA0411 [ MEGAP ( ME ntal disorder - associated GAP protein ) or WRP ( WAVE associatedRacGAPprotein ) ] ( human ) / Slit - Robo ( sr ) GAP1 ; srGAP2 ; srGAP3 ( mouse ) ND / ND / Rac1 > Cdc42 ( MEGAP ) , Rac1 ( WRP ) / ND ( mouse ) ND / ND / Rac1 ( WRP ) / Cdc42 > RhoA ( sr - GAP1 ) / ND / ND Brain ( MEGAP ) / brain , lung and spleen ( mouse ) Chr3p25 . 3 / Chr12q14 . 1 / Chr 1q21 . 2 KIAA0411 ( MEGAP ) has a putative role in severe mental retardation . WRP interacts with WAVE . SrGAPs interact with the Roundabout ( Robo ) repulsive guidance receptor and is involved in neuronal migration . ( Endris et al 2002 ; Ghose & Van Vactor 2002 ; Soderling et al 2002 ; Wong et al 2001 ) OCRL1 ( Oculocerebrorenal syndrome of Lowe 1 ) and the related INPP5B ( inositol polyphosphate 5 - phosphatase ) ( human ) Probably inactivedue to Gln instead of con - served Arg ND ND Chr Xq25 - 26 / Chr 1p34 PIP 2 5 - phosphatases ; down - regulate PIP 2 levels . Mutated OCRL1 gene causative of the severe X - linked mental retardation Lowe syndrome . Localizes to trans - Golgi network and is implicated in protein - trafficking . ( Dressman et al 2000 ; Ross et al 1991 ; Zhang et al 1995 ) Vilse ( KIAA1688 ) ( human ) Rac1 , Cdc42 ND ND Chr 8q24 . 3 ( pers . communi - cationC . Samakovlis ) The RhoGAP domain ( also referred to as Bcr - homology , BH , domain ) , comprises ~ 150 amino acid residues divided into three conserved boxes including a catalytic motif , which retains a highly conserved catalytic arginine residue ( reviewed in Boguski & McCormick 1993 ; Lamarche & Hall 1994 ; Moon & Zheng 2003 ) . GAPs for GTPases within the Rho subfamily share high sequence similarity , whereas the degree of similarity to GAPs for the other GTPases is low ( Scheffzek et al 1998 ) . Nevertheless , determination of the structures of p120RasGAP and p50RhoGAP revealed a common fold ( Barrett et al 1997 ; Rittinger et al 1998 ; Scheffzek et al 1996 ) . Superimposition of 27 the two GAPs showed that they share a core structure made up of seven (cid:68) - helices , and that the catalytic arginine residues are in approximately the same positions ( Rittinger et al 1998 ) . The mechanism of GAP - stimulated GTP hydrolysis Determination of the three - dimensional structures of complexes between Rho GTPases and their GAPs has provided much insight into the mechanism of GAP - stimulated GTP hydrolysis . So far , the structures of p50RhoGAP complexed with RhoA and Cdc42 , respectively , have been solved ( Nassar et al 1998 ; Rittinger et al 1997a ; Rittinger et al 1997b ) . The RhoGAP interacts with the switch I and II regions as well as the P - loop of the Rho GTPase . Upon GTP - hydrolysis , there is a conformational change in the Rho GTPase , causing the development of negative charges in the active site , which are stabilized by the critical arginine in the RhoGAP . In addition , this arginine interacts with Gln61 in the Rho GTPase , a residue responsible for positioning the water molecule for GTP - hydrolysis . Moreover , the structures of the GAP domains of p50RhoGAP , p85 (cid:68) , GRAF have been determined ( see Table 3 ; Barrett et al 1997 ; Longenecker et al 2000 ; Musacchio et al 1996 ) Substrate specificity Some GAPs show specificity towards a single Rho GTPase whereas others display a broader specificity . However , since RhoGAP activity measurements usually involve the well - known Rac , Cdc42 and Rho as substrates , studies on the remaining Rho GTPases are needed to complete the picture . (cid:69) - chimaerin is specific for Rac ( Leung et al 1993 ) , whereas p190RhoGAP shows GAP activity towards towards Rho primarily , but also Rac and Cdc42 ( Ridley et al 1993 ; Settleman et al 1992a ) . An intriguing report by Minoshima et al . showed that phosphorylation induced a shift in the specificity of MgcRacGAP ( male germ cell RacGAP ) from Cdc42 / Rac towards RhoA ( Minoshima et al 2003 ) . As mentioned , RhoGAPs most often contain other domains in addition to their GAP domain , such as SH2 and SH3 domains , Ser / Thr kinase domains , proline - rich regions , DH ( Dbl homology ) motifs , PDZ ( PSD - 95 / DlgA / ZO - 1 - like ) binding motifs , RhoGEF domains , and domains which confer binding to membrane lipids such as PH domains , PX ( Phox homology ) domains and BAR ( BIN / Amphiphysin / Rvsp ) domains ( reviewed in Chiang et al 2003 ; Moon & Zheng 2003 ; Zalcman et al 1999 ; Paper III ) . Possible functions for these motifs are to localize the GAP to its site of action , to regulate the GAP activity , by up - or down - regulating it , or even change its specificity , and / or to provide links between different signaling pathways . For example , (cid:69) 2 - chimaerin translocates to Golgi upon binding to phorbolesters ( Caloca et al 2001 ) . The BAR domain in RICH - 1 and PX domain in TCGAP confer binding to membrane - lipids , and might act to localize these proteins to membranes ( Chiang et al 2003 ; Richnau & Aspenström 2001 ) . The interaction between p120RasGAP and p190RhoGAP may serve to link the Ras and Rho signaling pathways , where the p120RasGAP might act as a Ras effector and regulate the activity of Rho ( Settleman et al 1992b ) . ARAPs ( ArfGAP , RhoGAP , ankyrin repeat , and PH domains - containing proteins ) contain in addition to a RhoGAP domain , an Arf GAP domain , a putative Ras 28 binding motif and PH domains . The ArfGAP activity is enhanced upon binding of a PH motif to the PI 3 - kinase product PIP 3 ( Krugmann et al 2002 ; Miura et al 2002 ) . In this way , ARAPs have been suggested to link Rho GTPase , Arf GTPase and PI 3 - kinase pathways . RalBP1 ( Ral binding protein 1 ) is yet an example of a multifaceted RhoGAP , connecting signal transduction and endocytosis . In a cascade connecting Ras , Ral and Rho pathways , Ras binds to a RalGEF / RalGDS causing activation of Ral , which then binds to and stimulates RalBP1 resulting in down - regulation of Rho GTPases ( Jullien - Flores et al 1995 ) . In addition , RalBP1 interacts with endocytic proteins such as adaptor protein 2 ( AP2 ) and the Eps15 homology ( EH ) proteins Reps1 ( RalBP1 associated Eps - homology domain protein 1 ) and POB ( partner of RalBP1 ) , and has been implicated in endocytosis of epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) - and insulin receptors ( Ikeda et al 1998 ; Jullien - Flores et al 2000 ; Nakashima et al 1999 ; Yamaguchi et al 1997 ) . Importantly , some RhoGAPs have been suggested to act as effectors mediating signals downstream of Rho GTPases . For instance , N - chimaerin appears to cooperate with Cdc42 and Rac1 to induce formation of filopodia and lamellipodia , independently of its RhoGAP activity ( Kozma et al 1996 ) . Microinjection of the N - chimaerin RhoGAP domain alone , however , inhibits Rac - mediated lamellipodia formation . TCGAP was proposed to act as a downstream effector of TC10 in regulating insulin - dependent glucose transport ( Chiang et al 2003 ) . The regulatory subunits of PI3 - kinase , p85 (cid:68) and p85 (cid:69) , contain the conserved catalytic arginine , but lacks some other residues of importance for GAP activity , and so far no GAP activity have been reported for these proteins ( Musacchio et al 1996 ; Otsu et al 1991 ; Zheng et al 1993 ) . However , activated Cdc42 and Rac1 interact with p85 (cid:68) and stimulate the PI 3 - kinase activity , suggesting a role for p85 as an effector instead of a down - regulator ( Bokoch et al 1996 ; Zheng et al 1994 ) . In addition , p85 subunits may act as adaptors to localize PI 3 - kinase activity to its site of action . Furthermore , there are GAP - like toxins , such as the P . aeruginosa toxin Exoenzyme S ( ExoS ) , which is a bifunctional toxin with an N - terminal RhoGAP - and C - terminal ADP - ribosyltransferase activities ( Henriksson et al 2002 ) . ExoS perturbs the activation of Rho GTPases , and other members of the Ras superfamily of proteins , in two ways ; by ADP - ribosylation ( Rac , Rho and Cdc42 ) , and stimulation of the intrinsic GTP - hydrolysis ( Rho and Cdc42 ) . Regulation of GAP activity Many RhoGAPs show different substrate specificities in vitro and in vivo , possibly reflecting the influence of regulatory molecules in vivo . A tightly regulated GAP activity ensures a correct regulation of its cognate Rho GTPase , and regulation of GAP activity has been shown to include phosphorylation , lipid binding and protein - protein interaction . The GAP activity of p190RhoGAP is enhanced upon phosphorylation by Src tyrosine kinase followed by binding to p120RasGAP ( Hu & Settleman 1997 ; Roof et al 1998 ) . The GAP activity of p190RhoGAP is then thought to be turned off by binding to and dephosphorylation by the low molecular weight protein - tyrosine phosphatase ( LMW - PTP ) , a key mediator of PDGF receptor signaling and a Src substrate ( Chiarugi et al 2000 ) . Furthermore , p200GAP binds to Src and appears to be phosphorylated by this 29 tyrosine kinase ( Moon et al 2003 ) . Protein - protein interactions can also regulate the GAP activity , for example the endocytic scaffolding protein intersectin binds CdGAP ( Cdc42 GTPase activating protein ) through its SH3 domains , thereby causing a conformational change in CdGAP resulting in an inhibition of the GAP activity toward Rac , both in vitro and in vivo ( Jenna et al 2002 ) . Moreover , the proline - rich tyrosine kinase 2 ( PYK2 ) inhibited the GAP activity of PSGAP ( PH - and SH3 domain - containing RhoGAP protein ) on Cdc42 , although it is not clear whether it is due to protein - protein interaction , phosphorylation of PSGAP , or both ( Ren et al 2001 ) . The members of the chimaerin family have a cysteine - rich motif similar to those found in protein kinase C . The GAP activity as well as the intracellular location of chimaerins can be regulated by binding of various membrane lipids to the cysteine - rich motif ( reviewed in Moon & Zheng 2003 ) . The reason for the overabundance of the RhoGAPs , and RhoGEFs , in comparison with their Rho GTPase substrates is unclear . However , these regulators might be expressed in specific cell types , at specific developmental stages and might be under spatial , biochemical or / and temporal regulation . To date , gene knock - outs in mouse have been made for BCR , p190 - A and p190 - B , and together with targeted knock - ins of mutated GAP domains and RNA interference , useful information will be provided about the functional significance of individual GAPs ( reviewed in Peck et al 2002 ) . 3 . H . Rho guanine - exchange factors ( GEFs ) When the GDP - bound Rho GTPase is released from the GDI at the plasma membrane a GEF facilitates the exchange of GTP for GDP , whereby a transient complex between a nucleotide - free Rho GTPase and the RhoGEF is formed . The subsequent binding of GTP to the Rho GTPase is favored by the high intracellular ratio of GTP to GDP ( reviewed in Zheng 2001 ) . The first characterized mammalian GEF , Dbl , was isolated as an oncogene product from a human diffuse B - cell lymphoma ( Eva & Aaronson 1985 ) . Subsequently , Dbl was shown to promote GDP - GTP exchange on Cdc42 . This exchange is dependent on a region comprising 180 amino acids in Dbl , now referred to as the DH domain ( Hart et al 1991 ; Hart et al 1994 ) . Analysis of genome sequences has revealed that there are around 60 Dbl - homology domains in human ( Venter et al 2001 ) . The DH domain is divided into three conserved regions CR1 , CR2 and CR3 , each 10 - 30 amino acids long ( reviewed in Hoffman & Cerione 2002 ; Schmidt & Hall 2002 ) . GEFs show a varying degree of specificity , with Dbl and Vav acting on several Rho GTPases , while others show specificity for a single RhoGTPase , such as faciogenital dysplasia protein 1 ( FGD1 ) ( Cdc42 ) , intersectin ( Cdc42 ) , and p115RhoGEF ( Rho ) ( Hart et al 1994 ; Hart et al 1996 ; Hussain et al 2001 ; Olson et al 1996 ; Zheng et al 1996 ) . Almost all GEFs have a PH domain adjacent and C - terminal to their DH - domains . Apart from the DH and PH domains , GEFs contain additional domains , including SH2 , SH3 , Ser / Thr kinase , RasGEF , RhoGAP , RanGEF , PDZ or additonal PH domains ( Schmidt & Hall 2002 ) . The specificity in vivo is often higher than in vitro , as exemplified by Tiam1 , acting on Cdc42 , Rac and Rho in vitro and only on Rac in vivo ( Michiels et al 1995 ) . Several mechanisms have been described for the regulation of the Dbl family of GEFs , including localization to membranes or the actin cytoskeleton mediated by the PH domain , intramolecular inhibition by DH - PH interaction or binding of 30 inhibitory sequences to the DH or PH domain , and stimulation by protein - protein interactions ( reviewed in Hoffman & Cerione 2002 ; Schmidt & Hall 2002 ; Zheng 2001 ) . Autoinhibition might be released by phosphorylation or by binding to proteins or PIPs , but in most cases the mechanism is not known . The intramolecular DH - PH interaction in Sos is released by binding of the PH domain to the PI 3 - kinase product PIP 3 ( Nimnual et al 1998 ) . One interesting example of activation of GEFs is the intermolecular oligomerization of onco - Dbl DH - domains ( Zhu et al 2001 ) . Oligomers of Dbl can recruit multiple Rho GTPases into a multimeric complex and thereby serve to coordinate multiple pathways . The Dbl family of GEFs appears to be the major class of positive regulators for Rho GTPases , although there are non - DH domain containing proteins that have been found to catalyze the GDP - GTP exchange on Rho GTPases , such as DOCK180 , and the S . typhimurium GEF - like protein SopE ( reviewed in Lerm et al 2000 ; Schmidt & Hall 2002 ) . Moreover , studies in yeast have shown that RhoGEFs can act both as upstream regulators and as downstream effectors of Rho GTPases , most likely reflecting their multidomain structure ( reviewed in Scita et al 2000 ) . 3 . I . Rho guanine dissociation inhibitors ( RhoGDIs ) GDIs have only been found for the Rab and Rho subfamilies of the Ras superfamily , where Rab proteins have distinct GDIs ( Ridley 2001a ) . In contrast to the RhoGAP and RhoGEF protein families , the RhoGDI family consists only of three members , namely RhoGDI (cid:68) , RhoGDI (cid:69) and RhoGDI (cid:74) ( reviewed in Olofsson 1999 ; Sasaki & Takai 1998 ) . RhoGDI (cid:68) was initially isolated as a protein inhibiting the dissociation of GDP from and the subsequent binding of GTP on RhoB ( Fukumoto et al 1990 ; Ohga et al 1989 ; Ueda et al 1990 ) . However , RhoGDI appears to associate equally well with the GDP - bound and the GTP - bound form of Rho GTPases , thereby sequestering Rho GTPases from the activities of both GEFs and GAPs ( Olofsson 1999 ; Scita et al 2000 ) . In resting cells , Rho GTPases are found complexed with RhoGDIs in the cytosol . The RhoGDIs have a pocket which masks the C - terminal prenyl group of the Rho GTPase , thereby inhibiting their interaction with membranes ( reviewed Zalcman et al 1999 ) . Upon cell activation the Rho GTPase is translocated and released at the plasma membrane . Two possible mechanisms have been proposed for regulation of RhoGDI activity , both resulting in an inactivation and release of the sequestered Rho GTPases . The first mechanism involves protein kinase C ( PKC ) - (cid:68) mediated phosphorylation of RhoGDI , and the second involves binding to members of the ERM - family of proteins ( Mehta et al 2001 ; Takahashi et al 1997 ) . The interaction of RhoGDIs with ERM proteins might be a way of directing Rho GTPases to the proper sites on the plasma membranes ( Scita et al 2000 ) . 4 . Conserved protein domains Binding of extra - cellular ligands to specific receptors on the plasma membrane on a target cell triggers signal transduction cascades inside the cell leading to diverse cellular responses . The propagation of these signals is controlled by protein - protein and protein - lipid interactions occurring through specific protein domains . These interactions can have various purposes such as targeting proteins to specific cellular locations , nucleating multimeric protein complexes , regulating the conformation and hence the activity and / or 31 specificity of an enzyme ( reviewed in Pawson 1995 ; Pawson & Nash 2003 ) . Whereas some protein domains mediate molecular interactions , others possess an enzymatic activity . Interaction domains were initially identified in the context of phosphotyrosine signaling , where SH2 domains of cytoplasmic proteins recognized phosphorylated tyrosine residues on activated autophosphorylated RTKs ( Pawson & Nash 2003 ) . Selected interaction domains which are relevant to this thesis work will be described more in detail below . SH3 domains consist of 50 - 70 amino acid residues and bind with moderate affinity and selectivity to specific proline - rich regions ( reviewed in Kay et al 2000 ; Mayer 2001 ) . There are 253 SH3 domains encoded by the human genome , suggesting a role for SH3 domain - mediated interactions in a plethora of cellular processes ( Pawson & Nash 2003 ) . The ligand specificity of certain SH3 domains have been determined with the use of combinatorial peptides libraries . The SH3 domains of Abl , Src , and PI 3 - kinase were the first to be characterized this way , and optimal binding was achieved by a core conserved motif , PXXP , where X denotes any amino acid ( Kay et al 2000 ; Mayer 2001 ; Ren et al 1993 ) . The ligand binding surface of the SH3 domain consists of three hydrophobic pockets . Two of the pockets are occupied by dipeptides ( a hydrophobic amino acid residue followed by a proline ) ( Figure 6 ) . Specificity of binding can be achieved by residues outside the PXXP core binding motif , for example the third binding pocket , where most SH3 domains prefer a positive residue such as arginine . The position of this positive residue governs in which of two orientations the peptide ligand binds with respect to the SH3 domain . The peptides can bind either N - to C - terminal [ left - handed ( + XXPXXP ) ] or C - to N - terminal [ right - handed ( XPXXPX + ) ] orientation with respect to the SH3 domain , and are denoted class I and class II ligands , respectively . 32 Figure 6 . The interaction of SH3 domains with proline - ligands . The SH3 domain has a relatively flat , hydrophobic ligand - binding surface ( white ) , consisting of three shallow pockets ( shadowed ) . Two of these pockets accommodate the two hydrophobic amino acid - proline dipeptides ( XP ) , whereas the third pocket , the specificity pocket , is occupied by a basic residue , typically arginine . The ligands can bind in either of two orientations depending on the position of the basic residue , and are classified as class I or class II ligands ( See text for details ) . Adapted and changed from Mayer , 2001 . Moreover , the tertiary structure of a protein could fold in such a way that residues otherwise spaced apart come together to mimic a canonical PXXP motif , as exemplified by the interaction between such a motif in p53 tumor suppressor and the SH3 domain of p53BP2 ( p53 - binding protein 2 ) ( Gorina & Pavletich 1996 ) . Recently , a number of SH3 domains have been shown to have ligand preferences other than the classical PXXP motif , for example binding of Eps8 ( epidermal growth factor receptor pathway substrate 8 ) to receptor - and nonreceptor tyrosine kinases ( PXXDY ) , binding of the endocytic scaffold protein CIN85 ( Cbl - interacting protein of 85 kDa ) to Cbl , synaptojanin 1 , PAK2 and ZO - 2 ( zonula occludens - 2 ) ( PX ( P / A ) XXR ) , binding of the RhoGEF PIX to PAK ( PPPVIAPRPETKS ) , binding of the hepatocyte growth factor - regulated tyrosine kinase substrate ( Hrs ) - binding protein to the deubiquitinating enzyme UBPY ( ubiquitin isopeptidase Y ) ( PX ( V / I ) ( D / N ) RXXKP ) , and binding of the Gads T - cell adaptor to the docking protein SLP - 76 ( SH2 domain - containing leukocyte protein of 76 kDa ) ( RXXK ) ( Kato et al 2000 ; Kowanetz et al 2003 ; Kurakin et al 2003 ; Liu et al 2003 ; Manser et al 1998 ; Mongiovi et al 1999 ) . Proline - rich sequences are often found in proteins involved in situations that require a rapid recruitment and / or exchange of proteins , for example during transcriptional initiation , signaling cascades , membrane - trafficking events , cytoskeletal reorganization , cell polarization and organelle biogenesis ( Kay et al 2000 ; Pawson & Nash 2003 ) . Interactions between SH3 domains and proline motifs may serve to assemble large multimeric complexes , alter the subcellular localization to increase the local concentration of components of signaling pathways , and regulate enzyme activity through intramolecular interactions . Some SH3 domain - proline motif interactions occur 33 as stable complexes , whereas others are tightly regulated . Regulation of SH3 domain - proline motif interactions could be achieved by conformational changes in the protein by intramolecular or intermolecular interactions , and / or by phosphorylation / dephosphorylation events , that either expose or bury the proline - motif or the SH3 domain . Although most SH3 - domain - mediated interactions are intermolecular , some occur within one and the same molecule . For example , the SH3 domains of Src and Abl interact with a proline - rich linker region between the SH2 domain and the catalytic domain resulting in a catalytically inactive kinase ( Barila & Superti - Furga 1998 ; Kay et al 2000 ) . There has been a great effort to design cell permeable peptidomimetic antagonists that interfere with and disrupt specific SH3 domain - proline motif interactions , for the purpose of evaluating the functional consequences of these interactions , and to explore the possibility that such antagonists can be used in the treatment of human disease ( reviewed in Kay et al 2000 ; Mayer 2001 ) . There is an expanding list of modules binding to proline - rich motifs , such as WW domains and Ena - VASP - homology 1 ( EVH1 ) domains ( Kay et al 2000 ) . Moreover , although ligands for EH domains and 14 - 3 - 3 domains are not proline - rich , they include a single proline residue ( Kay et al 2000 ) . PDZ domains are repeats of ~ 90 amino acid residues containing the motif Gly - Leu - Gly - Phe ( Saras & Heldin 1996 ) . PDZ domains are involved in four different classes of interactions ; binding to C terminal or internal motifs , PDZ - PDZ dimerization , and recognition of lipids ( Nourry et al 2003 ) . PDZ - domain - containing proteins often act as scaffolds close to the plasma membrane to aggregate receptors and signaling molecules in large multimeric complexes ( reviewed in Saras & Heldin 1996 ) . FCH domains are composed of about 100 amino acid residues present in a wide variety of proteins including the PCH family of proteins , RhoGAP proteins and tyrosine kinases ( Aspenström 1997 ; Lippincott & Li 2000 ) . FCH domains have been proposed to interact with microtubules ( Fujita et al 2002 ; Tian et al 2000 ) . Lipid binding domains . There is a growing list of domains that confer binding to phosphorylated head - groups of membrane lipids ( PIPs ) , such as the PH , FYVE ( Fab1p / YOTB / Vac1p / EEA1 ) , PX , epsin - N - terminal homology ( ENTH ) , band 4 . 1 protein and ERM homology ( FERM ) , Tubby and BAR domains ( Farsad et al 2001 ; Pawson et al 2002 ; Takei et al 1999 ; Paper III ) . These domains could act to target proteins to specific membranes and / or regulate their activity . Whereas PH domains confer binding to PIP 2 and PIP 3 at the plasma membrane , FYVE domains bind certain phospholipids on endosomal membranes ( Pawson et al 2002 ) . PH domains are found in a variety of proteins , in RhoGEFs , RhoGAPs , cytoskeletal proteins , and in several proteins of the endocytic machinery , for instance dynamin , AP2 and clathrin . As shown in Table 4 , BAR domains are present in the members of a wide variety of protein families ( reviewed in Zhang & Zelhof 2002 ; SMART database and BLASTp ) 34 Table 4 . BAR domain - containing proteins in vertebrates . Protein family Members with BAR domains Amphiphysin / Bridging - integrator ( BIN ) family Amphiphysin I Amphiphysin II splice variants : Amphiphysin IIa ( brain ) BIN1 [ also called Amphiphysin IIb ( muscle ) ] BIN1 [ ( ubiquitous ) two splice variants ] BIN2 BIN3 Endophilin family Endophilin A1 Endophilin A2 Endophilin A3 Endophilin B1 Endophilin B2 RhoGAP family RICH - 1 / nadrin and splice variants RICH - 2 ( KIAA0672 ) 3BP - 1 GRAF - 1 RhoGEF family KIAA1010 ArfGAP family Similar to KIAA1716 ( or centaurin B5 ) Coiled - coils are structures that consist of two to five amphiphatic (cid:68) - helices twisted around one another to form a supercoil ( reviewed in Burkhard et al 2001 ) . The coiled - coil motifs enables homotypic and heterotypic oligomerization and are found in a variety of proteins including cytoskeletal proteins , motor proteins , signaling proteins and proteins involved in membrane - trafficking processes . For example , the Rho GTPase effectors Dia , ROCK , IQGAP and citron kinase contain coiled - coil regions , which at least in the case of IQGAP have been proposed to facilitate oligomerization ( Bishop & Hall 2000 ) . Oligomerization of effectors might add another level of complexity to target activation by Rho GTPases ( Bishop & Hall 2000 ) . Further , the coiled - coil regions present in endocytic proteins dynamin , amphiphysin and endophilin are proposed to mediate oligomerization required for invagination of the plasma membrane during clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Farsad et al 2001 ; Takei et al 1998 ; Takei et al 1999 ) . 5 . Endocytosis RICH - 1 has a BAR domain with homology to the members of the amphiphysin and endophilin families of endocytic proteins . These proteins are involved in the most well - studied type of endocytosis , clathrin - mediated endocytosis , partly by interacting with lipids in the plasma membrane via their BAR domains . The multiple pathways of endocytosis Endocytosis is the common term for cells internalizing material from the extracellular environment into a vesicular compartment , either by the uptake of fluid , referred to as 35 ‘cell drinking’ ( pinocytosis ) or large particles , referred to as ‘cell eating’ ( phagocytosis ) ( reviewed in Marsh 2001 ) . Endocytosis has many functions in the cell , including internalization of nutrients , receptor regulation , recycling of synaptic vesicles , antigen presentation , and removal of apoptotic cells ( reviewed in Marsh & McMahon 1999 ) . In addition , several pathogens have been shown to use the endocytic machinery of the host cell to enter and infect it . Pinocytic events can be further divided into clathrin - dependent endocytosis , and the clathrin - independent processes ; macropinocytosis , caveolae - mediated endocytosis , and a process independent of both clathrin and dynamin . The most well - studied examples of internalization events are the clathrin - mediated endocytosis of receptors in non - neuronal cells and the fast synaptic vesicle recycling in neurons . 5 . A . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis Clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) is a receptor - mediated process and , since a vesicle cannot form without liquid content , also a pinocytic event ( reviewed in Marsh & McMahon 1999 ) . Endocytosis can be either constitutive , i . e . occur without apparent stimuli , or dependent on stimuli , such as ligand binding to growth factor receptors or recycling of synaptic vesicles after exocytosis ( reviewed in Marsh 2001 ; Takei & Haucke 2001 ) . Endocytosis via clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCVs ) in cultured cells takes less than one minute whereas , in the synapse for instance , it is an even faster process ( Marsh & McMahon 1999 ) . CCV formation is not restricted to the plasma membrane , but occurs also from the trans - Golgi network and endosomes ( Stoorvogel et al 1996 ; reviewed in Schmid 1997 ) . By contrast , so - called coat protein I ( COPI ) and COPII coats are involved in vesicular trafficking between the Golgi apparatus and the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) ( Figure 7 ) ( Schmid 1997 ) . Figure 7 . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis and intracellular membrane - trafficking events , and the different protein - coats involved ; clathrin , COP I and COP II . Changed and adapted from Kirchhausen , 2000 . ER LATE ENDOSOME LYSOSOME EARLY ENDOSOME NUCLEUS trans - Golgi cis - Golgi Clathrin - coats Clathrin - coats COP I - coats COP II coats PLASMA MEMBRANE RECYCLING ENDOSOME Extra cellular space 36 A multitude of protein - protein and protein - lipid interactions are needed to accomplish CME , a tightly regulated process involving the several subsequent steps . After the assembly of the protein coat and the deformation of the plasma membrane to create an invaginated coated pit , the scission of the vesicle neck creates a free coated vesicle . In the next step the vesicle is uncoated to enable either fusion with early endosome or , in the case of synaptic vesicle recycling , refilling with neurotransmitter and re - entrance into the pool of synaptic vesicles ( reviewed in Brodin et al 2000 ; Brodsky et al 2001 ; Takei & Haucke 2001 ) . The early endosome is mainly a sorting organelle and determines whether the endocytosed material , for example certain types of receptors , are recycled back to the plasma membrane , or selected for transport to late endosomal compartments followed by degradation in lysosomes ( Marsh 2001 ) . CME starts with the recruitment of the adaptor protein AP2 , via its interaction with the transmembrane ‘docking protein’ synaptotagmin , PIP 2 or PIP 3 , and endocytic sorting signals in the cytoplasmic domain of the membrane proteins that are to be internalized ( Brodin et al 2000 ; Brodsky et al 2001 ; Takei & Haucke 2001 ) . The neuron - specific adaptor protein 180 ( AP180 ) , or its ubiquitous homologue CALM ( clathrin - assembly lymphoid myeloid leukemia ) , is recruited by binding to PIP 2 , and appears to regulate the size of the vesicle ( Figure 8 ) . Figure 8 . The sequential steps of clathrin - mediated endocytosis and the key components involved . Adapted from Takei & Haucke , 2001 . 37 Both AP2 and AP180 then support formation of the clathrin coat , and a plethora of so called ‘accessory proteins’ are recruited by protein - protein and / or protein - lipid interactions to regulate the subsequent steps of the internalization . These proteins include amphiphysin , dynamin , endophilin , epsin , Eps15 , and synaptojanin . The membrane lipids themselves are important for protein - lipid interactions and signaling during the endocytic event . PIPs and consequently the enzymes controlling their turnover are important regulators of CME . During CME , PIPs , such as PIP 2 , act to recruit endocytic proteins to the plasma membranes to form the coated pit and to deform the membrane . Subsequently , to allow for uncoating of the vesicle after detachment , phosphatases such as the polyphosphoinositide phosphatase synaptojanin hydrolyze PIP 2 , whereas a phosphatidylinositol 4 - kinase ( PI 4 - kinase ; type II (cid:68) in particular ) together with a PIP 5 - kinase , primarily phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase type I (cid:74) ( PIPKI (cid:74) ) , regenerates the PIP 2 levels for a new round of endocytosis ( Cremona & De Camilli 2001 ; Guo et al 2003 ; Wenk et al 2001 ) . In addition , the interactions between several endocytic proteins are regulated by protein dephosphorylation / phosphorylation events . For example , phosphorylation of amphiphysin inhibited its binding to AP2 and clathrin ( Slepnev et al 1998 ) . Much work has been done to identify the proteins involved in CME , and at what stage ( s ) they act . Different approaches have been established to block the function of a protein in vivo in order to see at which stage CME is disrupted . These studies include over - expression of dominant - negative mutants , microinjection of interfering antibodies , peptide or protein domains , as well as generation of knock - out mice ( reviewed in Higgins & McMahon 2002 ) . Dynamin The dynamin family of large GTPases consists of three conventional tissue - specific isoforms ( dynamin - 1 , - 2 and - 3 ) and their splice variants , as well as the dynamin - related Drp1 ( dynamin - related protein 1 ) , OPA1 ( Optic atrophy 1 ) , hGBP1 ( human guanylate - binding protein 1 ) and Mx ( reviewed in Danino & Hinshaw 2001 ; Schmid et al 1998 ) . Dynamin was first identified as a protein interacting with microtubules , however , there is no evidence for this interaction in vivo ( reviewed in Hinshaw 2000 ) . The first implication of dynamin in CME came from studies where the temperature sensitive mutant in the Drosophila dynamin gene , Shibire , was shown to cause a block in endocytosis at the nerve terminals of the flies , visible on thin section electron micrographs ( Kosaka & Ikeda 1983 ) . This block correlated with a lack of vesicle scission , and accumulation of deeply invaginated clathrin - coated pits with necks surrounded by an electron - dense material referred to as a ‘collar’ . Accordingly , over - expression or microinjection of dynamin mutants , or functionally interfering forms of its binding partners , specifically inhibited CME in mammalian cells ( Damke et al 1994 ; Damke et al 2001 ; Shupliakov et al 1997 ; Simpson et al 1999 ) . Dynamin exists as a tetramer and can spontaneously self - assemble , via its coiled - coil motifs , into rings and spirals at low salt concentrations , or on lipid bilayers to form helical tubes that resemble the collared structures seen in nerve termini ( Carr & Hinshaw 1997 ; Hinshaw & Schmid 1995 ; Stowell et al 1999 ; Sweitzer & Hinshaw 1998 ; Takei et al 1998 ; Takei et al 1995 ) . 38 Although the exact mechanism for vesicle scission is not understood , it clearly involves GTP - hydrolysis by dynamin , as shown by experiments using dynamin mutants defective in GTP - binding and hydrolysis ( reviewed in Song & Schmid 2003 ) . During CME , dynamin is targeted to the coated - pits in its GDP - bound form , where binding of GTP triggers the assembly of dynamin oligomers in collar - like structures at the neck of the coated - pit ( Schmid et al 1998 ) . One model suggests that a subsequent GTP - hydrolysis triggers a conformational change that drives the membrane fission , either by constriction by dynamin collars , or by expansion of the helical pitch of dynamin rings ( reviewed in Kelly 1999 ; Song & Schmid 2003 ; Stowell et al 1999 ; Sweitzer & Hinshaw 1998 ) . Yet another model proposes that dynamin in its GTP - bound form acts as a ‘classical GTPase’ recruiting and / or interacting with effector proteins in order to form the vesicle , whereby dynamin self - assembly then triggers GTP - hydrolysis and termination of GTP - dependent interactions ( Sever et al 1999 ; Song & Schmid 2003 ) . In contrast to other GTPases dynamin possesses a high intrinsic GTPase activity ( reviewed in Hinshaw 2000 ) . The GTPase activity can be enhanced by different factors ; via oligomerization ( via coiled - coil motifs ) , binding to SH3 domain - containing proteins ( via the proline - rich motifs ) , association with microtubules , interaction with PIP 2 ( via the PH domain ) , and phosphorylation by PKC . The interaction of dynamin with SH3 domain - containing proteins , such as endophilins and amphiphysins , appears to be of importance for targeting dynamin to the plasma membrane and / or regulating its GTPase activity ( Hinshaw 2000 ; Huttner & Schmidt 2002 ) . In addition to its role in membrane trafficking events , dynamin has shown involvement in apoptosis , MAP ( mitogen - activated protein ) kinase signaling and actin reorganization ( reviewed in Sever 2002 ) . Moreover , phosphorylation / dephosphorylation of dynamin by PKC / calcineurin regulates its interactions with other endocytic proteins . For instance , dephosphorylation is required for the binding of dynamin to amphiphysin ( Slepnev et al 1998 ) . Amphiphysin Amphiphysin I was first identified as a synaptic vesicle associated protein in chicken brain extracts , and subsequently as an autoantigen in the Stiff - man syndrome associated with breast cancer in human ( De Camilli et al 1993 ; Lichte et al 1992 ) . The amphiphysin members of the BAR family of proteins include the brain - specific Amphiphysin I ( Amph I ; also referred to as amphiphysin in this thesis ) , the ubiquitous amphiphysin II ( Amph II ) and its splice variants ( reviewed in Zhang & Zelhof 2002 ) . Amphiphysin is proposed to recruit dynamin to the coated pit by the SH3 domain - mediated interaction with a proline - rich motif in dynamin and its additional binding sites for clathrin and AP2 ( Takei et al 1999 ; reviewed in Wigge & McMahon 1998 ) . Studies in which the interaction between amphiphysin and dynamin was disrupted confirmed its importance for endocytosis . For example , injection of the recombinant SH3 domain of amphiphysin into living cells caused a blockade of endocytosis at the stage of invaginated coated - pits , suggesting that the dynamin - amphiphysin interaction is required for scission of the vesicle ( David et al 1996 ; Shupliakov et al 1997 ) . Furthermore , over - expression of amphiphysin SH3 domain caused a block of receptor - mediated uptake of transferrin ( Simpson et al 1999 ; Wigge et al 1997 ) . Amphiphysin not only binds to dynamin , but also inhibits its oligomerization , and is thought to maintain 39 dynamin in its dissociated form until it is needed for the scission reaction ( reviewed in Wigge & McMahon 1998 ; Marsh & McMahon 1999 ) . Amphiphysin also interacts with synaptojanin via the SH3 domain , with endophilin via the proline - rich motif , and with PIP 2 via the BAR domain ( reviewed in Wigge & McMahon 1998 ; Zhang & Zelhof 2002 ) . In addition to roles in CME , amphiphysins have been proposed to be involved in neurite outgrowth ( Amph I ) , cell growth regulation ( Amph I ) , actin reorganization via c - Abl interaction ( Amph II ) , T - tubule biogenesis in muscle ( Amph II ) and signaling pathways via interaction with the RasGEF Sos ( Amph II ) ( Floyd et al 2001 ; Kadlec & Pendergast 1997 ; Lee et al 2002 ; Leprince et al 1997 ; Mundigl et al 1998 ) . Endophilin The endophilin family of proteins includes two subfamilies , the endophilin A1 , 2 and 3 ( also known as endophilin I , II and III , or SH3p4 , SH3p8 and SH3p13 , or SH3GL1 , 2 and 3 ) , and the recently identified endophilin B1 and B2 ( also known as SH3GLB1 and 2 ) ( reviewed in Huttner & Schmidt 2000 ; Modregger et al 2003 ; Pierrat et al 2001 ) . The endophilins were initially identified as fusion partners to the human mixed - lineage - leukemia gene , and subsequently implicated in CME by virtue of a SH3 - domain - dependent interaction with synaptojanin ( de Heuvel et al 1997 ; Ringstad et al 1997 ; So et al 1997 ) . The neuron - specific endophilin A1 ( also referred to as endophilin in this thesis ) is the most extensively studied of the endophilin isoforms , and the SH3 domain of endophilin interacts with the proline - rich motifs of several endocytic proteins , including synaptojanin , dynamin and amphiphysin ( Micheva et al 1997 ; Ringstad et al 1997 ; So et al 2000 ) . Disrupting SH3 - domain - dependent interactions of endophilin , has demonstrated a requirement for endophilin both during the early stages of invagination , and during later stages of scission and vesicle uncoating ( Gad et al 2000 ; Hill et al 2001 ; Ringstad et al 1999 ; Simpson et al 1999 ) . Moreover , endophilin was proposed to be recruited by the endocytic scaffold protein CIN85 during down - regulation of RTKs ( Petrelli et al 2002 ; Soubeyran et al 2002 ) . Furthermore , endophilin bound to proline - rich motifs in the cytoplasmic domains of membrane proteins including the G - protein - coupled (cid:69) - adrenergic receptor and the metalloprotease disintegrins ( Howard et al 1999 ; Tang et al 1999 ) . Interestingly , endophilin is thought to regulate JNK ( Jun kinase ; c - jun N - terminal kinase ) activation via interaction with the Germinal Center Kinase - like kinase ( Ramjaun et al 2001 ) . Other endophilin - binding - partners include huntingtin , N - WASP and RICH - 1 ( Otsuki et al 2003 ; So et al 2000 ; Paper III ) . 5 . B . Mechanisms for membrane invagination The complex cellular mechanism of endocytosis is difficult to analyze in living cells and required the development of a reliable in vitro system . Artificial liposomes provide an excellent substrate for mimicking the membrane shape changes under controlled conditions that take place during invagination and scission of the coated - pit ( reviewed in Higgins & McMahon 2002 ) . Incubation of artificial liposomes together with brain cytosol supplemented with the non - hydrolyzable GTP - analogue , GTP (cid:74) S ( 5 ' - guanosine alpha - thiotriphosphate ) and ATP ( adenosine 5 ' - triphosphate ) , resulted in the formation of 40 long tube - like structures and clathrin - coated buds , and immunogold labeling confirmed the presence of clathrin and the accessory proteins , dynamin , amphiphysin , endophilin and synaptojanin in these structures ( Farsad et al 2001 ; Takei et al 1998 ) . In fact , purified dynamin alone was able to form tube - like structures when incubated with liposomes , and oligomers of dynamin were visualized as helices on the surface of the lipid tubes ( Sweitzer & Hinshaw 1998 ; Takei et al 1998 ) . Furthermore , addition of GTP caused the tubes to vesiculate , consistent with the role of dynamin in vesicle scission upon GTP - hydrolysis . Subsequently , a similar tubulating activity was demonstrated for amphiphysin , endophilin and epsin ( Farsad et al 2001 ; Ford et al 2002 ; Takei et al 1999 ) . The common denominator for these tubulating proteins is a domain that inserts into the lipid bilayer by binding to acidic phospholipids , i . e . the PH domain in dynamin ( binds PIP 2 ) , the ENTH domain in epsin ( binds PIP 2 ) and the BAR domain of amphiphysin ( binds PIP 2 ) ( Farsad et al 2001 ; Ford et al 2002 ; Sweitzer & Hinshaw 1998 ; Takei et al 1998 ; Takei et al 1999 ) . For endophilin , amphiphysin and epsin , this domain contains an amphiphatic (cid:68) - helix with a hydrophobic face and a hydrophilic face , interacting with the side - chains and the head of membrane lipids , respectively ( reviewed in Hurley & Wendland 2002 ; Huttner & Schmidt 2002 ) . In the case of dynamin , amphiphysin and endophilin , coiled - coil mediated oligomerization of the proteins on the surface of the membrane is believed to provide the force for invagination ( Farsad et al 2001 ; Takei et al 1998 ; Takei et al 1999 ) . In contrast , epsin was proposed to stimulate tubule formation in the absence of oligomerization ( Ford et al 2002 ) . Dynamin together with amphiphysin or endophilin , respectively , could cooperatively deform liposomes into tubes , and whereas amphiphysin promoted vesiculation upon GTP - addition , endophilin inhibited the process ( Farsad et al 2001 ; Takei et al 1998 ) . Endophilin was initially proposed to facilitate membrane curvature by acting as a lysophosphatidic acid acyl transferase ( LPAAT ) , inducing a conformational change in certain membrane lipids and a subsequent shape change in the plasma membrane ( Schmidt et al 1999 ; reviewed in Scales & Scheller 1999 ) . Furthermore , the Golgi - trafficking protein CtBP / BARS ( C - terminal - binding protein / brefeldin A - ADP - ribosylated substrate ) was proposed to induce fission of Golgi membranes by virtue of a LPAAT activity ( Weigert et al 1999 ) . However , the enzymatic activity is probably not the driving force for invagination , since endophilin has been shown to tubulate liposomes lacking the substrates for the enzymatic activity [ lysophosphatidic acid ( LPA ) and phosphatidic acid ( PA ) ] , and when the enzymatic activity was inhibited ( Farsad et al 2001 ; Hurley & Wendland 2002 ; Huttner & Schmidt 2002 ) . However , the efficiency of endophilin mediated tubulation was higher when using liposomes from brain lipid extracts , as compared to synthetic liposomes ( Farsad et al 2001 ) . Thus , although the LPAAT - activity of endophilin appears to be indispensable for tubulation , it could act to speed up the tubulation process , or play a role at some other stage during CME ( Hurley & Wendland 2002 ; Huttner & Schmidt 2002 ) . In addition to the endophilin - and amphiphysin families , the BAR domain is present in the RhoGAP RICH - 1 and its close homologue RICH - 2 ( Paper III ) . In Paper III we show that the BAR domain in RICH - 1 has the ability to bind to and impose curvature on membranes . Thus , such domains appear to have evolved as functional modules in a variety of protein families ( Huttner & Schmidt 2002 ) . 41 The membrane shape changes involving lipid - binding and tubulation by endophilins , amphiphysins and dynamins are not restricted to endocytosis , but occur in addition during other events at the plasma membrane , as well as at intracellular membranes ( Huttner & Schmidt 2002 ) . Moreover , endocytic protein families such as the dynamins and endophilins are present as several isoforms and have , in addition , distantly related members , some of which localize to intracellular membranes . Members of the dynamin family of proteins and dynamin - related proteins have been implicated in internalization via caveolae , intracellular trafficking from late endosomes and Golgi , and fission during mitochondrial division ( reviewed in Danino & Hinshaw 2001 ; Schmid et al 1998 ) . The ubiquitous dynamin 2 and endophilin A2 both localize to podosomes and are implicated in generating membrane curvature to form these structures ( Ochoa et al 2000 ; reviewed in Orth & McNiven 2003 ) . The members of the endophilin B family localize to ER and Golgi , and are thought to play a role in intracellular membrane dynamics and signaling ( Huttner & Schmidt 2002 ; Modregger et al 2003 ) . 5 . C . Actin reorganization during clathrin - mediated endocytosis In budding yeast , endocytosis is dependent on actin reorganization , as shown by genetic studies , and many yeast proteins have dual functions in endocytosis and actin reorganization ( Geli & Riezman 1998 ; Munn 2001 ) . In vertebrates , however , studies employing actin - perturbing drugs and Rho GTPase mutants have resulted in conflicting results . Under some conditions actin reorganization facilitates , but is not critical for CME , although the events downstream of vesicle formation , for example uncoating , vesicle movement , recycling and sorting may require actin rearrangements ( reviewed in Schafer 2002 ) . Several functions for the actin cytoskeleton have been proposed during CME ; the actin cytoskeleton could provide the proper localization of the endocytic machinery , into so called ‘hot spots’ . Reorganization of actin could facilitate plasma membrane invagination , since the cortical actin cytoskeleton might have to be disassembled to allow for endocytosis . Moreover , actin polymerization at the neck of the vesicle could facilitate fission of the vesicle , and actin polymerization could aid in the propelling of the vesicle into the cell ( reviewed in Qualmann et al 2000 ; Schafer 2002 ) . ‘Actin comet tails’ have been observed to associate with endosomes , pinosomes , clathrin - coated and secretory vesicles , and resemble the mechanism whereby pathogens , such as Listeria monocytogenes , propel through the cytoplasm of infected cells ( Frischknecht et al 1999 ; Merrifield et al 1999 ; Rozelle et al 2000 ; Schafer 2002 ) . There has been a great effort in order to identify proteins which could provide a direct link between CME and the actin cytoskeleton , and there is now a growing list of candidates ( reviewed in McPherson et al 2001 ; Qualmann et al 2000 ; Schafer 2002 ) . Recent research has focused much attention on the involvement of actin in intracellular vesicle movement , and , interestingly , dynamin 2 has been shown to regulate polymerization of actin comets in live cells ( Lee & De Camilli 2002 ; Orth et al 2002 ) . A number of proteins involved in actin organization have been shown to bind to the proline - rich motif of dynamin 2 in an SH3 - domain - dependent fashion ( see Figure 9 ; reviewed in Orth & McNiven 2003 ; Schafer 2002 ) . Profilin was the first actin - binding protein found to bind the proline - rich motif of dynamin . Furthermore , cortactin binds to and co - localizes with dynamin 2 in cortical membrane ruffles after PDGF stimulation , 42 and regulates actin reorganization co - operatively with dynamin 2 ( Krueger et al 2003 ; McNiven et al 2000 ; Schafer et al 2002 ) . In addition , cortactin has been shown to co - localize with dynamin 2 in podosomal structures , actin comets , clathrin - coated pits and the Golgi complex ( Cao et al 2003 ; Ochoa et al 2000 ; Orth et al 2002 ) . Abp1 ( actin - binding protein 1 ) binds to , and co - localizes with , dynamin 2 in cortical membrane ruffles , clathrin - coated pits and at the Golgi complex ( Fucini et al 2002 ; Kessels et al 2001 ) . Moreover , over - expression of the SH3 domain of either cortactin or Abp1 inhibited transferrin uptake , further supporting a role for their interaction with dynamin in endocytic function ( Cao et al 2003 ; Kessels et al 2001 ) . Protein scaffolds that bring together a diverse set of proteins by virtue of their protein - protein interaction domains play important roles in endocytosis . For example , PKC and CK2 substrate in neurons / synaptic , dynamin - associated proteins ( PACSINs / syndapins ) ( mouse PACSIN I , II , and III , and the rat syndapin I and II ) and intersectins ( intersectins I and II ) are protein scaffolds that provide an indirect link between endocytosis and actin assembly by interacting with dynamin and N - WASP ( Hussain et al 2001 ; Qualmann et al 1999 ) . Over - expression of the PACSIN / syndapin SH3 domains was shown to inhibit receptor - mediated internalization of transferrin , and over - expression of full - length syndapins induced filopodia formation in HeLa cells ( Modregger et al 2000 ; Qualmann & Kelly 2000 ; Qualmann et al 1999 ; Simpson et al 1999 ) . Intersectin was shown to localize to clathrin - pits and to regulate the formation of CCVs ( Hussain et al 1999 ; Pucharcos et al 2000 ; Sengar et al 1999 ; Simpson et al 1999 ; Yamabhai et al 1998 ) . The huntingtin - interacting protein ( HIP1 ) and the related HIP1R localize to clathrin - coated pits ( via an ENTH domain interacting with PIP 2 ) and have in addition been shown to associate with CCVs ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al 1999 ; Metzler et al 2001 ; Mishra et al 2001 ; Waelter et al 2001 ) . A heterodimeric complex of HIP1 - HIP1R may function to anchor newly forming coated pits to the cortical cytoskeleton , through HIP1 - binding to clathrin and AP2 , and HIP1R - binding to actin ( McPherson 2002 ; Schafer 2002 ) . HIP1 was originally characterized by virtue of its interaction with huntingtin , the gene responsible for Huntington’s disease ( Gusella & MacDonald 1998 ) . 43 Figure 9 . A multitude of proteins are involved in linking the endocytic machinery with actin polymerization . For simplicity , all of the interactions that occur are not shown . Motifs that are shown in the figure but not discussed in the text include : NPF ( arginine - proline - phenylalanine ) motifs binding to EH domains and ANTH ( AP180 N - terminal homology ) domains interacting with membrane lipids . The BAR domain in RICH - 1 might confer binding to the plasma membrane , however , this has not been established . PRD refers to proline - rich domain . 6 . Rho GTPases and membrane - trafficking The first indication of an involvement of Rho GTPases in CME came from studies by Lamaze et al . , who showed that constitutively active mutants of either Rho or Rac could block transferrin - receptor mediated endocytosis ( Lamaze et al 1996 ; Qualmann & Mellor 2003 ; reviewed in Ridley 2001c ) . Furthermore , activated Rho was shown to inhibit internalization of the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor ( Vogler et al 1999 ) . Rho GTPases might participate in CME ( and other membrane - trafficking processes ) by modulating phosphoinositide metabolism , through regulation of the enzymes affecting phosphoinositide turnover ( reviewed in Symons & Rusk 2003 ) . Rac has been shown to interact with PI 3 - kinases , PIP 5 - kinases and synaptojanin 2 . For example , activated Rac may block internalization by recruiting synaptojanin 2 to membranes , resulting in depletion of PIP 2 and a reduced formation of coated - pits ( Malecz et al 2000 ) . As mentioned above , Cdc42 and Rho have been shown to interact with PI 3 - kinase , and Rho binds PIP 5 - kinases . Another way for Rho GTPases to influence CME and other membrane - trafficking events , is through their effects on the actin cytoskeleton , which of course can be influenced by changes in PIP 2 levels . Cdc42 may be coupled to CME through the endocytic scaffold intersectin - 1 , which is also a GEF for Cdc42 , and implicated in a feed - back loop on N - WASP . N - WASP binds to and enhances the GEF activity of intersectin , resulting in F - actin G - actin actin assembly BAR - AMPHIPHYSIN - SH3 SYNAPTOJANIN - PRD PH - AP2 CLATHRIN PROFILIN - SH3 INTERSECTIN - SH3 CORTACTIN - SH3 mAbp1 - SH3 PACSIN / SYNDAPIN - SH3 BAR - ENDOPHILIN - SH3 ENTH - EPSIN - NPF A N T H - A P 180 / C A L M Nck - SH3 Grb2 - SH3 ENTH - HIP1 PRD - N - WASP Cdc42 - GDP Cdc42 - GTP BAR - RICH - 1 - PRD PH - DYNAMIN - PRD + Rac - GTP Rac - GDP SYNAPTOTAGMIN receptor ligand ENTH - HIP1R NPF NPF EH Arp2 / 3 complex EH - Eps15 NPF PLASMA MEMBRANE 44 activation of Cdc42 and a subsequent N - WASP - mediated Arp2 / 3 actin assembly ( Hussain et al 2001 ) . Interestingly , over - expression of an intersectin - mutant unable to act on Cdc42 resulted in severe defects in T - cell receptor endocytosis , and resembles the effects caused by lack of WASP in these cells ( Qualmann & Mellor 2003 ) . The Cdc42 - effector ACK is another protein that may act to link Cdc42 to CME , possibly via an interaction with clathrin ( Qualmann & Mellor 2003 ) . Professional phagocytic cells internalize infectious particles by two types of mechanisms , both being receptor - mediated events ; type I involves Cdc42 ( via WASP and Arp2 / 3 ) and Rac ( via PAK1 and a PIP 5 - kinase ) , whereas type II involves Rho ( via ROCK ) ( Caron & Hall 1998 ; Qualmann & Mellor 2003 ) . Macropinocytic vesicles are formed when membrane ruffles fold back on themselves to form membrane bound vesicles ( reviewed in Ridley 2001c ) . Ridley et al . showed in early studies that Rac stimulated macropinocytosis in Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts , and , initially , pinocytosis was thought to occur as a consequence of an increased membrane ruffling ( Ridley 2001c ; Ridley et al 1992 ) . Recent reports , however , indicate that macropinocytosis can be uncoupled from membrane ruffling , and that these events are not exclusively mediated by Rac . For example , Rac is required for pinocytosis , but not for membrane - ruffling in spleen - derived dendritic cells ( West et al 2000 ) , and Ras can separately activate Rab5 - dependent pinocytosis and Rac - dependent membrane ruffling in baby hamster kidney cells ( Li et al 1997 ) . Moreover , macropinocytosis in bone - marrow - derived dendritic cells requires both Rac and Cdc42 ( Garrett et al 2000 ) . The localization of some Rho GTPases to endocytic vesicles indicated a role for these in intracellular membrane - trafficking ( reviewed in Ellis & Mellor 2000 ) . RhoB localizes to late endosomes and is involved in trafficking of the EGF receptor to lysosomes for degradation , whereas RhoD localizes to early endosomes and controls the motility of these compartments ( Gampel et al 1999 ; Gasman et al 2003 ; Murphy et al 1996 ) . Under physiological conditions , the movement of endosomes is regulated by the interplay between the actin filaments and microtubules . Whereas actin filaments appear to have a role in early transport of endosomes , microtubules seem to act during endosomal sorting ( Marsh 2001 ) . Another Rho GTPase implicated in intracellular - trafficking ( and targeted exocytosis ) is the Cdc42 - related Rho GTPase TC10 ( see Chapter 3 . D . ) . Additional endocytic and exocytic events involving Rho GTPases are reviewed in ( Ridley 2001c ; Symons & Rusk 2003 ) . The future challenge will be to dissect the downstream signaling events that mediate the roles of Rho GTPases in membrane - trafficking . Future studies might also reveal additional trafficking functions for some of the less well - characterized Rho - family members . Further , it will be of outstanding interest to investigate the involvement of RhoGAPs ( and RhoGEFs ) as regulators and / or downstream effectors in these and other processes . 45 PRESENT INVESTIGATIONS Aim The aim of this thesis work was to identify and characterize binding partners for the Cdc42 effector protein CIP4 , in order to elucidate the function of this protein in Rho GTPase - mediated activities . We isolated a previously unidentified RhoGAP ( RICH - 1 ) as a binding partner for CIP4 . This thesis work focuses on the characterization of this RhoGAP , and its role in regulating actin dynamics and membrane - trafficking . Introduction The yeast two - hybrid system and affinity chromatography approaches have been widely used to identify the targets that mediate the plethora of responses the Rho GTPases bring about in the cell . CIP4 was previously isolated from a yeast two - hybrid screen as a binding partner for constitutively active Cdc42 . In a yeast two - hybrid screen for proteins interacting specifically with the SH3 domain of CIP4 , we isolated several binding partners ( Paper I ) including a previously unidentified RhoGAP ( RICH - 1 ) . Figure I shows a schematic representation of RICH - 1 , and some of the binding partners we identified in Papers II - IV are indicated . In addition , we characterized a CIP4 - binding DRF , DAAM1 . Figure I . Schematic representation of RICH - 1 . The BAR domain confers binding to membrane lipids , the GAP domain is specific for Rac and Cdc42 , the proline motifs confer binding to several SH3 domain - containing proteins , and the extreme C - terminal binds to the PDZ domain - containing proteins , NHERF - 1 and NHERF - 2 . BAR domain RhoGAP domain proline - rich motifs STAL P1 P2 P3 P4 803 aa membrane - lipids Cdc42Rac CIP4 ( SH3 ) Endophilin ( SH3 ) Amphiphysin ( SH3 ) Abl ( SH3 ) CIN85 ( SH3 ) NHERF ( PDZ ) RICH - 1 PDZ - domain binding motif 46 We showed that RICH - 1 is a GAP for Rac and Cdc42 , but not for Rho , in vitro and in vivo ( Paper II ) . In addition to the RhoGAP domain , RICH - 1 exhibits an N - terminal BAR domain , a putative coiled - coil motif , a stretch of proline - rich motifs and a C - terminal PDZ domain - binding motif . In accordance with studies on the BAR domain - containing proteins amphiphysin I and endophilin A1 , the BAR domain in RICH - 1 binds lipids , and can deform lipid bilayers in vitro , thus , suggesting a role for RICH - 1 in membrane - trafficking ( Paper III ) . The proline motifs confer binding to a number of SH3 domain - containing proteins ( Paper III and Paper IV ) . Furthermore , RICH - 1 contains a PDZ binding motif , which binds to the first of two consecutive PDZ domains in NHERF ( Na + / H + exchanger - regulatory factor ) proteins ( Paper IV ; Reczek & Bretscher 2001 ) . Paper IV describes the interactions of RICH - 1 with CIN85 , the NHERF family of proteins , and Abl , each of which are described in more detail below . Cbl - interacting protein of 85 kDa ( CIN85 ) The multiadaptor proteins CIN85 and its close homologue CMS / CD2AP ( p130Cas ligand with multiple SH3 domains / CD2 associated protein ) are composed of three SH3 domains , a proline - rich motif , a coiled - coil region and three FxDxF motifs which confer binding to AP2 ( reviewed in Dikic 2002 ) . CMS / CD2AP in addition displays four putative actin binding motifs . By virtue of their SH3 domains , CIN85 and CMS / CD2AP interact with several proteins , including the Cbl family of ubiquitin ligases , the B - cell linker protein , and the T - cell receptor CD2 ( Dikic 2002 ; Kirsch et al 2001 ; Soubeyran et al 2002 ; Take et al 2000 ; Watanabe et al 2000 ) . In addition , the proline - rich motif in CIN85 confers binding to the SH3 domains in PI 3 - kinase , Grb2 , p130Cas , Fyn , Src , Yes and endophilins A1 - A3 ( Dikic 2002 ) . Moreover , the coiled - coil region in CIN85 mediates homo - oligomerization into tetramers ( Watanabe et al 2000 ) . CIN85 and CMS / CD2AP have been implicated in a number of cellular functions , partly by virtue of their ability to cluster membrane receptors ( Dikic 2002 ) . These include the organization of specialized junctions in the contact area between T - cells and antigen - presenting cells ( immunological synapses ) , formation of kidney glomeruli architecture , and down - regulation and degradation of RTKs . Growth - factor induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Cbl enhanced its association with CIN85 / CMS , presumably due to a conformational change in Cbl leading to unmasking of the proline - rich motifs able to interact with CIN85 / CMS ( Kirsch et al 2001 ; Petrelli et al 2002 ; Soubeyran et al 2002 ; Take et al 2000 ) . Recently , two groups independently of each other , presented the consensus for binding to the SH3 domains of CIN85 ( PX ( P / A ) XXPR ) ( Kowanetz et al 2003 ; Kurakin et al 2003 ) . CIN85 is involved in Cbl - and Cbl - b - mediated downregulation of RTKs ( Petrelli et al 2002 ; Soubeyran et al 2002 ; Szymkiewicz et al 2002 ) . Upon ligand - induced activation of RTKs , the ubiquitin ligase Cbl binds to the phosphorylated RTKs . Cbl then mediates the addition of ubiquitin , a tag which signals the degradation of the RTKs ( reviewed in Thien & Langdon 2001 ) . CIN85 / CMS are recruited to the Cbl - RTK complexes , whereby Cbl - mediated ubiquitination of CIN85 ( and CMS ) targets these proteins for common lysosomal degradation with Cbl and RTKs ( Haglund et al 2002 ) . In addition , Soubeyran et al . and Petrelli et al . proposed that endophilin is recruited to the RTK - Cbl - CIN85 complex in 47 order to promote invagination of the plasma membrane ( Petrelli et al 2002 ; Soubeyran et al 2002 ) . The NHERF family of proteins ERM proteins provide a linkage between the plasma membrane and the cortical actin cytoskeleton and participate in signal transduction ( reviewed in Bretscher et al 2002 ) . The association of ERM proteins with the cytoplasmic parts of membrane proteins can be either direct or indirect via the NHERF family of adaptor proteins [ EBP50 ( ERM - binding phosphoprotein 50 ; human ) / NHERF - 1 ( rabbit ) and E3KARP ( NHE3 kinase A regulatory protein ; human ) / NHERF - 2 ( rabbit ) ] . In addition to a C - terminal ERM binding motif , NHERF proteins contain two tandem PDZ domains ( PDZ - 1 and PDZ - 2 ) , which confer binding to several proteins , including the cytoplasmic part of many plasma membrane receptors ( reviewed in Voltz et al 2001 ) . Several functions for NHERFs have emerged ; they regulate the activity of ion - transporters such as NHE3 upon phosphorylation by protein kinase A ( PKA ) , they are involved in endocytosis of plasma membrane receptors to which they bind , and they appear to restrict membrane proteins to specific plasma - membrane domains by anchoring them to the cytoskeleton via ERM proteins ( reviewed in Bretscher et al 2002 ) . For example , EBP50 / NHERF - 1 appears to be required for recycling of the (cid:69) 2 - adrenergic receptor upon ligand - induced endocytosis ( Cao et al 1999 ) . Moreover , the (cid:69) 2 - adrenergic receptor appears to control Na + / H + exchange by NHE3 through its interaction with EBP50 / NHERF - 1 ( Hall et al 1998b ) . Maudsley et al . showed that EBP50 / NHERF - 1 regulates PDGF receptor activity by promoting PDGF receptor dimerization and autophosphorylation , consequently leading to a more efficient activation of the MAP kinase signal cascade ( Maudsley et al 2000 ) . EBP50 / NHERF - 1 was proposed to potentiate PDGF receptor clustering partly due to its own ability to oligomerize . A recent report showed that EBP50 / NHERF - 1 forms a complex with Csk - binding protein / phosphoprotein associated with glycosphingolipid - enriched microdomains ( Cbp / PAG ) ( a Csk - associated membrane adapter protein exclusively localized to lipid - rafts ) and ERM proteins . The lipid - rafts are thereby anchored to the actin cytoskeleton resulting in a restricted mobility , causing inhibition in the formation of immunological synapses ( Itoh et al 2002 ) . NHERF proteins have been implicated in human diseases such as hypertension , acute kidney failure and breast cancer ( Voltz et al 2001 ) . Several GAPs interact with PDZ domain - containing proteins ; the RhoGAP PARG interacts with PTPL1 , synGAP ( a RasGAP ) interacts with PSD - 95 , the RabGAP EPI64 and the RhoGAP RICH - 1 interact with EBP50 / NHERF - 1 ( Chen et al 1998 ; Kim et al 1998 ; Reczek & Bretscher 2001 ; Saras et al 1997 ) . Abelson tyrosine kinase ( Abl ) c - Abl is a non - receptor tyrosine kinase , and the product of the cellular homologue of the transforming gene of Abelson murine leukemia virus ( reviewed in Van Etten 1999 ) . c - Abl has been shown to be activated in response to growth - factor stimulation , as well as integrin engagement ( Lewis et al 1996 ; Plattner et al 1999 ) . An F - actin binding domain ( FABD ) in c - Abl associates directly with F - actin in cells that have been detached from 48 the ECM , and F - actin acts as an inhibitor of c - Abl tyrosine kinase activity ( Woodring et al 2001 ) . Upon integrin engagement , the kinase activity of Abl is rapidly increased upon dissociation from F - actin , and c - Abl is recruited to focal adhesions where it can phosphorylate a number of proteins involved in actin reorganization ( Lewis et al 1996 ; Van Etten 1999 ) . Hence , Abl is involved in regulating cell adhesion ( Kain & Klemke 2001 ; Lanier & Gertler 2000 ) . The kinase activity of c - Abl is required for PDGF - induced formation of ruffles , and the formation of microspikes upon integrin clustering ( Plattner et al 1999 ; Woodring et al 2002 ) . Thus , there exist a complicated cross - talk between c - Abl and F - actin that serve to regulate cell morphology and cell motility ( reviewed in Greaves 2002 ) . In addition , the kinase activity of Abl was proposed to be regulated by proteins binding to the SH3 domain of Abl ( Van Etten 1999 ) . The diaphanous - related formin DAAM1 is a CIP4 - binding protein with a role in regulating assembly of actin filaments and microtubules ( Paper I ) CIP4 was originally identified in a yeast two - hybrid screen as a protein interacting with constitutively active Cdc42 ( Aspenström 1997 ) . CIP4 was proposed to regulate the organization of the actin cytoskeleton , however , it lacked an actin binding site . Therefore , we set out to find a potential link between CIP4 and the actin cytoskeleton . First , we performed a yeast two - hybrid screen , using the SH3 domain of CIP4 as a bait , and identified six potential binding partners . The strongest interactor was a Myb - domain containing profilin - binding protein ( Mybp42POP ) , followed by , with decreasing strength of interaction with CIP4 ; RalA , acinus , the (cid:69) - subunit of the Na + / K + ATPase , the transcription factor active transcriptional factor 5 ( ATF - 5 ) , and a previously unidentified RhoGAP . In spite of the weak interaction with CIP4 in the yeast two - hybrid screen , we decided to focus our attention on the RhoGAP protein ( Paper II - IV ) . The RhoGAPs are important down - regulators of Rho GTPase activity , and can by virtue of their multidomain structure often act as effectors mediating events downstream of Rho GTPases . In addition , aberrant RhoGAP function has been implicated in diseases such as cancer and neurodegenerative disorders . Yuan et al . identified CIP4 as a gene upregulated during apoptosis in human breast cancer cells ( Yuan et al 2001 ) . We detected an interaction between CIP4 and acinus , a protein involved in condensation of the chromatin during apoptosis , and thus , CIP4 could affect apoptosis by its interaction with acinus . Furthermore , cytoskeletal components have been reported to translocate ion - channels to the plasma membrane through interactions with their SH3 domains and proline - rich sequences in the ion - channels , suggesting that CIP4 might localize the Na + / K + pump to the plasma membrane ( Cohen et al 1995 ) . The function of members of the PCH family of proteins in actin - based processes has been suggested to rely on an interaction with FH proteins . Furthermore , FBP17 was initially identified as protein binding to the mouse formin . Therefore , in the second part of this work , we wanted to investigate whether CIP4 and FBP17 interacted with a previously uncharacterized DRF , originally identified by the HUGO cDNA cloning effort as KIAA0666 . During the course of our study , Habas et al . showed that KIAA0666 was implicated in regulating cell polarity during gastrulation in Xenopus oocytes , relaying signals from the Wnt Frizzled pathway by forming a complex with 49 Disheveled and activated Rho ( Habas et al 2001 ) . Thus , the protein is hereafter denoted DAAM1 ( Disheveled associated activator of morphogenesis 1 ) . We showed by employing a GST pull - down assay , that the proline - rich FH1 domain in DAAM1 conferred binding to the SH3 domains of CIP4 and FBP17 . The interactions were confirmed in vivo , where CIP4 , but not FBP17 , was found to interact with DAAM1 . In addition , DAAM1 was found to interact with the SH3 domains of Src , n - Src , and Abl , and to a lesser extent spectrin , endophilin and Btk . We furthermore showed that DAAM1 displays an inhibitory intramolecular interaction domain in similarity to other DRFs . We found that DAAM1 interacted with constitutively active Rho and Cdc42 , in contrast to reports by Habas et al . describing an interaction with Rho only ( Habas et al 2001 ) . ROCK and mDia1 have been shown to cooperate in the formation of stress - fibers ( Watanabe et al 1999 ) . By contrast , our studies showed that DAAM1 over - expressing cells appeared to have a reduced content of polymerized actin , and these cells formed highly branched protrusions . This might be due to differences in primary sequences between Dia and DAAM1 causing differences in signaling , DAAM1 might sequester and thereby down - regulate intracellular Rho , and / or DAAM1 might act downstream of activated Cdc42 to induce filopodia . We found that ectopic DAAM1 caused an increase in the amount of microtubules and that DAAM1 appeared to localize to structures surrounding the microtubule organizing center ( MTOC ) . Thus , DAAM1 might affect MTOC localization and thereby cell polarization , however , this requires further studies . In addition , our studies revealed that DAAM1 and CIP4 , but not a CIP4 mutant devoid of the SH3 domain , appeared to cooperate to inhibit PDGF - BB - induced membrane - ruffling in porcine aortic endothelial cells stably expressing the PDGF - (cid:69) receptor ( PAE / PDGFR (cid:69) ) . DAAM1 interacted with Src in vivo , as shown by co - expression in Cos7 cells . Src mediated signaling appear to be of importance in the formation of podosomes ( Tarone et al 1985 ) . We show that over - expression of v - Src in PAE / PDGFR (cid:69) cells causes a drastic reorganization of actin with accumulation of polymerized actin at the cell margin , suggestive of podosome - like structures . A similar phenotype was seen in cells expressing ectopic v - Src and DAAM1 , and the proteins co - localized to ring - like structures surrounding the podosome - like structures , indicative of an interaction in vivo . PDGF - BB stimulation of cells co - expressing these proteins , but not v - Src alone , resulted in a loss of the podosome - like structures , suggesting that the concerted action of these proteins is required for actin reorganization . mDia1 and mDia2 have been shown to localize to endosomes in HeLa cells ( Tominaga et al 2000 ) . Further , Gasman et al . showed that RhoD activates hDia2C and Src to induce changes in the actin cytoskeleton and thereby regulate the motility of early endosomes ( Gasman et al 2003 ) . Studies employing the isolated DAD domain or an RBD truncation to disrupt the inhibitory intramolecular interaction in endogenous Dia mimics Rho - binding and has presented a potent way for its activation ( Alberts 2002 ) . Our preliminary studies show that PDGF (cid:69) - receptor endocytosis in PAE / PDGFR (cid:69) cells could be blocked by microinjection of a fragment including the DAD domain of DAAM1 , thus , implicating a role for DAAM1 in receptor - endocytosis ( data not shown ) . Furthermore , cells microinjected with the DAAM1 DAD domain displayed a more intense vinculin staining than non - injected cells ( data not shown ) . Copeland and Treisman showed that changes in actin dynamics can lead to the activation 50 of SRF and an ensuing upregulation of immediately early gene products , like vinculin ( Copeland & Treisman 2002 ; Evangelista et al 2003 ) . Src and DRFs could also activate the SRF in a pathway independent of actin dynamics , as shown in a report by Tominaga et al . ( Tominaga et al 2000 ) . Therefore , DAAM1 might activate the SRF to induce vinculin expression either by causing reorganization of actin , or / and by co - operating with Src . RICH , a Rho GTPase - activating protein domain - containing protein involved in signaling by Cdc42 and Rac1 ( Paper II ) The aim of this work was to clone and characterize the RhoGAP RICH - 1 , and to identify binding partners for this protein . This paper also presents initial characterization studies on RICH - 2 , a close homologue of RICH - 1 . We originally isolated RICH - 1 as a partial clone , derived from a Epstein - Barr virus - transformed human B - cell library , in a yeast two - hybrid screen for proteins interacting with the SH3 domain of CIP4 ( Paper I ) . RICH appeared to be present in at least two splice variants , a longer form of 803 amino acids ( RICH - 1 ) and a shorter form of 226 amino acids , named RICH - 1B . However , recent database searches have revealed the presence of an additional twelve mRNA transcripts encoding altogether twelve protein isoforms . This is supported by the finding of several splice variants of the rat orthologue of RICH - 1 , nadrin ( Furuta et al 2002 ) . RICH - 1 and nadrin show 83 % identity , but in contrast to RICH - 1 , nadrin exhibits a stretch of 29 glutamines in its C - terminal . Nadrin is a GAP for Rac , Cdc42 , and Rho in vitro . Moreover , nadrin enhanced Ca 2 + - dependent exocytosis and a splice variant of nadrin inhibits NGF - dependent neurite outgrowth in PC12 cells ( Furuta et al 2002 ; Harada et al 2000 ) . Both activities were proposed to rely on the GAP activity of nadrin ; the inhibitory effect on neurite extension is probably due to down - regulation of Rac and Cdc42 . RICH - 1 mRNA showed a ubiquitous expression although it was enriched in heart , placenta and skeletal muscle . Caution must be taken , however , as the presence of additional splice variants could compromise these results . Moreover , RICH - 2 mRNA was expressed at low levels in all tissues tested , although at particularly high levels in brain , suggesting that RICH - 2 is the neuronal form . Moreover , ectopic RICH - 1 showed a uniform cytoplasmic distribution in NIH3T3 and PAE / PDGFR (cid:69) cells , whereas RICH - 1B appeared to localize to vesicular structures . RICH - 1 and RICH - 2 showed in vitro GAP activity towards Cdc42 and Rac but not Rho , and RICH - 2 appeared to be a more effective GAP than RICH - 1 . Next , we wanted to investigate whether RICH - 1 displayed the same substrate specificity in vivo . Over - expression of RICH - 1 or the isolated RhoGAP domain blocked PDGF - BB - induced ruffling via Rac in PAE / PDGFR (cid:69) cells , but not serum - induced stress - fiber formation via Rho in NIH3T3 cells . In compliance with these observations , mutants of RICH - 1 or the isolated RhoGAP domain mutated in the catalytic arginine retrieved reverse results . To verify that RICH - 1 stimulated the GTP - hydrolysis on Rac and Cdc42 in vivo , we expressed the RICH - 1 GAP domain , together with either wild - type Rac or Cdc42 in PAE / PDGFR (cid:69) cells . GST pull - down with either the PAK or the WASP CRIB - domain to bring down activated Rac and Cdc42 , respectively , showed that the RICH - 1 GAP domain stimulated GTP hydrolysis on both Rac and Cdc42 . Thus , in accordance 51 with the in vitro GAP activity , RICH - 1 displays in vivo specificity towards Rac and Cdc42 . A GST pull - down approach showed that the RICH - 1 displayed binding to the SH3 domains of the CIP4 homologues PACSIN / syndapin and FBP17 / rapostlin , endophilin A1 , cortactin and Abl . The interaction between RICH - 1 and CIP4 was confirmed in vivo . The proline motifs in RICH - 1 were divided into proline - rich motif 1 to 4 ( P1 - P4 ) , and CIP4 was shown to interact with P2 . Previously , ectopic CIP4 had been shown to relocalize into clusters at the cell periphery and at the dorsal side of Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts upon co - expression with constitutively activated Cdc42 ( L61Cdc42 ) ( Aspenström 1997 ) . We wanted to investigate whether RICH - 1 co - localized with CIP4 in vivo , therefore we expressed RICH - 1 , CIP4 and L61Cdc42 in NIH3T3 fibroblasts . RICH - 1 showed co - localization into the CIP4 - containing clusters , which further confirmed their observed interaction . The RhoGAP RICH - 1 has a BAR ( BIN / Amphiphysin / Rvsp ) domain responsible for binding and tubulation of liposomes ( Paper III ) RICH - 1 has an N - terminal BAR domain , which comprises around 200 amino acid residues , and is found in several proteins including members of the amphiphysin and endophilin families ( Table 4 ) . The proposed function of the BAR domains in amphiphysin I and endophilin A1 is to interact with membrane lipids in order to impose curvature on the plasma membrane during CME ( Farsad et al 2001 ; Takei et al 1999 ) . In Paper II we show that the proline - rich motif in RICH - 1 interacts with the SH3 domains in endophilin A1 , as well as cortactin and PACSIN / syndapin , proteins implicated in linking endocytosis and actin reorganization . The aim of this work was to characterize the function of the BAR domain in RICH - 1 and to confirm the interaction of RICH - 1 with endophilin A1 . A GST fusion - protein comprising the first 125 amino acid residues of RICH - 1 , corresponding to the region in endophilin A1 required for lipid interaction , was shown to co - sediment with liposomes upon centrifugation , demonstrating that RICH - 1 bound to lipids . Next , the ability of RICH - 1 to tubulate liposomes , in an in vitro process aiming to mimic invagination of cellular lipid bilayers , was tested . Negative stain electron microscopy showed that a GST fusion - protein of RICH - 1B was able to tubulate liposomes . The tubes were encapsulated by a helical pattern , suggesting that RICH - 1B oligomerized by virtue of its coiled - coil region , on the surface of the tube in a manner similar to what has been reported for amphiphysin I , endophilin A1 and dynamin 1 . We have shown that the BAR domain in RICH - 1 binds to membrane lipids and can deform these into tubes , thus , indicating a role for RICH - 1 in membrane - trafficking events . However , our preliminary results indicate that ectopically expressed RICH - 1 and RICH - 1 deletion mutants do not interfere with the endocytosis of the PDGF - and the EGF receptors ( data not shown ) . In addition , we found that endogenous RICH - 1 co - localized with a marker specific for the ER , whereas ectopic RICH - 1B appeared to localize to mitochondria . It is important to stress that membrane tubulation is an event occuring not only at the plasma membrane during events such as endocytosis , but is also required for the budding of vesicles from intracellular membranes , such as the ER and Golgi . This is examplified by finding that endophilin B1 partially localizes to the 52 Golgi , can deform liposomes into tubes , but is not involved in the CME of transferrin ( Farsad et al 2001 ; Modregger et al 2003 ) . Instead , the members of the endophilin B family are thought to be involved in intracellular membrane - trafficking events . Furthermore , dynamin - like proteins have been found to localize to Golgi and mitochondria , and are implicated in Golgi transport and regulation of mitochodrial morphology . Taken together , our data suggests that RICH - 1 / RICH - 1B is involved in membrane - trafficking processes , possibly in the budding of vesicles originating from the ER , and / or as a regulator of mitochondrial morphology . In addition , the possibility that RICH - 1 might be involved in endocytic events other than CME , as well as exocytic events , should not be excluded . The interaction between RICH - 1 and endophilin A1 was confirmed in vivo , and in addition , RICH - 1 was shown to interact with amphiphysin II . Using a GST pull - down assay RICH - 1 was found to interact with the SH3 domains of both endophilin A1 and amphiphysin I , via its first proline - rich motif ( P1 ) ( importantly , the SH3 domains in amphiphysin I and II are identical ) . In accordance with these results , we found a sequence motif in RICH - 1 showing consensus for binding to both the amphiphysin I and endophilin A1 SH3 domains ( Cestra et al 1999 ) , PKPPTR , comprising residues 590 - 595 within the region of P1 . To ascertain the exact binding site ( s ) , however , experiments employing mutants in the RICH - 1 proline - rich regions are required . It is also possible that P1 might act in conjunction with one or more of the proline - rich motifs in binding to the SH3 domains . In conclusion , RICH - 1 could affect membrane - trafficking processes by virtue of its BAR domain , and / or GAP activity , and / or its interaction with endophilins or amphiphysins , and / or proteins implicated in linking membrane - trafficking and actin organization , including cortactin and PACSIN / syndapin . The RhoGAP RICH - 1 interacts with Abelson tyrosine kinase , and the scaffolding proteins NHERF - 2 and CIN85 ( Paper IV ) In Paper II we showed that RICH - 1 interacts with the SH3 domain in Abl . RICH - 1 was also shown to display a C - terminal PDZ domain - binding motif ( STAL ) , predicted to bind EBP50 PDZ - 1 , and fitting the more general consensus sequence X - ( S / T ) - X - ( L / V / I ) for a broad spectrum of PDZ domain - binding proteins ( Reczek & Bretscher 2001 ; Saras & Heldin 1996 ; Songyang et al 1997 ) . The optimal EBP50 PDZ - 1 binding consensus , however , is D - ( S / T ) - ( R / Y ) - L ( Hall et al 1998a ; Wang et al 1998 ) . In addition , we show that a proline - rich motif in RICH - 1 binds to the SH3 domains in the endocytic scaffold protein CIN85 . The aim of this work was to characterize the interactions of RICH - 1 with Abl , NHERF - 2 and CIN85 . Of note , human EBP50 and E3KARP are roughly 80 % identical to the rabbit orthologues NHERF - 1 and NHERF - 2 , and NHERF - 2 was used in our work ( Weinman et al 1995 ; Yun et al 1997 ) . The interaction of RICH - 1 with Abl was confirmed in vivo , and Abl was shown to phosphorylate RICH - 1 . The GAP activity of p190RhoGAP is regulated via phosphorylation by Src , suggesting that the GAP activity of RICH - 1 could be regulated in a similar manner via phosphorylation by Abl ( Hu & Settleman 1997 ; Roof et al 1998 ) . This is supported by the finding that RICH - 1 interacts with the SH3 domain of Src ( Paper II ) . Abl appeared to interact with the second proline rich motif in RICH - 1 , P2 . 53 Moreover , the SH3 domain in Abl also interacts with a proline - rich motif in the RhoGAP 3BP - 1 ( Cicchetti et al 1995 ) . We showed that RICH - 1 , but not a deletion mutant of RICH - 1 devoid of the PDZ - interacting motif , interacted with NHERF - 2 in vivo . In addition , NHERF - 2 localized RICH - 1 , but not the mutant lacking the PDZ - binding motif , to microvilli - like structures on the dorsal side of the cells , when co - expressed in PAE / PDGFR (cid:69) cells . The relevance of this interaction is not clear , however , one might speculate that NHERF family proteins act as scaffold proteins to recruit RICH - 1 to membranes in order to perform its function as a RhoGAP and / or as a tubulator . Moreover , Reczek et al . found that RICH - 1 existed in an in vivo complex which included ezrin , EBP50 / NHERF - 1 , the RabGAP EPI64 and PLC - (cid:69) 3 ( Reczek & Bretscher 2001 ) . The PDZ binding motif in RICH - 1 might in addition confer binding to other PDZ domain - containing proteins . CIN85 possesses three highly similar SH3 domains and has been implicated in the endocytosis and down - regulation of certain RTKs . Kowanetz et al . found a novel atypical consensus for binding to the CIN85 SH3 domains ( PXXXPR ) , supported by a report from Kurakin et al . ( PX ( P / A ) XXR ) ( Kowanetz et al 2003 ; Kurakin et al 2003 ) . Interestingly , we found that RICH - 1 possessed this consensus , residing in the region of amino acid residues 721 - 726 , ( PVPKPR ) , and was therefore predicted to bind to CIN85 . Using a GST pull - down assay , we showed that RICH - 1 bound to all three SH3 domains , denoted SH3 A , B and C , independently and in combinations . In vivo studies , using HEK293T cells , show that ectopically expressed RICH - 1 and CIN85 appear to interact in a phosphorylation - dependent manner upon EGF - stimulation . By contrast , a mutant of RICH - 1 in the conserved arginine in the region predicted to bind CIN85 [ RICH - 1 ( R726A ) ] showed no binding to CIN85 neither in vitro nor in vivo , thus , confirming that the interaction takes place through the predicted proline - rich motif in RICH - 1 . Immunofluorescence studies using Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) cells , showed that ectopic CIN85 relocalized RICH - 1 into large aggregates characteristic for CIN85 over - expression , thus , confirming their interaction in vivo . RICH - 1 might be recruited to membranes by CIN85 in a phosphorylation - dependent manner , where it could function in the regulation of Rho GTPase activity and / or facilitate membrane invagination ( Petrelli et al 2002 ; Soubeyran et al 2002 ) . In conclusion , in Paper IV we showed that RICH - 1 interacts with Abl , NHERF - 2 and CIN85 . Moreover , Abl appears to phosphorylate RICH - 1 , and perhaps thereby regulates its GAP activity . The scaffold proteins NHERF - 2 and CIN85 could recruit RICH - 1 to multimeric complexes situated at sites close to or at the plasma membrane , or intracellular membranes , in order for RICH - 1 to perform its functions as a RhoGAP and / or a tubulator . 54 FUTURE PERSPECTIVES Future studies on RICH - 1 should aim at elucidating the role of RICH - 1 in vivo . Studies employing Drosophila have shown that knock - out of the Drosophila orthologue of human RICH - 1 is lethal ( Billuart et al 2001 ) . We are currently studying the cellular role of Drosophila RICH , by employing an RNA interference - based method . Preliminary results indicate an involvement of RICH - 1 in the development of tracheal branches . Harada et al . showed that nadrin was involved in neuronal morphogenesis , by having an inhibitory effect on neurite outgrowth ( Furuta et al 2002 ) . Further studies employing RNA interference in mammalian cells , mouse knock - outs of full - length RICH - 1 or knock - ins of the GAP domain or the BAR domain of RICH - 1 will yield more information about the role of RICH - 1 in vivo . The RhoGAPs require tight regulation , otherwise the Rho GTPases they regulate will be either constitutively down - regulated or not turned off at all , resulting in abberant Rho GTPase signaling . Therefore , it is of importance to define how RICH - 1 GAP activity is regulated . We have shown that RICH - 1 interacts with Abl and is in addition phosphorylated by this tyrosine kinase . In keeping with what is know about the regulation of other RhoGAPs , possible mechanisms for RICH - 1 regulation might be phosphorylation , binding of lipids to the BAR domain , or interaction with SH3 domain - containing proteins via the proline - rich motifs . As mentioned above , BAR domains are found in several protein families , and is involved in shaping membranes during endocytosis , and evidently during other membrane - trafficking events . Future studies will aim at determining at which lipid bilayers RICH - 1 exerts its tubulating activity . 55 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The work presented in this thesis was carried out at the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research in Uppsala . I am thankful for the opportunity of meeting so many nice people during the years and , in particular , I wish to express my sincerest gratitude to the following people : Pontus Aspenström - my supervisor , for your support and for introducing me into the exciting world of small GTPases ! Carl - Henrik Heldin for sharing your great scientific knowledge with me and creating such an excellent atmosphere at the institute . Sofia Edlund - my lab bench partner and friend . Thanks for your kindness and support and for sharing ups and downs both outside and inside the lab . Aino Ruusala - thanks for being a such a good friend and for all your support throughout the years . It’s been ‘kiva’ ! Rainer Heuchel - for always being so kind and helpful and for broadening my scientific knowledge , especially on PCR ! Carina Hellberg and Tobias Sjöblom - for your kind and irreplaceable help during the writing of this thesis , thank you both ! Ivan Dikic - for broadening my scientific knowledge , and for always being very helpful . Eva Grönroos - for your kindness and support , and for always finding the time to help out in the lab , as well as with moving furniture ! Enrico Bracco - for your kindness , great friendship and support ! My fellow PhD students past and present - Camilla , Anders , Greger , Roya , Johan L , Kaska , Marcin , Maria Simonsson , Maria Sörby , Inga , Kaisa , Olli , Simon , Gudrun , Fumiko , Katerina , Åsa , Iwona , Marcin , Padideh , Sylke , Sirry , Kristian , etc . Past and present members of the CR - group and MB lab : Åsa F , Aive , Ann - Sofi , Ronggui , Christina , Jan , Patrik and Henrik . Jill , Anita , Lotti , Susanne , ’ Santa - Claus’ Christer , Ulla , Maréne , Arne , Aris , Patrik M , Serhiy , Johan E , Anders S , Hiroyuki , Jean - Baptiste , Ulrich , etc , for fun and interesting non - scientific and scientific discussions ! Ulf Hellman for always finding the time to fix my ramshackled bike ! The ‘de Camilli lab’ at Yale University , New Haven - for letting me visit the lab and benefit from the stimulating scientific atmosphere ! Jan Modregger - for help and encouragement during the writing of this thesis ! The supporting pillars of the institute ; Bengt ‘Becke’ Ejdesjö , Uffe Hedberg , Lasse Hermansson , Ingegärd Schiller , Eva Hallin , Inger Schönquist , Gull - Britt Pettersson , for your daily help and support , and for contributing to the nice atmosphere at the institute ! My dear friends Erika Terao , Sabine Gebert , Malin Wilhelmsson , Ylva ‘Pylvis’ Frimodig and Veronika Patcha , thank you for your encouragement and friendship ! Daniel Hägerstrand - for all your support and for being such a wonderful person . My parents Margareta and Kaj Richnau , for your endless encouragement and support . Marica Richnau for being a great sister and my best friend ! My nephew and niece Andreas and Michelle who have the wonderful ability to always cheer me up just by smiling and being there ! 56 Abo , A . , Pick , E . , Hall , A . , Totty , N . , Teahan , C . G . , Segal , A . W . 1991 . Activation of the NADPH oxidase involves the small GTP - binding protein p21rac1 . Nature 353 : 668 - 70 . Adams , A . E . , Johnson , D . I . , Longnecker , R . M . , Sloat , B . F . , Pringle , J . R . 1990 . CDC42 and CDC43 , two additional genes involved in budding and the establishment of cell polarity in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Cell Biol 111 : 131 - 42 . Agnel , M . , Roder , L . , Vola , C . , Griffin - Shea , R . 1992 . A Drosophila rotund transcript expressed during spermatogenesis and imaginal disc morphogenesis encodes a protein which is similar to human Rac GTPase - activating (cid:69) racGAP ) proteins . Mol Cell Biol 12 : 5111 - 22 Ahmed , S . , Kozma , R . , Monfries , C . , Hall , C . , Lim , H . H . , et al . 1990 . Human brain n - chimaerin cDNA encodes a novel phorbol ester receptor . Biochem J 272 : 767 - 73 . Alberts , A . S . 2002 . Diaphanous - related Formin homology proteins . Curr Biol 12 : R796 . Allen , W . E . , Zicha , D . , Ridley , A . J . , Jones , G . E . 1998 . A role for Cdc42 in macrophage chemotaxis . J Cell Biol 141 : 1147 - 57 . Amano , M . , Ito , M . , Kimura , K . , Fukata , Y . , Chihara , K . , et al . 1996 . Phosphorylation and activation of myosin by Rho - associated kinase ( Rho - kinase ) . J Biol Chem 271 : 20246 - 9 . Aspenström , P . 1997 . A Cdc42 target protein with homology to the non - kinase domain of FER has a potential role in regulating the actin cytoskeleton . Curr Biol 7 : 479 - 87 . Aspenström , P . 1999 . Effectors for the Rho GTPases . Curr Opin Cell Biol 11 : 95 - 102 . Aspenström , P . , Lindberg , U . , Hall , A . 1996 . Two GTPases , Cdc42 and Rac , bind directly to a protein implicated in the immunodeficiency disorder Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome . Curr Biol 6 : 70 - 5 . Awasthi , S . , Cheng , J . , Singhal , S . S . , Saini , M . K . , Pandya , U . , et al . 2000 . Novel function of human RLIP76 : ATP - dependent transport of glutathione conjugates and doxorubicin . Biochemistry 39 : 9327 - 34 . Barfod , E . T . , Zheng , Y . , Kuang , W . J . , Hart , M . J . , Evans , T . , et al . 1993 . Cloning and expression of a human CDC42 GTPase - activating protein reveals a functional SH3 - binding domain . J Biol Chem 268 : 26059 - 62 . Barila , D . , Superti - Furga , G . 1998 . An intramolecular SH3 - domain interaction regulates c - Abl activity . Nat Genet 18 : 280 - 2 . Barrett , T . , Xiao , B . , Dodson , E . J . , Dodson , G . , Ludbrook , S . B . , et al . 1997 . The structure of the GTPase - activating domain from p50rhoGAP . Nature 385 : 458 - 61 . Billuart , P . , Bienvenu , T . , Ronce , N . , des Portes , V . , Vinet , M . C . , et al . 1998 . Oligophrenin - 1 encodes a rhoGAP protein involved in X - linked mental retardation . Nature 392 : 923 - 6 . Billuart , P . , Winter , C . G . , Maresh , A . , Zhao , X . , Luo , L . 2001 . Regulating axon branch stability : the role of p190 RhoGAP in repressing a retraction signaling pathway . Cell 107 : 195 - 207 . Bishop , A . L . , Hall , A . 2000 . Rho GTPases and their effector proteins . Biochem J 348 Pt 2 : 241 - 55 . Boettner , B . , Van Aelst , L . 2002 . The role of Rho GTPases in disease development . Gene 286 : 155 - 74 . Boguski , M . S . , McCormick , F . 1993 . Proteins regulating Ras and its relatives . Nature 366 : 643 - 54 . Bokoch , G . M . , Vlahos , C . J . , Wang , Y . , Knaus , U . G . , Traynor - Kaplan , A . E . 1996 . Rac GTPase interacts specifically with phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase . Biochem J 315 : 775 - 9 . Borkhardt , A . , Bojesen , S . , Haas , O . A . , Fuchs , U . , Bartelheimer , D . , et al . 2000 . The human GRAF gene is fused to MLL in a unique t ( 5 ; 11 ) ( q31 ; q23 ) and both alleles are disrupted in three cases of myelodysplastic syndrome / acute myeloid leukemia with a deletion 5q . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97 : 9168 - 73 . Bos , J . L . 1989 . ras oncogenes in human cancer : a review . Cancer Res 49 : 4682 - 9 . Bourne , H . R . , Sanders , D . A . , McCormick , F . 1991 . The GTPase superfamily : conserved structure and molecular mechanism . Nature 349 : 117 - 27 Bouton , A . H . , Kanner , S . B . , Vines , R . R . , Wang , H . C . , Gibbs , J . B . , Parsons , J . T . 1991 . Transformation by pp60src or stimulation of cells with epidermal growth factor induces the stable association of tyrosine - phosphorylated cellular proteins with GTPase - activating protein . Mol Cell Biol 11 : 945 - 53 . Brakebusch , C . , Fassler , R . 2003 . NEW EMBO MEMBER ' S REVIEW : The integrin - actin connection , an eternal love affair . Embo J 22 : 2324 - 33 . 57 Bretscher , A . , Edwards , K . , Fehon , R . G . 2002 . ERM proteins and merlin : integrators at the cell cortex . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 3 : 586 - 99 . Brodin , L . , Low , P . , Shupliakov , O . 2000 . Sequential steps in clathrin - mediated synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Curr Opin Neurobiol 10 : 312 - 20 . Brodsky , F . M . , Chen , C . Y . , Knuehl , C . , Towler , M . C . , Wakeham , D . E . 2001 . Biological basket weaving : formation and function of clathrin - coated vesicles . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 17 : 517 - 68 Brouns , M . R . , Matheson , S . F . , Hu , K . Q . , Delalle , I . , Caviness , V . S . , et al . 2000 . The adhesion signaling molecule p190 RhoGAP is required for morphogenetic processes in neural development . Development 127 : 4891 - 903 . Brouns , M . R . , Matheson , S . F . , Settleman , J . 2001 . p190 RhoGAP is the principal Src substrate in brain and regulates axon outgrowth , guidance and fasciculation . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 361 - 7 . Burbelo , P . D . , Drechsel , D . , Hall , A . 1995a . A conserved binding motif defines numerous candidate target proteins for both Cdc42 and Rac GTPases . J Biol Chem 270 : 29071 - 4 . Burbelo , P . D . , Miyamoto , S . , Utani , A . , Brill , S . , Yamada , K . M . , et al . 1995b . p190 - B , a new member of the Rho GAP family , and Rho are induced to cluster after integrin cross - linking . J Biol Chem 270 : 30919 - 26 . Burkhard , P . , Stetefeld , J . , Strelkov , S . V . 2001 . Coiled coils : a highly versatile protein folding motif . Trends Cell Biol 11 : 82 - 8 . Burridge , K . , Turner , C . E . , Romer , L . H . 1992 . Tyrosine phosphorylation of paxillin and pp125FAK accompanies cell adhesion to extracellular matrix : a role in cytoskeletal assembly . J Cell Biol 119 : 893 - 903 . Caloca , M . J . , Fernandez , N . , Lewin , N . E . , Ching , D . , Modali , R . , et al . 1997 . Beta2 - chimaerin is a high affinity receptor for the phorbol ester tumor promoters . J Biol Chem 272 : 26488 - 96 . Caloca , M . J . , Garcia - Bermejo , M . L . , Blumberg , P . M . , Lewin , N . E . , Kremmer , E . , et al . 1999 . beta2 - chimaerin is a novel target for diacylglycerol : binding properties and changes in subcellular localization mediated by ligand binding to its C1 domain . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96 : 11854 - 9 . Caloca , M . J . , julWang , H . , Delemos , A . , Wang , S . , Kazanietz , M . G . 2001 . Phorbol esters and related analogs regulate the subcellular localization of beta 2 - chimaerin , a non - protein kinase C phorbol ester receptor . J Biol Chem 276 : 18303 - 12 . Cantor , S . B . , Urano , T . , Feig , L . A . 1995 . Identification and characterization of Ral - binding protein 1 , a potential downstream target of Ral GTPases . Mol Cell Biol 15 : 4578 - 84 . Cao , H . , Orth , J . D . , Chen , J . , Weller , S . G . , Heuser , J . E . , McNiven , M . A . 2003 . Cortactin is a component of clathrin - coated pits and participates in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Mol Cell Biol 23 : 2162 - 70 . Cao , T . T . , Deacon , H . W . , Reczek , D . , Bretscher , A . , von Zastrow , M . 1999 . A kinase - regulated PDZ - domain interaction controls endocytic sorting of the beta2 - adrenergic receptor . Nature 401 : 286 - 90 . Caron , E . 2002 . Regulation of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein and related molecules . Curr Opin Cell Biol 14 : 82 - 7 . Caron , E . , Hall , A . 1998 . Identification of two distinct mechanisms of phagocytosis controlled by different Rho GTPases . Science 282 : 1717 - 21 . Carr , J . F . , Hinshaw , J . E . 1997 . Dynamin assembles into spirals under physiological salt conditions upon the addition of GDP and gamma - phosphate analogues . J Biol Chem 272 : 28030 - 5 . Castrillon , D . H . , Wasserman , S . A . 1994 . Diaphanous is required for cytokinesis in Drosophila and shares domains of similarity with the products of the limb deformity gene . Development 120 : 3367 - 77 . Cestra , G . , Castagnoli , L . , Dente , L . , Minenkova , O . , Petrelli , A . , et al . 1999 . The SH3 domains of endophilin and amphiphysin bind to the proline - rich region of synaptojanin 1 at distinct sites that display an unconventional binding specificity . J Biol Chem 274 : 32001 - 7 . Chang , F . , Peter , M . 2002 . Cell biology . Formins set the record straight . Science 297 : 531 - 2 . Chang , L . , Adams , R . D . , Saltiel , A . R . 2002 . The TC10 - interacting protein CIP4 / 2 is required for insulin - stimulated Glut4 translocation in 3T3L1 adipocytes . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99 : 12835 - 40 Chen , H . J . , Rojas - Soto , M . , Oguni , A . , Kennedy , M . B . 1998 . A synaptic Ras - GTPase activating protein ( p135 SynGAP ) inhibited by CaM kinase II . Neuron 20 : 895 - 904 58 Chiang , S . H . , Baumann , C . A . , Kanzaki , M . , Thurmond , D . C . , Watson , R . T . , et al . 2001 . Insulin - stimulated GLUT4 translocation requires the CAP - dependent activation of TC10 . Nature 410 : 944 - 8 . Chiang , S . H . , Hwang , J . , Legendre , M . , Zhang , M . , Kimura , A . , Saltiel , A . R . 2003 . TCGAP , a multidomain Rho GTPase - activating protein involved in insulin - stimulated glucose transport . Embo J 22 : 2679 - 91 . Chiarugi , P . , Cirri , P . , Taddei , L . , Giannoni , E . , Camici , G . , et al . 2000 . The low M ( r ) protein - tyrosine phosphatase is involved in Rho - mediated cytoskeleton rearrangement after integrin and platelet - derived growth factor stimulation . J Biol Chem 275 : 4640 - 6 . Ching , Y . P . , Wong , C . M . , Chan , S . F . , Leung , T . H . , Ng , D . C . , et al . 2003 . Deleted in Liver Cancer ( DLC ) 2 Encodes a RhoGAP Protein with Growth Suppressor Function and Is Underexpressed in Hepatocellular Carcinoma . J Biol Chem 278 : 10824 - 30 . Chong , L . D . , Traynor - Kaplan , A . , Bokoch , G . M . , Schwartz , M . A . 1994 . The small GTP - binding protein Rho regulates a phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase in mammalian cells . Cell 79 : 507 - 13 . Chuang , T . H . , Xu , X . , Kaartinen , V . , Heisterkamp , N . , Groffen , J . , Bokoch , G . M . 1995 . Abr and Bcr are multi - functional regulators of the Rho GTP - binding protein family . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 92 : 10282 - 6 . Cicchetti , P . , Mayer , B . J . , Thiel , G . , Baltimore , D . 1992 . Identification of a protein that binds to the SH3 region of Abl and is similar to Bcr and GAP - rho . Science 257 : 803 - 6 Cicchetti , P . , Ridley , A . J . , Zheng , Y . , Cerione , R . A . , Baltimore , D . 1995 . 3BP - 1 , an SH3 domain binding protein , has GAP activity for Rac and inhibits growth factor - induced membrane ruffling in fibroblasts . Embo J 14 : 3127 - 35 . Cohen , G . B . , Ren , R . , Baltimore , D . 1995 . Modular binding domains in signal transduction proteins . Cell 80 : 237 - 48 . Copeland , J . W . , Treisman , R . 2002 . The Diaphanous - related Formin mDia1 Controls Serum Response Factor Activity through its Effects on Actin Polymerization . Mol Biol Cell 13 : 4088 - 99 Coulombe , P . A . , Bousquet , O . , Ma , L . , Yamada , S . , Wirtz , D . 2000 . The ' ins ' and ' outs ' of intermediate filament organization . Trends Cell Biol 10 : 420 - 8 . Cremona , O . , De Camilli , P . 2001 . Phosphoinositides in membrane traffic at the synapse . J Cell Sci 114 : 1041 - 52 . Damke , H . , Baba , T . , Warnock , D . E . , Schmid , S . L . 1994 . Induction of mutant dynamin specifically blocks endocytic coated vesicle formation . J Cell Biol 127 : 915 - 34 . Damke , H . , Binns , D . D . , Ueda , H . , Schmid , S . L . , Baba , T . 2001 . Dynamin GTPase domain mutants block endocytic vesicle formation at morphologically distinct stages . Mol Biol Cell 12 : 2578 - 89 . Danino , D . , Hinshaw , J . E . 2001 . Dynamin family of mechanoenzymes . Curr Opin Cell Biol 13 : 454 - 60 . David , C . , McPherson , P . S . , Mundigl , O . , de Camilli , P . 1996 . A role of amphiphysin in synaptic vesicle endocytosis suggested by its binding to dynamin in nerve terminals . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93 : 331 - 5 . De Camilli , P . , Thomas , A . , Cofiell , R . , Folli , F . , Lichte , B . , et al . 1993 . The synaptic vesicle - associated protein amphiphysin is the 128 - kD autoantigen of Stiff - Man syndrome with breast cancer . J Exp Med 178 : 2219 - 23 . de Heuvel , E . , Bell , A . W . , Ramjaun , A . R . , Wong , K . , Sossin , W . S . , McPherson , P . S . 1997 . Identification of the major synaptojanin - binding proteins in brain . J Biol Chem 272 : 8710 - 6 . Derry , J . M . , Ochs , H . D . , Francke , U . 1994 . Isolation of a novel gene mutated in Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome . Cell 79 : following 922 . Diekmann , D . , Brill , S . , Garrett , M . D . , Totty , N . , Hsuan , J . , et al . 1991 . Bcr encodes a GTPase - activating protein for p21rac . Nature 351 : 400 - 2 . Dikic , I . 2002 . CIN85 / CMS family of adaptor molecules . FEBS Lett 529 : 110 - 5 . Dombrosky - Ferlan , P . , Grishin , A . , Botelho , R . J . , Sampson , M . , Wang , L . , et al . 2003 . Felic ( CIP4b ) , a novel binding partner with the Src kinase Lyn and Cdc42 , localizes to the phagocytic cup . Blood 101 : 2804 - 9 . Downward , J . 1990 . The ras superfamily of small GTP - binding proteins . Trends Biochem Sci 15 : 469 - 72 . 59 Dressman , M . A . , Olivos - Glander , I . M . , Nussbaum , R . L . , Suchy , S . F . 2000 . Ocrl1 , a PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P ( 2 ) 5 - phosphatase , is localized to the trans - Golgi network of fibroblasts and epithelial cells . J Histochem Cytochem 48 : 179 - 90 . Ellis , C . , Moran , M . , McCormick , F . , Pawson , T . 1990 . Phosphorylation of GAP and GAP - associated proteins by transforming and mitogenic tyrosine kinases . Nature 343 : 377 - 81 . Ellis , S . , Mellor , H . 2000 . Regulation of endocytic traffic by rho family GTPases . Trends Cell Biol 10 : 85 - 8 . Endris , V . , Wogatzky , B . , Leimer , U . , Bartsch , D . , Zatyka , M . , et al . 2002 . The novel Rho - GTPase activating gene MEGAP / srGAP3 has a putative role in severe mental retardation . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99 : 11754 - 9 Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , Kessels , M . M . , Chopra , V . S . , Hayden , M . R . , Drubin , D . G . 1999 . An actin - binding protein of the Sla2 / Huntingtin interacting protein 1 family is a novel component of clathrin - coated pits and vesicles . J Cell Biol 147 : 1503 - 18 . Etienne - Manneville , S . , Hall , A . 2002 . Rho GTPases in cell biology . Nature 420 : 629 - 35 . Eva , A . , Aaronson , S . A . 1985 . Isolation of a new human oncogene from a diffuse B - cell lymphoma . Nature 316 : 273 - 5 . Evangelista , M . , Pruyne , D . , Amberg , D . C . , Boone , C . , Bretscher , A . 2002 . Formins direct Arp2 / 3 - independent actin filament assembly to polarize cell growth in yeast . Nat Cell Biol 4 : 260 - 9 . Evangelista , M . , Zigmond , S . , Boone , C . 2003 . Formins : signaling effectors for assembly and polarization of actin filaments . J Cell Sci 116 : 2603 - 11 . Farsad , K . , Ringstad , N . , Takei , K . , Floyd , S . R . , Rose , K . , De Camilli , P . 2001 . Generation of high curvature membranes mediated by direct endophilin bilayer interactions . J Cell Biol 155 : 193 - 200 . Feig , L . A . 1999 . Tools of the trade : use of dominant - inhibitory mutants of Ras - family GTPases . Nat Cell Biol 1 : E25 - 7 . Floyd , S . R . , Porro , E . B . , Slepnev , V . I . , Ochoa , G . C . , Tsai , L . H . , De Camilli , P . 2001 . Amphiphysin 1 binds the cyclin - dependent kinase ( cdk ) 5 regulatory subunit p35 and is phosphorylated by cdk5 and cdc2 . J Biol Chem 276 : 8104 - 10 . Ford , M . G . , Mills , I . G . , Peter , B . J . , Vallis , Y . , Praefcke , G . J . , et al . 2002 . Curvature of clathrin - coated pits driven by epsin . Nature 419 : 361 - 6 . Fransson , A . , Ruusala , A . , Aspenström , P . 2003 . Atypical rho GTPases have roles in mitochondrial homeostasis and apoptosis . J Biol Chem 278 : 6495 - 502 . Frischknecht , F . , Cudmore , S . , Moreau , V . , Reckmann , I . , Rottger , S . , Way , M . 1999 . Tyrosine phosphorylation is required for actin - based motility of vaccinia but not Listeria or Shigella . Curr Biol 9 : 89 - 92 . Fuchs , U . , Rehkamp , G . , Haas , O . A . , Slany , R . , Konig , M . , et al . 2001 . The human formin - binding protein 17 ( FBP17 ) interacts with sorting nexin , SNX2 , and is an MLL - fusion partner in acute myelogeneous leukemia . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98 : 8756 - 61 . Fucini , R . V . , Chen , J . L . , Sharma , C . , Kessels , M . M . , Stamnes , M . 2002 . Golgi vesicle proteins are linked to the assembly of an actin complex defined by mAbp1 . Mol Biol Cell 13 : 621 - 31 . Fujita , H . , Katoh , H . , Ishikawa , Y . , Mori , K . , Negishi , M . 2002 . Rapostlin is a novel effector of Rnd2 GTPase inducing neurite branching . J Biol Chem 277 : 45428 - 34 . Fujiwara , T . , Mammoto , A . , Kim , Y . , Takai , Y . 2000 . Rho small G - protein - dependent binding of mDia to an Src homology 3 domain - containing IRSp53 / BAIAP2 . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 271 : 626 - 9 . Fukumoto , Y . , Kaibuchi , K . , Hori , Y . , Fujioka , H . , Araki , S . , et al . 1990 . Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel type of regulatory protein ( GDI ) for the rho proteins , ras p21 - like small GTP - binding proteins . Oncogene 5 : 1321 - 8 . Furukawa , Y . , Kawasoe , T . , Daigo , Y . , Nishiwaki , T . , Ishiguro , H . , et al . 2001 . Isolation of a novel human gene , ARHGAP9 , encoding a rho - GTPase activating protein . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 284 : 643 - 9 . Furuta , B . , Harada , A . , Kobayashi , Y . , Takeuchi , K . , Kobayashi , T . , Umeda , M . 2002 . Identification and functional characterization of nadrin variants , a novel family of GTPase activating protein for rho GTPases . J Neurochem 82 : 1018 - 28 . 60 Gad , H . , Ringstad , N . , Low , P . , Kjaerulff , O . , Gustafsson , J . , et al . 2000 . Fission and uncoating of synaptic clathrin - coated vesicles are perturbed by disruption of interactions with the SH3 domain of endophilin . Neuron 27 : 301 - 12 . Gamblin , S . J . , Smerdon , S . J . 1998 . GTPase - activating proteins and their complexes . Curr Opin Struct Biol 8 : 195 - 201 . Gampel , A . , Parker , P . J . , Mellor , H . 1999 . Regulation of epidermal growth factor receptor traffic by the small GTPase rhoB . Curr Biol 9 : 955 - 8 . Garrett , M . D . , Major , G . N . , Totty , N . , Hall , A . 1991 . Purification and N - terminal sequence of the p21rho GTPase - activating protein , rho GAP . Biochem J 276 : 833 - 6 . Garrett , M . D . , Self , A . J . , van Oers , C . , Hall , A . 1989 . Identification of distinct cytoplasmic targets for ras / R - ras and rho regulatory proteins . J Biol Chem 264 : 10 - 3 . Garrett , W . S . , Chen , L . M . , Kroschewski , R . , Ebersold , M . , Turley , S . , et al . 2000 . Developmental control of endocytosis in dendritic cells by Cdc42 . Cell 102 : 325 - 34 . Gasman , S . , Kalaidzidis , Y . , Zerial , M . 2003 . RhoD regulates endosome dynamics through Diaphanous - related Formin and Src tyrosine kinase . Nat Cell Biol 5 : 195 - 204 . Geli , M . I . , Riezman , H . 1998 . Endocytic internalization in yeast and animal cells : similar and different . J Cell Sci 111 : 1031 - 7 . Ghose , A . , Van Vactor , D . 2002 . GAPs in Slit - Robo signaling . Bioessays 24 : 401 - 4 . Gilmore , A . P . , Burridge , K . 1996 . Regulation of vinculin binding to talin and actin by phosphatidyl - inositol - 4 - 5 - bisphosphate . Nature 381 : 531 - 5 . Goode , B . L . , Drubin , D . G . , Barnes , G . 2000 . Functional co - operation between the microtubule and actin cytoskeletons . Curr Opin Cell Biol 12 : 63 - 71 . Gorina , S . , Pavletich , N . P . 1996 . Structure of the p53 tumor suppressor bound to the ankyrin and SH3 domains of 53BP2 . Science 274 : 1001 - 5 . Govind , S . , Kozma , R . , Monfries , C . , Lim , L . , Ahmed , S . 2001 . Cdc42Hs facilitates cytoskeletal reorganization and neurite outgrowth by localizing the 58 - kD insulin receptor substrate to filamentous actin . J Cell Biol 152 : 579 - 94 . Greaves , S . 2002 . Ready and abl . Nat Cell Biol 4 : E74 . Gundersen , G . G . 2002 . Evolutionary conservation of microtubule - capture mechanisms . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 3 : 296 - 304 . Guo , J . , Wenk , M . R . , Pellegrini , L . , Onofri , F . , Benfenati , F . , De Camilli , P . 2003 . Phosphatidylinositol 4 - kinase type IIalpha is responsible for the phosphatidylinositol 4 - kinase activity associated with synaptic vesicles . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100 : 3995 - 4000 . Gusella , J . F . , MacDonald , M . E . 1998 . Huntingtin : a single bait hooks many species . Curr Opin Neurobiol 8 : 425 - 30 Habas , R . , Kato , Y . , He , X . 2001 . Wnt / Frizzled activation of Rho regulates vertebrate gastrulation and requires a novel Formin homology protein Daam1 . Cell 107 : 843 - 54 . Habets , G . G . , Scholtes , E . H . , Zuydgeest , D . , van der Kammen , R . A . , Stam , J . C . , et al . 1994 . Identification of an invasion - inducing gene , Tiam - 1 , that encodes a protein with homology to GDP - GTP exchangers for Rho - like proteins . Cell 77 : 537 - 49 Haglund , K . , Shimokawa , N . , Szymkiewicz , I . , Dikic , I . 2002 . Cbl - directed monoubiquitination of CIN85 is involved in regulation of ligand - induced degradation of EGF receptors . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99 : 12191 - 6 . Hall , A . 1998 . Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton . Science 279 : 509 - 14 . Hall , A . , Nobes , C . D . 2000 . Rho GTPases : molecular switches that control the organization and dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton . Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 355 : 965 - 70 . Hall , C . , Michael , G . J . , Cann , N . , Ferrari , G . , Teo , M . , et al . 2001 . alpha2 - chimaerin , a Cdc42 / Rac1 regulator , is selectively expressed in the rat embryonic nervous system and is involved in neuritogenesis in N1E - 115 neuroblastoma cells . J Neurosci 21 : 5191 - 202 . 61 Hall , C . , Monfries , C . , Smith , P . , Lim , H . H . , Kozma , R . , et al . 1990 . Novel human brain cDNA encoding a 34 , 000 Mr protein n - chimaerin , related to both the regulatory domain of protein kinase C and BCR , the product of the breakpoint cluster region gene . J Mol Biol 211 : 11 - 6 . Hall , R . A . , Ostedgaard , L . S . , Premont , R . T . , Blitzer , J . T . , Rahman , N . , et al . 1998a . A C - terminal motif found in the beta2 - adrenergic receptor , P2Y1 receptor and cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator determines binding to the Na + / H + exchanger regulatory factor family of PDZ proteins . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95 : 8496 - 501 Hall , R . A . , Premont , R . T . , Chow , C . W . , Blitzer , J . T . , Pitcher , J . A . , et al . 1998b . The beta2 - adrenergic receptor interacts with the Na + / H + - exchanger regulatory factor to control Na + / H + exchange . Nature 392 : 626 - 30 Harada , A . , Furuta , B . , Takeuchi , K . , Itakura , M . , Takahashi , M . , Umeda , M . 2000 . Nadrin , a novel neuron - specific GTPase - activating protein involved in regulated exocytosis . J Biol Chem 275 : 36885 - 91 . Hart , M . J . , Eva , A . , Evans , T . , Aaronson , S . A . , Cerione , R . A . 1991 . Catalysis of guanine nucleotide exchange on the CDC42Hs protein by the dbl oncogene product . Nature 354 : 311 - 4 . Hart , M . J . , Eva , A . , Zangrilli , D . , Aaronson , S . A . , Evans , T . , et al . 1994 . Cellular transformation and guanine nucleotide exchange activity are catalyzed by a common domain on the dbl oncogene product . J Biol Chem 269 : 62 - 5 . Hart , M . J . , Sharma , S . , elMasry , N . , Qiu , R . G . , McCabe , P . , et al . 1996 . Identification of a novel guanine nucleotide exchange factor for the Rho GTPase . J Biol Chem 271 : 25452 - 8 . Hartwig , J . H . , Bokoch , G . M . , Carpenter , C . L . , Janmey , P . A . , Taylor , L . A . , et al . 1995 . Thrombin receptor ligation and activated Rac uncap actin filament barbed ends through phosphoinositide synthesis in permeabilized human platelets . Cell 82 : 643 - 53 . Hawkins , P . T . , Eguinoa , A . , Qiu , R . G . , Stokoe , D . , Cooke , F . T . , et al . 1995 . PDGF stimulates an increase in GTP - Rac via activation of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase . Curr Biol 5 : 393 - 403 . Heisterkamp , N . , Kaartinen , V . , van Soest , S . , Bokoch , G . M . , Groffen , J . 1993 . Human ABR encodes a protein with GAPrac activity and homology to the DBL nucleotide exchange factor domain . J Biol Chem 268 : 16903 - 6 . Henriksson , M . L . , Sundin , C . , Jansson , A . L . , Forsberg , A . , Palmer , R . H . , Hallberg , B . 2002 . Exoenzyme S shows selective ADP - ribosylation and GTPase - activating protein ( GAP ) activities towards small GTPases in vivo . Biochem J 367 : 617 - 28 Higgins , M . K . , McMahon , H . T . 2002 . Snap - shots of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Trends Biochem Sci 27 : 257 - 63 . Hildebrand , J . D . , Taylor , J . M . , Parsons , J . T . 1996 . An SH3 domain - containing GTPase - activating protein for Rho and Cdc42 associates with focal adhesion kinase . Mol Cell Biol 16 : 3169 - 78 . Hill , E . , van Der Kaay , J . , Downes , C . P . , Smythe , E . 2001 . The role of dynamin and its binding partners in coated pit invagination and scission . J Cell Biol 152 : 309 - 23 . Hinshaw , J . E . 2000 . Dynamin and its role in membrane fission . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 16 : 483 - 519 Hinshaw , J . E . , Schmid , S . L . 1995 . Dynamin self - assembles into rings suggesting a mechanism for coated vesicle budding . Nature 374 : 190 - 2 . Hirose , K . , Kawashima , T . , Iwamoto , I . , Nosaka , T . , Kitamura , T . 2001 . MgcRacGAP is involved in cytokinesis through associating with mitotic spindle and midbody . J Biol Chem 276 : 5821 - 8 . Hirose , M . , Ishizaki , T . , Watanabe , N . , Uehata , M . , Kranenburg , O . , et al . 1998 . Molecular dissection of the Rho - associated protein kinase ( p160ROCK ) - regulated neurite remodeling in neuroblastoma N1E - 115 cells . J Cell Biol 141 : 1625 - 36 Hoffman , G . R . , Cerione , R . A . 2002 . Signaling to the Rho GTPases : networking with the DH domain . FEBS Lett 513 : 85 - 91 . Holbert , S . , Dedeoglu , A . , Humbert , S . , Saudou , F . , Ferrante , R . J . , Neri , C . 2003 . Cdc42 - interacting protein 4 binds to huntingtin : neuropathologic and biological evidence for a role in Huntington ' s disease . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100 : 2712 - 7 . 62 Homma , Y . , Emori , Y . 1995 . A dual functional signal mediator showing RhoGAP and phospholipase C - delta stimulating activities . Embo J 14 : 286 - 91 . Howard , L . , Nelson , K . K . , Maciewicz , R . A . , Blobel , C . P . 1999 . Interaction of the metalloprotease disintegrins MDC9 and MDC15 with two SH3 domain - containing proteins , endophilin I and SH3PX1 . J Biol Chem 274 : 31693 - 9 . Hu , K . Q . , Settleman , J . 1997 . Tandem SH2 binding sites mediate the RasGAP - RhoGAP interaction : a conformational mechanism for SH3 domain regulation . Embo J 16 : 473 - 83 . Hu , Y . , Mivechi , N . F . 2003 . HSF - 1 Interacts with Ral - binding Protein 1 in a Stress - responsive , Multiprotein Complex with HSP90 in Vivo . J Biol Chem 278 : 17299 - 306 . Hudson , A . M . , Cooley , L . 2002 . A subset of dynamic actin rearrangements in Drosophila requires the Arp2 / 3 complex . J Cell Biol 156 : 677 - 87 . Hurley , J . H . , Wendland , B . 2002 . Endocytosis : driving membranes around the bend . Cell 111 : 143 - 6 . Hussain , N . K . , Jenna , S . , Glogauer , M . , Quinn , C . C . , Wasiak , S . , et al . 2001 . Endocytic protein intersectin - l regulates actin assembly via Cdc42 and N - WASP . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 927 - 32 . Hussain , N . K . , Yamabhai , M . , Ramjaun , A . R . , Guy , A . M . , Baranes , D . , et al . 1999 . Splice variants of intersectin are components of the endocytic machinery in neurons and nonneuronal cells . J Biol Chem 274 : 15671 - 7 . Huttner , W . B . , Schmidt , A . 2000 . Lipids , lipid modification and lipid - protein interaction in membrane budding and fission - - insights from the roles of endophilin A1 and synaptophysin in synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Curr Opin Neurobiol 10 : 543 - 51 . Huttner , W . B . , Schmidt , A . A . 2002 . Membrane curvature : a case of endofeelin ' . Trends Cell Biol 12 : 155 - 8 . Ikeda , M . , Ishida , O . , Hinoi , T . , Kishida , S . , Kikuchi , A . 1998 . Identification and characterization of a novel protein interacting with Ral - binding protein 1 , a putative effector protein of Ral . J Biol Chem 273 : 814 - 21 . Insall , R . , Machesky , L . 2001 . Cytoskeleton . Encyclopedia of life sciences Ishizaki , T . , Morishima , Y . , Okamoto , M . , Furuyashiki , T . , Kato , T . , Narumiya , S . 2001 . Coordination of microtubules and the actin cytoskeleton by the Rho effector mDia1 . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 8 - 14 . Ishizaki , T . , Naito , M . , Fujisawa , K . , Maekawa , M . , Watanabe , N . , et al . 1997 . p160ROCK , a Rho - associated coiled - coil forming protein kinase , works downstream of Rho and induces focal adhesions . FEBS Lett 404 : 118 - 24 . Itoh , K . , Sakakibara , M . , Yamasaki , S . , Takeuchi , A . , Arase , H . , et al . 2002 . Cutting edge : negative regulation of immune synapse formation by anchoring lipid raft to cytoskeleton through Cbp - EBP50 - ERM assembly . J Immunol 168 : 541 - 4 Jantsch - Plunger , V . , Gonczy , P . , Romano , A . , Schnabel , H . , Hamill , D . , et al . 2000 . CYK - 4 : A Rho family gtpase activating protein ( GAP ) required for central spindle formation and cytokinesis . J Cell Biol 149 : 1391 - 404 . Jenna , S . , Hussain , N . K . , Danek , E . I . , Triki , I . , Wasiak , S . , et al . 2002 . The activity of the GTPase - activating protein CdGAP is regulated by the endocytic protein intersectin . J Biol Chem 277 : 6366 - 73 . Jordan , P . , Brazao , R . , Boavida , M . G . , Gespach , C . , Chastre , E . 1999 . Cloning of a novel human Rac1b splice variant with increased expression in colorectal tumors . Oncogene 18 : 6835 - 9 Jullien - Flores , V . , Dorseuil , O . , Romero , F . , Letourneur , F . , Saragosti , S . , et al . 1995 . Bridging Ral GTPase to Rho pathways . RLIP76 , a Ral effector with CDC42 / Rac GTPase - activating protein activity . J Biol Chem 270 : 22473 - 7 . Jullien - Flores , V . , Mahe , Y . , Mirey , G . , Leprince , C . , Meunier - Bisceuil , B . , et al . 2000 . RLIP76 , an effector of the GTPase Ral , interacts with the AP2 complex : involvement of the Ral pathway in receptor endocytosis . J Cell Sci 113 : 2837 - 44 . Kaartinen , V . , Gonzalez - Gomez , I . , Voncken , J . W . , Haataja , L . , Faure , E . , et al . 2001 . Abnormal function of astroglia lacking Abr and Bcr RacGAPs . Development 128 : 4217 - 27 . Kaartinen , V . , Nagy , A . , Gonzalez - Gomez , I . , Groffen , J . , Heisterkamp , N . 2002 . Vestibular dysgenesis in mice lacking Abr and Bcr Cdc42 / RacGAPs . Dev Dyn 223 : 517 - 25 . 63 Kadlec , L . , Pendergast , A . M . 1997 . The amphiphysin - like protein 1 ( ALP1 ) interacts functionally with the cABL tyrosine kinase and may play a role in cytoskeletal regulation . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94 : 12390 - 5 . Kain , K . H . , Klemke , R . L . 2001 . Inhibition of cell migration by Abl family tyrosine kinases through uncoupling of Crk - CAS complexes . J Biol Chem 276 : 16185 - 92 . Kanaho , Y . , Suzuki , T . 2002 . Phosphoinositide kinases as enzymes that produce versatile signaling lipids , phosphoinositides . J Biochem ( Tokyo ) 131 : 503 - 9 . Kanehisa , J . , Yamanaka , T . , Doi , S . , Turksen , K . , Heersche , J . N . , et al . 1990 . A band of F - actin containing podosomes is involved in bone resorption by osteoclasts . Bone 11 : 287 - 93 Kato , M . , Miyazawa , K . , Kitamura , N . 2000 . A deubiquitinating enzyme UBPY interacts with the Src homology 3 domain of Hrs - binding protein via a novel binding motif PX ( V / I ) ( D / N ) RXXKP . J Biol Chem 275 : 37481 - 7 . Kato , T . , Watanabe , N . , Morishima , Y . , Fujita , A . , Ishizaki , T . , Narumiya , S . 2001 . Localization of a mammalian homolog of diaphanous , mDia1 , to the mitotic spindle in HeLa cells . J Cell Sci 114 : 775 - 84 . Kay , B . K . , Williamson , M . P . , Sudol , M . 2000 . The importance of being proline : the interaction of proline - rich motifs in signaling proteins with their cognate domains . Faseb J 14 : 231 - 41 . Kelly , R . B . 1999 . New twists for dynamin . Nature cell biology 1 Kessels , M . M . , Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , Drubin , D . G . , Qualmann , B . 2001 . Mammalian Abp1 , a signal - responsive F - actin - binding protein , links the actin cytoskeleton to endocytosis via the GTPase dynamin . J Cell Biol 153 : 351 - 66 . Kim , J . H . , Liao , D . , Lau , L . F . , Huganir , R . L . 1998 . SynGAP : a synaptic RasGAP that associates with the PSD - 95 / SAP90 protein family . Neuron 20 : 683 - 91 Kimura , K . , Ito , M . , Amano , M . , Chihara , K . , Fukata , Y . , et al . 1996 . Regulation of myosin phosphatase by Rho and Rho - associated kinase ( Rho - kinase ) . Science 273 : 245 - 8 . Kinley , A . W . , Weed , S . A . , Weaver , A . M . , Karginov , A . V . , Bissonette , E . , et al . 2003 . Cortactin Interacts with WIP in Regulating Arp2 / 3 Activation and Membrane Protrusion . Curr Biol 13 : 384 - 93 . Kirchhausen , T . , Rosen , F . S . 1996 . Disease mechanism : unravelling Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome . Curr Biol 6 : 676 - 8 . Kirchhausen , T . 2000 . Three ways to make a vesicle . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 1 : 187 - 98 . Kirsch , K . H . , Georgescu , M . M . , Shishido , T . , Langdon , W . Y . , Birge , R . B . , Hanafusa , H . 2001 . The adapter type protein CMS / CD2AP binds to the proto - oncogenic protein c - Cbl through a tyrosine phosphorylation - regulated Src homology 3 domain interaction . J Biol Chem 276 : 4957 - 63 . Kj ø ller , L . , Hall , A . 1999 . Signaling to Rho GTPases . Exp Cell Res 253 : 166 - 79 . Kolluri , R . , Tolias , K . F . , Carpenter , C . L . , Rosen , F . S . , Kirchhausen , T . 1996 . Direct interaction of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein with the GTPase Cdc42 . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93 : 5615 - 8 . Kosaka , T . , Ikeda , K . 1983 . Possible temperature - dependent blockage of synaptic vesicle recycling induced by a single gene mutation in Drosophila . J Neurobiol 14 : 207 - 25 . Kotani , K . , Yonezawa , K . , Hara , K . , Ueda , H . , Kitamura , Y . , et al . 1994 . Involvement of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase in insulin - or IGF - 1 - induced membrane ruffling . Embo J 13 : 2313 - 21 . Kourlas , P . J . , Strout , M . P . , Becknell , B . , Veronese , M . L . , Croce , C . M . , et al . 2000 . Identification of a gene at 11q23 encoding a guanine nucleotide exchange factor : evidence for its fusion with MLL in acute myeloid leukemia . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97 : 2145 - 50 Kowanetz , K . , Szymkiewicz , I . , Haglund , K . , Kowanetz , M . , Husnjak , K . , et al . 2003 . Identification of a novel proline - arginine motif involved in CIN85 - dependent clustering of Cbl and downregulation of EGF receptors . J Biol Chem Kozma , R . , Ahmed , S . , Best , A . , Lim , L . 1995 . The Ras - related protein Cdc42Hs and bradykinin promote formation of peripheral actin microspikes and filopodia in Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts . Mol Cell Biol 15 : 1942 - 52 . Kozma , R . , Ahmed , S . , Best , A . , Lim , L . 1996 . The GTPase - activating protein n - chimaerin cooperates with Rac1 and Cdc42Hs to induce the formation of lamellipodia and filopodia . Mol Cell Biol 16 : 5069 - 80 . 64 Kozma , R . , Sarner , S . , Ahmed , S . , Lim , L . 1997 . Rho family GTPases and neuronal growth cone remodelling : relationship between increased complexity induced by Cdc42Hs , Rac1 , and acetylcholine and collapse induced by RhoA and lysophosphatidic acid . Mol Cell Biol 17 : 1201 - 11 . Krueger , E . W . , Orth , J . D . , Cao , H . , McNiven , M . A . 2003 . A Dynamin - Cortactin - Arp2 / 3 Complex Mediates Actin Reorganization in Growth Factor - stimulated Cells . Mol Biol Cell 14 : 1085 - 96 . Krugmann , S . , Anderson , K . E . , Ridley , S . H . , Risso , N . , McGregor , A . , et al . 2002 . Identification of ARAP3 , a novel PI3K effector regulating both Arf and Rho GTPases , by selective capture on phosphoinositide affinity matrices . Mol Cell 9 : 95 - 108 . Krugmann , S . , Jordens , I . , Gevaert , K . , Driessens , M . , Vandekerckhove , J . , Hall , A . 2001 . Cdc42 induces filopodia by promoting the formation of an IRSp53 : Mena complex . Curr Biol 11 : 1645 - 55 . Kumagai , N . , Morii , N . , Fujisawa , K . , Nemoto , Y . , Narumiya , S . 1993 . ADP - ribosylation of rho p21 inhibits lysophosphatidic acid - induced protein tyrosine phosphorylation and phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase activation in cultured Swiss 3T3 cells . J Biol Chem 268 : 24535 - 8 Kurakin , A . V . , Wu , S . , Bredesen , D . E . 2003 . Atypical recognition consensus of CIN85 / SETA / Ruk SH3 domains revealed by target - assisted iterative screening ( TAIS ) . J Biol Chem Kutsche , K . , Yntema , H . , Brandt , A . , Jantke , I . , Nothwang , H . G . , et al . 2000 . Mutations in ARHGEF6 , encoding a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Rho GTPases , in patients with X - linked mental retardation . Nat Genet 26 : 247 - 50 . Lamarche , N . , Hall , A . 1994 . GAPs for rho - related GTPases . Trends Genet 10 : 436 - 40 . Lamarche - Vane , N . , Hall , A . 1998 . CdGAP , a novel proline - rich GTPase - activating protein for Cdc42 and Rac . J Biol Chem 273 : 29172 - 7 . Lamaze , C . , Chuang , T . H . , Terlecky , L . J . , Bokoch , G . M . , Schmid , S . L . 1996 . Regulation of receptor - mediated endocytosis by Rho and Rac . Nature 382 : 177 - 9 . Lancaster , C . A . , Taylor - Harris , P . M . , Self , A . J . , Brill , S . , van Erp , H . E . , Hall , A . 1994 . Characterization of rhoGAP . A GTPase - activating protein for rho - related small GTPases . J Biol Chem 269 : 1137 - 42 . Lanier , L . M . , Gertler , F . B . 2000 . From Abl to actin : Abl tyrosine kinase and associated proteins in growth cone motility . Curr Opin Neurobiol 10 : 80 - 7 . Lauffenburger , D . A . , Horwitz , A . F . 1996 . Cell migration : a physically integrated molecular process . Cell 84 : 359 - 69 . Lee , E . , De Camilli , P . 2002 . Dynamin at actin tails . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99 : 161 - 6 . Lee , E . , Marcucci , M . , Daniell , L . , Pypaert , M . , Weisz , O . A . , et al . 2002 . Amphiphysin 2 ( Bin1 ) and T - tubule biogenesis in muscle . Science 297 : 1193 - 6 . Leeuwen , F . N . , Kain , H . E . , Kammen , R . A . , Michiels , F . , Kranenburg , O . W . , Collard , J . G . 1997 . The guanine nucleotide exchange factor Tiam1 affects neuronal morphology ; opposing roles for the small GTPases Rac and Rho . J Cell Biol 139 : 797 - 807 Leevers , S . J . , Vanhaesebroeck , B . , Waterfield , M . D . 1999 . Signalling through phosphoinositide 3 - kinases : the lipids take centre stage . Curr Opin Cell Biol 11 : 219 - 25 . Leprince , C . , Romero , F . , Cussac , D . , Vayssiere , B . , Berger , R . , et al . 1997 . A new member of the amphiphysin family connecting endocytosis and signal transduction pathways . J Biol Chem 272 : 15101 - 5 . Lerm , M . , Schmidt , G . , Aktories , K . 2000 . Bacterial protein toxins targeting rho GTPases . FEMS Microbiol Lett 188 : 1 - 6 Leung , T . , How , B . E . , Manser , E . , Lim , L . 1993 . Germ cell beta - chimaerin , a new GTPase - activating protein for p21rac , is specifically expressed during the acrosomal assembly stage in rat testis . J Biol Chem 268 : 3813 - 6 . Leung , T . , How , B . E . , Manser , E . , Lim , L . 1994 . Cerebellar beta 2 - chimaerin , a GTPase - activating protein for p21 ras - related rac is specifically expressed in granule cells and has a unique N - terminal SH2 domain . J Biol Chem 269 : 12888 - 92 . Lewis , J . M . , Baskaran , R . , Taagepera , S . , Schwartz , M . A . , Wang , J . Y . 1996 . Integrin regulation of c - Abl tyrosine kinase activity and cytoplasmic - nuclear transport . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93 : 15174 - 9 . 65 Li , G . , D ' Souza - Schorey , C . , Barbieri , M . A . , Cooper , J . A . , Stahl , P . D . 1997 . Uncoupling of membrane ruffling and pinocytosis during Ras signal transduction . J Biol Chem 272 : 10337 - 40 . Lichte , B . , Veh , R . W . , Meyer , H . E . , Kilimann , M . W . 1992 . Amphiphysin , a novel protein associated with synaptic vesicles . Embo J 11 : 2521 - 30 . Linder , S . , Aepfelbacher , M . 2003 . Podosomes : adhesion hot - spots of invasive cells . Trends Cell Biol 13 : 376 - 85 Linder , S . , Nelson , D . , Weiss , M . , Aepfelbacher , M . 1999 . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein regulates podosomes in primary human macrophages . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96 : 9648 - 53 . Lippincott , J . , Li , R . 2000 . Involvement of PCH family proteins in cytokinesis and actin distribution . Microsc Res Tech 49 : 168 - 72 . Liu , Q . , Berry , D . , Nash , P . , Pawson , T . , McGlade , C . J . , Li , S . S . 2003 . Structural basis for specific binding of the Gads SH3 domain to an RxxK motif - containing SLP - 76 peptide : a novel mode of peptide recognition . Mol Cell 11 : 471 - 81 . Ljubimova , J . Y . , Khazenzon , N . M . , Chen , Z . , Neyman , Y . I . , Turner , L . , et al . 2001 . Gene expression abnormalities in human glial tumors identified by gene array . Int J Oncol 18 : 287 - 95 . Lommel , S . , Benesch , S . , Rottner , K . , Franz , T . , Wehland , J . , Kuhn , R . 2001 . Actin pedestal formation by enteropathogenic Escherichia coli and intracellular motility of Shigella flexneri are abolished in N - WASP - defective cells . EMBO Rep 2 : 850 - 7 . Longenecker , K . L . , Zhang , B . , Derewenda , U . , Sheffield , P . J . , Dauter , Z . , et al . 2000 . Structure of the BH domain from graf and its implications for Rho GTPase recognition . J Biol Chem 275 : 38605 - 10 . Luo , L . 2000 . Rho GTPases in neuronal morphogenesis . Nat Rev Neurosci 1 : 173 - 80 . Luo , L . 2002 . Actin cytoskeleton regulation in neuronal morphogenesis and structural plasticity . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 18 : 601 - 35 Lynch , E . D . , Lee , M . K . , Morrow , J . E . , Welcsh , P . L . , Leon , P . E . , King , M . C . 1997 . Nonsyndromic deafness DFNA1 associated with mutation of a human homolog of the Drosophila gene diaphanous . Science 278 : 1315 - 8 . Machesky , L . M . 2002 . Sharks ' teeth and dunes . Nature 417 : 494 - 7 . Machesky , L . M . , Atkinson , S . J . , Ampe , C . , Vandekerckhove , J . , Pollard , T . D . 1994 . Purification of a cortical complex containing two unconventional actins from Acanthamoeba by affinity chromatography on profilin - agarose . J Cell Biol 127 : 107 - 15 . Machesky , L . M . , Hall , A . 1997 . Role of actin polymerization and adhesion to extracellular matrix in Rac - and Rho - induced cytoskeletal reorganization . J Cell Biol 138 : 913 - 26 . Machesky , L . M . , Insall , R . H . 1998 . Scar1 and the related Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , regulate the actin cytoskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr Biol 8 : 1347 - 56 . Madaule , P . , Axel , R . 1985 . A novel ras - related gene family . Cell 41 : 31 - 40 . Malecz , N . , McCabe , P . C . , Spaargaren , C . , Qiu , R . , Chuang , Y . , Symons , M . 2000 . Synaptojanin 2 , a novel Rac1 effector that regulates clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Curr Biol 10 : 1383 - 6 . Manser , E . , Leung , T . , Monfries , C . , Teo , M . , Hall , C . , Lim , L . 1992 . Diversity and versatility of GTPase activating proteins for the p21rho subfamily of ras G proteins detected by a novel overlay assay . J Biol Chem 267 : 16025 - 8 . Manser , E . , Loo , T . H . , Koh , C . G . , Zhao , Z . S . , Chen , X . Q . , et al . 1998 . PAK kinases are directly coupled to the PIX family of nucleotide exchange factors . Mol Cell 1 : 183 - 92 . Marsh , M . 2001 . Endocytosis . : Marsh , M . , McMahon , H . T . 1999 . The structural era of endocytosis . Science 285 : 215 - 20 . Maudsley , S . , Zamah , A . M . , Rahman , N . , Blitzer , J . T . , Luttrell , L . M . , et al . 2000 . Platelet - derived growth factor receptor association with Na ( + ) / H ( + ) exchanger regulatory factor potentiates receptor activity . Mol Cell Biol 20 : 8352 - 63 . Mayer , B . J . 2001 . SH3 domains : complexity in moderation . J Cell Sci 114 : 1253 - 63 . 66 McDonald , J . D . , Daneshvar , L . , Willert , J . R . , Matsumura , K . , Waldman , F . , Cogen , P . H . 1994 . Physical mapping of chromosome 17p13 . 3 in the region of a putative tumor suppressor gene important in medulloblastoma . Genomics 23 : 229 - 32 . McNiven , M . A . , Kim , L . , Krueger , E . W . , Orth , J . D . , Cao , H . , Wong , T . W . 2000 . Regulated interactions between dynamin and the actin - binding protein cortactin modulate cell shape . J Cell Biol 151 : 187 - 98 . McPherson , P . S . 2002 . The endocytic machinery at an interface with the actin cytoskeleton : a dynamic , hip intersection . Trends Cell Biol 12 : 312 - 5 . McPherson , P . S . , Kay , B . K . , Hussain , N . K . 2001 . Signaling on the endocytic pathway . Traffic 2 : 375 - 84 . Mehta , D . , Rahman , A . , Malik , A . B . 2001 . Protein kinase C - alpha signals rho - guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor phosphorylation and rho activation and regulates the endothelial cell barrier function . J Biol Chem 276 : 22614 - 20 . Merrifield , C . J . , Moss , S . E . , Ballestrem , C . , Imhof , B . A . , Giese , G . , et al . 1999 . Endocytic vesicles move at the tips of actin tails in cultured mast cells . Nat Cell Biol 1 : 72 - 4 . Metzler , M . , Legendre - Guillemin , V . , Gan , L . , Chopra , V . , Kwok , A . , et al . 2001 . HIP1 functions in clathrin - mediated endocytosis through binding to clathrin and adaptor protein 2 . J Biol Chem 276 : 39271 - 6 . Micheva , K . D . , Ramjaun , A . R . , Kay , B . K . , McPherson , P . S . 1997 . SH3 domain - dependent interactions of endophilin with amphiphysin . FEBS Lett 414 : 308 - 12 . Michiels , F . , Habets , G . G . , Stam , J . C . , van der Kammen , R . A . , Collard , J . G . 1995 . A role for Rac in Tiam1 - induced membrane ruffling and invasion . Nature 375 : 338 - 40 . Miki , H . , Miura , K . , Takenawa , T . 1996 . N - WASP , a novel actin - depolymerizing protein , regulates the cortical cytoskeletal rearrangement in a PIP2 - dependent manner downstream of tyrosine kinases . Embo J 15 : 5326 - 35 . Miki , H . , Sasaki , T . , Takai , Y . , Takenawa , T . 1998 . Induction of filopodium formation by a WASP - related actin - depolymerizing protein N - WASP . Nature 391 : 93 - 6 . Miki , H . , Takenawa , T . 1998 . Direct binding of the verprolin - homology domain in N - WASP to actin is essential for cytoskeletal reorganization . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 243 : 73 - 8 . Miki , H . , Yamaguchi , H . , Suetsugu , S . , Takenawa , T . 2000 . IRSp53 is an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the regulation of membrane ruffling . Nature 408 : 732 - 5 . Minoshima , Y . , Kawashima , T . , Hirose , K . , Tonozuka , Y . , Kawajiri , A . , et al . 2003 . Phosphorylation by Aurora B Converts MgcRacGAP to a RhoGAP during Cytokinesis . Dev Cell 4 : 549 - 60 . Mishima , M . , Kaitna , S . , Glotzer , M . 2002 . Central spindle assembly and cytokinesis require a kinesin - like protein / RhoGAP complex with microtubule bundling activity . Dev Cell 2 : 41 - 54 . Mishra , S . K . , Agostinelli , N . R . , Brett , T . J . , Mizukami , I . , Ross , T . S . , Traub , L . M . 2001 . Clathrin - and AP - 2 - binding sites in HIP1 uncover a general assembly role for endocytic accessory proteins . J Biol Chem 276 : 46230 - 6 . Mitchison , T . J . , Cramer , L . P . 1996 . Actin - based cell motility and cell locomotion . Cell 84 : 371 - 9 . Miura , K . , Jacques , K . M . , Stauffer , S . , Kubosaki , A . , Zhu , K . , et al . 2002 . ARAP1 : a point of convergence for Arf and Rho signaling . Mol Cell 9 : 109 - 19 . Modregger , J . , DiProspero , N . A . , Charles , V . , Tagle , D . A . , Plomann , M . 2002 . PACSIN 1 interacts with huntingtin and is absent from synaptic varicosities in presymptomatic Huntington ' s disease brains . Hum Mol Genet 11 : 2547 - 58 . Modregger , J . , Ritter , B . , Witter , B . , Paulsson , M . , Plomann , M . 2000 . All three PACSIN isoforms bind to endocytic proteins and inhibit endocytosis . J Cell Sci 113 Pt 24 : 4511 - 21 . Modregger , J . , Schmidt , A . A . , Ritter , B . , Huttner , W . B . , Plomann , M . 2003 . Characterization of Endophilin B1b , a brain - specific membrane - associated lysophosphatidic acid acyl transferase with properties distinct from endophilin A1 . J Biol Chem 278 : 4160 - 7 . Mongiovi , A . M . , Romano , P . R . , Panni , S . , Mendoza , M . , Wong , W . T . , et al . 1999 . A novel peptide - SH3 interaction . Embo J 18 : 5300 - 9 . 67 Moon , S . Y . , Zang , H . , Zheng , Y . 2003 . Characterization of a Brain - specific Rho GTPase - activating Protein , p200RhoGAP . J Biol Chem 278 : 4151 - 9 . Moon , S . Y . , Zheng , Y . 2003 . Rho GTPase - activating proteins in cell regulation . Trends Cell Biol 13 : 13 - 22 . Muller , R . T . , Honnert , U . , Reinhard , J . , Bahler , M . 1997 . The rat myosin myr 5 is a GTPase - activating protein for Rho in vivo : essential role of arginine 1695 . Mol Biol Cell 8 : 2039 - 53 . Mundigl , O . , Ochoa , G . C . , David , C . , Slepnev , V . I . , Kabanov , A . , De Camilli , P . 1998 . Amphiphysin I antisense oligonucleotides inhibit neurite outgrowth in cultured hippocampal neurons . J Neurosci 18 : 93 - 103 . Munn , A . L . 2001 . Molecular requirements for the internalisation step of endocytosis : insights from yeast . Biochim Biophys Acta 1535 : 236 - 57 . Murphy , C . , Saffrich , R . , Grummt , M . , Gournier , H . , Rybin , V . , et al . 1996 . Endosome dynamics regulated by a Rho protein . Nature 384 : 427 - 32 . Musacchio , A . , Cantley , L . C . , Harrison , S . C . 1996 . Crystal structure of the breakpoint cluster region - homology domain from phosphoinositide 3 - kinase p85 alpha subunit . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93 : 14373 - 8 . Nakamura , T . , Komiya , M . , Sone , K . , Hirose , E . , Gotoh , N . , et al . 2002 . Grit , a GTPase - activating protein for the Rho family , regulates neurite extension through association with the TrkA receptor and N - Shc and CrkL / Crk adapter molecules . Mol Cell Biol 22 : 8721 - 34 . Nakano , K . , Takaishi , K . , Kodama , A . , Mammoto , A . , Shiozaki , H . , et al . 1999 . Distinct actions and cooperative roles of ROCK and mDia in Rho small G protein - induced reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton in Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . Mol Biol Cell 10 : 2481 - 91 . Nakashima , S . , Morinaka , K . , Koyama , S . , Ikeda , M . , Kishida , M . , et al . 1999 . Small G protein Ral and its downstream molecules regulate endocytosis of EGF and insulin receptors . Embo J 18 : 3629 - 42 . Nassar , N . , Hoffman , G . R . , Manor , D . , Clardy , J . C . , Cerione , R . A . 1998 . Structures of Cdc42 bound to the active and catalytically compromised forms of Cdc42GAP . Nat Struct Biol 5 : 1047 - 52 . Neudauer , C . L . , Joberty , G . , Tatsis , N . , Macara , I . G . 1998 . Distinct cellular effects and interactions of the Rho - family GTPase TC10 . Curr Biol 8 : 1151 - 60 . Nimnual , A . S . , Yatsula , B . A . , Bar - Sagi , D . 1998 . Coupling of Ras and Rac guanosine triphosphatases through the Ras exchanger Sos . Science 279 : 560 - 3 . Nobes , C . D . , Hall , A . 1995 . Rho , rac , and cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress fibers , lamellipodia , and filopodia . Cell 81 : 53 - 62 . Nobes , C . D . , Hall , A . 1999 . Rho GTPases control polarity , protrusion , and adhesion during cell movement . J Cell Biol 144 : 1235 - 44 . Nobes , C . D . , Hawkins , P . , Stephens , L . , Hall , A . 1995 . Activation of the small GTP - binding proteins rho and rac by growth factor receptors . J Cell Sci 108 : 225 - 33 . Nourry , C . , Grant , S . G . , Borg , J . P . 2003 . PDZ domain proteins : plug and play ! Sci STKE 2003 : RE7 . Ochoa , G . C . , Slepnev , V . I . , Neff , L . , Ringstad , N . , Takei , K . , et al . 2000 . A functional link between dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton at podosomes . J Cell Biol 150 : 377 - 89 . O ' Connor , K . L . , Nguyen , B . K . , Mercurio , A . M . 2000 . RhoA function in lamellae formation and migration is regulated by the alpha6beta4 integrin and cAMP metabolism . J Cell Biol 148 : 253 - 8 . Ohga , N . , Kikuchi , A . , Ueda , T . , Yamamoto , J . , Takai , Y . 1989 . Rabbit intestine contains a protein that inhibits the dissociation of GDP from and the subsequent binding of GTP to rhoB p20 , a ras p21 - like GTP - binding protein . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 163 : 1523 - 33 . Okabe , T . , Nakamura , T . , Nishimura , Y . N . , Kohu , K . , Ohwada , S . , et al . 2003 . RICS , a novel GTPase - activating protein for Cdc42 and Rac1 , is involved in the beta - catenin - N - cadherin and N - methyl - D - aspartate receptor signaling . J Biol Chem 278 : 9920 - 7 . Olofsson , B . 1999 . Rho guanine dissociation inhibitors : pivotal molecules in cellular signalling . Cell Signal 11 : 545 - 54 . 68 Olson , M . F . , Pasteris , N . G . , Gorski , J . L . , Hall , A . 1996 . Faciogenital dysplasia protein ( FGD1 ) and Vav , two related proteins required for normal embryonic development , are upstream regulators of Rho GTPases . Curr Biol 6 : 1628 - 33 . Orth , J . D . , Krueger , E . W . , Cao , H . , McNiven , M . A . 2002 . The large GTPase dynamin regulates actin comet formation and movement in living cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99 : 167 - 72 . Orth , J . D . , McNiven , M . A . 2003 . Dynamin at the actin - membrane interface . Curr Opin Cell Biol 15 : 31 - 9 . Otsu , M . , Hiles , I . , Gout , I . , Fry , M . J . , Ruiz - Larrea , F . , et al . 1991 . Characterization of two 85 kd proteins that associate with receptor tyrosine kinases , middle - T / pp60c - src complexes , and PI3 - kinase . Cell 65 : 91 - 104 . Otsuki , M . , Itoh , T . , Takenawa , T . 2003 . Neural wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein is recruited to rafts and associates with endophilin a in response to epidermal growth factor . J Biol Chem 278 : 6461 - 9 . Oude Weernink , P . A . , Schulte , P . , Guo , Y . , Wetzel , J . , Amano , M . , et al . 2000 . Stimulation of phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase by Rho - kinase . J Biol Chem 275 : 10168 - 74 . Palazzo , A . F . , Cook , T . A . , Alberts , A . S . , Gundersen , G . G . 2001 . mDia mediates Rho - regulated formation and orientation of stable microtubules . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 723 - 9 . Park , S . H . , Weinberg , R . A . 1995 . A putative effector of Ral has homology to Rho / Rac GTPase activating proteins . Oncogene 11 : 2349 - 55 . Pawson , T . 1995 . Protein modules and signalling networks . Nature 373 : 573 - 80 . Pawson , T . , Nash , P . 2003 . Assembly of cell regulatory systems through protein interaction domains . Science 300 : 445 - 52 . Pawson , T . , Raina , M . , Nash , P . 2002 . Interaction domains : from simple binding events to complex cellular behavior . FEBS Lett 513 : 2 - 10 . Peck , J . , Douglas , G . t . , Wu , C . H . , Burbelo , P . D . 2002 . Human RhoGAP domain - containing proteins : structure , function and evolutionary relationships . FEBS Lett 528 : 27 - 34 . Petrelli , A . , Gilestro , G . F . , Lanzardo , S . , Comoglio , P . M . , Migone , N . , Giordano , S . 2002 . The endophilin - CIN85 - Cbl complex mediates ligand - dependent downregulation of c - Met . Nature 416 : 187 - 90 . Pierrat , B . , Simonen , M . , Cueto , M . , Mestan , J . , Ferrigno , P . , Heim , J . 2001 . SH3GLB , a new endophilin - related protein family featuring an SH3 domain . Genomics 71 : 222 - 34 . Pinheiro , N . A . , Caballero , O . L . , Soares , F . , Reis , L . F . , Simpson , A . J . 2001 . Significant overexpression of oligophrenin - 1 in colorectal tumors detected by cDNA microarray analysis . Cancer Lett 172 : 67 - 73 . Plattner , R . , Kadlec , L . , DeMali , K . A . , Kazlauskas , A . , Pendergast , A . M . 1999 . c - Abl is activated by growth factors and Src family kinases and has a role in the cellular response to PDGF . Genes Dev 13 : 2400 - 11 . Pollard , T . D . , Blanchoin , L . , Mullins , R . D . 2000 . Molecular mechanisms controlling actin filament dynamics in nonmuscle cells . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 29 : 545 - 76 Post , P . L . , Bokoch , G . M . , Mooseker , M . S . 1998 . Human myosin - IXb is a mechanochemically active motor and a GAP for rho . J Cell Sci 111 : 941 - 50 . Prakash , S . K . , Paylor , R . , Jenna , S . , Lamarche - Vane , N . , Armstrong , D . L . , et al . 2000 . Functional analysis of ARHGAP6 , a novel GTPase - activating protein for RhoA . Hum Mol Genet 9 : 477 - 88 . Pruyne , D . , Evangelista , M . , Yang , C . , Bi , E . , Zigmond , S . , et al . 2002 . Role of formins in actin assembly : nucleation and barbed - end association . Science 297 : 612 - 5 . Pucharcos , C . , Estivill , X . , de la Luna , S . 2000 . Intersectin 2 , a new multimodular protein involved in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . FEBS Lett 478 : 43 - 51 . Qualmann , B . , Kelly , R . B . 2000 . Syndapin isoforms participate in receptor - mediated endocytosis and actin organization . J Cell Biol 148 : 1047 - 62 . Qualmann , B . , Kessels , M . M . , Kelly , R . B . 2000 . Molecular links between endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton . J Cell Biol 150 : F111 - 6 . Qualmann , B . , Mellor , H . 2003 . Regulation of endocytic traffic by Rho GTPases . Biochem J 4 69 Qualmann , B . , Roos , J . , DiGregorio , P . J . , Kelly , R . B . 1999 . Syndapin I , a synaptic dynamin - binding protein that associates with the neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . Mol Biol Cell 10 : 501 - 13 . Ramesh , N . , Anton , I . M . , Hartwig , J . H . , Geha , R . S . 1997 . WIP , a protein associated with wiskott - aldrich syndrome protein , induces actin polymerization and redistribution in lymphoid cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94 : 14671 - 6 . Ramjaun , A . R . , Angers , A . , Legendre - Guillemin , V . , Tong , X . K . , McPherson , P . S . 2001 . Endophilin regulates JNK activation through its interaction with the germinal center kinase - like kinase . J Biol Chem 276 : 28913 - 9 . Reczek , D . , Bretscher , A . 2001 . Identification of EPI64 , a TBC / rabGAP domain - containing microvillar protein that binds to the first PDZ domain of EBP50 and E3KARP . J Cell Biol 153 : 191 - 206 . Reif , K . , Nobes , C . D . , Thomas , G . , Hall , A . , Cantrell , D . A . 1996 . Phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase signals activate a selective subset of Rac / Rho - dependent effector pathways . Curr Biol 6 : 1445 - 55 . Reinhard , J . , Scheel , A . A . , Diekmann , D . , Hall , A . , Ruppert , C . , Bahler , M . 1995 . A novel type of myosin implicated in signalling by rho family GTPases . Embo J 14 : 697 - 704 . Ren , R . , Mayer , B . J . , Cicchetti , P . , Baltimore , D . 1993 . Identification of a ten - amino acid proline - rich SH3 binding site . Science 259 : 1157 - 61 . Ren , X . D . , Schwartz , M . A . 1998 . Regulation of inositol lipid kinases by Rho and Rac . Curr Opin Genet Dev 8 : 63 - 7 . Ren , X . R . , Du , Q . S . , Huang , Y . Z . , Ao , S . Z . , Mei , L . , Xiong , W . C . 2001 . Regulation of CDC42 GTPase by proline - rich tyrosine kinase 2 interacting with PSGAP , a novel pleckstrin homology and Src homology 3 domain containing rhoGAP protein . J Cell Biol 152 : 971 - 84 . Richnau , N . , Aspenström , P . 2001 . Rich , a rho GTPase - activating protein domain - containing protein involved in signaling by Cdc42 and Rac1 . J Biol Chem 276 : 35060 - 70 . Ridley , A . J . 1999 . Stress fibres take shape . Nat Cell Biol 1 : E64 - 6 . Ridley , A . J . 2001a . Rho family proteins : coordinating cell responses . Trends Cell Biol 11 : 471 - 7 . Ridley , A . J . 2001b . Rho GTPases and cell migration . J Cell Sci 114 : 2713 - 22 . Ridley , A . J . 2001c . Rho proteins : linking signaling with membrane trafficking . Traffic 2 : 303 - 10 . Ridley , A . J . , Hall , A . 1992 . The small GTP - binding protein rho regulates the assembly of focal adhesions and actin stress fibers in response to growth factors . Cell 70 : 389 - 99 . Ridley , A . J . , Paterson , H . F . , Johnston , C . L . , Diekmann , D . , Hall , A . 1992 . The small GTP - binding protein rac regulates growth factor - induced membrane ruffling . Cell 70 : 401 - 10 . Ridley , A . J . , Self , A . J . , Kasmi , F . , Paterson , H . F . , Hall , A . , et al . 1993 . rho family GTPase activating proteins p190 , bcr and rhoGAP show distinct specificities in vitro and in vivo . Embo J 12 : 5151 - 60 . Ringstad , N . , Gad , H . , Low , P . , Di Paolo , G . , Brodin , L . , et al . 1999 . Endophilin / SH3p4 is required for the transition from early to late stages in clathrin - mediated synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Neuron 24 : 143 - 54 . Ringstad , N . , Nemoto , Y . , De Camilli , P . 1997 . The SH3p4 / Sh3p8 / SH3p13 protein family : binding partners for synaptojanin and dynamin via a Grb2 - like Src homology 3 domain . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94 : 8569 - 74 . Rittinger , K . , Taylor , W . R . , Smerdon , S . J . , Gamblin , S . J . 1998 . Support for shared ancestry of GAPs . Nature 392 : 448 - 9 . Rittinger , K . , Walker , P . A . , Eccleston , J . F . , Nurmahomed , K . , Owen , D . , et al . 1997a . Crystal structure of a small G protein in complex with the GTPase - activating protein rhoGAP . Nature 388 : 693 - 7 . Rittinger , K . , Walker , P . A . , Eccleston , J . F . , Smerdon , S . J . , Gamblin , S . J . 1997b . Structure at 1 . 65 A of RhoA and its GTPase - activating protein in complex with a transition - state analogue . Nature 389 : 758 - 62 . Rodriguez - Viciana , P . , Warne , P . H . , Khwaja , A . , Marte , B . M . , Pappin , D . , et al . 1997 . Role of phosphoinositide 3 - OH kinase in cell transformation and control of the actin cytoskeleton by Ras . Cell 89 : 457 - 67 . Rohatgi , R . , Ma , L . , Miki , H . , Lopez , M . , Kirchhausen , T . , et al . 1999 . The interaction between N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex links Cdc42 - dependent signals to actin assembly . Cell 97 : 221 - 31 . 70 Roof , R . W . , Haskell , M . D . , Dukes , B . D . , Sherman , N . , Kinter , M . , Parsons , S . J . 1998 . Phosphotyrosine ( p - Tyr ) - dependent and - independent mechanisms of p190 RhoGAP - p120 RasGAP interaction : Tyr 1105 of p190 , a substrate for c - Src , is the sole p - Tyr mediator of complex formation . Mol Cell Biol 18 : 7052 - 63 . Ross , T . S . , Jefferson , A . B . , Mitchell , C . A . , Majerus , P . W . 1991 . Cloning and expression of human 75 - kDa inositol polyphosphate - 5 - phosphatase . J Biol Chem 266 : 20283 - 9 . Rottner , K . , Hall , A . , Small , J . V . 1999 . Interplay between Rac and Rho in the control of substrate contact dynamics . Curr Biol 9 : 640 - 8 . Rozelle , A . L . , Machesky , L . M . , Yamamoto , M . , Driessens , M . H . , Insall , R . H . , et al . 2000 . Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate induces actin - based movement of raft - enriched vesicles through WASP - Arp2 / 3 . Curr Biol 10 : 311 - 20 . Sagot , I . , Klee , S . K . , Pellman , D . 2002a . Yeast formins regulate cell polarity by controlling the assembly of actin cables . Nat Cell Biol 4 : 42 - 50 . Sagot , I . , Rodal , A . A . , Moseley , J . , Goode , B . L . , Pellman , D . 2002b . An actin nucleation mechanism mediated by Bni1 and profilin . Nat Cell Biol 4 : 626 - 31 . Sahai , E . , Marshall , C . J . 2002a . RHO - GTPases and cancer . Nat Rev Cancer 2 : 133 - 42 . Sahai , E . , Marshall , C . J . 2002b . ROCK and Dia have opposing effects on adherens junctions downstream of Rho . Nat Cell Biol 4 : 408 - 15 . Sander , E . E . , ten Klooster , J . P . , van Delft , S . , van der Kammen , R . A . , Collard , J . G . 1999 . Rac downregulates Rho activity : reciprocal balance between both GTPases determines cellular morphology and migratory behavior . J Cell Biol 147 : 1009 - 22 Saras , J . , Franzen , P . , Aspenström , P . , Hellman , U . , Gonez , L . J . , Heldin , C . H . 1997 . A novel GTPase - activating protein for Rho interacts with a PDZ domain of the protein - tyrosine phosphatase PTPL1 . J Biol Chem 272 : 24333 - 8 . Saras , J . , Heldin , C . H . 1996 . PDZ domains bind carboxy - terminal sequences of target proteins . Trends Biochem Sci 21 : 455 - 8 . Sasaki , T . , Takai , Y . 1998 . The Rho small G protein family - Rho GDI system as a temporal and spatial determinant for cytoskeletal control . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 245 : 641 - 5 . Scales , S . J . , Scheller , R . H . 1999 . Lipid membranes shape up . Nature 401 : 123 - 4 . Schaefer , L . , Prakash , S . , Zoghbi , H . Y . 1997 . Cloning and characterization of a novel rho - type GTPase - activating protein gene ( ARHGAP6 ) from the critical region for microphthalmia with linear skin defects . Genomics 46 : 268 - 77 . Schafer , D . A . 2002 . Coupling actin dynamics and membrane dynamics during endocytosis . Curr Opin Cell Biol 14 : 76 - 81 . Schafer , D . A . , Weed , S . A . , Binns , D . , Karginov , A . V . , Parsons , J . T . , Cooper , J . A . 2002 . Dynamin2 and cortactin regulate actin assembly and filament organization . Curr Biol 12 : 1852 - 7 . Scheffzek , K . , Ahmadian , M . R . , Wittinghofer , A . 1998 . GTPase - activating proteins : helping hands to complement an active site . Trends Biochem Sci 23 : 257 - 62 . Scheffzek , K . , Lautwein , A . , Kabsch , W . , Ahmadian , M . R . , Wittinghofer , A . 1996 . Crystal structure of the GTPase - activating domain of human p120GAP and implications for the interaction with Ras . Nature 384 : 591 - 6 . Schmid , S . L . 1997 . Clathrin - coated vesicle formation and protein sorting : an integrated process . Annu Rev Biochem 66 : 511 - 48 Schmid , S . L . , McNiven , M . A . , De Camilli , P . 1998 . Dynamin and its partners : a progress report . Curr Opin Cell Biol 10 : 504 - 12 . Schmidt , A . , Hall , A . 2002 . Guanine nucleotide exchange factors for Rho GTPases : turning on the switch . Genes Dev 16 : 1587 - 609 . Schmidt , A . , Hall , M . N . 1998 . Signaling to the actin cytoskeleton . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 14 : 305 - 38 Schmidt , A . , Wolde , M . , Thiele , C . , Fest , W . , Kratzin , H . , et al . 1999 . Endophilin I mediates synaptic vesicle formation by transfer of arachidonate to lysophosphatidic acid . Nature 401 : 133 - 41 . Schmitz , A . A . , Govek , E . E . , Bottner , B . , Van Aelst , L . 2000 . Rho GTPases : signaling , migration , and invasion . Exp Cell Res 261 : 1 - 12 . 71 Scita , G . , Tenca , P . , Frittoli , E . , Tocchetti , A . , Innocenti , M . , et al . 2000 . Signaling from Ras to Rac and beyond : not just a matter of GEFs . Embo J 19 : 2393 - 8 . Seabra , M . C . 1998 . Membrane association and targeting of prenylated Ras - like GTPases . Cell Signal 10 : 167 - 72 . Sekimata , M . , Kabuyama , Y . , Emori , Y . , Homma , Y . 1999 . Morphological changes and detachment of adherent cells induced by p122 , a GTPase - activating protein for Rho . J Biol Chem 274 : 17757 - 62 . Sengar , A . S . , Wang , W . , Bishay , J . , Cohen , S . , Egan , S . E . 1999 . The EH and SH3 domain Ese proteins regulate endocytosis by linking to dynamin and Eps15 . Embo J 18 : 1159 - 71 . Seoh , M . L . , Ng , C . H . , Yong , J . , Lim , L . , Leung , T . 2003 . ArhGAP15 , a novel human RacGAP protein with GTPase binding property . FEBS Lett 539 : 131 - 7 . Settleman , J . , Albright , C . F . , Foster , L . C . , Weinberg , R . A . 1992a . Association between GTPase activators for Rho and Ras families . Nature 359 : 153 - 4 Settleman , J . , Narasimhan , V . , Foster , L . C . , Weinberg , R . A . 1992b . Molecular cloning of cDNAs encoding the GAP - associated protein p190 : implications for a signaling pathway from ras to the nucleus . Cell 69 : 539 - 49 . Sever , S . 2002 . Dynamin and endocytosis . Curr Opin Cell Biol 14 : 463 - 7 . Sever , S . , Muhlberg , A . B . , Schmid , S . L . 1999 . Impairment of dynamin ' s GAP domain stimulates receptor - mediated endocytosis . Nature 398 : 481 - 6 . Shan , Z . , Haaf , T . , Popescu , N . C . 2003 . Identification and characterization of a gene encoding a putative mouse Rho GTPase activating protein gene 8 , Arhgap8 . Gene 303 : 55 - 61 . Shibata , H . , Oishi , K . , Yamagiwa , A . , Matsumoto , M . , Mukai , H . , Ono , Y . 2001 . PKNbeta interacts with the SH3 domains of Graf and a novel Graf related protein , Graf2 , which are GTPase activating proteins for Rho family . J Biochem ( Tokyo ) 130 : 23 - 31 . Shields , J . M . , Pruitt , K . , McFall , A . , Shaub , A . , Der , C . J . 2000 . Understanding Ras : ' it ain ' t over ' til it ' s over ' . Trends Cell Biol 10 : 147 - 54 . Shtivelman , E . , Lifshitz , B . , Gale , R . P . , Canaani , E . 1985 . Fused transcript of abl and bcr genes in chronic myelogenous leukaemia . Nature 315 : 550 - 4 . Shupliakov , O . , Low , P . , Grabs , D . , Gad , H . , Chen , H . , et al . 1997 . Synaptic vesicle endocytosis impaired by disruption of dynamin - SH3 domain interactions . Science 276 : 259 - 63 . Simpson , F . , Hussain , N . K . , Qualmann , B . , Kelly , R . B . , Kay , B . K . , et al . 1999 . SH3 - domain - containing proteins function at distinct steps in clathrin - coated vesicle formation . Nat Cell Biol 1 : 119 - 24 . Skolnik , E . Y . , Margolis , B . , Mohammadi , M . , Lowenstein , E . , Fischer , R . , et al . 1991 . Cloning of PI3 kinase - associated p85 utilizing a novel method for expression / cloning of target proteins for receptor tyrosine kinases . Cell 65 : 83 - 90 . Slepnev , V . I . , Ochoa , G . C . , Butler , M . H . , Grabs , D . , Camilli , P . D . 1998 . Role of phosphorylation in regulation of the assembly of endocytic coat complexes . Science 281 : 821 - 4 . Small , J . V . , Stradal , T . , Vignal , E . , Rottner , K . 2002 . The lamellipodium : where motility begins . Trends Cell Biol 12 : 112 - 20 . Snapper , S . B . , Takeshima , F . , Anton , I . , Liu , C . H . , Thomas , S . M . , et al . 2001 . N - WASP deficiency reveals distinct pathways for cell surface projections and microbial actin - based motility . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 897 - 904 . So , C . W . , Caldas , C . , Liu , M . M . , Chen , S . J . , Huang , Q . H . , et al . 1997 . EEN encodes for a member of a new family of proteins containing an Src homology 3 domain and is the third gene located on chromosome 19p13 that fuses to MLL in human leukemia . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94 : 2563 - 8 . So , C . W . , Sham , M . H . , Chew , S . L . , Cheung , N . , So , C . K . , et al . 2000 . Expression and protein - binding studies of the EEN gene family , new interacting partners for dynamin , synaptojanin and huntingtin proteins . Biochem J 348 Pt 2 : 447 - 58 . Soderling , S . H . , Binns , K . L . , Wayman , G . A . , Davee , S . M . , Ong , S . H . , et al . 2002 . The WRP component of the WAVE - 1 complex attenuates Rac - mediated signalling . Nat Cell Biol 4 : 970 - 5 . 72 Song , B . D . , Schmid , S . L . 2003 . A Molecular Motor or a Regulator ? Dynamin ' s in a Class of Its Own . Biochemistry 42 : 1369 - 76 . Songyang , Z . , Fanning , A . S . , Fu , C . , Xu , J . , Marfatia , S . M . , et al . 1997 . Recognition of unique carboxyl - terminal motifs by distinct PDZ domains . Science 275 : 73 - 7 . Sordella , R . , Classon , M . , Hu , K . Q . , Matheson , S . F . , Brouns , M . R . , et al . 2002 . Modulation of CREB activity by the Rho GTPase regulates cell and organism size during mouse embryonic development . Dev Cell 2 : 553 - 65 . Soubeyran , P . , Kowanetz , K . , Szymkiewicz , I . , Langdon , W . Y . , Dikic , I . 2002 . Cbl - CIN85 - endophilin complex mediates ligand - induced downregulation of EGF receptors . Nature 416 : 183 - 7 . Spaargaren , M . , Bos , J . L . 1999 . Rab5 induces Rac - independent lamellipodia formation and cell migration . Mol Biol Cell 10 : 3239 - 50 . Sprang , S . R . 1997a . G protein mechanisms : insights from structural analysis . Annu Rev Biochem 66 : 639 - 78 Sprang , S . R . 1997b . G proteins , effectors and GAPs : structure and mechanism . Curr Opin Struct Biol 7 : 849 - 56 Srivastava , S . K . , Wheelock , R . H . , Aaronson , S . A . , Eva , A . 1986 . Identification of the protein encoded by the human diffuse B - cell lymphoma ( dbl ) oncogene . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 83 : 8868 - 72 Stoorvogel , W . , Oorschot , V . , Geuze , H . J . 1996 . A novel class of clathrin - coated vesicles budding from endosomes . J Cell Biol 132 : 21 - 33 . Stossel , T . P . 1993 . On the crawling of animal cells . Science 260 : 1086 - 94 . Stowell , M . H . , Marks , B . , Wigge , P . , McMahon , H . T . 1999 . Nucleotide - dependent conformational changes in dynamin : evidence for a mechanochemical molecular spring . Nat Cell Biol 1 : 27 - 32 . Sweitzer , S . M . , Hinshaw , J . E . 1998 . Dynamin undergoes a GTP - dependent conformational change causing vesiculation . Cell 93 : 1021 - 9 . Symons , M . , Derry , J . M . , Karlak , B . , Jiang , S . , Lemahieu , V . , et al . 1996 . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , a novel effector for the GTPase CDC42Hs , is implicated in actin polymerization . Cell 84 : 723 - 34 . Symons , M . , Rusk , N . 2003 . Control of vesicular trafficking by rho GTPases . Curr Biol 13 : R409 - 18 Szymkiewicz , I . , Kowanetz , K . , Soubeyran , P . , Dinarina , A . , Lipkowitz , S . , Dikic , I . 2002 . CIN85 participates in Cbl - b - mediated down - regulation of receptor tyrosine kinases . J Biol Chem 277 : 39666 - 72 . Takahashi , K . , Sasaki , T . , Mammoto , A . , Takaishi , K . , Kameyama , T . , et al . 1997 . Direct interaction of the Rho GDP dissociation inhibitor with ezrin / radixin / moesin initiates the activation of the Rho small G protein . J Biol Chem 272 : 23371 - 5 . Takai , Y . , Sasaki , T . , Matozaki , T . 2001 . Small GTP - binding proteins . Physiol Rev 81 : 153 - 208 . Take , H . , Watanabe , S . , Takeda , K . , Yu , Z . X . , Iwata , N . , Kajigaya , S . 2000 . Cloning and characterization of a novel adaptor protein , CIN85 , that interacts with c - Cbl . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 268 : 321 - 8 . Takei , K . , Haucke , V . 2001 . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis : membrane factors pull the trigger . Trends Cell Biol 11 : 385 - 91 . Takei , K . , Haucke , V . , Slepnev , V . , Farsad , K . , Salazar , M . , et al . 1998 . Generation of coated intermediates of clathrin - mediated endocytosis on protein - free liposomes . Cell 94 : 131 - 41 . Takei , K . , McPherson , P . S . , Schmid , S . L . , De Camilli , P . 1995 . Tubular membrane invaginations coated by dynamin rings are induced by GTP - gamma S in nerve terminals . Nature 374 : 186 - 90 . Takei , K . , Slepnev , V . I . , Haucke , V . , De Camilli , P . 1999 . Functional partnership between amphiphysin and dynamin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 1 : 33 - 9 . Takenawa , T . , Itoh , T . 2001 . Phosphoinositides , key molecules for regulation of actin cytoskeletal organization and membrane traffic from the plasma membrane . Biochim Biophys Acta 1533 : 190 - 206 . Tan , E . C . , Leung , T . , Manser , E . , Lim , L . 1993 . The human active breakpoint cluster region - related gene encodes a brain protein with homology to guanine nucleotide exchange proteins and GTPase - activating proteins . J Biol Chem 268 : 27291 - 8 . Tanaka , K . 2000 . Formin family proteins in cytoskeletal control . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 267 : 479 - 81 . 73 Tang , Y . , Hu , L . A . , Miller , W . E . , Ringstad , N . , Hall , R . A . , et al . 1999 . Identification of the endophilins ( SH3p4 / p8 / p13 ) as novel binding partners for the beta1 - adrenergic receptor . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96 : 12559 - 64 . Tarone , G . , Cirillo , D . , Giancotti , F . G . , Comoglio , P . M . , Marchisio , P . C . 1985 . Rous sarcoma virus - transformed fibroblasts adhere primarily at discrete protrusions of the ventral membrane called podosomes . Exp Cell Res 159 : 141 - 57 . Tatsis , N . , Lannigan , D . A . , Macara , I . G . 1998 . The function of the p190 Rho GTPase - activating protein is controlled by its N - terminal GTP binding domain . J Biol Chem 273 : 34631 - 8 . Taylor , J . M . , Macklem , M . M . , Parsons , J . T . 1999 . Cytoskeletal changes induced by GRAF , the GTPase regulator associated with focal adhesion kinase , are mediated by Rho . J Cell Sci 112 : 231 - 42 . Thien , C . B . , Langdon , W . Y . 2001 . Cbl : many adaptations to regulate protein tyrosine kinases . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2 : 294 - 307 Tian , L . , Nelson , D . L . , Stewart , D . M . 2000 . Cdc42 - interacting protein 4 mediates binding of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein to microtubules . J Biol Chem 275 : 7854 - 61 . Tikoo , A . , Czekay , S . , Viars , C . , White , S . , Heath , J . K . , et al . 2000 . p190 - A , a human tumor suppressor gene , maps to the chromosomal region 19q13 . 3 that is reportedly deleted in some gliomas . Gene 257 : 23 - 31 . Toker , A . , Cantley , L . C . 1997 . Signalling through the lipid products of phosphoinositide - 3 - OH kinase . Nature 387 : 673 - 6 . Tolias , K . F . , Cantley , L . C . , Carpenter , C . L . 1995 . Rho family GTPases bind to phosphoinositide kinases . J Biol Chem 270 : 17656 - 9 . Tolias , K . F . , Hartwig , J . H . , Ishihara , H . , Shibasaki , Y . , Cantley , L . C . , Carpenter , C . L . 2000 . Type Ialpha phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase mediates Rac - dependent actin assembly . Curr Biol 10 : 153 - 6 . Tominaga , T . , Sahai , E . , Chardin , P . , McCormick , F . , Courtneidge , S . A . , Alberts , A . S . 2000 . Diaphanous - related formins bridge Rho GTPase and Src tyrosine kinase signaling . Mol Cell 5 : 13 - 25 Toure , A . , Dorseuil , O . , Morin , L . , Timmons , P . , Jegou , B . , et al . 1998 . MgcRacGAP , a new human GTPase - activating protein for Rac and Cdc42 similar to Drosophila rotundRacGAP gene product , is expressed in male germ cells . J Biol Chem 273 : 6019 - 23 . Trahey , M . , McCormick , F . 1987 . A cytoplasmic protein stimulates normal N - ras p21 GTPase , but does not affect oncogenic mutants . Science 238 : 542 - 5 . Trahey , M . , Wong , G . , Halenbeck , R . , Rubinfeld , B . , Martin , G . A . , et al . 1988 . Molecular cloning of two types of GAP complementary DNA from human placenta . Science 242 : 1697 - 700 . Ueda , T . , Kikuchi , A . , Ohga , N . , Yamamoto , J . , Takai , Y . 1990 . Purification and characterization from bovine brain cytosol of a novel regulatory protein inhibiting the dissociation of GDP from and the subsequent binding of GTP to rhoB p20 , a ras p21 - like GTP - binding protein . J Biol Chem 265 : 9373 - 80 . Valencia , A . , Chardin , P . , Wittinghofer , A . , Sander , C . 1991 . The ras protein family : evolutionary tree and role of conserved amino acids . Biochemistry 30 : 4637 - 48 Van Aelst , L . , D ' Souza - Schorey , C . 1997 . Rho GTPases and signaling networks . Genes Dev 11 : 2295 - 322 . Van Etten , R . A . 1999 . Cycling , stressed - out and nervous : cellular functions of c - Abl . Trends Cell Biol 9 : 179 - 86 . Venter , J . C . , Adams , M . D . , Myers , E . W . , Li , P . W . , Mural , R . J . , et al . 2001 . The sequence of the human genome . Science 291 : 1304 - 51 . Vogler , O . , Krummenerl , P . , Schmidt , M . , Jakobs , K . H . , Van Koppen , C . J . 1999 . RhoA - sensitive trafficking of muscarinic acetylcholine receptors . J Pharmacol Exp Ther 288 : 36 - 42 . Vojtek , A . B . , Der , C . J . 1998 . Increasing complexity of the Ras signaling pathway . J Biol Chem 273 : 19925 - 8 . Voltz , J . W . , Weinman , E . J . , Shenolikar , S . 2001 . Expanding the role of NHERF , a PDZ - domain containing protein adapter , to growth regulation . Oncogene 20 : 6309 - 14 . Voncken , J . W . , van Schaick , H . , Kaartinen , V . , Deemer , K . , Coates , T . , et al . 1995 . Increased neutrophil respiratory burst in bcr - null mutants . Cell 80 : 719 - 28 . 74 Waelter , S . , Scherzinger , E . , Hasenbank , R . , Nordhoff , E . , Lurz , R . , et al . 2001 . The huntingtin interacting protein HIP1 is a clathrin and alpha - adaptin - binding protein involved in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Hum Mol Genet 10 : 1807 - 17 . Wang , D . Z . , Nur , E . K . M . S . , Tikoo , A . , Montague , W . , Maruta , H . 1997 . The GTPase and Rho GAP domains of p190 , a tumor suppressor protein that binds the M ( r ) 120 , 000 Ras GAP , independently function as anti - Ras tumor suppressors . Cancer Res 57 : 2478 - 84 . Wang , L . , Rudert , W . A . , Grishin , A . , Dombrosky - Ferlan , P . , Sullivan , K . , et al . 2002 . Identification and genetic analysis of human and mouse activated Cdc42 interacting protein - 4 isoforms . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 293 : 1426 - 30 . Wang , S . , Raab , R . W . , Schatz , P . J . , Guggino , W . B . , Li , M . 1998 . Peptide binding consensus of the NHE - RF - PDZ1 domain matches the C - terminal sequence of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator ( CFTR ) . FEBS Lett 427 : 103 - 8 Wasserman , S . 1998 . FH proteins as cytoskeletal organizers . Trends Cell Biol 8 : 111 - 5 . Watanabe , N . , Kato , T . , Fujita , A . , Ishizaki , T . , Narumiya , S . 1999 . Co - operation between mDia1 and ROCK in Rho - induced actin reorganization . Nat Cell Biol 1 : 136 - 43 . Watanabe , S . , Take , H . , Takeda , K . , Yu , Z . X . , Iwata , N . , Kajigaya , S . 2000 . Characterization of the CIN85 adaptor protein and identification of components involved in CIN85 complexes . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 278 : 167 - 74 . Waterman - Storer , C . M . , Worthylake , R . A . , Liu , B . P . , Burridge , K . , Salmon , E . D . 1999 . Microtubule growth activates Rac1 to promote lamellipodial protrusion in fibroblasts . Nat Cell Biol 1 : 45 - 50 . Weaver , A . M . , Young , M . E . , Lee , W . L . , Cooper , J . A . 2003 . Integration of signals to the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr Opin Cell Biol 15 : 23 - 30 Webb , D . J . , Parsons , J . T . , Horwitz , A . F . 2002 . Adhesion assembly , disassembly and turnover in migrating cells - - over and over and over again . Nat Cell Biol 4 : E97 - 100 . Weigert , R . , Silletta , M . G . , Spano , S . , Turacchio , G . , Cericola , C . , et al . 1999 . CtBP / BARS induces fission of Golgi membranes by acylating lysophosphatidic acid . Nature 402 : 429 - 33 . Weinman , E . J . , Steplock , D . , Wang , Y . , Shenolikar , S . 1995 . Characterization of a protein cofactor that mediates protein kinase A regulation of the renal brush border membrane Na ( + ) - H + exchanger . J Clin Invest 95 : 2143 - 9 . Welch , M . D . , Mullins , R . D . 2002 . Cellular control of actin nucleation . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 18 : 247 - 88 Wenk , M . R . , Pellegrini , L . , Klenchin , V . A . , Di Paolo , G . , Chang , S . , et al . 2001 . PIP kinase Igamma is the major PI ( 4 , 5 ) P ( 2 ) synthesizing enzyme at the synapse . Neuron 32 : 79 - 88 . Wennström , S . , Hawkins , P . , Cooke , F . , Hara , K . , Yonezawa , K . , et al . 1994 . Activation of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase is required for PDGF - stimulated membrane ruffling . Curr Biol 4 : 385 - 93 . West , M . A . , Prescott , A . R . , Eskelinen , E . L . , Ridley , A . J . , Watts , C . 2000 . Rac is required for constitutive macropinocytosis by dendritic cells but does not control its downregulation . Curr Biol 10 : 839 - 48 . Wherlock , M . , Mellor , H . 2002 . The Rho GTPase family : a Racs to Wrchs story . J Cell Sci 115 : 239 - 40 . Wigge , P . , McMahon , H . T . 1998 . The amphiphysin family of proteins and their role in endocytosis at the synapse . Trends Neurosci 21 : 339 - 44 . Wigge , P . , Vallis , Y . , McMahon , H . T . 1997 . Inhibition of receptor - mediated endocytosis by the amphiphysin SH3 domain . Curr Biol 7 : 554 - 60 . Wirth , J . A . , Jensen , K . A . , Post , P . L . , Bement , W . M . , Mooseker , M . S . 1996 . Human myosin - IXb , an unconventional myosin with a chimerin - like rho / rac GTPase - activating protein domain in its tail . J Cell Sci 109 : 653 - 61 . Wittmann , T . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . 2001 . Cell motility : can Rho GTPases and microtubules point the way ? J Cell Sci 114 : 3795 - 803 Wong , K . , Ren , X . R . , Huang , Y . Z . , Xie , Y . , Liu , G . , et al . 2001 . Signal transduction in neuronal migration : roles of GTPase activating proteins and the small GTPase Cdc42 in the Slit - Robo pathway . Cell 107 : 209 - 21 . 75 Woodring , P . J . , Hunter , T . , Wang , J . Y . 2001 . Inhibition of c - Abl tyrosine kinase activity by filamentous actin . J Biol Chem 276 : 27104 - 10 . Woodring , P . J . , Litwack , E . D . , O ' Leary , D . D . , Lucero , G . R . , Wang , J . Y . , Hunter , T . 2002 . Modulation of the F - actin cytoskeleton by c - Abl tyrosine kinase in cell spreading and neurite extension . J Cell Biol 156 : 879 - 92 . Yamabhai , M . , Hoffman , N . G . , Hardison , N . L . , McPherson , P . S . , Castagnoli , L . , et al . 1998 . Intersectin , a novel adaptor protein with two Eps15 homology and five Src homology 3 domains . J Biol Chem 273 : 31401 - 7 . Yamaguchi , A . , Urano , T . , Goi , T . , Feig , L . A . 1997 . An Eps homology ( EH ) domain protein that binds to the Ral - GTPase target , RalBP1 . J Biol Chem 272 : 31230 - 4 . Yuan , B . Z . , Miller , M . J . , Keck , C . L . , Zimonjic , D . B . , Thorgeirsson , S . S . , Popescu , N . C . 1998 . Cloning , characterization , and chromosomal localization of a gene frequently deleted in human liver cancer ( DLC - 1 ) homologous to rat RhoGAP . Cancer Res 58 : 2196 - 9 . Yuan , B . Z . , Zhou , X . , Durkin , M . E . , Zimonjic , D . B . , Gumundsdottir , K . , et al . 2003 . DLC - 1 gene inhibits human breast cancer cell growth and in vivo tumorigenicity . Oncogene 22 : 445 - 50 . Yuan , R . , Fan , S . , Achary , M . , Stewart , D . M . , Goldberg , I . D . , Rosen , E . M . 2001 . Altered gene expression pattern in cultured human breast cancer cells treated with hepatocyte growth factor / scatter factor in the setting of DNA damage . Cancer Res 61 : 8022 - 31 . Yuan , S . , Miller , D . W . , Barnett , G . H . , Hahn , J . F . , Williams , B . R . 1995 . Identification and characterization of human beta 2 - chimaerin : association with malignant transformation in astrocytoma . Cancer Res 55 : 3456 - 61 . Yun , C . H . , Oh , S . , Zizak , M . , Steplock , D . , Tsao , S . , et al . 1997 . cAMP - mediated inhibition of the epithelial brush border Na + / H + exchanger , NHE3 , requires an associated regulatory protein . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94 : 3010 - 5 . Zalcman , G . , Dorseuil , O . , Garcia - Ranea , J . A . , Gacon , G . , Camonis , J . 1999 . RhoGAPs and RhoGDIs , ( His ) stories of two families . Prog Mol Subcell Biol 22 : 85 - 113 Zhang , B . , Zelhof , A . C . 2002 . Amphiphysins : raising the BAR for synaptic vesicle recycling and membrane dynamics . Bin - Amphiphysin - Rvsp . Traffic 3 : 452 - 60 . Zhang , J . , King , W . G . , Dillon , S . , Hall , A . , Feig , L . , Rittenhouse , S . E . 1993 . Activation of platelet phosphatidylinositide 3 - kinase requires the small GTP - binding protein Rho . J Biol Chem 268 : 22251 - 4 . Zhang , X . , Jefferson , A . B . , Auethavekiat , V . , Majerus , P . W . 1995 . The protein deficient in Lowe syndrome is a phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate 5 - phosphatase . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 92 : 4853 - 6 . Zhang , Z . , Wu , C . , Wang , S . , Huang , W . , Zhou , Z . , et al . 2002 . Cloning and characterization of ARHGAP12 , a novel human rhoGAP gene . Int J Biochem Cell Biol 34 : 325 - 31 . Zhao , C . , Ma , H . , Bossy - Wetzel , E . , Lipton , S . , Zhang , Z . , Feng , G . S . 2003 . GC - GAP , a Rho family GAP protein that interacts with signaling adapters Gab1 and Gab2 . J Biol Chem Zheng , Y . 2001 . Dbl family guanine nucleotide exchange factors . Trends Biochem Sci 26 : 724 - 32 . Zheng , Y . , Bagrodia , S . , Cerione , R . A . 1994 . Activation of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase activity by Cdc42Hs binding to p85 . J Biol Chem 269 : 18727 - 30 . Zheng , Y . , Fischer , D . J . , Santos , M . F . , Tigyi , G . , Pasteris , N . G . , et al . 1996 . The faciogenital dysplasia gene product FGD1 functions as a Cdc42Hs - specific guanine - nucleotide exchange factor . J Biol Chem 271 : 33169 - 72 . Zheng , Y . , Hart , M . J . , Shinjo , K . , Evans , T . , Bender , A . , Cerione , R . A . 1993 . Biochemical comparisons of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Bem2 and Bem3 proteins . Delineation of a limit Cdc42 GTPase - activating protein domain . J Biol Chem 268 : 24629 - 34 . Zhu , K . , Debreceni , B . , Bi , F . , Zheng , Y . 2001 . Oligomerization of DH domain is essential for Dbl - induced transformation . Mol Cell Biol 21 : 425 - 37 . Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis Comprehensive Summaries of Uppsala Dissertations from the Faculty of Medicine Editor : The Dean of the Faculty of Medicine Distribution : Uppsala University Library Box 510 , SE - 751 20 Uppsala , Sweden www . uu . se , acta @ ub . uu . se ISSN 0282 - 7476 ISBN 91 - 554 - 5716 - 9 A doctoral dissertation from the Faculty of Medicine , Uppsala University , is usually a summary of a number of papers . A few copies of the complete dissertation are kept at major Swedish research libraries , while the sum - mary alone is distributed internationally through the series Comprehen - sive Summaries of Uppsala Dissertations from the Faculty of Medicine . ( Prior to October , 1985 , the series was published under the title “Abstracts of Uppsala Dissertations from the Faculty of Medicine” . )