Guiding Principles for Participatory Design - inspired Natural Language Processing Tommaso Caselli , Roberto Cibin , Costanza Conforti Enrique Encinas , Maurizio Teli University of Groningen Institute of Sociology of the Czech Academy of Sciences & Masaryk University Rural Senses Ltd . , University of Aalborg t . caselli @ rug . nl , roberto . cibin @ soc . cas . cz , stanze @ ruralsenses . com , { eencinas @ cs | maurizio @ plan } . aau . dk Abstract We introduce 9 guiding principles 1 to inte - grate Participatory Design ( PD ) methods in the development of Natural Language Processing ( NLP ) systems . The adoption of PD methods by NLP will help to alleviate issues concerning the development of more democratic , fairer , less - biased technologies to process natural lan - guage data . This short paper is the outcome of an ongoing dialogue between designers and NLP experts and adopts a non - standard for - mat following previous work by Traum ( 2000 ) ; Bender ( 2013 ) ; Abzianidze and Bos ( 2019 ) . Every section is a guiding principle . While principles 1 – 3 illustrate assumptions and meth - ods that inform community - based PD prac - tices , we used two ﬁctional design scenarios ( Encinas and Blythe , 2018 ) , which build on top of situations familiar to the authors , to elicit the identiﬁcation of the other 6 . Prin - ciples 4 – 6 describes the impact of PD meth - ods on the design of NLP systems , targeting two critical aspects : data collection & annota - tion , and the deployment & evaluation . Finally , principles 7 – 9 guide a new reﬂexivity of the NLP research with respect to its context , ac - tors and participants , and aims . We hope this guide will offer inspiration and a road - map to develop a new generation of PD - inspired NLP . 1 PD is about consensus and conﬂict PD has its origin in Scandinavia forty years ago , when it was articulated as an offensive strategy for the trade union movement to promote industrial democracy ( Group , 1981 ; Ehn , 1992 ) . PD was seen as a way to allow workers to shape the technologies they would use at the workplace ( Ehn , 2016 ) . 1 The principles are guided by the authors experience , pri - marily focused in Europe ( with the exception of one of them ) . However , we would defend the applicability of most of them to a wider range of contexts , with the situated effort of appro - priation and transformation that is an integral part of PD . As a form of system design performed with and by people ( Briefs et al . , 1983 ) , PD entails a process of mutual learning among participants , among de - sign researchers , and between design researchers and participants ( Simonsen and Robertson , 2012 ) . Traditionally , that means adopting a variety of re - search and design methods , from workshops ( Ehn et al . , 1996 ) to participant observations ( Blomberg and Karasti , 2012a ) , passing through cards ( Teli et al . , 2017 ) or games ( Vaajakallio and Mattelm¨aki , 2014 ) , to include scenarios ( Bødker , 2000 ) , proto - types ( Kannabiran and Bødker , 2020 ) , and many others . The appropriate combination of methods and activities is determined , in a situated way , be - ginning with the involvement of different social groups ( Bratteteig et al . , 2012 ) . Historically , PD questions who is involved in the design process from various communities ( DiS - alvo et al . , 2012 ) to speciﬁc socio - economic actors ( Teli , 2015 ) and how . As a consequence , the de - sign process can and should reﬂect on the visions for social transformation that the participants can develop ( Huybrechts et al . , 2020 ; Helgason et al . , 2020 ) , by translating those visions into alternatives to existing technologies ( Korsgaard et al . , 2016 ) . 2 Design is an inherently disordered and unﬁnished process Being based on nurturing relations between profes - sional technology designers and members of the various social groups they interact with , PD meth - ods and practices acknowledge that designing dig - ital technologies with non - professionals does not follow a linear model ( Callon , 2004 ; Cibin et al . , 2020 ) . Even when formalized ( Bratteteig et al . , 2012 ) , the design process is disordered and unﬁn - ished . This character is well represented by the expressions use - before - use and design - after - design ( Ehn , 2008 ; Fry , 2017 ) . P D p r i n c i p l e s 1 . PD is about consensus and conﬂict • PD entails a process of mutual learning between researchers and community • PD adopts a variety of research and design methods ( workshops , participants observation , cards , . . . ) 2 . Design is an inherently disor - dered and unﬁnished process • Use - before - use : tool’s use is envisioned before the tool is actually implemented • Design - after - design : tool’s design isn’t exhausted with delivery , but will be modiﬁed by the users’ appropriation , use , and feedback 3 . Communities are often not completely determined a priori • Communities are not a unitary whole , but can get formed within and through the design process N L P t oo l s 4 . Data and communities are not separate things • The shift from language as data to language as people : language data are produced by human speakers • Communities should be involved in the different stages of the NLP pipeline 5 . Community involvement is not scraping • Collaboration with a community should imply ethical engagement practices based on respect , equity and reciprocity • Researchers should communicate to the community the usage of the collected data in a transparent and appropriate way 6 . Never stop designing • Community adaptation should be treated as a feature of an NLP system at the design stage R e s e a r c h er s ’ re ﬂ e x i v i t y 7 . Text is a means rather than an end • The linguistic output of NLP systems should serve people’s needs rather than imitate people’s production of language . 8 . The thin red line between consent and intrusion • Do not assume that community members are technology experts nor techno - logically illiterate • A community’s refusal to collaboration is a risk that must be accepted 9 . The need to combine research goals , funding , and concrete social political dynamics • Designers and researchers as intermediaries between the interests of the different actors involved ( project beneﬁciaries , investors , funding agencies , and other stakeholders’ goals ) Table 1 : Summary of guiding principles for developing PD - inspired NLP tools Use - before - use addresses the common practice to build an image of the use of a product by people before use actually take place . The methods em - ployed to favor people determination of use - before - use ( e . g . , workshops , design games , ﬁctional sce - narios , and prototyping ) can become part of forms of participation washing ( Sloan et al . , 2020 ) , that is the use of methods belonging to PD in processes in which participants do not have a signiﬁcant inﬂu - ence on the outcome . When done properly , the keys in PD process are the articulation of transformative visions ( Huybrechts et al . , 2020 ) , the ethnographic approach to design ( Blomberg and Karasti , 2012b ) , and the reﬂexive discussion on the position of de - signers , communities , and institutions ( Lyle et al . , 2018 ; Teli et al . , 2020 ) . Design - after - design addresses the possibility of people’s manipulation of “ﬁnished” products . Design - after - design needs to be investigated and favored through concepts like infrastructuring ( Karasti , 2014 ) or by looking at the connections between speciﬁc digital artifacts and wider artifacts ecologies ( Bødker and Klokmose , 2012 ) . 3 Communities are often not determined a priori The last 20 years have seen a change in the sub - jects involved in PD , with the notion of community becoming one of the most relevant to describe the participants to PD projects ( Dittrich et al . , 2002 ; DiSalvo et al . , 2012 ; Light and Miskelly , 2019 ) . The notion of community is complex and multi - faceted . Long lasting criteria such as the sharing a place , an interest , or a condition have proven to be limited ( Mosconi et al . , 2017 ; Thinyane et al . , 2018 ; Cibin et al . , 2019 ; Teli et al . , 2020 ) . This paper deﬁnes a community as the presence of dense social relations and of , at least , an element - being it geography , interests , speciﬁc conditions , or struc - tural position in society in terms of power - tying together its members . Each of these dimensions represents a challenge to current practices of design and realization of NLP systems . Although the deﬁnition of community recalls an idea of a unitary whole , the ensemble of the participants to a project is not always completely determined a priori but it could get formed within and through the design process ( Le Dantec and DiSalvo , 2013 ) , which current sampling methods in NLP mostly fail to capture . A consolidated tendency is to look at PD prac - tices in terms of empowerment of marginalized groups ( Ertner et al . , 2010 ; Racadio et al . , 2014 ) . Their adoption and integration in the NLP pipeline can help to address underexposure of both language varieties and linguistic phenomena . Mario is a scholar in Human - Computer Inter - action and technology design . He works on a project to support the development of commu - nity radio stations by rural and isolated com - munities . One of the communities involved belongs to a village of about 600 inhabitants located between a river delta and the Black Sea in Romania . The inhabitants are mainly descendants of a group of Ukrainian Cossacks who immigrated there in the 18th century . In addition to speaking Romanian the residents speak a Ukrainian dialect . Together with a Romanian NGO specialising in human rights and media democracy , Mario works to involve the inhabitants as volunteers to run the radio station and create content for the programs . However , the Romanian broadcasting license obliges stations to transmit 24 hours a day , and the volunteers struggle to create enough content . Mario proposes to use a new and ad - vanced natural language generation system , GPT - 3 , to generate content . Besides the fact that the machine does not “speak” the commu - nity’s dialect and requires English translations , GPT - 3 produces output with prejudices and negative stereotypes against the community . 4 Data and communities are not separate things As we saw in the ﬁrst three points , communities represent the core element of PD . One might expect that communities have a prominent role in the de - velopment of NLP systems . Indeed , communities are the producers of the oil that runs NLP research : language data . We observe , however , that this is not the case . Searching for the term “community” in the ACL Anthology 2 returns 100 papers . However , by man - ually inspecting each of them , we discovered that only 9 present some sort of engagement with a community of speakers ( Garcia et al . , 2008 ; Levin , 2009 ; Bird et al . , 2014 ; Everson et al . , 2019 ; Kemp - ton , 2017 ; Susarla and Challa , 2019 ; Conforti et al . , 2 Accessed on April 30th , 2021 2020 ; Griscom , 2020 ; Le Ferrand et al . , 2020 ) . These works target endangered languages and pro - pose technological solutions to an array of prob - lems ( e . g . , archiving , documenting , or tooling ) . None of them presents an active and direct involve - ment of the communities in the design process of the suggested NLP solution . As pointed out by Bird ( 2020 ) , people agency is absent and language is seen as data to be dug . Compliance with PD methods requires for NLP to become more aware of the relationship between language data and the speakers who ﬁrst produced . In this context , we advocate for a shift of paradigm , from language as data to language as people . Mario’s story exempliﬁes the danger of forget - ting the link between NLP training data and its un - derlying producers : by not asking himself whether the language varieties behind GPT - 3 are representa - tive of the community he is trying to help , he ends up hurting it . The application of PD methods is a vi - able solution to overcome part of this predicament . The next principles will address two key steps of the development of NLP systems : data collection & annotation , and evaluation & deployment . 5 Community involvement is not scraping The training of current SOTA language models ( LMs ) is based on large amounts of written text crawled from the Web , with no or little documenta - tion ( Bender et al . , 2021 ) . However , the attempt to calibrate a tool to the needs of a speciﬁc community demands concrete social interactions . This requires the development of ethical engagement practices based on respect , equity , and reciprocity to gain the trust of the gatekeepers of the community ( Le Dan - tec and Fox , 2015 ; Hirmer et al . , 2021 ; Bird , 2020 ) . Gaining trust of communities is fundamental , es - pecially when dealing with small groups of people . In that case , all information is sensitive and often considered a currency that can be devalued once made public ( Giglitto , 2017 ) . Innovative , ﬂexible and transparent approaches to data collection and annotation should be put in practice . In line with PD methods , the way this can - not be reduced to a check - list valid for each and ev - ery community : context - speciﬁcity , which affects participation practices , cannot be avoided ( Sloan et al . , 2020 ) . Documenting , describing , explain - ing , and showing how the data a community makes available is processed by and used to create an NLP system is an essential step . It is up to the NLP re - searchers to gain trust by describing as best as they can the purpose of the work and the risks and ben - eﬁts for the community . Additional advantages of designing NLP systems around the needs of a com - munity are the possibilities of challenging existing power dynamics and also reduce risks of dual use . In this context , initiatives such as the Feminist . AI 3 collective and Indigenous data sovereignty prac - tices ( Kukutai and Taylor , 2016 ; Walter and Suina , 2019 ) are positive and innovative examples . 6 Never stop designing Mario’s scenario is a good example of a bottleneck in the deployment of NLP systems : in most cases , they will not ﬁt the needs of a community and adapting them is a challenging task . The adoption of Machine Learning techniques for developing NLP systems adopts a vision where statistical generalizations can be learned and ap - plied to broader contexts ( Sloan et al . , 2020 ) . Datasets are assumed to be good samples of lan - guage phenomena , but are actually deeply context - bound at different levels ( e . g . , time period , medium , population sample , among others ) . It is known that NLP tools struggle with tail phenomena ( Ettinger et al . , 2017 ) and are subject to bias ( Bender and Friedman , 2018 ) . Solutions are varied and focused on areas such as Domain Adaptation and Transfer Learning ( Blitzer et al . , 2006 ; Daum´e III , 2007 ; Ma et al . , 2014 ; Ganin and Lempitsky , 2015 ; Wu and Huang , 2016 ; Ruder et al . , 2017 ; Ruder and Plank , 2017 ; Ramponi and Plank , 2020 ) or de - biasing ( Go - nen and Goldberg , 2019 ; Paul Panenghat et al . , 2020 ; Liang et al . , 2020 ; Zhou et al . , 2021 ) . A PD - aware NLP tool should foresee this com - munity adaptation feature at its design stage . This requires to overcome technical ( i . e . , access or ma - nipulation of the code ) and resource ( ﬁnancial and human ) predicaments as well as the use of preda - tory practices of users’ involvement ( i . e . , recognize participation as labor ) . Having access to contin - uous and updated feedback from a community is paramount for ensuring that tool adaptation effec - tively addresses their evolving needs . In this con - text , researchers should put in place appropriate socio - technical solutions considering the peculiar - ities of the community ( e . g . , developing an API to report bugs might not be appropriate in areas 3 https : / / share . hek . ch / en / participatory - ai - how - to - make - better - ai / with limited internet connection ) . This open - ended evaluation process challenges existing industrial paradigm based on the idea of scaling . Katie is a PhD candidate in Interaction De - sign working on a project on compliance to la - bor norms . She engages relatively small trade unions in understanding how the unions can communicate widely and effectively to the pub - lic , and to the large population of prospective new members . She has collected a variety of in - formation , through interviews and workshops . During these activities , she has encountered two main challenges for her research : ( i ) she collected a large amount of textual data about labor conditions and used out - of - the - shelf NLP tools to run sentiment analysis on it ; however , the tools provide predictions only in an aggre - gated , uninterpretable form , which prevents Katie from providing the unions with speciﬁc insights . She has also applied for funding to improve the tools’ interpretability but her re - quest has been conditionally accepted subject to changes in her research topic ; ( ii ) although she is mindful of her role as a researcher , Katie has faced frictions when engaging with the unions as some of their members feel overtly exposed when sharing their experiences . 7 Text is a means rather than an end Introducing PD methods in the design of NLP tools promotes and embraces a philosophical perspec - tive on the interactions between humans and ma - chines , and of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in general , as a problem - solving tool rather than as an adaptive mechanism mimicking human abilities ( Winograd , 1997 ; Auernhammer , 2020 ) . On the contrary , cur - rent trends in NLP are more oriented towards a rationalist perspective , attempting to develop intel - ligent systems that understand language ( Bender and Koller , 2020 ) . This follows a logic of automation that attempts to ultimately remove human intervention ( Craw - ford , 2021 ) , reinforcing a vision of language as data . Language , however , is not a uniform entity but it adapts to the context where it is used . NLP systems have the potential to support the ﬂow of meanings between contexts but in order to do so , and act as means rather than ends ( Auger et al . , 2017 ; Hanna et al . , 2017 ) , they must contend with the structural solidity of the categories on which its algorithms are built ( Bender et al . , 2021 ) . The tools Katie uses are unable to offer insightful information to her respondents because the output is uninter - pretable ( i . e . , why a messages has been labeled in such a way ? ) . To see NLP technologies aligned with participatory methods and tasks demands a shift in the conceptualization of the outputs , or products , of NLP systems . The linguistic output of NLP systems should be material that triggers itera - tions or reﬁnements to serve people’s needs rather than imitate people’s production of language . 8 The thin red line between consent and intrusion Katie’s scenario highlights how common it is to take for granted that the community always wants to be helped authorizing researchers to use any tool . Refusing collaboration is a risk that must be accepted thus preventing or interrupting the devel - opment of a proposed technical solution . Importantly , the community’s consent can be considered authentic only if it was proceeded by appropriate communication . When introducing a technology or a tool to a community , researchers must avoid two unethical approaches . On one hand , using terminology with which a community is not familiar with might confuse more than ex - plain , thus potentially resulting in uninformed con - sent ( Tekola et al . , 2009 ) . Note , however , that re - searchers might also ﬁnd themselves in the opposite situation . When approaching ( small ) communities , researchers can be misled by what is called a deﬁcit model ( Irwin and Wynne , 1996 ) , i . e . , taking for granted that the reference community whom one is going to collaborate with lacks of knowledge re - garding science and technology . However , people are constantly immersed in an ecology of technolo - gies ( Bødker and Klokmose , 2012 ) and practical knowledge to which they refer when called upon to understand something new . To avoid misunderstandings , one must offer transparent information about the actions that will be carried out , making use of metaphors and com - parisons with existing artifacts , even if the com - plexity of the technological architecture represent a communication challenge ( Bratteteig and Verne , 2018 ) . And always keep in mind that this dialogue can steer people’s eyes in the wrong place . 9 The need to combine research goals , funding , and concrete social political dynamics All the cases observed highlight how a community - based collaboration between NLP and PD is an issue where multiple dimensions continuously in - teract . In addition to this , Katie’s ﬁction introduces an additional challenge : the need to obtain external funding to conduct her research and the interests ( and requests ) of the funding providers / agencies . These dynamics must take into account the goals of the researchers / designers , and of the commu - nities involved , which cannot be completely over - turned by the founders . It is evident that in this context the role of the designer / researcher becomes more and more that of an intermediary capable of translating and holding together the interests of the different stakeholders involved , without risk - ing being co - opted and involved only in a token way ( Cibin et al . , 2020 ; Teli et al . , 2020 ) . Acknowledgments We thank the anonymous reviewers for their effort in reviewing this paper , their constructive feedback and suggestions . CC is grateful to the RuralSenses team for sharing experiences on participatory prac - tices in sustainable project design . References Lasha Abzianidze and Johan Bos . 2019 . Thirty musts for meaning banking . In Proceedings of the First In - ternational Workshop on Designing Meaning Repre - sentations , pages 15 – 27 , Florence , Italy . Association for Computational Linguistics . Jan Auernhammer . 2020 . Human - centered ai : The role of human - centered design research in the develop - ment of ai . In Synergy - DRS International Confer - ence 2020 , Online . Design Research Society . James Auger , Julian Hanna , and Enrique Encinas . 2017 . Reconstrained design : Confronting oblique design constraints . Nordes , 7 ( 1 ) . Emily M Bender . 2013 . Linguistic fundamentals for natural language processing : 100 essentials from morphology and syntax . Synthesis lectures on hu - man language technologies , 6 ( 3 ) : 1 – 184 . Emily M . Bender and Batya Friedman . 2018 . Data statements for natural language processing : Toward mitigating system bias and enabling better science . Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 6 : 587 – 604 . Emily M . Bender , Timnit Gebru , Angelina McMillan - Major , and Shmargaret Shmitchell . 2021 . On the dangers of stochastic parrots : Can language models be too big ? In FAccT ’21 : 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness , Accountability , and Transparency , Virtual Event / Toronto , Canada , March 3 - 10 , 2021 , pages 610 – 623 . ACM . Emily M . Bender and Alexander Koller . 2020 . Climb - ing towards NLU : On meaning , form , and under - standing in the age of data . In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu - tational Linguistics , pages 5185 – 5198 , Online . As - sociation for Computational Linguistics . Steven Bird . 2020 . Decolonising speech and lan - guage technology . In Proceedings of the 28th Inter - national Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 3504 – 3519 , Barcelona , Spain ( Online ) . Inter - national Committee on Computational Linguistics . Steven Bird , Lauren Gawne , Katie Gelbart , and Isaac McAlister . 2014 . Collecting bilingual audio in re - mote indigenous communities . In Proceedings of COLING 2014 , the 25th International Conference on Computational Linguistics : Technical Papers , pages 1015 – 1024 . John Blitzer , Ryan McDonald , and Fernando Pereira . 2006 . Domain adaptation with structural correspon - dence learning . In Proceedings of the 2006 confer - ence on empirical methods in natural language pro - cessing , pages 120 – 128 . Association for Computa - tional Linguistics . Jeanette Blomberg and Helena Karasti . 2012a . Ethnog - raphy : Positioning ethnography within participatory design . In Jesper Simonsen and Toni Robertson , editors , Routledge International Handbook of Par - ticipatory Design , pages 106 – 136 . Routledge , New York , NY . Jeanette Blomberg and Helena Karasti . 2012b . Posi - tioning ethnography within participatory design . In Jesper Simonsen and Toni Robertson , editors , Rout - ledge international handbook of participatory de - sign , pages 86 – 116 . Routledge . Publisher : Rout - ledge London . Tone Bratteteig , Keld Bødker , Yvonne Dittrich , Preben Holst Mogensen , and Jesper Simonsen . 2012 . Organising principles and general guidelines for Par - ticipatory Design Projects . In Jesper Simonsen and Toni Robertson , editors , Routledge handbook of par - ticipatory design , page 117 . Routledge . Tone Bratteteig and Guri Verne . 2018 . Does ai make pd obsolete ? exploring challenges from artiﬁcial intelli - gence to participatory design . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Situated Actions , Workshops and Tutorial - Volume 2 , pages 1 – 5 . Ulrich Briefs , Claudio Ciborra , and Leslie Schneider . 1983 . Systems Design For , With , and by the Users : Proceedings of the Iﬁp Wg 9 . 1 Working Conference on Systems Design For , With , and by the Users , Riva Del Sole , Italy , 20 - 24 September 1982 . North Hol - land . S . Bødker . 2000 . Scenarios in user - centred de - sign—setting the stage for reﬂection and action . In - teracting with Computers , 13 ( 1 ) : 61 – 75 . Publisher : Oxford Academic . Susanne Bødker and Clemens Nylandsted Klokmose . 2012 . Dynamics in artifact ecologies . In Pro - ceedings of the 7th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Making Sense Through De - sign , NordiCHI ’12 , pages 448 – 457 , Copenhagen , Denmark . Association for Computing Machinery . Michel Callon . 2004 . The role of hybrid communi - ties and socio - technical arrangements in the partici - patory design . Journal of the center for information studies , 5 ( 3 ) : 3 – 10 . Roberto Cibin , Sarah Robinson , Maurizio Teli , Conor Linehan , Laura Maye , and Christopher Cs ´ ıkszentmih ´ alyi . 2020 . Shaping social innovation in local communities : The contribution of intermedi - aries . In Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Shaping Experi - ences , Shaping Society , NordiCHI ’20 , New York , NY , USA . Association for Computing Machinery . Roberto Cibin , Maurizio Teli , and Sarah Robinson . 2019 . Institutioning and community radio . a com - parative perspective . In Proceedings of the 9th In - ternational Conference on Communities amp ; Tech - nologies - Transforming Communities , Camp ; T ’19 , page 143 – 154 , New York , NY , USA . Association for Computing Machinery . Costanza Conforti , Stephanie Hirmer , Dai Morgan , Marco Basaldella , and Yau Ben Or . 2020 . Natural language processing for achieving sustainable devel - opment : the case of neural labelling to enhance com - munity proﬁling . In Proceedings of the 2020 Con - ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ( EMNLP ) , pages 8427 – 8444 , Online . As - sociation for Computational Linguistics . Kate Crawford . 2021 . The Atlas of AI . Yale University Press . Hal Daum´e III . 2007 . Frustratingly easy domain adap - tation . ACL 2007 , page 256 . Carl DiSalvo , Andrew Clement , and Volkmar Pipek . 2012 . Participatory design for , with , and by com - munities . In Jesper Simonsen and Toni Robertson , editors , International Handbook of Participatory De - sign , pages 182 – 209 . Routledge , Oxford . Yvonne Dittrich , Sara Eriks´en , and Christina Hansson . 2002 . PD in the Wild ; Evolving Practices of Design in Use . In Participatory Design Conference . Pelle Ehn . 1992 . Scandinavian design : On participa - tion and skill . In Paul S . Adler and Terry A . Wino - grad , editors , Usability , pages 96 – 132 . Oxford Uni - versity Press , Inc . Pelle Ehn . 2008 . Participation in design things . In Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 , PDC ’08 , pages 92 – 101 , USA . Indiana University . Pelle Ehn . 2016 . Design , Democracy and Work : Ex - ploring the Scandinavian Participatory Design Tra - dition . Critical Design / Critical Futures . Pelle Ehn , Bengt Brattg \ aard , E . Dalholm , R . C . Davies , Ann H¨agerfors , Birgitta Mitchell , and J¨orn Nilsson . 1996 . The envisionment workshop - from visions to practice . In Proceedings of the Partic - ipatory Design conference , pages 141 – 152 . MIT Boston . Enrique Encinas and Mark Blythe . 2018 . Research ﬁc - tion and thought experiments in design . Founda - tions and Trends in Human – Computer Interaction , 12 ( 1 ) : 1 – 105 . Marie Ertner , Anne Mie Kragelund , and Lone Malm - borg . 2010 . Five Enunciations of Empowerment in Participatory Design . In Proceedings of the 11th Bi - ennial Participatory Design Conference , PDC ’10 , pages 191 – 194 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . Allyson Ettinger , Sudha Rao , Hal Daum ´ e III , and Emily M Bender . 2017 . Towards linguistically gen - eralizable nlp systems : A workshop and shared task . In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Building Linguistically Generalizable NLP Systems , pages 1 – 10 . Rebecca Everson , Wolf Honor´e , and Scott Grimm . 2019 . An online platform for community - based lan - guage description and documentation . In Proceed - ings of the Workshop on Computational Methods for Endangered Languages , volume 1 . Tony Fry . 2017 . Design after design . Design Philosophy Papers , 15 ( 2 ) : 99 – 102 . Publisher : Routledge eprint : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14487136 . 2017 . 1392093 . Yaroslav Ganin and Victor Lempitsky . 2015 . Unsuper - vised domain adaptation by backpropagation . In In - ternational conference on machine learning , pages 1180 – 1189 . PMLR . Krissanne Kaye Garcia , Ma Angelica Lumain , Jose An - tonio Wong , Jhovee Gerard Yap , and Charibeth Cheng . 2008 . Natural language database interface for the community based monitoring system . In Pro - ceedings of the 22nd Paciﬁc Asia Conference on Lan - guage , Information and Computation , pages 384 – 390 . Danilo Giglitto . 2017 . Community empowerment through the management of intangible cultural her - itage in the isle of jura , scotland . Imperial Journal of Interdisciplinary Research , 3 ( 5 ) : 567 – 578 . Hila Gonen and Yoav Goldberg . 2019 . Lipstick on a pig : Debiasing methods cover up systematic gender biases in word embeddings but do not remove them . In Proceedings of the 2019 Workshop on Widening NLP , pages 60 – 63 , Florence , Italy . Association for Computational Linguistics . Richard Griscom . 2020 . Mobilizing metadata : Open data kit ( odk ) for language resource development in east africa . In Proceedings of the ﬁrst workshop on Resources for African Indigenous Languages , pages 31 – 35 . UTOPIA Project Group . 1981 . The UTOPIA Project . On Training , Technology and Products Viewed from the Quality of Work Perspective . Julian Hanna , James Auger , and Enrique Encinas . 2017 . Reconstrained design : a manifesto . Ingi Helgason , Michael Smyth , Enrique Encinas , and Ivica Mitrovi´c . 2020 . Speculative and critical design in education : Practice and perspectives . In Compan - ion Publication of the 2020 ACM Designing Interac - tive Systems Conference , pages 385 – 388 . Stephanie Hirmer , Alycia Leonard , Josephine Tumwe - sige , and Costanza Conforti . 2021 . Building repre - sentative corpora from illiterate communities : A re - viewof challenges and mitigation strategies for de - veloping countries . In Proceedings of the 16th Con - ference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics : Main Volume , pages 2176 – 2189 , Online . Association for Computational Linguistics . Dirk Hovy and Shannon L . Spruit . 2016 . The social impact of natural language processing . In Proceed - ings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( Volume 2 : Short Pa - pers ) , pages 591 – 598 , Berlin , Germany . Association for Computational Linguistics . Liesbeth Huybrechts , Maurizio Teli , Mela Zuljevic , and Mela Bettega . 2020 . Visions that change . Ar - ticulating the politics of participatory design . CoDe - sign , 16 ( 1 ) : 3 – 16 . Alan Irwin and Brian Wynne , editors . 1996 . Misun - derstanding Science ? : The Public Reconstruction of Science and Technology . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . Gopinaath Kannabiran and Susanne Bødker . 2020 . Pro - totypes as Objects of Desire . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Confer - ence , pages 1619 – 1631 . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA . Helena Karasti . 2014 . Infrastructuring in participatory design . In Proceedings of the 13th Participatory De - sign Conference : Research Papers - Volume 1 , PDC ’14 , pages 141 – 150 , Windhoek , Namibia . Associa - tion for Computing Machinery . Timothy Kempton . 2017 . Cross - language forced align - ment to assist community - based linguistics for low resource languages . In Proceedings of the 2nd Work - shop on the Use of Computational Methods in the Study of Endangered Languages , pages 165 – 169 . Henrik Korsgaard , Clemens Nylandsted Klokmose , and Susanne Bødker . 2016 . Computational alterna - tives in participatory design : putting the t back in socio - technical research . In Proceedings of the 14th Participatory Design Conference : Full papers - Vol - ume 1 , PDC ’16 , pages 71 – 79 , New York , NY , USA . Association for Computing Machinery . Tahu Kukutai and John Taylor . 2016 . Indigenous data sovereignty : Toward an agenda . Anu Press . Christopher A . Le Dantec and Carl DiSalvo . 2013 . In - frastructuring and the formation of publics in partici - patory design . Social Studies of Science , 43 ( 2 ) : 241 – 264 . Christopher A . Le Dantec and Sarah Fox . 2015 . Strangers at the Gate : Gaining Access , Building Rapport , and Co - Constructing Community - Based Research . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Con - ference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing , CSCW ’15 , pages 1348 – 1358 , Vancouver , BC , Canada . Association for Computing Machinery . Eric Le Ferrand , Steven Bird , and Laurent Besacier . 2020 . Enabling interactive transcription in an indige - nous community . In Proceedings of the 28th Inter - national Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 3422 – 3428 , Barcelona , Spain ( Online ) . Inter - national Committee on Computational Linguistics . Lori Levin . 2009 . Adaptable , community - controlled , language technologies for language maintenance . In 13th Annual Conference of the European Associa - tion for Machine Translation , page 8 . Citeseer . Paul Pu Liang , Irene Mengze Li , Emily Zheng , Yao Chong Lim , Ruslan Salakhutdinov , and Louis - Philippe Morency . 2020 . Towards debiasing sen - tence representations . In Proceedings of the 58th An - nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 5502 – 5515 , Online . Association for Computational Linguistics . Ann Light and Clodagh Miskelly . 2019 . Platforms , Scales and Networks : Meshing a Local Sustainable Sharing Economy . Computer Supported Coopera - tive Work ( CSCW ) , 28 ( 3 ) : 591 – 626 . Peter Lyle , Mariacristina Sciannamblo , and Maurizio Teli . 2018 . Fostering Commonfare . Infrastructuring Autonomous Social Collaboration . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’18 , pages 452 : 1 – 452 : 12 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . Ji Ma , Yue Zhang , and Jingbo Zhu . 2014 . Tagging the web : Building a robust web tagger with neural net - work . In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( Vol - ume 1 : Long Papers ) , volume 1 , pages 144 – 154 . Gaia Mosconi , Matthias Korn , Christian Reuter , Pe - ter Tolmie , Maurizio Teli , and Volkmar Pipek . 2017 . From Facebook to the Neighbourhood : Infrastructur - ing of Hybrid Community Engagement . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , 26 ( 4 - 6 ) : 959 – 1003 . Mithun Paul Panenghat , Sandeep Suntwal , Faiz Raﬁque , Rebecca Sharp , and Mihai Surdeanu . 2020 . Towards the necessity for debiasing natural language inference datasets . In Proceedings of the 12th Lan - guage Resources and Evaluation Conference , pages 6883 – 6888 , Marseille , France . European Language Resources Association . Robert Racadio , Emma J . Rose , and Beth E . Kolko . 2014 . Research at the margin : participatory de - sign and community based participatory research . In Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference on Short Papers , Industry Cases , Work - shop Descriptions , Doctoral Consortium papers , and Keynote abstracts - PDC ’14 - volume 2 , pages 49 – 52 , Windhoek , Namibia . ACM Press . Alan Ramponi and Barbara Plank . 2020 . Neural unsu - pervised domain adaptation in NLP—A survey . In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 6838 – 6855 , Barcelona , Spain ( Online ) . International Committee on Computational Linguistics . Sebastian Ruder , Parsa Ghaffari , and John G Bres - lin . 2017 . Data selection strategies for multi - domain sentiment analysis . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1702 . 02426 . Sebastian Ruder and Barbara Plank . 2017 . Learning to select data for transfer learning with bayesian opti - mization . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 372 – 382 , Copenhagen , Denmark . Association for Computational Linguistics . Jesper Simonsen and Toni Robertson . 2012 . Rout - ledge International Handbook of Participatory De - sign . Routledge , New York , NY . Mona Sloan , Emanuel Moss , Olaitan Awomolo , and Laura Forlano . 2020 . Participation is not a design ﬁx for machine learning ( pp . 1 – 7 ) . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learn - ing , Vienna , Austria . Sai Susarla and Damodar Reddy Challa . 2019 . A plat - form for community - sourced indic knowledge pro - cessing at scale . In Proceedings of the 6th Inter - national Sanskrit Computational Linguistics Sympo - sium , pages 68 – 82 , IIT Kharagpur , India . Associa - tion for Computational Linguistics . Fasil Tekola , Susan J Bull , Bobbie Farsides , Melanie J Newport , Adebowale Adeyemo , Charles N Rotimi , and Gail Davey . 2009 . Tailoring consent to con - text : designing an appropriate consent process for a biomedical study in a low income setting . PLoS Negl Trop Dis , 3 ( 7 ) : e482 . Maurizio Teli . 2015 . Computing and the Com - mon . Hints of a new utopia in Participatory De - sign . Aarhus Series on Human Centered Computing , 1 ( 1 ) : 4 . Maurizio Teli , Antonella De Angeli , and Maria Men´endez - Blanco . 2017 . The positioning cards : on affect , public design , and the common . AI & SOCI - ETY , pages 1 – 8 . Maurizio Teli , Marcus Foth , Mariacristina Sciannam - blo , Irina Anastasiu , and Peter Lyle . 2020 . Tales of Institutioning and Commoning : Participatory De - sign Processes with a Strategic and Tactical Perspec - tive . In Proceedings of the 16th Participatory De - sign Conference 2020 - Participation ( s ) Otherwise - Volume 1 , PDC ’20 , pages 159 – 171 , Manizales , Colombia . Association for Computing Machinery . Mamello Thinyane , Karthik Bhat , Lauri Goldkind , and Vikram Kamath Cannanure . 2018 . Critical Partici - patory Design : Reﬂections on Engagement and Em - powerment in a Case of a Community Based Orga - nization . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Full Papers - Volume 1 , PDC ’18 , pages 2 : 1 – 2 : 10 , New York , NY , USA . ACM . David R Traum . 2000 . 20 questions on dialogue act taxonomies . Journal of semantics , 17 ( 1 ) : 7 – 30 . Kirsikka Vaajakallio and Tuuli Mattelm ¨ aki . 2014 . De - sign games in codesign : as a tool , a mindset and a structure . CoDesign , 10 ( 1 ) : 63 – 77 . Publisher : Tay - lor & Francis Ltd . Maggie Walter and Michele Suina . 2019 . Indigenous data , indigenous methodologies and indigenous data sovereignty . International Journal of Social Re - search Methodology , 22 ( 3 ) : 233 – 243 . Terry Winograd . 1997 . From Computing Machinery to Interaction Design . In Peter Denning and Robert Metcalfe , editors , Beyond Calculation : The Next Fifty Years of Computing , pages 149 – 162 . Springer - Verlag . Fangzhao Wu and Yongfeng Huang . 2016 . Sentiment domain adaptation with multiple sources . In Pro - ceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Associa - tion for Computational Linguistics ( Volume 1 : Long Papers ) , volume 1 , pages 301 – 310 . Xuhui Zhou , Maarten Sap , Swabha Swayamdipta , Yejin Choi , and Noah Smith . 2021 . Challenges in au - tomated debiasing for toxic language detection . In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin - guistics : Main Volume , pages 3143 – 3155 , Online . Association for Computational Linguistics .