Exploring the Design of Social Robot User Interfaces for Presenting Data - Driven Stories Anuradha Herath University of British Columbia Kelowna , Canada caherath @ student . ubc . ca Samar Sallam University of British Columbia Kelowna , Canada sallams @ student . ubc . ca Yumiko Sakamoto University of British Columbia Kelowna , Canada yumiko . sakamoto @ ubc . ca Randy Gomez Honda Research Institute Japan Wako , Japan r . gomez @ jp . honda - ri . com Pourang Irani University of British Columbia Kelowna , Canada pourang . irani @ . ubc . ca Figure 1 : Potential methods of how a robot can be used as a multimodal presenter ( from left to right ) : Gestures : Robot turns and pointedly looks at a specific area of the visualization , Expert Embodiment : Robot embodies an expert in the field and presents the data , Augmentations : Robot augments the visualization with additional context , Emotional Expressions : Robot shows emotional expressions to give an additional layer of immersion for the context , Interventions : Robot provides extra information on the content . ABSTRACT Tabletop social robots are becoming increasingly common , not only as social companions but as presenters and orators of informa - tion . We present an exploration of utilizing robots as a multimodal presentation tool to communicate data - driven facts . Our explo - ration is inspired by the wealth of research on data videos ( DVs ) as these have become mainstream sources for swiftly conveying data - driven information to a mass audience . We first analyze 48 DVs that contain visible narrators ( presenters who are visible in Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspecificpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . MUM ’23 , December 03 – 06 , 2023 , Vienna , Austria © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 979 - 8 - 4007 - 0921 - 0 / 23 / 12 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3626705 . 3627781 the video frames ) as our source for understanding the techniques used to convey factual information via presenters . Twelve dimen - sions across four factors ( presenter - grounded ; narrative - grounded ; viewer - engagement - related ; and data - visualization - related ) were identified . These factors were carefully arranged in designing pre - senters to engage the audience with the video content . We adapt these findings to the design of an expressive social tabletop ro - bot that can communicate data - driven knowledge to its audience . Supported by four design sessions with expert content creators and designers , we provide nine design implications for designing multimodal presentations with an expressive tabletop social robot . We conclude with the possible application potentials of this unique data presentation modality . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Scenario - based design ; User interface design ; Information visualization . 315 MUM ’23 , December 03 – 06 , 2023 , Vienna , Austria Anuradha Herath , Samar Sallam , Yumiko Sakamoto , Randy Gomez , and Pourang Irani KEYWORDS Ubiquitous Multimedia Systems , Social Robots , Data Videos , Design Study , Human - Robot Interactions ACM Reference Format : Anuradha Herath , Samar Sallam , Yumiko Sakamoto , Randy Gomez , andPourangIrani . 2023 . ExploringtheDesignofSocialRobotUserInterfaces for Presenting Data - Driven Stories . In International Conference on Mobile andUbiquitousMultimedia ( MUM’23 ) , December03 – 06 , 2023 , Vienna , Austria . ACM , NewYork , NY , USA , 19pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3626705 . 3627781 1 INTRODUCTION Efficiently conveying data has posed a persistent challenge over time [ 19 , 57 ] . Evidence indicates that combining multiple modalities to present information – such as pairing videos with data visual - izations , incorporating pictographs and motion graphics along - side audio , all while employing storytelling techniques [ 25 , 46 ] – holds considerable promise in aiding audience comprehension [ 14 ] . Among the array of existing narrative visualization styles [ 83 ] , the potential of data videos or DVs [ 2 ] stands out , as they can effec - tively engage viewers by weaving data - driven information through visual and auditory channels , swiftly conveying insights [ 2 , 25 ] . These narrated presentations construct a coherent sequence of ar - guments utilizing various data visualization techniques ( e . g . , charts , pictographs ) within a storyline framework [ 2 , 48 , 83 ] . Among the diverse array of data video formats , the style remi - niscent of Hans Rosling’s approach with first - person narration [ 76 ] holds the capacity to captivate the audience . In such videos , the visible presenter assumes the role of a storyteller , offering a distinct opportunity to shape the perceived reliability of the information being presented , especially if the presenter holds recognized ex - pertise [ 17 ] . These presenters can leverage a wide spectrum of communication techniques , encompassing both verbal and non - verbal cues , to enhance the viewer’s experience [ 56 ] and facilitate the assimilation of the data - driven facts being conveyed . Develop - ing novel methods for presenting data can further expand the reach of the information to broader audiences , cater to various learn - ing preferences among viewers , and accommodate the distinctive attributes inherent in the extensive datasets at hand . Drawing inspiration from these recent advancements in data presentation techniques ( e . g . , [ 11 , 15 , 17 , 76 ] ) , the primary objective of this work is to delve into the unexplored realm of utilizing a tabletop social robot as a vehicle for presenting information to an audience . Social robots have seamlessly integrated themselves into a variety of social environments and applications , spanning realms like education and entertainment [ 1 , 7 , 88 ] . These versatile robots also provide support for a multitude of daily human needs , includ - ing information retrieval , education assistance , home surveillance and security , residence cleaning , as well as providing entertainment . Notably , stationary tabletop social robots have the distinct advan - tage of being exceptionally expressive ( e . g . , Haru [ 28 ] , Jibo [ 74 , 89 ] , Eilik [ 89 ] ) thereby significantly enriching user interactions [ 9 , 49 ] . These social robots have even demonstrated their ability to evoke emotions in users [ 34 ] , and their adaptability extends to accommo - dating diverse audience preferences [ 63 ] , and personalizing content according to specific audience characteristics like age , background , gender , and personality [ 4 , 31 , 72 ] . Consequently , should the feasi - bility of data presentation through such a medium be established , it has the potential to expand the spectrum of accessible audiences . Specifically , this study is centred around the exploration of the following two questions : RQ1 : What are the strategies employed by presenters , particularly those who are visible , to foster engagement within data videos ? and RQ2 : Is it feasible to transfer these strate - gies to multimodal presentation design through tabletop robots . To explore these questions , we carried out a qualitative analysis of 48 data videos featuring visible presenters , with the aim of dis - tinguishing prevalent tactics used by these presenters during their information dissemination . Our analysis identified 12 distinct di - mensions aligned with four discrete Factors ( Figure 2 ) that pre - senters harnessed to enhance the narrative experience . Moreover , we convened four dedicated design sessions , involving cohorts of adept designers representing diverse , relevant disciplines . These designers crafted designs tailored specifically for a tabletop social robot , exemplified by Haru [ 28 ] , renowned for its remarkable ex - pressiveness and efficacy in user engagement [ 93 ] . Our findings prominently demonstrate that designers employed a majority of the techniques we extracted from our analysis of presenter - visible data videos ( 9 out of 12 ) , leading us to highlight the potential of tabletop social robots as design tools for multimodal presentations . Our contributions are two - fold ; C1 : A qualitative characteri - zation of Factors found within existing data videos with visible presenters , and C2 : A set of implications for content designers designing multimedia presentations with tabletop social robots . By comparing the outcomes of the two studies , we further discuss the inabilities and potential capabilities of having a robot as a presenter of information . 2 RELATED WORK We succinctly introduce relevant literature on Data Videos ( DV ) as a medium for efficiently conveying information in a brief time - span . We outline prior works that have explored the significance of first - person narrators ( or presenters ) when storytelling in videos . Finally , aligned with our objectives , we provide a concise overview of prior research exploring the application of social robots for information communication . 2 . 1 Conveying Data with Videos Data - driven storytelling in the form of short videos or Data Videos ( DVs ) is becoming an increasingly popular medium for conveying information , and spreading awareness [ 2 , 78 , 79 , 82 ] . These videos incorporate data in the form of visual elements such as graphs , charts , or pictographs and utilize visual and audible features such as animations and sound effects to facilitate and enhance data comprehension for viewers with varying data literacy levels [ 2 , 79 ] . Amini et al . [ 2 ] offered a formal definition for DVs and explored their narrative structures as well as the visualization types and visual cues commonly used in DVs . Later studies showed that the use of pictographs and animation in data videos boosts viewers’ understanding and engagement with the videos [ 3 ] . Furthermore , DVs are proven to have persuasive capabilities [ 17 ] and hence have a great potential to advocate for certain behaviours [ 78 , 79 ] . DVs are widely used to communicate information in different areas and 316 Social Robot User Interfaces for Presenting Data - Driven Stories MUM ’23 , December 03 – 06 , 2023 , Vienna , Austria domains such as education [ 35 , 87 ] , journalism [ 95 , 96 ] , political messaging [ 22 , 84 ] as well as in health communication [ 91 ] . To our knowledge , there are no studies that systematically examined the narrative strategies of presenters in DVs . The most relevant obser - vation related to presenter strategies in DVs was done by Choe et al . [ 17 ] . They observed that a video advocating for physical activity was perceived as more influential when narrated by a character who was portrayed as a doctor compared to another version of the same video in which the presenter was a layperson . This shows the po - tential impact the features of a visible presenter and their perceived credibility can have on the overall effectiveness of communicating information to the viewer . Analyzing the roles and characteristics of first - person visible narrators in existing commonly viewed data videos can provide valuable insights into effectively integrating a visible storyteller during data presentations . 2 . 2 Importance of a Presenter in Communicating Data Prior research has shown that the presence of a presenter in sto - rytelling can improve comprehensibility and persuasiveness in various narrative applications [ 21 , 40 ] . For example , viewers often turn to and follow the presenters’ guidance when understanding the presented material [ 64 ] . Viewers would also be more willing to accept the provided information when the presenter is perceived to have experience in the conveyed content [ 5 , 17 , 39 ] . This was also effective for health reformation and health awareness - related in - formation [ 38 , 45 , 65 ] and has reduced reactive counter - arguments when introducing negative health - related information [ 67 ] ( e . g . , Causes of Obesity ) . Furthermore , users show more empathy , posi - tive attitudes , and more favourable behavioural intentions towards the information when a character is present to convey the informa - tion and experiences [ 69 ] . Virtual presenters are commonly used in educational environ - ments for providing assistance in learning [ 6 , 15 , 44 ] . The guidance through a virtual agent that plays different roles ( e . g . , expert , mo - tivator , mentor , etc . ) can have a significant positive impact on the learners’ understanding and behaviour [ 60 ] . Health - related appli - cations also incorporate virtual presenters for augmenting user experience [ 51 , 58 , 70 ] . Lisetti et al . [ 56 ] compared providing brief motivational interventions for excessive alcohol consumption with : a text - only interface , a virtual agent with neutral feelings , and a virtual agent with empathetic abilities . Results of their user evalu - ations indicate a significant impact on the intention of accepting interventions when given by a virtual agent as opposed to the text - only approach . Compared to virtual presenters , physical presenters ; specifically , social robots can utilize additional modalities for conveying infor - mation . In addition to their physical presence , social robots can be more influential than their counterpart virtual agents [ 52 ] . Robots’ physical embodiment attracts more narrative attention when com - pared with a similar virtual embodiment [ 18 ] . While both robots and virtual agents can stimulate pro - social behaviour in users [ 68 ] , robots were much preferred by the users in different scenarios like exercise motivation [ 80 ] , and learning assistance [ 53 ] . Moreover , in tandem with recent advancements in display tech - nology , the majority of contemporary social robots are being equipped with at least one miniature display [ 28 , 71 ] , enabling them to portray intricate emotions and expressions through these interfaces [ 55 , 77 ] . 2 . 3 Narrating Information with Social Robots Robots as narrators have been explored in varying domains such as education [ 10 , 24 , 85 ] , general presentations [ 32 , 90 ] , and story - telling [ 54 , 86 ] . The role of robots as educators has been explored across diverse research , spanning topics such as affective learn - ing [ 10 , 23 , 24 ] , as well as applications in enhancing educational motivation [ 85 ] . The incorporation of robots equipped with human - like social skills ( e . g . , eye contact , gaze aversion , utilizing the user’s name , recalling prior interactions , adopting an informal tone while speaking , etc . ) in learning environments has fostered more positive social interactions and better comprehension of the material [ 62 ] . Additionally , adopting the persona of a peer ( e . g . , a fellow student ) in collaborative learning scenarios has exhibited discernible impacts on children’s learning experiences [ 16 ] . As presenters , designed to communicate using non - verbal ges - tures , and gaze direction methods , robots can provide an enjoyable experience for viewers [ 32 ] . Especially in situations where a pre - sentation has to be repeated multiple times ( e . g . , an exhibition ) , robots with pre - defined gestures have been perceived to be more effective and acceptable by the audience [ 33 ] . Even co - presenting with a robot ( i . e . , shared narration ) can have a positive impact on both the audience and the human speakers themselves [ 90 ] . Storytelling with robots can also enhance story engagement and offer opportunities for interactivity [ 54 ] . For instance , by combining persuasive gestures and gazing behaviours , a robot can influence the viewers’ attitude toward the story content [ 36 ] . Emotional ex - pressions ( both facial and oratory ) also play a significant role in traditional storytelling . Storytelling with a robot that can express the story’s emotion ( with simple facial expressions and non - verbal behaviours ) has the ability to convey an equal amount of positive valence when compared with the human - based audio narration of the story ( i . e . , audiobooks ) [ 86 ] . Hence , employing a robot to convey information in a narrative format with the addition of vi - sualizations ( i . e . , videos , presentations , etc . ) could lead to better viewer engagement and emotional understanding of the conveyed message . Social robots are also viewed as companions [ 61 , 73 ] , and re - cently , designing tabletop versions of these companion robots has attracted an increase in interest [ 27 , 47 , 92 ] . Tabletop social robots offer the convenience of being mainly fixed in locations where their interactions are deemed beneficial ( such as a kitchen countertop , on a dining table or classroom desk ) . Their proximity with the viewer offers a physically closer interaction space , that can prove valu - able in storytelling settings . More often , tabletop social robots are embedded with the smarts to provide significant emotional and con - versational support through detailed facial expressions [ 30 , 37 , 55 ] to communicate intentions and emotions . Researchers have shown that a surprisingly rich design space is possible with just a few expressive visual attributes [ 30 ] . For example , Haru , a tabletop 317 MUM ’23 , December 03 – 06 , 2023 , Vienna , Austria Anuradha Herath , Samar Sallam , Yumiko Sakamoto , Randy Gomez , and Pourang Irani social robot , can easily express upto 11 unique emotions and ex - pressions with only the movement of its upper components . Given such diversity in communication power , in this first exploration , we limit our study to the use of tabletop social robots . We use the empathetic tabletop robot Haru [ 28 ] , a social robot that was specif - ically designed to heighten its emotional connection with its users . Through this exploration , we aim to further expand the utility of such tabletop social robots to communicate relevant and rich data . 3 STUDY 1 : UNDERSTANDING STRATEGIES UTILIZED BY VISIBLE PRESENTERS IN DATA VIDEOS To explore the possibility of enhancing the communicability of DVs using the multi - modal tool , namely , DVs with a physical presenter , we considered a tabletop social robot to play the role of a presen - ter of the video content . We chose a tabletop social robot for the presentation task due to three main reasons related to their capabil - ities and form factor ; 1 ) As their name suggests , social robots are designed to support social intelligence and consist of capabilities that enable them to be ideal candidates for communication and storytelling [ 27 , 36 , 94 ] ; 2 ) Tabletop social robots are often small in size , and are suitable to be placed beside a monitor without creating destructive saccade like eye - movements between the viewing of a monitor and the robot ; 3 ) Most tabletop social robots are designed with humanistic features making them desirable candidates as pre - senters . In addition , most tabletop robots are equipped with displays that allow them to convey emotions as well as other content . As a first step to explore how we can utilize tabletop social robots for multimodal presentations , we conducted a qualitative analysis of publicly available DVs which include visible presenters . Specifically , we took notes of the characteristics and features of the presenters , techniques they adopted in their presentation as well as their interactions with the video content . In this section , we describe our video selection and analysis processes in detail . 3 . 1 Selection and Filtering of Data Videos We first selected videos with the visible presenter ( s ) from the list of DVs used in previous studies ( Amini et al . [ 2 ] ( n = 50 ) , Cao et al . [ 13 ] ( n = 70 ) , and Sallam et al . [ 79 ] ( n = 9 ) ) . Since the presen - ters were only briefly visible in some of the collected videos ( e . g . , only introducing the topic ) , we chose to include only videos where presenters appeared at least once in the video introduction , main content , and ending ; 14 videos remained at the end of this step . Next , we searched reputable YouTube channels : The DV channels referenced in the previous studies mentioned above were explored . Amini et al . ’s [ 2 ] definition of DVs was adopted for the DV selection . That is , DVs should : ( 1 ) contain data - backed arguments to support their central message ; ( 2 ) include at least one data visualization ; and ( 3 ) use a narrative format . Two inclusion criteria were added ; first , a narrative agent needs to be present , and second , the video is shorter than 10 minutes . While Cao et al [ 13 ] and Amini et al . [ 2 ] reported an average DV duration between two and seven minutes , we found that many DVs with visible narrators were longer in length ( up to 10 minutes ) . We suggest that this extra length could be possibly attributed to the existence of additional presenter - only frames in the videos . Thus , the criterion for video duration was adjusted , yielding 34 additional videos . With these two steps , a total of 48 ( 14 + 34 ) videos were obtained for our analysis ( See Table 2 for the full list of videos ) . 3 . 2 Coding Process of the Data Videos Following Amini’s approach , [ 2 ] , we adapted both open - [ 26 ] and closed - coding [ 75 ] for our analysis . First , three HCI researchers conducted iterative open coding on eight videos to generate the initial attributes , dimensions , and factors . This step was followed by a refining process whereby the researchers had multiple discussions until an agreement was reached for all three ( i . e . , factors , dimen - sions , attributes ) . Moreover , three main data types were identified depending on the choices we observed for each of the attributes : binary , for attributes with yes or no choices ( e . g . , having a hu - man presenter ) ; numerical , for attributes containing countable enti - ties ( e . g . , number of experts present within the video ) , and Likert scale , for more subjective attributes with non - definitive choices ( e . g . , perceived credibility of the presenter ) . The definitions of these attributes were refined iteratively through individual coding and discussion process for another 10 additional videos from the corpus until substantial agreement among the researchers was reached consistently ( Cohen’s kappa ( for binary and numerical data ) > 0 . 63 , suggesting significant reliability [ 8 ] , and Pearson correlations ( for Likert data ) > 0 . 61 , suggesting moderate correlation [ 81 ] ) . Finally , the remaining 30 videos were randomly split between the two re - searchers who performed closed coding based on the final codebook ( for more details , see Appendix C ) . 3 . 3 Analysis of the Coding Outcomes Four main factors with twelve dimensions , and seventeen attributes were identified ( see Figure 2 ) . The following sections discuss these in detail . 3 . 3 . 1 Presenter . This factor describes the characteristics of the presenters including their general appearance , presence throughout the video , narration style , and gestures utilized by them . Presenter Appearance : Most videos included human presenters ( 87 . 5 % ) . All the animated presenters ( 11 . 4 % ) also displayed hu - manoid characteristics . Finally , all presenters were portrayed as adults . Presenter Presence : Generally , coders reported that the presen - ters were visibly present for the majority of the video duration ( M = 5 . 3 , SD = 1 . 30 , on a 7 - point Likert scale capturing the presenter’s presence from 1 : almost never to 7 : almost always ) . In frames with visualizations , the coders reported three unique scenarios for the presenter’s visibility ; fully present while visualizations happening around them , partially present whereby the presenter is absent only in frame - wide data visualizations but present around nar - rower / smaller visualizations , and randomly present where arbitrary presence was observed around full - frame data visualizations ( fully present in other frames ) . While narration in most of the videos was carried out by one presenter ( 84 . 2 % ) , several videos included multiple presenters ( 12 . 3 % with two presenters , and 4 . 1 % with three or more ) . 318 Social Robot User Interfaces for Presenting Data - Driven Stories MUM ’23 , December 03 – 06 , 2023 , Vienna , Austria Figure 2 : Results of qualitative analysis of 48 data videos with visible presenter ( s ) . Each layer represents Factors , Dimensions , and Attributes ( from the innermost to the outermost ) identified through the analysis . Narration Style & Credibility : The presenters were often vig - orous and engaged in conveying the information . They exhibit a high level of interest in the presented topic and narrated in a mix of a lecturing style and holding casual conversations ( M = 4 . 9 , SD = 1 . 37 , on a 7 - point scale where 1 : very casual and 7 : very formal ) . The presenters were also portrayed as having high credibility ( M = 5 . 4 , SD = 1 . 01 , on a 7 - point scale where 1 : not credible and 7 : very credible ) . Also they were often portrayed as experts in the field ( e . g . , physicists , researchers , head of research ) or had considerable experience in the video topic . In videos having multiple presenters , two types of narrative flows were recognized ; the presenters were either collaboratively delivering the content in the form of a con - versation , or individually presenting in an alternating manner ( i . e . , each presenter narrates distinct parts of the story ) . Expressions & Gestures : It was observed that the presenters com - monly relied on expressions and gestures to add more clues to the presented content . They used sarcasm and humour to main - tain the narrative’s appeal and reveal the irrationality of some counter - arguments on the topics in discussion . When explaining or demonstrating the results of certain theories in action , they showed excitement through speech variations , body language , and facial 319 MUM ’23 , December 03 – 06 , 2023 , Vienna , Austria Anuradha Herath , Samar Sallam , Yumiko Sakamoto , Randy Gomez , and Pourang Irani Figure 3 : Illustrations of unique facial expressions and gestures used by the presenters to convey different messages : A . Sarcasm ; B . Excitement ; C . Pain ; D . Surprise ; E . Doubt ; F . Joy ; G . Size Gesture ; H . Pointing Gesture ; I . Counting Gesture ; J . Motion Gesture . expressions . Along with the excitement , we recognized other dis - tinguishable expressions ( Figure 3 from A to F ) commonly centred around the eyes . In particular , presenters utilized special expres - sions to convey ; pain or indicate smallness ( squinting of the eyes ) ; surprise and curiosity ( enlargement of the eyes ) ; doubt , humour , or interest ( raising a single eyebrow ) ; and showing joy or awe ( crin - kling eyes ) . Hands and body gestures were also incorporated to add emphasis on the matters in discussion ( Figure 3 from G to J ) . The common gestures we found were ; size gestures , pointing gestures , counting gestures , and motion gestures ( e . g . , moving both hands from one side to the other to indicate the passage of time ) . 3 . 3 . 2 Narrative . In this factor , we discuss techniques adopted by the presenters to enhance the narrative . Story Participation : The protagonist characters often played the role of presenters in the video ( 56 . 3 % ) . They objectively pre - sented research - backed facts with the help of visualizations , with - out putting themselves in the story . Occasionally , the presenters involved in the story through self - examples by providing their own experiences ( 33 . 3 % ) . In some limited situations , we observed a full embodiment of the presenter in the plot of the story ( 10 . 4 % ) where the presenter played the role of a character in the story . Narration Effect : Several auditory narration techniques were em - ployed by the presenters . They frequently used sudden speed fluc - tuations ( 79 % ) in the narration to highlight specific content ( e . g . , to put an emphasis on an important fact ) . Also , presenters sometimes made sudden volume changes ( 40 % ) in their speech to emphasize the importance of certain facts and / or to convey extreme emotions ( e . g . , exasperation or joy ) . Finally , presenters commonly incorporated sudden pauses ( 88 % ) in their speech when introducing new topics or when they want the viewer to reflect on what has been previously discussed . Additional Character Involvement : Presenters occasionally re - lied on feedback and / or affirmations from other characters ( 30 % ) who were perceived as either experts or non - experts . Generally , ex - perts ( e . g . , doctors , financial managers , etc . ) appear in the video whenever a more credible or specialized explanation is needed . When further affirmation or examples of the theoretical applica - tions were necessary , presenters involved non - experts to discuss their habits , behaviours , or personal experiences . 3 . 3 . 3 Viewer Engagement . Presenters in the videos utilized two techniques to engage the viewers in the narrative ; ( 1 ) Mutual Experience Sharing by relating to their own per - spective to immerse the viewer into the storyline through 320 Social Robot User Interfaces for Presenting Data - Driven Stories MUM ’23 , December 03 – 06 , 2023 , Vienna , Austria phrases such as " If you are like me . . . . . " or " I’m someone with a tendency to . . . . . " ( 2 ) Directly Addressing the viewer by pointing straight toward them to secure their attention on the immediate topic . An instance in which the presenter directly addressed the viewer was to urge them to test a concept by saying " Go ahead and try to think of nothing " . 3 . 3 . 4 Data Visualization . In addition to the variations in pre - senter visibility in frames with visualizations ( mentioned in 3 . 3 . 1 ) , we also observed three categories of data visualizations utilized by visible presenters . ( 1 ) Visual Diagrams ( 48 % ) provided information or scientific expressions via diagrams ( Figure 4 . left ) . ( 2 ) Basic Charts ( 36 % ) contained basic charts ( e . g . , bar charts , pie charts , maps , etc . ) , without any additional visual elements like pictures or complex icons ( Figure 4 - middle ) . ( 3 ) Pictorial Visualizations ( 16 % ) are a more sophisticated for - mat of charts , in which , creative icons , pictures , and symbols are incorporated into the charts to boost the visual appeal while facilitating the video viewers’ comprehension of the presented data ( Figure 4 - right ; [ 97 ] ) . Figure 4 : Three Main Visualization Structures found in the analyzed DVs : Visual Diagrams ( left ) , Basic Charts ( middle ) , and Pictorial Visualizations ( right ) . Through our closed - as well as open - coding , we learned how the presenter in DVs is portrayed ( Presenter ) ; how the storylines are en - hanced ( Narrative ) ; how the videos attempt to capture the viewers’ attention ( Viewer engagement ) ; and how data - related information is communicated ( Data Visualization ) . To summarize some of our key findings , the presenter ( s ) were almost always depicted as adult humans - usually perceived as having high credibility - and these presenters often told the story in an objective manner . In narrating the story , they almost always changed the speech speed and the sound volume , while adding pauses for emphases and / or directing viewers’ attention ( see Fig . 2 ) . 4 STUDY 2 : ROBOTIC PRESENTATION DESIGN VIA STORYBOARDING To test the applicability of our findings to tabletop robotic presenta - tions and further understand the design approach of practitioners in narrative design , we conducted four group - based ideation and design sessions with creative design experts . The main focus of this study was to observe how designers incorporate a tabletop robot as a presenter , rather than how they generate content for a DV . Each session was video - recorded for subsequent coding for further details . 4 . 1 Participants Designers from various related fields were recruited via a poster published in design - related social media groups within the local university . Participants need to : ( 1 ) be 18 years or older ; and ( 2 ) have experience in at least one field of creative arts ( 3D animation , theatre , storytelling , etc . ) . Eight people participated ( five females and three males , aged 20 to 34 years ; Mean ( M ) = 27 . 4 , Standard Deviation ( SD ) = 5 . 2 ) with diverse experiences . All the participants had training and experience in more than one field of creative design ; theatre and play acting ( f = 3 ) , professional storytelling and voice acting ( f = 2 ) , 3D animation , graphic , and illustration design ( f = 2 ) , creative writing ( f = 3 ) , and data visualizations ( f = 2 ) . All participants had at least two years of experience ( M = 6 . 0 , SD = 4 . 1 ) in their respective fields . Participants were offered an online gift card for their participation . The study was approved by the research ethics board at the local university . 4 . 2 Study Design 4 . 2 . 1 The Choice of the Robot and the Display for the Study . For the role of robotic presenter , a tabletop social robot named " Haru " [ 28 ] ( Figure 5 ) was selected for two main reasons : 1 ) Haru is equipped with the functionalities and capabilities of most tabletop social robots ( e . g . , facial expressions and emotional capabilities , dis - play screens , body , and head movements , and auditory capabilities ) ; 2 ) Haru was specifically designed to provide better emotional and empathetic expressions [ 30 ] , which is a common method frequently utilized by the presenters in their presentation in DVs ) ; 3 ) Haru has been already employed in numerous works that explore various social interaction aspects including communication [ 29 , 42 , 94 ] , conversation [ 20 , 41 , 66 ] , and conveying emotions through verbal and non - verbal interactions [ 12 , 30 ] . Haru consists of two rotat - able mini - displays as its eyes ( See Fig . 5 ) , a speaker , an array of LEDs marking a mouth , and additional degrees of body motion ( e . g . , leaning back and forth , rotation , eyes / head movement , etc . ) . We acknowledge that Haru does not have hands . While this could limit the presenter’s capability to communicate via gestures , since currently used tabletop social robots generally are not equipped with dexterous hand movements for such purpose yet , Haru was one of the most suitable candidates for our study . 1 Figure 5 : The Table - top Social Robot Haru ( left - adapted from [ 12 ] ) , and communication modalities of Haru ( right ) . Along with Haru’s designs , a medium - sized tablet was intro - duced for the purpose of DV display . Thus , our design task included 1 WhileratherpopulartabletopSRslikeNaohavefingersthatcouldbeusedforgestures , they lack the capabilities for conveying detailed facial expressions , which we believe is paramount when playing a presenter role . 321 MUM ’23 , December 03 – 06 , 2023 , Vienna , Austria Anuradha Herath , Samar Sallam , Yumiko Sakamoto , Randy Gomez , and Pourang Irani a redesign of an existing DV to be presented using a tabletop robot and a medium - sized tablet . 4 . 2 . 2 Pilot Studies . Two pilot studies were conducted to identify the study time frames and the potential DV to be redesigned for the study ( N = 6 ) . The main factors considered for choosing the video were : the video length , the amount of data facts and visual - izations , the degree of complexity , and the ease of comprehension of the storyline . The participants were first asked to select the most suitable video from a pre - selected set of videos ( 5 DVs based on the aforementioned criteria with an invisible narrator ) for their designs . To introduce the robot , design illustrations from [ 28 ] were adopted along with a brief description of the 3D simulation of the robot’s movement capabilities . The most preferred video 2 discussed the differences between social classes and their effect on society and was relatively concise ( 2 mins 57s ) . The video is also readily comprehensible according to the participants’ feedback . Based on the pilot sessions , we estimated that the session should require approximately two hours . 4 . 2 . 3 Design Sessions . Four design sessions were conducted , with each consisting of two participants with diverse expertise . To test the usefulness of our findings , only two of the four pairs ( Experi - mental Condition ) received a list of design suggestions generated in Study 1 ( see Appendix D ) at the beginning of the session , and they were encouraged to use them in their design . Participants were asked to redesign the given DV to include a tabletop social robot as a physical presenter . All the necessary materials for creating the illustrations ( i . e . , drawing sheets , pencils , etc . ) were provided . 4 . 3 Study Procedure Each session consisted of three stages ; an introduction stage ( ≈ 30 minutes ) ; a design stage ( ≈ 60 minutes ) ; and a semi - structured interview stage ( ≈ 30 minutes ) . In the introduction stage , following a brief - demographic questionnaire , participants were introduced to DVs using : 1 ) a video explaining what DVs are , 2 ) a sample DV 3 , and 3 ) a DV with a visible presenter 4 . Subsequently , they were introduced to the robot using the illustrations ( Appendix E ) and were instructed about the task by showing the DV to be redesigned . The two groups in the experimental condition were provided with a list of findings from Study 1 ( see Appendix D ) , associated with presenter features . Participants were then encouraged to use those features in their design process . Except for this aspect , the two conditions were identical in procedure . Notably , participants in all four groups were instructed not to limit their imagination to the robot’s capabilities . In the design stage , the two participants worked collaboratively to generate their version of the storyline which should include Haru as a presenter . They were allowed to modify any elements in the video . Participants were asked to write down all additional details and information necessary to implement their designs . Throughout the design stage , an on - site researcher was present in the study room to assist the participants by answering their questions . At 2 https : / / youtu . be / hb28kAavh0M 3 https : / / youtu . be / QUW _ Zv _ jJb8 4 Video no . 12 from the final list ( see appendix 2 ) the end of the session , the on - site researcher conducted a semi - structured interview to better understand the generated storyboards and all design decisions , as well as any challenges participants might have faced in their design process . 4 . 4 Analysis of Storyboarding Process Four storyboard illustrations along with four recordings of the de - sign sessions were gathered . For the designing process , the two control pairs spent 63 . 73 mins on average while the two experi - mental pairs spent 51 . 34 mins . First , the same two researchers from Study 1 independently coded two video - recorded sessions ( one con - trol and one experimental ) by focusing on the strategies of how participants included Haru as a presenter in their DV presentations : the four factors generated in Study 1 ( see Figure 2 ) were used for the coding . While both coders reported almost the same strategies in both coded videos , they disagreed on some lower - level classifica - tions ( i . e . , dimensions and attributes ) . Hence , discussions between the coders were held until all conflicts were resolved and rules for classifying similar instances were put in place . Following [ 2 ] , after coding schemas were established , the remaining two recordings were coded by the first author . In this section , we describe our findings in detail . 4 . 4 . 1 Evaluation of Presenter Details . The analysis of coded record - ings revealed that all four pairs felt that the presenter should adopt a non - casual but not too formal presentation style ( i . e . , mixed - style presentation ) . They also incorporated a wide range of emotional expressions , mainly conveyed via Haru’s eyes to express ; happi - ness , sadness , anger , disappointment , and confusion ( i . e . , Unique Expressions , see Figure 6 ) . While the popular suggestion ( by three pairs ) was to narrate the entire video with the robot , one experi - mental pair considered alternating the narration between the robot and the tablet . All the pairs agreed that the robot and the tablet should “work as a team” when presenting . All four pairs utilized the robot’s body movements as unique gestures to guide viewers’ attention . Specifically , three out of the four groups ( two Control pairs and one Experimental pair ) used the robot’s body movements to shift the viewers’ attention from the robot to the display ( e . g . , The robot facing an object on the tablet , or “tracking " the motion of an object moving out of the frame , even beyond the tablet display by facing the objects ( Figure 7 - a ) ) . In contrast , one experimental pair utilized the movement of turning toward the viewer , to bring their attention back to the robot , while information is displayed on the robot’s eyes . Another suggestion by this pair was to flash the robot’s eye to attract the viewers’ attention . Note , due to the physical presence of the robot , any discussions regarding the other two presenter details we identified in Study 1 were not observed ( i . e . , Presenter Appearance and Presenter’s Presence ; see Figure 2 ) . 4 . 4 . 2 Evaluation of Narrative Enhancements . The robot playing the role of the presenter ( i . e . , Story Participation ; see Figure 2 ) was not fully anthropomorphized by all the groups . Both control pairs utilized the robot only as the presenter . Further , while one experimental pair designed the narration to be provided through the tablet ( i . e . , invisible narrator ) with the robot providing visual re - sponses , the other experimental pair utilized the robot as a viewing 322 Social Robot User Interfaces for Presenting Data - Driven Stories MUM ’23 , December 03 – 06 , 2023 , Vienna , Austria companion who occasionally provided supplementary information on the content within the video frame . In addition to eye expressions , all the pairs used the two eye displays to augment the narration . These augmentations mainly included a sub - set of visuals from the main scene or additional illustrations related to objects within the scene ( e . g . , the backstory of a character ) ( see Figure 7 - b , c , d ) . They also mentioned limiting the number of augmentations through the robot was necessary to avoid distractions from the content displayed on the tablet . The embodiment of the characters was another feature used by all the pairs ( Figure 7 - e ) . While embodiment was utilized for the presenter as well as other characters in the story , neither role was held for the full length of the video . Furthermore , participants used the robot’s displays to incorporate and present side characters ( i . e . , Use of other characters Figure 7 - f ) . One experimental pair discussed using mimicking movements to supplement some scenes . For example , when the sentence “ They build walls with their money " was mentioned in the video the robot would try to lean forward and hit an imaginary wall in its vicinity to further elaborate the scenario ( Figure 7 - g ) . 4 . 4 . 3 Viewer Involvement and Visualization Changes . Only the con - trol pairs specifically considered directing questions to the viewers as a means to increase engagement ( i . e . , Directly addressing the viewer ) . They also suggested altering some of the existing visual - izations . Both control pairs agreed that , with the robot’s presence , some of the complex visualizations will need more screen time or should be changed to simpler visualizations ( i . e . , Basic Charts ) for viewers to comprehend the information . Another remark by the experimental groups was to represent important statistics or numerical values with meaningful visual entities ( e . g . , a person holding a moneybag representing 1 % of wealth ) , which coincides with our definition of Visual Diagrams ( Figure 7 - h ) . 4 . 4 . 4 Additional Remarks by the Participants . Several positive feed - backs were made on our novel multimodal presentation tool . All the pairs complimented the incorporation of robots as narrative guides . A robot with “personality " was seen as a useful tool to en - hance the accessibility of information to a broader population . This Figure 6 : Emotional expressions illustrated by the partici - pants in the group design process . Participants expressed various types of emotions : A . Happiness , B . Disappointment , C . Confusion , D . Sadness , and E . Anger . was highlighted by the suggestion of offering viewers the option to choose the gender and the voice of the robot . Participants sug - gested this customizability of personification would boost viewers’ engagement and enable personalized data presentation . When asked about the placement of the robot and the tablet , all the pairs suggested that the robot and the tablet be placed side - by - side . Other suggestions include ; the robot placed on a platform behind the tablet , the tablet attached to the back of the robot , and the viewer holding the tablet while the robot is placed on a tabletop . Even though the on - site researcher encouraged participants not to limit their imagination to the capabilities of the robot , we did not observe any of the groups incorporating ideas beyond the robot’s capabilities . Overall , the design ideas generated by both groups were compa - rable and aligned with our findings from the DV analysis ( Study 1 ) . This lack of clear condition effect could reflect that the suggestions emerged in Study 1 might have captured the commonly used princi - ples ( see Appendix D ) adopted by practitioners : These suggestions could be more useful for guiding novice designers , then . Note , how - ever , that the average duration of the design process was shorter for the experimental pairs compared to the control pairs , possibly implying that , with the provided suggestions , the design procedure could have been processed systematically 5 implying benefits for experts as well . We acknowledge that suggestions related to alter - ing visualizations and involving the viewer were made by the two control pairs only . This could be possibly attributed to that pro - viding guidelines / design suggestions could limit the participants’ imagination . 5 DISCUSSION Combining findings from our DV analysis and the group design sessions , in this section , we first provide a set of implications for utilizing a robot in presenting multimodal presentations . A sum - mary is provided in Appendix A and details are listed below ( See Figure 1 for illustrations of potential applications ) . 5 . 1 Design Implications Role of the Robot in the narrative : Two roles for the robot were identified ; ( 1 ) a presenter , or ( 2 ) a viewing companion . As presenters , robots can enrich the narrative through in - person communication with additional cues , comments , and explanations of the visualized data . By adding visual and auditory cues , a viewing companion could possibly boost viewers’ engagement and enhance viewers’ information comprehension experiences . Robotic Interventions : As either presenters or viewing compan - ions , robots can intervene in three different scenarios ; ( 1 ) Posing as a commentator to provide additional commentary on the content within DVs ; ( 2 ) Impersonating characters that appear in the DVs to enhance the characters’ capabilities via additional modalities of interactions ; and ( 3 ) Adopting the environmental conditions portrayed in the DVs by incorporating certain characteristics or set - tings / conditions of the story depicted in the DVs ( see Figure 7 . e1 ) . Form of Delivery and Credibility : Both studies suggested that the narration of the data - related stories should be carried out in a 5 Note this was not statistically tested due to the small sample size . 323 MUM ’23 , December 03 – 06 , 2023 , Vienna , Austria Anuradha Herath , Samar Sallam , Yumiko Sakamoto , Randy Gomez , and Pourang Irani Figure 7 : Different augmentations proposed by the participants ( as illustrated by an external artist ) : a - Tracking motion beyond the display ; b , c - Augmentations of the main visualization ; d - Augmenting changes in data visualizations with supporting elements ; e - Embodiment of characters / presenter within the story ; f - Introduction of side characters into the story ; g - Playacting to provide additional meanings to the story ; h - Highlight various numeric values with alternate figures . semi - formal manner . This can be accomplished by presenting the information in a formal manner accompanied by casual remarks to elucidate the meaning . In line with Choe et al . ’s [ 17 ] findings regarding DV presenters , it is also better for the robots to be perceived as credible sources for providing information . This may be achieved through an embodiment of experts by the robot . Use of Gestures : Depending on the robot’s capabilities , designers can incorporate gestures in order to ; ( 1 ) highlight noteworthy sections in the story ; ( 2 ) provide additional insights on specific facts , or ( 3 ) guide the viewer between transitions if a secondary display is utilized . Use of Emotions : In line with previous research that asserts the importance of equipping robots with emotional capabilities [ 55 , 98 ] , our participants in Study 2 took advantage of the emotional capability of Haru . They used emotional cues such as happiness , anger , surprise , sadness , disappointment , and confusion ; even with just the eyes and the mouth expressions this could be an important modality for utilizing robots for ( multimodal ) presentations . Use of Audio Prompts : For multimodal presentations with a tabletop social robot , designers can include sudden pauses and breaks in the speech to offer the viewers a more human - like narration . Additionally , they can also incorporate volume changes in speech in moderation ( so it doesn’t become a distraction ) . Viewer Engagement : With the physical presence of the robot , directing specific questions to the viewer could be utilized as a strategy to engage the viewers in the presentation . This could be further improved by implementing the ability to answer viewers’ questions at specific intervals . Augmentation Mechanisms : We observed two unique methods of augmenting data visualizations through the robot ; ( 1 ) Use the robot’s display to present visualization - supporting information such as the legend of a chart , and ( 2 ) Highlight or emphasize a specific part of the visualization using the robot’s screen ( e . g . , showing a zoomed - in location of a map displayed on the primary display ) . In addition , we also observed that the robot’s display could be used for the augmentation of different scenes through complementary visualizations ( e . g . , visualizing a younger self of an older character in the main story ( presented on the primary display ) , using the robot’s ( secondary ) display ) . Data Visualizations : Both studies indicate that visual diagrams are a common approach to data visualization . While using complex visualizations may become necessary in some situations , our participants pointed out that heightened visualization com - plexity could extend the time for viewers to process the information . While some of these implications have been previously reported [ 55 , 97 , 98 ] , the aim of this paper is to collectively report the aspects that can be utilized for designing systems for multimodal presen - tation with a social robot in one catalogue . We believe the set of implications proposed in this work will help not only designers 324 Social Robot User Interfaces for Presenting Data - Driven Stories MUM ’23 , December 03 – 06 , 2023 , Vienna , Austria but also future human - robot interaction researchers in identifying novel areas of research in robot - based presentations . Since our initial DV analyses focused on human or humanoid presenters , we suggest some of our findings could be extended to full - sized social robots as well as virtual avatars , and even to physi - cal human presenters ( for a detailed description see Appendix A ) . We hope our findings could contribute to designing humanesque communication in humane - machine communication , which is con - sidered to be one of the major challenges in the field [ 50 ] . 5 . 2 Constraints of the Design Implications By observing how visible presenters present information in DVs , Study 1 generated 12 dimensions distributed across four main fac - tors ( see Figure 2 ) . These findings were then evaluated through four design sessions with experts . With two studies , nine design implications were generated for utilizing a tabletop social robot for multimodal presentations . For our design implications , we operationally chose a setting whereby the presenter robot has at least one display . While this may be the case for the majority of the recent social robots [ 43 ] , we acknowledge such an assumption could not be applicable to some social robots , leaving one of our implications irrelevant . We chose to utilize a tablet as a screen for video viewing ( in Study 2 ) for three main reasons ; 1 ) Using the robot’s displays in addition to the main display allows the participants to augment more supporting details ; 2 ) To give the robot the freedom and capacity to impersonate certain characters in the DV with various facial expressions and / or provide commentary at certain times ; and 3 ) The robots’ displays were simply too small to present DVs . One experimental pair in Study 2 discussed arm and hand ges - tures but avoided incorporating such gestures in their designs . We believe this could be due to their strict adherence to Haru’s capa - bilities even though they were advised to expand their imagina - tion beyond it . As the larger portion of existing tabletop robots is designed without arms ( e . g . , Jibo , Zenbo , Miro - E , Furhat ) or with less - functional or inoperative arms ( e . g . , Eilik , Mist , Misa ) , we specif - ically defined our gesture designing approach ( use of gestures ) to be versatile . Since arm - based gestures can be highly diverse and have the potential to improve users’ engagement in full - sized robotic in - teractions [ 59 ] , we believe a future study on arm - based expressions will be necessary when adapting our implications for full - sized robots with functional arms . 5 . 3 Future Work This work provides a set of general implications for presenting data - based information utilizing the help of robots . A future study investigating the actual effectiveness as well as the acceptability of presenting multimedia , namely with tabletop robots , will be fruit - ful . Compared to presenters in existing mediums for conveying information ( e . g . , DVs , narrative visualizations , general reports , etc . ) , presenting with a robot could provide an additional level of engagement while enhancing a sense of perceived connectedness for the viewers . Hence , an exploration of the persuasive poten - tial and benefits of using a robot to convey user - related data ( e . g . , health data , financial data , etc . ) will be also valuable . Additionally , presenting information with the help of a tabletop robot could pro - vide users with a means to interact with video content using the robot , and such interaction experiences could facilitate viewers’ content comprehension . This could be explored through a diverse set of modalities made possible through robots ( e . g . , conversations , tangible interactions , sensor - based gesture recognition , etc . ) . Our primary goal in this work has been to unveil the potential use of tabletop social robots as reporters of information and provide some insights on how they can be used for such a role . We hope our suggestions will help inspire the research community to explore novel applications of the current generation of tabletop robots as informants and design the next generation of better artificial human companions . 6 CONCLUSION Current work explored the potential of utilizing robots for multime - dia presentations . As social robots become pervasive , designers are seeking new application potentials among which , conveying data in a suitably narrated way can be appealing . As a primary step , we aimed to bridge the gap between robots conveying generic informa - tion and conveying data - driven knowledge . Since DVs are becoming an increasingly popular medium for communicating information to a broad audience using quick video presentation styles , we utilized DVs with visible presenters as our source of inspiration . Our initial analysis of 48 popular DVs that included visible presenters , revealed distinct factors producers of such content typically employ . These identified categories were then largely tested through the second exploration with the aid of expert designers whom we asked to redesign an existing DV without a visible presenter , to be presented using the tabletop robot , Haru , and a medium - sized tablet . From this exploration , we offer nine possible design implications that designers can employ to deliver information using a tabletop social robot . We believe this exploration constitutes a first step in study - ing how tabletop robots may be effectively leveraged for narrating data - driven content . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Iina Aaltonen , Anne Arvola , Päivi Heikkilä , and Hanna Lammi . 2017 . Hello Pepper , May I Tickle You ? Children’s and Adults’ Responses to an Entertainment Robot at a Shopping Mall . In Proceedings of the Companion of the 2017 ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human - Robot Interaction ( Vienna , Austria ) ( HRI ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , 53 – 54 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3029798 . 3038362 [ 2 ] Fereshteh Amini , Nathalie Henry Riche , Bongshin Lee , Christophe Hurter , and Pourang Irani . 2015 . Understanding Data Videos : Looking at Narrative Visualization through the Cinematography Lens . In Proceedings of the 2015 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Seoul , Republic of Korea ) ( CHI ’15 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , 1459 – 1468 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702431 [ 3 ] Fereshteh Amini , Nathalie Henry Riche , Bongshin Lee , Jason Leboe - McGowan , and Pourang Irani . 2018 . Hooked on Data Videos : Assessing the Effect of An - imation and Pictographs on Viewer Engagement . In Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces ( Castiglione della Pescaia , Grosseto , Italy ) ( AVI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , Article 21 , 9 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3206505 . 3206552 [ 4 ] Antonio Andriella , Carme Torras , and Guillem Alenya . 2020 . Short - term human – robot interaction adaptability in real - world environments . International Journal of Social Robotics 12 ( 2020 ) , 639 – 657 . [ 5 ] Anja Ballis and Lisa Schwendemann . 2022 . ‘In any case , you believe him one hundred percent , everything he says . ’ Trustworthiness in Holocaust survivor talks with high school students in Germany . Holocaust Studies 28 , 2 ( 2022 ) , 191 – 220 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17504902 . 2021 . 1915016 [ 6 ] Amy L . Baylor and Yanghee Kim . 2004 . Pedagogical Agent Design : The Impact of Agent Realism , Gender , Ethnicity , and Instructional Role . In Intelligent Tutoring 325 MUM ’23 , December 03 – 06 , 2023 , Vienna , Austria Anuradha Herath , Samar Sallam , Yumiko Sakamoto , Randy Gomez , and Pourang Irani Systems . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , 592 – 603 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 540 - 30139 - 4 _ 56 [ 7 ] Tony Belpaeme , James Kennedy , Aditi Ramachandran , Brian Scassellati , and Fumihide Tanaka . 2018 . Social robots for education : A review . Science Robotics 3 , 21 ( 2018 ) , eaat5954 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / scirobotics . aat5954 [ 8 ] Nicole J . - M . Blackman and John J . Koval . 2000 . Interval estimation for Co - hen’s kappa as a measure of agreement . Statistics in Medicine 19 , 5 ( 2000 ) , 723 – 741 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / ( SICI ) 1097 - 0258 ( 20000315 ) 19 : 5 < 723 : : AID - SIM379 > 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - A [ 9 ] Kari Blindheim , Mads Solberg , Ibrahim A . Hameed , and Rigmor Einang Alnes . 2022 . Promoting activity in long - term care facilities with the social robot Pepper : a pilot study . Informatics for Health and Social Care 0 , 0 ( 2022 ) , 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17538157 . 2022 . 2086465 PMID : 35702818 . [ 10 ] GianlucaBova , DavideCellie , CristinaGioia , FabianaVernero , ClaudioMattutino , andCristinaGena . 2019 . End - UserDevelopmentfortheWollyRobot . In End - User Development . Springer International Publishing , 221 – 224 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 24781 - 2 _ 19 [ 11 ] Rex P Bringula , Ian Clement O Fosgate Jr , Neil Peter R Garcia , and Josf Luinico M Yorobe . 2018 . Effects of pedagogical agents on students’ mathematics perfor - mance : A comparison between two versions . Journal of Educational Computing Research 56 , 5 ( 2018 ) , 701 – 722 . [ 12 ] Heike Brock , Selma Sabanovic , Keisuke Nakamura , and Randy Gomez . 2020 . Robust Real - Time Hand Gestural Recognition for Non - Verbal Communication with Tabletop Robot Haru . In 2020 29th IEEE International Conference on Robot and Human Interactive Communication ( RO - MAN ) . 891 – 898 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / RO - MAN47096 . 2020 . 9223566 [ 13 ] Ruochen Cao , Subrata Dey , Andrew Cunningham , James Walsh , Ross T . Smith , Joanne E . Zucco , and Bruce H . Thomas . 2020 . Examining the use of narrative constructs in data videos . Visual Informatics 4 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 8 – 22 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . visinf . 2019 . 12 . 002 [ 14 ] Juan C . Castro - Alonso and John Sweller . 2020 . The Modality Effect of Cognitive Load Theory . In Advances in Human Factors in Training , Education , and Learning Sciences . Springer International Publishing , 75 – 84 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 20135 - 7 _ 7 [ 15 ] Ching - Ju Chao , Hao - Chiang Koong Lin , Jin - Wei Lin , and Yu - Chuan Tseng . 2012 . AnAffectiveLearningInterfacewithanInteractiveAnimatedAgent . In 2012IEEE Fourth International Conference On Digital Game And Intelligent Toy Enhanced Learning . 221 – 225 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / DIGITEL . 2012 . 60 [ 16 ] Huili Chen , Hae Won Park , and Cynthia Breazeal . 2020 . Teaching and learning with children : Impact of reciprocal peer learning with a social robot on children’s learning and emotive engagement . Computers & Education 150 ( 2020 ) , 103836 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2020 . 103836 [ 17 ] Eun Kyoung Choe , Yumiko Sakamoto , Yanis Fatmi , Bongshin Lee , Christophe Hurter , Ashkan Haghshenas , and Pourang Irani . 2020 . Persuasive Data Videos : Investigating Persuasive Self - TrackingFeedback with Augmented Data Videos . AMIA Annu Symp Proc 2019 ( March 2020 ) , 295 – 304 . PMID : 32308822 . [ 18 ] Sandra Costa , Alberto Brunete , Byung - Chull Bae , and Nikolaos Mavridis . 2018 . Emotional Storytelling Using Virtual and Robotic Agents . International Jour - nal of Humanoid Robotics 15 , 03 ( 2018 ) , 1850006 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1142 / S0219843618500068 [ 19 ] Brent Dykes . 2015 . Data storytelling : What it is and how it can be used to effectively communicate analysis results . Applied Marketing Analytics 1 , 4 ( 2015 ) , 299 – 313 . [ 20 ] Marina Escobar - Planas , Vicky Charisi , and Emilia Gomez . 2022 . " That Robot Played with Us ! " Children’s Perceptions of a Robot after a Child - Robot Group Interaction . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 6 , CSCW2 , Article 393 ( nov 2022 ) , 23 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3555118 [ 21 ] Guillaume Faddoul and Samir Chatterjee . 2019 . The Virtual Diabetician : A Prototype for a Virtual Avatar for Diabetes Treatment Using Persuasion Through Storytelling . In 25th Americas Conference on Information Systems , AMCIS 2019 , Cancún , Mexico , August 15 - 17 , 2019 . Association for Information Systems . https : / / aisel . aisnet . org / amcis2019 / healthcare _ it / healthcare _ it / 4 [ 22 ] Lena Frischlich , Diana Rieger , Anna Morten , and Gary Bente . 2018 . The power of a good story : Narrative persuasion in extremist propaganda and videos against violent extremism . International Journal of Conflict and Violence ( IJCV ) 12 ( 2018 ) , a644 – a644 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4119 / ijcv - 3106 [ 23 ] Cristina Gena , Alberto Lillo , Claudio Mattutino , and Enrico Mosca . 2022 . Wolly : An Affective and Adaptive Educational Robot . In Adjunct Proceedings of the 30th ACM Conference on User Modeling , Adaptation and Personalization ( Barcelona , Spain ) ( UMAP ’22 Adjunct ) . Association for Computing Machinery , 146 – 150 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3511047 . 3537684 [ 24 ] Cristina Gena , Claudio Mattutino , Gianluca Perosino , Massimo Trainito , Chiara Vaudano , and Davide Cellie . 2020 . Design and Development of a Social , Educa - tional and Affective Robot . In 2020 IEEE Conference on Evolving and Adaptive Intelligent Systems ( EAIS ) . 1 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / EAIS48028 . 2020 . 9122778 [ 25 ] NahumGershonandWardPage . 2001 . WhatStorytellingCanDoforInformation Visualization . Commun . ACM 44 , 8 ( aug 2001 ) , 31 – 37 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 381641 . 381653 [ 26 ] Barney Glaser and Anselm Strauss . 1999 . The Discovery of Grounded Theory . Routledge Publishing Co . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4324 / 9780203793206 [ 27 ] RandyGomez , DeborahSzapiro , KerlGalindo , LuisMerino , HeikeBrock , Keisuke Nakamura , Yu Fang , and Eric Nichols . 2021 . Exploring Affective Storytelling with an Embodied Agent . In 2021 30th IEEE International Conference on Robot and Human Interactive Communication ( RO - MAN ) . 1249 – 1255 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / RO - MAN50785 . 2021 . 9515323 [ 28 ] Randy Gomez , Deborah Szapiro , Kerl Galindo , and Keisuke Nakamura . 2018 . Haru : Hardware Design of an Experimental Tabletop Robot Assistant ( HRI ’18 ) . AssociationforComputingMachinery , 233 – 240 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3171221 . 3171288 [ 29 ] Randy Gomez , Deborah Szapiro , Luis Merino , Heike Brock , Keisuke Nakamura , and Selma Sabanovic . 2020 . Emoji to Robomoji : Exploring Affective Telepresence Through Haru . In Social Robotics . Springer International Publishing , 652 – 663 . [ 30 ] Randy Gomez , Deborah Szapiro , Luis Merino , and Keisuke Nakamura . 2020 . A Holistic Approach in Designing Tabletop Robot’s Expressivity . In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation ( ICRA ) . 1970 – 1976 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ICRA40945 . 2020 . 9197016 [ 31 ] Goren Gordon , Samuel Spaulding , Jacqueline Kory Westlund , Jin Joo Lee , Luke Plummer , Marayna Martinez , Madhurima Das , and Cynthia Breazeal . 2016 . Affec - tive personalization of a social robot tutor for children’s second language skills . In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , Vol . 30 . [ 32 ] MitsuhiroGoto , TatsuyaIshino , KeisukeInazawa , NarimuneMatsumura , Tadashi Nunobiki , and Akihiro Kashihara . 2019 . Authoring Robot Presentation for Promoting Reflection on Presentation Scenario . In 2019 14th ACM / IEEE In - ternational Conference on Human - Robot Interaction ( HRI ) . 660 – 661 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / HRI . 2019 . 8673278 [ 33 ] Mitsuhiro Goto , Masanori Yokoyama , and Yumiko Matsuura . 2020 . Impression Evaluation of Presentation by a Communication Robot in an Actual Exhibition ( HRI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , 218 – 220 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3371382 . 3378264 [ 34 ] Luisa Graf , Miha Torkar , Emily Stückelmaier , Romaric Sichler , Pierre Malafosse , KerstinFischer , andOskarPalinko . 2022 . PerceivedTrustworthinessofanInterac - tiveRoboticSystem . In Proceedingsofthe2022ACM / IEEEInternationalConference on Human - Robot Interaction ( Sapporo , Hokkaido , Japan ) ( HRI ’22 ) . IEEE Press , 773 – 777 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5555 / 3523760 . 3523874 [ 35 ] Philip J . Guo , Juho Kim , and Rob Rubin . 2014 . How Video Production Affects Student Engagement : An Empirical Study of MOOC Videos . In Proceedings of the First ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale Conference ( Atlanta , Georgia , USA ) ( L @ S’14 ) . AssociationforComputingMachinery , 41 – 50 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556325 . 2566239 [ 36 ] Jaap Ham , Raymond H . Cuijpers , and John - John Cabibihan . 2015 . Combining Robotic Persuasive Strategies : The Persuasive Power of a Storytelling Robot that Uses Gazing and Gestures . International Journal of Social Robotics 7 , 4 ( 01 Aug 2015 ) , 479 – 487 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s12369 - 015 - 0280 - 4 [ 37 ] Frank Hegel , Friederike Eyssel , and Britta Wrede . 2010 . The social robot ‘Flobi’ : Key concepts of industrial design . In 19th International Symposium in Robot and Human Interactive Communication . 107 – 112 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ROMAN . 2010 . 5598691 [ 38 ] LeslieJ . HinyardandMatthewW . Kreuter . 2007 . UsingNarrativeCommunication as a Tool for Health Behavior Change : A Conceptual , Theoretical , and Empirical Overview . Health Education & Behavior 34 , 5 ( 2007 ) , 777 – 792 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1090198106291963 PMID : 17200094 . [ 39 ] KennethJ . Houghton , RachelC . Poirier , andCeliaM . Klin . 2022 . Crediblenarrators and misinformed readers . Memory & Cognition ( 30 Nov 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3758 / s13421 - 022 - 01368 - 1 [ 40 ] Juan - José Igartua and Laura Rodríguez - Contreras . 2020 . Narrative Voice Matters ! ImprovingSmokingPreventionwithTestimonialMessagesthroughIdentificationandCognitiveProcesses . International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 17 , 19 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / ijerph17197281 [ 41 ] Matouš Jelínek and Kerstin Fischer . 2021 . The Role of Emotional Expression in Behavior Change Coaching by a Social Robot . In Persuasive Technology . Springer InternationalPublishing , 193 – 199 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 79460 - 6 _ 15 [ 42 ] SwapnaJoshi , SawyerCollins , WakiKamino , RandyGomez , andSelmaŠabanović . 2020 . Social Robots for Socio - Physical Distancing . In Social Robotics . Springer International Publishing , 440 – 452 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 62056 - 1 _ 37 [ 43 ] Alisa Kalegina , Grace Schroeder , Aidan Allchin , Keara Berlin , and Maya Cakmak . 2018 . Characterizing the Design Space of Rendered Robot Faces . In Proceedings of the2018ACM / IEEEInternationalConferenceonHuman - RobotInteraction ( Chicago , IL , USA ) ( HRI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , 96 – 104 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3171221 . 3171286 [ 44 ] ChanMin Kim and Amy L . Baylor . 2008 . A Virtual Change Agent : Motivating Pre - serviceTeacherstoIntegrateTechnologyinTheirFutureClassrooms . Journal of Educational Technology & Society 11 , 2 ( 2008 ) , 309 – 321 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / jeductechsoci . 11 . 2 . 309 326 Social Robot User Interfaces for Presenting Data - Driven Stories MUM ’23 , December 03 – 06 , 2023 , Vienna , Austria [ 45 ] Hyun Suk Kim , Cabral A . Bigman , Amy E . Leader , Caryn Lerman , and Joseph N . Cappella . 2012 . Narrative Health Communication and Behavior Change : The Influence of Exemplars in the News on Intention to Quit Smoking . Journal of Communication 62 , 3 ( 04 2012 ) , 473 – 492 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1460 - 2466 . 2012 . 01644 . x [ 46 ] R . Kosara and J . Mackinlay . 2013 . Storytelling : The Next Step for Visualization . Computer 46 , 05 ( may 2013 ) , 44 – 50 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MC . 2013 . 36 [ 47 ] Hideki Kozima , Marek P . Michalowski , and Cocoro Nakagawa . 2009 . Keepon . International Journal of Social Robotics 1 , 1 ( 01 Jan 2009 ) , 3 – 18 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s12369 - 008 - 0009 - 8 [ 48 ] Bongshin Lee , Nathalie Henry Riche , Petra Isenberg , and Sheelagh Carpendale . 2015 . More Than Telling a Story : Transforming Data into Visually Shared Stories . IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 35 , 5 ( 2015 ) , 84 – 90 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MCG . 2015 . 99 [ 49 ] Christine P Lee , Bengisu Cagiltay , and Bilge Mutlu . 2022 . The Unboxing Ex - perience : Exploration and Design of Initial Interactions Between Children and Social Robots . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in ComputingSystems ( NewOrleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI’22 ) . AssociationforComputing Machinery , Article 151 , 14 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3501955 [ 50 ] Jong - Eun Roselyn Lee and Clifford I . Nass . 2010 . Trust in Computers : The Computers - Are - Social - Actors ( CASA ) Paradigm and Trustworthiness Perception in Human - Computer Communication . IGI Global , Hershey , PA , USA , 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4018 / 978 - 1 - 61520 - 901 - 9 . ch001 [ 51 ] Cynthia LeRouge , Kathryn Dickhut , Christine Lisetti , Savitha Sangameswaran , and Toree Malasanos . 2015 . Engaging adolescents in a computer - based weight management program : avatars and virtual coaches could help . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 23 , 1 ( 07 2015 ) , 19 – 28 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / jamia / ocv078 [ 52 ] Jamy Li . 2015 . The benefit of being physically present : A survey of exper - imental works comparing copresent robots , telepresent robots and virtual agents . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 77 ( 2015 ) , 23 – 37 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2015 . 01 . 001 [ 53 ] Jamy Li , René Kizilcec , Jeremy Bailenson , and Wendy Ju . 2016 . Social robots and virtual agents as lecturers for video instruction . Computers in Human Behavior 55 ( 2016 ) , 1222 – 1230 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2015 . 04 . 005 [ 54 ] Mike E . U . Ligthart , Mark A . Neerincx , and Koen V . Hindriks . 2020 . Design Patterns for an Interactive Storytelling Robot to Support Children’s Engagement and Agency ( HRI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , 409 – 418 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3319502 . 3374826 [ 55 ] Pei - Chun Lin , Patrick C . K . Hung , Ying Jiang , Carolina Padilla Velasco , and Marco Antonio Martínez Cano . 2023 . An experimental design for facial and color emotion expression of a social robot . The Journal of Supercomputing 79 , 2 ( 01 Feb 2023 ) , 1980 – 2009 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11227 - 022 - 04734 - 7 [ 56 ] Christine Lisetti , Reza Amini , Ugan Yasavur , and Naphtali Rishe . 2013 . I Can Help You Change ! An Empathic Virtual Agent Delivers Behavior Change Health Interventions . ACM Trans . Manage . Inf . Syst . 4 , 4 , Article 19 ( dec 2013 ) , 28 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2544103 [ 57 ] Zhihan Lv , Houbing Song , Pablo Basanta - Val , Anthony Steed , and Minho Jo . 2017 . Next - generation big data analytics : State of the art , challenges , and future research topics . IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 13 , 4 ( 2017 ) , 1891 – 1899 . [ 58 ] Zexin Ma and Douglas Zytko . 2021 . Designing Immersive Stories for Health : Choosing Character Perspective Based on the Viewer’s Modality . International Journal of Human – Computer Interaction 37 , 15 ( 2021 ) , 1423 – 1435 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447318 . 2021 . 1886486 [ 59 ] Mina Marmpena , Angelica Lim , and Torbjørn S . Dahl . 2018 . How does the robot feel ? Perception of valence and arousal in emotional body language . Paladyn , Journal of Behavioral Robotics 9 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 168 – 182 . https : / / doi . org / doi : 10 . 1515 / pjbr - 2018 - 0012 [ 60 ] Ati Suci Dian Martha and Harry B . Santoso . 2019 . The design and impact of the pedagogical agent : A systematic literature review . Journal of Educators Online 16 , 1 ( 1 Jan . 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 9743 / jeo . 2019 . 16 . 1 . 8 [ 61 ] Ester Martinez - Martin and Angel P . del Pobil . 2018 . Personal Robot Assistants for Elderly Care : An Overview . Springer International Publishing , Cham , 77 – 91 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 62530 - 0 _ 5 [ 62 ] JosephE . MichaelisandBilgeMutlu . 2019 . SupportingInterestinScienceLearning with a Social Robot ( IDC ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , 71 – 82 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3311927 . 3323154 [ 63 ] Noriaki Mitsunaga , Christian Smith , Takayuki Kanda , Hiroshi Ishiguro , and Norihiro Hagita . 2008 . Adapting robot behavior for human – robot interaction . IEEE Transactions on Robotics 24 , 4 ( 2008 ) , 911 – 916 . [ 64 ] Blaine Mullins and Peter Dixon . 2007 . Narratorial implicatures : Readers look to the narrator to know what is important . Poetics 35 , 4 ( 2007 ) , 262 – 276 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . poetic . 2007 . 08 . 002 [ 65 ] Sheila T . Murphy , Lauren B . Frank , Joyee S . Chatterjee , and Lourdes Baezconde - Garbanati . 2013 . Narrative Versus Nonnarrative : The Role of Identification , Transportation , and Emotion in Reducing Health Disparities . Journal of Commu - nication 63 , 1 ( 01 2013 ) , 116 – 137 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / jcom . 12007 [ 66 ] Eric Nichols , Deborah Szapiro , Yurii Vasylkiv , and Randy Gomez . 2022 . I Can’t Believe That Happened ! : Exploring Expressivity in Collaborative Storytelling with the Tabletop Robot Haru . In 2022 31st IEEE International Conference on Robot and Human Interactive Communication ( RO - MAN ) . 59 – 59 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / RO - MAN53752 . 2022 . 9900606 [ 67 ] Jeff Niederdeppe , Michael A . Shapiro , and Norman Porticella . 2011 . Attributions of Responsibility for Obesity : Narrative Communication Reduces Reactive Coun - terarguing among Liberals . Human Communication Research 37 , 3 ( 07 2011 ) , 295 – 323 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1468 - 2958 . 2011 . 01409 . x [ 68 ] Raquel Oliveira , Patrícia Arriaga , Fernando P . Santos , Samuel Mascarenhas , and Ana Paiva . 2021 . Towards prosocial design : A scoping review of the use of robots and virtual agents to trigger prosocial behaviour . Computers in Human Behavior 114 ( 2021 ) , 106547 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2020 . 106547 [ 69 ] Mary Beth Oliver , James Price Dillard , Keunmin Bae , and Daniel J . Tamul . 2012 . The Effect of Narrative News Format on Empathy for Stigmatized Groups . Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly 89 , 2 ( 2012 ) , 205 – 224 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1077699012439020 [ 70 ] H . J . A . op den Akker , R . Klaassen , and A . Nijholt . 2016 . Virtual Coaches for Healthy Lifestyle . Springer International Publishing . 121 – 149 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 31053 - 4 _ 8 [ 71 ] Amit Kumar Pandey and Rodolphe Gelin . 2018 . A Mass - Produced Sociable Hu - manoidRobot : Pepper : TheFirstMachineofItsKind . IEEERobotics & Automation Magazine 25 , 3 ( 2018 ) , 40 – 48 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MRA . 2018 . 2833157 [ 72 ] Hae Won Park , Ishaan Grover , Samuel Spaulding , Louis Gomez , and Cynthia Breazeal . 2019 . Amodel - freeaffectivereinforcementlearningapproachtoperson - alization of an autonomous social robot companion for early literacy education . In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , Vol . 33 . 687 – 694 . [ 73 ] Hae Won Park , Rinat Rosenberg - Kima , Maor Rosenberg , Goren Gordon , and Cynthia Breazeal . 2017 . Growing Growth Mindset with a Social Robot Peer ( HRI ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 137 – 145 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2909824 . 3020213 [ 74 ] Pranav Rane , Varun Mhatre , and Lakshmi Kurup . 2014 . Study of a home robot : Jibo . International journal of engineering research and technology 3 , 10 ( 2014 ) , 490 – 493 . [ 75 ] LynRichards . 2005 . Handlingqualitativedata : Apracticalguide . SagePublications , Inc . xiv , 207 – xiv , 207 pages . [ 76 ] Hans Rosling and Zhongxing Zhang . 2011 . Health advocacy with Gapminder animated statistics . Journal of epidemiology and global health 1 , 1 ( 2011 ) , 11 . [ 77 ] Ghazal Saheb Jam , Jimin Rhim , and Angelica Lim . 2021 . Developing a Data - Driven Categorical Taxonomy of Emotional Expressions in Real World Human Robot Interactions . In Companion of the 2021 ACM / IEEE International Conference onHuman - RobotInteraction ( Boulder , CO , USA ) ( HRI’21Companion ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 479 – 483 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3434074 . 3447218 [ 78 ] Yumiko Sakamoto , Samar Sallam , Aaron Salo , Jason Leboe - McGowan , and PourangIrani . 2022 . PersuasiveDataStorytellingwithaDataVideoduringCovid - 19Infodemic : AffectivePathwaytoInfluencetheUsers’PerceptionaboutContact Tracing Apps in less than 6 Minutes . In 2022 IEEE 15th Pacific Visualization Sym - posium ( PacificVis ) . 176 – 180 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / PacificVis53943 . 2022 . 00028 [ 79 ] Samar Sallam , Yumiko Sakamoto , Jason Leboe - McGowan , Celine Latulipe , and Pourang Irani . 2022 . Towards Design Guidelines for Effective Health - Related DataVideos : AnEmpiricalInvestigationofAffect , Personality , andVideoContent . In Proceedingsofthe2022CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , Article 342 , 22 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517727 [ 80 ] Sebastian Schneider and Franz Kummert . 2018 . Comparing the Effects of Social Robots and Virtual Agents on Exercising Motivation . In Social Robotics . Springer International Publishing , 451 – 461 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 05204 - 1 _ 44 [ 81 ] Patrick Schober , Christa Boer , and Lothar A . Schwarte . 2018 . Correlation Co - efficients : Appropriate Use and Interpretation . Anesthesia & Analgesia 126 , 5 ( 2018 ) . https : / / journals . lww . com / anesthesia - analgesia / fulltext / 2018 / 05000 / correlation _ coefficients _ _ appropriate _ use _ and . 50 . aspx [ 82 ] Anna Schorn . 2022 . Online explainer videos : Features , benefits , and effects . FrontiersinCommunication 7 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fcomm . 2022 . 1034199 [ 83 ] Edward Segel and Jeffrey Heer . 2010 . Narrative Visualization : Telling Stories with Data . IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 16 , 6 ( 2010 ) , 1139 – 1148 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2010 . 179 [ 84 ] Matthew A . Shapiro and Han Woo Park . 2015 . More than entertainment : YouTube and public responses to the science of global warming and climate change . Social Science Information 54 , 1 ( 2015 ) , 115 – 145 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0539018414554730 [ 85 ] Dafna Sinai and Rinat B . Rosenberg - Kima . 2022 . Perceptions of Social Robots as Motivating Learning Companions for Online Learning . In 2022 17th ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human - Robot Interaction ( HRI ) . 1045 – 1048 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / HRI53351 . 2022 . 9889592 [ 86 ] Hendrik Striepe and Birgit Lugrin . 2017 . There Once Was a Robot Storyteller : Measuring the Effects of Emotion and Non - verbal Behaviour . In Social Robotics . 327 MUM ’23 , December 03 – 06 , 2023 , Vienna , Austria Anuradha Herath , Samar Sallam , Yumiko Sakamoto , Randy Gomez , and Pourang Irani Springer International Publishing , 126 – 136 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 70022 - 9 _ 13 [ 87 ] Sean Tackett , Kyle Slinn , Tanner Marshall , Shiv Gaglani , Vincent Waldman , and Rishi Desai . 2018 . Medical Education Videos for the World : An Analysis of Viewing Patterns for a YouTube Channel . Academic Medicine 93 , 8 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1097 / ACM . 0000000000002118 [ 88 ] Fumihide Tanaka , Kyosuke Isshiki , Fumiki Takahashi , Manabu Uekusa , Rumiko Sei , and Kaname Hayashi . 2015 . Pepper learns together with children : Devel - opment of an educational application . In 2015 IEEE - RAS 15th International Con - ference on Humanoid Robots ( Humanoids ) . 270 – 275 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / HUMANOIDS . 2015 . 7363546 [ 89 ] Robots Team . 2019 . Jibo . https : / / robotsguide . com / robots / jibo [ 90 ] Yunus Terzioğlu , Prasanth Murali , Everlyne Kimani , and Timothy Bickmore . 2022 . Sharing the Spotlight : Co - presenting with a Humanoid Robot . In 2022 17th ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human - Robot Interaction ( HRI ) . 551 – 560 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / HRI53351 . 2022 . 9889400 [ 91 ] Chung - Hui Tseng and Tseng - Lung Huang . 2016 . Internet advertising video facilitatinghealthcommunication : Narrativeandemotionalperspectives . Internet Research : Electronic Networking Applications and Policy 26 , 1 ( 2016 ) , 236 – 264 . https : / / doi . org / doi : 10 . 1108 / IntR - 09 - 2014 - 0217 [ 92 ] Albert van Breemen , Xue Yan , and Bernt Meerbeek . 2005 . ICat : An Animated User - Interface Robot with Personality . In Proceedings of the Fourth International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems ( The Nether - lands ) ( AAMAS ’05 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 143 – 144 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1082473 . 1082823 [ 93 ] Hui Wang , Lei Zhang , Chuanxiong Zheng , Randy Gomez , Keisuke Nakamura , and Guangliang Li . 2022 . Personalized Storytelling with Social Robot Haru . In International Conference on Social Robotics . Springer , 439 – 451 . [ 94 ] Hui Wang , Lei Zhang , Chuanxiong Zheng , Randy Gomez , Keisuke Nakamura , and Guangliang Li . 2022 . Personalized Storytelling with Social Robot Haru . In Social Robotics . Springer Nature Switzerland , 439 – 451 . https : / / doi . org / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 031 - 24670 - 8 _ 39 [ 95 ] Wibke Weber . 2020 . 18 . Exploring narrativity in data visualization in journalism . In Data Visualization in Society , Martin Engebretsen and Helen Kennedy ( Eds . ) . Amsterdam University Press , Amsterdam , 295 – 312 . https : / / doi . org / doi : 10 . 1515 / 9789048543137 - 022 [ 96 ] Wibke Weber , Martin Engebretsen , and Helen Kennedy . 2018 . Data stories . Rethinking journalistic storytelling in the context of data journalism . Studies in Communication Sciences 18 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 191 – 206 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 24434 / j . scoms . 2018 . 01 . 013 [ 97 ] Jiayi Eris Zhang , Nicole Sultanum , Anastasia Bezerianos , and Fanny Chevalier . 2020 . DataQuilt : Extracting Visual Elements from Images to Craft Pictorial Visualizations . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI , USA ) ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / doi : 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376172 [ 98 ] Xinyu Zhu , Xingguo Zhang , Zinan Chen , Zhanxun Dong , Zhenyu Gu , and Danni Chang . 2022 . The Trusted Listener : The Influence of Anthropomorphic Eye Design of Social Robots on User’s Perception of Trustworthiness . In Proceedings ofthe2022CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems ( NewOrleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 571 , 13 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517670 328 Social Robot User Interfaces for Presenting Data - Driven Stories MUM ’23 , December 03 – 06 , 2023 , Vienna , Austria APPENDIX A SAMPLE APPLICATIONS OF THE DESIGN RECOMMENDATIONS Table 1 : A summary of the design recommendations and its applications Design Implications Attributes Sample Usage Role of the Robot Narrator Robot provides the narration for the video . Viewing companion Robot watches the video along with the viewer . Robotic Interventions Posing as a commentator Providing a definition to a term mentioned within the video . Character impersonation Playacting a character within the story . Environmental impersonation Mimicking shivering to show below zero temperatures . Form of Delivery and Credibility Semi - formal Robot adds it’s own opinion about the facts and narrates in a friendlier manner . Highly credible to the information conveyed Robot plays a role of an expert in the related field . Use of Gestures Highlight content Pointing at a specific section of a visualization . Additional insights Looking from left to right to show a passage of time within the storyline . Viewer guidance leaning backward while slowly looking up to show an increase in a graph . Use of Emotions Eye and mouth expressions Showing sadness through tears in the eyes and down turned mouth when talking about a negative outcome . Use of Audio prompts Sudden pauses Pausing the narration before conveying a key piece of information . Volume changes Reducing the volume of speech to emphasize the gravity of a situation . Viewer Engagement Asking questions Robot directly asking a question from the viewer related to the content in the frame . Answering questions Robot answering a question asked by the viewer related to the content in the frame . Data Visualizations Robot shows a cross - section of the brain while the main display shows a brain functionality at sleep . Augmenting Mechanisms Visualization - supporting information Robot shows a zoomed section of a map while the full map is displayed in the main display . Highlighting changes Robot shows a direction of change for a line graph displayed in the main display . 329 MUM ’23 , December 03 – 06 , 2023 , Vienna , Austria Anuradha Herath , Samar Sallam , Yumiko Sakamoto , Randy Gomez , and Pourang Irani B FINAL LIST OF VIDEOS Table 2 : The set of data videos with visible presenters used for the first study Title URL Source 1 The Ketogenic Diet Explained https : / / youtu . be / xgtLKeCkCiw Vox 2 Amazing benefits of dark chocolate https : / / youtu . be / 1bZBfBBjZ9g Seeker 3 Are milk substitutes better than cow’s milk ? https : / / youtu . be / TUpQpWxMYtk BBC Earth Lab 4 What Makes Spicy Foods Spicy https : / / youtu . be / tjXUtq7ALyY BBC Earth Lab 5 Why Does Junk Food Taste SO GOOD ? https : / / youtu . be / W5zO7on - VOg BBC Earth Lab 6 Can Proteins kill you ? https : / / youtu . be / _ m0fHZXVa6s BBC Earth Lab 7 How Much Water Do I Need To Drink ? https : / / youtu . be / Sv1d44YOIjg BBC Earth Lab 8 Is Sugar a Drug ? https : / / youtu . be / VAHWGa _ UYLI Be Smart 9 Can Exercise Actually " Boost " Your Metabolism ? https : / / youtu . be / _ X834O9MaCM Ted 10 What your toaster can teach you about the Universe https : / / youtu . be / S75XtHjYLr4 BBC Reel 11 The science is in : Exercise isn’t the best way to lose weight https : / / youtu . be / eXTiiz99p9o Vox 12 Is Height Genetic ? https : / / youtu . be / 0cuO5OSDMbw Be Smart 13 5 Weird Involuntary Behaviors Explained ! https : / / youtu . be / ZE8sRMZ5BCA Be Smart 14 % $ ? # Allergies ! https : / / youtu . be / sqrnShjM4II Be Smart 15 How Well Do Masks Work ? ( Schlieren Imaging In Slow Motion ! ) https : / / youtu . be / 0Tp0zB904Mc Be Smart 16 What This Chart Actually Means for COVID - 19 https : / / youtu . be / fgBla7RepXU Be Smart 17 The hidden dangers and surprising benefits of vitamin pills https : / / youtu . be / h - QBbH4So - A BBC Reel 18 Do 9 out of 10 dentists really recommend that toothpaste ? https : / / youtu . be / His41jX5tVc Ted 19 What identical twins separated at birth teach us about genetics https : / / youtu . be / JMlJcOSRX - 8 BBC Reel 20 Does Hot Water Freeze Faster Than Cold Water ? https : / / youtu . be / SkH2iX0rx8U Sciencium 21 The simple brain training that can help you lose weight https : / / youtu . be / poqTx7LJQ08 BBC Reel 22 There are thousands of mites living on your face https : / / youtu . be / UZGttZi6L94 BBC Reel 23 Global Wealth Report 2012 - WhatWillTheFutureBring https : / / youtu . be / WX - tEWNL _ e0 Suisse Group Research 24 Which Countries Have The Fastest Growing Populations ? https : / / youtu . be / 3nnbd1b _ tKQ Now this world 25 Just How Small is an Atom ? https : / / youtu . be / yQP4UJhNn0I TED - Ed 26 What really happens to your body during menopause https : / / youtu . be / cheqkrcHkrI Ted 27 13 Misconceptions About Global Warming https : / / youtu . be / OWXoRSIxyIU Veritasium 28 Can you Find your Soulmate Using Maths ? https : / / youtu . be / eEd - aoPCLtw BBC Earth Lab 29 How Habits Can Change Your Life ( and Your Brain ) https : / / youtu . be / vN1aRN5bQQ0 Be Smart 30 Geek Vs . Nerd : Which Are You ? https : / / youtu . be / mF4q _ K6YsjE BBC Earth Lab 31 How accurate is the weather forecast ? https : / / youtu . be / _ H4C - 08GkKo Ted 32 What makes a friendship last ? https : / / youtu . be / fD27hWT4ix0 Ted 33 What we miss when we focus on the average https : / / youtu . be / qAo9fA7c2VE Ted 34 Why some people are always late https : / / youtu . be / uk - JuzGlSgs BBC Reel 35 Why Boredom is Good For You https : / / youtu . be / LKPwKFigF8U Veritasium 36 Why Life Seems to Speed Up as We Age https : / / youtu . be / aIx2N - viNwY Veritasium 37 The Accuracy Paradox - When Less is More https : / / youtu . be / sivWzd _ AecU Up and Atom 38 The Illusion of Truth https : / / youtu . be / cebFWOlx848 Veritasium 39 Why Do We Have To Sleep ? https : / / youtu . be / 3mufsteNrTI Be Smart 40 A walk through the stages of sleep https : / / youtu . be / eM2VWspRpfk Ted 41 How caffeine and alcohol affect your sleep https : / / youtu . be / KQ9FfzMKBNc Ted 42 How much sleep do you really need ? https : / / youtu . be / knJWF4km3y0 Ted 43 The Problem With Linear Regression https : / / youtu . be / 9saL47Nuguw Up and Atom 44 Tim and Moby tell you about Swine Flu https : / / youtu . be / 6J2ftrIdGnE BrainPOPUK 45 Population Growth https : / / youtu . be / G4zGqZPlWHo BrainPOPUK 46 Climate Change and Your Health https : / / youtu . be / yUmwA - GjE1Q CDC 47 What is NOT Random ? https : / / youtu . be / sMb00lz - IfE Veritasium 48 Understanding percentiles in climate data https : / / youtu . be / e3ak - ognuTU Queensland Science 330 Social Robot User Interfaces for Presenting Data - Driven Stories MUM ’23 , December 03 – 06 , 2023 , Vienna , Austria C FINAL CODE - BOOK FROM THE VIDEO ANALYSIS Table 3 : Summary of finalized attributes , dimensions and factors . Factors Dimensions Attributes Data type Remarks Presenter Presenter Appearance Hybrid Binary Both Human and Animated Presenters Present Human Binary A Human Presenter Present Animated Binary An Animated Presenter Present Presenter Presence Presence Likert Likert scale ranging from limited presence ( 1 ) to full presence ( 7 ) Count Numerical Total number of presenters in the video Narration Style and Credibility Narration Style Likert Likert scale ranging from casual ( 1 ) to formal ( 7 ) Credibility Likert Likert scale ranging from not credible ( 1 ) to highly credible ( 7 ) Expressions and Gestures Facial Expressions Numerical Extreme Facial expressions conveyed Gestures Numerical Did the presenter use special gestures ? Narrative Presenter Participation ( in the story ) Presenter Binary Presenter only presents the story Self - example Binary Presenter includes themselves ( as examples , etc . ) in the storyline at various points Fully embedded Binary The presenter ( s ) is fully part of the story Narration Effect Speed Fluctuation Binary The narration speed fluctuated for an emphasis ( slowing down , speeding up ) Volume Fluctuation Binary The speech voice fluctuated for an emphasis Sudden Pause Binary Sudden pauses in speech for effect Additional Character Involvement Expert Numerical A side character with credible background Non - Expert Numerical A side character without clear credibility but has experience ViewerEngagement Mutual Experience Sharing Binary Mentioning the presenter’s experience that is potentially also been experienced by the viewer Direct Addressing Binary Contact the viewer directly with a question or a statement Data Visualization Basic Charts Numerical Simple traditional chart ( s ) alone ( i . e . , no additional visualization ) Visual Diagram Numerical A description of labeled portions in a diagram ( or a scientific expression using a diagram such as equations ) . Pictorial Visualization Numerical " Visual representations of data that transcend traditional visualizations , allowing for greater freedom of visual expression through a more experimental , organic approach to their graphical language " ( adapted from [ 97 ] ) Data type : Binary - ( Yes , No ) ; Likert - 7 - point Likert scale ; Numerical - Number of times the attribute was present in the videos 331 MUM ’23 , December 03 – 06 , 2023 , Vienna , Austria Anuradha Herath , Samar Sallam , Yumiko Sakamoto , Randy Gomez , and Pourang Irani D LIST OF DIMENSIONS PROVIDED IN STUDY 2 Table 4 : Dimentions provided for the participants of the experimental groups in Study 2 Dimentionis and identified Attributes Used in the Design Useful Narrator use of other characters ExpertsNon - Experts Delivery Style FormalMixedCasual Sudden distinguishable Emotions Humor / Sarcasm Excitement Auditory Cues Speed Changes ( e . g . , slow down , speed up ) Volume Change Sudden Pause in narration Narrator Inclusion in the story Just as a presenter Use themselves for examples in the story Fully included in the story Has higher credibility ( for narrating the data ) Involve the viewer 332 Social Robot User Interfaces for Presenting Data - Driven Stories MUM ’23 , December 03 – 06 , 2023 , Vienna , Austria E DESIGNS OF THE ROBOT USED IN STUDY 2 ( ADAPTED FROM [ 28 ] ) Figure 8 : Design sketches ( top ) and the diagrams showing the robots modalities ( bottom ) 333