Information fusion in practice : A distributed cognition perspective on the active role of users Maria Nilsson ⇑ , Joeri van Laere , Tarja Susi , Tom Ziemke Informatics Research Centre , University of Skövde , Box 408 , Sweden a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 7 October 2008 Received in revised form 5 October 2010 Accepted 31 January 2011 Available online 15 February 2011 Keywords : Human – computer interaction Human factors Distributed cognition Maritime surveillance User - fusion User reﬁnement a b s t r a c t Traditionally , the focus of most information fusion research has been on computational aspects , as illus - trated by , for example , different versions of the JDL data fusion model . Consequently , the human user has mainly been conceived as a relatively passive recipient of fused information . However , the importance of understanding the active role of human information processing in information fusion is gaining increas - ing recognition , as also reﬂected in discussions of a ’’level 5’’ in the JDL model . This paper presents a case study of the interaction between human and machine information processing in a maritime surveillance control room . A detailed analysis of cognitive processes and information ﬂows involved in identifying and tracking moving vessels illustrates how machines and human operators collaboratively perform fusion in a highly distributed fashion . The theoretical framework of distributed cognition provides an alternative or complementary way of analysing information fusion systems / processes that more clearly reveals the actual complexities of the interaction between human and machine information processing in practice . (cid:2) 2011 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction : a passive or an active user ? Information fusion , or data fusion , aims to process multiple sets of data , gathered from multiple sources , in order to build a holistic view of the environment [ 1 ] . This representation of the environ - ment should enable increased situation awareness and , ultimately , improved decision making . Based on an extensive review of mod - els for information fusion and decision making , Hall et al . [ 1 ] con - clude that ( 1 ) although it is recognised that decision making and situation awareness is both ‘‘components of a complete data fusion system’’ the ability to effectively represent such issues falls outside the traditional scope of the ﬁeld , and ( 2 ) neither data fusion models nor decision making models cover the entire scope required by the situation assessment domain . A ﬁrst question arising from Hall et al . ’s conclusions is whether or not it is desirable for the informationfusionﬁeld to extend its tra - ditional scope and include human situation awareness and decision making as objects of study . We agree with the observation of Hall et al . [ 1 ] that ‘‘decision making and situation awareness are compo - nents of a complete data fusion system’’ ( p . 6 ) . Without insight into the human situation awareness that is created and how it impacts decision making , it is impossible to deﬁne boundaries of the data fusion system in the design phase , and to monitor and manage its performance under operation . In terms of the JDL model there is a lack of necessary input for sensor management in terms of , e . g . , mission objectives and mission constraints . Similarly , Blasch [ 2 ] argues that ‘‘ [ t ] he user deﬁnes a fusion system , for without a user , there is no need to provide fusion of multi - sensory data’’ ( p . 3 ) . Sit - uation awareness and decision making may not be the key issues in information fusion , but the relations between these concepts and core fusion processes need to be clariﬁed . Thereby , information fusion systems designers and managers will be enabled to monitor validity issues ( e . g . , are we collecting and fusing relevant data and information ? ) . Furthermore , incorporating the interdependencies with decision making and situation awareness in the models , answers the need to provide ‘whole system solutions’ , where core fusion processes are embedded in and adapted to real - life situation awareness needs and decision making practices . A deadlock in the ongoing discussion of how to link data fusion models and human decision making models to inform one and an - other , is how much of the information fusion community has con - ceived the human user and the interaction between humans and machines in fusion processes . Ever since Hall et al . [ 3 ] as well as Blasch and Plano [ 4 ] independently introduced human – computer interaction issues to be included in a so called level 5 extension of the JDL model , there has been an ongoing debate on whether or not , and how , user related issues need to be incorporated . Sev - eral authors [ 1 , 2 , 5 ] have stressed that this debate has not reached a ﬁnal conclusion . A recurring issue in this debate is whether the user is a passive receiver of a situation picture , automatically gen - erated by fusion technology ( Fusion Automation ) , or whether the user is an active participant in the fusion process who , in collabo - ration with the fusion technology , generates and assesses a 1566 - 2535 / $ - see front matter (cid:2) 2011 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . inffus . 2011 . 01 . 005 ⇑ Corresponding author . Tel . : + 46 703687863 E - mail address : maria . nilsson @ viktoria . se ( M . Nilsson ) . Information Fusion 13 ( 2012 ) 60 – 78 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Information Fusion journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / inffus situation picture ( User - Fusion ) [ 2 ] . Consider the differences be - tween the two examples in Fig . 1 , they are drawn from the appli - cation area of target tracking and object identiﬁcation in maritime surveillance , which will serve as an illustrative case in the empirical part of this article . The ﬁrst example illustrates the dominant traditional view in information fusion . The so called MSDF system generates tracks and identities which are used as input for a human decision mak - ing process . Human – computer interaction issues are framed as a problem of interface between the technology and the receiving user , involving issues like information presentation ( menus , dis - plays ) , transaction management ( how do user and technology interact ) and cognitive aids ( tools to correct for human cognitive biases ) , as discussed by Hall et al . [ 3 ] . Based on the second exam - ple , we propose that , as we have argued in more detail elsewhere [ 7 ] , in many cases , the information fusion process extends beyond the boundary of the actual technology itself ( e . g . , beyond mathe - matical computation of radar data to determine position ) to in - clude manual functions performed by humans . Throughout this article we will argue that existing models and methods commonly applied in information fusion do not acknowledge such an active contribution of users in the fusion process , or describe it in an ab - stract or mechanical way . The theoretical framework of distributed cognition [ 8 ] is a rela - tively new approach in cognitive science and human – computer interaction that can be used to analyse the interaction between technology and human users from a different and broader perspec - tive [ 9 ] . Distributed cognition can provide an alternative explana - tory frame to the origin of interaction because it views cognitive processes as distributed and embedded in the environment . It can thus serve the information fusion community by a more pro - found insight in user needs and scenarios as well as a deeper understanding of how users actually utilise fusion technology . That in turn could eventually result in information fusion technology that is better integrated and utilised in fusion and decision making processes where machines and humans complement each other . The study described in this article discusses human - technology interaction ( i . e . , User Fusion in Fig . 1 ) in the case of target tracking and vessel identiﬁcation in maritime surveillance on an abstract as well as a very detailed level . The theoretical framework of distrib - uted cognition [ 8 ] is used here to describe at an abstract level how human users and technology collaboratively perform fusion , and to describe in detail the propagation of information and its transfor - mations through the system ( thus , empirically verifying our previ - ous theoretical arguments regarding the usefulness of a distributed cognition perspective in an information fusion context , see [ 7 ] ) . It is highlighted that sometimes machine processes mediate a trans - formation and that sometimes humans mediate a transformation . As such , the study empirically shows how the theoretical frame - work of distributed cognition can characterise the interaction be - tween humans and technology , and thereby , provide the means to extend current information fusion design practices and theoret - ical models ( cf . [ 7 ] ) . The article is organised as follows : Section 2 provides a theoret - ical background by discussing in more detail how existing models and methods of information fusion portray the role of the user and what their limitations are . Then in Section 3 , as an answer to the limitations of current methods , the theoretical framework of dis - tributed cognition is introduced as an alternative or complemen - tary means to model human – computer interaction . Section 4 presents the research design and Section 5 describes the case study results . Finally , the ﬁndings and their implications for information fusion research and practice are discussed and summarised in Sec - tions 6 and 7 . 2 . The role of the user in current information fusion models and methods The discussion of data or information fusion models presented here is not aimed to give an extensive overview of all aspects of all existing models and methods . Models and methods commonly used in the ﬁeld of information fusion have been selected by F USION - AUTOMATION : the user as passive receiver “ The crew is bombarded with sensor and information from communication links that must be correlated , fused and interpreted in order to arrive at some understanding of the tactical situation . Automation of the data fusion process has emerged as a possible option to assist the operators in coping with the ever - increasing flow and complexity of information , in their task of compiling the tactical picture . A multi - source data fusion ( MSDF ) system processes the data reported by multiple sources to derive the best estimates of the kinematics properties for each perceived entity in the environment , and to infer the identity and key attributes of these entities” [ 6 ] U SER - FUSION : the user as active participant In target tracking in the maritime surveillance fused information from different radars is utilised in order to identify objects positions to be tracked . In the studied setting , not only did the users ( the operators ) have to identify the radar readings as an object which initiates the target tracker , but also to associate the target tracker with the correct object when the target tracker lost the object to be followed . This is only one example of the way users work in cooperation with the technology in order to achieve their goals [ this study ] . Fig . 1 . Illustrative examples contrasting the concepts of ‘‘Fusion - automation’’ and ‘‘User - Fusion’’ . ( see above - mentioned reference for further information . ) M . Nilsson et al . / Information Fusion 13 ( 2012 ) 60 – 78 61 considering which models are discussed in handbooks [ 10 – 13 ] as well as in overview articles [ 1 , 14 , 15 ] . As Hall et al . [ 1 ] state , ‘‘ [ t ] he dominance of the JDL model and the OODA loop implies that for any new model to be valid , it must assert its value in compar - ison to these models’’ ( p . 12 ) . Hence , our discussion will primarily focus on these two models including their revisions and variations . That is , this review does not for instance include all methods of hu - man decision making ( which can be argued to display a more accu - rate picture of human decision making ) , rather it describes what is typically described in the information fusion community today . With regard to design and analysis methods for information fusion our review includes the data fusion and resource management dual node network of Bowman and Steinberg [ 13 ] , as well as agent based ubiquitous fusion [ 15 , 16 ] . Reviewed human factors methods include Cognitive Task Analysis ( CTA ) and Cognitive Work Analysis ( CWA ) [ 17 – 19 ] . In our analysis we focus on how these models and methods portray the interaction between human users and infor - mation fusion technology . 2 . 1 . JDL and OODA and their revisions and variations The most well - known and referenced model to conceptualise fusion processes is the JDL data fusion model which distinguishes between different levels of fusion such as object and impact assess - ment , typically used to inform decision making [ 11 , 12 ] . The gen - eral model has over the years been revised a number of times [ 2 – 4 , 20 , 21 ] ( for a more complete review of the JDL model and its history see , e . g . , [ 1 , 5 , 9 , 12 ] ) . As discussed in the introduction , there are currently diverging viewpoints on how the role of the user should be portrayed in the JDL model . Most often the user is perceived as a passive con - sumer of fused information [ 1 , 3 ] . Consequently , ‘level 5’ is re - stricted to human – computer interface issues , interface utilities , and dialogue and transaction management . In contrast , Blasch and Plano [ 4 ] as well as Blasch [ 2 ] acknowledge that the user ac - tively participates on different levels of the JDL model , as shown in Figs . 2a and 2b . Blasch [ 2 ] argues that ‘‘ [ t ] he IF [ information fu - sion ] community has typically overlooked the role of the user by designing them out of the system’’ ( p . 3 ) . Commenting on Fig . 2a , where a clear distinction is made be - tween roles of machines and roles of humans in information fu - sion , Blasch [ 2 ] states that ‘‘ [ l ] evel 2 ( SA ) [ situation assessment ] includes tacit functions which are inferred from level 1 explicit representations of object assessment . Since the unobserved aspects of the SA [ situation assessment ] problem cannot be processed by a computer , user knowledge and reasoning is necessary’’ ( p . 1 ) . Fur - thermore , Blasch [ 2 ] addresses the problem that an information fu - sion system cannot just automatically operate top - down from available data or the situation at hand , but needs some user guid - ance . Explaining the User - Fusion model ( Fig . 2b ) , Blasch describes how users actively contribute to different levels of the JDL model . Finally , Blasch argues that the user and the fusion system should complement each other . Human users will , for example , do better than a machine because they are ‘‘ ( 1 ) able to reason about the sit - uation , ( 2 ) assess what are the likely routes of a target , and ( 3 ) bring in contextual information to reason over the uncertainty’’ , whereas ‘‘target numbers and speed increase , a user will get over - loaded , and thus , routine calculations and data processing can be ofﬂoaded to a computer’’ [ 2 , p . 3 ] . In addition to the traditional technically oriented fusion models such as the JDL model , references to more human oriented models to capture human decision making can be found in the fusion community . For instance , in the mid 1950s Boyd developed an intuitive , straightforward model of decision making that aimed to explain why and how American pilots could decide and act faster than their Korean counterparts in one - to - one air combat [ 22 , 23 ] . The OODA loop model ( Fig . 3 ) was not originally intended to ex - plain more complex decision situations [ 24 , 25 ] . However , due to its intuitiveness and simplicity it can be interpreted to ﬁt almost any context [ 1 ] . In particular , Bryant [ 25 ] notes that the OODA loop helps to distinguish between information gathering ( observe , ori - ent ) and analysis and implementation ( decide and act ) as well as highlight two critical factors in decision making , namely time con - straints and information uncertainty . Despite these beneﬁts sev - eral authors have strongly criticised the application of the OODA loop in complex 1 decision situations . For example , Bryant [ 25 ] crit - icises it for being a reactive rather than a proactive model because it suggests that ‘‘observation is a process of unbiased reception of information , that ‘facts’ will manifest themselves in what one ob - serves’’ [ 25 ] . Breton and Rousseau [ 26 ] argue that this failure has lead to misconceptions such as that the understanding of , e . g . , the battle space solely develops from gathered data and thus decision making is a problem of gathering as much data as possible . To ex - pand the capacity of gathering data does not itself aid decision making . The resemblance in arguments between Bryant’s criticism of the OODA loop and Blasch’s critique of the JDL model is obvious . Both stress that fusion technology cannot autonomously solve is - sues like data selection and interpretation but that active user involvement is necessary . Actually , several variations of the origi - nal OODA loop have been proposed recently , that incorporate these critiques . First of all , Boyd himself has always been aware of the limitations of his original model , and presented a more elaborated version in 1995 [ 27 ] . The new version , illustrated in Fig . 4 , high - lights the complexity of the orient phase and introduces feedback loops between the four stages , which acknowledges that the infor - mation interpretation and decision making process may be less straightforward and more iterative than originally portrayed . Unfortunately , this variant of the OODA loop is not commonly used in the fusion community . To stress that it is not obvious what data and information to gather and fuse , Bryant [ 25 ] renamed the OODA loop and proposed the CECA model , involving the steps : Critique , Explore , Compare , Adapt . CECA more clearly indicates that a user ( decision maker ) is not a passive recipient of information , but has a plan or goal that guides his / her information gathering and information fusion pro - cesses . As such , information gathering is a combination of pas - sively receiving sensor input and actively searching for needed information ( cf . Fig . 5 ) . A number of other revisions have been proposed that acknowl - edge an active user , although they cannot be discussed in detail here , for example Smith [ 28 ] and Brehmer [ 24 ] . Furthermore , Tacit fusion Human Sensors and sources Information Fusion Explicit fusion Machine Human decision making Resource Management Mission Management Plattform ground station Environment L 0 L 1 L 2 / 3 L 4 / 6 ? L 5 Fig . 2a . DFIG 2004 model ( adapted from Blasch [ 2 ] ) . 1 Complex with regard to , for example , multiple decision makers , poorly deﬁned problems , multiple or unclear objectives , et cetera . 62 M . Nilsson et al . / Information Fusion 13 ( 2012 ) 60 – 78 Rousseau and Breton [ 26 , 29 ] and Grant [ 30 ] have presented revi - sions of the OODA loop on a more detailed level of granularity , but they argue for a more mechanical view of the fusion and deci - sion making process . As such , they are actually closer to the classic view of the passive user . A common challenge for all these OODA variations is to ﬁnd the appropriate balance between usefulness versus validity of the model . While the original model was easy to understand , but received criticism on validity , the newer varia - tions have been criticised for being too complex and therefore poorly informing design . Besides the dominant discussion around JDL and OODA , other models such as the one by Salerno et al . [ 32 ] that integrates the JDL model together with Endsley’s model of situation awareness [ 33 , 34 ] . In Salerno et al . ’s model [ 32 ] , the arrows clearly indicate how an active user inﬂuences both percep - tion and comprehension . This is in line with Endsley’s original model [ 33 , 34 ] that indicates how doctrines , rules , individual expe - riences , abilities , preconceptions , and objectives inﬂuence situa - tion awareness and decision making . 2 . 2 . Design and analysis methods for fusion Whereas the previous models discuss human – computer inter - action on a very abstract conceptual level , methods available in the fusion literature tackle this issue on a more detailed level to in - form design of information fusion systems . As summarised in [ 15 , p . 19 ] , the Dual Node Network ( DNN ) technical architecture for data fusion and resource management [ 13 ] ‘‘allows for a network of interacting fusion and management nodes’’ in which each data fusion node performs data preparation , data association and state estimation , and each resource management node performs the dual functions of task preparation , task planning , and resource state control . Distributed data fusion and resource management nodes can be applied for each JDL level and the networks can be adaptive . Although not explicitly stated , it is obvious throughout the descriptions in [ 13 ] that all these processes and tasks are to be automated , and that user issues are limited to visualisation , Sensors Level 2 Situation Assessemnt Leve 0 pre - processing Level 1 object assessment Level 3 Impact Assessemnt Database Management Support Data base Fusion Data base Distributed information sources Level 4 process refinements Level 5 USER Refinements Human Computer Interface Utiliy Performance Value Priority Context Intent Fig . 2b . User - Fusion model ( adapted from Blasch [ 2 ] ) . Observe Orient Decide Act Fig . 3 . The original OODA loop ( adapted from [ 22 – 24 ] ) . Observations Cultural Traditions Genetic Heritage New Information Previous Experience Analyses & Syntesisis Decision Hypothesis Action Test OBSERVE ORIENT DECIDE ACT Unfolding Circumstances Outside Information Feed forward Feed Forward Implicit Guidance & Control Unfolding interaction with environment Feedback Feed back Implicit Guidance & Control Fig . 4 . Boyd’s extended version of the OODA loop ( adapted from [ 24 , 27 ] ) . M . Nilsson et al . / Information Fusion 13 ( 2012 ) 60 – 78 63 supervision , and aided cognition , in accordance with the classic JDL model . Furthermore , Lambert [ 15 ] as well as Lambert and Scholtz [ 16 ] propose an agent - based ‘‘Ubiquitous Fusion’’ approach for the de - sign of high - level fusion systems and explicitly address the issue of fusion involving both people and machines in integrated high - er - level fusion systems . They observe that data fusion currently is dominated by a machine based sensor fusion paradigm . When distinguishing between fusion from the standpoint of machines , fusion from the standpoint of people , and the integration of the two , Lambert [ 15 ] states that ‘‘the people interpretation of the deconstructed JDL model is essentially situation awareness as de - ﬁned by Endsley [ 33 ] , id est , situation awareness is deconstructed JDL data fusion performed by people , with perception , comprehen - sion and projection providing the object , situation and impact assessments , respectively , within people’’ ( p . 8 , original emphasis ) . With regard to the integration aspect or interface fusion , it is ar - gued that when only low - level machine fusion is performed , ‘‘the integration interpretation of the JDL model , for example , includes the ‘picture’ part of the common operating picture ( COP ) in mili - tary contexts . It involves a stored representation of objects , per - haps presented on a screen . These images aim to integrate the stored representation of objects within the machine with stored representations of objects in the users’ heads’’ ( p . 8 , original emphasis ) . When turning to what interface fusion should look like at higher levels , Lambert [ 15 ] argues that the traditional ‘‘dots on maps’’ should be replaced by virtual advisers , virtual planning rooms , virtual battle spaces and virtual video animated reconstruc - tions . Besides , Lambert [ 15 ] promotes the ‘‘Legal agreement proto - col’’ ( LAP ) as a preferred agent social agreement protocol . It models legal contractual agreements that can apply between people , be - tween machine agents , or between people and machine agents . It implies that agents ( humans and machines ) dynamically negotiate intents , beliefs , and capabilities regulated by cost functions , there - by communicating in the form of speech acts and requiring a com - mon ontology ( an explicit speciﬁcation of conceptualisation : the objects , concepts , and other entities that are assumed to exist in some area of interest and the relationships that hold among them ) [ 13 , 15 , 16 ] . Lambert [ 15 ] states that ‘‘fusion capability is then assembled like lego™ blocks on the ﬂy as required’’ ( p . 19 ) . As we are about to introduce distributed cognition as an alter - native approach to reveal complex interactions between humans and machines , we cannot ignore a brief discussion of existing Human Factors methods that have the same purpose . Stanton et al . [ 19 ] give an overview of 91 Human Factors methods . It goes beyond the scope of this article to position distributed cognition with respect to each one of these methods . Cognitive systems engi - neering may be considered as a specialisation within Human Fac - tors focusing on the analysis and design of human machine systems [ 66 ] or an approach to the design of technology , training and processes intended to manage cognitive complexity in socio - technical systems [ 67 ] . Methods belonging to the ﬁeld of cognitive system engineering , for example cognitive work analysis , have been applied to inform design of information fusion systems [ 17 , 18 ] as well as navy command and control systems [ 36 ] . Cogni - tive system engineering and distributed cognition share the same fundamental underlying principles that cognition is distributed . That is , they share the critique on the traditional ‘cognition in the mind’ or human information processing view of cognition and their argument that the unit of analysis should encompass both humans and their internal and external resources grounded in the context of activity [ 9 , 66 , 68 ] . However , in cognitive system engineering , the focus is to capture the current work practises and inform design as well as to control the joint cognitive system , whereas the primary goal of distributed cognition is to understand how human cognitive processes actually function ( cf . Section 3 ) . As such , the two approaches can inform each other . 2 . 3 . Limitations of current models and methods As Hall et al . [ 1 ] point out : ‘‘A common weak point across all of the models in both data fusion and decision making is the implica - tion of the human – computer interaction . Only extensions to the JDL model and working variations of the OODA loop have at - tempted to explore the use of modern interface development the - ories and models to aid human in the loop . Therefore , any new model that attempts to cover this complete scope needs to care - fully examine the effect of the intersection between human cogni - tion , interface technology , and the environment’s task’’ ( p . 13 ) . Both the JDL model revisions and the OODA loop variations hold that there are different versions available , that either pictures the user as a passive receiver or as an active participant in the fusion process . In both cases the boxes and arrows are on a too abstract conceptual level to really explain human machine interactions in detail . Similarly , analysis methods in requirement derivation and cognitive system engineering [ 68 ] , most often , do not focus specif - ically on human cognitive processes in terms of information prop - agation and transformations of representational state on such a Information Gathering ( active , passive ) Situation Model ( ’how it currently is’ ) Conceptual Model ( ’how you want it to be’ ) FILTER Sensor output ADAPT COMPARE EXPLORE CRITIQUE Directed telescope towards needed information Update Formulate Questions Identify Information Needs Fig . 5 . The CECA loop ( adapted from [ 25 ] ) . 64 M . Nilsson et al . / Information Fusion 13 ( 2012 ) 60 – 78 detail level as Hutchins [ 8 , 42 ] . The agent based ubiquitous fusion approach of Lambert [ 15 ] may be considered the currently most detailed elaboration on Blasch’s [ 2 ] view of an active user partici - pating in all levels of the JDL model . Also , rhetorically and concep - tually this approach may resemble the distributed cognition approach we introduce later ( e . g . , both humans and machines col - laboratively perform fusion ) , it will be argued in the concluding discussion that both approaches differ in the way they portray and interpret the actual collaborative performance . That is , we ar - gue that the IF community might beneﬁt from also analysing the issue of human machine interaction in more detail from a different perspective that either is complementary to Lambert’s [ 15 ] agent - based approach , or provides an alternative way of dealing with this complex issue . 3 . Distributed cognition How can we explain and understand our ability to think , reason , make decisions , etc . ? Understanding these cognitive phenomena and how the mind is organised are the major questions of Cogni - tive Science . Originally , the ﬁeld focused on studying human cogni - tion simply in terms of a single individual’s internal processes ( i . e . , symbol manipulation inside the head ) . In other words , there was a rather narrow deﬁnition of what constitutes human cognition since nothing ‘‘outside’’ the individual is traditionally taken into account . Distributed cognition [ 8 ] on the other hand can be seen as a reaction to the traditional view of cognition which existed at the time . In short , distributed cognition is a theoretical framework that seeks to understand cognition as a distributed process . The central notion of the theory is that complex intelligent phenomena emerge from interactions between different components [ 8 ] . This interac - tion can exist between different components in the brain , the body , and the social or material world . The focus of distributed cognition is thus to understand the dynamic ﬂow of information through a system of components . As such , it has gained increasing attention as an analytical tool for capturing the interaction between humans and technology in various contexts [ 37 – 42 ] . That distributed cog - nition is particularly well suited for the analysis of complex sys - tems is seen in the great many studies conducted in settings such as : aircraft cockpits [ 42 ] , air trafﬁc control rooms [ 43 , 44 ] , ves - sel boards [ 8 ] , cardiac surgery [ 37 ] , emergency dispatch rooms [ 45 ] , and coordination of collaborative activities [ 46 ] . More re - cently , attempts have been made to develop distributed cognition from a descriptive theoretical framework , into a structured tool for capturing human - technology interactions [ 45 , 47 – 51 ] 2 . The attractiveness of distributed cognition mostly lies in its shift of focus from the traditional , rather narrow focus on the single individual’s internal cognitive processes , to consider cognitive pro - cesses as taking place within the larger unit of a socio - technical system ( cf . Fig . 6 ) . A socio - technical system includes the people carrying out a task and the artefacts they use ( e . g . , information systems ) [ 8 ] . This shift of focus allows observation of cognitive processes outside the indi - vidual mind , instead of having to infer what is going on , on the in - side . For instance , consider the cognitive process of solving a problem such as a mathematical equation , by using pen and paper , or by discussing it with others . The artefacts in use , or the involved people , are considered part of the cognitive process of problem solving , and the process itself is distributed across the system – the person / s and the artefacts s / he uses – rather than being merely an internal process . This means , distributed cognition allows cap - turing of the cognitive properties of the interactions within the so - cio - technical system , i . e . , properties of the collective behaviour [ 40 ] , which cannot be traced to any single individual or artefact . Within the cognitive system at least three different kinds of distri - bution can be observed . The processes are distributed [ 9 ] across the members of a group , between human internal mechanism ( e . g . , memory , attention ) and external structures ( e . g . , computer sys - tems , material and social environment ) , and distributed over time . Another attractive feature of distributed cognition is its focus on the ways information is processed within the socio - technical sys - tem ; how it is propagated , represented , and transformed [ 8 ] . That is , as information propagates through the system’s entities ( hu - mans and artefacts 3 ) , the representations and their representational states are transformed . Thereby , the cognitive processes become ob - servable . In other words , distributed cognition focuses on how cog - nitive processes function , how artefacts are used and modiﬁed to support cognition , not only by way of an object’s representational forms , but by the way an object’s properties are exploited [ 9 ] . That is , when using distributed cognition in the analysis of human - tech - nology interaction , one is provided with the possibility to get a task independent description of the system ( which is of particular inter - est when one would like to design new systems , e . g . , a plane is al - ways required to ﬂy , but the task of ﬂying the plane may change over time ) . More speciﬁcally , Hutchins’ [ 42 ] study of an aircraft cockpit fo - cused on the distribution of processes between internal structures ( e . g . , the pilot’s memory ) and external artefacts ( the equipment used by the pilots ) , and showed how human memory processes ex - tend beyond the boundary of the individual to include external artefacts as part of the process . Another study , by Hazlehurst et al . [ 37 ] , aimed to understand the achievement of situation awareness in cardiac surgery , among a group of individuals . The study focused on the activity they performed , the tasks they accomplished , and the coordination devices used in their interac - tions in this structured environment . In addition to providing a theoretical understanding of cognitive processes , distributed cog - nition has been used for the design and support of interactions be - tween people and technologies . In a study by Marti [ 43 ] , distributed cognition was used to inform the re - design of an air trafﬁc control system , which resulted in a system that provided better support for the operators’ activities ( e . g . , supporting exter - nal representations ) . Distributed cognition has also been suggested as an approach to research in human – computer interaction [ 9 , 52 ] . In summary , the use of distributed Cognition has resulted in a Cognitive system ( b ) Input Input Output Cognitive system ( a ) Output Fig . 6 . Fromatraditional cognitive scienceview ( a ) thecognitive system is conﬁned to the inside of the individual’s head , while in a distributed cognition view ( b ) cognitive processes are distributed across people and artefacts within the larger unit of a socio - technical system . 2 All the methods have been developed to ﬁt a particular situation and none of the methods mentioned focuses on capturing semi - automated processes , as would be required in an information fusion domain . 3 To refer to both humans and artefacts as ‘‘entities’’ , might be taken to imply that they are equal , but artefacts are not considered ( biologically ) cognitive [ 40 ] . M . Nilsson et al . / Information Fusion 13 ( 2012 ) 60 – 78 65 deeper understanding of the organisation of socio - technical sys - tems , and the way information processing is distributed within such systems . It has also lead to a deeper understanding of the role ( s ) of artefacts in human activities . Similarly , as we have theoretically argued in [ 7 ] , a distributed cognition perspective can be used to understand how information fusion technology and humans interact , and thereby also advance the research area of information fusion . To support those argu - ments , an empirical investigation is presented in the following sec - tions which exempliﬁes and further details the approach . 4 . Research design 4 . 1 . Research philosophy and strategy The aim of our empirical work presented in the following sec - tions is thus to exemplify how the theoretical framework of dis - tributed cognition [ 8 ] can extend , or complement , current models and methods of information fusion to more clearly capture the active role of the user in semi - automatic information fusion processes . As the issue of active user involvement in information fusion is a relatively new and unexplored research area , we argue that it is appropriate to follow an inductive research philosophy and inductive reasoning aimed at theory building [ 53 ] . 4 . 2 . Research method and techniques A case study of user activities was performed to exemplify the theoretical arguments presented in [ 7 ] , and in this paper . Generally speaking , research in the form of case studies usually consists of a detailed investigation , where data is collected over a period of time , on phenomena within their context . Underlying such studies is an aim to analyse the context and processes that illuminate the theoretical issues being studied [ 54 ] . Case studies also need to fo - cus on analytical generalisation , which is about theoretical propo - sitions rather than population , and so the argument is about the existence of processes , which may inﬂuence behaviours and ac - tions [ 54 ] . The case study presented here is ethnographically [ 55 ] inspired , using the qualitative method of participant observation [ 56 , 57 ] . This method allows the observation of participants , while being embedded in their work environment . In other words , the method allows the observer to ask questions and to be instructed by the users as they perform their work , and thereby increase the researcher’s ﬁrst hand understanding of the situation . More speciﬁcally , participatory observations [ 56 , 57 ] of ﬁve ex - pert operators , with an average of three years of experience , were conducted during four occasions ( including a pilot test ) , distrib - uted evenly around the clock to allow for different conditions , which made a total of 16 h of observation . The same researcher ( the ﬁrst author ) performed all the observations for consistency . The role of the researcher was participant - as - observer [ 56 ] , which refers to the researcher participating in activities , forming relation - ships , but who makes no secret of an intention to observe events [ 56 ] . As preparation , and for complementary information , the re - searcher got an introductory presentation of the work setting and was given the possibility to access documentation concerning current work procedures . Field notes ( pen and paper ) were used to record work procedures and events during the observations . The ﬁeld notes were summarised and then veriﬁed by two of the expert operators for correctness . 4 . 3 . Procedure The collected data was approached from the distributed cog - nition [ 8 ] perspective , that is , it was analysed for patterns describing information propagation between systems and opera - tors in the fusion processes . Importantly , the focus of the analysis is the content of what is being processed and how it is propa - gated through the system as opposed to outlining a task proce - dure . As distributed cognition is a theoretical framework , and not a method per se , the following procedure was deﬁned , for the purpose of this study , involving three main steps ( see [ 58 ] for more details ) : Step 1 ( data collection ) : the data was gathered at different abstraction levels , at the process level and the informational level ; a walkthrough of the fusion process and a layout of the technology involved is provided , identiﬁcation of entities , inputs and information ﬂow within the fusion process is described . Step 2 ( data modelling ) : the gathered data has been visualised using a speciﬁcally developed notation [ 58 ] for illustrating the concepts used in distributed cognition in terms of cognitive properties and information propagation . The notation has been developed with the intention to visualise information propaga - tion on a representational level . In addition , it has been devel - oped in such a way that it becomes independent of technological architectures . The notation is summarised in Fig . 7 and explained in Table 1 . Step 3 ( data analysis ) : the data was then been assessed from a distributed cognition point of view [ 8 ] . That is , patterns in the data with a focus on the functional relationships between humans and technology within the fusion process have been identiﬁed , and in particular the transformations of information as it is propagated through the socio - technical system ( cf . Table 1 ) . The identiﬁed concepts in Table 1 , together with the deﬁned notation , were used as a guideline to ﬁnd patterns in the collected data . Our ﬁndings are presented as they emerged from the data . 4 . 4 . Case site : Maritime surveillance Maritime surveillance was chosen as a case study to exemplify semi - automated fusion processes . Most often maritime surveil - lance involves identifying and tracking objects at sea or in a har - bour . The case study was performed in a surveillance control room responsible for the security of an area outside the south - wes - tern Swedish coastline . The main task of the operators located in the surveillance control room is to identify vessels , analyse the sit - uation , and when required , inform the responsible defence agency to take action . During the observations , a total of about 70 vessels were identiﬁed and tracked by the team of operators . The overall setup available to human operators in performing these activities , i . e . , identiﬁcation and tracking of vessels , is conceptually illus - trated in Figs . 8 and 9 . As illustrated in Fig . 8 , the environment in which the operator operates consists of different kinds of vessels , such as ships , freighters , ferries and boats , i . e . , both objects which are of inter - est to observe ( vessels ) and objects which can be classiﬁed as ‘‘noise’’ ( non - interesting objects ) . In order to track and identify these objects , there is a number of surveillance resources to be used , such as radars , optic cameras , AIS ( automatic identiﬁcation system ) , and VHS radio . Fusion of radar data allows automatic tracking of speciﬁc identiﬁed objects . For interaction with the system , a graphical user interface ( GUI ) is provided , which allows both interaction between the operators and the system , and the possibility of displaying the output of identiﬁcation and tracking of vessels . Using the components displayed in Fig . 8 , the task of identifying and tracking an object can be broken down as follows ( cf . Fig . 9 ) : 66 M . Nilsson et al . / Information Fusion 13 ( 2012 ) 60 – 78 Unit of analysis Representational state Information entity Transformation Mediating Thick line denotes that the entity has a mediating functionality A rectangle denotes an artefact / technology which functions as a resource in the process Human entity A circular shape denotes a human operator who functions as a resource in the process A dotted line denotes the representational state of an entity An arrow denotes information propagation and the transforms of representational states ( eg . , between visual , auditory or physical ) Unit of analysis is the socio - technical system including the above concepts Social structure A dashed line denotes , e . g . teamwork mediating Cognitive process An oval shape denotes a cognitive process which is distributed between artefacts and technology Fig . 7 . Distributed cognition notation [ 58 ] . Table 1 Glossary of terms . The descriptions are based on the work of [ 8 , 59 – 61 ] . Term Description Examples Information entity Physical or digital element ( not limited to a speciﬁc physical artefact ) that plays a functional role within an activity ( involved in the fusion process ) A monitor display and emails are separate information entities , although they are found within the same artefact Human entity A human element that plays a functional role within an activity ( involved in the fusion process ) A decision maker or operator responsible for a speciﬁc task Mediating The functionality an information entity or human entity provides to the process denoted by the functional relationship between entities , i . e . , not just determined by the physicality of the entity An information or human entity can have a mediating functionality of coordination in which they connect different entities Representational state Knowledge and information represented at speciﬁc instances in the conduct of an activity A monitor display , a verbal utterance , or a printed label , are all information – bearing structures Transformation A change in representational states ( visual , mental and auditory ) , when propagated between entities in the conduct of an activity A monitor display changes its state in response to an operator’s key command . A voice message changes its state as it is picked up by an operator and is represented mentally Social structure A social structure is a conﬁguration of humans for a speciﬁc purpose to achieve a goal Team working together or other organisational structures Cognitive process Manipulation ( including propagation , transformation ) of representational states which are distributed across individuals and artefacts , between ( human ) internal structures and external structures , and over time Cognitive processes are those involved in memory , decision making , inference , reasoning , learning , etc . Unit of analysis The functional relationships between entities and the transformation of representational states of information related to the process The fusion process manifested in the Maritime Control Room in which it is distributed across humans and technology M . Nilsson et al . / Information Fusion 13 ( 2012 ) 60 – 78 67 1 . An object is either picked up by radar ( displayed as plots on a screen ) or by the Automatic Identiﬁcation System ( AIS ) ( dis - played with an identiﬁcation number ) to be displayed on an overview display . 2 . A process starts where the operator manually distinguishes interesting vessels from environmentally caused radar readings ( noise ) . The identiﬁed vessel is classiﬁed either as unknown or the object is associated with the correct AIS information . To their help , the operators use additional equipment situated in the control room . The continuous tracking of identiﬁed vessels is performed by a fusion algorithm that combines information from different sensors . 3 . Finally , a report of interesting objects is transmitted via differ - ent technological equipment to headquarters . Usually there are ﬁve operators working in the control room in order to perform the above identiﬁed task procedures : one opera - tor responsible for incoming intelligence reports , two operators responsible for manual identiﬁcation of vessels , and two operators keeping track of the overall situational picture of the current situ - ation , who are also responsible for taking action when required . Thus , all operators work collaboratively in order to perform the task . Further details are provided in the next section . 5 . Analysis and results In this section the observational data is discussed from a dis - tributed cognition [ 8 ] perspective . A walkthrough of the fusion process is provided , from which the analysis can be unpacked , fol - lowed by the speciﬁc transformations of the process in detail . 5 . 1 . A walkthrough of a semi - automated fusion process The process of identiﬁcation and tracking of vessels , as de - scribed above , is a semi - automated fusion process , performed by a team of usually ﬁve operators working collaboratively with the technology ( cf . Fig . 10 ) . In this context , ‘‘semi - automated’’ refers to the fact that some of the functions associated with identiﬁcation and tracking are allocated to humans and some to technology . Hence , the fusion process goes beyond the boundary of the tech - nology itself , to include humans . More speciﬁcally , the general pro - cess ( not including individual differences ) involves the following . At the beginning of the identiﬁcation process , an object is picked up by the different radars ( displayed as plots ) and / or by AIS ( displayed with an identiﬁcation number ) to be visualised on an overview display . Next , the process starts when operators ( i . e . , the ﬁrst line of operators ) manually distinguish interesting vessels from environ - mentally caused radar readings ( noise ) on the overview display ( a description of the main artefacts used is presented in Table 2 ) . When an object is located it is automatically provided with infor - mation such as position , direction , course , call sign , time of initiation and updated at , in addition to AIS standard information . Also , an automatic fusion algorithm that continuously tracks objects is ini - tiated as an object is located . When an object is located and pro - vided with automatically generated information , the ﬁrst line of operators needs to add more information to further distinguish the vessels , such as type , class , name , nationality , type of identiﬁca - tion source ( quality of source ) and identiﬁed on list . In order to add this information the operator uses additional equipment in the Surveillance resources : VHS Radio , AIS etc . GUI : Fusion : tracking algorithms Environment : Fig . 8 . Components of the Maritime surveillance domain . Overview display Identification Monitoring Registration Sensor readings Additional equipment Additional equipment Action required Equipment transmitting information regarding current situation Different organizations demanding status of situation Fig . 9 . A schematic view of the current work processes . Arrows indicate ﬂow of information , and dashed arrows indicate on demand information ﬂow . 68 M . Nilsson et al . / Information Fusion 13 ( 2012 ) 60 – 78 control room , for instance , a long distance camera , the Internet , or the list of identiﬁed vessels provided by email ( cf . Table 2 ) . Most often a collection of these sources need to be utilised to add the required information ( cf . Fig . 11 ) . Mostly the operators change the overview display to only display located targets where they can focus on one target at the time to collect the required information ( cf . Table 2 ) . Each identiﬁed object needs to be veriﬁed ( because the AIS information may have been changed intention - ally ) and checked for permission to operate in Swedish waters . A target that seems suspicious ( e . g . , a foreign vessel with no right or permit to pass or operate in Swedish waters ) is prioritised and receives special attention . When the target has been fully identi - ﬁed and double - checked , the most important attributes are written down on a special summary report , which is provided to the sec - ond line of operators to be transmitted to the responsible agency e . g . , the military marine headquarters ( cf . Fig . 11 ) . Also , the second line of operators makes a special summary ( PowerPoint presenta - tion ) of what has been going on during their shift , to be presented to the following shift . For instance , consider a speciﬁc government owned vessel which enters the area of surveillance ( cf . Fig . 11 ) . The target is picked up on radar and AIS , and is located by the ﬁrst line of oper - ators . The automatic information provides the basic attributes for the target . The operator identifying this speciﬁc target has different options to verify the vessel . For instance , the operator can check the incoming list of identiﬁed vessels from the lighthouse or wait until the object passes the long distance optic camera . Thus , the operator sees the vessel and identiﬁes it as a government owned vessel . The type of source for verifying the object is then added as an attribute to the object . Also , the list of permits needs to be checked to see if the vessel has the right to operate in Swedish waters . It can now be determined that the vessel is performing , 1 Operator 5 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 The control room 1 2 1 Operator 1 First Line of operators Operator 2 1 1 Operator 3 Operator 4 Second Line of operators Fig . 10 . The physical ( spatial ) layout of the technology used in the control room : 1 . overview display ; 2 . optic camera ; 3 . intranet ; 4 . internet ; 5 . message equipment ; 6 . VHS / UHF radio ; 7 . database ; 8 . folder ; 9 . diary ; 10 . controlling radio ; 11 . communication unit ; 12 . telephone ; 13 . summary report ; 14 . fax ; 15 . email ; 16 . television ; 17 and 18 . computers . Table 2 Main artefacts used by operators in the maritime surveillance control room . Main information sources Description of functionality Overview display Main tool which operators interact with to identify and locate vessels . The overview display provides three different modes , depending on the task operators need to perform ; the operators can view the original radar data , and operators can chose to only view located objects , or view the trajectories of located objects . Information regarding the located objects is continuously updated for identiﬁcation Optical camera To verify the identity of located objects , a long distance optical camera with day and night vision can be used for visual identiﬁcation Intranet / internet / email Additional sources to identify and store information regarding vessels are available for the operators . An intranet is provided with information about internal routines . The Internet is used as a search engine for additional information , such as weather or the name of a vessel . Each day emails arrive with information regarding the identity of vessels passing the lighthouse Summary report A sheet of paper containing a summary of attributes identifying vessels is provided by the ﬁrst line of operators to the second line of operators , to be submitted to various systems ( e . g . , message equipment and diary ) Message equipment Technology enabling information from the summary report to be transmitted to , e . g . , military headquarters Diary The information regarding identiﬁed vessels from the summary report is stored in a special ‘‘diary’’ UHV / VHS radio The radio is used as a communication tool for communication between control room and different vessels . Also , the operators listen in on the communication between different vessels at sea ( they may mention the name of vessels and this information can be used in the identiﬁcation process ) Database Database containing pictures of different types of vessels . For instance , this database is used to determine what operators see in the optic camera ( i . e . , a comparison can be made ) Folder Collection and storage of incoming faxes and other documents such as permits M . Nilsson et al . / Information Fusion 13 ( 2012 ) 60 – 78 69 e . g . , research regarding ﬁshing according to its permit . Information regarding the vessel is noted on the summary report and when it is ﬁlled with information it is handed over to the second line of oper - ators to be transmitted to the marine military headquarters . It should be noted that the process is continuous and therefore lacks one single static output , rather it is dynamic , changing over time . For instance , information on identiﬁed vessels captured is continu - ously added to the summary report which in turn is added to the communication unit , and to the diary , both of which function as output as they are accessible by the responsible organisation , which is at a higher level in the hierarchy of the organisation ( cf . Fig . 11 ) . In summary , the fusion process becomes semi - automated in terms of involving both humans and technology to fuse the nec - essary information to identify and track vessels . 5 . 2 . A detailed view : information propagation between humans and technology Re - examining the overall semi - automated fusion process ( cf . Fig . 11 ) , it includes much information that is propagated through the system of humans and technology , and many transformations of representational states are identiﬁable in the different artefacts used ( cf . Table 3 ) . The identiﬁed trajectories exemplify the cooper - ation between operators and technology and the semi - automated nature of the fusion process . The distributed and sometimes shared cognitive processes are visible in the information ﬂow in this socio - technical system where processes are distributed across time and space and where many of the resulting representations facilitate different shared cognitive processes ( cf . Section 5 . 3 ) . In this con - text , without the operators and their cognitive processes the iden - tiﬁcation and tracking of objects would not be possible . For instance , we see that multiple radar data from external re - sources outside the control room are automatically transformed into visual information in terms of radar plots on an overview dis - play ( cf . , Fig . 11 ) . The radar plots on the overview display are then accessible to the ﬁrst line of operators who need to interpret the radar plots and located vessels . When the object is located a target tracker is automatically turned on . In other words , the information automatically transforms into different representational states as it is propagated between artefacts , without human intervention . As the operators pick up information from other sources ( e . g . , Table 3 , no . 14 , 15 , 16 , 5 , 6 , and 9 ) , summarise it , and use it to identify ob - jects on the overview display , the information is propagated through the socio - technical system , and its representational state is changed ( cf . Fig . 12 ) . For instance , the radio constantly provides audio information to the operators in the control room , and as it is picked up by the operators ; its representational state is transformed into internal representational states of the operators ( i . e . , a transformation be - tween audio and mental ) . That information is then added and used to identify vessels on the overview display , and again its represen - tational state is transformed ( cf . Fig . 13 ) . Similar propagations of information are initiated when informa - tion from other sources , such as email and fax , is used to identify vessels . In addition , knowledge in an operator’s mind ( e . g . , internal memory structures ) changes its representational state and be - comes accessible to others , as the knowledge is entered into the database containing pictures of vessels ( cf . Table 3 , no . 7 ) . Another example is the storage of experiences and knowledge on the Radar 1 Radar 2 AIS Email Telephone Fax VHSradio Opticcamera TV Internet Database Technology at headquarter Communication unit Diary Intranet Powerpoint presentation Overview display Operator1 First Line of operators Operator2 Operator3 Operator4 Second Line of operators Summaryreport External output Requested input Automatic input Airplane Surveillance boat Internal output Fig . 11 . A simpliﬁed overview of the overall fusion process . Arrows indicate information propagation between different entities , during which the representational states of the information also are transformed . For speciﬁcation of the notation see Fig . 7 and Table 1 . 70 M . Nilsson et al . / Information Fusion 13 ( 2012 ) 60 – 78 Intranet ; a change of representational state takes place as internal knowledge is written down and stored in an external format , and the knowledge also becomes shared knowledge ( cf . Table 3 , no 3 ) . When incoming faxes and other documents are collected and stored in a folder for easy access , the combined pieces of informa - tion ( the folder’s contents ) form a new representational state , and as new documents are added its representational state transforms again ( cf . , Table 3 , no . 8 ) . Similarly , as information is added to the located objects on the overview display , the representational state of the individual object is transformed as well as the representa - tional state of the overview display ( cf . , Fig . 14 ) . This occurs , for instance , when an object transforms from a located to a tracked and later identiﬁed object . In summary , the overall fusion process consists of changes in representational states as information is propagated through the socio - technical system , including both operators and technology . The identiﬁed trajectories exist between artefacts , within artefacts , and between artefacts and humans . Firstly , some transformations of representational states occur when the propagation between two artefacts is facilitated by hu - mans . That is , when additional information resources ( email , optic camera , fax , database , the Internet , airplane ) are actively requested by the operator to complete the fusion process , e . g . , when an optic camera is used to identify unknown objects displayed on the over - view display . Here , the human operator functions as a mediator be - tween the optic camera and the overview display , linking the two artefacts , and thereby enabling transformations of representational states ( cf . Fig . 15 ) . Also , the operator mediates the continuous reﬁnement of the fusion process , such as aiding the target tracker when an object is lost ( e . g . , when a tracked target is suddenly Table 3 A summary of human - technology interactions and representational transformations . Each number corresponds to the numbers in Fig . 10 . Mediating artefact Unit of analysis Examples of Cognitive Processes a 1 . Overview display Visualisation of current surveillance situation including objects of interest ; radar data is automatically transmitted to be displayed on a map , additional information ( internal structures of humans ) is also continuously added to the objects identiﬁed in the display changing the representational state Situation awareness , communication , reasoning , recognising 2 . Optical camera equipment ( day / night vision ) Visual contact for identiﬁcation of vessels ; the perceived image is associated ( through internal structures ) with vessels stored in , e . g . , internal memory and in the external database accessible to others ( perceptual information provide context to the overview display ) Situation awareness , trust , reasoning , recognising 3 . Intranet System for storage of knowledge and experience of incidents ; internal structures of humans are transformed into an external representation accessible to others Attention , memory , reasoning , communication 4 . Internet Backup system for overview display as well as a source of information ; information transforms uncertainty to clarity Memory , reasoning 5 . Message equipment Recording of attributes of interesting vessels ; radar data displayed on the overview display is transformed into written messages ( mediated by humans ) Communication , attention 6 . VHS Radio Communication tool for communication between control room and different vessels as well as communication between vessels ; the information picked up from the chosen channel transforms into internal knowledge , which then may be further propagated to another entity ( e . g . , auditive information provide context to the overview display ) Situation awareness 7 . Database with pictures of vessels Database containing identiﬁed vessels ; information stored in the database is transformed into external representations accessible to others Memory , reasoning , recognising 8 . Folder Collection and storage of incoming faxes and other documents ; pieces of incoming information are transformed into a representational state of combined information , for easy access Memory , attention 9 . Diary Document containing the most important incidents ( identiﬁed objects ) ; information on the overview display is transformed into a representation independent of time , accessible to others Memory , decision making 10 . Equipment controlling the radio Equipment controlling choice of VHS channel ; the information picked up from the chosen channel transforms into internal knowledge , which then may be further propagated to another entity Attention 11 . Communication unit Facilitation of communication ; the artefact mediates communication and as information propagates through the artefact , from one person to another , it may be transformed ( due to disturbances , etc . ) Communication , situation awareness , trust , reasoning , decision making 12 . Telephone To gain information and feedback on actions ; information is propagated through the phone , and it may transform representations , e . g . in case of disturbances on the line Communication 13 . Report A summary of identiﬁed vessels facilitate communication among the team of operators ; information is propagated to other communication equipment enabling shared access , i . e . , information from the overview display is transformed to a representation which can be used when interacting with other systems Attention , communication , reasoning , decision making 14 . Fax Provides information to the system ; a representational state of information accessible to the operators Attention , communication , recognising 15 . Email Information on weather reports and lists of identiﬁed objects is sent by email : knowledge is transformed and / or exchanged in the functional system and people outside the functional system , also the information can be used to identify objects and provide context to the overview display Attention , communication , recognising 16 . Additional equipment : TV Possibility to display additional information about current situation ; the equipment transforms information from the overview display into meaningful information Situation awareness 17 . Additional equipment : Computer with internet Independent computer equipment ; knowledge is transformed / exchanged between individuals in the functional system and people outside the functional system Situation awareness , communication 18 . Operator 1 – 2 First line of operators in charge of identifying and tracking vessels ; humans propagate information and thereby mediates coordination of resources ( both internal structures of humans and external artefacts ) enabling fusing of information Knowledge , memory , situation awareness , reasoning 19 . Operator 2 – 4 Second line of operators in charge of overall situation ; humans propagate information and thereby mediate communication to the outside of the system Situation awareness , knowledge , memory , reasoning 20 . Operator 5 Operator in charge of dealing with incoming faxes ; human mediating accessibility of faxes to the second line of operators Memory , reasoning , attention a In line with distributed cognition [ 8 ] , the concepts mentioned are here considered as cognitive processes , and cognition is considered as emerging in the interaction between components ( e . g . , humans and artefacts ) . It should be noted that what is termed ‘processes’ here , may be framed differently by other researchers . For instance , trust has recently been considered an ‘attitude’ and situation awareness is sometimes considered either as a process or as a state . M . Nilsson et al . / Information Fusion 13 ( 2012 ) 60 – 78 71 located on land , the operator moves the target to the right position at sea ) . The human operator actively requests additional informa - tion sources and thereby initiates the mediation of information by enabling different resources to connect / be fused ( cf . Fig . 15 ) . This exempliﬁes that the trajectories of information ﬂow between humans and artefacts . In addition , some of the information resources are introduced into the process via operators , without being requested , e . g . , when audible information given via radio is picked up and added by the operator to the overview display . Thus , the human operator auto - matically mediates a change in representational states . In other words , input to the fusion process can either be actively requested by operators or be automatically mediated by the operators . Secondly , some mediated transformations of representational states occur when , for instance , information resources are automat - ically included in the fusion process via technology without human intervention , allowing different technologies to connect / be fused . For example , multiple radar data are automatically transmitted to be displayed on the overview display ( cf . , Fig . 16 ) , which then can be interpreted by operators . This can be referred to as auto - matic input . Also , some representational states are continuously reﬁned in the information process , e . g . , as the target tracker auto - matically tracks identiﬁed objects at sea , and thereby change the information on the overview display . 5 . 3 . Distributed cognitive processes In this section cognition is presented from a distributed cogni - tion point of view , and its way of portraying cognitive processes . From a distributed cognition perspective the cognitive processes involved in the interaction become visible as they are distributed across the humans and the artefacts used ( cf . , Table 3 ) . In other words , the identiﬁcation of a vessel involves partly the automatic fusion of radar data and AIS information and partly the human cognitive process of recognising an object as a foreign vessel . To rec - ognise an object as a vessel that needs to be tracked is one of the most important cognitive processes that contribute to the IF pro - cess . The recognition of an object can be triggered by several things . 1st line operator Overview display Radar plots Internalstructure Radar 1 Radar readings AIS AIS data Radar 2 Radar readings AIS data Overview display Locatedobject Overview display Trackedobject Transformation between artefacts Transformation between artefact and human Transformation within the same artefact Fig . 12 . Transformation between artefacts , which changes the original representational state . For speciﬁcation of the notation see Fig . 7 and Table 1 . Computer E - mail Summary report List of vessels Overview display Trackedobject 1st line operator Internalstructure Radio Auditoryinfo Overview display Identifiedobject Optic camera Visual picture 2nd line operator Internalstructure 1st line operator Internalstructure Fig . 13 . Examples of transformations between humans and artefacts . A change in representational state occurs as information is transformed from human internal structure to a form accessible to others . For speciﬁcation of the notation see Fig . 7 and Table 1 . Folder Collection of faxes Fax A fax Piece of Information Overview display Identifiedobject Fig . 14 . Change of representational state within an artefact . Each time a fax is added , the folder changes its representational state . Similarly , each time new information is added to the overview display its representational state changes . For speciﬁcation of the notation see Fig . 7 and Table 1 . 72 M . Nilsson et al . / Information Fusion 13 ( 2012 ) 60 – 78 For instance , external information sources , such as email , draw the operators’ attention towards a speciﬁc kind of vessel . Also , previous experience and knowledge ( memory ( internal or external structures ) ) make them notice and attend to a speciﬁc vessel ( cf . Table 3 , no . 4 , 5 , and 9 ) . To recognise an object is a process where different features of the object are matched by the operators , with information from external information sources or internal knowledge ( cf . Table 3 , no . 1 , 2 , 6 , 7 , and 8 ) . The memory is distributed between humans and artefacts . For instance , the folder provides an external resource that extends human memory , and transforms individual memory into external memory shared by all the operators . The folder is also an object of interest in the fusion process , and as such it not only draws the individual operator’s attention but also facilitates shared atten - tion . In addition , situation awareness ( general understanding of the current situation ) may trigger the operators’ attention towards a speciﬁc vessel . ( See Figs . 17 and 18 ) . Reasoning about the provided information is also needed in order to determine whether or not the located object should be further processed . Here the operators’ ability to reason refers to transforming the information provided on the overview display into internal structures of the operators , where the information can be related to past experiences or information from other sources ( e . g . , Table 3 , no . 1 , 2 , 3 , 7 , 11 , etc . ) . For instance , email , tele - phone , and optic camera provide additional information that pro - vides the operator with the possibility to trust the identity of the object ( i . e . , trust the information on the overview display ) ( cf . Table 3 , no . 2 and 11 ) . That is , the possibility to double check the identity reported through other artefacts ( e . g . , data base , email , etc . ) increases trust . To be noted , the camera is considered to be an important tool as it extends the vision of the operator and pro - vides the operator with ﬁrsthand experience ( this should be com - pared to , e . g . , the Internet which is considered as a source with a higher degree of uncertainty ) . The information is then added as a property to the identiﬁed objects . The decision making activity involves the concern of whether or not the information should be passed onto be accessed by other organisations ( cf . , Table 3 , no . 9 and 11 ) . Moreover , a key part of the fusion process is communication which is mediated by several artefacts . Some equipment speciﬁcally provides a means for com - munication , such as the Intranet and VHS Radio ( cf . Table 3 , no . 3 and 6 ) . The equipment mediates communication and facilitates a common understanding of the current situation , that is , situation awareness ( cf . [ 33 ] ) . Notably , while situation awareness is facilitated by the over - view display , other artefacts are equally important , e . g . , optical camera , Intranet , and VHS radio ( cf . Table 3 , no . 2 , 3 and 6 ) . Situa - tion awareness , then , is a process distributed among the operators and the artefacts they interact with , and there is no one individual or one artefact that holds a complete situational picture . This means , situation awareness is not centralised to one single display ( i . e . , situation picture ) , or any other entity ( including humans ) , since no entity on its own can provide meaning to the current sit - uation . Even though the overview display provides a summary of the current situation , the way it is perceived within the context of its use , emerges from the interaction between several entities , which leads to an understanding of the current situation . For example , news items posted on internet as well as previous knowl - edge of operator can provide context and thus provide meaning to the items displayed on the overview display . This is further 1st line operator Internalstructure Optic camera Visual picture Overview display Identifiedobject Computer E - mail Radio Auditoryinfo Fax One fax Fig . 15 . Humans mediate information propagation between optic camera and overview display , enabling changes in representational states . The same process is initiated for email , fax , database , etc . For speciﬁcation of the notation see Fig . 7 and Table 1 . Overview display Radar plots Radar Radar readings AIS AIS data Radar Radar readings AIS data Fig . 16 . Automatic technology mediated transformation of representational states . For speciﬁcation of the notation see Fig . 7 and Table 1 . M . Nilsson et al . / Information Fusion 13 ( 2012 ) 60 – 78 73 exempliﬁed by the fact that each 12 h period is summarised in a PowerPoint presentation which to some degree allows knowledge and situation awareness to be shared between co - workers ( but it is not made accessible to other responsible organisations ) . It should be noted that the PowerPoint presentation is not only a report on identiﬁed vessels ( the ‘‘summary report’’ including objective attri - butes such as name , position , etc . , describing identiﬁed vessels ) , but is also intended to capture the operators’ impressions of the current situation ( e . g . , the knowledge and experience of individual operators used to interpret the current situation is included ) . Recognition Attention Memory Trust Situationawareness Overview display Radar Radar AIS Email Telephone Fax VHSradio Opticcamera TV Internet Database Requested input Automatic input Airplane Surveillance boat SituationPicture Communication unit Diary Intranet Powerpoint presentation External output Internal output Communication Summary report Reasoning Decsiion Making Fig . 17 . Schematic exempliﬁcation of what can trigger a cognitive process in the support of the fusion process ( i . e . , not information ﬂow , per se ) . For simplicity , an abstraction level has been chosen where each white box refers to a speciﬁc cognitive process , although , in reality , according to distributed cognition , these processes are distributed among humans and artefacts . The arrows indicate what can trigger each process . The illustration is a simpliﬁcation functioning as an example of what such a process can look like , that is , the process does not display individual differences or cognitive load . Organisational structure ( e . g . , social rules , roles , and physical structure ) Environment ( e . g . , sensors ) Decision maker 1 Rep . state Sensor ( s ) Rep . state Sensor ( s ) Rep . state IF system functionality Rep . state Other artifact ( s ) / tool ( s ) Rep . state Other information systems Rep . state Decision maker 2 Rep . state Decision maker n Rep . state Automatic Automatic / requested Fig . 18 . Fusion process abstracted from the identiﬁed transformation of representational states in humans and technology ( see Fig . 7 and Table 1 for notation ) . 74 M . Nilsson et al . / Information Fusion 13 ( 2012 ) 60 – 78 Hence , the overview display on its own is not enough to provide the operator with situation awareness . 6 . Discussion It might very well be argued that the empirical example of fu - sion processes in a maritime surveillance control room discussed here is too simplistic to be an appropriate representative of ad - vanced fusion processes in general . In other cases , these could be much more complex , much less interactive , or even fully auto - mated and not involving human operators at all . However , the point of the case study is not its universality , but rather to illustrate three points : ( 1 ) In many real - world cases of fusion , many of the rather abstract information fusion models discussed in Section 2 , such as the JDL model , have their limitations . ( 2 ) Many of the rather formally structured information fusion methods discussed in Section 2 . 2 , such as agent based and human factors approaches , focus only on some of the many relevant aspects in human – machine interaction , and that ( 3 ) an distributed cognition analysis can help to overcome some of these limitations . We believe that , in this sense , the chosen example is indeed representative of many – although certainly not all – real - world cases of fusion where human operators interact with each other as well as various technological tools – and that it illustrates how distributed cogni - tion can reveal relevant human – machine interaction issues that are not covered by other existing analysis methods . The following subsections will elaborate in more detail on the implications of a distributed cognition perspective . 6 . 1 . Increase the understanding of existing human – machine fusion processes As discussed in the introductory section , it has been acknowl - edged by several information fusion authors that the JDL model ( for example ) does not sufﬁciently capture , let alone explain , hu - man – computer interaction and cooperation . In the particular case study discussed here , the technology components investigated could be categorised as operating ﬁrst and foremost at JDL Level 1 ( i . e . , identiﬁcation and tracking ) . However , taking a distributed view [ 7 ] on the fusion process ( i . e . , including both humans and technology ) the outcome can also naturally be classiﬁed as contrib - uting to situation assessment and awareness , i . e . , JDL Level 2 . This illustrates that the ( technological ) system might have been devel - oped to have level 1 functionality , but once human users ( with their knowledge , inference capacities , etc . ) are involved as a com - ponent of the overall system , it provides , to some degree , level 2 functionality as well ( although not an automated level 2 system in this case ) . That is , by using a distributed cognition perspective , the fusion processes , extend beyond the boundary of one particular ( technological ) system or a single linear ( automatic ) transforma - tion from multiple data sources towards a human receiver ( as por - trayed by the JDL model ) . Instead , these fusion processes actually are emergent from the interaction between human and technolog - ical entities ( Fig . 18 ) . In fact , that the fusion process extends the boundary of technology is further reinforced by the fact that exter - nal resources continuously affect the outcome of the process . This has also been highlighted by Blasch [ 2 ] , where level 1 re - ferred to machines and level 2 / 3 referred to denoted humans ( cf . , Fig . 3a ) . The JDL model as such does not take this into account and in that sense does not capture the full granularity of fusion processes emerging from the user and the ( technological ) system . Neither are other systems or artefacts accounted for that contrib - ute to , for example , situation awareness ( situation assessment ) ac - counted for . Even with the various extensions of the JDL model discussed in Section 2 , the model does not explicitly address or examine the interaction between users and information fusion technology . Hence , as argued by Hall et al . [ 1 ] , and discussed at length in the introduction , there is a need to accommodate the interaction between human cognition , interface technology , and the environment ( cf . [ 7 ] ) . In this article , we have argued that by using a distributed cognition perspective and analysing human - technology interactions as propagations of information and trans - formations of representational states ( which are relatively med - ium - independent , i . e . , independent of whether they are carried out by people or machines ) , provides the means to characterise these interactions . As a result , deeper insights into the role of HCI in fusion emerge ( cf . [ 7 ] ) . In particular , in the distributed cognition analysis , not only can the origin of and reason for the interaction be captured , i . e . , the underlying cognitive mechanisms , but also the human users can be identiﬁed as active components in the fusion process . In other words , the operators aid , or in fact partially implement , the fusion process by reﬁning the output and collecting more information when required . As discussed earlier , the active role of the user is not commonly acknowledged in many of the models existing in information fusion research ( cf . the currently most accepted ver - sion of the JDL model ( cf . Fig . 1 ) and , the most often cited original version of the OODA loop , where no feedback loops are included in the model ( cf . , Fig . 3 ) ) . There are of course models such as Blasch’s [ 2 ] User - Fusion model ( cf . Fig . 3a ) and the CECA model [ 25 ] in which the user is portrayed as an active component . However , these models ( so far ) remain fairly abstract and general , and there - fore do not describe in detail how the user can play an active role , how that role can be identiﬁed and analysed in concrete cases , and what the overall implications are . In addition , as a consequence of viewing the human user as an active component in the fusion process , different categories of input could be identiﬁed in the case study . It could be seen that users ac - tively requested information from additional information sources when necessary , while other information sources were automati - cally perceived by the operators ( e . g . , audio information from the radio was automatically picked up by operators , without request , providing situation awareness , i . e . , the radio provided a context for the information displayed on the overview display ) . This is not typically acknowledged in information fusion research . Furthermore , the interaction between operators and informa - tion fusion technology should be viewed as bi - directionally interac - tions , i . e . , the users support the fusion process and similarly , the technological system supports the user . It could be argued that a traditional view of the human user is embedded in the visualisa - tion of the JDL - user model as it does not consider in what ways the system can extend the users’ cognitive processes . Blasch [ 2 ] , for instance , ( cf . , Fig . 3b ) speciﬁcally highlights different ways the user can contribute to the fusion process according to the different JDL levels ( i . e . , value , priority , context , intent , utility reﬁnement ) . However , as illustrated in Fig . 3b ( the User - Fusion model ) , the ‘‘interaction’’ is actually one directional . This means the contribu - tion of the system to the user’s reasoning and the contribution of the interaction with other systems are not taken into account . In contrast , our study has used distributed cognition to highlight the fact that , as well as how , cognitive processes are distributed be - tween humans and technology , both contributing to the fusion process . Situation awareness ( cf . , [ 33 ] ) , for example , is here a pro - cess distributed among the group of operators and the artefacts they interact with , rather than the output of a speciﬁc artefact such as the overview display . From a distributed cognition perspective , when cognition and situation awareness are scattered over many different people , artefacts and time , not all of the relevant cues and their relations that contribute to overall distributed cognition or overall situation awareness , can be a priori formalised in information needs , intents , beliefs , ontology et cetera to produce M . Nilsson et al . / Information Fusion 13 ( 2012 ) 60 – 78 75 the required common ground for communication between auto - mated fusion nodes or between human and machine agents . Also , part of cognition is intuitive or tacit , and therefore impossible to formalise at all , whereas the elements that can be formalised face the challenge to be updated while they are continuously and dynamically evolving . These considerations put limits to ap - proaches that rely on automating intents , beliefs and ontology , in line with Dreyfus’ [ 62 ] general critique of artiﬁcial intelligence . It goes beyond the aims and focus of this article to discuss the differ - ences between agent - based human - technology integrated fusion and the distributed cognition approach in detail , but our argument would be that even with evolving capabilities of machines to per - form parts of higher - level fusion ( situation and impact assess - ment ) , still ( a ) collaboration between humans and machines is necessary in most cases ( an observation shared with [ 15 ] ) and ( b ) the interaction between humans and machines goes beyond the display and mere representational issues of objects and their relations ( an observation where distributed cognition differs from the agent - based approach of [ 15 ] ) . Whether the agent - based approach and distributed cognition in the future are exploring dif - ferent alternative ways of understanding and designing human - computer interaction , or complementing each other , is one of the issues to be addressed in future research . 6 . 2 . Informing the design of information fusion processes and systems There is an underlying drive within the information fusion com - munity to increase automation where possible . However , to change a manual process to an automatic process is problematic ; increasing the automation does not necessarily mean that the fu - sion process becomes better ( in terms of , e . g . , speed , reliability , accuracy , etc . ) . Issues such as loss of control , lack of trust , and acceptance are all important human – computer interaction issues which affect the overall outcome of the process . However , as dis - tributed cognition is used to dig deeper into the black boxes of hu - man fusion and human machine interaction , it could shed light over this issue . In principle , distributed cognition ( in its original form ) does not provide any answers of how things can be done bet - ter or how to improve design of technology . It is a descriptive rather than prescriptive approach . However , it can provide the means to create hypothesis regarding what can fail / improve if a speciﬁc task / artefact in the process is to be automated / excluded . Consider the listed artefacts in Table 3 ; from a computational per - spective it may be possible to automate the fusion of the data pro - vided by the optical camera and radar readings ( together with the data base with pictures ) through various image processing algo - rithms . However , the distributed cognition analysis has revealed that those artefacts have an additional purpose to support , for in - stance , situation awareness and trust ( cf . Table 3 ) . It was observed that the operator used the camera to visually conﬁrm the identity of the vessel of interest . If the operator had visually identiﬁed the object it was provided with a high trust rate . Hence , when auto - mating the manual process those additional aspects need to be considered and further investigated as it may be important for the success of the overall fusion process when utilised for human decision making . The distributed cognition analysis also shed light over the role of additional artefacts contributing to the process which are not likely to be automated . This may due to both compu - tational and cognitive challenges . For instance , it may be difﬁcult to automate the process when humans perceive audio information from the radio in the background and associates it with internal structures ( e . g . , experience , situation awareness ) , and use it when interpreting the information overview display . This process is situ - ation dependent , dynamic and unpredictable . In addition , a distributed cognition analysis can provide the means to identify how humans cooperate with technology within a fusion process . The cognitive distributed analysis highlights the information ﬂow and its transformations of representational states and can thereby captures the cooperation points between human and technology . By analysing the activities associated with such cooperation points ( i . e . , changes of representational states ) , coop - eration can be characterised . Examples of activities include track - ing the history of actions , the process can be continuously updated , the order of tasks is ﬂexible , the humans can comment and rate the trust of object , etc . This knowledge can be used when improving old or designing new fusion processes . However , the ef - fect of all of the changes proposed needs to be empirically investi - gated in order to test its validity and user acceptance . In summary , we have argued and shown , throughout this arti - cle , that distributed cognition can provide the fusion community with a complementary approach to reveal the actual interaction between human and machine fusion in practice . Profound insight on such a key element of mixed initiative fusion systems can thus inform the ( re ) design of such systems in invaluable ways . Distrib - uted cognition is more detailed in its analysis than general fusion models like JDL and OODA . Compared to approaches like agent based ubiquitous fusion , distributed cognition is more focused on a detailed level to understand how cognitive processes function as they are , rather than to impose a general analysis framework or set of concepts to describe human – machine interaction . How - ever , distributed cognition in general ( when applied in other cases than fusion ) has received criticism for lacking a clear set of con - cepts , constructs , and units of analysis which would enable com - parison between cases and give clearer directions for how to deduce suggestions for improvement [ 40 , 63 ] . That is , distributed cognition is ﬁrst and foremost an approach for understanding underlying cognitive mechanism of humans embedded in an envi - ronment . While we respect and value the distributed cognition’s ethnographical strength and certainly want to keep that , we agree with the critics that some more uniformity in constructs and graphical notations would strengthen the further development of distributed cognition towards a method that enables comparison between cases , the formulation of qualitative performance criteria , and thereby a more uniﬁed way of deriving guidelines for system design . In Nilsson et al . [ 58 ] , we have taken some initial steps towards structuring the distributed cognition approach into a method . However , this method needs further development in order to pro - vide answers to such tricky issues such as , e . g . , ‘‘relevance’’ . How does a fusion system , e . g . , the designers of the technological fusion application , the self learning adaptive algorithm and sensor man - agement functionality , the human operators , their co - workers and decision makers all together agree on what is currently the dis - tinction between relevant and irrelevant data / information ? Fur - ther , how does this complex fusion system evolve to a renewed deﬁnition of what is and is not relevant or when they receive cues that either their environment or their mission has changed and , hence , ‘relevance’ needs to be reinterpreted ? In Laere et al . [ 64 ] and Nilsson et al . [ 65 ] we have taken some initial steps to answer such complicated questions , but more research is needed to an - swer how this continuous redeﬁnition of ‘what is relevant and what is not’ works . It could also very well be argued that the distributed cognition approach ( see also [ 7 ] ) presented and used here has its limitations as well , and might not be able to scale up to , or be useful for , the analysis of all cases of human – machine interactive fusion . In fact , we would certainly agree to that , with regard to the current state of distributed cognition as a methodology . The point of the exam - ple presented here of course has not been to introduce a ready - made methodology and demonstrate its universal applicability , but rather to take ﬁrst steps towards complementing current infor - mation fusion models and approaches with a distributed cognition 76 M . Nilsson et al . / Information Fusion 13 ( 2012 ) 60 – 78 perspective ( cf . , [ 58 ] ) . We envision that , like the models discussed in Section 2 , the distributed cognition perspective over time needs to be further adapted to , and co - evolve with , existing information fusion theories , models , methods and practices . 7 . Summary and conclusions Part of the aim of this paper has been ( a ) to argue , along with other information fusion researchers ( e . g . , Blasch [ 2 ] ) , that current information fusion theories and models , in particular the predom - inant JDL model , do not sufﬁciently take into account the active role of human users in fusion processes , ( b ) to demonstrate with an empirical real - world case study that even in seemingly rela - tively simple cases there can be complex interactions between hu - man and technological information processing in fusion processes , and ( c ) to demonstrate the usefulness of a distributed cognition perspective in analysing such processes . In particular , the case study illustrates that there can be an added value in applying a dis - tributed cognition perspective and methodology to the analysis of fusion processes as it not only supports an integrated view of both user and technology mediated activities in the fusion process , but also provides an explanation to the origin and purpose of the inter - action in terms of underlying cognitive mechanisms . With the case study presented here , the validity of our previous theoretical argu - ment put forward in [ 7 ] is further strengthened . The overall ﬁnd - ings can be captured in the following tenets : (cid:2) Many real - world IF processes , such as the example analysed here , cannot be reduced to the processing of a speciﬁc technical system ; rather , the fusion process in many cases emerges from the interaction between technology and its user ( s ) , and extends beyond user ( s ) , artefact ( s ) , and time . (cid:2) Fusion processes , such as the case studied here , consist of prop - agations of information through a system of artefacts and oper - ators where changes in representational states can be identiﬁed . Also , human and technology mediated transformations occur which can be automatically or actively initiated . Furthermore , in the example external and internal information sources have been identiﬁed . (cid:2) A distributed cognition view leads to equal consideration of manual ( operator ) as well as automated instances of fusion in the same overall fusion process . For instance , it does not distin - guish between representational states in technology or opera - tors , and the user is treated as an active component parallel to other ( technological ) components . (cid:2) Characterising the fusion process as transformations of repre - sentational state , the operator is naturally accommodated as an active part of the process . (cid:2) Different types of input to the fusion process have been identi - ﬁed and can be ( roughly ) categorised as actively requested or automatically perceived ones . (cid:2) A number of cognitive processes , such as situation awareness , memory , attention , trust , etc . , have been identiﬁed as resources of the fusion process and these processes are distributed across the operators and the artefacts they interact with . The distributed cognition perspective and case study presented here naturally only constitute initial steps towards a more encom - passing distributed cognition framework and methodology for information fusion research , but we are convinced that further the - oretical and methodological developments along these lines will be fruitful in the analysis of interactive fusion processes , for example , in the identiﬁcation of process failures , in the design and develop - ment of new information fusion processes and systems , as well as in the re - design or automation of existing ones . Acknowledgements This work was supported by the Information Fusion Research Program ( www . infofusion . se ) at the University of Skövde , Sweden , in partnership with the Swedish Knowledge Foundation under grant 2003 / 0104 and participating partner companies , in particular SAAB Systems . Furthermore , a special thank you goes to the partic - ipants of the case study . References [ 1 ] D . Hall , B . D . Hellar , M . McNeese , J . Llinas , Assessing the JDL model : A survey and analysis of decision and cognitive process models and comparison with the JDL model , in : Proceedings of the National Symposium on Sensor Data Fusion ( NSSDF ) , 2007 . [ 2 ] E . Blasch , Level 5 ( User Reﬁnement ) issues supporting information fusion management , in : Proceedings of Information Fusion , Florence , Italy , 2006 . [ 3 ] M . J . Hall , S . A . Hall , T . Tate , Removing the HCI bottleneck : how the human computer interface ( HCI ) affects performance of data fusion systems , in : Proceedings of MSS National Symposium on Sensor and Data Fusion , San Diego CA , 2000 , pp . 89 – 104 . [ 4 ] E . Blasch , S . Plano , JDL Level 5 fusion model ‘‘user reﬁnements’’ issues and applications in group tracking , SPIE Aerosense 4729 ( 2002 ) 270 – 279 . [ 5 ] J . Llinas , C . Bowman , G . Rogova , A . Steinberg , E . Waltz , F . White , Revisiting the JDL data fusion model II , in : Proceedings of International Conference on Information Fusion , Stockholm , Sweden , 2004 . [ 6 ] E . Bossé , J . Roy , S . Paradis , Modeling and simulation in support of the design of a data fusion system , International Journal of Information Fusion 1 ( 2000 ) 77 – 87 . [ 7 ] M . Nilsson , T . Ziemke , Rethinking Level 5 : distributed cognition and information fusion , in : Proceedings of the International Information Fusion Conference , Florence , Italy , 2006 . [ 8 ] E . Hutchins , Cognition in the Wild , MIT Press , Cambridge , 1995 . [ 9 ] J . Hollan , E . Hutchins , D . Kirsh , Distributed cognition : towards a new foundation for human – computer interaction research , ACM Transactions on Computer – Human Interaction 2 ( 2000 ) 174 – 196 . [ 10 ] E . Bossé , J . Roy , S . Wark , Concepts , Models , and Tools for Information Fusion , Artech House , Northwood , 2007 . [ 11 ] D . L . Hall , S . A . H . McMullen , Mathematical Techniques in Multisensor Data Fusion , second ed . , Artech House , Northwood , 2004 . [ 12 ] D . Hall , J . Llinas , Handbook of Multisensor Data Fusion , CSC Press , Boca Raton , 2001 . [ 13 ] C . L . Bowman , A . N . Steinberg , Systems engineering approach for implementing data fusion systems , in : M . E . Liggins , D . L . Hall , J . Llinas ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Multisensor Data Fusion : Theory and Practice , 2nd ed . , CRC Press , Boca Raton , 2009 . [ 14 ] E . Blasch , I . Kadar , J . Salerno , M . Kokar , S . Das , G . Powell , D . Corkill , E . Ruspini , Issues and challenges in situation assessment ( Level 2 Fusion ) , Journal of Advances in Information Fusion 1 ( 2006 ) 122 – 139 . [ 15 ] D . A . Lambert , A blueprint for higher level fusion systems , International Journal of Information Fusion 10 ( 2009 ) 6 – 24 . [ 16 ] D . Lambert , J . Scholz , A dialectic for network centric warfare , in : Proceedings of the 10th International Command and Control Research and Technology Symposium ( ICCRTS ) , MacLean , Virginia , 2005 . [ 17 ] A . M . Bisantz , N . Mazaeva , Work domain analysis using the abstraction hierarchy : two contrasting cases , in : A . M . Bisantz , C . M . Burns ( Eds . ) , Applications of Cognitive Work Analysis , CRC Press , Boca Raton , 2008 . [ 18 ] A . M . Bisantz , G . Rogova , E . Little , On the integration of cognitive work analysis within a multisource information fusion development methodology , in : Proceedings of Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting , 2004 , pp . 494 – 498 . [ 19 ] N . A . Stanton , P . M . Salmon , G . H . Walker , C . Baber , D . P . Jenkins , Human Factors Methods : A Practical Guide for Engineering and Design , Ashgate , England , 2005 . [ 20 ] A . N . Steinberg . , C . L . Bowman . , F . E . White . , Revisions to the JDL data fusion model , in : Proceedings of SPIE , Sensor Fusion : Architectures , Algorithms , and Applications , vol . 3719 , April 1999 , pp . 430 – 441 . [ 21 ] J . Kessler , Functional description of the data fusion process , in : Technical Report , Ofﬁce of Naval Technology , Naval Air Development Center , Warminster , PA , 1992 . [ 22 ] J . Boyd , Destruction & creation , presentation , 1976 . < http : / / www . goalsys . com / books / documents / DESTRUCTION _ AND _ CREATION . pdf > ( accessed 29 . 05 . 09 ) . [ 23 ] J . Boyd , A discourse on winning and loosing : Maxwell Air Force Base , presentation , 1987 . < http : / / www . d - n - i . net / dni / john - r - boyd > ( accessed 29 . 05 . 09 ) . [ 24 ] B . Brehmer , The dynamic OODA loop : amalgamating Boyd’s OODA loop and the Cybernetic approach to command and control , in : Proceedings of 10th International Command and Control Research and Technology Symposium , Virginia , 2005 . [ 25 ] D . J . Bryant , Critique , explore , compare , and adapt ( CECA ) : a new model for command decision making , in : Technical Report : DRDC Toronto TR 2003 - 105 , Defence R & D Canada , Toronto , 2003 . M . Nilsson et al . / Information Fusion 13 ( 2012 ) 60 – 78 77 [ 26 ] R . Breton , R . Rousseau , The C - OODA : a cognitive version of the OODA loop to represent C2 activities , in : 10th International Command and Control Research and Technology Symposium : The Future of C2 , McLean , VA , 2005 . [ 27 ] J . Boyd , The essence of winning and loosing : presentation made , 1995 . < http : / / www . chetrichards . com / modern _ business _ strategy / boyd / essence / eowl _ frameset . htm > ( accessed 29 . 05 . 09 ) . [ 28 ] E . A . Smith , Effects Based Operations : Applying Network Centric Warfare in Peace , Crisis , and War , Information Age Transformation Series , CCRP Publication series , 2002 . [ 29 ] R . Rousseau , R . Breton , The M - OODA Loop : a model incorporating control functions and teamwork in the OODA Loop , in Proceedings of the 2004 Command and Control Research Symposium , 2004 . [ 30 ] T . Grant , Unifying planning and control using an OODA - based architecture , in : Proceedings of the 2005 Annual Research Conference of the South African Institute of Computer Scientists and Information Technologists on IT Research in Developing Countries , 2005 , pp . 159 – 170 . [ 32 ] J . Salerno , M . Hinman , D . Boulware , Building a framework for Situation Awareness , in : Information Fusion , Stockholm , Sweden , 2004 . [ 33 ] M . R . Endsley , Toward a theory of situation awareness in dynamic systems , International Journal of Human Factors 37 ( 1995 ) 32 – 64 . [ 34 ] M . R . Endsley , Theoretical underpinnings of situation awareness : a critical review , in : M . R . Endsley , D . J . Garland ( Eds . ) , Situation Awareness Analysis and Measurement , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Mahwah , 2000 . [ 36 ] C . M . Burns , A . M . Bisantz , E . M . Roth , Lessons from a comparison of work domain models : representational choices and their implications , International Journal of Human Factors 46 ( 4 ) ( 2004 ) 711 – 727 . [ 37 ] B . Hazlehurst , C . K . McMullen , P . N . Gorman , Distributed cognition in the heart room : how situation awareness arises from coordinated communications during cardiac surgery , Journal of Biomedical Informatics 40 ( 5 ) ( 2007 ) 539 – 551 . [ 38 ] R . J . J . Boland , R . V . Tenkasi , D . Te’en , Designing information technology to support distributed cognition , Organization Science 5 ( 1994 ) 456 – 475 . [ 39 ] C . P . Nemeth , R . I . Cook , M . O’Connor , P . A . Klock , Using cognitive artifacts to understand distributed cognition , in : IEEE Transactions on Systems , Man and Cybernetics - Part A : Systems and Humans , vol . 34 , 2004 . [ 40 ] C . A . Halverson , Activity theory and distributed cognition : or what does CSCW need to do with theories ? , Computer Supported Cooperative Work 11 ( 2002 ) 243 – 267 [ 41 ] M . S . Ackerman , C . Halverson , Organizational memory as objects , processes , and trajectories : an examination of organisational memory in use , Computer Supported Cooperative Work 13 ( 2004 ) 155 – 189 . [ 42 ] E . Hutchins , How a cockpit remembers its speeds , Cognitive Science 19 ( 1995 ) 265 – 288 . [ 43 ] P . Marti , The choice of the unit of analysis for modelling real work settings , Cognition , Technology & Work 2 ( 2000 ) 62 – 74 . [ 44 ] R . E . Fields , P . C . Wright , P . Marti , M . Palmonari , Air trafﬁc control as a distributed cognitive system : a study of external representations , in : Proceedings of the Ninth European Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics , 1998 , pp . 85 – 90 . [ 45 ] A . Blandford , D . Furniss , DiCoT : a methodology for applying Distributed Cognition to the design of team working systems , in : Gilroy , S . W . , Harrison , M . D . , ( Eds . ) Interactive Systems : 12th International Workshop ( DSVIS 2005 ) , UK , 2006 , pp . 26 – 38 . [ 46 ] M . Perry , Process , representation and task world : Distributed cognition and the organisation of information , in : Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Research in Information Needs , Seeking and Use in Different Contexts , Shefﬁeld , UK , 1998 , pp . 552 – 567 . [ 47 ] S . Rinkus , M . Walji , K . A . Johnson - Troop , J . T . Malin , J . P . Turley , J . W . Smith , J . Zhang , Human - centered design of a distributed knowledge management system , Journal of Biomedical Informatics 38 ( 2005 ) 4 – 17 . [ 48 ] J . Eden , The distributed cognitive walkthrough , in : Proceedings of CHI 2007 , San Jose , USA , 2007 . [ 49 ] P . Wright , B . Fields , M . Harrison , Analysing human – computer interaction as distributed cognition : the resources model , Human Computer Interaction 15 ( 2000 ) 1 – 41 . [ 50 ] J . Galliers , S . Wilson , J . Fone , A method for determining information ﬂow breakdown in clinical systems , International Journal of Medical Informatics 76 ( 2007 ) . [ 51 ] M . V . Ferruzca , J . J . Fabergas , J . M . Monguet , MAIA : A method for applying distributed cognition to the management of learning system , in : Proceedings of EDMEDIA , 2007 , pp . 1413 – 1422 . [ 52 ] Y . Rogers , New theoretical approaches for HCI , in : Annual review of information science and technology , vol . 28 , 2004 , pp . 87 – 143 . [ 53 ] M . Q . Patton , Qualitative Research & Evaluation Methods , third ed . , Sage Publications , California , USA , 2002 . [ 54 ] J . Hartley , Case study research , in : C . Cassell , G . Symon ( Eds . ) , Essential Guide to Qualitative Methods in Organizational Research , Sage , London , 2004 . [ 55 ] M . H . Agar , The Professional Stranger : An Informal Introduction to Ethnography , Emerald Group Publishing Limited , Bingley , 2008 . [ 56 ] D . Waddington , Participant observation , in : C . Cassell , G . Symon ( Eds . ) , Essential Guide to Qualitative Methods in Organizational Research , Sage , London , 2004 . [ 57 ] K . M . Dewalt , B . R . Dewalt , Participant Observation : A Guide for Fieldworkers , Altamira Press , Walnut Creek , Ca : USA , 2002 . [ 58 ] M . Nilsson , T . Susi , J . van Laere , T . Ziemke , Formulising Distributed cognition into a tool to capture information fusion processes , in : Proceedings of Skövde Workshop of Information Fusion Topics ( SWIFT 2008 ) , Skövde , Sweden , 2008 . [ 59 ] B . Hazlehurst , P . N . Gorman , C . K . McMullen , Distributed cognition : an alternative model of cognition for medical informatics , International Journal of Medical Informatics 77 ( 2008 ) 226 – 234 . [ 60 ] M . Perry , Distributed cognition , in : J . M . Carroll ( Ed . ) , HCI Models , Theories , and Frameworks Toward aMultidisciplinary Science , Morgan Kauffman Publishers , San Francisco , USA , 2003 . [ 61 ] E . Hutchins , Distributed cognition , in : N . J . Smelser , P . B . Baltes ( Eds . ) , International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Science , Elsevier Science Ltd . , 2001 , pp . 2068 – 2072 . [ 62 ] H . Dreyfus , What Computers Still Cannot Do : A Critique of Artiﬁcial Reason , MIT Press , New York , 1992 . [ 63 ] B . A . Nardi , Coda and response to Christine Halverson , Computer Supported Cooperative Work 11 ( 2002 ) 269 – 275 . [ 64 ] J . van Laere , M . Nilsson , T . Ziemke , Implications of a Weickian perspective on decision making for information fusion research and practice , in : Proceedings of the International Conference of Information Fusion , Quebec , Canada , 2007 . [ 65 ] M . Nilsson , J . van Laere , T . Ziemke , J . Edlund , Extracting rules from expert operators to support situation awareness in maritime surveillance , in : Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Fusion , Cologne , Germany 2008 . [ 66 ] M . R . Endsley , R . Hoffman , D . Kaber , E . Roth , Cognitive engineering and decision making : an overview and future course , Journal of Cognitive Engineering and Decision Making 1 ( 1 ) ( 2007 ) 1 – 21 . [ 67 ] L . G . Militello , C . O . Dominguez , G . Lintern , G . Klein , The role of cognitive systems engineering in the systems engineering design process , System Engineering ( article online in advance of print ) , 2009 ( accessed 15 . 05 . 10 ) . [ 68 ] E . Hollnagel , D . D . Woods , Joint Cognitive Systems : Foundations of Cognitive Systems Engineering , Taylor & Francis Group , Boca Raton : FL : USA , 2005 . 78 M . Nilsson et al . / Information Fusion 13 ( 2012 ) 60 – 78