Commentary 96 NoteCards in the Age Meets Perfect Catherine C . Marshall Microsoft Corporation 1 Microsoft Way Redmond , WA 98052 cathymar @ microsoft . com of the Web : Practice Abstract Frank Halasz ' s " Reflections on NoteCards : Seven Issues for the Next Generation of Hypermedia Systems " was a remarkably prescient analy - sis that continues to influence the international hypertext research com - munity . Meanwhile , the Web has offered a basic reality check on the seven issues and has given us , as a community , an opportunity to learn from many and diverse hypertext practitioners . In essence , theWeb has brought hypertext out of the realm of research and into the realm of the everyday , the ordinary , the practical . In particular , I would like to intro - duce three major themes that come from observations of the Web in use : ( 1 ) The growing heterogeneity of hypermedia genres , uses , and users ; ( 2 ) the need to acknowledge the distinct role of hypermedia readers and , more specifically , provide hyperrrtedia readers with tools for personal annotation , re - retrieval , gathering , contextual access from mobile devices , and collaborative reading ; and ( 3 ) the recurring tension between formal and informal hypertext structures and representations . Keywords hypertext / hypermedia , use , reading , retrieval , formality user interface design , World - Wide Web , Introduction " Reflections on NoteCards : Seven Issues for the Next Generation of Hypermedia Systems " ( Halasz , 1988 ) prescribed a research agenda that profoundly influenced the direction and thought of the international hypermedia community for more than a decade . Meanwhile , theWeb , a technology that was still on the drawing board when Halasz introduced his seven issues , gathered a force and momentum that surprised even the most fervent hypertext aficionados . By the mid 1990s , hypertext was no longer confined to the lab or academia ; instead , hypertext practitio - ners - people who read , designed , and otherwise used the technology in their day - to - day work - - had become commonplace , an acknowledged part of what was hailed as the new information economy . The term hypertext ( or more specifically , hypermedia 1 ) no longer needed Halasz ' s ACM Journal of Computer Documentation August 2001Nol . 25 , No . 3 ACM Journal of Computer Documentation , 2001 , 25 : 96 - 103 © 2001 by the Association for Computing Machinery . Commenlary 97 carefully crafted opening explanation , " Hypermedia is a style of building systems for information representa - tion and management around a network of multi - media nodes connected together by typed links " ( Halasz , 1988 , p . 836 ) . The fellow in the next airplane seat knew that hypertext meant clicking on a link to get to a new place ( and that reading hypertext was , in a word , surf - ing ) . Thus the world had simultaneously expanded and constricted for those of us who had participated in the development of what Halasz referred to as the second generation of hypermedia systems : Intermedia ( Yankel - ovich et al . , 1985 ) , NoteCards ( Halasz et al . , 1987 ) , KMS ( Akscyn et al . , 1988 ) , Hypercard ( Goodman , 1987 ) , Storyspace ( Bolter , 1991 ) , and many other sophisticated efforts to make useful and usable com - puter tools of this sort , tools that by and large supported intellectual work . The world had expanded in that our experiences supporting small homogeneous user com - munities and their tightly woven hypertext networks could be brought to bear on solving broader problems and seeding user communities that were much larger in scope and numbers . It had constricted just by virtue of the fact that , once everyone knew what hypertext was , it became much harder to extend the view of hypertext to include , for example , links that were non - network structures ( Halasz , 1991 ) or to imagine hypertexts as we did in which links were implied by action , by spa - tial and temporal characteristics , and could be more fluid and ambiguous ( Marshall and Shipman , 1995 ) . Given Halasz ' s prescient discussion of the techno - logical issues that came to light during the course of the NoteCards effort - - many of which still form the basis of research projects and chart a space of important unsolved problems - - it would be easy to interpret the Web as a limiting force , one that mowed the field to a simple page - based model of hypertext with embedded links . Unlike the original vision of hypertext , at the Web ' s outset link - making and annotation were the province of the pages ' authors . Nor could nodes be organized and structured in multiple ways ; instead , embedded links represented in HTML described a sin - gle way of structuring a hypertext . Furthermore , many of the efforts to introduce database - like transactions into hypertext were thwarted by the Web ' s intentional statelessness ; in fact , much earlyWeb research focused on ways of reintroducing state to theWeb . 2 However , the Web offered something else that tran - scended any limitations it introduced : the ability to learn from many and diverse practitioners . It gave us , as a research community , the most basic reality check on the seven issues , and gave all of us the ability to reconsider our earlier reflections . What I attempt to do here is to bounce critical parts of the seven issues off the characteristics of the Web and our observations of ' the Web in use . What aspects of the seven issues stir dog us today , and what new questions have arisen through this unparaUeled opportunity to see hypertext in widespread use ? It is only fair to take under consid - eration Halasz ' s revisions to his original assessment of what the important issues are ( Halasz , 1991 ) ; these revisions prefigure some of the observations in this paper . In particular , I would like to introduce three major themes : ( 1 ) The growing heterogeneity of hyper - media genres , uses , and users ; ( 2 ) the need to acknowl - edge the distinct role of hypermedia readers , and more specifically , tools for using hypermedia beyond search ; and ( 3 ) the recurring tension between formal and infor - mal hypertext structures and representations . Heterogeneity of Hypermedia Genres , Uses , and Users One of the most noticeable assumptions underlying Halasz ' s seven issues is an unproblematic notion of the genres , uses , and users of hypermedia . The Web offers us unprecedented heterogeneity along all three of these dimensions . While Halasz recognized by 1991 that there was considerable diversity in our field , 3 he did not anticipate the webmasters , amateur publishers , advertisers , hucksters , and people of many walks of life who have taken up hypermedia as their chosen vehicle for expression and influence , but have no strong philo - sophical or design stance on many of the research issues that we take to heart ( whether or not scrolling destroys the navigational metaphor of hypermedia , for example ) . The second generation hypertext systems were designed with intellectual work in mind . We envisioned users to be people like ourselves - - students and teach - ers , lawyers and policy makers , researchers and ( later ) knowledge workers , museum - goers and information - seekers , writers and critics . We certainly did not envi - sion shoppers , pornographers , advertisers , entertain - ment - seekers , and media conglomerates as NoteCards users . Because intellectual work involves exploration and follows a model of readers as writers who respond to texts with annotations , links , and new hypertexts of their own , we inhabited an ethereal plane apart from APli | * . . . sAI i | / ~ i l a . . k s l r l i i . l l l l i i | | i l A . . . . . . i f ~ / ~ h441 - 1 ~ " il - - Co ~ nmentary 98 many of the day - to - day activities of people . Hyperme - din in the abstract was a populist , participatory medium , quite apart from our experiences in the paper document world . Even in Halasz ' s revised account of the seven issues in his memorable keynote address at Hypertext ' 91 , he still used intellectual work ( author - ing , knowledge representation , interactive fiction , com - puter - assisted software engineering , computer - aided instruction , and so on ) as the foil for his reflections on his past analysis . Instead , today a diverse spectrum of Web users have incorporated hypermedia into their work , their enter - tainment , and indeed their lives , and wonder more appropriately how hypermedia fits into the metaphors offered by their own activities , rather than how their activities fit into the model offered by hypermedia . For example , a librarian might wonder how a Web page should be cataloged given the Anglo - American Cata - loging Rules , and an on - line shopper might wonder whether an item has really been removed from her elec - tronic shopping cart if she ' s hit the Back button on her browser . A home user might wonder how he can find a porn site that caters to his most esoteric fetishes , and whether or not his kids can find the same one by look - ing through the browsing history . In a word , we are now confronted by a broader scope of intentions and by metaphors derived from a much broader range of asso - ciated activities . Let ' s look at how this increased scope changes our take on the issues . By 1991 , there was significant work on Halasz ' s first issue , search and query . It is clear that search is indeed a fundamental element of effective navigation . In fact , when we see people using the Web , they often use a search engine ( as opposed to a portal or known URL ) as a way of finding a starting point , switching to link - based navigation only when they ' re " close " to what they want . 4 And , as Halasz anticipated , hypermedia structure comes into play in some of the more successful search engines , albeit not in the spe - cific way we all expected , through user description of the desired structure , but instead through how many other pages link to this one . However , significant social factors have clouded the clear picture of search and query offered by the hypertext community . What do I mean by social factors ? As early as 1995 , it became clear that the one key battle was for readers ' attention . That year , newspapers like the San Jose Mer - cury News carried articles about Web content develop - ers spoofing the then - popular search engines by using false metadata to describe what a given page was about or by using words hidden in page backgrounds to intro - duce new terms or exaggerating the importance of oth - ers : If you want to attract people to your Web site , make sure you ' ve spiked your location with the hottest search keywords on the Net . So you may be selling widgets , but if you sprinkle a heavy dose of words such as " sex , " " nude " and " naked " into your site - - in ways that aren ' t necessarily visible to users - - you ' ll have the best - read widget site . Guaranteed . ( San Jose Mercury News , 1997 ) Hence , Web pages seeking reader attention might then use an entire dictionary ' s word list , so that every term brings the searcher to the site , or they would appeal to particular of the reader ' s prurient interests . Or an automobile dealership might have the word car duplicated 500 times in the metadata tag to affect the page ' s ranking , in much the way the Yellow Pages con - tained listings for AAA Bail Bonds or A - Aardvark Pest Control . From then on , a unique dialectic arose between search engine developers ( who sought to give their users what they were looking for so they would continue to use the search engine ) and content develop - ers ( who simply sought readers ' attention ) . Furthermore , intention comes into play even with - out deliberate misrepresentation . For example , Google uses the Web ' s link structures to bring factors like page connectedness ( and hence social evaluation of its worth ) into its evaluation of which pages best match a user ' s query . Unfortunately , this strategy does not work for certain genres of hypermedia that are visited and sought , but that do not have many incoming links ( again , pornography sites - - a significant genre on the Web - - provide good examples of this effect ) . Thus search engines have become invisible intermediaries between readers and authors of the hypermedia on the Web in a way that " Seven Issues " never anticipated . . The Distinct Role of Hypermedia Readers In the salad days of hypermedia systems , we pur - posefully ignored the divergence of needs between readers and writers . Readers , we reasoned , were on equal footing with writers . At any time , they could fruitfully switch roles ; in constructing meaning , a Gommentary 99 reader could transform into an annotator , and the anno - tator into a contributor ( Michalak and Coney , 1993 ) . Since then , it has become clear that there are many more readers than writers and that they occupy quite different niches in the hypermedia ecology ( Pitkow , 1998 ) . Readers are , in essence , gatherers ( Rosenberg , 1996 ) . Michel de Certeau is quoted by the historian Roger Chartier as offering the following almost poetic distinction between readers and writers : Far from being writersmfounders of their own place , heirs of the peasants of earlier ages now working on the soil of language , diggers of wells and builders of houses - - readers are travellers ; they move across lands belonging to someone else , like nomads poaching their way across fields they did not write , despoiling the wealth of Egypt to enjoy it themselves . . . . Reading takes no measures against the erosion of time ( one forgets oneself and also forgets ) , it does not keep what it acquires , or it does so poorly , and each of the places through which it passes is a repetition of the lost para - dise ( Chartier , 1994 , p . 1 ) . How does this distinction play out in Halaszian terms ? " Seven Issues " identified no technologies for readers ( save the acknowledgment that readers might interact with a separate presentation layer and that hypermedia materials might adapt to a reader ' s specific interests ) . In " As We May Think , " Vannevar Bush ( 1945 ) identified at least one new role and an associ - ated technology for readers , that of way - finding or path - making to link together formerly disparate bits of information ( displayed on a double - screen Memex ) . I would contend there are at least five other reading - ori - ented practices that bear some investigation when one looks at hypermedia in use : ( 1 ) personal annotation ( as opposed to published annotation ) ; ( 2 ) re - retrieval ; ( 3 ) gathering ( the intentional amassing of post - retrieval content with a specific purpose in mind ) ; ( 4 ) contextual access given , for example , mobile devices ; and ( 5 ) col - laborative reading . Each suggests an approach to defin - ing new technology . Personal Annotation Hypertext is fundamentally annotative , a character - istic manifested in the many mechanisms and systems for collaborative writing and scholarly commentary . But these mechanisms are not always appropriate for personal annotation , an unselfconscious practice that goes hand in hand with many reading tasks ( not leisure reading , but reading that is done with a purpose in mind ) . Nor is there much thought about how personal annotations might be useful to a community of hyper - text readers in much the same way that Amazon uses the reading and purchasing habits of anonymous read - ers like oneself to make recommendations . O ' Hara and SeUen found three characteristics of personal annotations on paper that distinguished them from their counterparts online ( O ' Hara and Sellen , 1997 ) . First , annotation on paper was smoothly inte - grated with reading ; on - line annotation was distracting . Second , paper better supported marking " on " the source document ; people wanted their marks to be dis - tinguishable from the source document . Finally , the subjects of their experiment also took notes on separate sheets or in other windows ; note - taking on paper was more closely interleaved with reading . In addition to these findings , my own field studies showed personal annotations to be highly varying in their status and value to other readers ( as well as to the original annota - tor ) and may require new strategies and abstractions to make them useful to other readers ( Marshall , 1998 ) . Pen - based systems running on tablet computers that use free - form digital ink promise to help readers anno - tate hypertexts in a familiar way ( Schilit et al . , 1999 ) . Paper - like user interfaces for hypertext readers support natural interaction with textual and graphic content , while they go beyond paper to support hypermedia capabilities ( e . g . , link traversal , the display of multime - dia content , search and query , and so on ) . Re - retrieval There has been a sea change in the way people interact with digital resources in general . The emerging philosophy seems to be , " If rve found it once , I can find it again . " People are far more willing to toss paper rather than collect it . Pitkow ( 1998 ) also cites a statistic that roughly half of the Web content is requested more than once by the same client - side computer . On the flip side , as an increasing number of digital documents cross our computer desktops - - many times as hypertext ephemera , rendered bits from the network that appear briefly as we traverse links to new sites - - we are moved to Wonder , " I know I ' ve seen that somewhere . Where did I read that ? " Hence re - retrieval becomes an impor - tant part of interaction with hypertext , a partner to search and query . In fact , in a recent project of ours , we found that one of the most important questions members A ~ . U . mnmmrnmm nf i " ~ nmnmmfmr n ~ , ~ ammam4 , a ' l ' i ~ n Ann ~ . . ~ , mk , ' l ~ . mAn - - n , . . h = kl - - Comme ~ a ~ 100 of our user community wanted to answer for them - selves was , " What did we say about this last time ? Why did we say that ? " Right now , we mainly treat re - retrieval as a problem to be addressed either via conventional search engine mechanisms or via browsing history lists . Additional research is necessary to know how we should handle those documents that fall through the cracks between our personal information stores , where there is much promising work that transcends the limits of today ' s file - system - based approach ( Dourish et al . , 1999 ) , and the growing hypermedia resources that are available online through the Web , where there is tremendous push to develop effective search and query mecha - nisms . Gathering Related to our last reading - related issue of re - retrieval is a phenomenon we might think of as gather - ing , the amassing of materials in service of a particular task ( be it writing , research , or analysis , to name a few such tasks ) . Of course , gathering is not a new practice . Many of us maintain extensive physical filing systems for our personal archives , or work in an office in which every level surface is covered with semi - sorted stacks of working papers . But gathering is increasingly per - formed electronically , especially given the noticeable shift toward writing as bricolage , a practice in which writers appropriate parts of existing documents 5 and hypermedia networks , and incorporate them into new material . Hypermedia is an ideal medium for such bri - colage , since it already has mechanisms , most notably links , that support the properly attributed re - use of materials . But , as Halasz noted ( 1988 ) , the slructure of hypermedia materials in an exploratory task is often unknown at the outset of the task ; rather , it emerges over time . The observation that structure is emergent and evolves over time led Halasz to conclude that virtual structures are the necessary remedy ( Halasz , 1988 ) . Virtual structures work in some situations in which a presentational structure is the goal , but not in others , in which a reader is exploring and interpreting materials , and needs to be in control of the structural fluidity him or herself . Readers ' use of search engines is an interest - ing illustration of this distinction . A search engine returns a simple virtual structure - - a ranked list - - that is generated algorithmically _ However , when the reader turns into a gatherer , he or she might also create some - thing like a ranked list , but it is a handmade evolving structure that reflects the current state of his or her understanding of the materials and how they fit the task . To address this requirement , we turned to spatial hypertext in which the structures are ambiguous , fluid , and implicit , but not necessarily computed ( Marshall and Shipman , 1995 ) . Gathering tools , as they are construed today , allow readers to gather references to Web documents rather than the documents themselves . This kind of indirec - tion is link - like and stays true to the hypermedia para - digm , but introduces an element of ambiguity . Is the reader referring to the specific page ? Or is the reader referring to the place ( thus allowing content updates to occur ) ? The answer is usually a rousing " it depends _ " Careful gatherers may distinguish between the two cases , and choose to make a version of the content local when they want the content to remain fixed . Is this merely , then , a recapitulation of Halasz ' s ver - sioning issue ? Perhaps , but when we consider gather - ing as a reader activity , what we are really concerned with is archiving ( i . e . , keeping the version that the reader is referring to intact ) . It is ordy the reader ' s refer - ence that makes the node worth preserving , rather than automatic tracking of all of the author ' s changes . This switch in perspectives may seem like a nuance of inter - pretation , but on the Web , we can all think of very real examples of authors or publishers working at cross - purposes to readers when a Web page is removed from the hypertext network . Who controls node fixity and persistence is essentially a copyright / fair use issue ; Samuelson and Davis ( 2000 ) discuss these sometime - divergent intellectual property interests . Right now it seems like there is no simple answer . If we apply Levy ' s sensible thoughts on archiving ( 1998 ) , the fact that the page is in use makes it worth saving , especially taken in tandem with Pitkow ' s characterization of the life span of Web documents as being 50 days ( Pitkow , 1998 ) . Thus , from an author ' s point of view , versioning is a service that is most appropriate to meet the require - ments of specific applications , for example , software engineering ; from a reader ' s point of view , archiving is a service that may well be necessary for gathering . Contextual Access Where do we read ? Throughout Halasz ' s " Seven Issues " discussion , there is an underlying assumption AI ~ * Ii IAnnpne | ~ , , ~ f ( ' ~ Amu , v , nnt ~ r nnw , nnm = nCnfinnm Annrnnmt 9nnl / V ~ l ~ l ~ In . ~ Gommentary 101 that we will go to the hypertexts ; we will access them through workstations and kiosks . In fact , dating back to Ted Nelson ' s SilverStands , the local outlets for Xanadu ( Nelson , 1981 ) , the hypertexts are accessible through stationary portals . In the current technological climate , there is a trend toward mobile access to the Web , to finding the infor - mation you want where and when you want it , in the context that is most appropriate . Of course , the mobile telephony - based interfaces to the Web have proven to be frustrating and haven ' t taken off the way the mobile access providers have tried to convince us they would . Cellular phones and two - way pages are still mostly used for communication . 6 On the other hand , if we look at devices with slightly larger form factors , devices more capable of displaying the kinds of hypermedia one finds on the Web - - Pocket PCs , Palm Pilots , electronic book devices , and laptop computers - - the story changes . Then contextual access to hypertexts and digital librar - ies through wireless connections begins to make sense to some of the traditional mobile knowledge worker constituencies such as journalists and legal profession - als ( Fagrell et al . , 2000 ; Elliott , 1995 ) . Design challenges then begin to enter into the pic - ture : how can we design hypermedia for radically dif - ferent modes of access ? How does the reading experience change with the form factor ? For example , many of the overview techniques authors and designers use to maintain reader orientation ( see the navigation issue , Halasz , 1988 ) are no longer appropriate ; display limitations , coupled with the nature of the users ' tasks , make them irrelevant . Collaborative Reading Collaboration is one of the issues Halasz calls out as a central research direction , and rightly so . In many ways , the Web itself can be thought of as the realization of collaborative hypertext . But I would like to single out collaborative reading as a phenomenon that begs further attention ; much of Halasz ' s rhetorical force was aimed at collaborative authoring , and much of the work we ( my collaborators and I ) have focused on has involved explicit instances of collaborative interpreta - tion and shared information spaces . Of course , the only way the Web can handle these tasks ( collaborative authoring and shared interpretation ) is with additional infrastructure . The substance of Issue 6 thus still stands as one of my own key concerns . Yet we also see much lighter weight collaborations arising on the Web . People read together , navigate together , recommend sites to each other , and form implicit shared understandings of worthwhile resources . In fact , there is frequently a meta - narrative that arises when people read hypertexts together ( either in face - to - face situations or using another communica - tion mode like the telephone or IRC ) . It is through this narrative that hypertexts become mutually intelligible . The research here might well be to help record and re - use some of the transient forms that now surround col - laborative reading ( see , for example , Marshall et al . , 1999 ) . Formality as a Leitmotif Would the Web have taken off if it were as compli - cated as the hypertext systems and models that Halasz envisions in " Seven Issues " ? Halasz himself notes ( in a section entitled " NoteCards in Use " ) that links used in an idea structuring and authoring application were " as a rule . . . ' See ' or ' Unspecified ' links and were placed at the end of the card of the card ' s text " ( Halasz , 1988 , p . 839 ) . In fact , much of the use I observed ( especially at sites I supported outside of Xerox PARC ) did not involve typed links . Link - typing schemes , if adopted , were frequently abandoned . The automatically main - tained hierarchical FileBox links were a far more com - mon way of introducing structure to the hypertext . Spatial means of structuring in which links were implied rather than declared were common as well ( Marshall and Shipman , 1993 ) . Technologically , then , typed links - - - hn fact , rela - tions as full - fledged objects - - seemed desirable . Our post - NoteCards system development effort incorpo - rated relations rather than links ( Marshall et al . , 1991 ) . But practically our experience with use showed them to be problematic ( Marshall and Rogers , 1992 ) and led us to develop a much simpler hypertext model with implicit links ; in this system , visual and spatial proper - ties stood in for more explicit notions of typing ( Mar - shall and Shipman , 1995 ) . What we were led to believe from a larger set of experiencesmours and those of other researchers - - was that , when formal structures such as typed links showed up in the user interface , interaction difficulties often followed . In fact , users would reject the system outright ( or simply ignore the formalisms ) unless the system demonstrated a clear benefit from the adoption and expression of these struc - tures ( Shipman and Marshall , 1999 ) . ACM Journal of Computer Documentation August 2001Nol . 25 , No . 3 Commentary 102 Indeed , what we have all experienced on the Web is that much explicit markup is directed toward creating pages with the fight appearance . Far less of the markup reflects a page ' s functional structure ( e . g . , heading level ) . It is easy to envision that markup which reflects content semantics ( as , for example , specified by the Text Encoding Initiative ) would be very rare . Most pro - fessionally designed Web sites devote significant atten - tion to getting the right look ( that is , a look that is appropriate to their genre ) , rather than to expressing structure that would , say , be useful to an automatic summarizing program . This basic tension between formal structures and informal practices has yet to be resolved and brings us to a further provocative question : What will happen as the Web standards become increasingly complex , as markup tilts toward XML and CSS ? As link representa - tions become richer ( e . g . , XLink ) ? WiU the payoff be sufficiently great to lure the extended community of hypertext authors into using them ? Will they use them consistently , and in a manner that fits readers ' needs ? As was true with Halasz ' s " Seven Issues , " it is through use over time that this new set of issues will be illuminated and potentially resolved . Endnotes 1I use the terms interchangeably here , since the original notion of hypertext was not intended to pre - clude non - textual media types . 2Subsequent open hypernledia developments made a concerted effort to get around all of these limita - tions - - especially the intertwining of structure and con - tent - - but , relying on the most basic markup and protocol specification , the Web is a stateless mix of structure and content . 3Halasz specifically suggested a philosophical dis - tinction between Navigators and Architects , between Literalists and Virtualists , between Card Sharks and Holy Scrollers , and between the Literati and the Engi - neers . 4In fact , it is informative ( and occasionally enter - taining ) to watch one of the so - called search engine voyeurs as it ticks past , for example , http : / / www . excite . com / search / voyeur / or http : / / www . infoti - ger . corn / voyeur . It is easy to see that people look for everything under the sun on theWeb . 5In a COlporate environment , this seems to be mani - fested by reuse of individual PowerPoint slides . 6Even the popular text - based i - mode cellular phones in Japan or SMS phones in Europe are still pri - marily about communication , not about information access . References Akscyn , R . M . , McCracken , D . L . , and Yoder , E . A . ( 1988 ) . KMS : A distributed hypermedia system for managing knowledge in organizations . Communica - tions of the ACM , 31 ( 12 ) , 820 - 835 . Bolter , J . D . ( 1991 ) . Writing space : The computer , hypertext , and the history of writing . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum and Associates . Chartier , R . ( 1994 ) . The order of books . Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press . Doufish , P . , Edwards , K . , LaMarca , A . , and Salisbury , M . ( 1999 ) . Presto : An experimental architecture for fluid interactive document spaces . ACM Transac - tions on Computer - Human Interaction , 6 ( 2 ) , 133 - 161 . Elliott , M . ( 1995 ) . Digital library design for organiza - tional usability in the courts . http : / / edfu . lis . uiuc . edu / allerton / 95 / s3 / elliott . html . Fagrell , H . , Forsberg , K . , and Sanneblad , J . ( 2000 ) . FieldWise : A mobile knowledge management archi - tecture , in Proceedings of CSCW 2000 . New York : ACM Press . Goodman , D . ( 1987 ) . The complete HyperCard hand - book . New York : Bantam Books . Halasz , E G . ( 1988 ) . Reflections on NoteCards : Seven issues for the next generation of hypermedia sys - tems . Communications of the ACM , 31 ( 12 ) , 836 - 852 . Halasz , F . G . ( 1991 ) . " Seven issues " : Revisited ( key - note address , Hypertext ' 91 Conference , San Anto - nio , Texas , December 18 , 1991 . http : / / www . parc . xerox . com / spl / projects / halasz - keynote / . Halasz , F . G . , Moran , T . P . , and Trigg , R . H . ( 1987 ) . NoteCards in a nutshell . In Proceedings oftheACM CH1 + G1 Conference , New York : ACM Press , pp . 45 - 52 . ACM Journal of Computer Documentation August 2001Nol . 25 , No . 3 Gommentary 103 Levy , D . M . ( 1998 ) . Heroic measures : Reflections on the possibility and purpose of digital preservation . In Proceedings of ACM Digital Libraries ' 98 , New York : ACM Press , pp . 152 - 161 . Marshall , C . C . ( 1998 ) . Toward an ecology of hypertext annotation . In Proceedings of ACM Hypertext ' 98 , New York : ACM Press , pp . 40 - 49 . Marshall , C . C . , and Shipman , F . M . III . ( 1995 ) . Spatial hypertext : Designing for change . Communications of the ACM , 38 ( 8 ) , 88 - 97 . Marshall , C . C . , and Shipman , F . M . III . ( 1993 ) . Searching for the missing link : Discovering implicit structure in spatial hypertext . In Proceedings of Hypertext " 93 , New York : ACM Press , pp . 217 - 230 . Marshall , C . C . , and Rogers , R . A . ( 1992 ) . Two years before the mist : Experiences with Aquanet . In Pro - ceedings of the ACM Conference on Hypertext ( ECHT " 92 ) , New York : ACM Press , pp . 53 - 62 . Marshall , C . C . , Halasz , F . G . , Rogers , R . A . , and Jans - sen , W . C . Jr . ( 1991 ) . Aquanet : A hypertext tool to hold your knowledge in place . In Proceedings of Hypertext " 91 , New York : ACM Press , pp . 261 - 275 . Marshall , C . C . , Price , M . N . , Golovchinsky , G . , and Schilit , B . N . ( 1999 ) . Collaborating over portable reading appliances . Personal Technologies , 3 ( 1 ) . Michalak , S . , and Coney , M . ( 1993 ) . Hypertext and the author / reader dialogue . In Proceedings of the fifth ACM conference on Hypertext , New York : ACM Press , pp . 174 - 182 . Nelson , T . H . ( 1981 ) . Literary machines . Swarthmore , Penn . O ' Hara , K . , and Sellen , A . ( 1997 ) . A comparison of reading paper and on - line documents . In Proceed - ings of CHI ' 97 , New York : ACM Press , pp . 335 - 342 . Pitkow , J . E . ( 1998 ) . Summary of WWW characteriza - tions . Web Journal 2 ( 1 - 2 ) , 3 - 13 . Rosenberg , J . ( 1996 ) . The structure of hypertext activ - ity . In Proceedings of Hypertext ' 96 , New York : ACM Press , pp . 22 - 30 . Samuelson , P . , and Davis , R . ( 2000 ) . The digital dilemma : A perspective on intellectual property in the information age . Presented at The 28th Research Conference on Communication , Information and Internet Policy ( Alexandria , Virginia , September 23 - 25 , 2000 ) . San Jose Mercury News ( 1997 ) . As online worlds col - lide , dueling innovations net unexpected results , March 2 . Schilit , B . N . , Price , M . N . , Golovchinsky , G . , Tanaka , K . , and Marshall , C . C . ( 1999 ) . As we may read : The reading appliance revolution . IEEE Computer 32 ( 1 ) , 65 - 73 . Shipman , F . , and Marshall , C . ( 1999 ) . Formality con - sidered harmful : Experiences , emerging themes , and directions on the use of formal representations in interactive systems . Computer Supported Coop - erative Work ( CSCW ) , 8 ( 4 ) , 333 - 352 . Yankelovich , N . , Meyrowitz , N . , and van Dam , A . ( 1985 ) Reading and writing the electronic book . IEEE Computer , October 1985 . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for per - sonal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies arc not make or distributed for profit or commerrcial advantage , and that all copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , to republish , to post on servers , or to redisribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . ©2001 ACM 1527 - 6805 / 01 / 0800 - 0096 $ 5 . 00 ACM Journal of Computer Documentation August 2001 / Vol . 25 , No . 3