University of Nebraska - Lincoln DigitalCommons @ University of Nebraska - Lincoln Faculty Publications , Department of Psychology Psychology , Department of January 2005 The interplay of traits and motives on volunteering : agreeableness , extraversion and prosocial value motivation Gustavo Carlo University of Nebraska - Lincoln , carlog @ missouri . edu Morris A . Okun Arizona State University , okun @ asu . edu George Knight Arizona State University , george . knight @ asu . edu Maria Rosario T . de Guzman University of Nebraska - Lincoln , mguzman2 @ unl . edu Follow this and additional works at : http : / / digitalcommons . unl . edu / psychfacpub Part of the Psychiatry and Psychology Commons This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Psychology , Department of at DigitalCommons @ University of Nebraska - Lincoln . It has been accepted for inclusion in Faculty Publications , Department of Psychology by an authorized administrator of DigitalCommons @ University of Nebraska - Lincoln . Carlo , Gustavo ; Okun , Morris A . ; Knight , George ; and de Guzman , Maria Rosario T . , " The interplay of traits and motives on volunteering : agreeableness , extraversion and prosocial value motivation " ( 2005 ) . Faculty Publications , Department of Psychology . 9 . http : / / digitalcommons . unl . edu / psychfacpub / 9 Th e interplay of traits and motives on volunteering : agreeableness , extraversion and prosocial value motivation Gustavo Carlo * , Department of Psychology , University of Nebraska - Lincoln Morris A . Okun , Department of Psychology , Arizona State University George P . Knight , Department of Psychology , Arizona State University Maria Rosario T . de Guzman , Department of Psychology , University of Nebraska - Lincoln Submitted January 2003 ; Submitted in revised form June 2004 ; accepted 4 August 2004 ; available online 5 November 2004 Abstract Social psychology and personality theorists have proposed that our understanding of prosocial behav - ior will be enhanced by examining the interplay of traits and motives . Th e present study was designed to test several pathways by which agreeableness , extraversion , and prosocial value motivation to volun - teer inﬂ uence volunteerism . A sample of 796 college students completed measures of the Big Five traits , prosocial value motivation to volunteer , and volunteering . Results of path analyses showed that prosocial value motivation to volunteer partially mediated the relations between agreeableness and extraversion , and volunteering . Furthermore , as agreeableness decreased , extraversion was more strongly related to prosocial value motivation to volunteer . In contrast , there was no support for the pathway in which ex - traversion and prosocial value motivation to volunteer jointly aﬀ ect volunteering . Discussion focuses on the utility of examining the links among traits and motives in predicting volunteering . Keywords : Agreeableness ; Extraversion ; Volunteering ; Motivation ; Prosocial behaviors ; Personality ; Traits ; Motives * Corresponding author : gcarlo1 @ unl . edu Published in Personality and Individual Diﬀ erences 38 ( 2005 ) , pp . 1293 - 1305 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . paid . 2004 . 08 . 012 © 2004 Elsevier Ltd . Used by permission . www . elsevier . com / locate / paid Available online at www . sciencedirect . com 1294 Carlo et al . , Th e interplay of traits and motives on volunteering . PAID 38 ( 2005 ) 1 . Introduction During the past 20 years , there has been a renaissance of interest in personality and motivation - al concepts in personality and social psychology ( Little , 1983 ) . Scholars continue to develop concep - tual models to account for the links between traits , motives , and behaviors . Traits and motives can be conceptualized as representing diﬀ erent levels of personality functioning ( McAdams , 1994 ; McClel - land , 1985a ) . McCrae and Costa ( 1999 ) posited that traits are “enduring patterns of thoughts , feelings , and actions . . . ” ( p . 140 ) . Traits are organized hierarchically from narrow to broad traits . At the broad - est level , researchers have identiﬁ ed ﬁ ve common traits : agreeableness , extraversion , openness , neuroti - cism , and conscientiousness . Motives reﬂ ect the tendency to strive for a general class of incentives that are highly fused with aﬀ ect ( McClelland , 1985b ) . Several classes of motives have been identiﬁ ed in the research literature on volunteering ( Clary et al . , 1998 ; Okun , Barr , & Herzog , 1998 ) . However , the relations between traits and social behaviors are often relatively modest in magnitude ( cf . , Bem & Funder , 1978 ; Kenrick & Funder , 1988 ) . Th is is also the case for the relations between per - sonality traits and volunteering behavior ( Omoto & Snyder , 1995 ) . Several explanations for the relative - ly modest and inconsistently signiﬁ cant relations have been posited ( Carlo , Knight , Eisenberg , & Ro - tenberg , 1991 ; Eisenberg , 1986 ; Kenrick & Funder , 1988 ; Knight , Johnson , Carlo , & Eisenberg , 1994 ) . First , investigators may not have focused upon the traits that are conceptually most relevant to the spe - ciﬁ c social behavior being studied . Second , the relations between traits and social behaviors may be me - diated by motives . Th ird , traits might interact with other traits to jointly inﬂ uence motives , which in turn , are causally more proximal to social behaviors . Fourth , traits might interact with motives to jointly inﬂ uence social behaviors . With regard to the ﬁ rst explanation , Graziano and Eisenberg ( 1997 ) suggest that agreeableness might be the core dispositional trait contributing to prosocial behaviors . Agreeable individuals are al - truistic , straight - forward , trusting , soft - hearted , modest , and compliant ( Graziano . 1994 ; McCrae & Costa , 1999 ) . Th ere is empirical evidence of the link between agreeableness and prosocial behaviors ( see Graziano & Eisenberg . 1997 ) . Furthermore , researchers have found signiﬁ cant positive relations be - tween agreeableness and volunteering ( e . g . , Smith & Nelson , 1975 ) . Similarly , extraversion is associated with sociability , gregariousness , assertiveness , positive emotions , warmth , and activity ( McCrae & Cos - ta , 1999 ) ; and has been shown to predict volunteering ( Burke & Hall , 1986 ; Kosek , 1995 ; Smith & Nel - son , 1975 ) . Because volunteerism often requires extensive social interactions , scholars have linked it to extraversion ( e . g . , Burke & Hall , 1986 ) . Hence , in the present study we have made predictions regarding the relations of personality traits ( i . e . , agreeableness and extraversion ) that are clearly conceptually re - lated to a social behavior ( i . e . , volunteering ) . Speciﬁ cally , we predict that agreeableness and extraversion will be positively associated with volunteering behavior . With regard to the second explanation , scholars have noted that traits may be indirectly related to social behaviors . A number of possible mediating variables have been posited that might help ac - count for the relations between traits and prosocial behaviors such as volunteering . Among those pos - sible mediating variables are motives . Clary and his associates ( Clary et al . , 1998 ) identiﬁ ed a set of six motives for volunteering including : career enhancement , learning new skills , social interaction , escape from negative feelings , personal development , and expressing prosocial values . Of these motives , the Carlo et al . , from Personality and Individual Diﬀ erences 38 ( 2005 ) 1295 prosocial value motive to volunteer ( hereafter referred to as prosocial value motive ) is clearly conceptu - ally related to volunteering because it reﬂ ects the endorsement of care - based values to voluntarily as - sist others ( Allison , Okun , & Dutridge , 2002 ; Clary et a ] . , 1998 ; Clary & Orenstein , 1991 ; Okun , 1994 ; Omoto & Snyder , 1995 ; Penner & Finkelstein , 1998 ) . Further , both agreeableness and extraversion re - ﬂ ect a positive orientation towards others , which conceptually forges a link between these personality dispositions and prosocial value motives . Hence , it is reasonable to presume that individuals who are al - truistic , trusting , warm , and emotionally positive may value prosocial behaviors . In the present study we examined the degree to which the eﬀ ects of agreeableness and extraversion on volunteering behavior were mediated by prosocial value motives . With regard to the third explanation , extraverted individuals may seek warm and positive social inter - actions , but these desires may really facilitate volunteering behavior when combined with the altruistic orientation inherent in agreeableness . Further , this joint eﬀ ect may be mediated through prosocial value motivation as described above . Th erefore , we also examined the degree to which the interaction eﬀ ect of agreeableness and extraversion on volunteering behavior was mediated by prosocial value motives . With regard to the fourth explanation , extraversion may provide the aﬃ liative disposition needed to volunteer . However , volunteerism may be jointly determined by whether there is a match between the personality traits associated with volunteerism and the motives that are most salient ( Carlo , Allen , & Buhman , 1999 ; Clary & Snyder , 1999 ) . For example , extraverted individuals may be more likely to vol - unteer than introverted individuals only when their prosocial value motivation is high . Prosocial val - ue motives are conceptually related to individual diﬀ erences in sympathy ( see Graziano & Eisenberg , 1997 ) which are linked to prosocial behaviors including altruism ( Batson , 1999 ; Eisenberg & Fabes , 1998 ; Staub , 1978 ) . Consequently , we examined the degree to which prosocial value motivation moder - ates the relation between extraversion and volunteering . 2 . Method 2 . 1 . Participants and procedures A sample of 849 college students was drawn from 1 , 272 students enrolled in sections of Introduc - tion to Psychology at a large southwestern state university . Students completed a battery of measures in classes as a prelude to participating in studies that can be used to fulﬁ ll a course requirement . To reduce respondent burden , students were randomly assigned to one of three versions of the battery with the constraint that approximately one - third of the students received each version of the battery . To assess sample biases , we compared students in the sample with those who were not in the sample on demographic and main variables . Students in the sample ( M = 4 . 29 , SD = 1 . 18 ; N = 849 ) had sig - niﬁ cantly lower prosocial value motivation to volunteer than students who were not in the sample ( M = 4 . 45 , SD = 1 . 12 ; N = 423 ) , t ( 1248 ) = – 2 . 41 , p < 0 . 05 . Similarly , we compared students in the sam - ple who had missing data ( N = 53 ) with those who did not ( N = 796 ) and found that students with missing data ( M = 5 . 01 , SD = 0 . 83 ) had signiﬁ cantly higher openness to experience scores , t ( 847 ) = 2 . 78 , p < 0 . 01 , than students without missing data ( M = 5 . 44 , SD = 1 . 08 ) . Sample biases were weak in 1296 Carlo et al . , Th e interplay of traits and motives on volunteering . PAID 38 ( 2005 ) magnitude of eﬀ ect and sparse . Th e ﬁ nal sample consisted of 796 undergraduates ( Median age = 19 years ; 56 % were women ; 75 % were White , non - Hispanic , 8 % were Hispanic , 5 % were Asian , 3 % were African American ) . 2 . 2 . Measures 2 . 2 . 1 . Volunteering We created a measure of volunteering based upon responses to four items . Students were asked whether they had ever volunteered ( 0 = no , 1 = yes ) , were currently volunteering ( 0 = no , 1 = yes ) , planned on volunteering during the next two months ( 0 = no , 1 = yes ) , and the likelihood that they would vol - unteer at the campus - based community service program if asked ( 0 = deﬁ nitely no , 1 = probably no , 2 = may be , 3 = probably yes , and 4 = deﬁ nitely yes ) . Students were provided the following deﬁ nition of vol - unteering : “By volunteering , we mean performing a service without compensation for an organization or agency . Th is may include church / religious groups , social service agencies , schools , not - for - proﬁ t or - ganizations ( e . g . , American Red Cross ) , cause - oriented organizations ( e . g . , a political campaign and / or environmental conservation group ) , or for proﬁ t corporation ( e . g . , hospital ) ” . Th e percentage of students who ever volunteered , were currently volunteering , and planned on volunteering in the next two months were 90 % , 19 % , and 45 % , respectively . Th e mean rating for likelihood of volunteering at the campus - based community program if asked was 2 . 20 ( SD = 0 . 98 ) . To determine whether a composite index of volunteer behavior could be created , a principal compo - nents analysis was carried out after standardizing the scores on the four items . Th e results of this analy - sis indicated that the eigenvalue for the ﬁ rst factor was 1 . 81 . Th e eigenvalues for the remaining factors were all below 1 . 00 . Th e lowest factor loading on the ﬁ rst factor was 0 . 52 . Factor scores were created us - ing the regression method . Higher scores indicate greater involvement in volunteering . Furthermore , prior studies have shown validity evidence for self - report , aggregate measures of about past , present , and future volunteerism ( e . g . , Clary et al . , 1998 ; Penner & Finkelstein , 1998 ) . Descriptive statistics for this measure and the other study measures are presented in Table 1 . 2 . 2 . 2 . Prosocial value motive We employed the Value - Expressive Scale from the Volunteer Functions Inventory ( VFI ) to assess prosocial value motive ( Clary , Snyder . & Ridge , 1992 ) . Participants indicated on a 7 - point scale how important / accurate each of ﬁ ve prosocial value reasons is for why they volunteer or would be if they were to volunteer ( sample item , “I feel compassion toward people in need” ) . Anchor points on the scale were from : 0 = “not at all important / accurate for you” , through 6 = “extremely important / accurate for you” . Scale scores were formed by averaging the responses to the ﬁ ve items . Higher scores on the scale are associated with greater prosocial value motive to volunteer . Adequate psychometric properties of this measure have been reported elsewhere ( Allison et al . , 2002 ; Clary et al . , 1992 ; Okun et al . , 1998 ) . 2 . 2 . 3 . Big Five traits Traits were assessed used the 44 - item version of the Big Five Inventory ( BFI - V44 ; John , Donahue , & Kentle , 1991 ) . Th is commonly used inventory was originally constructed to allow for the eﬃ cient Carlo et al . , from Personality and Individual Diﬀ erences 38 ( 2005 ) 1297 assessment of the big ﬁ ve dimensions of personality without providing for the more elaborate measure - ment of the various facets associated with each dimension ( Benet - Martinez & John , 1998 ) . BFI items consist of short phrases that are used to assess the most prototypical traits associated with each of the Big Five dimensions ( John et al . , 1991 ) . In the present study , students indicated how much they agreed or disagreed that each statement ap - plied to them . Ratings were made on a 9 - point scale with anchor points ranging from 0 = “strongly dis - agree” to 8 = “strongly agree” . A sample item for extraversion was “Outgoing , sociable” , and a sample item for agreeableness was “Is generally trusting” . Scale scores were formed by averaging the respons - es to the items associated with each personality dimension . Th e number of items on each scale ranged from 8 ( Extraversion and Neuroticism ) through 10 ( Openness to Experience ) . As scores on each scale increase , individuals are describing themselves as being higher on each personality dimension . Prior re - searchers have presented adequate evidence of the reliability and validity of the BFI scales ( Benet - Mar - tinez & John , 1998 ; Okun & Finch , 1998 ) . 3 . Results 3 . 1 . Preliminary analyses According to our ﬁ rst explanation for the inconsistent and relatively small relations between person - ality variables and volunteering , researchers may not have focused on those traits that are most concep - tually relevant to volunteering . As predicted ( see Table I ) , among the Big Five dimensions , agreeable - ness had the strongest correlation with volunteer behavior , followed by extraversion . Consistent with our second explanation , among the Big Five dimensions , agreeableness exhibited the strongest correla - tion with prosocial value motive , followed by extraversion , and prosocial value motive was the strongest overall correlate of volunteer behavior . Among the control variables , females had higher prosocial value motives and engaged in volun - teer behavior to a greater degree than males . Th e correlations among the Big Five dimensions ranged 1298 Carlo et al . , Th e interplay of traits and motives on volunteering . PAID 38 ( 2005 ) from – 0 . 29 to 0 . 33 . In light of the hypotheses of the present study , it is noteworthy that the correlation between agreeableness and extraversion was modest . 3 . 2 . Data analytic approach In testing our second , third , and fourth explanations for the weak and mixed ﬁ ndings regarding the relation between personality dimensions and volunteering , we carried out ﬁ ve regression models . We in - cluded conscientious , neuroticism , and openness as covariates in these analyses because they are often signiﬁ cantly correlated with agreeableness and / or extraversion . In addition , because gender diﬀ erences in prosocial behaviors and personality variables have been found in prior research ( e . g . , Eagly & Crow - ley , 1996 ; Penner & Finkelstein , 1998 ) , we also controlled for gender , neuroticism , openness to experi - ence , and conscientiousness . Including neuroticism , openness to experience and conscientiousness as covariates did not alter the results with respect to the hypotheses that we tested . 3 . 3 . Testing the mediation explanation Th e second possible explanation for the prior weak and inconsistent relations between personali - ty traits and prosocial behaviors posited that agreeableness and extraversion predicted prosocial val - ue motives , and that prosocial value motive is the strongest predictor of volunteer behavior . We tested this explanation by carrying out two regression analyses . In the ﬁ rst analysis , we regressed volunteer - ing behavior on the control variables ( gender , conscientiousness , neuroticism , openness to experience ) , agreeableness , extraversion , and prosocial value motive . In the second analysis , we regressed prosocial value motives on the control variables , agreeableness , and extraversion . Th e standardized partial regres - sion coeﬃ cients from the ﬁ rst regression analysis constitute the direct eﬀ ects of the variables on volun - teer behavior whereas the standardized partial regression coeﬃ cients ( betas ) from the second regression analysis constitute the direct eﬀ ects of the variables on prosocial value motives . Th ese eﬀ ects are presented in Table 2 ( columns 1 – 2 ) and Fig . 1 ( the coeﬃ cients in parentheses ) . Th ere it can be seen that only two variables were signiﬁ cant predictors of volunteer behavior - prosocial value motives ( ß = 0 . 32 ) and agreeableness ( ß = 0 . 08 ) . Together , the seven predictors explained 16 . 3 % of the variation in volunteer behavior , F ( 7 , 788 ) = 21 . 86 , p < 0 . 001 . Th e strongest predictors of proso - cial value motives were agreeableness ( ß = 0 . 31 ) and gender ( ß = 0 . 22 ) . In concert , the six predictors ac - counted for 21 . 7 % of the variation in prosocial value motives , F ( 6 , 789 ) = 36 . 45 , p < 0 . 001 . To examine the extent to which the eﬀ ects of agreeableness and extraversion on volunteer behavior were mediated by prosocial value motives , we computed their indirect eﬀ ects . Th e indirect eﬀ ects were computed by multiplying the beta for the path from the predictor to prosocial value motives by the beta for the path from prosocial value motives to the criterion variable ( i . e . , volunteering ) . For extraversion , the indirect eﬀ ect was 0 . 031 ( 0 . 096 × 0 . 318 ; Z = 2 . 68 , p < 0 . 01 , using the Sobel , 1982 procedure ) where - as for agreeableness , the indirect eﬀ ect was 0 . 099 ( 0 . 312 × 0 . 318 ; Z = 6 . 15 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Consequently , agreeableness and extraversion both exhibited signiﬁ cant indirect eﬀ ects on volunteer behavior via pro - social value motives . One index of eﬀ ect size for a mediated eﬀ ect is the proportion of the variable’s to - tal eﬀ ect ( indirect eﬀ ect plus direct eﬀ ect ) that is indirect ( see MacKinnon , Warsi , & Dwyer , 1995 ) . Carlo et al . , from Personality and Individual Diﬀ erences 38 ( 2005 ) 1299 Th e total eﬀ ect for extraversion on volunteer behavior was 0 . 076 ( 0 . 031 + 0 . 045 ) and the total eﬀ ect for agreeableness on volunteer behavior was 0 . 178 ( 0 . 099 + 0 . 079 ) . For extraversion 40 . 8 % of the total ef - fect was indirect ( [ 0 . 031 / 0 . 076 ] × 100 ) whereas for agreeableness 55 . 6 % of the total eﬀ ect was indirect ( [ 0 . 099 / 0 . 178 ] × 100 ) . 1300 Carlo et al . , Th e interplay of traits and motives on volunteering . PAID 38 ( 2005 ) 3 . 4 . Testing the moderated mediation explanation According to the third possible explanation , extraversion and agreeableness exert a joint eﬀ ect on prosocial value motives , which in turn , predicts volunteer behavior . Prior to testing this explanation , ex - traversion scores and agreeableness scores were centered ( i . e . , the mean was subtracted from each score ) to reduce non - essential collinearity when computing interaction terms , see Aiken and West , 1991 . Th e interaction term was created by multiplying each participant’s centered extraversion score by his or her centered agreeableness score . We tested this model by carrying out two multiple regression analyses . In the ﬁ rst analysis , we regressed volunteer behavior on the control variables , agreeableness , extraversion , prosocial value motives , and the extraversion by agreeableness interaction eﬀ ect . In the second analy - sis , we regressed prosocial value motive on the control variables , agreeableness , extraversion , and the ex - traversion by agreeableness interaction eﬀ ect . Th e direct eﬀ ects of the variables on prosocial value mo - tive and on volunteer behavior are presented in Table 2 ( columns 3 – 1 ) and Fig . 1 ( the coeﬃ cients not in parentheses ) . As expected , the extraversion by agreeableness interaction eﬀ ect did not have a signiﬁ cant direct re - lation to volunteer behavior ( ß = – 0 . 04 ) . However , as predicted , the extraversion by agreeableness inter - action eﬀ ect exerted a signiﬁ cant ( p < 0 . 05 ) eﬀ ect on prosocial value motive ( ß = – 0 . 08 ) . Th e interaction of extraversion and agreeableness exerted a signiﬁ cant ( Z = 2 . 29 , p < 0 . 05 , using Sobel , 1982 ) indirect eﬀ ect on volunteer behavior . Th e indirect eﬀ ect of the extraversion by agreeableness interaction eﬀ ect equals – 0 . 024 ( – 0 . 076 × 0 . 315 ) . For the extraversion by agreeableness interaction , the total eﬀ ect on vol - unteer behavior was – 0 . 064 ( – 0 . 024 + – 0 . 040 ) , and 37 . 5 % of the total eﬀ ect was indirect . To examine the form of the extraversion by agreeableness interaction eﬀ ect on prosocial value mo - tive , we followed procedures outlined in Aiken and West ( 1991 ) . More speciﬁ cally , we computed the unstandardized regression coeﬃ cient for extraversion and the y - intercept separately for individuals who were low on agreeableness ( one standard deviation below the mean ) and for individuals who were high on agreeableness ( one standard deviation above the mean ) . For individuals who were low on agreeable - ness , the unstandardized regression coeﬃ cient for extraversion was 0 . 16 and the y - intercept was 3 . 89 . In contrast , for individuals who were high on agreeableness , the unstandardized regression coeﬃ cient for extraversion was 0 . 04 and the y - intercept was 4 . 69 . Next , using these two equations , we generated predicted prosocial value motive scores separately for individuals low and high on agreeableness . Th ese predicted scores are depicted graphically in Fig . 2 . Th ere it can be seen that prosocial value motive is highest when individuals are high on both agreeableness and extraversion . Furthermore , the Figure in - dicates that the eﬀ ect of extraversion on prosocial value motive is larger among disagreeable as opposed to agreeable individuals . It should be pointed out that although the interaction eﬀ ect was signiﬁ cant , it uniquely accounted for only 0 . 6 % of the variation in prosocial value motivation to volunteer . 3 . 5 . Testing the moderation explanation According to our ﬁ nal possible explanation , extraversion and prosocial value motive jointly predict vol - unteerism . We tested this model by carrying out a hierarchical regression analysis . In the ﬁ rst step of the re - gression analysis , we regressed volunteer behavior on the control variables , extraversion , agreeableness , and Carlo et al . , from Personality and Individual Diﬀ erences 38 ( 2005 ) 1301 prosocial value motive . In the second step , we added the extraversion by prosocial value motive interac - tion eﬀ ect . Th e conditional F test of the interaction eﬀ ect was not signiﬁ cant , F ( 1 , 787 ) = 1 . 00 , p = 0 . 96 . 4 . Discussion Personality and social psychologists have recently focused upon mediational , moderational , and me - diated moderation models of behavior ( Baron & Kenny , 1986 ; Batson , 1999 ) . Further , these more com - plex models of human behavior have provided a basis for considering more sophisticated linkages be - tween personality traits , motives , and social behaviors . In the present study we examined the interplay of the Big Five personality traits , prosocial value motivation to volunteer and volunteerism behavior . Overall , the ﬁ ndings show some support for three of the four proposed explanations of the relatively modest and inconsistent relations between personality and behavior . As a caveat , a prospective design us - ing a more observational assessment of volunteering behavior would provide a more stringent test of these explanations . First , personality traits that are conceptually linked to volunteerism ( i . e . , agreeableness and extraversion ) were more strongly related to volunteerism behavior than less conceptually related traits ( i . e . , conscientiousness , neuroticism , and openness to experience ) . Second , prosocial value motivation partially / fully mediated the relations between agreeableness / extraversion and volunteerism . Th ird , extra - version and agreeableness interacted to inﬂ uence prosocial value motive , which in turn , predicted volun - teerism . In contrast , there was no supportive evidence for the direct interaction eﬀ ect of agreeableness and extraversion on volunteerism . Th e ﬁ ndings are consistent with Functional Approach theorists ( Omoto & 1302 Carlo et al . , Th e interplay of traits and motives on volunteering . PAID 38 ( 2005 ) Snyder , 1995 ) who suggest that prosocial value motives can partially account for the eﬀ ects of traits on volunteerism . Moreover , the ﬁ ndings are consistent with personality researchers who espouse the im - portance and relevance of agreeableness on prosocial behaviors ( Graziano , 1994 ; Graziano & Eisen - berg , 1997 ) ; however , the present ﬁ ndings suggest the need to examine both direct and indirect eﬀ ects of agreeableness . Th e ﬁ ndings supported the explanation that the relations between traits and behavior can be better accounted for by investigating the mediating eﬀ ect of motives . Indeed , nearly 56 % of the total eﬀ ect of agreeableness on volunteerism was mediated through prosocial value motivation . Individuals who are agreeable with others and who seek social stimulation are oriented toward , and motivated to respond to , the needs of others . In most prior studies of volunteerism , individual diﬀ erences in motivation to re - spond prosocially towards others were not considered . Th ese ﬁ ndings suggest that traits might be neces - sary but insuﬃ cient to predict volunteerism . Prosocial value motives might provide the impetus for vol - unteerism among individuals who have an agreeable ( and extraverted ) disposition . Agreeableness also had a signiﬁ cant direct eﬀ ect on volunteering . Why should agreeableness predict volunteer behavior , even when prosocial value motive is taken into account ? One facet of agreeableness involves being compliant with requests from others . Volunteer behavior is often triggered by requests from others for assistance ( Murk & Stephan , 1991 ) . Th us , high agreeable individuals may be more like - ly than low agreeable individuals to volunteer , holding prosocial value motive constant , because they are more likely to comply with requests to volunteer . Although extraversion did not exert a signiﬁ cant direct eﬀ ect on volunteering , it was signiﬁ cantly in - directly related to volunteering . In addition , extraversion and agreeableness exerted a joint eﬀ ect on pro - social value motivation , which in turn , predicted volunteer behavior . Th us , the joint eﬀ ect of extraver - sion and agreeableness on volunteer behavior was indirect ( rather than a direct interactive eﬀ ect ) . We had proposed that extraverted individuals may be prone to social situations but this tendency would not necessarily predispose them to engage in volunteer behavior unless they also valued helping others . In other words , we posited that the tendency of extraverts to seek social interaction would be channeled into the prosocial value motive only when they also were high in agreeableness . However , although the interaction eﬀ ect was signiﬁ cant , the form of the interaction was unexpected . It suggests that the in - ﬂ uence of extraversion on prosocial value motive increases as agreeableness decreases . Speciﬁ cally , the moderation eﬀ ect showed that extraversion is related to prosocial value motives the most among indi - viduals who are low in agreeableness . Perhaps in the absence of a predisposition to be good - natured , ex - traverted individuals are encouraged by others to engage in acts that help others and this leads to higher motivation to respond to other people’s concerns or needs . It is possible that those individuals who are high in agreeableness may already be so high in prosocial value motive that the relative increase in moti - vation associated with being high in extraversion is marginal . Clearly , future research is needed to close - ly examine this ﬁ nding . Consistent with this notion , in the present study , agreeableness was a relatively stronger predictor of both prosocial value motive and volunteerism than extraversion . Th is , of course , does not suggest that extraversion is less useful than agreeableness as an explanatory predictor of social behaviors . It is possi - ble that extraversion could better predict other social behaviors that are more relevant to this trait than to agreeableness . For example , one might expect that extraversion would better predict social interac - tion skills than agreeableness . Moreover , agreeableness might not be a consistent predictor of all types Carlo et al . , from Personality and Individual Diﬀ erences 38 ( 2005 ) 1303 of prosocial behaviors such as prosocial behaviors that are motivated by selﬁ sh motives ( e . g . , gaining other people’s approval ) . Th ere has been some discussion surrounding the utility of using global ( e . g . , agreeableness from the Big Five ) versus trait speciﬁ c ( e . g . , empathy ) personality variables as predictors of social behaviors such as volunteerism ( Funder , 1991 ; Graziano & Eisenberg , 1997 ; Knight et al . , 1994 ) . In much of the previ - ous research on prosocial behaviors , measures of relatively speciﬁ c traits or sociocognitive skills such as empathy , sympathy , and perspective taking have been employed ( e . g . , Allen & Rushton , 1983 ; Batson , 1999 ; Carlo et al . , 1999 ; Knight et al . , 1994 ) . However , the present study provides evidence of the link between global trait measures and volunteerism . It may be useful to integrate global and trait - speciﬁ c approaches in future research examining the linkage between personality and behavior . Further , a fuller understanding of the complex relations among traits ( both global and speciﬁ c ) , motivation , and social behavior will likely require a more careful consideration of the speciﬁ c social behavior being examined ( see Carlo et al . , 1999 ; Knight et al . , 1994 ) . Acknowledgement Funding support was provided by grants to the ﬁ rst author from the John Templeton Foundation , the American Psychological Association , and the Values - In - Action Institute and to the second author from Arizona State University’s Center for Nonproﬁ t Leadership and Management . References Aiken , L . S . , & West , S . G . ( 1991 ) . Multiple regression : testing and interpreting interactions . Th ousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications , Inc . Allen , N . , & Rushton , J . P . ( 1983 ) . Personality characteristics of community mental health volunteers : a review . Journal of Voluntary Action Research . 12 , 36 – 49 . Allison , L . D . , Okun , M . A . , & Dutridge , K . S . ( 2002 ) . Assessing volunteer motives : a comparison of an open - ended probe and likert rating scales . Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology , 12 , 243 – 255 . Baron , R . M . , & Kenny , D . A . ( 1986 ) . Th e moderator - mediator variable distinction in social psychological research : conceptual , strategic , and statistical considerations . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology . 51 , 1173 – 1182 . Batson , D . C . ( 1999 ) . Altruism and prosocial behavior . In D . T . Gilbert , S . T . Fiske , & G . Lindzey ( Eds . ) . Th e hand - book of social psychology ( 4th ed . ) ( Vol . 2 , pp . 282 – 316 ) . NY : McGraw - Hill . Bem , D . J . , & Funder , D . C . ( 1978 ) . Predicting more of the people more of the time : assessing the personality of situations . Psychological Review , 85 , 485 – 501 . Benet - Martinez , V . , & John , 0 . P . ( 1998 ) . Los Cinco Grandes across cultures and ethnic groups : multitrait - multimethod analyses of the Big Five in Spanish and English . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 75 , 729 – 750 . Burke , D . M . , & Hall , M . ( 1986 ) . Personality characteristics of volunteers in a Companion for Children program . Psychological Reports , 59 , 819 – 825 . Carlo , G . , Allen , J . , & Buhman , D . ( 1999 ) . Facilitating and disinhibiting prosocial behaviors : the nonlinear inter - action of trait perspective taking and trait personal distress on volunteering . Basic and Applied Social Psychology , 21 , 189 – 197 . Carlo , G . , Knight , G . P . , Eisenberg , N . , & Rotenberg , K . J . ( 1991 ) . Cognitive processes and prosocial behaviors among children : the role of aﬀ ective attributions and reconciliations . Developmental Psychology , 27 , 456 – 461 . 1304 Carlo et al . , Th e interplay of traits and motives on volunteering . PAID 38 ( 2005 ) Clary , E . G . , & Orenstein , L . ( 1991 ) . Th e amount and eﬀ ectiveness of help : the relationship of motives and abili - ties to helping behavior . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 17 , 58 – 64 . Clary , E . G . , & Snyder , M . ( 1999 ) . Th e motivations to volunteer : theoretical and practical considerations . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 8 , 156 – 159 . Clary , E . G . , Snyder , M . , & Ridge , R . ( 1992 ) . Volunteers’ motivations : a functional strategy for the recruitment , placement and retention of volunteers . Nonproﬁ t Management and Leadership , 2 , 333 – 350 . Clary , E . G . , Snyder , M . , Ridge , R . D . , Copeland , J . , Stukas , A . A . , Haugen , J . , & Miene , P . ( 1998 ) . Understanding and assessing the motivations of volunteers : a functional approach . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 74 , 1516 – 1530 . Eagly , A . H . , & Crowley , M . ( 1996 ) . Gender and helping behavior : a meta - analytic review of the social psycholog - ical literature . Psychological Bulletin , 100 , 283 – 308 . Eisenberg , N . ( 1986 ) . Altruistic emotion , cognition and behavior . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Eisenberg , N . , & Fabes , R . A . ( Eds . ) . ( 1998 ) . Prosocial development & Damon , W . ( Eds . ) . Handbook of child psychol - ogy : social and personality development ( Vol . 3 , pp . 701 – 778 ) . NY : Wiley . Funder , D . C . ( 1991 ) . Global traits : a neo - Allportian approach to personality . Psychological Science , 2 , 31 – 39 . Graziano , W . G . ( 1994 ) . Th e development of agreeableness as a dimension of personality . In C . F . Halverson , G . A . Kohnstamm , & R . P . Martin ( Eds . ) , Th e developing structure of temperament and personality from infancy to child - hood ( pp . 339 – 354 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Graziano , W . G . , & Eisenberg , N . H . ( 1997 ) . Agreeableness : a dimension of personality . In R . Hogan , J . Johnston , & S . Briggs ( Eds . ) , Handbook of personality psychology ( pp . 795 – 824 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . John , O . P . , Donahue , E . M . , Kentle , R . ( 1991 ) . Th e Big - Five Inventory - Versions 4a and 54 . Technical Report , In - stitute of Personality and Social Research , University of California , Berkeley , CA . Kenrick , D . T . , & Funder , D . C . ( 1988 ) . Proﬁ ting from controversy : lessons from the person - situation debate . American Psychologist , 43 , 23 – 34 . Knight , G . P . , Johnson , L . G . , Carlo , G . , & Eisenberg , N . ( 1994 ) . A multiplicative model of the dispositional ante - cedents of a prosocial behavior : predicting more of the people more of the time . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 66 , 178 – 183 . Kosek , R . B . ( 1995 ) . Measuring prosocial behaviors of college students . Psychological Reports , 3 , 739 – 742 . Little , B . R . ( 1983 ) . Personal projects : a rationale and method of investigation . Environment and Behavior , 15 , 273 – 309 . MacKinnon , D . P . , Warsi , G . , & Dwyer , J . H . ( 1995 ) . A simulation study of mediated eﬀ ect measures . Multivariate Behavioral Research , 30 , 41 – 62 . McAdams , D . P . ( 1994 ) . Can personality change ? Levels of stability and growth in personality across the life span . In T . F . Heatherton & J . L . Weinberger ( Eds . ) , Can personality change ? ( pp . 299 – 313 ) . Washington , DC : Amer - ican Psychological Association . McClelland , D . L . ( 1985a ) . Human motivation , Glenview , IL : Scott , Foresman , & Company . McClelland , D . L . ( 1985b ) . How motives , skills , and values determine what people do . American Psychologist , 40 , 812 – 825 . McCrae , R . R . , & Costa , P . T . ( 1999 ) . A ﬁ ve - factor theory of personality . In L . A . Pervin & O . P . John ( Eds . ) , Handbook of personality : theory and research ( 2nd ed . ) ( pp . 139 – 153 ) . New York : Guilford Press . Murk , P . J . , & Stephan , J . F . ( 1991 ) . Volunteers : How to get them , train them , and keep them . Economic Develop - ment Review , 9 , 73 – 75 . Okun , M . A . ( 1994 ) . Th e relation between motives for organizational volunteering and frequency of volunteering by elders . Journal of Applied Gerontology , 13 , 115 – 126 . Okun , M . A . , & Finch , J . F . ( 1998 ) . Th e Big Five personality dimensions and the process of institutional departure . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 23 , 233 – 256 . Okun , M . A . , Barr , A . , & Herzog , A . R . ( 1998 ) . Motivation to volunteer by older adults : a test of competing mea - surement models . Psychology and Aging , 13 , 608 – 621 . Carlo et al . , from Personality and Individual Diﬀ erences 38 ( 2005 ) 1305 Omoto , A . M . , & Snyder , M . ( 1995 ) . Sustained helping without obligation : motivation , longevity of service , and perceived attitude change among AIDS volunteers . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 68 , 671 – 686 . Penner , L . A . , & Finkelstein , M . A . ( 1998 ) . Dispositional and structural determinants of volunteerism . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology . 74 , 525 – 537 . Smith , B . M . , & Nelson , L . D . ( 1975 ) . Personality correlates of helping behavior . Psychological Reports , 37 , 307 – 310 . Sobel , M . E . ( 1982 ) . Asymptotic conﬁ dence intervals for indirect eﬀ ects in structural equation models . In S . Lein - hardt ( Ed . ) , Sociological methodology ( pp . 290 - 312 ) . Washington , DC : American Sociological Association . Staub , E . ( 1978 ) . Positive social behavior and morality : I . Social and personal inﬂ uences . New York , NY : Academic Press .