1 Single molecule tracking reveals nanodomains in biomolecular condensates Author ( s ) : Guoming Gao 1 , 2 , Emily R . Sumrall 1 , 2 , Nils G . Walter 2 , 3 * Author affiliations : 1 Biophysics Graduate Program , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , MI 48109 , USA 2 Center for RNA Biomedicine , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , MI 48109 , USA 3 Department of Chemistry , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , MI 48109 , USA * Correspondence : nwalter @ umich . edu Abstract Protein - rich biomolecular condensates formed by phase separation 1 play a crucial role in cellular RNA regulation by the selective recruitment and processing of RNA molecules 2 . The functional impact of condensates on RNA biology relies on the residence time of individual RNA molecules within a condensate 3 , which is governed by intra - condensate diffusion 4 – the slower or more confined the diffusion , the longer the residence time . However , the spatiotemporal organization of RNA and protein diffusion within a single condensate remains largely unknown due to the challenge of accurately profiling intra - condensate diffusion behaviors down to the single - molecule level . Here we introduced a general condensate - tethering approach that allows single molecule tracking ( SMT ) of fluorescently labeled proteins and RNAs within non - wetted spherical 3D condensates without the interference of condensate motions . We found that a significant fraction of RNA and protein molecules are locally confined , rather than freely diffusive , within a model condensate formed by full - length , tag - free , RNA - binding protein Fused - in - Sarcoma ( FUS ) , known for its critical roles in RNA biology under both physiological and pathological conditions 5 . Dynamic Point Accumulation for Imaging in Nanoscale Topography ( PAINT ) 6 reconstruction further revealed that RNA and proteins are confined to distinct slow - moving nanometer - scale regions , termed nanodomains , within a single condensate . Remarkably , nanodomains affect the diffusion but not the density of the confined biomolecules , supporting local percolation 1 , 7 rather than a secondary phase separation within the condensate as their origin . Beyond their regulatory roles on RNA residence time , nanodomains engender both elevated local connectivity and altered chemical environment , a prerequisite for pathological liquid - to - solid transition of FUS during aging . In summary , our study uncovers a patterned spatial organization of both protein and RNA molecules within a single condensate , revealing distinct diffusion dynamics that affect molecular retention time and interactions underlying cellular function and pathology . 2 Main Both protein and RNA molecules can phase separate into biomolecular condensates that regulate cellular activities by organizing biochemical reactions 1 , 7 - 9 . Co - assembled ribonucleoprotein ( RNP ) granules play critical roles in RNA metabolism 2 such as transcription 10 - 12 , splicing 12 - 14 , translation 15 , 16 , and decay 17 , 18 under both physiological and pathological conditions 9 . Proteins often serve as scaffold molecules that drive the phase separation , and RNAs usually partition into a condensate as guest molecules 8 , 19 , 20 . Cellular functions of RNP granules rely on the selective recruitment of RNA guest molecules and their corresponding processing machineries into condensates 1 , 2 , 8 , 19 , 20 , as well as the resulting modulation of biochemical reaction rates 21 , 22 . Since all biological processes are time - dependent , information on how long an RNA molecule resides in a condensate and how the internal architecture of the condensate regulates intra - condensate diffusion are crucial , yet underexplored . Single - molecule tracking ( SMT ) by fluorescence microscopy has provided evidence of distinct interaction kinetics of RNAs with RNP granules in cells based on RNA functionality 3 , 23 - 25 , but intracellular SMT generally lacks the spatiotemporal resolution needed to reveal intra - condensate diffusion . Complementary pioneering work using SMT in vitro has demonstrated different diffusive states and local chemical environments within condensates , with such measurements typically limited to proteins or organic dyes 26 - 33 . To gain deeper insight into the spatiotemporal organization of both protein scaffold and RNA guest molecules within RNP granules , we sought to identify and overcome the obstacles to accurate SMT within 3 - dimensional ( 3D ) condensates . Previous intra - condensate SMT experiments have been performed in condensates with protein 32 or RNA 34 components tethered to a membrane , forming flattened , wetted domains that have material properties distinct from those of spherical 3D condensates assembled via phase separation in bulk solution 35 , 36 . Even in the absence of membrane - tethering , condensates can still form wetted domains on glass surfaces due to non - specific protein absorption , which has not been systematically excluded in most studies 26 - 28 , 30 , 31 . Spherical 3D condensates can be preserved by proper surface passivation 33 , but condensates on passivated glass surfaces can exhibit rotational or translational motions that interfere with the SMT of slowly diffusing molecules . Therefore , a system that both preserves 3D condensate shape and eliminates interference from whole - condensate motions is critical for accurate intra - condensate SMT . Here we achieved accurate , simultaneous intra - condensate SMT of protein and RNA molecules by optimizing a general multi - tether approach that restricts condensate motion without inducing surface wetting . We chose Fused - in - Sarcoma ( FUS ) protein as our model RNP granule scaffold to assemble biomolecular condensates in vitro , since it regulates transcription , splicing , DNA - damage repair , and stress response by forming a variety of physiological and pathological condensates 5 , 37 - 40 . Notably , disease - related mutations of FUS have been linked to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( ALS ) and other neurodegenerative diseases , where mutants accelerate the liquid - to - solid phase transition of FUS condensates in a process termed aging , causing the pathological fibrilization of FUS within neurons 39 , 41 - 45 . We purified full - length tag - free FUS 46 , 47 to obtain condensates devoid of perturbations from protein truncations or purification tag and fluorescent protein appendages 48 . In contrast to the highly liquid - like material properties of these condensates , significant fractions of the constituting FUS scaffold molecules and model firefly luciferase ( FL ) messenger RNA ( mRNA ) guest molecules were found to be confined , rather than freely diffusive . Point Accumulation for Imaging in Nanoscale Topography ( PAINT ) reconstructions based on SMT trajectories directly visualized the underlying architecture that confines diffusion , defined by dynamic nanometer - scale regions within a single condensate . These nanodomains restrict the diffusion of molecules based on their size , shape , and charge , 3 leading to distinct protein and RNA diffusion behaviors within a condensate . The sub - condensate architecture observed here may form the basis for a spatial regulation of biochemical reactions that affect specific RNA and protein molecules in an RNP granule , including the fibrilization of FUS and aggregation of RNA . Tethering enables SMT in liquid - like , full - length , tag - free FUS condensates The N - terminal prion - like domain ( PrLD , 1 - 239 aa ) of FUS has been widely used as a model system to study phase separation 49 - 52 . We reasoned that the full - length protein contains C - terminal regions with structural and electrostatic features that may also affect condensate properties ( Fig . 1a , b ) . To investigate condensates that most closely approximate a physiological scaffold protein behavior , we purified FUS in its full - length tag - free form , adapting a recently described protocol featuring multiple ion - exchange chromatography steps and an optimized refolding protocol with 𝛽𝛽 - cyclodextran 46 , 47 ( Fig . S1 ) . In addition , the FL guest mRNA ~ 1 , 500 nucleotide ( nt ) in length was generated with the features necessary for intracellular translation , including a 5’ - cap , a 5’ untranslated region ( UTR ) , and a poly - A tail ( Fig . 1a , Fig . S1 ) . For fluorescence - based SMT , we used click - chemistry to covalently attach minimally disruptive 53 organic dye molecules between the coding sequence and unmodified poly - A tail ( Fig . 1a , Fig . S1 ) . To characterize the phase separation of full - length tag - free FUS , we triggered condensation by diluting a stock solution of FUS to a physiological concentration of 10 µM FUS found in Hela cell nucleus 39 . Condensates were generally imaged within 30 minutes of assembly to avoid aging . We first determined the phase diagram ( Fig . S2 ) , which shows a binodal curve similar to previous reports for truncated or tagged FUS 39 , 54 . Next , we measured the condensate fusion kinetics using microrheology in a dual - trap optical tweezers setup ( Fig . 1c ) . When the probing trap ( purple , Fig . 1c ) approaches the measurement trap ( orange , Fig . 1c ) at constant speed , the coalescence of the two condensates generates an increasing force on the measurement trap due to surface tension , accompanied by a decrease in total area of the condensates ( Fig . 1c ) . The force curve upon transitioning from touching to fully fused droplets was used to extract the characteristic fusion time 𝜏𝜏 39 , 54 ( Fig . 1d ) . The distribution of 𝜏𝜏 values ( Fig . 1e ) exhibits significantly faster fusion ( 𝜏𝜏 ! " # $ = 51 ± 4 ms ) than reported for tagged versions of FUS ( 𝜏𝜏 ! " # $ = ~ 150 ms for green fluorescence protein - labeled FUS 39 , 𝜏𝜏 ! " # $ = ~ 570 ms for maltose - binding protein - labeled FUS 54 ) . Taken together , these observations suggest that full - length tag - free FUS forms highly liquid condensates with phase - separation properties distinctive from commonly used truncated or tagged FUS models . To visualize entire condensates using highly inclined and laminated optical sheet ( HILO ) 55 microscopy , we doped 10 nM sparsely AlexaFluor488 - labeled FUS ( FUS - AF488 ) into the condensation reaction , whereas to perform SMT and measure the intra - condensate diffusion of single biomolecules we added 50 pM fluorescently labeled protein or RNA . Without tethering , we observed that condensates moved laterally on a polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) - passivated surface ( Fig . 1f ) . In addition , SMT trajectories of mRNA molecules within the same condensate were highly correlated , suggesting a significant contribution from both translational and rotational motions of the entire condensate ( Fig . 1g ) . Previously reported intra - condensate SMT trajectories of relatively small proteins appear to have been less affected 27 , 28 , 30 - 32 , suggesting that the comparably slow diffusion of mRNA molecules elevates this challenge . To prevent this interference of condensate motions with intra - condensate SMT observation , we developed a PEG - biotin : streptavidin : FUS - biotin tethering system , wherein the fraction of PEG - biotin controls tether density , and extensive washing prevents the contamination of condensates with streptavidin or FUS - biotin ( Fig . 1h ) . Notably , after optimizing the tether density to avoid surface wetting , we observed surface - captured FUS condensates that were spherical in both the x - y 4 plane ( Fig . 1i , Fig . S3 ) and the x - z plane ( Fig . 1j ) , rather than the previously reported flattened wetted domains 32 - 34 . Moreover , the uniform distribution of fluorescence intensity across the bulk fluorescence image of a tethered condensate ( Fig . 1i ) confirms that our full - length tag - free FUS condensates consisted of a single phase , rather than the multiphase organization of RNP granules assembled using multiple scaffolds 56 . Overall , multi - tethering provides an adaptable platform for accurate SMT within highly liquid - like , single - phase , full - length tag - free FUS condensates ( Fig . 1h , # 1 - 3 ) , as exemplified by the uncorrelated mRNA diffusion trajectories in the HILO cross - section imaging plane of an individual condensate ( Fig . 1k ) . Fig . 1 │ Tethering enables accurate single particle tracking of protein and RNA molecules within 3D biomolecular condensates . 5 a │ Schematic of the purified model protein and RNA . b │ Physicochemical profile of the full length FUS protein . All curves are running window analyses with a window size of 21 residues . IUPRED3 is a prediction score for IDR , curated by experimental database DisProt . Charge density is calculated from each residue’s pKa assuming pH = 7 . Hydropathy ( Hphob . ) is calculated with hydrophobicity scales determined by Eisenburg et al 57 . The red dotted line indicates the threshold of structured ( < 0 . 5 ) versus unstructured ( > 0 . 5 ) , positively versus negatively charged , or hydrophobic ( > 0 ) versus hydrophilic ( < 0 ) . c | Schematic of a C - Trap experiment that combines the force measurement from optical tweezers and the condensate total area from scanning - confocal fluorescence microscopy to measure the rheology of full - length , tag - free FUS condensates . d | Fitting of the high - frequency force data yields the rate constant 𝜏𝜏 ( characteristic fusion time ) of condensate fusion . e | Distribution of 𝜏𝜏 . Measurements were done in three biological replicates with N being the number of condensate pairs measured . f , g│ Condensates can undergo coalescence ( f ) and translational ( arrows in f ) or rotational ( arrows in g ) motions in the absence of surface tethers . The centroid position of a condensate ( f ) and the angular positions of three RNA molecules ( g ) in the current and previous frame are shown in white and yellow , respectively . h │ Schematic of a tethered , sparsely labeled condensate system enabling single - molecule and - particle tracking ( SMT and SPT ) in one or two channels simultaneously within a single biomolecular condensate . # 1 - 3 are three types of experiments to determine the sub - condensate heterogeneity using different probes . For bulk fluorescence imaging of condensates , a labeling ratio < 0 . 01 % was used to minimize the impact of fluorophores on condensates . i │ Bulk fluorescence image of tethered FUS condensates in a highly inclined laminated optical light sheet ( HILO ) microscope with the condensate boundary detected by a machine - learning - based pixel classifier , the best method for condensates with a broad range of sizes 58 , and the normalized intensity ( I , norm . ) profile along the white dotted line of the zoomed - in condensate . j │ Side view of a representative tethered FUS condensate shows its spherical shape . k | Representative RNA trajectories within a condensate in a typical video from a type # 1 experiment in h . The gray dotted line indicates the detected boundary of a tethered FUS condensate from bulk fluorescence . IDR , intrinsically disordered region ; RRM , RNA - recognition motif ; ZF , zinc - finger domain ; BBT , between - body - and - tail labeling strategy for mRNA ; UTR , untranslated region ; TSS , translation start site ; CDS , coding sequence ; ALEX , alternating - laser excitation ; PEG , polyethylene glycol ; mPEG , PEG monomethyl ether . All scale bars are 1 µm . Nanodomains govern intra - condensate diffusion patterns To systematically profile heterogeneous intra - condensate diffusion behaviors ( Fig . 2a ) , we developed a pipeline that categorizes SMT trajectories by diffusion type ( Fig . 2a - b ) and assesses population - wide shifts via distributions of specific observed metrics ( Fig . 2c ) . Generally , in the absence of active transport SMT trajectories can be assigned to one of three diffusion types : immobile , confined diffusion , and normal diffusion ( Fig . 2a ) , which are distinguished by the mean step size of a trajectory and the anomalous diffusion component a calculated from fitting the trajectory’s mean squared displacement ( MSD ) - lag time ( 𝜏𝜏 ) ( Fig . 2a - b ) . Immobile trajectories have step sizes smaller or similar to the mean localization error ( Fig . S4 ) so that a 30 nm threshold was used to distinguish mobile from immobile trajectories ( Fig . 2b ) . For mobile trajectories , confined diffusion yields a < 1 while normal diffusion ideally exhibits a = 1 . Since a is usually underestimated when fitting experimental data 59 , a more practical threshold of 0 . 7 was used instead of 1 to distinguish normal from confined diffusion trajectories ( Fig . 2b ) . The a estimates from single trajectories followed a broad distribution ( Fig . 2c ) so that we used the distribution of angles between steps calculated from all trajectories ( Fig . 2c ) as an orthogonal metric to quantify how significantly molecules were confined . An angle distribution 6 skewing towards 180° is expected for confined particles because they bounce back when approaching their confinement boundary , where 0° is defined as no change in directionality and 180° as a complete turn - back . In contrast , a uniform angle distribution is expected for normal diffusion , due to its isotropic nature . For normal diffusion trajectories , we used both MSD - 𝜏𝜏 fitting ( Fig . S5 ) and a Bayesian statistics - based state array ( SA ) method 60 ( Fig . 2c ) to estimate the distribution of apparent diffusion coefficients ( D app ) . To test the resulting diffusion - profiling pipeline , we used 20 - nm and 200 - nm polystyrene beads in the dilute phase outside of condensates as a normal diffusion control . We confirmed signatures of normal diffusion in both of these controls , with a normal diffusion fraction of 65 - 76 % , an a distribution peak at 1 , a uniform angle distribution , and single sharp peaks in the D app distribution . As expected from the Stokes - Einstein diffusion law , the peak for the 20 - nm beads was shifted from that of the 200 - nm beads roughly by a factor of 10 ( Fig . S6 , Table S1 ) . Notably , the diffusion profile of single FL mRNA molecules in the dilute phase matched well with that of the 20 - nm beads ( Fig . 2c , Fig . S6 ) , further validating our pipeline because the radius of gyration for such a 1500 - nt RNA was previously determined to be ~ 20 nm 61 . Collectively , these results indicate that our pipeline is well suited to categorize diffusion behaviors within an SMT dataset . To assess the diffusion of both protein scaffold and RNA guest molecules inside condensates , we applied our pipeline to the corresponding SMT datasets ( Fig . 2b - c , Fig . 1h # 1 - 2 ) . Previous studies have observed multiple normal diffusion states of protein scaffold molecules within membrane - wetted domains or non - tethered 3D condensates with a D app ranging from ~ 0 . 01 to ~ 0 . 52 µ m 2 / s 27 , 30 - 32 . Similarly , we found multiple diffusive states of FUS within the normal diffusion fraction , with a dominant peak at 0 . 81 µ m 2 / s ( Fig . 2c , Table S1 ) . Remarkably , we additionally found that both intra - condensate FUS and mRNA molecules were significantly confined , with confined fractions of 67 ± 1 % and 83 ± 2 % , respectively , considerably higher than that of the outside dilute phase mRNA control ( 40 ± 2 % ; Fig . 2b ) . Confined diffusion was further supported by an a component distribution biased toward 0 and an angle distribution skewing toward 180° ( Fig . 2c , Table S1 ) . The D app distributions of unconfined FUS and mRNA molecules were partially overlapping , suggesting the formation of RNP complexes , whereas a fast - diffusing peak was found only in the FUS distribution , consistent with the relatively small molecular weight of the free protein ( Fig . 2c ) . The diffusion of unconfined mRNA molecules within condensates was slower than that of mRNA outside of condensates , which suggests an elevated viscosity in the condensed phase but cannot explain the confined diffusion . Collectively , these findings revealed that both FUS scaffold and mRNA guest molecules are significantly confined within a condensate , with mRNA more confined than FUS , while the normal diffusion fraction contains multiple diffusive states , some of which may represent RNP complexes . To probe the spatial relationship between the confinement of scaffold and guest molecules , we next sought to visualize the sub - condensate architectures that dampen diffusion . To this end , we performed point accumulation for imaging in nanoscale topology ( PAINT ) 6 reconstruction from SMT trajectories , termed SMT - PAINT ( Fig . 2d ) , using dual - color SMT under alternating laser excitation ( ALEX ) to avoid bleed - through artifacts ( Fig . 1h # 3 ) . In a SMT - PAINT image , unconfined and fast - moving molecules leave fewer point locations and thus less pixel intensity than confined molecules because they quickly exit the imaging plane due to axial diffusion under HILO microscopy . Only confined molecules will significantly increase local point density and result in bright puncta in an SMT - PAINT image . We also ensured sufficient coverage of locations within a condensate by introducing an oxygen scavenging system ( OSS ) that extended SMT video length from the previous ~ 200 frames ( 4 s ) to ~ 10 , 000 frames ( 200 s ) ( Fig . 2d , Fig . S7 ) . The concentration - dependent increase observed in the number of trackable particles supports that the trajectories used for SMT - PAINT arose from the titrated molecules of 7 interest ( Fig . S7 ) . Using SMT - PAINT , we found distinct nanometer - scale regions that confine FUS and mRNA , which we term nanodomains ( Fig . 2e ) . The negative mean pixel - wise Pearson correlation coefficient ( PCC ) between the two nanodomains was - 0 . 26 ± 0 . 02 , suggesting a slight exclusion effect ( Fig . 2f ) . To further assess how non - confined molecules distribute throughout a condensate , we used step size heatmaps to measure the spatial distribution of fast - diffusing molecules ( Fig . 2g ) . We found that fast - diffusing FUS and mRNA molecules were spatially correlated with a positive mean PCC of 0 . 42 ± 0 . 02 ( Fig . 2h ) , suggesting co - diffusion of FUS and mRNA that was further supported by cross - pair correlation function ( G cross ) ( Fig . S8 ) . Taken together , these results yield intra - condensate diffusion patterns where distinct nanodomains confine protein scaffold and RNA guest molecules , while fast - diffusing molecules generally colocalize outside of these nanodomains . Fig . 2 │ FUS and RNA are confined in nanodomains . a │ Three representative mRNA trajectories within a single full - length tag - free FUS condensate , which can be classified into three categories : immobile , confined diffusion , and normal diffusion . b | Fractions of three categories for mRNA and FUS molecules in the condensed phase , and for mRNA 8 molecules in the dilute phase . Error bars are SEM from at least three experiments on different days . c | Distributions of diffusion metrics , including the anomalous diffusion component a , the angle between adjacent steps , and the apparent diffusion coefficient ( D app ) . Total number of molecules N in each dataset is included in the legend . The colored boxes on the top left corner of each distribution indicate the diffusion type ( s ) of molecules included in the plot . The a distribution was derived from mobile molecules with an R 2 > 0 . 7 in MSD - t fitting . The angle distribution was calculated from all molecules . The D app distribution was calculated from normal diffusion molecules only . The D app distribution was calculated via a state array ( SA ) method 60 . d | Raw SMT trajectories of FUS molecules within a single condensate and schematic for two ways of SMT - PAINT reconstruction . A plot of all FUS trajectories in a representative tethered condensate , colored by the start time of each trajectory . An SMT - PAINT image was generated by accumulating locations of all trajectories throughout a SMT dataset . Each frame of a time - lapse SMT - PAINT video was reconstructed by accumulating locations of trajectories within a time windows that is non - overlapping with adjacent windows . e | Dual - color SMT - PAINT of FUS and mRNA with a cross - sectioning profile along the white dotted line . Pixel intensity represents the number of SMT trajectories in each pixel . f | Distribution of pixel - wise Pearson Correlation Coefficient ( PCC ) of e , weighted by the number of SMT trajectories per pixel . A gray dotted line indicates PCC = 0 , distinguishing positive correlation ( PCC > 0 ) and negative correlation ( PCC < 0 ) . g | A heatmap of average step size of all FUS or mRNA trajectories on top of each pixel , with a cross - sectioning profile along the white dotted line . The higher the pixel intensity , the higher the average step size , or faster the diffusion . h | Pixel - wise weighted PCC of g . All scale bars are 1 µm . Statistics annotation : independent t - test , ns : 0 . 05 < p < = 1 , * : 0 . 01 < p < = 0 . 05 , * * : 0 . 001 < p < = 0 . 01 , * * * : 0 . 0001 < p < = 0 . 001 , * * * * : p < = 0 . 0001 . Functional impact of nanodomains on FUS and RNA To gain deeper insight into the impact of nanodomains on the internal environment within a condensate , we first characterized the mobility of FUS nanodomains by time - lapse SMT - PAINT , where subsets of SMT trajectories within non - overlapping time windows were reconstructed into frames of a video ( Fig . 2d , Fig , 3a ) . The motion of FUS nanodomains was determined to be slower than 10 nm / s based on the mean step size of nanodomains in these time - lapse videos , which was smaller than our localization errors ( Fig . S4 ) . Therefore , FUS nanodomains as a whole are immobile at the minute timescale relative to the condensate . To explore the influence of nanodomains on the local chemical environment within a condensate , we performed fluorescence lifetime imaging ( FLIM ) on 10 nM AlexaFluo488 - labeled FUS within tethered condensates ( Fig . 3b ) , where changes in fluorescence lifetime reflect an altered chemical environment 62 around the AlexaFluo488 dye . FLIM images showed nanometer - scale regions of low and high lifetime inside a condensate , with a minimum of ~ 3 . 2 ns and a maximum of ~ 3 . 5 ns , and a much higher lifetime of ~ 5 . 7 ns in the dilute phase ( Fig . 3b ) . Since our FLIM images were averaged from 10 scans spanning across ~ 5 min , any difference in lifetime associated with fast moving intra - condensate regions would have blurred out due to averaging . Therefore , we reasoned that the ~ 0 . 3 ns dispersion of lifetimes within a condensate is caused by a relatively immobile intra - condensate architecture , in particular the extremely slow - moving nanodomains ( Fig . 3a ) . To further test this hypothesis , we performed a fluorescence correlation spectroscopy ( FCS ) analysis at ten random locations within each tethered condensate on the same time - resolved confocal microscope used for FLIM to simultaneously derive local D app values and fluorescence lifetime ( Fig . 3c ) . The ten random locations are expected to sample both nanodomains and the spaces around them for us to relate local fluorescence lifetime and nanodomain - induced changes in D app , although FCS cannot distinguish slow from confined 9 diffusion . Indeed , we observed a positive correlation between lifetime and D app ( Fig . 3c ) , suggesting that the ~ 0 . 3 ns decrease of lifetime in FLIM images was caused by FUS nanodomains of low D app . Finally , we tested another previously used method to probe the intra - condensate chemical environment – imaging with Nile Red 26 , 28 . Although we found bright Nile Red puncta near the condensate surface , control experiments found such puncta also in the absence of condensates , indicating that they were caused by aggregation at the previously used dye concentrations , rather than an altered chemical environment ( Fig . S9 ) . Taken together , FUS nanodomains represent a slow - moving sub - condensate architecture that provides a distinct local chemical environment . Fig . 3 │ Nanodomain properties and their functional impacts on FUS and RNA . 10 a | Time - lapse SMT - PAINT reconstructions of nano - domains that confine FUS motions in the zoomed - in regions labeled by three different colored boxes in a SMT - PAINT image . Motions of the underlying nanodomains are depicted by orange trajectories , annotated with the velocity calculated from the mean step size of each trajectory . b | Fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy ( FLIM ) of AlexaFluo488 - labeled FUS . c | Cartoon and results of a random - sampling fluorescence correlation spectroscopy ( FCS ) - FLIM assay on a time - resolved laser - scanning confocal microscope . The scatter plot shows the correlation between D app measured by FCS and lifetime by FLIM with the distributions of each on the respective side . The blue line shows a linear regression model fit with the shaded area being the 95 % confidence interval of the fit . d | Auto - pair correlation function ( G auto ) of FUS or mRNA single - molecule locations , with amplitude ( A ) and radius ( R ) extracted by fitting with an exponential decay with a baseline of 1 . A gray dotted line indicates G auto = 1 , demarcating a random distribution without clustering ( G auto > 1 ) or self - exclusion ( G auto < 1 ) . 95 % confidence intervals of A and R were calculated by parametric bootstrapping , while the fitting results from each bootstrap are shown as histograms . Error bars are SEM of G auto across different condensates , weighted by the number of SMT trajectories in each condensate . e | Distribution of FUS and mRNA nanodomains relative to the center of each condensate . The distance to condensate center is normalized by the size of the condensate , while the probability is normalized by the molecular density and the increasing ring area from center to periphery of a condensate . Gray dotted lines indicate an expected uniform distribution of molecules , randomly distributed throughout each condensate . Error bars are 95 % confidence interval determined by non - parametric bootstrapping . f | Bright - field images of FUS fibril out - growth from the condensate surface after 24 hours incubation at room temperature . g | Exemplary multi - stage diffusion trajectory of an mRNA moving from one confined region to another , followed by normal diffusion until the mRNA leaves the FUS condensate from the edge . The white circle indicates the current position of the mRNA , while the white line indicates the trajectory before the current frame . h | A zoomed - in view of the trajectory , colored by the time each location is detected . i | Running - window analysis of D app and a value from a window size of 20 steps . Hidden Markov Model ( HMM ) is used to determine the transition point between confined and normal diffusion states . All scale bars are 1 µm . Statistics annotation : independent t - test , ns : 0 . 05 < p < = 1 , * : 0 . 01 < p < = 0 . 05 , * * : 0 . 001 < p < = 0 . 01 , * * * : 0 . 0001 < p < = 0 . 001 , * * * * : p < = 0 . 0001 . Since the 50 pM mRNA guest concentration was negligible relative to the 10 µ M total concentration for FUS scaffold , we reasoned that nanodomains confining mRNAs are specialized FUS nanodomains that confine mRNA molecules , and asked how different the two types of nanodomains are in size , confinement strength , and relative location within the condensate . For brevity and clarity , we will use the following abbreviations throughout the remainder of this article : FUS nanodomains for nanodomains that predominantly confine FUS molecules , and RNA nanodomains for nanodomains that confine FUS less but more strongly RNA molecules . First , we calculated the auto - pair correlation function ( G auto ) of all locations from FUS or mRNA SMT trajectories to determine the size and ability to retain molecules of FUS nanodomains and mRNA nanodomains , as the radius ( R ) and amplitude ( A ) of G auto , respectively ( Fig . 3d ) . The radius of FUS nanodomains was determined to be 190 ± 30 nm while mRNA nanodomains are 130 ± 10 nm ( Fig . 3d ) . FUS molecules were 58 ± 6 % more likely to be confined in FUS nanodomains compared to randomly distributed within a condensate , while mRNA molecules were 90 ± 10 % more likely to be confined in mRNA nanodomains ( Fig . 3d ) . In line with the modest probability increase in FUS compared to mRNA nanodomains , fast - moving FUS molecules also transitioned through the FUS nanodomains , whereas fast - moving mRNA molecules were mostly excluded from the RNA nanodomains ( Fig . S10 ) . That is , FUS nanodomains have a weaker ability to retain molecules and are of bigger size than mRNA 11 nanodomains . Second , we calculated the normalized location distribution of both nanodomains relative to the condensate center and found distinct distribution patterns ( Fig . 3e ) . FUS nanodomains predominantly localize to the peripheral region of a condensate , evidenced by a 15 ± 3 % increase in probability compared to a random distribution , with a more minor preference for the center of a condensate , observed as an 8 ± 7 % increase ( Fig . 3e ) . In contrast , mRNA nanodomains predominantly locate to the condensate center ( 15 ± 7 % increase in probability ) , and less locate to the periphery ( 7 ± 3 % increase ; Fig . 3e ) . Remarkably , the peripheral localization of FUS nanodomains , observed here right after condensate assembly , coincides with surface - originating fibril out - growth after 24 hours , a phenomenon associated with condensate aging 39 , 63 ( Fig . 3f ) . These findings suggest that FUS nanodomains may facilitate the recently reported surface - induced liquid - to - solid transition of FUS 28 , 63 , 64 . In summary , FUS nanodomains are distinct from mRNA nanodomains in size , confinement strength , and location within a condensate , which may contribute a distinct chemical environment that primes the fibrilization of FUS from the surface of a condensate . Given that the mRNA nanodomain is a specialized but distinct version of a FUS nanodomain , we hypothesized that it may play a role in regulating RNA residence time in a condensate by trapping . Indeed , the escape path of an mRNA molecule from the inside to the outside of a condensate was significantly prolonged by the presence of mRNA nanodomains ( Fig . 3g - i ) . As shown in a representative trajectory ( Fig . 3g - h ) , an mRNA molecule was initially confined within a nanodomain from 0 to 0 . 92 s . Following escape from the first nanodomain , it became trapped in a second nanodomain until 1 . 86 s . After a second escape , the mRNA molecule diffused freely and reached the condensate boundary at 2 . 74 s , at which point it disappeared from the focal plane due to rapid axial diffusion in the dilute phase . To confirm that the extended escape time was due to confinement within two mRNA nanodomains rather than dampened diffusion by an increased local viscosity , we implemented a running - window analysis of D app and the 𝛼𝛼 component of the trajectory and found clear transitions between normal and confined diffusion states ( Fig . 3i ) . In contrast to the potential role of FUS nanodomains in condensate aging , nanodomain - induced confined diffusion of mRNA molecules was only marginally promoted by aging ( Fig . S11 ) . To test whether an excess of RNA can rescue mRNA molecules from nanodomains via competitive binding , we added 50 ng / µ L Hela cell total RNA during the reconstitution of condensates and profiled the diffusion of mRNA molecules within condensates ( Fig . S12 ) . We found only a marginal change in the fraction of confined diffusion mRNA molecules but the disappearance of a slower diffusive state in the normal diffusion fraction ( Fig . S12 ) . This suggested that the addition of total RNA indeed rescues some mRNA molecules from protein binding , but it only affects freely diffusive mRNA molecules with no impact on nanodomain - induced confinement . In summary , mRNA nanodomains mainly function as traps that increase mRNA residence time in condensates , independent of condensate aging or the presence of an excess amount of RNA background . Size , shape , and charge determine intra - condensate diffusion We next asked how the properties of a biomolecule , such as size , shape and charge , affect their intra - condensate diffusion profile . Specifically , we probed why mRNA as a highly negatively charged , high - molecular - weight molecule was more confined in nanodomains than FUS , a mixed - charge , comparably lower molecular weight molecule ( Fig . 3d , Fig . 1b ) . Previous studies have reported a preference for some RNP granules to recruit longer RNAs 65 - 67 . Based on this knowledge , we first examined whether the confinement of RNA molecules in nanodomains is affected by length , by comparing the 1500 - nt long FL mRNA with a 22 - nt short microRNA ( miRNA ; here miRNA21 ) by using dual - color tracking ( Fig . 4a - c , using Fig . 1h # 3 ) . 12 SMT - PAINT images showed that miRNA molecules had a more diffusive distribution ( Fig . 4a ) than mRNA ( Fig . 2e ) . Analysis with G auto further revealed that miRNA molecules were only 30 ± 3 % more likely to be confined in condensate nanodomains than expected for a random distribution ( Fig . 4b , Fig . S13 ) , significantly lower than the 90 ± 10 % increase in probability for mRNA ( Fig . 3d ) . Moreover , the 220 ± 30 nm radius of miRNA nanodomain uncovered by G auto ( Fig . 4b , Fig . S13 ) far exceeded the 130 ± 10 nm radius of mRNA nanodomain ( Fig . 3d ) . The nearly - zero mean PCC of - 0 . 05 ± 0 . 02 in FUS - miRNA SMT - PAINT images further revealed a weaker exclusion effect between FUS and RNA nanodomains than those of FUS and mRNA ( Fig . 4c ) . These modestly confining , large miRNA nanodomains explain the more diffusive pattern of miRNA in SMT - PAINT images ( Fig . 4a ) . Notably , a consistent intra - condensate diffusion pattern was observed , namely a strong co - localizing effect on fast - diffusing protein and RNA molecules , with weak exclusion of confined protein and RNA molecules ( Fig . 4c , Fig . S8 ) . Given the weak nature of these miRNA nanodomains , we next tested whether the single Cy5 dye on the miRNA itself exerts an influence on diffusion , by testing the free dye ( Fig . 4d - e , using Fig . 1h # 1 ) . Unlike the expected slower normal diffusion when decreasing the molecular weight from RNA to free dye ( Fig . 4e D app spectrum ) , Cy5 is more confined than miRNA molecules , with a 53 ± 1 % confined fraction that is slightly larger than the 46 ± 2 % of the miRNA ( Fig . 4d ) . This conclusion is also supported by the a and angle distributions ( Fig . 4e , Table S1 ) . These observations indicate that the confinement of the Cy5 - labeled miRNA was likely the base line of confinement observable within a condensate , possibly due to non - specific dye - protein interactions 68 . To conclude , only long RNAs like mRNAs , but not short RNAs like miRNAs , are significantly confined within nanodomains . We further investigated how other physicochemical properties of mRNA , such as overall size , shape and strong negative charge of the ribose - phosphate backbone , contribute to intra - condensate diffusion . To this end , we compared the intra - condensate diffusion profiles of FL mRNA molecules and carboxylate - modified 20 - nm beads , which mimic the charge and ~ 20 nm gyration radius of a typical 1 , 500 - nt mRNA 61 ( Fig . 4f - g ) . Compared to the linear - polymer mRNA molecules , the spherical beads have a higher immobile fraction in condensates ( Fig . 4f ) . This finding aligns with the fact that elongated , but not globular - shaped , objects can thread through a meshwork - like environment 69 , as found in a condensed , percolated droplet . Such a threading ability of linear mRNA may also explain the slightly faster diffusion among the normal diffusion mRNA fraction compared to the spherical beads ( Fig . 4g ) . To additionally probe the effects of surface charge , we performed SPT on a series of 9 . 5 - nm quantum dots ( QD ) with negative - charge carboxylate , charge - neutral PEG , and positive - charge amine coated surfaces ( Fig . 4h - i ) . Notably , all aspects of the diffusion profile remain the same between negatively and positively charged QDs , including fractions of diffusion type ( Fig . 4h ) and the distributions of a component , angle , and D app ( Fig . 4i ) . The only difference among QDs was that the neutral QDs had a larger immobile fraction than either of the charged QDs ( Fig . 4h ) . Taken together , unlike the length of an RNA , which determines confinement in nanodomains , both the linear - polymer nature and negative charge of an mRNA primarily contribute to maintaining its mobility in condensates but do not govern its confinement . 13 Fig . 4 │ Effect of size , shape , and charge on the intra - condensate diffusion profile . a | Dual - color SMT - PAINT of FUS and micro - RNA ( miRNA ) with a cross - sectioning profile across the white dotted line . Pixel intensity represents the location density on each pixel . b | Auto - pair correlation function ( G auto ) of FUS or miRNA single - molecule locations , with amplitude ( A ) and radius ( R ) extracted by fitting to an exponential decay with a baseline of 1 . A gray dotted line indicates G auto = 1 , suggesting random distribution without clustering ( G auto > 1 ) or self - exclusion ( G auto < 1 ) . 95 % confidence intervals of A and R were calculated by parametric bootstrapping . Error bars are SEM of G auto across different condensates , weighted by the number of SMT trajectories in each condensate . c | Pixel - wise weighted PCC of dual - color SMT - PAINT images of FUS and mRNA or miRNA , abbreviated as r ( F loc , R loc ) , and of average step size images , abbreviated as r ( F step , R step ) . A gray dotted line indicates PCC = 0 , distinguishing positive correlation ( PCC > 0 ) and negative correlation ( PCC < 0 ) . d , f , h | Fractions of the immobile ( I . ) , confined diffusion ( C . ) and normal diffusion ( N . ) categories for mRNA , miRNA , and free Cy5 dye molecules in the condensed phase ( d ) , mRNA molecules and 20 - nm carboxylate - modified beads in the condensed phase ( f ) , and amine - , 14 PEG - , carboxylate - functionalized quantum dots ( QDs ) in the condensed phase ( h ) . Error bars are S . E . M . from more than three experiments on different dates . e , g , i | Distributions of the mean step size of each trajectory , the anomalous diffusion component a , the angle between adjacent steps , and the apparent diffusion coefficient ( D app ) for mRNA , miRNA , and free Cy5 dye molecules in the condensed phase ( e ) , mRNA molecules and 20 - nm carboxylate - modified beads in the condensed phase ( g ) , and amine - , PEG - , carboxylate - functionalized quantum dots ( QDs ) in the condensed phase ( i ) . The colored boxes in the top left corner of each distribution indicate the diffusion type ( s ) of the molecules included in the plot . The mean step size distribution is from all molecules , and the total number of molecules N is included in the legend . The a and angle distributions are from all mobile molecules or particles while the D app distribution is from only normal diffusion molecules or particles . The D app distribution is calculated by a state array ( SA ) method , while the D app distribution calculated by mean squared displacement ( MSD ) - t fitting can be found in Fig . S5 . The D app distribution is scaled to visualize the smaller peaks . A double - layered black - yellow dotted line indicates the threshold between immobile ( black ) and confined diffusion ( yellow ) diffusion , while a double - layered yellow - green dotted line indicates the threshold between confined ( yellow ) and normal ( green ) diffusion . All scale bars are 1 µm . Statistics annotation : independent t - test , ns : 0 . 05 < p < = 1 , * : 0 . 01 < p < = 0 . 05 , * * : 0 . 001 < p < = 0 . 01 , * * * : 0 . 0001 < p < = 0 . 001 , * * * * : p < = 0 . 0001 . Discussion Intra - condensate heterogeneity caused by a multiphase architecture , such as observed in the nucleolus , has long been characterized 56 , 70 , but intra - condensate heterogeneity independent of a secondary phase transition was only recently reported 26 , 28 , 63 , 71 . Percolation , a connectivity transition to form a network of physical bonds 7 , has been found to play a role in the pre - condensation assembly of protein clusters below the saturation concentration 72 , and of protein - RNA condensates after assembly 73 , 74 . However , it has remained unclear whether percolation has to be global , spanning throughout the condensate , or can be local . Our work addresses this question by characterizing nanodomains , which exemplify a local , rather than global , percolation emerging in liquid condensates assembled from full - length , tag - free FUS . Nanodomains revealed by SMT - PAINT confine either FUS scaffold molecules or RNA guest molecules ( Fig . 2 ) . Yet , they do not increase molecular density since they do not appear in bulk fluorescence images ( Fig . 1i , j ) , where a secondary phase separation would lead to changes in local concentration detectable in the fluorescence signal . Given that 99 . 9995 % of molecules in our condensate represent FUS , a model emerges in which the nanodomains confining FUS and those confining RNA are both formed by local percolation of FUS , but at distinct levels of local connectivity , possibly due to different FUS conformations ( Fig . 5 ) . In FUS nanodomains , the higher connectivity of FUS is sufficient to confine the protein but prevents the larger RNA molecules from entering due to the small pore size of the meshwork . In RNA nanodomains , the comparatively modest connectivity among FUS molecules permits RNA molecules to enter and become confined . As large biopolymers , their high multivalency effectively integrates them into an otherwise dynamic FUS connectivity network . The intra - condensate space outside both types of nanodomains has the lowest connectivity among FUS and thus fast - diffusing FUS and RNA molecules co - localize there ( Fig . 5 ) . The discovery of nanodomains brings to light a previously unexplored dimension of control over the molecular residence time within condensates—by modulating confined diffusion ( Fig . 3g - i ) —presenting a stark departure from the regulation based on normal diffusion as traditionally proposed 27 , 29 - 32 . The quantity , size , and confinement strength of nanodomains can 15 all affect the escape path and timing of a molecule from a condensate . A molecule will take longer to escape a condensate in the presence of more , larger , and higher connectivity nanodomains ( Fig . 5 ) . Fig . 5 │ Nanodomains govern diffusion within a biomolecular condensate and affect the fate of both protein scaffold and RNA guest molecules . Given that inter - chain interactions promote aggregation or fibrilization 75 , the high local connectivity within FUS nanodomains likely provides a chemical environment ( Fig . 3b - c ) that would be favorable to stacking between FUS molecules and to fibril growth . We observe nanodomains to form shortly after condensate assembly , often near the condensate periphery ( Fig . 3e ) , so that they could prime the fibrilization of FUS during later condensate aging , explaining the surface - originating FUS fibril out - growth characterized in both previous studies 28 , 63 , 64 and our work ( Fig . 3f ) . Therefore , nanodomain - driven , locally tuned , inter - molecular dynamics in condensates may have pathological consequences , complementing a recent report that intra - molecular structural dynamics in condensates remains as fast as in dilute solution 29 . In conclusion , this work represents a significant step forward in identifying the spatiotemporal organization of the internal space of a condensate by demonstrating how nanodomains govern the intra - condensate diffusion profile . The techniques employed here can readily be adapted for other RNP condensates to dissect how they regulate RNA fate . While future work is needed to fully understand the driving forces behind nanodomain formation and their implications for cellular processes , our findings lay the foundation to study sub - condensate regulation of molecular function , en route to a complete understanding of the biophysical basis of condensate function in physiology and disease . 16 Methods Purification and labeling of FUS and RNA Full - length tag - free human FUS was purified following a recently developed protocol 46 , 47 with a series of ion - exchange chromatography under denaturing condition ( Fig . S1 ) , followed by a slow two - step refolding into a storage buffer containing 𝛽𝛽 - cyclodextran ( BCD ) that prevents phase separation . FUS was over - expressed in E . coli BL21 ( DE3 ) from pET - FUS plasmid , a generous gift from the Ishihama group . Culture was grown to OD600 = 1 . 0 at 37 °C and induced with 1 mM isopropyl β - D - 1 - thiogalactopyranoside ( IPTG ) . After 6 h of growth at 37 °C , cells were harvested by centrifugation and suspended with buffer A , 10 % glycerol , 20 mM [ 4 - ( 2 - hydroxyethyl ) - 1 - piperazineethanesulfonic acid ] ( HEPES ) - NaOH pH 7 . 0 , 300mM NaCl , 1 mM dithiothreitol ( DTT ) , 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid ( EDTA ) , 0 . 1 % Tween - 20 , and 1x cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail ( Millipore Sigma ) , and store for 30 minutes on ice . Cell lysate was sonicated on ice , and insoluble protein was collected by centrifugation . The pellet was solubilized in a buffer B , 6 M Urea , 10 % glycerol , 20 mM HEPES - NaOH pH 7 . 0 , 1 mM DTT , 1 mM EDTA , and 1x cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail ( Millipore Sigma ) . After centrifugation , supernatant was filtered with 0 . 45 𝜇𝜇 m filter ( Fisher ) and loaded to HiTrap Q column ( Cytiva ) on an NGC Fast Protein Liquid Chromatography ( FPLC ) station ( Bio - Rad ) . The flow - through fraction was mixed with CM Sepharose FF resin ( GE HealthCare Lifesciences ) on a rotator at 4 °C over night and passed through an open column to remove resin . The flow - through fraction was loaded to HiTrap Capto S column ( Cytiva ) on NGC FPLC station . The flow - through fraction was loaded to HiTrap SP HP column ( Cytiva ) on NGC FPLC station , and bound proteins were fractionated with 0 to 500 mM linear gradient of NaCl in buffer C , 6 M Urea , 10 % glycerol , 20 mM HEPES - NaOH pH 7 . 0 , 1 mM DTT and 1 mM EDTA . FUS fractions were examined on sodium dodecyl sulfate ( SDS ) - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( PAGE ) to ensure purity . If purity was not desired , FUS fractions were pooled , diluted to reduce salt concentration , and re - ran the above protocol from CM Sepharose FF to HiTrap SP HP . Finally , FUS fractions with desired purity ( Fig . S1 ) were pooled , aliquoted to 0 . 5 mL , flash frozen in liquid nitrogen , and stored in - 80 °C freezer until refolding . For the first step in two - step refolding , 0 . 5 mL denatured FUS was thawed and diluted with 2 mL refolding buffer , 900 mM arginine , 100 mM [ N - cyclohexyl - 2 - hydroxyl - 3 - aminopropanesulfonic acid ] ( CAPSO ) pH 9 . 5 , 0 . 3 mM reduced glutathione , 0 . 03 mM oxidized glutathione , and 1mM ZnCl 2 , and stored over night at room temperature . The second step of refolding was performed during two rounds of two - hours dialysis against buffer D , 10 % glycerol , 20 mM HEPES - NaOH pH 6 . 8 , 300 mM NaCl , 0 . 1 mM EDTA , and 10mM BCD , with a SnakeSkin 10K MWCO dialysis tubing ( Fisher ) at room temperature . After concentrated with an Amicon 10K MWCO Ultra - 4 centrifugal filter unit ( Millipore Sigma ) , the protein concentration of the final product was measured on NanoDrop ( Thermo Fisher ) with an extinction coefficient of 70 , 140 M - 1 cm - 1 . The full - length tag - free FUS was aliquoted , flash frozen , and stored at - 80°C . To generate AlexaFluo488 - labeled full - length tag - free FUS , a third round of dialysis was performed using a buffer D , pH adjusted to 7 . 5 , right after the first two round of dialysis . AFDye 488 NHS Ester ( Click Chemistry Tools ) was added to FUS at a dye : protein molar ratio of 20 : 1 and incubated in dark at room temperature for 30 minutes . Ten rounds of buffer exchange to buffer D were performed using the above filter unit to ensure a complete removal of free dyes . Absorbance spectrum measured on NanoDrop was used to determine the labeling ratio and calculate the effective concentration of AlexaFluo488 - labeled full - length tag - free FUS . AlexaFlour647 - labeled firefly luciferase ( FL ) mRNA was synthesized according to an established protocol 53 , 76 . A T7 promoter sequence ( 5’ - TAATACGACTCACTATAGGG - 3’ ) was incorporated at the 5’ end of the FL open reading frame during PCR amplification from a pRL - 17 CMV vector ( Promega ) . A Kozak consensus sequence and a 50 - nucleotide upstream region was incorporated before the translation start site to ensure enough space for the assembly of translation initiation complex 77 . After in vitro transcription with home - made T7 RNA polymerase , the transcript was purified via denaturing PAGE containing 7 M urea . The isolated RNA underwent enzymatic capping ( NEB ) and polyadenylation ( Thermo Fisher ) , employing an initial incorporation of 2’ - azido - 2’ - dATP ( Jena Biosciences ) followed by rATP . Finally , a click - chemistry reaction with AF647 sDIBO alkyne ( Thermo Fisher ) was conducted , strategically labeling between the coding sequence and the non - modified poly ( A ) tail to produce functional , fluorophore - conjugated FL mRNA . Free dyes were removed by multiple rounds of washing of the ethanol - precipitated mRNA pellet , which was confirmed by denaturing PAGE ( Fig . S1 ) . FUS condensate assembly A 10x phase separation buffer containing 200 mM tris ( hydroxymethyl ) aminomethane ( Tris ) - HCl , pH 7 . 5 , 1000 mM NaCl , 20 mM DTT , and 10 mM MgCl 2 was prepared and filtered with a 0 . 22 𝜇𝜇 m syringe filter ( Millipore Sigma ) for all reconstitution experiments , which was adapted from prior phase separation studies of FUS . Condensates were reconstituted by thoroughly mixing the full - length tag - free FUS at a final concentration of 10 µM , a physiological concentration of FUS in Hela cell nucleus 39 , with the phase separation buffer , an optional OSS , and any fluorescently labeled species based on experimental type # 1 - 3 ( Fig . 1h ) , as described below . Note that we keep the time between the assembly of condensates and imaging within 30 minutes , except for aging experiments ( Fig . 4s - t ) , to ensure that all experimental observations reported in this study are signatures of early - stage condensates representing the dynamically assembled RNP granules in cells . Most importantly , we added the stock solution of FUS as the last component so that phase separation was initiated only after all other components were thoroughly mixed , mimicking the assembly of condensates within intracellular milieu . A total volume of 30 𝜇𝜇 L was used for each experiment . For intra - condensate SMT or SPT with condensate boundary detection needed ( Fig . 1h , # 1 ) , 10 nM AlexaFluo488 - labeled FUS and 50 pM of the fluorescent species for SMT or SPT , such as Cy5 free dye , Cy5 - labeled miRNA - 21 ( Integrated DNA Technologies ) , AlexaFlour647 - labeled FL mRNA , 20 - nm FluoSpheres Carboxylate - Modified Microspheres ( Thermo Fisher ) , 9 . 5 - nm CdSe / ZnS core - shell type QDs functionalized with carboxylic acid , PEG , or amine ( Millipore Sigma ) , were mixed with phase separation buffer and an OSS composed of 2 . 4 mM protocatechuic acid ( PCA ) , 24 nM protocatechuate - 3 , 4 - dioxygenase ( PCD ) , and 2 . 4 mM Trolox 78 before adding stock solution of FUS . Cy5 free dye was made by neutralizing the N - hydroxysuccinimide ( NHS ) group on Cy5 NHS - ester ( APExBIO ) in 10 mM Tris - NaCl , pH 8 . 5 in dark at room temperature overnight . For the tracking of Cy5 free dye , single - Cy5 - labeled miRNA - 21 , and the QDs , the PCA - PCD - Trolox OSS was omitted because these particles have low signal to noise ratio ( SNR ) due to fast - diffusion induced blurring , single - dye rather than multiple - dye labeling per molecule , and luminescence rather than fluorescence . For intra - condensate SMT of FUS , where condensate boundary detection was not needed because FUS single molecules in dilute phase cannot be tracked due to motion blurring by its fast diffusion ( Fig . 1h , # 2 ) , 50 pM of AlexaFluo488 - labeled FUS were mixed with phase separation buffer without OSS before adding stock solution of non - labeled full - length tag - free FUS . OSS was again omitted because AlexaFluo488 - labeled FUS molecules have low SNR due to fast - diffusion , which we found could be further hindered by autofluorescence of high concentrations of PCA and Trolox in the OSS . However , for all SMT - PAINT experiments , extended SMT measurements were needed for an adequate coverage of trajectories over the intra - condensate space ( Fig . 3f ) and thus we implemented a color - less coupled glucose oxidase and catalase ( GODCAT ) OSS 78 with 55 U / mL glucose oxidase , 40 mM glucose , and 290 U / mL catalase . This 18 approach enabled us to obtain 10 , 000 - frames long high - SNR SMT videos with much less autofluorescence than PCA and Trolox that fulfills SMT - PAINT reconstruction needs ( Fig . S7 ) . For intra - condensate SMT of FUS and RNA for dual - color SMT - PAINT reconstructions ( Fig . 1h , # 3 ) , 50 pM of AlexaFluo488 - labeled FUS and Cy5 - labeled miRNA - 21 or AlexaFluo647 - labeled FL mRNA were mixed with phase separation buffer and GODCAT OSS before adding stock solution of non - labeled full - length tag - free FUS . For any experiments involved crowding or total RNA , Dextran T - 500 ( Millipore Sigma ) was used at a final concentration of 10 % ( w / v ) and Human HeLa Cell total RNA ( TakaraBio ) was used at a final concentration of 50 ng / µ L . Besides super - resolution imaging experiments above , FUS condensates were also assembled for phase diagram ( Fig . S2 ) , rheology measurements with C - Trap ( Fig . 1c ) , z - stack imaging with an Alba5 time - resolved laser - scanning confocal microscope ( ISS , Inc ) ( Fig . 1k ) , and fibrilization imaging ( Fig . 4s ) with minor modifications as listed below . For phase diagram , a 10x phase separation buffer was made without NaCl and MgCl 2 so both salt concentrations and FUS concentrations could be dictated by the combinations of conditions on phase diagram . C - Trap ( LUMICKS ) is an optical tweezer combined with laser scanning confocal microscope and thus could use fluorescence imaging to precisely measure condensate size change during fusion ( Fig . 1c ) . For C - Trap experiments , a raised 200 nM concentration of AlexaFluo488 - labeled FUS with the PCA - PCD - Trolox OSS described above were used to ensure adequate SNR of condensates during fast - scanning confocal imaging . For the z - stack imaging of condensates for the confirmation of 3D shape ( Fig . 1k ) , an excess amount of red dye , 40 nM Cy5 free dye that can partition to FUS condensates , rather than AlexaFluo488 - labeled FUS was used to simultaneously show the 3D shape of condensate and the location of glass slide , utilizing the intrinsic red autofluorescence of glass . Finally , for fibrilization imaging ( Fig . 4s ) , FUS condensates were assembled without any OSS , crowding reagent , or fluorescent species to exclude the possibility that fibrilization is an artificial effect induced by any of them . Microrheology Condensate fusion events were measured on a u - Flux microfluidics chamber ( LUMICKS ) and thorough cleaning was needed before experiments . The u - Flux chamber was thoroughly flushed by Milli - Q water ( Millipore Sigma ) , 6 % hypo - chloride bleach solution , Milli - Q water again , and 0 . 5 M sodium thiosulfate to neutralize any remaining bleach . To prevent any unwanted protein - surface interactions , the u - Flux chamber was then sequentially flushed with 0 . 1 % ( w / v ) bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) and 0 . 5 % ( w / v ) Pluronic acid F - 127 ( Millipore Sigma ) . All flushes above were performed at 2 bars of pressure for at least 10 min under the control of the u - Flux microfluidics pumping system ( LUMICKS ) to ensure a thorough wash . The last flush before experiment was 1x phase separation buffer to match the solvent conditions of FUS condensates . Air bubbles in the chamber could perturb the lamina flow and thus it is critical to make sure the microfluidic chamber is free of bubbles before starting the experiment . If any bubble exists , 70 % ( v / v ) ethanol solution was used to wash off air bubbles by changing surface tension , and all previous washing steps should be performed again to prepare chamber for the following measurement . At least two channels within the u - Flux chamber were used for microrheology experiments , a condensate channel and a measurement channel . Condensates were assembled as described above and pumped into the condensate channel at a low pressure ( < 0 . 5 bar ) to prevent the fission or deformation of condensates by friction forces , which can affect rheology measurements . Condensate fusion events were measured in the second measurement channel flowing with saturated concentration of 400 nM FUS determined from the phase diagram ( Fig . S2 ) to avoid trapping additional free - floating condensates when moving the 19 probing trap . Condensates picked for microrheology measurement were all around 1 𝜇𝜇 m in diameter . The probing trap ( purple , Fig . 1c ) approached the measurement trap at a constant speed of 50 nm / s , which is slower than the condensate fusion time scale to provide adequate time for fusion . Force on the measurement trap ( orange , Fig . 1c ) was measured at 50 kHz while the confocal imaging was collected at 4 Hz , limited by the laser scanning speed and the size of a field of view ( FOV ) to cover the pair of condensates . Analysis of force traces and confocal imaging were performed with home - made python scripts and Pylake package ( LUMICKS ) . All home - made python scripts used in this section and below were all deposited at https : / / github . com / walterlab - um / intra _ condensate _ SPT . For confocal imaging data , condensate area was calculated by Otsu thresholding on fluorescence intensity , which has been proved to be the most accurate condensate boundary estimator among other computer vision methods for large condensates 58 . For force data , fusion events were identified by down sampling from 50 kHz to 5 Hz , calculating the gradient of force , and finding the largest peak in the gradient of force . For each fusion event , the original 50 kHz force data ( 𝐹𝐹 ) was fitted to a previously used model 39 , 54 : 𝐹𝐹 = 𝐴𝐴 + 𝐵𝐵𝑒𝑒 % & ' + 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 , where 𝜏𝜏 is the characteristic fusion time and 𝐴𝐴 , 𝐵𝐵 , 𝐶𝐶 are constants . The exponential part is a theoretical formula for droplet fusion . Constant A describes background of force measurement while constant C describe the artificial force increase introduced by the interference between optical traps when probing trap approaches measurement trap at a constant speed . All fusion events were manually inspected before subjected to the above pipeline to exclude traces generated by non - fusing condensates or debris . SMT / SPT under HILO microscope Condensates assembled with fluorescent species as described above were tethered on a glass slide surface via a PEG - biotin : streptavidin : FUS - biotin tethering system we developed , where the surface passivation step has been published before 79 . Glass coverslips were thoroughly cleaned chemically via alkaline Piranha solution and physically with sonication . To achieve surface passivation via PEG functionalization , glass coverslips were then treated with 3 - aminopropyltriethoxysilane ( APTES , Millipore Sigma ) with a 100 : 1 molar ratio mixture of 30 mM mPEG - succinimidyl valerate ( SVA , Fisher ) and 0 . 3 mM biotin - PEG - SVA , ended with a disuccinimidyl tartrate ( DST , Thermo Fisher ) treatment to neutralize any excess amount of reactive amine sites provided by APTES . Prepared slides were stored in a nitrogen tower in dark for up to 4 weeks . Right before experiments , sample wells ( Fig . S14 ) were made from half - cut PCR tubes ( Sigma - Aldrich ) glued to the prepared slides with epoxy ( Ellsworth Adhesives ) , and the PEG - biotin : streptavidin : FUS - biotin tethering system was established by incubating 1 mg / mL streptavidin ( Thermo Fisher ) and then 1 𝜇𝜇 M biotinylated FUS in sample wells for 15 minutes each , with three rounds of washing with T50 buffer , 10 mM Tris - HCl , 1 mm EDTA , pH 8 . 0 , between each step to prevent interference by contamination ( Fig . 1h ) . Note that the mPEG - SVA : biotin - PEG - SVA ratio was optimized to 100 : 1 to provide adequate tethers to restrict condensate motion while not inducing wetting . Once FUS condensates were added to each sample well , 50 𝜇𝜇 L of mineral oil was added dropwise on top of the mixture to prevent evaporation during imaging . The whole sample well was spun down at 200 g for 3 min to deposit FUS condensates to the glass surface for imaging later . All SMT or SPT inside or outside of condensates were performed on an Nanoimager ( Oxford ) equipped with a 100x objective lens , a set of two emission filters ( first with dual bands , 20 498 - 524 nm and 550 - 620 nm , and second with single band 665 - 705 nm ) , a 640 long - pass dichroic mirror channel splitter ( the resulted two channels are referred to as green and red channel below ) , and a sCMOS camera . All videos have a pixel size of 117 nm . To reduce fluorescence background and increase SNR of single particles , highly inclined and laminated optical light - sheet ( HILO ) 55 microscopy was achieved by setting the excitation laser angle to 52° , where the total internal reflection ( TIR ) angle on our Nanoimager is around 53° . All imaging was performed at 24°C . For intra - condensate SMT or SPT with condensate boundary detection needed ( Fig . 1h , # 1 ) , SMT / SPT was performed in the red channel with 20 ms exposure time at an acquisition frequency of 50 Hz for the first 200 frames , excited by ~ 30 mW of 640 nm laser , while condensate bulk fluorescence imaging was performed in the green channel at the same exposure and frequency for the last 10 frames , excited by ~ 2 mW of 473 nm laser . The exposure time was optimized to 20 ms since a longer exposure time will hinder the tracking of fast - diffusing species by increasing motion blurring effect while a shorter exposure time will diminish SNR of single particles . Since condensates were tethered , their boundaries could be determined from an average intensity projection of the last 10 frames . For intra - condensate SMT of FUS without condensate boundary detection needs ( Fig . 1h , # 2 ) , SMT of AlexaFluo488 - labeled FUS was performed in the green channel at the same 20 ms exposure time and 50 Hz frequency for 200 frames , excited by ~ 30 mW of 473 nm laser . For intra - condensate SMT of FUS and RNA for dual - color SMT - PAINT reconstructions ( Fig . 1h , # 3 ) , alternating - laser excitation ( ALEX ) of ~ 30 mW of 473 nm and 647 nm lasers were performed with 20 ms exposure time for each color , which translates to an effective acquisition frequency of 25 Hz for each color . Finally , for SMT of FL mRNA outside condensates , both sample preparation and imaging procedures were slightly adjusted . Since FUS condensates strongly recruit RNAs , most mRNA molecules were inside condensates because of the relatively large condensed - phase volume at total FUS concentration of 10 𝜇𝜇 M . To allow more mRNA molecules observed outside condensates , we reduced the condensed phase volume by decreasing FUS concentration to 1 𝜇𝜇 M and lifted our focal plane to well above condensates , ensuring all molecules captured were outside condensates . Phase diagram and fibrilization imaging Phase diagram samples were prepared at various FUS concentrations of 0 . 5 , 1 . 0 , 2 . 0 , and 5 . 0 µM . At each concentration we systematically varied the sodium chloride or potassium chloride salt concentrations of 0 . 1 , 0 . 5 , 0 . 75 , and 1 . 0 M . For an accurate measurement for condensation near phase boundary of the phase diagram , an incubation time of one hour was used to give the protein - condensates adequate time to coarsen into a detectable size . Samples were imaged on an Olympus IX81 microscope equipped with a 100x oil - immersion objective with ~ 1 mW of 488 nm laser and an exposure time of 100 ms . Fibrilization imaging was performed in bright field at various time points of 0 , 8 , and 24 hours using the Nanoimager ( Oxford ) described above with a 100 ms exposure time . Diffusion profiling pipeline To pick up only single particle fluorescence signal while suppressing background , band - pass filtering on all SMT / SPT videos was achieved by applying a difference of Gaussian ( DoG ) filter with a lower sigma of 1 pixel and a higher sigma of 3 pixels , representing on - focus and slightly off - focus single molecules . Filtered videos were subjected to TrackMate 80 to detect spots and extract trajectories . Spot detection was performed with a Laplacian of Gaussian ( LoG ) detector , 21 where an estimated object diameter was set to 5 pixels ( 585 nm ) and a spot quality threshold set to 5 or determined by the peak of false - positive spots in the distribution of quality values ( Fig . S15 ) . Trajectories were extracted by classic particle - linking algorithm , Linear Assignment Problem ( LAP ) , with the following parameter settings : for intra - condensate tracking , linking maximum distance was set to 5 pixels ( 585 nm ) with no gaps allowed ; for dilute - phase tracking , linking maximum distance was set to 15 pixels ( 1 . 755 𝜇𝜇 m ) with no gaps allowed . Trajectories were exported as csv files and fed to home - made python scripts for diffusion profiling . Our diffusion profiling pipeline has two parts : discrete categorization and continuous spectrum ( Fig . 2a - f ) . The discrete categorization part classifies every trajectory as either immobile , confined , or normal diffusion by following steps . To determine whether the particle is immobile or not , mean step size of each trajectory was calculated and compared to a threshold of 30 nm based on the 16 nm static localization error calculated from static mRNA molecules attached to glass surface ( Fig . S4 ) . To determine whether a mobile particle is confined or not , anomalous diffusion component 𝛼𝛼 was calculated by fitting the mean squared displacement ( MSD ) - lag time ( 𝜏𝜏 ) curve on a log - log scale using the formula below . 𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙 ( 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀 ) = 𝛼𝛼 𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙 ( 𝜏𝜏 ) + 𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙 ( 2𝑛𝑛𝑀𝑀 ) where 𝑛𝑛 is the dimension of tracking ( 𝑛𝑛 = 2 in our case ) and 𝑀𝑀 is the diffusion coefficient . Note that the optimal number of fitting points in an MSD - 𝜏𝜏 fitting has been determined to be roughly half of the trajectory length 81 , and thus we performed the fitting with a MSD - 𝜏𝜏 series with the biggest 𝜏𝜏 is smaller than half trajectory length unless it’s shorter than 5 steps , where a minimal number of 4 MSD - 𝜏𝜏 points were guaranteed for accurate fitting . Trajectories that did not fit well to the model , indicated by fitting R 2 < 0 . 7 , were removed from the pool when calculating diffusion type fractions . Trajectories with a < 0 . 7 were categorized as confined diffusion while a > 0 . 7 as normal diffusion . Notably , we found that trajectories with very small a were also having very small R2 and thus the removal of the bad - fitting trajectories also removed trajectories with extremely small a ( Fig . S16 ) . The continuous spectrum part generates distributions of mean step size , 𝛼𝛼 , angle between steps , apparent diffusion coefficient 𝑀𝑀 # ( ( , and localization error . The mean step size was calculated for all trajectories . The 𝛼𝛼 components were calculated as described above for only mobile trajectories . The angle between steps was defined as the angle between the previous and current step ranging from 0° , meaning no change in direction , to 180° , meaning a complete turn - back , regardless of left or right and was also calculated for all mobile trajectories . The 𝑀𝑀 # ( ( and localization error were calculated for non - confined trajectories by fitting MSD - 𝜏𝜏 curve to the following formula , which is optimized for least - square fit of MSD 81 , 82 : 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀 = 2𝑛𝑛𝑀𝑀𝜏𝜏 + 2𝜎𝜎 ) − 4𝑀𝑀𝐷𝐷𝜏𝜏 where 𝜎𝜎 is the localization error and 𝐷𝐷 is the motion blur coefficient ( 𝐷𝐷 = 1 6⁄ for continuous imaging as in our case ) . A Bayesian statistics - based state array method ( saSPT 60 ) was used to obtain a 𝑀𝑀 # ( ( spectrum with higher resolution , which originates from the fact that saSPT interprets 𝑀𝑀 # ( ( and localization error from each single step rather than a whole trajectory as above . Most parameters in saSPT were set to default values except that the range of diffusion coefficient in state array specified in “constants . py” file was changed accordingly . SMT - PAINT and step size heatmap analysis 22 Point accumulation reconstruction was performed with home - made python scripts on 10 , 000 - frames long SMT videos collected from SMT - PAINT experiments ( Fig . 1h , # 2 - 3 ) as described above . To ensure that puncta in SMT - PAINT images reveal underlying intra - condensate architecture that confines diffusion , the oversampling from long trajectories needs to be suppressed , avoiding the formation of artificial puncta due to a single long trajectory . Therefore , when generating the pool of locations for the reconstruction , only 10 locations were randomly sampled from all locations for any trajectory longer than 10 steps while all locations from trajectories shorter than 10 steps were passed along . SMT - PAINT image of the whole FOV was rendered by binning the pool of locations back to a grid of 117 - nm pixels , the same as the input SMT - PAINT video . Similarly , step size heatmap image of the whole FOV was generated from the pool above , by calculating pixel - by - pixel the mean for all steps that have a center of step within the pixel . Drift correction was not needed given the short total length of imaging time ( 200 s ) . Not all condensates were subjected to downstream analysis because some condensates did not have enough trajectories to cover the whole condensate while others had a strip - like pattern due to ‘lensing effect’ , where the spherical shape of condensates works as a lens to skew illumination ( Fig . S17 ) . Therefore , qualified condensates were picked by a python script followed by manual inspection . The python script first generates contours for all condensates by applying a threshold of 10 locations per pixel to the whole - FOV SMT - PAINT image smoothed with a 𝜎𝜎 = 1 Gaussian kernel . The whole - FOV SMT - PAINT image was split to individual - condensate SMT - PAINT images by filtering out condensates smaller than 200 pixel 2 and cropping out each remaining condensate with a surrounding box with a padding distance of 3 pixels . All individual - condensate SMT - PAINT images were manually inspected to leave out all condensates with unwanted strip - like pattern ( Fig . S17 ) SMT - PAINT and step size heatmap images of all qualified condensates were paired , such as SMT - PAINT images of FUS versus mRNA , step size heatmap of FUS versus mRNA , and SMT - PAINT versus step size heatmap images of FUS , and analyzed with weighted pixel - wise Pearson correlation coefficient ( PCC ) using the below formula : 𝑃𝑃𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 * " + , - & " . = ∑ 𝑤𝑤 + ( 𝑥𝑥 + − 𝑥𝑥̅ ) ( 𝑦𝑦 + − 𝑦𝑦J ) + K ( ∑ 𝑤𝑤 + ( 𝑥𝑥 + − 𝑥𝑥̅ ) ) + ) ( ∑ 𝑤𝑤 + ( 𝑦𝑦 + − 𝑦𝑦J ) ) + ) where 𝑥𝑥 + and 𝑦𝑦 + are the value of 𝑖𝑖 - th pixel in the vectorized ( 𝑋𝑋 , 𝑌𝑌 ) image pair , 𝑥𝑥̅ and 𝑦𝑦J are the mean of all pixels in the 𝑋𝑋 or 𝑌𝑌 image , and 𝑤𝑤 + is the weight of 𝑖𝑖 - th pixel in the same vectorized image . 𝑋𝑋 and 𝑌𝑌 image in the ( 𝑋𝑋 , 𝑌𝑌 ) image pair can be either SMT - PAINT image , where pixel value is number of locations , or step size heatmap image , where pixel value is mean step size . Weight is set to be the square of number of locations per pixel , factoring in that pixel values coming from more trajectories are more reliable than those coming from less trajectories . Pair - correlation functions Spatial distribution of SMT trajectories within a condensate was analyzed by the auto - or cross - pair correlation function 𝐺𝐺 # / & 0 ( 𝑟𝑟 ) or 𝐺𝐺 12033 ( 𝑟𝑟 ) ( a . k . a . radial distribution function ) of locations . Pair correlation function 𝐺𝐺 ( 𝑟𝑟 ) describes the probability of finding a particle of interest at a distance 𝑟𝑟 from a reference particle , where the reference particle and the particle of interest are of same type in 𝐺𝐺 # / & 0 ( 𝑟𝑟 ) but are of different type in 𝐺𝐺 12033 ( 𝑟𝑟 ) . Pair correlation function can be calculated by 23 𝐺𝐺 ( 𝑟𝑟 ) = 𝑁𝑁 + $ & " 2 " 3 & ( 𝑟𝑟 ) 𝑁𝑁 2 " 4 ∙ 𝜌𝜌 + $ & " 2 " 3 & ∙ 2𝜋𝜋𝑟𝑟 ∙ 𝑑𝑑𝑟𝑟 where function 𝑁𝑁 + $ & " 2 " 3 & ( 𝑟𝑟 ) counts the number of particles of interest that are 𝑟𝑟 to 𝑟𝑟 + 𝑑𝑑𝑟𝑟 away from reference particles in a condensate , 𝑁𝑁 2 " 4 is the total number of reference particles in a condensate , 𝜌𝜌 + $ & " 2 " 3 & is the density of particles of interest in a condensate , and 2𝜋𝜋𝑟𝑟 ∙ 𝑑𝑑𝑟𝑟 is the ring area that normalizes the excess number of particles counted by function 𝑁𝑁 + $ & " 2 " 3 & ( 𝑟𝑟 ) as the ring area scales with 𝑟𝑟 . In the python script , 𝑁𝑁 + $ & " 2 " 3 & ( 𝑟𝑟 ) was calculated by iterating through all reference particles because the normalization factor needs to be adjusted when the reference particle was too close to the condensate boundary . In that case , the ring centered at the reference particle was partially outside the condensate , where no particles of interest can be found , and thus it would be wrong to assume an average number of counts of 𝜌𝜌 + $ & " 2 " 3 & ∙ 2𝜋𝜋𝑟𝑟 ∙ 𝑑𝑑𝑟𝑟 can be found in the ring . Therefore , for all reference particles closer to the condensate boundary than 𝑟𝑟 + 𝑑𝑑𝑟𝑟 , the ring area within condensate was calculated to substitute 2𝜋𝜋𝑟𝑟 ∙ 𝑑𝑑𝑟𝑟 in the above equation . For all 𝐺𝐺 ( 𝑟𝑟 ) in this study , 𝑑𝑑𝑟𝑟 was kept at 100 nm and 𝑟𝑟 ranged from 0 to 1 𝜇𝜇 m , with a sliding - window of 20 nm between adjacent 𝑟𝑟 . Every qualified condensate yielded a 𝐺𝐺 ( 𝑟𝑟 ) and the 𝐺𝐺 ( 𝑟𝑟 ) for all plots was a weighted average of all the individual - condensate 𝐺𝐺 ( 𝑟𝑟 ) , with the weight being total number of particles within each condensate . Each individual - condensate 𝐺𝐺 ( 𝑟𝑟 ) was then fitted to the exponential model below because exponential decay can depict the behavior of molecules in a phase - transition system 83 : 𝐺𝐺 ( 𝑟𝑟 ) = 1 + 𝐴𝐴𝑒𝑒 % 25 where 𝐴𝐴 is the amplitude that describes how much more or less likely a particle could be found compared to a random distribution of particles , and 𝐷𝐷 is the characteristic radius of the clustering of particles . A parametric bootstrapping , 5 , 000 rounds of re - sampling from the pool of individual - condensate 𝐺𝐺 ( 𝑟𝑟 ) , was performed to estimate the 𝐴𝐴 and 𝐷𝐷 for each experiment and their confidence intervals . 𝐴𝐴 and 𝐷𝐷 in each bootstrapping round were also plotted as histograms . Spatial distributions of nanodomains Nanodomains locations were estimated by either puncta detected by a LoG spot detector on individual - condensate SMT - PAINT images or using the centroid of confined FUS or RNA trajectories within a condensate . The distance of all such locations within a condensate to the center of the condensate was normalized by the radius of the condensate , where the radius was calculated from the total area of the condensate assuming a circular shape . Similar to 𝐺𝐺 ( 𝑟𝑟 ) , the distribution of all such distances within a condensate was also biased by the ring area growing with 𝑟𝑟 , and thus needed to be normalized by ring area using : 𝑃𝑃 $ 02 ! ( 𝑟𝑟 ) = 𝑃𝑃 ( 𝑟𝑟 ) 𝜌𝜌 + $ & " 2 " 3 & ∙ 2𝜋𝜋𝑟𝑟 ∙ 𝑑𝑑𝑟𝑟 where 𝑃𝑃 ( 𝑟𝑟 ) and 𝑃𝑃 $ 02 ! ( 𝑟𝑟 ) are the probability and the normalized probability of distances that are 𝑟𝑟 to 𝑟𝑟 + 𝑑𝑑𝑟𝑟 away from the condensate center , 𝜌𝜌 + $ & " 2 " 3 & is the density of particles of interest in the condensate , and 2𝜋𝜋𝑟𝑟 ∙ 𝑑𝑑𝑟𝑟 is the ring area . Every qualified condensate yielded a 𝑃𝑃 $ 02 ! ( 𝑟𝑟 ) , and 5 , 000 rounds of non - parametric bootstrapping from the pool of individual - condensate 𝑃𝑃 $ 02 ! ( 𝑟𝑟 ) were performed to estimate the mean of 𝑃𝑃 $ 02 ! ( 𝑟𝑟 ) for every 𝑟𝑟 . 24 Fluorescence lifetime imaging and correlation spectroscopy Fluorescence lifetime imaging ( FLIM ) imaging of tethered condensates was performed with an Alba5 time - resolved laser - scanning confocal microscope ( ISS , Inc ) with a pulsed supercontinuum broadband laser excitation source ( Fianium WhiteLase SC - 400 - 8 - PP ) , avalanche photodiode ( APD ) detectors , and a Beckr - Hickl SPC - 830 TCSPC module . Condensates tethered on the glass surface were first found under regular scanning confocal imaging mode . After an optimal field of view framing a single condensate was identified , ten rounds of FLIM scanning throughout the whole filed of view were performed to ensure adequate data points for the lifetime calculation via deconvolution and fitting to a reference instrument response function ( IRF ) using FLIMfit 84 . The number of FLIM scans on each condensate was carefully chosen to achieve a total imaging time of around five minutes , matching a time scale where nanodomains were relatively immobile as revealed by time - lapse SMT - PAINT . The coupled fluorescence correlation spectroscopy ( FCS ) with FLIM assay was performed with the same setup as above , but only ten locations within each condensate were chosen at random using Sobel sampling rather than scanning through the whole condensate as in FLIM imaging . One - minute - long time - resolved intensity traces for Alexa488 - labeled full - length tag - free FUS were acquired per location and analyzed both for diffusion coefficient using FCS as well as fluorescent lifetime . Lifetime fitting was done with a MATLAB package FluoFit 85 , while FCS curves were analyzed with a custom MATLAB implementation of a segmented autocorrelation algorithm 86 to reduce the effect of photobleaching or long - term diffusive effects such as rocking of the condensate droplet as a whole . Note that the one - minute - long FCS traces provide much more datapoints for FLIM fitting compared to each pixel in a FLIM image , resulting in a better fit and explaining the different ranges of lifetime in FLIM imaging versus FCS - FLIM assays . Acknowledgement We thank Sujay Ray , Ziyuan Chen , Adam Decker , Nat Rogers , and Xiaofeng Dai for their insightful discussions on developing the analysis pipelines for our SMT datasets . We appreciate help from Damon Hoff of the Single Molecule Analysis in Real - Time ( SMART ) Center of Biophysics at the University of Michigan for FLIM and FCS measurements and analysis , and Ehsan Akbari and Denis Pelekhov at the Nano - Systems Laboratory ( NSL ) of the Physics department at the Ohio State University for their help in using a Lumicks C - Trap for condensate microrheology measurements . We much appreciate the invaluable feedback and proofreading efforts from Ziyuan Chen , Adrien Chauvier , Yi Zhu , Sicong Ma , and Minjun Jin . We also thank Liuhan Dai for his early joint efforts in protein purification and Mohammed Hijaz for help with quantifying the translatability of FL mRNAs . Lastly , we acknowledge the University of Michigan UM - GPT for proofreading and grammar edits using a GPT - 4 . 0 Turbo model . References 1 Mittag , T . & Pappu , R . V . A conceptual framework for understanding phase separation and addressing open questions and challenges . Mol Cell 82 , 2201 - 2214 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2022 . 05 . 018 2 Roden , C . & Gladfelter , A . S . RNA contributions to the form and function of biomolecular condensates . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 22 , 183 - 195 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41580 - 020 - 0264 - 6 25 3 Pitchiaya , S . et al . Dynamic Recruitment of Single RNAs to Processing Bodies Depends on RNA Functionality . Mol Cell 74 , 521 - 533 e526 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2019 . 03 . 001 4 Bressloff , P . C . & Newby , J . M . Stochastic models of intracellular transport . Rev Mod Phys 85 , 135 - 196 ( 2013 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1103 / RevModPhys . 85 . 135 5 Portz , B . , Lee , B . L . & Shorter , J . FUS and TDP - 43 Phases in Health and Disease . Trends Biochem Sci 46 , 550 - 563 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tibs . 2020 . 12 . 005 6 Giannone , G . et al . Dynamic superresolution imaging of endogenous proteins on living cells at ultra - high density . Biophys J 99 , 1303 - 1310 ( 2010 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2010 . 06 . 005 7 Pappu , R . V . , Cohen , S . R . , Dar , F . , Farag , M . & Kar , M . Phase Transitions of Associative Biomacromolecules . Chem Rev 123 , 8945 - 8987 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acs . chemrev . 2c00814 8 Lyon , A . S . , Peeples , W . B . & Rosen , M . K . A framework for understanding the functions of biomolecular condensates across scales . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 22 , 215 - 235 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41580 - 020 - 00303 - z 9 Alberti , S . & Hyman , A . A . Biomolecular condensates at the nexus of cellular stress , protein aggregation disease and ageing . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 22 , 196 - 213 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41580 - 020 - 00326 - 6 10 Hwang , D . W . , Maekiniemi , A . , Singer , R . H . & Sato , H . Real - time single - molecule imaging of transcriptional regulatory networks in living cells . Nat Rev Genet ( 2024 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41576 - 023 - 00684 - 9 11 Sharp , P . A . , Chakraborty , A . K . , Henninger , J . E . & Young , R . A . RNA in formation and regulation of transcriptional condensates . RNA 28 , 52 - 57 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1261 / rna . 078997 . 121 12 Guo , Y . E . et al . Pol II phosphorylation regulates a switch between transcriptional and splicing condensates . Nature 572 , 543 - 548 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 019 - 1464 - 0 13 Li , W . et al . Biophysical properties of AKAP95 protein condensates regulate splicing and tumorigenesis . Nat Cell Biol 22 , 960 - 972 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41556 - 020 - 0550 - 8 14 Xu , S . et al . SRRM2 organizes splicing condensates to regulate alternative splicing . Nucleic Acids Res 50 , 8599 - 8614 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / nar / gkac669 15 Zhuang , Y . et al . Circadian clocks are modulated by compartmentalized oscillating translation . Cell 186 , 3245 - 3260 e3223 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 05 . 045 16 Nosella , M . L . & Forman - Kay , J . D . Phosphorylation - dependent regulation of messenger RNA transcription , processing and translation within biomolecular condensates . Curr Opin Cell Biol 69 , 30 - 40 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2020 . 12 . 007 17 Tibble , R . W . , Depaix , A . , Kowalska , J . , Jemielity , J . & Gross , J . D . Biomolecular condensates amplify mRNA decapping by biasing enzyme conformation . Nat Chem Biol 17 , 615 - 623 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41589 - 021 - 00774 - x 18 Cougot , N . , Babajko , S . & Seraphin , B . Cytoplasmic foci are sites of mRNA decay in human cells . J Cell Biol 165 , 31 - 40 ( 2004 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200309008 19 Ditlev , J . A . , Case , L . B . & Rosen , M . K . Who ' s In and Who ' s Out - Compositional Control of Biomolecular Condensates . J Mol Biol 430 , 4666 - 4684 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2018 . 08 . 003 20 Banani , S . F . , Lee , H . O . , Hyman , A . A . & Rosen , M . K . Biomolecular condensates : organizers of cellular biochemistry . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 18 , 285 - 298 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm . 2017 . 7 26 21 Peeples , W . & Rosen , M . K . Mechanistic dissection of increased enzymatic rate in a phase - separated compartment . Nat Chem Biol 17 , 693 - 702 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41589 - 021 - 00801 - x 22 Collins , M . J . , Tomares , D . T . , Nandana , V . , Schrader , J . M . & Childers , W . S . RNase E biomolecular condensates stimulate PNPase activity . Sci Rep 13 , 12937 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 023 - 39565 - w 23 Mateju , D . et al . Single - Molecule Imaging Reveals Translation of mRNAs Localized to Stress Granules . Cell 183 , 1801 - 1812 e1813 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2020 . 11 . 010 24 Wilbertz , J . H . et al . Single - Molecule Imaging of mRNA Localization and Regulation during the Integrated Stress Response . Mol Cell 73 , 946 - 958 e947 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2018 . 12 . 006 25 Moon , S . L . et al . Multicolour single - molecule tracking of mRNA interactions with RNP granules . Nat Cell Biol 21 , 162 - 168 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41556 - 018 - 0263 - 4 26 Wu , T . , King , M . R . , Farag , M . , Pappu , R . V . & Lew , M . D . Single fluorogen imaging reveals distinct environmental and structural features of biomolecular condensates . bioRxiv ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2023 . 01 . 26 . 525727 27 Kamagata , K . , Kusano , R . , Kanbayashi , S . , Banerjee , T . & Takahashi , H . Single - molecule characterization of target search dynamics of DNA - binding proteins in DNA - condensed droplets . Nucleic Acids Res 51 , 6654 - 6667 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / nar / gkad471 28 He , C . , Wu , C . Y . , Li , W . & Xu , K . Multidimensional Super - Resolution Microscopy Unveils Nanoscale Surface Aggregates in the Aging of FUS Condensates . J Am Chem Soc 145 , 24240 - 24248 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / jacs . 3c08674 29 Galvanetto , N . et al . Extreme dynamics in a biomolecular condensate . Nature 619 , 876 - 883 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 023 - 06329 - 5 30 Kamagata , K . et al . Structure - dependent recruitment and diffusion of guest proteins in liquid droplets of FUS . Sci Rep 12 , 7101 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 022 - 11177 - w 31 Kamagata , K . et al . Molecular principles of recruitment and dynamics of guest proteins in liquid droplets . Sci Rep 11 , 19323 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 021 - 98955 - 0 32 Shen , Z . et al . Biological condensates form percolated networks with molecular motion properties distinctly different from dilute solutions . Elife 12 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 81907 33 Yao , R . W . & Rosen , M . K . Advanced Surface Passivation for High - Sensitivity Studies of Biomolecular Condensates . bioRxiv ( 2024 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2024 . 02 . 12 . 580000 34 Snead , W . T . et al . Membrane surfaces regulate assembly of ribonucleoprotein condensates . Nat Cell Biol 24 , 461 - 470 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41556 - 022 - 00882 - 3 35 Yuan , F . et al . Membrane bending by protein phase separation . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 118 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 2017435118 36 Rouches , M . , Veatch , S . L . & Machta , B . B . Surface densities prewet a near - critical membrane . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 118 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 2103401118 37 Zuo , L . et al . Loci - specific phase separation of FET fusion oncoproteins promotes gene transcription . Nat Commun 12 , 1491 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 021 - 21690 - 7 38 Levone , B . R . et al . FUS - dependent liquid - liquid phase separation is important for DNA repair initiation . J Cell Biol 220 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 202008030 39 Patel , A . et al . A Liquid - to - Solid Phase Transition of the ALS Protein FUS Accelerated by Disease Mutation . Cell 162 , 1066 - 1077 ( 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 07 . 047 27 40 Wang , W . Y . et al . Interaction of FUS and HDAC1 regulates DNA damage response and repair in neurons . Nat Neurosci 16 , 1383 - 1391 ( 2013 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nn . 3514 41 Kwiatkowski , T . J . , Jr . et al . Mutations in the FUS / TLS gene on chromosome 16 cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis . Science 323 , 1205 - 1208 ( 2009 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1166066 42 Vance , C . et al . Mutations in FUS , an RNA processing protein , cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis type 6 . Science 323 , 1208 - 1211 ( 2009 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1165942 43 Mackenzie , I . R . , Rademakers , R . & Neumann , M . TDP - 43 and FUS in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia . Lancet Neurol 9 , 995 - 1007 ( 2010 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1474 - 4422 ( 10 ) 70195 - 2 44 Lagier - Tourenne , C . et al . Divergent roles of ALS - linked proteins FUS / TLS and TDP - 43 intersect in processing long pre - mRNAs . Nat Neurosci 15 , 1488 - 1497 ( 2012 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nn . 3230 45 Deng , H . , Gao , K . & Jankovic , J . The role of FUS gene variants in neurodegenerative diseases . Nat Rev Neurol 10 , 337 - 348 ( 2014 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrneurol . 2014 . 78 46 Ishiguro , A . , Katayama , A . & Ishihama , A . Different recognition modes of G - quadruplex RNA between two ALS / FTLD - linked proteins TDP - 43 and FUS . FEBS Lett 595 , 310 - 323 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / 1873 - 3468 . 14013 47 Ishiguro , A . , Lu , J . , Ozawa , D . , Nagai , Y . & Ishihama , A . ALS - linked FUS mutations dysregulate G - quadruplex - dependent liquid - liquid phase separation and liquid - to - solid transition . J Biol Chem 297 , 101284 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbc . 2021 . 101284 48 Alberti , S . et al . A User ' s Guide for Phase Separation Assays with Purified Proteins . J Mol Biol 430 , 4806 - 4820 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2018 . 06 . 038 49 Monahan , Z . et al . Phosphorylation of the FUS low - complexity domain disrupts phase separation , aggregation , and toxicity . EMBO J 36 , 2951 - 2967 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 15252 / embj . 201696394 50 Murthy , A . C . et al . Molecular interactions underlying liquid - liquid phase separation of the FUS low - complexity domain . Nat Struct Mol Biol 26 , 637 - 648 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41594 - 019 - 0250 - x 51 Murray , D . T . et al . Structure of FUS Protein Fibrils and Its Relevance to Self - Assembly and Phase Separation of Low - Complexity Domains . Cell 171 , 615 - 627 e616 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2017 . 08 . 048 52 Wang , J . et al . A Molecular Grammar Governing the Driving Forces for Phase Separation of Prion - like RNA Binding Proteins . Cell 174 , 688 - 699 e616 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2018 . 06 . 006 53 Custer , T . C . & Walter , N . G . In vitro labeling strategies for in cellulo fluorescence microscopy of single ribonucleoprotein machines . Protein Sci 26 , 1363 - 1379 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / pro . 3108 54 Kaur , T . et al . Molecular Crowding Tunes Material States of Ribonucleoprotein Condensates . Biomolecules 9 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / biom9020071 55 Tokunaga , M . , Imamoto , N . & Sakata - Sogawa , K . Highly inclined thin illumination enables clear single - molecule imaging in cells . Nat Methods 5 , 159 - 161 ( 2008 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth1171 56 Sanders , D . W . et al . Competing Protein - RNA Interaction Networks Control Multiphase Intracellular Organization . Cell 181 , 306 - 324 e328 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2020 . 03 . 050 57 Eisenberg , D . , Schwarz , E . , Komaromy , M . & Wall , R . Analysis of membrane and surface protein sequences with the hydrophobic moment plot . J Mol Biol 179 , 125 - 142 ( 1984 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0022 - 2836 ( 84 ) 90309 - 7 28 58 Gao , G . & Walter , N . G . Critical Assessment of Condensate Boundaries in Dual - Color Single Particle Tracking . J Phys Chem B 127 , 7694 - 7707 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acs . jpcb . 3c03776 59 Burnecki , K . , Kepten , E . , Garini , Y . , Sikora , G . & Weron , A . Estimating the anomalous diffusion exponent for single particle tracking data with measurement errors - An alternative approach . Sci Rep 5 , 11306 ( 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / srep11306 60 Heckert , A . , Dahal , L . , Tjian , R . & Darzacq , X . Recovering mixtures of fast - diffusing states from short single - particle trajectories . Elife 11 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 70169 61 Gopal , A . , Zhou , Z . H . , Knobler , C . M . & Gelbart , W . M . Visualizing large RNA molecules in solution . RNA 18 , 284 - 299 ( 2012 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1261 / rna . 027557 . 111 62 Berezin , M . Y . & Achilefu , S . Fluorescence lifetime measurements and biological imaging . Chem Rev 110 , 2641 - 2684 ( 2010 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / cr900343z 63 Emmanouilidis , L . et al . A solid beta - sheet structure is formed at the surface of FUS droplets during aging . Nat Chem Biol ( 2024 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41589 - 024 - 01573 - w 64 Shen , Y . et al . The liquid - to - solid transition of FUS is promoted by the condensate surface . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 120 , e2301366120 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 2301366120 65 Khong , A . et al . The Stress Granule Transcriptome Reveals Principles of mRNA Accumulation in Stress Granules . Mol Cell 68 , 808 - 820 e805 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2017 . 10 . 015 66 Hubstenberger , A . et al . P - Body Purification Reveals the Condensation of Repressed mRNA Regulons . Mol Cell 68 , 144 - 157 e145 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2017 . 09 . 003 67 Glauninger , H . , Wong Hickernell , C . J . , Bard , J . A . M . & Drummond , D . A . Stressful steps : Progress and challenges in understanding stress - induced mRNA condensation and accumulation in stress granules . Mol Cell 82 , 2544 - 2556 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2022 . 05 . 014 68 Zanetti - Domingues , L . C . , Tynan , C . J . , Rolfe , D . J . , Clarke , D . T . & Martin - Fernandez , M . Hydrophobic fluorescent probes introduce artifacts into single molecule tracking experiments due to non - specific binding . PLoS One 8 , e74200 ( 2013 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0074200 69 Todorov , T . I . , de Carmejane , O . , Walter , N . G . & Morris , M . D . Capillary electrophoresis of RNA in dilute and semidilute polymer solutions . Electrophoresis 22 , 2442 - 2447 ( 2001 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / 1522 - 2683 ( 200107 ) 22 : 12 < 2442 : : AID - ELPS2442 > 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - 9 70 Lafontaine , D . L . J . , Riback , J . A . , Bascetin , R . & Brangwynne , C . P . The nucleolus as a multiphase liquid condensate . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 22 , 165 - 182 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41580 - 020 - 0272 - 6 71 Erkamp , N . A . et al . Spatially non - uniform condensates emerge from dynamically arrested phase separation . Nat Commun 14 , 684 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 023 - 36059 - 1 72 Seim , I . et al . Dilute phase oligomerization can oppose phase separation and modulate material properties of a ribonucleoprotein condensate . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 119 , e2120799119 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 2120799119 73 Wadsworth , G . M . et al . RNAs undergo phase transitions with lower critical solution temperatures . Nat Chem 15 , 1693 - 1704 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41557 - 023 - 01353 - 4 29 74 Lin , A . Z . et al . Dynamical control enables the formation of demixed biomolecular condensates . Nat Commun 14 , 7678 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 023 - 43489 - 4 75 Joshi , A . et al . Single - molecule FRET unmasks structural subpopulations and crucial molecular events during FUS low - complexity domain phase separation . Nat Commun 14 , 7331 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 023 - 43225 - y 76 Schmidt , A . , Gao , G . , Little , S . R . , Jalihal , A . P . & Walter , N . G . Following the messenger : Recent innovations in live cell single molecule fluorescence imaging . Wiley Interdiscip Rev RNA 11 , e1587 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / wrna . 1587 77 Brito Querido , J . et al . Structure of a human 48S translational initiation complex . Science 369 , 1220 - 1227 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . aba4904 78 Aitken , C . E . , Marshall , R . A . & Puglisi , J . D . An oxygen scavenging system for improvement of dye stability in single - molecule fluorescence experiments . Biophys J 94 , 1826 - 1835 ( 2008 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 107 . 117689 79 Johnson - Buck , A . et al . Kinetic fingerprinting to identify and count single nucleic acids . Nat Biotechnol 33 , 730 - 732 ( 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nbt . 3246 80 Tinevez , J . Y . et al . TrackMate : An open and extensible platform for single - particle tracking . Methods 115 , 80 - 90 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ymeth . 2016 . 09 . 016 81 Michalet , X . & Berglund , A . J . Optimal diffusion coefficient estimation in single - particle tracking . Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 85 , 061916 ( 2012 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 85 . 061916 82 Berglund , A . J . Statistics of camera - based single - particle tracking . Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 82 , 011917 ( 2010 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 82 . 011917 83 Veatch , S . L . et al . Correlation functions quantify super - resolution images and estimate apparent clustering due to over - counting . PLoS One 7 , e31457 ( 2012 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0031457 84 Warren , S . C . et al . Rapid Global Fitting of Large Fluorescence Lifetime Imaging Microscopy Datasets . Plos One 8 ( 2013 ) . https : / / doi . org / ARTN e70687 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0070687 85 Enderlein , J . & Erdmann , R . Fast fitting of multi - exponential decay curves . Opt Commun 134 , 371 - 378 ( 1997 ) . https : / / doi . org / Doi 10 . 1016 / S0030 - 4018 ( 96 ) 00384 - 7 86 Kohler , J . , Hur , K . H . & Mueller , J . D . Autocorrelation function of finite - length data in fluorescence correlation spectroscopy . Biophys J 122 , 241 - 253 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2022 . 10 . 027