HAL Id : hal - 00190545 https : / / telearn . archives - ouvertes . fr / hal - 00190545 Submitted on 23 Nov 2007 HAL is a multi - disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci - entific research documents , whether they are pub - lished or not . The documents may come from teaching and research institutions in France or abroad , or from public or private research centers . L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL , est destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche , publiés ou non , émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français ou étrangers , des laboratoires publics ou privés . User Centered System Design : New Perspectives on Human - Computer Interaction Roy D . Pea To cite this version : Roy D . Pea . User Centered System Design : New Perspectives on Human - Computer Interaction . Journal educational computing research , 1987 , 3 ( 1 ) , pp . 129 - 134 . ￿hal - 00190545￿ J . EDUCATIONAL COMPUTING RESEARCH , Vol . 3 ( 1 ) , 1987 BOOK REVIEW Editors : DR . BENEDICT DU BOULAY The University of Sussex School of Social Sciences Cognitive Studies Programme Arts Building Falmer Brighton BN I 9QN England DR . HING - KAY HO University of Southern California 6831 Alta Vista Drive Rancho Palos Verdes , CA 90274 User Centered System Design : New Perspectives on Human - Computer Interaction , edited by D . A . Norman and S . W . Draper , Hillsdale , New Jersey : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , 1985 . 526 pp . including glossary , subject - author index . This is a seminal and provocative book , focusing on people and how interactive systems can aid their mental work , alone and together . Emerging out of collabo - rative work by the UCSD group on Human - Machine Interaction and colleagues , it defines anew the map of central issues , questions , and complex tradeoffs facing designers , creators , and users of interactive systems . As the editors empha - size , it is not a how - to book for designers but a guide to new ways of thinking about user - centered system design " from which to derive the new directions in which we must move " ( p . 2 ) . The tactic for exposition throughout is primarily one of offering speculative , prescriptive essays that are empirically - informed by introspection , observation , and occasionally , experiments with specific systems . Chapters on related overarching themes are collected in topical sections , with a helpful introductory essay by the editors organizing their commonalities and dis - tinctive points . The six sections escalate in analytic scale from micro to macro , from concerns with individual actions and system understandings to questions of O 1987 . Baywood Publishing Co . , Inc . 130 I BOOK REVIEW " proactive " societal impact made possible by thoughtful design of links between people , systems , and society . There is a productive cohabitation of tensions in approach represented in the twenty - two chapters . Some chapters offer traditional examinations of infor - mation processing considerations for guiding interface design , others phenomeno - logical treatments of " direct engagement " experiences users have with some interactive systems , and many address social context issues , asking how inter - faces can redesign work , jobs , offices , human interactions and even society . There is unusually successful " cross - talk " here for an edited volume , and a mani - festo " feel " to the book as a whole . All the same , some central thrusts of the group as a whole are apparent , since many generative themes cycle throughout . The importance of the system image model , what the user sees , is repeatedly treated as key to driving users ' expec - tations for what can be done with the system , how it works , and how to recover from error . Other emphases include the need to better exploit the adaptive mechanisms which natural language conversation has evolved for repairing mis - understanding , and for managing multi - tasking . A central outcome of this approach is a shift toward defining human - computer interaction as a collaborative process between persons and machines . Many chapters are devoted to extending the design problem definition to include social structures and related contextual factors , and they emphasize the focal nature of collaboration not only in mental work with machines , but in getting help in learning how to use systems and recover from errors with grace . Section I is a survey section on User - centered System Design . Hooper provides a sensitive treatment of parallels between architectural and interface design , and concludes that user input on purposes for design artifacts is central to their suc - cess . Even though rapid system prototyping makes possible some exploratory evaluative analyses of systems , difficult issues remain in establishing evaluative criteria and selecting aspects of the system for formative evaluation . Continuing this parallel , Bannon discusses potential negative impacts of architectural design on society , which might be avoided if designers take greater responsibility in assessing users ' values and needs . Each chapter insists on linking values of user communities to system design ; processes and mechanisms for doing so are not described but present challenges for the future . Norman provides a compre - hensive guide to critical phenomena in the field of Cognitive Engineering , de - fined as cognitive science applied to design , construction , and use of machines . It is a field concerned with showing how to make better choices within a complex space of tradeoffs , such as that of functionality / learnability , or supportive / in - terruptive system - based reminding activities . His goal is to develop an approxi - mate theory of action that may be used to analyze systems and guide design . The psychogeography he provides , with landmarks such as the Gulf of Execu - tion ( from user ' s goals to the physical system mechanisms and states that allow their achievement ) and the Gulf of Evaluation ( from physical system states to goal monitoring ) provides a powerful grid for situating user - centered system de - sign issues . The aim of such design is to facilitate bridging this gap , moving either system or user closer to one another . Section I1 highlights phenomenological aspects of " the interface experience . " Building on Aristotle ' s Poetics , Laurel asks that we imagine interfaces as stages BOOK REVIEW I 131 for experiencing a world in which we participate as agents . She proposes some principles for achieving such first - personness in design . Hutchins , Hollan and Norman offer the deepest analysis to date of highly - touted " direct manipulation interfaces , " such as the Xerox Star and Apple Macintosh . They elaborate a psy - chological theory for why such designs effectively present the illusion of direct engagement , and they critically evaluate the alleged advantages of such designs . DiSessa thoughtfully analyzes the future of programming , and argues for a shift from the dominant goal of breaking the " complexity barrier " ( to make easier creating and maintaining huge programs ) to overcoming the " utility barrier " ( making less effort in programming yield greater value , even for novice users ) . He illuminates how theBoxer language he has been developing at MIT approaches this goal . His triadic scheme for analyzing dimensions of change in programming in terms of presentation - manipulation , structure , and context ( what one does ) deserves close attention , as does his critique of direct manipulation . In Section I1 on Users ' Understandings , five chapters invoke central issues in cognitive science , dealing with the complexities of defining , assessing , and pro - moting " understanding . " Collectively , the authors focus on the substantive de - tails and origins of the mental models users construct for how computational systems work . They hope that with better knowledge about how users come pro - gressively to understand a system , we may be able to build better learning sup - port into it . Riley discusses three criteria for establishing user understanding of an interactive system : internal coherence , validity , and integration of available and new knowledge . Lewis asks how users understand what is happening in system interactions . His account of explanation - building as a key ~ encoding struc - ture when learning to use systems is the richest chapter for educators and de - velopmentalists , and has important implications for training models . Owen dis - cusses some examples of user interactions suggesting the existence of naive theories of how computation works which may interfere with system learning . DiSessa differentiates three different models of computation which he believes should be learned simultaneously : structural , functional , and distributed models ( aggregations of partial understandings ) . Mark describes a rigorous knowledge - based design methodology he has developed for ensuring coherence of the system image model presented to users for an office automation system . Section IV looks at User Activities , examining their structure with a parti - cular emphasis on supporting multiple , interleaved activities . Windows as they are today are inadequate , since some of these activities are related , others not . Cypher offers empirical grist for the argument that users need flexibility in grouping their systems activities , since these act . ivities often share contexts in different ways . Miyata and Norman ' s chapter on psychological constraints on pursuing multiple activities is a complementary treatment , drawing on experi - mental work in attention , memory , perception , and cognition . This chapter sug - gests various supports for reminding users of suspended activities , as well as for concurrent activities . Their analysis of " reminding " suggests fertile ground for future experimentation . From research on the success of topic - switching in natural language discourse , Reichman ( Adar ) takes rich prescriptions for rede - signing communication paradigms for window systems . The aim is to attain smoother ballistics of system use . Section V assesses technical possibilities for developing a more optimal pragmatics of human - machine communication . Buxton ' s chapter highlights the mismatch between the range of input devices used and the sensorimotor capa - cities we have available , including two hands , feet , sound and voice . His im - portant admonitions on matching input device features to task appropriate - ness recommend less simplistic holistic comparisons of input devices than commonly found . Draper traces design implications of the important unifying 110 concept of a " shared medium " : making user input refer to an object in the system ' s output . Section VI highlights the need for a unified approach to designing interactive systems for better information pow - between people as well as between sys - tems and people . Owen offers insights on conditions when we may need to vol - unteer information to users before they know how to request it . O ' Malley de - scribes types of question formulation supports for helping users help themselves , and persuasively considers how systems can help users help each other . Taking the stance that error is an inevitable aspect of much goal - directed action , Lewis and Norman propose and critically examine methods for minimizing error - proneness ( at the level of user system understanding ) , and for rapid discovery of and graceful recovery from errors . Bannon discusses current tools and future prospects for system - facilitated interpersonal communication . Section VII is devoted to John Seeley Brown ' s futuristic synthesis chapter on interactive systems as socio - cognitive technologies . He argues that creative tasks such as designing , communicating , and writing can be better socially constituted with computer supports . He offers a heuristic framework of issues and design strategies for analyzing the challenges of maintaining user understanding and control of interactive systems . Generalizing from natural language discourse , he provides a compelling pragmatic analysis of the central nature of " repair , " or trouble management , in systems design and use . Finally , Brown forcefully con - veys the need for " mutual intelligibility " - a dynamic in which machines and people can understand one another ' s moves in an interaction and respond appro - priately . Revisiting Bauhaus , he characterizes potentials of interactive technol - ogies as carriers of social change , for example , to create design communities through distributable recorded histories of design development . I have no doubt that the authors ' novel treatments of concerns in user - centered system design will have broad applicability to interactive systems de - signed for work , learning , and even play . Indeed , many chapters make one im - patient to test one ' s favorite or in - progress designs against the various prescrip - tions and analyses of the tradeoffs they outline . This volume contributes an excellent new source for teaching graduate courses and for conducting industry workshops . What questions test the limits of the new perspectives contributed by this volume ? And what next steps might be profitable ? Experimental design work informed by these perspectives is clearly in order . Enlightened by the new issues and methodologies , the how - to - do - it enthusiast will probably run to Card , Moran and Newell ' s Psychology of Human - Computer Interaction for comfort from the difficulties of social , communicative and phenomenological analyses recom - mended here . But I believe these groundbreaking chapters provide an attractive counterpoint to an isolated experimentalism , giving this field a welcome kinship to literary criticism and social theory . But that leads to its main limitations . BOOK REVIEW 1 133 It is an ironic challenge that once the authors have widened their scope to include many divergent perspectives and literatures ( e . g . , architectural design , Aristotle ' s poetics ) , other fields become pressing and their omission more salient . The first is the " logic of inquiry " : there is an extensive literature on question formulating and posing , dating from Dewey and colleagues to current studies in erotetic logic by Rescher and others . The section on information flow might be enriched if it built more on this substantial history . Throughout this book , the fundamental problem haunting the reader concerns the moral dimensions of systems design . The authors often confront prescriptive issues . Sometimes prescriptions involve only local principles of interactive systems design , for example , concerning 110 conventions . But once the discourse turns to reshaping society by using interactive systems as carriers of social change , to transforming human attitudes , beliefs and behaviors , the inadequacies of cognitive engineering as moral science are revealed . These struggles are no - where more apparent than in Hooper and Bannon ' s introductory chapters com - paring user - centered system design to architectural design , and in Brown ' s treatment of social change potentials of computing . How does the designer get from possibilities to telos ? Unfortunately , the tenor of moral dialectic found in contemporary " post - modernist " exchanges in philosophy and social theory is absent here . Issues treated here are more microsocial ( i . e . , relating to existing user groups ) than macrosocial , pertaining to societal or global changes . Few would dispute the values of sharing and collaboration to which the authors ' user - centered systems would aim . But difficulties abound , such as distribution of power and solidarity in access to data and systems . And in the moral realm as in systems design there are tradeoffs , for example , of freedom and equality . The profound possibilities of negative effects of the " reshaping " of society with technologies require more analysis . For example , consider the establishment of new contexts and methods for discrimination , and of invasions of privacy and impositions of social control . As a responsible consumer of proposed societal changes wrought through new technologies , one must ask : who does the reshaping of society with technolo - gies ? And in whose interests , for what purposes ? These issues are familiar from continentally - inspired debates on research knowledge and human interests , and debates over third world industrialization . But they resurface here with a vengeance . Until such questions are addressed , we should be cautious of pro - nouncements that " userv - centered system design should play proactive roles in shaping society . Current " users " are not representative of the social base that defines the society . Poor and unemployed communities are either un - or under - represented in the collection of needs and interests supported by technologies discussed here . Contexts for examples are primarily offices , uni - versity mainframe operating systems , accounting , programming , and corpor - ate board rooms . This is understandable , because examples are drawn from research studies funded by related institutions . But there are likely to be in - compatibilities of American financial interests competing in a world economy and non - nationalistic moral issues of global freedom , justice , and other social ideals . Any responsible " proactive " shaper of interactive systems needs to monitor these influences . 134 1 BOOK REVIEW It is also worth noting that there is a complex history of child - centered ap - proaches to education which share some of these difficulties . But in some sense the UCSD issues are deeper , since they potentially involve the definition of " homo sapiens siliconous " : integrations of human mind and interactive tech - nologies not only to support but to reshape what humans do , think about , and feel about themselves and others in their social system . Throughout , the designer faces difficult values issues : what should be done given a field of choices , each with different advantages and costs , individual and social , many of them un - known until tried ? Of course this isalready an ambitious book , and we cannot expect the authors to have compiled a moral treatise on top of a psychotechnological one . None - theless , the social dimensions of these essays render apparent the need to strike a collaborative mode with the work of social theorists such as Gadamer and Habermas , critical epistemologists such as Bernstein , Putnam and Rorty , and the many communities to be affected by the social changes wrought by future tech - nologies . We need to articulate and experiment with methods for designing , monitoring , and evaluating the social and moral consequences of new interactive systems . Paradoxically , electronic communication media , if universally accessible and usable , might provide the very medium of " user input " on values that would rekindle the possibilities of a democratic ideal . Only then will the humane uses of technology to which the authors clearly aspire emerge from the needs and in - terests of the evolving communities and societies they should serve . Roy Pea Bank Street College of Education New York