Technical Hypertext Accessibility : Information Structures and Rhetorical Framing Lawrie Hunter Kochi University of Technology Miyanokuchi 185 , Tosa Yamada , Kochi , Japan 782 - 8502 lawrie _ hunter @ kochi - tech . ac . jp ABSTRACT This paper outlines work in progress towards using information structure maps as a graphical means of informing the reader of his / her position in a hypertext array , and of the rhetorical intent of any given utterance . The graphical navigation aids described here support the non - native writer’s ( NNW ) use of model technical text , and provide an inroad for developing NNW awareness of the distinction between information elements and rhetorical devices . Categories and Subject Descriptors H . 5 . 4 [ Information interfaces and presentation ] : Hypertext / Hypermedia - navigation . General Terms Design , Experimentation , Human Factors . Keywords design , human factors , representations , information structures , rhetorical frames , information mapping , navigation support , hypertext 1 . INTRODUCTION The non - native writer ( NNW ) of technical English , for example the Japanese engineering student , is attempting a multi - level orchestration of rhetorical moves and information elements , where information is framed by such moves as citation , observation , and analysis , which are in turn framed by overarching moves such as accepting , rejecting , questioning and proposing . Often the NNW may not have full control of the mechanics of even the information elements – and even in good model texts the layers of this discourse are tangled in linear text whose section - by - section structuring reveals only part of the rhetorical manoeuvring taking place . The NNW typically acquires English technical writing knowledge through the observation , analysis and mimicry of model texts , and skill through the monitored application of that knowledge . This points to a need for ' considerate ' model texts which distinguish between information elements and rhetorical moves . The difficulty of decoding these models can be further eased by presenting the information elements as low - text information maps such as those developed by Hunter [ 5 ] . At this point in the development of model text , hypertext is a useful mode of presentation , given its flexibility of manipulation of ( multiple ) views . However , informal surveys suggest that successful use of hypertext for considerate technical text calls for some degree of explicit signalling not only of content structure but also of both utterance intent ( rhetorical move ) and lexia position within the greater document . 2 . INFORMATION STRUCTURES Mohan [ 7 ] proposed six " knowledge structures " or patterns of meaning and language that appear in discourse : description , classification , sequence , principle , choice and evaluation . The author has modified Mohan ' s knowledge structures so as to creating a mapping of the irreducible information structures which are signalled explicitly in technical writing . These information structures ( description , classification , comparison , sequence and cause - effect ) can be represented [ 5 ] by iconic node - link - node graphics , such as those shown in Figure 1 . Figure 1 . Iconic information structure graphics ( Hunter , 2002 ) 2 . 1 Information Structures , Graphically Within a technical document , information elements are grouped around themes or topics . For example , Figure 2 shows the information elements chosen by a journalist to introduce ocean thermal energy conversion ( OTEC ) in a science magazine . Here the information structure types are sequence and attribute comparison . 2 . 2 Adding Rhetorical Framings Common web design practice uses the sidebar menu or the text line menu to signal the structure of an overall document and ( at Copyright is held by the author / owner ( s ) . HT’05 , September 6 - 9 , 2005 , Salzburg , Austria . ACM 1 - 59593 - 168 - 6 / 05 / 0009 . times ) the position of the viewed page ( the ' lexia ' ) within that document . The place of the information contained in a given lexia within the information array of a whole document is less certainly signalled in such devices ; table - of - contents type menus actually represent text structure ( and the formal component of rhetorical structure ) rather than information structure . Figure 2 . An information structure map . In technical writing , information elements are framed by such rhetorical devices as citations , claim qualifiers and data commentaries . It is essential that the reader of technical text be aware of this nested nature of technical text . 2 . 2 Multiple encodings A typical information element has multiple encodings in written language . For example , " hungry [ cause - effect ] eat " can be written in numerous ways , including ' We eat if we are hungry , ' ' I was hungry , so I ate ' and ' I am going to eat since I am hungry . ' The NNW can only gain confident knowledge of these variations through what is referred to in the literature as ' ' extensive reading , ' ' the rapid reading of a large number of documents without overly careful attention to unknown lexical items , as opposed to intensive reading , which is meticulous , dictionary - oriented , slow reading . 3 . CONCLUSION The planned application of this hypertext interface design , then , is the creation of an extensive set of academic papers presented in a hypertext format which consistently reveals the position of each lexia in the overall document ' s rhetorical and text structures ; one of the formats under development is shown in Figure 3 . Clicking on links in the information map calls up several variations of utterance expressing the mapped content , for learner awareness and for richness of second language input . In a complementary version , model research papers are broken down into small lexia ; clicking on sentences in a lexia results in the highlighting of related map sections , and of structure and move tags . This approach also has applicability to writing genres other than technical - academic , given the system ' s capacity to vary the presentation of text structures , information structures and rhetorical move elements . Figure 3 . Hypertext revealing text position , rhetorical intent and information structure of lexia elements . 4 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Armani , J . & Rocci , A . Conceptual maps in e - learning . Information design journal + Document design 11 ( 2 / 3 ) . John Benjamins . 2003 . [ 2 ] Carter , L . Arguments in hypertext : a rhetorical approach . Hypertext 2000 : Proceedings of the eleventh ACM conference on hypertext and hypermedia . ACM Press . 2000 . [ 3 ] Horn , R . What kinds of writing have a future ? Speech at Association of Computing Machinery SIGDOC , October 22 , 2001 . [ 4 ] Hunter , L . Information structure diagrams as link icons . Learning Technology 4 ( 3 ) July 2002 . http : / / lttf . ieee . org / learn _ tech / issues / july2002 / index . html # 1 [ 5 ] Kolb , D . Twin media : Hypertext under pressure . Hypertext 2004 : Proceedings of the fifteenth ACM conference on hypertext and hypermedia . ACM Press . 2004 . [ 6 ] Mohan , B . Language and Content . Oxford University Press . 1986 . [ 7 ] Nanard , J . & Nanard , M . Using structured types to incorporate knowledge in hypertext . Proceedings of the Third ACM Conference on Hypertext . 1991 . [ 8 ] Storkerson , P . & Wong , J . Hypertext and the art of memory . Visible Language 31 . 2 . 1997 .