The Development of a Scientific Specialty : The Phage Group and the Origins of Molecular Biology NICHOLAS C . MULLINS THIS paper analyses the formation of a new discipline , molecular biology , from the development of phage work . It argues that such social variables as the competitive position and relative status of each of the specialties or disciplines from whioh a new one is formed are not sufficient to explain phage work ' s development into the specialty of molecular biology . Even though persons in physics , a field with high academic standing , decided to enter biology , which had a lower academic standing , and even though some recruiting of students occurred , these factors alone are not sufficient to account for the development of the specialty , particularly given the competitiveness of modern conditions . In the emergence of molecular biology from phage work , the variables of status and competitive position , adduced by Professors Ben - David and Collins to explain the emergence of experimental psychology from the hybridisation of physiology and philosophy , seem to be less important than oth ~ normal activities which occur in scientific development . These normal activities may be classified as intellectual and social . In the former category are : ( 1 ) paradigm development ; f2 ) problem success and ( 3 ) " puzzle solving - . 1 In the second , social , category are : ( 4 ) com - munication 2 ; , ( 5 ) co - authorship 3 ; ( 6 ) colleagueship and ( 7 ) apprenticeship . ~ Paradigm development occurs when a group of personas , either together or separately , experience a " Gestalt ~ shift " which changes their perception of ~ he topic or topics they are analysing . Their subsequent research uses this new perception , and some of that research is then published . Success in solving some problem is necessary to justify this shift , and the develop - ing area must poin ~ to interesting problems for further research . Further successes may eventually enable the new approach to establish itself as a Kuhn , Thomas , The Structure o Scientific Revolutions ( University of Chicago Press , 1962 ) . 2 Mullins , Nicholas C . , " The Distribution of Social and Cultural Properties in Informal Communication Networks among Biological Scientists " , American Sociological Review , XXXIII , 5 ( October , 1968 ) , pp . 786 - 797 . Price , Derek de Solla and Beaver , D . , " Collaboration in an Invisible College " , American Ps ) , chologist , XXI , 6 ( November , 1966 ) , pp . 1011 - 1018 . Ben - David , Joseph , " Scientific Productivity and Academic Organisation in Nineteenth Century Medicine " , American Sociological Review , XXV , 6 ( December , 1960 ) , pp . 828 - 843 . See also Ben - David , Joseph and Collins , Randall , " Social Factors in the Origins of New Science : The Case of Psychology " , American Sociological Review , XXXI , 4 ( August , 1966 ) , pp . 451 - 465 . 52 Nicholas C . Mullins normal science in Kuhn ' s sense . The puzzle - solving activity of normal science then continues from that point . ~ Although the development of molecular biology as a new discipline from one of its major sources ( the Phage Group ) appears on the surface to be a classic example of role hybridisation , closer analysis shows that this is not so . Not only must intellectual and social structural variables be adduced , but the specific relationship between the intellectual and the social structural variables must be demonstrated . ~ Intellectual Problems and Processes The Phage Group was named for the bacteriophage , a virus which infests bacteria . A phage attaahes itself to a bacterium and , after a short time , the bacterium destroys itself and produces many new phages . ( E . Coli , a common bacterium found in the intestinal tract , is such a bacterium . ) Bacteriophages make excellent subjects for the study of cell structure and reproduction . The central intellectual problem for the phage workers was to discover the mechanisms by which genetic informa - tion was transferred . Phages were studied largely by members of the informational school of molecular biology . ( It should be noted , however , that not all scientists working on phages were informationally oriented , or vice versa . ) The informational school passed through several stages : the romantic ( 1935 - 53 ) , the dogmatic ( 1954 - 62 ) and the academic ( 1963 to date ) . 7 These phases and their intellectual problems correspond roughly , to the processes of paradigm development , success and puzzle - solving . 5 Kuhn , Thomas , " Logic of Discovery or Psychology of Research " , in Lakatos , lmre and Musgrave , Alan ( eds . ) , Criticism and the Growth ol Knowledge ( Cambridge University Press , 1970 ) , pp . 1 - 23 , is much clearer than The Structure ol Scientific Revolutions on the point of paradigm development , success and change into normal science . s Stent , Gunther S . , " That was Molecular Biology That Was " , Science , CLX , 3826 ( 26 April , 1968 ) , pp . 390 - 395 . Stent ' s is one of several unique documents which have aided me in this paper ' s analysis . See also Cairns , John , Stent , Gunther S . , and Watson , James D . ( eds . ) , Phage and the Origins o Molecular Biology ( Cold Spring Harbor : Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory of Quantitative Biology , 1966 ) . This book provides the basic data for this paper . Each contributor to the volume was asked to describe the historical development of one segment of the Phage Group during a period in which the author played a major role . These papers , with citations to the literature contemporary with the developments discussed , constitute a unique source : the self - conscious history of a scientific group ' s development through its crucial period . The book is unique because many of the group ' s members have deliberately attempted to recall the historical develop - ment of phage work . The Cairns volume does not attempt to cover the total literature as a textbook or a review article might do ; it refers only to those papers which were important to the Phage Group itself . The book serves as a lens through which we can look back through time and observe the phage workers ' understanding of how their group developed and grew . This picture may not be complete , however , in the sense of including all the factors that led to its development , and I have compensated for this lack by using other sources of information on the Phage Group and indicating how analysis of other groups ' developments resemble or differ from their self - description . See also Watson , James D . , The Double Helix ( New York : Atheneum Press ; t968 ) . r Stent , Gunther S . , op . cit . The Development of a Scientific Specialty FIGURE 1 Characteristic Structures in the Development of a Scientific Specialty 53 ( A ) Paradigm Group 4 - - - - - A . . . . . . B ' ' ' ~ ( B ) Network ( C ) Cluster A ~ . . . . . - B f l ( D ) Specialty ~ ' " ' " " . ~ C ~ ~ B ~ ' ~ ~ J , . . ~ . % # . " % . f E ~ ~ , ~ D - - - . . . . - " communications . . . . . . colleagueship co - authorship . . . . . . . . . . . . . ~ . student of 54 Nicholas C . MuUins Social Structures and Activities The social structures which are formed by the characteristic social activities cited above may be classified as : ( 1 ) paradigm group ; ( 2 ) com - munication network ; ( 3 ) duster and ( 4 ) specialty . The emergence of mole - cular biology as a specialty passed through these four structural stages . In each of these four structural stages , the following social activities occur ( see Figure 1 ) : ( 1 ) communication , i . e . , serious discussion about current research s ; ( 2 ) co - authorship , a more intimate form of association in which two scientists jointly report their research results on some topic ; ( 3 ) apprenticeship , in which a student is trained and sponsored by his teacher and ( 4 ) colleagueship , in which two scientists work in the same laboratory . Most scientists who are at all active in research engage in one or another of these activities , sometimes within a specific subgroup , but almost always within the scientific community as a whole . The purpose here is not simply to show that these activities ~ occur but rather to indicate the pattern in which they occur , since that pattern can indicate ( roughly ) Vhe stage to which an intellectual group has developed . It should be emphasised that for any given intellectual problem these activities overlap . Paradigm and network - type structures , in particular , continue to form and function even after a group has entered the cluster or specialty stage . Their function at these stages is usually to supply new members and ideas to the increasingly formal cluster or specialty , although occasionally a totally new cluster will result . The analytical distinction of the different stages is not intended to imply that the activities which constitute the preceding stages are no longer functioning ; it is intended only . to show that for a given intellectual problem , a more complex structure has been established . The following section presents more detail on each of the four stages and analyses the Phage Group in terms of this analytical scheme . At each stage relevant components of the intellectual problem and social activities will be indicated . The Paradigm Group : 1935 - 45 A paradigm group is the minimal form of a scientific group . Its members have no necessary social connections . Kuhn indicates that any useful paradigm must , by definition , be the possession of some social group which is using it . He is not clear , however , about what such a group might look like or of whom it might consist . 9 The minimal requirement of such an entity is two or more estaNished scientists who have shifted from one viewpoint to another ( Gestalt shift ) , and who s Mullins , N . C . , op . cit . Personal interview , February 1968 . These communications are not bound by institutional , status or disciplinary boundaries . 9 Kuhn , Thomas , The Structure o / Scientific Revolutions , pp . 12 - 13 , 18 - 20 . The Development of a Scientific Specialty 55 might or might not be in communication with one another . 1 ~ A paradigm group is t , hus a set of individuals , all of whom have moved into a similar cognitive situation with respect to the same , or similar , problems . Intellectual Problem : Study of the bacteriophage ' s cell structure and reproduction constituted the Phage Group ' s central intellectual problem . The bacteriophage was selected for study because it offered a simple model system through which to examine the basic process of cell reproduction . Phage work was not the first or only attempt to study this problem . Biochemists ( e . g . , Chargaff n ) , geneticists ( e . g . , Sturtevant ~ 2 ) , structural chemists ( e . g . , Pauling ) , X - ray crystallographers ( e . g . , Perutz ) and others were also trying to determine the structure and function of large , biologically interesting molecules . 1 ~ These scientists can be regarded as constituting a paradigm group . All were studying the same basic problem , but they had no particular contact with each other . Nonethe - less , as Stent points out , their approaches could be generally classified as structural or informational ? 4 The Phage Group ' s approach was basically inforriaa ` tional , and in this paper , therefore , the focus is on details of the informational approach . Indeed , the informational school found its social structure in the Phage Group , which was concerned with " the secret of life " , the way in which " living matter manages . to record and perpetuate experience , , . as The group ' s specific intellectual forebear was Niels Bohr , who , although a physicist , argued that the ultimate principles of life might not be explicable in strictly physical terms . Max Delbrtick , a student of Bohr , guessed that genetics would be the area in which such principles would be found . 1 ~ Schrtidinger may be regarded as an alternative forebear ? 7 Schrtidinger did not agree with Bohr ' s view regarding ultimate principles and wrote as though the " secret of life " would be found in some coding process which operated through standard physical principles . What is Life ? influenced many scientists who later participated in phage work . These phage workers were influenced more by Delbrtick ' s standards for theoretical and experi - mental work than by his transmission of Bohr ' s philosophical approach . 10 It has long been known that ideas occur in multiples ; thus , most ideas occur to several persons independently . See Merton , R . K . , " Singletons and Multiples in Scientific Discovery " , Proceedings o / the American Philosophical Society , CV , 5 ( October , 1961 ) , pp . 470 - 486 . It has not been proved that paradigm shifts follow the same model , but since they , too , are ideas , it is likely that they do . 11 Chargaff , Erwin , " A Few Remarks on Nucleic Acids , De - coding and the Rest of the World " , and " Arnphisbaena " , Essays on Nucleic Acids ( Amsterdam : Elsevier Publishing Co . , 1963 ) , pp . 161 - 173 and pp . 174 - 199 . 12 Sturtevant , A . H . , A History o Genetics ( New York : Harper & Row , 1965 ) , p . 104 . 13 Watson , James D . , The Double Helix . a4 Stent , Gunther S . , op . cit . 15 Delbriick , Max , " A Physicist Looks at Biology " , in Cairns , John , et al . ( eds . ) , op . tit . , pp . 12 - 13 . 18 Stent , Gunther S . , op . cit . lr SchrSdinger , E . , What Is Lile ? The Physical Aspect of the Living Cell ( Cambridge : The University Press , 1944 ) . 56 Nicholas C , Mullins ( Delbrtick opposed the biochemical approach of most reductionists in their study of the gene . ) Salvador Luria , the emigr6 Italian bacteriologist , another early phage worker , also disagreed with Delbrtick and arranged for his own first graduate , student ( Watson ) to study biochemistry through a post - doctoral arrangement , is There were some intellectual successes daring this period . Delbrtick , Zimmer and Timofeeff - Rossovsky published a paper on target theory which , although it later proved to , be inaccurate , affected the Phage Group by interesting Schr / Sdinger in biological work . This paper was the source of SchrSdinger ' s references to " Delbrtick ' s model " in What is Life ? 1 ~ Delbrtick also published several papers which are described as " elegant work " ; both Anderson and Kellenberger report them to have been extremely striking . 2 ~ The group ' s paradigm , formally stated , became the study of phages to solve the problem of genetic information transmission with methods as precise as could be developed . This paradigm , like most real paradigms , was not initially very precise , but it did become more precise as time and work passed . A very important event for this paradigm occurred ' when norms were established to govern the kind of research to be done and the manner in which it was to be done and presented . In 1944 research was limited , by agreement ( at least among Delbrtick , Luria , Anderson , Demerec and Fano ) , to one bacterium , ( E . Coli ) and one set of phages ( the T - series ) , in order to produce comparability of results ? 1 Social Processes : In 1933 - 34 several physicists ( including Max Delbrtick , Leo Szilard and others ) , discussing the future of fundamental physics , concluded that : ( 1 ) physics would provide no interesting research for some time ( until new machinery had made certain large - scale investigations possible ) 2 ~ ; ( 2 ) biology had the greatest number of unsolved problems which appeared open to fruitful investigation by physical methods , although " new laws of physics " might be necessary 53 ; ( 3 ) someone should enter biology . Delbriick and Szilard ( the latter at a later date ) did so ; SchrSdinger wrote in the area . Following his decision , Delbriick began discussions with two available " quantitative biologists " , Timo ~ eeff - Rossovsky and Zimmer , for 10 hours at a ~ ime , two or three clays a week . 2 " 18 Fleming , D . , " Emigr6 Physicists and the Biological Revolution " , in Fleming , D . and Bailyn , B . ( eds . ) , The Intellectual Migration , Europe and America 1930 - 1960 ( Cam - bridge , Mass . : Harvard University Press , 1969 ) , pp . 185 - 189 . 19 Ibid . , pp . 168 - 172 . 20 Anderson , Thomas F . , " Electron Microscopy of Phages " , in Cairns , John , et al . ( eds . ) , op . cit . , p . 63 ; also Kellenberger , Edward , " Electron Microscopy of Developing Bacteriophag e " in ibid . , p . 116 . 21 Anderson , Thomas F . , op . cit . , p . 73 . 22 Gamow , George , Thirty Years That Shook Physics : The Story of Quantum Theory ( Garden City , New York : Doubleday , 1966 ) , p . 69 . 23 Stent , Gunther S . , op . cit . ; Stent , Gunther S . , " Introduction : Waiting for the Paradox " , in Cairns , John , et al . ( eds . ) , op . cit . , p . 4 ; Moore , Ruth , Niels Bohr : The Man , His Science and the World They Changed ( New York : Knopf , 1966 ) , pp . 248 - 249 . 24 Zimmer , K . G . , " The Target Theory " , in Cairns , John , et al . ( eds . ) , op . cit . , pp . 36 - 37 . Monod \ L w o f f The Development ol a Scientific Specialty F I G U R E 2 Paradigm Group , Phage Work , 1935 - - 45 5 7 Putnam K a l c k a r Evans A n d e r s o n : , . D e l b r f i c ~ k / l l i . . T E ~ ~ D e m e r e c ~ ~ T i m o f ~ y ~ ~ ? m m e r L u n a V i n o g r a d Weigle H e r s h e y A d a m s W i l l i a m s F r a n k e l - C o n r a t K l e i n s c h m i d t c o - a u t h o r s h i p - c o l l e a g u e s h i p 58 Nicholas C . Mullins Delbrtick and Luria ( although a bacteriologist , the latter had read some physics while in the Italian army 25 ) both emigrated to the United States at the beginning of the Second World War . They met and began work , trying to influence others to study phages , but with little success until 1945 . Luria reports much discussion from 1943 to 1945 , of means for recruiting ? 6 Schr6dinger ' s What is Life ? provided a " shot in the arm ' " for recruiting about this time . ~ 7 Delbrtick , Luria , Hershey , Lwoff , Anderson and Monod were all at work by 1940 ( Figure 2 ) . All but Anderson were clearly first - generation members of the group . Each of them was doing phage work or a subject closely connected with it , but they had little systematic communication with each other until 1946 . Lwoff and Monod were in France , Delbrtick was at Vanderbilt University , Luria at Columbia , Hershey at Washington University in St . Louis and Zimmer and Timofeeff - Rossovsky were in Germany during the Second World War ; Timofeeff - Rossovsky did not survive the fall of Berlin . Ellis dropped out of academic work around 1941 . Szilard and Novick were working on the Manhattan Project . Kleinschmidt and Weigle were Swiss who stayed in Switzerland . The latter five were obviously separated by the war , but their simultaneous involvement in other activities might equally well have separated them . Some of them knew other scientists involved in phage work , but in any case they lacked contact with each other . Stent has labelled the whole 1935 - 53 period a . s the " romantic era " of phage work ? 8 I find it more convenient to view this 19 - year period as having two phases : 1935 - 45 as " ea ~ rly romantic " and 1945 - 53 as " late romantic " . The break came because a few scientists ( notably Delbrfick , Luria and Hershey ) began taking systematic steps to recruit new scientists for phage work , principally through t ~ e initiation of the summer phage course at Cold Spring Harbor . Communication Network : 1945 - 53 This is the " late romantic " period of phage work ; it concludes with the discovery by Watson and Crick of the DNA model . It was marked by several intellectual successes and the development of a social organisa - tion which we will call a communication network ( a set of pairs and triads of scientists engaged in regular communication , or colleagueship , over a period of time 29 ) . The patterns of a network are in constant flux and they can change without much perceptible effect on the science itself . A network grows , decreases and functions as each scientist who is a member of it makes a few new contacts and breaks others ( usually unintentionally , through neglect ) . The pattern of these contacts is fairly far - flung . In a 25 Fleming , D . , op . cit . , p . 178 . 26 Luria , Salvador , " Mutations of Bacteria and of Bacteriophage " in Cairns , John , et al . ( eds . ) , op . cit . , p . 178 ; Anderson , Thomas K . , op . cit . , p . 72 , calls it a " plot " . 2 ~ Stent , Gunther S . , in Cairns , John , et al . ( eds . ) , op . cit . , p . 3 . 28 Stent , Gunther S . , " That Was Molecular Biology That Was " , pp . 390 - 395 . 29 See Mullins , N . C . , op . cit . The Development of a Scientific Specialty 59 group of scientists writing on the same very specific problem area , some of them might have all their contacts within the group ; others might have their contacts within and without ~ he group ; while others , who are clearly studying the same problem as those scientists already mentioned , might not be connected with any of the other groups . These contacts might include any of the activities from communication , through co - authorship and cotleagueship , to apprenticeship , We should note Vhat the communi - cation network structure shows two changes from the paradigm group structure : ( 1 ) increased connection among scientists who are working in the area , and ( 2 ) a corresponding decrease in disconnected or independent persons . Intellectual Problem : " If it be true " , wrote Max Delbrtick in 1949 , " that the essence of life is the accumulation of experience through the genera - tions , then one may - perhaps suspect that the key problem of Nology , from the l ~ hysicist ' s point of view , is how living matter manages to record and perpetuate its experience . " ~ o Clearly , phage work ' s central problem did not change during this period . Stent indicates the chief characteristic of the intellectual problem during , this period : " The outstanding accomplish - ment of 1945 - 53 was the introduction into microbial genetics of previously unknown standards for experimental design : deductive logic , and data evaluation , " al There were significant intellectual successes during this period . Mark Adams , who taught the summer phage course from 1946 - 55 , codified the first set of phage work techniques . 32 Hershey and Chase demonstrated the physical transfer of DNA in phage infection , thereby proving that DNA was the genetic material ? ~ Through these and other smaller successes , there developed the first elaborations of the phage work paradigm which outlined the terms in which " puzzle - solving " could be done . 2These successes were not universally acclaimed or even universally understood at first . H . Kalckar , a biochemist , who took the first phage course , remarked : " Delbrtick introduced me to quantitative biology and genetics through his first phage course , held at Cold Spring Harbor in 1945 . At the time , few biochemists thought along the lines of Poisson distributions , although there were some notaNe exceptions . " 34 This was a different kind of biology ; so different that Watson , reading ~ 0he results , of the Hershey - Chase experiment to 400 microbiologists , found that 3o Delbriick , Max , in Cairns , John , et al . ( eds . ) , op . clt . , pp . 12 - 13 . 31 Stent , Gunther S . , " That Was Molecuhr Biology That Was " , p . 393 . 32 A later ( and much revised ) version of this technique can be found in the Appendix , " Methods of Study of Bacterial Viruses " , to Adams , Mark H . , Bacteriophages ( New . York : Interscience Publishers , Inc . , 1959 ) , pp . 443 - 522 . zz Hershey , A . and Chase , M . , " Independent Functions of Viral Protein and Nuclein Acid in Growth of Bacteriophage " , reprinted from Journal o / General Physiology , XXXV ( 1952 ) , pp . 39 - 56 , in Taylor , J . Herbert ( ed . ) , Selected Papers on Molecular Genetics ( New York : Academic Press , 1965 ) , pp . 212 - 229 . z4 KMckar , Herman M . , " High Energy Phosphate Bonds ~ Optional or Obligatory ? " in Cairns , John , et al . ( eds . ) , op . cit . , p . 43 . Monod F X C U R E 3 / A ' ~ / Jacob Network Stage , Phage Work , 1945 - 53 Sininovitch ~ Kjeldgaard / I Stent ~ \ Hayes Putnam / I ~ / / ~ J Kaiser I Doermann ~ \ Maaloe = - W a t s o n ~ " ' W o l l m a n ~ . ~ . Evans " x / K a l c k a r ' ~ . . ~ Anderson D elbrtick welgte Crick Demerec Streisinger Szilard Latarjet ~ Levinthal ~ Adams Chase ~ . " ~ D e M a r s / ~ colleagueship " ~ Williams student of The Development of a Scientific Specialty 6I only scientists studying phages understood the point of the experiment and were interested25 Social Processes : The phage network ' s major source of new members and initial contact . s , which might later result in post - doctoral fellowships and subsequent colleagueships , was Cold Spring Harbor , where the summer course in phage techniques was taught ( Figure 3 ) 2 ~ The network is clearly beginning to grow and change from the paradigm group ( Figure 3 ) . One cause of growth is change in its members ' institutional arrangements . Delbrtick had no students while he was at Vanderbilt . There he belonged t O a department of physics which was not suitable for recruiting and training phage workers . His only recruit was one colleague , A . H . Doermann . The phage course ' . had brought in some new people , but it was not until Delbriick joined the California Institute of Technology deparment of biology in 1947 that any phage worker had access to many graduate students who could be recruited into phage work . Luria , meanwhile , was at Indiana University and there he had his first students , Watson and Delbucco . The Institut Pasteur ( with Lwoff as its central figure ) operated during this whole period , as did the electron microscope centre at the University of Geneva ' s Physics Institute , with the Kellenbergers and Weigle . Columbia University and the University of Chicago provided , space for other phage workers . The " first phage meeting " , in March 1947 , attracted eight peopIe : M . H . Adams , T . F . Anderson , M . Delbriick , A . Doermann , A . Hershey , S . Luria , S . S . Cohen ( a biochemist ) and M . Zelle . zr By 1949 , interaction among phage . workers had increased to the point where Szilard was con - ducting a monthly Midwest phage meeting at which / oshua Lederberg , Kalckar , Watson , Luria and others were regular attenders . Watson records a small phagemeeting during the sPring of 1949 at Bloomington , Indiana , with Hershey , Doermann , Weigle , Putnam , Kozloff , Delbrtick , Szilard , Luria , Novick , Delbucco , Stent and Wollman attending2 ~ These meetings were in addition to a summer meeting and the phage course . During this stage , group growth prompted arrangements to increase inter - action which , in turn , fostered fu ~ her growth and interaction . Recruitment was crucial to the growth of the network . Table I presents the date and place of entry of 65 persons into the study of phages2 ~ ( " Place of entry " indicates the place where relations with the network an Watson , James D . , op . cit . , p . i19 ' : 3 ~ It should be noted that these may not include all possible persons or connections . This fact is important , however , only if other persons and connections sufficient to destroy the basic pattern shown in this figure can be found . " . . . . . . zz See Luria , Salvador , op . cir . , p . 178 . I cannot find Zelle ' s name elsewhere in phage literature nor have ! been able to determine his importance , if any , to phage work . He therefore does not appear in Figure 3 or Table I of this paper . 3s Watson , James D , " Growing Up in the Phage Group " in Cairns , John , et al . ( eds . ) , op . cit . , p . 242 . z9 Fifty - one of these are co - authors of more than one paper listed in Cairns , John , et al . ( eds . ) , op , r The remaining 15 are : otherwise noted in that volume as members for a limited time . 62 Nicholas C . Mullins TABLE 1 Agents o / Entry and Recruits 1935 1940 1945 1950 1955 1960 1965 . rerne ( CT = w ' ) Kaiser ( c ' r ) t ' " Wo ~ ! m ~ ( CT - lxl ) ~ - Benzer ( CTopd ) orer ( CSH . dg ) ~ - Maaloo ( P ) ( KalckaO ( P ) ( Putnam ) ( C ~ Ig ) ' ~ ' S ~ eJmcr ( IS ) o ~ eiglr ( P ) ~ Ad ~ r ( G ) Kdlenberger ( G ) KelIenbcrger ( G ) i Boy de hTour ( G ) Sec ~ ud ( O ) Bolle ( O ) Lidausls ( G ) " I Meselson ( CT ) Stent ( CT - Ixl ) I - ~ - . ~ Visconti ( P ) / I / - Edgar ( CT - Ixl ) ( Hershey ) ( CSH ) , / , Steinberg ( CT ) Lwo ~ k ~ u ~ ann ( IP ) Jacob ( IP ) Sininovitch ( IP ) Kjeldgaar80P ) . Cohen ( IP ) Stani ~ r ( IP ) ~ Lufia ~ Latarj ~ t ( I ) d I Hayes s derson ( Col - clg ) ~ - Crlck ( Cam ) ( Delbucco ) ( 1 ) , , DeMars ( lit ' ) I Strc ~ tnger ( Ill ) FLshcr ( HI ) Ellis ( C ' O ~ ( Adams ) ( NYUp Brenner ( Cam ) ( Monod ) ( S ) Stretton ( Cam ) t Williams ( M ) Kleiaschmidt ( B ) LSackus ( M ) ~ Frankel - Conrat ( 13 ) Adelberg ( B ) LBums ( 13 ) The Development of a Sc & ntific Specialty 63 Key B University of California , M University of Michigan Berkeley NYU New York University C University of Chicago ( reed . ) ( biochemistry , biophysics ) O Oregon ( Institute for Cam University of Cambridge Molecular Biology ) Col Columbia University P Phage course CSH Cold Spring Harbor R University of Rochester CT California Institute of S Sorbonne Technology V Vanderbilt University G University of Geneva ( physics ) I Indiana University clg colleague I11 University of Illinois pd post - doctoral fellow IP Institut Pasteur vi visitor IS Iowa State University ( name ) not in Phage Group a The date listed for each person may be one of three : ( 1 ) the date on which this person became associated with the previous - generation person ; ( 2 ) the date of a Ph . D . awarded by the department or school of interest ; ( 3 ) the date of a joint paper . In general the earliest verifiable date has been used as marking the beginning of the relationship . The indication of place , in this case P , marks the location at which initiation into the Phage Group occurred , in this instance at the Cold Spring Harbor phage course . Parentheses around the name indicates that that person ( Kalckar ) did not publish in the group . Kalckar is the earliest student of whom there is record in the data . b Vinograd was a well - established investigator at the California Institute of Technology , a man of 54 with his own research laboratory . Meselson ( Cairns , op . cit . , p . 152 ) describes the relationship as providing technical help to him and Stab _ l , who were not established at that point . Cairns describes his arrival in Pasadena from Australia to work with Delbucco and notes that he lived in a house with Meselson and several others . He mentions that , during this period , Meselson was a major influence on his choice of later work . Lielausis also worked for Edgar . Her place in this table is arbitrary . She was a technician and may not be considered a full member . a Latarjet could not be found in any edition of American Men of Science . He wrote one paper with Luria . o Sinsheimer ' s contribution to the Cairns volume reports that Max Delbriick , in a conversation in Pasadena in 1953 , directed his research into the area which later blossomed into his phage career . Sinsheimer graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1948 in biophysics and was at Iowa State until 1957 . In 1957 he came to the California Institute of Technology as a professor of biology . His relationship to Delbriick is not clear . His placement is arbitrary . Only Stanier ' s work with Lwoff is noted by Cairns . g In 1950 Hayes was a medical bacteriologist who attended a summer course at Cambridge taught by E . F . Gale and there met Cavalli - Sforza who was working on E . Coli KI2 ( the bacterium with which the Phage Group was concerned ) . He met Watson in 1952 and thereby gained entry to Cold Spring Harbor in 1953 . Wollman provided the contact with Hayes after 1955 . Backus was a student at Michigan in i950 ; Williams was also there . The relation of this whole group ( Adelberg , Kleinschmidt , Startler , Williams and Frankel - Conrat ) to the Phage Group is not clear . In 1967 , all were at the Virus Laboratory at Berkeley which could be considered an alternate , perhaps competing , centre for the study of viruses . Stent , a legitimate member of the Phage Group , was in the Virus Laboratory as well . i Stretton was a student at the molecular biology unit at Cambridge ( 1961 ) ; both Brenner and Crick were there , as well as others . His placement is uncertain . He was also an instructor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology when Luria , Levinthal and others were there . Brenner and Crick are clearly very major figures in molecular biology but were not in the Phage Group . J Mark Adams was to have taught in the phage course in 1948 but was too ill to do so . He clearly belongs in the early group . He died in 1956 at the age of 44 . k At Cold Spring Harbor in 1948 , did not take phage course . 1 Ellis went into industry in 1941 . SOtrRCE : American Men of Science , 5 vols . , 10th edition , revised ( Tempe , Arizona : Cattell Press , 1961 ) ; 6 vols . , llth edition , revised ( New York : R . R . Bowker Co . , 1966 ) . Cairns , John , et al . ( eds . ) , op . cir . ; Directory of British Scientists 1966 - 67 , 2 vols . ( London : Ernest Benn Ltd . , 1966 ) . Stent , Gunther S . , op . ctt . ; Walsh , John , " Geneva : Molecular Biology Research Comes of Age " , Science , CLIX , 3816 ( 16 February , 1968 ) , pp . 718 - 721 . 64 Nicholas C . Mullins were first established . 4 ~ From the available information , 41 it appears that 14 persons were neither students nor colleagues who were recruited by others . These , then , constitute the " first generation " of phage workers . Thirty - five persons were recruited by the 14 members of the first generation , 19 of those by Delbrtick . The 12 members of the tllird generation were recruited by second - generation members and , likewise , the five members of the fourth , by the third . The importance of students 42 is very clearly underscored ; of the 52 members of the second or later generations , 30 ( 57 " 5 per cent . ) are clearly identifiable as graduate students in the conventional sense . The summer phage course recruited eight members of the second and later generations . Delbriick ' s recruiting technique was extremely vigorous , particularly after his 1948 arrival at the California Institute of Technology . Contributors to the , Cairns volume note that . , Delbriick frequently held seminars given on any interesting topic , usually accompanied by his devastating critiques . 4s Mention is made of his changing , or producing a new orientation to , a line of work , and Table I shows his influence on colleagues . Delbrtick ' s advance over other scientists in similar positions ( e . g . , Hilbert ' s with respect to invariant theory 44 ) was his recognition , during the early forties , that under traditi ~ onal conditions he would not have sufficient students soon enough to maintain the momentum created by his and Luria ' s initial discoveries . Initiating a summer course was his solution to this dilemma . 4 ~ The importance of students is shown by the fact that for the 41 on whom age data are available ( predominantly American and British ) , the average age is 34 " 6 years , with a median of 33 ; the youngest entrant is 23 , the oldest 54 . On average , the entrants were younger scientists . The date of completion of the Ph . D . functions as a " second birth - date " , marking the official beginning of a scientific career . I have doctoral dates on 40 of the 41 reported above and on one other , for a total of 41 . There were three major groups in terms of the number of years between date of receipt of the doctorate to the beginning of the phage career ( Table II ) . The first 17 scientists began their phage careers somewhere between three years before and three years after receiving the Ph . D . ; all were direct students of previous phage workers ( Table I ) . a0 Table I , with its wide range of entry dates , clearly illustrates the overlap that can occur among model stages . Tables II - V show a similar overlap of network ' s specific social processes with earlier and later stages . 4x Data included several interviews with past and present phage workers . a2 Fisher , Charles S . , " The Last Invariant Theorists " , European Journal of Sociology , VIII , 2 ( 1967 ) , pp . 216 - 244 . 43 Streisinger , George , " Terminal Redundancy , or Ali ' s Well That Ends Well " in Cairns , John , et aL ( eds . ) , op . cir . , p . 336 . 44 Fisher , Charles S . , op . cir . 45 Important figures such as Szilard , Evans and Weigle could not have been recruited by other means . All were senior men at other institutions and simply not available for instruction in new techniques . Phage work , like the invariant theory as described by Fisher , is a specific intellectual tradition ( in each case including a large component of technique ) which must be passed from person to person if that tradition is to persist . The Development o a Scientific Specialty T ~ LE II Years rom Ph . D . to Entry into Phage Work by Stages 65 to 1945 1946 - 53 1954 - 62 1963 - 66 Paradigm Network Cluster Specialty Total - - 3 to 3 1 10 5 1 17 4to 9 4 4 4 1 13 10 to 15 0 2 2 0 4 16 + 1 3 2 1 7 Total 6 19 13 3 41 SOURCE : Entry dates : Cairns , John , et al . ( eds ) , op . cit . Ph . D . dates : American Men o Science , lOth edition . Fourteen persons entered within five to eight years after receiving the Ph . D . ; these were young scientists seeking anew area in which to continue their scientific careers . Six of these 14 were first - generation phage workers . ( Note that 75 per cent . of the scientists included in Table 1I had moved into phage work within eight years of receiving the Ph . D . ) The reminder entered between 10 and 29 years after receiving the doctorate ; these constitute the group ' s more random additions . Three of these were recruited through the phage course ; four others were first - generation scientists . These data show that recruitment was concentrated in the network stage . It is likely , however , that if data were available for the period up to the present , the specialty stage would show equally heavy , or heavier , recruiting . ( Recruiting by recognised specialties and disciplines is , after all , aidedby the financial resources and structures of the institutions to which they belong . It should , therefore , meet with fewer obstacles than the recruiting of an informal , developing network . ) Of the 41 persons on whom data are available ( Table III ) , physics , chemistry , biophysics and physical chemistry supplied 41 " 5 per cent . ( 17 out of 41 ) of the total entrants . Bacteriology , medicine , virology , biology and biochemistry supplied 44 per cent . ( 18 out of 41 ) . Molecular biologists constitute another 14 . 5 per cent . ( 6 out of 41 ) . These data indicate a heavy influx of physical scientists into what had been essentially a biological science . ( All the physicists had entered by 1953 . ) " Phage careers " ~ 6 within the network varied in duration . Careers 46 , , Phage career " is here defined as that period extending from the date of the first paper cited by a contributor to the Cairns volume to the date of the last paper so cited ( this definition assumes that the participants closely followed developments within phage work and would , therefore , cite each scientist active during his own active period ) . This paper discusses phage rather than total careers because individuals move in and out of particular kinds of work , and sometimes cease productive work altogether . 66 Nicholas C . Mullins TABLE III Fields of Specialisation o Ph . D . by Stages for Entrants during each Period Entry during 1945 46 - 53 54 - 62 63 - 66 Paradigm Network Cluster Specialty Total Physical Science Physics 1 Biophysics 0 Physical chemistry 0 Chemistry 2 Biological Science Physician 1 Bacteriology 0 Virology 0 Biochemistry 1 Nutrition 0 Biology 1 Molecular biology 0 7 0 1 1 0 1 2 2 0 a 0 2 2 0 1 4 1 1 0 2 3 0 2 8 ; 2 1 6 1 2 a 0 4 0 1 0 6 0 1 1 7 1 3 6 19 13 3 41 a There is one physician whose entry is known but not the date of the receipt of his medical degree . SougcB : Cairns , John , et aI . ( eds . ) , op . cit . ; American Men of Science ( 1961 , 1966 ) ; and Directory of British Scientists . constituted by a single point in time ( i . e . , scientists who published only one paper of interest to any contributor to the Cairns volume ) constitute the largest group . The mean career length is 3 " 21 years . If we exclude single point careers , we find the mean length to be 6 " 1 years and the median career four years . This mean career is less than a fifth of the average scientific working career of 35 years and suggests that the phage network ' s member - ship was not very stable . This conclusion is reinforced by the range of duration of careers during the entire 31 - year period from 1935 to 1966 . Even the first 13 persons in the field , all of whom entered before 1950 , had an average career of less than 10 years . This shortness of career suggests that the network grew by net gains , rather than simply by adding new persons who then remained until the end of their own working lives or the end of the time period considered . The Development of a Scientific Specialty TABLE IV Length of Careers of Phage Workers 7 Number Length of Phage ( in years ) Workers 0 ~ 59 1 5 2 9 3 10 4 3 5 2 6 3 7 1 8 1 9 2 10 2 11 5 13 3 14 1 16 1 17 2 23 1 27 1 Total 111 Point careers ( only cited once ) . SOURCE : American Men of Science ( 1961 , 1966 ) ; Cairns , John , etaI . ( eds . ) i ; oP . cir . , and Directory of British Scientists . 68 Nicholas C . Multins TABLE V Support and Locations of Careers in Phage Work Number of Years of Place persons support a 1 . California Institute of Technology 2 . Institut Pasteur 3 . University of Geneva 4 . University of Chicago 5 . University of California , Berkeley 6 . Cold Spring Harbor 7 . University of Oregon 8 . Johnson Foundation 9 . Kaiser Wil , helm Institute 10 . New York University Medical School 11 . Paul Erlich Institute ( Frankfurt ) 12 . Institute for Radiation Biology 13 . Institute for Medical Physiology ( Copenhagen ) 14 . University of Michigan 15 . Vanderbilt University 16 . Molecular Biology Research Unit , Cambridge Sorbonne , _ / Indiana University 17 " 1 Postgraduate Medical School , University of London 20 . Washington University ( St . Louis ) 21 . Oak Ridge National Laboratory Purdue University 22 . Stanford University 24 . Guggenheim Foundation 25 . University of Illinois _ f Massachusetts Institute of Technology " / Johns Hopkins Umverslty 28 . University of Cambridge 29 . Public Health Institute , New York ' Australian National University 30 . . Rockefeller Foundation Fulbright Foundation National Institutes of Health Fellowship Harvard University 32 . Columbia University Missouri University University of Cologne 19 64 7 36 8 35 5 34 7 32 4 17 4 14 1 14 3 12 2 11 1 11 1 11 1 9 3 8 2 8 3 7 1 7 1 7 1 7 2 5 2 5 1 5 1 5 4 4 2 4 1 4 1 4 3 3 1 3 1 2 1 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 a Derived from adding the number of years each person was supported . SOURCE : American Men of Science ( 1961 , 1966 ) ; Cairns , John , op . eit . ; Directory of British Scientists ; Stent , Gunther S . , op . cit . ; Walsh , John , op . cit . The Development of a Scientific Specialty 69 To summarise , the typical entrant was young , a graduate or post - doctoral student recruited by a first - generation member of the network , and slightly more likely to have a physical science than a biological science back - ground . He also had a relatively short career as a phage worker . When we examine careers of all lengths , the entries , number of careers active in a given year , exits and net gain or loss in membership for the time period covered , we can see how active the group was ( Table V ) . There are 680 phage career years in the period from 1935 to 1965 . Turnover is a multifarious process of entries and exits ( yearly average 5 " 3 ) . Since the average number of members for that period is 21 . 8 , per year , ranging from as low as four in 1944 , to 28 in 1964 , 1 ~ the turnover rate averages a rather substantial 25 per cent . per year . There was , as we have observed above , a limited growth during the paradigm stage . The network stage generally showed steady , rapid growth with a slight setback towards the end of the period . Since both well - established as well as point - careers must have ended during this period , we must ask how this particular social group managed to survive and grow . The network size itself doubled three times in 20 years ( 1944 - 64 ) , a very rapid growth rate , larger than for science as a whole but not unusual for a developing field . 4s The high turnover and the short career discussed above indicate that this network was not formed around a very few , continuously productive , founders . Indeed , at any given point in time , the network ' s predominant social structure consisted largely of interacting pairs and triads of collabor - ating and collegial scientists with few , if any , larger groups . 4 ~ Leadership , conjunction on an accidental basis , personal marginality to a existing area , the ability to mobilise resources and the existence of competition can help create and maintain pairs and triads . Cluster : 1954 - - 62 A cluster forms when scientists become self - conscious about their patterns of communication and begin to set boundaries around those who are working on their common problem . It develops from recombinations of pairs and triads in response to certain favourable conditions , e . g . , luck , leadership , a substantial problem for research , a supporting institution or institutions . These clusters are often identified by name by those inside and outside the cluster , are more stable than the pairs and triads which constitute them , have a distinct culture and are able to draw support and 4z At least two of the 1944 entries are questionable . Zimmer and Timofeeff - Rossovsky were in Berlin . From 1939 to 1945 they were not in contact with the rest of the duster , and Timofeeff - Rossovsky died before 1945 . 4s Price , Derek de Solla , Little Science , Big Science ( New York : Columbia University Press , 1963 ) . 49 Such pairs and triads tend to disappear , leaving no trace unless they publish a work jointly . The Cairns volume , for all its limitations noted earlier , has been invaluable in naming as phage workers the members of many such small groups who do not show up in publication data . 70 Nicholas C . Mullins students . While a cluster can include some students of earlier cluster members , it has not yet established formal structures and procedures which permit it to maintain itself when its informal connections of co - authorship and communication change , Intellectual Problem : The predominant intellectual problem of the phage cluster can be seen in its belief - system . The belief - system of a scientific group includes its view of its own history 5o and the set of beliefs , theories , etc . , which its members share . Hershey 5t says that there was no central " dogma " until 1953 , but Novick points to a collection of papers , " con - sidered basic to ( the ) new field , later to be called molecular biology " , which was completed in 1946 . ~ Jerne refers explicitly to " their Central Dogma , . 53 Stent , formulates this central " dogma " as follows : That DNA achieves both autocatalytic and heterocatalytic functions by serving as a template for the synthesis of replica polynucleotide chains , through the formation of complementary hydrogen bonds - - DNA chains for the autocatalytic , and RNA chains for the heterocatalytic functions . To complete " the heterocatalytic functions , the replica RNA chains are translated into polypeptides by way of a genetic code , under which any given short permuta - tion of three nucleotides along the RNA chain represents one of the standard 20 amino acids . 5 ~ It took from 1935 to 1962 to prove ~ his model . When success was achieved , however , it presented the cluster with difficulties . Finding the secret of life did not lead to new laws of physics or to a new view of the world . The solution required only the making and , breaking of hydrogen bonds . Delbrtick , disappointed , gradually dropped out of phage work during the middle 1950s . Social Processes : Outstanding opportunities to form pairs , and the ability to move beyond those pairs and triads of collaborators and colleagues characteristic of the network stage , were provided for phage workers by the " melting pot " at Cold Spring Harbor and other , more frequent , informal sessions at vehich persons could be assessed and invited to other places where phage work was going on ; by the availability of post - doctoral and research funds to make pairing profitable ; and by the short - term nature of " soft money " which produced frequent and regular searches for new combinations , thus avoiding the problem of finding new roles as long as positions were available . 5 ~ 50 See Fisher , Charles S . , op . eit . , and " The Death of a Mathematical Theory : A Study in the Sociology of Knowledge " , Archives for History of Exact Sciences , III , 2 ( 1966 ) , pp . 132 - 159 . See also Kuhn , Thomas , The Structure of Scientific Revolutions . 5t Hershey , A . , " The Injection of DNA into Cells by Phage " , in Cairns , John , et al . ( eds . ) , op . cir . , p . 100 . 52 Novick , Aaron , " Phenotypic Mixing " in Cairns , John , et al . ( eds . ) , op . cit . , p . 135 . 53 Jerne , N . K . , " The Natural Selection Theory of Antibody Formation : Ten Years Later " , in Cairns , John , et al . ( eds . ) , op . cir . , p . 306 . 54 Stent , Gunther S . , " That Was Molecular Biology That Was " , p . 394 . 55 Ben - David , Joseph , " Roles and Innovations in Medicine " , American Journal of Sociology , LXV , 6 ( May , 1960 ) , pp . 557 - 568 . FIGURE 4 Cluster Stage , Phage Wo , rk , 1954 - 62 Adelbetg / ~ Buras Ep ~ e ~ m \ S e T e ~ l ~ e d n ~ Edgar . ~ x 7ac ~ \ " ~ \ Kellenberger . G . \ \ ~ . . ~ - ' ~ ~ \ ~ \ ~ 7 ; . . ~ t l l , \ - - \ / & , ~ z / / ~ jeldgaard ~ Ko ~ off ~ Xtent Doerinann ~ " ~ 7 / ~ er ~ ~ / ~ / Z / / ~ " ~ " t " i ' l \ ~ ~ ) I ~ / L / . / d d ( / - ~ , I I I ~ Evans / ~ Kalck ~ ~ ~ VinoHg ' rad Cairns Szilard Zimmer DeMars he . . . . student of Williams _ _ co , authorship / / colleagueship Frankel - Conrat Sinsheimer Adams ( d . 1956 ) Chase Strcisinger t ~ r t % , < 72 Nicholas C . Mullins When a group coalesces and receives a name , its members continue to form pairs and triads which , if formed between members , can be called factions ; if formed between members and others the process can be called recruitment , co - option , falling away , etc . , depending on the various outcomes . By 1954 phage workers were rapidly becoming a cluster ( Figure 4 ) . The phage cluster did increase its membership between 1954 and 1962 ( see Table V ) , but its growth rate was less rapid than that during the net - work phase . These data probably do not include all who joined the cluster , but it is unlikely that enough scientists have been omitted to change the pattern of growth significantly . In the absence of a constant central membership , other factors helped to maintain the cluster ' s solidarity . These were : recognition by others ( as early as 1946 a recognisable group of scientists studying phages existed ) , 5 ~ the duster ' s belief - system , a common life - style and a high rate of interaction among its members . Only the last two need further discussion here . Life - style includes both research style and style of life . A major ~ eature of the cluster ' s research style was " limited sloppiness " ; Delbriick was not experimentally oriented , and he diffused some of this attitude to phage workers . " The principle of limited sloppiness " is never defined precisely , but it suggested that some lack of precision in doing an experiment increased the ikeli . hood of more interesting results . 5r The research style included also a distaste for chemistry , 5s and a publication style which emphasised few but excellent papers over many trivial ones . Delbrtick ' s attitude was , " Don ' t write too many papers " . He emphasised , too , the need to think away from an experiment , at least one day a ~ veek . 59 Another feature was an emphasis on theory over experimental data ; as Delbriick put it , " Say a little too much in interpretation , , . 6o ( These features are different from those of the research style of biochemists and crystallographers , two other major scientific groups with whom contact was frequent and often contentious . ) A trenchant and unrelenting intellectual honesty with one another in papers was also characteristic of the group seminars and conversations . 61 Watson claims that he enjoyed " the honest way in which good and bad science got sorted out , , . 62 Jerne , who was particularly persistent one evening , reports one of several attempts 5s See Watson , James D . , in Cairns , John , et al . ( eds . ) , op . cit . , p . 92 ; Andr6 Lwoff , " The Prophage and I " , ibid . , p . 89 ; Lloyd M . Kozloff , " Transfer of Parental Material to Progeny " , ibid . , p . 110 ; N . Visconti , " Mating Theory " , ibid . , p . 142 . 57 Benzer , Seymour , " Adventures in the rII Region " , in Cairns , John , et aL ( eds . ) , op . cit . , p . 158 . 58 Ibid . , pp . 158 - 159 . 5g Ibid . , pp . 157 - t58 . so Anderson , Thomas F . , op . cit . , p . 71 . sl Delbriick as described by Visconti , in Cairns , John , et al . ( eds . ) , op . cir . , p . 143 ; and Strelsinger , G . , tbld . , p . 336 . Luria as described by Watson , James D . , ibid . , p . 239 ; ~ Benzer , Seymour , ibid . , p . 158 . s2 Watson , James D . , in Cairns , John , et al . ( eds . ) , op . cit . , p . 241 . The Development of a Scientific Specialty 73 to obtain his colleague ' s good opinion of a new idea as follows : " I had no better luck with James Watson , whom I accosted one night in an all - night restaurant ; in his characteristic way of producing a succinct , unambiguous answer to any question , he said ' It stinks ' . " 63 And we should not fail to note the incredible quantity of both physical and intellectual energy which spilled over from research style into phage workers ' general style of living . Certainly phage workers were largely academics living what Chargaff called the " monotonous and routine lives of scientists - . 64 A major question is ~ how their life - style differed from that of non - phage workers living at the same time and in the same places . Camping trips were one rather amazing characteristic of life in the group which worked with Delbriick . Benzer relates : Sometimes Delbrtick would proclaim Wednesday and Thursday as a weekend , to avoid crowds and highway traffic on camping trips . The first camping trip in which I participated , into the Anza desert , was fairly typical . We just kept driving until the car got stuck in the sand , and that determined the campsite . Most of the following day was spent in digging the car out . Such visits to the desert were ( and still are ) the favorite means of ente ~ ining visitors , although some people , like Luria , will not come to Cal Tech unless guaranteed immunity from camping . It was on one such trip in 1950 that Andr6 Lwoff invited me to spend a year in his laboratory at the Insti . tut Pasteur in Paris . 65 The camping mania seemed to strike only at the California Institute of Technology , although members of the Geneva and the Institut Pasteur groups took part when they were there , indicating a fairly general ( among phage workers ) enjoyment of vigorous physical activity . Jerne , for example , describes rock climbing with Weigle and Benzer , although only Weigle possessed any skill in this . 66 Another peculiar element of the California Institute of Technology life - style was the writing expedition . 6r Delbriick would take several students to the institute ' s Marine Biology Station at Corona Del Mar and lock them up until each had produced a written report of his work and its interpretation . When everyone has finished and Mrs . Delbrtick had typed these reports , the participants would sit around and criticise each other ' s papers . Such sessions created a strong motivation for re - writing , and everyone emerged with a completed paper . The summer at Cold Spring Harbor was a clear part of the general life - style . It was recognised as a pleasant summer gathering place and even Watson is lyrical about it . as The wider communication of successes and ideas was provided by a continuing chronicle ( the Phage Information 68 Jerne , N . K . , op . cir . , p . 306 . 64 Chargaff , E . , " A Quick Climb up Mount Olympus " , Science , CLIX , 3822 ( 29 March , 1968 ) , pp . 1448 - 1449 . 65 Benzer , Seymour , op . cit . , p . 159 . 66 Jerne , N . K . , op . cit . , p . 305 . 6r Benzer , Seymour , op . cit . , p . 158 . as Watson , James D . , in Cairns , John , et al . ( eds . ) , op . cit . , pp . 241 - 242 . 74 Nicholas C . Mullins Service ) which permitted cumulation and prevented duplication in research . This service permitted development of a citation pattern on current work 69 whioh helped to sort trivial research ( " noise " ) from important work ( " signals , ) . 76 Telephone calls , letters , personal visits and meetings kept the chronicle current . Sets of contacts encouraged reasonable explanations , discussed strange results and provided confirma - tion ( or the reverse ) of doubtful ones . This concentration on results produced a " mental hygiene " ( such : as Auguste Comte recommended ) . Phage workers tended to read and use ideas only from other phage workers as defined above . ( Interestingly , work from the older French phage research workers was among that which was ignored , to the distress of E . Wollman , whose parents ' work was labelled " nonsense " by an anonymous note card at the California Institute of Technology . 71 ) Formal professional societies were not important to the phage cluster . The week - long Summer phage meetings , which were institutionalised early but not as a formal society , effectively reduced the need for other formal meetings . Phage workers simply talked to Other phage workers wherever they happened to encounter each other . Specialty : 1962 - - 66 A speciality is an institutionalised cluster which has developed regular processes for training and recruitment into roles which are institutionally defined as belonging to that specialty . TM Members are ' : aware of each other ' s v ~ ork , although not necessarily deeply involved in communications with , one another . They may share a paradigm and a set of judgements about what general work should bedone in the field , although the details of those ideas might differ . The Specialty , then , has many aspects of a formal organisation , i . e . , recruitment procedures , tests of membership , journals , meetings , etc . , and the locations which support its work become much more important than they were at earlier stages . 73 Intellectual Problems : The specialty ' s problems may be described by Kuhn ' s concep t of puzzle - solving which is the normal activity of science . Kuhn describes puzzle - solving as having the following characteristics : an assured solution ; rules which limit , the acceptable solutions ; and rules 69 Price , Derek de Solla , and Beaver , D . , " An Invisible College Collaboration " American psychologist , XXI ; 6 ( November , 1966 ) , pp . 1011 - 10t8 . T0 May , Kenneth O . , " Growth and Quality of Mathematical Literature " , Isis , LIX , 4 ( Winter , 1969 ) , pp . 363 - 371 . 7 ! Wollman , Elie L . ; " Bacterial Conjugation " , in Cairns , John , et al . ( eds . ) , op . cit . , p . 216 . ~ 2 Ben - David , Joseph , " Roles and Innovations in Medicine " , American Journal of Sociology , LXV , 6 ( May , 1960 ) , pp . 557 - 568 . - ~ The reader will notice that in the above section I have considered data only up to i966 . Information on molecular biology after that date certainly exists and is available . It kas not been considered , however , because this paper ' s focus has been on phage workers . By 1966 the character of that group ' s intellectual problem had shifted radically ( see below ) and its members , no longer a distinct entity as in earlier stages , had been largely absorbed by the ispecialty of molecular biology . The Development of a Scientific Specialty 75 which limit the means for arriving at those solutions / 4 This activity is clearly different from the research of early phage workers which was uncertain with respect to results ; molecular biology ' s puzzles are those questions about which molecular biologists have been writing papers since roughly 1962 . Scientific journals abound with examples(cid:12)9 Delbrtick ' s " few but excellent " principle regarding the production of papers is clearly no longer operative . J . D . Bemal stated in 1965 : (cid:12)9 . . probably the most important question of all is what to do next , and how to arrange the molecular biology of the future . This will be a matter of following up the most glorious adventure of a violent breakthrough and raid into the unknown in the history of science . The pioneers have gone out and just chewed up the particular part of Nature that : happened to be handiest , attacked it and analyzed it . But you cannot go on doing that indefinitely . TM As , far as phage study was concerned , Bernal could not have been more to the point . More particularly , various parts of the " dogma " of phage work had been clarified by 1962 : the genetic code was demonstrably decipher - able and proteins were analysable into their structures . Other existing problems ~ vere not of the same scope . A sense of sadness and nostalgia pervades the Cairns volume , Watson ' s memoirs , Stent ' s articles and the other publications which relate phage work ' s marvellously exciting history prior to 1965 . Social Processes : It is much more difficult to " monitor " a specialty than a duster in spite of the increased institutional visibility of the former . Hundreds of scientists now attend phage meetings . r ~ Molecular biology has institutionalised status , regular degree programmes and many graduates . Molecular biology itself covers a broader content than did phage work , although the Phage . Group is certainly one of its immediate ancestors . Any group moving into the " academic " stage needs a scienti - fic community working full : time on the problems in the discipline and that kind of commitment requires regular appointments . Institutional support , then , is crucial to the shift of a group into the status of a specialty . Of Vhe institutions which over the years from 1945 to 1966 provided posts for phage workers and in the number of " support years " which these institutions provided , 7 ~ the California Institute of Technology ( Delbrtick ' s location during most of the network , and all of the cluster r4 Kulm , Thomas , The Structure o / Scientific Revolutions , p . 38 . 75 Bernal , J . D . , " Opening Remarks " in Ciba Foundation Symposium , G . E . W . Wolstenholme and Maeve O ' Connor ( eds . ) , Principles Of Biomolecular Organization ( Boston : Little , Brown and Company , 1966 ) , p . 6 . re Luria , Salvador , op . cit . , p . 178 . rr Institutional support sometimes reflects the availability of a special technique and / or special technical equipment . The Geneva development , for example , was clearly a response to the presence of an electron microscope . The development at the California Institute of Technology , however , was not the result of any single special technique or piece of equipment ( except , perhaps , the mind of Max Delbriick ! ) . FIGURE 5 Specialty Stage , Phage Work , 1 ' 963 - - 66 Sechaud : . . . . _ . . Streisinger Stretton Adelberg J ' ~ . Epstein ~ - . . ~ ~ / ~ ~ . . / T ~ er . . , = o , , , = , o = , o , " , . . . . . . , . , = o , , o ~ _ _ " - ~ ' - - . q t . - 7 ~ / / x ~ / / \ \ N , ~ ' - ' - - - ~ ~ " Kellenberger , E . ~ - ~ f / / / / Sarabha , ~ J e r a ~ ~ Kellenberger , G . Kjeldgaard - - ' ~ ' ~ Evans ~ \ I Maaloe / Kalckar ~ \ ~ . . - Vinograd Wollman " - Weigle ~ - - Szilard Cairns Zimmer / Levinthal Hershey co - authorship ' , ' , Williams colleagueship ~ . / Sinsheimer ~ F i e r s student of " ~ Kleinschmldt ' " The Development of a Scientific Specialty 77 period ) supplied most of the non - phage course entrants ; it also provided support for the largest number of years . The Institut Pasteur and the University of Geneva , centred around Lwoff and Weigle respectively , als0 constituted major centres of phage activities throughout the whole period . Geneva now houses a large molecular biology group . The University of Chicago and , the University of California in Berkeley , the other two places supplying more than 20 years of phage support , did : so without providing many students . The University of Chicago had two research groups , Szilard ' s biophysics group of two and Evans ' biochemistry group of three . Berkeley had the Virus Laboratory , whose relation to the Phage Group is not clear from the data available . Cold Spring Harbor , of course , housed the summer symposia and the phage course , as well as a small permanent group under A . Hershey . The University of Oregon opened an Institute (cid:12)9 of Molecular Biology in 1959 , and all of its support follows that date . Typically , once a specialty pattern is established , the old core of ~ he group is gone , and research activity occurs largely on the fringes of the group ( Figure 5 ) . During this period , new departments of molecular biology and transformed departments of biology increasingly replaced the earlier " research institute " pattern ~ The processes of apprenticeship are now more formal because rules and programmes exist . The growth of the specialty ( see Table V ) is slow by contrast with the stages described earlier , but it is actually quite rapid if one includes persons graduating with degrees in molecular biology . It is quite possible , however , that some of these persons belong to o , ~ her paradigm groups and networks , a situation that held for many early phage workers whose degrees were in physics or chemistry , but whose research was largely biological . Ironically , formali - sation , which is the price of success , brings a loss of that distinctiveness which made the paradigm , network and cluster groups attractive and interesting . A molecular biologist , who wishes ' to remain anonymous , told me that the early sixties marked the coming of " the physicists " to journal editor - ships , particularly the Journal of Molecular Biology , which was obviously a major organ of publication . 78 Prior to this time , Delbrtick ' s membership in the United States National Academy of Sciences enabled several papers to be published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences and Luria , a bacteriologist , had , been an editor of Virology in the middle 1950s . TM In the same interview , this informant also said that , as the physicists took over the journa } s , the criteria for publishable work changed , becoming more like Delbriick ' s own criteria , and the competition for publication became increasingly severe . This was a result of the institu - tionalisation of an important aspect of the research style of ' the Phage Group . s ~ ~ s Mullins , N . C . , personal interview , February 1968 . ra Weigle , J . , " Story and Structure of the Transducing Phage " , in Cairns , John et al . ( eds . ) , op . cit . , p . 228 . so Mullins , N . C . , personal interview , February 1968 . 78 Nicholas C . Mullins By 1971 , many honours , including seven Nobel prizes , had come to phage workers ( Watson and Crick , 1962 ; Jacob and Monod , 1965 ; Delbrtick , Luria and Hershey , 1969 ) . Department , s and institutes of mole - cular biology and molecular genetics have been established in Europe , Japan and the United States . The social processes and normative patterns of institutional maintenance , different from those of initial institutionalisa - tion , now predominate . Summary Phage workers constituted a visible and accessible group of scientists . They gradually acquired a name ( the " Phage Group " ) ; known scientists were working in it and were accessible to students who could , in turn , teach and pass the " trade " along , providing means for effective commu - nication and a distinctive culture and normative structure . These ~ actors acted as a " glue " for the group , through which a tremendous number of workers passed within a relatively short period . The " glue " was effective enough to hold more scientists than it lost . Solidarity reinforced solidarity . The first - generation scientists vcho studied phages , particularly those working before 1945 ( the " early romantic " phase ) , constituted a paradigm group ; they pursued the same research problem and formed a pool of potential contacts . As potential contacts became actual relations , an interacting network of communications began to form . Networks have a potential for explosive growth because each person within a network can recruit new partners . Some components of networks interaction are work groups ( colleagueship ) , teacher - student pairs and triads , communica - tion nets , pre - print exchanges , etc . During the " late romantic " phase of phage work , the network grew rapidly . There was no abrupt transition to the cluster stage . Some interacting pairs and triads simply began to consolidate for longer than the particular occasions that brought them together . Certain minimum conditions are necessary for such occurrences : ( 1 ) luck , ( 2 ) leadership , ( 3 ) a substantial problem - - also important in early stages - - and ( 4 ) some sort of institutional stability . Phage work had several instances of good luck ; the initial contact between Delbriick and Luria was just one example of that luck . Max DelbriJck certainly provided crucial leadership , and his institution of the summer phage course is only one example of his gift for leadership . The year 1945 was a critical one ; the first students of phage workers appeared - - this was possibly an accident - - and the summer phage course , a key factor , began . The transition depended on the recognition of phage workers as a group and their development of characteristics which would distinguish their intellectual style ( e . g . , the central dogma ) and social life ( e . g . , the summer phage course ) . Many networks of interaction die out before they have a chance to form clusters . The cluster evolved very slowly . as interest was ~ timulated by discoveries . Since the basic discover - ies in a field come at about the same rate per year , no matter how many The Development of a Scientific Specialty 79 people are working in that area , sl it is likely that the sense of excitement which often permeates a developing cluster must be generated by some - one with Delbrtick ' s charismatic force of personality . Indeed , leadership and charisma may be the most important factors , much more important , for example , than accuracy in intellectual judge - ment , If we re - examine the major decisions of Delbriick ' s career , we see that he made many major errors at different junctures regarding what was to be significant in the future . He misjudged the results of the first fission experiment , preferring instead to believe that the chemists had " messed up " their analyses . 8 ~ He was wrong to guide Watson away from chemistry when both Luria and Watson were reasonably certain that some knowledge of DNA ' s chemistry would be necessary to understand its biological functioning . ( Incidentally , both Watson and Luria erred in selecting bio - chemistry as the proper source of information , but Watson saw his error and transferred to a location in which he could learn and use both structural chemistry and X - ray crystallography . ) Delbriick erred also , after moving from phage work , in selecting Phycomyces as a simple model system for perception . It has since been well demonstrated that the insect eye offers a more tractable model system , s3 He was absolutely right only in his choice of phage as a problem and in his dedication to the goal of discovering the " secret of life " He was quite mistaken as to what that " secret " would look like . Clearly , then , his importance to phage work and the eventual development of molecular biology lies elsewhere than in his intellectual accuracy . From duster to specialty is an easy transition , particularly in the United States where universities are established in a pattern of decentrali - sation and competition . Molecular biology achieved departmental status there by the very early 1960s . All scientists belong to one or another paradigm group as long as they keep up with the literature in their respective fields ; this is so simply by definition . Active scientists , i . e . , those who are active in research , belong to some interaction pairs and nets of larger size ; not many scientists belong to a cluster , while all belong to at least one specialty . Some Concluding Remarks on the Sociological Study of the Emergence of Specialties The foregoing discussion has , suggested some reasons why phage workers became a successful group within science . There are others . The socio - logical approach offers some particularly intriguing insights , particularly with respect to " social engineering " . Price considered the development of specialties the first piece of social sl May , Kenneth O . , op . cit . s2 Visconti , N . , op . cit . , p . 148 . s3 Stent , Gunther S . , in Cairns , John , et al . ( eds . ) , op . cit . , pp . 7 - 8 . 80 Nicholas C . Mullins engineering in science since the invention of the journal , s ~ However that may be , it seems clear that the centrality of Delbrtick and his many specific influences on the group indicate that the group ' s very existence and content were consciously determined by phage workers , particularly by Delbrtick . In the case of the Phage Group a series of social arrangements - - the summer course , the unconventional life - style , the ability to establish communication on a more stable footing and to supply the pool of poten - tial contacts through the summer phage meetings - - made the group coalesce for longer than a network normally does . The intellectual success of the Watson - Crick model and its successful exploitation from 1954 to 1963 ( the ' ~ dogmatic " phase or time of cluster , formation ) , how - ever , are also important and should not be ignored . Two cases suggest that deliberate " social engineering " has influenced the development of specialties in other areas of science . Hilbert ' s activities , which led to the establishment o , f " modern algebra " as a major move - ment in mathematics , resemble DelbriJck ' s phage activities . Both the particular social activities and the fertility of the central person ' s ideas are crucial factors . 85 Bohr ' s Copenhagen group in quantum physics was another suoh deliberate creation , s6 The details of any given case aside , however , it is clear that any reasonable sociological interpretation of a scientific group ' s development or its failure to develop , must ( 1 ) analyse the dynamics of group processes ( 2 ) consider both intellectual and social variables . An external situation , e . g . , the structure of the American university system , which is the same for a set of groups , cannot be used to explain the success or failure of particular groups within that set . What is important , to scientific groups are the normal processes of science : social and intellectual , and how they operate or are " engineered " . Professors Joseph Ben - David and Randall Collins have presented a somewhat different interpretation of the conditions of emergence of new specialties in science . They have argued , with particular reference to the emergence of psychology , that : " growth of a new discipline occurs where and when persons become interested in the new idea , nor only as intellectual content , but also as a potential means of establishing a new intellectual identity and particularly a new occupational role . " s7 They state that " role - hybridisation " ( " fitting the methods and , tech - niques of an old role to the materials of a new one , with the deliberate purpose of creating a new role " ss ) is the means by which a new scientific 84 Price , Derek de Solla , Little Science , Big Science , pp . 83 - 87 . Contrary to Price ' s model , however , the group began at a time when its area was not hard - pressed . s5 Fisher , Charles S . , " The Last Invariant Theorists " s ~ See Gamow , George , op . cit . ; Moore , Ruth , o17 . cit . ; Cline , Barbara L . , Men Who Made a New Physics : Physicists and Quantum Theory ( New York : New American Library , 1965 ) . sr Ben - David , Joseph , and Collins , Randall , " Social Factors in the Origins of a New Science : The Case of Psychology " , American Sociological Review , XXXI , 4 ( August , 1966 ) , p . 452 . 88 Ibid . , p . 459 . The Development of a Scientific Specialty 81 role is established . They go on to say that role - hybridisation between fields occurs when : ( 1 ) field A ( for Ben - David and Collins , philosophy ) has a better competitive position , t , han field B ( for them , physiology ) ; movement into field A is thus encouraged ; and ( 2 ) field A ' s ( philosophy ' s ) academic standing is below that of field B ( physiology ) . s9 They further state that the development of a new discipline is preceded by " forerunners " who do not actually begin the discipline itself but who work with those ideas that will later be important to the discipline . " Founders " are those who first , have students , and ' ~ followers " are the actual students ? ~ An adequate measure of a new discipline ' s existence is the presence of followers . Given this theory and example , a physiologist who wanted to move into philosophy in order to benefit from its easier competitive situation , while simultaneously maintaining his prior scientific status in physiology , would have to apply his physiological methods to philosophical materials and train students to do likewise . Psychology , a new discipline , was the outcome of this particular case . Professors Ben - David and Collins contrast role - hybridisation with what they call the " idea - hybridisation " , a construction which , in their opinion , fails to explain , the development of the particular discipline on which they concentrated , i . e . , psychology , within one country , Germany . 9z That the views of Professor Ben - David and Collins are at best of limited applicability is shown by Dr . Charles Fisher ' s research into the demise of a mathematical specialty , invariant theory ? 2 Fisher demonstrates that , if one is to understand a particular specialty ' s rise or fall , knowledge of its intellectual history must be combined with knowledge of various aspects of social structure ( for example , whether its practitioners had students ) . He notes that , during their lifetimes , scientists change intellectual prob - lems and , if a specialty and its problems are to be passed on , its practi - tioners mus , t have students at the time they are working on its problems . Further , new recruits to that specialty ( " followers " in the terminology of Professors Ben - David and Collins ) must also be in a position to , have students . Fisher ' s study shows that , at least for the specialty of invariant theory , Professors Ben - David and Collins ' division of a discipline ' s members into forerunners , founders and followers is too simple . The foregoing analysis of the development of phage work shows at least the limitations of the hypothesis regarding role - hybridisation as put forward by Professors Ben - David and Collins . Role - hybridisation might explain the addition of many new members when a cluster begins to achieve institutional status , but it does not seem helpful in explaining the development of its earlier stages . Dr . Fisher ' s research and the foregoing analysis show , too , that the division into " forebears , founders and s9 Ibid . , p . 465 . 9o Ibid . , p . 454 . 91 Ibid . , pp . 451 - - 452 . 92 Fisher , Charles S . , " The Death of a Mathematical Theory : A Study in the Sociology of Knowledge " , and " The Last Invariant Theorists " . 82 Nicholas C . Mullins foUowers " is too simple to fit the cases dealt with by Dr . Fisher and myself . Their work is not necessarily wrong ; it is only insufficient . Further research is needed to specify the details of this and other cases of discipline or specialty formation , particularly through the crucial duster stage . It is also desirable to connect I0hese cases ~ r certain general sociological ideas . The parallels between the processes described in this paper and the " routinisation of charisma " , as described by Max Weber with regard to religious phenomena , is striking . 93 But until we have more detailed case studies and can specify the particular properties of scientific development , it seems fruitless to speculate further . 9s Weber , Max , Economy and Society , Roth , Gunther and Wittich , Claus ( eds . ) ( New York : Bedminster Press , 1969 ) .