Organisms sense a wide range of signals in their internal and external environments . These signals , whether radiant energy , chemical entities or physical forces , need to be converted or transduced into signals that can be used by the organism . The transduced signal can be electri­ cal , such as the depolarization or hyperpolarization of the plasma membrane , can be chemical , as in the production of a second messenger , or can be trans­ criptional , as in the activation of gene expression by steroid hormones . One of the main challenges in the study of sensory systems is to discover the nature of the transduction process . The light­transducing mole­ cule rhodopsin has been known for 130 years and olfactory receptors were discovered 17 years ago 1 , but molecules that transduce physical forces have been more difficult to identify . All cells interact physically with their surroundings , and can do so on various timescales . Animals and plants , for example , respond to touch , and all cells respond to changes in osmolarity . The growth and organization of tissues is regulated by physical contact between cells . Indeed , cancer can be thought of as a disease in which the physical regulation of cell growth has been removed . Rather than discussing all of the physical signals that cells can react to ( reviewed in Ref . 2 ) , I sum marize the progress that has been made towards discover­ ing the transducing molecules , particularly channel proteins , in mechanosensory cells . These are special­ ized cells in the nervous system of animals that have evolved to respond to physical forces ( fIG . 1 ) . In mam­ mals , mechanosensory cells include those that respond to touch , sound , acceleration , muscle and tendon stretch and to changes in blood pressure . These mam­ malian cells have diverse structures but they share one feature : the nature of their transduction molecules is unknown ( BOX 1 ) . The quest for neurosensory molecules One of the most influential observations in the field of mechanosensation is that neurosensory transduction is extremely rapid . This observation was first made by Corey and Hudspeth 3 using hair cells from the bullfrog sacculus . They found that movement of the hair bundle produced an electrical response within 40 µ s . Because this rate was faster than that seen for light­stimulated channel closing in the vertebrate retina ( of the order of tens of milliseconds ) , which involves a chemical inter­ mediate , they suggested that transduction might be too rapid to involve a chemical intermediate ( unless its action was needed in its immediate vicinity ) and that the electrical response must result from the direct gating of a transduction channel . Similar submillisecond responses that were recorded from Drosophila melanogaster bristle mechanoreceptors 4 , Caenorhabditis elegans touch recep­ tor neurons 5 and D . melanogaster chordotonal hearing receptors 6 led to the same conclusion . These observa­ tions have focused the search for transduction molecules to the identification of putative transduction channels that , perhaps by association with other proteins , are directly gated by mechanical force . Several different strategies have been used to iden­ tify channels and other components that transduce mechanical force . Investigators have directly assayed for mechanically gated channels . For bacteria , the observ ation that membrane stretch of spheroplasts could open a channel 7 provided an assay that led to the discovery of the bacterial mechanosensitive channel of large conductance ( MscL ) 8 . Other channels , particularly certain classes of K + channels ( see below ) that were not previously suspected of being gated by mechanical forces , were shown to be regulated by membrane stretch when expressed in heterologous cells . Unfortunately , applying force to membranes seems to activate a small number of channels ; several candidate transduction channels are Columbia University Department of Biological Sciences , 1012 Fairchild Center , M . C . 2446 , New York , New York 10027 , USA . e‑mail : mc21 @ columbia . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2595 Spheroplast A preparation of bacterial membrane that can be recorded electrophysio­ logically . Spheroplasts are produced by using a bacterial strain that conditionally does not allow cell division , thus allowing the formation of large membrane structures . Neurosensory mechanotransduction Martin Chalfie Abstract | Neurons that sense touch , sound and acceleration respond rapidly to specific mechanical signals . The proteins that transduce these signals and underlie these senses , however , are mostly unknown . Research over the past decade has suggested that members of three families of channel proteins are candidate transduction molecules . Current studies are directed towards characterizing these candidates , determining how they are mechanically gated and discovering new molecules that are involved in mechanical sensing . R E V I E W S 44 | jAnUARy 2009 | VOLUMe 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology B Drosophila melanogaster A Caenorhabditis elegans D . melanogaster larva Mouse Cb Cc Cd Ce Cf Ca not activated by membrane stretch when expressed in heterologous cells . Researchers have also used genetic screens to iden­ tify mutants that are defective in mechanosensation . By cloning the affected genes , one can identify proteins that are essential for the process . Genetic screening was first used to identify touch­insensitive mutants in C . elegans 9 – 11 , but has subsequently been used to find mutants that are defective in nose touch in C . elegans 12 , bristle mechanosensation and hearing in D . melano­ gaster 13 , 14 , hearing and lateral line mechanosensation in zebrafish 15 , 16 and hearing in mice 17 , 18 . In addition , numerous inherited human conditions that give rise to deafness have also been studied ( see Ref . 19 and the Review by jaalouk and Lammerding 101 in this issue ) . Although the genetic approach has proven useful , it has various limitations ( BOX 2 ) . Investigators have also studied homologues of proteins that were identified by the other methods , but this approach has had variable success ( see below ) . Putative mechanosensory channels These various efforts have identified three classes of channel proteins . These proteins are currently being con­ sidered to be candidate mechanosensory trans duction molecules in animals : DeG / enaC ( degenerin ( also known as ACCn1 ) / epithelial na + channel ( enaC ; also known as SCnn1 ) ) subunits , transient receptor potential ( TRP ) proteins and two­pore­domain K + channel ( K 2P ; also known as KCnK ) subunits . DEG / ENaC channels in mechanosensation . The DeG / enaC proteins are membrane proteins that have two transmembrane domains that are coupled by a large extracellular domain . The crystallographic structure of the channel that is formed by one member of the family ( the chicken acid­sensing ion channel 1 ( ASIC1 ) ) has recently been determined 20 . evidence that these proteins form channels ( fIG . 2 ) that are involved in mechano­ sensation comes from work on the receptors for gentle touch in C . elegans . Two genes that encode DeG / enaC Figure 1 | A gallery of mechanosensitive cells . A | The touch receptor neurons ( red ) , the ciliated ASH neurons ( green ) and the CEP neurons ( blue ) of Caenorhabditis elegans . Enlargements show ( clockwise from the top ) : the ciliated ending of an ASH cell in the amphid at the nose of the animal , a cross - section of an ALM receptor for gentle touch showing its prominent bundle of microtubules and extracellular matrix ( dark grey ) , and the ciliated ending of a CEP neuron and its association with the cuticle ( grey ) . B | The chordotonal organ ( top left panel ) , the external bristle ( top right panel ) and a multidendritic cell ( bottom panel ) of Drosophila melanogaster . The sensory neuron is shown in red . C | The inner ( red ) and outer ( blue ) hair cells of the auditory system , in the organ of Corti ( Ca ) and in the sacculus ( Cb ) ; the hair cells of the vestibular apparatus ( Cc ) and various cells and sensory organs in the skin ( Merkel cells ( blue ) and Merkel disks ( red ) ; the palisade endings ( Cd ) ; the Meissner - like corpuscles , the Pacinian - like corpuscles and intraepidermal endings ( Ce ) ; and lanceolatae endings in mammals ( Cf ) . Figure is modified , with permission , from Ref . 100  ( 2002 ) Annual Reviews . R E V I E W S nATURe ReVIewS | MoleCulAr Cell Biology VOLUMe 10 | jAnUARy 2009 | 45 f o c u S o n m E c h a n ot R a n S d u c t I o n © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Prohibitin domain ( PHB domain ) . A 150 amino­acid sequence that is found in several proteins in prokayotes and eukaryotes . Human PHB proteins include prohibitin , stomatin and podocin . The PHB domain in C . elegans MeC­2 and mouse podocin allows the binding of cholesterol . Paraoxonase A family of proteins in humans , two of which are associated with high­density lipoprotein particles and another is localized to the plasma membrane in a wide range of cells . A similar protein , MeC­6 , is needed for touch sensitivity in C . elegans . proteins — mechanosensory abnormality 4 ( mec­4 ) ( Ref . 21 ) and mec­10 ( Ref . 22 ) — are expressed in the touch receptor neurons and can be mutated to produce touch­ insensitive animals 10 . Loss of mec­4 activity abolishes the mechanosensory current that is recorded from C . elegans touch receptor neurons both when the animal is touched and when the touch is removed 5 . This result shows that MeC­4 is essential for this dual­directional touch sensi­ tivity , but it does not indicate that MeC­4 is the trans­ duction molecule ( BOX 1 ) . Analysis of unusual alleles of mec­4 and mec­10 , however , supported the hypothesis that MeC­4 and MeC­10 are part of the transduction apparatus 5 . These alleles — which have altered equivalent amino acids near the pore­forming part of the molecule — cause touch insensitivity by changing the ion selectiv­ ity of the mechanosensory current ( making it less sodium selective ) , instead of abolishing the current entirely . This selective change of the transduction response and the rapidity of the response ( see above ) strongly suggest that these proteins transduce touch . The MeC­4 and MeC­10 proteins are not the only components of the transduction apparatus . Two other membrane proteins colocalize and interact with MeC­4 and MeC­10 and are crucial for touch sensitivity . These proteins are the prohibitin­domain protein MeC­2 ( RefS 23 , 24 ) and the paraoxonase ­like protein MeC­6 ( Ref . 25 ) . Both proteins greatly increase channel activity ( by 30 – 45­fold ) , when co­expressed with an activated version of MeC­4 in Xenopus laevis oocytes , without affecting the amount of protein that is localized to the surface of the oocyte . Recent observations of single channel patches from X . laevis oocytes 26 showed that the addition of these proteins did not change the properties of the activated channels . The increase of activity , there­ fore , probably derives from an increase in the number of functional ( that is , open ) channels that are present in the patch . These results and studies of MeC­2 , MeC­6 or simi­ lar proteins support the hypothesis that MeC­2 and MeC­6 are needed for channel function because they affect the lipid environment of the channels . MeC­2 and podocin , a similar protein from the mammalian kidney , bind to cholesterol 27 . Cholesterol is needed for C . elegans touch sensitivity , and a mutation that lowers MeC­2 binding to cholesterol makes animals more insensitive to touch when cholesterol levels are reduced 27 . The MeC­6­like proteins in humans , paraoxonase 1 and paraoxonase 3 , are thought to regu­ late cholesterol oxidation in high­density lipoprotein ( HDL ) particles 28 . These observations suggest that the regulation of the lipid environment , particularly the use of cholesterol , is important for the function of the C . elegans transduction complex . Although DeG / enaC channels transduce mechani­ cal signals in C . elegans , their role in mechanical signal­ ling in other organisms is unclear . Two homologues in D . melanogaster , Pickpocket and Ripped Pocket , which were identified mainly because of their similarity to the C . elegans proteins 29 , 30 , might be potential mechano­ receptors , but this has not been supported by subse­ quent research 31 , 32 . In mammals , the situation is equally as uncertain . Several mechanosensory cells in the skin express different DeG / enaC proteins ( α enaC , β enaC , γ enaC , ASIC2 and ASIC3 ) 33 – 37 . The loss in mice of either ASIC2 , ASIC3 or both proteins , however , did not induce touch defects 38 , or alternatively produced modest defects 35 , 36 . Loss of ASIC proteins also produced mod­ est effects on gastrointestinal mechanosensitivity 39 . The problem in these experiments is that if the channels are heteromeric , loss of any one protein might alter but not abolish the response . Acid­sensing by ASIC1A , ASIC2A and ASIC3 ( Ref . 40 ) and na + flux through the enaC channels 41 depend on the subunit composition . Recent experiments in mice have suggested that mutations in two different mec­2 ­like genes reduce touch reception 42 , 43 . These results cannot be taken as an indica­ tion that their protein products are part of a DeG / enaC complex , as is found in C . elegans , because the mamma­ lian MeC­2­like protein podocin can bind and regulate the activity of TRPC6 channels 27 . TRP channels in mechanosensation . The TRP family of channel proteins were named for the D . melanogaster gene , the product of which was the first known mem­ ber of the family 44 . The TRP channels seem to mediate many forms of sensory perception , including mechano­ sensation 45 , 46 . The finding that many TRP channels are needed for or influence mechanosensory processes ( see below ) hints that these channels might act as transducers , but direct evidence has been lacking . Box 1 | The difficulties of identifying mehanosensory transduction molecules Several difficulties have impeded the search for the transducing molecules that are involved in neurosensory mechano­ transduction . First , the sensory cells or their receptor endings are sparse ( the dispersed touch receptors in skin or the 15 , 000 or so hair cells in the cochlea ) . The rarity of the cells makes the collection of suitable numbers for biochemical studies ( as was done for rod cells in the retina ) difficult . Second , estimates of the number of transducing molecules suggest that they are low . For example , each vertebrate hair cell is thought to have approximately 50 – 100 copies of each transduction channel complex 88 , 94 , 95 . Third , and perhaps most importantly , assaying the function of candidate transduction molecules in heterologous systems can be difficult . The assay is not a problem when the molecules ( most of which are currently thought to be membrane channels ) can be gated by changes in physical force in the lipid bilayer , such as by changing osmotic pressure or by manipulating the membrane physically . Such manipulation has been used to identify and characterize channels that are needed to respond to changes in osmolarity in bacteria 8 , 82 . Unfortunately , such membrane manipulation does not activate many eukaryotic channels that are candidate mechanosensory receptors . Either these molecules are false candidates , they transduce forces that are not applied to the membrane or they require other proteins to function . R E V I E W S 46 | jAnUARy 2009 | VOLUMe 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Chordotonal organ The mechanosensory structure that is used in insects for mechanosensation and hearing . Proprioception The sense of body position and movement . The first indication that these proteins might have a role in mechanosensory transduction came from stud­ ies of the TRP gene osm­9 in C . elegans 47 . These studies showed that osm­9 was needed not only for nose touch but also for olfaction . Because osm­9 is needed for sev­ eral sensory modalities , its role in mechanosensation — whether as a transduction molecule or as a modulator molecule — is unclear . More direct involvement of a TRP channel in mech­ anosensation came from the study of the no mechano­ receptor potential C ( nompC ) gene in D . melanogaster 4 , 13 . A putative null mutation of this gene leads to the loss of the receptor potential peak that follows stimu­ lation of the bristle mechanosensors . However , a small ( 10 % of the potential peak ) current occurs when the mutant bristles are stimulated , so the role of nOMPC as the transducer molecule is unclear . nOMPC is also needed for the chordotonal organs in johnston’s organ , the D . melanogaster ear , but its loss does not eliminate sound­induced receptor potentials 48 . Because nOMPC is needed for the mechanically induced amplification that is exhibited by the johnston’s organ — a process that is thought to involve transduction — Göpfert et al . 49 have argued that nOMPC is needed , at least in part , for transduction in fly hearing . The authors further postu­ lated that a second , unknown transduction channel is also involved . NompC ­like genes are found in C . elegans 4 and zebrafish 50 . In C . elegans , some cells that express the nompC ­like gene ( such as the CeP neurons in fIG . 1 ) respond to the mechanical presence of bacteria or small beads ( that is , they seem to respond to texture 51 ) ; other nompC ­like gene­expressing neurons seem to be needed for proprioception 52 . Mutation of the C . elegans gene abolishes proprioception 52 ; the animals have not been tested directly for the texture response . In zebrafish , reduction of the nompC ( also known as trpn1 ) gene using morpholino oligonucleotides causes deafness , a circling behaviour that is indicative of the loss of the vestibular sense , and a loss of microphonic potentials that result from mechanical stimulation of the lateral line hair cells . Together , these data sug­ gest an evolutionarily conserved ( but undefined ) role for the nOMPC channels in mechanosensation . Curiously , similar proteins have not been found in mammals 50 , 53 . Several other TRP channels have been implicated in various forms of mechanosensation . The D . melano­ gaster TRPV genes nanchung and inactive are needed for hearing and for the electrical response of chordo­ tonal neurons in the johnston’s organ 54 , 55 . Both pro­ tein products are needed for their localization to the cilia of chordotonal neurons , and both are activated by hypo­osmotic shock when heterologously expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells . Göpfert et al . 49 have argued that these channels are not hearing tranduction channels , although they might still be mechanically gated 56 . In C . elegans , the TRPV proteins OSM­9 and OCR­2 are required for osmosensation , mechano­ sensation and chemosensation , and , as with the D . melanogaster proteins , they are mutually required for their localization to cilia 47 , 57 . Osmolarity regu­ lation has also been suggested for mammalian TRPV genes 58 . The TRPA painless gene in D . melanogaster is needed for the response to both harsh touch and a heated probe 59 . Further support for a role of TRP channels in mechanical responses comes from work in yeast that shows that the TRP­like protein TRPy1 ( also known as yVC1 ) is needed for the vacuolar response to increased osmolarity , and also shows that patches from the vacuoles that contain TRPy1 channels can be gated by applied pressure 60 . Other TRP channels were initially thought to be involved in mechanosensation , but subsequent research has questioned this . Corey et al . 61 suggested that the mammalian TRPA1 might be the long­sought hair cell transduction channel , but this group and others sub sequently found that transgenic mice that lack this channel are not deaf 62 , 63 . The role of TRPA1 in mediat­ ing noxious touch is unclear . One group found a reduc­ tion in this response in transgenic mice 63 , but another group did not 62 . Reduction of TRPA1 using morpholino oligonucleotides in zebrafish also reduced hair cell activity 61 , but a recent study that examined knockout mutants found no reduction in hair cell function 64 . The suggestion that TRPC1 ( Ref . 65 ) forms a stretch­ activated channel has also been recently challenged 66 . It was found that the heterologous expression systems that were used in the original study had variable , intrinsic stretch­activated currents , so that the activity in TRPC1­transfected cells could not be distinguished from control cells . This study also questioned whether TRPC6 forms a stretch­activated channel , as previously suggested 67 . However , their case is not as strong , because they tested heterologous expression in a different cell line . The TRPC6 channel has also been proposed as a mechanically gated channel in the kidney 27 . Box 2 | Limitations of genetics to identify mechanosensory molecules Genetic screens for mutants that have lost mechanosensory function can identify candidate genes that are essential for mechanosensation , but such screens can simultaneously be both too broad and too restrictive . Screens can be overly broad because mutations might affect transduction indirectly , therefore interfering with processes that are upstream ( such as the production or differentiation of the sensory cell ) or downstream ( such as the amplification of the transduced signal ) of transduction . A selective downstream effect was found for the glr‑1 gene , which encodes a glutamate receptor , in Caenorhabditis elegans 12 . The C . elegans ASH neurons sense touch to the nose and several other sensory signals , but glr‑1 is only needed for nose touch . Insensitivity , however , is due to loss of glr‑1 in postsynaptic but not ASH neurons . Conversely , a gene that has a developmental role might also have a direct effect . For example , extracellular matrix proteins organize the mechanosensory transduction complex in C . elegans touch receptor neurons , but might also be needed for transduction 72 . Genetic schemes are often too restrictive because they can miss pleiotropically or redundantly acting genes , which leads to either general effects or no obvious mutant phenotype , respectively . The difficulty of identifying transducers of mechanical stimuli in vertebrates might be due to these problems . In addition , attempts to obtain mutants with defects in mechanosensation usually look for the loss of sensation . Screens for mutants with enhanced sensitivity are more difficult . Screens for suppressor mutations could potentially identify mutations that increase touch sensitivity , but these have been done rarely ( for example , Ref . 91 ) . R E V I E W S nATURe ReVIewS | MoleCulAr Cell Biology VOLUMe 10 | jAnUARy 2009 | 47 f o c u S o n m E c h a n ot R a n S d u c t I o n © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved MEC - 1 and MEC - 9 ( Kunitz or EGF proteins ) Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology MEC - 6 ( Paraoxonase - like protein ) MEC - 4 MEC - 10 ( DEG / ENaC ) MEC - 2 ( PHB - domain protein ) MEC - 5 ( Collagen ) a b MEC - 7 ( β - tubulin ) MEC - 12 ( α - tubulin ) 5 pA 100 ms Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Side view Top view Stereocilium An actin­containing projection in a vertebrate hair cell . Kinocilum The single projection in each vertebrate hair cell that contains a microtubule axoneme . K + channels in mechanosensation . Several types of K + channels can be gated by mechanical force , but their involvement in perception has not been shown . Gu et al . 68 found that the D . melanogaster Shaker protein ( with its amino­terminal regulation domain removed ) could be activated and inactivated by membrane stretch when expressed in X . laevis oocytes . Patel , Honoré and co­workers found that three types of K 2P channels , the TReK1 ( also known as KCnK2 ) , TReK2 ( also known as KCnK10 ) and TRAAK channels , are mechanically gated ( reviewed in Ref . 69 ) . In the past , these chan­ nels were thought to contribute to the negative resting membrane potential of cells . However , the discovery that these channels can be stretch activated invites speculation that they function in mechanosensory per­ ception . A Trek1 ­knockout mouse has an intriguing touch sensiti vity phenotype : these animals are more , not less , sensitive to gentle touch 70 . Alloui et al . 70 sug­ gest that TReK1 could counter an unidentified trans­ duction channel that depolarizes skin sensory cells . If such dual channel responses to touch are common , then the K 2P channels might have an important and previ­ ously unrecognized role in mechanosensory signalling . whether these channels are part of a larger signalling complex with the depolarizing channels or are needed independently for recovery from depolarization caused by the mechanical stimuli remains to be seen . Cell structures and mechanosensation The involvement of several different channel families in mechanosensory transduction is , perhaps , not surpris­ ing given the large range of cell shapes and structures that seem to transduce mechanical signals ( fIG . 1 ) . In particular , the cells differ with regard to distinct cytoskeletal elements and extracellular components . Because of the uniqueness of many of these struc­ tures , investigators have puzzled over their roles in mechanosensation . Many cells have distinctive cytoskeletal arrays . Some animal cells have ciliated endings ( for example , the bristle and chordotonal neurons of insects and the ASH nose touch neurons of C . elegans ) . Other cells , such as the hair cells in the vertebrate vestibular and auditory systems , have prominent actin­containing stereocilia in addition to the ciliated kinocilium . Further cells , such as the neurons that detect gentle touch in C . elegans and other nematodes , have prominent bundles of large­ diameter microtubules . Finally , the cells that respond to body touch in insects and in the skin of vertebrates have processes that branch extensively but do not have specialized cytoskeletal structures . The role of the cytoskeleton has been investigated by disrupting it through genetic or chemical manipu­ lation . For example , mutation of the α ­tubulin gene mec­12 or the β ­tubulin gene mec­7 results in the elimi­ nation of the large­diameter microtubules of C . elegans touch receptor neurons 10 . Because the resulting cells have the smaller­diameter microtubules that are found in other C . elegans neurons , they grow and appear to be grossly normal , but animals are touch insensitive . electrophysiological examination of the cells , how­ ever , has shown that a small mechanosensory current remains in touch neurons that lack mec­7 activity 5 . This result suggests that the specialized microtubules are important but not essential for mechanosensory trans­ duction . Mutations that eliminate cilia or affect cilia­ mediated transport also eliminate mechanosensory function in C . elegans 71 and D . melanogaster bristles ( reviewed in Ref . 56 ) . The problem with these experiments is that because the cytoskeleton is involved in so many cellular functions , Figure 2 | gentle touch in Caenorhabditis elegans . a | Proteins that are needed in the touch receptor neurons . The extracellular proteins mechanosensory abnormality 1 ( MEC - 1 ) and MEC - 9 ( which have multiple epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) and Kunitz domains ) and MEC - 5 ( collagen in mammals ) might associate with the DEG / ENaC ( degenerin ( also known as ACCN1 ) / epithelial Na + channel ( ENaC ; also known as SCNN1 ) ) complex , which consists of MEC - 2 , MEC - 4 , MEC - 6 and MEC - 10 . The specialized microtubules with MEC - 7 and MEC - 12 tubulins are needed for touch sensitivity , but probably do not associate with the channel complex . b | Electrophysiological response of a PLM touch receptor neuron . Force ( top trace ) elicits an inward current ( bottom trace ) that rapidly adapts when the animal is touched and when the touch is removed . PHB , prohibitin domain . Image in part a is modified , with permission , from Ref . 92  ( 2007 ) Springer . Image in part b is modified , with permission , from Nature Neuroscience Ref . 5  ( 2005 ) Macmillan Publishers Ltd . All rights reserved . Figure 3 | Mechanosensory transduction in bacteria . Bacterial channels , such as the mechanosensitive channel of large conductance ( MscL ) , are gated through forces in the lipid bilayer . As the bacterium swells , changing forces in the membrane rearrange the channel from a closed to an open configuration . Figure is reproduced , with permission , from Nature Ref . 81  ( 2005 ) Macmillan Publishers Ltd . All rights reserved . R E V I E W S 48 | jAnUARy 2009 | VOLUMe 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Gatingspring Transductionchannel Positivedeflection Channelsclose Bundlemovement Adaptationmotor Tip link Transductionchannel Adaptationmotor Oppositestereocilium Actin a b a direct role in sensory transduction is hard to distin­ guish from other functions . As with the channels , loss of cytoskeleton could have direct and indirect roles in mechanosensation , even for specialized structures . For example , loss of expression of the mec­7 and mec­12 tubulin genes in C . elegans affects the distribution but not the production of mechanosensory puncta 72 , 73 . These defects could cause the touch insensitivity that is found in mec­7 and mec­12 mutants . However , late disruption of the microtubules does not cause these defects , but does result in touch insensitivity in adults ( A . Bounoutas and M . C . , unpublished observations ) . This suggests that touch sensitivity requires the spe­ cialized microtubules , but given the residual mechano­ sensory current that is seen in mec­7 mutants 5 , their role is unclear . Mechanosensory cells often have specialized extra­ cellular components that are required for their func­ tion . Tip links , the thin extracellular strands that connect the tips of stereocilia to the upper shaft of adja­ cent stereo cilia in auditory hair cells 74 , are prominent examples . Two proteins have been found to be impor­ tant components of the tip links — cadherin 23 and proto cadherin 15 ( RefS 75 – 78 ) . Loss of these proteins in mice and humans leads to disorganized stereocilia and hearing loss . Attachment to extracellular structures is also important for insect bristle mechanoreceptors 79 and for C . elegans touch receptor neurons 72 , 80 . A major question that remains unanswered for most sensory systems is the role that these specialized struc­ tures have in transduction . Are they needed for the organization of the transduction apparatus or are they integrally required for the transduction ? Distinctly dif­ ferent models for transduction have evolved based on whether extracellular and intracellular interactions are needed for mechanosensory perception . Potential gating mechanisms Considerable debate exists regarding the nature of the gating process in mechanical systems , and several types of models have been proposed for how force opens mechano­ sensory transduction channels ( fIGS 3 – 5 ) . The main question is whether force is conveyed through the lipid bilayer or by associated structures . Three models have been proposed for the gating of mechanosensory channels . First , changes in forces in the lipid bilayer affect channel conformation ( and no other proteins are needed ) ; second , stretching between tethered intra cellular and extracellular structures opens the channels ( membrane forces do not have a role ) ; and third , movement of a single tether to the channel alters the inter action of the channel with the membrane and the forces within it , thereby opening the channel . The second and third models predict that extracellular and / or cytoplasmic tethers transmit the stimulus force to the channels . The membrane force model . The simplest model , which involves only membrane forces , derives from studies of the MscL and MscS mechanosensitive channels of bacteria ( reviewed in Ref . 81 ) . These channels were the first mechanosensitive channels to be identified . each channel is formed from multimers of single membrane proteins , and when both are eliminated in Escherichia coli , the bacteria fail to adapt to osmotic stress 82 . Only the forces in the membrane and no other proteins are required to gate these channels ( fIG . 3 ) . The exact nature of the gating is still under study . Two recent papers 83 , 84 suggest that stretching the membrane causes the MscS channel to open because its membrane helices tilt . Because membrane stretch opens Shaker and the K 2P channels , these channels might be regulated in an analo­ gous fashion , as might the recently discovered MscS­like channels in plants ( BOX 3 ) . Figure 4 | Dual - tether model . a | Channels in adjacent stereocilia of auditory and vestibular hair cells are thought to be tethered to extracellular tip links and to the intracellular actin cytoskeleton through the adaptation motor . The directional response of the cells is consistent with a dual - tethered model . b | Transduction and fast adaptation in stereocilia . Positive deflection ( left to middle panel ) opens the channel , allowing Ca 2 + entry ( pink ) . Channel closure ( right panel ) leads to bundle movement in the opposite direction . Images in parts a and b are modified , with permission , from Nature Ref . 86  ( 2001 ) Macmillan Publishers Ltd . All rights reserved . R E V I E W S nATURe ReVIewS | MoleCulAr Cell Biology VOLUMe 10 | jAnUARy 2009 | 49 f o c u S o n m E c h a n ot R a n S d u c t I o n © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Pull up Push down MEC - 6 MEC - 4 MEC - 10 MEC - 7 ( β - tubulin ) MEC - 12 ( α - tubulin ) Dual - tether model . As discussed above , most mechano­ sensing cells in animals have specialized structures that seem to be important for sensory function . These structures might have a direct role in transduction . This would predict gating through the tethering of these structures to the transduction channel , which usually involves both intracellular and extracellular tethers 85 , 86 . The first such dual­tether model was proposed for vertebrate hair cell transduction . In this model , the hypothetical transduction channel is tethered to the extracellular tip links that connect the stereocilia and to the actin filaments of the internal cytoskeleton ( for example , see Ref . 86 ) ( fIG . 4 ) . Bending the stereocilia stretches the channel between these two tethering points and effectively opens the channel like a trap door . Forces in the membrane are not needed to open the channel . One consequence of this model is that transduction is unidirectional : only movement of the stereocilia in the direction that stretches the tethered connections will open the channels . This model derives from electrophysiological experi­ ments that suggest that the channel is a gated spring , the opening of which can be modulated 87 . This suggestion comes from electron microscopy observations of fila­ mentous strands ( tip links ) that join the stereocilia of the hair cells 74 and from calcium imaging experiments , which suggest that transduction leads to calcium entry at the tips of the stereocilia 88 . This dual tether model is attractive because it accounts for the anatomy of the hair cells , the directionality of the response to bundle displacement 89 and the finding that loss of tip links by chelation of calcium 90 or by mutation of genes for tip­link proteins ( see above ) abolishes transduction . Because the hair cell transduction channel has not been identified , however , this model remains an intriguing speculation . Recent evidence suggests that chordotonal organs transduce sound through a gating­spring mechanism 6 , so these cells might use a dual­tether mechanism . A dual­tether model was proposed to explain the trans­ duction that involves C . elegans touch receptor neurons 91 , but recent results suggest that this model is unfavourable ( see above ) . Single - tether model . In an incisive review , Kung 81 sug­ gested that both membrane forces and tethering con­ tribute to channel gating . In this model , movement relative to the membrane is important for the gating . Manipulation of a single tether repositions the channel vis­à­vis the membrane , thereby resulting in a change of forces that gate the channel in a similar way to that of the bacterial channels . The difference between the membrane force model and this single­tether model is that in the first , changes in forces in the membrane ( produced by the swelling of the cell ) influence channel opening , whereas in the second , the repositioning of the channel puts it under different forces in the membrane . One of the consequences of this model is that moving the channel into or out of the plane of the membrane would open the channel . As such , this model would allow for the dual directional signalling that is seen , for example , in the C . elegans touch receptor neurons . we have proposed such a model for these cells with the association of the extracellular matrix proteins as the single tether 92 ( fIG . 5 ) . Testing this type of model by reconstitution would be difficult , however , because it posits connections of the channel with tethering proteins , and the tether would need to be reconstructed . This dif­ ficulty might explain why some putative channels cannot be mechanically gated in vitro . Conclusions and future directions Depending on one’s point of view , the problem of mech­ anosensation in animals is either exciting or vexing . Most candidate channels are either channels that are needed for mechanical signalling that have not been shown to be mechanically gated , or are mechanically gated channels with no connection to mechanosensa­ tion . The strongest candidate in animals is the MeC­4 channel complex in C . elegans , but the TReK1 channel in mammals ( albeit in the novel role of modulating the mechanosensory response ) and the TRP channels remain appealing candidates . Future work in the field will undoubtedly be directed towards proving that Figure 5 | Single - tether model . Based on the concepts of Kung 81 , we have suggested a single - tether model for the mechanosensory abnormality 4 ( MEC - 4 ) channel , which is needed for gentle touch in Caenorhabditis elegans 92 . Movement of the channel through its connection to extracellular matrix proteins will change the interaction with the membrane , thereby leading to the opening of the channel . Such a model explains how the channel can be opened by both the application and the removal of touch . Figure is reproduced , with permission , from Ref . 92  ( 2007 ) Springer . Box 3 | MscS - like channels in plants Given the deep understanding that has been gained for the bacterial channels , the finding that eukaryotes lack mechanosensitive channel of large conductance ( MscL ) ­like channels is disappointing . Animals also seem to lack MscS­like channels , but these channels have homologues in plants 82 , 96 . Research in Arabidopsis thaliana 97 , 98 and Chlamydomonas reinhardtii 99 has shown that these channels can be gated mechanically . Unfortunately , mutation of the genes for these proteins does not result in detectable mechanosensitive phenotypes . For example , mutation of the five MscS­like genes that are expressed in A . thaliana roots eliminated mechanosensitive currents in protoplasts , but resulted in plants that were indistinguishable from wild type 98 . Two other A . thaliana genes could rescue the bacterial genes , so had retained mechanosensitive properties 97 , a result that suggests they are gated in a similar way to the bacterial homologues . A mechanosensory role for these genes , however , has not been identified . R E V I E W S 50 | jAnUARy 2009 | VOLUMe 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Connexin A gap junction and hemijunction protein that is found in vertebrates . Pannexin A gap junction and hemijunction protein that is found in vertebrates and invertebrates . The invertebrate proteins were originally called innexins . known candidates transduce mechanical signals . In part , this analysis will involve the expression in vivo of modified proteins that can potentially alter the transduction response . Genetics has been an important tool in the discovery of candidate mechanoreceptors , and this identification has led to subsequent investigations of homologous pro­ teins . Although considerable efforts have been under­ taken to determine whether similar channels function as mechanotransducers , few of these candidates have been shown to be transduction molecules . The DeG / enaC proteins provide a good example . Although MeC­4 has a proven mechanosensory activity , the functions of other DeG / enaC proteins in mechanical sensing have been more difficult to demonstrate . One possible problem in studying the putative mechanosensory function of other members of a protein family is that genetic redundancy might be obscuring mechano sensory activity . In bacte­ ria , for example , both MscL and MscS channels must be absent for an osmotic phenotype to be seen . The incomplete loss of the mechanosensory potentials in bristle receptors and a minor defect in hearing in nompC mutants in D . melanogaster also suggest redundancy . Furthermore , although touch­insensitive mutants have been found in C . elegans , D . melanogaster and zebrafish , to my knowledge an inherited condition in humans or mice that is characterized by a loss of touch insensitiv­ ity without the loss of sensory endings has not been identified . Mechanosignalling molecules in mammals might have been missed because multiple overlapping transduction complexes might sense touch and other mechanical senses . Further research on mouse strains in which multiple genes have been knocked out is needed in the future . Given the present state of our knowledge of candi­ date mechanosensory channels and the diversity of cells that respond to mechanical stimuli , we are likely to find further transducing channels in the future . Some might come from the analysis of new channel families — per­ haps , for example , the connexin or pannexin hemichannels . Other candidates will probably appear in new high­ throughput genetic screens 64 or from the increased use of whole genome approaches from systems biology , such as genome­wide microarray analysis and RnA inter­ ference screens , applied to mechanosensory cells . For example , microarray analysis of overrepresented genes in the touch receptor neurons of C . elegans 93 identified a K 2P channel gene that is highly expressed in the cells ( the function of which has not been tested ) . Although considerable progress has been made over the past 10 years ( from having no candidate transducers to having many ) , all of the major questions remain . we still need to identify the proteins that transduce mechan­ ical signals in sensory neurons ( particularly vertebrate hair cells ) , to determine whether they must be channels , to learn how transduction occurs and to understand how other cellular components , including the lipid environ­ ment , affect transduction . I am optimistic , however , that the next 10 years will bring us the answers to many of these questions . 1 . Buck , L . & Axel , R . A novel multigene family may encode odorant receptors : a molecular basis for odor recognition . Cell 65 , 175 – 187 ( 1991 ) . 2 . Vogel , V . & Sheetz , M . Local force and geometry sensing regulate cell functions . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 265 – 275 ( 2006 ) . 3 . Corey , D . P . & Hudspeth , A . J . Response latency of vertebrate hair cells . Biophys . J . 26 , 499 – 506 ( 1979 ) . Provides the first demonstration of the rapidity of hair cell mechanosensory transduction . 4 . Walker , R . G . , Willingham , A . T . & Zuker , C . S . A Drosophila mechanosensory transduction channel . Science 287 , 2229 – 2234 ( 2000 ) . Reports the cloning and characterization of the nompC gene , which is needed for the rapid bristle mechanosensory currents . 5 . O’Hagan , R . , Chalfie , M . & Goodman , M . B . The MEC‑4 DEG / ENaC channel of Caenorhabditis elegans touch receptor neurons transduces mechanical signals . Nature Neurosci . 8 , 43 – 50 ( 2005 ) . Provides evidence that the MEC‑4 channel is part of a mechanosensory transducer for touch sensitivity . 6 . Albert , J . T . , Nadrowski , B . & Göpfert , M . C . Mechanical signatures of transducer gating in the Drosophila ear . Curr . Biol . 17 , 1000 – 1006 ( 2007 ) . 7 . Martinac , B . , Buechner , M . , Delcour , A . H . , Adler , J . & Kung , C . Pressure‑sensitive ion channel in Escherichia coli . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 84 , 2297 – 2301 ( 1987 ) . 8 . Sukharev , S . I . , Blount , P . , Martinac , B . , Blattner , F . R . & Kung , C . A large‑conductance mechanosensitive channel in E . coli encoded by MscL alone . Nature 368 , 265 – 268 ( 1994 ) . Identifies the gene for the first mechanotransducing channel , the MscL channel of E . coli . 9 . Sulston , J . , Dew , M . & Brenner , S . Dopaminergic neurons in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans . J . Comp . Neurol . 163 , 215 – 226 ( 1975 ) . References 9 – 11 describe the genetic screens for mutations that affect gentle touch sensitivity in C . elegans . 10 . Chalfie , M . & Sulston , J . Developmental genetics of the mechanosensory neurons of Caenorhabditis elegans . Dev . Biol . 82 , 358 – 370 ( 1981 ) . 11 . Chalfie , M . & Au , M . Genetic control of differentiation of the Caenorhabditis elegans touch receptor neurons . Science 243 , 1027 – 1033 ( 1989 ) . 12 . Hart , A . C . , Sims , S . & Kaplan , J . M . Synaptic code for sensory modalities revealed by C . elegans GLR‑1 glutamate receptor . Nature 378 , 82 – 85 ( 1995 ) . 13 . Kernan , M . , Cowan , D . & Zuker , C . Genetic dissection of mechanosensory transduction : mechanoreception‑ defective mutations of Drosophila . Neuron 12 , 1195 – 1206 ( 1994 ) . Describes the first genetic screen for mechanosensory mutants in D . melanogaster . 14 . Eberl , D . F . , Duyk , G . M . & Perrimon , N . A genetic screen for mutations that disrupt an auditory response in Drosophila melanogaster . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 14837 – 14842 ( 1997 ) . 15 . Granato , M . et al . Genes controlling and mediating locomotion behavior of the zebrafish embryo and larva . Development 123 , 399 – 413 ( 1996 ) . 16 . Nicolson , T . et al . Genetic analysis of vertebrate sensory hair cell mechanosensation : the zebrafish circler mutants . Neuron 20 , 271 – 283 ( 1998 ) . Describes the first analysis of zebrafish mutants with developmentally or functionally defective hair cells . 17 . Friedman L . M . , Dror , A . A . & Avraham , K . B . Mouse models to study inner ear development and hereditary hearing loss . Int . J . Dev . Biol . 51 , 609 – 631 ( 2007 ) . 18 . Brown , S . D . , Hardisty‑Hughes , R . E . & Mburu , P . Quiet as a mouse : dissecting the molecular and genetic basis of hearing . Nature Rev . Genet . 9 , 277 – 290 ( 2008 ) . 19 . Petit , C . From deafness genes to hearing mechanisms : harmony and counterpoint . Trends Mol . Med . 12 , 57 – 64 ( 2006 ) . 20 . Jasti , J . , Furukawa , H . , Gonzales , E . B . & Gouaux , E . Structure of acid‑sensing ion channel 1 at 1 . 9 Å resolution and low pH . Nature 449 , 316 – 323 ( 2007 ) . 21 . Driscoll , M . & Chalfie , M . The mec‑4 gene is a member of a family of Caenorhabditis elegans genes that can mutate to induce neuronal degeneration . Nature 349 , 588 – 593 ( 1991 ) . 22 . Huang , M . & Chalfie , M . Gene interactions affecting mechanosensory transduction in Caenorhabditis elegans . Nature 367 , 467 – 470 ( 1994 ) . 23 . Huang , M . , Gu , G . , Ferguson , E . L . & Chalfie , M . A stomatin‑like protein necessary for mechanosensation in C . elegans . Nature 378 , 292 – 295 ( 1995 ) . 24 . Goodman , M . B . et al . MEC‑2 regulates C . elegans DEG / ENaC channels needed for mechanosensation . Nature 415 , 1039 – 1042 ( 2002 ) . 25 . Chelur , D . S . et al . The mechanosensory protein MEC‑6 is a subunit of the C . elegans touch‑cell degenerin channel . Nature 420 , 669 – 673 ( 2002 ) . 26 . Brown , A . L . , Liao , Z . & Goodman M . B . MEC‑2 and MEC‑6 in the Caenorhabditis elegans sensory mechanotransduction complex : auxiliary subunits that enable channel activity . J . Gen . Physiol . 131 , 605 – 616 ( 2008 ) . 27 . Huber , T . B . et al . Podocin and MEC‑2 bind cholesterol to regulate the activity of associated ion channels . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 17079 – 17086 ( 2006 ) . 28 . Getz , G . S . , Reardon , C . A . Paraoxonase , a cardioprotective enzyme : continuing issues . Curr . Opin . Lipidol . 15 , 261 – 267 ( 2004 ) . 29 . Adams , C . M . et al . Ripped Pocket and Pickpocket , novel Drosophila DEG / ENaC subunits expressed in early development and in mechanosensory neurons . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 143 – 152 ( 1998 ) . 30 . Darboux , I . , Lingueglia , E . , Pauron , D . , Barbry , P . & Lazdunski , M . A new member of the amiloride‑ sensitive sodium channel family in Drosophila melanogaster peripheral nervous system . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 246 , 210 – 216 ( 1998 ) . 31 . Ainsley , J . A . et al . Enhanced locomotion caused by loss of the Drosophila DEG / ENaC protein Pickpocket1 . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1557 – 1563 ( 2003 ) . 32 . Ainsley , J . A . , Kim , M . J . , Wegman , L . J . , Pettus , J . M . & Johnson , W . A . Sensory mechanisms controlling the timing of larval developmental and behavioral transitions require the Drosophila DEG / ENaC subunit , Pickpocket1 . Dev . Biol . 322 , 46 – 55 ( 2008 ) . R E V I E W S nATURe ReVIewS | MoleCulAr Cell Biology VOLUMe 10 | jAnUARy 2009 | 51 f o c u S o n m E c h a n ot R a n S d u c t I o n © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 33 . Drummond , H . A . , Abboud , F . M . & Welsh , M . J . Localization of β and γ subunits of ENaC in sensory nerve endings in the rat foot pad . Brain Res . 884 , 1 – 12 ( 2000 ) . 34 . Fricke , B . et al . Epithelial Na + channels and stomatin are expressed in rat trigeminal mechanosensory neurons . Cell Tissue Res . 299 , 327 – 334 ( 2000 ) . 35 . Price , M . P . et al . The mammalian sodium channel BNC1 is required for normal touch sensation . Nature 407 , 1007 – 1011 ( 2000 ) . 36 . Price , M . P . et al . The DRASIC cation channel contributes to the detection of cutaneous touch and acid stimuli in mice . Neuron 32 , 1071 – 1083 ( 2001 ) . 37 . García‑Añoveros , J . , Samad , T . A . , Zuvela‑Jelaska , L . , Woolf , C . J . & Corey , D . P . Transport and localization of the DEG / ENaC ion channel BNaC1 α to peripheral mechanosensory terminals of dorsal root ganglia neurons . J . Neurosci . 21 , 2678 – 2686 ( 2001 ) . 38 . Drew , L . J . et al . Acid‑sensing ion channels ASIC2 and ASIC3 do not contribute to mechanically activated currents in mammalian sensory neurones . J . Physiol . 556 , 691 – 710 ( 2004 ) . 39 . Page , A . J . et al . Different contributions of ASIC channels 1a , 2 , and 3 in gastrointestinal mechanosensory function . Gut 54 , 1408 – 1415 ( 2005 ) . 40 . Benson , C . J . et al . Heteromultimers of DEG / ENaC subunits form H + ‑gated channels in mouse sensory neurons . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 2338 – 2343 ( 2002 ) . 41 . Canessa , C . M et al . Amiloride‑sensitive epithelial Na + channel is made of three homologous subunits . Nature 367 , 463 – 467 ( 1994 ) . 42 . Martinez‑Salgado , C . et al . Stomatin and sensory neuron mechanotransduction . J . Neurophysiol . 98 , 3802 – 3808 ( 2007 ) . 43 . Wetzel , C . et al . A stomatin‑domain protein essential for touch sensation in the mouse . Nature 445 , 206 – 209 ( 2007 ) . 44 . Montell , C . & Rubin , G . M . Molecular characterization of the Drosophila trp locus : a putative integral membrane protein required for phototransduction . Neuron 2 , 1313 – 1323 ( 1989 ) . 45 . Venkatachalam , K . & Montell , C . TRP channels . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 76 , 387 – 417 ( 2007 ) . 46 . Sharif‑Naeini , R . et al . TRP channels and mechanosensory transduction : insights into the arterial myogenic response . Pflugers Arch . 456 , 529 – 540 ( 2008 ) . 47 . Colbert , H . A . , Smith , T . L . & Bargmann , C . I . OSM‑9 , a novel protein with structural similarity to channels , is required for olfaction , mechanosensation , and olfactory adaptation in Caenorhabditis elegans . J . Neurosci . 17 , 8259 – 8269 ( 1997 ) . 48 . Eberl , D . F . , Hardy , R . W . & Kernan , M . J . Genetically similar transduction mechanisms for touch and hearing in Drosophila . J . Neurosci . 20 , 5981 – 5988 ( 2000 ) . 49 . Göpfert , M . C . , Albert , J . T . , Nadrowski , B . & Kamikouchi , A . Specification of auditory sensitivity by Drosophila TRP channels . Nature Neurosci . 9 , 999 – 1000 ( 2006 ) . 50 . Sidi , S . , Friedrich , R . W . & Nicolson , T . NompC TRP channel required for vertebrate sensory hair cell mechanotransduction . Science 301 , 96 – 99 ( 2003 ) . 51 . Sawin , E . R . , Ranganathan , R . & Horvitz , H . R . C . elegans locomotory rate is modulated by the environment through a dopaminergic pathway and by experience through a serotonergic pathway . Neuron 26 , 619 – 631 ( 2000 ) . 52 . Li , W . , Feng , Z . , Sternberg , P . W . & Xu , X . Z . A C . elegans stretch receptor neuron revealed by a mechanosensitive TRP channel homologue . Nature 440 , 684 – 687 ( 2006 ) . 53 . Corey , D . P . What is the hair cell transduction channel ? J . Physiol . 576 , 23 – 28 ( 2006 ) . 54 . Kim , J . et al . A TRPV family ion channel required for hearing in Drosophila . Nature 424 , 81 – 84 ( 2003 ) . 55 . Gong , Z . et al . Two interdependent TRPV channel subunits , inactive and Nanchung , mediate hearing in Drosophila . J . Neurosci . 24 , 9059 – 9066 ( 2004 ) . 56 . Kernan , M . J . Mechanotransduction and auditory transduction in Drosophila . Pflugers Arch . 454 , 703 – 720 ( 2007 ) . 57 . Tobin , D . et al . Combinatorial expression of TRPV channel proteins defines their sensory functions and subcellular localization in C . elegans neurons . Neuron 35 , 307 – 318 ( 2002 ) . 58 . Liedtke , W . TRPV channels’ role in osmotransduction and mechanotransduction . Handb . Exp . Pharmacol . 179 , 473 – 487 ( 2007 ) . 59 . Tracey , W . D . Jr , Wilson , R . I . , Laurent , G . & Benzer , S . painless , a Drosophila gene essential for nociception . Cell 113 , 261 – 273 ( 2003 ) . 60 . Zhou , X . L . et al . The transient receptor potential channel on the yeast vacuole is mechanosensitive . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 7105 – 7110 ( 2003 ) . 61 . Corey , D . P . et al . TRPA1 is a candidate for the mechanosensitive transduction . 62 . Bautista , D . M . et al . TRPA1 mediates the inflammatory actions of environmental irritants and proalgesic agents . Cell 124 , 1269 – 1282 ( 2006 ) . 63 . Kwan , K . Y . et al . TRPA1 contributes to cold , mechanical , and chemical nociception but is not essential for hair‑cell transduction . Neuron 50 , 277 – 289 ( 2006 ) . 64 . Prober , D . A . et al . Zebrafish TRPA1 channels are required for chemosensation but not for thermosensation or mechanosensory hair cell function . J . Neurosci . 28 , 10102 – 10110 ( 2008 ) . 65 . Maroto , R . et al . TRPC1 forms the stretch‑activated cation channel in vertebrate cells . Nature Cell Biol . 7 , 179 – 185 ( 2005 ) . 66 . Gottlieb , P . et al . Revisiting TRPC1 and TRPC6 mechanosensitivity . Pflugers Arch . 455 , 1097 – 1103 ( 2008 ) . 67 . Spassova , M . A . , Hewavitharana , T . , Xu , W . , Soboloff , J . & Gill , D . L . A common mechanism underlies stretch activation and receptor activation of TRPC6 channels . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 16586 – 16591 ( 2006 ) . 68 . Gu , C . X . , Juranka , P . F . & Morris , C . E . Stretch‑ activation and stretch‑inactivation of Shaker‑IR , a voltage‑gated K + channel . Biophys . J . 80 , 2678 – 2693 ( 2001 ) . 69 . Dedman , A . et al . The mechano‑gated K 2P channel TREK‑1 . Eur . Biophys . J . 28 Mar 2008 ( doi : 10 . 1007 / s00249‑008‑0318‑8 ) . An up‑to‑date summary of the research of the K 2P channels in vertebrates . 70 . Alloui , A . et al . TREK‑1 , a K + channel involved in polymodal pain perception . EMBO J . 25 , 2368 – 2376 ( 2006 ) . 71 . Kaplan , J . M . & Horvitz , H . R . A dual mechanosensory and chemosensory neuron in Caenorhabditis elegans . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 90 , 2227 – 2231 ( 1993 ) . 72 . Emtage , L . , Gu , G . , Hartwieg , E . & Chalfie , M . Extracellular proteins organize the mechanosensory channel complex in C . elegans touch receptor neurons . Neuron 44 , 795 – 807 ( 2004 ) . 73 . Zhang , S . Stomatin Gene Family in Caenorhabditis elegans . Thesis , Columbia Univ . ( 2004 ) . 74 . Pickles , J . O . , Comis , S . D . & Osborne , M . P . Cross‑ links between stereocilia in the guinea pig organ of Corti , and their possible relation to sensory transduction . Hear . Res . 15 , 103 – 112 ( 1984 ) . 75 . Siemens , J . et al . Cadherin 23 is a component of the tip link in hair‑cell stereocilia . Nature 428 , 950 – 955 ( 2004 ) . 76 . Söllner , C . et al . Mutations in cadherin 23 affect tip links in zebrafish sensory hair cells . Nature 428 , 955 – 959 ( 2004 ) . 77 . Ahmed , Z . M . et al . The tip‑link antigen , a protein associated with the transduction complex of sensory hair cells , is protocadherin‑15 . J . Neurosci . 26 , 7022 – 7034 ( 2006 ) . 78 . Kazmierczak , P . et al . Cadherin 23 and protocadherin 15 interact to form tip‑link filaments in sensory hair cells . Nature 449 , 87 – 91 ( 2007 ) . 79 . Chung , Y . D . , Zhu , J . , Han , Y . & Kernan , M . J . nompA encodes a PNS‑specific , ZP domain protein required to connect mechanosensory dendrites to sensory structures . Neuron 29 , 415 – 428 ( 2001 ) . 80 . Du , H . , Gu , G . , William , C . M . & Chalfie , M . Extracellular proteins needed for C . elegans mechanosensation . Neuron 16 , 183 – 194 ( 1996 ) . 81 . Kung , C . A possible unifying principle for mechanosensation . Nature 436 , 647 – 654 ( 2005 ) . Presents a reconsideration of the dual‑tether model of mechanosensation . 82 . Levina , N . et al . Protection of Escherichia coli cells against extreme turgor by activation of MscS and MscL mechanosensitive channels : identification of genes required for MscS activity . EMBO J . 18 , 1730 – 1737 ( 1999 ) . Describes the identification of the gene that encodes the MscS channel in E . coli . 83 . Vasquez , V . , Sotomayor , M . , Cordero‑Morales , J . , Schulten , K . & Perozo , E . A structural mechanism for MscS gating in lipid bilayers . Science 321 , 1210 – 1214 ( 2008 ) . 84 . Wang , W . et al . The structure of an open form of an E . coli mechanosensitive channel at 3 . 45 Å resolution . Science 321 , 1179 – 1183 ( 2008 ) . 85 . Morris , C . E . Mechanosensitive ion channels . J . Membr . Biol . 113 , 93 – 107 ( 1990 ) . 86 . Gillespie , P . G . & Walker , R . G . Molecular basis of mechanosensory transduction . Nature 413 , 194 – 202 ( 2001 ) . 87 . Corey , D . P . & Hudspeth , A . J . Kinetics of the receptor current in bullfrog saccular hair cells . J . Neurosci . 3 , 962 – 976 ( 1983 ) . 88 . Denk , W . , Holt , J . R . , Shepherd , G . M . & Corey , D . P . Calcium imaging of single stereocilia in hair cells : localization of transduction channels at both ends of tip links . Neuron 15 , 1311 – 1321 ( 1995 ) . 89 . Hudspeth , A . J . & Corey , D . P . Sensitivity , polarity , and conductance change in the response of vertebrate hair cells to controlled mechanical stimuli . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 74 , 2407 – 2411 ( 1977 ) . 90 . Assad , J . A . , Shepherd , G . M . & Corey , D . P . Tip‑link integrity and mechanical transduction in vertebrate hair cells . Neuron 7 , 985 – 994 ( 1991 ) . 91 . Gu , G . , Caldwell , G . A . & Chalfie , M . Genetic interactions affecting touch sensitivity in Caenorhabditis elegans . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 6577 – 6582 ( 1996 ) . 92 . Bounoutas , A . & Chalfie , M . Touch sensitivity in Caenorhabditis elegans . Pflugers Arch . 454 , 691 – 702 ( 2007 ) . 93 . Zhang , Y . et al . Identification of genes expressed in C . elegans touch receptor neurons . Nature 418 , 331 – 335 ( 2002 ) . 94 . Crawford , A . C . , Evans , M . G . & Fettiplace , R . Activation and adaptation of transducer currents in turtle hair cells . J . Physiol . 419 , 405 – 434 ( 1989 ) . 95 . Howard , J . & Hudspeth , A . J . Compliance of the hair bundle associated with gating of mechanoelectrical transduction channels in the bullfrog’s saccular hair cell . Neuron 1 , 189 – 199 ( 1988 ) . 96 . Pivetti , C . D . et al . Two families of mechanosensitive channel proteins . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 67 , 66 – 85 ( 2003 ) . 97 . Haswell , E . S . & Meyerowitz , E . M . MscS‑like proteins control plastid size and shape in Arabidopsis thaliana . Curr . Biol . 16 , 1 – 11 ( 2006 ) . References 97 – 99 describe the initial characterization of genes for plant channels that are similar to the MscS channels of bacteria . 98 . Haswell , E . S . , Peyronnet , R . , Barbier‑Brygoo , H . , Meyerowitz , E . M . & Frachisse , J . M . Two MscS homologs provide mechanosensitive channel activities in the Arabidopsis root . Curr . Biol . 18 , 730 – 734 ( 2008 ) . 99 . Nakayama , Y . , Fujiu , K . , Sokabe , M . & Yoshimura , K . Molecular and electrophysiological characterization of a mechanosensitive channel expressed in the chloroplasts of Chlamydomonas . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 5883 – 5888 ( 2007 ) . 100 . Ernstrom , G . G . & Chalfie , M . Genetics of sensory mechanotransduction . Annu . Rev . Genet . 36 , 411 – 453 ( 2002 ) . 101 . Jaalouk , D . E . & Lammerding , J . Mechanotransduction gone awry . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 23 Dec 2008 ( doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2597 ) . Acknowledgements The author thanks J . Árnadóttir for helpful discussions . Research in the author’s laboratory has been supported by grant GM30997 from the US Public Health Service . DATABASES Entrez Gene : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / entrez / query . fcgi ? db = gene mec‑4 | mec‑10 | nanchung | nompC | painless | trpn1 uniProtKB : http : / / www . uniprot . org ACCN1 | ASIC1 | ASIC2 | ASIC3 | MEC - 2 | MEC - 6 | OCR - 2 | OSM - 9 | paraoxonase 1 | paraoxonase 3 | SCNN1 | TRPA1 | TRPC1 | TRPC6 | YVC1 FURTHER INFORMATION martin chalfie’s homepage : http : / / www . columbia . edu / cu / biology / faculty - data / martin - chalfie / faculty . html All linkS Are ACtive in the online pDf R E V I E W S 52 | jAnUARy 2009 | VOLUMe 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved