Current Biology , Vol . 13 , 329 – 332 , February 18 , 2003 ,  2003 Elsevier Science Ltd . All rights reserved . PII S0960 - 9822 ( 03 ) 00051 - 4 The Force - Velocity Relationship for the Actin - Based Motility of Listeria monocytogenes tions that would slow all biochemical rates [ 5 ] , the large molecules of methylcellulose do not perturb the kinetics of actin assembly , particularly ARP2 / 3 - dependent as - James L . McGrath , 1 , 4 , 5 Narat J . Eungdamrong , 2 , 4 Charles I . Fisher , 1 Fay Peng , 1 Lakshminarayanan Mahadevan , 3 , 6 Timothy J . Mitchison , 2 and Scot C . Kuo 1 , * sembly in extracts ( Figure 1A ) . To facilitate mixing of methylcellulose with motility solutions and Listeria , we 1 Department of Biomedical Engineering Johns Hopkins University exploitedthe temperature - dependentsolubility ofmeth - ylcellulose powder to dissolve it in situ within each mi - 720 Rutland Avenue Ross 724 croscope slide ( see Supplementary Material available with this article online ) . However , microheterogeneities Baltimore , Maryland 21205 2 Department of Cell Biology and wall effects from thin microscope chambers ( (cid:1) 12 (cid:1) m ) preclude calculating mechanical drag forces from Harvard Medical School 250 Longwood Avenue bulk rheological measurements of methylcellulose . To locally measure viscoelastic moduli ( | G * ( (cid:2) ) | ) , we used Boston , Massachusetts 02115 3 Department of Mechanical Engineering laser - tracking microrheology ( LTM ; [ 6 , 7 ] ) to track the Brownian motion of three or more surface - modified Massachusetts Institute of Technology 77 Massachusetts Avenue polystyrene particles immediately near motile bacteria ( Figure 2B ) . To prevent spurious local mechanics , Cambridge , Massachusetts 02139 blocking chemistries are required to suppress nonspe - cific actin polymerization on bare tracer particles . Using the generalized Stokes equation F drag (cid:3) 6 (cid:4) SaV (cid:5) ( (cid:6) ˙˙ ) to Summary calculate drag forces on bacteria , we account for the size ( minor radius a ) , shape ( S ) , speed ( V ) , and the The intracellular movement of the bacterial pathogen steady - shear viscosity (cid:5) ( (cid:6) ˙ ) at a shear rate of (cid:6) ˙ (cid:3) V / 2a . Listeria monocytogenes has helped identify key mo - For general non - Newtonian fluids , dynamic viscosity lecular constituents of actin - based motility ( recent re - (cid:5) * ( (cid:2) ) , measured from oscillatory deformations at fre - views [ 1 – 4 ] ) . However , biophysicalas wellas biochem - quency (cid:2) , cannot predict the steady - shear viscosity (cid:5) ( (cid:6) ˙ ) ical data are required to understand how these experienced by steadily moving Listeria . However , molecules generate the forces that extrude eukaryotic methylcellulosesolutionsobeytheCox - Merzrule , which membranes . For molecular motors and for muscle , states that the steady - shear viscosity (cid:5) ( (cid:6) ˙ ) is empirically force - velocity curves have provided key biophysical the same as the dynamic viscosity | (cid:5) * ( (cid:2) ) | when (cid:6) ˙ (cid:3) (cid:2) data to distinguish between mechanistic theories . [ 8 ] . With the simple identity , (cid:5) * ( (cid:2) ) (cid:3) G * ( (cid:2) ) / i (cid:2) , we can use Here we manipulate and measure the viscoelastic this approach to calculate drag forces from LTM mea - properties of tissue extracts to provide the first force - surements ( see Supplementary Materials ) . velocity curve for Listeria monocytogenes . We find Across 45 bacteria , we find a highly curvilinear rela - that the force - velocity relationship is highly curved , tionship between Listeria speeds and the drag forces almost biphasic , suggesting a high cooperativity be - due to local viscoelastic moduli ( Figure 3 ) . Although the tween biochemical catalysis and force generation . Us - moduli of extracts spans (cid:1) 500 - fold range , Listeria were ing high - resolution motion tracking in low - noise ex - only slowed by a factor of (cid:1) 20 . Despite our best efforts , tracts , we find long trajectories composed exclusively we could not fully stall Listeria and can only put a lower of molecular - sized steps . Robust statistics from these bound of 200 pN for stalling forces . As shown in the trajectories show a correlation between the duration inset of Figure 3 , mechanical power increases as load of steps and macroscopic Listeria speed , but not be - increases . To determine the molecular basis of this self - tween average step size and speed . Collectively , our strengthening behavior , we used fluorescence micros - data indicate how the molecular properties of the Lis - copy to quantify the amount of actin in these tails . A teria polymerization engine regulate speed , and that 1 . 6 - fold increase in average density of actin - specific regulation occurs during molecular - scale pauses . fluorescence corresponds to a (cid:1) 3 - fold increase in me - chanical power and a (cid:1) 20 - fold increase in forces ( see Results and Discussion SupplementaryMaterials ) . Thesedata indicatecoopera - tive phenomenabecause larger forces canbe generated To mechanically slow the actin - based motility of Listeria by a small amount of additional actin polymerization . in bovine brain extracts , we used methylcellulose as a As in living host cells [ 9 ] , Listeria in brain extracts viscoelastic thickening agent . Unlike ideal viscous solu - frequently moved with monomer - spaced pauses ( Figure 1B ) . For tails that are not anchored , we note that actin * Correspondence : skuo @ bme . jhu . edu monomer insertion should move the tail and bacterium 4 These authors contributed equally to this work . in opposite directions , thus necessarily reducing the 5 Present address : Biomedical Engineering Department , University apparent size of bacterial displacements . High concen - ofRochesterMedicalCenter , 601ElmwoodAvenue , Box639 , Roch - trations of methylcellulose ( (cid:7) 1 % ) were required to sup - ester , New York 14642 . presslarge - scaleBrownianmotionsofbacteriaandtheir 6 Present address : Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics , Cambridge University , Cambridge , CB3 9EW , United Kingdom . tails . Quantifying the moduli of these thick solutions are Current Biology 330 Figure 1 . MethylcelluloseDoes NotSlow Ac - tinPolymerizationand Listeria SpeedsCorre - late with Pause Duration , Not Step Distance ( A ) Methylcellulose does not slow stimulated actinpolymerizationinextracts . Curvesshow kinetics of pyrene - actin polymerization stim - ulated by the ARP2 / 3 interacting domain of N - WASP ( VCApeptide ) inextractscontaining 0 % methylcellulose ( blue ) and 1 . 5 % methyl - cellulose ( red ) . Recombinant GST - VCA was purified as described previously [ 27 ] and used at 50 nM . Also shown is the unstimu - lated polymerization of actin ( no VCA added ) in extract ( green ) . ( B ) Methylcellulose does not slow the poly - merization rate of pure actin . The table com - pares the initial rate of polymerization normal - ized to controls containing no methylcellulose . ( C ) Thick methylcellulose reveals step - like motion in extracts . For methylcellulose concentrations (cid:8) 1 % , extraneous motions , such as pivoting tails , are large enough to obscure steps . The data shown are for 1 . 5 % methylcellulose and grid lines are spaced 5 . 4 nm . Positionalhistogramsaregeneratedfrom Listeria trajectories as previously described [ 9 ] , and blue crosses represent pause events detected by automated detection software ( see Supplementary Materials ) . In our current equipment , mechanical resonances obscure the Brownian motion of particles in the thick methylcellulose solutions needed to reveal steps . Thus , it is not possible to measure the viscoelasticity of these solutions using microrheology . ( D ) The average size of steps is independent of average Listeria velocity . The average step size over 66 trajectories ( 13 different bacteria ; 1152 steps ) is 5 . 2 (cid:9) 0 . 15 nm . Representative error bars show standard error of the mean for step sizes within that trajectory . ( E ) The duration of pauses correlates inversely with average Listeria velocity . Average velocity and the mean pause time are calculated for each of 66 trajectories . beyond the capabilities of our current LTM equipment , result from the combination of filament compliances of appropriate magnitudes . At the other extreme , many and so ourforce - velocity analysis does notextend to the regime required for observing molecular - scale pausing . filaments restrain bacteria and all tethering must release cooperatively to produce steps . Mechanical cooperativ - Analyzing 66 trajectories ( containing 1152 steps ) , the distance between pauses is 5 . 2 (cid:9) 0 . 15 nm . As shown ity could occur when propulsive stresses within the tail network exceed a threshold for frictional resistance , as in Figure 1C , the average step size during a trajectory does not correlate with the average speed during that suggested for mesoscopic , micrometer - sized stepping phenomena [ 13 , 14 ] . However , the notion of friction is trajectory , suggesting that the stepping phenomenon is an invariant feature of Listeria motility . The average fundamentally a mesoscopic generalization [ 15 ] and must be recast as molecular interactions to explain mol - duration of pauses , however , shows a strong inverse correlation with Listeria speeds ( Figure 1D ) . We con - ecule - sized steps . More constraining than molecule - sized steps , the un - clude that the regulation of Listeria speed occurs through changes in the duration of these molecular - usually curved force - velocity relationship for Listeria de - mands newer biophysical theories for its actin - based sized pauses , at least under the conditions required to observe steps . motility . Until recently , theoretical models predicted gentle exponential - like force - velocity relationships that Explanations for monomer - sized steps fall into three categories depending on the number of actin filaments cannot be parametrically altered tofit the sharply curved relationship that we have measured . Despite ambigu - that limit motion . Stretched by the pressure generated byother actinfilaments , a singletethering filamentmight ities in estimating the number of actin filaments in tails , these models predict numerical values that can differ provide a transient template for limiting the motions of the bacterium [ 9 ] . Rebinding to adjacent actin mono - from our measurements by orders of magnitude . In a mesoscopic gel model , Gerbal and colleagues suggest mers along the sides of this filament would generate monomer - sized displacements . Incorporating putative that , like an inflating balloon , stretching stresses within the tail increase as the crosslinked actin gel expands nucleotide - dependent binding between Listeria and F - actin , recent calculations develop more fully the sto - radially from the curved bacterial surface [ 13 ] . They pre - dicted a force - velocity relationship that is gently curved chastic generation of such filament templates ( ac - toclampin , [ 10 ] ) . Such single - filament explanations are andcannot fitourdata . Furthermore , this modelpredicts that Listeria will only slow when forces are strong only plausible for forces less than the breaking point of an individual actin filament ( (cid:1) 600 pN ; [ 11 ] ) . Alternatively , enough to deform crosslinked gels ( 0 . 1 – 1 nN ) . Instead , our data show velocities sensitive to loads (cid:1) 10 pN , a when several ( (cid:1) 5 ) tethered filaments are limiting , disso - ciation of one of the limiting filaments causes the other level adequate to bend single actin filaments [ 16 ] rather than the gel . In the Brownian ratchet models , positional limiting filaments to “stretch” [ 12 ] . Molecular - sized steps Brief Communication 331 Figure 3 . Force and Power Generated by Listeria Bacterial velocities decrease with increasing drag forces . Varying methylcelluloseconcentrationsbetween0 . 25 % and1 % caused Lis - teria to slow over 20 - fold . Using probe particles adjacent to motile Listeria , viscoelasticspectraweremeasuredtocalculatedragforces ( seeSupplementaryMaterials ) . Insettop : Thesamedatawasplotted onlogarithmicaxes . Insetbottom : Mechanicalpowerincreaseswith drag forces . Mechanical power in attowatts was calculated as the product of velocity and force . The smooth curves derive from a phenomenological least - squares curve - fitting to the normalized Hill model for muscle [ 18 ] : F / F max (cid:3) ( 1 (cid:10) v / v max ) / ( 1 (cid:11) cv / v max ) with F max (cid:3) 250 (cid:9) 120 pN , v max (cid:3) 74 (cid:9) 50 nm / s , and c (cid:3) 31 (cid:9) 44 . Calculated with the same F max and v max , the inset shows for comparison a curve with c (cid:3) 4 that is typical of muscle . To gain insight into mechanisms producing curvature in force - velocity curves , we note that the force - velocity relationship of Listeria resembles the hyperbolic rela - tionship of muscle , but with much higher curvature ( parametric curvature factors : c (cid:3) (cid:1) 30 for Listeria , inset Figure 3 ; c (cid:3) 1 . 3 – 6 for muscle [ 18 – 20 ] ) . Akin to myosin Figure 2 . Microrheology Experiments in muscle , bacterially bound ActA , and host cell ARP2 / 3 , ( A ) Listeria move slower and tails emerge in extracts thickened with G - actin and F - actin form a transient complex [ 1 ] that methylcellulose . Listeria aremoving at (cid:1) 3 (cid:1) m / min inthe leftcolumn both propels and restricts Listeria motion . Propulsion ( 0 . 25 % methylcellulose ) and (cid:1) 0 . 4 (cid:1) m / minintherightcolumn ( 0 . 75 % methylcellulose ) . occurs because the quaternary complex efficiently nu - ( B ) Viscoelasticspectrafortheparticlesshownin ( A ) . Dynamicmod - cleates new actin filament branches , but ARP2 / 3 re - uli , | G * ( (cid:2) ) | , as a function of oscillatory frequency , (cid:2) , were measured mains at the nodes of branches [ 21 ] and does not slide using LTM . Particles a and b around the fast moving Listeria reveal along the “mother” filament [ 22 ] . If long - lived , associa - an environmentan order ofmagnitude weaker thanthe environment tion of bacterially bound ActA to these nodal ARP2 / 3 around the slow moving Listeria ( particles c , d , e , and f ) at the necessarily “drags” on the work of the tail by acting as frequenciesmost relevantto Listeria motility ( (cid:2)(cid:8) 1rad / s ) . Forthese two bacteria , the drag forces and their velocities are 8 . 4 pN at 45 an internal load . Other proteins , such as F - actin binding nm / s and 80 pN at 7 . 3 nm / s for 0 . 25 % and 0 . 75 % methylcellulose , by VASP bound to ActA [ 23 ] , may contribute to the respectively . internal loading . The intrinsic lifetime of the tail bound molecularcomplexesthereforedefinesanaturalvelocitythresholdofbehavior . At faster velocities , bacterial tail fluctuations either of bacteria or of the ends of actin filaments allow room for monomer intercalation to gen - binding complexes are long lived enough to become internally stretched and reduce the net forces gener - erate forces [ 16 , 17 ] . These versions of the Brownian ratchet model predict exponential force - velocity rela - ated . Internal strain may accelerate the disassembly of these complexes . At slower velocities , bacterial tail tionships with gentle curvature . In a “clamped filament” model , a putative actin clamp mechanism latches onto binding complexes naturally disassemble without inter - nal strain , and the actin density of the tail should be subunits carrying ATP and then releases after hydrolysis to allow the axial diffusion of filaments [ 10 ] . The clamped maximal because there is more time to nucleate fila - ments . Our fluorescence data document such an in - filament model predicts a broad range of forces where velocity is relatively constant , and this range extends crease in actin density at slower velocities ( see Supple - mentary Materials ) . Like muscle models [ 24 ] , we expect (cid:1) 6 pN / filament ( (cid:1) 500 pN for 80 filaments ) . Current Biology 332 cells measured by laser tracking microrheology . Biophys . J . 78 , thatlonger - livedtailassociationswillincreasethecurva - 1736 – 1747 . ture of the force - velocity relationship of Listeria models . 8 . Haque , A . , andMorris , E . R . ( 1993 ) . Thermogelationofmethylcel - The importance of tail associations has been very re - lulose . Part I : molecular structures and processes . Carbohydr . cently incorporated in the elastic Brownian ratchet Polym . 22 , 161 – 173 . model to produce a “tethered” ratchet model [ 12 ] . The 9 . Kuo , S . C . , and McGrath , J . L . ( 2000 ) . Steps and fluctuations of Listeria monocytogenes during actin - based motility . Nature model predicts a sharply curved force - velocity relation - 407 , 1026 – 1029 . ship that is quantitatively similar to our data . 10 . Dickinson , R . B . , andPurich , D . L . ( 2002 ) . Clamped - filamentelon - The biochemical complexity of Listeria ’s actin - based gation model for actin - based motors . Biophys . J . 82 , 605 – 617 . motility [ 25 ] ensures that the absolute values of the 11 . Tsuda , Y . , Yasutake , H . , Ishijima , A . , and Yanagida , T . ( 1996 ) . force - velocity relationship reported here are not univer - Torsional rigidity of single actin filaments and actin - actin bond sal . Nonetheless , the unusually sharp curvature of the breakingforceundertorsionmeasureddirectlybyinvitromicro - manipulation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 12937 – 12942 . force - velocity relationship reveals the underlying antag - 12 . Mogilner , A . , and Oster , G . ( 2003 ) . Force generation by actin onistic mechanics . Tail binding accelerates propulsion polymerization II : the elastic ratchet and tethered filaments . biochemically but restrains mechanically . Combined Biophys . J . , in press . with strain - dependent release , the sharp curvature sug - 13 . Gerbal , F . , Chaikin , P . , Rabin , Y . , and Prost , J . ( 2000 ) . An elastic gests very long - lived tail binding complexes in Listeria . analysis of Listeria monocytogenes propulsion . Biophys . J . 79 , Although ARP2 / 3 demonstrates both antagonistic func - 2259 – 2275 . 14 . Bernheim - Groswasser , A . B . , Wiesner , S . , Golsteyn , R . M . , Car - tions , VASP is another possible candidate . VASP proba - lier , M . F . , and Sykes , C . ( 2002 ) . The dynamics of actin - based bly links bacteria to the barbed ends of actin [ 26 ] , while motility depend on surface parameters . Nature 417 , 308 – 311 . acceleratingmotility [ 25 ] . Becausethedurationofmono - 15 . Howard , J . ( 2001 ) . MechanicsofMotorProtinsandtheCytoskel - mer - spaced pauses correlates strongly with velocity , eton ( Sunderland , MA : Sinauer Associates ) . unbinding the tail appearsto be molecularly rate - limiting 16 . Mogilner , A . , and Oster , G . ( 1996 ) . Cell motility driven by actin for Listeria motility . Monomer - spaced pauses and the polymerization . Biophys . J . 71 , 3030 – 3045 . 17 . Peskin , C . S . , Odell , G . M . , and Oster , G . F . ( 1993 ) . Cellular mo - sharply curved force - velocity relationship may be facets tions and thermal fluctuations : the Brownian ratchet . Biophys . of the same molecular tail binding events . J . 65 , 316 – 324 . 18 . Fung , Y . C . ( 1993 ) . Biomechanics : Mechanical Properties of Liv - Supplementary Material ing Tissues , second edition ( New York , NY : Springer - Verlag ) . Additional methodological detail and two supplementary figures 19 . Chiu , Y . C . , Ballou , E . W . , and Ford , L . E . ( 1987 ) . Force , velocity , showingthatactintaildensitiesof Listeria increasewithhigherloads andpowerchangesduringnormalandpotentiatedcontractions and that velocities decrease with effective viscosity are available at of cat papillary muscle . Circ . Res . 60 , 446 – 458 . http : / / images . cellpress . com / supmat / supmatin . htm . 20 . Brutsaert , D . L . , and Sonnenblick , E . H . ( 1969 ) . Force - velocity - length - timerelationsofthecontractile elementsinheartmuscle Acknowledgments of the cat . Circ . Res . 24 , 137 – 149 . 21 . Cameron , L . A . , Svitkina , T . M . , Vignjevic , D . , Theriot , J . A . , and We thank James Harden , Anthony Beris , and Colin Keary for in - Borisy , G . G . ( 2001 ) . Dendritic organization of actin comet tails . sightful discussions on drag forces in viscoelastic fluids . We thank Curr . Biol . 11 , 130 – 135 . Eric Osborn and John Hartwig for material and help with actin poly - 22 . Volkmann , N . , Amann , K . J . , Stoilova - McPhie , S . , Egile , C . , Win - merizationassays . N . J . E . , T . J . M . , andL . M . weresupportedbygrants ter , D . C . , Hazelwood , L . , Heuser , J . E . , Li , R . , Pollard , T . D . , and fromtheCenterforBiomedicalEngineeringatM . I . T . andtheEdgerly Hanein , D . ( 2001 ) . Structure of Arp2 / 3 complex in its activated Foundation . J . L . M . and S . C . K . were supported by grants from the state and in actin filamentbranch junctions . Science 293 , 2456 – National Science Foundation and the Whitaker Foundation . S . C . K . 2459 . and T . J . M . are supported by grants from the National Institutes of 23 . Laurent , V . , Loisel , T . P . , Harbeck , B . , Wehman , A . , Grobe , L . , Health . Jockusch , B . M . , Wehland , J . , Gertler , F . B . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 1999 ) . Role of proteins of the Ena / VASP family in actin - based motilityof Listeriamonocytogenes . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 1245 – 1258 . Received : November 13 , 2002 24 . Huxley , A . F . ( 1957 ) . Muscle structure and theories of contrac - Revised : December 9 , 2002 tion . Prog . Biophys . Biophys . Chem . 7 , 255 – 318 . Accepted : December 10 , 2002 25 . Loisel , T . P . , Boujemaa , R . , Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . - F . Published : February 18 , 2003 ( 1999 ) . Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 , 613 – 615 . References 26 . Bear , J . E . , Svitkina , T . M . , Krause , M . , Schafer , D . A . , Loureiro , J . J . , Strasser , G . A . , Maly , I . V . , Chaga , O . Y . , Cooper , J . A . , Borisy , 1 . Higgs , H . N . , andPollard , T . D . ( 2001 ) . Regulationofactinfilament G . G . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and network formation through ARP2 / 3 complex : activation by a actin filament capping regulates fibroblast motility . Cell 109 , diverse array of proteins . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 70 , 649 – 676 . 509 – 521 . 2 . Pantaloni , D . , Le Clainche , C . , and Carlier , M . - F . ( 2001 ) . Mecha - 27 . Rohatgi , R . , Ma , L . , Miki , H . , Lopez , M . , Kirchhausen , T . , Take - nism of actin - based motility . Science 292 , 1502 – 1506 . nawa , T . , and Kirschner , M . W . ( 1999 ) . The interaction between 3 . Bear , J . E . , Krause , M . , andGertler , F . B . ( 2001 ) . Regulatingcellu - N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex links Cdc42 - dependent sig - lar actin assembly . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 , 158 – 166 . nals to actin assembly . Cell 97 , 221 – 231 . 4 . Cameron , L . A . , Giardini , P . A . , Soo , F . S . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 2000 ) . Secrets of actin - based motility revealed by a bacterial patho - gen . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 1 , 110 – 119 . 5 . Hunt , A . , Gittes , F . , and Howard , J . ( 1994 ) . The force exerted by a single kinesin molecule against a viscous load . Biophys . J . 67 , 766 – 781 . 6 . Mason , T . G . , Ganesan , K . , Van Zanten , J . H . , Wirtz , D . , and Kuo , S . C . ( 1997 ) . Particle tracking microrheology of complex fluids . Phys . Rev . Lett . 79 , 3282 – 3285 . 7 . Yamada , S . , Wirtz , D . , and Kuo , S . C . ( 2000 ) . Mechanics of living