Cognitive Development 18 ( 2003 ) 25 – 47 Cultural and experiential differences in the development of folkbiological induction Norbert Ross a , ∗ , Douglas Medin a , John D . Coley b , Scott Atran c a Psychology Department , Northwestern University , 2029 Sheridan Road , Evanston , IL 60208 , USA b Northeastern University , Boston , MA , USA c CNRS , 75794 Paris Cedex 16 , France Received 1 March 2002 ; received in revised form 1 August 2002 ; accepted 1 September 2002 Abstract Carey’s ( 1985 ) book on conceptual change and the accompanying argument that children’s biology initially is organized in terms of na¨ıve psychology has sparked a great detail of research and debate . This body of research on children’s biology has , however , been almost exclusively been based on urban , majority culture children in the US or in other industrialized nations . The development of folkbiological knowledge may depend on cultural and experiential background . If this is the case , then urban majority culture children may prove to be the exception rather than the rule , because plants and animals do not play a signiﬁcant role in their everyday life . Urban majority culture children , rural majority culture children , and rural Native American ( Menominee ) children were given a property projection task based on Carey’s original paradigm . Each group pro - duced a unique proﬁle of development . Only urban children showed evidence for early anthropocentrism , suggesting that the co - mingling of psychology and biology may be a product of an impoverished experience with nature . In comparison to urban majority cul - ture children even the youngest rural children generalized in terms of biological afﬁnity . In addition , all ages of Native American children and the older rural majority culture chil - dren ( unlike urban children ) gave clear evidence of ecological reasoning . These results show that both culture and expertise ( exposure to nature ) play a role in the development of folkbiological thought . © 2002 Elsevier Science Inc . All rights reserved . ∗ Corresponding author . Tel . : + 1 - 847 - 467 - 2421 ; fax : + 1 - 847 - 491 - 7859 . E - mail address : n - ross @ northwestern . edu ( N . Ross ) . 0885 - 2014 / 02 / $ – see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science Inc . All rights reserved . PII : S0885 - 2014 ( 02 ) 00142 - 9 26 N . Ross et al . / Cognitive Development 18 ( 2003 ) 25 – 47 1 . Introduction Current views of cognition portray concepts as being embedded in theory - like explanatoryframeworks ( Carey , 1985 , 1995 ; Keil , 1989 ; Medin , Lynch , & Solomon , 2000 ; Murphy & Medin , 1985 ) . These framework theories differ in different do - mains of experience ; a framework theory for understanding and predicting the behavior of physical objects necessarily differs from one , which allows us to pre - dict the behavior of sentient beings . Correspondingly , theorists have begun to conceive of conceptual development as a domain - speciﬁc process , and have inves - tigated development in core domains such as na¨ıve physics and na¨ıve psychology ( Gelman & Hirschfeld , 1999 ; Wellman & Gelman , 1992 ; Wellman & Inagaki , 1997 ) . However , recent research with adults indicates that framework theories , as well as domain - speciﬁc knowledge and reasoning strategies , differ across adult populations varying in expertise and cultural background ( see Medin , Ross , Atran , Burnett , & Blok , 2002 for an overview ) . Most of these advances have been reported within the domain of folkbiology , encompassing how people understand , catego - rize and reason about plants and animals ( Medin & Atran , 1999 ) . Agooddealofresearchhasbeenconductedinthelast15yearsontheacquisition of folkbiology , both because of the intrinsic importance of the domain and as a test case for more general ideas about conceptual development . However , most of this research has ignored potentially important differences with respect to the experiential base and the cultural background of the children . Studies have focused on urban majority culture children in either the US or other industrialized cultures . Giventheﬁndingswithadultsontheroleofcultureandexperience ( seeforexample López , Atran , Coley , Medin , & Smith , 1997 ; Medin , Lynch , Coley , & Atran , 1997 ) the focus on such a restricted participant pool seems surprising . An inﬂuential idea to emerge from this body of work is that children’s under - standing of the biological world undergoes a profound shift between ages 4 and 10 . Carey ( 1985 , 1995 ) argues that children’s early understanding of plants and animals is anthropocentric . That is , children’s understanding of other living things is largely in reference to , or by analogy to , human beings . As a consequence , prototypicality of humans is central to children’s conceptions of the biological world . One source of evidence that young children possess an anthropocentric folkbi - ology comes from a property projection task where children are taught a new fact about a given biological kind ( e . g . , a dog “has an omentum” ) and asked whether other kinds ( a bird , a ﬁsh , a plant ) share that property . The rationale is that projec - tion of a novel internal property is an index of the biological afﬁnity between base and target species ( Carey , 1985 ) . By examining patterns of projection , and com - paring those patterns to predictions derived from competing conceptual schemes , we may be able to diagnose which theories children are using to understand the world around them . Carey ( 1985 ) used this task to explore how children’s projec - tions from one basic - level animal category to other categories differed based on the similarity of the base and target categories . N . Ross et al . / Cognitive Development 18 ( 2003 ) 25 – 47 27 The task relies on two related ideas : ﬁrst , inductive inferences from prototypical members of a category are perceived as stronger than inferences from less central , typical members of that category ( Osherson , Smith , Wilkie , & Shaﬁr , 1990 ; Rips , 1975 ) . Second , inductive inferences are guided by the similarity between the base and target items . Within this paradigm an anthropocentric folkbiology makes two straightforward predictions : ﬁrst , if humans are central , prototypical exemplars of living things , then on average projections from humans should be stronger than projections from other living things . Second , an anthropocentric folkbiology should lead to asymmetries in projection . For example , inferences from human to dog should be stronger than from dog to human ( see Osherson et al . , 1990 for a formal model that predicts asymmetries of inferences between typical and atypical category members ) . The 4 - and 6 - year - olds studied by Carey ( 1985 ) generalized as would be pre - dicted by an anthropocentric view . Four - year - olds readily generalized from hu - mans as a base but showed little generalization from dogs and almost none from bees as a base . For 6 - year - olds , humans were still somewhat privileged , as chil - dren were more likely to project from humans to other animals ( 69 % ) than from dogs to other animals ( 54 % ) . Furthermore , asymmetries were evident in compar - ing human ≥ dog ( 76 % ) to dog ≥ human ( 41 % ) , and human ≥ bee ( 59 % ) to bee ≥ human ( 12 % ) . For 10 - year - olds and adults , humans are no longer uniquely central , though some effects suggestive of anthropocentrism are still evident in the 10 - year - old responses . Carey interpreted these results as supporting a comparison - to - exemplar model of biological reasoning in which the folkbiological gold standard is people . Carey ( 1985 ) argues that , “The prototypicality of people plays a much larger role in de - termining 4 - year - olds’ projection of having a spleen than does similarity among animals” ( p . 128 ) . Thus , according to Carey , early folkbiology is essentially an - thropocentric ( see also Johnson & Carey , 1998 ) . More generally , Carey interprets this pattern of reasoning , along with other evidence , as demonstrating that young children possess a qualitatively different understanding of biological phenom - ena , incommensurate with that of adults . As a consequence , pervasive conceptual change is necessary for children to acquire the adult model in which humans are seen as one animal among many ( e . g . , Carey , 1999 ) . Carey’s original ﬁndings stimulated a great deal of research on children’s biol - ogy . Much of this debate has centered on the question of whether children’s biology is distinct from children’s psychology . By now there are a number of studies that suggest that urban children have distinct notions of biology ( e . g . , Coley , 1995 ; Gelman & Wellman , 1991 ; Hatano & Inagaki , 1994 , 1999 ; Hickling & Gelman , 1995 ; Keil , 1989 , 1995 but see also Au & Romo , 1999 ; Johnson & Carey , 1998 ; Solomon , Johnson , Zaitchik , & Carey , 1996 ) and that contextual factors may affect the likelihood of children using a biological framework for explanation ( Gutheil , Vera , & Keil , 1998 ) . Although our study bears on the separation of folkbiology from folkpsychology , our focus is on the role of cultural and experiential factors in children’s inductive reasoning , especially with respect to anthropocentrism . 28 N . Ross et al . / Cognitive Development 18 ( 2003 ) 25 – 47 In some respects the claim that for young children humans are prototypical living things represents a puzzle if not a paradox . Most human cultures draw a sharp distinction between human beings and other animals and one might expect people to be very atypical animals . Johnson , Mervis , and Boster ( 1992 ) found just that ( see also Anglin , 1970 ) . In their study ( based on a triad similarity compar - ison ) children and adults showed converging patterns of similarity relationships among mammals . However , adults considered humans more like other mammals than children did . Indeed , when presented with human – nonhuman – nonhuman tri - ads , children almost never paired a human with another animal . This suggests that children see humans as much more distinctive and peripheral mammals than adults do . SowhytheapparentdifferencebetweentheJohnsonetal . ﬁndingsandtheCarey results ? In the present study we evaluate the idea that the amount and intimacy of children’s contact with plants and animals as well as their cultural background has a critical inﬂuence on the development of folkbiological reasoning . Both dimensions are important in explaining adult reasoning patterns ( Atran et al . , 1999 ; López et al . , 1997 ) and both may be relevant to children’s reasoning as well . Furthermore , there is evidence that industrialization and urbanization has led to biological kinds being less psychologically salient than they were a few centuries ago ( Wolff , Medin , & Pankratz , 1999 ) . The extent of this “devolution” or loss of contact with nature may vary as a function of culture and setting ( Ross , 2002a , 2002b ) . For example , plants and animals may be less salient to urban folk than they are for rural folk ( e . g . , compare Stross , 1973 with Dougherty , 1978 ) . Obviously , urban children visit zoos , watch animals and plants on television , own pets , observe squirrels , robins and pigeons in parks and walk past trees on a daily basis . However , these sorts of experiences may not be especially “intimate . ” The most speciﬁc level that Northwestern University undergraduates can name trees , on average , is just “tree” ( Coley , Medin , Profﬁtt , Lynch , & Atran , 1999 ) . In rural Wisconsin , home to two of our study populations , children are intro - duced to hunting and ﬁshing at an early age . Parents may call the attention to the fact that deer prefer the acorns of white oaks to those of other oaks or note that beavers love poplars . Even owning pets might be associated with different meanings in urban and rural contexts . In an urban setting dogs are often treated as family - members and live in the home . In contrast , in our Wisconsin study area the value of a dog is often judged by its abilities as a hunting dog and most dogs do not live in the home . These differences in treatment and respect may affect how children reason about living kinds in relation to human beings . If these considera - tions are correct , the anthropocentrism displayed by the young children in Carey’s ( 1985 ) study may not be caused by the fact that humans represent the prototypical animal , but , instead , may be attributable to humans being the only animal about which they have extensive knowledge . If anthropocentrism is indeed a consequence of the knowledge devolution among urban children , then we should ﬁnd clear differences among children of different cultural and experiential backgrounds . In our study we examine the N . Ross et al . / Cognitive Development 18 ( 2003 ) 25 – 47 29 degree to which children with different cultural beliefs and a rural versus an urban background reﬂect anthropocentric folkbiological reasoning . The degree to which a shift from an anthropocentric to a biocentric folkbiology is a universal aspect of conceptual development has not been addressed by previous research . To do so requires looking at conceptual development among children that differ in relevant ways from Carey’s population ( Coley , 2000 ) . It is important to examine the generality of this anthropocentric pattern of reasoning , on at least two grounds . First , as we have just noted , anthropocentric folkbiology may reﬂect a lack of close experience with the biological world . More precisely , urban children may be relative folkbiological novices . Indeed , there is evidence suggesting that knowledge has an impact on young children’s reliance on humans as a base for reasoning . Inagaki and Hatano ( 1987 , 1991 ) ﬁnd that humans serve as a privileged base for property projection , but that this process is constrained by knowledge . For example , properties are not projected from humans to nonhuman organisms when such an inference would contradict children’s knowledge of the nonhuman in question . This account differs from other models of analogy in that ( 1 ) rather than searching for most appropriate analogical base , a decision is made on whether humans are appropriate or not , and ( 2 ) object - speciﬁc knowledge is used , not to choose an appropriate analogical base , but rather to ( a ) judge the feasibility of the already - predicted behavior , and ( b ) compute the organism’s similarity to humans . Moreover , this account differs from Carey’s in that humans constitute a privileged analogical base because of children’s relatively rich knowledge about humans , not because of the centrality of humans in children’s biological theories . Furthermore , Inagaki ( 1990 ) presented evidence that knowledge inﬂuences children’s use of biological analogy . In her study all children were asked questions about observable and nonobservable properties of goldﬁsh , asked to reason about goldﬁsh in novel situations , and asked to reason about a novel aquatic animal ( a frog ) in similar situations . Children who were actively raising goldﬁsh possessed more knowledge about both observable and unobservable attributes of goldﬁsh . They were also more likely to make reasonable predictions about the behavior of goldﬁsh in novel situations . Most importantly , while both groups tended to analo - gize from humans to frogs when answering questions about frogs , the goldﬁsh raisers were more likely to analogize from goldﬁsh to frogs when answering the same questions . This suggests that knowledge of goldﬁsh enabled children who were actively raising goldﬁsh to employ goldﬁsh as an analogical base in a way that children who were not goldﬁsh raisers could not . Similar differences in knowledge and associated reasoning patterns are docu - mented in another study of our research team . Atran et al . ( 2001 ) found that among Yukatek Maya ( southern Mexico ) young girls showed less differentiation than boys when the peccary was the base for induction , a pattern consistent with an effect of experience or familiarity . Boys go with their fathers into the forest at an early age and , therefore , are much more familiar with the peccary than are girls . In general , for this rural population even the youngest children tested ( 4 – 5 - year - olds ) showed no evidence of anthropocentrism ; they generalized readily from both humans and 30 N . Ross et al . / Cognitive Development 18 ( 2003 ) 25 – 47 other animals as a function of biological relatedness . Note that the experiential differences documented in both Atran et al . ( 2001 ) and Inagaki ( 1990 ) undermine arguments about urban children being heavily exposed to and knowledgeable about animals ( bugs , squirrels , etc . ) . In this study , we take the issue a step further by examining how differences in experience and / or culture might lead to differences in reasoning about plants and animals . Following Carey , we teach children novel properties about humans , wolves , bees , goldenrod , and water , and then see whether they are willing to project these new properties to an array of animals , plants , and nonliving ob - jects . Of central importance is the question of comparative development : how do experience and cultural beliefs about nature affect inferences in the biological domain ? To address this question we examine children from three distinct populations : Native American children from the Menominee Indian Tribe of Wisconsin , rural majority culture children from the neighboring town of Shawano , Wisconsin , and Urban children from East Boston , MA . For a number of reasons , the Menominee population is of particular interest for this study . First , traditional folkbiological knowledge may be especially salient to the Menominee . Unlike most woodland tribes , the Menominee reservation occupies ( a small fraction of ) their traditional range ; hence , traditional knowledge of local plant and animal species is still cur - rent and pertinent . Menominee harvest a wide array of forest products ( such as timber , ﬁrewood , ginseng , wild berries , roots , and mushrooms ) and children par - ticipate from an early age on in these activities . Hunting and ﬁshing is common for children of both sexes and one can frequently observe groups of children ( of different ages ) pursuing these activities along the rivers and lakes of the reser - vation . Although this does not preclude them from owning pets and watching television ( which they also do ) , it casts their relation with the environment in a different perspective . The Menominee tribe is well known for its record of sus - tainable forestry ( Hall & Pecore , 1995 ) . In part , this seems to reﬂect a consen - sual folkecological model ( see Medin et al . , 2002 ) that stresses the importance of living kinds interacting in the local environment , including interacting with humans . The nearby majority culture town of Shawano provides a useful comparison population . Children in Shawano grow up in a very similar physical environment , also are introduced to ﬁshing and hunting at an early age and also have a great deal of ﬁrst hand experience with the natural world . However , with respect to the predominant adult models ( the potential end product of the developmental process ) we still ﬁnd clear cultural differences . Ecological relations are much more salient and important for Menominee ﬁshermen than for majority culture ﬁshermen ( Medin et al . , 2002 ) . Examining these populations allows us to examine the pervasiveness of an - thropocentric origins of folkbiology , and to begin to “triangulate” with respect to possible causes of conceptual differences ( Bailenson , Shum , Atran , Medin , & Coley , 2002 ; Medin et al . , 2002 ) . To the degree that the two Wisconsin N . Ross et al . / Cognitive Development 18 ( 2003 ) 25 – 47 31 populations are similar , experience is implicated in shaping folkbiological beliefs . To the degree that the rural majority culture children resemble the urban children rather than the Menominee children , a role of cultural beliefs , practices and goals about nature may be implicated . Distinct patterns among the three populations might suggest a combination of these factors in shaping conceptual development , whereas commonalties among all the groups would suggest candidates for univer - sals in development . Obviously , whatever the results are ( other than universals ) , much work remains to be done to understand the causes of these differences . How are distinct cultural models learned and transmitted ? What are the channels of learning , and what kind of experience has what kind of effects ? To tackle these issues is beyond the scope of this paper . To address them we need ﬁrst a clear understanding of the differences and commonalties in children’s development of folkbiology . This issue is the main focus of what follows . Our study differed from Carey’s in that we included two additional types of inductive bases , goldenrod and water . We added goldenrod so that we could ex - amine generalization both from animals to plants and from plants to animals . We had reason to believe that Menominee children would have a broad view of living kinds that includes not only plants but also natural entities such as rocks . In tra - ditional Menominee culture all natural entities like rocks and water are alive ( in related work in progress we are systematically examining cultural differences in children’s conception of alive by a series of detailed probes ) . Our original motiva - tion for including water as a base was to see if ecological relations might play some role in children’s inductions . Previously we had found that adults knowledgeable about biology often rely on ecological reasoning strategies ( López et al . , 1997 , Profﬁtt , Coley , & Medin , 2000 ) and we were interested in whether and when such strategies might appear in children’s reasoning . As it turned out , however , when water is a base children use a wide variety of strategies and it is difﬁcult to draw any clear conclusions . To reduce the complexity of an already complex design , we do not present the results for water as a base in this paper . Nonetheless , we were able to educe evidence for ecological reasoning from other bases . 2 . Method 2 . 1 . Participants A total of 242 children from three distinct populations participated in the study . NativeAmericanchildrenattendedKeshenaElementaryinKeshena , WI , arecently built school located on the Menominee Reservation . Rural children attended Lin - coln Elementary School in neighboring Shawano , WI . Urban children attended the Guild School located in an urban area of East Boston , MA . Participants in each locale were divided into three age groups : Kindergart - ners and ﬁrst - graders ( “young” ) , second - and third - graders ( “middle” ) , and fourth - graders ( “old” ) . Details on mean ages and ranges for each population are presented 32 N . Ross et al . / Cognitive Development 18 ( 2003 ) 25 – 47 Table 1 Mean ages and age range for the individual groups Group Age group Count Mean age Age range Urban majority 6 - year - olds 14 6 - 0 5 - 4 – 6 - 8 8 - year - olds 16 8 - 0 7 - 3 – 9 - 10 10 - year - olds 26 10 - 0 9 - 0 – 11 - 2 Rural majority 6 - year - olds 29 6 - 6 6 - 0 – 6 - 10 8 - year - olds 50 8 - 1 7 - 7 – 8 - 6 10 - year - olds 30 9 - 8 9 - 8 – 10 - 9 Rural Menominee 6 - year - olds 24 6 - 03 5 - 06 – 7 - 06 8 - year - olds 32 8 - 07 7 - 08 – 9 - 05 10 - year - olds 21 10 - 03 9 - 08 – 11 - 00 in Table 1 . All children were monolingual English speakers ( though Menominee children typically know Menominee terms for clan animals ) , and were interviewed individually by research assistants from their community . 2 . 2 . Materials Detailed color drawings of ﬁve different inferential bases ( human , wolf , bee , goldenrod , water ) and 16 target objects ( human , bear , raccoon , eagle , bluejay , tur - tle , gartersnake , sturgeon , trout , ﬂy , worm , maple , milkweed , rock , pencil , bicycle ) were used to present the questions . Categories were chosen to cover a large range of plants , animals , and nonliving objects . Bases were chosen to correspond to Carey’s items ( human , dog and bee ) , as well as to examine the extent to which children were willing to project properties of plants ( from goldenrod ) . Target objects fell into higher order classes ( nonhuman mammals , birds , reptiles , ﬁsh , invertebrates , plants , nonliving natural objects , and human - made artifacts ) . 2 . 3 . Design Children were asked about projecting unfamiliar properties from all ﬁve bases to all 16 targets . Properties were the names of substances ( sacra , andro , estro , hema , and gluco ) said to be found inside the base . A different property was used with each base , and bases and targets were presented in a random order for each child . Most children took more than one session to ﬁnish the task . 2 . 4 . Procedure Children who had received parental permission were interviewed individually at their school . Each child was ﬁrst given two warm - up tasks . In the ﬁrst , they were asked to name all the plants and animals that they knew . In the second , they were shown a shape and asked two questions about it . For instance , they might N . Ross et al . / Cognitive Development 18 ( 2003 ) 25 – 47 33 be shown a red triangle and asked , “Is this red ? Is it a square ? ” The object was to get the child to answer both “yes” and “no” in the experimental context and to minimize response biases . Children were then shown a picture of one of the bases and asked to name it . If they named it correctly , they were given positive feedback . If not , they were gently corrected . Next , they were taught a new property about the base . For example , the experimenter might show the wolf picture , and say , “Now , there’s this stuff called andro . Andro is found inside some kinds of things . One kind of thing that has andro inside is wolves . Now , I’m going to show you some pictures of other kinds of things , and I want you to tell me if you think they have andro inside like wolves do , OK ? ” Children were then shown each target individually , asked to name them ( the ﬁrst time through , with feedback given as above ) , and then asked whether they “have andro inside , like the [ base ] . ” Questions were asked generically , about the kinds in question ( “Do trout have andro inside , like wolves do ? ” ) rather than about the individuals pictured ( “Does this trout have andro inside , like this wolf does ? ” ) . Responses were scored 1 for “yes” ( making the projection from base to target ) and 0 for “no” ( declining to make the projection ) . Like Carey , we took property projection as a measure of perceived biological afﬁnity . The fact that we found that associations may be made on the basis of either taxonomic similarity or ecological relatedness poses something of an interpretative challenge . 3 . Results Each of the three study populations produced a unique proﬁle . ( Mean projec - tions by base , target and age for the three groups presented in Tables 2 – 4 . ) Although there were a number of similarities , the clear differences undermine the idea that anthropocentrism is a universal feature of folkbiological development . Below we detail these results organized to address three questions : the extent to which bio - logical similarity guided projections , evidence for anthropocentric reasoning , and evidence for causal / ecological reasoning . 3 . 1 . Within - group differences We conducted factor analyses for each age group for each population to see if we could ﬁnd distinct patterns of responding within a group . The rationale for this analysis is to test if one underlying model ( factor ) explains a large amount of the variance . If this is the case , we can readily assume a general consensus among the participants ( see Romney , Weller , & Batchelder , 1986 for the original model and Atran et al . , 1999 for its application as a tool to explore existing consensus ) . In almost every case a single factor solution gave a good account of the data and there were no obvious subgroups . For the young urban children there was no clear consensus and the second factor accounted for 12 % of the variance . When we 34 N . R o ss e t a l . / C ogn iti ve D eve l op m e n t 18 ( 2003 ) 25 – 47 N . R o ss e t a l . / C ogn iti ve D eve l op m e n t 18 ( 2003 ) 25 – 47 35 36 N . R o ss e t a l . / C ogn iti ve D eve l op m e n t 18 ( 2003 ) 25 – 47 N . Ross et al . / Cognitive Development 18 ( 2003 ) 25 – 47 37 separated young urban children based on their second factor scores , the most salient difference was that one group tended to say yes to most of the projections and the other group tended to say no to them . Both subgroups had broad , undifferentiated generalizations . Overall , there were no salient within - group clusters and the group patterns are not artifacts of averaging over distinct sub - proﬁles . 3 . 2 . Biological similarity as a guide to projections If children have a clear notion of biological afﬁnity , the likelihood of projec - tion should be predicted by biological similarity between base and target . We addressed this question in several ways . First , we conducted trend analyses to as - certain whether projections of properties from human and wolf showed a linear decrease in likelihood to bases in the following order : mammals , birds , reptiles and ﬁsh , invertebrates , and plants . A reliable linear trend would indicate projections based on biological similarity . R - squared values for the regressions , by age group and population , are presented in Table 5 . Second , in order to further detail the shape of these linear trends , we combined our targets into higher order categories : ( 1 ) higher animals ( nonhuman mammals , birds , and reptiles ) , ( 2 ) lower animals ( ﬁsh and invertebrates ) , ( 3 ) plants , and ( 4 ) inanimates . We then conducted separate 3 ( age group ) × 4 ( target group ) ANOVAs for each population exploring projections from human and wolf as a function of the phylogenic distance from these bases to the targets . Projections based on biological similarity should show decreasing strength with phylogenetic distance from the bases ; moreover , differences in pro - jection to each base group may also be informative . Third , biological similarity predicts that projections from goldenrod should be relatively high to plants , and higher to animals than to inanimates . Moreover , this pattern of projections from Table 5 R – squared values for linear trend analyses of projections from human and wolf Group From human From wolf BostonYoung No trend No trend Middle . 47 ∗ . 90 ∗∗ Old . 77 ∗∗ . 87 ∗∗ ShawanoYoung . 74 ∗∗ . 74 ∗∗ Middle . 90 ∗∗ . 89 ∗∗ Old . 86 ∗∗ . 85 ∗∗ MenomineeYoung . 54 ∗∗ . 64 ∗∗ Middle . 65 ∗∗ . 91 ∗∗ Old . 81 ∗∗ . 87 ∗∗ Note : ( ∗ ) P < . 05 , ( ∗∗ ) P < . 001 . 38 N . Ross et al . / Cognitive Development 18 ( 2003 ) 25 – 47 goldenrod can also be taken as evidence for some uniﬁed concept of living thing subsuming plants and animals . We therefore examined projections from goldenrod using the same analysis strategy . 3 . 3 . Urban children Patterns of projection for young urban children differed from middle and older children in several ways . First , trend analyses show no decreasing projections from human or wolf as a function of phylogenic distance ( see Table 5 ) . Young ur - ban children show evidence of biological similarity only at a very gross level . Projections from human did not differ by target ; young urban children were no more likely to project properties from human to bear than from human to rock . However , projections from wolf to other animals and plants were higher than to inanimates ( F ( 3 , 39 ) = 4 . 78 , M . S . E . = . 053 , P = . 0062 ) . Also , pro - jections from goldenrod to plants were higher than to other target categories ( F ( 3 , 39 ) = 5 . 15 , M . S . E . = . 069 , P = . 0043 ) , although this seems to be due to local similarity rather than any sense of living thing as a coherent concept ; projections from plants to animals didn’t differ from projections from plants to inanimates . In contrast , middle and older urban children both showed reliable linear trends ; projectionsdecreasedwithdecreasingbiologicalsimilaritybetweenbaseandtarget ( see Table 5 ) . Moreover , projections from human to higher animals were stronger than projections to lower animals and plants , all of which were stronger than projections to inanimates ( F ( 3 , 117 ) = 26 . 41 , M . S . E . = . 083 , P < . 0001 ) . Projections from wolf to higher animals were stronger than projections to lower animals which were stronger than projections to plants , which were stronger than projections to inanimates ( F ( 3 , 120 ) = 78 . 06 , M . S . E . = . 049 , P < . 0001 ) . Projections from goldenrod to plants were higher than to animals , which in turn were higher than to inanimates ( F ( 3 , 120 ) = 58 . 56 , M . S . E . = . 063 , P < . 0001 ) suggesting both biological similarity and some idea of afﬁnity between plants and animals . Thus , projection patterns for middle and older urban children reﬂect a much more reﬁned sense of biological similarity than for younger children . 3 . 4 . Rural children Unlike urban children , Shawano children’s projections showed linear decreases with decreasing biological similarity at all ages ( Table 5 ) . Projections from hu - man to higher animals were stronger than projections to lower animals which were stronger than projections to plants , which were stronger than projections to inanimates ( F ( 3 , 144 ) = 29 . 16 , M . S . E . = . 074 , P < . 0001 ) . Likewise , projec - tions from wolf decreased signiﬁcantly to each increasingly distant target group ( F ( 3 , 147 ) = 59 . 88 , M . S . E . = . 057 , P < . 0001 ) . Finally , like the two older ur - ban groups , projections from goldenrod to plants were higher than to animals , which in turn were higher than to inanimates ( F ( 3 , 147 ) = 79 . 10 , M . S . E . = . 052 , N . Ross et al . / Cognitive Development 18 ( 2003 ) 25 – 47 39 P < . 0001 ) indicating both biological similarity and some idea of afﬁnity between plants and animals . The only age difference in responses was that older children were more likely to project from goldenrod than were middle or younger children ( F ( 2 , 147 ) = 4 . 45 , M . S . E . = . 148 , P = . 0167 ) . Thus , there is clear evidence of projections based on biological similarity at all ages in the rural majority culture population . 3 . 5 . Menominee children As with the rural majority culture children , reliable linear trends for Menom - inee children of all ages show clear conceptions of biological afﬁnity in their projections from human and wolf ( Table 5 ) . Projections from human to higher and lower animals were stronger than projections to plants , which were stronger than projections to inanimates ( F ( 3 , 153 ) = 51 . 09 , M . S . E . = . 068 , P < . 0001 ) . Interestingly , unlike the two majority culture groups , Menominee children did not differentially attribute properties from humans to higher versus lower animals . This might reﬂect a different sense of the place of humans in the biological world . Like rural children , Menominee projections from wolf decreased signiﬁcantly to each increasingly distant target group ( F ( 3 , 153 ) = 43 . 08 , M . S . E . = . 085 , P < . 0001 ) . Finally , like the older urban children and all rural groups , Menom - inee projections from goldenrod to plants were higher than to animals , which in turn were higher than to inanimates ( F ( 3 , 153 ) = 50 . 20 , M . S . E . = . 068 , P < . 0001 ) . The only age difference in responses was that older children were more likely to project from human than were middle or younger children ( F ( 2 , 153 ) = 5 . 03 , M . S . E . = . 165 , P = . 0101 ) . Thus , there is clear evidence of projections based on a reﬁned sense of biological similarity at all ages among Menominee children . Another notable trend , most evident in the children’s justiﬁcations , is that Menominee children often made inferences in terms of ecological relations . All age groups showed a propensity for generalizing from bees to bears and they often mentioned that a bee might sting a bear or that a bear would eat honey . These sorts of justiﬁcations only appeared in older rural majority culture children and not at all with the urban children . 3 . 6 . Summary Biological similarity guided the projections of middle and older urban children , and of all age groups of rural and Menominee children . Likewise , stronger projec - tions from goldenrod to animals versus inanimates suggests some uniﬁed concept of living thing in all of these groups . Young urban children showed evidence of biological similarity only at a very gross level ; indeed , examination of Table 2 suggests a largely indiscriminate pattern of projection for this group . In contrast , young rural and Menominee children show clear evidence of a differentiated sense of biological similarity . Finally , Menominee children were just as likely to project 40 N . Ross et al . / Cognitive Development 18 ( 2003 ) 25 – 47 properties from human to lower animals as to higher animals , which may reﬂect a greater perceived intimacy between humans and nonhuman animals . 3 . 7 . Anthropocentrism An anthropocentric folkbiology predicts that , on average , projections from hu - mans — the central exemplar of living thing — should be stronger than projections from other living things . To examine this , we compare average projections from human , wolf , bee , and goldenrod to all targets . Furthermore , according to Carey , children’s anthropocentric folkbiology leads to asymmetries in projection favor - ing humans . To measure asymmetries in projection , for each child the average of projections from human to mammal , insect , and plant targets was calculated , as was the average of projections from wolf , bee , and goldenrod to human . If asym - metries exist , then average projections from human to speciﬁc targets should be higher than average projections from related bases to human targets . Our three populations showed clear differences in the presence and developmental course of anthropocentric reasoning . 3 . 8 . Urban children The urban sample showed mixed evidence of anthropocentric reasoning . Each age group showed a different pattern of overall projections from the four living bases , although contrary to the anthropocentric prediction , humans did not emerge as privileged . For younger children , there were no differences between average projections ( F ( 3 , 39 ) = 1 . 18 , M . S . E . = . 034 , P = . 330 ) . Remember , however , that their projections were broad and indiscriminate . For the middle age group , projections from human , wolf , and bee did not differ from each other , but all were stronger than projections from goldenrod ( F ( 3 , 42 ) = 8 . 46 , M . S . E . = . 013 , P = . 0002 ) . For older children , projections from human were only marginally stronger than projections from goldenrod ; projections from wolf and bee differed from neither ( F ( 3 , 75 ) = 2 . 58 , M . S . E . = . 013 , P = . 059 ) . In contrast , both the middle and older urban children show clear asymmetries in their projections . To test for asymmetries , mean projections from wolf , bee , and goldenrod to human were subtracted from mean projections from human to mammals , insects , and plants . Higher values represent stronger anthropocentric asymmetries in projection . One - tailed t - tests were used to compare these difference scores to zero for each age group . Although young urban children showed no asymmetries , middle ( M = . 289 , t ( 14 ) = 5 . 77 , P < . 0001 ) and older ( M = . 250 , t ( 25 ) = 4 . 02 , P = . 0002 ) urban children clearly favored projections from humans over projections to humans . The lack of asymmetries in the youngest urban group may be a byproduct of their relative lack of systematic projections over these stimuli ; we return to this point in Section 4 . Results for the older groups are consistent with Carey’s predictions about anthropocentric folkbiology . It is interesting to note , however , that in our urban population there was no reduction in N . Ross et al . / Cognitive Development 18 ( 2003 ) 25 – 47 41 asymmetries over time ; the pattern was as strongly evident among fourth graders as among second graders . 3 . 9 . Rural children The rural , majority culture sample also showed mixed evidence of anthro - pocentric reasoning . Age groups did not differ in overall patterns of projections from the four living bases ; no differences between average projections emerged ( F ( 3 , 144 ) = . 25 , M . S . E . = . 023 , P = . 8596 ) . Some anthropocentric asym - metries were evident , although the differences were smaller than for the urban children , and asymmetries weakened and disappeared among older rural chil - dren . Speciﬁcally , young rural children showed reliable asymmetries ( M = . 167 , t ( 15 ) = 1 . 91 , P = . 0379 ) , middle children showed marginal asymmetries ( M = . 136 , t ( 21 ) = 1 . 71 , P = . 0506 ) and older rural children showed no asymmetries at all . Like the urban children , rural children show some evidence of anthropocentric reasoning , but in striking contrast to urban children , anthropocentrism declines over time . 3 . 10 . Menominee children Menominee children showed virtually no evidence of anthropocentric reason - ing . Like the urban , majority culture group , all age groups projected equally from the four living bases ( F ( 3 , 153 ) = . 79 , M . S . E . = . 041 , P = . 5001 ) . Unlike the other groups , Menominee young and middle age groups showed no anthro - pocentric asymmetries . Interestingly , older Menominee children did show reliable anthropocentric asymmetries ( M = . 238 , t ( 13 ) = 2 . 74 , P = . 0084 ) . This , how - ever , is the only evidence of anthropocentric reasoning to emerge from Menominee children . 3 . 11 . Summary The three populations show distinct developmental trajectories with regards to anthropocentric reasoning . For the urban population , anthropocentric reasoning seems to accompany increasingly organized folk biological projections , and re - mains strong in 10 - year - olds . For the rural population , anthropocentric reasoning is present early on , but is waning in 8 - year - olds and disappears altogether in older children . For Menominee children , there is almost no evidence of anthropocentric reasoning at all . 3 . 12 . Ecological reasoning By ecological reasoning we refer to cases in which the inductive reasoning of the children is not based on biological similarity but on a relation the two species entertain . An example for the former would be that A and B share a 42 N . Ross et al . / Cognitive Development 18 ( 2003 ) 25 – 47 property because they are both mammals . An example for the latter would be that A ( bees ) and B ( bears ) share a property because bears eat honey or bees sting bears . Obviously , the two reasoning strategies are distinct and one might argue that ecological reasoning has to be grounded in more speciﬁc knowledge . Our stimuli were not designed to measure ecological reasoning . However , other results ( e . g . , López et al . , 1997 ; Medin et al . , 2002 ; Profﬁtt et al . , 2000 ) give us reason to ask whether culture and / or experience may heighten the salience of causal / ecological relations as a basis for inductive projection , especially in rural and Native American children . We have already mentioned that the Menominee children tended to give eco - logical justiﬁcations for inferences from bees to bears . We also ﬁnd some evidence that the rural majority culture children show ecological reasoning in the projection task . In particular , human interaction with ﬁsh and the ecological role of bees seem to be salient knowledge for both of our older rural samples . Consider , for example , projections from bees to humans , bee to bears and from bee to plants . Between the middle and old group of rural majority culture children , the proportions increase from . 20 , . 28 and . 30 , respectively to . 53 , . 73 and . 58 . The corresponding propor - tions for the urban middle and old groups of children go from . 31 , . 50 and . 40 to . 08 , . 62 , and . 44 . A three ( item ) by two ( age ) by two ( location ) ANOVA revealed a reliable interaction of age and location ( F = 15 . 5 , M . S . E . = 2 . 8 , df = 1 , 354 , P = . 000 ) . A common justiﬁcation for the rural children is that bees might sting or that bears eat honey . Projections from goldenrod to animals also demonstrate a clear increase not seen in urban children . In brief , rural majority culture children not only make inductions based on biological afﬁnity from an early age ; but older children also show ecological sensitivity not present in urban children . As noted before , we ﬁnd the same sensitivity to ecological factors among even younger Menominee children tested . 4 . General discussion The background for this study was the question of whether an anthropocentric folkbiology would inform reasoning as had been found in previous work with urban populations ( e . g . , Carey , 1985 ) . However , against the backdrop of studies with adults ( Bailenson et al . , 2002 ; López et al . , 1997 ; Medin et al . , 2002 ) and Yukatek Maya children ( Atran et al . , 2001 ) , we expected to ﬁnd both cultural and experiential differences in the development of folkbiological knowledge . Testing urban majority culture children , rural majority culture children , and rural Native American ( Menominee ) children , we observed three distinct developmental tra - jectories . Urban majority - culture children show a clear development from largely un - differentiated projections to similarity - based patterns of projection . For the two groups of older children we ﬁnd clear asymmetries in their projections ( with stronger projections from humans than to humans ) . However , humans do not N . Ross et al . / Cognitive Development 18 ( 2003 ) 25 – 47 43 emerge as privileged or prototypical animals , nor are they seen as one animal among many . Instead , it appears that humans are seen as atypical animals and justiﬁcations for not generalizing from some animal to humans tend to appeal to the claim that humans are not animals ( see also Johnson et al . , 1992 who report related ﬁndings ) . Rural majority - culture children exhibited a clear pattern for reasoning in terms ofbiologicalafﬁnityevenattheyoungestagetested . Asymmetriesbetweenhumans and other animals found among the youngest children tend to disappear with development . Furthermore , rural majority children show a developing sensitivity to ecological relations not observed among urban children . Menominee children provide yet a third proﬁle . The youngest children show broad , similarity - based projection from the four living bases , and exhibit signs of clear ecological reasoning . These trends did not appear to change much with age and none of the age groups showed asymmetries in their projections between humans and other animals . In a sense we expected this precocious ecological responding among Menomi - nee children given the adult data cited earlier ( Medin et al . , 2002 ) suggesting that Menominee ﬁshing experts pay much more attention to ecological relations than do their majority culture counterparts . Although we expect that this cultural differ - ence in “habits of the mind” is passed on to children , we are only now beginning to explore the social channels and cognitive mechanisms of cultural transmission ( Atran et al . , 2002 ; Medin et al . , 2002 ) . These ﬁndings undermine the universality of Carey’s claim of an anthropocen - tric development of folkbiological thought . Evidence seems to point at anthro - pocentrism as being largely an effect of the lack of relevant knowledge about the environment . Hence , with an increase of knowledge of biological afﬁnity and ecological relations , anthropocentrism disappears . The only exceptions are urban children . The lack of knowledge among the younger children of this group seems to inhibit any kind of patterned reasoning about plants and animals . It is logically possible that our rural populations ( both Menominee and majority culture ) are sim - ply advanced in their development and passed through the anthropocentric stage at an earlier age compared to their urban counterparts . However , there is no empir - ical support for such an assumption . Even 4 – 5 - year - old Yukatec Maya children in Mexico fail to show evidence for an anthropocentric folkbiology ( see Atran et al . , 2001 ) . Furthermore , later aspects of the developmental trajectories ( both within our data and looking at adults ) do not coincide across the three groups . This means that there is no compelling reason to entertain the idea of parallel developmental processes . Itisimportanttonotethatitappearstobethelackofknowledgeamongyoungur - ban children that drives their anthropocentric understanding of folkbiology . Given that we do not ﬁnd any evidence among children with greater knowledge of the natural environment , the data seem to reﬂect the fact that urban children use a readily accessible cognitive heuristic that compensates for the lack of sustained contact and interaction with local biodiversity . This readily accessible crutch can 44 N . Ross et al . / Cognitive Development 18 ( 2003 ) 25 – 47 be discarded once a certain level of biological awareness and competence has been achieved , leading to the conceptual shift described by Susan Carey . This interpre - tation is bolstered by two ﬁndings . First , it has been documented that western societies since the industrial revolution have indeed steadily lost intimacy and knowledge with respect to local biota ( Wolff et al . , 1999 ) . Second , studies with Maya children in Yucatan , Mexico , showed gender effects caused by differences in expertise ( Atran et al . , 2001 ) . The data suggest two future avenues for further work . First , we plan to look at exotic species , like those found in zoos , in order to test the role of familiarity with the species . On some grounds one might expect that urban children would fare better as they may be more familiar with exotic species than native animals . Rural children have much less experience with exotic species but , based on Inagaki’s ( 1990 ) ﬁndings on children’s ability to use their knowledge about certain species to reason about others , we do not expect different results in rural children . Second , it remains somewhat unclear why Menominee and rural majority culture children differ from one another . Here we will have to isolate these differences and look at the cultural contexts of learning about biology in order to understand the emergence of these different patterns . Finally , it is of considerable practical interest to understand whether and how these group differences carry over to and inﬂuence learning in the classroom . It is interesting to consider how one might take advantage of the relative precocity of the rural children ( especially the Menominee children ) , or how one might remedy the relatively impoverished experience of the urban children . 5 . Conclusion In this paper we have analyzed the development of folkbiological induction in children of three distinct cultural groups . Our ﬁndings suggest different underlying construals of the biological world among our three populations . The differences between urban and rural majority - culture children seem to reﬂect differences in both the cultural support for an interest in nature and for direct experience with nature . Both groups of majority - culture children may share anthropocentric cul - tural beliefs , but the richer experience of rural children seems to support more biocentric thought earlier than is seen among urban children . One way to capture the difference between the two rural groups is to argue that Menominee children’s patterns of folkbiological reasoning reﬂect a framework where ecological reasoning , the relations between species — including humans — is very salient . Some evidence for such a view comes from studies with Menominee andmajoritycultureﬁshexperts ( Medinetal . , 2002 ) . Majoritycultureexpertsshow a clear inﬂuence of goal orientation in the ways they perceive local ﬁsh while Menominee experts pay more attention to ecological features . Goal orientation , however , is another way to put human beings in the center of the perspective — as different from animals . N . Ross et al . / Cognitive Development 18 ( 2003 ) 25 – 47 45 Both culture and experience play an important role in the development of folk - biological knowledge . We think that analyzing cognitive development in terms of domain - speciﬁcity is a very fruitful strategy . Nonetheless , given our results , it seems hazardous to develop universal generalizations on the basis of data from children from populations where both cultural support for , and direct experience with , nature is generally impoverished . The novel empirical implication in this regard is that relative expertise and interaction , rather than mere exposure and observation , with respect to natural biodiversity may be the default condition for most human groups ( and perhaps for ancestral humanity ) . From a theoretical perspective , then , the chief interest ( other than mere convenience ) in studying “standard groups , ” such as urbanized children in and around major western research institutions , may not be to establish a baseline for generalizations about folkbiological knowledge , but to explore the cognitive consequences of limited input and devolutionary cultural processes on theory building in an impoverished environment . Acknowledgments The authors thank the children , parents and staff of the Guild School of Boston , the Lincoln Elementary School in Shawano , Wisconsin and the Keshena Elemen - tary School on the Menominee Reservation . We also would like to thank Bernadette Bear , Connie Rasmussen , Bill Waukau , Brian White , Lisa James , Robin Pitt , Kay Frederick , Anna Corinne Freeman and Christopher Lawson for their contribution to this project . Sandra Waxman provided constructive comments and suggestions throughout this project . We also thank Irene Pywasit for her advice and we dedicate this article to her memory . This research was supported by NIH grants MH55079 and RO1HD41653 - 01 and NSF grants 9983260 and BCS - 0132469 . References Anglin , J . ( 1970 ) . The growth of word meaning . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Atran , S . , Medin , D . , Ross , N . , Lynch , E . , Coley , J . , Ucan Ek’ , E . , & Vapnarsky , V . ( 1999 ) . Folkecology andcommonsmanagementintheMayaLowlands . ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademyofScience , 96 , 7598 – 7603 . Atran , S . , Medin , D . L . , Lynch , E . , Vapnarsky , V . , Ucan Ek’ , E . , & Sousa , P . ( 2001 ) . Folkbiology doesn’t come from folkpsychology : Evidence from Yukatek Maya in cross - cultural perspective . Journal of Cognition and Culture , 1 , 3 – 43 . Atran , S . , Medin , D . , Ross , N . , Lynch , E . , Vapnarsky , V . , Ucan Ek’ , E . , Coley , J . , Timura , C . , & Baran , M . ( 2002 ) . Folkecology , culturalepidemiology , andthespiritofthecommons . Agardenexperiment in the Maya Lowlands , 1991 – 2001 . Current Anthropology , 43 ( 3 ) , 1 – 23 . Au , T . K . , & Romo , L . F . ( 1999 ) . Mechanical causality in children’s “folkbiology . ” In D . L . Medin & S . Atran ( Eds . ) , Folkbiology . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Bailenson , J . , Shum , M . , Atran , S . , Medin , D . , & Coley , J . ( 2002 ) . A bird’s eye view : Triangulating biological categorization and reasoning within and across cultures and expertise levels . Cognition , 84 , 1 – 53 . 46 N . Ross et al . / Cognitive Development 18 ( 2003 ) 25 – 47 Carey , S . ( 1985 ) . Conceptual change in childhood . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Carey , S . ( 1995 ) . On the origin of causal understanding . In D . Sperber , D . Premack , & A . J . Premack ( Eds . ) , Causal cognition : A multidisciplinary debate . New York : Oxford University Press . Carey , S . ( 1999 ) . Sources of conceptual change . In E . Scholnick , K . Nelson , S . Gelman , & P . Miller ( Eds . ) , Conceptual development : Piaget’s legacy . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Coley , J . ( 1995 ) . Emergingdifferentiationoffolkbiologyandfolkpsychology : Attributionsofbiological and psychological properties to living things . Child Development , 66 , 1856 – 1874 . Coley , J . ( 2000 ) . On the importance of comparative research : The case of folkbiology . Child Development Special Issue , 71 ( 1 ) , 82 – 90 . Coley , J . D . , Medin , D . L . , Profﬁtt , J . B , Lynch , E . B . , & Atran , S . ( 1999 ) . Inductive reasoning in folkbiological thought . In D . L . Medin & S . Atran ( Eds . ) , Folkbiology . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Dougherty , J . W . ( 1978 ) . Salience and relativity in classiﬁcation . American Ethnologist , 5 , 66 – 80 . Gelman , S . , & Hirschfeld , L . ( 1999 ) . How biological is essentialism . In D . Medin & S . Atran ( Eds . ) , Folkbiology . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Gelman , S . , & Wellman , H . M . ( 1991 ) . Insides and essences : Early understandings of the nonobvious . Cognition , 38 , 213 – 244 . Gutheil , G . , Vera , A . , & Keil , F . ( 1998 ) . Do houseﬂies think ? Patterns of induction and biological beliefs in development . Cognition , 66 , 33 – 49 . Hall , K . , & Pecore , M . ( 1995 ) . Case study : Menominee tribal enterprises . Madison , WI : Institute for Environmental Studies and the Land Tenure Center , University of Wisconsin - Madison . Hatano , G . , & Inagaki , K . ( 1994 ) . Young children’s naive theory of biology . Cognition , 50 , 171 – 188 . Hatano , G . , & Inagaki , K . ( 1999 ) . A developmental perspective on informal biology . In D . L . Medin & S . Atran ( Eds . ) , Folkbiology . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Hickling , A . K . , & Gelman , S . A . ( 1995 ) . How does your garden grow ? Early conceptualization of seeds and their place in the plant growth cycle . Child Development , 66 , 856 – 876 . Inagaki , K . ( 1990 ) . The effects of raising animals on children’s biological knowledge . British Journal of Developmental Psychology , 8 , 119 – 129 . Inagaki , K . , & Hatano , G . ( 1987 ) . Young children’s spontaneous personiﬁcation as analogy . Child Development , 58 , 1013 – 1020 . Inagaki , K . , & Hatano , G . ( 1991 ) . Constrainedpersonanalogyinyoungchildren’sbiologicalinference . Cognitive Development , 6 , 219 – 231 . Johnson , S . , & Carey , S . ( 1998 ) . Knowledge enrichment and conceptual change in folkbiology : Evidence from people with Williams Syndrome . Cognitive Psychology , 37 , 156 – 200 . Johnson , K . E . , Mervis , C . B . , & Boster , J . S . ( 1992 ) . Developmental changes within the structure of the mammal domain . Developmental Psychology , 28 , 74 – 83 . Keil , F . C . ( 1989 ) . Concepts , kinds , and cognitive development . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . López , A . , Atran , S . , Coley , J . D . , Medin , D . L . , & Smith , E . ( 1997 ) . The tree of life : Universal and cultural features of folkbiological taxonomies and inductions . Cognitive Psychology , 32 , 251 – 295 . Medin , D . , & Atran , S . ( 1999 ) . Introduction . Folkbiology . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Medin , D . L . , Lynch , E . , Coley , J . , & Atran , S . ( 1997 ) . Categorization and reasoning among expert populations : Do all roads lead to Rome ? Cognitive Psychology , 32 , 49 – 96 . Medin , D . , Lynch , E . , & Solomon , K . ( 2000 ) . Aretherekindsofconcepts . AnnualReviewofPsychology , 51 , 121 – 147 . Medin , D . , Ross , N . , Atran , S . , Burnett , R . , Blok , S . ( 2002 ) . Categorization and reasoning in relation to culture and expertise . The psychology of learning and motivation ( Vol . 41 , pp . 1 – 41 ) . New York : Academic Press . Murphy , G . L . , & Medin , D . L . ( 1985 ) . The role of theories in conceptual coherence . Psychological Review , 92 , 289 – 316 . Profﬁtt , J . , Coley , J . , & Medin , D . ( 2000 ) . Expertise and category - based induction . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning . Memory and Cognition , 25 , 811 – 828 . Osherson , D . N . , Smith , E . E . , Wilkie , O . , López , A . , & Shaﬁr , E . ( 1990 ) . Category - based induction . Psychological Review , 97 , 185 – 200 . N . Ross et al . / Cognitive Development 18 ( 2003 ) 25 – 47 47 Rips , L . ( 1975 ) . Inductive judgments about natural categories . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 14 , 665 – 681 . Romney , A . K . , Weller , S . , & Batchelder , W . ( 1986 ) . Culture as consensus : A theory of culture and informant accuracy . American Anthropologist , 88 , 313 – 338 . Ross , N . ( 2002a ) . Lacandon Maya intergenerational change and the erosion of folkbiological knowledge . In J . R . Stepp , F . S . Wyndham , & R . K . Zarger ( Eds . ) , Ethnobiology and biocultural diversity ( pp . 585 – 592 ) . Athens : University of Georgia Press . Ross , N . ( 2002b ) . Cognitive aspects of intergenerational change : Mental models , cultural change and environmental behavior among the Lacandon Maya of Southern Mexico . Human Organization , 61 ( 2 ) , 125 – 138 . Solomon , G . E . A . , Johnson , S . C . , Zaitchik , D . , & Carey , S . ( 1996 ) . Like father , like son : Young children’s understanding of how and why offspring resemble their parents . Child Development , 67 , 151 – 171 . Stross , B . ( 1973 ) . Acquisition of botanical terminology by Tzeltal Children . In M . S . Edmonson ( Ed . ) , Meaning in Mayan languages . The Hague : Mouton and Co . Wellman , H . M . , & Gelman , S . A . ( 1992 ) . Cognitive development : Foundational theories of core domains . Annual Review of Psychology , 43 , 337 – 375 . Wellman , H . M . , & Inagaki , K . ( Eds . ) . ( 1997 ) . The emergence of core domains of thought : Children’s reasoning about physical , psychological and biological phenomenon . New Direction for Child Development . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass Publishers . Wolff , P . , Medin , D . , & Pankratz , C . ( 1999 ) . Evolution and devolution of folkbiological knowledge . Cognition , 73 , 177 – 204 .