Books The Mathematical Association of America , 1993 372 pages $ 35 . 00 " A Cat That Can ' t Be Caught " is the first chapter of this quite readable story of the life of Eric Temple Bell . Con stance Reid carries us along on her private - eye - like search for the truth about his early years , which he had kept secret from his friends , his family , and even from his beloved wife , and which he had even distorted ( the polite word ) when filling out a form for the Cal tech administration in 1943 . By a combina tion of diligence and luck the author has discovered that when Bell was about a year old his father moved the family from Scotland to San Jose , thence south to the farm country of Santa Clara Coun ty , where he began a fruit orchard . It was here that Bell spent his boyhood , and images of an idealized pastoral country side find their way into many of his poems and stories . Why was it necessary for him to keep these years secret ? Reid never finds this out . He was a teenager when his father died , and his mother rerurned the family to England , where Bell entered what we would call a high school and fell in love with mathematics . But it was back in the United States that Bell did his uni versity work - Stanford , Washington , and Columbia . After finishing his PhD , he began his teaching career and for many years seemed to want little more . Mathematical research was a minor ac tivity . Poetry demanded more attention , and it was the time for beginning an epic work , The Scarlet Night , the revision of which was to occupy the last years of his life . It was also the time for his mar riage , at the age of 27 , to his beloved Toby . The author said to Bell ' s son Taine : " The thought has passed my mind that your father might have preferred being a poet to being a mathematician , " to which Taine replied , " I think he might have ifhe had had any success . " Bell found no conflict between his dual interests , and wrote that " mathematics and poetry are simply isomorphic . " His mathematical research began to expand in original directions , which were , however , apparently not very well described in his publications . One of the reviewers contacted by Reid had two favorite instances of Bell ' s style : " the following complete sentence : ' Hence , etc . ' and my very favorite footnote : ' A set of elements form a semi - group if they have the group property , etc . " , A few years later his " recreational writing " began under the name of John Taine ( the basis for the name is obscure - it is not in his family history ) in the genre we now call science fiction . A friend suggested that it served " as a relief from the grind of mathematics . " Although Reid comments clearly on Bell ' s fictional products , her descriptions of his mathematics is another matter ; for Engineering & ScienceIFall1993 37 Lyle Bell ( right ) , E . T . Bell ' s grandson , presents to the Caltech Archives the 1670 edition of the Arithmeticorum of Diophantus , given to Bell when he retired from Caltech . The volume reproduces Fermat ' s famous margin notes postu lating his " last theor em " and is signed by all the members of the 1953 mathemat ics faculty . Accept ing the book is Tom Apostol , professor of mathematics , emeri tus , one of the signers . 38 Engineering & ScienceIFall1993 example : " The paper contains the funda mental general treatment of the algebra ic properties of generating functions that he used to explain the development of his theory of numerical functions , es pecially factorable or multiplicative functions . " I have always thought of myself as one of those readers so sought after by writers in Scientific American the " educated layman " - but that sentence mystifies me . Unhappily , it is not a unique example . In the mid - 1920s , R . A . Millikan persuaded Bell to come to Cal tech , in spite of better financial offers from east ern universities , such as the University of Chicago . He and Toby acquired their small house on the corner of San Pasqua ! and Michigan , and later the lot next door where he built his small hexagonal study in the midst of a bamboo jungle . This was to be the " generating site " for his mathematical papers , the expanding list ofJohn Taine sci - fi novels , and another type of publication that now began to get his attention : books and pamphlets intended to popularize science and mathematics . ( This last seemed ironic to some of his colleagues who found his descriptions of his own work obscute . ) He established good relationships with his fellows on the Caltech math faculty - Harry Bateman , A . D . Michal , Harry Van Buskirk , Morgan Ward ( who had been a graduate student of Bell ' s ) , and others - and a rather stormy one with H . P . Robertson ( also a former Bell student ) . He enjoyed his contacts with other faculty - T . H . Morgan , Paul Epstein , and , in particular , Edwin Hubble . Bell credits Hubble ' s wife , Grace , with important assistance in his nonmathematical writings , for example in his famous set of biographies , Men of Mathematics . Toby died in 1940 , and it seemed to many that Bell was never quite the same . He devoted most of his energy to the revision of his poem , The Scarlet Night , written decades before . He found a retreat in Redondo Beach to work on it without distraction . There , late one night , walking on the beach as was his habit , he was mugged , and was brought back to Pasadena in serious condition . Many of his friends felt that this second event , after Toby ' s death , caused a deep change in his personality . Nevertheless he continued to work on his poem and on another favorite project , a book about Fermat , called The Last Problem . But he was drinking too much and his health was steadily failing . In 1959 his son Taine took him to Taine ' s home in Watsonville to care for him , and it was there he died the following year . The book is a good read ( apart from a few descriptions of his mathematics ) . Opinions about his personality and abilities in his later years are expressed by quotes from those who knew him , and a good search of documents covers his earlier life . She enlisted some expert helpers in reviewing this material . The most interesting discovery for me was the breadth of his activities , which I knew of but never fully appreciated poetry , fiction , popular science , and one really out of left field : his strong hand in the organization and design of the Chi cago World ' s Fair in the early thirties . Albert R . Hibbs , BS ' 45 , PhD ' 55 ( Although a physicist , not a mathematician , Hibbs took courses from Bell and contributed one memorable quote to the book . He is now retired from his position as senior scientist at theJet Propulsion Laboratory . ) Cambridge University Press , 1993 164 pages $ 19 . 95 Most of us probably think we know pretty well what to expect from a book subtitled " what everyone should know abour science " ; in this case , we would be dead wrong . Of course , since that ex pectation has little to do with golems , perhaps we should not be too surprised . Collins and Pinch are among the leading practitioners of the field generally known as " sociology of scientific knowledge , " or SSK . This discipline examines science from the point of view that truths are accepted , controversies resolved , and knowledge created , not by any logically rigorous " scientific meth od , " but rather by social factors . To support their viewpoint , Collins and Pinch present seven case studies of controversy in science , varying widely by topic as well as outcome . An excellent illustration is provided by one that might not occur to many contemporary scientists as particulatly controversial : the roles of the Michelson - Morley exper iment and the Eddington observations of stellar displacement during an eclipse in " proving " the theory of relativity . In the first , complications by various factors that could have caused the observed neg ative result - no dependence on direc tion of the speed of light - - could not be rigorously excluded . Furthermore , another scientist subsequently obtained a positive result ( for which he received a prize from the AAAS in 1925 ) . Similar - ly , in the eclipse studies , some of the results gave deflections compatible with Einstein ' s prediction , while others were more consistent with classical New tonian physics . The experiment was announced as confirming Einstein , though ; the latter set of results was assumed ro be of poorer quality and ignored . From this and other studies including episodes such as Pasteur ' s rejection of spontaneous generation oflife , chemical transfer of memory , gravity waves , and cold fusion - Collins and Pinch conclude that there are no rigorous criteria available by which to judge the validity of an experiment and the resulting implications . Instead , such judgment is inextricably bound up with what one already believes : " relativity . . . is a truth which came into being as a result of decisions abour how we should live our scientific lives . . . a truth brought about by agreement to agree about new things . It was not a truth forced on us by the inexorable logic of a set of crucial experiments . " The chapter on gravity waves intro duces the key concept of the " experi menter ' s regress . " A novel experiment gives a certain result , bur is it a good experiment ? A good experiment would give the correct result - but until we ' ve carried out such an experiment , we don ' t know the correct result . Hence , the authors argue , it is impossible to resolve a disagreement by any rigorous experi mental criteria . Thus , in their view of the cold fusion controversy , choosing to favor Pons and Fleischmann ' s positive results or Nate Lewis ' s negative ones can only be based , ultimately , on whether or not we believe in cold fusion ; a dispas - Engineering & Science / Fall1993 39 What they do show quite clearly is that science is not Superman it doesn ' t leap tall problems in a single bound , but follows an often tortuous and iterative path , affected ( but not determined ) by the social factors upon which they lay so much stress . 40 Engineering & ScienceIFall1993 sionate assessment of the experiments cannot be reached . Collins and Pinch do challenge us to think about scientific research in ways that are probably rather new to most of us . Nonetheless , it is hard to see that they have even come close to justifying such sweeping conclusions , summed up as : " we have shown that scientists at the research front cannot settle their dis agreements through better experimenta tion , more knowledge , more advanced theories , or clearer thinking . " The sup port for the theory of relativity described above may not have been completely unambiguous , but additional results that Collins and Pinch call " mutually rein forcing " have left no doubt even in their minds about its truth . Isn ' t that a good example of settling a disagreement through better experimentation and all the rest ) As for the experimenter ' s regress , again they go too far . It is in fact often possible to assess the validity of an ex periment free from any straitjacket of belief . To take an extreme case , in eval uating the failure to observe a signal one might discover that the apparatus had not been plugged in . Some of the mis takes made by cold fusion researchers were not much less egregious . I would imagine that most readers familiar with the cold fusion story to any degree of detail will disagree strongly with the statement : " In cold fusion we find science as normal . " Should scientists read this book ? It ' s not obvious that Collins and Pinch think so : " this view of science . . . should make very little difference to the way scientists act when they are doing their work at , metaphorically speaking , the laboratory bench . " It seems to me that better sensi tivity to when and where social factors enter into scientific practice could well have a positive effect on scientific prog ress . Collins and Pinch , on the other hand , believe that these factors are ubiq uitous and inescapable , and that under standing the social view of science might even be detrimental to scientists perhaps like the centipede who can ' t walk when he thinks about how he does it . It seems paradoxical but almost inevitable that , having disagreed with so many of their conclusions , I would also contest their low valuation of the poten tial significance of their own work for scientists . In any case , the book amply satisfies one key criterion for recommen dation : it ' s fun to read . What about the use of " golem " as title and central metaphor for science ) The golem , a creature of early Jewish legend , was a clumsy monster , superhu man in physical strength but subhuman in intelligence . The implication is that science bumbles about its business , settling on answers more or less at random , and never learning from its experience how to do things better . In fact , Collins and Pinch have chosen the wrong legendary figure . What they do show clearly is that science is not Super man - it doesn ' t leap tall problems with a single bound , but follows an often tortuous and iterative path , affected ( but not determined ) by the social factors upon which they lay so much stress . For those who needed it , Collins and Pinch con vincingly knock down the straw man ( straw Superman ) ) representing a per fectly rational and straightforward scien tific method . The clay man of golem science that they set in its place is far less convincing . Jay A . Labinger Administrator , Beckman imtitttte Lecturer in Chemistry