Oncogene ( 2018 ) 37 : 6195 – 6211 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41388 - 018 - 0378 - x REVIEW ARTICLE Epithelial – mesenchymal - transition - inducing transcription factors : new targets for tackling chemoresistance in cancer ? Jente van Staalduinen 1 ● David Baker 1 ● Peter ten Dijke 1 ● Hans van Dam 1 Received : 26 July 2017 / Revised : 10 May 2018 / Accepted : 13 May 2018 / Published online : 12 July 2018 © Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature 2018 Abstract Chemoresistance remains a major complication of cancer treatments . Recent data provide strong evidence that chemoresistance is linked to epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) , a latent developmental process , which is re - activated during cancer progression . EMT involves transcriptional reprogramming and is driven by speci ﬁ c EMT transcription factors ( EMT - TFs ) . In this review , we provide support for the idea that EMT - TFs contribute to the development of resistance against cancer therapy and discuss how EMT - TFs might be targeted to advance novel therapeutic approaches to the treatment of cancer . Introduction Epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) is a normal physiological process during which epithelial cells acquire enhanced motility and invasiveness typical of mesenchymal cells . EMT is essential for embryonic development , wound healing , and stem cell biology . At the biochemical level , multiple morphogenic and environmental signals , such as transforming growth factor - β ( TGF - β ) , WNT , epidermal growth factors and platelet - derived growth factors , in ﬂ am - matory cytokines , and integrin receptor ligands have been demonstrated to promote EMT [ 1 , 2 ] . This process is mediated by several EMT - inducing transcription factors ( EMT - TFs ) , including TWIST1 / 2 , SNAI1 / 2 ( SNAI2 is also termed SLUG ) , and ZEB1 / 2 . Mechanistically , EMT - TFs suppress the expression of key epithelial genes such as CDH1 , which encodes the adherens junction protein E - cadherin . More recent studies have shown that EMT - TFs act cooperatively with EMT - inhibiting master regulators such as short RNA molecules miR200 and miR34a and the transcription factors OVOL1 / 2 and grainyhead - like 2 ( GRLH ) 2 . Collectively , these regulatory networks control the integrity of and the balance between the epithelial and mesenchymal phenotypes [ 3 ] . The existence of EMT in cancer was initially met with skepticism , because of a lack of convincing evidence using tumor biopsies . EMT is a transient process and dif ﬁ cult to catch in ﬁ xed clinical samples , and tumor cells that have undergone EMT are dif ﬁ cult to discriminate from cancer - associated ﬁ broblasts ( CAFs ) . Moreover , it stemmed from an absence of a clear de ﬁ nition of EMT coupled to the fact that tumor cells do not faithfully execute what might be described as “ classical ” EMT . Instead , tumor cells undergo a partial EMT resulting in a dynamic , intermediate EMT state . These hybrid epithelial / mesenchymal cells are often characterized by loss of epithelial markers , without apparent gain of morphological mesenchymal traits [ 3 ] . In recent years , several research groups have veri ﬁ ed the existence of these intermediate transitory phases using a variety of sys - tems biology approaches [ 4 – 8 ] . Moreover , circulating tumor cells co - expressing epithelial and mesenchymal markers [ 9 ] , as well as isolated ( ” budded ” ) tumor cells in the tumor stroma , which have lost epithelial traits [ 10 ] , have been hypothesized to have undergone a partial EMT . Although it has become increasingly clear that EMT could play a role in tumor progression , the precise role of ( partial ) EMT in cancer metastasis remains elusive [ 11 ] . How might EMT in ﬂ uence tumor progression ? An obvious answer is that the enhanced cell motility and invasiveness associated with EMT could drive tumor cell dissemination . It is established that induction of EMT can facilitate the early stages of cancer dissemination . Besides * Peter ten Dijke p . ten _ dijke @ lumc . nl 1 Department of Cell and Chemical Biology , Oncode Institute , Leiden University Medical Center , Leiden , Netherlands 1234567890 ( ) ; , : 1234567890 ( ) ; , : inducing morphological changes , SNAI1 and SNAI2 can , for instance , also promote breakdown of the extracellular matrix via upregulation of matrix metalloproteases MT1 - MMP , MT2 - MMP , MMP9 , and MT4 - MMP [ 12 ] . In addi - tion , the EMT - TF TWIST1 has been shown to regulate invadopodia , specialized subcellular structures found in invading tumor cells [ 13 , 14 ] . In recent years , it has become clear that polyclonal cohorts of carcinoma cells , rather than single tumor cells , undergo collective migration from the primary tumor site [ 15 – 17 ] . It has been suggested that within such migrating clusters , there are so - called leader tumor cells with EMT features that pave the way for intravasation into the vasculature . This is supported by the observation that epithelial - mesenchymal hybrid tumor cells can be a part of the circulating tumor cell aggregates [ 18 , 19 ] . It has also been shown that tumor cells undergoing TGF - β - induced EMT adopt properties of immune cells and migrate in a targeted fashion through the lymphatic system [ 20 , 21 ] . Interestingly , other stromal cell types , such as CAFs might also be involved in collective invasion . CAFs have been observed to express EMT - TFs and might con - tribute to the invasive edge of migrating cell cohorts [ 22 ] . In a recent study of Labernadie et al . CAFs were shown to physically interact with tumor cells via heterotypic adhe - sions ( E - Cadherin / N - Cadherin ) [ 23 ] . It has been reported that during metastatic outgrowth at distant sites , tumor cells with EMT properties may revert to a more epithelial phenotype through the process of mesenchymal – epithelial transition ( MET ) . Such transitions between different epithelial vs . mesenchymal states have been visualized in real time in the MMTV - PyMT mouse model of breast cancer . Through intravital microscopy , it was observed that a small population of breast - epithelial tumor cells at the primary tumor site underwent EMT and displayed migratory behavior . Subsequently , these mesenchymal - like tumor cells rapidly ( within a few cell divisions ) converted back to a more epithelial cell state at the distal site of metastatic outgrowth [ 24 ] . However , the absolute necessity of the EMT program for metastasis is still under debate . Transient overexpression of TWIST1 and SNAI1 has been shown to increase metastasis rates in genetically engineered mouse models of squamous cell carcinoma and breast cancer , respectively [ 25 – 27 ] . In a con ﬂ icting study , repression of EMT - TF including SNAI1 through overexpression of MiR - 200 did not result in a decrease in lung metastasis in a multifocal breast adeno - carcinoma model [ 28 ] . In another study , conditional knockout of SNAI1 or TWIST1 in a genetically engineered spontaneous pancreatic adenocarcinoma model showed a dispensability of EMT for metastasis [ 29 ] . Whether condi - tional knockouts of a single EMT - TF and single mesench - ymal markers can be used to determine the involvement of epithelial – mesenchymal plasticity in metastasis was subsequently questioned [ 30 , 31 ] . This nonredundancy between EMT - TFs was further demonstrated by the later observation that ZEB1 deletion ( but not TWIST1 or SNAI1 deletion ) in the same spontaneous pancreatic adenocarci - noma model lead to a signi ﬁ cant decrease in metastatic outgrowth [ 32 ] . From a clinical perspective , a major hurdle to overcome is resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs . A body of evidence has now uncovered crucial mechanistic links between EMT and the acquisition of resistance to therapies ( reviewed in refs . [ 33 – 35 ] ) . From the previous mentioned studies , it has become clear that EMT - TFs can have pleiotropic ( or non - EMT dependent ) tissue - speci ﬁ c effects on invasion , metastasis , and also therapy resistance [ 36 ] . We will therefore speci ﬁ cally focus on the role of EMT - TFs in chemoresistance . We will ﬁ rst consider the mechanisms by which the activities of EMT - TFs are controlled . We will also outline possible molecular mechanisms by which EMT - TFs could orchestrate resistance . Finally , we will discuss the ways in which therapy resistance might be resolved through the development of novel therapies tar - geting EMT - TFs . Controlling the activity of EMT - TFs Modulation by the tumor microenvironment Cellular crosstalk between tumor cells and surrounding stromal cells ( e . g . , tumor - associated macrophages ( TAMs ) and cancer - associated ﬁ broblasts ( CAFs ) ) shapes the phy - sical and biochemical properties of the tumor micro - environment ( TME ) . In progressing tumors , limited perfusion in combination with increasing metabolic demands can lead to a combination of hypoxic , oxidative , in ﬂ ammatory , and physical stress ( Fig . 1 ) [ 37 , 38 ] . These physiological conditions cause tumor cells to adapt their metabolism and the EMT program has been shown to regulate the expression of important metabolic genes . Examples of this general metabolic reprogramming are an increase in aerobic glycolysis ( Warburg effect ) , glutami - nolysis and biosynthetic activities ( e . g . , de novo lipid synthesis , nucleotide synthesis ) . In recent years , it has become clear that oncogenic mutations in metabolic genes can also drive EMT in tumor cells [ 39 – 41 ] . The intricate relationship between EMT and oncometabolites is well described in a recent review [ 42 ] . The hypoxia - inducible factors , HIF - 1 α and HIF - 2 α are important intracellular sensors of oxygen and nutrient deprivation . Their activities are enhanced after prolonged stimulation by TGF - β , Notch , and certain tyrosine kinase receptors such as epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) , insulin growth factor ( IGF ) - 1R , and KIT [ 43 ] . HIF - 1 α can 6196 J . van Staalduinen et al . activate EMT - TF expression in tumor cells via multiple mechanisms . For instance , HIF - 1 α activates TWIST expression by directly binding to the proximal promoter of the TWIST gene [ 44 ] . Moreover , HIF - 1 α can also indirectly promote nuclear localization of SNAI2 by promoting tran - scription of vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) - A and activating a VEGF - A / neuropilin ( NRP ) 1 autocrine signaling loop in pancreatic cancer cells [ 45 ] . Tumors have also been referred to as “ never - healing wounds ” with features of normal wound healing including in ﬂ ammation and formation of a reactive stroma [ 46 ] . Immune cells belonging to both the innate and adaptive immune systems are found in the tumor stroma and are important sources of EMT - inducing cytokines [ 47 ] . EMT can for instance be induced by in ﬂ ammatory cytokines secreted by TAMs [ 48 ] and myeloid - derived suppressor cells [ 49 ] . Besides the secretion of cytokines , reactive stromal cells have been shown to induce EMT in tumor cells by the release of extracellular vesicles containing lipids , mRNAs , noncoding RNAs and proteins , including receptors , ligands , and intracellular kinases [ 50 ] . Of note , since chemotherapy and radiotherapy promote oxidative and in ﬂ ammatory stress in tumor tissues , both type of cancer therapies contribute to an increase in the bioavail - ability of in ﬂ ammatory cytokines and a subsequent induc - tion of the EMT program [ 51 ] . Hypoxia and HIF - 1 α also help to shape the tumor - promoting in ﬂ ammatory response [ 52 ] . Whereas M1 - polarized macrophages are associated with an antitumor T - cell response [ 53 ] , M2 - polarization of TAMs , by contrast , has been associated with pro - tumorigenic physiological processes such as tissue remodeling and angiogenesis . Hypoxic tumor cells have been shown to directly stimulate M2 - polarization of TAMs by HIF1 - α - induced secretion of lactic acid [ 54 ] . Overall , post - translational modi ﬁ cations of EMT - TFs govern their subcellular location and protein stability . Post - translational control of EMT - TFs in the TME is illustrated by the example of TAMs located at the invasive front of the tumor . These cells are major producers of tumor necrosis factor ( TNF ) - α and TNF - α - induced NF - κ B signaling increases the half - life of SNAI1 by blocking its ubiquiti - nation and degradation in breast - cancer cells [ 55 ] . The ubiquitination and targeted degradation of the EMT TFs Fig . 1 Changes in the tumor microenvironment can lead to epithelial – mesenchymal transition by the activation of epithelial to mesenchymal - inducing transcription factors . Examples of molecules involved in the EMT process are written in italics . E - cadherin Epithelial cadherin , EMT - TF epithelial to mesenchymal - inducing transcription factor , IL - 6 interleukin - 6 , N - Cadherin Neural Cadherin , PDGF platelet - derived growth factor , TGF - β transforming growth factor - β Epithelial – mesenchymal - transition - inducing transcription factors : new targets for . . . 6197 depends on the balance between the activities of E3 ubi - quitin ligases and deubiquitinating enzymes ( DUBs ) . The RING - type family of E3 ligases form multi - subunit complexes , such as the canonical SCF complex ( Skp1 - Cullin1 - F - box ) and the noncanonical SPF - Fbxo45 complex ( Skp1 - Pam - Fbxo45 ) , in which the F - box protein is responsible for substrate - speci ﬁ city [ 56 ] . Several F - box proteins have been shown to be involved in the ubiquitination and degradation of EMT - TFs [ 56 , 57 ] . For instance , FBXW1A targets SNAI1 for degradation following glycogen synthase kinase ( GSK ) - 3 β - mediated nuclear export . TNF - α induced NF - κ B signaling prevents the ubiquitination and phosphorylation of SNAI1 by induction of COP9 signalosome 2 protein ( CSN2 ) , which prevents the binding of SNAI1 to both FBXW1A and GSK - 3 β [ 55 ] . Indirect targeting can occur via FBXW7 as well , which directs mTOR ( a regulator of SNAI1 , SNAI2 , and ZEB1 ) to the proteasome for degradation [ 58 ] . Ubiquitina - tion of SNAI1 is further controlled by the F - box proteins including Pellino - 1 , FBXL14 , FBX15 , FBXO11 , and FBXO45 [ 59 , 60 ] . FBXO45 has also been shown to ubi - quitinate other EMT - TFs , such as SNAI2 , ZEB2 , and TWIST1 [ 61 ] . In this network , these degradative processes are counterposed by the action of the deubiquitinase Dub3 , which blocks degradation of SNAI1 , SNAI2 , and TWIST1 [ 62 , 63 ] . E3 ligases and deubiquitinating enzymes can indirectly control EMT - TF activity via their effects on the EMT - inducing signaling pathways , such as the TGF - β pathway . TGF - β signaling is regulated by ( de ) ubiquitination on multiple levels . On the receptor level , the deubiquitinase USP2a promotes the recruitment and activation of SMAD2 and SMAD3 by the type 1 TGF - β receptor kinase ( TGFBRI ) [ 64 ] . The activated phospho - SMAD2 / 3 can be poly - ubiquitinated by the E3 ligase Nedd4l [ 65 ] and this is counteracted by the deubiquitinase OTUB1 [ 66 ] . The negative regulator SMAD7 can be poly - ubiquitinated by the E3 ligase ITCH [ 67 ] and this ubiquitination has recently been shown to be reversed by OTUD1 [ 68 ] . Another mechanism of EMT - TF regulation is via ﬂ uid shear stress . In a recent study in liver HepG2 cells , E - cadherin was shown to be downregulated in response to ﬂ uid shear stress - induced integrin - linked kinase ( ILK ) / phospha - tidyl inositol 3 kinase ( PI3K ) - AKT - SNAI1 signaling [ 69 ] . Modulation by noncoding RNAs EMT - TFs expression and function are each controlled by microRNAs . The well - characterized miR - 200 family con - sists of two separately transcribed clusters ( miR - 200a / 200b / 429 and miR - 200c / 141 ) . miR - 200 is both necessary and suf ﬁ cient for EMT in a variety of cancer cells [ 70 – 72 ] : when active , these clusters block TGF - β - induced EMT , whereas downregulation of miR - 200 expression is suf ﬁ cient to induce EMT . Several other miRNAs play prominent roles in the regulation of EMT - TF expression , including miR - 34 that regulates SNAI1 [ 73 ] . Another class of noncoding RNA , long noncoding RNA ( lncRNA ) , has also been linked to the regulation of EMT - TFs [ 74 ] . For example , TGF - β induces the expression of lncRNA - ATB and lncRNA - HIT , which mediate the expression of TGF - β - induced EMT - regulators such as miR - 200 and ZEB1 / 2 [ 75 – 78 ] . Several studies on the mechanisms of microRNA - lncRNA crosstalk implicate a role for lncRNA in the regulation of microRNA effector functions , which can in ﬂ uence EMT by modulating the activity of EMT - TFs [ 79 ] . In clinical tissue samples of gastric cancer , lncRNA zinc ﬁ nger antisense 1 ( ZFAS1 ) upregulation was asso - ciated with increased levels of ZEB1 [ 80 ] . LncRNA ZFAS1 has been shown to inhibit the actions of miRNA - 150 leading to activation of ZEB1 , MMP14 , and MMP16 in hepatocellular carcinoma [ 81 ] . Another mechanism is the sequestering of EMT - TF regulator miR - 200 by lncRNA MALAT - 1 [ 82 ] . Other transcription factors can in ﬂ uence EMT by mod - ulating EMT - TF activity . Wound - healing regulatory tran - scription factor GRHL2 has been shown to inhibit the activation of ZEB1 expression , whereas ZEB1 reciprocally represses the GRHL2 promoter resulting in a negative feedback loop [ 83 ] . Likewise , the OVOL transcription factor family has also been demonstrated to play an important role in the ZEB1 / 2 - miR - 200 regulation by indu - cing the expression of miR - 200 and decreasing ZEB1 expression , which , reciprocally inhibits OVOL1 / 2 [ 84 ] . Mathematical modeling of EMT has suggested that the additional regulation of the miR - 34 / SNAI and miR - 200 / ZEB1 networks by OVOL1 / 2 increases the concentrations of EMT - TFs leading to a hybrid epithelial - mesenchymal state rather than a completed mesenchymal state , resem - bling the partial EMT phenotype observed in many carci - nomas [ 8 ] . While the previous section focused on the mechanism controlling the activity of EMT - TFs , the fol - lowing section will consider the ways in which EMT - TFs control their downstream targets . Effector functions of EMT - TFs Interplay with epigenetic modi ﬁ ers EMT - TFs control epithelial and mesenchymal gene expression by interacting with epigenetic regulators . The best - studied EMT - TF target gene is E - cadherin , which is regulated by all major EMT - TF families ( SNAI1 , TWIST , and ZEB ) in a cell type - dependent fashion [ 85 ] . The negative correlation between E - Cadherin expression and 6198 J . van Staalduinen et al . tumor invasion and aggressiveness in tumor samples sparked the interest to characterize the mouse and human E - Cadherin promoter . The E - Cadherin promoter was subse - quently shown to harbor elements both positively and negatively regulating E - Cadherin transcription [ 86 ] . The negative regulatory elements have been shown to consist of E - boxes , DNA sequences bound by basic helix loop helix ( bHLH ) transcription factors . In later studies , it was shown that in the case of the E - Cadherin promoter , not bHLH TFs , but rather SNAI1 , ZEB , and TWIST bind and play impor - tant roles in regulating E - Cadherin promoter activity and transcriptional repression [ 87 – 89 ] . In this section , we will give an overview of the different epigenetic mechanisms by which EMT TFs can regulate downstream gene expression , such as DNA methylation , chromatin remodeling , and his - tone modi ﬁ cations . DNMT - mediated methylation One mechanism of transcriptional silencing involves hypermethylation of promoters by DNA methyltransferases ( DNMTs ) . EMT - TFs can directly bind E - box sequences and recruit DNMTs to the promoters of EMT target genes . In the case of E - cadherin , DNMTs are recruited to the pro - moter by SNAI1 , which forms a complex with DNMTs via the bridging molecule G9a [ 90 ] , whilst ZEB1 directly interacts with DNMT1 [ 91 ] . DNA methylation patterns are recognized by methyl - DNA - binding domains , such as the methyl - CpG - binding domain ( MBD ) , the C2H2 zinc ﬁ nger domain , or the SET - and RING ﬁ nger - associated ( SRA ) domain [ 92 ] . Methyl - DNA - binding proteins ( MBDs ) can subsequently interact with transcription factors and large chromatin remodeling complexes , such as methyl - DNA - binding protein 2 / 3 ( MBD2 / 3 ) , which associates with the NuRD complex [ 93 ] . Through these interactions , MBDs can promote changes in chromatin states and transcription . Recruitment of chromatin remodeling complexes Chromatin remodeling complexes such as SWI / SNF and NuRD complexes control transcription by nucleosome repositioning . Several EMT - TFs have been shown to directly interact with large chromatin remodeling com - plexes . For example , ZEB1 recruits the chromatin remo - delers CtBP and BRG1 to the E - Cadherin promoter [ 94 , 95 ] and TWIST1 binds to components of the NuRD complex [ 96 ] . Controlling the histone code Chromatin condensation is determined by the covalent modi ﬁ cations of histone tails , such as methylation and acetylation . EMT - TFs have been shown to recruit different histone modifying enzymes to affect the chromatin land - scape of epithelial and mesenchymal target gene promoters . For instance , SNAI1 interacts with histone lysine - speci ﬁ c demethylase 1 ( LSD1 ) to suppress E - cadherin promoter activity [ 97 ] . TWIST1 binds histone methyltransferase SET8 leading to simultaneous suppression of E - cadherin and enhancement of N - cadherin promoter activity in breast cancer cells [ 98 ] . Deacetylation of N - terminal histone tails by histone deacetylases ( HDACs ) compacts chromatin and leads to gene repression . Both SNAI1 and ZEB1 have been shown to interact with HDAC1 and HDAC2 at target gene promoters [ 99 , 100 ] . The epigenetic readers of histone lysine acetylation , such as BRD4 have also been shown to be involved in EMT . For instance , diacetylated TWIST1 interacts with BRD4 in order to form transcription activat - ing complexes [ 101 ] . However , HDAC class I inhibition reverts TGF - β induced EMT in a BRD4 - dependent manner in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cells suggesting a dual role for BRD4 [ 102 ] . For a more detailed overview of the role of histone modi ﬁ cations in EMT , we would like to refer to a recent review [ 93 ] . The exact role of EMT - TFs in the formation of epige - netic repressive or activating complexes during EMT remains unclear . EMT - TFs might recruit MBDs , chromatin remodelers and histone modifying enzymes to novel genomic regions by direct contact with these factors or indirectly via bridging molecules between the individual components of the multiprotein complexes . Better under - standing of the nature and dynamic regulation of epigenetic machines during epithelial - mesenchymal plasticity could unveil novel targets for reversing EMT in carcinomas . Regulating alternative splicing EMT - TFs can regulate downstream target genes by in ﬂ u - encing their alternative splicing . For instance , ﬁ broblast growth factor receptor ( FGFR ) 2 , cell junction protein p120 - Catenin , cell surface glycoprotein CD44 and actin cytos - keleton regulator MENA all have epithelial and mesenchymal - speci ﬁ c splice variants , the relative abun - dance of which are controlled by the splicing regulators ESPR1 and ESPR2 , which are necessary and suf ﬁ cient for the expression of the epithelial isoforms . Upon induction of EMT by TGF - β or forced SNAI1 / ZEB1 / 2 expression , the subsequent downregulation of ESPR1 / 2 expression leads to isoform switching of FGFR2 , p120 - Catenin , CD44 , and MENA from the epithelial to the mesenchymal - speci ﬁ c isoforms [ 103 ] . Recent high - throughput screening for trans - acting factors orchestrating alternative splicing supports a model in which transcription factors can have dual roles : an indirect role by regulating gene expression of splicing fac - tors , such as ESPR1 / 2 and a direct role in the actual splicing events [ 104 ] . Epithelial – mesenchymal - transition - inducing transcription factors : new targets for . . . 6199 EMT - TFs are associated with cancer therapy resistance During the last 15 years , a large body of experimental ﬁ ndings from in vitro studies and mouse xenograft studies supports a role of EMT - TFs in chemoresistance [ 105 – 151 ] ( Table 1 ) . In culture , chemoresistant subclones can be obtained after culturing carcinoma cells in the presence of increasing doses of chemotherapeutic agents . Such clones have then been analyzed in migration assays , invasion assays , and mouse xenograft models . Comparison of the expression levels of epithelial markers ( e . g . , E - cadherin ) , mesenchymal markers ( e . g . , Vimentin ) , and EMT - TFs speci ﬁ cally induced in resistant subclones led to the Table 1 Overview of cell culture studies in which EMT - TFs are associated with cancer therapy resistance EMT - TF Drug [ 83 – 129 ] Cell line Ref s . TWIST1 Paclitaxel Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma [ 105 ] Paclitaxel , vincristine , cisplatin Nasopharyngeal carcinoma [ 106 – 108 ] 5 - Fluorouracil Oral squamous cell carcinoma [ 109 ] Paclitaxel , doxorubicin , letrozole , tamoxifen , fulvestrant , trastuzumab Breast carcinoma [ 110 – 114 ] 5 - Fluorouracil , gemcitabine Hepatocellular carcinoma [ 115 , 116 ] Cisplatin Pancreatic cancer [ 117 ] Anthracycline Bladder cancer [ 118 ] Paclitaxel Epithelial ovarian carcinoma [ 119 ] 5 - Fluorouracil Colon cancer [ 120 ] Oxaliplatin Colorectal cancer [ 121 ] TWIST2 Cisplatin Epithelial ovarian cancer [ 122 ] SNAI1 Cisplatin , ge ﬁ tinib , erlotinib Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma [ 123 – 126 ] Cisplatin Nasopharyngeal carcinoma [ 108 ] Cisplatin Non - small cell lung cancer [ 127 ] Doxorubicin , camptothecin , 5 - Fluorouracil Breast carcinoma [ 128 , 129 ] Oxaliplatin Hepatocellular carcinoma [ 130 ] 5 - Fluorouracil , gemcitabine Pancreatic cancer [ 131 ] Cisplatin Prostatic cancer [ 132 ] Radiation , paclitaxel , cisplatin Epithelial ovarian cancer [ 119 , 133 , 134 ] Oxaliplatin Colorectal cancer [ 135 ] SNAI2 Cisplatin Nasopharyngeal carcinoma [ 108 ] Ge ﬁ tinib Lung adenocarcinoma [ 136 ] Tamoxifen , fulvestrant , trastuzumab Breast carcinoma [ 114 , 137 ] Gemcitabine Pancreatic cancer [ 138 ] Radiation , paclitaxel , cisplatin Epithelial ovarian cancer [ 133 , 134 ] ZEB1 Cisplatin Nasopharyngeal carcinoma [ 108 ] Nintedanib , erlotinib , crizotinib , ge ﬁ tinib Non - small cell lung cancer [ 139 – 142 ] Docetaxel Lung adenocarcinoma [ 143 ] Radiation , doxorubicin , tamoxifen , fulvestrant , trastuzumab Breast carcinoma [ 144 – 147 ] Gemcitabine Pancreatic cancer [ 148 ] CI1040 , erlotinib Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma [ 149 ] Docetaxel Prostatic cancer [ 150 ] Iressa , erlotinib Bladder cancer [ 151 ] 5 - Fluorouracil Colon cancer [ 120 ] ZEB2 Nintedanib Non - small cell lung cancer [ 139 ] Iressa , erlotinib Bladder cancer [ 151 ] 5 - Fluorouracil Colon cancer [ 120 ] 6200 J . van Staalduinen et al . identi ﬁ cation of EMT - TFs linked to drug - induced epithe - lial - mesenchymal plasticity ( see Table 1 ) . In vitro manip - ulation of the levels and the activity of the identi ﬁ ed EMT - TF further suggested that they could play a direct role of in the acquisition of drug resistance . Monitoring the levels of EMT - TF expression has been demonstrated to be of prognostic value in a variety of car - cinomas . For instance , histological expression analysis coupled to patient outcome data showed a correlation between positive TWIST1 expression in tumor specimens and poor overall survival of postoperative , oxaliplatin , and 5 - ﬂ uorouracil - treated colorectal cancer patients [ 152 ] . Immunohistochemical analysis of esophageal cancer sam - ples showed higher SNAI1 and ZEB1 expression after preoperative chemotherapy compared with chemo naive specimens . This high SNAI1 expression correlated with a poor response to chemotherapy and a shorter survival time [ 153 ] . Yet , due to technical challenges in tracking EMT - induced tumor cells in animal models it has been dif ﬁ cult to precisely de ﬁ ne the in vivo importance of EMT - TFs in chemoresistance . Fischer et al . addressed this problem using transgenic mouse models of breast cancer driven by the Polyoma Middle T ( MMTV - PyMT / Rosa26 - RFP - GFP / Fsp1 - Cre ) and the NEU ( MMTV - Neu / Rosa26 - RFP - GFP / Fsp1 - Cre ) oncogenes in which RFP expression in tumor cells is changed to GFP expression upon activation of the mesenchymal - speci ﬁ c ﬁ broblast speci ﬁ c protein 1 ( FSP1 ) . Through fate mapping it was found that GFP - positive EMT - induced tumor cells displayed increased tolerance to cyclophosphamide ( CTX ) treatment compared with RFP positive tumor cells with more epithelial characteristics . Using this setup , it was demonstrated that ablation of EMT - TF expression by overexpression of MiR - 200 reversed chemoresistance upon CTX treatment [ 28 ] . In another study , the role of EMT in chemoresistance was assessed by deletion of TWIST and SNAI1 in a pancreatic adenocarci - noma cancer ( PDAC ) model ( Pdx1 - Cre ; LSL - KrasG12D ; P53R172H / + ) ( KPC ) . Although primary tumor character - istics did not differ between KPC , KPC ; SNAI1cKO and KPC ; TWISTcKO mice , blockade of the EMT program by TWIST and SNAI1 deletion did enhance the sensitivity of tumor cells to gemcitabine and erlotinib suggesting that these EMT - TFs contribute to chemoresistance [ 29 ] . Importantly , EMT - TFs can have dual roles within the same type of tumor depending on the genetic background , the tumor microenvironment , and the therapy status . In a recent study by Zhang et al . it was shown that ZEB1 can suppress tumor growth in a model of untreated EGFR - mutated lung cancer . ZEB1 was found to induce NOTCH1 expression by miR - 200 repression and NOTCH1 could repress the promoter activity of ERBB3 , a known driver of EGFR - dependent cell growth . Interestingly , upon EGFR inhibitor treatment of the EFGR - mutated lung cancer , ZEB1 switches to a tumor - promoting role by inducing NOTCH1 - mediated EGFR inhibitor resistance [ 154 ] . Fur - thermore , EMT - TFs such as TWIST , SNAI1 , and ZEB families can play both redundant and nonredundant roles in the induction of EMT . In a study by Jiang et al . , it was shown that breast carcinoma cell lines develop tamoxifen resistance as a consequence of high EGFR expression and MAP kinase ERK phosphorylation . Tamoxifen resistance could be induced by overexpression of SNAI1 and SNAI2 , but not of TWIST1 . Moreover , disruption of adherence junctions by E - cadherin knockdown induced EMT , while increased EGFR expression and tamoxifen resistance were not observed . These observations suggest that SNAI1 and SNAI2 expression can promote tamoxifen resistance , pos - sibly in an EMT - independent fashion [ 155 ] . In support of this interpretation , high EMT - TF expression has also been associated with the development of drug resistance in EMT - independent non - epithelial cancers , such as chronic myeloid leukemia and melanoma [ 156 – 161 ] . Underlying mechanisms A common mechanism of action of chemotherapy and radiotherapy is the induction of apoptosis or programmed cell death due to induced DNA damage [ 162 ] . EMT - TFs have been associated with reduced proliferation , down - regulation of pro - apoptotic pathways and upregulation of pro - survival pathways and DNA repair mechanisms . Overexpression of SNAI1 in MDCK cells leads to impaired cell differentiation , enhanced MAPK and PI3K pathway activity and upregulation of the anti - apoptotic BCL - xL protein [ 163 ] . Stable overexpression of TWIST1 in a hypopharyngeal cancer cell line resulted in increased expression of the anti - apoptotic protein BCL - 2 , while the levels of the pro - apoptotic cleaved caspase - 3 and caspase - 9 decreased [ 105 ] . Moreover , expression of SNAI1 and SNAI2 in breast carcinoma and epithelial ovarian cell lines was found to ablate the DNA damage response by directly downregulating p53 and p53 - responsive and nonresponsive pro - apoptotic genes [ 134 , 164 ] . Increased repair of cisplatin - induced DNA damage by upregulation of excision repair cross - complementation group 1 ( ERCC1 ) protein by SNAI1 is an additional mechanism of cisplatin resistance [ 123 ] . EMT - TFs have been found to directly in ﬂ uence the expression of drug - inactivating enzymes and / or transpor - ters , including proteins involved in the modi ﬁ cation and transport of anticancer drugs [ 165 ] . For instance , gemcita - bine , a nucleoside analog used in the treatment of pancreatic cancer is transported into cells via human equilibrative nucleoside transporter 1 ( hENT1 ) and concentrating nucleoside transporter 3 ( CNT3 ) . Subsequently , Epithelial – mesenchymal - transition - inducing transcription factors : new targets for . . . 6201 gemcitabine is taken up by tumor cells as a pro - drug and needs multiple rounds of intracellular phosphorylation before acquiring clinical ef ﬁ cacy . A crucial and rate - limiting step for the metabolic activation of gemcitabine is phosphorylation by deoxycytidine kinase ( dCK ) [ 166 ] . Through studies using the before mentioned KPC PDAC tumor model , it was shown that KPC tumor cells lacking TWIST or SNAI1 were sensitive to gemcitabine and had upregulated levels of ENT1 and CNT3 , while levels of ENT2 were unchanged [ 29 ] . Moreover , high expression of hENT1 and dCK was associated with longer survival time in patients receiving gemcitabine as an adjuvant therapy [ 167 ] . Molecular analysis of gemcitabine resistant pancreatic cancer cell lines revealed that an activated Akt - GSK3 β - SNAI1 pathway is crucial for the downregulation of hENT1 . However the molecular mechanism by which SNAI1 downregulates hENT1 is unclear [ 166 ] . EMT - TFs also affect the expression of drug ef ﬂ ux transporters and drug - inactivating enzymes involved in multiple drug resistance ( MDR ) . ATP binding cassette ( ABC ) transporters responsible for the active ef ﬂ ux of a multitude of commonly used chemotherapeutic drugs are expressed at signi ﬁ cantly higher levels in hepatocellular carcinoma , breast cancer , early - stage lung adenocarcinoma and pancreatic cancer than in corresponding normal tissue cell types . The expression of ABC transporters is induced by chemotherapy and correlates with poor clinical outcome in a variety of carcinomas [ 168 ] . In a study using doxor - ubicin resistant breast carcinoma cell lines , Saxena et al . showed that SNAI1 and TWIST could increase the pro - moter activity of ABC transporters . In addition , they demonstrated direct binding of TWIST1 to the promoters of ABCC4 and ABCC5 , and showed that experimental induc - tion or reversal of EMT resulted in increased or decreased expression of ABC transporters and drug resistance , respectively [ 169 ] . Enhanced drug inactivation by upregulation of intracel - lular drug - metabolizing enzymes also plays a role in drug resistance . In the previously described Tri - PyMT model , the expression of aldehyde dehydrogenases ( ALDH ) s was ele - vated in the EMT - induced cyclophosphamide ( CTX ) resistant cells . Interestingly , ALDHs are responsible for the conversion of the active CTX metabolite into its nontoxic form and CTX is only potent in low ALDH expressing tumor cells [ 28 ] . EMT - associated resistance traits , such as reduced pro - liferation , upregulation of pro - survival pathways and ALDH activity have also been associated with the concept of cancer stem cells ( CSCs ) . It has been postulated that a subpopulation of tumor cells termed cancer stem cells are more resistant to therapy than the bulk non - CSC population and are responsible for metastasis formation and tumor relapse . Interestingly , CSC - enriched populations also display features of EMT in multiple carcinomas [ 34 ] . Whether EMT - TF activation is linked to cellular stemness in cancer remains to be determined . For example , it has been shown that CSCs can undergo MET at distant meta - static sites without losing their stemness properties [ 170 ] . It has therefore been suggested that EMT - TF might enable the development of stemness in tumor cells by creating a “ stemness window ” [ 171 ] . In future research , it will be important to dissect how EMT - TFs are linked to cellular stemness and chemoresistance . A clinical problem is that although cancer cells initially may respond well to targeted therapies , they often develop resistance . Mutations and differential expression of target molecules can signi ﬁ cantly decrease cellular sensitivity to targeted therapy . A common example of target altering mutations are so - called gatekeeper mutations , which block access of kinase inhibitors to the ATP - binding pocket , as exempli ﬁ ed by the inability of ge ﬁ tinib to inhibit EGFR T790M kinase activity [ 172 ] . Changes in androgen sensi - tivity provide another example . Whereas androgen depri - vation often is effective for treatment of primary prostate cancer , androgen independent castration - resistant prostate cancer ( CRPC ) is a major cause of death . SNAI2 has been demonstrated to facilitate castration resistance and to have dual roles in androgen receptor ( AR ) signaling in prostate cancer cells . First , SNAI2 expression is induced by andro - gens , but also leads to an increase in AR protein expression . Second , SNAI2 was found to bind AR , translocate to the nucleus upon androgen administration and act as co - activator for AR - mediated transcriptional regulation , thereby enhancing AR - induced cell growth both in the absence and presence of androgens [ 173 ] . A different sce - nario was found for estrogen independence in breast cancer . In this case , downregulation of the estrogen receptor by binding of TWIST and histone deacetylase 1 , or SNAI2 to the estrogen receptor ( ER ) promoter was shown to promote hormone resistance in breast cancer cell lines [ 113 , 137 ] . An Achilles ’ heel of targeted therapies is the development of resistance through phenotypic switching . Tumor cells often employ signaling pathway redundancy to bypass the oncogenic addiction to gain - of - function mutations in a pro - cess called kinome reprogramming . Kinome reprogrammed tumor cells can develop resistance to targeted therapy , for example , by re - activation of proliferation , invasion , or sur - vival genes [ 162 ] . High ZEB1 expression is associated with nonresponsiveness to MAPK inhibitor treatment and ZEB1 expression is also frequently upregulated upon long term BRAF inhibitor treatment in mutated BRAF melanoma [ 159 ] . Sun et al . showed that activated TGF - β signaling , the main inducer of EMT , upregulated EGFR expression which leads to a BRAF - MEK inhibitor resistant tumor population [ 174 ] . TGF - β signaling has not only been demonstrated to confer resistance to BRAF - MEK inhibitors , but also 6202 J . van Staalduinen et al . resistance to anaplastic lymphoma kinase ( ALK ) and EGFR inhibitors in non - small lung carcinoma cells [ 175 ] . Also crucial to BRAF - MEK inhibitor resistance in BRAF mela - noma might be the increase in c - JUN signaling through a decrease in BRAF - MEK negative regulator SPRY4 and increase in RHO / ROCK - JNK pathway activation [ 176 ] . Transcriptional activities by c - JUN activator JNK have been shown to play important roles in the induction of EMT - related transcription factors ( e . g . , ZEB1 , HOXCB9 ) reg - ulating epithelial - mesenchymal plasticity [ 177 ] . Whether EMT - TF expression is a mere byproduct of activated TGF - β and JNK signaling or EMT - TFs play an active role in kinase inhibitor resistance by for example upregulation of receptor tyrosine kinases such as EGFR in melanoma cells remains to be determined . Therapeutic avenues The large body of experimental data showing a functional role for EMT - TFs in tumor progression and chemoresis - tance provides a rationale for targeting EMT - TFs or their regulatory pathways in carcinomas ( Fig . 2 ) . Since a lot of studies observe the restoration of chemotherapy sensitivity by the delivery of small interfering RNAs targeting EMT - TFs , a combination of siRNA delivery and chemotherapy could be a novel form of combination therapy . For instance , Roberts et al . showed that cisplatin treatment combined with delivery of TWIST siRNA by nanoparticles leads to a lower epithelial ovarian tumor burden in mice than treat - ment with cisplatin alone [ 178 ] . In addition , it is also pos - sible to enhance ef ﬁ cacy by combining siRNAs with chemotherapeutic agents within the same polypeptide micelle nanoparticle , as demonstrated in a H460 xenograft model by Fang et al . [ 179 ] . Another option is the combi - nation of recombinant adeno - associated viruses ( rAAVs ) - mediated siRNA delivery and radiotherapy . Indeed , in an orthotopic cholangiocarcinoma model , a combination of rAAV2 - SNAI2 siRNA and γ - irradiation therapy completely regressed tumor growth [ 180 ] . Although the direct targeting of EMT - TFs is scienti ﬁ cally promising , RNA interference and its delivery systems are still in early stage of development . In addition to targeting the EMT - TFs themselves , one may consider targeting the signaling cascades that promote their activation . Several types of inhibitors of the TGF - β pathway , including antisense molecules , ligand traps , receptor antibodies and receptor kinase inhibitors , are cur - rently being evaluated in clinical trials for the treatment of a wide variety of cancers [ 181 ] . Interesting ﬁ ndings in this respect are that expression of WNT3 by trastuzumab - resistant breast carcinoma cell lines induces TWIST , SNAI2 , and EGFR expression [ 114 ] , and that a TGF - β type I receptor inhibitor effectively inhibits TWIST and Wnt3 expression and enhances antitumor activity of trastuzumab in breast carcinoma cells [ 182 ] . In pancreatic cancer , acti - vation of the AKT - GSK3 β signaling is essential for SNAI1 expression and gemcitabine resistance . Zidovudine inhibits the AKT - GSK3 β - SNAI1 pathway and resensitizes pan - creatic cancer cells to gemcitabine [ 166 ] . Other therapeutic avenues include the targeting of post - translational modifying enzymes such as kinases and ( de ) ubiquitinating enzymes that control the stability and activity states of EMT - TFs . For instance E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF8 , which directly activates TWIST1 by K63 - linked ubiquiti - nation - induced translocation to the nucleus , resulting in Fig . 2 Overview of putative therapeutic strategies to prevent or reverse cancer therapy resistance via direct or downstream targeting of EMT - TFs . Examples of molecules involved in the EMT process are written in italics . AONs anti - sense oligonucleotides , DUB deubiquitinating enzyme , EMT - TF epithelial to mesenchymal transition - inducing transcription factor , miR micro RNA , siRNA small interfering RNA . Modi ﬁ ers of activation of EMT - TFs ( for example , inhibitors of TGF - β receptor kinase activity that can block TGF - β - induced SNAI1 / 2 expression ) are not indicated Epithelial – mesenchymal - transition - inducing transcription factors : new targets for . . . 6203 enhanced EMT and chemoresistance in breast cancer cells [ 183 ] . Although many EMT - TF regulating E3 ubiquitin ligases have been recognized , only few deubiquitinating enzymes ( DUBs ) involved in modulating EMT - TF have been identi ﬁ ed [ 184 ] . In addition , DUBs are involved in the regulation of a multitude of cancer - related processes , including extracellular matrix remodeling and anoikis resistance [ 185 ] . Furthermore , DUBs have been shown to play instrumental roles in the regulation of TGF - β induced SMAD and non - SMAD signaling pathways [ 186 ] . Inhibi - tion of EMT - TF induction or EMT - induced processes by DUB modulators may have clinical promise for combatting cancer therapy resistance . Several noncoding RNAs have been associated with therapy resistance through their upstream regulation of EMT - TF expression and downstream modulation of EMT - TF effector functions . For instance , decreased miR - 186 expression was found in cisplatin - resistant ovarian cancer tissues . MiR - 186 was subsequently shown to reduce TWIST1 expression leading to a mesenchymal - epithelial transition , enhanced apoptosis , and cisplatin sensitivity [ 187 ] . In addition , Liu et al . showed that miR - 125b is upregulated by SNAI1 and orchestrates paclitaxel resistance by repression of pro - apoptotic BAK1 [ 188 ] . Targeting EMT - TF regulating microRNAs could thus potentially prevent or reverse therapy resistance . Indeed upregulation of ZEB1 - regulating miR - 200b / c and Let - 7 by 3 , 3 ʹ - diindo - lylmethane ( DIM ) or iso ﬂ avone reversed gemcitabine resistance of pancreatic cancer cells [ 148 ] . Moreover , nanoliposomal delivery of miR - 205 mimics targeting ZEB1 resensitized radio - resistant tumor cells to radiation - induced injury in a xenograft model [ 189 ] . Additional targets could be epigenetic modi ﬁ ers regulating the expression of EMT - TFs and / or microRNAs . For example , the interaction between SNAI1 and HDACs has been shown to be neces - sary for E - Cadherin repression and EMT in pancreatic cancer [ 190 ] . Mocetinostat , a class I HDAC inhibitor , has recently been shown to downregulate ZEB1 expression and upregulate gemcitabine sensitivity regulating miR - 203 in pancreatic cancer cells [ 191 ] . Some treatments preferentially target tumor cells with a mesenchymal phenotype . For instance , sensitivity of col - orectal cancer cell lines to p21 - activated kinase inhibitor PF - 3758309 was associated with a mesenchymal molecular pro ﬁ le [ 192 ] . Combinations of epithelial phenotype - directed and mesenchymal phenotype - directed therapies , such as PF - 3758309 might thus improve the duration of the clinical response . Oncolytic viruses , a novel class of promising anti - cancer agents , have intrinsic dif ﬁ culties targeting epithelial cells . Widely used receptors for oncolytic viral entry in epithelial ovarian cancer ( CAR , CD46 , or α V integrins ) are often positioned in tight junctions and inaccessible for binding [ 193 ] . Activation of EMT - TFs in cancer therapy resistant tumor cells is often accompanied by epithelial - mesenchymal plasticity and a loss of tight junctions . Ther - apy induced EMT could thus potentially act as a catalyst for viral oncolysis . A rapidly growing therapeutic arm for the treatment of carcinomas are immune checkpoint inhibitor antibodies . It has been shown that EMT can result in extensive changes in the cytoskeleton and the tumor cell surface repertoire , which alters tumor immunogenicity and diminishes the ef ﬁ cacy of cytotoxic T - lymphocyte induced lysis [ 194 ] . One suggested molecular mechanism for the immunomodulatory properties of tumor cells that have undergone partial EMT is induction of the immune checkpoint inhibitors PDL - 1 [ 195 – 198 ] or CTLA - 4 [ 199 ] . A recent study showed that TGF - β and chemotherapeutic agents upregulate PDL - 1 expression in non - small cell lung cancer cells and that EMT score is associated with PDL - 1 expression in clinical samples [ 200 ] . Moreover , blocking TGF - β by monoclonal antibodies has been shown to improve the ef ﬁ ciency of antitumor peptide vaccines [ 201 , 202 ] . Recently , Mariathasan et al . showed that in patients with metastatic urothelial cancer the lack of response to PDL - 1 - targetting antibodies was associated with TGF - β signaling . In support of this evidence , a com - bination of PDL - 1 and TGF blocking antibodies was sub - sequently shown to induce T - cell penetration and evoke an immune response in a mouse model [ 203 ] . Furthermore , in a genetically engineered mouse model of colorectal cancer , TGF - β inhibition improved the response to PDL - 1 blocking antibodies [ 204 ] . These observations suggest that a com - bination of chemotherapy and EMT / PDL - 1 blockade can synergistically target chemoresistant tumor populations . Finally , it should be repeated here that carcinoma cells that undergo EMT in the primary tumor may convert back to a more epithelial state at a distant metastatic site [ 24 ] . Targeting EMT in the primary tumor to prevent or reverse therapy resistance potentially induces mesenchymal - epithelial transition ( MET ) . Since MET might be favor - able for the outgrowth of micrometastases , EMT targeting could have substantial adverse effects in metastasized carcinomas . Concluding remarks Changes in the TME such as hypoxia and in ﬂ ammation can initiate the expression of EMT - TFs , e . g . , TWIST1 / 2 , SNAI1 / 2 , and ZEB1 / 2 in tumor cells . The expression , subcellular localization and activities of these EMT - TFs are governed by signaling molecules , microRNA and lncRNA families , other transcription factors , post - translational modi ﬁ cations , and metabolite levels . EMT - TFs directly affect epithelial - mesenchymal plasticity by recruiting epi - genetic modulators to target other genes and altering the 6204 J . van Staalduinen et al . proteome and secretome . In an indirect manner , EMT - TFs also modulate alternative splicing factors and cell metabo - lism . Cell culture assays , xenograft models and clinical data have shown that EMT - TF expression is instrumental in the development of chemoresistance in a multitude of carci - nomas . In recent years , novel transgenic mice models have increased our knowledge about the natural occurrence and importance of epithelial - mesenchymal plasticity in therapy resistance , but also in cancer invasion , migration , and metastasis . EMT - TFs have been found to alter therapy resistance by several molecular mechanisms . EMT - TFs can affect drug metabolism by changing the expression of drug - transporters and ( in ) activating enzymes . Secondly , EMT - TFs can directly promote drug ef ﬂ ux by binding to the promoters of multi - drug transporters of the ABC family . EMT - TF expression have also been shown to render tumor cells less sensitive to therapy - induced programmed cell - death by upregulation of anti - apoptotic genes , downregulation of pro - apoptotic genes and / or upregulation of proteins involved in DNA repair mechanisms . SNAI2 plays a role in castration - resistance prostate cancer by acting as a tran - scriptional coactivator of the androgen - activated androgen receptor and TWIST contributes to estrogen independence in breast cancer by repressing to the estrogen receptor promoter . Although EMT - TF expression is often observed in kinase inhibitor resistant tumor cell populations , a causal relationship between kinase inhibitor resistance and EMT - TF expression has not been established yet . By targeting EMT - TFs in carcinomas , we might open up the way for preventing or reversing resistance to cancer therapy . Direct targeting of EMT - TFs by siRNAs and tar - geting of EMT - TF modulators by natural products such as zidovudine or iso ﬂ avone are under development . Upstream and downstream targeting of EMT - TFs are currently explored as therapeutic options . The induction of a hybrid epithelial - mesenchymal phenotype by EMT - TF expression could also potentiate treatments that ef ﬁ ciently target tumor cells in a mesenchymal state , such as oncolytic viruses . Also , the ef ﬁ cacy of immune checkpoint inhibitor anti - bodies might improve in combinations with chemotherapy . Since MET , the reverse process of EMT , might be bene - ﬁ cial to the outgrowth of micrometastases , the stage of carcinoma could be important in the ef ﬁ cacy of EMT - TF targeting therapies . Acknowledgements Our studies on epithelial cell plasticity and cancer are supported by Cancer Genomics Centre Netherlands . We are grateful to Jonas Fuxe for critical comments on the manuscript . Compliance with ethical standards Con ﬂ ict of interest The authors declare that they have no con ﬂ ict of interest . References 1 . Zhang J , Tian XJ , Xing J . Signal transduction pathways of EMT induced by TGF - β , SHH , and WNT and their crosstalks . J Clin Med 2016 ; 5 : 41 . 2 . Lindsey S , Langhans SA . Crosstalk of oncogenic signaling pathways during epithelial – mesenchymal transition . Front Oncol . 2014 ; 4 : 358 . 3 . Nieto MA , Huang RY , Jackson RA , Thiery JP . EMT : 2016 . Cell . 2016 ; 166 : 21 – 45 . 4 . Lu M , Jolly MK , Levine H , Onuchic JN , Ben - Jacob E . MicroRNA - based regulation of epithelial - hybrid - mesenchymal fate determination . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 2013 ; 110 : 18144 – 9 . 5 . Tian XJ , Zhang H , Xing J . Coupled reversible and irreversible bistable switches underlying TGF β - induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition . Biophys J . 2013 ; 105 : 1079 – 89 . 6 . Zhang J , Tian XJ , Zhang H , Teng Y , Li R , Bai F , et al . TGF - β - induced epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition proceeds through stepwise activation of multiple feedback loops . Sci Signal . 2014 ; 7 : ra91 . 7 . Hong T , Watanabe K , Ta CH , Villarreal - Ponce A , Nie Q , Dai X . An Ovol2 - Zeb1 mutual inhibitory circuit governs bidirectional and multi - step transition between epithelial and mesenchymal states . PLOS Comput Biol . 2015 ; 11 : e1004569 . 8 . Jia D , Jolly MK , Boareto M , Parsana P , Mooney SM , Pienta KJ , et al . OVOL guides the epithelial - hybrid - mesenchymal transi - tion . Oncotarget . 2015 ; 6 : 15436 – 48 . 9 . Khoo BL , Lee SC , Kumar P , Tan TZ , Warkiani ME , Ow SG , et al . Short - term expansion of breast circulating cancer cells predicts response to anti - cancer therapy . Oncotarget . 2015 ; 6 : 15578 – 93 . 10 . Grigore AD , Jolly MK , Jia D , Farach - Carson MC , Levine H . Tumor budding : the name is EMT . Partial EMT . J Clin Med 2016 ; 5 : 51 . 11 . Ye X , Weinberg RA . Epithelial - mesenchymal plasticity : a cen - tral regulator of cancer progression . Trends Cell Biol . 2015 ; 25 : 675 – 86 . 12 . Tsai JH , Yang J . Epithelial - mesenchymal plasticity in carcinoma metastasis . Genes Dev . 2013 ; 27 : 2192 – 206 . 13 . Paz H , Pathak N , Yang J . Invading one step at a time : the role of invadopodia in tumor metastasis . Oncogene . 2014 ; 33 : 4193 – 202 . 14 . Eddy RJ , Weidmann MD , Sharma VP , Condeelis JS . Tumor cell invadopodia : invasive protrusions that orchestrate metastasis . Trends Cell Biol . 2017 ; 27 : 595 – 607 . 15 . Cheung KJ , Padmanaban V , Silvestri V , Schipper K , Cohen JD , Fairchild AN , et al . Polyclonal breast cancer metastases arise from collective dissemination of keratin 14 - expressing tumor cell clusters . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 2016 ; 113 : E854 – 863 . 16 . Aceto N , Bardia A , Miyamoto DT , Donaldson MC , Wittner BS , Spencer JA , et al . Circulating tumor cell clusters are oligoclonal precursors of breast cancer metastasis . Cell . 2014 ; 158 : 1110 – 22 . 17 . Cheung KJ , Gabrielson E , Werb Z , Ewald AJ . Collective inva - sion in breast cancer requires a conserved basal epithelial pro - gram . Cell . 2013 ; 155 : 1639 – 51 . 18 . Lambert AW , Pattabiraman DR , Weinberg RA . Emerging bio - logical principles of metastasis . Cell . 2017 ; 168 : 670 – 91 . 19 . Francart ME , Lambert J , Vanwynsberghe AM , Thompson EW , Bourcy M , Polette M , et al . Epithelial - mesenchymal plasticity and circulating tumor cells : travel companions to metastases . Dev Dyn . 2018 ; 247 : 432 – 50 . 20 . Johansson J , Tabor V , Wikell A , Jalkanen S , Fuxe J . TGF - β 1 - induced epithelial - mesenchymal transition promotes monocyte / macrophage properties in breast cancer cells . Front Oncol . 2015 ; 5 : 3 . Epithelial – mesenchymal - transition - inducing transcription factors : new targets for . . . 6205 21 . Pang MF , Georgoudaki AM , Lambut L , Johansson J , Tabor V , Hagikura K , et al . TGF - β 1 - induced EMT promotes targeted migration of breast cancer cells through the lymphatic system by the activation of CCR7 / CCL21 - mediated chemotaxis . Oncogene . 2016 ; 35 : 748 – 60 . 22 . Baulida J . Epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition transcription factors in cancer - associated ﬁ broblasts . Mol Oncol . 2017 ; 11 : 847 – 59 . 23 . Labernadie A , Kato T , Brugues A , Serra - Picamal X , Derzsi S , Arwert E , et al . A mechanically active heterotypic E - cadherin / N - cadherin adhesion enables ﬁ broblasts to drive cancer cell inva - sion . Nat Cell Biol . 2017 ; 19 : 224 – 37 . 24 . Beerling E , Seinstra D , de Wit E , Kester L , van der Velden D , Maynard C , et al . Plasticity between epithelial and mesenchymal states unlinks EMT from metastasis - enhancing stem cell capa - city . Cell Rep . 2016 ; 14 : 2281 – 8 . 25 . Tsai JH , Donaher JL , Murphy DA , Chau S , Yang J . Spatio - temporal regulation of epithelial - mesenchymal transition is essential for squamous cell carcinoma metastasis . Cancer Cell . 2012 ; 22 : 725 – 36 . 26 . Xu Y , Lee DK , Feng Z , Bu W , Li Y , Liao L , et al . Breast tumor cell - speci ﬁ c knockout of Twist1 inhibits cancer cell plasticity , dissemination , and lung metastasis in mice . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 2017 ; 114 : 11494 – 9 . 27 . Tran HD , Luitel K , Kim M , Zhang K , Longmore GD , Tran DD . Transient SNAIL1 expression is necessary for metastatic com - petence in breast cancer . Cancer Res . 2014 ; 74 : 6330 – 40 . 28 . Fischer KR , Durrans A , Lee S , Sheng J , Li F , Wong ST , et al . Epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition is not required for lung metastasis but contributes to chemoresistance . Nature . 2015 ; 527 : 472 – 6 . 29 . Zheng X , Carstens JL , Kim J , Scheible M , Kaye J , Sugimoto H , et al . Epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition is dispensable for metastasis but induces chemoresistance in pancreatic cancer . Nature . 2015 ; 527 : 525 – 30 . 30 . Ye X , Brabletz T , Kang Y , Longmore GD , Nieto MA , Stanger BZ , et al . Upholding a role for EMT in breast cancer metastasis . Nature . 2017 ; 547 : E1 – e3 . 31 . Aiello NM , Brabletz T , Kang Y , Nieto MA , Weinberg RA , Stanger BZ . Upholding a role for EMT in pancreatic cancer metastasis . Nature . 2017 ; 547 : E7 – e8 . 32 . Krebs AM , Mitschke J , Lasierra Losada M , Schmalhofer O , Boerries M , Busch H , et al . The EMT - activator Zeb1 is a key factor for cell plasticity and promotes metastasis in pancreatic cancer . Nat Cell Biol . 2017 ; 19 : 518 – 29 . 33 . Fabregat I , Malfettone A , Soukupova J . New Insights into the crossroads between EMT and stemness in the context of cancer . J Clin Med 2016 ; 5 : 37 . 34 . Shibue T , Weinberg RA . EMT , CSCs , and drug resistance : the mechanistic link and clinical implications . Nat Rev Clin Oncol . 2017 ; 14 : 611 – 29 . 35 . Pattabiraman DR , Weinberg RA . Targeting the epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition : the case for differentiation - based ther - apy . Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol . 2016 ; 81 : 11 – 19 . 36 . Nieto MA . Context - speci ﬁ c roles of EMT programmes in cancer cell dissemination . Nat Cell Biol . 2017 ; 19 : 416 – 8 . 37 . Gupta S , Roy A , Dwarakanath BS . Metabolic cooperation and competition in the tumor microenvironment : implications for therapy . Front Oncol . 2017 ; 7 : 68 . 38 . Goswami KK , Ghosh T , Ghosh S , Sarkar M , Bose A , Baral R . Tumor promoting role of anti - tumor macrophages in tumor microenvironment . Cell Immunol . 2017 ; 316 : 1 – 10 . 39 . Grassian AR , Lin F , Barrett R , Liu Y , Jiang W , Korpal M , et al . Isocitrate dehydrogenase ( IDH ) mutations promote a reversible ZEB1 / microRNA ( miR ) - 200 - dependent epithelial - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) . J Biol Chem . 2012 ; 287 : 42180 – 94 . 40 . Loriot C , Burnichon N , Gadessaud N , Vescovo L , Amar L , Libe R , et al . Epithelial to mesenchymal transition is activated in metastatic pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas caused by SDHB gene mutations . J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2012 ; 97 : E954 – 962 . 41 . Sciacovelli M , Goncalves E , Johnson TI , Zecchini VR , da Costa AS , Gaude E , et al . Fumarate is an epigenetic modi ﬁ er that elicits epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition . Nature . 2016 ; 537 : 544 – 7 . 42 . Sciacovelli M , Frezza C . Metabolic reprogramming and epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition in cancer . FEBS J . 2017 ; 284 : 3132 – 44 . 43 . Mimeault M , Batra SK . Hypoxia - inducing factors as master regulators of stemness properties and altered metabolism of cancer - and metastasis - initiating cells . J Cell Mol Med . 2013 ; 17 : 30 – 54 . 44 . Yang MH , Wu MZ , Chiou SH , Chen PM , Chang SY , Liu CJ , et al . Direct regulation of TWIST by HIF - 1 α promotes metas - tasis . Nat Cell Biol . 2008 ; 10 : 295 – 305 . 45 . Mak P , Leav I , Pursell B , Bae D , Yang X , Taglienti CA , et al . ERbeta impedes prostate cancer EMT by destabilizing HIF - 1 α and inhibiting VEGF - mediated snail nuclear localization : implications for Gleason grading . Cancer Cell . 2010 ; 17 : 319 – 32 . 46 . Dvorak HF . Tumors : wounds that do not heal . Similarities between tumor stroma generation and wound healing . N Engl J Med . 1986 ; 315 : 1650 – 9 . 47 . Fuxe J , Karlsson MC . TGF - β - induced epithelial - mesenchymal transition : a link between cancer and in ﬂ ammation . Semin Cancer Biol . 2012 ; 22 : 455 – 61 . 48 . Bonde AK , Tischler V , Kumar S , Soltermann A , Schwendener RA . Intratumoral macrophages contribute to epithelial - mesenchymal transition in solid tumors . BMC Cancer . 2012 ; 12 : 35 . 49 . Cui TX , Kryczek I , Zhao L , Zhao E , Kuick R , Roh MH , et al . Myeloid - derived suppressor cells enhance stemness of cancer cells by inducing microRNA101 and suppressing the corepressor CtBP2 . Immunity . 2013 ; 39 : 611 – 21 . 50 . Gopal SK , Greening DW , Rai A , Chen M , Xu R , Sha ﬁ q A , et al . Extracellular vesicles : their role in cancer biology and epithelial - mesenchymal transition . Biochem J . 2017 ; 474 : 21 – 45 . 51 . Jolly MK , Boareto M , Huang B , Jia D , Lu M , Ben - Jacob E , et al . Implications of the hybrid epithelial / mesenchymal phenotype in metastasis . Front Oncol . 2015 ; 5 : 155 . 52 . Triner D , Shah YM . Hypoxia - inducible factors : a central link between in ﬂ ammation and cancer . J Clin Invest . 2016 ; 126 : 3689 – 98 . 53 . Sica A , Mantovani A . Macrophage plasticity and polarization : in vivo veritas . J Clin Invest . 2012 ; 122 : 787 – 95 . 54 . Colegio OR , Chu NQ , Szabo AL , Chu T , Rhebergen AM , Jairam V , et al . Functional polarization of tumour - associated macro - phages by tumour - derived lactic acid . Nature . 2014 ; 513 : 559 – 63 . 55 . Wu Y , Deng J , Rychahou PG , Qiu S , Evers BM , Zhou BP . Stabilization of snail by NF - κ B is required for in ﬂ ammation - induced cell migration and invasion . Cancer Cell . 2009 ; 15 : 416 – 28 . 56 . Inoue Y , Itoh Y , Sato K , Kawasaki F , Sumita C , Tanaka T , et al . Regulation of epithelial - mesenchymal transition by E3 ubiquitin ligases and deubiquitinase in cancer . Curr Cancer Drug Targets . 2016 ; 16 : 110 – 8 . 57 . Diaz VM , de Herreros AG . F - box proteins : keeping the epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) in check . Semin Cancer Biol . 2016 ; 36 : 71 – 79 . 58 . Yang H , Lu X , Liu Z , Chen L , Xu Y , Wang Y , et al . FBXW7 suppresses epithelial - mesenchymal transition , stemness and metastatic potential of cholangiocarcinoma cells . Oncotarget . 2015 ; 6 : 6310 – 25 . 6206 J . van Staalduinen et al . 59 . Jeon YK , Kim CK , Hwang KR , Park HY , Koh J , Chung DH , et al . Pellino - 1 promotes lung carcinogenesis via the stabilization of Slug and Snail through K63 - mediated polyubiquitination . Cell Death Differ . 2017 ; 24 : 469 – 480 . 60 . Yu Q , Zhou BP , Wu Y . The regulation of snail : on the ubiquitin edge . Cancer Cell Microenviron . 2017 ; 4 : 2 . 61 . Xu M , Zhu C , Zhao X , Chen C , Zhang H , Yuan H , et al . Aty - pical ubiquitin E3 ligase complex Skp1 - Pam - Fbxo45 controls the core epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition - inducing transcription factors . Oncotarget . 2015 ; 6 : 979 – 94 . 62 . Wu Y , Wang Y , Lin Y , Liu Y , Jia J , Singh P , et al . Dub3 inhibition suppresses breast cancer invasion and metastasis by promoting Snail1 degradation . Nat Commun . 2017 ; 8 : 14228 . 63 . Lin Y , Wang Y , Shi Q , Yu Q , Liu C , Feng J , et al . Stabilization of the transcription factors slug and twist by the deubiquitinase dub3 is a key requirement for tumor metastasis . Oncotarget . 2017 ; 8 : 75127 – 40 . 64 . Zhao Y , Wang X , Wang Q , Deng Y , Li K , Zhang M , et al . USP2a supports metastasis by tuning TGF - β signaling . Cell Rep . 2018 ; 22 : 2442 – 54 . 65 . Gao S , Alarcon C , Sapkota G , Rahman S , Chen PY , Goerner N , et al . Ubiquitin ligase Nedd4L targets activated Smad2 / 3 to limit TGF - β signaling . Mol Cell . 2009 ; 36 : 457 – 68 . 66 . Herhaus L , Al - Salihi M , Macartney T , Weidlich S , Sapkota GP . OTUB1 enhances TGF β signalling by inhibiting the ubiquityla - tion and degradation of active SMAD2 / 3 . Nat Commun . 2013 ; 4 : 2519 . 67 . Park SH , Jung EH , Kim GY , Kim BC , Lim JH , Woo CH . Itch E3 ubiquitin ligase positively regulates TGF - β signaling to EMT via Smad7 ubiquitination . Mol Cells . 2015 ; 38 : 20 – 25 . 68 . Zhang Z , Fan Y , Xie F , Zhou H , Jin K , Shao L , et al . Breast cancer metastasis suppressor OTUD1 deubiquitinates SMAD7 . Nat Commun . 2017 ; 8 : 2116 . 69 . Liu S , Zhou F , Shen Y , Zhang Y , Yin H , Zeng Y , et al . Fluid shear stress induces epithelial - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) in Hep - 2 cells . Oncotarget . 2016 ; 7 : 32876 – 92 . 70 . Gregory PA , Bert AG , Paterson EL , Barry SC , Tsykin A , Farshid G , et al . The miR - 200 family and miR - 205 regulate epithelial to mesenchymal transition by targeting ZEB1 and SIP1 . Nat Cell Biol . 2008 ; 10 : 593 – 601 . 71 . Schliekelman MJ , Gibbons DL , Faca VM , Creighton CJ , Rizvi ZH , Zhang Q , et al . Targets of the tumor suppressor miR - 200 in regulation of the epithelial - mesenchymal transition in cancer . Cancer Res . 2011 ; 71 : 7670 – 82 . 72 . Gibbons DL , Lin W , Creighton CJ , Rizvi ZH , Gregory PA , Goodall GJ , et al . Contextual extracellular cues promote tumor cell EMT and metastasis by regulating miR - 200 family expres - sion . Genes Dev . 2009 ; 23 : 2140 – 51 . 73 . Abba ML , Patil N , Leupold JH , Allgayer H . MicroRNA reg - ulation of epithelial to mesenchymal transition . J Clin Med . 2016 ; 5 : 8 . 74 . Li J , Meng H , Bai Y , Wang K . Regulation of lncRNA and its role in cancer metastasis . Oncol Res . 2016 ; 23 : 205 – 17 . 75 . Fang C , Zan J , Yue B , Liu C , He C , Yan D . Long non - coding ribonucleic acid zinc ﬁ nger antisense 1 promotes the progression of colonic cancer by modulating ZEB1 expression . J Gastro - enterol Hepatol . 2017 ; 32 : 1204 – 11 . 76 . Richards EJ , Zhang G , Li ZP , Permuth - Wey J , Challa S , Li Y , et al . Long non - coding RNAs ( LncRNA ) regulated by trans - forming growth factor ( TGF ) β : LncRNA - hit - mediated TGF β - induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition in mammary epi - thelia . J Biol Chem . 2015 ; 290 : 6857 – 67 . 77 . Ma CC , Xiong Z , Zhu GN , Wang C , Zong G , Wang HL , et al . Long non - coding RNA ATB promotes glioma malignancy by negatively regulating miR - 200a . J Exp Clin Cancer Res . 2016 ; 35 : 90 . 78 . Yuan JH , Yang F , Wang F , Ma JZ , Guo YJ , Tao QF , et al . A long noncoding RNA activated by TGF - β promotes the invasion - metastasis cascade in hepatocellular carcinoma . Cancer Cell . 2014 ; 25 : 666 – 81 . 79 . Cao MX , Jiang YP , Tang YL , Liang XH . The crosstalk between lncRNA and microRNA in cancer metastasis : orchestrating the epithelial - mesenchymal plasticity . Oncotarget . 2017 ; 8 : 12472 – 83 . 80 . Zhou H , Wang F , Chen H , Tan Q , Qiu S , Chen S , et al . Increased expression of long - noncoding RNA ZFAS1 is associated with epithelial - mesenchymal transition of gastric cancer . Aging . 2016 ; 8 : 2023 – 38 . 81 . Li T , Xie J , Shen C , Cheng D , Shi Y , Wu Z , et al . Ampli ﬁ cation of long noncoding RNA ZFAS1 promotes metastasis in hepa - tocellular carcinoma . Cancer Res . 2015 ; 75 : 3181 – 91 . 82 . Xiao H , Tang K , Liu P , Chen K , Hu J , Zeng J , et al . LncRNA MALAT1 functions as a competing endogenous RNA to regulate ZEB2 expression by sponging miR - 200s in clear cell kidney carcinoma . Oncotarget . 2015 ; 6 : 38005 – 15 . 83 . Cieply B , Farris J , Denvir J , Ford HL , Frisch SM . Epithelial - mesenchymal transition and tumor suppression are controlled by a reciprocal feedback loop between ZEB1 and Grainyhead - like - 2 . Cancer Res . 2013 ; 73 : 6299 – 309 . 84 . Roca H , Hernandez J , Weidner S , McEachin RC , Fuller D , Sud S , et al . Transcription factors OVOL1 and OVOL2 induce the mesenchymal to epithelial transition in human cancer . PLOS ONE . 2013 ; 8 : e76773 . 85 . Serrano - Gomez SJ , Maziveyi M , Alahari SK . Regulation of epithelial - mesenchymal transition through epigenetic and post - translational modi ﬁ cations . Mol Cancer . 2016 ; 15 : 18 . 86 . Rodrigo I , Cato AC , Cano A . Regulation of E - cadherin gene expression during tumor progression : the role of a new Ets - binding site and the E - pal element . Exp Cell Res . 1999 ; 248 : 358 – 71 . 87 . Cano A , Perez - Moreno MA , Rodrigo I , Locascio A , Blanco MJ , del Barrio MG , et al . The transcription factor snail controls epithelial - mesenchymal transitions by repressing E - cadherin expression . Nat Cell Biol . 2000 ; 2 : 76 – 83 . 88 . Bolos V , Peinado H , Perez - Moreno MA , Fraga MF , Esteller M , Cano A . The transcription factor Slug represses E - cadherin expression and induces epithelial to mesenchymal transitions : a comparison with Snail and E47 repressors . J Cell Sci . 2003 ; 116 : 499 – 511 . 89 . Comijn J , Berx G , Vermassen P , Verschueren K , van Grunsven L , Bruyneel E , et al . The two - handed E box binding zinc ﬁ nger protein SIP1 downregulates E - cadherin and induces invasion . Mol Cell . 2001 ; 7 : 1267 – 78 . 90 . Dong C , Wu Y , Yao J , Wang Y , Yu Y , Rychahou PG , et al . G9a interacts with Snail and is critical for Snail - mediated E - cadherin repression in human breast cancer . J Clin Invest . 2012 ; 122 : 1469 – 86 . 91 . Fukagawa A , Ishii H , Miyazawa K , Saitoh M . deltaEF1 associ - ates with DNMT1 and maintains DNA methylation of the E - cadherin promoter in breast cancer cells . Cancer Med . 2015 ; 4 : 125 – 35 . 92 . Shimbo T , Wade PA . Proteins that read DNA methylation . Adv Exp Med Biol . 2016 ; 945 : 303 – 20 . 93 . Sun L , Fang J . Epigenetic regulation of epithelia - mesenchymal transition . Cell Mol Life Sci . 2016 ; 73 : 4493 – 515 . 94 . Sanchez - Tillo E , Lazaro A , Torrent R , Cuatrecasas M , Vaquero EC , Castells A , et al . ZEB1 represses E - cadherin and induces an EMT by recruiting the SWI / SNF chromatin - remodeling protein BRG1 . Oncogene . 2010 ; 29 : 3490 – 3500 . 95 . Grooteclaes ML , Frisch SM . Evidence for a function of CtBP in epithelial gene regulation and anoikis . Oncogene . 2000 ; 19 : 3823 – 8 . Epithelial – mesenchymal - transition - inducing transcription factors : new targets for . . . 6207 96 . Fu J , Qin L , He T , Qin J , Hong J , Wong J , et al . The TWIST / Mi2 / NuRD protein complex and its essential role in cancer metastasis . Cell Res . 2011 ; 21 : 275 – 89 . 97 . Lin Y , Wu Y , Li J , Dong C , Ye X , Chi YI , et al . The SNAG domain of Snail1 functions as a molecular hook for recruiting lysine - speci ﬁ c demethylase 1 . EMBO J . 2010 ; 29 : 1803 – 16 . 98 . Yang F , Sun L , Li Q , Han X , Lei L , Zhang H , et al . SET8 promotes epithelial - mesenchymal transition and confers TWIST dual transcriptional activities . EMBO J . 2012 ; 31 : 110 – 23 . 99 . Peinado H , Ballestar E , Esteller M , Cano A . Snail mediates E - cadherin repression by the recruitment of the Sin3A / histone deacetylase 1 ( HDAC1 ) / HDAC2 complex . Mol Cell Biol . 2004 ; 24 : 306 – 19 . 100 . Aghdassi A , Sendler M , Guenther A , Mayerle J , Behn CO , Heidecke CD , et al . Recruitment of histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 by the transcriptional repressor ZEB1 down - regulates E - cadherin expression in pancreatic cancer . Gut . 2012 ; 61 : 439 – 48 . 101 . Shi J , Wang Y , Zeng L , Wu Y , Deng J , Zhang Q , et al . Dis - rupting the interaction of BRD4 with diacetylated Twist sup - presses tumorigenesis in basal - like breast cancer . Cancer Cell . 2014 ; 25 : 210 – 25 . 102 . Mishra VK , Wegwitz F , Kosinsky RL , Sen M , Baumgartner R , Wulff T , et al . Histone deacetylase class - I inhibition promotes epithelial gene expression in pancreatic cancer cells in a BRD4 - and MYC - dependent manner . Nucleic Acids Res . 2017 ; 45 : 6334 – 49 . 103 . Warzecha CC , Carstens RP . Complex changes in alternative pre - mRNA splicing play a central role in the epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) . Semin Cancer Biol . 2012 ; 22 : 417 – 27 . 104 . Han H , Braunschweig U , Gonatopoulos - Pournatzis T , Weatheritt RJ , Hirsch CL , Ha KC , et al . Multilayered control of alternative splicing regulatory networks by transcription factors . Mol Cell . 2017 ; 65 : 539 – . e537 . 105 . Lu S , Yu L , Mu Y , Ma J , Tian J , Xu W , et al . Role and mechanism of Twist1 in modulating the chemosensitivity of FaDu cells . Mol Med Rep . 2014 ; 10 : 53 – 60 . 106 . Wang X , Ling MT , Guan XY , Tsao SW , Cheung HW , Lee DT , et al . Identi ﬁ cation of a novel function of TWIST , a bHLH protein , in the development of acquired taxol resistance in human cancer cells . Oncogene . 2004 ; 23 : 474 – 82 . 107 . Zhang X , Wang Q , Ling MT , Wong YC , Leung SC , Wang X . Anti - apoptotic role of TWIST and its association with Akt pathway in mediating taxol resistance in nasopharyngeal carci - noma cells . Int J Cancer . 2007 ; 120 : 1891 – 8 . 108 . Zhang P , Liu H , Xia F , Zhang QW , Zhang YY , Zhao Q , et al . Epithelial - mesenchymal transition is necessary for acquired resistance to cisplatin and increases the metastatic potential of nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells . Int J Mol Med . 2014 ; 33 : 151 – 9 . 109 . Harada K , Ferdous T , Ueyama Y . Establishment of 5 - ﬂ uorouracil - resistant oral squamous cell carcinoma cell lines with epithelial to mesenchymal transition changes . Int J Oncol . 2014 ; 44 : 1302 – 8 . 110 . Cheng GZ , Chan J , Wang Q , Zhang W , Sun CD , Wang LH . Twist transcriptionally up - regulates AKT2 in breast cancer cells leading to increased migration , invasion , and resistance to paclitaxel . Cancer Res . 2007 ; 67 : 1979 – 87 . 111 . Vichalkovski A , Gresko E , Hess D , Restuccia DF , Hemmings BA . PKB / AKT phosphorylation of the transcription factor Twist - 1 at Ser42 inhibits p53 activity in response to DNA damage . Oncogene . 2010 ; 29 : 3554 – 65 . 112 . Tilghman SL , Townley I , Zhong Q , Carriere PP , Zou J , Llopis SD , et al . Proteomic signatures of acquired letrozole resistance in breast cancer : suppressed estrogen signaling and increased cell motility and invasiveness . Mol Cell Proteom . 2013 ; 12 : 2440 – 55 . 113 . Vesuna F , Lisok A , Kimble B , Domek J , Kato Y , van der Groep P , et al . Twist contributes to hormone resistance in breast cancer by downregulating estrogen receptor . Oncogene . 2012 ; 31 : 3223 – 34 . 114 . Wu Y , Ginther C , Kim J , Mosher N , Chung S , Slamon D , et al . Expression of Wnt3 activates Wnt / β - catenin pathway and pro - motes EMT - like phenotype in trastuzumab - resistant HER2 - overexpressing breast cancer cells . Mol Cancer Res . 2012 ; 10 : 1597 – 606 . 115 . Uchibori K , Kasamatsu A , Sunaga M , Yokota S , Sakurada T , Kobayashi E , et al . Establishment and characterization of two 5 - ﬂ uorouracil - resistant hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines . Int J Oncol . 2012 ; 40 : 1005 – 10 . 116 . Wang R , Li Y , Hou Y , Yang Q , Chen S , Wang X , et al . The PDGF - D / miR - 106a / Twist1 pathway orchestrates epithelial - mesenchymal transition in gemcitabine resistance hepatoma cells . Oncotarget . 2015 ; 6 : 7000 – 10 . 117 . Ji H , Lu HW , Li YM , Lu L , Wang JL , Zhang YF , et al . Twist promotes invasion and cisplatin resistance in pancreatic cancer cells through growth differentiation factor 15 . Mol Med Rep . 2015 ; 12 : 3841 – 8 . 118 . Chen Y , Li L , Zeng J , Wu K , Zhou J , Guo P , et al . Twist confers chemoresistance to anthracyclines in bladder cancer through upregulating P - glycoprotein . Chemotherapy . 2012 ; 58 : 264 – 72 . 119 . Kajiyama H , Shibata K , Terauchi M , Yamashita M , Ino K , Nawa A , et al . Chemoresistance to paclitaxel induces epithelial - mesenchymal transition and enhances metastatic potential for epithelial ovarian carcinoma cells . Int J Oncol . 2007 ; 31 : 277 – 83 . 120 . Kim AY , Kwak JH , Je NK , Lee YH , Jung YS . Epithelial - mesenchymal transition is associated with acquired resistance to 5 - ﬂ uorocuracil in HT - 29 colon cancer cells . Toxicol Res . 2015 ; 31 : 151 – 6 . 121 . Deng JJ , Zhang W , Xu XM , Zhang F , Tao WP , Ye JJ , et al . Twist mediates an aggressive phenotype in human colorectal cancer cells . Int J Oncol . 2016 ; 48 : 1117 – 24 . 122 . Wang T , Li Y , Tuerhanjiang A , Wang W , Wu Z , Yuan M , et al . Twist2 contributes to cisplatin - resistance of ovarian cancer through the AKT / GSK - 3 β signaling pathway . Oncol Lett . 2014 ; 7 : 1102 – 8 . 123 . Hsu DS , Lan HY , Huang CH , Tai SK , Chang SY , Tsai TL , et al . Regulation of excision repair cross - complementation group 1 by Snail contributes to cisplatin resistance in head and neck cancer . Clin Cancer Res . 2010 ; 16 : 4561 – 71 . 124 . Masui T , Ota I , Yook JI , Mikami S , Yane K , Yamanaka T , et al . Snail - induced epithelial - mesenchymal transition promotes cancer stem cell - like phenotype in head and neck cancer cells . Int J Oncol . 2014 ; 44 : 693 – 9 . 125 . Maseki S , Ijichi K , Tanaka H , Fujii M , Hasegawa Y , Ogawa T , et al . Acquisition of EMT phenotype in the ge ﬁ tinib - resistant cells of a head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell line through Akt / GSK - 3 β / snail signalling pathway . Br J Cancer . 2012 ; 106 : 1196 – 204 . 126 . Dennis M , Wang G , Luo J , Lin Y , Dohadwala M , Abemayor E , et al . Snail controls the mesenchymal phenotype and drives erlotinib resistance in oral epithelial and head and neck squa - mous cell carcinoma cells . Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg . 2012 ; 147 : 726 – 32 . 127 . Wang H , Zhang G , Zhang H , Zhang F , Zhou B , Ning F , et al . Acquisition of epithelial - mesenchymal transition phenotype and cancer stem cell - like properties in cisplatin - resistant lung cancer cells through AKT / β - catenin / Snail signaling pathway . Eur J Pharmacol . 2014 ; 723 : 156 – 66 . 128 . Lim S , Becker A , Zimmer A , Lu J , Buettner R , Kirfel J . SNAI1 - mediated epithelial - mesenchymal transition confers chemoresis - tance and cellular plasticity by regulating genes involved in cell death and stem cell maintenance . PLOS ONE . 2013 ; 8 : e66558 . 6208 J . van Staalduinen et al . 129 . Zhang W , Feng M , Zheng G , Chen Y , Wang X , Pen B , et al . Chemoresistance to 5 - ﬂ uorouracil induces epithelial - mesenchymal transition via up - regulation of Snail in MCF7 human breast cancer cells . Biochem Biophys Res Commun . 2012 ; 417 : 679 – 85 . 130 . Ma JL , Zeng S , Zhang Y , Deng GL , Shen H . Epithelial - mesenchymal transition plays a critical role in drug resistance of hepatocellular carcinoma cells to oxaliplatin . Tumour Biol . 2016 ; 37 : 6177 – 84 . 131 . Yin T , Wang C , Liu T , Zhao G , Zha Y , Yang M . Expression of snail in pancreatic cancer promotes metastasis and chemoresis - tance . J Surg Res . 2007 ; 141 : 196 – 203 . 132 . Baritaki S , Yeung K , Palladino M , Berenson J , Bonavida B . Pivotal roles of snail inhibition and RKIP induction by the proteasome inhibitor NPI - 0052 in tumor cell chemoimmuno - sensitization . Cancer Res . 2009 ; 69 : 8376 – 85 . 133 . Haslehurst AM , Koti M , Dharsee M , Nuin P , Evans K , Geraci J , et al . EMT transcription factors snail and slug directly contribute to cisplatin resistance in ovarian cancer . BMC Cancer . 2012 ; 12 : 91 . 134 . Kurrey NK , Jalgaonkar SP , Joglekar AV , Ghanate AD , Chaskar PD , Doiphode RY , et al . Snail and slug mediate radioresistance and chemoresistance by antagonizing p53 - mediated apoptosis and acquiring a stem - like phenotype in ovarian cancer cells . Stem Cells . 2009 ; 27 : 2059 – 68 . 135 . Yang AD , Fan F , Camp ER , van Buren G , Liu W , Somcio R , et al . Chronic oxaliplatin resistance induces epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition in colorectal cancer cell lines . Clin Cancer Res . 2006 ; 12 : 4147 – 53 . 136 . Chang TH , Tsai MF , Su KY , Wu SG , Huang CP , Yu SL , et al . Slug confers resistance to the epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor . Am J Respir Crit Care Med . 2011 ; 183 : 1071 – 9 . 137 . Li Y , Wu Y , Abbatiello TC , Wu WL , Kim JR , Sarkissyan M , et al . Slug contributes to cancer progression by direct regulation of ER α signaling pathway . Int J Oncol . 2015 ; 46 : 1461 – 72 . 138 . Tsukasa K , Ding Q , Yoshimitsu M , Miyazaki Y , Matsubara S , Takao S . Slug contributes to gemcitabine resistance through epithelial - mesenchymal transition in CD133 ( + ) pancreatic can - cer cells . Hum Cell . 2015 ; 28 : 167 – 74 . 139 . Nishijima N , Seike M , Soeno C , Chiba M , Miyanaga A , Noro R , et al . miR - 200 / ZEB axis regulates sensitivity to nintedanib in non - small cell lung cancer cells . Int J Oncol . 2016 ; 48 : 937 – 44 . 140 . Yoshida T , Song L , Bai Y , Kinose F , Li J , Ohaegbulam KC , et al . ZEB1 mediates acquired resistance to the epidermal growth factor receptor - tyrosine kinase inhibitors in non - small cell lung cancer . PLOS ONE . 2016 ; 11 : e0147344 . 141 . Gao HX , Yan L , Li C , Zhao LM , Liu W . miR - 200c regulates crizotinib - resistant ALK - positive lung cancer cells by reversing epithelial - mesenchymal transition via targeting ZEB1 . Mol Med Rep . 2016 ; 14 : 4135 – 43 . 142 . Zhou G , Zhang F , Guo Y , Huang J , Xie Y , Yue S , et al . miR - 200c enhances sensitivity of drug - resistant non - small cell lung cancer to ge ﬁ tinib by suppression of PI3K / Akt signaling path - way and inhibits cell migration via targeting ZEB1 . Biomed Pharmacother . 2017 ; 85 : 113 – 9 . 143 . Ren J , Chen Y , Song H , Chen L , Wang R . Inhibition of ZEB1 reverses EMT and chemoresistance in docetaxel - resistant human lung adenocarcinoma cell line . J Cell Biochem . 2013 ; 114 : 1395 – 403 . 144 . Zhang P , Wei Y , Wang L , Debeb BG , Yuan Y , Zhang J , et al . ATM - mediated stabilization of ZEB1 promotes DNA damage response and radioresistance through CHK1 . Nat Cell Biol . 2014 ; 16 : 864 – 75 . 145 . Chen Y , Sun Y , Chen L , Xu X , Zhang X , Wang B , et al . miRNA - 200c increases the sensitivity of breast cancer cells to doxorubicin through the suppression of E - cadherin - mediated PTEN / Akt signaling . Mol Med Rep . 2013 ; 7 : 1579 – 84 . 146 . Manavalan TT , Teng Y , Litch ﬁ eld LM , Muluhngwi P , Al - Rayyan N , Klinge CM . Reduced expression of miR - 200 family members contributes to antiestrogen resistance in LY2 human breast cancer cells . PLOS ONE . 2013 ; 8 : e62334 . 147 . Bai WD , Ye XM , Zhang MY , Zhu HY , Xi WJ , Huang X , et al . MiR - 200c suppresses TGF - β signaling and counteracts trastu - zumab resistance and metastasis by targeting ZNF217 and ZEB1 in breast cancer . Int J Cancer . 2014 ; 135 : 1356 – 68 . 148 . Li Y , VandenBoom TG 2nd , Kong D , Wang Z , Ali S , Philip PA , et al . Up - regulation of miR - 200 and let - 7 by natural agents leads to the reversal of epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition in gemcitabine - resistant pancreatic cancer cells . Cancer Res . 2009 ; 69 : 6704 – 12 . 149 . Mirzoeva OK , Collisson EA , Schaefer PM , Hann B , Hom YK , Ko AH , et al . Subtype - speci ﬁ c MEK - PI3 kinase feedback as a therapeutic target in pancreatic adenocarcinoma . Mol Cancer Ther . 2013 ; 12 : 2213 – 25 . 150 . Hanrahan K , O ’ Neill A , Prencipe M , Bugler J , Murphy L , Fabre A , et al . The role of epithelial - mesenchymal transition drivers ZEB1 and ZEB2 in mediating docetaxel - resistant prostate can - cer . Mol Oncol . 2017 ; 11 : 251 – 65 . 151 . Adam L , Zhong M , Choi W , Qi W , Nicoloso M , Arora A , et al . miR - 200 expression regulates epithelial - to - mesenchymal transi - tion in bladder cancer cells and reverses resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor therapy . Clin Cancer Res . 2009 ; 15 : 5060 – 72 . 152 . Zhu DJ , Chen XW , Zhang WJ , Wang JZ , Ouyang MZ , Zhong Q , et al . Twist1 is a potential prognostic marker for colorectal cancer and associated with chemoresistance . Am J Cancer Res . 2015 ; 5 : 2000 – 11 . 153 . Hara J , Miyata H , Yamasaki M , Sugimura K , Takahashi T , Kurokawa Y , et al . Mesenchymal phenotype after chemotherapy is associated with chemoresistance and poor clinical outcome in esophageal cancer . Oncol Rep . 2014 ; 31 : 589 – 96 . 154 . Zhang T , Guo L , Creighton CJ , Lu Q , Gibbons DL , Yi ES , et al . A genetic cell context - dependent role for ZEB1 in lung cancer . Nat Commun . 2016 ; 7 : 12231 . 155 . Jiang Y , Zhao X , Xiao Q , Liu Q , Ding K , Yu F , et al . Snail and Slug mediate tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer cells through activation of EGFR - ERK independent of epithelial - mesenchymal transition . J Mol Cell Biol . 2014 ; 6 : 352 – 4 . pp 156 . Cosset E , Hamdan G , Jeanpierre S , Voeltzel T , Sagorny K , Hayette S , et al . Deregulation of TWIST - 1 in the CD34 + compartment represents a novel prognostic factor in chronic myeloid leukemia . Blood . 2011 ; 117 : 1673 – 6 . 157 . Vannini I , Bonafe M , Tesei A , Rosetti M , Fabbri F , Storci G , et al . Short interfering RNA directed against the SLUG gene increases cell death induction in human melanoma cell lines exposed to cisplatin and fotemustine . Cell Oncol . 2007 ; 29 : 279 – 87 . 158 . Mancini M , Petta S , Iacobucci I , Salvestrini V , Barbieri E , Santucci MA . Zinc - ﬁ nger transcription factor slug contributes to the survival advantage of chronic myeloid leukemia cells . Cell Signal . 2010 ; 22 : 1247 – 53 . 159 . Richard G , Dalle S , Monet MA , Ligier M , Boesp ﬂ ug A , Pom - mier RM , et al . ZEB1 - mediated melanoma cell plasticity enhances resistance to MAPK inhibitors . EMBO Mol Med . 2016 ; 8 : 1143 – 61 . 160 . Catalano A , Rodilossi S , Rippo MR , Caprari P , Procopio A . Induction of stem cell factor / c - Kit / slug signal transduction in multidrug - resistant malignant mesothelioma cells . J Biol Chem . 2004 ; 279 : 46706 – 14 . 161 . Sanchez - Tillo E , Fanlo L , Siles L , Montes - Moreno S , Moros A , Chiva - Blanch G , et al . The EMT activator ZEB1 promotes tumor Epithelial – mesenchymal - transition - inducing transcription factors : new targets for . . . 6209 growth and determines differential response to chemotherapy in mantle cell lymphoma . Cell Death Differ . 2014 ; 21 : 247 – 57 . 162 . Holohan C , Van Schaeybroeck S , Longley DB , Johnston PG . Cancer drug resistance : an evolving paradigm . Nat Rev Cancer . 2013 ; 13 : 714 – 26 . 163 . Vega S , Morales AV , Ocana OH , Valdes F , Fabregat I , Nieto MA . Snail blocks the cell cycle and confers resistance to cell death . Genes Dev . 2004 ; 18 : 1131 – 43 . 164 . Kajita M , McClinic KN , Wade PA . Aberrant expression of the transcription factors snail and slug alters the response to geno - toxic stress . Mol Cell Biol . 2004 ; 24 : 7559 – 66 . 165 . Baguley BC . Multiple drug resistance mechanisms in cancer . Mol Biotechnol . 2010 ; 46 : 308 – 16 . 166 . Namba T , Kodama R , Moritomo S , Hoshino T , Mizushima T . Zidovudine , an anti - viral drug , resensitizes gemcitabine - resistant pancreatic cancer cells to gemcitabine by inhibition of the Akt - GSK3beta - Snail pathway . Cell Death Dis . 2015 ; 6 : e1795 . 167 . Marechal R , Bachet JB , Mackey JR , Dalban C , Demetter P , Graham K , et al . Levels of gemcitabine transport and metabolism proteins predict survival times of patients treated with gemcita - bine for pancreatic adenocarcinoma . Gastroenterology . 2012 ; 143 : 664 . e661 – 666 168 . Fletcher JI , Haber M , Henderson MJ , Norris MD . ABC trans - porters in cancer : more than just drug ef ﬂ ux pumps . Nat Rev Cancer . 2010 ; 10 : 147 – 56 . 169 . Saxena M , Stephens MA , Pathak H , Rangarajan A . Transcription factors that mediate epithelial - mesenchymal transition lead to multidrug resistance by upregulating ABC transporters . Cell Death Dis . 2011 ; 2 : e179 . 170 . Liu S , Cong Y , Wang D , Sun Y , Deng L , Liu Y , et al . Breast cancer stem cells transition between epithelial and mesenchymal states re ﬂ ective of their normal counterparts . Stem Cell Rep . 2014 ; 2 : 78 – 91 . 171 . Jolly MK , Jia D , Boareto M , Mani SA , Pienta KJ , Ben - Jacob E , et al . Coupling the modules of EMT and stemness : A tunable ‘ stemness window ’ model . Oncotarget . 2015 ; 6 : 25161 – 74 . 172 . Shih JY , Gow CH , Yang PC . EGFR mutation conferring primary resistance to ge ﬁ tinib in non - small - cell lung cancer . N Engl J Med . 2005 ; 353 : 207 – 8 . 173 . Wu K , Gore C , Yang L , Fazli L , Gleave M , Pong RC , et al . Slug , a unique androgen - regulated transcription factor , coordinates androgen receptor to facilitate castration resistance in prostate cancer . Mol Endocrinol . 2012 ; 26 : 1496 – 507 . 174 . Sun C , Wang L , Huang S , Heynen GJ , Prahallad A , Robert C , et al . Reversible and adaptive resistance to BRAF ( V600E ) inhibition in melanoma . Nature . 2014 ; 508 : 118 – 22 . 175 . Huang S , Holzel M , Knijnenburg T , Schlicker A , Roepman P , McDermott U , et al . MED12 controls the response to multiple cancer drugs through regulation of TGF - beta receptor signaling . Cell . 2012 ; 151 : 937 – 50 . 176 . Ramsdale R , Jorissen RN , Li FZ , Al - Obaidi S , Ward T , Shep - pard KE , et al . The transcription cofactor c - JUN mediates phe - notype switching and BRAF inhibitor resistance in melanoma . Sci Signal . 2015 ; 8 : ra82 . 177 . Sahu SK , Garding A , Tiwari N , Thakurela S , Toedling J , Geb - hard S , et al . JNK - dependent gene regulatory circuitry governs mesenchymal fate . EMBO J . 2015 ; 34 : 2162 – 81 . 178 . Roberts CM , Shahin SA , Wen W , Finlay JB , Dong J , Wang R , et al . Nanoparticle delivery of siRNA against TWIST to reduce drug resistance and tumor growth in ovarian cancer models . Nanomedicine . 2017 ; 13 : 965 – 76 . 179 . Fang S , Wu L , Li M , Yi H , Gao G , Sheng Z , et al . ZEB1 knockdown mediated using polypeptide cationic micelles inhi - bits metastasis and effects sensitization to a chemotherapeutic drug for cancer therapy . Nanoscale . 2014 ; 6 : 10084 – 94 . 180 . Zhang K , Zhang B , Lu Y , Sun C , Zhao W , Jiao X , et al . Slug inhibition upregulates radiation - induced PUMA activity leading to apoptosis in cholangiocarcinomas . Med Oncol . 2011 ; 28 ( Suppl 1 ) : S301 – 309 . 181 . Katz LH , Li Y , Chen JS , Munoz NM , Majumdar A , Chen J , et al . Targeting TGF - β signaling in cancer . Expert Opin Ther Targets . 2013 ; 17 : 743 – 60 . 182 . He M , Zhou Z , Wu G , Chen Q , Wan Y . Emerging role of DUBs in tumor metastasis and apoptosis . therapeutic implication . Pharmacol Ther . 2017 ; 177 : 96 – 107 . 183 . Lee HJ , Li CF , Ruan D , Powers S , Thompson PA , Frohman MA , et al . The DNA damage transducer RNF8 facilitates cancer chemoresistance and progression through Twist activation . Mol Cell . 2016 ; 63 : 1021 – 33 . 184 . Wu Y , Tran T , Dwabe S , Sarkissyan M , Kim J , Nava M , et al . A83 - 01 inhibits TGF - β - induced upregulation of Wnt3 and epi - thelial to mesenchymal transition in HER2 - overexpressing breast cancer cells . Breast Cancer Res Treat . 2017 ; 163 : 449 – 60 . 185 . Ban YG , Yang JJ , Chang Y , Wang YL , Liu Y . USP7 promotes tumorigenesis in breast cancer and enhances MRI detection . Int J Clin Exp Med . 2016 ; 9 : 10018 – 27 . 186 . Liu S , de Boeck M , van Dam H , Ten Dijke P . Regulation of the TGF - β pathway by deubiquitinases in cancer . Int J Biochem Cell Biol . 2016 ; 76 : 135 – 45 . 187 . Zhu X , Shen H , Yin X , Long L , Xie C , Liu Y , et al . miR - 186 regulation of Twist1 and ovarian cancer sensitivity to cisplatin . Oncogene . 2016 ; 35 : 323 – 32 . 188 . Liu Z , Liu H , Desai S , Schmitt DC , Zhou M , Khong HT , et al . miR - 125b functions as a key mediator for snail - induced stem cell propagation and chemoresistance . J Biol Chem . 2013 ; 288 : 4334 – 45 . 189 . Zhang P , Wang L , Rodriguez - Aguayo C , Yuan Y , Debeb BG , Chen D , et al . miR - 205 acts as a tumour radiosensitizer by tar - geting ZEB1 and Ubc13 . Nat Commun . 2014 ; 5 : 5671 . 190 . Von Burstin J , Eser S , Paul MC , Seidler B , Brandl M , Messer M , et al . E - cadherin regulates metastasis of pancreatic cancer in vivo and is suppressed by a SNAIL / HDAC1 / HDAC2 repressor complex . Gastroenterology . 2009 ; 137 : 361 – 71 . 371 . e361 - 365 191 . Meidhof S , Brabletz S , Lehmann W , Preca BT , Mock K , Ruh M , et al . ZEB1 - associated drug resistance in cancer cells is reversed by the class I HDAC inhibitor mocetinostat . EMBO Mol Med . 2015 ; 7 : 831 – 47 . 192 . Pitts TM , Kulikowski GN , Tan AC , Murray BW , Arcaroli JJ , Tentler JJ , et al . Association of the epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition phenotype with responsiveness to the p21 - activated kinase inhibitor , PF - 3758309 , in colon cancer models . Front Pharmacol . 2013 ; 4 : 35 . 193 . Strauss R , Sova P , Liu Y , Li ZY , Tuve S , Pritchard D , et al . Epithelial phenotype confers resistance of ovarian cancer cells to oncolytic adenoviruses . Cancer Res . 2009 ; 69 : 5115 – 25 . 194 . Chockley PJ , Keshamouni VG . Immunological consequences of epithelial - mesenchymal transition in tumor progression . J Immunol . 2016 ; 197 : 691 – 8 . 195 . Chen L , Gibbons DL , Goswami S , Cortez MA , Ahn YH , Byers LA , et al . Metastasis is regulated via microRNA - 200 / ZEB1 axis control of tumour cell PD - L1 expression and intratumoral immunosuppression . Nat Commun . 2014 ; 5 : 5241 . 196 . Kim S , Koh J , Kim MY , Kwon D , Go H , Kim YA , et al . PD - L1 expression is associated with epithelial - to - mesenchymal transi - tion in adenocarcinoma of the lung . Hum Pathol . 2016 ; 58 : 7 – 14 . 197 . Ock CY , Kim S , Keam B , Kim M , Kim TM , Kim JH , et al . PD - L1 expression is associated with epithelial - mesenchymal transi - tion in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma . Oncotarget . 2016 ; 7 : 15901 – 14 . 198 . Hirai M , Kitahara H , Kobayashi Y , Kato K , Bou - Gharios G , Nakamura H , et al . Regulation of PD - L1 expression in a high - 6210 J . van Staalduinen et al . grade invasive human oral squamous cell carcinoma micro - environment . Int J Oncol . 2017 ; 50 : 41 – 48 . 199 . Mak MP , Tong P , Diao L , Cardnell RJ , Gibbons DL , William WN , et al . A patient - derived , pan - cancer EMT signature identi - ﬁ es global molecular ilterations and Immune target enrichment following epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition . Clin Cancer Res . 2016 ; 22 : 609 – 20 . 200 . Funaki S , Shintani Y , Kawamura T , Kanzaki R , Minami M , Okumura M . Chemotherapy enhances programmed cell death 1 / ligand 1 expression via TGF - β induced epithelial mesenchymal transition in non - small cell lung cancer . Oncol Rep . 2017 ; 38 : 2277 – 84 . 201 . Terabe M , Ambrosino E , Takaku S , O ’ Konek JJ , Venzon D , Lonning S , et al . Synergistic enhancement of CD8 + T cell - mediated tumor vaccine ef ﬁ cacy by an anti - transforming growth factor - β monoclonal antibody . Clin Cancer Res . 2009 ; 15 : 6560 – 9 . 202 . Terabe M , Robertson FC , Clark K , De Ravin E , Bloom A , Venzon DJ , et al . Blockade of only TGF - β 1 and 2 is suf ﬁ cient to enhance the ef ﬁ cacy of vaccine and PD - 1 checkpoint blockade immunotherapy . Oncoimmunology . 2017 ; 6 : e1308616 . 203 . Mariathasan S , Turley SJ , Nickles D , Castiglioni A , Yuen K , Wang Y , et al . TGF β attenuates tumour response to PD - L1 blockade by contributing to exclusion of T cells . Nature . 2018 ; 554 : 544 – 8 . 204 . Tauriello DVF , Palomo - Ponce S , Stork D , Berenguer - Llergo A , Badia - Ramentol J , Iglesias M , et al . TGF β drives immune eva - sion in genetically reconstituted colon cancer metastasis . Nature . 2018 ; 554 : 538 – 43 . Epithelial – mesenchymal - transition - inducing transcription factors : new targets for . . . 6211