Mapping Interaction onto Media Façades Nancy V . Diniz Xi ' an Jiaotong - Liverpool University Department of Architecture No . 111 Ren ' ai Road , Suzhou Dushu Lake , Suzhou Industrial Park , Jiangsu , P . R . China 215123 nancy . diniz @ xjtlu . edu . cn Carlos A . Duarte University of Lisbon LASIGE / FCUL , Campo Grande 1749 - 016 Lisboa , Portugal cad @ di . fc . ul . pt Nuno M . Guimarães University of Lisbon LASIGE / FCUL , Campo Grande 1749 - 016 Lisboa , Portugal guimaraesn @ acm . org ABSTRACT This paper discusses the emergence and need of principles and guidelines for the design of interaction spaces based on media façades , as large public interactive spaces . Media façades , as new architectural creations , are being designed and built all over the world , and possibilities for interaction with individuals and groups of users are being discovered in multiple dimensions . This paper consolidates a number of empirically observed features of current projects and maps these onto a systematic framework of feature domains . We expect the framework to help in conceptualization , analysis and evaluation of current and future designs and to guide the design of the active and interactive solutions Categories and Subject Descriptors H5 . 2 [ Information interfaces and presentation ] : User Interfaces - Input Devices and strategies , Interaction styles . General Terms Design , Human Factors Keywords Media Façades , Interaction , Large Architectural Displays 1 . INTRODUCTION Architecture has to couple with the human and societal demand for media interactivity and digital technology in transforming the design and construction of the built environment . Assuming the increasingly evident fact that architectural elements are becoming more responsive and actively coupled with their environments , the specific research and development of full scale kinetic surfaces , large displays and media façades has gained momentum . Architects , designers and computing engineers are exploring surface materials , surface treatments , input sensors , and all types of digital circuitry in many experiments and prototypes , developing full - scale systems that react in real time to sensing information , and articulate non - linear narratives with non traditional material realities . Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , to republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . PerDis 2012 , June 04 - 05 2012 , Porto , Portugal Copyright 2012 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 1414 - 5 / 12 / 06… $ 10 . 00 . The concept of interactive architecture is now a reality and will develop in the near future as pervasiveness of the individual and group connectivity through digital networks and devices grows stronger . The architectural designs will no longer remain static as before . ‘Smart’ design , once constrained to museum exhibits or advertising screens , is entering into every domain of public and private life as a spatial medium . Interactive architecture is revolutionizing and reinventing human relationships , our work , our houses and cities . In the light of this evolution , which can be observed in a host of individual projects , a set of questions emerges : “ how do we structure the design of the new architectures to mediate people and society ? ” , “ how can we enhance the perceptual grasp of the new dimensions of connectivity ? ” and “ how do we combine the emerging technologies ? ” . Classical and modern interactive spaces like classical computers , mobile devices , small interactive surfaces like tables or small walls , can be , and have been , conceptually approached with an evolving theoretical and design framework that identifies key interaction qualities [ 12 ] , principles and consolidated methods [ 7 ] , and new contexts of interaction [ 12 , 16 ] . The same conceptual and methodological reasoning should apply to the current large - scale architectural designs . We argue that a conceptual and practical continuum should be sought . This paper addresses the need for principles and guidelines for the design of large public interaction spaces , namely media façades . Interactive and digital media façades , as new architectural creations , are being designed and built all over the world , and the possibilities for interaction with individuals and groups of users are being discovered in multiple dimensions as recently presented in [ 2 ] , [ 4 ] , [ 5 ] and [ 6 ] . This paper brings together a number of empirically observed features of current projects and proposes a map of these onto a systematic framework of feature domains . We expect this emerging framework to help in the conceptualization , analysis and evaluation of current and future designs . The next section , A World of Media Displays , reviews a sample of projects , some with a pioneering role , others illustrating the fast growth of the media façades designs , coming from a particularly fertile environment for the new architectural design . Based on this sample and on a short review of related works , we sketch an analysis framework that includes key dimensions related with the role and ( possible ) interactive behavior of these architectural creations . The framework dimensions are related with interaction modalities already discussed for smaller spaces , like interaction with a wall or a room . As such , this is a first attempt to propose some degree of conceptual and design continuity . The final section discusses implications , needs and future evolution of this empirical approach . 2 . A WORLD OF MEDIA DISPLAYS This section presents a collection of related architectural cases , from pioneering projects to currently booming initiatives . Pioneering Media Surfaces Aegis Hyposurface TM [ 1999 - 2001 ] This project , developed by dECOI Architects , is one of the first world’s interactive walls , developed for a competition for the foyer of The Birmingham Hippodrome Theatre in 1999 . The brief asked for a piece which could portray on the exterior that which was happening on the interior as a dynamic and interactive art work . The piece is a metallic surface that has potential to deform physically in response to stimuli from the environment ( movement , sound , light , etc ) . The Aegis Hyposurface translates information into form , and creates an entirely new medium , digitally dynamic yet materially tactile . Any digitized input ( microphone , keyboard , movement sensor ) can trigger any physical output ( a wave or pattern or word ) ( see currently http : / / hyposurface . org ) . BIX [ 2003 ] “BIX” is a permanent light - and media installation for the Kunsthaus Graz in Austria set up in 2003 by realities : united architects from Berlin ( http : / / www . realities - united . de ) . BIX used a matrix of 930 fluorescent lamps integrated into the acrylic glass façade of a biomorphic building structure . Each ring of light acts as a pixel centrally controlled by a computer . Through the individually adjustable ring brightness , films and animations can be displayed ( 20 fps ) , transforming the Kunsthaus ' skin into a very large low resolution computer display . ICE [ 2002 ] Klein Dytham Architects and Toshio Iwai developed ICE ( Interactive Communicative Experience ) for the Bloomberg Headquarters , Tokyo ( http : / / klein - dytham . com / other / bloomberg - ice ) . The goal was to translate stock - exchange data into formats that anyone can understand . In this case , direct experience plays a major role – information processing that can be experienced physically . A 5x3 . 5m interactive wall is suspended from the ceiling and traversed by FTSE / NASDAQ data like ticker tape . The structure metaphorizes a green icicle , suspended freely from the ceiling , acting as a data collector . When the stock goes up it swells and shrinks when stocks drop . Infrared sensors detect people’s presence at a distance of half a meter and induce participation . The sensors register the visitors touch and movements of the body and convert them into optical and acoustic signals projected back in real time . Recent Cases The ARS Eletronica Building [ 2010 ] – Linz , Austria ( Fig . 1 ) The Ars Electronica Center ( www . aec . at ) is not only the siege of the interactive media and digital arts festival but also a vivid example of an enhanced architectural production . The use of this scenario for experimental interaction design is reported in [ 1 ] , turning this building into a reference case of interaction with media façades . Living Light [ 2010 ] – Seoul South Korea ( Fig . 2 ( a ) and 2 ( b ) ) Living Light by “The Living Architecture Office NY” is a permanent outdoor pavillion with a dynamic skin that glows and blinks in response to both data about air quality and public interest in the environment . Citizens can enter the pavilion or view it from nearby streets and buildings , and they can text message the building and it will text them back . Figure 1 . ARS Electronic Center ( www . aec . at ) Figure 2 ( a ) . Permanent installation“Living Light” , Seoul , South Korea ( www . livinglightseoul . net ) Figure 2 ( b ) . Permanent installation“Living Light” , Seoul , South Korea ( www . livinglightseoul . net ) Booming in China Chinese social and economic transformation has a visible impact in architectural innovation and also on the deployment of an increasing number of media façades . For their most part , media façades are still not interactive , act as marketing and information vehicle to enrich the urban space . A media façade attracts customers , boosts the image of large companies , and helps medium and small companies to stand out among competitors . Media façades are widely adopted by property developers , advertisers and TV channels . With advanced LED technologies the media façade wins over other digital outdoor carriers as it is easier to synchronize and control . A media façade may display graphical / color effects , text / images , commercials or slide - shows , on - line video , channels of digital TV and real - time information about traffic , weather , currency rates and emergency situations . Sky Canopy , Times Square [ 2009 ] – Suzhou , China The sky canopy of the Suzhou Industrial Park ( SIP ) ( Times Square development ) ( Fig . 3 ( a ) and ( b ) ) is a large scale unconventional media façade . The sky canopy enhances the shopping space and experience with multimedia projection surfaces that connect the buildings ( mostly retail shops ) along the river . The projection surface is supported by air cushions together with a glass fiber structure that build up a large LED display screen ) ( http : / / specialtyfabricsreview . com ) . Figure 3 ( a ) . Sky Canopy , SIP , Suzhou China , by HOK Suzhou Science Cultural Arts Centre [ 2007 ] – Suzhou China The Suzhou Science and Cultural Arts Centre’s façade ( Fig . 4 ( a ) and ( b ) ) developed by studio 505 meets requirements of large scale architectural spaces . The main buildig has a continuously curved large perimeter ( 1 . 5 km long ) with an inner weather proofing layer with both glazed and opaque areas , covered by an outer ornamental metal screen . The glazed areas allow for variations of color and shapes . Figure 3 ( b ) . Sky Canopy , SIP , Suzhou China ( www . hok . com ) Figure 4 ( a ) . Suzhou Science and Cultural Arts Centre , Studio 505 Figure 4 ( b ) . Suzhou Science and Cultural Arts Centre , Studio 505 ( www . studio505 . com . au ) 3 . FRAMING THE INTERACTION This section draws its inspiration from the above sample of architectural designs and a brief review of reference works . This reflection has two main goals . The first goal is to capture some implicit theory of current media façades that can be later applied in the analysis of other cases , helping in the design and evaluation of new designs . The second goal is to search for a conceptual approach that shows continuity with respect to the perspectives commonly used in interaction and user experience design and evaluation . 3 . 1 Related Concepts and Work Several works have addressed the characteristics of interaction in public spaces . The interaction dynamics discussed in [ 6 ] is a high level categorization of the four elements of engagement of users with public spaces ( physical , social , cultural and content ) . In [ 10 ] , the authors provide a more operational framework based on the analysis of the requirements and of the design space for interactive public displays . While the analysis seems to be more focused on smaller scale displays or surfaces , the concept of the Audience Funnel , as a model of interaction structure , and the identification of measurable dimensions ( attention , motivation and public interaction ) provide an important foundation for a similar reflection in the scope of the media façades . The collective participation styles , or community interaction , which can be envisaged in large surfaces , is vividly described and analyzed in [ 9 ] and [ 13 ] . More than the specific experimental settings , these works provide important guidance for the methods that need to be designed to observe , evaluate and study interaction with spaces like media façades 3 . 2 Dimensions for Media Façades Our first step in this section is to identify the framework dimensions that seem to emerge from the set of individual cases . We propose a number of simple questions “ What is the functional role of the façade ? ” , “ Who is the user interacting with the façade ? ” , “ Where is the user interacting with the façade ? ” , and “ How is the interaction generated ? ” . 3 . 2 . 1 What is the role ? Media façades are designed with different purposes in mind and with different roles . Some evident functional roles are : Aesthetical – where the media façade acts as a large display for typically dynamic visual representations . Information – where the media façade aims at presenting meaningful or systematic information to its potential users / viewers ( a simple example , not directly associated with media façades , is the coloring scheme of the Empire State Building 1 ) . Adaptive landscape – where the media façade adapts to environmental conditions , like weather , air quality or traffic . Community reflection or mediation – where the façade represents visually the actions of its user ( s ) or their behavior , implicitly or explicitly expressed ( see below ) . With this functional purpose , the façade becomes an architectural instantiation of a social media . We should note that these dimensions are not mutually exclusive and therefore some designs will address more than one of these functions . 1 http : / / www . esbnyc . com 3 . 2 . 2 Who is the user ? The user of the media façade , regardless of the adopted interaction style , can be : An individual user – single users can interact with small to large walls or even buildings , as long as they are equipped with the appropriate devices ( including linguistic devices such as voice or gesture ) , A group of users , generating patterns of interaction emerging from their collective activity , can impress the façade and receive specific information in return ( see Hello . Wall [ 15 ] as a small scale example ) , A crowd , composed by a large number of users , with or without a common goal or focus , but providing input to the media façade which generates the associated feedback . 3 . 2 . 3 Where is the user ? When the location of the users is concerned , we can distinguish between local or remote users . Local users can interact directly with the façade , either through specific devices or more natural interaction , but in any case with immediate and localized feedback . Remote users can experience similar types of interactive behavior through the user of specific devices or device usage ( for example , mobile smart phones ) which can also mediate the façade’s feedback . 3 . 2 . 4 How is the interaction generated ? This dimension relates with the dynamics of the interaction style . We distinguish between explicit and implicit interaction . Explicit interaction is triggered by the user’s directed actions through some interaction technique ( voice or gesture recognition , device mediated ) . Implicit interaction occurs when the natural behavior of the user ( s ) is used to drive the media façade . The above four dimensions are summarized in Table 1 , can now be used to map some of the previous examples . On the other hand , as we discuss in the final section , these dimensions also frame research issues in the interaction design space . Table 1 . Dimensions of Media Façades as Interactive Spaces What is the Role ? Who is the User ? Where is the User ? How is the interaction generated ? Aesthetical Individual Local Explicit Information Group Remote Implicit Adaptive landscape Crowd Local / Remote Implicit / Explicit Community reflection or mediation Group / Crowd Local / Remote Implicit / Explicit 3 . 3 Mapping the Sample The previous sample of cases can be analyzed according to the above framework . Some have limited interaction possibilities and only demonstrate potential for interaction . Others exhibit an explicit interactive nature . Aegis Hypo surface , originally designed with an aesthetical function in mind , could easily extend its function into the other functional categories . The interaction as designed , included individual or group input , and was generated locally in an explicit way . BIX was designed as a permanent aesthetical object but ends up providing and infrastructure , an architectural display , for the other functions . No specific interaction seems to have been designed for this installation but the base building “skin” can react to different types of input . ICE directly addresses the informational function , with explicit and individual and group interaction opportunities . The more recent examples , be they interactive from design or just potentially interactive , can also be framed by our generic categories . The ARS Electronica Center and the experiments reported in [ 1 ] are a vivid example of a media façade operating as a reflection of a user community , interacting individual - and explicitly , locally or remotely . Living Light provides information and landscape adaptation , allowing for individual , explicit and local and remote interaction . The large - scale media façades mentioned before , Times Square’s Sky Canopy and Suzhou SCAC , anticipate some other instances of our categories . While the current designs have a mainly aesthetical function , the other functions are potentially there but do not exist at the moment . At a large scale , crowd - based interaction is easily conceivable , together with the exploitation of implicit / explicit interactions . This small set of samples can therefore be positioned into the simple four - dimensional framework defined above . This should be understood as a first step towards our first goal , that allows further reflection , namely on the transition between the different values ( such as individual to crowd , information to mediation ) . 3 . 4 Interaction Modalities and Assessment Each instance of the interaction dimensions mentioned above directs the design into different directions . Explicit , individual and local interaction can exploit voice - and gesture - based commands , used in interactive walls and small - scale interactive spaces [ 14 ] . As the scale of the surface or façade increases , or as the number of users increases towards a group or crowd interaction , direct voice - and gesture - based interactions become questionable . This is a domain where evaluation is required ( analogous to the work presented in [ 11 ] ) . The scale increase suggests the stronger integration of mediating devices ( such as smart phones , as in [ 1 ] , or Hello . Wall’s Viewport [ 15 ] ) , which support the individual - group - crowd spectrum as well as the local - remote dimension . The generation of implicit interaction is closely related with the notion of context awareness in ubiquitous computing environments ( discussed in [ 8 ] ) , typically based in the integration of appropriate sensing infrastructures . In our context , this requires the design of active capabilities in the building’s surfaces , which can be oriented to some kinds self - production ( energy , CO 2 capture ) , to the adaptation to human activities and the enrichment of the urban experience . A design path from small - space sensing to large media façade activity is still to be conceived and experimented . This perspective of media façades as interactive spaces has two implications on the assessment of the interaction . The first one is the design of observation and data collection methods that support the analysis of the previously mentioned aspects like engagement , attention or motivation , in the scope of such a large - scale space . The second implication is the design of methods to evaluate progress and success of interaction , as a projection of usability and user experience evaluation , at this large - scale level . 4 . Conclusion When considering the broader design literature illustrated by our examples , we notice that a significant contribution for media façade design is still absent , namely the extension of the functionality beyond “aesthetic and information skins” . In the realm of the artistic interactive installations’ praxis and theory discourse in the past few years , the social interaction dimension has been widely discussed , generating multiple interpretations ( see [ 3 ] ) . This paper recognizes that the conceptual reflection on the design and development of private and commercial large media interactive spaces is still in its early stages . There is an opportunity to take advantage of the interactive potential of media façades , which are currently impressively under - used and high - maintenance human interaction infrastructures . On the other hand , seen from the architecture perspective , an analysis and reflection framework like the one presented here should also consider the process of “recycling and augmentation” of existing obsolete media façades . The design of media façades and active building surfaces should in any case bring together the conceptual and methodological knowledge of interaction design , and expand the user experience enhancement from the small device to the large urban environment . The level of smoothness and seamlessness that we can achieve in this design path is still an open question . 5 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Boring , S . , Gehring , S . , Wiethoff , A . , Blöckner , A . M . , Schöning , J . and Butz , A . ( 2011 ) Multi - user interaction on media facades through live video on mobile devices , In Proceedings of the 2011 Annual conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ISBN : 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0228 - 9 doi > 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979342 [ 2 ] Brynskov , M . , Dalsgaard , P . , Ebsen , T . , Fritsch , J . and Halskov , K ( 2009 ) Staging Urban Interactions with Media Façades , In Proceedings of Interact 2009 , LNCS , 2009 [ 3 ] Bullivant , L . ( 2005 ) 4dspace : Interactive Architecture , Architectural Design , Chichester : Wiley [ 4 ] Calabrese , F . et al ( 2007 ) Urban Computing and Mobile Devices , Pervasive Computing , IEEE , July - Sept 2007 , Vol . 6 ( 3 ) , doi > 10 . 1109 / MPRV . 2007 . 69 [ 5 ] Dalsgaard , P . and Halskov , K . ( 2010 ) Designing Urban Media Façades : cases and challenges , In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ISBN : 978 - 1 - 60558 - 929 - 9 doi > 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753670 [ 6 ] Dalsgaard , P . , Dindler , C . and Halskov , K . ( 2011 ) Understanding the Dynamics of Engaging Interaction in Public Spaces , In P . Campos et al . ( Eds . ) : INTERACT 2011 , Part II , LNCS 6947 , pp . 212 – 229 , 2011 [ 7 ] Dix , A . , Finlay , J . , Abowd , G . and Beale , R . ( 2003 ) Human Computer Interaction , Prentice Hall ; 3 rd ed , 2003 [ 8 ] Krumm , J . ( ed ) , ( 2010 ) Ubiquitous Computing Fundamentals , CRC Press , 2010 [ 9 ] Memarovic , M . , Langheinrich , M . , and Alt , F . ( 2012 ) Interacting Places – a Framework for Promoting Community Interaction and Place Awareness through Public Displays , in Adjunct Proceedings of the Tenth Annual IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications , 2012 ( in press ) . [ 10 ] Müller , J . , Alt , F . , Michelis , D . and Schmidt A . ( 2010 ) Requirements and design space for interactive public displays , In Proceedings of the international conference on Multimedia ( MM ' 10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1285 - 1294 . http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 1873951 . 1874203 [ 11 ] Neca , J . and Duarte , C . ( 2011 ) Evaluation of Gestural Interaction with and without Voice Commands , in Proceedings of IHCI 2011 - IADIS Conference on Interfaces and Human Computer Interaction , Rome , Italy , 2011 [ 12 ] Norman , D . ( 2002 ) The Design of Everyday Things , Basic Books , 2002 [ 13 ] Schroeter , R . ( 2012 ) Engaging new digital locals with interactive urban screens to collaboratively improve the city , In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ' 12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 227 - 236 . DOI = 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145239 http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145239 [ 14 ] TaySheng , J . ( 2005 ) Advanced ubiquitous Media for Interactive Space – A Framework , in COMPUTER AIDED ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN FUTURES 2005 , Part 5 , 341 - 350 , DOI : 10 . 1007 / 1 - 4020 - 3698 - 1 _ 32 [ 15 ] Prante , T . , Röcker , C . , Streitz , N . , Stenzel , R . , Magerkurth , C . , van Alphen , D . and Plewe , D . ( 2003 ) Hello . Wall – Beyond Ambient Displays . In : Peter Ljungstrand , Jason Brotherton ( Eds . ) : Video Track and Adjunct Proceedings of the 5th Intern . Conference on Ubiquitous Computing ( UBICOMP ' 03 ) , Seattle , Wash . , USA , Oct . 12 - 15 , 2003 [ 16 ] Winograd , Terry . 2001 . Interaction Spaces for Twenty - First - Century Computing . In Human - Computer Interaction in the New Millennium , ed . J . Carroll : 259 - 276 . New York : Addison - Wesley .