What if undergraduate students designed their own web learning environment ? Exploring students’ web 2 . 0 mentality through participatory design jcal _ 382146 . . 159 G . Palaigeorgiou , * G . Triantafyllakos† & A . Tsinakos‡ * Department of Computer and Communication Engineering , University of Thessaly , 37 Glavani – 28th October Street , 382 21 , Volos , Greece †Computer Science Department , Aristotle University of Thessaloniki , POB 888 , Thessaloniki , Greece ‡Department of Industrial Informatics , Technological Educational Institute of Kavala , Agios Loukas , 65404 , Kavala , Greece Abstract Following the increasing calls for a more skeptical analysis of web 2 . 0 and the empowerment of learners’ voices in formulating upcoming technologies , this paper elaborates on the participa - tory design of a web learning environment . A total of 117 undergraduate students from two Greek Informatics Departments participated in 25 participatory design sessions , employing two needs’ elicitation techniques , with the aim of envisioning a learning platform that meets their learning particularities and needs , incorporates and exploits their new technological habits , and can be harmoniously situated in their daily routine . Overall , 773 needs were elicited , proving that students had reﬁned views about the elements that can render the next wave of e - learning applications successful . They convincingly demonstrated their web 2 . 0 mentality but sought for a smooth transition to the new environment , promoting an evolution rather than a revolution . The resulting set of needs demarcates a zone of expectancies where the enhance - ment of the learning content and the contextualization of knowledge remain top priorities with revamped opportunities , while networking , participation and collaboration complement and improve their characteristics . Our study is an example of exploiting participatory design for exposing students’ thoughts and requirements from a critical design perspective . Keywords e - learning 2 . 0 , learning management systems , participatory culture , participatory design , student empowerment , web 2 . 0 . Introduction Educational commentators have pledged encomiastic remarks for the Web 2 . 0 ‘fairy tale’ and the profound effects of the new online lifestyle of young people to their learning ecology – in this paper , the ‘Web 2 . 0’term is viewed from a practice perspective ( Dohn 2009 ) , denoting more certain forms of user activities or prac - tices in web - mediated environments rather than describing the supporting technologies . In the web 2 . 0 era , learners are regarded as cooperative and altruistic actors ( Vassileva 2008 ) , who refuse to take on the role of a passive consumer and are transformed into active con - tributors , authors with a disposition to innovate , share , and form communities of interest , communities of prac - tice , and networks ( Boyd 2007 ) . Students , who suppos - edly inhabit the social web with ease , are placed at the centre of online activities , initiate and inﬂuence Accepted : 14 July 2010 Correspondence : GeorgePalaigeorgiou , DepartmentofComputer & CommunicationEngineering , UniversityofThessaly , 37Glavani – 28th October Str , 382 21 , Volos , Greece . Email : gpalegeo @ gmail . com doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2729 . 2010 . 00382 . x Original article 146 © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Journal of Computer Assisted Learning ( 2011 ) , 27 , 146 – 159 curriculum , connect to the world as a whole , and self - direct and self - regulate their learning ( McLoughlin & Lee 2008 ) . All too often , new manifestos promoting the virtues of the emerging networks make their appear - ance , while new visions of revolutionary pedagogies and learning theories have already been proposed , e . g . connectivism , pedagogy 2 . 0 ( McLoughlin & Lee 2008 ) , etc . However , these promises coexist with limited signs of threats to the prevailing learning practices and authorities . Great enthusiasm has been replaced by voices advocating a need for critical reﬂection on social software and Web 2 . 0 practices ( Selwyn 2007 ) . Essen - tially , the e - learning 2 . 0 concept is founded on assump - tions derived from observations of students’ behaviour in personal cyberspaces rather than being based on empirical research validating the envisioned transfor - mations ( Hemmi et al . 2009 ) . Only recently has formal research on Web 2 . 0 in higher education started to get published , and there is still no evidence that the prom - ised revolution has been unleashed . Research reports even contradict the expectations , as for example in the case of blogs or pod - casts which have failed in engaging undergraduate students in several cases ( e . g . Cole 2009 ; Kerawalla et al . 2009 ) . The ﬁndings vary and require a re - examination of both the questions posed and the answers explored ( Ravenscroft 2009 ) . Often , researchers disregard the fact that , even though technological resources provide opportunities for innovative interactions , they are not the deﬁnite regulator of pedagogical change ( McLoughlin & Lee 2008 ) . The introduction of web 2 . 0 practices and tech - nologies requires a signiﬁcant shift in students’ mindset and it is imperative to consider that change is not an instantaneous incident but a complex and subjective learning / unlearning process for all concerned ( Scott 2003 ) . Research shows that students of all ages are heavily inﬂuenced by prior learning practices and methods of delivery and are inclined to decipher new technologies through conventional views of learning ( CLEX 2009 ; Crook 2001 ) . Respectively , ‘old world’ educators may confront a ‘culture shock or skills crisis’ ( McLoughlin & Lee 2008 ) when forced to introduce novel approaches of which they may lack experience and conﬁdence . Hence , pragmatic e - learning 2 . 0 should be concerned not solely with affordances but also with the intersections between stakeholders’ expectations , motivations , skills and experiences ( Cole 2009 ) . In this transition stage ( CLEX 2009 ) , ‘learner voice’ has regained special focus ( Seale 2009 ) . Researchers claim that it is essential for the educational systems to conform to the learners , rather than the other way round and consider an open dialogue between learners and educators about educational reform to be an essen - tial requirement for developing new mediation tools and practices either in the school ( Clark et al . 2009 ) or the university context ( Conole & Creanor 2007 ; Selwyn 2007 ; Seale 2009 ) . Students are the ‘insiders’ in educational contexts , have a ﬁrsthand account of the various effects of learning interventions ( Lohnes & Kinzer 2007 ) and also have high expectations of how learning should take place and which technologies and learning environments best meet their needs ( Conole & Creanor 2007 ) . However , the opportunities to contrib - ute as equal partners in the educational reform are not commonplace . Given the dominance of constructivist and participatory approaches to learning , keeping students out of the design of new educational environ - ments creates a paradox : while we seek students’ active involvement , we suppress their freedom to make decisions about their own learning ( Siozos et al . 2009 ) . Undergraduate students’ input , until recently , has been constrained to the evaluation of prototypes or the assessment of their attitudes ( Lohnes & Kinzer 2007 ; Seale 2009 ) , and there is a scarcity of studies that focus on exposing their thoughts and desires from a critical design perspective ( Creanor et al . 2006 ; Seale 2009 ) . Students’ empowerment should be accompanied by an exploration of new methods for extracting their needs , desires , and expectations ( Lohnes & Kinzer 2007 ) . Interestingly , the participatory culture of Web 2 . 0 has not been associated with the participatory design ratio - nale that advocates the involvement of learners in the design process of new tools . In this paper , we will delve into undergraduate students’ needs for web - learning environments through participatory design . A signiﬁ - cantly shorter , preliminary analysis of the results of the speciﬁc study , before its completion , has been pre - sented in Palaigeorgiou et al . ( 2009 ) . In this paper , we elaborate more on the research questions and the meth - odological framework employed , describe in detail the set of students’ proposals based on an extended sample of participants and focus on an interpretative view of the results in regards to the Web 2 . 0 discussion agenda . Students’ web 2 . 0 mentality 147 © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Participatory design Participatory design is an approach to the design and development of technological and organizational systems that promotes the active involvement of poten - tial or current users in the decision - making processes . Sanoff ( 2007 ) states that ‘participatory design is an atti - tude about a force for change in the creation and man - agement of environments for people’ . All participatory design approaches share a commitment to the belief that users can and should be involved in the design process of technology that affects their work or their life ( Bødker et al . 1991 ) . The favourable participatory design outcomes are usually attributed to the exploita - tion of users’ tacit knowledge and the activation of their collective intelligence ( Sanoff 2007 ) . Studies with students of all ages as co - designers of educational tools are drawing the interest of an increas - ing number of researchers . Several participatory design methods have a strong ethnographic tradition and include contextual interviews and participant observa - tions in order to gain insights into how the participants use technologies in their everyday lives ( for example e . g . Creanor et al . 2006 with interpretative phenomeno - logical analysis ) . Seale ( 2009 ) asserts that the strong narrative and in - depth insights of these methods could be of high relevance ‘to research that is focusing on hearing the ‘ “student voice” in relation to e - learning experiences’ . However , there are also participatory techniques which focus on system design with students as participants such as scenario - based design , future workshops , and design games . For instance , in coopera - tive inquiry ( Druin 2002 ) , children were involved in cooperative prototyping and brainstorming activities , or in bonded design ( Large et al . 2006 ) intergenerational teams of users created low - tech prototypes of products through needs assessment , brainstorming , prototyping , and consensus building . While the literature is rich in case studies of children participating in the design of technology products , it is nevertheless limited when it comes to the critical design perspective of undergraduate students . Triantafyllakos et al . ( 2008 ) have proposed the We ! Design participa - tory methodology for incorporating undergraduate stu - dents in the development of educational applications claiming that ‘ [ undergraduate students ] , as a result of their extensive experience with common educational tasks ( 1 ) are able to easily recall , state and elaborate on their prior problems and needs ; ( 2 ) have unconsciously or deliberately thought of and formed solutions and pro - posals concerning those processes ; ( 3 ) are willing to collaborate with their colleagues . . . ; and ( 4 ) may produce numerous diverse ideas for the construction of prototypes in a short amount of time’ . Undergraduate students’ willingness to participate in a process of re - conceptualizing existing tools and educational prac - tices has been indicated in several case studies ( Trian - tafyllakos et al . 2008 , 2009 ; Siozos et al . 2009 ) . The missing element is usually researchers and learning designers’ determination to take students’ visions seriously . Aims Today , learning - management systems ( LMS ) constitute one of the most prevalent electronic platforms for pro - viding learning content to undergraduate students . LMS have extended the educational paradigm by expanding the classroom boundaries , capturing and maintaining course content , supporting the sharing of various resources , enabling students’ communication , collabo - ration and assessment , and giving instructors more ﬂex - ibility for developing and delivering pedagogical activities ( Coates et al . 2005 ) . The overwhelming majority of higher - education institutions have installed one or more LMS - type products since they are consid - ered as well - structured ‘single - entry - points’ for orga - nizing constructivist learning experiences which are on par with students’ technological expectations ( Coates et al . 2005 ; Lonn & Teasley 2009 ) Nevertheless , LMS have invoked little disruption to teaching practices ( Blin & Munro 2008 ) and students use them mostly as document and communication man - agement tools ( Lonn & Teasley 2009 ) . LMS have been criticized for replicating the anachronistic instructor - centred classroom or lecture - hall model that regards students as mere information consumers or end - users in the ‘walled garden’ of the institution’s systems ( McLoughlin & Lee 2008 ) . LMS do not conform to modern society metaphors , signs and practices ( Hemmi et al . 2009 ) , and the Web 2 . 0 philosophy . They prohibit students’ choice and independence in shaping their own learning paths , they do not exploit networking poten - tials , and fail to support diverse learning styles ( Craig 2007 ) , eventually leading to students’ de - motivation and monotony . Even though educational institutions 148 G . Palaigeorgiou et al . © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd demand from their users to access their LMS , their attempts are usually unsuccessful due to the ‘what’s in it for me’factor ( Chatti & Jarke 2007 ) . In this study , our objective was to help undergraduate students of a Greek Technological Institution to focus on their learning needs and experiences , and project them in their modern techno - centric practices in order to conceive / invent a web learning environment that address their own highest learning and technological expectations and needs . We intended to investigate the breadth and the nature of the desired educational ser - vices , to identify students’ needs related to web 2 . 0 ‘learning ways’ and to contribute to the corresponding debate . Typically , participatory design products usually ensure students’ satisfaction , a characteristic of great importance when it comes to online learning environ - ments ( Palmer & Holt 2009 ) . However , the design prod - ucts are also inextricable from the participants’ characteristics and particularities , along with their edu - cational environment . Therefore , students’ suggestions will reveal experiences and inspirations inﬂuenced mainly by the Greek academic environment and their study subject which , however , have been formed in the context of the universal internet experience . Methodology We followed the participatory design framework of the We ! Design methodology ( Triantafyllakos et al . 2008 ) , which designates that educational requirements can be extracted by conducting several iterations of concise and highly structured collaborative design sessions with different students . The iterations ensure the representa - tiveness of the undergraduate students’ needs , while their short duration renders them attractive to many stu - dents without signiﬁcantly disturbing their primary educational obligations . Such methods allow early design explorations more easily and in cost - effective ways ( Kensing & Blomberg 1998 ) . We conducted 25 design sessions with the participa - tion of 117 undergraduate students ( 52 male and 65 female ) studying in two different Informatics depart - ments of a Greek Technological Educational Institution . Students were on the third or fourth year of study ( with a mean age of 22 . 8 years old ) and fulﬁlled the methodolo - gy’s requirements for extensive computer experience , since they were engaged in social media , were familiar with Web 2 . 0 technologies , and had extensive educa - tional experience in tertiary courses and corresponding LMS . Hence , they were expected to have reﬁned predis - positions towards the weaknesses of the institutional e - learning services and the opportunities for change . Students’ registration in the design sessions was voluntary – they were granted extra credits for their par - ticipation – and it was conducted through the use of a web - based registration system ; hence , group synthesis was not controlled . Each design session lasted for approximately 2 h and 30 min and was comprised of four to six students and two experienced coordinators who had conducted more than 50 similar design sessions in the past . The coordi - nators guided the students throughout the design process and provided support when needed . The design sessions consisted of three phases : the introductory phase ( ~ 30 min ) , the needs elicitation phase ( ~ 100 min ) and the evaluation phase ( ~ 20 min ) . Two different par - ticipatory approaches were employed for the elicitation of students’ needs which enabled us to control the ﬁnal set of needs for technique bias . Although the two methods incorporated several common activities , they meant to provoke fundamentally different experience and engagement . The ﬁrst one asked for a structured exploration of the design space , while the second one evolved as a design game . In both cases , our intention was to support students in exploring the design space through three discrete perspectives ; one pragmatic , one situated , and one innovative . The pragmatic perspective aimed at a paradigm - preserving , nearly conservative , exploration of the design space through the use of appropriate cues that could help students recall prior experiences . The situated perspective encouraged students to situate their needs in real use contexts exploiting cues that referred to different time and space settings . The innovative per - spective initiated both a paradigm stretching and a para - digm breaking exploration of the design space through the use of various creative activities . The techniques were inspired from studies referring to idea generation theory ( Halskov & Dalsgaard 2007 ; Perttula & Sipilä 2007 ) . By employing imagery or textual elements , such as verbs , nouns , etc . , participants were encouraged to be creative , and to avoid the tendency to generate ideas with minimum cognitive effort that could lead to the reproduction of slightly modiﬁed instances of existing ideas or objects ( Ward 1994 ) . The design game aimed at establishing a more playful environment where Students’ web 2 . 0 mentality 149 © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd students’ interactions are unaffected by social inﬂu - ences on idea generation , such as production blocking , free riding , cognitive inertia , etc . The fact that the design games use explicit and well known rules and game mechanisms , can make the participants feel more at ease with the unfamiliar role of the designer they are asked to play ( Johansson 2006 ) . Introductory phase At the beginning of both types of design sessions , a detailed description of the design problem was pre - sented , namely , the envisioning of a web learning envi - ronment that meets students’ particularities , that incorporates , exploits and extends their web 2 . 0 prac - tices and that can be harmoniously situated in the daily routine of a contemporary , active student . The Web 2 . 0 term was exempliﬁed , ﬁrstly , by referencing to the opportunities and consequences of user practices in well - known web 2 . 0 services ( e . g . YouTube© , Flickr© , Facebook© ) , and secondly , by posing questions about students’ underlying attitudes with regards to participa - tion , collective knowledge production , and social networking . Students were then asked to play the role of a script - writer and develop their own ﬁctional characters – ‘design alter egos’ ( Triantafyllakos et al . 2009 ) by selecting a photograph from a rich set of photographs and by shaping her physiological , sociological , and psy - chological traits ( personality traits , professional ambi - tions , computer experience , etc . ) in a predesigned form . Then , the design alter ego then became their communi - cation agent throughout the design process , an ‘object to think with’ and an ‘object to think for’ ( Triantafyllakos et al . 2009 ) . Design alter egos were introduced in order to liberate the students from the fear of straightfor - wardly exposing themselves , to support and enhance their introspection and creativity ( Triantafyllakos et al . 2009 ) , and to overcome the notion of the ‘implied’ student ( Ulriksen 2009 ) that is formed from their prior educational experiences . Needs’ elicitation technique I Five activities for extracting students’ requirements were conducted : ( a ) Students were provided with a set of textual stimuli , in the form of nouns , verbs , and ques - tions regarding the diverse contexts where their design alter egos could spend time during the course of a day ( e . g . ‘in the morning , in the afternoon . . . with my roommate , with my family’ , etc . ) , together with exem - plary imagery ( e . g . photographs of a lecture room , a computer lab , a student’s room , etc . ) . They were then asked to create and elaborate on short ideal scenarios of using the web learning platform under design in the speciﬁed contexts . ( b ) In the next activity , students focused on their ﬁctional character’s personality traits and behaviours , and searched for needs directly linked back to their psychological characteristics . ( c ) Next , students were asked to imagine their design alter ego in an advanced technology context and identify new media affordances . Stimuli in the form of questions were provided ( e . g . ‘What kind of opportunities do Web 2 . 0 technologies offer for your design alter ego ? ’ ) . ( d ) Afterwards , a set of printouts depicting existing course websites were given to them . Students critically evalu - ated those solutions and incorporated their characteris - tics ( or not ) into the needs pool . ( f ) During the last activity , students were shown a 5 - min video comprised of segments from well - known science ﬁction movies . Afterwards , they were asked to envision the ways in which the educational system might change and how the new status quo could affect the requirements for the cor - responding learning environment . Students were pro - vided with a set of 23 printed hand - sized cards which presented all the activities and the corresponding stimuli and acted as a guide throughout the session . Needs’ elicitation technique II The second approach was structured as a board game . The main elements of the game were a round board and a set of pawns and dice , one for each participating student . The board was divided in 20 slices , each one accompanied by a description card which provided cues for creating scenarios . Students were given points whenever they managed to fulﬁl what was asked of them . Seven categories of slices were offered : ( 1 ) The learning category , which provided students with differ - ent sets of verbs and nouns extracted from learning theory books ( e . g . learn , explain , assessment ) in order to help them combine the essence of learning with the design task at hand . ( 2 ) The time category , which pre - sented prompts of different periods of time in design alter ego’s daily routine . ( 3 ) The context category , which provided images of three distinct contexts where 150 G . Palaigeorgiou et al . © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd their design alter ego might live : university , students’ rooms , recreational spaces . ( 4 ) The technology cat - egory , which asked students to envision the ways in which upcoming technological innovations could affect their design alter ego’s needs , problems and require - ments . Cues , as in previous categories , included verbs referring to the future and questions regarding the use of novel technology products in the classroom ( e . g . Tablet PCs , interactive whiteboards ) . ( 5 ) The divergent cat - egory consisted of two creativity techniques which asked students to imagine that the course website was either replaced by a human agent or transferred to another medium such as theatre , radio , etc . and then try to think of ways for addressing their design alter ego’s needs . ( 6 ) The existing solutions category , in which printouts of existing learning management systems were presented to students . ( 7 ) The extras category , which allowed students to use cards from whichever category they wanted . In both techniques , students , after being presented with the given tasks , thought alone at ﬁrst and presented and discussed their scenarios afterwards . Every need presented was reiterated and written down by one of the coordinators while at the same moment students co - formulated its wording . Inquiry The ﬁrst technique was applied in 12 sessions ( 54 stu - dents ) , while the second one was applied in thirteen ses - sions ( 63 students ) . In the evaluation phase of each session , students assessed the extracted needs in terms of their perceived signiﬁcance for the learning process and their innovativeness in a 5 - point scale . They also completed a questionnaire for assessing the design process , the coordinators’ inﬂuence , and for specifying their computer experience . Additionally , a semi - formal discussion was conducted with questions regarding stu - dents’ attitudes and evaluations of the product and the process . The design sessions were captured by a video camera and the discussions were transcribed . Inductive content analysis was conducted on students’ proposals in order to organize them in a number of categories . Identical analysis was also conducted on the transcripts that derived from the video recordings , in order to extract students’ perspectives on issues relative to the web 2 . 0 debate . In the second case , the identiﬁed cat - egorical scheme was connected with existing theory in order to function as a base for making inferences . The credibility of the analysis was established in both cases through peer debrieﬁng . Results Students and the process The participants could be considered as a representative sample of computer - literate students since they used computers for an average of 4 – 5 h per day and for an average of 6 . 29 years [ M = 6 . 29 , standard deviation ( sd ) = 2 . 29 ] . Their most frequent computer tasks included listening to music ( M = 6 . 29 , sd = 1 . 15 – in a 7 - point scale of frequency ) , emailing ( M = 5 . 56 , sd = 1 . 39 ) , seeking for entertainment material ( YouTube , etc . ) ( M = 5 . 56 , sd = 1 . 34 ) , and social net - working ( M = 5 . 40 , sd = 2 . 02 ) . Students were excited with their participation and evaluated very positively both the process and the prod - ucts of the design sessions . They characterized the resulting needs of their session as ‘innovative’ , ‘inter - esting’ , and ‘complete’ and the design process as ‘fun’ , ‘creative’ , ‘unexpectedly enjoyable’ , and ‘efﬁcient’ . The majority of students projected upon the design alter egos an idealized version of themselves and claimed that the characters liberated them from the fear of straightforwardly exposing themselves while they also functioned as a source of inspiration . Students under - lined the friendly , collaborative , and creative atmo - sphere that prevailed throughout the sessions and stated that the coordinators did not interfere or affect their design suggestions ( M = 4 . 51 , sd = 0 . 64 – answered in a 5 - point scale of agreement ) and that their behaviour was not inﬂuenced by the camera ( M = 4 . 57 , sd = 0 . 85 ) . The latter was also apparent from the informal atmo - sphere of the sessions in the video recordings and the students’ statements in the semi - formal discussions . Signiﬁcant statistical differences between the perceived satisfaction and effectiveness of the two techniques , which produced similar needs , were not detected ; although in the second technique , students recorded sig - niﬁcantly more needs per session . Most needs discussed later were extracted by both techniques . A frequent question regarding participatory design is whether participants’ proposals are superﬁcial . Three facts argue for the opposite , in our case . First , the inher - ent structure of the We ! Design methodology tries to overcome such problems by seeking ideas from Students’ web 2 . 0 mentality 151 © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd multiple individuals and sessions ensuring a minimum level of convergence and representativeness on the ﬁnal set of needs . Secondly , students were excited with the participation , there was creative cooperation for the design of ‘their’ product , and , hence , irresponsibility was far from evident . Thirdly , even though students reviewed only those needs produced in the session they participated in , they claimed that they would rely more on educational tools designed with similar participatory approaches ( M = 4 . 13 , sd = 0 . 87 ) , and as a participant commented : ‘It was about time for our thoughts and ideas to be heard’ . Students’ assessment of the identi - ﬁed scenarios was high ( M = 4 . 22 , sd = 0 . 66 ) and they suggested that their ideas could eventually lead to the design of an original and particularly satisfying learning platform ( M = 4 . 38 , sd = 0 . 73 ) . Needs elicited Students produced 773 distinct needs in 25 design ses - sions ( duplicates in each session were removed ) . These needs were organized based on their content , and similar needs were rephrased and grouped in 12 discrete categories commonly identiﬁed and agreed from the authors , as presented in Table 1 . Three of the categories ( usability , entertainment , and secretariat services ) incorporated requests which were not of high relevance to the learning process and will not be analysed . 1 The contents and presentation category gathered the majority of students’ needs , providing validation of the high value students attribute to online learning resources . More speciﬁcally , students asked for live broadcasts of lectures together with the delivery of the corresponding recorded versions , in the form of pod - casts or vodcasts . In two sessions , documentary was indicated as an intriguing format for presenting learning material in a more appealing and concise way . Students attributed great value on summaries ( textual , pod - casts , or vodcasts ) while they asked for resources that could help them contextualize the course contents in real working environments ( e . g . video - presentations from the workplace , video inter - views with domain experts , etc . ) . They sought for simulation software in order to experiment with the learning tasks and seemed puzzled about their absence in existing learning platforms . Rewarding collaborative game - like simulations and question banks with collaborative answering mode and ana - lytic feedback were considered signiﬁcant . Students requested extensive historic / background information for the subject domain , its evolution , and its projec - tions in the future , along with information about the most important ﬁgures that determined its develop - ment . A similar proposal concerned the presentation of videos in the form of ‘as today’ , as an additional motivation for visiting the website on a daily basis . They underlined the signiﬁcance of providing study material beyond the scope of the course require - ments , and , asked for extensive bibliography and linkography . Interestingly , they asked for self - initiated psychometric and learning style question - naires and required video tutorials presenting optimal studying strategies in relation to their distinctive characteristics . Finally , they proposed the creation of an encyclopaedia , in the form of a wiki which could be a valuable reference and a useful peer - to - peer learning tool . 2 Students proposed typical services of synchronous and asynchronous communication with their peers and their professors ( forums , chat , video - conferencing ) . They evaluated highly the idea of sub - mitting public questions to the instructors , so as to enforce immediate answers . In essence , they wanted to exploit the transparency of the medium in order to render it as a regulative medium that could make both teachers and learners commit to their obligations . Summative video - answers to students’ questions were also proposed and the value of an online appointments booking system was underlined , since they still value face - to - face interaction with their instructors . 3 Students suggested typical news services including information feeds in the form of emails , short message service ( SMS ) , and really simple syndica - tion ( RSS ) . However , they pursued a wider variety of relevant information such as political news ( laws , policies , etc . ) , industry , and research news ( discover - ies , new software , press , etc . ) , and related activities taking place in the academic environment or their city of residence ( seminars , conferences , etc . ) . They exhibited a genuine interest regarding the respective labour market of the subject domain and proposed the incorporation of employment ads relevant to the course domain , as a means to gaining a deeper under - standing of the labour market orientations . 152 G . Palaigeorgiou et al . © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd Table 1 . Students’ requirements for their ideal web learning platform . Needs # S I Content delivery 245 46 % Learning material ( pdfs , slides , notes , etc . ) 22 4 . 6 ( 1 . 3 ) 2 . 6 ( 1 . 3 ) Lectures live video - streaming 19 4 . 4 ( 0 . 8 ) 4 . 6 ( 0 . 8 ) Resources for relative software 9 4 . 4 ( 0 . 8 ) 3 . 5 ( 1 . 0 ) Extensive self - study material 13 4 . 2 ( 1 . 0 ) 2 . 9 ( 1 . 3 ) Simulations 10 4 . 2 ( 0 . 9 ) 4 . 0 ( 1 . 0 ) Multimedia versions of learning material 9 4 . 1 ( 1 . 0 ) 4 . 0 ( 1 . 0 ) Documentaries 2 4 . 0 ( 1 . 0 ) 4 . 2 ( 0 . 8 ) Professional case studies in videos 13 4 . 0 ( 0 . 9 ) 3 . 9 ( 1 . 1 ) Video / voice summaries 9 4 . 0 ( 0 . 9 ) 4 . 3 ( 0 . 8 ) Lectures video - recordings 21 3 . 9 ( 1 . 0 ) 4 . 5 ( 0 . 8 ) Textual summaries 9 3 . 9 ( 0 . 9 ) 3 . 0 ( 1 . 2 ) Wiki encyclopaedia – dictionary 14 3 . 9 ( 1 . 0 ) 3 . 4 ( 1 . 2 ) Formative assessment 17 3 . 7 ( 0 . 9 ) 3 . 5 ( 0 . 9 ) Bibliography – linkography 20 3 . 7 ( 0 . 9 ) 2 . 9 ( 1 . 2 ) Adaptability options 14 3 . 7 ( 1 . 1 ) 4 . 0 ( 0 . 8 ) Learning games 17 3 . 7 ( 1 . 1 ) 4 . 2 ( 0 . 8 ) Extracurricular content for further studying 15 3 . 6 ( 1 . 0 ) 3 . 3 ( 1 . 2 ) Lectures pod - casts 4 3 . 3 ( 1 . 1 ) 4 . 4 ( 0 . 7 ) Domain historical information 8 3 . 2 ( 0 . 9 ) 3 . 9 ( 0 . 9 ) Communication 83 40 % Public questioning boards with instructor 10 4 . 5 ( 0 . 8 ) 3 . 7 ( 1 . 2 ) Chat , email with instructors / online booking 26 4 . 2 ( 0 . 9 ) 3 . 9 ( 1 . 2 ) Forums ( + summative video answers of instructors ) 17 4 . 1 ( 1 . 0 ) 3 . 0 ( 1 . 3 ) Synchronous with colleagues ( chat ) 22 3 . 7 ( 0 . 9 ) 3 . 6 ( 1 . 2 ) Blog - style comments on all resources 8 3 . 4 ( 1 . 1 ) 3 . 5 ( 1 . 0 ) News 81 26 % Legislation , political and research roadmaps 2 4 . 3 ( 0 . 7 ) 4 . 3 ( 1 . 0 ) Lectures , announcements , projects , grades 21 4 . 3 ( 1 . 3 ) 2 . 4 ( 1 . 3 ) Labour market 5 4 . 0 ( 0 . 8 ) 4 . 1 ( 0 . 7 ) News feeds : email , RSS , SMS 20 4 . 0 ( 1 . 1 ) 4 . 2 ( 1 . 2 ) Events , exhibitions , seminars 15 3 . 9 ( 1 . 0 ) 3 . 5 ( 1 . 2 ) Research - industry news 18 3 . 6 ( 1 . 0 ) 3 . 5 ( 1 . 0 ) Projects 71 32 % Projects library 17 4 . 4 ( 0 . 7 ) 3 . 0 ( 1 . 3 ) Projects submission - feedback 13 4 . 3 ( 0 . 8 ) 3 . 5 ( 1 . 2 ) Supportive material for projects 14 4 . 3 ( 1 . 0 ) 3 . 2 ( 1 . 2 ) Best projects library and video presentations 7 4 . 0 ( 1 . 1 ) 3 . 8 ( 1 . 1 ) Project workspaces 10 3 . 8 ( 0 . 8 ) 4 . 0 ( 1 . 0 ) Team formation tools 7 3 . 5 ( 1 . 4 ) 4 . 1 ( 0 . 8 ) Peer to peer projects’ assessment 3 3 . 4 ( 0 . 8 ) 3 . 8 ( 0 . 7 ) Course description 56 21 % Contents description 3 4 . 7 ( 0 . 5 ) 2 . 2 ( 0 . 8 ) Educational opportunities ( postgraduate studies ) 7 4 . 3 ( 1 . 1 ) 3 . 6 ( 1 . 1 ) Frequent students’ mistakes – FAQs 3 3 . 9 ( 1 . 1 ) 3 . 7 ( 1 . 2 ) Expected skills video demonstration 5 3 . 9 ( 1 . 3 ) 3 . 5 ( 1 . 2 ) Success rate analysis 2 3 . 8 ( 1 . 6 ) 3 . 4 ( 1 . 5 ) Calendar ( lectures , activities , etc . ) 14 3 . 8 ( 1 . 3 ) 3 . 0 ( 1 . 3 ) Estimated study load analysis 2 3 . 7 ( 1 . 5 ) 3 . 8 ( 1 . 3 ) Aims , introductory trailer 15 3 . 6 ( 1 . 1 ) 2 . 8 ( 1 . 4 ) Prerequisites - relative courses 4 3 . 5 ( 1 . 5 ) 2 . 2 ( 1 . 5 ) Artistic connections ( ﬁlms , narratives , etc . ) 2 3 . 1 ( 0 . 8 ) 4 . 1 ( 1 . 2 ) Students’ web 2 . 0 mentality 153 © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 4 Students put emphasis in the creation of a projects pool in which they could easily discern and study the best ones with video presentations . They said that they would like to be able to contribute to this project pool and connect their work to their personal portfo - lio . Many needs concerned group work which , according to students , should be better supported by providing integrated project workspaces for struc - tured collaboration . They also wanted to have the choice to control their groups’ synthesis and illus - trated a tool which could enable them to select team - mates from an available ‘bid market’ . Table 1 . Continued Needs # S I Networking 53 51 % With instructors 7 4 . 1 ( 1 . 3 ) 3 . 0 ( 1 . 3 ) With students of similar courses 5 3 . 9 ( 0 . 9 ) 4 . 3 ( 0 . 7 ) With other courses ( instructors , projects , etc . ) 23 3 . 7 ( 1 . 0 ) 3 . 7 ( 1 . 1 ) With ex - students 3 3 . 6 ( 1 . 1 ) 3 . 9 ( 0 . 8 ) With professionals 4 3 . 4 ( 1 . 1 ) 3 . 8 ( 1 . 0 ) With fellow students 9 3 . 2 ( 1 . 4 ) 3 . 5 ( 1 . 3 ) Exploiting existing social networking sites 2 3 . 1 ( 1 . 5 ) 4 . 0 ( 0 . 9 ) Participation 47 47 % Present and share projects 9 3 . 8 ( 1 . 0 ) 3 . 2 ( 1 . 4 ) Produce and share notes , links , papers 12 3 . 8 ( 1 . 1 ) 3 . 4 ( 1 . 1 ) Extracurricular projects , e - mentoring , voting 20 3 . 7 ( 1 . 0 ) 4 . 2 ( 0 . 9 ) Produce course assessment in video format 4 3 . 7 ( 1 . 0 ) 4 . 1 ( 0 . 9 ) Produce fun material from lectures 2 2 . 3 ( 1 . 0 ) 4 . 0 ( 1 . 4 ) Course exams 36 36 % Prior exams library 16 4 . 6 ( 0 . 7 ) 2 . 7 ( 0 . 7 ) On line rating , feedback and discussion 14 4 . 2 ( 0 . 9 ) 4 . 0 ( 1 . 1 ) Preparative e - assessment tools 6 4 . 1 ( 0 . 9 ) 4 . 6 ( 0 . 7 ) Course assessment 18 50 % Instructor’s assessment 5 4 . 2 ( 0 . 9 ) 4 . 1 ( 1 . 1 ) Course’s organization and content assessment 13 3 . 7 ( 1 . 1 ) 3 . 7 ( 1 . 2 ) Usability 61 46 % Utilities for students with special needs 2 4 . 9 ( 0 . 4 ) 4 . 6 ( 0 . 7 ) Desktop application for local copies of the website 2 4 . 4 ( 0 . 5 ) 4 . 5 ( 0 . 7 ) Easy , simple and appealing interface 8 4 . 1 ( 0 . 8 ) 3 . 3 ( 1 . 1 ) Minimal personalization 9 3 . 9 ( 1 . 1 ) 3 . 2 ( 1 . 3 ) Resources update services 5 3 . 9 ( 0 . 9 ) 3 . 1 ( 1 . 2 ) Advanced search utilities 8 3 . 7 ( 1 . 3 ) 2 . 5 ( 1 . 4 ) Personal folder 7 3 . 5 ( 1 . 0 ) 4 . 1 ( 0 . 9 ) Mobile access 4 3 . 5 ( 1 . 1 ) 4 . 7 ( 0 . 6 ) Interface agents 7 3 . 1 ( 1 . 1 ) 4 . 7 ( 0 . 5 ) Mash - up interface for incorporating widgets 2 3 . 0 ( 1 . 4 ) 4 . 0 ( 0 . 8 ) Customizable interface 7 2 . 5 ( 1 . 1 ) 3 . 5 ( 1 . 1 ) Entertainment 13 15 % Music streaming 6 2 . 6 ( 1 . 3 ) 3 . 7 ( 1 . 3 ) Games 7 2 . 2 ( 1 . 2 ) 3 . 6 ( 1 . 2 ) Secretarial integration 9 22 % Secretarial services integration 9 4 . 1 ( 1 . 0 ) 3 . 0 ( 1 . 5 ) Total 773 Needs , needs categories ordered by signiﬁcance in each category . # , number of needs ª design sessions in which the need was discussed ; S , average perceived signiﬁcance ( standard deviation ) ; I , average perceived innovativeness ( standard deviation ) / percentage of perceived innovative needs per category ; RSS , really simple syndication ; SMS , short message service ; FAQ , frequently asked questions . 154 G . Palaigeorgiou et al . © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 5 The students anticipated clear and explicit expecta - tions from the courses and asked for a thorough sylla - bus . They discussed the idea of incorporating a video introduction to the course subject similar to that of a movie trailer . They insisted on the need for a better contextualization of the domain description into their world and asked for the incorporation of relevant edu - cational prospects ( postgraduate studies , opportuni - ties for diploma theses , etc . ) , artistic work that could stimulate the pursuit of the philosophical roots and pragmatic consequences of the course’s subject matter ( ﬁlms , literature , etc . ) , as well as a detailed portrayal of the skills they would acquire ( e . g . through the use of videos showing professional prac - tice in industry ) . Students also seemed to be inter - ested in informal views and empirical hints from their professors and asked for an estimated study load analysis – a subjective judgment of the anticipated load students will have to deal with during the semes - ter – and a frequent learning mistakes list which could help them avoid common pitfalls . 6 The scent of web 2 . 0 was particularly detectable in the networking needs category . Students were inter - ested in learning more about their instructors and , essentially , wanted to overcome the prescribed walls of formality inherent in their relationship . Many of them had already requested to become ‘friends’ with those professors who had active accounts in social networking sites . Students also asserted repeatedly that the learning platform should be part of a network of similar courses in different universities , a network with explicit possibilities for sharing resources and one which could overcome the existing organiza - tional and computational infrastructures . They expected a variety of video presentations , notes and case studies coming from different instructors , search services that index all these resources , and attributed great signiﬁcance to innovative communication / cooperation opportunities with other departments’ students and professors . They also asked for exten - sive networking opportunities with practitioners so as to communicate with them during project develop - ment , to understand their daily routine and to make themselves available in the case of job offers or any kind of internship openings . Students also asked for networking opportunities with ex - students who had successfully attended the course or graduated from the department in order to discuss and share their views on the value of the course contents . They evalu - ated as less important the networking with their fellow students . 7 Another set of innovative needs was identiﬁed in the participatory category . Students stated that they were willing to create and share learning resources ( such as class notes , bookmarks , and links to relative papers ) as well as fun material from lectures or team projects . Additionally , they wanted to participate in the formulation of the learning process by selecting and voting on their preferred way of teaching , select - ing topics of interest that would be elaborated by the instructor during dedicated lectures , organizing elec - tronic mentoring sessions with the instructor or ex - colleagues , initiating extracurricular student projects relevant to the domain , and ﬁnally , by voting on student - initiated requests , such as the change of the exam dates . They also said that they were willing to video - record informal assessments of the course which could be useful for prospective students before selecting the course . More intriguing ideas included short video - recorded dramatized summaries of each lecture by groups of students and periodic online ‘press conferences’ with the instructor for answering their questions . 8 The exams category included needs such as an old - exams repository with exemplary answers and online access to grades together with the teacher’s feedback . Students wanted to examine the validity of the assess - ment process by anonymously reviewing their col - leagues’ answers and marks , and by being able to start an e - argumentation in case of dispute . 9 Finally , students wanted to be able to evaluate both the instructor and the course’s contents . They sug - gested that informal evaluations should be conducted during the semester and should have a direct effect on the course’s progression . The forms of the proposed evaluation included questionnaires , a regular column of complaints , an anonymous blog devoted to assess - ment , and the realization of an online anonymous session for discussing problems and suggesting improvements . While we did not delve into the details of students’ proposals , it is apparent that they extracted a great breath of needs which are not met in their totality by any current system . Students evaluated 40 % of their propos - als as innovative and , hence , they provided a balanced Students’ web 2 . 0 mentality 155 © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd set of needs including both typical and innovative ideas for them . Most innovative ideas came up from a rela - tively small group of participants ( 19 from 117 ) that explored many ideas beyond conventional practices . However , these students were not necessarily the ‘digital pioneers’ ( as called in Clark et al . 2009 ) . There was no signiﬁcant statistical correlation between the number or the innovativeness of the proposed needs and the students’ computer experience . Students with less computer experience but who were more self - conscious about their learning , did have elaborate views on how technology can be exploited . It would be safe to say that the rest of the participants extracted needs at least as very demanding consumers , if not contributors , reveal - ing that the spectrum between the two poles is wide . Nevertheless , it should be expected that the students’ study subject , computer science , favoured the develop - ment of technologically innovative ideas . Interpretative analysis of students’ needs Students did not seem eager to challenge the dominant paradigm of LMS , an observation which is in agree - ment to research results concerning Web 2 . 0 tools that appear to extend rather than challenge current pedago - gies ( Hemmi et al . 2009 ) . However , when looking at the most innovative needs proposed , it is obvious that students already expect to incorporate several of the Web 2 . 0 practices . Their proposals are in a close rela - tion to the participatory culture ( Jenkins 2006 ; McLoughlin & Lee 2008 ) where there are greater opportunities to initiate and inﬂuence the curriculum ( e . g . they wanted to propose lecture subjects , to orga - nize mentoring sessions , and negotiate procedures ) , to produce and share content as authors ( e . g . they were willing to initiate extracurricular projects , to produce dramatized summaries and video - assessments for the course , to share notes and links ) , to interact with a wide network of stakeholders and resources ( e . g . they asked for multiple networking opportunities with instructors , fellow students , ex - students , fellow students of similar departments , professionals ) , and to control and person - alize the learning experience and the user interface ( e . g . they wanted explicit adaptability options , mash - ups , etc . ) . As expected , the two of the three categories with the most innovative needs ( as a percentage of the total needs per category ) were the categories ‘networking’ and ‘participation . ’ In general , students asked for a learning platform that couldenablethemtodiscerntheidiosyncraticcharacter - istics of the learning ﬁeld , open up to its opportunities , and , essentially , allow them to enter inside the domain’s world instead of merely learn about it ( Dall’Alba & Bar - nacle 2007 ; Ulriksen 2009 ) . For this reason , they sought for an acquaintance with the course’s knowledge domain ( e . g . industrial , research news ) , its historical evolution ( e . g . historical videos ) , the academic and pro - fessional opportunities it provides ( e . g . labour market news ) , its leading ﬁgures ( e . g . biographies ) , and the environment in which it ﬂourishes ( e . g . legislation , research agendas ) . Students were in opposition to the isolatingexperienceoftraditionaleducation ( McLough - lin & Lee 2008 ) , asking persistently for the contextual - ization of the domain’s knowledge and its grounding in real cases studies and circumstances ( e . g . expert inter - views , conferencing with corporations ) ( Dall’Alba & Barnacle 2007 ) and in their world ( e . g . ﬁlms , literature , postgraduate studies ) . They sought for a shift from text - based content to new forms of delivery ( Jenkins 2006 ) and suggested the cinematic and documentary lan - guages as two prospective candidates for improving content presentation and understanding . They also insisted on multiple forms of contents delivery ( e . g . e - books , notes , simulations , games ) with the video format being a common denominator in almost all needs categories . Students exploited the possibilities provided by net - working in order to dissolve the boundaries between universities , between universities and industry , and between students with similar learning interests . They envisioned networks with weak ties and asked more for object - centric ( overlapping interests and afﬁnities ) rather than ego - centric ( personal ties such as ‘friends’ , ‘acquaintances’ , or ‘colleagues’ ) networks ( Ryberg & Larsen 2008 ) . They promoted interaction with their col - leagues only when it concerned further elaboration on the course material ( Moore 2008 ) and not for the expan - sion of their social life . They attributed to the instructor the role of an authoritative source of information ( Hemmi et al . 2009 ) and wanted to take advantage of his / her expertise as an intermediate adaptation mechanism for accessing resources tailored to their level of knowledge . They tried to move instructors towards being facilitators that serve their needs and also learn by them ( CLEX 2009 ) and mentors with whom they can socialize . Although 156 G . Palaigeorgiou et al . © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd students considered instructors as an essential param - eter of successful learning , they questioned : (cid:129) the instructors’ ability to address the complex set of the needs on their own . They seemed to have several objections to the one - to - many teaching model and they explicitly wondered about the need to limit the number of instructors and students interacting in the digital world . They envisioned digital ‘constellations’ that provide plentiful networking opportunities , exploit technological advancements and offer better learning opportunities , without negating the institu - tional organization . (cid:129) the instructors’ authenticity in regards to the profes - sional environment . Students asked for the establish - ment of direct communication channels with professionals , video case - studies from the industry , and news from the labour market . They wanted to be able to critically evaluate their activities in the work environment ( McLoughlin & Lee 2008 ) and under - lined their current detachment from the professional reality which is antithetical to a world of specialized qualiﬁcations . Not all of the typical web 2 . 0 expectations were con - ﬁrmed . The majority of students did try to design a system around advanced digital literacy skills or per - sonal learning environments . They did not seem to emphasize self - direction ; instead , they focused on improving existing practices of self - studying enriched learning contents . Students were not willing to take full responsibility for the learning contents , nor did they concentrate on learning experiences that are short and random . They rather placed greater emphasis on content consumption and once more validated that they attribute more importance to the course’s content than to the interaction ( Moore 2008 ) . Moreover , despite any contrary suggestions ( e . g . Barnes & Tynan 2007 ) , students did not make strong analogies between their daily computer - related routine and the learning platform , and they did not synthesize needs , hobbies , and practices from the two areas . No - one asked for the incorporation of academic ser - vices into their personal networking spaces , and no one proposed the creation of online clubs , interest groups , etc . in the learning environment . Instead , they wanted to keep their learning and personal cyberspaces apart , and preferred the coexistence rather than the convergence of these two worlds ( Creanor et al . 2006 ; Conole & Creanor 2007 ; Selwyn 2007 ; CLEX 2009 ) . Discussion Are researchers’ projections on par with the students’ expectations ? The Greek undergraduate students con - vincingly demonstrated their e - learning 2 . 0 ‘mentality’ ( Crook 2008 ) , their cultural disposition towards open - ness , participation , and interaction through the fact they were in position to extract these innovative ( from their perspective ) needs and the signiﬁcance that they attrib - uted to them . However , students sought for a smooth transition to the new environment , and they promoted an evolution rather than a revolution . Their primary focus concerned the advancement of the form and the content of the learning material , the recognition of its dynamic character , the contextualization of knowledge , its gro - unding to research and industry communities of prac - tice , theintra - universitycooperation , networkingoppor - tunities with all related stakeholders , and the estab - lishment of a more facilitative role for the instructors : an oldsetofneedsexpressedintermsofthenewmedia . The resulting set of needs demarcates a zone of expectancies and offers a grid of feasible intermediate modiﬁcations that can retrospectively motivate and drive students to even more demanding and revolutionary calls . It is an intermixture of needs , problems , and wishes or , in essence , experiences , inspirations , and visions . Can such sets of needs become the genes of the new web X . 0 systems ? Participatory design offers tremendous unex - plored opportunities for better managing educational change and for promoting locality and diversity , involvement , and collaboration ( Siozos et al . 2009 ) . The students’ proposals have also practical implica - tions for learning systems designers . Beyond the appar - ent value of the requested functionality ( as presented in Table 1 ) , the pool of proposals can also be revisited and reorganized in order to envisage more conceptions of students’ expectations . For instance , students attributed to the web course a more transitory character that tran - scends the time constraints of a semester , supports knowledge exchange among students , professors , and professionals through informal means and , essentially , requires constant intra - university cooperation . Also , students suggested an impressive variety of metrics for the evaluation of the course’s attractiveness such as previous students’ video assessments , demonstrations Students’ web 2 . 0 mentality 157 © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd of targeted skills , trailers , relative labour market news , opportunities for networking with professionals , etc . Similar ideas could be investigated in more detail since they challenge the structural elements of existing systems and provide new directions and perspectives for the design of learning systems . Certainly , students’ proposals should not be consid - ered as a complete and well - processed set of require - ments . The practical fulﬁlment of students’ needs is far from easy and requires thorough reﬁnement on behalf of the designers on the one hand and the establishment of new social and institutional norms and processes on the other . Students expressed their vision for their own learning paths without considering the other stakehold - ers’ needs , abilities , and constraints . Moreover , it is sen - sible to envisage dissimilar sets of needs for different educational environments , subject matters , and levels of computer experience . The proposals exposed inspira - tions inﬂuenced mainly by the Greek academic environ - ment and were produced from computer literate students . Hence , the representativeness of the partici - pants in regards to the global undergraduate population should cause a concern when generalizing the results . Interestingly , three observations possibly widen the applicability of the proposals . Firstly , the students’ Internet experience which ﬁltered their views on oppor - tunities and challenges is relatively homogenized across universities and countries and , consequently , functions as a shared platform for design thinking . Secondly , our study indicated that computer experience is not the most determinative factor in conceiving technologically innovative educational set - ups . Therefore , students of other disciplines could have also provided insightful approaches or be satisﬁed by the current sample’s needs . Thirdly , if the educational community strives to develop a global community of learners , then the inter - sections between their expectations should be identiﬁed and met . In this study , we revealed Greek undergraduate students’ vision . We aimed at the application of similar participatory design techniques in different universities and / or countries and the conjoint analysis of the extracted ideas in order to validate the previous claims . References Barnes C . & Tynan B . ( 2007 ) The adventures of Miranda in the brave new world : learning in a Web 2 . 0 millennium . ALT - J 15 , 189 – 200 . Blin F . & Munro M . ( 2008 ) Why hasn’t technology disrupted academics’ teaching practice ? Understanding resistance to change through the lens of activity theory . Computer and Education 50 , 475 – 490 . Bødker S . , Greenbaum J . & Kyng M . ( 1991 ) Setting the stage fordesignasaction . In DesignatWork : CooperativeDesign of Computer Systems ( eds J . Greenbaum & M . Kyng ) , pp . 139 – 154 . Lawrence ErlbaumAssociates , Hillsdale , NJ . Boyd D . ( 2007 ) Why youth ( heart ) social network sites : the role of networked publics in teenage social life . In Youth , Identity , and Digital Media ( ed . D . Buckingham ) , pp . 119 – 142 . MIT Press , Cambridge . ChattiM . & JarkeM . ( 2007 ) Thefutureofe - learning : ashiftto knowledge networking and social software . International Journal of Knowledge and Learning 3 , 404 – 420 . Clark W . , Logan K . , Luckin R . , Mee A . & Oliver M . ( 2009 ) Beyond Web 2 . 0 mapping the technology landscapes of young learners . Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 25 , 56 – 69 . CLEX – Committee of Inquiry into the Changing Learner Experience ( 2009 ) Higher education in a web 2 . 0 world . Available at : http : / / www . jisc . ac . uk / publications / general publications / 2009 / heweb2 . aspx ( last accessed 23 January 2010 ) . Coates H . , James R . & Baldwin G . ( 2005 ) Acritical examina - tion of the effects of learning management systems on uni - versity teaching and learning . Tertiary Education and Management 11 , 19 – 36 . Cole M . ( 2009 ) Using Wiki technology to support student engagement : lessons from the trenches . Computers & Edu - cation 52 , 141 – 146 . Conole G . & Creanor L . ( 2007 ) In their own words : exploring the learner’s perspective on e - learning , JISC . Available at : http : / / www . jisc . ac . uk / media / documents / programmes / elea rningpedagogy / iowﬁnal . pdf ( last accessed 23 January 2010 ) . Craig E . ( 2007 ) Changing paradigms : managed learning envi - ronments and Web 2 . 0 . Campus - Wide Information Systems 24 , 152 – 161 . CreanorL . , TrinderK . , GowanD . & HowellsC . ( 2006 ) Who’s learning and how ? Researching the learner experience . In Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Ascilite Conference ( eds L . Markauskaite , P . Goodyear & P . Reimann ) , pp . 179 – 188 . Sydney University Press , Sydney . Crook C . ( 2001 ) The campus experience of networked learn - ing . In Networked Learning : Perspectives and Issues ( eds C . Steeples & C . Jones ) , pp . 293 – 308 . Springer - Verlag , London . Crook C . ( 2008 ) Web 2 . 0 technologies for learning : the current landscape – opportunities , challenges and tensions , BECTA . Available at : http : / / research . becta . org . uk / upload - 158 G . Palaigeorgiou et al . © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd dir / downloads / page - documents / research / web2 _ technologies _ learning . doc ( last accessed 23 January 2010 ) . Dall’Alba G . & Barnacle R . ( 2007 ) An ontological turn for higher education . Studies in Higher Education 32 , 679 – 691 . Dohn N . B . ( 2009 ) Web 2 . 0 : inherent tensions and evident challenges for education . International Journal of Computer - Supported Collaborative Learning 4 , 343 – 363 . Druin A . ( 2002 ) The role of children in the design of new technology . Behaviour and Information Technology 21 , 1 – 25 . Halskov K . & Dalsgaard P . ( 2007 ) The emergence of ideas : the interplay between sources of inspiration and emerging design concepts . CoDesign 3 , 185 – 211 . Hemmi A . , Bayne S . & Land R . ( 2009 ) The appropriation and repurposing of social technologies in higher education . Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 25 , 19 – 30 . Jenkins H . ( 2006 ) Convergence Culture : Where Old and New Media Collide . NewYork University Press , NewYork . Johansson M . ( 2006 ) Design games : reinstalling the designer in collaborative design . Available at : http : / / www . martin wetterstrand . se / publications / Design _ Games . pdf ( last accessed 3 July 2010 ) . Kensing F . & Blomberg J . ( 1998 ) Participatory design : issues and concerns . Computer Supported Cooperative Work 7 , 167 – 185 . Kerawalla L . , Minocha S . , Kirkup G . & Conole G . ( 2009 ) An empirically grounded framework to guide blogging in higher education . Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 25 , 31 – 42 . Large A . , Nesset V . , Beheshti J . & Bowler L . ( 2006 ) Bonded design : a novel approach to intergenerational information technology design . Library & Information Science Research 28 , 64 – 82 . Lohnes S . & Kinzer C . ( 2007 ) Questioning assumptions about students’ expectations for technology in college class - rooms . Innovate 3 . Lonn S . & Teasley S . ( 2009 ) Saving time or innovating prac - tice : investigating perceptions and uses of Learning Man - agement Systems . Computers & Education 53 , 686 – 694 . McLoughlin C . & Lee M . J . W . ( 2008 ) The 3 P’s of pedagogy for the networked society : personalization , participation , and Productivity . International Journal of Teaching and Learning in Higher Education 20 , 10 – 27 . Moore M ( 2008 ) What students really want . American Journal of Distance Education 22 , 1 – 2 . Palaigeorgiou G . , Triantafyllakos G . & Tsinakos A . ( 2009 ) Participatory design of the participatory culture : students’ projections of e - learning 2 . 0 . In Proceedings of the 2nd World Summit on the Knowledge Society ( WSKS 2009 ) , Crete , Greece ( eds M . Lutras , P . Ordonez de Pablos , E . Damiani , D . Avison , A . Naeve & D . Horner ) , pp . 119 – 128 . Springer , Berlin Heidelberg . Palmer S . & Holt D . ( 2009 ) Examining student satisfaction with wholly online learning . Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 25 , 101 – 113 . Perttula M . & Sipilä P . ( 2007 ) The idea exposure paradigm in design idea generation . Journal of Engineering Design 18 , 93 – 102 . Ravenscroft A . ( 2009 ) Social software , Web 2 . 0 and learning : status and implications of an evolving paradigm . Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 25 , 1 – 5 . Ryberg T . & Larsen M . ( 2008 ) Networked identities : under - standing relationships between strong and weak ties in networked environments . Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 24 , 103 – 115 . SanoffH . ( 2007 ) Specialissueonparticipatorydesign . Design Studies 28 , 213 – 215 . Scott G . ( 2003 ) Effective change management in higher edu - cation . Educause Review 38 , 64 – 80 . Seale J . ( 2009 ) Doing student voice work in higher education : an exploration of the value of participatory methods . British Educational Research Journal , doi : 10 . 1080 / 0141192090 3342038 . Selwyn N . ( 2007 ) Web 2 . 0 applications as alternative environ - ments for informal learning – a critical review . Paper pre - sented at the CERI - KERIS International Expert Meeting on ICT and Educational Performance , OECD , Cheju Island , South Korea . Siozos P . , Palaigeorgiou G . , Triantafyllakos G . & Despotakis T . ( 2009 ) Computer based testing using ‘digital ink’ : par - ticipatory design of a Tablet PC based assessment applica - tion for secondary education . Computers & Education 52 , 811 – 819 . Triantafyllakos G . , Palaigeorgiou G . & Tsoukalas I . ( 2008 ) We ! Design : a student - centred participatory methodology for the design of educational applications . British Journal of Educational Technology 39 , 125 – 139 . Triantafyllakos G . , Palaigeorgiou G . & Tsoukalas I . ( 2009 ) Design alter egos : constructing and employing ﬁctional characters in collaborative design sessions . In Proceedings of 23rd BCS Conference on Human Computer Interactionm ( ed . A . Blackwell ) , pp . 20 – 28 . British Computer Society , Cambridge . Ulriksen L . ( 2009 ) The implied student . Studies in Higher Education 34 , 517 – 532 . Vassileva J . ( 2008 ) Toward social learning environments . IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies 1 , 199 – 214 . Ward T . B . ( 1994 ) Structured imagination : the role of category structure in exemplar generation . Cognitive Psychology 27 , 1 – 40 . Students’ web 2 . 0 mentality 159 © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd