A bibliometric study of reference literature in the sciences and social sciences p Wolfgang Gla¨nzel a , * , Urs Schoepﬂin b a Max - Planck - Institute for the History of Science , Wilhelmstrasse 44 , D - 10117 Berlin , Germany b Research Association for Science Communication and Information e . V . ( RASCI ) , Johannes - Kepler - Weg 5 , D - 15236 Frankfurt ( Oder ) , Germany Received 23 May 1997 ; accepted 10 June 1998 Abstract In earlier papers the authors focused on di(cid:128)erences in the ageing of journal literature in science and the social sciences . It was shown that for several ﬁelds and topics bibliometric standard indicators based on journal articles need to be modiﬁed in order to provide valid results . In ﬁelds where monographs , books or reports are important means of scientiﬁc information , standard models of scientiﬁc communication are not reﬂected by journal literature alone . To identify ﬁelds where the role of non - serial literature is considerable or critical in terms of bibliometric standard methods , the totality of the bibliographic citations indexed in the 1993 annual cumulation of the SCI and SSCI databases , have been processed . The analysis is based on three indicators , the percentage of references to serials , the mean references age , and the mean reference rate . Applications of these measures at di(cid:128)erent levels of aggregation ( i . e . , to journals in selected science and social science ﬁelds ) lead to the following conclusions . 1 . The percentage of references to serials proved to be a sensitive measure to characterise typical di(cid:128)erences in the communication behaviour between the sciences and the social sciences . 2 . However , there is an overlap zone which includes ﬁelds like mathematics , technology oriented science , and some social science areas . 3 . In certain social sciences part of the information seems even to be originated in non - scientiﬁc sources : references to non - serials do not always represent monographs , pre - prints or reports . Consequently , the model of information transfer from scientiﬁc literature to scientiﬁc ( journal ) literature assumed by standard bibliometrics requires substantial revision before valid results can be expected through its application to social science areas . # 1999 Elsevier Science Ltd . All rights reserved . Information Processing and Management 35 ( 1999 ) 31 – 44 0306 - 4573 / 99 / $ - see front matter # 1999 Elsevier Science Ltd . All rights reserved . PII : S0306 - 4573 ( 98 ) 00028 - 4 PERGAMON p Parts of this study have been presented at the 5th International Conference on Scientometrics and Informetrics , held in River Forest , Illinois , June 7 – 10 , 1995 . * Corresponding author . On leave from : Information Science and Scientometrics Research Unit ( ISSRU ) , Library of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences , P . O . B . 1002 , H - 1245 Budapest , Hungary . 1 . Introduction In a series of publications the authors have studied so far the ‘‘ageing’’ of scientiﬁc journal literature . The ﬁndings included a demonstration of di(cid:128)erent ageing behaviours in the sciences and social sciences . Within the sciences , theoretical papers are signiﬁcantly ‘‘slower’’ than technology oriented or experimental research papers ( see , for example , Gla¨nzel and Schoepﬂin , 1994 ) . In terms of obsolescence , mathematical and social science literatures , however , show a very similar behaviour . On the other hand , the hypothesis of a di(cid:128)erent obsolescence of methodological and empirical research could not be conﬁrmed . Other authors have established di(cid:128)erences between the mere citation impacts of theoretical and empirical papers ( e . g . , for sociology : Peritz , 1983 ) . But ageing is not only inﬂuenced by the ‘‘level of abstraction’’ , it also depends on the document and journal types . Thus , letters to the editor and papers published in so - called letter journals have a signiﬁcantly shorter life - cycle than ‘‘regular’’ articles on similar topics . Although these studies could shed light upon some of the underlying mechanisms of obsolescence of scientiﬁc literature , many more questions remained unanswered . In order to formulate some of these a closer look into the notions of citations and references was taken . Unlike simplifying approaches in research evaluation which treat as equivalent citation rates to ‘‘quality measure’’ , we interpret the concept of citation as one important form of use of scientiﬁc information within the framework of documented science communication . In passing it should be mentioned that this interpretation is not in contradiction with the application of citation - based indicators to research - evaluation studies at higher levels of aggregation , since frequently ( or rarely ) used information disseminated , e . g . , by the scientiﬁc community of a country is certainly symptomatic for the research performance of the community in question . First , if citations are regarded as information use , the questions are which forms of information ‘‘sources’’ and ‘‘targets’’ play a role in science communication and what can be said about their structure in relation to ( social ) science topics and document types . Second , if cited references are regarded as the source of information use , the question in how far subject matters inﬂuence the age of references is also of interest . In the above - mentioned studies , the focus was on citations from documents published in scientiﬁc journals to journal articles . This approach is certainly adequate for ﬁelds where serial literature forms the main information source of the scientiﬁc communication . This is true for most subject areas in the life and hard sciences where the use of scientiﬁc information takes place mainly within the scientiﬁc community . On the other hand technology oriented literature has much more important targets of information use outside its community . The use of this literature is reﬂected rather by patents , mechanical and scientiﬁc equipment , technological procedures , software , etc . , than in new scientiﬁc literature . As for the information sources , the access to scientiﬁc information is not necessarily connected to scientiﬁc sources only . In this context , we mention Jensen’s Gradiva used as the main source of Freud’s ‘Der Wahn und die Tra¨ume in W . Jensens ‘‘Gradiva’’’ just as an example ( Freud , 1907 ; Jensen , 1903 ) . In the social sciences and , even more , in the humanities a considerable part of cited information is originated in non - science literature and , consequently , not in scientiﬁc periodicals . On the level of document types , non - serial scientiﬁc literature , especially monographs and books , plays a W . Gla¨nzel , U . Schoepﬂin / Information Processing and Management 35 ( 1999 ) 31 – 44 32 more important part for the scientiﬁc communication in the social sciences and humanities than for that in the sciences . In a number of citation studies these di(cid:128)erences have been considered mostly within one special subject area ( e . g . archaeology : Heisey , 1988 ; social science : Line , 1981 ) . In the present study the authors wish to analyse the structure of references of documents published in ( social ) science journals basically along the following questions . . First , what are the proportions of references to serials and to non - serial literature in the di(cid:128)erent ﬁelds in science and social sciences , respectively ? . Second , is there a relation between the age of the references and their type ? . Third , is there a correlation between the reference age and the share of ( non - ) serial literature and how is it possibly determined ? The reference structure of papers published in selected science and social science areas will be analysed with the help of bibliometric tools . Statistics are used to identify subjects with a great share of non - serial documents and to analyse the correlation . The results are expected to contribute to the validation of citation - based indicators in scientometrics – particularly in science areas which have proved to be ‘‘problematic’’ in bibliometrics such as mathematics , soft science and technology – and to show the possibilities and limitations of bibliometric indicators applied to the social sciences . 2 . Methodological considerations and data processing The two best known and most commonly used bibliometric measures of ageing are the Price Index and the citing ( cited ) half life . The relation of the ﬁrst index to the mean and median reference age has already been analysed by Gla¨nzel and Schoepﬂin ( 1995a ) and Egghe ( 1997 ) . A comparison of the mean age of references and the Price Index has shown that the age of references is only in part reﬂected by the Price Index , in particular , if the average age of references does not exceed about 15 years ( see Gla¨nzel and Schoepﬂin , 1995a ) . The Price Index which measures the probability that a reference is not older than 5 years does not properly reﬂect the age structure of references of very slowly ageing literature . The other measure , the cited half life , was designed to measure the ageing of scientiﬁc journals . A recent study by Moed et al . ( 1998 ) has , however , shown that this measure does not su(cid:129)ciently reﬂect ageing characteristics of journals . This is among others due to speciﬁc properties of the frequency distribution of references over time . The half life has been deﬁned under the assumption that references have an exponential distribution over time , but the validity of this assumption could not be substantiated ( cf . Moed et al . , 1998 ) . Therefore we decided to use a set of alternative measures which will be introduced in Section 2 . 4 . 2 . 1 . Data sources In principle , data on references in journals can be gathered from the Science Citation Reports for SCI and SSCI . Nevertheless , these data do not allow for a clear distinction between W . Gla¨nzel , U . Schoepﬂin / Information Processing and Management 35 ( 1999 ) 31 – 44 33 references in serials and references in non - serials . Therefore and for reasons of compatibility with other analyses by the authors ( e . g . , Gla¨nzel and Schoepﬂin , 1994 , 1995a , b ) we applied paper - by - paper assignment techniques . Consequently we had to decide for every single reference literature whether it was published in a serial or not . In the present study more than 600 , 000 source documents indexed in the 1993 volumes of the SCI and SSCI and containing at least one reference have been processed . The total number of references processed thus amounts to about 10 , 000 , 000 . These references have been analysed based on the assignment of source documents to journals and subject areas . All references cited in articles , notes , letters and reviews in the 1993 annual cumulation of the SCI and SSCI databases were selected . Source articles without references have been omitted . Although the formal structures of the two databases are identical , that is , SCI and SSCI use the same bibliographic ﬁelds with coincident components , there are serious di(cid:128)erences concerning the bibliographic data covered by the two databases . This should in any case be heeded in bibliometric applications . The most important peculiarity of the SSCI database is journal coverage . While in the SCI all journals are fully covered and indexed , in the SSCI both , fully and selectively covered journals can be found . This seemingly unimportant di(cid:128)erence has , however , immediate consequences if the database is used for bibliometric macro - level analysis . For our study , the most obvious consequence is in the subject classiﬁcation . The assignment of papers to subject categories according to ISI’s Subject Classiﬁcation can result in incorrect subject assignments if the papers are published in selectively covered journals ( e . g a paper on sociodemographic risk - factors in connection with HIV - infection which has been published in a life science journal can hardly be assigned to the correct ( sub ) ﬁeld if a subject classiﬁcation based on journals is used ) . On the other hand , an individual assignment of papers is – at least on the macro - level – not practicable . A second consequence is less obvious : the above - mentioned selective procedure results in a considerable overlap of the two databases . The annual average of this overlap amounts to roughly 15 % of the Social Sciences Citation Index . Therefore only fully covered journals are included in the subject analysis , regardless of the number of papers and references cited . Moreover , to obtain statistically reliable results the following thresholds were set for a journal to qualify for the analyses : publication of at least 20 papers in 1993 and citing at total of at least 100 references . 2 . 2 . Assignment criteria The age of the references was determined as the di(cid:128)erence between the publication years of the reference and of the citing article respectively ( the date of acceptance as truer base indicator for age calculation remains unconsidered in this macro - level study ) . In cases of missing publication years of the reference ( e . g . unpublished material ) , it was substituted by the publication date of the corresponding source document . References have been assigned to two categories , reference to serials ( S ) and reference to non - serials ( N ) . The criteria for this classiﬁcation can brieﬂy be summarised as follows . W . Gla¨nzel , U . Schoepﬂin / Information Processing and Management 35 ( 1999 ) 31 – 44 34 1 . All references with a valid volume number ( e . g . the corresponding ﬁeld contains at least one numeric value ) and a ﬁrst page have been considered to be part of periodically published literature ( assignment S ) . 2 . All references with missing ﬁrst page were considered not to be part of periodically published literature ( assignment N ) . Exception : the string ‘‘in press’’ in connection with a journal title indicates that the reference is to be published in a serial ( assignment S ) . 3 . References with missing volume number but with a valid ﬁrst page were treated in two ways : manually and based on a computerised procedure . The ﬁeld ‘‘reference journal or non - journal title’’ has been extracted and the frequency of the titles have been determined . If special substrings which unambiguously refer to journal titles were detected ( for example ‘‘CHEM LETT’’ , ‘‘JPN J . . . ’’ or ‘‘BRIT J . . . ’’ ) the corresponding references have been assigned to category S . Strings containing abbreviations of terms such as thesis , technical report , annual report , unpublished manuscript , handbook , yearbook , Handbuch , Jahrbuch etc . have been considered to refer to non - serial publications ( assignment N ) . The set of then still unidentiﬁed references has been classiﬁed manually provided the title in question occurred at least 20 times . Unidentiﬁed references with a ‘‘reference journal or non - journal title’’ that occurred less than 20 times in a complete annual database cumulation have automatically been assigned to category N . 4 . References published in newsletters were not considered as scientiﬁc literature and are classiﬁed therefore in category N . 2 . 3 . Possible sources of error While e(cid:128)orts were made to avoid errors by combining both manual and computerised procedures , the quality of the original data cannot been guaranteed if the main sources of failures are still data input errors . If volume / page numbers are omitted and irregular and cryptic journal abbreviations are used , an assignment to the correct reference - type category is made impossible . Another factor lies in the standards used by certain journals . Thus the references of the Cambridge Journal of Economics as indexed in the SSCI do not contain page numbers , which automatically excludes these entries from being identiﬁed as references to serial publications . However , checks of this journal showed a very low share of serials in the references ( 1 . 6 % ) . 2 . 4 . Methodological aspects Assignments to higher levels of aggregation ( e . g . , to subﬁelds ) are made based on the assignment to citing papers , that is , if one and the same reference was cited by several papers of a journal , the individual citations where cumulated . In this study all reference indicators of journals and subﬁelds are therefore weighted means and frequencies . Six subject areas each have been selected for the reference analysis in the sciences and the social sciences ; in the sciences , each area represents one of the major ﬁelds life sciences , physics , chemistry , engineering and mathematics , life sciences are represented by two subﬁelds . The following areas are analysed ( Table 1 ) . W . Gla¨nzel , U . Schoepﬂin / Information Processing and Management 35 ( 1999 ) 31 – 44 35 All subject areas are clustered based on ISI’s subject classiﬁcation . As any classiﬁcation the ISI scheme has its obvious limitations in deﬁning science areas . This is particularly true in deﬁning the scope of some ﬁelds in the social sciences . But since this classiﬁcation is widely used in conjunction with ISI data , it was considered appropriate to refer to it in this macro - level study . Detailed deﬁnitions of the areas are given in Braun et al . ( 1995a , b ) and Gla¨nzel ( 1996 ) . The following statistics have been calculated to measure the share of references to serial literature and the age of references . 1 . The percentage of references to serials . The share of references assigned to category S in all references ( N + S ) cited by a journal or subﬁeld expressed in percent . 2 . The mean references age . The age of references cited in a journal or subﬁeld are summed up and divided by the number of the references . This indicator can be determined also as a conditional mean , that is for both the subset of references in serials and non - serials separately . 3 . The mean reference rate . This is the ratio of the number of references cited by a journal and the total number of papers published in the journal including those that have not any references . Only articles , letters , notes and reviews were taken into account . These statistics were used for identifying subjects with a considerable share of non - serial documents and to analyse the correlation between reference age and share of ( non - ) serial literature . The results are expected to contribute to the validation of citation - based indicators in scientometrics . 3 . Reference analysis by journals A study of the reference structure of scientiﬁc literature would be of limited value if the share of publications without references is considerable . The ﬁrst step is therefore to examine this share to be within statistically reasonable limits in the set . In the sciences , this share is only 3 . 0 % and possible individual deviations are not essential . The results of the following analysis can therefore be considered valid for the sciences . In the social sciences however , the situation is di(cid:128)erent . The share of papers without references ranges from 3 % to 30 % . In particular , Table 1 Science and social science areas selected for the reference analysis Sciences Social sciences 1 . Immunology ( Life sciences ) 1 . Business 2 . Research medicine ( Life sciences ) 2 . Economics 3 . Solid state physics ( Physics ) 3 . Psychology and psychiatry 4 . Analytical chemistry ( Chemistry ) 4 . Sociology 5 . Electronic engineering ( Engineering ) 5 . Information and library science 6 . Mathematics ( Mathematics ) 6 . History and philosophy of science and social sciences W . Gla¨nzel , U . Schoepﬂin / Information Processing and Management 35 ( 1999 ) 31 – 44 36 there are 3 . 3 % in history of science and social sciences , 4 . 5 % in psychology , 6 . 3 % in sociology , 8 . 0 % in economics , 25 . 6 % in information and library science and 27 . 6 % in business . The ﬁrst four ﬁelds proved thus not problematic , but for information and library science and business results should be taken with care . 3 . 1 . The share of references in serials The macro - level analysis of the references based on journal assignment of citing papers has clearly conﬁrmed the hypothesis . The distribution of the share of serials references show signiﬁcantly di(cid:128)erent patterns in the sciences and the social sciences ( see Fig . 1 ) . While about 80 % of all science journals cite more than 70 % of all references to serials , the same percentage of all social science journals refer to at less than 70 % references in serials . Within the sciences , life - science journals show items with an almost negligible share of references to non - serial literature ( < 5 % ) . On the other extreme , the ﬁeld of engineering has almost 5 % of journals citing more than 50 % non - serial documents . The extremely skew distribution in the sciences is contrasted by a more symmetrical one in the social sciences . Here documents with a small share of references to non - serial literature ( < 20 % ) are found mainly in science journals ( in both life and hard sciences ) , but partially also in journals concerned with psychiatry and experimental psychology , and – to a lesser extent – in public health and ﬁnance business . Thus journals with an overwhelming share of references to serials ( > 80 % ) deal with the sciences or with areas which form the borderline between the sciences and social sciences . On the other hand , the journals with less than 20 % references to serials are mostly dealing with political science , and several titles can be found in subﬁelds of Fig . 1 . Distribution of the share of references to serials over journals in the sciences and social sciences . W . Gla¨nzel , U . Schoepﬂin / Information Processing and Management 35 ( 1999 ) 31 – 44 37 economics , geography and sociology , too . A more detailed discussion in the context of subject analysis will be given in Section 4 . 3 . 2 . The mean reference age As expected , the situation concerning the age of references is more complex . The comparison of the two databases does not yield any signiﬁcant deviation . Moreover , the frequency distributions over the mean reference age of journals coincide surprisingly ( see Fig . 2 ) . The polarisation of the mean reference age of journals within the SCI and SSCI , respectively , reveals interesting details concerning the information use of science and social science literature . In the sciences , journals citing more recent references are concerned with life sciences as well as with physical sciences ( e . g . , physics of condensed matter , optics ) and engineering ( electronic engineering and computer science ) . Journals citing ‘‘older’’ documents are concerned above all with mathematics ( see also Gla¨nzel and Schoepﬂin , 1994 ) , and further with parasitology , zoology , botany , entomology , geology , palaeontology , materials science and history of science . In the social sciences , journals citing ‘‘older’’ documents are concerned with the history of sciences and social sciences , with history , palaeontology and archaeology . More recent references can be found in political science , business and information and library science but partially in public health and sociology as well . A more detailed analysis of the journals assigned to the very heterogeneous ﬁeld public health , however , shows that the papers are to a great extent devoted to psychological and sociological topics . The comparison of the two conditional mean reference age statistics , i . e . , the mean age of references in serials ( a S ) and that in non - serials ( a N ) shows that there is an extremely strong relationship between these variables . The correlation coe(cid:129)cient is r = 0 . 810 , and the t - statistic Fig . 2 . Distribution of the mean reference age over journals in the sciences and social sciences . W . Gla¨nzel , U . Schoepﬂin / Information Processing and Management 35 ( 1999 ) 31 – 44 38 of 76 . 0 is far beyond the critical values with 3030 degrees of freedom at any reasonable conﬁdence level . The relationship can therefore be expressed by the linear function a N = 1 . 01 a S (cid:255) 0 . 25 . The statistical functions of the SSCI journals are again similar . A correlation coe(cid:129)cient of r = 0 . 823 is obtained , and the t - statistic of 50 . 5 ( with 1216 d . f . ) is also far beyond the critical values at any reasonable conﬁdence level . The linear relationship can thus be expressed by the function a N = 1 . 04 a S + 0 . 94 . In either cases the relation can roughly be approximated by the identity a N 0 a S . This means that for both science and social science journals the age of serial references corresponds to that of the non - serial references , that the age of serial references proportionally increases and decreases with that of the references in non - serial literature . ( See Fig . 3 . ) Fig . 3 . Graphic presentation of two conditional reference age statistics ( top : sciences , bottom : social sciences ) . W . Gla¨nzel , U . Schoepﬂin / Information Processing and Management 35 ( 1999 ) 31 – 44 39 Finally , the possible interdependence of reference - type and reference - age statistics are to be analysed . A linear regression analysis , however , demonstrates that the ‘‘type’’ of reference has only a small e(cid:128)ect on the age ( r = 0 . 267 in the sciences , r = 0 . 181 in the social sciences , respectively ) . Fig . 4 presents the plot of the values of the indicators for the SCI and SSCI journals . Due to the di(cid:128)erent patterns of the share of serials references in the sciences and social sciences the scatter plots show di(cid:128)erent polarisation for the two databases . Because of the great number of references in review journals the mean reference rate of journals in connection with other reference statistics have not been analysed . At a higher level Fig . 4 . Scatter plot of share of references in serials vs age of references ( top : sciences , bottom : social sciences ) . W . Gla¨nzel , U . Schoepﬂin / Information Processing and Management 35 ( 1999 ) 31 – 44 40 of aggregation , however , the inﬂuence of reviews is almost negligible . The analysis of the number of references by articles is therefore left to the following section . 4 . Reference analysis by subject ﬁelds For the reference analysis by subject ﬁelds , were calculated for a set of selected subject clusters ( see Section 2 ) . 1 . The share of serials in all references . 2 . The number of papers . 3 . The mean number of references . 4 . The mean reference age . The results are given in Table 2 . 4 . 1 . The share of serials in all references In Table 2 the subject areas are ranked by the share of serials in the references . Clearly three cluster groups can be distinguished : ﬁrst a group with a share level roughly between 83 % and 95 % of serials in all references . The clusters in this group are uniformly science ﬁelds with the two biomedical clusters being on top ( 94 . 3 % for immunology and 92 . 1 % for research medicine ) , solid state physics with 85 . 2 % and analytical chemistry with a share of 83 . 8 % of serials in all references . A second group of four subject clusters is deﬁned by a share level of 56 % to 65 % of serials . This group forms a borderline zone as it includes two science areas ( mathematics : 64 . 4 % ; electronic engineering : 62 . 2 % ) and two social science areas ( psychology and psychiatry : 64 . 0 % ; business : 56 . 0 % ) . Table 2 Reference - based indicators for selected science and social science areas ranked by the percentage of serials Subject area Number of papers Mean number of references Percentage of serials Mean reference age Immunology 23396 29 . 6 94 . 3 6 . 9 Research medicine 24369 25 . 9 92 . 1 7 . 9 Solid state physics 28466 23 . 6 85 . 2 10 . 1 Analytical chemistry 9605 20 . 9 83 . 8 9 . 4 Mathematics 11987 16 . 2 64 . 4 11 . 3 Psychology and psychiatry 11886 31 . 0 64 . 0 11 . 4 Electronic engineering 19222 15 . 0 62 . 2 8 . 6 Business 3663 20 . 8 56 . 0 10 . 9 Economics 7959 21 . 6 48 . 7 10 . 6 Information and library science 2128 14 . 9 47 . 6 9 . 1 Sociology 3675 32 . 7 40 . 4 12 . 5 History and philosophy of science and social sciences 658 48 . 7 34 . 7 38 . 8 W . Gla¨nzel , U . Schoepﬂin / Information Processing and Management 35 ( 1999 ) 31 – 44 41 The third group is formed by clusters having a share of serials below 50 % ( economics : 48 . 7 % ; information and library science : 47 . 6 % ; sociology : 40 . 4 % ; history and philosophy of science and social sciences : 34 . 7 % ) . The borderline zone characterised by the second group is also visualised in Fig . 1 where the percentage of references to serials was computed overall for the databases SCI and SSCI ( see Section 3 ) . The detailed ﬁndings for the selected clusters here ﬁt within in the picture of the overall databases . Table 2 can also be read as a ranked list of the relevance of journal publications for the science communication in the respective ﬁelds . Thus , immunology would be the ﬁeld where journal publications have the highest relevance for communicating research results , while in history and philosophy of science and social sciences the relevance would be much lower . It is not pretended that journal publications do not play a role at all in the social sciences or even the humanities . But it is obvious , that by looking at journal publications as the only source for scientiﬁc information , the bigger part would be left out of consideration . Of course , this ﬁnding is crucial when it comes to citation - based bibliometric measures in the discussed ﬁelds . 4 . 2 . The number of papers But also a closer examination of the mere size of our clusters is necessary : in solid state physics there were 28466 papers in the 1993 issue of the SCI . Psychology and psychiatry have less than half : 11886 papers ; history and philosophy of science and social sciences even 40 times less : 658 papers were indexed in 1993 . This is not so much a question of how representative the journal samples covered by the ISI - databases are ( see : Schoepﬂin , 1992 for the social sciences ) , since the ﬁelds di(cid:128)er greatly in their output , but the cluster size can inﬂuence or even set limits to the possibilities of statistical analyses . 4 . 3 . The mean number of references The ﬁelds are also distinguished by the number of references given in the papers . The calculation of the mean number of references shows that two of the core disciplines in the social sciences ( psychology and psychiatry and sociology ) have a similarly high number of references : 31 . 0 and 32 . 7 references on an average , respectively . Typically the historic ﬁeld of history and philosophy of science and social sciences has 48 . 7 references per article . In mathematics the well known fact that papers give rather few references could be conﬁrmed ( 16 . 2 ) . But for information and library science as well as electronic engineering a citation behaviour of technologically oriented disciplines could be shown . 4 . 4 . The mean reference age The citation behaviour of the two above mentioned ﬁelds is further conﬁrmed by the mean age of the references : not only do they have a low number of references , the mean reference age is also very low with 9 . 1 and 8 . 6 years respectively . Only some core ﬁelds in the biomedical sciences tend to cite more recent literature : immunology has the lowest mean reference age of W . Gla¨nzel , U . Schoepﬂin / Information Processing and Management 35 ( 1999 ) 31 – 44 42 our clusters ( 6 . 9 years ) followed by research medicine ( 7 . 9 years ) . As expected , history and philosophy of science and social sciences is positioned at the other end of the scale with 38 . 8 years . Surprisingly in the centre there is a large and heterogeneous group of six subject clusters ( solid state physics , analytical chemistry , mathematics , psychology and psychiatry , business and economy ) with mean reference ages between 10 and 11 . 5 years . This conﬁrms the picture mentioned earlier , that the overall calculations of the mean age distributions for references in the sciences and social sciences tend to coincide ( see Fig . 2 ) . Only by means of detailed analyses on the level of subject clusters the underlying di(cid:128)erences can be revealed . 5 . Discussion Communication processes in theoretical topics and fundamental research are comparatively slow . The slow ageing of mathematical literature has been already substantiated by Rousseau ( 1988 ) and the citation - based studies by Gla¨nzel and Schoepﬂin ( 1994 , 1995b ) . Rousseau suggested therefore to choose a greater citation window for determining impact factors in pure mathematics . In theoretical ﬁelds an observation period of about 4 years would make citation based indicators more reliable . Some topics in parasitology , zoology , botany , entomology , geology , palaeontology and materials science are also characterised by a higher age of cited literature . If the share of references published in non - serials is small and the published information is supposed to be used within the scientiﬁc community , then the scientiﬁc communication takes place to a great extent in journal articles , and consequently a similarly slow ageing can be expected in terms of the citing literature , too . For those topics a similarly large citation window should be chosen . From the bibliometric point of view those topics are the most problematic ones which depend largely on information not published in periodicals , e . g . monographs and technical reports . As it was repeatedly pointed out , the problem lies not in bibliometrics itself , but in the availability of appropriate databases which constitute the empirical basis for almost all of these studies . If moreover the information published in journals is aimed to be used outside the community ( as for example in technology oriented ﬁelds ) , then the application of bibliometric citation - based methods seems to be questionable . Nevertheless , for most journals and topics in the life sciences and in less fundamental research topics in physics and chemistry publishing research results in scientiﬁc journals can be considered the main component of documented scientiﬁc communication . Literature obsolescence in these subjects is relatively fast with respect of both references and citations . Therefore a citation window of 2 or 3 years may here be considered appropriate . The already mentioned correlation between the mean age of references and the Price Index for literature with fast ageing ( cf . , Gla¨nzel and Schoepﬂin , 1995a ; Egghe , 1997 ) add to the picture where a reasonable part of cited ( citing ) documents is covered in such a short observation period , and the usual citation - based indicators can be considered appropriate to measure the impact of published research results in these topics . W . Gla¨nzel , U . Schoepﬂin / Information Processing and Management 35 ( 1999 ) 31 – 44 43 Acknowledgements The study was supported by an Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellowship . The ﬁrst author wishes to acknowledge the support . References Braun , T . , Gla¨nzel , W . , & Grupp , H . ( 1995a ) . The scientometric weight of 50 nations in 27 science areas , 1989 – 1993 , Part I . All ﬁelds combined , mathematics , engineering , chemistry and physics . Scientometrics , 33 ( 3 ) , 263 – 293 . Braun , T . , Gla¨nzel , W . , & Grupp , H . ( 1995b ) . The scientometric weight of 50 nations in 27 science areas , 1989 – 1993 , Part II . Life sciences . Scientometrics , 34 ( 2 ) , 207 – 237 . Egghe , L . ( 1997 ) . Price index and its relation to the mean and median reference age . J . Am . Soc . Information Sci . , 48 ( 6 ) , 564 – 573 . Freud , S . ( 1907 ) Der Wahn und die Tra¨ume in W . Jensens ‘‘Gradiva’’ . Heller , Leipzig und Wien , p . 81 . Gla¨nzel , W . ( 1996 ) . A bibliometric approach to social sciences : national research performances in 6 selected social science areas , 1990 – 1992 . Scientometrics , 35 ( 3 ) , 291 – 307 . Gla¨nzel , W . , & Schoepﬂin , U . ( 1994 ) . A stochastic model for the ageing of scientiﬁc literature . Scientometrics , 30 ( 1 ) , 49 – 64 . Gla¨nzel , W . and Schoepﬂin , U . ( 1995a ) A bibliometric ageing study based on serial and non - serial reference literature in the sciences , Proceedings of 5th International Conference on Scientometrics and Informetrics , held in River Forest , IL , June 7 – 10 . Learned Information , Medford , pp . 177 – 185 . Gla¨nzel , W . , & Schoepﬂin , U . ( 1995b ) . A bibliometric study on ageing and reception processes of scientiﬁc literature . J . Information Sci . , 21 ( 1 ) , 37 – 53 . Heisey , T . M . ( 1988 ) . Paradigm agreement and literature obsolescence : a comparative study in the literature of the Dead Sea Scrolls . J . Documentation , 44 ( 4 ) , 285 – 301 . Jensen , W . ( 1903 ) Gradiva . Ein Pompejanisches Phantasiestu¨ck . Verlag von Carl Reissner , Dresden und Leipzig . Line , M . B . ( 1981 ) . The structure of social science literature as shown by a large - scale citation analysis . Social Sci . Information Studies , 1 , 67 – 87 . Moed , H . , van Leeuwen , Th . N . and Reedijk , J . , ( 1988 ) Ageing of scientiﬁc journals and journal impact factors , J . Documentation , 54 ( 4 ) , 387 – 419 . Peritz , B . C . ( 1983 ) . Are methodological papers more cited than theoretical or empirical ones ? The case of sociology . Scientometrics , 5 ( 4 ) , 211 – 218 . Rousseau , R . ( 1988 ) Citation distribution of pure mathematics journals . In Informetrics 87 / 88 , ed . L . Egghe and R . Rousseau , Elsevier , Amsterdam , pp . 249 – 260 . Schoepﬂin , U . ( 1992 ) Problems of representativity in the social sciences citation index . In Representations of Science and Technology , ed . P . Weingart et al . DSWO Press , Leiden , pp . 177 – 188 . W . Gla¨nzel , U . Schoepﬂin / Information Processing and Management 35 ( 1999 ) 31 – 44 44