Self Service Technologies : Eliminating Pain Points of Traditional Call Centers Jakita O . Thomas IBM Research Almaden 650 Harry Road San Jose , CA 95120 USA + 1 408 927 3539 owensby @ us . ibm . com Yolanda A . Rankin IBM Research Almaden 650 Harry Road San Jose , CA 95120 USA + 1 408 927 1403 yarankin @ us . ibm . com Neil Boyette IBM Research Almaden 17875 S . Edgewood Lane Oregon City , OR 97045 USA + 1 503 578 3514 nboyette @ us . ibm . com ABSTRACT Traditional call centers have become one of the primary means for providing customer support . Customer Service Representatives ( CSRs ) offer personalized attention to each customer via the telephone as the CSR interfaces with technology and customers to resolve customers’ requests . Because call centers are expensive , labor intensive , and produce latency during periods of high call volume , businesses utilize web - based Self Service Technologies ( SSTs ) to minimize costs , provide readily available resources as needed , and reduce latency while simultaneously serving multiple customers . However , web - based SSTs have their own share of challenges which can impede service quality . To better understand the painful front stage experiences attributed to traditional call centers , we conduct content analysis of interactions between CSRs and customers . Results provide a design framework for web - based customer support SSTs that eliminate the pain points attributed to traditional call centers and address the shortcoming of web - based SSTs . Categories and Subject Descriptors H . 1 . 2 [ Information Systems ] : User / Machine Systems , Human Information Processing . Keywords Traditional call center , self service technologies , customer support . 1 . INTRODUCTION Typically , a traditional call center is a centralized location that accepts large volumes of customer requests via the telephone and provides support for a variety of products and services [ 1 - 3 ] . Customer Support Representatives ( CSRs ) interact with one customer per call , giving each customer personal attention in an attempt to quickly resolve customer issues . However , personalized attention during high call volume creates increased latency as customers wait in queues for personalized service . Service providers minimize costs by encouraging CSRs to maximize the rate at which they service calls , resulting in constraints on the amount of time they can spend with individual customers [ 4 - 6 ] . Interactions between CSRs and customers in traditional call centers become a critical factor in customers’ perception of quality service [ 4 , 6 ] . In an attempt to service as many customers as possible , call center procedures often sacrifice effective interactions between CSRs and customers at the cost of problem resolution . These experiences represent painful front stage experiences for callers [ 7 ] . Due to the expensive overhead associated with traditional call centers , service providers are beginning to utilize Self Service Technologies ( SSTs ) as an economical alternative to customer service [ 2 , 8 ] . SSTs are designed to increase the service provider’s productivity and efficiency while offering customers convenient access to services [ 8 ] . For the purposes of this paper , we focus on web - based SSTs that provide customer service . These SSTs ( online tech support boards , live chat sessions with customer support personal , user forums , etc . ) offer a different alternative to customer service , enabling the customer to carry out a portion or all of the work while CSRs are available to assist as needed [ 9 ] . Customers independently engage in the troubleshooting process by searching knowledgebases for troubleshooting tips and online documentation of previously reported problems for solutions to their problems . Additionally , customers may seek assistance from CSRs or other users who have encountered similar problems . Prior research reveals that customers prefer the easy access , the flexibility of service options , and the control of the service experience that web - based SSTs offer [ 5 ] . Thus , web - based SSTs provide an alternative to customer support for tech savvy customers who can utilize online resources and are comfortable interacting with other customers to resolve technical issues . Nonetheless , SSTs have their share of challenges when it comes to providing quality customer service . SSTs are inherently more impersonal as the goal is to surpass the bottleneck of one CSR per customer configuration , providing a wealth of information to simultaneously service a multitude of customers . Novice users are often overwhelmed by the wealth of information and find it difficult to effectively navigate SSTs [ 5 ] . In addition , resolution of novel problem scenarios can be challenging . Most organizations have a dedicated staff for testing and support , but it is impossible to predict and account for all possible problem scenarios . Human - to - human interactions are the preferred mode Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . ACM CHIMIT’09 , November 7 - 8 , 2009 , Baltimore , Maryland , USA . Copyright 2009 ACM 1 - 60558 - 572 - 7 / 09 / 11 . . . $ 10 . 00 . 60 of communication for novel problems since no prior solution exists in the SST knowledgebase and new information needs to be collected to effectively understand and resolve customers’ problems . Self - help forums , another SST , offer support for technical issues via information volunteered by users , leveraging the collective knowledge of users who post to the site [ 9 ] . Unfortunately , this strategy can be unreliable , as it depends on both the user taking the time to submit information when there is no direct incentive to do so , and on the user knowing how to adequately describe the problem . The aforementioned examples illustrate the pain points attributed to web - based SSTs and indicate the need to re - conceptualize the design of web - based customer support SSTs . Given these issues , we posit that designers of web - based SSTs should first closely examine the painful front stage experiences attributed to call centers and then utilize these experiences to strategically design web - based SSTs . Based on this premise , we conduct content analysis of interactions between CSRs and customers in a call center , and then propose a design framework for a web - based customer support SST . 2 . TRADITIONAL CALL CENTERS A call center is a centralized location that accepts large volumes of customer requests via the telephone and dispenses support services via CSRs [ 3 , 7 ] . The service platform typically consists of an Interactive Voice Response ( IVR ) system , a call guidance system , and one or more ( typically company specific ) business applications and / or knowledgebases . Customers interact with IVR systems using touch tone phones or voice commands . The IVR system presents the customer with various options to resolve basic questions ( e . g . balance inquiry , shipping status , password resets etc . ) or for more complex requests , route the customer to the appropriate department . Similar to the troubleshooting processes associated with helpdesk personnel , we examine traditional call center processes as examples of distributed cognition . Incoming calls initiate a typical call procedure , representing inputs into the cognitive system and serving as long - term memories [ 1 ] . An IVR system handles a large volume of customers and efficiently routes calls and evolving call records to CSRs knowledgeable about a particular category of customer issues based upon the initial description of the problem . The IVR system consists of a backend component that collects any information the customer provided during the initial stages of the call ( e . g . customer’s name , serial number on equipment , etc . ) and displays this information on the CSR’s screen as soon as the call is connected to the CSR . This allows the CSR to pick up where the IVR left off , eliminating the need for the customer to repeat the same information . To provide consistent customer support , businesses employ a call guidance system that serves as the long - term memory of the troubleshooting process . A call guidance system divides customer support processes into one or more call flows . A call flow describes the steps that systematically guide a CSR through multiple call scenarios [ 3 ] . This call guidance system then monitors the interaction between the CSR and the customer and suggests possible solutions , the cognitive outputs of call centers . Using call flows allows the company to hire a less experienced labor force while still providing the customer with the same level of service . For tier 1 support , the call flow simply prompts the CSR to request customer information ( e . g . “Ask for their name , address , and serial number . ” ) . For issues that are not resolved at tier 1 , calls are escalated to tier 2 , and if necessary tier 3 . Call flows assist with troubleshooting for tiers 2 and 3 . For example , a call flow automatically verifies the compatibility of a system’s software with the operating system and checks the availability of service releases . Such automaticity offloads tedious and repetitive work , enabling CSRs to focus more on the customer . The call guidance system allows tier 3 CSRs to create call flows for newly reported problems or to solve more complex problems , a process that allows CSRs to contextualize information relative to troubleshooting while creating a long - term memory artifact . New call flows can be used by tiers 1 and 2 to quickly solve similar problems in the future , an example of organizational memory [ 1 ] . Screen sharing is another troubleshooting technique increasingly used in call centers . Screen sharing allows a CSR to view and / or remotely control a customer’s computer and is ideal for resolving software issues but requires users to have a functioning operating system and internet connection . Finally , the CSR interacts with the business applications and knowledgebases that are specific to that company , another instance of distributed cognition and organizational memory at work . These applications allow the CSR to view customer information , product information , common problems associated with products , etc . and utilize this information to provide quality customer service and resolve customers’ issues . 3 . FRONT STAGE EXPERIENCES IN CALL CENTERS 3 . 1 Method Moving toward the larger goal of re - conceptualizing the design of web - based customer support SSTs , we sought to understand the problems CSRs typically encountered as they interacted with callers , how calls were handled , and identified aspects of caller / CSR interactions that were problematic . We analyzed transcripts of calls from a large technology firm’s technical support call center based in the US . From 305 of calls , we randomly sampled more than 5 hours of CSR - customer interactions ( more than 50 calls ) . The call transcripts captured the kinds of problems customers reported , the different strategies CSRs employed to address customer problems , whether customer problems were resolved or needed to be escalated , and in some instances , what happened post escalation . Additionally , we tracked several dimensions : problem descriptions , breakdowns or pain points encountered in the troubleshooting process ; if the problem was resolved or escalated ; the length of time of the interactions ; and the length of any idle time in which either the CSR or customer was put on hold . 3 . 2 Exploration of Pain Points Our analysis of the data revealed three major types of pain points as CSRs attempted to resolve customers’ problems : 1 . shifting problem focus ; 2 . inadequacy of troubleshooting procedures ; 3 . and latency . To further explore these areas of pain , we examined excerpts of actual conversations between CSRs and customers / callers . For the sake of clarity , we have cleaned up conversation excerpts , removing filler words such as “uh” and changing the names of people , company , and tools that might reveal confidential information . 61 3 . 2 . 1 Shifting Problem Focus During the initial stages of troubleshooting , the CSR asks the caller to describe the problem he is having . The caller tells the CSR that he was trying to complete an ID request for another employee , but could not open the link in an email that would allow him to request an ID . He then describes the error message he receives when clicking on the link which involves the caller’s system having more than 250 fonts . Though the caller requests assistance with completing the ID request , the sub - problem of addressing the error message becomes the new problem of focus . CSR : How can I help ? Caller : I just got done talking with [ John Doe ] a little bit ago and he sent me an [ email ] with a link so he could try to do an ID request . CSR : Yes sir Caller : and I couldn ' t open up the [ link ] it came up with a message saying something about can ' t do something more than two hundred and fifty fonts or something . CSR : Okay , let me see can I find that error : “cannot configure more than two hundred and fifty fonts”…Ah , I think I know what that is . Large fonts procedure… [ I ] think we may need to enable large fonts - - that may solve our problem Caller : And how do I do that ? CSR : Yeah , it ' s been a while [ since I’ve encountered this problem ] , so I ' m trying to get [ the procedure ] to come up in my system now so I can walk you through that . Here , the CSR tries to find the procedure that will address the error message the caller has received . When he thinks he’s found the procedure dealing with the caller’s error message , he then tries to access the step - by - step procedure to walk the caller through the solution . CSR : What we ' re doing is trying to raise your size up above your default . Your default , I believe , is uh two fifty five , and we ' re trying to raise your size your font size up so it can read those files because you ' re on a new template , and this seems this seems to be the only way to fix that . ( The caller follows the instructions . ) Caller : Okay , then what ? CSR : Just save that . CSR : Alright , yes sir . Let ' s try to get there again see if we get that same error . Caller : Well , it ' s taking longer - - nope got the same error… Caller : You know all I ' m trying to do is create a new ID for the other guy there… ( CSR places customer on hold for more than 6 minutes . ) CSR : Ah ha ! Cannot configure more than two hundred and fifty fonts when accessing X database . Caller : You know what the problem is then ? CSR : I found it ! Caller : Well I ' ll tell you what - - why don ' t you work on that , and just give me a call back when you know what the fix is , and then I can fix mine . CSR : I got the fix . Caller : You got the fix ? CSR : Alright let ' s go— The CSR then explains that he hopes they will be able to increase the default number of fonts that the caller’s system can handle . The CSR asks the caller to open the system file , add a line , and save it . After closing the email application and opening it again , the CSR asks the caller to click on the link again to see if he still gets the same error , and indeed he does . The CSR and the caller look at the system file again to ensure that the information was entered correctly . The caller closes the email application and opens it again , tries the link a third time , and still gets the error message . Beginning to feel like this is taking a lot of time , the caller asks the CSR if he can keep working on a solution to the problem and then call him back . The CSR believes he has found the solution which involves removing some of the fonts from the Windows font file . The link for an ID request once again becomes the main problem of focus . As the excerpts show , the original problem , which involves completing an ID request , gets lost among smaller sub - problems ( editing the system file , deleting and reinstalling the “corrupt” database , etc . ) that take center stage . More than an hour is devoted to resolving these sub - problems , and the original problem remains unresolved . 3 . 2 . 2 Inadequacy of CSR Procedures As CSRs interact with callers , they refer to a set of procedures provided by the call guidance system described in Section 2 . While the call guidance system is very adept at helping CSRs walk callers through the resolution of some problems , our analysis reveals that often these procedures were inadequate for helping CSRs identify and address novel problems . CSR : Let me see . What does it say on live update ? Caller : It says [ on ] the first window that comes up : “How do you want to connect [ to ] internet ? ” CSR : Alright Caller : I work from a home office . CSR : And if you hit “next” , what does it say ? Caller : Well , that ' s where I get my message . I hit “next” , and then it says connect - ohh I see it says connecting to eastern U . S . Canada and others . CSR : Okay you switch that to U . S . West Caller : Okay - - wait a minute . I cancel this . How do I change it ? ( The CSR attempts to tell the customer how to change the internet configurations and realizes that she doesn’t have any information that tells her how to do so . ) CSR : Hang on one second I ' ll have to go to my two thousand [ procedures ] to see . Caller : Okay . ( Caller on hold for 3 . 72 minutes ) CSR : Sorry about that . Thanks for holding . Caller : That ' s okay . CSR : Yeah I wasn ' t planning to do this in this [ email app ] support ‘cause they don ' t give us enough information on - - Caller : Okay CSR : on how to change this server around - - Caller : Okay CSR : in our procedures . 62 In this excerpt , we see a CSR trying to assist a caller with configuring the home internet connection . Noticing that the procedures are not helpful in resolving the caller’s problem , the CSR puts the caller on hold to access a different set of procedures . After checking with additional resources , the CSR tells the caller that the procedures do not provide enough information to address the caller’s problem . Then the CSR escalates the caller’s problem to the next tier of support . This inadequacy appears to impact the caller’s perception of who controls the interaction . When a customer calls into the call center for technical support , it is often with the belief that they are contacting a CSR who is either an expert at solving their problem or at least more knowledgeable about their problem than the caller . Moreover , callers believe that the CSR has access to resources that are not available to the caller and can actually complete the problematic transaction on behalf of the caller . The traditional call center is designed to leverage this belief , providing resources that help the CSR control movement from problem identification to problem resolution , promoting the perception of the CSR as a knowledgeable expert . When it becomes clear to the caller that the CSR may not be as knowledgeable about the problem as the caller believed , a shift begins to take place . Instead of viewing the CSR as an expert and deferring to that expertise , the caller begins to interact with the CSR as more of a collaborative colleague , making suggestions about additional troubleshooting strategies . While this is a perfectly acceptable outcome , as both the CSR and the caller have an invested interest in resolving the problem , the traditional call center does not readily support collaborative problem solving , as the resources and information needed to solve many of these technical problems lie solely with the CSR . 3 . 2 . 3 Latency Our analysis also revealed that callers and CSRs spent a considerable amount of time waiting , including waiting for backup of the caller’s system , waiting in the queue to speak with a CSR , and waiting for the CSR to search their procedures to locate additional resources or consult with another CSR . Analysis of waiting times uncovered two findings , one a benefit and the other a challenge for human - to - human interaction in this context . First , CSRs and callers were very adept at filling the idle time spent waiting as they engaged in idle chat about different topics ( e . g . the weather , schedules for the day , religion , etc . ) . Secondly , latency exposed the seams between the front stage customer support delivered by the CSRs and the backstage use of the call guidance system , the expertise of other CSRs , and additional resources used to resolve customers’ problems . Such exposure once again caused the customer to perceive the CSR as less of an expert and less knowledgeable , resulting in a shift in control of the troubleshooting process . 4 . CONCLUSION Our analysis of the interactions between CSRs and customers in traditional call centers provide a framework for the design of customer support centers . First , it is important to keep the customer’s initial problem as the main focus . Allowing sub - problems , when they arise , to take the focus away from the initial problem can result in lengthy interactions that result in the customer’s initial problem remaining unresolved . Ultimately , a shift of focus to less important problems degrades customers’ perceptions of service quality . Second , there needs to be an efficient mechanism in place for updating step - by - step instructions for helping customers with their problems as new information becomes available or as new problems arise . Since problem solving is a collaborative process , web - based SSTs should afford CSRs of varying levels of expertise to work together to solve customers’ problems , especially when CSRs encounter novel ones . Finally , customer support centers for technical support should have some mechanism in place for dealing with latency issues . Accessing additional resources should be a seamless process that creates an opportunity the customer to learn more about the problem . The web - based SST can provide information about other users who have experienced the same problem or direct the user to other resources that they can access while they wait . In this instance , the web - based SST can alert the customer once a solution for the problem has been found . Thus , service providers should treat the customers’ time like the precious commodity it is . 5 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Our thanks to Stephen C . Gates and Raghuram Krishnapuram for giving us access to call center transcripts . 6 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Ackerman , M . C . and Halverson , C . 2004 . Organizational memory as objects , processes , and trajectories . Computer Supported Cooperative Work . 13 ( 2 ) , April 2004 , pp . 155 - 189 . [ 2 ] Anderson , S . , Pearo , L . K . , and Widener , S . K . 2008 . Drivers of service satisfaction : linking customer satisfaction to the service concept and customer characteristics . Journal of Service Research , 10 ( 4 ) , May 2008 , pp . 365 - 381 . [ 3 ] Cheng , I . , Krishna , V . , Boyette , N . , and Bethea , J . 2007 . Towards an agile service system for a global call center . In Business Process and Services Computing : 1st International Working Conference on Business Process and Services Computing , W . Abramowicz and L . A . Maciaszek , Eds . , 125 – 137 . [ 4 ] Helms , M . M . and Mayo , D . T . 2008 . Assessing poor quality service : perceptions of csr . Managing Service Quality 18 , 6 , 610 – 622 . [ 5 ] Liljander , V . , Gillberg , F . , Gummerus , J . , and Van Riel , A . 2006 . Technology readiness and the evaluation and adoption of self - service technologies . Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services 13 , 3 ( May ) , 177 – 191 . [ 6 ] Rafaeli , A . , Ziklik , L . , and Doucet , L . 2008 . The impact of call center employees’ customer orientation behaviors on service quality . Journal of Service Research 10 , 3 ( February ) , 239 – 255 . [ 7 ] Teboul , J . 2006 . Service is front stage : positioning services for value advantage . Palgrave McMillan . [ 8 ] Thomas , J . O . and Grandison , T . 2008 . Self - service – lessons from industry . In Proceedings of the International Conference of Service Science . [ 9 ] Yardi , S . and Poole , E . S . 2009 . Please help ! Patterns of personalization in an online tech support board . In the Proceedings of the 4 th International Conference on Communications & Technology , June 25 - 29 , 2009 , University Park , PA , USA 63