Competitive Strategy Under Uncertainty Birger Wernerfelt ; Aneel Karnani Strategic Management Journal , Vol . 8 , No . 2 . ( Mar . - Apr . , 1987 ) , pp . 187 - 194 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0143 - 2095 % 28198703 % 2F04 % 298 % 3A2 % 3C187 % 3ACSUU % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - K Strategic Management Journal is currently published by John Wiley & Sons . Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use , available at http : / / www . jstor . org / about / terms . html . JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use provides , in part , that unless you have obtained prior permission , you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles , and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal , non - commercial use . Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work . Publisher contact information may be obtained at http : / / www . jstor . org / journals / jwiley . html . Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission . JSTOR is an independent not - for - profit organization dedicated to and preserving a digital archive of scholarly journals . For more information regarding JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . http : / / www . jstor . org Fri May 25 13 : 30 : 36 2007 Strategic Management Journal , Vol . 8 , 187 - 1 94 ( 1 987 ) RESEARCH NOTES AND COMMUNICATIONS COMPETITIVE STRATEGY UNDER UNCERTAINTY BIRGER WERNERFELT J . L . Kellogg Graduate School of Management , Northwestern University , Evanston , Illinois , U . S . A . ANEEL KARNANI Graduate School of Business Administration , The University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , Michigan , U . S . A . Competitive strategy under uncertainty involves a trade - off between acting early and acting later after the uncertainty is resolved , and another trade - off between focusing resources on one scenario and spreading resources on several scenarios , thus maintaining flexibility . This paper analyzes both these trade - offs taking into consideration the nature of uncertainty , industry economics , intensity of competition , and the position of a firm relative to its competitors . INTRODUCTION syrup ) ( Porter and Spence , 1982 ) . It is likely that , some time in the future , one of these Since strategy is concerned with the future , the process technologies will become the dominant strategic context of a firm is always uncertain , one and displace the ' losing ' technologies from although the degree and the sources of uncertainty the industry . ( For the sake of convenience of may be different for different firms . Facing an exposition , let us ignore the possibility that some uncertain future , the first decision a firm has to technology yet to be invented will emerge as the make is when to act . The firm has the choice of dominant choice for the industry . ) A firm in this acting now or waiting until after the uncertainty industry therefore faces a technology investment is resolved , or at least partly resolved . If the firm decision . If it focuses its resources on one does act early while there still is uncertainty , it technology it will become a strong competitor if has to decide whether to focus its resources on that technology eventually turns out to be the several scenarios , thus maintaining flexibility . To right choice . This is clearly a risky strategy . properly analyze these decisions it is necessary Alternatively , the firm can spread its investment to take into account the nature of uncertainty over several technologies ; it thus lowers its risk and the firm ' s characteristics . This analysis is by maintaining flexibility , but may have little further complicated by the presence of compe - chance of becoming a strong competitor . ( So tition . there is an opportunity cost of doing this . ) When the future is known with certainty , Strategic options under uncertainty focusing resources yields advantages such as going down the learning curve faster and exploiting As an illustration , it may be useful to consider economies of scale . All the advantages of the situation in the corn wet milling industry where focusing are , of course , preserved in an uncertain several potential technologies could develop into environment . Flexibility , on the other hand , alternatives to that licensed by Standard Brands while it offers no benefits in an environment for manufacturing HFCS ( high fructose corn known with certainty , is advantageous under 0143 - 2095187 / 020187 - 08 $ 05 . 00 Received 10 May 1984 0 1987 by John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Revised 25 March 1985 188 Research Notes and Communications uncertainty . Thus , under uncertainty there is a trade - off between focus and flexibility . When faced with uncertainty there is a third option , besides focus and flexibility , available to a firm : to wait and act only after the uncertainty is removed . A firm in the corn wet milling industry can choose not to make a significant investment in production technology till it becomes relatively clear which technology is the superior one . In reality a firm can focus its resources to a greater or lesser extent ; in other words , it has an infinite number of options which lie along a continuum . Similarly , it can act right now or any time in the future . It is , however , much easier to discuss the problem and the factors which should influence the decision by considering only the extreme options rather than the entire range of options . This is not , of course , to imply that the firm should in fact choose one of the extreme options . The problem facing the corn wet miiling firm can be stylized by considering a two - time - period setting where the firm can make its investment in either period . By the second period the uncertainty will be fully resolved arid it will be known which of the competing technologies has emerged as the superior one . We will denote by ' wait ' the strategy of investing only in the second period afier the uncertainty is resolved . The ' focus ' strategy requires the firm to invest in any one technology in the first period ; under the ' flexibility ' strategy the firm invests in all competing technologies in the first period . ( In the two latter cases the firm may also invest in the second period . ) Stylizing the problem this way allows us to follow the ' 2x2 matrix tradition ' in the presentation of our results ! Research objective The objective of this paper is to offer a first - cut at an explicit analysis of the factors that influence the choice between the strategic options ' wait ' , ' focus ' and ' flexibility ' in the context of com - petitive strategy . This analysis will take into account the nature of uncertainty , characteristics of the firm and of the competitive environment facing the firm . No empirical evidence is presented , and it may be appropriate to look at our propositions as hypotheses awaiting rigorous testing . Previous Literature Concentrate your strength against your competi - tors ' relative neakness ( Henderson . 1979 : 13 ) . Managers should . . . as the best way of increasing the chances of the survival of their organization ( McKelvey and Aldrich , 1983 ) . Cyert and March ( 1963 : 118 - 120 ) in their classic book claim that firms try to avoid uncertainty rather than confront it . Whether or not firms in fact do that , the literature on strategic planning , it seems to us , has avoided discussing the trade - offs involved in confronting uncertainty . The previous literature in or related to business policy deals with uncertainty in one of two extreme ways : it assumes either that there is no uncertainty or that it is the dominating concern . One stream of literature , assuming away all uncertainty , uses concepts such as experience curve effects and economies of scale to argue that a firm subject to competition should commit its resources in a focused manner . The empirical evidence linking market share and profitability ( for example , Buz - zell , Gale and Sultan , 1975 ) is interpreted as providing support for the ' focus ' strategy . On the other hand there is an equally influential strearr , of planning literature . derived from systems theory ( for example , Ashby , 1952 ) or population ecology ( Hannan and Freeman , 1977 ) , which recognizes uncertainty and argues that a firm subject to uncertainty should try to achieve the ability to survive in the widest possible range of environments . That is , the firm should maximize its flexibility ( Utterback and Abernathy , 1975 ) . Thus the analysis that is offered assumes either that there is no uncertainty , and recommends ' focus ' as a strategy , or that uncertainty is such a dominating concern that ' flexibility ' is the right strategy . If we venture outside the strategic management field we find two tools which together provide the key to our problem . First there is statistical decision theory ( Raiffa , 1968 : Hertz , 1964 ) which tells us how to analyze decisions under risk . Secondly there is game theory which has already been used to give us insights into the competitive aspects of strategy ( Rao and Rutenberg , 1979 ; Spence , 1977 ) . The derived area of stochastic game theory ( Basar and Olsder , 1982 : Ch . 3 . 7 ) . is yet in its infancy but is clearly the correct approach to our problem . Accordingly we will develop our analysis from this perspective . NATURE OF UNCERTAINTY Since strategy is concerned with the future , the strategic context of a firm is always uncertain , although different firms face differing degrees of uncertainty . As a first step to analyzing competitive strategy a firm has to understand the sources of the uncertainty it faces and some key characteristics of this uncertainty . Uncertainty can arise from four different types of sources listed here in order of importance : demand structure , supply structure , competitors and externalities . Demand uncertainty On the demand side , the size of the market may be uncertain . How big will the demand be and when will it materialize ? Not only is this an important question in all emerging industries , but the experts in such an industry tend to have widely different demand projections . For example . in the corn wet milling industry estimates made in 1972 of the demand in 1980 ranged all the way from 2 . 5 billion pounds to 10 billion pounds . The size of the different market segments may be uncertain ; even the dimensions along which to segment the market may not be clear . The desired product ( or service ) design may be uncertain . Particularly in the early stages of the industry life cycle the ' dominant design ' may not yet have emerged ( Abernathy . 1978 ) . Finally there may be uncertainty regarding the appropriate distribution channels . Supply uncertaint ~ xogenous or endogenous On the supply side , uncertainty can arise from the internal operations of the firm as well as from the external developments in technology . First , there can be uncertainty about the best process tech - nology . In corn wet milling , the firms could develop HFCS capacity in several different ways . It may be uncertain if a superior technology will be invented , as well as when it will be invented . Supply uncertainty may finally arise from the operations of the firm itself . Key executives can leave , and fraud or accidents can occur . Uncertainty can be such that the firms in an Research Notes and Communications 189 industry , individually or collectively , have influence over its resolution . This is particularly true for supply uncertainty ( and of course for competitive uncertainty , e . g . in the case of preemption ) . For example , the ultimate success of a given technology depends critically on the firm ' s willingness to invest in it . Furthermore , some firms are much more in control than others . Quite often a dominant firm can virtually dictate standards for product specifications while smaller firms have to accommo - date to this . Competitive uncertainty and externalities This covers unpredictable circumstances inside competitive firms but also the nature of the competitors , their strategies and their response to our strategies . A major issue here is the identity of competitors . Who will enter the corn wet milling industry in the future ? Will it be integrated firms or specialists ? This in turn leads to questions about the competitive behavior of these firms , about their strategies and their aggressiveness . There may finally be uncertainty about the effects of external factors such as social pressures and government intervention . GENERAL PRINCIPLES Let us now outline how a firm should act under uncertainty , given a particular behavior on the part of its competitors . When to act We will here argue for the proposition below : Proposition 1 : The following factors will , ceteris paribus , make it more attractive to act before the uncertainty is resolved : ( a ) many first mover advantages , ( b ) low risk - aversion , and ( c ) ability to influence the way the uncertainty is resolved . Facing an uncertain situation , the first decision a firm has to make is when to act ; the firm has the choice of acting now or waiting until after the uncertainty is resolved , or at least partly resolved . The general principle is that the greater the ' first mover advantages ' in the industry , the more important it is for a firm to act early . First mover 190 Research Notes and Communications advantages could be due to various factors such as learning curve effects , cust9mer loyalty , patent protection and preemption of scarce resources ( see Scherer . 1980 : 245 - 247 ; Schmalensee , 1982 ; Urban and Hauser . 1980 ) . It is obviously riskier to act early than to wait . The more risk - averse a firm , the greater is the incentive for the firm to wait . This partly explains why the early entrants in a new industry are often backed by venture capital and hence are less risk - averse than companies with a more conventional capital structure . In situations where what are normally called first mover advantages do not exist ( or are not significant ) , a firm should still act early if both the following conditions are present : the firm has a preference for one particular alternative and the firm can influence the resolution of uncertainty such that that alternative is realized . Focus or flexibility If the firm does act early while there still is uncertainty , it has to decide whether to focus its resources and bet on one scenario or to hedge its bets and spread its resources on several scenarios , thus maintaining flexibility . On this issue we shall argue for the proposition below : Proposition 2 : The following factors will , ceteris paribus , make focus more attractive than flexi - bility : ( a ) many economies of scale , ( b ) low risk - aversion , and ( c ) ability to influence the way tlie uncertainty is resolved . The greater the returns to scale characterizing the investment under consideration , the greater is the advantage of the ' focus ' strategy . Note that returns to scale are different from first mover advantages : the former are static whereas the latter are dynamic in nature . First mover advantages afford greater returns to a firm which acts before another firm , while economies of scale afford greater returns to a firm which invests more . While returns to scale is a source of first mover advantages . it is not a sufficient condition for an industry to exhibit this characteristic . If , for example , technology is progressing very rapidly , it may be best to invest last and get the latest ' vintage ' instead of going early , even though this could give some preemptive advantages . Focusing resources is obviously riskier than maintaining flexibility . The more risk - averse the Table 1 . General principles Big first mover Small first mover advantages advantages Big economies Focus Wait of scale Small Flexibility Wait economies of scale firm , and the greater the degree of uncertainty , the greater is the incentive to maintain flexibility . Finally , if the firm has influence over the resolution of uncertainty , then clearly the firm has an incentive to focus its resources on its preferred scenario . UNDERLYING FACTORS While the above discussion analyzes several factors which influence the choice between the three strategies - wait , focus and flexibility - it does not explicitly consider competition . The analysis does implicitly assume that there is competition ; for example , first mover advantages are not much use if there is no competition . We next explicitly analyze how competition and some specific characteristics of the competitors influence the choice between the three strategies under uncertainty . Competition Proposition 3 : Because of the way they influence the payoffs , more cotnpetitors do , ceteris paribus , increase the incentives to ( a ) act early , and ( b ) focus . In general , the greater the number of competitors the greater is the incentive to act early rather than wait . For example , in an R & D race , the more a firm invests , and the sooner it invests , the more likely it is to win . If there is only one firm in the race , there is no particular hurry ; but if there are several firms in the race then it is important to act early so as to try to achieve a breakthrough before the competitors do . Simi - larly , the greater the number of competitors , the greater is the incentive to focus rather than hedge . For example , suppose that three firms face two possible scenarios and that two firms Research Notes and Communications 191 focus on one scenario each , whereas the third firm invests a little in both . In this case it will often be better to have a shot at dominating the industry than to be assured of the number two position . Relative size Proposition 4 : Because of their ability to come from behind , relatively bigger firms can , ceteris paribus , afford to : ( a ) wait in the presence of larger first - mover advantages , and ( b ) stay flexible in the presence of larger economies of scale . Asymmetries in the resource bases among the firms competing in an industry significantly influence the strategic choice between wait , focus and flexibility . A firm which commands some relevant resources in sufficiently large quantities may be able to wait and yet overcome the first - mover advantages of weaker competitors . In the corn wet milling industry , CPC with its financial resources , strong reputation , and good cost position may be able to enter late and yet snatch the leadership position for early entrants . A strong firm can better afford to wait than a weaker competitor , because it sometimes can ' leapfrog ' entry and mobility barriers . ( Whether this strength comes from multibusiness operations or dominance in a single market is irrelevant ) . One of the dangers of trying to maintain flexibility is that the firm may spread its resources so thinly that it will lose regardless of which scenario is realized . Clearly a larger firm with more resources can better afford to hedge than a smaller firm . A smaller firm may have no choice but to focus if it is to have any chance of winning . Casual observation suggests that the failure rate among small firms in an emerging industry is high . A partial explanation for this might be that the small firms tend to bet exclusively on one scenario and hope that they win , rather than try to maintain flexibility . The contents of propositions 3 ( a ) and 4 ( b ) are combined in Table 2 . Upside potential Proposition 5 : Because of their greater upside potential , big firms with sunk investments in an Table 2 . Typical situations More competition Less competition Small firm Focus Wait Big firm Flexibility Wait industry can , ceteris paribus , afford to invest more and stay flexible in the presence of larger econ - omies of scale . ' Another type of asymmetry among firms arises from how much they will gain if they bet on the right scenario in the focus strategy ; that is the firms face differing degrees of upside potential . What creates this difference is that success requires a set of investments which can be made sequentially and some firms have already made some of these investments . If a firm guesses right it can use the investments it has already made ; the more it has already invested , the greater is its upside potential . This potential clearly influences the trade - off between the focus and flexibility strategies ; the greater the upside potential , the greater is the incentive to maintain flexibility . WHERE TO FOCUS Proposition 6 : Firms who focus should , ceteris paribus , base their choice of where to focus on : ( a ) relative strength and expected profitability if they are strong , and ( b ) what others will do if they are weak . If a firm does decide to focus , it still has to choose where to focus its resources . Assuming that the scenarios are equally likely , a firm should focus its resources on the scenario under which it has the strongest position relative to its competitors . For example , consider two competi - tors in the corn wet milling industry : firm A which is strong in production skills , and firm B which is strong in distribution skills . Further suppose that the industry could evolve along one I A referee has pointed out to us that this synergy between past and future investments generally can apply to synergy between any other part of the firm ' s business and the new investment in question . 192 Research Notes and Communications of two equally likely scenarios ; under scenario 1 the demand will be very low and success will depend on production skills , whereas under scenario 2 the demand will be high and distri - bution will be the key skill required . Having decided to focus , there are strong reasons why firm A should focus its resources on scenario 1 and firm B should bet on scenario 2 . In other words , bet on your strength and hope that the scenario favorable to you will be realized . To emphasize that it is strengths relative to competitors that matter , and not absolute strengths , consider the above example with one change : firm B instead of being strong in distribution has its strength in production . but is weaker than firm A in production . Firm A should still focus its resources on scenario 1 ; firm B should bet on scenario 2 even though its strength is in production and not distribution . Under scenario 1 firm B would be at a competitive disadvantage relative to firm A , ~ vhereas under scenario 2 it is at least on an equal footing . In the absence of scenario - specific skills it is better , in general . to bet on the most likely scenario . This generalization has to be modified if the firms in the industry are not equally strong . The strongest firm . if it does focus , clearly should bet on the most likely scenario . A ~ veaker firm , on the other hand , is probably better off betting on a less likely scenario on the ground that if the most iikely scenario is realized , the firm will lose out to the stronger competitor anyway . In effect , the ~ veaker competitor is going for a small chance of a big profit rather than for a big chance of a very small profit . The reasoning used here is similar to that used to support the recommen - dation that a small firm should try to find a niche rather than competing head - on against a big firm in the major market segment . CONCLUSIONS Summary Competitive strategy under uncertainty involves , among other things . a trade - off betareen acting early and ~ vaiting , and another trade - off bet ~ veen focus and flexibility . This paper has analyzed these trade - offs taking into consideration the nature of uncertainty , economics of the industry . number of competitors and the position of a firm relative to its competitors . The previous literature has implied that in the presence of uncertainty focus is not a viable strategy . This paper has argued to the contrary by indicating that there are trade - offs involved here and thus , under certain circumstances . focus may be the best competitive strategy under uncertainty . We argued for the general principle that commitment can be postponed in situations without major first mover advantages . whereas first mover advantage and economies of scale make focusing of resources a logical choice . Without economies of scale but with first mover advantages the firm should act early and hedge its bets . The choice between the three strategies - wait , focus and flexibility - is also influenced by the number of competitors in the industry and the relative competitive position and past in \ ~ estments of the firm . In the typical situation Lve have argued that more competition makes earlier commitment more desirable . and that smaller firms have to take more chances and make focused bets . Lvhereas bigger firms , especially if they have sunk investments in the industry , can afford to hedge . Finally , firms should focus on scenarios ~ vhere their relative strength . given \ vhat others are expected to do . \ \ rill be greatest . The logic of our entire argument is summarized in Figure 1 . Managerial implications While the managerial implications of the present analysis seem quite direct , \ ve prefer to see this as a first - cut at a very complex problem . Several issues need further research before more specific recommendations can be made . For example all of the above analysis is contingent on the firm ' s inability to escape the trade - offs in any aray . Orie possibility is for the firm to concentrate its investments in flexible assets arhich can be used under several scenarios or in salvageable assets ~ vhich can be sold to other firms . The dra ~ vback of this approach is that such investments rarely offer the potential of a big competitive advantage . Another option , ~ vhich is frequently used in emerging industries . is for conlpetitors to cooper - ate with each other in dealing with uncertainty ( of course , subject to anti - trust approval ) . An example of this is cooperati \ ~ e agreements or joint ventures for doing research . If a firm can supply resources enough for betting on only one scenario , then a cooperative arrangement can Research h ' otes and Communications 193 First - mover advantages ( no . of competitors , relative size ) Risk - aversion Wait Time horizon Influenceability and preference Y Act / Economies of scale ( no . of comoetitors . relative size ) Risk - aversion Stakes ( other investments ) lnf lvenceability ond preference T Focus others do ) + Area of focus I l - - - + Flexibility 1 Figure 1 . Logic tree for main argument give it and its partners a reasonable presence in several scenarios . Thus the firm has the advan - tages of both focus ancl flexibility . There is , however , a price to be paid for this . The firm gets a guaranteed lease on its own life in exchange for guaranteed survival of competitors . It may be tempting to try to use uncertainty to shake out some of the competition . It is very risky , however , for a small firm not to join a cooperative arrangement if its competitors are cooperating . Cooperation is thus an attractive option for srnall firms facing uncertainty ; if the degree of uncertainty is very high and the resources required to bet on each scenario are also large , it may be attractive for even the big firms to join such cooperative arrangements . It is thus not surprising there are so man > - cooperative arrangements ( such as joint ventures , minority equity positions , and cooperative agreements for research or production ) in emerging . high - teclii ~ ology indus - tries . Further research While it is not the topic of this paper , we feel that the cooperation option is very til ~ ~ elq and of iilcreasing importance . It seems a major area for future research is to further understanci how cooperation can yield gains in risk - sharing and exploiting economies of scale . More direct exten - sions of the present paper coulci either take the form of applications to specific inciustries or types of industries ( emerging , regulated , concentrated , etc . ) or could consist of search for more detailed and perhaps contingency - based recommen - dations . The latter endeavor will very quickly require much more formalized arguments than those used on the broad - brush level here . While stochastic game theory is difficult to work with , we feel that the inlportance of the topic may justify going that extra mile . ACKNOM ' LEDGEMENT A11 earlier version of this paper appeared In the Proceedings of tlze Acndemp of iblanagetrzent , Boston , August 13 - 15 , 1953 . The participants at the meeting , the ciiscussant , Marvin Llcberman and t ~ oanonymous referees provided helpful conlments . 194 Research Notes and Communications REFERENCES Abernathy , W . J . The Productivity Dilemma : Road - block to Innovation in the Automobile Industry , Johns Hopkins Press , Baltimore , MD , 1978 . Ashby , W . R . Design for a Brain , Chapman and Hall , London , 1952 . Basar , T . and G . J . Olsder . Dynamic Noncooperative Game Theory , Academic Press , New York , 1982 . Buzzell , R . , B . T . Gale and R . G . M . Sultan . ' Market share - a key to profitability ' , Harvard Business Review , 53 ( 1 ) , 1975 , pp . 97 - 106 . Cyert , R . M . and J . G . March . A Behavioral Theory - of the Firm , Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ , 1963 . Hannan , M . T . and J . Freeman . ' The population ecology of organizations ' , A ~ nerican Journal of Sociology , 82 , 1977 , pp . 929 - 964 . Henderson , B . D . Henderson on Corporate Strategy , Abt Books , Cambridge , MA , 1979 . Hertz , D . ' Risk analysis in capital investment ' , Harvard Business Review , 42 ( 1 ) , 1964 , pp . 95 - 106 . McKelvey , B . and H . Aldrich . ' Population , natural selection , and applied organizational science ' , Administrative Science Quarterly , 28 , 1983 , pp . 101 - 128 . Porter , M . E . and A . M . Spence . ' The capacity expansion process in a growing olyepdy : the case of corn wet milling ' . In McCall , J . J . ( ed . ) , The Economics of Information and Uncertainty , University of Chicago Press , Chicago , IL , 1982 . Raiffa , H . Decision Analysis , Addison - Wesley , Read - ing , MA , 1968 . Rao , R . and D . Rutenberg . ' Preempting an alert rival : strategic timing of the first plant by analysis of sophisticated rivalry ' , Bell Journal of Ecor ~ omics , 10 , 1979 , pp . 412428 . Scherer , F . M . Industrial Market Structure and Econ - omic Performance , 2nd edn , Rand McNally , Chicago , IL , 1980 . Schmalensee , R . ' Product differentiation advantages of pioneering brands ' , American Economic Review , 72 , 1982 , pp . 349 - 365 . Spence , A . M . ' Entry , capacity , investment , and oligopolistic pricing ' , Bell Journal of Economics , 8 , 1977 , pp . 534 - 544 . Urban , G . and J . Hauser . Design and Marketing of New Products , Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ , 1980 . Utterback , J . M . and W . J . Abernathy . ' A dynamic model of process and product innovation ' , Inter - national Journal of Management Science , 3 , 1975 , pp . 639 - 656 . You have printed the following article : Competitive Strategy Under Uncertainty Birger Wernerfelt ; Aneel Karnani Strategic Management Journal , Vol . 8 , No . 2 . ( Mar . - Apr . , 1987 ) , pp . 187 - 194 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0143 - 2095 % 28198703 % 2F04 % 298 % 3A2 % 3C187 % 3ACSUU % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - K This article references the following linked citations . If you are trying to access articles from an off - campus location , you may be required to first logon via your library web site to access JSTOR . Please visit your library ' s website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR . References The Population Ecology of Organizations Michael T . Hannan ; John Freeman The American Journal of Sociology , Vol . 82 , No . 5 . ( Mar . , 1977 ) , pp . 929 - 964 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0002 - 9602 % 28197703 % 2982 % 3A5 % 3C929 % 3ATPEOO % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - J Populations , Natural Selection , and Applied Organizational Science Bill McKelvey ; Howard Aldrich Administrative Science Quarterly , Vol . 28 , No . 1 . ( Mar . , 1983 ) , pp . 101 - 128 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0001 - 8392 % 28198303 % 2928 % 3A1 % 3C101 % 3APNSAAO % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - Z Product Differentiation Advantages of Pioneering Brands Richard Schmalensee The American Economic Review , Vol . 72 , No . 3 . ( Jun . , 1982 ) , pp . 349 - 365 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0002 - 8282 % 28198206 % 2972 % 3A3 % 3C349 % 3APDAOPB % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - R http : / / www . jstor . org LINKED CITATIONS - Page 1 of 1 -