A fundamental problem in cell biology is how the densely packed cellular space is organized to enable con­ trol over complex biochemical reactions in space and time . One way to achieve spatiotemporal control is to regulate the localization of reaction components : con­ centrating components together can increase reaction kinetics , whereas segregating them can slow or inhibit reactions . These differences can alter flux through speci­ fic pathways and protect cells from damaging activities such as proteolysis , inappropriate covalent modifica­ tions and effects of low pH . Indeed , in vivo enzymatic reaction components are often packaged within distinct subcellular compartments . Classic organelles , such as the endoplasmic reticulum or Golgi apparatus , are compartments defined by sur­ rounding lipid bilayer membranes . These membranes are impermeable to most biological molecules . Thus , the interior and exterior of classic organelles are physically separated , and organelle compositions are regulated through specialized membrane transport machineries . However , many cellular compartments are not bound by membranes ( FIG . 1a ) . Examples include RNA – protein granules such as nucleoli , Cajal bodies and PML nuclear bodies in the nucleus 1 , as well as stress gran­ ules and germ granules in the cytoplasm 2 , 3 . Clusters of signalling molecules at membranes can be viewed in a similar light . These micron­scale structures are all defined by their ability to concentrate proteins and nucleic acids at discrete cellular sites . As these cellular compartments lack a physical barrier to separate their internal components from the surrounding medium , it remained elusive for many years how they concen­ trate molecules , maintain and regulate their structures , control their compositions and modulate internal biochemical activities . In this Review , we discuss cellular and biochemi­ cal observations that have led to a new physical model of membraneless compartments based on principles of polymer chemistry and soft matter physics . This model unites many of the observed behaviours of membraneless compartments , both membrane­associated molecular clusters and cytoplasmic or nuclear structures , under a common framework . We discuss how the model explains many aspects of the assembly and dissolution , composi­ tion and function of membraneless compartments . We suggest mechanisms by which these features can be regu­ lated in cells . Finally , we conclude with a series of major open questions in this exciting area of biology . Phase - separated liquid compartments The first membraneless compartment was observed within the nucleus of neuronal cells in the 1830s and was later termed the nucleolus 4 . Since then , many such com­ partments have been discovered in the nucleus , cyto­ plasm and on membranes of essentially all eukary otic cells . High­resolution microscopy imaging and descrip­ tions of their molecular components have revealed similarities in their shape , dynamics and manner of assembly , despite differences in their composition , location and function . Each type of membraneless com­ partment contains many molecular components . These components can remain stably concentrated within the structures for hours to days ; however , decades of photo­ bleaching recovery experiments consistently showed that many of these compartments could exchange with the surrounding medium on time­scales of sec­ onds to minutes 5 – 7 . These compartments also displayed unexpected behaviours , such as two of the same type fusing upon contact 8 – 14 ( Supplementary information S1 – S4 ( movies ) ) . Until recently , it remained unclear 1 Department of Biophysics and Howard Hughes Medical Institute , University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center , Dallas , Texas 75390 , USA . 2 Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics , 01307 Dresden , Germany . * These authors contributed equally to this work . Correspondence to A . A . H and M . K . R . hyman @ mpi - cbg . de ; Michael . Rosen @ utsouthwestern . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm . 2017 . 7 Published online 22 Feb 2017 Cajal bodies Biomolecular condensates in eukaryotic nuclei containing coilin and survival motor neuron protein ( SMN ) as well as many factors involved in mRNA splicing . Cajal bodies are thought to have a role in assembling spliceosomal small nuclear ribonucleoproteins . PML nuclear bodies Biomolecular condensates in eukaryotic nuclei containing promyelocytic leukaemia ( PML ) , death domain - associated protein ( DAXX ) and Sp100 . PML nuclear bodies are thought to have a role in apoptotic signalling , antiviral defence and transcriptional regulation . Biomolecular condensates : organizers of cellular biochemistry Salman F . Banani 1 * , Hyun O . Lee 2 * , Anthony A . Hyman 2 and Michael K . Rosen 1 Abstract | Biomolecular condensates are micron - scale compartments in eukaryotic cells that lack surrounding membranes but function to concentrate proteins and nucleic acids . These condensates are involved in diverse processes , including RNA metabolism , ribosome biogenesis , the DNA damage response and signal transduction . Recent studies have shown that liquid – liquid phase separation driven by multivalent macromolecular interactions is an important organizing principle for biomolecular condensates . With this physical framework , it is now possible to explain how the assembly , composition , physical properties and biochemical and cellular functions of these important structures are regulated . NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 1 REVIEWS © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . how these properties could be explained in physical and molecular terms . An important clue towards understanding the phys­ ical processes that drive the formation of membraneless compartments came from the discovery that P granules in germ cells of Caenorhabditis elegans are liquid­like . P granules are perinuclear membraneless compartments composed of many proteins and RNAs ( FIG . 1b ) . The rela­ tively large size of P granules ( 2 – 4 μm diameter ) com­ pared with most other cellular bodies ( 200 – 1 , 000 nm diameter ) enabled quantitative analysis of their forma­ tion . P granules fuse with one another 14 and subsequently relax back into a spherical shape ( FIG . 1b ; Supplementary information S1 ( movie ) ) . Photobleaching experiments demonstrated that proteins are highly mobile within P granules and exchange rapidly with the surrounding cytoplasm 14 . Crucially , under shear force , P granules can freely flow and deform around surfaces of other structures as well as undergo fission 14 . Together , these observations suggested that P granules are liquids that form through liquid – liquid demixing ( phase separation ) from the surrounding cytoplasm ( see next section ) . The concept of phase separation suggested how P granules could segregate asymmetrically during the first cell division in C . elegans embryos 15 . We note that such phase­ separated structures are distinct in physical properties and func­ tions from canonical macromolecular assemblies ( such as ribosomes ; for details see Supplementary information S5 ( box ) ) . Since this study of P granules , other compart­ ments , such as nucleoli 13 , DNA damage repair sites 16 , 17 and stress granules 16 , were also shown to exhibit liquid­like properties , highlighting the possibility that phase separ­ ation is a common mechanism by which membrane­ less compartments form 18 . As detailed below , principles of phase separation can indeed explain the formation of such structures with diverse material properties as well as the complex organization of such structures ( organiza­ tion into subcompartments , for example ) . The presence of a phase boundary explains how molecules can be con­ centrated in one place in a cell without a surrounding membrane but still provide an environment suitable for cellular biochemistry that depends on rapid diffusion . Phase separ ation also provides a unifying principle that explains the formation of membraneless compartments from diverse types of molecule . Non­membrane­bound compartments are highly diverse in their physical properties , dimensionality ( membrane­associated or soluble ) , molecular compo­ sition , subcellular location and functions . Throughout the years , these compartments have been referred to by various names , including cellular bodies , nuclear bodies , membraneless organelles , granules , speckles , aggregates , assemblages and membrane puncta . Here , we propose a new name — biomolecular condensates — which emphasizes the two features common to all of the struc­ tures : their ability to concentrate molecules and that they comprise biological molecules , independent of all other characteristics . We apply this name to both membrane­ associated structures and various non­membrane­bound organelles and granules because we believe that these structures are formed through similar mechanisms . The term also provides a link to concepts in condensed matter physics 19 , which , as we discuss below , are important in understanding the formation of these structures . Multivalency - driven phase separation Molecules will be miscible in solution until they reach their solubility limit , the threshold concentration at which they phase separate . As detailed in BOX 1 , this behav­ iour can be understood using classic thermodynamics . In the cell , the existence of separate phases enables the maintenance of a chemical equilibrium between com­ partments of different chemical properties ( for example , concentration ) through the rapid movement of molecules between them . Biomolecular condensates are often enriched with multivalent molecules — that is , molecules that harbour multiple elements that govern intra­ or inter­ molecular interactions 20 – 24 . As detailed in BOX 2 , this multi valency is important because classic concepts in polymer science indicate that multivalent molecules naturally assem­ ble into large oligomers or polymers when mixed . Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Perinucleolarcompartment Nucleolus Membraneclusters a 5 μ m b OPTdomain PMLbody Nuclearspeckles Cleavagebody Cajalbody PcG body Paraspeckle Gem Nuclearpore complex Germ granule Balbianibody Stressgranule RNA transportgranule Synapticdensities U body P body Signallingpuncta Nucleus Histone locus body DNA damage foci 0 s 21 s 32 s 36 s 46 s Figure 1 | Biomolecular condensates in eukaryotic cells . a | Schematic of the numerous condensates in the nucleus , cytoplasm and membranes of eukaryotic cells . Some compartments occur only in specific cell types , but are shown here for completeness . For example , Balbiani bodies and germ granules are specific to germ cells ( green hues ) , and RNA transport granules and synaptic densities are specific to neuronal cell types ( pink hues ) . See Supplementary information S6 ( table ) for more information on individual condensates . b | Caenorhabditis elegans germ granules , P granules , are perinuclear condensates that behave like liquids . A montage of live time - lapse imaging of P granules under shear force ( arrows , top left ) . P granules deform , drip and fuse with one another around a nucleus ( circular structure in the middle outlined in white ; time points ( in seconds ) : 0 , 21 , 32 , 36 and 46 . See also Supplementary information S1 – S4 ( movies ) . Gem , Gemini of Cajal body ; OPT , OCT1 / PTF / transcription ; PcG , Polycomb group ; PML , promyelocytic leukaemia . From REF . 14 ( Brangwynne , C . P . et al . Germline P granules are liquid droplets that localize by controlled dissolution / condensation . Science 324 , 1729 − 1732 ( 2009 ) . Modified with permission from the AAAS . R E V I E W S 2 | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION www . nature . com / nrm © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Entropy A measure of disorder in a given system . Specifically , the number of microstates possible for a given state . Systems tend to approach states that maximize their entropy . Free energy The energy available in a thermodynamic system to work . Systems tend to approach states that minimize their free energy . Stereospecificity A property of binding reactions whereby the specificity is largely dictated by the complementary geometries of the ligand and receptor molecules . This assembly will inherently decrease the solubility of the molecules due to entropy ­driven effects 25 , thus pro­ moting their phase separation . The coupled assembly and phase separation of multivalent macromolecules has emerged as an important organizing principle for bio­ molecular condensates . This idea can be applied broadly to understand the phase separation behaviour of diverse multivalent molecules . Such molecules include proteins composed of multiple modular interaction domains and proteins containing disordered regions that provide multi ple weakly adhesive sequence elements . RNA and DNA molecules , which can harbour multiple regions that bind to other nucleic acid molecules and proteins , can also undergo phase separation . Furthermore , as dis­ cussed below , this mechanism naturally leads to a bio­ logical means of regulating phase separation , as well as the composition , physical properties and biochemical functions of biomolecular condensates ( FIG . 2 ) . Phase separation of proteins with modular domains . There are now many examples of phase separation of natural proteins composed of modular interaction domains . The first example studied in detail was the actin­ regulatory signalling pathway consisting of the multivalent proteins nephrin , Nck and neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( N­WASP ) . These proteins assemble into high­order oligomers through inter­ actions between phospho­tyrosine ( pTyr ) residues in nephrin and Src homology 2 ( SH2 ) domains in Nck and between SH3 domains in Nck and proline­rich motifs ( PRMs ) in N­WASP ( FIG . 2a , left ) . This assembly prod­ uces both phase­separated liquid droplets suspended in solution 20 and phase­separated clusters on lipid bilayers when nephrin is attached to membranes in vitro 26 or in cells ( M . K . R . , unpublished observations ) . An analogous system is one controlling actin organization in T cells . This system comprises the proteins linker for activation of T cells ( LAT ) , growth factor receptor­bound protein 2 ( GRB2 ) , GRB2­related adaptor protein 2 ( GADS ) , son of sevenless ( SOS ) and SH2 domain­containing leuko­ cyte protein of 76 kDa ( SLP76 ; also known as LCP2 ) and forms membrane puncta in vitro and in cells in response to stimulation of the T cell receptor 27 . In addition to these signalling systems , the P body components mRNA­ decapping enzyme subunit 2 ( DCP2 ) and enhancer of mRNA­decapping protein 3 ( EDC3 ) ( FIG . 2b ) , the nucleo­ lar protein nucleophosmin ( NPM1 ) ( FIG . 2c ) and the postsynaptic density proteins SynGAP and postsynaptic density protein 95 ( PSD95 ; also known as DLG4 ) were shown to phase separate through multivalent interactions of folded domains . In these cases , the interactions are with ligands harbouring disordered regions 24 , 28 , 29 . Box 1 | Thermodynamics of phase separation To understand phase separation , we first consider free energy of the solution ( see the figure , panel a ) and the chemical potential ( see the figure , panel b ) , which is its first derivative ( with respect to molecular composition ) . These properties are dictated by the energy possessed by each molecular species within its chemical bonds , its location and its concentration in the system . For a simple system of non - interacting solute molecules in a solvent , free energy as a function of solute concentration is unimodal and the chemical potential is monotonic ( see the figure , unbroken red curves ) . A given value of chemical potential corresponds to a unique solution composition . Under these conditions , the solute molecules are , on average , distributed homogeneously to maximize the entropy of the system . Fluctuations that produce transient inhomogeneities in concentration ( and in chemical potential ) are dissipated by diffusive flux , which equalizes the differences in chemical potential across the system and minimizes free energy ( for further discussion , see REF . 19 ) . However , when solute molecules interact , the free energy curve becomes multimodal and the chemical potential curve becomes non - monotonic ( see the figure , broken curves and arrow ) . Then , some values of chemical potential correspond to two different solute concentrations , and the free energy of the system can be minimized by separating the solute molecules into two compartments of different concentrations but equal chemical potentials ( see the figure , unbroken blue curves ) 25 , 116 . In molecular terms , all macromolecules exhibit varying degrees of weak , nonspecific interactions with each other and with solvent ( water in biology ) . These interactions tend to be very low in affinity , short - lived , lacking stereospecificity and distributed throughout the surface of the molecule . Essentially , the solubility of macromolecules — the concentration at which they phase separate — is governed by the balance between the weak interactions between macromolecules and those between the macromolecule and water . When interactions between macromolecules are weaker than those between macromolecules and water ( so - called good solvent conditions ) , the macromolecules remain miscible in solution at all concentrations . However , when the macromolecule – macromolecule interactions are sufficiently stronger than macromolecule – water interactions ( poor solvent conditions ) , the macromolecule has limited solubility and gains the propensity to phase separate 117 . In such systems , phase separation occurs at the concentration at which the favourable energetics of macromolecule – macromolecule interactions begin to overcome the entropic tendency of the solution to remain homogeneously mixed . At this solubility limit , the molecular mixture separates into two phases : a large volume , low concentration dilute phase , and a small volume , high concentration condensed phase . The phase - separated state in such systems has the minimum free energy ( equilibrium ) . The chemical potential in both phases is equal , eliminating net diffusive flux between the phases while allowing individual molecules to move between them . Thus , the concentrated compartment is maintained persistently . At equilibrium , phase - separated liquid systems allow a cell to maintain concentration differences without constant input of energy . By contrast , gradients of soluble molecules in non - phase - separating systems , as seen for instance in cell polarity systems 118 , require a constant input of energy . Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology a b F r ee e n e r g y C h e m i c a l p o t e n t i a l Solute concentration Solute concentration R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 3 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . WW domains Small ( ~ 5 kDa ) modular signalling domains found in numerous proteins that contain two conserved tryptophan residues . WW domains bind to proline - containing peptide motifs . Cation − pi interactions Noncovalent interactions between positively charged residues ( for example , lysine ) and pi electrons in aromatic residues ( for example , phenylalanine ) . Pi‑stacking interactions Attractive interactions between aromatic rings , such as those found in phenylalanine , tyrosine and tryptophan residues . Phase separation has also been explored in vari­ ous engineered proteins composed of repeated folded domains connected by flexible linkers . These simpli­ fied model systems enable a more precise understand­ ing of the influence of individual physical parameters than would be possible in more complex , naturally occurring proteins . Examples include polySH3 pro­ teins binding to polyPRM ligands and proteins with multiple RNA­binding domains binding to repeated RNA oligonucleotides 20 . Proteins comprising multiple repeats of small ubiquitin­related modifier ( SUMO ) domains ( polySUMO proteins ) binding to polySUMO­ interaction­motif ( polySIM ) ligands have also been explored 30 ( FIG . 2a , right ) . Experiments with these mol­ ecules have identified valency ( that is , the number of interaction modules ) and affinity between the inter­ acting modules as key parameters controlling phase separation . Higher valency and affinity both promote assembly into larger structures , enabling phase separ­ ation at lower concentrations ( FIG . 2j ) , and decrease the dynamic rearrangements of molecules within phase­separated droplets 20 , 26 . We note that when molecules are highly soluble ( that is , are characterized by a high solubility limit ) , assembly does not necessarily lead to phase separation . For exam­ ple , engineered proteins consisting of tandem repeated WW domains readily polymerize when mixed with multi­ valent PRM­containing partners . However , this assem­ bly remains a single , macroscopically homo geneous phase 31 , 32 . These observations illustrate the idea that molecular assembly and phase separation of multivalent systems are distinct phenomena , even if often coupled . Phase separation of proteins with intrinsically dis­ ordered regions . Proteins containing large intrinsically disordered regions ( IDRs ) represent a second , abundant class of macromolecules that can phase separate under physiological conditions 33 . IDRs lack a defined 3D structure but often contain repeated sequence elements that provide the basis for multivalent weakly adhesive intermolecular interactions . IDR­containing proteins are enriched in many bio­ molecular condensates , particularly those that also concentrate RNA , such as P bodies , stress granules , germ granules and many nuclear structures . Many such proteins can phase separate on their own in vitro under various solution conditions 23 , 34 – 37 . The IDRs of these pro­ teins have low sequence complexity and are enriched in a limited number of amino acid types — primarily glycine , serine , glutamine , asparagine , phenylalanine and tyro­ sine . Some IDRs are also enriched in charged residues — lysine , arginine , glutamate and aspartate . The lack of sequence diversity generates multiple Gly / Ser­Phe / Tyr­Gly / Ser sequences and / or poly­Gln and poly­Asn tracts in these molecules , as well as blocks of positive or negative charge 21 , 23 , 38 – 41 . These repetitive motifs are important for their targeting to RNA granules 38 – 41 or the mitotic spindle 42 and for phase separation in vitro and in cells 23 , 35 , 36 , 42 , 43 . Several recent studies have pointed to a particularly important role of aromatic residues in the interactions that enable IDRs to phase separate ( FIG . 2e ) . The IDR in DEAD­box helicase 4 ( DDX4 ) , for example , con­ tains numerous Phe­Gly repeats whose aromatic rings appear to promote phase separation by engaging in cation − pi interactions with Arg residues intra molecularly and intermolecularly 23 and probably in pi - stacking interactions . Similarly , mutations in aromatic residues in BuGZ ( also known as ZNF207 ) and in the nephrin intracellular domain ( NICD ) decreases the ability of these proteins to phase separate 42 , 44 . Sequences enriched in Gln , Asn or Ser residues also contribute to the driv­ ing force for phase separation through dipolar interactions of their side chains 45 , 46 . Finally , the phase separation of IDR­containing proteins can also be promoted by inter­ actions between blocks of oppositely charged residues — either between two different molecular types ( FIG . 2f ) or as alternating blocks in the same molecular type 16 , 17 , 23 , 34 , 44 ( FIG . 2g ) . In these systems , the patterning of charged res­ idues is important : for the same net molecular charge , when the charge is uniformly distributed phase separ­ ation is disfavoured , whereas when charged residues are clustered phase separation is promoted 23 , 33 , 44 , 47 . Box 2 | Multivalency promotes phase separation In addition to the very low affinity interactions dominating solubility ( BOX 1 ) , biological macromolecules form complexes through relatively long - lived interactions that occur with high ( er ) affinity and high stereospecificity ; for example , the binding of modular signalling domains in proteins to their cognate ligands . When such interactions occur between multivalent molecules , the molecules assembly into large oligomers or polymers , resulting in the formation of complexes with varying stoichiometries 119 . Increasing the affinity between the interacting modules or the number of these modules ( referred to as the valency of the molecule ) promotes the formation of larger complexes 25 , 120 . Importantly , interactions governing solubility and those governing the formation of polymeric complexes are thermodynamically coupled , so that in poor solvent conditions ( which appear to apply to many macromolecules in water ) the solubility of a complex decreases as its size increases 117 , 121 . This phenomenon arises because the entropic cost of confining a complex into the condensed phase is lower than the cost of confining its components individually . This phenomenon may also be viewed as increased avidity of the weak , solubility - determining interactions as the size of the assembly grows . Thus , oligomerization and phase separation are linked for non - covalently associating multivalent molecules . By increasing the average size of complexes , oligomerization can enhance the weak , nonspecific interactions between molecules , thereby decreasing solubility and promoting phase separation . Because phase separation concentrates molecules into a condensed phase , it further increases the degree of binding in that phase , thereby promoting the formation of larger complexes . We note that , to our knowledge , previous conceptions of the assembly of multidomain macromolecules have focused largely on the networks created by strong , specific interactions , without consideration of the extremely weak , nonspecific interactions that govern solubility , and how they would be affected by the assembly process . We argue that considering the coupling between the strong and weak interactions , and therefore the ability of multivalency to promote phase separation , is essential to understanding the behaviour of multivalent biological molecules 122 . Finally , in some systems , such as disordered proteins , interactions may occupy intermediate regimes on the spectrum of strong , stereospecific contacts and weak , nonspecific contacts . In such cases , the distinction between interactions that govern assembly and those that govern solubility is blurred . Such systems may be considered either through the lens of simple phase separation or multivalency - driven phase separation . Nevertheless , as disordered polymers become less soluble as they grow longer or become more adhesive , in either view , the presence of multiple points of contact between molecules provides an important driving force for phase separation . R E V I E W S 4 | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION www . nature . com / nrm © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Dipolar interactions Interactions between two molecules that are electrically polarized , wherein the partial positive charge on one interacts with the partial negative charge on the other . Notably , all of these interaction types — aromatic , polar and charge – charge — are short lived and provide little structural order to the peptide chain , consistent with the dynamic nature of phase­separated liquids . In addition to these amino acid side­chain inter­ actions , interactions involving the polypeptide back­ bone are likely to have an important role in the phase separation of IDR­containing proteins . The IDRs from the RNA­binding proteins FUS , TATA­box binding protein associated factor 15 ( TAF15 ) , heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A2 ( hnRNPA2 ) , Ewing sar­ coma ( EWS ) and cold­inducible RNA­binding protein ( CIRBP ) form solid­like hydrogels when concentrated in vitro 22 , 41 , 48 . However , this mechanism only occurs after initial liquid – liquid phase separation for some of these proteins ( see below for a discussion of this tem­ poral progression ) . Based on a combination of X­ray diffraction , electron microscopy and chemical footprinting data , these hydrogels contain long filaments that appear to be generated from interactions between stretches of Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology a e i Increasing concentration of component A j Increasing valency or aﬃnity of components k Decreasing intrinsic solubility of component A f g h b EDC3 – DCP2 c NPM1 – R - motifs d PTB – RNA N - WASP pTyr residues in Nephrin Nck ( X ) 4 ( Y ) 4 Nephrin – Nck – N - WASP Engineeredmultidomainpolypeptides X = SH3 , SUMO Y = PRM , SIM EDC3 DCP2 NPM1 PTB ( UCUCUAAAA ) 5 Lower valency components ( 3 + 4 ) Higher valency ( 6 + 4 ) or higher aﬃnity between components [ B ] m o d u l e [ A ] module [ B ] m o d u l e [ A ] module [ B ] m o d u l e [ A ] module Phase separation No phase separation + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – RNA molecule Aromatic amino acid such as Phe 3 + 4 valency 6 + 4 valency A C B FUS or hnRNPA DDX4 NICD β - strands scGFP LAF - 1 Low solubility High solubility Figure 2 | Different modes of multivalent interactions in synthetic and natural systems undergoing liquid – liquid phase separation . a | ( Left ) Nephrin contains three phosphotyrosine ( pTyr ) motifs ( light blue circles ) , which interact with the SRC homology 2 ( SH2 ) domain ( dark blue ) on Nck . Nck also contains three SH3 domains ( blue ) , which bind to the numerous proline - rich motifs ( PRMs ) ( pink ) in neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( N‑WASP ) . ( Right ) Engineered multivalent model systems , consisting of multiple SH3 or small ubiquitin‑related modifier ( SUMO ) domains ( blue ) , paired with multivalent ligands that contain multiple PRMs or SUMO‑interaction motifs ( SIMs ) ( pink ) . See REF . 20 for details . b | Enhancer of mRNA‑decapping protein 3 ( EDC3 ) dimerizes via its YJeF amino‑terminal domain ( green rectangles ) and binds to the helical leucine - rich motifs ( purple triangles ) in mRNA‑decapping enzyme subunit 2 ( DCP2 ) via its LSm domain ( blue ) . See REF . 28 for details . c | Nucleophosmin ( NPM1 ) assembles into pentamers via its oligomerizing domain ( green triangles ) and binds to proteins that contain positively charged arginine - rich linear motifs ( R - motifs ) ( blue rectangles ) via its negatively charged acidic , tracts ( pink rectangles ) . NPM1 can also bind to potentially multivalent nucleic acids via its nucleotide‑binding domain ( not shown ) . See REF . 24 for details . d | The RNA - binding protein polypyrimidine tract binding protein ( PTB ) interacts with UCUCU tracts in RNA ( connected by AAAA linkers ) via its RNA recognition motifs ( blue squares ) . See REF . 20 for details . e | Association of intrinsically disordered regions ( IDRs ) via cation‑pi interactions between aromatic and basic residues , as in DEAD‑box helicase 4 ( DDX4 ) 23 . f | Patterned intermolecular electrostatic interactions between acidic and basic tracts , as in the interactions between the nephrin intracellular domain ( NICD ) and positively charged partners , such as supercharged GFP ( scGFP ) 44 . g | Patterned electrostatic interactions between acidic and basic tracts in a single molecular species , as in the P granule protein LAF - 1 ( REF . 34 ) . h | Polypeptide backbone interactions between β - strands in the polypeptide , as in FUS and heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A1 ( hnRNPA1 ) and hnRNPA2 ( REFS 16 , 35 , 43 , 49 ) . i | Phase diagram as a function of the concentrations of modules present in polymerizing multivalent components that are essential for condensate formation . Phase separation will be promoted by increasing the cellular concentration of component A ( black dot , arrow ) . j | Regulation of condensate formation by increasing the critical concentration by increasing the valency of A and / or B or the affinity between A and B ( arrow ) , whereas their cellular concentrations ( black dot ) remain fixed . Effective valency may be increased by the presence of a third interacting component as shown in the inset . k | Regulation of condensate formation by decreasing the intrinsic solubility of component A ( arrow ) , whereas its cellular concentration ( black dot ) remains fixed . As molecule A becomes less soluble , phase separation can occur at lower concentrations of A . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 5 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Chemical footprinting Use of a small reactive chemical to modify solvent - exposed sites in a macromolecule , providing information on the structure of that macromolecule . Chemical potential The partial molar free energy within a system . Mathematically , the first derivative of free energy with respect to composition . Systems tend to approach states that dissipate gradients in chemical potential . Histone locus bodies Biomolecular condensates in eukaryotic nuclei containing nuclear protein , ataxia - telangiectasia locus ( NPAT ) and FLICE - associated huge protein ( FLASH ) , and thought to be involved in the processing of histone mRNAs . Nuage Biomolecular condensates in metazoan germ cells thought to have a role in maintaining germ cell genomic integrity . This class of compartments includes P granules , polar granules and mammalian nuages . β­strands ( FIG . 2h ) , similar to those observed in amyloid fibres 22 , 41 , 48 , 49 . This result suggests that the interactions between β­strands that drive fibre and hydrogel forma­ tion when occurring thousands at a time may provide the weak multivalent adhesions that drive liquid – liquid phase separation when occurring only a few at a time 49 . Similarly , recent studies have demonstrated that short , evolutionarily conserved α­helical structures are impor­ tant for phase separation of another RNA­binding pro­ tein , TAR DNA­binding protein 43 ( TDP43 ) 50 – 52 . In any given IDR , the degree to which side chain and back­ bone interactions contribute to phase separation will depend on the amino acid composition and the overall sequence patterns of the protein . Predictive rules relat­ ing protein sequence to phase separation propensity are slowly emerging and remain an important area of future research 23 , 44 , 47 , 53 . IDRs can therefore undergo various types of homo­ typic and heterotypic interactions . Although the individual interacting motifs are less well defined in IDR­containing proteins than in multidomain proteins , multivalency appears to play a central part in promoting phase separation of both types of molecule . Regulation of assembly The physical mechanisms promoting phase separation as outlined above ( for more details see BOXES 1 , 2 ) sug­ gest that there are means to controlling key features of biomolecular condensates , including their total volume , assembly and disassembly . Specifically , because mol­ ecules will phase separate until the values of the chemical potential of both species are matched in the two phases , this control can be achieved by altering the cellular con­ centration of biomolecular condensate components and / or their propensity to phase separate 19 . Control of cellular concentration . Because condensates form by phase separation , their appearance in cells is sharp when their core components reach their solubility limit ( FIG . 2i ) . For example , nucleoli in C . elegans embryos form only when the nucleolar component FIB­1 ( and perhaps other key molecules ) is above a threshold con­ centration 54 . Under thermodynamic control , the total volume of the condensed phase ( that is , the phase­ separated entity ) will then be determined by the extent to which the concentrations of its components exceed their solubility limits . This phenomenon has , indeed , been observed quantitatively with engineered DDX­4 and NICD as well as qualitatively with natural condensates , such as PML bodies , nucleoli , P bodies , stress granules and centrosomes 23 , 44 , whose sizes scale with the expres­ sion levels of key components . Similarly , the formation of Cajal bodies , PML bodies , histone locus bodies , nuclear speckles ( artificial ) and nucleoli ( natural ) can be induced by experimentally concentrating their key components at a particular cellular site 55 – 59 . Furthermore , expanding the volume of isolated nuclei by placing them in a hypotonic solution leads to a reversible dissolution of PML bodies and nucleoli 60 . Moreover , by decreasing the concentra­ tion of nucleolar components in C . elegans embryos by increasing the cell volume , the nucleolar size decreases 54 . Essentially , any mechanism that alters the local concen­ tration of key components , including changes in protein expression , degradation and localization , will influence the formation and total volume of the condensed phase . Control of phase separation threshold . Condensate formation can also be controlled by modulating the phase separation threshold by changing the degree of molecu lar assembly ( FIG . 2j ) and / or intrinsic solubility ( FIG . 2k ) of key species . Post­translational modifications appear to be an important mechanism of achieving such control , as such modifications can change both the valency and intrinsic solubility of core condensate components . In the nephrin and LAT signalling assem­ blies ( see above ) , for example , higher numbers of pTyr resid ues promote phase separ ation , enabling the con­ trol of phase separ ation by modu lating the activity of kinases and phosphatases 20 , 26 , 27 . Similarly , phase separ­ ation of the nuage protein DDX4 is hindered by Arg methylation , which probably decreases the number of cation−pi inter actions 23 . Moreover , the number and structure of PML nuclear bodies are influenced by the degree of sumoyl ation of the PML protein , which can alter self­ assembly through its SIM 61 . Similarly , binding to interaction partners such as RNA can modu late pro­ tein solubility . For example , the solubility of a P granule component , PGL­3 , decreases in vitro in the presence of RNA ; in other words , PGL­3 phase separ ates at lower concentrations . Proteins that compete for RNA bind­ ing with PGL­3 , such as MEX­5 , can then increase the solubility limit of PGL­3 in the presence of RNA 15 , 23 , 26 , 62 . All these examples represent events that occur on rapid cellular time­scales ( in a matter of minutes ) . However , processes occurring on much slower time­scales , for example alternative splicing or evolu tionary pro­ cesses , could also alter phase separation propensity by modulating the interaction valency . Regulation of composition Individual biomolecular condensates have a specific composition , typically concentrating from 10 to sev­ eral hundred different proteins , and often also RNA mol ecules . Their composition is dynamically con­ trolled ; some components are constitutive , but many are recruited only transiently , for example , during particu­ lar stages of the cell cycle or in response to stimuli 61 , 63 – 66 . How can we understand this complexity ? Little work has been conducted so far to understand the general com­ positional control of condensates . One recent attempt to develop a general framework to explain condensate composition was based on dividing condensate compo­ nents into two qualitative classes 30 . The first are scaffolds , which are resident molecules essential for formation of the structure . Genetic studies have indicated that these scaffolds are often only a small subset of condensate com­ ponents . For example , PML is the only protein known to be essential to form PML nuclear bodies 67 . Similarly , the following key components are necessary for forming particular biomolecular condensates : spindle­ defective protein 5 ( SPD­5 ) for centrosomes in C . elegans 68 ; TIA1 for mammalian stress granules 69 ; the NEAT1 non­ coding R E V I E W S 6 | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION www . nature . com / nrm © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Paraspeckles Biomolecular condensates in the mammalian nucleus that contain the long non - coding RNA nuclear paraspeckle assembly transcript 1 ( NEAT1 ) and a variety of RNA - binding and other proteins . The functions of paraspeckles are not well understood , but include storage of certain RNAs . Balbiani bodies A transient collection of proteins , RNA and membrane - bound organelles ( endoplasmic reticulum , Golgi and mitochondria ) found in primary oocytes of all animals observed to date ( flies , frogs , mice and humans ) . RNA for paraspeckles ; and mRNAs for P bodies 2 . The second class of components , termed clients , con­ sists of molecules that are dispensable for biomolecular conden sate assembly . Clients constitute the majority of components and often localize to condensates in a regulated fashion by directly binding to scaffolds 61 , 63 , 66 . To elucidate principles of compositional control of biomolecular condensates , simple model systems composed of multivalent scaffolds and their cognate low valency clients were used 30 . Both in vitro and in cells , phase­separated droplets formed by polySUMO – polySIM scaffolds differentially recruited low valency clients ( for example , GFP­SUMO or GFP­SIM ) depend­ ing on the relative stoichiometries of the scaffold com­ ponents ( FIG . 3a , b ) . Changes in composition could be induced rapidly by altering the SUMO : SIM ratio in the scaffolds . In particular , when the stoichiometry is nearly equal , even very small changes in relative concentrations of polySUMO and polySIM could drive large changes in client recruitment . In addition , clients with higher valency ( for example , containing more than one SUMO domain ) were recruited more strongly ( FIG . 3c ) . Analogous behaviours were observed in mammalian PML nuclear bodies and yeast P bodies . In both cases , perturbing scaf­ fold stoichiometries ( by mutating sumoylation sites or modulating cellular mRNA levels , respectively ) , resulted in changes in client recruitment . Thus , despite the com­ plexity of biomolecular condensates , their compositions may be partially explained by simple principles . In addition to specific binding interactions , general electrostatic properties can also influence client recruit­ ment to condensates . This mechanism was shown recently in reconstituted LAT signalling clusters , which selectively exclude negatively charged proteins and concentrate positively charged proteins , probably because the scaf­ fold components of this condensate are highly negatively charged 27 . The relative importance of specific binding and electrostatic interactions is likely to vary between systems . IDR­based phase separating systems also show selec­ tive recruitment of clients . In some cases , this effect can be understood analogously to domain­based systems . For example , decreasing the number of Gly / Ser­Phe / Tyr­Gly / Ser motifs in hnRNPA2 and FUS decreases the efficiency of their recruitment into IDR­based droplets in vitro 49 and into stress granules in cells 41 , respectively , by redu­ cing the valency of these clients . In other systems , how­ ever , the molecular mechanisms governing selectivity of client recruitment are not yet understood 23 , 43 . Control of physical properties Many biomolecular condensates possess liquid­like prop­ erties . However , some appear to behave more like solids 70 or have solid­like elements 52 . Moreover , physical prop­ erties and organization of phase­separated droplets can change over time . As these properties are likely to influ­ ence condensate functions ( see below ) , they are probably regulated in vivo . Maturation of IDR­based phases . Phase­separated droplets of FUS and hnRNPA1 rapidly exchange mol­ ecules with the soluble phase ( as assessed by fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ) , contain largely disordered protein ( shown for FUS by nuclear magnetic resonance ) and behave macroscopically as liquids 16 , 35 – 37 , 43 , 49 . However , many droplets formed by IDR­containing proteins ( for example , FUS , PUB1 , LSM4 , eIF4GII , TIA1 , hnRNPA1 , WHI3 and FIB1 ) that are initially fluid become more viscoelastic over the course of several hours , eventually behaving as solids and ceasing to exchange molecules with the surroundings . This process is referred to as matur ation or hardening 16 , 35 , 37 , 43 , 49 , 71 . The material properties of these hardened states observed in vitro are currently unclear , but could be gels , glasses or two­phase solids . Maturation is also likely to occur in vivo , as some condensates behave as solids ( for example , Balbiani bodies 72 and yeast stress granules 70 ) or contain solid­like substructures ( see below ) . Balbiani bodies are particularly interesting in this regard . They are large membrane­less structures that are present in immature oocytes and are thought to protect organ­ elles during the many decades of oocyte dormancy . In Xenopus oocytes , Balbiani bodies are formed from a prion­domain­containing protein called Xvelo , which , when expressed from baculovirus , forms solid­like struc­ tures . Other proteins containing prion­like domains , such as FUS , form liquids in vitro 16 . Indeed , expression of the prion­like domain of FUS forms liquids , whereas that of Xvelo forms solids 72 . Therefore , it seems that the material properties are encoded in part by the prion­like domains . However , whether Xvelo forms a solid­ like Balbiani body de novo or matures through a more liquid­like state is Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Excess scaﬀold Excess scaﬀold Excess scaﬀold Higher valency client Low valency client Low valency client a b c Figure 3 | A model for compositional control of biomolecular condensates . Multivalent molecules that constitute the scaffold of the condensate contain complementary modules ( blue and yellow , for example , small ubiquitin - related modifier ( SUMO ) domains and SUMO‑interaction motifs , respectively ) ) , which enable the assembly of the scaffold to form the phase - separated structure ( large circles ) . Client molecules in this example harbour interaction modules complementary to the scaffold components but at a lower valency , and are recruited to the structure by binding to free cognate sites in the scaffold ( owing to stoichiometric excess of one of the modules ) . a | Stoichiometric excess of the scaffold component‑containing blue modules yields free blue scaffold sites . Clients containing yellow modules can be recruited to the body by binding to the blue scaffold sites that are unoccupied by scaffold – scaffold interactions . b | Stoichiometric excess of the scaffold component - containing yellow modules yields free yellow scaffold sites . Clients containing blue modules can be recruited to the body by binding to the yellow scaffold sites that are unoccupied by scaffold – scaffold interactions . c | Higher valency of the blue client promotes stronger recruitment of this client when the yellow scaffold module is in stoichiometric excess ( but not when the blue scaffold is in excess ( not shown ) ) . Figure modified with permission from REF . 30 , Cell Press . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 7 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . not known . Note that maturation is not observed with phase­separated liquids formed by proteins composed of modular domains ; in these systems dynamic behaviours are constant and determined by the affinity and kinetics of the modular domain – ligand interactions 24 . Several potential mechanisms could account for matur ation ( FIG . 4 ) . Unfolded proteins have a propensity to form amyloid fibres through β­strand interactions 73 . This behaviour should be enhanced for IDRs within phase­separated droplets because of the high protein concentrations 43 , 44 and the tendency of polymers to adopt extended conformations in the condensed phase , which predispose the polypeptide chain to make β­strand­like contacts 25 , 74 , 75 . Thus , phase separation could promote increased rates of nucleation and / or growth of amyloid fibres , which could further crosslink through lateral contacts . Indeed , droplet maturation occurs in vitro con­ comitant with the macroscopic formation of filamentous structures 16 , 35 – 37 , 43 , 49 , and fully matured droplets contain amyloid­like filaments observable by electron micro­ scopy 22 , 43 , 72 . Balbiani bodies are rich in β­sheets as assessed by thioflavin T staining . Chemical footprinting studies suggest that fibre formation in condensates also occurs in cells 49 . As an alternative to fibre formation , some systems may be kinetically trapped or ‘vitrified’ in an amorphous , crosslinked state if their β­strand ( or side chain ) inter­ actions form rapidly and dissociate slowly , preventing progression to regularized amyloid structures 75 ( FIG . 4 ) . Finally , increased entanglement of polymer chains ( whereby the chains wrap around each other and cannot cross ) could also change condensate properties in a manner akin to maturation 76 . These latter mechanisms may account for observations demonstrating that yeast stress granules behave as solids but do not appear to con­ tain fibres 70 . Although detailed experimental studies are currently lacking , the slowed molecular dynamics and increasing hardness of droplets as maturation proceeds in these scenarios may result from increases in three attributes : fibre length , numbers , crosslinking density and strength ; the density and strength of β­strand or side chain interactions ; or in the degree of entanglement . Regulation of physical properties by energy­ consuming processes . Cells probably have mechanisms to limit the tendency of IDRs to mature in order to tune the dynam­ ics and liquid­like properties of condensates into func­ tionally appropriate regimes ( see below ) . One likely mechanism involves the use of energy­dependent pro­ cesses or machines to control the degree of fibre and / or crosslink formation within condensates . Thus , the forma­ tion of these structures is limited when condensates need to be dynamic but promoted when condensates need to be static ( FIG . 4 ) . This need for the dynamic regulation of condensate material properties may explain why chaper­ ones , ATP­dependent disaggregases and molecular motors are present in many RNA granules 52 , 70 . Indeed , depletion of ATP increases the viscosity of stress granules and nucleoli 13 , 52 . Moreover , several ATPases can regulate the dynamics of stress granules , increasing or decreasing their persistence 50 , 52 . Recently , it has been suggested that imbalances between the thermodynamic drive of IDRs to form fibres and the opposing disaggregase machineries could lead to disease . In fact , a large body of data links dysregulation of RNA­containing condensates with neurodegenerative diseases . We direct readers to numerous recent reviews focused on this important topic 21 , 77 – 82 . In addition to controlling maturation , it is likely that energy­utilizing systems modulate many additional features of condensates . For example , the transcription of rRNA influences the nucleation and spatial distrib­ ution of condensing nucleoli in C . elegans embryos 59 , 83 . Furthermore , the size distribution of nucleoli and his­ tone locus bodies is influenced by the actin cytoskeleton , the dynamics of which are controlled by ATP hydro lysis in actin filaments , motors and nucleation factors 84 . The actin cytoskeleton can also affect the localization of con­ densates . For example , phase­separated LAT clusters are moved radially at the T cell – antigen presenting cell inter­ face by dynamic movements of the actin cytoskeleton 85 , 86 . Because energy consumption influences virtually all bio­ logical processes , these initial observations are probably exemplary of a more general phenomenon in the regu­ lation of condensates . The study of energy­ consuming , non­equilibrium materials — ‘active matter’ — is an area of great current interest in physics and materials science 87 – 90 . The application of physical theories should provide insight into the influence of cellular energy on the equilibrium processes of phase separation 13 , 91 . Figure 4 | Changing material properties of biomolecular condensates . Condensates composed of intrinsically disordered regions ( IDRs ) have the propensity to mature , changing their properties from liquid‑like to solid‑like . Initially , the components in the condensed phase exhibit only transient interactions and lack appreciable order . Thus , the molecules freely rearrange ( and exchange with the surrounding solution ) and the molecular dynamics can be described as that of a liquid . Over time , the liquid becomes more solid‑like . Several potential mechanisms for this ‘hardening’ and the concomitant decrease in molecular dynamics have been proposed , as described in the main text . Briefly , these mechanisms could include nucleation and elongation of amyloid‑like fibres , kinetic trapping into amorphous glasses ( vitrification ) or entanglement of the disordered polypeptides . ATP - dependent machineries such as chaperones and disaggregases are anticipated to act against these processes ( other mechanisms that do not depend on ATP may act similarly ) . Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Liquid Solid Molecular dynamics Time ATP - dependent machineries such as chaperones and disaggregases Fibrillization Vitriﬁcation Entanglement Exchange Internalrearrangement R E V I E W S 8 | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION www . nature . com / nrm © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Small nuclear ribonucleoprotein A RNA – protein complex that is the primary constituent of spliceosomes , the eukaryotic splicing machinery . Hammerhead ribozyme A catalytic RNA molecule involved in RNA cleavage found in organisms ranging from bacteria to mammals . Multiphase biomolecular condensates The studies we have discussed so far involve a single condensed phase and a more dilute surrounding phase . However , some biomolecular condensates are com­ posed of distinct subcompartments ; that is , they con­ tain secondary condensed phases within the primary condensed phase 52 , 71 , 92 , 93 . A recent study examined this process in detail for nucleoli and demonstrated that the subcompartments have distinct viscosities , surface tensions and compositions 71 . The encapsulation of one subcompartment by another is enabled by the distinct surface tensions of the phases , which arises from dis­ tinct multivalent interactions based on IDRs or folded domains of the components . How the composition of such multiphase condensates is regulated and how the assembly of such structures is initiated in cells remain open questions . The different subcompartments may have different propensities for maturation based on their composi­ tions . The ( inner ) dense fibrillar subcompartment of the nucleolus , for instance , is more prone to maturation than the ( outer ) granular component and may exhibit a spectrum of viscoelastic behaviours in cells , which are likely to be subject to regulation 13 , 71 . As indicated by their names , electron microscopy images of these sub­ compartments show distinct textures 94 . Similarly , Cajal bodies sometimes exhibit coiled structures that can be visualized by electron microscopy 23 , 43 , 95 and at other times appear more isotropic . These coiled elements may represent fibrous structures embedded within a larger liquid phase . Recent biochemical and high­resolution imaging studies have revealed that other condensates also contain substructures that behave as solids 13 , 52 , 92 , 93 . Although the function of these subcompartments remains to be determined , it seems likely that cells regu­ late the relative amounts of solid versus liquid material to yield a functional effect , such as regulating reaction kinetics or stabilizing the structure against mechanical forces ( see below ) . Implications for function We have discussed the physicochemical and molecular mechanisms that drive the formation of biomolecular condensates and how their assembly , composition and material properties can be regulated . These character­ istics of condensates present unique opportunities , dis­ tinct from those provided by macromolecular complexes ( Supplementary information S5 ( box ) ) , for controlling the biochemical environment of the cell 96 . In this section , we describe how the properties of condensates reflect their biological functions . Effects of biomolecular condensates on reaction kinetics . Condensates substantially increase the local concentra­ tion of resident chemical species . In the simplest case , the increase in concentration should accelerate reactions inside the structure ( FIG . 5a ) . Note , however , that the over­ all reaction rate will increase only if both enzyme and substrate of a reaction are concentrated in a condensed phase , but not if either is concentrated alone . This process has been observed for some cellular systems . For example , the rate of histone mRNA processing is significantly reduced when key components of this pro­ cess fail to concentrate within the histone locus body 97 . Similar effects have been shown for components of Cajal bodies in zebrafish 98 ; this finding is consistent with a computational model of small nuclear ribonucleoprotein assembly in these structures 99 . Acceleration of reac­ tions by phase separation has also been observed bio­ chemically . For example , the total solution activity of the hammerhead ribozyme can increase up to ~ 70­fold when it is concentrated along with its substrate RNA strand into phase­separated droplets in vitro 100 . Actin poly­ merization rates can also be substantially accelerated by concentrating the actin­related protein 2 ( ARP2 ) – ARP3 complex ( ARP2 / 3 complex ) and N­WASP into nephrin – Nck – N­WASP­based droplets or clusters on model membranes 20 , 26 . However , concentration into a condensed phase does not always result in an acceleration of the overall reaction rate . For example , essential factors for small nuclear RNA modification , called guide RNAs , are nor­ mally concentrated inside Cajal bodies . However , dis­ rupting Cajal body formation and thereby dispersing guide RNAs in the nucleoplasm does not seem to affect the efficiency of small nuclear RNA modification 23 , 101 . Similarly , the activity of enzymes in the purine biosyn­ thetic pathway was not significantly enhanced when they were concentrated with their substrate into phase­ separated droplets in vitro 102 . This lack of enhancement was due to the lower specific activities of the enzymes towards their substrates within the droplets compared with their activity in solution . In unpublished work , we have observed that the highly concentrated scaffolds and enzymes within phase­separated droplets frequently interfere with each other , with scaffold components inhibiting enzyme activities and enzymes dispersing droplets by covalently modifying scaffolds . In cells , it is likely that mechanisms exist to prevent or take advantage of such interference . Many physical features of condensates could affect reactions that occur within them . Molecular crowd­ ing — the decrease in accessible volume owing to high macromolecule concentration — can affect allosteric regulation and binding affinity and in turn alter enzy­ matic activities 103 . Furthermore , condensates are porous structures ( see below ) and this porosity will also have complex effects on the movement of molecules within them . A solution containing high concentrations of a small molecule ( for example , glycerol ) will slow the movement of all molecules within it and therefore decrease reaction rates . But a solution containing a con­ centrated polymer matrix will behave differently . In this case , the free volume between the condensed scaffold components will behave as pores , through which small proteins will move as though the polymer was absent ; only large molecules unable to permeate these pores or molecules that bind the polymer will move slowly 104 . The impact of such effects on biomolecular condensates — particularly those containing RNA — is likely to be significant because these condensates are composed of combinations of large RNA molecules , proteins of R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 9 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . various sizes and small organic compounds . In addi­ tion , the various viscoelastic properties of condensates , controlled , for example , by the degree of IDR matur­ ation , interaction kinetics of multidomain scaffolds , RNA composition 37 , 105 or active ( energy consuming ) processes , are likely to influence the dynamics of mol­ ecules within them ( FIG . 5b ) and at the phase boundary . Changes in viscoelasticity could also affect condensate composition . Understanding of these behaviours will greatly benefit from additional experimental and theor­ etical work describing the chemistry within complex , heterogeneous media . Regulating the specificity of biochemical reactions . Phase­separated compartments could concentrate a protein with a subset of its potential interaction part­ ners while excluding others , imparting specificity to biochemical processes . For example , a condensate could concentrate an enzyme with a particular subset of its possible substrates , conferring specificity to a potentially promiscuous reaction ( FIG . 5a ) . Similarly , a condensate could concentrate ( and thus accelerate the chemis­ try of ) molecules that act in one particular biological pathway while excluding components of alternative pathways , controlling biochemical flux . In this way , condensates could act analogously to classical scaf­ folding molecules in signalling pathways , which bind multiple , selected pathway components simultaneously to provide spatial proximity and structural organiza­ tion , thus enhancing flux and selectivity 106 . Consistent with this idea , clustering the metabolic branch point enzyme carB with one downstream enzyme , pyrB , but not another , argI , was shown to direct the metabolic flux of carbamoyl phosphate to favour pyrimidine and dis­ favour arginine in Escherichia coli 107 . Many metabolic enzymes localize to condensate­like puncta in response to nutrient starvation , suggesting that such effects may be generally important in metabolic control 108 , 109 . In a related example from mammalian cells , reconsti­ tuted T cell receptor signalling clusters concentrate kinases but exclude phosphatases , stabilizing the phosphorylation­dependent clusters 27 . Sequestration of molecules . Condensates could also in principle sequester molecules , thus effectively inhibiting their activity outside the structure ( FIG . 5c ) , as has been suggested for sequestration of the transcription factor death domain­associated protein ( DAXX ) in PML Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology a Reaction speciﬁcity c Reaction inhibition by sequestration b Reaction kinetics Maturation Phaseseparation Time Time Time Time Time d Concentration buﬀering Enzyme : Reactionsubstrate : Product : 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 ↑ ↑ Figure 5 | Functional consequences of forming biomolecular condensates . a | Concentrating reactants inside condensates can increase reaction kinetics and specificities . An enzyme with two alternative substrates is shown . Colocalizing the enzyme with one of its substrates within the condensed phase ( black circle ) accelerates rates of reaction with that substrate . Additionally , excluding the substrate of an alternative pathway can direct a specific reaction to occur inside condensates . b | Changes in the physical properties of cellular bodies can affect the kinetics of reactions . For example , increased viscosity of cellular bodies by fibre formation ( or other mechanisms of maturation , see main text and FIG . 4 ) , may slow the diffusion of molecules , decreasing reaction kinetics . c | Sequestering molecules inside condensates can prevent reactions involving partners present in the bulk phase . This sequestration could control substrate flux through various pathways . d | The concentration of essential condensate components in the bulk phase is maintained at the phase separation threshold ( defined by the solubility limit of the molecule ) . Thus , the concentration of these components in the bulk phase can be maintained despite fluctuations in expression or degradation . R E V I E W S 10 | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION www . nature . com / nrm © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Partition coefficients Measures the enrichment of chemical species into the condensed phase of a two - phase system . Mathematically , the partition coefficient is defined as the ratio of concentration of the species in the condensed phase to that in the dilute phase . bodies 110 . Stress and RNA transport granules have been ascribed similar storage functions 2 . An important con­ sideration for such models is that for sequestration to be effective , most copies of the desired species must be captured in the condensate . As one type of condensate typically constitutes only 1 – 2 % of the cellular volume ( A . A . H . and M . K . R . , unpublished observations ) , strong inhibition ( high depletion of the molecule from the surrounding nucleoplasm or cytoplasm ) would require very high partition coefficients for the sequestered com­ ponent . Further quantitative analyses of condensates will be necessary to test these sequestration models . Buffering cellular concentration of molecules . Once a phase­separated structure has formed , the volume of the condensed phase will grow as more scaffold com­ ponents are added to the system ; however , the scaffold component concentration in the surrounding solution will be maintained at the solubility threshold value ( FIG . 5d ) . This phenomenon could be used to buffer against biological fluctuations ( for example , in gene expression ) , making certain pathways more robust to noise or repressing pathways that require noise for their proper function 111 . Controlling function through dynamic regulation of phase separation . One important advantage of phase­separated structures is that all these potential functions can be switched on and off extremely rap­ idly by controlling the formation and dissolution of a condensed phase . At the solubility limit of a molecule , even minute changes in a physical parameter ( such as concentration or temperature ) can induce sharp phase transitions . For example , changes of 1 °C can cause con­ densation or dissolution of BuGZ , DDX4 , hnRNPA1 or FUS droplets 23 , 35 , 42 . Modest changes in salt concentration can have similar effects 23 , 43 . In addition , as described above , condensate composition can also be regulated in a switch­like fashion with small changes in relative stoichiometries of scaffold components . In conclusion , the biochemical environment within biomolecular condensates may be fundamentally differ­ ent from that in the surrounding cytoplasm or nucleo­ plasm , and this difference may endow the cells with unique strategies for regulating cellular reactions . Conclusions and perspectives Research in the past several years has made significant strides towards understanding the molecular mech­ anisms that underlie the formation , regulation and function of biomolecular condensates . Many of these structures appear to form through liquid – liquid phase separation , driven by interactions of multivalent mol­ ecules . This mechanism naturally leads to routes to control the assembly and disassembly , composition and physical properties of condensates . These routes in turn have implications for the biochemistry that occurs within them and consequently their cellular functions . The phase boundary allows molecules to be concen­ trated within condensates while continuously exchang­ ing with the surroundings , without the complications of transport through a membranous barrier . Therefore , composition of condensates can be regulated in a more flexible manner than that of classic organelles and with­ out specialized molecules and signals for import and export . For example , a more general mechanism , such as charge , can be used to target certain molecules to specific phases 27 even in the absence of high­affinity binding interactions . Furthermore , components within condensates can freely diffuse , providing ideal condi­ tions to regulate the rates of biochemical reactions while spatially constraining them . Given that cells can form compartments by phase separation , why would cells need intracellular mem­ branes at all ? Membrane­bound compartments can provide long­term stability that may be difficult to maintain with condensates because the local environ­ ment of a condensate is constantly changing owing to fluctuations in , for example , gene expression and mol­ ecule turnover . For instance , homeostatic reactions that are ongoing require long­term separation from the bulk cytoplasm . In addition to long­term storage , cytotoxic reactions need to be kept structurally separate to protect the integrity of the surrounding cytoplasm or nucleo­ plasm . Finally , very small molecules , such as ions , will be difficult to retain inside condensate . For example , a pH gradient could not be stably maintained with­ out a membrane . Thus , these two ways of organizing a cell — membranes or phase separation — are comple­ mentary and allow maximal possibilities in organizing cellular contents . Many important questions remain to be addressed regarding biomolecular condensates . Most importantly , we do not understand in most cases what biochemical or cellular functions uniquely emerge from organizing molecules into such structures . In many cases we can infer function from the collection of condensate com­ ponents , but we do not understand how the activities of those components change by virtue of being in the structure rather than being more uniformly distributed in the cell . Where examined , the phenotypes result­ ing from the disruption of condensates are relatively subtle and the structures do not appear to be essential for the viability of cells or organisms 112 – 115 . However , bio molecular condensates are evolutionarily con­ served , suggesting that they do have important func­ tional roles , perhaps in response to particular stimuli or stresses . We also do not understand the relationship between the microscopic properties of the component mol­ ecules and the macroscopic properties of condensates . Furthermore , it is not known how the latter relate to biochemical and cellular functions , or if cells regulate these properties to functional effect . Although at low resolution many biomolecular condensates appear to be homogeneous , as described above , electron microscopy and super­resolution light microscopy have both indicated that many of these condensates contain internal organization at multi­ ple scales 52 , 92 – 94 . Does this organization occur in other condensates , and , in general , how does it arise ? Is it dynamically controlled ? Is it functionally important ? R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 11 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . What are all of the factors that control the composi­ tion of a given biomolecular condensate ? We have dis­ cussed the importance of direct binding interactions and electrostatic effects , but are there other consider­ ations , perhaps related to active processes ? What do we need to know about a condensate ( or even a simplified phase­separated droplet ) to quantitatively predict how other molecules will partition into it ? How is composi­ tion finely tuned so that distinct condensate can coexist in a cell with shared components but functional differ­ ences ? Is there a sequence­ or structure­based code for recruiting IDRs into phase­separated droplets ? Does the idea that condensates are generated through phase separation and multivalent assemblies have implications for disease , and could this know­ ledge enable novel clinical opportunities ? Existing data suggest that condensates may lie across a contin­ uum of material and compositional states . Moreover , aberrations in this natural spectrum , some of which may involve misregulation of fibre formation , are implicated in neurodegeneration . How do these aberrations affect cell physiology ? This instance is probably only one of many whereby a mechanistic understanding of biomolecular condensates could have medical implications . Finally , what other cellular structures might be organized by phase separation ? In principle , any system composed of interactions between multivalent entities has the propensity to phase separate under appropriate solvent conditions . Chromatin biology is an intriguing area of cell biology that is enriched in multivalent inter­ actions . Chromatin can be considered as long arrays of nucleosomes modified with specific marks on their com­ ponent histones . These marks are read by specific modu­ lar domains that also often appear in multivalent arrays in chromatin­binding proteins . Thus , it seems reason­ able to infer that modified nucleosomes and histone tail readers may phase separate and that this process could affect aspects of chromatin organization and function . Addressing these questions is likely to require new technologies and new conceptual approaches , drawing on disciplines ranging from genetics to biochemistry to physics . The answers to these questions promise to explain how nanometre­scale molecules can give rise to micron­scale cellular organization and the function of this organization in biology . 1 . Mao , Y . S . , Zhang , B . & Spector , D . L . Biogenesis and function of nuclear bodies . Trends Genet . 27 , 295 – 306 ( 2011 ) . 2 . Decker , C . J . & Parker , R . P‑Bodies and stress granules : possible roles in the control of translation and mRNA degradation . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 4 , a012286 ( 2012 ) . 3 . Wu , H . Higher‑order assemblies in a new paradigm of signal transduction . Cell 153 , 287 – 292 ( 2013 ) . 4 . Pederson , T . The nucleolus . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 , a000638 ( 2011 ) . 5 . Dundr , M . et al . In vivo kinetics of Cajal body components . J . Cell Biol . 164 , 831 – 842 ( 2004 ) . 6 . Phair , R . D . & Misteli , T . High mobility of proteins in the mammalian cell nucleus . Nature 404 , 604 – 609 ( 2000 ) . 7 . Weidtkamp‑Peters , S . et al . Dynamics of component exchange at PML nuclear bodies . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 2731 – 2743 ( 2008 ) . 8 . Platani , M . , Goldberg , I . , Swedlow , J . R . & Lamond , A . I . In vivo analysis of Cajal body movement , separation , and joining in live human cells . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 1561 – 1574 ( 2000 ) . 9 . Shaw , P . J . & Jordan , E . G . The nucleolus . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 11 , 93 – 121 ( 1995 ) . 10 . Fu , L . et al . Nuclear aggresomes form by fusion of PML‑associated aggregates . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 4905 – 4917 ( 2005 ) . 11 . Chen , Y . ‑C . M . , Kappel , C . , Beaudouin , J . , Eils , R . & Spector , D . L . Live cell dynamics of promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies upon entry into and exit from mitosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 3147 – 3162 ( 2008 ) . 12 . Dellaire , G . , Ching , R . W . , Dehghani , H . , Ren , Y . & Bazett‑Jones , D . P . The number of PML nuclear bodies increases in early S phase by a fission mechanism . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 1026 – 1033 ( 2006 ) . 13 . Brangwynne , C . P . , Mitchison , T . J . & Hyman , A . A . Active liquid‑like behavior of nucleoli determines their size and shape in Xenopus laevis oocytes . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 4334 – 4339 ( 2011 ) . Demonstrates that nucleoli , similar to P granules , behave as phase - separated liquids , indicating the generality of the behaviour . 14 . Brangwynne , C . P . et al . Germline P granules are liquid droplets that localize by controlled dissolution / condensation . Science 324 , 1729 – 1732 ( 2009 ) . Shows that P granules behave as phase - separated liquids , providing a physical mechanism to explain condensate formation . 15 . Saha , S . et al . Polar positioning of phase‑separated liquid compartments in cells regulated by an mRNA competition mechanism . Cell 166 , 1572 – 1584 ( 2016 ) . 16 . Patel , A . et al . A liquid‑to‑solid phase transition of the ALS protein FUS accelerated by disease mutation . Cell 162 , 1066 – 1077 ( 2015 ) . 17 . Altmeyer , M . et al . Liquid demixing of intrinsically disordered proteins is seeded by poly ( ADP‑ribose ) . Nat . Commun . 6 , 8088 ( 2015 ) . 18 . Hyman , A . A . & Brangwynne , C . P . Beyond stereospecificity : liquids and mesoscale organization of cytoplasm . Dev . Cell 21 , 14 – 16 ( 2011 ) . 19 . Hyman , A . A . , Weber , C . A . & Jülicher , F . Liquid – liquid phase separation in biology . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 30 , 39 – 58 ( 2014 ) . 20 . Li , P . et al . Phase transitions in the assembly of multivalent signalling proteins . Nature 483 , 336 – 340 ( 2012 ) . The assembly of multivalent signalling proteins can promote phase separation , thus providing a molecular mechanism to explain biomolecular condensate formation and a biochemical route to understand the process . 21 . King , O . D . , Gitler , A . D . & Shorter , J . The tip of the iceberg : RNA‑binding proteins with prion‑like domains in neurodegenerative disease . Brain Res . 1462 , 61 – 80 ( 2012 ) . 22 . Han , T . W . et al . Cell‑free formation of RNA granules : bound RNAs identify features and components of cellular assemblies . Cell 149 , 768 – 779 ( 2012 ) . Demonstrates that disordered , low complexity sequences from proteins in RNA granules can form amyloid - like fibres and hydrogels , providing a closely related mechanism to explain biomolecular condensate formation . 23 . Nott , T . J . et al . Phase transition of a disordered nuage protein generates environmentally responsive membraneless organelles . Mol . Cell 57 , 936 – 947 ( 2015 ) . Disordered , low complexity sequences can phase separate , expanding the range of molecules showing this behaviour . 24 . Mitrea , D . M . et al . Nucleophosmin integrates within the nucleolus via multi‑modal interactions with proteins displaying R‑rich linear motifs and rRNA . eLife 5 , 13571 ( 2016 ) . 25 . Flory , P . J . Principles of Polymer Chemistry ( Cornell Univ . Press , 1953 ) . 26 . Banjade , S . & Rosen , M . K . Phase transitions of multivalent proteins can promote clustering of membrane receptors . eLife 3 , e04123 ( 2014 ) . Shows that multivalency - driven phase separation can also explain the clustering of membrane receptors . 27 . Su , X . et al . Phase separation of signaling molecules promotes T cell receptor signal transduction . Science 352 , 595 – 599 ( 2016 ) . Demonstrates that phase separation of multivalent proteins in the T cell receptor signalling pathway drives the formation of signalling clusters in cells ; phase separation also promotes actin assembly , protects the signalling molecules from inactivation by phosphatases and probably activates the intracellular MAPK cascade . 28 . Fromm , S . A . et al . In vitro reconstitution of a cellular phase‑transition process that involves the mRNA decapping machinery . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 53 , 7354 – 7359 ( 2014 ) . 29 . Zeng , M . et al . Phase transition in postsynaptic densities underlies formation of synaptic complexes and synaptic plasticity . Cell 166 , 1163 – 1175 . e12 ( 2016 ) . 30 . Banani , S . F . et al . Compositional control of phase‑separated cellular bodies . Cell 166 , 651 – 663 ( 2016 ) . Describes a simple model for controlling biomolecular condensate composition . 31 . Foo , C . T . S . W . P . , Lee , J . S . , Mulyasasmita , W . , Parisi‑Amon , A . & Heilshorn , S . C . Two‑component protein‑engineered physical hydrogels for cell encapsulation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 22067 – 22072 ( 2009 ) . 32 . Mulyasasmita , W . , Lee , J . S . & Heilshorn , S . C . Molecular‑level engineering of protein physical hydrogels for predictive sol – gel phase behavior . Biomacromolecules 12 , 3406 – 3411 ( 2011 ) . 33 . Brangwynne , C . P . , Tompa , P . & Pappu , R . V . Polymer physics of intracellular phase transitions . Nat . Phys . 11 , 899 – 904 ( 2015 ) . 34 . Elbaum‑Garfinkle , S . et al . The disordered P granule protein LAF‑1 drives phase separation into droplets with tunable viscosity and dynamics . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 112 , 7189 – 7194 ( 2015 ) . 35 . Molliex , A . et al . Phase separation by low complexity domains promotes stress granule assembly and drives pathological fibrillization . Cell 163 , 123 – 133 ( 2015 ) . 36 . Burke , K . A . , Janke , A . M . , Rhine , C . L . & Fawzi , N . L . Residue‑by‑residue view of in vitro FUS granules that bind the C‑terminal domain of RNA polymerase II . Mol . Cell 60 , 231 – 241 ( 2015 ) . 37 . Zhang , H . et al . RNA controls polyQ protein phase transitions . Mol . Cell 60 , 220 – 230 ( 2015 ) . 38 . Gilks , N . et al . Stress granule assembly is mediated by prion‑like aggregation of TIA‑1 . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 5383 – 5398 ( 2004 ) . R E V I E W S 12 | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION www . nature . com / nrm © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 39 . Decker , C . J . , Teixeira , D . & Parker , R . Edc3p and a glutamine / asparagine‑rich domain of Lsm4p function in processing body assembly in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Biol . 179 , 437 – 449 ( 2007 ) . 40 . Reijns , M . A . M . , Alexander , R . D . , Spiller , M . P . & Beggs , J . D . A role for Q / N‑rich aggregation‑prone regions in P‑body localization . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 2463 – 2472 ( 2008 ) . 41 . Kato , M . et al . Cell‑free formation of RNA granules : low complexity sequence domains form dynamic fibers within hydrogels . Cell 149 , 753 – 767 ( 2012 ) . 42 . Jiang , H . et al . Phase transition of spindle‑associated protein regulate spindle apparatus assembly . Cell 163 , 108 – 122 ( 2015 ) . 43 . Lin , Y . , Protter , D . S . W . , Rosen , M . K . & Parker , R . Formation and maturation of phase‑separated liquid droplets by RNA‑binding proteins . Mol . Cell 60 , 208 – 219 ( 2015 ) . 44 . Pak , C . W . et al . Sequence determinants of intracellular phase separation by complex coacervation of a disordered protein . Mol . Cell 63 , 72 – 85 ( 2016 ) . 45 . Crick , S . L . , Jayaraman , M . , Frieden , C . , Wetzel , R . & Pappu , R . V . Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy shows that monomeric polyglutamine molecules form collapsed structures in aqueous solutions . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 16764 – 16769 ( 2006 ) . 46 . Crick , S . L . , Ruff , K . M . , Garai , K . , Frieden , C . & Pappu , R . V . Unmasking the roles of N − and C‑terminal flanking sequences from exon 1 of huntingtin as modulators of polyglutamine aggregation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 20075 – 20080 ( 2013 ) . 47 . Das , R . K . & Pappu , R . V . Conformations of intrinsically disordered proteins are influenced by linear sequence distributions of oppositely charged residues . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 13392 – 13397 ( 2013 ) . 48 . Kwon , I . et al . Phosphorylation‑regulated binding of RNA polymerase II to fibrous polymers of low‑ complexity domains . Cell 155 , 1049 – 1060 ( 2013 ) . 49 . Xiang , S . et al . The LC domain of hnRNPA2 adopts similar conformations in hydrogel polymers , liquid‑like droplets , and nuclei . Cell 163 , 829 – 839 ( 2015 ) . References 16 , 35 , 43 and 49 demonstrate that initial phase separation of disordered proteins is followed over time by maturation or hardening into fibrous solids , uniting phase separation and fibre formation mechanisms of biomolecular condensate formation under a common framework . 50 . Buchan , J . R . , Kolaitis , R . ‑M . , Taylor , J . P . & Parker , R . Eukaryotic stress granules are cleared by autophagy and Cdc48 / VCP function . Cell 153 , 1461 – 1474 ( 2013 ) . 51 . Conicella , A . E . , Zerze , G . H . , Mittal , J . & Fawzi , N . L . ALS mutations disrupt phase separation mediated by α ‑helical structure in the TDP‑43 low‑complexity C‑terminal domain . Structure 24 , 1537 – 1549 ( 2016 ) . 52 . Jain , S . et al . ATPase‑modulated stress granules contain a diverse proteome and substructure . Cell 164 , 487 – 498 ( 2016 ) . 53 . Quiroz , F . G . & Chilkoti , A . Sequence heuristics to encode phase behaviour in intrinsically disordered protein polymers . Nat . Mater . 14 , 1164 – 1171 ( 2015 ) . 54 . Weber , S . C . & Brangwynne , C . P . Inverse size scaling of the nucleolus by a concentration‑dependent phase transition . Curr . Biol . 25 , 641 – 646 ( 2015 ) . 55 . Shevtsov , S . P . & Dundr , M . Nucleation of nuclear bodies by RNA . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 167 – 173 ( 2011 ) . 56 . Kaiser , T . E . , Intine , R . V . & Dundr , M . De novo formation of a subnuclear body . Science 322 , 1713 – 1717 ( 2008 ) . 57 . Mao , Y . S . , Sunwoo , H . , Zhang , B . & Spector , D . L . Direct visualization of the co‑transcriptional assembly of a nuclear body by noncoding RNAs . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 95 – 101 ( 2011 ) . 58 . Chung , I . , Leonhardt , H . & Rippe , K . De novo assembly of a PML nuclear subcompartment occurs through multiple pathways and induces telomere elongation . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 3603 – 3618 ( 2011 ) . 59 . Berry , J . , Weber , S . C . , Vaidya , N . , Haataja , M . & Brangwynne , C . P . RNA transcription modulates phase transition‑driven nuclear body assembly . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 112 , E5237 – E5245 ( 2015 ) . 60 . Hancock , R . A role for macromolecular crowding effects in the assembly and function of compartments in the nucleus . J . Struct . Biol . 146 , 281 – 290 ( 2004 ) . 61 . Dellaire , G . , Eskiw , C . , Dehghani , H . , Ching , R . & Bazett‑Jones , D . Mitotic accumulations of PML protein contribute to the re‑establishment of PML nuclear bodies in G1 . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 1034 – 1042 ( 2006 ) . 62 . Saha , S . et al . Polar positioning of phase‑separated liquid compartments in cells regulated by an mRNA competition mechanism . Cell 166 , 1572 – 1584 . e16 ( 2016 ) . 63 . Grousl , T . et al . Robust heat shock induces eIF2 α ‑phosphorylation‑independent assembly of stress granules containing eIF3 and 40S ribosomal subunits in budding yeast , Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 2078 – 2088 ( 2009 ) . 64 . Buchan , J . R . & Parker , R . Eukaryotic stress granules : the ins and outs of translation . Mol . Cell 36 , 932 – 941 ( 2009 ) . 65 . Hoyle , N . P . , Castelli , L . M . , Campbell , S . G . , Holmes , L . E . A . & Ashe , M . P . Stress‑dependent relocalization of translationally primed mRNPs to cytoplasmic granules that are kinetically and spatially distinct from P‑bodies . J . Cell Biol . 179 , 65 – 74 ( 2007 ) . 66 . Louria‑Hayon , I . et al . The promyelocytic leukemia protein protects p53 from Mdm2‑mediated inhibition and degradation . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 33134 – 33141 ( 2003 ) . 67 . Ishov , A . M . et al . PML is critical for ND10 formation and recruits the PML‑interacting protein Daxx to this nuclear structure when modified by SUMO‑1 . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 221 – 234 ( 1999 ) . 68 . Hamill , D . R . , Severson , A . F . , Carter , J . C . & Bowerman , B . Centrosome maturation and mitotic spindle assembly in C . elegans require SPD‑5 , a protein with multiple coiled‑coil domains . Dev . Cell 3 , 673 – 684 ( 2002 ) . 69 . Kedersha , N . L . , Gupta , M . , Li , W . , Miller , I . & Anderson , P . RNA‑binding proteins TIA‑1 and TIAR link the phosphorylation of eIF‑2 α to the assembly of mammalian stress granules . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 1431 – 1442 ( 1999 ) . 70 . Kroschwald , S . et al . Promiscuous interactions and protein disaggregases determine the material state of stress‑inducible RNP granules . eLife 4 , e06807 ( 2015 ) . 71 . Feric , M . et al . Coexisting liquid phases underlie nucleolar subcompartments . Cell 165 , 1686 – 1697 ( 2016 ) . Demonstrates the reconstitution of multilayered phase - separated liquid structures from simple mixtures of recombinant proteins , showing that such complexity can be achieved in a simple fashion . 72 . Boke , E . et al . Amyloid‑like self‑assembly of a cellular compartment . Cell 166 , 637 – 650 ( 2016 ) . 73 . Fändrich , M . , Fletcher , M . A . & Dobson , C . M . Amyloid fibrils from muscle myoglobin . Nature 410 , 165 – 166 ( 2001 ) . 74 . Vitalis , A . , Wang , X . & Pappu , R . V . Quantitative characterization of intrinsic disorder in polyglutamine : insights from analysis based on polymer theories . Biophys . J . 93 , 1923 – 1937 ( 2007 ) . 75 . Halfmann , R . A glass menagerie of low complexity sequences . Curr . Opin . Struc Biol . 38 , 9 – 16 ( 2016 ) . 76 . Watanabe , H . Viscoelasticity and dynamics of entangled polymers . Prog . Polym . Sci . 24 , 1253 – 1403 ( 1999 ) . 77 . Ramaswami , M . , Taylor , J . P . & Parker , R . Altered ribostasis : RNA – protein granules in degenerative disorders . Cell 154 , 727 – 736 ( 2013 ) . 78 . Li , Y . R . , King , O . D . , Shorter , J . & Gitler , A . D . Stress granules as crucibles of ALS pathogenesis . J . Cell Biol . 201 , 361 – 372 ( 2013 ) . 79 . Weber , S . C . & Brangwynne , C . P . Getting RNA and protein in phase . Cell 149 , 1188 – 1191 ( 2012 ) . 80 . Wolozin , B . Physiological protein aggregation run amuck : stress granules and the genesis of neurodegenerative disease . Discov . Med . 17 , 47 – 52 ( 2014 ) . 81 . Aguzzi , A . & Altmeyer , M . Phase separation : linking cellular compartmentalization to disease . Trends Cell Biol . 26 , 547 – 558 ( 2016 ) . 82 . Alberti , S . & Hyman , A . A . Are aberrant phase transitions a driver of cellular aging ? BioEssays 38 , 959 – 968 ( 2016 ) . 83 . Oakes , C . C . , La Salle , S . , Smiraglia , D . J . , Robaire , B . & Trasler , J . M . A unique configuration of genome‑wide DNA methylation patterns in the testis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 228 – 233 ( 2007 ) . 84 . Feric , M . & Brangwynne , C . P . A nuclear F‑actin scaffold stabilizes ribonucleoprotein droplets against gravity in large cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 , 1253 – 1259 ( 2013 ) . 85 . Kaizuka , Y . , Douglass , A . D . , Varma , R . , Dustin , M . L . & Vale , R . D . Mechanisms for segregating T cell receptor and adhesion molecules during immunological synapse formation in Jurkat T cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 20296 – 20301 ( 2007 ) . 86 . Yi , J . , Wu , X . S . , Crites , T . & Hammer , J . A . Actin retrograde flow and actomyosin II arc contraction drive receptor cluster dynamics at the immunological synapse in Jurkat T cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 23 , 834 – 852 ( 2012 ) . 87 . Lee , C . F . , Brangwynne , C . P . , Gharakhani , J . , Hyman , A . A . & Jülicher , F . Spatial organization of the cell cytoplasm by position‑dependent phase separation . Phys . Rev . Lett . 111 , 088101 ( 2013 ) . 88 . Zwicker , D . , Hyman , A . A . & Jülicher , F . Suppression of Ostwald ripening in active emulsions . Phys . Rev . E 92 , 012317 ( 2015 ) . 89 . Hagan , M . F . & Baskaran , A . Emergent self‑ organization in active materials . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 38 , 74 – 80 ( 2016 ) . 90 . Popkin , G . The physics of life . Nature 529 , 16 – 18 ( 2016 ) . 91 . Sanchez , T . , Chen , D . T . N . , DeCamp , S . J . , Heymann , M . & Dogic , Z . Spontaneous motion in hierarchically assembled active matter . Nature 491 , 431 – 434 ( 2012 ) . 92 . Wang , J . T . et al . Regulation of RNA granule dynamics by phosphorylation of serine‑rich , intrinsically disordered proteins in C . elegans . eLife 3 , e04591 ( 2014 ) . 93 . Lang , M . et al . Three‑dimensional organization of promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 392 – 400 ( 2010 ) . 94 . Boisvert , F . ‑M . , van Koningsbruggen , S . , Navascués , J . & Lamond , A . I . The multifunctional nucleolus . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 574 – 585 ( 2007 ) . 95 . Monneron , A . & Bernhard , W . Fine structural organization of the interphase nucleus in some mammalian cells . J . Ultrastruct . Res . 27 , 266 – 288 ( 1969 ) . 96 . Hyman , A . A . & Simons , K . Cell biology . Beyond oil and water — phase transitions in cells . Science 337 , 1047 – 1049 ( 2012 ) . 97 . Tatomer , D . C . et al . Concentrating pre‑mRNA processing factors in the histone locus body facilitates efficient histone mRNA biogenesis . J . Cell Biol . 213 , 557 – 570 ( 2016 ) . 98 . Strzelecka , M . et al . Coilin‑dependent snRNP assembly is essential for zebrafish embryogenesis . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 17 , 403 – 409 ( 2010 ) . 99 . Novotny , I . , Blazikova , M . , Stanek , D . , Herman , P . & Malinsky , J . In vivo kinetics of U4 / U6 · U5 tri‑snRNP formation in Cajal bodies . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 , 513 – 523 ( 2011 ) . 100 . Strulson , C . A . , Molden , R . C . , Keating , C . D . & Bevilacqua , P . C . RNA catalysis through compartmentalization . Nat . Chem . 4 , 941 – 946 ( 2012 ) . 101 . Deryusheva , S . & Gall , J . G . Small Cajal body‑specific RNAs of Drosophila function in the absence of Cajal bodies . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 5250 – 5259 ( 2009 ) . 102 . Davis , B . W . et al . Colocalization and sequential enzyme activity in aqueous biphasic systems : experiments and modeling . Biophys . J . 109 , 2182 – 2194 ( 2015 ) . 103 . Kuznetsova , I . M . , Zaslavsky , B . Y . , Breydo , L . , Turoverov , K . K . & Uversky , V . N . Beyond the excluded volume effects : mechanistic complexity of the crowded milieu . Molecules 20 , 1377 – 1409 ( 2015 ) . 104 . Cai , L . ‑H . , Panyukov , S . & Rubinstein , M . Mobility of nonsticky nanoparticles in polymer liquids . Macromolecules 44 , 7853 – 7863 ( 2011 ) . 105 . Elbaum‑Garfinkle , S . & Brangwynne , C . P . Liquids , fibers , and gels : the many phases of neurodegeneration . Dev . Cell 35 , 531 – 532 ( 2015 ) . 106 . Good , M . C . , Zalatan , J . G . & Lim , W . A . Scaffold proteins : hubs for controlling the flow of cellular information . Science 332 , 680 – 686 ( 2011 ) . 107 . Castellana , M . et al . Enzyme clustering accelerates processing of intermediates through metabolic channeling . Nat . Biotechnol . 32 , 1011 – 1018 ( 2014 ) . 108 . O’Connell , J . D . , Zhao , A . , Ellington , A . D . & Marcotte , E . M . Dynamic reorganization of metabolic enzymes into intracellular bodies . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 28 , 89 – 111 ( 2012 ) . 109 . Noree , C . , Monfort , E . , Shiau , A . K . & Wilhelm , J . E . Common regulatory control of CTP synthase enzyme activity and filament formation . Mol . Biol . Cell 25 , 2282 – 2290 ( 2014 ) . 110 . Li , H . et al . Sequestration and inhibition of Daxx‑mediated transcriptional repression by PML . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 , 1784 – 1796 ( 2000 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 13 © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 111 . Eldar , A . & Elowitz , M . B . Functional roles for noise in genetic circuits . Nature 467 , 167 – 173 ( 2010 ) . 112 . Kshirsagar , M . & Parker , R . Identification of Edc3p as an enhancer of mRNA decapping in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Genetics 166 , 729 – 739 ( 2004 ) . 113 . Dunckley , T . & Parker , R . The DCP2 protein is required for mRNA decapping in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and contains a functional MutT motif . EMBO J . 18 , 5411 – 5422 ( 1999 ) . 114 . Bernardi , R . & Pandolfi , P . P . Role of PML and the PML‑nuclear body in the control of programmed cell death . Oncogene 22 , 9048 – 9057 ( 2003 ) . 115 . Nakagawa , S . , Naganuma , T . , Shioi , G . & Hirose , T . Paraspeckles are subpopulation‑specific nuclear bodies that are not essential in mice . J . Cell Biol . 193 , 31 – 39 ( 2011 ) . 116 . Dill , K . A . & Bromberg , S . Molecular Driving Forces . ( Garland Science , 2011 ) . 117 . Flory , P . J . Thermodynamics of high polymer solutions . J . Chem . Phys . 10 , 51 ( 1942 ) . 118 . Griffin , E . E . , Odde , D . J . & Seydoux , G . Regulation of the MEX‑5 gradient by a spatially segregated kinase / phosphatase cycle . Cell 146 , 955 – 968 ( 2011 ) . 119 . Stockmayer , W . Molecular distribution in condensation polymers . J . Polymer Sci . 9 , 69 – 71 ( 1952 ) . 120 . Cohen , R . & Benedek , G . Equilibrium and kinetic theory of polymerization and the sol – gel transition . J . Phys . Chem . 86 , 3696 – 3714 ( 1982 ) . 121 . Huggins , M . L . Solutions of long chain compounds . J . Chem . Phys . 9 , 440 ( 1941 ) . 122 . Semenov , A . & Rubinstein , M . Thermoreversible gelation in solutions of associative polymers . 1 . Statics . Macromolecules 31 , 1373 – 1385 ( 1998 ) . Acknowledgements The authors thank R . Duronio and C . Weber for discussion and critical comments on the Review . Research on multivalency‑driven phase separation is supported in the Hyman laboratory by the Max Planck Society , and in the Rosen laboratory by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute , the Welch Foundation ( I‑1544 ) and a Sara and Frank McKnight Graduate Fellowship ( to S . F . B . ) . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing interests . SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION See online article : S1 ( movie ) | S2 ( movie ) | S3 ( movie ) | S4 ( movie ) | S5 ( box ) | S6 ( table ) ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF R E V I E W S 14 | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION www . nature . com / nrm © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved .