THE IMPACT OF DATA INFORMATION QUALITY OF XBRL - BASED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS ON NONPROFESSIONAL INVESTORS’ DECISION MAKING Arif Perdana , UQ Business School , The University of Queensland . , a . perdana @ business . uq . ed . au Abstract XBRL has the ability to provide financial statements with improved data information quality ( DIQ ) . Contextual and representational DIQ are relevant to perceptual and decision factors of nonprofessional investors when they interact with XBRL - based financial statements and make investment decisions . The author posits that XBRL - based financial statements with improved contextual and representational DIQ will positively influence nonprofessional investors’ DIQ perceptions , resulting in better alignment with decision factors ( i . e . , uncertainty , heuristic , task , technology , and individual characteristics ) to achieve better informed investment decisions . This research will use a web - based experiment to empirically test the proposed hypotheses . The results of this research are expected to contribute to the theoretical understanding of the links between XBRL enhanced DIQ , users’ perceptions , decision factors , and investment outcome performance . Establishing whether there are links between XBRL and improved DIQ , and whether improved DIQ aligns with decision factors , will make a practical contribution by benefiting nonprofessional investors through better informed investment decisions . Keywords : eXtensible business reporting language , XBRL , data information quality , investment decision making , nonprofessional investors . 1 INTRODUCTION Preparation , presentation and distribution of companies’ financial statements are inextricably linked with information systems and technology ( Hall , 2011 ; Bagranoff , Simkin & Norman , 2011 ) . Difficulties with processing and transforming transactions into financial statements arising from system compatibility , presentation requirements , and timely distribution can be solved by utilising information technology ( IT ) . Extensible business reporting language ( XBRL ) has developed over the last decade and can help overcome such problems . XBRL is a universally accepted computer markup language that allows different information systems to communicate easily ( Hoffman & Watson , 2010 ) , produce multiple and interactive financial statements’ formats , and support the timely distribution of those statements ( Debreceny & Gray , 2001 ; Baldwin , Brown & Trinkle , 2006 ) . Aside from providing benefits to companies managing financial statements , XBRL also helps financial statement users’ enhance their ability to evaluate and analyse financial data as well as helping support their decision making performance ( Scarlata , 2009 ) . Academics and practitioners alike recognize XBRL’s potential to benefit financial statement users ( see . , e . g . Baldwin et al . , 2006 ; Tribunella & Tribunella , 2010 ; Alles & Debreceny , 2012 ) . These benefits arise from XBRL’s capabilities to enhance data information quality ( DIQ ) via reducing information asymmetry , improving information accuracy , transparency , and timeliness ( Strand , 2001 ; Graziano , 2002 ; Willis & Sinet , 2008 ; Pinsker & Li , 2008 ; Kim , Lim , & No , 2012 ) . In addition , XBRL - based financial statements permit users to choose their preferred financial statement format , to directly search for information , to compare financial statements from different companies , to display information concisely , and to present information via graphical representations ( see , e . g . , Hodge , Kennedy & Maines , 2004 ; Pinsker & Wheeler , 2009 ; Taylor & Dzuranin , 2010 ; Arnold , Bedard , Phillips , & Sutton , 2012 ) . The author contends that XBRL equips financial statements with contextual and representational DIQ . Contextual DIQ confirms users’ expectation of retrieving and interpreting financial information ( Park & Kim , 2000 ; Lee , 2010 ) , while representational DIQ aligns financial information with users’ cognitive processing ( Vessey , 1991 ) . These two dimensions of DIQ can lead to better information acquisition and , thus , better informed investment decisions ( Jung , 2005 ) . Even though prior research has attempted to link XBRL - based financial statements to improved DIQ ( see , e . g . , Bovee , Ettredge , Srivastava , & Vasarhelyi , 2002 ; Hwang , Leem & Moon , 2008 ; Pinsker & Wheeler , 2009 ; Roohani , Furusho & Koizumi , 2009 ; Yingchun & Baohua , 2010 ; Yoon , Zo & Ciganek , 2010 ) and investigated the impact of XBRL on investment decision making ( see . , e . g . Scarlata , 2009 ; Arnold et al . , 2012 ) , questions still arise in relation to the links between XBRL , DIQ , decision factors and investment decision making . For example , how is the DIQ of the XBRL - based financial statements perceived by users , how do those statements influence decision factors and facilitate better performance when making investment decisions , and do such statements influence the willingness to invest ? These questions warrant investigation . How nonprofessional investors process financial information is indicated by an increasing body of research in this area ( see , e . g . , Elliott , Hodge , Kennedy , & Pronk , 2007 ; Jurney , 2008 ; Pitre , Daigle & Pinsker , 2009 ; Pinsker & Wheeler , 2009 ; Coram , 2010 ; Pinsker , 2011 ; Pitre , 2012 ; Arnold et al . , 2012 ) . Capital market authorities are also interested nonprofessional investors ( Juney , 2008 ) . This research will focus on how nonprofessional investors interact with XBRL - based financial statements and the manner in which the DIQ affects nonprofessional investors’ performance when making investment decisions . Drawing on DIQ literature , transaction cost analysis ( TCA ) , heuristic processing literature , and the task , technology , fit ( TTF ) theory , this research attempts to analyse users’ perceptions of XBRL - based financial statements’ DIQ . In particular , this research will investigate the impact of XBRL interactive financial statements on investment outcome performance ( i . e . , decision time , investment tasks accuracy , and willingness to invest ) and whether there is an alignment between XBRL interactive financial statement , decision making factors ( i . e . , uncertainty , heuristic processing , task characteristics , technology characteristics and individual characteristics ) , and investment outcome performance . TCA provides a framework to analyse both the capabilities of XBRL - based financial statements and DIQ’s ability to reduce uncertainty . XBRL’s impact on decision making performance and the ability to overcome the limitations of human information processing is examined from a heuristic information processing perspective . Finally , TTF is employed to uncover possible links between nonprofessional investors’ individual characteristics , investment tasks , and XBRL technology with DIQ to produce better informed investment decisions . The remainder of this submission proceeds as follows . Section 2 reviews relevant prior studies and develops the hypotheses . Section 3 describes the research methods . Section 4 identifies future work , and finally , section 5 presents conclusions . 2 PRIOR RESEARCH AND HYPOTHESES DEVELOPMENT 2 . 1 Extensible Business Reporting Language ( XBRL ) and Data Information Quality ( DIQ ) Over the past decade , XBRL research has appeared in academic publications ( see , e . g . , Rezaee , Elam & Sharbatoghlie , 2001 ; Malhotra & Garritt , 2004 ; Du & Roohani , 2007 ; Callaghan & Nehmer , 2009 ; Bonson , Cortijo , Escobar , Monreal , & Flores , 2010 ; Arnold et al . , 2012 ) . Additionally , several regulatory bodies and capital market authorities have encouraged ( and required ) the implementation of XBRL - based financial report filing . Generally , research and implementations of XBRL indicate that XBRL generates advantages to both financial information providers and users , allowing easier interaction with , and communication of , information to both parties . In addition , XBRL advocates claim XBRL delivers benefits to the accounting value chain , promotes the improvement of DIQ , and improves users’ performance in decision making ( Strand , 2001 ; Graziano , 2002 ; Willis & Sinet , 2008 ; Pinsker & Li , 2008 ; Scarlata , 2009 ) . The ability of XBRL to provide searchable and understandable financial statement formats leads to improvements of the DIQ . This argument aligns with the definition of DIQ , that is , the fitness of the data for users’ needs ( Neely & Cook , 2011 ) . A substantial body of research in the area of DIQ has resulted in the identification of different dimensions of DIQ ( see , e . g . , Gallagher , 1974 ; Ahituv , 1980 ; Iivari & Koskela , 1987 ; Wang & Strong , 1996 ; Wand & Wang , 1996 ) . Wang & Strong’s ( 1996 ) , study proposed fifteen DIQ dimensions ; namely , believability , accuracy , objectivity , reputation , value added , relevancy , timeliness , completeness , appropriate amount of data , interpretability , ease of understanding , representational consistency , concise representation , accessibility , and access security . Wang & Strong further classified these fifteen dimensions of DIQ into four categories : intrinsic , contextual , representational , and accessibility . Intrinsic DIQ refers to the inherent quality of the information itself ( i . e . , believability , accuracy , objectivity , and reputation ) . Contextual DIQ is associated with the fitness of the data and information to support the task being undertaken ( i . e . , value added , relevancy , timeliness , completeness , appropriate amount of data ) . Representational DIQ indicates that the information is easy to understand and to process by data consumers ( i . e . , interpretability , ease of understanding , representational consistency , and concise representation ) , and accessibility DIQ refers the information systems’ support of data and information security and accessibility ( Wang & Strong , 1996 ; Lee et al . , 2002 ) . In relation to XBRL based financial reporting and decision making , the author is particularly interested in two of the DIQ categories , namely , contextual DIQ and representational DIQ . These categories have an important association with the subjective aspects of financial statements’ DIQ ( Dourish et al . , 1993 ; Ballou & Pazer , 2003 ) . While these two DIQ categories play a pivotal role in users’ performance and decision making , there appears to be very limited research examining how these DIQ dimensions are perceived by XBRL - based financial statement users , or how better DIQ may lead to better decision making ( Wang & Strong , 1996 ) . Therefore , examining whether the presentation of XBRL - based financial statements conforms to those DIQ attributes and whether such presentation influences decision factors and subsequently improves decision making is worthy of investigation . 2 . 2 Nonprofessional Investors and Investment Decision Making Prior researchers note that nonprofessional investors possess particular characteristics , e . g . , a lack of investment experience and have little background knowledge of their investments ( Pinsker , 2007 ) , their investments assume low priorities compared to professional investors ( Pinsker & Wheeler , 2009 ) , and their decision making style often relies on unsophisticated frameworks ( Hodge & Pronk , 2006 ) . Despite their characteristics , nonprofessional investors still wield considerable influence on companies ( NYSE , 2002 ; Pitre et al . , 2009 ; Koonce , Williamson & Winchel , 2010 ) . Capital market authorities also seek to attract more nonprofessional investors ( Jurney , 2008 ) . Prior studies related to nonprofessional investors have mainly examined how financial information influences nonprofessional investors’ decision making . Findings from these studies suggested that the appropriate financial information provided to nonprofessional investors promotes better informed investment decisions ( Jurney , 2008 ) . Such information needs to conform to nonprofessional investors’ cognitive abilities and requirements to solve their investment tasks . For example , Scarlata , ( 2009 ) reported that XBRL - based financial statements helped improve nonprofessional investors practical and tactical behaviour resulting in better investment decision making . Arnold , et al . ( 2012 ) , found that nonprofessional investors more easily captured relevant information using XBRL - based financial statements . 2 . 3 Research Model and Hypothesis Development This research seeks to examine the link between XBRL , DIQ , decision factors and investment performance outcomes . The research model presented in Figure 1 illustrates this aim . Figure 1 . Research Model Data and information quality shown in Figure 1 refers to users’ contextual and representational DIQ perceptions . Contextual DIQ ( i . e . , appropriate amount of data and relevancy ) , and representational DIQ ( i . e . , ease of understanding , and representational concision ) are relevant to the user ' s perceptions of financial information content . Perceptions and expectations of DIQ are often different for each user ( Dourish et al . , 1993 , Watts , Shankaranarayanan & Even , 2009 ) . Contextual DIQ is enhanced by providing the relevant information in an easily retrievable format , which also helps enhance the information’s value . Representational DIQ is enhanced by information that is easy to process and interpret , thus , further helping to support decision making ( Lee et al . , 2002 ) . Different users have different needs and abilities to process information and , hence , investigating how XBRL - based financial statements with higher levels of contextual and representational DIQ are perceived by Investment Performance Outcomes XBRL FS Non XBRL FS Data Information Quality ( DIQ ) FS Format XBRL Interactive FS Decision Factors nonprofessional investors is central to differentiating XBRL - based financial statements from non XBRL - based financial statements . 1 Hypothesis 1 : XBRL financial statements are perceived by users to be better DIQ than non XBRL financial statements . XBRL - based interactive financial statements having higher contextual and representational DIQ are posited to deliver better information to financial statement users . Prior research has examined how contextual DIQ affects information acquisition . For example , Wu , Chuang & Joung , ( 2008 ) suggested contextual DIQ simplifies information searching and increases users’ confidence in making investment decisions . Jung ( 2005 ) found that time spent problem solving by users was substantially reduced by the presence of contextual DIQ . While contextual DIQ focuses on nonprofessional investors’ information retrieval , representational DIQ aligns more closely with their cognitive abilities . Prior studies in accounting information processing relative to individual cognition ( see , e . g . , Kelton , Pennington & Tuttle , 2010 ; Kelton & Pennington , 2012 ; Dilla , Janvrin & Jeffrey , forthcoming ) established that financial information with representational DIQ aligning with users’ mental representations , lead to improvements in decision making performance . In the following hypotheses , the author will use the term “XBRL - based interactive financial statement” to refer XBRL - based financial statements with both contextual DIQ and representational DIQ . Hypothesis 2 : Subjects who are provided with XBRL - based interactive financial statements will make better informed investment decisions than subjects who are provided with non XBRL - based financial statements . Hypothesis 2a : Subjects who are provided with XBRL - based interactive financial statements will , or perform investment tasks more accurately than subjects who are provided with non XBRL - based financial statements . Hypothesis 2b : Subjects who are provided with XBRL - based interactive financial statements will spend less time to perform investment tasks than subjects who are provided with non XBRL - based financial statements . Hypothesis 2c : Subjects who are provided with XBRL - based interactive financial statements are more willing to invest in the provided investment scenario than subjects who are provided with non XBRL - based financial statements . XBRL’s ability to enable quick information retrieval , enhance transparency , and to reduce information asymmetry , align with the dimensions of transaction cost analysis ( TCA ) . Uncertainty and bounded rationality are the two essential dimensions in TCA ( Cordella , 2006 ) . Nonprofessional investors need to consider these two dimensions when acquiring information and making decision , particularly in relation to transaction costs . Search costs , defined as ‘the cost of locating information on the opportunities for exchange’ ( Cordella , 2006 , p . 196 ) , are considered appropriate to conceive as transaction costs . Thus , the TCA framework is appropriate for this study as XBRL can help lower information search costs ( Peng , Shon & Tan , 2011 ) , reduce uncertainty ( see , e . g . , Roohani et al . , 2009 ; Bonson et al . , 2010 ; Yoon et al . , 2010 ; Kim et al . , 2012 ) , and help increase time devoted to analysing financial statements by reducing time consumed in error - prone re - inputting activities ( see , e . g . , Pinsker , Gara & Karim , 2005 ; Farewell , 2006 ; Bartley , Chen & Taylor , 2011 ) . Hypothesis 3 : Subjects who are provided with XBRL - based interactive financial statements exhibit lower uncertainty , thereby resulting in better investment performance outcomes than subjects who are provided with non XBRL - based financial statements . Heuristic processing is likely to occur in decision making activity ( Tversky & Kahneman , 1974 ) . Heuristic information processing appears to be used by both professional and nonprofessional investors . Substantial quantities of financial information compel professional and nonprofessional investors to perform heuristic information processing . Professional investors appear to undertake their 1 For example , PDF - based financial statements . information heuristic processing via practical and tactical action , while nonprofessional investors appear to simplify and limit their information acquisition , thus making decisions with little cognitive effort ( Kleinmuntz & Schkade , 1993 ; Monti , Boero , Berg , Gigerenzer & Martignon , 2012 ) . Thus , professional investors’ heuristic information processing appears better developed than that of nonprofessional investors . Professional investors heuristic processing is characterized by their skill to combine prior knowledge , investment tasks and financial information clues , and to search information directly , thus accelerating their investment decision making ( Hunton & McEwen , 1997 ; Scarlata , 2009 ) . Scarlata ( 2009 ) , found XBRL to be capable of mitigating the limitations of nonprofessional investors’ information processing . The author argues that XBRL - based interactive financial statements will help nonprofessional investors undertake financial analyses more like professional investors and , therefore , make better informed investment decisions . Hypothesis 4 : Subjects who are provided with XBRL - based interactive financial statements will undertake better heuristic information processing leading to better investment performance outcomes than subjects who are provided with non XBRL - based financial statements . Drawing on TTF theory , tasks , technology and individuals are the three key elements in TTF theory ( Goodhue & Thompson , 1995 ) . Tasks are the actions performed by individuals to change inputs to outputs . In this study , investment tasks refer to the set of necessary activities undertaken when investment decision making . Technologies are the tools individuals use to aid their problem solving tasks . In this context , technologies are related to the use of XBRL - based interactive financial statements which individuals use to support their problem solving tasks . Prior knowledge and motivation to use technology affects individuals’ performance when they interact with technologies . Individuals in this research are nonprofessional investors ( Goodhue & Thompson , 1995 ; D’Ambra , Wilson & Akter , 2013 ) . Those using XBRL - based financial statements have a better alignment between their tasks , the technology used and the characteristics and as such will arrive at better informed decisions . Hypothesis 5 : Subjects who are provided with XBRL - based interactive financial statements will confirm the TTF is indicated by the better investment performance outcomes than subjects who are provided with non XBRL - based financial statements . Hypothesis 5a : XBRL - based interactive financial statements better align with task characteristics , resulting in better investment performance outcomes by nonprofessional investors . Hypothesis 5b : XBRL - based interactive financial statements better align with technology characteristics , resulting in better investment performance outcomes by nonprofessional investors . Hypothesis 5c : XBRL - based interactive financial statements better align with individual characteristics , resulting in better investment performance outcomes by nonprofessional investors . . 3 RESEARCH METHOD 3 . 1 Research Design Experiments will be conducted to test the proposed hypotheses . Quantitative data will be collected via laboratory experiments in which contextual and representational DIQ are manipulated . The research will use real financial data for both the XBRL - based financial statements and non XBRL - based financial statements to achieve better external validity . XBRL - based financial statements will be obtained from the SEC and accessed via www . calcbench . com 2 , while the non - XBRL - based financial statements will be PDF versions of companies’ financial statements . The author posits that these 2 Calcbench . com provides interactive XBRL - based financial statements including an interface allowing users to directly retrieve financial information and apply that information to their tasks , compare different financial statements in an appropriate format , and view graphical representations of the information . features align with DIQ dimensions of appropriate amount of data , relevancy , ease of understanding , and representational concision . These embedded features represent the DIQ dimensions . DIQ dimensions of ‘appropriate amount of data’ and ‘relevancy’ correspond with contextual DIQ , while ‘ease of understanding’ and ‘representational concision’ are associated with representational DIQ . Participants in this experiment will be randomly assigned to two groups . The XBRL - based material will be given to the treatment group , with the control group receiving PDF - based versions of the financial statements . Perceived DIQ and decision factors such as uncertainty , heuristic processing , task characteristics , technology characteristics , and individual characteristics , will be assessed via questionnaires . Investment decisions will be assessed by the measured accuracy of the investment decision tasks , the time taken to arrive at a decision , and the willingness of the participants to invest . 3 . 2 Participants Dennis & Valacich ( 2001 ) suggest the participants in experimental research should align with the supporting theory and should have characteristics appropriate to the research . As this research does not involve ethical decision making and professional judgement , postgraduate business students will be appropriate participants in this study . The use of business students in experimental research related to general cognitive abilities and financial analysis are generally considered appropriate for such tasks ( see , e . g . , Libby , Bloomfield , & Nelson , 2002 ; Elliott et al . , 2007 ; Liyanarachchi , 2007 ) . Furthermore , Elliott et al . ( 2007 ) note that business students are good analogues for nonprofessional investors . Given that this research will employ multivariate statistical analysis , a large sample size will be required to adequately test the proposed hypotheses . Approximately 20 doctoral students will be invited to participate in the pilot test and 200 postgraduate business students will be invited to the main experiment . 4 FUTURE WORK 4 . 1 Experimental Design This research will employ a web - based experiment . A dedicated URL and host will be used to operationalise the experimental material . Prior to the experiments , participants will receive an online research information sheet and consent form . Upon consent to participate , participants will complete a short demographic questionnaire . Next , the experimental material containing the XBRL - based or PDF - based financial statements will be randomly assigned to the participants . Subsequently , participants will receive investment tasks requiring them to analyse financial statements , e . g . , calculating current ratio , ROA , operating profit margin , and PE ratios ( see , e . g . , Hodge et al . , 2004 ; Cong , Du & Feng , 2008 ; Scarlata , 2009 ) . Participants will next be asked to allocate an amount of imaginary funds based on the investment fund interval provided in the experimental material ( see , e . g . , Bailey & Sawers 2012 ; Dilla et al . , forthcoming ) . After concluding their investment tasks , participants will be asked to fill in questionnaires that will collect participants’ perceptual data . These measures will be adapted from prior research , e . g . , perceived DIQ ( Lee et al . , 2002 ) ; uncertainty ( Devaraj , Fan & Kohli . , 2002 ) ; heuristic processing ( Watts et al . , 2009 ) , task characteristics , technology characteristics , and individual characteristics ( Goodhue & Thompson , 1995 ) . Figure 2 below illustrates the experimental design . Figure 2 . Experimental Design 4 . 2 Data Analysis Two types of data will be collected in this research ; quantitative data and perceptual data . The two data types will be analysed separately using applicable statistical techniques to make appropriate inferences . Independent variables ( i . e . , XBRL - based financial statements and non XBRL - based financial statements ) and dependent variables ( i . e . , decision time and investment task accuracy ) will produce quantitative data , while other variables ( i . e . , perceived DIQ , uncertainty , heuristic processing , task characteristics , technology characteristics and individual characteristics ) will produce perceptual data . Analysis of variance will be used to test Hypothesis 1 , while multivariate analysis of variance ( MANOVA ) will be used to test Hypotheses 2 , 2a , 2b , 2c . Hypotheses 3 , 4 and 5 , 5a , 5b , and 5c will be tested using multiple comparisons for path analysis . 5 CONCLUSION In this paper the author discussed the link between financial statement format , data information quality ( DIQ ) , decision factors , and investment outcome performance . This research is required to explore users’ interactions with XBRL - based financial information to confirm whether XBRL , via improved DIQ , helps users to arrive at better informed investment decision . Randomized Groups Treated Group with XBRL - based Financial Statements Control Group with non XBRL - based Financial Statements Experimental Procedures , Materials & Questionnaires Control Group Outcomes Treated Group Outcomes Outcomes Comparison References Ahituv , N . ( 1980 ) . A Systematic Approach Toward Assessing the Value of an Information System . MIS Quarterly , 4 ( 4 ) , 61 - 75 . Alles , M . G . , & Debreceny , R . S . ( 2012 ) . The Evolution and Future of XBRL Research ( Editorial ) . International Journal of Accounting Information Systems , 13 ( 2 ) , 83 – 90 . Arnold , V . , Bedard , J . C . , Phillips , J . R . , & Sutton , S . G . ( 2012 ) . The Impact of Tagging Qualitative Financial Information on Investor Decision Making : Implications for XBRL . International Journal of Accounting Information Systems , 13 ( 1 ) , 2 – 20 . Baldwin , A . A . , Brown , C . E . , & Trinkle , B . S . ( 2006 ) . XBRL : An Impacts Framework and Research Challenge . Journal of Emerging Technologies in Accounting , 3 , 97 – 116 . Bailey , W . J . , & Sawers , K . M . ( 2012 ) . In GAAP We Trust : Examining How Trust Influences Nonprofessional Investor Decisions Under Rules - Based and Principles - Based Standards . Behavioral Research in Accounting , 24 ( 1 ) , 25 - 46 . Ballou , D . P . & Pazer , H . L . ( 2003 ) . Modeling Completeness versus Consistency Tradeoffs in Information Decision Systems . IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , 15 ( 1 ) , pp . 240 - 243 . Bagranoff , N . A . , Simkin , M . G . , Norman , C . S . ( 2010 ) . Core Concepts of Accounting Information Systems , 11th edition . USA : John Willey & Sons , Inc . Bartley , J . , Chen , A . Y . S . , & Taylor , E . Z . ( 2011 ) . A Comparison of XBRL Filings with Corporate 10 - KS—Evidence from the Voluntary Filing Program . Accounting Horizons , 25 ( 2 ) , 227 - 245 . Bonson , E . , Cortijo , V . , Escobar , T . , Flores , F . , & Monreal . , S . ( 2010 ) . Solvency II and XBRL : New Rules and Technologies in Insurance Supervision . Journal of Financial Regulation and Compliance , 18 ( 2 ) , 144 - 157 . Bovee , M . , Ettredge . , M . L . , Srivastava . , R . P . , & Vasarhelyi , M . A . ( 2002 ) . Does the Year 2000 XBRL Taxonomy Accommodate Current Business Financial - Reporting Practice ? Journal of Information Systems , 16 ( 2 ) , 165 - 182 . Callaghan , J . , & Nehmer , R . ( 2009 ) . Financial and Governance Characteristics of Voluntary XBRL Adopters in the United States . International Journal of Disclosure and Governance , 6 ( 4 ) , 321 – 335 . Coram , P . J . ( 2010 ) . The Effect of Investor Sophistication on the Influence of nonfinancial Performance Indicators on Investors Judgements . Accounting and Finance , 50 , 263 - 280 . Cordella , A . ( 2006 ) . Transaction Costs and Information Systems : Does IT Add Up ? Journal of Information Technology , 21 , pp . 195 - 202 . Cong , D . , Du , H . , & Feng , J . ( 2008 ) . Does Web Syndication Technology Facilitate Investor Decision Making ? Journal of Emerging Technologies in Accounting , 5 , 143 - 159 . D ' Ambra , J . Wilson , C . S . , & Akter , A . ( 2013 ) . Application of the Task - Technology Fit Model to Structure and Evaluate the Adoption of E - Books by Academics . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 64 ( 1 ) , 48 - 64 . Debreceny , R . S . , & Gray , G . L . ( 2001 ) . The Production and Use of Semantically Rich Accounting Reports on The Internet : XML and XBRL . International Journal of Accounting Information Systems , 2 ( 4 ) , 47 – 74 . Dennis , A . R . and J . S . Valacich ( 2001 ) Conducting Experimental Research in Information Systems . Communications of the Association for Information Systems . 7 , Article 5 . Devaraj , S . , Fan , M . , Kohli , R . ( 2002 ) . Antecedents of B2C Channel Satisfaction and Preference : Validating e - Commerce Metrics . Information Systems Research . 13 ( 3 ) , 316 - 333 . Dilla , W . N . , Janvrin , D . J . , & Jeffrey , C . ( forthcoming ) . The Impact of Graphical Displays of Pro Forma Earnings Information on Professional and Nonprofessional Investors’ Earnings Judgments . Behavioral Research in Accounting , In - Press . doi : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2308 / bria - 50289 Du , H . , & Roohani , S . ( 2007 ) . Meeting Challenges and Expectations of Continuous Auditing in the Context of Independent Audits of Financial Statements . International Journal of Auditing , 11 , 133 - 146 . Dourish , P . , Belloti , V . , Mackay , W . , Ma , C . Y . ( 1993 ) . Information and Context : Lessons from a Study of Two Shared Information Systems . Proceedings of the Conference on Organizational Computing Systems , 42 - 51 . Elliott , B . , F . Hodge , J . Kennedy , and M . Pronk . 2007 . Are MBA Students A Good Proxy for Nonprofessional Investors ? The Accounting Review , 82 ( 1 ) : 139 - 168 . Farewell , S . M . ( 2006 ) . An Introduction to XBRL Through The Use of Research and Technical Assignments . Journal of Information Systems , 20 ( 1 ) , 161 - 185 . Gallagher , C . A . ( 1974 ) . Perceptions of the Value of a Management Information System . Academy of Management Journal , 17 ( 1 ) , 46 - 55 . Goodhue , D . L . , & Thompson , R . L . ( 1995 ) . Task - Technology Fit and Individual Performance . MIS Quarterly , 19 ( 2 ) , 213 - 236 . Graziano , C . M . ( 2002 ) . XBRL : Streamlining Financial Reporting . Financial Executive , November , 52 - 55 . Hall , J . A . ( 2011 ) . Accounting Information Systems , 7th edition . USA : Cengage Learning Hoffman , C . , & Watson , L . A . ( 2010 ) . XBRL® For Dummies® . Indianapolis , Indiana : Wiley Publishing , Inc . Hodge , F . D . , Kennedy , J . J . , & Maines , L . A . ( 2004 ) . Does Search - Facilitating Technology Improve the Transparency of Financial Reporting . The Accounting Review , 79 ( 3 ) , 687 - 703 . Hodge , F . , & Pronk , M . ( 2006 ) . The Impact of Expertise and Investors ' Use of Online Financial Report Information . Journal of Accounting , Auditing & Finance , 21 ( 3 ) , 267 - 292 . Hunton , J . E . , & McEwen , R . A . ( 1997 ) . An Assessment of The Relation Between Analysts’ Earnings Forecast Accuracy , Motivational Incentives and Cognitive Information Search Strategy , The Accounting Review , 72 , 497 - 5151 Hwang , J . S . , Leem , C . S . & Moon , H . J . ( 2008 ) . A Study on Relationships among Accounting Transparency , Accounting Information Transparency , and XBRL , Third 2008 International Conferences on Convergence and Hybrid Information Technology . 502 – 509 . Iivari , J & Koskela , E . ( 1987 ) . The PIOCO Model for Information Systems Design . MIS Quarterly , 11 ( 3 ) , 401 - 419 . Jung , W . ( 2005 ) . An Experimental Study of the Effects of Contextual and Representational Data Quality on Decision Performance . The Claremont Graduate University . Jurney , N . S . ( 2008 ) . How Do Nonprofessional Investors Understand ad Use Relevance and Reliability of Financial Information ? University of Oklahoma . Kelton , A . S . , Pennington , R . R . , & Tuttle , B . M . ( 2010 ) . The Effects of Information Presentation Format on Judgement and Decision Making : A Review of the Information Systems Research . Journal of Information Systems , 24 ( 2 ) , 79 - 105 . Kelton , A . S . , & Pennington , R . R . ( 2012 ) . Internet Financial Reporting : The Effects of Information Presentation Format and Content Differences on Investor Decision Making . Computers in Human Behaviour , 28 , 1178 - 1185 . Kim , J . W . , Lim , J . H . , & No , W . G . ( 2012 ) . The Effect of First Wave Mandatory XBRL Reporting across the Financial Information Environment . Journal of Information Systems , 26 ( 1 ) , 127 - 153 . Kleinmuntz , D . N . , & Schkade , D . A . ( 1993 ) . Information Displays and Decision Processes . Psychological Science , 4 ( 4 ) . 221 - 227 . Koonce , L . , Williamson , M . G . , & Winchel , J . ( 2010 ) . Consensus Information and Nonprofessional Investors’ Reaction to the Revelation of Estimate Inaccuracies . The Accounting Review , 85 ( 3 ) , 979 - 1000 . Lee , C . A . ( 2010 ) . A Framework for Contextual Information in Digital Collections . Journal of Documentation , 67 ( 1 ) , 95 - 143 . Lee , Y . W . , Strong , D . M . , Kahn , B . K . , & Wang , R . Y . ( 2002 ) . AIMQ : A Methodology for Information Quality Assessment . Information & Management , 40 , 133 - 146 . Libby , R . , Bloomfield , R . and Nelson , M . W . ( 2002 ) . Experimental Research in Financial Accounting . Accounting , Organizations and Society , 27 , 775 - 810 . Liyanarachchi , G . A . ( 2007 ) . Feasibility of Using Student Subjects in Accounting Experiments : A Review . Pacific Accounting Review , 19 ( 1 ) , 47 - 67 . Malhotra , R . , & Garritt , F . ( 2004 ) . Extensible Business Reporting Language : The Future of E - Commerce - Driven Accounting . International Journal of E - Business , 9 ( 1 ) , 59 - 82 . Monti , M . , Boero , R . , Berg , N . , Gigerenzer , G . , & Martignon , L . ( 2012 ) . How Do Common Investors Behave ? Information Search and Portfolio Choice Among Bank Customers and University Students . Mind & Society , 11 ( 2 ) , 203 - 233 . Neely , M . P . , & Cook , J . S . ( 2011 ) . Fifteen Years of Data and Information Quality Literature : Developing a Research Agenda for Accounting . Journal of Information Systems , 25 ( 1 ) , 79 – 108 . Park , J & Kim , J . ( 2000 ) . Effects of Contextual Navigation Aids on Browsing Diverse Web Systems . Proceedings of SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Vol . 1 , No . 6 , April 2000 , 257 - 264 . Peng , E . Y . , Shon , J . , & Tan , C . ( 2011 ) . XBRL and Accruals : Empirical Evidence from China . Accounting Perspectives , 10 ( 2 ) , 109 - 138 . Pinsker , R . & Li , S . ( 2008 ) . Costs and Benefits of XBRL Adoption : Early Evidence . Communications of the ACM , 51 ( 3 ) , 47 - 50 . Pinsker , R . ( 2007 ) . Long Series of Information and Nonprofessional Investors ' Belief Revision . Behavioral Research in Accounting , 19 , 197 - 214 . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ . ( 2011 ) . Primacy or Recency ? A Study of Order Effects When Nonprofessional Investors Provided a Long Series of Disclosures . Behavioral Research in Accounting , 23 ( 1 ) , 161 - 183 Pinsker , R & Wheeler , P . ( 2009 ) . Nonprofessional Investors ’ Perceptions of the Efficiency and Effectiveness of XBRL - enabled Financial Statement Analysis and of Firms Providing XBRL - Formatted Information . International Journal of Disclosure and Governance , 6 ( 3 ) , 241 - 261 . Pinsker , R . E . , Gara , S . C . , & Karim , K . E . ( 2005 ) . XBRL Usage : A Socio - Economic Perspective . The Review of Business Information Systems , 9 ( 4 ) , 59 - 72 Pitre , T . J . ( 2012 ) . Effects of Increased Reporting Frequency on Nonprofessional Investors’ Earnings Predictions . Behavioral Research in Accounting , 24 ( 1 ) , 91 - 107 . Pitre , T , Daigle , R . , & Pinsker , R . ( 2009 ) . An Investigation of Nonprofessional Investors , Qualitative Materiality Judgments Incorporating SEC Listed vs . Non - Listed Events . Accounting Faculty Publications . Paper 22 . Available at http : / / ir . stthomas . edu / ocbacctpub / 22 [ Retrieved on January , 2013 ] . Rezaee , Z . , Elam , R . , & Sharbatoghlie . ( 2001 ) . Continuous Auditing : The Audit of The Future . Managerial Auditing Journal , 16 ( 3 ) , 150 - 158 . Roohani , S . , Furusho , Y . , & Koizumi . M . ( 2009 ) . XBRL : Improving Transparency and Monitoring Functions of Corporate Governance . International Journal of Disclosure and Governance , 6 ( 4 ) , 355 – 369 . Scarlata , A . N . ( 2009 ) . Can XBRL Improve Financial Analysis ? The Joint Effects of Technology and Knowledge on Decision Performance . University of Kentucky . Strand , C . , McGuire , B . L . , Watson , L . A . , & Hoffman , C . ( 2001 ) . The XBRL Potential . Strategic Finance , June , 58 - 63 . Taylor , E . Z . & Dzuranin , A . C . ( 2010 ) . Interactive Financial Reporting : An Introduction to eXtensible Business Reporting Language ( XBRL ) . Issues in Accounting Education , 25 ( 1 ) . 71 - 83 . Tribunella , T & Tribunella , H . ( 2010 ) . Using XBRL to Analyse Financial Statements : A Step - by - Step Spreadsheet Guide . The CPA Journal , March , 69 - 72 . Tversky , A & Kahneman , D . ( 1974 ) . Judgement Under Uncertainty : Heuristics and Bias . Science , 185 ( 4157 ) , 1124 - 1131 . Vessey , I . ( 1991 ) . Cognitive Fit : A Theory based Analysis of the Graphs versus Tables Literature . Decision Science , 22 , 219 - 241 . Willis , M . , & Sinnet , W . M . ( 2008 ) . XBRL . Financial Executive , November , 44 - 47 . Yingchun , S & Baohua , T . ( 2010 ) . Research on the Disclosure Quality of Financial Reporting on the Internet Based on XBRL Technology . International Conference on Computational and Information Sciences , 605 - 608 . Yoon , H . , Zo , H . , & Ciganek , A . P . ( 2011 ) Does XBRL Adoption Reduce Information Asymmetry ? Journal of Business Research , 64 ( 2 ) . 157 - 163 . Wang , R . Y & Strong , D . M . ( 1996 ) . Beyond Accuracy : What Data Quality Means to Data Consumers . Journal of Management Information Systems , 12 ( 4 ) 5 - 33 . Wand , Y . , & Wang , R . Y . ( 1996 ) . Data Quality Dimension in Ontological Foundations . Communications of the ACM , 39 ( 11 ) , 86 - 95 . Watts , S . , Shankaranarayanan . , & Even A . ( 2012 ) . Data Quality Assessment in Context : A Cognitive Perspective . Decision Support Systems , 48 , 202 - 211 . Wu , L . L . , Chuang , Y . L . , & Joung , Y . J . ( 2008 ) . Contextual Multidimensional Browsing . Computers in Human Behaviour , 2873 - 2888 .