Empowerment in HCI - A Survey and Framework Hanna Schneider , Malin Eiband , Daniel Ullrich , Andreas Butz LMU Munich Munich , Germany ﬁrstname . lastname @ iﬁ . lmu . de ABSTRACT Empowering people through technology is of increasing con - cern in the HCI community . However , there are different interpretations of empowerment , which diverge substantially . The same term thus describes an entire spectrum of research endeavours and goals . This conceptual unclarity hinders the development of a meaningful discourse and exchange . To bet - ter understand what empowerment means in our community , we reviewed 54 CHI full papers using the terms empower and empowerment . Based on our analysis and informed by prior writings on power and empowerment , we construct a frame - work that serves as a lens to analyze notions of empowerment in current HCI research . Finally , we discuss the implications of these notions of empowerment on approaches to technology design and offer recommendations for future work . With this analysis , we hope to add structure and terminological clarity to this growing and important facet of HCI research . ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . m . Information Interfaces and Presentation ( e . g . HCI ) : Miscellaneous Author Keywords Empowerment ; power ; literature survey ; framework . INTRODUCTION With the emergence of third wave HCI [ 10 , 37 , 38 ] , more abstract aspects of interaction move into the focus of the HCI community , such as agency , fulﬁllment , and social justice . One of these aspects is empowerment , a concept which seems to be multifaceted in itself : it can be a process , a method , an end goal ; it can be a world view , an ideology , a new paradigm , an approach to action , a symbol or a metaphor ; one can empower oneself or someone else [ 16 ] . According to Rappaport ( who has been associated with coining the term empowerment ) , “empowerment is a little bit like obscenity ; you have trouble deﬁning it but you know it when you see it” [ 74 ] . Moreover , empowerment ( almost ) always appears as an unconditionally positive mission no one would argue against . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspeciﬁcpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montreal , QC , Canada © 2018 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5620 - 6 / 18 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173818 No wonder that many tech companies are currently priding their businesses with a mission to empower people through technology : Microsoft “Our mission is to empower every person and ev - ery organization on the planet to achieve more . ” [ 62 ] Facebook “ Give people the power to build community and bring the world closer together . ” [ 29 ] Twitter “To give everyone the power to create and share ideas and information instantly , without barriers . ” [ 91 ] Tumblr “To empower creators to make their best work and get it in front of the audience they deserve . ” [ 85 ] At the same time , researchers in different disciplines , e . g . , management [ 16 ] , healthcare [ 94 ] , entrepreneurship [ 9 ] , and technology design [ 53 ] , have drawn attention to the fact that interventions that aim or claim to empower can ultimately turn out to be disempowering , for example if they mark disadvan - taged people as different or offer more help than needed [ 53 ] . In light of the various passionate calls for technology that empowers people in HCI [ 10 , 25 , 51 , 58 , 77 , 83 ] , we argue that a deeper investigation of empowerment , its theoretical foundations and the conditions under which empowerment prospers ( or not ) are essential to develop a more nuanced understanding of the concept , and to advance it within the HCI community . The aim of this paper is to help future research on empow - erment in HCI to navigate some of the conceptual unclarity currently prevalent in this ﬁeld . However , we do not aim at deriving a new , general deﬁnition of empowerment from our analysis , but rather at presenting different characteristics along which existing and future research can be classiﬁed . Our work is guided by the following research questions : RQ1 “How can different notions 1 of empowerment be charac - terized ? ” RQ2 “Which lines of research on empowerment in HCI emerge from this characterization ? ” Our contribution therefore is twofold : We ﬁrst present a frame - work derived from an analysis of 54 CHI publications using the terms empower and empowerment . The framework inte - 1 with notion we refer to researchers’ interpretation of the term CONCEPT OF POWER PSYCHOLOGICAL COMPONENT PERSISTENCE OF EMPOWERMENT DESIGN MINDSET pa r t i c i pa t o r y e x pe r t pe r s i s t en t t r an s i en t do i ng k no w i ng f ee li ng po w e r - t o po w e r - o v e r A ) EMPOWERING EXPERIENCES B ) SKILLS AND EDUCATION C ) SELF - ENHANCEMENT D ) HOLISTIC APPROACHES E ) EMPOWERMENT THROUGH DESIGN PROCESS F ) TECHNOLOGY FOR DEVELOPMENT G ) PROTECTIVE TECHNOLOGY H ) COMMUNITY EMPOWERMENT [ 12 , 14 , 22 , 24 , 32 , 33 , 40 , 63 , 68 , 96 ] [ 3 , 30 , 45 , 46 , 50 , 57 , 87 , 90 ] [ 7 , 18 , 19 , 48 , 59 , 61 , 60 , 64 , 66 , 72 , 78 , 86 ] [ 6 , 13 , 70 , 92 ] [ 11 , 15 , 56 , 67 , 93 ] [ 54 , 84 , 89 , 95 , 99 ] [ 1 , 4 , 20 , 82 , 98 ] [ 27 , 41 , 73 , 76 , 88 ] Lines of Research Framework Categories Figure 1 . Alluvial diagram of lines of research characterized by our framework : The vertical pillars represent the four categories of our framework and their manifestations . Each reviewed paper is represented by a horizontal line which splits when a paper was coded as multiple manifestations of a category . Papers in one line of research share the same color . Most papers in one line of research have a very similar coding - some differ in one or two categories . For example , papers in A ) Empowering Experiences all share an understanding of power - to as CONCEPT OF POWER , they focus on feeling as PSYCHOLOGICAL COMPONENT , the PERSISTENCE OF EMPOWERMENT is transient , and they use an expert DESIGN MINDSET . On the other hand , papers in , for example , D ) Hollistic Approaches share the same CONCEPT OF POWER , PERSISTENCE OF EMPOWERMENT and DESIGN MINDSET and address all three manifestations of PSYCHOLOGICAL COMPONENT . grates four categories ( CONCEPT OF POWER , PSYCHOLOGI - CAL COMPONENT , PERSISTENCE OF EMPOWERMENT , and DESIGN MINDSET ) which have been informed by prior work on the concepts of power and empowerment in social and political sciences as well as by design research in HCI . We then cluster our paper set through the lens of our framework to unravel prevailing lines of research on empowerment in HCI ( see ﬁgure 1 ) . This represents – to the best of our knowledge – the ﬁrst attempt to bring structure and clarity to the emerging body of work on empowerment in HCI . BACKGROUND Before starting our analysis , we need to cover some theoretical ground on the notions of the terms power and empowerment in social and political sciences . Power Power is the concept underlying empowerment . In social and political theory , deﬁnitions of the term have been heavily discussed and contested [ 36 ] . As a basis for this paper , we distinguish between two fundamentally different notions of power , both prevalent in the literature : power - to and power - over . With this , we adopt a common distinction ( see , for example , Allen [ 2 ] ) . Power - To : An Ability to Act The notion of power - to articulates power as an ability to do something . Writings that reﬂect this notion of power have for example been presented by Hobbes [ 39 ] and Arendt [ 8 ] . Hobbes deﬁnes power as a person’s “present means [ . . . ] to obtain some future apparent Good” [ 39 ] . Similarly , for Arendt “power is a something - anything - which makes or renders somebody able to do , capable of doing something . Power is capacity , potential , ability , or wherewithal . ” [ 8 ] . Arendt explicitly distinguishes power from authority , strength , force , and violence . When we use power - to in the rest of this paper , we refer to Arendt’s deﬁnition . Power - Over : Relations Between Actors When power is understood as power - over it refers to the re - lation between multiple actors . Most prominently , Weber deﬁnes power as “the probability that one actor within a social relationship will be in a position to carry out his own will despite resistance” [ 97 ] . Similarly , Dahl offers what he calls an “intuitive idea of power” according to which “A has power over B to the extent that he can get B to do something that B would not otherwise do” [ 23 ] . The actors A and B can be “individuals , groups , roles , ofﬁces , governments , nation - states , or other human aggregates” [ 23 ] . Dahl omits the notion of force , which makes his deﬁnition more suited for the purpose of this paper . With power - over , we therefore refer to Dahl’s deﬁnition . Empowerment Agreement on a deﬁnition of empowerment has not yet been reached , despite the considerable body of research on empow - erment and empowerment theory . Zimmerman introduced the concept of psychological empow - erment and deﬁnes empowerment as “a process in which peo - ple gain understanding and control over personal , social , eco - nomic , or political forces in order to take action to better their lives” [ 100 ] . Similarly , Rappaport deﬁnes empowerment as “a process by which people , organizations , and communities gain mastery over issues of concern to them” [ 74 ] . Within the scope of this paper , we adopt Rappaport’s deﬁnition of em - powerment , which remains deliberately open to both notions of power - as power - to and power - over . To denote the instance ( person , institution , etc . ) who is being empowered we use the term “empoweree” in this paper . METHOD To investigate our research questions , we conducted a struc - tured literature review on 54 CHI publications . Using the search functionality of the ACM Digital Library , we collected all CHI publications that used one of the terms “empowerment” ( N = 37 ) and “empower” ( N = 115 ) at least once – an approach that was similarly employed by Kannabiran et al . [ 47 ] and Schlesinger et al . [ 81 ] . We removed non - paper artifacts ( such as posters , keynotes , and workshops ) , resulting in 62 manuscripts . 1 ) Deriving of framework categories , manifestations and ex - clusion criteria ( all authors ) : After reviewing the paper set , we discussed commonalities and differences between the underlying notions of empow - erment . In several meetings , we deﬁned four categories and their manifestations with the goal to capture these con - ceptual differences . While we decided to integrate four categories in our framework , we considered several others in our discussions ( we elaborate on this decision in the limi - tation section of this paper ) . We decided to exclude papers in which empowerment was either used only marginally or did not directly refer to the presented system or research project , but rather to related work . We removed another eight papers [ 9 , 10 , 21 , 26 , 34 , 35 , 55 , 71 ] . 2 ) Coding ( ﬁrst and second author ) : Once the four framework categories were deﬁned , we coded the remaining 54 papers according to the coding scheme de - ﬁned by the framework . Papers that substantially addressed multiple manifestations within a category were coded as such . In cases of disagreement , coding was discussed in the team until consensus was reached . 3 ) Clustering ( ﬁrst and second author ) : We then clustered papers according to the ﬁnal coding , which resulted in eight clusters ( in the following called lines of research ) that share a similar notion of empower - ment . Table 2 provides an overview of the these lines of research and their characterization through the lens of our framework . In this paper , we describe both , the framework categories and the lines of research that emerged in our analysis . FRAMEWORK During the analysis , we identiﬁed four categories that helped us to describe differences between notions of empowerment and thus answer RQ1 “How can different notions of empowerment be charac - terized ? ” We combined these categories in an initial framework that we later use to discuss the scope of empowerment research in HCI . The four categories that are part of our framework – namely CONCEPT OF POWER , PSYCHOLOGICAL COMPO - NENT , PERSISTENCE OF EMPOWERMENT , and DESIGN MIND - SET – strongly resonate with psychological [ 100 ] and philo - sophical [ 8 , 23 ] literature on empowerment , as well as with design theory [ 80 ] . Below , we brieﬂy introduce the four cat - egories and discuss their relation to related work . Table 1 provides an overview of the categories in our framework . CONCEPT OF POWER The distinction between power - to and power - over emerged as a central aspect to differentiate between the different notions of empowerment . For example , a system that aims to help a community to confront the ones in power is reminiscent of power - over , while a system that aims to enable people to build their own technology is reminiscent of power - to . We therefore include this distinction in our framework . PSYCHOLOGICAL COMPONENT The effect of empowerment in the papers we reviewed dif - fered greatly and ranged from the feeling of power to skill development or taking action . We therefore integrated the cat - egory PSYCHOLOGICAL COMPONENT in our framework and deﬁne its manifestations as feeling , knowing and doing . This distinction has been derived from Zimmerman’s theory on psychological empowerment [ 100 ] , which has been success - fully applied to HCI research on empowerment by Ammari et al . [ 6 ] . While these components are , by deﬁnition , some - what interdependent , we categorized the papers we reviewed according to the effect of empowerment in their main focus . A system focusing on feeling might for example aim at im - proving users self - esteem by providing positive feedback , a system focusing on knowing might teach users a new skill that improves their chances to ﬁnd a new job , and a system focusing on doing might help users to get more work done in less time by automating certain processes . PERSISTENCE OF EMPOWERMENT The third category , PERSISTENCE OF EMPOWERMENT , can be transient or persistent . For example , while a prosthesis empowers its wearer immediately and only during use ( tran - sient ) , a voting system can help its users to gain political power which unfolds and persists after usage ( persistent ) . Similarly , an educational technology may expand users’ skills and job opportunities after and beyond system use ( persistent ) . DESIGN MINDSET In the forth category , we adopt a distinction that Sanders [ 80 ] used to describe the design research landscape , namely the distinction between expert mindset and participatory mindset . Categories Manifestation Deﬁnition Examples CONCEPT OF POWER power - to Power is understood as “something - anything - which makes or renders somebody able to do , capable of doing something” ( as in [ 8 ] ) . Multi - sensory , interactive maps for visually impaired children [ 17 ] . power - over Power is understood as a relation between two actors where “A has power over B to the extent that he can get B to do something that B would not otherwise do” [ 23 ] . A system that helps people to confront policy makers [ 41 ] . PSYCHOLOGICAL COMPONENT feeling Empowerment as perceived control , self - efﬁcacy , competence and motivation to exert power . A system that increases users’ self - esteem by balancing scores according to physical ability [ 33 ] . knowing Empowerment results in understanding and learning the awareness of action opportunities and the development of skills related to problem - solving and exerting power . Educational games [ 45 , 46 , 90 ] or a system that allows women to gain self - knowledge by looking at their vaginas [ 3 ] . doing Empowerment results in the exertion of power and taking action . Systems that enable people to achieve their goals in the ﬁrst place , or in quicker or more efﬁcient ways [ 7 , 64 ] . PERSISTENCE OF EMPOWERMENT transient Empowerment happens immediately , and only , during system use . Mobile phones [ 61 ] or systems assisting or supporting handicapped persons [ 7 , 18 , 72 ] . persistent Empowerment happens beyond and persists after system use . A public voting system [ 88 ] or an educational videogame [ 45 ] . DESIGN MINDSET participatory Technology can only be empowering when designed from the empoweree’s perspective . Multimodal games for fall rehabilitation co - designed with seniors [ 93 ] . expert Researchers analyze the need for empowerment from a third person perspective . Researchers analyzing crowdsourcing platforms , which encourage the exploitation of crowdworkers [ 1 ] . Table 1 . The categories and their manifestations of our framework , illustrated by examples from the literature we reviewed . When an expert mindset is adopted , design researchers see and refer to people as “subjects” , “users” , and “consumers” . When a participatory mindset is adopted , design researchers “value people as co - creators in the design process” [ 80 ] . The DESIGN MINDSET is especially relevant when designing em - powering technologies . Several researchers have questioned the validity of empowerment being given or granted by those having power and stressed the importance of empowerees tak - ing initiative as well [ 28 , 42 ] . If this argument is followed , it would likely be necessary to employ a participatory mindset to empower people . However , as experts’ knowledge and compe - tences can be equally beneﬁcial in the design of empowering technologies [ 42 ] , obtaining balance between the two seems ideal . ANALYSIS OF EMPOWERMENT RESEARCH AT CHI After deriving this framework from our literature analysis , we then used it to cluster the papers we reviewed and thus answer RQ2 “Which lines of research on empowerment in HCI emerge from this characterization ? ” The eight different lines of research that emerged from our analysis each share a different notion of empowerment . The black squares in table 2 mark the unique combination of char - acteristics of the notion of empowerment in a line of research , and therefore how it differs from the other lines of research . Gray squares mark characteristics that were true for only some of the papers in a line of research . The alluvial diagram in ﬁgure 1 provides more details on how papers within a line of research were coded differently : Again the vertical pillars represent the four categories of our framework and their mani - festations , while horizontal lines represent papers color - coded by the line of research . The diagram then shows the coding of each paper in every category ( where a paper is coded as multiple manifestations of a category , the line splits ) . Below we brieﬂy describe each line of research by summariz - ing the notion of empowerment and providing an example for illustration purposes , a synopsis of other facets prevalent in this line of research , as well as a takeaway . Within these de - scriptions , we refer to the coding according to our framework categories where appropriate and necessary ( for the complete coding of all four categories for all groups , see table 2 ) A ) Empowering Experiences Notion of Empowerment : Empowerment refers to users’ au - tonomy or self - esteem . Feeling empowered is the researchers’ main focus . It may , in turn , affect empowerees’ behaviors as well , but concrete action opportunities are not regarded as a prerequisite for empowerment . Example : In one project , Gerling et al . [ 33 ] used hidden bal - ancing to enable people with mobility disabilities to compete with able - bodied peers in exergames . Hidden balancing was achieved through input , time , or score balancing , the latter meaning that individual score multipliers are set for each player . As the hidden balancing was often not recognized by players ( but increased their self - esteem ) , it is evident that Line of Research Framework Categories CONCEPT OF POWER PSYCHOLOGICAL COMPONENT PERSISTENCE OF EMPOWERMENT DESIGN MINDSET power - to power - over feeling knowing doing transient persistent participat . expert A ) Empowering Experiences [ 12 , 14 , 22 , 24 , 32 , 33 , 40 , 63 , 68 , 96 ] (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) B ) Skills and Education [ 3 , 30 , 45 , 46 , 50 , 57 , 87 , 90 ] (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) C ) Self - Enhancement [ 7 , 18 , 19 , 48 , 59 , 61 , 60 , 64 , 66 , 72 , 78 , 86 ] (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) D ) Holistic Approaches [ 6 , 13 , 70 , 92 ] (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) E ) Empowerment through Design Process [ 11 , 15 , 56 , 67 , 93 ] (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) F ) Technology for Development [ 54 , 84 , 89 , 95 , 99 ] (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) G ) Protective Technology [ 4 , 1 , 20 , 82 , 98 ] (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) H ) Community Empowerment [ 27 , 41 , 73 , 76 , 88 ] (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) (cid:4) Table 2 . Lines of research coded with the presented framework categories . Each row presents a line of research , each column a manifestation of the four framework categories . A black square indicates that all papers in a line of research were coded as the respective manifestation ; a gray square indicates that some of the papers in a line of research were coded as the respective manifestation . this project is clearly focusing on the feeling aspect of PSY - CHOLOGICAL COMPONENT : Players’ behaviors stay the same but the likelihood of them winning the game increases . Synopsis : The feeling of empowerment can take on differ - ent forms . In the papers we reviewed its descriptions varied from “feeling powerful” [ 68 ] , over a “sense of agency” [ 22 ] , autonomy [ 24 , 40 , 63 ] , or feeling safe to enjoying in - game experiences in public spaces [ 12 ] . Two papers in this line of research focused on fostering learners’ autonomy [ 24 , 63 ] and three projects focused on people with speciﬁc impairments [ 32 , 33 , 96 ] . It was also observed that technology can ( unintentionally ) un - dermine users’ autonomy . Höök et al . [ 40 ] , for example , argue that this is the case in many affective computing technologies , which “isolate , measure , interact with and inﬂuence our emo - tions” . Similarly , Bopp et al . [ 14 ] report that “monitoring and evaluation practices” led to disempowerment and the “erosion of autonomy” of mission - driven organizations . Takeaway : Technology allows users to experience feelings that are associated with power and powerfulness , such as sense of agency , control , and privacy . B ) Skills and Education Notion of Empowerment : Empowerment is an attempt to help users acquire skills or knowledge that is expected to bene - ﬁt them because it will translate to better development or job opportunities , better ability to achieve a task , or general wellbe - ing . In contrast to ( A ) , research in this line of research focuses on knowing . As knowledge or skills are expected to last be - yond system use , empowerment is persistent ( PERSISTENCE OF EMPOWERMENT ) . Example : Almeida et al . [ 3 ] presented Labella , a system that allows women to construct “knowledge about ones own body” by looking at the vagina . Women’s understanding of their inti - mate anatomy is regarded as both crucial for their reproductive health and sexual wellbeing – and eroded by the social - cultural construction of the vagina “as something private , shameful and not to be talked about” . According to the authors , their prototype Labella empowers women through an improved understanding of their own bodies ( knowing ) , which can be expected to last beyond system use ( persistent ) . Synopsis : Other papers presented systems to improve career development skills [ 87 ] , language skills [ 46 , 90 ] , or scientiﬁc understanding [ 50 ] . Three of these focused on children in underdeveloped regions [ 45 , 46 , 90 ] . Two papers focused on task - speciﬁc knowledge and skills , namely on “critiquing” computer users to support their problem - solving and learning activities [ 30 ] and on informing design practices through data , and therefore on empowering designers [ 57 ] . Takeaway : Technology allows users to extend their skills or knowledge , which is expected to beneﬁt them beyond system use . C ) Self - Enhancement Notion of Empowerment : Technology empowers its users by “allowing them to do things that [ they ] would otherwise be incapable of doing” [ 61 ] while using the system . Users are given action opportunities they would not have without tech - nology , thus fostering productivity , efﬁciency , independence and engagement . Hence , research in this line of research fo - cuses on doing . The new abilities or opportunities last only during system use , and thus empowerment is transient . Example : O’Conell and Choong call for interactive visual - izations that “empower [ . . . ] information analysts to manage diverse , ever - increasing data ; search information and visual spaces to better understand information ; develop hypotheses ; and collaborate . ” [ 66 ] . Such a system would primarily help users to achieve more , to be more productive and efﬁcient ( do - ing ) . However , feeling empowered and knowing might more arise as a side effect . Synopsis : Besides systems that increase users’ productivity or efﬁciency [ 60 , 64 , 66 , 86 ] , work in this line of research includes two other ways technology may empower : ( 1 ) It may give its users new abilities , for example by assisting or supporting handicapped persons [ 7 , 18 , 72 ] , or through mobile phone usage in general [ 61 ] . ( 2 ) It may give its users new abilities , but users may determine the nature of these abilities themselves by building technology that ﬁts their needs ( Do - It - Yourself ) . Thus , users may develop the “ability and conﬁdence to control the technology in their life” [ 59 ] and actively engage in shaping future technologies [ 78 ] . Takeaway : Technology allows users to do things they would otherwise not be capable of . D ) Holistic Approaches Notion of Empowerment : Zimmerman [ 100 ] described the in - terpersonal , the interactional , and the behavioral components as fundamental parts of personal empowerment . Similarly , sev - eral papers took a holistic approach that suggests that feeling , knowing , and doing need to play into each other in a successful empowerment process . Two of these presented the design of a system [ 13 , 92 ] and two of them presented frameworks for empowerment in technology design . Systems : The ﬁrst system is the vocal chorder by Unander - Scharin et al . [ 92 ] . According to the authors , empowerment was indicated by the changing self - image of opera singers ( feeling ) , but this change in self - image happened because opera singers were able to “take control over the rhythmi - cal pace and overall artistic and aesthetic outcome of their performances” ( knowing and doing ) . Similarly , feeling , know - ing , and doing were entangled in Bickmore et al . ’s [ 13 ] virtual nurse agent . The agent helps people when they are in “one of the most disempowering situations one can experience in mod - ern society” , being a hospital patient . The agent is described as an “animated , empathic virtual nurse interface for educating and counseling hospital patients” . It is designed to mitigate pa - tients’ feelings of helplessness ( feeling ) and provides patients with more knowledge about their condition ( knowing ) , which will potentially result in them taking action or making better decisions ( doing ) . Frameworks : Oulasvirta’s humanistic research strategy presents equality , autonomy , and control as the goal of em - powering design . The paper includes a holistic view of steps towards designing empowering technology and the examples that illustrate how to apply the framework arguably address feeling , knowing and doing [ 70 ] . Lastly , Ammari et al . ’s [ 6 ] model of networked empowerment is derived from Zimmer - man’s theory on psychological empowerment and therefore by nature addresses feeling , knowing , and doing explicitly and extensively . Takeaway : Holistic approaches to empowerment pay deliber - ate attention to the interconnectedness of feeling , knowing , and doing . E ) Empowerment through Design Process Notion of Empowerment : Users are empowered by having their voice heard and being put into the center of the design process ( DESIGN MINDSET : participatory ) . In this view , putting users in the center of the design process itself leads to empowerment , as put by Baumer [ 11 ] : “practices of user - centered design have empowered technology users , making them the focus both of HCI design and scholarship . ” This view is reﬂected in all papers in this line of research . Example : Bossavit et al . “empowered [ high functioning autis - tic teens ] by assigning them speciﬁc roles across several [ de - sign ] sessions” [ 15 ] . As “users” , “informants” , “designers” and “testers” , they developed digital educational games to - gether with their teachers to improve Geography skills . Synopsis : Other work in this group , applied participatory design techniques with older adults [ 56 , 93 ] . On a different note , O’Leary et al . [ 67 ] suggest a new method of structured data collection – called Q methodology – which empowered participants because it allowed them to discuss “their health beliefs and attitudes with the interviewer . ” Takeaway : Participatory design methods themselves can be regarded as empowering . F ) Technology for Development Notion of Empowerment : As power imbalances ( e . g . , between societies , genders , or socioeconomic groups ) are of main con - cern , equality and empowerment are regarded as long - term goals . Effects of empowerment would entail social advance - ment , self - determination , or more fulﬁlled lives . Work in this line of research is characterized by the aim to gain a deep understanding for the communities in focus , which often in - volved long - term engagement with NGOs , social services , or collective organisations ( e . g . [ 84 , 89 , 95 ] ) . The CONCEPT OF POWER of work in this group cannot easily be categorized as either power - to or power - over : On the one hand , a recognition of groups or communities as being oppressed ( power - over ) is the main motivation in these projects ; on the other hand the approach taken is not directed towards confronting the ones in power ( power - over ) but towards extending the abilities of the powerless ( power - to ) . To reﬂect this in our coding , we coded this line of research as power - to and power - over . Example : Shroff and Kam [ 84 ] conducted 15 weeks of ﬁeld research with NGOs that aim to empower women in the de - veloping world . Their goal was to translate leanings into recommendations for technology design . The initial motiva - tion of their project was the power imbalance between women and men in the developing world ( power - over ) : “women in the developing world face violence in varying degrees : forced mar - riage , spousal abuse , forced prostitution , and infanticide” [ 84 ] . Their design recommendations focus on giving women the power to achieve more ( power - to ) and not to confront or ex - ert power over men : “promote an instructional sequence that leverages cultural elements to overcome fear of technology , use entertaining elements to interest women in professional development , and gradually incorporate numeric symbols to reinforce emerging numeracy skills” . Synopsis : Several research projects were motivated by helping those in powerless situations to better their situations , e . g . , women in the developing world [ 84 ] , the homeless popula - tion [ 54 ] , people living in rural areas [ 89 ] , local communities disempowered by the consequences of the ﬁnancial crisis [ 95 ] , or Palestinian refugees [ 99 ] . Takeaway : Technology design can aim at balancing social and global power by creating opportunities for the disadvantaged . G ) Protective Technology Notion of Empowerment : Empowerment is mainly under - stood as countering the loss of control evoked by interacting with existing technologies . Technology aims at balancing power between an existing technology ( and thus developers or providers ) on one side and its users on the other . Hence , the main motivation of work in this line of research , is addressing the power imbalance between technology users ( who are left with no option but to use the technology the way providers present it ) and providers . Moreover , we coded empowerment in this line of research as primarily transient as empowerment is intended to happen within the context of technology use . However , it might lead to more reﬂected and proactive con - sumer behavior in general and therefore facilitate persistent empowement . Example : In Almuhimedi et al . ’s [ 4 ] work , em - powerment is seen as giving users’ control over their private data . In particular , they use nudges as a privacy - enhancing technology to make users aware of and thus capable of reacting to data collection during smartphone usage . Synopsis : Research employed nudging [ 4 , 98 ] to increase users’ risk awareness , or monitoring [ 20 , 82 ] to allow users to better control their broadband use . Takeaway : Technology itself can be the source of disempower - ment . H ) Community Empowerment Notion of Empowerment : Papers in this line of research de - scribe a power imbalance between speciﬁc groups ( power - over ) and aim at helping the disempowered to confront the ones “in power” . It explores how technology can be used to help one group or community to acquire power over another , which is expected to last beyond system use ( persistent ) . Example : Hsu et al . [ 41 ] , investigate the potential of a community - empowered air quality monitoring tool to address the “unbalanced power structure between citizens , govern - ments , and businesses” . Their “design principle is to stimulate critical discussions and confront the current unbalanced power relation between stakeholders . ” [ 41 ] . Synopsis : In four of six cases in this line of research the ones “in power” are represented by governmental institutions and agencies [ 27 , 41 , 76 , 88 ] . On a different note , Rajanen et al . [ 73 ] investigate the power dynamics that take place in Open Source Software ( OSS ) development . However , such an approach – to empower one group at the cost of another – has also been criticized as onesided . According to Harding et al . [ 35 ] , the fact that system designers “focus almost exclusively on empowering citizens rather than adopting an informed , inclusive approach that addresses the needs of both citizens and civic authorities [ . . . ] sustained use and perceived value of civic engagement technologies remains low” . In their research , Harding et al . therefore focus on fostering mutual trust . Takeaway : Technology can facilitate the negotiation of politi - cal power . LIMITATIONS We are conﬁdent that our framework can help to classify a broad range of research on empowerment in HCI , although it is certainly not the only way of doing so . Several decisions we made when conducting this literature review and constructing our framework present possible limitations of this work : First , we selected the boundaries of our literature review to include only CHI full papers that use either the terms “em - power” or “empowerment” . With this we excluded work that strongly relates to the concept of empowerment without using the term explicitly , such as work on enabling technology [ 79 ] , or on choice architecture [ 43 ] . This decision was based on what we perceive as an increasing trend towards using the term “empowerment” itself as a keyword both in industry and HCI research without further explanation . Discovering what is behind this mere labeling and resolving the current termino - logical fuzziness initiated our work on the paper . A parallel example can be seen in the increasingly unclear use of “user experience” for describing a variety of usability - related con - cepts . Future work will need to test whether our framework is applicable without changes to related concepts . Second , we decided to integrate four main categories in our framework despite the emergence of several alternatives dur - ing our discussions . For example , papers differed in the way the need for empowerment was diagnosed ( by researchers , empowerees , or a third party ) and in their evaluation of em - powerment outcomes ( evaluation with users , reﬂection by researchers , or no assessment at all ) . It would also have been possible to distinguish between papers focusing on individual or community empowerment . Even though papers differed widely in these aspects , integrating them in the framework did not help to identify patterns and cluster in our data set . Hence , we left them out for the beneﬁt of simplicity and clar - ity . However , we welcome other research to extend , amend and validate our framework . Third , we decided to base our framework on existing dis - courses on power and empowerment in social and political sciences . Hence , our classiﬁcation of research on empow - erment inherits the contestability that is pervasive in these discourses . For example , some papers addressed more than one PSYCHOLOGICAL COMPONENT and have been coded ac - cording to the primary focus of the paper ( as understood by us ) . But , even though some papers could possibly be coded differ - ently , we strongly believe that our framework and analysis can bring an added value by structuring research on empowerment in HCI . DISCUSSION With the presented survey and framework , we hope to increase awareness of the different facets of empowerment and to help other researchers to obtain an overview of the ﬁeld of em - powerment research in HCI , to understand commonalities and differences between their own work and the work of others , to locate their research in related work , and to plan future re - search . In short , we intended the paper to be a reference point for terminology and structure for everybody who is using the term “empowerment” , be that in their research framing or in publications . Recommendations for HCI Research on Empowerment To facilitate a more structured discussion on empowerment , we propose several speciﬁc recommendations for HCI researchers in the ﬁeld : Reﬂect on the underlying ethical maxims of empowerment Power is the foundation of empowerment , yet the majority of publications reviewed refrained from deﬁning the term power explicitly - an observation that has for example been discussed in the literature on employee empowerment before [ 36 ] . Sim - ilarly , the ideal state to be reached through empowerment , i . e . , the underlying ethical maxim , is rarely made explicit , even though most papers seem to implicitly raise some sort of ethical claims . We argue that it is necessary to discuss the notion of power as well as the research project’s aims and goals and underly - ing ethical maxims before making any judgement about the effectiveness of empowerment . Different ethical maxims have been well discussed in philosophical literature . For exam - ple , do we aim for equality ( every individual / group should get the same ) , as suggested by Rawls’ theory of justice [ 75 ] , for equality of chances ( every individual / group has the same chances regardless if they take them or not ) or for a minimum threshold of each capability for everyone ( as suggested by Nussbaum [ 65 ] ) ? Other maxims are thinkable and each of them can lead to different recommendations and have their speciﬁc side - effects ( e . g . , preferring a lower power level as long as it is equal between groups ) . Deﬁning one’s ethical maxim is certainly a challenging task . Nonetheless , researchers should reﬂect and make transparent the implicit ethical maxim they use when talking about or requesting empowerment . We hope that our research high - lights this need for reﬂection and gives food for thought in this direction . Consider the design implications of different notions of power Our analysis further revealed that reﬂecting on the notion of power ( as power - to and power - over ) is of importance when designing for empowerment . Both notions require a differenti - ated view to understand the consequences and possible pitfalls of design . Power - over investigates social or political power imbalances between multiple actors . Investigating and designing for power - over situations holistically is challenging : Designers and researchers might have well - intended goals – e . g . , to em - power the unemployed population to earn a salary by con - ducting micro - tasks on crowd - sourcing platforms . However , the same technology can turn out to be disempowering , as it might allow employers to circumvent workers’ rights , which are in the real world protected and relentlessly defended by unions [ 1 ] . Since power - over deals with power comparisons between dif - ferent groups , the difference of power between those groups appears as an obvious metric by which empowerment is judged . Following this implication , different cases of change in power could lead to empowerment . For example , an increase of power in the targeted group is possible ( without taking away power from the counterpart ) just by transferring power from one group to another ( while the sum of power is held constant ) . Alternatively , a decrease of power in the superior group would also lead to a smaller power difference and therefore to em - powerment of the targeted group despite not changing their own power . Here , the sum of power is decreased , but all have the same ( low ) power . Moreover , there might be situations in which power imbalances are preferable , e . g . , if more ex - perienced or competent actors hold more decision power . To address these challenges holistically , we propose to adopt an “informed , inclusive approach that addresses the needs of both [ actors ] ” [ 35 ] as pursued by Harding et al . Power - to is predominant on an individual level and aims at increasing power for a single person ( no power is taken away from a third party if the individual gains power ) . Designing technology based on this understanding seems more straight - forward as it only requires a proper analysis and understanding of one actor’s situation . Designing for empowerment is , how - ever , not without pitfalls : Technology based on an notion of power - to was , for example , perceived as disempowering be - cause it framed people as worse off [ 77 ] or offered more help than needed [ 31 , 52 ] . Health management tools have been described as disempowering because they come with speciﬁc expectations on how patients have to behave and therefore interfere with their autonomy [ 94 ] . To avoid such unwanted side - effects , we recommend to adopt a holistic perspective , that considers all three psychological components ( feeling , knowing , and doing ) . Draw from existing work in social and political sciences Research on empowering technologies should be based on re - lated work on power and empowerment in social and political sciences . In the context of our framework , introducing the dis - tinction between different concepts of power [ 2 ] and Zimmer - man’s work on empowerment [ 100 ] turned out to be a fruitful basis for analysis . Other work , such as Sen and Nussbaum’s capabilities approach ( CA ) [ 65 ] might similarly aid to theoreti - cally ground the concept of empowerment in HCI . The CA has become inﬂuential in other ﬁelds such as welfare economics , international development and human rights and , recently , sev - eral authors in computer ethics , philosophy and technology for development ( ICDT4D ) advocated the CA as framework for designing empowering technology ( e . g . , by Johnston [ 44 ] , Oosterlaken [ 69 ] ) . However , none of the reviewed papers mentioned this approach . For HCI research projects , adopting the CA would likely entail starting from people’s wished - for outcomes and measuring the degree to which they have been attained [ 69 ] . While the capability approach does not propose speciﬁc methods to design and evaluate interventions , several researchers provided operationalizations that attempt to do so , e . g . , Kleine et al . [ 49 ] or Alsop and Heinsohn [ 5 ] . Such operationalizations could provide methodological grounding of empowerment evaluations in HCI , which is an important area for future work as few research projects in our review attempted or addressed the evaluation of empowerment ( for notable exceptions employing quantitative measures see [ 41 , 66 ] and qualitative methods see [ 40 , 41 , 70 , 92 ] ) . We hence encourage other researchers to make use of existing work to enhance conceptual clarity . Contribute to a structured analysis of empowerment For a differentiated analysis of the concept of empowerment and to adequately frame any research claims , we recommend to clearly articulate the decisions researchers make when in - vestigating empowerment . We suggest the four categories of our framework as a possible guideline in this matter : ( 1 ) The ﬁrst decision is the CONCEPT OF POWER that research is based on : Researchers can think of power as extending abilities ( power - to ) or as a limited resource that has to be redistributed ( power - over ) . ( 2 ) The second decision is the PSYCHOLOGICAL COMPONENT in focus : Does empowerment mean for researchers that em - powerees feel empowered ? That they are more aware of their situation , acquire new skills or a better understanding of issues that matter to them in their lives ( knowing ) ? Or does empower - ment only take place when empowerees ( have the opportunity to ) behave differently ( doing ) ? ( 3 ) The third decision concerns the PERSISTENCE OF EMPOW - ERMENT : Should empowerment happen immediately and only during system use ( transient ) ? Or should empowerment last beyond system use ( persistent ) ? ( 4 ) Finally , the forth decision is whether to adopt a partici - patory or expert DESIGN MINDSET : What do we gain from taking on an expert’s perspective when designing empowering technologies ? What do we gain from incorporating the em - poweree’s perspective as much as possible and which methods are best suited to accomplish this ? Concluding Remarks In this work , we reviewed papers on empowerment in HCI , constructed a framework grounded in work on power and empowerment , and described different lines of research preva - lent in our community . Our analysis revealed that notions on power and empowerment differ greatly between eight lines of research . To inspire a more structured discussion about the concept of empowerment , we provided several recommenda - tions which we hope may guide this dialogue . We strongly believe that the turn towards empowerment in HCI has the po - tential to inﬂuence technology design for the better . However , to utilize this potential in a responsible way , in each individual case , it 1 ) requires a deﬁnition of the underlying maxim and goal of empowerment and 2 ) an evaluation to what extent the envisioned goal has been reached . Unchallenged calls can entail the risk of becoming a mantra and lead to ineffective ( and potentially detrimental ) design choices . Appropriate met - rics are required to prevent such negative effects and ensure the effectiveness of the chosen form of empowerment . They are also needed as a foundation for design guides and best practices and to differentiate between effective and ineffective approaches of empowerment . In order to develop such metrics , a clear understanding of empowerment is needed : Who is the target group , which are the targeted psychological components , do we aim for an increase in power or a decrease in power difference ? In Zimmerman’s words , “the development of a universal and global measure of empowerment is not an appro - priate goal because it may not mean the same thing for every person , organization , or community everywhere . ” [ 100 ] . Our framework provides starting points for ﬁnding these metrics . But more than that , we hope to have highlighted the need to consciously reﬂect on the notions of power and empowerment researchers want to adopt for their project . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank Axel Hösl , Kilian Moser , Robert Schmidt and Fabius Steinberger as well as the anonymous reviewers for their help - ful comments on earlier versions of this manuscript . REFERENCES 1 . Ali Alkhatib , Michael S . Bernstein , and Margaret Levi . 2017 . Examining Crowd Work and Gig Work Through The Historical Lens of Piecework . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 4599 – 4616 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025974 2 . Amy Allen . 2016 . Feminist Perspectives on Power . In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ( fall 2016 ed . ) , Edward N . Zalta ( Ed . ) . Metaphysics Research Lab , Stanford University . 3 . Teresa Almeida , Rob Comber , Gavin Wood , Dean Saraf , and Madeline Balaam . 2016 . On Looking at the Vagina Through Labella . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1810 – 1821 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858119 4 . Hazim Almuhimedi , Florian Schaub , Norman Sadeh , Idris Adjerid , Alessandro Acquisti , Joshua Gluck , Lorrie Faith Cranor , and Yuvraj Agarwal . 2015 . Your Location Has Been Shared 5 , 398 Times ! : A Field Study on Mobile App Privacy Nudging . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 787 – 796 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702210 5 . Ruth Alsop and Nina Heinsohn . 2005 . Measuring empowerment in practice : Structuring analysis and framing indicators . Vol . 3510 . World Bank Publications . 6 . Tawﬁq Ammari and Sarita Schoenebeck . 2015 . Networked Empowerment on Facebook Groups for Parents of Children with Special Needs . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2805 – 2814 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702324 7 . Lisa Anthony , YooJin Kim , and Leah Findlater . 2013 . Analyzing User - generated Youtube Videos to Understand Touchscreen Use by People with Motor Impairments . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1223 – 1232 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2466158 8 . Hannah Arendt . 1958 . The human condition . University of Chicago Press . 9 . Seyram Avle , Silvia Lindtner , and Kaiton Williams . 2017 . How Methods Make Designers . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 472 – 483 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025864 10 . Shaowen Bardzell . 2010 . Feminist HCI : Taking Stock and Outlining an Agenda for Design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1301 – 1310 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753521 11 . Eric P . S . Baumer and Jed R . Brubaker . 2017 . Post - userism . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 6291 – 6303 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025740 12 . Steve Benford , Andy Crabtree , Stuart Reeves , Jennifer Sheridan , Alan Dix , Martin Flintham , and Adam Drozd . 2006 . The Frame of the Game : Blurring the Boundary Between Fiction and Reality in Mobile Experiences . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’06 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 427 – 436 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1124772 . 1124836 13 . Timothy W . Bickmore , Laura M . Pfeifer , and Brian W . Jack . 2009 . Taking the Time to Care : Empowering Low Health Literacy Hospital Patients with Virtual Nurse Agents . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’09 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1265 – 1274 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518891 14 . Chris Bopp , Ellie Harmon , and Amy Voida . 2017 . Disempowered by Data : Nonproﬁts , Social Enterprises , and the Consequences of Data - Driven Work . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3608 – 3619 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025694 15 . Benoît Bossavit and Sarah Parsons . 2016 . " This is How I Want to Learn " : High Functioning Autistic Teens Co - Designing a Serious Game . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1294 – 1299 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858322 16 . Ulrich Bröckling . 2003 . You are not responsible for being down , but you are responsible for getting up . Über Empowerment . Leviathan 31 , 3 ( 2003 ) , 323 – 344 . 17 . Emeline Brulé , Gilles Bailly , Anke Brock , Frédéric Valentin , Grégoire Denis , and Christophe Jouffrais . 2016 . MapSense : multi - sensory interactive maps for children living with visual impairments . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 445 – 457 . 18 . Emeline Brule , Gilles Bailly , Anke Brock , Frederic Valentin , Grégoire Denis , and Christophe Jouffrais . 2016 . MapSense : Multi - Sensory Interactive Maps for Children Living with Visual Impairments . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 445 – 457 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858375 19 . Stefan Parry Carmien and Gerhard Fischer . 2008 . Design , Adoption , and Assessment of a Socio - technical Environment Supporting Independence for Persons with Cognitive Disabilities . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’08 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 597 – 606 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1357054 . 1357151 20 . Marshini Chetty , David Haslem , Andrew Baird , Ugochi Ofoha , Bethany Sumner , and Rebecca Grinter . 2011 . Why is My Internet Slow ? : Making Network Speeds Visible . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1889 – 1898 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979217 21 . Nazli Cila , Iskander Smit , Elisa Giaccardi , and Ben Kröse . 2017 . Products As Agents : Metaphors for Designing the Products of the IoT Age . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 448 – 459 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025797 22 . David Coyle , James Moore , Per Ola Kristensson , Paul Fletcher , and Alan Blackwell . 2012 . I Did That ! Measuring Users’ Experience of Agency in Their Own Actions . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2025 – 2034 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208350 23 . Robert A Dahl . 1957 . The concept of power . Systems Research and Behavioral Science 2 , 3 ( 1957 ) , 201 – 215 . 24 . Katie Davis and Eve Klein . 2015 . Investigating High School Students’ Perceptions of Digital Badges in Afterschool Learning . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 4043 – 4046 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702413 25 . Michael L . Dertouzos . 1990 . Redeﬁning Tomorrow’s User Interface ( Plenary Address ) . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’90 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1 – . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 97243 . 97244 26 . Tawanna R . Dillahunt . 2014 . Fostering Social Capital in Economically Distressed Communities . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 531 – 540 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557123 27 . Sheena Erete and Jennifer O . Burrell . 2017 . Empowered Participation : How Citizens Use Technology in Local Governance . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2307 – 2319 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025996 28 . Marie Ertner , Anne Mie Kragelund , and Lone Malmborg . 2010 . Five Enunciations of Empowerment in Participatory Design . In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference ( PDC ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 191 – 194 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1900441 . 1900475 29 . Facebook . 2017 . About . ( 2017 ) . https : / / www . facebook . com / pg / facebook / about / [ Accessed Dec . 28 , 2017 ] . 30 . Gerhard Fischer , Andreas C . Lemke , Thomas Mastaglio , and Anders I . Morch . 1990 . Using Critics to Empower Users . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’90 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 337 – 347 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 97243 . 97305 31 . Leon Flicker . 1999 . Dementia Reconsidered : the Person Comes First . BMJ 318 , 7187 ( 1999 ) , 880 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1136 / bmj . 318 . 7187 . 880a 32 . Kathrin Gerling , Kieran Hicks , Michael Kalyn , Adam Evans , and Conor Linehan . 2016 . Designing Movement - based Play With Young People Using Powered Wheelchairs . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 4447 – 4458 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858070 33 . Kathrin Maria Gerling , Matthew Miller , Regan L . Mandryk , Max Valentin Birk , and Jan David Smeddinck . 2014 . Effects of Balancing for Physical Abilities on Player Performance , Experience and Self - esteem in Exergames . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2201 – 2210 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2556963 34 . Danna Gurari and Kristen Grauman . 2017 . CrowdVerge : Predicting If People Will Agree on the Answer to a Visual Question . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3511 – 3522 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025781 35 . Mike Harding , Bran Knowles , Nigel Davies , and Mark Rounceﬁeld . 2015 . HCI , Civic Engagement & # 38 ; Trust . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2833 – 2842 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702255 36 . Cynthia Hardy and Sharon Leiba - O’Sullivan . 1998 . The Power Behind Empowerment : Implications for Research and Practice . Human Relations 51 , 4 ( 1998 ) , 451 – 483 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 001872679805100402 37 . Steve Harrison , Phoebe Sengers , and Deborah Tatar . 2011 . Making epistemological trouble : Third - paradigm HCI as successor science . Interacting with Computers 23 , 5 ( 2011 ) , 385 – 392 . 38 . Steve Harrison , Deborah Tatar , and Phoebe Sengers . 2007 . The three paradigms of HCI . In Alt . Chi . Session at the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems San Jose , California , USA . 1 – 18 . 39 . Thomas Hobbes . 2006 . Leviathan . A & C Black . 40 . Kristina Höök , Anna Ståhl , Petra Sundström , and Jarmo Laaksolaahti . 2008 . Interactional Empowerment . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’08 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 647 – 656 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1357054 . 1357157 41 . Yen - Chia Hsu , Paul Dille , Jennifer Cross , Beatrice Dias , Randy Sargent , and Illah Nourbakhsh . 2017 . Community - Empowered Air Quality Monitoring System . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1607 – 1619 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025853 42 . Netta Iivari and Kari Kuutti . 2017 . Critical Design Research and Information Technology : Searching for Empowering Design . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 983 – 993 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3064663 . 3064747 43 . Anthony Jameson , Bettina Berendt , Silvia Gabrielli , Federica Cena , Cristina Gena , Fabiana Vernero , and Katharina Reinecke . 2014 . Choice Architecture for Human - Computer Interaction . Foundations and Trends in Human - Computer Interaction 7 , 1Ã´cÂ ˘AÂ¸S2 ( 2014 ) , 1 – 235 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1561 / 1100000028 44 . Justine Johnstone . 2007 . Technology as empowerment : A capability approach to computer ethics . Ethics and Information Technology 9 , 1 ( 2007 ) , 73 – 87 . 45 . Matthew Kam , Akhil Mathur , Anuj Kumar , and John Canny . 2009 . Designing Digital Games for Rural Children : A Study of Traditional Village Games in India . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’09 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 31 – 40 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518707 46 . Matthew Kam , Divya Ramachandran , Varun Devanathan , Anuj Tewari , and John Canny . 2007 . Localized Iterative Design for Language Learning in Underdeveloped Regions : The PACE Framework . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’07 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1097 – 1106 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1240624 . 1240791 47 . Gopinaath Kannabiran , Jeffrey Bardzell , and Shaowen Bardzell . 2011 . How HCI Talks About Sexuality : Discursive Strategies , Blind Spots , and Opportunities for Future Research . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 695 – 704 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979043 48 . Majeed Kazemitabaar , Jason McPeak , Alexander Jiao , Liang He , Thomas Outing , and Jon E . Froehlich . 2017 . MakerWear : A Tangible Approach to Interactive Wearable Creation for Children . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 133 – 145 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025887 49 . Dorothea Kleine . 2010 . ICT4WHAT ? - Using the choice framework to operationalise the capability approach to development . Journal of International Development 22 , 5 ( 2010 ) , 674 – 692 . 50 . Stefan Kreitmayer , Yvonne Rogers , Robin Laney , and Stephen Peake . 2012 . From Participatory to Contributory Simulations : Changing the Game in the Classroom . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 49 – 58 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2207685 51 . Richard E . Ladner . 2008 . Access and Empowerment : Commentary on & Ldquo ; Computers and People with Disabilities & Rdquo ; . ACM Trans . Access . Comput . 1 , 2 , Article 11 ( Oct . 2008 ) , 5 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1408760 . 1408765 52 . Amanda Lazar , Raymundo Cornejo , Caroline Edasis , and Anne Marie Piper . 2016a . Designing for the Third Hand : Empowering Older Adults with Cognitive Impairment Through Creating and Sharing . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1047 – 1058 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901854 53 . Amanda Lazar , Caroline Edasis , and Anne Marie Piper . 2016b . Technology to Empower or Disempower : Design Tensions Within the Context of Art Therapy . In GERONTOLOGIST , Vol . 56 . OXFORD UNIV PRESS INC JOURNALS DEPT , 2001 EVANS RD , CARY , NC 27513 USA , 660 – 660 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / geront / gnw162 . 2683 54 . Christopher A . Le Dantec and W . Keith Edwards . 2008 . Designs on Dignity : Perceptions of Technology Among the Homeless . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’08 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 627 – 636 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1357054 . 1357155 55 . Joseph Lindley and Paul Coulton . 2016 . Pushing the Limits of Design Fiction : The Case For Fictional Research Papers . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 4032 – 4043 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858446 56 . Stephen Lindsay , Daniel Jackson , Guy Schoﬁeld , and Patrick Olivier . 2012 . Engaging Older People Using Participatory Design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1199 – 1208 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208570 57 . Cecil Lozano , Devin Jindrich , and Kanav Kahol . 2011 . The Impact on Musculoskeletal System During Multitouch Tablet Interactions . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 825 – 828 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979062 58 . Steve Mann . 1998 . Wearable computing as means for personal empowerment . In Proc . 3rd Int . Conf . on Wearable Computing ( ICWC ) . 51 – 59 . 59 . David A . Mellis and Leah Buechley . 2014 . Do - it - yourself Cellphones : An Investigation into the Possibilities and Limits of High - tech Diy . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1723 – 1732 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557309 60 . Philip Mendels , Joep Frens , and Kees Overbeeke . 2011 . Freed : A System for Creating Multiple Views of a Digital Collection During the Design Process . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1481 – 1490 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979160 61 . Alexander Meschtscherjakov , David Wilﬁnger , and Manfred Tscheligi . 2014 . Mobile Attachment Causes and Consequences for Emotional Bonding with Mobile Phones . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2317 – 2326 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557295 62 . Microsoft . 2017 . About . ( 2017 ) . https : / / www . microsoft . com / en - us / about / default . aspx [ Accessed Dec . 28 , 2017 ] . 63 . Mitchell J . Nathan . 1990 . Empowering the Student : Prospects for an Unintelligent Tutoring System . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’90 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 407 – 414 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 97243 . 97317 64 . Cuong Nguyen , Yuzhen Niu , and Feng Liu . 2012 . Video Summagator : An Interface for Video Summarization and Navigation . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 647 – 650 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2207767 65 . Martha Nussbaum and Amartya Sen . 1993 . The quality of life . Oxford University Press . 66 . Theresa A . O’Connell and Yee - Yin Choong . 2008 . Metrics for Measuring Human Interaction with Interactive Visualizations for Information Analysis . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’08 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1493 – 1496 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1357054 . 1357287 67 . Katie O’Leary , Jordan Eschler , Logan Kendall , Lisa M . Vizer , James D . Ralston , and Wanda Pratt . 2015 . Understanding Design Tradeoffs for Health Technologies : A Mixed - Methods Approach . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 4151 – 4160 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702576 68 . Thomas Olsson and Markus Salo . 2012 . Narratives of Satisfying and Unsatisfying Experiences of Current Mobile Augmented Reality Applications . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2779 – 2788 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208677 69 . Ilse Oosterlaken . 2009 . Design for development : A capability approach . Design issues 25 , 4 ( 2009 ) , 91 – 102 . 70 . Antti Oulasvirta . 2004 . Finding Meaningful Uses for Context - aware Technologies : The Humanistic Research Strategy . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’04 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 247 – 254 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 985692 . 985724 71 . Saverio Perugini , Taylor J . Anderson , and William F . Moroney . 2007 . A Study of Out - of - turn Interaction in Menu - based , IVR , Voicemail Systems . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’07 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 961 – 970 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1240624 . 1240770 72 . Anne Marie Piper , Raymundo Cornejo , Lisa Hurwitz , and Caitlin Unumb . 2016 . Technological Caregiving : Supporting Online Activity for Adults with Cognitive Impairments . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 5311 – 5323 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858260 73 . Mikko Rajanen and Netta Iivari . 2015 . Power , Empowerment and Open Source Usability . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3413 – 3422 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702441 74 . Julian Rappaport . 1985 . The power of empowerment language . Social policy 16 , 2 ( 1985 ) , 15 – 21 . 75 . John Rawls . 2009 . A theory of justice . Harvard university press . 76 . Sunil Rodger , John Vines , and Janice McLaughlin . 2016 . Technology and the Politics of Mobility : Evidence Generation in Accessible Transport Activism . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2417 – 2429 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858146 77 . Yvonne Rogers and Gary Marsden . 2013 . Does He Take Sugar ? : Moving Beyond the Rhetoric of Compassion . interactions 20 , 4 ( July 2013 ) , 48 – 57 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2486227 . 2486238 78 . Yvonne Rogers , Jeni Paay , Margot Brereton , Kate L . Vaisutis , Gary Marsden , and Frank Vetere . 2014 . Never Too Old : Engaging Retired People Inventing the Future with MaKey MaKey . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3913 – 3922 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557184 79 . Alan Roulstone . 1998 . Enabling Technology : Disabled People , Work and New Technology ( 1st ed . ) . Taylor & Francis , Inc . , Bristol , PA , USA . 80 . Liz Sanders . 2008 . On Modeling : An Evolving Map of Design Practice and Design Research . interactions 15 , 6 ( Nov . 2008 ) , 13 – 17 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1409040 . 1409043 81 . Ari Schlesinger , W . Keith Edwards , and Rebecca E . Grinter . 2017 . Intersectional HCI : Engaging Identity Through Gender , Race , and Class . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 5412 – 5427 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025766 82 . Soumya Sen , Carlee Joe - Wong , Sangtae Ha , Jasika Bawa , and Mung Chiang . 2013 . When the Price is Right : Enabling Time - dependent Pricing of Broadband Data . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2477 – 2486 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2481343 83 . Ben Shneiderman . 1990 . Human Values and the Future of Technology : A Declaration of Empowerment . SIGCAS Comput . Soc . 20 , 3 ( Aug . 1990 ) , 1 – 6 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 97351 . 97360 84 . Geeta Shroff and Matthew Kam . 2011 . Towards a Design Model for Women’s Empowerment in the Developing World . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2867 – 2876 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979368 85 . Tumblr Staff . 2017 . Company . ( 2017 ) . https : / / staff . tumblr . com / post / 50902268806 / news [ Accessed Dec . 28 , 2017 ] . 86 . Bernhard Suhm and Pat Peterson . 2009 . Call Browser : A System to Improve the Caller Experience by Analyzing Live Calls End - to - end . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’09 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1313 – 1322 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518899 87 . Ryo Suzuki , Niloufar Salehi , Michelle S . Lam , Juan C . Marroquin , and Michael S . Bernstein . 2016 . Atelier : Repurposing Expert Crowdsourcing Tasks As Micro - internships . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2645 – 2656 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858121 88 . Nick Taylor , Justin Marshall , Alicia Blum - Ross , John Mills , Jon Rogers , Paul Egglestone , David M . Frohlich , Peter Wright , and Patrick Olivier . 2012 . Viewpoint : Empowering Communities with Situated Voting Devices . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1361 – 1370 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208594 89 . Emeline Therias , Jon Bird , and Paul Marshall . 2015 . Más Tecnologia , Más Cambio ? : Investigating an Educational Technology Project in Rural Peru . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 447 – 456 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702595 90 . Feng Tian , Fei Lv , Jingtao Wang , Hongan Wang , Wencan Luo , Matthew Kam , Vidya Setlur , Guozhong Dai , and John Canny . 2010 . Let’s Play Chinese Characters : Mobile Learning Approaches via Culturally Inspired Group Games . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1603 – 1612 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753565 91 . Twitter . 2017 . Company . ( 2017 ) . https : / / about . twitter . com / en _ us / company . html [ Accessed Dec . 28 , 2017 ] . 92 . Carl Unander - Scharin , Unander - Scharin , and Kristina Höök . 2014 . The Vocal Chorder : Empowering Opera Singers with a Large Interactive Instrument . In Proceedings of the 32Nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1001 – 1010 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557050 93 . Stephen Uzor , Lynne Baillie , and Dawn Skelton . 2012 . Senior Designers : Empowering Seniors to Design Enjoyable Falls Rehabilitation Tools . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1179 – 1188 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208568 94 . Tiffany Veinot . 2010 . Power to the Patient ? A Critical Examination of Patient Empowerment Discourses . Palgrave Macmillan UK , London , 30 – 41 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1057 / 9780230292543 _ 3 95 . Vasillis Vlachokyriakos , Clara Crivellaro , Christopher A . Le Dantec , Eric Gordon , Pete Wright , and Patrick Olivier . 2016 . Digital Civics : Citizen Empowerment With and Through Technology . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1096 – 1099 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2886436 96 . Jonathan Waddington , Conor Linehan , Kathrin Gerling , Kieran Hicks , and Timothy L . Hodgson . 2015 . Participatory Design of Therapeutic Video Games for Young People with Neurological Vision Impairment . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3533 – 3542 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702261 97 . Max Weber . 1978 . Economy and society : An outline of interpretive sociology . Vol . 1 . Univ of California Press . 98 . Pamela Wisniewski , Heng Xu , Mary Beth Rosson , Daniel F . Perkins , and John M . Carroll . 2016 . Dear Diary : Teens Reﬂect on Their Weekly Online Risk Experiences . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3919 – 3930 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858317 99 . George Yerousis , Konstantin Aal , Thomas von Rekowski , David W . Randall , Markus Rohde , and Volker Wulf . 2015 . Computer - Enabled Project Spaces : Connecting with Palestinian Refugees Across Camp Boundaries . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3749 – 3758 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702283 100 . Marc A . Zimmerman . 1995 . Psychological empowerment : Issues and illustrations . American Journal of Community Psychology 23 , 5 ( 01 Oct 1995 ) , 581 – 599 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF02506983