R EVIEW Proteomic analysis of clathrin - coated vesicles Peter S . McPherson Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery , Montreal Neurological Institute , McGill University , Montreal , Que . , Canada Received : April 16 , 2010 Revised : June 3 , 2010 Accepted : June 18 , 2010 For more than 50 years cell biologists have embraced the concept that biochemical and enzymatic analysis of isolated subcellular fractions provides insight into the function and machineries of cellular compartments including organelles . The utility of this approach has been signiﬁcantly enhanced with the advent of mass spectrometry leading to the broad application of organelle proteomics . Clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCVs ) form at the plasma membrane where they select protein and lipid cargo for endocytic entry into cells . CCVs also form at the trans - Golgi network , where they function in protein transport from the secretory pathway to the endosomal / lysosomal system . Herein we will describe how organelle proteomics of CCVs has greatly expanded our knowledge of the machineries , mechanisms and sites of clathrin - mediated membrane trafﬁcking . Keywords : Cell biology / Clathrin / Subcellular proteomics / Synaptic vesicle / Tandem mass spectrometry 1 Introduction ‘‘Until 1930 or thereabout biologists , in the situation of Astronomers and Astrophysicists , were permitted to see the objects of their interest , but not to touch them ; the cell was as distant from us , as the stars and galaxies were from them’’ . Taken from the Nobel lecture of Albert Claude [ 1 ] this quote encapsulates what is at the very heart of subcel - lular proteomics , the ability to disrupt a cell , fractionate the crude homogenate into component parts and to ‘‘touch’’ the resulting organelles and subcellular structures . Following from the pioneering work of Claude and Christian de Deuve , who shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medi - cine in 1974 with George Palade for ‘‘the structural and functional organization of the cell’’ , subcellular fractionation has become a routine technique in the cell biologist’s tool - box and fractionation protocols are available for a large array of organelles and subcellular compartments [ 2 ] . For the last half - century , biochemists and cell biologists have analyzed these fractions as a mean to discover new proteins and activities associated with organelles , for example , the enzy - matic components of mitochondria [ 3 ] , the temporal order - ing of protein processing in the secretory pathway [ 4 ] , and the protein composition of synaptic vesicles ( SVs ) [ 5 , 6 ] to name but a few . In many respects then , subcellular proteomics is an old concept . That said the pace of discovery has greatly intensiﬁed with the advent of mass spectrometry ( MS ) and its application to organelles , compartments , sub - compartments , and protein complexes [ 7 ] . Unlike earlier approaches , MS provides a quantitative identiﬁcation of the full complement of proteins associated with a compartment as well as their stoichiometry , and it provides an indication of the degree of contamination from other compartments [ 8 ] . Here I will focus on the proteomic analysis of clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCVs ) with an emphasis on how such studies have revealed new principles in clathrin - mediated trafﬁcking , particularly as it applies to the recycling of SVs in the presynaptic nerve terminal . I will also describe how CCV proteomics has greatly expanded the repertoire of proteins associated with clathrin - mediated events and as Abbreviations : AP , adaptor protein ; ARH , autosomal recessive hypercholesteremia ; CCP , clathrin - coated pit ; CCV , clathrin - coated vesicle ; CLC , clathrin - light chain ; CHC , clathrin - heavy chain ; CME , clathrin - mediated endocytosis ; COP I or II , coatomer complex I or II ; HIP1R , Huntingtin - interacting protein 1 related ; DENN , differentially expressed in normal and neoplastic cells ; LDL , low - density lipoprotein ; MPR , mannose - phosphate recep - tor ; SV , synaptic vesicles ; TGN , trans - Golgi network Correspondence : Professor Peter S . McPherson , Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery , Montreal Neurological Institute , McGill University , 3801 University Montreal , Que . , H3A 2B4 Canada E - mail : peter . mcpherson @ mcgill . ca Fax : 1 514 - 398 - 8106 & 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim www . proteomics - journal . com Proteomics 2010 , 10 , 4025 – 4039 4025 DOI 10 . 1002 / pmic . 201000253 such , on the mechanisms of how these processes occur . Finally , I will describe how the proteomic analysis of CCVs has contributed to the identiﬁcation of a role for clathrin - mediated events in the formation of retrograde carriers trafﬁcking between endosomes and the Golgi apparatus . 2 CCVs , an evolutionarily ancient coat system Formation , transport and organelle - speciﬁc fusion of membrane vesicles are essential aspects of eukaryotic cell biology . Most transport vesicles are initially encased in proteinaceous coats that assemble from oligomeric complexes recruited from the cytosol [ 9 ] . Coat complexes are an ancient eukaryotic adaptation and their appearance is in fact fundamental to the evolution of eukaryotic cells [ 10 – 12 ] . The common ancestry of coat complexes is reﬂected in their structure . Coatomer complex II ( COPII ) vesicles transport cargo from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cis - Golgi whereas coatomer complex I ( COPI ) vesicles transport cargo in the opposite direction , from the cis - Golgi back to the endoplasmic reticulum . CCVs function in endocytosis and in the transport of cargo from the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) to the endosomal system . Despite their involvement in the formation of vesicles with distinct trafﬁcking path - ways , there is a clear evolutionary relationship between COPI , COPII , and clathrin coats [ 12 ] . For example , at the tertiary structure level , the large subunits of each of these coat systems are composed of alpha - solenoids , beta - propel - lers , or both representing a common and conserved membrane deformation machinery [ 12 ] . Even more compelling , the cargo - selecting complexes of clathrin coats ( adaptor proteins or APs ) and COPI coats ( the F - subcom - plex ) are clearly related at the sequence level and may have nearly identical organization and structure [ 10 , 11 , 13 , 14 ] . Intriguingly , the alpha - solenoid and beta - propeller structure of the membrane deformation subunits of clathrin and COP trunk trunk linker + ear ear + linker AP - 2 clathrin AP - 1 accessoryproteins accessoryproteins CCP CCV endosome RME - 8 / HSC70 Vps26 / Vps35 / Vps29 SNX1 / 2 SNX5 / 6 Figure 1 . Model highlighting three sites of CCV budding , the plasma membrane , the TGN , and endosomes . On endosomes , CCVs generate an initial bud site , RME - 8 recruitment of HSC70 causes the clathrin coat to dissociate and the retromer , composed of SNX1 / 2 and SNX5 / 6 dimers and the trimeric Vps26 / Vps29 / Vps35 complex leads to elongated transport tubules that recruit additional cargo ( not shown ) for transport to the TGN . 4026 P . S . McPherson Proteomics 2010 , 10 , 4025 – 4039 & 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim www . proteomics - journal . com coats is also shared with the outer components of the nuclear pore complex that face the nuclear membrane and a shared ancestry is strongly suspected [ 15 ] . The conserved structures likely contribute to the membrane curvature that is inherent to CCVs , COP - coated vesicles and nuclear pores . Thus , the proteomic characterization of CCVs can provide details not only on clathrin - mediated trafﬁcking events but also on more general and evolutionarily conserved mechanisms at play in multiple membrane trafﬁcking systems . 3 CCVs , formation and function CCVs are the best studied of the coated transport vesicles [ 16 ] . They were ﬁrst detected in 1964 by Roth and Porter [ 17 ] when they observed that deposition of protein yolk in mosquito oocytes correlated with a 15 - fold increase in plasma membrane depressions with a 20 - m m bristle coat on their cytoplasmic side , clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) , the precursors to CCVs . A decade later Barbara Pearse devel - oped a subcellular fractionation procedure to isolate CCVs from pig brain revealing a protein of 180 000Da as the major protein component , which she named clathrin [ 18 ] . Subsequent studies demonstrated that clathrin isolated from the brain is composed of three copies of the clathrin - heavy chain ( CHC ) assembled into a three - legged , curled pinwheel structure , referred to as a clathrin triskelion , the assembly subunit of a clathrin coat [ 19 , 20 ] . When triskelia assemble , the legs interdigitate to form a lattice and the inherent curl of the triskelion leads to a curved clathrin coat [ 21 ] . Triskelia do not interact directly with the membrane . Therefore , other factors are needed to recruit clathrin triskelia to the membrane . These protein factors are known collectively as adaptor proteins or APs . There are two sites that have been ﬁrmly established as areas of CCV formation , the plasma membrane and the TGN , and CCVs arising at each site use distinct but highly related APs , AP - 1 at the TGN and AP - 2 at the plasma membrane ( Fig . 1 ) [ 22 ] . AP - 1 and AP - 2 are heterotetramers each composed of two large subunits and two smaller subunits . The N - term - inal regions of the large subunits along with the small subunits form a large trunk that interacts with speciﬁc phospholipids enriched on the cytoplasmic leaﬂet of the TGN or plasma membrane . The C - terminal portions of the large subunits are extended , ﬂexible , and unstructured linkers ending in globular ‘‘ear’’ domains ( Fig . 1 ) . CHC binds directly to AP - 1 and AP - 2 through the linker and ear of the large b - subunits ; thus , recruiting triskelia to the membrane where they assemble into a lattice [ 22 , 23 ] . The trunk also associates with the cytoplasmic tails of cargo destined for incorporation into CCVs . Thus , the APs are central players in CCV formation ; they recruit triskelia to the membrane , organize CCP formation , and recruit cargo . Through the ear domains , the APs also serve as a nexus for the recruitment of an array of accessory proteins that are critical for the formation of CCVs [ 24 – 26 ] . The accessory proteins have multiple functions : ( i ) They cooperate with APs in triskelia recruitment and coat assembly ; ( ii ) They bind the cytoplasmic tails of transmembrane cargo consti - tuting an additional mechanism to recruit cargo to CCPs [ 27 ] ; ( iii ) Through protein modules known as BAR [ 28 ] and ENTH [ 29 ] domains they bind phospholipids to induce and stabilize membrane curvature . In fact it is now generally recognized that these and related modules , which interact directly with the membrane drive membrane curvature and that the curved clathrin coat acts as a mold to allow the deformed membranes to form a spherical transport vesicle . Thus , CCV formation is a complex process involving the coordinated actions of multiple proteins , with a key role for the APs . The complexity of CCV formation is reﬂected in the diversity of physiological roles played by these carriers . One of the major cargos for TGN - derived CCVs is the mannose - phosphate receptor ( MPR ) [ 30 ] . Newly synthesized lysoso - mal enzymes are sorted from the general pool of secretory proteins by the acquisition within the Golgi of a mannose 6 - phosphate tag , which acts as a recognition system for binding the MPR . Speciﬁc sorting sequences in the cyto - plasmic tail of the MPR causes the receptor / ligand complex to concentrate in CCPs forming on the TGN membrane , which then bud off delivering the lysosomal enzymes to the endosomal system where they dissociate from the receptor and are eventually delivered to lysosomes ( whereas the receptor recycles back to the TGN ) [ 30 ] . Disruptions in this pathway lead to the accumulation of undegraded macromolecules in lysosomes causing severe lysosomal storage disease [ 30 ] . CCVs forming at the plasma membrane are responsible for clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) . CME is the major route of endocytic entry and plays important physiological roles [ 31 ] . For example , CME allows for the uptake of nutrients and mutations in low - density lipoprotein ( LDL ) receptors that prevent their targeting to CCPs cause increased blood cholesterol and familial hypercholesterolemia [ 32 ] . Muta - tions in autosomal recessive hypercholesteremia ( ARH ) , a clathrin - binding protein that recruits LDL receptor to CCPs cause an autosomal recessive form of hypercholesterolemia [ 33 ] . CME also controls the plasma membrane levels of G - protein and tyrosine kinase receptors and is required to couple these receptors to speciﬁc intracellular signaling pathways [ 34 ] . Interestingly , alterations in CME and endosomal trafﬁcking are emerging as a central theme in various neurodegenerative disorders including Parkinson’s disease [ 35 ] and hereditary spastic paraplegias [ 36 ] . Finally , specialized forms of CME provide a mechan - ism by which SVs reform following exocytosis [ 37 ] . Thus , clathrin - mediated trafﬁcking regulates a diverse array of critical cellular functions and is implicated in multiple disease processes , stressing the need for a complete understanding of the mechanisms involved in the formation and function of CCVs . Proteomics 2010 , 10 , 4025 – 4039 4027 & 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim www . proteomics - journal . com 4 Proteomic analysis of CCVs from brain , insights into SV recycling Whereas it is now recognized that the formation of cargo laden CCVs requires the orchestration of a large array of proteins , as recently as the mid 1990s it was thought that clathrin and APs were perhaps sufﬁcient for this process . However , numerous investigators in multiple laboratories began to identify additional accessory proteins revealing an unexpected complexity . The pace of the discovery was enhanced still with the application of subcellular proteomics . The subcellular proteomics approach is advantageous to traditional approaches to organelle analysis and protein discovery as it allows for the global analysis of all protein components of an organelle . It also provides important advantages to approa - ches that apply proteomics to whole cells or tissue lysates . First , because of the broad range in expression levels of proteins in a whole tissue or cell , less abundant proteins are below detection or are masked by higher abundance proteins [ 38 ] . Isolation of an organelle , which reduces protein complexity and enriches proteins of lower abun - dance speciﬁc to the compartment goes far to address this issue [ 39 , 40 ] . Perhaps more importantly , in subcellular proteomics the identiﬁed proteins are linked to a functional unit – the organelle under study . There have been multiple efforts in CCV proteomics and in fact CCVs were one of the ﬁrst organelles examined with the organelle proteomics approach [ 41 – 44 ] . Several of the studies involved the isolation of CCVs from rat tissues [ 41 – 43 ] whereas an additional study examined CCVs isolated from siRNA - treated HeLa cells [ 44 ] . In addition to the different starting materials ( tissues versus cells ) , the two sets of studies used quite different methodologies downstream of CCV isolation . Each of these sets of studies has advan - tages and disadvantages and these will be discussed in turn . The ﬁrst application of organelle proteomics to CCVs involved the analysis of CCVs puriﬁed from rat brain [ 41 , 42 ] . CCVs were isolated using a subcellular fractionation procedure that takes advantage of the relatively small size and high density ( owing to the protein coat ) of CCVs . The procedure is based on that of Maycox et al . [ 45 ] and is outlined in detail in Girard et al . [ 46 ] . Brieﬂy , it uses differential centrifugation to make a microsomal pellet that is further fractionated by a step Ficoll - sucrose gradient , a step gradient using sucrose in deuterium oxide , and a continuous sucrose gradient . One of the advantages of this approach is that large amounts of tissue are readily available allowing for the multiple step fractionation procedure with good yields and a high degree of purity . In fact , using a ﬁltration apparatus to ensure random sampling , electron microscopy revealed that the CCVs were 73 % pure [ 42 ] . One Figure 2 . Cartoon representation of CCVs from brain ( left ) and liver ( right ) as deﬁned by proteomic analysis . Each protein identiﬁed in each CCV analysis was assigned to functional categories ( white labels ) as deﬁned in Blondeau et al . [ 42 ] and Girard et al . [ 43 ] . The numbers represent the percentage of the MS / MS spectra that were assigned to peptides of proteins in that category relative to the total number of MS / MS spectra assigned to peptides for the entire CCV preparation . The numbers are derived from three independent CCV preparations for each tissue . CCVs in brain are smaller on average than CCVs - derived from liver , likely owing to the fact that the majority of CCVs in the liver are of TGN / endosomal origin whereas a large percentage of the CCVs from the brain are involved in recycling SVs [ 42 , 43 ] . Reprinted from Trends in Cell Biology , Bergeron , J . J . , Au , C . E . , Desjardins , M . , McPherson , P . S . , Nilsson , T . , Cell biology through proteomics – ad astra per alia porci . 2010 [ e - published ahead of print ] Ref . [ 8 ] , with permission from Elsevier . 4028 P . S . McPherson Proteomics 2010 , 10 , 4025 – 4039 & 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim www . proteomics - journal . com draw back is that the procedure is time consuming and during the day - long fractionation procedure , it is highly likely that proteins that have a lose association with CCVs are lost . For example , although there are numerous acces - sory proteins that interact with the APs [ 24 – 26 ] , amphi - physins for example , few were detected in the analysis [ 42 ] . Three independent preparations of brain CCVs were separated by standard 1 - D SDS - PAGE and (cid:2) 60 horizontal gel slices were cut for each lane . Each gel slice was subjected to an in - gel trypsin digestion with the liberated tryptic peptides analyzed by nanoscale liquid chromatography quadrupole time - of - ﬂight ( nanoLC - QTOF ) MS / MS ( details of this MS / MS analysis are provided in [ 42 ] ) . In sum total from the three preparations , 6133 MS / MS spectra were assigned to peptides identifying 209 unique proteins . Almost exactly half of those peptides , 3069 were assigned to the 18 identiﬁed proteins that deﬁned the known composi - tion of the clathrin coat ( Fig . 2 ) . This indicates the high degree of enrichment of the CCVs , consistent with the analysis of the various fractions of the preparation by coomassie blue staining and Western blot [ 42 ] . Despite this , known CCV components were not identiﬁed . For example , b arrestin is established to associate with CCVs but was not detected by the MS / MS analysis ; despite the fact that it was readily detectable by Western blot in the identical CCV fractions [ 42 ] . This may reﬂect one of the limitations of a 1 - D SDS - PAGE - based approach , namely that more abundant proteins can mask less abundant proteins of similar mole - cular mass . Although 2 - D gels involving isoelectric focusing and SDS - PAGE are able to overcome this drawback , they suffer the limitation of poor resolution of hydrophobic proteins in the focusing phase . Other 2 - D approaches have thus been utilized in subcellular proteomics studies . For example , Coughenour et al . [ 47 ] directly compared benzyl - dimethyl - n - hexadecyl ammonium chloride ( BAC ) / SDS - PAGE with isoelectric focusing / SDS - PAGE for the analysis of SVs and found that the BAC / SDS - PAGE approach was superior for the identiﬁcation of transmembrane proteins . A combination of 1 - D SDS - PAGE , BAC / SDS - PAGE , and SDS - PAGE / SDS - PAGE led to the identiﬁcation of 185 SV proteins but in general , the 1 - D approach together with LC - MS / MS appears the most robust method for membrane protein identiﬁcation [ 40 , 48 ] . In the brain CCV study , assignment of peptides to the various subunits of the AP complexes ( normalizing for the molecular mass of the proteins ) , an approach that we and others have coined peptide counting [ 42 , 49 ] ( see [ 50 ] for a review ) , revealed the expected 1 : 1 : 1 : 1 molar ratio for the various subunits of both AP - 1 and AP - 2 heterotetrameric complexes . Interestingly , there was an overall 5 : 1 ratio of AP - 2 : AP - 1 demonstrating that CME is robust in brain [ 42 ] . In liver the ratio is 0 . 5 : 1 [ 43 ] . Assuming that the relative ratio of CCVs between the TGN and the plasma membrane that are used for generalized ‘‘housekeeping forms’’ of membrane trafﬁcking is similar in most tissues , and applying the ratio found in liver to brain , it is calculated that approximately 90 % of the AP - 2 - positive CCVs in brain are specialized for neuron - speciﬁc functions . The release of neurotransmitter from the presynaptic nerve terminal involves the fusion of neurotransmitter containing SVs with the presynaptic plasma membrane . Since the early 1970s there has been ongoing discussion as to the fate of the fusing SVs [ 51 , 52 ] . One major theory says that SVs undergo a complete collapse and are retrieved by CME [ 51 ] . It has been alternatively argued that SVs only transiently fuse and are retrieved before collapse , the so - called kiss and run hypothesis [ 53 , 54 ] . That the overwhelming majority of AP - 2 positive CCVs in brain are involved in a neuron - speciﬁc endocytic function supports an important role for CCVs in the retrieval of SVs , and thus the full collapse model . Consistently , 622 peptides ( 10 . 3 % of the total ) in the brain CCVs were assigned to 32 proteins that were known components of SVs ( Fig . 2 ) , revealing SVs as a key cargo of brain CCVs . However , it must be noted that these data do not rule out the involvement of kiss and run or other forms of SV retrieval such as activity - dependent bulk endocytosis . In fact it is likely that multiple forms of release and retrieval are used depending to some degree on the rate of synaptic activity . Several studies have analyzed the proteome of puriﬁed SVs [ 47 , 48 , 55 , 56 ] ( see [ 40 ] for a comprehensive overview of these studies ) . Burre et al . [ 48 ] and Takamori et al . [ 56 ] used immunopuriﬁed SVs and SVs puriﬁed by controlled - pore glass chromatography , respectively , followed by 1 - D SDS - PAGE and LC - MS / MS and identiﬁed essentially all of the proteins assigned to the SV category in the brain CCV proteomics study . Two SV proteins that were identiﬁed in brain CCVs were the vesicular transporters for glutamate ( vGLUT ) and GABA ( vGAT ) , which are responsible for the uptake of these small molecule neurotransmitters into SVs . These transporters were also identiﬁed in the SV studies but these studies additionally identiﬁed the vesicular zinc , monoamine , and acetylcholine transporters [ 48 , 56 ] . It is likely that the later three transporters were present in the CCVs but were below the level of detection owing to the abundance of clathrin components that are greatly reduced in the SV preparations . Interestingly , Gronborg et al . [ 57 ] have recently used isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantiﬁcation to compare the protein composition of puri - ﬁed SVs enriched in vGLUT or vGAT . They found that only a small number of proteins were differentially distributed between the two populations , all of which were non exclu - sive , indicating that vesicular transporters are the only components essential for deﬁning the neurotransmitter phenotype of a SV and hence , of a neuron [ 57 ] . Although a full fusion mechanism is likely dominate in neurotransmitter release it remains unclear as to how the precise compositional identity of the SV is regenerated following the collapse of the SV into the plasma membrane ( see [ 37 ] for a discussion ) . One model suggests that SVs are generated directly from the plasma membrane via CCVs [ 58 ] . The CCVs could either sort the proteins following their Proteomics 2010 , 10 , 4025 – 4039 4029 & 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim www . proteomics - journal . com widespread dispersal throughout the plasma membrane or the SV could maintain its identity within the plasma membrane simplifying the sorting process [ 37 ] . Other models suggest that CCVs retrieve SV proteins from the plasma membrane but that an additional sorting step through endosomal membranes localized in the presynaptic compartment is required to reform SVs with precise composition [ 51 , 59 ] . Blondeau et al . [ 42 ] detected the SV proteins VAMP - 1 and - 2 , which are v - SNARES and the plasma membrane proteins , syntaxin 1A / B and SNAP - 25 , which are t - SNAREs on their CCV preparations . v - SNARE / t - SNARE pairing is critical for SV fusion and it is known that unpairing following fusion is imprecise , such that t - SNAREs are also detected in SVs [ 60 ] . In fact , peptide counting revealed a 2 . 4 - fold excess of v - SNAREs over t - SNARES on CCVs [ 42 ] , similar to what Walch - Solimena et al . [ 60 ] previously reported on SVs , consistent with the idea that CCVs directly recycle SVs without a need to sort out plasma membrane - derived t - SNAREs in endosomes . This requires the clathrin coat to sort SV membrane proteins with high ﬁdelity . Interestingly , a proteomic analysis of synaptic fractions suggests a mechanism to greatly simplify this process . Jia et al . [ 61 ] used LC - MALDI - MS / MS in combination with isotope labeling to perform a quantitative analysis of detergent - resistant fractions extrac - ted from highly enriched synaptic membranes . They demonstrated that a large number of SV proteins were signiﬁcantly enriched in the detergent - resistant fractions , suggesting a model whereby SV proteins remain clustered within the presynaptic plasma membrane through interac - tions with detergent - resistant lipids such as cholesterol [ 61 ] . In fact , a recent study using super resolution STED micro - scopy has revealed that SV proteins remain clustered in the plasma membrane following exocytic fusion and that there is limited intermixing of the proteins during SV recycling [ 62 ] . Thus , proteomics of CCVs , SVs and detergent - resistant synaptic fractions have converged to provide valuable new information regarding the nature of the SV cycle . Of interest , recent studies have indicated that pools of SVs responsible for evoked neurotransmitter release versus spontaneous release ( minis ) are functionally distinct , do not intermix and have different release mechanisms [ 63 , 64 ] . It will be interesting to determine if these pools of SVs use different retrieval mechanisms and organelle proteomics may be instructive in this regard . 5 Comparative quantitative proteomic analysis of CCVs , new mechanisms in clathrin trafﬁcking Another effort in CCV proteomics involved the isolation of CCVs from rat liver [ 43 ] . Vesicles were puriﬁed based on the method of Pilch et al . [ 65 ] as described in detail in Girard et al . [ 46 ] . Brieﬂy , this procedure uses differential centrifu - gation in combination with a series of discontinuous sucrose gradients . As for the brain CCV protocol , this protocol is time consuming but the isolated vesicles are even more pure than those from brain ( 89 versus 73 % as deter - mined by random sampling electron microscopy ) . As for brain , the liver CCVs were examined by 1 - D SDS - PAGE and MS / MS , with all of the inherent limitations described above . Despite the higher purity , the 9724 MS / MS spectra that were assigned to peptides from the liver CCVs led to the identiﬁcation of 346 proteins , substantially more than what was detected in brain . However , 26 . 2 % of those peptides assigned to essentially all known ribosomal proteins and to a large number of RNA - binding proteins , which together represented 100 of the 346 proteins identiﬁed ( Fig . 2 ) [ 43 ] . This led to the notion that the CCV preparations were ‘‘contaminated’’ with RNA granules , protein complexes composed of ribosomes and RNA - binding proteins that trafﬁc mRNAs for localized translation . Based on this observation , Elvira et al . [ 66 ] developed a subcellular frac - tionation protocol based on the CCV isolation protocol , but one that puriﬁes the RNA granules away from the ‘‘contaminating’’ CCVs . A complete proteomic analysis of these granules ( which are not abundant in adult brain ) led to new insights into RNA transport as described in [ 66 ] . This provides a striking example of how the ability of the mass spectrometer to detect all of the components of a subcellular fraction , including the contaminants can lead to unexpected insights . A surprising ﬁnding when comparing the brain and liver CCV proteomes using quantitative peptide counting was that the ratio of CHC to clathrin - light chains ( CLCs ) was very different . There are two CLCs , CLCa and CLCb , and it is established that in brain each of the three CHCs that make up a single clathrin triskelion is associated with either of the two CLCs in a 1 : 1 stoichiometric ratio [ 19 , 20 ] . This was conﬁrmed by peptide counts in brain CCVs ( Fig . 2 ) [ 42 ] . Moreover , it was known that puriﬁed clathrin triskelia in the absence of CLCs spontaneously self assemble and that adding back puriﬁed CLCs inhibits this activity with optimal inhibition occurring at a 1 : 1 stoichiometry [ 67 ] . Together , these data suggested a role for CLCs in the regulation of clathrin assembly and CCV formation . In liver , the ratio of CHC to CLCs was found to be 1 : (cid:2) 0 . 2 ( Fig . 2 ) [ 43 ] , well below the level where CLCs would inhibit CHC assembly in in vitro assembly assays and in fact this decreased ratio of CLCs to CHC was a general characteristic of non - neuronal cells . This proteomics - based discovery suggested that stoi - chiometric regulation of triskelia assembly through CLCs is unlikely in non - neuronal tissues . In fact several indepen - dent studies have now demonstrated that the loss of CLCs via siRNA - mediated knock down in multiple non - neuronal systems has no inﬂuence on the formation of CCVs in vivo or on CME of multiple clathrin - dependent cargo [ 68 – 70 ] . What then is the role of CLCs ? A clue to the answer came from studies revealing that huntingtin - interacting protein 1 related ( HIP1R ) , which is enriched on CCVs , is a binding partner for CLCs [ 71 – 74 ] . HIP1R also forms a complex with 4030 P . S . McPherson Proteomics 2010 , 10 , 4025 – 4039 & 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim www . proteomics - journal . com cortactin , an actin regulatory protein , and this complex inhibits actin assembly such that knock down of HIP1R leads to over exuberant actin assembly on clathrin - coated structures [ 75 , 76 ] . In fact , CLCs are required to recruit HIP1R to CCVs and knock down of CLCs leads to a similar actin assembly phenotype as knock down of HIP1R [ 69 ] . Intriguingly , it was recently demonstrated that the interac - tion of CLCs with HIP1R regulates actin assembly critical for the internalization of clathrin plaques , a novel form of large ﬂat clathrin lattice [ 70 ] . Thus , CLCs appear to function in a non - stoichiometric fashion as a mechanism to recruit an actin - regulatory machinery to clathrin - coated structures . It remains unclear as to why CHC : CLCs ratios are 1 : 1 in brain . However , given that such a large fraction of CCVs in brain are dedicated to SV recycling it is possible that CLCs play a unique role in this process . For example , a recent study provides a mechanism by which CLCs could regulate CHC assembly in a stoichiometric situation and it is possible that CLCs provide a unique layer of ﬁdelity in the assembly of clathrin coats involved in SV recycling [ 77 ] . Thus , comparative organelle proteomics of CCVs has led to striking new insights into the mechanisms of clathrin function . 6 Proteomic analysis of CCVs from HeLa cells , new sites of CCV budding A third major effort in CCV proteomics involved the isola - tion of CCVs from HeLa cells [ 44 ] . This study took quite a different slant from what can be considered the ‘‘more conventional’’ subcellular proteomics applied to CCVs from brain and liver . The authors raised the important point that since it is not possible to achieve absolute purity of an organelle , conventional organelle proteomics is unable to distinguish contamination from true constituents of the organelle . They thus isolated CCVs from control HeLa cells or HeLa cells in which the CHC was depleted by siRNA ( leading to what the authors termed mock CCVs ) [ 44 ] . They reasoned that the mock CCV fraction would be devoid of CCVs but still contain the proteins that contaminate CCVs isolated from control cells . The isolation procedure started from up to four 500cm 2 dishes of cells ( whereas a typical CCV preparation from tissue will start with (cid:2) 20g of tissue ) and involved preparation of a microsomal fraction by differential centrifugation followed by a Ficoll / sucrose gradient and a step sucrose gradient . The procedure was thus similar to preparations from tissues but did not involve as many steps and the purity of the CCVs was not directly assessed . They then compared the control and mock CCVs by isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantiﬁcation . A detailed analysis of the procedure is described in [ 44 ] . This analysis led to the identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of 552 proteins [ 44 ] . When plotting the ratio of control : mock , 53 proteins ( 10 . 1 % ) had a ratio of 2 or greater and were considered as bona ﬁde CCV proteins . Of these , approxi - mately half had been identiﬁed in the studies of Blondeau et al . [ 42 ] and Girard et al . [ 43 ] and half had not been previously described to associate with CCVs ( a table in [ 44 ] indicates the similarities and differences between the various proteomics studies ) . As will be discussed in detail below , the identiﬁcation of these new CCV - associated proteins has led to important new insights into the roles of clathrin - mediated membrane budding and in particular have linked clathrin coat components to the retromer , which is involved in retrograde trafﬁcking from endosomes . Given the innovative approach to organelle proteomics taken by Borner et al . [ 44 ] , it is worth taking a look at the approach in more detail . One of the obvious successful aspects is the identiﬁcation , with a high degree of conﬁ - dence , of new proteins associated with CCVs . As stated , 10 . 1 % of the identiﬁed proteins had a ratio of 2 or greater indicating that they were signiﬁcantly enriched in the control CCVs versus the mock CCVs . On the opposite side of this coin , only 12 . 4 % of the identiﬁed proteins had a ratio of less than 0 . 5 . This suggests that CCVs represent a relatively minor component of the CCV fraction . Otherwise , removing the CCVs should cause a substantial upregulation in the relative amount of contaminants ( with a correspondingly large decrease in ratio ) . This is consistent with the obser - vation that the coomassie patterns of the CCVs and the mock CCVs were quite similar [ 44 ] and likely reﬂects the inherent difﬁculty of obtaining highly enriched CCVs from cell lines [ 46 ] . It may thus be difﬁcult to discern bona ﬁde CCV proteins from contaminants , especially if the CCV proteins are normally distributed between CCVs and any membranes that contaminate the preparations . For exam - ple , LDL receptor , transferrin receptor and epidermal growth factor receptor are all well - deﬁned cargo of CCVs and all were identiﬁed in both Borner et al . [ 44 ] and Girard et al . [ 43 ] . Pools of these proteins are present on the plasma membrane and in endosomes as well as CCVs as they trafﬁc through the endocytic pathway , yet in Borner et al . [ 44 ] , they were all well below the cutoff for bona ﬁde CCV proteins . Despite these relatively minor considerations , the proteomics study of Borner et al . [ 44 ] has made a number of important contributions to the ﬁeld of clathrin - mediated membrane trafﬁcking . Following CME , most protein and lipid cargo converge on endosomes ( Fig . 1 ) . From there , some cargos are targeted to late endosomes / lysosomes whereas others recycle to the cell surface . It is also recog - nized that certain cargo can trafﬁc on a retrograde route to the TGN ( Fig . 1 ) [ 78 ] . Furthermore , a subset of proteins that trafﬁc from the TGN to endosomes , such as the MPR , are returned to the TGN and in fact undergo continuous cycles of trafﬁc between the two organelles . The retromer , which was initially discovered in yeast , is a coat - like protein complex that is involved in retrograde cargo delivery from endosomes to the TGN [ 79 ] . It is composed of ﬁve proteins in two subcomplexes , a dimer of Vps5p and Vps17p [ in mammals the equivalent proteins are sorting nexin ( SNX ) 1 / 2 and SNX 5 / 6 , respectively ] and a trimeric Proteomics 2010 , 10 , 4025 – 4039 4031 & 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim www . proteomics - journal . com core complex composed of Vps26 / Vps35 / Vps29 . The sorting nexin dimer binds to speciﬁc inositol phospholipid species that are enriched on endosomes and forms a BAR domain complex that binds to and stabilizes highly curved membranes ( Fig . 1 ) [ 79 ] . In this manner , the dimer is involved in the formation of transport tubules . The core complex , by simultaneously binding to retrograde cargo and the SNX dimer , selects and recruits cargo to the carrier tubules . Interestingly , Borner et al . [ 44 ] identiﬁed several SNXs in their group of 53 proteins with a control : mock ratio of 2 or greater and they conﬁrmed that components of both the dimeric and core complex are enriched on CCVs . This suggested a link between CCVs and the retromer complex . Further evidence of this link comes from studies on recep - tor - mediated endocytosis 8 ( RME - 8 ) , identiﬁed in CCV preparations in both Girard et al . [ 43 ] and Borner et al . [ 44 ] . RME - 8 localizes to endosomes and functions in endosomal membrane trafﬁcking [ 80 – 84 ] . RME - 8 contains a DnaJ domain that binds to Hsc70 , an ATPase functioning in disassembly of the clathrin coat ( Fig . 1 ) [ 81 , 84 ] . Intrigu - ingly , two recent studies have found an association between SNX1 and RME - 8 [ 85 , 86 ] . As for SNX1 , depletion of RME - 8 blocks the retrograde trafﬁcking of cargo , such as the MPR from endosome to TGN . Moreover , loss of any of RME - 8 , Hsc70 or SNX1 causes an accumulation of clathrin on early endosomes [ 85 , 86 ] . This suggests that RME - 8 recruits Hsc70 to endosomal membranes to allow for clathrin dynamics that are needed for the proper formation of retrograde transport carriers ( Fig . 1 ) . One could hypothesize a scenario in which the assembly of a clathrin coat helps to recruit the generalized machinery for the formation of a clathrin - coated bud . RME - 8 / Hsc70 subsequently uncoats the bud and the curved membrane is stabilized by the SNX dimer while cargo is incorporated [ 85 ] ( Fig . 1 ) . Alternatively , it is well - established that the endosomal membrane is coated by a ﬂat clathrin lattice that deﬁnes a microdomain on the endosome , where ubiquitinated proteins are targeted for inward invagination , formation of multivesicular bodies and targeting for degradation in lysosomes [ 87 ] . It is thus a reasonable scenario that SNXs recruit RME - 8 / Hsc70 to sites of retromer formation as a mechanism to disassemble clathrin locally , preventing this clathrin coat from encroaching on the region of the endosome where retromer mediates budding [ 86 ] . In regards to the ﬁrst model , it is interesting to note that enthoprotin / CLINT / epsinR was one of the most highly signiﬁcant hits in the Borner et al . [ 44 ] study and was in fact the ﬁrst novel protein stemming from CCV proteomics to be characterized [ 41 ] . While enthopro - tin / CLINT / epsinR is clearly present on CCVs of TGN origin and functions in anterograde trafﬁc [ 41 , 88 ] , there is also a role for the protein in retrograde , retromer - dependent trafﬁc from endosomes to the TGN [ 89 ] . Thus , it seems highly likely that the biochemical preparations of CCVs that have been analyzed by proteomics contain at least three pools of CCVs , those originating from the plasma membrane and the TGN and marked by the presence of AP - 2 and AP - 1 , respectively , and a third pool , originating from endosomes . The proteomic analysis of this complex mixture has in fact helped deﬁne a role for clathrin - dependent processes in the retrograde trafﬁcking pathway . 7 Proteomic analysis of CCVs , new molecules and mechanisms Perhaps the strongest achievement of organelle proteomics in general is the identiﬁcation of novel gene products , not previously demonstrated at the protein level , and their link to speciﬁc biological processes . The analysis of CCVs has been no exception . In the original CCV proteomics studies [ 41 , 42 ] , eight uncharacterized open - reading frames were identiﬁed at the protein level for the ﬁrst time and seven have been subsequently linked to clathrin - mediated trafﬁcking ( Table 1 ) . Three of these proteins function in CME . NECAP1 and NECAP 2 interact with AP - 2 and make the AP - 2 ear more efﬁcient in the recruitment of endocytic accessory proteins [ 90 ] . Adaptor associated kinase 1 ( AAK1 ) phosphorylates AP - 2 regulating its ability to recruit cargo into endocytic CCVs [ 91 ] and a recent study suggests a linkage of AAK1 function to age of onset in Parkinson’s disease , although the nature of this association remains unknown [ 92 ] . Interestingly , four of the novel proteins , enthoprotin / CLINT / epsinR , FYVE domain - containing protein localized to endosomes ( FENS - 1 ) [ 93 ] , coated - vesicle associated kinase of 104kDa ( CVAK104 ) [ 94 , 95 ] and clathrin - vesicle - associated Sec14 protein ( clavesin ) [ 96 ] all function in trafﬁcking between the Golgi and endosomes . This further supports that Golgi - and endosome - derived CCVs are a major component of the biochemical CCV preparations . The most recently characterized of the original novel proteins from brain CCVs is clavesin . Clavesin , which is alternatively known as cellular retinaldehyde - binding protein - like ( CRALBPL ) is composed of an N - terminal Sec14 domain , a lipid - binding module [ 97 ] and a short C - terminal tail that ends with a clathrin box , a clathrin - binding motif . Interestingly , clavesin is expressed speciﬁcally in neurons with no expression outside of the brain and no protein detected in non - neuronal cells within the nervous system [ 96 , 98 , 99 ] . Clavesin indeed binds to CHC and localizes to the TGN within cell bodies of cultured hippocampal neurons , suggesting that a pool of the protein is present on TGN - derived CCVs [ 96 ] . However , there is also a pool of clavesin on somatic endosomes and when the lipid - binding speciﬁcity of the Sec14 domain was determined , it was found that clavesin prefers phosphatidylinositol 3 , 5P 2 [ PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P 2 ] [ 96 ] . PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P 2 is enriched on late endo - somes / lysosomes and is thought to function in lysosome maturation and / or in retrograde trafﬁcking from endo - somes to the TGN [ 100 ] . Consistently , when clavesin is knocked down in neurons using inhibitory RNA , there is a swelling of lysosomes suggesting lysosome dysfunction [ 96 ] . This raises an intriguing and currently unanswered ques - tion , if clavesin functions in what is generally considered to 4032 P . S . McPherson Proteomics 2010 , 10 , 4025 – 4039 & 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim www . proteomics - journal . com Table 1 . Proteins originally identiﬁed by MS analysis of CCVs as uncharacterized open reading frames Protein Function Peptides Brain [ 42 ] AAK1 Binds AP - 2 , phosphorylates AP - 2 mu subunit , regulates AP - 2 - dependent cargo recruitment to CCPs [ 111 ] 62 CVAK104 / Scy1 like 2 Member of the Scy1 - like family of inactive protein kinases 3 Functions in the trafﬁcking of SNAREs between endosomes and the TGN [ 94 , 95 ] FENS - 1 Contains WD - 40 repeats and a PtdIns ( 3 ) P - binding FYVE domain , functions in endosomal trafﬁcking [ 93 ] 12 Enthoprotin / CLINT / Eps inR ENTH domain protein localized to TGN and endosomes [ 41 ] 44 Binds clathrin , functions in trafﬁcking from the TGN to endosomes and in retromer - mediated trafﬁcking from endosomes to TGN [ 41 , 89 ] NECAP 1 Brain - enriched component of CCV coats 23 Binds AP - 2 , regulates AP - 2 - mediated recruitment of accessory proteins [ 90 , 112 ] NECAP 2 Ubiquitously distributed NECAP 1 homologue , enriched on CCV coats [ 112 ] 4 Clavesin Neuron - speciﬁc protein , enriched on CCVs of TGN origin 12 Contains a PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P 2 - binding Sec14 domain , also binds clathrin , functions in lysosome maturation [ 96 ] Obg - like ATPase 1 a , b ) Putative ATPase / GTPase , member of the GTP1 / OBG family 2 Liver [ 43 ] NECAP 1 Also found in brain CCVs , see above 8 Enthoprotin Also found in brain CCVs , see above 319 FENS - 1 Also found in brain CCVs , see above 5 Connecdenn 1 Binds AP - 2 and clathrin , contains an N - terminal DENN domain that functions as a guanine - nucleotide exchange factor for Rab35 [ 113 ] 7 Functions in cargo recycling from endosomes [ 103 ] RME - 8 Contains a DnaJ domain , binds Hsc70 , localizes to endosomes [ 81 ] 59 Functions in endosomal trafﬁcking [ 83 , 85 , 86 ] p200 In a stable complex with gamma - synergin and aftiphilin , complex facilitates AP - 1 function [ 114 ] 16 Vac14 Scaffolds a protein complex that contains PIKfyve , a PtdIns3P 5 - kinase that generates PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P 2 5 Required for lysosomal maturation / function [ 101 , 102 ] EHD3 Contains a C - terminal EH domain , regulates endosome to Golgi trafﬁcking [ 115 ] 16 Atlastin - 3 b ) Transmembrane GTPase , functions in regulation of ER morphology [ 116 ] 12 Proline - rich coiled - coil 1 a , b ) Localized to Golgi apparatus 5 Transmembrane 9 a , b ) Transmembrane nine superfamily member four , contains nine transmembrane domains 6 Ossa b ) RNA - binding protein , activates Src kinase following oxidative stress [ 117 ] 8 GCN1L1 a , b ) General control of amino acid synthesis like 1 6 CLLD6 a , b ) Chronic lymphocytic leukemia deletion region gene 6 protein 17 D10Wsu52e a , b ) Complete unknown 15 Sec24c b ) Sec24 - related gene family , member C 6 Sec24 is a component of COPII coats , involved in ER to Golgi trafﬁcking PARP4 b ) Functions as a poly - ADP ribose polymerase [ 118 ] 28 Abca6 a , b ) ATP - binding cassette sub - family A member 6 , transmembrane protein , member of the ABC transporter superfamily 16 eIF3m a , b ) Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 subunit M , potentially involved in protein synthesis 21 Reep6 a , b ) Receptor expression enhancing protein 6 , transmembrane protein , involved in trafﬁcking GPCRs to the cell surface 7 Mpeg1 a , b ) Macrophage expressed gene 1 5 HeLa [ 44 ] Control / mock ratio TBC1D8B TBC1 domain family member 8B , RabGAP domain , Rab substrate unknown 4 . 05 YIPF6 a , b ) YIP1 family member 6 , Yip1p in yeast interacts with Rabs 2 . 28 Proteomics 2010 , 10 , 4025 – 4039 4033 & 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim www . proteomics - journal . com be a ‘‘housekeeping’’ process , that is , the maturation and function of lysosomes , and does so through interaction with a ubiquitous eukaryotic phospholipid species , why is it neuron speciﬁc ? At least a partial answer to this question has come from work on the Vac14 protein , which was one of the 21 novel proteins detected in the proteomic analysis of liver CCVs ( Table 1 ) . The major route of synthesis of PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P 2 is through 5 - phosphorylation of endosomal PtdIns3P via the actions of PIKfyve , a PtdIns3P 5 - kinase [ 99 ] . PIKfyve is found in a complex with Vac14 and Vac14 is required for PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P 2 production [ 101 ] . Intriguingly , the loss of Vac14 leads to massive neurodegeneration [ 101 , 102 ] . In fact Vac14 is the gene product that is mutated in the ingls ( infantile gliosis ) mouse , which shows glial proliferation as a consequence of neuronal death [ 101 ] . Alteration of Vac14 function also leads to severe alterations in the function and morphology of late endosomes / lysosomes [ 101 , 102 ] , similar to what is seen following knock down of clavesin [ 96 ] . Non - neuronal tissues do not appear to be involved and yet Vac14 has a ubiquitous tissue distribution and its loss leads to a broad - based loss in PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P 2 production . These data demonstrate that neurons are particularly sensitive to PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P 2 loss and imply the presence of neuron - speciﬁc PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P 2 effectors . Clavesin appears to be just such an effector and it is tempting to speculate that alterations in clavesin localization or function contribute to the neurode - generation seen in the Vac14 null mice . The presence of neuron - speciﬁc PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P 2 effectors may be an adaptive response to the demands placed on the degradative lyso - some - based machinery in neurons , owing to their large size and complex metabolic activity . Surprisingly , despite the fact that clavesin is neuron speciﬁc it is upregulated in several human carcinomas , suggesting that it may serve as a marker for these cancer cells [ 98 ] . Of the 21 novel proteins found in association with liver CCVs [ 43 ] , 8 have been subsequently conﬁrmed to function in endosomal membrane trafﬁcking , 7 remain unchar - acterized and for 6 , they are either not associated with CCVs ( contaminants ) or the link is unclear ( Table 1 ) . One of the novel proteins that was recently linked to clathrin - mediated trafﬁcking is connecdenn 1 / DENND1A [ 103 ] . Connecdenn 1 is composed of a C - terminal region with multiple binding motifs for clathrin and AP - 2 and an N - terminal DENN ( differentially expressed in normal and neoplastic cells ) domain . It has been shown that the DENN domain of connecdenn 1 functions as a guanine - nucleotide exchange factor for Rab35 [ 103 ] . Connecdenn 1 recruits Rab35 to CCVs on the plasma membrane for targeting to early endosomes . During transport , connecdenn activates Rab35 and active Rab35 leads to the formation of early endosome - derived tubules that function in fast recycling of selected cargo . In fact there are 18 human genes encoding DENN domain - bearing proteins and it is very tempting to speculate that the DENN domain may be a new and generalized form of guanine - nucleotide exchange factor for Rabs . Thus , CCV proteomics has led to the unexpected discovery of a new enzymatic activity directed towards Rab GTPases . The proteomic analysis of CCVs from HeLa cells identi - ﬁed ﬁve novel proteins , all of which have characteristics consistent with a role for the protein in CCV trafﬁcking [ 44 ] ( Table 1 ) . It is currently unclear if any of these proteins have direct links to clathrin - mediated trafﬁcking . 8 Proteomics for new cargo of CCVs The work described in the review thus far indicates how proteomics of CCVs has provided new insights into the mechanisms of clathrin - mediated membrane budding and the sites at which this process occurs . In addition , proteomic analysis of CCVs has revealed a number of new proteins that function in the formation of clathrin - coated buds . Can proteomics also be used to provide insight into the nature of the cargo that utilizes CCV - based trafﬁcking pathways ? In fact a recent study by Teckchandani et al . [ 104 ] provides a nice illustration of the power of proteomics in this regard . Receptors that undergo CME contain endocytic - sorting signals that allow them to interact with cargo adaptors . The best characterized of these adaptors is AP - 2 , and in fact until quite recently , AP - 2 was though to be sufﬁcient for the recruitment of most if not all endocytic cargo . However , it is Table 1 . Continued Protein Function Peptides SH3D19 / Eve - 1 b ) Contains multiple SH3 domains 2 . 29 Binds to the cytoplasmic tail of the disintegrin and metalloproteases ADAM12 , may be involved in EGF receptor shedding [ 119 ] TPD52L1 a , b ) Tumor protein D52 - like 1 , member of the D52 family of tumor proteins 4 . 45 TPD52 b ) Tumor protein D52 - like 1 , member of the D52 family of tumor proteins 3 . 52 Annotations are based primarily on the UniProt database or on the primary literature . The number of peptides for the brain and liver entries is the total from three independent repeats for each . For the HeLa cell analysis , the control to mock iTRAQ ratio is indicated ( see text ) . a ) Indicates no experimental annotation . b ) Indicates that the precise link to clathrin trafﬁcking remains unclear . 4034 P . S . McPherson Proteomics 2010 , 10 , 4025 – 4039 & 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim www . proteomics - journal . com now established that there is an array of cargo adaptors including the proteins Dab2 , Numb , b arrestin and ARH [ 27 ] . Each member of this group of monomeric adaptor proteins binds to components of the clathrin machinery , including clathrin and AP - 2 , and interacts with the cyto - plasmic tails of speciﬁc endocytic cargo . For example , ARH binds to a privileged site on the b 2 - ear of AP - 2 and this interaction recruits ARH to nascent CCPs [ 105 ] . At its N - terminus , ARH contains a phosphotyrosine - binding domain that binds to peptides that match the consensus NPXY , such as that found in the LDL receptor . In humans , an autosomal recessive form of hypercholesteremia similar to familial hypercholesteremia results from the loss of ARH , which leads to deﬁciencies in LDL receptor CME [ 106 , 107 ] . Dab2 binds to clathrin and like ARH , contains a phospho - tyrosine - binding domain that interacts with NPXY sequen - ces . In fact Dab2 has also been shown to function in the CME of LDL receptor [ 108 , 109 ] . Thus , both ARH and Dab2 have important roles in recruiting cargo to CCPs and CCVs . Interestingly , Dab2 has also been shown to regulate the migration of multiple cell types and Dab2 expression is strongly reduced in different carcinomas . It has been unclear if the role of Dab2 in cell migration and cancer is related to its function in CME . To address this question , Teckchandani et al . [ 104 ] used a cell surface capture technology coupled to SILAC ( stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture ) to identify glycoproteins whose surface levels were increased following Dab2 loss of function . Dab2 - deﬁcient cells were grown in SILAC media containing [ 13 C 6 , 15 N 4 ] arginine and [ 13 C 6 ] lysine whereas control cells were grown in normal media . After multiple generations of growth the cells were harvested and mixed , their surface glycoproteins were labeled using biocytin hydrazide , the cells were lysed and trypsinized and glycopeptides were isolated using strepta - vidin [ 104 ] . From this analysis , 41 proteins were reliably quantiﬁed with 13 proteins increased following Dab2 knock down . Of those , ﬁve were integrins , cell surface receptors for various components of the extracellular matrix . They were subsequently able to conﬁrm that indeed Dab2 functions as an endocytic adaptor for integrins through interactions with NPXY sequences in the integrin b chains . It appears then that Dab2 regulates the dynamics of integ - rin / extracellular matrix contacts . The authors favor a model in which Dab2 promotes migration by maintaining an intracellular pool of integrins that can be mobilized to the leading edge of cells during migration . Thus , proteomics has helped to deﬁne a functional link between CME , cell migration and cancer . 9 Concluding remarks Subcellular proteomics is an extremely valuable approach to the study of organelles and subcellular compartments , allowing cell biologists insights into organelle function at unprecedented levels of complexity and resolution , a so - called protein microscope [ 110 ] . CCVs were one of the ﬁrst organelles to come under scrutiny by subcellular proteomics and these studies have led to remarkable new insights into CCV formation and function . A challenge for the future will be to isolate more speciﬁc populations of CCVs , for example , those involved in endocytosis of SVs that are undergoing spontaneous release versus those undergoing evoked release . Proteomic analysis of such populations will provide new levels of insight and understanding . I am extremely grateful to Dr . Brigitte Ritter for the preparation of Figure 1 . PSM is supported by grants from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and is a James McGill Chair . The author has declared no conﬂict of interest . 10 References [ 1 ] Nobel Lecture , In : The Coming Age of the Cell . From Nobel Lectures , Physiology or Medicine 1971 – 1980 , Lindsten J , World Scientiﬁc Publishing Co . , Singapore , 1992 . [ 2 ] Bonifacino , J . , Lippincott - Schwartz , J . , Dasso , M . , Harford , J . , Yamada K . ( Eds . ) . , Subcellular Fractionation and Isola - tion of Organelles . Current Protocols in Cell Biology , Chapter 3 , Wiley , New York 2005 . [ 3 ] De Deuve , C . , Gianetto , R . , Appelmans , F . , Wattiaux , R . , Enzymic content of the mitochondria fraction . Nature 1953 , 172 , 1143 – 1144 . [ 4 ] Balch , W . E . , Glick , B . S . , Rothman , J . E . , Sequential intermediates in the pathway of intercompartmental transport in a cell - free system . Cell 1984 , 39 , 525 – 536 . [ 5 ] Wagner , J . A . , Kelly , R . B . , Topological organization of proteins in an intracellular secretory organelle : the synaptic vesicle . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 1979 , 76 , 4126 – 4130 . [ 6 ] Trimble , W . S . , Scheller , R . H . , Molecular biology of synaptic vesicle - associated proteins . Trends Neurosci . 1988 , 11 , 241 – 242 . [ 7 ] Au , C . E . , Bell , A . W . , Gilchrist , A . , Hiding , J . et al . , Orga - nellar proteomics to create the cell map . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 2007 , 19 , 376 – 385 . [ 8 ] Bergeron , J . J . , Au , C . E . , Desjardins , M . , McPherson , P . S . , Nilsson , T . , Cell biology through proteomics – ad astra per alia porci . Trends Cell Biol . 2010 [ e - published ahead of print ] March 12 . [ 9 ] Bonifacino , J . S . , Lippincott - Schwartz , J . , Coat proteins : shaping membrane transport . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2003 , 4 , 409 – 414 . [ 10 ] Schledzewski , K . , Brinkmann , H . , Mendel , R . R . , Phyloge - netic analysis of components of the eukaryotic vesicle transport system reveals a common origin of adaptor protein complexes 1 , 2 , and 3 and the F subcomplex of the coatomer COPI . J . Mol . Evol . 1999 , 48 , 770 – 778 . Proteomics 2010 , 10 , 4025 – 4039 4035 & 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim www . proteomics - journal . com [ 11 ] McMahon , H . T . , Mills , I . G . , COP and clathrin - coated vesicle budding : different pathways , common approaches . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 2004 , 16 , 379 – 391 . [ 12 ] Field , M . C . , Dacks , J . B . , First and last ancestors : recon - structing evolution of the endomembrane system with ESCRTs , vesicle coat proteins , and nuclear pore complexes . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 2009 , 21 , 4 – 13 . [ 13 ] Duden , R . , Grifﬁths , G . , Frank , R . , Argos , P . , Kreis , T . E . , Beta - COP , a 110 kd protein associated with non - clathrin - coated vesicles and the Golgi complex , shows homology to beta - adaptin . Cell 1991 , 64 , 649 – 665 . [ 14 ] Yu , W . , Lin , J . , Jin , C . , Xia , B . , Solution structure of human zeta - COP : direct evidences for structural similarity between COP I and clathrin - adaptor coats . J . Mol . Biol . 2009 , 386 , 903 – 912 . [ 15 ] Devos , D . , Dokudovskaya , S . , Alber , F . , Williams , R . et al . , Components of coated vesicles and nuclear pore complexes share a common molecular architecture . PLoS Biol . 2004 , 2 , e380 . [ 16 ] Brodsky , F . M . , Chen , C . Y . , Knuehl , C . , Towler , M . C . , Wakeham , D . E . , Biological basket weaving : formation and function of clathrin - coated vesicles . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 2001 , 17 , 517 – 568 . [ 17 ] Roth , T . F . , Porter , K . R . , Yolk protein uptake in the oocyte of the mosquito AEDES Aegypti L . J . Cell . Biol . 1964 , 20 , 313 – 332 . [ 18 ] Pearse , B . M . , Coated vesicles from pig brain : puriﬁcation and biochemical characterization . J . Mol . Biol . 1975 , 97 , 93 – 98 . [ 19 ] Ungewickell , E . , Branton , D . , Assembly units of clathrin coats . Nature 1981 , 289 , 420 – 422 . [ 20 ] Kirchhausen , T . , Harrison , S . C . , Protein organization in clathrin trimers . Cell 1981 , 23 , 755 – 761 . [ 21 ] Fotin , A . , Cheng , Y . , Sliz , P . , Grigorieff , N . et al . , Molecular model for a complete clathrin lattice from electron cryo - microscopy . Nature 2004 , 432 , 573 – 579 . [ 22 ] Ritter , B . , McPherson , P . S . , Molecular mechanisms in clathrin - mediated membrane budding . In : Ker . anen , S . , Jantti , J . ( Eds ) , Regulatory Mechanisms of Intracellular Membrane Transport , Topics in Current Genetics , Vol 10 , Springer , Berlin , Heidelberg , 2004 , pp 9 – 37 . [ 23 ] Collins , B . M . , McCoy , A . J . , Kent , H . M . , Evans , P . R . , Owen , D . J . , Molecular architecture and functional model of the endocytic AP2 complex . Cell 2002 , 109 , 523 – 535 . [ 24 ] Slepnev , V . I . , De Camilli , P . , Accessory factors in clathrin - dependent synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 2000 , 1 , 161 – 172 . [ 25 ] McPherson , P . S . , Ritter , B . , Peptide motifs : building the clathrin machinery . Mol . Neurobiol . 2005 , 32 , 73 – 87 . [ 26 ] Traub , L . M . , Common principles in clathrin - mediated sorting at the Golgi and the plasma membrane . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 2005 , 1744 , 415 – 437 . [ 27 ] Traub , L . M . , Tickets to ride : selecting cargo for clathrin - regulated internalization . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2009 , 10 , 583 – 596 . [ 28 ] Gallop , J . L . , McMahon , H . T . , BAR domains and membrane curvature : bringing your curves to the BAR . Biochem . Soc . Symp . 2005 , 72 , 223 – 231 . [ 29 ] Legendre - Guillemin , V . , Wasiak , S . , Hussain , N . K . , Angers , A . , McPherson , P . S . , ENTH / ANTH proteins and clathrin - mediated membrane budding . J . Cell Sci . 2005 , 117 , 9 – 18 . [ 30 ] Kornfeld , S . , Trafﬁcking of lysosomal enzymes in normal and disease states . J . Clin . Invest . 1986 , 77 , 1 – 6 . [ 31 ] Conner , S . D . , Schmid , S . L . , Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 2003 , 422 , 37 – 44 . [ 32 ] Brown , M . S . , Goldstein , J . L . , A receptor - mediated path - way for cholesterol homeostasis . Science 1986 , 232 , 34 – 47 . [ 33 ] Mishra , S . K . , Watkins , S . C . , Traub , L . M . , The autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia ( ARH ) protein interfaces directly with the clathrin - coat machinery . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2002 , 99 , 16099 – 16104 . [ 34 ] von Zastrow , M . , Sorkin , A . , Signaling on the endocytic pathway . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 2007 , 19 , 436 – 445 . [ 35 ] Fallon , L . , Belanger , C . M . , Corera , A . T . , Kontogiannea , M . et al . , A regulated interaction with the UIM protein Eps15 implicates parkin in EGF receptor trafﬁcking and PI ( 3 ) K - Akt signalling . Nat . Cell Biol . 2006 , 8 , 834 – 842 . [ 36 ] Soderblom , C . , Blackstone , C . , Trafﬁc accidents : molecular genetic insights into the pathogenesis of the hereditary spastic paraplegias . Pharmacol . Ther . 2006 , 109 , 42 – 56 . [ 37 ] McPherson , P . S . , Ritter , B . , Augustine , G . J . , The mole - cular machinery for synaptic vesicle endocytosis . In : Ehlers , M . , Hell , J . , ( Eds . ) , Structural and Functional Organization of the Synapse , Springer , Berlin , 2008 . [ 38 ] Huber , L . A . , Is proteomics heading in the wrong direction ? Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2003 , 4 , 74 – 80 . [ 39 ] Brunet , S . , Thibault , P . , Gagnon , E . , Kearney , P . et al . , Organelle proteomics : looking at less to see more . Trends Cell Biol . 2003 , 13 , 629 – 638 . [ 40 ] Burre , J . , Volknandt , W . , The synaptic vesicle proteome . J . Neurochem . 2007 , 101 , 1448 – 1462 . [ 41 ] Wasiak , S . , Legendre - Guillemin , V . , Puertollano , R . , Blondeau , F . et al . , Enthoprotin : a novel clathrin - associated protein identiﬁed through subcellular proteomics . J . Cell Biol . 2002 , 158 , 855 – 862 . [ 42 ] Blondeau , F . , Ritter , B . , Allaire , P . D . , Wasiak , S . et al . , Tandem MS analysis of brain clathrin - coated vesicles reveals their critical involvement in synaptic vesicle recy - cling . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2004 , 101 , 3833 – 3838 . [ 43 ] Girard , M . , Allaire , P . D . , McPherson , P . S . , Blondeau , F . , Non - stoichiometric relationship between clathrin heavy and light chains revealed by quantitative comparative proteomics of clathrin - coated vesicles from brain and liver . Mol . Cell Proteomics 2005 , 4 , 1145 – 1154 . [ 44 ] Borner , G . H . , Harbour , M . , Hester , S . , Lilley , K . S . , Robin - son , M . S . , Comparative proteomics of clathrin - coated vesicles . J . Cell Biol . 2006 , 175 , 571 – 578 . [ 45 ] Maycox , P . R . , Link , E . , Reetz , A . , Morris , S . A . , Jahn , R . , Clathrin - coated vesicles in nervous tissue are involved primarily in synaptic vesicle recycling . J . Cell Biol . 1992 , 118 , 1379 – 1388 . 4036 P . S . McPherson Proteomics 2010 , 10 , 4025 – 4039 & 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim www . proteomics - journal . com [ 46 ] Girard , M . , Allaire , P . D . , Blondeau , F . , McPherson , P . S . , Isolation of clathrin - coated vesicles by differential and density gradient centrifugation , Current Protocols in Cell Biology , Chapter 3 : Unit 3 . 13 , April 2005 . [ 47 ] Coughenour , H . D . , Spaulding , R . S . , Thompson , C . M . , The synaptic vesicle proteome : a comparative study in membrane protein identiﬁcation . Proteomics 2004 , 4 , 3141 – 3155 . [ 48 ] Burre , J . , Beckhause , T . , Schagger , H . , Corvey , C . et al . , Analysis of the synaptic vesicle proteome using three gel - based protein separation techniques . Proteomics , 2006 , 6 , 6250 – 6262 . [ 49 ] Liu , H . , Sadygov , R . G . , Yates3rd , J . R . , A model for random sampling and estimation of relative protein abundance in shotgun proteomics . Anal . Chem . 2004 , 76 , 4193 – 4201 . [ 50 ] Bergeron , J . J . , Hallett , M . , Peptides you can count on . Nat . Biotechnol . 2007 , 25 , 61 – 62 . [ 51 ] Heuser , J . E . , Reese , T . S . , Evidence for recycling of synaptic vesicle membrane during transmitter release at the frog neuromuscular junction . J . Cell Biol . 1973 , 57 , 315 – 344 . [ 52 ] Ceccarelli , B . , Hurlbut , W . P . , Mauro , A . , Turnover of transmitter and synaptic vesicles at the frog neuromus - cular junction . J . Cell Biol . 1973 , 57 , 499 – 524 . [ 53 ] Gandhi , S . P . , Stevens , C . F . , Three modes of synaptic vesicular recycling revealed by single - vesicle imaging . Nature 2003 , 423 , 607 – 613 . [ 54 ] Aravanis , A . M . , Pyle , J . L . , Tsien , R . W . , Single synaptic vesicles fusing transiently and successively without loss of identity . Nature 2003 , 423 , 643 – 647 . [ 55 ] Morciano , M . , Burre , J . , Corvey , C . , Karas , M . et al . , Immunoisolation of two synaptic vesicle pools from synaptosomes : a proteomics study . J . Neurochem . 2005 , 95 , 1732 – 1745 . [ 56 ] Takamori , S . , Holt , M . , Stenius , K . , Lemke , E . A . et al . , Molecular anatomy of a trafﬁcking organelle . Cell 2006 , 127 , 831 – 846 . [ 57 ] Grønborg , M . , Pavlos , N . J . , Brunk , I . , Chua , J . J . et al . , Quantitative comparison of glutamatergic and GABAergic synaptic vesicles unveils selectivity for few proteins including MAL2 , a novel synaptic vesicle protein . J . Neurosci . 2010 , 30 , 2 – 12 . [ 58 ] Takei , K . , Mundigl , O . , Daniell , L . , De Camilli , P . , The synaptic vesicle cycle : a single vesicle budding step involving clathrin and dynamin . J . Cell Biol . 1996 , 133 , 1237 – 1250 . [ 59 ] Faundez , V . , Horng , J . T . , Kelly , R . B . , A function for the AP3 coat complex in synaptic vesicle formation from endosomes . Cell 1993 , 93 , 423 – 432 . [ 60 ] Walch - Solimena , C . , Blasi , J . , Edelmann , L . , Chapman , E . R . et al . , The t - SNAREs syntaxin 1 and SNAP - 25 are present on organelles that participate in synaptic vesicle recycling . J . Cell Biol . 1995 , 128 , 637 – 645 . [ 61 ] Jia , J . Y . , Lamer , S . , Sch . umann , M . , Schmidt , M . R . et al . , Quantitative proteomics analysis of detergent - resistant membranes from chemical synapses : evidence for cholesterol as spatial organizer of synaptic vesicle cycling . Mol . Cell . Proteomics 2006 , 5 , 2060 – 2071 . [ 62 ] Opazo , F . , Punge , A . , B . uckers , J . , Hoopmann , P . et al . , Limited intermixing of synaptic vesicle components upon vesicle recycling . Trafﬁc 2010 [ Epub ahead of print ] . [ 63 ] Fredj , N . B . , Burrone , J . , A resting pool of vesicles is responsible for spontaneous vesicle fusion at the synapse . Nat . Neurosci . 2009 , 12 , 751 – 758 . [ 64 ] Groffen , A . J . , Martens , S . , Dı´ez Arazola , R . et al . , Doc2b is a high - afﬁnity Ca2 1 sensor for spontaneous neuro - transmitter release . Science 2010 , 327 , 1614 – 1618 . [ 65 ] Pilch , P . F . , Shia , M . A . , Benson , R . J . , Fine , R . E . , Coated vesicles participate in the receptor - mediated endocytosis of insulin . J . Cell Biol . 1983 , 96 , 133 – 138 . [ 66 ] Elvira , G . , Wasiak , S . , Blandford , V . , Tong , X . K . et al . , Characterization of an RNA granule from developing brain . Mol . Cell Proteomics 2006 , 5 , 635 – 651 . [ 67 ] Ungewickell , E . , Ungewickell , H . , Bovine brain clathrin light chains impede heavy chain assembly in vitro . J . Biol . Chem . 1991 , 266 , 12710 – 12714 . [ 68 ] Huang , F . , Khvorova , A . , Marshall , W . , Sorkin , A . , Analysis of clathrin - mediated endocytosis of epidermal growth factor receptor by RNA interference . J . Biol . Chem . 2004 , 279 , 16657 – 16661 . [ 69 ] Poupon , V . , Girard , M . , Legendre - Guillemin , V . , Thomas , S . et al . , Clathrin light chains function in mannose phosphate receptor trafﬁcking via regulation of actin assembly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 2008 , 105 , 168 – 173 . [ 70 ] Saffarian , S . , Cocucci , E . , Kirchhausen , T . , Distinct dynamics of endocytic clathrin - coated pits and coated plaques . PLoS Biol . 2009 , 7 , e1000191 . [ 71 ] Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , Warren , R . A . , Kessels , M . M . , Keen , J . H . et al . , The actin - binding protein Hip1R associ - ates with clathrin during early stages of endocytosis and promotes clathrin assembly in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 2001 , 154 , 1209 – 1223 . [ 72 ] Legendre - Guillemin , V . , Metzler , M . , Charbonneau , M . , Gan , L . et al . , HIP1 and HIP12 display differential binding to F - actin , AP2 , and clathrin . Identiﬁcation of a novel inter - action with clathrin light chain . J . Biol . Chem . 2002 , 277 , 19897 – 19904 . [ 73 ] Legendre - Guillemin , V . , Metzler , M . , Lemaire , J . F . , Philie , J . et al . , Huntingtin interacting protein 1 ( HIP1 ) regulates clathrin assembly through direct binding to the regulatory region of the clathrin light chain . J . Biol . Chem . 2005 , 280 , 6101 – 6108 . [ 74 ] Chen , C . Y . , Brodsky , F . M . , Huntingtin - interacting protein 1 ( Hip1 ) and Hip1 - related protein ( Hip1R ) bind the conserved sequence of clathrin light chains and thereby inﬂuence clathrin assembly in vitro and actin distribution in vivo . J . Biol . Chem . 2005 , 280 , 6109 – 6117 . [ 75 ] Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , Zhang , C . X . , Carreno , S . , Barroso , C . et al . , RNAi - mediated Hip1R silencing results in stable association between the endocytic machinery and the actin assembly machinery . Mol . Biol . Cell 2004 , 15 , 1666 – 1679 . Proteomics 2010 , 10 , 4025 – 4039 4037 & 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim www . proteomics - journal . com [ 76 ] Le Clainche , C . , Pauly , B . S . , Zhang , C . X . , Engqvist - Gold - stein , A . E . et al . , A Hip1R - cortactin complex negatively regulates actin assembly associated with endocytosis . EMBO J . 2007 , 26 , 1199 – 1210 . [ 77 ] Wilbur , J . D . , Hwang , P . K . , Ybe , J . A . , Lane , M . et al . , Conformational switching of clathrin light chain regulates clathrin lattice assembly . Dev . Cell 2010 , 18 , 841 – 848 . [ 78 ] Mallard , F . , Antony , C . , Tenza , D . , Salamero , J . et al . , Direct pathway from early / recycling endosomes to the Golgi apparatus revealed through the study of shiga toxin B - fragment transport . J . Cell . Biol . 1998 , 143 , 973 – 990 . [ 79 ] Bonifacino , J . S . , Hurley , J . H . , Retromer . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 2008 , 20 , 427 – 436 . [ 80 ] Zhang , Y . , Grant , B . , Hirsh , D . , RME - 8 , a conserved J - domain protein , is required for endocytosis in Caenor - habditis elegans . Mol . Biol . Cell 2001 , 12 , 2011 – 2021 . [ 81 ] Girard , M . , Poupon , V . , Blondeau , F . , McPherson , P . S . , The DnaJ - domain protein RME - 8 functions in endosomal traf - ﬁcking . J . Biol . Chem . 2005 , 280 , 40135 – 40143 . [ 82 ] Fujibayashi , A . , Taguchi , T . , Misaki , R . , Ohtani , M . et al . , Human RME - 8 is involved in membrane trafﬁcking through early endosomes . Cell Struct . Funct . 2008 , 33 , 35 – 50 . [ 83 ] Girard , M . , McPherson , P . S . , RME - 8 regulates trafﬁcking of the epidermal growth factor receptor . FEBS Lett . 2008 , 582 , 961 – 966 . [ 84 ] Chang , H . C . , Hull , M . , Mellman , I . , The J - domain protein Rme - 8 interacts with Hsc70 to control clathrin - dependent endocytosis in Drosophila . J . Cell Biol . 2004 , 164 , 1055 – 1064 . [ 85 ] Popoff , V . , Mardones , G . A . , Bai , S . K . , Chambon , V . et al . , Analysis of articulation between clathrin and retromer in retrograde sorting on early endosomes . Trafﬁc 2009 , 10 , 1868 – 1880 . [ 86 ] Shi , A . , Sun , L . , Banerjee , R . , Tobin , M . et al . , Regulation of endosomal clathrin and retromer - mediated endosome to Golgi retrograde transport by the J - domain protein RME - 8 . EMBO J . 2009 , 28 , 3290 – 3302 . [ 87 ] Sachse , M . , Urbe´ , S . , Oorschot , V . , Strous , G . J . , Klum - perman , J . , Bilayered clathrin coats on endosomal vacuoles are involved in protein sorting toward lyso - somes . Mol . Biol . Cell 2002 , 13 , 1313 – 1328 . [ 88 ] Lee , J . H . , Overstreet , E . , Fitch , E . , Fleenor , S . , Fischer , J . A . , Drosophila liquid facets - Related encodes Golgi epsin and is an essential gene required for cell proliferation , growth , and patterning . Dev . Biol . 2009 , 331 , 1 – 13 . [ 89 ] Saint - Pol , A . , Ye´lamos , B . , Amessou , M . , Mills , I . G . et al . , Clathrin adaptor epsinR is required for retrograde sorting on early endosomal membranes . Dev . Cell 2004 , 6 , 525 – 538 . [ 90 ] Ritter , B . , Denisov , A . Y . , Philie , J . , Allaire , P . D . et al . , The NECAP PHear domain increases clathrin accessory protein binding potential . EMBO J . 2007 , 26 , 4066 – 4077 . [ 91 ] Conner , S . D . , Schro¨ter , T . , Schmid , S . L . , AAK1 - mediated micro2 phosphorylation is stimulated by assembled clathrin . Trafﬁc 2003 , 4 , 885 – 890 . [ 92 ] Latourelle , J . C . , Pankratz , N . , Dumitriu , A . , Wilk , J . B . et al . , Genomewide association study for onset age in Parkinson disease . BMC Med . Genet . 2009 , 22 , 10 : 98 . [ 93 ] Ridley , S . H . , Ktistakis , N . , Davidson , K . , Anderson , K . E . et al . , FENS - 1 and DFCP1 are FYVE domain - containing proteins with distinct functions in the endosomal and Golgi compartments . J . Cell Sci . 2001 , 114 , 3991 – 4000 . [ 94 ] D . uwel , M . , Ungewickell , E . J . , Clathrin - dependent asso - ciation of CVAK104 with endosomes and the trans - Golgi network . Mol . Biol . Cell 2006 , 17 , 4513 – 4525 . [ 95 ] Borner , G . H . , Rana , A . A . , Forster , R . , Harbour , M . et al . , CVAK104 is a novel regulator of clathrin - mediated SNARE sorting . Trafﬁc 2007 , 8 , 893 – 903 . [ 96 ] Katoh , Y . , Ritter , B . , Gaffry , T . , Blondeau , F . et al . , The clavesin family , neuron - speciﬁc lipid - and clathrin - binding Sec14 proteins regulating lysosomal morphology . J . Biol . Chem . 2009 , 284 , 27646 – 27654 . [ 97 ] Saito , K . , Tautz , L . , Mustelin , T . , The lipid - binding SEC14 domain . Biochem . Biophys . Acta . 2007 , 1771 , 719 – 726 . [ 98 ] Zhao , S . , Xu , C . , Qian , H . , Lv , L . et al . , Cellular retinalde - hyde - binding protein - like ( CRALBPL ) , a novel human Sec14p - like gene that is upregulated in human hepatocel - lular carcinomas , may be used as a marker for human hepatocellular carcinomas . DNA Cell Biol . 2008 , 27 , 159 – 163 . [ 99 ] Kong , Y . H . , Ye , G . M . , Qu , K . , Pan , W . Q . et al . , Cloning and characterization of a novel , human cellular retinaldehyde - binding protein CRALBP - like ( CRALBPL ) gene . Biotechnol . Lett . 2006 , 28 , 1327 – 1333 . [ 100 ] Dove , S . K . , Dong , K . , Kobayashi , T . , Williams , F . K . , Michell , R . H . , Phosphatidylinositol 3 , 5 - bisphosphate and Fab1p / PIKfyve underPPIn endo - lysosome function . Biochem . J . 2009 , 419 , 1 – 13 . [ 101 ] Jin , N . , Chow , C . Y . , Liu , L . , Zolov , S . N . et al . , VAC14 nucleates a protein complex essential for the acute inter - conversion of PI3P and PI ( 3 , 5 ) P ( 2 ) in yeast and mouse . EMBO J . 2008 , 27 , 3221 – 3234 . [ 102 ] Zhang , Y . , Zolov , S . N . , Chow , C . Y . , Slutsky , S . G . et al . , Loss of Vac14 , a regulator of the signaling lipid phospha - tidylinositol 3 , 5 - bisphosphate , results in neurodegenera - tion in mice . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U S A . 2007 , 104 , 17518 – 17523 . [ 103 ] Allaire , P . D . , Marat , A . L . , Dall’Armi , C . , Di Paolo , G . et al . , The Connecdenn DENN domain : a GEF for Rab35 mediating cargo - speciﬁc exit from early endosomes . Mol . Cell 2010 , 37 , 370 – 382 . [ 104 ] Teckchandani , A . , Toida , N . , Goodchild , J . , Henderson , C . et al . , Quantitative proteomics identiﬁes a Dab2 / integrin module regulating cell migration . J . Cell Biol . 2009 , 186 , 99 – 111 . [ 105 ] Keyel , P . A . , Thieman , J . R . , Roth , R . , Erkan , E . et al . , The AP - 2 adaptor beta2 appendage scaffolds alternate cargo endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 2008 , 19 , 5309 – 5326 . [ 106 ] Eden , E . R . , Naoumova , R . P . , Burden , J . J . , McCarthy , M . I . , Soutar , A . K . , Use of homozygosity mapping to identify a region on chromosome 1 bearing a defective 4038 P . S . McPherson Proteomics 2010 , 10 , 4025 – 4039 & 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim www . proteomics - journal . com gene that causes autosomal recessive homozygous hypercholesterolemia in two unrelated families . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 2001 , 68 , 653 – 660 . [ 107 ] Garcia , C . K . , Wilund , K . , Arca , M . , Zuliani , G . et al . , Auto - somal recessive hypercholesterolemia caused by muta - tions in a putative LDL receptor adaptor protein . Science 2001 , 292 , 1394 – 1398 . [ 108 ] Keyel , P . A . , Mishra , S . K . , Roth , R . , Heuser , J . E . et al . , A single common portal for clathrin - mediated endocytosis of distinct cargo governed by cargo - selective adaptors . Mol . Biol . Cell 2006 , 17 , 4300 – 4317 . [ 109 ] Maurer , M . E . , Cooper , J . A . , The adaptor protein Dab2 sorts LDL receptors into coated pits independently of AP - 2 and ARH . J . Cell Sci . 2006 , 119 , 4235 – 4246 . [ 110 ] Bell , A . W . , Nilsson , T . , Kearney , R . E . , Bergeron , J . J . , The protein microscope : incorporating mass spectrometry into cell biology . Nat . Methods 2007 , 4 , 783 – 784 . [ 111 ] Conner , S . D . , Schmid , S . L . , Identiﬁcation of an adaptor - associated kinase , AAK1 , as a regulator of clathrin - medi - ated endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 2002 , 156 , 921 . [ 112 ] Ritter , B . et al . , Identiﬁcation of a family of endocytic proteins that deﬁne a new alpha - adaptin ear - binding motif . EMBO Rep . 2003 , 4 , 1089 . [ 113 ] Allaire , P . D . et al . , Connecdenn , a novel DENN domain - containing protein of neuronal clathrin - coated vesicles functioning in synaptic vesicle endocytosis . J . Neurosci . 2006 , 26 , 13202 . [ 114 ] Hirst , J . et al . , The aftiphilin / p200 / gamma - synergin complex . Mol . Biol . Cell 2005 , 16 , 2554 . [ 115 ] Naslavsky , N . et al . , EHD3 regulates early - endosome - to - Golgi transport and preserves Golgi morphology . J . Cell Sci . 2009 , 122 , 389 . [ 116 ] Hu , J . et al . , A class of dynamin - like GTPases involved in the generation of the tubular ER network . Cell 2009 , 138 , 549 . [ 117 ] Tanaka , M . et al . , A novel RNA - binding protein , Ossa / C9orf10 , regulates activity of Src kinases to protect cells from oxidative stress - induced apoptosis . Mol . Cell Biol . 2009 , 29 , 402 . [ 118 ] Hassa , P . O . et al . , The diverse biological roles of mammalian PARPS , a small but powerful family of poly - ADP - ribose polymerases . Front . Biosci . 2008 , 13 , 3046 ; 25 . [ 119 ] Tanaka , M . et al . , ADAM binding protein Eve - 1 is required for ectodomain shedding of epidermal growth factor receptor ligands . J . Biol . Chem . 2004 , 279 , 41950 . & 2010 WILEY - VCH Verlag GmbH & Co . KGaA , Weinheim www . proteomics - journal . com Proteomics 2010 , 10 , 4025 – 4039 4039