Surface probe measurements of the elasticity of sectioned tissue , thin gels and polyelectrolyte multilayer ﬁlms : correlations between substrate stiﬀness and cell adhesion Adam J . Engler a , Ludovic Richert b , Joyce Y . Wong c , Catherine Picart b , Dennis E . Discher a , * a Biophysical Engineering Lab , Mechanical Engineering and Applied Mechanics and Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA 19104 , USA b Institut National de la Sante´ et de la Recherche Me´dicale , Unite´ 595 , Universite´ Louis Pasteur , 11 Rue Humann , 67085 Strasbourg Cedex , France c Department of Biomedical Engineering , 44 Cummington St . , Boston University , Boston , MA 02215 , USA Abstract Surface probe measurements of the elasticity of thin ﬁlm matrices as well as biological samples prove generally important to understanding cell attachment across such systems . To illustrate this , sectioned arteries were probed by atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) within the smooth muscle cell ( SMC ) - rich medial layer , yielding an apparent Young (cid:1) s modulus E media (cid:1) 5 – 8 kPa . Polyacrylamide gels with E gel spanning several - fold above and below this range were then cast 5 – 70 l m thick and coated with collagen : SMC spreading shows a hyperbolic dependence in projected cell area ver - sus E gel . The modulus that gives half - max spreading is E 1 / 2 - spread (cid:1) 8 – 10 kPa , proving remarkably close to E media . More complex , layer - by - layer microﬁlms of poly ( LL - lysine ) / hyaluronic acid were also tested and show equivalent trends of increased SMC spreading with increased stiﬀness . Adhesive spreading of cells thus seems to correlate broadly with the eﬀective stiﬀness of synthetic materials and tissues . (cid:1) 2004 Published by Elsevier B . V . Keywords : Surface structure , morphology , roughness , and topography ; Adhesion ; Atomic force microscopy 0039 - 6028 / $ - see front matter (cid:1) 2004 Published by Elsevier B . V . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . susc . 2004 . 06 . 179 Abbreviations : PA , polyacrylamide ; AFM , atomic force microscopy ; FRAP , ﬂuorescence recovery after photo - bleaching ; PLL , poly ( LL - lysine ) ; HA , hyaluronic acid ; SMC , smooth muscle cell ; DMEM , Dulbeco (cid:1) s Modiﬁed Eagle Medium * Corresponding author . Address : Biophysical Engineering Lab , 112 Towne Building , 220 South 33rd St , Philadelphia , PA 19104 , USA . Tel . : + 1 - 215 - 898 - 4809 ; fax : + 1 - 215 - 573 - 6334 . E - mail address : discher @ seas . upenn . edu ( D . E . Discher ) . Surface Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx www . elsevier . com / locate / susc ARTICLE IN PRESS 1 . Introduction As a surface probe method for local elasticity measurements , atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) has been widely used on many materials , both syn - thetic and natural . In growing need of such charac - terizations are thin and soft gels that are now increasingly used in cell culture . Motivation for probing matrix mechanical properties by AFM de - rives from the relatively recent idea that the elastic or viscoelastic resistance of a substrate to cell - gen - erated forces is intrinsic to a cell (cid:1) s in vitro re - sponse , from adhesive spreading to diﬀerentiation [ 1 – 4 ] . In other words , a cell is tactile in attaching and responding to a ligand - coated surface—it is not simply a droplet that spreads on a favorable surface . (cid:2) Rheobiology (cid:1) aptly describes the phenom - ena while suggesting tissue - level mechanisms . Accurate and arguably highly local measurements of matrix and substrate mechanical properties are thus increasingly needed for understanding cell re - sponses on surfaces that might or might not mimic a particular tissue (cid:1) s elasticity . Pelham and Wang [ 3 ] were the ﬁrst to grow cells on collagen - coated polyacrylamide ( PA ) gel sub - strates of varied elasticity . Adjusting the gel (cid:1) s crosslinker , bis - acrylamide , permits systematic observation of elasticity - dependent diﬀerences in cell behavior . Cell spreading , cell crawling , and fo - cal adhesion assembly are a few of many cell re - sponses found to be inﬂuenced by such elasticity manipulations [ 1 – 6 ] . It has become clear , however , that various elastic moduli for (cid:1) 100 l m thick PA gels reported in Pelham and Wang [ 3 ] and Lo et al . [ 2 ] are incorrect by up to orders of magnitude when compared to more recent reports on PA gel elasticity [ 1 , 4 , 7 ] . Accurate measurements of PA gel elasticity , particularly as measured here by AFM , allow comparisons with tissue properties and highlight the need for systematic assess - ments of cell response together with matrix elastic - ity , where length scale eﬀects normal to the substrate are also considered together with lateral accuracy . AFM is a useful surface probe method not only for probing cell culture substrates but also for probing the elasticity of cells and perhaps even tis - sues that previously have been studied only by macroscopic methods [ 8 ] . Cells in vitro have been reported to have eﬀective Young (cid:1) s moduli , E cell , in the range of 1 – 100 kPa [ 8 – 12 ] . Relevant here , this range encompasses measurements of elasticity found for vascular smooth muscle cells ( SMC ) in culture , motivating questions of arterial media elasticity . Blood vessels , particularly arteries with complex structure and function , provide good examples of the possible insight to be gained from probing vascular cross - sections with three distinct annular layers of very diﬀerent composition ( Fig . 1 ) . The medial layer typically consists of (cid:1) 30 – 60 % SMCs and is also rich in collagen ( (cid:1) 10 – 40 % ) as well as elastin , which is why the media is often associated with vessel wall elasticity . How - ever , even with the complexity of the mechanical environment for these cells , a single composite modulus ( e . g . axial stress / vessel (cid:1) s extensional strain ) of pressurized vessels in high strain regimes is typically all that is reported or known [ 8 ] to rep - resent both static and dynamic elastic loading sit - uations . The arterial media is predominantly smooth muscle cell ( SMC ) tissue , with a Young (cid:1) s Fig . 1 . Arterial section . Arteries contain three layers of distinct composition and artery - dependent thickness . The Intima faces the vessel lumen and is lined with endothelial cells . The Media is both elastic and contractile with SMCs typically composing (cid:1) 30 – 60 % of the mass [ 20 ] . Collagen is the predominant matrix protein at (cid:1) 10 – 40 % by mass , with elastin also being a signiﬁcant fraction . The outermost , protective layer is the Adventitia , which is expected to be far stiﬀer . 2 A . J . Engler et al . / Surface Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx ARTICLE IN PRESS modulus E media that can presently only be esti - mated . For example , dog ureter muscle , when re - laxed , has a modulus in the range of 5 – 20 kPa at moderate strains of 10 – 30 % [ 8 , 9 ] . Within this seemingly narrow range of stiﬀness , adhesive spreading of vascular SMC is known to vary greatly in vitro [ 1 ] . If understood well enough , the layered geome - try of arterial vessel walls or perhaps just the elas - tin layering within the media might be eﬀectively mimicked with multilayer ﬁlms of alternating poly - electrolytes . Polyelectrolyte multilayer ﬁlms made by the layer - by - layer method of alternately dipping a substrate in cationic and anionic poly - electrolyte solutions [ 13 , 14 ] create a highly control - lable system dominated by electrostatic interaction between layers ( analogous to the coupling between layers of SMCs in the arterial vessel wall ) . While serum deposition is known to promote cell adhe - sion in nanometer thin and dense ﬁlms , such dep - osition has little eﬀect on swollen ﬁlms [ 15 , 16 ] . However , very little is yet known about the elastic - ity of multilayer ﬁlms , including eﬀects of layer number , thickness , and type of polyelectrolyte , as well as the inﬂuence of ﬁlm elasticity on cell adhesion . As a representative study in surface probe measurements from in vivo to in vitro , a speciﬁc goal here is to clarify the mechanical environment seen by SMC in vivo and to begin correlating this with SMC responses on collagen - coated polymer matrices . Here , length scale eﬀects relevant to SMC sensing of matrix stiﬀness are partially ad - dressed by attention to thickness h of gels and multilayers as well as AFM indentation depth . Lateral sensitivity and accuracy , at least in AFM , are also partly addressed by probing with pyramidal nanotips versus microbead tips and by studying lateral gradients of elasticity . Beyond these technical issues , a key question is whether model matrix materials other than PA gels show similar trends in cell response versus elasticity . To this end , the eﬀective elasticity of layer - by - layer polyelectrolyte ﬁlms—both with and without covalent crosslinking—is reported together with spreading of SMC on these thin ﬁlms . Ultimately , it is found that cells spread increasingly on stiﬀer substrates regardless of height ( > l m ) and compo - sition , with half maximum spreading coincident with tissue elasticity . 2 . Experimental procedures 2 . 1 . Gel substrates PA gel substrates were polymerized as homoge - nous or gradient thin ﬁlms on rigid glass supports . Gels with homogenous bis - acrylamide crosslinker concentration were prepared per Wang and Pel - ham [ 17 ] , with the addition of glass spacer beads of desired diameter . To induce crosslinking , 1 / 200 volume of 10 % ammonium persulfate and 1 / 2000 volume of N , N , N 0 , N 0 - tetramethylethylenedi - amine were added to PA gel solutions , composed of 5 – 10 % acrylamide monomer , 0 . 03 – 0 . 3 % bis - acrylamide crosslinker , and 1 % bead spacers ( 5 – 10 l m ; Duke Scientiﬁc ; Palo Alto , CA ) . Drops of polymerizing gel solution were placed on glutar - aldehyde - treated aminosilanized coverslips , which covalently bound the PA . Chlorosilanized cover - slips were placed on top of the PA , and weights were added to ensure that the gel thickness was de - ﬁned by the spacer bead diameter . The droplet vol - ume was also used to control gel height . Gel heights were visually conﬁrmed by calibrated through focusing in a light microscope , and AFM was employed to determine the gel stiﬀness ( detailed below ) . Rat - tail collagen type 1 ( BD Bio - sciences ; Bedford , MA ) was chemically crosslinked using a heterobifunctional photoactivating cross - linker , sulfo - SANPAH ( Pierce , Rockford , IL ) per Wang and Pelham [ 17 ] . Substrate attachment of collagen was measured with 10 : 1 collagen / FITC - collagen mixture and compared to standard slides of known ﬂuorescent collagen [ 1 , 4 ] in order to cal - ibrate the amount of surface - bond collagen . Attachment and accessibility to cells was also as - sessed using a polyclonal anti - collagen antibody that only binds native collagen ( Chemicon ; Teme - cula , CA ) and quantum dots ( Quantum Dot ; Hay - ward , CA ) labeled with secondary antibodies . To create elasticity gradients within PA gels , a microﬂuidic method was used [ 34 ] . Brieﬂy , poly - A . J . Engler et al . / Surface Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx 3 ARTICLE IN PRESS acrylamide was photopolymerized in mixing chan - nels patterned in polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) with two crosslinker inputs ( 0 . 048 % and 0 . 48 % bis - acrylamide ) that combined with 8 % acrylamide solutions in the microﬂuidic channels to create the gradient . The PA gradient gels were (cid:1) 90 l m thick , as conﬁrmed by light microscopy , and were pre - pared on aminosilanized coverslips . 2 . 2 . Polyelectrolyte multilayer preparation Poly ( LL - lysine ) / hyaluronic acid ( PLL / HA ) i multilayer ﬁlms , where i is the number of layer pairs , were previously shown to be micrometer thick ﬁlms [ 18 ] that could be used as cell substrate for cell adhesion [ 15 , 19 ] . They were prepared here by sequential layering on 24 mm · 24 mm cover - glass cleaned with 10 mM sodium dodecyl sulfate ( SDS ) and 0 . 1 N HCl ( 10 min ) and then rinsed with deionized water . PLL ( 30 kDa ) , PLL – ﬂuo - rescein ( 0 . 003 – 0 . 01 mol ﬂuorescein per mol lysine monomer ) , and HA ( 400 kDa ; Bioiberica , Spain ) were prepared by direct dissolution in ﬁltered 0 . 15 M NaCl solution ( pH 6 ) at 1 mg / ml ﬁnal con - centration . Films were prepared by an automatic dipping machine ( Dipping Robot DR3 , Kirstein GmbH , Germany ) in which the glass slides were arranged vertically in a homemade holder and im - mersed for 10 min in a ﬁrst polycation solution ( PLL ) . The slides were subsequently rinsed succes - sively in three diﬀerent beakers containing 0 . 15 M NaCl ( pH 6 ) ( volumes of 350 , 200 and 200 mL ) for 1 , 2 . 5 , and 2 . 5 min respectively . Samples were dipped in oppositely charged polyelectrolyte solu - tion , rinsed using the same procedure , and the process was repeated . Rinsing solutions were chan - ged after the deposition of every twentieth layer . Films were stored in 0 . 15 M NaCl at 4 (cid:3) C . The thickness of the ﬁlms was determined by confocal microscopy by measuring the green band in z - sec - tions corresponding to the diﬀuse band of PLL – ﬂuorescein within the ( PLL / HA ) ﬁlms [ 18 ] . To covalently crosslink carboxylate and pri - mary amine groups within the ﬁlm , 400 mM 1 - ethyl - 3 - ( 3 - dimethylamino - propyl ) carbodiimide ( EDC ) and 100 mM N - hydrosulfo - succinimide ( sulfo - NHS ) were mixed ( v / v ) in 0 . 15 M NaCl solution ( pH 5 ) [ 20 ] . The ( PLL / HA ) 20 ﬁlms and EDC / sulfo - NHS solution were incubated for 12 h , and rinsing was performed three times with a 0 . 15 M NaCl solution for 1 h [ 19 ] . Collagen was adsorbed to the HA surface of multilayers , whether the PLL / HA ﬁlm was cross - linked or not , overnight at 37 (cid:3) C . Excess collagen was rinsed away with 0 . 15 M NaCl and substrate attachment was measured using 10 : 1 collagen / FITC - collagen mixture and comparison to ﬂuores - cent collagen standards as above [ 1 , 4 ] . Z - section confocal microscopy was performed to conﬁrm surface localization of collagen on the native and crosslinked PLL / HA multilayers , and ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) was used to assess collagen mobility . 2 . 3 . Tissue sample preparation Whole carotid arteries were excised from 6 mo . old pigs and studied within 8 h . Arteries were cut into thin cross - sections with razor blades . The ves - sel sections were mounted on a coverglass so that the middle - layer—the media where smooth muscle cells ( SMCs ) are located ( see Fig . 1 ) —was exposed for probing by AFM . Tissue samples were kept in Dulbeco (cid:1) s Modiﬁed Eagle Medium ( DMEM ) sup - plemented with antibiotics . Tissue section thick - ness was conﬁrmed by light microscopy to be (cid:1) 100 l m . Samples were placed in the AFM and in - dented by a sphere - tipped probe ( detailed below ) . 2 . 4 . Cell culture A7r5 SMCs ( aorta - derived cell line ) were main - tained in polystyrene ﬂasks between passages 2 and 15 , and cultured in media containing DMEM , supplemented with 10 % of fetal bovine serum and antibiotics . Cells were passed every 3 days , when reaching (cid:1) 80 % conﬂuency , and plated on various substrates at (cid:1) 1 · 10 4 cells / dish for experiments . Substrates were either glass - bottom 35 mm dishes ( Mattek Corporation ; Ashland , MA ) or coverslips coated with the relevant thin ﬁlms . Cell images were taken after 4 h of incubation and ﬁxation with a 10 % formaldehyde solution and mounting media ( Biomeda ; Foster City , CA ) . Cell culture supplies were from Invitrogen , Life Technologies ( Carlsbad , CA ) ; all other supplies 4 A . J . Engler et al . / Surface Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx ARTICLE IN PRESS were from Sigma ( St . Louis , MO ) unless noted . Im - age analysis of projected cell area was performed with Scion Image ( Frederick , MD ) , and is dis - played as an average ( ±standard error of the mean ) with paired t - tests to determine signiﬁcance . 2 . 5 . Atomic force microscopy characterization of ﬁlms and gels Force - indentation proﬁles of arterial sections , PA gels , and ( PLL / HA ) i ﬁlms were collected with an Asylum 1 - D AFM ( Asylum Research ; Santa Barbara , CA ) . Thick homogeneous gels as well as gradient gels , which both range between 70 and 90 l m in thickness , were tested in the AFM with pyramid - tipped cantilevers ( Veeco ; Santa Barbara , CA ) having a nominal spring constant of (cid:1) 60 pN / nm that was more precisely deter - mined from thermal calibration . Force - indenta - tion curves obtained with this tip geometry were ﬁt up to 2 l m tip deﬂections with a Hertz cone model [ 10 , 21 ] . In addition , homogeneous PA gels of all heights were tested with borosilicate sphere - tipped cantilevers ( radius of 2 . 5 l m ; Bio - force Nanoscience ; Ames , IA ) having a similar spring constant (cid:1) 60 pN / nm . Force - indentation proﬁles from these samples were ﬁt with a Hertz sphere model using a thin ﬁlm correction appropri - ate when h 6 (cid:1) 13 R , where h is sample thickness and R is the radius of the sphere - tipped indenter [ 22 ] . In this limit , the importance of a thickness correction and larger contact area increases exponentially relative to the semi - inﬁnite substrate usually assumed for Hertz cone and sphere models [ 21 , 23 – 25 ] . There was no statistical diﬀerence be - tween the elastic moduli determined by the two probe geometries ( p = 0 . 45 ) on thick PA gels . Crosslinked and non - crosslinked ( PLL / HA ) ﬁlms were tested with the same borosilicate sphere - tipped cantilevers ( R = 2 . 5 l m ) using the thin ﬁlm corrected Hertz sphere model . Arterial tissue sec - tions were tested with both cantilever geometries and were suﬃciently thick to ﬁt uncorrected ver - sions of the Hertz cone [ 21 ] and sphere [ 23 ] . Sam - ples were indented at rates of approximately 2 l m / s , which is generally suﬃcient to explore elastic rather than viscoelastic properties of cells , matrix , or substrates [ 26 ] . 3 . Results 3 . 1 . Tissue elasticity by surface probing : Young (cid:1) s modulus of arterial media Cells , their protrusions , and cell - scale extracel - lular matrix establish dimensions of microns that AFM cantilevers can generally probe with mi - cron - diameter spheres glued to their tips . These probes , as well as more conventional pyramidal tips , can investigate a range of scales down to molecular ( i . e . nanometers ) . With tissue , the com - bination of length scale and soft substrates moti - vates AFM characterization using a range of indenter geometries . To probe the elasticity within the arterial media , fresh arteries ( (cid:1) 2 mm diameter ) were sectioned into (cid:1) 100 l m long segments ( see Methods ) and mounted wet under either sphere - or pyramid - tipped AFM cantilevers . Arterial sections ( n = 3 ) were probed with approximately 10 force - indenta - tion curves each . The curves were ﬁt well up to indentations of (cid:1) R ( 2 . 5 l m ) by conventional Hertz cone [ 21 ] and sphere [ 22 ] models . Assuming incompressibility , Table 1 lists the ﬁtted modulus within the narrow range E media = 5 – 8 kPa , appear - ing almost independent of tip length scale . Indentation by AFM strains the surface as well as the thickness of the material , with the strain decaying both laterally and with depth . A simple , ﬁrst estimate of the average radial strain at the sur - face , u rr , upon indenting to a depth R is readily made for the sphere - tipped cantilever . The mate - rial under the spherical indenter (cid:1) s diameter ( 2 R ) is assumed to stretch homogeneously , upon inden - tation , to half the circumference ( p R ) . This gives u rr (cid:1) ( p / 2 (cid:3) 1 ) (cid:4) 55 % , which is not extremely large in the context of sustainable arterial strains . More - over , such a strain exceeds by about 2 - fold or more the maximum lateral strains of 10 – 30 % typically Table 1 Local elasticity of medial layer in arterial section as determined by AFM AFM indenter Fitted depth Apparent E media Sphere - tipped ( n = 25 ) 2 . 5 ± 0 . 4 l m 5 . 7 ± 0 . 3 kPa Pyramid - tipped ( n = 42 ) 2 . 7 ± 0 . 2 l m 7 . 3 ± 0 . 7 kPa A . J . Engler et al . / Surface Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx 5 ARTICLE IN PRESS generated by cell tractions on a range of soft sub - strates [ 2 , 27 ] . 3 . 2 . Thin gel , elastic tissue mimics Polyacrylamide ( PA ) gels , with variable bis - crosslinker and surface - attached collagen , have emerged as a reproducible system for cell studies on the eﬀect of matrix compliance . Most such studies have used PA gels approaching (cid:1) 100 l m in thickness . Much thinner PA gels ( Fig . 2A ) were obtained by addition of a small volume of spacer microbeads to PA prior to polymerization between two coverslips . Removal of the upper , chlorosilan - ized coverslip yields a gel that is not only cova - lently bound to the lower coverslip but is also smooth over its top surface . Even for the thinnest gels of 5 l m , indentation to a depth (cid:1) R ( 2 – 3 l m ) with sphere - tipped AFM probes ( Fig . 2B ) show force proﬁles in surprisingly good agreement with the Hertz sphere model provided use is made of a thin ﬁlm correction [ 22 ] . Without the correction , the classic Hertz model analysis leads to an artiﬁ - cially high modulus ( by up to (cid:1) 50 % here , Fig . 2C open points ) , as expected of stress - stiﬀening with strain constraints at the underlying rigid glass . With the correction , gel elasticity did not vary signiﬁcantly with ﬁlm thickness ( p = 0 . 38 ) for either lightly crosslinked ( 0 . 03 % bis ) or densely crosslinked ( 0 . 3 % bis ) samples , for which respec - tive average moduli are E gel = 1 . 4 ± 0 . 1 kPa and 8 . 1 ± 0 . 1 kPa ( Fig . 2C ) . On the thickest , 70 l m PA gels , pyramid - tipped probes gave elastic moduli that were not signiﬁ - Fig . 2 . Thin ﬁlm PA gels and their elasticity . ( A ) Schematic of the polymerization process used to create PA gels down to micron - sized thickness . Acrylamide solutions containing a low concentration of appropriate spacer beads were polymerized between a lower aminosilinated coverslip and an upper chlorosilanized coverslip with a weight on top . Once fully polymerized , the non - stick upper coverslip was removed , yielding a thin PA gel . ( B ) Typical AFM indentation proﬁle of 5 l m thick PA gel using a microsphere - tipped probe . The ﬁt used here is a thin ﬁlm correction [ 22 ] of Sneddon (cid:1) s model of an axisymmetric probe indenting an inﬁnite material . Agreement between ﬁt and experiment is seen up to indentations of (cid:1) 50 % in gel height . ( C ) PA thin ﬁlm elasticity proves essentially independent of thickness as measured by AFM indentation . 5 % acrylamide solutions were mixed with either 0 . 3 % ( squares ) or 0 . 03 % ( circles ) bis - acrylamide crosslinker and polymerized with beads of varying radius . Closed points use the thin ﬁlm correction to the Hertz sphere model ; open points use the classic Hertz sphere model . The horizontal lines are averages of the thin ﬁlm corrected results . 6 A . J . Engler et al . / Surface Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx ARTICLE IN PRESS cantly diﬀerent ( p = 0 . 45 ) from those determined by the sphere - tipped probes , with or without a cor - rection for sample thickness . Thicker gels also tested by simple tension tests give similar moduli [ 1 ] . The results here collectively suggest that thin ﬁlms of soft PA gels ( E (cid:1) 1 kPa ) as well as moder - ately stiﬀ PA gels ( E (cid:1) 8 kPa ) can accurately mimic ECM stiﬀness without overwhelming stiﬀ - ening due to the underlying glass substrate . 3 . 3 . Cell spreading on thin gels Attaching collagen to PA gels creates a more adhesive surface for cells without altering gel elas - ticity [ 1 ] . Four hours after plating SMCs ( the aorta - derived cell line , A7R5 ) on various colla - gen - coated PA substrates , SMCs are more spread on stiﬀer substrates ( Fig . 3A ) . This substrate - stiﬀ - ness dependent trend with projected cell area is most prominent and clear at low elastic modulus , E gel < 5 kPa . At high E , including an extrapolation to cells plated directly on glass , spread cell area plateaus . Cell spreading is remarkably independent of gel height , h ; cell spreading on both 5 and 70 l m PA gels prove statistically similar ( p = 0 . 41 , Fig . 3A ) . Although these cells typically have lateral dimen - sions of (cid:1) 50 l m or more , traction forces [ 27 , 28 ] are such that cells do not ‘‘feel’’ a rigid substrate that is as close as 5 l m away , which is more typical of a cell height than a lateral dimension . On the other hand , modulus determinations by AFM on 5 l m substrates clearly require a correction for ﬁlm thickness . For tissue layers such as the arterial media , however , sensitivity to the local microelas - ticity means that adjacent layers ( e . g . adventitia or intima ) can be stiﬀer or softer without propagating deeply into a given layer . The thickness independence down to h (cid:1) 5 l m is sensible since cell tractions have been shown to create lateral displacements of 2 l m or less on var - ious PA gels [ 27 , 28 ] . The minimum length scale for cell traction propagation normal to the spreading axes ( or axis ) is an interesting question to address with thinner gels—perhaps together with assessing sensitivity to lateral gradients . The biologically rel - evant results here seem consistent with relatively homogeneous elastic properties within the media as revealed by the small coeﬃcient of variation in E media ( see Table 1 ) . Fig . 3 . Cell spreading on thin PA ﬁlms . ( A ) Spreading of SMCs was assessed on 5 and 70 l m thick PA gels as well as glass . No statistical diﬀerence was noted between cell populations on gels of similar compliance but diﬀerent thickness ( p = 0 . 34 ) . How - ever , cell spreading shows a steep dependence on the elastic modulus of substrates with similar collagen density , as observed before [ 1 ] . Inset images show representative cells spreading on both (cid:2) soft (cid:1) 1 kPa and (cid:2) very stiﬀ (cid:1) 35 kPa PA gels . White arrows in the images indicate 5 l m diameter spacer beads used to set the gel thickness . Scale bar = 50 l m . ( B ) 70 l m PA gel substrates of varying compliance and glass were coated with various collagen densities . While cells within the optimal region behaved similarly to those above , cells on both higher and lower collagen concentrations were smaller , indicating a biphasic behavior [ 1 , 4 ] dependent on the elasticity of the substrate . Inset image shows quantum dot labeling of a collagen - coated 8 kPa PA gel . Scale bar = 15 l m . A . J . Engler et al . / Surface Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx 7 ARTICLE IN PRESS A hyperbolic ﬁt of cell spreading versus sub - strate stiﬀness ( 1 ) proves insightful and has a form that deﬁnes the half - saturation constant , E 1 / 2 - spread : Area ¼ a ð E gel Þ m = ½ð E 1 = 2 (cid:3) spread Þ m þ ð E gel Þ m (cid:10) þ const : ð m (cid:4) 1 Þ ð 1 Þ For 5 and 70 l m PA gels , E 1 / 2 - spread = 7 . 9 and 10 kPa , respectively ; the statistical equivalence of the two datasets thus implies E 1 / 2 - spread (cid:4) 8 . 9 ± 1 . 1 kPa . Most important from this analysis is the remarkable correspondence E 1 / 2 - spread (cid:4) E media has a physiological interpretation as an elastic set point for SMC . Cells will spread more than normal for substrate perturbations that lead to matrix rigidiﬁ - cation , i . e . E > E 1 / 2 - spread ( Fig . 3A , large inset cell ) . Likewise , cells will spread less for substrate pertur - bations that lead to matrix softening , i . e . E < E 1 / 2 - spread ( Fig . 3A , small inset cell ) . Adhesive spreading is also dependent on ligand density , hence the need to attach collagen to the surface of gels [ 1 , 4 , 6 ] for cell receptors to bind . Importantly , gel - attached collagen is surface acces - sible on both supramolecular and micron length scales that are typical of cell receptors and protru - sions . This is shown with anti - collagen functional - ized quantum dots ( (cid:1) 10 nm ) here ( see Fig . 3B inset ) as well as micron - sized beads [ 2 ] that bind only to the gel surfaces when collagen is attached . Addition of functionalized quantum dots after cells are allowed to attach to the gels shows cells exclude the particles . The coupled dependence of cell spreading on both ligand density and stiﬀness proves highly non - linear , with a modest but clear maximum in cell spreading on the PA gel substrates ( Fig . 3B ) . At very low ligand on any substrate investigated , SMC spread minimally . On gels with the highest ligand densities , cell spreading is suppressed , espe - cially on soft substrates . Moderate ligand densities ( (cid:1) 200 ng / cm 2 collagen ) lead to considerable cell spreading [ 1 , 4 ] . It is important to note that cell spreading in Fig . 3A is performed at the optimal collagen density for the given substrates . 3 . 4 . Layer - by - layer ﬁlms : elasticity and crosslinking Multilayers of PLL as the polycation alternat - ing with HA as the polyanion were prepared on glass coverslips or slides with 20 layer pairs , i . e . ( PLL / HA ) 20 . By use of ﬂuorescein – PLL and con - focal microscopy [ 18 ] , a ﬁlm thickness of (cid:1) 4 l m was estimated . Samples were then mounted in the AFM and probed with sphere - tipped cantilev - ers using instrument parameters identical to the probing of PA gels , i . e . indentation rates of (cid:1) 2 l m / s and indentation distances of several hundred nanometers . Force - indentation curves of ( PLL / HA ) 20 ﬁlms were ﬁt with the same thin ﬁlm correc - tion of the Hertz sphere model [ 22 ] used earlier on thin PA gels : ignoring the correction here leads to a similar overestimate as seen with PA gels ( Fig . 2C ) . Importantly , the measurements on multilay - ers yield an apparent elastic modulus in the z - direc - tion , E perp . The qualiﬁcations on this modulus arise in part because the layer - by - layer formation process leads to orthotropic rather than isotropic symmetry , hence measurements perpendicular to the layer symmetry give only a modulus in that direction . Additionally , the PLL layers ( but not the HA layers ) have been found to reorganize as ﬂuorescent - PLL diﬀuses slowly throughout the ﬁlm [ 18 , 19 ] . E perp for PLL / HA ﬁlms is thus an apparent modulus with an implicit time scale . With the above qualiﬁcations for the multilay - ers , ( PLL / HA ) 20 was determined to have an aver - age E perp (cid:1) 85 kPa . This appears signiﬁcantly stiﬀer than equivalently thick PA gels , and yet the multilayer ﬁlms here contain highly swellable polysaccharides ( e . g . HA ) and are thus also hydro - gels . Diﬀerences in chemistry , however , alter pore size , hydration , and crosslinking between monomer units , and thus give very diﬀerent properties . Covalent crosslinking between multilayers should limit polyelectrolyte diﬀusion [ 19 ] , but it may not limit viscoelastic mechanisms involving solvent ﬂow or unbound polyelectrolytes . Thus , the multilayer maintains a more orthotropic sym - metry where the elastic modulus is an apparent E perp normal to the layer . Covalent bonding be - tween polymer chains within the multilayer was done with EDC and sulfo - NHS ( see Methods ) and increased the elastic modulus (cid:1) 15 - fold with - out a signiﬁcant change in gel thickness . Stiﬀening from these covalent bonds implies that polymer chains in the un - crosslinked , ionic ﬁlms are not 8 A . J . Engler et al . / Surface Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx ARTICLE IN PRESS so strongly bound to each other , mirroring the crosslink - dependent stiﬀness of PA gels . 3 . 5 . Layer - by - layer ﬁlms : collagen addition and cell spreading To study cell spreading on these multilayers , we pre - adsorbed collagen - I onto the surface of both the native and crosslinked multilayers . Surface concentrations similar to PA gels that gave ‘‘opti - mal’’ spreading ( Fig . 3B ) were sought ( i . e . (cid:1) 50 – 1000 ng / cm 2 ) . This approximate range was achieved by overnight incubations and was veri - ﬁed , as with the PA gels , by use of calibrated imag - ing of ﬂuorescent collagen ( see Methods ) . Furthermore , FRAP experiments were done on crosslinked PLL / HA ﬁlms with ﬂuorescent colla - gen adsorbed . This was spot - bleached under high laser power and the intensity of the spot was then followed . Collagen mobility was very limited , with recovery of bleached intensity saturating at (cid:1) 20 % of bleached intensity over cell culture - relevant time scales ( (cid:1) hours ) . Thus the multilayer - bound colla - gen seems reasonably well adsorbed and at surface concentrations on both native and crosslinked multilayers that have already been found optimal for SMC spreading on PA gels ( Fig . 3B ) . SMCs were therefore plated on the collagen - coated multilayer ﬁlms , and cell spreading was observed after 4 h ( Fig . 4 ) . Spreading is clearly promoted on the much stiﬀer , crosslinked multi - layers . Initial results for projected cell area are thus consistent in trend with the results above on PA gels ( compare Fig . 3A to Fig . 4 ) . 3 . 6 . Surface probe resolution on elastic gradients The results above are sensible and consistent only to the extent that the surface probe measure - ments of elasticity are well calibrated . While excel - lent correlation with macroscopic tension tests have been achieved using thick PA gel samples of 70 l m [ 1 ] , the spatial resolution limits for hetero - geneous , soft samples have not yet been addressed . Tissues are , of course , non - homogeneous as well as soft , and so validated methods of measurement are important for present and future work in this general area of cell responses to elasticity . This sec - tion concludes with a ﬁnal surface probe result on gradient PA gels . A microﬂuidic mixing system created crosslink - ing gradients with ﬁxed acrylamide monomer concentration ( 8 % ) from several input ports of various bis - acrylamide crosslinker concentrations . Through a series of channels , the mixer generates a smooth gradient in crosslinker concentration ( from 0 . 048 % to 0 . 48 % ) that spans the width of the gel ( 2 . 8 mm ) in a 90 l m thick PA gel . Gradient gels ( n = 2 ) were probed using pyramid - tipped AFM probes , with measurements ( n = 157 ) made at multiple locations , 200 l m apart along the width of the gel ( Fig . 5 ) . When compared to homo - geneous PA gels of identical monomer concentra - tion and indicated crosslinking concentration ( open square data , Fig . 5 ) , the two input points can be clearly identiﬁed and an equal mixture of the two inputs ( i . e . 1 2 ½ 0 : 048 % þ 0 : 48 % (cid:10) ¼ 0 : 264 % ) has a modulus found in the middle of the gel . A linear ﬁt of the elastic gradient in the central por - tion of the gel yields a slope of 12 Pa / l m for the Fig . 4 . Cell spreading on thin ( PLL / HA ) 20 ﬁlms . Thin multi - layer ﬁlms of poly ( LL - lysine ) / hyaluronic acid ( PLL / HA ) 20 , assembled by a layer - by - layer method [ 18 ] and selectively crosslinked , were assessed by AFM indentation . Multilayers were subsequently coated with a collagen monolayer to promote cell adhesion . Cells were then plated on these multilayer ﬁlms ( (cid:1) 4 l m thick ) , and the spread cell area was measured . Cells spread very little on un - crosslinked ﬁlms , and yet chemically crosslinked ( PLL / HA ) 20 ﬁlms , with a 15 - fold increase in elastic modulus , showed a 5 - fold increase in cell spread area . Cell morphology resembled that on PA gels . A . J . Engler et al . / Surface Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx 9 ARTICLE IN PRESS detectable change in elastic modulus with distance . This result illustrates the potential accuracy of AFM - determined elasticities in non - homogeneous soft samples such as layered arterial cross - sections ( e . g . Fig . 1 ) . 4 . Discussion Tissues , in general , and arteries , in particular , are heterogeneous in their elasticity as well as anisotropic , soft , and non - linear [ 8 ] . Surface prob - ing here of sectioned hydrated tissues by AFM ap - pears to be an accurate method to locally measure eﬀective elasticities in the relevant kiloPascal range . Histological sectioning of a tissue can in principle compromise the tissue (cid:1) s mechanical integrity . However , comparisons seem very good with macroscopic measurements of moduli on lar - ger and more intact SMC tissue samples [ 8 ] , where surface eﬀects are minimal . With care , the same AFM probing methodology can be applied to in vitro matrix mimics that range from micron thin ﬁlms of covalently crosslinked gels , to physically crosslinked multilayers , and microgradient gels . 4 . 1 . Probing the elasticity of soft polymer ﬁlms with AFM Measuring the elasticity of polymeric ﬁlms of various types may seem relatively trivial when compared to the complex structure , loading condi - tions , and viscoelasticity of tissues . However , in the thin ﬁlm limit , substrate defects and rigid sup - ports can prove a signiﬁcant complication . None - theless , the correlation between macroscopic and nanoscale mechanics noted elsewhere [ 1 ] for hy - drated gels carries over to thin ﬁlm regimes . This proves to be only minimally aﬀected by indenter geometry within this height range , since the moduli determined by sphere and blunted pyramid tips for 70 l m gels are not statistically diﬀerent ( p = 0 . 45 ) . Using sphere - tipped probes , the elastic modulus did not signiﬁcantly change as a function of height ( p = 0 . 38 ) in PA gels of high or low crosslinking density studied here ( Fig . 2C ) . In many past appli - cations of Hertz cone and sphere models [ 21 , 23 – 25 ] , an implicit assumption had been that indentations were being made into a semi - inﬁnite substrate regardless of a rigid support . As one ap - proaches the limit of thin ﬁlm elasticity , stiﬀening due to the rigid , constraining support and indenter geometry become important to substrate mechan - ics ( Fig . 2C ) . The few micron thick ﬁlms of ( PLL / HA ) 20 pre - sent further complications in probing by AFM . These ﬁlms are heterogeneous in being ortho - tropic , and they are non - covalent assemblies that can creep under the stress of the AFM probe . Moreover , in the native ﬁlms , the outermost layers are likely to be more sparse and hydrated , with a reduced electrostatic interaction versus the more ordered layers below . Even in the lower layers though , FRAP demonstrates signiﬁcant PLL ﬂuid - ity as this polymer diﬀuses among and within lay - ers [ 18 , 19 ] . This suggests that water as well as crosslinking reagents will also readily diﬀuse into the layers . Converting the purely electrostatic Fig . 5 . PA gels with resolvable elasticity gradients . Using techniques described elsewhere [ 5 ] , a 10 - fold crosslinker gradi - ent was established across the width of an 8 % PA gel by microﬂuidic mixing of solutions containing 0 . 48 % , 0 . 264 % , and 0 . 048 % bis - acrylamide . Using AFM indentation combined with lateral stage displacements , the elastic modulus was locally measured and mapped across the gel . Binned data is displayed as a function of length across the gel . Open squares denote gel standards containing the indicated crosslinker concentration . These correspond to the microﬂuidic inputs of minimum ( left ) , intermediate ( center ) , and maximum ( right ) crosslinker concentrations . 10 A . J . Engler et al . / Surface Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx ARTICLE IN PRESS crosslinking of such native ﬁlms ( ionic interac - tions ) to covalent crosslinking between the ammo - nium groups of PLL and the carboxylate groups of HA [ 15 ] ( amide bonds ) leads to the not so surpris - ing result that ﬁlm height decreases as polymer chains in the soft upper layers are crosslinked and water is shed from the ﬁlm . Increased layer density along with the covalent rather than physi - cal bonds both contribute to the 10 - fold increase in the apparent elastic modulus , E perp ( Fig . 4 ) . 4 . 2 . Cell spreading responses and ECM relevant microenvironments Cell spreading on thin PA ﬁlms of several mi - crons appear equivalent to those reported recently on much thicker , soft or stiﬀ PA substrates [ 1 , 2 , 6 , 29 ] . The basic trend in projected cell area , gi - ven suﬃcient surface accessible collagen ( Fig . 3B inset ) , is a hyperbolic , saturable spreading with increasing modulus , E gel . On the softest and thin - nest PA gels examined ( (cid:1) 1 kPa ; 5 l m thick ) , spreading diﬀerences were minimal . This implies surface tractions generated by cells decay prior to reaching the rigid support . With increasing stiﬀness , thin PLL / HA sub - strates qualitatively promoted spreading similar to PA gels at roughly similar collagen concentra - tions . The apparent elasticity scale , E perp , for the multilayers should not , however , be equated with the E gel for PA gels , which seem to be more ideal in their material behavior . For all systems studied , however , the AFM elasticity measurements were taken in seconds ( at indentation rates of l m / s ) , tending to make viscoelastic materials appear more elastic than viscous . Diﬀerences with the multilayers thus arise from slow polymer and col - lagen diﬀusion that is absent from even the most loosely crosslinked PA gels bearing covalently at - tached collagen . Crosslinked multilayers are stiﬀer , as expected , due to covalent crosslinks rather than electrostatic crosslinks , and this tends to promote cell spreading on a collagen coating . For future measurements , however , longer time scales of min - utes to hours seem relevant to understand the properties seen by cells in spreading . The hyperbolic form of spreading with increas - ing E reveals a mechanical setpoint , E 1 / 2 - spread for spreading [ 1 ] . This is expected to correspond to a typical in vivo stiﬀness of cell – matrix environ - ments . Given dissimilar behavior in other cell types , such as neuronal branching [ 7 ] and endot - helial tube formation [ 30 ] on soft gels , it is reason - able to assume that E 1 / 2 - spread diﬀers among cell types , which require wide - ranging micromechani - cal environments for diﬀerent cell / tissue function . Further evidence is noted in the original studies of epithelial cells on soft gels [ 3 ] where cells were shown to have smaller , dynamically ruﬄed shapes , and ﬁbroblasts were reported to be more polarized on soft gels . Nevertheless , matrix compliance and ligand density are coupled variables that determine cell responses dependent on the typical matrix stiﬀ - ness in vivo [ 1 , 4 ] . By explicitly measuring such a range here for vascular SMCs in arterial media by AFM indentation , we note that the elasti - city range of 5 – 8 kPa agrees with typical E 1 / 2 - spread (cid:4) 8 – 10 kPa . Biphasic behavior seen with cell spreading ver - sus collagen concentration on soft materials is mechanistically overlapping with biphasic behav - ior in cell migration versus ligand on rigid sub - strates [ 31 ] . At low ligand densities , there is a lack of adequate attachment for a cell to pull itself forward ( or spread as here ) , while at high ligand densities , detachment from ligand is needed to move forward [ 32 ] . Detachment is probably not a limitation in cell spreading on gels , so recently introduced spreading models contain a penalty term for cell stretching [ 1 ] . Extension is facilitated by the actin cytoskeleton , which is signaled to assemble through cell adhesion to stiﬀ substrates by signaling mechanisms that are under active investigation but do seem to involve calcium and Rho - family kinases [ 2 , 33 ] . Whether cell spreading will force open membrane channels , will dissociate signaling complexes that initiate cascades , or will cause speciﬁc conformational changes in select proteins are all possible but unclear mechanisms at this point . 4 . 3 . Lateral resolution of AFM on soft gels In addition to ligand concentration depen - dences , spatial variation in matrix elasticity is A . J . Engler et al . / Surface Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx 11 ARTICLE IN PRESS known to give rise to a form of cell motility termed durotaxis [ 2 , 5 ] . Cells tend to move to stiﬀer sub - strates , with immobilization by spreading . While step and steep gradients are detectable by cells [ 2 , 5 ] , whether or not shallower but clearly measur - able gradients of 12 Pa / l m ( Fig . 5 ) can produce a durotactic response has yet to be reported . Although the gradient gels studied here were thick , the results for homogeneous gels ( Fig . 2C ) indicate that thinner gels with gradients should yield simi - lar results . 5 . Conclusion Surface probe measurements of local elasticity allow a relatively accurate assessment of the mechanical properties of various soft matrices , materials , and thin ﬁlms . Such assessments corre - late well with adhesive spreading of a cell : stiﬀer materials tend to promote spreading of smooth muscle cells and half - max spreading occurs on PA matrices that approximate the stiﬀness of the SMC - rich arterial media . Remarkably , ﬁlms that are microns thick and much thinner than the spread dimensions of a cell still prove equivalent to much thicker hydrated substrates . The answer likely lies in micron - scale or less lateral substrate displacements exerted by a cell ; such tractions can decay suﬃciently before the rigid support proves constraining . Current challenges in surface probe measurement lie in accurately obtaining highly localized determinations of not only elastic - ity but also of more complex rheology for natural and synthetic matrices—especially on appropriate time scales that are biologically relevant . Surface or material preparation diﬃculties lie in the con - trolled generation of uniform , sub - micron , and soft gels either with PA gels , multilayers , or other materials . Acknowledgement The authors would like to thank Dr . Keith Gooch for kindly providing pig carotid arteries and Sooyoung Kim ( Boston University ) for pre - paring the gradient gels . Support was provided by grants or fellowships from the NIH , the NSF , the MDA , and the Ashton Foundation . References [ 1 ] A . Engler , L . Bacakova , C . Newman , A . Hategan , M . Griﬃn , D . Discher , Biophys . J . 86 ( 2004 ) 617 . [ 2 ] C . M . Lo , H . B . Wang , M . Dembo , Y . L . Wang , Biophys . J . 79 ( 2000 ) 144 . [ 3 ] R . J . Pelham , Y . - L . Wang , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 ( 1997 ) 13661 . [ 4 ] C . Gaudet , W . A . Marganski , S . Kim , C . T . Brown , V . Gunderia , M . Dembo , J . Y . Wong , Biophys . J . 85 ( 2003 ) 3329 . [ 5 ] J . Y . Wong , A . Velasco , P . Rajagopalan , Q . Pham , Lang - muir 19 ( 2003 ) 1908 . [ 6 ] C . A . Reinhart - King , M . Dembo , D . A . Hammer , Lang - muir 19 ( 2003 ) 1573 . [ 7 ] L . A . Flanagan , Y . E . Ju , B . Marg , M . Osterﬁeld , P . A . Janmey , Neuroreport 13 ( 2002 ) 2411 . [ 8 ] Y . - C . Fung , Biomechanics : Mechanical Properties of Living Tissues , Springer , New York , 1993 . [ 9 ] A . M . Collinsworth , S . Zhang , W . E . Kraus , G . A . Truskey , Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 283 ( 2002 ) C1219 . [ 10 ] C . Rotsch , K . Jacobson , M . Radmacher , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 ( 1999 ) 921 . [ 11 ] C . Rotsch , M . Radmacher , Biophys . J . 78 ( 2000 ) 520 . [ 12 ] A . B . Mathur , A . M . Collinsworth , W . M . Reichert , W . E . Kraus , G . A . Truskey , J . Biomech . 34 ( 2001 ) 1545 . [ 13 ] G . Decher , J . D . Hong , J . Schmitt , Thin Solid Films 210 – 211 ( 1992 ) 831 . [ 14 ] G . Decher , Science 277 ( 1997 ) 1232 . [ 15 ] L . Richert , P . Lavalle , D . Vautier , B . Senger , J . F . Stoltz , P . Schaaf , J . C . Voegel , C . Picart , Biomacromolecules 3 ( 2002 ) 1170 . [ 16 ] J . D . Mendelsohn , S . Y . Yang , J . Hiller , A . I . Hochbaum , M . F . Rubner , Biomacromolecules 4 ( 2003 ) 96 . [ 17 ] Y . - L . Wang , R . J . Pelham , Methods Enzymol . 298 ( 1998 ) 489 . [ 18 ] C . Picart , J . Mutterer , L . Richert , Y . Luo , G . D . Prestwich , P . Schaaf , J . - C . Voegel , P . Lavalle , P . N . A . S . 99 ( 2002 ) 12531 . [ 19 ] L . Richert , F . Boulmedais , P . Lavalle , J . Mutterer , E . Ferreux , G . Decher , P . Schaaf , J . - C . Voegel , C . Picart , Biomacromolecules 5 ( 2004 ) 284 . [ 20 ] G . Hermanson , Bioconjugate Techniques , Academic Press , San Diego , 1996 . [ 21 ] J . Domke , M . Radmacher , Langmuir 14 ( 1998 ) 3320 . [ 22 ] E . K . Dimitriadis , F . Horkay , J . Maresca , B . Kachar , R . S . Chadwick , Biophys . J . 82 ( 2002 ) 2798 . [ 23 ] I . N . Sneddon , Int . J . Eng . Sci . 3 ( 1965 ) 47 . [ 24 ] M . Vinckier , G . Semenza , FEBS Lett . 430 ( 1998 ) 12 . [ 25 ] J . H . Hoh , W . F . Heinz , Nanotechnology 17 ( 1999 ) 143 . 12 A . J . Engler et al . / Surface Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx ARTICLE IN PRESS [ 26 ] R . E . Mahaﬀy , C . K . Shih , F . C . MacKintosh , J . Kas , Phys . Rev . Lett . 85 ( 2000 ) 880 . [ 27 ] N . Wang , E . Ostuni , G . M . Whitesides , D . E . Ingber , Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 52 ( 2002 ) 97 . [ 28 ] J . L . Tan , J . Tien , D . M . Pirone , D . S . Gray , K . Bhadriraju , C . S . Chen , P . N . A . S . 100 ( 2002 ) 1484 . [ 29 ] K . A . Beningo , M . Dembo , I . Kaverina , J . V . Small , Y . L . Wang , J . Cell Biol . 153 ( 2001 ) 881 . [ 30 ] C . F . Deroanne , C . M . Lapiere , B . V . Nusgens , Cardiovasc . Res . 49 ( 2001 ) 647 . [ 31 ] S . L . Goodman , G . Risse , K . von der Mark , J . Cell Biol . 109 ( 1989 ) 799 . [ 32 ] D . A . Lauﬀenburger , J . J . Lindermann , Receptors : Models for Binding , Traﬃcking , and Signaling , Oxford University Press , London , 1996 . [ 33 ] A . D . Bershadsky , N . Q . Balaban , B . Geiger , Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 ( 2003 ) 677 . [ 34 ] N . Zaari , P . Rajagopalan , S . K . Kim , A . Engler , J . Y . Wong , Adv . Mater . , submitted . A . J . Engler et al . / Surface Science xxx ( 2004 ) xxx – xxx 13 ARTICLE IN PRESS