Research Policy 32 ( 2003 ) 185 – 207 Environmental jolts , institutional change , and the creation of entrepreneurial opportunity in the US electric power industry Wesley D . Sine a , ∗ , Robert J . David b , 1 a R . H . Smith School of Business , University of Maryland , 3314 Van Munching Hall , College Park , MD 20742 , USA b Faculty of Management , McGill University , 1001 Sherbrooke Street West , Montreal , Que . , Canada H3A 1G5 Abstract The relationship between institutional change and entrepreneurship is poorly understood . We build the theory in this area by tracing institutional change in the US electric power industry over a 40 - year period . Our analysis shows that en - vironmental jolts mobilize actors to reformulate institutions , resulting in increased entrepreneurial opportunity . When the institutional environment is stable , we ﬁnd that incumbent organizational forms and embedded logics present formidable obstacles to entrepreneurial activity . Environmental jolts , however , catalyze search processes and motivate the evaluation of current institutional logics . Speciﬁcally , in the case of the electric power industry , environments of abundance and regula - tion resulted in homogeneity of organizational structures and strategies , and few entrepreneurial opportunities . Environments marked by scarcity and crisis , however , witnessed heavy scrutiny of existing institutional arrangements that eroded their taken - for - grantedness and symbolic value , resulting in opportunities for entrepreneurial action . © 2002 Elsevier Science B . V . All rights reserved . Keywords : Environmental jolts ; Institutional change ; US electric power industry 1 . Introduction Institutional change plays an important role in the generation of opportunities for entrepreneurial activity , yet relatively little research has examined this relationship . Prevailing institutional logics— i . e . sets of socially - constructed assumptions , values , and beliefs—deﬁne appropriate structures , practices , and behaviors within organizational ﬁelds ( Clemens , 1993 ; Haveman and Rao , 1997 ; Thornton and Ocasio , 1999 ) , and changes in these logics can lead to ∗ Corresponding author . Tel . : + 1 - 301 - 405 - 0553 . E - mail addresses : wsine @ rhsmith . umd . edu ( W . D . Sine ) , rdavid @ management . mcgill . ca ( R . J . David ) . 1 Tel . : + 1 - 514 - 398 - 7463 ; fax : + 1 - 514 - 398 - 3876 . increased entrepreneurial opportunity and ultimately changes in industry structure . In this paper , we ex - amine the relationship between institutional change and entrepreneurial opportunity . Understanding this relationship can , we believe , contribute to the existing literature on technological entrepreneurship , which has generally neglected institutional factors ( for no - table exceptions , see Tushman and Murmann ( 1998 ) , Shane ( 2000 ) ) . We suggest that environmental jolts serve as cata - lysts for action . Speciﬁcally , jolts prompt institutional actors to engage in problemistic search processes that can both delegitimate existing institutional struc - tures and uncover alternative arrangements . While previous theory has linked environmental jolts to the decline of institutionalized structures and practices 0048 - 7333 / 02 / $ – see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science B . V . All rights reserved . PII : S0048 - 7333 ( 02 ) 00096 - 3 186 W . D . Sine , R . J . David / Research Policy 32 ( 2003 ) 185 – 207 ( e . g . Leblebici et al . , 1991 ; Singh et al . , 1991 ; Oliver , 1992 ; Burns and Wholey , 1993 ; Davis et al . , 1994 ; Greve , 1995 ; Strang and Sine , 2002 ) , little connection has been made between environmental jolts , institu - tional change , and entrepreneurial opportunity . We argue that jolts prompt search processes that erode the taken - for - granted nature of institutions , resulting in the re - evaluation of the costs and beneﬁts of ex - isting institutional structures and the creation of new entrepreneurial opportunities . Our approach links dis - parate but related research on environmental jolts , organizational search processes , institutional change , and entrepreneurship . We illustrate our approach through historical analysis of the regulation and par - tial deregulation of an industry that affects every part of modern life , the electric power industry . 2 . Theory There is growing interest among organizational scholars in the relationship between institutional change and entrepreneurial action ( DiMaggio , 1988 , 1991 ; Greenwood and Hinings , 1996 ; Barley and Tolbert , 1997 ; Fligstein , 1997 ; Hoffman , 1999 ) . This is a compelling and difﬁcult topic given that insti - tutions are by deﬁnition highly resistant to change . Neo - institutionalists describe institutions as routinized structures and behaviors that are taken for granted as “the way things are done , ” and therefore , escape day - to - day scrutiny ( Berger and Luckmann , 1966 ; Meyer and Rowan , 1977 ; DiMaggio and Powell , 1991 ; Scott , 1995 ) . Institutions are described as decoupled from typical measurable performance outcomes , and their worth is linked more to their historicity and symbolic value than to the relative effectiveness of their technical contributions , which are often assumed by constituents ( Berger and Luckmann , 1966 ; Meyer and Rowan , 1977 ) . Yet , even in highly institutional - ized ﬁelds , change can occur . In this paper , we seek to elucidate the relationship between institutional change and opportunities for entrepreneurship . Partic - ularly , we examine the complex relationship between environmental jolts , ﬁeld - level 2 search processes , 2 Explaining institutional change requires looking at the broader organizational ﬁeld of actors ( Leblebici et al . , 1991 ; DiMaggio , 1991 ; Hoffman , 1999 ) . The concept of “organizational ﬁeld” institutional change , and the creation of entrepreneurial opportunity . 2 . 1 . Environmental jolts Focusing on the organizational level , Meyer ( 1982 , p . 515 ) deﬁned environmental jolts as “transient per - turbations whose occurrences are difﬁcult to foresee and whose impact on organizations are disruptive and often inimical” . Unlike Meyer , however , our study investigates the inﬂuence of environmental jolts on entire ﬁelds of organizational activity ( for sim - ilar examples , see Tushman and Anderson , 1986 ; Kraatz and Zajac , 1996 ; Haveman and Rao , 1997 ; Hoffman , 1999 ) . Environmental jolts highlight insti - tutionalized assumptions about the environment , and reveal unexpected relationships between institution - alized practices , technologies , organizational forms , and outcomes that may not be apparent in times of stasis ( Strang and Bradburn , 1994 ) . Jolts can prompt ﬁeld - wide crisis , that is , perceptions by ﬁeld actors ( organizations , regulators , investors , customers , etc . ) that fundamental outcomes are in contrast to ex - pectations , and precipitate action intended to avoid dramatic negative outcomes . For example , in the case of the US auto industry , exogenous shocks revealed the reliance of current product strategies on cheap oil ( and hence on nations belonging to OPEC , otherwise known as the organization of petroleum exporting countries ) . This dependency had not been of cen - tral concern prior to the 1973 oil crisis . Similarly in the 1970s and early 1980s , intense competition from abroad highlighted the failure of the US auto industry to meet customer expectations regarding quality and efﬁciency . The result of destabilizing environmental jolts is often a re - examination of institutionalized log - ics and practices and a reorientation of organizational is similar to that of “industry” , but more inclusive . Whereas , “industry” typically refers to a group of ﬁrms producing similar outputs and their economic relationships with buyers and suppli - ers , an “organizational ﬁeld” is a social location of interaction between competing ﬁrms , suppliers , buyers , regulators and pol - icy makers ; that is , the ﬁeld level includes the “totality of rele - vant actors” ( DiMaggio and Powell , 1983 , p . 148 ) and their so - cial and economic relationships . Examining ﬁeld - level dynamics is particularly important in the study of the power industry be - cause consumer groups , legislators , and policy analysts are central actors . W . D . Sine , R . J . David / Research Policy 32 ( 2003 ) 185 – 207 187 strategies and processes with environmental demands ( Oliver , 1992 ) . 3 2 . 2 . Institutional actors Institutional theory has generally neglected ques - tions of interests and agency as they pertain to change in organizational ﬁelds and the elaboration of new organizational forms ( DiMaggio , 1988 ; DiMaggio and Powell , 1991 ) . This neglect is ironic , given that agency was central to earlier institutional approaches ( e . g . Selznick , 1949 ; Gouldner , 1954 ) . In attempting to address this gap , DiMaggio ( 1988 , p . 14 , emphasis added ) posited that new institutions arise when actors with sufﬁcient resources see in them an opportu - nity to realize interests that they value highly . These individuals engage in “institutionalization work” at organizational - ﬁeld level , which involves the propaga - tion of public theories about labor markets , consumer markets , expertise , and distinctive products or services ( DiMaggio , 1988 , p . 15 ; see also Fligstein , 1997 ) . This involves , according to Lounsbury and Glynn ( 2001 , p . 559 ) , the elaboration of culturally - embedded stories about how “resources or ideas will lead to future beneﬁts for consumers and society” . In this paper , we pick up on these general notions and elab - orate on how actors operating at the ﬁeld level create opportunities to build new organizational structures and change institutionalized practices . In particular , we examine the role jolts played in mobilizing legisla - tors , academics , technical innovators , and proponents of environmentally - friendly technology to reform the institutionalized industrial structure of regulated monopolies in the US power industry . 2 . 3 . Institutional logics Sociologists have argued that culturally - embedded and taken - for - granted understandings play a funda - mental role in deﬁning organizational arrangements 3 Our approach to jolts as catalysts of change bears some simi - larity to the work of Thomas Kuhn ( 1970 ) on the nature of “scien - tiﬁc revolutions” . For Kuhn , novel scientiﬁc theories emerge only amid a mounting state of crisis caused by the failure of exist - ing paradigms to adequately explain observed reality . Crises are thus a “necessary precondition” for the emergence of new theo - ries ( Kuhn , 1970 , p . 77 ) . We thank an anonymous reviewer for pointing out this link . and individual actions . These beliefs explain and justify social structures by integrating them into the socially - available stock of knowledge ( Berger and Luckmann , 1966 , pp . 61 – 64 ) . We deﬁne institutional logics as socially - constructed assumptions , values , and beliefs that deﬁne formal and informal rules of behav - ior and guide interpretation about why certain struc - tures and practices exist ( Clemens , 1993 ; Haveman and Rao , 1997 ; Thornton and Ocasio , 1999 ) . For ex - ample , Haveman and Rao ( 1997 ) found that forms of thrifts were underpinned by “theories of moral sentiments , ” or institutional logics comprising opin - ions , beliefs , and judgments about savings and home ownership . Thornton and Ocasio ( 1999 ) , meanwhile , found that executive attention was guided by current logics that inﬂuenced which organizational and indus - trial variables powerful actors paid attention to and the types of actions they undertook when determining executive succession . In line with this prior work , we argue that institutional logics underlie processes by which “individuals and organizations produce and reproduce their material subsistence , organize time and space , and provide meaning to their social reality” ( Thornton and Ocasio , 1999 , p . 804 ) . Any change in these logics , in turn , can be expected to shape ﬁeld level search processes and the creation of entrepreneurial opportunity . 2 . 4 . Problemistic search processes and the “solution bazaar” A common primary reaction by actors within an organizational ﬁeld ( managers , board of directors , policy makers , political action groups , etc . ) to environ - mental jolts is to instigate search processes in which they scrutinize the symptoms of the crisis and look for its causes ( Cyert and March , 1963 , p . 121 ) . 4 This search , we contend , weakens important institutional qualities , resulting in institutional degradation . Once institutional actors identify problems and weaknesses with existing institutions , previously institutionalized logics are disrupted and the search for new logics , forms , and practices begins . Problemistic search pro - cesses are usually carried out in the neighborhood 4 Although Cyert and March discussed search processes in the context of organizations , we believe that these same principles apply at the organizational ﬁeld level . 188 W . D . Sine , R . J . David / Research Policy 32 ( 2003 ) 185 – 207 of institutionalized policies ( Cyert and March , 1963 , p . 122 ) , robbing them of their pre - conscious status as the attention of institutional actors is focused on behaviors that had previously been taken for granted . This process makes embedded assumptions and be - liefs concerning institutionalized forms and practices ( i . e . institutional logics ) more salient and available for evaluation by constituents within the organizational ﬁeld . Thus , powerful actors that once took founda - tional logics about institutional practices for granted start to re - examine these assumptions during times of crisis . A common outcome of a search process is the discovery of unexpected weaknesses that were not widely known or salient before the crisis . For ex - ample , Strang and Bradburn ( 1994 ) found that the occasion for re - evaluation of entrenched structures and practices in the healthcare sector was the crisis of a spiraling health budget . As this crisis emerged , it motivated powerful actors to search for practices and organizational forms that were connected with the crisis . They carefully examined their current assump - tions about how the health care industry functioned . Strategies and practices connected with healthcare that were taken for granted before became the focus of attention . Increasing costs motivated not only scrutiny of existing practices , but also a search for and eval - uation of possible solutions ( Strang and Bradburn , 1994 ) . When institutional actors search for and sanction alternatives outside of institutionally prescribed bar - riers , they disrupt institutional logics by redeﬁning the set of available solutions ( Cyert and March , 1963 , p . 123 ) . Search processes , such as these can iden - tify as potential “solutions” structures and practices that , for various reasons in the past , were not con - sidered to be legitimate alternatives . Additionally , the loss of legitimacy of prevailing institutional log - ics opens up previously - stable organizational ﬁelds to entrepreneurs with “packaged” solutions ( Cohen et al . , 1972 ) . This redeﬁnition of available solutions caused by an institution’s loss of legitimacy creates a “solution bazaar , ” where decision makers shop for appropriate solutions and entrepreneurs with solu - tions ( e . g . consultants , innovators , and managers from other industries ) sell themselves as the best alterna - tive to decision makers’ needs . This mixture of deci - sion makers and alternatives—solution bazaars—and the decreased legitimacy for incumbent institutional structures is , we posit , a very fertile environment for entrepreneurship . In summary , crisis shakes the foundations of organi - zational ﬁelds by motivating scrutiny and search pro - cesses for causes and solutions . Crisis environments prompt powerful actors to engage in search processes that can ultimately result in profound institutional change . The resulting loss of taken - for - grantedness , recoupling of outcomes and behaviors , and redeﬁni - tion and expansion of alternatives renders practices that were once taken for granted as “the way things are done” vulnerable to reform or replacement . 3 . Research design 3 . 1 . Research site The electric power industry is a particularly inter - esting context for the study of institutional conﬂict and change because the nature of the structures , prac - tices , and exchange relationships in the industry— what we call its “industrial form”—remained stable and taken for granted for over 40 years , from 1935 to 1978 . By the time this regulated - monopoly indus - trial form changed , most living Americans had never experienced or could not remember a different sys - tem for the generation and distribution of electricity . This industrial form is the institution that we exam - ine in this paper . The US electric power industry’s industrial form of regulated monopoly was sup - ported by some of the most powerful organizations in American industry , including organized labor and the electric utilities , yet it changed after a dramatic environmental jolt : the energy crisis of the 1970s . We provide a brief timeline of the industry’s history in Fig . 1 , and examine its evolution in detail in the next section . The case of the electric power industry exempli - ﬁes the institutionalization of regulated monopolies in a country espousing free - market policies . For over 40 years , national and regional regulation of large centralized utilities operating in geographically de - ﬁned monopolies had been accepted as the natural way to generate and allocate electricity ( Hellman , 1972 ; Hyman , 1988 ; Hirsh , 1989 ) . The electric power in - dustry was distinguished from other institutions by W . D . Sine , R . J . David / Research Policy 32 ( 2003 ) 185 – 207 189 Fig . 1 . Key Events in the structuration of the US Electric Power Industry . 190 W . D . Sine , R . J . David / Research Policy 32 ( 2003 ) 185 – 207 various boundaries and institutional myths ( which we will detail in the next section ) , and was thus insulated from the spread of market - based structures ( Primeaux , 1986 ) . The fact that the institutional logic of regu - lated monopolies contradicted many of the assump - tions the public , the government , and many social scientists had concerning the importance of free enter - prise and competition rarely surfaced in discussions in the media from 1935 until the 1970s energy cri - sis ( Primeaux , 1986 ) . Beginning in 1973 , petroleum prices and interest rates skyrocketed , greatly increas - ing the cost of electricity generation ( Energy Informa - tion Administration , 1993 ) . This resulted in an energy crisis that motivated Congress ( Crew , 1985 ) , the aca - demic community ( Primeaux , 1986 ) , concerned citi - zens ( Hirsh , 1999 ) , and other stakeholders to search for alternative energy sources and organizational forms ( Sine , 2001 ) . 3 . 2 . Data and methods In the tradition of Leblebici et al . ( 1991 ) , we use historical analysis to examine the relationship between environmental jolts , ﬁeld level search pro - cesses , and institutional change in the electric power industry . This requires that we ﬁrst provide evidence that the industrial form of a regulated monopoly was indeed institutionalized within the electric power organizational ﬁeld . Second we must establish the effect of jolts on ﬁeld level search processes , particu - larly the mobilization of institutional actors , such as policy makers , innovators / entrepreneurs , academics , and popular social movements ( such as environmen - tal groups and consumer activists ) . Third , we need to provide evidence that access to policy makers by actors promoting alternative technologies and indus - trial forms ( innovators / entrepreneurs , academics , and social movements ) changed as a result of the jolt . Finally , we need to provide evidence that the policy makers’ agendas changed in light of alternative log - ics and technologies , producing rich opportunities for entrepreneurship . We follow the dominant industrial form of the power industry , the regulated monopoly , from incep - tion in 1935 to the passage of the Public Utilities Regulation Act in 1978 , a law that crystallized the de - cline of the institution of regulated monopolies in the US power industry . We chose these two dates because they represent years when key legislation was passed that helped create and reform the industrial structure of the electric power industry . Our historical analysis is based on industry histories , archival documents , and interviews with utility analysts , executives of power ﬁrms , and policy makers . The ﬁrst author interviewed 25 executives from utilities and non - utility ﬁrms , as well as ofﬁcials at the Department of Energy , the Fed - eral Energy Regulatory Commission , the California Public Utility Commission , and the New York State Energy Research & Development Authority . Our primary data sources for our examination of ﬁeld - level search processes are : ( 1 ) the Congressional Masterﬁle ( which includes House of Representa - tives and Senate published and unpublished reports , documents , executive documents , executive reports , committee hearings and prints ) ; ( 2 ) Reader’s Guide to Periodicals , ( which reviews some 300 popular magazines and journals , such as Newsweek , Harper ’ s Magazine , Readers Digest , and Time ) ; ( 3 ) the Peri - odical Contents Index ( PCI , 2000 ) , a data base that follows more than 2000 academic journals in a wide variety of disciplines , such as sociology , business , economics , anthropology , political science , and public administration . We analyzed political discussions rel - evant to the industry by searching the Congressional Masterﬁle for topics related to the electric power in - dustry , cogeneration , and alternative energy during the years 1935 – 1978 . We assessed popular discus - sion of the industry and its structure by searching for references to the electric power industry , alternative energy , and cogeneration in the Readers Guide to Periodicals 1935 – 1978 . Finally , we investigated aca - demic discussions about the industry by conducting a similar search in the Periodical Contents Index . In the following section , we brieﬂy review the events that led to the construction and implementation of regulated monopolies . We then examine the insti - tutionalization of the industrial form in question— large centralized utilities operating in a geographical monopoly—and the various ﬁeld level structures that increased its resistance to change . Finally , we address the role of the energy crisis in mobilizing institutional actors . In particular , we discuss the search processes motivated by this jolt and the effect of these search processes in delegitimating the current institution and legitimating alternative industrial and technological forms for generating power . W . D . Sine , R . J . David / Research Policy 32 ( 2003 ) 185 – 207 191 4 . Environmental jolts and institutional change in the electric power industry , 1935 – 1978 4 . 1 . Origin and institutionalization The electric power industry began in the late 1870s , and was characterized by rapid technological de - velopment . The industry was essentially technically mature by the early 1900s ( McGuire et al . , 1993 ) , and operated within a stable paradigm for some 60 years into the 1970s ( Samuels and Trebing , 1972 ) . After 1935 , the industry was characterized by a reg - ulated monopoly structure with sustained growth and signiﬁcant economies of scale . Throughout this pe - riod , utilities operated essentially as organizational islands , serving their own loads with their own re - sources ( Shapiro , 1989 ) . The advent of this regu - lated system reﬂected widespread dissatisfaction with the provision of service in the early years of the industry . The ﬁrst signiﬁcant electric experiments began in Europe in the 1730s , and the ﬁrst practical applica - tions were invented in the early 1800s . As early as the mid 1800s , arc lighting was used commercially . In January 1879 , the nation’s ﬁrst outdoor electric light serving a public purpose was installed in the belfry of Sage Chapel at Cornell University . The ﬁrst com - mercial electric generating in the US began with arc lighting service in downtown San Francisco in 1879 at the California Electric Light Company . About this same time , Thomas Edison perfected the incandescent light bulb . Three years later , he operated the Pearl Street Station , which provided reliable lighting service in downtown New York City . Technology increased exponentially in the decades following the construc - tion of Pearl Street Station . By the early 1900s , there were over 3000 private electric generating companies and over 1000 generators owned and operated in the public sector . The structuration of the industry is an interesting story in and of itself . Early in the industry’s develop - ment state and federal policy makers tried to foster an environment of competition , by granting nonexclu - sive competitive franchises and passing laws aimed at preventing price ﬁxing agreements ( Hellman , 1972 , p . 9 ) . Despite state and local governmental attempts to maintain competition within the industry , large hold - ing companies devoured their smaller competitors , and by 1907 many areas , such as greater New York , Detroit , and Denver were dominated by a single com - pany ( Hellman , 1972 ) . Captive markets were charac - terized by high rates and price collusion was common between adjacent electricity providers ( Kwoka , 1996 ) . New York and Wisconsin were the ﬁrst states to react to the increasing costs and established state com - missions to regulate electricity prices . This practice quickly diffused and by the early 1920s most states had appointed regulatory commissions ( Hellman , 1972 ; Kwoka , 1996 ) . In order to justify captive markets , early en - trepreneurs enthusiastically argued that the business of generating and distributing electric power was a “natural monopoly and should be granted geograph - ical monopolies in order to best serve the interest of the public” ( see Hirsh , 1999 , pp . 17 – 29 for a more detailed discussion of this process ) . The natural monopoly rationale had its roots in the late 1800s and differentiated certain industries from others , claim - ing that some economic norms ( competition ) did not apply to certain industries , such as the railroads and water , because large ﬁxed costs and small marginal costs made competition impossible ( Varian , 1996 ; Primeaux , 1986 ) . Generally , this logic became quite pervasive and was used extensively by legislators and academics for decades to rationalize the industry’s form ( Hirsh , 1999 ) . Samuel Insull was a key ﬁgure early in the indus - try . His inﬂuence shaped electricity generation and distribution for generations . 5 Insull and many leaders of other large holding companies realized that pub - lic sentiment toward electricity providers was growing increasingly negative , and became afraid that the mu - nicipalities might revoke their franchises . Hence , they decided to support state regulation , becoming heavily involved in its formulation in various states ( Hellman , 1972 ) . They struck an informal public - policy bargain with many state lawmakers in which utilities would operate on a cost - plus basis . Considering possible sav - ings from huge economies of scale , protection from most forms of competition , and virtually unlimited growth , this deal was a coup for Insull and other hold - ing companies . 5 See McGuire et al . ( 1993 ) for a rich description of the early structuration of the electric power industry . 192 W . D . Sine , R . J . David / Research Policy 32 ( 2003 ) 185 – 207 State regulatory commissions found it difﬁcult to regulate giant holding companies that had complex structures spanning many states . Additionally , the immense power of these companies was often used to inﬂuence state governments through donations to political parties and at times for illegal payments to regulators ( McDonald , 1962 ; Ramsay , 1937 ) . 6 The public remained highly dissatisﬁed with high prices and rampant corruption within the industry . In re - sponse to public outcry , the Federal Trade Commis - sion began a thorough investigation of the industry in 1927 that lasted for seven years . The ﬁndings from this study , released in stages beginning in 1928 and contin - uing through the Depression , increased public outrage as they detailed inﬂated valuations , watered stock , control of newspapers , and opposition to municipal ownership ( Hellman , 1972 ) . When Franklin Roosevelt took over the presidency in 1933 , the stage was set for change . At that time , over 60 % of the population had access to electricity . Unfortunately , many rural areas had been bypassed by electric utilities , only 10 % of which had access to electricity . In reaction to the growing power of a few large holding companies , their abuses , and reluctance to provide power to rural areas ( Gioia , 1989 ) , the Congress decided to crack down . In 1935 , a year and a half after Roosevelt’s inaugu - ration , he created the Rural Electriﬁcation Adminis - tration ( REA ) to promote rural electriﬁcation . 7 In that same year , Congress passed the Public Utility Hold - ing Company Act ( public law 74 – 333 ) , commonly known as PUHCA , that gave the Securities and Ex - change Commission broad authority over companies that produce , transmit , or distribute electricity in more than one state . Utilities that operated in only one state fell under state jurisdiction ( Energy Information Administration , 1993 ) . The SEC “required holding companies to divest their holdings until they became a single consolidated system serving a circumscribed geographical area” ( Energy Information Adminis - tration , 1993 , p . 19 ) . By 1940 , the law was fully implemented , and the industrial structure that would remain dominant for almost three decades was in place . 6 Insull admitted to paying US $ 150 , 000 to one commissioner . 7 The REA provided loans to both private and public organiza - tions that were expanding electricity to rural areas without elec - trical infrastructure . 4 . 2 . Institutionalization and maintenance : 1940 – 1965 A variety of environmental factors contributed to the institutionalization of the electric power industry’s structure , such as its designation as a “natural monopoly , ” low fuel prices , and rapidly advancing technology . This resulted in low electric rates , and political and popular satisfaction with the industry . Any real impetus to scrutinize the appropriateness of the power industry’s structure of regulated regional monopolies was ultimately lacking . As Cyert et al . ( 1965 ) explained , search processes are motivated by either dissatisfaction or conspicuous alternatives . The static environment between 1940 and 1965 provided neither . In this section , we review the factors that contributed to this stability . 4 . 2 . 1 . Increasing demand During WWII , the war industry needed vast amount of energy to produce planes , tanks , guns and other necessary equipment . Increasing demand invigorated the industry after the Depression ( Fenn , 1984 ) . It con - tinued to thrive after WWII as the booming postwar economy resulted in a dramatic increase in both in - dustrial and household use of electricity . Consumers in search of the American dream bought large num - bers of household appliances , such as refrigerators , that demanded energy both to manufacture and use on a daily basis ( Hyman , 1988 ) . Increased demand and large monopolies enabled utilities to reduce costs by building large power plants , thus taking advan - tage of economies of scale to keep rates relatively low . 4 . 2 . 2 . Technological advances Additionally , various technological advancements in the electric power industry were made possible by wartime improvements in materials ( metals ) that were stronger and more resistant to aggressive steam conditions ( Hirsh , 1989 , p . 64 ) . Cooling technology also improved after 1940 . Between 1940 and 1965 , technological advances enabled utilities to take ad - vantage of their captive markets by building plants with larger capacities , and proﬁting from economies of scale . For example , in 1935 the largest generator produced 208 MW , and this rose to 300 MW in 1956 and 1000 MW in 1965 ( Fenn , 1984 ) . The greater the W . D . Sine , R . J . David / Research Policy 32 ( 2003 ) 185 – 207 193 capacity of a generator , the fewer generators needed to produce the same amount of electricity , and given the same efﬁciency and down time , greater savings . Moreover , thermal efﬁciency continued to increase during this time period resulting in lower retail prices 8 . Average adjusted prices for a kilowatt - hour declined over 50 % between 1940 and 1965 ( Edison Electric Institute , 2002 ) . 4 . 2 . 3 . Fuel prices Fuel prices were also favorable to the industry and declined after WWII , as cheap foreign oil ﬂooded the market ( Hyman , 1988 ) . The abundance of fuel , ad - vancing technology and economies of scale enabled utilities to maintain or lower their prices and reap good proﬁts for many decades . 4 . 2 . 4 . The myth of a natural monopoly “The institutional world requires legitimation , that is , ways by which it can be explained and justiﬁed” ( Berger and Luckmann , 1966 , p . 61 ) . The academic explanation of natural monopoly provided the elec - tric power industry’s structure with a raison d’ˆetre . It was frequently used by proponents of the sys - tem as an explanation for why the industry deserved monopoly status 9 , and served as a powerful legitima - tor . Although this was the prevalent view , however , not all economists viewed electricity generation and distribution as a natural monopoly , and there always remained a few skeptics tucked away in academia 10 ( Gray , 1940 ) . ( See Primeaux ( 1986 ) for a detailed 8 Thermal efﬁciency increased from 2 . 5 % early in the industry’s history to over 33 % by 1965 ( Fenn , 1984 ) . 9 Legislators and academics rationalized the industry’s structure as a “natural monopoly , despite the existence of several examples in the Northwest where competition among generating facilities was very successful and resulted in lower prices ( Primeaux , 1986 ) . 10 In retrospect , Primeaux noted that “upon close examination , conditions cited as characteristics of natural monopolies are either non - existent or unimportant” in electricity generation ( Primeaux , 1986 , p . 1 ) . The monopoly structure of the electric utilities was not a natural state , but merely the outcome of institutional factors such as contracts , laws , investor inﬂuence , etc . ( Primeaux , 1986 , pp . 1 – 18 ) . After the original goals of the electric power industry’s regulatory structure had been fulﬁlled , it remained rationalized as a “natural monopoly . ” Thus , the formal organization of the electric power industry became institutionalized , reﬂecting more the “myths of ( its ) institutional environment instead of the demands of ( its ) work activities” ( Meyer and Rowan , 1977 ) . history of the natural monopoly rationale as applied to the electric power industry . ) 4 . 2 . 5 . Monopoly and monopsony The structural power of the utilities helped assure the absence of legitimate alternatives both to utilities and to their preferred technology , large centralized fos - sil fuel plants and large hydroelectric power plants . 11 Because utilities were the only distributor and whole - sale buyer in a speciﬁed area , this created a monopsony environment giving utilities the ability to decide who could connect to the grid . This power enabled utilities to keep other sources of electricity off the grid . In the few cases that entrepreneurs tried to build competing generators using alternative forms of power genera - tion , such as cogeneration technology , 12 utilities ei - ther refused to purchase or distribute the power for a reasonable price . The regulated monopoly structure also gave the industry the ability to decide how power would be generated for their clients and how research and de - velopment budgets would be allocated . This enabled the industry to inﬂuence the type of technology that would be developed and implemented in the future . Because the premise of natural monopolies is based on building larger and larger centralized plants in 11 Between 1935 and 1978 , utilities nationwide had very homoge - nous technological strategies , relying almost exclusively on large centralized coal , oil , natural gas , and large hydroelectric genera - tors . The amount of power generated by utilities using alternative energy sources and technology such as solar , cogeneration tech - nology , wind , small hydroelectric , or biomass was virtually zero through 1973 . In the early 1960s , the utilities also began to gen - erate power using nuclear technology , but this accounted for less than one - half of 1 % of energy generated in the US . Utility tech - nological strategies were very homogenous during the time period examined in this paper ( Energy Information Administration , 1993 ) . 12 Utilities tried to undermine these attempts at expansion despite the fact that onsite cogeneration accounted for up to 15 % of the power generated in the US in 1950 as many ﬁrms used this technology to decrease their energy costs ( Pierce , 1995 ) . Because utilities had captive markets , there were few incentives to motivate strategic alliances with non - utilities . Utilities used several strategies to discourage non - utilities from generating power , such as denying them interconnection , charging them higher than normal prices for backup electricity , or offering them sub - market prices for electricity produced ( Energy Information Administration , 1983 ) . Thus , the total amount of electricity sold by cogenerators to the grid prior to 1978 was insigniﬁcant . A study conducted in 1981 of purchases of power by public utilities from cogenerators could not identify a single purchase ( Resource Dynamics Corporation , 1983 ) . 194 W . D . Sine , R . J . David / Research Policy 32 ( 2003 ) 185 – 207 order to take advantage of economies of scale , and because existing plants predominantly used coal and oil as fuels ( and in some cases large hydroelectric plants ) , utility research and development focused on these technologies ( Hirsh , 1989 ) . Utilities failed to se - riously consider or develop promising alternatives , 13 such as cogeneration , 14 wind , geothermal , 15 and so - lar technologies . 16 The utilities’ structural power 13 Wind , geothermal , and biogas were not considered by large utilities as legitimate methods for generating electricity and there - fore little money was spent on research and development . Inde - pendent companies that did try to develop wind , geothermal , and solar power after 1935 did not have access to the grid and were rejected by large utilities ( see Righter , 1996 ) . The only clients of these manufacturers were farmers without access to the grid . Most of these companies quickly died as large centralized utilities used government funding to build power lines to rural areas . 14 For example , while other developed countries around the world were capturing wasted energy from factories through cogenera - tion ( Energy Information Administration , 1983 ) and experimenting with alternatives to petroleum and hydroelectric sources of energy such as solar , thermal and wind , the US electric power industry’s strategy remained remarkably stagnant and unidirectional . When the US policy makers ﬁnally got around to studying alternatives to centralized power , studies of relative energy efﬁciency conducted in the late 1970s “revealed that countries using cogeneration ex - perienced higher electricity conversion efﬁciencies than did the United States” ( Energy Information Administration , 1983 , p . vi ) . The total amount of oil used in a cogeneration plant is less than the oil used by utilities and manufacturers in separate operations ( Energy Information Administration , 1983 , p . 6 ) . In fact , advocates of cogeneration have argued since the early 1930s that cogenera - tion has inherent thermodynamic advantages over even the most advanced condensing plants of the time ( Pierce , 1995 ) . 15 Italy provides another example of the far sightedness of Europe on approaches to alternative power generation . Italy began using geothermal energy as early as 1904 and was the largest producer of electricity by geothermal means up to 1976 . Other countries that used signiﬁcant amounts of geothermal resources included Iceland , New Zealand , and the Soviet Union . Prior to the 1970s , the US had approximately four geothermal units . Despite adoption by other countries , the electric generating industry in the US spent virtually no effort on developing geothermal resources in the US . 16 Photovoltaic technology was ﬁrst developed in Britain in the early 1900s with a very low efﬁciency . This changed in 1954 at Bell Laboratories when they produced a silicon cell that converted light energy into electricity at an efﬁciency of 5 % . The US Government purchased 10 million small cells for satellites and spacecraft . How - ever , the electric generating industry ignored the potential use of this medium , and the lack of any sizable market kept photovoltaic cell prices high for years ( Pryde , 1983 ) . Other countries quickly adopted the technology and between 1955 and 1973 , Japanese and French companies led the world in research , production , and use of electricity from photovoltaic electricity ( Pryde , 1983 ) . increased the homogeneity of industrial processes and technology and ultimately decreased the number of alternative technologies that were available when the environment changed . For example , between 1935 and 1973 , 99 . 9 % of power generated by electric util - ities used one of four energy sources , coal , oil , gas , or large hydroelectric . Moreover , the records we have from this time period indicated there were virtually no non - utility private ﬁrms generating power and selling it to the grid . 4 . 2 . 6 . Legislative and popular scrutiny , 1940 – 1965 The lack of public and political discussion and scrutiny of the industrial structure of the electric power industry is reﬂected in the low number of arti - cles in the popular media and the paucity of legislative discussion between 1940 and 1965 about the current industrial structure and alternatives to this struc - ture . This lack of scrutiny provides evidence of the taken - for - grantedness of the electric power industry’s industrial form ( Figs . 2 – 4 ) . 17 Similar to other institu - tional theorists , we interpret the taken - for - grantedness as an indicator of institutionalization ( Berger and Luckmann , 1966 ; Tolbert and Zucker , 1983 ) , and point to both the taken - for - grantedness and ubiq - uity of the regulated monopoly structure during this time frame as evidence that this industrial form was highly institutionalized . A study of media discussions about the electric power industry in popular outlets surveyed by Readers ’ Guide to Periodicals ( Fig . 2 ) demonstrates a paucity of public discussion about the monopoly structure of the electric power industry from 1940 to 1965 . Besides the slight increase in the mid 1950s , 18 there was an astounding absence dur - ing 1940 – 1965 of federal legislative scrutiny of the merits of the electric power industry structure . This is especially surprising in light of the fact that according 17 Our approach here is similar to Tolbert and Zucker ( 1983 ) , who measured the degree of institutionalization of civil service reform as an inverse function of the level of debate in the popular press . 18 A slight increase in articles published on this topic in 1953 is related to a surge in electricity demand during this period and a healthy public discussion about how and where dams would be built to ﬁll this need rather than critiques of the standing industrial structure . Likewise , Fig . 3 depicting Congressional hearings and reports on the industry , shows a slight increase in roughly the same time period , again reﬂecting concerns about the demand increases and Congressional concern about where to build dams to provide electricity for the increased demand . W . D . Sine , R . J . David / Research Policy 32 ( 2003 ) 185 – 207 195 Fig . 2 . Popular press articles on the public utility industry from Readers’ Guide to Literature , 1935 – 1978 . to Vital Statistics of the US Congress , Senate activ - ity , measured by the number of Senate committee and subcommittee meetings and reports , increased 60 % from the 84th Congress ( 1955 – 1957 ) to the 94th Congress ( 1975 – 1977 ) . Activity in the House of Representatives increased by 40 % over that same time period ( Ornstein et al . , 1992 ) . Fig . 4 shows that between 1945 and 1965 we found no Congressional investigations aimed speciﬁcally at evaluating the monopoly structure of the electric power industry . The failure of policy makers to ask fundamental questions about the industry was both a result of its institution - alization and also reinforced the maintenance of this institution . It is important to note that the decision to continue with this structure was one made by de - fault , not by deep comparative studies of alternative structures . Arguing that the structure was maintained because it was the “best alternative” is misleading , because the public record demonstrates that few other alternatives were seriously considered on a national basis ( see Fig . 4 ) . In other words , the electric power industry’s structure was taken for granted at that time , reﬂecting its high degree of institutionalization . 19 It is important to note , however , that this absence of serious consideration in both the public media and congressional hearings of alternative means for gen - erating power did not mean that alternatives did not exist . In fact , throughout this time period , innovators and entrepreneurs in both the US and abroad were ex - perimenting with alternative methods , in some cases very successfully , but could neither enter the market nor catch the attention of policy makers or the popular media . 19 Other evidence of the institutionalization of the industrial struc - ture of regulated monopolies in the power industry is that its adop - tion at the state level was 100 % . Only a few cities nationwide had a system in which generating ﬁrms competed ( Primeaux , 1986 ) . 196 W . D . Sine , R . J . David / Research Policy 32 ( 2003 ) 185 – 207 Fig . 3 . Congressional hearings and reports of the electrical utility industry , 1935 – 1978 . Fig . 4 . Congressional hearings and reports on alternative energy , cogeneration and competition in the EUI , 1935 – 1978 . W . D . Sine , R . J . David / Research Policy 32 ( 2003 ) 185 – 207 197 4 . 2 . 7 . Summary The industrial form of geographic monopolies was originally implemented for very speciﬁc purposes . Yet after the ﬁrst decade , the supporting rationale for this form changed from functional to symbolic ( Tolbert and Zucker , 1983 ) . Geographic monopolies— originally used to promote technological coherence , rural electriﬁcation , and lower prices—were later rationalized as appropriate and natural ; soon there - after , public discussion on the structure of the electric power industry became exceedingly rare . Technolog - ical advances and decreasing fuel prices provided the industry with a great deal of slack resources that hid inefﬁciencies from constituents , such as customers , government regulators , suppliers , and industry lead - ers . To the average consumer , between 1940 and 1965 , the electric power industry seemed very successful . Without obvious signs of crisis , the regulated form became taken for granted . It was no longer a salient issue , even though it contradicted widely supported economic principles . It was simply accepted as the way things were done . 4 . 3 . Environmental changes , 1965 – 1972 The year 1965 was important for the industry : “electric utility prices peaked , rate reductions were at the lowest since Vietnam” ( Hyman , 1988 , p . 97 ) . The year ended with a large blackout in the Northeast affecting 30 million people distributed over roughly 80 , 000 square miles . Utilities responded to this event by installing interconnections that allowed genera - tors to transfer energy throughout the country and began emphasizing reserve generation . 20 However , the massive blackout shook many customers’ faith in public utilities . The outage drew the attention of academics , politicians , and consumers . The Federal Power Commission ( FPC ) immediately launched sev - eral investigations that uncovered a history of small power outages and a need for massive investment in infrastructure . Electricity costs also began to rise in the late 1960s and early 1970s , due to a minor increase in fuel costs and interest rates . As these costs were passed on to 20 This added infrastructure turned out to be vital to the future competitive market . It allowed generators to be in different loca - tions than distributors and to transmit energy to central retailers . customers and rising prices motivated rumblings in the popular press , Congress held several hearings between 1967 and 1972 to investigate pricing policies . How - ever , Congressional hearings and publications were focused on incremental reform of the current struc - ture and ignored important questions , such as whether the current industrial structure was better than alter - natives . Price increases also caught the eye of the academic community . A few social scientists pub - lished papers and books during this time critical of the non - competitive structure ( Kahn , 1970 ; Landis , 1960 ) . An important contribution in 1971 was a critical study by an economist that compared the effects of elec - tric utility regulation with a few US cities that used a more competitive structure ( Primeaux , 1986 , p . 10 ) . Its highly critical results had little impact at that time , however . Those in a position to change the system fo - cused their deliberations ( Congressional hearings , re - ports , etc . ) on pricing policies instead . The late 1960s and early 1970s were a time of social unrest and loss of public conﬁdence in public institutions . This distrust was driven by the unpopular Vietnam War and the Watergate scandal and exacer - bated by economic difﬁculty , fuel rationing , and huge jumps in utility costs ( Derthick and Quirk , 1985 ) . Ad - ditionally , growing awareness of the environmental destruction occurring at the hands of regulated utilities increased the hostile attitude of many environmen - tal groups ( Fenn , 1984 , pp . 51 – 52 ) . Environmental activists in the late 1960s and early 1970s pressured government agencies to investigate the environmental impact of the growing electric power industry . These groups succeeded in working with policy makers to craft the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 that required utilities to prepare and defend environ - mental impact statements . In sum , the period 1965 – 1972 was characterized by a large power failure , increasing electricity prices and greater levels of scrutiny by both academics and environmental activists . Although , during this period , both the concept of natural monopoly and the indus - trial structure of regulated monopolies were being heavily scrutinized by fringe actors , congressional records show very little discussion of changing the current industrial structure . Moreover , debate about whether or not power generation actually met the deﬁnition of a natural monopoly was not widespread , but rather conﬁned to various academic publications . 198 W . D . Sine , R . J . David / Research Policy 32 ( 2003 ) 185 – 207 The institutional structure of power generation as a natural monopoly remained stable and entrenched . 4 . 4 . Oil crisis In October 1973 , the electric power industry was hit by a sudden environmental jolt . OPEC , a multi - national Arab - dominated organization that had been established to coordinate oil prices , retaliated against the US for its support for Israel during the Yom Kip - pur War by temporarily cutting off oil supplies and then raising its price by over 200 % . OPEC continued to raise prices , from US $ 3 . 00 per barrel in 1973 to US $ 30 in 1980 . Increased fuel costs were passed on to both industrial and home consumers , raising elec - tric energy prices sharply . Electric utilities reacted by reducing reliance on oil through conversion to more expensive solid fuel plants and by building large nu - clear facilities . This required huge capital investments at a time when interest rates were very high 21 mak - ing the already expensive fuel substitution programs even more costly . Attempts by electric utilities to di - versify fuel types during the energy crisis of the 1970s resulted in huge , expensive production facilities ( nu - clear or coal ) that took many years to build and in the case of nuclear facilities , when ﬁnished were sub - stantially over - budget , 22 sometimes by more than a billion dollars . The new nuclear facilities were often not cost - efﬁcient relative to other forms of generation ( Michaels , 1996 ) . OPEC’s embargo and the resulting increase in oil prices created two major problems for the industry . First , the embargo disrupted the economy on a na - tional scale . “The economic disruption resulting from the oil embargo and the inﬂation crisis resulted in a more fragile national economy , with less stability in prices , interest rates , and inﬂation” ( Crew , 1991 , p . 6 ) . The oil embargo and its subsequent effect on the na - tional economy were interpreted as not only an eco - nomic issue but also as a national security dilemma . As long as the US was dependent on foreign oil , it 21 Ironically , high interest rates were in part caused by federal government anti - inﬂation policies in response to increasing prices , which in turn were partially caused by high oil prices . 22 Economist Charles Komanoff estimated cost overruns and can - cellations of nuclear plants topped the US $ 100 billion mark and resulted in rate increases of up to 30 % for every household in the nation ( Rudolph and Ridley , 1986 , p . 185 ) . would be vulnerable to the political whims of the Near East . Second , consumers ( i . e . voters ) were extremely dissatisﬁed with the energy crisis in general and with the huge jumps in electric prices in particular . In reac - tion to rising prices , consumer organizations , such as POWER ( People Outraged With Energy Prices ) sprang up all over the country to pressure Congress and state governments to act ( Primeaux , 1986 , p . 238 ) . 4 . 5 . Problemistic and solution searches As Kuhn ( 1970 ) has noted in the context of scien - tiﬁc revolutions , a response to crisis is typically the initiation of a search for a replacement for the dis - credited paradigm . In the electric power industry , a variety of searches for solutions to the problems de - scribed above were initiated in the public , non - proﬁt , and private sectors . These included searches within the current system in the US as well as outside of the US electric power industry . State regulatory agen - cies scoured utility operations , scrutinizing operational procedures , costs , and billing practices . Many state regulatory commissions responded to the crisis by in - creasing ex - post prudence reviews of building costs , that is they reviewed building costs and disallowed the recuperation of portions of the cost that the commis - sion felt were inﬂated or due to negligence on the part of utility managers . Between 1945 and 1975 , there were less than a dozen ex - post prudence cases in the entire country ; after 1975 prudence reviews became common ( Joskow and Schmalensee , 1983 , p . 160 ) . Congressional committees called utility managers and state regulators to fact ﬁnding hearings . Searches within the electric power industry for the causes and solutions to the high cost of electricity revealed no ob - vious answers but uncovered a slew of problems , such as the inefﬁciency of nuclear energy and the dearth of solutions entertained by the current electric power in - dustry , thus intensifying the impetus to ﬁnd a solution ( Munson , 1985 ) . Congress , the President’s advisors , state regulators , and policy makers engaged in more complex searches , both geographically and technolog - ically , scouring the world for possible solutions . For example , soon after OPEC’s announcement , Abraham A . Ribicoff ( D - Conn . ) , on behalf of the Committee of General Affairs , went on a fact ﬁnding trip where he toured a number of European nations in an effort to understand their systems and ﬁnd alternatives to the W . D . Sine , R . J . David / Research Policy 32 ( 2003 ) 185 – 207 199 current crisis ( Committee on General Affairs , 1973 ) . Presidential advisors created various reports outlin - ing alternative options and Congressional committees called over 50 hearings about the electric power indus - try between 1973 and 1978 ( compared to ﬁve over the previous ﬁve years ; see Fig . 3 ) . Each hearing lasted from several days to several weeks and represented months of preparation and work by its participants . The committees involved , ranged from the Commit - tee on Commerce Science and Transportation to the House Means and Ways Committee and the Commit - tee on Labor and Human Resources . Congressional committees invited academicians , professionals , and representatives of foreign systems to write reports and suggest alternatives . Committee members called on various bureaucrats from regulating agencies ( such as the Securities and Exchange Commission and the En - vironmental Protection Agency ) to testify about the current state of the industry and suggest alternatives . Regulating agencies in turn searched the academic and industrial sectors for solutions to the crisis and pre - sented them to Congress . It soon became clear to policy makers , based on forecasts by experts within and outside of the indus - try , that prices were going to continue to rise and the current structure of the electric power industry had created a climate where organizations were unable to “fully respond to the political pressure to insulate consumers from dramatic cost increases” ( Joskow and Schmalensee , 1983 , p . 159 ) . The electric power industry’s structure and strategies that had been taken for granted for so long were no longer taken for granted , but were now the focal point of deep scrutiny and criticism . During this scrutiny processes , many myths about the electric power industry were dispelled . It was no longer taken for granted that the generating industry was promoting the best interests of the public . The in - creased number of instances where construction costs for new plants were disallowed exempliﬁed regulatory distrust for the industry . Growth strategies advocated by power companies were no longer merely accepted by regulators and the public as the best alternative . Moreover , it was not just the strategies and policies of the industry that were under attack , but also its funda - mental structure . In several hearings , economists testi - ﬁed that electric utilities were not necessarily a natural monopoly ( Primeaux , 1986 ; Hirsh , 1999 ) . The many search processes catalyzed by the energy crisis coupled negative outcomes , such as high prices , inﬂexibility , and inefﬁciency with the structure and practices of the electric power industry , eroding its le - gitimacy . Critics of the industry whose voices had long been silent or largely ignored were heard and consid - ered after 1973 . Consumers , regulators and politicians intensely scrutinized every aspect of the industry , crit - icizing its structure , strategy , and management ( Fenn , 1984 ; Hirsh , 1989 ) . 4 . 5 . 1 . A new set of alternatives The oil crisis changed the set of strategies and solutions to power generating problems considered by regulators and legislators . Fringe energy experts and environmentalists , who had for years advocated conservation instead of growth strategies and soft alternative energy instead of fossil fuels and nuclear power , were granted access to the political elite and suddenly found themselves explaining their ideas in Congressional committees ( Hyman , 1988 ; Hirsh , 1999 ) . Experts in cogeneration and alternative energy educated policy makers at all levels about various pockets of resources that the industry had been ig - noring for decades . For example , between 1968 and 1972 cogeneration and alternative energy sources were discussed brieﬂy in committee meetings only four times ( all in 1972 ) , while during the next 4 years , they were a topic in 74 hearings and a focus of 28 committee prints and three reports ( Fig . 4 ) . Before 1973 , many alternative energy experts were unable to present their ideas to key legislators ( Righter , 1996 ) . Economists arguing against the standard conception of the electric power industry as a natural monopoly became highly involved in discussing alternative in - dustrial forms with policy think tanks ( Primeaux , 1986 ) . Most of the solutions considered by policy makers in Congressional committees during the crisis were not recent discoveries . Instead they were either from fringe areas of the industry or borrowed from other industries ; in effect , they were pre - packaged . This is similar to what Kuhn ( 1970 , p . 75 ) noted in his discussion of scientiﬁc revolutions : the solutions in question had “at least been partially anticipated during a period when there was no crisis . . . [ but ] in the absence of crisis those anticipations had been ignored” . In other words , the jolt of the oil crisis did not create a new set of solutions , but merely altered 200 W . D . Sine , R . J . David / Research Policy 32 ( 2003 ) 185 – 207 the focus of the public and policy makers to include pre - existing solutions as legitimate alternatives . 4 . 5 . 2 . A new policy agenda Early on in the search process , two themes emerged in the hearings : the country needed to conserve what energy it had , and it needed to ﬁnd alternative sources and strategies for electricity generation besides those offered by the large public utilities ( e . g . large coal , oil and nuclear facilities ) . Both cogeneration , a technol - ogy that harnesses excess energy ( usually in the form of heat ) from large industrial plants and converts it into electricity , and small power plants fueled by alter - native energy sources ( e . g . solar , wind , geo - thermal , small hydroelectric , etc . ) , that had been advocated by independent power enthusiasts and environmentalists for several years but were largely ignored , frequently surfaced during committee hearings as possible solu - tions after 1973 . This new energy agenda focused on moving away from the use of oil and natural gas , decreasing the en - vironmental impact of energy generation , and increas - ing the variety of organizations participating in the generation industry . In 1977 , the Carter administra - tion delivered the National Energy Plan to Congress , a 283 - page bill that contained over 100 different pieces of legislation that , among other things , advocated rate reform , wholesale power markets , power generation by small power plants and cogenerators , and required electric utilities to buy electricity from independent power ﬁrms and distribute it . Moreover , this bill stipu - lated that cogenerators and small power plants , unlike utilities , would be unregulated . This bill , if passed , would open the door to non - utility producers and lim - ited wholesale competition . The portion of the bill that advocated alternative power generation would later be known as the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act . Although many members of Congress were support - ive of the bill , electric power industry representatives launched a powerful lobbying campaign against most measures of the bill . Their key concerns centered on rate restructuring , coal conversion , and natural gas use . Generally , utilities felt that there was little to fear from small peripheral actors advocating cogeneration and alternative power . Thus , while provisions of the bill related to rate restructuring and fuel use were severely weakened in committees , advocates of alternative power generation , such as Senator Percy of Illinois , a founding member of the alliance to save energy , and Senator Durkin of New Hampshire were able to pro - tect provisions intended to foster alternative methods of power generation ( See Hirsh , 1999 , pp . 74 – 82 for an excellent description of the political processes behind the 1978 passage of the National Energy Act ( NEA ) ) . In 1978 , the Congress passed President Carter’s ﬁve - part National Energy Act ( Public Law 95 – 617 ) , the national policy response to the energy crisis . The legislation was intended to reduce reliance on im - ported oil and natural gas through conservation , the development of renewable energy resources , expanded use of coal , and to increase efﬁciency of utilization when oil and gas must be consumed . The Public Util - ity Regulatory Policies Act ( PURPA ) was arguably the most signiﬁcant portion of the NEA ( DOE / EIA - 0562 , 1993 : 22 ) . It provided for non - utility entities to con - struct new power generation facilities free from the constraints of regulation , and as such introduced lim - ited competition into the generation aspect of the util - ity industry . This change in institutional logic created enormous opportunities for entrepreneurs . Since the passage of the bill , thousands of independent power generators have been built and the power supplied by non - utilities has grown to approximately 10 % of the US market ( Sine , 2001 ) . As a result of PURPA , renewable forms of energy have increased from virtually 0 – 3 % of the nation’s overall electricity production . This is a signif - icant increase in absolute terms , considering the size of the energy market in the US ( 3706 billion kW / h ) . In sum , in the advent of crisis the dominant institu - tional logic of regulated monopolies was signiﬁcantly eroded , and alternative power generation technology and logics that had been relegated to the fringes of the ﬁeld became salient and widely adopted . 5 . Discussion The deregulation of the utilities is a case where some of the most politically potent of American industries , in collaboration with organized labor , fought as hard as they could to protect their inter - ests and lost . ( Derthick and Quirk , 1985 , p . 12 ) The electric power industry exempliﬁes the role that environmental jolts can play in institutional change . W . D . Sine , R . J . David / Research Policy 32 ( 2003 ) 185 – 207 201 Fig . 5 . Institutionalization and erosion of the regulated - monopoly industrial form in the US electric power industry . In this paper , we have illustrated the strong relation - ship between environmental jolts , ﬁeld level search processes , changes in institutional logics , and the gen - eration of entrepreneurial opportunity . We summarize our model of these relationships in Fig . 5 . As this ﬁgure shows , regulated geographical mo - nopolies were the norm for electric utilities for over 40 years , from 1935 to 1973 . This form was embedded in the social fabric and everyday reality . Most users did not question the lack of competition or the unidirec - tional strategy of the electric power industry . Utilities situated in regulated geographical monopolies , with centralized mega - generators , were the “current the - ory in use” ( Strang and Bradburn , 1994 ) , espoused by economists , professional managers , investors , and public servants . It was rationalized by academic pub - lications and industrial journals as the most efﬁcient , fair , and just system . The academic and popular press reinforced the important theoretical points ( of non - competitive regulation ) for decades , labeling it a natural monopoly . While a few dissenters questioned the legitimacy and effectiveness of non - competition in the electric utilities , their voices were rarely heard or heeded . As several crisis rocked the nation and its leaders , various fringe movements ( i . e . environmental , alter - native energy , cogeneration , etc . ) gained in inﬂuence , size , organization and power . Academics , reporters , political analysts , policy makers and their staffs re - acted to the crisis by searching for inefﬁciencies within the electric power industry that might cause or exacerbate the high prices . During this period of scrutiny , inefﬁciencies were recoupled with the in - dustrial structures that promoted them , resulting in an increased distrust and delegitimation of the existing logics supporting the structure of regulated monop - olies . Once weaknesses were discovered , solutions were sought . Fringe voices that had long been ex - cluded from the national spotlight were sought out and heard . Intellectual as well as ﬁnancial resources were funneled to organizations that supported alterna - tive strategies and structures . Because of the attention focused on the industry , policy makers , academicians , investors , potential entrepreneurs , and other members of the public became more informed of the weak - nesses of the electric power industry , as well as the existence of alternatives . The public redeﬁnition of the set of strategies and structures available to combat 202 W . D . Sine , R . J . David / Research Policy 32 ( 2003 ) 185 – 207 the crisis changed the institutional landscape from that of homogeneity to diversity and competition be - tween solutions . The energy crisis did not force the abandonment of the current industrial structure ( regu - lated geographical monopolies ) and its accompanying power generation strategies ( reliance on centralized generators using fossil fuels , nuclear , and large hy - dro ) . Instead , their prominence was degraded dra - matically , as their status changed from being viewed as the only or natural way of fulﬁlling US energy demands to one of many methods for fulﬁlling de - mand . This shift in institutional logic , we contend , created a fertile environment for entrepreneurship , and ultimately a new set of organizational forms and practices . Our account has several implications for theory , which we now discuss . 5 . 1 . Exogenous versus endogenous disruptions Our research differs from past explanations about the source of jolts or crisis . For instance , Kuhn ( 1970 ) argued that crisis results from anomalies that arise in the course of everyday , normal activity ; in other words , the source of crisis is endogenous to the ﬁeld in question . Other theorists have tended to focus on endogenous technological shocks ( e . g . Schumpeter , 1942 ; Tushman and Anderson , 1986 ) . In contrast , we examine exogenous , environmental jolts , i . e . crisis that originate outside the focal sec - tor of activity . Although endogenous technological shocks and environmental jolts have similar effects— that is , they hasten change—our research echoes ﬁndings by Cyert and March ( 1963 ) and Leblebici et al . ( 1991 ) about the sources of change . We show that exogenous jolts disrupt institutional logics and structures by motivating search processes that create awareness of ﬂaws in the current arrangement and increase the salience of alternatives . While Schum - peterian technological shocks and ensuing change are caused by the advent of new technology , resulting in “creative destruction” ( Schumpeter , 1942 ) , we ﬁnd that crisis resulting from exogenous jolts did not re - sult in the creation of new technological alternatives so much as the delegitimation of existing institu - tional logics , and increased awareness of pre - existing technological solutions ( e . g . alternative energy and cogeneration ) . 5 . 2 . Institutional logics and industrial change We found that institutionalized logics play an im - portant role in the persistence of industrial structures because they shape search processes , empower incum - bent actors , and shape organizational and technologi - cal strategies . We expand on these below . 5 . 2 . 1 . Institutional logics shape search processes We found that industrial structures are embedded in institutional logics that shape search processes and legitimate the authority and expertise of incumbent actors , and that the disruption of these logics by dis - conﬁrming environmental jolts weakened institutional maintenance processes . Similar to Thornton and Ocasio ( 1999 ) , we found that the actors’ ability to re - form or replace industrial structures and processes is highly dependent on current institutional logics . Prior to 1967 , it is clear from congressional records that most members of Congress were generally satisﬁed with the electric power industry 23 and gave little heed to the few innovators and social scientists working on the industry’s periphery . Congressional hearings and studies rarely asked fundamental and critical questions about the industrial structure because policy makers were not aware of fundamental structural ﬂaws and their implications . Policy makers were not aware of reform opportunities because their examinations of the industry were cursory and shaped by the logic of “natural monopolies” . Thus , taken - for - granted assumptions inﬂuenced information - gathering pro - cesses in a way that reinforced institutional logics rather than challenging them because these logics determined the boundaries of information gathering , such as what questions would be investigated , who would be contacted for information , who would tes - tify in congressional hearings , etc . Institutional log - ics , therefore became self - reinforcing . Opportunities for industrial reform and technological change were missed because they were not recognized . Opportuni - ties were not recognized because legislative inquiries rarely transcended prevailing institutional logics about the industry , its structure , strategies , and technical practices . This resulted in circular information gath - ering processes that reinforced rather than questioned 23 Instances of dissatisfaction typically had to do with operational details of the current system such as rate structures . W . D . Sine , R . J . David / Research Policy 32 ( 2003 ) 185 – 207 203 institutionalized logics , leaving actors within the ﬁeld ignorant of weaknesses inherent in the status quo . The oil crisis , however , disrupted circular informa - tion gathering processes and mobilized advocates of alternative structures and technology . When it became clear to legislators , regulators , consumer advocates , and energy consuming businesses that the current in - dustry did not offer solutions to the current crisis , this catalyzed broad search processes that resulted in in - creasing access for peripheral actors to central policy makers . Powerful institutional actors , such as ﬁrms with cogeneration potential and some state regulators , in alliance with peripheral players ( alternative energy advocates , environmentalists , and advocates of com - petition and rate reform ) , presented their arguments to federal and legislative fact ﬁnders in an effort to re - frame those institutional logics that provided the foun - dation for the current industrial structure and hence inﬂuence legislation , thereby opening up new opportu - nities for entrepreneurs . The records of policy makers after 1973 are rich with testimonies from diverse ac - tors trying to make convincing arguments that would result in paradigmatic change . Thus , a solution bazaar was created as policy makers looking for solutions and advocates of alternatives interacted . The legislation ultimately presented by President Carter was forged from information gathered from diverse movements and groups , such as the environmental movement , al - ternative power advocates , economists , entrepreneurs , captains of industry , utility managers , regulators , sci - entists , and engineers . Many of these actors were actively engaged in explicit institution building . 5 . 2 . 2 . Institutional logics authorize incumbent actors This research also reinforces previous work on the importance of culturally - embedded logics , which argues that cultural explanations play a central role in embedding new practices in societal structures , rationalizing them as part of the larger universe , and authorizing incumbent actors to maintain existing in - stitutions ( Berger and Luckmann , 1966 ; DiMaggio , 1982 , 1991 ; Thornton and Ocasio , 1999 ; Lounsbury and Glynn , 2001 ) . We found that between 1935 and 1973 , various fringe entrepreneurs , inventors , and economists tried to persuade the public and policy makers to consider alternative structural and techno - logical paradigms , yet failed at gaining the attention of powerful actors and making fundamental changes in prevailing institutionalized logics and practices until the energy crisis hit . 24 Legitimate incumbent utilities used their status as the de facto experts on power to create the rules or laws surrounding electric - ity production and distribution . They used their inﬂu - ence with legislators to draft laws that promulgated the interests of utilities at the expense of independent producers ( Righter , 1996 ) , thus increasing the difﬁ - culty , expense , and infeasibility of independent star - tups . The ability of the utilities to resist change was increased by the utilities’ power that was partially de - rived from their legitimacy as “natural monopolies” . Institutional change was more likely once the legiti - macy of incumbent actors and hence their power to shape policy was disrupted . The energy crisis and related search processes provided disconﬁrming ev - idence of the viability of current logics , decreasing the legitimacy of both the logic of natural monopolies and the organizational actors that it empowered . 5 . 2 . 3 . Institutional logics shape adoption of technology Technological advances do not always result in im - mediate entrepreneurial activity , but instead are me - diated by institutional logics . In the case of the power generation industry , the technical opportunities for producing power in a multitude of ways had existed for years , but the institutional conditions were not ripe for change . Important technological developments in turbine , geothermal , and other alternative generating methods occurred long before waves of entrepreneurs emerged to implement these technologies . The ge - ographical monopoly structure and accompanying institutional logic , natural monopoly , that deﬁned how power should be produced and distributed cre - ated almost insurmountable barriers for new ventures , impinging on their ability to obtain ﬁnancing and proﬁt by selling power to the grid . Entrepreneurial opportunities to implement technical power gener - ation alternatives depended upon ﬁrst persuading powerful actors , such as legislators , regulators , and potential investors , and other relevant stakeholders , of the weaknesses of the taken - for - granted industrial structures and strategies and potential opportunities for increasing the effectiveness of the current system . 24 For example , see Righter ( 1996 ) for a discussion of wind entrepreneurs and their inability to inﬂuence prevailing logics . 204 W . D . Sine , R . J . David / Research Policy 32 ( 2003 ) 185 – 207 Moreover , powerful actors had to be motivated to engage in institutional reform . That is , actors , such as legislators , regulators , equipment manufacturers , and other important stakeholders needed to create an economic , social , and technical environment that enabled innovative risk takers to organize resources , generate , and sell electricity to the grid . Environmen - tal jolts and resulting search processes both elucidated structural weaknesses and innervated actors to make institutional changes . As Hirsh put it , “the energy crisis caused politically powerful individuals to chal - lenge the standard business strategies of utility elites . . . After blindly supporting managers’ actions for decades . . . presidents , federal and state legislators , and regulatory commissioners became more activist” ( Hirsh , 1999 , p . 69 ) . 5 . 2 . 4 . Interdependence of structure and strategy This study highlights the interdependence of or - ganizational strategy and industrial structure . In this case , industrial structure and institutional processes shaped the set of organizational strategies used within the industry , resulting in homogeneity . Regulated monopolies created an environment antithetical to entrepreneurship . Moreover , the logic of economies of scale , closely linked with the logic of natural monopoly , dictated that the best way to take advan - tage of this particular structure was through large centralized power plants . These strategies precluded the use of alternatives , such as alliances with indus - trial partners to produce power through cogeneration and smaller decentralized generation technology , such as small hydroelectric , solar , biogas , and wind power . The institutionalized logic of natural monopoly advo - cated the regulated monopoly structure . This structure led to a series of strategies that overlooked conser - vation , as well as decentralized generation technolo - gies , such as most green power alternatives ( biomass , wind , solar , and small hydroelectric ) and cogenera - tion . Thus , research and development in the power industry focused , for decades , on speciﬁc technol - ogy types while overlooking technology that could tap alternative energy resources . Moreover , utilities resisted buying and distributing electricity from inde - pendents using alternative generating technology , and also refused to develop alternative generating meth - ods besides nuclear power . It was up to each utility to decide how much money to spend on research and development and which technologies to pursue . It is not surprising , then , that most electric utilities did not pursue alternative technologies that might compete with their existing technological strategy or possibly play an important role in a more decentralized mar - ket . In other words , strategies at the organizational level were strongly inﬂuenced by the institutionalized industrial structure that existed for over 40 years . 25 5 . 2 . 5 . Environments of stasis and innovation Finally , we ﬁnd a strong inverse relationship be - tween environments of stasis and innovation . We argue that in the electric power industry , frame - bending tech - nological change between 1935 and 1973 was rare , not necessarily because equally - promising technology was not possible , but instead because dominant logics and powerful incumbents reduced resources and in - centives for radical innovations and access to markets for fringe innovators and entrepreneurs . It took only a year after the Supreme Court upheld PURPA for dramatic changes in generation technologies to sur - face in the form of combined cycle - gas turbines which almost doubled generation efﬁciencies . This technol - ogy was not really new—it had been around for at least a decade before PURPA—but it had never been adapted to generate power for the grid . Pre - PURPA , the monopsony environment and lack of investment in alternative technologies limited the possibilities of reﬁning this technology and applying it to the power industry . The institutionalized logic of power generation as a natural monopoly was based on the assumption that ﬁrms with captive customers could maximize utility by building large centralized plants . Thus , the type of technology used and developed by electric utilities was as much deﬁned by the logic of natural monopoly , as was the principle of captive customers . 25 In this sense , our ﬁndings are in accord with the well - known perspective on industry structure elucidated by Michael Porter ( 1980 ) , whose framework would predict high barriers to entry , low buyer power , and low rivalry during the period 1940 – 1972 . Our fo - cus however , while not inconsistent with Porter , differs somewhat . His framework is explicitly intended to predict the proﬁtability of industries and to prescribe organizational - level strategies under various industrial structures . In contrast , we seek to explain the sources of radical change within ﬁelds of activity that are highly institutionalized , and to predict the emergence of entrepreneurial activity in areas that have long been stagnant . W . D . Sine , R . J . David / Research Policy 32 ( 2003 ) 185 – 207 205 These two basic pieces of the logic underlying the le - gal structure of the power industry shaped technolog - ical development and entrepreneurial opportunity ( or the lack thereof ) for over 40 years . In contrast , the 15 years following the passage of PURPA was ripe with technological advancement and entrepreneurial op - portunity as entrepreneurs applied for permits to build over 5000 non - utility generators in a variety of sizes and using many different technologies including solar , biomass , wind , cogeneration , etc . ( Sine et al . , 2002 ) . 26 5 . 3 . Limitations The generalizability of our analysis merits discus - sion . First , we argue that powerful environmental jolts will mobilize actors and generate search processes regardless of the industrial structure and the extent to which the feedback loops within the industry are self reinforcing or far reaching . In terms of generating change , however , these search processes will have the biggest impact on industries that are dominated by a single institutionalized structural and technological logic , and hence , are somewhat closed to alternative ideas . While jolts in diverse and dynamic industries will also mobilize actors and generate search pro - cesses , jolts in these environments will be less likely to result in radical change because we assume that in a dynamic industry powerful actors have greater awareness of fringe alternatives and fringe actors are already mobilized to some degree . Second , our deﬁnition of an environmental jolt , adopted from Meyer ( 1982 ) as a difﬁcult to predict disruptive environmental perturbation , does little in helping us to identify such events a priori and is quite context dependent . Clearly , stasis and crisis are two points on a continuum of environmental stability , and a difﬁcult question we do not fully answer is how large of an environmental jolt is required to move an industry from stasis to radical change . In our anal - ysis , we ﬁnd that small perturbations in the power industry in the mid - 1950s and late - 1960s motivated search processes , yet the associated discussions were 26 The US Ofﬁce of Technology Assessment reported in 1985 that the independent power industry created by PURPA served as the major source of innovation in power generation technology in the US between 1980 and 1985 . This is remarkable given that by 1985 , this sector produced only 5 % of US power and thus controlled only 5 % of revenues derived from electric generation . more focused on incremental change rather than fun - damental paradigmatic reform . The taken - for - granted logic of natural monopoly was never successfully challenged in these debates . Our study suggests that the breadth of the search processes motivated by an environmental jolt is related to several factors , such as the degree to which the current paradigm is taken for granted , the extent to which the jolt dis - rupts “normal” day - to - day routines and threatens the interests of powerful actors . Thus , issues about dam site locations and rate formulae in the 1950s led to discussions of process and rate reform , leaving funda - mental issues , such as competition and fundamental changes in generation technology untouched . Not un - til the oil crisis of the 1970s did meaningful change ensue . 6 . Conclusion In conclusion , the shock waves of the oil crisis con - tinue to reverberate throughout the US Weaknesses highlighted during the crisis drive continuing scrutiny and deregulation of the electric power industry . Both state and national legislation are presently recreat - ing the industry , and a national market that treats electricity as a commodity has developed . Moreover , thousands of new ﬁrms have entered the industry at all levels : generation , distribution , commodity mar - kets , etc . Although there are still many barriers ( such as infrastructure and state laws ) to a market where electricity is freely traded and distributed throughout the country , the US is moving very quickly towards this model . The current turbulence in the electric power industry can be traced to the oil crisis of the 1970s , which continues to drive a diversiﬁcation of alternative structures and strategies for power pro - duction and distribution . It is to these alternatives that we turn our attention in subsequent work already underway . References Barley , S . R . , Tolbert , P . S . , 1997 . Institutionalization and structuration : studying the links between action and institution . Organization Studies 18 , 93 – 117 . Berger , P . L . , Luckmann , T . , 1966 . The Social Construction of Reality . Doubleday , New York . 206 W . D . Sine , R . J . David / Research Policy 32 ( 2003 ) 185 – 207 Burns , L . R . , Wholey , D . R . , 1993 . Adoption and abandonment of matrix management programs : effects of organizational characteristics and interorganizational networks . Academy of Management Journal 36 , 10 – 38 . Clemens , E . S . , 1993 . Organizational repertoires and institutional change : women’s groups and the transformation of US politics , 1890 – 1920 . American Journal of Sociology 98 , 755 – 798 . Cohen , M . D . , March , J . G . , Olsen , J . P . , 1972 . A garbage can model of organizational choice . Administrative Science Quarterly 17 , 1 – 25 . Committee on General Affairs , 1973 . Committee Print . US Government Print Ofﬁce , Washington , DC . Crew , M . A . , 1985 . Analyzing the Impact of Regulatory Change in Public Utilities . Lexington Books , Boston . Crew , M . A . , 1991 . Competition and the Regulation of the Utilities . Kluwer Academic Publishers , Boston . Cyert , R . M . , March , J . G . , 1963 . A Behavioral Theory of the Firm . Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ . Cyert , R . M . , Dill , W . R . , March , J . G . , 1965 . The role of expec - tations in business decision making . Administrative Science Quarterly 2 , 306 – 340 . Davis , G . F . , Diekmann , K . A . , Tinsley , C . H . , 1994 . The decline and fall of the conglomerate ﬁrm in the 1980s : the deinsti - tutionalization of an organizational form . American Sociological Review 59 ( 4 ) , 547 – 570 . Derthick , M . , Quirk , P . J . , 1985 . The Politics of Deregulation . The Brookings Institute , Washington , DC . DiMaggio , P . J . , 1982 . Cultural entrepreneurship in nineteenth - century Boston : the creation of an organizational base for high culture in America . Media , Culture and Society 4 , 33 – 50 . DiMaggio , P . J . , 1988 . Interest and agency in institutional theory . In : Zucker , L . ( Ed . ) , Institutional Patterns and Organizations : Culture and Environment . Ballinger , Cambridge , MA . DiMaggio , P . J . , 1991 . Constructing an organizational ﬁeld as a professional project : US art museums , 1920 – 1940 . In : Powell , W . , DiMaggio , P . ( Eds . ) , The New Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis . University of Chicago Press , Chicago , pp . 267 – 292 . DiMaggio , P . J . , Powell , W . W . , 1983 . The iron cage revisited : institutional isomorphism and collective rationality in organi - zational ﬁelds . American Sociological Review 48 , 147 – 160 . DiMaggio , P . J . , Powell . W . W . , 1991 . Introduction . In : Powell , W . , DiMaggio , P . ( Eds . ) , The New Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis . University of Chicago Press , Chicago , pp . 1 – 38 . Edison Electric Institute , 2002 . EEI Pocketbook of Electric Utility Industry Statistics . Edison Electric Institute , Washington , DC . Energy Information Administration , 1983 . Cogeneration : Regu - lation , Economics and Capacity . Energy Information Admin - istration , Washington , DC . Energy Information Administration , 1993 . The Changing Structure of the Electric Power Industry 1970 – 1991 . Energy Information Administration , Washington , DC . Fenn , S . , 1984 . America’s Electric Utilities Under Siege and in Transition . Praeger Publishers , New York . Fligstein , N . , 1997 . Social skill and institutional theory . American Behavioral Scientist 40 , 397 – 405 . Gioia , P . L . , 1989 . The prudence standard : recent experience and future relevance . Public Utilities Fortnightly 9 , 11 – 17 . Gouldner , A . W . , 1954 . Patterns of Industrial Bureaucracy . Free Press , New York . Gray , H . M . , 1940 . The passing of the public utility concept . Journal of Land and Public Utility Economics 16 , 9 – 11 . Greenwood , R . , Hinings , C . R . , 1996 . Understanding radical organizational change : bringing together the old and the new institutionalism . Academy of Management Journal 21 ( 4 ) , 1022 – 1055 . Greve , H . R . , 1995 . Jumping ship : the diffusion of strategy abandonment . Administrative Science Quarterly 40 , 444 – 473 . Haveman , H . A . , Rao , H . , 1997 . Structuring a theory of moral sentiments : institutional and coevolution in the early thrift industry . American Journal of Sociology 102 ( 6 ) , 1606 – 1651 . Hellman , R . , 1972 . Government Competition in the Electric Utility Industry : A Theoretical and Empirical Study . Praeger Publishers , New York . Hirsh , R . F . , 1989 . Technology and Transformation in the American Electric Utility Industry . Cambridge University Press , New York . Hirsh , R . F . , 1999 . Power Loss , The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Hoffman , A . J . , 1999 . Institutional evolution and change : environ - mentalism and the US chemical industry . Academy of Management Journal 42 , 351 – 372 . Hyman , L . S . , 1988 . America’s Electric Utilities : Past , Present and Future . Public Utilities Reports Inc . , Arlington , VA . Joskow , P . L . , Schmalensee , R . , 1983 . Markets for Power : An Analysis of Electric Utility Deregulation . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Kahn , A . , 1970 . The Economics of Regulation : Principles and Institutions . Wiley , New York . Kraatz , M . S . , Zajac , E . J . , 1996 . Exploring the limits of the new institutionalism : the causes and consequences of illegitimate organizational change . American Sociological Review 61 , 812 – 836 . Kuhn , T . S . , 1970 . The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions ( Origi - nally published 1962 ) . University of Chicago Press , Chicago . Kwoka , J . E . , 1996 . Power Struggle . Kluwer Academic Publishers , Boston . Landis , J . T . , 1960 . Report on regulatory agencies to the President - elect , submitted by the chairman of the Subcommittee on Administrative Practice and Procedure to the Committee on the Judiciary of the United States Senate . US Government Print Ofﬁce , Washington , DC . Leblebici , H . , Salancik , G . R . , Copay , A . , King , T . , 1991 . Insti - tutional change and the transformation of interorganizational ﬁelds : an organizational history of the US radio broadcasting industry . Administrative Science Quarterly 36 , 333 – 363 . Lounsbury , M . , Glynn , M . A . , 2001 . Cultural entrepreneurship : stories , legitimacy , and the acquisition of resources . Strategic Management Journal 22 , 545 – 564 . McDonald , F . , 1962 . Insull . University of Chicago Press , Chicago . McGuire , P . , Granovetter , M . , Schwartz , M . , 1993 . Thomas Edison and the Social Construction of the Early Electricity Industry in America . In : Swedberg , R . ( Ed . ) , Explorations in Economic Sociology , Russell Sage Foundation , New York . Meyer , A . D . , 1982 . Adapting to environmental jolts . Administrative Science Quarterly 27 ( 4 ) , 515 – 538 . W . D . Sine , R . J . David / Research Policy 32 ( 2003 ) 185 – 207 207 Meyer , J . W . , Rowan , B . , 1977 . Institutionalized organizations : formal structure as myth and ceremony . American Journal of Sociology 83 , 340 – 363 . Michaels , R . J . , 1996 . Stranded investments , stranded intellectuals . Regulation 1 , 47 – 52 . Munson , R . , 1985 . The Power Makers . Rodale Press , Emmaus , PA . Oliver , C . , 1992 . The antecedents of deinstitutionalization . Organi - zational Studies 13 ( 4 ) , 563 – 588 . Ornstein , N . J . , Mann , T . E . , Malbin , M . J . , 1992 . Vital Statistics on Congress . AEI Press , London . Periodical Contents Index , 2000 . Bell & Howell Information and Learning Company . Pierce , M . A . , 1995 . A history of cogeneration before PURPA . American Society of Heating , Refrigeration , and Air Conditioning Engineers Journal . May , 53 – 59 . Porter , M . E . , 1980 . Competitive Strategy . Free Press , New York . Primeaux , W . J . , Jr . , 1986 . Direct Electric Utility Competition : The Natural Monopoly Myth . Praeger Publishers , New York . Pryde , P . R . , 1983 . Non Conventional Energy Resources . Wiley , New York . Ramsay , M . L . , 1937 . Pyramids of Power : The Story of Roosevelt , Insull , and the Utility Wars . The Bobbs - Merill Company , Indianapolis . Readers’ Guide to Periodical Literature , 1935 – 1978 . The H . W . Wilson Company , New York . Resource Dynamics Corporation , 1983 . Cogeneration : Regulation , Economics and Capacity . ( DOE / NBB - 0031 ) . Energy Infor - mation Administration , Washington , DC . Righter , R . , 1996 . Wind Energy in America : A History . University of Oklahoma Press , Norman . Rudolph , R . , Ridley , S . , 1986 . Power Struggle : The Hundred - Year War Over Electricity . Harper and Row , New York . Samuels , W . J . , Trebing , H . M . , 1972 . A Critique of Administration , and Regulation of Public Utilities . Michigan State University Press , East Lansing , MI . Schumpeter , J . A . , 1942 . Capitalism , Socialism , and Democracy . Harper and Row , New York . Scott , W . R . , 1995 . Institutions and Organizations . Sage Publi - cations , Thousand Oaks . Selznick , P . , 1949 . TVA and the Grass Roots . University of California Press , Berkeley . Shane , S . , 2000 . Prior knowledge and the discovery of entre - preneurial opportunities . Organization Science 11 , 448 . Shapiro , D . L . , 1989 . Generating Failure : Public Power Policies in the Northeast . University Press of America , New York . Singh , J . V . , Tucker , D . J . , Meinhard , A . G . , 1991 . Institutional change and ecological dynamics . In : Powell , W . W . , DiMaggio , P . J . ( Eds . ) , The New Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis . University of Chicago Press , Chicago , pp . 361 – 390 . Sine , W . D . , 2001 . Paradise lost : a study of the decline of institutions and the restructuring of organizational ﬁelds in the US power industry . Dissertation . Cornell University . Sine , W . D . , Haveman , H . A . , Tolbert , P . S . , 2002 . Institutional inﬂuences on founding variation in the emerging independent power industry . Working Paper . University of Maryland . Strang , D . , Bradburn , E . M . , 1994 . Theorizing legitimacy or legitimating theory ? Competing institutional accounts of HMO policy , 1970 – 1989 . Technical Report 93 - 2a . Cornell University . Strang , D . , Sine , W . D . , 2002 . Interorganizational institutions . In : Baum , J . ( Ed . ) , Blackwell Companion to Organizations . Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications , London . Thornton , P . H . , Ocasio , W . , 1999 . Institutional logics and the historical contingency of power in organizations : executive succession in the higher education publishing industry , 1958 – 1990 . American Journal of Sociology 105 , 801 – 843 . Tolbert , P . S . , Zucker , L . G . , 1983 . Institutional sources of change in the formal structure of organizations : the diffusion of civil service reform , 1880 – 1935 . Administrative Science Quarterly 28 , 22 – 39 . Tushman , M . L . , Anderson , P . , 1986 . Technological discontinuities and organizational environments . Administrative Science Quarterly 31 , 439 – 465 . Tushman , M . L . , Murmann , J . P . , 1998 . Dominant designs , techno - logy cycles , and organizational outcomes . Research in Organizational Behavior 20 , 231 – 266 . Varian , H . R . , 1996 . Intermediate Microeconomics , A Modern Approach . W . W . Norton & Company , New York .