fcell - 08 - 588556 November 21 , 2020 Time : 13 : 27 # 1 REVIEW published : 26 November 2020 doi : 10 . 3389 / fcell . 2020 . 588556 Edited by : Michael Schnoor , Center for Research and Advanced Studies , National Polytechnic Institute of Mexico ( CINVESTAV ) , Mexico Reviewed by : Marco Antonio Meraz - Ríos , Center for Research and Advanced Studies , National Polytechnic Institute of Mexico ( CINVESTAV ) , Mexico Archan Ganguly , University of Rochester , United States * Correspondence : Doory Kim doorykim @ hanyang . ac . kr Ji Young Mun jymun @ kbri . re . kr ; mjy1026 @ gmail . com Specialty section : This article was submitted to Cell Adhesion and Migration , a section of the journal Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology Received : 29 July 2020 Accepted : 27 October 2020 Published : 26 November 2020 Citation : Jung M , Kim D and Mun JY ( 2020 ) Direct Visualization of Actin Filaments and Actin - Binding Proteins in Neuronal Cells . Front . Cell Dev . Biol . 8 : 588556 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fcell . 2020 . 588556 Direct Visualization of Actin Filaments and Actin - Binding Proteins in Neuronal Cells Minkyo Jung 1 , Doory Kim 2 * and Ji Young Mun 1 * 1 Neural Circuit Research Group , Korea Brain Research Institute , Daegu , South Korea , 2 Department of Chemistry , Research Institute for Convergence of Basic Sciences , Institute of Nano Science and Technology , Research Institute for Natural Sciences , Hanyang University , Seoul , South Korea Actin networks and actin - binding proteins ( ABPs ) are most abundant in the cytoskeleton of neurons . The function of ABPs in neurons is nucleation of actin polymerization , polymerization or depolymerization regulation , bundling of actin through crosslinking or stabilization , cargo movement along actin ﬁlaments , and anchoring of actin to other cellular components . In axons , ABP – actin interaction forms a dynamic , deep actin network , which regulates axon extension , guidance , axon branches , and synaptic structures . In dendrites , actin and ABPs are related to ﬁlopodia attenuation , spine formation , and synapse plasticity . ABP phosphorylation or mutation changes ABP – actin binding , which regulates axon or dendritic plasticity . In addition , hyperactive ABPs might also be expressed as aggregates of abnormal proteins in neurodegeneration . Those changes cause many neurological disorders . Here , we will review direct visualization of ABP and actin using various electron microscopy ( EM ) techniques , super resolution microscopy ( SRM ) , and correlative light and electron microscopy ( CLEM ) with discussion of important ABPs in neuron . Keywords : electron microscopy , super - resolution microscopy , correlative light and electron microscopy , actin binding protein , actin , neuronal cell INTRODUCTION Neurons are specialized cells with long processes or connections in the nervous system . Each neuron has two types of cytoplasmic protrusions from the neuronal cell body , an axon and a dendrite ( Figure 1 ) . The length of an axon is the distance between one neuron and a target neuron , which varies from tens of micrometers to 1 m . The function of axon for transmission of information to diﬀerent neurons is essential for brain function , therefore axons normally form a connection with the correct target and maintain their structure . Because each neuron has a single axon , axon dysfunction is both the result and the main cause of many neurological disorders , such as loss of cognitive ability , general paralysis , paraplegia , and loss of sensory function . Another protrusion from neuron is dendrites , and the main function is receiving signals from other neurons . In dendrite , spines receiving signals can be classiﬁed into mature spines , mushroom - shaped and immature spines ( ﬁlopodia ) , or thin spines with a hairpin - like ﬁne head < 3 µ m in length ( Figure 2 ) . Actin ﬁlaments are a part of the cytoskeleton and form the speciﬁc axon and dendrite morphology ( Dogterom and Koenderink , 2019 ) . In developing neurons , dynamic regulation of actin polymerization and organization mediates axon morphogenesis and path ﬁnding to synaptic targets . Changes in the axon shape such as branching , branch retraction , axonal arbor morphology depend on actin ﬁlament dynamics . Actin ﬁlaments do not function in a naked state , and actin binding proteins ( ABP ) s regulate all aspects of actin , that is , actin ﬁlament dynamics and Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 1 November 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 588556 fcell - 08 - 588556 November 21 , 2020 Time : 13 : 27 # 2 Jung et al . Direct Visualization of ABPs FIGURE 1 | Axon and dendrite in a neuron . The morphological characteristics are mainly related to actin , ABPs , and other cytoskeletons in dendrite ( A ) and axon ( B ) . ABP , actin - binding protein . Reprinted by permission from Kevenaar and Hoogenraad ( 2015 ) . organization are regulated by various ABPs . In mature axons , stable F - actin and ABPs play a scaﬀolding role and maintain axon integrity through actin ring and help transport organelles . In addition , F - actin and ABPs mediate vesicular traﬃcking and regulate neurotransmitter release in mature axon terminals . Actin remodeling through ABPs in synaptic boutons also plays a crucial role in postsynaptic terminal plasticity . In postsynaptic terminal , the dendritic spine length , branching , spine density , shape of spine , and spine distribution ( actin - rich protrusions from the dendritic shaft ) , and motility respond morphologically to various physiological stimuli depending on actin and ABPs . Dysfunction of synapse plasticity causes neurological and psychiatric disorder , which includes Alzheimer’s disease ( AD ) , Parkinson’s disease ( PD ) , Huntington’s disease ( HD ) , schizophrenia , autism , and depression ( Ma et al . , 2012 ; Borovac et al . , 2018 ) . Therefore , researchers are trying to understand the mechanism of interaction of actin and ABPs in axon and dendrite in order to ﬁnd ways to prevent neuronal disorders . Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 2 November 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 588556 fcell - 08 - 588556 November 21 , 2020 Time : 13 : 27 # 3 Jung et al . Direct Visualization of ABPs FIGURE 2 | Function of ABPs in dendrites . Dendrites contain ABPs for ﬁlopodia initiation , elongation , spine head formation , and spine plasticity . Reprinted and modiﬁed by permission from Elsevier ( Soria Fregozo and Perez Vega , 2012 ) . As ABPs , the Arp2 / 3 complex binds with F - actin and nucleates a new ﬁlament from an existing actin ﬁlament . Arp2 / 3 complex deﬁciency induces excessive growth , exclusive axon branching , and loss of dendritic spine maturation and enlargement ( Strasser et al . , 2004 ; Pinyol et al . , 2007 ) . Formins are unbranched actin nucleators ( Kuhn and Geyer , 2014 ) , and involved in proper axon development ( Matusek et al . , 2008 ) through deep actin network formation . A high formin amount causes long F - actin bundles to push out ﬁlopodia and promotes long actin ﬁlament polymerization ( Hotulainen et al . , 2009 ) . Filament - severing proteins , such as actin - depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) and coﬁlin - 1 accelerated actin turnover ( Sarmiere and Bamburg , 2004 ) , because coﬁlin is a major actin depolymerization factor for regulating actin length ( Cichon et al . , 2012 ) . Coﬁlin - 1 activity is necessary for neurite growth and growth cone turning , receptor traﬃcking , dendritic spinogenesis , and dynamic synaptic plasticity ( Noguchi et al . , 2016 ) . As a linker to form actin networks , there are reports about ABPs tropomodulin ( Gray et al . , 2017 ) , ﬁlamin ( Cho et al . , 2015 ) , neurofascin ( Winkelman et al . , 2014 ) , spectrin ( Unsain et al . , 2018 ) , adducin ( Leite et al . , 2016 ) , and ERM proteins ( ezrin , radixin , moesin ) ( Marsick et al . , 2012 ) . Among them , we will show details of main proteins such as Arp2 / 3 , spectrin , neurofascin , and adducin through direct visualization techniques . Electron Microscopy ( EM ) is one of the primary methods of choice for visualizing actin and ABP , as it is capable of achieving a nanometer resolution . However , the application of conventional EM for live or wet biological samples is limited due to the need for high - vacuum conditions ( Kim et al . , 2015 ) . Moreover , the molecular speciﬁcity is limited in EM imaging as electron - dense heavy metals used for increasing the electron contrast of biological samples often stain lipids or proteins non - speciﬁcally . Although several molecular structures can be identiﬁed by their characteristic shapes from advanced EM images , such identiﬁable molecular structures are relatively few , and the characteristic structures of macromolecules are not known in most cases ( Kim Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 3 November 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 588556 fcell - 08 - 588556 November 21 , 2020 Time : 13 : 27 # 4 Jung et al . Direct Visualization of ABPs et al . , 2015 ) . Immuno - EM using antibodies conjugated with gold nanoparticles can be used to localize speciﬁc targets in EM , but it suﬀers from a low labeling eﬃciency and limited multi - target imaging ( Griﬃths and Hoppeler , 1986 ; Robinson et al . , 2000 ) . These limitations can be overcome using advanced EM techniques such as cryo - techniques , light microscopy ( LM ) with super resolution , and correlative light and electron microscopy ( CLEM ) . Although LM exhibits diﬀraction - limited spatial resolution ( ∼ 300 nm ) , it enables the simultaneous visualization of multiple targets with high molecular speciﬁcity . Live and wet biological samples can also be imaged using light microscopy . The recent development of super - resolution ﬂuorescence microscopy ( SRM ) has enabled substantially increased spatial resolution of light microscopy ( ∼ 10 nm ) by overcoming the diﬀraction limit ( Hell and Wichmann , 1994 ; Betzig et al . , 2006 ; Rust et al . , 2006 ; Huang et al . , 2009 ) . In this review , we focused on the application of ( 1 ) EM such as single particle analysis , electron tomography , unrooﬁng and , etching with cryo - techniques , ( 2 ) SRM such as STORM , PALM , and STED , ( 3 ) CLEM to the study of the molecular architecture of actin and ABP , since these are the most widely used techniques for such molecular ultrastructural studies . VISUALIZATION TECHNIQUES IN THE NANOSCALE TO STUDY ACTIN AND ACTIN - BINDING PROTEINS Electron Microscopy Electron microscopy is good tool for study actin and ABPs because of its nano scale resolution . Traditionally , actin and actin ABPs were observed by conventional EM such as negative stained EM and etching techniques . However , they have some limitations as we mentioned in introduction . Recently , advanced techniques including cryo - TEM , cryo - electron tomography , and CLEM have been used for the study . We will discuss three methods including single particle analysis , electron tomography with freeze - etching and unroof , and immuno gold staining among various EM techniques with their ﬁndings . As a single particle analysis with negative stained EM or cryo - EM showed proteins’ interaction in angstrom resolution level . It can reveal of ABPs’ binding mechanism to actin and their competition . Electron tomography with unroof and etching showed intervals the protein’s interaction to actin with higher resolution . Immuno - gold labeling showed speciﬁc ABP’s detailed locations in cells . Single Particle Analysis Using Negative - Stained EM and Cryo - EM Simple and reliable EM technique combined by image processing and 3D reconstruction ( Figure 3 ) can be used to visualize ABPs . EM and 3D reconstruction of puriﬁed ABPs and actin show ABP - binding sites for actin ﬁlaments in vitro ( Narita and Maeda , 2007 ; Egelman , 2010 ; Behrmann et al . , 2012 ) are used . Negative - stained EM of F - actin itself and F - actin with ABPs has been conventionally used for structural studies of actin with speciﬁc ABPs . Negative staining is a simple sample preparation method in which protein samples are embedded in a thin layer of dried heavy metal salt to increase specimen contrast . After EM imaging in low - dose mode , the straightened single ﬁlaments from the images are used for helical reconstruction or iterative helical real space reconstruction ( IHRSR ) . Averaging the reconstructions shows the 3D structure density , and the known X - ray crystal structure of each protein can be ﬁtted to the 3D structure . The technique shows the binding sites of cortactin ( Pant et al . , 2006 ) , ADF / coﬁlin ( Galkin et al . , 2011 ) , vinculin ( Thompson et al . , 2014 ) , drebrin ( Grintsevich et al . , 2010 ) to actin . Cryo - EM is applied to reveal further details because of its high resolution without staining and dehydration . Compared to negative - stained EM with ∼ 20 Å resolution , cryo - EM can reach 1 – 2 Å resolution ( Bartesaghi et al . , 2015 ; Merk et al . , 2020 ) . For decades , structural biologists have conventionally used X - ray crystallography involving crystallizing proteins . X - ray crystallography gives high - quality images of structures , but it is diﬃcult to make crystals . Cryo - EM does not use crystallized proteins , and uses vitriﬁed pure water including a protein solution in a hydrophilic carbon ﬁlm , which is plunged into a cryogen , such as liquid ethane . Frozen , hydrated protein samples are embedded in a thin layer of vitreous ice , which is imaged by cryo - EM using direct electron detection with complementary metal oxide semiconductor ( CMOS ) - based sensors or a charge - coupled device ( CCD ) . The ﬁrst cryo - EM of actin was performed by Trinick et al . ( 1986 ) at 40 Å resolution , and recent data of phalloidin - bound F - actin was reconstructed at 3 . 3 Å resolution ( Das et al . , 2020 ) . Using this technique , Galkin et al . ( 2008 ) investigated actin – ﬁmbrin / plastin interaction , and Chou et al . ( Chou and Pollard , 2019 ) investigated ADP – actin binding . Coﬁlin ( Tanaka et al . , 2018 ) , spectrin ( Avery et al . , 2017 ) , and Arp2 / 3 - binding sites ( Zimmet et al . , 2020 ) was also investigated using cryo - EM . 3D reconstruction techniques use Interactive Helical Real Space Reconstruction ( IHRSR ) . The 3D reconstruction software using IHRSR has a heterogeneous structure compared to traditional Fourier – Bessel approaches . However , there is still limitation , because when the protein has large heterogeneity , a large proportion of densities become smeared out in the 3D structure after averaging . Therefore , researchers often use ﬁxation to get tight ABP – actin binding or better alignment accuracy by checking the assigned azimuthal rotation angle of segments ( Yang et al . , 2016 ) . Structural studies of actin and ABPs using negative - stained EM and cryo - EM provide new insights into the mechanism underlying ABP – actin binding to regulate actin’s function . In addition , the structures show the competition between ABPs to regulate actin ﬁlaments’ interaction . Coﬁlin – actin and coﬁlin – actin bundles were also investigated using negative - stained EM Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 4 November 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 588556 fcell - 08 - 588556 November 21 , 2020 Time : 13 : 27 # 5 Jung et al . Direct Visualization of ABPs FIGURE 3 | EM imaging and 3D reconstruction of actin with ABPs in vitro . ( A ) ( A1 ) Negatively stained F - actin . ( A2 ) F - actin model based on EM . ( A3 ) Negatively stained actin and ABP ( arrows ) . ( A4 ) ( Top ) Comparison between negative - stained EM and cryo - EM . ( Bottom ) 3D reconstruction of actin and ABPs based on negative staining data . ( A5 ) Cryo - EM of F - actin ( top ) and 3D reconstruction at ∼ 5 . 5 Å resolution ( bottom ) Reprinted by permission from Korean Society of Microscopy ( Craig , 2017 ) . Scale bars = 200 Å ( A1 , A3 ) , 50 Å ( A4 ) , 500 Å ( ( A5 ) , top ) , 20 Å ( ( A5 ) , bottom ) . ( B ) ( B1 ) Actin ﬁlaments bound with coﬁlin - rod . Arrowheads show the intersection of the coﬁlin - rod clusters . ( B2 ) Coﬁlin - rod molecules are rarely bound to actin ﬁlaments and identiﬁed by a rod - shaped structure ( black arrowheads ) . ( B3 ) Actin ﬁlaments with bound coﬁlin molecules ( without rod fusion ) . Scale bars = 25 nm . Reprinted by permission from Ngo et al . ( 2015 ) . ( C ) 3D reconstruction workﬂow . Reprinted by permission from Elsevier ( Fromm and Sachse , 2016 ) . ( D ) 3D reconstruction of actin with ABP ( tropomyosin ) from cryo - EM . PDB ﬁtted to 3D EM volume . Scale bars = 90 Å . Reprinted by permission from Springer Nature ( Von Der Ecken et al . , 2015 ) . ( Minamide et al . , 2010 ; Ngo et al . , 2015 ) . Hyperactive coﬁlin after dephosphorylation shows conformational changes forming rod - shaped coﬁlin - actin bundles , which can aﬀect binding of other ABPs ( Figure 3B ; Ngo et al . , 2015 ) . The changes induce vesicle transport blocking , an increase in secreted A β , phosphorylated tau accumulation , neuroﬁbrillary tangle ( NFT ) formation , and other pathological hallmarks of AD ( Bamburg et al . , 2010 ) . Electron Tomography Using Quick Freeze and Deep Etching Determining the organization of axonal actin ﬁlaments in neurons was challenging . Hirokawa used quick - freeze and deep - etch ( QFDE ) methods to prepare frog spinal nerve axons for EM ( Hirokawa , 1982 ) . While conventional transmission electron microscopy ( cTEM ) requires chemical ﬁxation , dehydration , and Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 5 November 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 588556 fcell - 08 - 588556 November 21 , 2020 Time : 13 : 27 # 6 Jung et al . Direct Visualization of ABPs plastic embedding and results in artifactual changes , QFDE EM provides a pseudo 3D appearance detailed structures . Freeze fracture involvers breaking a frozen sample to reveal its intercellular structures . Freeze etching is the sublimation of surface ice under vacuum to reveal originally hidden details of the fractured face ( Figure 4C ) . With platinum replication using platinum , freeze - etched samples can be viewed with high dimensional stability and preservation quality capturing subtle structural changes , compared to cTEM ( Hirokawa et al . , 1988 ; Svitkina , 2009 ) . QFDE EM can show a central region of microtubules , NFs , interconnected membranous organelles , and a dense actin ﬁlament and ABP network ( Figure 4A ) . Therefore , QFDE EM has been used for decades to investigate cytoskeletal proteins ( Weaver et al . , 2002 ) . Weaver et al . used deep - etch EM of cortactin , N - WASP ( Neural Wiskott Aldrich Syndrome Protein ) , and the Arp2 / 3 complex and showed that cortactin and N - WASP can bind simultaneously to the Arp2 / 3 complex for actin assembly activation ( Figure 4B ) . In addition , immunogold or ﬂuorescent maker – labeled platinum - replica electron microscopy ( PREM ) used to study the speciﬁc ABPs . Labeling technique is a powerful tool to investigate the function of speciﬁc proteins ( Hirokawa et al . , 1988 ; Robenek and Severs , 2008 ; Vassilopoulos et al . , 2019 ) in actin binding , and they will be each explained immuno EM and CLEM section . Advanced methods ( Figure 5 ) for visualizing cytoplasmic surface of the neuronal cell membrane ( Morone et al . , 2008 ) include mechanical shearing and adhesion unrooﬁng . The mechanical shearing of a neuronal cell to expose the cytoplasmic surface of the neuronal cell membrane , and it enables observation of membrane cytoskeletons by cryo - EM and freeze - etch EM . In sonication unrooﬁng , ﬁne bubbles are generated , which adhere electrostatically to apical neuronal cell surfaces and remove the apical neuronal cell membrane ( Figure 5A ) . In adhesion unrooﬁng , positively charged grids that tightly adsorb neuronal cells are peeled from the cells . These techniques allowed visualization of the cytoplasmic surface and successfully shows many details of the cytoskeleton ( Morone , 2010 ) . In addition , it clearly shows the distribution of actin , FIGURE 4 | Freeze etching . ( A ) Organelle and cytoskeleton in mouse axon . A membranous organelle conveyed by transport is linked with a cytoskeleton , which could be a motor molecule ( arrow ) . Scale bar = 50 nm . Reprinted by permission from Science ( Hirokawa , 1998 ) . ( B ) Deep etch micrograph of cortactin molecules ( rows 1 and 2 ) , Arp2 / 3 complexes with the ends of cortactin molecules ( rows 3 ) , F - actin “branchpoints” ( Row 4 : Left two panels ) , Arp2 / 3 molecules anone ( Row 4 : Right two panels ) . Reprinted by permission from Elsevier ( Weaver et al . , 2002 ) . ( C ) A schematic diagram of freeze etching and freeze replica with immunolabeling . Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 6 November 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 588556 fcell - 08 - 588556 November 21 , 2020 Time : 13 : 27 # 7 Jung et al . Direct Visualization of ABPs FIGURE 5 | Advanced etching methods and electron tomography . ( A ) Rip off use adhesion unrooﬁng method and ultrasonication is for mechanical unrooﬁng . Reprinted by permission from Elsevier ( Morone et al . , 2008 ) . ( B ) A high - resolution tomogram was obtained from serial tilt images . Schematic representation of electron tomography and each projection image was acquired at a different tilt angles . Reprinted by permission from Springer Nature ( Morone , 2010 ) . ( C ) Tomogram showing the spacing between adjacent CaMKII particles in the complexes is ∼ 36 nm . Reprinted by permission from PNAS ( Wang Q . et al . , 2019 ) . Scale bar = 100 nm . ET , electron tomography . ABPs , transmembrane proteins , membrane lipids , and some organelles . Advanced techniques using freeze - etch combined with electron tomography ( ET ) can visualize the 3D molecular architecture of membrane - associated structures ( e . g . , membrane skeleton , clathrin - coated pits , and caveolae ) at high resolution ( Morone , 2010 ) . The nanometer resolution of the tomogram in Figure 5 shows that the spacing between adjacent proteins in the complexes is ∼ 36 nm . Freeze - etch electron tomography ( ET ) and ET using thin sectioning are good tools for high - resolution structural analysis . In ET , detailed 3D structures of subcellular macromolecular objects are obtained , because ET uses TEM images at incremental degrees of rotation around the target sample center . Images series of projections at diﬀerent tilt angles ( tilt series ) ( Figure 5B ) are automatically aligned by cross - correlation or semiautomatic alignment with or without ﬁducial markers , such as gold particles . After the tilt - axis direction is determined by alignment , a tomogram is reconstructed using weighted back - projection ( WBP ) , the algebraic reconstruction technique ( ART ) , or the simultaneous iterative reconstruction technique ( SIRT ) . Visualization of the computed tomogram is diﬃcult because of neuronal cell complexity , so various segmentation techniques , such as artiﬁcial intelligence with manual segmentation , have been developed . A tomogram image showed actin ﬁlaments had in parallel or branching arrangements by ABPs , such as CaMKII ( Figure 5C ) , in a neuron at a nanoscale resolution . ET showed improved resolution after sample preparation using quick freezing and cryo - EM ( Figure 5C ) . Immuno - Electron Microscopy Immuno - EM is used to label proteins of interest using the antibody – antigen reaction like in indirect immunoﬂuorescence . The ﬁrst antibody of the antigen of interest and a second antibody - tagged colloidal gold particle are used to locate speciﬁc proteins for actin binding . Gold is used because of its high electron density , and the ABP location shows black dots in EM ( Figure 6 ) . Diﬀerent sizes of gold particles can be used for multiple staining . Antibodies and gold particles cannot penetrate the resin used to embed samples , so before staining , thin sectioning using ultramicrotomy is necessary . For better antigenicity , cryoﬁxation , freeze - substitution , low - temperature embedding , or cryo - sectioning is used in immuno - EM ( Skepper and Powell , 2008 ) . In addition , there are two diﬀerent immunogold - labeling procedures , which can be divided depending on the embedding procedure . In pre - embedding , micrometer - thick tissue is immuno - stained prior to plastic embedding for ultrathin sections to be observed by TEM . In contrast , in post - embedding , tissue is embedded in a plastic resin and ultrathin sections are observed and then immunolabeled . Pre - embedding is better to get more immunolabeling , while Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 7 November 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 588556 fcell - 08 - 588556 November 21 , 2020 Time : 13 : 27 # 8 Jung et al . Direct Visualization of ABPs FIGURE 6 | Immunogold labeling . ( A , B ) . Fluorescence staining with β III spectrin antibody ( magenta ) and phalloidin ( cyan ) of tissue sections from mouse hippocampus . ( C ) Immunogold EM of β III spectrin staining in thin sections of the mouse brain . Dendritic spines are pseudocolored in yellow . Inset : Boxed regions are enlarged to show 5 nm gold particles . Scale bars = ( A , B ) , 1 µ m ; ( C ) , 200 nm . EM , electron microscopy . Reprinted by permission from Society for Neuroscience ( Eﬁmova et al . , 2017 ) . post - embedding gives better ultrastructure ( Webster et al . , 2008 ) . Immunogold labeling shows the detailed location of spectrin in the synapse ( Figure 6C ; Eﬁmova et al . , 2017 ) to study the function of β III spectrin in neurons . Super - Resolution Fluorescence Microscopy Super resolution microscopy can be divided into two categories ; single - molecule localization microscopy ( SMLM ) and illumination pattern engineering methods . The SMLM use photo - switchable ﬂuorophores to locate single molecules with high precision , and include stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( STORM ) ( Rust et al . , 2006 ) , photo - activated localization microscopy ( PALM ) ( Betzig et al . , 2006 ) , and ﬂuorescence photoactivation localization microscopy ( FPALM ) ( Hess et al . , 2006 ) . The illumination pattern engineering methods exploit a non - linear response to excitation ﬂuorophores to overcome the diﬀraction limit . Such methods include stimulated emission depletion ( STED ) microscopy ( Hell and Wichmann , 1994 ) , [ saturated ] structured - illumination microscopy ( [ S ] SIM ) ( Gustafsson et al . , 1995 ) , and reversible saturable optical ﬂuorescence transitions ( RESOLFT ) microscopy ( Hofmann et al . , 2005 ) . These SRM methods have also been applied to the study of actin and ABP by providing molecular - speciﬁc images at high resolution . Stochastic Optical Reconstruction Microscopy ( STORM ) The diﬀraction limit arises from the diﬀraction of light passed through optical systems , ultimately resulting in a blurred image from the spatial overlapping of point spread functions ( PSF ) of Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 8 November 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 588556 fcell - 08 - 588556 November 21 , 2020 Time : 13 : 27 # 9 Jung et al . Direct Visualization of ABPs single molecules . To distinguish these molecules individually , STORM takes advantage of photo - switchable ﬂuorescence dyes to temporally separate them ( Figure 7A ; Rust et al . , 2006 ; Huang et al . , 2009 ) . The temporally separated individual molecules are localized with high precision , and a super - resolution image can be constructed from the collections of localizations from multiple ﬂuorophores . This method enables the visualization of the ultrastructure of actin and ABP that was previously inaccessible with conventional optical methods and EM ( Xu et al . , 2013 ; Zhong et al . , 2014 ; Sidenstein et al . , 2016 ; Han et al . , 2017 ; Pan et al . , 2018 ; Wang G . et al . , 2019 ) . For example , Xu et al . ( 2013 ) ﬁrst examined the periodic ring - like structure of actin , spectrin , adducin , and sodium channels in axons with a periodicity of ∼ 180 – 190 nm using STORM , which had not been resolved by conventional light microscopy ( Figures 7B – D ) . They also performed two - color STORM imaging for spectrin and actin ( or adducing ) , which showed alternating periodic structures . Such a quasi - 1D , periodic , actin - spectrin cytoskeleton was not observed in dendrites ; thus , it allowed the authors to speculate that this structure may play an essential role in providing stable and elastic mechanical support for axons , which need to withstand mechanical strains on their long and thin structures . In a later study by the same research group , Zhong et al . ( 2014 ) used STORM to elucidate the developmental mechanism of this membrane - associated periodic skeleton ( MPS ) , such as how periodic cytoskeletons form and why they primarily form in axons ( Figure 7E ) . The STORM images revealed that this periodic structure is formed early on in the axon development , followed by propagation from the proximal to distal ends of axons . They also demonstrated that the local concentration of spectrin regulates this structure , and overexpression of spectrin induces this periodic structure in dendrites , which contain very low concentrations of spectrin under normal conditions . The authors also found that knocking out ankyrin B triggered the periodic structure in dendrites ; thus , ﬁnding that ankyrin B is critical for the polarized distribution of β II spectrin in neurites . Spectrin organization was also examined in a variety of neuronal and glial cell types by He et al . using the same methods ( Sidenstein et al . , 2016 ) . The authors showed that spectrin has a long - range and periodic distribution throughout all axons , whereas small patches of periodic spectrin structures are present in the sub - regions of dendrites and in four types of glial cells . These ﬁndings allow the authors to conclude that the periodic organization of spectrin is conserved across a wide range of invertebrate and vertebrate animal species . The spatial organization of spectrin , actin , and adducin in the dendrites and soma at diﬀerent developmental stages of cultured hippocampal neurons was also investigated by STORM ( Figure 7F ; Han et al . , 2017 ) . Han et al . observed that one - dimensional MPS slowly develops in the dendrites of mature neurons at a much slower rate than that in axons . Interestingly , the authors also found that they form a two - dimensional polygonal lattice structure in the somatodendritic compartment at a much slower rate than that in the 1D MPS in axons . This result suggests that actin - based membrane skeletons organized with spectrin and ABP are diﬀerentially regulated across diﬀerent sub - regions of neurons . A two - dimensional polygonal lattice structure was also observed from a native ultrastructure of the cytoskeleton in erythrocytes ( Pan et al . , 2018 ) . Pan et al . used STORM imaging to resolve the ultrastructure of the cytoskeleton , including β - spectrin , F - actin , protein 4 . 1 , tropomodulin , and adducin . They revealed a junction - to - junction distance of ∼ 80 nm , which is in agreement with the relaxed spectrin tetramers ; actin and its capping proteins occupy subsets of junctional complexes . Recently , Wang G . et al . ( 2019 ) investigated the behavior of MPS in sensory axon degeneration using the same super - resolution microscopy . From the STORM images of β II spectrin , they found that trophic deprivation ( TD ) caused the rapid disassembly of MPS , which can be initiated by actin destabilization . In contrast , knockout of β II spectrin prevented TD - induced retrograde signaling to protect axons from degeneration by inhibiting MPS formation . Collectively , substantial progress has recently been made in identifying the developmental mechanism of the periodic actin - spectrin - based membrane skeleton in diﬀerent sub - compartments of neurons by taking advantage of the high molecular speciﬁcity and spatial resolution of STORM . Photo - Activated Localization Microscopy ( PALM ) Another widely used SMLM method is PALM , which shares many similarities with STORM . PALM also exploits the temporal image separation of individual ﬂuorophores based on the on / oﬀ behavior of ﬂuorescent proteins ( Betzig et al . , 2006 ; Huang et al . , 2009 ) . Although the only diﬀerence between these two methods is the type of ﬂuorescent label ( i . e . , photo - switchable ﬂuorescent proteins for PALM and photo - switchable organic dyes for STORM ) , they are essentially similar in terms of conﬁguration and diﬀerences are blurred as they use both ﬂuorescent organic dyes and ﬂuorescent proteins . PALM is also used in the study of actin , and most investigations have focused on the visualization of actin dynamics using single - molecule tracking ( Tatavarty et al . , 2009 ; Frost et al . , 2010 ; Izeddin et al . , 2011 ) . Tatavarty et al . ( 2009 ) for instance , utilized PALM to observe the kinematic ( physical motion of actin ﬁlaments ) and kinetic dynamics of F - actin in the dendritic spines of hippocampal neurons , which had been hindered by the small size of the dendritic spines in diﬀraction - limited conventional light microscopy ( Figures 8A – C ) . Single - molecule tracking by PALM showed highly heterogeneous kinematic dynamics of F - actin in dendritic spines at a single - ﬁlament level , in which simultaneous actin movements were observed in both retrograde and anterograde directions . In contrast , the movements of ﬁlaments integrate into a net retrograde ﬂow at the ensemble level , suggesting short actin ﬁlaments in dendritic spines . Frost et al . ( 2010 ) also investigated the movement of individual actin molecules within living spines ( Figures 8D – F ) . In a similar manner to Tatavarty et al . , they used PALM - based single - molecule tracking to measure the velocity of single actin molecules along ﬁlaments as an index of the Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 9 November 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 588556 fcell - 08 - 588556 November 21 , 2020 Time : 13 : 27 # 10 Jung et al . Direct Visualization of ABPs FIGURE 7 | Continued Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 10 November 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 588556 fcell - 08 - 588556 November 21 , 2020 Time : 13 : 27 # 11 Jung et al . Direct Visualization of ABPs FIGURE 7 | Super - resolution STORM images of actin and ABPs . ( A ) The principle of SMLM , such as STORM , PALM , and FPALM . Reprinted by permission from Annual Reviews ( Huang et al . , 2009 ) . ( B ) Two - color STORM image of ( i ) actin ( green ) and β II - spectrin C terminus ( magenta ) , ( ii ) actin ( green ) and adducin ( magenta ) , ( iii ) β II - spectrin ( green ) and adducin ( magenta ) , and ( iv ) sodium channels ( Na v , green ) and β IV - spectrin N terminus ( magenta ) . ( C ) Spatial correlations between actin and the β II - spectrin C terminus [ ( i ) , black ] , between actin and adducin [ ( ii ) , blue ] , between adducin and the β II - spectrin C terminus [ ( iii ) , red ] , and between sodium channels and the β IV - spectrin N terminus [ ( iv ) , green ] , which are calculated for varying relative shifts between the two color channels along the axons . ( D ) A model for the cortical cytoskeleton in axons , forming ring - like structures wrapping around the circumference of the axon with a periodicity of ∼ 180 to 190 nm . Reprinted by permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science ( B ∼ D ) ( Xu et al . , 2013 ) . ( E ) Representative STORM images at different developmental stages , showing assembly of AIS components into the periodic lattice structure during late developmental stages . Reprinted by permission from Zhong et al . ( 2014 ) . ( F ) MPS components form 2D polygonal lattice structures in some somatodendritic regions of neurons . ( Left ) 3D STORM image of a dendritic region from a DIV 28 mouse neuron stained for ( i ) β III - spectrin , ( ii ) adducin , and ( iii ) β III - spectrin . ( Middle ) Zoom - in image of the region indicated by the white dashed box in the Left . ( Right ) 2D autocorrelation function of this boxed region , which shows a 2D periodic lattice pattern . Reprinted by permission from PNAS ( E , F ) ( Han et al . , 2017 ) . FIGURE 8 | Super - resolution PALM images of actin , showing heterogeneous actin dynamics within individual spines . ( A ) Fluorescence images of mature dendritic spines ( 23DIV ) . ( B ) Time - lapse image sequences of single EosFP - actin molecules showing ( i ) retrograde , ( ii ) stationary , ( iii ) anterograde , and ( iv ) random direction movement . ( C ) Models of actin organization in dendritic spines . ( left ) Highly polarized actin cytoskeleton , which is inconsistent with the experimental results . ( right ) Weakly polarized actin cytoskeleton , which is more consistent with the experimental results . Reprinted by permission from Tatavarty et al . ( A ∼ C ) ( Tatavarty et al . , 2009 ) . ( D , Left ) Map of actin molecule velocity across the inner extent of a dendritic spine , showing restricted areas of high velocity . ( Right ) Representative spine showing inward orientation of actin ﬂow . ( Arrow length : relative velocity ) ( E ) ( Left ) Actin velocity map and ( Right ) locally averaged molecular movement vector on the deconvolved wideﬁeld image of PSD - 95 - cerulean ( red ) with local tracked molecule density ( green ) , showing some but not all foci of high - velocity motion are closely associated with the synapse . ( D , E ) Reprinted by permission from Elsevier ( Frost et al . , 2010 ) . ( F ) Average velocity of tracked particles , showing tracked molecules originating at or near the PSD moved faster than molecules originating elsewhere in the cell . ( D – F ) Reprinted by permission from Elsevier ( Frost et al . , 2010 ) ( G ) Super - resolution PALM image of the dendritic segment . ( H ) Super - resolution time - lapse imaging of dendritic spines from a neuron expressing ABP - tdEosFP at DIV 27 , showing spine dynamics in mature hippocampal neurons . ( I ) PALM images of spine dynamics during AMPAR ( 2 mM ) activation , showing rounding - up spine after treatment ( arrowhead ) Reprinted by permission from Izeddin et al . ( G ∼ I ) ( Izeddin et al . , 2011 ) . ﬁlament polymerization rate . They found that the actin velocity on ﬁlaments was substantially elevated at the synapses . In contrast , no enhanced polymerization activity was observed in the endocytic zone , implying a highly heterogeneous rate of actin molecules . The morphological changes of the spine cytoskeleton were also investigated at super - resolution by Izeddin et al . ( 2011 ) ( Figures 8G – I ) . By combining PALM imaging with quantum dot tracking for long - term imaging , they simultaneously observed the cytoskeleton and spine membranes , and their evolution during pharmacologically induced synaptic activity . Although all studies discussed in this section visualize actin but not ABP in live cells , they demonstrate the possibility of future studies regarding ABP dynamics in relation to the actin in live neurons as a further application of PALM imaging . Stimulated Emission Depletion ( STED ) Another widely used SRM is STED , which was developed by Hell et al . In STED microscopy , a donut - shaped depletion light is used to suppress the ﬂuorescence emission from the ﬂuorophores as a pattern surrounding the focal spot of the excitation laser ( Figure 9A ; Hell and Wichmann , 1994 ; Huang et al . , 2009 ) . Such a negative pattern reduces the size of the ﬂuorescent region and scanning of this sharpened focal spot generates a super - resolution image . Through the use of STED , actin and ABP have been thoroughly investigated ( Urban et al . , 2011 ; Lukinaviˇcius et al . , 2014 ; Leite et al . , 2016 ; Sidenstein et al . , 2016 ; Barabas et al . , 2017 ; D’este et al . , 2017 ; Krieg et al . , 2017 ; Martínez et al . , 2020 ) . For instance , the subcortical cytoskeleton organization at synaptic sites was previously investigated using three - color multilevel STED nanoscopy ( Figure 9B ; Sidenstein et al . , 2016 ) . Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 11 November 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 588556 fcell - 08 - 588556 November 21 , 2020 Time : 13 : 27 # 12 Jung et al . Direct Visualization of ABPs FIGURE 9 | Super - resolution STED images of actin and ABPs . ( A ) The principle of STED microscopy . ( Left ) The stimulated emission process . ( Middle ) Schematic view of a STED microscope . ( Right ) A decreased size of the effective point spread function ( PSF ) by a donut - shaped STED laser . Reprinted by permission from Annual Reviews ( Huang et al . , 2009 ) . ( B ) ( i , iii ) Three - color STED image of a dendrite decorated with spines and stained with β II spectrin , phalloidin , and Homer / Bassoon , showing the periodic spectrin organization . ( ii , iv ) Single - channel images of the spine indicated in ( i ) , showing β II spectrin enters into the spine neck but does not reach the PSD . Magenta and cyan dashed lines highlight the shape of the spine / actin cage and the position of the PSD / Bassoon , respectively . Reprinted by permission from Springer Nature ( Sidenstein et al . , 2016 ) ( C ) Representative STED image of Glial actin , Axo - glial NrCAM , Neurofascin , Subunit 7 . 2 of axonal voltage - gated potassium channel ( Kv7 . 2 or KCNQ2 , N terminus antibody ) , axonal voltage - gated sodium channels ( Pan - Na v ) , β IV spectrin , and Ankyrin G at nodal gaps of sciatic nerve ﬁbers , some of which reveal a predominantly longitudinal periodicity . The red dashed line indicates the position of the node ( “N” ) . Reprinted by permission from PNAS ( D’este et al . , 2017 ) . ( D , E ) STED images of WT ( D ) and a - adducin KO ( E ) DIV19 RGCs , showing lack of adducin gives rise of axon actin rings of increased diameter in RGCs . Reprinted by permission from Leite et al . ( 2016 ) . ( F ) Spectrin forms an actin - dependent , periodic cytoskeleton in vitro . Representative confocal ( left ) , STED super - resolution images ( center ) , and power spectral density ( PSD ) proﬁles ( right ) of a - spectrin SPC - 1 : : GFP in C . elegans ( i ) control , ( ii ) control neurons treated with the actin depolymerizing agent , Latrunculin A ( 1 mM ) , ( iii ) in unc - 70 ( s1502 ) b - spectrin null mutant axons in vitro . Reprinted by permission from Krieg et al . ( 2017 ) ( G ) STED images of dendritic spines observed under control conditions ( i ) , as well as before and at subsequent times after chemical LTP stimulation ( ii ) . Spine neck diameters are indicated in each frame by arrows . Reprinted by permission from Elsevier ( Urban et al . , 2011 ) . This technique was developed based on an intrinsically co - aligned multicolor imaging scheme to overcome the limitations of multi - color imaging by STED , such as the requirement for complicated setups and analysis algorithms . This technique was successfully demonstrated by imaging neurofascin / spectrin and actin in cultured hippocampal neurons . The multicolor STED images revealed the ∼ 190 nm periodic actin / β II spectrin lattices along dendrites and spines , consistent with previously reported STORM images , whereas this periodic pattern was absent at presynaptic and postsynaptic sites . Such protein periodic structures in super - resolution images can now be automatically quantiﬁed in terms of the abundance and regularity of the MPS . For example , Barabas et al . ( 2017 ) presented a method for the automated quantiﬁcation of the quality and abundance of periodic protein structures in super - resolution images as an open - source image analysis tool that provides the distributions of correlation coeﬃcients for the spectrin membrane - associated periodic skeleton as an indication of the dynamic assembly and disassembly of the MPS . D’este et al . ( 2017 ) also used STED to map the nanoscale molecular organization of 12 proteins at the nodes of Ranvier of sciatic nerve ﬁbers , including cytoskeletal proteins of the axon , axonal , and glial nodal adhesion molecules , sodium and potassium channels , axonal proteins , and glial proteins ( Figure 9C ) . The STED images showed that β IV spectrin and ankyrin G revealed a known one - dimensional longitudinal order at nodal gaps , whereas neurofascin - 186 and neuron glial - related cell adhesion molecule ( NrCAM ) revealed a two - dimensional hexagonal - like lattice with a ∼ 190 nm periodicity , which has not yet been explored . The authors also observed that both glial proteins ( neurofascin - 155 and ankyrin B ) and axonal proteins ( β II spectrin , Caspr ) form quasi - 1D periodic arrangements at paranodes . These results suggest the importance of the lateral organization of proteins at the nodes of Ranvier . The defects in ABP have also been investigated by STED imaging to better understand their roles . For example , Leite et al . ( 2016 ) observed an increased actin ring without changing the inter - ring periodicity in neurons in mice lacking adducing ( Figures 9D , E ) . This result suggests a model in which adducin is responsible for controlling the diameter of actin rings and axons , but it is not necessary for actin ring assembly and periodicity . Krieg et al . ( 2017 ) reported that periodic spectrin structures Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 12 November 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 588556 fcell - 08 - 588556 November 21 , 2020 Time : 13 : 27 # 13 Jung et al . Direct Visualization of ABPs FIGURE 10 | Correlative Light and Electron Microscopy . ( A ) Correlative results of Ankyrin G tail ( ankG 480 , orange ) proximal axon by ﬂuorescent microscope image and PREM image . Reprinted by permission from Springer Nature ( Vassilopoulos et al . , 2019 ) . CLEM with Serial block - face ( SBF ) - SEM technique ( B ) and Cryo - Electron tomography ( C ) . Reprinted by permission from Springer Nature ( Sartori - Rupp et al . , 2019 ) . were absent due to the loss of UNC - 70 β - spectrin and actin depolymerization from STED images ( Figure 9F ) . These results allowed the authors to conclude that mechanical neuroprotection depends on spectrin - dependent longitudinal tension , and the defects in β - spectrin may sensitize neurons to damage . Live cell imaging for actin was also performed using time - lapse STED imaging . To investigate synapses in brain slices or brains under realistic conditions , Urban et al . ( 2011 ) used aberration - reducing optics for STED imaging and demonstrated this for deep inside biological tissue imaging ( Figure 9G ) . This method enabled the visualization of distinct actin distributions inside dendritic spines in living organotypic brain slices at depths of up to 120 mm with 60 – 80 nm spatial resolution , revealing that structurally heterogeneous and highly dynamic actin in spine necks were modulated by neuronal activity . However , long - term STED imaging of live biological samples is often limited due to its high laser power requirement for high spatial resolution . To overcome this limit , Lukinaviˇcius et al . ( 2014 ) introduced ﬂuorogenic probes for actin and tubulin ( SiR - actin , SiR - tubulin ) that exhibited Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 13 November 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 588556 fcell - 08 - 588556 November 21 , 2020 Time : 13 : 27 # 14 Jung et al . Direct Visualization of ABPs minimal cytotoxicity , excellent brightness , and photostability . They successfully revealed the one - dimensional periodic actin organization in the axons and the nine - fold symmetry of the centrosome of cultured rat neurons . These advances are expected to allow further investigations into ABP dynamics in vivo in the near future . Correlative Light and Electron Microscopy ( CLEM ) As previously stated , ﬂuorescence light microscopy ( LM ) and EM have been extensively used for biological studies to probe cellular structures and obtain a better understanding of biological functions . Each of these techniques has its distinct strengths and weaknesses that complement each other , as previously discussed . Fluorescence LM provides protein - speciﬁc information with high molecular speciﬁcity and sensitivity . Multicolor ﬂuorescence LM oﬀers a promising approach to monitor potential molecular interactions between spectrally diﬀerent ﬂuorescent labels , and live cell LM imaging can reveal the spatiotemporal dynamics of a protein . Moreover , recently developed SRM techniques allow images to be taken with a higher resolution than that with the diﬀraction limit , as described in the previous section . Although such advances in SRM have made remarkable headway in improving spatial resolution by order of magnitude or moreover , the diﬀraction limit , EM generally achieves a higher spatial resolution in protein localization compared to that with SRM , revealing the subcellular anatomy at resolutions of nanometers . However , conventional ﬁxation and staining methods of traditional EM do not usually provide protein - speciﬁc information because of the limited molecular speciﬁcity . Moreover , EM is limited to live cell imaging , since the electrons destroy the samples , and the sample needs to be processed and ﬁxed for EM imaging . As the strengths and weaknesses of LM and EM are complementary , these two methods can be eﬀective if used together for the same sample . This combination is the so - called correlative light and EM ( CLEM ) . It provides diﬀerent and complementary information by merging the speciﬁc protein localization advantages of LM with the ultrastructural information of EM . Correlative light and electron microscopy is often compared to immuno - EM because this has been the method of choice for protein localization at an ultrastructural level . However , the application of immuno - EM is signiﬁcantly limited by several technical diﬃculties , including the destruction of antigens by strong ﬁxation , inaccessibility of antigens in the plastic , poor survival of epitopes , limited preservation of morphology , incomplete labeling , non - speciﬁc binding of antibodies , and non - speciﬁc background . Therefore , only a subset of target molecules are successfully detected by immuno - EM . These drawbacks have prompted the development of various CLEMs for protein localization at an ultrastructural level . Compared with immuno - EM , CLEM signiﬁcantly improves the detection eﬃciency and sensitivity with suﬃcient reliability and speciﬁcity . Moreover , when EM is combined with SRM , such correlative SRM - EM approaches provide a more meaningful correlation between two images due to their closer resolution match compared to that by CLEM ( Kim et al . , 2015 ) . Such CLEM methods have also allowed for the identiﬁcation of neuronal cell structures and processes of interest in whole - cell images with high molecular speciﬁcity and high spatial resolution . This dual examination provides valuable unique and complementary information for actin and ABP . For instance , Vassilopoulos et al . ( 2019 ) utilized PREM to visualize the dynamic actin network and combined this with STORM to speciﬁcally localize ankyrin G ( Figure 10A ) . This correlation imaging method revealed the molecular organization of the actin rings and MPS components along the axonal plasma membrane . In particular , the association of MPS with microtubules via ankyrin G was visualized along the AIS by correlative STORM and PREM . Sochacki et al . also showed the technique of CLEM with PREM to observe a clathrin lattice and actin ( Sochacki et al . , 2017 ) . CLEM is also was used to obtain high - resolution images using serial sectioning . For example , tunneling nanotubes ( TNTs ) , which are actin - rich membranous protrusions , play a role in the intercellular transport of various cargoes between neuronal cells and can be observed by CLEM , which reveals their structural identity using LM with focused ion beam ( FIB ) – scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ) in neuronal cells ( Figure 10B ) . FIB - SEM is a serial block - face ( SBF ) - SEM technique using serial sectioning . Another SBF - SEM technique uses an ultramicrotome embedded inside a SEM . The advantage of these techniques is that we can easily obtain serial ultrathin sections , but the sections can be observed at one time . CLEM can be combined with cryo - ET after cryo - FIB sectioning . CLEM can also be combined with confocal or ﬂuorescent microscopy and super - resolution microscopy , such as stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( STORM ) ( Zhanghao et al . , 2019 ) and stimulated emission depletion microscopy ( STED ) ( Urban et al . , 2011 ) . Cryo - EM and cryo - FIB - SEM with LM show open - ended TNTs labeled with anti - N - cadherin antibodies and 3D structures of TNTs . Labeled TNTs are ﬁlled with parallel actin bundles and membrane - bound mitochondria ( Figure 10C ; Sartori - Rupp et al . , 2019 ) . CONCLUSION AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES In conclusion , various microscopy techniques have been successfully demonstrated to visualize actin ﬁlaments and ABPs in neuronal cells . First of all , EM has been the primary tool to study actin and ABPs because of its nanometer resolution , for example , single particle analysis , electron tomography with freeze etching and unroof , and immuno - gold staining . Using these EM techniques , ABP binding sites for actin ﬁlaments and the organization of axonal actin ﬁlaments in neurons have been investigated . However , molecular speciﬁc imaging and live - cell imaging have been limited to EM techniques . To overcome these limitations , the recently developed SRM has been applied to the study of actin and ABP , including STORM , PALM , and PALM . This method enables the visualization of the ultrastructure of actin and ABP that was previously inaccessible with conventional optical methods and EM , for example , the periodic ring - like Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 14 November 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 588556 fcell - 08 - 588556 November 21 , 2020 Time : 13 : 27 # 15 Jung et al . Direct Visualization of ABPs structure of actin and ABPs even in live neurons with high molecular speciﬁcity at high resolution . As the strengths and weaknesses of LM and EM are complementary , the CLEM has also been applied to the study of actin and ABP . Combining these two methods has allowed for the identiﬁcation of neuronal cell structures and processes of interest in whole cells with high molecular speciﬁcity and high spatial resolution . In the future , we foresee that in situ or wet - environment EM would be a goal in this ﬁeld to study actin and ABPs . Studies have reported progress in observing proteins’ structural changes ( Fitzpatrick et al . , 2013 ) and the ultrastructure of living cells in the Four - dimension ( 4D ) , time ( De Jonge and Ross , 2011 ; Ross , 2015 ) . Although the resolution is poor , live cells or proteins in situ have been observed so that actin and ABPs would be the next challenge for this 4D EM - combined CLEM in the near future . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS MJ , DK , and JM wrote the manuscript . All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version . FUNDING This research was supported by the KBRI basic research program through Korea Brain Research Institute funded by Ministry of Science and ICT ( 20 - BR - 01 - 09 ) , the Organelle Network Research Center ( NRF - 2017R1A5A1015366 ) , and the National Research Foundation of Korea ( NRF ) grant funded by the Korea Government ( MSIT ) ( No . 2018R1C1B6003436 ) . REFERENCES Avery , A . W . , Fealey , M . E . , Wang , F . , Orlova , A . , Thompson , A . R . , Thomas , D . D . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Structural basis for high - aﬃnity actin binding revealed by a beta - III - spectrin SCA5 missense mutation . Nat . Commun . 8 : 1350 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 017 - 01367 - w Bamburg , J . R . , Bernstein , B . W . , Davis , R . C . , Flynn , K . C . , Goldsbury , C . , Jensen , J . R . , et al . ( 2010 ) . ADF / Coﬁlin - actin rods in neurodegenerative diseases . Curr . Alzheimer Res . 7 , 241 – 250 . doi : 10 . 2174 / 156720510791050902 Barabas , F . M . , Masullo , L . A . , Bordenave , M . D . , Giusti , S . A . , Unsain , N . , Refojo , D . , etal . ( 2017 ) . Automatedquantiﬁcationofproteinperiodicnanostructuresin ﬂuorescence nanoscopy images : abundance and regularity of neuronal spectrin membrane - associated skeleton . Sci . Rep . 7 , 1 – 10 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 16280 - x Bartesaghi , A . , Merk , A . , Banerjee , S . , Matthies , D . , Wu , X . , Milne , J . L . S . , et al . ( 2015 ) . 2 . 2 Å resolution cryo - EM structure of β - galactosidase in complex with a cell - permeant inhibitor . Science 348 , 1147 – 1151 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aab1576 Behrmann , E . , Tao , G . , Stokes , D . L . , Egelman , E . H . , Raunser , S . , andPenczek , P . A . ( 2012 ) . Real - space processing of helical ﬁlaments in SPARX . J . Struct . Biol . 177 , 302 – 313 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2011 . 12 . 020 Betzig , E . , Patterson , G . H . , Sougrat , R . , Lindwasser , O . W . , Olenych , S . , Bonifacino , J . S . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Imaging intracellular ﬂuorescent proteins at nanometer resolution . Science 313 , 1642 – 1645 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1127344 Borovac , J . , Bosch , M . , and Okamoto , K . ( 2018 ) . Regulation of actin dynamics during structural plasticity of dendritic spines : signaling messengers and actin - binding proteins . Mol . Cell Neurosci . 91 , 122 – 130 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . mcn . 2018 . 07 . 001 Cho , Y . , Park , D . , and Cavalli , V . ( 2015 ) . Filamin A is required in injured axons for HDAC5 activity and axon regeneration . J . Biol . Chem . 290 , 22759 – 22770 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . m115 . 638445 Chou , S . Z . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2019 ) . Mechanism of actin polymerization revealed bycryo - EMstructuresofactinﬁlamentswiththreediﬀerentboundnucleotides . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 116 , 4265 – 4274 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1807028115 Cichon , J . , Sun , C . , Chen , B . , Jiang , M . , Chen , X . A . , Sun , Y . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Coﬁlin aggregation blocks intracellular traﬃcking and induces synaptic loss in hippocampal neurons . J . Biol . Chem . 287 , 3919 – 3929 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . m111 . 301911 Craig , R . ( 2017 ) . Molecular structure of muscle ﬁlaments determined by electron microscopy . Appl . Micros . 47 , 226 – 232 . doi : 10 . 9729 / am . 2017 . 47 . 4 . 226 Das , S . , Ge , P . , Oztug Durer , Z . A . , Grintsevich , E . E . , Zhou , Z . H . , and Reisler , E . ( 2020 ) . D - loop dynamics and near - atomic - resolution Cryo - EM structure of phalloidin - bound F - Actin . Structure 28 : e583 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . str . 2020 . 04 . 004 De Jonge , N . , and Ross , F . M . ( 2011 ) . Electron microscopy of specimens in liquid . Nat . Nanotechnol . 6 , 695 – 704 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nnano . 2011 . 161 D’este , E . , Kamin , D . , Balzarotti , F . , andHell , S . W . ( 2017 ) . Ultrastructuralanatomy of nodes of Ranvier in the peripheral nervous system as revealed by STED microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 114 , E191 – E199 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1619553114 Dogterom , M . , and Koenderink , G . H . ( 2019 ) . Actin – microtubule crosstalk in cell biology . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 20 , 38 – 54 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41580 - 018 - 0067 - 1 Eﬁmova , N . , Korobova , F . , Stankewich , M . C . , Moberly , A . H . , Stolz , D . B . , Wang , J . , et al . ( 2017 ) . betaIII spectrin is necessary for formation of the constricted neck of dendritic spines and regulation of synaptic activity in neurons . J . Neurosci . 37 , 6442 – 6459 . doi : 10 . 1523 / jneurosci . 3520 - 16 . 2017 Egelman , E . H . ( 2010 ) . Reconstruction of helical ﬁlaments and tubes . Methods Enzymol . 482 , 167 – 183 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0076 - 6879 ( 10 ) 82006 - 3 Fitzpatrick , A . W . , Lorenz , U . J . , Vanacore , G . M . , and Zewail , A . H . ( 2013 ) . 4D cryo - electron microscopy of proteins . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 135 , 19123 – 19126 . doi : 10 . 1021 / ja4115055 Fromm , S . A . , and Sachse , C . ( 2016 ) . Cryo - EM structure determination using segmented helical image reconstruction . Methods Enzymol . 579 , 307 – 328 . doi : 10 . 1016 / bs . mie . 2016 . 05 . 034 Frost , N . A . , Shroﬀ , H . , Kong , H . , Betzig , E . , and Blanpied , T . A . ( 2010 ) . Single - molecule discrimination of discrete perisynaptic and distributed sites of actin ﬁlament assembly within dendritic spines . Neuron 67 , 86 – 99 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2010 . 05 . 026 Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , Cherepanova , O . , Lebart , M . C . , and Egelman , E . H . ( 2008 ) . High - resolutioncryo - EMstructureoftheF - actin - ﬁmbrin / plastinABD2 complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 105 , 1494 – 1498 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0708667105 Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , Kudryashov , D . S . , Solodukhin , A . , Reisler , E . , Schroder , G . F . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Remodeling of actin ﬁlaments by ADF / coﬁlin proteins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 20568 – 20572 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1110109108 Gray , K . T . , Kostyukova , A . S . , and Fath , T . ( 2017 ) . Actin regulation by tropomodulin and tropomyosin in neuronal morphogenesis and function . Mol . Cell Neurosci . 84 , 48 – 57 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . mcn . 2017 . 04 . 002 Griﬃths , G . , and Hoppeler , H . ( 1986 ) . Quantitation in immunocytochemistry : correlation of immunogold labeling to absolute number of membrane antigens . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 34 , 1389 – 1398 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 34 . 11 . 3534077 Grintsevich , E . E . , Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , Ytterberg , A . J . , Mikati , M . M . , Kudryashov , D . S . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Mapping of drebrin binding site on F - actin . J . Mol . Biol . 398 , 542 – 554 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2010 . 03 . 039 Gustafsson , M . G . , Agard , D . A . , and Sedat , J . W . ( 1995 ) . “Sevenfold improvement of axial resolution in 3D wide - ﬁeld microscopy using two objective - lenses , ” in Proceedings of the Three - Dimensional Microscopy : Image Acquisition and ProcessingII : InternationalSocietyforOpticsandPhotonics , ( Washington , DC : SPIE - International Society for Optics and Photonics ) , 147 – 156 . doi : 10 . 1117 / 12 . 205334 Han , B . , Zhou , R . , Xia , C . , and Zhuang , X . ( 2017 ) . Structural organization of the actin - spectrin – based membrane skeleton in dendrites and soma of neurons . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 114 , E6678 – E6685 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1705043114 Hell , S . W . , and Wichmann , J . ( 1994 ) . Breaking the diﬀraction resolution limit by stimulated emission : stimulated - emission - depletion ﬂuorescence microscopy . Optics Lett . 19 , 780 – 782 . doi : 10 . 1364 / ol . 19 . 000780 Hess , S . T . , Girirajan , T . P . , and Mason , M . D . ( 2006 ) . Ultra - high resolution imaging by ﬂuorescence photoactivation localization Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 15 November 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 588556 fcell - 08 - 588556 November 21 , 2020 Time : 13 : 27 # 16 Jung et al . Direct Visualization of ABPs microscopy . Biophys . J . 91 , 4258 – 4272 . doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 106 . 091116 Hirokawa , N . ( 1982 ) . Cross - linker system between neuroﬁlaments , microtubules , and membranous organelles in frog axons revealed by the quick - freeze , deep - etching method . J . Cell Biol . 94 , 129 – 142 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 94 . 1 . 129 Hirokawa , N . ( 1998 ) . Kinesin and dynein superfamily proteins and the mechanism of organelle transport . Science 279 , 519 – 526 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 279 . 5350 . 519 Hirokawa , N . , Hisanaga , S . , and Shiomura , Y . ( 1988 ) . MAP2 is a component of crossbridges between microtubules and neuroﬁlaments in the neuronal cytoskeleton : quick - freeze , deep - etch immunoelectron microscopy and reconstitution studies . J . Neurosci . 8 , 2769 – 2779 . doi : 10 . 1523 / jneurosci . 08 - 08 - 02769 . 1988 Hofmann , M . , Eggeling , C . , Jakobs , S . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2005 ) . Breaking the diﬀraction barrier in ﬂuorescence microscopy at low light intensities by using reversibly photoswitchable proteins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 102 , 17565 – 17569 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0506010102 Hotulainen , P . , Llano , O . , Smirnov , S . , Tanhuanpaa , K . , Faix , J . , Rivera , C . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Deﬁning mechanisms of actin polymerization and depolymerization during dendritic spine morphogenesis . J . Cell Biol . 185 , 323 – 339 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200809046 Huang , B . , Bates , M . , and Zhuang , X . ( 2009 ) . Super - resolution ﬂuorescence microscopy . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 78 , 993 – 1016 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . biochem . 77 . 061906 . 092014 Izeddin , I . , Specht , C . G . , Lelek , M . , Darzacq , X . , Triller , A . , Zimmer , C . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Super - resolution dynamic imaging of dendritic spines using a low - aﬃnity photoconvertible actin probe . PLoS One 6 : e15611 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0015611 Kevenaar , J . T . , and Hoogenraad , C . C . ( 2015 ) . The axonal cytoskeleton : from organization to function . Front . Mol . Neurosci . 8 : 44 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fnmol . 2015 . 00044 Kim , D . , Deerinck , T . J . , Sigal , Y . M . , Babcock , H . P . , Ellisman , M . H . , and Zhuang , X . ( 2015 ) . Correlative stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy and electron microscopy . PLoS One 10 : e0124581 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0124581 Krieg , M . , Stühmer , J . , Cueva , J . G . , Fetter , R . , Spilker , K . , Cremers , D . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Genetic defects in β - spectrin and tau sensitize C . elegans axons to movement - induceddamageviatorque - tensioncoupling . eLife 6 : e20172 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 20172 Kuhn , S . , andGeyer , M . ( 2014 ) . ForminsaseﬀectorproteinsofRhoGTPases . Small GTPases 5 : e29513 . doi : 10 . 4161 / sgtp . 29513 Leite , S . C . , Sampaio , P . , Sousa , V . F . , Nogueira - Rodrigues , J . , Pinto - Costa , R . , Peters , L . L . , et al . ( 2016 ) . The actin - binding protein α - adducin is required for maintaining axon diameter . Cell Rep . 15 , 490 – 498 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2016 . 03 . 047 Lukinaviˇcius , G . , Reymond , L . , D’este , E . , Masharina , A . , Göttfert , F . , Ta , H . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Fluorogenic probes for live - cell imaging of the cytoskeleton . Nat . Methods 11 , 731 – 733 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2972 Ma , Q . L . , Yang , F . , Frautschy , S . A . , and Cole , G . M . ( 2012 ) . PAK in Alzheimer disease . Huntington disease and X - linked mental retardation . Cell Logist . 2 , 117 – 125 . doi : 10 . 4161 / cl . 21602 Marsick , B . M . , San Miguel - Ruiz , J . E . , and Letourneau , P . C . ( 2012 ) . Activation of ezrin / radixin / moesin mediates attractive growth cone guidance through regulation of growth cone actin and adhesion receptors . J . Neurosci . 32 , 282 – 296 . doi : 10 . 1523 / jneurosci . 4794 - 11 . 2012 Martínez , G . F . , Gazal , N . G . , Quassollo , G . , Szalai , A . M . , Del Cid - Pellitero , E . , Durcan , T . M . , et al . ( 2020 ) . Quantitative expansion microscopy for the characterization of the spectrin periodic skeleton of axons using ﬂuorescence microscopy . Sci . Rep . 10 , 1 – 11 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 59856 - w Matusek , T . , Gombos , R . , Szecsenyi , A . , Sanchez - Soriano , N . , Czibula , A . , Pataki , C . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Formin proteins of the DAAM subfamily play a role during axon growth . J . Neurosci . 28 , 13310 – 13319 . doi : 10 . 1523 / jneurosci . 2727 - 08 . 2008 Merk , A . , Fukumura , T . , Zhu , X . , Darling , J . E . , Grisshammer , R . , Ognjenovic , J . , et al . ( 2020 ) . 1 . 8 A resolution structure of beta - galactosidase with a 200 kV CRYO ARM electron microscope . IUCr J . 7 , 639 – 643 . doi : 10 . 1107 / s2052252520006855 Minamide , L . S . , Maiti , S . , Boyle , J . A . , Davis , R . C . , Coppinger , J . A . , Bao , Y . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Isolation and characterization of cytoplasmic coﬁlin - actin rods . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 5450 – 5460 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . m109 . 063768 Morone , N . ( 2010 ) . Freeze - etch electron tomography for the plasma membrane interface . Methods Mol . Biol . 657 , 275 – 286 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 60761 - 7 83 - 9 _ 22 Morone , N . , Nakada , C . , Umemura , Y . , Usukura , J . , and Kusumi , A . ( 2008 ) . Three - dimensional molecular architecture of the plasma - membrane - associated cytoskeletonasreconstructedbyfreeze - etchelectrontomography . MethodsCell Biol . 88 , 207 – 236 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0091 - 679x ( 08 ) 00412 - 3 Narita , A . , and Maeda , Y . ( 2007 ) . Molecular determination by electron microscopy of the actin ﬁlament end structure . J . Mol . Biol . 365 , 480 – 501 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2006 . 06 . 056 Ngo , K . X . , Kodera , N . , Katayama , E . , Ando , T . , and Uyeda , T . Q . ( 2015 ) . Coﬁlin - induced unidirectional cooperative conformational changes in actin ﬁlaments revealed by high - speed atomic force microscopy . eLife 4 : e04806 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 04806 . 033 Noguchi , J . , Hayama , T . , Watanabe , S . , Ucar , H . , Yagishita , S . , Takahashi , N . , et al . ( 2016 ) . State - dependent diﬀusion of actin - depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin underlies the enlargement and shrinkage of dendritic spines . Sci . Rep . 6 : 32897 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep32897 Pan , L . , Yan , R . , Li , W . , and Xu , K . ( 2018 ) . Super - resolution microscopy reveals the native ultrastructure of the erythrocyte cytoskeleton . Cell Rep . 22 , 1151 – 1158 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2017 . 12 . 107 Pant , K . , Chereau , D . , Hatch , V . , Dominguez , R . , andLehman , W . ( 2006 ) . Cortactin binding to F - actin revealed by electron microscopy and 3D reconstruction . J . Mol . Biol . 359 , 840 – 847 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2006 . 03 . 065 Pinyol , R . , Haeckel , A . , Ritter , A . , Qualmann , B . , and Kessels , M . M . ( 2007 ) . Regulation of N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex by Abp1 controls neuronal morphology . PLoS One 2 : e400 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0000400 Robenek , H . , and Severs , N . J . ( 2008 ) . Recent advances in freeze - fracture electron microscopy : thereplicaimmunolabelingtechnique . BiolProcedOnline 10 , 9 – 19 . doi : 10 . 1251 / bpo138 Robinson , J . , Takizawa , T . , and Vandre , D . ( 2000 ) . Applications of gold cluster compounds in immunocytochemistry and correlative microscopy : comparison with colloidal gold . J . Microscopy 199 , 163 – 179 . doi : 10 . 1046 / j . 1365 - 2818 . 2000 . 00734 . x Ross , F . M . ( 2015 ) . Opportunitiesandchallengesinliquidcellelectronmicroscopy . Science 350 : aaa9886 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aaa9886 Rust , M . J . , Bates , M . , and Zhuang , X . ( 2006 ) . Sub - diﬀraction - limit imaging by stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( STORM ) . Nat . Methods 3 , 793 – 796 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth929 Sarmiere , P . D . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2004 ) . Regulation of the neuronal actin cytoskeleton by ADF / coﬁlin . J Neurobiol . 58 , 103 – 117 . doi : 10 . 1002 / neu . 10267 Sartori - Rupp , A . , Cordero Cervantes , D . , Pepe , A . , Gousset , K . , Delage , E . , Corroyer - Dulmont , S . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Correlative cryo - electron microscopy reveals the structure of TNTs in neuronal cells . Nat . Commun . 10 : 342 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 08178 - 7 Sidenstein , S . C . , D’este , E . , Böhm , M . J . , Danzl , J . G . , Belov , V . N . , and Hell , S . W . ( 2016 ) . Multicolour multilevel STED nanoscopy of Actin / Spectrin Organization at Synapses . Sci . Rep . 6 : 26725 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep26725 Skepper , J . N . , and Powell , J . M . ( 2008 ) . Immunogold staining following freeze substitution and low temperature embedding after chemical ﬁxation or after cryoimmobilization for transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) . CSH Protoc . 2008 : dbrot5017 . doi : 10 . 1101 / pdb . prot5017 Sochacki , K . A . , Dickey , A . M . , Strub , M . P . , and Taraska , J . W . ( 2017 ) . Endocytic proteins are partitioned at the edge of the clathrin lattice in mammalian cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 19 , 352 – 361 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3498 Soria Fregozo , C . , and Perez Vega , M . I . ( 2012 ) . Actin - binding proteins and signallingpathwaysassociatedwiththeformationandmaintenanceofdendriticspines . Neurologia 27 , 421 – 431 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . nrleng . 2011 . 10 . 006 Strasser , G . A . , Rahim , N . A . , Vanderwaal , K . E . , Gertler , F . B . , and Lanier , L . M . ( 2004 ) . Arp2 / 3 is a negative regulator of growth cone translocation . Neuron 43 , 81 – 94 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2004 . 05 . 015 Svitkina , T . ( 2009 ) . Imaging cytoskeleton components by electron microscopy . Methods Mol . Biol . 586 , 187 – 206 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 60761 - 376 - 3 _ 10 Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 16 November 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 588556 fcell - 08 - 588556 November 21 , 2020 Time : 13 : 27 # 17 Jung et al . Direct Visualization of ABPs Tanaka , K . , Takeda , S . , Mitsuoka , K . , Oda , T . , Kimura - Sakiyama , C . , Maeda , Y . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Structural basis for coﬁlin binding and actin ﬁlament disassembly . Nat . Commun . 9 : 1860 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 04290 - w Tatavarty , V . , Kim , E . J . , Rodionov , V . , and Yu , J . ( 2009 ) . Investigating sub - spine actin dynamics in rat hippocampal neurons with super - resolution optical imaging . PLoS One 4 : e7724 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0007724 Thompson , P . M . , Tolbert , C . E . , Shen , K . , Kota , P . , Palmer , S . M . , Plevock , K . M . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Identiﬁcation of an actin binding surface on vinculin that mediates mechanical cell and focal adhesion properties . Structure 22 , 697 – 706 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . str . 2014 . 03 . 002 Trinick , J . , Cooper , J . , Seymour , J . , and Egelman , E . H . ( 1986 ) . Cryo - electron microscopy and three - dimensional reconstruction of actin ﬁlaments . J Microsc 141 , 349 – 360 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0007724 Unsain , N . , Stefani , F . D . , and Caceres , A . ( 2018 ) . The Actin / Spectrin membrane - associated periodic skeleton in neurons . Front . Synaptic . Neurosci . 10 : 10 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fnsyn . 2018 . 00010 Urban , N . T . , Willig , K . I . , Hell , S . W . , and Nägerl , U . V . ( 2011 ) . STED nanoscopy of actin dynamics in synapses deep inside living brain slices . Biophys . J . 101 , 1277 – 1284 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2011 . 07 . 027 Vassilopoulos , S . , Gibaud , S . , Jimenez , A . , Caillol , G . , and Leterrier , C . ( 2019 ) . Ultrastructure of the axonal periodic scaﬀold reveals a braid - like organization of actin rings . Nat . Commun . 10 : 5803 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 019 - 13835 - 6 Von Der Ecken , J . , Muller , M . , Lehman , W . , Manstein , D . J . , Penczek , P . A . , and Raunser , S . ( 2015 ) . Structure of the F - actin - tropomyosin complex . Nature 519 , 114 – 117 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature14033 Wang , G . , Simon , D . J . , Wu , Z . , Belsky , D . M . , Heller , E . , O’rourke , M . K . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Structuralplasticityofactin - spectrinmembraneskeletonandfunctional role of actin and spectrin in axon degeneration . eLife 8 : e38730 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 38730 . 041 Wang , Q . , Chen , M . , Schafer , N . P . , Bueno , C . , Song , S . S . , Hudmon , A . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Assemblies of calcium / calmodulin - dependent kinase II with actin and their dynamic regulation by calmodulin in dendritic spines . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 116 , 18937 – 18942 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1911452116 Weaver , A . M . , Heuser , J . E . , Karginov , A . V . , Lee , W . - L . , Parsons , J . T . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2002 ) . Interaction of Cortactin and N - WASp with Arp2 / 3 Complex . Curr . Biol . 12 , 1270 – 1278 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0960 - 9822 ( 02 ) 01035 - 7 Webster , P . , Schwarz , H . , and Griﬃths , G . ( 2008 ) . Preparation of cells and tissues for immuno EM . Methods Cell Biol . 88 , 45 – 58 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0091 - 679x ( 08 ) 00403 - 2 Winkelman , J . D . , Bilancia , C . G . , Peifer , M . , and Kovar , D . R . ( 2014 ) . Ena / VASP Enabled is a highly processive actin polymerase tailored to self - assemble parallel - bundled F - actin networks with Fascin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 111 , 4121 – 4126 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1322093111 Xu , K . , Zhong , G . , and Zhuang , X . ( 2013 ) . Actin , spectrin , and associated proteins form a periodic cytoskeletal structure in axons . Science 339 , 452 – 456 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1232251 Yang , S . , Woodhead , J . L . , Zhao , F . Q . , Sulbaran , G . , and Craig , R . ( 2016 ) . An approach to improve the resolution of helical ﬁlaments with a large axial rise and ﬂexible subunits . J . Struct . Biol . 193 , 45 – 54 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2015 . 11 . 007 Zhanghao , K . , Chen , X . , Liu , W . , Li , M . , Liu , Y . , Wang , Y . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Super - resolution imaging of ﬂuorescent dipoles via polarized structured illumination microscopy . Nat . Commun . 10 : 4694 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 019 - 12681 - w Zhong , G . , He , J . , Zhou , R . , Lorenzo , D . , Babcock , H . P . , Bennett , V . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Developmental mechanism of the periodic membrane skeleton in axons . eLife 3 : e04581 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 04581 . 025 Zimmet , A . , Van Eeuwen , T . , Boczkowska , M . , Rebowski , G . , Murakami , K . , and Dominguez , R . ( 2020 ) . Cryo - EM structure of NPF - bound human Arp2 / 3 complex and activation mechanism . Sci . Adv . 6 : eaaz7651 . doi : 10 . 1126 / sciadv . aaz7651 Conﬂict of Interest : The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest . Copyright © 2020 Jung , Kim and Mun . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( CC BY ) . The use , distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted , provided the original author ( s ) and the copyright owner ( s ) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited , in accordance with accepted academic practice . No use , distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms . Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 17 November 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 588556