AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 Endocytotic Cycling of PM Proteins Angus S . Murphy , 1 Anindita Bandyopadhyay , 1 Susanne E . Holstein , 2 and Wendy A . Peer 1 1 Department of Horticulture , Purdue University , West Lafayette , Indiana 47907 ; email : murphy @ purdue . edu 2 Institute for Plant Sciences , University of Heidelberg , 69120 , Heidelberg , Germany Annu . Rev . Plant Biol . 2005 . 56 : 221 – 51 doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . arplant . 56 . 032604 . 144150 Copyright c (cid:1) 2005 by Annual Reviews . All rights reserved First published online as a Review in Advance on January 14 , 2005 1543 - 5008 / 05 / 0602 - 0221 $ 20 . 00 Key Words endosomes , recycling , internalization , trafﬁcking , auxin Abstract Plasma membrane protein internalization and recycling mechanisms in plants share many features with other eukaryotic organisms . How - ever , functional and structural differences at the cellular and organismal level mandate specialized mechanisms for uptake , sorting , trafﬁcking , and recycling in plants . Recent evidence of plasma membrane cycling of members of the PIN auxin efﬂux facilitator family and the KAT1 inwardly rectifying potassium channel demonstrates that endocytotic cycling of some form occurs in plants . However , the mechanisms under - lying protein internalization and the signals that stimulate endocytosis of proteins from the cell - environment interface are poorly understood . Herewesummarizewhatisknownofendocytoticcyclinginanimalsand compare those mechanisms with what is known in plants . We discuss plant orthologs of mammalian - trafﬁcking proteins involved in endocy - totic cycling . The use of the styryl dye FM4 - 64 to deﬁne the course of endocytotic uptake and the fungal toxin brefeldin A to dissect the internalization pathways are particularly emphasized . Additionally , we discuss progress in identifying distinct endosomal populations marked by the small GTPases Ara6 and Ara7 as well as recently described ex - amples of apparent cycling of plasma membrane proteins . 221 A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 Contents INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 222 ENDOSOMAL CYCLING IN ANIMALS : AN OVERVIEW . . . . . . 222 PROTEIN COMPONENTS OF ENDOCYTOTIC CYCLING MECHANISMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 228 Adaptins and Adaptor Complexes . . . 228 ARFs / ARF - GEFs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 229 Dynamins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 230 Rab GTPases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 231 SNAREs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 232 Other Cytoskeletal Interactions . . . . . 232 Other Proteins Contributing to PM Protein Cycling . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233 WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT ENDOCYTOTIC CYCLING IN PLANTS ? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233 Endocytosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233 Endocytotic Compartments . . . . . . . . 234 Endosomal Sorting and Redirection 235 EVIDENCE FOR ENDOCYTOTIC RECYCLING IN PLANTS . . . . . . . 236 Auxin Transport Proteins and GNOM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 236 The KAT1 Inward - Rectifying Potassium Channel . . . . . . . . . . . . . 238 Other Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 238 CONCLUSION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 240 INTRODUCTION PM : Plasma Membrane Vectorial redirection : redistribution of a protein from the apical or basal plasma membrane to a lateral membrane Eukaryotic cells respond to external signals by altering transcriptional output and regulating the abundance and distribution of PM proteins that comprise the functional interface with the externalenvironment . Inanimalsandyeast , PM protein removal and recompartmentalization is regulated by endocytosis and endocytotic cy - cling . As the mechanisms underlying endocy - totic cycling have been elucidated , the expecta - tion that similar mechanisms would be found in plants has increased . Recent evidence that the PM localization of the PIN1 auxin efﬂux carrier complex and the KAT1 potassium channel are dynamically regulated ( 44 , 102 ) has intensiﬁed efforts to conclusively demonstrate endocytotic recycling in plants . In both cases , the proteins involved have been shown to respond to both signaling molecules and external environmen - tal cues ( 12 , 72 , 123 ) although no apparent cell surface receptor is involved . Many efforts are now underway to ﬁt plant vesicular cycling mechanisms into the context of mammalian models . However , as Figure 1 shows , develop - mental and structural differences at both the cellular and organismal level preclude the wholesale application of animal models to plants . In this review , we attempt to summa - rize the current understanding of this area of plant cell biology . ENDOSOMAL CYCLING IN ANIMALS : AN OVERVIEW Endocytosis is an essential eukaryotic phe - nomenon whereby cells take up extracellular substances and / or internalize PM proteins for transport to endosomes . Eukaryotic cellular membranes are highly dynamic structures ; in a typical cell the entire surface area of the PM turns over completely on an hourly ba - sis ( 171 ) . Endocytotic cycling helps maintain homeostatic regulation primarily by increas - ing or decreasing the surface content of me - diating molecules in response to extracellular cues . From the endosomes , PM proteins are either targeted into the lysosome / vacuole for degradation or recycled back to cell surface ( 116 ) . Mammalian endocytosis regulates mul - tiple physiological processes such as nutrient uptake , retrieval of exocytosed vesicle compo - nents , downregulation of signaling receptors , and the localization / abundance of membrane transporters ( 116 ) . In animals , endosomal cycling is an essential component of endocrine and cell - to - cell signal - ing . Although the cycling of membrane trans - port proteins in response to internal signals has been documented ( 93 ) , the endocytotic cycling of PM receptors in a process known as RME has been more intensively studied . In RME , the binding of an extracellular ligand to a PM 222 Murphy et al . A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 Figure 1 A comparison of plasma membrane ( PM ) localization in polarized animal and plant cells . Polarized animal cells have tight junctions that delineate the cell into basolateral and apical regions . As a result , animal cells exhibit targeting of PM proteins to basolateral or apical membranes ( 36 , 85 ) , basolateral redistribution of mistargeted proteins ( 186 ) , and symmetric redistribution of proteins to all sides of the PM following loss of polarity , as seen when pathogenic E . coli infection disrupts tight junctions ( 115 ) . Plant cells have cell walls and lack tight junctions to deﬁne the polarity of the cell . To date , four types of PM targeting have been documented in plants ( basal , lateral , apical , and nonpolar ) ( 28 , 39 , 145 , 163 , 165 ) . Vectorial redistribution of PM proteins following a stimulus has been shown , as with the PIN3 auxin efﬂux facilitator that is redistributed from the basal to the lateral side of cells after tropic stimulus ( 39 ) . ( A ) Generalized animal intestinal epithelial cell showing basolateral localization of carbonic anhydrase XII , apical localization of carbonic anhydrase IV , and basolateral redistribution of β ( 1 ) - integrin or Na + / K + ATPase after a pathogen - induced change in cellular polarity . Dashed lines denote redistributed proteins . ( B ) Generalized plant cell showing nonpolar localization of the PM ATPase , basal localization of PIN1 , lateral localization of COBRA , apical localization of AUX1 , and vectorial redistribution of PIN3 after a gravitropic stimulus . www . annualreviews . org · Endocytotic Cycle of PM Proteins 223 A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 RME : receptor - mediated endocytosis , the process by which a ligand - bound receptor is internalized and sorted ERC : endosomal recyclingcompartment , a network of tubules marked by the presence of LDL - R and iron - free Tf bound to the Tf - R . Proteins from the sorting endosomes are directed to the ERC for recycling to the plasma membrane or for sorting to the degradation pathway . Rab : small GTPases implicated in several steps of endocytotis . Of the plant orthologs , Ara6 is unique to the kingdom . receptor initiates the uptake of proteins or protein complexes from the cell surface . Of the various animal cell surface protein up - take mechanisms , clathrin - dependent endocy - tosis is by far the best investigated . Less is known about clathrin - independent processes , which are more difﬁcult to study because they are not concentrative and often lack speciﬁc markers . Clathrin - independent pathways in - clude caveolae / lipid raft - mediated endocyto - sis , ﬂuid - phase endocytosis , and phagocytosis . PM lipid microdomains enriched in choles - terol and sphingolipids sequester membrane proteins and play a role in trafﬁcking ( 59 ) . Studies with recycling Shiga toxin and Glyco - sylphosphatidyl inositol ( GPI ) - anchored pro - teins such as the folate receptor suggest a role for lipid microdomains in sorting in the ERC . Fluid - phase endocytosis and phagocy - tosis have been documented in animal cells as molecular internalization mechanisms but it has not been demonstrated that molecules in - ternalized by these processes are recycled to the PM . In clathrin - mediated RME , ligands bound to their respective receptors and destined for degradation in lysosomes become internalized via clustering in clathrin - coated pits ( 103 ) . As a result of recycling to the PM , some recep - tors are reused up to several hundred times . Endocytotic and biosynthetic recycling also maintain the identity of the respective or - ganelles by retrieving speciﬁc sets of func - tional proteins ( organelle homeostasis ) . RME is also essential to the basolateral redirection that maintains the speciﬁcity of apical and baso - lateral membranes in polarized cells ( 186 ) . Be - cause clathrin - mediated internalization is the most well understood endocytotic process , this overview focuses on recycling events in this pathway ( Figure 2 ) . The ﬁrst step in clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis is the recruitment of adaptor protein ( AP ) complexes and clathrin to the PM . Phos - phoinositides initiate coat assembly by directly binding to endocytotic proteins such as the AP2 adaptor complex and AP - 180 ( 88 , 140 ) . An ARF6 GTPase was also implicated in this initial recruitment step . APs link speciﬁc cargo to sites of coat assembly . The pinching off of the coated vesicle requires additional proteins such as dy - namins , amphiphysin , and Eps15 . The vesi - cles rapidly shed the coat proteins to undergo fusion with target endosomes and to allow recycling of the coat components . This uncoat - ing process requires auxilin and the molecular chaperone Hsc70 ( 66 , 175 ) . The newly formed endosomes fuse with one another and with pre - existing sorting endosomes in a process that requires N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fac - tor adaptor protein receptor ( SNARE ) and Rab proteins . The ﬁrst stop for transmembrane proteins internalized by clathrin - mediated endocytosis is the early endosomes , which include the pe - ripherally localized tubular - vesicular structures of the sorting endosomes as well as the ERC . Due to their intracellular localization , the sort - ing endosomes are the ﬁrst organelles to re - ceive PM - derived cargo such as the low - density lipoprotein ( LDL ) and transferrin ( Tf ) . In the acidic lumen of the sorting endosome ( pH 6 . 0 ) ( 75 ) , the dissociation of ligands from their re - ceptors occurs . The sorting endosome is also the ﬁrst main junction in the RME pathway because two main destinations can be reached from there : the PM and the late endosomes . Extensive studies of Tf and its receptor ( Tf - R ) show that recycling to the PM can either oc - cur directly from the sorting endosome or via the ERC ( 55 , 154 ) . For recycling the Tf - R and some ﬂuorescent lipid analogs ( e . g . , C6 - NBD - sphingomyelin ) fromthesortingendosome , the kinetics are fast , with a half - life ( t 1 / 2 ) of about twominutesandwithanefﬁciencyofmorethan 95 % . The ERC is associated with microtubules and exhibits a variable distribution , although more speciﬁc distributions in the vicinity of the nucleus and microtubule - organizing cen - ters have been reported ( 50 ) . In contrast to the sorting endosome , the ERC does not con - tain ligands or receptors that are destined for degradation , such as lysosomal enzymes and LDL , but instead is marked by the presence of LDL - R and iron - free Tf bound to the 224 Murphy et al . A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 Figure 2 Endocytotic cycling in animals and plants . Endocytotic cycling is well studied in animal cells with several types of cycling known : clathrin - mediated , clathrin - coated receptor - mediated , nonclathrin - mediated ( caveolae / lipid raft – mediated , ﬂuid - phase endocytosis , phagocytosis ) . In contrast , little is known about endocytosis in plants and much has been extrapolated from animal literature . Two discrete endosomal compartments have been identiﬁed in plants , as well as a gradation of maturation from one to the other . Redirection of endocytosed PM proteins back to the PM has not been directly demonstrated but is strongly supported by indirect evidence ( 43 , 44 ) . Black arrows indicate the endocytotic pathway ; red arrows indicate the secretory pathway . ( A ) In animals , clathrin - coated and receptor - mediated endocytosed vesicles from the plasma membrane ( PM ) are directed to the sorting endosome / early endosome [ Rab4 , LDL - receptor ( LDL - R ) and transferrin receptor ( TfR ) markers ] . From there , cargo is transported to the PM , endosomal recycling compartment [ Rab4 , Rab11 , LDL - R , transferrin bound to transferrin receptor ( Tf - TfR ) ] , or multivesicular body ( MVB ) / late endosome [ Rab7 , M6PR , lysobisphosphatidic acid ( LPBA ) ( 87 ) ] . From the endosomal recycling compartment , cargo can trafﬁc back to the PM or the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) ( Rab11 ) . From the MVB / late endosome , cargo can travel to the TGN [ cationic - independent mannose - 6 - phosphate receptor ( CI - M6PR ) ] or the lysosome [ ﬂuid - phase endocytosed HRP ( FPE - HRP ) , lysosome - associated membrane protein ( LAMP ) ( 24 ) ] . Cargo can also travel from the TGN to the sorting endosome / early endosome and MVB / late endosome . ( B ) In plants , cargo and PM proteins / markers are endocytosed into the partially coated reticulum ( PCR ) [ catonized ferritin ( CF ) , GNOM , Ara6 , FM4 - 64 , RabF2a ] . From the PCR , vesicle maturation results in direction of cargo to MVBs [ CF , FM4 - 64 , Ara7 , AtSyp21 , VSR proteins ] through vesicle maturation with overlapping compartment markers [ Ara6 and Ara7 ] or the TGN [ CF , FM4 - 64 , SYP - 42 , Ara4 ] . From the MVB / late endosome / prevacuolar compartment ( PVC ) , cargo is trafﬁcked to the vacuole [ CF , FM4 - 64 , pyrophosphatase ( 139 ) ] ; trafﬁcking to the TGN is hypothesized . Trafﬁcking from the TGN to the PCR or MVB has not been demonstrated . www . annualreviews . org · Endocytotic Cycle of PM Proteins 225 A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 Tf - R ( 99 , 111 ) . Two kinetics have been de - scribed for ERC - to - PM recycling : a fast rate usedbytheTf - RandC6 - NBD - sphingomyelin , which recycle almost completely back to the PM ( t 1 / 2 = 10 minutes ) , and a slower rate used by the GPI - anchored folate receptor ( t 1 / 2 = 30 minutes ) . This latter rate can be in - creased up to threefold when the cholesterol level in CHO cells is reduced by about 40 % , in - dicating that lipid microdomains may modulate sorting in the ERC ( 111 ) . The ERC membrane is the main intracellular cholesterol repository ( 54 ) . IRAP : insulin - responsive aminopeptidase , a type II integral membrane protein that colocalizes with GLUT4 in specialized insulin - responsive compartments and exhibits similar trafﬁcking dynamics as GLUT4 TGN : trans - golgi network EGF : Epidermal Growth Factor The role of the ERC in insulin - regulated trafﬁcking of the glucose - transporter GLUT4 was also recently described ( 18 ) . At low insulin concentrations , GLUT4 is equally distributed between the ERC and another distinct com - partment , characterized by the presence of the insulin - responsive aminopeptidase ( IRAP ) and the lack of Tf - R ( 18 , 195 ) ( Figure 3 ) . In the absence of insulin stimulation , GLUT4 is con - stitutively transported from the internal com - partments and cycles to the PM in a manner similar to Tf - R and other cell - surface proteins ( 141 ) . However , in response to increased in - sulin concentrations , a rapid net translocation of GLUT4 from the IRAP internal storage compartments to the PM occurs , resulting in higher uptake of glucose in fat and muscle cells ( 195 ) . Unlike the sorting endosomes , which ma - ture into late endosomes within 10 minutes , the ERC is a relatively long - lived organelle that re - quires vesicle coat proteins for recycling . The ERC uses clathrin - dynamin - coated vesicles for transport to the PM in nonpolarized and polar - ized cells ( 164 , 177 , 178 ) . As such , the clathrin coat does not play a prominent role in sort - ing or recycling steps ( 11 ) . It is also not re - quired for concentrating the Tf - R because a truncated version of this protein that does not interact with APs recycles at the same rate as the wild - type receptor in nonpolarized cells ( 98 ) . Rab11 and an Eps15 - homology protein containing an EH domain ( EHD1 / Rme1 ) also speciﬁcally regulate transport from the ERC to the TGN and PM ( 92 , 187 ) . In addition , COPI coat proteins ( 2 ) , sorting nexins , ( 191 ) and ARF6 ( 125 ) have been implicated in ERC sorting or ERC - mediated sorting of receptors . In nonpolarized cells , no sorting signal is re - quired for trafﬁcking from the sorting endo - some to the ERC and from the ERC to the PM . However , in polarized cells , sorting motifs are required for targeting to the apical or ba - solateral PM , as demonstrated by the recycling of Tf - R and LDL - R to the basolateral PM via AP1 / µ 1B - containing vesicles ( 41 ) . Because sorting endosomes mature into late endosomes , no vesicular carriers or concen - tration mechanisms are needed to transport soluble ligands . However , before sorting en - dosomes mature into late endosomes , most transmembrane proteins destined to be recy - cled are removed rapidly and efﬁciently in a process described as “geometry - based” sorting . In this process , up to 80 % of the membrane of sorting endosomes separates into narrow - diameter – tubules , which have a greater surface - area - to - volume ratio ; removing these tubules results in separation of recycling receptors from soluble cargo ( 98 , 111 ) . Although this recycling step requires no sorting motifs , further sort - ing of the internalized transmembrane proteins into the degradation pathway ( receptor down - regulation ) does . Signaling receptors such as the G - protein - coupled receptors and the receptor – protein kinases contain an ubiquitin moiety at their cy - toplasmic tails . Ubiquitination serves as a sort - ing signal for targeting into the invaginated membranes of the late endosome , a sorting process that simultaneously terminates their signaling function ( 81 ) . Subsequently , an hepa - tocyte - growth - factor - regulated tyrosine kinase substrate ( HRS ) serves as a linker between the ubiquitinated receptors and the endosomal ﬂat clathrin lattice , resulting in a bilayered clathrin coat that contains the mammalian equivalents to the yeast ESCRT ( endosomal sorting com - plex required for transport ) complexes ( 134 , 143 ) . For the EGF receptor protein kinase , the bulk of EGF receptors are bound to EGF and follow the process of receptor downregulation , but are also recycled from either the sorting 226 Murphy et al . A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 Figure 3 GLUT4 / IRAP , a special case of endocytotic recycling in animals . The insulin - responsive compartment ( IRC ) is characterized by the presence of the GLUT4 glucose transporter , the insulin - responsive aminopeptidase ( IRAP ) , and an absence of Tf - R . The IRC originates from the endosomal recycling compartment . Black arrows indicate the endocytotic pathway ; red arrows indicate the secretory pathway . ( A ) Under basal insulin conditions , the trafﬁcking of GLUT4 / IRAP to the PM is constitutive . The presence of IRAP in the IRC has not been conclusively demonstrated . ( B ) Under high insulin conditions , induction occurs and trafﬁcking of GLUT4 / IRAP to the PM is ∼ sevenfold greater than that of the basal rate . When insulin levels return to the basal state , so does the trafﬁcking rate . endosome as free receptors or from the ERC after internalization of its ligand TGF α ( 161 , 162 ) . G - protein - coupled receptors follow the same recycling routes described for receptor protein kinases . The recycling of dephospho - rylated G - protein - coupled receptors from the ERC via clathrin - coated vesicles containing β arrestin results in their rapid resensitization at the PM ( 46 , 162 ) . Because no direct input of PM vesicles to late endosomes has been demon - strated , late endosomes appear to function pri - marily as interfaces between endocytotic and biosynthetic pathways . The cation - independent mannose 6 - phos - phate receptor ( CI - M6PR ) is an example of a more complex recycling pathway . Its early itinerary resembles that of TGN38 ( 45 ) but then resembles the itinerary of the transmem - brane endoprotease furin in that it passes through the TGN and late endosomes en route to the PM . CI - M6PR is internalized via clathrin - coated pits from the PM and is www . annualreviews . org · Endocytotic Cycle of PM Proteins 227 A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 delivered via sorting endosomes to the ERC . From there it cycles several times to the PM . During each recycling round , a fraction re - turns to the late endosome via the TGN . Because the CI - M6PR is also the sorting re - ceptor for acid hydrolases from biosynthetic pathways , it is transported between the TGN and late endosomes , but it is clearly ab - sent from lysosomes . TGN to late endoso - mal sorting of CI - M6PR is mediated via an acidic - cluster - dileucine motif in its carboxy ter - minal and a monomeric Golgi - localized , γ - ear - containing , ARF - binding adaptor protein ( GGA2 ) . Return to TGN from the late en - dosome involves TIP47 ( tail - interacting pro - tein ) and Rab9 , whereas return of CI - M6PR from the early endosome involves AP1 and the cytosolic PACS - 1 APs . Recently , an additional retromer that is also implicated in the mainte - nance of cellular polarity ( 183 ) was identiﬁed in mammalian CI - M6PR endosomal retrieval to the Golgi ( 4 , 149 ) . The small Rab GTPases are master reg - ulators in vesicle targeting and fusion events andthusalsoregulaterecycling ( 196 ) . Although Rab5 regulates fusion of homotypic sorting en - dosomes , it is also required for heterotypic fusion of internalized clathrin - coated vesicles with sorting endosomes . This fusion requires an effector known as the early endosome anti - gen 1 ( EEA1 ) ( 155 ) . Rab4 and Rab11 are also implicated in Tf - R recycling because Tf - R se - quentially moves through Rab4 - ( sorting en - dosome and ERC ) and Rab11 - ( ERC , TGN ) positive structures ( 196 ) . Rab function is also regulated by interactions between proteins containing speciﬁc phospholipid interaction domains and localized endosomal membrane phospholipid concentrations ( 27 ) . Because of this , Rab5 , Rab4 , and Rab11 are often dis - tributed into distinct domains within the same endosome ( 160 , 169 ) . Proteins interacting with Rabs in this category are EEA1 and its asso - ciated endosomal SNARE protein , syntaxin13 ( 100 ) , other PI3P - binding proteins such as the sorting nexin3 ( 193 ) , and Rabip4 (cid:2) , which func - tions in endosome - to - PM recycling ( 37 ) . PROTEIN COMPONENTS OF ENDOCYTOTIC CYCLING MECHANISMS Adaptins and Adaptor Complexes Adaptors mediate the selection of cargo molecules for inclusion into coated vesicles in the late secretory and endocytotic pathways . One group of cargo adaptors are monomeric proteins such as AP180 , the β - arrestins , the GGAs ( Golgi - localized γ - adaptin - ear - homology - ARF - binding proteins ) , or the stonins . AP180 is the only plant monomeric adaptor ortholog identiﬁed to date ( 7 ) . An - other group consists of heterotetrameric AP complexes composed of adaptin subunits . Each complex contains two large ∼ 100 - kDa subunits consisting of one clathrin interactor ( β 1 − 4 ) and another large subunit that is complex speciﬁc ( α - adaptin / AP - 2 , γ - adaptin / AP - 1 , δ adaptin / AP - 3 and ε - adaptin / AP - 4 ) . A small ∼ 20 - kDa adaptin subunit ( σ 1 − 4 ) and a ∼ 50 - kDa medium subunit t ( µ 1 − 4 ) complete the complex ( 13 , 84 ) . In mammals , there are four AP complexes , but only the TGN - localized AP - 1 and the endocytic AP - 2 are connected with clathrin . Saccharomyces cerevisiae , C . ele - gans , and Drosophila all lack the AP - 4 complex , but the total number of adaptin orthologs in Arabidopsis points to the existence of four AP complexes ( 13 ) . Like mammals , the Arabidopsis genome contains several isoforms of some adaptins , namely two α - adaptin ( 7 , 67 ) , ﬁve β - adaptin ( 13 ) , three γ - adaptin ( 13 , 146 ) , ﬁve µ - adaptin ( 56 ) , and ﬁve σ - adaptin genes . In addition , δ - and ε - adaptins are coded for by single genes ( 13 ) . Like mammalian β 1 - and β 2 - adaptins , the β B - and β C - adaptins from Arabidopsis are highly similar . Some plant adaptin homologs are referred to by letters because the composition of plant AP complexes has not been elucidated and assignment to particular complexes cannot be made on sequence similarity alone . Adaptins have been identiﬁed in the rice genome and have been reported in other plant species , particularly a σ 1 - adaptin from the 228 Murphy et al . A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 Chinese medicinal tree ( 95 ) , a σ 2 - adaptin from maize ( 138 ) , andazucchiniCCV β - adaptinthat was recognized by bovine β 1 / β 2 - speciﬁc anti - bodies ( 65 ) and tentatively localized at the PM ( 31 ) . Little is known about adaptin functions in plants . Only two adaptins and one monomeric adaptor homolog from Arabidopsis have been functionally characterized on the molecular level . The µ A - adaptin At µ A - Ad was identi - ﬁed as a receptor - binding partner ( 56 ) , and a plantorthologofmammalian α - adaptins , which play a crucial role in endocytosis , was iden - tiﬁed as a binding partner for network pro - teins ( At α C - Ad ) . At µ A - Ad and At α C - Ad are found in high molecular weight AP - like com - plexes ( 7 , 56 ) . Consistent with a role in en - docytosis , At - AP180 promoted the formation of clathrin cages of nearly uniform size , thus functioning as a plant clathrin - assembly pro - tein ( 7 ) . Thereby , the assembly of clathrin triskelia depends on a single - DLL clathrin - binding motif , a feature that has not been de - scribed for mammalian AP180 ( 7 ) . At µ A - Ad is strongly implicated in clathrin - dependent vacuolar - trafﬁcking events , and its receptor - binding domain exhibited tyrosine - dependent interactions with the tyrosine - based sorting motif ( YXXØ ) of the mammalian TGN38 pro - tein and the ( VSR - PS1 ) vacuolar sorting re - ceptor from pea ( 56 ) . Based on their con - served features , the other four plant µ - adaptins are also expected to function as receptor - binding partners of plant AP complexes because the YXXØ motif functions in endo - cytosis as well ( 15 ) and some plant receptor - like kinases contain this motif . At - α C - Ad func - tions as a network - protein - binding partner because its carboxy - terminal ear region inter - acted not only with the mammalian network proteins Eps15 , AP180 , and amphiphysin , but also with the plant monomeric At - AP180 . Lit - tle is known about plant β - and γ - adaptins . β - adaptins were identiﬁed as interactors with PM complexes containing Arabidopsis auxin transport proteins and the Arabidopsis gluzincin membrane aminopeptidase and AtAPM1 ( 114 ) , and , more recently , γ - adaptins were identi - ﬁed as interactors with ADL6 ( DRP2 ) and the same complexes derived from microso - malmembranes ( A . Murphy , unpublisheddata ) . Yeast – two - hybrid studies conﬁrm that an Ara - bidopsis γ - adaptin interacts with the dynamin - like protein ADL6 ( DRP2 ) , probably involved in Golgi - originating vesicle trafﬁcking ( 90 ) . Al - though adaptin function appears to be largely conservedbetweenanimalsandplants , thereare caseswhereplantfunctiondiffers , aswhenplant adaptins other than the β subunit interacted with clathrin ( S . Holstein , unpublished data ) . ARF : ADP - ribosylation factor GEF : guanine nucleotide exchange factor ARF / GEF : ADP - ribosylation factor . Guanine nucleotide exchange factors are a family of small GTPases that regulate endocytotic cycling . ARFs / ARF - GEFs ARFs are a ubiquitous group of 20 - kDa , ras - related GTP - binding proteins that maintain organellar integrity and regulate intracellular transport ( 21 ) . Originally identiﬁed by their ability to stimulate the ADP - ribosyltransferase activity of cholera toxin ( 110 ) , the six types of ARFs recruit vesicle coats crucial for vesicle budding and cargo selection ( 30 ) . Under nor - mal conditions , cytosolic GDP - bound ARFs are inactive ( 29 ) . A vesicle - associated GTPase - activating protein ( GAP ) hydrolyzes GTP and releases the ARF protein , resulting in coat dis - sociation prior to vesicle fusion . GDP release requires an interaction with GEF proteins that contain a 200 amino acid sec domain required for GDP exchange activity . GEFs that con - tain sec7 are generally sensitive to Brefeldin A ( BFA ) , a noncompetitive inhibitor that stabi - lizes an abortive ARF - GDP complex ( 126 ) and inhibits activation of ARF GTPases by block - ing recruitment of vesicle coat components to membranes . However , a subset of this group contains a modiﬁed sec7 domain and is BFA resistant . ARF6 , the least conserved member of this family , appears to regulate endosome recycling and cortical actin reorganization ( 121 ) . Studies in mammalian systems using Madin - Darby Ca - nine Kidney cells indicate that ARF6 is present only on the apical surface of polarized epithe - lial cells ( 1 ) . Overexpression of ARF6 - Q67L , a GTP hydrolysis – deﬁcient mutant , stimu - lates endocytosis at this surface . However , the www . annualreviews . org · Endocytotic Cycle of PM Proteins 229 A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 ARF6 - T27N that retains bound GDP also stimulates apical endocytosis to a lesser ex - tent . A dominant negative form of dynamin or clathrin can inhibit this endocytosis . Overex - pression of these mutant forms of ARF6 also leads to an increase in the number of clathrin - coated pits in the PM ( 1 ) . This study indi - cates that ARF6 is an important modulator of clathrin - mediated endocytosis at the apical sur - face of the PM . In a similar study , when ARF6 and its mutant forms were expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells , the protein either colocal - ized to a perinuclear recycling compartment or accumulated at the PM , depending on its nucleotide status . This suggests that the pro - tein cycles between the PM and recycling en - dosomes and may be involved in the outward ﬂow of recycling membranes ( 32 ) . Franco et al . ( 38 ) showed that EFA6 , a protein exchange fac - tor for ARF6 , regulates endosomal membrane recycling and promotes the redistribution of transferrin receptors to the cell surface . EFA6 stimulates ARF6 guanine nucleotide exchange and localizes to a dense matrix on the cytoplas - mic face of PM invaginations . ARF6 is also re - quired for cortical actin rearrangements ( 133 ) and may link membrane trafﬁc with cytoskele - ton organization . ARL : ARF - like PH : pleckstrin homology domain PRD : proline - rich domain DRP : dynamin - related proteins in plants , large GTPases implicated in cycling and cell wall synthesis The Arabidopsis genome contains 21 ARF GTPase family members genomes , with iso - forms present in both ARF and ARL GTPase subfamilies . ARF6 localizes to the periphery of the cell where it has an essential role in endocy - toticpathways ( 104 ) . Thereareeight Arabidopsis proteins with sec7 domains , including GNOM , which is essential for recycling PM proteins from endosomes and is required for polarized distribution of the auxin efﬂux facilitator PIN1 ( 43 , 44 ) . However , the ARF substrate involved in GNOM - regulated endosomal trafﬁcking has not been determined . Dynamins Dynamins constitute a family of large ( 100 - kDa ) GTP phosphohydrolases that carry out diverse roles in eukaryotic membrane cy - cling ( 61 , 78 ) . These proteins have a pH , which allows them to bind to phosphoinositides , and a PRD , which mediates binding to proteins with Src homology 3 ( SH3 ) domains . A coiled - coil region ( CC domain ) serves as the GTPase effector domain ( 152 ) . Instead of functioning as classic switch GTPases , dynamins participate in membrane scission events by self - assembling into multimeric ring structures ( 64 ) . In vivo studies show interactions of dynamins with proteins such as endophilin1 that alter the geometry of lipid structures , resulting in the formation of vesicles ( 147 ) . Association of dynamins with actin or actin - binding and actin - depolymerizing proteins suggests that dynamin - actin interactions may also con - tribute to vesicle formation ( 131 , 190 ) . Studies in mammals suggest that dynamins link cellular membranes to the actin cytoskeleton and thereby regulate endocytosis ( 120 ) . In animals , there is extensive evidence that dynamins are involved in clathrin - mediated en - docytosis , internalization of caveolae , synap - tic vesicle recycling , and vesicular trafﬁcking to and from the Golgi complex ( 60 , 118 , 119 , 137 , 176 ) . In cultured mammalian cells , muta - tions in the GTP - binding domain of dynamin resulted in markedly reduced endocytotic up - take of transferrin receptors ( 62 ) . An analysis of intermediates in coated vesicle formation in these mutants indicated that endocytosis was blocked after the initiation of coat assembly and before the sequestration of ligands into deeply invaginated coated pits . ER - to - Golgi transport wasunaffectedinthesemutants , suggestingthat dynamins function in early endocytotic events ( 180 ) . However , subsequent confocal imaging studies showed association of dynamin with the TGN and perinuclear late endosomes contain - ing the CI - mannose - 6 - P receptor ( 118 ) . GFP - dynamin chimeras localized in the clathrin - coated vesicles at the cell surface also localize to the TGN ( 76 ) . Six dynamin - like protein subfamilies have beenidentiﬁedinplantsthatincludethe16 Ara - bidopsis dynamin - related proteins ( DRPs ) ( 70 ) . Of these , only members of the DRP2 subgroup , which are implicated in TGN to vacuolar traf - ﬁcking ( 74 ) , containallofthesignaturedomains 230 Murphy et al . A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 of classical mammalian dynamins ( 71 ) . Mem - bers of DRP families 1 and 3 lack both pleck - strin and Pro - rich domains and are unique to plants ( 179 ) . The DRP1 phragmoplastins con - stitute the largest plant - speciﬁc dynamin sub - family . In Arabidopsis , ﬁve dynamin - like pro - tein gene families have been identiﬁed , with partially overlapping functions ( 78 ) . DRP1 - mediated membrane trafﬁcking is essential for PM formation and recycling in plants ( 78 , 79 ) . A probable role in endocytotic events was sug - gested when DRP1 and several other proteins involvedinendocytosisandvesiculartrafﬁcking copuriﬁed with auxin efﬂux protein complexes ( 114 ) . More recently , the same complexes iso - lated from microsomal rather than PM frac - tions were found to be enriched in DRP2A bound to γ adaptin ( A . Murphy , unpublished data ; 114 ) . Consistent with ﬁndings in animals , cellular localization of ADL1A ( DRP1A ) was disrupted by an actin antagonist , suggesting in - volvement of actin - dynamin interactions in en - dosomal regulation in Arabidopsis ( 78 ) . Another yeast dynamin - like protein , VPS1p , is involved in protein transport from Golgi to an endo - somal compartment ( 189 ) , suggesting that the plant dynamin - like proteins could function in intracellular trafﬁcking events other than en - docytosis . Rab GTPases Rabs comprise a small family of ubiquitous proteins that are essential components of the membrane - trafﬁcking machinery . Rabs are im - plicated in vesicular formation , loading , trans - port along cytoskeletal elements , and dock - ing / fusion at target membranes ( 105 , 109 , 150 , 167 ) . Recent evidence shows that cargo pro - teins act as Rab effectors and regulate their own trafﬁcking by direct interactions with the transportmachinery ( 157 ) . LikemostGTPases , Rab proteins cycle between an inactive GDP - bound state and an active GTP - bound state . In the GTP - bound state , Rabs are associated with membranes and are attached to the cy - toplasmic surface of compartments ( 106 ) . The mechanism by which Rabs regulate endocytosis has not been elucidated , but it is hypothesized that the GTP - GDP cycle of Rabs might act as a timer switch to regulate the functionality of a membrane domain . It is also possible that Rabs act as GTP - activated switches that simply stabilize protein complexes required for tran - sition events . However , the ability of Rabs to link membranes to cytoskeletal motor proteins ( 148 ) suggests that they can generate uniquely functional membrane subdomains . In eukaryotes , speciﬁc Rab GTPases have been associated with the regulation of membrane - trafﬁcking events in distinct compartments ( 184 ) . In mammals Rab4 , Rab5 , Rab7 , Rab9 , and Rab11 , are involved in endo - cytotic vesicular trafﬁcking ( 127 , 171 ) . Rab4 , Rab5 , and Rab11 localize to early endocytic organelles where they regulate distinct events in the transferrin receptor pathway ( 106 ) . Rab5 regulates docking and fusion of early endo - somes and mediates interactions with multiple effectors . In its GTP - bound state , Rab5 builds an effector domain on the membrane , a process that requires the recruitment of PI3 kinases and PI3P - binding proteins that contain the FYVE motif ( 196 ) . Rab4 and Rab11 are also involved in regulating protein recycling back to the PM . Rab4 regulates formation of endosomal recycling vesicles in ongoing cycles of association and dissociation from early endosomes ( 105 ) . In mammals , human Rab11A and Rab11B isoforms have been localized in recycling endosomes ( 174 ) , and in epithelial cells mammalian Rab11A is crucial for the exit of internalized proteins from apical recycling endosomes ( 33 ) . Rab6 , a mammalian homologue of yeast Ypt6p , initially thought to function only in intra - Golgi transport , is required for recycling proteins between endosomes and the TGN ( 96 ) . A large number of highly conserved Rab GTPases have been identiﬁed in plants , and their localization generally coincides with that of their eukaryotic homologs , particularly those functioning in the exocytotic pathway ( 129 ) . However , unique isoforms of endocytosis - related Rabs have been identiﬁed in Arabidop - sis , including two Rab5 orthologs , seven Rab7 www . annualreviews . org · Endocytotic Cycle of PM Proteins 231 A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 orthologs , and Ara6 , which is structurally dis - similar to all known GTPases ( 173 ) . Orthologs ofRab4andRab9aremissingaltogetherin Ara - bidopsis . AtAra - 4 and Pea Pra3 are similar to the mammalian Rab11 and localize to or function within the TGN ( 73 , 172 ) . A Rab6 ortholog in Arabidopsis complements a mutation in the yeast Ypt6 protein that was implicated in protein re - cycling from endosomes to the Golgi and from late to early Golgi ( 10 , 94 ) . AtRabA4b , which is similar to Rab11 , labels a novel compartment that accumulates at the tips of root hair cells ( 129 ) . The tobacco ortholog of the mammalian Rab2thatregulatesmembraneﬂowinGolgiin - termediates localizes to Golgi bodies in pollen tubes ( 22 , 167 , 168 ) . However , Rha1 , which is associated with trafﬁcking of cargo molecules to the vacuole through late endosomal / PVCs in Arabidopsis , is an ortholog of Rab5 ( 158 ) , which regulates fusion of endosomal compartments in mammals . It is still unknown how Rabs are de - livered to distinct subcellular compartments or what other effectors are involved . PVC : prevacuolar compartment SNAREs N - ethylmaleimide - sensitivefactoradaptorpro - tein receptors ( SNAREs ) are essential compo - nents of vesicle - trafﬁcking machinery where they play a central role in membrane fusion events . SNAREscompriseafamilyofsmallpro - teins that are associated with different intracel - lular membranes and , as such , deﬁne the in - teractions and dynamic structures involved in endocytotic cycling . The role of SNARES in the endosomal system has been studied using endosomal fusion in both cell - free and intact cell assays . In mammals , SNARES are involved intwodistincthomotypicfusionstepsinvolving early and late endosomes ( 52 ) . The SNAREs VAMP - 7 , VAMP - 8 , and syntaxins 7 , 8 , and 13 have been implicated in both fusion events , whereascomplexationofVAMP - 8withthesyn - taxins 7 and 8 and Vti1b are involved in the homotypic fusion of late endosomes ( 3 ) . The v - SNARE cellubrevin has been implicated in the recycling of endocytic receptors back to the PM ( 101 ) and the t - SNARE Tlg2p in early stages of endocytotic internalization ( 151 ) . More re - cently , direct transport from early / recycling en - dosomes to the TGN ( bypassing the late endo - some ) was shown to be mediated by a complex formed between the TGN - localized syntaxin 6 , syntaxin16 , andVti1aandtheEE / RE - localized v - SNARES VAMP 3 and VAMP4 ( 96 ) . In a re - cent study , polarized recycling of T cell antigen receptors to the PM and their eventual fusion was shown to involve the t - SNARES syntaxin - 4 and SNAP - 23 ( 26 ) . In Arabidopsis , where studies of SNAREs have focused primarily on secretory and vac - uolar targeting , two SNARES ( AtVTI1a and AtVTI1b ) are involved in trafﬁcking to the PVC ( 198 ) . In addition , the syntaxins SYP21 , SYP22 , SYP4 , SYP5 , SYP42 , and SYP61 are associated with various endosomal compart - ments , including the PVC and TGN . Other Cytoskeletal Interactions All endocytotic pathways of membrane protein internalization depend on interaction with the cytoskeleton . Direct participation of F - actin in internalization events has been documented in animals and yeast ( 34 ) . Actin dynamics are also crucial for lipid raft - mediated endocytosis ( 124 ) . However , the molecular details of the in - teraction are not known and the speciﬁc steps of endocytosis where the interactions are involved have not been identiﬁed . Studies in Arabidopsis show that disrupting the actin cytoskeleton by latrunculin B or cytochalasin D inhibits the for - mation of BFA - induced endocytotic compart - ments involved in recycling PM proteins ( 44 ) . Anumberofproteinsplayanessentialrolein mediating interactions between vesicular struc - tural components and the actin cytoskeleton in animals ( 34 ) . Some of these molecular link - ers have also been identiﬁed in plants . Myosin , molecular motors that traverse along actin ﬁlaments , have been implicated in the distri - bution of endocytotic vesicles and membrane - bound molecules in Arabidopsis ( 68 ) . Compo - nents of the actin - related protein ( ARP ) 2 / 3 complex have also been implicated in the in - ternalization step and in the organization of the 232 Murphy et al . A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 actin cytoskeleton ( 144 ) . These functions of the ARP2 / 3 proteins are mediated by their interac - tions with calmodulin . The ARP2 / 3 complex in Arabidopsis has a similar function ( 91 ) . Other Proteins Contributing to PM Protein Cycling Rho GTPases are members of a small but diverse protein family ( 135 , 199 ) involved in signaling and regulation of endocytotic traf - ﬁc ( 130 ) . Although Rho - GTPases are not found in plants , plant Rho - related GTPases ( ROPs ) comprise a plant - speciﬁc subfamily ( 194 ) . ROPs have been localized to the tips of roothairs , havebeenimplicatedinpolargrowth ( 107 ) , and play a key role in fusing docked vesicles and endocytosis in these growing tips ( 19 ) . Immunophilins were originally discovered as receptors for a family of immunosuppres - sive drugs including cyclosporin A , FK506 , and rapamycin . Later , when immunophilins were found in bacteria , yeast , animals , and higher plants , it became evident that immunophilin - like proteins were likely involved in fundamen - talcellularprocesses . Mostimmunophilinspos - sess peptidyl prolyl cis / trans - isomerase activity required for protein folding and modiﬁcation . The Arabidopsis genome contains 52 genes en - coding putative immunophilins , including 23 putative FK506 - and rapamycin - binding pro - teins ( FKBPs ) and 29 putative Cyclosporin As ( CYPs ) ( 57 ) , many of which are localized to the chloroplast . Recent evidence suggests that a cy - clophilin interacts with the ARF - GEF GNOM ( 49 ) and that an FKBP immunophilin , TWD1 , may be involved in trafﬁcking PM transport proteins ( 42 ) . FattyacylCoAhasbeenidentiﬁed in cycling GLUT4 vesicles and has been impli - cated in membrane budding and fusion events ( 156 ) . In another study , acyl CoA dehydroge - nase ( ACD ) was found to mediate intracellu - lar retention of GLUT4 vesicles via associa - tion with IRAP ( 80 ) . A membrane - associated acyl CoA - binding protein that functions in intracellular lipid transfer from the ER and maintains a membrane - associated acyl pool at the PM was identiﬁed in Arabidopsis ( 47 ) . AtAPM1 , the IRAP homolog in Arabidopsis , was recentlyfoundtointeractwithACDs ( O . Lee & A . Murphy , unpublished data ) , suggesting a trafﬁcking role for these proteins in plants . ROP : Rho - related GTPases speciﬁc to plants , involved in endocytosis and fusion of docked vesicles WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT ENDOCYTOTIC CYCLING IN PLANTS ? Endocytosis Mostofwhatisknownaboutendocytosiscomes from studies in yeast and mammalian cells . Un - til recently , endocytosis in plants was a ques - tionable phenomenon because of the unfavor - able energetics inherent in the endocytosis of vesiclesinturgidcellswitharigidcellwall . Even thoughclathrin - coatedpitsweredetectedinthe plant PM decades ago and polyvalent electron - dense tracers were subsequently shown to be internalized by protoplasts ( 136 ) , this impor - tant phenomenon received little attention from plant biologists . However , recent studies uti - lizing styryl dyes , ﬁlipin - labeled plant sterols , reporter - tagged marker proteins characterizing endocytotic compartments , and the ﬂuid - phase marker LuciferYellow indicate that endocyto - sis mediates the internalization and recycling of PM molecules , including membrane proteins and sterols in plants ( 5 , 43 , 44 , 49 , 72 ) . Fur - thermore , because vigorous , constitutive endo - cytosis and recycling of the potassium channel KAT1inturgidguardcellswasrecentlydemon - strated ( 102 ) , turgidity can be ruled out as an inhibitory factor for endocytosis . At least four forms of endocytosis operate in plants : clathrin independent and dependent , phagocytotic , ﬂuid - phase and lipid raft - med - iated endocytosis . The clathrin - independent pathways are mediated by actin polymer - ization and require small GTPases ( 20 , 23 ) . Rhizobia are internalized into root cells by a Rab 7 - dependent phagocytotic process ( 159 ) and Baluska et al . ( 6 ) recently conﬁrmed the occurrence of ﬂuid - phase endocytosis in plants using the ﬂuid - phase marker Lucifer Yellow . Mongrand ( 108 ) andcolleguesrecentlydemon - strated the existence of lipid raft microdomains www . annualreviews . org · Endocytotic Cycle of PM Proteins 233 A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 in tobacco PM . Many GPI - anchored proteins in animals cluster into sphingolipid - and sterol - enriched lipid raft microdomains ( 112 ) . The structural sterols of plants , stigmasterol and sitosterol , form lipid rafts much more readily compared to cholesterol ( 192 ) , suggesting the possibility of raft - mediated endocytosis in plants . Recent studies identiﬁed GPI - anchored proteins associated with lipid rafts in plants ( 17 , 89 ) . Other studies suggest that PINFORMED ( PIN ) auxin efﬂux proteins may depend on structural sterols and lipid rafts for their recycling in plants ( 49 , 188 ) . A GPI - anchored immunophilin ( TWD1 ) and a fasciclin - like arabinogalactan protein ( FAGP2 ) were recently shown to associate with auxin efﬂux proteins in Arabidopsis ( 42 , 114 ) . Although the direct involvement of clathrin - coated vesicles in regulated endocytosis has not yet been demon - strated in plants , clathrin - coated vesicles and associated APs mediating clathrin - dependent endocytosis have been found in Arabidopsis ( 7 ) . To a large extent , studies of clathrin - mediated endocytosis are still predominantly exercises in comparison to mammalian processes ( see Overview , above ) . PCR : Partially coated reticulum , an apparent plant analog of mammalian early endosomes . MVBs : multivesicular bodies , also known as late endosomes or prevacuolarcompartments At present , molecular mechanisms underly - ing reversible membrane protein internaliza - tion in plants are unknown . However , polypep - tide signals and receptors for plant defense , growth , and development have been iden - tiﬁed ( 142 ) , kinase - associated protein phos - phatase ( KAPP ) - mediated endocytosis of At - SERK1 was recently documented ( 153 ) , and many other plant membrane receptor kinases with phosphorylation - and tyrosine - based in - ternalization motifs have been identiﬁed ( 67 ) . Endocytotic Compartments Endosomal compartments have been charac - terized largely by studies tracing the course of endocytosed molecules through dynamically changing compartments . This makes the com - partments difﬁcult to deﬁne and identify be - cause no molecule permanently resides in any compartment . Molecules may be transported into or out of the compartment through trans - port vesicles or , alternatively , the compartment itself may be modiﬁed and mature over time ( 98 ) , as diagrammed in Figure 2 . Plant endocytotic compartments are not well characterized and the term endosome is often used for any compartment containing an endocytosed material . Styryl dyes such as FM4 - 64 are incorporated into the plant PM , subsequently endocytosed , and transported to vacuoles via transport intermediates ( 185 ) ( Figure 2 ) . These dyes are widely used in colo - calization studies to ascertain the nature of intracellular vesicles that are putative endoso - mal compartments ( 14 , 49 , 173 ) . Ultrastruc - tural studies indicate that the PCR , a structure that was originally thought to arise from the TGN ( 63 ) , is analogous to early / recycling en - dosomes of animals . Time - course studies trac - ing the path followed by cationized ferritin in soybean and white spruce protoplasts ﬁrst la - beled these compartments ( 40 , 166 ) . Molecule sorting occurs in the early endosomes , from where they are either recycled back to the PM or are transported to the Golgi apparatus or MVBs ( 8 , 77 ) . From the MVBs they are tar - geted to vacuoles for degradation . In a recent study using N . tabacum BY - 2 cells , MVBs were identiﬁed as PVCs that are common to both secretory and endocytotic pathways ( 170 ) . In animals , proteins destined to be recycled back to the cell surface can be directly trans - ported to the PM by the ﬁssion of tubules from sorting endosomes or can be transported via the ERCs . In plants there is still no clear evidence of sorting and recycling endosomes , but two distinct classes of early endosomes were identi - ﬁed in Arabidopsis using double - labeling exper - iments ( 173 ) . One class of endosomes is char - acterized by Ara6 , a unique plant Rab GTPase , whereas another is characterized by Ara7 , the Arabidopsis homolog of mammalian Rab5 . A small population of endosomes also contains both Ara6 and Ara7 , suggesting endosomal maturation ( Figure 2 ) . However , although Ara6 and Ara7 both drive early endosomal fu - sion , it is unclear whether they mediate fusion of different endosomal populations . These two distinct early endosomal compartments could 234 Murphy et al . A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 participate in the sorting events that target en - docytosed proteins to the recycling or degrada - tion pathways . A number of plant proteins cycle between the PM and intracellular compartments . Phar - macological studies with the fungal toxin BFA , which targets the catalytic domains of ARF - GEFs ( 126 ) , demonstrate that the PIN1 PM auxin efﬂux facilitator can be reversibly re - tained in intracellular compartments ( 44 ) , di - agrammed in Figure 4 . The compartments are characterized by the presence of the endocy - totic markers Ara6 and FM4 - 64 . The ARF - GEF GNOM is a speciﬁc target of BFA ( 43 ) , suggesting that similar compartments function in the normal cycling of PIN1 and other pro - teins . These results also suggest that GNOM is functionally distinct from similar ARF - GEFs in animals that mediate ER - Golgi or intra - Golgi trafﬁcking ( 197 ) . Distinct compartments that are not labeled by endocytotic markers have also been identi - ﬁed both in animals and plants . In animals , the most striking of these is the compartments that house the GLUT4 glucose transporter in the absence of an insulin signal . These compart - ments lack transferrin receptors and are char - acterized by the presence of IRAP , which ex - hibits trafﬁcking dynamics similar to GLUT4 ( 80 ) . Comparablemechanismsinplantsaresug - gested by the PM and intracellular localization of AtAPM1 , an IRAP homolog in Arabidopsis ( 114 ) . Endosomal Sorting and Redirection In animals the ﬁrst branch point for endocy - tosed proteins is the sorting endosomes . Pro - teins in the sorting endosomes can have three distinct fates : they can be directly recycled back to the PM , transported to the ERC for eventual return to the PM , or they can end up in the late endosomes . The low luminal pH of the sort - ingendosomesunderliestheﬁrstrecyclingstep , dissociation of ligands from the receptors ( 128 ) . In contrast to animals ligand - receptor binding in plants occurs in an acidic ( pH ∼ 5 . 5 ) extra - cellular environment . As such , it is likely that ligand dissociation in the early endosomes of plants requires either greater acidiﬁcation than is seen in animal cells or a different sorting mechanism altogether . Studies with the vac - uolar proton pump inhibitor baﬁlomycin A1 indicate that endosomal V - ATPase activity is essential for transporting proteins from late en - dosomes to lysosomes because , in its absence , receptor - ligand complexes continuously recy - cle between the PM and the early endosome ( 181 ) . In Arabidopsis , acidiﬁcation is also re - quired for sorting , but may involve PM ATPase activity as well ( 9 ) . In mammals , phosphoinositol 3 - phosphate ( PI3P ) and Rab5 recruit microtubule motors to endosomes , thereby establishing speciﬁc mem - brane domains ( 160 ) . PI3P is required for two critical functions in early endosomes ( 51 ) . It regulates the dynamics of the compartment and , subsequently , participates in the retention of proteins in domains that mature into late endosomes . PI3P fuses to FYVE domain from human EEA and tags to GFP colocalized with BP - 80 in the PVC when transiently expressed . Overexpression of the chimeric protein inhibits targeting of Sporamin to the vacuole ( 83 ) . In mammals and yeast , ubiquitination of re - ceptors and transporters serves as a signal for their internalization . Studies with the yeast en - docytic cargo uracil permease ( Fur4p ) indicated thatubiquitinationwasrequiredforitsinternal - ization but deubiquitination was not required for its recycling . Ubiquitinated early endosomal proteins are directed by the ESCRT I , II , and III complexes to the MVB . Upon fusion with the lysosome , the internal vesicles of the MVBs and their cargo are accessible to luminal lytic enzymes . Studies in S . cerevisiae lacking a func - tional ESCRT complex resulted in mistarget - ing of endocytotic and biosynthetic ubiquiti - nated cargoes . Deﬁciencies in this complex also lead to the accumulation of receptors and trans - porters at the PM in yeast and higher eukary - otes . Predicted proteins with sequence similar - ity to the Vps23 component of the ESCRT - I complex are present in the Arabidopsis genome , suggesting that a similar mechanism may exist in plants . www . annualreviews . org · Endocytotic Cycle of PM Proteins 235 A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 EVIDENCE FOR ENDOCYTOTIC RECYCLING IN PLANTS Auxin Transport Proteins and GNOM Establishing plant polarity depends on the po - lar transport of the growth hormone auxin . The directionality of auxin transport is maintained by a polar transport apparatus that requires asymmetrically localized transporters and regu - lators . The PIN proteins are the best character - ized of such asymmetrically localized auxin ef - ﬂuxregulators . Pharmacological , physiological , 236 Murphy et al . A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 and molecular genetic studies suggest that activity , membrane localization , and vecto - rial realignment of PIN proteins is regu - lated by dynamic cycling between the PM and endosomal compartments ( 12 , 39 , 43 , 44 , 123 ) . PIN1 undergoes rapid actin - dependent cy - cling . When treated with BFA , PIN1 is still internalized but accumulates in unidentiﬁed , juxtanuclear compartments rather than return - ing to the PM ( 44 ) . Although initially pro - posed to result from the fusion of endosomal and post - Golgi membranes ( 117 ) , the BFA - induced bodies are surrounded by remnants of Golgi stacks and are actually aggregated endosomal compartments that accumulate the endocytotic tracer FM4 - 64 ( 43 ) . Similar BFA - induced internalization occurs for other PM - ATPases ( 44 ) , the PM marker Lti6a ( 49 ) , the peripheral membrane protein ARG1 ( 16 ) , and theputativeauxininﬂuxcarrierAUX1 ( 48 ) . Cell wall polymers such as pectins cross - linked with boron or calcium are also recycled by the same BFA - sensitive pathway in maize roots ( 5 ) . The BFA - induced compartments also accu - mulate other molecules involved in vesicular trafﬁcking such as the cytokinesis - speciﬁc syn - taxin KNOLLE and its interactor AtSNAP33 , the small GTPase ARF1 and small GTPase Pra2 ( 25 , 43 , 44 , 58 , 73 ) . This suggests that internalization and recycling mechanisms sim - ilar to those found in animals exist in plants . This cycling is regulated by extracellular sig - nals such as hormones and ﬂavonoids ( 123 ) , as is the case with the mammalian glucose trans - porter GLUT4 . As diagrammed in Figure 4 , the inhibition of PIN1 cycling by BFA is mediated by an ARF - GEF ( 43 ) . In gnom mutant embryos , PIN1 localization is largely randomized , suggesting that GNOM is required for proper PIN1 lo - calization on the PM ( 163 ) . When plants are transformed with an engineered BFA - resistant version of GNOM , PIN1 is localized on the ←−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−− Figure 4 PINFORMED ( PIN ) protein endocytosis and auxin transport in root tips . Indirect evidence suggests that the PIN components of the auxin efﬂux carrier complex undergo endocytosis and redistribution to the plasma membrane ( PM ) . This was demonstrated with pharmacological studies utilizing the fungal exocytosis inhibitor brefeldin A ( BFA ) , exogenous application of the transported hormone auxin ( IAA ) , studies of mutants exhibiting altered auxin ﬂux , and analysis of the effects of exogenous and endogenous auxin transport regulators ( 43 , 44 , 123 ) . ( A ) In untreated WT root tip cells with normal auxin levels , PIN1 protein is detected on the PM . ( B ) Indirect evidence suggests that PIN1 undergoes endocytosis and redistribution to the PM . When root tips are treated with BFA , PIN1 is endocytosed into BFA - sensitive compartments and is no longer observed on the membrane . Following BFA washout , PIN1 is redistributed to the PM , as in ( A ) . ( C ) BFA activity affecting PIN1 localization depends on binding to an ARF - GEF , GNOM . When GNOM is mutated ( GNOM M → L ) so that it can no longer bind BFA , then PIN1 is observed on the PM in BFA - treated cells . ( D ) When roots are treated with IAA , the rate of uptake of FM4 - 64 from the membrane is reduced ( A . Murphy , unpublished data ) and more PIN1 is observed on the PM . IAA also decreases the transcription of PIN1 ; therefore , no nascent PIN1 is delivered to the PM . If the cells are treated with the artiﬁcial auxin NAA plus BFA , then PIN1 is observed on the PM and not in BFA compartments ( T . Paciorek & J . Friml , personal communication ) . ( E ) Flavonols are endogenous compounds that can modulate auxin efﬂux at the apices . In the ﬂavonoid - deﬁcient mutant tt4 , auxin delivery to the root tip is greater than in WT , and PIN1 exhibits predominantly intracellular localization and is not found on the PM . PIN1 transcription is also reduced in the mutant , apparently reﬂecting the effect of long - term IAA exposure on PIN1 localization at the root tip . ( F ) The competitive auxin efﬂux inhibitor triodobenzoic acid ( TIBA ) binds at the efﬂux site . When BFA is washed out with TIBA , PIN1 localization remains in BFA compartments and does not return to the PM . ( G ) When tt4 is treated with BFA , PIN1 is observed in BFA compartments ( as in BFA - treated WT , unlike untreated tt4 ) . When BFA is washed out , then PIN1 is observed on the membrane , as in WT . In tt4 , when BFA is washed out with ﬂavonols , then PIN1 remains in BFA compartments ; however , in WT , PIN1 returns to the membrane . This suggests that BFA has pleiotropic effects on cycling and does not inhibit exocytosis via ARF - GEFs only . This also suggests that ﬂavonols interact with a protein that is required for PIN1 retention before sequestration in BFA compartments . www . annualreviews . org · Endocytotic Cycle of PM Proteins 237 A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 VDAC : voltage - dependent anion channel PM , but is not internalized in response to BFA treatment . Therefore , GNOM appears to be requiredforrecyclingofPIN1fromendosomes to the PM . However , cycling of other PM pro - teins such as PIN2 , a PM - ATPase , and the syn - taxin KNOLLE are not affected by GNOM , suggestingthatspeciﬁcARF - GEFsmightregu - latetheendocytoticrecyclingofdiscretegroups of PM proteins . In animals , endocytotic recycling also plays an essential role in maintaining the correct membrane protein composition in apical and basolateral membranes of polarized cells . How - ever , in plants , although delocalization of PIN proteinsfromthePM ( 12 ) andvectorialrelocal - ization of PIN3 in response to gravity ( 39 ) were recently demonstrated , no basolateral redirec - tion has been observed . Recent evidence of po - lar reorientation of PIN proteins in PID over - expression transformants ( 39a ) suggests that a PID - dependent regulatory mechanism con - trols the polarity of PIN proteins . The KAT1 Inward - Rectifying Potassium Channel The dogma that the high turgor of plant cells precludes endocytosis was recently chal - lenged by evidence that the KAT1 K + inward - rectifying channel is constitutively endocytosed from the guard cell PMs against high turgor pressure ( 72 ) ( Figure 5 ) . In WT and KAT1 - GFP transformed protoplasts , increases or de - creases in PM surface area resulting from a change in cellular pressure led to the incorpo - ration and withdrawal of vesicular membranes carrying an active K + in rectiﬁer . The density of KAT1 was higher in vesicular membranes than in the PM , suggesting that the channels re - mained clustered while trafﬁcking to and from the PM ( 72 ) . The endocytosis process starts im - mediately following pressure stimulation , rul - ing out channel concentration prior to inter - nalization . It is suggested that KAT1 channels form stable clusters and that membrane areas containingtheseclustersareretrievedpreferen - tially during pressure - driven endocytosis . The KAT1 : : GFP chimera was later shown to be in - ternalized and accumulated in small vesicles in the cortical regions of the cells . These bod - ies were also labeled with the styryl dye FM4 - 64 and were thus conﬁrmed to be endocytosed vesicles ( 102 ) . Other Examples Reports of environmentally responsive changes in the subcellular compartmentation of mem - brane proteins suggest that membrane protein internalizationandrecyclingarepartofthereg - ulatory repertoire of plants . In mammals , hor - monal signals trigger the cycling of aquaporins between the PM and internal vesicles ( 53 , 86 ) . Similar mechanisms may be at work in plants because the Arabidopsis aquaporins ( PIPs ) can localize both to the PM and vacuoles ( 132 ) , and the Mesembryanthemum crystallinum aqua - porins , M c TIP1and2 , areinternalizedfromthe PMandredistributedtothetonoplastandother membrane fractions in response to mannitol - induced water stress ( 182 ) . M c TIP1 and 2 were also localized to some unique multivesicular en - dosomal compartments and the observed redis - tribution was arrested when treated with BFA and other inhibitors of vesicular trafﬁcking . The VDACs have a dual localization in plants as in animals , being localized to the mitochon - drial outer membrane and PM ( 35 , 97 ) , which suggests cycling of these proteins between the PM and internal organelles . The recent ﬁnding that AtAPM1 interacts with VDACs ( O . Lee & A . Murphy , unpublished data ) suggests that VDACs may be trafﬁcked by this mechanism . Inanotherstudyfocusingonmembraneprotein endocytosis , BFA induced internalization of the low - temperature - inducible protein Lti6a and resulted in its colocalization with FM4 - 64 in discrete subcellular compartments ( 49 ) . A PM H + - ATPase also accumulated within BFA com - partments in an F - actin - dependent manner , but the redistribution did not require intact micro - tubules ( 49 ) . In another recent study Kim et al . ( 82 ) reported that the metal tolerance protein ( TgMTP1 ) can be localized to the PM and the 238 Murphy et al . A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 Figure 5 KAT1 recycling and a technique to quantitate endocytosis in plants . Endocytosis was thought not to occur in plants due to turgid cells and rigid cell walls . However , the variable surface area and capacitance of stomatal guard cells provide a method to quantitate endocytosis in plants ( 69 , 72 , 102 ) . Black arrows indicate the endocytotic pathway ; red arrows indicate the secretory pathway . ( A ) Guard cells swell and shrink to open and close the stomatal pores , thereby regulating the amount of gas exchanged with the environment . The activity of potassium channels , as indicated by membrane capacitance ( Cm ) , correlates with the surface area of the guard cell protoplast . The surface area and the capacitance increase with hydrostatic pressure . The surface area increases up to 40 % , and only a 3 % to 4 % increase of area can be accounted for by stretching the plasma membrane ( PM ) ; the capacitance increases by 14 % . Therefore , recruitment of additional PM material and ion channels occurs during stomatal opening and retrieval of PM material and ion channels occurs as stomata are closing . ( B ) KAT1 , an inward potassium channel rectiﬁer , is found in greater abundance in the endomembrane system than on the PM . Negative hydrostatic pressure results in reduced cell area , lower capacitance , and faster and selective endocytotic retrieval of KAT1 from the PM . ( C ) Positive pressure results in greater cell surface area , higher capacitance , and faster and selective insertion of KAT1 into the PM . www . annualreviews . org · Endocytotic Cycle of PM Proteins 239 A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 vacuole , suggesting that its dynamic relocaliza - tion between the PM and various endomem - brane systems could have a role in regulating metal hyperaccumulation . Similar endocytosis - mediated trafﬁcking of metal transporters has been documented in mammals . The PM zinc transporter Dri 27 / ZnT4 has been colocalized with the transferrin receptor and the clathrin adaptor complexes AP - 1 and AP - 2 in endoso - mal vesicles , suggesting that they are internal - ized in a clathrin - dependent manner from the PM ( 113 ) . CONCLUSION Recent experimental evidence suggests that plant cells respond to developmental pro - gramming and environmental conditions by regulating the endocytosis of PM proteins . This evidence also suggests that some of the mechanisms underlying endocytotic cycling are conserved between plants and animals . How - ever , as plant endosomal compartments and the proteins that characterize them are still poorly deﬁned , the extent of that conserva - tion has yet to be determined . Until recently , studies in plant cell biology focused primar - ily on secretory mechanisms at the expense of internalization pathways . Because of this , researchers should be cautious about overex - trapolation of mammalian models to plant systems . The proliferation of molecular tools in Arabidopsis , the advances in imaging tech - niques , and the growing availability of organel - lar markers , dyes , and reporter proteins are expected to accelerate our understanding of endocytotic cycling in plants and animals as well . SUMMARY POINTS 1 . Occurrence of endocytosis in plants is evident from recent reports . 2 . Plant endocytosis processes and players share common features with animals , but there are features unique to plants . 3 . Clathrin and adaptor complexes have been identiﬁed in plants , but evidence for receptor - mediated endocytosis is lacking . 4 . FM4 - 64 and BFA studies have made a signiﬁcant contribution to the understanding of the endocytotic pathway in plants . 5 . Endosomes are not well characterized in plants , but two early endosomal populations have been identiﬁed by double - labeling experiments ; Ara6 is targeted to only one of them . 6 . There is indirect evidence for cycling of PIN auxin efﬂux facilitators . The ARF - GEF GNOM is required for the observed cycling . 7 . The KAT1 K + inward - rectifying channel is endocytosed against high - turgor pressure of guard cells , suggesting turgor is not an inhibitory factor for endocytosis . 8 . Several other membrane transporters and channels are regulated by endocytotic recycling . LITERATURE CITED 1 . Altschuler Y , Liu S , Katz L , Tang K , Hardy S , et al . 1999 . ADP - ribosylation factor 6 and endocytosis at the apical surface of Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . J . Cell . Biol . 147 : 7 – 12 240 Murphy et al . A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 2 . Aniento F , Gu F , Parton RG , Gruenberg J . 1996 . An endosomal beta COP is involved in the pH - dependent formation of transport vesicles destined for late endosomes . J . Cell . Biol . 133 : 29 – 41 3 . Antonin W , Holroyd C , Tikkanen R , Honing S , Jahn R . 2000 . The R - SNARE endobrevin / VAMP - 8 mediates homotypic fusion of early endosomes and late endosomes . Mol . Biol . Cell . 11 : 3289 – 98 4 . Arighi CN , Hartnell LM , Aguilar RC , Haft CR , Bonifacino JS . 2004 . Role of the mammalian retromer in sorting of the cation - independent mannose 6 - phosphate receptor . J . Cell . Biol . 165 : 123 – 33 5 . Baluska F , Hlavacka A , Samaj J , Palme K , Robinson DG , et al . 2002 . F - actin - dependent endocytosis of cell wall pectins in meristematic root cells . Insights from brefeldin A - induced compartments . Plant Physiol . 130 : 422 – 31 6 . Baluska F , Samaj J , Hlavacka A , Kendrick - Jones J , Volkmann D . 2004 . Actin - dependent ﬂuid - phase endocytosis in inner cortex cells of maize root apices . J . Exp . Bot . 55 : 463 – 73 7 . Barth M , Holstein SEH . 2004 . Identiﬁcation and functional characterization of Arabidopsis AP180 , a binding partner of plant alpha C - adaptin . J . Cell Sci . 117 : 2051 – 62 8 . Battey NH , James NC , Greenland AJ , Brownlee C . 1999 . Exocytosis and endocytosis . Plant Cell 11 : 643 – 59 9 . Baxter IR , Armstrong G , Foster N , Peer WA , Hazen SP , et al . 2005 . A plasma membrane H + ATPase is required for the formation of proanthocyanidins in the seed coat endothelium of Arabidopsis thaliana . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 : 2649 – 54 10 . Bednarek SY , Reynolds TL , Schroeder M , Grabowski R , Hengst L , et al . 1994 . A small GTP - binding protein from Arabidopsis thaliana functionally complements the yeast YPT6 null mutant . Plant Physiol . 104 : 591 – 96 11 . Bennett EM , Lin SX , Towler MC , Maxﬁeld FR , Brodsky FM . 2001 . Clathrin hub expression affects early endosome distribution with minimal impact on receptor sorting and recycling . Mol . Biol . Cell . 12 : 2790 – 99 12 . Blakeslee JJ , Bandyopadhyay A , Peer WA , Makam SN , Murphy AS . 2004 . Relocalization of the PIN1 auxin efﬂux facilitator plays a role in phototropic responses . Plant Physiol . 134 : 28 – 31 13 . Boehm M , Bonifacino JS . 2001 . Adaptins : the ﬁnal recount . Mol . Biol . Cell . 12 : 2907 – 20 14 . Bolte S , Talbot C , Boutte Y , Catrice O , Read ND , Satiat - Jeunemaitre B . 2004 . FM - dyes as experimental probes for dissecting vesicle trafﬁcking in living plant cells . J . Microsc . 214 : 159 – 73 15 . Bonifacino JS , Traub LM . 2003 . Signals for sorting of transmembrane proteins to endosomes and lysosomes . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 72 : 395 – 447 16 . Boonsirichai K , Sedbrook JC , Chen RJ , Gilroy S , Masson PH . 2003 . ALTERED RE - SPONSE TO GRAVITY is a peripheral membrane protein that modulates gravity - induced cytoplasmic alkalinization and lateral auxin transport in plant statocytes . Plant Cell 15 : 2612 – 25 17 . Borner GHH , Lilley KS , Stevens TJ , Dupree P . 2003 . Identiﬁcation of glycosylphos - phatidylinositol - anchored proteins in Arabidopsis . A proteomic and genomic analysis . Plant Physiol . 132 : 568 – 77 18 . Bryant NJ , Govers R , James DE . 2002 . Regulated transport of the glucose transporter GLUT4 . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 3 : 267 – 77 19 . Camacho L , Malho R . 2003 . Endo / exocytosis in the pollen tube apex is differentially regu - lated by Ca 2 + and GTPases . J . Exp . Bot . 54 : 83 – 92 www . annualreviews . org · Endocytotic Cycle of PM Proteins 241 A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 20 . Caron E , Hall A . 1998 . Identiﬁcation of two distinct mechanisms of phagocytosis controlled by different Rho GTPases . Science 282 : 1717 – 21 21 . Chavrier P , Goud B . 1999 . The role of ARF and Rab GTPases in membrane transport . Curr . Opin . Cell . Biol . 11 : 466 – 75 22 . Cheung AY , Chen CY , Glaven RH , de Graaf BH , Vidali L , et al . 2002 . Rab2 GTPase regulates vesicle trafﬁcking between the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi bodies and is important to pollen tube growth . Plant Cell 14 : 945 – 62 23 . Chimini G , Chavrier P . 2000 . Function of Rho family proteins in actin dynamics during phagocytosis and engulfment . Nat . Cell . Biol . 2 : E191 – 96 24 . CookNR , RowPE , DavidsonHW . 2004 . Lysosomeassociatedmembraneprotein1 ( Lamp1 ) trafﬁcs directly from the TGN to early endosomes . Trafﬁc 5 : 685 – 99 25 . Couchy I , Bolte S , Crosnier MT , Brown S , Satiat - Jeunemaitre A . 2003 . Identiﬁcation and localization of a beta - COP - like protein involved in the morphodynamics of the plant Golgi apparatus . J . Exp . Bot . 54 : 2053 – 63 26 . Das V , Nal B , Dujeancourt A , Thoulouze MI , Galli T , et al . 2004 . Activation - induced po - larized recycling targets T cell antigen receptors to the immunological synapse ; involvement of SNARE complexes . Immunity 20 : 577 – 88 27 . De Matteis MA , Godi A . 2004 . PI - loting membrane trafﬁc . Nat . Cell . Biol . 6 : 487 – 92 28 . DeWitt ND , Hong B , Sussman MR , Harper JF . 1996 . Targeting of two Arabidopsis H ( + ) - ATPase isoforms to the plasma membrane . Plant Physiol . 112 : 833 – 44 29 . Donaldson JG . 2003 . Multiple roles for Arf6 : sorting , structuring , and signaling at the plasma membrane . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 41573 – 76 30 . Donaldson JG , Jackson CL . 2000 . Regulators and effectors of the ARF GTPases . Cur . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 : 475 – 82 31 . Drucker M , Herkt B , Robinson DG . 1995 . Demonstration of b - type adaptin at the plant PM . Cell Biol . Int . 19 : 191 – 201 32 . D’Souza - Schorey C , van Donselaar E , Hsu VW , Yang C , Stahl PD , Peters PJ . 1998 . ARF6 targets recycling vesicles to the plasma membrane : insights from an ultrastructural investi - gation . J . Cell . Biol . 140 : 603 – 16 33 . Duman JG , Tyagarajan K , Kolsi MS , Moore HP , Forte JG . 1999 . Expression of rab11a N124I in gastric parietal cells inhibits stimulatory recruitment of the H + - K + - ATPase . Am . J . Physiol . 277 : C361 – 72 34 . Engqvist - Goldstein AEY , Drubin DG . 2003 . Actin assembly and endocytosis : from yeast to mammals . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 : 287 – 332 35 . Fischer K , Weber A , Brink S , Arbinger B , Schunemann D , et al . 1994 . Porins from plants . Molecular cloning and functional characterization of two new members of the porin family . J . Biol . Chem . 269 : 25754 – 60 36 . Fleming RE , Parkkila S , Parkkila AK , Rajaniemi H , Waheed A , Sly WS . 1995 . Carbonic anhydrase IV expression in rat and human gastrointestinal tract regional , cellular , and sub - cellular localization . J . Clin . Invest . 96 : 2907 – 13 37 . Fouraux MA , Deneka M , Ivan V , van der Heijden A , Raymackers J , et al . 2004 . Rabip4 (cid:2) is an effector of rab5 and rab4 and regulates transport through early endosomes . Mol . Biol . Cell . 15 : 611 – 24 38 . Franco M , Peters PJ , Boretto J , van Donselaar E , Neri A , et al . 1999 . EFA6 , a sec7 domain - containing exchange factor for ARF6 , coordinates membrane recycling and actin cytoskele - ton organization . EMBO J . 18 : 1480 – 91 39 . Friml J , Wisniewska J , Benkova E , Mendgen K , Palme K . 2002 . Lateral relocation of auxin efﬂux regulator PIN3 mediates tropism in Arabidopsis . Nature 415 : 806 – 9 242 Murphy et al . A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 39a . Friml J , Yang X , Michniewicz M , Weijers D , Quint A , et al . 2004 . A pinoid - dependent binary switch in apical - basal pin polar targeting directs auxin efﬂux . Science 306 : 862 – 65 40 . Galway ME , Rennie PJ , Fowke LC . 1993 . Ultrastructure of the endocytotic pathway in glutaraldehyde - ﬁxedandhigh - pressurefrozen / freeze - substitutedprotoplastsofwhitespruce ( Picea glauca ) . J . Cell Sci . 106 ( Pt . 3 ) : 847 – 58 41 . Gan Y , McGraw TE , Rodriguez - Boulan E . 2002 . The epithelial - speciﬁc adaptor AP1B mediates post - endocytic recycling to the basolateral membrane . Nat . Cell . Biol . 4 : 605 – 9 42 . Geisler M , Kolukisaoglu HU , Bouchard R , Billion K , Berger J , et al . 2003 . TWISTED DWARF1 , a unique plasma membrane - anchored immunophilin - like protein , interacts with Arabidopsis multidrug resistance - like transporters AtPGP1 and AtPGP19 . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 : 4238 – 49 43 . Geldner N , Anders N , Wolters H , Keicher J , Kornberger W , et al . 2003 . The Arabidopsis GNOM ARF - GEF mediates endosomal recycling , auxin transport , and auxin - dependent plant growth . Cell 112 : 219 – 30 44 . Geldner N , Friml J , Stierhof YD , Jurgens G , Palme K . 2001 . Auxin transport inhibitors block PIN1 cycling and vesicle traﬁcking . Nature 413 : 425 – 28 45 . Ghosh P , Dahms NM , Kornfeld S . 2003 . Mannose 6 - phosphate receptors : new twists in the tale . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 4 : 202 – 12 46 . Goodman OB Jr , Krupnick JG , Santini F , Gurevich VV , Penn RB , et al . 1996 . Beta - arrestin acts as a clathrin adaptor in endocytosis of the beta2 - adrenergic receptor . Nature 383 : 447 – 50 47 . Graham IA , Li Y , Larson TR . 2002 . Acyl - CoA measurements in plants suggest a role in regulating various cellular processes . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 30 : 1095 – 99 48 . Grebe M , Friml J , Swarup R , Ljung K , Sandberg G , et al . 2002 . Cell polarity signaling in Arabidopsis involves a BFA - sensitive auxin inﬂux pathway . Curr . Biol . 12 : 329 – 34 49 . Grebe M , Xu J , Mobius W , Ueda T , Nakano A , et al . 2003 . Arabidopsis sterol endocytosis involves actin - mediated trafﬁcking via ARA6 - positive early endosomes . Curr . Biol . 13 : 1378 – 87 50 . Gruenberg J . 2001 . The endocytic pathway : a mosaic of domains . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 2 : 721 – 30 51 . Gruenberg J . 2003 . Lipids in endocytic membrane transport and sorting . Cur . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 : 382 – 88 52 . Gruenberg J , Howell KE . 1989 . Membrane trafﬁc in endocytosis : insights from cell - free assays . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 5 : 453 – 81 53 . Gustafson CE , Katsura T , McKee M , Bouley R , Casanova JE , Brown D . 2000 . Recycling of AQP2 occurs through a temperature - and baﬁlomycin - sensitive trans - Golgi - associated compartment . Am . J . Physiol . Renal . Physiol . 278 : F317 – 26 54 . Hao M , Lin SX , Karylowski OJ , Wustner D , McGraw TE , Maxﬁeld FR . 2002 . Vesicular and non - vesicular sterol transport in living cells . The endocytic recycling compartment is a major sterol storage organelle . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 609 – 17 55 . Hao M , Maxﬁeld FR . 2000 . Characterization of rapid membrane internalization and recy - cling . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 15279 – 86 56 . Happel N , Honing S , Neuhaus JM , Paris N , Robinson DG , Holstein SE . 2004 . Arabidopsis mu A - adaptin interacts with the tyrosine motif of the vacuolar sorting receptor VSR - PS1 . Plant J . 37 : 678 – 93 57 . He Z , Li L , Luan S . 2004 . Immunophilins and parvulins . Superfamily of peptidyl prolyl isomerases in Arabidopsis . Plant Physiol 134 : 1248 – 67 www . annualreviews . org · Endocytotic Cycle of PM Proteins 243 A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 58 . Heese M , Gansel X , Sticher L , Wick P , Grebe M , et al . 2001 . Functional characterization of the KNOLLE - interacting t - SNARE AtSNAP33 and its role in plant cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 155 : 239 – 49 59 . HelmsJB , ZurzoloC . 2004 . Lipidsastargetingsignals : lipidraftsandintracellulartrafﬁcking . Trafﬁc 5 : 247 – 54 60 . Henley JR , Krueger EW , Oswald BJ , McNiven MA . 1998 . Dynamin - mediated internaliza - tion of caveolae . J . Cell . Biol . 141 : 85 – 99 61 . Henley JR , McNiven MA . 1996 . Association of a dynamin - like protein with the Golgi ap - paratus in mammalian cells . J . Cell . Biol . 133 : 761 – 75 62 . Herskovits JS , Burgess CC , Obar RA , Vallee RB . 1993 . Effects of mutant rat dynamin on endocytosis . J . Cell . Biol . 122 : 565 – 78 63 . Hillmer S , Freundt H , Robinson DG . 1988 . The partially coated reticulum and its relation - ship to the golgi - apparatus in higher - plant cells . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 47 : 206 – 12 64 . Hinshaw JE , Schmid SL . 1995 . Dynamin self - assembles into rings suggesting a mechanism for coated vesicle budding . Nature 374 : 190 – 92 65 . Holstein SE , Drucker M , Robinson DG . 1994 . Identiﬁcation of a beta - type adaptin in plant clathrin - coated vesicles . J . Cell Sci . 107 ( Pt . 4 ) : 945 – 53 66 . Holstein SE , Ungewickell H , Ungewickell E . 1996 . Mechanism of clathrin basket dissoci - ation : separate functions of protein domains of the DnaJ homologue auxilin . J . Cell . Biol . 135 : 925 – 37 67 . Holstein SEH . 2002 . Clathrin and plant endocytosis . Trafﬁc 3 : 614 – 20 68 . Holweg C , Nick P . 2004 . Arabidopsis myosin XI mutant is defective in organelle movement and polar auxin transport . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 : 10488 – 93 69 . Homann U , Thiel G . 2002 . The number of K ( + ) channels in the plasma membrane of guard cell protoplasts changes in parallel with the surface area . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 : 10215 – 20 70 . Hong Z , Bednarek SY , Blumwald E , Hwang I , Jurgens G , et al . 2003 . A uniﬁed nomenclature for Arabidopsis dynamin - related large GTPases based on homology and possible functions . Plant Mol . Biol . 53 : 261 – 65 71 . Hong ZL , Geisler - Lee CJ , Zhang ZM , Verma DPS . 2003 . Phragmoplastin dynamics : mul - tiple forms , microtubule association and their roles in cell plate formation in plants . Plant Mol . Biol . 53 : 297 – 312 72 . Hurst AC , Meckel T , Tayefeh S , Thiel G , Homann U . 2004 . Trafﬁcking of the plant potas - sium inward rectiﬁer KAT1 in guard cell protoplasts of Vicia faba . Plant J . 37 : 391 – 97 73 . Inaba T , Nagano Y , Nagasaki T , Sasaki Y . 2002 . Distinct localization of two closely related Ypt3 / Rab11 proteins on the trafﬁcking pathway in higher plants . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 9183 – 88 74 . Jin JB , Kim YA , Kim SJ , Lee SH , Kim DH , et al . 2001 . A new dynamin - like protein , ADL6 , is involved in trafﬁcking from the trans - Golgi network to the central vacuole in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 13 : 1511 – 26 75 . Johnson LS , Dunn KW , Pytowski B , McGraw TE . 1993 . Endosome acidiﬁcation and re - ceptor trafﬁcking : baﬁlomycin A1 slows receptor externalization by a mechanism involving the receptor’s internalization motif . Mol . Biol . Cell . 4 : 1251 – 66 76 . Jones SM , Howell KE , Henley JR , Cao H , McNiven MA . 1998 . Role of dynamin in the formation of transport vesicles from the trans - Golgi network . Science 279 : 573 – 77 77 . Juergens G . 2004 . Membrane trafﬁcking in plants . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 20 : 481 – 504 78 . Kang BH , Busse JS , Bednarek SY . 2003 . Members of the Arabidopsis dynamin - like gene family , ADL1 , are essential for plant cytokinesis and polarized cell growth . Plant Cell 15 : 899 – 913 244 Murphy et al . A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 79 . Kang BH , Busse JS , Dickey C , Rancour DM , Bednarek SY . 2001 . The Arabidopsis cell plate - associated dynamin - like protein , ADL1Ap , is required for multiple stages of plant growth and development . Plant Physiol . 126 : 47 – 68 80 . Katagiri H , Asano T , Yamada T , Aoyama T , Fukushima Y , et al . 2002 . Acyl - coenzyme a dehydrogenases are localized on GLUT4 - containing vesicles via association with insulin - regulated aminopeptidase in a manner dependent on its dileucine motif . Mol . Endocrinol . 16 : 1049 – 59 81 . Katzmann DJ , Odorizzi G , Emr SD . 2002 . Receptor downregulation and multivesicular - body sorting . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 : 893 – 905 82 . Kim D , Gustin JL , Lahner B , Persans MW , Baek D , et al . 2004 . The plant CDF family member TgMTP1 from the Ni / Zn hyperaccumulator Thlaspi goesingense acts to enhance efﬂux of Zn at the plasma membrane when expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Plant J . 39 : 237 – 51 83 . Kim DH , Eu YJ , Yoo CM , Kim YW , Pih KT , et al . 2001 . Trafﬁcking of phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphate from the trans - Golgi network to the lumen of the central vacuole in plant cells . Plant Cell 13 : 287 – 301 84 . Kirchhausen T . 1999 . Adaptors for clathrin - mediated trafﬁc . Annu . Rev . Cell . Dev . Biol . 15 : 705 – 32 85 . Kivela A , Parkkila S , Saarnio J , Karttunen TJ , Kivela J , et al . 2000 . Expression of a novel transmembrane carbonic anhydrase isozyme XII in normal human gut and colorectal tumors . Am . J . Pathol . 156 : 577 – 84 86 . Klussmann E , Maric K , Rosenthal W . 2000 . The mechanisms of aquaporin control in the renal collecting duct . Rev . Physiol . Biochem . Pharmacol . 141 : 33 – 95 87 . Kobayashi T , Beuchat MH , Lindsay M , Frias S , Palmiter RD , et al . 1999 . Late endosomal membranes rich in lysobisphosphatidic acid regulate cholesterol transport . Nat . Cell . Biol . 1 : 113 – 18 88 . Krauss M , Kinuta M , Wenk MR , De Camilli P , Takei K , Haucke V . 2003 . ARF6 stimu - lates clathrin / AP - 2 recruitment to synaptic membranes by activating phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase type I gamma . J . Cell . Biol . 162 : 113 – 24 89 . Lalanne E , Honys D , Johnson A , Borner GHH , Lilley KS , et al . 2004 . SETH1 and SETH2 , two components of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor biosynthetic pathway , are re - quired for pollen germination and tube growth in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 16 : 229 – 40 90 . Lam BCH , Sage TL , Bianchi F , Blumwald E . 2002 . Regulation of ADL6 activity by its associated molecular network . Plant J . 31 : 565 – 76 91 . Li S , Blanchoin L , Yang Z , Lord EM . 2003 . The putative Arabidopsis arp2 / 3 complex controls leaf cell morphogenesis . Plant Physiol . 132 : 2034 – 44 92 . Lin SX , Grant B , Hirsh D , Maxﬁeld FR . 2001 . Rme - 1 regulates the distribution and func - tion of the endocytic recycling compartment in mammalian cells . Nat . Cell . Biol . 3 : 567 – 72 93 . Loder MK , Melikian HE . 2003 . The dopamine transporter constitutively internalizes and recycles in a protein kinase C - regulated manner in stably transfected PC12 cell lines . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 22168 – 74 94 . Luo Z , Gallwitz D . 2003 . Biochemical and genetic evidence for the involvement of yeast Ypt6 - GTPase in protein retrieval to different Golgi compartments . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 791 – 99 95 . Maldonado - Mendoza IE , Nessler CL . 1996 . Cloning and expression of a plant homologue of the small subunit of the Golgi - associated clathrin assembly protein AP19 from Camptotheca acuminata . Plant Mol . Biol . 32 : 1149 – 53 www . annualreviews . org · Endocytotic Cycle of PM Proteins 245 A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 96 . Mallard F , Tang BL , Galli T , Tenza D , Saint - Pol A , et al . 2002 . Early / recycling endosomes - to - TGNtransportinvolvestwoSNAREcomplexesandaRab6isoform . J . Cell . Biol . 156 : 653 – 64 97 . Marmagne A , Rouet MA , Ferro M , Rolland N , Alcon C , et al . 2004 . Identiﬁcation of new intrinsic proteins in Arabidopsis plasma membrane proteome . Mol . Cell . Proteomics 3 : 675 – 91 98 . Maxﬁeld FR , McGraw TE . 2004 . Endocytic recycling . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 : 121 – 32 99 . Mayor S , Presley JF , Maxﬁeld FR . 1993 . Sorting of membrane components from endosomes and subsequent recycling to the cell surface occurs by a bulk ﬂow process . J . Cell . Biol . 121 : 1257 – 69 100 . McBride HM , Rybin V , Murphy C , Giner A , Teasdale R , Zerial M . 1999 . Oligomeric com - plexes link Rab5 effectors with NSF and drive membrane fusion via interactions between EEA1 and syntaxin 13 . Cell 98 : 377 – 86 101 . McMahon HT , Ushkaryov YA , Edelmann L , Link E , Binz T , et al . 1993 . Cellubrevin is a ubiquitous tetanus - toxin substrate homologous to a putative synaptic vesicle fusion protein . Nature 364 : 346 – 49 102 . Meckel T , Hurst AC , Thiel G , Homann U . 2004 . Endocytosis against high turgor : intact guard cells of Vicia faba constitutively endocytose ﬂuorescently labelled plasma membrane and GFP - tagged K + - channel KAT1 . Plant J . 39 : 182 – 93 103 . Mellman I . 1996 . Endocytosis and molecular sorting . Annu . Rev . Cell . Dev . Biol . 12 : 575 – 625 104 . Menetrey J , Macia E , Pasqualato S , Franco M , Cherﬁls J . 2000 . Structure of Arf6 - GDP suggests a basis for guanine nucleotide exchange factors speciﬁcity . Nat . Struct . Biol . 7 : 466 – 69 105 . Mohrmann K , Gerez L , Oorschot V , Klumperman J , van der Sluijs P . 2002 . Rab4 function in membrane recycling from early endosomes depends on a membrane to cytoplasm cycle . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 32029 – 35 106 . Mohrmann K , van der Sluijs P . 1999 . Regulation of membrane transport through the endo - cytic pathway by rabGTPases . Mol . Membr . Biol . 16 : 81 – 87 107 . Molendijk AJ , Bischoff F , Rajendrakumar CS , Friml J , Braun M , et al . 2001 . Arabidopsis thaliana Rop GTPases are localized to tips of root hairs and control polar growth . EMBO J . 20 : 2779 – 88 108 . Mongrand S , Morel J , Laroche J , Claverol S , Carde JP , et al . 2004 . Lipid rafts in higher plant cells : puriﬁcation and characterization of Triton X - 100 - insoluble microdomains from tobacco plasma membrane . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 36277 – 86 109 . Moritz OL , Tam BM , Hurd LL , Peranen J , Deretic D , Papermaster DS . 2001 . Mutant rab8 impairs docking and fusion of rhodopsin - bearing post - Golgi membranes and causes cell death of transgenic Xenopus rods . Mol . Biol . Cell . 12 : 2341 – 51 110 . Moss J , Vaughan M . 1998 . Molecules in the ARF orbit . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 21431 – 34 111 . Mukherjee S , Ghosh RN , Maxﬁeld FR . 1997 . Endocytosis . Physiol . Rev . 77 : 759 – 803 112 . Muniz M , Riezman H . 2000 . Intracellular transport of GPI - anchored proteins . EMBO J . 19 : 10 – 15 113 . Murgia C , Vespignani I , Cerase J , Nobili F , Perozzi G . 1999 . Cloning , expression , and vesicular localization of zinc transporter Dri 27 / ZnT4 in intestinal tissue and cells . Am . J . Physiol . 277 : G1231 – 39 114 . MurphyAS , HoognerKR , PeerWA , TaizL . 2002 . Identiﬁcation , puriﬁcation , andmolecular cloning of N - 1 - naphthylphthalmic acid - binding plasma membrane - associated aminopepti - dases from Arabidopsis . Plant Physiol . 128 : 935 – 50 246 Murphy et al . A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 115 . Muza - Moons MM , Koutsouris A , Hecht G . 2003 . Disruption of cell polarity by en - teropathogenic Escherichia coli enables basolateral membrane proteins to migrate apically and to potentiate physiological consequences . Infect . Immun . 71 : 7069 – 78 116 . Naslavsky N , Boehm M , Backlund PS Jr , Caplan S . 2004 . Rabenosyn - 5 and EHD1 interact and sequentially regulate protein recycling to the plasma membrane . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 : 2410 – 22 117 . Nebenfuhr A . 2002 . Vesicle trafﬁc in the endomembrane system : a tale of COPs , Rabs and SNAREs . Curr . Opin . Plant Biol . 5 : 507 – 12 118 . Nicoziani P , Vilhardt F , Llorente A , Hilout L , Courtoy PJ , et al . 2000 . Role for dynamin in late endosome dynamics and trafﬁcking of the cation - independent mannose 6 - phosphate receptor . Mol . Biol . Cell . 11 : 481 – 95 119 . Oh P , McIntosh DP , Schnitzer JE . 1998 . Dynamin at the neck of caveolae mediates their budding to form transport vesicles by GTP - driven ﬁssion from the plasma membrane of endothelium . J . Cell . Biol . 141 : 101 – 14 120 . Orth JD , Krueger EW , Cao H , McNiven MA . 2002 . The large GTPase dynamin regulates actin comet formation and movement in living cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 : 167 – 72 121 . Palacios F , Price L , Schweitzer J , Collard JG , D’Souza - Schorey C . 2001 . An essential role for ARF6 - regulated membrane trafﬁc in adherens junction turnover and epithelial cell mi - gration . EMBO J . 20 : 4973 – 86 122 . Deleted in proof 123 . Peer WA , Bandyopadhyay A , Blakeslee JJ , Makam SN , Chen RJ , et al . 2004 . Variation in expression and protein localization of the PIN family of auxin efﬂux facilitator proteins in ﬂavonoid mutants with altered auxin transport in Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant Cell 16 : 1898 – 911 124 . Pelkmans L , Puntener D , Helenius A . 2002 . Local actin polymerization and dynamin re - cruitment in SV40 - induced internalization of caveolae . Science 296 : 535 – 39 125 . Peters PJ , Gao M , Gaschet J , Ambach A , van Donselaar E , et al . 2001 . Characterization of coated vesicles that participate in endocytic recycling . Trafﬁc 2 : 885 – 95 126 . Peyroche A , Antonny B , Robineau S , Acker J , Cherﬁls J , Jackson CL . 1999 . Brefeldin A acts to stabilize an abortive ARF - GDP - Sec7 domain protein complex : involvement of speciﬁc residues of the Sec7 domain . Mol . Cell 3 : 275 – 85 127 . Pfeffer SR . 2001 . Rab GTPases : specifying and deciphering organelle identity and function . Trends Cell Biol . 11 : 487 – 91 128 . Presley JF , Mayor S , McGraw TE , Dunn KW , Maxﬁeld FR . 1997 . Baﬁlomycin A1 treatment retards transferrin receptor recycling more than bulk membrane recycling . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 13929 – 36 129 . Preuss ML , Serna J , Falbel TG , Bednarek SY , Nielsen E . 2004 . The Arabidopsis Rab GTPase RabA4b localizes to the tips of growing root hair cells . Plant Cell 16 : 1589 – 603 130 . Qualmann B , Mellor H . 2003 . Regulation of endocytic trafﬁc by Rho GTPases . Biochem . J . 371 : 233 – 41 131 . Qualmann B , Roos J , DiGregorio PJ , Kelly RB . 1999 . Syndapin I , a synaptic dynamin - binding protein that associates with the neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . Mol . Biol . Cell . 10 : 501 – 13 132 . Quigley F , Rosenberg JM , Shachar - Hill Y , Bohnert HJ . 2002 . From genome to function : the Arabidopsis aquaporins . Genome Biol . 3 : RESEARCH0001 133 . Radhakrishna H , Donaldson JG . 1997 . ADP - ribosylation factor 6 regulates a novel plasma membrane recycling pathway . J . Cell . Biol . 139 : 49 – 61 www . annualreviews . org · Endocytotic Cycle of PM Proteins 247 A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 134 . Raiborg C , Bache KG , Gillooly DJ , Madshus IH , Stang E , Stenmark H . 2002 . Hrs sorts ubiquitinated proteins into clathrin - coated microdomains of early endosomes . Nat . Cell . Biol . 4 : 394 – 98 135 . Ridley A . 2000 . Rho GTPases . Integrating integrin signaling . J . Cell . Biol . 150 : F107 – 9 136 . Robinson DG , Hillmer S . 1990 . Endocytosis in plants . Physiol . Planta . 79 : 96 – 104 137 . Robinson MS . 1994 . The role of clathrin , adaptors and dynamin in endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Cell . Biol . 6 : 538 – 44 138 . Roca R , Stiefel V , Puigdomenech P . 1998 . Characterization of the sequence coding for the clathrin coat assembly protein AP17 ( sigma2 ) associated with the plasma membrane from Zea mays and constitutive expression of its gene . Gene 208 : 67 – 72 139 . Rocha Facanha A , de Meis L . 1998 . Reversibility of H + - ATPase and H + - pyrophosphatase in tonoplast vesicles from maize coleoptiles and seeds . Plant Physiol . 116 : 1487 – 95 140 . Rohde G , Wenzel D , Haucke V . 2002 . A phosphatidylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate bind - ing site within mu2 - adaptin regulates clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J . Cell . Biol . 158 : 209 – 14 141 . Royle SJ , Murrell - Lagnado RD . 2003 . Constitutive cycling : a general mechanism to regulate cell surface proteins . Bioessays 25 : 39 – 46 142 . Ryan CA , Pearce G , Scheer J , Moura DS . 2002 . Polypeptide hormones . Plant Cell 14 ( Suppl . ) : S251 – 64 143 . Sachse M , Strous GJ , Klumperman J . 2004 . ATPase - deﬁcient hVPS4 impairs formation of internal endosomal vesicles and stabilizes bilayered clathrin coats on endosomal vacuoles . J . Cell Sci . 117 : 1699 – 708 144 . Schaerer - Brodbeck C , Riezman H . 2000 . Functional interactions between the p35 subunit of the Arp2 / 3 complex and calmodulin in yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell . 11 : 1113 – 27 145 . Schindelman G , Morikami A , Jung J , Baskin TI , Carpita NC , et al . 2001 . COBRA encodes a putative GPI - anchored protein , which is polarly localized and necessary for oriented cell expansion in Arabidopsis . Genes Dev . 15 : 1115 – 27 146 . Schledzewski K , Brinkmann H , Mendel RR . 1999 . Phylogenetic analysis of components of theeukaryoticvesicletransportsystemrevealsacommonoriginofadaptorproteincomplexes 1 , 2 , and 3 and the F subcomplex of the coatomer COPI . J . Mol . Evol . 48 : 770 – 78 147 . Schmidt A , Wolde M , Thiele C , Fest W , Kratzin H , et al . 1999 . Endophilin I mediates synap - tic vesicle formation by transfer of arachidonate to lysophosphatidic acid . Nature 401 : 133 – 41 148 . Seabra MC , Coudrier E . 2004 . Rab GTPases and myosin motors in organelle motility . Trafﬁc 5 : 393 – 99 149 . Seaman MN . 2004 . Cargo - selective endosomal sorting for retrieval to the Golgi requires retromer . J . Cell . Biol . 165 : 111 – 22 150 . Segev N . 2001 . Ypt / rab gtpases : regulators of protein trafﬁcking . Sci . STKE 2001 : RE11 151 . Seron K , Tieaho V , Prescianotto - Baschong C , Aust T , Blondel MO , et al . 1998 . A yeast t - SNARE involved in endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell . 9 : 2873 – 89 152 . Sever S , Muhlberg AB , Schmid SL . 1999 . Impairment of dynamin’s GAP domain stimulates receptor - mediated endocytosis . Nature 398 : 481 – 86 153 . Shah K , Russinova E , Gadella TWJ , Willemse J , de Vries SC . 2002 . The Arabidopsis kinase - associated protein phosphatase controls internalization of the somatic embryogenesis recep - tor kinase 1 . Genes Dev . 16 : 1707 – 20 154 . Sheff DR , Daro EA , Hull M , Mellman I . 1999 . The receptor recycling pathway contains two distinct populations of early endosomes with different sorting functions . J . Cell . Biol . 145 : 123 – 39 248 Murphy et al . A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 155 . Simonsen A , Lippe R , Christoforidis S , Gaullier JM , Brech A , et al . 1998 . EEA1 links PI ( 3 ) K function to Rab5 regulation of endosome fusion . Nature 394 : 494 – 98 156 . Sleeman MW , Donegan NP , Heller - Harrison R , Lane WS , Czech MP . 1998 . Association of acyl - CoA synthetase - 1 with GLUT4 - containing vesicles . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 3132 – 35 157 . Smythe E . 2002 . Direct interactions between rab GTPases and cargo . Mol . Cell 9 : 205 – 6 158 . Sohn EJ , Kim ES , Zhao M , Kim SJ , Kim H , et al . 2003 . Rha1 , an Arabidopsis Rab5 homolog , plays a critical role in the vacuolar trafﬁcking of soluble cargo proteins . Plant Cell 15 : 1057 – 70 159 . Son O , Yang HS , Lee HJ , Lee MY , Shin KH , et al . 2003 . Expression of srab7 and SCaM genes required for endocytosis of Rhizobium in root nodules . Plant Sci . 165 : 1239 – 44 160 . Sonnichsen B , De Renzis S , Nielsen E , Rietdorf J , Zerial M . 2000 . Distinct membrane domains on endosomes in the recycling pathway visualized by multicolor imaging of Rab4 , Rab5 , and Rab11 . J . Cell . Biol . 149 : 901 – 14 161 . Sorkin A , Krolenko S , Kudrjavtceva N , Lazebnik J , Teslenko L , et al . 1991 . Recycling of epidermal growth factor - receptor complexes in A431 cells : identiﬁcation of dual pathways . J . Cell . Biol . 112 : 55 – 63 162 . Sorkin A , von Zastrow M . 2002 . Signal transduction and endocytosis : close encounters of many kinds . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 : 600 – 14 163 . Steinmann T , Geldner N , Grebe M , Mangold S , Jackson CL , et al . 1999 . Coordinated polar localization of auxin efﬂux carrier PIN1 by GNOM ARF GEF . Science 286 : 316 – 18 164 . StoorvogelW , OorschotV , GeuzeHJ . 1996 . Anovelclassofclathrin - coatedvesiclesbudding from endosomes . J . Cell . Biol . 132 : 21 – 33 165 . Swarup R , Friml J , Marchant A , Ljung K , Sandberg G , et al . 2001 . Localization of the auxin permease AUX1 suggests two functionally distinct hormone transport pathways operate in the Arabidopsis root apex . Genes Dev . 15 : 2648 – 53 166 . Tanchak MA , Rennie PJ , Fowke LC . 1988 . Ultrastructure of the partially coated reticulum and dictyosomes during endocytosis by soybean protoplasts . Planta 175 : 433 – 41 167 . Tisdale EJ . 1999 . A Rab2 mutant with impaired GTPase activity stimulates vesicle formation from pre - Golgi intermediates . Mol . Biol . Cell . 10 : 1837 – 49 168 . Tisdale EJ , Bourne JR , Khosravi - Far R , Der CJ , Balch WE . 1992 . GTP - binding mutants of rab1 and rab2 are potent inhibitors of vesicular transport from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi complex . J . Cell . Biol . 119 : 749 – 61 169 . Trischler M , Stoorvogel W , Ullrich O . 1999 . Biochemical analysis of distinct Rab5 - and Rab11 - positive endosomes along the transferrin pathway . J . Cell Sci . 112 ( Pt . 24 ) : 4773 – 83 170 . Tse YC , Mo BX , Hillmer S , Zhao M , Lo SW , et al . 2004 . Identiﬁcation of multivesicular bodies as prevacuolar compartments in Nicotiana tabacum BY - 2 cells . Plant Cell 16 : 672 – 93 171 . Tuvim MJ , Adachi R , Hoffenberg S , Dickey BF . 2001 . Trafﬁc control : Rab GTPases and the regulation of interorganellar transport . News Physiol . Sci . 16 : 56 – 61 172 . Ueda T , Anai T , Tsukaya H , Hirata A , Uchimiya H . 1996 . Characterization and subcellular localization of a small GTP - binding protein ( Ara - 4 ) from Arabidopsis : conditional expression under control of the promoter of the gene for heat - shock protein HSP81 - 1 . Mol . Gen . Genet . 250 : 533 – 39 173 . Ueda T , Yamaguchi M , Uchimiya H , Nakano A . 2001 . Ara6 , a plant - unique novel type Rab GTPase , functions in the endocytic pathway of Arabidopsis thaliana . EMBO J . 20 : 4730 – 41 174 . Ullrich O , Reinsch S , Urbe S , Zerial M , Parton RG . 1996 . Rab11 regulates recycling through the pericentriolar recycling endosome . J . Cell . Biol . 135 : 913 – 24 175 . Ungewickell E , Ungewickell H , Holstein SE , Lindner R , Prasad K , et al . 1995 . Role of auxilin in uncoating clathrin - coated vesicles . Nature 378 : 632 – 35 www . annualreviews . org · Endocytotic Cycle of PM Proteins 249 A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 176 . Vallis Y , Wigge P , Marks B , Evans PR , McMahon HT . 1999 . Importance of the pleckstrin homology domain of dynamin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Curr . Biol . 9 : 257 – 60 177 . van Dam EM , Stoorvogel W . 2002 . Dynamin - dependent transferrin receptor recycling by endosome - derived clathrin - coated vesicles . Mol . Biol . Cell . 13 : 169 – 82 178 . van Dam EM , Ten Broeke T , Jansen K , Spijkers P , Stoorvogel W . 2002 . Endocytosed trans - ferrin receptors recycle via distinct dynamin and phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase - dependent pathways . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 48876 – 83 179 . van der Bliek AM . 1999 . Functional diversity in the dynamin family . Trends Cell Biol . 9 : 96 – 102 180 . van der Bliek AM , Redelmeier TE , Damke H , Tisdale EJ , Meyerowitz EM , Schmid SL . 1993 . Mutations in human dynamin block an intermediate stage in coated vesicle formation . J . Cell . Biol . 122 : 553 – 63 181 . van Weert AW , Dunn KW , Gueze HJ , Maxﬁeld FR , Stoorvogel W . 1995 . Transport from late endosomes to lysosomes , but not sorting of integral membrane proteins in endosomes , depends on the vacuolar proton pump . J . Cell . Biol . 130 : 821 – 34 182 . Vera - Estrella R , Barkla BJ , Bohnert HJ , Pantoja O . 2004 . Novel regulation of aquaporins during osmotic stress . Plant Physiol . 135 : 2318 – 29 183 . Verges M , Luton F , Gruber C , Tiemann F , Reinders LG , et al . 2004 . The mammalian retromer regulates transcytosis of the polymeric immunoglobulin receptor . Nat . Cell . Biol . 6 : 763 – 69 184 . Vernoud V , Horton AC , Yang Z , Nielsen E . 2003 . Analysis of the small GTPase gene superfamily of Arabidopsis . Plant Physiol . 131 : 1191 – 208 185 . Vida TA , Emr SD . 1995 . A new vital stain for visualizing vacuolar membrane dynamics and endocytosis in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 128 : 779 – 92 186 . Wang E , Brown PS , Aroeti B , Chapin SJ , Mostov KE , Dunn KW . 2000 . Apical and baso - lateral endocytic pathways of MDCK cells meet in acidic common endosomes distinct from a nearly - neutral apical recycling endosome . Trafﬁc 1 : 480 – 93 187 . Wilcke M , Johannes L , Galli T , Mayau V , Goud B , Salamero J . 2000 . Rab11 regulates the compartmentalization of early endosomes required for efﬁcient transport from early endosomes to the trans - golgi network . J . Cell . Biol . 151 : 1207 – 20 188 . Willemsen V , Friml J , Grebe M , van den Toorn A , Palme K , Scheres B . 2003 . Cell polarity and PIN protein positioning in Arabidopsis require STEROL METHYLTRANSFERASE1 function . Plant Cell 15 : 612 – 25 189 . Wilsbach K , Payne GS . 1993 . Vps1p , a member of the dynamin GTPase family , is necessary for Golgi membrane protein retention in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . EMBO J . 12 : 3049 – 59 190 . Witke W , Podtelejnikov AV , Di Nardo A , Sutherland JD , Gurniak CB , et al . 1998 . In mouse brain proﬁlin I and proﬁlin II associate with regulators of the endocytic pathway and actin assembly . EMBO J . 17 : 967 – 76 191 . Worby CA , Dixon JE . 2002 . Sorting out the cellular functions of sorting nexins . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 3 : 919 – 31 192 . Xu XL , Bittman R , Duportail G , Heissler D , Vilcheze C , London E . 2001 . Effect of the structure of natural sterols and sphingolipids on the formation of ordered sphingolipid / sterol domains ( rafts ) . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 33540 – 46 193 . Xu Y , Hortsman H , Seet L , Wong SH , Hong W . 2001 . SNX3 regulates endosomal func - tion through its PX - domain - mediated interaction with PtdIns ( 3 ) P . Nat . Cell . Biol . 3 : 658 – 66 194 . Yang ZB . 2002 . Small GTPases : versatile signaling switches in plants . Plant Cell 14 : S375 – S88 250 Murphy et al . A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . AR242 - PP56 - 09 ARI 28 March 2005 17 : 1 195 . Zeigerer A , Lampson MA , Karylowski O , Sabatini DD , Adesnik M , et al . 2002 . GLUT4 retention in adipocytes requires two intracellular insulin - regulated transport steps . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 : 2421 – 35 196 . Zerial M , McBride H . 2001 . Rab proteins as membrane organizers . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 : 107 – 17 197 . Zhao X , Lasell TK , Melancon P . 2002 . Localization of large ADP - ribosylation factor - guanine nucleotide exchange factors to different Golgi compartments : evidence for distinct functions in protein trafﬁc . Mol . Biol . Cell . 13 : 119 – 33 198 . Zheng H , von Mollard GF , Kovaleva V , Stevens TH , Raikhel NV . 1999 . The plant vesicle - associated SNARE AtVTI1a likely mediates vesicle transport from the trans - Golgi network to the prevacuolar compartment . Mol . Biol . Cell . 10 : 2251 – 64 199 . Zheng ZL , Yang Z . 2000 . The Rrop GTPase switch turns on polar growth in pollen . Trends Plant Sci . 5 : 298 – 303 www . annualreviews . org · Endocytotic Cycle of PM Proteins 251 A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . Contents ARI 29 March 2005 21 : 29 Annual Review of Plant Biology Volume 56 , 2005 Contents Fifty Good Years Peter Starlinger (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 1 Phytoremediation Elizabeth Pilon - Smits (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 15 Calcium Oxalate in Plants : Formation and Function Vincent R . Franceschi and Paul A . Nakata (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 41 Starch Degradation Alison M . Smith , Samuel C . Zeeman , and Steven M . Smith (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 73 CO 2 Concentrating Mechanisms in Algae : Mechanisms , Environmental Modulation , and Evolution Mario Giordano , John Beardall , and John A . Raven (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 99 Solute Transporters of the Plastid Envelope Membrane Andreas P . M . Weber , Rainer Schwacke , and Ulf - Ingo Fl¨ugge (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 133 Abscisic Acid Biosynthesis and Catabolism Eiji Nambara and Annie Marion - Poll (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 165 Redox Regulation : A Broadening Horizon Bob B . Buchanan and Yves Balmer (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 187 Endocytotic Cycling of PM Proteins Angus S . Murphy , Anindita Bandyopadhyay , Susanne E . Holstein , and Wendy A . Peer (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 221 Molecular Physiology of Legume Seed Development Hans Weber , Ljudmilla Borisjuk , and Ulrich Wobus (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 253 Cytokinesis in Higher Plants Gerd Jürgens (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 281 Evolution of Flavors and Scents David R . Gang (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 301 v A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . Contents ARI 29 March 2005 21 : 29 Biology of Chromatin Dynamics Tzung - Fu Hsieh and Robert L . Fischer (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 327 Shoot Branching Paula McSteen and Ottoline Leyser (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 353 Protein Splicing Elements and Plants : From Transgene Containment to Protein Puriﬁcation Thomas C . Evans , Jr . , Ming - Qun Xu , and Sriharsa Pradhan (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 375 Molecular Genetic Analyses of Microsporogenesis and Microgametogenesis in Flowering Plants Hong Ma (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 393 Plant - Speciﬁc Calmodulin - Binding Proteins Nicolas Bouch´e , Ayelet Yellin , Wayne A . Snedden , and Hillel Fromm (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 435 Self - Incompatibility in Plants Seiji Takayama and Akira Isogai (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 467 Remembering Winter : Toward a Molecular Understanding of Vernalization Sibum Sung and Richard M . Amasino (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 491 New Insights to the Function of Phytopathogenic Baterial Type III Effectors in Plants Mary Beth Mudgett (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 509 INDEXES Subject Index (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 533 Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors , Volumes 46 – 56 (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 557 Cumulative Index of Chapter Titles , Volumes 46 – 56 (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) 562 ERRATA An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Plant Biology chapters may be found at http : / / plant . annualreviews . org / vi Contents A nnu . R e v . P l a n t . B i o l . 2005 . 56 : 221 - 251 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m a r j ou r n a l s . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by D r . D R . I VANA M A C HA C KOVA on 12 / 09 / 05 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y .