Between the Lines : A Comparative Study of Freeform - Based Knowledge - Map - Creation with Paper and Tablet Abstract Our research question is : can digital media work as a substitute for traditional pen ‐ and ‐ paper , and can it enhance or support our thinking process ? Affordances of paper versus digital and in particular around sketching have been largely discussed in the past . People often prefer pen and paper or whiteboards to software when it comes to the early stages of sensemaking tasks . Nowadays pen - enabled tablet - PCs are supposed to offer a sketching experience similar to pen and paper with good computation power and the ability to respond in real - time to user interactions . Therefore the question arises : how should pen - based interaction and user interfaces be designed to be more productive than pen and paper ? We created a prototype tablet application called SketchViz focusing on easy restructuring of information for users and conducted a study comparing both the interactions and visual representations of 25 participants performing a given task using either pen and paper or SketchViz . The results show , that the visual representations made using the prototype were very similar to those made using pen and paper . Users especially liked the way the application allowed them to change size and position of drawn objects on the virtual canvas ( which is different from current tools ) . They also mentioned having a Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the Owner / Author . Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . CHI ' 16 Extended Abstracts , May 07 - 12 , 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4082 - 3 / 16 / 05 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2892384 Marius Brade Chair of Media Design , Technische Universität Dresden , Dresden , Germany marius . brade @ tu - dresden . de Anja Sehl Department of Clinical Psychology Technische Universität Chemnitz , Chemnitz , Germany anja . sehl @ psych - tuc . de Rainer Groh Chair of Media Design , Technische Universität Dresden , Dresden , Germany rainer . groh @ tu - dresden . de Late - Breaking Work : Usable , Useful , and Desirable # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 3006 Figure 1 : SketchViz : handwritten text can be created along with sketches and doodles . Users may create a hierarchy between elements by encircling content ( and choosing a color ) . Words , and hierarchies are recognized by the system through recognition better possibility to switch between detail and overview . Mainly due to technical problems , working with pen and paper was rated easier and was less time consuming . We conclude that if these problems are fixed , SketchViz will offer an interesting starting point for a digital alternative to pen and paper for the early stages of sensemaking tasks . Author Keywords Comparative study ; sketching ; freeform interaction ; knowledge maps ; pen based interaction ; pen and paper . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . 2 . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : User Interfaces ; Evaluation / methodology . Introduction Sketching and Sensemaking In human computer interaction , considerable research has shown that sketching is the most immediate way of representing thoughts while making sense of information . According to Johnson et al . [ 9 ] , it can be seen as an iterative process , including problem - framing and exploring possible solutions . Tversky [ 14 ] analyzes sketching from the perspective of psychology . Results show that sketches reveal a user’s conception of a domain . Users new to a given topic extract structural information about spatial relations among elements while experts further infer detailed functional information . Fischer et al . [ 5 ] emphasize the importance of structure during problem - framing and exploring solutions . Examining iterative knowledge maps created by users whilst solving a collaborative task , they have found that changes to the spatial layout of information were an integral part of the working process . Russell et al . [ 11 ] define this “process of searching for a representation and encoding data in that representation to answer task - specific questions” as a sensemaking task . This includes processes involving the collection and organization of data into external visual representations in order to create an understanding . Thereby users often develop a simple structure to solve a given problem , although “the process is sometimes ill - defined , iterative and complex : information retrieval , organization and task re - definition all interact in sometimes subtle ways” [ 7 ] . The sensemaking process is inherent to many information processing tasks and also applicable to the creation of knowledge maps . The Importance of Changing the Visual Structure We believe , that there is an inherit connection between the iterative process of understanding information ( e . g . sensemaking ) and the process of changing the visual structure of external representations according to the current understanding of that information ( physical or digital ) . Thus it is all important , that respective tools should enable these changes with a minimum of effort . Related Tools and their Challenges Affordances of paper versus digital and in particular around sketching have been largely discussed in the past [ 3 , 6 , 8 , 12 , 15 ] – in our work we focus on changing a structure of a representation . Sutherland – one of the pioneers in digital sketching systems – created the first man ‐ machine graphical communication Late - Breaking Work : Usable , Useful , and Desirable # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 3007 system called SketchPad [ 13 ] . For making changes to the structure a user had to switch modes through an extensive physical keyboard . Up to now many digital tools require a user to switch to an editing mode for making changes to the structure of visual representations and back to a creation mode for drawing or creating content . Switching modes takes time and more importantly users may forget in which mode they are during a discussion or while they solve mental tasks . So a short irritation occurs , when they need to find out why the system does not respond in a way they expected it . The workflow is interrupted . Pen and paper enable fast and lightweight freehand drawing , which is particularly useful in the early stages of sensemaking [ 4 ] . Thus a pen inherits a “drawing mode” . Yet , pen and paper face limitations , as they do not allow for modifications like the rearrangement of drawn objects and their structure . Users have to erase objects and draw them again on the desired position . These kinds of interaction interrupts the flow of work while sensemaking as well . Our Approach We have developed a system ( see Figure 1 ) that offers a similar creation of representations to pen and paper , with the added advantage of changing position and size of objects . Our system uses a zoomable user interface according to the definition of Bederson to “support the spatial organization of and navigation among ( … ) visual objects” [ 1 ] . We did a comparative study in which participants had to complete a given task using pen and paper , as well as using our application “SketchViz” for sketching knowledge maps on a tablet - PC . To our knowledge no study comparing sketching via pen and paper with an application on a pen - tablet PC exists to date . SketchViz : Sketching Knowledge Maps We follow the freeform interaction paradigm by Moran et al . [ 10 ] . Accordingly , strokes can be created , changed or erased anywhere on the canvas without affecting existing strokes . Our application can be used single - handed ( see Figure 2 ) for creating and editing visual freeform representations . In contrast to existing tools , no menus or modes are necessary to change the structure of representations . Some shortcomings of pen and paper are addressed by SketchViz :  changing content ( information drawn on paper cannot be moved or scaled ) ,  running out of space ( limited deletion capabilities )  keeping track of the big picture in complex visual representations ( not needed content is still visible ) In order to overcome these shortcomings , the application permits users to make changes to the size and position of objects using as little interaction effort as possible . Based on handwriting and shape recognition , a data model of the hierarchical structure of a user’s information is implicitly created by the system ( see Figure 1 ) . Thus the selection of objects consisting several strokes is made easier ( e . g . tapping on a stroke of a word selects the whole word or tapping an outline selects everything encircled through it ) . Study : Comparison of SketchViz with Pen and Paper Goal of the Study To verify our design decisions , differences in handling the system and pen and paper are observed in respect to interaction processes , time used and ease of use . The following aspects are compared in more detail : Figure 2 : Single - handed editing with a 2 - finger gesture ( after selecting an object ) . Figure 3 : Study setup : table with video camera facing downwards ( A ) , filming interactions of subjects ( B ) . Late - Breaking Work : Usable , Useful , and Desirable # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 3008  spatial layout modifications ( speed and effort rated by users , reuse of previous layout )  visual representations ( quantity , types )  keeping track of the big picture ( rated by users , observed interaction behavior )  interaction ( use of hands / one hand , time spend ) Method Sample We conducted a within - subjects - design study in which 25 participants ( 4 female ) , with an average age of 31 ( SD = 4 . 80 ) took part . Among those were 4 students and 21 employees of different professions ( e . g . media computer sciences ( 16 ) , architecture , science , mathematics , industrial design and psychology ) . Setup Participants started with rating possibly confounding factors ( e . g . experience with : sketching , techniques like mind mapping , tablet - PCs ) using a Likert scale . Afterwards they completed a tutorial ( 30min ) using SketchViz . Following this , participants were requested to answer two sets of questions visually , via sketching or in written form . One set was answered by using pen and paper and the other one by using SketchViz . The order of sets of questions and working material were counterbalanced . A video camera was used for detailed monitoring of all user interactions ( see Figure 3 ) . There were no constraints on material positioning ( the camera was moved accordingly ) . Materials provided for the pen and paper condition consisted of white paper ( as many sheets as users needed ) , a variety of colored pens , a pencil and an eraser . SketchViz was presented on a “Samsung Galaxy Tab GT - P7510” together with a “Jot Pro” 1 stylus . Following the completion of each set of questions participants were asked to participate in a short standardized interview . They were requested to compare SketchViz with sketching via pen and paper and to give feedback and suggestions concerning the digital system . Task Participants had to write down ten names of people they know or like . Regarding these known persons they answered visually to questions like “who knows whom ? ” , “who likes whom and to what extent” . Both sets contained eight consecutive questions to ensure that participants had to sketch a structure of ever increasing complexity . The questions were chosen with the following requirements :  no expert knowledge necessary : tasks should be solvable with different professional backgrounds  provoking changes regarding structure and content of visual representations during the task completion  enabling a visual response ( sketching ) Results Dependent t - tests or pairwise comparisons were employed to compare means , whereas Wilcoxon tests were performed for comparing user ratings ( each on a 5 - point Likert scale ) . Spatial Layout Modification In terms of speed and effort when performing spatial layout modifications users rated SketchViz as significantly faster than working with pen and paper 1 http : / / www . adonit . net / jot / pro / ( last visited January 4 , 2015 ) Figure 4 : Examples for grouping of graphical objects using pen and paper ( A ) and SketchViz ( B ) . Late - Breaking Work : Usable , Useful , and Desirable # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 3009 ( Wilcoxon , z = - 3 . 67 p = . 000 ) . Regarding the effort required to modify visual representations a significant difference in favor of SketchViz was found ( Wilcoxon , z = - 3 . 10 p = . 002 ) . Participants loaded previous saved answers and reused parts of them for answering all consecutive questions under the SketchViz condition ( e . g . loaded previous representations and modified them ) . While working with pen and paper , reuse of former visual representations ( e . g . drawing over them with other colors ) occurred in approximately 60 % of visually answered questions . Representation S TRUCTURING C ONTENT Except for one , all participants ( 96 % ) grouped graphical objects together to categorize them when working under both conditions . One participant used this type of grouping only for sketching via SketchViz . When working with pen and paper this person used only coloring for grouping . The following types of representation were used for providing structure under both material conditions ( see Figure 4 ) : labels , symbols , explicit groups ( outline ) and implicit groups ( proximity ) . N UMBER OF G RAPHICAL O BJECTS Overall , participants created significantly ( t ( 24 ) = - 2 . 28 , p = . 032 ) more objects using paper ( mean : 25 , SD : 8 . 38 ) than using SketchViz ( mean : 20 , SD : 4 . 54 ) . However , pairwise comparisons have indicated that when using pen and paper prior to using SketchViz , participants created significantly more objects ( p = . 012 ) with pen and paper ( mean : 28 . 32 , SD : 2 . 45 ) than they did with SketchViz ( mean : 19 . 59 , SD : 1 . 34 ) . Using SketchViz first , there was no significant difference in the amount of objects ( p = . 378 ) . Keeping Track of the Big Picture Although statistically not significant , it seemed that keeping track of the overview was rated lower when working with pen and paper ( mean : 3 . 60 , SD : 1 . 12 ) than compared to using SketchViz ( mean : 4 . 13 , SD : 1 . 20 ) . When participants were requested to imagine how they would keep the overview if there were 10 more consecutive questions , the rating was in favor of SketchViz ( Wilcoxon , z = - 2 . 61 , p = . 009 ) . 18 ( 72 % ) participants created piles of used paper next to their current paper ( see Figure 5 ) . Additionally they placed a paper with their ten names separately . When using SketchViz , 23 ( 92 % ) participants enlarged important information and reduced the size of other details . Interaction H ANDLING OF M ATERIAL Working with pen and paper , all participants used both hands : the non - dominant hand to hold the paper down or turn it , the dominant for sketching ( see Figure 5 , B ) . However during interaction with SketchViz 17 ( 68 % ) participants used the dominant hand exclusively . 7 ( 28 % ) participants turned the tablet - PC with one or both hands ( see Figure 5 , C , D ) . E ASE OF U SE Table 1 presents the main advantages and drawbacks of both working materials , including the frequency with which they were mentioned . Participants rated the ease of use of pen and paper ( mean : 4 . 76 , SD : . 51 ) and SketchViz ( mean : 3 . 17 , SD : 1 . 01 ) . The difference is statistically significant ( Wilcoxon , z = - 3 . 93 , p = . 000 ) . 16 participants justified their rating and 12 ( 75 % ) Figure 5 : Examples of interactions : organizing sheets of paper in piles ( A , B ) ; rotating the tablet - PC with one ( C ) or two ( D ) hands . Late - Breaking Work : Usable , Useful , and Desirable # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 3010 stated that they experienced difficulties due to prototype software errors in pen recognition . C OMPLETION T IME For answering a question using pen and paper participants needed about two minutes ( mean : 126 . 99 sec . , SD : 59 . 22 sec . ) . This time almost doubled when SketchViz was used ( mean : 246 . 65 sec . , SD : 91 . 53 sec . ) . The difference is statistically significant ( t ( 24 ) = - 7 . 35 , p = . 000 ) . Discussion Our research question is : can digital media work as a substitute for traditional pen ‐ and ‐ paper , and can it enhance or support our thinking process ? Therefore our prototype SketchViz was compared with pen and paper , since it aims for simplifying modification of visual representations while sketching . Participants stated that changing content and relations on - the - fly while working on a task was the most important feature of the application , a feature they missed when working with pen and paper ( and also existing software tools ) . Thus they did not need to anticipate the structure of the resulting knowledge map . This resulted in less mental effort . As changing content was easy , more iterations on the structure of a map occurred . We assume that performing more iterations may improve the final quality of a map , because structure gets more important over time during sensemaking tasks [ 5 ] . We will address that hypothesis in future work . Most participants structured their answers with similar strategies regardless of the material used ( by means of labels , symbols or groups ) . The results show , that SketchViz offers a user experience that participants are familiar with from using pen and paper – except for some technical shortcomings of the prototype . When facing tasks with a higher level of complexity , the prototype can offer advantages compared to pen and paper in keeping track of the big picture in sketches because of the zoomable user interface . Although our results do not allow reliable conclusions , we assume ( based on interview questions ) that the differences in the amount of graphical objects and time were due to time consuming technical issues in pen recognition . It may be that participants using SketchViz as their first method created fewer objects when working with pen and paper afterwards to save time ( although no time limit was given ) . The task participants had to deal with was simplified , and its relevance to sensemaking processes taking place in real life working situations remains to be established . It is to be expected that knowledge workers have to handle many different sources of information – some may not always be explained visually . Furthermore , our study did not include collaborative aspects of knowledge work , which play also an important role in real life working environments . Nevertheless we believe that a system like SketchViz may be a good starting point to help knowledge workers during the early stages of sensemaking tasks , since modifications of representations occur frequently . Future work will focus on the digital connection with other tools for supporting further ( collaborative ) workflows . Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Christian Brändel for implementation , the participants of the study and Romy Müller for her valuable feedback regarding the study setup and on statistical methods . On behalf of Marius Brade , this research project ( contract no . 080951799 ) has been funded by the European Social Fond and the Free State of Saxony as well as SAP Research . Biggest advantage times mentioned ( % ) Biggest drawback times mentioned ( % ) P e n a n d P a p e r writing down information fast and easy 14 ( 58 ) Representations are getting cluttered and thus unclear over time 14 ( 58 ) S k e t c h V i z modification of spatial layout 18 ( 72 ) strokes were recognized with a lag , sometimes incomplete 12 ( 48 ) Table 1 : Main advantages and drawbacks compared . Late - Breaking Work : Usable , Useful , and Desirable # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 3011 References 1 . Bederson , B . The promise of zoomable user interfaces . Behaviour & Information Technology Vol . 30 , Iss . 6 , Taylor & Francis ( 2011 ) , 853 - 866 . 2 . Brade , M . , Brändel , C . , Salmen , A . , and Groh , R . SketchViz : a Sketching Interface for Domain Comprehension Tasks Illustrated by an Industrial Network Use Case . Proc . i - KNOW 2012 , ACM Press ( 2012 ) , Article 30 . 3 . Buxton B . Sketching User Experiences . Morgan Kaufmann , 2007 . 4 . Eppler , M . A Comparison between Concept Maps , Mind Maps , Conceptual Diagrams , and Visual Metaphors as Complementary Tools for Knowledge Construction and Sharing . Information Visualization 2006 Volume 5 , Palgrave Macmillan Ltd . ( 2006 ) , 202 - 210 . 5 . Fisher , K . , Counts , S . and Kittur , A . Distributed Sensemaking : Improving Sensemaking by Leveraging the Efforts of Previous Users . In Proc . CHI 2012 , ACM Press ( 2012 ) , 247 - 256 . 6 . Forbus , K . D . and Usher , J . Sketching for Knowledge Capture : a Progress Report . In Proc . IUI ’02 , pages 71 – 77 7 . Furnas G . W . and Russell D . M . 2005 . Making Sense of Sensemaking . Ext . Abstracts CHI 2005 , ACM Press ( 2005 ) , 2115 - 2116 . 8 . Goel , V . Sketches of Thought . The MIT Press , 1995 . B . Lawson . Design in Mind . Butterworth ‐ Heinemann , 1994 . 9 . Johnson , G . , Gross , M . D . , Hong , J . , and Yi - Luen Do , E . Computational Support for Sketching in Design : A Review . Foundations and Trends® in Human - Computer Interaction 2 , 1 ( 2007 ) , 1 – 93 . 10 . Moran , T . P . , Chiu , P . , Van Melle , W . , & Kurtenbach , G . ( 1995 , May ) . Implicit structure for pen - based systems within a freeform interaction paradigm . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems ( pp . 487 - 494 ) . ACM Press / Addison - Wesley Publishing Co . 11 . Russell , D . , Stefik , M . , Pirolli , P . , and Card , S . The Cost Structure of Sensemaking . In Proc . CHI 1993 , ACM Press ( 1993 ) , 269 - 276 . 12 . Sellen , A . J . and Harper . R . H . The Myth of the Paperless Office . MIT Press , 2003 . 13 . Sutherland , I . E . Sketch Pad : a Man - machine Graphical Communication System . PhD thesis , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Department of Electrical Engineering , January 1963 14 . Tversky , B . What do Sketches say about Thinking ? AAAI spring symposium on sketch understanding , ( 2002 ) , 148 – 151 . 15 . Weibel , N . , Signer , B . , Norrie , M . C . , Hofstetter , H . , Jetter H . and Reiterer , H . PaperSketch : A Paper ‐ Digital Collaborative Remote Sketching Tool , Proceedings of IUI 2011 Late - Breaking Work : Usable , Useful , and Desirable # chi4good , CHI 2016 , San Jose , CA , USA 3012