Information - Seeking in Large - Scale Digital Libraries Strategies for Scholarly Workset Creation David M . Weigl , Kevin R . Page Oxford e - Research Centre University of Oxford United Kingdom { david . weigl , kevin . page } @ oerc . ox . ac . uk Peter Organisciak , J . Stephen Downie School of Information Sciences University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign United States { organis2 , jdownie } @ illinois . edu ABSTRACT Large - scale digital libraries such as the HathiTrust contain massive quantities of content combined from heterogeneous collections , with consequential challenges in providing mechanisms for discov - ery , unified access , and analysis . The HathiTrust Research Center has proposed ‘worksets’ as a solution for users to conduct their re - search into the 15 million volumes of HathiTrust content ; however existing models of users’ information - seeking behaviour , which might otherwise inform workset development , were established before digital library resources existed at such a scale . We examine whether these information - seeking models can suffi - ciently articulate the emergent user activities of scholarly investiga - tion as perceived during the creation of worksets . We demonstrate that a combination of established models by Bates , Ellis , and Wilson can accommodate many aspects of information seeking in large - scale digital libraries at a broad , conceptual , level . We go on to identify the supplemental information - seeking strategies necessary to specifically describe several workset creation exemplars . Finally , we propose complementary additions to the existing models : we classify strategies as instances of querying , browsing , and contribution . Similarly we introduce a notion of scope according to the interaction of a strategy with content , content - derived meta - data , or contextual metadata . Considering the scope and modality of new and existing strategies within the composite model allows us to better express—and so aid our understanding of—information - seeking behaviour within large - scale digital libraries . CCS CONCEPTS • Information systems → Users and interactive retrieval ; Re - trieval tasks and goals ; KEYWORDS information - seeking behaviour , digital libraries , workset creation 1 INTRODUCTION The HathiTrust Digital Library ( HTDL ) provides access to over 14 . 8 million digitized volumes , comprising approximately 5 . 2 billion pages . The sheer scale of this resource , operating over heteroge - neous content while providing combined access to a diverse set of collections , entails new challenges in supporting discovery , analysis , and scholarly use of the wealth of materials contained within . A study of how potential HTDL users maintain collections for research [ 9 ] identified functionalities required by academics when working with large - scale digital libraries . Worksets seek to address these needs , offering capabilities such as : gathering individual doc - uments within citable collections ; supporting computational extrac - tion of document - derived features for scholarly analysis ; generating new descriptive information by inference over existing metadata ; and linking complementary information from external sources . Jett [ 11 ] implements worksets as machine - actionable research collec - tions aggregating members , metadata intrinsic to the workset’s essential nature , metadata intrinsic to digital architectures , meta - data supportive of human interactions , derivative metadata from workset members , and metadata concerning workset provenance . The explicit intent of worksets is to support scholarly research ; thus , ongoing development is strongly influenced by the available literature on scholars’ information - seeking behaviours . However existing models of information - seeking behaviour were established well before digital libraries at the scale of HTDL . In this paper we assess the coverage of these models when applied to large - scale digital libraries , and strategies which might enable them to accommodate the affordances of systems such as the HTDL . 2 BACKGROUND Information - seeking behaviour is a well - studied field of informa - tion science [ 15 ] . Many models and conceptual frameworks have been proposed , partly due to a tendency of model creation over elab - oration [ 14 ] . Most well - established models were largely developed in the 1980s - 90s [ 3 ] ; we discuss the most pertinent here . Ellis’s highly influential model of information - seeking behaviour in the research process [ 6 ] [ 8 ] was derived from interviews with social scientists , physicists , chemists , and English literature re - searchers . It maps behaviours to eight categories : starting char - acteristics of the initial search , e . g . references , authors , or broad queries on search tools ; chaining , traversal of references and cita - tions ; browsing , semi - directed or - structured searching of an area of potential interest ; differentiating between sources , e . g . by ap - proach , author , or publication venue ; monitoring of a ( sub - ) field to keep one’s knowledge up to date ; extracting selected material from a source for closer consideration ; verifying the accuracy of information obtained , e . g . by reference to external sources ; and ending , information gathering toward the end of a project , e . g . to situate it within the wider literature . 978 - 1 - 5386 - 3861 - 3 / 17 / $ 31 . 00 ©2017 IEEE Informed by Ellis , Bates’s “berrypicking” model [ 12 ] casts in - formation seeking as an evolving process of iterative refinement and reconception , where each encountered piece of information provides new ideas or directions . The user chases leads between different sources using a range of strategies . Bates describes six , noting the set is not exhaustive : subject search ; author search ; jour - nal run , inspection of all articles published in a journal for a given timespan ; area scanning , browsing of material collocated with previ - ously identified items ( cf . physical library shelf ) ; backward chaining by following references ; and forward chaining by finding material citing a given item . The user’s information need is not satisfied by a single set of results , but rather by a series of selections of references and bits of information – analogous to berries , scattered among bushes in the forest , being picked one handful at a time . Different conceptions of modes have been established to further account for the motivations and contexts of information seeking . Choo , Detlor , and Turnbull [ 4 ] describe four modes of browsing and searching , identified in work on environmental scanning [ 1 ] [ 13 ] : formal search guided by a specific information need ; informal search , unstructured searching to deepen one’s understanding of a specific issue ; conditioned viewing of information about selected topics in order to evaluate significance ; and undirected viewing , broad scan - ning with no specific information need in mind . Wilson [ 15 ] offers an alternative set of four modes : active search , actively seeking out information ; passive search , where information - seeking behaviour results in the incidental acquisition of relevant information that was not actively sought ; ongoing search to update or expand one’s established knowledge ; and passive attention , wherein knowledge acquisition takes place coincidentally , outside of any information - seeking context . Notably , passive attention explicitly accounts for serendipitous discovery , whereas the loosely equivalent undirected viewing of the other model demands a “considerable degree of ori - entation” in the selection of particular sources [ 1 ] . The above models were established before the widespread avail - ability of massive - scale distributed information systems . However , they can still support how we look at modern systems , and inspire novel solutions to information - seeking problems . In the early days of the World Wide Web , Choo et al [ 4 ] cross - tabulated Ellis’s cate - gories with the four modes of environmental scanning to establish a model of the behaviours of information professionals using this novel resource . They describe a set of “Web Moves” afforded by this environment : identifying web sites ; following links ; scanning site maps ; means of selection ( e . g . bookmarking , printing ) ; receiving push updates ; searching within pages ; and using search engines . The process of building worksets is particularly underserved by a view of information - seeking behavior in terms of single - query sessions . Although the strategies offered by Bates as exemplars of berrypicking do not encompass capabilities of the HTDL and other large - scale digital libraries – e . g . feature extraction and use , meta - data enrichment – workset uses are analogous to the behaviour characterised by “berrypicking” . Rather than developing new mod - els , we recontextualize and elaborate on the existing models in the context of workset building strategies . In the remainder of this paper , we consider the implications of established and novel strategies for exploration , discovery , and scholarly analysis of the HTDL’s diverse collections and datasets . Table 1 : Overlap of information - seeking models Strategy Category S t a r t i n g C h a i n i n g B r o w s i n g D i ff e r e - n t i a t i n g M o n i t - o r i n g E x t r a c t i n g V e r i f y i n g E n d i n g Subject search A A / P ※ O A / P Author search A A / P ※ O A / P Journal run A A / P O A / P A / P Area scan A / P O Backwards chaining A / P A / P ※ A / P Forwards chaining A / P A / P ※ O Modes of searching—A : Active search , P : Passive search , O : Ongoing search . ※ : May be used to differentiate when filtering ( but not as a search strategy ) 3 INFORMATION SEEKING IN THE HTDL 3 . 1 Strategies for scholarly research We investigate the coverage of Bates’s strategies within a frame - work of information - seeking behaviour offered by the models intro - duced in section 2 , considered in terms of their application to the large - scale resource for scholarly research offered by the HTDL . The reviewed literature supports a strong relationship between categories of behaviour within the research process ( acc . Ellis ) and the features of information seeking employed . To explore this rela - tionship further , we adapt Choo et al’s approach of cross - tabulation to investigate correspondences between Ellis’s categories and the strategies described by Bates . Like Choo , we are interested in un - derstanding modes of information seeking available through these interactions , but rather than applying the modes of environmental scanning , we apply those of Wilson [ 15 ] so to incorporate notions of serendipitous discovery ( passive attention ) . The results of our cross - tabulation of Bates’s strategies and El - lis’s categories , with Wilson’s modes of searching , are displayed in Table 1 . As expected , there is a differentiated correspondence of applicable strategies and modes of searching across the cate - gories of the information - seeking process . Ellis’s starting category presupposes an actively pursued information need , although it may be loosely defined ; hence , facet - based explorations according to subject , author , or publication venue are possibilities ; whereas the area scan , and backward and forward chaining strategies re - quire a starting point to already have been established in earlier search . The correspondence of the chaining category and strategies is straightforward , affording opportunities for active and passive search . Each strategy affords opportunities for browsing : sought information may be identified , and incidentally useful informa - tion encountered , by browsing through records along facet - based navigation vectors ; by area scanning , either physically along a li - brary shelf , or digitally by virtue of analogous catalogue metadata ( e . g . call number ) ; or via contextual traversal of a citation chain . Monitoring corresponds straightforwardly to ongoing search . El - lis’s respondents suggest that this is predominantly achieved by following trusted publications , making the journal run the most ap - plicable strategy . However , in principle any search strategy can be iteratively reapplied with a view toward acquiring newly available information , with the exception of backward chaining ( as articles do not accumulate further references once published ) . Extracting is supported by the journal run strategy , which entails purposeful selection of documents from a larger stream of potentially relevant material . Backward chaining may be applied to follow up claims in referenced articles ( verifying ) . Finally , activities in the ending category are defined largely in relation to starting [ 7 ] , although the supplementary nature of research at this stage offers greater op - portunity for discoveries of incidentally useful information ( passive search ) . Several gaps between the models’ coverage become apparent . None of Bates’s strategies address differentiating ; extracting and ver - ifying are limited . While Bates acknowledges her strategies are not intended to be comprehensive , these gaps also correspond to less comprehensive support for differentiation , extracting , and verifying within information systems available in 1989 . Further , Wilson’s passive attention does not apply to any of the investigated correspon - dences , as each presupposes the initial presence of an information need . Yet , differentiation and verification are especially important in collections the size of the HathiTrust , where techniques for data reduction , disambiguation , and duplicate detection assist in pro - moting precision when recall is very high ; extraction , afforded by the ability to reference information at large ( e . g . workset - level ) and fine ( e . g . paragraph - level ) grains of granularity , supports iterative scholarly research processes ; and serendipitous discovery is a key affordance of the increasing quantity and ubiquity of information afforded by modern technologies [ 5 ] . 3 . 2 Strategies for workset creation To elicit the deficiencies of coverage identified in the preceding section , we now consider illustrations of research using HTDL worksets . We identify enacted information - seeking strategies in italics , including applications of Bates’s strategies ; and of additional strategies not covered by Bates in bold italics . W1 : Novels by Austen’s contemporaries . An English litera - ture scholar conducts an author search to identify Austen’s works ; then applies contextual browsing , a form of chaining operating over any available metadata , refining to contemporaneous works according to the publication dates of Austen’s . Finally , she specifies a “language and literature” classification ( subject search ) , yielding a workset that can be refined , analysed , and referenced in publication . W2 : Perception of labour unions in different countries . A social historian prepares a manuscript on differing cultural atti - tudes towards labour unions . She conducts a concept search [ 10 ] on the term “union” . Contextual metadata maps the word to a dis - ambiguated ‘concept’ encompassing “labour organisation” while excluding e . g . “political union” or “union” in mathematical set theory . She then browses by publication place in the resulting collection . W3 : Bicycle illustrations within the HathiTrust . A com - puter vision algorithm is applied on a workset to identify pages containing bicycles illustrations ( feature generation ) . Image co - ordinates are stored as contextual metadata ( entity annotation ) . W4 : Bicycle illustrations in 19th century British works . A curator identifies British works published in the 19th century ( pub - lication date and publication place search ) . She then performs a feature - based search on contextual metadata of the type gener - ated in W3 to extract instances of bicycle illustrations within this workset . The resulting images are inspected ( content browsing ) to select particularly illustrative examples for use in an exhibit . W5 : Collecting dictionary duplicates to evaluate OCR . A computational linguistics researcher seeks scans of duplicate re - sources to evaluate the performance of optical character recognition ( OCR ) algorithms . He performs a genre search on “encyclopaedias and dictionaries” , narrowing down to instances of “Webster’s” via a title search . Browsing according to publication details ( browse by publication place and date ) , he identifies and marks a dupli - cate annotation over several scans of “Websters new international dictionary of the English language” published in 1952 . W6 : Studying cultural skews in attitudes towards London . A sociologist performs a concept search to disambiguate the term ‘London’ , removing irrelevancies ( e . g . ‘London , Ohio’ ) . She uses previously generated feature information to remove results situated on paratextual pages . Finally , she browses by publication place , investigating cultural skews in attitudes towards the British capital . W7 : The notion of relevance in Information Science . A doctoral student wishes to understand influential conceptualiza - tions of relevance . Performing a subject search on ‘Library and In - formation Science’ , followed by a keyword search for “relevance” , he ranks the results by number of citations . He then contextually browses the articles citing , or referenced in , the most highly cited works , iterating amongst the retrieved documents . 4 A MODEL OF INFORMATION SEEKING FOR LARGE - SCALE DIGITAL LIBRARIES Tabulating the emergent information - seeking strategies ( section 3 . 2 ) within our framework ( section 3 . 1 ) in Table 2 we now consider information seeking for workset creation within the HTDL . Bates’s strategies are expressed granularly , e . g . author search over the more general catalogue search . The increased number of strategies identified in section 3 . 2 corresponds to increased techni - cal capabilities of large scale DLs . We generalise these strategies into three behaviours classes : querying , browsing and contributing , the former two being well - described in the literature . Contributing by user ( e . g . annotations , workset assignment ) or system ( e . g . extracted features , provenance traces ) is a new addition required to articulate iterative use and reference in workset cre - ation and analysis . As a relatively recent technological affordance , contributing is insufficiently described in previous information - seeking models . We further distinguish different scopes over which information - seeking strategies are applied . These include content ( scanned images , textual content obtained via OCR ) ; content - derived metadata determined from the content alone ; and contextual meta - data , supplemented by system or user processes 1 . Having established these behavioural classes and scopes of ap - plication , we observe patterns in their interaction : querying and browsing strategies apply across all scopes ; whereas contributing is limited to contextual metadata ( by definition – all contributions must involve generative user and / or system actions ) . For our ex - amples , Choo et al’s strategies provide adequate coverage of the content scope ; and Bates’s partially for content - derived . We note every new information - seeking strategy is applied within content - derived and contextual metadata scopes , which are particularly relevant to dynamic collections . By implication , our elaborations of existing models are required to fully articulate and understand information - seeking behaviour in the context of contemporary large - scale digital libraries . 1 The content scope is scarcely represented within Table 2 as an effect of brevity , as most worksets ultimately result in content inspection by the user . Table 2 : Information - seeking strategies for workset creation Strategy Category S t a r t i n g C h a i n i n g B r o w s i n g D i ff e r e - n t i a t i n g M o n i t - o r i n g E x t r a c t i n g V e r i f y i n g E n d i n g Scope of application W 1 W 2 W 3 W 4 W 5 W 6 W 7 Qu e r y Keyword search A A / P ※ O A / P Content • Author search A A / P ※ O A / P Content - Derived • Title search A A / P ※ Content - Derived • Publication place A A / P ※ O A / P Content - Derived • Publication date A A / P ※ O A / P Content - Derived • Genre search A A / P ※ O A / P Content - Derived • Subject search A A / P ※ O A / P Content - Derived • • Concept search A A / P A O A / P Contextual • • Feature - based search A A / P ※ O A / P Contextual • • B r o w s e Content browsing A / P A A A / P Content • Publication place A A / P A / P A A A / P Content - Derived • • • Publication date A A / P A / P A A A / P Content - Derived • Contextual browsing S A / P / S A / P A A A / P A / P Contextual • • C o n t r i b u t e Feature generation A A O A Contextual • Entity annotation A A Contextual • Duplicate annotation A A Contextual • Workset instantiation A / P A / P A A / P A A A Contextual • • • • • • • Modes of search—A : Active search , P : Passive search ( P ) , O : Ongoing search , S : Serendipitous discovery ( passive attention ) , ※ : Differentiates when filtering 4 . 1 Summary of the combined model We propose a model of information - seeking behaviour for scholarly workset creation in large - scale digital libraries , combining Bates’s information - seeking strategies [ 12 ] , categories of information - seeking behaviour within the research process per Ellis [ 7 ] , and Wilson’s modes of information seeking [ 15 ] . In addition , we classify strategies as querying , browsing , and contributing behaviours . The strategies operate upon scopes of application : content representations ( e . g . images , OCR’d text ) , content - derived metadata , derived from content alone , contextual metadata , derived via external processes . 5 FUTURE WORK AND CONCLUSIONS In future work we will apply our model to differentiate user affor - dances offered by candidate technologies for implementing large - scale digital libraries , such as enterprise search databases and se - mantic web triplestores , and validate the model through user trials . We will also extend the conceptualization presented here in relation to agency and serendipitous discovery ( Wilson’s passive attention ) . The strategies presented in this paper are initiated by a human information seeker ; however , we posit there may be parallel , system - initiated information filtering [ 2 ] actions , either requested by the user as a profile - derived “deferred query” , or automatically through algorithmic heuristics . Consequently , under agency of the system , any of the presented strategies may serve the task of differentiating ( Table 2 ) , a core purpose of information filtering . Serendipitous discovery plays a role in only one of the presented strategies ( contextual browsing ) . This is not to diminish the impor - tance of the concept ; rather , the focus on strategies precludes further attention , as serendipitous discovery is—almost by definition—not a strategy . But it is clearly an important affordance of ubiquitous digital information [ 5 ] . Furthermore , when passive attention results in the serendipitous acquisition of relevant information , it may in turn trigger active searching activity . We have presented a model of information - seeking behaviour focussing on strategies for scholarly workset creation in the HTDL . It combines aspects of three well - established models in the litera - ture , introduces additional contributing strategies for information seeking , and specifies three scopes over which information - seeking strategies may be applied . These elaborations support the articula - tion of information - seeking behaviours concomitant to the emer - gent properties of large - scale digital libraries . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Undertaken through the Workset Creation for Scholarly Analysis and Data Capsules project , funder : Andrew W . Mellon Foundation . REFERENCES [ 1 ] F . J . Aguilar . 1967 . Scanning the business environment . Macmillan . [ 2 ] N . J . Belkin and W . B . Croft . 1992 . Information filtering and information retrieval : Two sides of the same coin ? Commun . ACM 35 , 12 ( 1992 ) , 29 – 38 . [ 3 ] Donald O . Case . 2012 . Looking for Information : A Survey of Research on Informa - tion Seeking , Needs and Behavior . Emerald Group Publishing . [ 4 ] C . W . Choo , B . Detlor , and D . Turnbull . 2000 . Information seeking on the Web : An integrated model of browsing and searching . First Monday 5 , 2 ( 2000 ) . [ 5 ] O . de Bruijn and R . Spence . 2001 . Serendipity within a ubiquitous computing environment : A case for opportunistic browsing . In Ubicomp 2001 . 362 – 369 . [ 6 ] D . Ellis . 1989 . A behavioural approach to information retrieval system design . Journal of documentation 45 , 3 ( 1989 ) , 171 – 212 . [ 7 ] D . Ellis . 1993 . Modelingtheinformation - seekingpatternsofacademicresearchers : A grounded theory approach . The Library Quarterly ( 1993 ) , 469 – 486 . [ 8 ] D . Ellis , D . Cox , and K . Hall . 1993 . A comparison of the information seeking patterns of researchers in the physical and social sciences . Documentation 49 , 4 ( 1993 ) , 356 – 369 . [ 9 ] K . Fenlon , M . Senseney , and et al . 2014 . Scholar - built collections : A study of user requirements for research in large - scale digital libraries . In In Proc . ASIST . [ 10 ] A . Hinze , C . Taube - Schock , D . Bainbridge , R . Matamua , and J . S . Downie . 2015 . Improving Access to Large - scale Digital Libraries Through Semantic - enhanced Search and Disambiguation . In Proceedings of the 15th ACM / IEEE - CS Joint Con - ference on Digital Libraries . ACM Press , 147 – 156 . [ 11 ] J . Jett , T . W . Cole , C . Maden , and J . S . Downie . 2016 . The HathiTrust Research Center Workset Ontology : A Descriptive Framework for Non - Consumptive Research Collections . Journal of Open Humanities Data 2 ( 2016 ) . [ 12 ] M . J . Bates . 1989 . The Design of Browsing and Berrypicking Techniques . Online review 13 , 5 ( 1989 ) , 407 – 424 . [ 13 ] R . L . Daft and K . E . Weick . 1984 . Toward a Model of Organizations as Interpreta - tion Systems . Academy of Management Review 9 , 2 ( 1984 ) , 284 – 295 . [ 14 ] R . Savolainen . 2016 . Contributions to conceptual growth : The elaboration of Ellis’s model for information - seeking behavior . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology ( 2016 ) . [ 15 ] T . D . Wilson . 1997 . Information behaviour : An interdisciplinary perspective . Information Processing & Management 33 , 4 ( July 1997 ) , 551 – 572 .