Comparative RNAi Screening Identifies a Conserved Core Metazoan Actinome by Phenotype The Harvard community has made this article openly available . Please share how this access benefits you . Your story matters Citation Rohn , Jennifer L . , David Sims , Tao Liu , Marina Fedorova , Frieder Schöck , Joseph Dopie , Maria K . Vartiainen , Amy A . Kiger , Norbert Perrimon , and Buzz Baum . 2011 . Comparative RNAi screening identifies a conserved core metazoan actinome by phenotype . The Journal of Cell Biology 194 ( 5 ) : 789 - 805 . Published Version doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201103168 Citable link http : / / nrs . harvard . edu / urn - 3 : HUL . InstRepos : 10336864 Terms of Use This article was downloaded from Harvard University’s DASH repository , and is made available under the terms and conditions applicable to Other Posted Material , as set forth at http : / / nrs . harvard . edu / urn - 3 : HUL . InstRepos : dash . current . terms - of - use # LAA JCB : Tools The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 J . Cell Biol . Vol . 194 No . 5 789 – 805 www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201103168 JCB 789 Correspondence to Jennifer L . Rohn : j . rohn @ ucl . ac . uk ; or Buzz Baum : b . baum @ ucl . ac . uk Abbreviations used in this paper : SCF , Skp1 - Cul1 - F - box - protein ; Slmb , super - numerary limbs . Complete screen data Drosophila : http : / / jcb - dataviewer . rupress . org / jcb / browse / 4609 / S2 Human actinome I : http : / / jcb - dataviewer . rupress . org / jcb / browse / 4609 / S3 Human actinome II : http : / / jcb - dataviewer . rupress . org / jcb / browse / 4609 / S4 Introduction The ability of animal cells to change their shape is essential for diverse processes from cell division to tissue remodeling during development , homeostasis , and disease ( Rungger - Brändle and Gabbiani , 1983 ; Lecuit and Lenne , 2007 ; St Johnston and Ahringer , 2010 ) . Moreover , for specialized cell types such as blood cells and neurons ( Tahirovic and Bradke , 2009 ; Diez - Silva et al . , 2010 ) , dynamic form plays a critical role in cellular physiology . In all cases , forces generated by cortical actin filament dynam - ics and by the ATP - dependent movement of myosin motors along filaments play key roles in reshaping cells ( Pollard , 2007 ) . Generating a form appropriate to function therefore depends on local remodeling of the actin – myosin network driven by signals from the environment as well as the complement of actin acces - sory proteins expressed by a given cell . The core actin cytoskeletal regulators are surprisingly well conserved across diverse species from yeast to humans . These include actin itself ; two conserved filament nucleation pathways , one mediated by formins and the other by Arp2 / 3 ; regulators of filament dynamics such as profilin , capping protein , and cofilin ; and upstream regulators , such as Ste20 family kinases and small Rho GTPases ( Cvrcková et al . , 2004 ; Rohn and Baum , 2010 ) . Much of our knowledge about actin regulation in metazoan or - ganisms relies on extrapolations from work done in yeast and on data from biochemical studies in a variety of systems . Further - more , metazoan genomes encode a large number of conserved A lthough a large number of actin - binding proteins and their regulators have been identified through classical approaches , gaps in our knowledge re - main . Here , we used genome - wide RNA interference as a systematic method to define metazoan actin regula - tors based on visual phenotype . Using comparative screens in cultured Drosophila and human cells , we generated phenotypic profiles for annotated actin regulators to - gether with proteins bearing predicted actin - binding do - mains . These phenotypic clusters for the known metazoan “actinome” were used to identify putative new core actin regulators , together with a number of genes with con - served but poorly studied roles in the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton , several of which we studied in detail . This work suggests that although our search for new components of the core actin machinery is nearing satu - ration , regulation at the level of nuclear actin export , RNA splicing , ubiquitination , and other upstream pro - cesses remains an important but unexplored frontier of actin biology . Comparative RNAi screening identifies a conserved core metazoan actinome by phenotype Jennifer L . Rohn , 1 David Sims , 2 Tao Liu , 1 Marina Fedorova , 1 Frieder Schöck , 3 Joseph Dopie , 4 Maria K . Vartiainen , 4 Amy A . Kiger , 5 Norbert Perrimon , 6 and Buzz Baum 1 1 MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology , University College London , London WC1E 6BT , England , UK 2 The Institute of Cancer Research , Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre , London SW3 6JB , England , UK 3 Department of Biology , McGill University , Montreal , Quebec H3A 1B1 , Canada 4 Research Program in Cell and Molecular Biology , Institute of Biotechnology , University of Helsinki , 00014 Helsinki , Finland 5 Division of Biological Sciences , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , CA 92093 6 Department of Genetics , Harvard Medical School , Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Boston , MA 02115 © 2011 Rohn et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the pub - lication date ( see http : / / www . rupress . org / terms ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported license , as described at http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 / ) . T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y JCB • VOLUME 194 • NUMBER 5 • 2011 790 DNA ( see Materials and methods for details ) . After filtering and annotating hits with a controlled vocabulary , we identified a number of broad phenotypic categories ( Fig . 1 , C and D ; see Table S2 for all hit annotations ) . The largest of these was the “viability” cluster , where gene silencing resulted in a consider - able reduction in cell number . These genes were eliminated from the morphological analysis , except where evidence was available that interacting proteins displayed similar phenotypes ( as for the SCF complex , described later ) . As expected , many hits in this visual screen were previ - ously identified as having a reduced cell area as a result of growth and / or adhesion defects in an automated image analysis of the same dataset ( Jani and Schöck , 2007 ; Sims et al . , 2009 ) . A cluster of dsRNAs induced a multinucleate phenotype associated with cytokinesis defects ( Echard et al . , 2004 ; Eggert et al . , 2004 ) . Of these , 17 were hits in previous studies , such as Rho ( Rho1 ) , Myosin II / MHC ( zipper ) , and Anillin ( scraps ) . Another cluster of dsRNAs induced various microtubule phenotypes , including various tubulin genes , the known microtubule regulator Tao - 1 ( Liu et al . , 2010 ) , dynein heavy chain ( Dhc64C ; Rasmusson et al . , 1994 ) , and nine eukaryotic initiation factor genes ( Table S2 ) . The remaining 143 dsRNAs induced defects in the actin cytoskeleton—the focus of this study ( Table S2 ) . Of these , 22 were already known to be involved in the regulation of actin filament dynamics . These included representatives of the core conserved actin machinery previously described , including sev - eral actins ( these are 95 % identical in Drosophila ) , Profilin ( chic ) , Capping protein ( cpa and cpb subunits ) , Cofilin ( twin - star ) , and three members of the Arp2 / 3 complex . Other known actin regulators identified as hits in our screen included the Rho family GTPases Rac1 , Rac2 , and Cdc42 , along with all known members of the SCAR complex ( SCAR , Abi , Hem , Sra - 1 ) ex - cept the HSPC300 subunit ( Kunda et al . , 2003 ; Rogers et al . , 2003 ) , which all share a spiky cell phenotype ( Table S2 ) . Sig - nificantly , this Rac / SCAR - like spiky phenotypic cluster included another ten dsRNAs targeting nine genes not previously linked to Rac / SCAR signaling . Furthermore , a further set of genes had spiky morphology after RNAi silencing similar to that of SCAR , although with a range of additional subtle differences that led us to assign them to a distinct category . This alternative spiky cluster included clathrin heavy chain ( Chc ) , which was recently characterized as having a role in SCAR - mediated lamellipodia formation independent from its role in vesicle trafficking ( Gautier et al . , 2011 ) . Our set of 143 putative actin regulators also contained two large clusters characterized by altered levels of actin fila - ments ( Table S2 ) . The “high phalloidin” cluster included actin - capping protein ( cpa and cpb ) , whose knockdown is known to lead to an increase in F - actin ( Kiger et al . , 2003 ; Rogers et al . , 2003 ) , whereas the “low phalloidin” class included several actin genes ( Act42A , Act5C , Act87E ) and Profilin ( chic ) . How - ever , because the overall intensity of actin staining was vari - able across plates and was affected by cell density , we chose not to include these two clusters in our further analysis . In - stead , in addition to the spiky cluster , we focused on dsRNAs giving rise to an assortment of rarer actin - related phenotypes ( category “other actin” ) , including an increase in intracellular genes of unknown function that contain protein domains known to bind to or regulate actin . In this study our goal was to extend this work by using RNAi screening to better define a conserved metazoan “actinome” based upon gene function . In recent years , with the development of high - throughput RNAi screening in cell culture , it has become possible to search in an unbiased fashion for new players involved in a variety of cell biological processes ( Echeverri and Perrimon , 2006 ) . Previ - ous screens have used RNAi to define regulators of Drosophila cell shape ( Kiger et al . , 2003 ) and to identify novel components of the SCAR complex ( Kunda et al . , 2003 ; Rogers et al . , 2003 ) , whereas other groups used RNAi together with automated com - putational approaches to screen for clusters of actin regulators ( Bakal et al . , 2007 ) . More recently , Fuchs et al . ( 2010 ) applied genome - wide RNAi screening and automated image analysis to survey genes regulating the shape of human HeLa cells , whereas D’Ambrosio and Vale ( 2010 ) used an automated analysis in a genome - wide screen to study cell spreading in Drosophila S2 cells . Although automating the image analysis speeds up an - notation , minimizes user bias , and generates quantitative data , the trained human eye is still superior when searching for novel and subtle phenotypes . Indeed , it remains a mainstay for many types of screen ( Eggert et al . , 2004 ; Sönnichsen et al . , 2005 ; Schnorrer et al . , 2010 ) . Here , to identify a core set of actin regulators , we per - formed a visual genome - wide RNAi screen in Drosophila S2R + cells , and a more focused screen in human HeLa cells . By comparing the orthologous human and fly RNAi datasets , we were able to eliminate genes from our analysis with cell type – or species - specific functions and to limit the number of genes identified with an indirect effect on the actin cytoskeleton . We then followed up a subset of the hits . This analysis identified a set of novel , conserved regulators of the actin cytoskeleton , in - cluding components of the Skp1 - Cul1 - F - box - protein ( SCF ) E3 ubiquitin ligase complex , the spliceosome and genes affecting the formation of actin filaments in the nucleus . The data suggest that although few previously uncharacterized core actin - binding proteins remain to be identified , understanding the complete picture of upstream regulation of actin cytoskeletal dynamics remains an important challenge . We further believe that this simple cross - species approach can be used as a simple , cheap , and effective way to screen for conserved regulators of a wide number of cell biological processes . Results A genome - wide Drosophila RNAi screen for cell morphology RNA interference enables systematic loss - of - function screens across a genome ( Mohr et al . , 2010 ) . Our goal was to use parallel cell - based RNAi screens in fly and human cell culture to gain a more comprehensive picture of metazoan actin regulators and their phenotypes . To do so , we first performed a genome - wide , high - content RNAi screen in the hemocyte - derived ad - herent Drosophila cell line S2R + ( Fig . 1 , A and B ; Table S1 ; Yanagawa et al . , 1998 ) , whose read - out was a visual inspection of images of fixed cells stained with  - tubulin , F - actin , and 791 Screens define the conserved metazoan actinome • Rohn et al . Donaldson et al . , 2004 ; Reynolds et al . , 2008 ) . We inspected the original screen images to determine whether other genes in the complex were identified by phenotype . It was clear from this analysis that , despite having a reduced cell number , Cul - 4 and Roc1a manifested the same spiky , Rac / SCAR - like phenotype , so these genes were annotated accordingly . In contrast , dsRNAs targeting other complex members including Cul - 2 , Cul - 3 , Cul - 5 , and SkpA were indistinguishable from controls . Based upon this analysis of the screen data , we selected a subset of genes for further validation : ( 1 ) 38 genes with strong actin - related phenotypes ( spiky or “other” annotations ) , which included novel genes along with core known genes ; and ( 2 ) 8 representative genes with a nuclear actin phenotype ( Table I ) . To exclude the possibility of sequence - specific off - target effects ( Perrimon and Mathey - Prevot , 2007 ) , we retested each of our chosen hits and their interactors using a second independent dsRNA ( Table S2 ) . From group I , 36 / 38 genes were confirmed as hits , including additional Arp2 / 3 genes and the extra SCF genes , and 6 / 8 group II genes were successfully validated ( Table I ) . These included genes with a known function in the export of actin monomers from the nucleus , namely chic and Exp6 ( Stüven et al . , 2003 ) . actin structures such as stress fibers or cytoplasmic speckles and / or changes in the level or organization of peripheral actin . This set included Pak3 , which we previously characterized as an actin regulator ( Asano et al . , 2009 ) , and the WH2 motif con - taining adenylate cyclase - associated protein Capulet / Act up ( Capt ; Baum et al . , 2000 ; Benlali et al . , 2000 ) . In addition , a cluster of 29 genes was characterized by a novel phenotype in which actin filaments accumulated as a bar or cable - like struc - ture within the nucleus . Next , we used hierarchical clustering tools within the FLIGHT database to reveal hits with similar phenotypes form - ing part of the same interaction network or protein complex . This analysis revealed a prominent cluster with spiky morphol - ogy containing slmb ( supernumerary limbs ) , lin19 , and Roc1b , all of which are members of the same well - characterized com - plex , the SCF family of E3 ubiquitin ligases . Roc1b is a RING domain – containing protein that facilitates transfer of charged ubiquitin from the E2 ligase ; Lin19 is a member of the cullin scaffold family , whereas Slmb is a member of the F - box family of proteins , which select protein targets for ubiquitination by the SCF complex ( Jiang and Struhl , 1998 ; Deshaies , 1999 ; Bocca et al . , 2001 ; Noureddine et al . , 2002 ; Ou et al . , 2002 ; Figure 1 . Screen overview . ( A ) A genome - wide morphology RNAi screen was performed in Drosophila S2R + cells and in a subset of human HeLa cells for genes corresponding to a comprehensive set of all known human actin regulatory genes and genes predicted to play a role based on their domain structure . Comparing the two screens we were able to cluster the hits into morphological groups and arrive at a shortlist of conserved known and new actin regulatory genes . ( B ) A flowchart of the methodology . ( C ) Breakdown of all Drosophila hits by dominant phenotype ; many hits fell into multiple categories , but these have only been accounted for in one category in this graph ( see Table S2 for details ) . ( D ) Fly and ( E ) human hits clustered as a heat map ; red indicates a hit in the specified category . JCB • VOLUME 194 • NUMBER 5 • 2011 792 Table I . Final list of genes with actin phenotypes conserved between Drosophila and mammalian cells FBgn Gene Phenotype group Known actin regulator Validated Function Mammalian orthologue ( s ) HeLa actinome hit ( s ) Mouse nuclear hit ( s ) FBgn0015610 Caf1 High actin No Yes Chromatin remodeling RBBP4 No N / A FBgn0034577 cpa High actin Yes Yes F - actin capping CAPZA1 , CAPZA2 , CAPZA3 CAPZA1 , CAPZA3 N / A FBgn0011570 cpb High actin Yes Yes F - actin capping CAPZB CAPZB N / A FBgn0000042 Act5C Low actin Yes Yes Actin filament formation ACTG1 ACTG1 N / A FBgn0000308 chic Low actin Yes Yes G - actin binding PFN1 , PFN2 , PFN3 , PFN4 PFN1 , PFN4 ( PFN3 not screened ) N / A FBgn0011785 BRWD3 Other actin No Yes WD40 domain protein BRWD1 , BRWD3 , PHIP No N / A FBgn0028388 Capt Other actin Yes Yes G - actin binding CAP1 , CAP2 No N / A FBgn0035586 CG10671 Other actin No No Endoplasmic reticulum FITM1 , FITM2 No N / A FBgn0039205 CG13623 Other actin No Yes Mitochondrial ISCA2 ( HBLD1 ) ISCA2 N / A FBgn0001491 L ( 1 ) 10Bb Other actin No Yes GPCR signaling BUD31 ( G10 ) BUD31 N / A FBgn0044826 Pak3 Other actin Yes Yes Rac GTPase signaling PAK3 No N / A FBgn0021967 Pdsw Other actin No No Mitochondial electron transport chain NDUFB10 No N / A FBgn0011726 tsr Other actin Yes Yes F - actin severing CFL1 , CFL2 , DSTN CFL1 , DSTN N / A FBgn0052138 CG32138 Spiky Moderately Yes Uncharacterized formin family member FMNL1 , FMNL2 , FMNL3 FMNL1 N / A FBgn0002183 dre4 Spiky No Yes DNA repair SUPT16H SUPT16H N / A FBgn0015509 lin19 Spiky No Yes Ubiquitin - dependent protein degradation CUL1 Not screened N / A FBgn0040291 Roc1b Spiky No Yes Ubiquitin - dependent protein degradation RBX1 RBX1 N / A FBgn0003415 skd Spiky No Yes Mediator complex MED13 , MED13L No N / A FBgn0005411 U2af50 Spiky No Yes RNA splicing U2AF2 U2AF2 N / A FBgn0020510 Abi Spiky ( SCAR - like ) Yes Yes SCAR complex ABI1 , ABI2 No N / A FBgn0031781 Arc - p20 a Spiky ( SCAR - like ) Yes Yes ARP2 / 3 complex ARPC4 ARPC4 N / A FBgn0011742 Arp14D Spiky ( SCAR - like ) Yes Yes ARP2 / 3 complex ACTR2 No N / A FBgn0011744 Arp66B Spiky ( SCAR - like ) Yes Yes ARP2 / 3 complex ACTR3 No N / A FBgn0039754 CG9747 Spiky ( SCAR - like ) No Yes Fatty acid desaturase SCD , SCD5 , TRMT2A , TRMT2B SCD ( only one screened ) N / A FBgn0011771 Hem Spiky ( SCAR - like ) Yes Yes SCAR complex NCKAP1 NCKAP1 N / A FBgn0031437 p16 - arc Spiky ( SCAR - like ) Yes Yes ARP2 / 3 complex ARPC5 No N / A FBgn0010333 Rac1 Spiky ( SCAR - like ) Yes Yes Rho family GTPase RAC1 RAC1 N / A FBgn0014011 Rac2 Spiky ( SCAR - like ) Yes Yes Rho family GTPase RAC2 No N / A FBgn0041781 SCAR Spiky ( SCAR - like ) Yes Yes SCAR complex WASF1 , WASF2 , WASF3 WASF3 N / A FBgn0016984 Sktl Spiky ( SCAR - like ) Yes Yes Lipid kinase PIPK51A , PIPK51B , PIPK51C PIP5K1C N / A a Spiky ( SCAR - like ) annotation added after re - assessment with a longer RNAi period . See text for details . b Spiky ( SCAR - like ) annotation added after network analysis and reassessment . See text for details . 793 Screens define the conserved metazoan actinome • Rohn et al . A and B , profilin , cofilin , actin , Arp2 / 3 , SCAR , nonmuscle myo - sin II , Rac , Rho , and Cdc42 . When comparing fly versus human phenotypes , some fly / human orthologous pairs had similar mor - phological attributes ; for example , both twinstar and CFL - 1 de - pletion caused increased peripheral F - actin and multinucleated cells ; and both cpb and CAPZB silencing induced a dramatic in - crease in F - actin levels ( Fig . 2 ) . In contrast , others gene pairs manifested different phenotypes ( e . g . , Act5C / ACTG1 and SCAR / WASF3 ; Fig . 2 ) . These differences are likely due to cell - and species - specific differences in the interaction networks controlling cell shape . We then inspected phenotypes for mammalian homo - logues of our novel validated Drosophila hits ( Table I ; see Table S4 for individual annotations and Fig . 1 E for their pheno - typic clustering ) . For this analysis we used human siRNAs in HeLa cells , with the exception of the small cluster manifesting actin bars in the nucleus , for which we depleted the mouse orthologues in murine R3A4 cells . This analysis identified eight human orthologues of the fly hits together with two genes not previously implicated in nuclear actin regulation ( Table I ; dis - cussed in detail later ) . The eight pairs of conserved fly / human hits represent a diverse range of predicted cellular processes ( Fig . 3 , A – C ) . Identification of a conserved set of actin regulators This analysis in Drosophila cells identified phenotypic profiles for the entire set of known actin regulators along with poorly characterized or unknown genes bearing actin - binding domains , and also identified a set of potentially novel actin regulators . To determine which of these genes perform conserved functions across species and cell types , we wanted to expand the analysis to a mammalian system . As a framework for the analysis of functional conservation of putative novel actin regulators , we therefore generated phenotypic profiles for the entire set of known mammalian actin regulators for comparison . To do so , we per - formed a duplicate siRNA screen of 516 known or predicted actin and Rho - GTPase family regulators ( the “actinome” ; Table S3 ) in human HeLa cells ( Fig . 1 , A and B ) . In addition , we tested the functions of representative close human ortho - logues of the set of putative novel actin regulators identified in the fly screen ( Table I ) . 116 genes from this set were annotated as hits ( Table S4 ) , based upon having a reproducible phenotype with ≥2 individual siRNAs . Comparison of the results of the S2R + and HeLa screens revealed several hits among orthologous actin regulators ( see Fig . 2 for representative images ) , including capping proteins FBgn Gene Phenotype group Known actin regulator Validated Function Mammalian orthologue ( s ) HeLa actinome hit ( s ) Mouse nuclear hit ( s ) FBgn0023423 slmb Spiky ( SCAR - like ) No Yes Ubiquitin - dependent protein degradation BTRC , FBXW11 Not screened N / A FBgn0038320 Sra - 1 Spiky ( SCAR - like ) Yes Yes SCAR complex CYFIP1 , CYFIP2 CYFIP1 N / A FBgn0032859 Arc - p34 Spiky ( SCAR - like ) a Yes Yes ARP2 / 3 complex ARPC2 ARPC2 N / A FBgn0038369 Arpc3a Spiky ( SCAR - like ) a Yes Yes ARP2 / 3 complex ARPC3A No N / A FBgn0065032 Arpc3b Spiky ( SCAR - like ) a Yes Yes ARP2 / 3 complex ARPC3B No N / A FBgn0001961 Sop2 Spiky ( SCAR - like ) Yes Yes ARP2 / 3 complex ARPC1A , ARPC1B ARPC1A N / A FBgn0033260 Cul - 4 Spiky ( SCAR - like ) b No Yes ubiquitin - dependent protein degradation CUL4A , CUL4B Not screened N / A FBgn0025638 Roc1a Spiky ( SCAR - like ) b No Yes ubiquitin - dependent protein degradation RBX1 RBX1 N / A FBgn0022213 Cas Nuclear actin No Yes Nuclear transport Cse1l N / A No FBgn0030121 CG17446 Nuclear actin No Yes Transcription Cxxc1 N / A No FBgn0031492 CG3542 Nuclear actin No No Splicing Prpf40a , Prpf40b N / A N / A FBgn0037093 CG7597 Nuclear actin No Yes Splicing ( kinase ) Crkrs , Cdc2l5 N / A Cdc2l5 ( Crkrs not tested ) FBgn0001337 Exp6 Nuclear actin Yes Yes Nuclear transport Xpo6 N / A Yes FBgn0037657 hyx Nuclear actin No Yes Transcription Cdc73 N / A Yes FBgn0016696 Pitslre Nuclear actin No No Splicing ( kinase ) Cdc2l1 N / A N / A FBgn0003449 snf Nuclear actin No Yes Splicing Snrpa , Snrpb2 N / A Too toxic to assess a Spiky ( SCAR - like ) annotation added after re - assessment with a longer RNAi period . See text for details . b Spiky ( SCAR - like ) annotation added after network analysis and reassessment . See text for details . Table I . ( Continued ) Final list of genes with actin phenotypes conserved between Drosophila and mammalian cells JCB • VOLUME 194 • NUMBER 5 • 2011 794 Figure 2 . Images of representative conserved core fly / human gene pairs . Grayscale panels , F - actin ; color panels , red is F - actin , green is  - tubulin , blue is DNA . In the case of human siRNAs , the representative siRNA ID number is indicated in the label . Bar , 50 µm . 795 Screens define the conserved metazoan actinome • Rohn et al . Figure 3 . Images of conserved novel fly / human gene knockdown pairs . Color and siRNA labeling as in Fig . 2 . The fly gene phenotypes manifested best under different conditions : ( A ) fixed after respreading on concanavalin A – coated surface ; ( B ) fixed after respreading on serum - coated surfaces ; or ( C ) fixed after continuous growth under RNAi , no respreading . Bar , 50 µm . On the right is a brief description of the known or predicted function of each set of genes . JCB • VOLUME 194 • NUMBER 5 • 2011 796 The FACT complex ( Belotserkovskaya et al . , 2003 ) is a heterodimeric complex involved in the modulation of chromatin assembly to influence gene expression , including Hox genes ( Shimojima et al . , 2003 ) . One of its subunits , SPT16 , was an actin hit in this category . Depletion of the Drosophila dre4 / dSPT16 gene in fly cells or its human orthologue , SupT16H ( SPT16 ) in HeLa cells caused an elongated cell shape and changes in peripheral actin levels in both cell types . CG9747 is an unstudied fly gene , but one of its human orthologues , SCD ( SCD1 ; stearoyl - CoA desaturase [ delta - 9 - desaturase ] ) , is an enzyme involved in the formation of saturated fatty acids ( Igal , 2010 ) . In our screen , depletion of CG9747 caused a spiky cell shape and increased actin puncta in S2R + cells , whereas in HeLa cells , SCD knockdown led to an increase in actin stress fibers , a variable cell shape ranging from elon - gated to geometric , and an increase in multinucleated cells . The final gene pair in this category , Roc1a / RBX1 , which we studied in more detail , is described fully in the next section . The SCF ubiquitin ligase pathway plays a role in cell shape Components of the Rac / SCAR pathway , including its upstream regulators , Rac and Cdc42 , the SCAR complex itself , and its downstream target , the Arp2 / 3 complex , which drives actin nu - cleation , were previously identified as having a common “spiky” RNAi phenotype in fly cells resulting from the loss of lamelli - podia ( Kunda et al . , 2003 ; Rogers et al . , 2003 ; see Fig . 4 A ) . RNAi - mediated depletion of the orthologous gene products from HeLa cells leads to a related phenotype , in which cells lose lamellipodia , take on a large geometrical shape , and accu - mulate stress fibers ( Fig . 4 A ; Innocenti et al . , 2004 ; Derivery et al . , 2008 ) . This readout provided us with a useful assay for uncovering novel conserved components of this signaling path - way , and our parallel RNAi screening approach revealed several conserved genes were whose knockdown recapitulated the Rac / SCAR phenotype in both systems . This included five members of the SCF complex . The core SCF complex recruits its substrate via an F - box receptor protein . Although our data suggested that slmb served that function , we wanted to inspect the phenotypes of all other F - box genes in our fly screening data . Drosophila has 37 mem - bers with domains characteristic of the F - box group ( Ho et al . [ 2006 ] have reported 31 ) , but slmb was the only one with a spiky phenotype . Although it is certainly possible that not all of these genes were efficiently depleted in the screen , these obser - vations are consistent with Slmb being the sole or major F - box protein involved in the SCF - mediated actin phenotype in our system . Having validated these hits using independent RNAi reagents ( Fig . 4 B shows representative examples ) , we chose to focus on a single component of this complex , Roc1a / RBX1 , for the follow up analysis because silencing of this gene led to a robust loss of lamellipodia in S2R + and HeLa cells ( Fig . 4 A ) . The stability of SCAR complex components ( consisting in Drosophila of SCAR , Abi , Hem , Sra - 1 , and HSPC300 ) has pre - viously been shown to be coordinately regulated by proteasome - dependent proteolysis , so that if one member of the complex is depleted by RNAi , the other components are also degraded We recovered only one pair , CG32138 / FMNL1 , among the many uncharacterized genes predicted by domain structure to be involved in actin regulation . Drosophila CG32138 is a previ - ously uncharacterized member of the formin family of actin - nucleating proteins ( Goode and Eck , 2007 ) whose depletion was associated with an actin phenotype marked by a failure to spread , broken and disorganized lamellipodia , and multiple cyto - plasmic actin cables , primarily positioned above the nucleus . Likewise , knockdown of FMNL1 , one of the three human ortho - logues of CG32138 , which has only recently been characterized ( Han et al . , 2009 ; Mersich et al . , 2010 ; Mason et al . , 2011 ) , also led to an accumulation of actin filaments in the apical cell body and lamellipodia with a serrated appearance . Two of the fly / human hit pairs , l ( 1 ) 10Bb / BUD31 and CG13623 / ISCA2 , were more unexpected . Fly l ( 1 ) 10Bb RNAi caused a particularly striking phenotype on knockdown that was unique in our screen : extremely large actin clumps and bro - ken , distorted lamellae . Depletion of its sole human orthologue , the highly conserved BUD31 , also led to large actin clumps and disorganized lamellipodia . The Saccharomyces cerevisiae homo - logue of this gene ( also called BUD31 ) has been shown to be part of a splicing complex ( Masciadri et al . , 2004 ) , and has been implicated in the splicing of actin and profilin transcripts . This effect is , however , unlikely to be a general consequence of aberrant RNA splicing because this striking phenotype is not shared by other splicing factors in fly cells ( Table I ) or in yeast ( Masciadri et al . , 2004 ) . Even less is known about CG13623 and its human orthologue ISCA2 ( HBLD1 ) , which are entirely uncharacterized proteins whose main distinguishing feature is the presence of a hesB / yadR / yfhF domain , which in bacteria is thought to play a role in the biogenesis of iron – sulfur clusters for electron transfer processes ( Cózar - Castellano et al . , 2004 ) . In our experiments , depletion of CG13623 led to asymmetrical lamellipodia , clumps of actin , and occasionally transverse stress fibers . Similarly , with the human orthologue ISCA2 , knock - down led to polarized , peripheral clumps of actin in a flattened , roughly geometric shape , with the frequent occurrence of a thick actin bar at cell – cell junctions . The five remaining gene pairs have been studied in other con - texts . Skittles functions in phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate production , and Xu et al . ( 2010 ) have demonstrated a role for the human orthologue PIP5K1C ( phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase type - 1 , also known as PIP5K1 - gamma ) in neutrophil polarity and adhesion . Depletion of these genes in both human and fly cells in our screen resulted in an elongated cell shape and an increase in actin puncta , which is consistent with the im - portant role of PIP 2 in the regulation of a large number of actin - binding proteins ( Yin and Janmey , 2003 ) . The human gene U2AF2 ( also known as U2AF65 ) en - codes the large subunit of the U2AF heterodimeric complex , which is involved in the initial steps of spliceosome assembly on preRNA ( Mollet et al . , 2006 ) . In Drosophila , the ortholo - gous large subunit U2AF50 has been additionally implicated in the nuclear export of intronless mRNAs ( Blanchette et al . , 2004 ) . In our screen , depletion of these two genes in both spe - cies causes disorganized actin and multinucleated cells , perhaps indicative of a defect in cytokinesis . 797 Screens define the conserved metazoan actinome • Rohn et al . Figure 4 . The SCF ubiquitin ligase complex is involved in actin regulation . For all grayscale panels , staining is for F - actin . RBX1 and roc1a phenocopy the SCAR complex in human ( A , top row ) and fly ( A , bottom row ) cells . Bar , 50 µm . ( B ) Depletion of various SCF members phenocopies SCAR knockdown in fly cells . Bar , 20 µm . ( C ) roc1a / RBX1 depletion does not affect SCAR complex stability as measured by Sra1 or WASF2 protein levels in Western blot , respectively in fly cells ( top ) or human cells ( bottom left ) , in the same situation when depleting other SCAR complex members does . Equal loading is indicated by tubulin staining of the same gels . The RBX1 knockdown in parallel cultures causes significant depletion ( bottom right ) , with loading shown by staining for CDC2 . ( D ) RacV12 overexpression ( as marked by GFP , green ; F - actin is red in top panels and grayscale in the bottom ; blue is DAPI ) rescues spiky phenotype of roc1a and slmb but not that of scar . Bar , 50 µm . ( E ) RacV12 overexpression ( as marked by myc - tag , green ; same staining for rest as in D ) rescues RBX1 knockdown but not that of NCKAP1 . Bar , 50 µm . ( Kunda et al . , 2003 ; Rogers et al . , 2003 ; Derivery et al . , 2008 ) . To determine whether Roc1a / RBX1 is involved in this process , we therefore silenced Roc1a in S2R + cells and then tested for the presence of Sra - 1 protein by Western blot , as a marker for whole SCAR complex stability . Although knockdown of Sra1 , SCAR , or Hem led to decreased levels of Sra - 1 protein as ex - pected , levels of Sra - 1 remained unchanged in Roc1a RNAi cells ( Fig . 4 C , top ) , under conditions in which nearly all cells manifested the spiky phenotype . Similarly , in human cells , the stability of the SCAR homologue WASF2 was unaffected by JCB • VOLUME 194 • NUMBER 5 • 2011 798 the downstream SCAR complex member NCKAP1 ( Fig . 4 E ) . These data suggest that Rac can activate lamellipodial formation independently of Roc1a / RBX1 ; i . e . , that Roc1a / RBX1 acts ge - netically upstream of Rac function . As a second test of this hypothesis , we performed double knockdown of roc1a in S2R + cells with Pak3 , a gene whose knockdown phenotype resembles the expression of constitutively active Rac ( Asano et al . , 2009 ) . Again this condition resulted in a partial rescue of the spiky phenotype ( Fig . S1 D ; note that Pak3 protein levels were un - affected by Roc1a silencing , as shown in Fig . S1 E ) . Taken to - gether , these data suggest that Roc1a protein exerts its effects upstream of Rac in a Pak3 - independent manner . To further confirm this genetic interaction between RBX1 and the Rac pathway , we wanted to investigate whether endog - enous activated Rac1 was reduced after depletion of RBX1 . First , we used siRNA to deplete either Rac1 or RBX1 in HeLa cells . We then replated cells to stimulate Rac activity during re - spreading over the course of 5 h , and performed a pull - down assay using beads conjugated to the PBD domain of PAK , which specifically binds to the GTP - bound active form of Rac1 . These experiments showed that levels of activated Rac1 were reduced to 36 ± 19 % compared with overall Rac1 levels after RBX1 silencing ( quantified in Fig . 5 A , with a representative Western blot shown in Fig . 5 B ) . Second , RBX1 - depleted HeLa cells were stained with an antibody that targets the active , GTP - bound form of Rac1 ( Haralalka et al . , 2011 ) . In this experiment , the high levels of active Rac1 seen in the cytoplasm and at the edges of spreading control cells were dramatically reduced after both RBX1 and Rac1 depletion ( Fig . S1 F ) . Taken together , these experiments support the hypothesis that RBX1 acts up - stream of Rac1 . Hyx / Cdc73 and CG7597 / Cdc2l5 knockdown lead to excess actin in the nucleus As mentioned previously , among the hits causing defects in the organization of the actin cytoskeleton , a subset displayed a prominent phalloidin - stainable bar in the nucleus of S2R + cells depleting RBX1 , whereas knockdown of the Sra1 homologue CYFIP2 or the Hem homologue NCKAP1 led to degradation of WASF2 protein in HeLa cells ( Fig . 4 C , bottom left ) , even though RBX1 levels were dramatically reduced after RNAi ( Fig . 4 C , bottom right ; the results of five replicate experiments in human and fly cells are quantified in Fig . S1 A ) . These results suggest that although the SCF complex regulates the stability of many targets and appears to regulate the formation of lamellipodial actin , it is unlikely to interfere directly with the stability of SCAR complex components . Two recent papers have reported that the FERM domain containing tumor - suppressor protein Merlin / NF2 interacts indi - rectly with the RBX1 / Cul4 complex ( Huang and Chen , 2008 ; Li et al . , 2010 ) . Moreover , other work has shown a link between Merlin and Rac ( Shaw et al . , 2001 ; Sherman and Gutmann , 2001 ; Xiao et al . , 2002 ; Okada et al . , 2005 ; Morrison et al . , 2007 ) . These reports led us to investigate the role of Merlin in our system . Western blots on HeLa cells depleted for RBX1 showed no sig - nificant increase in the amount of Merlin protein ( Fig . S1 B ) , in agreement with Huang and Chen ( 2008 ) . Moreover , we were un - able to detect a morphological or actin phenotype in S2R + cells treated with independent dsRNAs targeting Drosophila Merlin ( original fly screening data , and validated in Fig . S1 C ) , ruling out Merlin as the key link between the SCF complex and Rac . Finally , to determine whether we could place Roc1a ge - netically upstream or downstream of Rac1 , we tested the effect of introducing activated RacV12 - GFP into S2R + cells in which the expression of Roc1a and slmb as representative SCF mem - bers had been silenced using RNAi , compared with knockdown of SCAR as a representative SCAR complex member . In con - trol cells , activated RacV12 causes a characteristic phenotype , namely a very spread cell with high levels of lamellipodial actin . As shown in Fig . 4 D , although RacV12 was unable to rescue the spiky phenotype of SCAR RNAi , Roc1a - depleted and slmb - depleted cells positive for RacV12 - GFP developed prominent lamellipodia . Similarly , in HeLa cells , an activated RacV12 - myc construct was able to rescue RBX1 knockdown , but not that of Figure 5 . RBX1 depletion reduces active , GTP - bound Rac1 . PAK - PBD bead pull - down of HeLa cell lysates depleted for control , RBX1 , or Rac1 by siRNA , compared with the corresponding cellular lysate , probed with  - Rac1 . ( A ) The mean of three independent experiments , normalized to control levels , is shown . Error bars show standard deviation ; B shows a representative blot . The reaction control samples , preloaded with GTP  S and GDP ( rightmost two lanes ) , were run in parallel but on a separate gel and membrane , as indicated . 799 Screens define the conserved metazoan actinome • Rohn et al . nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles ( Cline et al . , 1999 ) . Snf was chosen as the representative example of the spliceosome com - plex for further analysis . In addition , depletion of the transcrip - tional regulator hyx / cdc73 , which is a component of the Paf transcription complex ( Shi et al . , 1996 ) , or of CG7597 , which is the orthologue of mammalian Cdc2l5 known to regulate alter - native splicing ( Even et al . , 2006 ) , also produced a similar nu - clear actin phenotype , as did the nuclear export gene Cas / CSE1 segregation protein and CG17446 . When we tested the mouse orthologues of these Drosoph - ila hits ( Table I ) by siRNA knockdown in a GFP - actin mouse fibroblast line R3A4 , which are more amenable than HeLa cells to studying nuclear export ( unpublished data ) , we found that the depletion of the Exp6 orthologue Xpo6 led to the clear accumu - lation of nuclear GFP - actin , as expected ( Fig . 6 C ) . In contrast , we found that depletion of the Cas orthologue Cse1l and the CG17446 orthologue Cxxc1 did not produce a nuclear actin phenotype by this test , and depletion of the snf orthologue Snrpb2 was too toxic to assess the phenotype . However , silencing ( Fig . 6 A ) , whereas fewer than 1 % of control cells did so ( Fig . 6 B ) . The identification of this phenotypic class was surprising given that F - actin in the nucleus in other systems has traditionally not been visible using the phalloidin stain ( Vartiainen , 2008 ) . How - ever , Exp6 and chic were identified among this set , both of which were previously shown to be required for the nuclear export of globular actin ( Fig . 6 A and B ; Stüven et al . , 2003 ) , suggesting a mechanism by which these nuclear filaments might form . This result led us to follow up the analysis of the nuclear actin pheno - typic cluster in both fly and mammalian cells . From the set of 28 dsRNAs that initially gave rise to a nu - clear actin phenotype , we chose to follow up 8 representatives , and reproducibly confirmed 6 of these as strong hits in S2R + cells using two independent dsRNAs , including Exp - 6 ( Table I ; note chic was primarily categorized due to its more dominant phenotype , “decreased actin” , but it also validated as a seventh nuclear actin gene ) . Notably , several of the hits we had initially identified were components of the spliceosome , including snf ( sans fille ) , which is an integral component of U1 and U2 small Figure 6 . Novel genes regulate actin in the nucleus . ( A ) Images showing actin bars in the nucleus of S2R + after gene depletion . Bar , 10 µm ( B ) Quantita - tion of bars of experiment represented in A . ( C ) Depletion of key genes induces actin accumulation in mammalian cells . Red is F - actin , blue is DNA , and green is GFP - actin . Bar , 20 µm . JCB • VOLUME 194 • NUMBER 5 • 2011 800 functions have been recently described ( Katoh and Katoh , 2003 ; Perdigoto et al . , 2008 ; Han et al . , 2009 ; Fabian et al . , 2010 ; Mersich et al . , 2010 ; Mason et al . , 2011 ) . Instead , our hits fell into functional categories likely to act upstream of actin , such as specific splicing factors , nuclear export path - ways , and proteasomal regulators . This highlights the impor - tance of studying the regulation of actin dynamics in a wider cell - biological context ( Pollard and Cooper , 2009 ) , to which this and other unbiased functional screens can make an impor - tant contribution . Intriguingly , several of these proved to be small genes ( e . g . , l ( 1 ) 10Bb , CG13623 , and Roc1a ) , which are often missed in classical genetics screens . Conversely , the vast majority of unstudied genes with predicted actin - binding domains but no previously identified phenotype did not have an actin phenotype in our study . Some of these genes may simply have been missed due to inefficient silencing ; how - ever , it is likely that many of these proteins were effectively depleted by our reagents but were not morphological hits because they may have evolved more subtle tissue - specific actin - related functions , or because they may simply act as scaffolds to tether other processes to the actin cytoskeleton . Among the basic cell processes upstream of actin regula - tion revealed by our screen , ubiquitination mediated by the SCF complex emerged as a conserved regulator upstream of Rac - mediated actin polymerization . Our phenotypic analysis of fly screen data suggests that Slmb / BTRC /  - TrCP is the main F - box receptor required for this activity . Slmb is known to regu - late transcription and cyclin - dependent kinases ( Frescas and Pagano , 2008 ) , but thus far no known roles for SCF / Slmb sug - gest a link to cell shape and the actin cytoskeleton . It is possible , for example , that SCF / Slmb targets a Rac inhibitor for degrada - tion , although we could detect no relevant phenotype in any of the known Rac inhibitors present in our screens . Further studies will be required to define the pathway in more detail . In addition , the screen identified a set of dsRNAs that gave rise to a previously undescribed phenotype , the accumulation of phalloidin - stained nuclear actin bars . It has become increas - ingly obvious that actin has many important functions in the cell nucleus , especially in the process of gene expression . For exam - ple , nuclear actin has been implicated in the regulation of tran - scription factor activity , in transcription by all three RNA polymerases , in chromatin remodeling , and in premRNA pro - cessing ( Skarp and Vartiainen , 2010 ) . Despite these essential roles , very little is known about how nuclear actin is regulated . In our genome - wide fly screen , we identified several factors whose depletion caused accumulation of F - actin in the nucleus . These proteins are therefore candidates for regulators of nuclear actin export or proteins that limit inappropriate actin polymer - ization within the nucleus . Both processes may be functionally significant , as recent studies have suggested that modulation of nuclear actin levels appears to correlate with cellular quiescence ( Spencer et al . , 2011 ) , and functional studies point to a require - ment for polymerized actin within the nucleus for this role ( McDonald et al . , 2006 ; Ye et al . , 2008 ) . How nuclear actin lev - els are regulated in cells remains poorly understood , although increased actin in the nucleus has been detected upon the induc - tion of different cellular stresses ( Vartiainen , 2008 ) . of the hyx orthologue Cdc73 and the CG7597 orthologue Cdc2l5 resulted in a similar nuclear accumulation of GFP - actin ( Fig . 6 C ) . These results suggest that , even though we were unable to see phalloidin - stained nuclear actin bars in these cells , the pathways regulating nuclear actin levels are at least partially conserved through evolution . Cdc73 , also known as parafibromin , is in humans encoded by the HRPT2 gene , mutations of which cause the hyperpara - thyroidism - jaw tumor syndrome ( Carpten et al . , 2002 ) . As a component of the Paf complex , Cdc73 is involved in many transcription - related processes , including communication with transcription factors , regulation of histone modification , and recruitment of premRNA processing factors ( Jaehning , 2010 ) . Accordingly , cells from Cdc73 knockout mice display altered gene expression profiles ( Wang et al . , 2008 ) . Although Cdc73 is mainly a nuclear protein ( Bradley et al . , 2007 ) , it has also been found in the cytoplasm , where it may interact with the actin cross - linking proteins actinin - 2 and actinin - 3 ( Agarwal et al . , 2008 ) . Cdc2l5 belongs to a subfamily of Cdc2 - related kinases ( Marqués et al . , 2000 ) , and is also called the cyclin - dependent kinase 13 ( Cdk13 ) due to its ability to bind to L - type cyclins ( Chen et al . , 2007 ) . It has been linked to alternative splicing ( Even et al . , 2006 ) , and binds , for example , to the HIV - 1 Tat - protein to regulate viral mRNA splicing ( Berro et al . , 2008 ) . It remains to be determined how these genes and the spliceo - some function to regulate levels of nuclear actin . In summary , we have used a genome - scale RNAi screen in fly cells and a secondary screen in mammalian cells to define a conserved actinome based upon phenotype . This includes a number of new conserved actin regulators and implicates sev - eral core molecular processes in the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton . This simple strategy could be applied to enhance our understanding of a wide range of cell biological processes . Discussion Many actin regulators have been characterized over the years in a variety of organisms , including cell - and species - specific regu - lators , and a set of proteins that has subsequently proven to be functionally conserved . We were interested in using a system - atic approach to define a core “actinome” based upon pheno - type in cultured cells from two different lineages derived from two disparate animal species , Drosophila and mammals . This comparative screening strategy yielded four broad categories of hits : ( 1 ) the expected suite of proteins with well - known bio - chemical functions related to actin ( e . g . , Arp2 / 3 complex , SCAR , Rac ) ; ( 2 ) poorly studied proteins with predicted biochemical functions related to actin ( e . g . , CG32138 / FMNL1 , Sktl / PIP5KC ) ; ( 3 ) proteins with known biochemical functions but little pre - vious relationship to actin or its regulation ( e . g . , the ubiquitin ligase component Roc1a / RBX1 , the cyclin - dependent kinase Hyx / Cdc73 ) ; and ( 4 ) genes encoding proteins with no known biochemical function but with a conserved actin phenotype in our screen ( e . g . , CG13623 / ISCA2 ) . Our analysis failed to identify good candidates for novel proteins that alter actin filament dynamics through direct bind - ing to actin aside from CG32138 / FMNL1 , whose actin - related 801 Screens define the conserved metazoan actinome • Rohn et al . PCR product . pDoner - RacV12 was used for an LR reaction ( Invitrogen ) with the pMT - NT - GFP - destination vector ( Liu et al . , 2010 ) to create the final con - struct . The sequence as well as the activating V12 point mutation was con - firmed by sequence analysis . Cell culture HeLa - Kyoto human carcinoma cells were cultured at 37°C in a humidified incubator under 5 % CO 2 in 9 - cm dishes in DME ( Invitrogen ) supple - mented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS , PAA ) and antibiotics ( 50 U / ml penicillin and 50 µg / ml streptomycin ; Invitrogen ) . Adherent S2R + Dro - sophila cells were cultured at 24°C in a humidified incubator in T25 flasks in Shields and Sang M3 insect medium ( Sigma - Aldrich ) supple - mented with FBS and antibiotics as for HeLa cells . A tetracyclin - inducible GFP - actin – expressing mouse fibroblast NIH3T3 cell line ( R3A4 ) was cre - ated using the T - REX system ( Invitrogen ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . R3A4 cells were maintained in DME supplemented with 10 % FBS , GlutaMAX ( Invitrogen ) and antibiotics , as for HeLa cells , at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 . Blasticidin and Zeocin ( InvivoGen ) were added during passaging but omitted during transfection . RNAi reagent design and synthesis The genome - wide screen was performed at the Drosophila RNAi Screening Center ( Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA ) using a library of 21 , 306 distinct dsRNAs ( See Table S1 for primer details ) targeting 12 , 061 protein - coding genes . Because the library targets 88 % of the genome , we would expect this dataset to contain phenotypic information for the vast majority of known actin regulators , along with phenotypes for previously uncharac - terized actin regulators . For validation experiments , PCR primers were based on a genome - wide library purchased from Invitrogen / Ambion , the DRSC validation library ( http : / / flyrnai . org ) , or designed de novo using SnapDragon ( http : / / flyrnai . org / snapdragon _ doc1 . html ; see Table S2 for details ) . Gene - specific amplicons (  200 – 500 bp ; average 400 bp ) were am - plified from genomic DNA by PCR using HotStart Taq polymerase ( QIAGEN ) with primer pairs synthesized to order ( EuroGentec ) . RNA was synthesized using a MegaScript reverse transcription kit ( Invitrogen ) , and purified using a Multiscreen HTS kit ( Millipore ) or NucAway spin column ( Applied Bio - systems ) , and annealed by heating at 65°C for 10 min then cooling slowly to room temperature . dsRNAs were quantified by NanoDrop spectrometry , and gel electrophoresis was used to confirm the integrity of the dsRNAs . dsRNAs were stored at  40°C until use . For the human screens , we used a computational approach to nomi - nate actin - and Rho GTPase – related genes to create the “actinome” library . The actinome library contained ( 1 ) genes with known actin cytoskeleton association ; ( 2 ) genes with predicted actin - binding domains ; and ( 3 ) Rho family GTPases , GAPs , and GEFs . We also determined the human ortho - logues of Drosophila actin morphology hits by comparing orthologue as - signments from Homologene ( http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / homologene ) , Inparanoid ( http : / / inparanoid . sbc . su . se / cgi - bin / index . cgi ) , and Ensembl ( http : / / www . ensembl . org / index . html ) . Synthetic siRNAs for all target genes were obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientific / Dharmacon ( Table S3 ) . For controls , we included multiple instances of the following four Thermo Fisher Scientific controls : siCONTROL ( a scrambled negative - control siRNA sequence ) ; INCENP and KIF11 , which give strong and distinctive pheno - types ; and siTOX , an siRNA reagent that induces cell death . All siRNAs were reconstituted in nuclease - free water in 1x buffer provided by the man - ufacturer . For the mouse cell siRNA experiments , we purchased siRNA from QIAGEN and Sigma - Aldrich ( Table S3 ) . High - throughput RNAi screening The genome - wide S2R + cell screen was performed as described previ - ously ( Kiger et al . , 2003 ) . In brief , a semi - automated method was used to seed 10 µl of a trypsinized suspension of S2R + cells at a concentration of 2 × 10 6 cells / ml in serum - free M3 medium into black , thin - bottomed 384 - well tissue culture plates ( Corning ) already containing a 3 - µl droplet of dsRNA (  0 . 3 µg ) . After a 30 - min incubation at room temperature , wells were supplemented with 30 µl of complete M3 medium . All manipu - lations were performed with an alcohol - sterilized WellMate liquid - handling robot inside a tissue culture hood . Plates were spun briefly , sealed with parafilm , and incubated in a 25°C humidified incubator for 5 d before being processed : using a semi - automated method with the Well - Mate robot , cells were fixed with freshly prepared 4 % formaldehyde in PBS for 20 min at room temperature , permeabilized with 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 in PBS for 5 min , then blocked with 5 % BSA in PBS for 30 min . Next , cells were stained with a mixture of FITC - conjugated anti –  - tubulin antibody ( clone DM1A at 1 : 400 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , TRITC - conjugated phal - loidin ( 0 . 125 µg / ml ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , and DAPI ( 1 µg / ml ; Sigma - Aldrich ) Nuclear export of actin is mediated by the importin -  family member Exportin - 6 , which seems to use the small actin - binding protein profilin as a cofactor ( Stüven et al . , 2003 ) . In our experiments in both fly and mammalian cells , depletion of either Exportin - 6 or profilin resulted in the nuclear actin pheno - type , demonstrating that our screen was sensitive enough to re - cover known factors involved in this process . The polymerization status of actin in the nucleus is still somewhat unclear , but it is thought that the majority of nuclear actin would be monomeric ( McDonald et al . , 2006 ) . Indeed , phalloidin does not generally stain the nucleus , and we did not observe phalloidin - stainable bars in mammalian cells . Nevertheless , several studies have sug - gested a role for F - actin in the nucleus ( Miyamoto et al . , 2011 ) and S2R + cells may therefore represent a good system in which to study this phenomenon . Of note , many of the nuclear actin hits from Drosophila cells are components of the spliceosome . Although the spliceo - some component we chose to validate in mouse cells , Snrpb2 , could not be analyzed due to cell death , Cdc2l5 , which pro - duced the phenotype in both systems , has also been linked to splicing ( Even et al . , 2006 ) . How defects in spliceosome func - tion result in the nuclear actin phenotype is presently unclear , but it may be due to altered expression of proteins required for nuclear export of actin , or to a general stress response in the cell , as this has been shown to increase nuclear actin levels ( Welch and Suhan , 1985 ) . Alternatively , actin itself has been implicated in premRNA processing , and binds directly to sev - eral hnRNP proteins ( Percipalle et al . , 2002 ) that play a key role in this process . Perhaps disruption of the splicing process re - leases actin from these factors , resulting in uncontrolled actin polymerization within the nucleus . Future studies will reveal at which stage the identified factors impinge on nuclear actin to regulate its nuclear export and / or polymerization properties . In summary , our species - comparative approach , as exem - plified by the Rac / SCAR cluster and the actin - in - the - nucleus cluster , revealed that entire functional modules can be recapitu - lated across species , and that such “phenoprinting” can be used as a powerful shortcut to find novel actin regulators . Even when the precise nature or appearance of phenotype itself is not always conserved between species ( e . g . , a spiky appearance in S2R + cells versus a triangular , stress - fiber appearance in HeLa cells ; or the phalloidin stainable bar in S2R + versus actin accu - mulation in mouse cells ) , consistent phenoprints within a spe - cies can still be used to pinpoint conserved functional modules . By making our data freely available , we expect that they can be further mined by the community for functional pathways tai - lored to individual laboratory interests , and as such should serve as an important resource for the future . Materials and methods Recombinant DNA cloning We constructed pMT - RacV12 from a preexisting pUAS - RacV12 plasmid template using PCR with oligo Rac1 ( NT _ BP ) forward ( 5  - GGGGACAAGTTT - GTACAAAAAAGCAGGCTTCGAAGGAGATAGAACCATGGATGCAGGC - GATCAAGTGCGTCG - 3  ) and Rac1 ( NT _ BP ) reverse ( 5  - GGGACCACTTT - GTACAAGAAAGCTGGGTCTTAGAGCAGGGCGCACTTGCGC - 3  ) . The PCR amplimer was gel purified ( QIAGEN ) , then a BP Clonase ( Invitrogen ) reaction was performed with the pDoner201 vector and purified RacV12 JCB • VOLUME 194 • NUMBER 5 • 2011 802 plastic tissue culture plate ) and mixed these with 3 µg of dsRNA corre - sponding to the gene of interest or , as a negative control , to dsRNA target - ing LacZ or dsRed , whose sequences are not present in the fly genome . This mixture was incubated at 24°C for 30 min before addition of complete serum - containing medium ( 300 µl ) . Cells were grown for 3 – 7 d at 24°C , depending on the experiment , then replated onto FBS - or Con A – coated circular 13 - mm - diam coverslips and allowed to spread before analysis ( typically 1 – 3 h ) . In experiments where cells were not replated before analy - sis ( e . g . , validating the nuclear actin hits in S2R + cells ) , cell seeding was slightly different : 50 , 000 cells in 200 µl directly onto coverslips in a 24 - well plate , analyzed after 6 d . For experiments requiring plasmid transfection , S2R + cells were transfected in 4 - well plates with 1 ug total of DNA using FugeneHD ( Roche ) , following the manufacturer’s protocol . We used GFP - tagged RacV12 under the control of a metallothionein promoter ( pMT ) , or as a negative control , pMT - Gal4 . 18 h before processing the experiments , a copper sul - phate solution was added to the medium ( final concentration , 70 nM ) to in - duce expression from the pMT promoter . For human cell validation , our strategy was to repeat the screen twice and to use pools as well as individual siRNAs for depletion , so on average each gene was tested five different ways in two separate sessions . We relied upon independent siRNAs and not pools for validation because 75 genes of the 116 hits failed to display a phenotype when using the pool in a situation when two or more of its individual siRNA components had a positive , gene - consistent phenotype . This result was likely due in part to dosage effects , as we kept the overall concentration of siRNA constant for all conditions , meaning that on average , each single siRNA was present at four times the concentration of its pool counterpart . Small - scale HeLa experiments were performed in 384 - well plates or by scaling up appropriately into 8 - well chamber slides ( LabTek ; Thermo Fisher Scientific ) precoated with fibronectin ( 10 µg / µl in PBS ; Sigma - Aldrich ) . We used Thermo Fisher Scientific siCONTROL as a negative con - trol in all cases . When plasmid transfection of RNAi cultures was required , FugeneHD was used as for S2R + cells together with a myc - tagged RacV12 construct ( Hogan et al . , 2009 ) or as a negative control , a histone - 2B - RFP construct , 18 h before processing . For experiments with mouse R34A cells , 5 , 000 cells were seeded on coverslips in a 24 - well plate overnight . Cells were transfected with 10 nM siRNA using Interferin siRNA transfection re - agent ( Polyplus ) . After transfection , cells were incubated at 37°C with 5 % CO 2 for 4 d before induction of GFP - actin expression with 1 µg / ml tetra - cycline for 24 h , and were then analyzed . A GFP - alone construct was used as a negative control . For immunostaining , all cell types were fixed and permeabilized as described for screening ( except we used 4 % paraformaldehyde instead of formaldehyde for the nuclear DNA experiments ) . For some experiments , wells that had received tagged RacV12 constructs were stained with the same mix , except DM1A - stained cells were visualized using a goat anti – mouse immunoglobulin antibody conjugated to Alexa 647 ( 1 : 500 ; Invitro - gen ) ; GFP signal was bolstered using anti - GFP antibody ( Invitrogen ) , and myc - tagged - RacV12 was visualized using  - Myc tag ( Clone 4A6 ; Milli - pore ) . For experiments assessing the presence and localization of GTP - bound Rac1 , we used the monoclonal antibody  - Active Rac1 ( NewEast Biosciences ) at a concentration of 1 : 200 . For HeLa cells , slides were mounted in FluorSave Reagent ( EMD ) and imaged using a scanning con - focal microscope ( model SP5 , Leica ; either the 40x lens or the 63x oil lens , NA 1 . 25 and 1 . 4 , respectively ; ) . For mouse cells , we used a confocal microscope ( TCS SP5 MP SMD FLIM ; Leica ) equipped with a 63x ( NA 1 . 3 ) oil objective . For both Leica microscopes , LAS AF software ( Leica ) was used for image acquisition . For fly cell experiments in which we were assessing phalloidin - stainable bars in the nucleus , actin was visualized with Alexa Fluor 594 – conjugated phalloidin ( Invitrogen ) instead of TRITC - phalloidin , slides were mounted with Moviol - DABCO ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , and images were acquired using a microscope ( AX70 Provis ; Olympus ) equipped with an Plan Apochromat 60x , NA 1 . 40 oil objective . The cam - era used was F - view II FW ( Olympus ) , and images were acquired with the analySIS software ( Olympus ) . All images were processed according to good practice using ImageJ / FIJI or Photoshop ; in some cases we altered the brightness and contrast of the entire image to improve the image . Color channels were merged using either ImageJ or Photoshop . Western blot analysis and GTP - bound Rac1 pull - down assays For Western blotting to inspect SCAR complex stability , we either lysed samples directly in 2x Laemmli buffer ( Sigma - Aldrich ) and disrupted them with a fine - gauge needle , or lysed them in ice - cold RIPA buffer ( 50 mM Hepes , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM EDTA , 1 % NP - 40 , 0 . 5 % sodium deoxycholate , in a PBS solution containing 1 % BSA for 1 h . After 4x washing with PBS , plates were sealed with adhesive foil and stored in PBS containing 0 . 1 % sodium azide ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . Images were acquired using a 20x objec - tive lens ( NA 0 . 45 ) on a modified Eclipse TE - 2000E microscope ( Nikon ) equipped with a Prior Proscan motorized stage and MetaMorph software ( Molecular Devices ) , autofocusing on the DAPI channel . Images were screened visually using the MetaMorph “Review Screen Data” applica - tion . The uploaded . tif files were converted from 16 - bit to 8 - bit but were otherwise unprocessed . The fly cell screen was performed once , and three independent re - searchers visually inspected images captured from two sites per well to nominate potential hits with morphology phenotypes of any description . We filtered the set of nominated hits to exclude dsRNAs with ( 1 ) > 1 pre - dicted amplicon ; ( 2 ) one or more CAN repeats ( a stretch of a particular tri - nucleotide sequence [ CA n ] repeated five or more times , which is known to cause nonspecific effects ( Echeverri et al . , 2006 ) ) ; ( 3 ) > 5 predicted off - target effects ( 19 bp ; Echeverri et al . , 2006 ) ; and ( 4 ) no known protein - encoding gene target according to FlyBase version 5 . 23 ( http : / / flybase . org ; Table S1 ) . Images from the remaining dsRNAs were then annotated using a controlled vocabulary to describe phenotypes affecting cell number , cell size , and all aspects of nuclear and cytoskeletal morphology . DsRNAs with weak or in - consistent phenotypes ( defined as present in only one of the two sites ) were excluded from this analysis . In inspecting this refined list of dsRNAs associ - ated with morphological phenotypes ( see hit annotation details in Table S2 ) , we found that when multiple dsRNAs targeting the same gene were annotated as hits , a similar range of phenotypes was recorded , demon - strating the robustness of the method . For HeLa cell screens , siRNAs were arrayed into the Corning screening plates at a final concentration of 0 . 5 µM ( 3 µl ) using both indi - vidual siGENOME duplexes and SmartPools ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) using a Biomek Fx robotic liquid - handling robot ( Beckman Coulter ) , sealed with foil adhesives and stored at  40°C until use . Trypsinized HeLa cells ( 2 , 000 cells per well ) without antibiotics were reverse trans - fected with Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) according to the manufactur - er’s instructions at a final volume of 80 µl ( final siRNA concentration of 25 nM ) . All transfection manipulations were performed sterilely as de - scribed for S2R + cells , and the plates were spun briefly to eliminate any bubbles and incubated at 37°C in a humidified incubator under 5 % CO 2 for 3 d before processing as for the fly screen . Each human gene was tar - geted using four independent siRNAs , each individually assessed in four separate wells , and , for genes in the actinome , with the addition of a fifth well containing those four siRNAs pooled together . The entire screen was performed in duplicate , and images ( three sites per well ) from both screens were loaded into FLIGHT . Images were annotated by two inde - pendent researchers blinded to well designations ; although we assessed the same general phenotypic categories as with the fly screen , we used more extensive sub - descriptions to reflect the greater detail visible in these cells . Genes were considered hits if at least two independent siRNA constructs were identified as strong morphological hits with similar phe - notypes in both screen replicates by both researchers . Hierarchical clustering and network analysis We performed hierarchical clustering of both Drosophila and human bi - nary RNAi phenotype annotations using the correlation distance and Wards method using R ( http : / / www . r - project . org ) . To identify related hits that formed part of the same complex or interaction group , we used the network analysis tool on the FLIGHT database , which queries interaction data from a large set of online databases including Reactome and BioGrid ( Sims et al . , 2006 , 2010 ) . Morphological phenotype validation For validation experiments , we delivered dsRNAs to S2R + cells in a similar manner as the high - throughput protocol and incubated them for 6 d . This longer incubation ensured that all phenotypes had time to manifest . Under these conditions , for example , we also validated the remaining four Arp2 / 3 complex components ( Arc - p34 , Arpc3a , Arpc3b and Arc - p20 ) that were not identified as hits initially because these proteins have a low turnover ( Kunda et al . , 2003 ) . Cells were then trypsinized and replated at a lower density into two black , thin - bottomed confocal - ready 384 - well tis - sue culture plates ( Greiner bio - one ) —one whose wells had been precoated overnight at 37°C with FBS , the other coated with concanavalin A ( Con A IV - S ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , dissolved at 5 µg / ml in water . Cells were allowed to spread for 1 – 3 h and then fixed . We also fixed replicates in which the cells were not replated after RNAi . For RNAi experiments destined to be replated onto glass coverslips , we suspended cells in serum - free medium at a concentration of 2 × 10 6 cells / ml ( 100 µl droplet in a well of a 4 - well 803 Screens define the conserved metazoan actinome • Rohn et al . References Agarwal , S . K . , W . F . Simonds , and S . J . Marx . 2008 . The parafibromin tumor suppressor protein interacts with actin - binding proteins actinin - 2 and actinin - 3 . Mol . Cancer . 7 : 65 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1476 - 4598 - 7 - 65 Asano , Y . , A . Jiménez - Dalmaroni , T . B . Liverpool , M . C . Marchetti , L . Giomi , A . Kiger , T . Duke , and B . Baum . 2009 . Pak3 inhibits local actin fila - ment formation to regulate global cell polarity . HFSP J . 3 : 194 – 203 . doi : 10 . 2976 / 1 . 3100548 Bakal , C . , J . Aach , G . Church , and N . Perrimon . 2007 . Quantitative morphologi - cal signatures define local signaling networks regulating cell morphol - ogy . Science . 316 : 1753 – 1756 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1140324 Baum , B . , W . Li , and N . Perrimon . 2000 . A cyclase - associated protein regulates actin and cell polarity during Drosophila oogenesis and in yeast . Curr . Biol . 10 : 964 – 973 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0960 - 9822 ( 00 ) 00640 - 0 Belotserkovskaya , R . , S . Oh , V . A . Bondarenko , G . Orphanides , V . M . Studitsky , and D . Reinberg . 2003 . FACT facilitates transcription - dependent nucleosome alteration . Science . 301 : 1090 – 1093 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1085703 Benlali , A . , I . Draskovic , D . J . Hazelett , and J . E . Treisman . 2000 . act up con - trols actin polymerization to alter cell shape and restrict Hedgehog signaling in the Drosophila eye disc . Cell . 101 : 271 – 281 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 00 ) 80837 - 5 Berro , R . , C . Pedati , K . Kehn - Hall , W . Wu , Z . Klase , Y . Even , A . M . Genevière , T . Ammosova , S . Nekhai , and F . Kashanchi . 2008 . CDK13 , a new potential human immunodeficiency virus type 1 inhibitory factor regulating viral mRNA splicing . J . Virol . 82 : 7155 – 7166 . doi : 10 . 1128 / JVI . 02543 - 07 Blanchette , M . , E . Labourier , R . E . Green , S . E . Brenner , and D . C . Rio . 2004 . Genome - wide analysis reveals an unexpected function for the Drosophila splicing factor U2AF50 in the nuclear export of intronless mRNAs . Mol . Cell . 14 : 775 – 786 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2004 . 06 . 012 Bocca , S . N . , M . Muzzopappa , S . Silberstein , and P . Wappner . 2001 . Occurrence of a putative SCF ubiquitin ligase complex in Drosophila . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 286 : 357 – 364 . doi : 10 . 1006 / bbrc . 2001 . 5394 Bradley , K . J . , M . R . Bowl , S . E . Williams , B . N . Ahmad , C . J . Partridge , A . L . Patmanidi , A . M . Kennedy , N . Y . Loh , and R . V . Thakker . 2007 . Parafibromin is a nuclear protein with a functional monopartite nuclear localization signal . Oncogene . 26 : 1213 – 1221 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . onc . 1209893 Carpten , J . D . , C . M . Robbins , A . Villablanca , L . Forsberg , S . Presciuttini , J . Bailey - Wilson , W . F . Simonds , E . M . Gillanders , A . M . Kennedy , J . D . Chen , et al . 2002 . HRPT2 , encoding parafibromin , is mutated in hyperpara - thyroidism - jaw tumor syndrome . Nat . Genet . 32 : 676 – 680 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ng1048 Chen , H . H . , Y . H . Wong , A . M . Geneviere , and M . J . Fann . 2007 . CDK13 / CDC2L5 interacts with L - type cyclins and regulates alternative splicing . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 354 : 735 – 740 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2007 . 01 . 049 Cline , T . W . , D . Z . Rudner , D . A . Barbash , M . Bell , and R . Vutien . 1999 . Functioning of the Drosophila integral U1 / U2 protein Snf independent of U1 and U2 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles is revealed by snf ( + ) gene dose effects . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 96 : 14451 – 14458 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 96 . 25 . 14451 Cózar - Castellano , I . , M . del Valle Machargo , E . Trujillo , M . F . Arteaga , T . González , P . Martín - Vasallo , and J . Avila . 2004 . hIscA : a protein impli - cated in the biogenesis of iron - sulfur clusters . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1700 : 179 – 188 . Cvrcková , F . , F . Rivero , and B . Bavlnka . 2004 . Evolutionarily conserved mod - ules in actin nucleation : lessons from Dictyostelium discoideum and plants . Review article . Protoplasma . 224 : 15 – 31 . D’Ambrosio , M . V . , and R . D . Vale . 2010 . A whole genome RNAi screen of Drosophila S2 cell spreading performed using automated computational image analysis . J . Cell Biol . 191 : 471 – 478 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201003135 Derivery , E . , J . Fink , D . Martin , A . Houdusse , M . Piel , T . E . Stradal , D . Louvard , and A . Gautreau . 2008 . Free Brick1 is a trimeric precursor in the assembly of a functional wave complex . PLoS ONE . 3 : e2462 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0002462 Deshaies , R . J . 1999 . SCF and Cullin / Ring H2 - based ubiquitin ligases . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 15 : 435 – 467 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . cellbio . 15 . 1 . 435 Diez - Silva , M . , M . Dao , J . Han , C . T . Lim , and S . Suresh . 2010 . Shape and bio - mechanical characteristics of human red blood cells in health and disease . MRS Bull . 35 : 382 – 388 . doi : 10 . 1557 / mrs2010 . 571 Donaldson , T . D . , M . A . Noureddine , P . J . Reynolds , W . Bradford , and R . J . Duronio . 2004 . Targeted disruption of Drosophila Roc1b reveals func - tional differences in the Roc subunit of Cullin - dependent E3 ubiquitin ligases . Mol . Biol . Cell . 15 : 4892 – 4903 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 - 03 - 0180 Echard , A . , G . R . Hickson , E . Foley , and P . H . O’Farrell . 2004 . Terminal cyto - kinesis events uncovered after an RNAi screen . Curr . Biol . 14 : 1685 – 1693 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2004 . 08 . 063 and 0 . 1 % SDS , pH 7 . 7 ) to which protease inhibitor cocktail ( Sigma - Aldrich ) had been added , incubated and agitated the samples for 10 min on ice , centrifuged them to harvest protein - containing supernatants , then made them up to 1x Laemmli buffer . All samples were heated at 99°C for 10 min before loading onto SDS - PAGE gels ranging from 15 % for small proteins to 8 % for large ones ; or NuPAGE 4 – 12 % Bis / Tris gradient gels ( Invitrogen ) for the Rac pull - down assay ( see the next paragraph ) . We then transferred proteins to Immobilon - P ( Millipore ) membrane by Western blotting . Membranes were blocked with 5 % nonfat dry milk in Tris - buffered saline / 0 . 05 % Triton X - 100 ( TBS - T ) for 1 h . All primary antibody incuba - tions were at room temperature for several hours or at 4°C overnight in TBS - T ( 1 : 1 , 500 for the  - dSra1 antibody ( a gift from Alexis Gautreau , LEBS Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique , Gif - sur - Yvette , Paris , France ) ; 1 : 1 , 000 for the human NF2 / Merlin antibody ( B12 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ) ; 1 : 1 , 500 for the WAVE2 / WASF2 antibody ( Gautreau et al . , 2004 ) ; 1 : 2 , 000 for the dPak3 antibody ( Asano et al . , 2009 ) ; 1 : 2 , 000 for the  - tubulin antibody ( DM1A ; Sigma - Aldrich ) ; and 1 : 2 , 000 for the anti - cdc2 antibody ( anti - PSTAIR ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , and then washed five times with TBS - T . We next incubated membranes with the appropriate HRP - conjugated secondary antibodies ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; Dako ) in TBS - T for 1 h , and washed them as before , followed by an ECL procedure and detection on either Hyperfilm EC or an ImageQuant LAS4000 ( solutions , film , and apparatus all from GE Healthcare ) . When reprobing was required , we stripped membranes in a hot solution of 100 mM 2 - mercaptoethanol , 2 % SDS , and 62 . 5 mM Tris , pH 6 . 8 ( 50°C ) for 30 min with agitation , then washed them 2x 10 min in TBS - T until they were odorless . We always tested membranes with ECL to confirm absence of signal before rewash - ing and reblocking as normal . Protein bands were quantified on unsatu - rated exposures using the ImageQuantTL software according to the manufacturer’s instructions . For assessing the activity state of Rac1 biochemically in HeLa cells , we scaled up the siRNA transfection to 9 - cm plates ( 2 . 6 × 10 6 cells 18  L Lipofectamine 2000 and 12 µl of siRNA [ stock : 20 µM ] in a total of 4 ml ) . The media was changed the next day , and 3 d after transfection with siRNA , when cultures were less than 50 % confluent , we trypsinized the cells and replated them to stimulate Rac1 activity . At 5 h after replating , when the cells were actively spreading , we performed the pull - down assay using the Rac1 Activation Assay Biochem kit ( Cytoskeleton ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . The samples were run on NuPAGE gradient gels , Western blotted , and probed with the kit’s monoclonal antibody to Rac1 . Along with the washed beads and samples of total cell - clarified ly - sates , we also ran a purified His - Rac protein as a control for the Western blot , and each replicate assay included a GTP  S - loaded positive control , and a GDP - loaded negative control for the pull - down . Active Rac levels were normalized for total basal Rac1 protein levels and quantified as in the previous paragraph ; we confirmed that the levels of total Rac1 were not altered by the siCONTROL or RBX1 siRNA treatments . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows additional cell biological and biochemical observations . Table S1 provides details of the 21 , 306 fly dsRNAs . Table S2 pro - vides annotations for all fly hits ( worksheet 1 ) and dsRNA fly validation primer details ( worksheet 2 ) . Table S3 provides all mammalian siRNAs and their details . Table S4 provides the annotation for all human hits . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 201103168 / DC1 . We thank the Actin RNAi Consortium , members of our laboratory for helpful discussions , and Jonathan Lees for additional bioinformatical advice . We thank Alexis Gautreau for helpful discussions and for providing anti - dSra1 and anti – human WASF2 antiserum ; Helen Morrison for the human NF2 / Merlin antibody ; Catherine Hogan for the myc antibody and human RacV12 construct ; Rob de Bruin for the CDC2 antibody ; and Anne Ridley , Francisco Vega , Harry Mellor , Shruti Haralalka , and Heike Laman for helpful discussions . J . L . Rohn was funded by a fellowship from the Wellcome Trust . M . K . Vartiainen was funded by Academy of Finland , University of Helsinki Re - search Funds , and Sigrid Juselius foundation . J . Dopie was funded by a fellow - ship from the Helsinki Graduate Program in Biotechnology and Molecular Biology . N . Perrimon is an investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute . B . Baum was funded by the Royal Society , the EMBO YIP program , UCL , and Cancer Research UK . Submitted : 31 March 2011 Accepted : 1 August 2011 JCB • VOLUME 194 • NUMBER 5 • 2011 804 the formation of actin - based protrusions . Curr . Biol . 13 : 1867 – 1875 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2003 . 10 . 005 Lecuit , T . , and P . F . Lenne . 2007 . Cell surface mechanics and the control of cell shape , tissue patterns and morphogenesis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 : 633 – 644 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2222 Li , W . , L . You , J . Cooper , G . Schiavon , A . Pepe - Caprio , L . Zhou , R . Ishii , M . Giovannini , C . O . Hanemann , S . B . Long , et al . 2010 . Merlin / NF2 sup - presses tumorigenesis by inhibiting the E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4 ( DCAF1 ) in the nucleus . Cell . 140 : 477 – 490 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2010 . 01 . 029 Liu , T . , J . L . Rohn , R . Picone , P . Kunda , and B . Baum . 2010 . Tao - 1 is a negative regulator of microtubule plus - end growth . J . Cell Sci . 123 : 2708 – 2716 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 068726 Marqués , F . , J . L . Moreau , G . Peaucellier , J . C . Lozano , P . Schatt , A . Picard , I . Callebaut , E . Perret , and A . M . Genevière . 2000 . A new subfam - ily of high molecular mass CDC2 - related kinases with PITAI / VRE motifs . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 279 : 832 – 837 . doi : 10 . 1006 / bbrc . 2000 . 4042 Masciadri , B . , L . B . Areces , P . Carpinelli , M . Foiani , G . Draetta , and F . Fiore . 2004 . Characterization of the BUD31 gene of Saccharomyces cerevi - siae . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 320 : 1342 – 1350 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2004 . 05 . 228 Mason , F . M . , E . G . Heimsath , H . N . Higgs , and S . H . Soderling . 2011 . Bi - modal regulation of a formin by srGAP2 . J . Biol . Chem . 286 : 6577 – 6586 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M110 . 190397 McDonald , D . , G . Carrero , C . Andrin , G . de Vries , and M . J . Hendzel . 2006 . Nucleoplasmic beta - actin exists in a dynamic equilibrium between low - mobility polymeric species and rapidly diffusing populations . J . Cell Biol . 172 : 541 – 552 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200507101 Mersich , A . T . , M . R . Miller , H . Chkourko , and S . D . Blystone . 2010 . The formin FRL1 ( FMNL1 ) is an essential component of macrophage podosomes . Cytoskeleton ( Hoboken ) . 67 : 573 – 585 . Miyamoto , K . , V . Pasque , J . Jullien , and J . B . Gurdon . 2011 . Nuclear actin poly - merization is required for transcriptional reprogramming of Oct4 by oocytes . Genes Dev . 25 : 946 – 958 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 615211 Mohr , S . , C . Bakal , and N . Perrimon . 2010 . Genomic screening with RNAi : results and challenges . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 79 : 37 – 64 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev - biochem - 060408 - 092949 Mollet , I . , N . L . Barbosa - Morais , J . Andrade , and M . Carmo - Fonseca . 2006 . Diversity of human U2AF splicing factors . FEBS J . 273 : 4807 – 4816 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1742 - 4658 . 2006 . 05502 . x Morrison , H . , T . Sperka , J . Manent , M . Giovannini , H . Ponta , and P . Herrlich . 2007 . Merlin / neurofibromatosis type 2 suppresses growth by inhibiting the activation of Ras and Rac . Cancer Res . 67 : 520 – 527 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 06 - 1608 Noureddine , M . A . , T . D . Donaldson , S . A . Thacker , and R . J . Duronio . 2002 . Drosophila Roc1a encodes a RING - H2 protein with a unique function in processing the Hh signal transducer Ci by the SCF E3 ubiquitin ligase . Dev . Cell . 2 : 757 – 770 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1534 - 5807 ( 02 ) 00164 - 8 Okada , T . , M . Lopez - Lago , and F . G . Giancotti . 2005 . Merlin / NF - 2 mediates con - tact inhibition of growth by suppressing recruitment of Rac to the plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 171 : 361 – 371 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200503165 Ou , C . Y . , Y . F . Lin , Y . J . Chen , and C . T . Chien . 2002 . Distinct protein degrada - tion mechanisms mediated by Cul1 and Cul3 controlling Ci stability in Drosophila eye development . Genes Dev . 16 : 2403 – 2414 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 1011402 Percipalle , P . , A . Jonsson , D . Nashchekin , C . Karlsson , T . Bergman , A . Guialis , and B . Daneholt . 2002 . Nuclear actin is associated with a specific sub - set of hnRNP A / B - type proteins . Nucleic Acids Res . 30 : 1725 – 1734 . doi : 10 . 1093 / nar / 30 . 8 . 1725 Perdigoto , C . N . , L . Gervais , E . Overstreet , J . Fischer , A . Guichet , and F . Schweisguth . 2008 . Overexpression of partner of numb induces asym - metric distribution of the PI4P 5 - Kinase Skittles in mitotic sensory organ precursor cells in Drosophila . PLoS ONE . 3 : e3072 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0003072 Perrimon , N . , and B . Mathey - Prevot . 2007 . Matter arising : off - targets and genome - scale RNAi screens in Drosophila . Fly ( Austin ) . 1 : 1 – 5 . Pollard , T . D . 2007 . Regulation of actin filament assembly by Arp2 / 3 complex and formins . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 36 : 451 – 477 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . biophys . 35 . 040405 . 101936 Pollard , T . D . , and J . A . Cooper . 2009 . Actin , a central player in cell shape and movement . Science . 326 : 1208 – 1212 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1175862 Rasmusson , K . , M . Serr , J . Gepner , I . Gibbons , and T . S . Hays . 1994 . A family of dynein genes in Drosophila melanogaster . Mol . Biol . Cell . 5 : 45 – 55 . Reynolds , P . J . , J . R . Simms , and R . J . Duronio . 2008 . Identifying determinants of cullin binding specificity among the three functionally different Drosophila melanogaster Roc proteins via domain swapping . PLoS ONE . 3 : e2918 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0002918 Echeverri , C . J . , and N . Perrimon . 2006 . High - throughput RNAi screening in cultured cells : a user’s guide . Nat . Rev . Genet . 7 : 373 – 384 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrg1836 Echeverri , C . J . , P . A . Beachy , B . Baum , M . Boutros , F . Buchholz , S . K . Chanda , J . Downward , J . Ellenberg , A . G . Fraser , N . Hacohen , et al . 2006 . Minimizing the risk of reporting false positives in large - scale RNAi screens . Nat . Methods . 3 : 777 – 779 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth1006 - 777 Eggert , U . S . , A . A . Kiger , C . Richter , Z . E . Perlman , N . Perrimon , T . J . Mitchison , and C . M . Field . 2004 . Parallel chemical genetic and genome - wide RNAi screens identify cytokinesis inhibitors and targets . PLoS Biol . 2 : e379 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0020379 Even , Y . , S . Durieux , M . L . Escande , J . C . Lozano , G . Peaucellier , D . Weil , and A . M . Genevière . 2006 . CDC2L5 , a Cdk - like kinase with RS domain , interacts with the ASF / SF2 - associated protein p32 and affects splicing in vivo . J . Cell . Biochem . 99 : 890 – 904 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcb . 20986 Fabian , L . , H . C . Wei , J . Rollins , T . Noguchi , J . T . Blankenship , K . Bellamkonda , G . Polevoy , L . Gervais , A . Guichet , M . T . Fuller , and J . A . Brill . 2010 . Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate directs spermatid cell polarity and exocyst localization in Drosophila . Mol . Biol . Cell . 21 : 1546 – 1555 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E09 - 07 - 0582 Frescas , D . , and M . Pagano . 2008 . Deregulated proteolysis by the F - box pro - teins SKP2 and beta - TrCP : tipping the scales of cancer . Nat . Rev . Cancer . 8 : 438 – 449 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrc2396 Fuchs , F . , G . Pau , D . Kranz , O . Sklyar , C . Budjan , S . Steinbrink , T . Horn , A . Pedal , W . Huber , and M . Boutros . 2010 . Clustering phenotype popula - tions by genome - wide RNAi and multiparametric imaging . Mol . Syst . Biol . 6 : 370 . doi : 10 . 1038 / msb . 2010 . 25 Gautier , J . J . , M . E . Lomakina , L . Bouslama - Oueghlani , E . Derivery , H . Beilinson , W . Faigle , D . Loew , D . Louvard , A . Echard , A . Y . Alexandrova , et al . 2011 . Clathrin is required for Scar / Wave - mediated lamellipodium forma - tion . J . Cell Sci . In press . Gautreau , A . , H . Y . Ho , J . Li , H . Steen , S . P . Gygi , and M . W . Kirschner . 2004 . Purification and architecture of the ubiquitous Wave complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 101 : 4379 – 4383 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0400628101 Goode , B . L . , and M . J . Eck . 2007 . Mechanism and function of formins in the con - trol of actin assembly . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 76 : 593 – 627 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . biochem . 75 . 103004 . 142647 Han , Y . , E . Eppinger , I . G . Schuster , L . U . Weigand , X . Liang , E . Kremmer , C . Peschel , and A . M . Krackhardt . 2009 . Formin - like 1 ( FMNL1 ) is regulated by N - terminal myristoylation and induces polarized membrane blebbing . J . Biol . Chem . 284 : 33409 – 33417 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M109 . 060699 Haralalka , S . , C . Shelton , H . N . Cartwright , E . Katzfey , E . Janzen , and S . M . Abmayr . 2011 . Asymmetric Mbc , active Rac1 and F - actin foci in the fusion - competent myoblasts during myoblast fusion in Drosophila . Development . 138 : 1551 – 1562 . doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 057653 Ho , M . S . , P . I . Tsai , and C . T . Chien . 2006 . F - box proteins : the key to protein deg - radation . J . Biomed . Sci . 13 : 181 – 191 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11373 - 005 - 9058 - 2 Hogan , C . , S . Dupré - Crochet , M . Norman , M . Kajita , C . Zimmermann , A . E . Pelling , E . Piddini , L . A . Baena - López , J . P . Vincent , Y . Itoh , et al . 2009 . Characterization of the interface between normal and transformed epithe - lial cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 : 460 – 467 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1853 Huang , J . , and J . Chen . 2008 . VprBP targets Merlin to the Roc1 - Cul4A - DDB1 E3 ligase complex for degradation . Oncogene . 27 : 4056 – 4064 . doi : 10 . 1038 / onc . 2008 . 44 Igal , R . A . 2010 . Stearoyl - CoA desaturase - 1 : a novel key player in the mecha - nisms of cell proliferation , programmed cell death and transformation to cancer . Carcinogenesis . 31 : 1509 – 1515 . doi : 10 . 1093 / carcin / bgq131 Innocenti , M . , A . Zucconi , A . Disanza , E . Frittoli , L . B . Areces , A . Steffen , T . E . Stradal , P . P . Di Fiore , M . F . Carlier , and G . Scita . 2004 . Abi1 is essential for the formation and activation of a WAVE2 signalling complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 : 319 – 327 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1105 Jaehning , J . A . 2010 . The Paf1 complex : platform or player in RNA polymerase II transcription ? Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1799 : 379 – 388 . Jani , K . , and F . Schöck . 2007 . Zasp is required for the assembly of functional integrin adhesion sites . J . Cell Biol . 179 : 1583 – 1597 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200707045 Jiang , J . , and G . Struhl . 1998 . Regulation of the Hedgehog and Wingless signal - ling pathways by the F - box / WD40 - repeat protein Slimb . Nature . 391 : 493 – 496 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 35154 Katoh , M . , and M . Katoh . 2003 . Identification and characterization of human FMNL1 , FMNL2 and FMNL3 genes in silico . Int . J . Oncol . 22 : 1161 – 1168 . Kiger , A . A . , B . Baum , S . Jones , M . R . Jones , A . Coulson , C . Echeverri , and N . Perrimon . 2003 . A functional genomic analysis of cell morphology using RNA interference . J . Biol . 2 : 27 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1475 - 4924 - 2 - 27 Kunda , P . , G . Craig , V . Dominguez , and B . Baum . 2003 . Abi , Sra1 , and Kette control the stability and localization of SCAR / WAVE to regulate 805 Screens define the conserved metazoan actinome • Rohn et al . Rogers , S . L . , U . Wiedemann , N . Stuurman , and R . D . Vale . 2003 . Molecular re - quirements for actin - based lamella formation in Drosophila S2 cells . J . Cell Biol . 162 : 1079 – 1088 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200303023 Rohn , J . L . , and B . Baum . 2010 . Actin and cellular architecture at a glance . J . Cell Sci . 123 : 155 – 158 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 049759 Rungger - Brändle , E . , and G . Gabbiani . 1983 . The role of cytoskeletal and cytocon - tractile elements in pathologic processes . Am . J . Pathol . 110 : 361 – 392 . Schnorrer , F . , C . Schönbauer , C . C . Langer , G . Dietzl , M . Novatchkova , K . Schernhuber , M . Fellner , A . Azaryan , M . Radolf , A . Stark , et al . 2010 . Systematic genetic analysis of muscle morphogenesis and function in Drosophila . Nature . 464 : 287 – 291 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature08799 Shaw , R . J . , J . G . Paez , M . Curto , A . Yaktine , W . M . Pruitt , I . Saotome , J . P . O’Bryan , V . Gupta , N . Ratner , C . J . Der , et al . 2001 . The Nf2 tumor sup - pressor , merlin , functions in Rac - dependent signaling . Dev . Cell . 1 : 63 – 72 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1534 - 5807 ( 01 ) 00009 - 0 Sherman , L . S . , and D . H . Gutmann . 2001 . Merlin : hanging tumor suppression on the Rac . Trends Cell Biol . 11 : 442 – 444 . Shi , X . , A . Finkelstein , A . J . Wolf , P . A . Wade , Z . F . Burton , and J . A . Jaehning . 1996 . Paf1p , an RNA polymerase II - associated factor in Saccharomyces cerevisiae , may have both positive and negative roles in transcription . Mol . Cell . Biol . 16 : 669 – 676 . Shimojima , T . , M . Okada , T . Nakayama , H . Ueda , K . Okawa , A . Iwamatsu , H . Handa , and S . Hirose . 2003 . Drosophila FACT contributes to Hox gene expression through physical and functional interactions with GAGA factor . Genes Dev . 17 : 1605 – 1616 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 1086803 Sims , D . , B . Bursteinas , Q . Gao , M . Zvelebil , and B . Baum . 2006 . FLIGHT : database and tools for the integration and cross - correlation of large - scale RNAi phenotypic datasets . Nucleic Acids Res . 34 ( Database issue ) : D479 – D483 . doi : 10 . 1093 / nar / gkj038 Sims , D . , P . Duchek , and B . Baum . 2009 . PDGF / VEGF signaling controls cell size in Drosophila . Genome Biol . 10 : R20 . doi : 10 . 1186 / gb - 2009 - 10 - 2 - r20 Sims , D . , B . Bursteinas , E . Jain , Q . Gao , B . Baum , and M . Zvelebil . 2010 . The FLIGHT Drosophila RNAi database : 2010 update . Fly ( Austin ) . 4 : 344 – 348 . Skarp , K . P . , and M . K . Vartiainen . 2010 . Actin on DNA - an ancient and dynamic relationship . Cytoskeleton ( Hoboken ) . 67 : 487 – 495 . Sönnichsen , B . , L . B . Koski , A . Walsh , P . Marschall , B . Neumann , M . Brehm , A . M . Alleaume , J . Artelt , P . Bettencourt , E . Cassin , et al . 2005 . Full - genome RNAi profiling of early embryogenesis in Caenorhabditis elegans . Nature . 434 : 462 – 469 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature03353 Spencer , V . A . , S . Costes , J . L . Inman , R . Xu , J . Chen , M . J . Hendzel , and M . J . Bissell . 2011 . Depletion of nuclear actin is a key mediator of quiescence in epithelial cells . J . Cell Sci . 124 : 123 – 132 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 073197 St Johnston , D . , and J . Ahringer . 2010 . Cell polarity in eggs and epithelia : paral - lels and diversity . Cell . 141 : 757 – 774 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2010 . 05 . 011 Stüven , T . , E . Hartmann , and D . Görlich . 2003 . Exportin 6 : a novel nuclear export receptor that is specific for profilin . actin complexes . EMBO J . 22 : 5928 – 5940 . doi : 10 . 1093 / emboj / cdg565 Tahirovic , S . , and F . Bradke . 2009 . Neuronal polarity . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 1 : a001644 . doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a001644 Vartiainen , M . K . 2008 . Nuclear actin dynamics—from form to function . FEBS Lett . 582 : 2033 – 2040 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . febslet . 2008 . 04 . 010 Wang , P . , M . R . Bowl , S . Bender , J . Peng , L . Farber , J . Chen , A . Ali , Z . Zhang , A . S . Alberts , R . V . Thakker , et al . 2008 . Parafibromin , a component of the human PAF complex , regulates growth factors and is required for embryonic development and survival in adult mice . Mol . Cell . Biol . 28 : 2930 – 2940 . doi : 10 . 1128 / MCB . 00654 - 07 Welch , W . J . , and J . P . Suhan . 1985 . Morphological study of the mammalian stress response : characterization of changes in cytoplasmic organelles , cytoskeleton , and nucleoli , and appearance of intranuclear actin filaments in rat fibroblasts after heat - shock treatment . J . Cell Biol . 101 : 1198 – 1211 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 101 . 4 . 1198 Xiao , G . H . , A . Beeser , J . Chernoff , and J . R . Testa . 2002 . p21 - activated ki - nase links Rac / Cdc42 signaling to merlin . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 883 – 886 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . C100553200 Xu , W . , P . Wang , B . Petri , Y . Zhang , W . Tang , L . Sun , H . Kress , T . Mann , Y . Shi , P . Kubes , and D . Wu . 2010 . Integrin - induced PIP5K1C kinase polar - ization regulates neutrophil polarization , directionality , and in vivo in - filtration . Immunity . 33 : 340 – 350 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2010 . 08 . 015 Yanagawa , S . , J . S . Lee , and A . Ishimoto . 1998 . Identification and characterization of a novel line of Drosophila Schneider S2 cells that respond to wingless signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 32353 – 32359 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . 273 . 48 . 32353 Ye , J . , J . Zhao , U . Hoffmann - Rohrer , and I . Grummt . 2008 . Nuclear myosin I acts in concert with polymeric actin to drive RNA polymerase I transcrip - tion . Genes Dev . 22 : 322 – 330 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 455908 Yin , H . L . , and P . A . Janmey . 2003 . Phosphoinositide regulation of the actin cyto - skeleton . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 65 : 761 – 789 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . physiol . 65 . 092101 . 142517