Plant Physiol . ( 1975 ) 55 , 333 - 337 Phycomyces : A Change in Mechanical Properties after a Light Stimultts ' Received for publication May 13 , 1974 and in revised form September 6 , 1974 JOSEPH K . E . ORTEGA , R . IGOR GAMow , AND C . NORMAN AHLQUIST2 Department of Aerospace Engineering Sciences and Mechanical Engineering Department , University of Color ado , Boulder , Colorado 80302 ABSTRACT Tensile tests were conducted on the photoresponsive stage IVb sporangiophore of the fungus Phycomyces before and after a saturating light stimulus . The results demonstrate that an increase in the mechanical extensibility of the cell wall occurs after the light stimulus . This increase in me - chanical extensibilitv occurs in the growing zone of the sporangiophore . The majority of this increase occurs in the region about 300 tameters beneath the sporangium . A mature stage IVb sporangiophore of the fungus Phycoin yces is a large cylindrical single - celled aerial hypha , 100 , um in diameter and several centimeters long . In an earlier stage of sporangio - phore development , a large spherical spore sac , the sporangium , develops on the tip of this elongating cylinder . The stage IVb sporangiophore grows vertically along its longitudinal axis and rotates about this axis in a clockwise direction when viewed from above . This left - handed spiral growth occurs in a region ( grow - ing zone ) between 0 . 1 to 2 . 5 mm below the sporangium . In recent years , a number of researchers have been attracted to studying the stage IVb sporangiophore as a model organism for sensory physiology . Phycomnyces responds quantitatively to a wide variety of stimuli , but perhaps the response that has been the most thor - oughly studied has been the light - growth response ; it responds quantitatively to broad band blue light and to UV but is totally insensitive to red light . A transient increase in growth rate occurs several minutes after a uniform increase in light intensity . This transient increase in growth rate is superimposed on the basal growth rate of the cell . This increase begins 2 . 5 to 3 min after the light stimulus and continues for another 6 to 7 min before the growth rate decreases to the normal rate of about 50 , um ' min . Stimulated growth rates of 70 Mm / min are typically observed . For a complete description of the behavior and physiology of Phycomnyces see Bergman et al . ( 2 ) and for a recent discussion of the light - growth response see Foster and Lipson ( 6 ) . The purpose of the present work has been to elucidate the mechanism of the light - growth response by measuring the me - chanical extensibility of the growing cell wall of the sporangio - phore during dark adaptation and after light stimulation . A recent 1 This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grants GB - 31039 and GB - 35597 . 2 Present address : Intel Corporation , Santa Clara , California . comparison of the mechanical extensibility of the cell wall of the nongrowing stage II with respect to the growing stage IVb sporangiophores has shown that the elongating stage IVb ex - hibits more extensibility when tested in tension than does the nonelongating stage 11 ( 1 ) . This increase in mechanical extensi - bility of the cell wall is accompanied by a transition in the me - chanical properties of the cell wall from a basically elastic struc - ture to a more plastic structure . Similar findings have been re - ported in the classic iron lung experiments of Roelofsen ( 9 ) . The following experiments were performed in an attempt to elucidate any possible changes in cell wall extensibility that may occur as a result of a saturating light stimulus . In each experi - ment , the same individual sporangiophore was used to ensure measurement of real changes within any given sporangiophore and not some random variation that may occur between sporan - giophores . MIATERIALS AND METHODS The sporangiophores were grown in glass shell vials containing 4 . 0 % 0 potato dextrose agar with 1 . 0 % - yeast extract under diffuse incandescent light . The sporangiophores were grown and tested at 22 C . Tensile loads were applied with an Instron Model T . M . tension - compression machine equipped with a Model A load cell set at high sensitivity ( 2 g full scale ) to stage IVb sporangiophores at a constant displacement rate of 2 . 54 mmj " min . These rates en - sured that any measured changes between a light - stimulated and dark - adapted state ( dark - adapted in red light for 40 min ) could not be explained as an artifact of increased growth rates . Before each tensile test the sporangiophore was dark - adapted for at least 40 min in a box ( 15 cm X 15 cm X 13 cm ) constructed of transparent red Plexiglas . This box contained a light bulb ( Syl - vania , 25 w , 120 v , soft white light ) which could be turned off and on from outside the box . All stimuli were pulse - up stimuli of 10 - sec or 2 - min duration . Tensile loads were transmitted to the sporangiophore using a 0 . 2 - mm Nichrome wire hook which passed first through a small hole in the Plexiglas box and was then attached directly under the sporangium ( Fig . 1 ) . The data for determining extension as a function of tensile load were obtained using two separate methods . First , the imposed displacement was calculated from the product of the machine extension rate and the time required to reach a particular tensile load . This method does not measure the actual extension of the sporangiophore since part of the imposed displacement is used to deform elastically the loading hook , but this method does measure actual changes in the extension of the sporangiophore since the extension of the loading hook is a linear function of load . In the second method , the actual extension was measured from photographs of the sporangiophore with starch markers on the growth zone . The photographs were taken with a 35 - mm Nikon FTN single lens reflex camera equipped with bellows ex - 333 www . plantphysiol . org on January 13 , 2018 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 1975 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . ORTEGA , GAMOW , AND AHLQUIST : . . . . w x : s * . . . . . - : : s * . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . - . . . . . , . . . . . i . . . . y 0 ; , - - ] * . . . . . . . . . : . . . . . . BE e . s * . . . . . . . * . . . . . FIG . 1 . Photograph of a stage IVb sporangiophore with starch markers and 0 . 2 - mm Nichrome wire hook attached immediately beneath the sporangium . tension , 50 - mm f , 2 . 0 lens and F - 36 motor drive . The photographs were taken at known loads , enlarged ( 40 X ) , and subsequently analyzed to yield the tensile load versus extension between pairs of starch markers . Both of the preceding methods were performed simultaneously on the same sporangiophore to check the con - sistency of the experimental results . To compare the mechanical behavior of a sporangiophore in a light - stimulated state to a dark - adapted state an elaborate loading sequence must be employed . Loading and unloading a sporangio - phore alters the mechanical properties of the cell wall such that a sporangiophore loaded a second time exhibits less extension for a given load . This " strain - hardening " phenomenon decreases to a negligible level after a number of consecutive loadings as shown in Figure 2 . Thus by sequentially loading and unloading a number of times , the variation in cell wall extensibility due to strain - hardening can be minimized . Since the light - growth response occurs 2 . 5 to 3 min after the light stimulus , it is also necessary to account for natural relaxation 334 Plant Physiol . Vol . 55 , 1975 www . plantphysiol . org on January 13 , 2018 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 1975 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . Plant Physiol . Vol . 55 , 1975 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF PHYCOMYCES LOAD ( m g ) 200 120 40 0 I ~ ~ ~ ~ 5 . ? 10 - 100 EXTENSION ( Ii m ) 200 FIG . 2 . The slope of the " load versus extension curve " increases by consecutively loading and unloading the sporangiophore . The numbers on top of each curve represent the number of consecutive loading and unloading that occurred prior to and including the loading from which the data for the respective curve were obtained . ( recovered extensibility ) that occurs during the period between the initiation of the light stimulus and the subsequent loading of the sporangiophore that measures its extensibility . Recovered ex - tensibility is used here to represent the change in mechanical extensibility of the cell wall which naturally occurs during the 4 - min relaxation period and is represented by the increase in extension observed from the S . H . 3 curve to control No . 1 ( C - 1 ) curve ( Fig . 3a ) . During the 4 - min relaxation period when no load is being applied , a significant amount of recovery occurs . The amount of recovered extensibility during this period can readily be determined by first strain - hardening the sporangiophore , al - lowing it to relax for 4 min and then loading it again . The in - crease in extension that occurs as a result of the 4 - min relaxation period represents the mechanical extensibility recovered during this period and can be subtracted from the change in mechanical extension that occurs after a combination of light stimulus 4 - min relaxation period . The following loading and unloading sequence was used in all experiments . After a 40 - min dark adaptation period , the sporan - giophore was consecutively loaded and unloaded 15 times to 240 mg to achieve a S . H . state . This was followed by a 4 - min relaxa - tion period at the end of which the sporangiophore was again loaded , the mechanical extensibility determined , and then loaded and unloaded another 5 to 10 times again to achieve a S . H . state . At the beginning of a second 4 - min relaxation period , a pulse - up light stimulus was applied . Four min after the initiation of the light stimulus the sporangiophore was again loaded to 240 mg , and the mechanical extensibility again was determined . RESULTS Typical " load versus extension " curves calculated from the imposed extension rate for a single sporangiophore are shown in Figure 3 . In Figure 3 , a and b , the curves on the Jeft ( those with the largest slope ) represent the S . H . state . In Figure 3a , the S . H . state is achieved by loading and unloading the sporangiophore 15 times . In Figure 3b , the S . H . state was reached by loading and unloading the sporangiophore 5 to 10 times after the first relaxation period . The two curves on the right in Figure 3 , a and b , represent the mechanical extensibility determined from IAbbreviations : S . H . : strain - hardened ; L . R . : light response . the first loading after the first relaxation and combination light stimulus / relaxation period , respectively . The increase in ex - tensibility due to the first relaxation period is represented by the increase in extension observed from the strain - hardened curve to control No . 1 ( C - 1 ) curve in Figure 3a . The increase in exten - sibility due to the combination , light stimulus / relaxation period , is represented by the increase in extension observed from the S . H . curve to the L . R . curve in Figure 3b . The larger increase in extensibility in Figure 3b is interpreted to be the result of the light stimulus . We determined the magnitude of the increase in extension ( EL ) that results from a light stimulus , by subtracting the increase in extension that occurs as a result of the 4 - min relaxation period ( El ) from the increase in extension that occurs after a combina - tion light stimulus 4 - min relaxation period , E2 . EL = E2 - El ; where El = ( C - 1 ) - S . H . and E2 = L . R . - S . H . The values for S . H . , C - 1 , and L . R . representing the extension were always ob - tained from the curves at a load of 200 mg . The mean value of LOAD ( mg ) 200 120 40 0 S . H . C - 1 _ so 100 EXTENSION I i1 m a 200 LOAD ( mg ) 200 r 120 40 S . H . _ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ v 0 I 100 EXTENSION [ u1 m ] 0 L . R . v 20b 200 FIG . 3 . An increase in mechanical extensibility , calculated from the imposed extension of a single sporangiophore , occurs after a 4 - min relaxation period ( a ) and after a combination pulse - up light stimulus , / 4 - min relaxation period ( b ) . a : Curve labeled S . H . represents the mechan - ical extensibility of the dark - adapted sporangiophore after it had been " strain - hardened " ( loaded and unloaded 14 times ) , and the curve labeled C - 1 represents the sporangiophore ' s mechanical extensibility after a 4 - min relaxation period . b : Curve S . H . again represents the sporangiophore ' s mechanical extensibility after a second sequence of strain hardening ( loaded and unloaded 5 to 10 times ) and the curve labeled L . R . represents the strain - hardened sporangiophore ' s mechani - cal extensibility after a combination light - stimulus ' 4 - min relaxation period . The larger increase in mechanical extensibility observed in b is attributed to the light stimulus . 335 ) - www . plantphysiol . org on January 13 , 2018 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 1975 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . ORTEGA , GAMOW , AND AHLQUIST Plant Physiol . Vol . 55 , 1975 EL , for 15 experiments , is 16 . 8 Aum with a standard deviation of 8 . 9 j , m . To ensure that the light stimulus was responsible for the in - crease in extensibility and not some artifact of the loading se - quence , the same loading sequence was performed without the light stimulus . In all cases , the increase in extension that resulted from the second relaxation period without a light stimulus was always the same or less than the increase in extension that re - sulted from the first relaxation period . As previously described , the magnitude of the difference in extension that results from the first and second relaxation periods ( E , ) can be determined . For seven experiments the mean value of E , is - 5 . 3 , um with a stand - ard deviation of ±4 . 9 Am . This result ensures that the increased extensibility must be a function of the light stimulus alone . Inter - estingly , even after such a complex loading sequence , three spo - rangiophores , which were observed afterward , exhibited growth at a near normal rate of approximately 30 , m min , for many hours afterward . e ( Engineering Stra . n ) 0 . 3 r 0 . 2 0 . 1 LOAD ( mg ) 200 S . H6 . C - 1 a L . R . X 11 , FIG . 5 . Engineering strain . e , plotted as a function of X shows the change in mechanical extensibility of local regions within the growth zone . The engineering strain of various regions along the grow ing zone of a single sporangiophore is plotted during the " strain - hardened " state S . H . ( X ) , after a 4 - min relaxation period C - 1 ( @ ) and after a combination pulse - up light stimulus / 4 - min relaxation period L . R . ( V ) . 0 100 EXTENSION [ i m ] LOAD ( m g ) 200 100 [ 0 SJH . L . R . V 100 EXTENSION [ rn m ] FIG . 4 . Increase in mechanical extensibi photographs taken at known loads of a singl after a 4 - min relaxation period [ a ] and aftei light stimulus / 4 - min relaxation period [ b ] ) . I labeled S . H . represent the mechanical exten phore in the " strain - hardened " state . a : Cur rangiophore ' s mechanical extensibility after a b : curve L . R . represents the sporangiophore ' after a combination light - stimulus / 4 - min rela increase in mechanical extensibility observe tributed to the light stimulus . ri I ' To be sure that the observed increase in mechanical extensibil - 200 ity occurred in the growing zone and to check the consistency of the experimental results , both the photographic and calculated methods were performed simultaneously . Figure 1 is representa - tive of photographic data ; note the hook attached under the sporangium and the random distribution of starch granules on the cell wall . Figure 4 shows typical load versus extension curves obtained from photographs taken at known loads , of the upper 4 - mm region of a sporangiophore marked with starch granules . Although the total extension due to loading is less than the ex - tension calculated from the imposed extension rate , the increase in extension that results from the first relaxation and combination light stimulus , ; relaxation periods are quantitatively the same as the respective increases in the calculated extension ( the sporangi - ophore used to obtain the curves in Fig . 4 is not the same spor - rangiophore used for Fig . 3 ) . Of the four experiments conducted where the extension was calculated and compared with the ex - tension measured from photographic data for individual sporan - giophores , the increases in extension were very nearly the same . , b The important result is that the measured increase in extensibil - 200 ity following a pulse - up light stimulus occurs in the growing zone . To determine which local region ( s ) in this upper 4 - mm zone experiences a change in extensibility as a result of a light ility , as measured from stimulus , the fractional extension or engineering strain , e , was e sporangiophore ( occurs plotted as a function of X ( the distance below the base of the a combination pulse - up sporangium ) . 4 Figure 5 shows " e versus X " curves calculated . n both a and b the curves from the photographic data obtained from the same sporangio - veC - I rpnrpto nthstheago - phore whose " load versus extension " curves are presented in VW , % - - 1 I toss % , 11 _ It V i 4 - min relaxation period ; ' s mechanical extensibility txation period . The larger d in b ( L . R . - S . H . ) is at - 4Engineering strain , e , is the ratio of the change in length of the sample , AX , to its original length xo . The engineering strain was deter - mined for each region by measuring the increase in extension between starch grains using enlarged photos taken at 40 mg and 200 mg load . 336 100 . 1000 2300 3000 x I www . plantphysiol . org on January 13 , 2018 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 1975 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF PHYCOMYCES Figure 3 . Because the two curves for S . H . sporangiophore in Figure 3 , a and b , are nearly identical , they are plotted as one in Figure 5 . Figure 5 shows that the major increase in the light - in - duced mechanical extensibility occurs in the upper 300 , tm of the growing zone . Three experiments where the extensibility was measured photographically all show that the majority of the in - crease that results from a light stimulus occurs in the upper 300 , um of the growing zone . This result is in agreement with Castle ' s ( 3 ) finding that maximum stimulated growth occurs in this re - gion . The sharp local increase in the mechanical extensibility in the upper region of the growing zone does not necessarily repre - sent the distribution of increased extensibility found during the stimulated growth of the light - growth response because during tensile loading the sporangiophore is subjected to much greater longitudinal loads than it experiences due to internal turgor pres - sure alone , and light - induced weakening of the cell wall may be expected to be magnified at the weakest region by such a large tensile load . To ensure that the heat generated by the light source ( Sylvania , 25 w , 120 v , soft white light ) was not responsible for the meas - ured increase in extensibility that occurred after a light stimulus the following controls were conducted . A Schott RG 630 ( 630 nm ) 3 mm thick , cut - off filter , which is 90 % transparent to wave - lengths longer than 670 nm and essentially opaque to shorter wavelengths ( 600 nm or less ) was mounted between the light source and the test sporangiophore . The same loading sequence was performed as previously described and a 2 - min red light pulse - up stimulus was substituted for the normal 2 - min white light pulse - up stimulus . The results were the same as those ob - tained when the loading sequence was conducted without a light stimulus . The reciprocal experiment , filtering out the infrared and permitting white light to be transmitted , was also performed . In this experiment a water filter , 1 . 5 cm thick , was mounted be - tween the light source and the test sporangiophore . Again the same loading sequence was used with a 2 - min white light pulse - up stimulus given at the beginning of the second 4 - min relaxation period . The results were the same as those results obtained with a 2 - min white light pulse - up stimulus without the water filter . These experiments ensure that the increase in mechanical extensibility is a result of the light stimulus and not heat generated by the light source . DISCUSSION The observed increase in mechanical extensibility after a pulse - up light stimulus is consistent with the following model for cell expansion . The internal turgor pressure ( 2 - 3 atm ) drives the plastic deformation of the soft , extensible wall of the growing zone which could result in longitudinal and radial expansion of the cell . This model predicts that an increase in extension rate ( growth rate ) can be achieved by increasing the extensibility of the cell wall ( 8 ) . In view of this proposed model for cell expansion in Plhyco - myces , the primary effect of a light stimulus is to cause a weaken - ing of the cell wall which will then result in faster extension rates . This weakening of the cell wall could be achieved with a cell wall - loosening enzyme . The weakening of the cell wall would then be followed by an increase in the rate of cell wall synthesis to prevent the thinning out of the cell wall and eventual rupture . This in - crease in cell wall synthesis would result in a thickening of the cell wall , thus a decrease in cell wall extensibility and a decrease in extension rate . This could account for the transient nature of the light - growth response . Cell wall - loosening enzymes have been reported in plant sys - tems ( 4 ) and recently chitinase activity has been located in the stage IVb sporangiophore by R . J . Cohen ( 5 ) . In addition , in - creased cell wall synthesis ( chitin synthesis ) in stage IVb spo - rangiophores after a light stimulus has also been observed ( 7 ) . Further studies of these two interesting and perhaps coupled processes could contribute to the understanding of the molecular mechanism of the light - growth response . Acknouledgment . s - We thank Miss Ba . rbel Bottger for excellent technical assistance and Ken Foster for the many fruitful discussions while this project was underway . LITERATURE CITED 1 . AHLQrIST , C . N . AND R . I . GAM OW . 1973 . The mechanical behavior of stage II and stage IV . Plant Physiol . 51 : 586 - 587 . 2 . BERGMAN - , K . , P . V . BURKE , E . CERDk - OLMEDO , C . N . DAVID , M . DELBRtCK , K . W . FOSTER , E . W . GOODALL , M . HEISENBERG , G . MEISSNER , M . ZALAKAR , D . S . DENNISON , AND W . SHROPSHIRE , JR . 1969 . Phycomyces . Bacteriol . Rev . 33 : 99 - 157 . 3 . CASTLE , E . S . 1959 . Growth distribution in the light - growth responses of Phyco - myces . J . Gen . Physiol . 42 : 697 - 702 . 4 . CLELAND , R . 1971 . Cell wall extension . Ann . Rev . Plant Physiol . 22 : 197 - 222 . 5 . COHEN , R . J . 1974 . Some properties of chitinase from Phycomyces blakesleeanus . Life Sci . 15 : 289 - 300 . 6 . FOSTER , K . W . AND E . D . LIPsoN . 1973 . The light - growth response of Phycomyces . J . Gen . Physiol . 62 : 590 - 617 . 7 . JAN , Y . N . 1974 . Properties and cellular localization of chitin synthesis in Phyco - myces blakesleeanus . J . Biol . Chem . 249 : 1973 - 1979 . 8 . ORTEGA , J . K . E . AND R . I . GAMOW . 1974 . The problem of handedness reversal during the spiral growth of Phycomyces . J . Theor . Biol . 47 : 317 - 335 . 9 . ROELOFSEN , P . A . 1950 . The origin of spiral growrth in Phycomyces . Rec . Trav . Bot . N6erl . 42 : 73 - 110 . Plant Physiol . Vol . 55 , 1975 337 www . plantphysiol . org on January 13 , 2018 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 1975 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved .