Four Mental Operations in Creative Cognition : The Importance of Abstraction Hans Welling Instituto Superior Te´cnico , Portugal ABSTRACT : In reviewing existing theories of crea - tivity , 4 mental operations seem to account for creative cognition : application , analogy , combi - nation , and abstraction . The defining characteristics and the resulting products of these 4 operations are discussed and broad implications for understanding cultural movements , such as surrealism and renais - sance , and scientific revolutions , such relativity theory , are explored . These operations form an ordi - nal scale of innovation , but are not predictive of the impact or success of the creative product . The abstraction operation is stressed , having been rela - tively neglected in the literature on creative cog - nition . Careful distinction between these 4 operations may shed new light on the sudden - grad - ual and special – ordinary controversies that exist in the field . Further , the often - used insight problem methodology is insufficient for studying the full range of creative operations . Examples of a more adequate methodology are provided . Creativity has been the object of formal academic study for over a century and of philosophical reflection for more than 2 millennia . In spite of ingenious experimental design stemming from tra - ditions such as Gestalt ( e . g . , Kohler , 1925 ; Wertheimer , 1945 ) , Associative theory ( e . g . , Mednick , 1962 ; Martindale , 1989 ) , Problem - Solving ( e . g . , Newell , Shaw , & Simon , 1962 ) , Cognitive ( e . g . , Finke , Ward , & Smith , 1992 ; Schooler , Ohlsson , & Brooks , 1993 ) or Integrationist models ( e . g . , Simonton , 1999 ; Sternberg , 1999a ) , the essence of the creative act continues elusive . A lot is known about creativity , such as the occurrence of incu - bation and insight phenomena ( Dunker , 1945 ) , intuition and other meta - cognitive phenomena ( Smith , 1995 ) , and asymmetric distribution ( Simonton , 1997 ) ; the effects of mental imagery ( Rothenberg , 1979 ) , verbal interference ( Schooler & Melcher , 1995 ) , and priming ( Smith , 1995 ) ; and the role of personality ( Eysenck , 1997 ) , social context ( Csikszentmihhalyi & Sawyer , 1995 ) , prior knowledge , and domain specificity ( Weisberg , 1995b ) . However , it has been hard to pinpoint the exact cognitive operations that account for cre - ative capacity . This difficulty can be resumed in the creativity paradox introduced by Plato ( quoted in Jowett , 1937 ) in his discussions with Meno about where new knowledge comes from . Put dif - ferently : How can a system produce ideas beyond the concepts that are already included in it ? Where did Newton’s conception of gravity come from ? How did Scho¨nberg get to his decatonal system ? Plato’s solution for this problem is that all new knowledge has to be a reminiscence , probably even from previous lives . Apart from the metaphysical character of this solution , any hypothesis that implies , like Plato’s , drawing from a pool of exist - ing ideas is faced with at least two problems . The first is that the scope of our knowledge would always be limited , and the second consists of the fact that it is unclear where this pool of knowledge came from in the first place . Many authors have chosen a two - fold solution , proposing some kind of operation that generates ideas , followed by a second operation that selects the useful results from this generation process . Among several people who know they helped me , I want to thank especially Max Welling for our ongoing discussions and Ant (cid:1) oonio Branco Vasco for his careful review . Correspondence should be sent to Hans Welling , Quinta do Moinho , Canaviais , 7000 - 213 . E ´ vora , Portugal . E - mail : hanswelling @ yahoo . com Creativity Research Journal 2007 , Vol . 19 , Nos . 2 – 3 , 163 – 177 Copyright # 2007 by Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Creativity Research Journal 163 This two - fold solution can be found in most major theories on creativity such as Campbell’s ( 1960 ) blind variation and selective retention model ; Mednick’s ( 1962 ) associative hierarchy theory ; Finke et al . ’s ( 1992 ) geneplore model , and Davidson and Sternberg’s ( 1986 ) three process theory of creativity . In this article , I principally review and organize the possible cognitive operations in existing the - ories that generate new ideas or products . Only in the discussion section I offer some tentative reflections on the selection operation . Its main contribution is to demonstrate that existing the - ories on creativity can essentially be brought back to four creative cognitive operations . Special attention will be given to the abstraction oper - ation , which has often been neglected the litera - ture , though it constitutes a core operation for many instances of higher creativity . Finally , I dem - onstrate the relevancy of distinguishing these four operations with respect to the special – ordinary and the sudden - gradual controversies that exist in the field and research methodology . I shall begin by outlining some general aspects of creativ - ity and by describing these two controversies . Defining Creativity There is no simple definition of creativity , but several emphases have been made in the past that highlight various aspects of the creative effort , both with respect to its process as well as to its product . Probably the most defining characteristic of creativity is that of novelty . To be creative means producing or thinking something new . Scientific or artistic creativity requires that something original is produced , or at least added , something that has not been conceived or made before . A scientific discovery , for instance , will not be deemed authorship if it has been published elsewhere before . When studying creativity as a cognitive function , originality for the individual alone is the only requirement . An individual that finds an original solution for a certain problem , unaware of the fact that this solution has been found previously by somebody else , is still con - sidered a valid example of creativity . For instance , acts may be observed in children that are creative , yet are commonly performed by children in a certain developmental phase . New behavior in a subject that has been acquired by imitation or by verbal transmission will not classify as creative . A particular difficulty exists in defining this novelty criterion . From a certain perspective , every human act might be considered creative in the sense that no situation is exactly the same as a pre - vious one . Even something as automatic as car driving requires constant adaptations to new traf - fic situations , and thus might be considered cre - ative . Most calculus problems one encounters , one has never performed before , yet are solved by applying the same rules and operations . Although admitting that some creativity is involved in such situations , most authors prefer to differentiate between normal thought and cre - ative thought , designating the latter as productive ( Wertheimer , 1945 ) , lateral ( de Bono , 1970 ) , or divergent thought ( Guilford , 1986 ; Runco , 1991a ) . This distinction will be elaborated further in the special – ordinary controversy section . A second defining characteristic of creativity is that its result should be adaptive ( Simonton , 1999 ) . Not just any variation or innovation can be considered creative unless the product is adapt - ive or useful to the goal it was designed for . An inventor who produces wild ideas , without any use or practical applicability , is rather judged insane than creative . According to Simonton , the creative effort does not exist in a vacuum but is appreciated according to practical or aesthetic standards . For instance , Edison’s invention of the electric light may not be an example of extra - ordinary complex creation , but it is valued and remembered by its usefulness . A third and final consideration about creativity is that some ideas or products can be considered more creative than others ( Simonton , 1999 ) . Some creativity impresses more than others , because some things are more radically or profoundly new than others Rembrandt made fabulous paint - ings , but remained largely within the existing tra - dition . Van Gogh , poorly understood in his time , paved the way for a new style . Mozart is probably one of the most gifted composers ever and took an existing tradition to its peak , yet Scho¨nberg revo - lutionized music . Faraday has contributed greatly to the understanding of the unity of electricity and H . Welling 164 Creativity Research Journal magnetism , yet after Einstein and Bohr , physics has never been the same . The distinction between important versus revolutionary contributions in science has been clarified by Kuhn ( 1962 ) . He argued that most discoveries and theories occur within the current methodological framework of the scientific community , whereas few surpass the existing boundaries and assumptions . The ones that eventually cause paradigm shifts in their scientific field , when their ability to incorporate and exceed the existing paradigm is demonstrated . A similar reasoning can be applied to other , fields such as artistic , social , commercial , or interperso - nal creativity ( Gardner , 1983 ) . Although authors will generally agree on these defining characteristics of what is to be considered creative , this agreement does not extend itself to the question how creativity comes about . A lot of discussion has been going on around two key issues that will be outlined now . Two Controversies In studying creativity scientifically , two important approaches were developed , which Sternberg and Davidson ( 1995 ) referred to as the puzzle - problem approach and the ‘‘great - minds approach . ’’ The first is rooted in the Gestalt tra - dition . In 1926 , Wallas published an influential process model for creative problem - solving , in which he proposed four phases : introductory work ( preparation ) , a period of apparent inactivity ( incubation ) , a sudden understanding ( illumi - nation ) , and , finally , elaborating and testing the idea ( verification ) . Gestalt psychologists such as Wertheimer ( 1945 ) and Duncker ( 1945 ) saw a par - allel between this illumination phase and the insight that occurs in the discovery of perceptual organization such as pattern recognition or figure – background switching . This led to a long - standing experimental tradition of investigating the creative process and measuring individuals’ creative potential through the so - called insight problems ( Sternberg & Davidson , 1995 ) . Insight problems as opposed to analytical problems cannot be tackled by straightforward problem - solving . The solution strategies that first come to mind are not able to solve the problem . Insight problems can help to understand aspects of creativity , because their resolution process mimics phases of the creative process such as impasse , incubation , and insight . The value of these experi - ments was that they reproduced the phenomena that are characteristic elements of artistic and scientific creativity on a convenient laboratorial scale . Among these are the effects of priming and cognitive fixation ( Smith , 1995 ) , verbal inter - ference in the incubation phase ( Schooler & Melcher , 1995 ) , the influence of hints ( Burke , Mayer , & Hoffman , 1966 ) , and the role of restruc - turing the problem ( Gick & Lockert , 1995 ) . An excellent collection of recent developments in this approach can be found in Sternberg and Davidson ( 1995 ) . The great - minds approach to investigating crea - tivity studied characteristics of creative people and their products , elements largely drawn from bio - graphical data and self - reports . One of the first and most famous in this line was Hadamard ( 1945 ) ; current representatives of this approach being Simonton ( 1886 , 1997 , 1999 ) and Weisberg ( 1986 , 1988 , 1995a , 1995b ) . Having the obvious disadvantages of nonexperimental research , this approach has nevertheless produced important data about the creative process . It has demon - strated the importance of imagery ( Poincare´ , 1945 ; Rothenberg , 1979 ) , nonconformistic person - ality ( Chambers , 1964 ) , social context ( Sternberg & Lubart , 1995 ; Csikszentmihhalyi & Sawyer , 1995 ) , the role of prior knowledge and domain specificity ( Mandler , 1995 ; Weisberg , 1995b ) , and intuition and other meta - cognitive phenomena ( Smith , 1995 ) . From the confrontation of these two approaches , two controversies regarding the cre - ative process arose , having very important impli - cations for the understanding of creative capacity . The first controversy deals with the ques - tion of whether creativity should be understood as a gradual process in which solutions appear in a continuous fashion or as a discreet process in which the solution pops up in a single sudden leap . This is commonly known as the ‘‘sudden – gradual’’ controversy ( Smith , Ward , & Finke , 1995 , p . 328 ) . The great minds approach has found evidence for a gradual process in often - reported meta - cognitive phenomena such as ‘‘feelings of knowing’’ or ‘‘warmth ratings’’ ( Smith , 1995 ) . Gruber ( 1974 ) , Four Mental Operations in Creative Cognition Creativity Research Journal 165 studying the creative process in highly creative individuals , concluded that creation is a slow con - struction process . Simonton ( 1997 ) corroborated this finding , showing that it takes more than a decade to produce significant results in a scientific or artistic career . Arguments for the sudden hypothesis have come mostly from the Gestaltic puzzle - problem approach . It was argued that subjects first had to liberate themselves from func - tional fixedness ( Duncker , 1945 ) . This allowed for restructuring the problem ( Wertheimer , 1945 ) , which then led to immediate insight ( Ellen , 1982 ; Scheerer , 1963 ) . Crucial in this respect was the often - cited research by Metcalfe and colleagues ( Metcalfe , 1986 ; Metcalfe & Wiebe , 1987 ) , who found no evidence of feelings of warmth in insight problems , thus presenting a strong argument against the notion of creativity as a more gradual process . In Metcalfe’s experiments , subjects could not predict their success on insight problems , whereas they could on routine algebra problems and trivia questions . Several attempts have been made to explain these findings without invoking a sudden insight . Perkins ( 1981 ) , in studying retro - spective reports , observed that the majority of sub - jects reported solving insight problems in a piecemeal stepwise fashion . He argued that the problem was solved in logical steps , but each step happened so quickly that they seemed to have occurred in a single leap . Similarly , Weisberg ( 1986 , 1995a ) , studying the creative careers of vari - ous scientists and artists , argued that insight fol - lowing restructuring was only one of the many crucial processes . He also identified combination of ideas , drawing analogies and outside influences , as an essential process , which together with restructuring make up a gradual process of shap - ing ideas or style : ‘‘There seems very little reason to believe that solutions to novel problems come about in leaps of insight . At every step of the way , the process involves a small movement away from what is known’’ ( Weisberg , 1986 , p . 50 ) . Bowers , Farvolden , and Mermigis ( 1995 ) observed that incorrect answers or guesses in verbal insight problems often have a close semantic relationship with the correct solution . They argued that the suddenness of the appearance of insight represents an abrupt awareness of a mental state preceded by more continuous unconscious cognitive processes . Several attempts have been made to bridge this controversy by identifying some intermediate steps that lead to the restructuring of a problem . Davidson and Sternberg ( 1986 ) identified selective encoding , combination , and comparison as leading to insight , whereas Finke et al . ( 1992 ) found evidence of the existence of preinventive forms leading to innovative design . The second controversy deals with the question as to whether ordinary , everyday creativity is gov - erned by the same processes that are found in art and science or if they represent structurally differ - ent special capacities . Smith , Ward , and Finke ( 1995 ) refer to this issue as the ‘‘special – ordinary paradox’’ ( p . 328 ) . Advocates of the idea that the same processes are at work in all areas of creativity can be found mostly working within the puzzle - problem approach . Ghiselin ( 1952 ) , for instance , found that renowned creators reported the same phases of hard preparatory work , incubation , insight , and verification of their ideas , as found in the process of insight problems . Thurstone ( 1952 ) found no qualitative differences in prob - lem - solving at different levels of complexity . Novell , Shaw , and Simon ( 1962 ) simulated cre - ative problem - solving in computer programs and concluded that creativity can be explained by ordi - nary processes , such as memory , algorithms , and inferential reasoning . Langly and Jones ( 1988 ) saw creativity as stemming from memory and thinking processes . More recently , Mandler ( 1995 ) defended that the ability to produce novelty is common in everyday thinking , suggesting that the mechanisms underlying creativity are normal ones . Schank and Cleary ( 1995 ) stated , ‘‘these small acts of creativity , though they differ in scope , are not different in kind from the brilliant leaps of Einstein’’ ( p . 229 ) . Finke ( 1995 ) specified processes that ‘‘can occur at many levels , ranging from major scientific theories and artistic creations to the simple , everyday activities’’ ( p . 304 ) . The most important arguments against this view came from authors that studied great creators . Vernon ( 1989 ) was strongly opposed to comparing ordinary crea - tivity , such as a house owner designing his or her garden , with the creativity found in great artists such as Leonardo DaVinci . Treffinger ( 1987 ) viewed everyday creativity ( ‘‘little C’’ ) as minor , compared to high creativity ( ‘‘big C’’ ) . Dennis H . Welling 166 Creativity Research Journal ( 1955 ) , Walberg ( 1988 ) , and Vernon ( 1989 ) found arguments for differentiated creative abilities in the asymmetric distribution of creativity in the general population . A very small percentage of creators are responsible for the large majority of the important creative contributions . Although part of this effect may be explained by differences in motivation and opportunity , this finding consti - tutes a good argument that everyday creativity is probably not based on the same skills . Chase and Simon ( 1973 ) , and later Simonton ( 1997 ) , demonstrated that typically a period of 10 years is required for a scientist to make a major contri - bution to his or her field , and about 20 years to produce his or her most important work . It is questionable whether the cognitive processes involved in creativity , as found in yearlong endea - vors of scientists and artists , are comparable with the processes involved in the solution of rather simple insight problems that generally do not require more than 10 or 15 min to be solved . Within the great - minds , approach Weisberg ( 1986 , 1988 ) took a dissident position , arguing that insight should not be distinguished from other types of problem solving . He defend the idea that great creators basically do the same as everybody else , using regular cognitive skills such as imagery , language , and memory . I show later on that new light can be shed on these two controversies when both the demands of the task and the required cre - ative operations are taken into account more accu - rately . These creative cognitive operations are now reviewed . Creative Cognitive Operations In this section , four different cognitive opera - tions are discussed . Three of them ( application , analogy , and combination ) are generally men - tioned in the literature on creative cognition , yet seldom properly distinguished from each other . A fourth operation , abstraction , can be found in the field of developmental and educational psy - chology ( Thomas , Crowl , & Kaminsky 1996 ) , yet rarely appears in the literature of creative cog - nition . The four operations , as will become clear by their description , represent an ordinal scale with respect to the amount of innovation involved in each type of creativity . Interestingly enough , the reference that comes closest to identifying these four operations in conjunction is over a century old . It is from William James ( 1880 ) : But turn to the highest order of minds , and what a change ! Instead of thoughts of concrete things patiently following one another in a beaten track of habitual suggestion , we have the most abrupt cross - cuts and tran - sitions from one idea to another , the most rarefied abstractions and discriminations , the most unheard of combinations of elements , the subtlest associations of analogy . ( p . 10 ) Application of Existing Knowledge A creative cognitive operation that is often mentioned in the literature on creativity might be identified as application : the adaptive use of exist - ing knowledge in its habitual context . Creativity is required for fitting reality into an existing concep - tual format . This operation consists of the creative adaptation of existing conceptual structures to fit normally occurring variations . The most obvious instance of application is everyday activity . Seem - ingly repetitious activities such as walking , driving , the use of language , and calculus all imply the application of known rules in a creative fashion . This operation is virtually identical to Sternberg’s ( 1999b ) ‘‘conceptual replication , ’’ which he defined as replication ‘‘under circumstances some - what different from those that originally gave rise to it’’ ( p . 92 ) . I prefer the term application because it has a less mechanical connotation . The Gestalt tradition thought of this type of activity as non - creative . For example , Wertheimer ( 1945 ) dis - tinguished this reproductive thought from the creative productive thought . Several authors have argued against this view of mechanically repeated action , arguing that everyday routine activity requires a considerable amount of creativity . For example , Mandler ( 1995 ) stated that ‘‘no rep - etition is very truly entirely that ; there is always something novel in whatever we do or say’’ ( p . 11 ) . Schank and Cleary ( 1995 ) drew attention to the fact that no situation is exactly the same as a previous one : ‘‘The world is not full of standard problems amenable to standard solutions . Every - body needs to be somewhat creative simply to get through a typical day and deal with the Four Mental Operations in Creative Cognition Creativity Research Journal 167 innumerable shifts from the ordinary that arise’’ ( p . 229 ) . Even the simplest routine activity implies a certain recreation of cognitive structures , because no situation is exactly the same as previ - ous ones . Application bears a strong resemblance to Piaget’s ( 1936 = 1952 ) principle of assimilation . As opposed to accommodation , which implies a change in the organism’s functioning to enhance adaptation to the environment , the principle of assimilation assumes that reality is formed and interpreted according to the existing cognitive structure . In the realm of intellectual activity , a good illus - tration of application may be the work of a lawyer . The lawyer has to find the most advantageous fit between the facts present in the case and existing juridical concepts . This surely is a complex and creative task . Yet this creativity is limited in the sense that the lawyer cannot invent new concepts or laws , but has to work within the existing frame - work ; no new conceptual structures are being cre - ated . Also , a considerable part of experimental and laboratorial scientific work can be considered application , because it is done within the existing framework introducing the necessary variations to adapt it to the necessities of the current context . Finally , in the realm of art , an example of appli - cation is craftsmanship : although basically the same product is produced with existing techniques , new adaptations are required continuously . Analogy Detection A second creative cognitive operation that is commonly identified is the use of analogy . Many authors have referred to analogy as a key concept in creativity . It implies the transposition of a con - ceptual structure from one habitual context to another innovative context . The abstract relation - ship between the elements of one situation is simi - lar to those found in the innovative context . Michael Wertheimer ( 1991 ) virtually defined insight as analogy : ‘‘Discovery of the applicability of an existing schema to a new situation’’ ( p . 190 ) . Finke et al . ( 1992 ) also referred to analogical transfer as a generative process for creating prein - ventive structures . Weisberg ( 1995a ) explained sev - eral artistic and scientific achievements by analogical transfer as follows : ‘‘situations in which information from a previous situation is trans - ferred to the new situation that is analogous to the old’’ ( p . 62 ) . Analogy detection can be found in the three process theory of creativity of Davidson and Sternberg ( 1986 ; Sternberg , 1986 ) in the selective comparison phase , which involves the judicious use of analogies . Dunbar ( 1995 ) , while studying scientists , identified three different kinds of analogical reasoning . Local analogy occurs when the scientist draws an analogy on a single characteristic from one experiment to another ; in regional analogy a whole system of relationships from a similar domain is mapped onto another domain , and long - distance analogy is used when these systems come from an entirely different domain . Unlike the application oper - ation , detecting and implementing an analogy is generally accepted as a creative act . It is seldom recognized though , that for this operation , in essence , no new cognitive structure is required ! In both the application operation and the analogy operation , existing structures are used creatively . In the case of an application operation , they are used to deal with variations within the habitual domain ; in the case of analogy , the existing knowl - edge is transferred to a new context . Most insight problems require solutions that are based on the use of analogy . A classification of insight problems ( Weisberg , 1995b ) showed that , in the large majority of these problems , the solution is either based on discovering an unconventional use of objects or words , or requires a loosening from the initial ( most obvious ) interpretation of the task . In these cases , the solution emerges from using the creative operation of analogy detection . This implies serious limitations for this method - ology , an issue that will be addressed in the Discussion section . An illustration of a scientific field in which the use of analogies is particularly frequent is chemis - try . Numerous concepts such as bonds , shells , loadings , and energy are mere analogical approxi - mations to model molecular interactions . Ke´kule´’s ( Wotiz & Rudofsky , 1954 ) famous discovery of the circular structure of the benzene model is another good example of creation by analogy . No new con - cept was required to solve the problem , because the concept of a circle was readily available . Other discoveries that are usually considered the result of H . Welling 168 Creativity Research Journal analogical reasoning are Archimedes’ crown ( Davidson , 1995 ) and the planetary model of the atom ( Finke , 1995 ) . In art , the importance of analogy can be found in the spreading of artistic styles like Impression - ism or Surrealism . For instance , surrealism is based the idea of transcending everyday reality incorporating imaginative and unconscious ele - ments ( compare Breton , 1924 ) . Having originated in literature ( Breton ; Soupault ) , it quickly spread to the visual arts ( Chirico ; Giacometti ) , music ( Vare ` se ) , and film and photography ( Bu ~ nnuel ; Man Ray ) . On an even bigger scale , the role of analogy can be seen in the spreading of the idea - tional content , for instance , during the Renais - sance , which influenced virtually all areas of intellectual and artistic activity . Following a renewed interest in classical texts in Italy in the 15th century 1 ( Holmes , 1989 ) , the idea of import - ing classical values and methods , analogous to what happened in the visual arts and science ( e . g . , Donatello , Michelangelo , da Vinci ) , took place in fields such as music , philosophy , architec - ture , politics , law , and even warfare . Combination Generation Combination is the merging of two or more concepts into one new idea . It differs from analogy in the sense that this operation requires the cre - ation of a new conceptual structure . Concepts can be combined either spatially—concepts are applied simultaneously—or temporally , in which the combination results from the sequential appli - cations of existing ideas ( Simonton , 1999 ) . Mumford , Mobley , Uhlman , Reiter - Palmon , and Doares , ( 1991 ) added that combination can not only be obtained by the combination of previously distinct concepts , but also by the rearrangement of elements within an existing concept . Combination of ideas is probably the most frequently invoked mechanism for explaining creative ability . Maier ( 1940 ) argued that novel actions and approaches can be attained by old experiences in new combi - nations ; Martindale ( 1989 ) stated that creative thought comes from new combinations of old ideas . Combination lies at the basis of Campbell’s ( 1960 ) influential blind variation and selective retention model , in which the generation of new ideas results from a random combination process followed by an evaluation in which only the most useful ideas are retained . More recently , Simonton ( 1988b ; 1992 ) elaborated this idea , introducing the concept of chance - permutations to clarify the vari - ation step and drawing a link to Darwinism for explaining the selection mechanism to extract adaptive ideas from these permutations . Mednick ( 1962 ) , within the associativist tradition , explained the concept of combination by the combination of remote ideas . Differences in creative ability can thus be explained by the steepness of the subject’s associative hierarchy . Subjects with flat associative gradients more easily associate remote ideas and are more creative than subjects with steep associat - ive gradients . Koestler ( 1964 ) found that creation in arts and science was obtained by sudden fusion of schemata . In the geneplore model of creativity , one of the generative processes identified by Finke et al . ( 1992 ) is mental synthesis , which is based on the combination of object parts , words , or con - cepts . Similarly , in their three - process theory of creativity Davidson and Sternberg ( 1986 ) pro - posed a selective combination process that is based on putting together the element of a problem in a way that previously has not been obvious to the individual . Scott et al . ( 2005 ) distinguished differ - ent two heuristics in arriving at conceptual combi - nation : one involving feature extraction and mapping procedures 2 , leading to better perform - ance when a large number of element are pre - sented , and another using case models , leading to better performance when few elements a presented . 1 This is one of several competing explanations of where and when the Renaissance started , but these differences are not relevant for the point made here . 2 Confusingly in the context of this article , Scott et al . refer to this as an analogical approach . This comes from the ‘‘analogi - cal reasoning mechanisms’’ ( p . 80 ) that are involved in discover - ing new combinations , specifically mapping features from one category onto another . This is different from analogical transfer I refer to , which leads directly to the creative end product . One thing are operations involved in procedures , strategies or heur - istics that prepare for and lead ( or not ) to a creative solution . Another thing are the operations that are involved in the final creative step : the discovery of an innovative structure . I propose that operations involved in procedures towards creativity are many , but those that constitute the creative step itself , are few . Four Mental Operations in Creative Cognition Creativity Research Journal 169 Finally , the combination operation is essential for concepts such as morphological synthesis ( Allen , 1962 ) , bissociation ( Koestler , 1964 ) , and concep - tual combinations ( Hampton , 1987 ) . An example of a scientific field in which combi - nation thinking is predominant is engineering ( Owens , 1969 ) , both in its temporal and spatial variants . Many technical solutions are the result of bringing together existing elements in a useful and practical manner . An often cited example of scientific creativity is the discovery of the chemical structure of DNA ( e . g . , Gick & Lockhart , 1995 ; Weisberg , 1995a ) . This discovery is a good illus - tration of a combination operation . The double helix model resulted from combining existing building elements such as nucleotides , hydrogen bonds , and spiral lines into a single structure ( Watson , 1968 ) . In the realm of the arts , combi - nation can be found in the influences artists have on each other , incorporating aspects of others’ work into their own artistic styles . Maybe the most extreme example is Picasso , who vampirized other painters’ work , first by imitating it and finally incorporating it into his own style ( Miller , 1996 ) . Abstraction Discovery A fourth creative operation that can be ident - ified is abstraction . Although the previous three operations are specifically identified by a number of authors in the field of creative cognition , abstraction is generally not . Abstraction as a sol - ution for the new knowledge paradox was first proposed by Piaget ( 1968 ) in his work on genetic epistemology . He distinguished empirical abstrac - tion , focusing on objects , and reflective abstraction , in which the mental concepts and actions are the focus of abstraction . Young children primarily use empirical abstraction to organize the concrete external world , and increasingly use reflexive abstractions to organize their interiorized mental concepts . The underlying operation of ‘‘setting up a correspondence’’ ( Piaget , 1968 , p . 18 ) is the same for both types of abstraction . Piaget inferred that new abstract knowledge is built on top of other existing knowledge , so that new knowledge always depends on existing knowledge . He con - cluded that different levels of abstraction arise from the ‘‘transposition from one hierarchical level to another level’’ ( Piaget , 1968 , p . 18 ) . In order to arrive at a formal definition of abstraction , it should be recognized that , linguistically , abstrac - tion refers both to the mental process as well as the product of this process . The mental process of abstraction may be defined as the discovery of any structure , regularity , pattern , or organization that is present in a number of different perceptions that can be either physical or mental in nature . From this detection results the product abstrac - tion : a conceptual entity , which defines the relationship between the elements it refers to on a lower , more concrete , level of abstraction . It may be helpful to give some examples to illustrate this definition . The first example is the acquisition of the notion of weight in young children ( Piaget , 1972 ) . Initially , young children only report the concrete experience of objects that are easy to lift and objects that are difficult to lift . From numer - ous physical experiences of heavy and light things , the notion of weight starts to emerge . In the begin - ning , the child will confuse weight with visual appearance , because usually bigger things are hea - vier and smaller things are lighter . From the repeated experience that some big things are light and some small ones can be heavy , a separate notion of weight starts to be perceived , inde - pendent of its concrete physical appearance . This is a new abstract notion that brings together the different experiences of graduations of heavy and light into one new concept of weight . A second illustration of abstraction is a classification example ( see Figure 1 ) . For dividing the six figures into two logical groups of three , several solutions are possible . Three solutions are based on a concrete feature ( big circles ; small triangles ; containing squares ) ; in the fourth more abstract solution ( inside figure equals outside figure ) different concrete forms are grouped and the grouping criterion is derived from the relationship between the concrete fea - tures . In a small experiment that I conducted , Figure 1 . Classification example : there are several ways to logi - cally divide these six figures into two groups of three . H . Welling 170 Creativity Research Journal 88 out of 100 subjects first discovered concrete solutions and in the last place ( or not at all ) the more abstract solution . On a very basic level , abstraction can already be identified in the princi - ples of perceptual organization , such as grouping and closure ( Wertheimer , 1923 = 1950 ) . In fact , it is a challenging hypothesis that these perceptual organizations may have formed the neurological matrix for abstraction in higher cognitive func - tions , analogous to Dam (cid:1) aasio’s ( 1995 ) idea that sys - tems for physiological monitoring , applied to mental processes , formed the basis for conscious - ness . Abstract representation is a prerequisite for several cognitive operations such as symbolization , classification , discrimination , generalization , and pattern recognition . It is not possible to classify objects or to recognize a pattern without the exist - ence of an abstract criterion to determine class or distinguish a pattern . Margolis ( 1987 ) has taken this argument to the extreme point of view , that the entire cognitive repertoire of judgement and thinking is based on the capacity of identifying some type of regularity , pattern , structure , or coherence . A final consideration on the definition of abstraction is that by associating abstraction with the notion of pattern recognition and classi - fication , an ambiguity may have been , unwittingly , introduced . What is traditionally understood by pattern recognition and classification are memory - based reproductive processes resulting from applying existing conceptual structures . These two operations would belong to the realm of the earlier mentioned application operation . What I refer to in this section are rather the opera - tions of pattern discovery and class - creation through which new structures are formed through creative abstraction . In spite of the importance of the notion of abstraction in developmental and educational psy - chology ( Crowl , 1996 ) and in psychological assess - ment ( Lezak , 1983 ) , in the literature on creativity the notion seems to have been largely neglected . It seems that this is a striking example of segre - gation in scientific fields . Several authors on cre - ative cognition can be found who distinguished abstraction operations but designated it with dif - ferent terminology . A first instance can be found in James ( 1890 = 1950 ) citing Martineau ( 1879 ) , when he discussed the act of comparison , which evokes abstract attributes . It is worthwhile repro - ducing part of this piece of 19th century prose : When a red ivory ball , seen for the first time , has been withdrawn , it will leave a mental representation of itself , in which all that it simultaneously gave us will indistin - guishably coexist . Let a white ball succeed to it ; now , and not before , will an attribute detach itself , and the color , by force of contrast , be shaken out into the foreground . Let the white ball be replaced by an egg : and this new difference will bring the form into notice from its previous slumber . ( p . 486 ) Mednick ( 1962 ) approaching creativity from an associativist perspective identified the abstraction operation distinguishing between creativity that results from association by similarity and creativ - ity that results from association through a third mediating factor . He emphasized the abstract nat - ure of the latter operation in arguing that this mediating factor is made up of common elements in the associated parts . He hints at the abstract nature of these elements when he states that associ - ation by similarity occurs in areas that are less dependent on symbols , whereas mediated associ - ation ‘‘is of great importance in those areas of endeavor where the use of symbols is mandatory’’ ( Mednick , 1962 , p . 222 ) . Rothenberg ( 1979 ) , in studying the relationship between creativity and dream phenomena in highly creative individuals , identified two processes that were reported fre - quently by both renowned artists and scientists . The first one is homospatial thinking , ‘‘the actively conceiving two or more discrete entities occupying the same space , a conception leading to the articu - lation of new identities’’ ( p . 69 ) . The second is janusian thinking , ‘‘actively conceiving two or more opposite or antithetical ideas , images , or concepts simultaneously’’ ( p . 55 ) . Both processes seem especially fit for abstraction discovery because they stimulate the discovery of the relationship between entities . In fact both operations are strik - ingly similar to the comparison experiment by Martineau ( 1879 ) , mentioned earlier . The only authors who wrote extensively about the impor - tance of abstraction in creativity are Root - Bernstein ( 1991 ) and Root - Bernstein and Root - Bernstein ( 1999 ) . They amply discussed the role of abstraction , or abstracting as they called it , in many examples of scientific and artistic Four Mental Operations in Creative Cognition Creativity Research Journal 171 creativity . Root - Bernstein ( 1991 ) approached abstraction as a process of simplification and ‘‘elimination of unnecessary detail to reveal under - lying order , pattern or structure’’ ( p . 87 ) . In discuss - ing some works of abstract art , Root - Bernstein and Root - Bernstein ( 1999 ) gave the impression that the process of simplification and stripping of detail lead to the discovery of abstraction . I think that it is more correct to state that structure , that is , the relationship between entities , once discovered can be more clearly demonstrated in a simplified rep - resentation leaving out unnecessary detail . It is not very likely that a strategy of random stripping of details will easily reveal underlying structure . Explicit reference to the role of abstraction in crea - tivity can be found in Ward , Patterson , and Sifonis ( 2004 ) , who demonstrated that encouraging abstract ways of formulating creative generation tasks results in increased originality . A similar result was found earlier by Jansson , Condoor , and Brock ( 1993 ) with respect to engineering design tasks . Also , Vandervert et al . ( Vandervert , Schimpf , & Liu , 2007 ; Welling , 2007 ) linked creativity to abstraction , proposing that the cerebellum might have an important role in inno - vative thought through its capacity of abstracting the dynamics of both movement and thought . Scientific fields in which abstraction plays an important role are biology , physics , and math - ematics . A good example of scientific innovation that results from abstraction is Einstein’s ( 1905 ) relativity theory . In his theory , the relation between time and space is redefined into a new higher abstraction in which time and space are part of the same entity . Another example is Darwin’s ( 1859 = 1964 ) theory on evolution . Darwin explained his observations of diversity of charac - teristics within species , introducing a new abstrac - tion : evolution of species through the higher survival rate of the specimens possessing the most adaptive characteristics . Dawkins’ ( 1976 ) refine - ment—introducing the concept of survival of genes rather than the survival of individuals in order to explain altruistic tendencies—is yet another example of abstraction . Gould ( 2002 ) contested this exclusive reliance on selection and emphasized the role of chance and environmental factors in evolution . Gould’s contribution does not intro - duce a new abstraction , but is a good example of a combination operation . Two existing concepts , selection and chance factors , are combined into a useful new one . In the field of the arts , the abstrac - tion operation can be illustrated by the transition from figurative to abstract painting as can be found in the work of Braque , Rothko , and Mondriaan . Another example is the development of an entirely new personal language , such as can be found in the work of Bartok , Mir (cid:1) oo , and Van Gogh . Discussion The four mental operations presented above are theoretically exclusive , but in practical terms their distinction may sometimes be difficult . It may be difficult to know if a creator arrived at a particular solution through analogy , or if his or her discovery was the result of an independent abstraction oper - ation whose similarity with an existing concept elsewhere was discovered only later . Simonton ( 1987 ) for instance , shows that simultaneous dis - covery ( multiples ) is quite a common phenomenon and often it is difficult to establish if the authors had knowledge of each other’s progress . Another fact that may complicate distinguishing one oper - ation from another is that many creative products are the result of the use of more than one oper - ation . Weisberg ( 1995a ) , for instance , showed that many creations are the result of a stepwise process of progressive ‘‘discontinuities’’ ( p . 60 ) . These four operations form an ordinal scale , with innovation increasing from application to abstraction . In the application operation , an existing structure suffers minor adaptations in habitual context ; in the ana - logy operation existing a structure is transferred to an innovative context ; in the combination oper - ation existing structures are combined to form a new one ; and , finally , in the abstraction operation a new structure is formed , defining the relationship between existing structures . However , one should keep in mind that none of the mentioned opera - tions generate entirely new knowledge because the result is always dependent on , or constructed with , previous knowledge . It may be tempting to assume that the ideas that result from abstraction are also the ones that are most impressive or revol - utionary , but this is not the case . For example , a great scientific and social revolution was the intro - duction of the heliocentric planetary movement H . Welling 172 Creativity Research Journal ( Miller , 1996 ) . Because the idea of circular motion was already present in the geocentric conception , no particularly brilliant feat , but rather courage , was required to arrive at this idea . The heliocentric worldview constitutes a mere analogy of the geo - centric view . Sternberg ( 1999b ) , in his propulsion model , distinguished seven different types of impact that creative contributions may have on a domain , varying from replication on one end of the scale to reinitiation on the other . Originality and importance are of a different order ; an idea being revolutionary or not depends on its relation with the already existing ideas in a domain . Distinguishing these four operations may shed some new light on the two controversies described above . With respect to the sudden - gradual contro - versy , as outlined , defenders of the gradual pos - ition derived their arguments mainly from biographical studies of creators who report feel - ings of warmth , while authors that focussed on insight problems defended a process of sudden discovery in which meta - cognitive phenomena play no role . The explanation of their contradic - tory observations may be that in each situation , different cognitive operations are involved . Csikszentmehalyi and Sawyer ( 1995 ) suggested that there may exist two types of creative insight , one characteristic of a short time - frame process and another of a ‘‘long time - frame process . ’’ The task demands of insight problems and the task demands of scientific or artistic creations are quite different . Because of experimental convenience , insight problems are rather easy to solve and can - not reasonably be compared with issues like the Fermat problem or the creative leap in color use in Van Gogh’s painting . Insight problems are not solved immediately because the subject is led in the wrong direction , for instance , by infrequent word use or another type of suggestive instruction . After restructuring the problem , the solution is rapidly found by using ordinary problem - solving skills requiring just an application operation . An example of such a problem is the nine - dot problem ( Duncker , 1945 ) . In another type of insight prob - lem , the solution requires the uncommon use of objects , with the subject being led astray by the object’s ordinary use that comes to mind first . An example of this type of insight problems is the pendulum problem ( Maier , 1931 ) . The cognitive operation thus typically required to solve this kind of problem is the analogy operation . Scientific and artistic creations typically require deep reconceptualization that results from combi - nation or abstraction operations . These operations represent long time - frame processes of many years , in which solutions are intuitively pursued until becoming verbally explicit ( Welling , 2005 ) . Look - ing at the complete oeuvre of Mondriaan or Escher and following their productions chronologically , there seems to exist a natural sequence that is easy to detect post - hoc . It is as if the artist has been working towards his final product . Of course , the artist could not foresee his final work , but some prospective process must be at work to produce this gradual progression . This may explain why products of a long time - frame that result from combination and abstraction opera - tions are accompanied by feelings of warmth , whereas insight problems that are generally pro - ducts resulting from short time - frame processes such as application or analogy operations are not . With respect to the special – ordinary contro - versy , identifying these four different creative operations basically provides arguments for the defenders on the special side . It seems that so - called high creativity is more readily associated with combination and abstraction operations , while everyday creativity is derived primarily from application and analogy operations . Some contradictory findings might be explained by the fact that high creativity is often not the result of a single operation , but results from a longer period in which several operations are put to use during the discovery process . The fact that essentially different processes may be at work in solving insight problems and in scientific or artis - tic creativity has implications for the validity of psychological assessment through insight pro - blems . The fact that relatively simple insight problems can be predictive of ( high ) creative potential is understandable , because they measure the important capacity for divergent thinking to overcome cognitive fixation . They cannot mea - sure the person’s ability to put to good use com - bination and abstraction operations , ask the right questions , intuition for fruitful directions , persist - ence , and other important aspects that make up the complex issue of a successful creative career . Four Mental Operations in Creative Cognition Creativity Research Journal 173 Different methodology is required to study the full range of creative cognitive operations exper - imentally . Researching creativity with the tra - ditional methodology of insight problems , on the one hand , hardly goes beyond application and analogy operations . Self - reports from highly creative people , on the other hand , lack experi - mental rigor . Some recent studies have used methodologies that seem more appropriate to study both short and long time - frame processes . Examples are Getzels and Csikszentmihhalyi’s ( 1976 ) longitudinal study on problem - finding ; Finke et al . ’s ( 1992 ) research on preinventive forms ; Dunbar’s ( 1995 ) longitudinal study of real scientists working on their own research , and Mumford’s social innovation problems ( Scott et al . , 2005 ; Hunter et al . , in press ) . In the introduction , I mentioned that most authors adopted a two - step model—generation of new ideas , followed by the selection of adaptive ideas—to describe the creative process . The four creative operations refer essentially to the first step of this process . The second step has received less attention in the literature ( Runco , 1991b ) . The generation of new ideas does not guarantee their usefulness . For instance , Schank and Cleary ( 1995 ) , while simulating the creation of inferences by a computer program , found that a combina - torial explosion occurred that ‘‘drowned relevant inferences in a swamp of irrelevant ones’’ ( p . 233 ) . Simonton ( 1999 ) related the usefulness of an idea to its evolutionary or adaptive value . This state - ment may be quite clear for inventions such as the wheel or gunpowder , but less obvious for theoretical science or artistic works . Miller ( 1996 ) argued that our capacity to select may come as a sense of beauty : ‘‘intuition and aesthetics come into play to weed out certain combinations’’ ( p . 335 ) . Although this description may come close to how many people actually experience a selective process , it is not very helpful for understanding its mechanism of functioning . Runco ( 2003 ) argued that selection does not only occur after idea gener - ation , but is inextricable from ideation . Dam (cid:1) aasio ( 1994 ) in his work on the primacy of emotion , pre - sented some proof that this selection device actu - ally exists on a neurological level . In a patient with a very specific frontal lobe lesion , no intellec - tual deficit could be determined through ordinary cognitive assessment . Yet he was unable to give a normal direction to his personal and professional life . Dam (cid:1) aasio concluded that the patient’s deficit resided in the inability to distinguish relevant from nonrelevant information . The patient would pro - duce an enormous amount of solutions for such a simple problem as a new doctor’s appointment , taking almost every possible consideration into account , unaware of the futility of this extensive effort . Dam (cid:1) aasio ( 1994 ) proposed that humans possess an emotionally based selection tool that he calls a ‘‘somatic marker’’ ( p . 165 ) . This idea of relevancy of information may be an important clue for further studying the selection mechanism . In some cases , relevancy may be measured by its survival value , in other cases by aesthetic criteria , but in every task , implicit selection criteria are present that determine what is an acceptable or good solution . Even while solving the pendulum problem , the respondent somehow knows that ‘‘ask the extraterrestrial to hand me the cord’’ is not the intended answer . Throughout the creative process , the creator uses the implicit criteria to sel - ect what ideas to pursue . For example , in an engin - eering problem , there may exist unstated selection criteria for size or cost of the proposal . Artistic productions are supposed to demonstrate orig - inality and not imitation , yet the creator may keep in mind that distancing too far from contemporary style may lose the public’s interest . In scientific creations , in principle , practical use would be less of a requirement than in engineering problems , but there may exist criteria for comprehensiveness and elegance . Successful creators are probably well aware of this required structure and it may be quite revealing to study these criteria . References Allen , M . S . ( 1962 ) . Morphological creativity : The miracle of your hidden brain power . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Bowers , K . S . , Farvolden , P . , & Mermigis , L . ( 1995 ) . Intuitive antecedents of insight . In S . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 27 – 52 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Breton , A . ( 1924 ) . Manifesto of surrealism . Retrieved June 12 , 2005 , from http : / / www . tcf . ua . edu / Classes / Jbutler / T340 / SurManifesto / ManifestoOfSurrealism . htm H . Welling 174 Creativity Research Journal Burke , R . J . , Maier , N . R . F . , & Hoffman , J . R . ( 1966 ) . Func - tions of hints in individual problem - solving . American Journal of Psychology , 79 , 389 – 399 . Campbell , D . T . ( 1960 ) . Blind variation and selective retention in creative thought as in other knowledge processes . Psychological Review , 67 , 380 – 400 . Chambers , J . A . ( 1964 ) . Relating personality and biographical factors to scientific creativity . Psychological Monographs , 78 , 1 – 20 . Chase , W . G . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1973 ) . Perception in chess . Cog - nitive Psychology , 4 , 55 – 81 . Jansson , D . G . , Condoor , S . S . , & Brock , H . R . ( 1993 ) . Cog - nition in design : Viewing the hidden side of the design pro - cess . Environment and Planning – B , Planning and Design , 20 , 257 – 271 . Csikszentmihhalyi , M . , & Sawyer , K . ( 1995 ) . Creative insight : The social dimension of a solitary moment . In R . J . Sternberg & J . E . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of insight ( pp . 329 – 361 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Dam (cid:1) aasio , A . R . ( 1994 ) . Descartes’ error : Emotion , reason and the human brain . New York : Grosset - Putnam . Dam (cid:1) aasio , A . R . ( 1995 ) . The feeling of what happens : Body and emotion in the making of consciousness . New York : Harcourt - Brace . Darwin , C . ( 1964 ) . On the origin of species . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . ( Original work published 1859 ) Davidson , J . E . , & Sternberg , R . J . ( 1986 ) . What is insight ? Edu - cational Horizons , 64 , 177 – 179 . Dawkins , R . ( 1976 ) . The selfish gene . Oxford , UK : Oxford University Press . de Bono , E . ( 1970 ) . Lateral thinking : Creativity step by step . New York : Harper and Row . Dennis , W . ( 1955 ) . Variations in productivity among creative workers . Scientific Monthly , 80 , 277 – 278 Dunbar , K . ( 1995 ) . How scientists really reason : Scientific reasoning in real - world laboratories . In R . J . Sternberg & J . E . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of insight ( pp . 365 – 395 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT press . Duncker , K . ( 1945 ) . On problem - solving . Psychological Mono - graphs , 58 , 1 – 112 . Einstein , A . ( 1905 ) Zur elektrodynamik bewegter Ko¨rper [ About the electrodynamics of moving bodies ] . Annalen der Physik , 17 , 891 – 921 . Ellen , P . ( 1982 ) . Direction , past experience , and hints in creative problem solving : A reply to Weisberg and Alba . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 111 , 316 – 325 . Eysenck , H . ( 1997 ) . Creativity and personality . In M . A . Runco ( Ed . ) , Creativity research handbook ( pp . 41 – 66 ) . Cresskill , NJ : Hampton Press . Finke , R . A . ( 1995 ) . Creative realism . In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 27 – 52 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Finke , R . A . , Ward , T . B . , & Smith , S . M . ( 1992 ) . Creative cog - nition : Theory , research , and application . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Holmes , G . ( Ed . ) . ( 1989 ) . Art and politics in Renaissance Italy . London : British Academy . Hunter , S . T . , Bedell , K . E . , Ligon , G . S . , Hunsicker , C . M . , & Mumford , M . D . ( in press ) . Applying multiple structures in creative thought : Effects on idea generation and prob - lem solving . Creativity Research Journal . Gardner , H . ( 1983 ) . Frames of mind : The theory of multiple intelligences . New York : Basic Books . Getzels , J . W . , & Csikszentmihhalyi , M . ( 1976 ) . The creative vision : A longitudinal study of problem finding in art . New York : Wiley . Ghiselin , B . ( 1952 ) . The creative process and its relation to the identification of creative talent . In C . W . Taylor & F . Barron ( Eds . ) , Scientific creativity ( pp . 355 – 364 ) . New York : Wiley . Gick , M . L . , & Lockhart , R . S . ( 1995 ) . Cognitive and affective components of insight . In R . J . Sternberg & J . E . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of insight ( pp . 197 – 228 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Gould , S . J . ( 2002 ) . The structure of evolutionary theory . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Gruber , H . E . ( 1974 ) . Darwin on man : A psychological study of scientific creativity . New York : EP Dutton & Co . Guilford , J . P . ( 1986 ) . Creative talents : Their nature , uses and development . Buffalo , NY : Bearly . Hadamard , J . ( 1945 ) . The psychology of invention in the math - ematical field . New York : Dover . Hampton , J . ( 1987 ) . Inheritance of attributes in natural concept conjunctions . Memory & Cognition , 15 , 55 – 71 . James , W . ( 1880 , October ) . Great men , great thoughts , and the environment ( Lecture delivered before the Harvard Natu - ral History Society ) . Atlantic Monthly , October , 1880 . Reproduced in http : / / www . emory . edu = EDUCATION / mfp / jgreatmen . html James , W . ( 1950 ) . The principles of psychology . New York : Dover . ( Original work published 1890 ) . Jowett , B . ( 1937 ) . The dialogues of Plato . New York : Random House . Koestler , A . ( 1964 ) . The act of creation . New York : Macmillan . Kohler , W . ( 1925 ) . The mentality of apes . New York : Harcourt Brace . Kuhn , T . S . ( 1962 ) . Structure of scientific revolutions . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Langly , P . , & Jones , R . ( 1988 ) . A computational model of scientific thought . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , The nature of creativity : Contemporary psychological perspectives ( pp . 340 – 361 ) . Cambridge , MA : Cambridge University Press . Lezak , M . ( 1983 ) . Neuropsychological assessment ( 2nd ed . ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Maier , N . R . F . ( 1931 ) . Reasoning in humans II . The solution of a problem and its appearance in consciousness . Journal of Comparative Psychology , 12 , 181 – 194 . Maier , N . R . F . ( 1940 ) . The behavior mechanisms concerned with problem solving . Psychological Review , 47 , 43 – 58 . Mandler , G . ( 1995 ) . Origins and consequences of novelty . In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 9 – 25 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Four Mental Operations in Creative Cognition Creativity Research Journal 175 Margolis , H . ( 1987 ) . Patterns , thinking and cognition . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Martindale , C . ( 1989 ) . Personality , situation , and creativity . In J . A . Glover , R . R . Ronning , & C . R . Reynolds ( Eds . ) , Handbook of creativity : Perspectives on individual differ - ences ( pp . 211 – 232 ) . New York : Plenum Press . Mednick , S . ( 1962 ) . The associative basis of the creative process . Psychological Review , 69 , 220 – 232 . Metcalfe , J . , & Wiebe , D . ( 1987 ) . Intuition in insight and non - insight problem solving . Memory & Cognition , 15 , 238 – 246 . Metcalfe , J . ( 1986 ) . Feeling of knowing in memory and problem solving . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 12 , 288 – 294 . Miller , A . I . ( 1996 ) . Insight of genius : Imagery and creativity in science and art . New York : Springer - Verlag . Mumford , M . D . , Mobley , M . I . , Uhlman , C . E . , Reiter - Palmon , R . , & Doares , L . ( 1991 ) . Process analytic models of creative thought . Creativity Research Journal , 4 , 91 – 122 . Newell , A . , Shaw , J . C . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1962 ) . The processes of creative thinking . In H . E . Gruber , G . Terrell , & M . Wertheimer ( Eds . ) , Contemporary approaches to creative thinking ( pp . 63 – 119 ) . New York : Atherton Press . Owens , W . A . ( 1969 ) . Cognitive , noncognitive , and environ - mental correlates of mechanical ingenuity . Journal of Applied Psychology , 53 , 199 – 208 . Perkins , D . N . ( 1981 ) . The mind’s best work . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Piaget , J . ( 1952 ) . The origins of intelligence in the child . New York : International University Press . ( Original work pub - lished in 1936 ) . Piaget , J . ( 1968 ) . Genetic epistemology . New York : Columbia University Press . Piaget , J . ( 1972 ) . The psychology of the child . New York : Basic Books . Root - Bernstein , R . S . ( 1991 ) . Teaching abstracting in an integrated art and science curriculum . Roeper Review , 13 , 85 – 90 . Root - Bernstein , R . S . , & Root - Bernstein , M . M . ( 1999 ) . Sparks of genius : The thirteen thinking tools of the world’s most cre - ative people . New York : Houghton . Rothenberg , A . ( 1979 ) . The emerging goddess : The creative pro - cess in art , science , and other fields . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Runco , M . A . ( 1991a ) . Divergent thinking . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Runco , M . A . ( 1991b ) . The evaluative , valuative , and divergent thinking of children . Journal of Creative Behavior , 25 , 311 – 319 . Runco , M . A . ( 2003 ) . Idea evaluation , divergent thinking , and creativity . In M . A . Runco ( Ed . ) , Critical creative processes ( pp . 69 – 94 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Scott , G . M . , Lonergan , D . C . , & Mumford , M . D . ( 2005 ) . Conceptual combination : Alternative knowledge struc - tures , alternative heuristics . Creativity Research Journal , 17 , 21 – 36 . Schank , R . C . , & Cleary , C . ( 1995 ) . Making machines creative . In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 229 – 247 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Scheerer , M . ( 1963 ) . Problem solving . Scientific American , 208 ( 4 ) , 118 – 128 . Schooler , J . W . , & Melcher , J . ( 1995 ) . The ineffability of insight . In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 97 – 133 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Schooler , J . W . , Fallshore , M . , & Fiore , S . M . ( 1995 ) . Epilogue : Putting insight into perspective . In R . J . Sternberg & J . E . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of insight ( pp . 559 – 587 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Schooler , J . W . , Ohlsson , S . , & Brooks , K . ( 1993 ) . Thoughts beyond words : When language overshadows insight . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 122 ( 2 ) , 166 – 183 . Simonton , D . K . ( 1987 ) . Multiples , chance , genius , creativity , and zeitgeist . In D . N . Jackson & J . P . Rushton ( Eds . ) , Scientific excellence : Origins and assessment ( pp . 98 – 128 ) . Beverly Hills , CA : Sage . Simonton , D . K . ( 1997 ) . Creative productivity : A predictive and explanatory model of career trajectories and land - marks . Psychological Review , 104 , 66 – 89 . Simonton , D . K . ( 1999 ) . Origins of genius : Darwinian perspectives on creativity . New York : Oxford University Press . Smith , S . M . ( 1995 ) . Fixation , incubation , and insight in mem - ory and creative thinking . In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 135 – 156 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Sternberg , R . J . , & Davidson , J . E . ( Eds ) . ( 1995 ) . The nature of insight . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Sternberg , R . J . ( 1977 ) . Component processes in analogical reasoning . Psychological Review , 84 , 353 – 378 . Sternberg , R . J . ( 1986 ) . A triarchic theory of intellectual gifted - ness . In R . J . Sternberg & J . E . Davidson ( Eds . ) , Concep - tions of giftedness ( pp . 223 – 243 ) . Cambridge , MA : Cambridge University Press . Sternberg , R . J . ( Ed . ) . ( 1999a ) . Handbook of creativity . Cambridge , MA : Cambridge University Press . Sternberg , R . J . ( 1999b ) . A propulsion model of types of creative contributions . Review of General Psychology , 3 , 83 – 100 . Sternberg , R . J . , & Lubart , T . I . ( 1995 ) . Defying the crowd : Cul - tivating creativity in a culture of conformity . New York : Free Press . Thomas , K . , Crowl , S . , Kaminsky , D . , & Podell , M . ( 1996 ) . Educational psychology : Windows on teaching . Madison , WI : Brown and Benchmark . Thurstone , L . L . ( 1952 ) . The scientific study of inventive talent . Chicago : Chicago University Press . Treffinger , D . J . ( 1987 ) . Research on creativity assessment . In S . G . Isaksen ( Ed . ) , Frontiers of creativity research ( pp . 103 – 109 ) . Buffalo , NY : Bearly . Vandervert , L . R . , Schimpf , P . H . , & Liu , H . ( 2007 ) . How work - ing memory and the cerebellum collaborate to produce creativity and innovation . Creativity Research Journal , 19 , 1 – 18 . H . Welling 176 Creativity Research Journal Vernon , P . E . ( 1989 ) . The nature - nurture problem in creativity . In J . A . Glover , R . R . Ronning , & C . R . Reynolds ( Eds . ) , Handbook of creativity : Perspectives on individual differ - ences ( pp . 93 – 110 ) . New York : Plenum Press . Ward , T . B . , Patterson , M . J . , & Sifonis , C . M . ( 2004 ) . The role of specificity and abstraction in creative idea generation . Creativity Research Journal , 16 , 1 – 9 . Walberg , H . J . ( 1988 ) . Creativity and talent as learning . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , The nature of creativity : Contempor - ary psychological perspectives ( pp . 340 – 361 ) . Cambridge , MA : Cambridge University Press . Wallas , G . ( 1926 ) . The art of thought . New York : Franklin Watts . Watson , J . D . ( 1968 ) . The double helix . New York : Signet Books . Weisberg , R . W . ( 1986 ) . Creativity : Genius and other myths . New York : W . H . Freeman . Weisberg , R . W . ( 1988 ) . Problem solving and creativity . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , The nature of creativity : Contempor - ary psychological perspectives ( pp . 148 – 176 ) . Cambridge , MA : Cambridge University Press . Weisberg , R . W . ( 1995a ) . Case studies of creative thinking : Reproduction versus restructuring in the real world . In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognitionapproach ( pp . 53 – 72 ) . Cambridge , MA : MITPress . Weisberg , R . W . ( 1995b ) . Prolegomena to theories of insight in problem solving : Definition of terms and a taxonomy of problems . In R . J . Sternberg & J . E . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of insight ( pp . 157 – 196 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Welling , H . ( 2005 ) . The intuitive process : The case of psycho - therapy . Journal of Psychotherapy Integration , 15 , 19 – 47 . Welling , H . ( 2007 ) . Cerebellar creativity : Abstraction of mental movements . Creativity Research Journal , 19 , 55 – 57 . Wertheimer , M . ( 1945 ) . Productive thinking . New York : Harper . Wertheimer , M . ( 1950 ) . Laws of organization in perceptual forms ( translation of Untersuchungen zur Lehre von der Gestalt II . Psychologische Forschungen , 4 , 301 – 350 . ) . In W . Ellis ( Ed . ) , A source book of Gestalt psychology ( pp . 71 – 88 ) . New York : Humanities Press . ( Original work published 1923 ) . Wertheimer , M . ( 1991 ) . Max Wertheimer : Modern cognitive psychology and the Gestalt problem . In A . Kimble , M . Wertheimer , & C . White ( Eds . ) , Portraits of pioneers in psychology ( Vol . 1 , pp . 189 – 207 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Wotiz , J . H . , & Rudofsky , S . ( 1954 ) . Kekule´’s dream : Fact or fiction ? Chemistry in Britain , 20 , 720 – 723 . Four Mental Operations in Creative Cognition Creativity Research Journal 177