1 STROBE Statement—Checklist of items that should be included in reports of cross - sectional studies Item No Recommendation Line No Title and abstract 1 ( a ) Indicate the study’s design with a commonly used term in the title or the abstract Title / Abstract Introduction P1 ( b ) Provide in the abstract an informative and balanced summary of what was done and what was found Abstract Methods and findings P1 Introduction Background / rationale 2 Explain the scientific background and rationale for the investigation being reported Introduction P1 / P2 Objectives 3 State specific objectives , including any prespecified hypotheses Introduction P4 Methods Study design 4 Present key elements of study design early in the paper Methods – Study design P1 - P5 Setting 5 Describe the setting , locations , and relevant dates , including periods of recruitment , exposure , follow - up , and data collection Methods – Study design P1 - P3 Participants 6 ( a ) Give the eligibility criteria , and the sources and methods of selection of participants Methods – Study design P1 - P3 Variables 7 Clearly define all outcomes , exposures , predictors , potential confounders , and effect modifiers . Give diagnostic criteria , if applicable Methods – Survey design P1 - P3 Data sources / measurement 8 * For each variable of interest , give sources of data and details of methods of assessment ( measurement ) . Describe comparability of assessment methods if there is more than one group Methods – Survey design P1 - P3 Bias 9 Describe any efforts to address potential sources of bias Methods – Statistical Analysis Plan – P2 - P5 Study size 10 Explain how the study size was arrived at Methods – Study design P4 Quantitative variables 11 Explain how quantitative variables were handled in the analyses . If applicable , describe which groupings were chosen and why Methods – Statistical Analysis Plan – P3 - P6 , P8 - 12 Statistical methods 12 ( a ) Describe all statistical methods , including those used to control for confounding Methods – Statistical Analysis Plan – P1 - P12 ( b ) Describe any methods used to examine subgroups and interactions Methods – Statistical Analysis Plan – P4 - P12 ( c ) Explain how missing data were addressed Methods – Statistical Analysis Plan – P4 2 ( d ) If applicable , describe analytical methods taking account of sampling strategy Methods – Statistical Analysis Plan – P3 - P6 , P8 - P9 ( e ) Describe any sensitivity analyses Methods – Statistical Analysis Plan – P5 Results Participants 13 * ( a ) Report numbers of individuals at each stage of study—eg numbers potentially eligible , examined for eligibility , confirmed eligible , included in the study , completing follow - up , and analysed Results – Participant characteristics - P1 - P3 ( b ) Give reasons for non - participation at each stage Results – Participant characteristics - P1 ( c ) Consider use of a flow diagram No diagram - Tables S1 , S2 Descriptive data 14 * ( a ) Give characteristics of study participants ( eg demographic , clinical , social ) and information on exposures and potential confounders Results – Participant characteristics - P1 - P3 ( b ) Indicate number of participants with missing data for each variable of interest NA Outcome data 15 * Report numbers of outcome events or summary measures Results – Mean contacts … P1 - P2 Main results 16 ( a ) Give unadjusted estimates and , if applicable , confounder - adjusted estimates and their precision ( eg , 95 % confidence interval ) . Make clear which confounders were adjusted for and why they were included Results – Mean contacts … P1 - P2 ( b ) Report category boundaries when continuous variables were categorized Methods – Statistical Analysis Plan – P11 Results - P2 ( c ) If relevant , consider translating estimates of relative risk into absolute risk for a meaningful time period NA Other analyses 17 Report other analyses done—eg analyses of subgroups and interactions , and sensitivity analyses Results – Mean contacts … P3 - P14 Discussion Key results 18 Summarise key results with reference to study objectives Discussion P1 Limitations 19 Discuss limitations of the study , taking into account sources of potential bias or imprecision . Discuss both direction and magnitude of any potential bias Discussion – Limitations – P1 Interpretation 20 Give a cautious overall interpretation of results considering objectives , limitations , multiplicity of analyses , results from similar studies , and other relevant evidence Discussion – Comix in Context – P1 - P2 Discussion – Conclusions – P1 3 Generalisability 21 Discuss the generalisability ( external validity ) of the study results Discussion – Limitations – P1 Other information Funding 22 Give the source of funding and the role of the funders for the present study and , if applicable , for the original study on which the present article is based Funding statement * Give information separately for exposed and unexposed groups . Note : An Explanation and Elaboration article discusses each checklist item and gives methodological background and published examples of transparent reporting . The STROBE checklist is best used in conjunction with this article ( freely available on the Web sites of PLoS Medicine at http : / / www . plosmedicine . org / , Annals of Internal Medicine at http : / / www . annals . org / , and Epidemiology at http : / / www . epidem . com / ) . Information on the STROBE Initiative is available at www . strobe - statement . org .