JCB JCB : Article T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y 3551 The Rockefeller University Press J . Cell Biol . Vol . 216 No . 11 3551 – 3570 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201703152 Introduction Pairs of sister chromatids must be precisely divided into two cells during cell division to prevent missegregation . Chro - mosome missegregation results in aneuploidy , which is asso - ciated with cancer and birth defects ( Yuen et al . , 2005 ; Pfau and Amon , 2012 ) . Therefore , understanding the mechanisms of chromosome segregation is critical to understanding the fi - delity of chromosome transmission . Microtubules attach to the chromosome via kinetochores and pull them to the poles during chromosome segregation . The kinetochore is a sever - al - megadalton – sized protein structure assembled on a spe - cialized region of the chromosome called the centromere . The centromeric region is a ∼ 130 - bp sequence in budding yeast and is epigenetically defined in higher organisms . Most of the ki - netochore proteins and their functions are evolutionarily con - served . In higher eukaryotes , each kinetochore interacts with multiple microtubules ( McAinsh et al . , 2003 ; Chan et al . , 2005 ; Walczak et al . , 2010 ) , whereas in Saccharomyces cerevisiae , each chromosome interacts with only one microtubule ( Winey et al . , 1995 ) , making it an ideal defined system for studying kinetochore – microtubule interaction . The yeast kinetochore ( Fig . 1 a ) consists of > 60 proteins that assemble into submodules , constituting the inner and outer kinetochore . The inner kinetochore consists of CBF3 – Ndc10 , Mif2 , COMA , and Cnn1 complexes that connect the centro - meric region of the chromosome to the outer kinetochore . The MIND – Mis12 , Spc105 – CeKNL - 1 , Dam1 , and Ndc80 com - plexes form the outer kinetochore and link the inner kinetochore to the microtubule ( De Wulf et al . , 2003 ; Lampert and Wester - mann , 2011 ) . The Ndc80 complex is a heterotetramer of Spc25 , Spc24 , Nuf2 , and Ndc80 . Ndc80 binds to the tubulin subunits of a microtubule using an unstructured N terminus as a fingerlike projection along with the calponin homology domain ( Guimar - aes et al . , 2008 ; Powers et al . , 2009 ) . The MIND – MIS12 com - plex , a heterotetramer of Nsl1 , Nnf1 , Dsn1 , and Mtw1 , links the Ndc80 complex to the inner kinetochore ( Obuse et al . , 2004 ; Hornung et al . , 2011 ) . The Dam1 complex , a heterodecamer , is the functional analogue of the Ska1 complex in higher eu - karyotes and forms a ringlike structure around the microtubule in vitro that may slide along the microtubule as it disassembles ( Westermann et al . , 2006 ; Wang et al . , 2007 ; Welburn et al . , 2009 ; Schmidt et al . , 2012 ; van Hooff et al . , 2017 ) . Ndc80 and Dam1 complexes use different means of microtubule contact but work cooperatively to track the disassembling end of the microtubule during chromosome segregation ( Powers et al . , 2009 ; Tien et al . , 2010 ; Umbreit et al . , 2014 ) , resulting in the movement of chromosomes to the poles ( Grishchuk and McIn - tosh , 2006 ) . Although some structural details of the kinetochore submodules that provide attachments to microtubules have been determined , how the submodular structure for kinetochore – microtubule attachments functions in a living cell is not clear . The kinetochore is a large , evolutionarily conserved protein structure that connects chromosomes with microtubules . During chromosome segregation , outer kinetochore components track depolymerizing ends of microtubules to facilitate the separation of chromosomes into two cells . In budding yeast , each chromosome has a point centromere upon which a single kinetochore is built , which attaches to a single microtubule . This defined architecture facilitates quantitative ex - amination of kinetochores during the cell cycle . Using three independent measures—calibrated imaging , FRAP , and photoconversion—we find that the Dam1 submodule is unchanged during anaphase , whereas MIND and Ndc80 sub - modules add copies to form an “anaphase configuration” kinetochore . Microtubule depolymerization and kinesin - related motors contribute to copy addition . Mathematical simulations indicate that the addition of microtubule attach - ments could facilitate tracking during rapid microtubule depolymerization . We speculate that the minimal kinetochore configuration , which exists from G1 through metaphase , allows for correction of misattachments . Our study provides insight into dynamics and plasticity of the kinetochore structure during chromosome segregation in living cells . Structural plasticity of the living kinetochore Karthik Dhatchinamoorthy , 1 , 2 Manjunatha Shivaraju , 1 Jeffrey J . Lange , 1 Boris Rubinstein , 1 Jay R . Unruh , 1 Brian D . Slaughter , 1 and Jennifer L . Gerton 1 , 3 1 Stowers Institute for Medical Research , Kansas City , MO 2 The Open University , Milton Keynes , England , UK 3 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , University of Kansas Medical Center , Kansas City , KS © 2017 Dhatchinamoorthy et al . This article is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution 4 . 0 International , as described at https : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) . Correspondence to Jennifer L . Gerton : jeg @ stowers . org M . Shivaraju’s present address is Center for Regenerative Medicine , Massa - chusetts General Hospital , Boston , MA ; Dept . of Internal Medicine and Dept . of Pediatrics , Pulmonary and Critical Care Unit , Massachusetts General Hospital , Boston , MA ; and Harvard Stem Cell Institute , Cambridge , MA . Abbreviations used : FCS , fluorescence correlation spectroscopy ; MAP , microtu - bule - associated protein ; SPB , spindle pole body . JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 11 • 2017 3552 A microtubule is a polymer of α and β tubulin dimers and interacts with the outer kinetochore to pull the chromosome . A microtubule is a highly dynamic structure , as it can add or lose tubulin dimers in processes called “rescue” and “catastro - phe , ” respectively ( Desai and Mitchison , 1997 ) . Growing and shrinking microtubule tip structures differ by their degree of microtubule protofilament curve , which can influence the in - teraction with the Ndc80 complex ( Asbury et al . , 2011 ; Foley and Kapoor , 2013 ) . Microtubule - associated proteins ( MAPs ) can alter the microtubule dynamics by interacting with the microtubule tip and the tubulin dimers . MAPs have been im - plicated in chromosome capture , spindle stability , and chro - mosome movement ( Pearson et al . , 2003 ; Gandhi et al . , 2011 ) . Stu2 , one of the XMAP215 family proteins , specifically inter - acts with the Ndc80 complex ( Miller et al . , 2016 ) and affects microtubule behavior . Loss of Stu2 results in loss of tension , leading to missegregation of chromosomes in the absence of the spindle assembly checkpoint ( Miller et al . , 2016 ) . Although the function of Stu2 has been studied in metaphase with purified kinetochores , the function of MAPs during anaphase , when a kinetochore must track a microtubule with prolonged rapid dis - assembly , has not been examined . We present data consistent with structural plasticity of the kinetochore during chromosome segregation . Our calibrated imaging , FRAP , photoconversion , and genetic studies suggest that the outer - kinetochore complexes—especially the MIND and Ndc80 complexes—add new copies of proteins during anaphase . However , the Dam1 complex remains unchanged . Both the MAP Stu2 and the kinesin motor Kar3 , working with Vik1 , facilitate the copy number increase of MIND and Ndc80 subcomplexes in anaphase , suggesting these kinetochore sub - modules can adjust their addition based on the rate of micro - tubule depolymerization . Simulations of kinetochore function using Hill’s kinetochore attachment model ( Hill , 1985 ) predict that the addition of each coupler ( or copy ) decreases the detach - ment rate by approximately fourfold , suggesting addition of the Ndc80 submodule could improve attachment during anaphase . We observe similar structural changes in kinetochores in fission yeast , suggesting structural plasticity is an evolutionarily con - served property of kinetochores in higher eukaryotes . Collec - tively , our results suggest that parts of the kinetochore structure can sense and adapt to microtubule dynamics , whereas other parts remain constant . Overall , the design of the kinetochore may accommodate structural plasticity that promotes accurate segregation of chromosomes . Results Submodules of the yeast kinetochore increase in intensity during anaphase Budding yeast has 16 chromosomes with centromeres that form a cluster ( Jin et al . , 1998 , 2000 ) , and EGFP - tagged kinetochore proteins form a subdiffraction - limited spot ( Joglekar et al . , 2008b ) . Kinetochores form a single cluster from G1 through late S phase . When sister kinetochores biorient and start to sep - arate , the single cluster divides into two equal clusters with half as many kinetochores . To investigate the kinetochore structure during the cell cycle , we used endogenously expressed kineto - chore proteins tagged with EGFP at the C terminus to examine fluorescence intensity . In an asynchronous culture , cells having no bud were categorized as G1 phase , whereas anaphase cells exhibited the maximum distance between kinetochore clusters or spindle pole bodies ( SPBs ) . The fluorescence intensity of kineto - chore clusters , represented by a heat map , showed that subunits of the Ndc80 complex had higher intensity in anaphase cells than in G1 cells ( Fig . 1 b ) . However , Dam1p of the Dam1 complex had similar intensity in both anaphase and G1 cells ( Fig . 1 c ) . We further quantified the intensity of the kinetochore clus - ter through the cell cycle by arresting cells in G1 using α factor and subsequently releasing them for imaging . As expected , the intensity of the Nuf2 ( Ndc80 complex ) cluster increased during S phase based on the doubling of kinetochore structures ( 16 to 32 ) and then dropped as the cell progressed through metaphase , and the 32 kinetochores split into two groups of 16 ( Fig . 1 d ) . An exact doubling of intensity is not always seen in S phase because of difficulties in measurement of the cluster during this stage ( Shivaraju et al . , 2012 ) . The fluorescence intensity of the cluster increased as the chromosomes separated during anaphase ( Figs . 1 d and S1 a ) . At the end of anaphase , the flu - orescence intensity of the 16 - chromosome cluster was nearly twofold higher than G1 , suggesting more proteins were pres - ent in each kinetochore structure ( Fig . 1 d ) . We examined all proteins from the Ndc80 and MIND complexes ( not depicted ) , finding similar intensity profiles to Nuf2 and Dsn1 ( MIND complex ; Fig . S1 , b and c ) . In contrast , similar experiments with Dam1 complex proteins showed little intensity increase during anaphase relative to G1 . As an example , we showed Ask1 , the intensity of which increased from G1 to S phase as expected but did not increase during anaphase ( Figs . 1 e and S1 d ) . A kymograph heat map analysis showed that Nuf2 increased in in - tensity during anaphase , whereas Ask1 did not ( Fig . 1 , f and g ) . Our analyses indicate that the increase was specific to anaphase because the intensity dropped in the subsequent G1 stage . Some kinetochore subcomplexes increase during anaphase To further quantify the fluorescence increase , we used calibrated imaging , which is based on measuring the absolute intensity of EGFP in live yeast using fluorescence correlation spectroscopy ( FCS ) . The intensity of a single EGFP is determined each time an experiment is performed , and this value is used to determine copy number based on brightness of the kinetochore cluster ( Smith et al . , 2014 ) . Nuclear pore complex proteins have been used extensively to validate this method ( Shivaraju et al . , 2012 ) . Furthermore , calibrated imaging was used to demonstrate that the copy number of Cse4 - GFP in diploid cells is twice that of haploid cells , strengthening confidence in the accuracy of the method ( Shivaraju et al . , 2012 ) . We collected multiple measure - ments on multiple days to identify and verify strong trends . Strains with EGFP epitope – tagged proteins of Ndc10 , Ctf19 / COMA ( hereafter COMA ) , Cnn1 , Spc105 , MIND , Ndc80 , and Dam1 kinetochore complexes were used for quanti - fication in G1 and anaphase . All strains were karyotyped to val - idate normal ploidy ( see the Yeast strains section of Materials and methods ; Table S1 ) . Although data were collected for cal - ibrated imaging from an asynchronously growing culture , we compared calibrated imaging results for Dsn1 during G1 using an asynchronous culture - versus – α - factor arrest ( Fig . S2 a ) . The copy number was independent of the method used to obtain G1 cells . These data also demonstrate the reproducibility of the cal - ibrated imaging method between two independent experiments . Several of the inner kinetochore proteins displayed a significant increase in their copy number during anaphase Structural plasticity of the living kinetochore • Dhatchinamoorthy et al . 3553 ( Fig . 2 a ) . Outer kinetochore proteins also displayed an increase in copies during anaphase ( Fig . 2 b ) . These included proteins from the MIND and Ndc80 complexes , which increased in copy number in anaphase by 50 – 100 % ( Figs . 2 d and S2 b ) . Sub - units of the COMA subcomplex , such as Okp1 and Ame1 , also increased in copy number in anaphase ( Fig . 2 a ) . The MIND complex is joined to the inner kinetochore by COMA ( Hornung et al . , 2014 ) and associates with the microtubule - associated Ndc80 complex of the outer kinetochore . These three subcom - plexes all displayed increases as chromosomes are separating Figure 1 . The intensity of some kinetochore submodules increases in anaphase . ( a ) Model of a yeast kinetochore ( Kt ) showing inner and outer kinetochore complexes . The Ndc80 complex interacts with microtubules ( MTs ) with fingerlike projection ; the Dam1 complex can form a ringlike structure . ( b and c ) Heat map analyses of Ndc80 - EGFP ( b ) and Dam1 - EGFP ( c ) intensities in an asynchronous culture . Cell cycle stages have been marked near the cell . Red inserts show enlarged intensity heat map . Ndc80 is much brighter in anaphase than G1 . The intensity of Dam1 is similar in G1 and anaphase . ( d and e ) Intensity profiles of Nuf2 - EGFP ( d ) and Ask1 - EGFP ( e ) over the cell cycle are shown . The distance between the two kinetochore clusters ( Kt - Kt distance , bottom graphs ) helps to define the cell cycle stage in addition to the bud morphology ( top ) . ( f ) Kymograph of Nuf2 - EGFP heat map over the cell cycle shows an increase in intensity as kinetochore clusters separate in anaphase . ( g ) Kymograph of Ask1 - EGFP heat map shows G1 and anaphase kinetochore clusters have similar intensity . Bars , 5 µm . JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 11 • 2017 3554 during anaphase , consistent with the idea that they operate together structurally . The subunits of the Dam1 complex , in contrast to sub - units of COMA , MIND , and Ndc80 complexes , had a similar copy number in G1 and anaphase ( Fig . 2 , c and d ) . Subunits of the Dam1 complex show only a slight increase in copy number between G1 and anaphase ( Fig . 2 c ) . The mean distribution of 12 ± 4 ( SEM ) correlates reasonably well with the modeling of 16 - fold symmetry of a Dam1 ring encircling a microtubule as - sembled in vitro ( Westermann et al . , 2006 ; Wang et al . , 2007 ) . Overall , inner - complex proteins tended to be present at lower copy numbers relative to the outer - complex proteins , consis - tent with a structure with an initial anchoring point to the cen - tromere with amplification moving toward the microtubule side . Debate in the past over calibrated imaging of centromere / kinetochore proteins in yeast has centered on the size of the cluster , which undergoes compaction in anaphase ( Joglekar et al . , 2006 ) . Simulations of centromere compaction demonstrated an observed increase in the peak intensity of the cluster of cen - tromeric Cse4 by ∼ 40 % ( Aravamudhan et al . , 2013 ) . It is worth noting that the 40 % estimate ( Aravamudhan et al . , 2013 ) for differences in amplitude assumed a 1 . 4 - NA objective , and thus is inaccurate when applied to the data presented in this study and in a previous publication ( Shivaraju et al . , 2012 ) , as the current data were acquired with a 1 . 2 - NA objective . The differ - ence in amplitude expected based on spot size is highly depen - dent on the resolution of the system , and given our resolution , the maximum difference in amplitude we could expect based Figure 2 . The kinetochore has higher copy numbers of Ndc80 and MIND subcomplexes in anaphase , whereas the Dam1 complex has similar copy number in G1 and anaphase . ( a ) Violin plot of copy numbers of the inner kine - tochore proteins in G1 and anaphase . The horizontal middle line is the mean , and the box represents the SD . 50 – 173 clusters were used to calculate the copy number . ( b ) Violin plot showing copy number of the outer kine - tochore proteins . Subunits in the MIND and Ndc80 subcomplexes nearly double in copy number in anaphase . 50 – 150 clusters were used to calculate the copy number . ( c ) Violin plot showing the copy number of the subunits of the Dam1 subcomplex with similar counts in G1 and anaphase . 50 – 280 clusters were used to calculate the copy number . For a – c , a two - tailed t test was used to test for statisti - cal significance . ( d ) The ratio of kinetochore proteins in anaphase to G1 ( n = 3 ) show that the subunits of the MIND and Ndc80 subcomplexes have higher copy number in anaphase as compared with the Dam1 sub - units . Error bars represent SEM . Structural plasticity of the living kinetochore • Dhatchinamoorthy et al . 3555 on compaction was 20 – 25 % ( Smith et al . , 2014 ) . We took spe - cific steps to ensure that the data presented in this study are not clouded by this complication . First , we included data only on spots whose fit width was under a threshold ( set as an SD of 182 nm for the Gaussian fit ; Shivaraju et al . , 2012 ) . The increase by ≥ 50 % by the end of anaphase for many of the kinetochore pro - teins after selecting similarly sized clusters surpassed the 25 % increase that may occur as a result of compaction . Furthermore , we did not observe an increase in the Dam1 complex despite the similar extent of compaction observed for it relative to other kinetochore submodules . These factors strongly suggest that the intensity increase we observed was not caused by the compac - tion of the kinetochore . Nonetheless , we repeated our analysis with the integrated intensity method ( Joglekar et al . , 2006 ) , which is immune to artifacts from compaction . After applying the same - sized filter as above to eliminate spots that were disperse , we integrated the total intensity of each spot in G1 and anaphase . We normal - ized the kinetochore protein intensities to the mean integrated intensity of Cse4 during anaphase ( which we set as 2 Cse4 / kinetochore ; Fig . S2 c ) . Although noise increased as expected based on integration , we obtained consistent results , with many proteins in the inner and outer kinetochore increasing in copy number in anaphase , whereas the Dam1 complex did not . MIND and Ndc80 complexes recover in FRAP , but Dam1 complex does not If copies of a kinetochore protein are added in anaphase , FRAP experiments should reveal this addition . We bleached the ki - netochore cluster in metaphase ( when kinetochore clusters are < 1 µm apart ) and followed it through the cell cycle to quan - tify the percent recovery in the subsequent anaphase . As the kinetochore clusters moved toward the pole , proteins from the COMA , MIND , and Ndc80 complexes recovered to varying degrees ( Fig . 3 , a and b ; and Fig . S3 , a – c ) . Quantification of subunits of the bleached MIND and Ndc80 complexes shows a recovery of > 80 % in late anaphase ( Fig . 3 e ) . The recovery of a few subunits of the MIND and Ndc80 subcomplexes in FRAP beyond the starting value ( > 100 % ) suggests that these com - plexes might have more protein in anaphase than metaphase . However , Ask1 and other subunits of the Dam1 complex failed to recover in anaphase ( Fig . 3 , c and d ; and Fig . S3 d ) . Although we saw some experimental variation of the percent recovery with subunits of the same complex , we attribute this in part to variable bleaching of the nucleoplasm . Furthermore , proteins with low starting copy number such as Mif2 were challenging to image without significant bleaching . Overall , however , our FRAP experiments revealed that all of the Ndc80 and MIND subunits examined recovered more fluorescence than the Dam1 subunits ( Figs . 3 e and S3 ) . Furthermore , the recovery in MIND , Ndc80 , and Dam1 subunits was not statistically different within the complex , and MIND and Ndc80 were not statistically sig - nificantly different from each other , but both were statistically significantly different from Dam1 ( P < 0 . 0005 ) . Similar FRAP experiments performed on metaphase clusters by ourselves ( not depicted ) and others ( Joglekar et al . , 2008b ; Suzuki et al . , 2016 ) resulted in no recovery within metaphase , suggesting that recov - ery is specific to progression from metaphase through anaphase . Furthermore , bleaching in mid - to late anaphase did not result in recovery within anaphase as determined by ourselves ( not de - picted ) and others ( Joglekar et al . , 2008b ; Suzuki et al . , 2016 ) . Collectively , the FRAP data are consistent with the addition of MIND and Ndc80 subunits from early to late anaphase and little addition of Dam1 complex subunits . MIND and Ndc80 complexes add copies during anaphase , whereas the Dam1 complex remains stable Our FRAP studies indicate that submodules of the kinetochore , especially the MIND and Ndc80 complexes , are dynamic during anaphase . However , FRAP cannot distinguish between com - plete protein turnover versus retention of old subunits plus the addition of new subunits . To address this issue , we used kineto - chore proteins tagged with a photoconvertable epitope ( tdEos ) that can be converted from green to red fluorescence with a brief exposure to ultraviolet light ( 405 nm ; McKinney et al . , 2009 ; Wisniewski et al . , 2014 ) . We selectively photoconverted the kinetochore cluster in metaphase and followed it through anaphase . Preexisting protein will be red after photoconversion , and protein in the nucleoplasm will remain green ( with the ex - ception of a small amount of off - axis photoconversion , which we estimated to be > 5 % ) . Photoconversion of the cluster was > 70 % in our experiments . We then monitored the addition of protein to the kinetochore during anaphase . Addition of green fluorescence was unmistakable evidence of the addition of pro - tein subunits . In the case of Ndc80 - tdEos , we observed a > 40 % increase in green intensity at the kinetochore cluster during anaphase , suggesting that new copies were being added ( Fig . 4 , a and b ) . Red fluorescence at the kinetochore cluster was sim - ilar throughout the experiment , implying that the preexisting protein was maintained , although in some experiments a slight increase in red fluorescence was observed , possibly because of photoconversion of nearby nucleoplasm ( Fig . S4 a ) . A similar photoconversion experiment using Ask1 - tdEos from the Dam1 complex did not show any addition of new protein in anaphase ( Fig . 4 , c and d ; and Fig . S4 e ) , sug - gesting this complex is more stable . Cnn1 and Spc105 were added during anaphase ( Fig . S4 b ) . Photoconversion exper - iments suggest MIND and Ndc80 complexes added > 50 % new protein in anaphase ( Fig . 4 , e and f ; and Fig . S4 , c and d ) , whereas the Dam1 complex added little , if any , new protein in anaphase . The addition in MIND , Ndc80 , and Dam1 subunits was not statistically different within the complex , and MIND and Ndc80 were not statistically significantly different from each other , but both were statistically significantly different from Dam1 ( P < 0 . 0005 ) . To rule out the possibility that the increase in green fluo - rescence might be caused by the compaction of the kinetochore or that folding dynamics of tdEos are a factor , we photocon - verted the surrounding nucleoplasm during metaphase , chang - ing the protein to its red form , without photoconverting the kinetochore cluster ( leaving it green ) . As these cells progressed into anaphase , red fluorescence was added to the kinetochore cluster , strongly suggesting that new copies were added from the nucleoplasm ( Fig . 5 ) . Collectively , the independent obser - vations from FRAP , photoconversion , and calibrated imaging experiments suggest that additional copies of the MIND and Ndc80 subcomplexes were added to kinetochores as cells pro - gressed from metaphase to anaphase , while the Dam1 com - plex remained constant . MAPs affect kinetochore copy number As the kinetochore tracks the depolymerizing microtubules during anaphase , chromosomes move to the poles . MAPs affect JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 11 • 2017 3556 microtubule function and dynamics ( Mallavarapu et al . , 1999 ; Wolyniak et al . , 2006 ) . Bik1 , Stu2 , and Bim1 are MAPs that locate near the kinetochore – microtubule attachment site ( He et al . , 2001 ; Aravamudhan et al . , 2014 ) . Stu2 / XMAP215 ( STU2 homologue in human ) has been implicated as a microtubule de - stabilizer and in some cases as a microtubule polymerase ( van Breugel et al . , 2003 ; Al - Bassam et al . , 2006 ; Podolski et al . , 2014 ) . Stu2 is important for spindle elongation and stabiliza - tion during anaphase ( Kosco et al . , 2001 ; Severin et al . , 2001 ; van Breugel et al . , 2003 ) . Stu2 mutants have slower microtubule dynamics with a longer paused state and shorter spindles ( He et al . , 2001 ; Pearson et al . , 2003 ) . Ndc80 complexes physically interact with Stu2 ( Miller et al . , 2016 ) . A yeast strain bear - ing a temperature - sensitive stu2 - 11 allele has slower spindle elongation and takes longer to complete anaphase than WT cells ( ∼ 10 min slower ) . Mutations that affect MAPs can therefore affect microtubule dynamics . To test the effect of microtubule dynamics on kinetochore structure , we used strains with compromised MAP function , deleting BIK1 and BIM1 , or using a temperature - sensitive al - lele of the essential STU2 , stu2 - 11 . Calibrated imaging revealed that the stu2 - 11 mutant at room temperature ( 25°C ) had fewer copies of the Ndc80 complex in anaphase compared with the WT strain or the bim1 Δ or bik1 Δ strains , suggesting mi - crotubule dynamics controlled by Stu2 could affect anaphase addition ( Fig . 6 a ) . In contrast , the Dam1 complex was rela - tively unaffected by compromising MAP function , suggesting that microtubule dynamics more specifically affect the Ndc80 Figure 3 . Subunits of the Ndc80 and MIND subcomplexes recover in FRAP , whereas sub - units of the Dam1 subcomplex do not . ( a and b ) Kinetochore ( Kt ) clusters in metaphase with Nuf2 - EGFP were bleached once they were separated by < 2 µm ( 1 min ) , and recovery was monitored and the intensities were quan - tified from a single cell ( n = 9 ) . For both the mother and daughter clusters , intensity was normalized to 1 at 0 min . The second time point represents a photobleach step . ( c and d ) Kinetochore clusters with Ask1 - EGFP were followed as in a and b . Quantification of the Ask1 - EGFP kinetochore cluster intensity from a single cell ( n = 19 ; d ) shows no recovery . Bars , 5 µm . ( e ) Percent recovery after photo - bleaching for kinetochore proteins is shown ; each dot represents an individual cluster . Sub - units of the COMA ( Ame1 and Okp1 ) , MIND , and Ndc80 complexes show > 80 % recovery in anaphase ( green ) , whereas Mif2 and sub - units of the Dam1 subcomplex show little re - covery ( red ) . A two - tailed t test was used to test for statistical significance . Structural plasticity of the living kinetochore • Dhatchinamoorthy et al . 3557 Figure 4 . Ndc80 and MIND subcomplexes add new copies during anaphase , whereas Dam1 does not . ( a ) Ndc80 - tdEos is photoconverted in metaphase ( 4 min ) and followed through anaphase . The increase in green fluorescence ( white arrowheads ) suggests that new copies are added . ( b ) Quantification of normalized green and red fluorescence intensities at the Ndc80 - tdEos spot is plotted over time from a single cell ( n = 20 ) . ( c and d ) A similar analysis was performed for Ask1 - tdEos . The normalized green fluorescence plot shows that new protein is not added during anaphase . For a and d , the prepho - toconverted images have been saturated for better visualization ; please refer to the quantifications in b and c . Bars , 5 µm . ( e ) The mean change in the normalized green fluorescence intensity is shown for each kinetochore ( Kt ) protein during anaphase . Error bars represent SEM . The number of experiments is indicated in parentheses . ( f ) Graph showing the percentage of green fluorescence addition during anaphase by kinetochore protein for the number of individual clusters indicated . MIND and Ndc80 subcomplexes ( green ) have more green fluorescence at the maximum kinetochore distance than Dam1 subunits ( red ) . A two - tailed t test was used to test for statistical significance . JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 11 • 2017 3558 complex ( Fig . 5 b ) . FRAP experiments show poorer recovery of Nuf2 - GFP in the stu2 - 11 mutant compared with WT ( Fig . 6 , c and d ) . Furthermore , photoconversion experiments suggest Ndc80 - tdEos failed to add copies during anaphase in the stu2 - 11 strain ( Fig . 6 , e and f ) . Collectively , these data suggest that microtubule destabilization with slower spindle elongation in the stu2 - 11 mutant specifically affects the number of Ndc80 complexes added during anaphase . We speculate that the ad - dition of the Ndc80 submodule can adjust based on the rate of microtubule depolymerization during anaphase , whereas the Dam1 submodule structure is relatively immune to microtubule dynamics during anaphase . Addition of MIND and Ndc80 subcomplexes in anaphase is coupled to established cell cycle factors Having established that the kinetochore is a plastic structure with a minimal copy number state or “G1 configuration” from G1 to metaphase and a high - copy number state or “anaphase configu - ration” in anaphase as well as that it may respond to microtubule depolymerization , we next asked how this structural transition is coupled to known regulators of metaphase and anaphase . We evaluated the addition of MIND and Ndc80 in many different mutant backgrounds , including mutations compromising ( a ) intersister centromere tension , ( b ) microtubule motors , ( c ) the kinetochore itself , ( d ) mitotic exit , and ( e ) cytokinesis . Deletion of MCM21 , which encodes a subunit of the COMA subcomplex , reduces cohesion at centromeres ( Ng et al . , 2009 ; Stephens et al . , 2013 ) , which results in lower tension between sister centromeres . We asked whether tension during metaphase was an important factor for structural changes in the kinetochore during anaphase . However , we found that addition of Ndc80 and MIND complexes in anaphase occurred normally without MCM21 ( Fig . 7 a ) . Mutation in the tension sensor IPL1 similarly did not affect addition of Ndc80 in anaphase ( Fig . S5 a ) . Experiments with temperature - sensitive mutants that were conducted at 37°C precluded calibrated imaging because of the instability of EGFP , but measurements of intensity from metaphase to anaphase revealed whether the intensity increased during anaphase . Although data are shown for one cell , the re - sults described represent the trend observed in a minimum of eight total cells from three independent experiments . The re - sults of the mcm21 Δ and ipl1 - 2 mutants together suggest neither metaphase tension nor the sensing of the tension are necessary to achieve the anaphase kinetochore configuration . Kar3 is a kinesin - 14 motor protein that depends on noncat - alytic motorlike proteins for its localization . Kar3 binds to Vik1 ( Mayer et al . , 2004 ) to localize on SPBs and interacts with Cik1 for its midzone localization ( Tytell and Sorger , 2006 ) . Kar3 - Cik1 can bind to the Ndc80 complex to localize on microtubules ( Mieck et al . , 2015 ) . Calibrated imaging in deletion mutants re - vealed that Vik1 , but not Cik1 , is required for the addition of Figure 5 . Photoconversion of Dsn1 - tdEos in the nucleoplasm reveals copy addition during anaphase . ( a and b ) Snapshots with quantification of a nu - cleoplasm photoconverted ( marked with a white dotted line ) cell from metaphase through anaphase . Protein from photoconverted nucleoplasm ( red ) in the daughter cell ( top cluster ) was added to the kinetochore ( Kt ) during anaphase . The addition of new protein is demonstrated by the increase in the red fluorescence ( white arrows ) . Bar , 5 µm . ( c ) The mother cell kinetochore ( bottom cluster ) without nucleoplasm photoconversion shows the expected increase in green fluorescence but no increase in red fluorescence during anaphase . This experiment was repeated seven times with similar results . Structural plasticity of the living kinetochore • Dhatchinamoorthy et al . 3559 Figure 6 . A mutation in STU2 reduces the addition of Ndc80 subunits in anaphase . ( a and b ) Calibrated imaging was used to calculate the copy number for the protein indicated in each MAP mutant during G1 and anaphase , similar to Fig . 2 , and then was plotted as in Fig . 2 d . The stu2 - 11 mutant has a lower anaphase / G1 ratio than WT for Nuf2 , whereas Dam1 is unaffected . The bik1 Δ and bim1 Δ mutants had a lower copy number for Ask1 in G1 , affecting the anaphase / G1 ratio . 50 – 130 clusters were considered for the copy number calculation ( n = 3 ) . ( c and d ) Snapshots and quantification of FRAP from a single cell shows that Nuf2 does not recover during anaphase in the stu2 - 11 background ( n > 8 ) . ( e and f ) Photoconversion of Ndc80 - tdEos in the stu2 - 11 background shows that green fluorescence does not increase in anaphase from a single cell ( n > 8 ) . Bars , 5 µm . Dotted white lines mark cell peripheries . All experiments were performed at room temperature . A two - tailed t test was used to test for statistical significance , and the error bars represent SEM . Kt , kinetochore . JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 11 • 2017 3560 the MIND subunit Dsn1 and the Ndc80 subunit Nuf2 during anaphase ( Fig . 7 b ) . These results suggest that the SPB function of Kar3 - Vik1 , but not Kar3 - Cik1 at the spindle midzone , can influence structural changes in the kinetochore during anaphase . Although the observations with deletion of VIK1 could be caused by increased or mislocalized Kar3 - Cik1 , we did not see evidence of this when monitoring Kar3 . Loss of VIK1 is associated with increased mitotic chromosome loss ( Daniel et al . , 2006 ) ; we speculate this loss could be caused in part by failure to achieve a kinetochore configuration that can effectively track kinetochores . Kip3 ( MCAK in mammals ) is a multifunctional motor protein with microtubule - depolymerizing activity for growing microtubules ( Su et al . , 2011 ) . Kip3 has been implicated in the maintenance of genome stability ( Duffy et al . , 2016 ) . Calibrated imaging in a kip3 Δ background revealed that Kip3 was required for the full addition of the MIND subunit Dsn1 and Ndc80 sub - unit Nuf2 during anaphase because significantly less addition was observed ( Fig . 7 c ) . This finding is consistent with the Stu2 result and suggests that a lower rate of microtubule depolymer - ization may be sensed and fewer couplers may be added during anaphase . In summary , we found that some motor - related pro - teins are required for the increase in copy number of MIND and Ndc80 complexes in anaphase . Moreover , there are inter - mediate levels of addition of these proteins in different mutant backgrounds , reinforcing the idea that the kinetochore structure is adjustable and plastic . The kinetochore structure has been proposed to be hierar - chical , with the recruitment of some subcomplexes dependent Figure 7 . The kinesin - related motors Kip3 and Vik1 facilitate addition of the MIND and Ndc80 complexes in anaphase . ( a – c ) Cali - brated imaging was performed for the Dsn1 subunit of MIND and the Nuf2 subunit of Ndc80 in various mutant backgrounds and represented as violin plots . The horizontal mid - dle line is the mean , and the box represents the SD . A two - tailed t test was used to test for statis - tical significance . 80 – 150 clusters from three independent experiments were used to calcu - late the copy number . ( a ) Deletion of MCM21 did not affect the copy number of Dsn1 or Nuf2 in G1 or anaphase . ( b ) Disrupting the local - ization of Kar3 at SPBs with deletion of VIK1 , but not the midzone localization with deletion of CIK1 , mildly reduced the copy number of Dsn1 and Nuf2 in G1 and more significantly in anaphase . ( c ) Deletion of KIP3 reduced the addition of Dsn1 and Nuf2 in anaphase . Structural plasticity of the living kinetochore • Dhatchinamoorthy et al . 3561 on the recruitment of others ( Biggins , 2013 ) . Deletion of the Mcm21 subunit of COMA did not affect the addition of MIND or Ndc80 in anaphase . We further analyzed whether the addi - tion of MIND and Ndc80 subunits in anaphase was dependent on the microtubule - interacting proteins Dam1 or Spc105 . In - terestingly , in the dam1 - 11 strain , the Nuf2 subunit of Ndc80 did not show addition in anaphase , suggesting that Dam1 com - plex is necessary for the addition of the Ndc80 complex in anaphase ( Fig . 8 a ) . In the spc105 - 15 strain , the Nuf2 subunit of Ndc80 displayed a similar intensity increase in anaphase as in a WT strain ( Fig . 8 c ) . Mitotic exit requires the function of the protein phos - phatase Cdc14 ( Jaspersen et al . , 1998 ; Visintin et al . , 1998 ) . The cdc14 - 3 mutant arrests in late anaphase ( Culotti and Hart - well , 1971 ) . In the cdc14 - 3 strain , the Nuf2 subunit of Ndc80 increased similar to a WT strain ( Fig . S5 b ) . The strain then Figure 8 . Dam1 is required for the increase in Nuf2 - GFP in anaphase , but the increase occurs normally in cnn1Δ , cnn1 - 16A , and spc105 - 15 mutants . ( a – c ) α - Factor – arrested cells were released at 37°C for live - cell microscopy and were imaged from metaphase . At least eight cells total were imaged from three independent experiments . The Nuf2 - GFP subunit of the Ndc80 complex was followed from metaphase to anaphase . ( a ) In the dam1 - 11 temperature - sensitive mutant background at a nonpermissive temperature ( 37°C ) , Nuf2 - GFP was not added during anaphase . ( b ) Calibrated imaging was used to cal - culate and compare the copy number for Nuf2 in WT and cnn1 Δ strains in G1 and anaphase . Deletion of CNN1 did not affect the copy number of Nuf2 in either G1 or anaphase . ( c ) A mutant version of Cnn1 that cannot be phosphorylated ( Cnn1 - 16A ) strongly interacted with the Ndc80 complex ( Malvezzi et al . , 2013 ) . Quantification of intensity of Nuf2 - GFP in the cnn1 - 16A mutant background shows addition in anaphase . Quantification of intensity of Nuf2 - GFP in the spc105 - 15 temperature - sensitive mutant background shows that Nuf2 - GFP is added in anaphase . Kt , kinetochore . JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 11 • 2017 3562 arrested with the anaphase configuration , demonstrating that the return to the minimal configuration of the kinetochore requires progression of the cell cycle into telophase . Cytokinesis requires components of the septin ring such as Cdc10 and Cdc11 ( Hartwell , 1971 ; Longtine et al . , 1996 ; Field and Kellogg , 1999 ) . Without septin function , cytokinesis does not occur , but other aspects of the cell cycle may still prog - ress . In cdc11 - 4 and cdc10 - 5 strains , which did not undergo cytokinesis , the Nuf2 subunit of Ndc80 increased similar to a WT strain and then returned to the minimal configuration of the kinetochore , again similar to a WT strain ( Fig . S5 c ) . This result suggests that the physical act of cytokinesis is not required for the structural transitions in the kinetochore . Collectively , these results demonstrate that the structural transitions at the kineto - chore are coupled to some of the previously studied cell cycle regulators , but not to others . Kinetochore intensity increase during anaphase is evolutionarily conserved Budding and fission yeast diverged ∼ 600 million years ago from a common ancestor ( Hedges , 2002 ) . Fission yeast has a regional centromere but forms a subdiffraction - limited ki - netochore cluster like budding yeast ( Liu et al . , 2005 ) , and the kinetochore – microtubule architecture is also conserved ( Joglekar et al . , 2008a ) . We tagged kinetochore proteins with EGFP to study their intensity during the cell cycle in Schizosac - charomyces pombe . Dsn1 - EGFP and Ndc80 - EGFP intensities increased in anaphase compared with G2 ( Fig . 9 , a and b ) , sim - ilar to our observations in budding yeast ( Figs . 1 and S1 ) . We used the kinetochore distance to identify the cell cycle stages . For technical reasons , it was easier to quantify the intensity in G2 ( rather than metaphase ) and anaphase and normalize for the number of chromosomes . The intensity of the kinetochore clus - ter dropped as the cell transitioned from G2 to metaphase and then increased again during anaphase ( Fig . 9 c ) . Anaphase cells have higher fluorescence intensity per chromosome for subunits of the MIND and Ndc80 subcomplexes , suggesting more cop - ies per chromosome in anaphase ( Fig . 9 , a – d ) . The Dam1 com - plex in S . pombe localized along the microtubule with multiple puncta ( Gao et al . , 2010 ) , making it difficult to assess kineto - chore - associated Dam1 . Altogether , our data suggest that the Ndc80 and MIND subcomplexes also increase during anaphase in fission yeast , suggesting that plasticity of kinetochore struc - ture may be evolutionarily conserved . Kinetochore copy number increase is predicted to improve chromosome attachment In anaphase , the kinetochore must persistently track the rapidly depolymerizing microtubule . Hill’s model for kinetochore – microtubule interaction has been extensively used to mathemat - ically describe kinetochore movement ( Hill , 1985 ) . The number of proximal coupler microtubule attachments can change based on microtubule dynamics , with depolymerization favoring mo - tion , and polymerization favoring a stable attachment ( Hill , 1985 ; Joglekar and Hunt , 2002 ; Joglekar et al . , 2006 ; Asbury et al . , 2011 ) . Polymerization of the microtubule changed the kine - tochore binding site from N to N + 1 , promoted by random ther - mal motion , whereas depolymerization promoted the movement of the microtubule out of the kinetochore “sleeve” ( Fig . 10 a ; Joglekar and Hunt , 2002 ) . Given our experimental observa - tions , we simulated kinetochore – microtubule attachment during prolonged depolymerization with different numbers of couplers ( a . k . a . different sleeve lengths ) , with the speculation that more couplers might prevent detachment of the kinetochore from the disassembling microtubule . Our simulation studies using Hill’s equation show that the addition of couplers decreased the prob - ability of detachment exponentially in a given anaphase time ( Fig . 10 b ) . If we simulated a 10 - min anaphase , addition of a single coupler decreased the probability of a lost attachment by approximately fourfold . The model predicts that the same num - ber of couplers will have a lower probability of loss with longer anaphase ( Fig . 10 c ) . Based on our experimental evidence , the coupler that could be added to prevent a lost attachment is the Ndc80 submodule . The simulations demonstrate that adding even a single coupler is predicted to have a significant effect on the persistence of attachment . Discussion Error - free chromosome segregation is essential for successful progression of life . Experiments using purified yeast kineto - chores have revealed that microtubule depolymerization makes kinetochores highly susceptible to detachment ( Akiyoshi et al . , 2010 ) , which in turn could be deleterious for chromosome transmission . Our work suggests that the kinetochore structure , particularly the MIND and Ndc80 subcomplexes but not the Dam1 subcomplex , is modified during the rapid microtubule depolymerization of anaphase in living cells . The increase in Ndc80 copies has the potential to increase contacts between the microtubule and kinetochore during anaphase , presumably to facilitate efficient tracking and prevent chromosomes from being lost from the spindle . We speculate that fewer copies of the Ndc80 submodule during G1 and metaphase with the kinetochore in a minimal configuration could facilitate cor - rection of spindle – microtubule misattachments as compared with the anaphase configuration , in which more kinetochore – microtubule contacts would need to be broken before correction ( Fig . 10 d ) . Our results suggest that the kinetochore is an adjust - able structure , which may contribute to robust functionality for chromosome segregation . Kinetochore submodules are adjustable and stoichiometric during anaphase The kinetochore interacts with the assembling and disas - sembling microtubule tip throughout the cell cycle . During anaphase , however , the kinetochore must track on a rapidly disassembling microtubule without losing the attachment . The Ndc80 complex makes this connection to the microtubule tip through its calponin homology domain and N - terminal un - structured fingerlike projections . The Ndc80 complexes align parallel with each other , with the highest Förster resonance energy transfer in anaphase ( Aravamudhan et al . , 2014 ) . As a microtubule disassembles , it is proposed that the Ndc80 com - plex breaks the interaction with the microtubule near the tip and forms a new , more internal interaction ( Asbury et al . , 2011 ; Foley and Kapoor , 2013 ) . Oligomerization of the Ndc80 com - plex is necessary for it to track the microtubule in vitro . Dam1 , an essential complex for kinetochore function in budding yeast , forms a ringlike structure and tracks the disassembling microtu - bule . The presence of these two different types of microtubule contacts may facilitate robust attachment . However , the type of attachments made by the Ndc80 submodule may be more Structural plasticity of the living kinetochore • Dhatchinamoorthy et al . 3563 amenable to adjustment . We observe that the Ndc80 complex gradually adds copies as the SPBs separate during anaphase , and this addition is accompanied by the addition of copies of the MIND complex and the Okp1 and Ame1 subunits of the COMA complex ( Hornung et al . , 2014 ) , which anchors the MIND complex to the centromere . Collectively , Okp1 / Ame1 - MIND - Ndc80 may form a working structural module , stretching from the inner kinetochore to the microtubule . The addition of the Okp1 / Ame1 - MIND - Ndc80 kinetochore submodules could pro - mote chromosome attachment to microtubules as chromosomes move to opposite poles during anaphase . The relative stoichiometry of proteins within Ndc80 and MIND submodules remains similar in G1 and anaphase , reinforcing the idea that they function as structural submod - ules within the kinetochore . Because there are more copies of Ndc80 than MIND and more copies of MIND than Okp1 / Ame1 , our results would suggest a single Okp1 - Ame1 sub - module may associate with more than one MIND submodule , and one MIND submodule may associate with more than one Ndc80 submodule . Although Okp1 and Ame1 may exist in the COMA submodule with Ctf19 , they have a significantly higher copy number than Ctf19 . However , overall stoichiometry of the Figure 9 . Ndc80 increase during anaphase is observed in S . pombe . ( a ) Quantification of intensity of SpDsn1 - GFP ( MIND – MIS12 com - plex ) from metaphase to anaphase from a sin - gle cell shows an increase during anaphase ( n = 8 ) . ( b and c ) Quantification ( b ) and snapshots ( c ) showing an increase in intensity of SpNdc80 - GFP of a single cell from meta - phase to anaphase in fission yeast ( n = 8 ) . Bar , 5 µm . ( d ) Quantification of kinetochore ( Kt ) protein intensity per chromosome in G2 and anaphase represented as a violin plot . Kinetochore clusters in anaphase have signifi - cantly higher intensity than kinetochore clusters in G2 . 50 – 130 clusters were used for the vio - lin plot . A two - tailed t test was used to test for statistical significance . JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 11 • 2017 3564 COMA submodule is roughly maintained from G1 to anaphase . In contrast to the subunits of the MIND and Ndc80 submod - ules , which all exhibit similar behavior in FRAP and photo - conversion experiments , Okp1 and Ame1 show more recovery than Ctf19 after photobleaching , suggesting different structural dynamics for the subunits of this submodule . Cnn1 has been reported to function as a receptor for the Ndc80 complex in anaphase ( Schleiffer et al . , 2012 ; Malvezzi et al . , 2013 ) . How - ever , neither deletion of CNN1 nor the phosphodeficient muta - tion cnn1 - 16A affected the copy number or addition of Ndc80 , suggesting that it is not required for recruitment of Ndc80 in anaphase ( Fig . 8 , b and c ) . Although Cnn1 may bind to Ndc80 and normally be involved in its recruitment during anaphase , it does not appear to be essential . Overall , our results start to re - veal the behavior of subunits and submodules within the struc - ture of the living kinetochore . The Dam1 subcomplex forms an oligomeric structure and at high protein concentrations , it forms a complete ring with 16 - fold symmetry in vitro ( Westermann et al . , 2005 ; Miranda et al . , 2007 ; Wang et al . , 2007 ; Ramey et al . , 2011 ) . The Dam1 Figure 10 . Simulations using Hill’s biased diffusion model and a working model for kinetochore configuration in G1 and anaphase . ( a ) Hill’s equation for the microtubule ( MT ) – kinetochore interaction is shown with a cartoon to depict each variable . During microtubule polymerization , the microtubule moves inside the kinetochore sleeve from M − 1 to M for calculating the k in . During depolymerization of the microtubule , interactions are broken and reformed in a new position by moving from M to M − 1 for calculating the k out . ( b ) The number of couplers is plotted against the probability of detachment ( shown by heat map ) as a function of anaphase length . Addition of each coupler increases the probability of remaining attached exponentially . ( c ) The probability of an attachment breaking is plotted against the number of couplers for a 10 - , 20 - , and 30 - min anaphase , revealing that the addition of each coupler expo - nentially decreases the loss of kinetochore – microtubule interaction . ( d ) The kinetochore in G1 through metaphase has fewer copies of COMA , MIND , and Ndc80 subcomplexes relative to the kinetochore at the end of anaphase , which experiences addition of the Okp1 – COMA ( blue ) , Mtw1 – MIND ( purple ) , and Ndc80 ( red ) subcomplexes . This addition is facilitated by Stu2 ( yellow ) . The Dam1 complex ( green ) is represented as a similar ringlike structure in G1 and anaphase encircling the microtubule . Structural plasticity of the living kinetochore • Dhatchinamoorthy et al . 3565 subcomplex can interact with the microtubule as a monomer , partial ring , complete ring , or double ring in vitro ( Miranda et al . , 2007 ; Gestaut et al . , 2008 ; Kim et al . , 2017 ) , suggesting that multiple modalities of interaction are possible . The recently proposed model of two Dam1 rings , based on in vitro data , is difficult to reconcile with our observations along with those of Joglekar et al . ( 2006 ) , which were collected in vivo . The data from Kim et al . ( 2017 ) could instead be interpreted to mean that the Dam1 complex can interact with microtubules in two distinct modes , rather than two Dam1 rings coexisting in vivo . All forms of the Dam1 subcomplex form a load - bearing contact with the microtubule and track the depolymerizing microtubule processively ( Gestaut et al . , 2008 ; Umbreit et al . , 2014 ) . Previ - ous imaging estimated the Dam1 subcomplex at 10 – 20 copies per kinetochore in vivo ( Joglekar et al . , 2006 ) , similar to our estimate of 12 ± 4 copies . A partial Dam1 ring has been ob - served by tomography ( McIntosh et al . , 2013 ) , suggesting that the Dam1 complex could form an incomplete ring in vivo . Our data support the idea that Dam1 may be an incomplete ring in vivo and , in contrast with Cnn1 , that Dam1 is required for the addition of Ndc80 in anaphase . Previous studies on kinetochore protein copy number specifically focused on metaphase or anaphase and typically used centromeric histone protein Cse4 as a reference ( Joglekar et al . , 2006 , 2008a ) . The relative copy number of kinetochore proteins was given in metaphase and anaphase relative to Cse4 in metaphase and Cse4 in anaphase , respectively , with Cse4 unchanged over the cell cycle . However , a later study argued that Cse4 fluorescence changes between metaphase and anaphase ( Shivaraju et al . , 2012 ) , suggesting these previ - ous measurements may be reinterpreted . With the unchanging Cse4 reference used in the previous study , the anaphase values calculated relative to metaphase showed a slight relative de - crease in copy number for the MIND complex member Mtw1p , a slight relative decrease for COMA complex member Ctf19p , and a large ( approximate factor of 2 ) relative decrease in copy number for Dam1 complex member Ask1p ( Joglekar et al . , 2006 ) . Based on our collection of calibrating imaging , FRAP , and photoconversion data , we instead argue that subunits of the Dam1 subcomplex remain constant from metaphase to anaphase , whereas subunits of the MIND and COMA submod - ules are added during anaphase . Our data are therefore consis - tent with the previous study but simply differ in the calibration reference . In fact , if we use Cse4 as a reference at two copies / kinetochore in anaphase , our anaphase numbers are strikingly similar to the previous study ( Table S2 ) . Our FRAP results are also consistent with prior studies . Previous FRAP experi - ments were performed on a handful of kinetochore proteins for ∼ 5 min ( 300 s ) and did not reveal any recovery ( Joglekar et al . , 2006 , 2008b ; Suzuki et al . , 2016 ) . However , these experiments differed from ours in that they were performed either in meta - phase or in anaphase . In contrast , we followed recovery from metaphase to anaphase typically for a longer period . Further - more , the critique that compaction of the cluster can affect the intensity of the spot by 40 % and therefore may explain the dif - ferences we observe in anaphase is refuted by both the FRAP and photoconversion data , where intensity changes are not the readout but rather are the absence ( Dam1 complex ) or presence ( Ndc80 complex , for example ) of intensity in anaphase after photobleaching or photoconversion in metaphase . In sum , our results are compatible with the published literature . Kinetochore plasticity may be influenced by microtubule dynamics and may be evolutionarily conserved MAPs can influence the rate of microtubule assembly and dis - assembly during the cell cycle ( Kosco et al . , 2001 ) . The Stu2 / XMAP215 family is important for spindle elongation and kinetochore – microtubule interaction ( Usui et al . , 2003 ; Miller et al . , 2016 ) . Loss of Stu2 severely reduces the microtubule dy - namics , makes spindles shorter , and arrests cells in metaphase ( Kosco et al . , 2001 ; Pearson et al . , 2003 ) . Reduced microtubule dynamics in a stu2 mutant ( McAinsh et al . , 2003 ) as well as the kip3 mutant ( Tytell and Sorger , 2006 ; Gardner et al . , 2011 ) are associated with less addition of Ndc80 subunits in our ex - periments , revealing a correlation between a lower disassembly rate and the number of Ndc80 submodules added . Stu2 may help to directly recruit or stabilize additional Ndc80 complexes via its interaction with Ndc80 . Given that Stu2 is evolutionarily conserved ( human orthologue ch - TOG ) and that its interaction with Ndc80 is evolutionarily conserved ( Miller et al . , 2016 ) , this protein could play a similar role in higher eukaryotes . In contrast , the Dam1 complex was unaffected by compromis - ing microtubule dynamics . We speculate that the kinetochore may be able to sense the rate of microtubule depolymerization and adjust the number of Ndc80 copies added for attachment , whereas the Dam1 subcomplex may not vary its attachment by depolymerization rate . The kinetochore configuration in the stu2 - 11 and kip3 mutants during anaphase is intermediate between the normal G1 and anaphase configurations , suggest - ing fewer microtubule couplers are present under conditions of reduced depolymerization speed and reinforcing the idea of structural plasticity . A purified kinetochore complex detaches from a disas - sembling microtubule ∼ 100 - fold faster than a polymerizing microtubule in vitro ( Akiyoshi et al . , 2010 ; Sarangapani et al . , 2014 ) ; detachment in a cell could result in aneuploidy . Our results suggest that the living kinetochore enhances its interaction with the depolymerizing microtubule by increas - ing the copy number of the Ndc80 subcomplex . These struc - tural changes would be difficult to observe in vitro because they depend on a soluble pool of subunits . Simulation of kinetochore interactions with microtubules predicts that the addition of each coupler decreases the probability of losing the microtubule attachment by fourfold . We propose that the addition of the Ndc80 - MIND - Okp1 - Ame1 modules could serve this role . In yeast , as each chromosome is attached to a single microtubule , this addition may be especially im - portant for faithful completion of chromosome segregation . Our results in fission yeast support addition of Ndc80 sub - complexes during anaphase as a conserved feature of a liv - ing kinetochore structure . How might structural plasticity promote chromosome segregation ? The structural plasticity of the kinetochore may contribute to its functionality . We speculate that in metaphase , fewer copies of Ndc80 might facilitate error correction by Aurora B kinase ( Biggins et al . , 1999 ; Cheeseman et al . , 2002 ; Tanaka et al . , 2002 ) . Increased Ndc80 levels , as reported in cancer , may com - promise error correction if they lead to increased microtubule attachments , contributing to the increased aneuploidy observed ( Yuen et al . , 2005 ; Pfau and Amon , 2012 ; Meng et al . , 2015 ) . JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 11 • 2017 3566 Once chromosomes start moving to the poles during anaphase , the addition of Ndc80 - MIND - Okp1 - Ame1 submodules may provide extra attachments that facilitate robust microtubule tracking . Interestingly , kinetochores revert to the lower copy structure in telophase / G1 . Many kinases and phosphatases regulate mitosis and the kinetochore in particular . Our exam - ination of metaphase and anaphase regulators revealed that nei - ther intersister tension nor the sensing of tension are required for the structural changes , but factors that affect microtubule dynamics , the kinetochore itself , and mitotic exit promote the structural transitions . We speculate that additional kinases and / or phosphatases will contribute to the regulation of the kine - tochore configuration . In the future , it will be important to pursue how the living kinetochore structure is regulated and how the structural plasticity contributes to its functionality for chromosome segregation . Materials and methods Yeast strains The S . cerevisiae and S . pombe strains used in this study are listed in Table S1 . We thank S . Westermann ( University of Duisburg - Essen , Essen , Germany ) for providing yeast strains . Karyotyping by quan - titative PCR was done as previously described ( Pavelka et al . , 2010 ) to examine the ploidy level of strains used in microscopy studies . In brief , genomic DNA from experimental and control haploid and diploid strains was used to perform a quantitative PCR assay with a set of prim - ers from one noncoding region on each chromosome arm to determine the copy number of the PCR product in the experimental strain . Reac - tion conditions , primers , and chromosome copy number calculations were previously derived ( Pavelka et al . , 2010 ) . Microscopic techniques All microscope data for GFP counting , FCS , and FRAP were acquired as previously described ( Shivaraju et al . , 2012 ) by using a LSM - 510 confocal microscope ( ZEI SS ) outfitted with a ConfoCor 3 module and two single - photon – counting avalanche photodiodes . A C - Apochro - mat 40× 1 . 2 NA water objective was used . A high - frequency trading 488 / 561 main dichroic allowed excitation of GFP ( 488 - nm laser line ) and mCherry ( 561 - nm laser ) . A secondary nearfield transducer 565 beam splitter was used as an emission dichroic . After passage through a 505 – 550 - nm Bandpass or Longpass 580 filter for GFP and mCherry , respectively , photon counts were collected on avalanche photodiodes in single - photon counting mode . Pinhole was set to 1 airy unit . FCS with image calibration FCS and image calibration were done as previously described ( Shi - varaju et al . , 2012 ) . In brief , using the FCS module of the ConfoCor 3 ( ZEI SS ) , FCS of an endogenously expressed monomeric GFP in live cells was used to calculate the intensity of a single GFP . As with im - aging , the 488 - nm laser line was used to excite GFP , and emission was collected through a 505 – 550 - nm Bandpass filter . Pinhole was set to 1 airy unit . To calculate the copy number of a kinetochore protein , a z series was taken with 0 . 4 - µM step size and 6 . 4 - µs pixel dwell time . The kinetochore cluster was fit to a 2D Gaussian , and peak amplitude of the fit was divided by single GFP intensity after correcting for differences in laser power . Fits were performed with custom ImageJ ( National In - stitutes of Health ) plugins incorporating a grid search over spatial and width coordinates and linear least squares for amplitude and baseline determination . Automation was accomplished with ImageJ macros in - cluded in the online supplemental material . To compare values using the integrated intensity ( Joglekar et al . , 2006 ) , we multiplied the spot intensity amplitude by the SD squared of the Gaussian fit and then nor - malized to a value of 2 for Cse4 intensity in anaphase . Although the integrated intensity method compared with a known standard and the amplitude - based method that determines GFP copy number based on comparison to FCS of a cytosolic GFP standard should provide identi - cal results , we prefer the amplitude - based method for two reasons . The first reason is that it calculates the copy number from first principles and does not require a standard for comparison . The second reason is that when fitting noisy data to a 2D Gaussian , there is far less uncer - tainty in the height of the Gaussian ( amplitude ) than there is in the width of the Gaussian ( SD ) . Furthermore , the integral of a Gaussian uses the SD squared , adding more uncertainty . The main drawback to the amplitude - based method is that it requires the spot being fit to be diffraction limited . This drawback is partially mitigated in this work by use of a 1 . 2 - NA objective rather than a 1 . 4 - NA objective , effectively increasing the size of a spot that can be considered diffraction limited ( Smith et al . , 2014 ) as well as the removal of spots above a certain size threshold as described previously ( Shivaraju et al . , 2012 ) . A Python script with MatPlotLib was used to plot the kinetochore copy number as a violin plot . Origin 9 . 1 was used for statistical analysis . FRAP FRAP measurements were performed to examine the recovery of ki - netochore protein during anaphase . Yeast cells expressing kinetochore proteins tagged with EGFP were grown to mid - log phase in synthetic complete media , harvested , and sandwiched between a slide and cover - slip in a 1 % agarose solution made with medium . Long time - lapse im - aging demonstrated yeast cells were alive and divided at a normal rate in the agar pad for up to 4 h . We took time points with 5 - min intervals to minimize bleaching . Before photobleaching , a z series was taken with 0 . 4 - µM step size and 6 . 4 - µs pixel dwell time . Acquisition of a z stack was essential because of the mobility of the kinetochore cluster in living yeast cells and to ensure proper quantitation of kinetochore intensity . After the initial acquisition , a kinetochore cluster labeled with EGFP was irreversibly photobleached by four rapid scans with high 488 - nm laser power . The ability of the cells to continue to grow and divide ensured that photobleaching did not grossly damage the cells . After photobleaching , videos were acquired to examine recovery of the kinetochore cluster during anaphase . In most cases , cells were used that also expressed Spc42 - mCherry from a centromeric plasmid to mark the cell cycle . Recovery of kinetochore proteins was observed as the reap - pearance of a punctate spot centered in the nucleus . ImageJ software was used as in the previous section for calibrated imaging to calculate the intensity , and the distance between the kinetochore clusters was determined with standard ImageJ measurement tools . The percent re - covery was calculated as follows : % Recovery = ( Max . Intensity in anaphase − Pos t bleach Intensity _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Pr e bleach Intensity − Pos t bleach Intensity ) × 100 . Photoconversion of kinetochore proteins at metaphase For cell cycle time series and photoconversion studies , an Ultraview VoX spinning - disk system ( PerkinElmer ) with a CSU - 10 spinning - disk ( Yo - kogawa Electric Corporation ) was used . The system was attached to a 200 - m inverted microscope ( ZEI SS ) . Images were acquired with a 100× 1 . 46 NA α - Plan Apochromat oil objective onto an electron - multiplying charge - coupled device camera ( C9100 - 13 ; Hamamatsu Photonics ) using Volocity software ( PerkinElmer ) . GFP and mCherry or the green and red forms of tdEos were excited with the 488 - nm and 561 - nm laser lines , respectively , using a 405 / 488 / 561 / 640 dichroic . The emission Structural plasticity of the living kinetochore • Dhatchinamoorthy et al . 3567 filter for green was a 500 – 550 - nm Bandpass , and for red it was a 415 – 475 - nm / 580 – 650 - nm dual Bandpass filter . Data were acquired with alternative excitation and were verified to be free of spectral cross - talk . Photoconversion experiments were used to measure the addition of new protein at the kinetochore cluster in anaphase . Yeast cells ex - pressing tdEos or mEos were grown , and the experiment proceeded as in FRAP—with the exception that the kinetochore cluster was photoconverted with four iterations of the 405 - nm laser and subse - quently imaged with the 488 - nm ( green ) / 561 - nm ( red ) laser line with spinning - disk microscopy using the system detailed above . Intensity quantification with Gaussian fitting was performed as in the calibrated imaging experiments . Percent green addition was calculated as follows : % Green addition = ( Max . Green Intensity in anaphase − Pos t activation Green Intensity _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Pr e activation Green Intensity − Pos t activation Green Intensity ) × 100 . For cell - cycle series / videos , the cells were maintained on 2 % agar pads at room temperature . Simulation of kinetochore – microtubule interaction with Hill’s equation Simulations of kinetochore – microtubule tracking for depolymerizing microtubules were performed according to the Hill model ( Hill , 1985 ) as described previously by Joglekar and Hunt ( 2002 ) with minor mod - ifications outlined in Fig . 10 a . The microtubule movement inside the sleeve was performed by discrete steps of the size L = 0 . 615 nm , and the size of the sleeve was M × L . The position N of microtubule is de - termined by its left tip 1 ≤ N ≤ M ( Fig . 6 a ) . The following physical mechanisms are incorporated into the model : ( a ) Random thermal motion of the sleeve at a rate κ . ( b ) Loss of tubulin monomers at the microtubule tip . Each additional interaction of the microtubule with the tubulin binding site ( corresponding with the increasing N ) reduces the free energy by W ( it has negative value ) so that the insertion of the microtubule into the sleeve is promoted . This move - ment requires first to break all existing binding between microtubules and binding sites , which creates a potential energy barrier B for each occupied binding site so that this barrier is equal to N × B . We set free en - ergy equal to zero when the microtubule detaches from the sleeve . Thus , at position N = 1 , we have it equal to W < 0 ; at N = 2 , it is 2W ; and at arbi - trary N , this value is N * W . Consider first the transition from N to ( N − 1 ) corresponding with outward movement . It can happen by both reasons mentioned above . The rate of transition from position N − 1 to position N ( out of the kinetochore sleeve composed of M binding sites or couplers ) is described by the following equation ( microtubule depolymerization ) : k out = S [ κ r M − N _ _ _ _ _ ƒ ( load ) + β ] . In this equation , κ is the constant describing the sleeve thermal mo - tion between tubulin binding sites , s is the exponent incorporating the loss of free energy because of movement out of the sleeve , r is the potential barrier associated with bond breaking in the sleeve , β is the rate of microtubule depolymerization , and f is the Boltzmann load fac - tor coupling the tension force ( F ) on the chromosome to the distance traveled , l , as follows : f = e − F × l ⁄ 2 kT . The first contribution to the rate k out reads κ × e [ W _ _ _ _ k × T ] × e [ − ( M − N ) × B _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ k × T ] / f , where k is the Boltzmann constant , T = 300 K is the temperature , and f is the Boltzmann factor representing the effect of the load on the kinetics . f = e − F × L _ _ _ _ _ _ 2 kB × T , The numerator represents the mechanical work performed in shifting the sleeve against the tension F . We used f < 1 corresponding with the case when the tension pulls the microtubule out of the sleeve . The second contribution caused by tubulin loss is estimated as β × e [ W / ( k × T ) ] , where β is the rate of tubulin depolymerization . Likewise , the transition from position N to N − 1 is described as follows ( microtubule polymerization ) : k in = κ r M − N ƒ _ _ _ _ _ _ S . The reverse transition from N − 1 to N corresponding with inward movement is caused by the sleeve motion only and its rate , k in = κ × ( e [ − W / ( k × T ) ] ) × ( e − ( M − N ) × B _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( k × T ) ) × f . Now , we introduce the quantities s = e [ W _ _ _ _ k × T ] < 1 and r = e [ ( − B ) _ _ _ _ k × T ] < 1 . Using them , we found k out = κ * s * r M − N / f + β * s and k in = κ * r M − N * f / s . Note that the factor of s in the denominator of the k in term is different from previous derivations . This does not change the overall behavior of the system except to scale the tension required for tracking upwards by a factor of ∼ 5 . We used a tension value of 20 pN for all simulations reported in this study . We used the recommended values from Joglekar and Hunt ( 2002 ) for all other parameters except in the case of the number of cou - plers , M , which we varied to observe the changes in dynamics of kine - tochore loss . Simulations were coded as custom ImageJ plugins and an automation macro , included in the online supplement . Simulations of kinetochore tracking were initiated with the microtubule fully inserted in the kinetochore sleeve ( N = M ) . Simulations were run with a time step of 10 µs and for a maximum length of 10 , 000 s . At each time step , a random number was generated between 0 and 1 . If that random number was < k in ( scaled to the time step increment ) , the microtubule was inserted one binding site further into the sleeve , with a maximum insertion of M binding sites . Otherwise , if the random number was > 1 − k out , the micro - tubule was pulled out of the sleeve by one binding site . If at any time this resulted in n = 0 , the kinetochore was considered lost by the microtubule . 1 , 000 simulations were performed , and the mean loss time was found for each set of coupler number . The time required to lose the kinetochore was exponentially distributed for all parameter sets in this study . Therefore , the probability of loss within a particular anaphase could be estimated by integrating the exponential distribution up to the anaphase length time : P loss = 1 − e − τ loss ⁄ τ anaphase . We mapped the mean kinetochore loss time as a function of the number of couplers of up to nine couplers . Above that value , the simulations became prohibitively long , but the trend of mean loss time was per - fectly exponential , following the equation τ loss = e − 13 . 1789 + 1 . 6331 × M . We then used this formula to extrapolate loss times ( and probabilities ) for higher numbers of couplers . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows a gradual increase of subunits from the MIND and Ndc80 subcomplexes from metaphase to anaphase . Similar intensity measurements for a subunit of the Dam1 subcomplex do not show an increase in intensity during the same cell cycle window . Fig . S2 presents the results of an alternative calculation method for the copy JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 11 • 2017 3568 number of kinetochore proteins . Fig . S3 shows quantification of FRAP performed on kinetochore subunits . COMA , MIND , and Ndc80 com - plex subunits recovered in anaphase , whereas subunits of the Dam1 subcomplex did not . Fig . S4 presents quantification from photoconver - sion experiments of kinetochore proteins . Fig . S5 presents quantifica - tion of Ndc80 addition during anaphase and reduction in G1 in spindle assembly checkpoint , mitotic exit pathway , and cytokinesis mutants . Table S1 is a list of strains used in this study . Table S2 is a compar - ison of kinetochore copy in anaphase . ImageJ macros and plugins are available in the online supplemental material . The macro entitled “batch _ gaussian _ roi _ macro _ v2 . ijm” cycles through the point regions of interest in the RoiManager and fits them in the selected channel and at their brightest z position to 2D Gaussians via a grid search and linear least squares methodology . The macro entitled “kt _ loss _ sim _ macro . ijm” runs 1 , 000 kinetochore - tracking simulations until the kinetochore is lost or the simtime value is met . The macro then outputs a plot of loss times . There are three plugin files ( Jay _ plugins , Jay _ plugins2 , and Jay _ Plugins3 ) that provide support code for the macros . Acknowledgments We thank Professor Stefan Westermann for yeast strains . We thank Mark Miller for his assistance with the graphical abstract and Richard Shrock for manuscript preparation . Funding was provided by the National Institutes of Health R01 GM080477 ( to J . L . Gerton ) and the Stowers Institute for Medical Research . The authors declare no competing financial interests . Author contributions : K . Dhatchinamoorthy , M . Shivaraju , and B . D . Slaughter conducted the experiments . B . Rubinstein and J . R . Unruh conducted simulations . J . R . Unruh , J . J . Lange , and B . D . Slaughter as - sisted K . Dhatchinamoorthy with image quantification . K . Dhatchina - moorthy and J . L . Gerton designed the experiments . K . Dhatchinamoorthy , J . L Gerton , J . R . Unruh , and B . D Slaughter wrote the paper . Submitted : 22 March 2017 Revised : 17 July 2017 Accepted : 21 August 2017 References Akiyoshi , B . , K . K . Sarangapani , A . F . Powers , C . R . Nelson , S . L . Reichow , H . Arellano - Santoyo , T . Gonen , J . A . Ranish , C . L . Asbury , and S . Biggins . 2010 . Tension directly stabilizes reconstituted kinetochore - microtubule attachments . Nature . 468 : 576 – 579 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature09594 Al - Bassam , J . , M . van Breugel , S . C . Harrison , and A . Hyman . 2006 . Stu2p binds tubulin and undergoes an open - to - closed conformational change . J . Cell Biol . 172 : 1009 – 1022 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200511010 Aravamudhan , P . , I . Felzer - Kim , and A . P . Joglekar . 2013 . The budding yeast point centromere associates with two Cse4 molecules during mitosis . Curr . Biol . 23 : 770 – 774 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 03 . 042 Aravamudhan , P . , I . Felzer - Kim , K . Gurunathan , and A . P . Joglekar . 2014 . Assembling the protein architecture of the budding yeast kinetochore - microtubule attachment using FRET . Curr . Biol . 24 : 1437 – 1446 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 05 . 014 Asbury , C . L . , J . F . Tien , and T . N . Davis . 2011 . Kinetochores’ gripping feat : conformational wave or biased diffusion ? Trends Cell Biol . 21 : 38 – 46 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2010 . 09 . 003 Biggins , S . 2013 . The composition , functions , and regulation of the budding yeast kinetochore . Genetics . 194 : 817 – 846 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1534 / genetics . 112 . 145276 Biggins , S . , F . F . Severin , N . Bhalla , I . Sassoon , A . A . Hyman , and A . W . Murray . 1999 . The conserved protein kinase Ipl1 regulates microtubule binding to kinetochores in budding yeast . Genes Dev . 13 : 532 – 544 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gad . 13 . 5 . 532 Chan , G . K . , S . T . Liu , and T . J . Yen . 2005 . Kinetochore structure and function . Trends Cell Biol . 15 : 589 – 598 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2005 . 09 . 010 Cheeseman , I . M . , S . Anderson , M . Jwa , E . M . Green , J . Kang , J . R . Yates III , C . S . Chan , D . G . Drubin , and G . Barnes . 2002 . Phospho - regulation of kinetochore - microtubule attachments by the Aurora kinase Ipl1p . Cell . 111 : 163 – 172 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 02 ) 00973 - X Culotti , J . , and L . H . Hartwell . 1971 . Genetic control of the cell division cycle in yeast : III . Seven genes controlling nuclear division . Exp . Cell Res . 67 : 389 – 401 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0014 - 4827 ( 71 ) 90424 - 1 Daniel , J . A . , B . E . Keyes , Y . P . Ng , C . O . Freeman , and D . J . Burke . 2006 . Diverse functions of spindle assembly checkpoint genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Genetics . 172 : 53 – 65 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1534 / genetics . 105 . 046441 Desai , A . , and T . J . Mitchison . 1997 . Microtubule polymerization dynamics . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 13 : 83 – 117 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . cellbio . 13 . 1 . 83 De Wulf , P . , A . D . McAinsh , and P . K . Sorger . 2003 . Hierarchical assembly of the budding yeast kinetochore from multiple subcomplexes . Genes Dev . 17 : 2902 – 2921 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gad . 1144403 Duffy , S . , H . K . Fam , Y . K . Wang , E . B . Styles , J . H . Kim , J . S . Ang , T . Singh , V . Larionov , S . P . Shah , B . Andrews , et al . 2016 . Overexpression screens identify conserved dosage chromosome instability genes in yeast and human cancer . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 113 : 9967 – 9976 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1611839113 Field , C . M . , and D . Kellogg . 1999 . Septins : cytoskeletal polymers or signalling GTPases ? Trends Cell Biol . 9 : 387 – 394 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0962 - 8924 ( 99 ) 01632 - 3 Foley , E . A . , and T . M . Kapoor . 2013 . Microtubule attachment and spindle assembly checkpoint signalling at the kinetochore . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 14 : 25 – 37 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm3494 Gandhi , S . R . , M . Gierli ń ski , A . Mino , K . Tanaka , E . Kitamura , L . Clayton , and T . U . Tanaka . 2011 . Kinetochore - dependent microtubule rescue ensures their efficient and sustained interactions in early mitosis . Dev . Cell . 21 : 920 – 933 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2011 . 09 . 006 Gao , Q . , T . Courtheoux , Y . Gachet , S . Tournier , and X . He . 2010 . A non - ring - like form of the Dam1 complex modulates microtubule dynamics in fission yeast . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 107 : 13330 – 13335 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1004887107 Gardner , M . K . , M . Zanic , C . Gell , V . Bormuth , and J . Howard . 2011 . Depolymerizing kinesins Kip3 and MCAK shape cellular microtubule architecture by differential control of catastrophe . Cell . 147 : 1092 – 1103 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 10 . 037 Gestaut , D . R . , B . Graczyk , J . Cooper , P . O . Widlund , A . Zelter , L . Wordeman , C . L . Asbury , and T . N . Davis . 2008 . Phosphoregulation and depolymerization - driven movement of the Dam1 complex do not require ring formation . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 : 407 – 414 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb1702 Grishchuk , E . L . , and J . R . McIntosh . 2006 . Microtubule depolymerization can drive poleward chromosome motion in fission yeast . EMBO J . 25 : 4888 – 4896 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / sj . emboj . 7601353 Guimaraes , G . J . , Y . Dong , B . F . McEwen , and J . G . Deluca . 2008 . Kinetochore - microtubule attachment relies on the disordered N - terminal tail domain of Hec1 . Curr . Biol . 18 : 1778 – 1784 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2008 . 08 . 012 Hartwell , L . H . 1971 . Genetic control of the cell division cycle in yeast . IV . Genes controlling bud emergence and cytokinesis . Exp . Cell Res . 69 : 265 – 276 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0014 - 4827 ( 71 ) 90223 - 0 He , X . , D . R . Rines , C . W . Espelin , and P . K . Sorger . 2001 . Molecular analysis of kinetochore - microtubule attachment in budding yeast . Cell . 106 : 195 – 206 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 01 ) 00438 - X Hedges , S . B . 2002 . The origin and evolution of model organisms . Nat . Rev . Genet . 3 : 838 – 849 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrg929 Hill , T . L . 1985 . Theoretical problems related to the attachment of microtubules to kinetochores . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 82 : 4404 – 4408 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 82 . 13 . 4404 Hornung , P . , M . Maier , G . M . Alushin , G . C . Lander , E . Nogales , and S . Westermann . 2011 . Molecular architecture and connectivity of the budding yeast Mtw1 kinetochore complex . J . Mol . Biol . 405 : 548 – 559 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2010 . 11 . 012 Hornung , P . , P . Troc , F . Malvezzi , M . Maier , Z . Demianova , T . Zimniak , G . Litos , F . Lampert , A . Schleiffer , M . Brunner , et al . 2014 . A cooperative mechanism drives budding yeast kinetochore assembly downstream of CENP - A . J . Cell Biol . 206 : 509 – 524 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201403081 Jaspersen , S . L . , J . F . Charles , R . L . Tinker - Kulberg , and D . O . Morgan . 1998 . A late mitotic regulatory network controlling cyclin destruction in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Biol . Cell . 9 : 2803 – 2817 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . 9 . 10 . 2803 Jin , Q . , E . Trelles - Sticken , H . Scherthan , and J . Loidl . 1998 . Yeast nuclei display prominent centromere clustering that is reduced in nondividing cells and Structural plasticity of the living kinetochore • Dhatchinamoorthy et al . 3569 in meiotic prophase . J . Cell Biol . 141 : 21 – 29 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 141 . 1 . 21 Jin , Q . W . , J . Fuchs , and J . Loidl . 2000 . Centromere clustering is a major determi - nant of yeast interphase nuclear organization . J . Cell Sci . 113 : 1903 – 1912 . Joglekar , A . P . , and A . J . Hunt . 2002 . A simple , mechanistic model for directional instability during mitotic chromosome movements . Biophys . J . 83 : 42 – 58 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0006 - 3495 ( 02 ) 75148 - 5 Joglekar , A . P . , D . C . Bouck , J . N . Molk , K . S . Bloom , and E . D . Salmon . 2006 . Molecular architecture of a kinetochore - microtubule attachment site . Nat . Cell Biol . 8 : 581 – 585 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb1414 Joglekar , A . P . , D . Bouck , K . Finley , X . Liu , Y . Wan , J . Berman , X . He , E . D . Salmon , and K . S . Bloom . 2008a . Molecular architecture of the kinetochore - microtubule attachment site is conserved between point and regional centromeres . J . Cell Biol . 181 : 587 – 594 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200803027 Joglekar , A . P . , E . D . Salmon , and K . S . Bloom . 2008b . Counting kinetochore protein numbers in budding yeast using genetically encoded fluorescent proteins . Methods Cell Biol . 85 : 127 – 151 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0091 - 679X ( 08 ) 85007 - 8 Kim , J . O . , A . Zelter , N . T . Umbreit , A . Bollozos , M . Riffle , R . Johnson , M . J . MacCoss , C . L . Asbury , and T . N . Davis . 2017 . The Ndc80 complex bridges two Dam1 complex rings . eLife . 6 : e21069 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 21069 Kosco , K . A . , C . G . Pearson , P . S . Maddox , P . J . Wang , I . R . Adams , E . D . Salmon , K . Bloom , and T . C . Huffaker . 2001 . Control of microtubule dynamics by Stu2p is essential for spindle orientation and metaphase chromosome alignment in yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell . 12 : 2870 – 2880 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . 12 . 9 . 2870 Lampert , F . , and S . Westermann . 2011 . A blueprint for kinetochores - new insights into the molecular mechanics of cell division . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 : 407 – 412 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm3133 Liu , X . , I . McLeod , S . Anderson , J . R . Yates III , and X . He . 2005 . Molecular analysis of kinetochore architecture in fission yeast . EMBO J . 24 : 2919 – 2930 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / sj . emboj . 7600762 Longtine , M . S . , D . J . DeMarini , M . L . Valencik , O . S . Al - Awar , H . Fares , C . De Virgilio , and J . R . Pringle . 1996 . The septins : roles in cytokinesis and other processes . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 8 : 106 – 119 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0955 - 0674 ( 96 ) 80054 - 8 Mallavarapu , A . , K . Sawin , and T . Mitchison . 1999 . A switch in microtubule dynamics at the onset of anaphase B in the mitotic spindle of Schizosaccharomyces pombe . Curr . Biol . 9 : 1423 – 1428 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0960 - 9822 ( 00 ) 80090 - 1 Malvezzi , F . , G . Litos , A . Schleiffer , A . Heuck , K . Mechtler , T . Clausen , and S . Westermann . 2013 . A structural basis for kinetochore recruitment of the Ndc80 complex via two distinct centromere receptors . EMBO J . 32 : 409 – 423 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2012 . 356 Mayer , M . L . , I . Pot , M . Chang , H . Xu , V . Aneliunas , T . Kwok , R . Newitt , R . Aebersold , C . Boone , G . W . Brown , and P . Hieter . 2004 . Identification of protein complexes required for efficient sister chromatid cohesion . Mol . Biol . Cell . 15 : 1736 – 1745 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E03 - 08 - 0619 McAinsh , A . D . , J . D . Tytell , and P . K . Sorger . 2003 . Structure , function , and regulation of budding yeast kinetochores . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 : 519 – 539 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . cellbio . 19 . 111301 . 155607 McIntosh , J . R . , E . O’Toole , K . Zhudenkov , M . Morphew , C . Schwartz , F . I . Ataullakhanov , and E . L . Grishchuk . 2013 . Conserved and divergent features of kinetochores and spindle microtubule ends from five species . J . Cell Biol . 200 : 459 – 474 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 20120915423420873 McKinney , S . A . , C . S . Murphy , K . L . Hazelwood , M . W . Davidson , and L . L . Looger . 2009 . A bright and photostable photoconvertible fluorescent protein . Nat . Methods . 6 : 131 – 133 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1296 Meng , Q . C . , H . C . Wang , Z . L . Song , Z . Z . Shan , Z . Yuan , Q . Zheng , and X . Y . Huang . 2015 . Overexpression of NDC80 is correlated with prog - nosis of pancreatic cancer and regulates cell proliferation . Am . J . Cancer Res . 5 : 1730 – 1740 . Mieck , C . , M . I . Molodtsov , K . Drzewicka , B . van der Vaart , G . Litos , G . Schmauss , A . Vaziri , and S . Westermann . 2015 . Non - catalytic motor domains enable processive movement and functional diversification of the kinesin - 14 Kar3 . eLife . 4 : e04489 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 04489 Miller , M . P . , C . L . Asbury , and S . Biggins . 2016 . A TOG Protein Confers Tension Sensitivity to Kinetochore - Microtubule Attachments . Cell . 165 : 1428 – 1439 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 04 . 030 Miranda , J . J . , D . S . King , and S . C . Harrison . 2007 . Protein arms in the kinetochore - microtubule interface of the yeast DASH complex . Mol . Biol . Cell . 18 : 2503 – 2510 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E07 - 02 - 0135 Ng , T . M . , W . G . Waples , B . D . Lavoie , and S . Biggins . 2009 . Pericentromeric sister chromatid cohesion promotes kinetochore biorientation . Mol . Biol . Cell . 20 : 3818 – 3827 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E09 - 04 - 0330 Obuse , C . , O . Iwasaki , T . Kiyomitsu , G . Goshima , Y . Toyoda , and M . Yanagida . 2004 . A conserved Mis12 centromere complex is linked to heterochromatic HP1 and outer kinetochore protein Zwint - 1 . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 : 1135 – 1141 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb1187 Pavelka , N . , G . Rancati , J . Zhu , W . D . Bradford , A . Saraf , L . Florens , B . W . Sanderson , G . L . Hattem , and R . Li . 2010 . Aneuploidy confers quantitative proteome changes and phenotypic variation in budding yeast . Nature . 468 : 321 – 325 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature09529 Pearson , C . G . , P . S . Maddox , T . R . Zarzar , E . D . Salmon , and K . Bloom . 2003 . Yeast kinetochores do not stabilize Stu2p - dependent spindle microtubule dynamics . Mol . Biol . Cell . 14 : 4181 – 4195 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E03 - 03 - 0180 Pfau , S . J . , and A . Amon . 2012 . Chromosomal instability and aneuploidy in cancer : from yeast to man . EMBO Rep . 13 : 515 – 527 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / embor . 2012 . 65 Podolski , M . , M . Mahamdeh , and J . Howard . 2014 . Stu2 , the budding yeast XMAP215 / Dis1 homolog , promotes assembly of yeast microtubules by increasing growth rate and decreasing catastrophe frequency . J . Biol . Chem . 289 : 28087 – 28093 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M114 . 584300 Powers , A . F . , A . D . Franck , D . R . Gestaut , J . Cooper , B . Gracyzk , R . R . Wei , L . Wordeman , T . N . Davis , and C . L . Asbury . 2009 . The Ndc80 kinetochore complex forms load - bearing attachments to dynamic microtubule tips via biased diffusion . Cell . 136 : 865 – 875 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2008 . 12 . 045 Ramey , V . H . , A . Wong , J . Fang , S . Howes , G . Barnes , and E . Nogales . 2011 . Subunit organization in the Dam1 kinetochore complex and its ring around microtubules . Mol . Biol . Cell . 22 : 4335 – 4342 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E11 - 07 - 065921965284 Sarangapani , K . K . , E . Duro , Y . Deng , F . L . Alves , Q . Ye , K . N . Opoku , S . Ceto , J . Rappsilber , K . D . Corbett , S . Biggins , et al . 2014 . Sister kinetochores are mechanically fused during meiosis I in yeast . Science . 346 : 248 – 251 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1256729 Schleiffer , A . , M . Maier , G . Litos , F . Lampert , P . Hornung , K . Mechtler , and S . Westermann . 2012 . CENP - T proteins are conserved centromere receptors of the Ndc80 complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 : 604 – 613 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb2493 Schmidt , J . C . , H . Arthanari , A . Boeszoermenyi , N . M . Dashkevich , E . M . Wilson - Kubalek , N . Monnier , M . Markus , M . Oberer , R . A . Milligan , M . Bathe , et al . 2012 . The kinetochore - bound Ska1 complex tracks depolymerizing microtubules and binds to curved protofilaments . Dev . Cell . 23 : 968 – 980 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2012 . 09 . 012 Severin , F . , B . Habermann , T . Huffaker , and T . Hyman . 2001 . Stu2 promotes mitotic spindle elongation in anaphase . J . Cell Biol . 153 : 435 – 442 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 153 . 2 . 435 Shivaraju , M . , J . R . Unruh , B . D . Slaughter , M . Mattingly , J . Berman , and J . L . Gerton . 2012 . Cell - cycle - coupled structural oscillation of centromeric nucleosomes in yeast . Cell . 150 : 304 – 316 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 05 . 034 Smith , S . E . , B . D . Slaughter , and J . R . Unruh . 2014 . Imaging methodologies for systems biology . Cell Adhes . Migr . 8 : 468 – 477 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4161 / cam . 29152 Stephens , A . D . , C . W . Quammen , B . Chang , J . Haase , R . M . Taylor II , and K . Bloom . 2013 . The spatial segregation of pericentric cohesin and condensin in the mitotic spindle . Mol . Biol . Cell . 24 : 3909 – 3919 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E13 - 06 - 0325 Su , X . , W . Qiu , M . L . Gupta Jr . , J . B . Pereira - Leal , S . L . Reck - Peterson , and D . Pellman . 2011 . Mechanisms underlying the dual - mode regulation of microtubule dynamics by Kip3 / kinesin - 8 . Mol . Cell . 43 : 751 – 763 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2011 . 06 . 027 Suzuki , A . , B . L . Badger , J . Haase , T . Ohashi , H . P . Erickson , E . D . Salmon , and K . Bloom . 2016 . How the kinetochore couples microtubule force and centromere stretch to move chromosomes . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 : 382 – 392 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb3323 Tanaka , T . U . , N . Rachidi , C . Janke , G . Pereira , M . Galova , E . Schiebel , M . J . Stark , and K . Nasmyth . 2002 . Evidence that the Ipl1 - Sli15 ( Aurora kinase - INC ENP ) complex promotes chromosome bi - orientation by altering kinetochore - spindle pole connections . Cell . 108 : 317 – 329 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 02 ) 00633 - 5 Tien , J . F . , N . T . Umbreit , D . R . Gestaut , A . D . Franck , J . Cooper , L . Wordeman , T . Gonen , C . L . Asbury , and T . N . Davis . 2010 . Cooperation of the Dam1 and Ndc80 kinetochore complexes enhances microtubule coupling and JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 11 • 2017 3570 is regulated by aurora B . J . Cell Biol . 189 : 713 – 723 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200910142 Tytell , J . D . , and P . K . Sorger . 2006 . Analysis of kinesin motor function at budding yeast kinetochores . J . Cell Biol . 172 : 861 – 874 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200509101 Umbreit , N . T . , M . P . Miller , J . F . Tien , J . C . Ortolá , L . Gui , K . K . Lee , S . Biggins , C . L . Asbury , and T . N . Davis . 2014 . Kinetochores require oligomerization of Dam1 complex to maintain microtubule attachments against tension and promote biorientation . Nat . Commun . 5 : 4951 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms5951 Usui , T . , H . Maekawa , G . Pereira , and E . Schiebel . 2003 . The XMAP215 homologue Stu2 at yeast spindle pole bodies regulates microtubule dynamics and anchorage . EMBO J . 22 : 4779 – 4793 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / emboj / cdg459 van Breugel , M . , D . Drechsel , and A . Hyman . 2003 . Stu2p , the budding yeast member of the conserved Dis1 / XMAP215 family of microtubule - associated proteins is a plus end - binding microtubule destabilizer . J . Cell Biol . 161 : 359 – 369 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200211097 van Hooff , J . J . E . , B . Snel , and G . J . P . L . Kops . 2017 . Unique Phylogenetic Distributions of the Ska and Dam1 Complexes Support Functional Analogy and Suggest Multiple Parallel Displacements of Ska by Dam1 . Genome Biol . Evol . 9 : 1295 – 1303 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / gbe / evx088 Visintin , R . , K . Craig , E . S . Hwang , S . Prinz , M . Tyers , and A . Amon . 1998 . The phosphatase Cdc14 triggers mitotic exit by reversal of Cdk - dependent phosphorylation . Mol . Cell . 2 : 709 – 718 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1097 - 2765 ( 00 ) 80286 - 5 Walczak , C . E . , S . Cai , and A . Khodjakov . 2010 . Mechanisms of chromosome behaviour during mitosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 : 91 – 102 . Wang , H . W . , V . H . Ramey , S . Westermann , A . E . Leschziner , J . P . Welburn , Y . Nakajima , D . G . Drubin , G . Barnes , and E . Nogales . 2007 . Architecture of the Dam1 kinetochore ring complex and implications for microtubule - driven assembly and force - coupling mechanisms . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 14 : 721 – 726 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nsmb1274 Welburn , J . P . , E . L . Grishchuk , C . B . Backer , E . M . Wilson - Kubalek , J . R . Yates III , and I . M . Cheeseman . 2009 . The human kinetochore Ska1 complex facilitates microtubule depolymerization - coupled motility . Dev . Cell . 16 : 374 – 385 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 01 . 011 Westermann , S . , A . Avila - Sakar , H . W . Wang , H . Niederstrasser , J . Wong , D . G . Drubin , E . Nogales , and G . Barnes . 2005 . Formation of a dynamic kinetochore - microtubule interface through assembly of the Dam1 ring complex . Mol . Cell . 17 : 277 – 290 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2004 . 12 . 01915664196 Westermann , S . , H . W . Wang , A . Avila - Sakar , D . G . Drubin , E . Nogales , and G . Barnes . 2006 . The Dam1 kinetochore ring complex moves processively on depolymerizing microtubule ends . Nature . 440 : 565 – 569 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature04409 Winey , M . , C . L . Mamay , E . T . O’Toole , D . N . Mastronarde , T . H . Giddings Jr . , K . L . McDonald , and J . R . McIntosh . 1995 . Three - dimensional ultrastructural analysis of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitotic spindle . J . Cell Biol . 129 : 1601 – 1615 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 129 . 6 . 1601 Wisniewski , J . , B . Hajj , J . Chen , G . Mizuguchi , H . Xiao , D . Wei , M . Dahan , and C . Wu . 2014 . Imaging the fate of histone Cse4 reveals de novo replacement in S phase and subsequent stable residence at centromeres . eLife . 3 : e02203 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 02203 Wolyniak , M . J . , K . Blake - Hodek , K . Kosco , E . Hwang , L . You , and T . C . Huffaker . 2006 . The regulation of microtubule dynamics in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by three interacting plus - end tracking proteins . Mol . Biol . Cell . 17 : 2789 – 2798 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E05 - 09 - 0892 Yuen , K . W . , B . Montpetit , and P . Hieter . 2005 . The kinetochore and cancer : what’s the connection ? Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 17 : 576 – 582 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2005 . 09 . 012