Leading Edge Review Cancer Invasion and the Microenvironment : Plasticity and Reciprocity Peter Friedl 1 , 2 , 3 , * and Stephanie Alexander 2 , 3 1 Microscopical Imaging of the Cell , Department of Cell Biology , Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre , 6500 HC Nijmegen , The Netherlands 2 David H . Koch Center for Applied Research of Genitourinary Cancers , Department of Genitourinary Medical Oncology , The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center , Houston , TX 77030 , USA 3 Department of Dermatology and Rudolf Virchow Center , DFG Research Center for Experimental Biomedicine , University of Wuerzburg , D - 97080 Wuerzburg , Germany * Correspondence : p . friedl @ ncmls . ru . nl DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 11 . 016 Cancer invasion is a cell - and tissue - driven process for which the physical , cellular , and molecular determinants adapt and react throughout the progression of the disease . Cancer invasion is initi - ated and maintained by signaling pathways that control cytoskeletal dynamics in tumor cells and the turnover of cell - matrix and cell - cell junctions , followed by cell migration into the adjacent tissue . Here , we describe the cell - matrix and cell - cell adhesion , protease , and cytokine systems that underlie tissue invasion by cancer cells . We explain how the reciprocal reprogramming of both the tumor cells and the surrounding tissue structures not only guides invasion , but also generates diverse modes of dissemination . The resulting ‘‘plasticity’’ contributes to the generation of diverse cancer invasion routes and programs , enhanced tumor heterogeneity , and ultimately sustained metastatic dissemination . Introduction Cancer invasion and metastasis are landmark events that trans - form a locally growing tumor into a systemic , metastatic , and live - threatening disease . The initial steps of local invasion include the activation of signaling pathways that control cytoskeletal dynamics in tumor cells and the turnover of cell - matrix and cell - cell junctions , followed by active tumor cell migration into the adjacent tissue ( Chambers et al . , 2002 ; Friedl and Wolf , 2003 ; Sahai , 2007 ) . Metastasis then occurs when invading tumor cells engage with blood and lymph vessels , penetrate basement membranes and endothelial walls , and disseminate through the vessel lumen to colonize distant organs ( Fidler , 2003 ) . Like cells in primary tumors , cells in metastases also proliferate , invade , and enter blood vessels , leading to secondary metastasis ( Kienast et al . , 2010 ; Armstrong et al . , 2011 ; Hou et al . , 2011 ) . In the past few decades , cell and tumor biologists have iden - tiﬁed the mechanisms of cell migration in normal and malignant cells , including the regulation of cell adhesion and cytoskeletal dynamics ( Lauffenburger and Horwitz , 1996 ; Ridley et al . , 2003 ; Sanz - Moreno and Marshall , 2010 ) . However , attempts to deﬁne the rate - limiting mechanisms that govern invasive and metastatic cancer cell migration , such as a dominant signaling pathway , receptor - ligand interaction , or protease - substrate interaction , have largely failed . Instead , cancer cell invasion is now regarded as a heterogeneous and adaptive process . Indeed , it is this ‘‘plasticity’’ in cell adhesion , cyto - skeletal dynamics , and mechanotransduction that perpetuates migration and dissemination under diverse structural , molec - ular , and even adverse microenvironmental conditions ( Friedl and Wolf , 2010 ; Sahai , 2007 ; Sanz - Moreno and Marshall , 2010 ) . Plasticity of invasion , together with other hallmarks of neoplasia , including cancer cell growth , survival , and genomic instability , lead to morphological , signaling , and genetic differ - ences between primary and metastatic lesions within the same patient ( intrapatient heterogeneity ) , within the same lesion ( intratumoral heterogeneity ) , and across time ( Choi et al . , 2011 ; Honeth et al . , 2008 ; Lopes et al . , 2009 ; Shapiro et al . , 2011 ; Stoecklein et al . , 2008 ; Wang et al . , 2009 ) . Such heterogeneous tumor progression is mirrored by an ‘‘activation’’ response of stromal cells nearby the growing tumor , including ﬁbroblasts , endothelial cells , and macrophages . Once ‘‘activated , ’’ these cells reorganize the structure and composi - tion of the connective tissue by depositing extracellular matrix components ( ECM ) , cytokines , and growth factors ( Egeblad et al . , 2010 ; He et al . , 2011 ; Picchio et al . , 2008 ; Shapiro et al . , 2011 ) . By remodeling the tissue structure , releasing growth factors , and imposing metabolic stress , the reactive tumor stroma , in turn , inﬂuences cancer cell functions , often enhancing tumor growth and invasion and aggravating cancer resistance during metabolic challenge and therapy ( Alexander and Friedl , 2012 ; Giese et al . , 2003 ; Sansing et al . , 2011 ; Yao et al . , 2011 ) . Thus , in a reciprocal manner , tumor cells inﬂuence the stroma and vice versa , jointly driving cancer progression ( Nelson et al . , 2008 ; Xu et al . , 2009 ) . Here , we summarize the adhe - sion , protease , and cytokine systems that underlie tissue invasion by cancer cells . We discuss how the reactive tumor 992 Cell 147 , November 23 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . microenvironment steers plasticity and perpetuates invasion and metastatic dissemination . Mechanisms of Cell Migration Cancer invasion is a cyclic process in which the cell changes shape , produces morphological asymmetry , and then translo - cates the cell body . Depending on the cell type and tissue envi - ronment , cells can migrate in two major ways : individually , when cell - cell junctions are absent , or collectively as multicellular groups , when cell - cell adhesions are retained ( Friedl and Wolf , 2010 ) ( Figure 1 ) . The underlying process in both types of migra - tion is the dynamics of the cytoskeleton coupling with cell surface receptors that engage with surrounding tissue struc - tures ; thus , the cytoskeleton serves as the cell’s engine , and the cell surface receptors act as its transmission ( Ridley et al . , 2003 ) . Cancer cells recapitulate the types and mechanisms of migration used by normal , nontumor cells . They activate the same machineries for changing shape , generating force , and remodeling ECM ( Friedl , 2004 ) as normal cells , but neoplastic cells lack physiological ‘‘stop signals’’ immobilizing and anchoring the cells ( Cox et al . , 2001 ) , which arguably perpetu - ates neoplastic cell migration . Figure 1 . Cell Migration : A Multistep Process In general , cells can migrate individually or collectively as multicellular groups . ( A ) Single - cell migration involves ﬁve molecular steps that changethecellshape , itsposition , andthetissuestructure through which it migrates . ( B ) Collectively migrating cells formtwomajorzones : zone 1 , in which a ‘‘leader cell’’ generates a proteolytic micro - track at the front of the migrating group , and zone 2 , in which the subsequent cells then widen this microtrack to form a larger macrotrack . ( Figure modiﬁed from Friedl and Wolf , 2008 . ) Invasive single - cell migration results from ﬁve interdependent molecular steps that change the cell shape , its position , and the tissue structure through which it migrates ( Friedl and Wolf , 2009 ; Lauffenburger and Horwitz , 1996 ; Sheetz et al . , 1999 ) ( Figure 1A ) . In step 1 , the cytoskel - etonpolarizesbyactinpolymerization andforms a leading protrusion at the opposite end of a ‘‘pre - uropod’’ region , which marks the consti - tutive rear end of the cell ( Estecha et al . , 2009 ; Poincloux et al . , 2011 ) . In step 2 , the leading edge protrusion engages with extracellular substrates , followed by recruitment and adhe - sion of cell surface receptors that form focalized clusters and couple extracelluar adhesion to intracellular mechanosignaling and force gener - ation ( Friedl et al . , 1997 ) . In step 3 , several micrometer rearward of the leading edge , cell surface proteases become engaged with extra - cellular scaffold proteins and execute locally controlled proteolysis ( Friedl and Wolf , 2009 ) . This proteolysis modiﬁes the molecular and mechanical tissue properties and allows space fortheadvancingcellbody ( Friedlet al . , 1997 ) . Instep4 , thesmall GTPase Rho activates myosin II , and contraction mediated by actomyosin generates tension inside the cell . In step 5 , this contractionisfollowedbythegradualturnoverofadhesionbonds at the trailing edge , which slides forward while the leading edge protrudes further . In most cells , the leading edge protrusion is controlled by the small GTPase Rac or Cdc42 , which generate pseudopodia or ﬁlopodia that engage with ECM substrate ( Sanz - Moreno and Marshall , 2010 ) . In some cell types with low Rac activity or in poorly adhesive environments , a variation of steps 1 and 2 occurs ( i . e . , the pseudopod protrusion and adhesion steps ) in which the leading edge generates leading bleb - like or even bleb - and pseudopod - free smooth membrane propulsions . These propulsions are stabilized by cortical F - actin and interca - late between extracellular tissue structures ( Lorentzen et al . , 2011 ; Poincloux et al . , 2011 ) . Here , the force is generated near the rear pole in an actomyosin - and integrin - dependent manner ( Poincloux et al . , 2011 ) . The physicochemical steps in single - cell migration are coor - dinated within the same cell body and executed in a synchronous , often pulsatile manner , which allows the cell body to protrude and Cell 147 , November 23 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 993 generate traction in an oscillatory manner ( Ridley et al . , 2003 ) . If multiple cells originate from the same location , such as a tumor , the ‘‘leader cell’’ forms a proteolytic microtrack of locally removed ECM barriers ( zone 1 ) . The following cells then widen or excavate this microtrack by mechanical force and proteolysis to form a larger macrotrack ( zone 2 ) ( Ilina et al . , 2011 ; Wolf et al . , 2007 ) ( Figure 1B ) . In collective migration , protrusion and retraction are coordinated in a ‘‘supracellular manner , ’’ in which cytoskeletal protrusion and contractility are mechanically mediated through cell - cell junctions ( Hidalgo - Carcedo et al . , 2011 ; Tambe et al . , 2011 ) , allowing the cell group to behave as ‘‘mega - cell’’ ( Figure 1B ) . Patterns and Diversity of Cancer Cell Invasion The ﬁve - step model of cell migration is active in many types of cell movement for both normal and neoplastic single cells . Oper - ationally , individual cell and multicellular migration follow the paradigm of active cell migration , whereas multicellular growth leads to passive cell movement by pushing ( Figure 2 ) . Figure 2 . Modes of Cell Movement Implicated in Cancer Invasion and Metastasis Single - cell and collective cell migration can be further partitioned based on the speciﬁc cell - cell junctions , the contractility of cytoskeleton , and the turnover of cell attachments to extracellular matrix ( ECM ) . These modes of migration can be further unstable and change upon alterations of cell - cell interactions , cell - ECM adhesion , or cytoskeletal contractility , resulting in intermediate phenotypes . Rounded / Amoeboid Migration Cells migrating with low adhesion force or high actomyosin - mediated contractility adopt morphologically spherical shapes . This is re - ferred to here as amoeboid migration because the Dictyostelium discoideum amoeba mi - grates by this mechanism ( Friedl et al . , 2001 ) . Amoeboid movement , which uses Rac - depen - dent ﬁlopodia , has small or diffusely organized adhesion sites that generate weak to negligible adhesion force toward the substrate ( La¨mmer - mann and Sixt , 2009 ) . The second form of amoeboid movement , which uses Rho - domi - nated blebbing , lacks deﬁned adhesions and mediates cell translocation by propulsion using either blebs or smooth membrane protrusion at the leading edge and lateral intercalation ( Lorentzen et al . , 2011 ; Paluch et al . , 2006 ; Poincloux et al . , 2011 ) . Amoeboid cells tend to migrate in the absence of proteolytic ECM breakdown by adapting their shape to and squeezing through tissue gaps and trails ( Wolf et al . , 2003b ) . The origin of amoe - boid tumors is often hematopoietic or neuro - ectodermal , including leukemias , lymphomas , and small cell lung carcinoma , but amoeboid movements are also detected as cell subsets in most other tumor types ( Madsen and Sahai , 2010 ; Wolf et al . , 2003b ) . Mesenchymal Migration When cytoskeletal protrusions and adhesion capabilities are strongly developed , invading cells adopt spindle - shaped , elon - gated morphology with focalized cell - matrix adhesions contain - ing multimolecular integrin clusters and proteolytic activity toward ECM substrates ( Wolf et al . , 2007 ) . Focalized pro - teases on the cell’s surface generate small microtracks through which subsequent cells can follow ( Friedl and Wolf , 2009 ) ( Fig - ures 1A and 2 ) . Mesenchymally migrating tumor cells originate from tumors of the connective tissue , including soft tissue sarcomas . They also originate from all other tumor types after the tumor cells dedifferentiate and lose cell - cell junctions ( Bra - bletzetal . , 2001 ; FriedlandWolf , 2009 ; Sanz - Morenoetal . , 2008 ) . Multicellular Streaming When individual cells move one after each other using the same path within the tissue , it is referred to as ‘‘multicellular streaming . ’’ This occurs mainly when individual cells become 994 Cell 147 , November 23 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . chemotactically attracted by a particular source or jointly follow microtracks that are often present in peripheral connective tissue ( Kulesa and Gammill , 2010 ) . In neoplasia , multicellular streaming is often seen as chain - or swarm - like ( i . e . , diffuse ) tissue inﬁltration of many tumor cells in hematologic and solid tumors ( Kedrin et al . , 2008 ) . Collective Invasion Collective invasion requires cell - cell adhesion and multicellular coordination to occur simultaneously with migration , which results in multicellular groups and strands originating at the inter - face between tumor and stroma ( Friedl et al . , 1995 ; Ilina and Friedl , 2009 ) . Collective invasion may adopt different morphol - ogies , which depend on the cell type , the number of jointly moving cells , and the tissue structure being invaded . For instance , groups of cells can form small clusters , solid strands , or ﬁles ; if epithelial polarity is retained during migration , these structures can even form an inner lumen ( Friedl and Gilmour , 2009 ) . In most cases of collective cancer invasion , one or several leader cells with mesenchymal characteristics form the tip of multicellular strands and generate forward traction and pericellu - lar proteolysis toward the tissue structure ( Gaggioli et al . , 2007 ; Khalil and Friedl , 2010 ) . In a second type of collective invasion , a blunt bud - like tip protrudes along tissue space consisting of multiple cells that variably change position , lacking deﬁned leader cells ( Ewald et al . , 2008 ) ; this type of invasion occurs preferentially in soft tissues and cells of strong epithelial polarity . Collective migration is prevalent in morphogenesis during development and recapitulated in most epithelial and mesenchymal tumor types ( Friedl and Gilmour , 2009 ; Friedl et al . , 1995 ) . Expansive Growth Some surrounding tissues impose little to no physical conﬁne - ment on proliferating tumor cells and thus do not hinder the expansion of a cancerous lesion . When tumor cells grow into these tissues , the increase in volume leads to multicellular outward pushing with intact cell - cell junctions and no signs of active migration ( Iguchi et al . , 2008 ; Ishizaki et al . , 2001 ) . Eventu - ally , this expansive growth without migration results in spherical lesions within a ‘‘capsule’’ of ECM , formed by aligned collagen ﬁbers in circular orientation ( Ishizaki et al . , 2001 ) . Expansive growth may displace cells by volume expansion and pushing when migration activity is absent or , if coupled with migration , contributes to and enhances collective invasion ( Ilina et al . , 2011 ) ( B . Weigelin and P . F . , unpublished data ) . Although these migration modes can be classiﬁed as morpho - logic and mechanistic entities for experimental and conceptual purposes , cells often display features from multiple modes in three - dimensional ( 3D ) tissues . This includes intermediate or transition states in which cells may change their molecular proﬁles and switch migration mode ( e . g . , from proteolytic to non - proteolytic migration or single - cell to collective migration ) ( Friedl and Wolf , 2010 ; Wolf et al . , 2003a ) . For example , when individual cells become attracted by the same chemotactic source , they may ﬁrst undergo multicellular streaming with short - lived cell - cell junctions that brieﬂy form and resolve again ; when cell - cell adhesion molecules are then upregulated , the cells may join each other and convert to a collective migration mode ( Kulesa and Gammill , 2010 ) . Thus , diverse molecular programs jointly determine the morphology and mechanism by which normal and neoplastic cells move through tissues . Physical and Molecular Determinants of Invasion The molecular mechanisms underlying each migration mode depend on a set of connected mechanical and signaling path - ways , which vary in their coordination and strength depending on the particular migration mode . Such variations include the organization of the cytoskeleton ; the capability to remodel tissue structures ; and the type , strength , and turnover of cell - substrate adhesions , cell - cell adhesions , and intercellular communication . Stromal signals modulate all of these pathways through chemo - kines , cytokines , and growth factors ( Friedl and Wolf , 2010 ) . Different types of adhesion systems contribute directly or indi - rectly to mechanocoupling between the actin cytoskeleton and extracellular ECM ( Figure 3A ) or cell surface scaffolds ( Fig - ure 3B ) . Together , these adhesion systems govern migration . ECM Receptors Integrins are heterodimeric surface receptors composed of a and b chains . Together , these chains mediate adhesion and mechanotransduction to extracellular ligands , including a 2 b 1 integrin predominantly binding to ﬁbrillar collagen ; a V b 3 , a V b 1 , and a 5 b 1 interacting with ﬁbronectin ; and a 3 b 1 and a 6 b 1 engaging with laminin ( Hynes , 2002 ) . After associating with ligands , the cytoplasmic tails of integrins connect to cytoskeletal adaptor proteins , including talin , paxillin , and kindlin and the me - chanosensing modulators vinculin and p130Cas ( Geiger et al . , 2009 ; Grashoff et al . , 2010 ) . Adaptor and mechanosensing mod - ulator proteins engage with the actin cytoskeleton and trigger signaling to protein kinases , including the focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) and Src ( Geiger et al . , 2009 ; Hodivala - Dilke et al . , 1999 ; Hynes , 2002 ) . Downstream integrin effectors further include the small GTPases Rac and Rho , which reinforce cell protrusion and rear contraction ( Ridley et al . , 2003 ) . In addition to contact to ECM substrate , integrin engagement with extracellular ligands is also activated by inside - out signaling through Rac , the Ras - related GTPase Rap1 , and talin ( Lee et al . , 2009 ; Ridley et al . , 2003 ) . CD44 and its alternatively spliced variants bind to hyaluronic acid ( i . e . , a high - molecular weight glycosaminoglycan abun - dantly present in all connective tissues ) and , with low afﬁnity , to heparan sulfate , collagen , and ﬁbronectin ( Zo¨ller , 2011 ) . CD44 connects to the actin cytoskeleton by the adaptor proteins ezrin , radixin , and moesin ( ERM ) and ankyrin and mediates intra - cellular signaling through Src kinase and small Rho GTPases , including RhoA ( Zo¨ller , 2011 ) . CD44 and its splice variants also bind to chemokines and growth factors , and they enhance signaling through cis interactions with growth factor receptors , including the hepatocyte growth factor receptor ( c - Met ) , ﬁbro - blast growth factor ( FGFR - 1 ) , the epidermal growth factor recep - tors ( EGFR ) , and its variants ERBB2 – 4 . Thus , CD44 delivers joint ECM and growth factor signaling to invading cells ( Couchman , 2010 ; Zo¨ller , 2011 ) . CD44 also serves as a coreceptor for other adhesion receptors , including integrins and podoplanin ( Zo¨ller , 2011 ) . Podoplanin is a cell surface mucin that connects to the actin cytoskeleton through ezrin . Podoplanin signals to enhance RhoA activity , which strongly increases cell invasion ( Martı´n - Vil - lar et al . , 2006 ; Wicki et al . , 2006 ) . Given its extensive crosstalk Cell 147 , November 23 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 995 with other receptor / ligand systems , it is unclear whether CD44 serves as bona ﬁde adhesion receptor that mediates adhesion and mechanotransduction in the absence of other pathways or whether its primary role is to provide cosignaling ( Maaser et al . , 1999 ) . Similar to CD44 , membrane - bound proteoglycans , such as syndecans , glypicans , and neuropillin , interact through their sugar moieties weakly with ECM components , including hyalur - onic acid , ﬁbronectin , collagen , or elastin . These interactions enhance adhesion in cooperation with integrins , and together with integrins and growth factor receptors , the proteoglycans deliver signals via PKC and Src ( Couchman , 2010 ; Theocharis et al . , 2010 ) . Syndecans - 2 and - 4 engage with ezrin or a - actinin , respectively , and they couple to the actin cytoskeleton . However , their direct contributions to adhesion and migration are still unclear ( Couchman , 2010 ) . The discoidin domain receptors DDR1 and DDR2 interact selectively with ﬁbrillar collagen and transmit signaling via STAT5 , NF k B , and p38 MAPK / ERK or the Src - related kinases Syk , Shc , and Src , respectively ( Neuhaus et al . , 2011 ; Vogel et al . , 2006 ) . DDRs support E - and N - cadherin - mediated cell - cell adhesion ( Eswaramoorthy et al . , 2010 ; Shintani et al . , 2008 ) , and they increase proteolytic cell functions via matrix met - alloproteinases ( MMPs ) , including MMP - 1 , MMP - 2 , MMP - 9 , and MMP - 10 ( Ruiz and Jarai , 2011 ) . The signaling activity of DDRs after they bind to the ECM is well established ; however , whether DDRs connect to the actin cytoskeleton and directly contribute to mechanotransduction is unknown . Integrins are thus the main adhesion and mechanotrans - duction system for interstitial migration , with modulatory input and crosstalk to alternative cell - ECM and growth factor sig - naling systems through CD44 , cell surface proteoglycans , and DDRs . Cell - Cell Adhesion Receptors Receptors that transmit cell - cell adhesion forces toward the actin cytoskeleton provide cooperation between tumor cells during collective invasion ( Giampieri et al . , 2009 ; Ilina and Friedl , 2009 ) . These receptors also support single - cell and collective movement along the surfaces of other tissue - resident cells encountered during the migration process ( Figure 3B ) . Figure 3 . Molecular Determinants of Cell Migration Simpliﬁed view of molecules mediating adhesion and migration signaling . ( A ) Cellsurfacereceptorsandadaptorsthatmediatethedynamicinterfacebetweentheactincytoskeletonandpromigratorysignalingandtheextracellularmatrix ( ECM ) . ( B ) Cell surface proteins that mediate and regulate interactions between cells . Similar adhesion mechanisms may mediate homotypic cell - cell cohesion during collective invasion and transient and more dynamic heterophilic interaction to resident tissue cells encountered during tissue invasion . ( C ) Protease systems upregulated in cancer progression , invasion , and metastasis . ( D ) Receptors for chemokines , cytokines , and growth factors , which sense soluble , ECM - , or proteoglycan - bound factors and interaction partners . Green symbols represent selected intracellular adapters to the actin cytoskeleton , as speciﬁed below the drawing ( A and B ) ; shaded labels represent major signaling molecules regulating actin organization and cell migration . 996 Cell 147 , November 23 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . Members ofthe cadherin familyof adhesionreceptors mediate homotypic interactions between cells of the same type and heterotypic interactions between different cell types . These interactions include stable cell - cell adhesion through adherens junctions ( Harris and Tepass , 2010 ) , dynamic adhesion via the transient co - engagement of small GTPases Rac1 and RhoA , and dynamic junctional remodeling by cytoskeletal dynamics ( Kardash et al . , 2011 ) . In both stable and dynamic cell - cell adhesion , cadherins engage with cytoskeletal adaptor and sig - naling proteins , including a - catenin , b - catenin , and p120 - cate - nin , which connect to the actin and microtubule cytoskeleton ( Berx and van Roy , 2009 ; Harris and Tepass , 2010 ; Reynolds , 2010 ) . Dependingonthetypeoftumor , differentsetsofcadherins are expressed and involved in cell - cell interaction , including E - , N - , and P - cadherins , cadherin - 11 , and cadherin - 13 ( Berx and van Roy , 2009 ) . In polarized resting epithelium , E - cadherin suppresses migration signaling by inhibiting Rac1 ( Kitt and Nelson , 2011 ) and further maintains cell - cell cohesion , polarity between the basal and luminal layer of an epithelium , and epithe - lial stability . In contrast , in activated and neoplastic epithelium , E - cadherin and other cadherins jointly coordinate collective movements ( Friedl and Gilmour , 2009 ) . In activated epithelial cells , cosignaling of E - cadherin and integrins , together with downstream Src activation , enhances actin dynamics and acto - myosin contractility , leading to both single - cell and collective migration ( Geisbrecht and Montell , 2002 ; Kardash et al . , 2010 ; Martinez - Rico et al . , 2010 ) . When co - engaged with DDR1 , E - cadherin signaling limits actomyosin contractility along cell - cell junctions , which stabilizes cell - cell junctions and supports collective invasion ( Hidalgo - Carcedo et al . , 2011 ) . Compared to E - cadherin , N - cadherin and cadherin - 7 mediate weaker adhe - sion strengths ( Chu et al . , 2006 ) and are associated with further increased motility in cancer . This enhanced motility is most likely due to N - cadherin and cadherin - 7’s co - engagement with growth factor receptors , including FGFR or PDGFR , which enhances downstream signaling through MAPK and PI3K ( Berx and van Roy , 2009 ) . Thus , cadherins show duality in delivering both migration - inhibiting and migration - promoting signaling in a context - dependent manner ( Martinez - Rico et al . , 2010 ) . The immunoglobulin superfamily of cell adhesion molecules ( CAM ) mediates homophilic cell - cell interactions in neoplastic cells through the direct or indirect coupling to the actin cytoskel - eton via actin - binding adaptor proteins a - actinin , ankyrin , and ezrin ( Gavert et al . , 2010 ; Maness and Schachner , 2007 ) . This family of adhesion molecules includes L1CAM , EpCAM , NCAMs , or ALCAM . L1CAM is upregulated in the leading front of collectively invading epithelial tumors that display a stabilized mesenchymal phenotype with high invasion capability ( Bergmann et al . , 2010 ; Hung et al . , 2010 ) . This is consistent with a role for L1CAM in leader - cell function and partial EMT during collective invasion ( Gavert et al . , 2011 ) . Likewise , ALCAM is upregulated in cell - cell junctions of collectively invading epithelial cancer associated with increased metastasis ( van den Brand et al . , 2010 ) . Similar to leukocytes , tumor cells develop heterophilic cell - cell interactions with endothelial cells and platelets that express ICAM - 1 , VCAM - 1 , or PECAM - 1 . These interactions occur through b 1 and candidate integrins b 2 , a V b 3 , and a 4 b 7 ex - pressed by the tumor cells and mediate intravascular migration and adhesion arrest of circulating tumor cells ( Hynes , 2002 ; Sto - letov et al . , 2010 ) . Integrins may further engage with ECM proteins tethered and immobilized on encountered cell surfaces ( e . g . , ﬁbronectin and laminin ) and mediate cell - cell adhesion between tumor cells ( Casey et al . , 2001 ) . Besides mechanocoupling , CAMs enhance the signaling of integrins and growth factor receptors ( e . g . , EGFR and FGFR ) through ERK , ILK , or Src ( Kiefel et al . , 2011 ; Zecchini et al . , 2011 ) . Their contributions to homotypic interaction between tumor cells and heterotypic interactions between tumor and stromal cells make CAMs versatile mechanotrans - duction and signaling devices in both single - cell and collective invasion . Several other receptor families contribute to cell - cell contacts and multicellular coordination . These include connexins that form gap junctions ( Li et al . , 2008 ) , as well as ephrins and Eph receptors . Ephrins and Eph receptors weaken homotypic and heterotypic binding by engaging with alternative sets of ephrins expressed by neighboring tumor and stromal cells ( Astin et al . , 2010 ) , thereby contributing to tumor cell guidance and migration in a tissue context - dependent manner . Overall , tumor cells engage in a variety of overlapping and synergistic cell - matrix and cell - cell adhesion systems that balance cell - cell cohesion within the tumor and cohesion toward stromal interfaces . Protease Systems In both tumor and stromal cells , multiple protease systems are upregulated with overlapping substrate speciﬁcities . These systems include MMPs , ADAMs , cathepsins , the serine protease urokinase plasminogen activator ( uPA ) , and its receptor uPAR ( Mason and Joyce , 2011 ; Rizki et al . , 2008 ) ( Figure 3C ) . Upregu - lated proteases contribute to tumor invasion and progression through at least three distinct mechanisms ( Egeblad and Werb , 2002 ; Wolf and Friedl , 2011 ) . First , cell surface proteases , notably membrane - type ( MT ) MMPs and ADAMs ( a disintegrin and metalloproteinases ) , execute contact - dependent proteolysis of structural ECM proteins , including ﬁbrillar and nonﬁbrillar collagens , ﬁbronectin , and laminins , as well as ECM - tethered , matricellular proteins ( e . g . , tenascin and glypican ) ( Sabeh et al . , 2004 , 2009 ; Wolf et al . , 2007 ) . Proteolytic ECM degradation has a dual function : ( 1 ) it generates biologically active epitopes of ECM components with adhesion - or migration - promoting effects ( Kenny et al . , 2008 ) , and ( 2 ) it structurally remodels tissue to form de novo gaps and trails bordered by multiﬁber ECM bundles ( Gaggioli et al . , 2007 ; Sabeh et al . , 2009 ; Wolf et al . , 2007 ) . Second , proteases that are secreted and tethered to the cell surface , notably MMPs and ADAMs , enzymatically process other proteases and cell surface receptors , including adhesion and growth factor receptors ( Overall and Blobel , 2007 ) . This controls the activation and turnover of these receptors and thus accounts for adaptive changes of receptor availability on both tumor and stromal cells and interstitial protease content . Finally , secreted proteases , particularly MMPs and plasmin , regulate the repertoire of available extracellular growth factors by enzymatic activation , inactivation , or degradation ( Dean et al . , 2008 ; Mu et al . , 2002 ; Sounni et al . , 2010 ) . MMPs and ADAMs Cell 147 , November 23 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 997 can release ECM - bound factors , which then form diffusing gradients toward neighbor cells ( Shiao and Coussens , 2010 ) . Thus , the proinvasive tumor microenvironment dominated by proteases consists of both structural ECM remodeling sup - ported by pericellular proteolysis and deregulated proteolytic processing of chemokines , growth factors , and their receptors , which impacts both tumor and stromal cells . Chemokines , Growth Factors , and Their Receptors The transition from a ﬁxed , tissue - anchored state to a mobile state is often induced by extracellular chemokines , cytokines , and growth factors released by tumor cells themselves or acti - vated stromal cells . These factors engage redundant and nonre - dundant intracellular signaling networks in both tumor and stromal cells ( Figure 3D ) . Invasion - promoting chemokines include CXCL12 , CXCL10 , CCL21 , or CCL25 . They mediate and perpetuate invasive migration of tumor cells in the primary tumor and likely during metastatic dissemination ( Allinen et al . , 2004 ; Zlotnik et al . , 2011 ) . Migration - promoting signals induced by chemokines and their receptors CXCR4 , CXCR3 , and CCR9 are mainly mediated by JAK / PI3K / JNK , PI3K , Src - family kinase Syk , and the small GTPases Rac1 , RhoA , and Rap1 ( El Haibi et al . , 2010 ; Lee et al . , 2009 ; Tybulewicz and Henderson , 2009 ) . Besides their control on the cell cycle and cell survival , many growth factors , including HGF , EGF , FGF , and TGF b , share signaling through ERK , JNK , Src , mTOR , and PI3K pathways toward Rac and Cdc42 activation and enhanced cytoskeletal dynamics ( Massague´ , 2008 ; Shapiro et al . , 2011 ; Trusolino et al . , 2010 ) . Because of their pleiotropic effects , promigratory conditioning of the tumor - associated tissue increases : ( 1 ) the invasion and dissemination of tumor cells ; ( 2 ) the motility and activity of stromal cells , including ﬁbroblasts and macrophages ; ( 3 ) the recruitment and transendothelial migration of circulating leukocytes and precursor cells into the tumor stroma ; and ( 4 ) the mobilization of bone marrow - derived cells into the circu - lation through systemic growth factor effects in other organs , including the bone marrow ( Orimo et al . , 2005 ; Padua and Mas - sague´ , 2009 ; Roussos et al . , 2011 ; Zlotnik et al . , 2011 ) . Thus , multiple overlapping adhesion and signaling networks cooperate toward molecular and structural reorganization of contacted tissues and support tumor cell invasion and meta - static dissemination . Heterogeneity of Invasion Routes In vivo , cancer invasion and metastatic dissemination depend upon two interconnected complementary cell escape strategies . The ﬁrst and simplest strategy is the movement of cells along pre - existing tissue structures in which the available space matches or exceeds the volume of the cell or cell group . The second strategy results from proteolytic breakdown of tissue structures to generate de novo space required for invasion ( Wolf et al . , 2009 ; Wolf and Friedl , 2011 ) . Guidance Structures in Tissues Recently , two - dimensional ( 2D ) and 3D microscopy have map - ped the structural organization of tissues during cell invasion , and intravital microscopy has been used to examine experi - mental tumors in vivo ( Pittet and Weissleder , 2011 [ this issue of Cell ] ) . These approaches , combined with histopathological analysis of human tumors , strongly suggest that both single - cell and multicellular tumor invasion are guided and supported by pre - existing structures and interfaces present in every tissue ( Alexander et al . , 2008 ; Condeelis and Segall , 2003 ; Grytsenko et al . , 2011 ; Schedin and Keely , 2011 ) ( Figure 4 ) . Conceptually , tissue structures that guide invasion can be categorized as ‘‘2D’’and ‘‘3D’’ depending onwhether cells adhere to a substrate on one or several sides . 2D surfaces , with even or irregular conformation , form nearly barrier - free track - like gaps and trails that typically contain interstitial ﬂuid and glycosaminoglycans . In vivo , most 2D surfaces are encountered in a 3D context , such as a second opposing surface , or a nearby 3D scaffold ; therefore , with the notable exception of adherence to the wall of a larger vessel , cell invasion is , in most cases , constitutively three dimensional . Inner - body surfaces are always covered with an epithelium or endothelium layer , and thus , interacting cells depend upon cell - cell rather than cell - matrix interactions . 2D cell surfaces include : the peritoneum covering all internal organs ; the pleura covering the lungs and thorax wall ; the ventricles of the brain ; and inner surfaces of larger blood and lymph vessels ( Figure 4A ) . Viewed from a cell mechanics angle , cell surfaces allow for highly effec - tive , almost barrier - free dissemination of tumor cells . This is observed during peritoneal or pleural carcinosis in which tumor and other cells readily spread centimeters , likely by both active migration and migration - independent passive drift ( Zecchini et al . , 2011 ) . When viewed at microscopic resolution , connective tissue is not a uniform , homogeneous meshwork of ECM , but rather , it is composed of nonrandom structures , including discontinuities formed by surface - like gaps and tracks . The anatomic function of these gaps and tracks is likely transportation of tissue ﬂuids , tissue elasticity , and mechanical sliding of tissue components relative to each other . 3D tracks with bordering 2D interfaces are formed by larger anatomic structures covered by a basement membrane , including small blood vessels , myoﬁbers , nerve tracks , and adipocytes ( Figure 4B ) . Similar longitudinal tracks are formed by bundled 3D collagen ﬁbers ( Figure 4C ) . These ‘‘inner surfaces’’ likely correspond anatomically to narrow clefts ( ‘‘shrinkage artifacts’’ ) that are abundantly present in virtually every tissue after ﬁxation and , when reconstructed three dimensionally , display a 3D track system ( O . Ilina and P . F . , unpublished data ) along and between ﬁbrillar interstitial tissue structures . In cancer lesions and tumor xenografts monitored by 3D intravital microscopy , these interfaces are often used by invading cells with little sign of structural alteration or degen - eration ( Alexander et al . , 2008 ; Condeelis and Segall , 2003 ) . Other tissue - speciﬁc guidance structures preferentially used by metastasizing cells are bone cavities , which are covered by a monolayer of lining cells , and the perivascular tracks in brain vessels formed between glial cells and the basement membrane of vascular smooth muscle cells ( Figure 4D ) . Another special case of barrier - free dissemination is the lumen of small vessels , which provide a tube - like track for rapid intravascular dissemina - tion of cancer cells through capillaries in peripheral tissue and liver sinusoids ( Tsuji et al . , 2006 ) ( Figure 4A ) . Lastly , 3D scaffolds composed of randomly organized ﬁbrin and collagen ﬁbrils provide a combination of 1D ( the string - like linear ﬁber ) and 3D scaffold with pores of complex geometry 998 Cell 147 , November 23 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . ( Doyle et al . , 2009 ; Wolf et al . , 2009 ) ( Figure 4C ) . Such ECM networks are predominant in loose connective tissue , such as the dermis of young mice , provisional tissue such as a ﬁbrin clot after tissue wounding , and as largely ECM - free tracks ( formed by astrocytes and neuronal ﬁbers ) the white matter of the brain ( Grytsenko et al . , 2011 ; Wolf et al . , 2009 ) . These networks are similar to in vitro - reconstituted 3D collagen matrices or basement membrane equivalents frequently used for cell invasion research . Invading cells are thus required to accommodate diverse geometries and molecular ligand systems for adhesion and migration in vivo . Whereas in vitro - reconstituted ECM models , Figure 4 . Anatomic Tissue Structures Guiding Cancer Invasion ( A ) Epithelial and endothelial surfaces devoid of ECM . ( B ) Basement membranes interfacing with the ECM between cells and tissues . ( C ) Collagen - rich interstitial scaffolds of compact or loose structure and organization . ( D ) Complex interfaces composed of both cell surfaces and ECM scaffolds . Solid multimeric scaffold structures interface with tissue pores and track - like gaps ( cyan ) . Cell 147 , November 23 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 999 due to their cell - independent polymerization process , mimic random ECM structures , complex cell and tissue engineering is needed to recapitulate the multicomponent complexity of 2D interface - based track geometries of guiding scaffolds in vivo ( Ilina et al . , 2011 ) . Molecular Guidance Cues Physical space is likely translated into directed cell polarity and cytoskeletal dynamics through receptor - mediated molecular recognition of the adjacent scaffold structure . Invading cancer cells often simultaneously integrate signals from : ( 1 ) ECM mole - cules , including collagens , laminins , ﬁbronectin , and elastin ; ( 2 ) cell surfaces , including cadherins , CAMs , and proteoglycans ; and ( 3 ) gradients of promigratory factors , i . e . , chemotactic ( soluble factors ) and haptotactic gradients ( ECM - bound factors ) . Molecular sensing through adhesion and chemotactic receptors directs tumor cell migration to mediate chemotaxis and hapto - taxis ( i . e . , directional moltility along a gradient of cell adhesion sites or substrate - bound chemoattractants ) jointly with physical contact guidance , which is often tissue context dependent . Besides the physical scaffold structure , the ECM guidance of invading cells is mediated by covalently and noncovalently associated accessory components deposited by stromal cells . Guidance by ECM The molecular and physical characteristics of the ECM strongly contribute to cell adhesion , migration , and cell fate decisions with consequences for cancer cell invasion and dissemination . The quantitatively most abundant and important component of connective tissue is collagen type I , which serves as structural frame for cells and other scaffold proteins ( Grytsenko et al . , 2011 ; Wolf et al . , 2009 ) . In the activated tumor stroma , the density of collagen ﬁbers is often increased ( i . e . , desmoplasia ) , and hyaluronan , proteoglycans , and glycoproteins ( e . g . , ﬁbrin , ﬁbronectin , and vitronectin ) become upregulated . Together these molecules decorate and ‘‘functionalize’’ the collagen scaf - fold . In vitro , mesenchymal ﬁbroblasts and cancer cells migrate along 2D or through 3D collagen using a 2 b 1 , a 1 b 1 , or a 11 b 1 in - tegrins and a 5 b 1 , a V b 3 , and a V b 5 for migration along or through ﬁbrin or ﬁbronectin scaffolds ( Even - Ram and Yamada , 2005 ; Maaser et al . , 1999 ) . Integrins also mediate the migration of normal and cancer cells along structural components of basement membranes by engaging with collagen type IV ( a 1 b 1 , a 2 b 1 ) , laminins ( a 3 b 1 , a 6 b 1 ) , ﬁbrillin ( a 5 b 1 , a V b 3 , a V b 6 ) , perlecan , and versican ( b 1 ) ( Hynes , 2002 ) . Consequently , perivascular invasion of glioma cells and perineural invasion of pancreatic cancer cells are linked to the function of laminin - binding b 1 integrins ( Piao et al . , 2009 ; Ryschich et al . , 2009 ) , but the mechanisms of other basement membrane - dependent routes , including peri - and intramuscular guidance and adipose tissue invasion , are unknown . Most ECM proteins undergo enzymatic postprocessing by cell - derived proteases ( Figure 3C ) or crosslinking proteins . Fibrillar collagens become glycosylated and crosslinked by lysyl oxydases ( LOX ) and lysyl hydroxylases , which increases collagen stiffness and resistance to assault by pH changes and proteolytic degradation ( Levental et al . , 2009 ; Paszek et al . , 2005 ) . Normal and neoplastic cells sense differences in physical ECM properties and migrate preferentially toward regions of increased stiffness , termed durotaxis ( Lo et al . , 2000 ) . Stiff substrate enhances and reinforces the clustering of integrins and the secondary formation of focal adhesions and cytoskeletal linkages through the adaptor proteins p130Cas and vinculin ( Grashoff et al . , 2010 ; Sawada et al . , 2006 ) . This augments both cell contractility and mesenchymal functions ( Levental et al . , 2009 ) . Consequently , the upregulation of peri - tumor collagen production favors cancer cell invasion and metastasis in breast and other cancer models ( Goetz et al . , 2011 ; Levental et al . , 2009 ; Paszek et al . , 2005 ) . Besides modulating cell invasion , the physical tissue properties determine the fate of normal cells with consequences for cell growth and differentiation ( Discher et al . , 2005 ) . As a central downstream signaling pathway that connects mechanotransduction to gene expression , cell prolifer - ation in response to substrate stiffness is regulated by Yap1 , a transcription factor downstream of the hippo pathway ( Dupont et al . , 2011 ) . Yap1 engagement supports epithelial stem cell growth and hyperproliferation , which is counteracted by signaling through a - catenin ( Schlegelmilch et al . , 2011 ) . Thus , Yap1 represents an important mechanosensitive candidate effector for neoplastic progression in cells with deregulated cad - herin / catenin axis . Guidance along Cell Membranes Besides cell - ECM interactions mediating cell migration , an understudied but emerging mechanism is the guidance by cell - cell junctions . Besides the epithelium covering inner - body cavi - ties and endothelium forming the lumen of blood and lymph vessels , intermittent and likely discontinuous cell scaffolds are abundant in most tissues , including ﬁbroblast networks , macro - phages , and epithelial structures ( Figure 4 ) . In developing zebra - ﬁsh , primordial amoeboid germ cells migrating individually through a cell - rich tissue scaffold employ E - cadherin and Rho - mediated actomyosin contraction for migration ( Kardash et al . , 2011 ) . The small group of germ cells of the developing Drosophila ovary , called border cells , provides an example of collective migration mediated by E - cadherin . These cells are connected by E - cadherin , guided by EGF , and depend upon E - cadherin for migration ( Geisbrecht and Montell , 2002 ) . Cell - cell junctions thus represent an alternative mechanotransduc - tion mechanism for migration , when cell - matrix adhesions are downregulated or absent . However , though effective in morpho - genesis , the role of cadherin - based cell - cell interactions in tumor cell invasion is still unclear . Secreted Guidance Molecules Many chemokines and growth factors contain one or several ECM - binding domains , which immobilize the factors in tissues , thereby forming a stable promigratory scaffold . Chemokines and growth factors contain binding sites to heparan sulfate side chains ( Lortat - Jacob et al . , 2002 ) that are present in intersti - tial and cell surface proteoglycans and heparin ( Hynes , 2009 ) . After functionalization , a scaffold contains both adhesion sites ( for integrins and other receptors ) and immobilized migration - inducing signal ( via CCR or GFR ) on the same geometric struc - ture , such as a ﬁbril or basement membrane , to support cell protrusions and adhesion in close vicinity along the same substrate . In 3D invasion models of branching morphogenesis , which support collective sprouting of epithelial ducts of the mammary or salivary gland , immobilization of FGF10 to heparan 1000 Cell 147 , November 23 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . sulfate maximizes duct elongation and growth by engaging FGFR2 signaling ; in contrast , a diffusion - only variant of FGF10 lacks the proinvasive function and supports only growth ( Makar - enkova et al . , 2009 ) . Likewise , the chemokine CXCL12 / SDF - 1 and EGF interact with interstitial heparan sulfate and form stable gradients that guide migrating tumor cells and passenger leuko - cytes ( Allinen et al . , 2004 ; Netelenbos et al . , 2002 ; Wyckoff et al . , 2004 ) . TGF b is a master inducer of mesenchymal invasion and stem cell functions in cancer cells . It is immobilized to the ECM via ﬁbronectin and ﬁbrillin by latent TGF b - binding proteins and becomes released through limited proteolysis mediated by MMPs or furin that are activated and released by activated stromal cells ( Mu et al . , 2002 ) . Alternatively , integrins bind to latent TGF b - binding protein complexes and pull to induce a conformational change that is required to make ECM - bound TGF b accessible foritsreceptors ( Wipffetal . , 2007 ) . Osteopontin is a secreted cytokine - like proteoglycan that binds to CD44 and integrins . Osteopontin is upregulated in many tumor types and stronglysupportsinvasivecellguidance ( Bellahce ` neetal . , 2008 ) . In addition to these examples , gene expression proﬁling and proteomics have revealed abundant sets of soluble factors and ECM proteins upregulated in the microenvironment of tumors , indicative of complex signaling pathways induced in both tumor and stromal cells ( Allinen et al . , 2004 ; Wang et al . , 2004 ) . Besides their local peri - tumor function , many deposited factors diffuse into blood and lymphatic ﬂuid , which unfolds systemic , hormone - like functions . CXCL12 / SDF - 1 and osteopontin are important examples of these soluble factors . Tumor - derived CXCL12 / SDF - 1 mobilizes bone marrow stem cells that become recruited into the tumor and contribute to the formation of tumor blood vessels ( Orimo et al . , 2005 ) , and osteopontin activates bone marrow - derived cells that integrate into the tumor and accelerate tumor outgrowth ( McAllister et al . , 2008 ) . Thus , multiple and partially overlapping mechanisms contribute to the mechanical and molecular guidance of tumor cells , but their crosstalk and hierarchy still remain unknown . Plasticity of Invasion and Metastasis Programs Together , the different modes of cancer cell invasion , the recep - tors and cytoskeletal regulators available for cell - cell and cell - matrix adhesion , the divergent degree of ECM remodeling capa - bility , and the range of invasion - guiding molecular and physical tissue environments provide a multiscale framework of combina - torial possibilities or states that allow cancer invasion to be a plastic and adaptive process ( Friedl , 2004 ; Friedl and Wolf , 2010 ) . Consequently , with altered tissue composition and condi - tioning by released factors , tumor cells undergo changes in signaling and function that lead to secondary effects in the invaded tissue and , in turn , the tumor cells themselves . Plasticity of Tissue Structures Interstitial cancer cell invasion occurs in different phases that can be labeled operationally as an initial , nondestructive guid - ance phase , followed by a phase of tissue remodeling . In a step - wise manner , invasive migration leads to the production of pores , tunnels , and lagunae , which guide and can be populated by mobile tumor cells ( Alexander et al . , 2008 ; Condeelis and Segall , 2003 ) ( S . A . , unpublished data ) ( Figure 5A ) . With upregu - lated MMPs , most notably MT1 - MMP / MMP14 , pericellular proteolysis executed by tumor cells themselves or ﬁbroblasts Figure 5 . Plasticity of Cell - Matrix Interaction , Invasion , and Tissue Remodeling ( A ) Migrating cells transition from an initial nondestructive dissemination to migration that involves small - and large - scale tissue remodeling . The pre - existing space available to invading cells governs the caliber of individual and multicellular invasion and becomes iteratively widened by pericellular proteolysis . ( B ) Epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition of a stable epithelium after downregulation of cell - cell junctions and facilitated single - cell detachment . ( CandD ) Invasionprogramsdisplay plasticity , oradaptability , including transitionfromcollectivecellmigration toindividualcellmigration ( C ) and mesenchymal - to - amoeboid transition ( D ) . Key regulators of these transitions altered in expression or function are indicated . Cell 147 , November 23 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 1001 generates micro - and macrotracks bordered by condensed ordered collagen bundles , which strongly support both single - cell and collective invasion ( Friedl et al . , 1997 ; Gaggioli et al . , 2007 ; Goetz et al . , 2011 ; Wolf et al . , 2007 ) ( Figure 5A ) . These de novo tracks guide tumor cells and , with pressure exerted by the invading cells , become gradually widened until the tissue space consumed by invading cell masses matches the regres - sion of the ECM ( Gaggioli et al . , 2007 ; Ilina et al . , 2011 ; Wolf and Friedl , 2011 ) . Such trails , often ﬁlled by tumor cells , are abundant in most interstitial collagen - rich tissues , including des - moplastic stroma ( Levental et al . , 2009 ; Paszek et al . , 2005 ) . Thus , despite its increased absolute collagen density , the signals , gaps , and trails present in desmoplastic stroma enhance cancer invasion and progression rather than acting as barrier . By direct and indirect mechanisms , desmoplastic tissue remodeling is a strong mediator of neoplastic progression , inva - sion , and metastasis ( Egeblad et al . , 2010 ) . As key mediators of desmoplasia , resident ﬁbroblasts and immigrated ﬁbroblast precursor cells receive activation signals through growth factors , including TGF b , IL - 1 , and PDGF . They then develop into cancer - associated myoﬁbroblasts ( CAF ) that deposit , remodel , and contract ﬁbrillar collagen ( De Wever et al . , 2008 ; Egeblad et al . , 2010 ) . As a physiological process of the connective tissue reor - ganization , the postpartum involution of the mammary gland leads to the deposition of ﬁbrillar collagen and collagen - induced release of proinﬂammatory COX - 2 ( Lyons et al . , 2011 ) . This reorganization is sufﬁcient to impose growth , invasion as multi - cellular strands and metastasis programs in otherwise benign or less aggressive breast tumor lesions ( Lyons et al . , 2011 ) . A similar progression of breast cancer is triggered by activated ﬁbroblasts that reorganize and condense the breast stroma to aligned , bundled collagen tracks that condition breast cancer invasion and metastasis ( Goetz et al . , 2011 ) . In bone metastases , bone resorption is executed by osteo - clasts in which RANKL ( receptor activator of NF - k B ligand ) is activated by a TGF - b (cid:1) and MMP13 - dependent mechanism ; this allows the growing tumor to expand into de novo space , which eventually results in local bone destruction ( Nannuru et al . , 2010 ; Nannuru and Singh , 2010 ) . In all cases , pre - existing tissue space is ﬁrst ﬁlled by invading cells without apparent degradation , and then , with increasing cell density and the upre - gulation of MMPs and other proteases , the tissue is degraded and reorganized . As an outcome , cancer invasion leads to secondary loss of tissue integrity and function , including tissue necrosis , ulceration , and vessel rupture . Accordingly , the struc - tures detected by histology represent statically looking snap - shots of an otherwise dynamic and plastic process by which the growing and invading tumor replaces and eventually destroys interstitial tissue . Plasticity of Cell - Cell Junctions : The Epithelial - to - Mesenchymal Transition A central molecular program enhancing tumor cell invasion in response to environmental triggers is the epithelial - to - mesen - chymal transition ( EMT ) . EMT initiates or augments invasive functions by enhancing Rac - dependent mesenchymal migra - tion . It also contributes to cell growth , cell survival , and the ree - mergence of stem cell characteristics ( Thiery et al . , 2009 ) ( Figure 5B ) . During EMT , upstream signals through growth factors of the tumor stroma , including Wnt , TGF b , FGF , and EGF , lead to the activation of transcriptional repressors , including ZEB1 , Twist , and Snail1 and 2 , which directly and indirectly inhibit E - cadherin transcription ( Spaderna et al . , 2008 ; Yang et al . , 2004 ) . For example , in breast cancer cells undergoing EMT in response to MMP - 3 ( which cleaves cell surface E - cadherin and thus weakens cell - cell junctions ) , the onset of migration depends on Rac activation and cell - derived production of reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) , which in turn upregulate Snail ( Radisky et al . , 2005 ) . With E - cadherin expression diminished , adherens junc - tions and the signaling thereof are weakened or replaced by less stringent cell - cell adhesions through N - cadherin or L1CAM ( Gavert et al . , 2007 ; Yano et al . , 2004 ) . This results in the disturbance of apicobasal polarity and cell anchoring to the basement membrane , which , in turn , allows the cells to acquire a mobile mesenchymal phenotype ( Thiery et al . , 2009 ) . The EMT program further favors a stem cell - like phenotype that invades , disseminates , and is able to establish distant metas - tases ( Mani et al . , 2008 ) . The induction of EMT with downregulation of E - cadherin expression is likely tunable , dependent on whether complete or partial EMT signaling is present . As consequence , EMT can be complete with loss of E - cadherin and the typical EMT signaling and protein expression proﬁle . However , EMT may be partial with different levels of E - cadherin expression retained , and even EMT - like dissemination without EMT - associated gene expression patterns may develop ( Christiansen and Rajase - karan , 2006 ; Gavert et al . , 2011 ; Pa ` ez - Ribes et al . , 2009 ; Wicki et al . , 2006 ) . In epithelial cancer lesions , EMT is detected in a few often cohesive cells located at the leading edge , as well as small cohesive groups and individual cells scattered and moving independently without connection to the main tumor ( Brabletz et al . , 2001 ; Gavert et al . , 2007 ) . Thus , besides repre - senting a program for complete loss of cell - cell junctions , EMT further may contribute to collective cell functions , including collective invasion . This is consistent with the prominent collec - tive invasion of primary mesenchymal tumors and melanoma ( Alexander et al . , 2008 ; Hegerfeldt et al . , 2002 ) . EMT is also thought to represent a program transiently controlled by the microenvironment , which locally downregu - lates epithelial characteristics and facilitates cell escape from the primary tumor . However , with local upstream signaling lost , cells undergo mesenchymal - to - epithelial reversion after meta - static seeding in the secondary organ ( Spaderna et al . , 2006 ; Thiery et al . , 2009 ) . Thus , EMT - dependent invasion and metas - tasis programs are strongly responsive to microenvironmental changes and adaptive in their signaling program and associated invasion dynamics . Plasticity of Cell - Matrix Interactions and Cytoskeletal Dynamics The executive mechanotransducing mechanisms of cell migra - tion are plastic and allow the rapid adaptation to environmental changes and challenges ; these adaptations often result in transi - tions between different modes of migration ( Friedl and Wolf , 2010 ; Sanz - Moreno and Marshall , 2010 ) . Such plasticity likely originates in response to tissue microregions and responses to therapeutic challenge . The natural regulation of gene expression 1002 Cell 147 , November 23 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . and signal states in tumor cells by the microenvironment thus accounts for the often heterogeneous invasion pattern in progressing tumor lesions . In addition , diversity of persisting invasion is caused by rewiring of signaling networks and differ - ential cell survival during tissue damage and therapy ( Alexander and Friedl , 2012 ) . In collectively invading tumors , cell - cell coordination and signaling are mediated by either E - cadherin expressed at levels that do not confound the migration process or alternative cad - herins , including N - or VE - cadherin ( Yano et al . , 2004 ) ( Fig - ure 5C ) . Mechanisms of collective invasion with expressed E - cadherin in cell - cell junctions include the upregulation of : L1CAM , which strongly promotes migration ( Gavert et al . , 2011 ; Shtutman et al . , 2006 ) ; the guanin nucleotide exchange factor Tiam - 1 , which activates Rac1 but maintains adherens and tight junctions ( Mertens et al . , 2005 ; Walch et al . , 2008 ) ; or podoplanin , which increases RhoA activity in the presence of E - cadherin - based adhesions ( Wicki et al . , 2006 ) . Similar to the EMT program , the transition from collective cell migration to individual cell migration ( i . e . , the collection - to - individual transition ) is triggered by local Rac1 engagement , allowing for ectopic tip cell behavior , substrate engagement , and eventually , cell detachment ( which is facilitated by down - regulation of cadherin - based cell - cell adhesion ) ( Figure 5C ) . Environmental stimuli can favor single - cell detachment from tumors , partly through EMT and partly in the absence of EMT ( Bertout et al . , 2008 ; Pennacchietti et al . , 2003 ) . These stimuli include TGF b , EGF , and other growth factors , but also metabolic stress , such as acidiﬁcation of the stroma causing a shift in tumor metabolism ( i . e . , the Warburg effect ) and hypoxia with reactive HIF - 1 a signaling ( Bertout et al . , 2008 ; Pennacchietti et al . , 2003 ) . Alternatively , amoeboid dissemination may originate from collective invasion when cell - cell junctions are abandoned and release the cells toward a single - cell migration program of low integrin - mediated adhesion and high Rho - mediated cortical actomyosin contractility ( Hegerfeldt et al . , 2002 ; Sanz - Moreno et al . , 2008 ) . In breast cancer lesions , EGF secreted predomi - nantly by activated macrophages activates and guides tumor cells that have detached from the epithelial main mass by amoe - boid dissemination ( Wyckoff et al . , 2004 ) . Thus , the type of migration maintained after detachment from the multicellular state depends upon the governance of adhesion strength , cyto - skeletal protrusions and contractility , and the competence to remodel the ECM . Mesenchymal invasion may undergo secondary conversion to amoeboid , rounded migration by diverse mechanisms , such as a decrease in Rac activity and concomitant activation of Rho - mediated actomyosin contractility ( Sahai and Marshall , 2003 ) . The therapeutic inhibition of MMPs can also trigger amoeboid migration because pericellular proteolysis by MMPs prompts conversion to nonproteolytic amoeboid cell deforma - tion to bypass narrow ECM barriers ( Wolf et al . , 2003a ) ( Figure 5D ) . Likewise , amoeboid movement in otherwise mesen - chymal cells is induced by inhibiting chemokine - meditated Rac activation ( Ge´rard et al . , 2007 ) , activating Rho by inhibiting p190RhoGAP ( Nimnual et al . , 2003 ) , or engaging EphA2 ( an indirect Rho activator ) ( Parri et al . , 2009 ) . Lastly , gene mutations that impact integrin availability or the Rac / Rho balance may lead to plasticity of invasion and metastasis . Mutation or loss of p53 leads to enhanced integrin turnover and recycling , which converts cells to the amoeboid dissemination mode and strongly enhances invasion / metastasis ( Gadea et al . , 2007 ; Muller et al . , 2009 ) . Thus , in context , with gain or loss of cell - cell junctions and adaptive signaling control through Rac and Rho , cancer invasion programs are plastic and responsive to microenvironmental signals and molecular interference , which secures migration under challenging conditions ( Madsen and Sahai , 2010 ) . These basic conversion mechanisms have been established for in vitro conditions using cell lines , and their relevance for tumor lesions in vivo await conﬁrmation by using 3D histopathology combined with intravital imaging ( Pittet and Weissleder , 2011 ) . Likewise , how invasion plasticity is connected with or distinct from EMT programs remains to be shown in vitro and in vivo . This will identify EMT - dependent and - independent routes and niches of natural and therapy - induced plasticity of invasion and their contribution to metastatic dissemination ( Christiansen and Rajasekaran , 2006 ) . Plasticity and Reciprocity—A Model The mechanisms of spatiotemporal plasticity ( i . e . , to change phenotype and function ) and reciprocity ( i . e . , to do this by pro - cessing signals received from the environment ) are fundamental to the step - wise changes in both tumor cells and the microenvi - ronment , a process that receives further drift with cells moving from one environment to another . The concept of dynamic reci - procity for cells engaging with and thereby altering the ECM was originally coined by Paul Bornstein for cell - matrix interactions in wound healing ( Bornstein et al . , 1982 ) and was further developed by Mina Bissell and coworkers for epithelial morphogenesis ( Bissell et al . , 1982 ) and cancer ( Nelson et al . , 2008 ; Xu et al . , 2009 ) . Accordingly , plasticity and reciprocity account for the morphologic and functional inter - and intralesion heterogeneity driven by complementary mechanisms , including genomic insta - bility as well as epigenetic , signaling , and functional adaption to cope with altering environmental conditions ( Figure 6A ) . Such ‘‘fate - changing’’ events that trigger signiﬁcant adaptation in tumor cells occur in response to metabolic changes in the micro - environment , including hypoxia and severe metabolic stress ( Bertout et al . , 2008 ) , as well as chronic growth factor stimulation and inﬂammation ( Allinen et al . , 2004 ; Polyak et al . , 2009 ) ( Figure 6B ) . A critical common mediator of plasticity and reciprocity is the change of cell position . Cell invasion provides access to different physicalandmolecularstructures , includingthelocaltumorstroma and secondary organs after metastatic colonization , and thus reﬁnes signaling input ( Figures 6B and 6C ) . Consequently , cancer invasion and metastasis are both cause and consequence of plasticity and reciprocity . Over time , the changes driving adaptive reprogramming of tumor cells and the reactive tumor stroma thus lead to a kinetic , ever - changing coevolution of the tumor with its environment ( Hanahan and Weinberg , 2011 ; Polyak et al . , 2009 ) . Related tissue remodeling processes , such as morphogenesis andwoundhealing , followwell - deﬁnedprogramswithrate - limiting steps and endpoints ( e . g . , for limb ororgan formationorclosure of a tissue defect ) . In contrast , cancer is more ﬂexible in time , space , Cell 147 , November 23 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 1003 signaling programs , and genetics and thus represents a perpetu - ating process without a clear end point , illustrated here as open - ended spirals ( Figure 6 ) . Concluding Remarks Well - deﬁned experimental conditions in vitro have allowed the precise delineation of receptor - ligand interactions and their basic involvement in invasive migration , but their complexity and synergistic availability in vivo make it challenging to identify the dominant and compensation mechanisms that maintain and rescue metastatic dissemination ( Friedl and Wolf , 2003 ; Madsen and Sahai , 2010 ; Sanz - Moreno and Marshall , 2010 ) . Although the intracellular machinery that generates force via actomyosin is well - deﬁned , the range of molecular and physical adhesion and transmission modes at the cell and tissue level support the adaptation of cell migration . This adaptation is similar to and likely intertwined with the compensation and plasticity of focal adhesion and other signaling networks during cell invasion ( Zaidel - Bar et al . , 2007 ) . Consequently , because most pathways of adhesion , proteases , and chemokine / growth factors exhibit ample overlap and redundancy , the natural or therapeutically induced loss of one mechanistic pathway may lead to a drift in signaling and mechanotransducing effector networks . This may trigger alternative mechanisms of invasion and dissemina - tion instead of inhibiting function . Recent studies identiﬁed two unexpected examples for alter - native migration modes in 3D environments : the interstitial mi - gration of leukocytes independently of integrin ( Friedl and Wei - gelin , 2008 ; La¨mmermann et al . , 2008 ; La¨mmermann and Sixt , 2009 ) and the propulsive cell migration of normal and neoplastic cells by blebs ( Fackler and Grosse , 2008 ; Lorentzen et al . , 2011 ; Poincloux et al . , 2011 ) . The contribution of these types of cell movement to metastatic cancer invasion in vivo awaits determi - nation . In addition to active actomyosin - driven migration , other mechanisms of cell transport include passive drift along tissue structures and cell pushing by expansive growth . Both of these alternative mechanisms still have not been formally integrated into the spectrum of cell translocation principles . The invaded tissue is often regarded as a homogeneous and passive scaffold that the tumor cells modify in a unidirectional manner , and indeed , this notion has been strengthened by most 2D and 3D in vitro models ( Friedl et al . , 1997 ; Wolf et al . , 2009 ) . The concept of plasticity and reciprocity of cancer inva - sion , however , describes invasion as a reciprocal process gov - erned by multiple sets of overlapping , redundant , and poten - tially , ever - changing active and passive mechanisms of molecular mechanotransduction . This adaptability renders cell invasion and metastasis as a robust perpetuating process , the targeting of which—if ever possible—will require understanding the hierarchy of stringent control points . To this end , systems biology and mathematical modeling approaches are required to classify rate - limiting nodes and modiﬁers of molecular mecha - notransduction for each migration mode and tissue - context . Figure 6 . Reciprocity , Plasticity , and Evolution of Tumor Cell Inva - sion and Metastasis ( A ) Reciprocalcrosstalk betweentumorcells and thestroma ( i . e . , stromalcells together with ECM and released factors ) results in evolutionary plasticity of both tumor cells and the tissue environment . ‘‘Reciprocity’’ results from the bidirectional communication between stromal ( S ) and tumor ( T ) compart - ments , which is transmitted by mediators ( M ) released by both compartments in a reciprocal manner . Stromal alterations include cell - derived physico - chemical changes of the microenvironment , such as deposited ECM components , ECM degradation and remodeling , change of ECM stiffness and porosity , and released cytokines and growth factors . Plasticity of the cell phenotype and function consists of : changes in the activation , migration , and differentiation state of the cell ; metabolic switches ; and epigenetic alterations that may further prompt secondary genomic instability . Consequently , with each cycle of interactive engagement with the stroma , the cell state diverges from itsorigin , leading to progression of the tumoror themetastasis ( indicated as spiral ) . ( B ) Branching and altered direction of reciprocal plasticity in the course of cancer progression . Direction - changing dichotomy is reached by a change in the position of the tumor cell , which results in a different tissue location and change in environmental input ( upper spirals ) ; likewise , step - wise bifurcation of reciprocal evolution may be induced by changes of the local tissue condi - tions , including altered composition of inﬁltrate cells during inﬂammatory and metabolic stress , insufﬁcient perfusion resulting in hypoxia , and tissue repair programsinducedbyspontaneousortherapy - induced ( tumor ) necrosis ( lower spirals ) . ( C ) Second - andthird - orderreciprocity . Reciprocalplasticitycanevolveduring metastatic progression to generate second - and third - order reciprocity . In the course of metastasis , tissue - speciﬁc reciprocity and microenvironmental inputs synergize to drive local plasticity of tumor cells and the tumor stroma , resulting in the evolution of tumor subregions with diverse progression and adaptation capabilities . As a consequence , reciprocity and plasticity may impose parallel or divergent evolution of cell clones and populations . 1004 Cell 147 , November 23 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We gratefully acknowledge Bettina Weigelin , Antoine Khalil , and Vaishnavi Narasimhan for helpful comments and corrections on the manuscript . The work of the laboratory is supported by grants from the Netherlands’ Science Foundation ( NWO - VICI 918 . 11 . 626 ) , the Dutch Cancer Foundation ( KWF 2008 - 4031 ) , the European Union ( ENCITE HEALTH TH - 15 - 2008 - 208142 ; FP7 - T3Net - 237946 ; FP7 - PEOPLE - 2010 - IEF - 276443 ) , and the Deut - sche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( SPP1190 / FR1155 / 8 - 3 ) . REFERENCES Alexander , S . , and Friedl , P . ( 2012 ) . Cancer invasion and resistance - intercon - nected processes of disease progression and therapy failure . Trends Mol . Med . 10 . 1016 / j . molmed . 2011 . 11 . 003 . Alexander , S . , Koehl , G . E . , Hirschberg , M . , Geissler , E . K . , andFriedl , P . ( 2008 ) . Dynamicimagingofcancergrowthandinvasion : amodiﬁedskin - foldchamber model . Histochem . Cell Biol . 130 , 1147 – 1154 . Allinen , M . , Beroukhim , R . , Cai , L . , Brennan , C . , Lahti - Domenici , J . , Huang , H . , Porter , D . , Hu , M . , Chin , L . , Richardson , A . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Molecular char - acterization of the tumor microenvironment in breast cancer . Cancer Cell 6 , 17 – 32 . Armstrong , A . J . , Marengo , M . S . , Oltean , S . , Kemeny , G . , Bitting , R . L . , Turnbull , J . D . , Herold , C . I . , Marcom , P . K . , George , D . J . , and Garcia - Blanco , M . A . ( 2011 ) . Circulating tumor cells from patients with advanced prostate and breast cancer display both epithelial and mesenchymal markers . Mol . Cancer Res . 9 , 997 – 1007 . Astin , J . W . , Batson , J . , Kadir , S . , Charlet , J . , Persad , R . A . , Gillatt , D . , Oxley , J . D . , and Nobes , C . D . ( 2010 ) . Competition amongst Eph receptors regulates contact inhibition of locomotion and invasiveness in prostate cancer cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 1194 – 1204 . Bellahce ` ne , A . , Castronovo , V . , Ogbureke , K . U . , Fisher , L . W . , and Fedarko , N . S . ( 2008 ) . Small integrin - binding ligand N - linked glycoproteins ( SIBLINGs ) : multifunctional proteins in cancer . Nat . Rev . Cancer 8 , 212 – 226 . Bergmann , F . , Wandschneider , F . , Sipos , B . , Moldenhauer , G . , Schniewind , B . , Welsch , T . , Schirrmacher , P . , Klo¨ppel , G . , Altevogt , P . , Scha¨fer , H . , andSe - bens Mu¨erko¨ster , S . ( 2010 ) . Elevated L1CAM expression in precursor lesions and primary and metastastic tissues of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma . Oncol . Rep . 24 , 909 – 915 . Bertout , J . A . , Patel , S . A . , andSimon , M . C . ( 2008 ) . TheimpactofO2availability on human cancer . Nat . Rev . Cancer 8 , 967 – 975 . Berx , G . , and van Roy , F . ( 2009 ) . Involvement of members of the cadherin superfamily in cancer . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 1 , a003129 . Bissell , M . J . , Hall , H . G . , andParry , G . ( 1982 ) . Howdoestheextracellularmatrix direct gene expression ? J . Theor . Biol . 99 , 31 – 68 . Bornstein , P . , McPherson , J . , and Sage , H . ( 1982 ) . Synthesis and secretion of structural macromolecules by endothelial cells in culture . In Pathobiology of theEndothelialCell , P & SBiomedicalSciencesSymposia , Volume6 , H . Nossel and H . Vogel , eds . ( New York : Academic Press ) , pp . 215 – 228 . Brabletz , T . , Jung , A . , Reu , S . , Porzner , M . , Hlubek , F . , Kunz - Schughart , L . A . , Knuechel , R . , and Kirchner , T . ( 2001 ) . Variable beta - catenin expression in colorectal cancers indicates tumor progression driven by the tumor environ - ment . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 10356 – 10361 . Casey , R . C . , Burleson , K . M . , Skubitz , K . M . , Pambuccian , S . E . , Oegema , T . R . , Jr . , Ruff , L . E . , and Skubitz , A . P . ( 2001 ) . Beta 1 - integrins regulate the formation andadhesionofovariancarcinomamulticellularspheroids . Am . J . Pathol . 159 , 2071 – 2080 . Chambers , A . F . , Groom , A . C . , and MacDonald , I . C . ( 2002 ) . Dissemination and growth of cancer cells in metastatic sites . Nat . Rev . Cancer 2 , 563 – 572 . Choi , Y . P . , Shim , H . S . , Gao , M . Q . , Kang , S . , and Cho , N . H . ( 2011 ) . Molecular portraits of intratumoral heterogeneity in human ovarian cancer . Cancer Lett . 307 , 62 – 71 . Christiansen , J . J . , and Rajasekaran , A . K . ( 2006 ) . Reassessing epithelial to mesenchymal transition as a prerequisite for carcinoma invasion and metas - tasis . Cancer Res . 66 , 8319 – 8326 . Chu , Y . S . , Eder , O . , Thomas , W . A . , Simcha , I . , Pincet , F . , Ben - Ze’ev , A . , Perez , E . , Thiery , J . P . , andDufour , S . ( 2006 ) . PrototypicaltypeIE - cadherinandtypeII cadherin - 7 mediate very distinct adhesiveness through their extracellular domains . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 2901 – 2910 . Condeelis , J . , and Segall , J . E . ( 2003 ) . Intravital imaging of cell movement in tumours . Nat . Rev . Cancer 3 , 921 – 930 . Couchman , J . R . ( 2010 ) . Transmembrane signaling proteoglycans . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 26 , 89 – 114 . Cox , E . A . , Sastry , S . K . , and Huttenlocher , A . ( 2001 ) . Integrin - mediated adhe - sion regulates cell polarity and membrane protrusion through the Rho family of GTPases . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 265 – 277 . De Wever , O . , Demetter , P . , Mareel , M . , and Bracke , M . ( 2008 ) . Stromal myo - ﬁbroblasts are drivers of invasive cancer growth . Int . J . Cancer 123 , 2229 – 2238 . Dean , R . A . , Cox , J . H . , Bellac , C . L . , Doucet , A . , Starr , A . E . , and Overall , C . M . ( 2008 ) . Macrophage - speciﬁc metalloelastase ( MMP - 12 ) truncates and inacti - vates ELR + CXC chemokines and generates CCL2 , - 7 , - 8 , and - 13 antago - nists : potential role of the macrophage in terminating polymorphonuclear leukocyte inﬂux . Blood 112 , 3455 – 3464 . Discher , D . E . , Janmey , P . , andWang , Y . L . ( 2005 ) . Tissuecellsfeelandrespond to the stiffness of their substrate . Science 310 , 1139 – 1143 . Doyle , A . D . , Wang , F . W . , Matsumoto , K . , and Yamada , K . M . ( 2009 ) . One - dimensional topography underlies three - dimensional ﬁbrillar cell migration . J . Cell Biol . 184 , 481 – 490 . Dupont , S . , Morsut , L . , Aragona , M . , Enzo , E . , Giulitti , S . , Cordenonsi , M . , Zan - conato , F . , Le Digabel , J . , Forcato , M . , Bicciato , S . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Role of YAP / TAZ in mechanotransduction . Nature 474 , 179 – 183 . Egeblad , M . , Rasch , M . G . , and Weaver , V . M . ( 2010 ) . Dynamic interplay between the collagen scaffold and tumor evolution . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 22 , 697 – 706 . Egeblad , M . , and Werb , Z . ( 2002 ) . New functions for the matrix metalloprotei - nases in cancer progression . Nat . Rev . Cancer 2 , 161 – 174 . El Haibi , C . P . , Sharma , P . K . , Singh , R . , Johnson , P . R . , Suttles , J . , Singh , S . , and Lillard , J . W . , Jr . ( 2010 ) . PI3Kp110 - , Src - , FAK - dependent and DOCK2 - independent migration and invasion of CXCL13 - stimulated prostate cancer cells . Mol . Cancer 9 , 85 . Estecha , A . , Sa´nchez - Martı´n , L . , Puig - Kro¨ger , A . , Bartolome´ , R . A . , Teixido´ , J . , Samaniego , R . , and Sa´nchez - Mateos , P . ( 2009 ) . Moesin orchestrates cortical polarityofmelanomatumourcellstoinitiate3Dinvasion . J . CellSci . 122 , 3492 – 3501 . Eswaramoorthy , R . , Wang , C . K . , Chen , W . C . , Tang , M . J . , Ho , M . L . , Hwang , C . C . , Wang , H . M . , and Wang , C . Z . ( 2010 ) . DDR1 regulates the stabilization of cell surface E - cadherin and E - cadherin - mediated cell aggregation . J . Cell . Physiol . 224 , 387 – 397 . Even - Ram , S . , and Yamada , K . M . ( 2005 ) . Cell migration in 3D matrix . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 17 , 524 – 532 . Ewald , A . J . , Brenot , A . , Duong , M . , Chan , B . S . , and Werb , Z . ( 2008 ) . Collective epithelial migration and cell rearrangements drive mammary branching morphogenesis . Dev . Cell 14 , 570 – 581 . Fackler , O . T . , and Grosse , R . ( 2008 ) . Cell motility through plasma membrane blebbing . J . Cell Biol . 181 , 879 – 884 . Fidler , I . J . ( 2003 ) . The pathogenesis of cancer metastasis : the ‘seed and soil’ hypothesis revisited . Nat . Rev . Cancer 3 , 453 – 458 . Friedl , P . ( 2004 ) . Prespeciﬁcation and plasticity : shifting mechanisms of cell migration . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 , 14 – 23 . Friedl , P . , Borgmann , S . , andBro¨cker , E . B . ( 2001 ) . Amoeboidleukocytecrawl - ing through extracellular matrix : lessons from the Dictyostelium paradigm of cell movement . J . Leukoc . Biol . 70 , 491 – 509 . Cell 147 , November 23 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 1005 Friedl , P . , and Gilmour , D . ( 2009 ) . Collective cell migration in morphogenesis , regeneration and cancer . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 445 – 457 . Friedl , P . , Maaser , K . , Klein , C . E . , Niggemann , B . , Krohne , G . , andZa¨nker , K . S . ( 1997 ) . Migration of highly aggressive MV3 melanoma cells in 3 - dimensional collagen lattices results in local matrix reorganization and shedding of alpha2 and beta1 integrins and CD44 . Cancer Res . 57 , 2061 – 2070 . Friedl , P . , Noble , P . B . , Walton , P . A . , Laird , D . W . , Chauvin , P . J . , Tabah , R . J . , Black , M . , and Za¨nker , K . S . ( 1995 ) . Migration of coordinated cell clusters in mesenchymal and epithelial cancer explants in vitro . Cancer Res . 55 , 4557 – 4560 . Friedl , P . , and Weigelin , B . ( 2008 ) . Interstitial leukocyte migration and immune function . Nat . Immunol . 9 , 960 – 969 . Friedl , P . , and Wolf , K . ( 2003 ) . Tumour - cell invasion and migration : diversity and escape mechanisms . Nat . Rev . Cancer 3 , 362 – 374 . Friedl , P . , and Wolf , K . ( 2008 ) . Tube travel : the role of proteases in individual and collective cancer cell invasion . Cancer Res . 68 , 7247 – 7249 . Friedl , P . , and Wolf , K . ( 2009 ) . Proteolytic interstitial cell migration : a ﬁve - step process . Cancer Metastasis Rev . 28 , 129 – 135 . Friedl , P . , and Wolf , K . ( 2010 ) . Plasticity of cell migration : a multiscale tuning model . J . Cell Biol . 188 , 11 – 19 . Gadea , G . , de Toledo , M . , Anguille , C . , and Roux , P . ( 2007 ) . Loss of p53 promotes RhoA - ROCK - dependent cell migration and invasion in 3D matrices . J . Cell Biol . 178 , 23 – 30 . Gaggioli , C . , Hooper , S . , Hidalgo - Carcedo , C . , Grosse , R . , Marshall , J . F . , Har - rington , K . , and Sahai , E . ( 2007 ) . Fibroblast - led collective invasion of carci - noma cells with differing roles for RhoGTPases in leading and following cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 1392 – 1400 . Gavert , N . , Ben - Shmuel , A . , Lemmon , V . , Brabletz , T . , and Ben - Ze’ev , A . ( 2010 ) . Nuclear factor - kappaB signaling and ezrin are essential for L1 - medi - ated metastasis of colon cancer cells . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 2135 – 2143 . Gavert , N . , Sheffer , M . , Raveh , S . , Spaderna , S . , Shtutman , M . , Brabletz , T . , Barany , F . , Paty , P . , Notterman , D . , Domany , E . , and Ben - Ze’ev , A . ( 2007 ) . Expression of L1 - CAM and ADAM10 in human colon cancer cells induces metastasis . Cancer Res . 67 , 7703 – 7712 . Gavert , N . , Vivanti , A . , Hazin , J . , Brabletz , T . , and Ben - Ze’ev , A . ( 2011 ) . L1 - mediated colon cancer cell metastasis does not require changes in EMT and cancer stem cell markers . Mol . Cancer Res . 9 , 14 – 24 . Geiger , B . , Spatz , J . P . , and Bershadsky , A . D . ( 2009 ) . Environmental sensing through focal adhesions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 21 – 33 . Geisbrecht , E . R . , and Montell , D . J . ( 2002 ) . Myosin VI is required for E - cad - herin - mediated border cell migration . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 616 – 620 . Ge´rard , A . , Mertens , A . E . , vanderKammen , R . A . , andCollard , J . G . ( 2007 ) . The Par polarity complex regulates Rap1 - and chemokine - induced T cell polariza - tion . J . Cell Biol . 176 , 863 – 875 . Giampieri , S . , Manning , C . , Hooper , S . , Jones , L . , Hill , C . S . , and Sahai , E . ( 2009 ) . Localized and reversible TGFbeta signalling switches breast cancer cells from cohesive to single cell motility . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 , 1287 – 1296 . Giese , A . , Bjerkvig , R . , Berens , M . E . , and Westphal , M . ( 2003 ) . Cost of migra - tion : invasion of malignant gliomas and implications for treatment . J . Clin . Oncol . 21 , 1624 – 1636 . Goetz , J . G . , Minguet , S . , Navarro - Le´rida , I . , Lazcano , J . J . , Samaniego , R . , Calvo , E . , Tello , M . , Osteso - Iba´n˜ez , T . , Pellinen , T . , Echarri , A . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Biomechanical remodeling of the microenvironment by stromal caveolin - 1 favors tumor invasion and metastasis . Cell 146 , 148 – 163 . Grashoff , C . , Hoffman , B . D . , Brenner , M . D . , Zhou , R . , Parsons , M . , Yang , M . T . , McLean , M . A . , Sligar , S . G . , Chen , C . S . , Ha , T . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2010 ) . Measuring mechanical tension across vinculin reveals regulation of focal adhesion dynamics . Nature 466 , 263 – 266 . Grytsenko , P . , Ilina , O . , and Friedl , P . ( 2011 ) . Interstitial guidance of cancer invasion . J . Pathol . Published online October 18 , 2011 . 10 . 1002 / path . 3031 . Hanahan , D . , and Weinberg , R . A . ( 2011 ) . Hallmarks of cancer : the next gener - ation . Cell 144 , 646 – 674 . Harris , T . J . , and Tepass , U . ( 2010 ) . Adherens junctions : from molecules to morphogenesis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 502 – 514 . He , K . , Xu , T . , and Goldkorn , A . ( 2011 ) . Cancer cells cyclically lose and regain drug - resistant highly tumorigenic features characteristic of a cancer stem - like phenotype . Mol . Cancer Ther . 10 , 938 – 948 . Hegerfeldt , Y . , Tusch , M . , Bro¨cker , E . B . , and Friedl , P . ( 2002 ) . Collective cell movement in primary melanoma explants : plasticity of cell - cell interaction , beta1 - integrin function , and migration strategies . Cancer Res . 62 , 2125 – 2130 . Hidalgo - Carcedo , C . , Hooper , S . , Chaudhry , S . I . , Williamson , P . , Harrington , K . , Leitinger , B . , and Sahai , E . ( 2011 ) . Collective cell migration requires suppression of actomyosin at cell - cell contacts mediated by DDR1 and the cell polarity regulators Par3 and Par6 . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 , 49 – 58 . Hodivala - Dilke , K . M . , McHugh , K . P . , Tsakiris , D . A . , Rayburn , H . , Crowley , D . , Ullman - Cullere´ , M . , Ross , F . P . , Coller , B . S . , Teitelbaum , S . , and Hynes , R . O . ( 1999 ) . Beta3 - integrin - deﬁcient mice are a model for Glanzmann thrombas - thenia showing placental defects and reduced survival . J . Clin . Invest . 103 , 229 – 238 . Honeth , G . , Bendahl , P . O . , Ringne´r , M . , Saal , L . H . , Gruvberger - Saal , S . K . , Lo¨vgren , K . , Grabau , D . , Ferno¨ , M . , Borg , A . , and Hegardt , C . ( 2008 ) . The CD44 + / CD24 - phenotype is enriched in basal - like breast tumors . Breast Cancer Res . 10 , R53 . Hou , J . M . , Krebs , M . , Ward , T . , Sloane , R . , Priest , L . , Hughes , A . , Clack , G . , Ranson , M . , Blackhall , F . , and Dive , C . ( 2011 ) . Circulating tumor cells as a window on metastasis biology in lung cancer . Am . J . Pathol . 178 , 989 – 996 . Hung , S . C . , Wu , I . H . , Hsue , S . S . , Liao , C . H . , Wang , H . C . , Chuang , P . H . , Sung , S . Y . , and Hsieh , C . L . ( 2010 ) . Targeting L1 cell adhesion molecule using lenti - virus - mediated short hairpin RNA interference reverses aggressiveness of oral squamous cell carcinoma . Mol . Pharm . 7 , 2312 – 2323 . Hynes , R . O . ( 2002 ) . Integrins : bidirectional , allosteric signaling machines . Cell 110 , 673 – 687 . Hynes , R . O . ( 2009 ) . Theextracellularmatrix : notjustprettyﬁbrils . Science 326 , 1216 – 1219 . Iguchi , T . , Aishima , S . , Taketomi , A . , Nishihara , Y . , Fujita , N . , Sanefuji , K . , Mae - hara , Y . , and Tsuneyoshi , M . ( 2008 ) . Extracapsular penetration is a new prog - nostic factor in human hepatocellular carcinoma . Am . J . Surg . Pathol . 32 , 1675 – 1682 . Ilina , O . , Bakker , G . J . , Vasaturo , A . , Hofmann , R . M . , andFriedl , P . ( 2011 ) . Two - photon laser - generated microtracks in 3D collagen lattices : principles of MMP - dependent and - independent collective cancer cell invasion . Phys . Biol . 8 , 015010 . Ilina , O . , and Friedl , P . ( 2009 ) . Mechanisms of collective cell migration at a glance . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 3203 – 3208 . Ishizaki , M . , Ashida , K . , Higashi , T . , Nakatsukasa , H . , Kaneyoshi , T . , Fujiwara , K . , Nouso , K . , Kobayashi , Y . , Uemura , M . , Nakamura , S . , and Tsuji , T . ( 2001 ) . The formation of capsule and septum in human hepatocellular carcinoma . Virchows Arch . 438 , 574 – 580 . Kardash , E . , Reichman - Fried , M . , Maitre , J . L . , Boldajipour , B . , Papusheva , E . , Messerschmidt , E . M . , Heisenberg , C . P . , and Raz , E . ( 2010 ) . A role for Rho GTPases and cell - cell adhesion in single - cell motility in vivo . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 47 – 53 . Kedrin , D . , Gligorijevic , B . , Wyckoff , J . , Verkhusha , V . V . , Condeelis , J . , Segall , J . E . , and van Rheenen , J . ( 2008 ) . Intravital imaging of metastatic behavior through a mammary imaging window . Nat . Methods 5 , 1019 – 1021 . Kenny , H . A . , Kaur , S . , Coussens , L . M . , and Lengyel , E . ( 2008 ) . The initial steps of ovarian cancer cell metastasis are mediated by MMP - 2 cleavage of vitro - nectin and ﬁbronectin . J . Clin . Invest . 118 , 1367 – 1379 . Khalil , A . A . , and Friedl , P . ( 2010 ) . Determinants of leader cells in collective cell migration . Integr . Biol . ( Camb ) 2 , 568 – 574 . Kiefel , H . , Pfeifer , M . , Bondong , S . , Hazin , J . , and Altevogt , P . ( 2011 ) . Linking L1CAM - mediated signaling to NF - k B activation . Trends Mol . Med . 17 , 178 – 187 . 1006 Cell 147 , November 23 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . Kienast , Y . , von Baumgarten , L . , Fuhrmann , M . , Klinkert , W . E . , Goldbrunner , R . , Herms , J . , and Winkler , F . ( 2010 ) . Real - time imaging reveals the single steps of brain metastasis formation . Nat . Med . 16 , 116 – 122 . Kitt , K . N . , and Nelson , W . J . ( 2011 ) . Rapid suppression of activated Rac1 by cadherinsandnectinsduringdenovocell - celladhesion . PLoSONE 6 , e17841 . Kulesa , P . M . , and Gammill , L . S . ( 2010 ) . Neural crest migration : patterns , phases and signals . Dev . Biol . 344 , 566 – 568 . La¨mmermann , T . , Bader , B . L . , Monkley , S . J . , Worbs , T . , Wedlich - So¨ldner , R . , Hirsch , K . , Keller , M . , Fo¨rster , R . , Critchley , D . R . , Fa¨ssler , R . , and Sixt , M . ( 2008 ) . Rapid leukocyte migration by integrin - independent ﬂowing and squeezing . Nature 453 , 51 – 55 . La¨mmermann , T . , and Sixt , M . ( 2009 ) . Mechanical modes of ‘amoeboid’ cell migration . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 21 , 636 – 644 . Lauffenburger , D . A . , and Horwitz , A . F . ( 1996 ) . Cell migration : a physically inte - grated molecular process . Cell 84 , 359 – 369 . Lee , H . S . , Lim , C . J . , Puzon - McLaughlin , W . , Shattil , S . J . , and Ginsberg , M . H . ( 2009 ) . RIAM activates integrins by linking talin to ras GTPase membrane - tar - geting sequences . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 5119 – 5127 . Levental , K . R . , Yu , H . , Kass , L . , Lakins , J . N . , Egeblad , M . , Erler , J . T . , Fong , S . F . , Csiszar , K . , Giaccia , A . , Weninger , W . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Matrix crosslinking forces tumor progression by enhancing integrin signaling . Cell 139 , 891 – 906 . Li , Z . , Zhou , Z . , andDonahue , H . J . ( 2008 ) . AlterationsinCx43andOB - cadherin affect breast cancer cell metastatic potential . Clin . Exp . Metastasis 25 , 265 – 272 . Lo , C . M . , Wang , H . B . , Dembo , M . , and Wang , Y . L . ( 2000 ) . Cell movement is guided by the rigidity of the substrate . Biophys . J . 79 , 144 – 152 . Lopes , F . F . , da Costa Miguel , M . C . , Pereira , A . L . , da Cruz , M . C . , de Almeida Freitas , R . , Pinto , L . P . , and de Souza , L . B . ( 2009 ) . Changes in immunoexpres - sion of E - cadherin and beta - catenin in oral squamous cell carcinoma with and without nodal metastasis . Ann . Diagn . Pathol . 13 , 22 – 29 . Lorentzen , A . , Bamber , J . , Sadok , A . , Elson - Schwab , I . , and Marshall , C . J . ( 2011 ) . An ezrin - rich , rigid uropod - like structure directs movement of amoe - boid blebbing cells . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 1256 – 1267 . Lortat - Jacob , H . , Grosdidier , A . , and Imberty , A . ( 2002 ) . Structural diversity of heparan sulfate binding domains in chemokines . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 1229 – 1234 . Lyons , T . R . , O’Brien , J . , Borges , V . F . , Conklin , M . W . , Keely , P . J . , Eliceiri , K . W . , Marusyk , A . , Tan , A . C . , and Schedin , P . ( 2011 ) . Postpartum mammary gland involution drives progression of ductal carcinoma in situ through collagen and COX - 2 . Nat . Med . 17 , 1109 – 1115 . Maaser , K . , Wolf , K . , Klein , C . E . , Niggemann , B . , Za¨nker , K . S . , Bro¨cker , E . B . , and Friedl , P . ( 1999 ) . Functional hierarchy of simultaneously expressed adhe - sion receptors : integrin alpha2beta1 but not CD44 mediates MV3 melanoma cell migration and matrix reorganization within three - dimensional hyalur - onan - containing collagen matrices . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 3067 – 3079 . Madsen , C . D . , and Sahai , E . ( 2010 ) . Cancer dissemination – lessons from leukocytes . Dev . Cell 19 , 13 – 26 . Makarenkova , H . P . , Hoffman , M . P . , Beenken , A . , Eliseenkova , A . V . , Meech , R . , Tsau , C . , Patel , V . N . , Lang , R . A . , and Mohammadi , M . ( 2009 ) . Differential interactions of FGFs with heparan sulfate control gradient formation and branching morphogenesis . Sci . Signal . 2 , ra55 . Maness , P . F . , and Schachner , M . ( 2007 ) . Neural recognition molecules of the immunoglobulin superfamily : signaling transducers of axon guidance and neuronal migration . Nat . Neurosci . 10 , 19 – 26 . Mani , S . A . , Guo , W . , Liao , M . J . , Eaton , E . N . , Ayyanan , A . , Zhou , A . Y . , Brooks , M . , Reinhard , F . , Zhang , C . C . , Shipitsin , M . , etal . ( 2008 ) . Theepithelial - mesen - chymal transition generates cells with properties of stem cells . Cell 133 , 704 – 715 . Martinez - Rico , C . , Pincet , F . , Thiery , J . P . , andDufour , S . ( 2010 ) . Integrinsstim - ulate E - cadherin - mediated intercellular adhesion by regulating Src - kinase activation and actomyosin contractility . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 712 – 722 . Martı´n - Villar , E . , Megı´as , D . , Castel , S . , Yurrita , M . M . , Vilaro´ , S . , and Quinta - nilla , M . ( 2006 ) . PodoplaninbindsERM proteins to activate RhoA and promote epithelial - mesenchymal transition . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 4541 – 4553 . Mason , S . D . , and Joyce , J . A . ( 2011 ) . Proteolytic networks in cancer . Trends Cell Biol . 21 , 228 – 237 . Massague´ , J . ( 2008 ) . TGFbeta in Cancer . Cell 134 , 215 – 230 . McAllister , S . S . , Gifford , A . M . , Greiner , A . L . , Kelleher , S . P . , Saelzler , M . P . , Ince , T . A . , Reinhardt , F . , Harris , L . N . , Hylander , B . L . , Repasky , E . A . , andWein - berg , R . A . ( 2008 ) . Systemic endocrine instigation of indolent tumor growth requires osteopontin . Cell 133 , 994 – 1005 . Mertens , A . E . , Rygiel , T . P . , Olivo , C . , van der Kammen , R . , and Collard , J . G . ( 2005 ) . The Rac activator Tiam1 controls tight junction biogenesis in keratino - cytesthroughbindingtoandactivationoftheParpolaritycomplex . J . CellBiol . 170 , 1029 – 1037 . Mu , D . , Cambier , S . , Fjellbirkeland , L . , Baron , J . L . , Munger , J . S . , Kawakatsu , H . , Sheppard , D . , Broaddus , V . C . , and Nishimura , S . L . ( 2002 ) . The integrin alpha ( v ) beta8 mediates epithelialhomeostasis through MT1 - MMP - dependent activation of TGF - beta1 . J . Cell Biol . 157 , 493 – 507 . Muller , P . A . , Caswell , P . T . , Doyle , B . , Iwanicki , M . P . , Tan , E . H . , Karim , S . , Lu - kashchuk , N . , Gillespie , D . A . , Ludwig , R . L . , Gosselin , P . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Mutant p53 drives invasion by promoting integrin recycling . Cell 139 , 1327 – 1341 . Nannuru , K . C . , Futakuchi , M . , Varney , M . L . , Vincent , T . M . , Marcusson , E . G . , and Singh , R . K . ( 2010 ) . Matrix metalloproteinase ( MMP ) - 13 regulates mammary tumor - induced osteolysis by activating MMP9 and transforming growth factor - beta signaling at the tumor - bone interface . Cancer Res . 70 , 3494 – 3504 . Nannuru , K . C . , and Singh , R . K . ( 2010 ) . Tumor - stromal interactions in bone metastasis . Curr . Osteoporos . Rep . 8 , 105 – 113 . Nelson , C . M . , Khauv , D . , Bissell , M . J . , and Radisky , D . C . ( 2008 ) . Change in cell shape is required for matrix metalloproteinase - induced epithelial - mesenchymal transition of mammary epithelial cells . J . Cell . Biochem . 105 , 25 – 33 . Netelenbos , T . , Zuijderduijn , S . , VanDenBorn , J . , Kessler , F . L . , Zweegman , S . , Huijgens , P . C . , and Dra¨ger , A . M . ( 2002 ) . Proteoglycans guide SDF - 1 - induced migration of hematopoietic progenitor cells . J . Leukoc . Biol . 72 , 353 – 362 . Neuhaus , B . , Bu¨hren , S . , Bo¨ck , B . , Alves , F . , Vogel , W . F . , and Kiefer , F . ( 2011 ) . Migration inhibition of mammary epithelial cells by Syk is blocked in the pres - ence of DDR1 receptors . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 68 , 3757 – 3770 . Nimnual , A . S . , Taylor , L . J . , and Bar - Sagi , D . ( 2003 ) . Redox - dependent down - regulation of Rho by Rac . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 236 – 241 . Orimo , A . , Gupta , P . B . , Sgroi , D . C . , Arenzana - Seisdedos , F . , Delaunay , T . , Naeem , R . , Carey , V . J . , Richardson , A . L . , and Weinberg , R . A . ( 2005 ) . Stromal ﬁbroblasts present in invasive human breast carcinomas promote tumor growth and angiogenesis through elevated SDF - 1 / CXCL12 secretion . Cell 121 , 335 – 348 . Overall , C . M . , and Blobel , C . P . ( 2007 ) . In search of partners : linking extracel - lular proteases to substrates . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 245 – 257 . Padua , D . , andMassague´ , J . ( 2009 ) . Rolesof TGFbeta inmetastasis . CellRes . 19 , 89 – 102 . Pa ` ez - Ribes , M . , Allen , E . , Hudock , J . , Takeda , T . , Okuyama , H . , Vin˜als , F . , Inoue , M . , Bergers , G . , Hanahan , D . , and Casanovas , O . ( 2009 ) . Antiangio - genic therapy elicits malignant progression of tumors to increased local inva - sion and distant metastasis . Cancer Cell 15 , 220 – 231 . Paluch , E . , Sykes , C . , Prost , J . , andBornens , M . ( 2006 ) . Dynamicmodesofthe cortical actomyosin gel during cell locomotion and division . Trends Cell Biol . 16 , 5 – 10 . Parri , M . , Taddei , M . L . , Bianchini , F . , Calorini , L . , and Chiarugi , P . ( 2009 ) . EphA2reexpressionprompts invasionofmelanomacells shifting from mesen - chymal to amoeboid - like motility style . Cancer Res . 69 , 2072 – 2081 . Paszek , M . J . , Zahir , N . , Johnson , K . R . , Lakins , J . N . , Rozenberg , G . I . , Gefen , A . , Reinhart - King , C . A . , Margulies , S . S . , Dembo , M . , Boettiger , D . , et al . Cell 147 , November 23 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 1007 ( 2005 ) . Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell 8 , 241 – 254 . Pennacchietti , S . , Michieli , P . , Galluzzo , M . , Mazzone , M . , Giordano , S . , and Comoglio , P . M . ( 2003 ) . Hypoxia promotes invasive growth by transcriptional activation of the met protooncogene . Cancer Cell 3 , 347 – 361 . Pittet , M . J . , and Weissleder , R . ( 2011 ) . Intravital imaging . Cell 147 , this issue , 983 – 991 . Piao , Y . , Lu , L . , and deGroot , J . ( 2009 ) . AMPAreceptors promote perivascular glioma invasion via beta1 integrin - dependent adhesion to the extracellular matrix . Neuro - oncol . 11 , 260 – 273 . Picchio , M . , Beck , R . , Haubner , R . , Seidl , S . , Machulla , H . J . , Johnson , T . D . , Wester , H . J . , Reischl , G . , Schwaiger , M . , and Piert , M . ( 2008 ) . Intratumoral spatial distribution of hypoxia and angiogenesis assessed by 18F - FAZA and 125I - Gluco - RGD autoradiography . J . Nucl . Med . 49 , 597 – 605 . Poincloux , R . , Collin , O . , Liza´rraga , F . , Romao , M . , Debray , M . , Piel , M . , and Chavrier , P . ( 2011 ) . Contractility of the cell rear drives invasion of breast tumor cells in 3D Matrigel . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 1943 – 1948 . Polyak , K . , Haviv , I . , andCampbell , I . G . ( 2009 ) . Co - evolutionoftumorcellsand their microenvironment . Trends Genet . 25 , 30 – 38 . Radisky , D . C . , Levy , D . D . , Littlepage , L . E . , Liu , H . , Nelson , C . M . , Fata , J . E . , Leake , D . , Godden , E . L . , Albertson , D . G . , Nieto , M . A . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Rac1b and reactive oxygen species mediate MMP - 3 - induced EMT and genomic instability . Nature 436 , 123 – 127 . Reynolds , A . B . ( 2010 ) . Exposing p120 catenin’s most intimate affair . Cell 141 , 20 – 22 . Ridley , A . J . , Schwartz , M . A . , Burridge , K . , Firtel , R . A . , Ginsberg , M . H . , Borisy , G . , Parsons , J . T . , and Horwitz , A . R . ( 2003 ) . Cell migration : integrating signals from front to back . Science 302 , 1704 – 1709 . Rizki , A . , Weaver , V . M . , Lee , S . Y . , Rozenberg , G . I . , Chin , K . , Myers , C . A . , Bas - com , J . L . , Mott , J . D . , Semeiks , J . R . , Grate , L . R . , et al . ( 2008 ) . A human breast cell model of preinvasive to invasive transition . Cancer Res . 68 , 1378 – 1387 . Roussos , E . T . , Condeelis , J . S . , andPatsialou , A . ( 2011 ) . Chemotaxisincancer . Nat . Rev . Cancer 11 , 573 – 587 . Ruiz , P . A . , and Jarai , G . ( 2011 ) . Collagen I induces discoidin domain receptor ( DDR ) 1 expression through DDR2 and a JAK2 - ERK1 / 2 - mediated mechanism in primary human lung ﬁbroblasts . J . Biol . Chem . 286 , 12912 – 12923 . Ryschich , E . , Khamidjanov , A . , Kerkadze , V . , Bu¨chler , M . W . , Zo¨ller , M . , and Schmidt , J . ( 2009 ) . Promotion of tumor cell migration by extracellular matrix proteins in human pancreatic cancer . Pancreas 38 , 804 – 810 . Sabeh , F . , Li , X . Y . , Saunders , T . L . , Rowe , R . G . , and Weiss , S . J . ( 2009 ) . Secreted versus membrane - anchored collagenases : relative roles in ﬁbro - blast - dependent collagenolysis and invasion . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 23001 – 23011 . Sabeh , F . , Ota , I . , Holmbeck , K . , Birkedal - Hansen , H . , Soloway , P . , Balbin , M . , Lopez - Otin , C . , Shapiro , S . , Inada , M . , Krane , S . , etal . ( 2004 ) . Tumorcelltrafﬁc through the extracellular matrix is controlled by the membrane - anchored collagenase MT1 - MMP . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 769 – 781 . Sahai , E . ( 2007 ) . Illuminating the metastatic process . Nat . Rev . Cancer 7 , 737 – 749 . Sahai , E . , and Marshall , C . J . ( 2003 ) . Differing modes of tumour cell invasion have distinct requirements for Rho / ROCK signalling and extracellular proteol - ysis . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 711 – 719 . Sansing , H . A . , Sarkeshik , A . , Yates , J . R . , Patel , V . , Gutkind , J . S . , Yamada , K . M . , and Berrier , A . L . ( 2011 ) . Integrin ab 1 , a v b , a 6 b effectors p130Cas , Src and talin regulate carcinoma invasion and chemoresistance . Biochem . Bio - phys . Res . Commun . 406 , 171 – 176 . Sanz - Moreno , V . , Gadea , G . , Ahn , J . , Paterson , H . , Marra , P . , Pinner , S . , Sahai , E . , and Marshall , C . J . ( 2008 ) . Rac activation and inactivation control plasticity of tumor cell movement . Cell 135 , 510 – 523 . Sanz - Moreno , V . , and Marshall , C . J . ( 2010 ) . The plasticity of cytoskeletal dynamics underlying neoplastic cell migration . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 22 , 690 – 696 . Sawada , Y . , Tamada , M . , Dubin - Thaler , B . J . , Cherniavskaya , O . , Sakai , R . , Ta - naka , S . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2006 ) . Force sensing by mechanical extension of the Src family kinase substrate p130Cas . Cell 127 , 1015 – 1026 . Schedin , P . , and Keely , P . J . ( 2011 ) . Mammary gland ECM remodeling , stiff - ness , and mechanosignaling in normal development and tumor progression . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 , a003228 . Schlegelmilch , K . , Mohseni , M . , Kirak , O . , Pruszak , J . , Rodriguez , J . R . , Zhou , D . , Kreger , B . T . , Vasioukhin , V . , Avruch , J . , Brummelkamp , T . R . , and Ca - margo , F . D . ( 2011 ) . Yap1 acts downstream of a - catenin to control epidermal proliferation . Cell 144 , 782 – 795 . Shapiro , I . M . , Cheng , A . W . , Flytzanis , N . C . , Balsamo , M . , Condeelis , J . S . , Ok - tay , M . H . , Burge , C . B . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2011 ) . An EMT - driven alternative splicing program occurs in human breast cancer and modulates cellular phenotype . PLoS Genet . 7 , e1002218 . Sheetz , M . P . , Felsenfeld , D . , Galbraith , C . G . , and Choquet , D . ( 1999 ) . Cell migration as a ﬁve - step cycle . Biochem . Soc . Symp . 65 , 233 – 243 . Shiao , S . L . , and Coussens , L . M . ( 2010 ) . Thetumor - immunemicroenvironment and response to radiation therapy . J . Mammary Gland Biol . Neoplasia 15 , 411 – 421 . Shintani , Y . , Fukumoto , Y . , Chaika , N . , Svoboda , R . , Wheelock , M . J . , and Johnson , K . R . ( 2008 ) . Collagen I - mediated up - regulation of N - cadherin requires cooperative signals from integrins and discoidin domain receptor 1 . J . Cell Biol . 180 , 1277 – 1289 . Shtutman , M . , Levina , E . , Ohouo , P . , Baig , M . , and Roninson , I . B . ( 2006 ) . Cell adhesion molecule L1 disrupts E - cadherin - containing adherens junctions and increasesscatteringandmotilityofMCF7breastcarcinomacells . CancerRes . 66 , 11370 – 11380 . Sounni , N . E . , Dehne , K . , van Kempen , L . , Egeblad , M . , Affara , N . I . , Cuevas , I . , Wiesen , J . , Junankar , S . , Korets , L . , Lee , J . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Stromal regulation of vessel stability by MMP14 and TGFbeta . Dis . Model . Mech . 3 , 317 – 332 . Spaderna , S . , Schmalhofer , O . , Hlubek , F . , Berx , G . , Eger , A . , Merkel , S . , Jung , A . , Kirchner , T . , and Brabletz , T . ( 2006 ) . A transient , EMT - linked loss of base - ment membranes indicates metastasis and poor survival in colorectal cancer . Gastroenterology 131 , 830 – 840 . Spaderna , S . , Schmalhofer , O . , Wahlbuhl , M . , Dimmler , A . , Bauer , K . , Sultan , A . , Hlubek , F . , Jung , A . , Strand , D . , Eger , A . , et al . ( 2008 ) . The transcriptional repressor ZEB1 promotes metastasis and loss of cell polarity in cancer . Cancer Res . 68 , 537 – 544 . Stoecklein , N . H . , Hosch , S . B . , Bezler , M . , Stern , F . , Hartmann , C . H . , Vay , C . , Siegmund , A . , Scheunemann , P . , Schurr , P . , Knoefel , W . T . , etal . ( 2008 ) . Direct genetic analysis of single disseminated cancer cells for prediction of outcome and therapy selection in esophageal cancer . Cancer Cell 13 , 441 – 453 . Stoletov , K . , Kato , H . , Zardouzian , E . , Kelber , J . , Yang , J . , Shattil , S . , and Klemke , R . ( 2010 ) . Visualizing extravasation dynamics of metastatic tumor cells . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 2332 – 2341 . Tambe , D . T . , Hardin , C . C . , Angelini , T . E . , Rajendran , K . , Park , C . Y . , Serra - Pic - amal , X . , Zhou , E . H . , Zaman , M . H . , Butler , J . P . , Weitz , D . A . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Collective cell guidance by cooperative intercellular forces . Nat . Mater . 10 , 469 – 475 . Theocharis , A . D . , Skandalis , S . S . , Tzanakakis , G . N . , and Karamanos , N . K . ( 2010 ) . Proteoglycans in health and disease : novel roles for proteoglycans in malignancy and their pharmacological targeting . FEBS J . 277 , 3904 – 3923 . Thiery , J . P . , Acloque , H . , Huang , R . Y . , and Nieto , M . A . ( 2009 ) . Epithelial - mesenchymal transitions in development and disease . Cell 139 , 871 – 890 . Trusolino , L . , Bertotti , A . , and Comoglio , P . M . ( 2010 ) . MET signalling : princi - ples and functions in development , organ regeneration and cancer . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 834 – 848 . Tsuji , K . , Yamauchi , K . , Yang , M . , Jiang , P . , Bouvet , M . , Endo , H . , Kanai , Y . , Yamashita , K . , Moossa , A . R . , and Hoffman , R . M . ( 2006 ) . Dual - color imaging of nuclear - cytoplasmic dynamics , viability , and proliferation of cancer cells in the portal vein area . Cancer Res . 66 , 303 – 306 . Tybulewicz , V . L . , and Henderson , R . B . ( 2009 ) . Rho family GTPases and their regulators in lymphocytes . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 9 , 630 – 644 . 1008 Cell 147 , November 23 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . van den Brand , M . , Takes , R . P . , Blokpoel - deRuyter , M . , Slootweg , P . J . , and van Kempen , L . C . ( 2010 ) . Activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule expres - sion predicts lymph node metastasis in oral squamous cell carcinoma . Oral Oncol . 46 , 393 – 398 . Vogel , W . F . , Abdulhussein , R . , and Ford , C . E . ( 2006 ) . Sensing extracellular matrix : an update on discoidin domain receptor function . Cell . Signal . 18 , 1108 – 1116 . Walch , A . , Seidl , S . , Hermannsta¨dter , C . , Rauser , S . , Deplazes , J . , Langer , R . , von Weyhern , C . H . , Sarbia , M . , Busch , R . , Feith , M . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Combined analysisofRac1 , IQGAP1 , Tiam1andE - cadherinexpressioningastriccancer . Mod . Pathol . 21 , 544 – 552 . Wang , W . , Goswami , S . , Lapidus , K . , Wells , A . L . , Wyckoff , J . B . , Sahai , E . , Singer , R . H . , Segall , J . E . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2004 ) . Identiﬁcation and testing of a gene expression signature of invasive carcinoma cells within primary mammary tumors . Cancer Res . 64 , 8585 – 8594 . Wang , X . , Zhang , J . , Fan , M . , Zhou , Q . , Deng , H . , Aisharif , M . J . , and Chen , X . ( 2009 ) . The expression of E - cadherin at the invasive tumor front of oral squa - mous cell carcinoma : immunohistochemical and RT - PCR analysis with clini - copathological correlation . Oral Surg . Oral Med . Oral Pathol . Oral Radiol . Endod . 107 , 547 – 554 . Wicki , A . , Lehembre , F . , Wick , N . , Hantusch , B . , Kerjaschki , D . , andChristofori , G . ( 2006 ) . Tumorinvasionintheabsenceofepithelial - mesenchymaltransition : podoplanin - mediated remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton . Cancer Cell 9 , 261 – 272 . Wipff , P . J . , Rifkin , D . B . , Meister , J . J . , and Hinz , B . ( 2007 ) . Myoﬁbroblast contraction activates latent TGF - beta1 from the extracellular matrix . J . Cell Biol . 179 , 1311 – 1323 . Wolf , K . , Alexander , S . , Schacht , V . , Coussens , L . M . , von Andrian , U . H . , van Rheenen , J . , Deryugina , E . , and Friedl , P . ( 2009 ) . Collagen - based cell migra - tion models in vitro and in vivo . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 20 , 931 – 941 . Wolf , K . , and Friedl , P . ( 2011 ) . Extracellular matrix determinants of proteolytic and non - proteolytic cell migration . Trends Cell Biol . Published online October 27 , 2011 . in press . 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2011 . 09 . 006 . Wolf , K . , Mazo , I . , Leung , H . , Engelke , K . , von Andrian , U . H . , Deryugina , E . I . , Strongin , A . Y . , Bro¨cker , E . B . , and Friedl , P . ( 2003a ) . Compensation mecha - nism in tumor cell migration : mesenchymal - amoeboid transition afterblocking of pericellular proteolysis . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 267 – 277 . Wolf , K . , Mu¨ller , R . , Borgmann , S . , Bro¨cker , E . B . , andFriedl , P . ( 2003b ) . Amoe - boid shape change and contact guidance : T - lymphocyte crawling through ﬁbrillar collagen is independent of matrix remodeling by MMPs and other proteases . Blood 102 , 3262 – 3269 . Wolf , K . , Wu , Y . I . , Liu , Y . , Geiger , J . , Tam , E . , Overall , C . , Stack , M . S . , and Friedl , P . ( 2007 ) . Multi - step pericellular proteolysis controls the transition from individual to collective cancer cell invasion . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 893 – 904 . Wyckoff , J . , Wang , W . , Lin , E . Y . , Wang , Y . , Pixley , F . , Stanley , E . R . , Graf , T . , Pollard , J . W . , Segall , J . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2004 ) . A paracrine loop between tumor cells and macrophages is required for tumor cell migration in mammary tumors . Cancer Res . 64 , 7022 – 7029 . Xu , R . , Boudreau , A . , andBissell , M . J . ( 2009 ) . Tissuearchitectureandfunction : dynamic reciprocity via extra - and intra - cellular matrices . Cancer Metastasis Rev . 28 , 167 – 176 . Yang , J . , Mani , S . A . , Donaher , J . L . , Ramaswamy , S . , Itzykson , R . A . , Come , C . , Savagner , P . , Gitelman , I . , Richardson , A . , and Weinberg , R . A . ( 2004 ) . Twist , a master regulator of morphogenesis , plays an essential role in tumor metas - tasis . Cell 117 , 927 – 939 . Yano , H . , Mazaki , Y . , Kurokawa , K . , Hanks , S . K . , Matsuda , M . , and Sabe , H . ( 2004 ) . Roles played by a subset of integrin signaling molecules in cadherin - based cell - cell adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 166 , 283 – 295 . Yao , H . , Zeng , Z . Z . , Fay , K . S . , Veine , D . M . , Staszewski , E . D . , Morgan , M . , Wilder - Romans , K . , Williams , T . M . , Spalding , A . C . , Ben - Josef , E . , and Livant , D . L . ( 2011 ) . Role of a ( 5 ) b ( 1 ) Integrin Up - regulation in Radiation - Induced Inva - sion by Human Pancreatic Cancer Cells . Transl . Oncol . 4 , 282 – 292 . Zaidel - Bar , R . , Itzkovitz , S . , Ma’ayan , A . , Iyengar , R . , and Geiger , B . ( 2007 ) . Functional atlas of the integrin adhesome . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 858 – 867 . Zecchini , S . , Bombardelli , L . , Decio , A . , Bianchi , M . , Mazzarol , G . , Sanguineti , F . , Aletti , G . , Maddaluno , L . , Berezin , V . , Bock , E . , et al . ( 2011 ) . The adhesion molecule NCAM promotes ovarian cancer progression via FGFR signalling . EMBO Mol . Med . 3 , 480 – 494 . Zlotnik , A . , Burkhardt , A . M . , and Homey , B . ( 2011 ) . Homeostatic chemokine receptors and organ - speciﬁc metastasis . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 11 , 597 – 606 . Zo¨ller , M . ( 2011 ) . CD44 : can a cancer - initiating cell proﬁt from an abundantly expressed molecule ? Nat . Rev . Cancer 11 , 254 – 267 . Cell 147 , November 23 , 2011 ª 2011 Elsevier Inc . 1009