The Work to Make a Network Work : Studying CSCW in Action John Bowers Department of Psychology University of Manchester lvlanchester U . K . E - mail : bowers @ hera . psy . man . ac . uk Rank Xerox Research Centre Cambridge EuroPARC 61 , Regent Street Cambridge U . K . Email : bowers @ europarc . xerox . com ABSTRACT This paper reports on a field study of the procurement , implementation and use of a local area network devoted to running CSCW - related applications in an organization within the U . K . ’S central government . In this particular case , the network ran into a number of difficulties , was resisted by its potential users for a variety of reasons , was faced with being withdrawn from service on a number of occasions and ( at the time of writing ) remains only partly used . The study points to the kinds of problems that a project to introduce computer support for cooperative work to an actual organization is likely to face and a series of concepts me offered to help manage the complexity of these problems . In so doing , this paper adds to and extends previous studies of CSCW tools in action but also argues that experience from the field should be used to re - organise the research agenda of CSCW . INTRODUCTION It is now eight years since the first conference explicitly devoted to Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’86 , Austin , Texas , USA ) . In the interim , we have seen the maturing of a number of the applications described in developmental form at that conference and their commercial release . This has prompted some evaluation studies examining the use of CSCW - related or CSCW - inspired tools . However , while there are many studies of electronic mail usage , investigations into more sophisticated CSCW or ‘groupware’ tools remain few in number . Furthermore , those which attempt to study CSCW applications in action in actual work settings rather than in the laboratory are even Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantaqe , the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and Its date appear , and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association of Computing Machinery . To copy otherwise , or to republish , requires a fee ancflor specific permission . CSCW 94 - 10 / 94 Chapel Hill , NC , USA @ 1994 ACM 0 - 89791 - 689 - 1 / 94 / 0010 . . $ 3 . 50 rarer . Those that do exist [ e . g . 9 , 12 , 14 , 20 , 21 ] give the impression that CSCW tools , though promising great gains , can run into a series of severe problems in their situations of use . As the momentum of both CSCW research and commercial exploitation is undiminished , these findings may cause some concern . For example , in a well - known paper , Gmdin [ 12 ] tells of an electronic meeting scheduler which can automatically find free slots in the diaries of individuals within a group and inform those involved of meetings at those times . The problem with such an application is that each individual in the group in question would have to keep a personal diary for the meeting scheduler to work at all and have to maintain it in an accurate and up - to - date condition for the scheduler to be useful . Grudin argues that , while a manager might see the utility of such an application in alleviating the burden of trying to find time when everyone is free , those who are managed have to do extra work in keeping diaries they might not otherwise bother with . The discrepancy between who gets the benefit and who does the ( extra ) work is one of Grudin’s three problems which can lead to ‘groupware failun + . Orlikowski [ 21 ] reports a field study of the introduction of Lotus NotesTM 1 to an organization she calls ‘Corporation Alpha’ . The manner of the implementation of Notes , Orlikowski suggests , militated against users developing an appropriate understanding of the collaborative aspects of Notes . In the absence of such a ‘mental model’ , Notes was assimilated to more familiar personal applications . This led to the usage of Notes being resisted and inadequately integrated into members’ working practices , as well as to some skepticism about Notes’ abilities . Furthermore , the reward systems , policies and procedures , culture and ‘work norms’ at large in Corporation Alpha made it dit % cult for members to see the worth of Notes in their work or how its 1Trade marks are acknowledged per product on their first appearance in the text and not noted thereafter . 287 use would be accounted for or how the time spent on the system would be charged . The impression one gets from Orlikowski’s study is that a technology which is inconsistent with the form of an organization is likely to be rejected . Harper [ 14 ] continues this theme of organizational form influencing the acceptability of technology . In a comparison of the use of ‘active badges’ in two research laboratories , Harper argues that their use and acceptance varies subtly both between the two organizations and within an organization in relation to the roles and responsibilities associated with different jobs . Orlikowski’s and Harper’s work has implication for how we should see the organization / technology relation . They both argue that the extent to which a technology will be accepted is closely tied to the form and nature of the organization it is implemented in . On the other hand , organizations are depicted explicitly in Harper’s account ( and by implication in Orlikowski’s ) as resistant to change - in particular change provoked by the introduction of new technologies . These and related ‘technological failures’ ( if they are taken to be such ) have provoked a number of responses . Some researchers have criticised the manner in which computer based tools are typically developed and imposed on users and have tried to re - orient the relations between designers and situations of use . This kind of critique and response is commonplace amongst those who advocate ‘participatory design’ . For example , B @ ker and Gr @ nbak [ 5 ] argue for the rapid , cooperative prototyping of tools developed in close collaboration with actual end users and evaluated in a work - Iike situation of use . Other researchers have argued that ethnographic study and related methods drawn from a sociological and anthropological tradition can help give researchers an in - depth knowledge of the work practices into which a new application may be inserted . While there now exist examples of ethnographers and computer scientists in long standing collaborations [ 2 ] , the precise way in which knowledge of a field site can be introduced to system development remains controversial [ 15 , 16 ] . Yet other researchers point to the relative immaturity of CSCW as a research field and reassure themselves that “it is early days yet” . This paper seeks to add to this literature on the examination of CSCW - related tools in action . However , the approach taken here and the kind of field site studied differ from the work of , for example , Harper and Orlikowski . One particularly interesting feature of the current study is that many of the users we shall encounter were very familiar with the aims , findings and nature of CSCW research . Indeed , the network was introduced specifically and reflexively to study CSCW technologies and the relevance of CSCW research to the users’ own organization . In sociological terms , ‘CSCW’ was itself a ‘member - category’ for many of the people studied : they talked about what was and was not CSCW , and what were the interesting recent developments in the field . This degree of acquaintance presents an interesting contrast with the consultancy firm studied by Orlikowski . Also , in contrast to the study of ‘active badges’ reported by Harper , the applications in use in the current study are not in development , they are widely available commercial y , and the work setting is not a research laboratory responsible for the development of the applications , but an organization within the U . K . ’S central government . Finally , the author is particularly interested in exploring the relation between the sociallorganizational and the technical not just as a way of advancing work within CSCW but as a general issue within the social and computing sciences . Accordingly , this paper towards the end will avail itself of and point to connections between CSCW and areas such as the sociology of science and technology [ 3 , 18 , 24 ] and recent developments in organization theory [ 4 , 11 ] . THE ORGANIZATIONAL SETTING The setting for the fieldwork reported in this paper has been an organization within the United Kingdom’s central government . This organization , which can be called ‘CGO’2 , is responsible for developing the standards , procurement policies and specifications of best practice which central government organizations should observe with respect to government computing . Additional ] y , as - increasingly in the U . K . - private sector organizations often undertake work in contract with central government and indeed , as more government functions are ‘pnvatised’ , the advice of CGO and its publications often find clients and readers outside of a central government context . For example , CGO has been responsible for developing a systems analysis and design methodology which has become very well known and is widely used in both government and the private sector . CGO’S work also includes managing and maintaining the infrastructure of the government’s telecommunications network , developing quality management and security procedures and ( controversially ) taking a leading role in ‘market testing’ ( exploring possibilities for the delegation of CGO’S own services to the private sector ) . In March 1993 , CGO had 379 permanent staff in post . Over the last three years , CGO has undergone an organizational change which members typically report as being extensive . According to an introductory brochure called This is CGO which visitors can tike from piles situated in public places around CGO’S London and Norwich offices , the organization has become “streamlined” and “rationalised” so that it can be more “attuned to its clients’ needs” . Amongst other things , these changes have involved combining , renaming and in some cases removing branches of the organization , together with introducing a group of people ( account managers ) specifically responsible for liaising between the organization and its customers and monitoring how work should be accounted and charged for . The culmination of these organizational changes was marked by two developments in 1992 - 1993 . First , CGO - 2T0 maintain anonymity , all proper names of persons , organizations and branches within organizations , and corporate networks have been changed . 288 formerly a division of the Department of the Treasury - was transferred to the Ofllce of Public Service and Science , and second ] y , it was decided that CGO’S entire operation should be concentrated at its Norwich site in a new building . The move to Norwich is anticipated to be complete by 1995 . The Future Technology Branch Amongst CGO’S various branches , the Future Technology Branch ( FTB ) has the brief of exploring new computing developments and research in computer science and allied trades . Additionally , each year , lTB organises a two day conference and exhibition called ‘Developing Technologies’ . Each of FTB’s members is responsible for a number of research and development areas and through commissioning consultants’ reports or through their own analysis work , amongst other activities , they assemble ‘Technology Briefs’ which report on ‘the state of the art’ for further dissemination through CGO . Anticipating that it may be of relevance to central government computing , FTB has conducted a number of studies of the emerging research field of Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , employing a series of consultants over the last five years who have between them written a review monograph on the subject and explored how recent research in the social and computing sciences may impact upon more established methods of systems analysis and design , such as those CGO have been associated within the past . As a main part of this endeavour over the last two years , FTB have themselves installed a local area network of computers which runs a variety of applications , all of which are intended to “support cooperative working” . It is this network ( known to members as ‘The CSCW Network’ ) , the issues involved in its construction and maintenance and in the use of the applications present and how all of these matters are experienced in CGO which is the subject of the field work reported here . The CSCW Network : Hardware and Software At any one time , this Network has consisted of about 20 Apple MacintoshTM computers connected together via EthernetTM . During the lifetime of the project , the exact models of machines has undergone change as older machines have been upgraded and faulty machines replaced . Indeed , as will be discussed below , this changing constitution of the Network has led to some problems in its management and use . Initially , the Network consisted of Macintoshes drawn from the Mac II range . At the time of writing ( February 1994 ) , the network mixes four Mac CentrisTM machines , two QuadrasTM and one LCW Series I alongside the remaining Mac II machines . The network topology is a straight line comecting the machines which are spread over the 6th , ‘Rh and 8th floors of CGO’S London building . After much experimentation , two machines ( a Quadra and a Mac IIfx ) have been dedicated to running server applications : one running the electronic mail server , one running all the other server applications . Additional y , the Mac LC machine is now dedicated to running modem and remote access software . The remaining desktop machines reside in individuals’ offices and are used as personal , networked machines . In addition , 10 Apple PowerbooksTM have been purchased . Nearly all the commercially available applications for the Macintosh which permit multiple users or which have been explicitly promoted as supporting group work have been purchased for this Network . This includes well know applications such as Lotus Notes3 and less well known ones such as MarkUpTM - a tool for supporting commenting ( and marking up ) of draft documents . However , only some of these are in regular use on the Network . The most signitlcant are ( in approximate order of frequency of usage ) : l l l l l 9 QuickmalTM which provides electronic mail Meeting MakerTM - a shared electronic diary and meeting scheduling tool InforumTM - an electronic discussion tool which can also be used as a bulletin board TimbuktuTM - a screen sharing application Information sharing facilities provided under Apple’s System FM AppleTalk RemoteTM - which provides remote access to the Network MarkUp - an electronic document annotation tool AspectsTM - a shared authoring application In addition , multi - user , networkable versions of project management and database software have been purchased ( Mac Project ProT ~ l and Filemaker ProTM ) . Day - to - day wordpmcessing , spreadsheet and graphical work is supported by Claris WorksTM . It should be noted that Apple hardware and related software are non - standard procurements for CGO . Indeed , CGO has a PC - based corporate standard network , TYSIM , which offers word processing , email , diary management and other tools , and which all CGO employees can have access to . However , Dan - the CSCW Network project manager - speciilcally ~ gued for a more self - contained network so that ( i ) a larger range of CSCW - related and CSCW - inspired applications could be purchased and ( ii ) their use and impacts could be studied in an experimental fashion . As we shall see , the practical sustainability ( or otherwise ) of Dan’s attempts at ‘experimental control’ and the relative isolation of one network from the other turn out to be critical to the fate of the CSCW Network project . The CSCW Network : The Users Over the lifetime of the Network , its constituency of users has changed as individuals have been promoted , transferred or , in one case , has retired4 . However , throughout , the 3Though Notes was not fully implemented across the CSCW Network . 41dentifying users in the field is problematic ! For one thing , the extent to which an individual’s work involves computer use at all and , for another , whether using the CSCW Network constitutes an individual’s main encounter with computers are highly variable matters across the people named in the text . 289 intention of the Network has been to connect the members of two branches ( FTB and one other , the Designated Studies Branch , see below ) and those involved with the management ‘line’ these branches are part of . This includes , then : l Within the Future Technology Branch ( fTt’B ) Alan , the head of FTB ( retired March 1993 ) Dan , the project manager and FTB member with a particular interest in CSCW research Dave , the FTB member with a particular interest in Optical Character Recognition technologies and natural language interfaces to databases Dwight , assistant to Alan , Dan and Dave * Within the Designated Studies Branch ( DSB ) Will , the head of DSB ( and from March 1993 of FTB as well ) Terry , who is principally responsible for the DSB’S work on comparative studies of operating systems and computing developments for the disabled Mike , a student on release to CGO , assistant to Terry * Jon , head of the Special Studies Department ( SSD ) , which contains DSB , F1’B and three other branches ( the heads of these branches also have access to the Network but are only occasional users ) , and his secretary . Q Des , head of the division which contains the Special Studies Department . Jon reports to Des . Des’ secretary is also on the Network . ( In August 1994 , Des was promoted to become director of CGO , ) l Two consultants : Charlotte , contracted to FI’B to provide training in the facilities on the Network Louise , contracted to FTB to organise the annual ‘Developing Technologies’ conference Observations like this make employing the concept of ‘user’ straightforwardly to refer to people in a field setting somewhat tricky . For example , one person rejected my characterisation of him as “a CSCW Network user” in an interview ! To be a user or not , for this person , was not an innocent matter . It concerned how I should regard his allegiance to the Network . As a non - user , he could not be held responsible for what went on there . Thus , ‘user’ can be a ‘member - category’ with particular patterns of usage ( ! ) open to empirical study . This , however , would take us away from the focus of the current paper , where I will continue to refer to users while being mindful of the term’s problematic status . See Cooper and Bowers [ 10 ] who make a start at anrdysing how the term ‘user’ has emerged in HCI to set HCI apart as a new research field potentially distinct from traditional ergonomics with its concern for ‘the operator’ . In addition to these 16 users , who have had access to the Network through most of the project’s lifetime , 10 others have had usemames on the Network at sometime or another . These have included one user who daily accessed the Network by a remote call from CGO’S Norwich office . Two further consultants ( Max and Tim ) have been employed to advise on the introduction and use of the Network . These external consultants do not have usemames on the Network but have written a series of documents advising FTB on how the Network might be best used and studied . A Brief Outline of the Field Work Methods Employed The author has had contact with CGO for nearly five years , the last 2 years of which have involved me undertaking a field stody of the installation , early and mature use of the Network . In the period January - April 1992 , I undertook a series of detailed interviews with most of the personnel listed above . All interviews were tape - recorded , open ended and Iasting up to three hours . On the basis of these interviews , a series of field observation studies were planned , involving ‘shadowing’ persomeI in their work . These were extended over an 18 month period following initial interviews . From November 1993 until the time of writing , I have been engaged in another round of interviews with the principal network users . Most Network users , then , have been the subject of two interview studies and extended periods of observation while at work . Over the whole period of my contact with CGO , I have also accumulated specimen reports and other documents , official CGO and Civil Service publications , some office memos and archives of electronic communication . I have a complete ‘log’ of six months of electronic mail usage as well as complete archives of bulletin boards and so forth . Throughout , my analysis of these materials has been attentive to the problems that Network users have encountered in their use of the Network and how these problems relate not only to the functionality of the technology but also to the nature of CGO as an organization and the form that the work of COO members takes . I have been at particular pains to characterise ‘the work to make the Network work’ in all its various forms and the resistance the Network has encountered . This has included attending to : l . l how the Network and the usage of the applications which run on it become concerns which require management ( the Network is not just used ; it and its use are managed ) the accounts members have of the Network , their work and how their work changes with the introduction of the network facilities ( e . g . how is the Network to be used for electronic document production and what problems does this raise ? ) how organizational concerns relate to the Network , its usage and its acceptability or otherwise . 290 CSCW AND THE TRANSITION TO ELECTRONIC DOCUMENT PRODUCTION : CATALOGING DIFFICULTIES Much of the work of the civil servants who use the Network is concerned with document production . In their work researching developments in computing of possible relevance to government , writing business cases , reports or technical briefs or soliciting reports from consultants are central activities . The introduction of the Network and the applications which run on it has afforded the opportunity to study some of the issues raised when a paper - document intensive work site faces the possible automation of its document production practices . In this section , I report on some of the issues I have observed as being pertinent for members . Changing Documents or Rejecting Technology Many of the debates I have observed surrounding the introduction of the Network can be expressed in terms of the choice between changing the existing form of documents or the practices surrounding their production on the one hand or rejecting the new technology as being inconsistent with those existing practices on the other . For example , one of the applications procured by the FTB supports the production of ‘smart forms’ where fields can be designed and constraints expressed over the kinds of material that can be placed in the fields . When combined with an appropriate mail system , this application could support the ‘intelligent’ routing of messages . At one meeting , two consultants to the network project ( Max and Tim ) and Dan were exploring the possibility of using this application to support the production of business cases within FTB . According to Dan , fields could be defined mimicking the standard structure of CGO business cases , and the case - when complete - could be routed automatically to the appropriate person to give approval for the case . It became apparent , however , that the application placed limits on how large fields could be . This was taken as a reason by the consultants to reject the application for supporting business cases as sections from existing business cases in FTB frequently exceeded the limits the application would impose . In contrast , Dan took this as an advantage of the use of ‘smart forms’ as it would encourage the writing of more concise business cases , indeed ones which were more strictly compliant with CGO’S guidelines for their production . This is an example of a recurrent phenomenon in the use of CSCW technologies and the transition to electronic document production at COO . The acceptability of new technical possibilities is not so much a matter of how well a new possibility allows the mimicking of existing paper - based practices but of whether existing paper - based practices are regarded as legitimate in the first place . Thus , the introduction of new technical possibilities for future work provokes debates about past practices . Conducting and managing these debates or anticipating their possibility has been an overhead in exploring possibilities for automating document production . This overhead can become sigti ] cant if prima facie the argument could go either way ( as with the example mentioned above ) . The Unfeasibility of Total Automation and the Counter - Productiveness of Partial Automation Providing automated support for all aspects of a document production practice is often unfeasible . If a document is to be sent to someone not on the Network , then it has to be printed out and put in the internal mail . Here , electronic mail will , obviously , not do as a complete solution . It turned out that the ‘smart forms’ mentioned above could not import text from a word processing package or be integrated with email in the manner hoped for . Thus , the total automation of the business case production and approval cycle ( i . e . conducting it entirely with electronic documents and related communication ) turned out to be unfeasible . However , it often appeared to lTB members that partially automated solutions with the applications available to them were also objectionable . If the work of translating in or out of an electronic medium ( through , say , OCR or re - typing ) was seen to exceed the benefit of using the automated facilities , then cases could be produced for resisting the new facilities altogether . Electronic Documents , Trust and Awareness Several members reported that they did not ‘trust’ the Network and the applications implemented on it . For example , after a number of early delivery failures , Dave took to printing out a copy of all email sent and received . Occasionally he took a by - hand copy as well . While , of course , one can debate the appropriateness of this reaction , it nevertheless provides a stark example of the lengths workers are prepared to go to if a technology does not command their trust - lengths which add to the work they are doing . In a related fashion , several users of the Network reported that they were frequently unaware of events on the Network . The email package used did not have an alerting mechanism . The computer conferencing package did but , naturally , its alert was - as one member put it - “vanilla flavoured”5 : important arrivals were not any differently signalled than trivial ones . Once alerted or once a period of time had elapsed when a user suspected that important email may have arrived , members would often interrupt their ongoing work to consult email and / or the conferencing facilities . Persistent ‘to - ing and fro - ing’ from one application to another was reported by several users as annoying and - at times when time - critical work was being undertaken - as counter - productive . Members often contrasted the delivery of email with the delivery of internal mail where delivery times were fixed and common ] y understood , and the physical presence of correspondence of varying shapes , sizes and appearances in an in - tray constituted a more robust and ‘seeable - at - a - glance’ mechanism for alerting recipients . 5Double - quoted phrases in this paper are all quoted from members . 291 Electronic Documents and Their Mobility In principle , electronic documents are highly mobile from one Network node to another . However , reading and annotating documents are activities that senior civil servants often have to perform at locations far removed from the Network and under circumstances which make the use of even a portable computer unfeasible ( e . g . on crowded commuter trains ) . For Des , one of the more senior civil servants on the Network , this proved to be a substantial complaint over the pertinence of the Network facilities to his work . Much of Des’ working life was spent in meetings at various locations in the UK and Europe or in transit between them . On the occasions when Des would work over weekends , he would often do this at sea aboard his yacht ( which had no Network access ! ) . There was no point in having documents and related communication in electronic form for him if the majority of his opportunities for work would be in “hostile” environments militating against the use of computing technology . Even the overhead involved in printing out a document ( especially if it was lengthy ) would be , for him , excessive . Accordingly , this worker often asked for hard copy of documents intended for his attention . Under certain circumstances , knowing that this would be his preference , authors of documents for Des in turn bypassed the use of electronic document production or transmission facilities as - if the end product was always going to be treated as hard copy - there was no point in using any document technology more advanced than a standard word processor . In this way , the case for resisting some of the CSCW - related applications and document production facilities ‘tickled down’ the line . Sharing Electronic Documents and Dilemmas of Responsibility Another ‘in principle benefit’ of electronic document production , transmission and storage is that it affords the easier ‘shareability’ of data . This , naturally , is a ubiquitous theme of the CSCW literature . Indeed , CGO’S CSCW Network offered several ways of sharing data ( e . g . , file sharing under Macintosh System 7 , shared database applications ) . However , sharing data can often bring about dilemmas of responsibility and ownership . On several occasions , workers reported an unwillingness to share data lest it be updated inappropriately or otherwise altered by some one else . The signit3cance and practical use of various fields in a database record , for example , may have been developed ‘privately’ by a single user . To allow others ‘in’ would involve ( at the very least ) engaging in extra work annotating the database or explaining use - conventions to others , and this would still not eliminate the risk that the database might be modified in ways which the initial user would find confusing . Additionally , database and other electronic document modifications may not be automatically notified . Thus , a group of users sharing data may not be aware of changes made since they last used the shared document or data and so forth . Again , alerting other users to changes became an overhead to the sharing of documents and data which - on some occasions - was solved by , for example , affixing yellow post - it notes to the screens of other users who shared the data . On other occasions , the overhead involved in sharing was anticipated in advance as involving prohibitive risks or extra work , leading to data being kept privately or to Louise printing out versions which she amotated by hand and took to be the database as it , was the only secure and up - to - date version . Ironically , under these circumstances , the electronic and shareable version becomes but “a pale shadow of the real one” . Electronic Documents : Are they a form of writing or a form of speech ? Several members reported dilemmas over how electronic documents should be understood pragmatically . For example , in some members’ accounts , there is a difference in the Civil Service between spoken interaction and the written word . Spoken interaction , 1 was told by Dave , is likely to be cordial , consensual and less critical than how written texts are taken . Writing , because written / printed documents are the medium for policy and its interpretation - practices which are frequently governed by law , is treated with a sceptical orientation , small details are noted and criticised , and exact wordings come to be important . According to these accounts , text in an electronic medium is profoundly indeterminate pragmatical y . Should a bulletin board contribution be taken as akin to “consensual , corridor conversation” or more like fragments of policy requiring debate and analysis ? Two infrequent users of the Network gave me this as their account for their relative reluctance to engage with the new facilities : they were unsure about how their words were going to be taken and “had their fingers burnt already” . Several authors have argued that electronic writing has this ambiguous location between speech and writing . In these accounts , this is not only oriented towards by members but it is given a specillc inflection in the light of a formulation of the culture of their organization . Rationales and Accountability The bulletin board and computer conferencing technologies in place on the Network aroused a degree of controversy from members over the accountability of their contributions . In many ways , this relates to several aspects of the point just made about the ‘pragmatic’ of electronic text . For some members on some occasions , the accumulating contributions to a discussion on a conferencing system provided an automatically captured , emerging rationale for decisions taken , an argument one can also find in the CSCW literature . Will and Jon were especially attracted to the use of conferencing technologies to assist in this manner in the discussion of issues in the management of FTB and SSD . However , for other members andlor on other occasions , there was a concern that contributions to the conferencing system would m ~ e decision making visible and hence accountable in ways which otherwise would not occur . As contributions were indelibly stamped with the time and the name of the individual author in question , several members felt that sending messages to a computer conference was a dangerous thing to do and that quite serious and unanticipatable ramifications of such an action might lie in wait in the future . For some members , especially when combined with 292 the points made above about speech / writing dilemmas and differences , this constituted a reason for either not using the technology or for using it in a self - consciously safe and mundane way - an outcome which contradicts the accounts one sometimes reads in the CSCW literature about the usefulness of conferencing and allied technologies for creative or problem solving work or for exploring the available possibilities in decision making . In contrast to relaxed creativity , using conferencing technologies was for Louise “sticking my head up above the parapet” . In this way , ironically , the ‘real work’ of decision making remained off the Network and unsupported by it . Changing the Temporality of Work One of the earliest applications for the electronic document production facilities on the CSCW Network that was foreseen by members concerned computer - based support for the writing of monthly reports . FTB and DSB are responsible for the production of monthly reports of their activities , including accounts of meetings attended , deliverables produced , in - line work planning changes as well as a whole section concerning financial management and expenditure in the previous calendar month . The production of these reports - prior to the introduction of the Network’s facilities - involved the soliciting of individual contributions from FTB and DSB members by respective Branch Heads , who would then edit the ( often handwritten contributions ) into an appropriately organised report together with contributions of their own , The Branch Head of DSB , Will , reported that this whole process would typically take him two solid days of work . On Alan’s retirement , Will took over the management of FTB as well and was not relishing the potential irony of spending a substantial portion of a month reporting on what the Branches did in the rest of it ! Will was particularly hopeful that the CSCW Network might help him in his part of the work of writing monthly branch reports . The facilities of the Network were investigated to see how they might be employed to assist the electronic production of these documents . Ultimately , a number of facilities were put in place : a computer conference in which members would commit to and report on their completion of contributions , a series of named and shared ‘drop folders’ where members would deposit raw text for inclusion , templates were provided for use in preparing contributions and giving an overall organization to each report , and a shared archive of past reports was compiled , After two or three months of usage , Will reported only partial gains in the production of monthly reports . They were still taking him about two days to do . Part of the problem was that he was unaware of when contributions were being deposited in the drop folders and had to search periodically “on the off - chance of something new having arrived” . Another aspect was that it was hard to start work on the report before knowing the overall shape that it was going to take . Members were not using the computer conference that had been set up to indicate what their contributions would be or to notify when they had been written . Branch members on the other hand could not clearly see the value of using the computer conference . It seemed to add unnecesstuily to their work . Accordingly , Will began to suggest new methods for producing monthly reports electronically . Instead of submitting contributions in a brief period after the relevant month had been completed , members were to report on their activities as and when they occurred , sending outlines to the conference and full text accounts to the drop folders . In this way , not only would the Branch Head be able to anticipate the shape of the following month’s report , he would also become more aware of the activities of members as they would be of each other’s activities , In this use of electronic document production facilities , the temporality of the work of writing a report has been changed from something done “in a blast” after the reporting period was complete to something done throughout the reporting period . However , several branch members were unhappy about this solution too . As it suggested to them that they had to report on all their activities as and when they did them , there were concerns that this marked a lack of trust in how members spent their time . Additionally , the use of conferencing technology was resisted : “why should I tell everyone what I’ve been doing when it’s just a matter between me and the Bmnch Head ? ” Electronic Documents and the Visibility of Document Production Practices The case of the impact of CSCW technologies on monthly reporting practices has another aspect which is worth bringing out as this has been observed in other uses of such technologies at CGO . Producing documents in an electronic medium on a network allows not just the products ( the documents themselves ) of practices to be available but the practices by which those products are created are now visible , inspectable and manageable . Assembling material for monthly reports is now to be spread over the month . Not only is the monthly report to be produced , it is to be produced in the right kind of way . This change - for Des and Jon , two of the senior managers at COO - meshes with the aim to become a “quality organization” where the processes by which work is done are as open to quality inspection as are the products of that work . In this picture , electronic document and CSCW technologies may support total quality reviewing and inspection because the practices of document production leave as legible traces as the products themselves . By having a “peek in” at the status of work , Jon could ensure that work was being done according to approved “quality methods” and was on schedule and so forth . Reviewing , commenting and business case approval procedures have all been discussed in relation to the Network in this way at CGO . Appreciating these opportunities for increased management and inspection of the day - to - day texture of work , there have been debates about how the Network should be used : whether the aim of total visibility of work should be pursued or whether the current practices of , for example , working on documents and ont y at exact , clear moments handing them over , moving them from the private to the public domain , should continue to be honoured . At the time 293 of writing , these two orientations make an uneasy peace between them , While the practices of monthly report writing are being made increasing visible to the Branch Head , his line manager ( Jon ) , though also on the Network , cannot peek into the drop folders and the monthly report conference . This has been done quite bluntly by not giving Jon access to these sources . Will suspects that this arrangement cannot go on for very long and that Jon may well be offended if he finds out this arrangement . Indeed , Jon has complained to me that “I am not being included in using the Network for monthly branch reports” . On the other hand , several branch members have instructed me that they may not prepare their contributions on - line if their preliminary drafts are now going to be inspectable by not only the Branch Head but his line manager . Simulating line management through access controls has its dilemmas then , while facilitating the visibility of all aspects of document production practices is not clearly satisfacto ~ or even always possible . Anticipating that the preliminary or ‘in progress’ nature of their work might be misunderstood and perhaps inappropriately censured , some members have made their current work ‘invisible’ to their managers . Again ironically , in this way , the ‘real work’ of document production often remained off the Network and unsupported by it . As before , the artful management of these dilemmas has been a substantial overhead in the implementation and use of the Network . The CSCW Network Now The CSCW Network has settled into a fairly stable pattern of usage over the last nine months or so , Person - to - person electronic mail is extensively used on a day - to - day basis by a ‘hard core’ of six Network users . However , usage is heavily ‘skewed’ towards these six who between them have been responsible for over 85 % of the Network’s mail trtilc . Recent interviews with users ( which can only be briefly discussed here ) reveal a continued reluctance to use or experiment with the other applications on the Network , except in a casual fashion . Certainly , for many users , it has only been the electronic mail facilities which have even come close to being part of their daily working lives . The applications more closely related to or inspired by CSCW research have remained , as one user put it , “exotica” , From the above ‘catalogue of difficulties’ , one can see how this situation has emerged . The individualised division of labour that exists in CGO does not make it obvious to Network users why they should share data or collaborate on document production . Dave has different areas of interest in his work from Dan , Will and Terry . He is interested in following the relevance of OCR technologies for central govement computing , Dan is not . Dave , then , is content to inform others of his work via email on a “need to know basis” and sees little use for joint authoring and computer conferencing technologies . Sharing data , reporting on one’s own work , engaging in electronic rather than spoken communication all lead to organizational dilemmas which require extra time and effort to deliberate over , debate , manage or work round . Similarly , the Network’s facilities have been resisted when dilemmas over how they fit into the organization’s line management structure have not been solved . In contrast with Orlikowski’s claims in her study of Corporation Alpha [ 21 ] , the CGO workers are not resisting the CSCW “exotica” through lack of an understanding of what CSCW is about . As noted in the Introduction , CSCW and collaborative computing were certainly familiar to CGO workers . Even with this understanding , CSCW tools may be resisted if they do not relate to members’ work practices . Does this mean that the CSCW Network has been a failure ? Well , this is not so clear . Indeed , members themselves are divided on this issue . Dan , the project manager , has characterised the Network as “a failure but an instructive one” . In interview , however , most other users characterise the Network as a success when asked . But this is largely due to either ( i ) drawing comparisons between the corporate standard network TYSIM which reflect well on the CSCW Network ( “it’s much easier to use than TYSIM” ) , and / or ( ii ) focusing particularly on the electronic mail facilities ( “Quickmail is easy to use and much more flexible than TYSIM’S email” ) . Jon , by contrast , characterises the CSCW Network as having failed because ( i ) nobody used what he takes to be “the CSCW facilities , email doesn’t really count” , and ( ii ) the whole Network project has not offered demonstrable gains over what was already available on TYSIM , which remains after all the corporate standard , and for an organization devoted to developing standards for others to follow , the use of a non - standard Apple network without clear advantages is “too dangerous” . Equally , Jon is concerned that “from the outside” it will seem strange that - even allowing for the use of Apple technology - a well - known application like Lotus Notes was not specifically used . The fact that Notes was not fully available at the outset of the project and that Dan argues that Notes does not yet match the full functionality of the suite of applications purchased will seem as inadequate defences “from the outside” . What these different accounts of the Network’s success or failure suggest is that this judgement is not only variable amongst members but contingent upon : l just what in members’ accounts the Network and , indeed , CSCW itself are taken to be ( as an email platform , it’s a success ; as a CSCW experiment , it’s an instructive failure ) l just what comparisons are made with other available or known technical solutions ( is it better than TYSIM ? than Lotus Notes ? ) l for how long the suspension of existing organizational standards and policies can be argued for especially under anticipated pressure from ‘outsiders’ to whom a ‘client - centred’ organization should be increasingly accountable . Thus , I would maintain it is important that the” current account should not be read as another failure story . For one thing , given that the CGO members between them are quite nuanced and flexible in their understanding of the terms 294 ‘success’ and ‘failure’ , I ( as analyst ) should certainly match them ! But in addition , for us to classify the CSCW Network one way or another maybe to crudely simplify and direct attention away from the series of practical problems which need to be addressed when moving CSCW out of the laboratory and into the outside world . The next section offers some concepts inspired by the above fieldwork which may help us negotiate this transition . UNDERSTANDING CSCW IN ACTION I want to conclude by picking out a number of general points to make about the fieldwork reported here . In so doing , I want to introduce some concepts which may have some general utility in helping understand the complex issues surrounding the ‘real world’ implementation of CSCW technologies . Design , Debate and Boundary Objects First , it is important to realise the debated significance of the technologies I have examined . A technology for documenting decision making rationale may equally appear to be a device for increasing the accountability that workers have for all aspects of their work . A technology which may support the transformation of work may seem to another party to be inadequately sensitive to existing practices . What Max and Tim , the consultants , described as “routine computer conferencing with a bit of fancy structure thrown in” was presented in the manual as an “electronic meeting tool” . What was to Dan and Terry a “screen sharing application” was to Louise “Big Brother” . In design , we must ( somehow ) anticipate that the signitlcance of what we produce is likely to be a debated and often unsettled affair as soon as our products fall into the hands of others , War suggests on the basis of a series of studies [ 22 ] that this dilemma is often resolved through the creation of ‘boundary objects’ , entities which can , in some sense , be shared across different social worlds , yet have a variable significance between them . Boundaxy objects have the dual nature of being both abstract and concrete . Perhaps , if we recognise the variable significance of CSCW technologies when they are put into action in actual organizational settings , we should make the development of boundary objects an aim of design . Admittedly , this is a speculative suggestion , but it does indicate that a ‘requisite ambiguity’ in technology may be a desirable feature of design . Network Implementation , Management and Use as Heterogeneous Engineering It does not seem analytically justified to classify the problems and issues we have encountered as being either purely social / organizational on the one hand or purely technical on the other . Most of the phenomena are composites and materially heterogeneous . They are socio - technical . Client - server architectures , the pragmatic status of electronic writing , the mobility ( or otherwise ) of electronic documents , questions of data sharing are all issues with human and non - human components . The management and use of a CSCW network will require the solution of a range of problems , be they economic or electronic , organizational or computational . In proposing the CSCW Network , procuring it and managing it , Dan has had to follow and anticipate markets for computing products , learn about client server architectures , orient to the sensitivities of his co - workers , as well as get down on his hands and knees to repair cabling . But this is a mundane multi - disciplinarity , an everyday flexibility geared towards solving day - to - day problems as best one can . Those involved with the maintenance and use of a CSCW network have to become ( in Law’s [ 19 ] phrase ) ‘heterogeneous engineers’ . The Organizational Significance of CSCW Technologies Clients and servers , electronic writing , data sharing and the rest also all have an organizational inflection , often a quite explicit one in terms of the ‘culture’ of the civil service or the changing role of central government organizations and so forth . Additionally , while organizational standards are not an ‘iron cage’ of rules which members must operate within ( their suspension can be argued for ) , they can return with vengeance if things go wrong . In this way , what seems in prospect like an interesting experiment can be in retrospect a dangerous fragmentation of “how we should do things” or of the organization itself . Accounts of what the organization has been , is or should be enter in as resources to resolving questions surrounding what should be done and with what technology . Thus , CSCW research also has to be organizational reseamh . But organizational reseamh , I would suggest , of a new sort - one which takes seriously the variable identity of organizations , how accounts of organizations operate perforrnatively as both enablements and constraints , and how technologies do not so much exist in an organizational ‘context’ but are part of what organizations actually turn out to be [ 4 , 11 , ’ 17 ] . Organizational or Technological Determinism and the ‘Gradient of Resistance’ ? These last points about organizationhechnology relations can be illustrated further . I have noted that the individualised division of labour in CGO , as it is understood by ~ B and DSB members , militates against their use of CSCW technology . Indeed , it seems that only those technologies which ‘mesh’ with this ( e . g . person - to - person email ) are those which are used and accepted . These findings make it tempting to tell an ‘organizational determinist’ story : only those technologies consistent with the form of an organization will be accepted . However , Jon ( and occasionally Des and Will ) have suggested that this division of labour is a fault with CGO and should not be taken for granted . Indeed , Jon laments the lack of teamwork in the British Civil Semite in general and suggests that “forward looking people” are anticipating this changing . In the early days of the CSCW Network project , Jon looked to the technology to provoke this organizational change . Jon on that occasion was himself offering a kind of technological determinism : organizations will change in response to technology . Similarly , the discussion between the consultants and Dan over the use of ‘smart forms ! for business cases saw the consultants being organizational determinists ( rejecting the technology because of how 295 business cases were done ) and Dan being a kind of technological determinist ( using the technology to try and encourage new forms of business case ) . That members themselves can vary in their own accounts of the organizationhechnology relation suggests that it would be ill - advised in opting for any simplified account . Jon and Dan might have achieved the transformation of organizational form through technology . But it turned out that the former was the stronger force . One can imagine other cases where the relation might be reversed or more complex . Simplified accounts of the relationship between organizations and technology only become available once the story has been told . The CGO case only seems amenable to an organizational determinist reading now and retrospectively , then and prospectively it was unclear which would be the stronger ‘force’ or exert the greatest ‘resistance’ to change : pre - existing work practices and organizational form or the CSCW technologies themselves . Bowers and Pycock [ 6 ] introduce the image of the ‘gradient of resistance’ to help us understand issues in technological development and implementation . At any moment , some aspects of a ‘socio - technical complex’ will tend to resist change more than others . What actually changes depends in turn on the forces that can be amassed to provoke it . What matters is what’s resilient and what isn’t and the distribution of forces not whether one element is human ( or social ) and one non - human ( or technical ) 6 . In the current case , CGO’S division of labour resisted change just as much as the maximum field size of the ‘smart forms’ . In contrast , the practices surrounding the production of monthly branch reports can be vaned a little more easily , as can which machine operates as a mail server . Understanding and managing change is a matter of sorting out what resists and what doesn’t and what are the available resources which can be mobilised as forces for change . An image of this sort should encourage us to look at the details of cases and not argue for grand theories which relate technological cause to organizational effect ( or vice versa ) in crude ways . The Productivity Paradox Several authors have claimed that the computerisation of the workplace often leads to at best modest productivity gains and often losses , in spite of the promises which accrue to automation [ 23 ] . While the meaning of ‘productivity’ and questions of measurement remain highly controversial , this finding should not surprise us . One way of reading the ‘catalogue of difficulties’ noted above is in terms of how they all contribute to a significant 61t is important to realise that this is not an implicit advocacy of an anti - human moral or political philosophy . It may certainly matter to those humans involved whether they are being forced to change or not ! However , I argue elsewhere that a view about humankechnology relations like that in the text is acturdly of more use to humans in addressing the politics of technology than any view which makes either technology to be an irresistible force or organizations to be immovable objects . management overhead for the network studied . All the matters discussed are ones which require a degree of management . Some seem to provoke well - nigh intractable problems . Some seem to touch on quite profound questions about the legitimacy of current and past practices and ( even ) the destiny of the organization itself . ‘The work to make the network work’ is considerable . There are a large number of ( quite heterogeneous ) problems which require solution or management . Thus , I would contend that there is no grand , general explanation of the productivity paradox ( in spite of the efforts of some theoreticians ) just a multiplicity of mundane , day - to - day troubles which together can be enough to make any technical innovation grind to a halt . The Work to Make the Network Work I have been at pains to emphasise the unanticipated overhead that came with the introduction of the CSCW Network to CGO : the work required to mdce the Network work . And this for two reasons . First , it is easy to miss such work or dismiss it as merely ‘oiling the wheels’ but , in this case , the many and varied ways in which introducing CSCW tools has led to extra work has at various times threatened the viability of the whole project . Secondly , the phrase ‘the work to make IT work’ I suggest as a general characterisation of the phenomenon Grudin [ 12 ] observes some specific manifestations of . For example , Grudin argues that one reason why ‘groupware fails’ is that who gets the benefit and who has to do extra work are often discrepant . While this can be true , discrepancies between the beneficiaries and the ( extra - ) workers is not a necessary condition for failure . Extra work - no matter who does it or how it relates to benefit - can sometimes be reason enough for abandoning technologies or certain courses of action . And sometimes not . For extra work can sometimes pass undetected or othertimes might be regarded as “a good job for a junior to do to find out what goes on here” and so forth and so on . Furthermore , what counts as a benefit and what counts as significant extra work is not always agreed upon in a work site and this discord itself can be problematic for CSCW tools . In short , there area multitude of ways in which the work to make IT work may manifest itself . Grudin’s story of the electronic meeting scheduler is an elegant , though particular , example of one way in which this work can be recognised and distributed . One should not be so naive7 as to think that ‘groupware success’ is guarantied if those who get the benefit and those who work for it are the same . SOME FUTURES FOR CSCW RESEARCH It was remarked above that one should resist reciting the CGO case as a failure story . I also want to circumvent a pessimistic reading of this paper with respect to CSCW research itself . While studies like the current one and others [ 12 , 14 , 21 , 25 ] indicate that CSCW ( or groupware ) tools are likely to face tough problems when they get implemented in actual work settings , this should not be 7Aud naturally Grudin isn’t - as he makes plain in [ 13 ] which contains points similar to some of those made here . 296 taken as an argument for abandoning CSCW research . Indeed , the opposite . A field study like the one reported can be a valuable source of information about what research issues should be prioritised and what is less crucial . This need not match how we normally see research priorities and , in this way , we can learn from the fieldg . For example , in this field site , the utility of a shared authoring tool hinged on whether sharing itself was desirable , not on which protocol for cursor control it implemented ! Clearly , a study like the one at CGO points to the importance of formulating implementation and change management strategies appropriate for CSCW . But it may also reorganise our technological research agenda . Specifically , the CGO experience has led to three particular issues being identified by myself and colleagues involved in the development of new applications . More detailed accounts of our development ideas appear in other papers at this conference and elsewhere . Here , just a simple overview will be given by way of conclusion . More sophisticated awareness mechanisms are required for CSCW . The applications installed on the Network did not always incorporate mechanisms for alerting users to relevant events and when they did , the mechanisms were not always informative . According y , users often reported problems to do with their ‘awareness’ of what was happening on the Network , and what the current state of their work was . A beep is too blunt an awareness tool . More sophisticated access mechanisms are required for CSCW . The Civil Servants studied worked with a line management organizational structure . Relating ‘the line’ to the Network proved problematic especially when attempts were made to simulate the line management structure through access contxols . Just like beeps , access controls are blunt tools . In response to observations like these , [ 1 ] reports on work developing a model of awareness and access for guiding the development of both virtual reality based CSCW technologies and more traditional shared databases . More support should be available for CSCW network management . Network and system management is an often neglected art . However , the management of CGO’S CSCW Network and the multiplicity of tasks involved in it proved to be a substantial source of extra , unanticipated work . If anything , the complexity of CSCW tools may lead to an even greater management overhead than with more conventional tools . Indeed , the practical feasibility of many CSCW implementation attempts may stand or fall on the basis of whether system management will be a tractable task . Accordingly , management issues should not be tdegated to being a mundane issue of lesser research interest but tools which actually support this task should be 80f course , this is not the only way in which we can learn from the field . Field study can also give us the detailed knowledge of work practice required for the motivated development of tools for those practices . On the many ways in which field study can relate to design and development , see for example [ 15 ] . explored . [ 7 ] makes a start on developing applications which give users views on the very netsvorks and tools which they use . Whatever the outcome of our current technological development endeavors , as more and more applications develop a maturity which takes them out of laboratones and into organizations , for CSCW , implementation studies will be where the action’s at . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The support of the following is acknowledged : the European Communities’ ESPRIT Basic Research Action , COMIC ; Rank Xerox Research Centre Cambridge EuroPARC ; and CCTA : The Government Centre for Information Systems . Tom Rodden , Graham Button and Tom Dale are thanked for many helpful suggestions and other forms of help during the conduct of this research . An anonymous reviewer also gave a series of most useful suggestions which were gratefully received and , for the most part , acted on . REFERENCES , 1 . 2 . 3 . 4 . 5 . 6 . 7 . 8 . 9 . Benford , S . , Bowers , J . , Falden , L . and Rodden , T . ‘Realising a spatial model for virtual environments’ . In B . Pehrson and E . Skarback ( eds . ) Proceedings of ERCIA4 : European Research Consortium for Information and Mathematics , June 1994 . Swedish Institute of Computer Science , Stockholm , 1994 . Bentley , R . , Hughes , J . , Randall , D . , Rodden , T . , Sawyer , P . , Shapiro , D . and Somerville , 1 . ‘Ethnographically informed systems design for air trafilc control’ , in Proceedings of CSCW’92 , J . Turner and R . Kraut ( eds . ) , ACM Press , New York , 1992 . BiJ ~ er , W . , Hughes , T . and Pinch , T , ( eds . ) The social construction of technological systems , MIT Press , Cambridge MA . Bloomfield , B . ‘Information systems in the U . K . NHS’ , Social Studies of Science , 21 , 701 - 734 , 1991 . Bgidker , S . and Gr @ baek , K . ‘Cooperative Prototyping Studies - users and designers envision a dental case record system’ , in Studies in Computer Supported Cooperative Work , J . M . Bowers and S . D . Benford ( eds . ) , Elsevier , North Holland , 1991 . Bowers , J . and Pycock , J . ‘Talking through design : Requirements and resistance in cooperative prototyping’ . In Proceedings of CHI’94 , Boston , USA , April 1994 . ACM Press , New York , 1994 . Bowers , J . , Pycock , J . , Dean , G . and Rodden , T . ‘Running the network : Supporting cooperative systems’ . Submitted for publication . Bowers , J . and Rodden , T . Exploding the Interface : Experiences of a CSCW Network . In ZnierCHZ ’93 : Bridges Between Worlds - Proceedings of InterCHI ’93 , April 1993 , Amsterdam , The Netherlands , 1993 . Bullen , C . and Bennett , J . ‘Groupware in practice : An interpretation of work experience’ . In Proceedings of CSCW’90 , ACM Press , New York , 1990 . 297 10 . 11 . 12 . 13 . 14 . 15 . 16 . 17 . Cooper , G . and Bowers , J . ‘Representing the user : Notes on the disciplinary rhetoric of HCI’ , in Social and Interfactional Dimensions of Human - Computer Interfaces , P . Thomas ( cd ) , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . Cooper , R . ‘Organization / disorganization’ , in The theory and philosophy of organizations , J . Hasard and D . Pym ( eds . ) , Routledge , London , 1990 . Grudin , J . ‘Why CSCW applications fail : Problems in design and evaluation of organization interfaces’ , in Proceedings of CSCW88 , ACM Press , New York . Grudin , J . ‘Groupware and cooperative work : Promises and problems’ , in The art of human computer inte ~ ace design , B . Laurel ( cd . ) , Addison - Wesley , Reading MA , 1990 . Harper , R . ‘Looking at ourselves : An examination of the social organisation of two research laboratories’ , in Proceedings of CSCW’92 , J . Turner and R , Kraut ( eds , ) , ACM Press , New York , 1992 . Hughes , J . , King , V . , Rodden , T , and Andersen , H . ‘Moving out from the control room : Ethnography in system design’ . In this volume . Hughes , J . , Randall , D . and Shapiro , D . ‘Faltering from ethnography to design’ , in Proceedings of CSCW’92 , J . Turner and R . Kraut ( eds . ) , ACM Press , New York , 1992 . Jirotka , M . , Gilbert , G . N , and Luff , P . ‘On the social organisation of organisations’ , Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 1 , 95 - 118 , 1992 . 18 . 19 . 20 . 21 . 22 . 23 . 24 . 25 . Latour , B . Science in Action , Open University Press , Milton Keynes , 1987 . Law , J , , ‘Technology and Heterogeneous Engineering : The Case of Portugese Expansion’ , in [ 3 ] , 1987 , Markws , M , L . and Connolly , T . ‘Why CSCW Applications Fail : Problems in the Adoption of Interdependent Work Tools’ , in Proceedings of CSCW’90 , ACM Press , New York , 1990 . Orlikowski , W . ‘Learning from Notes : Organizational issues in groupware implementation’ , in Proceedings of CSCW’92 , J . Turner and R . Kraut ( eds . ) , ACM Press , New York , 1992 . Star , S . L . and Gnesemer , J . , ‘Institutional Ecology , “Translations” , and Coherence : Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology , 1907 - 1939’ , Social Studies of Science , 19 , 387 - 4 [ 20 , 1989 . Thurow , L . C . ‘Foreword’ in The Corporation in the 1990s , M . S . Scott Morton ( cd . ) , C ) xford University Press , New York , 1991 . Woolgar , S . ‘Configuring the User : The Case of Usability Trials’ , in A Sociology of Monsters : Essays on Power , Technology and Domination , Law , J . ( cd ) , Sociological Review Monograph 38 , Routledge and Kegam Paul , London , 1991 . Zuboff , S . In the age of the smar , t machine , Basic Books , New York , 1988 . 298 —