28 Behavior Analysis and Social Action - Volume 6 , Number 1 , 1987 Feminist Forum Janet Ellis North Texas State University What Is It ? A means of providing information regarding profes sional development of female behavior analysts in ( at least ) three fields : education , institutional / clinical practice , and business . Our focus will be on discussion of behaviors re quired for success in these ( and any other ) areas ; problems encountered by female behaviorists in their work settings ; solutions that writers and readers have implemented ; ques tions that writers and readers would like to ha ve answered by other writers and readers . Why Is It ? The raison d ' etre for such a forum is best explained by this assertion : Males have retained ceremonial control over al most all natural and cultural resources , even those pro duced by the technological behavior of women . Women have , perhaps consequently or perhaps an tecedently , gained access to the technological reinfor cers by way of making personal reinforcers contingent on access . ( Glenn , 1986 , p . 7 ) It is time for women who have earned access to our cul ture ' s technological reinforcers to obtain them with their technological behavior rather than being forced into the po sition many people , especially women , have found them selves : using personal reinforcers to gain access to cultural resources . This column is designed to provide women and men the opportunity to reflect on ways they have dealt with such cultural contingencies or share ideas they have for helping others deal with such contingencies . How Is It ? BASA has provided an arena in which we can meet bi annually . We are earnestly soliciting manuscripts from jour nal readers that will provoke , inform , challenge , and gener ally satisfy the interests of feminists ( female and male ) in behavior analysis . We have asked some women we know and some women everyone will know to contribute to this forum . We invite all our readers to respond with articles and / or letters giving us their alternative or consensual views , of fering ideas for research possibilities , offering guidelines gained from personal experience or passed on by wise others , and providing material that may be useful to others , especially women entering our field . We hope that women trying to establish themselves in our field and women as well as men who just might need such a verbal community as this to help remind them why the y are doing what they ' re trying to do will find these useful . Our first two pieces have been contributed by Beth Sulzer - Azaroff and Betty K . Armstrong . References Glenn , S . S . ( 1986 ) . Metacontingenciesin Walden Two . Behavior Analysis & Social Action Journal , 5 and 6 , 2 - 8 .