Arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian methods J . Donea 1 , A . Huerta 2 , J . - Ph . Ponthot 1 and A . Rodr¶‡guez - Ferran 2 1 LTAS , Thermo - M¶ecanique et Milieux Continus , Universit¶e de Li(cid:181)ege , Campus du Sart - Tilman , B ^ at . 52 , Chemin des Chevreuils , 1 , B - 4000 Li(cid:181)ege , Belgium 2 LaC(cid:181)aN ( Laboratori de C(cid:181)alcul Num(cid:181)eric ) , Departament de Matem(cid:181)atica Aplicada III , E . T . S . de Ingenieros de Caminos , Universitat Polit(cid:181)ecnica de Catalunya , Jordi Girona 1 , E - 08034 Barcelona , Spain ABSTRACT Aim of the present chapter is to provide an in - depth survey of arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian ( ALE ) methods , including both conceptual aspects of the mixed kinematical description and numerical implementation details . Applications are discussed in (cid:176)uid dynamics , nonlinear solid mechanics and coupled problems describing (cid:176)uid - structure interaction . The need for an adequate mesh update strategy is underlined and various automatic mesh displacement prescription algorithms are reviewed . This includes mesh regularization methods essentially based on geometrical concepts , as well as mesh adaptation techniques aiming at optimizing the computational mesh according to some error indicator . Emphasis is then placed on particular issues related to the modeling of compressible and incompressible (cid:176)ow and nonlinear solid mechanics problems . This includes the treatment of convective terms in the conservation equations for mass , momentum and energy , as well as a discussion of stress update procedures for materials with history - dependent constitutive behaviour . key words : ALE description , convective transport , ﬂnite elements , stabilization techniques , mesh regularization and adaptation , (cid:176)uid dynamics , nonlinear solid mechanics , stress update procedures , (cid:176)uid - structure interaction 1 . INTRODUCTION The numerical simulation of multidimensional problems in (cid:176)uid dynamics and nonlinear solid mechanics often requires to cope with strong distortions of the continuum under consideration , while allowing for a clear delineation of free surfaces and (cid:176)uid - (cid:176)uid , solid - solid , or (cid:176)uid - structure interfaces . A fundamentally important consideration when developing a computer code for simulating problems in this class is the choice of an appropriate kinematical description of the continuum . In fact , such a choice determines the relationship between the deforming continuum and the ﬂnite grid or mesh of computing zones , and thus conditions the ability of the numerical method to deal with large distortions and provide an accurate resolution of material interfaces and mobile boundaries . The algorithms of continuum mechanics usually make use of two classical descriptions of motion : the Lagrangian description and the Eulerian description , see , for instance , Malvern ( 1969 ) . The arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian ( in short ALE ) description , which is the subject of the present chapter , was developed in an attempt to combine the advantages of the Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . 2 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF COMPUTATIONAL MECHANICS above classical kinematical descriptions , while minimizing as far as possible their respective drawbacks . Lagrangian algorithms , in which each individual node of the computational mesh follows the associated material particle during motion , see Figure 1 , are mainly used in structural mechanics . The Lagrangian description allows an easy tracking of free surfaces and interfaces between diﬁerent materials . It also facilitates the treatment of materials with history dependent constitutive relations . Its weakness is its inability to follow large distortions of the computational domain without recourse to frequent remeshing operations . Eulerian algorithms are widely used in (cid:176)uid dynamics . Here , as shown in Figure 1 , the computational mesh is ﬂxed and the continuum moves with respect to the grid . In the Eulerian description large distortions in the continuum motion can be handled with relative ease , but generally at the expense of precise interface deﬂnition and resolution of (cid:176)ow details . Because of the shortcomings of purely Lagrangian and purely Eulerian descriptions , a technique has been developed that succeeds to a certain extent in combining the best features of both the Lagrangian and the Eulerian approaches . Such a technique is known as the arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian ( ALE ) description . In the ALE description , the nodes of the computational mesh may be moved with the continuum in normal Lagrangian fashion , or be held ﬂxed in Eulerian manner , or , as suggested in Figure 1 , be moved in some arbitrarily speciﬂed way to give a continuous rezoning capability . Because of this freedom in moving the computational mesh oﬁered by the ALE description , greater distortions of the continuum can be handled than would be allowed by a purely Lagrangian method , with more resolution than is aﬁorded by a purely Eulerian approach . The simple example in Figure 2 illustrates the ability of the ALE description to accommodate signiﬂcant distortions of the computational mesh , while preserving the clear delineation of interfaces typical of a purely Lagrangian approach . A coarse ﬂnite element mesh is used to model the detonation of an explosive charge in an overstrong cylindrical vessel partially ﬂlled with water . A comparison is made of the mesh conﬂgurations at time t = 1 . 0 ms obtained , respectively , with the ALE description ( with automatic continuous rezoning ) and with a purely Lagrangian mesh description . As further evidenced by the details of the charge - water interface , the Lagrangian approach suﬁers from a severe degradation of the computational mesh , in contrast with the ability of the ALE approach to maintain a quite regular mesh conﬂguration of the charge - water interface . Aim of the present chapter is to provide an in - depth survey of ALE methods , including both conceptual aspects and numerical implementation details in view of applications in large deformation material response , (cid:176)uid dynamics , nonlinear solid mechanics , and coupled (cid:176)uid - structure problems . The chapter is organized as follows . The next section introduces the ALE kinematical description as a generalization of the classical Lagrangian and Eulerian descriptions of motion . Such generalization rests upon the introduction of a so - called referential domain and on the mapping between the referential domain and the classical material and spatial domains . Then , the fundamental ALE equation is introduced , which provides a relationship between material time derivative and referential time derivative . On this basis , the ALE form of the basic conservation equations for mass , momentum and energy is established . Computational aspects of the ALE algorithms are then addressed . This includes mesh update procedures in ﬂnite element analysis , the combination of ALE and mesh reﬂnement procedures , as well as the use of ALE in connection with mesh - free methods . The chapter closes with a discussion of problems commonly encountered in the computer implementation of ALE algorithms in (cid:176)uid dynamics , solid mechanics , and coupled problems describing (cid:176)uid - structure interaction . Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . ECM009 3 ? t Lagrangian description SSSSSS AAAAAA ⁄⁄⁄⁄⁄⁄ ¢¢¢¢¢¢ ⁄⁄⁄⁄⁄⁄ 4 4 4 4 4 h h h h h 4 4 4 4 4 h h h h h ? t Eulerian description SSSSSS AAAAAA ⁄⁄⁄⁄⁄⁄ ¢¢¢¢¢¢ ⁄⁄⁄⁄⁄⁄ 4 4 4 4 4 h h h h h 4 4 4 4 4 h h h h h ? t ALE description SSSSSS AAAAAA ⁄⁄⁄⁄⁄⁄ ¢¢¢¢¢¢ ⁄⁄⁄⁄⁄⁄ 4 4 4 4 4 h h h h h 4 4 4 4 4 h h h h h 4 material point particle motion h node mesh motion Figure 1 . One - dimensional example of Lagrangian , Eulerian and ALE mesh and particle motion . 2 . DESCRIPTIONS OF MOTION Since the ALE description of motion is a generalization of the Lagrangian and Eulerian descriptions , we start with a brief reminder of these classical descriptions of motion . We closely follow the presentation by Donea and Huerta ( 2003 ) . Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . 4 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF COMPUTATIONAL MECHANICS a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) Figure 2 . Lagrangian vs . ALE descriptions : ( a ) initial FE mesh ; ( b ) ALE mesh at t = 1 ms ; ( c ) Lagrangian mesh at t = 1 ms ; ( d ) details of interface in Lagrangian description . ’ v R X R x reference configuration current configuration x X Figure 3 . Lagrangian description of motion . 2 . 1 . Lagrangian and Eulerian viewpoints Two domains are commonly used in continuum mechanics : the material domain R X ‰ R n sd , with n sd spatial dimensions , made up of material particles X , and the spatial domain R x , consisting of spatial points x . The Lagrangian viewpoint consists of following the material particles of the continuum in their motion . To this end , one introduces , as suggested in Figure 3 , a computational grid which follows the continuum in its motion , the grid nodes being permanently connected to the same material points . The material coordinates , X , allow us to identify the reference conﬂguration , R X . The motion of the material points relates the material coordinates , X , to the spatial Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . ECM009 5 ones , x . It is deﬂned by an application ’ such that ’ : R X £ [ t 0 ; t ﬂnal [ ¡ ! R x £ [ t 0 ; t ﬂnal [ ( X ; t ) 7¡ ! ’ ( X ; t ) = ( x ; t ) ( 1 ) which allows us to link X and x during time by the law of motion , namely x = x ( X ; t ) ; t = t ( 2 ) which explicitly states the particular nature of ’ : ﬂrst , the spatial coordinates x depend both on the material particle , X , and time t , and , second , physical time is measured by the same variable t in both material and spatial domains . For every ﬂxed instant t , the mapping ’ deﬂnes a conﬂguration in the spatial domain . It is convenient to employ a matrix representation for the gradient of ’ , @ ’ @ ( X ; t ) = 0 @ @ x @ X v 0 T 1 1 A ( 3 ) where 0 T is a null row - vector and the material velocity v is v ( X ; t ) = @ x @ t ﬂﬂﬂ X ( 4 ) with ﬂﬂﬂ X meaning \ holding the material coordinate X ﬂxed " . Obviously , the one - to - one mapping ’ must verify det ( @ x = @ X ) > 0 ( non zero to impose a one - to - one correspondence and positive to avoid orientation change of the reference axes ) at each point X and instant t > t 0 . This allows to keep track of the history of motion and , by the inverse transformation ( X ; t ) = ’ ¡ 1 ( x ; t ) , to identify at any instant the initial position of the material particle occupying position x at time t . Since the material points coincide with the same grid points during the whole motion , there are no convective eﬁects in Lagrangian calculations : the material derivative reduces to a simple time derivative . The fact that each ﬂnite element of a Lagrangian mesh always contains the same material particles represents a signiﬂcant advantage from the computational viewpoint , especially in problems involving materials with history - dependent behaviour . This aspect is discussed in detail by Bonet and Wood ( 1997 ) . However , when large material deformations do occur , for instance vortices in (cid:176)uids , Lagrangian algorithms undergo a loss in accuracy , and may even be unable to conclude a calculation , due to excessive distortions of the computational mesh linked to the material . The di – culties caused by an excessive distortion of the ﬂnite element grid are overcome in the Eulerian formulation . The basic idea in the Eulerian formulation , which is very popular in (cid:176)uid mechanics , consists in examining as time evolves the physical quantities associated with the (cid:176)uid particles passing through a ﬂxed region of space . In an Eulerian description the ﬂnite element mesh is thus ﬂxed and the continuum moves and deforms with respect to the computational grid . The conservation equations are formulated in terms of the spatial coordinates x and the time t . Therefore , the Eulerian description of motion only involves variables and functions having an instantaneous signiﬂcance in a ﬂxed region of space . The material velocity v at a given mesh node corresponds to the velocity of the material point coincident at the considered time t with the considered node . The velocity v is Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . 6 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF COMPUTATIONAL MECHANICS consequently expressed with respect to the ﬂxed element mesh without any reference to the initial conﬂguration of the continuum and the material coordinates X : v = v ( x ; t ) . Since the Eulerian formulation dissociates the mesh nodes from the material particles , convective eﬁects appear due to the relative motion between the deforming material and the computational grid . Eulerian algorithms present numerical di – culties due to the non - symmetric character of convection operators , but permit an easy treatment of complex material motion . By contrast with the Lagrangian description , serious di – culties are now found in following deforming material interfaces and mobile boundaries . 2 . 2 . ALE kinematical description The above reminder of the classical Lagrangian and Eulerian descriptions has highlighted the advantages and drawbacks of each individual formulation . It has also shown the potential interest of a generalized description capable of combining at best the interesting aspects of the classical mesh descriptions , while minimizing as far as possible their drawbacks . Such a generalized description is termed arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian ( ALE ) description . ALE methods were ﬂrst proposed in the ﬂnite diﬁerence and ﬂnite volume context . Original developments were made , among others , by Noh ( 1964 ) , Franck and Lazarus ( 1964 ) , Trulio ( 1966 ) and Hirt et al . ( 1974 ) ; this last contribution has been reprinted in 1997 . The method was subsequently adopted in the ﬂnite element context and early applications are to be found in the work of Donea et al . ( 1977 ) , Belytschko et al . ( 1978 ) , Belytschko and Kennedy ( 1978 ) and Hughes et al . ( 1978 ) . In the ALE description of motion , neither the material conﬂguration R X nor the spatial one R x is taken as the reference . Thus , a third domain is needed : the referential conﬂguration R ´ where reference coordinates ´ are introduced to identify the grid points . Figure 4 shows these domains and the one - to - one transformations relating the conﬂgurations . The referential domain R ´ is mapped into the material and spatial domains by “ and ' respectively . The particle motion ’ may then be expressed as ’ = ' – “ ¡ 1 , clearly showing that , of course , the three mappings “ , ' and ’ are not independent . The mapping ' from the referential domain to the spatial domain , which can be understood as the motion of the grid points in the spatial domain , is represented by ' : R ´ £ [ t 0 ; t ﬂnal [ ¡ ! R x £ [ t 0 ; t ﬂnal [ ( ´ ; t ) 7¡ ! ' ( ´ ; t ) = ( x ; t ) ( 5 ) and its gradient is @ ' @ ( ´ ; t ) = 0 @ @ x @ ´ ^ v 0 T 1 1 A ( 6 ) where now the mesh velocity ^ v ( ´ ; t ) = @ x @ t ﬂﬂ ﬂ ´ ( 7 ) is involved . Note that both the material and the mesh move with respect to the laboratory . Thus , the corresponding material and mesh velocities have been deﬂned deriving with respect to time the equations of material motion and mesh motion respectively , see equations ( 4 ) and ( 7 ) . Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . ECM009 7 (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:6) (cid:6) (cid:6) (cid:7) (cid:8) (cid:9) Figure 4 . The motion of the ALE computational mesh is independent from the material motion . Finally , regarding “ , it is convenient to represent directly its inverse “ ¡ 1 , “ ¡ 1 : R X £ [ t 0 ; t ﬂnal [ ¡ ! R ´ £ [ t 0 ; t ﬂnal [ ( X ; t ) 7¡ ! “ ¡ 1 ( X ; t ) = ( ´ ; t ) ( 8 ) and its gradient is @ “ ¡ 1 @ ( X ; t ) = 0 @ @ ´ @ X w 0 T 1 1 A ( 9 ) where the velocity w is deﬂned as w = @ ´ @ t ﬂﬂﬂ X ( 10 ) and can be interpreted as the particle velocity in the referential domain , since it measures the time variation of the referential coordinate ´ holding the material particle X ﬂxed . The relation between velocities v , ^ v and w can be obtained by diﬁerentiating ’ = ' – “ ¡ 1 , @ ’ @ ( X ; t ) ( X ; t ) = @ ' @ ( ´ ; t ) ¡ “ ¡ 1 ( X ; t ) ¢ @ “ ¡ 1 @ ( X ; t ) ( X ; t ) = @ ' @ ( ´ ; t ) ( ´ ; t ) @ “ ¡ 1 @ ( X ; t ) ( X ; t ) ( 11 ) Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . 8 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF COMPUTATIONAL MECHANICS or , in matrix format : 0 @ @ x @ X v 0 T 1 1 A = 0 @ @ x @ ´ ^ v 0 T 1 1 A 0 @ @ ´ @ X w 0 T 1 1 A ( 12 ) which yields , after block - multiplication , v = ^ v + @ x @ ´ ¢ w ( 13 ) This equation may be rewritten as c : = v ¡ ^ v = @ x @ ´ ¢ w ( 14 ) thus deﬂning the convective velocity c , that is , the relative velocity between the material and the mesh . The convective velocity c , see equation ( 14 ) , should not be confused with w , see equation ( 10 ) . As stated before , w is the particle velocity as seen from the referential domain R ´ , whereas c is the particle velocity relative to the mesh as seen from the spatial domain R x ( both v and ^ v are variations of coordinate x ) . In fact , equation ( 14 ) implies that c = w if and only if @ x = @ ´ = I ( where I is the identity tensor ) , that is , when the mesh motion is purely translational , without rotations or deformations of any kind . After the fundamentals on ALE kinematics have been presented , it should be remarked that both Lagrangian or Eulerian formulations may be obtained as particular cases . With the choice “ = I , equation ( 3 ) reduces to X · ´ and a Lagrangian description results : the material and mesh velocities , equations ( 4 ) and ( 7 ) , coincide , and the convective velocity c , see equation ( 14 ) , is null ( there are no convective terms in the conservation laws ) . If , on the other hand , ' = I , equation ( 2 ) simpliﬂes into x · ´ , thus implying an Eulerian description : a null mesh velocity is obtained from equation ( 7 ) and the convective velocity c is simply identical to the material velocity v . In the ALE formulation , the freedom of moving the mesh is very attractive . It helps to combine the respective advantages of the Lagrangian and Eulerian formulations . This could however be overshadowed by the burden of specifying grid velocities well suited to the particular problem under consideration . As a consequence , the practical implementation of the ALE description requires that an automatic mesh displacement prescription algorithm be supplied . 3 . THE FUNDAMENTAL ALE EQUATION In order to express the conservation laws for mass , momentum , and energy in an ALE framework , a relation between material ( or total ) time derivative , which is inherent to conservation laws , and referential time derivative is needed . 3 . 1 . Material , spatial and referential time derivatives In order to relate the time derivative in the material , spatial and referential domains , let a scalar physical quantity be described by f ( x ; t ) , f ⁄ ( ´ ; t ) and f ⁄⁄ ( X ; t ) in the spatial , referential Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . ECM009 9 and material domains , respectively . Stars are employed to emphasize that the functional forms are , in general , diﬁerent . Since the particle motion ’ is a mapping , the spatial description f ( x ; t ) and the material description f ⁄⁄ ( X ; t ) of the physical quantity can be related as f ⁄⁄ ( X ; t ) = f ¡ ’ ( X ; t ) ; t ¢ or f ⁄⁄ = f – ’ ( 15 ) The gradient of this expression can be easily computed as @ f ⁄⁄ @ ( X ; t ) ( X ; t ) = @ f @ ( x ; t ) ( x ; t ) @ ’ @ ( X ; t ) ( X ; t ) ( 16 ) which is amenable to the matrix form (cid:181) @ f ⁄⁄ @ X @ f ⁄⁄ @ t ¶ = (cid:181) @ f @ x @ f @ t ¶ 0 @ @ x @ X v 0 T 1 1 A ( 17 ) which renders , after block - multiplication , a ﬂrst expression which is obvious , i . e . ( @ f ⁄⁄ = @ X ) = ( @ f = @ x ) ( @ x = @ X ) ; however , the second one is more interesting : @ f ⁄⁄ @ t = @ f @ t + @ f @ x ¢ v ( 18 ) Note that this is the well known equation that relates the material and the spatial time derivatives . Dropping the stars to ease the notation , this relation is ﬂnally cast as @ f @ t ﬂﬂﬂ X = @ f @ t ﬂﬂﬂ x + v ¢ r f or df dt = @ f @ t + v ¢ r f ( 19 ) which can be interpreted in the usual way : the variation of a physical quantity for a given particle X is the local variation plus a convective term taking into account the relative motion between the material and spatial ( laboratory ) systems . Moreover , in order not to overload with notation the rest of the text , except for the speciﬂc sections , the material time derivative is denoted as d ¢ dt : = @ ¢ @ t ﬂﬂﬂ X ( 20 ) and the spatial time derivative as @ ¢ @ t : = @ ¢ @ t ﬂﬂﬂ x ( 21 ) The relation between material and spatial time derivatives is now extended to include the referential time derivative . With the help of mapping “ , the transformation from the referential description f ⁄ ( ´ ; t ) of the scalar physical quantity to the material description f ⁄⁄ ( X ; t ) can be written as f ⁄⁄ = f ⁄ – “ ¡ 1 ( 22 ) and its gradient can be easily computed as @ f ⁄⁄ @ ( X ; t ) ( X ; t ) = @ f ⁄ @ ( ´ ; t ) ( ´ ; t ) @ “ ¡ 1 @ ( X ; t ) ( X ; t ) ( 23 ) Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . 10 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF COMPUTATIONAL MECHANICS or , in matrix form (cid:181) @ f ⁄⁄ @ X @ f ⁄⁄ @ t ¶ = (cid:181) @ f ⁄ @ ´ @ f ⁄ @ t ¶ 0 @ @ ´ @ X w 0 T 1 1 A ( 24 ) which renders , after block - multiplication , @ f ⁄⁄ @ t = @ f ⁄ @ t + @ f ⁄ @ ´ ¢ w ( 25 ) Note that this equation relates the material and the referential time derivatives . However , it also requires the evaluation of the gradient of the considered quantity in the referential domain . This can be done , but in computational mechanics it is usually easier to work in the spatial ( or material ) domain . Moreover , in (cid:176)uids , constitutive relations are naturally expressed in the spatial conﬂguration and the Cauchy stress tensor , that will be introduced next , is the natural measure for stresses . Thus , using the deﬂnition of w given in equation ( 14 ) , the previous equation may be rearranged into @ f ⁄⁄ @ t = @ f ⁄ @ t + @ f @ x ¢ c ( 26 ) The fundamental ALE relation between material time derivatives , referential time derivatives and spatial gradient is ﬂnally cast as ( stars dropped ) @ f @ t ﬂﬂﬂ X = @ f @ t ﬂﬂﬂ ´ + @ f @ x ¢ c = @ f @ t ﬂﬂﬂ ´ + c ¢ r f ( 27 ) and shows that the time derivative of the physical quantity f for a given particle X , that is , its material derivative , is its local derivative ( with the reference coordinate ´ held ﬂxed ) plus a convective term taking into account the relative velocity c between the material and the reference system . This equation is equivalent to equation ( 19 ) but in the ALE formulation , that is , when ( ´ ; t ) is the reference . 3 . 2 . Time derivative of integrals over moving volumes To establish the integral form of the basic conservation laws for mass , momentum and energy , we also need to consider the rate of change of integrals of scalar and vector functions over a moving volume occupied by (cid:176)uid . Consider thus a material volume V t bounded by a smooth closed surface S t whose points at time t move with the material velocity v = v ( x ; t ) where x 2 S t . A material volume is a volume that permanently contains the same particles of the continuum under consideration . The material time derivative of the integral of a scalar function f ( x ; t ) ( note that f is deﬂned in the spatial domain ) over the time - varying material volume V t is given by the following well - known expression , often referred to as Reynolds transport theorem ( see , for instance , Belytschko et al . ( 2000 ) for a detailed proof ) : d dt Z V t f ( x ; t ) dV = Z V c · V t @ f ( x ; t ) @ t dV + Z S c · S t f ( x ; t ) v ¢ n dS ( 28 ) which holds for smooth functions f ( x ; t ) . The volume integral in the right - hand side is deﬂned over a control volume V c ( ﬂxed in space ) which coincides with the moving material volume Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . ECM009 11 V t at the considered instant , t , in time . Similarly , the ﬂxed control surface S c coincides at time t with the closed surface S t bounding the material volume V t . In the surface integral , n denotes the unit outward normal to the surface S t at time t , and v is the material velocity of points of the boundary S t . The ﬂrst term in the right - hand side of expression ( 28 ) is the local time derivative of the volume integral . The boundary integral represents the (cid:176)ux of the scalar quantity f across the ﬂxed boundary of the control volume V c · V t . Noting that Z S c f ( x ; t ) v ¢ n dS = Z V c r ¢ ( f v ) dV ( 29 ) one obtains the alternative form of Reynolds transport theorem : d dt Z V t f ( x ; t ) dV = Z V c · V t (cid:181) @ f ( x ; t ) @ t + r ¢ ( f v ) ¶ dV ( 30 ) Similar forms hold for the material derivative of the volume integral of a vector quantity . Analogous formulae can be developed in the ALE context , that is with a referential time derivative . In this case however , the characterizing velocity is no longer the material velocity v , but the grid velocity ^ v . 4 . ALE FORM OF CONSERVATION EQUATIONS To serve as an introduction to the discussion of ALE ﬂnite element and ﬂnite volume models , we establish in this section the diﬁerential and integral forms of the conservation equations for mass , momentum and energy . 4 . 1 . Diﬁerential forms The ALE diﬁerential form of the conservation equations for mass , momentum and energy are readily obtained from the corresponding well - known Eulerian forms Mass : d‰ dt = @ ‰ @ t ﬂﬂﬂ x + v ¢ r ‰ = ¡ ‰ r ¢ v Momentum : ‰d v dt = ‰ ‡ @ v @ t ﬂﬂﬂ x + ( v ¢ r ) v · = r ¢ (cid:190) + ‰ b Energy : ‰ dE dt = ‰ ‡ @ E @ t ﬂﬂﬂ x + v ¢ r E · = r ¢ ( (cid:190) ¢ v ) + v ¢ ‰ b ( 31 ) where ‰ is the mass density , v the material velocity vector , (cid:190) denotes Cauchy stress tensor , b the speciﬂc body force vector and E the speciﬂc total energy . Only mechanical energies are considered in the above form of the energy equation . Note that the stress term in the same equation can be rewritten in the form r ¢ ( (cid:190) ¢ v ) = @ @ x i ( (cid:190) ij v j ) = @ (cid:190) ij @ x i v j + (cid:190) ij @ v j @ x i = ( r ¢ (cid:190) ) ¢ v + (cid:190) : r v ( 32 ) where r v is the spatial velocity gradient . Also frequently used is the balance equation for the internal energy ‰ de dt = ‰ ‡ @ e @ t ﬂﬂ ﬂ x + v ¢ r e · = (cid:190) : r s v ( 33 ) Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . 12 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF COMPUTATIONAL MECHANICS where e is the speciﬂc internal energy and r s v denotes the stretching ( or strain rate ) tensor , the symmetric part of the velocity gradient r v ; that is , r s v = 12 ( r v + r T v ) . All one has to do to obtain the ALE form of the above conservation equations is to replace in the various convective terms the material velocity v with the convective velocity c = v ¡ ^ v . The result is : Mass : @ ‰ @ t ﬂﬂﬂ ´ + c ¢ r ‰ = ¡ ‰ r ¢ v Momentum : ‰ ‡ @ v @ t ﬂﬂﬂ ´ + ¡ c ¢ r ¢ v · = r ¢ (cid:190) + ‰ b Total energy : ‰ ‡ @ E @ t ﬂﬂﬂ ´ + c ¢ r E · = r ¢ ( (cid:190) ¢ v ) + v ¢ ‰ b Internal energy : ‰ ‡ @ e @ t ﬂﬂﬂ ´ + c ¢ r e · = (cid:190) : r s v : ( 34 ) It is important to note that the right - hand side of equation ( 34 ) is written in classical Eulerian ( spatial ) form , while the arbitrary motion of the computational mesh is only re(cid:176)ected in the left - hand side . The origin of equations ( 34 ) and their similarity with the Eulerian equations ( 31 ) have induced some authors to name this method the quasi - Eulerian description , see for instance Belytschko et al . ( 1980 ) . Remark ( Material acceleration ) Mesh acceleration plays no role in the ALE formulation , so only the material acceleration a , the material derivative of velocity v , is needed , which is expressed in the Lagrangian , Eulerian and ALE formulation respectively as a = @ v @ t ﬂﬂﬂ X ( 35a ) a = @ v @ t ﬂﬂﬂ x + v @ v @ x ( 35b ) a = @ v @ t ﬂﬂﬂ ´ + c @ v @ x ( 35c ) Note that the ALE expression of acceleration ( 35c ) is simply a particularization of the fundamental relation ( 27 ) , taking the material velocity v as the physical quantity f . The ﬂrst term in the right - hand side of relationships ( 35b ) and ( 35c ) represents the local acceleration , the second term being the convective acceleration . 4 . 2 . Integral forms The starting point for deriving the ALE integral form of the conservation equations is Reynolds transport theorem ( 28 ) applied to an arbitrary volume V t whose boundary S t = @ V t moves with the mesh velocity ^ v : @ @ t ﬂ ﬂﬂ ´ Z V t f ( x ; t ) dV = Z V t @ f ( x ; t ) @ t ﬂ ﬂﬂ x dV + Z S t f ( x ; t ) ^ v ¢ n dS ( 36 ) where , in this case , we have explicitly indicated that the time derivative in the ﬂrst term of the right - hand side is a spatial time derivative , as in expression ( 28 ) . We then successively replace the scalar f ( x ; t ) by the (cid:176)uid density ‰ , momentum ‰ v and speciﬂc total energy ‰E . Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . ECM009 13 Similarly , the spatial time derivative @ f = @ t is substituted with expressions ( 31 ) for the mass , momentum and energy equation . The end result is the following set of ALE integral forms : @ @ t ﬂﬂﬂ ´ Z V t ‰ dV + Z S t ‰ c ¢ n dS = 0 @ @ t ﬂﬂﬂ ´ Z V t ‰ v dV + Z S t ‰ v c ¢ n dS = Z V t ( r ¢ (cid:190) + ‰ b ) dV @ @ t ﬂﬂﬂ ´ Z V t ‰E dV + Z S t ‰E c ¢ n dS = Z V t ‡ v ¢ ‰ b + r ¢ ( (cid:190) ¢ v ) · dV ( 37 ) Note that the integral forms for the Lagrangian and Eulerian mesh descriptions are contained in the above ALE forms . The Lagrangian description corresponds to selecting ^ v = v ( c = 0 ) , while the Eulerian description corresponds to selecting ^ v = 0 ( c = v ) . The ALE diﬁerential and integral forms of the conservation equations derived in the present section will be used as a basis for the spatial discretization of problems in (cid:176)uid dynamics and solid mechanics . 5 . MESH UPDATE PROCEDURES The majority of modern ALE computer codes are based on either ﬂnite volume or ﬂnite element spatial discretizations , the former being popular in the (cid:176)uid mechanics area , the latter being generally preferred in solid and structural mechanics . Note , however , that the ALE methodology is also used in connection with so - called mesh - free methods , see for instance Ponthot and Belytschko ( 1998 ) for an application of the element - free Galerkin method to dynamic fracture problems . In the remainder of this chapter reference will mainly be made to spatial discretizations produced by the ﬂnite element method . As already seen , one of the main advantages of the ALE formulation is that it represents a very versatile combination of the classical Lagrangian and Eulerian descriptions . However , the computer implementation of the ALE technique requires the formulation of a mesh update procedure that assigns mesh node velocities or displacements at each station ( time step , or load step ) of a calculation . The mesh update strategy can in principle be chosen by the user . However , the remesh algorithm strongly in(cid:176)uences the success of the ALE technique and may represent a big burden on the user if it is not rendered automatic . Two basic mesh update strategies may be identiﬂed . On one hand , the geometrical concept of mesh regularization can be exploited to keep the computational mesh as regular as possible and to avoid mesh entanglement during the calculation . On the other hand , if the ALE approach is used as a mesh adaptation technique , for instance to concentrate elements in zones of steep solution gradient , a suitable indication of the error is required as basic input to the remesh algorithm . 5 . 1 . Mesh regularization The objective of mesh regularization is of a geometrical nature . It consists in keeping the computational mesh as regular as possible during the whole calculation , thereby avoiding excessive distortions and squeeze of the computing zones and preventing mesh entanglement . Of course , this procedure decreases the numerical errors errors due to mesh distortion . Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . 14 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF COMPUTATIONAL MECHANICS Mesh regularization requires that updated nodal coordinates be speciﬂed at each station of a calculation , either through step displacements , or from current mesh velocities ^ v . Alternatively , when it is preferable to prescribe the relative motion between the mesh and the material particles , the referential velocity w is speciﬂed . In this case , ^ v is deduced from equation ( 13 ) . Usually in (cid:176)uid (cid:176)ows the mesh velocity is interpolated and in solid problems the mesh displacement is directly interpolated . First of all , these mesh - updating procedures are classiﬂed depending on whether the boundary motion is prescribed a priori or its motion is unknown . When the motion of the material surfaces ( usually the boundaries ) is known a priori , the mesh motion is also prescribed a priori . This is done deﬂning an adequate mesh velocity in the domain , usually by simple interpolation . In general , this implies a Lagrangian description at the moving boundaries ( the mesh motion coincides with the prescribed boundary motion ) while an Eulerian formulation ( ﬂxed mesh velocity ^ v = 0 ) is employed far away from the moving boundaries . A transition zone is deﬂned in between . The interaction problem between a rigid body and a viscous (cid:176)uid studied by Huerta and Liu ( 1988a ) falls in this category . Similarly , the crack propagation problems discussed by Koh and Haber ( 1986 ) and Koh et al . ( 1988 ) , where the crack path is known a priori , also allow the use of this kind of mesh update procedure . Other examples of prescribed mesh motion in nonlinear solid mechanics can be found in the works by Liu et al . ( 1986 ) , Hu¶etink et al . ( 1990 ) , van Haaren et al . ( 2000 ) and Rodr¶‡guez - Ferran et al . ( 2002 ) , among others . In all other cases at least a part of the boundary is a material surface whose position must be tracked at each time - step . Thus a Lagrangian description is prescribed along this surface ( or at least along its normal ) . In the ﬂrst applications to (cid:176)uid dynamics ( usually free surface (cid:176)ows ) , ALE degrees of freedom were simply divided into purely Lagrangian ( ^ v = v ) or purely Eulerian ( ^ v = 0 ) . Of course , the distortion was thus concentrated in a layer of elements . This is , for instance , the case for numerical simulations reported by Noh ( 1964 ) , Franck and Lazarus ( 1964 ) , Hirt et al . ( 1974 ) and Pracht ( 1975 ) . Nodes located on moving boundaries were Lagrangian , while internal nodes were Eulerian . This approach was used later for (cid:176)uid - structure interaction problems by Liu and Chang ( 1984 ) and in solid mechanics by Haber ( 1984 ) and Haber and Hariandja ( 1985 ) . This procedure was generalized by Hughes et al . ( 1981 ) using the so - called Lagrange - Euler matrix method . The referential velocity , w , is deﬂned relative to the particle velocity , v , and the mesh velocity is determined from equation ( 13 ) . Huerta and Liu ( 1988b ) improved this method avoiding the need to solve any equation for the mesh velocity inside the domain and ensuring an accurate tracking of the material surfaces by solving w ¢ n = 0 , where n is the unit outward normal , only along the material surfaces . Once the boundaries are known , mesh displacements or velocities inside the computational domain can in fact be prescribed through potential - type equations or interpolations as is discussed next . In (cid:176)uid - structure interaction problems , solid nodes are usually treated as Lagrangian , while (cid:176)uid nodes are treated as described above ( ﬂxed or updated according to some simple interpolation scheme ) . Interface nodes between solid and (cid:176)uid must generally be treated as described in Section 6 . 1 . 2 . Occasionally they can be treated as Lagrangian , see for instance Belytschko and coworkers ( 1978 ; 1980 ; 1982 ; 1985 ) , Argyris et al . ( 1985 ) , Huerta and Liu ( 1988b ) . Once the boundary motion is known several interpolation techniques are available to determine the mesh rezoning in the interior of the domain . Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . ECM009 15 5 . 1 . 1 . Transﬂnite mapping method This method was originally designed for creating a mesh on a geometric region with speciﬂed boundaries , see e . g . Gordon and Hall ( 1973 ) , Haber and Abel ( 1982 ) and Eriksson ( 1985 ) . The general transﬂnite method describes an approximate surface or volume at a non - denumerable number of points . It is this property that gives rise to the term transﬂnite mapping . In the 2D case , the transﬂnite mapping can be made to exactly model all domain boundaries , and thus no geometric error is introduced by the mapping . It induces a very low cost procedure , since new nodal coordinates can be obtained explicitly once the boundaries of the computational domain have been discretized . The main disadvantage of this methodology is that it imposes restrictions on the mesh topology , as two opposite curves have to be discretized with the same number of elements . It has been widely used by the ALE community to update nodal coordinates , see e . g . Ponthot and Hogge ( 1991 ) , Yamada and Kikuchi ( 1993 ) , Gadala and Wang ( 1998 ; 1999 ) and Gadala et al . ( 2002 ) . 5 . 1 . 2 . Laplacian smoothing and variational methods As in mesh generation or smoothing techniques the rezoning of the mesh nodes consists in solving a Laplace ( or Poisson ) equation for each component of the node velocity or position , so that on a logically regular region the mesh forms lines of equal potential . This method is also sometimes called elliptic mesh generation and was originally proposed by Winslow ( 1963 ) . This technique has an important drawback : in a non - convex domain nodes may run outside it . Techniques to preclude this pitfall either increase the computational cost enormously or introduce new terms in the formulation which are particular to each geometry . Examples based on this type of mesh update algorithms are presented , among others , by Benson ( 1989 ; 1992a ; 1992b ) , Liu et al . ( 1988 ; 1991 ) , Ghosh and Kikuchi ( 1991 ) , Chenot and Bellet ( 1995 ) and L˜ohner and Yang ( 1996 ) . An equivalent approach based on a mechanical interpretation : ( non ) linear elasticity problem is used by Schreurs et al . ( 1986 ) , Le Tallec and Martin ( 1996 ) , Belytschko et al . ( 2000 ) and Armero and Love ( 2003 ) , while Cescutti et al . ( 1988 ) minimize a functional quantifying the mesh distortion . 5 . 1 . 3 . Mesh smoothing and simple interpolations In fact , in ALE it is possible to use any mesh smoothing algorithm designed to improve the shape of the elements once the topology is ﬂxed . Simple iterative averaging procedures where can be implemented , see for instance Donea et al . ( 1982 ) , Batina ( 1991 ) , Tr¶epanier et al . ( 1993 ) , Ghosh and Raju ( 1996 ) and Aymone et al . ( 2001 ) . A more robust algorithm ( especially in the neighborhood of boundaries with large curvature ) was proposed by Giuliani ( 1982 ) based on geometric considerations . The goal of this method is to minimize both the squeeze and distortion of each element in the mesh . Donea ( 1983 ) and Huerta and Casadei ( 1994 ) show examples using this algorithm , Sarrate and Huerta ( 2001 ) and Hermansson and Hansbo ( 2003 ) improvements to the original procedure . The main advantage of these mesh regularization methods is they are both simple and rather general . They can in fact be applied to unstructured meshes consisting of triangular and quadrilateral elements in 2D , and to tetrahedral , hexahedral , prism and pyramidal elements in 3D . 5 . 2 . Mesh adaptation When the ALE description is used as an adaptive technique , the objective is to optimize the computational mesh to achieve an improved accuracy , possibly at low computing cost ( the total number of elements in a mesh remains unchanged throughout the computation , as well as the Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . 16 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF COMPUTATIONAL MECHANICS element connectivity ) . Mesh reﬂnement is typically carried out by moving the nodes towards zones of strong solution gradient , such as localization zones in large deformation problems involving softening materials . The ALE algorithm then includes an indicator of the error and the mesh is modiﬂed to obtain an equi - distribution of the error over the entire computational domain . The remesh indicator can , for instance , be made a function of the average or the jump of a certain state variable . Equi - distribution can be carried out using an elliptic or a parabolic diﬁerential equation . The ALE technique can nevertheless be coupled with traditional mesh reﬂnement procedures , such as h - adaptivity , to further enhance accuracy through the selective addition of new degrees of freedom , see Askes and Rodr¶‡guez - Ferran ( 2001 ) . Consider , for instance , the use of the ALE formulation for the prediction of yield line patterns in plates , see Askes et al . ( 1999 ) . With a coarse ﬂxed mesh , ﬂgure 5 ( a ) , the spatial discretization is too poor and the yield line pattern cannot be properly captured . One possible solution is , of course , to use a ﬂner mesh , see ﬂgure 5 ( b ) . Another possibility , very attractive from a computational viewpoint , is to stay with the coarse mesh and use the ALE formulation to relocate the nodes , see ﬂgure 5 ( c ) . The level of plastiﬂcation is used as the remesh indicator . Note that , in this problem , element distortion is not a concern ( contrary to the typical situation illustrated in ﬂgure 2 ) ; nodes are relocated to concentrate them along the yield lines . ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) Figure 5 . Use of the ALE formulation as an r - adaptive technique . The yield line pattern is not properly captured with ( a ) a coarse ﬂxed mesh . Either ( b ) a ﬂne ﬂxed mesh or ( c ) a coarse ALE mesh is required . Studies on the use of ALE as a mesh adaptation technique in solid mechanics are reported , among others , by Pijaudier - Cabot et al . ( 1995 ) , Huerta et al . ( 1999 ) , Askes and Sluys ( 2000 ) , Askes and Rodr¶‡guez - Ferran ( 2001 ) , Askes et al . ( 2001 ) and Rodr¶‡guez - Ferran et al . ( 2002 ) . Mesh adaptation has also found widespread use in (cid:176)uid dynamics . Often account must be taken of the directional character of the (cid:176)ow , so that anisotropic adaptation procedures are to be preferred . For example , an e – cient adaptation method for viscous (cid:176)ows with strong shear layers has to be able to reﬂne directionally to adapt the mesh to the anisotropy of the (cid:176)ow . Anisotropic adaptation criteria again have an error estimate as basic criterion , see for instance Fortin et al . ( 1996 ) , Castro - Diaz et al . ( 1996 ) , Ait - Ali - Yahia et al . ( 2002 ) , Habashi et al . ( 2000 ) and M˜uller ( 2002 ) for the practical implementation of such procedures . 6 . ALE METHODS IN FLUID DYNAMICS Due to its superior ability with respect to the Eulerian description to deal with interfaces between materials and mobile boundaries , the ALE description is being widely used for the Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . ECM009 17 spatial discretization of problems in (cid:176)uid and structural dynamics . In particular , the method is frequently employed in the so - called hydrocodes , which are used to simulate the large distortion / deformation response of materials , structures , (cid:176)uids and (cid:176)uid - structure systems . They typically apply to problems in impact and penetration mechanics , fracture mechanics and detonation / blast analysis . We shall brie(cid:176)y illustrate the speciﬂcities of ALE techniques in the modeling of viscous incompressible (cid:176)ows and in the simulation of inviscid , compressible (cid:176)ows , including interaction with deforming structures . The most obvious in(cid:176)uence of an ALE formulation in (cid:176)ow problems is that the convective term must account for the mesh motion . Thus as already discussed in Section 4 . 1 , the convective velocity c replaces the material velocity v , which appears in the convective term of Eulerian formulations , confront equations ( 31 ) and ( 34 ) . Note that the mesh motion may increase or decrease the convection eﬁects . Obviously , in pure convection ( for instance if a fractional - step algorithm is employed ) or when convection is dominant , stabilization techniques must be implemented . The interested reader is urged to consult Chapter 51 of this Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics for a thorough exposition of stabilization techniques available to remedy the lack of stability of the standard Galerkin formulation in convection - dominated situations or the textbook by Donea and Huerta ( 2003 ) . It is important to note that in standard (cid:176)uid dynamics the stress tensor only depends on the pressure and ( for viscous (cid:176)ows ) on the velocity ﬂeld at the point and instant under consideration . This is not the case in solid mechanics as discussed below in Section 7 . Thus stress update is not a major concern in ALE (cid:176)uid dynamics . 6 . 1 . Boundary conditions The rest of the discussion of the speciﬂcities of the ALE formulation in (cid:176)uid dynamics concerns boundary conditions . In fact , boundary conditions are related to the problem , not to the description employed . Thus the same boundary conditions employed in Eulerian or Lagrangian descriptions are implemented in the ALE formulation . That is , along the boundary of the domain , kinematical and dynamical conditions must be deﬂned . Usually , this is formalized as ( v = v D on ¡ D n ¢ (cid:190) = t on ¡ N where v D and t are the prescribed boundary velocities and tractions , respectively ; n is the outward unit normal to ¡ N , and ¡ D and ¡ N are the two distinct subsets ( Dirichlet and Neumann , respectively ) , which deﬂne the piecewise smooth boundary of the computational domain . As usual , stress conditions on the boundaries represent the \ natural boundary conditions " , and thus , they are automatically included in the weak form of the momentum conservation equation , see ( 34 ) . If part of the boundary is composed of a material surface whose position is unknown , then a mixture of both conditions is required . The ALE formulation allows an accurate treatment of material surfaces . The conditions required on a material surface are : a ) no particles can cross it , and b ) stresses must be continuous across the surface ( if a net force is applied to a surface of zero mass the acceleration is inﬂnite ) . Two types of material surfaces are discussed here : free surfaces and (cid:176)uid - structure interfaces , which may be frictionless or not ( whether the (cid:176)uid is inviscid or not ) . Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . 18 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF COMPUTATIONAL MECHANICS 6 . 1 . 1 . Free surfaces The unknown position of free surfaces can be computed in two diﬁerent manners . First , for the simple case of a single valued function z = z ( x ; y ; t ) an hyperbolic equation must be solved , @ z @ t + ( v ¢ r ) z = 0 This is the kinematic equation of the surface and has been used , for instance , by Ramaswamy and Kawahara ( 1987 ) , Huerta and Liu ( 1988b ; 1990 ) and Souli and Zolesio ( 2001 ) . Second , a more general approach can be obtained by simply imposing the obvious condition that no particle can cross the free surface ( because it is a material surface ) . This can be imposed in a straightforward manner imposing along this surface a Lagrangian description ( i . e . , w = 0 or v = ^ v ) . However , this condition may be relaxed imposing only the necessary condition : w equal to zero along the normal to the boundary ( i . e . n ¢ w = 0 , where n is the outward unit normal to the (cid:176)uid domain , or n ¢ v = n ¢ ^ v ) . The mesh position , normal to the free surface , is determined from the normal component of the particle velocity and remeshing can be performed along the tangent see , for instance , Huerta and Liu ( 1989 ) or Braess and Wriggers ( 2000 ) . In any case , these two alternatives correspond to the kinematical condition ; the dynamic condition expresses the stress - free situation , n ¢ (cid:190) = 0 , and since it is a homogeneous natural boundary condition , as mentioned earlier , it is directly taken into account by the weak formulation . 6 . 1 . 2 . Fluid - structure interaction Along solid - wall boundaries , the particle velocity is coupled to the rigid or (cid:176)exible structure . The enforcement of the kinematic requirement that no particles can cross the interface is similar to the free surface case . Thus conditions n ¢ w = 0 or n ¢ v = n ¢ ^ v are also used . However , due to the coupling between (cid:176)uid and structure , extra conditions are needed to ensure that the (cid:176)uid and structural domains will not detach or overlap during the motion . These coupling conditions depend on the (cid:176)uid . For an inviscid (cid:176)uid ( no shear eﬁects ) only normal components are coupled because an inviscid (cid:176)uid is free to slip along the structural interface ; that is , ( n ¢ u = n ¢ u S continuity of normal displacements n ¢ v = n ¢ v S continuity of normal velocities where the displacement / velocity of the (cid:176)uid ( u / v ) along the normal to the interface must be equal to the displacement / velocity of the structure ( u S / v S ) along the same direction . Both equations are equivalent and one or the other is used , depending on the formulation employed ( displacements or velocities ) . For a viscous (cid:176)uid the coupling between (cid:176)uid and structure requires that velocities ( or displacements ) coincide along the interface ; that is , ( u = u S continuity of displacements v = v S continuity of velocities In practice , two nodes are placed at each point of the interface : one (cid:176)uid node and one structural node . Since the (cid:176)uid is treated in the ALE formulation , the movement of the (cid:176)uid mesh may be chosen completely independent of the movement of the (cid:176)uid itself . In particular , we may constrain the (cid:176)uid nodes to remain contiguous to the structural nodes , so that all nodes on the sliding interface remain permanently aligned . This is achieved by imposing that the grid velocity ^ v of the (cid:176)uid nodes at the interface be equal to the material velocity v S of the adjacent Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . ECM009 19 structural nodes . The permanent alignment of nodes at ALE interfaces greatly facilitates the (cid:176)ow of information between the (cid:176)uid and structural domains and permits (cid:176)uid - structure coupling to be eﬁected in the simplest and most elegant manner ; that is , the imposition of the previous kinematic conditions is simple because of the node alignment . The dynamic condition is automatically veriﬂed along ﬂxed rigid boundaries , but it presents the classical di – culties in (cid:176)uid - structure interaction problems when compatibility at nodal level in velocities and stresses is required ( both for (cid:176)exible or rigid structures whose motion is coupled to the (cid:176)uid (cid:176)ow ) . This condition requires that the stresses in the (cid:176)uid be equal to the stresses in the structure . When the behavior of the (cid:176)uid is governed by the linear Stokes law ( (cid:190) = ¡ p I + 2 ” r s v ) or for inviscid (cid:176)uids this condition is ¡ p n + 2 ” ( n ¢ r s ) v = n ¢ (cid:190) S or ¡ p n = n ¢ (cid:190) S respectively , where (cid:190) S is the stress tensor acting on the structure . In the ﬂnite element representation , the continuous interface is replaced with a discrete approximation and instead of a distributed interaction pressure , consideration is given to its resultant at each interface node . There is a large amount of literature in ALE (cid:176)uid - structure interaction ( both for (cid:176)exible structures and rigid solids ) , see , among others , Liu and Chang ( 1985 ) , Liu and Gvildys ( 1986 ) , Nomura and Hughes ( 1992 ) , Le Tallec and Mouro ( 2001 ) , Casadei et al . ( 2001 ) , Sarrate et al . ( 2001 ) and Zhang and Hisada ( 2001 ) . Remark ( Fluid - rigid body interaction ) In some circumstances , especially when the structure is embedded in a (cid:176)uid and its deformations are small compared with the displacements and rotations of its center of gravity , it is justiﬂed to idealize the structure as a rigid body resting on a system consisting of springs and dashpots . Typical situations in which such an idealization is legitimate include the simulation of wind - induced vibrations in high - rise buildings or large bridge girders , the cyclic response of oﬁshore structures exposed to sea currents , as well as the behavior of structures in aeronautical and naval engineering where structural loading and response are dominated by (cid:176)uid induced vibrations . An illustrative example of ALE (cid:176)uid - rigid body interaction is shown is Section 6 . 2 . Remark ( Normal to a discrete interface ) In practice , especially in complex 3D conﬂgurations , one major di – culty is to determine the normal vector at each node of the (cid:176)uid - structure interface . Various algorithms have been developed to deal with this issue , Casadei and Halleux ( 1995 ) and Casadei and Sala ( 1999 ) present detailed solutions . In 2D the tangent to the interface at a given node is usually deﬂned as parallel to the line connecting the nodes at the ends of the interface segments meeting at that node . Remark ( Free surface and structure interaction ) The above discussion of the coupling problem only applies to those portions of the structure which are always submerged during the calculation . As a matter of fact , there may exist portions of the structure which only come into contact with the (cid:176)uid some time after the calculation begins . This is , for instance , the case for structural parts above a (cid:176)uid free - surface . For such portions of the structural domain some sort of sliding treatment is necessary , as for Lagrangian methods . 6 . 1 . 3 . Geometric conservation laws In a series of papers , see Lesoinne and Farhat ( 1996 ) , Koobus and Farhat ( 1999 ) , Guillard and Farhat ( 2000 ) and Farhat et al . ( 2001 ) , Farhat Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . 20 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF COMPUTATIONAL MECHANICS and coworkers have discussed the notion of geometric conservation laws for unsteady (cid:176)ow computations on moving and deforming ﬂnite element or ﬂnite volume grids . The basic requirement is that any ALE computational method should be able to predict exactly the trivial solution of a uniform (cid:176)ow . The ALE equation of mass balance ( 37 ) 1 is usually taken as the starting point to derive the geometric conservation law . Assuming uniform ﬂelds of density ‰ and material velocity v , it reduces to the continuous geometric conservation law @ @ t ﬂﬂﬂ ´ Z V t dV = Z S t ^ v ¢ n dS ( 38 ) As remarked by Smith ( 1999 ) , equation ( 38 ) can also be derived from the other two ALE integral conservation laws ( 37 ) with appropriate restrictions on the (cid:176)ow ﬂelds . Integrating equation ( 38 ) in time from t n to t n + 1 renders the discrete geometric conservation law ( DGCL ) j › n + 1 e j ¡ j › ne j = Z t n + 1 t n (cid:181)Z S t ^ v ¢ n dS ¶ dt ( 39 ) which states that the change in volume ( or area , in 2D ) of each element from t n to t n + 1 must be equal to the volume ( or area ) swept by the element boundary during the time interval . Assuming that the volumes › e in the left - hand side of equation ( 39 ) can be computed exactly , this amounts to requiring also the exact computation of the (cid:176)ux in the right - hand side . This poses some restrictions on the update procedure for the grid position and velocity . For instance , Lesoinne and Farhat ( 1996 ) show that , for ﬂrst - order time - integration schemes , the mesh velocity should be computed as ^ v n + 1 = 2 = ( x n + 1 ¡ x n ) = ¢ t . They also point out that , although this intuitive formula was used by many time - integrators prior to DGCLs , it is violated in some instances , especially in (cid:176)uid - structure interaction problems where mesh motion is coupled to structural deformation . The practical signiﬂcance of DGCLs is a debated issue in the literature . As admitted by Guillard and Farhat ( 2000 ) , \ there are recurrent assertions in the literature stating that , in practice , enforcing the DGCL when computing on moving meshes is unnecessary " . Later , Farhat et al . ( 2001 ) and other authors have studied from a theoretical viewpoint the properties of DGCL - enforcing ALE schemes . The link between DGCLs and the stability ( and accuracy ) of ALE schemes is still a controversial topic of current research . 6 . 2 . Applications in ALE (cid:176)uid dynamics The ﬂrst example consists in the computation of cross - (cid:176)ow and rotational oscillations of a rectangular proﬂle . The (cid:176)ow is modeled by the incompressible Navier - Stokes equations and the rectangle is regarded as rigid . The ALE formulation for (cid:176)uid - rigid body interaction proposed by Sarrate et al . ( 2001 ) is used . Figure 6 depicts the pressure ﬂeld at two diﬁerent instants . Flow goes from left to right . Note the cross - (cid:176)ow translation and the rotation of the rectangle . The ALE kinematical description avoids excessive mesh distortion , see ﬂgure 7 . For this problem , a computationally e – cient rezoning strategy is obtained by dividing the mesh into three zones : 1 ) the mesh inside the inner circle is prescribed to move rigidly attached to the rectangle ( no mesh distortion and simple treatment of interface conditions ) ; ( 2 ) the mesh outside the outer circle is Eulerian ( no mesh distortion and no need to select mesh velocity ) ; ( 3 ) a smooth transition is prescribed in the ring between the circles ( mesh distortion under control ) . Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . ECM009 21 ( a ) ( b ) Figure 6 . Flow around a rectangle . Pressure ﬂelds at two diﬁerent instants . ( a ) ( b ) Figure 7 . Detail of ﬂnite element mesh around the rectangle . The ring allows a smooth transition between the rigidly moving mesh around the rectangle and the Eulerian mesh far from it . The second example highlights ALE capabilities for (cid:176)uid - structure interaction problems . The results shown here , discussed in detail by Casadei and Potapov ( 2004 ) , have been provided by Casadei and are reproduced here with the authors’ kind permission . The example consists in a long 3D metallic pipe with a square cross section , sealed at both ends , containing a gas at room pressure , see ﬂgure 8 . At the initial time , two \ explosions " take place at the ends of the pipe , simulated by the presence of the same gas , but at a much higher initial pressure . The gas motion through the pipe is partly aﬁected by internal structures within the pipe ( diaphragms # 1 , # 2 and # 3 ) that create a sort of labyrinth . All the pipe walls , and the internal structures , are deformable and characterized by an elastoplastic behavior . The pressures and structural material properties are so chosen that very large motions and relatively large deformations occur in the structure . Figure 9 shows the real deformed shapes ( not scaled up ) of the pipe with superposed (cid:176)uid pressure maps . Note the strong wave propagation eﬁects , the partial wave re(cid:176)ections at obstacles , and the \ ballooning " eﬁect of the thin pipe walls in regions at high pressure . This is a severe test , among other things , for the automatic ALE rezoning algorithms , which must keep the (cid:176)uid mesh reasonably uniform under large motions . Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . 22 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF COMPUTATIONAL MECHANICS x y z D i ap hr a g m # 1 D i ap hr a g m # 2 D i ap hr a g m # 3 H i g h - P r ess u r e H i g h - P r ess u r e AC 3 D 1 3 Figure 8 . Explosions in a 3D labyrinth . Problem statement . 2 . 50 E + 0 4 5 . 00 E + 0 4 7 . 50 E + 0 4 1 . 00 E + 05 1 . 2 5 E + 05 1 . 50 E + 05 1 . 7 5 E + 05 2 . 00 E + 05 2 . 2 5 E + 05 2 . 50 E + 05 2 . 7 5 E + 05 3 . 00 E + 05 3 . 2 5 E + 05 3 . 50 E + 05 Fl uid Press u re t = 0 t = 25 m s t = 5 0 m s ( a ) 2 . 50 E + 0 4 5 . 00 E + 0 4 7 . 50 E + 0 4 1 . 00 E + 05 1 . 2 5 E + 05 1 . 50 E + 05 1 . 7 5 E + 05 2 . 00 E + 05 2 . 2 5 E + 05 2 . 50 E + 05 2 . 7 5 E + 05 3 . 00 E + 05 3 . 2 5 E + 05 3 . 50 E + 05 t = 0 t = 25 ms t = 5 0 ms Flui d Pr e ss u r e 2 . 50E + 0 4 5 . 00E + 0 4 7 . 50E + 0 4 1 . 00E + 05 1 . 25E + 05 1 . 50E + 05 1 . 7 5E + 05 2 . 00E + 05 2 . 25E + 05 2 . 50E + 05 2 . 7 5E + 05 3 . 00E + 05 3 . 25E + 05 3 . 50E + 05 t = 0 t = 25 ms t = 5 0 ms Flui d Pre ss u re ( b ) ( c ) Figure 9 . Explosions in a 3D labyrinth . Deformation in structure and pressure in (cid:176)uid are properly captured with ALE (cid:176)uid - structure interaction : ( a ) whole model ; ( b ) zoom of diaphragm # 1 ; ( c ) zoom of diaphragms # 2 and # 3 . 7 . ALE METHODS IN NONLINEAR SOLID MECHANICS Starting in the late 1970’s , the ALE formulation has been extended to nonlinear solid and structural mechanics . Particular eﬁorts were made in response to the need to simulate problems Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . ECM009 23 describing crack propagation , impact , explosion , vehicle crashes , as well as forming processes of materials . The large distortions / deformations which characterize these problems clearly undermine the utility of the Lagrangian approach traditionally used in problems involving materials with path - dependent constitutive relations . Representative publications on the use of ALE in solid mechanics are , among many others , Liu et al . ( 1986 ; 1988 ) , Schreurs et al . ( 1986 ) , Benson ( 1989 ) , Hu¶etink et al . ( 1990 ) , Ghosh and Kikuchi ( 1991 ) , Baaijens ( 1993 ) , Huerta and Casadei ( 1994 ) , Rodr¶‡guez - Ferran et al . ( 1998 ) , Askes et al . ( 1999 ) , Askes and Sluys ( 2000 ) and Rodr¶‡guez - Ferran et al . ( 2002 ) . If mechanical eﬁects are uncoupled from thermal eﬁects , the mass and momentum equations can be solved independently from the energy equation . According to expressions ( 34 ) , the ALE version of these equations is @ ‰ @ t ﬂﬂﬂ ´ + ( c ¢ r ) ‰ = ¡ ‰ r ¢ v ( 40a ) ‰ a = ‰ @ v @ t ﬂ ﬂﬂ ´ + ‰ ( c ¢ r ) v = r ¢ (cid:190) + ‰ b ( 40b ) where a is the material acceleration deﬂned in ( 35 ) , (cid:190) denotes the Cauchy stress tensor and b represents an applied body force per unit mass . A standard simpliﬂcation in nonlinear solid mechanics consists of dropping the mass equation ( 40a ) , which is not explicitly accounted for , thus solving only the momentum equation ( 40b ) . A common assumption consists of taking the density ‰ a constant , so that the mass balance ( 40a ) reduces to r ¢ v = 0 ( 41 ) which is the well - known incompressibility condition . This simpliﬂed version of the mass balance is also commonly neglected in solid mechanics . This is acceptable because elastic deformations typically induce very small changes in volume , while plastic deformations are volume preserving ( isochoric plasticity ) . This means that changes in density are negligible and that equation ( 41 ) automatically holds to su – cient approximation without the need to add it explicitly to the set of governing equations . 7 . 1 . ALE treatment of steady , quasistatic and dynamic processes In discussing the ALE form ( 40b ) of the momentum equation , we shall distinguish between steady , quasistatic and dynamic processes . In fact , the expression for the inertia forces ‰ a critically depends on the particular type of process under consideration . A process is called steady if the material velocity v in every spatial point x is constant in time . In the Eulerian description ( 35b ) , this results in a zero local acceleration @ v = @ t j x and only the convective acceleration is present in the momentum balance , which reads ‰ a = ‰ ( v ¢ r ) v = r ¢ (cid:190) + ‰ b ( 42 ) In the ALE context , it is also possible to assume that a process is steady with respect to a grid point ´ and neglect in expression ( 35c ) the local acceleration @ v = @ t j ´ , see for instance Ghosh and Kikuchi ( 1991 ) . The momentum balance then becomes ‰ a = ‰ ( c ¢ r ) v = r ¢ (cid:190) + ‰ b ( 43 ) Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . 24 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF COMPUTATIONAL MECHANICS However , the physical meaning of a null ALE local acceleration ( that is , of an \ ALE - steady " process ) is not completely clear , due to the arbitrary nature of the mesh velocity and , hence , of the convective velocity c . A process is termed quasistatic if the inertia forces ‰ a are negligible with respect to the other forces in the momentum balance . In this case the momentum balance reduces to the static equilibrium equation r ¢ (cid:190) + ‰ b = 0 ( 44 ) in which time and material velocity play no role . Since the inertia forces have been neglected , the diﬁerent descriptions of acceleration in equation ( 35 ) do not appear in equation ( 44 ) , which is therefore valid in both Eulerian and ALE formulations . The important conclusion is that there are no convective terms in the ALE momentum balance for quasistatic processes . A process may be modeled as quasistatic if stress variations and / or body forces are much larger than inertia forces . This is a common situation in solid mechanics , encompassing for instance various metal forming processes . As discussed in the next section , convective terms are nevertheless present in the ALE ( and Eulerian ) constitutive equation for quasistatic processes . They re(cid:176)ect the fact that grid points are occupied by diﬁerent particles at diﬁerent times . Finally , in transient dynamic processes all terms must be retained in expression ( 35c ) for the material acceleration and the momentum balance equation is given by expression ( 40b ) . 7 . 2 . ALE constitutive equations Compared to the use of the ALE description in (cid:176)uid dynamics , the main additional di – culty in nonlinear solid mechanics is the design of an appropriate stress update procedure to deal with history - dependent constitutive equations . As already mentioned , constitutive equations of ALE nonlinear solid mechanics contain convective terms that account for the relative motion between mesh and material . This is the case for both hypoelastoplastic and hyperelastoplastic models . 7 . 2 . 1 . Constitutive equations for ALE hypoelastoplasticity Hypoelastoplastic models are based on an additive decomposition of the stretching tensor r s v ( symmetric part of the velocity gradient ) into elastic and plastic parts , see for instance Belytschko et al . ( 2000 ) or Bonet and Wood ( 1997 ) . They were used in the ﬂrst ALE formulations for solid mechanics and are still the standard choice . In these models , material behavior is described by a rate - form constitutive equation (cid:190) ? = f ( (cid:190) ; r s v ) ( 45 ) relating an objective rate of Cauchy stress (cid:190) ? to stress and stretching . The material rate of stress _ (cid:190) = @ (cid:190) @ t ﬂﬂ ﬂ X = @ (cid:190) @ t ﬂﬂ ﬂ ´ + ( c ¢ r ) (cid:190) ( 46 ) cannot be employed in relation ( 45 ) to measure the stress rate because it is not an objective tensor , so large rigid - body rotations are not properly treated . An objective rate of stress is obtained by adding to _ (cid:190) some terms which ensure the objectivity of (cid:190) ? , see for instance Malvern ( 1969 ) or Belytschko et al . ( 2000 ) . Two popular objective rates are the Truesdell rate and the Jaumann rate (cid:190) ? = _ (cid:190) ¡ r w v ¢ (cid:190) ¡ (cid:190) ¢ ( r w v ) T ( 47 ) Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . ECM009 25 where r w v = 12 ( r v ¡ r T v ) is the spin tensor . Substitution of equation ( 47 ) ( or similar expressions for other objective stress rates ) into equation ( 45 ) yields _ (cid:190) = q ( (cid:190) ; r s v ; : : : ) ( 48 ) where q contains both f and the terms in (cid:190) ? which ensure its objectivity . In the ALE context , referential time derivatives , not material time derivatives , are employed to represent evolution in time . Combining expression ( 46 ) of the material rate of stress and the constitutive relation ( 48 ) yields a rate - form constitutive equation for ALE nonlinear solid mechanics _ (cid:190) = @ (cid:190) @ t ﬂﬂﬂ ´ + ( c ¢ r ) (cid:190) = q ( 49 ) where , again , a convective term re(cid:176)ects the motion of material particles relative to the mesh . Note that this relative motion is inherent to ALE kinematics , so the convective term is present for all the situations described in Section 7 . 1 , including quasistatic processes . Because of this convective eﬁect , the stress update cannot be performed as simply as in the Lagrangian formulation , in which the element Gauss points correspond to the same material particles during the whole calculation . In fact , the accurate treatment of the convective terms in ALE rate - type constitutive equations is a key issue for the accuracy of the formulation , as discussed in Section 7 . 3 . 7 . 2 . 2 . Constitutive equations for ALE hyperelastoplasticity Hyperelastoplastic models are based on a multiplicative decomposition of the deformation gradient into elastic and plastic parts , F = F e F p , see for instance Belytschko et al . ( 2000 ) or Bonet and Wood ( 1997 ) . They have only very recently been combined with the ALE description , see Rodr¶‡guez - Ferran et al . ( 2002 ) and Armero and Love ( 2003 ) . The evolution of stresses is not described by means of a rate - form equation , but in closed form as ¿ = 2 dW d b e b e ( 50 ) where b e = F e ¢ ( F e ) T is the elastic left Cauchy - Green tensor , W is the free energy function and ¿ = det ( F ) (cid:190) is the Kirchhoﬁ stress tensor . Plastic (cid:176)ow is described by means of the (cid:176)ow rule _ b e ¡ r v ¢ b e ¡ b e ¢ ( r v ) T = ¡ 2 _ (cid:176) m ( ¿ ) ¢ b e ( 51 ) The left - hand side of equation ( 51 ) is the Lie derivative of b e with respect to the material velocity v . In the right - hand side , m is the (cid:176)ow direction and _ (cid:176) is the plastic multiplier . Using the fundamental ALE relation ( 27 ) between material and referential time derivatives , the (cid:176)ow rule ( 51 ) can be recast as @ b e @ t ﬂ ﬂﬂ ´ + ( c ¢ r ) b e = r v ¢ b e + b e ¢ ( r v ) T ¡ 2 _ (cid:176) m ( ¿ ) ¢ b e ( 52 ) Note that , like in equation ( 49 ) , a convective term in this constitutive equation re(cid:176)ects the relative motion between mesh and material . Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . 26 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF COMPUTATIONAL MECHANICS 7 . 3 . Stress - update procedures In the context of hypoelastoplasticity , various strategies have been proposed to cope with the convective terms in equation ( 49 ) . Following Benson ( 1992b ) , they can be classiﬂed into split and unsplit methods . If an unsplit method is employed , the complete rate equation ( 49 ) is integrated forward in time , including both the convective term and the material term q . This approach is followed , among others , by Liu et al . ( 1986 ) who employ an explicit time - stepping algorithm and by Ghosh and Kikuchi ( 1991 ) who use an implicit unsplit formulation . On the other hand , split , or fractional - step , methods treat the material and convective terms in ( 49 ) in two distinct phases : a material ( or Lagrangian ) phase is followed by a convection ( or transport ) phase . In exchange for a certain loss in accuracy due to splitting , split methods are simpler and especially suitable to upgrade a Lagrangian code with the ALE description . An implicit split formulation is employed by Hu¶etink et al . ( 1990 ) to model metal forming processes . An example of explicit split formulation may be found in Huerta and Casadei ( 1994 ) where ALE ﬂnite elements are used to model fast transient phenomena . The situation is completely analogous for hyperelastoplasticity , and similar comments apply regarding the split or unsplit treatment of material and convective eﬁects . In fact , if a split approach is chosen , see Rodr¶‡guez - Ferran et al . ( 2002 ) , the only diﬁerences with respect to the hypoelastoplastic models are ( 1 ) the constitutive model for the Lagrangian phase ( hypo / hyper ) and ( 2 ) the quantities to be transported in the convection phase . 7 . 3 . 1 . Lagrangian phase In the Lagrangian phase , convective eﬁects are neglected . The constitutive equations recover their usual expressions ( 48 ) and ( 51 ) for hypo - and hyper - models respectively . The ALE kinematical description has ( momentarily ) disappeared from the formulation , so all the concepts , ideas and algorithms of large strain solid mechanics with a Lagrangian description apply , see Bonet and Wood ( 1997 ) , Belytschko et al . ( 2000 ) and Chapter 29 of this Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . The issue of objectivity is one of the main diﬁerences between hypo - and hyper - models . When devising time - integration algorithms to update stresses from (cid:190) n to (cid:190) n + 1 in hypoelastoplastic models , a typical requirement is incremental objectivity ( that is , the appropriate treatment of rigid body rotations over the time interval [ t n ; t n + 1 ] ) . In hyperelastoplastic models , on the contrary , objectivity is not an issue at all , because there is no rate equation for the stress tensor . 7 . 3 . 2 . Convection phase The convective eﬁects neglected before have to be accounted for now . Since material eﬁects have been already treated in the Lagrangian phase , the ALE constitutive equations read simply @ (cid:190) @ t ﬂ ﬂﬂ ´ + ( c ¢ r ) (cid:190) = 0 ; @ b e @ t ﬂ ﬂﬂ ´ + ( c ¢ r ) b e = 0 ; @ ﬁ @ t ﬂ ﬂﬂ ´ + ( c ¢ r ) ﬁ = 0 ( 53 ) Equations ( 53 ) 1 and ( 53 ) 2 correspond to hypo - and hyper - elastoplastic models respectively , cf . with equations ( 49 ) and ( 52 ) . In equation ( 53 ) 3 , valid for both hypo - and hyper - models , ﬁ is the set of all the material - dependent variables ( i . e . variables associated to the material particle X : internal variables for hardening or softening plasticity , the volume change in non - isochoric plasticity , etc . see Rodr¶‡guez - Ferran et al . ( 2002 ) ) . Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . ECM009 27 The three equations ( 53 ) can be written more compactly as @ ¥ @ t ﬂﬂﬂ ´ + ( c ¢ r ) ¥ = 0 ( 54 ) where ¥ represents the appropriate variable in each case . Note that equation ( 54 ) is simply a ﬂrst - order linear hyperbolic PDE which governs the transport of ﬂeld ¥ by the velocity ﬂeld c . However , two important aspects should be considered in the design of numerical algorithms for the solution of this equation : 1 . ¥ is a tensor ( for (cid:190) and b e ) or vector - like ( for ﬁ ) ﬂeld , so equation ( 54 ) should be solved for each component ⁄ of ¥ : @ ⁄ @ t ﬂﬂﬂ ´ + c ¢ r ⁄ = 0 ( 55 ) Since the number of scalar equations ( 55 ) may be relatively large ( for instance : eight for a 3D computation with a plastic model with two internal variables ) , the need for e – cient convection algorithms is a key issue in ALE nonlinear solid mechanics . 2 . ⁄ is a Gauss - point - based ( i . e . not a nodal - based ) quantity , so it is discontinuous across ﬂnite element edges . For this reason , its gradient r ⁄ cannot be reliably computed at the element level . In fact , handling r ⁄ is the main numerical challenge in ALE stress update . Two diﬁerent strategies may be used to tackle the di – culties associated to r ⁄ . One possible approach is to approximate ⁄ by a continuous ﬂeld e ⁄ , and replace r ⁄ by r e ⁄ in equation ( 55 ) . The smoothed ﬂeld e ⁄ can be obtained , for instance , by least - squares approximation , see Hu¶etink et al . ( 1990 ) . Another possibility is to retain the discontinuous ﬂeld ⁄ and devise appropriate algorithms that account for this fact . To this aim , a fruitful observation is noting that , for a piecewise constant ﬂeld ⁄ , equation ( 55 ) is the well - known Riemann problem . Through this connection , the ALE community has exploited the expertise on approximate Riemann solvers of the CFD community , see Le Veque ( 1990 ) . Although ⁄ is in general not constant for each element ( expect for one - point quadratures ) , it can be approximated by a piecewise constant ﬂeld in a simple manner . Figure 10 depicts a four - noded quadrilateral with a 2 £ 2 quadrature subdivided into four subelements . If the value of ⁄ for each Gauss point is taken as representative for the whole subelement , then a ﬂeld constant within each subelement results . In this context , equation ( 55 ) can be solved explicitly by looping all the subelements in the mesh by means of a Godunov - like technique based on Godunov’s method for conservation laws , see Rodr¶‡guez - Ferran et al . ( 1998 ) : ⁄ n + 1 = ⁄ L ¡ ¢ t V N ¡ X ¡ = 1 f ¡ ( ⁄ c¡ ¡ ⁄ L ) [ 1 ¡ sign ( f ¡ ) ] ( 56 ) According to equation ( 56 ) , the Lagrangian ( i . e . after the Lagrangian phase ) value ⁄ L is updated into the ﬂnal value ⁄ n + 1 by taking into account the (cid:176)ux of ⁄ across the subelement edges . In the second term of the right - hand - side , ¢ t is the time - step , V is the volume ( or area , in 2D ) of the subelement , N ¡ is the number of edges per subelement , ⁄ c¡ is the value of ⁄ in Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . 28 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF COMPUTATIONAL MECHANICS Figure 10 . Finite element subdivided into subelements for the Godunov - like stress update the contiguous subelement across edge ¡ , and f ¡ is the (cid:176)ux of convective velocity across edge ¡ , f ¡ = R ¡ ( c ¢ n ) d ¡ . Note that a full - donor ( i . e . full upwind ) approach is obtained by means of sign ( f ¡ ) . Remark ( Split stress update and iterations ) In principle , the complete stress update must be performed at each iteration of the nonlinear equilibrium problem . However , a common simpliﬂcation consists in leaving the convection phase outside the iteration loop , see Baaijens ( 1993 ) , Rodr¶‡guez - Ferran et al . ( 1998 ) and Rodr¶‡guez - Ferran et al . ( 2002 ) . That is , iterations are performed in a purely Lagrangian fashion up to equilibrium and the convection phase is performed after remeshing , just once per time step . Numerical experiments reveal that disruption of equilibrium caused by convection is not severe and can be handled as extra residual forces in the next load step , see references just cited . Remark ( ALE ﬂnite strain elasticity ) Since hyperelasticity can be seen as a particular case of hyperelastoplasticity , we have chosen here the more general situation for a more useful presentation . In the particular case of large elastic strains ( hyperelasticity ) , where F = F e , an obvious option is to particularize the general approach just described by solving only the relevant equation ( i . e . equation ( 52 ) for b e ; note that there are no internal variables ﬁ in elasticity ) . In the literature other approaches exist for this speciﬂc case . Yamada and Kikuchi ( 1993 ) and Armero and Love ( 2003 ) exploit the relationship F = F ' F ¡ 1 “ , where F ' and F “ are the deformation gradients of mappings ' and “ respectively ( see ﬂgure 4 ) , to obtain an ALE formulation for hyperelasticity with no convective terms . In exchange for the need to handle the convective term in the update of b e , see equations ( 52 ) and ( 53 ) 2 , the former approach has the advantage that only the quality of mapping ' needs to be controlled . On the latter approaches , on the contrary , both the quality of ' and “ must be ensured ; that is , two meshes ( instead of only one ) must be controlled . 7 . 4 . Applications in ALE nonlinear solid mechanics For illustrative purposes , two powder compaction ALE simulations are brie(cid:176)y discussed here . More details can be found in Rodr¶‡guez - Ferran et al . ( 2002 ) and P¶erez - Foguet et al . ( 2003 ) . The ﬂrst example involves the bottom punch compaction of an axisymmetric (cid:176)anged component , see ﬂgure 11 . If a Lagrangian description is used , see ﬂgure 11 ( a ) , the large upward mass (cid:176)ow leads to severe element distortion in the reentrant corner , which in turn aﬁects the Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . ECM009 29 Figure 11 . Final relative density after the bottom punch compaction of a (cid:176)anged component : ( a ) Lagrangian approach leads to severe mesh distortion ; ( b ) ALE approach avoids distortion . accuracy in the relative density . With an ALE description , see ﬂgure 11 ( b ) , mesh distortion is completely precluded by means of a very simple ALE remeshing strategy : a uniform vertical mesh compression is prescribed in the bottom , narrow part of the piece , and no mesh motion ( i . e . Eulerian mesh ) in the upper , wide part . The second example involves the compaction of a multi - level component . Due to extreme mesh distortion , it is not possible to perform the simulation with a Lagrangian approach . Three ALE simulations are compared in ﬂgure 12 , corresponding to top , bottom , and simultaneous top - bottom compaction . Even with an unstructured mesh and a more complex geometry , the ALE description avoids mesh distortion , so the ﬂnal relative density proﬂles can be computed , see ﬂgure 13 . 7 . 5 . Contact algorithms Contact treatment , especially when frictional eﬁects are present , is a very important feature of mechanical modeling and certainly remains one of the more challenging problems in computational mechanics . In the case of the classical Lagrangian formulation , much attention has been devoted to contact algorithms and the interested reader is referred to references by Zhong ( 1993 ) , Wriggers ( 2002 ) , Laursen ( 2002 ) in order to get acquainted with the subject . By contrast , modeling of contact in connection with the ALE description has received much less attention . Paradoxically , one of the interesting features of ALE is that , in some situations , the formulation can avoid the burden of implementing cumbersome contact algorithms . The Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . 30 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF COMPUTATIONAL MECHANICS Figure 12 . Final relative density of a multi - level component . From left to right : top , bottom and double compaction . 0 10 20 30 40 0 , 54 0 , 57 0 , 60 0 , 63 0 , 66 Relative density H e i gh t [ mm ] Top comp . Bottom comp . Double comp . Figure 13 . Relative density proﬂles in a multi - level component along a vertical line for the three compaction processes . coining problem in Figure 14 is a good illustration of the versatility of ALE algorithms in the treatment of frictionless contact over a known ( moving ) surface . The material particle M located at the punch corner at time t has been represented . At time t + ¢ t , the punch has moved a little bit downwards and , due to compression , the material particle M has moved a little bit to the right . When a Lagrangian formulation is used in the simulation of such a process , due to the fact that the mesh sticks to the material , a contact algorithm has to be used to obtain a realistic simulation . On the contrary , using an ALE formalism , the implementation of a contact algorithm can be avoided . This is simply because the ALE formulation allows us to prevent the horizontal displacement of the mesh nodes located under the punch , irrespective of the material (cid:176)ow . Numerous illustrations of this particular case can be found , amongst others , in Schreurs et al . ( 1986 ) , Hu¶etink et al . ( 1990 ) , Hogge and Ponthot ( 1991a ) , Huerta and Casadei ( 1994 ) , Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . ECM009 31 Figure 14 . Schematic description of the coining process . Rodr¶‡guez - Ferran et al . ( 2002 ) , Gadala and Wang ( 1998 ; 2002 ) and Martinet and Chabrand ( 2000 ) . However , in more general situations a contact algorithm cannot be avoided . In such a case , the nodes of contact elements have to be displaced convectively in accordance with the nodes on the surface of the bulk material and tools . A direct consequence of this displacement is that convective eﬁects have to be taken into account for history - dependent variables . In the simplest penalty case where the normal pressure is proportional to the penetration , the normal contact stress only depends on the current geometry and not on the history of penetration . As a consequence , no convection algorithm needs to be activated for that quantity . On the contrary , for a Coulomb friction model , the shear stresses in the contact elements are incrementally calculated . They therefore depend on the history and hence a convective increment of the shear stress should be evaluated . One simple way to avoid the activation of the convection algorithm for the contact / friction quantities is indeed to keep the boundaries purely Lagrangian . However , in general this will not prevent mesh distortions and non - convexity in the global mesh . Various applications of the ALE technology have been developed so far to treat the general case of moving boundaries with Coulomb or Tresca frictional contact . For example , in their pioneering work on ALE contact , Haber and Hariandja ( 1985 ) update the mesh , so that nodes and element edges on the surface of contacting bodies coincide exactly at all points along the contact interface in the deformed conﬂguration . In such a case , the matching of node pairs and element edges ensures a precise satisfaction of geometric compatibility and allows a consistent transfer of contact stresses between the two bodies . A similar procedure was established by Ghosh ( 1992 ) but , in this case , the numerical model introduces ALE nodal points on one of the contacting ( slave ) surfaces that are constrained to follow Lagrangian nodes on the other ( master ) surface . Liu et al . ( 1991 ) presented an algorithm , mostly dedicated to rolling applications , where the stick nodes are assumed Lagrangian , whereas the slip nodes are equally spaced between the two adjacent stick nodes . More general procedures have been introduced by Hu¶etink et al . ( 1990 ) . More recently , sophisticated frictional models incorporating lubrication models have been used in ALE formulations . In such a case , the friction between the contacting lubricated bodies is expressed as a function of interface variables ( mean lubrication ﬂlm thickness , sheet and tooling roughness ) in addition to more traditional variables ( interface pressure , sliding speed and strain rate ) . Examples of complex lubrication models integrated into an ALE framework have been presented by Hu and Liu ( 1992 ; 1993 ; 1994 ) , Martinet and Chabrand ( 2000 ) and Boman and Ponthot ( 2000 ; 2002 ) . Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . 32 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF COMPUTATIONAL MECHANICS REFERENCES Ait - Ali - Yahia D , Baruzzi G , Habashi WG , Fortin M , Dompierre J and Vallet M - G . Anisotropic mesh adaptation : towards user - independent , mesh - independent and solver - independent CFD . Part II . Structured grids . Int . J . Numer . Methods Fluids 2002 ; 39 ( 8 ) : 657 { 673 . Argyris JH , Doltsinis JSt , Fisher H and W˜ustenberg H . TA ƒANTA PEI . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 1985 ; 51 ( 1 - 3 ) : 289 { 362 . Armero F and Love E . An arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian ﬂnite element method for ﬂnite strain plasticity . Int . J . Numer . Methods Eng . 2003 ; 57 ( 4 ) : 471 { 508 . Askes H and Rodr¶‡guez - Ferran A . A combined rh - adaptive scheme based on domain subdivision . Formulation and linear examples Int . J . Numer . Methods Eng . 2001 ; 51 ( 3 ) : 253 { 273 . Askes H , Rodr¶‡guez - Ferran A and Huerta A . Adaptive analysis of yield line patterns in plates with the arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian method . Comput . Struct . 1999 ; 70 ( 3 ) : 257 { 271 . Askes H and Sluys LJ . Remeshing strategies for adaptive ALE analysis of strain localisation . Eur . J . Mech . A - Solids 2000 ; 19 ( 3 ) : 447 { 467 . Askes H , Sluys LJ and de Jong BBC . Remeshing techniques for r - adaptive and combined h = r - adaptive analysis with application to 2D / 3D crack propagation . Structural Engineering and Mechanics 2001 ; 12 ( 5 ) : 475 { 490 . Aymone JLF , Bittencourt E and Creus GJ . Simulation of 3D metal forming using an arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian ﬂnite element method . J . Mater . Process . Technol . 2001 ; 110 ( 2 ) : 218 { 232 . Baaijens FPT . An U - ALE formulation of 3 - D unsteady viscoelastic (cid:176)ow . Int . J . Numer . Methods Eng . 1993 ; 36 ( 7 ) : 1115 { 1143 . Batina JT . Implicit (cid:176)ux - split Euler schemes for unsteady aerodynamic analysis involving unstructured dynamic meshes . AIAA Journal 1991 ; 29 ( 11 ) : 1836 { 1843 . Belytschko T and Kennedy JM . Computer methods for subassembly simulation . Nucl . Eng . Des . 1978 ; 49 : 17 { 38 . Belytschko T , Kennedy JM and Schoeberle DF . Quasi - Eulerian ﬂnite element formulation for (cid:176)uid - structure interaction . In Proc . Joint ASME / CSME Pressure Vessels and Piping Conference , ASME , 1978 . Belytschko T , Kennedy JM and Schoeberle DF . Quasi - Eulerian ﬂnite element formulation for (cid:176)uid - structure interaction . J . Press . Vessel Technol . - Trans . ASME 1980 ; 102 : 62 { 69 . Belytschko T , Flanagan DP and Kennedy JM . Finite element methods with user - controlled meshes for (cid:176)uid - structure interaction . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 1982 ; 33 ( 1 - 3 ) : 669 { 688 . Belytschko T and Liu WK . Computer methods for transient (cid:176)uid - structure analysis of nuclear reactors . Nuclear Safety 1985 ; 26 ( 1 ) : 14 { 31 . Belytschko T , Liu WK and Moran B . Nonlinear Finite Elements for Continua and Structures . Wiley : Chichester , 2000 . Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . ECM009 33 Benson DJ . An e – cient , accurate , simple ALE method for nonlinear ﬂnite element programs . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 1989 ; 72 ( 3 ) : 305 { 350 . Benson DJ . Vectorization techniques for explicit ALE calculations . An e – cient , accurate , simple ALE method for nonlinear ﬂnite element programs . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 1992a ; 96 ( 3 ) : 303 { 328 . Benson DJ . Computational methods in Lagrangian and Eulerian hydrocodes . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 1992b ; 99 ( 2 - 3 ) : 235 { 394 . Boman R and Ponthot JP . Numerical simulation of lubricated contact in rolling processes . J . Mater . Process . Technol . 2002 ; 125 - 126 : 405 { 411 . Boman R and Ponthot JP . Finite elements for the lubricated contact between solids in metal forming processes . Acta Metallurgica Sinica 2000 ; 13 ( 1 ) : 319 { 327 . Bonet J and Wood RD . Nonlinear Continuum Mechanics for Finite Element Analysis . Cambridge University Press : Cambridge , 1997 . Braess H and Wriggers P . Arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian ﬂnite element analysis of free surface (cid:176)ow . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 2000 ; 190 ( 1 - 2 ) : 95 { 110 . Casadei F and Halleux JP . An algorithm for permanent (cid:176)uid - structure interaction in explicit transient dynamics . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 1995 ; 128 ( 3 - 4 ) : 231 { 289 . Casadei F and Sala A . Finite element and ﬂnite volume simulation of industrial fast transient (cid:176)uid - structure interactions . In Proceedings European Conference on Computational Mechanics - Solids , Structures and Coupled Problems in Engineering , Wunderlich W ( ed ) . TU M˜unchen , Germany , 1999 . Casadei F , Halleux JP , Sala A and Chill(cid:181)e F . Transient (cid:176)uid - structure interaction algorithms for large industrial applications . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 2001 ; 190 ( 24 - 25 ) : 3081 { 3110 . Casadei F and Potapov S . Title of paper Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 2004 ; to appear in the Special Issue on the ALE formulation Castro - Diaz MJ , Bourouchaki H , George PL , Hecht F , Mohammadi B . Anisotropic adaptative mesh generation in two dimensions for CFD . Proceedings of the Third ECCOMAS Computational Fluid Dynamics Conference , Paris , 9 - 13 September , 1996 , 181 - 186 . Cescutti JP , Wey E and Chenot JL . Finite element calculation of hot forging with continuous remeshing . In Modelling of metal forming processes , EUROMECH - 233 , Chenot JL , O ~ nate E ( eds ) . Sophia - Antipolis , France , 1988 ; 207 { 216 . Chenot JL and Bellet M . The ALE method for the numerical simulation of material forming processes . In Simulation of Materials Processing : Theory , Methods and Applications - NUMIFORM 95 , Shen SF , Dawson P ( eds ) . Ithaca , New - York , 1995 ; 39 { 48 . Donea J , Fasoli - Stella P , and Giuliani S . Lagrangian and Eulerian ﬂnite element techniques for transient (cid:176)uid - structure interaction problems . In Trans . 4th Int . Conf . on Structural Mechanics in Reactor Technology , Paper B1 / 2 , San Francisco , California , USA , 1977 . Donea J , Giuliani S , and Halleux JP . An Arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian ﬂnite element method for transient dynamic (cid:176)uid - structure interactions . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 1982 ; 33 ( 1 - 3 ) : 689 { 723 . Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . 34 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF COMPUTATIONAL MECHANICS Donea J . Arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian ﬂnite element methods . In Computational Methods for Transient Analysis , Belytschko T , Hughes TJR ( eds ) . North - Holland : Amsterdam , 1983 ; 474 { 516 . Donea J and Huerta A . Finite Element Methods for Flow Problems . Wiley : Chichester , 2003 . Eriksson LE . Practical three - dimensional mesh generation using transﬂnite interpolation . SIAM J . Sci . Stat . Comput . 1985 ; 6 ( 3 ) : 712 { 741 . Farhat C , Geuzaine Ph and Grandmont C . The discrete geometric conservation law and the nonlinear stability of ALE schemes for the solution of (cid:176)ow problems on moving grids . J . Comput . Phys . 2001 ; 174 ( 2 ) : 669 { 694 . Fortin M , Vallet M - G , Dompierre J , Bourgault Y , Habashi WG . Anisotropic mesh adaptation : Theory , validation and applications . Proceedings of the Third ECCOMAS Computational Fluid Dynamics Conference , Paris , France , 9 - 13 September , 1996 , 174 - 180 . Franck RM and Lazarus RB . Mixed Eulerian - Lagrangian method . In Methods in Computational Physics , Vol . 3 : Fundamental methods in Hydrodynamics Alder B , Fernbach S , Rotenberg M ( eds ) . Academic Press : New York , 1964 . Gadala MS and Wang J . ALE formulation and its application in solid mechanics . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 1998 ; 167 ( 1 - 2 ) : 33 { 55 . Gadala MS and Wang J . Simulation of metal forming processes with ﬂnite element methods . Int . J . Numer . Methods Eng . 1999 ; 44 ( 10 ) : 1397 { 1428 . Gadala MS , Movahhedy MR and Wang J . On the mesh motion for ALE modeling of metal forming processes . Finite Elem . Anal . Des . 2002 ; 38 ( 5 ) : 435 { 459 . Ghosh S . Arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian ﬂnite element analysis of large deformation in contacting bodies . Int . J . Numer . Methods Eng . 1992 ; 33 ( 9 ) : 1891 { 1925 . Ghosh S and Kikuchi N . An Arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian ﬂnite element method for large deformation analysis of elastic - viscoplastic solids . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 1991 ; 86 ( 2 ) : 127 { 188 . Ghosh S and Raju S . R - S adapted Arbitrary Lagrangian Eulerian ﬂnite element method for metal - forming problems with strain localization . Int . J . Numer . Methods Eng . 1996 ; 39 ( 19 ) : 3247 { 3272 . Giuliani S . An algorithm for continuous rezoning of the hydrodynamic grid in Arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian computer codes . Nucl . Eng . Des . 1982 ; 72 : 205 { 212 . Gordon WJ and Hall CH . Construction of curvilinear co - ordinate systems and applications to mesh generation . Int . J . Numer . Methods Eng . 1973 ; 7 ( 4 ) : 461 { 477 . Guillard H and Farhat C . On the signiﬂcance of the geometric conservation law for (cid:176)ow computations on moving meshes . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 2000 ; 190 ( 11 - 12 ) : 1467 { 1482 . Habashi WG , Fortin M , Vallet M - G , Dompierre J , Bourgault Y , Ait - Ali - Yahia D . Anisotropic mesh adaptation : towards user - independent , mesh - independent and solver - independent CFD solutions . Part I : Theory . Int . J . Numer . Methods Fluids 2000 ; 32 ( 6 ) : 725 { 744 . Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . ECM009 35 Haber R and Abel JF . Discrete transﬂnite mappings for the description and meshing of three - dimensional surfaces using interactive computer graphics . Int . J . Numer . Methods Eng . 1982 ; 18 ( 1 ) : 41 { 66 . Haber RB . A mixed Eulerian - Lagrangian displacement model for large - deformation analysis in solid mechanics . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 1984 ; 43 ( 3 ) : 277 { 292 . Haber RB and Hariandja BH . Computational strategies for nonlinear and fracture mechanics problems . An Eulerian - Lagrangian ﬂnite element approach to large deformation frictional contact . Comput . Struct . 1985 ; 20 ( 1 - 3 ) : 193 { 201 . Hermansson J and Hansbo P . A variable diﬁusion method for mesh smoothing . Commun . Numer . Methods Eng . 2003 ; 19 ( 11 ) : 897 { 908 . Hirt CW , Amsden AA , Cook JL . An Arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian computing method for all (cid:176)ow speeds . J . Comput . Phys . 1974 ; 14 : 227 { 253 . Reprinted in J . Comput . Phys . 1997 ; 135 ( 2 ) : 203 { 216 . Hogge M and Ponthot JP . Metal forming analysis via Eulerian - Lagrangian FEM with adaptive mesh . Latin American Research 1991 ; 21 : 217 { 224 . Hu YK and Liu WK . ALE ﬂnite element formulation for ring rolling analysis . Int . J . Numer . Methods Eng . 1992 ; 33 ( 6 ) : 1217 { 1236 . Hu YK and Liu WK . An ALE hydrodynamic lubrication ﬂnite element method with application to strip rolling . Int . J . Numer . Methods Eng . 1993 ; 36 ( 5 ) : 855 { 880 . Hu YK and Liu WK . Finite element hydrodynamic friction model for metal forming . Int . J . Numer . Methods Eng . 1994 ; 37 ( 23 ) : 4015 { 4037 . Huerta A and Liu WK . Viscous (cid:176)ow structure interaction . J . Press . Vessel Technol . - Trans . ASME 1988a ; 110 ( 1 ) : 15 { 21 . Huerta A . and Liu WK . Viscous (cid:176)ow with large free - surface motion . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 1988b ; 69 ( 3 ) : 277 { 324 . Huerta A and Liu WK . ALE formulation for large boundary motion . In Trans . 10th Int . Conf . Structural Mechanics in Reactor Technology , Vol . B , Anaheim , California , USA , 1989 , 335 { 346 . Huerta A and Liu WK . Large amplitude sloshing with submerged blocks . J . Press . Vessel Technol . - Trans . ASME 1990 ; 112 : 104 { 108 . Huerta A and Casadei F . New ALE applications in non - linear fast - transient solid dynamics . Eng . Comput . 1994 ; 11 ( 4 ) : 317 { 345 . Huerta A , Rodr¶‡guez - Ferran A , D¶‡ez P , Sarrate J . Adaptive ﬂnite element strategies based on error assessment . Int . J . Numer . Methods Eng . 1999 ; 46 ( 10 ) : 1803 - 1818 . Hu¶etink J , Vreede PT , van der Lugt J . Progress in mixed Eulerian - Lagrangian ﬂnite element simulation of forming processes . Int . J . Numer . Methods Eng . 1990 ; 30 ( 8 ) : 1441 { 1457 . Hughes TJR , Liu WK and Zimmermann TK . Lagrangian - Eulerian ﬂnite element formulation for incompressible viscous (cid:176)ows . U . S . - Japan Seminar on Interdisciplinary Finite Element Analysis , Cornell Univ . , Ithaca , NY , 1978 . Hughes TJR , Liu WK and Zimmermann TK . Lagrangian - Eulerian ﬂnite element formulation for incompressible viscous (cid:176)ows . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 1981 ; 29 ( 3 ) : 329 { 349 . Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . 36 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF COMPUTATIONAL MECHANICS Koh HM and Haber RB . Elastodynamic formulation of the Eulerian - Lagrangian kinematic description . J . Appl . Mech . - Trans . ASME 1986 ; 53 ( 4 ) : 839 { 845 . Koh HM , Lee HS and Haber RB . Dynamic crack propagation analysis using Eulerian - Lagrangian kinematic descriptions . Comput . Mech . 1988 ; 3 : 141 { 155 . Koobus B and Farhat C . Second - order accurate and geometrically conservative implicit schemes for (cid:176)ow computations on unstructured dynamic meshes . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 1999 ; 170 ( 1 - 2 ) : 103 { 129 . Laursen TA . Computational Contact and Impact Mechanics . Springer : Berlin , 2002 . Lesoinne M and Farhat C . Geometric conservation laws for (cid:176)ow problems with moving boundaries and deformable meshes , and their impact on aeroelastic computations . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 1996 ; 134 ( 1 - 2 ) : 71 - 90 . Le Tallec P and Martin C . A nonlinear elasticity model for stuctured mesh adaptation . In Proceedings of the Third ECCOMAS Computational Fluid Dynamics Conference , Paris , France , 1996 , 174 - 180 . Le Tallec P and Mouro J . Fluid - structure interaction with large structural displacements . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 2001 ; 190 ( 24 - 25 ) : 3039 { 3067 . Le Veque RJ . Numerical Methods for Conservation Laws . Lectures in Mathematics , ETH Z˜urich . Birkh˜auser Verlag : Basel , 1990 . Liu WK and Chang HG . A method of computation for (cid:176)uid structure interaction . Comput . Struct . 1985 ; 20 ( 1 { 3 ) : 311 { 320 . Liu WK and Chang HG . E – cient computational procedures for long - time duration (cid:176)uid - structure interaction problems . J . Press . Vessel Technol . - Trans . ASME 1984 ; 106 : 317 { 322 . Liu WK , Belytschko T and Chang H . An arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian ﬂnite element method for path - dependent materials . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 1986 ; 58 ( 2 ) : 227 { 245 . Liu WK , Chang H , Chen JS and Belytschko T . Arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian Petrov - Galerkin ﬂnite elements for nonlinear continua . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 1988 ; 68 ( 3 ) : 259 { 310 . Liu WK , Chen JS , Belytschko T and Zhang YF . Adaptive ALE ﬂnite elements with particular reference to external work rate on frictional interface . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 1991 ; 93 ( 2 ) : 189 { 216 . Liu WK and Gvildys J . Fluid - structure interaction of tanks with an eccentric core barrel . Comput . Methods Appl . Mech . Eng . 1986 ; 58 ( 1 ) : 51 { 77 . L˜ohner R and Yang C . Improved ALE mesh velocities for moving bodies . Commun . Numer . Methods Eng . 1996 ; 12 ( 10 ) : 599 { 608 . Malvern LW . Introduction to the Mechanics of a Continuous Medium . Prentice - Hall : Englewood Cliﬁs , New Jersey , USA , 1969 . Martinet F and Chabrand P . Application of ALE ﬂnite element method to a lubricated friction model in sheet metal forming . Int . J . Solids Struct . 2000 ; 37 ( 29 ) : 4005 - 4031 . M˜uller J - D . Anisotropic adaptation and multigrid for hybrid grids . Int . J . Numer . Methods Fluids 2002 ; 40 ( 3 - 4 ) : 445 { 455 . Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . ECM009 37 Noh WF . CEL : A time - dependent two - space dimensional coupled Eulerian - Lagrangian code . In Methods in Computational Physics , Vol . 3 , Alder B , Fernbach S , Rotenberg M ( eds ) . Academic Press : New York , 1964 . Nomura T and Hughes TJR . An Arbitrary Lgrangian - Eulerian ﬂnite element method for interaction of (cid:176)uid and a rigid body . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 1992 ; 95 ( 1 ) : 115 { 138 . P¶erez - Foguet A , Rodr¶‡guez - Ferran A and Huerta A . E – cient and accurate approach for powder compaction problems . Comp . Mech . 2003 ; 30 ( 3 ) : 220 { 234 . Pijaudier - Cabot G , Bod¶e L , Huerta A . Arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian ﬂnite element analysis of strain localization in transient problems . Int . J . Numer . Methods Eng . 1995 ; 38 ( 24 ) : 4171 { 4191 . Ponthot JP and Belytschko T . Arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian formulation for element - free Galerkin method . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 1998 ; 152 ( 1 - 2 ) : 19 { 46 . Ponthot JP and Hogge M . The use of the Eulerian - Lagrangian FEM in metal forming applications including contact and adaptive mesh . In Advances in Finite Deformation Problems in Material Processing , Chandra , Reddy JN ( eds ) . ASME Winter Annual Meeting , ASME AMD - 125 , Atlanta , 1991 ; 44 { 64 . Pracht WE . Calculating three - dimensional (cid:176)uid (cid:176)ows at all (cid:176)ow speeds with an Eulerian - Lagrangian computing mesh . J . Comput . Phys . 1975 ; 17 : 132 { 159 . Ramaswamy B and Kawahara M . Arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian ﬂnite element method for unsteady , convective , incompressible viscous free surface (cid:176)uid (cid:176)ow . Int . J . Numer . Methods Fluids 1987 ; 7 ( 10 ) : 1053 { 1075 . Rodr¶‡guez - Ferran A , Casadei F , Huerta A . ALE stress update for transient and quasistatic processes . Int . J . Numer . Methods Eng . 1998 ; 43 ( 2 ) : 241 { 262 . Rodr¶‡guez - Ferran A , P¶erez - Foguet A and Huerta A . Arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian ( ALE ) formulation for hyperelastoplasticity . Int . J . Numer . Methods Eng . 2002 ; 53 ( 8 ) : 1831 { 1851 . Sarrate J and Huerta A . An improved algorithm to smooth graded quadrilateral meshes preserving the prescribed element size . Commun . Numer . Methods Eng . 2001 ; 17 ( 2 ) : 89 { 99 . Sarrate J , Huerta A and Donea J . Arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian formulation for (cid:176)uid rigid - body interaction . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 2001 ; 190 ( 24 - 25 ) : 3171 { 3188 . Schreurs PJG , Veldpaus FE and Brekelmans WAM . Simulation of forming processes using the Arbitrary Eulerian - Lagrangian formulation . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 1986 ; 58 ( 1 ) : 19 { 36 . Souli M , Zolesio JP . Arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian and free - surface methods in (cid:176)uid mechanics . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 2001 ; 191 ( 3 - 5 ) : 451 { 466 . Smith RW . AUSM ( ALE ) : a geometrically conservative Arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian (cid:176)ux splitting scheme . J . Comput . Phys . 1999 ; 150 ( 1 ) : 268 { 286 . Tr¶epanier JY , Reggio M , Paraschivoiu M , Camarero R . Unsteady Euler solutions for arbitrarily moving bodies and boundaries . AIAA Journal 1993 ; 31 ( 10 ) : 1869 { 1876 . Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . 38 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF COMPUTATIONAL MECHANICS Trulio JG . Theory and structure of the AFTON codes . Report AFWL - TR - 66 - 19 , Air Force Weapons Lab . , 1966 . van Haaren MJ , Stoker HC , van den Boogaard AH and Hu¶etink J . The ALE method with triangular elements : Direct convection of integration point values . Int . J . Numer . Methods Eng . 2000 ; 49 ( 5 ) : 697 { 720 . Winslow AM . Equipotential zoning of two - dimensional meshes . Report UCRL - 7312 , University of California , Lawrence Radiation Laboratory , 1963 . Wriggers P . Computational Contact Mechanics . Wiley : Chichester , 2002 . Yamada T and Kikuchi F . An Arbitrary Lagrangian - Eulerian ﬂnite element method for incompressible hyperelasticity . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 1993 ; 102 ( 2 ) : 149 { 177 . Zhang Q and Hisada T . Analysis of (cid:176)uid - structure interaction problems with structural buckling and large domain changes by ALE ﬂnite element method . Comput . Meth . Appl . Mech . Eng . 2001 ; 190 ( 48 ) : 6341 { 6357 . Zhong ZH . Finite Element Procedures for Contact - Impact Problems . Oxford University Press : Oxford , 1993 . Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics . Edited by Erwin Stein , Ren¶e de Borst and Thomas J . R . Hughes . c (cid:176) 2004 John Wiley & Sons , Ltd .