1 Supplemental Data Cell , Volume 133 Capping Protein Increases the Rate of Actin - based Motility by Promoting Filament Nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 Complex Orkun Akin and R . Dyche Mullins Supplemental Discussion At the highest ratios of CP to Arp2 / 3 , the actin networks become too inhomogeneous to support efficient steady - state motility or shell growth . MovieS5 demonstrates two defining features of this concentration regime : ( 1 ) The actin network does not remain connected around the bead . ( 2 ) Patches of the network frequently lose contact with the surface and float away . We attribute the loss of network connectivity mainly to the decrease in average filament length . These networks are not held together by traditional crosslinking proteins that can link any two filaments , regardless of their origin . They are , instead , entangled arbors of branched filaments . The degree of entanglement will increase with both the density of Arp2 / 3 branches and the average length of the filaments . While the density of branches is high at high CP concentrations , we suspect that the average filament becomes too short to connect isolated dendritic arbors . As a result , the ActA - coated beads generate disconnected fragments of network that never coalesce into a coherent shell . The second feature , loss of contact with the bead surface , is likely a symptom of limiting Arp2 / 3 : In our study of steady - state motility and shell growth , we were constrained to concentration ranges that produced actin structures robust enough to be characterized with our current methods . It is within these ranges that we found the rate of nucleation to increase with CP concentration independent of the Arp2 / 3 concentration . Of course this trend can not continue indefinitely , and we believe that the network dynamics at higher CP to Arp2 / 3 ratios reflect the effects of limiting Arp2 / 3 concentrations . In our system , the Arp2 / 3 complex is one of two possible modes of surface : network attachment , the other being the WH2 domains of the immobilized NPF ( Co et al . , 2007 ) . Thus , if the assembly process has to ‘wait’ for new Arp2 / 3 complexes to arrive at the bead surface , i . e . when Arp2 / 3 is limiting , the actin network frequently loses contact with the surface altogether . Supplemental Experimental Procedures Protein Purification and Modification Cytoplasmic actin was purified from Acanthamoeba castellani by the method of Gordon et al . ( 1976 ) . Actin was stored in 0 . 5 mM TCEP , 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 2 mM Tris [ pH 8 . 0 ] and gel filtered before use . Arp2 / 3 was prepared from Acanthamoeba castellani by the method of Dayel et . al . ( 2001 ) and further purified by cation exchange chromatography on monoS ( GE Healthcare ) . Recombinant mouse CP α 1 β 2 was purified as described ( Palmgren et al . , 2001 ) . Recombinant Acanthamoeba castellani cofilin ( i . e . actophorin ) was purified as described ( Quirk et al . , 1993 ) . Recombinant human profilin I was purified by poly - L - proline affinity chromatography as described ( Kaiser et al . , 1989 ) . Full - length Listeria monocytogenes ActA lacking the signal sequence and membrane anchor , ActA 30 - 612 , was extended at the C - terminus with a KCK motif and a 6xHis - tag using standard molecular biology techniques . ( Primer information is available upon request . ) ActA 30 - 612 - KCK - 6H was expressed in E . coli and purified on Ni - NTA resin ( Qiagen ) under denaturing conditions followed by anion exchange chromatography on monoQ ( GE Healthcare ) . The minimal Arp2 / 3 - activating domain of ActA , ActA 30 - 170 , ( Zalevsky et al . , 2001 ) was extended at the C - terminus with a 6xHis - tag using standard molecular biology techniques and purified as ActA 30 - 612 - KCK - 6H . Actin was labeled on Cys - 374 with tetramethylrhodamine - maleimide ( Invitrogen ) as described ( Otterbein et al . , 2001 ) . Essentially the same protocol was used to label actin with Alexa488 - maleimide ( Invitrogen ) , except the labeled protein was recovered in the polymerized actin pool . Arp2 / 3 was labeled with Alexa488 - maleimide as described ( Zalevsky et al . , 2001 ) . Motility Assays and Microscopy Carboxylated polystyrene beads were purchased from Bangs Labs . Except for the aster shown in Supplemental Figure 3 , all experiments were carried out with beads coated with the ActA 30 - 612 - KCK - 6H construct , referred to 2 as ‘ActA’ in the text . ActA was covalently crosslinked to the beads using EDC : sulfoNHS ( Pierce ) chemistry . Briefly , bead suspensions corresponding to 10 10 μ m 2 / mL of surface area were charged with EDC in the presence of sulfoNHS . Beads were washed to remove excess crosslinker and coupled to 2 - 4 μ M ActA for 2 hours at room temperature . Non - specifically adsorbed protein was removed by washing the beads in buffer containing 0 . 1 % NP - 40 and 2 M urea . The efficiency of crosslinking was determined by quantifying the ActA concentration in the flow - through and subsequent washes using fluorescently - stained SDS gels . The calculated surface density of crosslinked ActA varied between 2x10 4 and 10 5 μ m - 2 and correlated with the bead - specific density of functional groups reported by the manufacturer . The final product was stored in 1 mg / mL BSA , 2 mM Tris [ pH 8 . 0 ] and used at 1 : 30 dilution in motility assays . All images were acquired on a software - controlled ( SimplePCI , Compix ) Nikon TE300 Eclipse inverted epifluorescence microscope equipped with a digital camera ( Model C4742 - 98 , Hamamatsu ) . To minimize non - specific protein adsorption , glass slides ( Fisher ) and coverslips ( Corning ) were washed in ethanol and KOH and treated with a 2 % solution of diethyldichlorosilane ( Gelest ) in 5 % water , 95 % isopropanol [ pH 4 . 5 with acetic acid ] . Microscopy chambers were prepared by spreading 1 - 5 μ L of motility mix between the glass pieces . To prevent evaporation , the chambers were sealed with valap ( molten mixture of vaseline , lanolin , and paraffin at 1 : 1 : 1 mass ratio ) . Biochemical Analysis of Shell Growth Shell growth reactions set up with 3 μ M actin were arrested by diluting 1 : 1 into KMEI ( 50 mM KCl , 1 mm MgCl2 , 1 mM EGTA , 10 mM imidazole [ pH 7 . 0 ] ) containing 20 μ M each of Latrunculin B and phalloidin . Shells in the arrested reactions were sedimented at 500 rcf for 2 minutes . Pelleted shells were washed three times using a magnetic separator and resuspended within 12 minutes of arrest . Bead density in the resuspended samples was determined using a hemocytometer . Supernatants from the low speed spin were spun again at 360 K rcf for 15 minutes . Dilution series of the original reactions , washed shells , and high speed pellets and supernatants were run on 4 - 12 % tris - glycine gels ( Invitrogen ) . The gels were stained with Sypro Ruby ( Invitrogen ) , imaged with a Typhoon 9400 fluorescence imager ( GE Healthcare ) , and analyzed using ImageQuant ( GE Healthcare ) . Image Analysis Distances traveled by motile comet tails were determined by tracking the centroids of binarized phase - contrast bead images . Comet tail lengths were measured using skeletonized binary masks from fluorescence images . Shell sizes were measured using a routine that accepted user corrections to initial estimates based on intensity statistics . Image intensity adjustments for figures were performed with Photoshop ( Adobe ) and ImageJ ( http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / ij / ) . Unless noted otherwise , the intensity adjustment of each image was performed independently of accompanying images in the same figure . Calculation of Elongation Rates Actin assembly during shell growth can be described by the equation d / dt [ P ] = k + [ A ] [ E ] - k - [ E ] , where [ P ] is the concentration of filamentous actin in shells , [ A ] is the concentration of monomeric actin , [ E ] is the concentration of free barbed ends , and k + and k - are the kinetic constants for the interaction of actin monomers with barbed ends . The net elongation rate per barbed end , k + [ A ] - k - , is dominated by k + . To estimate the value of k + during shell growth , we evaluated the time - sum form of the rate equation , using the measured values of [ P ] and [ A ] , the estimated value of [ E ] , and the published value of k - ( Pollard , 1986 ) . We solved for k + over each interval of the experimental time series . Values shown in Supplemental Figure 6C are each the average of four estimates , corresponding to separate solutions over four time intervals . 3 Supplemental Figures Figure S1 . Arresting actin dynamics with Latrunculin B and phalloidin . A . Used together , Latrunculin B and phalloidin arrest actin dynamics and preserve the distribution of actin between the monomeric and polymeric states . Black trace plots the time course of polymerization of 4 μ M actin ( 5 % pyrene labeled ) , as measured by the increase in pyrene fluorescence . At the indicated time points , aliquots from a parallel polymerization reaction were diluted 1 : 1 into buffer containing 20 μ M each of Latrunculin B and phalloidin . 60 minutes after the start of polymerization , the arrested samples were centrifuged at 360K rcf for 15 minutes . The actin concentration in the supernatants and the resuspended pellets was determined from fluorescently stained SDS - PAGE gels . B . Latrunculin B / phalloidin treatment arrests Arp2 / 3 - dependent motility and cofilin - dependent network disassembly . Motile comet tails were pulsed with a second color of actin and arrested at the indicated times . Reaction conditions were as described in Figure 1B , with 175 nM Ap2 / 3 and 168 nM CP . Arrowheads indicate the position of the beads . Increase in length of the second color over time was used to determine the rate of tail growth . Error bars represent standard deviation ( average n = 39 ) . 4 Figure S2 . Localization of Arp2 / 3 in actin comet tails and shells . A . Nearly all of the Arp2 / 3 detected in actin comet tails is incorporated into the network through dendritic nucleation at the bead surface . We assembled actin comet tails with Alexa488 - labeled ( 10 % of total protein ) or unlabeled Arp2 / 3 . 30 minutes after mixing , we arrested motility with Latrunculin B / phalloidin treatment . We then added a matching concentration of Alexa488 - labeled Arp2 / 3 to the tails assembled with unlabeled protein and imaged both reactions using identical settings . Conditions : 7 . 5 μ M actin ( 5 % TMR - labeled ) , 4 μ M cofilin , 3 μ M profilin , 175 nM Arp2 / 3 ( with or without 10 % Alexa488 - labeled fraction ) , 168 nM CP . Panels : Representative comet tails assembled with ( left ) and without ( right ) Alexa488 - labeled Arp2 / 3 . Tails are framed to position the beads ( not shown ) to the left of each panel . Display limits were set to the same values for each channel . Graph : Raw pixel intensities along the first two microns of the actin comet tails shown in the green panels are plotted . Dashed line marks the position of the beads . B . Arp2 / 3 targets strongly to the bead surface in the absence of ongoing actin assembly . The reaction was Latrunculin B / phalloidin arrested 60 seconds after mixing and incubated with 50 nM Alexa488 - labeled Arp2 / 3 . Conditions : 5 . 8 μ m ActA - coated beads mixed with 3 μ M actin ( 5 % TMR - labeled ) , 96 nM Arp2 / 3 , and 84 nM CP . Figure S3 . Filament bundling converts actin halos into asters . Image was acquired 30 minutes after mixing . To display the full length of individual bundles , gamma was set to 2 during brightness and contrast adjustment . Conditions : 0 . 5 μ m ActA [ 30 - 170 ] - coated beads mixed with 7 . 5 μ M actin ( 5 % TMR - labeled ) and 50 nM Arp2 / 3 in the presence of 0 . 35 % methyl cellulose . 5 Figure S4 . Biochemical analysis of shell growth . A . Fluorescently stained SDS - PAGE gel of an arrested and fractionated shell growth reaction . Internal standards for each protein were set up using the dilution series of the original reaction ( i . e . Load ) . The composition of the three fractions was determined with a three - point line fit to the standards . The Arp2 and p40 subunits of the Arp2 / 3 complex migrate too close to actin to be resolved individually . This does not affect the quantification of actin , which was at least twenty times more abundant than Arp2 / 3 in our experiments . B . Fractionation and washing do not damage arrested shells . C . The concentration of filamentous actin not associated with shells increases with [ CP ] . Values were calculated by subtracting the actin recovered in the shells and the high speed supernatant from the total actin concentration . We noted that amount of actin measured in the high speed pellets actually decreased with increasing [ CP ] . However , this trend paralleled a decrease in the fraction of starting mass recovered ( i . e . ( beads + hss + hsp ) / input ) , suggesting that there was a systematic error in material recovery from high speed pellets with increasing [ CP ] . D . The amount of Arp2 / 3 recovered in arrested and washed shells does not vary with [ CP ] or [ Arp2 / 3 ] . 6 Figure S5 . CP recovered from arrested and washed shells is a reliable reporter for the total number of filaments . A . Non - specific association of CP with actin shells does not account for the increase in CP recovered from shells with increasing starting [ CP ] . After LatB / phalloidin arrest , we diluted actin shells prepared with low starting [ CP ] into buffer ( left ) or buffer with CP ( center ) to match the total concentration used to prepare shells with high starting [ CP ] ( right ) . Following a two - minute incubation , all three reactions were processed to determine the protein content in the shells and high speed supernatants as described in the text . Values shown are the average of two independent experiments . Conditions : 5 . 8 μ m ActA - coated magnetic beads , 3 μ M actin ( 5 % TMR - labeled ) . B . All filaments in an actin shell are capped after LatB / phalloidin arrest . 5 . 8 μ m ActA - coated magnetic beads were mixed with 3 μ M actin ( 5 % TMR - labeled ) , 120 nM Arp2 / 3 , and 168 nM CP to initiate shell growth . The reaction was arrested 60 seconds after mixing and the shells were washed using a magnetic separator . The arrested and washed shells were then mixed with either 3 μ M actin ( 5 % Alexa488 - labeled ) or with 3 μ M actin ( 5 % Alexa488 - labeled ) and 13 μ M profilin . This second round of assembly was arrested again 60 seconds after mixing and shells were imaged with fluorescence microscopy . Polymerization in the presence of actin alone is not a result of barbed end elongation but of new filament nucleation by surface - bound Arp2 / 3 , which is inhibited by profilin ( Machesky et al . , 1999 ) 7 Figure S6 . Kinetics of shell growth . A . Soluble CP concentration for the conditions discussed Figure 5 . B . Soluble actin concentration for the conditions discussed Figure 5 . C . Observed rate of filament elongation does not vary significantly with Arp2 / 3 concentration . Rates of filament elongation for the conditions discussed in Figure 5 were estimated by comparing the measured actin network assembly with expected assembly , calculated using the measured concentration of monomeric actin and the estimated density of barbed ends ( see Supplemental Experimental Procedures for details ) . Supplemental References Co , C . , Wong , D . T . , Gierke , S . , Chang , V . , and Taunton , J . ( 2007 ) . Mechanism of actin network attachment to moving membranes : barbed end capture by N - WASP WH2 domains . Cell 128 , 901 - 913 . Dayel , M . J . , Holleran , E . A . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2001 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex requires hydrolyzable ATP for nucleation of new actin filaments . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98 , 14871 - 14876 . Gordon , D . J . , Eisenberg , E . , and Korn , E . D . ( 1976 ) . Characterization of cytoplasmic actin isolated from Acanthamoeba castellanii by a new method . J Biol Chem 251 , 4778 - 4786 . Kaiser , D . A . , Goldschmidt - Clermont , P . J . , Levine , B . A . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1989 ) . Characterization of renatured profilin purified by urea elution from poly - L - proline agarose columns . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 14 , 251 - 262 . Machesky , L . M . , Mullins , R . D . , Higgs , H . N . , Kaiser , D . A . , Blanchoin , L . , May , R . C . , Hall , M . E . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) . Scar , a WASp - related protein , activates nucleation of actin filaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96 , 3739 - 3744 . Otterbein , L . R . , Graceffa , P . , and Dominguez , R . ( 2001 ) . The crystal structure of uncomplexed actin in the ADP state . Science 293 , 708 - 711 . Palmgren , S . , Ojala , P . J . , Wear , M . A . , Cooper , J . A . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2001 ) . Interactions with PIP2 , ADP - actin monomers , and capping protein regulate the activity and localization of yeast twinfilin . J Cell Biol 155 , 251 - 260 . 8 Pollard , T . D . ( 1986 ) . Rate constants for the reactions of ATP - and ADP - actin with the ends of actin filaments . J Cell Biol 103 , 2747 - 2754 . Quirk , S . , Maciver , S . K . , Ampe , C . , Doberstein , S . K . , Kaiser , D . A . , VanDamme , J . , Vandekerckhove , J . S . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1993 ) . Primary structure of and studies on Acanthamoeba actophorin . Biochemistry 32 , 8525 - 8533 . Vignjevic , D . , Yarar , D . , Welch , M . D . , Peloquin , J . , Svitkina , T . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Formation of filopodia - like bundles in vitro from a dendritic network . J Cell Biol 160 , 951 - 962 . Zalevsky , J . , Grigorova , I . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2001 ) . Activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex by the Listeria acta protein . Acta binds two actin monomers and three subunits of the Arp2 / 3 complex . J Biol Chem 276 , 3468 - 3475 .