Actin machinery and mechanosensitivity in invadopodia , podosomes and focal adhesions Corinne Albiges - Rizo 1 , * , Olivier Destaing 1 , Bertrand Fourcade 1 , 2 , Emmanuelle Planus 1 and Marc R . Block 1 1 INSERM U823 Institut Albert Bonniot , Université Joseph Fourier , CNRS ERL3148 , Equipe DySAD , Site Santé , BP 170 , 38042 Grenoble , Cedex 9 , France 2 Université Joseph Fourier , Structure et Propriétés des Architectures Moléculaires , UMR5819 CNRS , CEA - Grenoble , 17 rue des Martyrs , 38054 Grenoble , Cedex 9 , France * Author for correspondence ( corinne . albiges - rizo @ ujf - grenoble . fr ) Key words : Invadopodia , Podosomes , Actin , Mechanosensitivity , Focal adhesion Summary The invasiveness of cells is correlated with the presence of dynamic actin - rich membrane structures called invadopodia , which are membrane protrusions that are associated with localized polymerization of sub - membrane actin filaments . Similar to focal adhesions and podosomes , invadopodia are cell matrix adhesion sites . Indeed , invadopodia share several features with podosomes , but whether they are distinct structures is still a matter of debate . Invadopodia are built upon an N - WASP - dependent branched actin network , and the Rho GTPase Cdc42 is involved in inducing invadopodial - membrane protrusion , which is mediated by actin filaments that are organized in bundles to form an actin core . Actin - core formation is thought to be an early step in invadopodium assembly , and the actin core is perpendicular to the extracellular matrix and the plasma membrane ; this contrasts with the tangential orientation of actin stress fibers anchored to focal adhesions . In this Commentary , we attempt to summarize recent insights into the actin dynamics of invadopodia and podosomes , and the forces that are transmitted through these invasive structures . Although the mechanisms underlying force - dependent regulation of invadopodia and podosomes are largely unknown compared with those of focal adhesions , these structures do exhibit mechanosensitivity . Actin dynamics and associated forces might be key elements in discriminating between invadopodia , podosomes and focal adhesions . Targeting actin regulatory molecules that specifically promote invadopodium formation is an attractive strategy against cancer - cell invasion . Introduction Tumor - cell invasion across tissue barriers requires degradation of the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , as well as dynamic interactions between the ECM and the intracellular actin cytoskeleton that occur through organized adhesive structures . The best - characterized adhesive structures , named focal adhesions , contain clusters of transmembrane integrin receptors that are tethered at one end to the ECM and at the other to actin stress fibers , which are responsible for cell traction and ECM reorganization . However , other adhesive structures , known as podosomes and invadopodia , also exist . Podosomes are distinct adhesive structures that are found on the ventral side of a wide range of cells , including osteoclasts , macrophages and endothelial cells . In osteoclasts , podosomes are involved in the formation of a sealing zone that establishes an isolated compartment in which bone is degraded ( Gimona et al . , 2008 ) . It has also been demonstrated that lymphocytes use podosomes : they extend ‘invasive podosomes’ to palpate the surface of , and ultimately form transcellular pores through , the vascular endothelium ( Carman et al . , 2007 ) . Invasive cancer cells and Srctransformed cells display podosome - like actin - rich membrane protrusions called invadopodia , which are primary sites of rapid actin polymerization and which represent the major sites of matrix degradation in these cells ( Weaver , 2008 ) . Invadopodia of tumor cells appear as irregular dots in the vicinity of the nucleus and in proximity to the Golgi complex . Podosomes in osteoclasts and invadopodia in Src - transformed cells share the feature of selforganizing into a ring ( the so - called rosette ) ; in the case of osteoclasts , this can expand to a belt called the sealing zone . This self - organization is crucial for efficient matrix degradation and cell invasion ( Badowski et al . , 2008 ; Saltel et al . , 2006 ) . These rosettes can be formed after stimulation with potent angiogenic factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) and tumor necrosis factor - α ( TNFα ) ( Osiak et al . , 2005 ) . Because of the significant impact of invadopodia in oncological events such as cell invasion and matrix degradation , we need more insight into the mechanisms that favor the development of invadopodia at the expense of focal adhesions . Invadopodia , podosomes and focal adhesions are all cell - matrix adhesion sites that connect the actin cytoskeleton within the cytosol to the extracellular matrix , but they differ in their architecture and dynamics despite sharing most of the same proteins ( such as integrin , talin and paxillin ) ( Block et al . , 2008 ) ( Figs 1 , 2 and 3 ) . Active actin polymerization , induction of membrane curvature , rapid turnover of cell - matrix adhesions and local modulation of contractile forces are all likely to play a central role in the promotion of invadopodium formation . In this Commentary , we discuss recent insights into the actin dynamics of invadopodia and podosomes , and the forces that are transmitted through these invasive structures . Fig . 1 . Schematic view of signaling pathways that lead to actin organization at focal adhesions . ( A ) At the initial stage of adhesion formation , integrins or other unidentified receptors bind to components of the ECM ( grey ) , leading to clustering of receptors into PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - enriched areas of plasma membrane . ( B ) In early spreading adhesions at the cell periphery , the Arp2 / 3 complex and WASP are targeted to adhesions by FAK . Blue arrows represent the spatiotemporal sequence of structure assembly . Pink arrows indicate protein recruitment . ( C ) Autophosphorylation of FAK at Tyr397 destabilizes the Arp2 / 3 - WASP - FAK complex . Talin is recruited to adhesions , allowing integrin - ECM linkages to be functionally coupled to actomyosin ; this enables actomyosin contractility to affect adhesion reinforcement and subsequent maturation . Actin filaments can be crosslinked by α - actinin . Myosin II incorporates into the α - actinin - crosslinked actin - filament bundles . ( D ) The collective dynamics of focal adhesions can be imaged by the actin - stress - fiber - mediated connection of focal adhesions . Connections can be observed between focal adhesions at the front of the cell with sliding trailing adhesions at the rear of the cell . Fig . 2 . Schematic view of signaling pathways that lead to actin organization at invadopodia or podosomes . ( A ) At the initial stage of adhesion formation , integrins or other unidentified receptors bind to components of the ECM ( grey ) , leading to clustering of receptors into PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - enriched areas of plasma membrane . ( B ) Recruitment of Src to adhesion sites leads to phosphorylation of several proteins such as cortactin , WASP , FAK and regulators of small GTPases . Continuous actin nucleation relies on the continuous and strong activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex at the membrane through the synergistic action of cortactin and WASP - family proteins . ( C ) DRF / mDia1 elongates actin filaments into columnar structures from the branched actin network that was previously induced by N - WASP , the Arp2 / 3 complex and cortactin . ( D ) Podosomes or invadopodia are mechanically connected through a network of radial actin filaments that lie parallel to the substratum . Role of F - actin in the assembly of focal adhesions , podosomes and invadopodia Various types of directed cell motility are driven by the polymerization of an actin network that pushes the membrane forwards . During cell motility , the leading edge of the cell exhibits a range of dynamic structures such as lamellipodia , filopodia and membrane ruffles ( Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . Correlative fluorescence and electron microscopy show that the lamellipodium which contains a dense network of branching actin filaments that undergo fast retrograde flow – forms a cohesive , separable layer of actin in front of a less dynamic actin network called the lamella . At the rear of the lamellipodium , the motor myosin II pulls lamellipodial actin filaments and condenses them into lamellar actin bundles , causing periodic edge retraction ( as a result of mechanical breakage of the link between focal adhesions and stress fibers ) , as well as initiation of new adhesion sites and force generation that is accompanied by assembly of actin into stress fibers . Live - cell imaging has shown that nascent cell - matrix adhesions arise in the lamellipodium ( Giannone et al . , 2007 ) and grow and mature during the forward movement of the lamellipodium , forming focal adhesions connected to stress fibers that are tangentially oriented with respect to the ECM ( Fig . 1 ) . These focal adhesions are localized at the interface between the lamellipodial and lamellar filamentous ( F ) - actin networks ( Hu et al . , 2007 ) . Even though the lamellipodial actin structure has been well described , the precise organization of the actin filaments that emerge from focal adhesions is poorly understood , mostly because of the absence of ultrastructural studies that show adhesion sites and the cytoskeleton at the same time . Fig . 3 . Three - dimensional ( 3D ) reconstruction of F - actin structure in a BHKRSV cell . ( A ) A 3D reconstruction was derived by combining images from confocal planes viewed from the side of the basal ( adherent ) face . F - actin staining was carried out after fixation in 4 % paraformaldehyde with TRITCphalloidin . 3D reconstruction and rendering of the actin cytoskeleton was carried out through EDIT3D software , using grey - level images of each confocal z - stack ( developed by Yves Usson and Franck Parazza , UMR CNRS 5525 , Grenoble , France ) . Actin stress fibers are indicated by arrowheads , and the collective organization of podosomes and invadopodia by arrows . ( B ) A color scale was added , purely to indicate the relative position of the z - plane . The most basal plane was colored blue . Scale bars : 5 μm . Invadopodia and podosomes differ from focal adhesions in the geometry and dynamics of their associated actin cytoskeleton ( Fig . 2 ) . Indeed , the formation of invadopodia and podosomes was historically described as a major actin - cytoskeleton reorganization that was induced by the expression of the oncogene v - Src ( Tarone et al . , 1985 ) . Invadopodia and podosomes comprise an actin core containing the actin - nucleation machinery [ including Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) , neuronal WASP ( N - WASP ) , WASP - interacting protein ( WIP ) , the Arp2 / 3 complex and cortactin ] surrounded by a multimeric protein complex that consists of integrins and integrin - associated proteins such as talin , vinculin and paxillin ( Mueller et al . , 1992 ; Desai et al . , 2008 ) . Integrins and their associated proteins constitute an adhesive ring that colocalizes with a region of polymerized actin , called the ‘actin cloud’ , between the multiple actin cores , which form a cluster , ring or belt of invadopodia or podosomes ( Collin et al . , 2006 ; Destaing et al . , 2003 ) . Live - cell imaging of GFP - actin has revealed that podosomes undergo cycles of rapid polymerization and depolymerization , and have a life - span of 2 to 4 minutes ( Destaing et al . , 2003 ; Ochoa et al . , 2000 ) . Invadopodia are thought to have a much longer lifespan of ~ 30 minutes but , in Src - transformed baby hamster kidney ( BHK ) cells , inhibition of protein tyrosine phosphatases speeds up invadopodial dynamics to give half - lives similar to those of podosomes ( Badowski et al . , 2008 ) . Moreover , fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) experiments have shown that the podosome actin core and the actin cloud undergo continuous actin polymerization and depolymerization , which is maintained throughout the podosome life span ( Destaing et al . , 2003 ) . In terms of assembly , invadopodia formation is initiated by the nucleation of F - actin ; these filaments are oriented perpendicularly to the substrate ( Artym et al . , 2006 ; Badowski et al . , 2008 ) ; by contrast ( and as described above ) , the assembly of focal adhesions starts with occupancy of integrins by ECM components and integrin clustering , after which actin stress fibers form ( Cai and Sheetz , 2009 ; Vicente - Manzanares et al . , 2009 ) . Because the actin core of invadopodia assembles before the surrounding integrin - containing adhesive ring , and actin disruption is a prerequisite for invadopodium disassembly ( Badowki et al . , 2008 ) , we can hypothesize that invadopodia are maintained by repetitive nucleation of actin polymerization at the invadopodium tip , followed by the rearrangement of actin filaments within the shaft . At the molecular level , high - resolution scanning electron microscopy combined with fluorescence microscopy has resolved the molecular architecture of arrays of invadopodia and podosomes , revealing that these adhesive structures contain two F - actin networks with opposite orientations . Podosome cores are composed of bundles of actin cables that lie perpendicular to the substratum , and the cores communicate through a network of radial actin filaments that lie parallel to the substratum ; these correspond to the actin cloud ( Fig . 2 ) ( Gavazzi et al . , 1989 ; Luxenburg et al . , 2007 ) . These observations suggest the existence of tangential forces between podosome actin cores . The magnitude and direction of the resulting forces probably depends on the collective organization of a group of invadopodia or podosomes into a cluster , ring or belt . In conclusion , focal adhesions , invadopodia and podosomes are all strongly associated with actin filaments that link neighboring structures . However , although fast - polymerizing actin seems to be the scaffold that allows assembly of and stabilizes invadopodia and podosomes , actin stress fibers with much slower dynamics seem to be required to transmit the tangential forces that are needed for focaladhesion maturation ( Riveline et al . , 2001 ) ( Fig . 4 ) . How assembly of invadopodia and podosomes is coupled with actin nucleation Understanding the structure and properties of invadopodia , podosomes and focal adhesions requires detailed knowledge of the localization and dynamics of the signaling networks that regulate actin nucleation and polymerization . For example , and as mentioned above , fast actin turnover might be important for the extension of podosomes or invadopodia , whereas slow self - renewal of actin stress fibers might be a feature of the more static focal adhesions ( Fig . 4 ) . In addition , the balance between activation and stabilization of WASP - family proteins , capping of actin barbed ends , and Arp2 / 3 - complex - dependent branching of actin filaments seems to govern the final actin structure and to influence whether adhesive and protrusive structures form ( Pollard et al . , 2000 ) . In this section , we discuss the localization and role of actin - nucleation Fig . 4 . Actin dynamics in stress fibers and invadopodia rosettes in mouse embryonic fibroblasts transformed with Src . ( A ) Recovery of GFP - actin after photobleaching ( green rectangles ) is faster in invadopodial rosettes than in stress fibers . Images were extracted from a time series in which mouse embryonic fibroblasts expressing Src and GFP - actin were shown to form both invadopodial rosettes and stress fibers . Imaging and photobleaching conditions were exactly the same in both conditions . ( B ) Analysis of normalized fluorescence intensity shows that the net flux of actin , which is determined by the tangent at the origin of the recovery curve ( black arrows ) , is faster in podosomes than in stress fibers . The plateau of the recovery curve does not reach the same level as before photobleaching , allowing the determination of the immobile fraction in each structure . From this analysis , it seems that stress fibers are composed mostly of poorly dynamic F - actin . and - elongation factors and the physical properties of the membrane in invadopodium and podosome dynamics . Role of actin - nucleation factors in adhesive structures Actin nucleation relies on the Arp2 / 3 complex , which is activated at the membrane by proteins of the WASP family ( WASP is found in leucocytes , whereas N - WASP is more widely expressed ) . The activation of WASP and N - WASP ( via opening of the closed conformation ) is linked to several cooperating factors that facilitate their interaction with the Arp2 / 3 complex , including WASPinteracting protein ( WIP ) , which shuttles WASP - family proteins to areas of actin assembly ( Chabadel et al . , 2007 ; Lafuente et al . , 2004 ; Peterson et al . , 2007 ) . Cortactin ( see below ) promotes actin nucleation synergistically with WASP by simultaneously binding to the Arp2 / 3 complex and actin filaments , which has the dual effect of activating actin nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex and stabilizing the new filament branches created by the complex ( Weaver et al . , 2002 ; Weaver et al . , 2001 ) . WIP binds directly to cortactin , enhancing its ability to activate the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Kinley et al . , 2003 ) . In addition , the activity of WASP - family proteins is probably controlled by their diffusion rate . N - WASP can interact with free barbed ends of growing actin filaments ( Co et al . , 2007 ) . Recent data have shown that N - WASP is able to limit actin - filament growth by antagonizing filament - capping proteins at the barbed ends and that it thereby controls the rate of Arp2 / 3 - complex - dependent actinbased motility of intracellular viruses ( Weisswange et al . , 2009 ) . Actin nucleators at focal adhesions In focal adhesions , the relationship between integrins and the actinnucleation machinery is not well understood , even though actin - polymerization activity has been reconstituted from integrin receptors and associated proteins isolated from non - adherent hematopoietic cells ( Butler et al . , 2006 ) . The focal - adhesion protein vinculin can associate transiently with the Arp2 / 3 complex upon cell adhesion to the ECM protein fibronectin ( DeMali et al . , 2002 ) , but neither Arp2 / 3 nor WASP has been identified in mature focal adhesions . However , the recruitment of actin into stress fibers is impaired when focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) , another focal - adhesion protein , is missing or cannot be phosphorylated on Tyr397 ( Serrels et al . , 2007 ) . Recently , it has been established that the FERM ( band 4 . 1 , ezrin , radixin , moesin ) domain of FAK interacts with the Arp2 / 3 complex and WASP , providing a link between integrin engagement , formation of nascent spreading adhesions and actin polymerization ( Serrels et al . , 2007 ) . Arp2 / 3 might interact with FAK at early spreading adhesions at the cell periphery and then be released from maturing adhesion structures in nascent lamellipodia ( Serrels et al . , 2007 ) . Autophosphorylation of FAK at Tyr397 destabilizes the Arp2 / 3 - WASP - FAK complex , inhibits Arp2 / 3 - dependent lamellipodium extension and prevents or delays stress - fiber assembly ( Serrels et al . , 2007 ; Wu et al . , 2004 ) . Actin nucleators at podosomes and invadopodia In contrast to the situation at focal adhesions , the Arp2 / 3 complex is enriched at the core of podosomes or invadopodia and throughout the length of the actin core ( Baldassarre et al . , 2006 ; Linder et al . , 2000 ; Yamaguchi et al . , 2005 ) . Knocking down the Arp2 / 3 complex in osteoclasts impairs podosome formation ( Hurst et al . , 2004 ) . Arp2 / 3 - complex - dependent and N - WASP - regulated actin polymerization is essential in the early phase of podosome and invadopodium formation . Additionally , it is tempting to speculate that Arp2 / 3 - complex - controlled actin branching has a crucial role in the fission of podosomes to generate new daughter podosomes ( Evans et al . , 2003 ) . RNA interference and dominant - negativemutant expression analyses have revealed that N - WASP , the Arp2 / 3 complex and their upstream regulators Nck1 , Cdc42 and WIP are needed for invadopodium formation ( Yamaguchi et al . , 2005 ) . Additionally , dendritic cells and macrophages in which WASP expression is decreased or deficient ( as observed in knockdown experiments , knockout mice or individuals with Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome ) fail to make functional podosomes ( Olivier et al . , 2006 ) , whereas WASP rescue results in the recovery of normal podosome organization ( Burns et al . , 2001 ) . Within these cell types , N - WASP is not able to compensate for WASP deficiency . The reason is not fully understood , but a total rescue by N - WASP requires an additional stimulus [ stimulation of protein kinase C ( PKC ) with phorbol myristate acetate ( TPA ) , for instance ] to form podosomes ( Tatin et al . , 2006 ) . As in focal adhesions , it seems that actin polymerization is also regulated by a FAK - family member in podosomes , as revealed by the decrease of the actin net flux in Pyk2knockout osteoclasts ( Gil - Henn et al . , 2007 ) . The role of cortactin Another way to regulate actin cytoskeleton remodeling is the activation of Arp2 / 3 by cortactin , which has emerged as a key protein in the coordination of membrane dynamics . Cortactin is one of the few cytoskeletal proteins that is specifically required for the assembly of invadopodia in carcinoma cells ( Artym et al . , 2006 ) . It does not accumulate into focal adhesions but rather at the edge of lamellipodia , where the polymerized actin - filament meshwork pushes the membrane of migrating cells ( Bryce et al . , 2005 ) . Many studies have suggested that cortactin overexpression increases tumor aggressiveness , possibly by promoting invasion , metastasis and invadopodium formation ( Artym et al . , 2006 ; Clark et al . , 2007 ) . Deacetylation of cortactin by HDAC6 alters its association with actin , thus modulating cell motility ( Zhang et al . , 2003 ) . Cortactin is also a Src - kinase substrate that is frequently overexpressed in cancer . Cortactin phosphorylation by Src enhances actin assembly and increases binding of cortactin to Nck and WIP , and might therefore favor the appearance of new podosomes ( Tehrani et al . , 2007 ) . Phosphorylation of cortactin seems to be involved in its turnover and stability , possibly through its interaction with WIP , but does not trigger its localization to invadopodia . Finally , supervillin , an F - actin - and myosin - II - binding protein , was recently reported to reorganize the actin cytoskeleton and potentiate invadopodial function by acting as a mediator of cortactin ( Crowley et al . , 2009 ) . Our knowledge on the role of actin - nucleation factors at adhesive structures can be summarized as follows : actin - nucleation factors seem to localize stably at the heart of invadopodial and podosome structure , but not at mature focal adhesions ( although they are transiently involved in nascent adhesions ) . Membrane curvature controls actin polymerization In contrast to focal adhesions , which are found in flat areas of the cell’s ventral face , invadopodia and podosomes are protrusive structures , suggesting that they are formed through a mechanism that couples actin polymerization and membrane deformation . This process is likely to involve proteins that deform membranes , such as BAR - and F - BAR - family proteins . For instance , the F - BAR protein Toca - 1 has membrane - binding and membrane - deformation activities , and generates tubular membrane structures of defined diameters ( 20 - 50 nm ) by bending the membrane towards the cytosol to form positive curvature ( Cory and Cullen , 2007 ; Takano et al . , 2008 ) . The N - WASP – WIP complex is known to be activated by Toca - 1 and the GTPase Cdc42 , and thereby to promote localized actin polymerization at sites of membrane curvature ( Ho et al . , 2004 ) . Recently , podosome formation in macrophages was shown to require the F - BAR - domain - containing formin - binding protein 17 ( FBP17 ) . This protein recruits WASP , WIP and dynamin - 2 to the plasma membrane , probably by facilitating membrane deformation ( Tsuboi et al . , 2009 ) . Similarly , in NIH3T3 cells , ASAP1 [ a BARdomain protein and Arf GTPase - activating protein ( ArfGAP ) ] was found to be a Src substrate that controls invadopodium assembly ( Bharti et al . , 2007 ) . All these results show that actin polymerization can be stimulated by membrane curvature , which is triggered by spatially appropriate interactions of F - BAR proteins and the N - WASP – WIP complex ( Takano et al . , 2008 ) . ASAP3 , which is closely related to ASAP1 , is associated with focal adhesions and circular dorsal ruffles but does not localize to invadopodia or podosomes ( Ha et al . , 2008 ) . Reduction of ASAP3 expression results in fewer actin stress fibers , reduced levels of phosphomyosin , and slower cell migration and invasion . Conversely , downregulation of ASAP1 has no effect on migration or invasion . Given these new findings , it is worth noting that membrane invagination has been observed at the center of podosome actin cores ( Kaverina et al . , 2003 ; Ochoa et al . , 2000 ) . Of equal biological importance to the generation of positive membrane curvature is the topologically opposite process – the generation of negative curvature , in which the membrane is deformed away from the cytosolic environment . The IRSp53 - and MIM ( missing in metastasis ) - homology domain ( IMD ) constitutes a structural module that generates negative membrane curvature , giving rise to tubules of 80 nm diameter ( Mattila et al . , 2007 ) . Whereas BAR domains stabilize membrane tubules by coating the outside of the tubules , the MIM domain binds the inside of the forming tube ( Suetsugu et al . , 2006 ) . IRSp53 generates protrusions from the plasma membrane that look like actincontaining filopodia ( Yamagishi et al . , 2004 ) . IRSp53 contains various Rac - binding domains , suggesting that it might also be involved in lamellipodial extension ( Suetsugu et al . , 2006 ) . Indeed , IRSp53 is required , in association with the WAVE2 - Abi1 complex , for some actin - mediated processes such as lamellipodium formation , but not for the formation of filopodia and podosomes ( Abou - Kheir et al . , 2008 ) . However , IRSp53 also contains a Cdc42 - binding motif and seems to be required for the Cdc42 - induced formation of filopodia ( Lim et al . , 2008 ) . This latter activity seems to depend on the stage of its association with another cytoskeletal modulator , epidermal growth factor receptor kinase substrate 8 ( Eps8 ) , which is known to be an actin - capping and - bundling protein ( Disanza et al . , 2006 ) . Eps8 is not found in focal adhesions but is localized in podosomes ( Goicoechea et al . , 2006 ) . All these results indicate that F - BAR proteins might have a major role in podosome formation , as might IRSp53 in lamellipodia or filopodia . An attractive hypothesis is that , depending on its partner , IRSp53 specifically induces distinct types of membrane protrusions . Actin - elongation factors in adhesive structures In addition to actin - nucleation factors and inducers of membrane curvature , actin - elongation factors also seem to have a role in invadopodium formation . Both Ena / VASP - family proteins and formins – which act as elongation factors – promote actin polymerization at the barbed ends of actin filaments . The emerging idea is that different formins and Ena / VASP proteins support highly variable rates of actin - filament elongation , thus optimizing the assembly and architecture of specific actin structures . Ena / VASP proteins localize at focal adhesions , the leading edge of lamellipodia and the tips of filopodia ( Gertler et al . , 1996 ) . Ena / VASP activity regulates the geometry of assembling actin - filament networks by capturing filament barbed ends and antagonizing capping proteins ; this anti - capping activity involves direct binding to profilin - actin complexes and to globular ( G ) - and F - actin ( Barzik et al . , 2005 ; Bear et al . , 2000 ; Ferron et al . , 2007 ; Pasic et al . , 2008 ) . Ena / VASP proteins also bundle actin filaments ( Bachmann et al . , 1999 ; Barzik et al . , 2005 ) , and are thought to cluster filament barbed ends during filopodium formation and elongation ( Applewhite et al . , 2007 ; Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) . Mena , a member of the Ena / VASP family , is involved in cell motility , and its upregulation in several human cancers is correlated with increased invasiveness ( Di Modugno et al . , 2004 ; Krause et al . , 2003 ; Wang et al . , 2004 ; Wang et al . , 2007 ) . It has been recently shown that Mena is differentially spliced in vivo in invasive tumor cells as compared with non - motile resident tumor cells . Both Mena and its invasive isoform ( Mena INV ) promote actin polymerization in a cofilin - dependent manner , but the Mena INV isoform seems to favor invasiveness by promoting invadopodium stabilization and enhancing the matrix - degradation activity of invadopodia ( Philippar et al . , 2008 ) . Src is a key mediator of actin dynamics in podosomes and invadopodia The non - receptor tyrosine kinase Src , which initiates podosome formation and regulates podosome structure , is a member of a family of nine closely related tyrosine kinases that is defined by a common domain structure , including a myristoylated N - terminal domain that targets Src to membranes , two Src - homology - protein - binding domains ( SH2 and SH3 ) and the tyrosine - kinase catalytic domain . Activation of Src occurs either when Tyr527 is dephosphorylated , allowing the ‘opening’ of the molecule , or when the intramolecular interactions of the SH2 or SH3 domains are disrupted by intermolecular interactions with other Src - binding partners . Activation of Src leads to the autophosphorylation of Tyr416 in the activation loop of the kinase domain , which is essential for the full tyrosine - kinase activity of Src ( Roskoski , 2004 ) . As mentioned previously , expression of v - Src , the oncogenic and constitutively active form of Src , induces a rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton that is characterized by a switch from stress fibers to invadopodia in BHK cells ( Tarone et al . , 1985 ) . Even though Src is ubiquitous , the specific link between Src and podosomes has been confirmed by the targeted disruption of the Src gene in mice , which leads to osteopetrosis as a result of nonfunctional osteoclasts that are unable to form a sealing zone from podosomes ( Soriano et al . , 1991 ) . Indeed , bone matrix resorption by osteoclasts is known to depend on a specific organization of their cytoskeleton into a peripheral belt of podosomes . This phenotype is mostly Srcdependent because the disruption of any other Src - kinase family member failed to reproduce such a phenotype ( Horne et al . , 1992 ; Lowell et al . , 1996 ; Sanjay et al . , 2001 ; Soriano et al . , 1991 ) . Src tyrosine - kinase activation is both necessary and sufficient for podosome and invadopodium formation . Because actin - core polymerization is a prerequisite for the assembly of podosomes and invadopodia , Src has the capacity to regulate ( through phosphorylation ) and / or recruit ( through interactions with its SH2 and SH3 domains ) specific substrates that regulate actin polymerization and architecture . Re - expression of Src mutants in Src - null osteoclasts has shown that its tyrosine - kinase activity is essential for podosome regulation and is not compensated for by its adaptor function ; however , Src needs to be properly localized by either its SH2 or SH3 domains , as its membrane localization is not sufficient ( Destaing et al . , 2008 ) . In osteoclasts , Src regulates rearrangements in the actin cytoskeleton by stimulating Rac1 GTPase via a protein complex that also includes the Syk kinase , αvβ3 integrin and the Rac guanine - nucleotide exchange factor Vav3 ( Zou et al . , 2007 ) . Src also downregulates the activity of the GTPase ARF6 , via the GTPase - activating protein GIT2 , to maintain sealing zones and osteoclast polarity during bone degradation ( Heckel et al . , 2009 ) . Among the identified substrates of Src is Tks5 ( Fish ) , a scaffold protein that binds to members of the ADAM family of membranespanning proteases , to WASP - family proteins and to cortactin ( Abram et al . , 2003 ; Seals et al . , 2005 ; Seals and Courtneidge , 2003 ) . In the initial stages of podosome formation , phosphatidylinositol ( 3 , 4 ) - bisphosphate [ PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 ] plays an important role in anchoring Tks5 to the plasma membrane ( Oikawa et al . , 2008 ) . Tks5 , which is essential for podosome formation , forms a complex with Grb2 at adhesion sites in a Src - dependent manner . Furthermore , N - WASP binds to all SH3 domains of Tks5 , which facilitates the formation of podosome rings . Podosome precursors are formed around focal - adhesion - related adhesions , and this might be in response to a change in the phosphorylation status of proteins ( such as Tks5 ) and in the composition of phosphoinositides on the plasma membrane ( Oikawa et al . , 2008 ) . Thus , the N - WASP – Arp2 / 3complex signal might accumulate on the platform of the Tks5Grb2 complex at focal adhesions , which is stabilized by PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 . These data provide the molecular basis for the transformation of focal adhesions into podosomes and / or invadopodia . AFAP - 110 is another Src - associated protein with a role in podosome formation . In response to activation of PKCα , Src is activated in an AFAP - 110 - dependent fashion , and this signaling pathway is responsible for PKCα - induced podosome formation ; by contrast , AFAP - 110 colocalizes with actin stress fibers in quiescent cells ( Flynn et al . , 1993 ; Gatesman et al . , 2004 ) . AFAP - 110 contributes to the aggressiveness and growth of tumors ( Zhang et al . , 2007 ) . This protein might have an important role in the regulation of podosome stability and lifespan as an actin - filament cross - linking protein and as an adaptor protein that relays PKCα signals to activate Src ( Dorfleutner et al . , 2008 ) . It is also possible that AFAP - 110 controls podosome half - life through its ability to regulate cell contractility and cross - link stress fibers ( Burgstaller and Gimona , 2004 ) . Activation of the endoprotease calpain - 2 by extracellular - signalregulated kinases 1 and 2 ( Erk1 / 2 ) ( Glading et al . , 2004 ) might result from the Src - dependent phosphorylation of paxillin ( Badowski et al . , 2008 ; Petit et al . , 2000 ) . Previous studies have established a role for calpain - 2 in the turnover of the focal adhesions of migrating cells ; calpain - 2 is thought to mediate talin proteolysis in focal adhesions and thereby to trigger disassembly ( Franco et al . , 2004 ) . Another study revealed that calpain - mediated cleavage of the integrin chain β3 at Tyr759 switches the functional outcome of integrin signaling from cell spreading to retraction ( Flevaris et al . , 2007 ) . Calpain - 2 is also thought to increase invadopodium dynamics by acting both downstream and upstream of Src , through the proteolysis of specific Src effectors such as cortactin ( to promote invadopodium disassembly ) and through proteolysis and activation of the Src activator PTP1B ( to promote invadopodium assembly ) ( Cortesio et al . , 2008 ) . The protein tyrosine phosphatase PTP1B can promote Src activation through the direct dephosphorylation of the inhibitory phosphotyrosine 529 ( Bjorge et al . , 2000 ; Cortesio et al . , 2008 ; Liang et al . , 2005 ) . In conclusion , Src is a major player in the assembly and dynamics of invadopodia and podosomes , acting at multiple levels from actin nucleation to the activity of integrin - associated complexes . High Src activity seems to be essential for its role at invadopodia , but leads to diminished focal - adhesion assembly . Invadopodia , podosomes and focal adhesions are mechanosensitive structures with distinct characteristics Adhesive structures and environment sensing A cell can sense and respond to a wide range of external chemical and physical signals . It can integrate this information through its adhesive structures and , as a consequence , can change its morphology , dynamics and behavior . In addition , cells can adapt their adhesive structures to external constraints such as the rigidity , density or topography of the substrates ( Fig . 5A , B ) . Several physical parameters might contribute to the strength of adhesion between a cell and its environment , including ligand surface density , number of adhesion receptors , affinity of integrins for their respective ligands , strength of receptor linkages and organization of the receptors at the cell surface ( Gallant et al . , 2005 ; Gupton and Waterman - Storer , 2006 ; Huttenlocher et al . , 1996 ; Palecek et al . , 1998 ) . The more rigid the matrix , the higher the intracellular - tension and cell - traction forces ( Paszek et al . , 2005 ; Wang et al . , 2000 ) . In terms of cell sensitivity to extracellular stiffness , experiments and theory have shown the role of two important parameters : adhesionsite dynamics and cytoskeleton tension ( Fereol et al . , 2009 ) . Augmented surface density of matrix ligands induces faster focaladhesion assembly . It has been recently shown that matrix - density sensing depends on the focal - adhesion regulator ICAP - 1 ( Millon - Fremillon et al . , 2008 ) . Matrix topography is also important , because the distance between individual integrin molecules modulates adhesion : the distance between individual integrins must be no more than 55 nm to reinforce adhesion ( Arnold et al . , 2004 ; Selhuber - Unkel et al . , 2008 ) and allow recruitment of vinculin to adhesions ( Cavalcanti - Adam et al . , 2006 ) . An emerging concept is that the functions of some proteins can be up - or downregulated by stretching ; thus , the proteins act as mechanosensors to convert mechanical cues into chemical signals , in a process called mechanotransduction . This property has been demonstrated for extracellular proteins such as fibronectin and intracellular proteins such as zyxin , talin and p130Cas [ a Src - family kinase substrate that is involved in various cellular events such as migration , survival , transformation and invasion ( Defilippi et al . , 2006 ) ] . For instance , direct application of a piconewton force stimulates the mechanical extension of p130Cas , unmasking a Src substrate domain and thereby allowing its phosphorylation by Srcfamily kinases ( Sawada et al . , 2006 ) . Force - induced conformational changes in talin lead to the exposure of a binding site for vinculin ( del Rio et al . , 2009 ) , and force can also modify extracellular fibronectin to alter integrin adhesion ( Hirata et al . , 2008 ; Hoffman et al . , 2006 ; Yoshigi et al . , 2005 ) . The forces generated by cellular adhesion not only stretch but also partially unfold fibrillar fibronectin ( Baneyx and Vogel , 1999 ; Smith et al . , 2007 ) . The stretching of matrix fibers not only increases their rigidity but is also thought to make new binding sites available . Below , we discuss the role of mechanosensing in focal - adhesion assembly and maturation , and describe new data that indicate a mechanosensing role for podosomes and invadopodia . Fig . 5 . Visualization of actin structure and paxillin in mRFP - actin - transfected BHK - RSV cells . ( A , B ) Rigid ( A ) and flexible ( B ) substrates were coated with vitronectin . Staining for paxillin ( green ) was carried out after fixation in 4 % paraformaldehyde with anti - paxillin antibodies . 3D reconstruction ( right - most images ) was carried out using EDIT3D software as in Fig . 3 . ( A ) On the left is an image from a single confocal plane of a BHK - RSV cell adherent on glass ( rigid ) substrate . The right image shows a 3D reconstruction . Arrowheads indicate focal adhesions . ( B ) Left and middle panels show images from two confocal planes of a BHK - RSV cell adherent on hydrogel made of polyacrylamide ( flexible ) substrate . Confocal planes were from the top of the gel ( left ) and inside the gel ( middle ) . Note that focal adhesions ( arrowheads ) are smaller in size on the flexible substrate ( B ) than on the rigid one ( A ) . ( B ) The 3D reconstruction ( right ) shows that collective organizations of podosomes or invadopodia ( arrow ) seem to ‘push’ the gel , hauling the whole cell body . Interplay between actin polymerization and myosin in focal - adhesion assembly and maturation Mechanical forces are required for the assembly and maturation of focal adhesions . Nascent adhesions form at the base of the lamellipodium in a myosin - II - independent manner , and their assembly rate is proportional to the rate of lamellipodial protrusion . Nascent adhesions seem to be different from other adhesive sites known as focal complexes ( the precursors of focal adhesions ) , which are two times larger , induced by active Rac1 , dependent on myosin II and appear mainly at the lamellipodium - lamellum interface ( Choi et al . , 2008 ; Nobes and Hall , 1995 ) . At the rear of the lamellipodium , nascent adhesions either disassemble or mature through a sequential mechanism that is coupled to myosin - II - induced tension . At focal adhesions , there is active polymerization of actin filaments that can be crosslinked by α - actinin . Myosin II incorporates into the α - actinin - crosslinked actin - filament bundles and displaces α - actinin . This allows the contraction of actin bundles , generating tension . The overall process is extremely dynamic ( Cai and Sheetz , 2009 ; Vogel and Sheetz , 2009 ) . Stress fibers are anchored to focal adhesions , which grow in response to contractile force . Traction forces generated by stress fibers are in the order of several hundred nanonewtons ( nN ) . Analyses of actin dynamics in stress fibers indicate that preformed actin filaments are added to the adhesion sites and enable the rapid turnover of actin in stress fibers ( Hotulainen and Lappalainen , 2006 ) . Maturation of focal adhesions from nascent adhesions can occur along an α - actinin – actin template that elongates centripetally from nascent adhesions ( Choi et al . , 2008 ) . Maturation and growth of focal adhesions involve force reinforcement that is dependent on talin ( Zhang et al . , 2008 ) ( Fig . 5A , B ) . These internal tensions can be mimicked by application of external forces ( Riveline et al . , 2001 ) . Maturation into focal adhesions is mediated by Rho kinase and mDia1 , both of which are effectors of the small GTPase RhoA ( Kimura et al . , 1996 ; Watanabe et al . , 1999 ) ; Rho kinase stimulates myosin - IIdependent contractility by inactivating myosin - light - chain phosphatase ( Katoh et al . , 2001 ) , whereas mDia1 is involved in actin nucleation and in the elongation of parallel arrays of actin filaments ( Burridge and Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , 1996 ; Rottner et al . , 1999 ) . Myosin II exerts a force of 5 . 2 nN / μm 2 on focal adhesions ( Schwarz et al . , 2002 ) . Maturation of focal adhesions is a slow process that can take up to 60 minutes ( Zamir et al . , 1999 ) and corresponds to a sevenfold force reinforcement ( Gallant et al . , 2005 ) . Mechanics of podosomes and invadopodia Whereas mechanosensing is well documented for focal adhesions , little has been known about whether this occurs in invadopodia and podosomes . However , recent reports provide compelling evidence that invadopodia and podosomes are also major sites through which cells sense mechanical forces ( Collin et al . , 2008 ) . It seems that , in contrast to focal adhesions , intracellular tensions are not required for podosome assembly . However , podosome lifespan , the mean distance between podosomes , their collective organization into a rosette , and expansion of the rosette all depend on the flexibility of the substrate ( Collin et al . , 2006 ) . These findings suggest that intracellular constraints have a role in the collective dynamics of these podosome rings . Recent data have demonstrated that a rosette of invadopodia in Src - transformed BHK cells can exert traction forces with a magnitude of 200 Pa , which is comparable to that generated underneath focal adhesions ( Collin et al . , 2008 ) . Therefore , rosettes can be thought of as mechanosensory structures that can sense and transmit mechanical forces . A striking correlation has also been observed between the increase in the matrix - degrading activity of invadopodia in breast carcinoma cells and the increase in rigidity of the ECM ( Alexander et al . , 2008 ) . This proteolytic activity is linked to the phosphorylated form of mechanosensing proteins such as p130Cas and FAK ( Alexander et al . , 2008 ) . It has also been shown that , in Srctransformed BHK cells , rosette formation is required for efficient ECM degradation and transmigration through a HeLa - cell monolayer ( Badowski et al . , 2008 ; Saltel et al . , 2008 ; Saltel et al . , 2006 ) . A tempting conclusion is that the birth of podosomes or invadopodia does not require tensile forces , whereas collective organization of invadopodia or podosomes into rosettes is controlled by applied external - force anisotropy , which is not yet well characterized . Indeed , in contrast to what is observed with focal adhesions , podosomes or invadopodia seem to be promoted by a decrease in local cellular contractility ( Burgstaller and Gimona , 2004 ) . In line with this idea , it is noteworthy that assembly of individual invadopodia often occurs in the center of the ventral surface of cancer cells , where traction forces are lower than at the cell periphery ( Cai et al . , 2006 ; Cai and Sheetz , 2009 ; Dembo and Wang , 1999 ; Dubin - Thaler et al . , 2008 ; Pelham and Wang , 1999 ; Tan et al . , 2003 ) . Indeed , podosome assembly is correlated with the local dispersal of contractile proteins , including myosin , tropomyosin and calponin , and the recruitment of p190RhoGAP to podosome sites ( Lener et al . , 2006 ) . Also , the adhesion - associated ion channel TRPM7 plays a role in relaxing cellular contractility in response to mechanical forces , through phosphorylation of myosin - II heavy chain ( Clark et al . , 2006 ) . Activation of TRPM7 induces the transformation of focal adhesions into podosomes through a kinase - dependent mechanism , an effect that can be mimicked by pharmacological inhibition of myosin II . Inhibition of RhoA or Cdc42 abolishes invadopodium formation ( Sakurai - Yageta et al . , 2008 ; Yamaguchi et al . , 2005 ) ; however , this effect might not be because of a diminution of contractility , but rather because of the requirement for other Rho effectors such as DRF / mDia1 ( human / mouse ) formins for the formation and activity of invadopodia in two - and three - dimensional systems ( Lizarraga et al . , 2009 ) . Recent data show that podosome rosettes develop torsional tractions that can deform the underlying matrix underneath podosome rings ( Collin et al . , 2008 ) . Short - term treatment with the myosin inhibitors ML7 or blebbistatin , or with the ROCK inhibitor Y27632 ( which all decrease contractility ) leads to transient dissipation of podosome rosettes , but the supramolecular structures are still present in cells subjected to these inhibitors for longer treatment periods ( M . R . B . and C . A . - R . , unpublished ) . Some myosin II has been observed at the periphery of the core domain of podosomes in Src - transformed cells , and also in association with the sealing zone on osteoclasts ( Saltel et al . , 2008 ; Tanaka et al . , 1993 ) , but myosin II is noticeably absent in invadopodia or podosomes so contractility does not seem to occur within these individual structures . The dynamic assembly of invadopodia or podosomes is still not well understood and the molecular motors associated with this process remain to be identified . All published observations indicate that actin polymerization might be sufficient to promote podosomal or invadopodial protrusion , which in turn would trigger tangential forces through actin radial arrays around podosomal or invadopodial actin cores . Indeed , N - WASP activation has been visualized at the base of invadopodia , suggesting that Arp2 / 3complex - mediated actin nucleation is confined to this area ( Lorenz et al . , 2004 ) . Subsequently , DRF / mDia1 might act on the branched array induced by N - WASP , the Arp2 / 3 complex and cortactin , and elongate actin filaments to trigger invadopodial protrusion . This process , combined with the tangential forces developed through actin radial arrays around invadopodial actin cores , should permit podosome rosettes to protrude from the cell if the surrounding environment is sufficiently flexible ( Fig . 5 ) . Undoubtedly , the spatiotemporal measurements of force - field displacements of podosome rosettes will resolve this point , and will add a mechanical element to our understanding of the fast invasion of cells expressing podosomes or invadopodia . Future research will also include investigating how the physical ECM environment affects cellular invasiveness , because cancer - associated breast tissue is much stiffer than normal tissue ( Boyd et al . , 2005 ; Samani et al . , 2007 ) . Some reports already suggest a role for tissue rigidity in promoting both the formation and invasiveness of tumors , possibly by increasing invadopodial activity ( Alexander et al . , 2008 ; Parekh and Weaver , 2009 ) . Conclusions and perspectives Our increasing knowledge of invadopodial involvement in tumorcell invasion and metastasis makes these structures very attractive targets for cancer therapy ( Stylli et al . , 2008 ) . The mode of invasion that is induced by invadopodial structures requires fast assembly of adhesions , ECM proteolysis and a dynamic actin cytoskeleton ( to allow fast changes in supramolecular structures and the development of traction forces ) . Tissue invasion is most efficient when these cellular processes are combined . This Commentary emphasizes the role of many actin - cytoskeleton - associated proteins as major players in the Src - mediated organization of adhesive interactions such as podosomes and invadopodia . The combination of actin nucleators and elongation factors , each with distinct mechanisms and modes of regulation , allows the versatility that is required to construct actin networks with specialized architectures and functions . Moreover , there is growing evidence that actinbinding proteins have multiple roles in tumorigenic and metastatic processes of various human tumors . Indeed , the balance between actin regulators might determine the type of adhesive structure that is formed and eventually account for the differences in shape and dynamics of invadopodia and podosomes . Force and membrane tension generated by intracellular motors ( such as myosin ) and regulated by substrate viscoelasticity might affect actin polymerization , and in turn the formation of invadopodia or podosomes and their collective organization into rosettes . The urgency of defining these mechanisms is particularly obvious as growing evidence indicates that alterations in cellular mechanoresponses are involved in many diseases . Theoretical physical models also need to be developed to address the physical mechanisms that underlie the formation of invadopodia and podosomes , and the maintenance of their collective organization . We apologize to those authors whose important work we were unable to cite owing to space restrictions . We thank the members of the laboratory for all their input and helpful discussions . Artwork was done by Olivier Ali . We thank Laurent Blanchoin for critical reading of the manuscript . Work in the Albiges - Rizo laboratory is supported by grants from CNRS , INSERM , the Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer , the Association de la Recherche pour le Cancer and the Région Rhône - Alpes . References Abou - Kheir , W . , Isaac , B . , Yamaguchi , H . and Cox , D . ( 2008 ) . Membrane targeting of WAVE2 is not sufficient for WAVE2 - dependent actin polymerization : a role for IRSp53 in mediating the interaction between Rac and WAVE2 . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 379 - 390 . Abram , C . L . , Seals , D . F . , Pass , I . , Salinsky , D . , Maurer , L . , Roth , T . M . and Courtneidge , S . A . ( 2003 ) . The adaptor protein fish associates with members of the ADAMs family and localizes to podosomes of Src - transformed cells . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 16844 - 16851 . Alexander , N . R . , Branch , K . M . , Parekh , A . , Clark , E . S . , Iwueke , I . C . , Guelcher , S . A . and Weaver , A . M . ( 2008 ) . Extracellular matrix rigidity promotes invadopodia activity . Curr . Biol . 18 , 1295 - 1299 . Applewhite , D . A . , Barzik , M . , Kojima , S . , Svitkina , T . M . , Gertler , F . B . and Borisy , G . G . ( 2007 ) . Ena / VASP proteins have an anti - capping independent function in filopodia formation . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 2579 - 2591 . Arnold , M . , Cavalcanti - Adam , E . A . , Glass , R . , Blummel , J . , Eck , W . , Kantlehner , M . , Kessler , H . and Spatz , J . P . ( 2004 ) . Activation of integrin function by nanopatterned adhesive interfaces . Chemphyschem 5 , 383 - 388 . Artym , V . V . , Zhang , Y . , Seillier - Moiseiwitsch , F . , Yamada , K . M . and Mueller , S . C . ( 2006 ) . Dynamic interactions of cortactin and membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase at invadopodia : defining the stages of invadopodia formation and function . Cancer Res . 66 , 3034 - 3043 . Bachmann , C . , Fischer , L . , Walter , U . and Reinhard , M . ( 1999 ) . The EVH2 domain of the vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein mediates tetramerization , F - actin binding , and actin bundle formation . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 23549 - 23557 . Badowski , C . , Pawlak , G . , Grichine , A . , Chabadel , A . , Oddou , C . , Jurdic , P . , Pfaff , M . , Albiges - Rizo , C . and Block , M . R . ( 2008 ) . Paxillin Phosphorylation controls invadopodia / podosomes spatiotemporal organization . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 633 - 645 . Baldassarre , M . , Ayala , I . , Beznoussenko , G . , Giacchetti , G . , Machesky , L . M . , Luini , A . and Buccione , R . ( 2006 ) . Actin dynamics at sites of extracellular matrix degradation . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 85 , 1217 - 1231 . Baneyx , G . and Vogel , V . ( 1999 ) . Self - assembly of fibronectin into fibrillar networks underneath dipalmitoyl phosphatidylcholine monolayers : role of lipid matrix and tensile forces . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 12518 - 12523 . Barzik , M . , Kotova , T . I . , Higgs , H . N . , Hazelwood , L . , Hanein , D . , Gertler , F . B . and Schafer , D . A . ( 2005 ) . Ena / VASP proteins enhance actin polymerization in the presence of barbed end capping proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 28653 - 28662 . Bear , J . E . , Loureiro , J . J . , Libova , I . , Fassler , R . , Wehland , J . and Gertler , F . B . ( 2000 ) . Negative regulation of fibroblast motility by Ena / VASP proteins . Cell 101 , 717 - 728 . Bharti , S . , Inoue , H . , Bharti , K . , Hirsch , D . S . , Nie , Z . , Yoon , H . Y . , Artym , V . , Yamada , K . M . , Mueller , S . C . , Barr , V . A . et al . ( 2007 ) . Src - dependent phosphorylation of ASAP1 regulates podosomes . Mol . Cell . Biol . 27 , 8271 - 8283 . Bjorge , J . D . , Pang , A . and Fujita , D . J . ( 2000 ) . Identification of protein - tyrosine phosphatase 1B as the major tyrosine phosphatase activity capable of dephosphorylating and activating c - Src in several human breast cancer cell lines . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 4143941446 . Block , M . R . , Badowski , C . , Millon - Fremillon , A . , Bouvard , D . , Bouin , A . P . , Faurobert , E . , Gerber - Scokaert , D . , Planus , E . and Albiges - Rizo , C . ( 2008 ) . Podosome - type adhesions and focal adhesions , so alike yet so different . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 87 , 491 - 506 . Boyd , N . F . , Rommens , J . M . , Vogt , K . , Lee , V . , Hopper , J . L . , Yaffe , M . J . and Paterson , A . D . ( 2005 ) . Mammographic breast density as an intermediate phenotype for breast cancer . Lancet Oncol . 6 , 798 - 808 . Bryce , N . S . , Clark , E . S . , Leysath , J . L . , Currie , J . D . , Webb , D . J . and Weaver , A . M . ( 2005 ) . Cortactin promotes cell motility by enhancing lamellipodial persistence . Curr . Biol . 15 , 1276 - 1285 . Burgstaller , G . and Gimona , M . ( 2004 ) . Actin cytoskeleton remodelling via local inhibition of contractility at discrete microdomains . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 223 - 231 . Burns , S . , Thrasher , A . J . , Blundell , M . P . , Machesky , L . and Jones , G . E . ( 2001 ) . Configuration of human dendritic cell cytoskeleton by Rho GTPases , the WAS protein , and differentiation . Blood 98 , 1142 - 1149 . Burridge , K . and Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , M . ( 1996 ) . Focal adhesions , contractility , and signaling . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 12 , 463 - 518 . Butler , B . , Gao , C . , Mersich , A . T . and Blystone , S . D . ( 2006 ) . Purified integrin adhesion complexes exhibit actin - polymerization activity . Curr . Biol . 16 , 242 - 251 . Cai , Y . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2009 ) . Force propagation across cells : mechanical coherence of dynamic cytoskeletons . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 21 , 47 - 50 . Cai , Y . , Biais , N . , Giannone , G . , Tanase , M . , Jiang , G . , Hofman , J . M . , Wiggins , C . H . , Silberzan , P . , Buguin , A . , Ladoux , B . et al . ( 2006 ) . Nonmuscle myosin IIAdependent force inhibits cell spreading and drives F - actin flow . Biophys . J . 91 , 39073920 . Carman , C . V . , Sage , P . T . , Sciuto , T . E . , de la Fuente , M . A . , Geha , R . S . , Ochs , H . D . , Dvorak , H . F . , Dvorak , A . M . and Springer , T . A . ( 2007 ) . Transcellular diapedesis is initiated by invasive podosomes . Immunity 26 , 784 - 797 . Cavalcanti - Adam , E . A . , Micoulet , A . , Blummel , J . , Auernheimer , J . , Kessler , H . and Spatz , J . P . ( 2006 ) . Lateral spacing of integrin ligands influences cell spreading and focal adhesion assembly . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 85 , 219 - 224 . Chabadel , A . , Banon - Rodriguez , I . , Cluet , D . , Rudkin , B . B . , Wehrle - Haller , B . , Genot , E . , Jurdic , P . , Anton , I . M . and Saltel , F . ( 2007 ) . CD44 and beta3 integrin organize two functionally distinct actin - based domains in osteoclasts . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 48994910 . Choi , C . K . , Vicente - Manzanares , M . , Zareno , J . , Whitmore , L . A . , Mogilner , A . and Horwitz , A . R . ( 2008 ) . Actin and alpha - actinin orchestrate the assembly and maturation of nascent adhesions in a myosin II motor - independent manner . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 10391050 . Clark , E . S . , Whigham , A . S . , Yarbrough , W . G . and Weaver , A . M . ( 2007 ) . Cortactin is an essential regulator of matrix metalloproteinase secretion and extracellular matrix degradation in invadopodia . Cancer Res . 67 , 4227 - 4235 . Clark , K . , Langeslag , M . , van Leeuwen , B . , Ran , L . , Ryazanov , A . G . , Figdor , C . G . , Moolenaar , W . H . , Jalink , K . and van Leeuwen , F . N . ( 2006 ) . TRPM7 , a novel regulator of actomyosin contractility and cell adhesion . EMBO J . 25 , 290 - 301 . Co , C . , Wong , D . T . , Gierke , S . , Chang , V . and Taunton , J . ( 2007 ) . Mechanism of actin network attachment to moving membranes : barbed end capture by N - WASP WH2 domains . Cell 128 , 901 - 913 . Collin , O . , Tracqui , P . , Stephanou , A . , Usson , Y . , Clement - Lacroix , J . and Planus , E . ( 2006 ) . Spatiotemporal dynamics of actin - rich adhesion microdomains : influence of substrate flexibility . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 1914 - 1925 . Collin , O . , Na , S . , Chowdhury , F . , Hong , M . , Shin , M . E . , Wang , F . and Wang , N . ( 2008 ) . Self - organized podosomes are dynamic mechanosensors . Curr . Biol . 18 , 12881294 . Cortesio , C . L . , Chan , K . T . , Perrin , B . J . , Burton , N . O . , Zhang , S . , Zhang , Z . Y . and Huttenlocher , A . ( 2008 ) . Calpain 2 and PTP1B function in a novel pathway with Src to regulate invadopodia dynamics and breast cancer cell invasion . J . Cell Biol . 180 , 957 971 . Cory , G . O . and Cullen , P . J . ( 2007 ) . Membrane curvature : the power of bananas , zeppelins and boomerangs . Curr . Biol . 17 , R455 - R457 . Crowley , J . L . , Smith , T . C . , Fang , Z . , Takizawa , N . and Luna , E . J . ( 2009 ) . Supervillin reorganizes the actin cytoskeleton and increases invadopodial efficiency . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 948 - 962 . Defilippi , P . , Di Stefano , P . and Cabodi , S . ( 2006 ) . p130Cas : a versatile scaffold in signaling networks . Trends Cell Biol . 16 , 257 - 263 . del Rio , A . , Perez - Jimenez , R . , Liu , R . , Roca - Cusachs , P . , Fernandez , J . M . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2009 ) . Stretching single talin rod molecules activates vinculin binding . Science 323 , 638 - 641 . DeMali , K . A . , Barlow , C . A . and Burridge , K . ( 2002 ) . Recruitment of the Arp2 / 3 complex to vinculin : coupling membrane protrusion to matrix adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 159 , 881 891 . Dembo , M . and Wang , Y . L . ( 1999 ) . Stresses at the cell - to - substrate interface during locomotion of fibroblasts . Biophys . J . 76 , 2307 - 2316 . Desai , B . , Ma , T . and Chellaiah , M . A . ( 2008 ) . Invadopodia and matrix degradation , a new property of prostate cancer cells during migration and invasion . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 13856 - 13866 . Destaing , O . , Saltel , F . , Geminard , J . C . , Jurdic , P . and Bard , F . ( 2003 ) . Podosomes display actin turnover and dynamic self - organization in osteoclasts expressing actingreen fluorescent protein . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 407 - 416 . Destaing , O . , Sanjay , A . , Itzstein , C . , Horne , W . C . , Toomre , D . , De Camilli , P . and Baron , R . ( 2008 ) . The tyrosine kinase activity of c - Src regulates actin dynamics and organization of podosomes in osteoclasts . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 394 - 404 . Di Modugno , F . , Bronzi , G . , Scanlan , M . J . , Del Bello , D . , Cascioli , S . , Venturo , I . , Botti , C . , Nicotra , M . R . , Mottolese , M . , Natali , P . G . et al . ( 2004 ) . Human Mena protein , a serex - defined antigen overexpressed in breast cancer eliciting both humoral and CD8 + T - cell immune response . Int . J . Cancer 109 , 909 - 918 . Disanza , A . , Mantoani , S . , Hertzog , M . , Gerboth , S . , Frittoli , E . , Steffen , A . , Berhoerster , K . , Kreienkamp , H . J . , Milanesi , F . , Di Fiore , P . P . et al . ( 2006 ) . Regulation of cell shape by Cdc42 is mediated by the synergic actin - bundling activity of the Eps8 - IRSp53 complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 8 , 1337 - 1347 . Dorfleutner , A . , Cho , Y . , Vincent , D . , Cunnick , J . , Lin , H . , Weed , S . A . , Stehlik , C . and Flynn , D . C . ( 2008 ) . Phosphorylation of AFAP - 110 affects podosome lifespan in A7r5 cells . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 2394 - 2405 . Dubin - Thaler , B . J . , Hofman , J . M . , Cai , Y . , Xenias , H . , Spielman , I . , Shneidman , A . V . , David , L . A . , Dobereiner , H . G . , Wiggins , C . H . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2008 ) . Quantification of cell edge velocities and traction forces reveals distinct motility modules during cell spreading . PLoS ONE 3 , e3735 . Evans , J . G . , Correia , I . , Krasavina , O . , Watson , N . and Matsudaira , P . ( 2003 ) . Macrophage podosomes assemble at the leading lamella by growth and fragmentation . J . Cell Biol . 161 , 697 - 705 . Fereol , S . , Fodil , R . , Laurent , V . M . , Balland , M . , Louis , B . , Pelle , G . , Henon , S . , Planus , E . and Isabey , D . ( 2009 ) . Prestress and adhesion site dynamics control cell sensitivity to extracellular stiffness . Biophys . J . 96 , 2009 - 2022 . Ferron , F . , Rebowski , G . , Lee , S . H . and Dominguez , R . ( 2007 ) . Structural basis for the recruitment of profilin - actin complexes during filament elongation by Ena / VASP . EMBO J . 26 , 4597 - 4606 . Flevaris , P . , Stojanovic , A . , Gong , H . , Chishti , A . , Welch , E . and Du , X . ( 2007 ) . A molecular switch that controls cell spreading and retraction . J . Cell Biol . 179 , 553 - 565 . Flynn , D . C . , Leu , T . H . , Reynolds , A . B . and Parsons , J . T . ( 1993 ) . Identification and sequence analysis of cDNAs encoding a 110 - kilodalton actin filament - associated pp60src substrate . Mol . Cell . Biol . 13 , 7892 - 7900 . Franco , S . J . , Rodgers , M . A . , Perrin , B . J . , Han , J . , Bennin , D . A . , Critchley , D . R . and Huttenlocher , A . ( 2004 ) . Calpain - mediated proteolysis of talin regulates adhesion dynamics . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 , 977 - 983 . Gallant , N . D . , Michael , K . E . and Garcia , A . J . ( 2005 ) . Cell adhesion strengthening : contributions of adhesive area , integrin binding , and focal adhesion assembly . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 4329 - 4340 . Gatesman , A . , Walker , V . G . , Baisden , J . M . , Weed , S . A . and Flynn , D . C . ( 2004 ) . Protein kinase Calpha activates c - Src and induces podosome formation via AFAP - 110 . Mol . Cell . Biol . 24 , 7578 - 7597 . Gavazzi , I . , Nermut , M . V . and Marchisio , P . C . ( 1989 ) . Ultrastructure and goldimmunolabelling of cell - substratum adhesions ( podosomes ) in RSV - transformed BHK cells . J . Cell Sci . 94 , 85 - 99 . Gertler , F . B . , Niebuhr , K . , Reinhard , M . , Wehland , J . and Soriano , P . ( 1996 ) . Mena , a relative of VASP and Drosophila Enabled , is implicated in the control of microfilament dynamics . Cell 87 , 227 - 239 . Giannone , G . , Dubin - Thaler , B . J . , Rossier , O . , Cai , Y . , Chaga , O . , Jiang , G . , Beaver , W . , Dobereiner , H . G . , Freund , Y . , Borisy , G . et al . ( 2007 ) . Lamellipodial actin mechanically links myosin activity with adhesion - site formation . Cell 128 , 561 - 575 . Gil - Henn , H . , Destaing , O . , Sims , N . A . , Aoki , K . , Alles , N . , Neff , L . , Sanjay , A . , Bruzzaniti , A . , De Camilli , P . , Baron , R . et al . ( 2007 ) . Defective microtubule - dependent podosome organization in osteoclasts leads to increased bone density in Pyk2 ( – / – ) mice . J . Cell Biol . 178 , 1053 - 1064 . Gimona , M . , Buccione , R . , Courtneidge , S . A . and Linder , S . ( 2008 ) . Assembly and biological role of podosomes and invadopodia . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 20 , 235 - 241 . Glading , A . , Bodnar , R . J . , Reynolds , I . J . , Shiraha , H . , Satish , L . , Potter , D . A . , Blair , H . C . and Wells , A . ( 2004 ) . Epidermal growth factor activates m - calpain ( calpain II ) , at least in part , by extracellular signal - regulated kinase - mediated phosphorylation . Mol . Cell . Biol . 24 , 2499 - 2512 . Goicoechea , S . , Arneman , D . , Disanza , A . , Garcia - Mata , R . , Scita , G . and Otey , C . A . ( 2006 ) . Palladin binds to Eps8 and enhances the formation of dorsal ruffles and podosomes in vascular smooth muscle cells . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 3316 - 3324 . Gupton , S . L . and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2006 ) . Spatiotemporal feedback between actomyosin and focal - adhesion systems optimizes rapid cell migration . Cell 125 , 13611374 . Ha , V . L . , Bharti , S . , Inoue , H . , Vass , W . C . , Campa , F . , Nie , Z . , de Gramont , A . , Ward , Y . and Randazzo , P . A . ( 2008 ) . ASAP3 is a focal adhesion - associated Arf GAP that functions in cell migration and invasion . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 14915 - 14926 . Heckel , T . , Czupalla , C . , Expirto Santo , A . I . , Anitei , M . , Arantzazu Sanchez - Fernandez , M . , Mosch , K . , Krause , E . and Hoflack , B . ( 2009 ) . Src - dependent repression of ARF6 is required to maintain podosome - rich sealing zones in bone - digesting osteoclasts . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 1451 - 1456 . Hirata , H . , Tatsumi , H . and Sokabe , M . ( 2008 ) . Mechanical forces facilitate actin polymerization at focal adhesions in a zyxin - dependent manner . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 27952804 . Ho , H . Y . , Rohatgi , R . , Lebensohn , A . M . , Le , M . , Li , J . , Gygi , S . P . and Kirschner , M . W . ( 2004 ) . Toca - 1 mediates Cdc42 - dependent actin nucleation by activating the N WASP - WIP complex . Cell 118 , 203 - 216 . Hoffman , L . M . , Jensen , C . C . , Kloeker , S . , Wang , C . L . , Yoshigi , M . and Beckerle , M . C . ( 2006 ) . Genetic ablation of zyxin causes Mena / VASP mislocalization , increased motility , and deficits in actin remodeling . J . Cell Biol . 172 , 771 - 782 . Horne , W . C . , Neff , L . , Chatterjee , D . , Lomri , A . , Levy , J . B . and Baron , R . ( 1992 ) . Osteoclasts express high levels of pp60c - src in association with intracellular membranes . J . Cell Biol . 119 , 1003 - 1013 . Hotulainen , P . and Lappalainen , P . ( 2006 ) . Stress fibers are generated by two distinct actin assembly mechanisms in motile cells . J . Cell Biol . 173 , 383 - 394 . Hu , K . , Ji , L . , Applegate , K . T . , Danuser , G . and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2007 ) . Differential transmission of actin motion within focal adhesions . Science 315 , 111 - 115 . Hurst , I . R . , Zuo , J . , Jiang , J . and Holliday , L . S . ( 2004 ) . Actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex is required for actin ring formation . J . Bone Miner . Res . 19 , 499 - 506 . Huttenlocher , A . , Ginsberg , M . H . and Horwitz , A . F . ( 1996 ) . Modulation of cell migration by integrin - mediated cytoskeletal linkages and ligand - binding affinity . J . Cell Biol . 134 , 1551 - 1562 . Katoh , K . , Kano , Y . , Amano , M . , Kaibuchi , K . and Fujiwara , K . ( 2001 ) . Stress fiber organization regulated by MLCK and Rho - kinase in cultured human fibroblasts . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 280 , C1669 - C1679 . Kaverina , I . , Stradal , T . E . and Gimona , M . ( 2003 ) . Podosome formation in cultured A7r5 vascular smooth muscle cells requires Arp2 / 3 - dependent de - novo actin polymerization at discrete microdomains . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 4915 - 4924 . Kimura , K . , Ito , M . , Amano , M . , Chihara , K . , Fukata , Y . , Nakafuku , M . , Yamamori , B . , Feng , J . , Nakano , T . , Okawa , K . et al . ( 1996 ) . Regulation of myosin phosphatase by Rho and Rhoassociated kinase ( Rho - kinase ) . Science 273 , 245 - 248 . Kinley , A . W . , Weed , S . A . , Weaver , A . M . , Karginov , A . V . , Bissonette , E . , Cooper , J . A . and Parsons , J . T . ( 2003 ) . Cortactin interacts with WIP in regulating Arp2 / 3 activation and membrane protrusion . Curr . Biol . 13 , 384 - 393 . Krause , M . , Dent , E . W . , Bear , J . E . , Loureiro , J . J . and Gertler , F . B . ( 2003 ) . Ena / VASP proteins : regulators of the actin cytoskeleton and cell migration . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 , 541 - 564 . Lafuente , E . M . , van Puijenbroek , A . A . , Krause , M . , Carman , C . V . , Freeman , G . J . , Berezovskaya , A . , Constantine , E . , Springer , T . A . , Gertler , F . B . and Boussiotis , V . A . ( 2004 ) . RIAM , an Ena / VASP and Profilin ligand , interacts with Rap1 - GTP and mediates Rap1 - induced adhesion . Dev . Cell 7 , 585 - 595 . Lener , T . , Burgstaller , G . , Crimaldi , L . , Lach , S . and Gimona , M . ( 2006 ) . Matrixdegrading podosomes in smooth muscle cells . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 85 , 183 - 189 . Liang , F . , Lee , S . Y . , Liang , J . , Lawrence , D . S . and Zhang , Z . Y . ( 2005 ) . The role of protein - tyrosine phosphatase 1B in integrin signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 24857 - 24863 . Lim , K . B . , Bu , W . , Goh , W . I . , Koh , E . , Ong , S . H . , Pawson , T . , Sudhaharan , T . and Ahmed , S . ( 2008 ) . The Cdc42 effector IRSp53 generates filopodia by coupling membrane protrusion with actin dynamics . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 20454 - 20472 . Linder , S . , Higgs , H . , Hufner , K . , Schwarz , K . , Pannicke , U . and Aepfelbacher , M . ( 2000 ) . The polarization defect of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome macrophages is linked to dislocalization of the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Immunol . 165 , 221 - 225 . Lizarraga , F . , Poincloux , R . , Romao , M . , Montagnac , G . , Le Dez , G . , Bonne , I . , Rigaill , G . , Raposo , G . and Chavrier , P . ( 2009 ) . Diaphanous - related formins are required for invadopodia formation and invasion of breast tumor cells . Cancer Res . 69 , 2792 - 2800 . Lorenz , M . , Yamaguchi , H . , Wang , Y . , Singer , R . H . and Condeelis , J . ( 2004 ) . Imaging sites of N - wasp activity in lamellipodia and invadopodia of carcinoma cells . Curr . Biol . 14 , 697 - 703 . Lowell , C . A . , Fumagalli , L . and Berton , G . ( 1996 ) . Deficiency of Src family kinases p59 / 61hck and p58c - fgr results in defective adhesion - dependent neutrophil functions . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 895 - 910 . Luxenburg , C . , Geblinger , D . , Klein , E . , Anderson , K . , Hanein , D . , Geiger , B . and Addadi , L . ( 2007 ) . The architecture of the adhesive apparatus of cultured osteoclasts : from podosome formation to sealing zone assembly . PLoS ONE 2 , e179 . Mattila , P . K . , Pykalainen , A . , Saarikangas , J . , Paavilainen , V . O . , Vihinen , H . , Jokitalo , E . and Lappalainen , P . ( 2007 ) . Missing - in - metastasis and IRSp53 deform PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - rich membranes by an inverse BAR domain - like mechanism . J . Cell Biol . 176 , 953 - 964 . Millon - Fremillon , A . , Bouvard , D . , Grichine , A . , Manet - Dupe , S . , Block , M . R . and Albiges - Rizo , C . ( 2008 ) . Cell adaptive response to extracellular matrix density is controlled by ICAP - 1 - dependent beta1 - integrin affinity . J . Cell Biol . 180 , 427 - 441 . Mueller , S . C . , Yeh , Y . and Chen , W . T . ( 1992 ) . Tyrosine phosphorylation of membrane proteins mediates cellular invasion by transformed cells . J . Cell Biol . 119 , 1309 - 1325 . Nobes , C . D . and Hall , A . ( 1995 ) . Rho , rac , and cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress fibers , lamellipodia , and filopodia . Cell 81 , 53 - 62 . Ochoa , G . C . , Slepnev , V . I . , Neff , L . , Ringstad , N . , Takei , K . , Daniell , L . , Kim , W . , Cao , H . , McNiven , M . , Baron , R . et al . ( 2000 ) . A functional link between dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton at podosomes . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 377 - 389 . Oikawa , T . , Itoh , T . and Takenawa , T . ( 2008 ) . Sequential signals toward podosome formation in NIH - src cells . J . Cell Biol . 182 , 157 - 169 . Olivier , A . , Jeanson - Leh , L . , Bouma , G . , Compagno , D . , Blondeau , J . , Seye , K . , Charrier , S . , Burns , S . , Thrasher , A . J . , Danos , O . et al . ( 2006 ) . A partial downregulation of WASP is sufficient to inhibit podosome formation in dendritic cells . Mol . Ther . 13 , 729 - 737 . Osiak , A . E . , Zenner , G . and Linder , S . ( 2005 ) . Subconfluent endothelial cells form podosomes downstream of cytokine and RhoGTPase signaling . Exp . Cell Res . 307 , 342 353 . Palecek , S . P . , Huttenlocher , A . , Horwitz , A . F . and Lauffenburger , D . A . ( 1998 ) . Physical and biochemical regulation of integrin release during rear detachment of migrating cells . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 929 - 940 . Parekh , A . and Weaver , A . M . ( 2009 ) . Regulation of cancer invasiveness by the physical extracellular matrix environment . Cell Adh . Migr . 3 , 288 - 292 . Pasic , L . , Kotova , T . and Schafer , D . A . ( 2008 ) . Ena / VASP proteins capture actin filament barbed ends . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 9814 - 9819 . Paszek , M . J . , Zahir , N . , Johnson , K . R . , Lakins , J . N . , Rozenberg , G . I . , Gefen , A . , Reinhart - King , C . A . , Margulies , S . S . , Dembo , M . , Boettiger , D . et al . ( 2005 ) . Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell 8 , 241 - 254 . Pelham , R . J . , Jr and Wang , Y . ( 1999 ) . High resolution detection of mechanical forces exerted by locomoting fibroblasts on the substrate . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 935 - 945 . Peterson , F . C . , Deng , Q . , Zettl , M . , Prehoda , K . E . , Lim , W . A . , Way , M . and Volkman , B . F . ( 2007 ) . Multiple WASP - interacting protein recognition motifs are required for a functional interaction with N - WASP . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 8446 - 8453 . Petit , V . , Boyer , B . , Lentz , D . , Turner , C . E . , Thiery , J . P . and Valles , A . M . ( 2000 ) . Phosphorylation of tyrosine residues 31 and 118 on paxillin regulates cell migration through an association with CRK in NBT - II cells . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 957 - 970 . Philippar , U . , Roussos , E . T . , Oser , M . , Yamaguchi , H . , Kim , H . D . , Giampieri , S . , Wang , Y . , Goswami , S . , Wyckoff , J . B . , Lauffenburger , D . A . et al . ( 2008 ) . A Mena invasion isoform potentiates EGF - induced carcinoma cell invasion and metastasis . Dev . Cell 15 , 813 - 828 . Pollard , T . D . and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 , 453 - 465 . Pollard , T . D . , Blanchoin , L . and Mullins , R . D . ( 2000 ) . Molecular mechanisms controlling actin filament dynamics in nonmuscle cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 29 , 545 - 576 . Riveline , D . , Zamir , E . , Balaban , N . Q . , Schwarz , U . S . , Ishizaki , T . , Narumiya , S . , Kam , Z . , Geiger , B . and Bershadsky , A . D . ( 2001 ) . Focal contacts as mechanosensors : externally applied local mechanical force induces growth of focal contacts by an mDia1dependent and ROCK - independent mechanism . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 1175 - 1186 . Roskoski , R . , Jr ( 2004 ) . Src protein - tyrosine kinase structure and regulation . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 324 , 1155 - 1164 . Rottner , K . , Hall , A . and Small , J . V . ( 1999 ) . Interplay between Rac and Rho in the control of substrate contact dynamics . Curr . Biol . 9 , 640 - 648 . Sakurai - Yageta , M . , Recchi , C . , Le Dez , G . , Sibarita , J . B . , Daviet , L . , Camonis , J . , D’Souza - Schorey , C . and Chavrier , P . ( 2008 ) . The interaction of IQGAP1 with the exocyst complex is required for tumor cell invasion downstream of Cdc42 and RhoA . J . Cell Biol . 181 , 985 - 998 . Saltel , F . , Chabadel , A . , Zhao , Y . , Lafage - Proust , M . H . , Clezardin , P . , Jurdic , P . and Bonnelye , E . ( 2006 ) . Transmigration : a new property of mature multinucleated osteoclasts . J . Bone Miner . Res . 21 , 1913 - 1923 . Saltel , F . , Chabadel , A . , Bonnelye , E . and Jurdic , P . ( 2008 ) . Actin cytoskeletal organisation in osteoclasts : a model to decipher transmigration and matrix degradation . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 87 , 459 - 468 . Samani , A . , Zubovits , J . and Plewes , D . ( 2007 ) . Elastic moduli of normal and pathological human breast tissues : an inversion - technique - based investigation of 169 samples . Phys . Med . Biol . 52 , 1565 - 1576 . Sanjay , A . , Houghton , A . , Neff , L . , DiDomenico , E . , Bardelay , C . , Antoine , E . , Levy , J . , Gailit , J . , Bowtell , D . , Horne , W . C . et al . ( 2001 ) . Cbl associates with Pyk2 and Src to regulate Src kinase activity , alpha ( v ) beta ( 3 ) integrin - mediated signaling , cell adhesion , and osteoclast motility . J . Cell Biol . 152 , 181 - 195 . Sawada , Y . , Tamada , M . , Dubin - Thaler , B . J . , Cherniavskaya , O . , Sakai , R . , Tanaka , S . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2006 ) . Force sensing by mechanical extension of the Src family kinase substrate p130Cas . Cell 127 , 1015 - 1026 . Schwarz , U . S . , Balaban , N . Q . , Riveline , D . , Bershadsky , A . , Geiger , B . and Safran , S . A . ( 2002 ) . Calculation of forces at focal adhesions from elastic substrate data : the effect of localized force and the need for regularization . Biophys . J . 83 , 1380 - 1394 . Seals , D . F . and Courtneidge , S . A . ( 2003 ) . The ADAMs family of metalloproteases : multidomain proteins with multiple functions . Genes Dev . 17 , 7 - 30 . Seals , D . F . , Azucena , E . F . , Jr , Pass , I . , Tesfay , L . , Gordon , R . , Woodrow , M . , Resau , J . H . and Courtneidge , S . A . ( 2005 ) . The adaptor protein Tks5 / Fish is required for podosome formation and function , and for the protease - driven invasion of cancer cells . Cancer Cell 7 , 155 - 165 . Selhuber - Unkel , C . , Lopez - Garcia , M . , Kessler , H . and Spatz , J . P . ( 2008 ) . Cooperativity in adhesion cluster formation during initial cell adhesion . Biophys . J . 95 , 5424 - 5431 . Serrels , B . , Serrels , A . , Brunton , V . G . , Holt , M . , McLean , G . W . , Gray , C . H . , Jones , G . E . and Frame , M . C . ( 2007 ) . Focal adhesion kinase controls actin assembly via a FERM - mediated interaction with the Arp2 / 3 complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 10461056 . Smith , M . L . , Gourdon , D . , Little , W . C . , Kubow , K . E . , Eguiluz , R . A . , Luna - Morris , S . and Vogel , V . ( 2007 ) . Force - induced unfolding of fibronectin in the extracellular matrix of living cells . PLoS Biol . 5 , e268 . Soriano , P . , Montgomery , C . , Geske , R . and Bradley , A . ( 1991 ) . Targeted disruption of the c - src proto - oncogene leads to osteopetrosis in mice . Cell 64 , 693 - 702 . Stylli , S . S . , Kaye , A . H . and Lock , P . ( 2008 ) . Invadopodia : at the cutting edge of tumour invasion . J . Clin . Neurosci . 15 , 725 - 737 . Suetsugu , S . , Kurisu , S . , Oikawa , T . , Yamazaki , D . , Oda , A . and Takenawa , T . ( 2006 ) . Optimization of WAVE2 complex - induced actin polymerization by membrane - bound IRSp53 , PIP ( 3 ) , and Rac . J . Cell Biol . 173 , 571 - 585 . Svitkina , T . M . , Bulanova , E . A . , Chaga , O . Y . , Vignjevic , D . M . , Kojima , S . , Vasiliev , J . M . and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Mechanism of filopodia initiation by reorganization of a dendritic network . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 409 - 421 . Takano , K . , Toyooka , K . and Suetsugu , S . ( 2008 ) . EFC / F - BAR proteins and the N - WASPWIP complex induce membrane curvature - dependent actin polymerization . EMBO J . 27 , 2817 - 2828 . Tan , J . L . , Tien , J . , Pirone , D . M . , Gray , D . S . , Bhadriraju , K . and Chen , C . S . ( 2003 ) . Cells lying on a bed of microneedles : an approach to isolate mechanical force . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 1484 - 1489 . Tanaka , J . , Watanabe , T . , Nakamura , N . and Sobue , K . ( 1993 ) . Morphological and biochemical analyses of contractile proteins ( actin , myosin , caldesmon and tropomyosin ) in normal and transformed cells . J . Cell Sci . 104 , 595 - 606 . Tarone , G . , Cirillo , D . , Giancotti , F . G . , Comoglio , P . M . and Marchisio , P . C . ( 1985 ) . Rous sarcoma virus - transformed fibroblasts adhere primarily at discrete protrusions of the ventral membrane called podosomes . Exp . Cell Res . 159 , 141 - 157 . Tatin , F . , Varon , C . , Genot , E . and Moreau , V . ( 2006 ) . A signalling cascade involving PKC , Src and Cdc42 regulates podosome assembly in cultured endothelial cells in response to phorbol ester . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 769 - 781 . Tehrani , S . , Tomasevic , N . , Weed , S . , Sakowicz , R . and Cooper , J . A . ( 2007 ) . Src phosphorylation of cortactin enhances actin assembly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 11933 - 11938 . Tsuboi , S . , Takada , H . , Hara , T . , Mochizuki , N . , Funyu , T . , Saitoh , H . , Terayama , Y . , Yamaya , K . , Ohyama , C . , Nonoyama , S . et al . ( 2009 ) . FBP17 mediates a common molecular step in the formation of podosomes and phagocytic cups in macrophages . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 8548 - 8556 . Vicente - Manzanares , M . , Choi , C . K . and Horwitz , A . R . ( 2009 ) . Integrins in cell migration - the actin connection . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 199 - 206 . Vogel , V . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2009 ) . Cell fate regulation by coupling mechanical cycles to biochemical signaling pathways . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 21 , 38 - 46 . Wang , H . B . , Dembo , M . and Wang , Y . L . ( 2000 ) . Substrate flexibility regulates growth and apoptosis of normal but not transformed cells . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 279 , C1345 - C1350 . Wang , W . , Goswami , S . , Lapidus , K . , Wells , A . L . , Wyckoff , J . B . , Sahai , E . , Singer , R . H . , Segall , J . E . and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2004 ) . Identification and testing of a gene expression signature of invasive carcinoma cells within primary mammary tumors . Cancer Res . 64 , 8585 - 8594 . Wang , W . , Wyckoff , J . B . , Goswami , S . , Wang , Y . , Sidani , M . , Segall , J . E . and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2007 ) . Coordinated regulation of pathways for enhanced cell motility and chemotaxis is conserved in rat and mouse mammary tumors . Cancer Res . 67 , 35053511 . Watanabe , N . , Kato , T . , Fujita , A . , Ishizaki , T . and Narumiya , S . ( 1999 ) . Cooperation between mDia and ROCK in Rho - induced actin reorganization . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 136 143 . Weaver , A . M . ( 2008 ) . Invadopodia . Curr . Biol . 18 , R362 - R364 . Weaver , A . M . , Karginov , A . V . , Kinley , A . W . , Weed , S . A . , Li , Y . , Parsons , J . T . and Cooper , J . A . ( 2001 ) . Cortactin promotes and stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin filament network formation . Curr . Biol . 11 , 370 - 374 . Weaver , A . M . , Heuser , J . E . , Karginov , A . V . , Lee , W . L . , Parsons , J . T . and Cooper , J . A . ( 2002 ) . Interaction of cortactin and N - WASp with Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 12 , 1270 - 1278 . Weisswange , I . , Newsome , T . P . , Schleich , S . and Way , M . ( 2009 ) . The rate of N - WASP exchange limits the extent of ARP2 / 3 - complex - dependent actin - based motility . Nature 458 , 87 - 91 . Wu , X . , Suetsugu , S . , Cooper , L . A . , Takenawa , T . and Guan , J . L . ( 2004 ) . Focal adhesion kinase regulation of N - WASP subcellular localization and function . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 9565 - 9576 . Yamagishi , A . , Masuda , M . , Ohki , T . , Onishi , H . and Mochizuki , N . ( 2004 ) . A novel actin bundling / filopodium - forming domain conserved in insulin receptor tyrosine kinase substrate p53 and missing in metastasis protein . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 1492914936 . Yamaguchi , H . , Lorenz , M . , Kempiak , S . , Sarmiento , C . , Coniglio , S . , Symons , M . , Segall , J . , Eddy , R . , Miki , H . , Takenawa , T . et al . ( 2005 ) . Molecular mechanisms of invadopodium formation : the role of the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 complex pathway and cofilin . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 441 - 452 . Yoshigi , M . , Hoffman , L . M . , Jensen , C . C . , Yost , H . J . and Beckerle , M . C . ( 2005 ) . Mechanical force mobilizes zyxin from focal adhesions to actin filaments and regulates cytoskeletal reinforcement . J . Cell Biol . 171 , 209 - 215 . Zamir , E . , Katz , B . Z . , Aota , S . , Yamada , K . M . , Geiger , B . and Kam , Z . ( 1999 ) . Molecular diversity of cell - matrix adhesions . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 1655 - 1669 . Zhang , J . , Park , S . I . , Artime , M . C . , Summy , J . M . , Shah , A . N . , Bomser , J . A . , Dorfleutner , A . , Flynn , D . C . and Gallick , G . E . ( 2007 ) . AFAP - 110 is overexpressed in prostate cancer and contributes to tumorigenic growth by regulating focal contacts . J . Clin . Invest . 117 , 2962 - 2973 . Zhang , X . , Jiang , G . , Cai , Y . , Monkley , S . J . , Critchley , D . R . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2008 ) . Talin depletion reveals independence of initial cell spreading from integrin activation and traction . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 1062 - 1068 . Zhang , Y . , Li , N . , Caron , C . , Matthias , G . , Hess , D . , Khochbin , S . and Matthias , P . ( 2003 ) . HDAC - 6 interacts with and deacetylates tubulin and microtubules in vivo . EMBO J . 22 , 1168 - 1179 . Zou , W . , Kitaura , H . , Reeve , J . , Long , F . , Tybulewicz , V . L . , Shattil , S . J . , Ginsberg , M . H . , Ross , F . P . and Teitelbaum , S . L . ( 2007 ) . Syk , c - Src , the alphavbeta3 integrin , and ITAM immunoreceptors , in concert , regulate osteoclastic bone resorption . J . Cell Biol . 176 , 877 - 888 .