1040 | VOL . 9 NO . 11 | NOVEMBER 2012 | nature methods correspondence Besides being versatile and fast , rapi d STORM is easy to use , deploy , inspect and extend . It is open source and based on wide - spread , mature , portable and open technologies such as C + + , the GNU tool chain and wxWidgets . A graphical user interface and user manual allow quick acquaintance . Automated prerelease validation and wide use on a range of biological targets ensure reliable results . rapi d STORM is regularly updated , and both source code and com - piled packages are available from our website at http : / / www . super - resolution . biozentrum . uni - wuerzburg . de / . Note : Supplementary information is available at http : / / www . nature . com / doifinder / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2224 . acKnoWLedGments We thank G . Krohne ( Julius - Maximilians University Würzburg ) for providing us with the Asc222 antibody , H . Neuweiler for help with sample preparation , A . Lampe ( Free University of Berlin ) for providing initial data and discussion for two - color imaging and K . Lidke ( University of New Mexico ) for providing the Smith - Joseph - Rieger - Lidke GPU data . This work was supported by the Biophotonics Initiative of the German Ministry of Research and Education ( BMBF ) ( grant no . 13N11019 ) . competInG FInancIaL Interests The authors declare no competing financial interests . steve Wolter 1 , anna Löschberger 1 , thorge holm 1 , sarah aufmkolk 1 , marie - christine dabauvalle 2 , sebastian van de Linde 1 & markus sauer 1 1 Department of Biotechnology and Biophysics , Biocenter , Julius - Maximilians University Würzburg , Würzburg , Germany . 2 Department of Electron Microscopy , Biocenter , Julius - Maximilians University Würzburg , Würzburg , Germany . e - mail : m . sauer @ uni - wuerzburg . de rapi d STORM : accurate , fast open - source software for localization microscopy To the Editor : In recent years , there has been a dramatic increase in the use of localization microscopy : that is , super - resolution fluorescence imaging by stochastic photoswitch - ing , photoactivation or other fluorescence - generating pro - cesses . The evaluation of localization microscopy data with a Gaussian model of the point - spread function ( PSF ) is a common and cogent technique 1 , and Poissonian maximum - likelihood estimator ( MLE ) fitting of the Gaussian model has been shown to yield optimal precision 2 . However , current software support is based on less precise approximations of MLE fitting or is slow , hardware dependent , closed source or unmaintained . Many advances have been made with unpublished or prototypical software packages , leaving established labs with homemade software and new labs with immense technology entry costs . This state has weakened the core strengths of localization microscopy : cost - efficiency and experimental simplicity . Here we report the computational optimization of iterative MLE fitting and the development of a fast , easy - to - use and open - source software program called ‘rapid , accurate program imple - menting direct stochastic optical recon - struction microscopy’ 3 ( rapi d STORM , Supplementary Software ) . To our knowl - edge , rapi d STORM is the fastest and most powerful open - source localization micros - copy software available ( Supplementary Table 1 and Fig . 1 ) and supports classic localization microscopy , astigmatic and multiplane three - dimensional ( 3D ) assign - ment , and multicolor localization micros - copy ( Fig . 1 ) . It is the only public software capable of quickly evaluating multiplane 3D and multicolor experiments . All vari - ants are unified in a single fitting routine by integrating appropri - ate factors into the Gaussian PSF model ( Supplementary Note 1 and Supplementary Fig . 1 ) , thereby avoiding the introduction of unnecessary degrees of fitting freedom and allowing fitting of the emitter position in all planes concurrently with optimal preci - sion 4 . We demonstrate the accuracy , ease of use and power of our approach with a range of 3D and two - color d STORM experiments on the nuclear pore complex 5 ( Fig . 1c – f and Supplementary Fig . 2 ) . Through careful computational optimization ( Supplementary Notes 1 and 2 ) , we were able to achieve full MLE localization precision ( Supplementary Fig . 3 ) at a speed of more than 50 , 000 localizations per second ( Fig . 1b ) on regular PC hardware . This speed is similar to the speed of previously published graphics processing unit ( GPU ) implementations and resides within the real - time domain for typical samples and cameras 6 . b Multifluorophoresample rapi d STORM QuickPALM x x y z 1 - color 2D 2 - color 2D 1 - color 3D astigmatism 1 - color 3D biplane Localization rate ( s – 1 ) Open - source software for Gaussian PSF fitting Optics Source image stack Meta - info F 2 values Alignment 3D PSF 0 . 29 1 QuickPALM Smith - Joseph - Rieger - Lidke GPU MLE * PALM3D QuickPALM rapi d STORM LSQ rapi d STORM MLE rapi d STORM LSQ rapi d STORM MLE rapi d STORM LSQ rapi d STORM MLE rapi d STORM LSQ rapi d STORM MLE 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5 a c d e f 1 , 300 1 , 000 500 Z ( nm ) Figure 1 | Multicolor d STORM with rapi d STORM . ( a ) The signal of single fluorophores is imaged on two spectrally separated cameras . Fluorophores are localized with a multispectral Gaussian PSF model and distinguished by their F 2 values ( the ratio of the intensity in the long - wavelength channel and the total intensity ) . ( b ) Speed of data processing with rapi d STORM and major alternatives . The bar groups denote different evaluation requirements , and the bar length shows the logarithm of the achieved speed . An asterisk denotes that displayed speed excludes preprocessing time ; the software is not public . ( c ) d STORM image of the nuclear pore complexes of Xenopus laevis oocytes 5 shows the Alexa 700 – labeled central channel ( cyan ) and the Alexa 647 – labeled protein gp210 ( red ) . ( d , e ) Biplane ( d ) and astigmatic ( e ) 3D d STORM images of nuclear pores of X . laevis A6 cells labeled with Mab414 and Alexa 647 – labeled antibodies . ( f ) Axial section of 2 µm thickness from d . Scale bars , 2 µm ( c ) , 200 nm ( inset ) and 1 µm ( d – f ) . n p g © 2012 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . n p g © 2012 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . nature methods | VOL . 9 NO . 11 | NOVEMBER 2012 | 1041 correspondence of modifications is available for each locus ( Supplementary Methods ) . This allows ORCAE to eliminate a bottleneck found in other online annotation tools , such as yrGATE 5 , where a cura - tor needs to approve modifications before they become avail - able . Indeed , in the spirit of community annotation , the quality of the presented annotation is the responsibility of the whole community . However , to ensure a certain level of quality , several automatic checks have been put in place that encompass all exist - ing knowledge on the gene structure and functions ( for example , whether a KOG or EC number exist ) ( Supplementary Methods ) . Finally , ORCAE is highly dynamic : upon modification of a gene model , all the available information is immediately updated and presented on the gene page . Note : Supplementary information is available at http : / / www . nature . com / doifinder / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2242 . acKnoWLedGments We thank S . Rombauts , Y . C . Lin , B . Verhelst , S . De Bodt and T . Van Parys for their help in developing the portal and in the preparation of this manuscript . This work was supported by the Ghent University Multidisciplinary Research Partnership ‘Bioinformatics : from nucleotides to networks’ and Research Foundation Flanders ( FWO ) ( awarded to T . A . ) . competInG FInancIaL Interests The authors declare no competing financial interests . Lieven sterck 1 , 2 , Kenny Billiau 1 , 2 , thomas abeel 1 , 2 , pierre rouzé 1 , 2 & Yves Van de peer 1 , 2 1 Department of Plant Systems Biology , VIB , Ghent , Belgium . 2 Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics , Ghent University , Ghent , Belgium . e - mail : lieven . sterck @ psb . vib - ugent . be 1 . Parkhill , J . , Birney , E . & Kersey , P . Genome Biol . 11 , 402 ( 2010 ) . 2 . Salzberg , S . L . Genome Biol . 8 , 102 ( 2007 ) . 3 . Schlueter , S . D . , Wilkerson , M . D . , Huala , E . , Rhee , S . Y . & Brendel , V . Trends Plant Sci . 10 , 9 – 14 ( 2005 ) . 4 . Guignon , V . et al . Bioinformatics 28 , 1054 – 1056 ( 2012 ) . 5 . Wilkerson , M . D . , Schlueter , S . D . & Brendel , V . Genome Biol . 7 , R58 ( 2006 ) . Figure 1 | Gene page in the ORCAE resource . Through the extensive use of graphical representations , a clear overview of the data is provided to assist users in easily assessing the quality and accuracy of the offered annotations for a given gene locus . 1 . Stallinga , S . & Rieger , B . Opt . Express 18 , 24461 – 24476 ( 2010 ) . 2 . Mortensen , K . I . , Churchman , L . S . , Spudich , J . A . & Flyvbjerg , H . Nat . Methods 7 , 377 – 381 ( 2010 ) . 3 . van de Linde , S . et al . Nat . Protoc . 6 , 991 – 1009 ( 2011 ) . 4 . Ram , S . , Prabhat , P . , Chao , J . , Ward , E . S . & Ober , R . J . Biophys . J . 95 , 6025 – 6043 ( 2008 ) . 5 . Löschberger , A . et al . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 570 – 575 ( 2012 ) . 6 . Smith , C . S . , Joseph , N . , Rieger , B . & Lidke , K . A . Nat . Methods 7 , 373 – 375 ( 2010 ) . orcae : online resource for community annotation of eukaryotes To the Editor : Genome sequencing and annotation projects are no longer restricted to large sequencing institutes . With high - throughput next - generation sequencing technologies , draft genome sequences are now being determined at an unprecedent - ed pace . However , more and more genome sequences are poorly annotated . To bridge this gap , there is an increasing need for easy - to - use , online genome - annotation tools 1 . Moreover , genome proj - ects are being conducted by smaller consortia , and thus genome annotation should benefit maximally from community annota - tion efforts 2 that reflect the knowledge available in the scientific community 3 . Therefore , we developed ORCAE ( http : / / bioinfor - matics . psb . ugent . be / orcae / , formerly known as BOGAS ) , a wiki - style annotation portal . ORCAE offers public access to a wide variety of plant , fungal and animal genomes ( Supplementary Table 1 ) . The basic setup of ORCAE is highly comparable to wiki sys - tems such as MediaWiki , and the information page for each gene can be seen as a ‘topic’ page of a traditional text wiki . We developed ORCAE with a gene - centric vision in mind , which is reflected by the fact that the gene information pages ( Fig . 1 and Supplementary Figs . 1 and 2 ) are the central pages in the system ( Supplementary Methods ) , in contrast to chromosome - centric systems such as GNPannot 4 . The system is ideally suited to allow multiple people to simultaneously curate the initial automatic pre - dictions , a typical setup in many genome projects where curators with diverse expertise join forces to improve the genome annota - tion . ORCAE offers functionality to browse , annotate and manage eukaryotic genome annotation projects . The system can be used both to present published genomes to the scientific community and to coordinate manual annotation and curation efforts in ongoing annotation projects . This is one of ORCAE’s main advan - tages because users have a central access point where annotations can be queried or improved . For publicly available genomes , everyone is allowed to view all gene pages . Restricted genome projects are only accessible for registered users . Editing privileges are limited to participants in the particular genome project , whereas nonmembers of the consortium can receive editing privileges when approved by the consortium ( Supplementary Methods ) . The portal will keep track of all the modifications to both func - tional and structural annotations . This is done in a wiki - compliant manner : all edits are stored in the database , and thus a history n p g © 2012 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . n p g © 2012 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d .