High - Speed Atomic Force Microscopy and Nanomechanical Mapping as Tools for Studying Dynamic Membrane Remodeling Processes Lorena Redondo - Morata Univ . Lille , CNRS , Inserm , CHU Lille , Institut Pasteur de Lille , U1019 - UMR 9017 - CIIL - Center for Infection and Immunity of Lille , F - 59000 Lille , France . Atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) has recently undergone significant technological improvements that enable recording of surface topography in the sub - second timescales . This development , termed High - Speed AFM ( HS - AFM ) is particularly of interest for the study of the dynamics of biomolecules . It was used with great success to study the structural dynamics of molecular motors such as myosin V [ 1 ] and the characterization of membrane protein dynamics in a lipid bilayer [ 2 ] . Most recently , we have succeeded to visualize the molecular mechanism of Snf7 assembly formation [ 3 ] . Snf7 is the major polymerization component of the Endosomal Sorting Complex Required for Transport - III ( ESCRT - III ) . We observed the formation of spiraling filaments on negatively charged membranes and estimated that these filaments can store sufficient elastic energy to drive membrane deformation . In our most recent work , we studied the molecular role of Vps4 , an ATPase that it is known to drive the disassembly of persisting filaments of ESCRT - III [ 4 ] . We observed that in the presence of Vps4 , ESCRT - III polymers disassemble partially , remaining the most - inner part of the ring - like structure refractory to the action of the enzyme . Surprisingly , in the presence of a soluble Snf7 pool , ESCRT - III assemblies shrink under the action of Vps4 , liberating free space in the membrane were new ESCRT - III assemblies are growing simultaneously ( Figure 1 ) . This results in a high exchange and lateral mobility of ESCRT - III assemblies on membranes . Dynamic exchange provides an explanation for how ESCRT - III filaments gradually adapt their shape during membrane constriction , which has broad implications in diverse cellular processes , differing in size , shape , and duration – such as plasma membrane repair , cytokinesis , or viral budding . Using similar methodology , we are also interested in the dynamic nanomechanical changes of the lipid membrane due to lipid - lipid interactions . In lipid membranes , the ultimate lipid phase coexistence to be fully understood are transient nanodomains , often ( confusedly ) referred to as lipid rafts [ 5 ] . Based on the current knowledge , microdomains in equilibrium are no longer considered suitable models for the biological structure that rafts represent . Multiscale spatiotemporal measurements of the membrane mechanical properties can help to experimentally address different scenarios where membrane micro - and nano - domain formation finds theoretical support . Atomic Force Microscopy ( AFM ) - based Force Spectroscopy can resolve coexistence of domains at concentrations where height differences at domain boundaries are not detectable [ 6 ] . Non - equilibrium fluctuations by tuning membrane ( local and global ) environment actively controlling curvature , leaflet asymmetry , solid support topography and addition of external components would help complete the manifold where domain formation occurs . Here , we will focus on the in situ conversion of sphingomyelin to ceramide . Ceramide is produced in cells from sphingomyelin by means of the enzymatic activity of endogenous sphingomyelinase . The presence of ceramide has a high impact in the physical chemical properties of the membrane , inducing changes in the curvature , phase , segregation , and order . The local production of ceramide induces local mechanical changes depending on the chain length and degree of unsaturation of the original sphingomyelin ( Figure 2 ) . AFM - based Force Spectroscopy is an ideal technique to investigate the mechanical properties of lipid bilayers at the nanoscale , their elastic constants [ 7 ] but also their plastic deformation and rupture [ 6 ] . However , the viscoelastic parameters of lipid membranes have been less explored by these means . In this 55 doi : 10 . 1017 / S1431927621013271 Microsc . Microanal . 27 ( Suppl 2 ) , 2021 © The Author ( s ) , 2021 . Published by Cambridge University Press on behalf of Microscopy Society of America work , we systematically studied the enzymatic conversion of sphingomyelin - containing supported lipid bilayers to ceramide by adding sphingomyelinase in situ . The different ceramide localization in the membrane and mechanical properties is relevant in several biological contexts as apoptosis or viral infection . Finally , we will discuss possible approaches to evaluate the dynamic changes in viscoelasticity of lipid membranes [ 8 ] , i . e . , using fast mapping with bimodal AFM [ 9 ] . [ 1 ] N Kodera et al , Nature 468 ( 2010 ) , p . 72 . [ 2 ] I Casuso et al , Nature Nanotechnology 7 ( 2012 ) , p . 525 . [ 3 ] N Chiaruttini et al , Cell 163 ( 2015 ) , p . 866 . [ 4 ] B Mierzwa et al , Nature Cell Biology 19 ( 2017 ) , p . 787 . [ 5 ] FM Goñi , Chemistry and Physics of Lipids 218 ( 2019 ) , p . 34 . [ 6 ] L Redondo - Morata et al , Langmuir 28 ( 2012 ) , p . 12851 . [ 7 ] L Redondo - Morata et al , Biophysical Journal 111 ( 2016 ) , p . 363 . [ 8 ] Z Al - Rekabi , S Contera , Proceedings of the Natural Academy of Sciences 115 ( 2018 ) , p . 2658 . [ 9 ] V Gisbert et al , ACS Nano 15 ( 2021 ) , p . 1850 . [ 10 ] The author acknowledges funding from the Agence National de la Recherche ( ANR ) , as part of the ‘Investments d ' Avenir’ Programme ( I - SITE ULNE / ANR - 16 - IDEX - 0004 ULNE ) . Figure 1 . HS - AFM imaging of ESCRT - III polymers on supported lipid membranes , followed by the addition of Vps4 and ATP . The overlays highlight pre - formed spirals ( blue ) or newly formed spirals ( orange ) . Our model suggests that Vps4 induces dynamic reorganization of ESCRT - III assemblies . Figure 2 . Fast nanomechanical mapping of a biphasic lipid membrane . After injection of sphingomyelinase to the solution , sphingomyelin - enriched domains evolve to ceramide - enriched domains , which impacts the lipid order , domain distribution and local mechanics . Microsc . Microanal . 27 ( Suppl 2 ) , 2021 56