Technology , Innovation and Institutions Working Paper Series TII - 7 May 2007 TO SHARE OR NOT TO SHARE ? PROFESSIONAL NORMS , REFERENCE GROUPS , AND INFORMATION WITHHOLDING AMONG LIFE SCIENTISTS * MARTINE R . HAAS Cornell University School of Industrial & Labor Relations Ives Hall East 146E Ithaca , NY 14853 mh293 @ cornell . edu SANGCHAN PARK Cornell University School of Industrial & Labor Relations Ives Hall 440 Ithaca , NY 14853 sp339 @ cornell . edu Executive Editors Michael Lounsbury ( Alberta ) (cid:144) Nelson Phillips ( Imperial ) (cid:144) Andrew Hargadon ( Davis ) Advisory Board Steven R . Barley ( Stanford University ) (cid:144) James Evans ( University of Chicago ) (cid:144) Robert Friedel ( University of Maryland ) (cid:144) Raghu Garud ( Penn State University ) (cid:144) Peter Karnoe ( Copenhagen Business School ) (cid:144) Steve Maguire ( McGill University ) (cid:144) Kamal Munir ( Cambridge University ) (cid:144) Fiona Murray ( MIT ) (cid:144) Wanda Orlikowski ( MIT ) (cid:144) Jason Owen - Smith ( University of Michigan ) (cid:144) Walter W . Powell ( Stanford University ) (cid:144) Victor Seidel ( Oxford University ) (cid:144) Toby Stuart ( Harvard Business School ) (cid:144) Steve Vallas ( George Mason University ) (cid:144) Marc Ventresca ( Oxford University ) (cid:144) Jennifer Whyte ( Imperial College London ) (cid:144) Joanne Yates ( MIT ) (cid:144) Christopher Zott ( INSEAD ) Technology Commercialization Centre University of Alberta (cid:144) 3 - 23 School of Business (cid:144) Edmonton , AB (cid:144) T6G 2R6 Tel : 780 - 492 - 3375 (cid:144) Fax : 780 - 492 - 5709 (cid:144) www . bus . ualberta . ca / tcc (cid:144) tcc @ ualberta . ca TO SHARE OR NOT TO SHARE ? PROFESSIONAL NORMS , REFERENCE GROUPS , AND INFORMATION WITHHOLDING AMONG LIFE SCIENTISTS ABSTRACT Why are professional norms violated ? Norm violations are usually attributed to individual interests that lead individuals to reject professional norms . In contrast , we take the view that norm violations can occur when professional norms are valued but it is difficult to ascertain the appropriate course of professional conduct . According to this view , individuals look to cues from their professional reference groups to help them resolve sociological ambivalence arising from conflicting role expectations . To test this argument , we examine the influence of professional reference groups on information withholding by scientists . In the scientific profession , information withholding violates the fundamental norm of sharing . Analyzing a dataset of 1849 geneticists and other life scientists from 100 U . S . universities , we find that beyond individual interests , information withholding is influenced by the behaviors of peers as well as the attitudes of superiors within the profession . The findings indicate that norm violations can occur even when professionals strive to understand and uphold standards of professional conduct rather than ignoring them . We discuss the implications for the professions literature , theories of organizational learning , and knowledge management initiatives in firms . Keywords : norms , professions , reference groups , information sharing / withholding , science 1 Professions characteristically strive to establish and enforce strong norms that are intended to guide professional conduct , where norms are understood as morally regulated and expected behaviors in the group ( Goode , 1957 ; Wilensky , 1964 ; Merton , 1973 [ 1942 ] ; Freidson , 2001 ) . Such norms serve to distinguish and buffer the profession from bureaucratic organizations or neighboring occupations ( Scott , 1965 ; Abbott , 1988 ; Freidson , 1994 ) . By instilling codes of ethics , they also constrain self - interested behavior that might undermine the professional community or its clients ( Berlant , 1975 ; Freidson , 2001 ) . Studies of professions show that strong norms are inculcated through the rigors of professional socialization , including extensive formal training and apprenticeships ( e . g . , Merton , George , and Kendall , 1957 ; Leicht and Fennell , 1997 ) , and maintained through complex systems of rewards and sanctions , both material and social ( e . g . , Parsons , 1951 ; Berlant , 1975 ) . Despite the formal and informal emphasis on upholding professional norms , however , individual members of professions often violate them ( Mulkay , 1969 ; Pavalko , 1988 ; Leicht and Fennell 2001 ) , raising the question of why norm violations occur . We examine violations of the norm of information sharing in the academic science community . In Merton’s seminal paper on the normative structure of science , first published in 1942 , he identified communalism or “communism” as one of the four fundamental norms of the scientific profession , alongside the norms of universalism , disinterestedness , and organized skepticism ( Merton , 1973 [ 1942 ] ) . The norm of communalism obliges scientists to place their research in the public domain through full and open sharing with the scientific community as early as possible in the discovery process . This emphasis on information sharing as a professional norm is based on the longstanding belief that the refusal to share information impedes scientific progress by preventing scientists from challenging , verifying , and building 2 upon the work of others ( Polanyi , 1962 ; Rosenberg , 1966 ) . In reality , however , the ideal of openness is often breached , as attested by gossip that circulates widely among scientists , reports of information withholding in the press , and growing debate about the effects of the commercialization of science in creating incentives for greater secrecy and eroding professional standards ( e . g . , Bok , 1982 ; Nelkin , 1984 ; Argyres and Liebeskind , 1998 ; Cook - Deegan and MacCormack , 2001 ; Louis et al . , 2001 ) . These concerns lend urgency to the question of why scientists withhold information in contravention of the professional norm of sharing . In response , medical researchers have examined this question in a recent series of studies published in the leading medical journals ( e . g . , Blumenthal et al . , 1997 ; Campbell et al . , 2002 ; Walsh and Hong , 2003 ; Blumenthal et al . , 2006 ) . The approach of these studies of has been to trace the reasons for information withholding among scientists to individual explanations . For example , life scientists have been shown to be more likely to refuse requests from other scientists for information related to their research if they engage in commercial activities or receive financial support from industry ( Campbell et al . , 2002 ) . The theoretical premise that underlies this approach is that information withholding occurs when individual interests lead scientists to reject the professional norm of information sharing because the perceived benefits of withholding outweigh the perceived costs of incurring the sanctions or forsaking the rewards of the scientific community . This premise is consistent with theories of professional socialization that emphasize the importance of instilling a strong professional identity for ensuring that members act in the collective interests of the profession rather than their individual interests ( e . g . , Pavalko , 1988 ; Leight and Fennell , 1997 ; Friedson , 2001 ) . The implication is that norm violations are an individual phenomenon that occurs because professional identity is too 3 provisional or contingent to resist the temptations and pressures to violate professional norms that are inevitably experienced by members of the profession . In contrast , research on information exchange in organizations suggests that information withholding may have social as well as individual explanations . Studies of learning and knowledge sharing within organizations have shown , for example , that information exchange is inhibited by fear about reporting mistakes in groups ( Edmondson , 1996 ) , lack of trust between exchange partners ( Levin and Cross , 2004 ) , secrecy as a means to exert control in politicized environments ( Feldman , 1988 ) , and rewards for individual heroics under time pressure ( Perlow , 1999 ) . More generally , a “culture of hoarding” ( Boisot , 1998 ) is often blamed for major organizational failures like the inability of the U . S . intelligence agencies to avert the tragedy of 9 / 11 or the NASA space shuttle disasters ( Kean and Hamilton , 2004 ; Vaughan , 1996 , 2006 ) . In such cultures , organizational design features that are intended to increase information exchange , such as group - oriented incentive systems , may have little effect ( Quigley et al . , 2007 ) . These insights suggest that withholding behavior that appears to be individualistic may be the result instead of individuals seeking and taking cues from others around them . We build on these foundations to suggest that scientists who withhold information may be attempting to follow professional norms rather than rejecting them , but these norms operate at the level of subgroups embedded within the profession rather than the level of the profession itself . Scientists look to subgroup norms to guide their conduct because professional role expectations are often conflicting rather than clear , making it difficult to ascertain the appropriate cause of professional conduct by referring to general scientific norms . In 1963 , Merton departed from his early characterization of science as governed by fundamental norms that serve as clear guides to professional conduct to propose instead that scientists often experience “sociological 4 ambivalence” – incompatible normative expectations assigned to a role or set of roles in a social system ( Merton and Barber , 1963 ; Merton , 1976 ) . Drawing on this insight , we characterize science as a profession governed by conflicting role expectations of information sharing and information withholding , and propose that scientists attempt to resolve the resulting sociological ambivalence by following the cues of salient subgroups within the profession , rather than simply reverting to individual interests . To examine the influence of subgroup norms on information withholding among scientists , we utilize the concept of “professional reference groups” , defined as members of a profession who share common characteristics and serve as potential sources of social influence for other members . In contrast to other sources of social influence like interpersonal networks or institutional affiliations , professional reference groups can influence members of the profession who do not belong to the reference group or even interact with the reference group members directly ( Merton , 1968 ; Singer , 1981 ) . This allows for relational influence from more alters than social network methods typically elicit ( Lawrence , 2006 ) , as well as cognitive influence based on shared social categories rather than personal ties ( Strang and Meyer , 1993 ) and motivational influence based on aspirations rather than current interactions or affiliations ( Merton , 1968 ) . i We develop hypotheses concerning the influence of professional reference groups on information withholding by scientists and specify boundary conditions for reference group influence that arise from the characteristics of the group members , their behaviors , and the characteristics of the scientists themselves . After establishing that life scientists face conflicting role expectations using qualitative data from in - depth field interviews , we test the hypotheses using quantitative survey data from a national study of 1 , 849 life scientists at 100 leading U . S . research universities . 5 INFORMATION WITHHOLDING AMONG LIFE SCIENTISTS Resistance to Information Sharing Academic scientists regularly receive requests for information related to their research , where information refers to research - related findings , methods , data , or materials ( McCain , 1991 ; Hilgartner and Brandt - Rauf , 1994 ; Campbell et al . , 2002 ) . Even when the research results are already published in journals or technical reports , additional sharing is often requested by others who wish to replicate or extend the findings because results presented in these formats typically omit critical research - related information that cannot be published , such as clones , algorithms , software , detailed descriptions of techniques , or nuanced tacit knowledge that allows for precise replication . The importance of sharing such information for the progress of science provides the functional imperative for the professional norm of communalism identified by Merton ( 1973 [ 1942 ] ) . In Merton’s early formulation of this fundamental norm , he stated : “Secrecy is the antithesis of this norm ; full and open communication its enactment” ( Merton , 1973 [ 1942 ] : 274 ) . This formulation suggests that information withholding is a violation of a uniformly revered norm of sharing , a socially unacceptable and morally unjustifiable act . In the view of the early sociology of science literature , the professional norm of communalism is inculcated during graduate training , reinforced by rewards of recognition and credit for priority , and regulated by the threat of social sanctions ( Parsons , 1951 ; Merton , 1957 ; Hagstrom , 1965 ; Storer , 1966 ; Bourdieu , 1975 ) . Given these mutually reinforcing institutional mechanisms for ensuring compliance , why would scientists violate this fundamental professional norm by withholding rather than sharing information ? 6 Research on information exchange in organizational settings offers some possible explanations for why individuals sometimes withhold rather than share information with colleagues . Motivated by the importance of knowledge sharing to firm competitive performance ( Grant , 1996 ; Kogut and Zander , 1996 ) , recent studies have highlighted the role of electronic communication technologies and social network ties in facilitating information exchanges ( e . g . , Sproull and Kiesler , 1991 ; Brown and Duguid , 1991 ; Hansen , 1999 ; Reagans and McEvily , 2003 ) . The implication is that withholding occurs because barriers to sharing impede the ability to exchange information easily . Yet individuals often choose to withhold information even if barriers to sharing are minimized , indicating that willingness as well as ability to share matters . For example , employees avoid contributing to document repositories ( Connolly and Thorn , 1991 ) , and perceptions of competition inhibit sharing among alliance partners or even subsidiaries of the same firm ( Larsson et al . , 1998 ; Hansen , Mors , and Løvås , 2005 ) . Social identity theory suggests that resistance to sharing can be reduced by a collective identity orientation that encourages individuals to elevate the collective interests of the group above their individual interests ( e . g . , Brewer and Gardner , 1996 ; Chatman et al . , 1998 ; Brickson , 2000 ) . Of particular relevance to information sharing among scientists , a collective identity orientation should encourage group members to uphold a norm of generalized exchange where the benefits of helping others are delayed , indirect , or even non - existent , such as the fundamental norm of scientific communalism ( Gouldner , 1957 ; Blau , 1964 ; Flynn , 2005 ) . This expectation is consistent with theories of effort withholding in groups , which have argued that behaviors like social loafing and free - riding are more common when group members feel lower levels of identification with the group ( Latane , Williams , and Harkins , 1979 ; Weldon and Gargano , 1985 ; Schnake , 1991 ; Kidwell and Bennett , 1993 ; Shapiro et al . 2002 ) . Research on social dilemmas 7 provides empirical support by demonstrating that group identification has a powerful effect on members’ willingness to restrict individual gain to preserve a collective good in mixed - motive situations ( e . g . , Kramer and Brewer , 1984 ; Brewer and Kramer , 1986 ; Bazerman , Mannix , and Thompson , 1988 ) . Similarly , research on social exchange in groups has shown that the emergence of a collective identity facilitates productive exchanges between group members ( e . g . , Lawler , Thye , and Yoon , 2000 ) . Existing theoretical frameworks thus suggest that information withholding among scientists can be attributed to failures to instill a sufficiently strong professional identity to ensure that professional norms are not rejected when collective interests clash with individual interests . Yet this conclusion assumes that professional norms provide clear role expectations that individuals choose to follow or reject by weighing the costs and benefits of violating them . If conflicting rather than clear role expectations govern information exchange among scientists , however , information withholding may be due not to the rejection of professional norms but instead to attempts to resolve sociological ambivalence in a professionally acceptable way . Conflicting Role Expectations and Sociological Ambivalence Merton and other scholars came to modify their early view of the normative structure of science as they realized that the socialization , reward , and sanctioning systems of scientists do not actually produce full compliance with the supposedly fundamental norms of the scientific profession ( e . g . , Merton , 1963 ; Mulkay and Williams , 1971 ; Latour and Woolgar , 1979 ) . In particular , Merton’s later writings departed from his initial conceptualizations of unitary professional norms that serve as clear guides to professional conduct to argue that science , like any institution , is “patterned in terms of potentially conflicting pairs of norms” ( Merton , 1976 : 33 ) . This juxtaposition of dominant and counter - norms creates “inner conflict among scientists 8 who have internalized both of them” ( Merton , 1976 : 36 ) . For example , scientists’ professional role expectations demand originality , encouraging them to strive to be first to announce a significant discovery , but also humility , discouraging them from fighting for priority if multiple investigators announce a discovery simultaneously ( Merton , 1963 ) . According to Merton , the sociological ambivalence that results from such incompatible role expectations differs from the psychological ambivalence that arises from experiencing contradictory emotions , holding contradictory ideas , or confusion over how to act to fulfill one’s wishes ( cf . Jansen and Von Glinow , 1985 ; Smelser , 1998 ; Pratt , 2000 ) . He argued that while sociological ambivalence is a major source of psychological ambivalence , “…people are exposed to [ sociological ambivalence ] not because of their idiosyncratic history or distinctive personality , but because the ambivalence is inherent in the social positions they occupy” ( Merton and Barber , 1963 : 96 ) . ii Given this , “ [ we must ] consider , first , how potentially contradictory norms develop in every social institution ; next , how in the institution of science conflicting norms generate marked ambivalence in the lives of scientists ; and finally , how this ambivalence affects the actual , as distinct from the supposed , relations between men of science” ( Merton , 1963 : 80 ) . Despite Merton’s modifications of his early views on the norms of science , his initial conceptualizations have continued to dominate much scholarly and public discourse , while the idea of sociological ambivalence has been largely neglected . Merton himself did not explicitly discuss the implications for the professional norm of communalism , or explain how scientists resolve ambivalence arising from competing role expectations . The most direct elaboration of sociological ambivalence in the scientific context was proposed by Mitroff ( 1974 ) in a study of the Apollo moon scientists , where he argued that each of the four fundamental norms of science identified by Merton ( 1973 [ 1942 ] ) is opposed by a contradictory counter - norm . This analysis 9 focused predominantly on the norm of universalism , however , and other scholars who have built on the concept of sociological ambivalence have not addressed communalism either , or considered how sociological ambivalence can be resolved ( e . g . , Mills , 1983 ; Etzkowitz , 1989 ) . This neglect is unfortunate because the possibility of sociological ambivalence can offer insight into scientists’ decisions to share or withhold information . If professional role expectations are conflicting rather than clear , scientists may choose to act according to their individual interests . Yet rather than rejecting professional norms entirely , they instead may look to the norms of salient reference groups within the profession for cues to guide their behavior . Reference Groups and Information Withholding Reference group theory enables the detection of sociological uniformities underlying apparently individualistic patterns of behavior ( Merton and Rossi , 1950 ) . We identify the members of a professional reference group as the set of other individuals who are professionally equivalent or superior to the focal individual . Within the scientific profession , the life sciences community encompasses a series of fields including biochemistry , genetics , microbiology , and pathology , among others . Other life scientists in the same field thus constitute a professional reference group for a life scientist . Within the field of genetics , which is the main focus of our study , scientists have a specialty based on the model organism on which they work , such as drosophila ( fruit flies ) , yeast , or humans . iii For a geneticist who specializes in drosophila , other geneticists who also specialize in drosophila thus constitute a subgroup of more similar colleagues than a group composed of all other geneticists . Within each specialty , further subgroups of even more similar colleagues can be identified based on achieved professional status ( position earned through abilities and effort ) . In the life sciences community , relevant professional status characteristics include academic rank , research experience , research 10 productivity , and research budget . Colleagues of comparable rank , experience , productivity , and budget constitute reference groups of status - equals for the focal scientist , while those of higher rank , experience , productivity , and budget constitute reference groups of status - superiors . For scientists faced with conflicting professional role expectations , the conduct of reference group members influences the visibility of information withholding behavior and signals its social acceptability . Interpersonal visibility , defined as “the extent to which the norms and the role - performances within a group are readily open to observation by others” ( Merton , 1968 : 373 ) , is a critical condition for normative influence ( Merton , 1968 ; Marsden and Friedkin , 1993 ) . If information withholding behavior is not visible to scientists seeking cues to guide their own professional conduct , they are likely to conclude that it is inappropriate for them . In contrast , more visible behavior facilitates emulation by others ( cf . Haveman , 1993 ; Strang and Macy 2005 ) . The social acceptability of withholding behavior is also critical , because unacceptable behavior threatens the rewards that the reference group can provide and increases the risk of sanctions . For example , colleagues can reject applications for funding , recommend against promoting , or spread gossip that damages the reputation of a scientist who engages in unacceptable behavior ( cf . Burt and Knez , 1996 ) . Behavior that seems more acceptable in the reference group , in contrast , appears less risky to the focal scientist . Acceptability does not necessarily accompany visibility , or vice versa : rare incidents of egregious withholding may be highly visible but widely regarded as unacceptable , while instances of limited withholding may be unobjectionable but rarely noticed . By increasing both the visibility and acceptability of information withholding , more withholding behavior in the scientist’s reference groups increases the likelihood that a scientist will engage in such behavior too . The visibility of withholding behavior increases because the 11 scientist is more likely to personally experience , observe , or hear about a withholding incident ( cf . Merton , 1967 ) . The acceptability of withholding behavior increases because it becomes more legitimate to the extent that more group members engage in ( cf . Meyer and Rowan , 1977 ; DiMaggio and Powell , 1983 ) . If other scientists have withheld information themselves , they are likely to be less critical of a scientist who withholds , at least publicly , reducing the actual and perceived risk of incurring social sanctions . Scientists also run a lower risk of having their own withholding behavior noticed when others engage in similar behavior , since any particular withholding incident is less worthy of attention and gossip . Thus , the first hypothesis is that when faced with conflicting role expectations , scientists will look to reference group cues rather than simply acting according to their individual interests : Hypothesis 1 ( H1 ) : Information withholding by reference group members will be positively associated with information withholding by a scientist . Reference groups composed of scientists who are more similar to the focal scientist will likely be more salient for that scientist , since homophily – preference for similar others – is a strong basis for attraction and influence in social contexts ( e . g . , Festinger , 1954 ; Lazarsfeld and Merton , 1954 ; Ibarra , 1992 ) . Greater salience increases the visibility of reference group members’ behaviors because the focal scientist will be more interested in finding out about them and likely to notice them . Greater salience also increases the importance of the social acceptability of withholding behaviors to the focal scientist , again making reference group members’ withholding behavior more influential . Even for scientists who do not care about whether their behavior is socially acceptable to their colleagues , the behaviors of salient reference group members may still matter because they serve as signals about the competitive 12 landscape : if colleagues frequently withhold information , scientists might decide that sharing information would put them at a competitive disadvantage . Hence : Hypothesis 2 ( H2 ) : Information withholding by reference group members will be more positively associated with information withholding by a scientist if the reference group members are more similar to the scientist . If information withholding by reference group members serves as a social cue that guides the behaviors of scientists , the influence of this cue can be expected to be greater when the cue is less ambiguous . The influence of withholding behavior by reference group members thus will be stronger when this behavior is more crystallized , where crystallization refers to the extent of agreement among members of the group about the level of the behavior in which an individual can appropriately engage ( Jackson , 1965 ) . A high level of withholding among reference group members serves as a stronger cue encouraging withholding if more members of the group withhold at or around the same level because there seems to be greater agreement that withholding is acceptable . In contrast , a high level of withholding by reference group members serves as a weaker cue if some members withhold frequently while others withhold rarely because it is less clear that withholding is generally acceptable among the group members . By increasing the ambiguity surrounding whether information withholding is acceptable , greater variance thus reduces the effects of withholding by reference group members on a scientist’s withholding decision . Hypothesis 3 ( H3 ) : Information withholding by reference group members will be less positively associated with information withholding by a scientist if the reference group members vary more in their levels of information withholding . 13 Although the behaviors of reference group members can influence any scientist , the findings of prior research indicate that individual interests make some scientists more likely to withhold information than others ( e . g . , Campbell et al . , 2002 ) . Considering these findings in conjunction with reference group influence suggests that scientists whose individual interests favor withholding may have a greater propensity to be influenced by withholding by members of their reference groups . For example , scientists who are more engaged in commercial activities may be more motivated to identify and exploit examples of information withholding by reference group members , in order to justify their own inclinations to withhold information both to themselves and others . In contrast , scientists who are less predisposed to withhold information may be slower to emulate withholding behaviors among reference group members , since their individual interests in following those cues are lower . Hypothesis 4 ( H4 ) : Information withholding by reference group members will be more positively associated with information withholding by a scientist if the individual interests of the scientist favor information withholding . In summary , individual interests that lead scientists to reject the professional norm of sharing constitutes only one possible explanation for information withholding . Alternatively , a theory of professional conduct that recognizes the existence of sociological ambivalence allows for the possibility that withholding occurs as scientists who face conflicting role expectations try to follow professional norms by seeking cues from reference groups within the profession . METHODS The hypotheses were tested using quantitative data obtained from a survey of 3000 geneticists and other life scientists conducted between March and July 2000 by the Center for 14 Survey Research at the University of Massachusetts in Boston . We also conducted 18 field interviews with a snowball sample of academic scientists who worked in genetics and other life sciences fields . Using a semi - structured protocol , the field interviews lasted one to two hours and sometimes included laboratory tours and on - site observations . Qualitative Data The field interviews provided a richer understanding of the professional norms in the life science community . Specifically , the interviews revealed that scientists experienced sociological ambivalence resulting from the conflict between professional role expectations of information sharing and information withholding . The interviews also indicated that the life sciences community was characterized by extensive collegial interaction , which provided the mechanism through which reference group cues were sought and supplied . Expectations of information withholding . Although a dominant professional norm of sharing governed responses to requests for information from other scientists , the field interviews indicated that withholding also occurred regularly . While scientists sometimes clearly violated the norm of sharing because they did not care about avoiding the sanctions or reaping the rewards of the professional community , they also commonly noted that fulfilling their professional roles could require them to withhold rather than share information . In our interviews , the most widely referenced explanation for information withholding was to protect research autonomy – the freedom to choose what to study , how to study , and when to study it ( e . g . , Polanyi , 1951 ; Merton , 1957 ; Hagstrom , 1965 ; Sutton , 1984 ) . If valuable research - related information was shared with others , this freedom could be reduced , resulting in diminished ability to fulfill the professional role expectation of innovative scholarship . As one scientist succinctly stated : 15 “My job is to generate and publish original research findings . If I give away data or materials , even from a paper I’ve already published , I’m going to have more trouble doing my job successfully . ” A second basis for an obligation to withhold that scientists often noted was a professional role expectation of protecting doctoral or post - doctoral students . Sharing information that could compromise the ability of students to publish their work was widely viewed as a violation of a professional responsibility toward dependents . For example , a senior professor of plant genomics told us : “I was giving a talk at a meeting in Japan last week , and we’re a little behind getting the story out on the red and white rice - - - it’s my graduate student’s thesis . So I didn’t talk about it . There were 900 people in the audience . It would’ve made a wonderful presentation . But someone could have stolen a piece of it , and my student could have been in trouble . ” Another scientist observed : “People often explain [ withholding ] by saying ‘my graduate student needs to get full credit . ’ I think that’s partly an acceptable excuse , but it’s also a real reason . There are big investments in collecting data… more senior people have less riding on a particular dataset , but if they give the game away too soon , their students’ work could be wrecked . ” Scientists also viewed themselves and others as subject to professional obligations to withhold as a result of expectations of loyalty to a laboratory , collaboration , or tight - knit research community . As one scientist put it : “There are major clusters around who share inside but not with others . If you show you aren’t loyal to the group you’re in , you may never be trusted by anyone… . When you’re coming of age , you might be eliminated from future opportunities if you violate trust . ” A junior researcher offered an example from his personal experience that highlighted the sanctions that could accompany violations of an expectation of withholding : “In my former lab , I worked on a technology that has the potential to be widely used . . . It was my turn to present at a joint group meeting with five or six other endocrine labs . The PI [ principal investigator ] was afraid I’d maybe say something I shouldn’t . He asked to review the slides , he said okay , don’t talk too much about this , don’t give too much detail . At the meeting , of course , people wanted to ask me questions . A senior person asked me something that I thought it was completely appropriate for me to answer . But 16 my PI got very angry even at the meeting . Afterwards he told me to come to his office . We almost fought over this . It was just one incident , but it shows the priorities that some people have . ” Finally , scientists’ roles as professionals require them to stay within the law , and sometimes that necessitated withholding . As described by the plant genomics professor : “There are laws telling me that I can’t send certain wild species of rice to people without a permit . I have to say I’d love to share it with you but do you have a permit… my whole program could be shut down . ” As these illustrations indicate , academic scientists viewed their professional roles as accompanied by potentially conflicting expectations : to share information and to withhold it . Sometimes the decision was obvious , but sometimes it was not . As one scientist put it : “It’s often a judgment call . ” Another articulated the ambivalence that many expressed as follows : “Every time I get a request , I struggle with whether to just ship out whatever the person asks for , or tell them look , I want to help but I can’t give you this just yet , if you get back to me in a few months hopefully things will look different . I really want to be a good colleague , but there are good reasons to hold back sometimes . On the other hand , I know it’s frustrating to be on the other end when someone won’t let you have something you need . I’ve spent some sleepless nights over this . ” Communication of reference group norms . Beyond revealing professional role expectations that mandated information withholding rather than sharing , our field interviews also indicated that members of the life sciences community engaged in extensive collegial interactions , proving a mechanism for learning about sharing and withholding behaviors among members of salient reference groups . They typically participated in frequent conferences as well as consortia , retreats , and other formal and informal meetings , estimating that they attended between four and ten meetings per year of varying size , excluding advisory committees , peer review committees , study sections at the National Institutes of Health , and numerous other opportunities for interaction . Several 17 well - established scientists noted that they had speaking engagements every month and could attend conferences every two weeks if they wished . The laboratory - based research system also generated extensive networks of contacts that provide even newly minted assistant professors with the infrastructure to support extensive communication with others in the field . Tenure - track and tenured professors usually ran labs in which instructors , post - doctoral students , graduate students and undergraduates were employed alongside technicians and administrative staff . The training and socialization process undergone in the lab generated contacts for those working there , and their departures to their own labs left the heads of their former labs with ever - expanding networks of one - time lab members . Finally , contacts were also built and maintained through the extensive collaborations that are typical in the life sciences . Articles were rarely sole - authored and lists of co - authors could be long ; for example , one associate professor who described himself as moderately productive estimated that he had worked with about 10 primary collaborators and more than 30 co - authors in total in 15 years of publishing . The result of these wide - ranging connections and forums for communication was that scientists had numerous sources and opportunities to learn about incidents of information withholding by their professional colleagues . The social environments in which life scientists operated thus established fertile conditions for reference group influence . Quantitative Data Survey design and administration . To collect the quantitative data used in this study ( see Campbell et al . , 2002 ) , survey recipients were selected by identifying all departments and programs in genetics and human genetics in the 100 U . S . universities that received the most funding from the National Institutes of Health in 1998 , and randomly selecting up to three 18 additional life science departments and programs at the same universities from lists of clinical departments ( medicine , pathology , psychiatry , pediatrics , and surgery ) and non - clinical departments ( biochemistry , microbiology , pharmacology , physiology , and anatomy ) . iv All faculty members in each selected department and program were identified using the Association of American Medical Colleges faculty roster system , Peterson’s Graduate Programs in the Biological Sciences , school and individual websites , college bulletins , and direct contact with departments . In addition , all faculty members who were principal investigators on at least one research grant from the Human Genome Project ( HGP ) in the five years preceding the study were identified . The stratified sample of 3000 faculty members included all 1547 faculty members in genetics or human genetics departments and all 219 grantees of the HGP . The remainder of the sample was randomly selected so that half were from non - clinical departments ( n = 617 ) and half were from clinical departments ( n = 617 ) . To avoid including clinical department faculty who were not actively engaged in research , the sample excluded clinical faculty who had not published at least one article in the MEDLINE database in the three years preceding the study . The design of the survey was informed by two focus group discussions , 20 semi - structured interviews with biomedical researchers , and previous experience with similar surveys ( Blumenthal et al . , 1997 ; Campbell , Louis , Blumenthal , 1998 ) . The survey was pre - tested in nine cognitive interviews conducted by professional interviewers . Of the 3000 potential respondents , 107 were ineligible for the study because they were retired , out of the country , not located at the sampled institution , not faculty appointments , in the sample twice , or deceased . Of the remaining subjects , 1849 responded , yielding an overall response rate of 64 % . 19 Confidentiality concerns prevented identification of the institutions to which the respondents belonged in the survey , but the research design enabled the identification of non - respondents while ensuring respondent anonymity by asking the respondents to return a postcard separately from the survey , which itself had no unique identifying information . From the list of non - respondents , 256 were interviewed briefly by telephone to determine how they differed from respondents . Non - respondents were more likely to be full professors , less likely to be geneticists , and more likely to receive a high number of requests for information related to their research . Dependent Variables Information withholding . Following prior research on information withholding by life scientists , the dependent variable in this study focused on denials of requests for information related to published research ( see Campbell et al . , 2002 ) . The survey respondents were asked : “In the last three years , about how many times have you received requests from other academic scientists for information , data or materials concerning your published research ? ” Of the 1849 respondents , 1388 reported having received at least one request . Those who reported receiving at least one request were then asked : “In the last three years , how many times have you denied giving other academic scientists requested information , data , or materials related to your published research ? ” Respondents who reported that they had denied at least one request were considered to have engaged in information withholding . After restricting the sample to 1251 respondents who had received at least one request and were not missing data , the dependent variable was coded 1 if the respondent reported denying at least one request or 0 otherwise ( information withheld ) . v In additional analyses not reported here , we examined alternative dependent variables that captured whether a scientist denied requests for information related to unpublished rather 20 than published research ( 31 % and 11 % reported engaging in these behaviors , respectively ) , the number of denials of information related to both unpublished and published research , and substantial delays in responding to requests for information related to both unpublished and published research rather than denials ( 28 % and 17 % reported engaging in these behaviors , respectively ) . The results using these alternative dependent variables were similar and led to the same substantive conclusions as those reported below . Individual - level Variables To incorporate individual explanations for information withholding , we included three sets of individual - level variables in the analyses . First , we examined the individual experiences , activities , and attributes that prior research has found to significantly predict information withholding ( Campbell et al . , 2002 ) , using the same variable coding schema . Because scientists who receive more requests are more likely to deny requests , the survey respondents were asked : “In the last 3 years , about how many times have you received requests from academic scientists for information , data or materials concerning your published research ? ” A dichotomous variable was coded 0 indicating “low” if the respondent received 1 - 6 requests or 1 indicating “high” if the respondent received more than 6 requests ( requests received ) . vi To capture engagement in commercial activities , a dichotomous variable was coded 1 if the respondent answered “yes” to any of the following items concerning engagement in commercial activities , or 0 otherwise : “In the last 3 years has the research that you do at your university resulted in ( a ) patents applied for , ( b ) patents issued , ( c ) patents licensed , ( d ) a product under regulatory review , ( e ) a product on the market , and ( f ) a start - up company ? ” ( commercial activities ) . To capture whether the respondents had received research grants or contracts from companies whose work was related to their area of scientific expertise in the last three years , a dichotomous variables was coded 1 for 21 “yes” or 0 for “no” ( industry support ) . Additional variables were coded 1 if the respondent reported conducting research that involved living humans as research subjects in the last three years or 0 if not ( human subjects ) , and 1 if the respondent was male or 0 if female ( male ) . Second , we included additional individual - level variables that our field interviews as well as prior research suggested could motivate information withholding in the life sciences context . Scientists who had been refused themselves might be more likely to refuse others , since reciprocity is important in facilitating exchange ( Gouldner , 1957 ) . The survey asked : “In the last 3 years how many times have your requests to another academic scientist for additional information , data or materials concerning published research been denied ? ” The responses were coded 1 if one or more requests had been denied or 0 otherwise ( own requests denied ) . Mentors provide role models that socialize entrants to the profession and may guide later withholding behavior , given the influence of early career imprinting ( e . g . , Burton , Sorensen , and Beckman , 2002 ; Higgins , 2005 ) . We averaged the responses to two questions : “When you were in pre - doctoral / post - doctoral training , how willing were your lab directors / mentors to share their research information , data , or materials with other academic scientists ? ” ( scores of 1 “very” , 2 “somewhat” , 3 “not very” or 4 “not at all” ) ( mentoring ) . Since perceived competition is known to drive races for scientific priority and tempt scientists toward secrecy ( Merton , 1957 ; Cohen , Nelson , and Walsh , 2000 ) , scientists who view their fields as more competitive might be more motivated to refuse a request from other scientists . Perceptions of competition were captured by asking the survey respondents : “How would you characterize the overall level of competition for recognition or scientific priority in your specific area of research ? ” ( scores of 1 “not at all competitive” , 2 “not very competitive” , 3 “moderately competitive” or 4 “very competitive” ) ( perceived competition ) . 22 Third , we included individual - level variables that corresponded to the professional characteristics used to construct the reference group variables described below , to examine whether individual differences in these characteristics could account for any apparent effects of information withholding by reference group members . To establish their professional field within the life sciences , the survey respondents were asked to identify themselves as geneticists ( coded 1 ) or others ( coded 0 ) , where a geneticist was defined as a scientist “whose research involves any of the following : ( 1 ) identification of genomes , genes , or gene products in any organism ; ( 2 ) study of the structure , function , or regulation of genes or genomes ; ( 3 ) comparison of genes and genomes between species and populations” ( field ) . To establish their professional specialty , the respondents who identified themselves as geneticists were asked to indicate whether they specialized in working with amphibia , bacteria , drosophila , fungi , humans , other mammals , nematodes , plants , viruses , yeast , zebra fish , or other organisms , and a dichotomous variable for each specialty was coded 1 if the geneticist specialized in that organism or 0 otherwise ( e . g . , specialty - drosophila ) . To capture their professional status , a categorical variable capturing academic rank was coded 1 if the respondent was an instructor or lecturer , 2 if an assistant professor , 3 if an associate professor , or 4 if a full professor ( rank ) , experience was measured by the number of years spent conducting research in the U . S . ( experience ) , productivity was measured by the number of articles published in refereed journals in the last three years ( productivity ) , and research budget was measured by the total fiscal year budget in thousands of dollars for all grants , contracts and projects from all sources on which the scientist was the principal investigator ( budget ) . Reference Group Variables 23 We examined the influence of three nested levels of professional reference groups : field - based reference groups determined by genetics or non - genetics field within the life sciences , specialty - based reference groups determined by organism specialty within genetics , and status - based reference groups determined by rank , experience , productivity , or budget within specialty within genetics . While many other possible criteria for determining reference groups exist , these criteria were selected for analysis in the present study because ( a ) they are standard professional dimensions along which scientists commonly categorize themselves and others , ( b ) examining three nested levels of reference groups enabled us to test the influence of reference groups of increasing professional equivalence to the focal scientist , and ( c ) the potential to progress from lower to higher levels of rank , experience , productivity , and budget enabled us to test the influence of reference groups composed of status - superiors as well as status - equals . Identifying reference group members . The first step in constructing the reference group measures was to identify the members of each focal scientist’s professional reference groups . The scientist’s field - based reference group included all scientists coded 1 if the focal scientist was a geneticist or 0 if a non - geneticist . Within the field of genetics , the scientist’s specialty - based reference group included all geneticists coded 1 for the same specialty as the focal geneticist ( e . g . , geneticists specializing in drosophila if the focal scientist was a geneticist specializing in drosophila ) . For the status - based reference groups within a specialty , a scientist’s rank - based reference group included all geneticists in the same specialty of equal rank ( e . g . , geneticists specializing in drosophila of associate professor rank if the focal scientist was a geneticist specializing in drosophila of associate professor rank ) , while the experience - based , productivity - based , and budget - based reference groups included all geneticists in the same specialty who fell within moving windows set to 3 years above and below the focal scientist’s 24 experience , 3 articles more and less than the focal scientist’s productivity , and $ 150 , 000 above and below the focal scientist’s budget , respectively ( e . g . , geneticists specializing in drosophila who had between 3 years less and 3 years more experience than the focal scientist ) . vii Constructing reference group measures . The second step in constructing the reference group measures was to calculate the withholding behaviors in the group . To capture the extent to which the members of each professional reference group engaged in information withholding , we calculated the average number of times that the members of the group reported denying information to other academic scientists who requested it ( e . g . , status RG [ rank ] – WH level , referring to the level of withholding by geneticists specializing in the same organism of the same rank as the focal scientist ) . viii To capture the variance in withholding behaviors among the group members , we calculated the standard deviation in the number of times that the members of each group withheld information ( e . g . , status RG [ rank ] - WH variance , referring to the variance in withholding behaviors among geneticists specializing in the same organism of the same rank as the focal scientist ) . ix Matching reference groups to individuals . To construct the dataset for the analyses , we matched the reference group measures for each scientist to that scientist’s entry in the dataset . For example , a geneticist specializing in drosophila who held the rank of associate professor was matched to the level and variance of withholding behavior among all geneticists , geneticists specializing in drosophila , and geneticists specializing in drosophila who were also associate professors . This approach to analyzing the relationship between group behaviors and individual behaviors is consistent with a substantial body of research that supports the utility of using contextual effects of this type in studies of scientists ( e . g . , Louis et al . , 1989 ) as well as other populations ( see Burstein , 1980 ; Manski , 1993 for methodological reviews ) . x 25 Group - level Variables Controlling for Alternative Explanations Our theory and hypotheses focused on the influence of reference group withholding on individual withholding , but it is possible that observed associations between these variables could arise from unobserved factors that affected withholding by reference group members as well as withholding by an individual scientist , rather than by a causal relationship between them . We controlled for several such alternative explanations in our analyses . First , some groups might have been more commercialized than others , encouraging withholding by both reference group members and an individual scientist . For example , some genetics specialties might have offered greater opportunities and rewards for commercial activities than others , or senior faculty might have been more engaged in commercial activities than junior faculty who worked on the same organism . To control for this possibility , we included a group - level variable for the proportion of members in each reference group who were engaged in commercial activities in the models ( RG commercialization ) . Second , some groups might have been more competitive than others , creating perceptions of higher competitiveness and affecting withholding by both the group members and an individual scientist . We therefore controlled for the average level of perceived competition among the members of each reference group ( RG perceived competition ) . Third , to control for the possibility that members of some groups might have received more requests than others due to the nature of their work , again affecting withholding by both group members and an individual scientist , we included a measure of the average number of requests received by the members of each group ( RG requests received ) . Finally , since reference groups composed of more similar members might have been more influential because they were smaller rather than because they were more salient , we also included a group - level control for the number of members in the group in the models ( RG size ) . 26 Additional Exploratory Analyses In additional analyses , we explored the influence of attitudes to withholding among reference group members as well as their behaviors on a focal scientist’s likelihood of withholding . Along with the individual - level and group - level control variables described above , we included the focal scientist’s attitude to withholding as an individual - level control variable in these models using the scientist’s response to the following statement : “Academic scientists should freely share information , data , or materials with all academic scientists” ( scale of 1 “completely agree” , 2 “somewhat agree” , 3 “somewhat disagree” or 4 “completely disagree” ) . xi We examined the effects of withholding attitudes in a reference group by averaging the attitudes toward withholding reported by the members of that reference group to construct a measure where a higher score indicated more favorable attitudes to withholding . We also explored the influence of both attitudes and behaviors in reference groups composed of status - superiors as well as reference groups composed of status - equals , using the four professional status criteria . We identified reference groups of status - superiors as including geneticists specializing in the same organism of higher rank ( e . g . , geneticists specializing in drosophila of full professor rank if the focal scientist was a geneticist specializing in drosophila of associate professor rank ) or geneticists specializing in the same organism who fell above the experience , productivity , or budget windows for the focal scientist ( e . g . , geneticists specializing in drosophila who had 4 or more years of experience than a focal scientist specializing in drosophila ) . xii We then calculated the average level of withholding and attitudes to withholding among the members of each of these groups of status - superiors to examine their influence on the focal scientist’s likelihood of withholding . 27 RESULTS The 1859 life scientists in the sample reported receiving a total of 35 , 601 requests in the last three years from other academic scientists for information , data , or materials concerning their published research , an average of 19 . 7 requests per scientist . The proportion of scientists in the sample who reported denying at least one such request was 10 . 9 % , and those who withheld information denied an average of 9 . 7 % of requests received . This indicates that information sharing was the dominant response to a request from another scientist , but also that the level of information withholding was substantial , especially given the likelihood that incidents of withholding were underreported in the survey . While some level of information withholding is to be expected among scientists , the question for this study is whether systematic patterns in withholding behavior can be established based on individual or reference group characteristics . - - - - - insert Table 1 and Table 2 about here - - - - - Table 1 reports descriptive statistics and correlations . In the subsequent tables , logistic analysis is used to predict the likelihood that a scientist engaged in information withholding . The models in Table 2 show the effects of the individual - level variables on a scientist’s likelihood of information withholding . Model 1 shows that most of the individual - level variables that were found to predict information withholding in previous research ( Campbell et al . , 2002 ) were significant when considered simultaneously in multivariate models : life scientists were more likely to withhold information if they received more requests , engaged in commercial activities , used human subjects in their research , and were male , though industry support was not associated with withholding in this model or any others . Model 1 also shows that scientists were more likely to withhold if they had had requests of their own denied . The effects of perceived competition and mentoring were not significant in this model , though they were associated with 28 a higher likelihood of withholding in some subsequent models . Model 2 indicates that those who worked in the field of genetics were no more or less likely to withhold than non - geneticists . Model 3 limits the sample to geneticists only and reveals some differences across specialties within genetics : compared to geneticists who specialized in humans , those who specialized in mammals , viruses , or yeast were less likely to withhold . Model 4 shows that there were no significant main effects of individual rank , experience , productivity , or budget on the likelihood of information withholding among geneticists . xiii - - - - - insert Table 3 about here - - - - - Table 3 introduces the reference group variables and presents the results for H1 and H2 . These models include all the individual - level variables from Model 1 in Table 2 . Including controls for specialties where appropriate did not change the results , indicating that the findings reported below were not driven by one or two specialties . The models also include the group - level controls for reference group size , commercialization , competition , and requests received . None of these were significant and their inclusion did not change the results , indicating that alternative explanations based on these factors did not account for the findings . xiv The models then introduce the reference group variables based on professional field , specialty , and status . Model 1 in Table 3 shows that the level of withholding in reference groups composed of all others in same field ( genetics or other ) did not have significant effects on the probability of withholding by a member of that field ( geneticist or other ) . However , Model 2 indicates that the level of withholding in groups composed of other scientists with the same specialty within genetics did have significant effects , providing initial evidence to support H1 , which predicted that withholding in a reference group would be positively associated with the probability of withholding by a scientist beyond any effects attributable to individual - level variables . The fit of 29 Model 2 is also a significant improvement upon the fit of the same model with the individual - level variables only ( χ 2 = 194 . 85 ; df = 5 ; p < . 000 ) , further supporting H1 . Additionally , comparing Model 2 to Model 1 indicates that reference groups composed of more similar members ( i . e . same specialty within field ) had a more significant influence than reference groups composed of less similar members ( i . e . same field ) , providing initial evidence to support H2 . Models 3 - 6 in Table 3 examine the influence of withholding behavior in reference groups composed of geneticists with the same specialty who also shared the same rank , experience , productivity , or budget as the focal scientist ( i . e . status within specialty within field ) . These models provide further support for H1 , as there was a significant influence of reference group withholding behavior on a focal scientist’s withholding behavior for each of the four status - based reference groups examined . Each of these models also fits the data significantly better than the same models excluding the reference group variables ( average χ 2 = 16 . 65 ; df = 1 ; p < . 01 ) . Thus , there is strong evidence to support the claim that withholding behavior is driven by more than a scientist’s individual interests . Additionally , these models provide further support for H2 , since the influence of reference groups composed of members who are similar in status within specialty is more significant than the influence of more inclusive reference groups based on the same specialty , and the improvements in model fit relative to the same models excluding the reference group variables are correspondingly greater for Models 3 - 6 ( average χ 2 = 16 . 65 ; df = 1 ; p < . 01 ) than for Model 2 ( χ 2 = 5 . 27 ; df = 1 ; p < . 05 ) . - - - - - insert Table 4 about here - - - - - Table 4 reports the results for H3 , which predicted that variance in withholding behavior in the reference group moderates the influence of the level of withholding in a reference group on a scientist’s likelihood of withholding . To test this hypothesis , we examined interactions 30 between the ( mean - centered ) level and variance of withholding in the reference group . The findings support the hypothesis : for all four types of status - based reference groups , the positive influence of higher levels of withholding in the reference group on withholding by a focal scientist was lower when there was more variance around those higher levels of withholding . Model fit was significantly better than for the corresponding Models 3 - 6 in Table 3 ( average χ 2 = 11 . 66 ; df = 2 ; p < . 05 ) . Finally , Table 5 reports selected results for H4 , which predicted that individual interests moderate the influence of reference group withholding behavior on a scientist’s withholding behavior . To test this hypothesis , we examined interactions between the four status - based reference group variables and the three individual - level variables that significantly predicted withholding in Tables 3 and 4 : involvement in commercial activities , being male , and perceptions of competition . The results indicated no significant interactions between the reference group variables and involvement in commercial activities or being male ( not shown ) . However , the results unexpectedly revealed a significant negative interaction between the level of withholding among scientists of the same rank and the focal scientist’s perceptions of competition ( reported in Table 5 ) . Plotting this interaction effect in Figure 1 shows that the positive association between withholding by scientists of the same rank and withholding by a focal scientist was stronger when perceived competition was low than when it was high . Thus , rather than amplifying the withholding tendencies of those who were more individually inclined to withhold because they viewed their fields as highly competitive , withholding among scientists of similar rank particularly increased the likelihood of withholding among scientists who were individually less inclined to withhold because they were less concerned about competition . - - - - - insert Figure 1 about here - - - - - 31 In summary , the analyses revealed that withholding behavior in professional reference groups was associated with individual withholding beyond the effects of individual - level variables and controlling for alternative explanations captured by the group - level control variables . Overall , the results revealed strong support for H1 , H2 , and H3 , but no support for H4 . The additional exploratory analyses revealed some further interesting results . First , examining the attitudes of reference group members toward withholding rather than their withholding behaviors , we found no significant relationships between the attitudes of group members of the same rank , productivity , or budget , as well as specialty within genetics , and the likelihood of withholding by a focal scientist . More favorable attitudes to withholding among reference group members with the same experience , though , were significantly associated with a higher likelihood of withholding by a scientist ( b = 4 . 95 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Second , examining the influence of reference groups composed of status - superiors rather than status - equals revealed no significant relationships between the withholding behavior of scientists of higher rank , experience , productivity , or budget and the likelihood of withholding by a focal scientist . In contrast , we found that more favorable attitudes toward withholding among scientists of higher rank , experience , productivity , and budget were all significantly associated with a higher likelihood of withholding by the focal scientist ( b = 3 . 43 , p < 0 . 10 ; b = 2 . 11 , p < 0 . 01 ; b = 2 . 02 , p < 0 . 05 ; b = 1 . 82 , p < 0 . 05 respectively ) . These results reveal that withholding decisions were influenced by the attitudes of status - superiors as well as the behaviors of status - equals . DISCUSSION The main finding of this study is that scientists who withheld information requested by others did not simply reject professional norms based on their individual interests . Instead , they often looked to reference groups within the scientific profession to guide their behavior , 32 indicating that professional norms were still valued , but at a local rather than global level . Higher levels of information withholding among reference group members encouraged withholding by individual scientists , especially when those members were more similar to the scientist in professional field , specialty , and status , and when their own behaviors converged more . Unexpectedly , scientists whose individual interests favored withholding were not more likely to follow cues of withholding from their reference groups . On the contrary , there was some evidence to suggest that scientists who were not individually inclined to withhold information might have been corrupted by withholding in their reference groups , since scientists who viewed their fields as less competitive were more influenced by withholding among colleagues of the same rank than scientists who viewed their fields as highly competitive . The additional exploratory analyses further revealed that professional reference groups composed of higher status members also exerted influence on scientists , but mostly through their attitudes to withholding rather than their withholding behaviors . These results indicate that scientists look beyond status - equals to reference groups of status - superiors for normative guidance . The influence of status - superiors can be explained by aspirations , as these are reference groups to which the scientists may well hope to belong in the future ( Merton , 1968 ; Siegel and Siegel , 1971 ) . “Anticipatory socialization” helps increase their chances of joining the higher status group and ease their adjustment once they join ( Merton and Rossi , 1950 : 58 ) . However , the injunctive norms of a group , which refer to what members believe ought to be done , often differ from its descriptive norms , which refer to what they actually do ( Cialdini , Reno , and Kallgren , 1990 , Reno , Cialdini , and Kallgren , 1993 ) – and aspiring group members recognize that status - superiors usually expect them to “do as we say , not as we do . ” It is also easier to find out about the withholding attitudes of status - superiors than their withholding 33 behaviors , as they are more likely to volunteer the former than the latter when asked . In contrast , the behaviors of status - equals are more likely to be visible and draw attention , cause offense , generate gossip , or trigger competitive responses , rendering the withholding behaviors of status - equals more influential than their attitudes . Limitations Overall , these results lend strong support to the argument that scientists look beyond their individual interests to social cues from reference groups when deciding whether to withhold or share information requested by others . There are some limitations of the empirical findings , however , arising from the research design ( see also Campbell , 2002 : 479 - 480 ) . First , information withholding behavior was self - reported and survey respondents are often reluctant to report engaging in socially undesirable behavior ( Fowler , 1993 ) . Given this , 10 . 9 % of scientists reporting engaging in withholding and refusing an average of 9 . 7 % of requests each seems consequential , but these likely constitute lower bound estimates of the actual levels of withholding behavior . Also , the actual levels may have been even higher because the 256 non - respondents may have been more likely to engage in withholding than respondents since they were more likely to have received a high number of requests and this was a significant predictor of withholding . These measurement issues make the analyses presented here more conservative tests of our hypotheses , however , as any group - level as well as individual - level influences on withholding should be harder to detect . Another limitation that should be addressed in future research is that the anonymity of the survey respondents prevented the isolation of sources of normative influence that may or may not overlap with reference groups . There is evidence that both spatial proximity ( institutions ) and social proximity ( co - author networks ) to others involved in commercial science affects the 34 likelihood that an academic scientist becomes an entrepreneur ( Stuart and Ding , 2006 ; Bercovitz and Feldman , 2007 ) . These sources of influence could be important for other outcomes too , like information withholding . Because data on the institutional affiliations of the scientists in this study were not available , it was not possible to examine the effects of shared environments or particular university characteristics . The interpersonal networks of the scientists were not known either , preventing exploration of the effects of overall connectedness or strong versus weak ties . The data also did not reveal who asked for the information , making it impossible to investigate whether status - inferiors were more likely to respond to requests from status - superiors , for example , or whether scientists were more responsive to requests from other scientists they knew . These limitations granted , however , focusing on reference groups again provides a conservative test of the effects of local norms because such groups provide a relatively diffuse source of influence compared to more immediate sources such as work groups , network contacts , or institutional affiliations , whose effects might be expected to be more substantial . Our conceptualization of reference groups was an etic ( observer - defined ) rather than an emic ( participant - defined ) one ( Knorr - Cetina , 1982 ) : we identified structurally equivalent or superior sets of individuals to determine the boundary of a reference group , and tested our hypotheses by examining reference groups defined across multiple criteria with varying levels of similarity to the focal scientist to ensure the results were robust across reference groups rather than artifacts of the selection of a particular group . An alternative approach would be to rely on self - reports identifying other scientists whom the focal scientist knows , interacts with , or looks to for guidance , to ascertain a set of reference individuals . As Lawrence ( 2006 ) showed , however , in addition to a likely lack of common characteristics among these individuals , that approach has other drawbacks , including the difficulty of 35 ensuring robustness across reference group types as well as the problem that essentially arbitrary limitations on the numbers of group members identified may distort the results . Furthermore , the etic approach again simply establishes a harder test for our hypotheses than an emic approach that uses self - identified reference groups . Still , confirming the importance of reference group influence using an emic approach would be valuable . Last , there is considerable room for manoeuver around exactly what scientists might agree to share or choose to withhold in response to a specific request that was not captured in our data . Hilgartner and Brandt - Rauf ( 1994 ) suggest that scientific information is embedded in evolving data streams composed of heterogeneous collections of entities ; there is a chain of products ranging from raw materials at the upstream end to increasingly refined materials downstream , and some portions of a data stream may be well - established whereas others may be of uncertain reliability . The implication is that decisions about providing access to different portions of the data stream entail different strategic and practical considerations for scientists , and the issue of information sharing becomes a question of what exactly to disseminate , to whom , by what means , and when . This reality echoes the situation in many organizational settings , and calls for additional investigation into the possibility that different norms and counter - norms might govern different forms of information sharing within specific empirical contexts . Theoretical and Managerial Implications The findings of this study provide support for the argument that scientists who face sociological ambivalence arising from contradictory professional role expectations look to their reference groups for cues to guide their behavior . Existing theories of professions have long recognized that conflicting expectations create tension at the boundaries of professions , where 36 pressures are often imposed by encroaching occupations or by heteronomous administrative structures that subordinate professional work to non - professional bureaucratic goals ( e . g . , Goode , 1957 ; Blau and Scott , 1962 ; Scott , 1965 ; Abbott , 1988 ; Barley and Tolbert , 1991 ; Wallace , 1995 ; Scott et al . , 2000 ) . xv Yet conflicting expectations exist and create tensions not only at the boundaries of professions but also within them , because many professional roles impose contradictory demands . Scientists not only face conflicting expectations of information sharing and withholding but they must be also be both passionate and intellectually neutral about their research ( Mitroff , 1974 ) , as well as simultaneously eager and reticent about claiming originality in their work ( Merton , 1963 ) . Beyond the scientific profession , physicians are expected to be compassionate but emotionally detached from their patients ( Merton and Barber , 1963 ) , while accountants are expected to maintain good client relations yet resist pressures to report their finances in a favorable light ( Sorensen and Sorensen , 1974 ) . The pervasiveness of competing role expectations within professions renders efforts to resolve sociological ambivalence central to understanding professional conduct . The reference group theory of professional conduct developed here contends that because conflicting role expectations often exist within professions , professional conduct is guided not simply by whether the collective interests of the profession win out over the individual interests of its members , or vice versa , but by the behaviors and attitudes of subgroups embedded inside the profession . Even where professional norms are highly institutionalized , as is the dominant norm of information sharing in the scientific community , there is often variation in the enactment of these norms within the profession . Local subcultures can encourage and explain behavior that is not satisfactorily explained by either the institutions of the profession or individual interests . This approach to understanding the professional conduct of scientists aims to avoid the extremes 37 of an over - socialized , structure - centered perspective where norms are viewed as iron - cage constraints on action ( cf . Merton 1973 [ 1942 ] ; DiMaggio and Powell , 1983 ) and an under - socialized , actor - centered perspective where norms are viewed as mere rhetorical resources that are useful in justifying strategic behavior ( cf . Mulkay , 1969 ; Zabusky and Barley , 1997 ; Sismondo , 2004 ) . Instead , professional norms are viewed as locally embodied and enacted , consistent with ethnographic studies that have drawn attention the everyday processes through which small groups adapt global professional norms such as organized skepticism to serve unexpected functions in the daily work of scientific laboratories ( e . g . , Owen - Smith , 2001 ) . In drawing attention to the enactment of professional norms at the meso - level of reference groups , this approach also complements and extends recent macro - level developments in organizational theory that argue that “institutional contradictions” created by the coexistence of conflicting institutional logics generate inherent tensions in institutional arrangements ( Friedland and Alford , 1991 ; Seo and Creed , 2002 ; Fiss and Zajac , 2004 ) , such as the tension between professional and market logics in hospitals ( Scott et al . , 2000 ) or trustee and performance logics in the mutual fund industry ( Lounsbury , 2007 ) . By focusing on competing role expectations that regulate specific behaviors rather than competing logics that govern cultural belief systems , this study brings the concept of institutional contradictions down to the everyday level of professionals going about their work . The results of the study have implications for organizations as well as professions . In response to recent calls for greater insight into the mechanisms of organizational learning ( e . g . , Argote and Ophir , 2002 ; Ingram , 2002 ) , the findings illuminate the issues of culture that clearly contribute to the problems of knowledge sharing in organizational settings . If an organization has a “culture of hoarding” ( Boisot , 1998 ) in which secrecy is the norm , withholding is likely to be 38 pervasive whatever structural barriers to sharing are eliminated . Even in an organization with a strong firm - wide culture committed to knowledge sharing and incentives in place to support it , local counter - cultures of withholding in particular offices or communities of practice can be very influential for their members ( cf . Martin and Siehl , 1983 ) . These implications suggest that the mechanisms that explain organizational learning must include not only the micro - level individual characteristics and macro - level structural conditions that inhibit knowledge sharing , but also the meso - level norms of the groups in which individuals , teams , and organizations are embedded . Further , while theories of knowledge sharing and information exchange in organizations usually view learning from colleagues as functional for the organization , these theories might usefully be extended to account for the dysfunctional learning that sometimes occurs among colleagues in organizational settings . Individual behaviors that subvert the organization’s collective interests and seem to indicate weak organizational identity could be due , in contrast , to dysfunctional learning that occurs where organizational identity is strong but organizational norms are unclear or conflicting . For example , the corporate accounting scandals of recent years are typically attributed to the norm - breaking behaviors of a handful of rogue individuals , at least officially . The reference group theory of professional conduct developed here suggests an alternative explanation based on dysfunctional learning : in high pressure corporate environments , a counter - norm of “winning at any cost” may emerge in conflict with the dominant norm of “winning fairly” . Organization members might come to view either standard as consistent with the collective interests of the organization , and hence appropriate to their roles as committed organizational members . Dysfunctional learning may thus occur as organization members look to cues from those in their teams or units to guide their own behavior in the face of sociological ambivalence . 39 In conclusion , while the institutional conditions are in place to encourage members of the scientific profession to share their information with others , as in organizational settings that establish and nurture a culture of sharing , individuals sometimes withhold information instead . Among scientists , information withholding is encouraged not only by individual interests but also by reference group norms that favor withholding , indicating that local professional norms are valued even where global norms seem to be rejected . By helping scientists to resolve ambivalence arising from contradictory role expectations , local norms and counter - norms within the scientific profession thus exert powerful influences over everyday professional conduct . 40 REFERENCES Abbott , A . 1988 . The System of Professions : An Essay on the Division of Expert Labor . Chicago : The University Chicago Press . of Argote , L . , and R . Ophir 2002 . “Intraorganizational learning . ” In J . A . C . Baum , ( ed . ) , Companion to Organizations : 181 - 207 . Malden , MA : Blackwell . Argyres , N . S . and J . P . Liebeskind 1998 . “Privatizing the intellectual commons : Universities and the commercialization of biotechnology . ” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization , 35 : 427 - 454 . Barley , S . R . and P . S . Tolbert 1991 . “Introduction : At the intersection of organizations and occupations . ” Research in the Sociology of Organizations , 8 : 1 - 13 . Bazerman , M . H . , E . A . Mannix , and L . L . Thompson 1988 . “Groups as mixed - motive negotiations . ” In E . J . Lawler ( ed . ) , Advances in Group Processes , 5 : 195 - 216 . Bercovitz , J . , and M . Feldman 2007 . “Academic entrepreneurs : Who participates and why ? ” In F . Malerba and S . Brusoni ( ed . ) , Perspectives on Innovation . Cambridge University Press . Berlant , J . L . 1975 . Profession and Monopoly , Berkeley : University of California Press . Blau , P . , and R . Scott 1962 . Formal organizations : A comparative approach . Chandler Pub . Co . : San Francisco . Blau , P . M . 1964 . Exchange and Power in Social Life . New York : Wiley . Blumenthal , D . , E . G . Campbell , M . S . Anderson , N . Causino , and K . S . Louis 1997 . “Withholding research results in academic life science : Evidence from a national survey of faculty . ” Journal of the American Medical Association , 277 : 1224 - 1228 . 41 Blumenthal , D . , E . G . Campbell , M . Gokhale , R . Yucel , B . Clarridge , S . Hilgartner , N . Holtzman , and T . G . Ferris 2006 . “Data Withholding in Genetics and the Other Life Sciences : Prevalences and Predictors . ” Academic Medicine , 81 : 137 - 145 . Boisot , M . 1998 , Knowledge Assets , Securing competitive advantage in the information economy . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Bok , S . 1982 . Secrets : On the Ethics of Concealment and Revelation . New York : Pantheon Books . Bourdieu , P . 1975 . “The specificity of the scientific field and the social conditions of the progress of reason . ” Social Science Information 14 : 19 - 47 . Brewer , M . B . , and W . Gardner 1996 . “Who is this “we” ? : Levels of collective identity and self - representations . ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 71 : 83 - 93 . Brewer , M . B . , and R . M . Kramer . 1986 . “Choice behavior in social dilemmas : Effects of social identity , group size , and decision framing . ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 50 : 543 - 549 . Brickson , S . 2000 . “The impact of identity orientation on individual and organizational outcomes in demographically diverse settings . ” Academy of Management Review , 25 : 82 - 101 . Brown , J . S . , and P . Duguid 1991 . “Organizational learning and communities - of - practice : Toward a unified view of working , learning , and innovating . ” Organization Science 2 : 40 - 57 . Burstein , L . 1980 . “The analysis of multilevel data in educational research and evaluation . ” In D . C . Berliner ( ed . ) , Review of Educational Research , 8 : 158 - 233 . Washington , DC : American Educational Research Association . Burt , R . , and M . Knez 42 1996 . Trust and third - party gossip . In R . M . Kramer and T . R . Tyler ( ed . ) , Trust in Organizations : Frontiers of Theory and Research : 68 - 89 . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Burton , M . D . , J . B . Sorensen , and C . M . Beckman . 2002 . “Coming from Good Stock : Career Histories and New Venture Formation” In M . Lounsbury and M . J . Ventresca ( ed . ) Research in the Sociology of Organizations . 19 : 229 - 262 . Oxford , U . K . : Elsevier ( JAI Press ) . Campbell , E . G . , K . S . Louis , D . Blumenthal . 1998 . “Looking a gift horse in the mouth : corporate gifts that support life sciences research . ” Journal of American Medical Association , 279 : 995 - 999 . Campbell , E . G . , B . R . Clarridge , M . Gokhale , L . Birenbaum , S . Hilgartner , N . A . Holtzman , and D . Blumenthal 2002 . “Data withholding in academic genetics : Evidence from a national survey . ” Journal of American Medical Association , 287 : 473 - 480 . Chatman , J . , J . Polzer , S . Barsade , and M . Neale 1998 . “Being different yet feeling similar : The influence of demographic composition and organizational culture on work processes and outcomes . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 43 : 749 - 780 . Cialdini , R . B . , R . R . Reno , and C . A . Kallgren 1990 . “A focus theory of normative conduct : Recycling the concept of norms to reduce littering in public places . ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 58 : 1015 - 1026 . Cohen , W . M . , R . R . Nelson , and J . P . Walsh 2000 . “Protecting their intellectual assets : Appropriability conditions and why U . S . manufacturing firms patent ( or not ) . ” Working Paper 7552 . Cambridge , MA : National Bureau of Economic Research . Connolly , T . , and B . K . Thorn 1991 . “Discretionary data bases : Theory , data , and implications . ” In J . Fulk and C . Steinfield ( ed . ) , Organizations and communication technology : 219 - 233 . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Cook - Deegan , R . M . , and S . J . McCormack 2001 . “Intellectual property : Patents , secrecy , and DNA . ” Science , 293 : 217 . DiMaggio , P . J . , and W . W . Powell 43 1983 . “The iron cage revisited : Institutional isomorphism and collective rationality in organizational fields . ” American Sociological Review , 48 : 147 - 160 . Edmondson , A . C . 1996 . “Learning from mistakes is easier said than done : Group and organizational influences on the detection and correction of human error . ” Journal of Applied Behavioral Science , 32 : 5 - 28 . Etzkowitz , H . 1989 . “Entrepreneurial science in the academy : A case of the transformation of norms . ” Social Problems , 36 : 14 - 29 . Feldman , S . P . 1988 . “Secrecy , information , and politics : an essay on organizational decision making . ” Human Relations 41 : 73 – 90 . Festinger , L . 1954 . “A theory of social comparison processes . ” Human Relations , 7 : 117 - 140 . Fiss , P . C . , and E . J . Zajac 2004 . “The diffusion of ideas over contested terrain : The ( non ) adoption of a shareholder value orientation among German firms . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 49 : 501 - 534 . Flynn , F . 2005 . “Identity orientations and forms of social exchange in organizations . ” Academy of Management Review , 30 : 737 - 750 . Fowler , F . J . 1993 . Survey Research Methods . Newbury Park , CA : Sage Publications . Freidson , E . 1994 . Professionalism Reborn : Theory , Prophecy and Policy . Chicago : University of Chicago . Freidson , E . 2001 . Professionalism : The Third Logic . Chicago : University of Chicago . Friedland , R . , and R . R . Alford 1991 . “Bring society back in : Symbols , practices , and institutional contradictions . ” In W . W . Powell and P . J . DiMaggio ( ed . ) , The New Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis : 232 - 263 . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . 44 Goode , W . J . 1957 . “Community within a community : The professions . ” American Sociological Review , 22 : 194 - 200 . Gouldner , A . W . 1957 . “Cosmopolitans and locals : Toward an analysis of latent social roles - I . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 2 : 281 - 306 Grant , R . M . 1996 . “Prospering in dynamically competitive environments : Organizational capability as knowledge integration . ” Organization Science , 7 : 375 - 387 . Hagstrom , W . O . 1965 . The Academic Community . New York : Basic Books . Hansen , M . T . 1999 . “The search - transfer problem : The role of weak ties in sharing knowledge across organization subunits . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 44 : 82 - 111 . Hansen , M . T . , M . L . Mors , B . Løvås 2005 . “Knowledge sharing in organizations : Multiple networks , multiple phases . ” Academy of Management Journal 48 : 776 - 793 . Haveman , H . A . 1993 . “Follow the leader : Mimetic isomorphism and entry into new markets . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 38 : 593 - 627 . Higgins , M . C . 2005 . Career Imprints : Creating Leaders Across an Industry . San Francisco , Calif . : Jossey - Bass . Hilgartner , S . , and S . I . Brandt - Rauf 1994 . “Data access , ownership , and control : toward empirical studies of access practices . ” Knowledge : Creation , Diffusion , Utilization 15 : 355 - 72 . Ibarra , H . 1992 . “Homophily and differential returns : Sex differences in network structure and access in an advertising firm . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 37 : 422 - 447 . Ingram , P . 45 2002 . “Interorganizational learning . ” In J . A . C . Baum ( ed . ) , Companion to Organizations . 642 - 663 . New York : Blackwell . Jackson , J . 1965 . “Social stratification , social norms , and roles . ” In I . D . Steiner and M . Fishbein ( eds . ) , Current studies in social psychology : 301 - 309 . New York : Holt , Rinhart , & Winston . Jansen , E . and M . Glinow 1985 . “Ethical ambivalence and organizational reward systems . ” Academy of Management Review , 10 : 814 - 822 . Katz , D . , and R . L . Kahn 1966 . The Social Psychology of Organizations , New York : John Wiley & Sons New York . Knorr - Cetina , K . 1982 . “Scientific communities or transepistemic arenas of research ? A critique of quasi - economic models of science . ” Social Studies of Science 12 : 101 - 30 . Kidwell , R . E . , and N . Bennett 1993 . “Employee propensity to withhold effort : a conceptual model to intersect three avenues of research . ” Academy of Management Review 18 : 429 - 456 . Kogut , B . , and U . Zander 1996 . “What firms do ? Coordination , identity , and learning . ” Organization Science . 7 : 502 - 518 . Kean , T . H . , and L . H . Hamilton 2004 . The 9 / 11 Commission Report : Final Report of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the United States of America . W . W . Norton & Company . Kramer , R . M . , and M . B . Brewer 1984 . “Effects of group identity on resource utilization in a simulated commons dilemma . ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 46 , 1044 - 1057 . Larsson , R . , L . Bengtsson , K . Henriksson , and J . Sparks 1998 . “The interorganizational learning dilemma : Collective knowledge development in strategic alliances . ” Organization Science , 9 : 285 - 305 . Latane , B . , K . Williams , and S . Harkins 46 1979 . “Many hands make light the work : the causes and consequences of social loafing . ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 37 : 822 - 832 . Latour , B . and S . Woolgar 1979 . Laboratory Life : The Social Construction of Scientific Facts . London : Sage . Lawler , E . J . , R . S . Thye , and J . Yoon 2000 . “Emotion and group cohesion in productive exchange . ” American Journal of Sociology 106 : 616 - 57 . Lawrence , B . S . 2006 . “Organizational reference groups : A missing perspective on social context . ” Organization Science 17 : 80 - 100 . Lazarsfeld , P . F . , and R . K . Merton 1954 . “Friendship as a social process : A substantive and methodological analysis . ” In M . Berger , T . Abel , and C . H . Page ( eds . ) , Freedom and Control in Modern Society : 18 - 66 . New York : Van Nostrand . Leicht , K . T . , and M . L . Fennell 1997 . “The changing organizational context of professional work . ” Annual Review of Sociology 23 : 215 - 231 . Leicht , K . T . , and M . L . Fennell 2001 . Professional Work : A Sociological Approach . Malden , MA : Blackwell Publishing . Levin , D . Z . , and R . Cross 2004 . “The strength of weak ties you can trust : The mediating role of trust in effective knowledge transfer . ” Management Science , 50 ( 11 ) : 1477 - 1490 . Louis , K . S . , D . Blumenthal , M . E . Gluck , and M . A . Stoto 1989 . “Entrepreneurs in Academe : An exploration of behaviors among life scientists . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 34 : 110 - 131 . Louis , K . S . , L . M . Jones , M . S . Anderson , D . Blumenthal , and E . G . Campbell 2001 . “Entrepreneurship , secrecy , and productivity : A comparison of clinical and non - clinical life sciences faculty . ” Journal of Technology Transfer , 26 : 233 - 245 . Lounsbury , M . 47 2007 . “A tale of two cities : Competing logics and practice variation in the professionalizing of mutual funds . ” Academy of Management Journal 50 : 289 - 307 . Manski , C . F . 1993 . “Identification of endogenous social effects : The reflection problem . ” Review of Economic Studies , 60 : 531 - 542 . Marsden , P . V . , and N . E . Friedkin 1993 . “Network studies of social influence . ” Sociological Methods and Research , 22 : 127 - 151 . Martin , J . , and C . Siehl 1983 . “Organizational culture and counterculture : An uneasy symbiosis . ” Organizational Dynamics , 12 : 52 - 64 . McCain , K . W . 1991 . “Communication , competition , and secrecy : The production and dissemination of research - related information in genetics . ” Science , Technology , and Human Values , 16 : 491 - 516 . Merton , R . K . 1957 . “Priorities in scientific discovery : A chapter in the sociology of science . ” American Sociological Review , 22 : 635 - 659 . Merton , R . K . 1963 . “The Ambivalence of Scientists . ” Bulletin of the Johns Hopkins Hospital 112 : 77 - 97 . Merton , R . K . 1968 . “Continuities in the theory of reference groups and social structure . ” In R . K . Merton ( eds . ) , Social Theory and Social Structure : 335 - 440 . New York : Free Press . Merton , R . K . 1973 ( 1942 ) . “The normative structure of science . ” In R . K . Merton ( eds . ) , The Sociology of Science : Theoretical and Empirical Investigations : 267 - 278 . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Merton , R . K . 1976 . Sociological Ambivalence . New York : The Free Press . Merton , R . K . and A . S . Rossi 1950 . “Contributions to the Theory of Reference Group Behavior . ” In R . K . Merton and P . F . Lazarsfeld ( eds . ) , Continuities in Social Research . New York : The Free Press , 40 - 105 . Merton . R . K . , G . George , and P . L . Kendall 48 1957 . The Student - Physician : Introductory Studies in the Sociology of Medical Education . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Merton . R . K . and E . Barber 1963 . “Sociological ambivalence . ” In E . A . Tiryakian ( eds . ) , Sociological Theory , Values , and Socio - cultural Change : 91 - 120 . New York : The Free Press . Meyer , J . W . , and B . Rowan 1977 . “Institutionalized organizations : Formal structure as myth and ceremony . ” American Journal of Sociology , 83 : 340 - 363 . Mills , E . W . 1983 “Sociological ambivalence and social order : The constructive uses of normative dissonance . ” Sociology and Social Research , 67 : 279 - 287 Mitroff , I . 1974 . “Norms and counter - norms in a select group of the Apollo moon scientists : A case study of the ambivalence of scientists . ” American Sociological Review , 39 : 579 - 595 . Mulkay , M . J . 1969 . “Some aspects of cultural growth in the sciences . ” Social Research , 36 : 22 - 52 . Mulkay , M . J . , and A . T . Williams 1971 . “A sociological study of a physics department . ” British Journal of Sociology 22 : 68 - 82 . Nelkin , D . 1984 . Science as Intellectual Property : Who Controls Research ? New York : MacMillan . Owen - Smith , J . 2001 . “Managing laboratory work through skepticism : Processes of evaluation and control . ” American Sociological Review , 66 : 427 - 452 . Parsons , T . 1951 . The Social System . Glencoe , IL : Free Press . Pavalko , R . M . 1988 . Sociology of Occupations and Professions ( 2nd ed ) . Itasca , IL : Peacock . Perlow , L . A . 49 1999 . “The time famine : Toward a sociology of work time . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 44 : 57 - 81 . Polanyi , M . 1951 . The Logic of Liberty : Reflections and Rejoinders . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Polanyi , M . 1962 . Personal Knowledge : Toward a Post - Critical Philosophy . New York , NY : Harper Torch books . Pratt , M . G . 2000 . “The good , the bad , and the ambivalent : Managing identification among Amway distributors . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 45 : 456 - 493 . Pratt , M . G . and C . K . Barnett 1997 . “Emotions and unlearning in Amway recruiting techniques . ” Management Learning , 28 : 65 - 88 . Quigley , N . R . , P . E . Tesluk , E . A . Locke , and K . M . Bartol 2007 . “A multilevel investigation of the motivational mechanisms underlying knowledge sharing and performance . ” Organization Science , 18 : 71 - 88 . Reagans , R . , and B . McEvily 2003 . “Network structure and knowledge transfer : The effects of cohesion and range . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 48 : 240 - 267 . Reno , R . R . , R . B . Cialdini , and C . A . Kallgren 1993 . “The transsituational influence of social norms . ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 64 , 104 - 112 . Rosenberg , S . A . 1996 . “Secrecy in medical research . ” New England Journal of Medicine , 334 : 392 - 394 . Schnake , M . E . 1991 . “Equity in efforts : the sucker effect in co - acting groups . ” Journal of Management 17 : 41 - 56 . Scott , W . R . 1965 . “Reactions to supervision in a heteronomous professional organization . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 10 : 65 - 81 . Scott , W . R , M . Ruef , P . Mendel , and C . A . Caronna 50 2000 . Institutional Change and Healthcare Organizations : From Professional Dominance to Managed Care . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Seo , M . G . , and W . E . D . Creed 2002 . “Institutional contradictions , praxis , and institutional change : A dialectical perspective . ” Academy of Management Review . 27 : 222 - 248 . Shapiro , D . L . , S . A . Furst , G . M . Spreitzer , and M . A . Von Glinow 2002 . “Transnational teams in the electronic age : are team identity and high performance at risk ? ” Journal of Organizational Behavior 23 : 455 - 467 . Siegel , A . E . , and S . Siegel 1971 . “Reference groups , membership groups , and attitude change . ” In A . Doob and D . T . Regan ( eds . ) , Readings in Experimental Social Psychology : 391 - 398 . New York : Appleton - Century - Crofts . Singer , E . 1981 . “Reference groups and social evaluation . ” In M . Rosenberg and R . H . Turner ( eds . ) , Social Psychology and Sociological Perspectives : 66 - 93 . New Brunswick , NH : Transaction . Sismondo , S . 2004 . An Introduction to Science and Technology Studies . Malden , MA : Blackwell Publishing . Smelser , N . J . 1998 . “The rational and the ambivalent in the social sciences : 1997 Presidential Address . ” American Sociological Review , 63 : 1 - 16 . Sorensen , J . B . 2002 . “The use and misuse of the coefficient of variation in organizational demography research . ” Sociological Methods and Research , 30 : 475 - 491 . Sorensen , J . E . , and T . L . Sorensen 1974 . “The conflict of professionals in bureaucratic organizations . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 19 : 98 - 106 . Sproull , L . , and S . Kiesler 1991 . Connections . Cambridge , MIT Press . Storer , N . W . 1966 . The Social System of Science . New York : Holt , Rinehart and Winston . 51 Strang , D . , and J . W . Meyer 1993 . “Institutional conditions for diffusion . ” Theory and Society , 22 : 487 - 511 . Strang , D . , and M . W . Macy 2001 . “In search of excellence : Fads , success stories , and adaptive emulation . ” American Journal of Sociology 107 : 147 - 182 . Stuart , T . E . , and W . W . Ding 2006 . “When do scientists become entrepreneurs ? The social structural antecedents of commercial activity in the academic life sciences . ” American Journal of Sociology , 112 : 97 - 144 . Sutton , J . R . 1984 . “Organizational autonomy and professional norms in science : A case study of the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory . ” Social Studies of Science , 14 : 197 - 224 . Vaughan , D . 1996 . The Challenger Launch Decision : Risky Technology , Culture , and Deviance at NASA . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Vaughan , D . 2006 . “NASA revisited : Theory , analogy , and public sociology . ” American Journal of Sociology 112 : 353 - 393 . Wallace , J . E . 1995 . “Organizational and professional commitment in professional and nonprofessional organizations . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 40 : 228 - 255 . Walsh , J . P . , and W . Hong 2003 . “Secrecy is increasing in step with competition . ” Nature , 422 : 801 - 802 . Weldon , E . , and G . M . Gargano 1985 . “Cognitive effort in additive task groups : the effects of shared responsibility on the quality of multi - attribute judgments . ” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 36 : 348 - 361 . Wilensky , H . L . 1964 . “The professionalization of everyone ? ” American Journal of Sociology , 70 : 137 - 158 . Zabusky , S . E . , and S . R . Barley 52 1997 . “You can’t be a stone if you’re cement : Reevaluating the emic identities of scientists in organizations . ” Research in Organizational Behavior , 19 : 361 - 404 . 53 Table 1 . Descriptive Statistics and Correlations Variable Mean S . D . Min Max 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1 Information withheld 0 . 11 0 . 31 0 1 2 No . of requests received 0 . 55 0 . 50 0 1 0 . 09 3 Commercial activities 0 . 33 0 . 47 0 1 0 . 11 0 . 13 4 Industry support 0 . 67 0 . 47 0 1 0 . 06 0 . 02 0 . 18 5 Human subjects 0 . 33 0 . 47 0 1 0 . 06 - 0 . 15 0 . 06 0 . 10 6 Male 0 . 75 0 . 43 0 1 0 . 05 0 . 03 0 . 10 - 0 . 02 - 0 . 04 7 Own requests denied 0 . 37 0 . 48 0 1 0 . 09 0 . 13 0 . 11 0 . 09 - 0 . 06 - 0 . 01 8 Competition 3 . 59 0 . 57 1 4 0 . 06 0 . 07 0 . 12 0 . 10 - 0 . 04 0 . 03 0 . 15 9 Mentoring 1 . 60 0 . 62 1 4 0 . 07 - 0 . 07 0 . 00 0 . 01 0 . 05 - 0 . 06 0 . 08 0 . 04 10 Rank 2 . 26 0 . 83 0 3 - 0 . 02 0 . 08 0 . 10 0 . 08 0 . 03 0 . 19 - 0 . 03 - 0 . 01 11 Experience 21 . 93 9 . 61 0 53 - 0 . 02 0 . 06 0 . 03 0 . 01 - 0 . 11 0 . 18 - 0 . 09 - 0 . 02 12 Productivity 10 . 66 9 . 37 0 80 0 . 07 0 . 18 0 . 29 0 . 15 0 . 16 0 . 11 0 . 11 0 . 13 13 Budget 0 . 38 1 . 39 0 40 . 00 0 . 03 0 . 09 0 . 15 0 . 02 0 . 05 - 0 . 02 0 . 03 0 . 06 14 Specialty RG 0 . 28 0 . 14 0 0 . 43 0 . 11 - 0 . 15 0 . 05 0 . 08 0 . 33 - 0 . 02 - 0 . 03 0 . 00 15 Status RG [ rank ] - level 0 . 28 0 . 79 0 25 0 . 14 0 . 01 0 . 06 0 . 03 0 . 07 0 . 03 - 0 . 04 0 . 03 16 Status RG [ experience ] - level 0 . 30 0 . 18 0 0 . 8 0 . 15 - 0 . 10 0 . 01 0 . 09 0 . 25 - 0 . 04 0 . 01 - 0 . 02 17 Status RG [ productivity ] - level 0 . 28 0 . 31 0 2 0 . 22 0 . 00 0 . 07 0 . 01 0 . 17 - 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 01 18 Status RG [ budget ] - level 0 . 29 0 . 36 0 6 0 . 22 0 . 03 0 . 12 0 . 08 0 . 19 0 . 04 - 0 . 03 0 . 03 19 Status RG [ rank ] - variance 0 . 80 0 . 46 0 1 . 52 0 . 14 - 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 08 0 . 35 0 . 10 - 0 . 02 0 . 02 20 Status RG [ experience ] - variance 1 . 03 0 . 74 0 3 . 42 0 . 04 - 0 . 09 0 . 00 0 . 07 0 . 04 0 . 00 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 05 21 Status RG [ productivity ] - variance 0 . 90 0 . 89 0 4 . 85 0 . 09 - 0 . 06 - 0 . 04 - 0 . 03 0 . 03 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 04 22 Status RG [ budget ] - variance 0 . 95 0 . 86 0 5 . 66 0 . 07 0 . 00 0 . 07 0 . 10 0 . 05 0 . 06 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 03 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 10 Rank - 0 . 12 11 Experience - 0 . 15 0 . 65 12 Productivity - 0 . 01 0 . 30 0 . 09 13 Budget - 0 . 04 0 . 06 0 . 00 0 . 18 14 Specialty RG 0 . 11 - 0 . 03 - 0 . 03 0 . 08 0 . 06 15 Status RG [ rank ] - level - 0 . 02 - 0 . 02 0 . 03 0 . 04 0 . 02 0 . 17 16 Status RG [ experience ] - level 0 . 09 - 0 . 03 - 0 . 11 0 . 04 0 . 04 0 . 85 0 . 16 17 Status RG [ productivity ] - level 0 . 03 0 . 10 0 . 08 0 . 16 0 . 05 0 . 45 0 . 12 0 . 38 18 Status RG [ budget ] - level 0 . 08 0 . 09 0 . 01 0 . 14 0 . 05 0 . 40 0 . 08 0 . 36 0 . 24 19 Status RG [ rank ] - variance 0 . 01 0 . 45 0 . 25 0 . 28 0 . 09 0 . 69 0 . 91 0 . 58 0 . 36 0 . 32 20 Status RG [ experience ] - variance 0 . 05 - 0 . 04 - 0 . 08 - 0 . 04 - 0 . 01 0 . 72 0 . 12 0 . 83 0 . 31 0 . 32 0 . 34 21 Status RG [ productivity ] - variance 0 . 03 0 . 04 0 . 10 - 0 . 09 0 . 02 0 . 49 0 . 13 0 . 43 0 . 77 0 . 17 0 . 28 0 . 53 22 Status RG [ budget ] - variance 0 . 06 0 . 07 0 . 03 0 . 06 0 . 12 0 . 53 0 . 12 0 . 53 0 . 23 0 . 71 0 . 31 0 . 68 0 . 35 Notes : p < . 05 where r > 0 . 05 Correlations are reported for the sample of 1240 geneticists on which most of the analyses are based ; correlations for the full sample of 1849 life scientists are available on request , as are correlations for the individual - level specialty variables and group - level controls which range between + / - 0 . 20 . 54 Table 2 . Logistic Analysis of Relationship between Individual - level Variables and Information Withholding by Life Scientists M1 M2 M3 M4 Individual - level variables No . of requests received 0 . 64 * * 0 . 57 * 0 . 36 0 . 43 ( 0 . 23 ) ( 0 . 23 ) ( 0 . 29 ) ( 0 . 30 ) Commercial activities 0 . 50 * 0 . 44 * 0 . 74 * * 0 . 78 * * ( 0 . 22 ) ( 0 . 22 ) ( 0 . 27 ) ( 0 . 28 ) Industry support 0 . 16 0 . 20 0 . 25 0 . 32 ( 0 . 24 ) ( 0 . 25 ) ( 0 . 30 ) ( 0 . 31 ) Human subjects 0 . 50 * 0 . 58 * 0 . 14 0 . 22 ( 0 . 23 ) ( 0 . 24 ) ( 0 . 33 ) ( 0 . 34 ) Male 0 . 85 * * 0 . 85 * * 1 . 03 * * 1 . 11 * * ( 0 . 30 ) ( 0 . 30 ) ( 0 . 38 ) ( 0 . 41 ) Own requests denied 0 . 43 * 0 . 38 + 0 . 33 0 . 40 ( 0 . 21 ) ( 0 . 22 ) ( 0 . 26 ) ( 0 . 27 ) Competition 0 . 33 0 . 33 0 . 51 + 0 . 48 ( 0 . 22 ) ( 0 . 23 ) ( 0 . 29 ) ( 0 . 29 ) Mentoring 0 . 26 0 . 30 + 0 . 03 0 . 08 ( 0 . 17 ) ( 0 . 17 ) ( 0 . 22 ) ( 0 . 22 ) Field 0 . 40 ( 0 . 28 ) Specialty - amphibia 0 . 34 0 . 47 ( 0 . 85 ) ( 0 . 86 ) Specialty - bacteria - 0 . 75 - 0 . 72 ( 0 . 49 ) ( 0 . 51 ) Specialty - drosophila - 0 . 19 - 0 . 12 ( 0 . 49 ) ( 0 . 51 ) Specialty - fungi 0 . 24 0 . 28 ( 0 . 84 ) ( 0 . 86 ) Specialty - mammals - 0 . 71 * - 0 . 71 * ( 0 . 34 ) ( 0 . 34 ) Specialty - nematodes 0 . 29 0 . 39 ( 0 . 86 ) ( 0 . 87 ) Specialty - viruses - 1 . 32 * - 1 . 33 * ( 0 . 66 ) ( 0 . 67 ) Specialty - yeast - 1 . 12 + - 1 . 07 + ( 0 . 60 ) ( 0 . 61 ) Rank - 0 . 17 ( 0 . 22 ) Experience 0 . 02 ( 0 . 02 ) Productivity 0 . 00 ( 0 . 02 ) Budget - 0 . 00 ( 0 . 00 ) Constant - 5 . 50 * * * - 5 . 85 * * * - 5 . 19 * * * - 5 . 55 * * * ( 0 . 93 ) ( 0 . 96 ) ( 1 . 25 ) ( 1 . 33 ) Degrees of freedom 8 9 16 20 Log likelihood - 316 . 70 - 309 . 71 - 209 . 21 - 203 . 45 Notes : Standard errors in parentheses ; + p < . 1 , * p < . 05 , * * p < . 01 , * * * p < . 001 Sample size is n = 1849 for M1 and M2 ( all life scientists ) , n = 1240 for M3 and M4 ( geneticists only ) . Specialty base category is humans ; plants , zebrafish , protozoa , avian specialties dropped due to insufficient observations . 55 56 Table 3 . Logistic Analysis of Relationship between Reference Group Behaviors and Information Withholding by Life Scientists Variables M1 M2 M3 M4 M5 M6 Individual - level controls No . of requests received 0 . 57 * 0 . 37 0 . 36 0 . 33 0 . 45 0 . 39 ( 0 . 23 ) ( 0 . 29 ) ( 0 . 30 ) ( 0 . 29 ) ( 0 . 30 ) ( 0 . 30 ) Commercial activities 0 . 44 * 0 . 68 * 0 . 58 * 0 . 78 * * 0 . 66 * 0 . 62 * ( 0 . 22 ) ( 0 . 27 ) ( 0 . 28 ) ( 0 . 27 ) ( 0 . 28 ) ( 0 . 28 ) Industry support 0 . 20 0 . 19 0 . 18 0 . 14 0 . 25 0 . 29 ( 0 . 25 ) ( 0 . 30 ) ( 0 . 30 ) ( 0 . 30 ) ( 0 . 30 ) ( 0 . 31 ) Human subjects 0 . 58 * 0 . 25 0 . 09 0 . 21 0 . 26 0 . 34 ( 0 . 24 ) ( 0 . 33 ) ( 0 . 34 ) ( 0 . 33 ) ( 0 . 33 ) ( 0 . 32 ) Male 0 . 85 * * 1 . 02 * * 0 . 88 * 1 . 02 * * 1 . 07 * * 0 . 97 * ( 0 . 30 ) ( 0 . 38 ) ( 0 . 39 ) ( 0 . 38 ) ( 0 . 39 ) ( 0 . 40 ) Own requests denied 0 . 38 + 0 . 31 0 . 41 0 . 28 0 . 27 0 . 32 ( 0 . 22 ) ( 0 . 26 ) ( 0 . 27 ) ( 0 . 26 ) ( 0 . 26 ) ( 0 . 26 ) Competition 0 . 33 0 . 55 + 0 . 56 + 0 . 56 + 0 . 59 + 0 . 55 + ( 0 . 23 ) ( 0 . 29 ) ( 0 . 31 ) ( 0 . 29 ) ( 0 . 31 ) ( 0 . 30 ) Mentoring 0 . 30 + 0 . 06 0 . 07 0 . 06 0 . 11 0 . 06 ( 0 . 17 ) ( 0 . 22 ) ( 0 . 22 ) ( 0 . 22 ) ( 0 . 22 ) ( 0 . 22 ) Group - level controls RG size - 0 . 00 - 0 . 00 - 0 . 00 - 0 . 00 0 . 00 ( 0 . 00 ) ( 0 . 01 ) ( 0 . 00 ) ( 0 . 01 ) ( 0 . 00 ) RG commercialization 0 . 85 - 0 . 35 0 . 13 - 0 . 92 - 0 . 19 ( 3 . 26 ) ( 1 . 44 ) ( 1 . 66 ) ( 0 . 97 ) ( 1 . 05 ) RG competition 1 . 49 0 . 52 1 . 37 0 . 20 - 0 . 72 ( 1 . 99 ) ( 1 . 21 ) ( 1 . 16 ) ( 1 . 01 ) ( 1 . 15 ) RG requests received 0 . 68 0 . 01 0 . 63 - 1 . 03 - 0 . 29 ( 1 . 90 ) ( 0 . 97 ) ( 1 . 42 ) ( 0 . 93 ) ( 1 . 02 ) Reference group variables Field RG 3 . 81 ( 2 . 69 ) Specialty RG 3 . 32 * ( 1 . 49 ) Status RG [ rank ] 3 . 38 * * * ( 0 . 82 ) Status RG [ experience ] 3 . 26 * * * ( 0 . 90 ) Status RG [ productivity ] 1 . 78 * * * ( 0 . 42 ) Status RG [ budget ] 1 . 36 * * ( 0 . 47 ) Constant - 6 . 76 * * * - 12 . 45 + - 8 . 12 + - 12 . 07 * * - 6 . 27 + - 3 . 46 ( 1 . 27 ) ( 7 . 04 ) ( 4 . 29 ) ( 4 . 42 ) ( 3 . 41 ) ( 3 . 72 ) Degrees of freedom 9 13 13 13 13 13 Log likelihood - 309 . 71 - 213 . 34 - 204 . 42 - 208 . 05 - 204 . 88 - 206 . 23 Notes : Standard errors in parentheses ; + p < . 1 , * p < . 05 , * * p < . 01 , * * * p < . 001 Sample size is n = 1849 for M1 ( all life scientists ) , n = 1240 for M2 - M6 ( geneticists only ) . Table 4 . Moderating Effects of Group Convergence on Relationship between Reference Group Behaviors and Information Withholding by Life Scientists Variables M1 M2 M3 M4 Individual - level controls No . requests received 0 . 37 0 . 27 0 . 39 0 . 39 ( 0 . 30 ) ( 0 . 30 ) ( 0 . 30 ) ( 0 . 31 ) Commercial activities 0 . 64 * 0 . 80 * * 0 . 70 * 0 . 60 * ( 0 . 28 ) ( 0 . 28 ) ( 0 . 29 ) ( 0 . 29 ) Industry support 0 . 25 0 . 19 0 . 33 0 . 36 ( 0 . 30 ) ( 0 . 30 ) ( 0 . 31 ) ( 0 . 31 ) Human subjects 0 . 06 0 . 05 0 . 13 0 . 19 ( 0 . 34 ) ( 0 . 34 ) ( 0 . 34 ) ( 0 . 33 ) Male 0 . 96 * 1 . 05 * * 0 . 98 * 0 . 95 * ( 0 . 39 ) ( 0 . 38 ) ( 0 . 39 ) ( 0 . 40 ) Own requests denied 0 . 47 + 0 . 30 0 . 30 0 . 29 ( 0 . 27 ) ( 0 . 27 ) ( 0 . 27 ) ( 0 . 27 ) Competition 0 . 55 + 0 . 55 + 0 . 52 + 0 . 52 + ( 0 . 31 ) ( 0 . 29 ) ( 0 . 31 ) ( 0 . 30 ) Mentoring 0 . 08 0 . 06 0 . 01 0 . 00 ( 0 . 22 ) ( 0 . 23 ) ( 0 . 23 ) ( 0 . 23 ) Group - level controls RG size 0 . 00 - 0 . 00 - 0 . 00 0 . 00 ( 0 . 01 ) ( 0 . 00 ) ( 0 . 01 ) ( 0 . 00 ) RG commercialization - 0 . 76 - 0 . 43 - 1 . 76 - 0 . 21 ( 1 . 32 ) ( 1 . 92 ) ( 1 . 16 ) ( 1 . 21 ) RG competition - 1 . 48 - 1 . 38 - 1 . 12 - 2 . 52 + ( 1 . 41 ) ( 1 . 32 ) ( 1 . 21 ) ( 1 . 43 ) RG requests received - 0 . 04 0 . 38 - 0 . 94 0 . 05 ( 0 . 97 ) ( 1 . 68 ) ( 1 . 00 ) ( 1 . 04 ) Reference group variables Status RG [ rank ] – WH level 11 . 72 * * * ( 2 . 96 ) Status RG [ experience ] – WH level 5 . 36 * * * ( 1 . 50 ) Status RG [ productivity ] – WH level 3 . 84 * * * ( 1 . 03 ) Status RG [ budget ] – WH level 3 . 95 * * ( 1 . 15 ) Status RG [ rank ] – WH variance - 3 . 20 * * ( 1 . 15 ) Status RG [ experience ] – WH variance - 0 . 75 ( 0 . 50 ) Status RG [ productivity ] – WH variance - 0 . 01 ( 0 . 26 ) Status RG [ budget ] – WH variance - 0 . 72 * ( 0 . 30 ) Status RG [ rank ] – WH level * WH variance - 5 . 28 * ( 2 . 17 ) Status RG [ experience ] – WH level * WH variance - 2 . 44 + ( 1 . 47 ) Status RG [ productivity ] – WH level * WH variance - 1 . 73 * * ( 0 . 63 ) Status RG [ budget ] – WH level * WH variance - 0 . 51 * ( 0 . 26 ) Constant 0 . 16 - 0 . 66 - 0 . 04 3 . 38 ( 4 . 98 ) ( 4 . 86 ) ( 4 . 20 ) ( 4 . 68 ) Degrees of freedom 15 15 15 15 Log likelihood - 199 . 86 - 201 . 75 - 197 . 71 - 200 . 92 57 Notes : Standard errors in parentheses ; + p < . 1 , * p < . 05 , * * p < . 01 , * * * p < . 001 ; Sample size is n = 1240 ( geneticists only ) . Table 5 . Moderating Effects of Individual Tendencies on Relationship between Reference Group Behaviors and Information Withholding by Life Scientists Variables M1 M2 M3 M4 Individual - level controls No . requests received 0 . 39 0 . 33 0 . 44 0 . 38 ( 0 . 30 ) ( 0 . 29 ) ( 0 . 30 ) ( 0 . 30 ) Commercial activities 0 . 59 * 0 . 79 * * 0 . 65 * 0 . 61 * ( 0 . 28 ) ( 0 . 27 ) ( 0 . 28 ) ( 0 . 29 ) Industry support 0 . 25 0 . 13 0 . 26 0 . 30 ( 0 . 30 ) ( 0 . 30 ) ( 0 . 30 ) ( 0 . 31 ) Human subjects 0 . 10 0 . 20 0 . 25 0 . 34 ( 0 . 34 ) ( 0 . 33 ) ( 0 . 33 ) ( 0 . 32 ) Male 0 . 89 * 1 . 02 * * 1 . 11 * * 0 . 97 * ( 0 . 39 ) ( 0 . 38 ) ( 0 . 39 ) ( 0 . 40 ) Own requests denied 0 . 44 0 . 27 0 . 26 0 . 31 ( 0 . 27 ) ( 0 . 26 ) ( 0 . 26 ) ( 0 . 27 ) Competition 0 . 69 * 0 . 52 + 0 . 53 + 0 . 54 + ( 0 . 34 ) ( 0 . 31 ) ( 0 . 31 ) ( 0 . 30 ) Mentoring 0 . 12 0 . 06 0 . 11 0 . 06 ( 0 . 23 ) ( 0 . 22 ) ( 0 . 22 ) ( 0 . 22 ) Group - level controls RG size - 0 . 01 - 0 . 00 - 0 . 00 0 . 00 ( 0 . 01 ) ( 0 . 00 ) ( 0 . 01 ) ( 0 . 00 ) RG commercialization - 0 . 25 0 . 11 - 0 . 97 - 0 . 18 ( 1 . 47 ) ( 1 . 67 ) ( 0 . 98 ) ( 1 . 05 ) RG competition 0 . 17 1 . 38 0 . 35 - 0 . 72 ( 1 . 24 ) ( 1 . 16 ) ( 1 . 03 ) ( 1 . 15 ) RG requests received 0 . 10 0 . 62 - 1 . 04 - 0 . 31 ( 0 . 98 ) ( 1 . 42 ) ( 0 . 93 ) ( 1 . 02 ) Reference group variables Status RG [ rank ] - WH level 3 . 82 * * ( 0 . 88 ) Status RG [ experience ] - WH level 3 . 20 * * ( 0 . 91 ) Status RG [ productivity ] - WH level 1 . 74 * * ( 0 . 43 ) Status RG [ budget ] - WH level 1 . 28 * ( 0 . 52 ) Status RG [ rank ] - WH level * Competition - 3 . 15 * ( 1 . 59 ) Status RG [ experience ] - WH level * Competition 0 . 55 ( 1 . 43 ) Status RG [ productivity ] - WH level * Competition 0 . 70 ( 0 . 85 ) Status RG [ budget ] - WH level * Competition 0 . 38 ( 1 . 00 ) Constant - 4 . 24 - 9 . 10 * - 4 . 21 - 1 . 09 ( 4 . 46 ) ( 4 . 35 ) ( 3 . 58 ) ( 3 . 83 ) Degrees of freedom 14 14 14 14 Log likelihood - 202 . 40 - 207 . 97 - 204 . 53 - 206 . 15 Notes : Standard errors in parentheses ; + p < . 1 , * p < . 05 , * * p < . 01 , * * * p < . 001 ; Sample size is n = 1240 ( geneticists only ) . 58 Figure 1 . Estimated Effects of the Interaction between Perceived Competition and Withholding by Reference Group Scientists of the Same Rank on Withholding Behavior - 0 . 04 - 4 . 04 5 . 35 - 13 . 57 - 15 . 00 - 10 . 00 - 5 . 00 0 . 00 5 . 00 10 . 00 High competition Low competition L og odd s o f i n f o r m a ti on w it hho l d i ng High level of withholding among scientists of the same rank Low level of withholding among scientists of the same rank Note : The predicted logit estimates were based on the coefficient estimates of model1 in Table 5 . “High level of withholding among scientists of the same rank” represents a score that is one standard deviation above the mean , whereas “Low level of withholding among scientists of the same rank” represents a score that is one standard deviation below the mean . “High competition” is equal to the highest value of perceived competition , while “Low competition” is equal to the lowest value of perceived competition . All other variables were evaluated at their grand means . 59 i Reference groups are conceptually distinct from other related constructs although there is often empirical overlap . They differ from work groups or organizational departments because they typically extend beyond the small set of colleagues with whom an individual frequently interacts to complete a task and members are not necessarily perceived by others or by themselves as a group ( Merton , 1968 ) . They differ from communities of practice , which consist of participants who are engaged in a joint enterprise and share repertoires of stories , tools , artifacts , and concepts , because an individual need not participate in them to be influenced by them ( Merton , 1968 ) . They differ from personal networks because they may include others in the organization whom the individual knows but rarely or never interacts with directly ( Lawrence , 2006 ) , as well as others beyond the organization whom the individual does not personally know and may not even recognize , such as prominent scientists who run large research centers ( Merton , 1968 ) . We argue that reference groups can exert influence even in the absence of direct personal contacts or shared affiliations , although distinguishing these effects empirically is beyond the scope of this paper . ii In contrast to role conflict , which according to role theory arises from the contradictory demands of one or more role - senders ( Katz & Kahn , 1966 ) , sociological ambivalence arises from contradictory role expectations that are not imposed by particular role - senders . Research based on role theory also focuses almost exclusively on its negative consequences , while a core premise of sociological ambivalence is that it can have positive consequences , including enabling individuals to fulfill their various functions more effectively ( Merton & Barber , 1963 ) , providing slack that protects systems from extreme volatility ( Mills , 1983 ) , and fostering flexibility and learning ( Pratt & Barnett , 1997 ) . iii Geneticists also specialize by field of genetic research , such as mapping and sequencing , population genetics , or single gene disorders , though their research often crosses several such fields . In our interviews , we found that classifying colleagues by the main organism on which they work ( “he’s a mouse man” ) is the dominant way in which geneticists conceptualize their communities , although referring to geneticists by their primary field or fields is becoming increasingly common . iv These departments were included because they received the largest number of NIH grants in 1998 . v Self - reported measures like these are likely to be under - estimates , but there were sufficient reports of information withholding to proceed with the analyses . vi Using a continuous measure instead does not change the results . vii The criteria used to construct the moving windows were robust to minor modifications . Using categorical measures rather than moving windows also gave similar results . viii Alternatively , the extent of information withholding could be measured by the proportion of the reference group members who refused at least one request . This variable was highly correlated with the average - based variable ( r = 0 . 85 or above ) and gives the same results , so we report the results for the average - based variable only . ix An alternative measure is the coefficient of variation ( the ratio of the standard deviation to the mean ) , but this was not appropriate here because the mean values in the reference group categories often were close to zero , making it too sensitive to changes in the standard deviation , and also because it confounds two characteristics of reference group behaviors – the standard deviation and the mean – creating interpretation problems ( Sorensen , 2002 ) . 60 x Due to the cross - sectional nature of the data , excluding the focal scientist when calculating the withholding behaviors in that scientist’s reference groups introduces a systematic bias in the analyses because the group measures will be affected by that scientist’s behavior . For example , if the excluded scientist has withheld , the group’s level of withholding will appear lower than if the excluded scientist has not withheld . This creates an artificial negative association between the level of withholding in the group and withholding by the scientist . To avoid inducing such spurious relationships , the extensive literature on endogenous social effects ( including sociological research on peer influence in schools and economic research on supply and demand ) typically retains the individual’s observation in the higher level group . Manski ( 1993 ) terms this the “reflection problem , ” noting that there is no ideal solution when trying to determine whether the average behavior in a group causes or reflects the individual’s behavior . In the present study , it is evident that including focal scientists in the averages for their reference groups is less concerning when those groups are larger : at the extreme , if a reference group includes one million scientists , the inclusion or exclusion of the focal scientist will make no difference . To ensure that the results of this study were not simply attributable to small reference groups where focal scientists’ behaviors contributed substantially to the group averages , we ran our analyses using a limited dataset that omitted the smallest reference groups ( up to 40 % of all the reference groups in each analysis ) . The results of the study still held , indicating that the reference group effects were robust for groups to which the focal scientists’ own behaviors contributed little . xi Excluding this individual - level variable does not change the results . xii We conducted sensitivity tests to examine the robustness of the criteria used to construct the moving windows . Using research experience based on a 7 - year window as an example , four specifications are possible for identifying status - superiors for a focal scientist : those with 4 + years more experience ( open window starting from the upper bound of the focal scientist’s window ) , those with 4 - 10 years more experience ( closed 7 - year window starting from the upper bound of the focal scientist’s window ) , those with 1 + years more experience ( open window starting from the scientist’s own experience ) , those with 1 - 7 years more experience ( closed 7 - year window starting from the scientist’s own experience ) , The results of the analyses were similar across these different specifications , and also using varying window sizes . We also examined measures based on categories rather than moving windows , which again gave similar results . xiii No curvilinear effects of these variables were found either . xiv In additional analyses , we also examined interactions between the group - level control variables and the reference group variables , for example to see whether the influence of withholding behavior in the reference group varied with the size of the group , but no significant interactions were found . xv In contrast , conflicts of interest arise when professionals experience contradictions between self - interest and their duties to their clients or firms , or when they perform duties for multiple parties with conflicting agendas . 61