Structure Mapping in Analogy and Similarity Dcdre Centner Arthur B . Markman Northwestern University Columbia University Analogy and similarity are often assumed to be distinct psychological processes . In contrast to this position , the authors suggest that both similarity and analogy involve a process of structural alignment and mapping , that is , that similarity is like analogy . In this article , the authors first describe the structure - mapping process as it has been worked out for analogy . Then , this view is extended to similarity , where it is used to generate new predictions . Finally , the authors explore broader implications of structural alignment for psychological processing . A nalogy and similarity are central in cognitive processing . They are often viewed as quite sepa - rate : Analogy is a clever , sophisticated process used in creative discovery , whereas similarity is a brute perceptual process that we share with the entire animal kingdom . This view of similarity has important implica - tions for the way we model human thinking , because similarity is demonstrably important across many areas of cognition . We store experiences in categories largely on the basis of their similarity to a category representa - tion or to stored exemplars ( Smith & Medin , 1981 ) . In transfer , new problems are solved using procedures taken from prior similar problems ( Bassok , 1990 ; Holyoak & Koh , 1987 ; Keane , 1988 ; Kolodner , 1993 ; Novick , 1988 , 1990 ; Ross , 1987 , 1989 ; Winston , 1980 ) , and inferences about people are influenced by their similarity to other known individuals ( Andersen & Cole , 1990 ; Read , 1984 ) . Even the way we respond affectively to a situation may be based in part on our responses to previous similar situations ( Kahneman & Miller , 1986 ) . Thus , an under - «tanding of similarity processing may provide general _ isight into human thinking . In our research , we have taken a very different route from the " stars above , mud below " view of analogy and similarity . We suggest that the process of carrying out a comparison is the same in both cases . The general idea is summarized by the slogan " similarity is like analogy " ( Centner & Markman , 1995 ; Markman & Centner , 1993a ; Medin , Goldstone , & Centner , 1993 ) . We summarize re - cent evidence suggesting that the process involved in both similarity and analogy comparisons is one of structural alignment and mapping between mental representations ( Falkenhainer , Forbus , & Centner , 1989 ; Centner , 1983 , 1989 ; Centner & Markman , 1993 , 1994 , 1995 ; Gold - stone , 1994b ; Goldstone & Medin , 1994 ; Goldstone , Medin , & Centner , 1991 ; Markman & Centner , 1993a , 1993b ; Medin et al . , 1993 ) . We begin with creative anal - ogy and then turn to similarity . Analogy Johannes Kepler was a great discoverer and a prolific analogizer . He was an early champion of Copernicus ' s ( 1543 / 1992 ) proposal that the earth and other planets moved , rather than the sun . In 1596 , in the course of trying to work out the laws of planetary motion , Kepler found himself asking a seemingly simple question : Why is it that the outermost planets move slower than the innermost planets ? According to the best existing models , the planets ' motion was caused by planetary spirits or souls that impelled the planets on their courses . As Kepler noted , one possibility was that the spirits that moved the outer planets just happened to be weaker than the spirits that moved the inner planets ; but he proposed instead the radical idea that there is one spirit or power emanating from the sun that moves all the planets : that is , that the sun causes the motion of the planets . 1 Kepler had hit upon a major idea , an important precursor of gravity . But there was a seemingly fatal objection . For the sun to move the planets would require action at a distance , an abhorrent notion to any physical scientist ( including Newton , when he developed the full theory of gravity some 80 years later ) . Kepler ' s response to this self - posed challenge was to consider an analogy to light . In his Astronomia Nova ( The New Astronomy ; 1609 / 1992 ) , Kepler developed this analogy between the motive power and light ( see Centner et al . , in press , for details ) : But lest I appear to philosophize with excessive insolence , I shall propose to the reader the clearly authentic example of light , since it also makes its nest in the sun , thence to break forth into the whole world as a companion to this motive power . Dcdre Centner , Department of Psychology , Northwestern University ; Arthur B . Markman , Department of Psychology . Columbia University . This work was supported by National Science Foundation ( NSF ) Grant SBR - 95 - 11757 , Office of Naval Research Grant N00014 - 89 - J1272 , and NSF Career Award SBR - 95 - 10924 . We thank Doug Medin , Ken Forbus , and the Similarity and Anal - ogy group for discussions of this work and Mark Keane , Brian Ross , and Colleen Siefert for helpful comments on this article . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Dedre Centner , Department of Psychology , Northwestern University , 2029 Sheridan Road , Evanston , IL 60208 . Electronic mail may be sent via Internet to gentner @ nwu . edu . ' This causal interpretation , which went well beyond Copemicus ' s original proposal , also accounted for another regularity Kepler noted , namely , that each individual planet moves faster in its orbit the closer it is to the sun . January 1997 · American Psychologist Copyrighl 1997 by ihc American Psychological Association , Inc . 0003 - U6fiX / 97 / S : . 00 Vol . 52 . No . I . 45 - 56 с Dedre Gen in е г Who . I ask . will sav trut light is something material ? Neverthe - less , ji earn» out its operations with respect to plate , suffers alieraiion . is reflected and refracted , and assumes quantities so as ю he dense or rare , and to be capable of being taken ач a stirlace wherever it tails upon something illuminable . Now just js ii is said in nptics . thai light does not exist in ι he intermediate чрлсе between the source and ι he illunnnahle . this is equal ! ) ; нл ' и1 ' the шише pi»v \ er { , \ \ tr < > n < inuit \ n \ ti . р 3S3 ( II light can travel undctcetahlv on its way between the source and destination . vet illuminate its destination , then MI ton could the mom е force be undeiectable on its wav from sun to planet . \ et affect the planet ' s motion once it arrives at the planet . But Kepler was not content with a mere proof of possibility . He pushed the analog ) further Me used it to state whv the moti \ c power dimin - ishes with distance : Just as the light from a lamp shines brighter on near objects than on further ones , so it is with the sun ' s mum е power , and for the same reason : The motive power ( like the light» is not lost as it disperses but is spread out over a greater area . Because nothing is lost as the emission spreads from the source . Kepler ι 1609 / 199 ^ ) argued . " The emission , then , in the same manner as light , is immaterial , unlike odours , which arc accompanied by a diminution of substance , and unlike heat from a hot furnace , or anything similar which fills the intervening space " ( p . 381 ι . Mere , odors and heat are used as " near - misses " ( Winston . 1980 ) — potential analogs thai differ \ vith respeel to the key behavior and serve to sharpen the parallel between light and the motive power . Kepler ' s analogical model faced further challenges . Me had to explain why . given this power emanating from the sun , the planets mo \ ed closer and further on their orbits instead of maintaining a constant distance from the sun . To meet these challenges , he again turned to analogy . For example , he invoked a " boatman " analogy to explain the in - and - out motion of the planets . Me postu - lated that the sun rotated around its axis , creating a whirling circular river of motive power that pushed the planets around . : Then , as a ferryman can steer his boat ( the planet ; back and forth orthogonally to the river ' s current , so the planets , could move in and out with only a constant sidewisc current of moti \ c power . But although Kepler worked this analog ) fur decades , he was never satishcd with it ; it seemed to require a degree of sentience on the part of the planets to sense how ю steer . In another much explored analogy , he likened the sun and planet to two magnets that approach or repel each other depending on which poles are proximate . Kepler ' s writings demonstrate the central features of analogy . First , analogy is a device for conveying that two situations or domains share relational structure de - spite arbitrary decrees of difference in the objects thai make up the domains ( Centner , 1983 ) . The magnet anal - ogy , tor example , will stand or fall according to whether the causal relations between two magnets arc the same as those between - the sun and planet , and not according to the resemblance between a magnet and the sun . Common relations arc essential to analogy ; common objects arc not . This promoting of relations over objects makes anal - ogy a useful cognitive device , for physical objects arc normally highly salient in human processing—easy to focus on , recogni / e . encode , retrieve , and so on . But this is still not specific enough . There is , in general , an indefinite number of possible relations that an analog ) could pick out ( Goodman . 1972 ) , and most of these are ignored . For example , we ma \ find a spider - web and a fishing net analogous because both trap their prey , both remain stationary while their prey enters , and so on . But it would not contribute to the analog ) lo note that " Both are smaller than the Taj Mahal , ' or " Both are smaller than the Kremlin . " Mow do we select which common relations to pay attention to ' The major goal of this article is to demonstrate that the process of compari - son— both in analogy and in similarity—operates so as to favor interconnected svstems of relations and their arguments . . As the above discussion shows , to capture the pro - cess of analog ) , we must make assumptions not only about the processes of comparison , but about the nature of tvpical conceptual cognitive representations and how representations and processes interact ( Palmer . 1978 ) . In particular , we must have a representational system thai is sufficiently explicit about relational structure to ex - press the causal dependencies that match across the do - mains . We need a representational scheme capable of expressing not only objects but also the relationships and bindings that hold between them , including higher order relations such as causal relations . ' One clarification is in • In Kepler ' s pre - New Ionian prnsics . the - un was required lo push [ he planets around in their orbits , not morel ) ic atiraei ihem . ' Formal ] ) , the elements of our representations are objects ( or enn - fiiii . object descriptors ( called attribute * } , fimctwns ( which express dimensional information } , and relations between representational ele - ments Attributes and relations are predicate - ^ ilh truth values . Func - tions differ troni predicates in that the ) map irom a set of arguments Arthur B . Marlcrnan order here . To discuss alignment processes , we need to take representation seriously , but this should not be taken to imply a commitment to any particular representation as the best or only possible representation of a situation . ( Logically , such a position would be indefensible . ) Rather , we assume that the comparison process operates over a person ' s current representations , however they are derived . Thus , to predict the outcome ol a comparison , we should know the person ' s current psychological con - strua ! of the things being compared , including goals and contextual information as well as lone - term knowledge . Structural Alignment View of Analogy and Similarity The defining characteristic of analog ) is that it involves an alignment of relational structure . There are three psy - chological constraints on this alignment . First , the align - ment must be strui - H4rull \ consistent ; In other words , it must observe parallel connectivity and one - to - one corre - spondence . Parallel connectivity requires that matching relations must ha \ e matching arguments , and one - to - one correspondence limits any element in one representation to at most one matching element in the other representa - tion ( Falkenhaincr . Forbus . & Gcntncr . 19S6 , I9S9 ; Gent nor . 1983 . 1989 ; Centner A : Clement . 1988 : HoKoak & . Thagard , 1989» . For example , in Kepler ' s ( 161 ) 9 / 1992 ! analog ) , the planet corresponds to the boat and the sun ' s power to the river ' s current , because they plav similar roles in a common relational structure . This also shows a second characteristic of analogy , namely , relational fo - cus : AS discussed above , analogies must involve common relations but need not involve common object descrip - imto laJuos other than truth value· . . Г - or i - \ arnpk· . a t ' uncuun like color ( bull ) = red md ) bo used to represent the dimension nf color . The same assertion could be represented UMIIJ ; color a \ mi aunbute . a * in rtd ( hull ) , or using color as a relation , a· , in color ( ball . red ) . W - ' e as \ ume ihai him a propem is represented will aflect the wa > it i· . p ^ xjeued lions ( e . g . , it docs not detract from the analogy that the planet does not look like a boat ) . The final characteristic of analogy is sysiematicity : Analogies tend to match con - nected systems of relations ( Centner , 1983 , 1989 ) . A matching set of relations interconnected by hieher order constraining relations makes a better analogical match than an equal number of matching relations that arc un - connected to each other . The systcmancity principle cap - tures a taeit preference for coherence and causal pre - dictive power in analogical processing . We are not much interested in analogies that capture a series of coir . wi - dences . even if there are a great many of them . Л particularly striking example of structural domi - nance in analogy is that of " cross - mapping . Α < . M - M . S - tnnp / iini ; is a comparison in which iv . o analogous scenar - ios contain similar or identical objects thai plav diiYer . i ; ; relational roles in the two scenarios ( Centner л . Tuupin . 1986 ; see also Centner & Rattermann . 1991 ; Gold - stone & Medin , 1994 ; Markman & Gcntncr . 1993b : Ross . 1987 . 1989 ) . Л simple example of a cros > - mapping i > this simple proportional analogy : The obvious possibility of matching the two identical 3 > is dismissed because to do so would misalign the rela - tional roles of the terms . Instead , the object correspon - dences arc 1 — 3 and 3 - * 9 . preserving the relational commonality ( the identical ratio ) across the pair . Given an alignment of structure , further inference * can often be made from the anaJogy . The implicit prefer - ence for systematic ) ! ) — tor aligning ot " connected s ) s - icms of knowledge — is crucial here . It is what permit ' us to generate spontaneous inferences . When we have aligned a system η the base domain with a ( typical ! ) less complete ) system in the target domain , then further statements ( i4tmliJtite inferences ) connected to the bjsc system in the base can be projected into the target . These candidate inferences arc only guesses : Their factual cor - rectness must he checked separately . This uncertaintv i - appropriate : Any process capable of producing novel tru ^ inferences is also capable of generating false inference ' This kind of spontaneous analogical inference abounds in Kepler ' 1 · writings . He followed hi > initial anai - ogv establishing that the motive power ι like light ) car . operate at a distance with a series of further projection * I that the motive power { like light ] spreads uut througr . space , that н becomes diffused without dmum - rimi ; ir total quantity etc . ) . He even asked whether it could un - dergo an eclipse the decided not and used this disanalog ) to conclude that the motive power cannot be the san ' v ihing as the sun ' s light ) . Similarity Is Like Analogy Kepler ' s analogical feats are nothing short of amazing Reflecting on ^ his powers makes it clear why the abilit ) to form analogies has been taken as a sign ot intelligence . making the four - term analog ) problem a staple oi apti - tude tests . But consider the following more pro > aic example : Lucas , a 25 - monih - old child , plays with a new toy thai has six colored doors . Each door has its own key—a red key for a red door , a blue key for a blue door , and so on . Lucas opens each door with the key of ihe corresponding color Then he sees a sevcnih while key . He carefully inspects the toy from top to bottom . Then he turns to his parents and asks . " Where the white door ? " Child development is full of these moments , as in the example of Aaron ' s analogy from self lo other discussed in the article by Holyoak and Thagard ( 1997 . this issue ) or this example contributed by Lise Menn { personal com - munication , February 1995 ) : Her two - year - old son watched fascinated as some pet ducklings ale . Then he held his arms to his sides and bent down and up like the ducklings . Finally he announced , pointing at the duck - lines . " Have no hands ! " He had figured out why they ate so differently from him . These kinds of comparison - based discoveries are so commonplace that they arc hardly noticeable as anything special , and yet they con - tain the same essential characteristics of analogical pro - cessing that marks Kepler ' s use of analogy . In a fundamental sense , similarity is like analog ) . in that both involve an alignment of relational structure ( Centner A Markman . 1945 ) . The difference between them is that in analogy , only relational predicates are shared , whereas in literal similarity , both relational predi - cates and object attributes are shared . In Kepler ' s anal - og ν . there is no physical resemblance between a boat on a ri \ er and a planet revolving around the sun . In Lucas ' s similarity comparison , each kev and door pair is similar lo every other , making it casv tor Lucas to align the pairs . Thi· . contrast between analogy and literal similarity is in fact a continuum , not a dichotomy . Yet it is ; m important continuum psychologically , because overall similarity comparisons arc far easier to notice and map than purciv analogical comparisons , especially for no \ ices like Lucas tCentner . Rauermunn . & . Forbus . 1993 ; Holyo . ik & Koh . I9S7 : Keane . I9KS : Ross . 1989 ) . Figure 1 places this distinction between analogy anil similarity within н similaritv space dctined bv the degree of attributional similarity and the degree of relational similarity . Analogy occurs when comparisons exhibit ; i high degree of relational similarity with verv little attri - bute similarity . As the amount of attribute similarity in - creases , the comparison shifts toward literal similaritv . Λ / ί ' ίϊ· - ί / / ί / ϊ ( ·ϋΓίΐΗΓί ' matches share object descriptions but not relations . For example , comparing a planet with a round ball would constitute a mere - appearance match . Mere - appearance matches arc . in a sense , the opposite tif analogies . Such matches arc of course sharply limited in their predictive utility . Nonetheless , they arc important to consider , because they often occur among children and other novices and may interfere with their learning . The bottom left corner of the space is anomalous compari - sons , which share no significant attribute or relational commonalties . Finally , Figure 1 shows that metaphors span the range from relational comparisons ( e . g . " two lovers like twin compasses " ) to attribute comparisons ( e . g . , " a moon like a silver coin " ) . Figure 1 Similarity Space , Showing Different Kinds of Matches in Terms of the Degree of Relational Versus Object - Description Overlap Process Model of Alignment and Mapping : The Structure - Mapping Engine \ Ye have argued that the comparison process involves a rather sophisticated process of structural alignment and mapping over rich complex representations . A skeptical reader might justifiably inquire at this point whether there is any plausible real - time mechanism that could compute such a structural alignment . This problem is not trivial , and some early models made the assumption that the top - level conclusion or coal oi the analogy was known in advance to case the computational burden ( Greiner . 198S ; Holyoak . 1985 ; see Centner & Clement , 1988 . for a dis - cussion ) . However , these solutions are limited , because people can process analogies without advance knowledge oi their meaning . When you read " Philosophy is lan - guage idling . " you probably understand its meaning with - out a prior goal context ( although a relevant prior context would of course facilitate comprehension ) . Thus , a pro - cess model of comparison should be able to operate with - out advance knowledge of the final interpretation . The structure - mapping engine ( SME ; Falkcnhainer et a ! . . 1986 . 1989 ; Forbus , Centner . & Law , 1995 ) uses a local - to - global alignment process to arrive at a structural alignment of two representations / Figure 2 shows SME ' s three stages of mapping . In the first stage , SME begins blind and local by matching all identical predicates and subprcdicates in the two representations . This initial 1 Similar algorithms have been incorporated into other computa - tional models of analogy ( Burstcin . 19X8 ; Goldstone . 19 ' J4b : Gold - sione & Meclin . IW - l : lloljoak A Thagard . I9S9 ; Keane . Lciiecwuy & Duff . 14941 . · * \ Ve make the theoretical assumption that simibnti ol relational predicates can be expressed as partial identity . The idea is that when two situations arc analogous , they must have some system of identical relations . This identically applies ю the underlying concepts : the actual surface words used to express the relation need not be identical , for example . " Jupiier travels slower than Mercury " is analogous to " Jupi - ter moves slower than Mercury " or " Jupiter ' s rate of motion is lower than Mercurv ' s " ( see Centner & Clement . 19XS ) . Figure 2 Overview of the Algorithm Used by the Structure - Mapping Engine Ba» larset stage 2 Structural coalescence mappings SlageJ Smalt structures combined into ximal interpretation : candidate inferences mapping is typically inconsistent , containing many - to - unc matches . In the second phase , these local matches are coalesced into structural ! ) consistent connected clusters ( called kerntils ) . Finally , in the third stage , these kernuN iire merged into one or а few maximal structural ! ) consis· leni interpretations ( i . e . , mappings displaying one - to - one correspondences and parallel connectivity ) . SME then produces a structural evaluation of the interprctationis ) . using a kind of cascade - like algorithm in which evidence is passed down from predicates to their arguments . Thi - method favors deep systems over shallow systems , even if they have equal numbers of matches ( Forbus . & . Genmcr . 1ЧХ9 ) . Finally predicates connected ю the common structure in the base , but not initially present in the target , are proposed as ctinJitiaic inferences in the target . Thus , structural completion can lead to spontaneous unplanned inferences . SME has the psychologically appealing feature that it can derive more than one interpretation for an analogs . It normally produces two or three best interpretations of an analogy — that is , interpretations receiving the highest structural evaluations . For example , suppose we asked SME to interpret another of Kepler ' s analogical conjec - tures , namely , lhat the earth might impel the moon just as the sun does the earth : 1 . CAUSE ( TRAVEL ( motive power , sun . eanh ) . REVOLVE AROUND ( earth , sun» ) 2 . CAUSE [ TRAVEL ( motive power , earth , moon ) . REVOLVE AROUND fmoon . earth ) I . Given this cross - mapped pair . SME would produce a rela - tional interpretation in which the earth in Sentence 1 corresponds to the moon in Sentence 2 , as well a > an object - based interpretation in which the earth corre - sponds lo the earth . Because of its preference for deeply connected relational structure , the relational interpreta - tion would receive a higher structural evaluation and would win over the object interpretation . A good explanatory analogy can often be extended , as in Kepler ' s analogical extensions . Computational mod - els have tried to capture this propensity with the no : : on of incremental mapping . For example . SME can e \ ; end an existing analogical mapping by adding further con - nected material from the base domain ( either drawn from current context or from long - term memory iForbus . Fer - guson , & Gcntner . 1994 ; see also Burstein . 198S ; Kea . nc , Ledgeway . & Duff . 1994 ] ) . These models operate or . ihe assumption ( which we discuss later ) that extendir . i a connected mapping is easier than creating a r . ew mapping . Structure Mapping at Work Commonalities and Differences The experience of comparison i ^ selective : Only certain commonalities are highlighted . \ Vc have suggested : nat a central factor controlling what information i > cor . sid - cred in a comparison is s \ sictnaticit \ : the presence οί higher order com . actions between lower order relav . jns ( Clement & Centner . 1991 : Forbus & Centner . N39 : Centner . 1983 ) . For example , comparing the picture * in Figure 3A and 3B highlights the commonality that : \ > lh show a child looking at a pet . In contrast , compering Figure 3A with 3C highlight·· the commonality that " roth show an animal being frightened b \ another ar . imal iMarkman & . Gentncr . m prc > si . In both cases , ihe irror - mation highlighted b \ the comparison forms a connected relational system , and commonalitie * not connecter to the matching system ι such as the fact that there are dress - ers in both 3A and ? B ) seem to recede in importance . This pattern has aUo been demonstrated using pas ^ ges ( Clement & Gentner . 1991 ) . In this stud > . people - лho were given analogous stories judged that corresponding sentences were more important when the corresponding sentence pairs were pan of a matching relational s \ - ; cm than when they were not . More surprisingly , structural alignment also ir . rlu - cnces what differences are psychologicalU salient For example , when comparing Figure ЗЛ and 3B . we notice lhat it is a snake that the bo \ is looking at in one picture and a fish in the other . Both the snake and the fish play the same role in the matching structure . Differences lhat are connected to the common system ( like the fish - snake differencet we call ttltgnahle differences ( Gentner & Markman . 1994 ; Markman & Gentner . 199 ? b . ] ug6 ) . January 1997 - American Psychologist 49 St«gu Loc«f match· ! Figure 3 The Role of Commonalities and Differences ι Similarity Ahgnablc differences can be contrasted with non - aiifimihle differences , which are aspects of one situation that have no correspondence at all in the other situation . I - or example , in the comparison of Figures ЗЛ and 31i . the dog in Figure 3A has no correspondence with anything in Figure 3B . and hence it is a nonalignable difference . Just as commonalities gain in importance when they are part of a matching system , so too do differences . Thai is , ahgnablc differences are more salient than non - alignable differences . Intuitively , this focus on alignable differences makes sense , for it leads to a focus on those differences that are relevant to the common causal or goal structure that spans the situations . However , if we follow this logic a few steps further , we arrive at the rather intriguing prediction that there should be more salient differences for high - similar than for low - similar pairs ( because in general , high - similarity pairs will have larger common systems and more alignable differences ) . For example , if you imagine listing all possible differ - ences for the pair hotel - motel and contrast that with listing all possible differences for the pair magazine - kitten , you will probably find that it is much easier to list differences for the first , high - similarity pair . Experi - mental results bear out this observation . Participants who were asked to list differences between hotel and motel readily listed ( alignable ) differences : " Hotels arc in cities , motels are on the highway " ; " you slay longer in hotels than in motels " ; " hotels have many floors , motels only one or two " ; and so on . When given a low - similarity pair like magazine - kitten , participants tended lo list non - alignuble differences , such as " \ bu pet a kitten , you don ' t pel a magazine , " or " kittens have fur and maga - zines don ' t . " This finding of a greater number of alignable differences for high - similarity pairs has been obtained in empirical studies involving both word pairs ( Markman & Centner , 1993b ; Markman & Wisniewski , in press ) and picture pairs ( Markman & Gcntncr , 1У96 ) . An informal observation is that participants often ex - pressed confusion or irritation over the low - similarity pairs , perhaps reflecting their feeling thai it makes no sense to talk about differences in the absence of a mean - ingful alignment . If the comparison process focuses on alignable dif - ferences rattier than on nonalignable differences , then alignable differences should be listed more fluently than nonalignable differences . This means that people should find it easier to list differences for pairs of similar items than for pairs of dissimilar items , because high - similarit > pairs have many commonalties and , hence , many alignable differences . Such a prediction runs against the commonsense view — and the most natural prediction of feature - intersection models — that it should be easier to list differences the more of them there arc to list — that is , the more dissimilar the two items are . In a study by Gcntncr and Markman ( 1994 ) , participants were given a page containing 40 word pairs , half similar and half dissimilar , and were given five minutes to list one differ - ence for as many different pairs as they could . They were told that they would not have time to do all 40 pairs , and so they should do the easiest pairs first . The results provided strong evidence for the alienability predictions ; Participants listed many more differences for similar pairs ( A / = 11 . 4 ) than for dissimilar pairs ( Л - / = 5 . 9 ) . Furthermore , this difference was concentrated in the alignable differences . Over twice as many alignable dif - ferences were given for similar pairs ( Л / = 9 . 0 ) than for dissimilar pairs ( Л / = 3 . 9 ) . Because people focus on alignable differences rather than on nonalignable differences when making compari - sons , alignable differences have a greater impact on peo - ple ' s perception of similarity than do nonalignable differ - ences . Thus , all else being equal , alignable differences count more against similarity than nonalignable differ - ences . One way to test this prediction is to pit compari - sons involving a given alignable difference against com - parisons involving the same contrast as a nonalignable Figure 4 The Importance of Alignable and Nonalignable Differences in Similarity difference . For example , in the top figure of the triad in Figure 4 , the man shoots an arrow at a target . In the nonalignablc - differencc option , the man shoots an arrow . it a target , bul there is also a bird ( a nonalignable differ - ence ) in the picture . In the alignable - difterencc option , the man shoots an arrow at a bird ( an alignabie differ - ence ) ; ihe target has been moved ю the tree behind the man . When asked which option is most similar to the target , participants chose ihc nonaUcnabte - diffcrcnce op - lion , suggesting thai the alignabie difference decreased the similarity of the pair more than did the nonalignable difference ( Markman & . Centner , 1996 ) . " In summary , the process of structural alignment leads to a focus on matching relational systems . This focus determines both which commonalities are salient and which differences are salient . This last ma \ seem paradoxical : Why should the common alignment deter - mine which differences are important ? Yet , if we reflect that most pairs of items in the world are dissimilar , this pattern seems functionally sensible . Intuitively , it is when a pair of items is similar that their differences arc likely to be important . Analogical Inference Analogies can lead to new inferences , as Kepler ' s ( 1609 / 1992 ) example demonstrates , and the same is true of > imilarity comparisons . As in analogy , when there is a match between a base and target domain , facts about the base domain that are connected to the matching informa - tion may be proposed as candidate inferences ( Falkcn - hainercia ! . , 1986 , 1989 ) . For example , imagine sou have d friend with a sarcastic sense of humor that makes her difficult to get along with but a helpful temperament thai Ά ins her the loyally of her friends . If you met a new person and discovered that he had a sarcastic sense of humor , then based on his similarity to your other friend . \ ou would probably be more willing to suppose tha : he ь difficult to get along with than to infer that he ha - г helpful temperament that win > him loyal friend - . . This point was demonstrated in a study by Clement and Gentncr ( 1991 ) . They asked people to read pair > or analogous stories . The base story had two key facts , each of which was connected to a causal antecedent . Neither of these key facts was stated in the target story . Howewr . the target story did have a fact thai corresponded to one of the causal antecedents from the base . When partici - pants were gwen the analog ) and asked ю make a new " In the triad in Figure 4 . the mi - . ipulalion of atignable - and r . or . - •LignabU ' - difteri . ' nce opuoni abo involves moving ihe target , w - icr . could be a confound . See Markman and Genmer ( 19961 for anc ' - - . er \ алат of ihe study thai escapes ihi % problem prediction about the target story , they predicted the key fact that was connected to the matching causal antecedent more than twice as often as they predicted the other key fact . Convergent findings have been obtained by Read ( 1984 ) , Spellman and Holyoak ( in press ) , and Markman ( 1996 ) . Likewise , Lassaline ( 1996 ) showed that people ' s willingness to infer new facts in a category - induction task increased when these facts were connected to shared causal reiations . These results show how structural align - ment and mapping allow people to predict new informa - tion from old . Connectivity and Asymmetry People often find comparisons much more similar in one direction than the other , as Tvcrsky ( 1977 ) noted in his seminal treatise on similarity . For example , we prefer " Л scanner is like a cop > machine " to " A copy machine is like a scanner . " As Tversky pointed out , this directional - ity \ s al odds with the pervasive intuition that similarity is a symmetric relation ( after all , if A is similar to B , then shouldn ' t В be equally similar to A ? ) . Structure mapping offers a natural explanation : We propose that asymmetries typicalh arise when one of the comparison items is mure systematic than the other ( Bowdle & Cent - ner . 1996 : Centner & Bowdle . 1994 ) . According to struc - ture - mapping theory , inferences are projected from the Ixise to the target . Thus , having the more systematic and ainerent item as the base maximizes the amount of infor - mation that can be mapped from base to target . Consistent \ \ ith ihis claim . Bundle and Centner found that when participants were given pairs of passages varying in their caudal coherence . ( he > ( a ) consistently preferred compar - i ^ on - i in which the more coherent passage was the base and the less coherent passage was the target , ( Ь ) generated more inferences from the more coherent passage to the les· . coherent one , and ( c ) rated comparisons with more coherent bases as more in formative than the reverse comparisons . Extended Mapping One particularly interesting use of analogy is in extended mappings . They arise in creative thinking , as when KcpJer explored the implications of analogies between the mo - tive power and light or magnetism . Extended analogies are used in instruction as well : for example , when electric current and voltage are described in terms of water Mow and pressure ( Centner & Centner , 1983 ) . They also arise in ordinary language , with metaphoric systems like " Marriage is a journey " that can be extended ( e . g . , ' ' " ' You have to slog through the rough spots but eventually the road will get smoother " [ Gibbs , 1994 ; Lakoff & Johnson . I9SO ] . We have found , consistent with the structure - mapping account , that it is easier to extend an existing domain mapping than to initiate a new one [ Boronat & Centner . 1996 ; Centner & Boronat , 1992 ) ) . People who read passages containing extended metaphors one sen - tence at a time were faster to read the final sentence when it was a consistent extension of the metaphor of the passage , as in Example A ( below ) , than when it utilized a different metaphor , as in Example В ( below ) . For exam - ple , one passage described a debate in terms of a race : A . Dan saw the big debate as a race . . . . He knew that he had to steer his course carefully in the competition . His strategy was to go cruising through the initial points and then make his move . . . . He revved up as he made his last key points . His skill left his opponent far behind him at the finish line . B . Dan saw [ he bij ; debate as a war . . . . He knew that he had to use every weapon at his command in the competition . He mapped ( tut his straitrgy to ensure that he established a domi - nant position . . . . He intensified the bombardment as he nude his last key points . His skill left his opponent far behind him at the finish line . If extending an existing connected mapping is easier than creating a new mapping , then people should be faster to read the final sentence in Example A than in Example B . This is exactly what happened . This finding fits with the compulational notion of incremental mapping , in which mctaphoric passages can be understood by adding to an initial mapping ( F : orbus el al . . 1994 ; Kcanc et a ! . . 1994 ) . interestingly , this result held only for novel meta - phors und not for conventional metaphors , it is possible that conventional metaphors have their mctaphoric mean - ings stored lexically , making it unnecessary to carry out a domain mappinc ( Bowdle & . Centner . 1996 ; Gentncr & Wolff . 19 % ) . Connectivity and Pure Mapping Learners are often called on to map information trom one situation to another . For example , when we buy a new VCR . climb into a rental car , or fire up an update of Windows , we must decide which aspects of our prior knowledge apply to the new situation . To study the deter - minants of this mapping process . Centner and Schu - macher ( 1986 ; Schumacher & Centner , 1988 ) taught par - ticipants how to pilol a . ship using a simulated device panel . A game - like task was used in which participants could directly manipulate certain parameters { such as en - gine thrust or coolant valve opening ) that controlled other parameters ( such as velocity or engine temperature ) . If the ' ) ' performed corrcciiy . the ship made port in lime ; otherwise , they lost ihc game . After the first device had been well learned , participants were transferred to a sec - ond analogous device panel , and the number of trials to reach criterion on the new panel was measured . Partici - pants ' speed of learning was affected both by transpar - ency— participants learned the new panel faster when there were physical resemblances between structurally corresponding elements —and by systcmaticity — parti - cipants learned the new panel faster when they had learned a causal explanation for the procedures . Consistent with these patterns , both Ross ( 1987 . 1989 ) and Reed ( 1987 ) have found transparency effects . They have shown that participants are better at transfer - ring algebraic solutions when corresponding base and target objects arc similar . Reed measured the transpar - ency of the mapping between two analogous algebra problems by asking participants to identify pairs of corrc - spending concepts . He found that transparency was a good predictor of their ability to notice and apply solu - tions from one problem to the other . Ross ( 1989 ) found thai participants ' ability ίο transfer the problem - solving solution correctly was disrupted when cross - mapped cor - respondences were used . Research with children shows early effects of transparency and somewhat later effects of systemaiicity ( Centner & Toupin , 1986 ) . We suspect that to derive the benefits of systematic explanations may require possessing some degree of domain knowledge . Three generalizations emerge from ihc transfer stud - ies . First , transparency makes analogical mapping easier . Close , literal similarity matches are the easiest sort of mapping and the kind for which participants are least likely to make errors . Second , possessing a systematic higher order structure can permit transfer even under ad - verse transparency conditions . Having a strong causal model can enable a learner to transfer even when the objects mismatch perceptually . A third point , on which we expand below , is that different kinds of similarity may enter into different subprocesses of transfer . Further Implications Ubiquity of Alignment Our structure - mapping abilities constitute a rather re - markable talent . In creative thinking , analogies serve to highlight important commonalities , ю project inferences , and to suggest new ways to represent the domains . Yet . it would be wrong to think of analogy as esoteric , the property of geniuses . On the contrary , we often take anal - ogs for granted , as in examples like the following from Hofstadtcr ( 1995 , p . 76 ) . Shelley : I ' m going to pay for my beer now . . Tim : Me . loo [ Tim had a coke . ] Tim does not mean that he too is going to pay for Shel - ley ' s beer I the nonanalogica ) interpretation ) , nor even that he too is going to pay for his own beer , but rather that he is going to pay for what in his situation best corresponds to Shelley ' s beer : namely , his coke . This ability to carry out fluent , apparently effortless , structural alignment and mapping is a hallmark of human cognitive processing . Plurality of Similarity We have reviewed evidence that similarity is a process , of structural alignment and mapping over articulated rep - resentations . However , similarity docs not always appear so structurally discerning . Λ particularly striking case occurs in similarity - based retrieval . Several findings sug - gest that similarity - based retrieval from long - term mem - ory is based on overall similarity , with surface similarity heavily weighted , rather than by the kind of structural alignment that best supports inference ( Centner , 1989 ; Holyoak & Koh , 1987 ; Keane , 1988 ; Ross , 1989 ; Seifen . McKoon , Abelson , & Ratcliff , 1986 ) . For example . Gent - ncr et al . ( 1993 ) gave participants a memory set of stones and later probed them with stories that were similar in various ways . The greater the surface similarity between the probe and a target in memory ( in terms of shared objects and characters ) , the more likely the target was to be retrieved . In contrast , the greater the degree of shared higher order relational structure ( such as shared causal structure ) , the higher the rated inferential soundness and similarity of the pair . Thus , the kind of similarity that most reliably led to remindings was not the kind partici - pants most valued in making inferences . In fact , partici - pants often rated their own remindings as low in both soundness and similarity . Findings like this suggest that similarity is pluralis - tic ( Centner . I989 ; Goldstone , I994a ; Medinet al . . 1993 ) . Indeed , a parallel disassociation has been found in prob - lem - solving transfer : Retrieval likelihood is sensitive to surface similarity , whereas likelihood of successful prob - lem solving is sensitive to structural similarity ( Keane . 3988 ; Ross , 1987 , 1989 ; but see Hammond , Seifen . & Gray . 1991 ) . This suggests that different kinds of similar - ity may have different psychological roles in transfer . The simulation " Many are called - but few are chosen " ( MAC - FAC ; Forbus et al . , 1995 ) models this phenome - non with a two - stage system : The first stage ( MACt is an indiscriminate , computationally cheap search for any kinds of similarities in memory , and the second stage ( FAC ) carries out a structure mapping of the candidates from the first stage . Another way in which similarity is pluralistic is that different kinds of similarity emerge at different points in processing . Response deadline studies of relational comparisons suggest that when participants are required to respond quickJy ( under 700 ms or under 1 . 000 ms , depending on the lask and materials ) , they base their sense of similarity on local matches ( even cross - mapped object matches ) rather than on relational matches ( Gold - stone & . Medin , 199 - 1 ; Ratcliff & McKoon , 1989 ) . Al longer response deadlines , this pattern is reversed . This time course of similarit ) has been successfully modeled for processing features conjoined into objects b > Gold - stone and Medin ' s ( 199 - tj Similarity , Interactive Activa - tion , and Mapping ( SIAM ) model , using a local - to - global ргосе < . > like thar of SME . Overall , the difference between early and late processing seems to be a shift from local matches to global structural alignment . Implications for Other Cognitive Processes Categorization . Structural alignment and mapping can provide insight into other cognitive processes isec Figure 5 ) . As one example , similarity is often given a central role in categorization ( Hampton . 1995 . Rosch . 1975 ; Smith & Medin , 1981 ) . It is common to assume vhat obiects can be categorized on the basis of perceptual , behavioral , or functional commonalities with the cate - gory representation ( e . g . . robins are seen as bird * because of their perceptual and behavioral similarity to л prom - type bird or to many other birds that have been encoun - tered ) . However , many researchers have pointed cut cases in which rated similarity and probability of category membership are dissociated ( Gelman & Wellman . 1991 ; Figure 5 Some Uses of Comparison in Cognitive Processing Alignment and mapping processes are used in perceiving similarity _ { alignrnenl ) ~ categorizing ( selecting best match from memory ) discovering new category ( abstracting common system ] Kcil . 1989 ; Rips , 1989 ) . For example , bats have Ihe per - ceptual and behavioral characteristics of birds ( they arc similar to birds in this sense ) , but they are classified as mammals , because of important ( though nonobvious ) properties , such as giving birth to live young . On the basis of examples like this , similarity ' s role in categoriza - tion has been challenged ; it has been argued that category membership judgments are theory based rather than simi - larity based ( Kcil , 1989 ; Murphy & Medin , 1985 ) . The process of alignment and mapping points the way to a reconciliation of similarity - based and theory - based accounts ( sec also Goldstone , 1994a ) . If we focus purely on perceptual similarity among objects , we are led to conclude that bats should be categorized with birds . On this view , theory - based knowledge ( such as why bats are mammals ) must intervene from elsewhere lo overrule this assignment . However , if the similarity computation is assumed to be that of structural alignment , then the similarity between two instances will be based not only on object - level commonalities but also on com - mon relations such as common causal relauons and com - mon origins . Assuming that our representations include information about theory - based relations , such as that bats bear live young , as well as information about fea - tures , then the schism between similarity - based and the - ory - based categorization may be more apparent than real . Developmentally , if we assume that theoretical knowledge is acquired gradually , this view would account for the characteristic - to - defming shift ( Keil & Batterman , 1984 ) in children ' s interpretations of word meaning from local object features ( e . g . , a taxi is bright yellow and has a checkered sign ) to deeper relational commonalities ( e . g . , a taxi is a vehicle that may be hired to transport people ) . Choice and decision . Structural alignment also sheds light on the processes underlying choice behavior . Medin , Goldstone , and Markman ( 1995 ) reviewed paral - lels between phenomena in decision processing and phe - nomena in comparison processing that suggest an im - portant role for structural alignment in decision making . Structural alignment influences which features to pay attention to in choice options . Research suggests that alignable differences are given more weight in choice situations than are nonalignable differences ( Linde - mann & Markman , 1996 ; Markman & . Medin , 1995 ; Slovic & MacPhillamy , 1974 ) . For example , Markman and Medin ( 1995 ) asked participants to choose between video games and to justify their choices . Their justifica - tions were more likely to contain alignable differences than nonalignable differences . As another example , Kah - neman and Tversky ( 1984 ) described to participants a hypothetical store in which a jacket could be bought for SI25 and a calculator for SI5 . They offered participants the opportunity to go to another store and save $ 5 on the total purchase . Participants who were offered a jacket for S125 and a calculator for S10 were more willing to make the effort to go to another store than those offered a jacket for S120 and a calculator for S15 . Even though the monetary reward for going to the other store was the same for both groups , participants were influenced by the alignable difference . Conclusions Comparison processes foster insight . They highlight commonalities and relevant differences , they invite new inferences , and they promote new ways of construing situations . This creative potential is easiest to notice when the domains compared are very different , as in Kepler ' s analogies or John Donne ' s metaphors . But even prosaic similarity comparisons can lead to insights . Sometimes these insights are so obvious that we might fail to notice them , as when two - year - old Lucas noticed the repeated pattern of keys opening doors ; or Aaron ( in Holyoak & Thagard ' s article , 1997 ) spontaneously switched roles in the kiss - and - make - better schema ; or when a six - year - old realized that tulips must need water , because people do ( Inagaki & Hatano , 1987 ) . At first glance , these mundane examples might seem to have nothing in common with the bold analogies of scientific discovery . But let us close 54 January 1997 · American Psychologist with our own analogy . Analogies are like comets , flashing through our awareness and riveting our attention . Literal similarity is like planetary motion : steady , predictable , and prosaic . But the planets are central to the behavior of the solar system , and ( like literal similarity compari - sons ) they are always with us . Finally , both planets and comets are governed by the same fundamental iaws . REFERENCES Andersen . S . M . , & Cole , S . W . ( 1990 ) . " Do I know you ? " : The role of significant others in general social perception . Journal of Personal - ity ami Social Psychology . 59 , 384 - 399 . Bassok , M . { 1990 ) . Transfer of domain - specific problem - solving proce - dures . Journal nf Experimental PrycholoRy : learning . Memory and Cognition . 16 . 522 - 533 . Boronat , C . , & Centner , D . ( 1996 ) . Metaphors are { sometimes ) pro - cessed as generative domain mappings . Manuscript in preparation . Bowdle , B . F . . & Centner , D . ( 1996 ) . Infomutiivity and asymmetry in similarity . Manuscript in preparation . Burstein , M . H . ( 1988 ) . Incremental learning from multiple analogies . In Л . Prieditis ( Ed . ) , Analogica ( pp . 37 - 62 ) . Los Altos , CA : Morgan Kaufmann . Copernicus , N . ( 1992 ) . De revolutionibus orbium caelestium ( Edward Rosen , Trans . ) . Baltimore : Johns Hopkins University Press . ( Original work published 15 - 13 ) Clement , C . A . , & Centner , D . ( 1991 ) . Systematicity as a selection constraint in analogical mapping . Cognitive Science . 15 . 89 - 132 . Falkenhainer , B . , Forbus , K . D . , & Genmer , D . ( 1986 ) . The structure - mapping engine . In Proceedings of the fifth national conference on artificial intelligence ( pp . 272 - 277 ) . Los Altos , CA : Morgan Kaufmann . Falkennainer , B . . Forbus , K . D . , & Genmer . D . ( 1984 ) . The structure - mapping engine : Algorithm and examples . Artificial Intelligence , 41 . 1 - 63 - Forbus , K . D . Ferguson . R . W . . & Gentner , D . ( 1994 ) . Incremental slruciurc - mappmg . In A . Ram & K . Eiseli ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the sixteenth annual conference of the Cognitive Science Sociefy ( pp . 313 - 318J . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Forbus , K . D . , & Centner , D . ( 1989 ) . Structural evaluation of analogies : What counts ? In 77if proceedings of the eleventh annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society· ( pp . 341 - 348 ) . Hillsdale , NJ . Erlbaum . Forbus . K . D . , Centner , D . . & Law . K . f 1У95 ) . MAC / FAC : A model of si rr . ilarily - based retrieval . Cognitive Sciente , IV . 141 - 205 . Gelman , S . A . , & . Wcllman . II . M . ( 19911 . Inside * and essences : Early understandings of the non - obvious . Cognition . 3S . 213 - 244 . Centner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for analog ) . Cognitive Science , 7 . 155 - 170 Gentner , D . ( 1989 ) The mechanisms of analogical learning In S . Vosni - adou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) . Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp 199 - 241 ) . London : Cambridge University Prey , . Gentner . D . , & . Buronat , C . B . ( 1W2 ) . Metaphors are ( sornetirnt ' si pro - cessed as generative domain - mappings . Unpublished manuscript . Centner . D , ά Bowdle . B F : ( 1994 ) . The coherence imbalance hypothe - sis : A functional approach to asymmetrv in comparison . In A . Ram A . K Eiselt ( Eds . ) . ITie sixteenth annual meeting of the Cognitive Sci - ence Society ( pp 351 - 356 ) . Hitlsdale . NJ : Erlbaum . Gentner . D . . Brem . S . , Ferguson . R . . Markman . A . B . Levidow . Β . Β . Wolff . P . . & . Forbus . K D ( in press ) . Conceptual change via analogi - cal reasoning A case stud ) of Johannes Kepler . Journal of the l ^ arn - iny Sciences . Centner . D . , & Clement . С . ( 19ХЯ ) . Evidence for relational selectivity in the interpretation of analogy and metaphor . In G H . Himer ( Ed . ) . The psychology of learning and motivation ( pp . 307 - 358 ) . San Ггап - cisco ; Academic Pre ^ s . Gentner , D . , & . Centner , D . R . ( 19K3 ) . Flowing waters or teeming crowds : Mental models of electricity . In P . Genmer Λ A . L . Stevens ( Eds . ) . Mental models ( pp . 99 - 129 ) . HillsdaJe , NJ : Erlbaum . Genmer , D . . & Markman , A . B . ( 1993 ) . Analogy — Watershed or Water - loo ? Structural alignment and the development of connecuonist mod - els of analogy . In S . J . Hanson . J . D . Cowan . & C . L . Giles ( Eds . ) . Advances in neural information processing systems 5 ( pp . 855 - 8621 . San Mateo . CA : Morgan Kaufmann . Genmer , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1994 ) . Structural alignment in compar - ison : No difference without similarity . Psychological Science . 5 . 152 - 158 . Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1995 ) . Similarity is like analogy . In C . Cacciari ( Ed . ) , Similarity ( pp . 111 - 148 ) . Brussels . Belgium : BREPOLS . Centner , D . , & Rattermann , Μ . Ϊ . ( 1991 ) . Language and the career of similarity . In S . A . Gelman it J . P . Byrnes ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on thought and language : Interrelations in development ( pp . 225 - 277 ) . London : Cambridge University Press . Centner , D . . Rattermann , M . J . , & Forbus , K . D . ( 1993 ) . The roles of similarity in transfer : Separating retrievability from inferential soundness . Coxnitivt Psychology . 25 . 524 - 575 . Gentner , D . , & Schumacher , R . M , ( 1986 ) . Use of structure mapping theory for complex systems . In Proceedings of the 1986 IEEE inter - national conference on systems , man . and cybernetics \ pp . 252 - 258 ) . New York : IEEE . Centner , D . , & Toupin , C . ( 1986 ) . Systemaucity and surface similarity in the development of analogy . Cogniii \ e Science . W , 277 - 300 . Gentner , D . . & Wolff , P . ( 1996 ) . Metaphor and knowledge change . Ln A . Kashcr & Y . Shen ( Eds . ) , Cognitive aspects of metaphor : Structure , comprehension and use . Manuscript in preparation . Gibbs , R . W . f 19У4 ) . The poetics of mind . New York : Cambridge Univer - sity Press . Goldstone , R . L . ( 1994a ) . The role of similarity in categorization : Pro - viding a groundwork . Cognition . 52 . 125 - 157 . Goldstone . R . L . ( I994b ) . Similarity , interactive activation , and map - ping . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning . Memory and Cognition . 20 , 3 - 28 . Golditonc , R . L . , & Medin . D . L . ( 1994 ) . The time course of compari - son . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning . Memory and Cognition . 20 . 29 - 50 . Goldstone , R . L . . Medin , D . L . , & Centner , D . ( 1991 ) . Relational s : : ni - larity and the non - independence of features in similarity judgments Cognitive Psvcholofrf . 23 . 222 - 262 . Goodman . N ( 1972 ) . Problems and prospects . Indianapolis . IN : Bobbs - Merrill . Gremer , R . ( 1988 ) . Learning by understanding analozies . Artificial in - telligence . 35 . 81 - 125 . Hammond , K . J . . Seifert . CM . . & Gray , K . C . ( 199 ! ι . Functional ^ in analogical transfer : A hard match is good to fine ! . The Journal of the Uaminz Sciences . I . 111 - 152 I lampion , J . A . ( 1995 ) . Testing ihe prototype theorj o : ' concepts . Jour - nal of Memory and Language . 34 . 686 - 708 . HnfsLadler , L ) . ( 1995 ) . Fluid concepts and creative analogies . New " lork Basic Books . HoUoak . K . J . ( I9S5 ) . The pragmatics of analogical transfer . In С - Н Bower ( Ed . ) . The psvchologv of learning and mo : i \ a : ion . Advancfi in rrsninh and theory ( pp . 59 - 87 ) , New \ brk : Acjdemic Pres , Molyoak . K . J . A . Koh . K . ( 1987 ) . Surface and structural simitarn > in analogical irjiisfer . Memory and Cognition . 15 . 332 - . UO . Hiilvoak . K . J . . & Thagard . P . ( 198У ) . Analogical mapping b > constant satisfaction Cognitive Science . 13 . 295 - 355 . Hulvoak . K J . . & Thagard . P , ( 1997 ) The analogical rr ; ; nd . Amer . . an Psychology . 52 , 35 ~ - - »4 . Inagaki . Κ . . . Λ . Haumo , C . ( 1487 ) . V > unb ! children ' s spor . unious perwn - ifk - jtion as analogy . Child De \ tlopmtnt . 58 . 101 . » - W20 Kahneman . D . . k Miller . D , Τ ( 1986 ) . Norm theory : Comparing re - il ; t > to its alternatives . t * s \ chological Reviev , : 9 . 1 . 136 - 153 Kahneman . D . . & Tverskv , A . ( 19 , 44 ) . Choices , values , and frarrei American Pncfatlogist , 39 . 341 - 350 . Kt - ane . Μ . Τ ( 198S ) Analogical mechanisms Amncial Intfllitit ' nf Kn - trn ; 2 . 224 - 250 Keane . M , T . Ledpeway . T . & . Duff , S . ( 1944 ) Const - lints on analc - ei - cal mapping : A comparison of three models . Cognnt \ e Science . JX . 387 - 438 . Keil . F . C . ( 1989 ) . Concepts , kinds and cognitive de \ elopment . Cam - bridge , MA : MIT Press . Keil , F . С . , & Batterman , N . ( 1984 ) . A characteristic - to - defining shift in the development of word meaning . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior . 23 , 221 - 236 . Kepler , J . ( 1992 ) . The new astronomy ( W . H . Donahue , Trans . ) . Cam - bridge , England : Cambridge University Press . ( Original work pub - lished 1609 ) Kolodner , J . ( 1993 ) . Case - based reasoning . San Mateo , CA : Morgan Kaufmann . Lakoff , G . , & Johnson , M . ( 1980 ) . Metaphors we live by . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Lassaline , М . E . ( 1996 ) . Structural alignment in induction and similar - ity . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 22 , 754 - 770 . Lindemann , P . G . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1996 ) . Alignability and attribute importance in choice . In G . Cottrell ( Ed . ) , Proceedings of the eigh - teenth annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 358 - 363 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Markman , A . B . ( 1996 ) . Constraints on analogical inference . Manu - script in preparation . Markman , A . B . , & Centner , D . ( 1993a ) . Splitting the differences : A structural alignment view of similarity . Journal of Memory and Lan - guage . 32 , 517 - 535 . Markman , A . B . , & Centner , D . ( 1993b ) . Structural alignment during similarity comparisons . Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 431 - 467 . Markman , A . B . , & Centner , D . ( 1996 ) . Commonalities and differences in similarity comparisons . Memory & Cognition , 24 , 235 - 249 . Markman , A . B . , & Centner , D . ( in press ) . The effects of alignability on memory . Psychological Science . Markman , A . B . , & Medin , D . L . ( 1995 ) . Similarity and alignment in choice . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 63 , 117 - 130 . Markman , A . B . , & Wisniewski , E . J . ( in press ) . Similar and different : The differentiation of basic level categories . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition . Medin , D . L . , Goldstone , R . L . , & Centner , D . ( 1993 ) . Respects for similarity . Psychological Review , 100 , 254 - 278 . Medin , D . L . , Goldstone , R . L . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1995 ) . Comparison and choice : Relations between similarity processing and decision processing . Psychonomic Bulletin and Review , 2 , 1 - 19 . Murphy , G . L . , & Medin , D . L . ( 1985 ) . The role of theories in concep - tual coherence . Psychological Review , 92 , 289 - 315 . Novick , L . R . ( 1988 ) . Analogical transfer , problem similarity and exper - tise . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory and Cognition , 14 , 510 - 520 . Novick , L . R . ( 1990 ) . Representational transfer in problem solving . Psychological Science . 1 , 128 - 132 . Palmer , S . E . ( 1978 ) . Fundamental aspects of cognitive representation . In E . Rosch & В . В . Lloyd ( Eds . ) , Cognition and categorization ( pp . 259 - 303 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Ratcliff , R . , & McKoon , G . ( 1989 ) . Similarity information versus rela - tional information : Differences in the time course of retrieval . Cogni - tive Psychology , 21 , 139 - 155 . Read , S . J . ( 1984 ) . Analogical reasoning in social judgment : The impor - tance of causal theories . Journal of Personality and Social Psychol - ogy . 46 , 14 - 25 . Reed , S . K . ( 1987 ) . A structure - mapping model for word problems . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cogni - tion , 13 , 124 - 139 . Rips , L . J . ( 1989 ) . Similarity , typicality , and categorization . In S . Vosni - adou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 21 - 59 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Rosch , E . ( 1975 ) . Cognitive representations of semantic categories . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 104 , 192—233 . Ross , В . Н . ( 1987 ) . This is like that : The use of earlier problems and the separation of similarity effects . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 13 , 629 - 639 . Ross , В . Н . ( 1989 ) . Distinguishing types of superficial similarities : Dif - ferent effects on the access and use of earlier examples . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 15 , 456 - 468 . Schumacher , R . M . , & Centner , D . ( 1988 ) . Remembering causal sys - tems : Effects of systematicity and surface similarity in delayed trans - fer . In Proceedings of the Human Factors Society 32nd annual meet - ing ( pp . 1271 - 1275 ) . Santa Monica , CA : Human Factors Society . Seifert , C . M . , McKoon , G . , Abelson , R . P . , & Ratcliff , R . ( 1986 ) . Memory connection between thematically similar episodes . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 12 , 220 - 231 . Slovic , P . , & MacPhillamy , D . ( 1974 ) . Dimensional commensurability and cue utilization in comparative judgment . Organizational Behav - ior and Human Performance , 11 , 172 - 194 . Smith , E . E , , & Medin , D . L . ( 1981 ) . Categories and concepts . Cam - bridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Spellman , Β . Α . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( in press ) . Pragmatics in analogical mapping . Cognitive Psychology . Tversky , A . ( 1977 ) . Features of similarity . Psychological Review , 84 , 327 - 352 . Winston , P . H . ( 1980 ) . Learning and reasoning by analogy . Communica - tions of the Association for Computing Machinery , 23 , 689 - 703 .