SWELL1 is a regulator of adipocyte size , insulin signaling and glucose homeostasis The Harvard community has made this article openly available . Please share how this access benefits you . Your story matters Citation Zhang , Y . , L . Xie , S . K . Gunasekar , D . Tong , A . Mishra , W . J . Gibson , C . Wang , et al . 2017 . “SWELL1 is a regulator of adipocyte size , insulin signaling and glucose homeostasis . ” Nature cell biology 19 ( 5 ) : 504 - 517 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3514 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb3514 . Published Version doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3514 Citable link http : / / nrs . harvard . edu / urn - 3 : HUL . InstRepos : 34492391 Terms of Use This article was downloaded from Harvard University’s DASH repository , and is made available under the terms and conditions applicable to Other Posted Material , as set forth at http : / / nrs . harvard . edu / urn - 3 : HUL . InstRepos : dash . current . terms - of - use # LAA SWELL1 is a regulator of adipocyte size , insulin signaling and glucose homeostasis Yanhui Zhang 1 , Litao Xie 1 , Susheel K . Gunasekar 1 , Dan Tong 1 , Anil Mishra 1 , William J . Gibson 2 , Chuansong Wang 3 , Trevor Fidler 4 , Brodie Marthaler 1 , Aloysius Klingelhutz 5 , E . Dale Abel 4 , Isaac Samuel 6 , Jessica K . Smith 6 , Lei Cao 3 , and Rajan Sah 1 , 4 , * 1 Department of Internal Medicine , Division of Cardiovascular Medicine , University of Iowa , Carver College of Medicine , Iowa City , IA , 52242 2 Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA , 02115 3 Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics , The Ohio State University , Columbus , Ohio 4 Fraternal Order of the Eagles Diabetes Research Center , Iowa City , IA , 52242 5 Department of Microbiology , University of Iowa , Carver College of Medicine , Iowa City , IA , 52242 6 Department of Surgery , University of Iowa , Carver College of Medicine , Iowa City , IA , 52242 SUMMARY Adipocytes undergo considerable volumetric expansion in the setting of obesity . It has been proposed that such marked increases in adipocyte size may be sensed via adipocyte - autonomous mechanisms to mediate size - dependent intracellular signaling . Here , we show that SWELL1 ( LRRC8a ) , a member of the Leucine Rich Repeat Containing protein family , is an essential component of a volume - sensitive ion channel ( VRAC ) in adipocytes . We find that SWELL1 - mediated VRAC is augmented in hypertrophic murine and human adipocytes in the setting of obesity . SWELL1 regulates adipocyte insulin - PI3K - AKT2 - GLUT4 signaling , glucose uptake and lipid content via SWELL1 C - terminal leucine - rich repeat domain interactions with GRB2 / Cav1 . Silencing GRB2 in SWELL1 KO adipocytes rescues insulin - pAKT2 signaling . In vivo , shRNA - mediated SWELL1 knock - down and adipose - targeted SWELL1 knock - out reduce adiposity and adipocyte size in obese mice while impairing systemic glycaemia and insulin - sensitivity . These studies identify SWELL1 as a cell - autonomous sensor of adipocyte size that regulates adipocyte growth , insulin sensitivity and glucose tolerance . Users may view , print , copy , and download text and data - mine the content in such documents , for the purposes of academic research , subject always to the full Conditions of use : http : / / www . nature . com / authors / editorial _ policies / license . html # terms * Corresponding Author : Dr . Rajan Sah , 169 Newton Rd . PBDB 4334 , Iowa City , Iowa 52242 , Phone : 319 - 353 - 5660 rajan - sah @ uiowa . edu . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Conceptualization , R . S . ; Methodology , Y . Z . , L . X . , S . G . , D . T . , W . J . G . , T . F . , R . S . ; Formal Analysis , R . S . , Y . Z . , L . X . , S . G , D . T . , A . M . , W . J . G . , T . F . ; Investigation , R . S . , Y . Z . , L . X . , S . G , D . T . , T . F . , B . M . , A . M . ; Resources , C . W . , L . C . , E . D . A . , J . S . , I . S . ; Writing – Original Draft , R . S . , Writing – Review & Editing , R . S . , Y . Z . , L . X . , S . G . , D . T . E . D . A . ; Visualization , R . S . , Y . Z . , L . X . , S . G ; Supervision , R . S . ; Funding Acquisition , R . S . HHS Public Access Author manuscript Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . Published in final edited form as : Nat Cell Biol . 2017 May ; 19 ( 5 ) : 504 – 517 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3514 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t INTRODUCTION The adipocyte maximizes energy storage by forming a large lipid droplet , separated from the plasma membrane by a thin rim of cytoplasm , while maintaining a tremendous capacity for volumetric expansion - increasing > 30 - fold in the setting of obesity 1 . This lipid droplet growth augments adipocyte stiffness , thereby reducing membrane compliance 2 and increasing membrane tension , which in turn has been shown to activate intracellular signaling pathways 3 , 4 , implying that adipocytes may be mechano - sensitive 4 . Moreover , adipocyte size in obesity has been correlated with the severity of linked diseases such as diabetes and insulin resistance 5 , 6 , suggesting that increases in adipocyte volume 1 or membrane tension 7 may alter intracellular signaling . Others propose that caveolae enable expanding adipocytes to auto - regulate lipid content based on mechanical lipid droplet - plasma membrane interactions 8 and tune insulin signaling in response to adipocyte swelling 9 . However , the molecular identity a putative adipocyte volume sensor remains a mystery . Ion channels are membrane proteins that can signal in response to membrane - stretch , and accordingly provide plausible candidates for adipocyte membrane stretch - sensors that bridge membrane tension with intracellular signaling . There are a number of candidate stretch / mechano - sensitive ion channels in mammalian cells including TRPM7 10 , 11 , TRPV2 12 , TRPV4 13 , TRPC6 14 and Piezo - 1 / Piezo - 2 15 . Many of these ion channels are expressed in adipocytes 16 , and have signaling roles important for adipogenesis 16 , fatty acid sensing 17 , oxidative metabolism , inflammation and energy homeostasis 18 . In this study , we explored swell - activated ion channel signaling in adipocytes by applying the patch - clamp technique to freshly isolated , mature murine and human adipocytes . Using this approach , we identified a prominent swell - activated chloride current in adipocytes , characteristic of the volume - regulated anion current ( VRAC ) , and discovered that the gene LRRC8a , a member of the Leucine Rich Repeat ( LRR ) Containing proteins 19 , 20 ( SWELL1 ) , is required for adipocyte VRAC . Interestingly , Kumar et al . 21 , unaware of the volume - sensitive ion channel function of SWELL1 ( LRRC8a ) , recently showed that it can signal via phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) / AKT in lymphocytes , a pathway known to be important for lipid and glucose homeostasis in adipocytes 22 , 23 . On the background of these recent findings we hypothesized that SWELL1 may participate in sensing adipocyte volume during physiological or pathophysiological adipocyte expansion and engage insulin - PI3K - AKT signaling – thereby coupling adipocyte growth with insulin signaling . Herein , we link the volume - sensitive SWELL1 molecule to adipocyte insulin signaling and growth ; and propose a model in which SWELL1 activates in response to adipocyte expansion , and tunes insulin - mediated activation of growth and glucose import pathways . Adipocyte patch clamp reveals prominent swell - activated current in murine and human adipocytes To identify a putative swell - activated ionic current in adipocytes we performed patch - clamp recordings on mature murine adipocytes freshly isolated from inguinal white adipose tissue ( iWAT ) . We measured ionic currents in voltage - clamp mode while simultaneously swelling the adipocyte by applying positive pressure ( ~ 3 – 5 mmHg , whole - cell configuration ) via the Zhang et al . Page 2 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t patch - pipette ( Fig . 1a - Swelled ) . After a few minutes , we observed activation of a large swell - activated current ( Fig . 1b & c ) . This current is outward rectifying , characterized by larger outward current at positive voltages compared to inward currents at negative voltages during sequential voltage ramps ( Fig . 1b & c ) or voltage steps ( Fig . 1d ) , with the current amplitude proportional to the extent of adipocyte swelling ( Fig . 1e – g ) . This current reverses at −11 . 7 ± 2 . 5 mV , which is near the reversal potential of chloride under our conditions ( −11 . 5 mV , junction potential corrected ) . Application of low chloride extracellular solution largely abolished the outward component of this current and shifted the current reversal towards 0 mV ( Fig . 1h ) , suggesting a predominant chloride conductance . Finally , this swell - activated adipocyte current is blocked by 4 - [ ( 2 - Butyl - 6 , 7 - dichloro - 2 - cyclopentyl - 2 , 3 - dihydro - 1 - oxo - 1H - inden - 5 - yl ) oxy ] butanoic acid ( DCPIB ) , a selective blocker of the volume - regulated anion current ( VRAC ) or volume - sensitive outwardly rectifying chloride current ( VSOR ) ( Fig . 1b – c ) . We also confirmed this swell - activated current to be present in the murine 3T3 - F442A ( Fig . 1i ) and human adipocyte cell lines ( Fig . 1j , NPAD ) 24 upon hypotonic swelling , and this current is fully inhibited by DCPIB . Collectively , these data suggest that this swell - activated adipocyte chloride current is VRAC or VSOR , as identified previously in numerous other cell types 25 , 26 , including adipocytes 27 . SWELL1 / LRRC8a is required for swell - activated VRAC in adipocytes As SWELL1 - LRRC8 - complexes have been recently shown to form the ion channel responsible for VRAC in several common cell lines 19 , 20 , 28 , we next asked whether SWELL1 was required for adipocyte VRAC . We generated an adenovirus expressing a short - hairpin RNA directed to SWELL1 mRNA ( Ad - shSWELL1 - mCherry ) to knock - down SWELL1 in both mature , primary adipocytes and in adipocyte cell lines , while a scrambled shRNA served as a control ( Ad - shSCR - mCherry ) . We confirmed robust knock - down ( KD ) of SWELL1 mRNA ( Supplementary Fig . 1a ) and protein ( Supplementary Fig . 1b ) in cultured human pre - adipocytes upon adenoviral shRNA transduction . To knock - down SWELL1 in mature , primary murine adipocytes , we injected Ad - shSWELL1 / shSCR - mCherry directly into iWAT of mice and then isolated and recorded from patch - clamped mCherry positive adipocytes 5 days later ( Fig . 2a ) . ShRNA - mediated SWELL1 knock - down nearly abolished all swell - activated VRAC in murine adipocytes as compared to the scrambled shRNA control ( Fig . 2b & c ) , in addition to VRAC in both murine 3T3 - F442A adipocytes ( Supplementary Fig . 1c & d ) and in a human adipocyte cell line ( Supplementary Fig . 1e & f ) . As a complementary approach , we used CRISPR / cas9 gene editing 29 to disrupt SWELL1 using either a single guide RNA ( gRNA ; Supplementary Fig . 2a ) or double gRNA ( Supplementary Fig . 2b & c ) approach in the 3T3 - F442A adipocyte line . From two independent SWELL1 CRISPR / cas9 knock - out ( KO ) adipocyte cell lines we find that VRAC is entirely abolished ( Fig . 2d & e ) upon SWELL1 gene disruption , and this is associated with complete loss of SWELL1 protein ( Fig . 2f ) . To achieve conditional ablation of SWELL1 , we generated mice with flanking loxP sites around SWELL1 Exon 3 by applying a CRISPR / cas9 knock - in approach 30 ( Supplementary Fig . 2d ) . Cultured tail - tip fibroblasts from SWELL1 fl mice transduced with adenoviral - Cre - Zhang et al . Page 3 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t mCherry ( Ad - Cre - mCherry ) show excision of SWELL1 Exon 3 ( Supplementary Fig . 2e ) . Primary adipocytes isolated and cultured from the stromal vascular fraction ( SVF ; Supplementary Fig . 2f ) also show specific SWELL1 mRNA ablation when transduced ( > 90 % efficient ) with Ad - Cre - mCherry ( Supplementary Fig . 2g & h ) , and this is associated with ablation of VRAC ( Supplementary Fig . 2i – k ) . Next , we measured VRAC in mature murine adipocytes isolated from iWAT of SWELL1 fl mice 5 – 7 days after direct injection with either Ad - mCherry or Ad - Cre - mCherry ( Fig . 2g ) . We find that SWELL1 deletion ( Ad - Cre - mCherry ) entirely ablates swell - induced VRAC in mature adipocytes ( Figure 2h – j ) . Collectively , these data show that SWELL1 / LRRC8a is required for swell - induced VRAC currents in both primary adipocytes and adipocyte cell lines . SWELL1 - mediated VRAC is increased in adipocytes of obese mice and humans As adipocyte hypertrophy is the relevant physiological stimulus encountered in vivo , we asked whether lipid droplet expansion in the setting of obesity could activate SWELL1 - mediated VRAC at the adipocyte plasma membrane . We isolated mature adipocytes from iWAT of lean ( normal chow : NC , 10 – 12 weeks ) and obese ( high fat diet , HFD , 10 – 12 weeks ; Supplementary Fig . 3a ) mice and measured VRAC using the perforated - patch configuration of the patch - clamp technique ( Fig . 3a , see Methods ) pre - and post hypotonic swelling . Similar to positive - pressure swelling , we discovered that a minimal amount of adipocyte swelling is required ( ~ 1 – 2 % increase in diameter ) to activate robust SWELL1 - mediated currents ( Fig . 3a & b ; i to ii ) - easily within the physiological range of adipocyte expansion / contraction occurring during feeding / fasting . As expected , adipocytes isolated from obese mice are hypertrophic compared to lean mice based on cell size ( Fig . 3c ) and cell capacitance ( Fig . 3d ) , the latter providing a measure of adipocyte surface area . SWELL1 - mediated current densities in hypertrophic adipocytes are significantly increased compared to adipocytes of lean mice , both upon adipocyte swelling ( Fig . 3e – g ) and , importantly , prior to swelling ( Fig . 3e & h , pre - stimulation ) . To determine whether these increases in SWELL1 - mediated currents measured in hypertrophic adipocytes result from SWELL1 - LRRC8 channel activation versus augmented SWELL1 - LRRC8 channel expression , we performed qPCR to measure relative mRNA expression levels of SWELL1 / LRRC8a , LRRC8b , LRRC8c , LRRC8d and LRRC8e in adipocytes from lean compared to obese mice ( Supplementary Fig . 3b ) , and found a non - statistically significant trend toward increasing SWELL1 ( 2 . 2 - fold ; p = 0 . 07 ) expression , with significant increases in LRRC8b ( 3 - fold , p < 0 . 05 ) and LRRC8d ( 2 . 9 - fold , p < 0 . 01 ) . Therefore , it is possible that augmented adipocyte VRAC currents in obesity occur due to SWELL1 - LRRC8 channel activation by adipocyte hypertrophy , in addition to coordinated increases in SWELL1 / LRRC8a , LRRC8b and LRRC8d expression . We next asked whether VRAC is also activated in hypertrophic adipocytes of obese humans and patch - clamped mature adipocytes freshly dissociated from visceral fat harvested from obese , BMI > 30 , bariatric surgery patients compared to leaner non - bariatric patients , BMI < 30 ( see Supplementary Fig . 3c ) . As in mice , there is a significant , though less marked , increase in adipocyte size ( Figure 3i ) and adipocyte capacitance ( Figure 3j ) in obese compared to leaner non - bariatric patients . Similarly , VRAC is augmented upon swelling in adipocytes from obese compared to leaner patients ( Figure 3k – m ) , as is basal or “pre - Zhang et al . Page 4 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t activated” VRAC inward current ( Fig . 3k & n , pre - stimulation ) . Taken together , these data strongly suggest that SWELL1 - mediated VRAC is augmented in adipocytes as they hypertrophy in obese mice and humans . SWELL1 regulates lipid content and glucose metabolism in 3T3 - F442A adipocytes To obtain unbiased insight into putative SWELL1 - dependent molecular pathways impacting adipocyte function we performed genome - wide RNA sequencing ( RNA Seq ) of wild - type ( WT ) and CRISPR / cas9 mediated SWELL1 KO adipocytes . This revealed significant differences in RNA transcriptional profile with 9090 differentially expressed genes based on a false - discovery rate q - value of 0 . 25 ( Supplementary Fig . 4a ; Supplementary Table 1 ) . Gene Set Enrichment Analysis ( GSEA ) of the RNA sequencing data highlights pathways related to hypoxia , adipogenesis , glucose metabolism and insulin signaling ( Supplementary Fig . 4b and Supplementary Table 2 ) . Consistent with a requirement for SWELL1 in adipogenesis , both SWELL1 KO adipocytes ( Fig . 4a ) and cultured SWELL1 KO primary adipocytes ( Fig . 4b ) develop less intracellular lipid than WT as assessed by AdipoRed fluorescence imaging ( under high glucose culture conditions , 25 mM ) . Switching to low glucose media ( 5 mM ) abolishes this difference in intracellular lipid content between WT and SWELL1 KO adipocytes ( Supplementary Fig . 4c ) . These data suggest that impaired glucose uptake , and consequently diminished de novo lipogenesis , underlies the reduction in lipid content in SWELL1 KO adipocytes relative to WT under high glucose culture conditions . We next measured basal and insulin - stimulated glucose uptake in WT and SWELL1 KO adipocytes using radioactively labeled 2 - deoxy - D - glucose . WT adipocytes exhibit the expected increase in glucose uptake upon insulin - stimulation 31 , while this effect is abrogated in SWELL1 KO adipocytes ( Fig . 4c ) . Transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) images of SWELL1 KO adipocytes reveal a significant reduction in glycogen content compared to WT adipocytes under conditions of chronic insulin stimulation ( i . e . differentiation media , 860 nM ) ( Fig . 4d , Supplementary Fig . 4d ) . Taken together , these data suggest that SWELL1 is required for both glucose uptake / metabolism and lipogenesis in adipocytes . SWELL1 regulates insulin - PI3K - AKT signaling , GLUT4 translocation , GSK3 β and FOXO1 As both glucose uptake and lipogenesis require intact insulin - phosphoinositol 3 - kinase - AKT2 ( insulin - PI3K - AKT2 ) signaling in adipocytes 22 , 32 , we next examined the integrity of this pathway in SWELL1 KO adipocytes . SWELL1 deletion in both SWELL1 KO 3T3 - F442A adipocytes ( Fig . 4e ) and SWELL1 KO primary adipocytes ( Fig . 4f ) significantly reduced insulin - stimulated pAKT2 ( pSerine474 ) when compared to their respective WT adipocytes , whereas pAKT1 ( pSerine473 ) levels remained constitutively increased . To determine whether SWELL1 silencing in mature adipocytes in vivo also disrupts insulin - PI3K - AKT signaling we examined insulin - stimulated pAKT2 and pAKT1 in iWAT of mice 7 days after direct iWAT injection with Ad - shSCR - mCherry / Ad - shSWELL1 - mCherry . Paralleling the in vitro data , iWAT SWELL1 knock - down significantly dampened insulin - pAKT2 signaling without influencing insulin - mediated phosphorylation of AKT1 ( Fig . 4g ) . Zhang et al . Page 5 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t As insulin - PI3K - AKT2 stimulates glucose uptake via GLUT4 plasma membrane translocation , we directly measured insulin - stimulated GLUT4 translocation , using a surface biotinylation , and then blotted for GLUT4 in the plasma membrane ( PM ) versus cytosol ( C ) . We find that insulin - stimulated GLUT4 PM translocation is reduced in SWELL1 KO adipocytes ( Fig . 4h ) . As it is well established that phosphorylation - mediated inhibition of the RabGAP AS160 ( pThreonine642 ) is required for insulin - stimulated GLUT4 vesicle docking and fusion with the PM 33 , 34 , and that this phosphorylation event is AKT2 - specific and AKT1 - independent 32 we next examined insulin - stimulated pAS160 / AS160 . We find that pAS160 / AS160 is reduced in SWELL1 KO adipocytes compared to WT ( Fig . 4i ) , consistent with the observed reduction in insulin - PI3K - pAKT2 - GLUT4 signaling . Insulin - PI3K - AKT - mediated phosphorylation of Glycogen Synthase Kinase - 3 β ( pGSK3 β ) inhibits GSK3 β activity and subsequently dis - inhibits glycogen synthase , allowing glucose to be stored as glycogen 35 . We find that insulin - stimulated pGSK3 β / GSK3 β and pGSK3 β / β - actin ( pSerine9 ) are reduced in SWELL1 KO adipocytes ( Fig . 4j ) , providing a molecular mechanism for the reduction in glycogen granules observed on EM ( Fig . 4d ) . Thus , SWELL1 - mediated pAKT2 signaling appears to coordinately regulate both glucose import via GLUT4 translocation and glycogen synthesis via GSK3 β . We next examined the AKT - substrate FOXO1 , a transcription factor that suppresses adipocyte differentiation when nuclear localized , but upon insulin - AKT - mediated phosphorylation pFOXO1 becomes excluded from the nucleus – thereby releasing adipocyte differentiation programs 36 . We find that insulin - AKT - mediated pFOXO1 / FOXO1 and pFOXO1 / β - actin ( pThreonine24 ) , are enhanced in SWELL1 KO adipocytes ( Fig . 4j ) , in a manner similar to pAKT1 . Taken together , these data show that SWELL1 is required for insulin - PI3K - AKT2 activity and downstream signaling in adipocytes and suggest that SWELL1 may connect volume of the expanding adipocyte with “tuning” of insulin - PI3K - AKT2 signaling . SWELL1 regulates insulin - pAKT2 signaling via GRB2 - dependent interactions In lymphocytes , SWELL1 connects with PI3K signaling via a Growth Factor Receptor - bound 2 ( GRB2 ) interaction 21 . GRB2 is linked to insulin receptor ( IR ) signaling via a direct interaction with insulin - receptor substrate ( IRS ) 1 / 2 37 and is thought to modulate insulin signaling . We confirmed that GRB2 co - immuno - precipitates ( IP ) with IR in both 3T3 - F442A adipocytes ( Supplementary Fig . 5a ) and HEK cells ( Supplementary Fig . 5b ) ; and that GRB2 co - IPs with IRS1 ( using an epitope - tagged IRS1 construct : Myc - TEV - HA - IRS1 ) in HEK cells ( Supplementary Fig . 5c ) . Next , we tested for an endogenous GRB2 - SWELL1 interaction in adipocytes . We find that GRB2 co - IPs with SWELL1 in WT but not SWELL1 KO adipocytes , and that insulin - stimulation reduces this SWELL1 - GRB2 interaction ( Fig . 5a ) , suggesting a dynamic , insulin - dependent SWELL1 - GRB2 interaction ( see SWELL1 / GRB2 densitometry ) . GRB2 has also been reported to associate with caveolin - 1 ( Cav1 ) 38 . Cav1 is enriched in adipocytes 39 , thought to form insulin signaling microdomains 40 , is required for normal adipocyte insulin signaling 41 and has been described as a cellular mechanosensor 8 , 42 that regulates PI3K - AKT signaling 43 . Moreover , there are reports that Cav1 regulates VRAC 44 , further suggesting a putative SWELL1 - Cav1 molecular interaction . We find that Cav1 co - Zhang et al . Page 6 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t IPs with GRB2 in adipocytes ( Fig . 5a ) , and SWELL1 also co - IPs with Cav1 in WT but not in SWELL1 KO adipocytes ( Fig . 5b ) . These data suggest that SWELL1 resides in an insulin signaling macromolecular complex that includes Cav1 , GRB2 , IRS - 1 , and IR . It has been proposed that the SWELL1 L eucine - R ich R epeat D omain ( LRRD ) may provide docking surfaces for protein - protein interactions for signaling to various protein - kinases 45 . To determine if SWELL1 LRRD is required for GRB2 binding , we expressed wild - type SWELL1 ( Fig . 5c ) , and the SWELL1 mutant , SWELL1 Δ91 / + 35 ( Fig . 5d ) , in HEK cells and attempted to pull - down these SWELL1 proteins with endogenous GRB2 . SWELL1 Δ91 / + 35 is a mutation which replaces 91 C - terminal LRRD amino acids with 35 amino acids derived from the neighboring intronic sequence 46 ( Fig . 5d ) ; this partially disrupts the LRRD , and inactivates SWELL1 activity 20 . When WT SWELL1 and SWELL1 Δ91 / + 35 are transiently expressed at equal levels in HEK cells ( SWELL1 / β - actin = 1 . 38 ; SWELL1 Δ91 / + 35 / β - actin = 1 . 41 ; Fig . 5e ) we find that SWELL1 Δ91 / + 35 co - IP’s with GRB2 less efficiently ( SWELL1 Δ91 / + 35 / GRB2 = 0 . 07 ) than WT SWELL1 ( SWELL1 / GRB2 = 0 . 31 ) ( Fig . 5e ) , suggesting that the SWELL1 - LRRD is required for GRB2 binding . We next asked how a SWELL1 - GRB2 complex may regulate insulin signaling . It is noteworthy that GRB2 loss of function enhances insulin - PI3K - AKT and MAP kinase signaling in cultured hepatocytes 47 and in C2C12 myoblasts 48 ; and also augments insulin signaling and glucose tolerance in vivo 48 , suggesting that GRB2 is a negative regulator of insulin signaling . We find that insulin - stimulation reduces both SWELL1 - GRB2 and Cav1 - GRB2 , but not SWELL1 - Cav1 interactions in WT adipocytes ( Fig . 5a & b ) , suggesting that insulin - stimulation induces GRB2 dissociation from the insulin - signaling complex , thereby dis - inhibiting downstream insulin signaling . To examine whether the defect in insulin - pAKT2 signaling observed upon SWELL1 KO is due to unrestrained GRB2 - mediated inhibition we generated stable WT / GRB2 KD and SWELL1 KO / GRB2 KD adipocytes using a lentiviral shRNA to GRB2 . Similar to prior reports in hepatocytes and myoblasts , we observe enhanced insulin - pAKT2 signaling in WT GRB2 - deficient adipocytes ( Fig . 5f , g & h ) , even under non - insulin stimulated conditions . Importantly , GRB2 KD in SWELL1 KO adipocytes rescues the impairment in insulin - pAKT2 activation , confirming that suppression of insulin - pAKT2 signaling upon SWELL1 ablation is GRB2 - dependent ( Fig . 5f , i & j ) . Overall , these data suggest that SWELL1 modulates insulin - PI3K - AKT2 signaling by titrating GRB2 - inhibition of a Cav1 - IRS1 - IR signaling complex via a C - terminal LRRD - mediated interaction with GRB2 . SWELL1 knock - down reduces adipocyte size , adiposity and impairs glucose tolerance in obese mice Based on our findings that SWELL1 is required for insulin - PI3K - AKT2 signaling and that SWELL1 is activated in hypertrophic adipocytes in the context of obesity , we asked whether SWELL1 knock - down can influence adipocyte size , adiposity and glucose tolerance in obese mice . We tested the acute effects of SWELL1 knock - down on adipocyte size , by injecting iWAT of obese mice ( HFD , 10 – 12 weeks ) with either Ad - shSCR - mCherry or Ad - shSWELL1 - mCherry , and after 12 days , isolating and measuring the transduced adipocyte . We find that SWELL1 - depleted adipocytes are 28 % smaller than control adipocytes ( Fig . Zhang et al . Page 7 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 6a & b ) with a leftward shifted size distribution ( Fig . 6c ) . To examine the effects of SWELL1 knock - down in vivo during the development of diet - induced obesity we generated adeno - associated viruses ( AAV / Rec2 ) for sustained viral expression of shSWELL1 , as this AAV / Rec2 serotype has a high tropism for adipose tissue and can sustain expression for up to 12 months 49 . After direct iWAT injection with either AAV / Rec2 - shSWELL1 - mCherry or AAV / Rec2 - shSCR - mCherry , both groups of mice were placed on a HFD for 16 weeks prior to analysis . Patch - clamp recordings from hypertrophic AAV / Rec2 - shSWELL1 - mCherry transduced iWAT adipocytes confirm strong SWELL1 silencing compared to AAV / Rec2 - shSCR - mCherry at 16 weeks post injection ( Fig . 6d & e ) and this is associated with reduced adipocyte size ( Fig . 6f & g ) , as observed with acute adenoviral SWELL1 knock - down in iWAT of obese mice ( Fig . 6a – c ) . Interestingly , while AAV / Rec2 iWAT transduction is patchy and restricted to the injection site ( Supplementary Fig . 6a , iWAT ) , we note wide - spread viral transduction of much of the visceral epididymal white adipose tissue ( Supplementary Fig . 6a , eWAT ) . In addition , we observe transduction of liver and skeletal muscle ( Supplementary Fig . 6b ) , resulting in a pattern of AAV / Rec2 transduction , involving several insulin - sensitive tissues . Nuclear Magnetic Resonance ( NMR ) measurements reveal a trend toward reduced total % fat ( Supplementary Fig . 6c ) , accompanied by a small increase in % lean mass ( Supplementary Fig . 6d ) . As visceral adipose was preferentially transduced by AAV / Rec2 we speculated that the reduction in global adiposity measured by NMR might be driven by contraction of the visceral depot . To discriminate subcutaneous from visceral adipose tissue non - invasively in vivo , we turned to microCT imaging 50 . This revealed a significant reduction specifically in visceral adiposity , with a marked reduction of the epididymal fat depot ( Fig . 6h – j ) , consistent with preferential SWELL1 KD in visceral fat . MicroCT derived 3D reconstructions of visceral adipose of representative AAV / Rec2 - shSCR / shSWELL1 - mCherry are shown in Fig . 6h ( right panels , red ) and in Movies S1 and S2 , respectively . We next examined both glucose and insulin tolerance in these mice , and found that SWELL1 knock down in vivo is associated with impaired glucose tolerance ( Fig . 6k ) and insulin resistance ( Fig . 6l ) . Adipocyte - restricted SWELL1 deletion induces systemic glucose intolerance and insulin - resistance As a complementary approach to the AAV / Rec2 - mediated SWELL1 KD experiments we generated adipose - targeted SWELL1 knock - out ( Adipo KO ) mice by crossing SWELL1 fl mice with Adiponectin - Cre mice to achieve adipose - restricted Cre - mediated SWELL1 recombination using the Cre - loxP system 51 ( Fig . 7a ) . Adipo KO mice show clear adipose - restricted SWELL1 Exon 3 deletion in subcutaneous ( iWAT ) , visceral ( eWAT ) and brown ( BAT ) adipose tissue without evidence of recombination in other tissues ( Fig . 7a ) . SWELL1 - LRRC8 currents are entirely ablated in mature Adipo KO adipocytes compared to WT adipocytes ( Fig . 7b & c ) . At baseline , Adipo KO mice are indistinguishable from littermate SWELL1 fl controls with respect to total body weight ( Fig . 7d ) and adiposity - as assessed by both NMR ( Fig . 7e & f ) and iWAT / eWAT weights ( Fig . 7g & h ) . Moreover , there are no differences in adipocyte size ( Supplementary Fig . 7a – f ) . mRNA expression levels of adipocyte differentiation markers , including Adiponectin , C / EBP α , C / EBP β , and PPAR γ are either unchanged or slightly increased in iWAT of Adipo KO mice compared to WT ( Supplementary Fig . 7g ) . Despite normal adipocyte development , Adipo KO mice exhibit Zhang et al . Page 8 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t impaired glucose tolerance ( Fig . 7i ) and insulin - sensitivity ( Fig . 7j ) compared to WT , as observed with systemic AAV / Rec2 - mediated SWELL1 knock down ( Fig . 6k , i ) . Collectively , these data indicate that adipocyte SWELL1 is required for normal systemic glycemia and insulin - sensitivity but is dispensable for normal postnatal development and differentiation of adipocytes in vivo under basal conditions . Adipocyte - restricted SWELL1 ablation limits adiposity and adipocyte size in obese mice As SWELL1 - LRRC8 activity is augmented in the setting of obesity in mice and humans we next asked whether SWELL1 is required for adipocyte hypertrophy under conditions of over - nutrition . Adipo KO mice placed on a HFD ( 16 weeks ) gain less weight ( Fig . 8a ) , despite no consistent differences in daily food consumption ( Fig . 8b ) , and this is attributed to a marked reduction in percent adiposity ( Fig . 8c ) and total adipose mass ( Fig . 8d ) ; while percent lean mass is proportionately increased ( Fig . 8e ) , with total lean mass unchanged ( Fig . 8f ) . Inguinal and epididymal fat pads are also significantly smaller in Adipo KO mice relative to WT littermate controls ( Fig . 8g ) . As the reduction in total adiposity and fat pad size observed in Adipo KO mice may arise from fewer adipocytes , smaller adipocytes , or both , we next measured adipocyte size in WT and Adipo KO mice . Measurements of adipocyte cross - sectional areas from H & E stained sections of HFD Adipo KO and WT iWAT ( Fig . 8h ) reveal a striking reduction in adipocyte size in Adipo KO mice relative to WT ( Fig . 8i & j ) . Overlaying the adipocyte size distribution of lean / obese , WT and Adipo KO mice shows that SWELL1 deletion has no effect on adipocyte size in lean mice but induces a clear leftward shift in adipocyte size in the setting of obesity toward a lean phenotype ( Fig . 8k ) . Adipocyte size of freshly dissociated adipocytes isolated from HFD Adipo KO iWAT are also significantly smaller than WT ( Supplementary Fig . 8a & b ) , with a leftward shifted size distribution ( Supplementary Fig . 8c ) ; comparable in relative size reduction to our viral knock - down studies ( Fig . 6b – c & f – g ) . Moreover , glucose intolerance and insulin - resistance associated with obesity is further exacerbated in Adipo KO mice compared to WT littermates controls ( Fig . 8l & m ) . To determine whether these differences in adipocyte size in Adipo KO relative to WT mice are related to differences in energy expenditure we measured heat production , VO 2 , VCO 2 , RER , food consumption , activity level and sleep in both lean ( Supplementary Fig . 7h – n ) and obese mice ( Supplementary Fig . 8d – j ) by indirect calorimetry . There are no differences in any measured parameter in lean WT compared to Adipo KO mice . In obese mice we observe an increase in energy expenditure in Adipo KO mice ( Supplementary Fig . 8d ) , but this is associated with an increase in activity level ( Supplementary Fig . 8h ) , which may be driving the increased energy expenditure . Collectively , these data identify SWELL1 as a swell - activated , volume - sensitive regulator of adipocyte growth , adiposity and insulin signaling and delineates a SWELL1 / LRRD - GRB2 - Cav1 - IRS1 - PI3K - AKT2 signaling pathway in adipocytes . Zhang et al . Page 9 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t DISCUSSION Our data show that the recently identified membrane protein , SWELL1 19 , 20 , is a critical component of a prominent volume - sensitive ion channel in adipocytes that is activated in the context of adipocyte hypertrophy in obesity , and is required for adipocyte expansion and insulin - PI3K - AKT2 signaling via a LRRD - mediated GRB2 interaction . These findings link SWELL1 , with adipocyte insulin - signaling and provide a putative molecular mechanism for the previously described effects of adipocyte membrane tension on lipogenesis and intracellular signaling 1 – 4 , 7 , 9 . We propose a working model in which SWELL1 is activated by increases in adipocyte volume during adipocyte hypertrophy , and potentiates insulin - PI3K - AKT2 signaling via C - terminal LRRD interactions with GRB2 - Cav1 - IRS1 - IR to support insulin - mediated GLUT4 PM translocation , glucose import and lipogenesis . In this model , SWELL1 senses adipocyte volumetric expansion and acts as a feed - forward amplifier to further promote adipocyte expansion , energy storage , and enhance insulin - AKT2 signaling during times of caloric excess ( feeding ) . In support of this model , Eduardsen et al . 9 demonstrated that osmotically - induced increases in cellular volume could potentiate insulin signaling in 3T3 - L1 preadipocytes , through unknown mechanisms . Moreover , Chen and Chalfie 52 recently demonstrated a similar phenomenon in the touch receptor neurons of C . elegans , implying that the concept of “mechano - tuning” of insulin signaling may be a universal theme in cell biology . To add further complexity , SWELL1 is known to form heteromultimers with LRRC8b - e 19 , 28 , which modifies channel gating , and may influence the diversity of molecular interactions with different protein partners based on the relative abundance of LRRC8b - e in a given cell type or tissue . Therefore , depending on the expression profile of LRRC8 proteins in different tissues , SWELL1 modulation of intracellular signaling may vary in a cell - type dependent fashion . For example , previous studies identified the broadly expressed membrane protein LRRC8c , also named F actor of A dipocyte D ifferentiation ( FAD ) 158 , as a factor required for adipocyte differentiation 53 and diet - induced obesity 54 - through un - identified molecular mechanisms . As LRRC8c ( FAD158 ) forms a complex with SWELL1 28 and modifies SWELL1 - LRRC8 channel function 19 , 28 , our findings may provide a mechanism for FAD158 / LRRC8c action in adipocyte biology . It is intriguing that adipose - targeted SWELL1 ablation appears not to grossly affect adipocyte development , adipocyte size or adiposity under basal conditions , but results in significant suppression of adipocyte expansion in the setting of obesity . This is in line with our observation that SWELL1 is activated in hypertrophic adipocytes from obese mice and humans , suggesting that SWELL1 activity is primarily required for extremes of adipocyte expansion in obese states . This phenotype is also consistent with the finding that SWELL1 deletion disrupts specifically PI3K - AKT2 signaling - an AKT isoform that is dispensable for adipocyte development 22 , 55 , and instead is primarily important in “obesogenic” adipogenesis 56 and systemic glucose homeostasis 22 , 55 , in contrast to AKT1 23 , 57 . Moreover , Adipo KO mice phenocopy AKT2 − / − mice 22 , 55 and adipose - targeted GLUT4 KO mice 58 with respect to systemic glucose intolerance and insulin resistance , supporting the notion of a SWELL1 - regulated insulin - AKT2 - GLUT4 pathway . Zhang et al . Page 10 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t In summary , we show that SWELL1 is a required component of a volume - sensitive ion channel complex that is activated in the setting of obesity and positively regulates adipocyte lipid content and glucose uptake via GRB2 - mediated modulation of insulin - PI3K - AKT2 signaling . As SWELL1 is broadly expressed , and PI3K - AKT pathway ubiquitous , and fundamentally intertwined with numerous signaling pathways we anticipate that SWELL1 signaling will be physiologically and pathophysiologically important in a multitude of different tissues and disease states . METHODS Patients The University of Iowa Institutional Review Board ( IRB ) approved the study involving human samples . Informed consent was obtained from human subjects . Visceral adipose tissues were obtained from esophageal fat pads , either from morbidly obese patients who underwent bariatric surgeries or normal control subjects who underwent non - bariatric surgeries at the University of Iowa Hospital . Patients were anonymous to the research team except for information of gender , age , and BMI . Fat tissue was kept in ice cold PBS and transferred to laboratory within 20 minutes . Animals The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Iowa approved all experimental procedures involving animals . Only male mice were used in all studies . The experiments were not randomized . The investigators were blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment for certain experiments : 1 . microCT imaging and quantification of adiposity ; 2 . Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Imaging ; 3 ; glucose tolerance testing ; 4 . Insulin tolerance testing . All C57BL / 6 mice involved in the study were purchased from Charles River Labs . Adiponectin - Cre mice were a kind gift from Dr . Matthew Potthoff at The University of Iowa . All the mice were housed in a temperature , humidity , and light controlled room and allowed free access to water and food . High fat diet was used to induce obesity in mice . Mice were fed at libitum with 60 % kcal % high - fat Diet ( Research Diets ) for 12 – 16 weeks starting at the age of 4 ~ 6 weeks . The weights were recorded weekly after initiation of HFD . Daily food consumption was calculated weekly by monitoring the total food consumption for WT and Adipo KO mice , measured as mean food consumption for 1 to 4 mice caged together . Adenoviruses and Adeno - associated viruses preparation Human adenovirus type 5 with hLRRC8A - shRNA and scrambled non - targeting control was obtained from Vector Biolabs ( Ad5 - mCherry - U6 - hLRRC8A - shRNA , 2 . 2X10 10 PFU / ml , Ad5 - U6 - scramble - mCherry , 1X10 10 PFU / ml ) . Human adenovirus type 5 with Ad5 - CMV - Cre - mCherry ( 3X10 10 PFU / ml ) and Ad5 - CMV - mCherry ( 1X10 10 PFU / ml ) were obtained from The University of Iowa Viral Vector Core . The AAV serotype rec2 with hLRRC8A - shRNA and mCherry reporter ( AAVrec2 - mCherry - U6 - hLRRC8a , 2 . 2X10 13 vector genomes ( vg ) / ml ) were produced by Dr . Lei Cao’s Laboratory as previously described 49 . Scrambled non - targeting shRNA was used as a control ( AAVrec2 - mCherry - Scramble , 3 . 8X10 13 vg / ml ) . Zhang et al . Page 11 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Primary mature adipocytes isolation Mouse inguinal fat pads were removed and washed with HBSS ( Gibco ) and then minced . The minced tissue was digested for 30 – 40 minutes at 37°C in 10 ml of digestion buffer ( 3 % BSA in HBSS , 1mM CaCl 2 , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 8 mg / ml collagenase D , 2 . 4 units / ml Dispase II ) . The digested tissue was filtered through a 220 μm mesh , and centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 3 minutes . The supernatant , which contained mature adipocytes , was collected . Cells were washed with DMEM / F12 medium ( Sigma ) containing 10 % FBS ( Gibco ) , 100 IU penicillin and 100 μg / ml streptomycin by repetitive pelleting . For mature adipocytes , the final adipocyte suspension was aliquoted in a 24 - well plate . Glass coverslips coated with Matrigel ( Corning ) were placed on the surface of the cell suspension upside down , and incubated at 37°C for at least 20 min . The coverslips with adipocytes attached were then placed on the bottom of a perfusion chamber for subsequent experiments . Human fat samples were processed using the same protocol . Mouse primary stromal vascular fraction ( SVF ) isolation for culture SWELL1 fl mouse inguinal fat pads were prepared and digested as described above . To isolate SVF , the pellet was saved and washed with DMEM / F12 medium ( Sigma ) containing 10 % FBS ( Gibco ) , 100 IU penicillin and 100 μg / ml streptomycin by repetitive pelleting . SVFs were seeded on collagen - coated plates ( BD Bioscience ) for subsequent culture and differentiation ( see Cell Culture , below ) . Cell culture No cell lines used in this study were found in the database of commonly misidentified cell lines that is maintained by ICLAC and NCBI Biosample . The cell lines were not authenticated . HEK and 3T3 - F442A ( Sigma - Aldrich ) cells were grown in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium ( DMEM ) containing 4 . 5 g / L glucose , 10 % FBS ( Gibco ) and 100 IU penicillin and 100 μg / ml streptomycin . Both cell lines tested negative for mycoplasma . To induce 3T3 - F442A cells differentiation , confluent cells were cultured in the above medium supplemented with 5 μg / ml ( 860 nM ) insulin ( Cell applications , Inc . ) . To compare lipid content under low glucose condition , DMEM containing 1 g / L glucose was used . Primary mouse SVFs were seeded in collagen - coated plates ( BD Bioscience ) and cultured in a growth medium which consisted of DMEM / F12 medium ( Sigma ) supplemented with 10 % FBS , 100 IU penicillin and 100 μg / ml streptomycin . When cells reached confluence , adipocytes differentiation was induced by changing the above medium to a differentiation medium . The differentiation medium was the growth medium supplemented with 0 . 5 M IBMX ( Cayman ) , 1 μM Dexamethasone ( Cayman ) , 5 μg / ml ( 860 nM ) Insulin and 1 μM Rosiglitazone ( Enzo ) . Cells were maintained in the differentiation medium for 10 – 12 days . For immortalized human preadipocytes ( NPAD ) 24 , the cells were cultured in Preadipocyte Basal Medium 2 ( PBM - 2 ) ( Lonza , MD ) supplemented with 10 % FBS , L - glutamine , gentamycin , and amphotericin according to the manufacturer’s instructions . For differentiation , the culture medium was supplemented with dexamethasone , IBMX , indomethacin , and human insulin prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions ( Lonza , MD ) . Cells were left in the differentiation medium for 10 – 12 days . Zhang et al . Page 12 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Adenovirus and adeno - associated virus injections to mouse inguinal adipose depot Mice were anesthetized by isofluorane ( 1 – 4 % ) , and placed in a prone position . The skin above the inguinal fat pad was prepared in a sterile fashion and an incision made to expose the inguinal fat pad . Virus diluted in sterile PBS : 1 × 10 10 vg / 20 μl ( adeno - associated virus ) or 1 × 10 9 PFU / 40 μl ( adenovirus ) for lean mouse , 2 × 10 9 PFU / 100 μl ( adenovirus ) for obese mouse was injected at multiple sites of the fat pad using a 0 . 3 cc , 31G insulin syringe . After the injection , incisions were closed with surgical clips . CRISPR / cas9 - mediated gene knockout in 3T3 - F442A cells Guide RNA sequences targeting SWELL1 gene were designed using web based CRISPR design tool ( http : / / crispr . mit . edu / ) ( Supplementary Table 4 ) and were cloned in a Cas9 expressing bicistronic vector ( pSpCas9 ( BB ) - 2A - Puro ) as described 59 . 3T3 - F442A cells were either nucleofected with single ( 399 for KO1 ) or double ( 295 / 399 for KO2 ) guide vectors using Amaxa ® Cell Line Nucleofector ® Kit V per manufacturer’s instructions . Puromycin selection medium ( 1 μg / ml ) was added 48 hours after nucleofection and maintained for 5 days . The cell pool was expanded and clonally diluted . Genomic modifications of individual clones were confirmed by Sanger sequencing for KO1 , whereas a PCR screen was used to confirm the deletion of the gene fragment between the two guide pairs for KO2 . Control 3T3 - F442A adipocytes were either WT 3T3 - F442A adipocytes or 3T3 - F442A clonal lines isolated from the cas9 / gRNA transfections that did not undergo CRISPR / cas9 - mediated gene editing . Generation of WT / GRB2KD and SWELL1 KO / GRB2 KD 3T3 - F442A adipocytes Lenti GRB2 and LUC ( luciferase ) shRNAs , packaging , and envelope plasmids are kind gifts from Dr . Jon C . Houtman at The University of Iowa . The LUC shRNA was used as a control . Viral production and transduction were performed as described in Bilal et . al 60 . In brief , lentiviral vector plasmid , packaging , and envelope plasmids were transfected into 293T cells . Virus containing supernatant was harvested and used to transduce WT and SWELL1 KO 3T3 - F442A cells . Cells were incubated with virus in the presence of 8 μg / ml Hexadimethrine bromide ( Sigma ) for 72 hours . Post transduction , the cells were selected with 0 . 5 μg / ml puromycin . Puromycin was then gradually increased to 2 μg / ml ( 0 . 5 μg / ml increments ) . Non - transduced cells were used as selection control . Selection was maintained for an additional week after the selection control cells were 100 % sloughed off . The transduced cells were then cultured and differentiated as described in cell culture . Generation of CRISPR / cas9 mediated SWELL1 floxed ( SWELL1 fl ) mice and Adipose - targeted SWELL1 KO mice ( Adipo KO mice ) SWELL1 intronic sequences were obtained from Ensembl Transcript ID ENSMUST00000139454 . All CRISPR / Cas9 sites were identified using ZiFit Targeter Version 4 . 2 ( http : / / zifit . partners . org / ZiFiT / ) . Sites with the presence of G and A nucleotides at sgRNA position 1 – 4 and GC content between 35 – 75 % were preferred . Sites with potential off - target binding were identified with CRISPR design tool ( http : / / crispr . mit . edu ) . A full list of potential off targets for each CRISPR - Cas9 target sequence was obtained using CasOT ( http : / / eendb . zfgenetics . org / casot / ) . Pairs of oligonucleotides corresponding to the chosen Zhang et al . Page 13 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t CRISPR - Cas9 target sites were designed , synthesized , annealed , and cloned into the pX330 - U6 - Chimeric _ BB - CBh - hSpCas9 construct ( Addgene plasmid # 42230 ) , following the protocol detailed in Le Cong et al 61 . Oligonucleotides are listed in Supplementary Table 5 . ssODNs ( Supplementary Table 5 ) donors were designed to incorporate a LoxP sequence and unique restriction enzyme site at the cut site of the CRISPR - Cas9 target sequence along with 60 bp of homology on either side . CRISPR - Cas9 reagents and ssODNs were injected into the pronuclei of F1 mouse strain embryos at an injection solution concentration of 5 ng / μl and 75 – 100 ng / μl , respectively . Correctly targeted mice were screened by PCR across the predicted loxP insertion sites on either side of Exon 3 . In mice that showed the expected shift in amplicon size from ssODN insertion , we subsequently performed restriction enzyme digest on the PCR product to further confirm correct ssODN insertion . Adipo KO mice were then generated by crossing SWELL fl / fl mice with Adiponectin - Cre mice to obtain Adiponectin - Cre / SWELL1 fl / fl ( Adipo KO ) mice . These mice were maintained on a C57B6 / 129 mixed background . Age and gender - matched SWELL1 fl / fl littermates served as controls . Induction of SWELL1 knockout in adipocytes isolated from SWELL1 fl mice SVFs were isolated from SWELL1 fl mice as described above , and cultured in DMEM / F12 medium with 10 % FBS . Once cells reach 30 – 40 % confluency , culture medium was switched to DMEM / F12 with 2 % FBS . Adenovirus was added in the medium and incubated with cells for 6 hours . The cells were then washed with fresh medium three times and cultured in DMEM / F12 medium with 10 % FBS for another 5 – 7 days before differentiation . RNA isolation and quantitative RT - PCR Total RNA was isolated from either adipocytes or inguinal fat pads of WT / Adipo KO mice solubilized in TRIzol using PureLink ™ RNA kit ( Life Technologies ) . Complementary DNA ( cDNA ) was synthesized using iScript ™ Reverse Transcriptase kit ( BioRad ) with 1 μg of purified RNA . qRT - PCR reaction was setup using Power SYBR green PCR master mix ( Applied Biosystems ) containing 0 . 5 μL of cDNA and the amplification curves were monitored in StepOnePlus Real - Time PCR instrument ( Applied Biosystems ) . All measurements were carried out in triplicates and GAPDH was used as internal standard for ΔΔC T calculations . The qRT - PCR primers used are listed in Supplementary Table 3 . RNA Sequencing and analysis The libraries were prepared using the Illumina TruSeq Stranded mRNA Sample Preparation kit ( Illumina ) using 500 ng of input total RNA . The molar concentrations of the indexed libraries were measured using the High Sensitivity DNA kit ( Agilent Technologies ) and combined equally into one pool . The molar concentration of the pool was measured using Illumina Library Quantification Kit ( KAPA Biosystems ) and sequenced on the HiSeq 2500 sequencer ( Illumina ) with a 100 bp Paired - End SBS chemistry ( Illumina ) . Paired - end FASTQ files were aligned to the Mus _ musculus _ GRCm38 _ Ensembl reference genome with TopHat v8 . 7on GenePattern . Aligned BAMs were used as input to Cufflinks v2 . 02 for transcript quantification . FPKM files from Cufflinks were converted to GCT files via the GenePattern module Fpkm _ trackingToGct . Differential expression analyses were computed by t - test in R . Corrections for multiple hypotheses were performed with the Benjamini Zhang et al . Page 14 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Hochberg method . Gene Set Enrichment was performed from the pre - ranked differentially expressed genes ( ranked by t - score ) using the GSEA Preranked GenePattern module with C2 - Biocarta as the gene sets database . Electrophysiology All experiments were conducted at room temperature . Currents were recorded with either an Axopatch 200B amplifier or a MultiClamp 700B amplifier paired to a Digidata 1550 digitizer and both used pClamp 10 . 4 software . For mechanical swelling , whole - cell recordings were performed in extracellular solution ( in mM ) : 135 NaCl , 5 . 4 CsCl , 10 HEPES , 10 Glucose , 1 CaCl 2 , 3 MgCl 2 , 0 . 1 CdCl 2 , pH 7 . 4 with NaOH , and positive pressure applied via patch - pipette . In a subset of experiments , a pressure manometer was placed in - line with the patch pipette to quantify the positive pressure applied to achieve mechanical swelling . The intracellular solution contained ( in mM ) : 120 L - aspartic acid , 20 CsCl , 1 MgCl 2 , 5 EGTA , 10 HEPES , 5 MgATP , 120 CsOH , 0 . 1 GTP , pH 7 . 2 with CsOH . For hypotonic swelling , extracellular solution consisted of the following ( in mM ) : 90 NaCl , 2 CsCl , 1 MgCl 2 , 1 CaCl 2 , 10 HEPES , 10 mannitol , pH 7 . 4 with NaOH ( 210 mOsm / kg ) . The isotonic extracellular solution consisted of the same composition above but with 110 mM instead of 10 mM mannitol ( 300 mOsm / kg ) . Swell - activated current was elicited by perfusing cells with hypotonic solution ( 210 mOsm / kg ) . The patch electrodes were prepared from borosilicate glass capillaries ( WPI ) and had a resistance of 2 . 5 – 4 . 8 M Ω when filled with pipette solution . For perforated patch recordings , the intracellular solution was as above but without ATP and GTP , and contained 360 μg / ml Amphotericin B ( Sigma ) . This approach minimally perturbs the adipocyte plasma membrane , protects against lipid occluding the patch - pipette during recordings , and permits controlled activation of SWELL1 - mediated current ( via hypotonic swelling ) which allows for more accurate quantification than can be achieved using positive - pressure induced adipocyte swelling in whole - cell configuration . The holding potential was 0 mV . Voltage steps were elicited from a 0 mV holding potential from −80 to + 80 mV in 20 mV increments every 1 s . Voltage ramps from −100 to + 100 mV ( at 0 . 4 mV / ms ) were applied every 4 s . Sampling interval was 100 μs and filtered at 10 KHz . For perforated - patch recordings , cells with a membrane resistance below G Ω or access resistance above 20 M Ω were discarded . Immunoblotting and immunoprecipitation For iWAT Western blot , the inguinal fat pads were harvested 10 minutes after the mouse received an i . p . insulin ( 5 unit / kg BW ) injection . Fat tissues were minced and homogenized in cold RIPA buffer ( 150 mM NaCl , 20 mM HEPES , 1 % NP - 40 , 5mM EDTA , PH 7 . 4 ) with added proteinase / phosphatase inhibitors ( Roche ) . For cultured 3T3 - F442A and primary adipocytes , cells were washed twice with ice cold PBS , and lysed with the same lysis buffer as above for 30 min on ice . Lysates were then further lysed with 2 rounds of 10 – 20 seconds sonication , and centrifuged at 14 , 000 × g for 15 min at 4°C . Supernatant was collected , and protein concentration determined using a DC protein assay kit ( Bio - rad ) . For immunoblotting , equal amounts of protein ( 20 – 50 μg ) was boiled with SDS loading buffer , electrophoretically separated in 4 – 15 % gradient SDS - PAGE gel ( Bio - Rad ) under reducing conditions and transferred to PVDF membranes ( Bio - Zhang et al . Page 15 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Rad ) . For immunoprecipitation experiments , 1 mg of protein lysate was incubated with the specific antibody at 4°C for 4 to 8 hours . 30 μl of equilibrated protein A / G sepharose beads ( GE ) were added , followed by an additional 2 – 4 hours of incubation at 4°C . The beads were then washed three times with RIPAbuffer , re - suspended in laemmli buffer ( Bio - rad ) , boiled for 5 minutes , separated by SDS - PAGE gel and then transferred to PVDF membranes . Membranes were blocked with 5 % BSA in TBST buffer ( 0 . 2M Tris , 1 . 37M NaCl , 0 . 2 % Tween20 , pH 7 . 4 ) at room temperature for one hour , then incubated with primary antibody either at room temperature for 2 hours or 4°C overnight . Membranes were then incubated with corresponding secondary antibody ( Bio - Rad , Goat - anti - rabbit # 170 - 6515 , Goat - anti - Mouse # 170 - 5047 ; abcam , Mouse - anti - Rabbit IgG heavy chain # ab99702 or mouse - anti - Rabbit IgG light chain # ab99697 , all used at 1 : 10000 ) at room temperature for one hour . The signals were visualized by chemiluminescence ( Pierce ) and imaged using a ChemiDoc XRS + imaging system ( Bio - rad ) . Protein band intensities were analyzed using ImageJ software ( National Institute of Health ) . To measure insulin - stimulated GLUT4 translocation , differentiated 3T3 - F442A adipocytes were serum starved for 6 hours , and insulin ( 0 and 100 nM ) stimulated for 15 mins . Cells were placed on ice for 10 min to stop trafficking . The cell surface was labeled for 30 min on ice with 0 . 5 mg / ml EZ - link Sulfo - NHS - Biotin ( Thermo - Pierce ) in PBS . After quenching with 100 mM Glycine in PBS , the cells were lysed in the same lysis buffer described above . 1mg of each protein lysate was diluted to 1 μg / μl and incubated with 50 μl of NeutrAvidin beads ( Thermo - Pierce ) for 16 hours at 4°C prior . The beads were washed three times with RIPA buffer , re - suspended in 2 X laemmli buffer ( Bio - rad ) , boiled for 10 minutes , separated by SDS - PAGE gel and Western blot performed as described above . Caveolin - 1 ( Cav1 ) served as an internal control to confirm equal PM protein loading between insulin - stimulation conditions . The primary antibodies used in current study include : from Cell Signaling : anti - phospho Akt1 ( # 9018 ) , anti - phospho Akt2 ( # 8599 ) , anti - Akt ( # 4685 ) , anti - IR ( # 3020 ) , anti - Cav1 ( # 3267 ) , anti - phospho - AS160 ( # 4288 ) , anti GSK - 3 β ( # 9832 ) , anti - phospho - GSK - 3 β ( # 9336 ) , anti - phospho - FoxO1 ( Thr24 ) / FoxO3a ( Thr32 ) ( # 9464 ) , anti - FoxO1 ( # 9462 ) and anti - β - Actin ( # 8457 ) ; from Santa Cruz : Anti - Grb2 ( sc - 255 ) ; from Covance : Anti - HA ( MMS - 101P ) ; from Millipore : Anti - Glut4 ( # 07 - 1404 ) , and anti - AS160 ( # 07 - 741 ) ; and from BD Scientific : Anti - Grb2 ( # 610111 ) . Anti - LRRC8a was a kind gift from Dr . Thomas J . Jentsch 19 . All primary antibodies were used at 1 : 1000 , except for Anti - Grb2 ( BD ) at 1 : 5000 , Anti - LRRC8A at 1 : 3000 . AdipoRed imaging Lipid content was quantified using AdipoRed assay reagent ( Lonza ) . In brief , differentiated cells were washed with PBS ( pH7 . 4 ) three times , and incubated with AdipoRed solution at room temperature for 10 minutes . Cells were again washed gently with PBS . Fluorescence signal was measured with an excitation wavelength of 485 nm and an emission wavelength of 572 nm . Images were captured using an ORCA - Flash4 . 0 HAMAMATSU digital camera C11440 ( HAMAMATSU , Japan ) . Fluorescence intensity quantifications were carried out using Metamorph software ( Molecular Devices , Inc ) . Zhang et al . Page 16 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Isolated adipocyte size measurement For mature adipocyte size measurement , coverslips with adipocytes attached were transferred to a bath chamber on the stage of an inverted microscope ( IX73 , Olympus ) and visualized using a 20x or 40x objective lens ( Olympus ) . Cell images were captured using an ORCA - Flash4 . 0 HAMAMATSU digital camera C11440 ( HAMAMATSU , Japan ) and recorded using Metamorph software ( Molecular Devices , Inc . ) . The cross - sectional area was measured as an indicator of the cell size , using Metamorph software . Glucose Uptake 3T3 - F442A cells incubated in 24 - well culture dishes were washed three times with serum free DMEM , then serum starved for 16 – 18 hours in 5 mM Glucose DMEM and 1 % BSA . Cells were then washed two times with PBS and incubated in glucose free and pyruvate rich ( 1 mM ) DMEM ( Sigma D5030 - 10X1L ) for 30 minutes at 37°C with 5 % CO 2 . Cells were then treated with or without cytochalasin B ( 30μM final , in DMSO Sigma C6762 - 10mg ) . H 3 2 - Deoxy - D - Glucose ( 2 - DOG ) ( NET 328A001 mL , Perkin Elmer ) was diluted 1 : 40 in H 1 2 - DOG ( Sigma D6134 - 5g ) then added to cells at a final concentration of 10 mM 2 - DOG . Insulin was then added at a final concentration of 100 nM and cells were incubated for 30 minutes at 37 °C with 5 % CO 2 . Following incubations cells were washed three times with PBS , and suspended in 500 μL 1M NaOH by pipetting up and down . Cell lysates were then freeze thawed twice diluted in Ultima Gold scintillation fluid and analyzed using Beckman Coulter LS - 6500 scintillation counter . Protein concentrations were assessed in parallel using BCA analysis . H 3 Content was then normalized to H 3 2 - DOG standard curves and glucose uptake values were generated normalized to protein content . Electron microscopy and glycogen estimation WT and SWELL1 KO 3T3 - F442A adipocytes were fixed using 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1 M sodium cacodylate for 30 min at room temperature ( RT ) . After a rinse with 0 . 1 M sodium cacodylate , the adipocytes were fixed in a buffer containing 1 % osmium tetroxide and 1 . 5 % potassium ferrocyanide for 30 min at RT . Cells were stained with 2 . 5 % uranyl acetate followed by gradient dehydration with 25 to 100 % ethanol , infiltrated with Eponate 812 before overnight polymerization at 70°C . Ultrathin sections ( 80 nm ) were cut using a Leica UC6 ultramicrotome and placed on Formvar and carbon - coated copper grids . After staining with 2 . 5 % uranyl acetate and Reynold’s lead citrate for 2 min each respectively , the grids were viewed under JEOL JEM - 1230 transmission electron microscope . ImageJ software was used to calculate the mean glycogen particle size from a total of 1352 particles in five different fields of cell surfaces visualized in two individual grids . Metabolic phenotyping The investigators were blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment for all metabolic phenotyping . For glucose tolerance tests ( GTT ) , mice were fasted for 6 hours . Glucose levels in tail blood were measured with a standard glucometer at the indicated times after an intraperitoneal ( IP ) injection of D - glucose ( 1g / kg BW for lean mice and AAV virus injected obese mice ; 0 . 75g / kg BW for HFD mice ) . For insulin tolerance test ( ITT ) , mice were fasted for 4 hours and blood glucose levels were measured at the above indicated times Zhang et al . Page 17 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t after an IP injection of insulin ( HumulinR , 1U / kg BW for lean mice and AAV virus injected obese mice ; 1 . 25U / kg BW for HFD mice ) . Mouse body composition ( fat and lean mass , and water content ) was measured by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance ( NMR ) 18 . Visceral and subcutaneous fat were imaged by Siemen’s Inveon PET / CT / SPECT small animal scanner 62 . CT parameters were 220° degree of rotation , 360 steps , 500 ms exposure time , 50 kV / 500microamps , binning of 4 . Analysis performed on Inveon Research Workplace 4 . 2 . 0 . 15 . Metabolic measurements of energy expenditure , respiratory exchange ratio , oxygen consumption , carbon dioxide production , food intake , and physical activity were performed using CLAMS ( Comprehensive Lab Animal Monitoring System , Columbus Instruments ) by University of Iowa Metabolic Phenotyping Core . Histological analysis Tissues were fixed in 1X zinc - formalin for 24 – 48 h at 4°C . Paraffin embedding , sectioning , and hematoxylin and eosin staining were performed by University of Iowa Central Microscopy Facility . Images were taken on an Olympus BX - 61 light microscope ( Olympus , Center Valley , PA ) at 20X . Adipocyte area was measured using ImageJ or Metamorph software . Statistics and Reproducibility Statistical tests used are indicated in the figure legends . All statistical tests were performed using GraphPad Prism version 6 . 02 for Windows ( GraphPad Software ) . No samples or animals were excluded from the analysis . No statistical method was used to predetermine sample size . Neither samples nor animals were randomized . Student’s t - test was used for single comparisons , based on the data approximately matching a normal distribution . Wilcoxon or Mann - Whitney test was used as non - parametric test , for data that was not normally distributed . 2 - Way ANOVA was used for GTT and ITT analysis . Data are expressed as mean ± s . e . m . , and P < 0 . 05 was considered statistically significant . Unless specified , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 , and not significant ( NS ) p > 0 . 05 . Data Availability Deep - sequencing ( RNA – seq ) data that support the findings of this study have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus ( GEO ) under accession codes GSE86318 . Source data for Fig . 4e – j and Fig . 5g – h have been provided as Supplementary Table 7 . All other data supporting the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request . Supplementary Material Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material . Acknowledgments We thank Dr . Thomas J . Jentsch ( FM / MDC , Berlin ) for kindly sharing SWELL1 / LRRC8a antibody and Dr . Ardem Patapoutian for sharing Flag - SWELL1 and SWELL1 Δ91 / + 35 . RNA - Seq data presented herein were obtained at the Genomics Division of the Iowa Institute of Human Genetics . We thank Rita Sigmund , Joe Galbraith , and Michael Knudson of the University of Iowa Tissue Procurement Core facility ( TPC ) for services provided related to Zhang et al . Page 18 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t acquisition of study specimens ( NCI award number P30CA086862 ) and Susan Walsh of the Small Animal Imaging Core , University of Iowa . We thank the University of Utah Mutation Generation and Detection Core , DNA Sequencing Core , DNA / Peptide Synthesis Core , and Transgenic Gene Targeting Mouse Facility for reagents and services . We thank Drs . Mark Anderson , François Abboud , Peter Snyder , Chris Benson , and Janice Robertson for their thoughtful review of the manuscript . We thank Macaulay Elliot - Hudson and Paul Lüken for assistance with data analysis . This work was supported by grants from the NIH NIDDK 1R01DK106009 ( R . S . ) , the Roy J . Carver Trust ( R . S . ) , the American Heart Association Fellow - to - Faculty Award ( R . S . ) , an American Heart Association Postdoctoral Award ( Y . Z . ) and an American Cancer Society Pilot Grant ( R . S . ) . References 1 . Farnier C , et al . Adipocyte functions are modulated by cell size change : potential involvement of an integrin / ERK signalling pathway . Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord . 2003 ; 27 : 1178 – 1186 . [ PubMed : 14513065 ] 2 . Shoham N , et al . Adipocyte stiffness increases with accumulation of lipid droplets . Biophys J . 2014 ; 106 : 1421 – 1431 . [ PubMed : 24655518 ] 3 . Shoham N , et al . Static mechanical stretching accelerates lipid production in 3T3 - L1 adipocytes by activating the MEK signaling pathway . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol . 2012 ; 302 : C429 – 441 . [ PubMed : 22012328 ] 4 . Pellegrinelli V , et al . Human adipocyte function is impacted by mechanical cues . The Journal of pathology . 2014 ; 233 : 183 – 195 . [ PubMed : 24623048 ] 5 . Salans LB , Knittle JL , Hirsch J . The role of adipose cell size and adipose tissue insulin sensitivity in the carbohydrate intolerance of human obesity . J Clin Invest . 1968 ; 47 : 153 – 165 . [ PubMed : 16695937 ] 6 . Weyer C , Foley JE , Bogardus C , Tataranni PA , Pratley RE . Enlarged subcutaneous abdominal adipocyte size , but not obesity itself , predicts type II diabetes independent of insulin resistance . Diabetologia . 2000 ; 43 : 1498 – 1506 . [ PubMed : 11151758 ] 7 . Khan T , et al . Metabolic dysregulation and adipose tissue fibrosis : role of collagen VI . Molecular and cellular biology . 2009 ; 29 : 1575 – 1591 . [ PubMed : 19114551 ] 8 . Briand N , et al . Caveolin - 1 expression and cavin stability regulate caveolae dynamics in adipocyte lipid store fluctuation . Diabetes . 2014 ; 63 : 4032 – 4044 . [ PubMed : 24969108 ] 9 . Eduardsen K , et al . Cell volume regulation and signaling in 3T3 - L1 pre - adipocytes and adipocytes : on the possible roles of caveolae , insulin receptors , FAK and ERK1 / 2 . Cell Physiol Biochem . 2011 ; 28 : 1231 – 1246 . [ PubMed : 22179011 ] 10 . Oancea E , Wolfe JT , Clapham DE . Functional TRPM7 channels accumulate at the plasma membrane in response to fluid flow . Circ Res . 2006 ; 98 : 245 – 253 . [ PubMed : 16357306 ] 11 . Numata T , Shimizu T , Okada Y . TRPM7 is a stretch - and swelling - activated cation channel involved in volume regulation in human epithelial cells . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol . 2007 ; 292 : C460 – 467 . [ PubMed : 16943238 ] 12 . Muraki K , et al . TRPV2 is a component of osmotically sensitive cation channels in murine aortic myocytes . Circ Res . 2003 ; 93 : 829 – 838 . [ PubMed : 14512441 ] 13 . Liedtke W , Tobin DM , Bargmann CI , Friedman JM . Mammalian TRPV4 ( VR - OAC ) directs behavioral responses to osmotic and mechanical stimuli in Caenorhabditis elegans . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2003 ; 100 ( Suppl 2 ) : 14531 – 14536 . [ PubMed : 14581619 ] 14 . Spassova MA , Hewavitharana T , Xu W , Soboloff J , Gill DL . A common mechanism underlies stretch activation and receptor activation of TRPC6 channels . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2006 ; 103 : 16586 – 16591 . [ PubMed : 17056714 ] 15 . Coste B , et al . Piezo proteins are pore - forming subunits of mechanically activated channels . Nature . 2012 ; 483 : 176 – 181 . [ PubMed : 22343900 ] 16 . Che H , Yue J , Tse HF , Li GR . Functional TRPV and TRPM channels in human preadipocytes . Pflugers Arch . 2014 ; 466 : 947 – 959 . [ PubMed : 24057349 ] 17 . Sukumar P , et al . Constitutively active TRPC channels of adipocytes confer a mechanism for sensing dietary fatty acids and regulating adiponectin . Circ Res . 2012 ; 111 : 191 – 200 . [ PubMed : 22668831 ] Zhang et al . Page 19 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 18 . Ye L , et al . TRPV4 is a regulator of adipose oxidative metabolism , inflammation , and energy homeostasis . Cell . 2012 ; 151 : 96 – 110 . [ PubMed : 23021218 ] 19 . Voss FK , et al . Identification of LRRC8 heteromers as an essential component of the volume - regulated anion channel VRAC . Science . 2014 ; 344 : 634 – 638 . [ PubMed : 24790029 ] 20 . Qiu Z , et al . SWELL1 , a Plasma Membrane Protein , Is an Essential Component of Volume - Regulated Anion Channel . Cell . 2014 ; 157 : 447 – 458 . [ PubMed : 24725410 ] 21 . Kumar L , et al . Leucine - rich repeat containing 8A ( LRRC8A ) is essential for T lymphocyte development and function . J Exp Med . 2014 ; 211 : 929 – 942 . [ PubMed : 24752297 ] 22 . Garofalo RS , et al . Severe diabetes , age - dependent loss of adipose tissue , and mild growth deficiency in mice lacking Akt2 / PKB beta . J Clin Invest . 2003 ; 112 : 197 – 208 . [ PubMed : 12843127 ] 23 . Cho H , Thorvaldsen JL , Chu Q , Feng F , Birnbaum MJ . Akt1 / PKBalpha is required for normal growth but dispensable for maintenance of glucose homeostasis in mice . J Biol Chem . 2001 ; 276 : 38349 – 38352 . [ PubMed : 11533044 ] 24 . Vu BG , Gourronc FA , Bernlohr DA , Schlievert PM , Klingelhutz AJ . Staphylococcal superantigens stimulate immortalized human adipocytes to produce chemokines . PLoS One . 2013 ; 8 : e77988 . [ PubMed : 24205055 ] 25 . Strange K , Emma F , Jackson PS . Cellular and molecular physiology of volume - sensitive anion channels . Am J Physiol . 1996 ; 270 : C711 – 730 . [ PubMed : 8638650 ] 26 . Okada Y , Sato K , Numata T . Pathophysiology and puzzles of the volume - sensitive outwardly rectifying anion channel . J Physiol . 2009 ; 587 : 2141 – 2149 . [ PubMed : 19171657 ] 27 . Inoue H , Takahashi N , Okada Y , Konishi M . Volume - sensitive outwardly rectifying chloride channel in white adipocytes from normal and diabetic mice . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol . 2010 ; 298 : C900 – 909 . [ PubMed : 20107039 ] 28 . Syeda R , et al . LRRC8 Proteins Form Volume - Regulated Anion Channels that Sense Ionic Strength . Cell . 2016 ; 164 : 499 – 511 . [ PubMed : 26824658 ] 29 . Jinek M , et al . A programmable dual - RNA - guided DNA endonuclease in adaptive bacterial immunity . Science . 2012 ; 337 : 816 – 821 . [ PubMed : 22745249 ] 30 . Yang H , et al . One - step generation of mice carrying reporter and conditional alleles by CRISPR / Cas - mediated genome engineering . Cell . 2013 ; 154 : 1370 – 1379 . [ PubMed : 23992847 ] 31 . Fasshauer M , et al . Essential role of insulin receptor substrate - 2 in insulin stimulation of Glut4 translocation and glucose uptake in brown adipocytes . J Biol Chem . 2000 ; 275 : 25494 – 25501 . [ PubMed : 10829031 ] 32 . Gonzalez E , McGraw TE . Insulin - modulated Akt subcellular localization determines Akt isoform - specific signaling . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2009 ; 106 : 7004 – 7009 . [ PubMed : 19372382 ] 33 . Sano H , et al . Insulin - stimulated phosphorylation of a Rab GTPase - activating protein regulates GLUT4 translocation . J Biol Chem . 2003 ; 278 : 14599 – 14602 . [ PubMed : 12637568 ] 34 . Eguez L , et al . Full intracellular retention of GLUT4 requires AS160 Rab GTPase activating protein . Cell metabolism . 2005 ; 2 : 263 – 272 . [ PubMed : 16213228 ] 35 . Medina M , Wandosell F . Deconstructing GSK - 3 : The Fine Regulation of Its Activity . Int J Alzheimers Dis . 2011 ; 2011 : 479249 . [ PubMed : 21629747 ] 36 . Nakae J , et al . The forkhead transcription factor Foxo1 regulates adipocyte differentiation . Dev Cell . 2003 ; 4 : 119 – 129 . [ PubMed : 12530968 ] 37 . Siddle K . Molecular basis of signaling specificity of insulin and IGF receptors : neglected corners and recent advances . Front Endocrinol ( Lausanne ) . 2012 ; 3 : 34 . [ PubMed : 22649417 ] 38 . Wary KK , Mariotti A , Zurzolo C , Giancotti FG . A requirement for caveolin - 1 and associated kinase Fyn in integrin signaling and anchorage - dependent cell growth . Cell . 1998 ; 94 : 625 – 634 . [ PubMed : 9741627 ] 39 . Pilch PF , Liu L . Fat caves : caveolae , lipid trafficking and lipid metabolism in adipocytes . Trends in endocrinology and metabolism : TEM . 2011 ; 22 : 318 – 324 . [ PubMed : 21592817 ] 40 . Gustavsson J , et al . Localization of the insulin receptor in caveolae of adipocyte plasma membrane . FASEB J . 1999 ; 13 : 1961 – 1971 . [ PubMed : 10544179 ] Zhang et al . Page 20 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 41 . Cohen AW , et al . Caveolin - 1 - deficient mice show insulin resistance and defective insulin receptor protein expression in adipose tissue . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol . 2003 ; 285 : C222 – 235 . [ PubMed : 12660144 ] 42 . Sinha B , et al . Cells respond to mechanical stress by rapid disassembly of caveolae . Cell . 2011 ; 144 : 402 – 413 . [ PubMed : 21295700 ] 43 . Sedding DG , et al . Caveolin - 1 facilitates mechanosensitive protein kinase B ( Akt ) signaling in vitro and in vivo . Circ Res . 2005 ; 96 : 635 – 642 . [ PubMed : 15731459 ] 44 . Trouet D , et al . Caveolin - 1 modulates the activity of the volume - regulated chloride channel . J Physiol . 1999 ; 520 ( Pt 1 ) : 113 – 119 . [ PubMed : 10517805 ] 45 . Abascal F , Zardoya R . LRRC8 proteins share a common ancestor with pannexins , and may form hexameric channels involved in cell - cell communication . Bioessays . 2012 ; 34 : 551 – 560 . [ PubMed : 22532330 ] 46 . Sawada A , et al . A congenital mutation of the novel gene LRRC8 causes agammaglobulinemia in humans . J Clin Invest . 2003 ; 112 : 1707 – 1713 . [ PubMed : 14660746 ] 47 . Shan X , et al . Suppression of Grb2 expression improved hepatic steatosis , oxidative stress , and apoptosis induced by palmitic acid in vitro partly through insulin signaling alteration . In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim . 2013 ; 49 : 576 – 582 . [ PubMed : 23771793 ] 48 . Liu X , et al . Downregulation of Grb2 contributes to the insulin - sensitizing effect of calorie restriction . American journal of physiology Endocrinology and metabolism . 2009 ; 296 : E1067 – 1075 . [ PubMed : 19240254 ] 49 . Liu X , et al . Adipose tissue insulin receptor knockdown via a new primate - derived hybrid recombinant AAV serotype . Molecular Therapy — Methods & Clinical Development . 2014 ; 1 50 . Metzinger MN , et al . Correlation of X - ray computed tomography with quantitative nuclear magnetic resonance methods for pre - clinical measurement of adipose and lean tissues in living mice . Sensors ( Basel ) . 2014 ; 14 : 18526 – 18542 . [ PubMed : 25299952 ] 51 . Lee KY , et al . Lessons on conditional gene targeting in mouse adipose tissue . Diabetes . 2013 ; 62 : 864 – 874 . [ PubMed : 23321074 ] 52 . Chen X , Chalfie M . Modulation of C . elegans touch sensitivity is integrated at multiple levels . The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience . 2014 ; 34 : 6522 – 6536 . [ PubMed : 24806678 ] 53 . Tominaga K , et al . The novel gene fad158 , having a transmembrane domain and leucine - rich repeat , stimulates adipocyte differentiation . J Biol Chem . 2004 ; 279 : 34840 – 34848 . [ PubMed : 15184384 ] 54 . Hayashi T , et al . Factor for adipocyte differentiation 158 gene disruption prevents the body weight gain and insulin resistance induced by a high - fat diet . Biol Pharm Bull . 2011 ; 34 : 1257 – 1263 . [ PubMed : 21804215 ] 55 . Cho H , et al . Insulin resistance and a diabetes mellitus - like syndrome in mice lacking the protein kinase Akt2 ( PKB beta ) . Science . 2001 ; 292 : 1728 – 1731 . [ PubMed : 11387480 ] 56 . Jeffery E , Church CD , Holtrup B , Colman L , Rodeheffer MS . Rapid depot - specific activation of adipocyte precursor cells at the onset of obesity . Nature cell biology . 2015 ; 17 : 376 – 385 . [ PubMed : 25730471 ] 57 . Chen WS , et al . Growth retardation and increased apoptosis in mice with homozygous disruption of the Akt1 gene . Genes Dev . 2001 ; 15 : 2203 – 2208 . [ PubMed : 11544177 ] 58 . Abel ED , et al . Adipose - selective targeting of the GLUT4 gene impairs insulin action in muscle and liver . Nature . 2001 ; 409 : 729 – 733 . [ PubMed : 11217863 ] 59 . Ran FA , et al . Genome engineering using the CRISPR - Cas9 system . Nat Protoc . 2013 ; 8 : 2281 – 2308 . [ PubMed : 24157548 ] 60 . Bilal MY , Houtman JC . GRB2 Nucleates T Cell Receptor - Mediated LAT Clusters That Control PLC - gamma1 Activation and Cytokine Production . Frontiers in immunology . 2015 ; 6 : 141 . [ PubMed : 25870599 ] 61 . Cong L , et al . Multiplex genome engineering using CRISPR / Cas systems . Science . 2013 ; 339 : 819 – 823 . [ PubMed : 23287718 ] Zhang et al . Page 21 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 62 . Lublinsky S , Luu YK , Rubin CT , Judex S . Automated separation of visceral and subcutaneous adiposity in in vivo microcomputed tomographies of mice . J Digit Imaging . 2009 ; 22 : 222 – 231 . [ PubMed : 18769966 ] Zhang et al . Page 22 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 1 . Adipocyte patch clamp reveals prominent swell - activated current in murine and human adipocytes ( a ) Mature mouse adipocyte patch - clamped using the whole - cell configuration of the patch - clamp technique . Baseline ( left ) and post swelling ( right ) by positive pressure via the patch pipette ( p ) . Black arrow : nucleus , yellow arrow : plasma membrane , blue arrow : lipid droplet . ( b ) Outward and inward swell - activated current over time at , + 100 mV ( black ) and 7minus ; 100 mV ( blue ) , respectively measured in ( a ) during positive pressure swelling and inhibition by DCPIB . Voltage protocol shown in inset . ( c ) Current - voltage plots ( from b ) at baseline ( black ) , after swelling ( blue ) , and with DCPIB inhibition ( green ) . ( d ) Representative current traces at baseline ( top ) and after swelling ( bottom ) during voltage steps ( shown in inset ) . ( e ) Mature adipocyte swelled to increasing sizes ( i – iv ) . ( f ) Whole - cell current over time and ( g ) current - voltage plots at increasing adipocyte sizes , at steady - state ( i – iv ) . e – g n = 5 biologically independent experiments . ( h ) Current - voltage relationship of adipocyte swell - activated current before and after application of low chloride extracellular solution ( 5 . 4 mM CsCl ) . ( i – j ) Swell - activated current over time in 3T3 - F442A adipocyte ( i , inset ) and in a human adipocyte cell line ( j , inset ) upon hypotonic swelling ( Hypo : 210 mOsm ) , followed Zhang et al . Page 23 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t by DCPIB inhibition . Inward current at −100 mV ( negative , blue trace ) ; outward current at + 100 mV ( positive , black trace ) . Scale bar : 50 μm for ( a ) . Zhang et al . Page 24 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 2 . SWELL1 mediates a swell - activated current in adipocytes ( a ) Experimental approach for SWELL1 knock - down , isolation and recording of primary mature mouse adipocytes from iWAT . ( b – c ) Representative VRAC current - voltage plot ( b ) and mean outward ( + 100 mV ) and inward ( −100 mV ) VRAC current density ( c ) in Ad - shSCR ( black , n = 6 ) and Ad - shSWELL1 ( red , n = 6 ) transduced mature adipocytes upon swell - activation . ( d – e ) VRAC over time + / − hypotonic swelling in WT ( grey trace ) and in a CRISPR / cas9 SWELL1 knock out ( KO , red trace ) 3T3 - F442A pre - adipocyte ( d ) and mean peak outward ( + 100 mV ) and inward ( −100 mV ) current ( e ) in WT ( n WT = 12 ) and two independent CRISPR / cas9 SWELL1 knock - outs ( KO1 , KO2 ) adipocyte cell lines ( n KO1 = 7 , n KO2 = 5 ) . ( f ) Representative Western blot of SWELL1 and β - actin in WT and CRISPR / cas9 SWELL1 KO 3T3 - F442A adipocyte cell line ( representative of 20 + blots ) . Uncropped blots are shown in Supplementary Fig . 9a . ( g ) Experimental approach for generating SWELL1 knock - out primary mature mouse adipocytes from iWAT of SWELL1 fl mice . ( h – j ) Representative VRAC current over time ( h ) , current - voltage plot ( i ) , and mean peak outward ( + 100 mV ) and inward ( −100 mV ) current density ( j ) induced by swelling ( blue arrows ) in WT and SWELL1 KO primary mature adipocytes ( n WT = 5 , n KO = 6 ) . Significance between the indicated groups in c , e and j was calculated using a two - tailed Student’s t - test . Exact P - Zhang et al . Page 25 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t values are listed in Supplementary Table 6 . Error bars represent mean ± s . e . m . * ( P < 0 . 05 ) , * * ( P < 0 . 01 ) , * * * ( P < 0 . 001 ) . See also Supplementary Figure 1 & 2 . Scale bar : 100 μm for ( g ) . Zhang et al . Page 26 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 3 . SWELL1 - mediated VRAC is increased in adipocytes of obese mice and humans ( a ) Mature mouse adipocyte before ( i ) and after ( ii ) hypotonic swelling under perforated - patch conditions . Inset shows increase in cytoplasmic volume associated with SWELL1 - mediated VRAC activation in b . ( b ) SWELL1 - mediated current over time induced by hypotonic swelling ( 210 mOsm ) . ( c ) Images of adipocytes isolated from iWAT of lean mice raised on regular chow and obese mice raised on a HFD . ( d ) Mean adipocyte capacitance ( pF , n Lean = 18 cells , n HFD = 16 cells ) . ( e ) SWELL1 - mediated current over time + / − hypotonic swelling ( black triangle : pre - stimulation ) . ( f ) SWELL1 - mediated current - voltage relationship at peak activation . ( g – h ) Mean peak outward ( + 100 mV ) and inward ( −100 mV ) SWELL1 - mediated current density after hypotonic swelling ( g , n = 5 , n Lean = 5 cells , n HFD = 5 cells ) and pre - stimulation ( h , n Lean = 5 , n HFD = 6 ) from e . ( i ) Images of adipocytes isolated from visceral fat of non - bariatric surgery patients ( BMI < 30 ) and obese bariatric surgery patients ( BMI > 30 ) . ( j ) Mean adipocyte capacitance ( pF , n BMI < 30 = 7 cells , n BMI > 30 = 13 cells ) . ( k ) SWELL1 - mediated VRAC current over time + / − hypotonic swelling ( black triangle : pre - stimulation ) . ( l ) Current - voltage relationship at peak activation . ( m – n ) Mean peak outward ( + 100 mV ) and inward ( −100 mV ) current density after hypotonic activation Zhang et al . Page 27 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t ( m ) and pre - stimulation ( n ) ( BMI < 30 : n = 7 cells , BMI > 30 : n = 13 cells ) . Significance between the indicated groups in d , j were calculated using a two - tailed Student’s t - test ; indicated groups in g , h , m , n were calculated using a two - tailed Mann - Whitney U - test . Exact P - values are listed in Supplementary Table 6 . Error bars represent mean ± s . e . m . * ( P < 0 . 05 ) , * * ( P < 0 . 01 ) , * * * ( P < 0 . 001 ) . Scale bars in ( a , c , i ) are 50 μm . See also Supplementary Figure 3 . Zhang et al . Page 28 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 4 . SWELL1 regulates lipid content and glucose metabolism via insulin - pAKT2 - AS160 - GLUT4 and GSK3 β signaling Representative fluorescence images of AdipoRed stained ( a ) WT and SWELL1 KO 3T3 - F442A adipocytes and ( b ) WT and SWELL1 KO cultured primary adipocytes . Average AdipoRed fluorescence intensity per cell in ( a ) WT 3T3 - F442A ( n = 462 ) and SWELL1 KO 3T3 - F442A ( n = 451 ) and ( b ) WT ( n = 2491 ) and SWELL1 KO ( n = 1515 ) cultured primary adipocytes . Measurements pooled from 3 and 4 separate experiments in ( a ) and ( b ) , respectively . Scale bar : 200 μm . ( c ) Insulin - stimulated ( 100 nM ) glucose uptake using 2 - Deoxy - D - Glucose ( n = 10 biologically independent samples per condition ) . ( d ) Transmission Electron Microscopy ( TEM ) images of glycogen granules and mean granule diameter in WT and SWELL1 KO 3T3 - F442A adipocytes ( n = 5 fields each ) . Scale bar : 0 . 5 μm . Inset shows granules ( black arrows ) in magnified area ( Scale bar : 0 . 1 μm ) . Western blots of insulin - stimulated pAKT2 , pAKT1 , and AKT in ( e ) WT and SWELL1 KO 3T3 - F442A adipocytes ( 0 , 100 nM insulin ) and ( f ) WT and SWELL1 KO primary cultured adipocytes ( 0 , 10 nM ) . N = 4 independent experiments in ( e ) , and N = 6 for AKT2 and N = 7 for pAKT1 in ( f ) . ( g ) Western blots of insulin - stimulated pAKT2 , pAKT1 , and AKT from mouse iWAT injected with Ad - shSCR or Ad - shSWELL1 . N = 4 independent experiments . ( h ) Western blots of insulin - stimulated ( 0 , 100 nM ) plasma membrane ( PM ) GLUT4 , cytosolic ( C ) GLUT4 , PM and C Cav1 and β - Actin in WT and SWELL1 KO 3T3 - F442A adipocytes . Quantification of insulin - stimulated PM GLUT4 / PM Cav1 ( normalized to unstimulated ) , PM GLUT4 / β - actin . N = 6 independent experiments . ( i , j ) Western blots of insulin - stimulated ( 0 , 100 nM ) pAS160 , AS160 , pGSK3 β , GSK3 β , pFOXO1 , FOXO1 and β - actin in WT and SWELL1 KO 3T3 - F442A adipocytes . N = 4 independent experiments for pAS160 and N = 6 Zhang et al . Page 29 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t for pFOXO1 and pGSK3 β . Significance between the indicated groups in a – c , e – j were calculated using a two - tailed Student’s t - test . Wilcoxon - test used for statistical significance in d . Exact P - values are listed in Supplementary Table 6 . Uncropped blots for e – j are shown in Supplementary Fig . 9b – p . Statistics source data for e – j can be found in Supplementary Table 7 . Error bars represent mean ± s . e . m . * ( P < 0 . 05 ) , * * ( P < 0 . 01 ) , * * * ( P < 0 . 001 ) . See also Supplementary Figure 4 . Zhang et al . Page 30 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 5 . SWELL1 / LRRD - GRB2 - Cav1 - IRS1 - IR complex regulates insulin - pAKT2 signaling ( a ) GRB2 immunoprecipitation from WT and SWELL1 KO 3T3 - F442A adipocytes and immunoblot with SWELL1 , Cav1 and GRB2 antibodies . Densitometry values for GRB2 co - immunoprecipitated SWELL1 ( SWELL1 / GRB2 ) and GRB2 co - immunoprecipitated Cav1 ( Cav1 / GRB2 ) over GRB2 . Representative blot from 3 independent experiments . ( b ) Cav1 immunoprecipitation from WT and SWELL1 KO 3T3 - F442A adipocytes and immunoblot with SWELL1 and Cav1 antibodies . β - actin serves as a loading control for input samples . Densitometry values for Cav1 co - immunoprecipitated SWELL1 ( SWELL1 / Cav1 ) . Representative blot from 3 independent experiments . ( c – d ) Cartoons depicting SWELL1 WT , and SWELL1 Δ91 / + 35 mutant . ( e ) GRB2 immunoprecipitation from HEK cells transfected with SWELL1 WT , non - transfected or SWELL1 Δ91 / + 35 and then immunoblot with SWELL1 , GRB2 antibodies . β - actin serves as a loading control for input samples . Representative blot from 5 independent experiments . ( f ) Western blots of pAKT2 , AKT , β - actin , and GRB2 in non - insulin ( - : 0 nM ) and insulin - stimulated ( + : 100 nM ) WT ( shLUC ) , WT / GRB2 KD ( shGRB2 ) , SWELL1 KO ( shLUC ) and SWELL1 KO / GRB2 KD ( shGRB2 ) 3T3 F442A adipocytes . ( g – j ) Densitometry ratio of pAKT2 / AKT and GRB2 / β - actin in WT ( g & h ) and SWELL1 KO ( h & i ) 3T3 - F442A adipocytes . Mean data and statistics from 3 independent experiments shown . Significance between the indicated groups in g – j were calculated using a two - tailed Student’s t - test . Exact P - values are listed in Supplementary Table 6 . Uncropped blots for a are shown in Supplementary Fig . 9q – s ; for b in Supplementary Fig . 9u – w ; for e in Supplementary Fig . 9x – z ; for f in Supplementary Fig . 9aa . Statistics source data for g – h Zhang et al . Page 31 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t can be found in Supplementary Table 7 . Error bars represent mean ± s . e . m . * ( P < 0 . 05 ) , * * ( P < 0 . 01 ) , * * * ( P < 0 . 001 ) . See also Supplementary Figure 5 . Zhang et al . Page 32 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 6 . SWELL1 knock - down reduces adipocyte size and adiposity in obese mice ( a ) Bright field ( BF , left ) and mCherry fluorescence ( right ) images of mature adipocytes isolated from iWAT of obese mice ( 60 % HFD for 12 weeks ) 12 days after adenoviral transduction with either Ad - shSCR - mCherry or Ad - shSWELL1 - mCherry . Scale bar : 50 μm . ( b – c ) Mean adipocyte area ( b ) and size distribution ( c ) of Ad - shSCR - mCherry ( black bars , n = 126 ) and Ad - shSWELL1 - mCherry ( red bars , n = 100 ) transduced adipocytes from iWAT of obese mice . Measurements pooled from 3 Ad - shSCR and 4 Ad - shSWELL1 injected mice ( d – e ) Current - voltage plots ( d ) and mean outward ( + 100 mV ) and inward ( −100 mV ) SWELL1 - mediated current ( e ) induced by positive - pressure swelling of mature primary adipocytes freshly isolated from iWAT of AAV - shSCR ( n = 7 ) and AAV - shSWELL1 ( n = 5 ) transduced mice . ( f – g ) Mean adipocyte area ( f ) and size distribution ( g ) of AAV - shSCR ( black bars , n = 96 ) and AAV - shSWELL1 ( red bars , n = 61 ) transduced iWAT adipocytes from mice raised on HFD . Measurements pooled from 3 independent experiments . ( h ) Representative microCT images from the 7 th thoracic vertebrae ( T7 ) to 4 th tail vertebrae ( Cd4 ) of AAV - shSCR ( Top ) and AAV - shSWELL1 ( Bottom ) transduced mice . Left and Center : Coronal and Sagittal 2D sections showing subcutaneous ( SAT , yellow ) and visceral ( VAT , blue ) adipose tissue . Right : 3D rendering of visceral adipose tissue only ( red ) . Scale bar : 10 mm . ( i – j ) Mean adipose tissue volumes of VAT ( left ) and SAT ( right ) between anatomic landmarks T7 and Cd4 ( i ) and L6 - Cd4 ( j ) in AAV - shSCR and AAV - shSWELL1 transduced mice ( n = 4 each ) . ( k ) Glucose tolerance test ( AAV - shSCR , n = 5 mice ; AAV - shSWELL1 n = 6 mice ) . ( l ) Insulin tolerance test ( AAV - shSCR , n = 6 mice ; AAV - Zhang et al . Page 33 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t shSWELL1 , n = 5 mice ) . Significance between the indicated groups in b , e , f , i , j were calculated using a two - tailed Student’s t - test , and k , l calculated using a 2 - way Anova . Exact P - values are listed in Supplementary Table 6 . Error bars represent mean ± s . e . m . * ( P < 0 . 05 ) , * * ( P < 0 . 01 ) , * * * ( P < 0 . 001 ) . See also Supplementary Figure 6 . Zhang et al . Page 34 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 7 . Adipocyte SWELL1 is dispensable for adipose development but required for glucose homeostasis and insulin - sensitivity in vivo ( a ) Adipose tissue specific SWELL1 knockout mice were generated by crossing SWELL1 fl to Adiponectin - Cre mice ( top ) . PCR across SWELL1 Exon 3 in genomic DNA extracted from different tissues of an Adipo KO mouse . Cre - mediated SWELL1 recombination results in a 426 bp amplicon ( bottom ) . Uncropped blot shown in Supplementary Fig . 9ab . ( b – c ) Representative SWELL1 - mediated VRAC current - voltage plot ( b ) and mean outward ( + 100 mV ) and inward ( −100 mV ) current ( c ) induced by positive - pressure swelling of primary , mature adipocytes freshly isolated from iWAT of littermate SWELL1 fl ( WT ) control ( n = 5 ) and Adipo KO ( n = 5 ) mice . ( d ) Body weight of 12 week old ( WT ) ( n = 8 ) and Adipo KO ( n = 7 ) mice raised on regular chow diet . ( e – f ) NMR measurements of fat mass ( e ) and percent fat ( f ) in WT ( n = 8 ) and Adipo KO ( n = 7 ) mice from d . ( g – h ) Total fat pad weights and ratio of fat pad over body weight of iWAT and eWAT in WT and Adipo KO mice ( n = 4 mice in each group ) . ( i ) Glucose tolerance test of WT ( n = 9 ) and Adipo KO ( n = 8 ) mice raised on regular chow diet . ( j ) Insulin tolerance test of WT ( n = 9 ) and Adipo KO ( n = 8 ) mice raised on regular chow diet . Data obtained from 2 separate cohorts of mice . Significance Zhang et al . Page 35 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t between the indicated groups in c , d – h were calculated using a two - tailed Student’s t - test , and i , j calculated using a 2 - way Anova . Exact P - values are listed in Supplementary Table 6 . Error bars represent mean ± s . e . m . * * * ( P < 0 . 001 ) . See also Supplementary Figure 7 . Zhang et al . Page 36 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 8 . Adipose - restricted SWELL1 deletion limits adipocyte size in obese mice ( a – b ) . Body weight ( a ) and food consumption ( b ) in WT ( n = 12 ) and Adipo KO ( n = 9 ) mice measured at the indicated times on HFD . ( c – d ) NMR measurements of percent fat ( c ) and fat mass ( d ) in WT ( n = 12 ) and Adipo KO ( n = 9 ) mice ( HFD for 15 weeks ) . ( e – f ) NMR measurements of percent lean mass ( e ) and lean mass ( f ) in WT ( n = 12 ) and Adipo KO ( n = 9 ) mice ( HFD for 15 weeks ) . ( g ) Representative inguinal ( iWAT ) and epididymal ( eWAT ) fat pads dissected from WT and Adipo KO mice ( top ) . Total fat pad weights and ratio of fat pad over body weight of iWAT and eWAT in WT and Adipo KO mice ( n = 7 mice in each group ) . ( h ) H & E staining of iWAT adipose tissue from WT and Adipo KO mice raised on HFD for 17 weeks . ( i – j ) Mean WT ( n = 818 ) and Adipo KO ( n = 1173 ) adipocyte cross - sectional areas ( i ) and size distribution ( j ) measured from iWAT histological sections ( h ) . Measurements pooled from 3 separate experiments . ( k ) Cross - sectional area distribution of adipocytes from H & E stained sections from WT and Adipo KO mice raised on a lean diet or HFD ( 17 weeks ) . ( l ) Glucose tolerance test and ( m ) Insulin tolerance test of WT ( n = 8 ) and Adipo KO ( n = 7 ) mice raised on HFD for 12 weeks . Scale bars in ( h ) : 50 μm . Data obtained from 2 separate cohorts of mice . Significance between the indicated groups in a – j were calculated using a two - tailed Student’s t - test , and l , m calculated using a 2 - way Anova . Exact P - values are listed in Supplementary Table 6 . Error bars represent mean ± s . e . m . * ( P < 0 . 05 ) , * * ( P < 0 . 01 ) , * * * ( P < 0 . 001 ) . See also Supplementary Figure 8 . Zhang et al . Page 37 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2017 October 24 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t