Short Papers Targeted Genotyping of Variable Number Tandem Repeats with AdVNTR Mehrdad Bakhtiari 1 ( B ) , Sharona Shleizer - Burko 2 , Melissa Gymrek 1 , 2 , Vikas Bansal 3 , and Vineet Bafna 1 1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , CA 92093 , USA mbakhtiari @ uscd . edu , vbafna @ eng . ucsd . edu 2 Department of Medicine , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , CA 92093 , USA 3 Department of Pediatrics , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , CA 92093 , USA Extended Abstract Whole Genome Sequencing is increasingly used to identify Mendelian variants in clinical pipelines . These pipelines focus on single nucleotide variants ( SNVs ) and also structural variants , while ignoring more complex repeat sequence vari - ants . We consider the problem of genotyping Variable Number Tandem Repeats ( VNTRs ) , composed of inexact tandem duplications of short ( 6 − 100 bp ) repeat - ing units . VNTRs span 3 % of the human genome , are frequently present in coding regions , and have been implicated in multiple Mendelian disorders ( e . g . , Medullary cystic kidney disease , Myoclonus epilepsy , and FSHD ) and complex disorders such as bipolar disorder . In some cases , the disease associated vari - ants correspond to point mutations in the VNTR sequence while in other cases , changes in the number of tandem repeats ( RU count ) show a statistical asso - ciation ( or causal relationship ) with disease risk . While existing tools are able to recognize VNTR carrying sequence , genotyping VNTRs ( determining repeat unit count and sequence variation ) from whole genome sequenced reads remains challenging . We describe a method , adVNTR , that models the problems of RU counting and mutation detection using HMMs trained for each target VNTR . adVNTR models can be developed for short - read ( Illumina ) and single molecule ( PacBio ) whole genome and exome sequencing . It has three components : ( i ) HMM training module for model parameter estimation ; ( ii ) read recruitment ; and , ( iii ) estimating RU counts and variant detection . We compared read recruit - ment with alignment - based methods . The results show that while adVNTR works well for a range of RU counts , other mapping tools work well only when the simulated RU count matches the reference RU count . We performed a long range ( LR ) PCR experiment on the individual NA12878 to assess the accuracy of the adVNTR genotypes . To test performance of counting of Repeat Units on real data where the true VNTR genotype is not known , we conﬁrmed our results by checking for Mendelian inheritance consistency at 865 VNTRs in two trios . c (cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG , part of Springer Nature 2018 B . J . Raphael ( Ed . ) : RECOMB 2018 , LNBI 10812 , pp . 243 – 244 , 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 89929 - 9 244 M . Bakhtiari et al . For short VNTRs , adVNTR can be an eﬀective tool for larger population - scale studies of VNTR genotypes using WGS data replacing labor intensive gel elec - trophoresis . We found the RU count frequencies for two disease - linked VNTRs in GP1BA and MAOA genes , using 150 PCR - free WGS data . The 2R / 3R genotypes in GP1BA are associated with Aspirin Treatment failure for stroke prevention . Notably , our results suggest that the 2R genotype is absent in African popula - tions suggesting that this shorter allele arose after the out of Africa transition . adVNTR is available at https : / / github . com / mehrdadbakhtiari / adVNTR . Reference 1 . Bakhtiari , M . , Shleizer - Burko , S . , Gymrek , M . , Bansal , V . , Bafna , V . : Targeted genotyping of variable number tandem repeats with adVNTR . bioRxiv , p . 221754 ( 2017 ) Positive - Unlabeled Convolutional Neural Networks for Particle Picking in Cryo - electron Micrographs Tristan Bepler 1 , 2 , Andrew Morin 2 , 6 , Alex J . Noble 3 , Julia Brasch 4 , Lawrence Shapiro 4 , 5 , and Bonnie Berger 1 , 2 , 6 ( B ) 1 Computational and Systems Biology , MIT , Cambridge , MA , USA bab @ mit . edu 2 Computer Science and AI Laboratory , MIT , Cambridge , MA , USA 3 National Resource for Automated Molecular Microscopy , Simons Electron Microscopy Center , New York Structural Biology Center , New York , NY , USA 4 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics , Columbia University , New York , NY , USA 5 Mortimer B . Zuckerman Mind Brain Behavior Institute , New York , NY , USA 6 Department of Mathematics , MIT , Cambridge , MA , USA Background Structure determination with cryoEM involves reconstructing a 3D molecule from 2D projections . This process often requires tens to hundreds of thousands of experimental projections , or particles . Locating these particles in cryoEM micrographs , referred to as particle picking , is a major bottleneck in the cur - rent protein structure determination pipeline . This pipeline generally consists of sample and EM grid preparation , imaging , particle picking , and eventually structure determination . Labeling a suﬃcient number of particles to determine a high resolution structure can require months of eﬀort – even with the use of existing methods designed to automate the process . Limitations of these tools include high false positive rates , requiring many hand - labeled training examples , and poor performance on non - globular proteins . In order to better automate particle picking , and thus accelerate structure determination , we newly frame the particle picking problem as an instance of positive - unlabeled classiﬁcation . In our framework , for a set of micrographs con - taining particles of interest with a small number labeled for training , we learn a convolutional neural network ( CNN ) to classify particles from background using a novel generalized - expectation criteria [ 1 ] to regularize the model’s posterior over the unlabeled micrograph regions . This advance allows us to achieve state - of - the - art particle detection results with minimal hand - labeling required . B . Berger — This work was partially supported by grants : NIH R01 - GM081871 , NIH R01 - MH1148175 , Simons Foundation ( 349247 ) , NYSTAR , NIH NIGMS ( GM103310 ) , the Agouron Institute ( F00316 ) and NIH S10 OD019994 - 01 . c (cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG , part of Springer Nature 2018 B . J . Raphael ( Ed . ) : RECOMB 2018 , LNBI 10812 , pp . 245 – 247 , 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 89929 - 9 246 T . Bepler et al . Methods We develop Topaz , the ﬁrst particle picking pipeline to use CNNs trained using only positive and unlabeled examples and GE - binomial , a general objective func - tion for learning classiﬁer parameters from positive and unlabeled data . The GE - binomial objective penalizes the negative log - likelihood of the labeled data points while regularizing the classiﬁer’s posterior over the unlabeled data to match a binomial distribution prior on the number of unlabeled positives . Denoting the set of labeled positive data points by P , the probabilistic classiﬁer as g , the clas - siﬁer’s posterior over the number of unlabeled positives as q , and the binomial prior as p , the GE - binomial objective function is : − E x ∈ P [ log g ( x ) ] + KL ( q (cid:2) p ) , where KL is the Kullback - Leibler divergence . In the Topaz pipeline , CNN classiﬁers are ﬁt to labeled particles and the remaining unlabeled micrograph regions using minibatched stochastic gradient descent to minimize the GE - binomial objective . Predicted particle coordinates are next extracted by scoring each micrograph region with the trained classi - ﬁer and then using the non - maximum suppression algorithm to greedily select candidate particle coordinates . Results We show that the Topaz pipeline is able to accurately detect particles when trained with very few labeled example particles . On the EMPIAR - 10096 cryoEM data set [ 2 ] , Topaz achieves 46 % precision at 90 % recall with only 1000 labeled particles . In contrast , at the same recall level , EMAN2’s byRef method [ 3 ] only reaches 33 % precision with the same set of labeled particles – corresponding to 71 % more false positives than Topaz . Remarkably , Topaz still achieves better precision than EMAN2 at 90 % recall with 1 / 10th and even 1 / 100th the num - ber of labeled particles . At all numbers of labeled particles tested , we improve substantially over EMAN2’s byRef method in area under the precision - recall curve . The relative improvement in particle detection provided by Topaz is even greater on a second , unpublished dataset provided by the Shapiro lab , contain - ing stick - like particles with low signal - to - noise ratio . Furthermore , we show that combining a convolutional decoder with the convolutional feature extractor and classiﬁer learned with GE - binomial to form a hybrid classiﬁer + autoencoder can further improve generalization when very few labeled data points are available . Finally , we demonstrate that our GE - binomial objective function outperforms other positive - unlabeled learning methods never before applied to particle pick - ing . Topaz runs eﬃciently , training in hours and predicting in seconds with a single consumer grade GPU . We expect Topaz to become an essential component of single particle cryoEM analysis and our GE - binomial objective function to be widely applicable to positive - unlabeled classiﬁcation problems . Positive - Unlabeled Convolutional Neural Networks for Particle Picking 247 References 1 . Mann , G . S . , McCallum , A . : Generalized expectation criteria for semi - supervised learning with weakly labeled data . J . Mach . Learn . Res . 11 , 955 – 984 ( 2010 ) 2 . Tan , Y . Z . , Baldwin , P . R . , Davis , J . H . , Williamson , J . R . , Potter , C . S . , Carragher , B . , Lyumkis , D . : Addressing preferred specimen orientation in single - particle cryo - EM through tilting . Nat . Methods 14 , 793 – 796 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 4347 3 . Tang , G . , Peng , L . , Baldwin , P . R . , Mann , D . S . , Jiang , W . , Rees , I . , Ludtke , S . J . : EMAN2 : an extensible image processing suite for electron microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 166 , 205 – 213 ( 2007 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2006 . 05 . 009 Designing RNA Secondary Structures Is Hard ´Edouard Bonnet 1 , Pawe(cid:2)l Rz (cid:2) a˙zewski 2 , and Florian Sikora 3 ( B ) 1 Department of Computer Science , Middlesex University , London , UK edouard . bonnet @ dauphine . fr 2 Faculty of Mathematics and Information Science , Warsaw University of Technology , Warsaw , Poland p . rzazewski @ mini . pw . edu . pl 3 Universit´e Paris - Dauphine , PSL Research University , CNRS , LAMSADE , Paris , France florian . sikora @ dauphine . fr An RNA sequence is a word over an alphabet on four elements { A , C , G , U } called bases . RNA sequences fold into secondary structures where some bases pair with one another while others remain unpaired . Pseudoknot - free secondary structures can be represented as well - parenthesized expressions with additional dots , where pairs of matching parentheses symbolize paired bases and dots , unpaired bases . The two fundamental problems in RNA algorithmic are to predict how sequences fold within some model of energy and to design sequences of bases which will fold into targeted secondary structures . Predicting how a given RNA sequence folds into a pseudoknot - free secondary structure is known to be solvable in cubic time since the eighties [ 15 , 16 ] and in truly subcubic time by a recent result of Bringmann et al . [ 3 ] , whereas Lyngsø has shown it is NP - complete if pseudoknots are allowed [ 13 ] . As a stark contrast , it is unknown whether or not designing a given RNA secondary structure is a tractable task ; this has been raised as a challenging open question by several authors [ 2 , 6 , 7 , 9 , 11 , 14 ] . Because of its crucial importance in a number of ﬁelds such as pharmaceutical research and biochemistry , there are dozens of heuristics and software libraries dedicated to RNA secondary structure design [ 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 , 8 ] . It is therefore rather surprising that the computational complexity of this central problem in bioinformatics has been unsettled for decades . As our main result we show that , in the simplest model of energy which is the Watson - Crick model the design of secondary structures is NP - complete if one adds natural constraints of the form : index i of the sequence has to be labeled by base b . This negative result suggests that the same lower bound holds for more realistic models of energy . It is noteworthy that the additional constraints are by no means artiﬁcial : they are provided by all the RNA design pieces of software and they do correspond to the actual practice ( see for example the instances of the EteRNA project [ 12 ] ) . Our reduction from a variant of 3 - Sat has as main ingredients : arches of parentheses of diﬀerent widths , a linear order interleaving variables and clauses , and an intended rematching strategy which increases the number of pairs if and only if the three literals of a same clause are false . The correctness of the construction is also quite intricate ; it relies on the polynomial c (cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG , part of Springer Nature 2018 B . J . Raphael ( Ed . ) : RECOMB 2018 , LNBI 10812 , pp . 248 – 250 , 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 89929 - 9 Designing RNA Secondary Structures Is Hard 249 algorithm for the design of saturated structures – secondary structures without dots – by Haleˇs et al . [ 9 , 10 ] , counting arguments , and a concise case analysis . We also show that a naive brute - force algorithm for RNA Design can be improved by a careful structural analysis . References 1 . Aguirre - Hern´andez , R . , Hoos , H . H . , Condon , A . : Computational RNA secondary structure design : empirical complexity and improved methods . BMC Bioinf . 8 ( 1 ) , 34 ( 2007 ) 2 . Andronescu , M . , Fejes , A . P . , Hutter , F . , Hoos , H . H . , Condon , A . : A new algorithm for RNA secondary structure design . J . Mol . Biol . 336 ( 3 ) , 607 – 624 ( 2004 ) 3 . Bringmann , K . , Grandoni , F . , Saha , B . , Williams , V . V . : Truly sub - cubic algorithms for language edit distance and RNA - folding via fast bounded - diﬀerence min - plus product . In : IEEE 57th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science , FOCS 2016 , pp . 375 – 384 ( 2016 ) 4 . Butterfoss , G . L . , Kuhlman , B . : Computer - based design of novel protein structures . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 35 , 49 – 65 ( 2006 ) 5 . Churkin , A . , Retwitzer , M . D . Reinharz , V . , Ponty , Y . , Waldisp¨uhl , J . , Barash . D . : Design of RNAs : comparing programs for inverse RNA folding . Brieﬁngs Bioinf . ( 2017 ) 6 . Condon , A . : Problems on RNA secondary structure prediction and design . In : Baeten , J . C . M . , Lenstra , J . K . , Parrow , J . , Woeginger , G . J . ( eds . ) ICALP 2003 . LNCS , vol . 2719 , pp . 22 – 32 . Springer , Heidelberg ( 2003 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 3 - 540 - 45061 - 0 2 7 . Condon , A . : RNA molecules : glimpses through an algorithmic lens . In : Correa , J . R . , Hevia , A . , Kiwi , M . ( eds . ) LATIN 2006 . LNCS , vol . 3887 , pp . 8 – 10 . Springer , Heidelberg ( 2006 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 11682462 2 8 . Garc´ıa - Mart´ın , J . A . , Clote , P . , Dot´u , I . : RNAiFold : a web server for RNA inverse folding and molecular design . Nucleic Acids Res . 41 ( Webserver - Issue ) , 465 – 470 ( 2013 ) 9 . Hales , J . , H´eliou , A . , Manuch , J . , Ponty , Y . , Stacho , L . : Combinatorial RNA design : designability and structure - approximating algorithm in watson - crick and nussinov - jacobson energy models . Algorithmica 79 ( 3 ) , 835 – 856 ( 2017 ) 10 . Haleˇs , J . , Maˇnuch , J . , Ponty , Y . , Stacho , L . : Combinatorial RNA design : designabil - ity and structure - approximating algorithm . In : Cicalese , F . , Porat , E . , Vaccaro , U . ( eds . ) CPM 2015 . LNCS , vol . 9133 , pp . 231 – 246 . Springer , Cham ( 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 19929 - 0 20 11 . Jedwab , J . , Petrie , T . , Simon , S . : An inﬁnite class of unsaturated rooted trees corresponding to designable RNA secondary structures . CoRR , abs / 1709 . 08088 ( 2017 ) 12 . Lee , J . , Kladwang , W . , Lee , M . , Cantu , D . , Azizyan , M . , Kim , H . , Limpaecher , A . , Gaikwad , S . , Yoon , S . , Treuille , A . , Das , R . , Participants , E . R . N . A . : RNA design rules from a massive open laboratory . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . 111 ( 6 ) , 2122 – 2127 ( 2014 ) 13 . Lyngsø , R . B . : Complexity of pseudoknot prediction in simple models . In : D´ıaz , J . , Karhum¨aki , J . , Lepist¨o , A . , Sannella , D . ( eds . ) ICALP 2004 . LNCS , vol . 3142 , pp . 919 – 931 . Springer , Heidelberg ( 2004 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 540 - 27836 - 8 77 250 ´E . Bonnet et al . 14 . Lyngsø , R . B . : Inverse folding of RNA ( 2012 ) . http : / / citeseerx . ist . psu . edu / viewdoc / download ? doi = 10 . 1 . 1 . 226 . 5439 & rep = rep1 & type = pdf 15 . Nussinov , R . , Jacobson , A . B . : Fast algorithm for predicting the secondary structure of single - stranded RNA . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . 77 ( 11 ) , 6309 – 6313 ( 1980 ) 16 . Zuker , M . , Stiegler , P . : Optimal computer folding of large RNA sequences using thermodynamics and auxiliary information . Nucleic Acids Res . 9 ( 1 ) , 133 – 148 ( 1981 ) Generalizable Visualization of Mega - Scale Single - Cell Data Hyunghoon Cho 1 , Bonnie Berger 1 , 2 ( B ) , and Jian Peng 3 ( B ) 1 CSAIL , MIT , Cambridge , MA 02139 , USA 2 Department of Mathematics , MIT , Cambridge , MA 02139 , USA bab @ mit . edu 3 Department of Computer Science , UIUC , Urbana , IL 61801 , USA jianpeng @ illinois . edu 1 Introduction Single - cell RNA sequencing ( scRNA - seq ) has been a key tool in dissecting inter - cellular variation in biomedical sciences . A standard analysis for scRNA - seq data is to visualize the cells in a low - dimensional ( 2D or 3D ) space via methods such as t - stochastic neighbor embedding ( t - SNE ) [ 1 ] , where each cell is represented as a dot and dots of cells with similar expression proﬁles are located close to each other in space . Such visualization reveals the salient structure of the data in a form that is easy for researchers to grasp and further analyze . Recent advances in sequencing technologies has led to an exponential growth in the number of cells sequenced in a study . For example , 10x Genomics recently published a dataset of 1 . 3 million mouse neurons [ 2 ] . The emergence of such mega - scale data poses new computational challenges before they can be widely adopted , as many of the existing tools for scRNA - seq analysis ( including t - SNE ) require prohibitive runtimes or computational resources for data of this size . We introduce neural t - SNE ( net - SNE ) , a scalable and generalizable method for visualizing millions of cells for scRNA - seq analysis . net - SNE learns a high - quality mapping function that takes an expression proﬁle as input and outputs a low - dimensional embedding in 2D or 3D for visualization . Unlike t - SNE , the mapping function learned by net - SNE can be used to map previously unseen cells . In addition to allowing fast visualization of datasets with millions of cells , net - SNE enables novel workﬂows for single - cell genomics , where newly observed cells are visualized in the context of existing datasets for translational analysis . 2 Methods Our method ( net - SNE ) models the position of each cell in the visualization as the output of a parameterized map evaluated at the given expression proﬁle . We use feedforward neural networks ( NNs ) to represent the embedding function , drawing from the intuition that NNs have suﬃcient expressive capacity to ﬁnd high - quality maps similar to those typically uncovered by t - SNE . To optimize c (cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG , part of Springer Nature 2018 B . J . Raphael ( Ed . ) : RECOMB 2018 , LNBI 10812 , pp . 251 – 253 , 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 89929 - 9 252 H . Cho et al . the NN parameters , net - SNE minimizes the same objective score optimized by t - SNE via gradient descent . This choice of objective allows net - SNE to emulate the behavior of t - SNE while newly achieving generalizability and scalability . Notably , net - SNE is compatible with existing optimizations for t - SNE—our implementa - tion of net - SNE incorporates an eﬃcient variant of t - SNE based on Barnes - Hut approximation [ 1 ] . We achieve further eﬃciency by employing stochastic opti - mization techniques , where only a subset of cells are used to approximate each parameter update . Such stochastic acceleration is newly enabled by net - SNE due to the fact that parameters being optimized are shared across all cells . 3 Results We observed that net - SNE learns an embedding that closely matches t - SNE on 13 scRNA - seq datasets with known clusters in terms of both visual quality and clustering accuracy . Furthermore , when an entire cluster of cells was withheld and placed onto the visualization after the fact , net - SNE accurately positioned the held - out cells as a distinct cluster , despite not having seen any cells from the missing cluster . To demonstrate fast visualization of mega - scale datasets , we also pre - trained net - SNE on a random subset of 100K cells from the 10x Genomics dataset and used the learned embedding to instantly visualize the entire dataset in less than a minute . This approach obtained a higher quality map than t - SNE with the default parameters , the latter of which took 13 h to ﬁnish . While the pre - training of net - SNE took 3 h in our experiment , we note that a pre - trained embedding may be readily available in certain use cases . We provide example visualizations by net - SNE in Fig . 1 . PBMC68k Zeisel Klein Kolodziejczyk 10x Genomics Fig . 1 . Example 2D visualizations of single - cell RNA - seq datasets by net - SNE Overall , our results demonstrate that net - SNE not only learns high quality maps like t - SNE , but also gracefully generalizes to unseen cells . This allows net - SNE to eﬃciently visualize mega - scale single - cell data by using a pre - trained embedding from a subsampled or an existing dataset . Our work is widely appli - cable to other data science domains with millions of data points to be visualized . Acknowledgements . This work was partially supported by NIH R01GM081871 . Generalizable Visualization of Mega - Scale Single - Cell Data 253 References 1 . Van Der Maaten , L . : Accelerating t - SNE using tree - based algorithms . J . Mach . Learn . Res . 15 ( 1 ) , 3221 – 3245 ( 2014 ) 2 . 10x Genomics : Transcriptional Proﬁling of 1 . 3 Million Brain Cells with the Chromium TM Single Cell 3’ Solution . Application Note ( 2017 ) . https : / / www . 10xgenomics . com / single - cell / . Accessed October 2017 Probabilistic Count Matrix Factorization for Single Cell Expression Data Analysis G . Durif 1 , 2 ( B ) , L . Modolo 1 , 3 , 4 , J . E . Mold 4 , S . Lambert - Lacroix 5 , and F . Picard 1 1 LBBE , UMR CNRS 5558 , Universit´e Lyon 1 , 69622 Villeurbanne , France ghislain . durif @ inria . fr 2 Universit´e Grenoble Alpes , Inria , CNRS , Grenoble INP , LJK , 38000 Grenoble , France 3 LBMC UMR 5239 CNRS / ENS Lyon , 69007 Lyon , France 4 Department of Cell and Molecular Biology , Karolinska Institutet , Stockholm , Sweden 5 UMR 5525 Universit´e Grenoble Alpes / CNRS / TIMC - IMAG , 38041 Grenoble , France The combination of massive parallel sequencing with high - throughput cell biology technologies has given rise to single - cell Genomics . Similar to the paradigm shift of the 90 s characterized by the ﬁrst molecular proﬁles of tis - sues , it is now possible to characterize molecular heterogeneities at the cellular level ( Saliba et al . 2014 ) . The statistical characterization of heterogeneities in single - cell expression data thus requires an appropriate model , since the tran - scripts abundance is quantiﬁed for each cell using read counts . Hence , standard methods based on Gaussian assumptions are likely to fail to catch the biologi - cal variability of lowly expressed genes , and Poisson or Negative Binomial dis - tributions constitute an appropriate framework ( Chen et al . 2016 ) . Moreover , dropouts , either technical ( due to sampling diﬃculties ) or biological ( no expres - sion or stochastic transcriptional activity ) , constitute another major source of variability in scRNA - seq ( single - cell RNA - seq ) data , which has motivated the development of the so - called Zero - Inﬂated models ( Kharchenko et al . 2014 ) . A standard and popular way of quantifying and visualizing the variability within a dataset is dimension reduction , principal component analysis ( PCA ) being the most widely used technique in practice . Model - based PCA ( Collins et al . 2001 ) oﬀers the unique advantage to be adapted to the data distribution and to be based on an appropriate metric , the Bregman divergence . It consists in speci - fying the distribution of the data through a statistical model . A probabilistic zero - inﬂated version of the Gaussian PCA was proposed by Pierson and Yau ( 2015 ) in the context of single cell data analysis ( the ZIFA method ) . However , scRNA - seq data may be better analyzed by methods dedicated to count data such as the Non - negative Matrix Factorization ( Lee and Seung 1999 , NMF ) or the Gamma - Poisson factor model ( Cemgil 2009 ) . However , none of the currently available dimension reduction methods fully model single - cell expression data , characterized by overdispered zero inﬂated counts ( Zappia et al . 2017 ) . Our method is based on a probabilistic count matrix factorization ( pCMF ) . We pro - pose a dimension reduction method that is dedicated to over - dispersed counts c (cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG , part of Springer Nature 2018 B . J . Raphael ( Ed . ) : RECOMB 2018 , LNBI 10812 , pp . 254 – 255 , 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 89929 - 9 Probabilistic Count Matrix Factorization for Single Cell Expression 255 with dropouts , in high dimension . Our factor model takes advantage of the Pois - son Gamma representation to model counts from scRNA - seq data ( Zappia et al . 2017 ) . In particular , we use Gamma priors on the distribution of principal com - ponents . We model dropouts with a Zero - Inﬂated Poisson distribution , and we introduce sparsity in the model thanks to a spike - and - slab approach ( Malsiner - Walli and Wagner 2011 ) that is based on a two component sparsity - inducing prior on loadings ( Titsias and L´azaro - Gredilla 2011 ) . The model is inferred using a variational EM algorithm that scales favorably to data dimension , as compared with Markov Chain Monte Carlo ( MCMC ) methods ( Blei et al . 2017 ) . Then we propose a new criterion to assess the quality of ﬁt of the model to the data , as a percentage of explained deviance , because the standard variance reduction that is used in PCA needs to be adapted to the new framework dedicated to counts . We show that pCMF better catches the variability of simulated data and experimental scRNA - seq datasets . Finally , pCMF is available in the form of a R package available at https : / / gitlab . inria . fr / gdurif / pCMF . References Blei , D . M . , Kucukelbir , A . , McAuliﬀe , J . D . : Variational inference : a review for statis - ticians . J . Am . Stat . Assoc . ( 2017 ) . ( just - accepted ) Cemgil , A . T . : Bayesian inference for nonnegative matrix factorisation models . Compu - tational Intelligence and Neuroscience ( 2009 ) Chen , H . - I . H . , Jin , Y . , Huang , Y . , Chen , Y . : Detection of high variability in gene expression from single - cell RNA - seq proﬁling . BMC Genomics 17 ( Suppl 7 ) ( 2016 ) Collins , M . , Dasgupta , S . , Schapire , R . E . : A generalization of principal components analysis to the exponential family . In : Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp . 617 – 624 ( 2001 ) Kharchenko , P . V . , Silberstein , L . , Scadden , D . T . : Bayesian approach to single - cell dif - ferential expression analysis . Nat . Methods 11 ( 7 ) , 740 ( 2014 ) Lee , D . D . , Seung , H . S . : Learning the parts of objects by non - negative matrix factor - ization . Nature 401 ( 6755 ) , 788 – 791 ( 1999 ) Malsiner - Walli , G . , Wagner , H . : Comparing spike and slab priors for Bayesian variable selection . Austrian J . Stat . 40 ( 4 ) , 241 – 264 ( 2011 ) Pierson , E . , Yau , C . : ZIFA : dimensionality reduction for zero - inﬂated single - cell gene expression analysis . Genome Biol . 16 , 241 ( 2015 ) Saliba , A . - E . , Westermann , A . J . , Gorski , S . A . , Vogel , J . : Single - cell RNA - seq : advances and future challenges . Nucleic Acids Res . 42 ( 14 ) , 8845 – 8860 ( 2014 ) Titsias , M . K . , & L´azaro - Gredilla , M . : Spike and slab variational inference for multi - task and multiple kernel learning . In : Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp . 2339 – 2347 ( 2011 ) Zappia , L . , Phipson , B . , Oshlack , A . : Splatter : simulation of single - cell RNA sequencing data . Genome Biol . 18 , 174 ( 2017 ) Fixed - Parameter Tractable Sampling for RNA Design with Multiple Target Structures Stefan Hammer 1 , 2 , 3 , Yann Ponty 4 , 5 ( B ) , Wei Wang 4 , 5 , and Sebastian Will 2 1 Department of Computer Science and Interdisciplinary Center for Bioinformatics , University Leipzig , 04107 Leipzig , Germany 2 Department of Theoretical Chemistry , Faculty of Chemistry , University of Vienna , 1090 Vienna , Austria 3 Research Group Bioinformatics and Computational Biology , Faculty of Computer Science , University of Vienna , 1090 Vienna , Austria 4 CNRS UMR 7161 LIX , Ecole Polytechnique , Bat . Turing , 91120 Palaiseau , France 5 AMIBio team , Inria Saclay , Bat Alan Turing , 91120 Palaiseau , France yann . ponty @ lix . polytechnique . fr Motivation . Engineering artiﬁcial biological systems promises broad applica - tions in synthetic biology , biotechnology and medicine . Here , the rational design of multi - stable RNA molecules is especially powerful , since RNA can be gener - ated with highly speciﬁc properties and programmable functions . In particular , designing artiﬁcial riboswitches became popular due to their potential as ver - satile biosensors [ 1 ] . Eﬀective in - silico methods proved to greatly facilitate the design approach and have tremendous impact on their cost and feasibility . Statement of Problem . Most methods for computational design share a similar overall strategy : one or several initial seed sequences are generated and optimized subsequently . In this contribution we revisit the ﬁrst main ingredient of ( multi - target ) design methods , namely the sampling of sequences , which energetically favor several given target structures at the same time . While previous multi - target methods [ 4 , 6 ] relied on ad - hoc sampling strategies , sampling seeds from the uniform distribution was solved only recently [ 2 , 3 ] . Algorithmic Contributions . We generalize Boltzmann sampling for RNA design , which was recently shown powerful for single targets in IncaRNAtion [ 5 ] , to design for multiple structural targets . After showing that even uniform sampling is # P - hard , we introduce the tree decomposition - based ﬁxed parameter tractable ( FPT ) sampling algorithm RNARedPrint . Finally , we combine our FPT stochas - tic sampling algorithm with multi - dimensional Boltzmann sampling over distri - butions controlled by expressive RNA energy models . We show that sampling t sequences of length n for k target structures takes O ( 2 d n k + t n k ) time , where d : = min ( w + c + 1 , 2 ( w + 1 ) ) , depending on the tree width w of the dependency graph ( covering all dependencies between sequence positions introduced by the energy function ) as well as the number c of connected components in the com - patibility graph ( covering the constraints enforcing canonical base pairings ) . Due c (cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG , part of Springer Nature 2018 B . J . Raphael ( Ed . ) : RECOMB 2018 , LNBI 10812 , pp . 256 – 258 , 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 89929 - 9 Fixed - Parameter Tractable Sampling for RNA Design with Multiple 257 to a constraint framework , RNARedPrint supports generic Boltzmann - weighted sampling for arbitrary additive RNA energy models ; this moreover enables tar - geting speciﬁc free energies or GC - content , compare Fig . 1 . Empirical Results . We study general properties of the approach and generate bio - logically relevant multi - target Boltzmann - weighted designs . Thereby , we observe signiﬁcant improvements over ad - hoc methods or even uniform sampling . Extensibility of the Approach . The presented framework is designed to enable even more general new possibilities for sequence generation in the ﬁeld of RNA sequence design by enforcing additional constraints , including more complex sequence constraints , e . g . forbidden motifs in the designed sequences . Fig . 1 . General outline of RNARedPrint . From a set of target secondary structures ( i ) , base - pairs are merged ( ii ) into a compatibility graph ( iii ) . Based on its tree decompo - sition ( iv ) , we compute the partition function , followed by a Boltzmann sampling of valid sequences ( v ) . An adaptive scheme learns weights to achieve targeted energies and GC - content , leading to the production of suitable designs ( vi ) . Availability as free software : https : / / github . com / yannponty / RNARedPrint References 1 . Domin , G . , Findeiß , S . , Wachsmuth , M . , Will , S . , Stadler , P . F . , M¨orl , M . : Applica - bility of a computational design approach for synthetic riboswitches . Nucleic Acids Res . 45 ( 7 ) , 4108 – 4119 ( 2017 ) 2 . Hammer , S . , Tschiatschek , B . , Flamm , F . , Hofacker , I . L . , Findeiß , S . : RNAblueprint : ﬂexible multiple target nucleic acid sequence design . Bioinformatics 33 , 2850 – 2858 ( 2017 ) 3 . H¨oner zu Siederdissen , C . , Hammer , S . , Abfalter , I . , Hofacker , I . L . , Flamm , C . , Stadler , P . F . : Computational design of RNAs with complex energy landscapes . Biopolymers 99 , 1124 – 1136 ( 2013 ) 258 S . Hammer et al . 4 . Lyngso , R . B . , Anderson , J . W . J . , Sizikova , E . , Badugu , A . , Hyland , T . , Hein , J . : Frnakenstein : multiple target inverse RNA folding . BMC Bioinf . 13 , 260 ( 2012 ) 5 . Reinharz , V . , Ponty , Y . , Waldisp¨uhl , J . : A weighted sampling algorithm for the design of RNA sequences with targeted secondary structure and nucleotide distri - bution . Bioinformatics 29 , i308 – i315 ( 2013 ) 6 . Taneda , A . : Multi - objective optimization for RNA design with multiple target sec - ondary structures . BMC Bioinf . 16 , 280 ( 2015 ) Contribution of Structural Variation to Genome Structure : TAD Fusion Discovery and Ranking Linh Huynh 1 and Fereydoun Hormozdiari 1 , 2 , 3 ( B ) 1 Genome Center , UC Davis , Davis , USA 2 MIND Institute , UC Davis , Davis , USA 3 Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine , UC Davis , Davis , USA fhormozd @ ucdavis . edu Introduction The signiﬁcant contribution of structural variants ( e . g . deletion , insertion , and inversion ) to function , disease , and evolution is well reported . However , in many cases , the mechanism by which these variants contribute to the phenotype is not well understood . This is especially the case for studying non - coding struc - tural variants and their potential biological impact . With the advent of high - throughput chromosome conformation capture ( Hi - C [ 1 ] ) we have novel insights into genome structure and its contribution to gene regulation . Using Hi - C data we are able to study the genomic interactions , such as enhancer - promoter inter - actions that are the main mechanism for gene regulation . The analysis of Hi - C data has also provided evidence that genome folds into diﬀerent compartments and domains which guide the regions of the genome that can interact with each other . One of these types of domains discovered is called topological associ - ated domains ( TADs ) and has provided a novel understanding of how genome structure contributes to regulation [ 2 ] . Recent studies reported structural vari - ants ( SVs ) that disrupted the three - dimensional genome structure by fusing two TADs , such that enhancers from one TAD interacted with genes from the other TAD , could cause severe developmental disorders [ 3 ] . However , no method exists for directly scoring and ranking structural variations based on their eﬀect on the three - dimensional structure such as the TAD disruption . In this paper , we for - mally deﬁne TAD fusion and provide a combinatorial approach for assigning a score to quantify the level of TAD fusion for each deletion denoted as TAD fusion score . Methods Our goal is to develop a computational method that can provide a score for deletions based on its level of modifying the 3D genomic structure and potential of causing a TAD fusion . In our method , the input consists of a Hi - C contact matrix of the genome with reference allele ( i . e . , without the deletion ) and the c (cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG , part of Springer Nature 2018 B . J . Raphael ( Ed . ) : RECOMB 2018 , LNBI 10812 , pp . 259 – 260 , 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 89929 - 9 260 L . Huynh and F . Hormozdiari coordinates of the deletion . The output is a score representing the number of new genomic interactions made ( i . e . , TAD fusion score ) as a result of the deletion . For this paper , we are only considering deletions , however , this approach can be extended to consider other SV types ( e . g . translocations ) . We propose a two - step framework for calculating the TAD fusion score : ( i ) predicting a new Hi - C contact matrix G of the mutated chromosome ( i . e . with the deletion ) given the Hi - C contact matrix H of a genome without the deletion and the deletion coordinates as the inputs ; ( ii ) comparing this predicted / new Hi - C contact matrix G with the original Hi - C contact matrix H to estimate the number of new interactions created as a result of that deletion . For the ﬁrst step , we extend the power law model ( i . e . length - based model ) by adding new param - eters that represent the TAD structure . By that , all model parameter values can be estimated by solving a linear programming . For the second step , we deﬁne TAD fusion score as the expected number of additional genomic interactions created as a result of the deletion . Here , the genomic interactions can be deﬁned by a simple step function or by a Bayesian formula . Results We show that our extended model gives a better prediction of the Hi - C con - tact matrix than the ( length - based ) power law model . In addition , our method can accurately score deletions which result in TAD fusion , and it outperforms the approaches which use predicted TADs to overlay the deletion on them for predicting TAD fusion . Furthermore , we show that our method correctly gives higher scores to deletions reported to cause developmental disorders as a result of disrupting genome structure in comparison to the deletions reported in the 1000 genomes project . Finally , we also show that deletions that cause TAD fusion are rare and under negative selection in general population . TAD fusion score is available at https : / / github . com / huynhvietlinh / FusionScore . References 1 . Lieberman - Aiden , E . , Van Berkum , N . L . , Williams , L . , Imakaev , M . , Ragoczy , T . , Telling , A . , Amit , I . , Lajoie , B . R . , Sabo , P . J . , Dorschner , M . O . , et al . : Compre - hensive mapping of long - range interactions reveals folding principles of the human genome . Science 326 ( 5950 ) , 289 – 293 ( 2009 ) 2 . Dixon , J . R . , Selvaraj , S . , Yue , F . , Kim , A . , Li , Y . , Shen , Y . , Hu , M . , Liu , J . S . , Ren , B . : Topological domains in mammalian genomes identiﬁed by analysis of chromatin interactions . Nature 485 ( 7398 ) , 376 – 380 ( 2012 ) 3 . Lupi´a˜nez , D . G . , Kraft , K . , Heinrich , V . , Krawitz , P . , Brancati , F . , Klopocki , E . , Horn , D . , Kayserili , H . , Opitz , J . M . , Laxova , R . , et al . : Disruptions of topological chromatin domains cause pathogenic rewiring ofgene - enhancer interactions . Cell 161 ( 5 ) , 1012 – 1025 ( 2015 ) Assembly of Long Error - Prone Reads Using Repeat Graphs Mikhail Kolmogorov 1 ( B ) , Jeﬀrey Yuan 2 , Yu Lin 3 , and Pavel Pevzner 1 1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , USA mkolmogo @ ucsd . edu 2 Graduate Program in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , USA 3 Research School of Computer Science , Australian National University , Canberra , Australia The problem of genome assembly is ultimately linked to the r epeat charac - terization problem , the compact representation of all repeat families in a genome as a repeat graph [ 1 ] . Long read technologies have not made the repeat charac - terization problem irrelevant . Instead , they have simply shifted the focus from short repeats to longer repeats comparable in length to the median SMS read size ; e . g . , Kamath et al . [ 2 ] analyzed many bacterial genomes that existing SMS assemblers failed to assemble into a single contig . Since even bacterial ( let alone , eukaryotic ) genomes have long repeats , SMS assemblers currently face the same challenge that short read assemblers faced a decade ago , albeit at a diﬀerent scale of repeat lengths . Most algorithms for assembling long error - prone reads use an overlap - layout - consensus ( OLC ) approach that does not provide a repeat characterization [ 3 , 4 ] . In contrast , de Bruijn graphs emerged as a popular approach for short read assembly because they oﬀered an elegant representation of all repeats in a genome that reveals their mosaic structure . Most short read assemblers con - struct the de Bruijn graph based on all k - mers in reads and further transform it into an assembly graph using various graph simpliﬁcation procedures . However , in the case of SMS reads , the key assumption of the de Bruijn graph approach ( that most k - mers from the genome are preserved in multiple reads ) does not hold even for short k - mers , let alone for long k - mers ( e . g . , k = 1000 ) . As a result , various issues that have been addressed in short read assembly ( e . g . , how to deal with the fragmented de Bruijn graph , how to transform it into an assem - bly graph , etc . ) remain largely unaddressed in the case of the de Bruijn graph approach to SMS assemblies . Here , we describe the Flye algorithm for constructing repeat graphs ( which have properties similar to de Bruijn graphs ) from SMS reads . Flye is built on top of the ABruijn assembler [ 5 ] , which generates accurate overlapping contigs but does not reveal the repeat structure of the genome . In contrast to ABruijn , Flye initially generates inaccurate overlapping contigs ( i . e . , contigs with potential assembly errors representing random walks on the true repeat graph ) and com - bines these initial contigs into an accurate assembly graph that encodes all pos - sible assemblies consistent with the reads . Flye further resolves bridged repeats c (cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG , part of Springer Nature 2018 B . J . Raphael ( Ed . ) : RECOMB 2018 , LNBI 10812 , pp . 261 – 262 , 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 89929 - 9 262 M . Kolmogorov et al . in the assembly graph thus constructing a new , less tangled assembly graph , and ﬁnally outputs accurate ﬁnal contigs formed by paths in this graph . Flye also introduces a new algorithm that uses small diﬀerences between repeat copies to resolve unbridged repeats that are not spanned by any reads . We benchmarked Flye against several state - of - the - art SMS assemblers using various datasets and demonstrated that it generates accurate assemblies while also providing insight into how to plan additional experiments ( e . g . , using contact or optical maps ) to ﬁnish the assembly . Flye is freely available at http : / / github . com / fenderglass / Flye . References 1 . Pevzner , P . A . , Tang , H . , Tesler , G . : De novo repeat classiﬁcation and fragment assembly . Genome Res . 14 ( 9 ) , 1786 – 1796 ( 2004 ) 2 . Kamath , G . M . , Shomorony , I . , Xia , F . , Courtade , T . A . , Tse , N . : D : HINGE : long - read assembly achieves optimal repeat resolution . Genome Res . 27 ( 5 ) , 747 – 756 ( 2017 ) 3 . Chin , C . S . , Peluso , P . , Sedlazeck , F . J . , Nattestad , M . , Concepcion , G . T . , Clum , A . , Dunn , C . , O’Malley , R . , Figueroa - Balderas , R . , Morales - Cruz , A . , Cramer , G . R . : Phased diploid genome assembly with single - molecule real - time sequencing . Nat . Methods 13 ( 12 ) , 1050 ( 2016 ) 4 . Koren , S . , Walenz , B . P . , Berlin , K . , Miller , J . R . , Bergman , N . H . , Phillippy , A . M . : Canu : scalable and accurate long - read assembly via adaptive k - mer weighting and repeat separation . Genome Res . 27 ( 5 ) , 722 – 736 ( 2017 ) 5 . Lin , Y . , Yuan , J . , Kolmogorov , M . , Shen , M . W . , Chaisson , M . , Pevzner , P . A . : Assembly of long error - prone reads using de Bruijn graphs . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . 113 ( 52 ) , E8396 – E8405 ( 2016 ) A Multi - species Functional Embedding Integrating Sequence and Network Structure Mark D . M . Leiserson 1 , Jason Fan 1 , Anthony Cannistra 2 , Inbar Fried 3 , Tim Lim 4 , Thomas Schaﬀner 5 , Mark Crovella 4 , and Benjamin Hescott 6 ( B ) 1 Department of Computer Science , University of Maryland , College Park , USA 2 Department of Biology , University of Washington , Seattle , USA 3 University of North Carolina Medical School , Chapel Hill , USA 4 Department of Computer Science , Boston University , Boston , USA 5 Department of Computer Science , Princeton University , Princeton , USA 6 College of Computer and Information Science , Northeastern University , Boston , USA b . hescott @ northeastern . edu Introduction . Transferring biological knowledge between species is funda - mental for many important problems in genetics . These problems range from the molecular - level , such as predicting protein function or genetic interac - tions [ 4 ] , to the organism - level , such as predicting human disease models [ 5 ] . The most common approach researchers have taken is to use orthologs inferred from DNA sequencing data . More recently , researchers have sought to expand beyond sequence - based orthologs using high - throughput proteomics data under the hypothesis that genes with similar topology in protein - protein interaction ( PPI ) networks have similar functions . Many methods have been introduced to infer homology across species ( i . e . a node matching ) from sequence similarity and PPI networks , including network alignment [ 1 ] . More recently , Jacunski , et al . [ 4 ] identiﬁed connectivity homologous gene pairs using a small set of features derived from PPI networks . These prior works are focused on node matching and constructing node feature vectors , but do not address the problem of embedding genes from diﬀerent species into a shared , general - purpose space . Methods . We introduce a new algorithm , Homology Assessment across Networks using Diﬀusion and Landmarks ( HANDL ) , that leverages graph ker - nels to embed nodes from two PPI networks into a biologically meaningful and general - purpose vector space using network and sequence data . 1 Kernels , par - ticularly kernels that capture random walks and / or heat diﬀusion processes on graphs , have been widely and successfully used for computing similarity between nodes within biological networks [ 2 ] . The main computational challenge HANDL solves is relating network kernel matrices from diﬀerent species . Because the kernel matrices from networks of 1 An implementation of HANDL is available at https : / / github . com / lrgr / HANDL . c (cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG , part of Springer Nature 2018 B . J . Raphael ( Ed . ) : RECOMB 2018 , LNBI 10812 , pp . 263 – 265 , 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 89929 - 9 264 M . D . M . Leiserson et al . Fig . 1 . HANDL embeds nodes into a shared vector space . diﬀerent species have diﬀerent dimensions , traditional kernel transfer learning approaches ( e . g . [ 3 ] ) cannot be directly applied . We show a schematic of the HANDL algorithm in Fig . 1 . HANDL takes as input a source network , a target network , and a set of landmarks shared between the networks to embed nodes from the target species into the vector space of the source species . The inner - product between embeddings gives HANDL similarity scores between nodes in diﬀerent species . As HANDL is a general algorithm , the landmarks and graph kernel can be customized for particular applications . In this work , we use a subset of homologs between the source and target species as landmarks and the regularized Laplacian kernel speciﬁcally to capture protein functional similarity . Results . We show that the human - mouse and baker’s - ﬁssion yeast cross - species embeddings constructed by HANDL are biologically meaningful with three cross - species tasks . First , we ﬁnd that HANDL similarity scores are strongly correlated with cross - species functional similarity , and that pairs with the highest HANDL similarity scores are more functionally similar than pairs with the closest connec - tivity homology proﬁles [ 4 ] . Next , we use the algorithm and data from McGary , et al . [ 5 ] and HANDL - homologs ( node pairs with high HANDL similarity scores ) to ﬁnd new , novel human - mouse disease models ( phenologs , i . e orthologous phe - notypes ) that are supported by biological literature . Finally , we show that node vectors themselves are of more general use . We use HANDL to transfer knowl - edge of synthetic lethal ( SL ) interactions in baker’s to ﬁssion yeast ( and vice versa ) . We compute embeddings for the source and target species then train a support vector machine ( SVM ) only on embeddings of the source species . We ﬁnd that that the SVM also separates embeddings of the target species with respect to SLs and non - SLs on previously unseen data . These results show how HANDL can transfer knowledge of genetics between humans and model organisms . We anticipate that HANDL can serve as the foundation for more sophisticated approaches for transfer learning across species . A Multi - species Functional Embedding Integrating Sequence 265 References 1 . Clark , C . , Kalita , J . : A comparison of algorithms for the pairwise alignment of biological networks . Bioinformatics 30 ( 16 ) , 2351 – 2359 ( 2014 ) 2 . Cowen , L . , Ideker , T . , Raphael , B . J . , Sharan , R . : Network propagation : a universal ampliﬁer of genetic associations . Nat . Rev . Genet . ( 2017 ) 3 . Huang , J . , Smola , A . J . , Gretton , A . , Borgwardt , K . M . , and Scholkopf , B . : Correct - ing sample selection bias by unlabeled data . Adv . Neural Inf . Process . Syst . 601 – 608 ( 2006 ) 4 . Jacunski , A . , Dixon , S . J . , Tatonetti , N . P . : Connectivity homology enables inter - species network models of synthetic lethality . PLoS Comp . Bio . 11 ( 10 ) , e1004506 ( 2015 ) 5 . McGary , K . L . , Park , T . , Woods , J . O . , Cha , H . , Wallingford , J . B . , Marcotte , E . M . : Systematic discovery of nonobvious human disease models through orthologous phe - notypes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 107 ( 14 ) , 6544 – 6549 ( 2010 ) Deciphering Signaling Speciﬁcity with Deep Neural Networks Yunan Luo 1 , Jianzhu Ma 2 , Yang Liu 1 , Qing Ye 1 , Trey Ideker 2 , and Jian Peng 1 ( B ) 1 Department of Computer Science , University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign , Champaign , USA 2 School of Medicine , University of California San Diego , La Jolla , USA jianpeng @ illinois . edu 1 Introduction Protein kinase phosphorylation is one of the primary forms of post - translation modiﬁcation ( PTM ) that transduce cellular signals and regulate cellular pro - cesses . Defective signal transductions , which are associated with protein phos - phorylation , have been linked to many human diseases , such as cancer . Deﬁning the organization of the phosphorylation - based signaling network and , in partic - ular , identifying kinase - speciﬁc substrates can help reveal the molecular mecha - nism of the signaling network and understand their impacts on human diseases . 2 Methods We present DeepSignal , a deep learning based method for predicting the sub - strate speciﬁcity of kinase domains . Unlike most of the previous methods that only focus on using substrate sequences to derive the kinases speciﬁcity , DeepSig - nal takes into account the information in both kinase domain sequences and substrate peptides , and translates a kinase sequences into its speciﬁcity proﬁle ( e . g . , a position - speciﬁc scoring matrix , PSSM ) . DeepSignal employs the Long Short - Term Memory ( LSTM ) network , a deep learning architecture with memory units , to process the kinase sequences with various lengths using a single model , enabling the learning of universal knowledge across multiple kinase domains . Our deep learning based method is able to automatically extract complex features in kinase domain sequences that best explains the substrate speciﬁcity of this kinase . For example , with the memory ability of LSTM , DeepSignal can exploit and record the long and short range dependencies between residues spanning over an arbitrary distance in the kinase domain , which is challenging for previous non - deep learning methods of phosphosites prediction . In addition , DeepSignal can transfer the knowledge from currently available kinase - substrate data to predict phosphosites for new kinases , which is infeasible for many existing kinase - speciﬁc methods . Y . Luo , J . Ma , and Y . Liu — Equal contribution . c (cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG , part of Springer Nature 2018 B . J . Raphael ( Ed . ) : RECOMB 2018 , LNBI 10812 , pp . 266 – 268 , 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 89929 - 9 Deciphering Signaling Speciﬁcity with Deep Neural Networks 267 3 Results We evaluated the ability of DeepSignal on predicting the substrate speciﬁcity of kinase domains . Our method is able to achieve 0 . 875 AUROC ( area under the receiver operating characteristic curve ) and 0 . 21 AUPRC ( area under the precision - recall curve ) scores in a ﬁve - fold cross - validation , which is a substan - tial improvement over previous methods GPS 2 . 0 [ 1 ] and NetPhorest [ 2 ] . To test the generalization ability of our method , we further apply DeepSignal to predict the binding speciﬁcity of SH2 domain ( Fig . 1 ) , another phosphorylation - based signaling modular domain , on four high - throughput datasets . DeepSignal signiﬁcantly outperforms two SH2 - peptide interaction methods ( SMALI [ 3 ] and SH2PepInt [ 4 ] ) and one general protein - protein interaction method ( PrePPI [ 5 ] ) . Although trained on 80 % of the data in the ﬁve - fold cross - validation , our method still achieves higher or comparable AUROC scores when compared to a method ( MSM / D - PEM [ 6 ] ) that was pre - trained on all the binding data of each dataset . Overall , these results demonstrated the ability of DeepSignal on predicting the binding speciﬁcity of phosphorylation - based signaling domains . Fig . 1 . Evaluation of prediciton performance on prediction of the binding between SH2 domains and phosphotyrosine peptides . To study the impact of mutations on cancer , we used DeepSignal to con - struct the signaling network using only the protein primary sequences of 16 , 254 proteins , including 307 kinase domains , 122 SH2 domains and 190 , 427 phos - phoproteins across 18 cancer types . For each cancer type , we mapped all the coding mutations from TCGA on the protein sequences . This resulted 6 , 286 mutations on kinase domains , 776 mutations on SH2 domains and 37 , 996 muta - tions on phosphoproteins . We use DeepSignal to quantify the change of the bind - ing speciﬁcity caused by the cancer mutations of a given kinase / SH2 - peptide , and predict a ranking list of single - nucleotide variants ( SNV ) that potentially disrupt phosphosites . We found DeepSignal is more sensitive in detecting known cancer genes related to signaling transduction than an existing statistical app - roach [ 6 ] . DeepSignal can further discover new perturbed pathways related to cancer including CTNNB1 pathway in UCEC , PTEN pathway in GBM and SMAD4 pathway in LUAD . 268 Y . Luo et al . Acknowledgments . This work was supported in part by the NSF CAREER Award , the Sloan Research Fellowship , and the PhRMA Foundation Award in Informatics . References 1 . Xue , Y . , et al . : Gps 2 . 0 , a tool to predict kinase - speciﬁc phosphorylation sites in hierarchy . Mol . Cell . Proteomics 7 , 1598 – 1608 ( 2008 ) 2 . Miller , M . L . , et al . : Linear motif atlas for phosphorylation - dependent signaling . Sci . Signal 1 , ra2 ( 2008 ) 3 . Li , L . , et al . : Prediction of phosphotyrosine signaling networks using a scoring matrix - assisted ligand identiﬁcation approach . Nucleic Acids Res . 36 , 3263 – 3273 ( 2008 ) 4 . Kundu , K . , Costa , F . , Huber , M . , Reth , M . , Backofen , R . : Semi - supervised predic - tion of sh2 - peptide interactions from imbalanced high - throughput data . PloS one 8 , e62732 ( 2013 ) 5 . Zhang , Q . C . , Petrey , D . , Garz´on , J . I . , Deng , L . , Honig , B . : Preppi : a structure - informed database of protein - protein interactions . Nucleic Acids Res . 41 , D828 – D833 ( 2012 ) 6 . AlQuraishi , M . , Koytiger , G . , Jenney , A . , MacBeath , G . , Sorger , P . K . : A multi - scale statistical mechanical framework integrates biophysical and genomic data to assemble cancer networks . Nat . Genet . 46 , 1363 – 1371 ( 2014 ) Integrative Inference of Subclonal Tumour Evolution from Single - Cell and Bulk Sequencing Data Salem Malikic 1 , Katharina Jahn 2 , 3 , Jack Kuipers 2 , 3 , S . Cenk Sahinalp 4 ( B ) , and Niko Beerenwinkel 2 , 3 ( B ) 1 School of Computing Science , Simon Fraser University , Burnaby , BC , Canada 2 Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering , ETH Zurich , Basel , Switzerland niko . beerenwinkel @ bsse . ethz . ch 3 SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics , Basel , Switzerland 4 Department of Computer Science , Indiana University , Bloomington , IN , USA cenksahi @ indiana . edu Cancer is a genetic disease that develops through a branched evolutionary process . It is characterised by the emergence of genetically distinct subclones through the random acquisition of mutations at the level of single - cells and shifting prevalences at the subclone level through selective advantages purveyed by driver mutations . This interplay creates complex mixtures of tumour cell pop - ulations which exhibit diﬀerent susceptibility to targeted cancer therapies and are suspected to be the cause of treatment failure . Therefore it is of great inter - est to obtain a better understanding of the evolutionary histories of individual tumours and their subclonal composition . Most of the current data on tumour genetics stems from short read bulk sequencing data . While this type of data is characterised by low sequencing noise and cost , it consists of aggregate measurements across a large number of cells . It is therefore of limited use for the accurate detection of the distinct cellular populations present in a tumour and the unambiguous inference of their evolutionary relationships . Single - cell DNA sequencing instead provides data of the highest resolution for studying intra - tumour heterogeneity and evolution , but is characterised by higher sequencing costs and elevated noise rates . As the strengths and weaknesses of bulk and single - cell sequencing data are to a large extent complimentary with respect to phylogeny inference , using both data types for a joint inference should improve our understanding of subclonal tumour evolution over using each type of data alone . In this work , we develop B - SCITE , the ﬁrst computational approach that infers trees of tumour evolu - tion from combined bulk and single - cell sequencing data . B - SCITE employs an MCMC search scheme to ﬁnd the mutation tree that maximizes the joint like - lihood of both data types . The model accounts for typical sequencing biases and artifacts , including the variability in depth of coverage among diﬀerent bulk sequencing datasets and the contamination of single - cell data by doublets . Using S . Malikic , K . Jahn , and J . Kuipers — Equal contributors . c (cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG , part of Springer Nature 2018 B . J . Raphael ( Ed . ) : RECOMB 2018 , LNBI 10812 , pp . 269 – 270 , 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 89929 - 9 270 S . Malikic et al . a comprehensive set of simulated data , we show that B - SCITE systematically outperforms existing methods with respect to tree reconstruction accuracy and subclone identiﬁcation . High - ﬁdelity reconstructions are obtained even with a modest number of single cells , suggesting that combined bulk and single - cell data may be a competitive strategy for tumor phylogeny reconstruction . On real data , we show that B - SCITE provides more realistic mutation histories compared to the results reported in previous studies or obtained by existing methods . Mantis : A Fast , Small , and Exact Large - Scale Sequence - Search Index Prashant Pandey 1 ( B ) , Fatemeh Almodaresi 1 , Michael A . Bender 1 , Michael Ferdman 1 , Rob Johnson 1 , 2 , and Rob Patro 1 1 Computer Science Department , Stony Brook University , Stony Brook , USA { ppandey , falmodaresit , bender , mferdman , rob . patro } @ cs . stonybrook . edu , robj @ vmware . com 2 VMware Research , Palo Alto , USA The ability to issue sequence - level searches over publicly available databases of assembled genomes and known proteins has played an instrumental role in many studies in the ﬁeld of genomics , and has made BLAST [ 2 ] and its variants some of the most widely - used tools in all of science . However , until recently , tools for searches over genomic data were restricted to reference sequences . As a result , the vast majority of publicly - available sequencing data ( e . g . , the data deposited in the SRA [ 3 ] ) has been diﬃcult to search because it exists in the form of raw , unassembled sequencing reads . Recently , Solomon and Kingsford introduced the sequence Bloom tree ( SBT ) [ 8 ] for performing searches over thousands of sequencing experiments . This seminal work introduced both a formulation of this problem , and the ini - tial steps toward a solution . The space and query time of the SBT structure has been further improved by Solomon and Kingsford [ 9 ] and Sun et al . [ 10 ] . Sequence Bloom trees repurpose Bloom ﬁlters to index large sets of raw sequencing data probabilistically and , as a result , they are forced to cope with Bloom ﬁlters’ limitations . For example , the SBT needs to merge Bloom ﬁlters , but Bloom ﬁlters must be the same size to be merged , and they cannot be resized . Consequently , SBTs use Bloom ﬁlters of the same size to represent sets of widely varying cardinalities . As a result , most of the Bloom ﬁlters in the SBT are sub - optimally tuned and ineﬃcient in their use of space . ( SBTs partially mitigate this issue by compressing their Bloom ﬁlters using an oﬀ - the - shelf compressor . ) We introduce Mantis , a space - eﬃcient data structure that can be used to index thousands of raw - read experiments and facilitate large - scale sequence searches on those experiments . Mantis uses counting quotient ﬁlters [ 5 ] instead of Bloom ﬁlters , enabling rapid index builds and queries , small indexes , and exact results , i . e . , no false positives or negatives . Furthermore , Mantis is also a colored De Bruijn graph ( cDBG ) representation , and supports the same fast de Bruijn graph traversals as Squeakr [ 4 ] , and hence may be useful for topological analyses such as computing the length of the query covered in each experiment ( rather than just the fraction of k - mers present ) . c (cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG , part of Springer Nature 2018 B . J . Raphael ( Ed . ) : RECOMB 2018 , LNBI 10812 , pp . 271 – 273 , 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 89929 - 9 272 P . Pandey et al . Mantis has several advantages over prior work : – Mantis is exact . A query for a set Q of k - mers and threshold θ returns exactly those data sets containing at least fraction θ of the k - mers in Q . There are no false positives or false negatives . In contrast , we show that SBT - based systems exhibit only 57 – 67 % precision , meaning that many of the results returned for a given query are , in fact , false positives . – Mantis supports much faster queries than existing SBT - based systems . In our experiments , queries in Mantis ran up to 100 × faster than when using an ( in RAM ) SSBT . – Mantis supports much faster index construction . For example , we were able to build the Mantis index on 2 , 652 data sets in 16 hours and 35 min . SSBT reported 97 hours to construct an index on the same collection of data sets . – Mantis uses less storage than SBT - based systems . For example , the Mantis index over the 2 , 652 experiments used for evaluation is 20 % smaller than the compressed SSBT index . – Mantis returns , for each experiment containing at least 1 k - mer from the query , the number of query k - mers present in this experiment . Thus , the full spectrum of relevant experiments can be analyzed . While these results can be post - processed to ﬁlter out those not satisfying a θ - query , we believe the Mantis output is more useful , as one can analyze which experiments were close to achieving the θ threshold , and can examine if a natural ﬁltering “cutoﬀ” exists . Mantis builds on Squeakr , a k - mer counter based on the counting quotient ﬁlter ( CQF ) . Prior work has shown how CQFs can be used to improve perfor - mance and simplify the design of k - mer - counting tools [ 4 ] and de Bruijn graph representations [ 6 ] . In a similar spirit , Mantis uses the CQF to create a simple space - and time - eﬃcient index for searching for sequences in large collections of experiments . Mantis is based on cDBGs . The “color” associated with each k - mer in a cDBG is the set of experiments in which that k - mer occurs ( similar to Rainbowﬁsh [ 1 ] ) . We use an exact CQF to store a table mapping each k - mer to a color ID , and another table mapping color IDs to the actual set of experiments containing that k - mer . Mantis uses an oﬀ - the - shelf compressor [ 7 ] to store the bit vectors representing each set of experiments . Mantis takes as input the collection of CQFs representing each data set , and outputs the search index . Construction is eﬃcient because it can use sequential I / O to read the input and write the output CQFs . Similarly , queries for the color of a single k - mer are eﬃcient since they require only two table lookups . Mantis is available at https : / / github . com / splatlab / mantis . Mantis : A Fast , Small , and Exact Large - Scale Sequence - Search Index 273 References 1 . Almodaresi , F . , Pandey , P . , Patro , R . : Rainbowﬁsh : A Succinct Colored de Bruijn Graph Representation . In WABI , volume 88 , pages 18 : 1 – 18 : 15 , 2017 2 . Altschul , S . F . , Gish , W . , Miller , W . , Myers , E . W . : Basic local alignment search tool . J . Mol . Biol . 215 , 403 – 410 ( 1990 ) 3 . Kodama , Y . , Shumway , M . , Leinonen , R . : The sequence read archive : explosive growth of sequencing data . Nucleic Acids Res . 40 ( D1 ) , D54 – D56 ( 2011 ) 4 . Prashant Pandey , Michael A Bender , Rob Johnson , and Rob Patro . Squeakr : An Exact and Approximate k - mer Counting System . Bioinformatics , page btx636 , 2017 5 . Prashant Pandey , Michael A . Bender , Rob Johnson , and Robert Patro . A General - Purpose Counting Filter : Making Every Bit Count . In SIGMOD , pages 775 – 787 , 2017 6 . Prashant Pandey , Michael A . Bender , Rob Johnson , and Robert Patro . deBGR : an eﬃcient and near - exact representation of the weighted de Bruijn graph . Bioin - formatics , 33 ( 14 ) , 2017 7 . Rajeev Raman , Venkatesh Raman , and S . Srinivasa Rao . Succinct indexable dic - tionaries with applications to encoding k - ary trees and multisets . In SODA , pages 233 – 242 , 2002 8 . Solomon , B . , Kingsford , C . : Fast search of thousands of short - read sequencing experiments . Nat . Biotechnol . 34 ( 3 ) , 300 – 302 ( 2016 ) 9 . Solomon , B . , Kingsford , C . : Improved Search of Large Transcriptomic Sequencing Databases Using Split Sequence Bloom Trees . In : Sahinalp , S . C . ( ed . ) RECOMB 2017 . LNCS , vol . 10229 , pp . 257 – 271 . Springer , Cham ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 56970 - 3 16 10 . Sun , C . , Harris , R . S . , Chikhi , R . , Medvedev , P . : AllSome Sequence Bloom Trees . In : Sahinalp , S . C . ( ed . ) RECOMB 2017 . LNCS , vol . 10229 , pp . 272 – 286 . Springer , Cham ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 56970 - 3 17 Tensor Composition Analysis Detects Cell - Type Speciﬁc Associations in Epigenetic Studies Elior Rahmani 1 ( B ) , Regev Schweiger 2 , Saharon Rosset 3 , Sriram Sankararaman 1 , and Eran Halperin 1 , 4 , 5 1 Department of Computer Science , UCLA , Los Angeles , CA , USA elior . rahmani @ gmail . com 2 Blavatnik School of Computer Science , Tel - Aviv University , Tel Aviv , Israel 3 Department of Statistics , Tel Aviv University , Tel Aviv , Israel 4 Department of Human Genetics , UCLA , Los Angeles , CA , USA 5 Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine , UCLA , Los Angeles , CA , USA ehalperin @ cs . ucla . edu Abstract . Identifying cell - type speciﬁc associations of genes with dis - ease and mapping known associations to particular cell types is a key in understanding disease etiology . While developments in technologies for proﬁling genomic features such as gene expression and DNA methy - lation have led to the availability of large - scale tissue - speciﬁc genomic data , prohibitive costs drastically restrict collection of cell - type speciﬁc genomic data . This , in turn , limits the identiﬁcation of disease - related genes and cell types . It is therefore desired to develop new approaches for detecting cell - type speciﬁc associations between phenotypes and tissue - speciﬁc genomic data . We suggest a new matrix factorization formulation , which allows us to deconvolve a two - dimensional input ( observations by features ) into a three - dimensional output . Traditional matrix factorization formula - tions essentially take as an input a multiple - source heterogeneous matrix of observations and output a matrix of source - speciﬁc weights and a matrix of source - speciﬁc features . We generalize this approach by assum - ing that source - speciﬁc features are unique for each observation rather than shared across all observations , and we propose Tensor Composi - tion Analysis ( TCA ) , a method for estimating observation - and source - speciﬁc values based on the model . We apply our model in the context of epigenetic association studies , where DNA methylation data measured from a heterogeneous tissue are often used , and we show that TCA allows us to extract cell - type speciﬁc methylation levels from two dimensional tissue - speciﬁc methylation data . We further derive a statistical test for detecting cell - type speciﬁc eﬀects of methylation on phenotypes based on the TCA model , and using a simulation study we demonstrate its potentials and limitations . Finally , using ﬁve large whole - blood methylation datasets , we demonstrate that our model allows the detection of novel replicating cell - type speciﬁc asso - ciations without collecting cost prohibitive cell - type speciﬁc data , thus c (cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG , part of Springer Nature 2018 B . J . Raphael ( Ed . ) : RECOMB 2018 , LNBI 10812 , pp . 274 – 275 , 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 89929 - 9 Tensor Composition Analysis Detects 275 suggesting an exciting new opportunity to unveil more of the hidden sig - nals in genomic association studies with potential design implications for future data collection eﬀorts . Assembly - Free and Alignment - Free Sample Identiﬁcation Using Genome Skims Shahab Sarmashghi 1 ( B ) , Kristine Bohmann 2 , 3 , M . Thomas P . Gilbert 2 , 4 , Vineet Bafna 5 , and Siavash Mirarab 1 1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , CA 92093 , USA ssarmash @ ucsd . edu 2 Evolutionary Genomics , Natural History Museum of Denmark , University of Copenhagen , Copenhagen , Denmark 3 School of Biological Sciences , University of East Anglia , Norwich , Norfolk , UK 4 Norwegian University of Science and Technology , University Museum , 7491 Trondheim , Norway 5 Department of Computer Science and Engineering , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , CA 92093 , USA Extended abstract The ability to quickly and inexpensively describe the taxonomic diversity in an environment is critical in this era of rapid climate and biodiversity changes . The currently preferred molecular technique , barcoding , is low - cost and widely used , but has drawbacks . As sequencing costs continue to fall , an alternative approach based on genome - skimming has been proposed [ 1 , 2 ] . This approach ﬁrst applies low - pass ( 100 Mb – several Gb per sample ) sequencing to voucher and / or query samples and then recovers marker genes and / or organelle genomes computationally . In contrast , we suggest the use of the unassembled sequence data for taxonomic identiﬁcation using an alignment - free approach based on the k - mer decomposition of the sequencing reads . Speciﬁcally , we ﬁrst estimate the average sequencing depth and error rate for each genome skim , by comparing our derived theoretical distribution of k - mers’ multiplicity and the histogram of k - mer counts computed using Jellyﬁsh [ 3 ] . The genome length is also esti - mated from the average sequencing depth accordingly . Then , the similarity of two genome skims is measured by the Jaccard index between their correspond - ing k - mer collections . Finally , the hamming distance between genomes is esti - mated from the Jaccard index , using the following formula obtained by modeling the impact of low sequencing coverage , sequencing error , and diﬀering genome lengths on the similarity of genome skims : D = 1 − (cid:2) 2 ( ζ 1 L 1 + ζ 2 L 2 ) J η 1 η 2 ( L 1 + L 2 ) ( 1 + J ) (cid:3) 1 / k . c (cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG , part of Springer Nature 2018 B . J . Raphael ( Ed . ) : RECOMB 2018 , LNBI 10812 , pp . 276 – 277 , 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 89929 - 9 Assembly - Free and Alignment - Free Sample Identiﬁcation 277 In this equation , when coverage is low , we use all k - mers and set : η i = 1 − e − c i ( 1 − k / (cid:2) ) ( 1 − (cid:3) i ) k , ζ i = η i + c i ( 1 − k / (cid:4) ) ( 1 − ( 1 − (cid:5) i ) k ) . For higher coverages , we remove k - mers with multiplicity below a threshold m , and set : ζ i = η i = 1 − m − 1 (cid:4) t = 0 ( c i ( 1 − k / (cid:4) ) ( 1 − (cid:5) i ) k ) t t ! e − c i ( 1 − k / (cid:2) ) ( 1 − (cid:3) i ) k . In these equations , k and (cid:4) are k - mer and read length , respectively , and c i , (cid:5) i , and L i are substituted from the estimates of coverage , error rate , and genome length for each genome skim . The Jaccard index between two genome skims , J , is computed by Mash [ 4 ] eﬃciently using a hashing technique . We have tested our tool , Skmer , on genome skims simulated from assemblies of 90 species from two genera of insects ( Anopheles and Drosophila ) and across the avian tree of life . We test the accuracy of the distances computed by Skmer , and subsequently use the distances to ﬁnd the exact / closest match to a query sample in a reference set of genome skims . Comparing to the other k - mer based tools , Skmer shows excellent performance in our simulation studies , especially when the coverage is below 4X [ 5 ] . Skmer makes the assembly - free approach to genome - skimming a viable alter - native to the traditional barcoding . The software is made publicly available on Github ( https : / / github . com / shahab - sarmashghi / Skmer . git ) . References 1 . Straub , S . C . K . , Parks , M . , Weitemier , K . , Fishbein , M . , Cronn , R . C . , Liston , A . : Navigating the tip of the genomic iceberg : next - generation sequencing for plant systematics . Am . J . Bot . 99 ( 2 ) , 349 – 364 ( 2012 ) 2 . Coissac , E . , Hollingsworth , P . M . , Lavergne , S . , Taberlet , P . : From barcodes to genomes : extending the concept of dna barcoding . Mol . Ecol . 25 ( 7 ) , 1423 – 1428 ( 2016 ) 3 . Mar¸cais , G . , Kingsford , C . : A fast , lock - free approach for eﬃcient parallel counting of occurrences of k - mers . Bioinformatics 27 ( 6 ) , 764 – 770 ( 2011 ) 4 . Ondov , B . D . , Treangen , T . J . , Melsted , P . , Mallonee , A . B . , Bergman , N . H . , Koren , S . , Phillippy , A . M . : Mash : fast genome and metagenome distance estimation using MinHash . Genome Biol . 17 ( 1 ) , 132 ( 2016 ) 5 . Sarmashghi , S . , Bohmann , K . , Gilbert , M . T . P . , Bafna , V . , Mirarab , S . : Assembly - free and alignment - free sample identiﬁcation using genome skims ( 2017 ) . bioRxiv 230409 Eﬃcient Algorithms to Discover Alterations with Complementary Functional Association in Cancer Rebecca Sarto Basso 1 , Dorit S . Hochbaum 1 , and Fabio Vandin 2 , 3 ( B ) 1 University of California at Berkeley , Berkeley , USA rebeccasarto @ berkeley . edu , hochbaum @ ieor . berkeley . edu 2 University of Padova , Padova , Italy fabio . vandin @ unipd . it 3 Brown University , Providence , USA Introduction . Recent advances in sequencing technologies now allow to assay the entire complement of somatic alterations in large tumour cohorts [ 5 ] . Sev - eral computational methods have been recently designed to identify driver alter - ations , associated to the disease , and to distinguish them from passenger alter - ations not related with the disease . The identiﬁcation of driver alterations is complicated by the extensive intertumour heterogeneity , with large ( 100 – 1000’s ) and diﬀerent collections of alterations being present in tumours from diﬀerent patients and no two tumours having the same collection of alterations [ 6 , 7 ] . One of the reasons for such heterogeneity is that driver alterations target cancer pathways , groups of interacting genes performing given functions in the cell and whose alteration is required to develop the disease [ 2 , 7 ] . One of the main remain - ing challenges is the identiﬁcation of alterations with functional impact [ 3 ] . Several methods for the de novo discovery of mutated cancer pathways have leveraged the mutual exclusivity of cancer alterations , with cancer pathways displaying at most one alteration for each patient [ 3 , 7 ] . The mutual exclusivity property is due to the complementarity of genes in the same pathway , with alterations in diﬀerent members of a pathway resulting in a similar impact at the functional level . An additional source of information that can be used to identify genes with complementary functions are quantitative measures for each samples such as functional proﬁles , obtained for example by genomic or chemical perturbations [ 1 ] . The employment of such quantitative measurements is crucial to identify meaningful complementary alterations since one can expect mutual exclusivity to reﬂect in functional properties of altered samples which are speciﬁc to the altered samples . Methods and Results . We study the problem of ﬁnding sets of alterations with complementary functional associations using alteration data and a quantitative ( functional ) target measure from a collection of cancer samples . We provide a rigorous combinatorial formulation for the problem and prove that the associated computational problem is NP - hard . We develop two eﬃcient algorithms , a greedy algorithm and an ILP - based algorithm to identify the set of k genes with the highest association with a target and prove rigorous guarantees in the quality of their solutions . c (cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG , part of Springer Nature 2018 B . J . Raphael ( Ed . ) : RECOMB 2018 , LNBI 10812 , pp . 278 – 279 , 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 89929 - 9 Eﬃcient Algorithms to Discover Alterations with Complementary Functional 279 Our algorithms are implemented in our tool fUNctional Complementar - ity of alteratiOns discoVERy ( UNCOVER ) 1 . We compared UNCOVER with REVEALER [ 4 ] , a recently developed greedy algorithm to identify mutually exclusive sets of alterations associated with functional phenotypes . Consider - ing four cancer datasets from [ 4 ] , we compared the solutions obtained by our algorithms with the solutions from REVEALER in terms of the information coeﬃcient ( IC ) , the target association score used in [ 4 ] as a quality of the solu - tion . Surprisingly , in two out of four datasets our methods , which do not consider the IC score , identify solutions with IC score higher ( by at least 5 % ) than the solutions reported by REVEALER , while for the other two datasets the IC score is very similar . These results show that UNCOVER identiﬁes better solutions than REVEALER when evaluated using our objective function and also when evaluated according to the objective function of REVEALER . In addition , UNCOVER has a running time that is on average two orders of magnitude smaller than required by REVEALER . The eﬃciency of UNCOVER enables the analysis of a large number of targets . We have run UNCOVER on a dataset with thousands of functional targets and tens of thousands alter - ations from the Achilles project dataset 2 and the Cancer Cell Line Encyclope - dia ( CCLE ) . While running UNCOVER ( including preprocessing ) on the entire dataset required 24 h , based on the runtime required on the instances reported in [ 4 ] running REVEALER on this dataset would have required about 5 months of compute time . On such large dataset , UNCOVER identiﬁes several statisti - cally signiﬁcant associations between target values and mutually exclusive alter - ations in genes sets . Acknowledgement . This work is supported , in part , by NSF grant IIS - 124758 and by the University of Padova grants SID2017 and PROACTIVE2017 . This work was done in part while FV was visiting the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing , supported by the Simons Foundation . References 1 . Cowley , et al . : Parallel genome - scale loss of function screens in 216 cancer cell lines for the identiﬁcation of context - speciﬁc genetic dependencies . Sci Data ( 2014 ) 2 . Creixell , et al . : Pathway and network analysis of cancer genomes . Nat . Met . ( 2015 ) 3 . Garraway and Lander : Lessons from the cancer genome . Cell ( 2013 ) 4 . Kim , et al . : Characterizing genomic alterations in cancer by complementary func - tional associations . Nat . Biotech . ( 2016 ) 5 . TCGA Research Network : Integrated genomic characterization of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma . Cancer Cell ( 2017 ) 6 . Vandin : Computational methods for characterizing cancer mutational heterogeneity . Frontiers in genetics ( 2017 ) 7 . Vogelstein , et al . : Cancer genome landscapes . Science ( 2013 ) 1 https : / / github . com / VandinLab / UNCOVER . 2 https : / / portals . broadinstitute . org / achilles . Latent Variable Model for Aligning Barcoded Short - Reads Improves Downstream Analyses Ariya Shajii 1 , Ibrahim Numanagi´c 1 , 2 , and Bonnie Berger 1 , 2 ( B ) 1 Computer Science and AI Lab , MIT , Cambridge , MA , USA bab @ mit . edu 2 Department of Mathematics , MIT , Cambridge , MA , USA Background : Barcoded read sequencing allows short - reads to carry long - range information by virtue of read “barcodes” , and has several advantages ( including signiﬁcantly reduced cost and lower error rates ) over long - read sequencing . Here we introduce a two - tiered statistical binning approach , EMerAld—or EMA for short—to barcoded read sequence alignment , an essential component of any bar - coded sequencing pipeline , and as a result improve downstream genotyping and phasing . Our method enables the probabilistic placement of reads between diﬀer - ent read clouds [ 1 ] , and also in a single cloud that spans homologous elements . The two tiers consist of : ( i ) a novel latent variable model to probabilistically assign reads to possible source fragments ; and ( ii ) newly exploiting expected read coverage ( read density ) to resolve the diﬃcult case of multiple repetitive align - ments of reads within a single read cloud . These ambiguous alignments account for a large fraction of the rare variants that currently cannot be resolved and are of great interest to biologists [ 2 ] . Methods : Current linked - read alignment methods ﬁrst perform a standard all - mapping , then partition the resulting alignments into groups of nearby reads with a common barcode called “read clouds” . Reads are then assigned to one of their possible clouds by optimizing a global score function that takes into account edit distance , mate pairs , read clouds , etc . Our two main conceptual advances are as follows . Intuitively , rather than assigning each read to just one of its pos - sible alignments at any given time , we make use of probabilistic assignments of reads to clouds and employ a latent variable model to determine ﬁnal alignment probabilities ; thereby , we select the most likely cloud ( and thus alignment ) for each read . During the cloud alignment process , we also utilize a disjoint - set data structure over read clouds to normalize alignment probabilities in a physically sensible way . Once reads are assigned to clouds , we propose a diﬀerent statis - tical binning optimization approach to better handle the ubiquitous repetitive regions of the genome . Whereas currently - used methods simply pick the lowest edit distance alignment of a read in a given cloud , we instead optimize a com - bination of edit distance and “read density” , which takes into account the read density distribution over fragments . This two - tiered process can be interpreted c (cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG , part of Springer Nature 2018 B . J . Raphael ( Ed . ) : RECOMB 2018 , LNBI 10812 , pp . 280 – 282 , 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 89929 - 9 Latent Variable Model for Aligning Barcoded Short - Reads 281 Fig . 1 . Overview of EMA pipeline . ( a ) Idealized model of linked - read sequencing , wherein some number of unknown source fragments in a single droplet are sheared , barcoded and sequenced to produce linked - reads . ( b ) EMA’s “read clouds” are con - structed by grouping nearby - mapping reads sharing the same barcode ; these clouds represent possible source fragments . EMA then partitions the clouds into a disjoint - set induced by the alignments , where two clouds are connected if there is a read aligning to both ; connected components in this disjoint - set ( enclosed by dashed boxes ) correspond to alternate possibilities for the same unknown source fragment . EMA’s latent variable model optimization is subsequently applied to each of these connected components indi - vidually . ( c ) EMA applies a novel statistical binning optimization algorithm to clouds containing multiple alignments of the same read to pick out the most likely alignment , by optimizing a combination of alignment edit distances and read densities within the cloud . In the ﬁgure , the green regions of the genome are homologous , thereby resulting in multi - mappings within a single cloud . ( d ) While the statistical binning optimization operates within a single cloud , EMA’s latent variable model optimization determines the best alignment of a given read between diﬀerent clouds , and produces not only the ﬁnal alignment for each read , but also interpretable alignment probabilities . as statistical binning ﬁrst in assigning reads to clouds and then within clouds . The EMA pipeline is shown in Fig . 1 . Results : EMA is much faster and less memory intensive compared to other tools . EMA’s overhead over the initial run of an all - mapper is virtually negligible , 282 A . Shajii et al . and EMA is at least 1 . 5 × faster than Lariat ( the current 10x alignment tool [ 1 ] ) , which translates into days faster for the user . In addition , we show that genotypes called from EMA’s alignments contain over 30 % fewer false positives than those called from Lariat’s , with a fewer number of false negatives , on 10x WGS datasets of NA12878 and NA24385 , as compared to NIST GIAB gold standard variant calls . We also demonstrate that EMA’s alignments improve phasing performance over Lariat’s in both NA12878 and NA24385 , producing fewer switch / mismatch errors and larger phased blocks on average . Moreover , we demonstrate that EMA is able to eﬀectively resolve alignments in regions containing nearby homologous elements—a particularly challenging problem in read mapping—through the introduction of our novel statistical bin - ning optimization framework , which enables us to ﬁnd variants in the pharma - cogenomically important CYP2D region that go undetected when using Lariat or BWA . This enhanced capability addresses one of the major weaknesses of linked - read sequencing as compared to long - read sequencing , where only a relatively small subset of the original source fragment is observed—and more speciﬁcally , that the order of reads within the fragment is not known—making it diﬃcult to produce accurate alignments if the fragment spans homologous elements . Discussion : Our advance is a general framework applicable to many barcoded sequencing problems . It is likely to be of interest to any developers , and even users , of barcoded or linked - read sequencing technologies that come along . We highlight that 10x sequencing is just an instance of general “barcoded read sequencing” , and other technologies that make use of the same paradigm already exist and are likely to emerge in the future , given its numerous advantages over long - read sequencing . Several technologies already employ barcoded sequencing in addition to 10x Genomics’ , such as Illumina’s TruSeq SLR platform ( formerly Moleculo ) , and Complete Genomics’ Long Fragment technology . Our framework should apply to these ( and similar ) technologies as well . Due to their substantial improvements over existing methods for aligning and interpreting linked - read data , the algorithms employed by EMA are likely to be a fundamental compo - nent of read cloud - based methods in the future . Acknowledgements . We thank Chris Whelan , Chad Nusbaum , Eric Banks , as well as the rest of the SV Group from the Broad Institute for providing us with data samples and many valuable suggestions . Also , we thank Jian Peng and Lillian Zhang for their helpful suggestions . Funding A . S . , I . N . and B . B . are partially funded by NIH grant GM108348 . References 1 . Bishara , A . , et al . : Read clouds uncover variation in complex regions of the human genome . Genome Res 25 ( 10 ) , 1570 – 1580 ( 2015 ) 2 . Sekar , A . , et al . : Schizophrenia risk from complex variation of complement compo - nent 4 . Nature 530 , 177 ( 2016 ) ModulOmics : Integrating Multi - Omics Data to Identify Cancer Driver Modules Dana Silverbush 1 ( B ) , Simona Cristea 2 , 3 , 4 ( B ) , Gali Yanovich 5 , Tamar Geiger 5 , Niko Beerenwinkel 6 , 7 , and Roded Sharan 1 1 Blavatnik School of Computer Science , Tel Aviv University , Tel Aviv , Israel dsilverb @ broadinstitute . org , roded @ post . tau . ac . il 2 Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology , Dana - Farber Cancer Institute , Boston , MA , USA 3 Department of Biostatistics , Harvard T . H . Chan School of Public Health , Boston , MA , USA 4 Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology , Harvard University , Cambridge , MA , USA scristea @ jimmy . harvard . edu 5 Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry , Sackler Faculty of Medicine , Tel Aviv University , Tel Aviv , Israel 6 Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering , ETH Zurich , Basel , Switzerland niko . beerenwinkel @ bsse . ethz . ch 7 Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics , Basel , Switzerland Introduction : Recent rapid advancements in sequencing technologies allowed the collection of DNA , RNA , and protein data from tens of thousands of can - cer patients . Mathematical and computational tools are used to analyze these complex data sets , aiming to reveal mechanistic and predictive insights into tumor treatment and progression . Key to achieving these goals is ﬁnding molec - ular alterations that drive tumorigenesis , or drivers , such as single nucleotide variants ( SNVs ) , copy number alterations ( CNAs ) , changes in the transcrip - tional activity of genes , or changes in protein concentration . Groups of such functionally connected genetic alterations , also termed cancer driver modules or pathways , activate mechanisms that gradually contribute to triggering the hall - marks of cancer , conferring ﬁtness advantages to the tumors . The identiﬁcation of such driver modules is an important challenge in the ﬁeld of cancer genomics , since clinically targeting driver pathways can improve patient treatment . Nev - ertheless , most of the existing computational tools to address this problem use primarily somatic mutations , not fully exploiting additional data types . Here , we describe ModulOmics , a method to de novo identify cancer driver modules by integrating multiple sources of biological information ( protein - protein inter - actions , mutual exclusivity of mutations or copy number alterations , transcrip - tional co - regulation , and RNA co - expression ) into a single probabilistic model . Methods : Given a set G = { G 1 , . . . , G n } of genes and a collection M = { M 1 , . . . M m } of models for diﬀerent data types , we introduce S G , D . Silverbush , S . Cristea , N . Beerenwinkel , and R . Sharan — equal contribution . c (cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG , part of Springer Nature 2018 B . J . Raphael ( Ed . ) : RECOMB 2018 , LNBI 10812 , pp . 283 – 284 , 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 89929 - 9 284 D . Silverbush et al . the ModulOmics probabilistic score of the set G , reﬂecting how likely are the genes in G to be functionally connected . S G is computed as the mean of m proba - bilistic scores P ( G | M k ) , each representing the degree of functional connectivity of the set G , under a diﬀerent model : S G = 1 m m (cid:2) k = 1 P ( G | M k ) ( 1 ) Here , we consider four models , as follows : M 1 computes the connectivity of the genes in G based on their proximity in the protein - protein interaction ( PPI ) network , M 2 estimates the degree of mutual exclusivity among DNA alterations of the genes in G across the patient cohort , M 3 assesses the co - regulation of the genes in G on the basis of their shared transcriptional regulators that are active in the patient cohort , and M 4 evaluates the transcriptional connectivity of the genes in G based on their coexpression proﬁles . The goal of ModulOmics is to identify groups that maximize the global score in Eq . 1 . As the number of candidate groups grows exponentially with maximal group size , we use a heuristic two - step optimization procedure . The optimization routine ﬁrst performs an approximation of the exact scores of the set G under each of the four models M k , by decomposing them into pairwise scores and using integer linear programming ( ILP ) to ﬁnd good initial solutions . The initial solutions are further reﬁned via stochastic search starting from these initial solutions and using the global score . Results : Using ModulOmics , we accurately identify known cancer driver genes and pathways in three large - scale TCGA datasets of breast cancer , glioblas - toma ( GBM ) and ovarian cancer , outperforming state - of - the - art methods for module detection . Notably , in breast cancer subtypes , the highest scoring mod - ules reliably separate cancerous from normal tissues in an independent patient cohort . Focusing on individual subtypes , the modules of Her2 and Basal are enriched with Gene Ontology ( GO ) terms related to cell proliferation , reﬂecting their more aggressive nature . Driver modules in triple negative ( TN ) samples capture the accumulation of down - regulated tumor suppressors such as TP53 , BRCA1 , RB1 and PTEN , a pattern also supported by reverse phase protein array ( RPPA ) data . The highest scoring modules in Luminal A suggest two potential functionalities of PTEN : a canonical one as part of the PI3K path - way , and a non - canonical one as a regulator of cell proliferation . ModulOmics is freely available in two forms , as an open - source R code for the identiﬁcation of cancer driver modules from a cohort of cancer samples ( https : / / github . com / danasilv / ModulOmics ) , and as a webserver for the evaluation of any set of genes of interest using the TCGA data processed in this study ( http : / / anat . cs . tau . ac . il / ModulOmicsServer / ) . SCI Φ : Single - Cell Mutation Identiﬁcation via Phylogenetic Inference Jochen Singer 1 , 2 , Jack Kuipers 1 , 2 , Katharina Jahn 1 , 2 , and Niko Beerenwinkel 1 , 2 ( B ) 1 Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering , ETH Zurich , Basel , Switzerland niko . beerenwinkel @ bsse . ethz . ch 2 SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics , Basel , Switzerland Abstract . Understanding the evolution of cancer is important for the development of appropriate cancer therapies . The task is challeng - ing because tumors evolve as heterogeneous cell populations with an unknown number of genetically distinct subclones of varying frequen - cies . Conventional approaches based on bulk sequencing are limited in addressing this challenge as clones cannot be observed directly . Single - cell sequencing holds the promise of resolving the heterogeneity of tumors . However , this advantage comes at the cost of elevated noise due to the limited amount of DNA material present in a cell and the extensive DNA ampliﬁcation required prior to sequencing . Here , we present SCI Φ , the ﬁrst single - cell - speciﬁc variant caller that combines single - cell genotyping with reconstruction of the cell lineage tree . SCI Φ leverages the fact that the somatic cells of an organism are related via a phylogenetic tree where mutations are propagated along tree branches . Our inference scheme starts with an initial identiﬁcation of possible mutation loci and then performs joint phylogenetic inference and variant calling via posterior sampling . In a ﬁrst step , likely mutated loci are identiﬁed using the posterior probability of observing at least one mutated cell at a speciﬁc locus . In order to do so , SCI Φ models the nucleotide counts using a beta - binomial distribution . This is especially useful in the single - cell setting , since the beta - binomial distribution can be described as a P´olya urn model , which in turn is a very close approximation of the multiple displacement ampli - ﬁcation commonly used to amplify the genomic material of a single - cell . In a second step , the identiﬁed loci are used to infer the tumor phy - logeny . Here , we account for dropout events by modeling the likelihood of observing a mutation in a cell as a weighted mixture of the likelihoods of homozygous reference genotype , heterozygous genotype , and homozy - gous alternative genotype . Our model to infer tumor phylogeny consists of three parts : the genealogical tree , the mutation attachments to edges , and the parameters of the model . Because the tree search space grows superexponentially in the number of cells , we employ a Markov Chain J . Singer , J . Kuipers — These authors contributed equally . c (cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG , part of Springer Nature 2018 B . J . Raphael ( Ed . ) : RECOMB 2018 , LNBI 10812 , pp . 285 – 286 , 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 89929 - 9 286 J . Singer et al . Monte Carlo scheme to traverse through the tree space with mutation assignment and learn the parameters of the model . Using the relationship between cells , we are able to reliably call mutations in each single - cell even in experiments with high dropout rates and missing data . We show that SCI Φ outperforms existing meth - ods on simulated data and apply it to diﬀerent real - world datasets . Availability : https : / / github . com / cbg - ethz / SCIPhI AptaBlocks : Accelerating the Design of RNA - Based Drug Delivery Systems Yijie Wang 1 , Jan Hoinka 1 , Piotr Swiderski 2 , and Teresa M . Przytycka 1 ( B ) 1 National Center of Biotechnology Information , National Library of Medicine , NIH , Bethesda , MD 20894 , USA przytyck @ ncbi . nlm . nih . gov 2 Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology , Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope , Duarte , CA 91010 , USA Extended Abstract Synthetic RNA molecules are increasingly used to alter cellular functions [ 1 – 4 ] . These successful applications indicate that RNA - based therapeutics might be able to target currently undruggable genes [ 5 , 6 ] . However , to achieve this promise , an eﬀective method for delivering therapeutic RNAs into speciﬁc cells is required . Recently , RNA aptamers emerged as promising delivery agents due to their ability of binding speciﬁc cell receptors [ 7 , 8 ] . Crucially , these aptamers can frequently be internalized into the cells expressing these receptors on their surfaces . This property is leveraged in aptamer based drug delivery systems by combining such receptor - speciﬁc aptamers with a therapeutic “cargo” such that the aptamer facilitates the internalization of the cargo into the cell [ 9 – 11 ] . The advancement of this technology however is contingent on an eﬃcient method to produce stable molecular complexes that include speciﬁc aptamers and cargoes . A recently proposed experimental procedure for obtaining such complexes relies on conjugating the aptamer and the cargo with complementary RNA strands so that when such modiﬁed molecules are incubated together , the complemen - tary RNA strands hybridize to form a double - stranded “sticky bridge” connect - ing the aptamer with its cargo [ 12 , 13 ] . However , designing appropriate sticky bridge sequences guaranteeing the formation and stability of the complex while simultaneously not interfering with the aptamer or the cargo as well as not caus - ing spurious aggregation of the molecules during incubation has proven highly challenging . To ﬁll this gap , we developed AptaBlocks , a computational method to design sticky bridges to connect RNA - based molecules ( blocks ) . Accounting for the three - step procedure [ 12 , 13 ] , we formulate the sticky bridge sequence design as an optimization problem utilizing an objective function which reﬂects the biophysical characteristics of the assembly process . Speciﬁcally , we designed the objective function considering the equilibrium probabilities of the target struc - tures over all possible structures of the aptamer - stick and cargo - stick , the proba - bility of the interaction between the aptamer - stick and cargo - stick at equilibrium , the hybridization energy between the sticky bridge sequences , and additional c (cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG , part of Springer Nature 2018 B . J . Raphael ( Ed . ) : RECOMB 2018 , LNBI 10812 , pp . 287 – 288 , 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 89929 - 9 288 Y . Wang et al . sequence constraints including but not limited to the GC content . We further provide a simulated annealing algorithm that enables eﬃcient estimation of the corresponding combinatorial optimization problem . The eﬀectiveness of the algo - rithm has been veriﬁed computationally and experimentally . AptaBlocks can be used in a variety of experimental settings and its preliminary version has already been leveraged to design an aptamer based delivery system for a cytotoxic drug targeting Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cells [ 14 ] . It is thus expected that AptaBlocks will play a substantial role in accelerating RNA - based drug delivery design . References 1 . Kushwaha , M . , et al . : Using RNA as molecular code for programming cellular function . ACS Synth . Biol . 5 ( 8 ) , 795 – 809 ( 2016 ) 2 . Chappell , J . , Watters , K . E . , Takahashi , M . K . : A renaissance in RNA synthetic biology : new mechanisms , applications and tools for the future . Curr . Opin . Chem . Biol . 28 , 47 – 56 ( 2015 ) 3 . Mckeague , M . , Wong , R . S . , Smolke , C . D . : Opportunities in the design and appli - cation of RNA for gene expression control . Nucleic Acids Res . 44 ( 10 ) , 2987 – 2999 ( 2016 ) 4 . Qi , L . S . , Arkin , A . P . : A versatile framework for microbial engineering using syn - thetic non - coding RNAs . Nat . Rev . Microbiol . 12 ( 5 ) , 341 – 354 ( 2014 ) 5 . Ryther , R . C . C . , et al . : siRNA therapeutics : big potential from small RNAs . Gene Ther . 17 ( 1 ) , 5 – 11 ( 2005 ) 6 . Chakraborty , C . : Potentiality of small interfering RNAs ( siRNA ) as recent thera - peutic targets for . Curr . Drug Targets 8 ( 3 ) , 469 – 482 ( 2007 ) 7 . Zhou , J . , Rossi , J . J . : Cell - speciﬁc aptamer - mediated targeted drug delivery . Oligonucleotides 21 ( 1 ) , 1 – 10 ( 2011 ) 8 . Zhang , Y . , Hong , H . , Cai , W . : Tumor - targeted drug delivery with aptamers . Curr . Med . Chem . 18 ( 27 ) , 4185 – 4194 ( 2011 ) 9 . Mcnamara II , J . O . , et al . : Cell type - speciﬁc delivery of siRNAs with aptamer siRNA chimeras . Nat . Biotechnol . 24 ( 8 ) , 1005 – 1015 ( 2006 ) 10 . Thiel , K . W . , et al . : Delivery of chemo - sensitizing siRNAs to HER2 + - breast cancer cells using RNA aptamers . Nucleic Acids Res . 40 ( 13 ) , 6319 – 6337 ( 2012 ) 11 . Pastor , F . , et al . : Induction of tumour immunity by targeted inhibition of nonsense - mediated mRNA decay . Nature 465 ( 7295 ) , 227 – 230 ( 2010 ) 12 . Zhou , J . , et al . : Selection , characterization and application of new RNA HIV gp 120 aptamers for facile delivery of Dicer substrate siRNAs into HIV infected cells . Nucleic Acids Res . 37 ( 9 ) , 3094 – 3109 ( 2009 ) 13 . Zhou , J . , Rossi , J . : Aptamers as targeted therapeutics : current potential and chal - lenges . Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . 16 ( 3 ) , 181 – 202 ( 2016 ) 14 . Yoon , S . , et al . : Aptamer - drug conjugates of active metabolites of nucleo - side analogs and cytotoxic agents inhibit pancreatic tumor cell growth . Mol . Ther . : Nucleic Acid 6 , 80—88 ( 2017 ) A Unifying Framework for Summary Statistic Imputation Yue Wu 1 , Eleazar Eskin 1 , 2 , and Sriram Sankararaman 1 , 2 ( B ) 1 Department of Computer Science , UCLA , Los Angeles , USA { eeskin , sriram } @ cs . ucla . edu 2 Department of Human Genetics , UCLA , Los Angeles , USA Imputation has been widely utilized to aid and interpret the results of Genome - Wide Association Studies ( GWAS ) . Imputation methods , that aim to ﬁll in “data” at untyped SNPs , have emerged as an eﬀective strategy to increase the power of GWAS since the causal variant may not be directly observed or typed in these studies . In the context of GWAS , there are two broad classes of methods to impute association statistics at untyped SNPs . The ﬁrst class , termed Two - step imputation , imputes genotypes at untyped SNPs followed by computing association statistics at the imputed genotypes [ 1 – 6 ] . In practice , the ﬁrst step of genotype imputation relies on discrete Hidden Markov Models ( HMM ) [ 1 , 6 ] . The second class of methods , termed summary statistic imputation ( SSI ) , directly imputes association statistics at untyped SNPs given the association statistics at the typed SNPs . The joint distribution of association statistics at the typed SNPs and untyped SNPs has been shown to follow a multivariate normal distribution ( MVN ) [ 7 – 9 ] . SSI is appealing as it tends to be computationally eﬃcient while only requiring the summary statistics from a study while the Two - step impu - tation methods require access to individual - level data which can be diﬃcult to obtain in practice . Current summary - statistic based imputation methods calibrate the imputed statistics using a technique we call variance re - weighting ( SSI - VR ) . Despite recent progress , the statistical properties of summary statistic imputation meth - ods ( including the impact of variance re - weighting ) and the connection between the two classes of summary statistic imputation methods has not been ade - quately understood . In this paper , we show that the two classes of imputation methods , Two - step imputation and SSI are asymptotically multivariate normal with small diﬀerences in the underlying covariance matrix . Using this asymptotic equiva - lence , we can understand the eﬀect of the imputation method on the power of the study . Our new method , SSI , performs summary statistic imputation with - out variance re - weighting . The resulting statistics do not then have unit variance as in traditional summary statistic imputation but instead correctly take into account the ambiguity of the imputation process . We compared the performance of the diﬀerent imputations methods on the Northern Finland Birth Cohort ( NFBC ) data set [ 10 ] to show that SSI increases power over no imputation while SSI - VR can sometimes lead to lower power . c (cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG , part of Springer Nature 2018 B . J . Raphael ( Ed . ) : RECOMB 2018 , LNBI 10812 , pp . 289 – 290 , 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 89929 - 9 290 Y . Wu et al . Finally , we compared the results from SSI , SSI - VR and Two - step impu - tation on the NFBC dataset and show that the resulting statistics are close thereby justifying the theory . References 1 . Browning , S . R . , Browning , B . L . : Rapid and accurate haplotype phasing and miss - ing data inference for whole genome association studies using localized haplotype clustering . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 81 , 1084 – 1097 ( 2007 ) 2 . Howie , B . , Fuchsberger , C . , Stephens , M . , Marchini , J . , Abecasis , G . R . : Fast and accurate genotype imputation in genome - wide association studies through pre - phasing . Nat . Genet . 44 ( 8 ) , 955 – 959 ( 2012 ) 3 . Howie , B . N . , Donnelly , P . , Marchini , J . : A ﬂexible and accurate genotype impu - tation method for the next generation of genome - wide association studies . PLoS Genet . 5 ( 6 ) , e1000529 ( 2009 ) 4 . Li , Y . , Willer , C . , Sanna , S . , Abecasis , G . : Genotype imputation . Annu . Rev . Genomics Hum . Genet . 10 , 387 – 406 ( 2009 ) 5 . Li , Y . , Willer , C . J . , Ding , J . , Scheet , P . , Abecasis , G . R . : MaCH : using sequence and genotype data to estimate haplotypes and unobserved genotypes . Genet . Epi - demiol . 34 ( 8 ) , 816 – 834 ( 2010 ) 6 . Marchini , J . , Howie , B . , Myers , S . , McVean , G . , Donnelly , P . : A new multipoint method for genome - wide association studies by imputation of genotypes . Nat . Genet . 39 , 906 – 913 ( 2007 ) 7 . Han , B . , Kang , H . M . , Eskin , E . : Rapid and accurate multiple testing correction and power estimation for millions of correlated markers . PLoS Genet . 5 ( 4 ) , e1000456 ( 2009 ) 8 . Kostem , E . , Lozano , J . A . , Eskin , E . : Increasing power of genome - wide association studies by collecting additional single - nucleotide polymorphisms . Genetics 188 ( 2 ) , 449 – 460 ( 2011 ) 9 . Hormozdiari , F . , Kostem , E . , Kang , E . Y . , Pasaniuc , B . , Eskin , E . : Identifying causal variants at loci with multiple signals of association . Genetics 198 ( 2 ) , 497 – 508 ( 2014 ) 10 . Sabatti , C . , Hartikainen , A . - L . , Pouta , A . , et al . : Genome - wide association analysis of metabolic traits in a birth cohort from a founder population . Nat . Genet . 41 ( 1 ) , 35 – 46 ( 2009 ) Characterizing Protein - DNA Binding Event Subtypes in ChIP - Exo Data Naomi Yamada , William K . M . Lai , Nina Farrell , B . Franklin Pugh , and Shaun Mahony ( & ) Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Center for Eukaryotic Gene Regulation , The Pennsylvania State University , University Park , PA 16802 , USA mahony @ psu . edu Introduction : A given regulatory protein may have multiple modes of interaction with the genome ; at some sites , it may directly bind cognate DNA motifs , while at others it may bind indirectly via protein - protein interactions with other regulators . Each protein - DNA interaction mode may be associated with distinct sequence motifs , and may also produce distinct patterns in high - resolution protein - DNA binding assays . For example , the ChIP - exo [ 1 ] protocol precisely characterizes protein - DNA crosslinking patterns by combining chromatin immunoprecipitation ( ChIP ) with 5 ’ to 3 ’ exonu - clease digestion . Since different regulatory complexes will result in different protein - DNA crosslinking signatures , analysis of ChIP - exo sequencing tag patterns should enable detection of multiple protein - DNA binding modes for a given regulatory protein . However , current ChIP - exo analysis methods either treat all binding events as being of a uniform type , or rely on DNA motifs to cluster binding events into subtypes . We introduce the ChIP - exo mixture model ( ChExMix ) to systematically detect multiple protein - DNA interaction modes in a single ChIP - exo experiment . ChExMix discovers and characterizes binding event subtypes in ChIP - exo data by leveraging both sequencing tag enrichment patterns and DNA motifs . ChExMix de ﬁ nes possible binding event subtypes by both clustering observed ChIP - exo tag distribution patterns and performing targeted de novo motif discovery around the positions of the predicted binding events . ChExMix then uses an Expectation Maximization learning scheme to probabilistically model the genomic locations and subtype membership of binding events using both ChIP - exo tag locations and DNA sequence information . In analyzing ChIP - exo data , ChExMix offers a more principled and robust approach to character - izing binding subtypes than simply clustering binding events using motifs . Results : ChExMix uses DNA motif and ChIP - exo tag distribution patterns to accu - rately estimate multiple binding subtypes within a single ChIP - exo . We demonstrate the ability of ChExMix to estimate binding subtypes and assign binding events to subtypes by creating datasets that computationally mix data from CTCF and FoxA1 ChIP - exo experiments . CTCF and FoxA1 are known to display distinct ChIP - exo tag distribution patterns at their respective binding events . We simulated different repre - sentations of each subtype by modulating the relative number of tags drawn from each ChIP - exo experiment . ChExMix detects the two subtypes and accurately assigns subtypes to binding events over a wide range of relative sampling rates from the CTCF and FoxA1 subtypes . In contrast , a motif - driven approach fails to appropriately classify © Springer International Publishing AG , part of Springer Nature 2018 B . J . Raphael ( Ed . ) : RECOMB 2018 , LNBI 10812 , pp . 291 – 292 , 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 89929 - 9 many of the FoxA1 subtype binding events . ChExMix performance remains reasonably high when we remove DNA motifs from consideration and assign subtypes using only ChIP - exo tag distribution information . Our results demonstrate that ChExMix enables discovery of unique subtypes within a single ChIP - exo dataset and accurately assigns subtypes to binding events . To assess ChExMix ’ s ability to characterize binding locations , we compare ChExMix performance in predicting human CTCF and mouse FoxA2 binding event locations to that of seven ChIP - exo analysis methods . ChExMix outperforms other methods by exactly locating the CTCF events at the motif position in 90 . 2 % of the shared CTCF events . Similarly , ChExMix exactly locates the FoxA2 events at the motif position in 67 . 4 % of the shared FoxA2 events . ChExMix binding event pre - dictions also contain instances of the cognate motif at a high rate . These results suggest that ChExMix maintains high accuracy in protein - DNA binding event predictions . We further demonstrate that ChExMix can characterize biologically relevant binding event subtypes in ER positive breast cancer cells . FoxA1 , ER α , and CTCF have previously been shown to co - localize at a subset of genomic loci . However , how these proteins interact with each other and DNA at speci ﬁ c sites remained elusive . In FoxA1 ChIP - exo data , ChExMix identi ﬁ es subtypes corresponding to ER α and CTCF motifs , and about a half of these subtypes ’ binding events display ER α and CTCF ChIP - exo enrichment with similar tag distributions . Our results thus suggest that ER α and CTCF may mediate binding of FoxA1 via protein - protein interactions at a subset of the genomic loci where multiple factors are co - bound . These results strongly suggest that ChExMix can discover binding event subtypes representing direct and indirect TF interactions from a single ChIP - exo experiment . Conclusions : ChExMix provides a principled platform for elucidating diverse protein - DNA interaction modes in a single ChIP - exo experiment by exploiting both ChIP - exo tag enrichment patterns and DNA motifs . Using a fully integrated frame - work , ChExMix allows simultaneous detection of binding event locations , discovery of binding event subtypes , and assignment of binding events to subtypes . ChExMix enables new forms of insight from a single ChIP - exo experiment , taking analysis towards a ﬁ ne - grained characterization of distinct protein - DNA binding modes at speci ﬁ c genomic loci . ChExMix is freely available from https : / / github . com / seqcode / chexmix . Reference 1 . Rhee , H . S . , Pugh , B . F . : Comprehensive genome - wide protein - DNA interactions detected at single - nucleotide resolution . Cell 147 ( 6 ) , 1408 – 1419 ( 2011 ) 292 N . Yamada et al . Continuous - Trait Probabilistic Model for Comparing Multi - species Functional Genomic Data Yang Yang 1 , Quanquan Gu 2 , Takayo Sasaki 3 , Julianna Crivello 4 , Rachel O’Neill 4 , David M . Gilbert 3 , and Jian Ma 1 ( B ) 1 Computational Biology Department , School of Computer Science , Carnegie Mellon University , Pittsburgh , USA jianma @ cs . cmu . edu 2 Department of Computer Science , University of Virginia , Charlottesville , USA 3 Department of Biological Science , Florida State University , Tallahassee , USA 4 Department of Molecular and Cell Biology , Institute for Systems Genomics , University of Connecticut , Storrs , USA Multi - species functional genomic data from various high - throughput assays are highly informative for the comparative analysis of gene regulation to better understand the molecular mechanisms of phenotypic diversity between human and other mammalian species . Continuous - trait models , which are key to the modeling of functional genomic signals , are gaining increasing attention in genome - wide comparative genomic studies . However , computational models are currently under - explored to fully capture continuous features in the context of multi - species comparisons . There have been several types of continuous - trait evolutionary models , including Brownian motion and Ornstein - Uhlenbeck ( OU ) process . However , to the best of our knowledge , there are no existing computa - tional methods available to simultaneously infer heterogeneous continuous - trait evolutionary models along the genome based on functional genomic signals . In this paper , we develop a new continuous - trait probabilistic model for more accurate state estimation using multi - variate features from cross - species func - tional genomic signals . We call our model phylogenetic hidden Markov Gaussian processes ( Phylo - HMGP ) . Phylo - HMGP incorporates the evolutionary aﬃnity among multiple species into the hidden Markov model ( HMM ) for exploiting both temporal dependencies across species in the context of evolution and spa - tial dependencies along the genome in a continuous - trait model . The goal of the proposed method is to identify heterogeneous cross - species genomic feature patterns more eﬀectively . The Gaussian processes embedded in the HMM are specialized to be multi - variate OU processes or Brownian motion in this study . Both simulation studies and real data application demonstrate the eﬀective - ness of Phylo - HMGP . Importantly , we applied Phylo - HMGP to analyze a new cross - species DNA replication timing ( RT ) dataset from the same cell type in ﬁve primate species ( human , chimpanzee , orangutan , gibbon , and green mon - key ) . We demonstrate that our Phylo - HMGP model enables discovery of genomic regions with distinct evolutionary patterns of RT . We found that regions with c (cid:2) Springer International Publishing AG , part of Springer Nature 2018 B . J . Raphael ( Ed . ) : RECOMB 2018 , LNBI 10812 , pp . 293 – 294 , 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 89929 - 9 294 Y . Yang et al . conserved early RT and conserved late RT exhibit strong correlation with con - stitutive early RT and constitutive late RT , respectively , deﬁned from human ES cell diﬀerentiation . In addition , we found enrichment for speciﬁc cis - regulatory elements in hominini speciﬁc early RT regions . Taken together , the proposed Phylo - HMGP explores a new integrative frame - work to utilize continuous - trait evolutionary models with spatial constraints to study genome - wide functional genomic features across species . The new method is also ﬂexible such that varied continuous - trait evolutionary models or assump - tions can be incorporated . We believe that Phylo - HMGP provides a generic framework that has the potential to more precisely capture the evolutionary his - tory of regulatory regions based on functional genomic signals across diﬀerent species . Deep Learning Reveals Many More Inter - protein Residue - Residue Contacts than Direct Coupling Analysis Tian - Ming Zhou 1 , 2 , Sheng Wang 3 ( & ) , and Jinbo Xu 1 ( & ) 1 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago , Chicago , USA jinboxu @ gmail . com 2 The Institute for Theoretical Computer Science ( ITCS ) , Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences , Tsinghua University , Beijing , China 3 Computational Bioscience Research Center ( CBRC ) , King Abdullah University of Science and Technology ( KAUST ) , Thuwal , Saudi Arabia We study how to predict inter - protein residue - residue contacts between a pair of putative interacting proteins , which has been reported useful for the 3D structure modeling of a PPI or protein docking . Direct - coupling analysis ( DCA ) has been applied to intra - protein and inter - protein contact prediction , but it does not fare well for pro - teins without many sequence homologs . This is a big issue for inter - protein contact prediction since it is challenging to ﬁ nd so many interlogs ( i . e . , interacting homologs ) . Because of this , currently DCA for inter - protein contact prediction mainly focuses on prokaryotes and mitochondria [ 1 , 2 ] since it is relatively easy to ﬁ nd interlogs in prokaryotes , but not in eukaryotes with abundant paralogs . We have developed a deep learning ( DL ) method for intra - protein contact pre - diction [ 3 – 5 ] , which greatly outperformed DCA and was of ﬁ cially ranked ﬁ rst in CASP12 [ 6 ] . Our DL method needs much fewer sequence homologs than DCA to be effective because it makes use of contact occurrence patterns , in addition to co - evolution , for contact prediction . This abstract shows that DL can also work on inter - protein contact prediction , especially for eukaryotes . To avoid over ﬁ tting , we do not train our DL model using any protein complex data ( i . e . , inter - protein contacts ) , but use our previous DL model trained by only protein chains ( i . e . , intra - protein contacts ) to predict inter - protein contacts . We propose a new phylogeny - based method to identify interlogs for a putative interacting protein pair , especially for eukaryotes in which some interacting genes may have big genomic distance . Coupled with DL , this new method works better on eukaryotes than genome - based methods employed by Baker [ 1 ] and Marks [ 2 ] . As shown in Fig . 1 , given a pair of putative interacting proteins A and B under prediction , we ﬁ rst build multiple sequence alignments ( MSAs ) for A and B , respectively . Then we employ genome - and phylogeny - based strategies to concatenate MSA _ A and MSA _ B into two paired MSAs consisting of only interlogs . Finally , we use our DL method to predict two inter - protein contact maps and average them for ﬁ nal prediction . Our DL method outperforms pure DCA on three large datasets and works on both prokaryotes and eukaryotes . Table 1 shows the performance comparison on Baker ’ s dataset . © Springer International Publishing AG , part of Springer Nature 2018 B . J . Raphael ( Ed . ) : RECOMB 2018 , LNBI 10812 , pp . 295 – 296 , 2018 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 89929 - 9 References 1 . Ovchinnikov , S . , Kamisetty , H . , Baker , D . : Robust and accurate prediction of residue – residue interactions across protein interfaces using evolutionary information . Elife 3 , e02030 ( 2014 ) 2 . Hopf , T . A . , et al . : Sequence co - evolution gives 3D contacts and structures of protein complexes . Elife 3 , e03430 ( 2014 ) 3 . Wang , S . , et al . : Accurate de novo prediction of protein contact map by ultra - deep learning model . PLoS Comput . Biol . 13 ( 1 ) , e1005324 ( 2017 ) 4 . Wang , S . , et al . : Folding membrane proteins by deep transfer learning . Cell Syst . 5 ( 3 ) , 202 – 211 . e3 ( 2017 ) 5 . Wang , S . , Sun , S . , Xu , J . : Analysis of deep learning methods for blind protein contact prediction in CASP12 . Proteins : Struct . Funct . Bioinf . ( 2017 ) 6 . Schaarschmidt , J . , et al . : Assessment of contact predictions in CASP12 : co - evolution and deep learning coming of age . Proteins ( 2017 ) Fig . 1 . Method ﬂ owchart Table 1 . Inter - protein contact prediction accuracy ( % ) on Baker ’ s data . GCNN is our method and ( s ) indicates a web server . EVfold is same as EVcomplex , but run locally with our MSAs . “ Genome ” and “ Phylogeny ” denote two MSA generation methods . “ Merged ” indicates prediction is merged from “ Genome ” and “ Phylogeny ” . Columns 3 – 9 show accuracy of top L / 10 , L / 20 , 20 and 10 predicted contacts . Predictor MSA L / 10 L / 20 20 10 EVcomplex ( s ) Built - in 14 . 25 20 . 10 21 . 55 26 . 55 Gremlin ( s ) Built - in 23 . 74 33 . 23 41 . 21 52 . 76 EVfold Genome 28 . 01 39 . 45 46 . 90 57 . 59 EVfold Phylogeny 15 . 61 23 . 09 26 . 21 36 . 21 EVfold Merged 25 . 13 36 . 12 42 . 07 54 . 83 CCMpred Genome 28 . 44 39 . 54 47 . 41 53 . 45 CCMpred Phylogeny 17 . 04 25 . 49 30 . 34 39 . 31 CCMpred Merged 27 . 70 38 . 72 46 . 03 55 . 52 GCNN Genome 51 . 41 60 . 80 62 . 76 68 . 79 GCNN Phylogeny 32 . 61 39 . 30 42 . 24 47 . 59 GCNN Merged 48 . 25 57 . 09 60 . 52 65 . 86 296 T . - M . Zhou et al . Author Index Achtman , Mark 225 Alikhan , Nabil - Fareed 225 Almodaresi , Fatemeh 271 Altenbuchinger , Michael 75 Aluru , Chaitanya 211 Aluru , Srinivas 211 Bakhtiari , Mehrdad 243 Bankevich , Anton 1 Bafna , Vineet 243 , 276 Bansal , Vikas 243 Basso , Rebecca Sarto 278 Beltran , Pierre M . Jean 54 Beerenwinkel , Niko 269 , 283 , 285 Berger , Bonnie 245 , 251 , 280 , 285 Bender , Michael A . 271 Bepler , Tristan 245 Bohmann , Kristine 276 Bonnet , É douard 248 Boroojeny , Ali Ebrahimpour 37 Brasch , Julia 245 Canzar , Stefan 21 Cannistra , Anthony 263 Chakraborty , Shounak 21 Chikhi , Rayan 105 Cho , Hyunghoon 251 Chitsaz , Hamidreza 37 Chockalingam , Sriram P . 211 Craven , Mark 194 Cristea , Ileana M . 54 Cristea , Simona 283 Crivello , Julianna 293 Crovella , Mark 263 DeCourcy , Alex 138 Durif , G . 254 Eskin , Eleazar 289 Fan , Jason 263 Farrell , Nina 291 Ferdman , Michael 271 Franklin Pugh , B . 291 Fried , Inbar 263 Gagie , Travis 105 Galitzine , Cyril 54 Gallagher , Suzanne Renick 37 Gasch , Audrey 194 Geiger , Tamar 283 Gilbert , David M . 293 Gilbert , M . Thomas P . 276 G ö rtler , Franziska 75 Gu , Quanquan 293 Gymrek , Melissa 243 Halperin , Eran 274 Hammer , Stefan 256 Hescott , Benjamin 263 Ho , Yi - Hsuan 194 Hochbaum , Dorit S . 278 Hoinka , Jan 287 Hormozdiari , Fereydoun 259 Huynh , Linh 259 Ideker , Trey 266 Jahn , Katharina 269 , 285 Johnson , Rob 271 Joseph , Tyler A . 90 Kolmogorov , Mikhail 261 Kuipers , Jack 269 , 285 Kuosmanen , Anna 105 Lai , William K . M . 291 Lambert - Lacroix , S . 254 Larson , Gary 122 Leiserson , Mark D . M . 263 Li , Sujun 138 Lim , Tim 263 Lin , Yu 261 Liu , Yang 266 Luhmann , Nina 225 Luo , Yunan 266 Ma , Jian 293 Ma , Jianzhu 266 Mahony , Shaun 291 M ä kinen , Veli 105 Malikic , Salem 269 Marschall , Tobias 21 Mirarab , Siavash 276 Modolo , L . 254 Mold , J . E . 254 Morin , Andrew 245 Noble , Alex J . 245 Numanagi ć , Ibrahim 280 Oefner , Peter J . 75 O ’ Neill , Rachel 293 Orenstein , Yaron 154 Pandey , Prashant 271 Patro , Rob 271 Paavilainen , Topi 105 Pe ’ er , Itsik 90 Peng , Jian 251 , 266 Pevzner , Pavel 1 , 261 Picard , F . 254 Ponty , Yann 256 Przytycka , Teresa M . 287 Quince , Christopher 225 Rahmani , Elior 274 Roch , Sebastien 167 Rosset , Saharon 274 Rz ąż ewski , Pawe ł 248 Sankararaman , Sriram 274 , 289 Sarmashghi , Shahab 276 Sahinalp , S . Cenk 37 , 269 Sasaki , Takayo 293 Schaffner , Thomas 263 Schmidler , Scott 122 Schulz , Marcel H . 21 Schweiger , Regev 274 Shajii , Ariya 280 Shapiro , Lawrence 245 Sharan , Roded 283 Shari ﬁ - Zarchi , Ali 37 Shleizer - Burko , Sharona 243 Shrestha , Akash 37 Sikora , Florian 248 Singer , Jochen 285 Silverbush , Dana 283 Solbrig , Stefan 75 Soul é , Antoine 177 Spang , Rainer 75 Steyaert , Jean - Marc 177 Sverchkov , Yuriy 194 Swiderski , Piotr 287 Tang , Haixu 138 Thankachan , Sharma V . 211 Thorne , Jeffrey L . 122 Tomescu , Alexandru 105 Vandin , Fabio 278 Vitek , Olga 54 Waldisp ü hl , J é r ô me 177 Wang , Kun - Chieh 167 Wang , Sheng 295 Wang , Wei 256 Wang , Yijie 287 Wettig , Tilo 75 Will , Sebastian 256 Wu , Yue 289 Xu , Jinbo 295 Yamada , Naomi 291 Yang , Yang 293 Yanovich , Gali 283 Ye , Qing 266 Yuan , Jeffrey 261 Zhou , Tian - Ming 295 Zhou , Zhemin 225 298 Author Index