l ! ! % ? ! ConferenceCompanionoCHI’940 Boston , MassachusettsUSAoAprilW ? 8 , 1994 Visual Information Seeking using the FilmFinder Christopher Ahlberg and Ben Shneiderrnan Department of Computer Science , Hurnan - Comvuter Interaction Laboratory & Institute for Svsterns Research Universi ~ of Maryland , Co fiege Park , ~ D 26742 E - mail : ahlberg @ cs . chalmers . se , ben @ cs . umd . edu Tel : + 1 - 301 - 405 - 2680 ABSTRACT The FilmFinder allow users to explore a large film database . By applying the dynamic queries approach to filtering information , a continuous starfield display of the films , and tight coupling among the components of the display , the FilmFinder environment encourages incremental and exploratory search . KEYWORDS : Information Retrieval , Dynamic queries , Video - On - Demand INTRODUCTION Gutenberg’s invention of printing 500 years ago changed politics , religion , economics , and daily life . Since that time , the trickle of what we call information has grown into a river , and some say a flood . But now we have begun to create powerful computerized tools to control the flood and harness it to serve our needs . The key is the combination of the computer’s capacity for rapid search coupled with animated visual presentation of results . Human perceptual abilities are truly remarkable , and with proper design , the computer becomes a telescope and microscope for clearly viewing complex data . INFORMATION SEEKING TOOLS Our information seeking design principles start with the dynamic queries approach to filtering information by adjusting sliders and other widgets to produce a complex boolean query [ 1 ] . Second is the starfield display in which result sets are continuously visible as points of light [ 2 ] . Starfield displays take two carefully selected ordinal variables from a relatioml database and produce a scattergram of the records . A textual database is converted into a single comprehensible and manipulable display . The third concept is tight coupling between components of a display . Users can alter the parameters on the input or the output to progressively refine their queries . Tley start from overviews , zoom in on the desired items and get details on demand . Adjusting one widget changes the space of possible queries in an other - which eliminates empty and invalid query results . Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material IS Eranted provided that the coptes are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage , the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear , and “otlce is give” that copyng is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery . To copy otherwise , or to republish , requires a fee andlor specific permission . CH194 Companion - 4 / 94 Boston , Massachusetts USA e 1994 ACM 0 - 897 S1 - 651 - 4 / 94 / 0433 . . . $ 3 . 50 THE FILMFINDER People usually find films by store , browsing film ads in walking around in the paper , looking a video in film encyclopedias , etc . Video stores organize their films by categories , and although browsing the aisles in a video store can be fun , it is not a good way of finding films by attributes such as titles , actors , years , etc . Our solution , the FilmFinder , depends on the dynamic queries approach [ 1 ] , a novel stileld display [ 2 ] to see the query results , and the principle of tight coupling [ 2 ] . The FilmFinder encourages incremental , exploratory , and associative search by allowing users to use query output as input for the next query . By using Alphasliders as query devices , which lets users browse and select only from valid queries , user errors are reduced . Query results are continuously presented in a stileld , a scatter plot where each film is represented by a point of light of different colors . Each category of films has its own color . The position of the film is determined by when it was produced and a measure of popularity . The starfield displays allow users to rapidly overview query results as queries are formulated - old and unpopular fdms can easily be discarded [ Ahlberg & Shneiderman , Color plate 1 & 2 ] . CONCLUSION The FilmFinder is just a start . It needs development to handle larger databases and more varied information . However , we feel that it does provide an attractive example of how new technologies can help harness the flood of information . REFERENCES : 1 . 2 . 3 . Ahlberg , C . , Williamson , C . , Shneiderman , B . , Dynamic Queries for Information Exploration : An Implementation and Evaluation , Proceedings ACM CHI’92 Conference , 619 - 626 , 1992 Ahlberg , C . , Shneiderman , B . Visual Information Seeking : Tight Coupling of Dynamic Query Filters with Starfield Displays , ACM CHI’94 Conference , 1994 Ahlberg , C . , Shneiderman , B . , The Alphaslider - a Rapid and Compact Selector , ACM CHI’94 Conference , 1994 433