Assessing student learning of Newton’s laws : The Force and Motion Conceptual Evaluation and the Evaluation of Active Learning Laboratory and Lecture Curricula Ronald K . Thornton Center for Science and Mathematics Teaching , Departments of Physics and Education , Tufts University , Medford , Massachusetts 02155 David R . Sokoloff Department of Physics , University of Oregon , Eugene , Oregon 97403 (cid:126) Received 6 November 1995 ; accepted 14 July 1997 (cid:33) In this paper , we describe the Force and Motion Conceptual Evaluation , a research - based , multiple - choice assessment of student conceptual understanding of Newton’s Laws of Motion . We discuss a subset of the questions in detail , and give evidence for their validity . As examples of the application of this test , we ﬁrst present data which examine student learning of dynamics concepts in traditional introductory physics courses . Then we present results in courses where research - based active learning strategies are supported by the use of microcomputer - based (cid:126) MBL (cid:33) tools . These include (cid:126) 1 (cid:33) Tools for Scientiﬁc Thinking Motion and Force and RealTime Physics Mechanics laboratory curricula , and (cid:126) 2 (cid:33) microcomputer - based Interactive Lecture Demonstrations . In both cases , there is strong evidence , based on the test , of signiﬁcantly improved conceptual learning . © 1998 American Association of Physics Teachers . I . INTRODUCTION In this paper , we discuss the Force and Motion Conceptual Evaluation 1 (cid:126) FMCE (cid:33) , and its use to evaluate student learning in introductory physics courses . This research - based , multiple - choice assessment instrument was designed to probe conceptual understanding of Newtonian mechanics . Results obtained on a subset of questions that were asked before and after instruction demonstrate that students are little affected by the traditional approach . In an effort to ad - dress this problem , we have developed two active learning , microcomputer - based laboratory (cid:126) MBL (cid:33) curricula , Tools for Scientiﬁc Thinking Motion and Force and RealTime Physics Mechanics . We have also developed Tools for Scientiﬁc Thinking Interactive Lecture Demonstrations , a general strat - egy to encourage active learning in large lecture classes , or in any situation in which only one computer is available . After describing the test and giving arguments for its valid - ity , we describe its application in the assessment of the ef - fectiveness of these three curricula in helping students de - velop a functional understanding of the ﬁrst and second laws . 2 II . CONTEXT FOR THE INVESTIGATION While we and others have evaluated large numbers of stu - dents at many colleges , universities , and high schools with the FMCE , we have had the opportunity to do our most extensive controlled testing at the University of Oregon , in the noncalculus (cid:126) algebra - based (cid:33) and calculus - based general physics lecture courses and in the introductory physics labo - ratory , and at Tufts University in both the noncalculus and calculus - based courses with laboratories . At Oregon , the noncalculus lecture course generally en - rolls between 400 and 500 students divided among either two or three lecture sections . The calculus - based course enrolls 60 – 90 students in one lecture section . The laboratory is a separate course , with weekly experiments , enrolling about 250 students from both of these lecture courses . The fact that as many as half of the students in these courses are not en - rolled in the laboratory has allowed us to divide the students in each course into two research study groups . One group consists of students who are only enrolled in lecture , and will be referred to below as the NOLAB group . The other group is enrolled in both lecture and laboratory and will be referred to as the LAB group . At Tufts , the noncalculus physics course enrolls 160 to 200 students in a single lecture section . As part of this course , almost all of these students take the laboratory , in which they do a new lab every two weeks . (cid:126) Enrollment in the lab sections is a mix of students from both the noncalculus and calculus - based courses . (cid:33) In addition to a large calculus - based course in the Fall , Tufts offers an off - semester section in the Spring . Almost all of the 50 – 70 students in this sec - tion also are enrolled in a laboratory which meets every week . These students are statistically more likely to have trouble with physics than those in the Fall course , and many have postponed taking physics to increase their chances of success . III . DESCRIPTION OF THE FMCE In previous studies , we have reported on the evaluation of student understanding of kinematics concepts using a series of multiple - choice questions . 3 Some of these questions are included in the FMCE . 4 In this paper , we will focus on four sets of questions from the FMCE that probe students’ views of force and motion (cid:126) dynamics (cid:33) concepts , the ‘‘Force Sled’’ questions (cid:126) questions 1 – 7 (cid:33) , the ‘‘Cart on Ramp’’ questions (cid:126) questions 8 – 10 (cid:33) , the ‘‘Coin Toss’’ questions (cid:126) questions 11 – 13 (cid:33) , and the ‘‘Force Graph’’ questions (cid:126) questions 14 – 21 (cid:33) . Appendix A contains the complete FMCE . 1 Most physics professors thought initially that these questions were much too simple for their students and expected that most would answer in a Newtonian way after traditional physics instruc - tion at a selective university . After seeing typical responses to these questions in which fewer than 10 % of the students 338 338 Am . J . Phys . 66 (cid:126) 4 (cid:33) , April 1998 © 1998 American Association of Physics Teachers seem to change their views of dynamics after traditional in - struction , some professors suggested that perhaps the ques - tions are not signiﬁcant (cid:126) or valid and reliable (cid:33) measures of students’ knowledge . Our research does not support this point of view , and we will discuss evidence for the validity of the questions after looking at some actual research results . Figure 1 (cid:126) a (cid:33) and (cid:126) b (cid:33) shows the percentage of 240 noncal - culus NOLAB students at Oregon during 1989 and 1990 who answered the Force Sled questions and Force Graph ques - tions in a Newtonian way . The questions were administered both before and after traditional instruction on dynamics , which included standard lectures , homework problems , quiz - zes , and exams . These results show that less than 20 % of the students answered dynamics questions in ways that are con - sistent with a Newtonian view of the world either before or after traditional instruction . (cid:126) See the discussion of Force Graph question 15 in Sec . IV , below . (cid:33) These results are typi - cal and not unique to Oregon . Identical questions were asked before and after instruction . The pre - test was not returned nor discussed with the students . It is clear that asking the same questions twice could not have had a large instructional effect , since the total change before and after traditional in - struction averaged about 7 % . The results from this pre - test (cid:126) and those that follow (cid:33) show that very few students entering a university general physics course , including those who have previously studied physics , understand dynamics from a Newtonian point of view . Unhappily , the post - test results show that only a small percentage of students adopt a New - tonian framework , even after well executed traditional in - struction . These observations are consistent with other re - search into student understanding of dynamics . 4 – 15 The results of the Cart on Ramp and the Coin Toss , which are shown in Fig . 2 for this same group of students , indicate that very few students answer these questions as a physicist would . We consider that these questions have been answered from a Newtonian point of view only when the choices on all three questions indicate a constant force downward for the Coin Toss and downward along the ramp for the Cart on Ramp . (cid:126) Essentially all student models result in the Newton - ian answer for the question in each set referring to downward motion . (cid:33) These questions have been asked of thousands of students . The fact that traditional instruction has little effect on stu - dents’ beliefs about force and motion , as shown by the re - sults in Figs . 1 and 2 , is conﬁrmed by considerable additional research . IV . DISCUSSION OF THE DYNAMICS QUESTIONS ON THE FMCE The FMCE is most useful when correlations among stu - dent answers on different questions are examined . In this paper , however , we are concerned primarily with the per - centage of students answering questions in a Newtonian way in order to evaluate traditional instruction and our active learning curricula . It will be useful to look more closely at the questions in order to determine their ability to probe students’ ideas . Note that although both the Force Sled and the Force Graph ques - tions explore the relationship between force and motion by asking about similar motions , the two sets of questions are very different in a number of ways . The Force Sled questions make no reference to graphs and no overt reference to a coordinate system . They use ‘‘natural’’ language as much as possible , and they explicitly describe the force acting on the moving object . On the other hand , the Force Graph questions use a graphical representation , make explicit references to coordinate systems , and do not explicitly describe the force that is acting . It is easier to ask more complex questions Fig . 1 . Effect of traditional instruction on students’ answers to the Force Sled (cid:126) Natural Language (cid:33) and Force Graph (cid:126) Graphical (cid:33) questions from the FMCE . Percent of a matched group of 240 University of Oregon noncalcu - lus general physics students who answered (cid:126) a (cid:33) each Force Sled question and (cid:126) b (cid:33) each Force Graph question in a Newtonian manner before and after traditional instruction in 1989 – 1990 . Fig . 2 . Student understanding of dynamics before and after traditional in - struction . Percent of a matched group of 240 University of Oregon noncal - culus general physics students who answered groups of dynamics questions in a Newtonian manner before and after traditional instruction in 1989 – 1990 . The Natural Language Evaluation is a composite of the Force Sled questions , and the Graphical Evaluation is a composite of the Force Graph questions . All three Coin Toss and Cart on Ramp questions had to be an - swered correctly for the answers to be considered Newtonian . 339 339 Am . J . Phys . , Vol . 66 , No . 4 , April 1998 R . K . Thornton and D . R . Sokoloff using the more precise graphical representation . In spite of these differences in the two types of questions , students’ re - sponses are very similar where there is an exact analog be - tween the Force Sled and Force Graph questions . In the few cases where students do very much better answering the Force Graph questions than the Force Sled questions , it is possible that their English language skills are weak . Some questions serve speciﬁc purposes . Force Sled ques - tion 5 is intended to identify statistically students who are just beginning to consider Newton’s First Law as a descrip - tion of the world . It is very similar to question 2 but is designed to elicit the Newtonian answer of zero net force for motion at constant velocity . Students who are beginning to accept a Newtonian view statistically choose ‘‘no applied force needed’’ for this question , even while answering Force Sled question 2 (cid:126) and Force Graph question 14 (cid:33) by choosing a constant force in the direction of motion . Students who are far from consistently adopting a Newtonian view , still an - swer Force Sled question 5 by picking a nonzero applied force . Thus question 5 helps identify students who are begin - ning to have doubts about their previous views but are not entirely convinced . It is not a good indicator of ﬁrm New - tonian thinking . Note that many more students answered this question in a Newtonian way both before and after tradi - tional instruction than other similar questions . Force Sled question 6 was originally intended to probe directly whether students believed that the net force is in the direction of the acceleration , but further research showed that many students who believed this still chose the ‘‘wrong’’ answer . (cid:126) Note that the answer is directly contained in the question . (cid:33) When asked to reconsider their answer , these stu - dents would change it to B , the Newtonian answer . Up to 40 % of physics faculty also choose an answer other than B (cid:126) almost always F (cid:33) . After discussion , they agree the answer should be B , but see no way to make the question clearer . This result indicates that a ‘‘wrong’’ answer to question 6 does not necessarily indicate non - Newtonian reasoning . Since some people very consistently answer all other ques - tions from a Newtonian viewpoint while still missing ques - tion 6 , we must interpret the results cautiously . Such results conﬁrm the value of asking a variety of questions of diverse audiences to probe understanding of particular concepts . The combination of Force Sled questions 1 – 4 and 7 , on the other hand , indicate reliably (cid:126) in a statistical sense (cid:33) the prevalence of non - Newtonian and Newtonian student views . We will use a composite average of the results on these ﬁve questions in the comparisons that follow and label this aver - age as the ‘‘natural language evaluation . ’’ Figure 2 shows this average for the data already presented in Fig . 1 (cid:126) a (cid:33) before and after traditional instruction . Some questions are asked to make sure that students can read English , can understand the format , and / or can interpret graphs . Question 15 in the Force Graph sequence , which asks for the force on an object which is at rest , is the only single question in which the most common student view and Newtonian view are the same . Consequently , it is answered the same way by a physicist and by 85 % to 95 % of students even before instruction . If a large percentage of students an - swer this question incorrectly (cid:126) common for middle school students (cid:33) , it is likely that many of these students are unable to read graphs . Force Graph question 20 is , statistically , one of the last questions in this set answered correctly , even by students who answer the other questions in a Newtonian way . We will use a composite average of the seven questions , 14 and 16 through 21 , to make comparisons and label them the ‘‘graphical evaluation . ’’ Figure 2 shows this average for the data already presented in Fig . 1 (cid:126) b (cid:33) before and after tradi - tional instruction . (cid:126) It is not possible to compare directly stu - dent ability to answer natural language or graphical ques - tions in terms of the averages we have just deﬁned , since the Force Sled and Force Graph questions included in the aver - ages are not direct analogs . (cid:33) We have tracked conceptual understanding of Newton’s First and Second Laws of incoming students at Oregon and Tufts over a number of years and ﬁnd very stable results . Some results for students entering noncalculus physics courses are shown in Fig . 3 (cid:126) a (cid:33) . Results for calculus - based introductory courses are shown in Fig . 3 (cid:126) b (cid:33) . Notice that the variations between courses or institutions are generally larger than the small changes which result from traditional instruction (cid:126) shown in Figs . 1 and 2 (cid:33) . V . CONCEPTUAL UNDERSTANDING OF DYNAMICS BEFORE AND AFTER ACTIVE LEARNING LABORATORIES The Tools for Scientiﬁc Thinking ( TST ) Motion and Force 16 and RealTime Physics ( RTP ) Mechanics 17 MBL laboratory curricula , developed for the introductory labora - tory at universities , colleges , and high schools , are designed to allow students to take an active role in their learning and encourage them to construct physical knowledge for them - Fig . 3 . Comparison of understanding of dynamics before instruction in (cid:126) a (cid:33) noncalculus and (cid:126) b (cid:33) calculus - based introductory physics courses at Oregon and Tufts . 340 340 Am . J . Phys . , Vol . 66 , No . 4 , April 1998 R . K . Thornton and D . R . Sokoloff selves from actual observations . These curricula have been described in more detail elsewhere . 4 , 7 , 18 They make substan - tial use of the results of physics education research . 4 – 15 Both were designed to introduce active learning into the labora - tory portion of a traditionally structured introductory course . Both use the MBL force probe and motion detector to mea - sure and display the force applied to an object and its motion (cid:126) position , velocity , and / or acceleration (cid:33) simultaneously in real time . 19 They use a guided discovery approach and are intended for student groups of two to four . They support the peer learning that is possible when data are immediately pre - sented in an understandable form . They engage students through a learning cycle which includes predictions , obser - vations , and comparisons . In addition , they pay attention to student alternative understandings that have been docu - mented in the research literature . The TST Motion and Force curriculum , released in 1992 , was designed to help improve conceptual understanding in mechanics by substituting a small number of active learning laboratories for traditional ones . The RTP Mechanics cur - riculum , released in 1994 , has the more ambitious goal of completely replacing the entire introductory laboratory with a sequenced , coherent set of active learning laboratories . The origins of RTP Mechanics lie in TST Motion and Force and Workshop Physics . 20 How well do students understand dynamics concepts after completing the TST and RTP active learning laboratories ? During 1989 – 1991 , the LAB students in the Oregon noncal - culus general physics course completed all of the TST Mo - tion and Force labs . In 1991 , they were evaluated with the FMCE a number of times during the term , largely to measure the effectiveness of Interactive Lecture Demonstrations . (cid:126) See Sec . VI . (cid:33) However , we were also able to evaluate the LAB group’s conceptual understanding after they had completed the TST Motion and Force labs . As can be seen in Fig . 3 (cid:126) a (cid:33) , the pre - test results for the group of students in 1991 are very similar to results in other years . The same questions (cid:126) with the order rearranged (cid:33) were asked of the LAB group after the students completed the two TST kinematics and two TST dynamics laboratories , about ﬁve weeks after the pre - test . During this period , the students also experienced about one lecture of special kinematics Interactive Lecture Demonstra - tions . The ﬁrst two bars of Fig . 4 show the results for the same group of 72 LAB students before instruction and then after lectures and laboratories . As can be seen , there are very sig - niﬁcant improvements even though the post - test was given immediately after the last laboratory , before the students had much time to assimilate their knowledge of these concepts . (cid:126) As shown in the last two bars of Fig . 4 , more than 90 % of these LAB students were answering most questions in a Newtonian manner by the end of the course . This additional improvement was achieved through dynamics Interactive Lecture Demonstrations , as described in Sec . VI . (cid:33) From 1992 to 1994 , students in the Oregon introductory laboratory completed the RTP Mechanics laboratories . Be - cause research , as shown in Fig . 3 (cid:126) a (cid:33) , shows that the pre - test results vary little from year to year , no pre - test was given during these years , but the FMCE was part of the laboratory ﬁnal examination . In Fig . 5 (cid:126) a (cid:33) , the ﬁnal results for the LAB group from the noncalculus general physics course in each year , 1992 through 1994 , are compared to the average pre - test results for 1989 – 91 . These results should also be com - pared to the 7 % gain achieved by traditional instruction on these questions , shown in Fig . 2 . (cid:126) The additional improve - ment in the Coin Toss and Cart on Ramp questions in 1994 is attributable to a curricular change in RTP Mechanics , which placed more emphasis on motion caused by the gravi - tational force . (cid:33) A much smaller LAB group of students in the calculus - based general physics course at Oregon in 1992 – 94 also completed the RTP Mechanics laboratories and the lab ﬁnal . These results are shown in Fig . 5 (cid:126) b (cid:33) . While no pre - test was given to these classes , the 1995 pre - test results for the same Fig . 4 . Effect of TST Motion and Force labs and Interactive Lecture Dem - onstrations on understanding of dynamics in 1991 Oregon noncalculus gen - eral physics . Fig . 5 . Effect of RTP Mechanics labs on understanding of dynamics in 1992 – 1994 Oregon (cid:126) a (cid:33) noncalculus and (cid:126) b (cid:33) calculus - based general physics . 341 341 Am . J . Phys . , Vol . 66 , No . 4 , April 1998 R . K . Thornton and D . R . Sokoloff course are included for comparison . This seems reasonable , since the pre - test data for calculus - based courses shown in Fig . 3 (cid:126) b (cid:33) are all very consistent with one another . The students in the Spring (cid:126) off - semester (cid:33) introductory calculus - based course at Tufts also did the RTP Mechanics laboratories during the Springs of 1994 and 1995 . The results on the FMCE for a combined group of 88 students from both years is shown in Fig . 6 before all instruction and on the ﬁnal examination . Figure 7 compares results on the FMCE after traditional instruction in introductory noncalculus physics courses and after experiencing the RTP Mechanics labs in noncalculus and calculus - based courses . The signiﬁcant improvement in conceptual understanding as a result of the labs is very simi - lar in calculus and noncalculus courses and similar for stu - dents at Oregon and at Tufts . VI . CONCEPTUAL UNDERSTANDING OF DYNAMICS BEFORE AND AFTER INTERACTIVE LECTURE DEMONSTRATIONS Despite considerable evidence that traditional approaches are ineffective in teaching physics concepts , 3 – 15 most physics students in this country continue to be taught in lectures , often in large lectures with more than 100 students . Also , many high school and college physics programs are unable to support hands - on laboratory work for large numbers of students because they have only a few computers . After several years of research , we formalized in 1991 a procedure for the Tools for Scientiﬁc Thinking Interactive Lecture Demonstrations (cid:126) ILDs (cid:33) , which engages students in the learning process and , therefore , converts the usually pas - sive lecture environment to a more active one . The procedure involves students recording individual predictions of the out - comes of simple experiments on a Prediction Sheet (cid:126) which is collected (cid:33) , discussing their predictions with neighbors and then comparing their predictions to the actual results dis - played for the class with MBL tools . We have published four sequences of mechanics ILDs to enhance the learning of ki - nematics and dynamics , including Newton’s Three Laws . More details on the procedure and design , as well as descrip - tions of these four ILD sequences , will be found elsewhere . 4 – 7 , 21 , 22 Here we report on assessments of conceptual learning gains using the FMCE for introductory physics students who experienced series of ILDs on kinematics and Newton’s First and Second Laws . In the Fall of 1991 , as a substitute for traditional instruction , students in the noncalculus general physics class at Oregon experienced about two full lectures of ILDs on kinematics and dynamics . A similar set of ILDs was carried out in the noncalculus introductory physics class at Tufts , during Fall , 1994 . At Tufts , all students were en - rolled in the laboratory , where they completed only the two TST Motion and Force kinematics laboratories . 16 At both Oregon and Tufts , students were awarded a small number of points toward their ﬁnal grades for attending and handing in their Prediction Sheets , but their answers were not graded . Figure 8 compares student learning of dynamics concepts in traditional instruction to learning in identical courses with ILDs . As we mentioned in Sec . IV , the pre - test results for Oregon students in 1991 and Tufts students in 1994 were very similar to those of the combined 1989 – 1990 group of Oregon students , which we show in the ﬁrst bar of Fig . 8 . In comparison , the last two bars show that the effect of experi - encing about two full lectures of ILDs is very substantial . Fig . 6 . Effect of RTP Mechanics labs on understanding of dynamics in Spring , 1994 – 1995 Tufts calculus - based introductory physics . Fig . 7 . Understanding of dynamics in noncalculus (cid:126) NC (cid:33) and calculus - based (cid:126) C (cid:33) courses at Oregon and Tufts which included RTP Mechanics labs com - pared to that with traditional instruction . Fig . 8 . Understanding of dynamics in non - calculus courses at Oregon and Tufts with ILD - enhanced instruction compared to that with traditional in - struction . 342 342 Am . J . Phys . , Vol . 66 , No . 4 , April 1998 R . K . Thornton and D . R . Sokoloff VII . INSTRUCTIONAL AND ASSESSMENT HISTORIES In order to illustrate the proper use of the FMCE in assess - ing the effectiveness of learning strategies and to give more detail on the experimental protocol used in this research , we present here a more detailed account of the timelines of in - struction and testing at Oregon and Tufts . Figure 9 shows an assessment history for the noncalculus NOLAB group of Or - egon students , while Fig . 4 shows results for the LAB group . The bars labeled ‘‘Before Instruction’’ (cid:126) meaning before all dynamics instruction (cid:33) show the results on the FMCE after two traditional kinematics lectures . (cid:126) In all of these studies at both Oregon and Tufts , neither the evaluation questions nor the answers were returned or posted at any time until after the ﬁnal examination . (cid:33) After two more weeks of lectures , including several lectures on Newton’s Laws , the students experienced a total of about one lecture of kinematics ILDs . About a week later , after all lectures on dynamics were ﬁn - ished , dynamics questions from the FMCE were given as part of the midterm examination . The bars labeled ‘‘After Traditional (cid:49) ’’ in Fig . 9 show the effect on dynamics con - ceptual understanding of enhancing kinematics instruction with the kinematics ILDs . The NOLAB students improved on the natural language questions by 14 % , on the graphical questions by 24 % , on the Coin Toss questions by 47 % , and on the Cart on Ramp questions by 35 % . These improvements after enhanced kinematics instruction and traditional dynamics instruction can be explained by our previous research on the learning hierarchy formed by kine - matics and dynamics concepts . We have shown that improv - ing student understanding of kinematics also improves stu - dent learning of dynamics , even if dynamics is taught in a traditional manner . 4 , 5 We have reported previously on substantial gains in con - ceptual understanding of kinematics by students who have experienced our active learning laboratories . 3 Our analysis was based on averages of students’ responses on the four velocity and ﬁve acceleration questions on the FMCE . What about the effect of ILDs ? Whereas at Oregon an average of only 35 % of noncalculus NOLAB students can answer the acceleration questions and 70 % the velocity questions cor - rectly after traditional instruction , 80 % of these same stu - dents answer the acceleration questions and 90 % answer the velocity questions correctly after a combination of the two kinematics sequences of ILDs . For noncalculus LAB stu - dents at Oregon and for Tufts noncalculus students , both of whom also completed the two TST kinematics labs , these percentages rise to 90 % – 95 % on both sets of questions . At the time of the midterm assessment , the LAB students had also completed the four TST Motion and Force labs . The even larger increases seen in the bar in Fig . 4 labeled ‘‘After TST Labs , ’’ have already been mentioned in Sec . V . About 70 % of the LAB students are answering in a Newtonian manner . About a week after the midterm examination , the 40 min - utes of ILDs on Newton’s First and Second laws were pre - sented to the students . In the lecture following the ILDs , the same dynamics questions from the FMCE were asked as part of a quiz—with the order of questions and choices rear - ranged . The results on this quiz for the NOLAB group are shown by the bars labeled ‘‘After ILDs’’ in Fig . 9 . Figure 4 shows the results for the LAB students . The effect of the dynamics ILDs on the NOLAB group seems truly remark - able in that nearly 70 % are now answering both natural lan - guage and graphical questions in a Newtonian way after only an additional 40 minutes of interactive presentation of the concepts in lecture . Students are doing even better on the Coin Toss and Cart on Ramp questions . The LAB group also shows some additional improvement , so that now roughly 80 % are answering the questions in a Newtonian way . (cid:126) Since such a large percentage of the LAB group was answering these questions correctly before the dynamics ILDs , we ex - pect that those who were still missing these questions were among the weakest students in the class . The fact that the ILDs still were effective in changing the view of dynamics for approximately half of these weaker students seems very encouraging . (cid:33) The assessment history of students in the noncalculus gen - eral physics course at Tufts in Fall , 1994 is shown in Fig . 10 . One difference from Oregon was that at Tufts all traditional instruction in kinematics and dynamics was completed be - fore any ILDs were presented . (cid:126) The timelines at Oregon and Tufts were necessitated by our desire to assess the effective - ness of the ILDs independently from traditional instruction . (cid:33) The ‘‘Before Instruction’’ evaluation represents results on the FMCE given on the ﬁrst day of class . The students were Fig . 9 . Assessment history for the 1991 Oregon noncalculus NOLAB group showing understanding of dynamics before , during , and after instruction which included kinematics and dynamics ILDs . Fig . 10 . Assessment history for the 1994 Tufts noncalculus course showing understanding of dynamics before , during , and after instruction which in - cluded two TST kinematics labs , and kinematics and dynamics ILDs . 343 343 Am . J . Phys . , Vol . 66 , No . 4 , April 1998 R . K . Thornton and D . R . Sokoloff given traditional lectures and problems on kinematics and dynamics . They also completed the ﬁrst two TST Motion and Force labs on kinematics . After all traditional instruction on mechanics (cid:126) plus the kinematics labs (cid:33) , the students were evaluated again . Since the kinematics instruction was en - hanced by the two labs , the data are labeled ‘‘Traditional (cid:49) ’’ in Fig . 10 . During the next week , two 40 - min sequences of ILDs on kinematics and Newton’s First and Second Laws were pre - sented . The day after the second set of ILDs , the dynamics questions with rearranged choices were included as 45 out of 100 points on the second hour exam in the course . The re - sults are very gratifying . In Fig . 10 the bars labeled ‘‘After ILDs’’ show a gain of almost 50 % from 80 min of ILD instruction , with almost 90 % of the students answering ques - tions in a Newtonian way after instruction enhanced by ILDs . The total gain of over 75 % from before instruction should be compared to the 7 % – 10 % gain we have seen re - sulting from traditional instruction . VIII . RETENTION OF CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE GAINED FROM ACTIVE LEARNING LABORATORIES AND ILDs Retention of the Newtonian conceptual view seems to be very good for students who have completed the TST or RTP labs . Whenever questions were asked again up to six weeks after instruction in dynamics had ended , the percentage of students answering in a Newtonian way increased rather then decreased . We attribute this increase to assimilation of the concepts . It might not be too surprising if the improved learning from the ILDs were more ephemeral . The research data , however , seem to show that the ILD - enhanced learning also is persistent . As a test of retention , the Force Graph and Cart on Ramp questions were included on the Oregon ﬁnal exami - nation . The ﬁnal was given about six weeks after the dynam - ics ILDs , during which time no additional dynamics instruc - tion took place . The bars labeled ‘‘Final’’ show the results for the NOLAB group in Fig . 9 and for the LAB group in Fig . 4 . As can be seen , assimilation apparently has resulted in a 6 % increase for the graphical questions and a more modest increase for the Cart on Ramp questions . The bars labeled ‘‘Final’’ in Fig . 10 show the results on the Tufts ﬁnal , which was seven weeks after dynamics instruction— including ILDs —had ended . There is a 7 % increase on the graphical questions , a 23 % increase on the Coin Toss , and a 36 % increase on the Cart on Ramp questions , even though there was no additional relevant instruction . (cid:126) It should be noted that the post - test labeled ‘‘After ILDs’’ was given the next day after the dynamics ILD , so that there was no time for assimilation . (cid:33) IX . SUMMARY OF EVIDENCE FOR THE VALIDITY OF THE FMCE Our observations that 70 % – 90 % of students answer the FMCE dynamics questions from a Newtonian perspective at the end of the term after completing the TST or RTP labora - tory curriculum and / or participating in the ILDs , while less than 20 % do so after traditional lecture instruction , has led some to question the validity of the test . Are the questions signiﬁcant indicators of student understanding of dynamics ? To some extent , we have already addressed important ques - tions that might be raised . Student answers to the Force Graph questions correlate with answers to the very different format Force Sled questions which probe the same concepts . The correlation holds both before and after traditional or en - hanced instruction . To explore further the signiﬁcance of the Newtonian stu - dent responses , we also included on the ﬁnal exam at Oregon and Tufts a new set of simple conceptual questions which had not been asked previously . Figure 11 shows ten of these new questions which are of a different format and set in rather different contexts than the Force Graph questions . We only consider students at Oregon and Tufts who answered at least seven of the eight Force Graph questions from a New - tonian point of view . The ﬁrst number in parentheses after each Newtonian answer in Fig . 11 indicates the percentage of Oregon students giving the Newtonian answer , while the sec - ond number is the percentage of Tufts students giving this answer . The results were impressive , with nine out of ten of these questions answered from a Newtonian point of view by 80 % or more Oregon students and 86 % or more Tufts stu - dents . The results on these new questions were particularly gratifying , since previous work had shown us that students often do not generalize in ways that seem obvious to physi - cists . After traditional or enhanced instruction , students statisti - cally answer the Coin Toss questions and the Cart on Ramp questions in a non - Newtonian way even after they answer most of the other questions on the FMCE in a Newtonian manner . 4 Many of their answers seem to indicate that they associate force with velocity rather than acceleration . As shown in Sec . III , after traditional instruction only 5 % of the students at Oregon answer the Coin Toss questions in a Newtonian manner , while after the laboratories and ILDs at Oregon and after the ILDs at Tufts , over 90 % do . The Coin Toss questions and analogs provide more evi - Fig . 11 . Alternative assessment questions asked on the ﬁnal exam at Oregon and Tufts which test understanding of dynamics in different contexts . The ﬁrst set of numbers in parentheses show the percent of the 1991 Oregon noncalculus general physics students who had answered at least seven of the eight Force Graph questions in a Newtonian manner who also did so on these questions . The second set of numbers in parentheses shows the same percentages for the 1994 Tufts noncalculus students . 344 344 Am . J . Phys . , Vol . 66 , No . 4 , April 1998 R . K . Thornton and D . R . Sokoloff dence that students who answer the Force Graph questions from a Newtonian point of view have made a fundamental belief change . If we look again at the sample of students at Oregon and Tufts who answered at least seven of the eight Force Graph questions from a Newtonian point of view , we ﬁnd that 93 % of these students also did so on the Cart on Ramp questions . Figure 12 shows a coin toss analog which they had not seen previously , a block sliding into a spring . Ninety - two percent of these same students again answered from a Newtonian point of view . As with all the questions on the FMCE , students who an - swered correctly were also able to describe in words why they picked the answers they did . 5 Statistically one of the last questions to be answered in a Newtonian manner is the force on a cart rolling up a ramp as it reverses direction at the top (cid:126) Cart on Ramp question 9 (cid:33) . Students were asked to explain how they determined this force . The following are typical written explanations from students who answered this ques - tion from a Newtonian point of view : ‘‘After the car is released the only net force acting on it is the x - component of its weight which has a net force down the ramp in the positive direction . ’’ ‘‘When the car is at the top of the ramp , its velocity is 0 for just an instant , but in the next instant it is moving down the ramp , v2 (cid:50) v1 (cid:53) a pos number so it is accel . down . Also , gravity is always pulling down on the car no matter which way it is moving . ’’ ‘‘The only two forces involved were gravity and fric - tion . At the top of the ramp the net force was down - ward because gravity is higher in magnitude than fric - tion (cid:126) unless the tires & the ramp were sticky (cid:33) . ’’ Typical student answers for those who answered as if motion implies force were : ‘‘At the highest point , the toy car’s force is switching from one direction to another and there are no net forces acting upon it , so it is zero . ’’ ‘‘Because at the one instant the car is at its highest point it is no longer moving so the force is zero for that one instant it is at rest (cid:53) net force (cid:53) 0 . ’’ The agreement between the multiple - choice and open answer responses is almost 100 % . Such results give us conﬁdence in the signiﬁcance of student choices . In summary , most students answer the Force Graph or Force Sled questions as if they held a Newtonian point of view , and also are able to answer Coin Toss and coin toss analog questions and other questions that they have never seen before . In addition , students’ written explanations agree with their choices on these multiple - choice questions . These results support the usefulness of the questions on the FMCE for evaluating student understanding . X . WHY IS THE FMCE INSTRUCTIONALLY USEFUL ? The difﬁculties in convincing physics professors and high school teachers to give up course time for testing , our desire to make evaluation less subjective , and the effort involved in analyzing large samples moved us to use multiple - choice questions on the FMCE . Although a more complete under - standing of student learning can be gained by an open - ended questioning process , the FMCE has allowed us to gather suf - ﬁcient data at many different institutions to counter the com - mon response that ‘‘my students do not have these difﬁcul - ties you describe . ’’ Almost all answers , ‘‘right or wrong’’ help us to evaluate student views about dynamics . Because the available choices in the questions were derived from stu - dents’ answers to free response questions and from student interviews , students almost always ﬁnd an answer that they are satisﬁed with . Guessing correctly is very difﬁcult because many of the questions require students to choose an answer from up to nine choices . The correlations among questions have been examined and individual questions have been cor - related with more open - ended student answers . Because we are able to identify statistically most student views from the pattern of answers and because there are very few random answers , we are also able to identify students with less com - mon beliefs about motion and follow up with interviews or open - ended questions . The use of an easily administered and robust multiple - choice test has also allowed us and others to track changes in student views of dynamics 4 , 5 and to separate the effects of various curricular changes on student learning . Student answers correlate well (cid:126) above 90 % (cid:33) with written short answers in which students explain the reason for their choices , and almost all students pick choices that we can associate with a relatively small number of student models . 5 Testing with smaller student samples shows that those who can pick the correct graph under these circumstances are al - most equally successful at drawing the graph correctly with - out being presented with choices . The great majority of students at Oregon and Tufts who completed the MBL laboratory curricula and / or ILDs an - swered the FMCE dynamics questions in a Newtonian man - ner . It would be a mistake to imagine that students uniformly apply a consistent model (cid:126) at least from the point of view of most physicists (cid:33) to all ‘‘manners’’ of motion . Many students consider speeding up , slowing down , moving at constant ve - locity , and standing still to be independent states of motion that do not require a consistent relationship between force and acceleration or velocity . Numbers of students commonly require an object slowing down to have a constant force op - posing the motion while requiring an ever increasing force for an object which is speeding up . The dynamics of these changing student views is described elsewhere . 5 The fact that most students are using ‘‘models’’ (cid:126) even if they are incorrect or are applied in very limited circumstances (cid:33) is a good be - ginning for instruction . XI . CONCLUSIONS We have developed and reﬁned the research - based Force and Motion Conceptual Evaluation so that it is now a reliable means of assessing student understanding of mechanics con - Fig . 12 . Alternative coin toss analog questions asked on the ﬁnal exam at Oregon in 1991 and Tufts in 1994 . 345 345 Am . J . Phys . , Vol . 66 , No . 4 , April 1998 R . K . Thornton and D . R . Sokoloff cepts , and it is easily administered to large groups of stu - dents . Our studies of conceptual understanding using this test show that introductory physics students do not commonly understand kinematics and dynamics concepts as a result of thorough traditional instruction . Since the choices available to students on the FMCE allow us to distinguish among com - mon student views about dynamics , 5 this test has been useful for guiding the development of instructional strategies . This research and that of others , along with the development of user friendly microcomputer - based laboratory tools , have al - lowed us to extend our computer supported , active learning laboratory curricula to dynamics and have allowed us to de - velop a strategy for more active learning of these concepts in lectures using ILDs . Assessments using the FMCE indicate that student understanding of dynamics concepts is signiﬁ - cantly improved when these learning strategies are substi - tuted for traditional ones . In a future paper we will discuss assessment of learning of Newton’s Third Law in laboratory and lecture using the FMCE . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are especially grateful to Priscilla Laws of Dickinson College , co - author of RealTime Physics , for her continuing collaboration which has contributed signiﬁcantly to this work . The laboratory and lecture curricula which we have developed would not have been possible without the hard - ware and software development work of Stephen Beardslee , Lars Travers , Ronald Budworth , and David Vernier . We thank the faculty at the University of Oregon and Tufts Uni - versity for assisting with our student assessments . We also thank the students for participating in these assessments and in the testing of our laboratory and lecture curricula . We are grateful to Lillian McDermott and the Physics Education Group at the University of Washington for reviewing this paper and offering many constructive suggestions . Finally , this work was supported by the National Science Foundation and by the Fund for Improvement of Post - secondary Educa - tion (cid:126) FIPSE (cid:33) of the U . S . Department of Education . See Ref . 2 . APPENDIX A : COMPLETE FORCE AND MOTION CONCEPTUAL EVALUATION 346 346 Am . J . Phys . , Vol . 66 , No . 4 , April 1998 R . K . Thornton and D . R . Sokoloff 347 347 Am . J . Phys . , Vol . 66 , No . 4 , April 1998 R . K . Thornton and D . R . Sokoloff 348 348 Am . J . Phys . , Vol . 66 , No . 4 , April 1998 R . K . Thornton and D . R . Sokoloff 349 349 Am . J . Phys . , Vol . 66 , No . 4 , April 1998 R . K . Thornton and D . R . Sokoloff 350 350 Am . J . Phys . , Vol . 66 , No . 4 , April 1998 R . K . Thornton and D . R . Sokoloff 1 Revisions and updates of the Force and Motion Conceptual Evaluation , as well as conceptual evaluations under development in other areas of phys - ics , are available from the Center for Science and Mathematics Teaching , Tufts University , 4 Colby Street , Medford , MA 02155 , or from the Work - shop Physics On - line Instructor Resource Guide on the World Wide Web at http : / / physics . dickinson . edu . 2 This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant No . USE - 9150589 , ‘‘Student Oriented Science , ’’ Grant No . USE - 9153725 , ‘‘The Workshop Physics Laboratory Featuring Tools for Scien - tiﬁc Thinking , ’’ and Grant No . TPE - 8751481 , ‘‘Tools for Scientiﬁc Think - ing : MBL for Teaching Science Teachers , ’’ and by the Fund for Improvement of Post - secondary Education (cid:126) FIPSE (cid:33) of the U . S . Depart - ment of Education under Grant No . G008642149 , ‘‘Tools for Scientiﬁc Thinking , ’’ and number P116B90692 , ‘‘Interactive Physics . ’’ 3 R . K . Thornton and D . R . Sokoloff , ‘‘Learning motion concepts using real - time , microcomputer - based laboratory tools , ’’ Am . J . Phys . 58 , 858 – 867 (cid:126) 1990 (cid:33) . 4 R . K . Thornton , ‘‘Using large - scale classroom research to study student conceptual learning in mechanics and to develop new approaches to learn - ing , ’’ in Microcomputer - Based Labs : Educational Research and Stan - dards , edited by Robert F . Tinker , Series F , Computer and Systems Sci - ences 156 , 89 – 114 (cid:126) Springer - Verlag , Berlin , 1996 (cid:33) . 5 R . K . Thornton , ‘‘Conceptual dynamics : Changing student views of force and motion , ’’ in Thinking Physics for Teaching , edited by C . Tarsitani , C . Bernardini , and M . Vincentini (cid:126) Plenum , London , 1995 (cid:33) . 6 R . K . Thornton , ‘‘Changing the physics teaching laboratory : Using tech - nology and new approaches to learning to create an experiential environ - ment for learning physics concepts , ’’ Proceedings of the Europhysics Study Conference , The Role of Experiment in Physics Education , edited by Seta Oblak and Nada Razpet (cid:126) Ljubljana , Slovenia , 1993 (cid:33) . 7 Ronald K . Thornton , ‘‘Learning physics concepts in the introductory course : Microcomputer - based Labs and Interactive Lecture Demonstra - tions , ’’ in Proc . Conf . on the Intro . Physics Course , edited by Jack Wilson (cid:126) Wiley , New York , 1997 (cid:33) , pp . 69 – 85 . 8 A . B . Arons , A Guide to Introductory Physics Teaching (cid:126) Wiley , New York , 1990 (cid:33) . 9 L . C . McDermott , ‘‘Research on conceptual understanding in mechanics , ’’ Phys . Today 37 , 24 – 32 (cid:126) 1984 (cid:33) . 10 L . C . McDermott , ‘‘Guest comment : How we teach and how students learn—a mismatch ? , ’’ Am . J . Phys . 61 , 295 – 298 (cid:126) 1993 (cid:33) . 11 L . C . McDermott , ‘‘Millikan lecture 1990 : What we teach and what is learned—closing the gap , ’’ Am . J . Phys . 59 , 301 – 315 (cid:126) 1991 (cid:33) . 12 J . A . Halloun and D . Hestenes , ‘‘The initial knowledge state of college physics students , ’’ Am . J . Phys . 53 , 1043 – 1056 (cid:126) 1985 (cid:33) . 13 D . Hestenes , M . Wells , and G . Schwackhammer , ‘‘Force concept inven - tory , ’’ Phys . Teach . 30 (cid:126) 3 (cid:33) , 141 – 158 (cid:126) 1992 (cid:33) . 351 351 Am . J . Phys . , Vol . 66 , No . 4 , April 1998 R . K . Thornton and D . R . Sokoloff 14 L . C . McDermott , P . Shaffer , and M . D . Somers , ‘‘Research as a guide for teaching introductory mechanics : An illustration in the context of the At - wood’s machine , ’’ Am . J . Phys . 62 , 46 – 55 (cid:126) 1994 (cid:33) . 15 M . Wells , D . Hestenes , and G . Schwackhammer , ‘‘A modeling method for high school physics instruction , ’’ Am . J . Phys . 63 , 606 – 619 (cid:126) 1995 (cid:33) . 16 Ronald K . Thornton and David R . Sokoloff , Tools for Scientiﬁc Thinking—Motion and Force Laboratory Curriculum and Teachers’ Guide (cid:126) Vernier Software , Portland , OR , 1992 (cid:33) , 2nd ed . 17 David R . Sokoloff , Priscilla W . Laws , and Ronald K . Thornton , RealTime Physics : Mechanics V . 1 . 40 (cid:126) Vernier Software , Portland , OR , 1994 (cid:33) . 18 Ronald K . Thornton and David R . Sokoloff , ‘‘RealTime Physics : Active Learning Laboratory , ’’ in The Changing Role of Physics Departments in Modern Universities : Proceedings of the International Conference on Un - dergraduate Physics Education , edited by E . F . Redish and J . S . Rigden (cid:126) American Institute of Physics , Woodbury , NY , 1997 (cid:33) , pp . 1101 – 1118 . 19 The MBL probes , interface , software , and curricula discussed here are available from Vernier Software , 8565 Beaverton - Hillsdale Highway , Portland , OR 97225 - 2429 . 20 P . W . Laws , ‘‘Calculus - based physics without lectures , ’’ Phys . Today 44 (cid:126) 12 (cid:33) , 24 – 31 (cid:126) 1991 (cid:33) . 21 David R . Sokoloff and Ronald K . Thornton , ‘‘Using interactive lecture demonstrations to create an active learning environment , ’’ Phys . Teach . 35 (cid:126) 6 (cid:33) , 340 - 47 1997 (cid:126) in press (cid:33) . 22 Copies of the complete mechanics Interactive Lecture Demonstration package , including teacher instructions and student Prediction and Results sheets are available from Vernier Software , 8565 Beaverton – Hillsdale Highway , Portland , OR 97225 - 2429 . 352 352 Am . J . Phys . , Vol . 66 , No . 4 , April 1998 R . K . Thornton and D . R . Sokoloff