1 Scientific RepoRTs | 7 : 12970 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 13438 - 5 www . nature . com / scientificreports Turnover and flow of the cell membrane for cell migration Masahito Tanaka , Takeomi Kikuchi , Hiroyuki Uno , Keisuke Okita , Toshiko Kitanishi - Yu mura & Shigehiko Yumura The role of cell membrane dynamics in cell migration is unclear . To examine whether total cell surface area changes are required for cell migration , Dictyostelium cells were flattened by agar - overlay . Scanning electron microscopy demonstrated that flattened migrating cells have no membrane reservoirs such as projections and membrane folds . Similarly , optical sectioning fluorescence microscopy showed that the cell surface area does not change during migration . Interestingly , staining of the cell membrane with a fluorescent lipid analogue demonstrated that the turnover rate of cell membrane is closely related to the cell migration velocity . Next , to clarify the mechanism of cell membrane circulation , local photobleaching was separately performed on the dorsal and ventral cell membranes of rapidly moving cells . The bleached zones on both sides moved rearward relative to the cell . Thus , the cell membrane moves in a fountain - like fashion , accompanied by a high membrane turnover rate and actively contributing to cell migration . Cell migration plays important roles in many cellular processes , such as morphogenesis , immune responses , and wound healing . The cytoskeleton has been well established to contribute to cell migration . Cells migrate by extending anterior pseudopods via a pushing force generated by the assembly of actin filaments and retract - ing their rear by a contractile force of actomyosin 1 , 2 . In this context , the cell membrane at the anterior must be enlarged to extend the pseudopods . However , the cell membrane can physically stretch at most 2 – 3 % 3 . The expan - sion of the cell surface ( cell membrane ) can be explained either by the utilization of a folded membrane surface as a reservoir or by the exocytosis of internal vesicles , which remains controversial . In the first model ( Fig . 1A ) , cell surface projections and folds are lost or gained coincident with cell surface expansion or shrinkage during cell shape changes , in a manner reminiscent of the bellows of an accordion . This idea ( the membrane unfolding model ) came originally from studies of free - living amoebae 4 and has been supported in many species of cells by scanning electron microscopy and recent live cell imaging 5 – 7 . Chen proposed ‘retraction induced spreading hypothesis’ , from the observations that the retraction of the trailing edge resulting in the folding of cell surface proceeds spreading at the leading edge of fibroblasts 8 . On the other hand , in support of the latter model ( Fig . 1B and C ) , many pieces of evidence have accumulated to show that exocytosis and endocytosis from the internal membrane stores contribute to cell migration 9 , 10 . The cell membrane is always refreshed by membrane insertion via the exocytic fusion of membrane precursor vesicles and membrane removal via endocytic uptake . In slowly moving cells such as fibroblasts , the internalized membrane vesicles are returned to the leading edge , which should help with extension for forward cell migration . The membrane area taken up each minute is about the same as that required to extend the front of the cell 11 . However , a more rapid supply of new cell membrane is required for more rapidly migrating cells , such as leuko - cytes and Dictyostelium cells . The time required for exchanging the total cell membrane has been examined in Dictyostelium cells . Internalization of isotope - labeled surface proteins indicated a time of 45 min for total cell membrane exchange 12 . Internalization of the cell membrane stained with a fluorescent lipid analogue ( FM1 - 43 ) revealed a 4 – 10 min turnover time in vegetative cells , which may be reasonable to explain the contribution of cell membrane turnover to cell migration 13 . However , these authors examined cells in a vegetative stage , where the cells actively eat the external nutrient medium . In addition , they examined the measurements in a suspension condition , where the cells could not migrate . Thus , it is difficult to discuss the direct relationship between cell membrane turnover and cell migration . Department of Functional Molecular Biology , Graduate School of Medicine , Yamaguchi University , Yamaguchi , 753 - 8512 , Japan . Masahito Tanaka and Takeomi Kikuchi contributed equally to this work . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S . Y . ( email : yumura @ yamaguchi - u . ac . jp ) Received : 31 March 2017 Accepted : 25 September 2017 Published : xx xx xxxx OPEN www . nature . com / scientificreports / 2 Scientific RepoRTs | 7 : 12970 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 13438 - 5 If new cell membrane is supplied through the cytoplasm and old membrane is taken up from the cell surface as the cell migrates , how does the cell membrane behave ? There are two models for the circulation of the cell membrane during cell migration : the fountain flow model and the caterpillar flow model . In the fountain flow model ( Fig . 1B ) , both the dorsal and ventral membranes flow toward the rear of migrating cells ; membrane pre - cursor vesicles are fused to the anterior cell membrane to supply new membrane lipids , and at the rear , membrane is removed by internalization . The fountain flow model was originally called the ‘retrograde flow model’ 14 , but this is sometime confused with actin retrograde flow 15 , 16 . Thus , here we will use the term ‘fountain flow’ . In the caterpillar flow model ( Fig . 1C ) , the cell membrane moves circularly in the order of the ventral , anterior , dorsal , and rear regions . In this case , the cell membrane may turn over everywhere . In previous experiments to examine the above models , after the cell membrane of polymorphonuclear leu - kocytes was stained with a fluorescent lipid analog , a small linear region was photobleached as a marker . The bleached marker moved forward with the same velocity as the cell advanced . This result refutes the fountain flow model 17 . However , due to a technical limitation at that time , the photobleaching was simultaneously per - formed on both the dorsal and ventral cell membrane in single cells , and the individual movements could not be distinguished . Figure 1 . Three models for the behavior of the cell membrane during cell migration . In a membrane unfolding model ( A ) , the cell changes its shape during migration by alternating between folding ( upper panel in A ) and unfolding ( lower panel in A ) the cell membrane . The folded surface appears as projections and wrinkles on the cell surface and is utilized as a membrane reservoir . In the fountain flow model ( B ) , both the dorsal and the ventral membrane flow toward the rear of a migrating cell ; membrane precursor vesicles fuse with the anterior cell membrane to supply membrane ( exocytosis ) , and membrane is taken up at the rear ( endocytosis ) . In the caterpillar flow model ( C ) , the cell membrane moves circularly in the order of the ventral , anterior , dorsal , and rear regions . In this case , the cell membrane may turn over everywhere . The dotted arrows show the direction of cell migration . The solid arrows indicate the direction of trafficking and membrane flow . www . nature . com / scientificreports / 3 Scientific RepoRTs | 7 : 12970 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 13438 - 5 Figure 2 . The total cell surface area does not change during cell migration . Typical scanning electron micrographs of Dictyostelium cells without ( A and B ) and with ( C and D ) agar - overlay . In the case of agar - overlay , the cells were observed after the agar sheet was removed . Panels B and D show enlarged images of panels A and C . The cell without the agar - overlay had many wrinkles , as well as small and long projections , on its surface . In contrast , the cells pressed with agar - overlay were flattened and there was no sign of wrinkles or projections on the cell surface . Bars in panels A and C , 5 µ m ; Bars in panels B and D , 2 . 5 µ m . ( E ) Representative time - lapse 3D - images from z - sectioning stacks of a migrating pre - aggregation cell expressing GFP - ABD under agar - overlay . Each cell image is cropped to identically sized squares , and thus does not show the actual displacement of the cell ( see also Supplementary Video S1 ) . Bar , 5 µ m . ( F ) Time - lapse image stacks obtained from the cell boundary of panel E at 20 sec intervals . Arrow indicates the direction of cell migration . The surface area ( G ) , cell volume ( H ) , cell velocity ( I ) , and circularity ( J ) of the cell shown in panel E are plotted over time . Note that the cell surface area and cell volume did not change although the cell shape changed vigorously . We confirmed this result with independent experiments using 20 different migrating cells ( see Supplementary www . nature . com / scientificreports / 4 Scientific RepoRTs | 7 : 12970 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 13438 - 5 In the present study , we first examined whether the cell surface area changes during cell migration using improved experimental approaches , and we could not find any changes in the total cell surface area during cell migration . Next , we found a direct relationship between the rate of cell membrane internalization and the veloc - ity of cell migration . Furthermore , we demonstrate that the cell membrane flows rearward , as the fountain flow model assumes , and provide essential information regarding the mechanism of cell migration . Results The total area of the cell surface is constant during cell migration . Migrating Dictyostelium cells always change their shape by extending pseudopods and retracting their rear . Previous experiments have shown substantial dynamic changes of up to 20 – 30 % in cell surface area during migration in Dictyostelium cells 18 . However , we previously showed using scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ) that there are many projections and wrinkles on the cell surface 19 , which may complicate the accurate measurement of the cell surface area . Here , to lessen small projections and surface wrinkles , the cells were pressed with an agar block to expand the cell mem - brane . Without agar - overlay , the cells were 7 – 9 µ m in height , and agar - overlaid cells became flat , with a thickness of about 2 µ m . Even under this condition , the cells could migrate extending large pseudopods . Blebs were also observed only during the initial pressuring with the agar overlay 20 . The cells under agar - overlay did not extend thin extensions such as filopods and microvilli as far as we observed under a light microscope . To confirm this , the cells were observed using scanning electron microscopy . An agar block was removed to observe the cell sur - face after fixation ( see Materials and Methods ) . Whereas the cells without agar - overlay had many wrinkles and projections on their surface ( Fig . 2A and B ) , the cells under agar - overlay had flattened shapes and no signs of wrinkles and projections on the cell surface ( Fig . 2C and D ) . There could be minute wrinkles or folds in the cell membrane under the resolution of SEM . However , we could not find any such minute wrinkles or folds under transmission electron microscopy , which has higher resolutions than SEM ( Supplementary Fig . S1 ) . To examine the total volume and total surface area of migrating cells , cells expressing GFP - ABD , a marker of actin filaments , were pressed with agar - overlay , and a z - series of fluorescence images was acquired by optical sectioning fluorescence microscopy , processed using deconvolution to remove out - of - focus signals , and then reconstituted as 3D images ( Fig . 2E ) . In this figure , each cell image is cropped to identically sized squares , and thus does not show the actual displacement of the cell . Figure 2F shows time - lapse image stacks obtained from the cell boundary of Fig . 2E at 20 sec intervals , indicating that the cells can migrate under agar - overlay ( see also Supplementary Video S1 ) . Figure 2G – J show a typical time course of the cell surface area , cell volume , instantane - ous velocity and cell circularity , respectively . As the value of cell circularity approaches 1 , the cell shape becomes round ( see Materials and Methods ) . Whereas the cell changed its morphology with fluctuating velocity ( Fig . 2I and J ) , there was almost no change in the surface area and volume ( Fig . 2G and H ) . We confirmed this result with independent measurements of 20 different migrating cells . The maximal changes in relative surface area and volume were 5 . 01 ± 1 . 62 % and 5 . 17 ± 1 . 79 % , respectively ( Supplementary Table S1 ) . From these experiments , we concluded that cells are able to deform without any cell surface reservoirs such as projections and wrinkles . Uptake of cell membrane during cell migration . Aguado - Velasco and Bretscher ( 1999 ) showed that the uptake of cell membrane equivalent to one cell surface area takes 4 – 10 min in vegetative cells , which may rea - sonably explain the contribution of cell membrane turnover to cell migration . However , vegetative cells are very active in internalizing the nutrient medium by macropinocytosis . In addition , the group performed the meas - urements in a suspension culture condition , where the cells could not migrate . In the present study , we directly investigated membrane internalization in individual migrating cells in a non - vegetative stage ( pre - aggregation and aggregation - competent stages ) , when the endocytic and pinocytic activities are greatly reduced 21 . Migrating Dictyostelium cells ( pre - aggregation stage ) on a coverslip were stained with CellMask Orange , a fluorescent lipid analogue , and observed by confocal microscopy . Once this probe is inserted into the cell mem - brane , it emits an orange colored fluorescence under illumination by green light . The cell membrane was stained uniformly within 1 min after applying the probe ( upper panel of Fig . 3A ) . After removing the free probe in the buffer , fluorescent images were acquired over time . The fluorescence was internalized gradually as the cell migrated , and finally , many fluorescent vesicles were observed inside the cells , which is presumably a result of endocytosed membrane ( bottom panel of Fig . 3A ) . The integrated fluorescence intensities of the cell membrane and the cell interior were measured as described in the Methods section ( Fig . 3G ) . Figure 3B and C shows the time courses of the fluorescence intensities of the cell membrane and the cell interior , respectively . The fluorescence at the cell membrane decreased , with a half - life of 324 ± 139 s ( n = 23 ) . The fluorescence inside the cells increased in a fashion opposite to that of the cell membrane . Thus , half of the total lipids of the cell membrane were internalized and newly exchanged within approximately 5 min . In the presence of sodium azide , an uncoupler of oxidative phosphorylation , the fluorescence intensity inside the cells did not increase and the surface staining did not change ( Fig . 3D ) . Figure 3E and F show the time courses of the fluorescence intensities of the cell membrane and the cell interior , respectively , which suggest that the probe Table S1 ) . There was no correlation between the velocity and cell circularity ( the Pearson’s correlation coefficient was 0 . 026 ± 0 . 332 , n = 20 ) . The mean cell velocity did not change when GFP - ABD was expressed or when cells were labeled with Cell Mask Orange , compared with untreated control cells ( 3 . 38 ± 0 . 81 , 3 . 30 ± 0 . 68 and 3 . 57 ± 0 . 83 μ m / min , respectively ) . Data are presented as mean ± SD and analyzed by one way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test . ( n = 20 each ) . www . nature . com / scientificreports / 5 Scientific RepoRTs | 7 : 12970 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 13438 - 5 Figure 3 . Uptake of cell membrane during cell migration . Dictyostelium cells were stained with CellMask Orange , a fluorescent lipid analogue . Within 1 min after adding the probe , the cell membrane was stained uniformly , as observed by confocal microscopy ( upper panel in A ) . The fluorescence was internalized as the cell migrated , suggesting that cell membrane is taken up inside the cell ( lower panel in A ) . As shown in panel G , the integrated fluorescence intensity of the cell membrane and inside the cells were calculated ( see details in Materials and Methods ) . Graphs B and C show typical time courses of the fluorescence intensities of the cell membrane and inside the cells , respectively . The integrated fluorescence at the cell membrane decreased with a half - life of 324 ± 139 s ( n = 23 cells ) . The integrated fluorescence inside the cells increased in a manner inversely correlated with the fluorescence at the cell membrane . Therefore , half of the total lipids in the cell membrane are internalized and newly exchanged within approximately 5 min . ( D ) Cells were stained with CellMask Orange in the presence of sodium azide ( upper panel in D ) . The fluorescence of cell surface did not show any change and the fluorescence intensity inside the cells did not increase ( lower panel in D ) . Graphs E and F show typical time courses of the fluorescence intensities of the cell membrane and inside the cells , respectively . ( H ) After stained with CellMask Orange , the cells were overlaid with an agar block . Note that the probe was already internalized and found in many intracellular vesicles about 5 min after the agar - overly . Bar , 10 µ m . www . nature . com / scientificreports / 6 Scientific RepoRTs | 7 : 12970 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 13438 - 5 does not cross the cell membrane . In addition , the internalization of cell membrane is due to the endocytosis , which is energy - dependent 13 . We could not examine the time course of cell membrane internalization under agar - overlay , because the agar - overlay took more time than without agar - overlay . After this preparation , we found that the probe was already internalized into small vesicles in the cytoplasm ( Fig . 3H ) . In any case , it is clear that the cells rapidly internalize cell membrane . We frequently observed that the staining with CellMask Orange remained for a longer period of time in the cell membrane of slowly - migrating cells than in that of fast - migrating cells ( Fig . 4A ) . The uptake of the Figure 4 . Uptake rate of the cell membrane is correlated with cell velocity . ( A ) Two typical images of the time course of cell membrane internalization ( slowly - and fast - migrating cells ) . Each cell image is cropped to identically sized squares , and thus does not show the actual displacement of the cell . Note that the staining with CellMask Orange remained for a longer period in the cell membrane of slowly - moving cells than in that of fast - migrating cells . Bars , 5 µ m . ( B ) The relationship between the half - life of cell membrane internalization and the cell velocity . The cell velocity was calculated from time - lapse images using imageJ software . Note that faster - migrating cells internalize the cell membrane more rapidly than slower cells . Pre - aggregation cells ( circles ) and aggregation - competent cells ( triangles ) are indicated . www . nature . com / scientificreports / 7 Scientific RepoRTs | 7 : 12970 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 13438 - 5 lipid could be related to the velocity of cell migration . Thus , we examined the cell membrane internalization in aggregation - competent cells , which migrate much faster than pre - aggregation cells . An average half - life of the internalization was 106 ± 45 s ( n = 11 ) , which is much faster than that of pre - aggregation cells . Figure 4B shows the relationship between the half - life of membrane internalization and the cell velocity of pre - aggregation cells ( circles ) and aggregation - competent cells ( triangles ) , indicating that faster migrating cells internalized their membrane lipids more rapidly . In the fastest cell , the half - life was approximately 60 s . If a migrating cell should refresh its total cell membrane relative to the advance of its total body length ( 20 µ m ) , the half - life should be 60 s when the cell migrates with a velocity of 10 µ m / min , which is consistent with the actual value observed . Lipid movement by lateral diffusion in the cell membrane independently of the cytoskeleton . There are two models for the circulation of the cell membrane during cell migration : the fountain flow model and the caterpillar flow model ( Fig . 1 ) . To clarify which model is suitable , photobleaching experiments were per - formed separately on the dorsal and ventral cell membranes . If both bleached zones moved rearward , the mem - brane moved in a fashion consistent with the fountain flow model ( Fig . 1B ) . If the bleached zone in the dorsal cell membrane moved forward and that in the ventral cell membrane moved rearward , the membrane moved in a fashion consistent with the caterpillar flow model ( Fig . 1C ) . Before these experiments , the lateral diffusion of lipids in the cell membrane was characterized . The cell mem - branes were stained with Polaric , a fluorescent lipid analogue similar to CellMask Orange , and a small part of the cell membrane was photobleached ( 0 sec in Fig . 5A ) . The fluorescence of CellMask Orange could not be bleached by the maximum power of our HeNe laser , and thus we changed the fluorescent lipids to Polaric , the fluorescence of which could be easily bleached by our argon laser . Polaric also showed a similar kinetics of internalization of cell membrane to CellMask Orange ( data not shown ) . After bleaching , the bleached area gradually closed from the periphery , indicating the fluorescent recovery within this short period could not be caused by the supply of cell membrane via exocytosis , but by a simple lateral diffusion of lipids ( Fig . 5B ) . Figure 5C shows a time course of fluorescence recovery in the bleached area . The half - life of recovery was 2 . 00 ± 0 . 47 s ( n = 26 ) , and the diffusion coefficient was 0 . 78 ± 0 . 15 µ m 2 / s , which is comparable to previous measurements of animal culture cells 22 . Next , to examine whether the lateral movement of lipids is affected by actin filaments , microtubules , or myo - sin II , the cell membranes were photobleached in the presence of inhibitors , latrunculin B , thiabendazole , or blebbistatin . In addition , sodium azide was used as a positive control . Figure 5D shows that all these inhibitors did not affect the diffusion coefficients , which were calculated from the half - life of recovery . Therefore , the lipids freely moved in the cell membrane by simple lateral diffusion independently of the action of cytoskeleton . Circulation of the cell membrane during cell migration . To distinguish between the above two mem - brane flow models using photobleaching experiments , the cells must advance rapidly enough to detect the move - ment of bleached marker zones before their fluorescence is recovered by diffusion . If the marker is 5 µ m in width , then its lifetime will be approximately 3 sec . The cell should advance at least 0 . 5 µ m for us to easily detect the advance of the membrane within this time ( i . e . , 10 µ m / min in cell velocity ) . Dictyostelium is a suitable candidate for studying migrating cells with such a high velocity . Figure 6 shows typical results of photobleaching experiments in fast - migrating cells . The dorsal and ven - tral cell membranes were able to be distinguished by a confocal microscope with the optical depth set to 1 µ m ( Supplementary Fig . S2 ) . Figure 6A and B show phase - contrast and fluorescence images before photobleaching , immediately after photobleaching , and after fluorescence recovery . Lower panels of Fig . 6A and B show kymo - graphs of the white rectangle in each top figure , which clearly demonstrate that both membranes moved rearward relative to the cells as the cells advanced . Relative to the substratum , the bleached regions did not move . To investigate whether other membrane regions may behave in a different way from the middle , the ante - rior and posterior regions were photobleached , respectively . Unfortunately , the anterior region was very sen - sitive to the photobleaching laser , resulting in stopping cell migration . Figure 6C and D show typical images ( phase - contrast and fluorescence ) when the posterior regions were photobleached . The kymographs show that both ventral and dorsal membranes moved rearward relative to the cells as the cells advanced , which was simi - lar to the results at middle regions . Figure 6E and F show summaries of forward displacements of the bleached regions and tail edges of multiple cells ( n = 18 each ) in the ventral ( E ) and dorsal ( F ) for 4 . 8 sec , respectively . Therefore , the membrane lipids move in a manner consistent with the fountain flow model during cell migration . Discussion In the present study , the total cell surface area did not change , although the cells vigorously changed their shapes with fluctuating velocity during cell migration under agar - overlay . Previous studies have shown a fluctuation of up to 20 – 30 % of the cell surface area in migrating Dictyostelium cells 18 . These authors also used agar - overlay to flatten the cells , but the thickness of the cells was approximately 6 µ m ( the cell diameter is approximately 7 – 9 µ m ) . In our agar - overlay experiments , the thickness was only 2 µ m , which means that cells were much more flattened . Scanning and transmission electron microscopic observations showed that the cell surface had neither noticeable projections nor wrinkles under agar - overlay . This suggests that the cells can migrate without unfolded cell mem - brane as a membrane reservoir . When the cell membrane is tethered by pulling an attached bead using an optical tweezers , the tension of the membrane has two phases 23 . In the initial phase , the tension does not change even when the tether elongates , suggesting that the membrane reservoir is provided to the cell surface by stretching out membrane folds 23 . By pulling more , in the second phase , the tension abruptly increases , inducing exocytosis from the internal membrane stores . For phagocytosis and cell spreading , a biphasic membrane supply mechanism has www . nature . com / scientificreports / 8 Scientific RepoRTs | 7 : 12970 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 13438 - 5 Figure 5 . Lateral diffusion of lipids is not affected by cytoskeletons . The cell membrane was stained with Polaric , a similar fluorescent lipid analogue to CellMask Orange . ( A ) Typical fluorescence images when a small region of the cell membrane was photobleached ( 0 sec ) . ( B ) The fluorescence intensity profiles in the white rectangle in panel A at each time ( − 0 . 9 , 0 . 0 , 1 . 8 , and 8 . 0 sec ) . Note that the fluorescence recovered by a simple lateral diffusion of the lipids . ( C ) A time course of fluorescence recovery in the bleached circles . ( D ) A comparison of the diffusion coefficient in the presence of inhibitors ( latrunculin B , thiabendazole , blebbistatin , and sodium azide ) , indicating that all these inhibitors do not affect the lateral diffusion of the membrane lipids ( n = 20 each ) . Data are presented as mean ± SD and analyzed by one way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test . ns , not significant . Bar , 10 µ m . www . nature . com / scientificreports / 9 Scientific RepoRTs | 7 : 12970 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 13438 - 5 Figure 6 . Circulation of the cell membrane during cell migration . Photobleaching experiments in fast - migrating cells . Aggregation - competent cells were stained with Polaric , and the small vertical rectangle regions in the ventral ( A and C ) and dorsal cell membrane ( B and D ) were photobleached using a confocal microscope . Middle ( A and B ) and posterior ( C and D ) regions of the cells were bleached , respectively . In each of panel A – D , phase - contrast ( left ) and fluorescence ( right ) images before photobleaching , immediately after photobleaching , and after fluorescence recovery are shown . The directions of cell migration are indicated by black arrows . The lower figure in each panel shows a kymograph of the white rectangle shown in each top figure . The white dotted lines show the fluorescence recovery of bleached regions , and the solid lines show the advance of both ends ( anterior and posterior ) of the migrating cells , respectively . Graphs E and F show summaries of forward displacements of the bleached zones and tail edges of multiple cells ( n = 18 each ) in the ventral ( E ) and dorsal ( F ) for 4 . 8 sec , respectively . Note that the bleached regions did not move relative to the substratum , whereas the cell advanced . Data are presented as mean ± SD and analyzed by unpaired two - tailed Student’s t - test . * * * P ≤ 0 . 0001 . Bar , 10 µ m . www . nature . com / scientificreports / 10 Scientific RepoRTs | 7 : 12970 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 13438 - 5 been proposed 24 , 25 . Therefore , we concluded that a reservoir of unfolded membrane is dispensable for cell migra - tion , although we cannot exclude the possibility that it contributes to the cell shape change during cell migration in the absence of agar - overlay . In addition , our data indicate that filopods , which sometimes have been considered to be organelles that help to explore a substratum 26 , 27 , are dispensable for cell migration . Previous researchers studied the rate of internalization of the cell membrane in vegetative Dictyostelium cells in suspension conditions 12 , 13 , 28 , 29 . Vegetative cells vigorously internalize external nutrient by macropinocytosis , which is not directly related with membrane turnover for cell migration . Thus , here , we measured the internali - zation of the cell membrane by observing individual migrating cells under non - nutrient conditions . The fastest half - life was approximately 60 s in the present study , which is much faster than previous measurements . This rapid internalization can explain much faster cell migration . Our photobleaching experiments to evaluate the two models showed that the fountain flow model is more likely to account for the findings described using our system . When a cell is passing through a confined three - dimensional environment such as in a tissue , both lower and upper surfaces of the cell have contact with substratum or surrounding cells . Under this condition , it may be practically difficult to explain the circulation of cell membrane by the caterpillar model . On the other hand , the fountain flow model may be applicable to the circulation of cell membrane in such a confined space . In the fountain flow model , new cell membrane must be inserted at the anterior of the migrating cell by exocytosis and taken up at the rear by endocytosis . At present , there is no direct observation of such membrane dynamics in Dictyostelium cells . However , clathrin , a mediator of endocytosis , localizes at the rear of migrating Dictyostelium cells , and clathrin - knockout cells show slow migration , providing evidence that endocytosis mainly occurs in the rear of migrating cells and contributes to cell migration 30 . Clathrin - containing pits and vesicles also mainly appear at the rear of migrating leukocytes and epithelial cells 31 , 32 . Endocytosis can also occur via a clathrin - independent process , such as a caveolae - mediated process . Caveolin - 1 - deficient mouse embryonic fibro - blasts exhibit poor directionality and non - polarized morphology 33 . Caveolin - 1 localizes at the rear of migrating endothelial cells 34 . Polarized exocytosis at the leading edge for the localized delivery of membranes has been demonstrated in several species of cells . For example , when Physarum plasmodium is stained with rhodamine - phosphatidyl eth - anolamine , which specifically binds to slime , the slime is found to be exocytosed at the anterior membrane to form protrusions 35 , 36 . G - glycoprotein synthesized by transfected vesicular stomatitis virus at the Golgi apparatus is transported to the leading edge of migrating fibroblasts , and inhibition of this transport results in defects of directed cell migration 37 , 38 . The preferential addition of newly synthesized membrane protein occurs at axonal growth cones 39 . Transferrin and low - density lipoprotein receptors are also transferred to the leading edge of carcinoma cells via exocytosis of the internal membrane 40 . Integrins , integral membrane proteins related with cell - substratum adhesion , are recycled to the anterior of migrating neutrophils via a Ca 2 + - dependent mechanism 41 . Interestingly , previous photobleaching experiments showed that cAR1 , a cAMP receptor in the cell mem - brane , moves forward during cell migration in Dictyostelium cells 18 . This observation is inconsistent with the fountain flow model . cAR1 evenly localizes at the cell membrane and is not internalized for a long time 42 , 43 , which suggests that non - circulating membrane components may behave in a different manner from the circulation of membrane lipids . Whether many circulating membrane proteins behave in a fashion similar to the membrane lipids of Dictyostelium cells is unknown at present . In the present study , to clarify which model is more suitable as a membrane flow model , photobleaching experiments were separately performed on the dorsal and ventral cell membranes in rapidly moving cells . Both photobleached regions did not move relative to the substratum , indicating that the cell membrane moves in a manner consistent with the fountain flow model . Recently , we observed the movement of beads attached to the dorsal cell surface of migrating Dictyostelium cells 44 . Interestingly , the beads did not move relative to the substra - tum as the cell advanced , and the attached beads finally accumulated at the rear of the cells as the cells advanced forward . The cortical actin filaments also did not move relative to the substratum 44 , which is consistent with the present results of the lipid movement ( Fig . 6 ) . These pieces of evidence suggest that many cell membrane com - ponents , including the cortical actin cytoskeleton , do not move relative to the substratum , supporting retrograde flow . The fountain flow model assumes that the membrane insertion occurs in the anterior region of migrating cells , and simultaneously , cell membrane uptake occurs in the rear region . Balance between this insertion and uptake generates the retrograde flow of both the dorsal and the ventral cell membrane . Because the total cell area is constant under the agar - overlay condition , the temporal and spatial coordination of exocytosis and endocytosis is essential for cell migration . Cell membrane tension likely regulates such coordination . There are several studies in the literature indicating that an increase in surface tension triggers an increase in exocytosis , and inversely a decrease in surface tension increases endocytosis 45 – 48 . How migrating cells maintain a constant cell membrane surface area by coordinating exocytosis and endo - cytosis and how these membrane dynamics are coordinated with the cytoskeletal systems to drive cell migration remain to be investigated . Methods Cell Culture . Dictyostelium discoideum cells ( AX2 – 214 ) were cultured in a plastic dish at 22 °C in HL5 medium ( 1 . 3 % bacteriological peptone , 0 . 75 % yeast extract , 85 . 5 mM D - glucose , 3 . 5 mM Na 2 HPO 4 12H 2 O , 3 . 5 mM KH 2 PO 4 , pH 6 . 3 ) . The extra - chromosomal expression vector GFP - ABD ( actin - binding domain of fila - min , supplied by Dr . T . Q . P . Uyeda ) , a probe for actin filaments , was transformed into the cells by electroporation as described previously 49 . The transformed cells were selected in HL5 medium supplemented with 10 μ g / ml G418 www . nature . com / scientificreports / 11 Scientific RepoRTs | 7 : 12970 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 13438 - 5 ( Sigma ) . The cells were washed with BSS ( 10 mM NaCl , 10 mM KCl , 3 mM CaCl 2 , and 3 mM MES , pH 6 . 3 ) and incubated in the same solution for 3 – 5 h before experiments . In some experiments , to obtain more rapidly migrat - ing cells , the incubation time was extended to 8 – 10 h , when the cells became aggregation - competent . Cell membrane straining . The cells were settled in a glass - bottom plastic dish and 5 µ g / ml of CellMask Orange ( Invitrogen ) was added . A 1 mg / ml stock solution of CellMask Orange was made in dimethyl sulfoxide ( DMSO ) . As a control , a final concentration of 0 . 5 % DMSO did not affect cell migration and morphology . One minute after staining , the excess dye was removed by washing with BSS . The cell membrane was also stained with 0 . 625 µ g / ml of Polaric ( PLT - 500c6 , Goryo Chemical ) . A 0 . 25 mg / ml stock solution of Polaric was made in DMSO . In some cases , the cells were overlaid with a 1 . 5 % agar block after staining with these dyes . Microscopy . For agar - overlay , a thin agar block ( 0 . 17 µ m thick ) was gently placed on cells attached to cover - slips , as described previously 50 . Excess buffer was removed by absorbing with filter paper , until the cells became flat , as assessed by microscopy . After the agar - overlay , the cells expressing GFP - ABD were observed under an optical sectioning fluorescence microscope ( DeltaVision , GE Healthcare Life Science ) . Six z - axis images with an interval of 0 . 3 – 0 . 5 µ m were acquired over time at a time interval of 10 s . Each image was processed by deconvolution to remove out - of - focus fluorescence using a DeltaVision system . Then , the images were processed to make 3D view , and the total cell surface area , cell volume , cell velocity , and circularity were examined using Volocity software ( PerkinElmer ) . Circularity is defined by the following formula ( 1 ) : π = Circularity 4 A / P , ( 1 ) 2 where A is the cell area and P is the cell perimeter , respectively . When the circularity of a cell equals 1 , the cell shape is round , and as the shape deviates from a circle , the value decreases . To observe the cell membrane , cells stained with CellMask Orange were excited with a He / Ne laser ( 543 nm ) and the emission was filtered with a long pass filter ( > 560 nm ) . The cells stained with Polaric were excited by an Argon laser ( 488 nm ) and the emission was filtered with a band pass filter ( 515 – 530 nm ) . The cells were observed under a confocal microscope ( LSM 510 Meta , Zeiss ) equipped with a 100X objective lens ( Plan Neofluar , NA 1 . 3 ) . Time - lapse images were acquired with an interval of 0 . 1 – 1 s . Latrunculin B ( Sigma ) was dissolved in DMSO to make a 2 mM stock solution . The final concentration of latrunculin B in the experiments was 5 µ M in BSS . Thiabendazole ( Tokyo Chemical Industry ) was dissolved in DMSO to make a 100 mM stock solution . The final concentration of thiabendazole in the experiments was 100 µ M in BSS . ( − ) - blebbistatin ( Sigma ) was dissolved in DMSO to make a 20 mM stock solution . The final con - centration of blebbistatin in the experiments was 150 µ M in BSS . Sodium azide ( Sigma ) was dissolved in distilled water to make a 1 . 5 M stock solution . The final concentration of sodium azide in the experiments was 15 mM in BSS . Photobleaching . Photobleaching was performed using a confocal microscope as previously described 51 . Briefly , the full power of the argon laser ( 488 nm line ) was applied to an assigned region of a cell . The fluorescence intensity in the bleached area was monitored with respect to time after background subtraction . The time course of recovery was fitted to the equation for a single exponential rise to the maximum using ImageJ software ( http : / / rsbweb . nih . gov / ij ) , and the half - time for recovery was calculated as previously described 51 , 52 . To examine the diffusion coefficient , a circular area with 5 µ m diameter in the cell membrane was bleached after the cell membrane was stained with Polaric . After calculating the half - life , the diffusion coefficient ( D ) was calculated by following formula ( 2 ) : = . D 0 25r / t , ( 2 ) 2 1 / 2 where r is the radius of the bleached area and t 1 / 2 is the half - life for fluorescence recovery . This formula assumes that the fluorescent probes show a pure 2D diffusional mobility in the cell membrane and photobleaching is per - formed by a confocal microscope 53 . There was no immobile fraction in the present FRAP experiments . Image analysis . The fluorescence intensities of the cell membrane and the cell interior were calculated as follows . The cell shapes were outlined from phase contrast microscopic images . As depicted in Fig . 3G , the inte - grated fluorescence intensity in a 1 µ m - thick outline including the cell membrane was calculated as the fluores - cence of the cell membrane . The integrated fluorescence inside the outline was used as the fluorescence of the cell interior . The time course of fluorescence intensity of the cell membrane was fitted to the equation for a single exponential fall to minimum , and that inside the cell was fitted to the equation for a single exponential rise to maximum using ImageJ software . The mean cell velocity was calculated using ‘manual tracking’ plugin in ImageJ software . Scanning electron microscopy . For scanning electron microscopy , cells either with or without agar - overlay were processed by the same method . First , they were fixed by immersing into ethanol containing 1 % formalin at − 17 °C for 30 min . Then , the solution was exchanged with ethanol / acetone ( 1 : 1 ) for 10 min , and then exchanged with acetone for 10 min . The samples were post - fixed in acetone containing 1 % osmium tetroxide on ice for 2 h , and then washed 2 times in absolute acetone for 10 min each . To remove the agar , the absolute acetone was exchanged with ethanol / acetone ( 1 : 1 ) for 10 min , then exchanged with ethanol for 10 min . Then , the ethanol was exchanged with 50 % ethanol ( diluted with distilled water ) and the agar was melted and removed by heating www . nature . com / scientificreports / 12 Scientific RepoRTs | 7 : 12970 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 13438 - 5 the solution . Then , the solution was exchanged with an ethanol series ( 50 , 75 , 95 , 100 , and 100 % ) for 20 min each , then exchanged with t - butanol . The samples were finally freeze - dried using a freeze - drier ( Eiko , ID - 2 ) . In other samples , instead of t - butanol , ethanol was exchanged with HDMS ( hexamethyl disilazane ) and then the samples were air - dried . After coating with gold using a sputter coater ( Sanyu Electron , SC - 704 ) , the cells were observed under a scanning electron microscope ( JEOL , JSM - 6360LA ) . Transmission electron microscopy . The cells on a carbon - coated aluminum sheet of 10 µ m thickness with a stainless ring folder were agar - overlaid and quickly frozen in liquid nitrogen - solid nitrogen slush ( frozen liquid nitrogen in a vacuum ) at − 210 °C . The frozen cells were subjected to freeze - substitution with 1 % OsO 4 in acetone at − 80 °C for 2 days , dehydrated in absolute acetone at room temperature , substituted with propylene oxide , and then embedded in Spurr’s resin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . After the resin was cured by a specified method , the aluminum sheet was removed . The cells were serially sectioned at a thickness of 50 – 60 nm using an ultramicrotome ( Leica EM UC7 ) and stained with 1 % uranyl acetate followed by Reynold’s lead citrate 54 . They were observed under electron microscope ( Quanta 3D , FEI or CM - 120 , Philips ) . Statistical analysis . Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 7 ( GraphPad ) . Data are presented as mean ± SD and analyzed by unpaired two - tailed Student’s t - test or one way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test . Data availability . All relevant data are available from the authors on reasonable request . References 1 . Pollard , T . D . & Borisy , G . G . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 ( 2003 ) . 2 . Uchida , K . S . , Kitanishi - Yumura , T . & Yumura , S . Myosin II contributes to the posterior contraction and the anterior extension during the retraction phase in migrating Dictyostelium cells . J Cell Sci 116 , 51 – 60 ( 2003 ) . 3 . Mohandas , N . & Evans , E . Mechanical properties of the red cell membrane in relation to molecular structure and genetic defects . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 23 , 787 – 818 ( 1994 ) . 4 . Grebecki , A . Membrane and cytoskeleton flow in motile cells with emphasis on the contribution of free - living amoebae . Inter Rev Cytol 148 , 37 – 80 ( 1994 ) . 5 . Erickson , C . A . & Trinkaus , J . P . Microvilli and blebs as sources of reserve surface membrane during cell spreading . Exp Cell Res 99 , 375 – 384 ( 1976 ) . 6 . Figard , L . & Sokac , A . M . A membrane reservoir at the cell surface : unfolding the plasma membrane to fuel cell shape change . Bioarchitecture 4 , 39 – 46 ( 2014 ) . 7 . Kapustina , M . , Elston , T . C . & Jacobson , K . Compression and dilation of the membrane - cortex layer generates rapid changes in cell shape . J Cell Biol 200 , 95 – 108 ( 2013 ) . 8 . Chen , W . T . Surface changes during retraction - induced spreading of fibroblasts . J Cell Sci 49 , 1 – 13 ( 1981 ) . 9 . Bretscher , M . S . Exocytosis provides the membrane for protrusion , at least in migrating fibroblasts . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 , 916 ( 2008 ) . 10 . Schmoranzer , J . , Kreitzer , G . & Simon , S . M . Migrating fibroblasts perform polarized , microtubule - dependent exocytosis towards the leading edge . J Cell Sci 116 , 4513 – 4519 ( 2003 ) . 11 . Bretscher , M . S . Moving membrane up to the front of migrating cells . Cell 85 , 465 – 467 ( 1996 ) . 12 . Thilo , L . & Vogel , G . Kinetics of membrane internalization and recycling during pinocytosis in Dictyostelium discoideum . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 77 , 1015 – 1019 ( 1980 ) . 13 . Aguado - Velasco , C . & Bretscher , M . S . Circulation of the plasma membrane in Dictyostelium . Mol Biol Cell 10 , 4419 – 4427 ( 1999 ) . 14 . Bretscher , M . S . Endocytosis : relation to capping and cell locomotion . Science 224 , 681 – 686 ( 1984 ) . 15 . Cramer , L . P . Molecular mechanism of actin - dependent retrograde flow in lamellipodia of motile cells . Front Biosci 2 , d260 – 70 ( 1997 ) . 16 . Welch , M . D . , Mallavarapu , A . , Rosenblatt , J . & Mitchison , T . J . Actin dynamics in vivo . Curr Opin Cell Biol 9 , 54 – 61 ( 1997 ) . 17 . Lee , J . , Gustafsson , M . , Magnusson , K . E . & Jacobson , K . The direction of membrane lipid flow in locomoting polymorphonuclear leukocytes . Science 247 , 1229 – 1233 ( 1990 ) . 18 . Traynor , D . & Kay , R . R . Possible roles of the endocytic cycle in cell motility . J Cell Sci 120 , 2318 – 2327 ( 2007 ) . 19 . Yumura , S . & Fukui , Y . Filopodelike projections induced with dimethyl sulfoxide and their relevance to cellular polarity in Dictyostelium . J Cell Biol 96 , 857 – 865 ( 1983 ) . 20 . Sugiyama , T . , Pramanik , M . K . & Yumura , S . Microtubule - Mediated Inositol Lipid Signaling Plays Critical Roles in Regulation of Blebbing . PLoS One 10 , e0137032 ( 2015 ) . 21 . Maeda , Y . Axenic growth of Dictyostelium discoideum wild - type NC - 4 cells and its relation to endocytotic ability . J Gen Microbiol 129 , 2467 – 2473 ( 1983 ) . 22 . Fulbright , R . M . , Axelrod , D . , Dunham , W . R . & Marcelo , C . L . Fatty acid alteration and the lateral diffusion of lipids in the plasma membrane of keratinocytes . Exp Cell Res 233 , 128 – 134 ( 1997 ) . 23 . Raucher , D . & Sheetz , M . P . Characteristics of a membrane reservoir buffering membrane tension . Biophys J 77 , 1992 – 2002 ( 1999 ) . 24 . Gauthier , N . C . , Fardin , M . A . , Roca - Cusachs , P . & Sheetz , M . P . Temporary increase in plasma membrane tension coordinates the activation of exocytosis and contraction during cell spreading . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108 , 14467 – 14472 ( 2011 ) . 25 . Masters , T . A . , Pontes , B . , Viasnoff , V . , Li , Y . & Gauthier , N . C . Plasma membrane tension orchestrates membrane trafficking , cytoskeletal remodeling , and biochemical signaling during phagocytosis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110 , 11875 – 11880 ( 2013 ) . 26 . Jacquemet , G . , Hamidi , H . & Ivaska , J . Filopodia in cell adhesion , 3D migration and cancer cell invasion . Curr Opin Cell Biol 36 , 23 – 31 ( 2015 ) . 27 . Mattila , P . K . & Lappalainen , P . Filopodia : molecular architecture and cellular functions . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 , 446 – 454 ( 2008 ) . 28 . Thilo , L . Quantification of endocytosis - derived membrane traffic . Biochim Biophys Acta 822 , 243 – 266 ( 1985 ) . 29 . Bacon , R . A . , Cohen , C . J . , Lewin , D . A . & Mellman , I . Dictyostelium discoideum mutants with temperature - sensitive defects in endocytosis . J Cell Biol 127 , 387 – 399 ( 1994 ) . 30 . Damer , C . K . & O’Halloran , T . J . Spatially regulated recruitment of clathrin to the plasma membrane during capping and cell translocation . Mol Biol Cell 11 , 2151 – 2159 ( 2000 ) . 31 . Davis , B . H . , Walter , R . J . , Pearson , C . B . , Becker , E . L . & Oliver , J . M . Membrane activity and topography of F - Met - Leu - Phe - Treated polymorphonuclear leukocytes . Acute and sustained responses to chemotactic peptide . Am J Pathol 108 , 206 – 216 ( 1982 ) . 32 . Mutch , L . J . , Howden , J . D . , Jenner , E . P . , Poulter , N . S . & Rappoport , J . Z . Polarised clathrin - mediated endocytosis of EGFR during chemotactic invasion . Traffic 15 , 648 – 664 ( 2014 ) . www . nature . com / scientificreports / 13 Scientific RepoRTs | 7 : 12970 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 13438 - 5 33 . Grande - Garcia , A . et al . Caveolin - 1 regulates cell polarization and directional migration through Src kinase and Rho GTPases . J Cell Biol 177 , 683 – 694 ( 2007 ) . 34 . Isshiki , M . et al . Sites of Ca2 + wave initiation move with caveolae to the trailing edge of migrating cells . Journal of Cell Science 115 , 475 – 484 ( 2002 ) . 35 . Sesaki , H . & Ogihara , S . Protrusion of cell surface coupled with single exocytotic events of secretion of the slime in Physarum plasmodia . J Cell Sci 110 , 809 – 818 ( 1997 ) . 36 . Sesaki , H . & Ogihara , S . Secretion of slime , the extracellular matrix of the plasmodium , as visualized with a fluorescent probe and its correlation with locomotion on the substratum . Cell Struct Funct 22 , 279 – 289 ( 1997 ) . 37 . Bergmann , J . E . , Kupfer , A . & Singer , S . J . Membrane insertion at the leading edge of motile fibroblasts . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 80 , 1367 – 1371 ( 1983 ) . 38 . Prigozhina , N . L . & Waterman - Storer , C . M . Protein kinase D - mediated anterograde membrane trafficking is required for fibroblast motility . Curr Biol 14 , 88 – 98 ( 2004 ) . 39 . Craig , A . M . & Wyborski , R . J . & Banker , G . Preferential addition of newly synthesized membrane protein at axonal growth cones . Nature 375 , 592 – 594 ( 1995 ) . 40 . Bretscher , M . S . & Aguado - Velasco , C . EGF induces recycling membrane to form ruffles . Curr Biol 8 , 721 – 724 ( 1998 ) . 41 . Lawson , M . A . & Maxfield , F . R . Ca ( 2 + ) - and calcineurin - dependent recycling of an integrin to the front of migrating neutrophils . Nature 377 , 75 – 79 ( 1995 ) . 42 . Xiao , Z . , Zhang , N . , Murphy , D . B . & Devreotes , P . N . Dynamic distribution of chemoattractant receptors in living cells during chemotaxis and persistent stimulation . J Cell Biol 139 , 365 – 374 ( 1997 ) . 43 . de Keijzer , S . , Galloway , J . , Harms , G . S . , Devreotes , P . N . & Iglesias , P . A . Disrupting microtubule network immobilizes amoeboid chemotactic receptor in the plasma membrane . Biochim Biophys Acta 1808 , 1701 – 1708 ( 2011 ) . 44 . Yumura , S . et al . Cell - scale dynamic recycling and cortical flow of the actin - myosin cytoskeleton for rapid cell migration . Biol Open 2 , 200 – 209 ( 2013 ) . 45 . Apodaca , G . Modulation of membrane traffic by mechanical stimuli . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 282 , F179 – 90 ( 2002 ) . 46 . Gauthier , N . C . , Rossier , O . M . , Mathur , A . , Hone , J . C . & Sheetz , M . P . Plasma membrane area increases with spread area by exocytosis of a GPI - anchored protein compartment . Mol Biol Cell 20 , 3261 – 3272 ( 2009 ) . 47 . Gauthier , N . C . , Masters , T . A . & Sheetz , M . P . Mechanical feedback between membrane tension and dynamics . Trends Cell Biol 22 , 527 – 535 ( 2012 ) . 48 . Keren , K . Cell motility : the integrating role of the plasma membrane . Eur Biophys J 40 , 1013 – 1027 ( 2011 ) . 49 . Yumura , S . , Matsuzaki , R . & Kitanishi - Yumura , T . Introduction of macromolecules into living Dictyostelium cells by electroporation . Cell Struct Funct 20 , 185 – 190 ( 1995 ) . 50 . Yumura , S . , Mori , H . & Fukui , Y . Localization of actin and myosin for the study of ameboid movement in Dictyostelium using improved immunofluorescence . J Cell Biol 99 , 894 – 899 ( 1984 ) . 51 . Yumura , S . Myosin II dynamics and cortical flow during contractile ring formation in Dictyostelium cells . J Cell Biol 154 , 137 – 146 ( 2001 ) . 52 . Yumura , S . et al . Multiple myosin II heavy chain kinases : roles in filament assembly control and proper cytokinesis in Dictyostelium . Mol Biol Cell 16 , 4256 – 4266 ( 2005 ) . 53 . Kang , M . , Day , C . A . , Kenworthy , A . K . & DiBenedetto , E . Simplified equation to extract diffusion coefficients from confocal FRAP data . Traffic 13 , 1589 – 1600 ( 2012 ) . 54 . Yumura , S . & Kitanishi - Yumura , T . Immunoelectron microscopic studies of the ultrastructure of myosin filaments in Dictyostelium discoideum . Cell Struct Funct 15 , 343 – 354 ( 1990 ) . Acknowledgements We would like to thank Dr . T . Q . P . Uyeda for critical reading of the manuscript and helpful comments . This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public , commercial , or not - for - profit sectors . Author Contributions M . T . , T . K . , H . U . , K . O . and T . K . Y . were involved in the experimental work and data analysis . S . Y . was involved in the project planning and data analysis . M . T . , T . K . , T . K . Y . and S . Y . wrote the manuscript . Additional Information Supplementary information accompanies this paper at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 13438 - 5 . Competing Interests : The authors declare that they have no competing interests . Publisher ' s note : Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 International License , which permits use , sharing , adaptation , distribution and reproduction in any medium or format , as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author ( s ) and the source , provide a link to the Cre - ative Commons license , and indicate if changes were made . The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license , unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material . If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per - mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use , you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder . To view a copy of this license , visit http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / . © The Author ( s ) 2017