38 # ActuallyAutistic Twitter as a Site for Epistemic Resistance and Crip Futurity JOSH GUBERMAN , University of Michigan School of Information The Internet has , for several decades , played a critical role in autistic self - advocacy and community building . This semi - autoethnographic , interpretivist study turns to # ActuallyAutistic Twitter to examine autistic con - cerns about autism research , how these concerns differ from those of autism researchers , and how autistics interact with autism research and researchers . I find that # ActuallyAutistic Twitter discourses align with the neurodiversity paradigm , while dominant autism discourses in the academy align with the medical model of disability . Though both orientations towards autism research sometimes share research priorities , they rep - resent fundamentally irreconcilable approaches to these priorities and autism , more broadly . I explore how autistics on Twitter interact with non - autistic researchers and how the tenor of these interactions varies ac - cording to which research paradigm a particular researcher subscribes . I conclude with a discussion of how HCI researchers interested in autism can operationalize these findings by approaching their work through the framework of crip technoscience . CCS Concepts : • Human - centered computing → Accessibility theory , concepts and paradigms ; • So - cial and professional topics → People with disabilities ; Codes of ethics ; Additional Key Words and Phrases : Autism , Twitter , human - computer interaction , crip technoscience ACM Reference format : Josh Guberman . 2023 . # ActuallyAutistic Twitter as a Site for Epistemic Resistance and Crip Futurity . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 30 , 3 , Article 38 ( June 2023 ) , 34 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3569891 1 INTRODUCTION Throughout this article , drawing on a mixture of interpretivist methods to analyze autoethno - graphic , social media , and ( academic ) textual data , I attempt to illustrate points of departure be - tween academic approaches to autism research and the stated needs and priorities of a subset of members of the Autistic 1 Twitter community . Using crip technoscience [ 58 ] as an analytical tool , I will explore how Twitter represents a particularly interesting field site for studying interactions 1 Throughout this article , I use identity - first language ( “autistic person” ) over person - first language ( “person with autism” ) . This choice reflects my personal preference as an autistic person and respects the general preferences of autistic adults [ see 25 , 26 , 29 , 52 , 76 ] . This work was supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under grant number DGE 1256260 and the University of Michigan School of Information Diversity , Equity , and Inclusion Committee . Author’s address : J . Guberman , University of Michigan School of Information , Ann Arbor , Michigan , 48104 ; email : guberman @ umich . edu . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . 1073 - 0516 / 2023 / 06 - ART38 $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3569891 ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . Corrected Version of Record . V . 1 . 1 . Published July 01 , 2023 . 38 : 2 J . Guberman between autistics and academia . Whereas systemic structures of ableism often bar autistic and dis - abled participation in HCI and academia , more broadly [ e . g . , 44 , 65 , 66 , 168 ] , Twitter is a platform popular among many autistics and academics alike . On Twitter , members of these two groups ( in which , as in my case , membership sometimes overlaps ) enter into conversation with one another or at least attempt to do so . These interactions between autistic Twitter users and academia ( aca - demic research , institutions , and researchers ) served as my primary site of inquiry as I tried to answer four guiding questions : ( 1 ) on what research topics do autistics focus ? ; ( 2 ) how do autistic research priorities differ from those of non - autistic stakeholders ? ; ( 3 ) how do autistics interact with autism research and researchers ? ; and ( 4 ) , how might interactions between autistics and autism re - searchers on Twitter affect the foci and directions of autism research ? Drawing on insights gleaned from examining these first four questions , I attempt to address an additional question : ( 5 ) What do these data mean for HCI autism research ? Through an inductive coding process , I make several key findings . First , I find that Autistic Twitter can serve as a rich source of autistic counternarratives woefully absent from much of HCI and academic autism research . Second , I note that the autistic counternarratives I observe broadly align with a neurodiversity framework [ 74 ] for understanding autism . In contrast , dom - inant autism discourses in HCI , academia writ large , and society tend to align with the medical model of disability [ 18 , 97 ] . Third , I attend to these different perspectives through the lens of crip technoscience [ 58 ] , a framework with which designers can align themselves and their work with the needs and knowledge of disabled people . In doing so , I find that paying attention to friction between autistics and the academic establishment can yield important insights for future HCI re - search . As I explain in detail in a subsequent section covering this study’s methods , my data collec - tion process was collaborative , relying heavily on members of Autistic Twitter to send me tweets they felt were relevant to this research . While some tweets in my dataset focus directly on the intersection between autism and technology and are therefore directly related to HCI , many more tweets focus on broader trends in academic autism research . Most of my tweets come from a single question - and - response style Twitter chat [ see 27 , 94 ] . I can only speak to my research questions within the context from which the tweets originate . I will not attempt to extrapolate sweeping conclusions about the nature and needs of all autistic Twitter users based on my small dataset . Instead , I will attempt to show how merely seeking out and seriously considering even a subset of counternarratives can open doors to new ways of conducting HCI research . 2 BACKGROUND Within this section , I contextualize and motivate the present research study by sharing personal narratives and relevant literature . As Behar [ 23 ] articulates , an ethnographer’s personal history inevitably shapes all of their interactions in and insights from the field . Indeed , emerging femi - nist interpretivist methodologies like situational analysis [ 36 ] , position the researcher and their subjectivities as a primary component of analyses . Despite the meticulous construction of science and research as objective [ see , e . g . , 132 ] , knowers are fundamentally situated in and affected by their political contexts . The knowable from any given standpoint is inherently partial [ 59 ] . Be - har [ 23 ] suggests ethnographers forgo the pretense of objectivity , arguing that vulnerability and transparency in the field lead to research with greater context and richness of analyses . With per - sonal narratives , though , comes personal feelings . As Lin and Lindtner [ 81 ] explain , HCI places a high value on positive feelings , productivity , and usefulness . They write , “feelings of anger , grief , and envy , when expressed by marginalized people , tend to be shut down , shoved aside , refused , and shunned away” ( p . 14 ) . Despite the risk of being written off , Williams and Boyd argue against pretending HCI work is “apolitical , neutral , or dispassionate” [ 161 , p . 266 ] . Williams muses , ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . # ActuallyAutistic Twitter as a Site for Epistemic Resistance and Crip Futurity 38 : 3 Maybe I don’t have to shape my voice into the dispassionate “appropriate” tone for the benefit of others . Maybe I just have to reach the people who are ready to hear it . Maybe they can do the dispassionate work of subtle advocacy for covert change . I don’t have it in me . I will be passionate as long as I witness harm [ 161 , p . 266 ] . As an autistic scholar of autism studies in HCI , this article is both personal and political . Throughout the rest of this section , I will stake out my positions and those of this article . I’ll describe the personal experiences that led me to find and study Autistic Twitter , a brief history of autistic self - advocacy and social media use , the present state of autism research in HCI , and the potentialities of a reorientation towards crip technoscience . Some readers may have experience with the feelings and perspectives I share . For the unfamiliar , I hope some of you will hear me out . 2 . 1 Autism in HCI During my first year of graduate school , I was openly disabled . I wasn’t shy about having multiple learning disabilities or how disabled embodi / mindedment affected my experiences with and approaches to research . I wasn’t openly autistic , though . Most of the autism - related articles HCI articles I read were deeply upsetting . Yergeau [ 167 ] explains , “In all things discursive , autism repre - sents decided lack” ( p . 7 ) . In popular discourse , we ( autistic people ) lack empathy , agency , and self - hood [ 19 , 165 , 167 ] . In HCI , autistic people additionally appear to lack ( among other things ) the abil - ity to build and maintain autistic communities without support from non - autistic facilitators [ 67 ] , and our capacity for empathy is at least partially contingent upon intermediaries , like potted mush - rooms [ 57 ] . Many HCI studies at the intersection of autism and design aim at supporting habilita - tive interventions , like applied behavioral analysis ( ABA ) [ 140 ] . These interventions operate through curative [ see 78 ] and normative violence [ 30 , 91 , 92 ] to mandate and enforce verbalization at the expense of communication modalities many autistics prefer [ see 2 , 17 , 64 , 171 ] , a reduction in stereotypy [ see 7 ] , compliance to authority figures [ see 118 , 167 ] , and cisgender , heterosexual , and ablenormative / neurotypical norms on nonconforming bodyminds [ see 167 ] . Spiel and Gerling [ 141 ] analyze autism articles related to the field’s recent increased interest in the role of technology in play , finding that , even in play contexts , a majority of autism HCI studies prescriptively support medical and educational goals . 2 Such research , rooted in compulsory able - bodiedness [ see 93 ] prioritizes the appearance of normalcy and indistinguishability from non - autistic peers [ 84 ] over autistic children’s health and well - being [ 21 , 32 , 33 ] . Furthermore , it extends the pervasive surveillance and control associated with habilitative interventions [ 118 , 167 ] into ever more domains of an autistic child’s life . In supporting intervention programs that seek to minimize the degree to which autistic people evince autisticness , some HCI research may contribute to the disproportionately high suicide rates among autistic people , which studies suggest may be related to masking or “camouflaging” as neurotypical [ 21 , 32 , 33 , 121 ] . Roughly a decade ago , partially in response to problematic curative approaches to disability within the field , Mankoff and colleagues [ 87 ] urged HCI researchers in disability design spaces to include insights from disability studies and disabled people in their work . Disability studies is a field of critical inquiry that centers disabled embodiment and interrogates institutionalized concep - tions of disability . In alignment with the medical model of disability , HCI traditionally construes disability as an individualized medical problem [ see 18 , 66 , 87 ] . The field of disability studies of - fers alternative understandings of disability that shift focus away from individuals onto structural forces that affect impaired bodyminds . The social model constructs disability as something existing 2 There are , of course , noticeable exceptions to this trend [ e . g . , 112 – 114 ] . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . 38 : 4 J . Guberman outside of the person . A person can have impairments rooted in physical , cognitive , and / or psy - chological differences . Under the social model , the interaction between impairment and external , disabling factors leads to disability [ 18 ] . These factors can be material , such as a lack of curb cuts or elevators , or systemic , such as discriminatory welfare and hiring policies or a capitalist obses - sion with productivity . Under the social model , the hardship associated with disability exists not within an individual and arises not because of one’s impairments but is , rather , associated with externalities . 3 Mankoff and colleagues [ 87 ] recognized that their colleagues in disability design spaces operating within harmful curative , medicalizing , and agency - denying models of disability did so not out of malice but rather as a function of trying to do good while lacking certain critical information . Mankoff and colleagues [ 87 ] proposed listening to and including disabled people in disability - oriented HCI research , as well as drawing heavily on the theoretical offerings of disabil - ity studies , as essential tools in avoiding harmful but “well - meaning errors” ( p . 7 ) while trying to serve marginalized users . While HCI often still struggles to embrace disability studies [ 66 ] , disabled people [ 65 ] , and dis - abled knowledges [ 168 ] , Mankoff and colleagues’ 2010 article [ 87 ] foreshadowed future work that takes non - medicalizing approaches to disability and autism . HCI has a historical ( and contempo - rary ) propensity to liken autistic people to inanimate objects ( e . g . , typewriters , robots , and com - puters from the 1960s [ see 123 , 159 , 160 ] ) and to support technologies that undermine autistic safety and self - determination through surveillance , behavioral control , and outright physical re - straint [ 140 , 162 ] . In contrast , a growing number of HCI scholars now draw on the neurodiver - sity paradigm and movement in response to harmful approaches to autism research within the field [ e . g . , 77 , 112 , 114 , 139 , 162 , 168 ] . Singer [ 137 ] , an autistic sociologist , coined the term neu - rodiversity as an umbrella category for all forms of difference affecting cognition and perception . One is neurodivergent [ 72 ] if they have one or more disabilities that affect how they experience the world , including autism , other developmental disabilities , intellectual disabilities , learning disabil - ities , and psychiatric disabilities . In common parlance , we refer to those who are not neurodiver - gent as neurotypical . Within the neurodiversity paradigm , people , irrespective of ( non ) disability , are considered worthy and valuable by virtue of existing [ 74 ] . The activism - oriented neurodiver - sity movement arose from the neurodiversity paradigm as a way to challenge harmful , dominant autism discourses [ 116 ] . Without trying to change or correct autistic people or their behavior , the neurodiversity movement addresses difficulties inherent to autistic life , including the disallowance of self - determination , frequent social exclusion , worsened material conditions , and sub - par levels of physical and emotional well - being [ 115 ] . The neurodiversity paradigm is aligned , although not interchangeable with , the social model of disability . As do some detractors of the social model [ e . g . , 73 , 133 ] , neurodiversity recognizes that , even in the absence of ableist cultures and infrastructure , in many cases and for many people , autism would remain disabling . Rather than separating or denying a link between autism and disability , neurodiversity recognizes autism as a disability but does so while resisting stigmatizing or pathologizing disablement [ 127 ] . 2 . 2 Autistic in HCI and Online I first discovered autistic social media through Twitter during my first year of graduate studies . As I described above , the bulk of autism - related HCI articles I encountered constructed people like me as fundamentally lacking qualities deemed essential to humanity [ e . g . , theory of mind ; 3 Critics suggest the social model goes too far in suggesting that , absent disabling externalities , autistics would not be negatively affected by the impairments associated with autism [ 34 , 137 ] . Indeed , Oliver [ 108 ] , a key historical figure in the articulation , promotion , and widespread adoption of the social model argues that the model has never fully reflected the reality of disability but has served as an important political tool in rights - based disability activism . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . # ActuallyAutistic Twitter as a Site for Epistemic Resistance and Crip Futurity 38 : 5 see 19 , 165 ] . Some articles positioned us as less - than - human , while others rhetorically distanced us from the realm of the living altogether [ see 123 ] . How could these people ever see me as a colleague if they knew I was autistic ? It didn’t ( and often still doesn’t ) feel particularly safe to disclose being autistic in a field that treats people like me as non - agentic , epistemically disadvantaged problems needing solving . For months , I felt alone in the field and wondered whether it made sense for me to remain in a place that didn’t appear to value my existence . Sometimes I yearned to talk through this experience with other academics but was afraid of how my peers and mentors would react to my disclosing being autistic . It wouldn’t have been the first time if , after such a disclosure , someone’s attitude towards me swiftly shifted from collegial to paternalistic . By chance , I eventually stumbled across an unexpected niche of Twitter . On # ActuallyAutistic Twitter , I found community , among other autistics , both within and outside the academy . The # ActuallyAutistic Twitter community became a much - needed lifeline as I struggled to find my footing in academia . Using # ActuallyAutistic and several other community hashtags to organize their content and make it more findable , autistic people conversed about their lives and experiences . I learned that my experiences within the academy were far from unusual—indeed , once surrounded by other autistic people who have experienced academic ableism [ 44 ] , my situation seemed rather banal . I found comfort in that banality . Whereas openly discussing these experiences with non - autistic academics was a risky - feeling proposition , on # ActuallyAutistic Twitter , it sometimes felt similar to how I imagine allistics ( i . e . , non - autistic people [ 86 ] ) feel when they talk about the weather . While this recurrent discourse can eventually seem commonplace , the underlying issues have much greater import than the neurotypical 4 fascination with ambient temperature . The sheer number of autistics on Twitter reporting similar experiences to mine suggested that anti - autistic ableism was a much more widespread issue within the academy . I saw and engaged in numerous conversations delineating the issues autistics face in research and higher education , suggestions for how these issues might be redressed , and efforts to build alliances with those po - sitioned to enact the desired changes . I found myself quite interested in the particulars of these ef - forts . What follows is an investigation of the ways autistic Twitter users engage in discourse about autism research and with autism researchers . My personal experiences as an autistic autism re - searcher and as a frequent participant in discussions on # ActuallyAutistic Twitter frame this study . It bears mentioning that , although I only recently found my way to Autistic Twitter , there’s a rich history of online autistic communities . Indeed , for decades , the Internet has been an integral component of many autistic communities and the self - advocacy movement . Sinclair [ 136 ] writes about how geographically distant autistic community members shared online spaces with parents of autistic people as the movement was first coalescing . As is still often the case today , parents led the prominent autism organizations , organized the autism conferences , and set the agendas for policy - and research - oriented advocacy [ 136 ] . Sinclair [ 136 ] recalls how , in the days and weeks following a large autism conference in the 1990s , they and other autistics flocked to a parent - dominated online autism forum . At the time , neurotypical users comprised the majority population of such forums . Some of the neurotypicals rebuked the autistic forum users , saying the autistic posts were of no interest to them , and asking them to stop “wasting bandwidth” [ 136 , p . 47 ] . Many parents didn’t feel that autistics should be involved in ongoing discussions about them or that topics of interest to autistics might be relevant to organizations purporting to exist to support them . This dynamic led to a year - long autistic vs . neurotypical flame war [ see 99 ] , dubbed by 4 Neurotypicality refers to the absence of developmental disabilities , psychiatric disabilities , or any other conditions that render the functioning of one’s brain and perception as non - normative , whereas neurodivergence indicates the presence of one or more such conditions [ 42 , 72 ] . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . 38 : 6 J . Guberman Sinclair and co - conspirators as the Snore Wars [ 136 ] . The Snore Wars were so named because , as Sinclair writes , “some of the autistic messages the parents first began complaining about were playful perseverative discussions about someone’s snoring at the conference” [ 136 , p . 48 ] . The Snore Wars are significant , in part , because they led to the creation of a dedicated online forum made by and for autistic people . Whereas the nascent US autistic community had previously consisted of a few people who communicated via e - mail and newsletters , saw each other occasion - ally at conferences , and sometimes congregated on forums geared towards the needs and interests of neurotypicals , this forum represented the creation of dedicated , public autistic space 5 ( or , as Sinclair referred to the forum , an “autistic cyberspace” [ 136 , p . 48 ] ) . Parents and other neurotypi - cals were allowed to join the forum but were subject to community norms [ 136 ] . To my knowledge , the Snore Wars was the first example in a long history of autistics leveraging digital spaces to re - claim narratives about themselves . Current - day examples of this kind of online activity play out on many forums , personal blogs , and popular social media sites . This current study was motivated by a desire to attempt to bring autistic narratives missing from autism research into HCI and think through how they might redefine how we approach autism in our work . As mentioned above , Twitter seemed the ideal site from which to gather relevant data , as the platform is popular among autistic and academic communities , allowing for cross - community interaction . A growing body of literature focuses on autistic social media use . As mentioned previously , the Internet was integral to forming early autistic communities and the self - advocacy movement [ 136 ] . A more recent study finds that autistic blogs play a role in building autistic identity and spaces for autistic discourse [ 130 ] . Further work suggests that social media use has positive mental health benefits for autistic users , including an increased sense of happiness [ 158 ] and decreased loneliness [ 90 ] . While autistic Internet communities were first formed on forums and blogs , Twitter has become a hub for autistic community conversations , connections , and organizing . Gillespie – Lynch and colleagues note that autistic adults appear to prefer blogs and interest - based communities to social networking platforms [ 53 ] . It seems possible that the popularity of platforms like Twitter and Tumblr among autistics , relative to that of social networking platforms like Facebook , relates to these sites functioning as both social networks and ( micro ) blogs . However , evidence for this claim is currently lacking . Twitter may lend itself to autistic communication because it’s text - based , asynchronous , and highly structured [ see 28 , 53 ] . In early autistic use of ( micro ) blogging sites like Twitter and Tumblr , autistics often posted un - der the # Autism hashtag . Parent , sibling , and professional perspectives often in conflict with those of autistic people came to dominate # Autism . The alternative hashtag , # ActuallyAutistic , was first used on Tumblr before spreading to Twitter and Instagram [ 40 , 102 , 170 ] . The # ActuallyAutistic hashtag is intended for use only by autistic people , including those with formal diagnoses , those ex - ploring diagnosis , and those who self - diagnose [ 85 ] . However , this typically “unspoken netiquette” is often violated [ 49 ] . Other community hashtags include # AskingAutistics ( for autistic and allistic people with questions for autistic people ) , # AutisticsInAcademia ( used by and for autistic students , educators , and researchers ) , and numerous hashtags regarding aspects of autistic culture and in - tersectionality . 5 Autistic space refers to physical or virtual spaces created by and for autistic people and strives to account for differences between neurotypicals and autistics and the vast heterogeneity among autistics . While these spaces may not be the conflict - free , sensory utopia one might wish for , these spaces seek to foster an environment wherein the myriad needs of autistic peoplearevalued , normalized , andaccommodatedaswellaspossible , despitethepossibilityofconflictingaccessneeds [ 101 , 135 , 136 , 163 ] . Writes Seidmann , “ . . . what defines an autistic space is not the absence of [ neurotypical ] people , but rather , it is the fact that the place is run by and for autistic people who are identifying and deciding how to meet the needs of its members” [ 130 , p . 7 ] . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . # ActuallyAutistic Twitter as a Site for Epistemic Resistance and Crip Futurity 38 : 7 Recently , Osorio conducted an interpretivist study of the rhetorics of # ActuallyAutistic Twitter [ 109 ] . Osorio notes that the topoi of # ActuallyAutistic Twitter respond to and challenge dominant discourses around autism , which frame autism as “bad , ” undesirable , and something to be fixed . The three overarching topoi Osorio identifies and details in her article are prioritizing expe - riential expertise , embracing neurodivergence , and documenting anti - autistic ableism . My current study builds on Osorio’s work to articulate how activist - oriented discourses on # ActuallyAutistic Twitter might be pertinent to academic autism research . 2 . 3 Orienting Tactics In this article , I explore disjunctures between the stated priorities , needs , and experiences of a sam - ple of autistic people on Twitter and the approaches to autism often taken in academic research . Following Rosner [ 122 ] , I demonstrate how , through adopting an alternative orienting tactic , HCI might better acknowledge and account for the bodyminds , practices , and experiences that domi - nant approaches [ see 69 , 81 , 122 ] to HCI often marginalize [ see 123 , 140 , 162 , 168 ] . Rosner [ 122 ] identifies four dominant logics of HCI : objectivity , individualism , solutionism , and universalism . She argues that , in dictating what counts as valid research ( i . e . , aligned with the imperatives of liberal capitalism ) , these logics preclude us from asking or answering certain questions , such as , “How do design interventions feed tactics of exploitation ? How might they unwittingly control the social ? What kinds of political work do they reinforce ? ” [ 122 , p . 39 ] . Lin and Lindtner [ 81 ] explain that the field’s progress - oriented values carry a positive affective valence , and this type of work is frequently framed as “doing good . ” And , when we do good , positive work that prohibits us from ask - ing the critical questions Rosner [ 122 ] identifies , we feel good [ 81 ] . By preventing us from asking critical questions and steering us towards research that feels good , Lin and Lindtner [ 81 ] suggest these ideals obfuscate the violence said ideals confer upon marginalized bodyminds , whose needs may exist outside of or clash with these imperatives . However , as Rosner [ 122 ] demonstrates , we can resurface silenced voices , practices , and knowledges and imagine alternative design futures by intentionally adopting alternative - orienting tactics . To this end , I adopt Hamraie and Fritch’s [ 58 ] framework of crip technoscience and its four commitments as my orienting tactic . Hamraie and Fritsch [ 58 ] develop crip technoscience as means for designers to align themselves and their work with the activist - oriented needs and knowledges of disabled people . They place crip technoscience in opposition to disability technoscience , the latter of which refers to the forms of individualizing , habilitative , and otherwise ( techno ) ableist [ see 131 , 132 ] approaches to disability technology . Crip technoscience is grounded in four central commitments : ( 1 ) Centering the work of disabled people as knowers and makers ; ( 2 ) Access as friction ; ( 3 ) Interdependence as politi - cal technology ; and ( 4 ) Disability justice . Centering the work of disabled people as knowers and makers shifts power and expertise from abled disability designers and “experts” to disabled people , their existing technological practices , and their embodied knowledges ( sometimes referred to as cripistemologies [ 70 ] ) . Through contextualizing my findings in this study within the commitments of crip technoscience , which I describe in greater detail later in this article , I indicate potential paths toward alternative and more liberatory modes of autism research within HCI . 3 METHODS As I will explain throughout this section and the next , the methods and methodology used in this study evolved throughout the project to match the kinds of data collected and the preferences of the people from whom I collected data . I draw on sampling and inductive coding practices common to grounded theory ( GT ) [ 35 ] , the political commitments , attention to context , and concern with power and dominance inherent to critical discourse analysis ( CDA ) [ 157 ] , and the self - referential narrative of autie - / autist - ethnography [ 55 , 119 , 120 , 166 ] . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . 38 : 8 J . Guberman In articulating the principles of CDA , van Dijk notes that “critical discourse analysts ( should ) take an explicit socio - political stance : they spell out their point of view , perspective , principles , and aim , both within their discipline and within society at large” [ 157 , p . 252 ] . For van Dijk , CDA is fundamentally concerned with how discourses relate to power , particularly focusing on how those in dominant positions leverage discourse to maintain power over marginalized groups . A key part of the critical discourse analyst’s role is to take on the perspectives of and be in solidarity with those suffering due to domination [ 157 ] . In that I explicitly include personal narratives in this article , this work is semi - autoethnographic . Perhaps more precisely , this work is semi - autistethnographic , to borrow a term from Grace [ 55 ] . As Rose [ 119 , 120 ] writes , in addition to following similar self - reflexive narrative structures to standard autoethnographic writing , autistethnographies serve several unique purposes . These ac - counts enact resistance by narrating autistic selfhood ( which some people might presume to be oxymoronic ) , challenging the notion that one must strive for normativity , revealing the work and harm endemic to comporting oneself in ways compatible with the norms of neurotypical society and building pathos to resist pathologization [ 120 ] . I cannot separate myself and my experiences with # ActuallyAutistic Twitter and autism research from my analyses . Indeed , these experiences motivated this study , helped steer my data collection , and provided crucial context for my analyses . Aligning myself with my situated perspective as an autistic autism researcher in HCI and a member of Autistic Twitter , through this study , I draw on CDA and autistethnography to advocate for myself , knowledges of other autistics , and , as Ros - ner [ 122 ] might say , an HCI that might be otherwise . 3 . 1 Research Site Compared to Tumblr and other platforms on which autistic discourse on autism research occurs , Twitter has the advantage ( for this study ) of having a large and active academic user base . There - fore , Twitter may be conducive to conversations between autistics and autism researchers . I focus specifically on # ActuallyAutistic Twitter because it is a platform , and a community within a plat - form , with which I am very familiar . As a participating observer [ see 24 ] of Autistic Twitter , I hold insights and contextual knowledge about this site that allow targeted data collection , nuanced analysis , and a deeper understanding of the discourses and the people generating the discourses . Within academia and autism discourses writ large , people are likely to interpret my status as an autistic person as a mark against my credibility as a knower [ 166 , 167 ] . On # ActuallyAutistic Twit - ter , however , expertise about autism is not located within the so - called autism experts , nor in autism parents , charities , or professionals . As Osorio observes in her investigation of the topoi of # ActuallyAutistic Twitter , the experiential expertise borne of autistic embody / enmindenment is a critical marker of credibility [ 109 ] . Similar to how one might gain access to a physical field site , before planning this research project , I spent over a year and a half developing relationships with a breadth of community members , leaders , and organizations both on and offline . 6 I hoped my 6 My community - building efforts primarily revolved around my active participation on Autistic Twitter . I engaged in Twit - ter chats and hashtag campaigns , replied to and retweeted others’ tweets , and posted personal content on a near - daily basis . I built up a network of mutual followers , many of whom I went on to build one - on - one relationships through DM conversations about research , shared experiences , or common interests . Through Twitter , I learned about , applied for , and was accepted into an autistic - run summer fellowship for autistic university students interested in strengthening their local and national advocacy skills . Through this seven - day , in - person training , I met many other aspiring autistic academics , became acquainted with well - known and respected leaders in the autistic self - advocacy movement , and received guidance on how to engage with the public and legislators about advocacy goals . Additionally , I attended an international autistic conference and retreat , through which I developed personal relationships with additional autistics and self - advocates from diverse backgrounds . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . # ActuallyAutistic Twitter as a Site for Epistemic Resistance and Crip Futurity 38 : 9 insider status as an autistic community member and the credibility afforded to me by my relation - ships within the community would allow me to obtain more in - depth and forthcoming narratives from participants , navigate the subtleties of community politics , and mitigate some of the poten - tials for re - marginalizing the people with and from whom I collect data . 3 . 2 Data Collection and Inductive Analysis Concerning Twitter data , this study’s unit of analysis consists of entire Twitter conversations or sections thereof instead of individual Tweets . Conversations are sometimes limited to a single thread and replies to that thread . In other cases , conversations comprise multiple threads , multi - threaded conversations , and / or a collection of individual tweets about a singular research publica - tion or topic . As a frequent participant in these Twitter conversations about autism research , I was wary of inadvertently collecting a dataset solely reflective of my interests rather than those of a wider swath of autistic Twitter users . After receiving an institutional review board ( IRB ) over - sight exemption , I tweeted a thread explaining my research . In the thread , I asked autistics to send me tweets or threads they felt might warrant inclusion in my study . My tweets about this study in - cluded several popular community hashtags to boost the study’s reach . I didn’t compensate people for assisting with data collection . However , I later gave everyone involved in this process a chance to provide input during my analyses and to receive a $ 20 gift card as compensation . As data came in from the community , I employed theoretical sampling ( in this case , searching based on relevant hashtags , keywords , or users ) , a method associated with GT [ 35 ] , to seek additional Twitter data related to emerging and interesting trends in the data I already had . I manually transferred all collected data into a qualitative data analysis software package for storage and analysis . Initially , I employed inductive coding practices associated with GT [ 35 ] to label and make sense of my data . I ceased data collection when , having open - coded the data I already had , I stopped noticing new topics within the data . Before continuing with axial coding , I reached out to every individual from whom I collected tweets to inform them of the inclusion of their tweets within my dataset and give them agency over whether and how I used their data . Recent research shows that , while some data are considered “public” and therefore exempt from IRB oversight and informed consent of the creators of that data , many people creating these data are unaware of and uncomfort - able with the ways researchers may use said data [ 50 , 110 ] . Because I anticipated I might receive tweets authored by people other than those who submitted said data , following the methods of Haimson [ 56 ] , I took an opt - out approach to data collection and usage . I attempted to contact the owners of each Twitter account in my dataset , except those of accounts belonging to public fig - ures or organizations . Whenever possible , I reached out via Twitter Direct Message . If I could not send a Direct Message because the account owner and I didn’t follow each other , and the account owner had disabled direct messages for non - mutual followers , I attempted to reach out via pub - licly available e - mail addresses . In one case , I reached out to someone through their “public figure” Facebook page . If I could not find a way to contact an account owner , I removed their data from my dataset . I gave each account owner I was able to contact an opportunity to opt out of my research entirely , resulting in removing their data from the study . I told them that if I didn’t hear from them within five business days , I might use their data in my study but wouldn’t quote or reference it directly . Those amenable to my using their data were given control over whether and how I di - rectly referenced their data . Most people who consented to my using their data were comfortable with me directly referencing their tweets and asked to be cited by name and / or Twitter handle . A few people asked that I reference their tweets anonymously , using heavy obfuscation [ see 89 ] , or without direct references ( i . e . , to only use their tweets behind the scenes to support my overall analyses ) . I contacted all account owners with data directly referenced or referenced through ob - fuscation within this article and provided them with excerpts of the article that included pertinent ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . 38 : 10 J . Guberman references . I asked them to confirm that the reference reflects their comfort levels regarding my use of their data and correctly characterizes their words . I contacted a total of 43 Twitter users asking permission to use their data . One person entirely opted out of my using their data in this study . Thirty Twitter users responded , permitting me to use their tweets per one or several of the options I offered . Two users responded requesting additional information but did not respond when I followed up with them . Ten users did not respond to my request . Most of the people who re - sponded , including the person who opted out , expressed appreciation for the care taken to protect their control over how their content is used and their privacy maintained . My analyses and findings center primarily around a single Twitter chat from which I collected 266 tweets by 64 unique Twitter users . Several participants within this Twitter chat are ostensibly non - autistic allies and / or autism researchers . Whereas many people who submitted data for this study pointed me to specific tweets or threads , which I manually transferred into my data analysis software , a few community members suggested I read one or several Twitter chats . Twitter chats are scheduled discussions on Twitter wherein a “moderator” tweets one or more questions relating to a particular topic [ 27 , 94 ] . Typically , these questions begin with “Q” ( for question ) , followed by a numeral indicating the question number ( i . e . , the first tweeted question in a given chat might begin , “Q1” ) . The questions contain a predetermined hashtag so participants and readers can search for tweets belonging to the chat . Anyone on Twitter can respond to the questions . Responses typically mirror the structure of the questions . They begin with “A” ( for answer ) , followed by a numeral in - dicating the question being answered , and contain the predetermined hashtag for the chat . The Q / A and shared hashtag structures of these conversations allow the chats to be aggregated , some - times having been formatted so that tweets are ordered based on the questions they respond to on third - party websites or blogs . The chat I primarily focus on in this article , which I will describe in greater detail in the following section , was moderated by Thinking Person’s Guide to Autism ( TGPA ) , a well - established blog that posts about and invites guest writers to post about autism from a neurodiversity perspective , and as it relates to the needs and interests of autistic people . Because the tweets in this chat were organized by a hashtag rather than ( as in the case of other multi - tweet conversations I collected ) as threaded replies , different methods were required for col - lecting these tweets . Whereas the other tweets in my dataset were collected manually , 7 I utilized the recently expanded academic access to the Twitter API [ see 156 ] to collect all tweets the week of the chat that ( A ) contained the predetermined hashtag for the chat and ( B ) had either a “Q” or an “A” followed by a numeral . I sorted the raw JSON data such that answers were nested under the questions to which they corresponded and exported the organized data to a series of text files ( a separate file for each question and all the tweets in response to it ) . Once properly formatted to match my manually - collected data , I imported these Twitter chat data into my qualitative data analysis package for inductive coding . I sometimes supplement these Twitter chat data with other community - submitted tweets to ( a ) provide concrete examples of things discussed within the chat and / or ( b ) more explicitly tie research issues discussed in the chat to HCI . My coding followed the qualitative analysis practices delineated by Miles and colleagues [ 96 ] . During my first pass of coding , I relied heavily on a mixture of in - vivo codes [ 96 ] and short codes paraphrasing the topic or topics of a given tweet . I open - coded data in this fashion throughout the collection process . My Ph . D . advisors , Oliver Haimson and Silvia Lindtner , independently coded a subset of the data , and we discussed our respective codes together . After concluding data collection , having appeared to have reached saturation as indicated by my open coding no longer identifying new topics , and after contacting the owners of the accounts for which I had data , I continued 7 That is , by locating the tweet a community member directed me to via its URL in a web browser and manually copying the text of the tweet into my qualitative data analysis software . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . # ActuallyAutistic Twitter as a Site for Epistemic Resistance and Crip Futurity 38 : 11 with axial coding . During this second pass of coding , I went through my initial codes looking for overarching themes . I then sorted my data into hierarchical , thematic categories . Owing primarily to the kinds of data community members sent me , the themes into which I coded the data took the form of priorities for autism research . After sorting the data , I went back through them , paying attention to their discursive construction and , in particular , the politics and ideologies embedded within individual tweets and larger clusters of data . This inductive coding process allowed me to discover how the data speak to this study’s guiding questions . Through subsequently interrogating these insights through the framework of crip technoscience , I try to reveal implications for HCI research . 4 DISCUSSING RESEARCH ON AUTISTIC TWITTER : OBSERVATIONS AND IMPLICATIONS In this section , I compare traditional academic autism discourses with a sample of autistic dis - courses about autism research on autistic Twitter . The Twitter chat central to my analyses was hosted during the 2019 International Society of Autism Research’s ( INSAR ) annual confer - ence . INSAR is a widely influential organization within academic , scientific , and medical autism re - search , holding one of the largest international autism conferences and publishing a leading autism journal . The research presented at INSAR represents dominant paradigms for and approaches to autism research . As Des Roches Rosa , the managing editor of TPGA , notes , INSAR has historically been antagonistic to non - academic ( i . e . , autistic ) participation and non - medicalizing characteri - zations of autism [ 41 ] . In the two years leading up to INSAR 2018 , Des Roches Rosa writes that meaningful strides were made toward addressing the needs and concerns of autistic people . Yet , there remained essential gaps . The conference remained inaccessible to some autistic attendees . There also remained a lack of autistic leadership within INSAR and a persistent lack of autistic representation within research projects [ 41 ] . The TPGA INSAR Twitter chat consisted of eight questions relating to thoughts around research priorities , concerns about current directions of autism research , and barriers faced by autistic peo - ple trying to access research . 8 Some of the questions were explicitly directed toward autistic re - spondents , one towards autism researchers ( some of whom are autistic ) , and several towards a more general audience . From the hashtags respondents used and my prior knowledge of many of the people participating in the chat , for most participants , I was able to ascertain whether they were ( or at least whether they openly identified as ) autistic . This chat was analytically useful for several key reasons . Firstly , although the questions around which the chat was organized prescribed certain kinds of responses , it provided a focused dis - cussion around one of the main topics of interest in this study—namely , autistic perspectives on autism research . It also provided examples of autistic challenges to traditional approaches to autism research and interactions between autistic people and non - autistic autism researchers . The partic - ipants in the Twitter chat and other Autistic Twitter users from whom I collected data were nearly unanimous in approaching autism from within the neurodiversity framework . Using these data , I could make direct comparisons against the priorities and concerns around research held by the 29 members of the editorial board of Autism Research , the journal of INSAR . Before INSAR 2019 , the Autism Research editorial board members published an article containing their respective commen - taries on current gaps in autism research [ 5 ] . These commentaries serve as a sample of the types of autism researchers who present at INSAR . I take them as a reflection of dominant approaches to autism research within the academic autism research establishment . With three exceptions , these commentaries subscribe to medical and deficit - based approaches to autism and autism research . 8 For the full text of each of the 8 questions , see [ 148 – 155 ] . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . 38 : 12 J . Guberman 4 . 1 Convergent Research Priorities , Divergent Systems of Meaning I began my analyses by identifying and categorizing the stated research priorities of autistic people within my Twitter sample and comparing these to the priorities listed in the INSAR publication [ 5 ] . As an autistic researcher who encounters both approaches to autism research on a near - daily ba - sis , I would have thought that , at every level , medical - model - oriented and neurodiversity - oriented research would be radically different . When I read a well - researched article written from a neu - rodiversity perspective , I feel support from and gratitude for the research and researchers . I feel seen by the research—my personhood recognized , my needs valid , and my existence intrinsically worthy . When I encounter medical - model autism research , though , I return to that place of despair I felt early in my doctoral studies—a place of fear , non - belonging and loneliness , and quiet anger towards ableist systems within the academy that would rather I cease to exist than try to accommo - date my presence . In categorizing the stated research priorities across the chat and the published commentaries , though , I was surprised to see that , at a high level , many of the stated priorities and concerns sounded quite similar . For example , a priority for both participants of the Twitter chat and some researchers who published commentaries were the disparate rates of autism diagnosis across various demographic lines . Likewise , both conversations were frequently concerned with autism interventions , co - occurring conditions , and practical concerns about research . Yet , upon closer in - spection , the meaning of these stated priorities , and the approaches suggested for addressing them , varied widely . Here , I’ll highlight several examples of shared priorities that are interpreted and pursued in different ways that are particularly relatable to the kinds of work HCI researchers focus on or can focus on—research around interventions / treatments and meta - concerns about how autism research is conducted and disseminated . There were , of course , myriad examples of priorities held by one group but not the other . The examples below , though , highlight the differences in these two types of discourses—differences that also extend to the other shared priorities ( e . g . , addressing disparate rates in autism diagnoses across various demographic lines , the mental health needs of autistics , and various co - occurring conditions ) not discussed in this article . In a later section , I will position these incongruencies as points of friction—opportunities for alternative modes of research built upon the knowledges and experiences of disabled people and situated within the framework of crip technoscience [ see 58 ] . 4 . 1 . 1 Intervening in Interventions . Increasing research into autism interventions was a common focus for both social and medical model adherents . Medical approaches to autism see interventions for mitigating autistic traits as a necessity that merits research and resources . In contrast , the autistic and neurodiversity - aligned perspectives within my data question the underlying premises of these interventions and whether they should happen at all . For medical - model researchers , the earlier an autistic can be diagnosed , the sooner they can enter treatment and the better their long - term outcomes . Medical - model scientists and clinicians writing in the INSAR editorial commentary were interested in developing faster and less expensive diagnostic tools [ 5 ] . The specific concerns relating to treatment and intervention expressed within the published commentaries relate to ( 1 ) acquiring monetary support for interventions found to be efficacious but which have been shelved because of a lack of research funding ; ( 2 ) the development of new , targeted treatments for individuals who don’t respond to current interventions ; ( 3 ) more efficient ways to predict a given individual’s response to a given intervention and to monitor their treatment outcomes ; ( 4 ) high quality , rigorous clinical trials of new and existing interventions so families and providers can make informed decisions about treatment options ; and ( 5 ) an investi - gation of how early behavioral intervention affects brain chemistry and topology [ 5 ] . Implicit in ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . # ActuallyAutistic Twitter as a Site for Epistemic Resistance and Crip Futurity 38 : 13 each of these concerns is that it is desirable to achieve an outcome wherein the autistic subject is rendered less autistic . The efficacy , validity , and numeracy of options available to achieve this particular outcome are the foci of medical - model approaches to treatment and interventions . A significant proportion of autism technology research in HCI aligns with this medicalized and in - terventionist perspective [ 140 , 141 ] . Therefore , the following critiques of this perspective speak directly to the ideological and methodological choices of autism technology research in HCI . While autistic and neurodiversity - aligned Twitter users in my sample are also interested in treatments and preventions , their interest primarily revolves around their concerns with the prac - tical implications and methodological and ethical groundings of medical - model approaches . When autistics in my dataset 9 tweet about the outcomes of behaviorist therapies , they do so in terms of , for example , the “ [ l ] ong term consequences of early intervention” [ emphasis added ; 47 ] or the “ [ a ] ctual outcomes of ABA” [ 71 ] . The framing of behaviorist interventions in terms of their conse - quences and actual outcomes dismisses the normative values of neurotypical behavior and commu - nication as unquestionable goods , which are present not only in medical autism research but also within HCI autism studies [ see 87 , 140 ] . As Twitter user @ endeverstar tweets , “if we’re measuring the wrong things , we get lauded “evidenced - based practices” that are actually intensely harm - ful” [ 145 ] . Rather than gauging these interventions in terms of their success in making autistics appear more neurotypical , participants in the INSAR chat appear more interested in unanticipated outcomes , including , as Tania Melnyczuk tweets , “ # CRPD violations and trauma in ABA” [ 144 ] . 10 Trauma , both as an effect of “treatment” and as a consequence of simply existing in a neurotypical world that expects neurotypicality , was a common theme in the INSAR chat . Several participants in the INSAR chat expressed concerns specific to technologically mediated autism interventions . Twitter user @ theoriesofminds tweets , “I’m very concerned about research being translated uncritically into tech for fine - grained behavioral control and surveillance . We ur - gently need research on harms done , including when implemented as intended” [ 146 ] . Such tech - nologies have featured prevalently in various autism research in HCI [ e . g . , 22 , 54 , 88 , 138 , 169 ] . Dis - cussing the same kinds of technological interventions , Sue Fletcher – Watson tweets concerns over the high risk of “intrusion and privacy issues” [ 143 ] . Even beyond the confines of the INSAR chat , concerns about technologically mediated interventions are prevalent on # ActuallyAutistic Twitter . In response to a recent research study on wearable technologies that prompt autistic chil - dren to perform various normative behaviors , @ AutSciPerson tweets , “I cannot emphasize how much I hate research that uses technology to force autistic people to mask” [ 8 ] . As @ endeverstar noted , choosing the wrong outcome measures for a study creates a risk of inflicting unanticipated harm [ 145 ] . As mentioned above , emerging research suggests that masking—affecting neurotyp - ical communication and behavior styles—is related to an increased risk for suicide [ 21 , 32 , 33 ] . Williams and Gilbert , in a recent article about wearable autism technologies , write , “This fram - ing of assisted normalization as access legitimizes historical abuses of institutionalization and re - minds us of ‘The Ugly Laws’ which denied disabled citizens access to public space based on their ‘unsightly difference’” [ 162 , p . 4 ] . Medical model researchers appear to see the emerging and in - creasing capabilities of wearable technologies as a means to increase the reach of behavioral autism interventions . However , autistic Twitter users in my dataset ( as well as some researchers within HCI [ e . g . , 162 ] ) implore researchers to consider the consequences of this kind of research . 9 Here , “autistics in my dataset” refers primarily to tweets contained within the INSAR Twitter chat , which comprises the bulk of my corpus of Twitter data , but also to tweets and threads external to the INSAR chat to which I was referred by autistic Twitter users . 10 CRPD , here , refers to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities [ see 100 ] . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . 38 : 14 J . Guberman In response to an INSAR chat question about concerns with current directions in autism re - search , several chat participants list the recent trend in autism technology research involving “social robots” [ see 160 ] as a source of consternation . 11 Spiel and colleagues observe that , over the past decade , technological intervention research for autism has increasingly focused on using robots [ 140 ] . They also note that these robot interventions are often used to reinforce “treatment” paradigms like ABA . As I have written elsewhere , this autism – robot research is premised on com - plicated rhetorical acrobatics through which autistic people are positioned as less human and less alive than their non - autistic counterparts [ see 123 ] . This robot research reasserts negative and de - humanizing stereotypes about “robotic” autistics while , at the same time , attempting to “coerce autistic children , through normative violence , into a less autistic . . . state” [ 123 , p . 101 ] . The departure between perspectives around autism intervention between medical - model autism researchers and neurodiversity - oriented Twitter users in my dataset revolves around : ( A ) whether we value and accept autistic people as who they are ; or ( B ) whether their potential worth is tied to their capacity to be shaped in ways that obfuscate their non - neurotypicality . These medical - model perspectives are ultimately related to the values of use , utility , production , and consumption inherent to the field of HCI and inscribed within behavioral autism intervention frameworks [ 81 , 118 ] . Autistics participating in the INSAR chat , as well as other autistic Twitter users within my dataset , implore researchers to listen to their experiences with these kinds of " treatments " and consider how the assumptions and values inherent to these approaches inflict harm , even if—as I tend to assume to be true in most cases—the researchers have good intentions . 4 . 1 . 2 Autistic Research , not Autism Research . For neurodiversity advocates within my Twitter dataset and the INSAR commentaries [ 5 ] , autistic people and knowledges are fundamental to ev - ery aspect of autism research , and autism research should serve autistic people . One anonymous Twitter user wrote about how a significant amount of autism research they see doesn’t appear to have asked the fundamental question , “how will autistic people benefit from this work ? ” 12 Whether and how impacted people will benefit from research is a timely question for HCI researchers as we increasingly grapple with what it means to conduct just and reflexive research that challenges systemic forms of oppression [ e . g . , 6 , 37 , 81 , 139 ] . Within the medical model of disability , biomedical and psychological research is intended for clinicians , who are then positioned to disseminate knowledge to ( non - autistic ) laypeople [ 5 ] . For example , one researcher expressed concern over how we communicate genetic research to the gen - eral ( non - autistic ) public—to be clear about what can and cannot be inferred from or about genetic findings [ 5 ] . Medical - model researchers in the INSAR commentaries [ 5 ] and neurodiversity propo - nents within my Twitter dataset frequently discussed issues I categorized under the code “practical considerations for research . ” These concerns focus less on individual research topics than on meta - level considerations about how research is conducted and disseminated . Here , divisions between medical - model and neurodiversity - paradigm views relate to the kinds of methods and research designs autism researchers should focus on , the roles autistic people should play in research , and differences in the intended audience for research findings . Related to methods and research design , many researchers in the published commentaries [ 5 ] are interested in improving the quality of research , irrespective of the type of research . One of the 11 These users did not respond to my request to include their data in my study . In accordance with the data - use practices I communicated with them via Twitter direct - messages , I have referenced their tweets only in aggregate without any direct citations . 12 This user did not respond to my request to include their data in my study . In accordance with the data - use practices I communicatedwiththemviaTwitterdirect - messages , Ihavereferencedtheirtweetanonymouslyandhaveobfuscated [ see 89 ] the tweet’s text . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . # ActuallyAutistic Twitter as a Site for Epistemic Resistance and Crip Futurity 38 : 15 key considerations was choosing the correct methods to produce valid results based on one’s re - search questions . The particularities of these concerns tended to focus on which kinds of imaging technologies to deploy for studies of autistic brain functioning , which kinds of genetic investiga - tions make sense given what we know about the heterogeneity of autism , and how very few cases of autism appear related to single - gene variance . Also relating to brain imaging studies and again noting the vast heterogeneity among the autistic population , one researcher urged their colleagues to employ within - group study designs . There was also a focus on ensuring research is translational and that , where possible , it’s interdisciplinary . Absent from these discussions of methodological rigor were reflections on how autistic people might play a role in or be affected by such research . In contrast , neurodiversity - oriented people—both in the published commentaries and in the INSAR chat—were interested in participatory methodologies , irrespective of the research topic . There was a significant focus on the desire for research to be autistic - led or , at the very least , co - produced with autistic people . Dissanayake , in the published commentaries , writes , “Of particular need is research that is co - produced with autistic researchers” and suggests this necessitates a “fo - cus on training autistic scholars to contribute to these research efforts” [ 5 , p . 9 ] . Furthermore , as Sarah O’Brien specifies on Twitter , co - production must be “done meaningfully and not to fulfill diversity criteria in all areas” [ 129 ] . Likewise , in the Twitter chat , the Centre for Autism Research and Education calls for “more participatory research throughout the entire research process . From writing the grants , to designing the study , to analysing and collecting data , to taking the findings back to the community” [ 38 ] . One of Laura Crane’s tweets stresses the need to have serious conver - sations about “ how we include and involve autistic people as research partners” [ emphasis added 79 ] , and a tweet from Lorcan Kenny calls for research “assessing how autistic involvement actually changes how research gets done” [ 82 ] . In addition to exemplifying neurodiversity perspectives on critical research design and methodological issues , these conversations about autistic - led and fully participatory research exemplify how neurodiversity proponents view the role of autistic people in relationship to autism research . This sentiment expressed on Twitter that autism research should be for and conducted with autistic people appears to go beyond wanting research to be about autistic interests and needs . To these particular people on # ActuallyAutistic Twitter , meaningful participation entails making sure articles are written using accessible , non - pathologizing , and non - eugenicist language [ see tweets 48 , 83 , 95 ] , publishing articles outside of paywalls [ see tweets 48 , 63 , 83 , 95 ] , and providing fund - ing and accommodations for autistic people to attend and participate in research conferences . 13 These concerns about data privacy are the kinds of “practical considerations for research” dis - cussed within my Twitter dataset . The absence of these neurodiversity - oriented concerns from medical - model autism researchers’ conceptualizations of methodological rigor indicates another area where the inclusion of disabled people and knowledges in the research process may result in better and more meaningful research [ see 87 ] . 4 . 2 Privacy As I noted in the earlier section about disparate priorities for autism intervention research , some Twitter users were concerned about how technologically - mediated interventions might infringe upon autistic privacy and autonomy [ e . g . , 143 , 146 ] . People within my # ActuallyAutistic Twitter dataset expressed broad privacy concerns , both within and outside the INSAR chat . Beyond the INSAR chat , in other tweets and threads sent to me by # ActuallyAutistic community members , some autistics are wary of the possibility of research claiming to be participatory of autistics or 13 Icollectedseveraltweetsrelatingtoacademicconferences’financial , physical , andsensoryaccessibilitybutdidnotobtain permission to cite these tweets directly . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . 38 : 16 J . Guberman inclusive of our knowledges but without meaningfully including or respecting autistic participa - tion . Among these privacy concerns is the prospect that researchers might turn to publicly avail - able social media data to exploit autistic knowledge without crediting or meaningfully involving autistic people in the research . In a separate Twitter chat about autistic preferences for autism research , and particularly pertinent to this study , autistics expressed their preferences for and con - cerns about how autism researchers engage with autistic social media . Many people were very interested in having autistic knowledges , such as those present on social media included in re - search articles . Still , they were also concerned about the exploitative use of their data in autism research . Speaking to the importance of autism researchers engaging with autistic social media , @ theoriesofminds tweets , “I think it’s important for researchers who study autism and similar neurodivergence to learn from autistic and nd communities , and doubly important for autistic / nd researchers to also have access to social support from those communities” [ 147 ] . Alyssa Hillary Zisk feels autistic social media are an important source of autistic knowledge but wants this knowl - edge to be used respectfully . They tweet , “I do want autism researchers to read autistic writing , and not just writing by autistic people who get published in peer - reviewed journals . That doesn’t mean I want researchers treating our writing like a zoo exhibit” [ 3 ] . 14 Several people also noted the importance of consent and credit when using autistic social media data for research . @ Endo _ Gremlin tweeted , “I think following our blogs and social media ect [ sic ] is fine but any use of it should be with informed consent from all involved” [ 128 ] . A conversation between Rua Williams and Alyssa Hillary Zisk directly informed the data - use practices of this present study . In a series of threaded tweets , Williams tweeted , I find the emerging practice of “scraping” publicly posted data for research pur - poses troublesome . It Can be extractive and exploitative . People consent to pub - lic posting but they don’t consent to research interpretation . . . . interpretation of findings should be validated with original posters . This means requesting retroactive consent . Not everyone will respond , but those that do are entitled to editorial control , anonymity ( or note ) , and veto power . . . . sound like work ? So was the original labor in the tweets and blogs you’re scraping . Also , I’ve seen projects like this where blogs are “anonymized” but literally anyone who’s been in the community long enough can identify the original content . It’s theft . Cite us . [ 124 – 126 ] Similarly , Zisk tweeted , “I very much appreciated the researchers who asked whether I wanted to be anonymous , pseudonymous , or named , rather than assuming anonymity was what I’d want or what ‘had to happen’” [ 4 ] . When I reached out to get consent to use data for this study , the response I received from the community was overwhelmingly positive . It certainly took a significant amount of work . However , it was worthwhile to know , with certainty , that I was adequately representing the needs and interests of the people about whom I was writing . 5 CROSSING CHASMS WITHOUT BUILDING BRIDGES Reading the INSAR chat , it stood out to me that autistic and non - autistic people , all of whom ap - proached autism research from a neurodiversity perspective , were saying and advocating for very similar things . These interactions were amicable . There was no fighting or arguing . The tenor of these interactions corresponds to other such interactions happening on Twitter outside the confines of the INSAR chat . In one such instance , @ AutSciPerson responds to a thread by Noah 14 Zisk’s mention of zoo exhibits is an “in” reference to a term coined by Jim Sinclair , self - narrating zoo exhibits , which refers to the ways autistic people are frequently treated in neurotypical spaces [ 136 ] . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . # ActuallyAutistic Twitter as a Site for Epistemic Resistance and Crip Futurity 38 : 17 Sasson , an allistic autism researcher who takes a neurodiversity approach to autism , about some of his research . @ AutSciPerson points out gender disparities related to various aspects of the study’s design , including the study’s participant sample , and asked for Sasson’s thoughts on the matter . Sasson responded to the concerns , validating them while also defending aspects of the study’s de - sign . He went on to say that his research team is very interested in further work that follows the directions suggested by @ AutSciPerson [ 8 , 9 , 104 – 106 ] . In my experience as a participant - observer of # ActuallyAutistic Twitter , this professional and cordial tone is typical of conversations between autistic Twitter users and researchers doing work that autistics support . This kind of transparency and interaction with the community appears to go a long way toward building positive relation - ships with neurodiversity advocates . However , sometimes # ActuallyAutistic Twitter users take a much different approach when interacting with medical - model research ( ers ) . Throughout much of the INSAR chat , autistics called out medical - model research as insensitive to the needs and priorities of autistic people , violating research ethics , and perpetrating violence leading to long - term harm . While these critiques were not personal attacks against individual researchers , they did not mince words when describing this research in terms of its negative im - pacts ( e . g . , as mentioned earlier , talking about this research in terms of abuse , trauma , violence , and CRPD violations ) . These critiques typically take the form of multi - tweet threads . Some are directed toward the autistic community , while others are directed toward the researchers . In my Twitter data and my experiences as a participant - observer of # ActuallyAutistic Twitter , it appears rare for researchers to interact with these critiques . When they do , they often appear only to engage long enough to dismiss the critiques without actually acknowledging or responding to their content . As one example of the ways autistics engage with this kind of research , I turn again to @ AutSciPer - son’s thread critiquing a study about a new wearable device for autistic children . Below , I share some excerpts from that thread : The only consideration for the autistic person’s well - being is the Tactile sensi - tivity survey to see if she could wear the smartwatch . Who takes the survey , you might ask ? The autistic child’s father . Not the autistic person herself ! We have no idea if that’s accurate . . . . The main goal is seeing how well the autistic 9 - year old girl follows directions using the watch . It’s not about increased quality of life outcomes . It’s about [ how ] often she looks at the watch and what it says . . . . Here’s the scary part . They used a “Treatment acceptability survey’ to assess how useful teaching assistants , special education teachers , and SLPs found the smartwatch . That’s right . They asked everyone how well the “treatment’ worked except for the autistic person . . . . This is where it gets really quite devastating . Here are the results of the acceptability survey . . . . . In this survey , 67 % of profes - sionals disagreed with the statement “I believe this treatment is likely to result in permanent improvement . . . . [ Professionals also responded to the statement , ] “I believe that it would be acceptable to use this treatment without children’s con - sent . ’ 67 % agreed , 33 % strongly agreed ! Why is this question even being asked ? It’s not ethical to perform a study on someone without their consent . So how is it ethical to force an autistic student to wear a smartwatch ? Esp . with all of its sen - sory stimuli . How can you make an autistic person use this when the majority [ of professionals surveyed ] disagreed that it helped ? ! ] [ 10 , 12 – 16 ] This thread is particularly interesting because , in response to the concerns about the ethics of compromising a child’s right to bodily autonomy to deploy a treatment of dubious efficacy , the journal in which the study was published responded . The official Twitter account of the Journal of Augmentative and Alternative Communication responded to say : ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . 38 : 18 J . Guberman Per policy , the AAC Journal does not publish studies without IRB approval . Here , informed consent was obtained from the legal guardian . Not sure how you ar - rived at the conclusion that the child was forced to wear the watch . [ 1 ] This response was typical of the occasions in my dataset in which medical - model researchers engage with autistics over critiques of their research . @ AutSciPerson wasn’t suggesting the study lacked IRB approval . They were questioning the study’s choice to ask a question about deploying a technology out “in the wild” without consent , noting that , in a research setting , this would likely violate ethical research guidelines . The journal’s glib response treats @ AutSciPerson as someone unfamiliar with or unable to read academic research . Clicking over to @ AutSciPerson’s profile , though , it’s readily apparent that they’re a Ph . D . student studying neuroscience and one with 20 , 000 followers , no less . Yet , the response from the AAC Journal could be interpreted as reacting to an autistic person as if they are simply too impaired to understand the nuances of academic studies . @ AutSciPerson provided clarifying responses to the AAC Journal’s tweet , but the journal did not reply again . Within my data and experiences , there are key discursive differences between autistic interac - tions with non - autistic , neurodiversity - aligned researchers and autistic interactions with medical - model research ( ers ) . In the case of the former , autistic interactions are conversational and con - structive . They involve many non - rhetorical questions and genuine attempts to interact and build understanding with the researchers . In these conversations , one’s autistic - ness is displayed and recognized as a badge signifying one belongs in conversations about autism research . As is the case in the thread discussed above wherein @ AutSciPerson critiques a medical - model study , inter - actions with medical - model research ( ers ) may resemble exposés in the form of multi - tweet threads . In these conversations , terms like “actual outcomes” are paired with one’s autistic identity to imply that the research ( er ) , failing to include autistic perspectives , misses the mark with their research in some critical and often harmful way . In these interactions , autistic identity becomes a crowbar—a blunt instrument for forcing one’s way into a conversation from which they were excluded but felt they should be part . While I observed a moderate amount of cordial engagement between # ActuallyAutistic Twitter users and neurodiversity - oriented researchers , within my data , there was a distinct lack of autis - tics engaging collaboratively with medical - model researchers . In my collected data , I saw only one instance ( which I cannot quote for lack of response from the Twitter user regarding my us - ing their data ) wherein a medical - model researcher meaningfully engaged with autistic criticisms . They did so reluctantly , taking a defensive posture , and stopped engaging when their responses were critiqued , but they tried , nonetheless . Discussing the present study with a colleague , I was asked whether I would engage with such harsh , public critiques of my work and whether this is a genuinely effective way to stop or lessen future medical - model research . My response was that it’s not my job to do emotional labor on behalf of researchers who make it more difficult for me to exist within or outside of the academy through their violent research . Once again , I’d like to draw your attention to a quote from Williams : Maybe I don’t have to shape my voice into the dispassionate “appropriate” tone for the benefit of others . Maybe I just have to reach the people who are ready to hear it . Maybe they can do the dispassionate work of subtle advocacy for covert change . I don’t have it in me . I will be passionate as long as I witness harm [ 161 , p . 266 ] . In my data , autistics make it clear to whoever will listen that there is a vast ideological chasm between their neurodiversity - view of research and the views of medical - model researchers . By calling out the violence in medical - model research , perhaps these autistics are not trying to make ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . # ActuallyAutistic Twitter as a Site for Epistemic Resistance and Crip Futurity 38 : 19 nice with these researchers . They may be taking on the role of the passionate witness [ 161 ] , calling attention to injustice as best as possible , given how they can ( and can’t ) partake in academic dis - courses . Autistics aren’t necessarily trying to build bridges here . Allies may be better positioned to do the more dispassionate work of building bridges . Based on the limited sample of tweets within my dataset , it’s challenging to speak to the efficacy of this approach to interacting with medical - model autism researchers with respect to bringing them around to a more neurodiversity - aligned perspective . Anecdotally , though , it appears that these discourses may have a positive ( for these autistic Twitter users ) effect , at least some of the time . Talking about how researchers often use ableist terminology , which renders their research inaccessible to autistics who don’t want to read about themselves characterized these ways , Laura Crane [ 80 ] tweets , “I cringe at my old research articles where I used words like this . . . I’m trying to be a better ally now ! ” Having been influenced by the autistic community , researchers like Crane , through their research and public engagement on Twitter , are positioned to contribute to the more nuanced work of calling in and building bridges with the people who autistics don’t feel safe interacting with themselves . 6 CRIP TECHNOSCIENCE AS AN ALTERNATIVE ORIENTATION TOWARD AUTISM TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH On # ActuallyAutistic Twitter , some neurodiversity proponents demonstrate alternative ways to approach autism research and autistic people—ways that support us as we are , rather than eradi - cating us or predicating our recognition as humans , deserving of rights and self - determination [ see 123 ] on pretending to be something we’re not . Within the neurodiversity framework , it is not the humanity of autistics that is suspect , but rather the humanity of an institutionalized conception of personhood that casts autistic people as lesser beings than their allistic counterparts . Crip techno - science [ 58 ] provides a framework with which HCI researchers might draw on the epistemic ac - tivism of # ActuallyAutistic Twitter ( or other sources of marginalized knowledge ) to inform their future research with autistic or otherwise marginalized people . As mentioned earlier , crip technoscience [ 58 ] revolves around four central commitments : ( 1 ) Centering the work of disabled people as knowers and makers ; ( 2 ) Access as friction ; ( 3 ) In - terdependence as political technology ; and ( 4 ) Disability justice . Centering the work of disabled people as knowers and makers shifts power and expertise from abled disability designers and “ex - perts” to disabled people , their existing technological practices , and their embodied knowledges ( sometimes referred to as cripistemologies [ 70 ] ) . Though listed second in Hamraie and Fritsch’s [ 58 ] commitments of crip technoscience , the notion of access as friction is fundamental to understand - ing how non - dominant knowledges , such as those contained within this study’s Twitter dataset , can play a role in how HCI scholars conduct future research . Understanding access as friction requires a rejection of more traditional notions of accessibil - ity within HCI , wherein accessibility is understood through the lenses of habilitation and inclu - sionism [ see 98 , 103 , 118 , 164 ] . Instead , this commitment to frictional access asks researchers and designers to pay attention to the ways disabled people use technology to subvert and render ac - cessible inhospitable infrastructure . We might understand the autistic ( and autistic - allied ) Twitter use discussed above as a means to subvert the inaccessibility and hostility of academia , using an informal channel to interact with and address concerns with academic autism research ( ers ) . These interactions may read as hostile to researchers under scrutiny and observers unfamiliar with the stakes of neurodiversity advocacy . Even when provided in more standard formats , as in the Ymous and colleagues’ [ 168 ] conference article , disabled critiques of mainstream disability research may , quite understandably , make disability researchers uncomfortable . As Lin and Lindtner [ 81 ] note , many HCI researchers tend to shy away from negative feelings , preferring to build solutionistic ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . 38 : 20 J . Guberman end - user tools to patch over underlying systemic issues [ see also 43 , 45 , 46 , 69 ] . Yet , points of failure ( often denoted by the presence of protest and non - compliance ) at the intersections of disability and design can be generative , indicating invitations for researchers to participate in new or different kinds of research rather than mere condemnation of existing work . Giving serious consideration to the complaints of marginalized people need not spell the end of research with marginalized people . Instead , drawing on examples from this study’s data , I argue that it opens the door for continued research that benefits not only researchers ( with their unyielding expectations to produce and pub - lish ) , but also the marginalized people around or with whom research occurs . However , indications of friction , such as those on # ActuallyAutistic Twitter discussed above , are only generative so long as these non - dominant epistemologies are taken seriously . The first commitment of crip technoscience centers on the work of disabled people as know - ers and makers [ 58 ] . Within HCI autism research , autistic people are often positioned as pas - sive , non - agentic recipients of beneficent HCI researchers rather than as active participants and subject - matter experts in research ostensibly for and about them , even in studies purporting “in - clusive” or “value - sensitive” methodologies [ 37 , 140 , 168 , 172 , 173 ] . To briefly restate some of the # ActuallyAutistic Twitter concerns discussed above , participants of # ActuallyAutistic Twit - ter within my dataset wonder about the safety and necessity of autism interventions [ see tweets 47 , 71 , 144 , 145 ] , the pervasive surveillance and control inherent to wearable autism technolo - gies [ see tweets 11 , 143 , 146 ] , and non - consensual usage of autistic data in academic research [ see tweets 3 , 4 , 124 – 126 , 128 , 147 ] . These concerns represent areas of friction between these Twitter users and institutionalized approaches to autism research , pointing to problems HCI researchers might address through their work . The non - inclusion of autistic people ( as subject - matter experts ) in research and design likely facilitates some of the issues autistic people and allies discussed within my Twitter dataset . These repeated concerns exemplify an ongoing issue within disability research in HCI , first articulated by Mankoff and colleagues [ 87 ] over a decade ago . In a more recent review of wearable technology research within HCI , HCI researchers Williams and Gilbert [ 162 ] suggest HCI researchers still struggle to recognize the ways their work may adversely impact autis - tic users . Like Mankoff and colleagues [ 87 ] , Williams and Gilbert suggest this difficulty relates to researchers’ lack of familiarity with the embodied and lived experiences of disabled people [ 162 ] . This commitment to recognizing disabled people as knowers and makers extends beyond simply looking to places like Twitter or autistic - written critical autism studies articles for inspiration . When researchers borrow autistic knowledge without directly involving autistic subject - matter experts in their research ( e . g . , through non - consensual use of # ActuallyAutistic Twitter data ) , HCI researchers risk designing well - intentioned studies that , through positioning non - autistic parents , teachers , and caregivers as ultimate authorities on autistic needs [ e . g . , 172 , 173 ] , unintention - ally reify epistemic injustices within academic research . Instead , centering the work of disabled people as knowers and makers ( as autistic people and allies in my dataset call for [ see tweets 38 , 80 , 82 , 129 ] ) might suggest HCI researchers favor participatory approaches wherein autistic people ( rather than their non - autistic Others ) are included as necessary stakeholders and subject - matter experts . Despite widespread cultural tropes that position autistic people as unknowing and unknowledgeable about ourselves [ 19 , 167 ] , Gillespie – Lynch and colleagues [ 53 ] , through an em - pirical investigation , find that autistic people are more knowledgeable about autism than their non - autistic counterparts . Systemic ableism—including the access issues addressed by autistic people on Twitter and discussed earlier in this article—prevents autistic experts from entering the acad - emy [ see 44 ] and their knowledges from entering into academic discourse . However , my research shows that some autistic knowledges about autism are readily available on Twitter . At least some autistic people appear interested in active involvement in autism research , and they know things that should be important to academics interested in non - violent , ethical , and ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . # ActuallyAutistic Twitter as a Site for Epistemic Resistance and Crip Futurity 38 : 21 beneficent research . The accessible autistic autism expertise on Twitter may serve as jumping - off points for researchers interested in pursuing new and different kinds of autism research and for finding potential autistic co - researchers with whom to conduct that work . In my own experience throughout this study , as an HCI researcher , I’ve found # ActuallyAutistic Twitter to be an excellent tool for identifying research areas and enlisting autistic participation . Were it not for the keen insights I shared from the autistic Twitter users discussing data usage ethics , my data collection and usage methods would have looked quite different—even as an autistic person myself , I might have caused unintentional harm to other autistics while attempting to do good . In leaning on the wisdom and skills of autistic people when we encounter friction between our perceptions and perspectives as researchers and the needs and experiences of autistic people , perhaps we can design better research and build better designs led and informed by autistic people and knowledge . This idea of relying on others to produce positive outcomes lends itself to the third commitment of crip technoscience—interdependence as a political technology [ 58 ] . Drawing on Kafer’s [ 73 ] crip reinterpretations of Haraway’s cyborg theory [ 60 ] , this underscores the importance of participa - tory work emerging from within disability communities and cultures that centers collective , lib - eratory efforts . This commitment opposes traditional models of disability technoscience , wherein non - disabled benefactors from outside the community descend upon disabled people offering tech - nological fixes to our perceived individual deficits . Hamraie and Fritsch write , We position the crip politics of interdependence as a technoscientific phenome - non , the weaving of relational circuits between bodies , environments , and tools to create non - innocent , frictional access . Mainstream disability technoscience presumes disability as an individual experience of impairment rather than a col - lective political experience of world - building and dismantling . This perception has two primary consequences . First , disabled people are perceived as dependent and the goal of technoscience becomes to encourage independence . Second , dis - ability and technology are both perceived as apolitical and stable phenomena , rather than material - discursive entanglements that take shape through struggle , negotiation , and creativity . [ 58 , p . n . p . ] Autism , in particular , is framed around individual experiences of disability . Even the etymology of the word “autism” implies an inward - turning self - focus [ 86 ] . Yet , # ActuallyAutistic Twitter repre - sents a site for collective world - and community - building . My data show Twitter as a site for collec - tive efforts to expose and deconstruct anti - autistic ableism within the academy . Some autistics on Twitter resist normalizing therapies and highlight the politics inherent to the control and surveil - lance technologies HCI researchers develop for and deploy against autistic subjects . They demand to be recognized not as passive recipients of beneficent researchers’ technological artifacts [ see 140 ] but as critical stakeholders in the frictional processes of working as or with researchers to develop artifacts that serve autistic needs , as recognized by autistic users . This commitment has implications for how HCI researchers design , what they design , and their possible roles as allies in addressing frictions between autistic people and non - autistic institutions ( e . g . , the academy ) . Normalizing technologies are often developed through “participatory” methods , which raises questions about how HCI researchers currently operationalize participation . Earlier , in discussing crip technoscience’s commitment to disabled people as knowers and makers in conjunction with the sentiments expressed within my data , I suggest participatory methodologies as a means to produce better research and designs . While multiple people in the INSAR chat call for greater autistic participation in autism research [ e . g . , 129 ] , Crane appears to go beyond calling for mere participation , asking other researchers to consider “ how we include and involve autistic people as research partners” [ emphasis added ; 79 ] . While participatory design methodology was initially ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . 38 : 22 J . Guberman developed within the context of promoting and addressing the needs of workers [ 134 , 142 ] , Costanza - Chock [ 37 ] notes that unreflexive “participatory” studies wherein researchers swoop into a community and extract data from their participants , never to return or provide direct ben - efits for those participants , risks unintentionally reifying inequities those researchers intended to address . The inequities exacerbated by uncritical participatory research include issues researchers may not anticipate , such as those expressed by the autistic Twitter users calling for access to the physical and literary venues in which research conducted with or about them is shared and dis - cussed [ see tweets 48 , 63 , 83 , 95 ] . Within the context of participatory work with and in Black communities , Harrington and colleagues [ 61 , 62 ] explore how researchers must understand and account for the privilege they bring to their research and the nuances of their participants’ sit - uatedness or risk of perpetuating unintentional harm . They suggest that reflexive participatory research should be centrally concerned with continued engagement with and benefits to com - munity stakeholders and research partners [ 61 , 62 ] . HCI researchers should keep in mind these considerations and others related to reflexive and ethical participatory research and design [ e . g . , 6 , 37 ] when working with autistic people and communities . An additional implication of a commitment to interdependence relates to the kinds of technolo - gies we build . To reiterate a point made by @ endeverstar , “if we’re measuring the wrong things , we get lauded “evidenced - based practices” that are actually intensely harmful” [ 145 ] . If we remove in - dependence and normativity as required outcomes for autism technology use , possibilities for new types of designs emerge . It becomes possible , for example , to recognize # ActuallyAutistic Twitter , in and of itself , as a political , sociotechnical technology for interdependence and epistemic ac - tivism . It doesn’t remove autism from the purview of HCI but redefines the scope of what designs one can and should consider . Instead of supporting behavioral interventions with social robots [ see 123 , 160 ] , researchers might work with autistics to develop sociotechnical tools to explore exist - ing and find new special interests and connect with and share knowledge with others who share our interests . Instead of using eye - tracking technologies [ e . g . , 107 ] to diagnose autism earlier so that we can send younger and younger children off to be made includable [ 5 , 118 ] , we might study the information - gathering practices of parents of autistic children and build interventions designed to provide them with helpful , neurodiversity - aligned information and services as early as possible . These are plausible futures and technologies HCI researchers are well - positioned to help build . Another important implication of a commitment to interdependence relates to the role of HCI researchers in ongoing debates over the nature of autism research . Here , I draw on the adversar - ial encounters I observed on Twitter between autistic people and medical - model researchers . As Miele – Rodas writes , “Without the strength and will to resist the world . . . , the autistic individual is prone to imprisonment and extermination . Resistance to . . . tyrannical expectations of compul - sory sociality . . . is necessary to autistic survival and self - determination” [ 117 , p . 127 ] . In some very literal ways , autistic life may depend on resistance to medicalization and habilitation and a turn towards neurodiversity - aligned understandings of autistic existence [ 21 , 32 , 33 , 91 , 121 ] . If some autistic people on Twitter seem blunt , unyielding , or even aggressive in their interactions with autism researchers on the platform , perhaps it’s because they experience ( as I sometimes do ) cer - tain kinds of autism research as an existential threat . Whether these interactions happen in digital spaces like Twitter , or physical spaces like CHI or ASSETS conferences , these disputes not only represent highly frictional areas that demand the serious attention of HCI researchers but also opportunities for enacting a crip politics of interdependence . It can be difficult for anyone , autistic or not , to independently agitate for their existence and recognition within spaces in which de - humanizing rhetorics about them are institutionalized . As Williams notes , sometimes we need to leave the more nuanced work involved in reaching out to and calling in the people doing harmful ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . # ActuallyAutistic Twitter as a Site for Epistemic Resistance and Crip Futurity 38 : 23 research to allies who aren’t directly harmed by that work [ 161 ] . Rather than turning away from the friction some autistics create through their pro - neurodiversity discourses , HCI researchers are well - positioned to do kinder , more subtle access - making work by taking on neurodiversity ori - entations to autism in their research . They can accomplish this by conversing with their peers and colleagues who still subscribe to the medical model of disability , participating in conference Q & A sessions , peer - reviewing articles , and steering students interested in autism research in the right direction . Working together , interdependently , perhaps autistic people and non - autistic HCI researchers can build powerful coalitions and enact forms of systemic changes called for on—but not implementable through—Twitter . The fourth and final commitment of crip technoscience is to disability justice [ 58 ] . Disability jus - tice is a radical framework for identifying and addressing the ways interplaying forces of hetero - patriarchy , white supremacy , colonialism , and capitalism 15 contribute to ableism and the oppres - sion of all disabled people [ 68 ] . This commitment involves a view of autism and autistic people divorced from the demands of capitalism . It involves a recognition of autistics as whole and worthy , irrespective of their economic production . Too , it involves deep commitments to intersectionality , reflexivity , situatedness , and solidarity [ 58 , 68 ] . In this study , I draw on CDA because of CDA’s commitment to taking a stance—to being in solidarity with and working towards justice for disem - powered people living under hegemonic powers [ 157 ] . The methods we choose and the research questions we ask are inherently political . To choose an apolitical approach to research—if such an approach can be said to exist—is a political choice in itself . Our choices as researchers affect the material , social , and psychological conditions of the people with whom we work . While a commitment to disability justice helped guide my research in both theoretical and prac - tical ways , it also exposes some limitations of this study . Any participatory work is always , by nature , incomplete—unrepresentative of all possible perspectives . Disability justice stresses the need to start from the perspectives of and follow the leadership of those most impacted by in - tersecting forces of oppression . The findings of this study are limited to the types of people from which I was able to collect data and my own experiences as a white autistic person with high levels of educational privilege . The overrepresentation of white people on # ActuallyAutistic Twitter is a common topic of discussion . As Puar notes , it is less safe for Black , Indigenous , and people of color ( BIPOC ) to identify with or build cultures around disability [ 111 ] . Critically , autistic - of - color knowledges are underrepresented on # ActuallyAutistic Twitter and in this study . It is imperative to conduct future research in which this knowledge is intentionally sought out , elevated into , and taken seriously within academic discourse and used to help address the barriers that prevent or make undesirable BIPOC participation in already - existing autistic spaces . 7 OTHER LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK This study focuses primarily on conversations within my dataset around research priorities that ap - pear in both neurodiversity and medical - model discourses . In this study , I chose to focus on shared ( but differently understood and interpreted ) priorities to highlight the differences between the two research paradigms . There were also research interests and concerns held by autistic people that were less common among or comparable to the concerns of medical - model autism researchers . Future research must catalog these other interests and concerns if our autism research is to be accountable to autistic people . Understanding the incompleteness of our perspectives is vital to operationalizing ethical designs based on our research . For example , the data I share within this study , which primarily revolves around a single Twitter chat and several auxiliary threads , are usable to exemplify the perspectives 15 As Barbarin tweets , “There is no form of capitalism that values disabled people” [ 39 ] . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . 38 : 24 J . Guberman held by many , but certainly not all , autistic people . My data are also helpful for demonstrating how these ( or any ) knowledges and activism that create friction between marginalized people and aca - demic institutions can , through a framework like a crip technoscience , be generative for identify - ing new kinds of coalitions and research programs . These data are not conducive to creating grand theories about autistic knowledges or activism or building any universal sociotechnical tools that will help all autistic people . The framework of design justice , which is perhaps more directly applicable to HCI than disability justice , operationalizes the principles of disability justice as actionable considerations for design research [ 37 ] . Costanza – Chock [ 37 ] , writing about design justice , explains that universalist design principles often effectively erase marginalized groups of people . Costanza – Chock also notes that any given design will always disadvantage some people over others . My goal for this article is not to propose universal solutions to anti - autistic epistemic injustice , but rather to demonstrate how seeking out and staying with uncomfortable disjunctures between marginalized experiences and institutionalized discourses can result in research and design that works towards more liberatory futures . 8 CONCLUSION This study contributes to a growing body of HCI literature that approaches autism research from a perspective sensitive to the needs , interests , and personhood of autistic and neurodivergent peo - ple [ e . g . , 51 , 77 , 139 , 140 , 162 , 168 ] . It also builds on recent work highlighting autistic social media as a site for community building , creating autistic space , nurturing autistic culture and identity , and epistemic activism [ 109 , 112 , 130 ] . This study is unique in focusing specifically on autistic on - line discourses about autism research . Throughout this study , I have attempted to show that , by virtue of their lived experiences , autistic people may often hold valid concerns and priorities for research that , arguably , should view them as primary stakeholders . My data are based on only a small subset of all autistic Twitter users and an even smaller sample of all autistic people . I have tried to articulate these data as exemplars of how discontinuities between marginalized and insti - tutionalized knowledges and practices can lead to alternative forms of research beneficial to all involved parties . Our research has real impacts , and those impacts might not be those we intended or even imagined possible . Within the medical model of disability , autistic people are constructed as non - agentic , non - knowers . The neurodiversity paradigm challenges this construction of autism , argu - ing that all conscious beings know things , even if these knowledges do not resemble your own . Twitter is one place in which autistic expertise and preferences about research reside . These knowl - edges are critical to conducting ethical and just autism research and design in HCI . Because autis - tic knowledges are more readily available on Twitter than in the academy , I suggest we take these informal data sources seriously as credible epistemic artifacts . Perhaps taking these knowledges seriously will help those who hold these episteme gain footholds within the academy themselves . Currently , as both my Twitter data and diverging views within the published INSAR commen - taries demonstrate , there is a clear ideological divide in autism research , each side of which has significant political , ethical , and practical implications . As researchers , when faced with such divisions , we have to make choices in our research—do we take a side , try to stay neutral , or maybe even attempt to do both at the same time ? My own research interests around disability have followed a non - linear trajectory . Long before graduate school , before I even went back to school for my undergraduate degree , I found myself imagining technological solutions to my own autistic impairments . It was these design ideas , totally incom - patible with the neurodiversity paradigm that they were , that led me to HCI , autistic communities , and disability justice advocacy . Those ideas I had for autism technologies came from a place of ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . # ActuallyAutistic Twitter as a Site for Epistemic Resistance and Crip Futurity 38 : 25 uninterrogated and unrecognized internalized ableism [ see 31 ] . It isn’t easy to put aside , let alone recognize , the politics and cultural tropes that underly our research—discourses so ubiquitous so as to seem natural and as if no alternatives were possible [ 20 , 75 ] . Alternative futures do exist , though , as do frameworks for ushering in their existences . For those open to taking a side , I present Hamraie and Fritsch’s [ 58 ] crip technoscience as a framework for turning divisions in and around autism research into new and more justice - oriented research programs . In parting , I extend you , my readers , an invitation to work ( or perhaps continue to work ) with me towards , rather than against , autistic and crip futurity . 9 AUTHOR STATEMENT This article builds on my work in a recent book chapter [ 123 ] . The co - authored chapter exam - ines the ways autistic people are disappeared from academia and society—both epistemically and corporally—through rhetoric and research—in the authors’ respective fields . Drawing upon exam - ples of ghosts , mice , and robots as objects that disappear from the autistic human subject , we ex - plore this disappearance and its implications . We address disappearance by rematerializing or reap - pearing the autistic person as a subject and academic , sharing methodologies for advancing autistic thought in and around academia . We conclude by calling upon academia to support the autistic researchers’ scholar - activism , value autistic knowledges , and address ableist disappearance in so - ciety . My particular contributions to this in - press chapter focus on the rhetorical implications of considering autistic people as or alongside robots in human - computer interaction research . This current article is also related to an in - press theoretical essay that , building on the afore - mentioned book chapter , the in - press text use crip technoscience as an alternative framework for approaching autism research within human - computer interaction . The in - press essay explores the consequences of popular rhetorics within HCI ( i . e . , those that frame autistics as robots and ma - chines ) that dehumanize autistic people and may play a role in normalizing anti - autistic violence . My co - author and I position the ( crip - ) cyborg as an alternative and potentially liberatory fram - ing than the autistic - as - robot . Primarily concerned with rhetorics within HCI , the in - press article builds entirely on personal experience and extant literature and includes no analyses of newly - collected data . Within the article , my co - author and I include a short discussion of the role crip technoscience can play in aiding a perspectival and rhetorical shift towards autistics - as - agentic - humans / cyborgs , and the ramifications thereof . This current article moves beyond rhetorics to include concrete examples of how not just lan - guage , but research framings , questions , and topics affect the autistic people . My prior chapter focuses on personal experiences as an autistic scholar in the field of human - computer interaction . My in - press article focuses on the power of words and rhetorics within research , design , and cul - ture , and on the liberatory potentials of adopting alternative lexicons for discussing autism . In contrast to my other works , the present article focuses on the experiences , priorities , and needs of a broader population of autistic people . Building on my previous and contemporaneous work’s call for researchers to support autistic scholar - activism and to value autistic knowledge , this current article provides discrete examples of autistic knowledge , directs researchers towards Twitter as a repository of such knowledge , and provides guidance for researchers about how they can go about supporting autistic people and communities through their own research and advocacy . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I gratefully acknowledge the guidance and feedback of my pre - candidacy committee members , Oliver Haimson , Silvia Lindtner , and M . Remi Yergeau , as well as the keen insights of Autistic Twitter members @ theoriesofminds , Ira Kraemer , and Alyssa Hillary Zisk . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . 38 : 26 J . Guberman REFERENCES [ 1 ] AAC Journal [ @ AACjourn ] . 2021 . @ AutSciPerson Per policy , the AAC Journal does not publish studies without IRB approval . Here , informed consent was obtained from the legal guardian . Not sure how you arrived at the conclusion that the child was forced to wear the watch . Retrieved April 21 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / AACjourn / status / 1356082744116305920 . [ 2 ] Meryl Alper . 2017 . Giving Voice : Mobile Communication , Disability , and Inequality . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . [ 3 ] Alyssa . 2019 . A2 : I do want autism researchers to read autistic writing , and not just writing by autistic people who get published in peer - reviewed journals . That doesn’t mean I want researchers treating our writing like a zoo exhibit . # AutChat . Retrieved April 18 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / yes _ thattoo / status / 1191102329874997249 . [ 4 ] Alyssa [ @ yes _ thattoo ] . 2019 . @ StarFeuri I very much appreciated the researchers who asked whether I wanted to be anonymous , pseudonymous , or named , rather than assuming anonymity was what I’d want or what “had " to happen . # AutChat . Retrieved April 18 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / yes _ thattoo / status / 1191104875922411520 . [ 5 ] David G . Amaral , George M . Anderson , Anthony Bailey , Raphe Bernier , Somer Bishop , Gene Blatt , Ricardo Canal - Bedia , Tony Charman , Geraldine Dawson , Petrus J . de Vries , Emanuel Dicicco - Bloom , Cheryl Dissanayake , Yoko Kamio , Rajesh Kana , Naila Z . Khan , Allison Knoll , Frank Kooy , Janet Lainhart , Pat Levitt , Katherine Loveland , Nancy Minshew , Ralph - Axel Mueller , Declan Murphy , Peter Mundy , Sara Palencia , Jennifer Pinto - Martin , Alexia Rattazzi , Sally Rogers , Wendy L . Stone , Sara Jane Webb , and Andrew Whitehouse . 2019 . Gaps in current autism research : The thoughts of the autism research editorial board and associate editors . Autism Research 12 , 5 ( 2019 ) , 700 – 714 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / aur . 2101 [ 6 ] Mariam Asad . 2019 . Prefigurative design as a method for research justice . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 1 – 18 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359302 [ 7 ] American Psychiatric Association . 2013 . Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( 5th ed . , first revision ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1176 / appi . books . 9780890425787 . [ 8 ] AutisticSciencePerson [ @ AutSciPerson ] . 2019 . I’m really interested in this , but I think it would be even more inter - esting if they had more than 3 autistic women doing the videos ( they had 17 autistic adult men and 3 autistic adult women that neurotypicals were watching videos of ) . I wonder about gender differences here . Retrieved April 18 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / AutSciPerson / status / 1105536544553746433 . [ 9 ] AutisticSciencePerson [ @ AutSciPerson ] . 2019 . @ Noahsasson @ kmdebrabander @ DanielFasoAny thoughts onthis ? Also wondering if 76 % female neurotypicals ( 384 / 505 ) rating mostly autistic males ( 17 / 20 ) might affect the results , compared to NT males judging autistic males or NT females judging autistic females . Retrieved April 18 , 2021 from https : / / t . co / biKVvZfrOt . https : / / twitter . com / AutSciPerson / status / 1105537992016445445 . [ 10 ] AutisticSciencePerson [ @ AutSciPerson ] . 2021 . Here’s the scary part . They used a “Treatment acceptability survey” to assess how useful the teaching assistants , special education teachers , and SLPs found the smartwatch . That’s right . They asked everyone how well the “treatment” worked except for the autistic person . 6 / 13 . Retrieved April 21 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / AutSciPerson / status / 1353498482863202304 . [ 11 ] AutisticSciencePerson [ @ AutSciPerson ] . 2021 . I cannot emphasize how much I hate research that uses tech - nology to force autistic people to mask . I’m honestly surprised this article wasn’t from The Onion . A thread about this : 1 / 15 https : / / t . co / IsbVIYJTSB . Retrieved April 18 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / AutSciPerson / status / 1353182978738958337 . [ 12 ] AutisticSciencePerson [ @ AutSciPerson ] . 2021 . It’s not ethical to perform a study on someone without their consent . So how is it ethical to force an autistic student to wear a smartwatch ? Esp . with all of its sensory stimuli . How can you make an autistic person use this when the majority disagreed that it helped ? ! 9 / 13 . Retrieved April 21 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / AutSciPerson / status / 1353498488940720131 . [ 13 ] AutisticSciencePerson [ @ AutSciPerson ] . 2021 . The main goal is seeing how well the autistic 9 - year old girl follows directionsusingthewatch . It’snotaboutincreasedqualityoflifeoutcomes . It’saboutoftenshelooksatthewatchand does what it says . 3 / 13 . Retrieved April 21 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / AutSciPerson / status / 1353498479847493636 . [ 14 ] AutisticSciencePerson [ @ AutSciPerson ] . 2021 . The majority of professionals ( total sample size is 171 ) don’t actually thinkusingthesmartwatchwashelpful . “Ibelievethatitwouldbeacceptabletousethistreatmentwithoutchildren’s consent . ” 67 % agreed , 33 % strongly agreed ! Why is this question even being asked ? 8 / 13 . Retrieved April 21 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / AutSciPerson / status / 1353498487967637506 . [ 15 ] AutisticSciencePerson [ @ AutSciPerson ] . 2021 . The only consideration for the autistic person’s well - being is the Tactile sensitivity survey to see if she could wear the smartwatch . Who takes the survey , you might ask ? The autistic child’s father . Not the autistic person herself ! We have no idea if that’s accurate . 2 / 13 . Retrieved April 21 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / AutSciPerson / status / 1353498478702448643 . [ 16 ] AutisticSciencePerson [ @ AutSciPerson ] . 2021 . This is where it gets really quite devastating . Here are the results of the acceptability survey ( alt - text included ) . In this survey , 67 % of professionals disagreed with the statement “I believe this treatment is likely to result in permanent improvement . ” Only 33 % agreed . 7 / 13 https : / / t . co / qExwLlYu0W . Retrieved April 21 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / AutSciPerson / status / 1353498486512242689 . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . # ActuallyAutistic Twitter as a Site for Epistemic Resistance and Crip Futurity 38 : 27 [ 17 ] Mel Baggs . 2007 . In My Language . Retrieved May 28 , 2019 from https : / / www . youtube . com / watch ? v = JnylM1hI2jc . [ 18 ] Colin Barnes . 2012 . Understanding the social model of disability : Past , present and future . In Proceedings of the Routledge Handbook of Disability Studies . Routledge Handbooks Online , 12 – 29 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4324 / 9780203144114 . ch2 [ 19 ] Simon Baron - Cohen , Leda Cosmides , and John Tooby . 1997 . Mindblindness : An Essay on Autism and Theory of Mind ( revised ed . ) . Bradford Books , Cambridge , Mass . [ 20 ] Roland Barthes . 2018 . Myth today ( 1957 ) . In Proceedings of the Critical Theory and Interaction Design . Jeffrey Bardzell , Shaowen Bardzell , and Mark Blythe ( Eds . ) , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 96 – 130 . [ 21 ] Jonathan S . Beck , Rebecca A . Lundwall , Terisa Gabrielsen , Jonathan C . Cox , and Mikle South . 2020 . Looking good but feeling bad : “Camouflaging” behaviors and mental health in women with autistic traits . Autism 24 , 4 ( 2020 ) , 809 – 821 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1362361320912147 [ 22 ] Andrew Begel , John Tang , Sean Andrist , Michael Barnett , Tony Carbary , Piali Choudhury , Edward Cutrell , Alberto Fung , Sasa Junuzovic , Daniel McDuff , Kael Rowan , Shibashankar Sahoo , Jennifer Frances Waldern , Jessica Wolk , Hui Zheng , and Annuska Zolyomi . 2020 . Lessons learned in designing AI for autistic adults . In Proceedings of the 22nd International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility . Association for Computing Machinery , 1 – 6 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3373625 . 3418305 [ 23 ] Ruth Behar . 1997 . The Vulnerable Observer : Anthropology That Breaks Your Heart ( 1st . ed . ) . Beacon Press , Boston . [ 24 ] H . Russell Bernard . 2012 . Social Research Methods : Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches ( 2nd . ed . ) . SAGE Publica - tions , Inc , Los Angeles . [ 25 ] Monique Botha , Jacqueline Hanlon , and Gemma Louise Williams . 2021 . Does language matter ? Identity - first versus person - first language use in autism research : A response to Vivanti . Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders ( 2021 ) . https : / / link . springer . com / article / 10 . 1007 / s10803 - 020 - 04858 - w . [ 26 ] Lydia Brown . 2021 . Identity first language . Autistic Self Advocacy Network . Retrieved June 2 , 2019 from https : / / autisticadvocacy . org / about - asan / identity - first - language / . [ 27 ] Ceren Budak and Rakesh Agrawal . 2013 . On participation in group chats on Twitter . In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on World Wide Web . ACM , 165 – 176 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2488388 . 2488404 [ 28 ] Moira Burke , Robert Kraut , and Diane Williams . 2010 . Social use of computer - mediated communication by adults on theautismspectrum . In Proceedingsofthe2010ACMConferenceonComputerSupportedCooperativeWork . Association for Computing Machinery , 425 – 434 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1718918 . 1718991 [ 29 ] Simon M . Bury , Rachel Jellett , Jennifer R . Spoor , and Darren Hedley . 2020 . “It defines who i am” or “it’s something i have” : What language do [ Autistic ] Australian adults [ on the Autism spectrum ] prefer ? Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders ( 2020 ) . https : / / link . springer . com / article / 10 . 1007 / s10803 - 020 - 04425 - 3 # citeas . [ 30 ] Judith Butler . 2004 . Undoing Gender . Routledge , New York ; London . [ 31 ] Fiona Kumari Campbell . 2009 . Disability harms : Exploring internalized ableism . Disabilities : Insights from Across Fields and Around the World . Marchall , Catherine A . , Elizabeth Kendall , and Martha E . Banks ( Eds . ) . Vol . 1 , ABC - Clio , Santa Barbera , CA , 19 – 33 . [ 32 ] Sarah Cassidy , Louise Bradley , Rebecca Shaw , and Simon Baron - Cohen . 2018 . Risk markers for suicidality in autistic adults . Molecular Autism 9 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 42 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s13229 - 018 - 0226 - 4 [ 33 ] S . A . Cassidy , K . Gould , E . Townsend , M . Pelton , A . E . Robertson , and J . Rodgers . 2020 . Is camouflaging autistic traits associated with suicidal thoughts and behaviours ? Expanding the interpersonal psychological theory of suicide in an undergraduate student sample . Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 50 , 10 ( 2020 ) , 3638 – 3648 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10803 - 019 - 04323 - 3 [ 34 ] Robert Chapman . 2020 . Neurodiversity , disability , and wellbeing . In Proceedings of the Neurodiversity Reader : Explor - ing Concepts , Lived Experience and Implications for Practice . Damian Milton ( Ed . ) , Pavilion Publishing and Media Ltd , 57 – 72 . [ 35 ] Kathy Charmaz and Richard G . Mitchell . 2001 . Grounded theory in ethnography . In Proceedings of the Handbook of Ethnography . SAGE Publications Ltd , 1 Oliver’s Yard , 55 City Road , London England EC1Y 1SP United Kingdom , 160 – 174 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4135 / 9781848608337 . n11 [ 36 ] Adele E . Clarke , Carrie Friese , and Rachel Washburn . 2017 . Situational Analysis : Grounded Theory After the Interpre - tive Turn ( 2nd . ed . ) . SAGE Publications , Inc . [ 37 ] Sasha Costanza - Chock . 2020 . Design Justice : Community - Led Practices to Build the Worlds We Need . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . [ 38 ] CRAE [ @ CRAE _ IOE ] . 2019 . # autinsar A1 . 1 ) more participatory research throughout the entire research process . From writing the grants , to designing the study , to analysing and collecting data , to taking the findings back to the community / developing leads for further research , building future leaders . Retrieved April 18 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / CRAE _ IOE / status / 1123989794634313740 . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . 38 : 28 J . Guberman [ 39 ] Crutches & Spice [ @ Imani _ Barbarin ] . 2019 . There is no form of capitalism that values disabled people . Retrieved September 12 , 2019 from https : / / twitter . com / Imani _ Barbarin / status / 1171913965250723846 . [ 40 ] The Lame Dame . 2012 . The Actuallyautistic Tag : Since There Seems to Be Some Confusion . Retrieved August 22 , 2019 from https : / / thelamedame . tumblr . com / post / 26098953978 / the - actuallyautistic - tag - since - there - seems - to - be . [ 41 ] Shannon Des Roches Rosa . 2018 . Autism meeting evolves to address needs of people on the spectrum . Re - trieved April 1 , 2021 from https : / / www . spectrumnews . org / opinion / viewpoint / autism - meeting - evolves - address - needs - people - spectrum / . [ 42 ] Merriam - Webster . comDictionary . 2021 . Neurotypical . RetrievedMarch29 , 2021fromhttps : / / www . merriam - webster . com / dictionary / neurotypical . [ 43 ] Carl DiSalvo . 2018 . Bruno latour as sociologist and design theorist ? In Proceedings of the Critical Theory and Interac - tion Design . Jeffrey Bardzell , Shaowen Bardzell , and Mark Blythe ( Eds . ) , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 470 – 484 . [ 44 ] Jay Dolmage . 2017 . Academic Ableism : Disability and Higher Education . University of Michigan Press , Ann Arbor . [ 45 ] Paul Dourish . 2006 . Implications for design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , 541 – 550 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1124772 . 1124855 [ 46 ] Paul Dourish . 2018 . Ideology and interpellation : Althusser’s “ideology and ideological state apparatuses” . In Proceed - ings of the Critical Theory and Interaction Design . Jeffrey Bardzell , Shaowen Bardzell , and Mark Blythe ( Eds . ) , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 407 – 416 . [ 47 ] Dr Jac [ @ JacdenHouting ] . 2019 . A2 : So , so many ! Basically everything to do with adulthood . Trauma . Long - term consequences of early intervention . # AutINSAR . Retrieved April 17 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / JacdenHouting / status / 1123991536344207361 . [ 48 ] Dr Jac [ @ JacdenHouting ] . 2019 . A7 : Accessible language - so many “lay” summaries are NOT lay . Paywalls , obvs . But also topics researched , and the way research is presented . Research so confronting that it triggers meltdown is NOT accessible . # AutINSAR . Retrieved April 18 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / JacdenHouting / status / 1124006953691250695 . [ 49 ] Laina Eartharcher . 2017 . The # Actuallyautistic Hashtag Is * Only * for Actually - Autistic People . Retrieved Au - gust 22 , 2019 from https : / / thesilentwaveblog . wordpress . com / 2017 / 01 / 02 / the - actuallyautistic - hashtag - is - only - for - actually - autistic - people / . [ 50 ] Casey Fiesler . 2019 . Ethical considerations for research involving ( speculative ) public data . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , GROUP ( 2019 ) , 1 – 13 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3370271 [ 51 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Katta Spiel , Laura Scheepmaker , and Irene Posch . 2019 . Nurturing constructive disagree - ment - agonistic design with neurodiverse children . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , Glasgow , Scotland Uk , 1 – 11 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300501 [ 52 ] Morton Ann Gernsbacher . 2017 . Editorial perspective : The use of person - first language in scholarly writing may accentuate stigma . Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry , and Allied Disciplines 58 , 7 ( 2017 ) , 859 – 861 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / jcpp . 12706 [ 53 ] Kristen Gillespie - Lynch , Steven K . Kapp , Christina Shane - Simpson , David Shane Smith , and Ted Hutman . 2014 . In - tersections between the autism spectrum and the internet : Perceived benefits and preferred functions of computer - mediated communication . Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities 52 , 6 ( 2014 ) , 456 – 469 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1352 / 1934 - 9556 - 52 . 6 . 456 [ 54 ] Matthew S . Goodwin , Ozan Özdenizci , Catalina Cumpanasoiu , Peng Tian , Yuan Guo , Amy Stedman , Christine Peura , Carla Mazefsky , Matthew Siegel , Deniz Erdoˇgmuş , and Stratis Ioannidis . 2018 . Predicting imminent aggression onset in minimally - verbal youth with autism spectrum disorder using preceding physiological signals . In Proceedings of the 12th EAI International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare . Association for Computing Machinery , 201 – 207 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3240925 . 3240980 [ 55 ] Elizabeth J . Grace . 2013 . Autistethnography . In Proceedings of the Both Sides of the Table : Autoethnographies of Ed - ucators Learning and Teaching WithIn [ Dis ] ability . Philip Smith ( Ed . ) , Peter Lang Publishing , Inc , New York , New York . [ 56 ] Oliver Lee Haimson . 2018 . The Social Complexities of Transgender Identity Disclosure on Social Media . Ph . D . Disserta - tion . UC Irvine . Retrieved from https : / / escholarship . org / uc / item / 19c235q0 . [ 57 ] Foad Hamidi , Melanie Baljko , and Isabel Gómez . 2017 . Using participatory design with proxies with children with limited communication . In Proceedings of the 19th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Ac - cessibility . Association for Computing Machinery , 250 – 259 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3132525 . 3132527 [ 58 ] Aimi Hamraie and Kelly Fritsch . 2019 . Crip technoscience manifesto . Catalyst : Feminism , Theory , Technoscience 5 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 1 – 33 . Retrieved from https : / / catalystjournal . org / index . php / catalyst / article / view / 29607 . [ 59 ] Donna Haraway . 1988 . Situated knowledges : The science question in feminism and the privilege of partial perspec - tive . Feminist Studies 14 , 3 ( 1988 ) , 575 – 599 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 3178066 ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . # ActuallyAutistic Twitter as a Site for Epistemic Resistance and Crip Futurity 38 : 29 [ 60 ] Donna Haraway . 1990 . Simians , Cyborgs , and Women : The Reinvention of Nature ( 1st . ed . ) . Routledge , New York . [ 61 ] Christina Harrington , Sheena Erete , and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Deconstructing community - based collaborative design : Towards more equitable participatory design engagements . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 1 – 25 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359318 [ 62 ] Christina N . Harrington , Katya Borgos - Rodriguez , and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Engaging low - income african american older adults in health discussions through community - based design workshops . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI’19 . ACM Press , Glasgow , Scotland Uk , 1 – 15 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300823 [ 63 ] Helen Rottier [ @ helenrottier ] . 2019 . A2 : I also think it’s important and valuable to communicate about research findings on social media ! Our community has a right to know what is out there , in plain language and without paywalls . # AutChat . Retrieved April 18 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / helenrottier / status / 1191103941875879936 . [ 64 ] Alyssa Hillary . 2019 . Am I the curriculum ? Curriculum Inquiry 49 , 4 ( 2019 ) , 373 – 386 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 03626784 . 2019 . 1664255 [ 65 ] Megan Hofmann . 2019 . Accessibility Protests at SIGCHI . Retrieved October 21 , 2021 from https : / / www . washington . edu / accesscomputing / resources / accesscomputing - news - june - 2019 / accessibility - protests - sigchi . [ 66 ] MeganHofmann , DevvaKasnitz , JenniferMankoff , andCynthiaL . Bennett . 2020 . Livingdisabilitytheory : Reflections on access , research , and design . In Proceedings of the 22nd International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility . Association for Computing Machinery , 1 – 13 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3373625 . 3416996 [ 67 ] Hwajung Hong , Eric Gilbert , Gregory D . Abowd , and Rosa I . Arriaga . 2015 . In - group questions and out - group answers : Crowdsourcing daily living advice for individuals with autism . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI’15 . ACM Press , Seoul , Republic of Korea , 777 – 786 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702402 [ 68 ] Sins Invalid . 2019 . Skin , Tooth , and Bone : The Basis of Movement is Our People ( 2nd . ed . ) . sinsinvalid . org . [ 69 ] Lilly Irani , Janet Vertesi , Paul Dourish , Kavita Philip , and Rebecca E . Grinter . 2010 . Postcolonial computing : A lens on design and development . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Asso - ciation for Computing Machinery , 1311 – 1320 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753522 [ 70 ] Merri Johnson and Robert McRuer . 2014 . Cripistemologies . Journal of Literary and Cultural Disability Studies 8 , 2 ( 2014 ) , 127 – 148 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3828 / jlcds . 2014 . 12 [ 71 ] Julia Bascom [ @ JustStimming ] . 2019 . A2 : Everything . MOTOR DIFFERENCES , including inertia . Mental health , ad - diction , and suicide . Actual reasons behind behaviors . Different responses to different kinds of prompts or support . Burnout . Fluctuating skills . Actual outcomes of ABA and other interventions . ( 1 / 3 ) # autinsar . Retrieved April 17 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / JustStimming / status / 1123991285759655936 . [ 72 ] Neurodivergent K . 2015 . PSA from the actual coiner of “neurodivergent” . Retrieved April 11 , 2021 from https : / / sherlocksflataffect . tumblr . com / post / 121295972384 / psa - from - the - actual - coiner - of - neurodivergent . [ 73 ] Alison Kafer . 2013 . Feminist , Queer , Crip . Indiana University Press , Bloomington , Indiana . [ 74 ] Steven K . Kapp , Kristen Gillespie - Lynch , Lauren E . Sherman , and Ted Hutman . 2013 . Deficit , difference , or both ? Autism and neurodiversity . Developmental Psychology 49 , 1 ( 2013 ) , 59 – 71 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0028353 [ 75 ] Jofish Kaye . 2018 . Barthes , and calling the mundane to account . In Proceedings of the Critical Theory and Interaction Design . Jeffrey Bardzell , Shaowen Bardzell , and Mark Blythe ( Eds . ) , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 131 – 143 . [ 76 ] LorcanKenny , CarolineHattersley , BonnieMolins , CaroleBuckley , CarolPovey , andElizabethPellicano . 2016 . Which terms should be used to describe autism ? Perspectives from the UK autism community . Autism 20 , 4 ( 2016 ) , 442 – 462 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1362361315588200 [ 77 ] OsKeyes . 2020 . Automatingautism : Disability , discourse , andArtificialIntelligence . JournalofSociotechnicalCritique 1 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 31 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 25779 / 89bj - j396 [ 78 ] Eunjung Kim . 2017 . Curative Violence : Rehabilitating Disability , Gender , and Sexuality in Modern Korea ( illustrated ed . ) . Duke University Press Books , Durham . [ 79 ] Laura Crane [ @ LauraMayCrane ] . 2019 . A2 : I think the thing really missing from research conversations is how we better include and involve autistic people as research partners . I’m a big fan of the work being led by @ cnicolaidis @ dora _ raymaker in this respect ! # AutINSAR . Retrieved April 18 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / LauraMayCrane / status / 1123991735078666240 . [ 80 ] Laura Crane [ @ LauraMayCrane ] . 2019 . A7 : I think researchers often use terribly offensive language when talking about autism ( abnormal , deficit , impaired ) - this makes research inaccessible ( I cringe at my old research articles where I used words like this . . . I’m trying to be a better ally now ! ) # AutINSAR . Retrieved April 21 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / LauraMayCrane / status / 1124002956154691592 . [ 81 ] Cindy Lin and Silvia Lindtner . 2021 . Techniques of use : Confronting value systems of productivity , progress , and usefulness in computing and design . In Proceedings of the ACM Human Factors in Computing Systems Conference . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . 38 : 30 J . Guberman [ 82 ] Lorcan Kenny [ @ LorcanKenny ] . 2019 . @ thinkingautism A2 : Some examples include sleep difficulties , food and eat - ing challenges , managing physical health difficulties , keeping employment ( rather than simply attaining employ - ment ) , assessing how autistic involvement actually changes how research gets done # AutINSAR . Retrieved April 18 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / LorcanKenny / status / 1123992285446852609 . [ 83 ] Lorcan Kenny [ @ LorcanKenny ] . 2019 . @ thinkingautism A7 : The results of research is often only described in sci - entific papers which might be behind a paywall and written in scientific language . To change this we must get universities to incentivise researchers to do public engagement ( i . e . , make it a promotion criteria ) # AutINSAR . Re - trieved April 18 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / LorcanKenny / status / 1124002101766578176 . [ 84 ] O . Ivar Lovaas and Tristram Smith . 1988 . Intensive behavioral treatment for young autistic children . In Proceedings of the Advances in Clinical Child Psychology . Springer , 285 – 324 . [ 85 ] Sara Luterman . 2015 . Autism self - diagnosis is not special snowflake syndrome . NOS Magazine . Retrieved August 24 , 2019 from http : / / nosmag . org / autism - self - diagnosis - is - not - special - snowflake - syndrome / . [ 86 ] Andrew Main . 2003 . Allism : An Introduction to a Little - known Condition . Technical Report . Retrieved from http : / / www . fysh . org / ~ zefram / allism / allism _ intro . txt . [ 87 ] Jennifer Mankoff , Gillian R . Hayes , and Devva Kasnitz . 2010 . Disability studies as a source of critical inquiry for the field of assistive technology . In Proceedings of the 12th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility . Association for Computing Machinery , 3 – 10 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1878803 . 1878807 [ 88 ] Gabriela Marcu , Anind K . Dey , and Sara Kiesler . 2012 . Parent - driven use of wearable cameras for autism support : A field study with families . In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on Ubiquitous Computing . Association for Computing Machinery , 401 – 410 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2370216 . 2370277 [ 89 ] Annette Markham . 2012 . Fabrication as ethical practice . Information , Communication and Society 15 , 3 ( 2012 ) , 334 – 353 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1369118X . 2011 . 641993 [ 90 ] Micah O . Mazurek . 2013 . Social media use among adults with autism spectrum disorders . Computers in Human Behavior 29 , 4 ( 2013 ) , 1709 – 1714 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2013 . 02 . 004 [ 91 ] Anne McGuire . 2016 . Life without autism : A cultural logic of violence . In Proceedings of the Re - Thinking Autism : Diagnosis , Identity and Equality . Sami Timimi , Rebecca Mallett , and Katherine Runswick - Cole ( Eds . ) , Jessica Kingsley Publishers , 93 – 109 . [ 92 ] Anne McGuire . 2016 . War on Autism : On the Cultural Logic of Normative Violence . University of Michigan Press , Ann Arbor . [ 93 ] Robert McRuer and Michael Bérubé . 2006 . Crip Theory : Cultural Signs of Queerness and Disability . NYU Press . [ 94 ] Claudia Megele . 2014 . Theorizing twitter chat . Journal of Perspectives in Applied Academic Practice 2 , 2 ( 2014 ) , 46 – 51 . [ 95 ] Melissa Chapple [ @ melissachapple ] . 2019 . @ autchatmod A2 : Findings should be put in to accessible formats and be open access if possible ( free to read ) . I’ve found autistic communities online to be an amazing resource - the community is diverse so not everyone will like the methods being transparent about this is important . Retrieved April 18 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / melissachapple / status / 1191103131301625859 . [ 96 ] Matthew B . Miles , A . Michael Huberman , and Johnny Saldana . 2019 . Qualitative Data Analysis : A Methods Sourcebook ( 4th . ed . ) . SAGE Publications , Inc , Los Angeles . [ 97 ] Elliot Mishler . 2000 . Critical perspectives of the biomedical Model . In Proceedings of the Perspectives in Medical Soci - ology ( 3rd . ed . ) . Phil Brown ( Ed . ) , Waveland Pr Inc , Prospect Heights , Ill , 153 – 166 . [ 98 ] David T . Mitchell and Sharon L . Snyder . 2015 . The Biopolitics of Disability : Neoliberalism , Ablenationalism , and Pe - ripheral Embodiment . University of Michigan Press . [ 99 ] Peter J . Moor , Ard Heuvelman , and Ria Verleur . 2010 . Flaming on YouTube . Computers in Human Behavior 26 , 6 ( 2010 ) , 1536 – 1546 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2010 . 05 . 023 [ 100 ] United Nations . 2006 . OHCHR | Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities . Retrieved April 17 , 2021 from https : / / www . ohchr . org / en / hrbodies / crpd / pages / conventionrightspersonswithdisabilities . aspx . [ 101 ] Ari Neeman . 2015 . Dealing with Accidental Discrimination . Retrieved April 11 , 2021 from https : / / arineeman . com / 2015 / 11 / 30 / dealing - with - accidental - discrimination / 00000 . [ 102 ] Autistic Self Advocacy Network . 2014 . The Autistic Self Advocacy Network . Retrieved August 22 , 2019 from https : / / autisticadvocacy . tumblr . com / post / 95007096162 / what - is - with - the - tags - actuallyautistic - which . [ 103 ] Alan F . Newell . 1995 . Extra - ordinary human - computer interaction . Extra - ordinary Human - computer Interaction - Interfaces for Userd with Disabilities , Alistair D . N . Edwards ( Ed . ) . Cambridge University Press . New York , NY . ( 1995 ) , 3 – 18 . [ 104 ] Noah Sasson [ @ Noahsasson ] . 2019 . @ AspieHuman @ kmdebrabander @ DanielFaso most of the autistic adults they were rating were male . The tiny sample of autistic adults who were female prevented us making conclusions about whether autistic females are evaluated differently than autistic males , but that is a direction we are interested in going . Retrieved April 18 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / Noahsasson / status / 1105547597870182402 . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . # ActuallyAutistic Twitter as a Site for Epistemic Resistance and Crip Futurity 38 : 31 [ 105 ] Noah Sasson [ @ Noahsasson ] . 2019 . @ AspieHuman @ kmdebrabander @ DanielFaso The rater sample was 76 % fe - male , but we still had well over 100 male raters so we still could examine gender effects . There were just a few . Male NTs rated autistic adults as more attractive and were more willing to hang out with them compared to NT females . Maybe because . . . Retrieved April 18 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / Noahsasson / status / 1105547112157192192 . [ 106 ] Noah Sasson [ @ Noahsasson ] . 2019 . We have a new paper ! Led by my student Kerrianne Morrison ( w / @ kmdebrabander and @ DanielFaso ) we find that impressions of autistic adults made by neurotypicals ( NT ) are driven more by characteristics of the NT perceiver than by those of the ASD target . THREAD https : / / t . co / V0xtFdXFGx . Retrieved April 18 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / Noahsasson / status / 1104028378011758593 . [ 107 ] Jessica S . Oliveira , Felipe O . Franco , Mirian C . Revers , Andréia F . Silva , Joana Portolese , Helena Brentani , Ariane Machado - Lima , and Fátima L . S . Nunes . 2021 . Computer - aided autism diagnosis based on visual attention models using eye tracking . Scientific Reports 11 , 1 ( 2021 ) . https : / / www . nature . com / articles / s41598 - 021 - 89023 - 8 # citeas . [ 108 ] Mike Oliver . 2013 . The social model of disability : Thirty years on . Disability and Society 28 , 7 ( 2013 ) , 1024 – 1026 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09687599 . 2013 . 818773 [ 109 ] Ruth Osorio . 2020 . I am # ActuallyAutistic , hear me tweet : The autist - topoi of autistic activists on Twitter | encultur - ation . Enculturation 31 ( 2020 ) . Retrieved from http : / / enculturation . net / I _ Am _ ActuallyAutistic . [ 110 ] Nicholas Proferes . 2017 . Information flow solipsism in an exploratory study of beliefs about Twitter . Social Media + Society 3 , 1 ( 2017 ) . https : / / journals . sagepub . com / doi / 10 . 1177 / 2056305117698493 # core - collateral - self - citation . [ 111 ] Jasbir K . Puar . 2017 . The Right to Maim : Debility , Capacity , Disability . Duke University Press Books , Durham . [ 112 ] Kathryn E . Ringland . 2019 . A place to play : The ( Dis ) Abled embodied experience for autistic children in online spaces . In Proceedings ofthe2019CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems . Association forComputing Machinery , Glasgow , Scotland Uk , 1 – 14 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300518 [ 113 ] Kathryn E . Ringland , Christine T . Wolf , Lynn Dombrowski , and Gillian R . Hayes . 2015 . Making “safe” : Community - centered practices in a virtual world dedicated to children with autism . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . Association for Computing Machinery , 1788 – 1800 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675216 [ 114 ] KathrynE . Ringland , ChristineT . Wolf , HeatherFaucett , LynnDombrowski , andGillianR . Hayes . 2016 . “WillIalways be not social ? ” : Re - conceptualizing sociality in the context of a minecraft community for autism . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI’16 . ACM Press , 1256 – 1269 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858038 [ 115 ] Scott Michael Robertson . 2009 . Neurodiversity , quality of life , and autistic adults : Shifting research and professional focuses onto real - life challenges . Disability Studies Quarterly 30 , 1 ( 2009 ) . Retrieved from https : / / dsq - sds . org / article / view / 1069 . [ 116 ] Scott M . Robertson and Ari D . Ne’eman . 2008 . Autistic acceptance , the college campus , and technology : Growth of neurodiversity in society and academia . Disability Studies Quarterly 28 , 4 ( 2008 ) . Retrieved from https : / / dsq - sds . org / article / view / 146 . [ 117 ] Julia Miele Rodas . 2008 . “On the spectrum” : Rereading contact and affect in jane eyre . Nineteenth - Century Gender Studies 4 , 2 ( 2008 ) , 115 – 30 . [ 118 ] Robin Roscigno . 2019 . Neuroqueerness as fugitive practice : Reading against the grain of applied behavioral analysis scholarship . Educational Studies 55 , 4 ( 2019 ) , 405 – 419 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00131946 . 2019 . 1629929 [ 119 ] Irene Rose . 2005 . Autistic autobiography : Introducing the field . In Proceedings of the Autism and Representation : Writ - ing , Cognition , Disability Conference . [ 120 ] Irene Rose . 2008 . Autistic autobiography or autistic life narrative ? Journal of Literary and Cultural Disability Studies 2 , 1 ( 2008 ) , 44 – 54 . [ 121 ] Kieran Rose . 2018 . Masking : I am not OK – The Autistic Advocate . Retrieved from https : / / theautisticadvocate . com / 2018 / 07 / masking - i - am - not - ok . html . [ 122 ] Daniela K . Rosner . 2018 . Critical Fabulations : Reworking the Methods and Margins of Design ( illustrated ed . ) . The MIT Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts . [ 123 ] Helen Rottier , Ben Pfingston , and Joshua Guberman . 2022 . Ghosts , mice , and robots : DisAppearing the autistic per - son . In Proceedings of the DisAppearing : Encounters in Disability Studies . Tanya Tichkosky , Elaine Cagulada , Maddy De Welles , and Efrat Gold ( Eds . ) , Women’s Press , Vancouver , BC , Canada , 93 – 105 . [ 124 ] RuaM . Williams [ @ StarFeuri ] . 2019 . Q2con’t : Interpretationoffindingsshouldbevalidatedwiththeoriginalposters . This means requesting retroactive consent . Not everyone will respond . But those that do are entitled to editorial control , anonymity ( or not ) , and veto power . # AutChat . Retrieved April 18 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / StarFeuri / status / 1191104246638403589 . [ 125 ] Rua M . Williams [ @ StarFeuri ] . 2019 . Q2 con’t : Sound like work ? So was the original labor in the tweets and blogs you’re scraping . Also , I’ve seen projects like this where blogs are “anonymized " but literally anyone who’s been in the community long enough can identify the original content . It’s theft . Cite us . Retrieved April 18 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / StarFeuri / status / 1191105055665139712 . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . 38 : 32 J . Guberman [ 126 ] Rua M . Williams [ @ StarFeuri ] . 2019 . Q2 : I find the emerging practice of “scraping” publicly posted data for re - search purposes troublesome . It Can be extractive and exploitative . People consent to public posting but they don’t consent to research interpretation . # AutChat ( continued in replies . ) . Retrieved April 18 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / StarFeuri / status / 1191103123684806661 . [ 127 ] Ginny Russel . 2020 . Critiques of the neurodiversity movement . In Autistic Community and the Neurodiversity Move - ment : Stories from the Frontline . Steven K . Kapp ( Ed . ) , Palgrave Macmillan , 287 – 303 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 981 - 13 - 8437 - 0 [ 128 ] sam [ @ Endo _ Gremlin . 2019 . # AutChat a2 I think following our blogs and social media ect is fine but any use of it should be with informed consent from all involved . And neurotypicals should always accept that they may be asked to leave a discussion or accept a group may be ranting in general not personal . Retrieved April 18 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / Endo _ Gremlin / status / 1191103196283985920 . [ 129 ] sarah o’brien [ @ SarahMarieOB ] . 2019 . A1 : Top three priorities 1 . Co - production being done meaningfully and not to fulfil diversity criteria butin allareas . 2 . Practical , appliedand applicableresearch . 3 . Lifetimeresearch - weare young and old ! # AutINSAR . Retrieved April 18 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / SarahMarieOB / status / 1123989714829225985 . [ 130 ] Vered Seidmann . 2020 . On blogs , autistic bloggers , and autistic space . Information , Communication and Society ( April 2020 ) , 1 – 16 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1369118X . 2020 . 1754878 [ 131 ] Ashley Shew . 2017 . Technoableism , Cyborg Bodies , and Mars . Technology and Disability . Retrieved September 25 , 2019 from https : / / techanddisability . com / 2017 / 11 / 11 / technoableism - cyborg - bodies - and - mars / . [ 132 ] Ashley Shew . 2020 . Ableism , technoableism , and future AI . IEEE Technology and Society Magazine 39 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 40 – 85 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MTS . 2020 . 2967492 [ 133 ] Tobin Siebers . 2018 . Disability Theory . University of Michigan Press , Ann Arbor . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3998 / mpub . 309723 [ 134 ] Jesper Simonsen and Toni Robertson . 2012 . Routledge International Handbook of Participatory Design . Routledge . [ 135 ] Jim Sinclair . 2010 . Being autistic together . Disability Studies Quarterly 30 , 1 ( 2010 ) . Retrieved from http : / / dsq - sds . org / article / view / 1075 . [ 136 ] Jim Sinclair . 2012 . Autism network international : The development of a community and its culture . In Proceedings of the Loud Hands : Autistic People , Speaking . Julia Bascom ( Ed . ) , The Autistic Press , 22 – 70 . [ 137 ] Judy Singer . 2017 . NeuroDiversity : The Birth of an Idea . Judy Singer . [ 138 ] Gary Singleton , Steve Warren , and Wayne Piersel . 2014 . Clinical overview of the need for technologies for around - the - clock monitoring of the health status of severely disabled autistic children . In Proceedings of the 2014 36th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society . 789 – 791 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / EMBC . 2014 . 6943709 [ 139 ] Katta Spiel , Emeline Brulé , Christopher Frauenberger , Gilles Bailly , and Geraldine Fitzpatrick . 2018 . Micro - ethics for participatory design with marginalised children . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Full Papers - Volume 1 ( PDC’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , Hasselt and Genk , Belgium , 1 – 12 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210586 . 3210603 [ 140 ] Katta Spiel , Christopher Frauenberger , Os Keyes , and Geraldine Fitzpatrick . 2019 . Agency of autistic children in technology research & # x2014 ; a critical literature review . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 26 , 6 ( 2019 ) , 38 : 1 – 38 : 40 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3344919 [ 141 ] Katta Spiel and Kathrin Gerling . 2021 . The purpose of play : How HCI games research fails neurodivergent pop - ulations . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 28 , 2 ( 2021 ) , 11 : 1 – 11 : 40 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3432245 [ 142 ] Clay Spinuzzi . 2005 . The methodology of participatory design . Technical Communication 52 , 2 ( 2005 ) , 163 – 174 . [ 143 ] SueFletcher - Watson [ @ SueReviews ] . 2019 . A3I’mconcernedabouttechnologybasedmonitoringsystemsthataren’t co - created around an autistic - identified need . Massive risk of normalisation here as well as intrusion and privacy issues . # AutINSAR . Retrieved April 17 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / SueReviews / status / 1123995726915276803 . [ 144 ] Tania ZA AutisticStrategies . net [ @ ekverstania ] . 2019 . Q1 # AutINSAR 1 . Treatment of hypo - and hyperkalaemic sen - soryoverstimulationandcofactorssuchasiNOSoverproduction2 . autisticapraxia ( body - minddisconnect ) 3 . # CRPD violationsandtraumainABA . 4 . RCCXTheory . ( Ja , Iknowyousaidthree . . . ) https : / / t . co / qHpLzU9f4p . RetrievedApril 17 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / ekverstania / status / 1124200068205166592 . [ 145 ] the neuropunk who lived . 2019 . a3 see my previous comment on outcome measures is probably my main concerns - if we’re measuring the wrong things , we get lauded “evidence based practices” that are actually intensely harmful # AutINSAR . Retrieved April 17 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / endeverstar / status / 1123993380445356033 . [ 146 ] theories of minds [ @ theoriesofminds ] . 2019 . A3 I’m very concerned about research being translated uncritically into tech for fine - grained behavioral control and surveillance . We urgently need research on harms done including when implemented as intended . # AutINSAR https : / / t . co / 52vayHFOJt . Retrieved April 17 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / theoriesofminds / status / 1123993046813749249 . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . # ActuallyAutistic Twitter as a Site for Epistemic Resistance and Crip Futurity 38 : 33 [ 147 ] theories of minds [ @ theoriesofminds ] . 2019 . @ autchatmod A2 I think it’s important for researchers who study autismandsimilarneurodivergencestolearnfromautisticandndcommunities , anddoublyimportantforautistic / nd researchers to also have access to social support from those communities . # AutChat . Retrieved April 18 , 2021 from https : / / twitter . com / theoriesofminds / status / 1191102193048276992 . [ 148 ] Thinking Person’s Guide To Autism [ @ thinkingautism ] . 2019 . Q1 : What are your top three priorities for autism research ? # AutINSAR # INSAR2019 . Retrieved August 24 , 2022 from https : / / twitter . com / thinkingautism / status / 1123988758565666818 . [ 149 ] Thinking Person’s Guide To Autism [ @ thinkingautism ] . 2019 . Q2 : Which topics do # ActuallyAutistic people discuss that are missing from research conversations ? # AutINSAR # INSAR2019 . Retrieved August 24 , 2022 from https : / / twitter . com / thinkingautism / status / 1123990614230622209 . [ 150 ] Thinking Person’s Guide To Autism [ @ thinkingautism ] . 2019 . Q3 : What concerns do you have about the directions in which autism research is headed , based on work presented at # INSAR2019 , or in general ? # AutINSAR . Retrieved August 24 , 2022 from https : / / twitter . com / thinkingautism / status / 1123992513738629120 . [ 151 ] Thinking Person’s Guide To Autism [ @ thinkingautism ] . 2019 . Q4 : Researchers : How do you think your research ( or another researcher’s work ) will improve the lives of # ActuallyAutistic people who are already here—as opposed to autistic people in future generations ? # AutINSAR # INSAR2019 . Retrieved August 24 , 2022 from https : / / twitter . com / thinkingautism / status / 1123993972484071424 . [ 152 ] Thinking Person’s Guide To Autism [ @ thinkingautism ] . 2019 . Q5 : Which co - occurring conditions need more research attention , and why ? # AutINSAR # INSAR2019 . Retrieved August 24 , 2022 from https : / / twitter . com / thinkingautism / status / 1123995504289955841 . [ 153 ] Thinking Person’s Guide To Autism [ @ thinkingautism ] . 2019 . Q6 : What are some concerns of minority autistic community members that don’t get enough research attention ? # AutINSAR # INSAR2019 . Retrieved August 24 , 2022 from https : / / twitter . com / thinkingautism / status / 1123998308064747520 . [ 154 ] ThinkingPerson’s GuideToAutism [ @ thinkingautism ] . 2019 . Q7 : Whataresome barriersthatmakeautismresearch results less accessible to # ActuallyAutistic people ( cognitive , financial , etc ) , and how can we reduce them ? # AutIN - SAR # INSAR2019 . Retrieved August 24 , 2022 from https : / / twitter . com / thinkingautism / status / 1124000719164641286 . [ 155 ] Thinking Person’s Guide To Autism [ @ thinkingautism ] . 2019 . Q8 : Any topics we’ve missed that you’d like to discuss ? # AutINSAR # INSAR2019 . Retrieved August 24 , 2022 from https : / / twitter . com / thinkingautism / status / 1124001786631794688 . [ 156 ] Adam Tornes and Leanne Trujillo . 2021 . Enabling the future of academic research with the Twitter API . Retrieved August 24 , 2022 from https : / / blog . twitter . com / developer / en _ us / topics / tools / 2021 / enabling - the - future - of - academic - research - with - the - twitter - api . html . [ 157 ] TeunA . vanDijk . 1993 . Principlesofcriticaldiscourseanalysis . DiscourseandSociety 4 , 2 ( 1993 ) , 249 – 283 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0957926593004002006 [ 158 ] Deborah M . Ward , Karen E . Dill - Shackleford , and Micah O . Mazurek . 2018 . Social media use and happiness in adults with autism spectrum disorder . Cyberpsychology , Behavior , and Social Networking 21 , 3 ( 2018 ) , 205 – 209 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1089 / cyber . 2017 . 0331 [ 159 ] Joseph Weizenbaum . 1983 . Eliza—a computer program for the study of natural language communication between man and machine . Communications of the ACM 26 , 1 ( 1983 ) , 23 – 28 . [ 160 ] Rua M . Williams . 2021 . I , misfit : Empty fortresses , social robots , and peculiar relations in autism research . Techné : Research in Philosophy and Technology 25 , 3 ( ( 2021 ) , 451 – 478 . [ 161 ] Rua M . Williams and LouAnne E . Boyd . 2019 . Prefigurative politics and passionate witnessing . In Proceedings of the 21stInternationalACMSIGACCESSConferenceonComputersandAccessibility . AssociationforComputingMachinery , 262 – 266 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3308561 . 3355617 [ 162 ] Rua M . Williams and Juan E . Gilbert . 2019 . Cyborg perspectives on computing research reform . In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , 1 – 11 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290607 . 3310421 [ 163 ] Brooke Winters . 2018 . Understanding competing accessibility needs . Thinking Person’s Guide to Autism . Re - trieved April 11 , 2021 from https : / / thinkingautismguide . com / 2018 / 10 / acknowledging - and - accepting - competing - accessibility . html . [ 164 ] Jacob O . Wobbrock , Shaun K . Kane , Krzysztof Z . Gajos , Susumu Harada , and Jon Froehlich . 2011 . Ability - based de - sign : Concept , principles and examples . ACM Transactions on Accessible Computing 3 , 3 ( 2011 ) , 9 : 1 – 9 : 27 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1952383 . 1952384 [ 165 ] M . Remi Yergeau . 2010 . Circle wars : Reshaping the typical autism essay . Disability Studies Quarterly 30 , 1 ( 2010 ) . Retrieved from https : / / dsq - sds . org / article / view / 1063 . [ 166 ] M . RemiYergeau . 2013 . Clinicallysignificantdisturbance : Ontheoristswhotheorizetheoryofmind . DisabilityStudies Quarterly 33 , 4 ( 2013 ) . Retrieved from http : / / dsq - sds . org / article / view / 3876 . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 . 38 : 34 J . Guberman [ 167 ] M . Remi Yergeau . 2018 . Authoring Autism : On Rhetoric and Neurological Queerness . Duke University Press Books , Durham . [ 168 ] Anon Ymous , Katta Spiel , Os Keyes , Rua M . Williams , Judith Good , Eva Hornecker , and Cynthia L . Bennett . 2020 . “I am just terrified of my future” - Epistemic violence in disability related technology research . In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , 1 – 16 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3334480 . 3381828 [ 169 ] Camellia Zakaria , Richard C . Davis , and Zachary Walker . 2016 . Seeking independent management of problem behav - ior : A proof - of - concept study with children and their teachers . In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children . Association for Computing Machinery , 196 – 205 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2930674 . 2930693 [ 170 ] Alyssa Hillary Zisk . 2014 . Yes , That Too : Why actually autistic tag . Retrieved August 22 , 2019 from http : / / yesthattoo . blogspot . com / 2014 / 09 / why - actually - autistic - tag . html . [ 171 ] Alyssa Hillary Zisk and Elizabeth Dalton . 2019 . Augmentative and alternative communication for speaking autistic adults : Overview and recommendations . Autism in Adulthood 1 , 2 ( 2019 ) , 93 – 100 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1089 / aut . 2018 . 0007 [ 172 ] Annuska Zolyomi , Anne Spencer Ross , Arpita Bhattacharya , Lauren Milne , and Sean Munson . 2017 . Value sensitive design for neurodiverse teams in higher education . In Proceedings of the 19th International ACM SIGACCESS Con - ference on Computers and Accessibility . Association for Computing Machinery , 353 – 354 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3132525 . 3134787 [ 173 ] Annuska Zolyomi , Anne Spencer Ross , Arpita Bhattacharya , Lauren Milne , and Sean A . Munson . 2018 . Values , iden - tity , and social translucence : Neurodiverse student teams in higher education . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Confer - ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , 1 – 13 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174073 Received 2 August 2021 ; revised 14 June 2022 ; accepted 8 August 2022 ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 30 , No . 3 , Article 38 . Publication date : June 2023 .