AI Magazine Search Current Archives Announcements About Login Home / Archives / Vol 12 No 2 : Summer 1991 / Articles Improving Human Decision Making through Case - Based Decision Aiding Janet L . Kolodneer DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1609 / aimag . v12i2 . 895 Abstract Case - based reasoning provides both a methodology for building systems and a cognitive model of people . It is consistent with much that psychologists have observed in the natural problem solving people do . Psychologists have also observed , however , that people have several problems in doing analogical or case - based reasoning . Although they are good at using analogs to solve new problems , they are not always good at remembering the right ones . However , computers are good at remembering . I present case - based decision aiding as a methodology for building systems in which people and machines work together to solve problems . The case - based decision - aiding system augments the person ' s memory by providing cases ( analogs ) for a person to use in solving a problem . The person does the actual decision making using these cases as guidelines . I present an overview of case - based decision aiding , some technical details about how to implement such systems , and several examples of case - based systems .  PDF Published 1991 - 06 - 15 Issue Vol 12 No 2 : Summer 1991 Section Articles Authors who publish with this journal agree to the following terms : 1 . Author ( s ) agree to transfer their copyrights in their article / paper to the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence ( AAAI ) , in order to deal with future requests for reprints , translations , anthologies , reproductions , excerpts , and other publications . This grant will include , without limitation , the entire copyright in the article / paper in all countries of the world , including all renewals , extensions , and reversions thereof , whether such rights current exist or hereafter come into effect , and also the exclusive right to create electronic versions of the article / paper , to the extent that such right is not subsumed under copyright . 2 . The author ( s ) warrants that they are the sole author and owner of the copyright in the above article / paper , except for those portions shown to be in quotations ; that the article / paper is original throughout ; and that the undersigned right to make the grants set forth above is complete and unencumbered . 3 . The author ( s ) agree that if anyone brings any claim or action alleging facts that , if true , constitute a breach of any of the foregoing warranties , the author ( s ) will hold harmless and indemnify AAAI , their grantees , their licensees , and their distributors against any liability , whether under judgment , decree , or compromise , and any legal fees and expenses arising out of that claim or actions , and the undersigned will cooperate fully in any defense AAAI may make to such claim or action . Improving human decision making through case - based decision aiding Decisions have to make sense based on past experience . Asks , “What are the facts , costs , and benefits ? ” ​ Intuition : The bias is toward innovation . When leaders can influence their groups to avoid groupthink , decision making becomes possible based on a healthy consensus . Consensus is not the same as 100 - percent agreement . In consensus , group members determine that they actively support the decision of the group , even though it might not be their personal choice . Use Job Aid 3 - 2 , on the following page , to lead groups toward reaching a healthy consensus rather than a premature decision born out of groupthink . Decision Making and Problem Solving . Page 3 . 11 . Moreover , the undersigned agrees to cooperate in any claim or other action seeking to protect or enforce any right the undersigned has granted to AAAI in the article / paper . If any such claim or action fails because of facts that constitute a breach of any of the foregoing warranties , the undersigned agrees to reimburse whomever brings such claim or action for expenses and attorneys’ fees incurred therein . 4 . Author ( s ) retain all proprietary rights other than copyright ( such as patent rights ) . 5 . Author ( s ) may make personal reuse of all or portions of the above article / paper in other works of their own authorship . 6 . Author ( s ) may reproduce , or have reproduced , their article / paper for the author’s personal use , or for company use provided that AAAI copyright and the source are indicated , and that the copies are not used in a way that implies AAAI endorsement of a product or service of an employer , and that the copies per se are not offered for sale . The foregoing right shall not permit the posting of the article / paper in electronic or digital form on any computer network , except by the author or the author’s employer , and then only on the author’s or the employer’s own web page or ftp site . Such web page or ftp site , in addition to the aforementioned requirements of this Paragraph , must provide an electronic reference or link back to the AAAI electronic server , and shall not post other AAAI copyrighted materials not of the author’s or the employer’s creation ( including tables of contents with links to other papers ) without AAAI’s written permission . 7 . Author ( s ) may make limited distribution of all or portions of their article / paper prior to publication . 8 . In the case of work performed under U . S . Government contract , AAAI grants the U . S . Government royalty - free permission to reproduce all or portions of the above article / paper , and to authorize others to do so , for U . S . Government purposes . 9 . In the event the above article / paper is not accepted and published by AAAI , or is withdrawn by the author ( s ) before acceptance by AAAI , this agreement becomes null and void . Open Journal Systems Information For Readers For Authors Copyright © 2019 , Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence . All rights reserved .