Angiogenesis in Tissue Engineering : Breathing Life into Constructed Tissue Substitutes MATTHIAS W . LASCHKE , M . D . , 1 YVES HARDER , M . D . , 1 , 2 MICHAELA AMON , 1 IVAN MARTIN , Ph . D . , 3 JIAN FARHADI , M . D . , 4 ANDREJ RING , M . D . , 5 NESTOR TORIO - PADRON , M . D . , 6 RENE´ SCHRAMM , M . D . , Ph . D . , 1 MARTIN RU¨CKER , M . D . , 7 DOMINIC JUNKER , 1 JO¨RG M . HA¨UFEL , 1 CARLOS CARVALHO , 8 MICHAEL HEBERER , M . D . , 3 GU¨NTER GERMANN , M . D . , 9 BRIGITTE VOLLMAR , M . D . , 10 and MICHAEL D . MENGER , M . D . 1 ABSTRACT Long - term function of three - dimensional ( 3D ) tissue constructs depends on adequate vascularization after implantation . Accordingly , research in tissue engineering has focused on the analysis of angiogenesis . For this purpose , 2 sophisticated in vivo models ( the chorioallantoic membrane and the dorsal skinfold chamber ) have recently been introduced in tissue engineering research , allowing a more detailed analysis of angiogenic dysfunction and engraftment failure . To achieve vascularization of tissue constructs , several approaches are currently under investigation . These include the modiﬁcation of biomaterial properties of scaffolds and the stimulation of blood vessel development and maturation by different growth factors using slow - release devices through pre - encapsulated microspheres . Moreover , new microvascular net - works in tissue substitutes can be engineered by using endothelial cells and stem cells or by creating arteriovenous shunt loops . Nonetheless , the currently used techniques are not sufﬁcient to induce the rapid vascularization necessary for an adequate cellular oxygen supply . Thus , future directions of re - search should focus on the creation of microvascular networks within 3D tissue constructs in vitro before implantation or by co - stimulation of angiogenesis and parenchymal cell proliferation to engineer the vascularized tissue substitute in situ . INTRODUCTION T ISSUE ENGINEERING IS AN EMERGING FIELD OF SCIENCE that the National Science Foundation ﬁrst deﬁned in 1987 as ‘‘an interdisciplinary ﬁeld that applies the principles of engineering and the life sciences towards the development of biological substitutes that restore , maintain or improve tissue function . ’’ 1 Because the loss or failure of tissue or an organ is one of the most frequent and expensive problems in human health care today , it is expected that the devel - opment of methods to regenerate human tissue or to re - construct entire organs using tissue engineering will have an important inﬂuence on various medical specialties in the future . 1 Institute for Clinical and Experimental Surgery , University of Saarland , Homburg , Germany . 2 Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery , University of Berne , Switzerland . 3 Institute for Surgical Research , University of Basel , Switzerland . 4 Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery , University of Basel , Switzerland . 5 Department of Plastic and Hand Surgery / Burn Center , University of Bochum , Germany . 6 Department of Plastic and Hand Surgery , University of Freiburg , Germany . 7 Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery , Medical University of Hannover , Germany . 8 FMF Freiburger Materialforschungszentrum , Freiburg , Germany . 9 Department of Plastic , Reconstructive and Hand Surgery / Burn Center , University of Heidelberg , Ludwigshafen , Germany . 10 Department of Experimental Surgery , University of Rostock , Schillingallee 70 , Rostock , Germany . TISSUE ENGINEERING Volume 12 , Number 8 , 2006 # Mary Ann Liebert , Inc . 2093 Plastic and reconstructive surgery would beneﬁt in par - ticular from tissue engineering to the extent that the ap - plication of artiﬁcially engineered tissue may be completely substituted for current clinical techniques such as ﬂap surgery for the treatment of extensive skin defects and implantation of foreign materials for breast reconstruction . First steps toward those novel strategies have already been taken . Engineered skin and cartilage have recently been introduced for clinical use . 2 , 3 Several other potential tissue types for substitutive treatment are currently under investi - gation , including liver , 4 , 5 bone , 6 muscle , 7 adipose , 8 , 9 and ner - vous 10 tissues . Engineered cartilage is a relatively simple tissue , be - cause cartilage is avascular and has a low metabolic de - mand . In contrast , the engineering of more complex tissues consisting of large 3D structures remains a critical chal - lenge . Because the amount of oxygen required for cell survival is limited to a diffusion distance of approximately 150 to 200 m m from the supplying blood vessel , 11 , 12 long - term survival and function of such 3 - dimensionally con - structed tissues depend on rapid development of new blood vessels , which provide nutrients and oxygen to the cells not only of the margin but also of the center of the tissue grafts . In fact , the growth of a new microvascular system remains one of the major limitations in the successful introduction of tissue engineering products to clinical practice . Ac - cordingly , the focus of research in tissue engineering has changed toward the understanding of angiogenesis and new blood vessel formation . Angiogenesis is deﬁned as the formation of new capil - laries from pre - existing blood vessels and represents a complex dynamic process characterized by a coordinated sequence of humoral and cellular interactions . 13 , 14 Upon angiogenic stimulation , vascular endothelial cells are acti - vated and begin to degrade their surrounding basement membrane by the expression and release of matrix me - talloproteinases as indicated by vasodilatation . Then the endothelial cells migrate into the interstitium , resulting in the formation of capillary buds and sprouts . Endothelial cells behind the migrating endothelium of the sprouts pro - liferate so that the newly developing blood vessel elon - gates . The stabilization of the new vessel wall requires the recruitment of other cell types , including smooth muscle cells , pericytes , and ﬁbroblasts , as well as the production of extracellular matrix compounds . The interaction of distinct soluble factors such as cytokines and growth factors tightly regulates all these steps . 15 IN VIVO MODELS TO STUDY ANGIOGENESIS IN TISSUE ENGINEERING PRODUCTS To improve current techniques and to develop new stra - tegies for optimal vascularization of implanted tissue con - structs , sophisticated experimental models are required that allow for a detailed analysis of blood vessel ingrowth in engineered tissue constructs in vivo . Previous studies have analyzed the process of angiogenesis primarily using in vitro cell culture experiments and histological examinations of formalin - ﬁxed tissue . Recently , however , 2 commonly used in vivo models to study angiogenesis , the chorioallantoic membrane ( CAM ) assay and the dorsal skinfold chamber , have been introduced in the ﬁeld of tissue engineering . The CAM assay The chicken embryo CAM is an extraembryonic mem - brane that serves as a transient gas exchange surface , similar to the lung . The allantois of the chicken embryo ﬁrst appears at day 3 of incubation and rapidly grows until day 10 . The adjacent mesodermal layers of the chorion and the allantois fuse to form the CAM , which is characterized by a dense microvascular network ( Fig . 1 ) . 16 , 17 During the ﬁrst days of incubation , undifferentiated blood vessels are scattered in the mesoderm of the CAM . These vessels grow rapidly until day 8 , when some differentiate into capillaries . The ability of the CAM to support the ingrowth of blood vessels in im - planted tissue substitutes depends on the day of implanta - tion , because vascularization increases with expansion and differentiation of the CAM parallel to the development of the embryo . Between incubation days 9 and 12 , the CAM reaches its maximum vascularization potential . Afterwards , blood vessels of the CAM begin to regress until incubation day 21 , when the chick hatches . Thus , implantation studies using the CAM model can be performed between incubation days 5 and 15 ( the ﬁrst 10 days after implantation ) . Embryologists originally developed the CAM assay to study the developmental potential of embryonic tissue grafts . During the last decades , this in vivo model has successfully been used to investigate basic mechanisms of angiogenesis FIG . 1 . High - resolution , epi - illumination in vivo microscopy , visualizing the microvascular network of the chorioallantoic membrane at day 14 of incubation , consisting of supplying ar - terioles ( arrow ) , nutritive capillaries ( arrow heads ) , and draining venules ( double arrows ) . Scale bar : 2 . 2mm . Color images avail - able online at www . liebertpub . com / ten . 2094 LASCHKE ET AL . such as migration , proliferation , and differentiation of en - dothelial cells , 18 – 20 changes of the extracellular matrix , 21 , 22 and the effect of growth factors and angiogenesis inhibitors on blood vessel development . 23 – 25 Moreover , the CAM is a suitable model for the assessment of the angiogenic potential of transplanted benign 26 and malignant tissue , 27 , 28 whereby xenografts from mammalian species can be implanted into the CAM without rejection . This is because the early chicken embryo lacks a complete immune system . Further advan - tages of this model include easy preparation of the CAM vascular network , low costs , and less - severe restrictions on its use than with mammal models . Two - dimensionally designed matrix constructs and mesh networks may be positioned directly onto the CAM to per - form high - resolution imaging of the vascularization process ( Fig . 2 ) . Engineered constructs with an increased 3D ex - tension , however , cannot be studied using this approach . Therefore , Borges et al . have modiﬁed the original CAM assay to a cylinder model . 29 , 30 For this purpose , fertilized chicken eggs were incubated at 37 . 8 8 C for 3 days . Then , the eggs were prepared for implantation of the tissue con - struct by opening the eggshell in a circular area and re - moving enough albumen to minimize adhesion of the shell membrane . After 5 days of reincubation , cultivated human subcutaneous preadipocytes , which were integrated into a matrix of ﬁbrin glue , were implanted in a specially de - signed plastic cylinder ﬁlled with cell medium and placed through the prepared observation window onto the surface of the CAM . In this way , it was possible to investigate the early steps of vascularization of the constructs for up to 8 days post - implantation using light microscopic and histo - logical techniques . 29 In a second set of experiments , adult human dermal microvascular endothelial cell spheroids and preadipocytes were combined in a ﬁbrin matrix and im - planted into the CAM . 30 This resulted in the formation of a new capillary network within the tissue construct , consist - ing of human endothelial cells , which connected to the CAM vessel system . This ﬁnding demonstrates that the co - transplantation of endothelial cell spheroids with me - senchymal cells might be a promising new approach to engineering adequately vascularized tissue constructs with - out applying exogenous angiogenic growth factors . In addition to the restriction in use to a period of approx - imately 10 days , there are some limitations on the applica - tion of the CAM assay . Native epi - illumination microscopy is adequate to study blood vessels with a size of more than 10 m m , whereas smaller blood vessels ( capillaries after maturation ) are more difﬁcult to visualize . This drawback can be overcome using intravascular application of a high - molecular - weight ﬂuorescent marker , which , however , re - quires sophisticated manual skills . Furthermore , the initial lack of an immune system may be advantageous for the study of xenografts but does not allow the assessment of the material biocompatibility . Finally , using the CAM assay , FIG . 2 . The chorioallantoic membrane model allows the vascularization and engraftment of various biomaterials to be studied . Implantation of a polyglactin 910 mesh ( A ) and a hydrogel scaffold ( C ) at day 7 of incubation induces angiogenesis , resulting in adequate ingrowth of newly formed blood vessels ( arrows ) until day 14 of incubation ( B , D ) . Scale bars : A , B ¼ 0 . 9mm ; C , D ¼ 1 . 4mm . Color images available online at www . liebertpub . com / ten . ANGIOGENESIS IN TISSUE ENGINEERING 2095 one should be aware that it consists of embryonal tissue , which itself is characterized by a growth factor proﬁle different from that of adult tissue . Overall , however , we feel that the CAM must be con - sidered to be a suitable screening assay that allows for the study of cell viability , proliferation , and differentiation within implanted tissue constructs during the early steps of vascularization ( the ﬁrst 10 days after implantation ) . The model enables the investigation of the effect of angiogenic factors and gene therapy on transplanted cells and of the distinct vascularization properties of different biomaterials used for the engineering of tissue constructs . The dorsal skinfold chamber Algire ﬁrst introduced the dorsal skinfold chamber in mice in 1943 . 31 During the last 3 decades , it has been modiﬁed and adapted for the use in rats , 32 immunocom - petent mice , 33 nude and severe combined immuno - deﬁcient mice , 34 , 35 and hamsters . 36 For surgical preparation , the back of the anesthetized animal is shaved and depilated . Two symmetrical titanium frames are implanted on the extended dorsal skinfold so that they sandwich the double layer of skin . Subsequently , 1 layer of skin is completely removed in a circular area of approximately 15 mm in diameter , and the remaining layers ( consisting of striated skin muscle , subcutaneous tissue , and skin ) are covered with a removable coverslip incorporated into the observation window of one of the titanium frames . After the preparation , the animals are allowed to recover for at least 48 h to exclude changes of the microcirculation due to anesthesia and surgical trauma . The major advantage of the dorsal skinfold preparation is that the microcirculation can be analyzed through the ob - servation window repetitively in unanesthetized animals over a period of 3 to 4 weeks ( Fig . 3 ) . 37 Furthermore , the chamber model is ideal for transplantation and implantation experi - ments , because the cover glass of the observation window can temporarily be removed . The skinfold chamber model has been used to study angiogenesis within various physiological tissues 38 – 42 and malignant tumors , 43 , 44 as well as biomater - ials such as synthetic and biosynthetic vascular grafts 45 – 47 and metallic implants . 48 – 50 Using this model , the quantiﬁ - cation of the angiogenic process is possible using the com - bination of epi - illumination multi - ﬂuorescence microscopy and computer - assisted off - line analysis techniques ( Fig . 4 – 6 ) . Moreover , cellular and molecular aspects can be assessed , including leukocyte and platelet adhesion , macrophage acti - vation , mast cell degranulation , vascular endothelial leakage , and apoptotic and necrotic cell death . There are also some limitations in the use of the dorsal skinfold chamber for studying angiogenesis in tissue en - gineering constructs . The size of the construct should not exceed 5 mm in diameter ( width and length ) to adequately ﬁt within the 11 - mm - sized chamber . Moreover , the height of the construct should be limited to 1 mm to ensure ade - quate closure of the chamber tissue by the cover glass . Despite these limitations , we feel that the dorsal skinfold chamber model is an ideal tool for the long - term in vivo study of blood vessel growth and remodeling in porous biomedical materials used in the ﬁeld of tissue engineering . Druecke et al . used the dorsal skinfold chamber of mice to study neovascularization and biocompatibility of acel - lular poly ( ether ester ) block - copolymer scaffolds of dif - ferent pore sizes . 51 This type of biomaterial can be easily tailored , is biodegradable , and has been proven to support ingrowth of different tissues . After implantation of the scaffolds into the dorsal skinfold chambers , vascularization of the scaffolds was analyzed over 20 days . The results of the study showed that pore size inﬂuences vessel ingrowth into poly ( ether ester ) block - polymer scaffolds , which was most pronounced in the scaffolds with the largest pores . This corresponds with what has been reported from new vessel formation in synthetic vascular graft materials 45 and underlines the importance of the biomaterial properties for the vascularization process of implanted tissue constructs . ANGIOGENESIS AND VASCULARIZATION OF TISSUE ENGINEERING CONSTRUCTS The angiogenic process is of particular interest if a new structurally integrated tissue is generated from autologous FIG . 3 . ( A ) Syrian golden hamster equipped with a dorsal skinfold chamber ( weight * 4g ) . ( B ) Overview of the observation window after the implantation of the chamber into the dorsal skinfold . Large microvessels ( arterioles and venules of the striated muscle and subcutaneous tissue ) can be identiﬁed without the use of high - resolution intravital ﬂuorescence microscopy . ( C ) In - travital ﬂuorescence microscopy of the micro - angioarchitecture of the dorsal skinfold chamber consisting of arterioles ( arrow ) , parallelly arranged muscle capillaries ( arrowheads ) , and post - capillary and collecting venules ( double arrows ) . Blue light epi - illumination with intravascular plasma contrast enhancement by 5 % ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate – labeled dextran 150 , 000 i . v . Scale bars : A ¼ 12 . 5 mm ; B ¼ 2 . 5mm ; C ¼ 105 m m . Color images avail - able online at www . liebertpub . com / ten . 2096 LASCHKE ET AL . cultured cells . For this purpose , a small tissue sample is taken from the patient , and the cells are then isolated and expanded in culture . Subsequently , these cells are trans - ferred into a 3D scaffold , which serves as a template for new tissue formation . Finally , this tissue construct can be implanted back into the patient , with the surgical procedure inducing an inﬂammatory wound - healing response . This , together with the hypoxia of the cells seeded onto the im - plant , stimulates the endogenous release of angiogenic growth factors , which themselves trigger the ingrowth of new blood vessels from the surrounding host tissue . However , although blood vessel ingrowth is often noted in implanted tissue constructs over time , the vascularization is too slow or too limited to provide adequate nutrient and oxygen transport to the transplanted cells . To solve this pro - blem , several approaches are currently under investigation . The search for the ideal scaffold Scaffolds provide a 3D framework for cells to attach to and on which to proliferate that can be implanted into a tissue defect site . In general , 2 main types of scaffolds can be differentiated : synthetically derived polymer scaffolds 52 and naturally occurring scaffolds . 53 Synthetically derived polymer scaffolds should be bio - compatible and biodegradable and should ensure an optimal interaction with endothelial cells to promote angiogenesis . To develop scaffolds that fulﬁll these properties , it is of great importance to investigate how different biomaterials modulate endothelial cell function . For this purpose , a variety of endothelial cell culture systems have been es - tablished during recent years . They allow for the evaluation of new biomaterials in terms of endothelial cell attach - ment , 54 cytotoxicity , 55 growth , 56 angiogenesis , 57 and gene regulation . 56 Additionally , co - culture systems can be used to study blood vessel development in tissue constructs on a higher level of cellular organization , considering the in - teraction between endothelial cells and other cell types . 58 , 59 In addition to the cellular interaction with biomaterials , the architecture of the scaffold seems to play an important role in adequate vascularization . Pinney et al . reported that the 3D structure of a scaffold in itself can change the an - giogenic activity of incorporated cells . 60 When culturing ﬁbroblasts on a lactate - glycolate copolymer scaffold to form a dermal - equivalent tissue , they observed that the cellular content of vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) messenger ribonucleic acid in these 3D cultures was 22 times greater than that in the same ﬁbroblasts grown as monolayers . In addition , the pore size of the scaffolds has been shown to be a critical determinant of blood vessel ingrowth , 51 which is signiﬁcantly faster in pores with a size greater than 250 m m than in those less than 250 m m . FIG . 4 . Intravital ﬂuorescence microscopy of an isolated ovarian follicle ( A , asterisk ) and an endometrial tissue fragment ( C , asterisk ) directly after transplantation into the dorsal skinfold chamber of a Syrian golden hamster . After 10 days , the grafts are completely vascularized exhibiting a dense , glomerular - like network of newly formed microvessels ( B , D ) . Scale bars : A , B ¼ 105 m m ; C , D ¼ 170 m m . ANGIOGENESIS IN TISSUE ENGINEERING 2097 Finally , molecular deteriorations that are induced during the incorporation process of the implant might inﬂuence the ingrowth of blood vessels into scaffolds . This may explain why currently used biomaterials partly fail to vascularize , independent of their material properties . Fibronectin , for example , is the only mammalian adhesion protein that binds and activates a 5 b 1 - integrins , which are known to exert proangiogenic actions , although Vogel and Baneyx , 61 who investigated the role of this adhesion protein in scaffold vascularization , could not demonstrate an acceleration or improvement of implant vascularization but documented an inhibitory action on the process of new vessel formation . This inhibition was interpreted as the result of excessive tension generated by cells in contact with implanted bio - materials , which may have changed the molecular structure of ﬁbronectin ﬁbrils , deteriorating their capability to bind and activate a 5 b 1 - integrins . In addition to synthetically derived polymer scaffolds , naturally occurring scaffolds composed of extracellular matrix proteins offer promising alternatives for tissue repair and regeneration . Important examples are small intestinal submucosa , acellular dermis , cadaveric fascia , the bladder acellular matrix graft , and the amniotic membrane . 53 These types of scaffolds have been shown to promote rapid in - teraction with the surrounding host tissue , to induce the deposition of cells and additional extracellular matrix , and to accelerate the process of angiogenesis . These naturally occurring scaffolds can be processed so that they retain growth factors , 62 glycosaminoglycans , 63 and structural ele - ments such as ﬁbronectin , elastin , and collagen , 64 , 65 which are important regulatory factors of angiogenesis . For ex - ample , Pieper et al . 66 demonstrated that the attachment of glycosaminoglycans to collagen matrices preserves porous FIG . 5 . Overview of the observation window of a mouse dorsal skinfold chamber directly after implantation of a poly ( lactide - co - glycolide ) ( PLGA ) scaffold ( A , B ) and 10 days later ( C , D ) . Higher magniﬁcation of selected regions of interest in the border zone of the scaffold ( C , D : white frame ) at day 10 after im - plantation demonstrates the formation of new blood vessels growing into the scaffold biomaterial ( E , F ) . The visualization of the microcirculation is much more detailed using high - resolution intravital ﬂuorescence microscopy with intravascular plasma contrast enhancement by 5 % ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate – labeled dextran 150 , 000 i . v . ( B , D , F ) than corresponding images made under a stereo - microscope ( A , C , E ) . Scale bars : A – D ¼ 1 . 4mm ; E ¼ 240 m m ; F ¼ 105 m m . Color images available online at www . liebertpub . com / ten . FIG . 6 . Epi - illumination in vivo microscopy of a polyglactin 910 mesh 14 days after implantation into the dorsal skinfold chamber of a Syrian golden hamster ( A ) . Intravital ﬂuorescence microscopy with intravascular plasma contrast enhancement by 5 % ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate – labeled dextran 150 , 000 i . v . of the border zone of the mesh ( A : white frame ) shows the formation of a dense network of newly formed microvessels entwining the syn - thetic mesh ﬁbers ( B ) . Scale bars : A ¼ 875 m m ; B ¼ 380 m m . Color images available online at www . liebertpub . com / ten . 2098 LASCHKE ET AL . matrix integrity and promotes blood vessel ingrowth . In another study , elastic ﬁbers of an extracellular matrix scaf - fold were shown to act as ‘‘microguides’’ for endothelial cell and pericyte migration during capillary sprouting . 67 However , many questions remain to be answered until naturally occurring scaffolds can be used for clinically re - levant tissue engineering , including the immunologic re - sponse of the host to such implants and the methods to modify their mechanical and physical properties . 68 Thus , the ideal scaffold , which promotes angiogenesis of en - gineered tissue sufﬁciently , has not been determined . Stimulation of angiogenesis by growth factors Growth factors play the central regulatory role in the process of angiogenesis . In recent decades , many of these factors were identiﬁed and are now available in recombinant forms to support engraftment of tissue engineering products . These include VEGF , platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) , and different ﬁbroblast growth factors ( FGF - 1 and FGF - 2 ) . 69 The systemic application of these factors might accel - erate the ingrowth of blood vessels into implanted tissue constructs . However , this strategy is limited , because the inherent instability of many growth factors requires high levels of protein for a measurable effect in vivo , and the risk of blood vessel development at distant sites of the body remains uncontrolled . 70 A better alternative seems to be the incorporation of growth factors into the scaffold biomaterial , which guaran - tees localized and sustained delivery . This principle has al - ready been shown to be successful in a rabbit ear ulcer model , in which the delivery of FGF - 1 through biodegradable ﬁbrin or collagen scaffolds resulted in an enhanced healing process of full - thickness skin defects , as indicated by increased an - giogenesis and enhanced epithelialization . 71 , 72 In general , there are 2 possibilities to incorporate growth factors into synthetic scaffolds . It can be done by simply mixing the growth factor with polymer particles before processing the polymer into a porous scaffold , resulting in a rapid release of the growth factor within days to weeks . 73 The second ap - proach involves the pre - encapsulation of growth factors in microspheres , which are then incorporated into the scaffold , guaranteeing growth factor release over a longer time span . 74 , 75 Recently , Richardson et al . combined these 2 approaches to establish a new polymer system that allows for the delivery of 2 or more growth factors with distinct ki - netics . 76 By using this system , they could demonstrate that dual delivery of VEGF and PDGF , each with distinct ki - netics , results in the rapid formation of a mature vascular network inside polymer scaffolds that had been implanted into the subcutaneous tissue of rats . Local release of growth factors may also be achieved by transplanting fragmented tissue such as omentum . The omentum contains a large number of microvascular en - dothelial cells and is composed mainly of adipocytes that produce an enormously high level of VEGF . 77 Co - transplantation of fragmented omentum with preadipocytes under the dorsal skin of Wistar rats has been shown to effectively augment soft tissue by increasing VEGF pro - duction and capillary growth . 77 Finally , blood vessel development might be stimulated using gene transfer of angiogenic growth factors to the cells incorporated into the scaffold . 78 The idea behind this ap - proach is to achieve an in vivo controlled release of the growth factor for a certain period . In the past , the angiogenic therapy of bone tissue regeneration 79 and ischemic dis - eases 80 – 82 was attempted by applying plasmids carrying growth factor deoxyribonucleic acid . However , at present there is no information about the adverse effects of such gene therapy , and it is impossible to control the level and time period of gene expression . Thus , the controlled release of growth factors on the protein level seems safer and clinically more applicable than the use of gene transfer procedures . 83 Engineering vascularized tissue in vitro A network of newly developed microvessels may be en - gineered in vitro by seeding scaffolds with endothelial cells . 84 , 85 After implantation of those tissue constructs , the endothelial cells should develop interconnections to the blood vessels of the surrounding tissue , resulting in an adequate perfusion of the prefabricated microvascular net - work . By using this method , the period required for the in - growth of new blood vessels into the center of the scaffold can be dramatically shortened . However , there remain a considerable number of unsolved problems to realize this theoretical approach . Although different seeding methods for 3D polymeric scaffolds have been established , 86 – 88 it is unclear whether they can guarantee a homogeneous dis - tribution of endothelial cells throughout a large tissue con - struct . Moreover , the seeding of a scaffold with endothelial cells does not necessarily result in the development of new blood vessels in vitro , because this process depends on the coordinated release of a variety of signaling factors such as VEGF and PDGF and involves other cell types , including smooth muscle cells and pericytes , which are normally found under in vivo conditions but not necessarily in vitro . Thus , further research is needed to improve current cell culture and seeding techniques for the development of tissue constructs , which bear their own intrinsic vascular system before implantation and engraftment . Tremblay et al . have most recently reported promising results . 89 With the use of endothelialized reconstructed skin in which a network of human capillary - like structures was spontaneously formed within the dermis in vitro , they showed successful in - osculation of the in vitro constructed microvasculature to host blood vessels in less than 4 days after implantation . 89 Induction of vascularization by stem cells In the near future , the use of autologous stem cell sources will become of major importance for constructing new ANGIOGENESIS IN TISSUE ENGINEERING 2099 tissues . Several studies have recently reported the suc - cessful creation of tissue - engineered vascular grafts with good long - term function by seeding different grafts with bone marrow cells and endothelial progenitor cells . 90 – 92 In addition , endothelial progenitor cells from the bone marrow circulate in the bloodstream and are incorporated into the vessel wall . In culture , these cells have been shown to give rise to 3 important blood vessel cell components : endothelial cells , pericytes , and vascular smooth muscle cells . 93 In vivo , a considerable number of experimental studies could demonstrate that these progenitor cells are capable of inducing angiogenesis and vasculogenesis at sites of critical perfusion and hypoxia , such as myocardial infarction , stroke , and hind - limb ischemia . 94 Progenitor cell – derived regeneration and repair of ischemic or necrotic tissue are thought to be due to an enhancement of func - tional re - or neovascularization . 95 Accordingly , the vessel - forming capacity of stem and progenitor cells may also be useful to improve survival and function of constructed tissue substitutes by induction and acceleration of angio - genesis and maturation of newly formed blood vessels . Future research that aims at improving angiogenesis in tissue constructs should thus include the therapeutic use of endothelial progenitor cells . Engineering vascularized tissue in vivo In 1979 , Erol and Spira reported a new method to fa - cilitate engraftment in poorly vascularized tissues . 96 For this purpose , they implanted an arteriovenous shunt loop in the rat groin . After some days , they observed the devel - opment of new blood vessels originating from the loop that could support engraftment of an overlying skin graft . Since then , a number of other experimental studies have used an arteriovenous shunt loop as a vascular carrier for pre - fabricated skin ﬂaps . 97 – 99 The principle of this method is the induction of angiogenesis by increased shear stress and wall tension within the loops’ vasculature . It is believed that these 2 factors disturb the integrity of endothelial and vascular smooth muscle cells , making them more suscep - tible to the action of angiogenic growth factors . 13 Recently , Mian et al . demonstrated that this approach can be used to engineer new connective tissue in vivo . 100 , 101 They used a model comprising an arteriovenous shunt loop sandwiched in artiﬁcial dermis and placed in a plastic growth chamber . After subcutaneous implantation of this chamber , ﬁbroblast and vascular outgrowth from the ar - teriovenous shunt resulting in the development of a well - vascularized mass of mature ﬁbrous tissue was observed . With the use of this technique , Dolderer et al . 9 reported the in vivo generation of large amounts of vascularized adipose tissue . An adipofascial tissue ﬂap and a matrix scaffold were integrated into a growth chamber , which was then implanted into pigs . After 12 weeks , newly formed adipose tissue had grown to up to 60 % of the chamber volume , and when this tissue was transferred to another site in the body , it stayed stable in volume and showed no signs of ﬁbrotic alteration . 9 Thus , this novel approach of in vivo tissue en - gineering may represent a ﬁrst step toward the endogenous production of signiﬁcant amounts of vascularized adipose tissue for autologous soft tissue replacement . CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES Research on tissue engineering during the last few years has brought evidence that delayed vascularization or lack of vascularization is one of the major obstacles to successfully realizing the clinical use of in vitro engineered tissue and organ substitutes . The design of the scaffold of the tissue construct , including nature and texture of the material , may help to overcome the limitations in new blood vessel in - growth . A porosity of more than 250 m m seems mandatory for adequate vascularization . The ideal nature of the ma - terial , however , has yet to be determined . Furthermore , 3 distinct approaches seem to be most promising in improv - ing and accelerating vascularization and thus should be addressed by future research in tissue engineering : ( 1 ) the creation of microvascular networks within 3D tissue con - structs in vitro with inosculation to the host’s vasculature after implantation ; ( 2 ) the co - stimulation of angiogenesis and parenchymal cell proliferation , for example , with the use of arteriovenous shunt loops , to engineer the vascu - larized tissue substitute entirely in situ ; and ( 3 ) the in - corporation of progenitor or stem cells , in vivo and in vitro , to accelerate the formation and maturation of new blood vessels . These 3 approaches , which must be further tested in sophisticated in vivo models , may further open the door to successful clinical use of tissue - engineered products in organ replacement . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are grateful for the ﬁnancial support of the Homburg Surgical Research Symposium ‘‘Angiogenesis and Micro - circulation in Flap Surgery’’ by Ethicon Products GmbH . This article is based on conclusions drawn at the Homburg Surgical Research Symposium ‘‘Angiogenesis and Micro - circulation in Flap Surgery , ’’ held in November 2004 at the Monastery Hornbach , Germany . All authors contributed by presentation or intensive discussion at the meeting . The article was written by MWL and MDM . All authors re - viewed and approved the article . REFERENCES 1 . Langer , R . , and Vacanti , J . P . Tissue engineering . Science 260 , 920 , 1993 . 2 . Vacanti , C . A . , and Upton , J . Tissue - engineered morphogen - esis of cartilage and bone by means of cell transplantation 2100 LASCHKE ET AL . using synthetic biodegradable polymer matrices . Clin Plast Surg 21 , 445 , 1994 . 3 . Kremer , M . , Lang , E . , and Berger , A . C . Evaluation of dermal - epidermal skin equivalents ( ‘composite - skin’ ) of human ker - atinocytes in a collagen - glycosaminoglycan matrix ( Integra artiﬁcial skin ) . Br J Plast Surg 53 , 459 , 2000 . 4 . Jiang , J . , Kojima , N . , Guo , L . , Naruse , K . , Makuuchi , M . , Miyajima , A . , Yan , W . , and Sakai , Y . Efﬁcacy of engineered liver tissue based on poly - L - lactic acid scaffolds and fetal mouse liver cells cultured with oncostatin M , nicotinamide , and dimethyl sulfoxide . Tissue Eng 10 , 1577 , 2004 . 5 . Ohashi , K . , Waugh , J . M . , Dake , M . D . , Yokoyama , T . , Kuge , H . , Nakajima , Y . , Yamanouchi , M . , Naka , H . , Yoshioka , A . , and Kay , M . A . Liver tissue engineering at extrahepatic sites in mice as a potential new therapy for genetic liver diseases . Hepatology 41 , 132 , 2005 . 6 . Salgado , A . J . , Coutinho , O . P . , and Reis , R . L . Bone tissue engineering : state of the art and future trends . Macromol Biosci 4 , 743 , 2004 . 7 . Deasy , B . M . , Li , Y . , and Huard , J . Tissue engineering with muscle - derived stem cells . Curr Opin Biotechnol 15 , 419 , 2004 . 8 . Patrick , C . W . Breast tissue engineering . Annu Rev Biomed Eng 6 , 109 , 2004 . 9 . Dolderer , J . H . , Findlay , M . W . , Cooper - White , J . , Thompson , E . W . , Trost , N . , Hennessy , O . , Penington , A . , Morrison , W . A . , and Germann , G . In vivo tissue engineering of vascu - larised adipose tissue for reconstructive surgery : An important step towards human application . Langenbecks Arch Surg 389 , 453 , 2004 . 10 . Lundborg , G . Alternatives to autologous nerve grafts . Hand - chir Mikrochir Plast Chir 36 , 1 , 2004 . 11 . Folkman , J . , and Hochberg , M . Self - regulation of growth in three dimensions . J Exp Med 138 , 745 , 1973 . 12 . Colton , C . K . Implantable biohybrid artiﬁcial organs . Cell Transplant 4 , 415 , 1995 . 13 . Risau , W . Mechanisms of angiogenesis . Nature 386 , 671 , 1997 . 14 . Carmeliet , P . Mechanisms of angiogenesis and arteriogenesis . Nat Med 6 , 389 , 2000 . 15 . Patan , S . Vasculogenesis and angiogenesis . Cancer Treat Res 117 , 3 , 2004 . 16 . Romanoff , A . L . Membrane growth and function . Ann N Y Acad Sci 155 , 288 , 1952 . 17 . Ribatti , D . , Nico , B . , Vacca , A . , Roncali , L . , Burri , P . H . , and Djonov , V . Chorioallantoic membrane capillary bed : a useful target for studying angiogenesis and anti - angiogenesis in vivo . Anat Rec 264 , 317 , 2001 . 18 . Ausprunk , D . H . , Knighton , D . R . , and Folkman , J . Differ - entiation of vascular endothelium in the chick chorioallantois : a structural and autoradiographic study . Dev Biol 38 , 237 , 1974 . 19 . Kurz , H . , Ambrosy , S . , Wilting , J . , Marme , D . , and Christ , B . Proliferation pattern of capillary endothelial cells in chor - ioallantoic membrane development indicates local growth control , which is counteracted by vascular endothelial growth factor application . Dev Dyn 203 , 174 , 1995 . 20 . Yang , E . Y . , and Moses , H . L . Transforming growth factor beta 1 - induced changes in cell migration , proliferation , and an - giogenesis in the chicken chorioallantoic membrane . J Cell Biol 111 , 731 , 1990 . 21 . Ausprunk , D . H . Distribution of hyaluronic acid and sulfated glycosaminoglycans during blood - vessel development in the chick chorioallantoic membrane . Am J Anat 177 , 313 , 1986 . 22 . Maragoudakis , M . E . , Panoutsacopoulou , M . , and Sarmonika , M . Rate of basement membrane biosynthesis as an index to angiogenesis . Tissue Cell 20 , 531 , 1988 . 23 . Wilting , J . , Christ , B . , and Bokeloh , M . A modiﬁed chor - ioallantoic membrane ( CAM ) assay for qualitative and quanti - tative study of growth factors . Studies on the effects of carriers , PBS , angiogenin , and bFGF . Anat Embryol 183 , 259 , 1991 . 24 . Wilting , J . , Christ , B . , Bokeloh , M . , and Weich , H . A . In vivo effects of vascular endothelial growth factor on the chicken chorioallantoic membrane . Cell Tissue Res 274 , 163 , 1993 . 25 . Wilting , J . , Weich , H . A . , and Christ , B . Effects of vascular endothelial growth factor and basic ﬁbroblast growth factor : application with corneal grafts on the chorioallantoic mem - brane . Acta Anat 147 , 207 , 1993 . 26 . Maas , J . W . , Groothuis , P . G . , Dunselman , G . A . , de Goeij , A . F . , Struyker Boudier , H . A . , and Evers , J . L . Endometrial angiogenesis throughout the human menstrual cycle . Hum Reprod 16 , 1557 , 2001 . 27 . Knighton , D . , Ausprunk , D . , Tapper , D . , and Folkman , J . Avascular and vascular phases of tumour growth in the chick embryo . Br J Cancer 35 , 347 , 1977 . 28 . Gordon , J . R . , and Quigley , J . P . Early spontaneous metastasis in the human epidermoid carcinoma HEp3 / chick embryo model : contribution of incidental colonization . Int J Cancer 38 , 437 , 1986 . 29 . Borges , J . , Tegtmeier , F . T . , Padron , N . T . , Mueller , M . C . , Lang , E . M . , and Stark , G . B . Chorioallantoic membrane an - giogenesis model for tissue engineering : a new twist on a classic model . Tissue Eng 9 , 441 , 2003 . 30 . Borges , J . , Mueller , M . C . , Padron , N . T . , Tegtmeier , F . , Lang , E . M . , and Stark , G . B . Engineered adipose tissue supplied by functional microvessels . Tissue Eng 9 , 1263 , 2003 . 31 . Algire , G . H . An adaption of the transparent chamber techni - que to the mouse . J Natl Cancer Inst 4 , 1 , 1943 . 32 . Papenfuss , H . D . , Gross , J . F . , Intaglietta , M . , and Treese , F . A . A transparent access chamber for the rat dorsal skin fold . Microvasc Res 18 , 311 , 1979 . 33 . Cardon , S . Z . , Oestermeyer , C . F . , and Bloch , E . H . Effect of oxygen on cyclic red blood cell ﬂow in unanesthetized mammalian striated muscle as determined by microscopy . Microvasc Res 2 , 67 , 1970 . 34 . Lehr , H . A . , Leunig , M . , Menger , M . D . , Nolte , D . , and Messmer , K . Dorsal skinfold chamber technique for intravital microscopy in nude mice . Am J Pathol 143 , 1055 , 1993 . 35 . Leunig , M . , Yuan , F . , Menger , M . D . , Boucher , Y . , Goetz , A . E . , Messmer , K . , and Jain , R . K . Angiogenesis , micro - vascular architecture , microhemodynamics , and interstitial ﬂuid pressure during early growth of human adenocarcinoma LS174T in SCID mice . Cancer Res 52 , 6553 , 1992 . 36 . Endrich , B . , Asaishi , K . , Gotz , A . , and Messmer , K . Technical report—a new chamber technique for microvascular studies in unanesthetized hamsters . Res Exp Med 177 , 125 , 1980 . 37 . Menger , M . D . , and Lehr , H . A . Scope and perspectives of intravital microscopy—bridge over from in vitro to in vivo . Immunol Today 14 , 519 , 1993 . ANGIOGENESIS IN TISSUE ENGINEERING 2101 38 . Funk , W . , Endrich , B . , and Messmer , K . A novel method for follow - up studies of the microcirculation in non - malignant tissue implants . Res Exp Med 186 , 259 , 1986 . 39 . Menger , M . D . , Jaeger , S . , Walter , P . , Feifel , G . , Hammersen , F . , and Messmer , K . Angiogenesis and hemodynamics of micro - vasculature of transplanted islets of Langerhans . Diabetes 38 Suppl 1 , 199 , 1989 . 40 . Vollmar , B . , Laschke , M . W . , Rohan , R . , Koenig , J . , and Menger , M . D . In vivo imaging of physiological angiogenesis from immature to preovulatory ovarian follicles . Am J Pathol 159 , 1661 , 2001 . 41 . Laschke , M . W . , Menger , M . D . , and Vollmar , B . Ovariectomy improves neovascularization and microcirculation of freely transplanted ovarian follicles . J Endocrinol 172 , 535 , 2002 . 42 . Langer , S . , Sinitsina , I . , Biberthaler , P . , Krombach , F . , and Messmer , K . Revascularization of transplanted adipose tissue : a study in the dorsal skinfold chamber of hamsters . Ann Plast Surg 48 , 53 , 2002 . 43 . Asaishi , K . , Endrich , B . , Gotz , A . , and Messmer , K . Quanti - tative analysis of microvascular structure and function in the amelanotic melanoma A - Mel - 3 . Cancer Res 41 , 1898 , 1981 . 44 . Vajkoczy , P . , Ullrich , A . , and Menger , M . D . Intravital ﬂuorescence videomicroscopy to study tumor angiogenesis and microcirculation . Neoplasia 2 , 53 , 2000 . 45 . Menger , M . D . , Hammersen , F . , Walter , P . , and Messmer , K . Neovascularization of prosthetic vascular grafts . Quantitative analysis of angiogenesis and microhemodynamics by means of intravital microscopy . Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 38 , 139 , 1990 . 46 . Menger , M . D . , Walter , P . , Hammersen , F . , and Messmer , K . Quantitative analysis of neovascularization of different PTFE - implants . Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 4 , 191 , 1990 . 47 . Menger , M . D . , Hammersen , F . , and Messmer , K . In vivo assessment of neovascularization and incorporation of pros - thetic vascular biografts . Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 40 , 19 , 1992 . 48 . Kraft , C . N . , Hansis , M . , Arens , S . , Menger , M . D . , and Voll - mar , B . Striated muscle microvascular response to silver implants : a comparative in vivo study with titanium and stainless steel . J Biomed Mater Res 49 , 192 , 2000 . 49 . Kraft , C . N . , Burian , B . , Perlick , L . , Wimmer , M . A . , Wallny , T . , Schmitt , O . , and Diedrich , O . Impact of a nickel - reduced stainless steel implant on striated muscle microcirculation : a comparative in vivo study . J Biomed Mater Res 57 , 404 , 2001 . 50 . Kraft , C . N . , Weber , W . , Burian , B . , Zander , D . , Wallny , T . , Schmitt , O . , and Diedrich , O . Striated muscle microvascular response to implants with sol - gel calcium phosphate coating . A comparative in vivo study . Z Orthop Ihre Grenzgeb 140 , 672 , 2002 . 51 . Druecke , D . , Langer , S . , Lamme , E . , Pieper , J . , Ugarkovic , M . , Steinau , H . U . , and Homann , H . H . Neovascularization of poly ( ether ester ) block - copolymer scaffolds in vivo : long - term investigations using intravital ﬂuorescent microscopy . J Biomed Mater Res 68A , 10 , 2004 . 52 . Agrawal , C . M . , and Ray , R . B . Biodegradable polymeric scaffolds for musculoskeletal tissue engineering . J Biomed Mater Res 55 , 141 , 2001 . 53 . Hodde , J . Naturally occurring scaffolds for soft tissue repair and regeneration . Tissue Eng 8 , 295 , 2002 . 54 . Kirkpatrick , C . J . , Otto , M . , Kooten , T . V . , Krump , V . , Kriegsmann , J . , and Bittinger , F . Endothelial cell cultures as a tool in biomaterial research . J Mater Sci Mater Med 10 , 589 , 1999 . 55 . Peters , K . , Unger , R . E . , Barth , S . , Gerdes , T . , and Kirkpatrick , C . J . Induction of apoptosis in human microvascular en - dothelial cells by divalent cobalt ions . Evidence for integrin - mediated signaling via the cytoskeleton . J Mater Sci Mater Med 12 , 955 , 2001 . 56 . Kirkpatrick , C . J . , Unger , R . E . , Krump - Konvalinkova , V . , Pe - ters , K . , Schmidt , H . , and Kamp , G . Experimental approaches to study vascularization in tissue engineering and biomaterial applications . J Mater Sci Mater Med 14 , 677 , 2003 . 57 . Peters , K . , Schmidt , H . , Unger , R . E . , Otto , M . , Kamp , G . , and Kirkpatrick , C . J . Software - supported image quantiﬁcation of angiogenesis in an in vitro culture system : application to studies of biocompatibility . Biomaterials 23 , 3413 , 2002 . 58 . Black , A . F . , Hudon , V . , Damour , O . , Germain , L . , and Auger , F . A . A novel approach for studying angiogenesis : a human skin equivalent with a capillary - like network . Cell Biol Toxicol 15 , 81 , 1999 . 59 . Frerich , B . , Lindemann , N . , Kurtz - Hoffmann , J . , and Oertel , K . In vitro model of a vascular stroma for the engineering of vascularized tissues . Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 30 , 414 , 2001 . 60 . Pinney , E . , Liu , K . , Sheeman , B . , and Mansbridge , J . Human three - dimensional ﬁbroblast cultures express angiogenic ac - tivity . J Cell Physiol 183 , 74 , 2000 . 61 . Vogel , V . , and Baneyx , G . The tissue engineering puzzle : a molecular perspective . Annu Rev Biomed Eng 5 , 441 , 2003 . 62 . Hodde , J . P . , Record , R . D . , Liang , H . A . , and Badylak , S . F . Vascular endothelial growth factor in porcine - derived extra - cellular matrix . Endothelium 8 , 11 , 2001 . 63 . Meinert , M . , Eriksen , G . V . , Petersen , A . C . , Helmig , R . B . , Laurent , C . , Uldbjerg , N . , and Malmstrom , A . Proteoglycans and hyaluronan in human fetal membranes . Am J Obstet Gynecol 184 , 679 , 2001 . 64 . McPherson , T . B . , and Badylak , S . F . Characterization of ﬁ - bronectin derived from porcine small intestinal submucosa . Tissue Eng 4 , 75 , 1998 . 65 . Chaplin , J . M . , Costantino , P . D . , Wolpoe , M . E . , Bederson , J . B . , Griffey , E . S . , and Zhang , W . X . Use of an acellular dermal allograft for dural replacement : an experimental study . Neurosurgery 45 , 320 , 1999 . 66 . Pieper , J . S . , van Wachem , P . B . , van Luyn , M . J . A . , Brouwer , L . A . , Hafmans , T . , Veerkamp , J . H . , and van Kuppevelt , T . H . Attachment of glycosaminoglycans to collagenous matrices modulates the tissue response in rats . Biomaterials 21 , 1689 , 2000 . 67 . Anderson , C . R . , Ponce , A . M . , and Price , R . J . Im - munohistochemical identiﬁcation of an extracellular matrix scaffold that microguides capillary sprouting in vivo . J His - tochem Cytochem 52 , 1063 , 2004 . 68 . Badylak , S . F . The extracellular matrix as a scaffold for tissue reconstruction . Semin Cell Dev Biol 13 , 377 , 2002 . 69 . Norrby , K . Angiogenesis : new aspects relating to its initiation and control . APMIS 105 , 417 , 1997 . 70 . Yancopoulos , G . D . , Davis , S . , Gale , N . W . , Rudge , J . S . , Wiegand , S . J . , and Holash , J . Vascular - speciﬁc growth factors and blood vessel formation . Nature 407 , 242 , 2000 . 71 . Pandit , A . S . , Feldman , D . S . , Caulﬁeld , J . , and Thompson , A . Stimulation of angiogenesis by FGF - 1 delivered through a modiﬁed ﬁbrin scaffold . Growth Factors 15 , 113 , 1998 . 2102 LASCHKE ET AL . 72 . Pandit , A . S . , Feldman , D . S . , and Caulﬁeld , J . In vivo wound healing response to a modiﬁed degradable ﬁbrin scaffold . J Biomater Appl 12 , 222 , 1998 . 73 . Shea , L . D . , Smiley , E . , Bonadio , J . , and Mooney , D . J . DNA delivery from polymer matrices for tissue engineering . Nat Biotechnol 17 , 551 , 1999 . 74 . Tabata , Y . , Miyao , M . , Yamamoto , M . , and Ikada , Y . Vas - cularization into a porous sponge by sustained release of basic ﬁbroblast growth factor . J Biomater Sci Polym Ed 10 , 957 , 1999 . 75 . Perets , A . , Baruch , Y . , Weisbuch , F . , Shoshany , G . , Neufeld , G . , and Cohen , S . Enhancing the vascularization of three - dimensional porous alginate scaffolds by incorporating con - trolled release basic ﬁbroblast growth factor microspheres . J Biomed Mater Res 65A , 489 , 2003 . 76 . Richardson , T . P . , Peters , M . C . , Ennett , A . B . , and Mooney , D . J . Polymeric system for dual growth factor delivery . Nat Biotechnol 19 , 1029 , 2001 . 77 . Masuda , T . , Furue , M . , and Matsuda , T . Novel strategy for soft tissue augmentation based on transplantation of frag - mented omentum and preadipocytes . Tissue Eng 10 , 1672 , 2004 . 78 . Riabikhin , A . W . , Walgenbach , K . J . , Martiny - Baron , G . , Bittner , K . , Bannasch , H . , Seifer , B . , Marme , D . , and Stark , G . B . Increased three - dimensional endothelial growth in a collagen matrix following addition of recombinant VEGF and liposomal gene transfer with VEGF - 165 . Cells Tissues Or - gans 166 , 16 , 2000 . 79 . Bonadio , J . , Smiley , E . , Patil , P . , and Goldstein , S . Localized , direct plasmid gene delivery in vivo : prolonged therapy re - sults in reproducible tissue regeneration . Nat Med 5 , 753 , 1999 . 80 . Schwarz , E . R . , Speakman , M . T . , Patterson , M . , Hale , S . S . , Isner , J . M . , Kedes , L . H . , and Kloner , R . A . Evaluation of the effects of intramyocardial injection of DNA expressing vas - cular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) in a myocardial in - farction model in the rat - angiogenesis and angioma formation . J Am Coll Cardiol 35 , 1323 , 2000 . 81 . Taniyama , Y . , Morishita , R . , Hiraoka , K . , Aoki , M . , Naka - gami , H . , Yamasaki , K . , Matsumoto , K . , Nakamura , T . , Ka - neda , Y . , and Ogihara , T . Therapeutic angiogenesis induced by human hepatocyte growth factor gene in rat diabetic hind limb ischemia model : molecular mechanisms of delayed an - giogenesis in diabetes . Circulation 104 , 2344 , 2001 . 82 . Kasahara , H . , Tanaka , E . , Fukuyama , N . , Sato , E . , Sakamoto , H . , Tabata , Y . , Ando , K . , Iseki , H . , Shinozaki , Y . , Kimura , K . , Kuwabara , E . , Koide , S . , Nakazawa , H . , and Mori , H . Bio - degradable gelatin hydrogel potentiates the angiogenic effect of ﬁbroblast growth factor 4 plasmid in rabbit hindlimb ischemia . J Am Coll Cardiol 41 , 1056 , 2003 . 83 . Simons , M . , Bonow , R . O . , Chronos , N . A . , Cohen , D . J . , Giordano , F . J . , Hammond , H . K . , Laham , R . J . , Li , W . , Pike , M . , Sellke , F . W . , Stegmann , T . J . , Udelson , J . E . , and Ro - sengart , T . K . Clinical trials in coronary angiogenesis : issues , problems , consensus : an expert panel summary . Circulation 102 , E73 , 2000 . 84 . Holder , W . D . , Jr . , Gruber , H . E . , Roland , W . D . , Moore , A . L . , Culberson , C . R . , Loebsack , A . B . , Burg , K . J . L . , and Mooney , D . J . Increased vascularization and heterogeneity of vascular structures occurring in polyglycolide matrices containing aortic endothelial cells implanted in the rat . Tissue Eng 3 , 149 , 1997 . 85 . Mooney , D . J . , and Mikos , A . G . Growing new organs . Sci Am 280 , 60 , 1999 . 86 . Burg , K . J . , Holder , W . D . Jr . , Culberson , C . R . , Beiler , R . J . , Greene , K . G . , Loebsack , A . B . , Roland , W . D . , Eiselt , P . , Mooney , D . J . , and Halberstadt , C . R . Comparative study of seeding methods for three - dimensional polymeric scaffolds . J Biomed Mater Res 51 , 642 , 2000 . 87 . Kaigler , D . , Krebsbach , P . H . , West , E . R . , Horger , K . , Huang , Y . C . , and Mooney , D . J . Endothelial cell modulation of bone marrow stromal cell osteogenic potential . FASEB J 19 , 665 , 2005 . 88 . Wendt , D . , Marsano , A . , Jakob , M . , Heberer , M . , and Martin , I . Oscillating perfusion of cell suspensions through three - dimensional scaffolds enhances cell seeding efﬁciency and uniformity . Biotechnol Bioeng 84 , 205 , 2003 . 89 . Tremblay , P . L . , Hudon , V . , Berthod , F . , Germain , L . , and Auger , F . A . Inosculation of tissue - engineered capillaries with the host’s vasculature in a reconstructed skin transplanted on mice . Am J Transplant 5 , 1002 , 2005 . 90 . Cho , S . W . , Lim , S . H . , Kim , I . K . , Hong , Y . S . , Kim , S . S . , Yoo , K . J . , Park , H . Y . , Jang , Y . , Chang , B . C . , Choi , C . Y . , Hwang , K . C . , and Kim , B . S . Small - diameter blood vessels engineered with bone marrow - derived cells . Ann Surg 241 , 506 , 2005 . 91 . Hibino , N . , Shin’oka , T . , Matsumura , G . , Ikada , Y . , and Kurosawa , H . The tissue - engineered vascular graft using bone marrow without culture . J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 129 , 1064 , 2005 . 92 . Kaushal , S . , Amiel , G . E . , Guleserian , K . J . , Shapira , O . M . , Perry , T . , Sutherland , F . W . , Rabkin , E . , Moran , A . M . , Schoen , F . J . , Atala , A . , Soker , S . , Bischoff , J . , and Mayer , J . E . , Jr . Functional small - diameter neovessels created using en - dothelial progenitor cells expanded ex vivo . Nat Med 7 , 1035 , 2001 . 93 . Yamashita , J . , Itoh , H . , Hirashima , M . , Ogawa , M . , Nishika - wa , S . , Yurugi , T . , Naito , M . , Nakao , K . , and Nishikawa , S . Flk1 - positive cells derived from embryonic stem cells serve as vascular progenitors . Nature 408 , 92 , 2002 . 94 . Asahara , T . , and Kawamoto , A . Endothelial progenitor cells for postnatal vasculogenesis . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 287 , C572 , 2004 . 95 . Zwaginga , J . J . , and Doevendans , P . Stem cell - derived an - giogenic / vasculogenic cells : possible therapies for tissue re - pair and tissue engineering . Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 30 , 900 , 2003 . 96 . Erol , O . O . , and Spira , M . New capillary bed formation with a surgically constructed arteriovenous ﬁstula . Surg Forum 30 , 530 , 1979 . 97 . Hirase , Y . , Valauri , F . A . , and Buncke , H . J . Creation of neo - vascularised free ﬂaps using vein grafts as pedicles : a pre - liminary report on experimental models . Br J Plast Surg 42 , 216 , 1989 . 98 . Takato , T . , Zuker , R . M . , and Turley , C . B . Prefabrication of skin ﬂaps using vein grafts : an experimental study in rabbits . Br J Plast Surg 44 , 593 , 1991 . 99 . Wilson , Y . T . , Kumta , S . , Hickey , M . J . , Hurley , J . V . , and Morrison , W . A . Use of free interpositional vein grafts as pedicles for prefabrication of skin ﬂaps . Microsurgery 15 , 717 , 1994 . ANGIOGENESIS IN TISSUE ENGINEERING 2103 100 . Mian , R . , Morrison , W . A . , Hurley , J . V . , Penington , A . J . , Romeo , R . , Tanaka , Y . , and Knight , K . R . Formation of new tissue from an arteriovenous loop in the absence of added extracellular matrix . Tissue Eng 6 , 595 , 2000 . 101 . Mian , R . A . , Knight , K . R . , Penington , A . J . , Hurley , J . V . , Messina , A . , Romeo , R . , and Morrison , W . A . Stimulating effect of an arteriovenous shunt on the in vivo growth of isografted ﬁbroblasts : a preliminary report . Tissue Eng 7 , 73 , 2001 . Address reprint requests to : Matthias W . Laschke , M . D . Institute for Clinical and Experimental Surgery University of Saarland D - 66421 Homburg / Saar Germany E - mail : matthias . laschke @ uniklinik - saarland . de 2104 LASCHKE ET AL .