What do Sketches Say about Thinking ? Barbara Tversky Department of Psychology Stanford University Stanford , California 94025 - 2130 bt @ psych . stanford . edu Abstract Sketches are produced in many domains to communicate with self or others . They are a kind of external representation serving as a cognitive tool to augment memory and information processing by relieving the mind of some of those burdens . Sketches schematize . They do not portray reality ; rather they convey conceptions of reality . Sketches use elements and spatial relations on paper to represent elements and spatial or abstract relations in the domain of interest . They incorporate relevant information and omit irrelevant . As such , they reveal people’s conceptions of domains . . An analysis of sketches of routes , for example , reveals that they segment routes around action points , typically turns . Order of drawing reflects mental organization of the domain . From sketches , novices extract structural information about the spatial relations among elements . Experts are also able to extract functional information , information that must be inferred from rather than directly extracted from sketches . Why do People Sketch ? Sketches are a way of externalizing ideas , of turning internal thoughts public , of making fleeting thoughts more permanent . Of course , written language can do the same , but sketches have the advantage of conveying visuospatial ideas directly , using elements and spatial relations on paper to convey elements and spatial relations in the world . This may explain their ubiquity ; maps and architectural plans have been found incised in stone , etched on leather , impressed in clay , and drawn on paper in diverse cultures scattered over the world . Sketches can also convey abstract ideas metaphorically , using elements and spatial relations on paper to express abstract elements and relations . Expressing ideas in a visuospatial medium makes comprehension and inference easier than in a more abstract medium such as language . The externality of sketches and similar cognitive tools promotes memory , providing a record that does not rely on unreliable human memory . They also provide a token for the contents of working memory , relieving the dual burden of holding the content and also simultaneously operating on it . Instead , computations and inferences can be made on an external representation ( e . g . , Kirsch , 1995 ; Tversky , 2001 ) . The public nature of sketches allows a community to observe , comment on , and revise the ideas , and enact those revisions in the external representation . Like spoken and written language , sketches are a form of communication . More than talking , sketches often serve as communications for self . One role of a sketch is to check the completeness and internal consistency of an idea , especially a spatial idea . A sketch is a literal model of an idea , an existence proof . Another role of sketches for self is to see new relations and figures . These newly seen objects and relations can promote new ideas ( e . g . , Goel , 1995 ; Goldschmidt , 1991 , 1994 ; Shon , 1983 ; Shon and Wiggins , 1992 ; Suwa , Gero , and Purcell , 2000 ; Suwa and Tversky , 1996 , 1997 ; Suwa , Tversky , Gero , and Purcell , 2001 ) . Sketchers make sketches with certain ideas and goals in mind , but fortuitously , may see new objects and configurations in their sketches . These encounters produced welcome but unintended discoveries , and may be a fruitful source of new design ideas . What do People Put in Sketches ? Schematic Structure Let’s begin with maps , the most ubiquitous of sketches , produced by novices and experts , adults and children across the world and over the millennia . Two broad classes of maps can be discerned : those that convey regions ( e . g . , Taylor and Tversky , 1992 ) , and those that convey routes ( e . g . , Tversky and Lee , 1998 , 1999 ) . In both cases , maps schematize . They include information important to their purposes , eliminating the irrelevant . More than that , map sketches simplify , even distort , the information included to conform to the structure to be conveyed . The structure captured by sketches is not the structure of the environment , but rather , the conceptual structure of the information . Evidence for this comes from an analysis of route sketch maps by Tversky and Lee ( 1998 , 1999 ) . From : AAAI Technical Report SS - 0 2 - 0 8 . Compilation copyright © 200 2 , AAAI ( www . aaai . org ) . All rights reserved . Students were approached outside a dorm and asked if they knew how to get to a local fast food restaurant . If so , they were asked to either sketch a map or to write directions to the restaurant . These were analyzed by a system developed by Denis ( 1997 ) for decomposing route directions into a sequence of segments consisting of start points , reorientations , progressions , and end points . The analysis held for route sketches as well as route directions . In the case of route sketches , each segment was represented by stylized elements . Start and end points were depicted as blobs , irrespective of their actual shape , or names . Reorientations were depicted as T’s , L’s , or + ’s depending on the configuration of the intersection , but irrespective of the actual angles . Progressions were depicted as straight lines or curves , again , irrespective of the actual curvature . Sketch maps could be analog , unlike language . Instead , they are quite language - like . They are segmented into elements . They consist of language - like strings of stylized figures , lines , curves , and blobs ( Zacks , Lee , and Heiser , 2000 ) . These elements can be combined in different ways to create different meanings , again , like language ( Goodman , 1968 ) . The parallels to language go further . In fact , the meanings of the depictive elements can be mapped onto the meanings of the linguistic elements . Reorientations were two types , “go down” for straight paths and “follow around” for curved paths . Actions at intersections , regardless of angle or type , were described as “make a” or “take a” or “turn” followed by a direction . Long distances with no actions are truncated , and short ones with many actions enlarged . A survey of these maps as well as those produced across ages and cultures ( Tversky , 2000 ) illustrates yet other features of sketches . They often include depictive elements that are not present in reality , such as boundaries and arrows . They also include symbolic elements such as names , populations , distances . They may mix perspectives , for example , portraying a road system from above and salient landmarks from within . This allows travelers to find a route to a landmark and to recognize the landmark when they arrive . Both route sketches and route directions , then , reflect the same conceptual structure . Routes are conceived of as sequences of start points , reorientations , progressions , and end points . The sketch elements are sufficient to convey that structure , but insufficient to convey the exact configuration in the world . In fact , they may severely distort the configuration of the world . These distortions do conflict with their purpose , of getting a traveler from one point to another . The environment itself can correct the distortions . Even if a 60 degree turn is depicted as 90 degrees , the traveler has little choice but to turn 60 degrees . Similarly , if a road is more or less curved than depicted , the traveler again has little choice but to follow the road’s curvature , whatever it is . Route sketches , like spoken and written language , are an ancient and well - practiced form of communication , so it is not surprising that they have become stylized , indeed , language - like , consisting of a small set of schematized elements that can be combined in different ways to convey different meanings . They have advantages over spoken and written language in that the elements themselves are spatial , and can be readily interpreted in context , straight lines on paper as straight paths in the world . Other Domains Sketches from other domains have the same character ; that is , they consist of a small set of stylized elements that are combinatoric . Children from all over the world sketch people as circular blobs for heads and later for bodies , sticks for arms and legs ( Goodnow , 1977 ; Kellogg , 1969 ) . Handwriting can be decomposed into 12 - 14 stroke types that are used to compose all letters ( Bar On , 1999 ) . The graffiti interface to PDA’s is based on combing a small set of diagrammatic elements . Japanese and Chineses calligraphy is composed of a small set of strokes , combined in different ways . Architectural sketches , too , can be decomposed into a small set of elements that can be combined to create large structures ( Do and Gross , 1997a , 1997b ) . Sketches of statistical data and mechanical devices are also composed of simple figures that have meanings easily interpreted in context . Arrows , for example , are asymmetric lines . They suggest an asymmetric connection . As such , they have many uses , among them , to label , to indicate direction , to indicate motion , to indicate order . Hierarchical Structure Sketches of regions reveal other characteristics of sketches . The order in which people draw regional maps reflects the conceptual structure of the maps ( Taylor and Tversky , 1992 ) . Participants read descriptions or studied maps of regions . Later , they were asked to produce sketches and descriptions of the regions . The order of sketching elements of the regions and the order of mentioning them in descriptions correlated . For regions that had features on different environmental scales , the large features , such as rivers and mountains , were depicted or described before the smaller ones , such as road structure or buildings . This suggests that people impose a hierachical structure on even flat regions , and use that structure to organize the environment . Sketches in many domains are not presentations of reality , they are representations of reality ( Tversky , 1999 ) . They differ from reality in important ways : they omit information , they add information , they distort information . As such , they are not externalized images , at least not in the “classic” sense of images , as internalized perceptions ( Kosslyn , 1980 ) . Sketches can be , however , externalizations of ideas . As such , they can convey ideas , especially visual spatial ones , effectively . They can also facilitate discovery of new objects and relations , foster new ideas . Let us now turn to what people extract from sketches . What do People Extract from Sketches ? It is not trivial to say that people can extract from sketches what sketchers intended . How often have we returned to our own sketches , and writings , only to be bewildered by what was meant to be conveyed . Across a number of domains , including maps and diagrams of devices , what is meant to be conveyed is structure . In fact , from well - composed accurate route maps , the structure of the route can be communicated accurately enough for a traveler to arrive at the proper destination . Similarly , from a well - constructed diagram of a device , the structure of the device can be conveyed ( Heiser and Tversky , 2002 ) . Sketches can also provide a rich source of new ideas for design . ideas ( e . g . , Goel , 1995 ; Goldschmidt , 1991 , 1994 ; Shon , 1983 ; Shon and Wiggins , 1992 ; Suwa , Gero , and Purcell , 2000 ; Suwa and Tversky , 1996 , 1997 ; Suwa , Tversky , Gero , and Purcell , 2001 ) . Sketchers make sketches with certain ideas and goals in mind , but fortuitously , may see new objects and configurations in their sketches . These encounters produced welcome but unintended discoveries , and may be a fruitful source of new design ideas . Extracting the Unseen from the Seen Sketches and diagrams can be useful for conveying more than structure . They can also be effective in conveying certain abstractions that may be inferred from the structure presented in the sketch but are not directly conveyed by the sketch . Consider mechanical devices such as a bike pump , car brake , or pulley system . All of these devices move ; what’s more they move to accomplish certain ends . How they move and what they accomplish is usually not directly conveyed in sketches . The small addition of an arrow to sketches of mechanical systems changes their interpretation . When asked to write descriptions of what is portrayed in the diagram , participants viewing simple diagrams of a car brake , pulley system or bike pump write structural descriptions . When arrows were added to the diagrams , participants write functional descriptions of the devices , explaining what they do , step - by - step . The arrows convey temporal order , allowing viewers to mentally animate ( Hegarty , 1992 ) the device . Inferring causal sequence from temporal order is apparently an inference undergraduates make immediately ( Heiser and Tversky , 2002 ) . The converse also holds . When presented with a structural description of one of the systems and asked to construct a diagram , participants produced sketches without arrows . However , when provided with a functional description , participants produced sketches with arrows ( Heiser and Tversky , , 2002 ) . Ability Ability affects the kinds of inferences participants are able to make from sketches . Participants with high mechanical ability were better at making functional inferences from sketches than participants with low mechanical ability ( Heiser and Tversky , 2002 ) . Expertise Expertise is another quality that affects the inferences that can be made from sketches . Suwa and Tversky ( 1996 ; 1997 ) asked trained architects and students of architecture to design a museum under certain constraints . Afterwards , the participants saw videos of their sketching sessions and reported what they were thinking as they drew each line of the sketch . Practicing architects made more functional inferences from their own sketches than students of architecture . For example , practictioners were more likely to “see” patterns of movement and patterns of light in their sketches than students . These functional attributes are not directly conveyed in the sketches , but can be inferred from them . The presence of corridors connecting high and low use structures allows inferences about traffic flow , just as the presence of windows and skylights along with knowledge of cardinal directions allo inferences about light . In another experiment , trained designers and laypeople were shown abstract , ambiguous sketches and asked to generate as many different interpretations of the sketches as they could . Expert designers generated more interpretations than laypeople . Structure is readily acquired from well - formed sketches . Unseen information , such as motion , can also be inferred from sketches , though these inferences from the seen to the unseen may depend on expertise and ability . Nature of Sketches Sketches are a useful tool for checking and conveying ideas , for self and others . They also serve as an external display to facilitate inference and discovery . , to go from the intended to the unintended , to go from the seen to the unseen . Sketches for design or for diagrams are structured . They consist of elements or segments that can be combined to create a wide range of meanings . The elements are often simply schematic figures such as lines and blobs whose meanings are readily interpretable from their geometric and Gestalt properties . Such sketches have some of the structure of spoken language . Unlike language , however , sketches convey figural and relational properties directly , facilitating memory , inference , and discovery . Nevertheless , there are intriguing parallels between sketches and language , between depictions and descriptions at two levels : at an abstract level , in the very existence of segmentation and combination , and at the level of content of a particular domain , in the particular segments and combinations , most notably in route maps and directions . Under the proper light , analysis of each , descriptions and depictions , can reveal thinking . Acknowledgments . The author is indebted to Masaki Suwa , Paul Lee , Jeff Zacks , and Julie Heiser for hours of good talk on sketches and diagrams . Some of the research reported here was supported by Office of Naval Research , Grants Number NOOO14 - PP - 1 - O649 and N000140110717 to Stanford University References Bar On , E . : 1999 , Personal communication . Denis , M . : 1997 , The description of routes : A cognitive approach to the production of spatial discourse , Cahiers de Psychologie Cognitive , 16 , 409 - 458 . Do , E . Y - L and Gross , M . D . : 1997a , Computatbility of design diagrams : An empirical study of diagram conventions in design , in R . Junge ( ed . ) , CAAD Futures , pp . 171 - 176 . Do , E . Y - L . and Gross , M . D . : 1997b , Inferring design intentions from sketches : An investigation of freehand drawing conventions in design , in Y - T Liu , J - Y Tsou , and J - H Hou ( eds ) , Proceedings of the Second Conference on Computer Aided Architectural Design Research in Asia , Taiwan , pp . 217 - 227 . Goel , V . : 1995 , Sketches of Thought , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Goldschmidt , G . : 1991 , The dialectics of sketching , Design Studies , 4 , 123 - 143 . Goldschmidt , G . : 1994 , On visual design thinking : The vis kids of architecture , Design Studies , 15 , 158 - 174 . Goodman , N . : 1968 , Languages of Art : An Approach to a Theory of Symbols , The Bobbs - Merrill Company , Inc . Goodnow , J . : 1977 , Children ' s Drawing , Open Books , London . Hegarty , M . 1992 . Mental animation : Inferring motion from static displays of mechanical systems . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 18 , 1084 - 1102 . Heiser , J . and Tversky , B . 2002 . Descriptions and depictions of complex systems : Structural and functional perspectives , submitted . Kellogg , R . : 1969 , Analyzing Children ' s Art , National Press , Palo Alto , CA . Kirsh , D . : 1995 , The intelligent use of space , Artificial Intelligence , 73 , 31 - 68 . Kosslyn , S . M . : 1980 , Image and Mind , Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . Kosslyn , S . M . : 1996 , Image and Brain , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Schon , D . A . : 1983 , The Reflective Practitioner , Basic Books , New York . Schon , D . A . and Wiggins , G . : 1992 , Kinds of seeing and their function in designing , Design Studies , 13 , 135 - 156 . Suwa , M . , Gero , J . and Purcell , T . ( 2000 ) . Unexpected discoveries and S - invention of design requirements : Important vehicles for a design process , Design Studies , 21 , 539 - 567 . Suwa , M . , Gero , J . and Purcell , T . ( 2000 ) . Unexpected discoveries and S - invention of design requirements . Important vehicles for a design process , Design Studies , 21 , 539 - 567 . Suwa , M . and Tversky , B . : 1996 , What architects see in their sketches : Implications for design tools , Human Factors in Computing Systems : Conference Companion , ACM , NY , pp . 191 - 192 . Suwa , M . and Tversky , B . : 1997 , What architects and students perceive in their sketches : A protocol analysis , Design Studies , 18 , 385 - 403 . Suwa , M . , Tversky , B . , Gero , J . , and Purcell , T . ( 2001 ) . Seeing into sketches : Regrouping parts encourages new interpretations . In J . S . Gero , B . Tversky and T . Purcell ( Editors ) . Visual and spatial reasoning in design , II . Pp . 207 - 219 . Sydney , Australia : Key Centre of Design Computing . Taylor , H . A . and Tversky , B . : 1992 , Descriptions and depictions of environments , Memory and Cognition , 20 , 483 - 496 . Tversky , B . ( 1999 ) . What does drawing reveal about thinking ? In J . S . Gero and B . Tversky ( eds ) , Visual and spatial reasoning in design . Sydney , Australia : Key Centre of Design Computing and Cognition pp . 93 - 101 . Tversky , B . ( 2000 ) . Some ways that maps and diagrams communicate . In Freksa , C . , Brauer , W . , Habel , C . , and Wender , K . F . ( eds ) . Spatial cognition II : Integrating abstract theories , empirical studies , formal models , and practical applications . Springer - Verlag , Berlin , pp . 72 - 79 . Tversky , B . : 2001 , Spatial schemas in depictions , in M . Gattis ( ed . ) , Spatial Schemas and Abstract Thought , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , pp . 79 - 111 . Tversky , B . and Lee , P . U . : 1998 , How space structures language , in C . Freksa , C . Habel , and K . F . Wender ( eds ) , Spatial Cognition : An interdisciplinary approach to representation and processing of spatial knowledge , Springer - Verlag , Berlin , pp . 157 - 175 . Tversky , B . and Lee , P . U . 1999 , Pictorial and verbal tools for conveying routes In C . Freksa , and D . M . Mark , ( eds ) . Spatial information theory : cognitive and computational foundations of geographic information science , Springer - Verlag , Berlin , pp . 51 - 64 . Tversky , B , Zacks , J . , Lee , P . U . , & Heiser , J . ( 2000 ) . Lines , blobs , crosses , and arrows : Diagrammatic communication with schematic figures . In M . Anderson , P . Cheng , and V . Haarslev eds . , Theory and application of diagrams . Springer - Verlag , Berlin , pp . 221 - 230 . .