This article was downloaded by : [ 129 . 110 . 242 . 50 ] On : 15 September 2016 , At : 09 : 30 Publisher : Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences ( INFORMS ) INFORMS is located in Maryland , USA Operations Research Publication details , including instructions for authors and subscription information : http : / / pubsonline . informs . org Operations Research Trajectories : The Anglo - American Experience from the 1940s to the 1990s Maurice W . Kirby , To cite this article : Maurice W . Kirby , ( 2000 ) Operations Research Trajectories : The Anglo - American Experience from the 1940s to the 1990s . Operations Research 48 ( 5 ) : 661 - 670 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1287 / opre . 48 . 5 . 661 . 12402 Full terms and conditions of use : http : / / pubsonline . informs . org / page / terms - and - conditions This article may be used only for the purposes of research , teaching , and / or private study . Commercial use or systematic downloading ( by robots or other automatic processes ) is prohibited without explicit Publisher approval , unless otherwise noted . For more information , contact permissions @ informs . org . The Publisher does not warrant or guarantee the article’s accuracy , completeness , merchantability , fitness for a particular purpose , or non - infringement . Descriptions of , or references to , products or publications , or inclusion of an advertisement in this article , neither constitutes nor implies a guarantee , endorsement , or support of claims made of that product , publication , or service . © 2000 INFORMS Please scroll down for article—it is on subsequent pages INFORMS is the largest professional society in the world for professionals in the fields of operations research , management science , and analytics . For more information on INFORMS , its publications , membership , or meetings visit http : / / www . informs . org OPERATIONS RESEARCH TRAJECTORIES : THE ANGLO - AMERICAN EXPERIENCE FROM THE 1940s TO THE 1990s MAURICE W . KIRBY Department of Economics , The Management School , Lancaster University , Lancaster , LA1 4YX , United Kingdom m . kirby @ lancaster . ac . uk ( Received January 1999 ; accepted May 1999 ) This paper is derived from the author’s sponsored history of Operations Research in Britain from its formal inception in the later 1930s . It is inspired by the knowledge that any history of OR in Britain that ignores the interrelationship with OR in the United States would be grossly incomplete . This relates not only to the period of military collaboration in World War II but also to the profound in * uence on British operations researchers of American - derived techniques and methods . The Anglo - American perspective serves also to highlight major contrasts , as well as striking similarities in the development of OR in both countries . The paper advocates the need for ongoing research into the history of OR as an essential complement to the advancing frontier of knowledge , both in theory and in practice . Virtually all disciplines worthy of university - level study have their chroniclers , and this should apply with no less force to OR in the light of its impressive trajectory of development and early acknowledgment of its utilitarian value in a wide variety of settings in the public and private sectors . I n 1994 I received the commission from the UK Opera - tional Research Society to research and prepare a full - scale history of British OR from its formal inception in 1938 . The Society had already provided funding for research into the reasons for the success and survival of OR groups , a sen - sitive issue in view of the well - publicised closure or disper - sal of some apparently well - established groups during the economic recession of the early 1990s , following on simi - lar experiences in the early 1970s and 1980s . The resulting research could not avoid contextual commentary on the his - tory of OR ( Fildes and Ranyard 1997 ) , and it was this factor , together with an acute awareness of the dwindling number of OR pioneers , that prompted the historical commission . A further consideration , fully consistent with experience in the United States , was rooted in perceptions of an ongoing “crisis of con8dence” in OR , dating back to the 1970s . This was the product of cumulative uncertainties concerning the status of OR in managerial and executive hierarchies , its methods , and educational ethos . In this context , an historical account , prepared by an economic historian with no previous allegiance to OR , might o : er insights into the current state of the discipline , thereby stimulating fruitful debate on its fu - ture trajectory . As a professional historian , I have consulted a wide range of archive material , much of it assembled under OR Society auspices and deposited at the Modern Records Centre ( MRC ) located at the University of Warwick . The MRC contains the Society’s own archive , as well as the records of a wide range of OR groups in the corporate and public utility sectors . The Archives Committee of the Society has also sponsored a sequence of oral interviews with OR veterans with audio tapes and written transcripts available for bona & de researchers attending the MRC . Otherarchive sources are located within particular organisa - tions , both public and private , with the largest single collec - tion being held by the Public Record O = ce at Kew . The lat - ter , supplemented by historical archives located within the UK Ministry of Defence , o : ers a vast array of material on the military origins of OR before 1939 and detailed accounts of its di : usion throughout the British military command struc - ture after 1940 . With this volume of primary research ma - terial at his disposal , together with published general ac - counts , privately held papers and personal reminiscences , the historian of British OR is well served . The presumption must be that a range of archive material of at least equal proportions exists in the United States . One positive result of the present paper would be to stimulate interest in the postwar history of OR in the United States following on McCloskey’s pioneering articles on wartime OR , published in the later 1980s ( McCloskey 1987a , 1987b , 1987c ) . The present paper begins with an analysis of the di : usion of OR in Britain and the United States during World War II and utilizes German experience to explain the receptiv - ity of Anglo - American military commanders to OR con - ducted by civilian scientists . The second section takes issue with early American views of the rapid take - up of civil - ian OR in Britain after 1945 , and this serves as a pre - lude to discussion of the factors that precipitated the rapid di : usion of industrial , civil government , and educational Subject classi & cations : History of OR / MS : Anglo / U . S . comparisons and contrasts . OR / MS philosophy : Anglo / U . S . comparisons and contrasts . Area of review : O R C HRONICLE . Operations Research , ? 2000 INFORMS 0030 - 364X / 00 / 4805 - 0661 $ 05 . 00 Vol . 48 , No . 5 , September – October 2000 , pp . 661 – 670 661 1526 - 5463 electronic ISSN D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 110 . 242 . 50 ] on 15 S e p t e m b e r 2016 , a t 09 : 30 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . 662 / K IRBY provision for OR after 1960 . The 8nal section o : ers a commentary on the emergent “crisis” in British OR after 1970 , drawing parallels with more recent experience in the United States . 1 . OR IN WORLD WAR II In the years after 1940 , OR di : used extraordinarily rapidly throughout the respective British and American mili - tary commands at the same time as high - ranking o = cers displayed considerable trust and con8dence in the advice tendered by civilian OR scientists . In the British case , fol - lowing the Battle of Britain in the late summer of 1940 , by the beginning of 1942 substantial OR sections were attached to the Commanders - in - Chief headquarters in RAF Fighter , Coastal , and Bomber Commands and The Royal Navy . Only the army lagged behind , but even there an anti - aircraft OR group had been formed as early as 1940 ( Kirby and Capey 1997a , 1997b ) . In the United States , it is necessary only to read Philip Morse’s autobiography ( Morse 1977a ) and McCloskey’s account of American OR in World War II ( McCloskey 1987c ) to appreciate the equally rapid rate of di : usion in the aftermath of Pearl Harbour . Inspired in large measure by British experience , by the end of 1942 , OR had penetrated substantially into the Navy and Army Air Forces , both at home and abroad . In accounting for these parallel developments , the following factors are of relevance . The 8rst can be put in the form of questions that can be an - swered , in part , by reference to German experience . Speci - 8cally , why were civilian scientists in both Britain and the United States admitted into the inner core of defence plan - ning up to and including the highest level of government ; and , secondly , what were the circumstances which encour - aged senior allied commanders to place considerable faith and trust in the advice tendered by civilian operations re - searchers ? In answer to the 8rst question , it is instructive to note the comparative situation in Germany . Of all the World War II belligerents it might be thought that the appl - ication of the “scienti8c method” to military planning would have proceeded furthest there . Germany was a country ex - ceptionally well endowed with university - level scienti8c institutes , government research establishments , and private sector provision for the development of advanced technol - ogy and managerial practice . In all these respects , historians of scienti8c and technical education have drawn invidious contrasts with British and German , if not American , pro - vision in these areas ( Locke 1989 ) . Yet although German scientists competed with their British and American counter - parts in the development of radar , the organisation and use of scienti8c resources on the part of the German armed forces failed to match both British and American achievements . In Germany , in contrast to Britain and the United States , civil - ian scientists were not integrated into high - level military command structures , and their collaboration in military tech - nical programmes was comparatively limited ( Overy 1980 ) . One explanation for this ( applicable also in the Japanese context ) was the relatively rigid hierarchical organisation of the German armed forces , which circumscribed severely the potential for civilian involvement . A second factor , perhaps of even greater importance , was the application of political tests of loyalty in the name of the Nazi Party and the result - ing loss of a considerable proportion of the German scien - ti8c elite as a result of emigration in the face of racial and religious persecution . It is also instructive to note that whilst Prime Minister Churchill and President Roosevelt brought civilian scientists into their innermost counsels , Hitler chose to surround himself with astrologers , at least until 1944 , when he began to take an interest in fundamental science in the search for new terror weapons of mass destruction . Fi - nally , in answer to the second question , the point should be emphasised that the application of OR to military tactics and strategy produced such demonstrable and impressive results at a su = ciently early stage in the war that they could hardly be ignored even by the most bone - headed of military com - manders . In this respect , it is necessary only to highlight the considerable demonstration e : ect of OR’s role in determin - ing the successful outcome of the Battle of Britain . Until the advent of radar , RAF Fighter Command depended on airborne standing patrols as the primary means of enemy aircraft interception . To make matters worse , in the summer of 1940 , the RAF’s defensive capabilities were being eroded progressively by the loss of 8ghter aircraft in France and hence the dwindling number of squadrons available for the defence of the British mainland . The role of OR in redeem - ing the situation was underlined vividly after the war by Sir Charles Goodeve , formerly Assistant Controller for Re - search and Development in the Admiralty : In his estimate , radar as a new technology had increased the probability of 8ghter interception by a factor of 10 , and operations researchers in designing the “man - machine system” had in - creased this by a factor of two . The combined e : ect , there - fore , had been to render Fighter Command 20 times more powerful ( Goodeve 1948 ) . Admittedly , this was a “back of the envelope” calculation , but there can be no doubting the profound impact on the military mind of the contribution of civilian scientists in enhancing the combat e : ectiveness of an entire military command at a critical stage in the war . In other words , con8dence in OR was the direct product of enhanced military capability out of all proportion to the amount of e : ort spent on the relevant research pro - gramme ( Kirby and Capey 1997a , Checkland and Holwell 1998 ) . Constraints of space preclude detailed commentary , but there is ample evidence in both Britain and the United States of the positive results of wartime OR : The favourable outcome of the anti - U - boat campaign in the North Atlantic was heavily dependent on Anglo - US OR studies , as was the increasing bombing accuracy of RAF Bomber Command and the US Eighth Air Force in their joint campaign against the German homeland . The success of OR in these and other theatres is well documented in public archives , published of - 8cial histories , and personal reminiscences ( Morse and Kim - ball 1951 , Brothers 1956 , Air Ministry 1963 , Blackett 1962 , Waddington 1973 , Tidman 1984 , Johnson and Katcher 1973 , Morse 1977a , McArthur 1990 , Kirby and Capey 1997b ) . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 110 . 242 . 50 ] on 15 S e p t e m b e r 2016 , a t 09 : 30 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . K IRBY / 663 The one exception to the generally positive record of wartime OR is the relatively limited use of OR techniques by the British and American armies . There are obvious ex - planations for this , which can be highlighted by reference to British experience . In the 8rst instance , the man - machine systems that were so conducive to OR studies for the al - lied air forces and navies were relatively rare in the army given the then state of technology in relation to military operations . Whilst the evidence suggests that the British army made good use of OR in the organisation of armoured divisions in advance of the D - Day landings ( Shephard 1984 , 1994 ) , the evidence also points strongly to the fact that op - erations researchers attached to overseas army commands failed to make any signi8cant impact . The reason is indicated in a postwar report of the work of operations researchers at - tached to the 21st Army Group encompassing all the British invasion forces engaged in the D - Day landings . The rele - vant OR group was undoubtedly the most successful of all the groups attached to overseas commands , but even here , : : : many of the ideas that emerged from our reports were never adopted , often never even considered because they were only ideas buried in reports that were never read . The conclusion that must follow from this is that the investigating body , the [ Operational Research Section ] can be lowly ranked , but that it needs a highly - ranked o = cer , a Scienti8c Adviser , to see that its ideas are carried out . ( Army Council 1947 ) The overall conclusion to be derived from this is that taking the period of the war as a whole , British operations researchers were most in * uential in the context of home - based military commands and when investigating ongoing operational problems . This stands in marked contrast to the high status accorded to the OR groups attached to the US Eighth and Twentieth Air Forces in the European and Paci8c theatres , respectively ( Brothers 1956 ) . The British experi - ence can be explained in large measure by reference to the unique role ful8lled by Patrick Blackett ( sometimes referred to as “the father of OR” ) . A distinguished physicist , Fellow of the Royal Society , and future Nobel Prize winner , Blackett had been involved with OR since its inception . It was Blackett who established most of the home - based British OR groups , and there can be no doubting his sin - gular e : ectiveness ( Lovell 1975 ) . Operations researchers overseas , however , could never aspire to Blackett’s role and status : Obliged to accept honorary military rank due to service exigencies , they were bound to be constrained by their lowly position in the military hierarchy , quite apart from their subservience to rapidly moving events in active military theatres . And even in Blackett’s case , his scien - ti8c reputation and formidable record in tactical OR could not prevent his eventual marginalisation in relation to the higher strategic conduct of the war ( Zuckerman 1992 ) . 2 . AMERICAN VIEWS OF EARLY BRITISH CIVIL OR An interesting perspective on the postwar di : usion of OR in Britain beyond the military sector is provided by early American commentaries . In 1954 , for example , Florence Trefethen wrote : The general postwar di : usion of OR in Britain proceeded directly from wartime experience and did not pick up a thread of related business activity from prewar years . In one sense this was an advantage . The American industrial manager , having previous experience with management consultants and di : ering experts of all types , could and did say to the OR man , ‘what’s new about this ? ’ Unconvincing replies , in many instances , deterred management from encouraging the activity : American nonmilitary OR , consequently , got o : to a slow start after the war . The British industrialist , on the other hand , immediately recognised OR as a new and valuable instrument . ( Trefethen 1954 ) This interpretation was subsequently reinforced by Russell Acko : in 1957 , when he pointed to the invasion of US industry by “specialised scientists” well before 1940 , so that in contrast to British experience , by the early 1950s substantial progress had already been made in resolving “managerial problems arising from the interaction of func - tional departments” ( Acko : 1957 ) . These American views , therefore , pointed to the enthusiastic welcome given to OR in the UK industrial sector after 1945 and also to the US lag in the take - up of civil OR in light of earlier developments in scienti8c management . Super8cially , the Trefethen - Acko : interpretation is attractive . In accordance with Trefethen’s account , for example , it might be argued that the very absence of a scienti8c approach to business manage - ment provided the postwar British advocates of civilian OR with an original and attractive agenda . It is also the case that the political and economic circumstances of Britain in the later 1940s gave every appearance of pro - viding an ideal environment for the di : usion of civil OR in view of the election of a Labour Government in 1945 ostensibly committed to central planning , the al - location of scarce resources according to rational prin - ciples , and the creation of a large , nationalised public utility sector hitherto starved of resources and operating at the limits of capacity . All of this focussed attention on the application of “e = ciency” criteria in the planning and ex - ecution of investment programmes . Indeed , governmental interest in civilian OR , was registered in the appointment of an o = cial Committee on Industrial Productivity ( CIP ) to produce recommendations on how industrial e = ciency could be improved , especially in the Anglo - American con - text . Signi8cantly , the Committee’s remit included OR as a potential aid to heightened productivity . Finally , the later 1940s witnessed several well - publicised conferences and seminars at which wartime operations researchers of the cal - ibre of Patrick Blackett and Solly Zuckerman proclaimed the relevance of OR to national economic and social well - being . However , in spite of these factors in favour of the di : usion of OR , the reality is that there was no signi8cant British lead in the take - up of OR beyond the military sector after 1945 . In the case of the CIP , it is true that the Commit - tee was highly enthusiastic about the potential bene8ts of civilian OR and advocated detailed studies of its relevance to a wide range of industrial sectors , from gas and electri - city to motor vehicles and machine tools . The credibility of the report , however , was destroyed by civil servants within the Treasury and the Board of Trade , most of whom were D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 110 . 242 . 50 ] on 15 S e p t e m b e r 2016 , a t 09 : 30 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . 664 / K IRBY committed to nonintervention in civilian manufacturing in - dustry . As the Treasury commented : : : : the more we read the literature about OR the closer we come to the conclusion that it is merely a term covering a whole range of sensible activity ( already known , studied and applied under other names ) arbitrarily and to no purpose di : erentiated from other sensible activity . ( Public Record O = ce 1949a ) Other civil servants , concerned about OR’s intervention - ist agenda , characterised the report as “an announcement of some very large territorial ambitions and the resulting impression could easily seem to some people Hitlerism” ( Public Record O = ce 1949b ) . This heavily politicised re - action to OR as a totalitarian force on the side of fas - cism was reinforced from the opposite end of the political spectrum by accusations that the leading advocates of OR , including Blackett , Zuckerman , and J . D . Bernal , were com - munist sympathisers . It is on public record , for example , that Blackett , for all his scienti8c eminence ( his Nobel Prize was awarded in 1948 ) , was marginalised in British public life for two decades after 1945 on account of his principled opposition to the spread of nuclear weapons ( Lovell 1975 , Zuckerman 1992 ) . In this setting , Jonathan Rosenhead has observed that the onset of the Cold War in 1947 induced : : : : a change in the intellectual climate in which certain ideas and policies , including that of centralised state planning , became tarred with the brush of totalitarianism . OR , because of the socialist perspective of many of its originators was exposed to this chill wind . ( Rosenhead 1989 ) The fact remains that serious governmental interest in civil OR in Britain had to await the latter half of the 1960s , fol - lowing the election of a Labour Government ostensibly com - mitted to economic planning and industrial modernisation . What of the fate of OR in British industry after 1945 in light of Trefethen’s and Acko : ’s claim that it was di : used rapidly ? If it is true that British industrial OR got o : to a * ying start after the war , then it is instructive to note that it was con8ned to two industries , albeit of national signif - icance : the publicly owned coal - mining industry , and iron and steel . Even here , there were very distinctive and person - alised circumstances in the take - up of OR in these particular instances . On its formation in 1947 the National Coal Board ( NCB ) contained a spectrum of Board members di : erenti - ated by specialist function . The member for “science” was Sir Charles Ellis , who had been the driving force behind the development of OR for the British army in the later stages of the war . It was Ellis’ personal intervention that resulted in the foundation in 1947 of the NCB’s Field Investigation Group , destined to become the largest OR group in British industry . So too , in the case of iron and steel , the 8rst OR group was attached to the British Iron and Steel Research Association ( BISRA ) an over - arching body for the indus - try as a whole . BISRA’s postwar director was Sir Charles Goodeve , a former colleague of Blackett at the Admiralty , and it was his personal decision to establish an OR facil - ity . The critical point to note , therefore , is that contrary to the views of Trefethen and Acko : , early British industrial OR was very restricted in its sectoral coverage and wholly dependent upon high - level personal advocacy rather than being the product of any broadly based and enthusiastic wish to embrace OR . In fact , it was not until the 1960s that indus - trial OR began to di : use rapidly in Britain , fully in accord with experience in the United States . It is true that by the end of the 1950s British OR had penetrated more widely into the iron and steel industry and also into the manufac - turing sector generally . Such evidence as exists , however , suggests that in manufacturing , OR work was con8ned to very small numbers down to single individuals ( Kirby and Capey 1998 ) . In a comparative setting , therefore , there is every reason for claiming that industrial OR was valued no more in Britain than in the United States up to the end of the 1950s . 3 . THE DIFFUSION OF OR AFTER 1960 Why then did industrial OR take o : after 1960 ? In the British case , the answer is refreshingly uncomplicated , being rooted in dramatic changes in industrial structure that took place during the course of the decade . The key factor in this re - spect was the rapid closure of the Anglo - American “corpo - rate gap , ” whereby British business had lagged signi8cantly behind its US counterpart in the adoption of multidivisional corporate structures inhabited by professional salaried man - agers di : erentiated by specialist function . Up to the early 1960s British business was dominated by family ownership and control , which had placed a signi8cant institutional barrier in the way of managerial professionalism on the American model ( Elbaum and Lazonick 1986 , Chandler 1990 ) . In 1960 , only 30 of the top British companies , by market value , possessed US - style multidivisional structures ; by 1970 the number had more than doubled to 72 in response to a notable upsurge in company mergers . At the same time , the proportion of the top 100 companies achieving multi - national status via the acquisition of wholly owned sub - sidiaries abroad increased from 29 % in 1950 to 58 % in 1970 ( Channon 1973 ; Hannah 1983 ) . These trends were direct responses to the onset of heightened competition , both na - tionally and internationally , from the later 1950s onward . In circumstances of increasing managerial complexity , therefore , British business , advised in many cases by North American management consultancies ( McKinsey in particu - lar ) , began to adopt what the distinguished historian of man - agement education , Robert Locke , has termed “Classical [ American ] management , ” utilising “the new science - based managerial instruments” pioneered in the United States , from linear programming and statistical analysis to cyclo - metric feedback systems and electronic data processing ( Locke 1989 ) . As a leading historian of British business has commented , the post - 1960 di : usion of OR at a time when operations researchers could present themselves credibly as the gatekeepers to new computer technologies “made the administration of larger scale enterprises more tractable” ( Hannah 1983 ) . With new instruments of control and decision - making at their disposal , the new corporate managers in British industry could envisage growth in 8rm D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 110 . 242 . 50 ] on 15 S e p t e m b e r 2016 , a t 09 : 30 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . K IRBY / 665 size with a degree of con8dence denied to their pre - 1960 counterparts ( Channon 1973 , Dyas and Thanheiser 1976 ) . In US industry , the post - 1960 di : usion of OR was pro - pelled by similar in * uences , aided and abetted by several country - speci8c factors . Radnor and Neal ( 1973 ) , for ex - ample , have pointed to parallel developments in “the ever - increasing size and complexity of the business situation” and “the felt need to utilize fully the organisation’s computer facilities . ” As in Britain , competitive pressures were mount - ing , at the same time as regulatory agencies and stockholders were becoming more assertive ( Turban 1972 ) . In marked contrast to British experience , however , and in direct oppo - sition to the interpretations of Trefethen and Acko : , the up - surge in American OR can be explained to some extent by the receptivity of US corporate managers to OR / MS tech - niques based on their distinctive educational experiences . This fact points to major contrasts and comparisons between British and American educational provision for OR in par - ticular and MS in general . To the historian of OR it is one of the great paradoxes in comparing and contrasting the postwar trajectories of the subject in Britain and the United States that although Britain was the OR pioneer , educational provision lagged far be - hind the United States . By the end of the 1950s there was al - ready a small but * ourishing academic OR community in the United States at a time when OR in Britain was practitioner - dominated , with an overwhelming bias in favour of the coal and steel industries ( Smiddy and Naum 1954 , Acko : 1957 ) . Apart from one or two short courses at individual universi - ties , British postgraduate OR programmes were notable for their absence ( Kirby and Capey 1998 ) . This di : ering ex - perience can be explained in two ways . First , it is interest - ing to compare the postwar careers of Patrick Blackett and Philip Morse , the acknowledged British and American pio - neers of OR . It is true that in the later 1940s and early 1950s Blackett wrote one or two articles on wartime OR for the scienti8c periodicals of the day ( Blackett 1948 , 1953 ) ; he even contributed the lead article to the introductory issue of the 8rst OR journal , the Operational Research Quar - terly ( Blackett 1950 ) . After that , however , Blackett disap - peared from the OR world virtually without trace until the mid - 1960s , when he was readmitted to political life as an adviser on industrial policy ( Kirby 1999 ) . The same can be said of the other great names of British wartime OR—men of the calibre of Zuckerman and Bernal—all of them re - turned after the war to their original academic disciplines in physics , chemistry , anatomy , and biology and did not seek to build an academic OR community . The physicist Morse , on the other hand , played a pivotal role not only in the institutional development of American OR but also in securing the di : usion of the subject as an academic disci - pline worthy of university - level study ( Morse 1977a , 1997b ; Horvath and Ernst 1986 ) . By the later 1950s there were at least six American universities with graduate curricula lead - ing to postgraduate degrees in OR , and it was American operations researchers who produced the 8rst genuine text - book on the subject ( Churchman et al . 1957 ) . The suspicion remains , however , that even if Blackett had collaborated with other wartime operations researchers to promote aca - demic OR in the 1950s , their e : orts would have been frus - trated by the conservatism of British universities in relation to vocational education in general and to management and business studies in particular ( Locke 1989 ) . The fact remains that Morse and his colleagues were able to promote OR ed - ucation within a university structure that had been at the forefront of management science education since the begin - ning of the century . American universities , therefore , could provide the kind of congenial home for OR that was wholly lacking in Britain . During the 1960s , however , as the Anglo - American corporate gap was closed , so too was the gap in management education . This was the direct result of the cre - ation of a number of new universities and business schools in Britain with a willingness to experiment with new curric - ula and an upsurge of interest in management education in the context of that mounting awareness of the competitive decline of British industry alluded to above . In this context , the question arises as to the origins of the 8rst generation of British OR academics . Unsurprisingly , the overwhelm - ing majority came from the only fertile source available : the pre - existing practitioner community , located mainly in the coal and steel industries . The best example of this relates to the new University of Lancaster , founded in 1964 . The 8rst vice - chancellor , Sir Charles Carter , was a distinguished in - dustrial economist who was determined to establish an OR department at the university’s inception . It was Lancaster , therefore , that established the 8rst dedicated professorship in OR at a British university , the 8rst incumbent being Pat Rivett , a former President of the Operational Research So - ciety and Director of the NCB’s Field Investigation Group ( FIG ) in the 1950s . In establishing his new department , be - fore moving to the new University of Sussex in 1967 , Rivett predictably and understandably drew on the pool of talented operations researchers within FIG . Before commenting on the comparative development of OR after 1970 , it is worthwhile o : ering some remarks on a very distinctive aspect of British OR that has had few paral - lels in the United States . This concerns the di : usion of OR into central government beyond the military - defence sector . OR in civil government got underway in Britain in the later 1960s in response to modernising in * uences orchestrated by the then Labour government . The essential catalyst for the incorporation of OR within a range of central government departments was the decision of the government to establish a committee of inquiry into the civil service , in view of the fact that it had remained unmodernised since the Harcourt - Trevelyan reforms of the 1850s . To its credit , the Opera - tional Research Society seized the opportunity presented by the inquiry to advocate the case for a central government OR group that would deal with national and regional plan - ning problems as well as contributing to problem solving at the departmental and interdepartmental levels . As for the group’s position within the civil service structure , the Soci - ety envisaged two possibilities of more or less equal merit : 8rst , that it should serve the needs of the two key “economic” D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 110 . 242 . 50 ] on 15 S e p t e m b e r 2016 , a t 09 : 30 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . 666 / K IRBY ministries—the Treasury and the Department of Economic A : airs—as well as the Cabinet O = ce ; or , alternatively , that a British - style RAND Corporation should be established , if only to resolve any problems of precedence and seniority within established Whitehall hierarchies ( Kirby and Capey 1998 ) . The 8rst option was chosen , insofar as the Treasury was divided in two in 1968 . Hitherto , the Treasury had been responsible for macroeconomic policy and the management of the home civil service . After that date the latter function was hived o : into a separate Civil Service Department . It was this department that played a key role in di : using OR into other government departments , a movement that gath - ered pace after 1970 . The driving force was provided by Sir William Armstrong , former Permanent Treasury Secretary , who took over the management of the new Civil Service Department . Well known for his extreme dislike of “strongly de8ned ideological attitudes” and his preference for “facts and logic” ( Brittan 1971 ) , Armstrong was an OR enthusiast and determined to establish a civil government OR facility . As head of the Home Civil Service he was ideally placed to do so , a fact that reinforces in the British case the critical role of personal advocacy and enthusiasm in the di : usion of OR . 4 . THE " CRISIS " OF OR : FROM THE 1970s TO THE 1990s The presidential address to the British Operational Research Society in 1974 was delivered by Rolfe Tomlinson , the then head of the NCB’s operational research group . As a direct participant in the expansion of OR in the 1960s , Tomlinson took pride in reminding his audience of the di : usion of OR into manufacturing , the state - owned public utilities , an increasing range of government departments , and the dis - cipline’s incorporation in university - level curricula . Other developments included OR’s penetration into the 8nancial services sector and its application to social policy issues following the establishment of the Institute for Operational Research and the Local Government Operational Research Unit . In light of these developments , Tomlinson entitled his address “OR 1s , ” signifying that the OR community , embracing both practitioners and academics , had achieved impressive credibility in the private and public sectors ( Tomlinson 1974 ) . But having drawn the attention of his audience to the rationale for the title of his address , Tomlin - son then asked why the current mood of the Society signally failed to re * ect these substantial achievements . It is clear , in retrospect , therefore , that Tomlinson was attempting to stem an emergent crisis of con8dence in the British OR community . In explaining the doubts and uncertainties that began to aUict the British OR community in the 1970s , it is evident that longer term concerns were beginning to interact with more recent developments . In the former category there was the growing perception that OR had failed to capitalise on its wartime pro8le at the strategic level . To the extent that most peacetime work had been “tactical , ” it had been consistent with a gradual slippage of status of OR groups in relation to senior management ( Eilon 1977 , Dando and Sharp 1977 , Fildes and Ranyard 1997 ) . An excellent illustration of the problems confronting OR groups , even within apparently robust and sympathetic institutional structures , is provided by experience in the iron and steel industry . In a celebra - tory volume on the 8rst 20 years of OR in BISRA , the then head of the OR division , Roger Collcutt , frankly admitted that as late as 1965 there remained “a hard core of disillu - sioned rather than enthusiastic management in the iron and steel industry” ( Collcutt 1965 ) . The reasons , according to Collcutt , lay in OR project failures in which “lack of consul - tation” between the OR team and management was the dom - inant element . Other factors included inadequately de8ned problems , de8cient analysis , and boardroom politics . It was , of course , somewhat ironic that Tomlinson’s con8dence - building address noted the recent demise of BISRA’s OR division . In a much broader context , applicable also to the United States , it is evident that the post - 1950 di : usion of indus - trial OR was facilitated greatly by the ongoing process of economic growth in conditions of relative international economic stability . In this context , OR had been production - oriented in the postwar sellers’ market . As Pat Rivett remarked in a 1974 paper with respect to his own experience as an OR practitioner , For many years those of us in Operational Research had a rather easy and exciting life . Our life was easy because the national economies in which we worked were expanding , new job opportunities were constantly being created and the growth of the organizations which we served , which is one of the fundamental objectives of all organizations , was more or less assured by the continuing growth of the economies in which we worked . ( Rivett 1974 ) The 1960s , however , had ushered in a period of increasing macroeconomic instability , re * ected domestically in a ris - ing trend of import penetration and ultimately to concerns over “deindustrialisation” in the 1970s ( Blackaby 1978 ) . Ex - ternally , the end of the “golden age” of western economic growth was signalled by the devaluation of the US dollar in 1972 and the 8rst oil crisis in 1973 – 1974 . It is a facile point , but in an increasingly complicated world consisting of a se - ries of unpredictable “messes , ” a discipline with its roots embedded 8rmly in the “classical” methodology forged in the 1940s and 1950s was bound to encounter a crisis of con8dence ( Eilon 1975 , Sadler 1978 , Radford 1978 , Harris 1978 , Rosenhead 1978 , Dando and Bennett 1981 , Collcutt 1981 ) . At the sectoral level , the current historian of British Petroleum has described how the company’s commitment to linear programming as a means of planning its global op - erations was rapidly eroded after the 1967 Arab - Israeli war so that the company entered the 1970s with a managerial style based upon pragmatism , far removed from any notions of global modelling with the aid of computer simulations ( Bamberg , forthcoming ) . The very fact that classical OR was being questioned after 1970 provoked further anxieties concerning OR’s long - standing claim to scienti8c status . The most eloquent , if extreme , British expression of the view that OR was D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 110 . 242 . 50 ] on 15 S e p t e m b e r 2016 , a t 09 : 30 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . K IRBY / 667 not a “hard” science akin to , say , physics or chemistry , was provided by Dando and Sharp ( 1978 ) . In this paper , they argued that the “myth” of OR’s pretensions to scien - ti8c status had been underwritten by the belief , extant in the 1950s , that rational , physical science would provide the solution to the world’s problems . Anticipating Andrew Abbott ( Abbott 1988 ) , they claimed that the myth had been perpetuated in the 1960s as OR attained academic status via the application of increasingly complex mathematics . Moreover , the early “tactical , ” production - led successes of OR had reinforced these trends , insofar as it had been pos - sible to use “simple models and elegant mathematics , and easily to implement some ‘solutions’ as the environ - ment was uncomplicated . ” If this judgment resonated with the notion of “messes , ” it was complemented by the emergence in the later 1970s of the “commu - nity” OR movement , which argued that the discipline should move beyond the worlds of business and gov - ernment to examine the social and economic needs of the wider community . The extreme manifestation of this view , with heavy political undertones , was provided by Rosenhead and Thunhurst’s ( 1982 ) controversial argument that even in its tactical role , OR had helped to bolster the power and in * uence of the “haves” against society’s “have nots . ” If the crisis in British OR was being articulated increas - ingly vigorously as the 1970s unfolded , it can only be said that the temperature of debate was raised to new heights by the intervention of the American operations resear - cher Russell Acko : . In a 1961 publication charting the progress of OR , Acko : cited , with approval , Bevan’s view that OR should be applied e : ectively to broad problems , as for example , to an industry as opposed to the bench , to a transport system as opposed to a railway track . Incidentally , I can see no reason why OR should not be applied in the future to studies concerned with national planning and national policy . ( Acko : 1961 ) If this American view was entirely consistent with the opti - mism expressed in the 1948 Industrial Productivity Report on OR , by the late 1970s , Acko : , distinguished OR pioneer and enthusiast , was deeply disillusioned with the course and conduct of OR on both sides of the Atlantic in the previous decade . Re * ecting the global uncertainties of the 1970s , he too underlined the notion of messes—in his terms , “dynamic situations that consist of complex systems of changing problems that interact with each other , ” thereby rendering optimal solutions redundant . In this respect , Acko : called for a “new paradigm” in which OR should replace its problem solving orientation by one that focussed on the planning and design of systems ( Acko : 1979a , 1979b ) . In elaborating on the reasons for his disillusion , Acko : reserved particular opprobrium for the academic OR community . It is well known that Patrick Blackett , noting the development of OR after 1950 , periodically inveighed against the “evils of increasingly complex mathematics , ” which served only to obscure “real issues” ( Dando and Sharp 1978 ) . In a memorable phrase—hardly 8t , perhaps , for public consumption—Acko : himself referred to in - dustrial managers’ equation of OR with “mathematical masturbation , ” denoting the gradual takeover of the OR community by second - generation academics with no prac - tical experience of the real world . Indeed , the mounting obsession with mathematical models and algorithms had been instrumental in eroding one of the original strengths of wartime OR : its interdisciplinarity . Acko : ’s concerns were shared by others ( McClelland 1975 , Simpson 1978 ) and found full re * ection in the Report of the Commission on the Future Practice of Operational Research , published in 1986 under the auspices of the Operational Research Society ( OR Society 1986 ) . The Commission itself had been ap - pointed in response to continuing uncertainties concerning the future of OR in the wake of the economic recession of the early 1980s , which had resulted in the closure of several industrial OR groups . A strong feature of the report was its concern with the views of OR practitioners . For example , in the section dealing with OR methodology , the Commission commented that practitioners , in contrast to their academic counterparts , evidently made little use of the mathematical techniques ( linear programming and queueing theory ) most commonly associated with OR . This obser - vation was followed by some caustic remarks on the con - tents of the Journal of the Operational Research Society ( JORS ) : The journal is felt to be unhelpful in fostering OR in practice by virtually all practitioners , and is considered a positive hindrance by many . This practitioner concern about the Journal is one aspect of a more general criticism , namely that the Society does not do enough to present the true nature and achievements of OR to the world , and might in some of its activities be misrepresenting these things , conceivably harmfully . ( OR Society 1986 ) That “misrepresentation , ” according to the report , was that OR was “a mathematical , or at least abstract and nonprag - matic subject , ” a remark followed by the apocryphal but true observation that some practitioner members of the Opera - tional Research Society held such a negative view of JORS that they “took positive steps to prevent clients and potential clients” from seeing it . What is immediately striking about the British debate on OR is that the concerns expressed from the mid - 1970s onward were parallelled fully in the United States well into the 1990s . In 1978 , for example , Hall and Hess , in ask - ing the question whether OR / MS was “Dead or Dying , ” re - ferred to perceptions of OR’s excessive specialisation and limited applicability in view of its technique orientation . They also pointed to the poor quality of OR / MS publi - cations and the post - 1970 demise of numerous corporate OR groups ( Hall and Hess 1978 ) . Earlier in the decade , Bonder , in distinguishing between OR analysts and OR sci - entists , concluded that formal education for analysts ( i . e . , operations researchers “whose role is to assist management in identifying meaningful operational and planning problems and in inventing and analyzing alternative feasible solutions to them” ) , was grossly de8cient in that “new analysts are unable to solve problems” ( Bonder 1973 ) , a theme to which he returned with increased vehemence in 1979 . By that D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 110 . 242 . 50 ] on 15 S e p t e m b e r 2016 , a t 09 : 30 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . 668 / K IRBY time , Bonder was fully in accord with the views of Acko : , currently being expounded in Britain , in that The relevance of current mathematical developments in OR is con - tinually questioned and , perhaps more signi8cant , the techniques and methods are being developed by individuals who have more of a dis - ciplinary allegiance to mathematics and economics than to operations research . ( Bonder 1979 ) In the meantime , Philip Morse , in re * ecting on the evolution of the Operations Research Society of America ( ORSA ) agreed retrospectively with Patrick Blackett that in the aftermath of World War II there had been “a narrowing in outlook of many operations research workers . ” Like Blackett , Morse regretted the increasing mathematization of OR to the extent that “The pages of Operations Research had come to resemble advanced mathematic texts , than like those of journals of physical science” ( Morse 1977b ) . In the ensuing decade articles in Operations Research returned repeatedly to the increasing divorce between OR theory and practice and the consequent implications for OR education ( Balut and Armacost 1986 , Borsting 1987 , Miser 1987 , Pierskalla 1987 ) . In terms of the growing divide between the US academic and practitioner communities , the ultimate commentary was provided by Corbett and Van Wassenhove in the context of their “natural drift” hypothesis , focussing on the increasing gap between OR theory ( management science ) and OR practice ( management consulting ) as re - * ected in the declining attention devoted to the subject in established management journals such as the Harvard Busi - ness Review and the Sloan Management Review ( Corbett and Van Wassenhove 1993 ) . In explaining the natural drift , they made excellent use of Abbott’s seminal study of “the Division of Expert Labor , ” paying particular attention to his concept of professional regression ( Abbott 1988 ) . As noted above , this had already been anticipated in the crit - ical British literature of the 1970s commenting on the “academisation” of OR . As Abbott stated , Once a 8eld [ such as OR / MS ] becomes self - conscious and professional , practitioners draw their self - respect from other colleagues’ admiration . Since the professions are founded on knowledge , admiration peaks when knowledge is most pure , that is , when it is least deformed by actual application . Hence mathematical pre - eminence . ( Abbott 1988 ) For Abbott , such regression was both inevitable and irreversible , although Corbett and Van Wassenhove drew some comfort from his judgment that compared to other areas of human endeavour , OR / MS “is a profession that has managed to organize itself relatively * exibly and suc - cessfully . ” In a 1992 paper , Geo : rion repeated earlier British concerns about OR’s academic structure whereby professional advancement was wholly dependent on theo - retical work at the expense of integrative or applied studies ( Geo : rion 1992 ) —hence the growing divide between the practitioner and academic communities and the increasing disillusion of the former with the contents of the main - stream academic journals ( Reisman and Kirschnick 1994 ) . Anticipating the work of Fildes and Ranyard on the fate of British industrial OR groups from the 1970s onward ( Fildes and Ranyard 1997 ) , Geo : rion also focussed on the “dispersion” of OR / MS in US industry : There is only one term to fairly describe the conduct of MS / OR in industry today : dispersed . The idea that MS / OR is conducted mainly by organized groups of MS / OR professionals is a myth . MS / OR is practised mainly by individuals in myriad types of sta : groups and functional areas . ( Geo : rion 1992 ) In accounting for this phenomenon , Geo : rion referred , inter alia , to the ongoing demise of OR groups as a result of managerial downsizing and decentralization , the di : usion of OR techniques into other disciplines and professions that competed for managers’ attention all the more e : ectively in view of the end of the “bandwagon e : ect” of OR that had rested primarily on its claims to novelty as a managerial tool . Finally , although OR could lay claim to strategic im - pact in the historical past , the limited tactical orientation of the majority of industrial applications had resulted in OR’s slippage of status in managerial hierarchies . 5 . CONCLUSION To the historian of British OR , the tone and content of the ongoing US debate on the future of OR / MS can only induce a profound sense of deja vu . It is salutary to note that vir - tually all the concerns expressed in the 1990s by Geo : rion and his colleagues had been set out eloquently and in detail by Samuel Eilon in 1980 in a summary paper written in the immediate aftermath of Acko : ’s recantation ( Eilon 1980 ) . Re * ecting the “soul - searching” of the British OR commu - nity in the 1970s , Eilon observed : The OR / MS group reports at a level well below the board , its work concentrates on tactical problems , often with limited terms of reference , its contribution to the evaluation of strategy is minimal , its approach is technique - orientated and the competition from other functions is real and sometimes threatening : the uniqueness of the OR approach is not seen as indispensable , its methodology is challenged , it is regarded as a narrow specialist discipline , a suitable sanctuary for mathematicians , its involvement in implementation is tenuous and its general impact somewhat limited . ( Eilon 1980 ) But then , in referring to the dispersion of OR , Eilon re - minded his readers of a prescient question that had 8rst been posed by Rivett and Acko : in their “managers’ guide” to OR , published in 1963 : Will OR take over management ? This is a blunt question and it de - mands a blunt answer . The answer is quite simple—No . Management , in fact , will take over OR . ( Rivett and Acko : 1963 ) In this context , Eilon was prepared to downgrade the seriousness of the crisis in British OR to the extent that OR has been so successful in its application that it has now been warmly embraced by all functions of management to become an integral part of their planning and evaluation procedures and , viewed in this light , we should congratulate ourselves on a remarkable achievement . ( Eilon 1980 ) To an OR outsider it is fascinating to note that Eilon’s views , informed by British experience in the 1970s , were being fully articulated by Geo : rion in 1992 . Despite his concerns about the integrity of the OR profession as a re - sult of ongoing dispersion , Geo : rion also conceded that OR / MS was being used ever more widely in response to D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 110 . 242 . 50 ] on 15 S e p t e m b e r 2016 , a t 09 : 30 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . K IRBY / 669 the increasingly rapid di : usion of OR / MS tools in the wake of the computer / communications revolution inaugurated in the 1980s . Thus , by the early 1990s , linear and nonlinear optimization codes in combination with spreadsheet pack - ages , were widely available to non - OR / MS professionals at modest cost . In conformity with Eilon’s interpretation , this “democratization of operations research , ” however vulgar ( and therefore to be regretted by “professionals” ) , pre - sented new challenges and opportunities . Applicable to both academics and practitioners alike , these included an abso - lute requirement for up - to - date knowledge of the moving frontier of information technology , a determined e : ort to di : use OR / MS into the low - productivity service sector , and , for academics in particular , the need to moderate their enthusiasm for theoretical discourse in favour of the prac - tical relevance of OR / MS as represented in the excellent sequence of Edelman 8nalist papers published in Inter - faces . To the OR outsider it is also evident that the profes - sional organizations—the Operational Research Society in Britain , and INFORMS in the United States—should seek to sustain inclusivity in terms of the academic / practitioner interface . Since embarking on the historical commission , I have attended all the annual conferences of the British Society as well as a number of specialist seminars . These have been deeply reassuring occasions on two counts : 8rst , the attendance of considerable numbers of practitioners , as well as academics , together with sessions embracing both theory and practice ; and second , the presence of substantial numbers of delegates who have yet to enter middle age . Impressions can , of course , mislead , but the British OR community gives every appearance of vibrancy and gener - ational progression . Britain is , of course , a small , compact island with excellent communications both nationally and regionally . The United States is a country of continental proportions , but it does enjoy all the bene8ts of a sophisti - cated transport and communications network . As Geo : rion observed , innovative use of the latter holds out the prospect of restraining or even reversing the adverse e : ects on practitioners of dispersal and decentralization . ACKNOWLEDGMENT The author is grateful to Professors Norman Lawrie and Hugh Miser for their advice and encouragement in the pre - paration of this paper . Errors of fact and / or interpretation are the sole responsibility of the author . REFERENCES Abbott , A . 1988 . The System of Professions : An Essay on the Expert Division of Labor . University of Chicago Press , Chicago , IL . Acko : , R . L . 1957 . A comparison of operational research in the U . S . A . and in Great Britain . Oper . Res . Quart . 8 88 – 100 . —— . 1961 . The meaning , scope , and methods of OR . Idem , ed . Progress in OR , Vol . 1 . John Wiley , New York , 3 – 34 . —— . 1979a . The future of OR is past . J . Oper . Res . Soc . 30 93 – 103 . —— . 1979b . Resurrecting the future of operational research . J . Oper . Res . Soc . 30 189 – 199 . Air Ministry . 1963 . The Origins and Development of Operational Research in the Royal Air Force . HMSO , London , UK . Army Council . 1947 . Operational Research in the British Army , 1939 – 1945 . Balut , S . J . , R . L . Armacost . 1986 . ORSA as viewed by its members . Oper . Res . 34 945 – 953 . Bamberg , J . H . Forthcoming . A History of the British Petroleum Company , Vol . 3 . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . Blackaby , F . 1978 . De - industrialisation . Heinemann , London , UK . Blackett , P . M . S . 1948 . Operational research . Adv . Sci . 5 . —— . 1950 . Operational research . Oper . Res . Quart . 1 3 – 6 . —— . 1953 . Recollections of problems studied , 1940 – 1945 . Brasseys Ann . —— . 1962 . Studies of War . Oliver and Boyd , Edinburgh , Scotland . Bonder , S . 1973 . Operations research education : Some require - ments and de8ciencies . Oper . Res . 21 796 – 809 . —— . 1979 . Changing the future of operations research . Oper . Res . 27 209 – 224 . Borsting , J . R . 1987 . Presidents’ symposium : Re * ections on OR / MS education . Oper . Res . 35 387 – 391 . Brittan , S . 1971 . Steering the Economy : The Role of the Treasury . Penguin , Harmondsworth . Brothers , L . A . 1956 . Operations analysis in the United States Air Force . J . F . McCloskey and John M . Coppinger , eds . Operations Research for Management , Vol . II . The Johns Hopkins Press , Baltimore , MD , 3 – 19 . Chandler , A . D . 1990 . Scale and Scope : The Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism . Belknap Press of Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA , London , UK . Channon , D . F . 1973 . The Strategy and Structure of British Enterprise . Macmillan , London , UK . Checkland , P . , S . Holwell . 1998 . Information ; Systems and Information Systems : Making Sense of the Field . John Wiley , Chichester , UK , 127 – 154 . Churchman , C . W . , R . L . Acko : , E . L . Arno : . 1957 . Introduction to Operations Research . John Wiley , New York . Collcutt , R . H . 1965 . The First Twenty Years of Operational Research . BISRA , London , UK . —— . 1981 . OR changes . J . Oper . Res . Soc . 32 361 – 369 . Committee on OR . 1986 . Report of the Commission on the Future Practice of Operational Research . J . Oper . Res . Soc . 33 828 – 886 . Corbett , C . J . , L . N . Van Wassenhove . 1993 . The natural drift : What happened to operations research ? Oper . Res . 41 625 – 640 . Dando , M . R . , R . G . Sharp . 1978 . Operational research in the U . K . in 1977 : The causes and consequences of a myth ? J . Oper . Res . Soc . 29 939 – 949 . —— , P . G . Bennett . 1981 . A Kuhnian crisis in management science ? J . Oper . Res . Soc . 32 939 – 942 . Dyas , G . P . , H . T . Thanheiser . 1976 . The Emerging European Enterprise . Macmillan , London . Eilon , S . 1975 . How scienti8c is OR ? OMEGA 3 1 – 8 . —— . 1977 . Technician or adviser ? OMEGA 5 1 – 6 . —— . 1980 . The role of management science . J . Oper . Res . Soc . 31 17 – 28 . Elbaum , B . , W . Lazonick , eds . 1986 . The Decline of the British Economy . Clarendon Press , Oxford , UK . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 110 . 242 . 50 ] on 15 S e p t e m b e r 2016 , a t 09 : 30 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d . 670 / K IRBY Fildes , R . , J . Ranyard . 1997 . Success and survival of operational research groups . J . Oper . Res . Soc . 48 336 – 360 . Geo : rion , A . M . 1992 . Forces , trends and opportunities in MS / OR . Oper . Res . 40 423 – 445 . Goodeve , Sir C . 1948 . Operational research . Nature 164 377 – 384 . Hall , J . R . , S . W . Hess . 1978 . OR / MS : Dead or dying ? RX for survival . Interfaces 8 42 – 44 . Hannah , L . 1983 . The Rise of the Corporate Economy . Methuen , London , UK . Harris , D . J . , 1978 . Corporate planning and OR . J . Oper . Res . Soc . 29 9 – 17 . Horvath , W . J . , M . G . Ernst . 1986 . Philip McLeod Morse 1903 – 1985 : A remembrance . Oper . Res . 34 7 – 9 . Johnson , E . A . , D . A . Katcher . 1973 . Mines against Japan . Naval Ordnance Laboratory , Annapolis , MD . Kirby , M . W . , R . Capey , 1997a . The air defence of Great Britain , 1920 – 1940 : An operational research perspective . J . Oper . Res . Soc . 48 555 – 568 . —— , —— . 1997b . The area bombing of Germany in World War II : An operational research perspective . J . Oper . Res . Soc . 48 561 – 567 . —— , —— . 1998 . The origins and di : usion of operational research in the UK . J . Oper . Res . Soc . 49 307 – 326 . —— . 1999 . Blackett in the “white heat” of the scienti8c revolution : Industrial modernisation under the Wilson government , 1964 – 70 . J . Oper . Res . Soc . 50 . Locke , R . 1989 . Management and Higher Education since 1940 : The In ; uence of America and Japan on West Germany ; Britain and France . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . Lovell , Sir B . 1975 . Patrick Maynard , Stuart Blackett , Baron Blackett of Chelsea . Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society . 21 1 – 116 . McArthur , C . W . 1990 . Operations Analysis in the US Army Eighth Air Force in World War II . American Mathematical Society , Providence , RI . McClelland , W . G . 1975 . Mathematics in management - how it looks to the manager . OMEGA 3 147 – 155 . McCloskey , J . F . 1987a . The beginnings of operations research 1934 – 1941 . Oper . Res . 35 143 – 152 . —— . 1987b . British operations research in World War II . Oper . Res . 35 453 – 470 . —— . 1987c . U . S . operations research in World War II . Oper . Res . 35 910 – 925 . Miser , H . J . 1987 . Presidents’ symposium : Science and pro - fessionalism in operations research . Oper . Res . 35 314 – 319 . Morse , P . M . , G . E . Kimball . 1951 . Methods of Operations Research . Technology Press of MIT , Cambridge , MA and John Wiley , New York . —— . 1977a . In At the Beginning : A Physicist ’ s Life . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . —— . 1977b . ORSA twenty - 8ve years later . Oper . Res . 25 186 – 188 . Operational Research Society . 1986 . Report of the Commission on the Future Practice of Operational Research . J . Oper . Res . Soc . 37 829 – 866 . Overy , R . J . 1980 . The Air War 1939 – 1945 . Europa , London , UK . Public Record O = ce . 1949a . Committee on Industrial Pro - ductivity : Working Party : Statement by Mr . Wardley Smith , Economic Information Unit . CAB 132 / 50 , 34095 . —— . 1949b . A Short Account of Operational Research Describing Its History and Techniques and Its Bearing on Productivity . CAB 132 / 50 , 34095 . Pierskalla , W . P . 1987 . Presidents’ symposium : Creating growth in OR / MS . Oper . Res . 35 153 – 156 . Radford , K . J . 1978 . Decision making in a turbulent environment . J . Oper . Res . Soc . 29 677 – 682 . Radnor , M . , R . D . Neal . 1973 . The progress of management science activities in large US corporations . Oper . Res . 21 427 – 450 . Reisman , A . , F . Kirschnick . 1994 . The devolution of OR / MS : Implications from a statistical content analysis of papers in * agship journals . Oper . Res . 42 577 – 588 . Rivett , B . H . P . , R . L . Acko : . 1963 . A Manager ’ s Guide to Operational Research . John Wiley , New York . —— . 1974 . Prospective for operational research . OMEGA 2 225 – 233 . Rosenhead , J . 1978 . An education in robustness . J . Oper . Res . Soc . 29 105 – 111 . —— , C . Thunhurst . 1982 . A materialist analysis of operational research . J . Oper . Res . Soc . 33 14 – 22 . —— . 1989 . Operational research at the crossroads : Cecil Gordan and the development of post - war OR . J . Oper . Res . Soc . 40 3 – 28 . Sadler , M . 1978 . OR and the transition to a post - industrial society . J . Oper . Res . Soc . 29 1 – 7 . Shephard , R . 1984 . Readings on Early Military Operational Research ( with Particular Reference to Army OR ) . Royal Military College of Science , Shrivenham , UK . —— . 1994 . The in * uence of Solandt on the development of early operational research in Britain . C . E . Law , G . R . Lindsay , D . M . Grenville , eds . Perspectives in Science and Technology : The Legacy of Omand Solandt . Queen’s University Quarterly , Kingston , Ontario , Canada . Simpson , M . G . 1978 . Those who can’t ? J . Oper . Res . Soc . 29 517 – 522 . Smiddy , H . F . , L . Naum . 1954 . Evolution of a “science of managing” in America . Management Sci . 1 1 – 31 . Tidman , K . R . 1984 . The Operations Evaluation Group : A History of Naval Operations Analysis . Naval Institute Press , Annapolis , MD . Tomlinson , R . E . 1974 . OR 1s . Oper . Res . Quart . 25 347 – 360 . Trefethen , F . N . 1954 . A history of operations research . J . F . McCloskey , F . N . Trefethen , eds . Operations Research for Management . Johns Hopkins Press , Baltimore , MD , 3 – 35 . Turban , E . 1972 . A sample survey of operations research activities at the corporate level . Oper . Res . 20 308 – 321 . Waddington , C . H . 1973 . O . R . in World War 2 : Operational Research Against the U - Boat . Elek Science , London , UK . Zuckerman , S . 1992 . Six Men Out of the Ordinary . Peter Owen , London , 13 – 38 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m i n f o r m s . o r g by [ 129 . 110 . 242 . 50 ] on 15 S e p t e m b e r 2016 , a t 09 : 30 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y , a ll r i gh t s r e s e r v e d .