A PERFORMING MEDIUlVI FOR WORKING GROUP GRAPHICS Fred Lakin Center for the Study of Language and Information , Stanford University lakin ~ csli . stanford . edu Center for Design Research , Stanford University Stanford , California 94305 Rehabilitation R & D Center , Palo Alto Veterans Hospital 3801 Miranda Ave , Palo Alto , California 94304 ABSTRACT Writing and drawing together on a common display often assist a working group in a task . For example , face - to - face groups have long enjoyed the richness of graphic communication found on blackboards . The spontaneous image manipulations which take place over time on a blackboard can be viewed as a text - graphic performance . A human performer generates and manipulates text and graphics for the purpose of assisting the working group in their task . The phenomenon of performed text - graphics presents oppor - tunities for research in the area of computer - supported cooper - ative work . 11 Spontaneous generation demands a performing medium where the focus is on live manipulation of text and graphics . Design of a computer - based medium with enough agility and generality to support blackboard - like activity is a challenge for interface design . 2 ] Agility and generality must not be achieved at the expense of specializability . After a group has initially sketched an idea in text and graphics , then that same medium should also support refining the sketch according to formal schema . 3 ] The performing medium can also be used as a recording medium for studying image manipulation as part of the working group process . This paper presents a stepwise approach to the design of a performing medium for working group graphics . First , examples of non - computer text - graphics for groups are examined to get a preliminary idea of the underlying phenomenon : the performing of text - graphic manipulation to assist working groups . Next key features of that kind of text - graphic manipulation are isolated . Then , third , the architecture and behavior of a graphics editor providing those features is described . SECTIONS 1 . INTRODUCTION : WORKING GROUP GRAPHICS ON NON - COMPUTER MEDIA 1 . 1 Examples 1 . 2 The phenomenon 1 . 3 Methodological assumption 2 . FEATURES OF TEXT - GRAPHIC MANIPULATION FOR WORKING GROUPS 2 . 1 Chronological 2 . 2 Text - Graphic 2 . 3 Manipulatory 2 . 4 Performed 2 . 5 Fast 2 . 6 Unstructured 2 . 7 Structured 2 . 8 Reflective 3 . A COMPUTER MEDIUM FOR PERFORMING TEXT - GRAPHICS 4 . CHRONOLOGICAL 5 . TEXT - GRAPHIC 6 . MANIPULATIONS 7 . PERFORMING MEDIUM 8 . AGILITY 9 . GENERAL PURPOSE 10 . SPECIALIZABLE 10 . 1 Formal visual languages ( Statics ) 10 . 2 Formal Visual Dynamics 11 . REFLECTION 11 . 1 Storing & Retrieving Performances 11 . 2 Measuring Performances 11 . 3 On What Can ' t Be Measured 12 . CONCLUSION 13 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 14 . APPENDIX : ON THE MEASUREMENT OF WORKING GROUP GRAPHICS 15 . FOOTNOTES 16 . REFERENCES 1 . INTRODUCTION : WORKING GROUP GRAPH - ICS ON NON - COMPUTER MEDIA 1 . 1 Examples Blackboard Figure 1 : engineers in the early Sixties working together on a common display for the entire design process , taking projects all the way from brainstorming to machine drawings which were then sent to the shop as polaroid prints ITAB62 ] . Duration : unknown . Operator : multiple . Style : " Panoramic Design . " Figure 1 . Engineers in the early Sixties doing " Panoramic Design " on a blackboard . 255 Large sheet paper graphics Figure 2 : concept explo - ration session for interdisciplinary mix of computer scientists and cognitive rehabilitation engineers ; text and graphics manipulated by professional facilitator [ Sibbet84 ] . Recorded on video tape , and also in 35mm slides . Duration : 40 minutes . Operator : sin - gle . Style : " Mapping state of the art . " Figure 2 . Concept exploration on a large sheet of paper operated by professional facilitator . Manipulable card paper graphics Figure 3 : problem definition session with working group from US Geological Survey ; group generates key phrases in brainstorm , organizes them using spatial juxaposition and movable line networks ILakin74 ] 1 Recorded in 35ram slides . Duration : 90 minutes . Operator : mulitple . Style : " Group Concept Growth . " Figure 3 . Problem definition session using manipulable cards to brainstorm , then organize . 1 . 2 The phenomenon First , the subjective impression after ten years of observing working groups is what we might call text - graphic dance : chunks of text and graphics created at one location on the display , lingering there for a while , and then moved or changed or erased ; continually shifting patterns forming and reforming as the group goes about developing and displaying their concepts . An expressive performing art , the meaning of which is in all of the intermediate imagery , where the final frame may not be any more meaningful than the final position in a ballet . And finally , the impression is also of a performing art so horribly artifact - bound that text - graphic dance as it was ' meant ' to be is only glimpsed now and then through the clumsy media that circumstances force the performers to employ . Next , to more objectively characterize the phenomen¢ underlying the three examples : a text - graphic performance serve a task - oriented group . The performance is text - graph in that it involves manipulating text and graphics over a s , period of time . The performance serves the working group in th the images displayed during the performance relate to their ta ' . ( present , represent , express , explain , diagram , show the structu of , mean ) . The performance is by an operator ( or operator whose purpose it is to insure that the performance serves t ] group . We will call this kind of text - graphic performance " workil group graphics " . There are many other kinds of possible tex graphic performances that we won ' t discuss in this paper ( a sin E operator for his own consumption , multiple operators for a pl ~ oriented group , etc . ) . There are many different possible styl of text - graphic peforming within the kind we have designat ~ working group graphics . The use of the blackboard desrib ~ above was called " Panoramic Design " by the practioners ; th style can be described in more detail as brainstorm - and - then - d machine - drawing [ TAB62 ] . Styles will be discussed below . There is various theoretical work which either deals direct with the phenomenon of working group graphics , or can she some light on it . Having a common display often aids fac to - face task groups . Ball and Gilkey coined the terra " explic group memory " to point out the fact that the display provid a lingering representation of the task state [ Ball72 ] . Graphic imagery seems to tap a powerful kind of conceptualizing : " visu thinking " [ Arnheim69 , McKim72 ] . The social dynamics the working group may change for the better . Profession display operators like Brunon , Doyle , Sibbet and Straus pofl out that more of the group ' s members tend to participate ! idea generation , rather than the concepts being controlled [ the verbally and / or politically dominant [ Brunon71 , Doyle7 Sibbet76 ] . 1 . 3 Methodological assumption It is a major premise q this paper that text - graphics performed for working groups hal spatial and temporal structure . First , the images themselvq are spatial , and arranged spatially . Second , the manipulatic of these images takes place over time and so has tempor : arrangement . And third , both kinds of arrangement are order ] and patterns can be discovered . The more radical extension to this premise is that the tex graphics themselves can be studied separate from their contex That is , the social situation of working group graphics is group in a room together with a common display ; in conjunctie with the text - graphic performance the group members talk t each other and use their bodies to gesture and point . Within question the concomitant aural and gestural annotations a ~ crucial to the overall meaning of the performance ( probably be : studied through video taping ) . But the premise here is the the manipulation of the text - graphics themselves constitute a orderly phenomenon that can be supported and studied : in sense , the text - graphics have a life of their own . The study c this aspect of text - graphic performances , in isolation , is muc like linguistics : a quest for temporal and spatial structures of th expressions themselves 2 It is also like an odd kind of dane choreography which attempts to notate improvised dances . In terms of the text - graphics themselves , then , the notion style is one way of labelling certain spatiM / temporal structure There are many different ways ( styles ) of operating displays i order to help a face - to - face group . Styles can be characterized b : 256 among other features , distinctive static images ( charts , diagrams , matrices , lists ) and distinctive dynamics ( sequences of images and manipulations ) . Skilled practitioners ( like Ball , Brunon , Doyle , Sibbet , Straus ) provide a good reference for styles ; they each have defined many distinct ones . Part of an operator ' s skill is matching a style to a group and a task . In conclusion , we note that de - situating the text - graphics from the working group situation must be done carefully and under advisement . It is a methodological move , and in the long run may lead to problems . In the short run , however , it has two payoffs . First , it allows us to focus on the text - graphics themselves to see what structure is there 3 . Second , it is a direct way to describe the specifications for a computer - based medium to support this kind of text - graphic manipulation . 2 . FEATURES OF TEXT - GRAPHIC MANIPULA - TION FOR WORKING GROUPS This Section strives for a delicate balance , attempting to characterize the phenomenon of text - graphic manipulation which lies ' behind ' the examples while at the same time aware that our view is admittedly constrained by their limited technology . Yet the examples are also liberating in their own way , demanding capabilites not easily attained on computer graphics systems . What is ultimately at stake is supporting the ' heir ' to blackboard activity . We want to include all the features of text - graphic manipulation found in earlier instances of that activity without being restrained to them . 2 . 1 Chronological If we were to come upon a text - graphic performance cold and unprepared , what might strike us first is that it is a dynamic phenomenon , unfolding over time : some - thing ' s moving . What ' s moving is the text - graphics , described below . The state of the text - graphics at any one time can be captured in a static image or frame . Yet the performance as a whole cannot be captured in any one frame , but instead must be represented as a dynamic sequencing of the frames over time . 2 . 2 Text - Graphic The fact that text - graphic manipulation unfolds over time allows us to observe how objects precipitate out of the activity ( why chronology was introduced first ) . That is , a flurry of activity is observed and then there is a pause - - the difference in the image state before and after the flurry is a new object ( or a manipulation of an old object ) . Sometimes new objects are text , sometimes graphics , sometimes both . Static frames from the examples show the kind of images that are being manipulated : text and graphics in spatial arrangement . As a general policy , we don ' t want to say whether any particular object is text or graphics until we need to . Oft times the distinction between text and graphics is dubious at best - - perhaps the group will be using Chinese characters or circuit diagram symbology . 2 . 3 Manlpulatory Now that in the course of describing this phenomenon we have time , and text - graphics , then just an eye - blink later we have manipulation . It ' s thanks to manipulation that the text - graphics change over time ( and in changing , we can see what the pieces of text - graphics are ) . Manipulation includes generating , moving , modifying and erasing text - graphic objects . We observe that sometimes operators want to manipulate just little pieces , whereas othertimes they want to manipulate groups of objects as a unit ( most apparent in the manipulable cards ) . 2 . 4 Performed Working group graphics is performed by an operator or a group . This fact helps characterize the operation of the medium , and the nature of the medium being operated . There is a performer , and there are consumers of the performance . The consumers are there to watch the images , using them as explicit group memory . The display can be easily seen by all members of the group . 2 . 5 Fast What is fast ? It is manipulation of text - graphic objects in time . In working group graphics , the agility of text - graphic manipulation is paramount . Leisurely illustration will not do - - the group will get bored or lose their train of thought . Loss of a minute may mean loss of an idea . Figure 4 is the final frame from the large sheet paper graphics performance in figure 2 ; it took the operator 20 minutes to make this image . Figure 5 shows generation times for selected images in figure 4 as timed Figure 4 . Final frame in large sheet paper graphics performance depicted in figure 2 . 7 secs 10 secs 18 secs 45 secs 95 secs Figure 5 . Generation times for subimages from figure 4 . 257 from the video tape of the performance . The images are being put up there very quickly . In addition to initial image generation , agile manipulation of images observed in the examples includes erasibility ( blackboard ) and shuffling ( manipulable cards ) . 2 . 6 Unstructured The media in the three examples do not restrict the kind of objects that can be written or drawn 4 ; nor do they restrict the temporal order in which images are created . The point is , any kind of image can be created - - from diagrams to paragraphs to LISP code to cartoons to matrices - - regulated only by the purpose and style of the operator . 2 . 7 Structured Both spatial and temporal structures can be observed in the text - graphic manipulation found in the examples . A formal spatial schema called ' mechanical drawing , ' for instance , is during the blackboard activity in example one . Mechanical drawing is a system which limits the kind of text - graphics one may create and their arrangement ; in fact it could be called a kind of visual language . Likewise , temporal patterns can be observed in the examples . In the case of the manipulable cards several temporal trends became obvious during the 90 minute performance . Cards were put up on the display space in the upper - middle area first . As more cards appeared , columns began to form . 30 minutes into the session , colored overlays appeared on top of some of the cards . Then at 45 minutes , the line networks showed up . During the course of the performance , 106 cards were generated ; as many as 88 were on the display at one time but only 73 were present in the final frame . 2 . 8 Reflective Text - graphic manipulation for working groups can be reflective : that is , using a piece of text - graphics which refers to some aspect of a text - graphic performance . The engineers in example one are taking an instant photograph of the final frame on the blackboard ( figure 1 ) . Each member of the group in example two was provided with an image of the final frame ( figure 4 ) . And the performers in example three made competing plans for the reorganization of the display as part of their performance ( figure 6 ) . The plans were themselves pieces of text - graphics each of which diagrammed a possible way to reorganize the display ( as it turned out , the final development of the display was guided by a merger of two plans , the one in the lower left and the one in the upper right of figure 6 ) . The reflecting on performances characteristic of working group graphics can take place both during the act and afterwards . Reflection serves a variety of purposes . During the act , it can Figure 6 . Plans , themselves pieces of text - graphics , each of which diagram a possible reorganization for the display in figure 3 . be used to guide the performing . And after the fact , reflectin at leisure has more academic uses . Medium designers mig [ want to delineate the manipulation capabilities of equipmen Psychologists might want to study that aspect of the cogniti ~ behavior of the group explicitly displayed in the sequence image manipulations . And members of a working group war a record of conclusions reached and how they came about . Reflection manifests itself in two concrete features of texl graphic manipulation . The first is simply the storage and r ~ trieval of static images and image dynamics from performance ~ The second feature is measurement ( one way academics like t reflect on performing ) . Measurement is embodied in ' soft ' instrt ments for uncovering and delineating temporal / spatial patterr in performances . For instance , a more detailed account of tt : card movements in example three could easily be represented i a table or a chart . In fact , in a sense measurement itself can 1 : described as a kind of text - graphic manipulation : measuremer is a transformation on a performance into a text - graphic object i some formal visual language ( designed to perspicuously preset some structures in the performance and leave out others ) . 3 . A COMPUTER MEDIUM FOR PERFORMINq TEXT - GRAPHICS The computer medium designed to provide the capabilil for the features Section 2 is a graphics editor called vmacs T2 s vmacs combines the generality and agility of emacs wit LISP - like processing of visual objects . The name vmacs indicates that it was inspired by emac [ StallmanSl ] ; is meant to co - exist with emacs ; can be thoug [ of as a collection of visual macros bound to keys and mous buttons ; and is basically a general purpose editor which ca then be specialized for particular applications ( like LISP mod in emacs ) , vmacs is for people who spend a lot of time i their graphics editor . The primary functions are not invoked b menu to avoid visual clutter , vmacs is written partly in th PAM graphics language , which provides text - graphic objects manipulations on them , and computing with text - graphic forrr [ LakinS0a , 80b , 80c ] . vmacs and PAM are implemented in ZetaLISP on a Syrr bolics 3645 . The display is approximately 1000 by 800 lines an can be used by small groups of 3 - 4 around a single termina Video projection will support larger groups . For the time bein vrnacs is intended to be operated by a single skilled individua : The following Sections describe vmaes in more detail a a text - graphic manipulator for group graphics . Each Sectio discusses vmacs in terms of one of the key features from Sectio 2 ( Chronological , Text - graphic , Manipulatory , Performed , Fast Unstructured , Structured , Reflective ) . 4 . CHRONOLOGICAL The notion of a vmacs event gives us image frames - - static - - and then dynamics are event and image sequences . This come : about in the following way . The mouse and keyboard handle : determines when a user event has taken place ( i . e . when th , mouse has been moved or buttons or keys pushed ) . An event is 4 - tuple consisting of a time , a cursor location , a user input , ant a parameter to the input . Each event changes the appearancq of the display . Cursor moving is considered the ' minimal ' even with user input equal to ( MOVE - CURSOR ) . Each tuple in al event is a textual symbolic expression ( in LISP ) ; there are n ~ visual objects in event slots . A history is a sequence of events , vmacs keeps a histor ~ 258 list at all times . Histories can be replayed . A static frame is the state of the display between events . ' Statics ' deal with matters in one frame . ' Dynamics ' deal with matters across frames - - i . e . with histories ( event sequences ) and the corresponding image sequences . 5 . TEXT - GRAPHIC Figure 7 shows the taxonomy for manipulable objects in the vmacs graphics editor . The aim is for text and graphics to be so completely integrated that the very distinction is secondary : initially we have raw , undifferentiated text - graphic objects , and then text is just a kind of graphics . To speak of text - graphic objects is to delay making the distinction between text and graphics for as long as possible : first , because the distinction is only useful in certain situations and inappropriate in others ; and second , because we may want to use the PAM language to redefine just what text is ( i . e . , textp can have different definitions ) . Chinese characters are a good example of objects for which the traditional distinction between text and graphics is inappropriate . The taxonomy in figure 7 was designed from the start to include Chinese characters ( see that the character examples are L , T , K and tien ) . The taxonomy provides a way of describing the appearance of objects in a single frame from a performance . R teMt - gre ~ h ~ : object is either 8 line or e ~ ttern A 1the is a draullne or a character or e textline R drmwtn | t5 a vector chain draun through one or note Iota & ton = , • \ B = hlrletlr 15 one or More drawllnes L T K ~ C R tlMtltn ! is one or Bore character5 GEORGE R plttlPn is a group of none oP More ' tries . rid / or patterns . GEORGE Figure 7 . Taxonomy for graphic objects in the vmacs graphics editor . 6 . MANIPULATIONS vmacs is organized around manipulations on the currently selected object . Manipulations include dragging , erasing and scaling . Atomic objects ( the drawlines and textlines in figure 7 ) can be grouped into patterns ; patterns can contain other patterns . The tree structure of patterns is indicated by the spider webs in figure 7 . Any object can be selected , from the smallest visual atom up to the largest pattern ( everything on the screen ) . Since any selected object can be manipulated , the operator ' s experience of grouping objects into patterns is simply the determination of " what moves with what . " The pattern structures allow support of the hierarchial manipulations observed on media like blackboards e . Structural manipulation is very important for agility in handling complex images . Erasure and shuffling ( moving more than one object at a time ) are two important moves supported by pattern structures . 7 . PERFORMING MEDIUM Group display vmacs currently supports small groups of 3 - 4 around a single terminal . Larger groups will be supported with projection ; figure 8 shows the layout for a room with an 6ft projection screen and the operator console to one side . Figure 8 . Room layout for vmacs on 6ft projection screen . Skilled single user vmacs is currently designed for a single operator ( a co - operated version is planned ) . Skill level required is equivalent to touch typing emacs : someone who doesn ' t have to look at his / her hands in order to input text and type the control keys . In addition to the manual skills of image manipulation , some skill at group facilitation is also required of the operator . For beginners , this can be simply the ability to listen and put what the group says up on the screen . At more expert levels , facilitation involves knowing many styles of text - graphic performing and when each is appropriate 7 . The long - term goal of this research is for the system to act an assistant during performance , taking the burden off the human operator by supplying both manipulatory and facilitory expertise through graphic intervention . Imagery reserved for content The content of the display is being continually viewed by the group for cognitive purposes . Therefore we don ' t want it obscured by menus popping up or other visual clutter solely for the purpose of controlling image manipulation . Skilled vmacs operators can use control keys for all primary functions ( changing selection , erasing , etc . ) so no menus appear during performing• 8 . AGILITY Agility is measured in text - graphic manipulations per sec - ond . Right off we must acknowledge the problem with mice for generating freehand graphics . Optical mice are definitely an im - provement ; styluses are better yet . Your usual editor for text There is a lot of text en - try / editing in most performances , and so it ' s important that the operator ' s customary text editing reflexes invoke the appropriate 259 functions . Since vmacs is designed for the emacs community , the text entry interface happens to be a sub - set of emacs ( it could be any other text editor used by the operator ) , Touch typing in a graphics editor vmacs employs the NLS control organization paradigm : operator ' s eyes on the display , one hand on the mouse for spatial input and the other hand on a keyboard for inputting additional control information Eagelbart62 , English67 , The hypothesis is that agility in a graphics editor requires touch typing ( controlling ) . The operator can ' t take time to look away from the images being manipulated , either to his hands or to menus . Menus might be OK for cross - country skiing , but not for slalom Engelbart85 . III 4 ps I l l ° \ , . b . k S S " F A N F O ~ P U N i ~ I ~ l l x H . Agility measures A big deal has been made of agilit ~ Does vmacs have it ? Test results so far are mixed . At this poin in development , vmacs is fast enough to be successfully used i : improvisational , blackboard - type image manipulation for sma working groups . However , the clumsiness of mouse drawing i holding back performance on blackboard transcription tests fo image generation . Figure 9 - a is the final frame of the large shee paper graphics example ; figure 9 - b is a vmacs transcription c that image . The overall generation time for the image in figur 9 - a was 20 minutes ( operator : professional facilitator / cartoonist as opposed to 120 minutes for the vmacs version in figure 9 - ( operator : amateur and not particularly fast cartoonist ) . Clearl Figure 9a . Final frame in large sheet paper graphics performance depicted in figure 2 . IIIrlll ~ THE SPECTRUM OF AUGMENTATION FROM ~ " " ~ = : " : . . , WHAT IS GOING ON - STATE OF ~ HE ART ? - - Figure 9 - b . vmacs transcription of image from figure 9 - a . ~ z ~ - - . / / ' ~ " ~ " _ T E OT A ~ , • , ~ 0 ~ T ~ , . ~ , ~ , , " ~ , ~ . ~ " Figure 9c . Grouping structures for manipulation created by operator in making figure 9b . 260 it ' s hard to draw with a mouse ; dry marker on newsprint is six times faster ! For a different perspective on agility , figure 10 compares the generation times for selected sub - images from the video tape of the performance with the generation times for their vmacs counterparts . Here we notice the same factor of six time differential for the first three images , which are drawing intensive . However , vmacs is only three times slower on the last two images , which are predominantly textual . The real issue is not whether the professional facilitator with dry marker is faster than the vmacs operator , but how much generative agility is necessary to support working group graphics . We know the speed of generation in the video tape is fast enough because it was taken from a successful performance . For this reason the comparisons are presented . However , as mentioned vmacs is used to facilitate small groups ; vmacs has other manipulative strengths which compensate . When considering agility , we must remember that image generation is only part of the story , albeit an important part . Since computer media have traditionally been weak in this capability , it was chosen for the focus here . But the media differential favors computer graphics for other kinds of agility : for example , when it comes to erasure and shuffling , vmacs the computer medium is clearly superior . Precise measures for agility of this kind will be a goal of future work . The most agility imaginable In order to get a better feeling for all aspects of agility working in concert , let ' s see if we can imagine the most responsive possible medium for text - graphic dance . This imaginary performing instrument will represent the limits of agility which the present medium tries to approach . We might describe this medium in operation as hand - powered performance animation . Not only are text and graphics moving as fast as the operator desires , but even the very quality of their movement in under his or her complete control . Admittedly such a medium is hard to imagine - - complete animation of text - graphics generated live in performance - - but perhaps part of the problem lies with our ability to imagine . . . Consider the following parable . A cargo plane is flying over the jungle enroute to a very remote Club Med . Through a freak accident , the player piano meant for the night club accidentally falls out of the cargo bay along with hundreds of paper rolls , some with music and some blank . Miraculously the piano survives intact , the only damage being the total destruction of the keyboard . Discovered by a local tribe , one of their musicians figures out how the player piano can be operated in order to make music . It takes about two days to punch a roll which then produces two minutes of music . Years later an explorer happens upon the tribe and they demonstrate piano music for him . He listens politely and thinks somebody ought to tune the thing . Then he tries to explain the concept of a keyboard and its use in jazz improvisation . The tribe listens politely and thinks he is crazy . They explain patiently that his idea would never work : piano music is far too complex for human beings to make up and control in real time - - and even if they could , no interface could possibly handle the bandwidth . 7 secs 40 sees 10 secs 18 secs RETRPHYSIC8 59 secs 122 secs ~ ' ~ . 45 secs $ NEETERM flPHASIR BO6TOH n | RGRRN | RPHR $ XR EHRR Iily . mpn * x 4 * dl . , * * m * Nt mA . tu . n * * 142 secs 95 sees • RESEARCH SYSTEM ~ knouled91 to hllp daei | ne ? o ~ lld u | | ae & ~ e * | ©hedqJIfn8 ? • Roe ~ ndori 0 " 0 - 0 " 0 • U ~ . t to r = e ~ d o ~ ltah * . • tl , = ~ = n , 263 sees Figure 10 . Comparison of the generation times for selected sub - images from figure 9 - a with the generation times for their vmacs counterparts . 261 9 . GENERAL PURPOSE vmacs is a general purpose graphics editor . The operator simply creates text - graphic objects wherever and whenever he or she desires . Now it is true that the operator may later choose to have the system process some of those objects under particular systems of interpretation ( next Section ) . But then again he or she may not choose to do so ; in fact , there may not be any particular , speci - fiable system of interpretation for objects nevertheless perfectly useful in working group graphics . The point is , there will always be this tension in text - graphic performing between specifiable formal structure and the lack of it - - images may start out looking like one thing and end up being another . And the change may have been the performer ' s intention , or he may have changed his mind . vmacs supports this feature of working group graphics by being general purpose ; this is in contrast to other systems which allow processing of visual objects , but at the expense of syntax - directed editing , forcing the user to choose a single system of interpretation for the images before they can be created . In vmacs , every graphic act which is not prohibited is permitted . A consequence of the vmacs approach is the freedom to use different visual languages in the same image , as is typical of blackboard use . Equally important , as mentioned above , is the flexibility to create objects in no particular visual language . vmacs supports new and different styles of performance before we understand them well enough to build special tools . One general purpose manipulation important across many different styles of text - graphic performance is shuffling . Shuffling is the organized moving of image groups . " Take these pieces in the middle and put them over at the right - hand edge . " Shuffling is supported in vmacs by the generalized grouping structures mentioned in Section 6 ; these structures can be created very rapidly , on the fly in the course of a performance . 10 . SPECIALIZABLE vmaes is an experiment . Fundamentally it is firsL an agile , general purpose graphics editor which can Lhen be extended ( we hypothesize ) to handle different special purpose graphics applications . Generality means that objects can be created in any spatial pattern in any temporal order . Specialization lies in recognizing certain spatial or temporal structures and then acting to assist the user . The necessary prerequisite for this specializability is the programmatic processing of both statics and dynamics . This will be clearer if we consider the specifics of the static and dynamic cases . 10 . 1 Formal visual languages ( Statics ) vmacs supplies the basic primitives with which to construct images for many different applications . But for any particular application , certain patterns of visual objects , distinguished by definable static spatial criteria , have special significance . For the person employing those text - graphic objects in communication , they have meaning under a system of interpretation or " visual language . " In such cases , based on their spatial arrangement , an appropriate structure representing a syntactic grouping of the objects can be found ; this underlying structure can then be used in processing the objects semantically . Recovering underlying structure based on spatial structure for use in interpretation is a way of specializing vmacs . The recovery can be called spatial parsing ; if successful it then facilitates programmatic manipulation and interpretation of images , including : assistance for agile manual manipulation of objects , translation into anothe text - graphic language , and / or compilation into an internal fort representing the semantics . Processing static text - graphic images during parsing il vmacs is thanks to the PAM language which provides LISP like functions for manipulating visual forms , including viz - firs ! viz - rest , viz - equal , viz - assoc and viz - eval Lakin80c } . Procedurally Specified Figure 11 shows the resu of parsing four visual communication objects in vmacs usin procedurally directed processing ; the resulting objects can the be processed semantically by the system Lakin87 . VennLIS A visual programming language based on lisp . VIC : A visu ~ communication system for aphasics . SIBTRAN : Graphic device for organizing textual sentence fragments ; this is a first attem to formalize some of the structures found in blackboard activit like figure 2 . FSA : Finite state automaton diagrams . I * , i o Figure 11 . Four visual communication objects that can 1 ~ procedurally parsed for interpretation in vmacs . Grammar Driven Spatial parsing is quite complex ; it advantageous to simplify programming by embedding the parsi knowledge explicitly in grammars rather than implicitly in pr , cedures . Figure 12 shows a grammar for bar charts represent ~ in Visual Grammar Notation Lakin87 . The Visual firamm ; Notation is well suited for dealing with the patterning of el L . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . roojlls p ~ od ~ * d Figure 12 . A visual grammar for a very simple family bar charts , the input region , the resulting parsed object ; al then , based on the parse , textual interpretation and automal ' prettifying ' . 262 ments in visual communication objects . The whole enterprise is made possible by the fact that visual objects created in vmacs can be computed with by PAM functions - - including both the visual objects representing the grammars and the elements in the visual communication objects to be parsed . Figure 13 shows grammar directed parsing for objects from four visual languages . Bar Charts : a simple family of bar charts . DAGS : Directed acyclic graph notation as used by linguists . SIBTRAN : The grammar directed parser for this language is more powerful than the procedurally directed one , handling recursive forms . Visual Grammar Notation : Itself a visual language , with the bar chart grammar as an example . : i - - R i : Figure 13 . Examples of grammar directed parses for visual objects . Work is underway on two other grammars for visual lan - guages of use to working groups . 10 page manuscript with figures ( ~ future ~ ) : Useful for groups massaging working images into pre - sentable form . Machine drawing ( ~ future * } : To support groups like those in figure 1 who want to move from brainstorming into dimensioned drawings . 10 . 2 Formal Visual Dynamics The dynamics of text - graphic manipulation in vmacs can be temporally structured according to formal schema . This is accomplished through software modules called performance administrators which guide the course of user interaction . A performance administrator examines each event before it takes place , and also the state of images on the display Lakin87 . It may intervene with graphic actions of its own when appropriate to a predefined goal . Performance administrators have been created to assist people in using two of the visual languages , VIC and SIBTRAN . Both of these administrators utilize spatial parsing as an integral part of assistance . Other performance administrators have been created which train brain damaged users in basic mouse skills , and teach full vmacs to brain normals . Procedurally Specified VIC : The administrated envi - ronment provides a training facility for the VIC language , con - tinually parsing phrases as they are assembled and undoing un - grammatical constructions . SIBTRAN : The SIBTRAN assistant uses the grammar directed parser to intervene when it recognizes certain spatial constructions . Trainers : Low - level peformance administrators teach basic skills like tracking a target with the mouse ( see figure 14 ) and making marks . Administrated replay : User interacts with images as they are replayed , and that inter - action is administrated . This technique is utilized for a vmacs tutorial . Grammar Driven ( * future * ) A language for visually specifying the dynamics of visual interaction is the next logical step . Paul Haeberli has already implemented such a system based on the data flow formalism Haeberli86 . 11 . REFLECTION In vmacs a performance is a sequence of text - graphic manipulation events and the corresponding images . It is useful to capture a performance so that we may reflect upon it . vmacs supports the capture for reflection of many aspects of a text - graphic performance - - both statics and dynamics can be stored and measured . Some of the techniques are literally reflective , transforming an aspect of a performance into a piece of text - graphics which refers to it . 11 . 1 Storing & Retrieving Performances Statics vmacs has emacs - style files and buffers for on - line storage of images Figures 7 , 8 , 9 - b , 9 - c , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , and 15 are images from vmacs buffers . For paper hardcopy there is only a screen dump facility at present , but a vmacs image to page description language translator is planned . Hardcopy could be formatted for various purposes , under either procedure or grammar direction . Dynamics Actual dynamics : Recorded live from perfor - mance ; then stored , retrieved and replayed on - line . Composed dynamics : Created ' synthetically ' through score compilers or his - tory editors . Passive dynamics are viewed in replay like an ani - mated cartoon . Interactive dynamics are participatory , where the user interacts with the replaying images , and that performance is administrated . We might imagine a group creating an interactive graphic tutorial for the final presentation of their concept . 11 . 2 Measuring Performances Measuring some aspect of a performance implies a level of interpretation or filtering beyond merely recording it . For instance , an audio tape of a working group session is a record ; while a transcription of that tape into speakers and their phrases is an interpretation , albeit a very low level one s . In this sense , a vmacs history is already a low - level measurement because the mouse - and - keyboard handler has interpreted the dynamics in terms of events . However , it ' s a funny kind of interpretation - - first , because some of the interpretation was done at the time when the medium was designed ( when the handler was coded ) ; and second because the performance couldn ' t even take place without some kind of artifact for text - graphic manipulation . The result is that vmacs has shaped the performance into nicely chunked events about nicely computable - with text - graphic objects . In so far as vmacs is a good medium , the performers will not complain , since they benefit from the power of the system . And at the same time , those who want to measure performances benefit greatly : the medium is the measure . More detailed thoughts on measurement can be found in the Appendix , Section 14 . The discussion there uses measurement to explore intuitions about the richness of the text - graphic dance that vmacs is designed to support . In addition , the discussion indicates how measurement may provide a bootstrap for improving vmacs as a better medium for that dance . However generated , one result of any measurement will finally be a piece of text - graphics for human consumption . An 263 algorithm has transformed an image or a history and obtained data which then needs to be presented clearly and effectively . For this purpose there exist formal visual languages ( or notations ) designed to emphasize aspects of interest in the data while leaving out the non - essential . Here PAM and vmacs can assist the measurers as well as the measurees . First , after the data has been generated , PAM programs can automatically translate it into a form in the appropriate visual language . And once displayed as a visual object , then the power of vmacs is available for manipulating these images too . The result of all of the measurements described below can be automatically displayed as graphs or charts ; figures 14 and 15 are examples . Statics ( measuring things in one frame ) Spatiality : Parsing is a one way of measuring the spatial arrangement of objects - - indicating whether they fall into specified patterns , figures 11 and 13 . vmacs also keeps track of spatial details like cursor position and the defining points in drawlines . Grouping Structure : Explicit user - built tree structures can be recorded . Figure 9 - c shows the grouping structures for manipulation cre - ated by the operator in the course of making figure 9 - b . Dynamics ( measuring things that change over time ) In vmacs , histories are amenable not only to replaying but also to analysis . Because a history list is symbolic , it can be processed symbolically and various tabulations made of the events comprising it . Or a history can be replayed , with analysis performed on each of the image frames as they are generated . In either case - - history with or with out the spatial image context - - as with the other measures , the result will be some text - graphic object : a table , chart , or graph . Spatiality : vmacs keeps track of spatial dynamics during performances . One such dynamic is cursor position ; figure 14 shows the results of an aphasic patient ' s performance in the tracking task for cursor movement control . Expressed in figure 14 are the location and seconds elapsed for each hit ( boxed numbers ) , and the distance between cursor position and target for each cursor movement ( the comet - like tails along the cursor path ) . Other spatial dynamics are monitored in vmacs , such as III 12 hits over 1 run in 8 : 81 : 48 total time IV Figure 14 . Plot of target hits during aphasic patient ' s tracking task for cursor movement control . the drag vectors for each move operation . Grouping Structure : The unmodified tree structure of the whole image reflects the temporal order in which objects were created . In addition , the dynamics of user - built structures can be measured . For example , figure 15 shows the depth of tree structure ( the little squares ) in each object selected during the creation of figure 9 - b . Remember that an object must be selected before it can be manipulated , so that selection behavior indicates where the operator was spendin his manipulation time . Out of 464 selection acts made during th performance , atomic objects ( level 1 ) were selected about 70 % c the time . Simple patterns with only atomic members ( level 2 were selected about 22 % of the time ; and patterns with simpl patterns as members ( level 3 ) 5 % of the time . More comple patterns were targets for the remaining 3 % of the selection act , , Mtnuteg Figure 15 . Depth of tree structure in each object selected durin creation of figure 9 - b . 11 . 3 On What Can ' t Be Measured The part of a texl graphic performance most important may finally be the harde . , to measure . Text - graphics for working groups is importar at all because it is expressive of the group ' s task . Some ( the expression takes place in the static image content , and : relatively easy to measure . And yet finally , to return to th initial characterization of the phenomenon of working grou graphics , it is like a dance , and the most effective expressly quality may be the hardest to isolate scientifically : the qualit : of movement of the tezt - graphics 9 . ff each visual event is unde full expressive control of the performer , then nuances of phrasinl and timing may strike the audience very forcibly , but be ver : hard to measure . To algorithmically measure the full effect of performance may be like trying to write a program to measur , the effectiveness of a piece of music . 12 . CONCLUSION Manipulating text - graphics for working groups is a perform ing art similar to dance . To support such performances on computer requires a performing medium . Examining examples of non - computer text - graphics for grou I gives a preliminary idea of the underlying phenomenon : the per forming of text - graphic manipulation to assist working groups Among key features of this kind of text - graphic manipulatio : are : agility ( speed in creation , moving and modifying images 1 generality ( freedom to create any kind of image at any time am place ) ; structure ( definable spatial patterns of text and graph ics are often used ) ; and dynamics ( manipulation of text - graphic unfolding over time ) . The vmacs TM graphics editor is a computer medium de signed to provide these features , vmacs achieves agility throug a touch - typing interface with no waiting for menus . The fen tures of generality and structure are tied together , vmacs i basically a general purpose editor which can then be specialize , to support manipulations of the specific spatial patterns foun , in particular applications . LISP - like processing of text - graphi objects is available for spatial parsing and interpretation accord ing to formal schema . And finally , the dynamics of text - graphi manipulation for working groups are represented in vmacs b symbolic history lists , which allows live performances to be as sisted by performance - administrator software modules , and als allows the recorded history of a performance to be replayed , o analyzed according to various measurement algorithms . 264 13 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The development of vmacs as a performing medium has profitted from contributions by Harlyn Baker , John Bear , Gayle Curtis , Scott Kim , Larry Leifer , Mike Lowry , Paul Martin , Rob Myers , Alex Pentland , Fernando Pereira , Warren Robinett , Ted Selker , Stuart Shieber , Josh Singer , Dick Steele , Hans Uszkoreit , Mabry Tyson , and Machiel Van der Loos . 14 . APPENDIX : ON THE MEASUREMENT OF WORKING GROUP GRAPHICS What kind of measures can be made of vmacs performances , and Why would we want to ? Measurement of simple parameters of performance - - like cursor position over time , results of se - lection attempts on visual objects , size of drawline marks made , distance objects were dragged , grouping structures created - - are used in representing and teaching basic manipulation skills ( fig - ures 14 and 15 ) . Measurers for more complex parameters are in working prototype stage . As an example , one program replays histories in order to search for occurrences of ' drag - grouping ' ; the idea behind this measure is that simple conceptual groupings of visual objects can be inferred by finding spatial juxaposition relations that the operator preserves during dragging 10 . Mea - sures of drag - grouping use temporal and spatial patternings to discover how people are ' thinking about ' ( in a primitive sense ) the visual objects . Another approach to getting at underlying cognitive issues is the spatial parsing described in Section 10 . 1 , which is a tool for looking at static spatial patternings during visual communication . Each of the visual languages analyzed is , in part , a set of rules used by humans for collecting a set of visual elements into conceptual groups - - visual phrases - - for interpretation in that language . And Visual Grammar No - tation is a perspicuous way of representating those rules , with each grammar visually displaying the patterns of human spatial arrangement for a well - defined subset of visual communication activity . One promising avenue for future work lies in examing the explicit creation of grouping structures for manipulation which are easy to measure in vmacs . For example , in figure 9 - c we might try to find the relation between the manipulative groupings indicated by the tree networks and conceptual groupings ( how people see the images together ) . Now these two kinds of grouping can ' t be unrelated ( unless the operator is trying to trick us ) , but nor does it seem likely that the relation is one - to - one . Specifying exactly how they are related will take careful research . But the measures described above only scratch the surface in examining working group graphics ; this phenomenon seems to offer fundamental leverage for measuring cognitive behavior . In comparison with protocols taken from a single individual during a cognitive task , working group graphics is explicit , synoptic and graphic . The text - graphics on the group display are explicit and complete in that the group itself monitors to make sure nothing important is left off the display . And at the same time , there is neither room nor time to put up irrelevant material , so the group itself performs synopsis , distilling the salient points from their own verbalizing . In addition , working group graphics uses rich yet easy to process graphic devices of gross texture ( line networks , spatial arrangement and juxaposition , variation in text case ) to show semantic connections among smaller text - graphic pieces . However , the cognitive aspects of the current research are still in the fledgling stage , unable to do much with all this leverage . The display of concept development on vmacs may be so rich yet so easy to measure , but the phenomenon of interest seems just out of reach . During the performance , we can see the text - graphics shifting and measure their coursings precisely , so what does that tell us about the coursing of ideas ? Assuming progress can he made on these problems , then in the future perhaps heuristics about text - graphic patternings during concept development can be discovered which could be used by assistive software modules . Under the guidance of such performance - adiminstrators , the group ' s text - graphic medium might finally become a ' rational external device ' . A . R . Luria coined this term to describe a card system he designed to help a brain damaged soldier tell a story . The problem was not unlike one often faced by working groups : when telling a story orally , the patient could either generate the pieces or order them , but he couldn ' t do both . " Replacement of the defective internal schemes by a system of rational external aids provided a practical means of overcoming the patient ' s defect . . . " Luria66 . 15 . FOOTNOTES 1 Use of waxed cards for manipulable group display was first developed by Porter and Verger Porter74 ; then extended by Lakin with movable line networks and color overlays . A similar technique involving ( less agile ) cards pinned to cork boards arose independently in Europe Jacobs73 . 2 Actually , this method of study is akin to old - style linguis - tics , which should be seen in contrast to newer approaches like the study of situated language at the Center for the Study of Language and Information at Stanford . s In fact an early study comparing telemediated groups with face - to - face groups provided writing and drawing media in each case , but failed to record or measure its use Weston73 . 4 The manipulable card system does impose a size limitation on images . s vmaes is a trademark of Fred Lakin . 6 PAM and vmacs are both based on the SAM ( Structure - Arises - out - of - Manipulation ) model of text - graphic activity Lakin83 r Facilitation skills - - what they are and how to acquire them - - have for the most part been ignored in this paper . This is in part due to the methodological focus on the text - graphics themselves , and in part due to lack of space . However , three comments about the facilitation skills of operators need to be made . First , the facilitory expertise of the operator may well be more important than the power of the performing medium in determining the overall productivity of a meeting for a task - oriented group . A well facilitated group on a poor medium will probably out perform a poorly facilitated group on a powerful medium . Other eras may have been more aware of this . There is a possibly apocryphal report that around the turn of the century training in blackboard use was part of every school teacher ' s professional preparation . Second , one issue is simply consciousness raising : it is easier to get good performance out of a group which is meeting literate , i . e . which has used text - graphic media and expects to do so . Third , the focus on the text - graphics themselves provides a good framework for studying facilitation skills and teaching them . s Transcribing a video tape of a performance seems inher - ently trickier ( into what notation would it be transcribed ? a storyboard ? ) . Is this because any cinematographic documentary is already interpretative in a way that just putting a microphone in a room is not ? 9 This is point is directly due to conversations with Gayle 265 Curtis and Margo Apostolos on robot ballet . 10 Of course , this is only when the human himself has not constructed explicit grouping structures in order to drag groups of objects as a unit . 16 . REFERENCES Arnheim69 Arnheim , Rudolph , VISUAL THINKING , Univer - sity of California Press , 1969 . BaU71 Ball , Geoffry H . and Gilkey , James Y . , " Facilitation and Explicit Group Memory - - Their Application in Education " , SRI International IR & D No . 183531 - 409 , Menlo Park , CA , Dec 1971 . Brunon71 Brunon , Joseph , " Group Dynamics and Visual Thinking " , Journal of Architectural Education , No . 3 , 1971 . Doyle76 Doyle , Michael and Straus , David , HOW TO MAKE MEETINGS WORK , Wyden Books , 1976 . Engelbart62 Engelbart , D . C . , AUGMENTING HUMAN IN - TELLECT : A CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK , SRI In - ternational , Menlo Park , California , Oct 1962 . Engelbart85 Engelbart , D . C . , remark made in keynote address at SIGCHI85 , San Francisco , CA , April 1985 . English67 English , W . K . , Engelbart , D . C . , and Berman , M . L . , " Display - Selection Techniques for Text Manipulation " , IEEE Trans . on Human Factors in Electronics , Vol . HFE - 8 , No . 1 , March 1967 . Haeberli86 Haeberli , Paul , " A Data - Flow Manager for an In - teractive Programming Environment , " USENIX Summer Proceedings , 1986 . Jacob73 Jacob , Heiner , TEAM TEACHING , unpublished manuscript , 107 Carroll Place , New Brunswick , New Jersey 08901 , 1973 . Lakin74 Lakin , Fred , facilitation at the US Geological Survey , Menlo Park , CA , May 3 , 1974 . Lakin80a Lakin , Fred , " A Structure from Manipulation for Text - Graphic Objects , " published in the proceedings of SIGGRAPH ' 80 , Seattle , Washington , July , 1980 . Lakin80b Lakin , Fred , " Diagramming a Project on the Electric Blackboard , " video tape for SIGGRAPH ' 80 , July 1980 . Lakin80c Lakin , Fred , " Computing with Text - Graphic Forms , " published in the proceedings of the LISP Conference at Stanford University , August 1980 . Lakin83 Lakin , Fred , " Measuring Text - Graphic Activity " , pub - lished in the proceedings of GRAPHICS INTERFACE ' 83 , Edmonton , Alberta , May 1983 . Lakin87 Lakin , Fred , " Spatial Parsing for Visual Languages , " to appear in VISUAL LANGUAGES , edited by Shi - Kuo Chang , Plenum Press , 233 Spring Street , NY NY , forthcoming Spring 1987 . Luria66 Luria , A . R . , HUMAN BRAIN AND PSYCHOLOGI - CAL PROCESSES . New York , Harper & Row , 1966 . McKim72 McKim , Robert H . , EXPERIENCES IN VISUAl THINKING , Wadsworth Publishing Co . , Inc . , Belmont CA , 1972 . Porter74 Porter , Elias H . , and Verger , Morris D . " Interactiv Planning System " , unpublished manuscript , Los Angeles CA , 1974 . Slbbet76 Sibbet , David , " Introduction to Group Graphics " The Corospondent , CORO Foundation Northern Califor nia Public Affairs Quarterly , Summer 1976 . Sibbet84 Sibbet , David , facilitation at Stanford Universit ) March 9 , 1984 . Stallman81 Stallman , Richard : " EMACS , the Extensible Customizable Self - Documenting Display Editor " , MIT A Memo 519a , March 1981 . TAB62 TAB Engineers , Inc , " Training Course in Panorami Design , " reprinted from METALFAX Magazine for Apri 1962 . Weston73 Weston , J . R . & Kristen , C . , TELECONFERENC ING : A COMPARISON OF ATTITUDES , UNCER TAINTY AND INTERPERSONAL ATMOSPHEREI IN MEDIATED AND FACE - TO - FACE GROUP IN TERACTION , prepared for the Social Policy and Pro grams Branch , the Dept . of Communications , Ottawe Canada , December , 1973 . 266