Using language as related stimuli for concept generation IVEY CHIU and L . H . SHU Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering , University of Toronto , Toronto , Ontario , Canada ( Received October 27 , 2005 ; Accepted July 25 , 2006 ! Abstract This paper examines the use of language , specifically verbs , as stimuli for concept generation . Because language has been shown to be important to the reasoning process in general as well as to specific reasoning processes that are central to the design process , we are investigating the relationship between language and conceptual design . The use of language to facilitate different stages of the design process has been investigated in the past . Our previous work , and the work of others , showed that ideas produced can be expressed through related hierarchical lexical relationships , so we investigated the use of verbs within these hierarchical relationships as stimuli for ideas . Participants were provided with four problems and related verb stimuli , and asked to develop concepts using the stimuli provided . The stimuli sets were generated by exploring verb hierarchies based on functional words from the problem statements . We found that participants were most successful when using lower level ~ more specific ! verbs as stimuli , and often higher level general verbs were only used successfully in conjunction with lower level verbs . We also observed that intransitive verbs ~ verbs that cannot take a direct object ! were less likely to be used successfully in the development of concepts . Overall , we found that the verb chosen as stimulus by the participant directly affects the success and the type of concept developed . Keywords : Conceptual Design ; Design Stimuli ; Verb - Based Concept Generation 1 . INTRODUCTION The connection between language and reasoning has been noted since the days of the ancient Greeks , who used the same word , logos , to denote both concepts ~ Kalmar & David - son , 1997 ! . More recent work in cognitive sciences and psycholinguistics has established the relationship between language and reasoning ~ Levinson , 1996 ; Li & Gleitman , 2002 ! . The relationship between language and reasoning for the purposes of design , such as in spatial reasoning and decision making , has also been established ~ Gero et al . , 1994 ; Dentsoras , 2005 ! . In this paper , we examine the effects of language on concept generation with the goal of estab - lishing the foundation for a language - based design support system . Such a system will exploit the relationship between language and reasoning to facilitate the concept generation process . Other researchers also recognize the overall importance of natural language to the design process . Natural language can be used in requirements specification ~ Burg , 1997 ; Nuseibeh & Easterbrook , 2000 ! , concept generation ~ Seg - ers , 2004 ; Chiu & Shu , 2005 , 2007 ! , design representation ~ Pahl & Beitz , 1996 ; Stone & Wood , 2000 ! , and design outcome analysis ~ Mabogunje & Leifer 1997 ; Dong et al . , 2003 ! . We choose to focus on concept generation , as it is a crucial stage where many decisions are made that affect the rest of the product realization cycle . It is frequently esti - mated that 75 % of total product cost is committed by the end of conceptual design ~ Ullman , 2003 ! . Using the con - nection between language and reasoning to improve con - cept generation may assist in reducing the overall cost in the product realization cycle . Our past work involved searching for biological analo - gies for design in natural - language format using computa - tional linguistic techniques ~ Chiu & Shu , 2005 , 2007 ! . In this context , we recognized the use of lexical relationships within natural - language knowledge sources , that is , how authors tend to think about and express their knowledge . We used these relationships to retrieve relevant biological phenomena for use as stimuli in engineering problems . The presence of lexical relationships has also been identified in design activity outputs such as in design conversations Reprint requests to : L . H . Shu , Department of Mechanical and Indus - trial Engineering , University of Toronto , 5 King’s College Road , Toronto , Ontario M5S 3G8 , Canada . E - mail : shu @ mie . utoronto . ca Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing ~ 2007 ! , 21 , 103 – 121 . Printed in the USA . Copyright © 2007 Cambridge University Press 0890 - 0604 0 07 $ 25 . 00 DOI : 10 . 1017 0 S0890060407070175 103