“The creative process does not end with an idea , it only starts with an idea . ” —John Arnold Creativity and productive thinking are stated goals of most programs designed for the gifted and talented ( Feldhusen & Treffinger , 1985 ; Gowan , Khatena , & Torrance , 1979 ) . Creative learning and creative prob - lem solving are well established programming areas for those who provide differentiated , as well as regular classroom instruction ( Costa , 2001 ; McGrane & Sternberg , 1992 ; Pfeiffer , 2003 ) . Brainstorming has arguably become the most widely known and used ( and , all too frequently , misused ) term associated with creativity and creative problem solving . A great deal of brainstorming research appears to narrowly focus on four “guidelines . ” This problem is compounded by an overwhelming focus on the ques - tion : Are individuals or groups more productive when brainstorming ( Rickards , 1999 ) ? Many who read this research are led to the misguided conclusion that brain - storming should not be used for group idea generation ( Diehl & Stroebe , 1991 ; Nickerson , 1999 ) . The purposes of this article are to reexamine the empirical literature surrounding this group procedure and to offer some suggestions for improving this line of inquiry . We will discuss the results of an exploratory study that investigated the importance of the role of the group facilitator . This article will conclude with impli - cations for those interested in teaching , learning , and applying brainstorming . B a c k g r o u n d Osborn ( 1953 ) outlined specific procedures for cre - ative problem solving , including one tool he called brain - storming for the creative collaboration of groups . Osborn A Reexamination of Brainstorming Research : Implications for Research and Practice Scott G . Isaksen and John P . Gaulin Creativity Research Unit , The Creative Problem Solving Group , Inc . A B S T R A C T Brainstorming may be the best - known tool for group idea generation and is widely taught in gifted and talented programs . Many empirical studies have been conducted regarding the effectiveness of brain - storming , and they have provided useful insights into the salient barriers facing groups who use this tool . Although a great deal of this literature focuses on the limitations of brainstorming , the exploratory study included in this article sheds light on approaches that can enhance the value of this tool by examining the impact of the facilitator’s role within group idea gen - eration . Finally , this article outlines recommenda - tions for teaching , learning , and applying brainstorming . P U T T I N G T H E R E S E A R C H T O U S E The purpose of this article is to help educators appreciate the brainstorming procedure as a power - ful and valuable addition to any learning program . Since brainstorming is a group procedure , teachers can respond to the necessity of helping groups work better together , jointly create solutions to complex problems , and create common support for imple - mentation of those ideas . Teachers can use the information presented here to design effective brainstorming sessions . Many critical researchers have discovered that brainstorm - ing—limited simply to four basic rules—does in fact have limitations . This article reviews these limita - tions and explains how the entire brainstorming pro - cedure mitigates these issues . Teachers can pursue the best practices included in this article to help them teach about brainstorming and to design effec - tive brainstorming sessions . A R E E X A M I N A T I O N O F B R A I N S T O R M I N G R E S E A R C H G I F T E D C H I L D Q U A R T E R L Y • F A L L 2 0 0 5 • V O L 4 9 N O 4 3 1 5 A R E E X A M I N A T I O N O F B R A I N S T O R M I N G R E S E A R C H ( 1953 , 1963 ) outlined four guidelines for brainstorming : ( a ) criticism is ruled out—group members should defer judgment until after the session ; ( b ) freewheeling is wel - comed—because it is easier to tame down ideas , partici - pants are encouraged to share their wild ideas ; ( c ) quantity is wanted—the more ideas participants have , the better the chances they will have good ideas ; and ( d ) combina - tion and improvement are sought—participants should feel free to build on ideas from others . Beyond providing the four guidelines , Osborn outlined detailed procedures for making brainstorming work , including the preparation of the group , the task to be worked on , the climate for the session , and the role of the group leader . Some studies were supportive of brainstorming . Meadow and Parnes ( 1959 ) compared trained subjects working in real groups using brainstorming to an alterna - tive group approach calling for critical evaluation . Significantly more high - quality solutions were produced in the brainstorming condition . A number of other scholars have confirmed these results ( Gerlach , Schutz , Baker , & Mazer , 1964 ; Parloff & Handlon , 1964 ; Price , 1985 ; Weisskopf - Joelson & Eliseo , 1961 ) . Other propo - nents have expanded on these results ( Brown & Paulus , 2002 ; Firestien & McCowan , 1988 ; Meadow , Parnes , & Reese , 1959 ; Parnes , 1961 ) . Taylor , Berry , and Block ( 1958 ) provided the first comparison between nominal and real brainstorming groups . Since nominal groups allow for individuals to work alone and then pool their results after the fact , they minimize any of the potential process losses of real inter - acting groups . By comparing real groups to nominal groups in this way , numerous studies have identified many of the possible barriers to productivity in brain - storming groups . B a r r i e r s t o E f f e c t i v e B r a i n s t o r m i n g Three major categories of barriers explain the improved performance of nominal groups over real groups . These are : the emergence of judgments during generation , members giving up on the group , and an inadequate structure of the interaction . We will review each of these below . Applying Judgment Inappropriately Numerous studies have pointed out the existence of uniformity pressure and evaluation apprehension in brainstorming groups . The productivity of brainstorming groups may be inhibited by fear of critical evaluation and the participants’ desire to go along with the dominant pattern of idea generation . Some studies ( Dunnette , Campbell , & Jaastad , 1963 ; Vroom , Grant , & Cotton , 1969 ) found that the lack of participation by those who were more influenced by the fear of evaluation allowed others ( presumably less inhibited ) to dominate the dis - cussion , especially in the early phases of the session . Other studies ( Camacho & Paulus , 1995 ; Diehl & Stroebe , 1987 , 1991 ; Maginn & Harris , 1980 ) have con - firmed that fear of evaluation inhibits the productive gen - eration of ideas . Cognitive inertia , which occurs when group mem - bers pursue the same line of thinking , has been identified in several studies ( Bouchard , Barsaloux , & Drauden , 1974 ; Vroom et al . , 1969 ) . This notion is similar to cog - nitive uniformity , where individuals feel pressure to sup - port and maintain the direction of a discussion and not stray too far from the current theme ( Taylor et al . , 1958 ) . Fear of being judged and pressure to stay within the bounds of existing options clearly have an inhibiting effect on the performance of groups when their task is generating many , varied , and unusual ideas . It also under - scores the notion that there may be other significant fac - tors that impact group performance . Giving Up on the Group Individuals give up on a group during brainstorming for a number of reasons . Studies have pointed out that free riding , social loafing , matching of effort , or the sucker effect can limit the productivity of real brainstorming groups ( Henningsen , Cruz , & Miller , 2000 ; Kerr & Bruun , 1983 ) . These barriers lower motivation and effort when individuals work collectively . When these barriers are present , the individual gives up on the group and syn - ergy is minimized ( Latané , Williams , & Harkins , 1979 ) . Karau and Williams ( 1993 ) defined social loafing as “the reduction in motivation and effort when individuals work collectively compared with when they work indi - vidually or coactively” ( p . 681 ) . Working coactively is when individuals work in the real or imagined presence of others , but their inputs are not combined with the inputs of others . Social loafing has received a great deal of attention in the literature ( e . g . , Harkins , Latané , & Williams , 1980 ; Jackson & Williams , 1985 ; Paulus , 1983 ; Shepperd , 1993 ) . Factors purported to explain social loafing include a lack of accountability and decreased influence . 3 1 6 G I F T E D C H I L D Q U A R T E R L Y • F A L L 2 0 0 5 • V O L 4 9 N O 4 A R E E X A M I N A T I O N O F B R A I N S T O R M I N G R E S E A R C H Social loafing results when there is a loss of personal accountability for performance . Individuals are not as likely to be held personally accountable for the results ( positive or negative ) when working in a group . Typical behavior manifested by reduced accountability includes less focus on performance standards or greater reliance on an individual high performer in the group ( Kerr & Bruun , 1983 ) . Thus , people can “hide in the crowd” with less concern over being held personally accountable for ( poor ) group performance ( Davis , 1969 ) . Social loafing may also be caused by the perception of decreased personal influence on results . Each individ - ual member of a group has less influence or impact on the group , reducing the individual’s contribution to the group’s productivity ( Ruback , Dabbs , & Hopper , 1984 ) . Social loafing is more likely as the size of the group increases ( Karau & Williams , 1993 ) . Matching of effort , or the “sucker effect , ” has also been found to increase the likelihood that members might give up on the group ( Paulus & Dzindolet , 1993 ; Zalesny & Ford , 1990 ) . Individuals working in groups may compare and match their performance with that of others in their group ( Paulus , Brown , & Ortega , 1999 ; Seta , Seta , & Donaldson , 1991 ) . Mulvey and Klein ( 1998 ) found that those who perceived that teammates were loafing lowered their own personal goals because they anticipated that others had done the same . To protect themselves from carrying the highest burden on the team , individuals may also lower their efforts so as to avoid being the sucker of the free riding of other mem - bers ( Orbell & Dawes , 1981 ) . This reduction of effort can occur even if group members only perceive loafing or if other group members offer excuses , justifications , apolo - gies , or other defensive management strategies ( Mulvey , Bowes - Sperry , & Klein , 1998 ) . A variety of intrapersonal factors may influence the commitment of individuals within groups . These may include various personality characteristics ( Jablin & Seibold , 1978 ) and diversity of cognitive styles ( Wheeler , 1995 ) , as well as gender and cultural differences ( Lamm & Trommsdorff , 1973 ) . In addition , the kind and amount of time devoted to tasks may also influence individuals’ decisions to give up on the group . If members of brain - storming groups are provided enough time and encour - agement to extend their effort , they generate more and better ideas than groups lacking this time and effort ( Basadur & Thompson , 1986 ; Parnes , 1961 ; Watson , Michaelsen , & Sharp , 1991 ) . Zagona , Willis , and MacKinnon ( 1966 ) found that groups lacking the time to get to know each other did not take full advantage of the diverse knowledge of other members . Giving up on the group can be caused by the quality of the interaction among group members . The failure to listen during group interaction ( Jablin & Seibold , 1978 ) , the mismanagement of time ( Bouchard , 1972 ) , and the ability of the group to keep judgment separate from idea generation ( Osborn , 1953 ) can all affect the quality of the interaction . The amount of training participants received to pre - pare for effective group interaction may also influence the degree to which individuals may give up on a group . Smith ( 1993 ) illustrated the impact of even brief training on group idea - generating performance . Groups receiving only 5 minutes of training on discounting ( verbal or non - verbal criticism ) and its effects on group ideation signifi - cantly outperformed untrained groups , in which discounting occurred . Those groups trained to avoid dis - counting produced significantly more ideas and had more positive perceptions of their interpersonal working cli - mate . Members of brainstorming groups who perceive that other members are not pulling their own weight have lower satisfaction with the group and lower ultimate per - formance ( Mulvey et al . , 1998 ) . Members rationalize their reduced effort by focusing on such factors as the inability to receive credit or blame for group perform - ance , the fear of being “used” by other group members , and the increased difficulty of coordinating effort . Unless there is some group process intervention designed to mitigate these issues , suboptimal group performance will result . Interacting Within a Limiting Process Structure A third challenge facing real brainstorming groups is that the structure of the interaction can inhibit produc - tivity . This is called production blocking , or the proce - dural mechanism effect . Production blocking refers to the impact of group process that encourages only one person to talk at a time ( Bouchard & Hare , 1970 ; Diehl & Stroebe , 1987 ) or having only one person recording ideas at a flipchart ( Mullen , Johnson , & Salas , 1991 ) . The impact is that others are inhibited or prohibited from contributing during the time that someone else is talking or ideas are being recorded . A prime contributor to production blocking is the lack of procedures that encourage simultaneous process - ing . Bouchard ( 1972 ) found significant differences on group productivity depending on such variables as idea G I F T E D C H I L D Q U A R T E R L Y • F A L L 2 0 0 5 • V O L 4 9 N O 4 3 1 7 A R E E X A M I N A T I O N O F B R A I N S T O R M I N G R E S E A R C H recording method ( tape recorded vs . self - written ) , pre - session instructions , and group size . This notion of manipulating recording methods was extended by Gallupe , Bastianutti , and Cooper ( 1991 ) . They agreed with Osborn ( 1953 ) that group members do think of more ideas than they actually produce . Indeed , they suggested that this problem increases with groups of larger sizes ( Cohen , Whitmyre , & Funk , 1960 ) . Their hypothesis was that electronic methods might be effec - tively employed by groups to mitigate this factor . Nunamaker , Applegate , and Konsynski ( 1987 ) provided support for this notion . In summary , inappropriately applying judgment , giving up on the group , and interacting within a limiting process structure represent barriers to group productivity that have been uncovered in a large portion of the research on group brainstorming . O v e r c o m i n g t h e B a r r i e r s A great deal of brainstorming research has focused on determining the barriers to real - group productivity . Hackman ( 1987 ) urged researchers to shift their focus from productivity losses to productivity gains . Two promising areas for overcoming the barriers outlined above include the use of technology and facilitation . The Use of Technology One area of research designed to overcome the bar - riers outlined above includes Electronic Brainstorming ( EBS ) , Group Support Systems ( GSS ) , or Group Decision Support Systems ( GDSS ) . This area has been explored by a number of researchers ( Clawson , Bostrom , & Anson , 1993 ; Cooper , Gallupe , Pollard , & Cadsby , 1998 ; Dennis , Valacich , Connolly , & Wynne , 1996 ; Thompson & Coovert , 2002 ) . While this emerging line of research offers important implications for overcoming barriers in real groups , this technology is not universally available in classrooms and organizations . Instead of comparing real groups with nominal groups or individuals , EBS research compares real groups to virtual groups , linked via technology . Because the technology enables simultaneous participant interaction in real time and provides anonymity and protection from criticism , it is capable of mitigating some of the factors that have been found to reduce productivity in real group meetings ( Hollingshead & McGrath , 1995 ) . EBS research has provided insights to help minimize production blocking and increase anonymity in order to reduce evaluation apprehension ( Connolly , Jessup , & Valacich , 1990 ; Gallupe et al . , 1991 ) . The benefits of reducing this apprehension include : a wider variety of ideas , the identification of more new topics and ideas , and increased involvement and participation ( Nunamaker , Briggs , Mittleman , Vogel , & Balthazard , 1997 ) . EBS research has focused on such issues as consensus and equality of influence ( Zigurs & Dickson , 1990 ) , the complexity and relevance of the task and group structure ( Hollingshead & McGrath , 1995 ) , quality of decisions ( Bui & Sivasankaran , 1990 ; Dennis , Valacich , & Nunamaker , 1990 ) , and the use of e - mail as opposed to face - to - face meetings ( Eveland & Bikson , 1989 ; Finholt , Sproull & Kiesler , 1990 ) . Benbasat and Lim ( 1993 ) found that formal hierarchy appeared to reduce the benefits of using EBS . However , the negative effects of hierarchy in a real - group session had significantly greater impact , resulting in such things as extended meetings , fewer alternatives shared , reduced elaboration or flexibility in thinking , and generally lower satisfaction . EBS proved to be a much better medium when compared to real - group meetings , as it relates to these factors . There are some difficulties surrounding the use of EBS . Hare ( 1976 ) points out that a group’s ability to focus and decide is more difficult when a large number of ideas are available for review . EBS may also result in less over - all participation ( Daly , 1993 ) and more task - irrelevant communication ( Weisband , 1992 ) . A number of questions surrounding the nature of the technology have also been raised . Nunamaker et al . ( 1997 ) discussed the difference between idea description fields that allow for short , concise answers and those that allow for more elaboration . The nature or design of the description field can affect the number of ideas gener - ated , as well as the degree of detail and elaboration pro - vided . On the basis of this research , EBS can mitigate inap - propriate judgment through anonymity and overcome many of the challenges of production blocking . While the use of technology does advance the effective use of groups , Nunamaker et al . ( 1997 ) concluded that technol - ogy does not replace the need for group leadership . In sharing some of the lessons they learned over 12 years of using group support systems , they stated that the use of technology “ . . . can make a well - planned meeting bet - ter , and it can make a poorly planned meeting worse . . . 3 1 8 G I F T E D C H I L D Q U A R T E R L Y • F A L L 2 0 0 5 • V O L 4 9 N O 4 A R E E X A M I N A T I O N O F B R A I N S T O R M I N G R E S E A R C H any tool is only as good as the artisan who wields it” ( pp . 171 – 172 ) . The Use of Facilitators Osborn ( 1953 ) defined the role of group leader , or facilitator , who would be responsible for a variety of activities before , during , and after the meeting . These responsibilities included reinforcing the guidelines and encouraging the even participation of all group members . In addition , the leader was responsible for identifying a variety of tools and structuring the interaction so that people would maintain their energy and ideas would be recorded quickly and accurately . These activities were designed to prepare group members for dealing both with the task at hand and with the process . In this way , group productivity would be enhanced , as many of the barriers to thinking would be managed or eliminated . A few studies have examined the effects of using a trained facilitator to help manage the group interaction . Offner , Kramer , and Winter ( 1996 ) found that having a trained facilitator who managed the group interaction and recorded ideas significantly influenced idea produc - tion . They found that groups with a facilitator did better than those without one . The facilitated brainstorming groups matched the performance of nominal groups . Oxley , Dzindolet , and Paulus ( 1996 ) reported similar findings when studying the level of training of the facili - tator . They found that the groups having the benefit of a highly trained facilitator outperformed nonfacilitated groups , as well as those helped by facilitators with less training . They concluded that groups with a highly trained facilitator may achieve the productivity of nomi - nal groups without foregoing the advantages of interac - tion . The prevailing paradigm of comparing real against nominal groups has led to an improved understanding of the salient barriers to brainstorming productivity and some technology - based strategies for overcoming them . It has not offered a great deal of additional insight for those who must function with face - to - face , bona fide groups ( Putnam & Stohl , 1990 , 1996 ) or work groups ( Ford , 1999 ; Forsyth , 2000 ; Sundstrom , McIntyre , Halfhill , & Richards , 2000 ) . This is important since real , diverse , and dispersed groups are increasingly doing so much of what goes on in the world . Sutton and Hargadon ( 1996 ) critiqued brainstorming research because , in large part , it uses participants who : ( 1 ) had no past or future task interdependence ; ( 2 ) had no past or future social relationships ; ( 3 ) didn’t use the ideas generated ; ( 4 ) lacked pertinent techni - cal expertise ; ( 5 ) lacked skills that complement other participants ; ( 6 ) lacked expertise in doing brainstorming ; and ( 7 ) lacked expertise in leading brainstorming sessions . ( p . 4 ) Although these limitations were identified on the basis of an inquiry within an industrial design firm , many could also be relevant to a classroom situation . For example , the productivity of brainstorming within a classroom can be enhanced if the students involved have learned and applied the skills associated with working effectively within groups . Given the need for real group - to - group comparisons there is a need for research to obtain an improved under - standing of additional procedures that impact productiv - ity gains of real groups . The following exploratory study was conducted as an instructional exercise with an under - graduate humanities class within a public university col - lege to reach that objective . T h e S t u d y This exploration took place within the context of an instructional experience . The purpose of the instruc - tional experience was to help the students discover some of the differences that might result from following differ - ent small - group idea - generating procedures . A discov - ery - oriented approach outlined by McCall and Bobko ( 1990 ) was followed . The study sought to demonstrate the difference a facilitator might make when working with small - group procedures , as well as to allow for a comparison of various procedures for idea generation . Method This exploratory study involved generating ideas for dealing with junk mail . The task was chosen for its famil - iarity and its realistic qualities . Participants were ran - domly divided into nine working groups , each assigned a specific procedure for generating ideas . Three groups were instructed to have a discussion : One of these was instructed to have a free discussion ( Group 1 ) , one was instructed to have a discussion aimed at producing 5 – 7 really good ideas ( Group 2 ) , and the third was instructed to come up with at least 20 ideas ( Group 3 ) . The fourth and fifth groups were instructed to use Brainwriting ( Geschka , Schaude , & Schlicksupp , 1975 ; Gryskiewicz , 1980 ) . Brainwriting allows participants to write their own ideas down and to share them by exchang - G I F T E D C H I L D Q U A R T E R L Y • F A L L 2 0 0 5 • V O L 4 9 N O 4 3 1 9 A R E E X A M I N A T I O N O F B R A I N S T O R M I N G R E S E A R C H ing papers during the session , allowing both simultaneous processing and building on each other’s ideas . In one of these two groups , a Brainwriting facilitator joined the group to help generate ideas ( Group 4 ) ; in the other , the facilitator explained the tool and stimulated some ideas , but did not actually join the group in generating ideas or in modeling the use of the tool ( Group 5 ) . The sixth group was instructed to generate ideas individually , but follow the guidelines for brainstorming ( Group 6 ) . This condition most closely resembled the nominal group approach taken in much of the empirical brainstorming research . The seventh group was instructed to work as a group and follow the guidelines for brainstorming ( Group 7 ) . This group most closely resembled the group brainstorming condition used in most of the empirical research . The eighth group was instructed to work with a trained facilitator to come up with as many ideas as pos - sible . The facilitator used brainstorming with Post - its“ ( Isaksen , Dorval , & Treffinger , 1998 ) and used some idea stimulators to help the group generate ideas ( Group 8 ) . Brainstorming with Post - its TM allows each participant to record their own ideas simultaneously and then share them verbally with the group after which they are posted on a flipchart to encourage “hitch - hiking , ” or deliber - ately building on ideas offered by others in the group . The ninth group was instructed to work with a trained facilitator , who followed the same procedure as in Group 8 , but also had someone in the group who took on the role of client ( Group 9 ) . The client had received facilita - tor training as well , but , in this situation , was asked to take on the role of owning the task , clarifying the prob - lem , and answering questions , but not evaluating the ideas . The facilitator of this group briefed the participants on the social roles included in an idea - generating session ( Isaksen , 1983 ) . Each of the four facilitators participating in the study had received extensive training in the facilitation of cre - ative problem - solving approaches ( Isaksen & Dorval , 2000 ; Isaksen , Dorval , & Treffinger , 2000 ; Parnes , Noller , & Biondi , 1977 ) . The facilitators used their knowledge and skills to introduce the tools and prompt the group members to follow the guidelines , rather than following a detailed script . Participants The sample was an intact group of students who had a history of interaction . They received partial course credit for their involvement . The course included 82 reg - istered undergraduate students . This particular course was chosen for the study due to the fact that it was a humanities elective and likely to draw a diverse group of students . Students were provided the option to partici - pate in the experience or an alternative class exercise . Only 2 of the 82 students registered for the course elected to participate in the alternative exercise . Six students were absent for the exercise . The participants included 27 males and 48 females . The facilitator for the fourth group is included for a total of 75 participants in the study . Their average age was 24 . 4 years and spanned from 18 to 56 . They came from a variety of major departments and included some students who had not declared a major . Procedure The exercise occurred within the last third of the semester . Students were given a one - page summary memo the week before the class in which they would actually be asked to generate ideas . They were provided with background , a description of the desired outcome for the work they would do , and an invitation to think about the challenge prior to the next class . The basic question outlined in the memo was , “What can we do about the increasing amount of junk mail ? ” The desired session outcome was described as , “I would like to have a variety of original ideas that help me deal more effectively with my junk mail . ” The specific problem statement used for all the groups was , “How to deal with junk mail ? ” Students reported to class the following week and were randomly assigned a letter corresponding to the group within which they would work . Time was given for each of the students to go to their assigned room , and all groups started and stopped working within a 30 - minute time limit . Observers were assigned to each of the five groups that were not assigned a facilitator . The observers and the facilitators collected data , and a preliminary report of the gross fluency was reported to the class and used for instructional purposes . Later , the ideas were recorded from the flipcharts , forms , and sheets turned in by the participants . Ideas that were duplicated were sub - tracted from the gross number and net fluency was calcu - lated . Results Table 1 shows the net fluency produced from each of the nine groups . The open - discussion group ( Group 1 ) produced more ideas than either of the other two discus - 3 2 0 G I F T E D C H I L D Q U A R T E R L Y • F A L L 2 0 0 5 • V O L 4 9 N O 4 A R E E X A M I N A T I O N O F B R A I N S T O R M I N G R E S E A R C H sion groups that were assigned a quota . The discussion group given the 5 – 7 ideas quota ( Group 2 ) actually pro - duced 7 ideas , and the one given the quota of at least 20 ( Group 3 ) produced 21 , illustrating the importance of the specific instructions given to the group . Consistent with previous research comparing nomi - nal versus real groups , the group asked to follow the brainstorming guidelines but work individually ( Group 6 ) produced more ideas than the real interacting group told to brainstorm as a group ( Group 7 ) . The group instructed to brainstorm on its own ( Group 7 ) also pro - duced fewer ideas than the group instructed to engage in a free discussion ( Group 1 ) . Group 6 , the nominal group brainstorming condition , also outperformed all the dis - cussion groups . The four groups that utilized facilitators produced more ideas than the other five procedures by a ratio of more than 5 : 1 . The group that included both a trained facilitator and a client produced more ideas than the group with only a trained facilitator . The client did not generate ideas , but seemed to have a positive effect on the group . The Mann - Whitney U was computed to compare the facilitated against the nonfacilitated conditions ( Sager & Baron , 1994 ) . This nonparametric version of the two - group unpaired t test was applied given the number of observations within each category . When comparing the ranks between the two groups , significantly more ideas were generated by the facilitated groups ( z = – 2 . 45 ; p < . 02 ) than those following instructions on their own . The two groups using facilitated Brainwriting ( Groups 4 and 5 ) performed better than the facilitated group brainstorming and all other procedures used in the study . The Brainwriting group that used the facilitator to generate ideas , as well as reinforce the brainstorming guidelines , generated more ideas than the Brainwriting group in which the facilitator only reinforced the guide - lines and explained the tool . Table 2 presents the gross fluency produced by each of the individuals in the nominal group brainstorming condi - tion ( Group 6 ) . Looking more deeply into the comparison of the unfacilitated , nominal and real brainstorming groups , no individual generating alone outperformed the real brainstorming group . Further , the only group proce - dure that failed to produce more ideas than any individual wit hin t he nominal g roup was that of the discussion group that was asked to produce only 5 – 7 good ideas , a condition that deliberately introduced judgment . D i s c u s s i o n The results of many previous brainstorming studies have led some researchers to conclude that the use of group brainstorming is less effective than individuals gen - erating ideas alone . The two groups in this study most closely resembling the typical comparison in much of the previous research were the nominal group ( Group 6 ) and brainstorming as a group ( Group 7 ) , without the use of a facilitator . Consistent with previous research , the nomi - nal group outperformed the real interacting group on G I F T E D C H I L D Q U A R T E R L Y • F A L L 2 0 0 5 • V O L 4 9 N O 4 3 2 1 T a b l e 1 Fluency Results Across Groups Gross Redundant Net Group # Method Type n Fluency Ideas Fluency Nonfacilitated Groups : 1 Open discussion 9 29 1 28 2 Generate 5 – 7 ideas 8 7 0 7 3 Generate at least 20 ideas 8 21 0 21 6 Nominal group brainstorming 9 58 27 31 7 Brainstorm as a group 8 25 2 23 Facilitated Groups : 8 Brainstorm as a group with facilitator 8 132 22 110 9 Brainstorm as a group with facilitator and client 8 190 47 143 5 Brainwriting with facilitator 8 193 45 148 4 Brainwriting with facilitator also generating 9 332 64 268 A R E E X A M I N A T I O N O F B R A I N S T O R M I N G R E S E A R C H fluency of ideas . However , no individual generating ideas alone outperformed the real interacting group . Further , the two real brainstorming groups using facilitators gen - erated an average of 126 . 5 nonredundant ideas per group compared to 58 for the nominal group . The two real brainstorming groups using Brainwriting produced an average of 208 nonredundant ideas per group . This rep - resents a 400 – 600 % improvement on fluency , clearly illustrating the impact of having a trained facilitator . Kramer , Fleming , and Mannis ( 2001 ) confirmed this finding . The results of their two experiments demon - strated that real brainstorming groups generate as many ideas as nominal groups , when assisted by a trained facil - itator . Further , they argue for more focus on mechanisms to improve real - group brainstorming because of the numerous benefits derived from interacting groups ( Dugosh , Paulus , Roland , & Yang , 2000 ) . Fleming ( 2000 ) outlined these benefits as including the following : higher levels of coordinated effort in subsequent prob - lem - solving stages ; a clearer and common understanding of ideas generated and chosen for implementation ; par - ticipants feeling more involved , responsible , and com - mitted ; and higher levels of satisfaction with the process . From a practical perspective , this raises a question about the appropriateness of nominal groups being called groups at all . Katzenbach ( 1998 ) indicated that teams are made up of a small number of people with complemen - tary skills who are committed to a common purpose and approach for which they hold themselves mutually accountable . Groups in name only lack most of these qualities . Further , nominal groups may lack the basic requirements , like face - to - face interaction , needed to provide insights about procedures and variables impact - ing real - group process gains . The brainstorming group that was working without the benefit of a facilitator generated 23 nonredundant ideas , compared to an average of 167 . 25 ideas for the four facilitated idea - generation groups . Although , in princi - ple , they were all using a similar real - group procedure , using a facilitator made an impressive 700 % improve - ment . Brainstorming is not likely to have the benefits it was designed to produce without the assistance of a trained facilitator . This exploratory study also reinforced the impor - tance of how instructions are worded and provided to an idea - generating group . The group that was asked for 5 – 7 good ideas generated exactly 7 ideas . Similarly , the group asked to come up with at least 20 good ideas delivered 21 . The group simply instructed to have an open discussion generated 29 . Slight variations in the wording of instruc - tions may have an effect on fluency , particularly for non - facilitated groups . L i m i t a t i o n s Although this study used randomly assigned mem - bership to groups , as well as a common task and time frame , there were a number of limitations in its design and execution . The problem itself , while being somewhat realistic , was not real . The participants were not especially moti - vated to solve the problem . The use of students in this type of study , while convenient , certainly was far less than ideal . In the future , it may be more appropriate to set up a situation using a real problem that engages the partici - pants in a significant way . Using real - life professionals would improve the transferability of the findings to real - world applications . The research design of this study did not allow for multiple groups using a similar approach , and this limits the strict interpretation and generalizability of its find - ings . The statistical analyses were also very limited in sophistication . Facilitators did not follow a prescribed or predetermined procedure , which limited the researchers’ ability to determine precisely what the facilitators did to enhance performance . This study measured only fluency of ideas as the cri - terion for effectiveness . Many researchers have called for additional criteria upon which to assess effectiveness 3 2 2 G I F T E D C H I L D Q U A R T E R L Y • F A L L 2 0 0 5 • V O L 4 9 N O 4 T a b l e 2 Nominal Group Fluency Results Number Participant of Ideas 1 10 2 6 3 1 4 13 5 6 6 3 7 6 8 3 9 10 Total 58 A R E E X A M I N A T I O N O F B R A I N S T O R M I N G R E S E A R C H G I F T E D C H I L D Q U A R T E R L Y • F A L L 2 0 0 5 • V O L 4 9 N O 4 3 2 3 T a b l e 3 Brainstorming Best Practices Issues Osborn’s Original Recommendations Before Brainstorming Prepare the group “The . . . leader should be trained in advance for his function . Ideally he ( the leader ) should have taken a course in creative problem solving . At least , he should have assiduously studied problem - solving” ( p . 172 ) . Define roles and responsibilities ( i . e . , leadership , group members ) . Evaluate candidates for group membership based on the nature of the task , as well as self - starters , a mix of gender , styles , and content expertise . Group size should be between 5 – 7 participants for each facilitator . Invite participants and provide them with role definitions and key background information not less than 2 days before meeting . Include some examples of the type of ideas desired Provide training in the guidelines before the meeting , including a thorough orientation of participants unfamiliar with brainstorming . Provide for individual ideation before the session . Prepare the task “The leader’s first job is to process the problem . . . definition of aim is often half the battle” ( pp . 172 – 173 ) . Provide a clearly focused problem statement ( i . e . , simple and specific , not complex or compound ) . Select tasks that require many , varied , and unusual ideas . Prepare a list of idea stimulating questions . Prepare the environment “The spirit of a brainstorming session is important” ( p . 157 ) . Ensure that , during the session , members have the same rank or level of power . Display and prepare to reinforce the guidelines . Prepare idea - spurring questions . During Brainstorming Dealing with judgment “Criticism is ruled out . Adverse judgment of ideas must be withheld until later” ( p . 156 ) . “Freewheeling is welcomed . The wilder the idea the better ; it is easier to tame down than to think up” ( p . 156 ) . The session should start with an explanation of the task and a short Q & A . Explain guidelines in familiar language , using informal words . Enforce guidelines gently , but firmly . Maintaining group commitment “Combination and improvements are sought . . . participants should suggest how ideas of others can be turned into better ideas” ( p . 156 ) . Leaders should come prepared with ideas to submit during the dry periods . Extend effort by setting challenging quotas . Provide incubation breaks . The session lasts for 30 – 45 minutes . Reward all ideas with receptiveness . A R E E X A M I N A T I O N O F B R A I N S T O R M I N G R E S E A R C H ( Sutton & Hargadon , 1996 ) . Future brainstorming research needs to consider criteria beyond fluency in order to better understand and validate the nature of process gains and to recognize that effectiveness is a mul - tidimensional construct . I m p l i c a t i o n s a n d A p p l i c a t i o n s We have a number of core concerns regarding much of the previous research . First , the comparison of real groups to nominal groups sets up an unnecessary tension between individual and group idea - generating approaches . Osborn’s ( 1953 ) original positioning of brainstorming included time for individual ideation before and after the session . His assertion was that brain - storming should not be seen as a replacement for individ - ual ideation , but should be a supplement to individual effort . A great deal of previous research seems to miss this point . A second major concern relates to the leadership role and responsibilities for managing a brainstorming session . Simply assembling a group and then telling them to brainstorm does not work and is entirely inconsistent with the practices suggested by Osborn . It is clear that the role of a trained group facilitator is central to having a successful brainstorming session . Osborn ( 1953 ) recom - mended that a leader of brainstorming sessions be well versed and trained in creative problem solving . Osborn saw the group leadership role in a brainstorming session as central to its success . Isaksen & Dorval ( 2000 ) outlined the facilitator’s role within creative problem - solving groups as including preparing the group , preparing the task , creating the 3 2 4 G I F T E D C H I L D Q U A R T E R L Y • F A L L 2 0 0 5 • V O L 4 9 N O 4 Enhancing the process structure “Quantity is wanted . The greater the number of ideas , the more the likeli - hood of useful ideas” ( p . 156 ) . Collect individual idea lists before the session starts . Each person makes notes of any ideas that they have until they can offer them . Have a recording secretary ( or two if necessary ) . Have a “warm - up” session , with exercises that practice and reinforce key skills and principles . Tape record the session . After Brainstorming Follow - through “After brainstormers have slept on a problem , they sometimes generate the most valuable of all ideas” ( p . 198 ) . Combination , elaboration , etc . should be used to further develop ideas . Seek to reconsider the silliest ideas , and look for how they might be modified to create the best solution . Ask for afterthoughts—additional individual ideation . Provide feedback and thank you . Evaluation “It is usually wise to have the final evaluation done by those directly responsi - ble for the problem” ( p . 200 ) . Use a separate session dedicated to evaluating ideas ( “Ideas should always be screened and otherwise processed—with a smaller and different group” [ p . 200 ] ) . Practical ( e . g . , pilot ) testing is a most desirable method of verification . Implementation “It is for want of imagination in their application , rather than in their means of acquisition , that they ( creative ideas ) fail . The creative process does not end with an idea—it only starts with an idea” ( p . 197 ) . It takes 4 tons of ore to get 1 oz . of gold . Note . The page references in this table are all from Osborn ( 1963 ) . T a b l e 3 c o n t i n u e d environment , and facilitating process . Preparing the group involves ensuring that the participants are well aware of the task before they meet and that they are well versed in the brainstorming guidelines . Preparing the task means ensuring that it is well defined , that the expected outcomes are clear , and that the task is set up for ideation . Creating the environment involves establishing and maintaining a climate or patterns of behavior con - ducive to creative production . Finally , the facilitating process includes using generating and focusing tools appropriately , based on the observed quality of the inter - action and the content of the ideation . By and large , a majority of the brainstorming research appears to ignore the importance of this facilitative leadership role . A third concern is that brainstorming has been treated as an isolated event , rather than as a part of a larger process . As a group procedure , brainstorming was designed to be supplemented by individual ideation ( before and after the group session ) and by the use of a variety of other tools designed to enhance idea generation ( i . e . , idea - spurring questions , incubation ) . Brainstorming was introduced as one idea - generating tool within the entire creative problem - solving process . Although much of the brainstorming research pro - vides reinforcement of the barriers to group productivity , those authors who conclude that brainstorming has , at best , limited efficacy , have failed to appreciate the full scope of Osborn’s ( 1953 ) proposition . Further , our expe - rience and reading underscores the ubiquitous use of brainstorming in the real world ( i . e . , in nonlaboratory settings , amongst adult professionals , for the purpose of addressing real tasks ) ( Kerr & Tindale , 2004 ) . For those who have an interest in teaching brain - storming and in preparing students or colleagues to apply this group idea - generating tool , the following table out - lines what Osborn ( 1953 ) described as best practice . As Table 3 illustrates , Osborn provided detailed suggestions for best practice before , during , and after a brainstorming session . On the basis of this review of research , the exploratory study reported in this article , a review of Osborn’s seminal work , and our own experience in applying brainstorming , we offer the following sugges - tions : 1 . Put brainstorming in perspective . Brainstorming is only one part of a larger creative process . It is a good tool for groups of students who need to generate many , varied , and unique ideas . While there is an appropriate time for brainstorming , there is also a need for other complemen - tary thinking processes and tools for analysis , judgment , and development of ideas . Since advertisers developed the term brainstorming , it is no surprise that it has found its way into broad , everyday use . The downside is that it has been used to describe everything from a heated debate to a group discussion , or even an excuse to dump work on someone else . The abuse of the term brainstorming has led to a general misunderstanding of its purpose and most effective use . 2 . Be prepared . The success of the brainstorming effort depends on the effective execution of the group leader’s role before , during , and after the session . Central to this is the responsibility to prepare the group , the task , and the environment for maximum productivity . The teacher , trainer , or facilitator must have an adequate level of train - ing , background , and experience in brainstorming and creative problem solving . Those teaching or training brain - storming should be aware that the impact of applying this tool is maximized by taking the necessary time to prepare in advance . Spontaneous brainstorming sessions may not yield as powerful an impact . 3 . Have a robust tool kit . It is important that people have more than one tool in their tool kit . Brainstorming is best learned and applied in conjunction with other idea - gen - erating tools and techniques . Further , a more complete creative process involves both critical and creative think - ing , thus requiring the inclusion of critical thinking tools and techniques . Teachers should be aware that brain - storming is not the only tool available for idea generation and should expose their students in learning and applying a variety of thinking and problem - solving tools . 4 . There is no substitute for experience . The best teachers and / or practitioners of brainstorming have extensive experience actually using the tool . This experience helps the user know when and how to apply brainstorming . These experiences have value when they are applied and debriefed for both out - of - context or warm - up tasks ( i . e . , uses for a brick ) and real problems . Experience provides a deeper and more meaningful understanding of best - prac - tice brainstorming . Teachers can apply brainstorming to a number of professional activities like curriculum plan - ning , school administration , planning special events , etc . , in order to acquire this experience . They can also take time to debrief the application of the tool with their stu - dents to encourage experiential learning . 5 . Reinforce both individual and group ideation . Osborn G I F T E D C H I L D Q U A R T E R L Y • F A L L 2 0 0 5 • V O L 4 9 N O 4 3 2 5 A R E E X A M I N A T I O N O F B R A I N S T O R M I N G R E S E A R C H A R E E X A M I N A T I O N O F B R A I N S T O R M I N G R E S E A R C H designed brainstorming to supplement individual ideation . He realized that there were many more sophis - ticated challenges facing real groups when they had to engage in ideation . Teachers , trainers , and facilitators need to provide adequate support and reinforcement for individual incubation and ideation , as well as creative col - laboration by groups . It is important when planning any brainstorming session to allow time for individual ideation before or after its real - group application . 6 . Emphasize benefits beyond fluency . For those teaching gifted students , the benefits of brainstorming go well beyond generating ideas . Brainstorming can result in improved coordination , better understanding of the ideas generated , and faster implementation of those ideas . In addition , individuals learn the importance of a climate conducive to creativity , the value of diverse thinking and problem - solving styles , and that creative thinking is enjoyable and powerful . The purpose of this article was to examine the empirical brainstorming research , provide the results of an original exploratory study , and to outline implications and applications for effective brainstorming . Rather than throwing the baby out with the bathwater , we believe that the research can provide valuable insights for those who conduct future brainstorming research , as well as those interested in helping others learn and apply this valuable tool . R e f e r e n c e s Basadur , M . , & Thompson , R . ( 1986 ) . Usefulness of the ideation principle of extended effort in real world profes - sional and managerial creative problem solving . Journal of Creative Behavior , 20 , 23 – 34 . Benbasat , I . , & Lim , L . H . ( 1993 ) . The effects of group , task , context , and technology variables on the usefulness of group support systems : A meta - analysis of experimental studies . Small Group Research , 24 , 430 – 462 . Bouchard , T . J . , Jr . ( 1972 ) . Training , motivation , and personal - ity as determinants of the effectiveness of brainstorming groups and individuals . Journal of Applied Psychology , 56 , 324 – 331 . Bouchard , T . J . , Jr . , Barsaloux , J . , & Drauden , G . ( 1974 ) . Brainstorming procedure , group size , and sex as determi - nants of the problem - solving effectiveness of groups and individuals . Journal of Applied Psychology , 59 , 135 – 138 . Bouchard , T . J . , Jr . , & Hare , M . ( 1970 ) . Size , performance , and potential in brainstorming groups . Journal of Applied Psychology , 54 , 51 – 55 . Brown , V . R . , & Paulus , P . B . ( 2002 ) . Making group brain - storming more effective : Recommendations from an asso - ciative memory perspective . Current Directions in Psychological Science . 11 , 208 – 212 . Bui , T . , & Sivasankaran , T . R . ( 1990 ) . Relation between GDSS use and group task complexity . Proceedings of the Twenty - Third Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences , 3 , 69 – 78 . Camacho , L . M . , & Paulus , P . B . ( 1995 ) . The role of social anx - iousness in group brainstorming . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 68 , 1071 – 1080 . Clawson , V . K . , Bostrom , R . P . , & Anson , R . ( 1993 ) . The role of the facilitator in computer - supported meetings . Small Group Research , 24 , 547 – 565 . Cohen , D . , Whitmyre , J . W . , & Funk , W . H . ( 1960 ) . Effect of group cohesiveness and training upon creative thinking . Journal of Applied Psychology , 44 , 319 – 322 . Connolly , T . , Jessup , L . M . , & Valacich , J . S . ( 1990 ) . Effects of anonymity and evaluative tone on idea generation in com - puter - mediated groups . Management Science , 36 , 689 – 703 . Cooper , W . H . , Gallupe , R . B . , Pollard , S . , & Cadsby , J . ( 1998 ) . Some liberating effects of anonymous electronic brain - storming . Small Group Research , 29 , 147 – 178 . Costa , A . L . ( Ed . ) . ( 2001 ) . Developing minds : A resource book for teaching thinking . Alexandria , VA : Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development . Daly , B . ( 1993 ) . The influence of face - to - face versus computer - mediated communication channels on collective induc - tion . Accounting , Management & Information Technology , 3 , 1 – 22 . Davis , J . H . ( 1969 ) . Group performance . Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley . Dennis , A . R . , Valacich , J . S . , Connolly , T . , & Wynne , B . E . ( 1996 ) . Process structuring in electronic brainstorming . Information Systems Research , 7 , 268 – 277 . Dennis , A . R . , Valacich , J . S . , & Nunamaker , J . H . , Jr . ( 1990 ) . An experimental investigation of the effects of group size in an electronic meeting environment . IEEE Transactions on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics , 25 , 1049 – 1057 . Diehl , M . , & Stroebe , W . ( 1987 ) . Productivity loss in brain - storming groups : Toward the solution of a riddle . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 53 , 497 – 509 . Diehl , M . , & Stroebe , W . ( 1991 ) . Productivity loss in idea - gen - erating groups : Tracking down the blocking effect . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 61 , 392 – 403 . Dugosh , L . K . , Paulus , P . B . , Roland , E . J . , & Yang , H . C . ( 2000 ) . Cognitive stimulation in brainstorming . Journal of Personal Social Psychology , 79 , 722 – 732 . Dunnette , M . D . , Campbell , J . , & Jaastad , K . ( 1963 ) . The effect of group participation on brainstorming effectiveness for two industrial samples . Journal of Applied Psychology , 47 , 30 – 37 . Eveland , J . D . , & Bikson , T . K . ( 1989 ) . Work group structures and computer support : A field experiment . ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems , 6 , 354 – 379 . 3 2 6 G I F T E D C H I L D Q U A R T E R L Y • F A L L 2 0 0 5 • V O L 4 9 N O 4 A R E E X A M I N A T I O N O F B R A I N S T O R M I N G R E S E A R C H Feldhusen , J . F . , & Treffinger , D . J . ( 1985 ) . Creative thinking and problem solving in gifted education . Dubuque , IA ; Kendall / Hunt . Finholt , T . , Sproull , L . , & Kiesler , S . ( 1990 ) . Communication and performance in ad hoc groups . In J . Galegher , R . Kraut , & C . Egido ( Eds . ) , Intellectual teamwork : Social and technological foundations of cooperative work ( pp . 291 – 325 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Firestien , R . L . , & McCowan , R . ( 1988 ) . Creative problem solving and communication behavior in small groups . Creativity Research Journal , 1 , 106 – 114 . Fleming , G . P . ( 2000 ) . The effects of brainstorming on subsequent problem solving . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , Graduate School of St . Louis University , Ann Arbor , MI . Ford , C . M . ( 1999 ) . Thinking big about small groups in the real world : Comment on Craig and Kelly . Group Dynamics : Theory , Research , and Practice , 3 , 257 – 262 . Forsyth , D . F . ( 2000 ) . One hundred years of group research : Introduction to the special issue . Group Dynamics : Theory , Research , and Practice , 4 , 3 – 6 . Gallupe , R . B . , Bastianutti , L . M . , & Cooper , W . H . ( 1991 ) . Unblocking brainstorms . Journal of Applied Psychology , 76 , 137 – 142 . Gerlach , V . S . , Schutz , R . E . , Baker , R . L . , & Mazer , G . E . ( 1964 ) . Effects of variations in test directions on originality test response . Journal of Educational Psychology , 55 , 79 – 83 . Geschka , H . , Schaude , G . R . , & Schlicksupp , H . ( 1975 ) . Modern techniques for solving problems . In M . M . Baldwin ( Ed . ) , Portraits of complexity : Applications of systems methodologies to societal problems ( pp . 1 – 7 ) . Columbus , OH : Battelle Memorial Institute . Gowan , J . C . , Khatena , J . , & Torrance , E . P . ( Eds . ) . ( 1979 ) . Educating the ablest : A book of readings . New York : F . E . Peacock Publishers . Gryskiewicz , S . S . ( 1980 ) . A study of creative problem solving tech - niques in group settings . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , University of London , London . Hackman , J . R . ( 1987 ) . The design of work teams . In J . W . Lorsch ( Ed . ) , Handbook of organizational psychology ( pp . 315 – 342 ) . New York : Prentice Hall . Hare , A . P . ( Ed . ) . ( 1976 ) . Handbook of small group research ( 2nd ed . ) . New York : The Free Press . Harkins , S . G . , Latané , B . , & Williams , K . ( 1980 ) . Social loaf - ing : Allocating effort or taking it easy ? Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 16 , 457 – 465 . Henningsen , D . D . , Cruz , M . G . , & Miller , M . L . ( 2000 ) . Role of social loafing in predeliberation decision making . Group Dynamics : Theory , Research , and Practice , 4 , 168 – 175 . Hollingshead , A . B . , & McGrath , J . E . ( 1995 ) . Computer - assisted groups : A critical review of the empirical literature . In R . A . Guzzo , E . Salas , & Associates ( Eds . ) , Team effective - ness and decision making in organizations ( pp . 46 – 78 ) . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass . Isaksen , S . G . ( 1983 ) . Toward a model for the facilitation of cre - ative problem solving . Journal of Creative Behavior , 17 , 18 – 30 . Isaksen , S . G . , & Dorval , K . B . ( 2000 ) . Facilitating creative problem solving . In S . G . Isaksen ( Ed . ) , Facilitative leader - ship : Making a difference with creative problem solving ( pp . 187 – 249 ) . Dubuque , IA : Kendall / Hunt . Isaksen , S . G . , Dorval , K . B . , & Treffinger , D . J . ( 1998 ) . Toolbox for creative problem solving : Basic tools and resources . Buffalo , NY : Creative Problem Solving Group—Buffalo . Isaksen , S . G . , Dorval , K . B . , & Treffinger , D . J . ( 2000 ) . Creative approaches to problem solving : A framework for change . Dubuque , IA : Kendall / Hunt . Jablin , F . M . , & Seibold , D . R . ( 1978 ) . Implications for prob - lem solving groups of empirical research on “brainstorm - ing” : A critical review of the literature . Southern Speech Communications Journal , 43 , 327 – 356 . Jackson , J . M . , & Williams , K . D . ( 1985 ) . Social loafing on dif - ficult tasks : Working collectively can improve perform - ance . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 49 , 937 – 942 . Karau , S . J . , & Williams , K . D . ( 1993 ) . Social loafing : A meta - analytic review and theoretical integration , Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 65 , 681 – 706 . Katzenbach , J . R . ( 1998 ) . Teams at the top : Unleashing the potential of both teams and individual leader . Boston : Harvard Business School Press . Kerr , N . L . , & Bruun , S . E . ( 1983 ) . Dispensability of member effort and group motivation losses : Free - rider effects . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 44 , 78 – 94 . Kerr , N . L . , & Tindale , R . S . ( 2004 ) . Group Performance and Decision Making . Annual Reviews Psychology , 55 , 623 – 655 . Kramer , T . J . , Fleming , G . P . , & Mannis , S . M . ( 2001 ) . Improving face - to - face brainstorming through modeling and facilitation . Small Group Research , 32 , 533 – 557 . Lamm , J . , & Trommsdorff , G . ( 1973 ) . Group versus individual performance on tasks requiring ideational proficiency ( brainstorming ) : A review . European Journal of Social Psychology , 3 , 361 – 388 . Latané , B . , Williams , K . , & Harkins , S . ( 1979 ) . Many hands make light work : The causes and consequences of social loafing . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 37 , 822 – 832 . Maginn , B . K . , & Harris , R . J . ( 1980 ) . Effects of anticipated evaluation on individual brainstorming performance . Journal of Applied Psychology , 65 , 219 – 225 . McCall , M . W . , & Bobko , P . ( 1990 ) . Research methods in the service of discovery . In M . D . Dunnette & L . M . Hough ( Eds . ) , Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology ( 2nd ed . , pp . 381 – 418 ) . Palo Alto , CA : Consulting Psychologists Press . G I F T E D C H I L D Q U A R T E R L Y • F A L L 2 0 0 5 • V O L 4 9 N O 4 3 2 7 A R E E X A M I N A T I O N O F B R A I N S T O R M I N G R E S E A R C H McGrane , P . A . , & Sternberg , R . J . ( 1992 ) . Discussion : Fatal vision—The failure of the schools in teaching children to think . In C . Collins & J . N . Mangieri ( Eds . ) , Teaching thinking : An agenda for the 21st century ( pp . 333 – 344 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Meadow , A . , & Parnes , S . J . ( 1959 ) . Evaluation of training in creative problem solving . Journal of Applied Psychology , 43 , 189 – 194 . Meadow , A . , Parnes , S . J . , & Reese , H . ( 1959 ) . Influences of brainstorming instructions and problem sequence on a cre - ative problem solving test . Journal of Applied Psychology , 43 , 413 – 416 . Mullen , B . , Johnson , C . , & Salas , E . ( 1991 ) . Productivity loss in brainstorming groups : A meta - analytic integration . Basic and Applied Psychology , 12 , 3 – 23 . Mulvey , P . W . , Bowes - Sperry , L . , & Klein , H . J . ( 1998 ) . The effects of perceived loafing and defensive management on group effectiveness . Small Group Research , 29 , 394 – 415 . Mulvey , P . W . , & Klein , H . J . ( 1998 ) . The impact of perceived loafing and collective efficacy on group goal processes and group performance . Organizational behavior and human deci - sion processes , 74 , 62 – 87 . Nickerson , R . S . ( 1999 ) . Enhancing creativity . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of creativity ( pp . 392 – 430 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Nunamaker , J . F . , Applegate , L . M . , & Konsynski , B . R . ( 1987 ) . Facilitating group creativity : Experience with a group decision support system . Journal of Management Information Systems , 3 , 5 – 19 . Nunamaker , J . F . , Briggs , R . O . , Mittleman , D . D . , Vogel , D . R . , & Balthazard , P . A . ( 1997 ) . Lessons from a dozen years of group support systems research : A discussion of lab and field findings . Journal of Management Information Systems , 13 , 163 – 207 . Offner , A . K . , Kramer , T . J . , & Winter , J . P . ( 1996 ) . The effects of facilitation , recording , and pauses on group brainstorm - ing . Small Group Research , 27 , 283 – 298 . Orbell , J . , & Dawes , R . ( 1981 ) . Social dilemmas . In G . Stephenson & H . H . Davis ( Eds . ) , Progress in applied social psychology ( Vol . 1 , pp . 37 – 65 ) . New York : Wiley . Osborn , A . F . ( 1953 ) . Applied imagination : Principles and procedures of creative thinking . New York : Charles Scribner’s Sons . Osborn , A . F . ( 1963 ) . Applied imagination : Principles and procedures of creative problem solving ( 3rd Rev . ed . ) . New York : Charles Scribner’s Sons . Oxley , N . L . , Dzindolet , M . T . , & Paulus , P . B . ( 1996 ) . The effects of facilitators on the performance of brainstorming groups . Journal of Social Behavior and Personality , 11 , 633 – 646 . Parloff , M . B . , & Handlon , J . H . ( 1964 ) . The influence of crit - icalness on creative problem solving in dyads . Psychiatry , 52 , 117 – 122 . Parnes , S . J . ( 1961 ) . Effects of extended effort in creative prob - lem solving . Journal of Educational Psychology , 52 , 117 – 122 . Parnes , S . J . , Noller , R . B . , & Biondi , A . M . ( 1977 ) . Guide to cre - ative action . New York : Scribners . Paulus , P . B . ( 1983 ) . Group influences on individual task per - formance . In P . B . Paulus ( Ed . ) , Basic group processes ( pp . 97 – 120 ) . New York : Springer - Verlag . Paulus , P . B . , Brown , V . , & Ortega , A . H . ( 1999 ) . Group cre - ativity . In R . E . Purser & A . Montuori ( Eds . ) , Social creativ - ity in organizations ( Vol . 2 , pp . 151 – 176 ) . Cresskill , NJ : Hampton Press . Paulus , P . B . , & Dzindolet , M . T . ( 1993 ) . Social influence processes in group brainstorming . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 64 , 575 – 586 . Pfeiffer , S . I . ( 2003 ) . Challenges and opportunities for students who are gifted : What the experts say . Gifted Child Quarterly , 47 , 161 – 169 . Price , K . H . ( 1985 ) . Problem - solving strategies : A comparison by problem - solving phases . Group & Organization Studies , 10 , 278 – 299 . Putnam , L . L . , & Stohl , C . ( 1990 ) . Bona fide groups : A recon - ceptualization of groups in context . Communication Studies , 41 , 248 – 265 . Putnam , L . L . , & Stohl , C . ( 1996 ) . Bona fide groups . In R . Y . Hirokawa & M . S . Poole ( Eds . ) , Communication and group decision making ( 2nd ed . , pp . 147 – 178 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : SAGE Publications . Rickards , T . ( 1999 ) . Brainstorming . In M . A . Runco & S . R . Pritzker ( Eds . ) , Encyclopedia of creativity ( pp . 219 – 227 ) . New York : Academic Press . Ruback , R . B . , Dabbs , J . M . , & Hopper , C . H . ( 1984 ) . The process of brainstorming : An analysis with individual and group vocal parameters . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 47 , 558 – 567 . Sager , S . , & Baron , C . ( 1994 ) . Statview for the Macintosh ( 2nd ed . ) . Berkeley , CA : Abacus Concepts . Seta , J . J . , Seta , C . E . , & Donaldson , S . ( 1991 ) . The impact of comparison processes on coactors’ frustration and willing - ness to expend effort . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 17 , 560 – 568 . Shepperd , J . A . ( 1993 ) . Productivity loss in performance groups : A motivation analysis . Psychological Bulletin , 113 , 67 – 81 . Smith , B . L . ( 1993 ) . Interpersonal behaviors that damage the productivity of creative problem - solving groups . Journal of Creative Behavior , 27 , 171 – 187 . Sundstrom , E . , McIntyre , M . , Halfhill , T . , & Richards , H . ( 2000 ) . Work groups : From the Hawthorne studies to work teams of the 1990s and beyond . Group Dynamics : Theory , Research , and Practice , 4 , 44 – 67 . Sutton , R . I . , & Hargadon , A . ( 1996 ) . Brainstorming in con - text : Effectiveness in a product design firm . Administrative Science Quarterly , 41 , 685 – 718 . Taylor , D . W . , Berry , P . C . , & Block , C . H . ( 1958 ) . Does group participation when using brainstorming facilitate or inhibit creative thinking ? Administrative Science Quarterly , 6 , 22 – 47 . Thompson , L . F . , & Coovert , M . D . ( 2002 ) . Stepping up to the challenge : A critical examination of face - to - face and com - 3 2 8 G I F T E D C H I L D Q U A R T E R L Y • F A L L 2 0 0 5 • V O L 4 9 N O 4 A R E E X A M I N A T I O N O F B R A I N S T O R M I N G R E S E A R C H puter - mediated team decision making . Group Dynamics : Theory , Research , and Practice , 6 , 55 – 64 . Vroom , V . H . , Grant , L . D . , & Cotton , T . S . ( 1969 ) . The con - sequences of social interaction in group problem solving . Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 4 , 77 – 95 . Watson , W . , Michaelsen , L . K . , & Sharp , W . ( 1991 ) . Member competence , group interaction , and group decision mak - ing : A longitudinal study . Journal of Applied Psychology , 76 , 803 – 809 . Weisband , S . P . ( 1992 ) . Group discussion and first advocacy effects in computer - mediated and face - to - face decision making groups . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 53 , 352 – 380 . Weisskopf - Joelson , E . , & Eliseo , T . S . ( 1961 ) . An experimental study of the effectiveness of brainstorming . Journal of Applied Psychology , 45 , 45 – 49 . Wheeler , J . W . ( 1995 ) . An exploratory study of preferences associated with creative problem solving . Unpublished master’s project , Center for Studies in Creativity , State University of New York , College at Buffalo . Zagona , S . V . , Willis , J . E . , & MacKinnon , W . J . ( 1966 ) . Group effectiveness in creative problem - solving tasks : An exami - nation of relevant variables . The Journal of Psychology , 62 , 111 – 137 . Zalesny , M . D . , & Ford , J . K . ( 1990 ) . Extending the social information processing perspective : New links to attitudes , behaviors , and perceptions . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 47 , 205 – 246 . Zigurs , I . , & Dickson , G . ( 1990 ) . Computer support for decision - making teams : The issue of outcome quality . Faculty Working Paper Series , College of Business and Administration , University of Colorado , Boulder . A u t h o r N o t e The authors would like to thank Stanley S . Gryskiewicz , Sidney J . Parnes , Morris I . Stein , and Donald J . Treffinger for helpful comments on earlier drafts of this article . Also , many thanks are due to Eileen Beaton Colling and Matt Walters who provided technical assistance on this project . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to S . G . Isaksen , Creativity Research Unit , CPSB , P . O . Box 648 , 6 Grand View Trail , Orchard Park , NY 14217 . Web site : http : / / www . cpsb . com G I F T E D C H I L D Q U A R T E R L Y • F A L L 2 0 0 5 • V O L 4 9 N O 4 3 2 9 (cid:69)(cid:120)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:108)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:115) (cid:55)(cid:105) (cid:45)(cid:105)(cid:204) (cid:204)(cid:133)(cid:105) (cid:45)(cid:204)(cid:62)(cid:152)(cid:96)(cid:62)(cid:192)(cid:96)(cid:195)(cid:116) (cid:28)(cid:135)(cid:163)(cid:211) (cid:193) (cid:45) (cid:204) (cid:62) (cid:152) (cid:96) (cid:62) (cid:192) (cid:96) (cid:195) (cid:113) (cid:9) (cid:62) (cid:195) (cid:105) (cid:96) (cid:1) (cid:195) (cid:195) (cid:105) (cid:195) (cid:195) (cid:147) (cid:105) (cid:152) (cid:204) (cid:179) (cid:22) (cid:152) (cid:195) (cid:204) (cid:192) (cid:213) (cid:86) (cid:204) (cid:136) (cid:156) (cid:152) (cid:13)(cid:221)(cid:105)(cid:147)(cid:171)(cid:143)(cid:62)(cid:192)(cid:195) (cid:31)(cid:62)(cid:204)(cid:133) (cid:47) (cid:62)(cid:195)(cid:142)(cid:195) (cid:19)(cid:105)(cid:62)(cid:204)(cid:213)(cid:192) (cid:105) (cid:85) (cid:12)(cid:136)(cid:118) (cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:192) (cid:105)(cid:152)(cid:204)(cid:136)(cid:62)(cid:204)(cid:105)(cid:96) (cid:171)(cid:105)(cid:192)(cid:118)(cid:156)(cid:192)(cid:147)(cid:62)(cid:152)(cid:86)(cid:105) (cid:204)(cid:62)(cid:195)(cid:142)(cid:195) (cid:62)(cid:204) (cid:204)(cid:133)(cid:192) (cid:105)(cid:105) (cid:143)(cid:105)(cid:219)(cid:105)(cid:143)(cid:195) (cid:85) (cid:47) (cid:105)(cid:62)(cid:86)(cid:133)(cid:105)(cid:192) (cid:152)(cid:156)(cid:204)(cid:105)(cid:195) (cid:118)(cid:156)(cid:192) (cid:62)(cid:195)(cid:195)(cid:105)(cid:195)(cid:195)(cid:147)(cid:105)(cid:152)(cid:204) (cid:62)(cid:152)(cid:96) (cid:136)(cid:152)(cid:195)(cid:204)(cid:192)(cid:213)(cid:86)(cid:204)(cid:136)(cid:156)(cid:152) (cid:85) (cid:45)(cid:204)(cid:62)(cid:152)(cid:96)(cid:62)(cid:192) (cid:96)(cid:195)(cid:113)(cid:76)(cid:62)(cid:195)(cid:105)(cid:96) (cid:195)(cid:86)(cid:156)(cid:192)(cid:136)(cid:152)(cid:125) (cid:192)(cid:213)(cid:76)(cid:192)(cid:136)(cid:86)(cid:195) (cid:85) (cid:1)(cid:152)(cid:152)(cid:156)(cid:204)(cid:62)(cid:204)(cid:105)(cid:96) (cid:76)(cid:105)(cid:152)(cid:86)(cid:133)(cid:147)(cid:62)(cid:192)(cid:142) (cid:171)(cid:62)(cid:171)(cid:105)(cid:192)(cid:195) (cid:85) (cid:10)(cid:143)(cid:62)(cid:195)(cid:195)(cid:192) (cid:156)(cid:156)(cid:147)(cid:113)(cid:204)(cid:105)(cid:195)(cid:204)(cid:105)(cid:96) (cid:147)(cid:62)(cid:204)(cid:105)(cid:192)(cid:136)(cid:62)(cid:143) (cid:85) (cid:1) (cid:86)(cid:156)(cid:195)(cid:204)(cid:113)(cid:105)(cid:118) (cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:86)(cid:204)(cid:136)(cid:219)(cid:105) (cid:86)(cid:156)(cid:195)(cid:204)(cid:113)(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:86)(cid:204)(cid:136)(cid:219)(cid:105) (cid:195)(cid:156)(cid:143)(cid:213)(cid:204)(cid:136)(cid:156)(cid:152) (cid:20)(cid:105)(cid:204) (cid:31)(cid:156)(cid:192)(cid:105) (cid:54)(cid:62)(cid:143)(cid:213)(cid:105) (cid:136)(cid:152) (cid:62) (cid:45)(cid:136)(cid:152)(cid:125)(cid:143)(cid:105) (cid:45)(cid:213)(cid:76)(cid:195)(cid:86)(cid:192)(cid:136)(cid:171)(cid:204)(cid:136)(cid:156)(cid:152) (cid:20)(cid:105)(cid:204) (cid:31)(cid:156)(cid:192)(cid:105) (cid:54)(cid:62)(cid:143)(cid:213)(cid:105) (cid:136)(cid:152) (cid:62) (cid:45)(cid:136)(cid:152)(cid:125)(cid:143)(cid:105) (cid:45)(cid:213)(cid:76)(cid:195)(cid:86)(cid:192)(cid:136)(cid:171)(cid:204)(cid:136)(cid:156)(cid:152) (cid:31)(cid:62)(cid:204)(cid:133) (cid:42)(cid:192)(cid:156)(cid:118)(cid:105)(cid:195)(cid:195)(cid:136)(cid:156)(cid:152)(cid:62)(cid:143) (cid:12)(cid:105)(cid:219)(cid:105)(cid:143)(cid:156)(cid:171)(cid:147)(cid:105)(cid:152)(cid:204) (cid:220)(cid:220)(cid:220)(cid:176)(cid:105)(cid:221)(cid:105)(cid:147)(cid:171)(cid:143)(cid:62)(cid:192)(cid:195)(cid:176)(cid:86)(cid:156)(cid:147)(cid:220)(cid:220)(cid:220)(cid:176)(cid:105)(cid:221)(cid:105)(cid:147)(cid:171)(cid:143)(cid:62)(cid:192)(cid:195)(cid:176)(cid:86)(cid:156)(cid:147) (cid:110)(cid:228)(cid:228)(cid:113)(cid:123)(cid:120)(cid:228)(cid:113)(cid:123)(cid:228)(cid:120)(cid:228)(cid:110)(cid:228)(cid:228)(cid:113)(cid:123)(cid:120)(cid:228)(cid:113)(cid:123)(cid:228)(cid:120)(cid:228) (cid:1)(cid:143)(cid:136)(cid:125)(cid:152)(cid:105)(cid:96) (cid:204)(cid:156) (cid:45)(cid:204)(cid:62)(cid:204)(cid:105) (cid:45)(cid:204)(cid:62)(cid:152)(cid:96)(cid:62)(cid:192)(cid:96)(cid:195)