Mapping molecular complexes with Super - Resolution Microscopy and Single - Particle Analysis Afonso Mendes 1 , * , Hannah S . Heil 1 , * , Simao Coelho 1 , Christophe Leterrier 2 , and Ricardo Henriques 1 , 3 , 1 Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência , Oeiras , Portugal 2 Aix Marseille Université , CNSR , INP UMR7051 , NeuroCyto , Marseille , France 3 MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology , University College London , London , United Kingdom * These authors contributed equally Understanding the structure of supramolecular complexes pro - vides insight into their functional capabilities and how they can be modulated in the context of disease . Super - resolution mi - croscopy ( SRM ) excels in performing this task by resolving ul - trastructural details at the nanoscale with molecular speciﬁcity . However , technical limitations , such as underlabelling , preclude its ability to provide complete structures . Single - particle anal - ysis ( SPA ) overcomes this limitation by combining information from multiple images of identical structures and producing an averaged model , effectively enhancing the resolution and cov - erage of image reconstructions . This review highlights impor - tant studies using SRM - SPA , demonstrating how it broadens our knowledge by elucidating features of key biological struc - tures with unprecedented detail . structural biology | super - resolution microscopy | single - particle analysis Correspondence : rjhenriques @ igc . gulbenkian . pt Introduction Organized assemblies containing several copies of one or more molecular entities are a hallmark of the living world and their existence underlies every biological process . Study - ing their structure and assembly dynamics is crucial to un - derstanding their formation , function , and resulting activity . Typically , these structural assemblies are characterised by speciﬁc molecular interactions , recruitment , conformational changes , and catalysis of subsequent reactions . These com - plex supramolecular constructs range from cellular compo - nents to viruses and display structural redundancy across dif - ferent levels of complexity ( Fig . 1a ) . For example , the Hu - man Immunodeﬁciency Virus type 1 ( HIV - 1 ) capsid , which houses and directs the intracellular trafﬁcking of the vi - ral genome towards the nucleus during infection ( 1 ) , is a ~ 40 MDa supramolecular complex containing at least 1500 copies of the HIV - 1 capsid protein ( CA ) ( 2 ) . Notably , its for - mation involves assembling the CA monomers into approx - imately 12 pentameric and 250 hexameric complexes and their subsequent congregation to form a ﬁnal and more com - plex structure ( 3 , 4 ) ( Fig . 1b ) . Among the experimental tools to study biological structures , microscopy stands out by allowing their direct observation . In particular , ﬂuorescence microscopy allows observations with molecular speciﬁcity . The spatial resolution achiev - Fig . 1 . Assembly of supramolecular complexes . ( a ) Supramolecular complexes such as clathrin - coated pits , the nuclear pore complex ( NPC ) , the Herpes simplex virus type 1 ( HSV - 1 ) , the centriole and the Vaccinia virus ( VACV ) comprise highly ordered structures across a size range of several hundred nanometers . ( b ) Struc - tural redundancy occurs at different scales within the same biological assembly . For example , the Human Immunodeﬁciency Virus type 1 ( HIV - 1 ) capsid is composed of at least 1500 copies of the HIV - 1 capsid protein ( CA ) ( 2 ) , which assemble into approximately 250 hexameric CA complexes before congregating to form the fully - assembled capsid ( 3 , 4 ) . ( c ) Supramolecular complexes can be mapped by com - bining SRM with SPA . For this , several image sections containing super - resolved views of single particles are chosen . A ﬁltering step removes non - matching objects based on predeﬁned criteria . The remaining image sections are aligned and an av - eraged view of the object’s architecture is generated , which is then used to infer a model of the supramolecular structure . ( NPC and HIV - 1 CA structures were created using Mol * ( 6 ) ; PDB IDs : 7N9F ( NPC ) , 2M8N ( CA monomer ) , 6OBH ( CA hexamer ) , and 3J3Y ( HIV - 1 capsid ) ) . able with conventional light - based microscopy is limited to approximately half of the wavelength ( ~ 200 nm ) ( 5 ) . Elec - tron microscopy ( EM ) can resolve structures well below the diffraction limit but provides limited information on the iden - tity of molecular components and the precise location of a substantial population of molecules within very small com - plexes . The advent of super - resolution microscopy ( SRM ) has enabled nano - sized structures to be resolved while re - taining the molecular contrast provided by molecule - speciﬁc ﬂuorescent labelling . Despite the potential of SRM to resolve small molecular structures , factors such as low labelling densities and local - Mendes & Heil et al . | ar ‰ iv | February 17 , 2022 | 1 – 12 isation uncertainty hinder its ability to map supramolecular complexes with high precision and generate complete mod - els . Single - Particle Analysis ( SPA ) , sometimes called " parti - cle averaging " , is an analytical method that combines infor - mation from several views of a structure of interest , termed particle , and produces an averaged model ( Fig . 1c ) . It was ﬁrst developed in the ﬁeld of cryo - EM ( 7 – 10 ) but has recently been applied successfully in SRM . Despite fundamental dif - ferences between EM and SRM , SPA can overcome impor - tant SRM limitations , such as under - labelling due to stochas - tic ﬂuorophore excitation . SPA is primarily used to map bi - ological structures by generating image reconstructions with a higher signal - to - noise ratio ( SNR ) than the original images used . Here , we provide an overview of SPA applications in SRM , discuss current limitations , and consider future develop - ments . SPA overcomes critical SMLM limitations Current SRM technologies can be classiﬁed into two broad categories based on the principle underlying their ability to achieve sub - diffraction resolutions . One type includes methods that modulate the light’s path by exploring dif - ferent illumination schemes , such as Structured Illumina - tion Microscopy ( SIM ) ( 11 ) and Stimulated Emission De - pletion ( STED ) microscopy ( 12 ) . The second category includes modalities that exploit the intrinsic properties of ﬂuorophores , namely the ability to control their stochas - tic " on / off " switching ( i . e . , " blinking " ) and their excita - tion / emission spectra ( i . e . , photoconversion ) . This last cat - egory contains methods such as Photoactivated Localisation Microscopy ( PALM ) ( 13 ) , direct Stochastic Optical Recon - struction Microscopy ( dSTORM ) ( 14 , 15 ) and Point Ac - cumulation for Imaging in Nanoscale Topology ( PAINT ) ( 16 , 17 ) , which enable the reconstruction imaged structures from the localisation coordinates of single and isolated ﬂu - orophores . These are known as Single Molecule Localisa - tion Microscopy ( SMLM ) modalities . At the interface of these two categories lies “MINimal photon FLUXes” ( MIN - FLUX ) , which uses a doughnut - shaped excitation light beam to detect the presence of a ﬂuorophore and then triangulates its exact localisation by reﬁning the beam’s position until the doughnut’s zero centre matches the ﬂuorophore’s position , thus , minimizing the ﬂux of photons ( 18 ) . A more detailed explanation of the principles , advantages , and disadvantages of each SRM modality is available in ( 19 ) . Despite its ability to reveal the localisation of individual molecules within supramolecular complexes , SMLM has no - table limitations such as labelling artifacts , target - to - label distances ( i . e . , linking error ) , and lack of temporal informa - tion . For example , single proteins are typically imaged using antibody - based labelling ( i . e . , immunolabelling ) or fusions between ﬂuorescent tags and the proteins of interest . In im - munolabelling , the antibody’s epitope is separated from the ﬂuorophore by a short linker , resulting in a slight displace - ment of the ﬂuorescent signal relative to the actual binding site in the target molecule . In turn , fusions with ﬂuorescent tags minimise this linking error . Still , they can disturb the target proteins’ function , an effect often related to steric hin - drance or alterations in their spatial distribution and binding afﬁnities ( e . g . , ( 20 ) ) . Another caveat of SMLM is related to the density and coverage of the labelling . SMLM stochas - tically samples the distribution of labels in a specimen ( 15 ) . Thus , there is no guarantee that all the ﬂuorophores in a sam - ple are acquired or excited proportionally . Furthermore , in immunolabeling , different regions within a supramolecular complex might not be equally accessible to the labelling an - tibodies , resulting in heterogeneous or incomplete coverage . In addition , immunolabeling is performed using chemically ﬁxed structures . Although this allows for a snapshot of criti - cal cellular activities and subsequent nanometer characterisa - tion , the spatial - temporal progression of the cellular activities is conﬁned to the time of ﬁxation and may contain ﬁxation - induced artifacts . SPA is a computational approach that signiﬁcantly en - hances structural studies using microscopy . In SPA , par - ticles are compared , and goodness - of - ﬁt metrics such as cross - correlation ( 21 , 22 ) evaluate the particle before aver - aging . The typical procedure of SPA comprises 1 ) image acquisition , 2 ) particle detection and segmentation , 3 ) se - lection , 4 ) alignment , 5 ) averaging , and 6 ) model genera - tion . An example pipeline showcasing a dSTORM dataset containing the nuclear envelope of a Xenopus oocyte la - belled for the NPC protein gp210 ( 23 ) ( data available at doi : 10 . 5281 / zenodo . 506824 ) is shown in Fig . 2 . Mapping supramolecular structures at the nanoscale with SRM - SPA The studies referenced in the following sections highlight the potential and limitations of SRM and SPA in mapping the architecture of biological molecular assemblies . The Nuclear Pore Complex . The NPC mediates and regu - lates the translocation of molecules across the nuclear enve - lope . It is one of the largest supramolecular complexes in the eukaryotic cell , with a diameter of ~ 125 nm and a height of ~ 70 nm . Its cylindrical structure with eightfold symmetry is composed of multiple copies of at least 30 different proteins called nucleoporins ( Nups ) that form a cytoplasmic ring , a nuclear ring , and a central channel with a diameter of 35 - 50 nm ( 25 – 27 ) ( Fig . 1a ) . Molecules crossing via the NPC need to be at least slightly smaller than its central channel . Thus , knowing the exact diameter of the NPC is crucial to un - derstand which molecules or molecular complexes can travel across it . This becomes particularly relevant in the context of infection with pathogens trying to reach the host’s genome , such as HIV - 1 ( 28 ) . In addition , owing to key structural fea - tures such as large size , radial symmetry and low variability between individual entities , NPCs became a preferential bi - ological structure to evaluate SRM - SPA methods ( 29 ) . Fur - thermore , while averaged reconstructions of NPC densities were made using EM - SPA ( 30 ) , the organisation of its com - ponents within the complex remained unknown . ar ‰ iv | 2 Mendes & Heil et al . | SPA in SRM Fig . 2 . Example SPA framework using dSTORM data of the NPC protein gp210 . ( a - c ) A super - resolved image is acquired before the analysis . ( d ) Particles corresponding to the structure of interest are manually or automatically detected from a super - resolved image , generating an image library containing several segmented particles . ( e ) The particle population is ﬁltered to remove unwanted objects according to speciﬁc criteria . ( f ) Each particle is aligned and used in an iterative averaging process ( 24 ) , resulting in a ﬁnal model ( g ) with enhanced structural accuracy . Scale bars represent 2 µm ( a - d ) and 100 nm ( e - g ) . Schermelleh et al . ( 31 ) used 3D SIM to resolve single NPCs with molecular speciﬁcity , but the spatial resolution was in - sufﬁcient to reveal ﬁne structural details . Loschberger et al . ( 32 ) tackled this problem using dSTORM to image NPCs in nuclear envelopes isolated from Xenopus laevis ( frog ) oocytes . They focused on gp210 , a protein that forms ho - modimers and then multimers that surround and anchor the NPC on the luminal side of the nuclear pore membrane ( 33 ) . Previous experiments using biochemical tools suggested a model where at least eight gp210 dimers were present in each NPC ( 34 ) . Loschberger et al . ( Löschberger et al . , 2012 ) ( 32 ) resolved an eightfold symmetrical arrangement of gp210 and calculated an average diameter for the com - plex of 161 ± 17 nm . They generated images from 426 in - dividual rings ( ~ 160 000 localisations ) that were automat - ically detected and aligned to conﬁrm the statistically ob - served eightfold symmetry . The ﬁnal averaged image dis - played the eightfold symmetry of the gp210 ring previously observed and a diameter of 164 ± 7 nm . Attempts to distin - guish gp210 monomers and dimers failed because the linkage error ( ~ 18 nm ) was too high to achieve the required spatial resolution . Finally , the authors exploited the high binding afﬁnity of ﬂuorescently labelled wheat germ agglutinin for N - acetylglucosamine - modiﬁed Nups to resolve the inner lin - ing of the central channel of the NPC . The same analytical approach was performed by combining 621 rings ( ~ 40 000 localisations ) and calculating a 41 ± 7 nm pore diameter . Szymborska et al . ( 35 ) extended this type of approach to other components of the NPC using a distinct SPA routine . They labelled Nup133 in whole cells and mapped the po - sition of the ﬂuorophores relative to the centre of the nu - clear pore with a precision of 0 . 1 nm and an accuracy of 0 . 3 nm . The authors conducted a thorough characterisation of the NPC’s structure by labelling several members of the Nup107 - 160 complex , a primary component of the NPC . In doing so , they addressed the existence of three contradic - tory models for the orientation of the subcomplex and the radial position of its components on the nanometer scale ( 36 – 38 ) . The same SPA framework was used to map the relative positions of the proteins in the complex . Nup - GFP fusion proteins and dye - coupled anti - GFP nanobodies were used to minimise the linking error and overcome the inability to ob - tain antibodies for several Nup107 - 160 members working in SRM . Using this methodology , they calculated similar ring diameters , and the differences between the two approaches corresponded to the difference in the linker’s size between the two approaches . These measurements concluded that a head - to - tail arrangement of the Nup107 - 160 complexes along the nuclear pore’s circumference most likely explained the data . Importantly , they showed that the developed SPA implemen - tation could be applied to asymmetric structures without los - ing precision if a molecular reference in a second colour channel was used . Many studies on the nanoarchitecture of NPCs followed , and this subject remains an intense area of research today . Some of these studies will be discussed further in light of the SPA implementations used ( e . g . , LocMoFit ( 39 ) , Fig . 3a ) . Viruses . Viruses are among the smallest biological struc - tures known . Due to their small size , viral structures have historically been described using EM ( 40 ) . However , this ap - proach is limited to mapping speciﬁc molecules’ position and molecular identity within viral supramolecular complexes . SRM - SPA overcomes this limitation by using data from thou - sands of labelled viral particles to provide averaged 3D mod - els with molecular speciﬁcity . Mendes & Heil et al . | SPA in SRM ar ‰ iv | 3 Moreover , Gray et al . ( 41 ) developed VirusMapper . This SPA framework automatically performs detection , segmen - tation , alignment , classiﬁcation , and averaging thousands of individual viral particles to generate high - resolution recon - structions of viral particles with substructural detail . Impor - tantly , VirusMapper is a user - friendly and open - source Im - ageJ / Fiji implementation . The authors evaluated the ana - lytic capabilities of the framework using multi - colour SIM and STED images of Vaccinia virus ( VACV ) , the smallpox vaccine virus ( 42 ) . VirusMapper enabled mapping the rela - tive localisations of several viral proteins within the fully as - sembled virion . Importantly , it also allowed the detection of changes in the arrangement of a particular viral protein ( L4 ) in the viral complex induced by the virion’s fusion with the cell membrane , a feature that even EM had not been able to demonstrate robustly . In a follow - up study ( 43 ) , Gray et al . used VirusMapper and an extensive collection of virus mu - tants to investigate the nanoscale organisation of the VACV entry complex , a supramolecular complex located on the vi - ral membrane that is crucial for binding and fusion with the membrane of the host cell . They determined that fusion ac - tivity and success correlated with a speciﬁc orientation of the virion and the spatial distribution of viral binding and fusion proteins ( Fig . 3b ) . The Herpes simplex virus type 1 ( HSV - 1 ) is a common cause of cold sores but can also cause blindness and encephali - tis ( 44 , 45 ) . It is highly contagious and establishes a re - markably persistent and latent infection in sensory ganglia with periodic reactivation leading to symptomatic or asymp - tomatic virus shedding ( 46 ) . The structure of the virus , a ~ 200 nm diameter sphere with a 125 nm diameter icosa - hedral capsid housing the viral DNA genome , was ﬁrst de - termined by EM / ET ( 47 – 49 ) . The most complex layer of the virus is called tegument and contains over 20 proteins ( 50 ) . Laine et al . ( 51 ) used two - colour dSTORM to map the relative localisation of several HSV - 1 proteins in the vi - ral envelope and tegument . Using viral proteins fused with ﬂuorescent proteins , they resolved individual capsids inside infected cells . They could discriminate between enveloped and non - enveloped particles and reveal the subcellular lo - calisation of viral components and their relative amounts in the cytoplasm and the nucleus . With this information , the authors classiﬁed the structures resolved based on the pres - ence of a capsid , tegument , or envelope , effectively achieving nanoarchitecture - based characterisation of single virions . A SPA framework was developed and used to map more than 50 viral particles . The algorithm generates averaged models for individual viral proteins based on their localisation and radii distribution . Also , the thickness of each protein layer is estimated from the population’s diameter variability and deviation from spherical symmetry ( Fig . 3c ) . Human immunodeﬁciency virus type 1 ( HIV - 1 ) is the causative agent of acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome ( AIDS ) . The HIV - 1 genome encodes at least 12 functional proteins ( 52 ) , but several cellular factors are required for its successful replication , including members of the endoso - mal sorting complexes required for transport ( ESCRT ) ( 53 – 55 ) . Understanding the nanoscale organisation and function of ESCRT subcomplexes at viral assembly sites is crucial to eluicidate the mechanisms underlying HIV propagation . Van Engelenburg et al . ( 56 ) used PALM to image ESCRT sub - complexes that interact directly with HIV - 1 Gag ( the main component of the HIV - 1 capsid ) and play a role in HIV - 1 membrane abscission . They expressed ESCRT proteins fused with ﬂuorescent proteins in the COS7 cell line and resolved structural details of viral assembly sites at the plasma mem - brane . Furthermore , using a Gag - mEOS2 protein fusion as a reference , they detected ESCRT subcomplexes forming clus - ters at the plasma membrane that were discernible from their corresponding cytosolic pools . Importantly , a two - colour SPA approach allowed the authors to quantitatively determine that large fractions of some ESCRT proteins become trapped inside the HIV - 1 Gag lattice of viral - like particles during vi - ral assembly . Furthermore , the deletion of a speciﬁc amino acid motif in Gag precluded this phenomenon . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis ( CME ) is critical for many biological processes , such as signalling , nutrient uptake , and pathogen entry . CME in - volves the assembly of supramolecular complexes contain - ing clathrin and many other proteins at the plasma mem - brane , leading to the inward budding of an intracellular vesi - cle . The vesicle is then pinched off the plasma membrane and rapidly uncoats to allow its fusion with endosomes . Because of the high conservation of CMEs between yeast and humans , yeast models are often used to study their structures and dy - namics . The endocytic machinery comprises subdiffraction limit structures extensively characterised using microscopy and SPA . Berro and Pollard ( 57 ) developed a SPA framework that tracks protein patches located at the endocytic sites and then performs particle alignment and averaging . This approach captures in super - resolution the endocytic pathway as a func - tion of the conformational state . This is done by classi - fying different conformational states within the membrane , thus inferring sequential progress . Among other discoveries , the authors mapped the average positions of endocytic pro - teins along membrane invagination using confocal ﬂuores - cence microscopy . Furthermore , Picco et al . ( 58 ) developed a similar SPA approach to characterise protein dynamics dur - ing vesicle budding . They combined live - cell imaging data with previous EM structural data and characterised the endo - cytic process thoroughly . Finally , Mund et al . ( 59 ) developed a SPA framework that uses SRM images to characterise the dynamics of vesicle budding during CME . They ﬂuorescently tagged 23 different endocytic proteins and imaged thousands of ﬁxed yeast cells , collecting data from more than 100 , 000 endocytic sites . Using live cell imaging data as a temporal reference , the average positions of labelled proteins at endo - cytic sites were mapped with unprecedented accuracy and 3D models of their distribution at different stages of endocytosis were generated ( Fig . 3d ) . Cilia . Cilia are small organelles that take the shape of a pro - trusion projecting from the cell body . Their type functions as ar ‰ iv | 4 Mendes & Heil et al . | SPA in SRM Fig . 3 . Overview of biological structures analysed with SRM - SPA . ( a ) Nuclear Pore Complex . Single NPC particles ( raw data ) were assumed to represent samples of the same underlying distribution . A particle was found ( in the example the particle iv ) so that it best describes all other sites based on the rank on sum log - likelihood ( LL ) of the all - to - all matrix , where the 50 subset sites were ﬁtted to each other . The initial template is built based on sequential registration in the order of the sum LL rank . The ﬁnal fused particle is used to register all sites in the 318 - site data set . This procedure yields an updated fused particle , which is used to register the data set again . This process is iterated until convergence . The ﬁnal average ( model ) was calculated from 318 particles without any assumption on the underlying geometry or symmetry in a tilted view ( mode , top left ) . For comparison , the EM density of the NPC with C - termini of Nup96 is indicated in red ( model , top right ) . Top and side views ( model , bottom ) , where the nucleoplasmic and cytoplasmic rings are shown together ( left panel ) , or separately ( middle , right panels ) ( vii ) The two proteins per ring per symmetric unit give rise to tilted elongated average protein distributions in the averages ( arrows in model , bottom ) . Scale bars represent 50nm . Adapted from ( 39 ) . ( b ) Vaccinia virus . Segmented and aligned particles are used to generate multi - component models of single virions . For this , more than one seed selection criterion is applied to a single reference channel ( VACV A4 frontal and sagittal pictured ) . Additional virion components ( VACV F17 pictured ) are aligned to the reference for generating virion orientation - based ( frontal and sagittal ) models of various viral components . A composite image of all sagital models is shown ( A17 ( cyan ) / CM ( yellow ) / A4 ( red ) / DNA ( blue ) / L4 ( green ) / F17 ( magenta ) ) . Scale bar represents 100 nm . Adapted from ( 41 ) . ( c ) Herpes simplex virus type 1 . Virus images obtained from aligned particles ( right , larger insets ) and individual representative particles ( left , smaller insets ) . Scale bar represents 100 nm . Adapted from ( 51 ) . ( d ) Clathrin - mediated endocytosis . ( i ) Dual - color side - view super - resolution images of Las17 - SNAP and Abp1 - mMaple at individual sites . Images were rotated so endocytosis occurs upward and sorted by the distance of Abp1 centroid to Las17 at the base . ( ii ) Averages of Las17 and Abp1 at endocytic sites . For comparison , average outer boundaries of the actin network ( dotted lines ) , and average plasma membrane proﬁles ( solid line ) obtained by correlative light - electron microscopy ( 60 ) are overlaid for each time point , as inferred from the images . Scale bar represents 100 nm . Adapted from ( 59 ) . ( e ) Cilia . ( i ) 2D STORM images of the ciliary distal appendages of mTEC cells with CEP164 labeled . The STORM localisations of an individual structure are ﬁtted to an ellipse , which is then deformed to a circle . The circularised structure is normalised to a ring with a ﬁxed diameter calculated by averaging the diameter of 31 original structures . Image ( ii ) shows the resulting averaged structure after alignment . Scale bar represents 100 nm . Adapted from ( 24 ) . ( f ) Centriole . RPE - 1 C1 - GFP cells were immunolabeled for the indicated proteins and imaged ﬁrst in a wide - ﬁeld mode , followed by 3D STORM imaging , and correlative electron microscopy analysis . Averaged STORM signals were pseudocoloured , rotated and then superimposed to generate a horizontal distributional map of the DAPs . Scale bar represents 200 nm . Adapted from ( 61 ) . Mendes & Heil et al . | SPA in SRM ar ‰ iv | 5 cellular antennas to integrate environmental signals or create extracellular ﬂows by continuous beating . They are gener - ated from the basal body , a cylindrical structure composed of triplet microtubules arranged with ninefold symmetry ( 62 – 65 ) . The skeleton of cilia , called the axoneme ( 66 ) , com - prises microtubule doublets arranged with ninefold symme - try around a central microtubule doublet and is contained by a membrane contiguous to the plasma membrane . In hu - mans , the importance of cilia is highlighted by several dis - eases , called ciliopathies , which arise from defective ciliary function typically caused by mutations . These include poly - cystic kidney disease ( PKD ) , polydactyly , and Joubert syn - drome ( JBTS ) . Similar to NPCs , cilia are the subject of several SRM studies . In particular , the " transition zone " separates the ciliary and plasma membranes and is proposed to function as a gate to the cilium ( 67 ) . EM studies on the transition zone’s structure revealed " Y " - shaped densities called Y - links , with the stem anchored at the microtubule doublets and the two arms at - tached to the ciliary membrane ( 68 ) . However , the Y - links’ components and the arrangement of proteins in the transition zone were unknown . Shi et al . ( 69 ) imaged the transition zone using a two - colour 3D STORM . They observed several proteins forming rings with different diameters localised be - tween the axoneme and the ciliary membrane . Based on the radial , angular , and axial distribution of the ciliary compo - nents , they constructed a 3D map of the transition zone with a resolution of 15 - 30 nm , demonstrating that the protein rings observed were consistent with being Y - links . A protein called Smoothened ( SMO ) formed a ring of discrete clusters specif - ically in the transition zone . The authors revealed that certain JBTS - associated mutations reduced SMO localisation in the transition zone and the ciliary membrane . This study also showed that the diameter of the rings compos - ing the ciliary transition zone , often with an elliptical shape , varied from 369 to 494 nm . This reveals an important struc - tural characteristic of many large cellular organelles called semi - ﬂexibility . Brieﬂy , semi - ﬂexible structures can display slightly different sizes and shapes due to elastic deformation or molecular composition variations while maintaining sym - metry and angular arrangement . This heterogeneity poses a problem for particle alignment and averaging , reducing the accuracy of the ﬁnal reconstructed images . To address this problem , Shi et al . ( 24 ) developed SRM - SPA algorithms that take structural ﬂexibility as a degree of freedom for image registration . They work by deforming heterogeneous ellipti - cal structures into more uniform ones and then aligning and averaging the deformed structures . The algorithms were eval - uated using simulated and experimental SMLM data of cil - iary appendages from mouse tracheal epithelial cells ( Fig . 3e ) . They resolved the ninefold ciliary symmetry and gen - erated multi - colour 3D models with a higher resolution than state - of - the - art algorithms based on rigid structure registra - tion ( 70 – 72 ) . Robichaux et al . ( 73 ) combined cryo - ET and STORM imag - ing to map repeating structures in a specialised structure of the rod sensory cilium called “connecting cilium” . Subtomo - gram averaging provided a structural framework of the con - necting cilium , used as a reference to map the distribution of speciﬁc molecular components resolved with STORM . This method allowed mapping subcompartments of the connecting cilium with high precision and revealed structural differences in knockouts for basal body proteins . Centriole . The basal ciliary body originates from the centri - ole , a cellular structure ( 74 ) sharing a similar organisation , including microtubule triplets arranged radially with nine - fold symmetry ( 75 ) . They display proximal - distal polarity . The proximal end shows a supramolecular matrix called the pericentriolar material ( 76 – 78 ) , which is important for mi - crotubule nucleation and centriole duplication , the latter re - sulting in a mother and a daughter centriole . The distal end of the mother centriole contains projections called distal ap - pendages ( DAs ) , which are required for ciliogenesis ( 79 – 85 ) , microtubule anchoring and centriole positioning ( 86 – 88 ) . Several proteins are distributed around the centriole’s centre , forming 100 - 200 nm diameter rings . Due to centri - oles’ small size and high molecular complexity , mapping the exact distribution of several centriole proteins remains a chal - lenge . Gartenmann et al . ( 89 ) devised a SPA method to resolve the diameter of centriole rings with unprecedented precision in Drosophila larval wing disks . Their framework involved an initial imaging step with 3D SIM to resolve the ring of the well - established centriole protein Asl . Then , several GFP fu - sions to centriole proteins were imaged with SMLM and us - ing the centre of the Asl rings as initial estimates for the cen - triole’s centroid , localisations within 100 nm were averaged to calculate a new centre . The process was repeated until the centroid positions converged . Finally , the average radius of the rings was calculated , and the distribution of GFP fusion proteins in the centriole was reconstructed . By taking advan - tage of the high labelling density of 3D SIM , the high preci - sion of SMLM , and the resolution enhancements and statis - tical robustness of SPA , this framework allowed calculating radii with an accuracy of ± 4 - 5 nm . Bowler et al . ( 61 ) used a combination of cryo - ET , STORM imaging , and SPA to map the precise location of DA proteins in 3D ( Fig . 3f ) . They revealed the dynamic nature of DAs by demonstrating with ultrastructural detail the reorganisations that occur before and during mitosis . The centriole is also a central component of the centrosome , a microtubule - organising structure comprising a pair of centri - oles responsible for the mitotic spindle formation during cell division . Sieben et al . ( 72 ) developed SPARTAN , a graphical user interface employing a novel SRM - SPA framework that generates 3D structure reconstructions from two - channel 2D SMLM data . In this study , centrosomes from a human cell line were puriﬁed and concentrated in coverslips by centrifu - gation before imaging with PALM . A library of densely la - belled particles ( 10 % - 20 % of the entire population ) was cre - ated , and the particles were aligned and classiﬁed according to their orientation . An averaged model for one labelled pro - tein was generated , on which models for other proteins could be mapped . Using this tool , they conﬁrmed the ninefold sym - ar ‰ iv | 6 Mendes & Heil et al . | SPA in SRM metry of Cep164 , a crucial centriolar component . They also revealed unknown features of the human centriole’s architec - ture , such as closer proximity of the Cep164 N - terminus to the centriolar wall than previously reported ( 78 ) . Quantitative structural descriptions outside the scope of SPA SPA refers to frameworks that register and average particles to produce a ﬁnal model with improved SNR . Despite compa - rable analytical methods ( e . g . , pair - correlation ) sharing key statistical approaches , such as numerical descriptions of en - semble parameters ( e . g . , particle diameter ) , these are not well suited to produce improved image reconstructions - unlike SPA . For example , spatial descriptive statistics such as pair - correlation ( 90 ) , Ripley’s K - function ( 91 ) and Density - Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise ( 92 ) have been employed to determine clustering states and average cluster sizes of particle populations . Gunzenhäuser et al . ( 93 ) devel - oped a quantitative method to reveal the functional and mor - phological aspects of the HIV - 1 assembly based on SMLM data . They analysed hundreds of HIV - 1 Gag clusters and de - termined the number of Gag molecules per cluster , as well as the frequency distribution of the clusters with respect to their radius and aspect ratio . Malkusch et al . ( 94 ) evalu - ated the performance of different cluster analysis methods in the same context . They were able to classify Gag clusters corresponding to three different stages of viral assembly . Fi - nally , Floderer et al . ( 95 ) expressed assembly - defective Gag mutants in live cells to follow the trajectories of individual molecules . They calculated the duration and the energy pro - portions involved in each assembly stage . A type of analytical tool that has recently been explored in microcopy is deep - learning ( DL ) . Examples of its applica - tions in bioimage analysis are image processing ( e . g . , de - noising ) and particle tracking and segmentation , with several user - friendly tools available to researchers as open - source ( e . g . , ( 96 ) ) . The use of DL in SPA is showcased in ( 97 ) . Here , six DL models were trained and benchmarked on their ability to recognise the septin ring , a structure arising in cells treated with the actin polymerisation inhibitor cytochalasin D . Mod - els were able to identify hundreds of septin rings with high accuracy . The segmented rings were then used for particle averaging , producing models with sensitivity for slight struc - tural deviations induced by a septin ring - related gene knock - out . Finally , supramolecular complexes can be mapped using dif - ferent ﬂuorescent labels in the same protein . For example , Mennella et al . ( 77 ) resolved kendrin / pericentrin , a compo - nent of the pericentriolar material in human centrioles , with antibodies against the protein’s N - terminus and a GFP tag in the C - terminus using SIM . The distance from the different ﬂuorescent signal to the center of the structure allowed to de - termine the protein’s orientation in the supramolecular com - plex , with the C - terminus positioned closer to the centre and the N - terminus extending outwards with radial symmetry . Another example is Leterrier et al . ( 98 ) , where the nanoscale organisation of the neuronal protein ankG in a region of the axon called the Axon Initial Segment ( AIS ) was determined using antibodies targeting different domains of the protein . A known spectrin - binding domain of ankG , which is closer to the protein’s N - terminus , was colocalized with spectrin bands just under the plasma membrane and displayed a marked pe - riodicism . In contrast , downstream domains closer to the C - terminus progressively lost this periodicity and were found to be located deeper in the cytoplasm than the N - terminus by 3D - STORM . Current challenges in SPA The studies mentioned in the previous sections showcase the potential of SRM - SPA to map the nanoarchitecture de - tails of supramolecular complexes . However , they also high - light current limitations . In general , the increased computa - tion resources and times required to perform the analyses in novel SPA frameworks are minimised by exploiting different mathematical approaches and hardware speciﬁcations , such as Fast Fourier Transforms ( 99 ) and Graphical Processing Units ( e . g . , ( 100 ) ) . However , more fundamental challenges remain . In particular , crucial steps in SPA methodologies in - volve using an initial template . Particles detected in a dataset can be included or excluded from the analysis with respect to how well they match the chosen template . Additionally , particle averaging involves iterative reﬁnement of the shape of an initial template . The template chosen is typically ar - bitrary , often consisting of a simpliﬁed shape recapitulating a priori knowledge on the structures of interest . For exam - ple , a simple spherical shape can be used as a template if the structure of interest is a mature HIV - 1 or HSV - 1 particle . Another option is to select a representative particle from the dataset , which can be a single particle , a subpopulation , or even a class average ( e . g . , VirusMapper ( 41 ) ) . The problem shared among these approaches is that the ﬁnal reconstructed structures are biased towards the template used . Another important limitation of SPA arises from the assump - tion that all particles represent the same underlying structure . However , this is not necessarily true , as most particle pop - ulations are expected to display some degree of heterogene - ity . For example , some biological structures sporadically or transiently manifest as variations of their canonical structure , such as the NPC variant with ninefold symmetry ( 35 ) , semi - ﬂexible ciliary structures ( 24 ) and multicore HIV - 1 particles ( 101 ) . These particular structures are underrepresented in the ﬁnal reconstructions , decreasing their accuracy and remain - ing undetected . Novel particle registration approaches minimise tem - plate bias . Several studies focused on developing so - called " template - free " SPA methodologies , which use non - arbitrary or data - driven templates to overcome template bias . For ex - ample , Fortun et al . ( 102 ) developed an SPA framework that reconstructs 3D supramolecular assemblies from 2D SRM images of particles in different orientations . While this framework uses a small number of hand - picked templates to detect particles , it estimates their orientations and performs Mendes & Heil et al . | SPA in SRM ar ‰ iv | 7 volume reconstructions without resorting to a priori knowl - edge , creating an initial model that is iteratively reﬁned by averaging . This framework allowed mapping the distribution of Cep63 around the central centriole barrel from STED im - ages with unprecedented accuracy . Salas et al . ( 70 ) used multivariate statistical analysis to clas - sify particles according to their orientation . Representative examples of each class were then selected based on the visual match between the class average and the individual particles and used to perform multireference alignments . The algo - rithm successfully produced high - resolution 3D reconstruc - tions of DNA origami ( 103 ) structures and T4 bacteriophages from SMLM and simulated data . Furthermore , Heydarian et al . ( 100 ) developed an “all - to - all” registration approach . Each particle is registered pair - wise against every other particle , producing similarity met - rics and estimates of each pair’s relative orientation and po - sition . All the possible absolute positions and orientations of each particle are then calculated using a technique from the ﬁeld of computer vision called " structure from motion " ( 104 ) . A quality control step is performed to remove outliers and registration errors by inferring the combinations of rel - ative parameters from the absolute parameters obtained pre - viously . These retrodicted parameters are then compared to those found in the all - to - all registration , and pairs deviating from their registered counterparts above a speciﬁed threshold are discarded from the next steps . These procedures generate a data - driven template that is further reﬁned by particle aver - aging . The algorithm’s performance was ﬁrst evaluated using a dataset containing 2D DNA origami particles imaged with DNA - PAINT and generated image reconstructions with ~ 3 nm resolution . In addition , the algorithm was able to perform using particles with labelling densities as low as 30 % . The algorithm was also tested using the NPC dataset in ( 32 ) and successfully retrieved the NPC’s eightfold symmetry without requiring prior knowledge . More recently , this framework was extended to enable 3D SPA ( 105 ) . Another example is Blundell et al . ( 106 ) , where DL was used to predict each particle’s pose . Here , a neural network ﬁts a 3D model against a library of particles viewed in 2D . The framework was able to discern the centriole’s expected toroidal structure from the STORM dataset acquired in ( 72 ) . It is important to note that , although " template bias " exists when using arbitrary models as an initial reference for SPA , completely discarding prior knowledge on the structures of interest might not be the most sensible action . Indeed , the ’template - free’ algorithms showcased so far produce recon - structions that can be further improved by taking prior knowl - edge into account . On this note , Wu et al . ( 39 ) developed LocMoFit . This framework extracts particle geometry from SMLM data and ﬁts the particles to geometric models based on maximum - likelihood estimation ( MLE ) . When the geom - etry of the structure of interest is known , the user can de - cide on the class of geometric models to be used for the ﬁtting . Importantly , when an underlying geometry cannot be recovered , the algorithm can perform particle averaging to generate a data - driven template by combining the all - to - all registration methodology developed by Heydarian et al . ( 100 ) with MLE . Mund et al . ( 107 ) used LocMoFit to ex - tend their work on clathrin - mediated endocytosis developed in ( 59 ) . Here , they densely labelled clathrin in the human melanoma cell line SK - MEL - 2 and used 3D SMLM to re - solve the endocytic sites . Then , they performed extensive quantitative descriptions of the structures analysed and were able to infer a spatial - temporal model of the endocytic pro - cess . Improving sensitivity to detect structure heterogene - ity . Image classiﬁcation can be used to enhance SPA’s lack of sensitivity to particle heterogeneity . This usually involves calculating similarity metrics ( e . g . , cross - correlation at dif - ferent relative rotations ( 21 , 22 ) for particle pairs and then sorting the particles into a suitable number of classes . Sev - eral SPA frameworks mentioned so far use classiﬁcation to group particles according to their viewing orientation ( e . g . , ( 41 , 72 ) . The particles’ relative orientations can be calcu - lated to produce a 3D model from 2D projections with this information . A more underlooked challenge of SPA that beneﬁts from par - ticle classiﬁcation is the ability to detect and classify par - ticles representing different underlying structures . This be - comes particularly difﬁcult when the various structures are not known a priori and reasonable templates cannot be pro - vided . Huijben et al . ( 108 ) extended the pipeline developed in ( 100 ) to achieve this goal . In this implementation , the sim - ilarity metric obtained from the all - to - all registration strat - egy is converted into a dissimilarity metric and multidimen - sional scaling ( 109 ) is used to translate the values of each registration pair into spatial coordinates projected in a multi - dimensional space . The multidimensional particles are then classiﬁed using k - means clustering ( 110 ) and each class is averaged to generate the ﬁnal reconstructions . In particular , the authors provide a relatively simple strategy to determine an optimal number of classes without a priori knowledge . The framework was evaluated using a 2D DNA origami test dataset imaged with DNA - PAINT ( 16 , 111 ) , containing par - ticles belonging to several different classes . Under these con - ditions , the algorithm correctly classiﬁed > 95 % of the anal - ysed particles . The averaged reconstructions achieved reso - lutions between 3 . 7 and 5 . 7 nm . Most importantly , the al - gorithm correctly classiﬁed an NPC with ninefold symme - try in a simulated dataset where this class was highly under - represented ( 2 % of the total number of particles ) . Further - more , the algorithm detected classes corresponding to ellipti - cal NPCs in the Xenopus oocyte NPC dataset mentioned pre - viously ( 32 ) . Although the presence of these elliptical struc - tures in the data was deemed by the authors to be an artifact generated during sample preparation without any biological signiﬁcance , their successful detection showcases once again the high sensitivity of the classiﬁcation framework and its ability to detect unknown structures . In this context , Sabinina et al . ( 112 ) used SPA to perform quantitative descriptions and obtain an average model of the NPC . They observed that the nuclear basket protein TPR was distributed over a larger vol - ume than expected , suggesting averaging over different NPC ar ‰ iv | 8 Mendes & Heil et al . | SPA in SRM conformations . Accordingly , they found signiﬁcant variation in descriptive parameters , such as circularity and diameter , which exceeded the expected registration error . Thus , they developed a classiﬁcation method that does not depend on a priori information about the structures of interest and used it to conﬁrm the presence of different NPC conformations . Conclusions and Outlook Determining the ﬁne structure of supramolecular complexes gives crucial insight into their assembly dynamics and func - tional capabilities . SRM excels at imaging small biologi - cal structures containing multiple components with different molecular identities at high resolutions . It successfully tack - les the challenge of surpassing the diffraction limit of light by bringing together cutting - edge microscopy technology , mod - ulation of the physical properties of ﬂuorescent labels , and advanced statistical analysis . Furthermore , the implemen - tation of SPA in SRM substantially improves the accuracy of image reconstructions overcoming crucial caveats of SRM such as under - labelling and labelling heterogeneity . It com - bines information from thousands of imaged structures and produces reconstructions that effectively contain more local - isations than their underlabelled counterparts . This enables the mapping of supramolecular complexes in 3D and retriev - ing architectural features with single - digit nanometer preci - sion . Additionally , the analysis can be performed in multi - ple colour channels representing different labelled molecules present in the same molecular assembly , which allows using a reference molecule to register the remaining ( e . g . , ( 41 ) ) . Despite the great success of SRM - SPA in mapping supramolecular complexes , its capabilities have not yet been fully explored . So far , SPA studies have focused almost ex - clusively on generating reconstructions of a unique and fully assembled structure . However , these same structures un - dergo a process of assembly comprising multiple metastable structures that share crucial molecular players . Resolving the ﬁne structural details of intermediate structures is cru - cial to describing the assembly dynamics of the correspond - ing supramolecular complexes . There are several obstacles to mapping metastable structures . For example , the degree to which each structure is represented in the data is a func - tion of its relative stability or frequency , resulting in a hetero - geneous representation . Combined with the already existing caveats of SRM ( e . g . , underlabelling ) increases the chances that less stable structures are under - represented , potentially to a point where it becomes hard or even impossible to ac - quire a sample with enough particles to accurately represent the structure . In addition , structural plasticity as observed in ( 24 ) and ( 112 ) also contributes to under - representation of a particular structure . Furthermore , the lack of temporal information due to ﬁxed - sample imaging precludes the mapping of the sequential as - sembly of supramolecular complexes . This problem was ad - dressed in Berro and Pollard ( 57 ) , where a ’brute force’ ap - proach was taken . Brieﬂy , clathrin - mediated endocytosis was oversampled to ensure that a suitable number of particles rep - resenting each metastable structure were detected . Then , the assembly process’s temporal hierarchy was estimated from the similarity between metastable structures . A potential so - lution to this problem might reside in correlating the ﬁne structural details resolved with SRM - SPA with structural and temporal information extracted from live - cell SRM imaging . While still being limited by the constrains of live - cell SRM today , remarkable progress and future development of both ﬁelds , SPA and live - cell SRM , will be the key to elucidating the dynamics of the structural rearrangement of molecular complexes within living cells . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank Marie - Christine Dabauvalle and Georg Krohne for the nuclear envelope preparation and Xiaoyu Shi for sharing the " Deformed Alignment " code . This work was supported by the Gulbenkian Foundation ( A . M . , H . S . H . , S . C . , R . H . ) and re - ceived funding from the European Research Council ( ERC ) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme ( grant agreement no . 101001332 to R . H . ) , the European Molecular Biology Organization ( EMBO - 2020 - IG - 4734 to R . H . and ALTF 499 - 2021 to H . S . H ) , the Wellcome Trust ( 203276 / Z / 16 / Z to R . H . ) , and NHMRC ( APP1183588 to S . C . ) . A . M . would like to acknowledge sup - port from the Integrative Biology and Biomedicine PhD programme from Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência . EXTENDED AUTHOR INFORMATION • Afonso Mendes : 0000 - 0001 - 7324 - 555X ; ￿ afonsomendes92 • Hannah S . Heil : 0000 - 0003 - 4279 - 7022 ; ￿ Hannah _ SuperRes • Simao Coelho 0000 - 0002 - 0763 - 3172 ; ￿ simaopc • Christophe Leterrier : 0000 - 0002 - 2957 - 2032 ; ￿ christlet • Ricardo Henriques : 0000 - 0002 - 2043 - 5234 ; ￿ HenriquesLab AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS A . M . and H . S . H . contributed equally to the preparation of the manuscript and ﬁg - ures . All authors advised in the preparation and edited content . COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interests . Bibliography 1 . Edward M . Campbell and Thomas J . Hope . HIV - 1 capsid : The multifaceted key player in HIV - 1 infection . Nature Reviews Microbiology , 13 : 471 – 483 , 7 2015 . ISSN 17401534 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrmicro3503 . 2 . Brady J . Summers , Katherine M . Digianantonio , Sarah S . Smaga , Pei - Tzu Huang , Kaifeng Zhou , EvaE . Gerber , WeiWang , andYongXiong . ModularHIV - 1capsidassembliesreveal diverse host - capsid recognition mechanisms . Cell Host Microbe , 26 : 203 – 216 . e6 , 8 2019 . ISSN 19313128 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2019 . 07 . 007 . 3 . BarbieK . Ganser , SuLi , VictorY . Klishko , JohnT . Finch , andWesleyI . Sundquist . Assem - bly and analysis of conical models for the HIV - 1 core . Science , 283 : 80 – 83 , 1 1999 . ISSN 0036 - 8075 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 283 . 5398 . 80 . 4 . Su Li , Christopher P . Hill , Wesley I . Sundquist , and John T . Finch . Image reconstructions of helical assemblies of the HIV - 1 CA protein . Nature , 407 : 409 – 413 , 2000 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 35030177 . 5 . E . Abbe . Beiträge zur theorie des mikroskops und der mikroskopischen wahrnehmung . Archiv für Mikroskopische Anatomie , 9 : 413 – 468 , 12 1873 . ISSN 0176 - 7364 . doi : 10 . 1007 / BF02956173 . 6 . David Sehnal , Sebastian Bittrich , Mandar Deshpande , Radka Svobodová , Karel Berka , Václav Bazgier , Sameer Velankar , Stephen K . Burley , Jaroslav Koˇca , and Alexander S . Rose . Mol * Viewer : Modernwebappfor3Dvisualizationandanalysisoflargebiomolecular structures . Nucleic Acids Research , 49 : W431 – W437 , 7 2021 . ISSN 13624962 . doi : 10 . 1093 / nar / gkab314 . 7 . Joachim Frank . Single - particle reconstruction of biological macromolecules in electron microscopy - 30 years . Quarterly Reviews of Biophysics , 42 : 139 – 158 , 8 2009 . ISSN 00335835 . doi : 10 . 1017 / S0033583509990059 . 8 . Mikhail Kudryashev , Daniel Castaño - Díez , and Henning Stahlberg . Limiting factors in sin - gle particle cryo electron tomography . Computational and Structural Biotechnology Jour - nal , 1 : e201207002 , 2012 . ISSN 20010370 . doi : 10 . 5936 / csbj . 201207002 . 9 . GuangTang , LiweiPeng , PhilipR . Baldwin , DeepinderS . Mann , WenJiang , IanRees , and Steven J . Ludtke . EMAN2 : An extensible image processing suite for electron microscopy . JournalofStructuralBiology , 157 : 38 – 46 , 12007 . ISSN10478477 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2006 . 05 . 009 . 10 . Marin Van Heel , Brent Gowen , Rishi Matadeen , Elena V . Orlova , Robert Finn , Tillmann Pape , Dana Cohen , Holger Stark , Ralf Schmidt , Michael Schatz , and Ardan Patwardhan . Single - particle electron cryo - microscopy : Towards atomic resolution . Quarterly Reviews of Biophysics , 33 : 307 – 369 , 2000 . ISSN 00335835 . doi : 10 . 1017 / S0033583500003644 . 11 . M . G . L . Gustafsson . Surpassing the lateral resolution limit by a factor of two using struc - tured illumination microscopy . Journal of Microscopy , 198 : 82 – 87 , 5 2000 . ISSN 0022 - 2720 . doi : 10 . 1046 / j . 1365 - 2818 . 2000 . 00710 . x . 12 . T . A . Klar , S . Jakobs , M . Dyba , A . Egner , and S . W . Hell . Fluorescence microscopy with diffraction resolution barrier broken by stimulated emission . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 97 : 8206 – 8210 , 7 2000 . ISSN 0027 - 8424 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 97 . 15 . 8206 . Mendes & Heil et al . | SPA in SRM ar ‰ iv | 9 13 . Eric Betzig , George H . Patterson , Rachid Sougrat , O . Wolf Lindwasser , Scott Olenych , Juan S . Bonifacino , Michael W . Davidson , Jennifer Lippincott - Schwartz , and Harald F . Hess . Imaging intracellular ﬂuorescent proteins at nanometer resolution . Science , 313 : 1642 – 1645 , 9 2006 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1127344 . 14 . Michael J . Rust , Mark Bates , and Xiaowei Zhuang . Sub - diffraction - limit imaging by stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( STORM ) . Nature Methods , 3 : 793 – 795 , 10 2006 . ISSN 15487091 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth929 . 15 . Sebastian Van De Linde , Anna Löschberger , Teresa Klein , Meike Heidbreder , Steve Wolter , Mike Heilemann , and Markus Sauer . Direct stochastic optical reconstruction mi - croscopy with standard ﬂuorescent probes . Nature Protocols , 6 : 991 – 1009 , 6 2011 . ISSN 17542189 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2011 . 336 . 16 . Joerg Schnitzbauer , Maximilian T . Strauss , Thomas Schlichthaerle , Florian Schueder , and Ralf Jungmann . Super - resolution microscopy with DNA - PAINT . Nature Protocols , 12 : 1198 – 1228 , 6 2017 . ISSN 17502799 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2017 . 024 . 17 . A . Sharonov and R . M . Hochstrasser . Wide - ﬁeld subdiffraction imaging by accumulated binding of diffusing probes . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 103 : 18911 – 18916 , 12 2006 . ISSN 0027 - 8424 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0609643104 . 18 . Francisco Balzarotti , Yvan Eilers , Klaus C . Gwosch , Arvid H . Gynnå , Volker Westphal , Fernando D . Stefani , Johan Elf , and Stefan W . Hell . Nanometer resolution imaging and tracking of ﬂuorescent molecules with minimal photon ﬂuxes . Science , 355 : 606 – 612 , 2 2017 . ISSN 0036 - 8075 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aak9913 . 19 . Guillaume Jacquemet , Alexandre F . Carisey , Hellyeh Hamidi , Ricardo Henriques , and Christophe Leterrier . The cell biologist’s guide to super - resolution microscopy . Journal of Cell Science , 133 , 6 2020 . ISSN 14779137 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 240713 . 20 . João I . Mamede , Joseph Grifﬁn , Stéphanie Gambut , and Thomas J . Hope . A new genera - tion of functional tagged proteins for HIVﬂuorescence imaging . Viruses , 13 , 3 2021 . ISSN 19994915 . doi : 10 . 3390 / v13030386 . 21 . R . Bracewell . Pentagramnotationforcrosscorrelation . InMcGraw - Hill , editor , TheFourier Transform and Its Applications , pages 46 – 243 . New York , 3rd edition edition , 1965 . 22 . A . Papoulis . In McGraw - Hill , editor , The Fourier integral and its applications , pages 244 – 245 . New York , 1962 . 23 . Hannah S . Heil , Benjamin Schreiber , Ralph Götz , Monika Emmerling , Marie Christine Dabauvalle , Georg Krohne , Sven Höﬂing , Martin Kamp , Markus Sauer , and Katrin G . Heinze . Sharpening emitter localization in front of a tuned mirror . Light : Science and Applications , 7 , 12 2018 . ISSN 20477538 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41377 - 018 - 0104 - z . 24 . XiaoyuShi , GaloGarcia , YinaWang , JeremyF . Reiter , andBoHuang . Deformedalignment of super - resolution images for semi - ﬂexible structures . PLoS ONE , 14 , 3 2019 . ISSN 19326203 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0212735 . 25 . Nadav Elad , Tal Maimon , Daphna Frenkiel - Krispin , Roderick YH Lim , and Ohad Medalia . Structuralanalysisofthenuclearporecomplexbyintegratedapproaches . CurrentOpinion inStructuralBiology , 19 : 226 – 232 , 42009 . ISSN0959440X . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . sbi . 2009 . 02 . 009 . 26 . Ulrich Scheer , Marie Christine Dabauvalle , Georg Krohne , René Peiman Zahedi , and Al - bert Sickmann . Nuclear envelopes from amphibian oocytes - From morphology to protein inventory . European Journal of Cell Biology , 84 : 151 – 162 , 3 2005 . ISSN 01719335 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2004 . 12 . 001 . 27 . CaterinaStrambio - De - Castillia , MarioNiepel , andMichaelP . Rout . Thenuclearporecom - plex : Bridging nuclear transport and gene regulation . Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biol - ogy , 11 : 490 – 501 , 7 2010 . ISSN 14710072 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2928 . 28 . Vojtech Zila , Erica Margiotta , Beata Turoˇnová , Thorsten G . Müller , Christian E . Zimmerli , Simone Mattei , Matteo Allegretti , Kathleen Börner , Jona Rada , Barbara Müller , Marina Lusic , Hans Georg Kräusslich , and Martin Beck . Cone - shaped HIV - 1 capsids are trans - ported through intact nuclear pores . Cell , 184 : 1032 – 1046 . e18 , 2 2021 . ISSN 10974172 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2021 . 01 . 025 . 29 . Jervis Vermal Thevathasan , Maurice Kahnwald , Konstanty Cie´sli´nski , Philipp Hoess , Sudheer Kumar Peneti , Manuel Reitberger , Daniel Heid , Krishna Chaitanya Kasuba , SarahJaniceHoerner , YimingLi , YuLeWu , MarkusMund , UlfMatti , PedroMatosPereira , Ricardo Henriques , Bianca Nijmeijer , Moritz Kueblbeck , Vilma Jimenez Sabinina , Jan El - lenberg , and Jonas Ries . Nuclear pores as versatile reference standards for quantitative superresolution microscopy . Nature Methods , 16 : 1045 – 1053 , 10 2019 . ISSN 15487105 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41592 - 019 - 0574 - 9 . 30 . Stephen G . Brohawn , James R . Partridge , James R . R . Whittle , and Thomas U . Schwartz . TheNuclearPoreComplexhasenteredtheatomicage . Structure , 17 : 1156 – 1168 , 92009 . ISSN 09692126 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . str . 2009 . 07 . 014 . 31 . Lothar Schermelleh , Peter M Carlton , Sebastian Haase , Lin Shao , Lukman Winoto , Peter Kner , Brian Burke , M Cristina Cardoso , David A Agard , Mats G L Gustafsson , Heinrich Leonhardt , and John W Sedat . Subdiffraction multicolor imaging of the nuclear periphery with 3d structured illumination microscopy . Science , 320 : 1332 – 1336 , 2008 . 32 . Anna Löschberger , Sebastian van de Linde , Marie Christine Dabauvalle , Bernd Rieger , Mike Heilemann , Georg Krohne , and Markus Sauer . Super - resolution imaging visualizes the eightfold symmetry of gp210 proteins around the nuclear pore complex and resolves the central channel with nanometer resolution . Journal of Cell Science , 125 : 570 – 575 , 2 2012 . ISSN 00219533 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 098822 . 33 . Catherine Favreau , Ricardo Bastos , Jean Cartaud , Jean - Claude Courvalin , and Pekka Mustonen . Biochemicalcharacterizationofnuclearporecomplexproteingp210oligomers . EuropeanJournalofBiochemistry , 268 : 3883 – 3889 , 72001 . ISSN00142956 . doi : 10 . 1046 / j . 1432 - 1327 . 2001 . 02290 . x . 34 . L Gerace , Y Ottaviano , and C Kondor - Koch . Identiﬁcation of a major polypeptide of the nuclear pore complex . Journal of Cell Biology , 95 : 826 – 837 , 12 1982 . ISSN 0021 - 9525 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 95 . 3 . 826 . 35 . AnnaSzymborska , AlexDeMarco , NathalieDaigle , VolkerCCordes , JohnAGBriggs , and Jan Ellenberg . Nuclear pore scaffold structure analyzed by super - resolution microscopy and particle averaging . Science , 341 : 655 – 658 , 2013 . 36 . Frank Alber , Svetlana Dokudovskaya , Liesbeth M . Veenhoff , Wenzhu Zhang , Julia Kipper , Damien Devos , Adisetyantari Suprapto , Orit Karni - Schmidt , Rosemary Williams , Brian T . Chait , Andrej Sali , and Michael P . Rout . The molecular architecture of the nuclear pore complex . Nature , 450 : 695 – 701 , 11 2007 . ISSN 14764687 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature06405 . 37 . Stephen G Brohawn , Nina C Leksa , Eric D Spear , Kanagalaghatta R Rajashankar , and Thomas U Schwartz . Structural evidence for common ancestry of the nuclear pore com - plex and vesicle coats . Science , 322 : 1369 – 1373 , 2008 . 38 . Kuo Chiang Hsia , Pete Stavropoulos , Günter Blobel , and André Hoelz . Architecture of a coatforthenuclearporemembrane . Cell , 131 : 1313 – 1326 , 122007 . ISSN00928674 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2007 . 11 . 038 . 39 . Yu - Le Wu , Philipp Hoess , Aline Tschanz , Ulf Matti , Markus Mund , and Jonas Ries . Maximum - likelihood model ﬁtting for quantitative analysis of SMLM data . bioRxiv , 2021 . doi : 10 . 1101 / 2021 . 08 . 30 . 456756 . 40 . Christophe Hourioux , Denys Brand , Pierre - Yves Sizaret , Franck Lemiale , Sarah Lebigot , Francis Barin , and Philippe Roingeard . Identiﬁcation of the glycoprotein 41 cytoplasmic tail domains of human immunodeﬁciency virus type 1 that interact with pr55 gag particles . AIDS Research and Human Retroviruses , 16 : 1141 – 1147 , 8 2000 . ISSN 0889 - 2229 . doi : 10 . 1089 / 088922200414983 . 41 . Robert D . M . Gray , Corina Beerli , Pedro Matos Pereira , Kathrin Maria Scherer , Jerzy Samolej , Christopher Karl Ernst Bleck , Jason Mercer , and Ricardo Henriques . VirusMap - per : Open - source nanoscale mapping of viral architecture through super - resolution mi - croscopy . Scientiﬁc Reports , 6 , 7 2016 . ISSN 20452322 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep29132 . 42 . Lucas Sánchez - Sampedro , Beatriz Perdiguero , Ernesto Mejías - Pérez , Juan García - Arriaza , Mauro Di Pilato , and Mariano Esteban . The evolution of poxvirus vaccines . Viruses , 7 : 1726 – 1803 , 4 2015 . ISSN 19994915 . doi : 10 . 3390 / v7041726 . 43 . Robert D . M . Gray , David Albrecht , Corina Beerli , Moona Huttunen , Gary H . Cohen , Ian J . White , Jemima J . Burden , Ricardo Henriques , and Jason Mercer . Nanoscale polarization of the entry fusion complex of vaccinia virus drives efﬁcient fusion . Nature Microbiology , 4 : 1636 – 1644 , 10 2019 . ISSN 20585276 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41564 - 019 - 0488 - 4 . 44 . Asim V . Farooq and Deepak Shukla . Herpes simplex epithelial and stromal keratitis : An epidemiologic update . Survey of Ophthalmology , 57 : 448 – 462 , 9 2012 . ISSN 00396257 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . survophthal . 2012 . 01 . 005 . 45 . Richard J . Whitley and David W . Kimberlin . Herpes simplex : Encephalitis children and adolescents . SeminarsinPediatricInfectiousDiseases , 16 : 17 – 23 , 2005 . ISSN10451870 . doi : 10 . 1053 / j . spid . 2004 . 09 . 007 . 46 . Michael P . Nicoll , João T . Proença , and Stacey Efstathiou . The molecular basis of herpes simplexviruslatency . FEMSMicrobiologyReviews , 36 : 684 – 705 , 52012 . ISSN01686445 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1574 - 6976 . 2011 . 00320 . x . 47 . Jay C . Brown and William W . Newcomb . Herpesvirus capsid assembly : Insights from structural analysis . Current Opinion in Virology , 1 : 142 – 149 , 2011 . ISSN 18796265 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . coviro . 2011 . 06 . 003 . 48 . Kay Grunewald , Prashant Desai , Dennis C . Winkler , J . Bernard Heymann , David M . Bel - nap , WolfgangBaumeister , andAlasdairC . Steven . Three - dimensionalstructureofherpes simplex virus from cryo - electron tomography . Science , 302 : 1396 – 1398 , 11 2003 . ISSN 0036 - 8075 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1090284 . 49 . Z . Hong Zhou , Matthew Dougherty , Joanita Jakana , Jing He , Frazer J . Rixon , and Wah Chiu . Seeing the herpesvirus capsid at 8 . 5 Å . Science , 288 : 877 – 880 , 5 2000 . ISSN 0036 - 8075 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 288 . 5467 . 877 . 50 . Bernard N . Fields , Diane E . Grifﬁn , David Mahan Knipe , Jane Doe , Robert A . Lamb , and Martin Malcolm A . Fields Virology . 4th edtion edition , 2001 . ISBN 978 - 0781718325 . 51 . Romain F . Laine , Anna Albecka , Sebastian van de Linde , Eric J . Rees , Colin M . Crump , and Clemens F . Kaminski . Structural analysis of herpes simplex virus by optical super - resolution imaging . Nature Communications , 6 : 5980 , 5 2015 . ISSN 2041 - 1723 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms6980 . 52 . Rainer Seitz . Human immunodeﬁciency virus ( HIV ) . Transfusion Medicine and Hemother - apy , 43 : 203 – 222 , 5 2016 . ISSN 16603818 . doi : 10 . 1159 / 000445852 . 53 . Dimiter G Demirov , Akira Ono , Jan M Orenstein , and Eric O Freed . Overexpression of the N - terminal domain of TSG101 inhibits HIV - 1 budding by blocking late domain function . Proceedings of the National Academy of Science , 99 : 955 – 960 , 1 2002 . 54 . JenniferE . Garrus , UtaK . vonSchwedler , OwenW . Pornillos , ScottG . Morham , KentonH . Zavitz , Hubert E . Wang , Daniel A . Wettstein , Kirsten M . Stray , Mélanie Côté , Rebecca L . Rich , David G . Myszka , and Wesley I . Sundquist . Tsg101 and the vacuolar protein sorting pathway are essential for hiv - 1 budding . Cell , 107 : 55 – 65 , 10 2001 . ISSN 00928674 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 01 ) 00506 - 2 . 55 . Juan Martin - Serrano , Trinity Zang , and Paul D . Bieniasz . HIV - 1 and Ebola virus encode small peptide motifs that recruit Tsg101 to sites of particle assembly to facilitate egress . Nature Medicine , 7 : 1313 – 1319 , 12 2001 . ISSN 1078 - 8956 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nm1201 - 1313 . 56 . Schuyler B . Van Engelenburg , Gleb Shtengel , Prabuddha Sengupta , Kayoko Waki , Michal Jarnik , Sherimay D . Ablan , Eric O . Freed , Harald F . Hess , and Jennifer Lippincott - Schwartz . Distribution of ESCRT machinery at HIV assembly sites reveals virus scaf - folding of ESCRT subunits . Science , 343 : 653 – 656 , 2014 . ISSN 10959203 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1247786 . 57 . Julien Berro and Thomas D . Pollard . Local and global analysis of endocytic patch dynam - ics in ﬁssion yeast using a new " temporal superresolution " realignment method . Molec - ular Biology of the Cell , 25 : 3501 – 3514 , 11 2014 . ISSN 19394586 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E13 - 01 - 0004 . 58 . Andrea Picco , Markus Mund , Jonas Ries , François Nédélec , and Marko Kaksonen . Vi - sualizing the functional architecture of the endocytic machinery . eLife , 4 , 2 2015 . ISSN 2050 - 084X . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 04535 . 59 . Markus Mund , Johannes Albertus van der Beek , Joran Deschamps , Serge Dmitrieff , Philipp Hoess , Jooske Louise Monster , Andrea Picco , François Nédélec , Marko Kakso - nen , and Jonas Ries . Systematic nanoscale analysis of endocytosis links efﬁcient vesicle formation to patterned actin nucleation . Cell , 174 : 884 – 896 . e17 , 8 2018 . ISSN 10974172 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2018 . 06 . 032 . 60 . Wanda Kukulski , Martin Schorb , Marko Kaksonen , and John A . G . Briggs . Plasma mem - brane reshaping during endocytosis is revealed by time - resolved electron tomography . Cell , 150 : 508 – 520 , 8 2012 . ISSN 10974172 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 05 . 046 . 61 . MathewBowler , DongKong , ShufengSun , RashmiNanjundappa , LaurenEvans , Veronica Farmer , Andrew Holland , Moe R . Mahjoub , Haixin Sui , and Jadranka Loncarek . High - resolution characterization of centriole distal appendage morphology and dynamics by ar ‰ iv | 10 Mendes & Heil et al . | SPA in SRM correlative STORM and electron microscopy . Nature Communications , 10 , 12 2019 . ISSN 20411723 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 08216 - 4 . 62 . SusanK . Dutcher . Theawesomepowerofdikaryonsforstudyingﬂagellaandbasalbodies in chlamydomonas reinhardtii . Cytoskeleton , 71 : 79 – 94 , 2 2014 . ISSN 19493584 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 21157 . 63 . Galo Garcia and Jeremy F . Reiter . A primer on the mouse basal body . Cilia , 5 , 4 2016 . ISSN 20462530 . doi : 10 . 1186 / s13630 - 016 - 0038 - 0 . 64 . ChadG . PearsonandMarkWiney . Basalbodyassemblyinciliates : Thepowerofnumbers . Trafﬁc , 10 : 461 – 471 , 2009 . ISSN 13989219 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2009 . 00885 . x . 65 . Anastassiia Vertii , Hui Fang Hung , Heidi Hehnly , and Stephen Doxsey . Human basal body basics . Cilia , 5 , 3 2016 . ISSN 20462530 . doi : 10 . 1186 / s13630 - 016 - 0030 - 8 . 66 . RichardG . W . Anderson . Thethree - dimensionalofthebasalbodyfromtherhesusmonkey oviduct . Journal of Cell Biology , 54 : 246 – 265 , 8 1972 . ISSN 1540 - 8140 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 54 . 2 . 246 . 67 . Francesc R . Garcia - Gonzalo and Jeremy F . Reiter . Scoring a backstage pass : Mecha - nisms of ciliogenesis and ciliary access . Journal of Cell Biology , 197 : 697 – 709 , 6 2012 . ISSN 00219525 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201111146 . 68 . NortonB . GilulaandPeterSatir . Theciliarynecklace . JournalofCellBiology , 53 : 494 – 509 , 5 1972 . ISSN 1540 - 8140 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 53 . 2 . 494 . 69 . Xiaoyu Shi , Galo Garcia , Julie C . Van De Weghe , Ryan McGorty , Gregory J . Pazour , Dan Doherty , BoHuang , andJeremyF . Reiter . Super - resolutionmicroscopyrevealsthatdisrup - tion of ciliary transition - zone architecture causes joubert syndrome . Nature Cell Biology , 19 : 1178 – 1188 , 9 2017 . ISSN 14764679 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3599 . 70 . Desirée Salas , Antoine Le Gall , Jean Bernard Fiche , Alessandro Valeri , Yonggang Ke , Patrick Bron , Gaetan Bellot , and Marcelo Nollmann . Angular reconstitution - based 3D re - constructions of nanomolecular structures from superresolution light - microscopy images . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 114 : 9273 – 9278 , 8 2017 . ISSN 10916490 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1704908114 . 71 . Joerg Schnitzbauer , Yina Wang , Shijie Zhao , Matthew Bakalar , Tulip Nuwal , Baohui Chen , and Bo Huang . Correlation analysis framework for localization - based superresolution mi - croscopy . ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademyofSciencesoftheUnitedStatesofAmer - ica , 115 : 3219 – 3224 , 3 2018 . ISSN 10916490 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1711314115 . 72 . ChristianSieben , NiccolòBanterle , KyleM . Douglass , PierreGönczy , andSulianaManley . Multicolor single - particle reconstruction of protein complexes . Nature Methods , 15 : 777 – 780 , 10 2018 . ISSN 15487105 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41592 - 018 - 0140 - x . 73 . Michael A . Robichaux , Valencia L . Potter , Zhixian Zhang , Feng He , Jun Liu , Michael F . Schmid , and Theodore G . Wensel . Deﬁning the layers of a sensory cilium with STORM and cryoelectron nanoscopy . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 116 : 23562 – 23572 , 2019 . ISSN 10916490 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1902003116 . 74 . Michel Bornens . The centrosome in cells and organisms . Science , 335 : 422 – 426 , 1 2012 . ISSN 0036 - 8075 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1209037 . 75 . Manuel Bauer , Fabien Cubizolles , Alexander Schmidt , and Erich A Nigg . Quantita - tive analysis of human centrosome architecture by targeted proteomics and ﬂuores - cence imaging . The EMBO Journal , 35 : 2152 – 2166 , 10 2016 . ISSN 0261 - 4189 . doi : 10 . 15252 / embj . 201694462 . 76 . Steffen Lawo , Monica Hasegan , Gagan D . Gupta , and Laurence Pelletier . Subdiffrac - tion imaging of centrosomes reveals higher - order organizational features of pericentri - olar material . Nature Cell Biology , 14 : 1148 – 1158 , 11 2012 . ISSN 14657392 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2591 . 77 . V . Mennella , B . Keszthelyi , K . L . Mcdonald , B . Chhun , F . Kan , G . C . Rogers , B . Huang , and D . A . Agard . Subdiffraction - resolution ﬂuorescence microscopy reveals a domain of the centrosome critical for pericentriolar material organization . Nature Cell Biology , 14 : 1159 – 1168 , 11 2012 . ISSN 14657392 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2597 . 78 . Katharina F . Sonnen , Lothar Schermelleh , Heinrich Leonhardt , and Erich A . Nigg . 3D - structuredilluminationmicroscopyprovidesnovelinsightintoarchitectureofhumancentro - somes . Biology Open , 1 : 965 – 976 , 10 2012 . ISSN 20466390 . doi : 10 . 1242 / bio . 20122337 . 79 . Luká š ˇCajánek and Erich A . Nigg . Cep164 triggers ciliogenesis by recruiting Tau tubulin kinase 2 to the mother centriole . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 111 , 7 2014 . ISSN 10916490 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1401777111 . 80 . Susanne Graser , York Dieter Stierhof , Sébastien B . Lavoie , Oliver S . Gassner , Stefan Lamla , Mikael Le Clech , and Erich A . Nigg . Cep164 , a novel centriole appendage pro - tein required for primary cilium formation . Journal of Cell Biology , 179 : 321 – 330 , 10 2007 . ISSN 00219525 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200707181 . 81 . Ichiro Izawa , Hidemasa Goto , Kousuke Kasahara , and Masaki Inagaki . Current topics of functional links between primary cilia and cell cycle . Cilia , 4 , 12 2015 . ISSN 20462530 . doi : 10 . 1186 / s13630 - 015 - 0021 - 1 . 82 . James E . Sillibourne , Ilse Hurbain , Thierry Grand - Perret , Bruno Goud , Phong Tran , and Michel Bornens . Primary ciliogenesis requires the distal appendage component Cep123 . Biology Open , 2 : 535 – 545 , 6 2013 . ISSN 20466390 . doi : 10 . 1242 / bio . 20134457 . 83 . Barbara E . Tanos , Hui Ju Yang , Rajesh Soni , Won Jing Wang , Frank P . Macaluso , John M . Asara , and Meng Fu Bryan Tsou . Centriole distal appendages promote membrane docking , leading to cilia initiation . Genes and Development , 27 : 163 – 168 , 2013 . ISSN 08909369 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 207043 . 112 . 84 . Qing Wei , Qingwen Xu , Yuxia Zhang , Yujie Li , Qing Zhang , Zeng Hu , Peter C . Harris , Vicente E . Torres , Kun Ling , and Jinghua Hu . Transition ﬁbre protein FBF1 is required for the ciliary entry of assembled intraﬂagellar transport complexes . Nature Communications , 4 , 11 2013 . ISSN 20411723 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms3750 . 85 . Xuan Ye , Huiqing Zeng , Gang Ning , Jeremy F . Reiter , and Aimin Liu . C2cd3 is critical for centriolardistalappendageassemblyandciliaryvesicledockinginmammals . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 111 : 2164 – 2169 , 2 2014 . ISSN 00278424 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1318737111 . 86 . Nathalie Delgehyr , James Sillibourne , and Michel Bornens . Microtubule nucleation and anchoringatthecentrosomeareindependentprocesseslinkedbynineinfunction . Journal of Cell Science , 118 : 1565 – 1575 , 4 2005 . ISSN 00219533 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 02302 . 87 . KazuhiroTateishi , YujiYamazaki , TomokiNishida , ShinWatanabe , KoshiKunimoto , Hiroaki Ishikawa , and Sachiko Tsukita . Two appendages homologous between basal bodies and centrioles are formed using distinct odf2 domains . Journal of Cell Biology , 203 : 417 – 425 , 11 2013 . ISSN 00219525 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201303071 . 88 . Gregory Mazo , Nadine Soplop , Won Jing Wang , Kunihiro Uryu , and Meng Fu Bryan Tsou . Spatial control of primary ciliogenesis by subdistal appendages alters sensation - associatedpropertiesofcilia . DevelopmentalCell , 39 : 424 – 437 , 112016 . ISSN18781551 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2016 . 10 . 006 . 89 . Lisa Gartenmann , Alan Wainman , Maryam Qurashi , Rainer Kaufmann , Sebastian Schu - bert , Jordan W . Raff , and Ian M . Dobbie . A combined 3D - SIM / SMLM approach allows centriole proteins to be localized with a precision of ~ 4 – 5 nm . Current Biology , 27 : R1054 – R1055 , 10 2017 . ISSN 09609822 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2017 . 08 . 009 . 90 . Sarah L . Veatch , Pietro Cicuta , Prabuddha Sengupta , Aurelia Honerkamp - Smith , David Holowka , and Barbara Baird . Critical ﬂuctuations in plasma membrane vesicles . ACS Chemical Biology , 3 : 287 – 293 , 5 2008 . ISSN 15548929 . doi : 10 . 1021 / cb800012x . 91 . B . D . Ripley . The second - order analysis of stationary point processes . Journal of Applied Probability , 13 : 255 – 266 , 6 1976 . ISSN 0021 - 9002 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 3212829 . 92 . MartinEster , Hans - PeterKriegel , JorgSander , andXiaoweiXu . Adensity - basedalgorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise . pages 226 – 231 , 1996 . 93 . Julia Gunzenhäuser , Nicolas Olivier , Thomas Pengo , and Suliana Manley . Quantitative super - resolution imaging reveals protein stoichiometry and nanoscale morphology of as - sembling HIV - gag virions . Nano Letters , 12 : 4705 – 4710 , 9 2012 . ISSN 15306984 . doi : 10 . 1021 / nl3021076 . 94 . Sebastian Malkusch , Walter Muranyi , Barbara Müller , Hans Georg Kräusslich , and Mike Heilemann . Single - molecule coordinate - based analysis of the morphology of HIV - 1 as - sembly sites with near - molecular spatial resolution . Histochemistry and Cell Biology , 139 : 173 – 179 , 1 2013 . ISSN 09486143 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00418 - 012 - 1014 - 4 . 95 . Charlotte Floderer , Jean Baptiste Masson , Elise Boilley , Sonia Georgeault , Peggy Merida , Mohamed El Beheiry , Maxime Dahan , Philippe Roingeard , Jean Baptiste Sibarita , Cyril Favard , andDelphineMuriaux . SinglemoleculelocalisationmicroscopyrevealshowHIV - 1 Gag proteins sense membrane virus assembly sites in living host CD4 T cells . Scientiﬁc Reports , 8 , 12 2018 . ISSN 20452322 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 34536 - y . 96 . LucasvonChamier , RomainF . Laine , JohannaJukkala , ChristophSpahn , DanielKrentzel , EliasNehme , MartinaLerche , SaraHernández - Pérez , PietaK . Mattila , EleniKarinou , Séa - mus Holden , Ahmet Can Solak , Alexander Krull , Tim Oliver Buchholz , Martin L . Jones , Loïc A . Royer , Christophe Leterrier , Yoav Shechtman , Florian Jug , Mike Heilemann , Guil - laume Jacquemet , and Ricardo Henriques . Democratising deep learning for microscopy with ZeroCostDL4Mic . Nature Communications , 12 , 12 2021 . ISSN 20411723 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 021 - 22518 - 0 . 97 . Amin Zehtabian , Paul Markus Müller , Maximilian Goisser , Leon Obendorf , Lea Jänisch , Nadja Hümpfer , Jakob Rentsch , and Helge Ewers . Precise measurement of nanoscopic septin ring structures in deep learning - assisted quantitative superresolution microscopy . bioRxiv , 12 2021 . doi : 10 . 1101 / 2021 . 12 . 28 . 474382 . 98 . Christophe Leterrier , Jean Potier , Ghislaine Caillol , Claire Debarnot , Fanny Rueda Boroni , and Bénédicte Dargent . Nanoscale architecture of the axon initial segment reveals an organized and robust scaffold . Cell Reports , 13 : 2781 – 2793 , 12 2015 . ISSN 22111247 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2015 . 11 . 051 . 99 . M . Heideman , D . Johnson , and C . Burrus . Gauss and the history of the fast fourier trans - form . IEEE ASSP Magazine , 1 : 14 – 21 , 10 1984 . ISSN 0740 - 7467 . doi : 10 . 1109 / MASSP . 1984 . 1162257 . 100 . Hamidreza Heydarian , Florian Schueder , Maximilian T . Strauss , Ben van Werkhoven , Mo - hamadreza Fazel , Keith A . Lidke , Ralf Jungmann , Sjoerd Stallinga , and Bernd Rieger . Template - free 2D particle fusion in localization microscopy . Nature Methods , 15 : 781 – 784 , 10 2018 . ISSN 15487105 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41592 - 018 - 0136 - 6 . 101 . J . A . G . Briggs . Structural organization of authentic , mature HIV - 1 virions and cores . The EMBO Journal , 22 : 1707 – 1715 , 4 2003 . ISSN 14602075 . doi : 10 . 1093 / emboj / cdg143 . 102 . Denis Fortun , Paul Guichard , Virginie Hamel , Carlos Oscar S . Sorzano , Niccolo Banterle , Pierre Gonczy , and Michael Unser . Reconstruction from multiple particles for 3D isotropic resolution in ﬂuorescence microscopy . IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging , 37 : 1235 – 1246 , 5 2018 . ISSN 1558254X . doi : 10 . 1109 / TMI . 2018 . 2795464 . 103 . Swarup Dey , Chunhai Fan , Kurt V . Gothelf , Jiang Li , Chenxiang Lin , Longfei Liu , Na Liu , Minke A . D . Nijenhuis , Barbara Saccà , Friedrich C . Simmel , Hao Yan , and Pengfei Zhan . DNA origami . Nature Reviews Methods Primers , 1 : 13 , 12 2021 . ISSN 2662 - 8449 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s43586 - 020 - 00009 - 8 . 104 . Anette Eltner and Giulia Soﬁa . Structure from motion photogrammetric technique . De - velopments in Earth Surface Processes , 23 : 1 – 24 , 1 2020 . ISSN 09282025 . doi : 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 444 - 64177 - 9 . 00001 - 1 . 105 . Hamidreza Heydarian , Maarten Joosten , Adrian Przybylski , Florian Schueder , Ralf Jung - mann , Ben van Werkhoven , Jan Keller - Findeisen , Jonas Ries , Sjoerd Stallinga , Mark Bates , and Bernd Rieger . 3D particle averaging and detection of macromolecular sym - metry in localization microscopy . Nature Communications , 12 , 12 2021 . ISSN 20411723 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 021 - 22006 - 5 . 106 . Benjamin Blundell , Christian Sieben , Suliana Manley , Ed Rosten , QueeLim Ch’ng , and Susan Cox . 3D structure from 2D microscopy images using deep learning . Frontiers in Bioinformatics , 1 , 10 2021 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fbinf . 2021 . 740342 . 107 . MarkusMund , AlineTschanz , Yu - LeWu , FelixFrey , JohannaLMehl , MarkoKaksonen , Ori Avinoam , Ulrich S Schwarz , and Jonas Ries . Superresolution microscopy reveals partial preassembly and subsequent bending of the clathrin coat during endocytosis . bioRxiv , 2022 . doi : 10 . 1101 / 2021 . 10 . 12 . 463947 . 108 . Teun A . P . M . Huijben , Hamidreza Heydarian , Alexander Auer , Florian Schueder , Ralf Jungmann , Sjoerd Stallinga , and Bernd Rieger . Detecting structural heterogeneity in single - moleculelocalizationmicroscopydata . NatureCommunications , 12 , 122021 . ISSN 20411723 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 021 - 24106 - 8 . 109 . Michael A . A . Cox and Trevor F . Cox . Handbook of Data Visualization . 2008 . 110 . A . K . Jain , M . N . Murty , and P . J . Flynn . Data clustering . ACM Computing Surveys , 31 : 264 – 323 , 9 1999 . ISSN 0360 - 0300 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 331499 . 331504 . 111 . Alexander Auer , Maximilian T . Strauss , Sebastian Strauss , and Ralf Jungmann . Nan - Mendes & Heil et al . | SPA in SRM ar ‰ iv | 11 oTRON : A Picasso module for MLP - based classiﬁcation of super - resolution data . Bioin - formatics , 36 : 3620 – 3622 , 6 2020 . ISSN 14602059 . doi : 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btaa154 . 112 . Vilma Jimenez Sabinina , M . Julius Hossain , Jean Karim Hériché , Philipp Hoess , Bianca Nijmeijer , Shyamal Mosalaganti , Moritz Kueblbeck , Andrea Callegari , Anna Szymborska , Martin Beck , Jonas Ries , and Jan Ellenberg . Three - dimensional superresolution ﬂuo - rescence microscopy maps the variable molecular architecture of the nuclear pore com - plex . Molecular Biology of the Cell , 32 : 1523 – 1533 , 8 2021 . ISSN 19394586 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E20 - 11 - 0728 . ar ‰ iv | 12 Mendes & Heil et al . | SPA in SRM