In Vivo Phosphorylation of Adaptors Regulates Their Interaction with Clathrin Andrew Wilde and Frances M . Brodsky The G . W . Hooper Foundation , Department of Immunology and Microbiology , and Departments of Biopharmaceutical Sciences and Pharmaceutical Chemistry , University of California , San Francisco 94143 - 0552 Abstract . The coat proteins of clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCV ) spontaneously self - assemble in vitro , but , in vivo , their self - assembly must be regulated . To deter - mine whether phosphorylation might influence coat formation in the cell , the in vivo phosphorylation state of CCV coat proteins was analyzed . Individual compo - nents of the CCV coat were isolated by immunoprecip - itation from Madin - Darby bovine kidney cells , labeled with 32Porthophosphate under normal culture condi - tions . The predominant phosphoproteins identified were subunits of the AP1 and AP2 adaptors . These in - cluded three of the four 100 - kD adaptor subunits , et and 132 of AP2 and 131 of AP1 , but not the ~ / subunit of AP1 . In addition , the ix1 and p . 2 subunits of AP1 and AP2 were phosphorylated under these conditions . Lower levels of in vivo phosphorylation were detected for the clathrin heavy and light chains . Analysis of phosphory - lation sites of the 100 - kD adaptor subunits indicated they were phosphorylated on serines in their hinge re - gions , domains that have been implicated in clathrin binding . In vitro clathrin - binding assays revealed that , upon phosphorylation , adaptors no longer bind to clathrin . In vivo analysis further revealed that adaptors with phosphorylated 100 - kD subunits predominated in the cytosol , in comparison with adaptors associated with cellular membranes , and that phosphorylated t32 subunits of AP2 were exclusively cytosolic . Kinase ac - tivity , which converts adaptors to a phosphorylated state in which they no longer bind clathrin , was found associated with the CCV coat . These results suggest that adaptor phosphorylation influences adaptor - clath - rin interactions in vivo and could have a role in control - ling coat disassembly and reassembly . C LATHRIN - MEDIATED vesicular transport occurs at two sites within the cell . At the plasma membrane , clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCV ) 1 facilitate recep - tor - mediated endocytosis ( Pearse and Robinson , 1990 ) to internalize soluble extracellular molecules such as nutri - ents , antigens , and growth factors and to down - regulate their receptors . CCV are also formed at the TGN where they sort newly synthesized lysosomal enzymes to the en - docytic pathway and play a role in secretory granule bio - genesis ( Pearse and Robinson , 1990 ) . The CCV coat is formed by polymerization of triskelion - shaped clathrin molecules into a lattice , catalyzed by adaptor molecules . The AP2 and AP1 adaptors nucleate clathrin assembly at the plasma membrane and the TGN , respectively , and play a role in selecting integral membrane proteins for Address all correspondence to Frances M . Brodsky , G . W . Hooper Foun - dation , Department of Immunology and Microbiology , University of Cali - fornia at San Francisco , 513 Parnassus Avenue , Room HSW - 1527 , Box 0552 , San Francisco , CA . 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : CCV , clathrin - coated vesicle ; CIAP , calf intestinal alkaline phosphatase ; MDBK , Madin - Darby bovine kidney ; PVDF , polyvinylidene difluoride . concentration in CCVs . Purified clathrin and adaptor mol - ecules , when sufficiently concentrated , will coassemble un - der physiological conditions in vitro ( Keen , 1990 ) . The cellular assembly of coat proteins needs to be tightly regulated to ensure thai the coat forms only at the membrane to initiate vesiculation , and that coat disassem - bly occurs only after the CCV has formed . Thus , there must be regulatory factors in the cell to ensure that clath - rin and adaptors interact at the appropriate cellular loca - tion but avoid coassembly in the cytosol . Results from several studies have suggested CCV coat protein phosphor - ylation may play a role in controlling assembly state in vivo ( Georgieva - Hanson et al . , 1988 ; Pypaert et al . , 1991 ) . Endocytosis is inhibited during mitosis by cytosolic factors that block CCV invagination in an in vitro assay , an effect that could be partially reproduced by addition of purified cdc2 kinase to the assay ( Pypaert et al . , 1991 ) . The mitotic inhibition of CCV invagination in vitro was reversed by di - luting cytosol , and this reversal was sensitive to okadaic acid , a protein phosphatase inhibitor . Furthermore , phos - phorylation of coat proteins by CCV - associated kinases destabilizes the clathrin coat of isolated brain CCV ( Geor - gieva - Hanson et al . , 1988 ) . Together , these data indicate phosphorylation may influence CCV assembly or disas - © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 96 / 11 / 635 / 11 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 135 , Number 3 , November 1996 635 ~ 45 635 sembly , but the target molecules for the implicated kinases and phosphatases have not yet been identified . Conversely , in vitro studies have established that some CCV components can be phosphorylated by CCV - associ - ated kinases , but the functional significance of the phos - phorylation and whether it occurs in vivo has yet to be es - tablished ( Morris et al . , 1990 ) . Each heterotetrameric adaptor has two 100 - kD subunits ( designated a and 32 3 in AP2 , and 31 13 ' and ~ / in AP1 ) and one medium and one small subunit ( designated Izl AP47 and or1 AP19 in AP1 , and Ix2 AP50 and ~ r2 AP17 in AP2 ) . When the ki - nase activity of purified CCV is stimulated , it is possible to phosphorylate all four 100 - kD adaptor subunits . The me - dium subunits of AP1 and AP2 have both been reported to become phosphorylated in vitro ( Merrese et al . , 1990 ; Pauloin and Thurieau , 1993 ) . Indeed , Ix1 was reported to have an intrinsic casein kinase II - like activity ( Merrese et al . , 1990 ) . or1 and ~ 2 have not been found to be phosphory - lated in any conditions . In vitro phosphorylation of clath - rin , which comprises a 180 - kD heavy chain and two ho - mologous light chains , LCa and LCb , has revealed a casein kinase II activity associated with CCV that phosphorylates LCb but not LCa . The target site in LCb was mapped to serines 11 and 13 , in the amino - terminal region , which are absent in LCa ( Hill et al . , 1988 ) . In vitro , the clathrin heavy chain can be phosphorylated by pp60 vsrc ( Mooi - broek et al . , 1992 ) . A limited number of studies on the in vivo phosphoryla - tion of CCV coat proteins have been carried out in special - ized cell types such as neurons and reticulocytes ( Bar - Zvi et al . , 1988 ; Corvera and Capocasale , 1990 ; Keen and Black , 1986 ) . One study found that in cultured neurons , the 100 - kD CCV coat proteins are phosphorylated , as well as the Ix2 but not Ix1 ( Keen and Black , 1986 ) . It was not es - tablished which of the 100 - kD proteins became phosphor - ylated , as antibodies distinguishing the different 100 - kD proteins were not available at the time these studies were carried out . In reticulocytes , it was found that the distribu - tion of phosphorylated 100 and 50 - kD CCV proteins ap - parently correlated with their assembly state , further sup - porting the idea that phosphorylation of adaptors may influence CCV formation ( Bar - Zvi et al r , 1988 ) . Again , due to lack of appropriate reagents , the phosphorylated adaptor subunits were not identified . A third study re - ported that , in chick embryo fibroblast cells transformed with Rous sarcoma virus , phosphorylation of the clathrin heavy chain occurred on tyrosine and serine residues ( Martin - Perez et al . , 1989 ) . Tyrosine phosphorylation of the clathrin light chains was also shown to occur upon the stimulation of cells with EGF ( Mooibroek et al . , 1992 ) . Each of these studies of clathrin phosphorylation impli - cated pp60 vsrc as the tyrosine kinase responsible . The data summarized above demonstrate the potential for many CCV coat proteins to be phosphorylated both in vivo and in vitro , and hint at a possible role for phosphory - lation in cellular regulation of CCV coat assembly or dis - sassembly . It was therefore of interest to establish more accurately which CCV coat protein subunits are modified by phosphorylation in vivo , and to correlate their modifi - cation with coat protein interactions . Here we identify the CCV coat protein subunits that are phosphorylated in vivo and show that phosphorylation of adaptors is a negative regulator of their interaction with clathrin . This phosphor - ylation effect was reproduced in vitro by stimulation of CCV - associated kinase activity . ! a addition , the 32 sub - units of AP2 adaptors in the cytosol were all phosphory - lated , while the 132 subunits of membrane - associated AP2 were predominantly dephosphorylated , further supporting a role for phosphorylation in regulating the assembly state of CCV coat proteins in the cell . Materials and Methods Materials Clathrin and adaptors were purified using a method based on that of Man - fredi and Bazari ( 1987 ) with the modifications described by Chang et al . ( 1993 ) . All chemicals were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co . ( St . Louis , MO ) unless otherwise stated in the text . The antibodies X22 , LCB . 1 , TD . 1 , X16 , and AP . 6 were generated in this laboratory ( see Table I ) . Antibodies 100 / 1 , 100 / 2 , and 100 / 3 , and antibodies GD / 1 and RY / 1 were obtained from E . Ungewickell and L . Traub ( Washington University , St . Louis , MO ) , respectively . Antibodies AC1 - Mll and AP50 - 2 were ob - tained from M . Robinson ( University of Cambridge , UK ) . Cell Culture , Phosphate Labeling , and Immunoprecipitation Madin - Darby bovine kidney ( MDBK ) cells , obtained from the American Type Culture Collection ( Rockville , MD ) , were cultured in DME ( Chang et al . , 1993 ) to 80 - 90 % confluency . Cells were washed in phosphate - free DME ( GIBCO BRL , Gaithersburg , MD ) , and then labeled for 3 h in a medium containing 250 mCi / ml 32porthophosphate ( Dupont - New En - gland Nuclear , Wilmington , DE ) . Cells were then solubilized in 0 . 5 ml of IP buffer ( 0 . 5M Tris / HC1 , pH 7 . 2 , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 20 mM EDTA , 10 mM NaF , 30 mM Na4PPi , 2 mM benzamidine , 1 mM Na3VO 4 , lmg / ml pepsta - tin A , aprotinin , and teupeptin , and 0 . 1 mM PMSF ) and centrifuged ( 13 , 000 g , 10 rain , 4°C ) ; the supernatant was removed and used for immu - noprecipitation by antibodies prebound to protein A - sepharose ( Pharma - cia , Uppsala , Sweden ) . Immunoprecipitates were analyzed by SDS - PAGE ( Laemmli , 1970 ) and by Western blotting and subsequent autoradiogra - phy using x - ray film ( X - OMAT ; Eastman - Kodak Co . , Rochester , NY ) . Phosphoamino Acid Analysis MDBK cells were labeled as described previously , and the immunoprecip - itated proteins were analyzed by SDS - PAGE and Western blotting of the protein onto polyvinylidene difluoride ( PVDF ) membrane ( Immobilon - P ; Millipore Corp . , Bedford , MA ) . Phosphorylated proteins were excised from the membrane and heated at ll0°C for 1 . 5 h in 6 N HC1 ( Pierce Chemical Co . , Rockford , IL ) . The resultant solution of hydrolyzed protein was analyzed by one - dimensional thin - layer electrophoresis on 0 . 1 mm plates ( EM Separations , Gibbstown , NJ ) using 10 % acetic acid and 1 % pyridine running buffer to separate the different phosphorylated amino acids . The migration of standards of the phosphoamino acids serine , thre - onine , and tyrosine was visualized with ninhydrin , and the migration of 32P - containing phosphoamino acids was determined by autoradiography . Fractionation of Labeled Cells MDBK cells were labeled with 32porthophosphate as above . Cells were harvested in 100 mM MES , pH 6 . 8 , 1 mM EGTA , 0 . 5 mM MgC12 , and 0 . 2 mM DTT and lysed by repeated freeze thaw in liquid nitrogen . Cell ly - sate was centrifuged ( 1 , 000 g , 10 min ) , to remove intact cells and nuclei , and the supernatant was removed and centrifuged ( 100 , 000 g , 30 min ) to separate membranes ( pellet ) from the cytosol ( supernatant ) . To the cyto - solic fraction , Tris / HC1 , pH 7 . 2 , and Triton X - 100 were added to final con - centrations of 0 . 5 M and 1 % , respectively , before being used for immuno - precipitation as described above . The membrane fraction was solubilized in IP buffer and centrifuged ( 13 , 000 g , 10 min ) , and the supernatant was used for immunoprecipitation as described before . Immunoprecipitations were analyzed by SDS - PAGE , Western blotting , and autoradiography . The amount of protein found in the different fractions was determined by immunoblotting using the ECL detection system ( Amersham Corp . , Ar - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 135 , 1996 636 lington Heights . IL ) and by quantitation using the Molecular Dynamics Personal Densitometer ( Sunnyvale , CA ) . The relative levels of 32p - labeled proteins in each of the fractions were determined using a phosphorimager ( Molecular Dynamics ) . To determine the ratio of phosphorylated proteins in the membrane as compared with those in the cytosol , the phosphorim - ager values were normalized according to the protein levels determined from the immunoblot experiments . Two - dimensional Gel Electrophoresis Proteins were resolved in the first dimension by isoelectric focusing on a 3 . 3 % acrylamide gel containing 9 M urea and 2 % ampholytes ( Pharma - cia ) . The ampholyte mixture was a 3 : 1 mix of the pH 5 . 0 - 7 . 0 ampholytes and the pH 3 . 5 - 10 ampholytes , respectively . Proteins were then separated on the basis of size on a standard 8 % acrylamide SDS - PAGE gel ( O ' Far - rell , 1975 ) and transferred onto nitrocellulose before detection by immu - noblotting . Protease Digestion of Immunoprecipitated Adaptors MDBK ceils were labeled with [ 32p ] orthophosphate , as above , and AP1 and AP2 were immunoprecipitated with the 100 / 3 and AP . 6 antibodies . Immunoprecipitated coat proteins were resuspended in 50 pJ of 50 mM Tris / HCI , pH 8 . 0 , and digested at 37°C for either l , 3 , or 5 min by the addi - tion of either 0 . 025 mg of elastase or 0 . 1 mg of trypsin . The resultant digest was analyzed by SDS - PAGE , Western blotting , and autoradiography . Clathrin Cage - binding Assay Purified clathrin was concentrated to > 1 mg / ml , and then dialyzed over - night against 100 mM MES , pH 6 . 5 , 1 mM EGTA , 0 . 5 mM MgCI 2 , 3 mM CaCl2 , and 0 . 2 mM DTT at 4°C to allow clathrin cages to assemble . The cages were harvested by centrifugation ( 100 , 000 g , 15 min ) , and the pel - leted cages were resuspended in the dialysis buffer . Clathrin cages were added to cytosol made from [ 32p ] orthophosphate - labeled MDBK cells har - vested in 100 mM MES , pH 6 . 8 , 1 mM EGTA , 0 . 5 mM MgCI 2 , and 02 mM DTT , and incubated for 3 h at 4°C . Cages were then pelleted and solubi - lized ; adaptors were then immunoprecipitated from both the pellet and the supernatant ; and immunoprecipitates were analyzed by SDS - PAGE , Western blotting , and autoradiography . In experiments where cytosol from nonradiolabeled cells was tested for cage binding , the presence of adaptors in pellets or supernatants was analyzed directly by SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting . Dephosphorylation of Cytosolic Adaptors Cytosol was prepared from MDBK cells labeled with [ 32P ] orthophosphate as above in the absence of phosphatase inhibitors . Adaptors were dephos - phorylated by the addition of calf intestinal alkaline phosphatase ( CIAP ) ( Boehringer Mannheim Biochemicals , Indianapolis , IN ) , 5 U / ml , and in - cubated at 37°C for 30 min . The cytosol was then used in the cage - binding assay described above . Mock treatment was by incubation at 37°C for 30 rain without adding CLAP . Stimulation of Clathrin - coated Vesicle - associated Kinase Activity CCVs were purified from bovine brain using the method described by Bauxbaum and Woodman ( 1995 ) . Proteins were stripped from purified CCVs using 0 . 5 M Tris , pH 7 . 4 . Kinase activity was stimulated as de - scribed by Morris et al . ( 1990 ) , by the addition of KC1 , MgC12 , polylysine , and ATP to final concentrations of 0 . 15 M , 5 mM 100 l ~ g / ml and 100 ~ M , respectively , and by diluting the stripped protein solution such that the fi - nal Tris concentration was 100 mM . This solution was then incubated at room temperature for 30 min . The reaction was stopped by the addition of EDTA to a final concentration of 20 mM . Results Adaptor Subunits Are Major CCV Phosphoproteins The purpose of this study was to identify components of the CCV coat that are phosphorylated in vivo and to in - vestigate the role of these modifications in regulating coat assembly . In recent years , our laboratory and others have developed and characterized antibodies specific for each of the subunits of clathrin and the AP1 and AP2 adaptors ( Table I ) . These antibodies were used to immunoprecipi - tate components of the CCV coat from solubilized MDBK cells , biosynthetically labeled with [ 32p ] orthophosphate . Analysis of the immunoprecipitated proteins after SDS - PAGE and autoradiography revealed that , under these steady state culture conditions , components of both adap - tors and clathrin are constitutively phosphorylated , and that several adaptor subunits appear to be the dominant targets for phosphorylation among the CCV components analyzed ( Fig . 1 ) . To verify which subunits of CCV proteins were phos - phorylated , immunoprecipitates were further analyzed by immunoblotting with specific antibodies , as well as by au - toradiography , and the resulting films were overlaid ( Fig . 2 ) . Immunoprecipitated 100 - kD adaptor subunits were re - solved on SDS - PAGE gels containing 6 M urea before this analysis ( Ahle and Ungewickell , 1986 ) . Once phosphory - lated polypeptides were identified from both adaptors and clathrin , gel bands were excised and hydrolyzed , and the phosphoamino acid composition was determined by thin - layer electrophoresis ( Fig . 3 ) . In AP1 , the 131 subunit was phosphorylated ( Fig . 2 A ) , and its phosphorylation was shown to be exclusive to serine residues ( Fig . 3 A ) . In AP2 , both the et and 132 sub - units were found to be phosphorylated ( Fig . 2 B ) on serine residues ( Fig . 3 A ) . Quantitation of the amount of [ 32p ] phosphate incorporated in the et and 132 subunits showed that the 132 subunit contained twice as much phos - phate as a ( data not shown ) . For both AP1 and AP2 , the medium subunits were also phosphorylated ( Fig . 2 , C and D ) . The I ~ 1 subunit of AP1 was phosphorylated equally on serine and threonine residues . In contrast , the t ~ 2 subunit of AP2 was phosphorylated predominantly on serine resi - dues with only a minor amount of threonine phosphoryla - tion ( Fig . 3 B ) . Figure 1 . In vivo - phosphorylated CCV coat proteins . Autoradio - graph of the immunoprecipitated coat protein components of CCV from MDBK cells labeled in vivo with [ 32p ] orthophosphate . AP2 immunoprecipitated with antibody AP . 6 ( lane 1 ) . Clathrin immu - noprecipitated with antibody X22 ( lane 2 ) . Immunoprecipitation using a control antibody DA6 that recognizes the ct chain of class II histocompatibility molecules ( not expressed in MDBK cells ) ( lane 3 ) . AP1 immunoprecipitated with antibody 100 / 3 ( lane 4 ) . Immunoprecipitation was carried out in the presence of 0 . 5 M Tris , pH 7 . 0 , to prevent coat protein assembly . Immunopre - cipitates were analyzed on a t0 % acrylamide - SDS gel . The mi - gration of molecular weight standards in kilodaltons ( kD ) is indi - cated on the lefthand side of this figure and all subsequent figures . Wilde and Brodsky Adaptor Phosphorylation Regulates Clathrin Binding 637 Table L Antibodies Used in This Study Antibody Antigen Reference 100 / 1 131 subunit of AP1 and ( Ahle et al . , 1988 ) 132 subunit of AP2 100 / 2 ct subunit of AP2 ( Ahle et al . , 1988 ) 100 / 3 " , / subunit of AP1 ( Ahle et al . , 1988 ) AC1 - M11 tx subunit of AP2 ( Robinson , 1987 ) AP . 6 ~ t subunit of AP2 ( Chin et al . , 1989 ) G / DI 131 subunit of AP1 and ( Traub et al . , 1995 ) 132 subunit of AP2 RY / 1 Ixl of API gift from L . Traub AP50 - 2 p , 2 of AP2 ( Page and Robinson , 1995 ) X16 Clathrin light chain a ( LCa ) ( Brodsky , 1985 ) X22 Clathrin heavy chain ( Brodsky , 1985 ) LCB . 1 Clathrin light chain b ( LCb ) ( Brodsky et al . , 1987 ) TD . 1 Clathrin heavy chain ( Niithke et al . , 1992 ) Under the same steady state culture conditions , clathrin heavy chain was weakly phosphorylated ( Fig . 2 E ) , pre - dominantly on tyrosine residues but with some serine phosphorylation ( Fig . 3 C ) . Clathrin light chains , LCa and LCb , were both phosphorylated ( Fig . 2 / 7 ) on serine resi - dues ( Fig . 3 C ) . LCb was the predominant target for phos - phorylation in clathrin , correlating with in vitro findings that LCb has a target site for CCV - associated casein kinase II activity that is absent in the LCa sequence ( Hill et al . , 1988 ) . Identification of the Phosphorylated Domains of the lO0 - kD Adaptor Subunits The 100 - kD subunits of adaptors have proline / glycine - rich hinge regions within which are proteolysis sites that allow the adaptors to be fragmented into their constituent do - mains . Limited cleavage releases the globular " ear " do - mains , from the " head " of the adaptors , which comprises the NH2 - terminal 60 - 70 - kD portion of each 100 - kD sub - unit plus the medium and small subunits . A number of studies have assigned specific functions to the proteolyti - cally defined domains of adaptors ( Goodman and Keen , 1995 ; Keen and Beck , 1989 ; Shih et al . , 1995 ; Traub et al . , 1995 ) . The head domains of both AP1 and AP2 have local - ization specificity for the intracellular membrane where each type of adaptor is found ( Page and Robinson , 1995 ; Peeler et al . , 1993 ) , The hinge regions of both 131 and 132 , as well as sequences in the et chain of AP2 , can interact with clathrin ( Goodman and Keen , 1995 ; Shih et al . , 1995 ) . The domains in which adaptors are phosphorylated were identified to establish a potential functional consequence for these modifications . AP1 or AP2 adaptors were separately immunoprecipi - tated from 32p - labeled MDBK cells and cleaved with either trypsin or elastase , and the resulting fragments were ana - lyzed by SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting ( Fig . 4 ) . The tryp - sin cleavage site lies in the hinge domain of the 100 - kD adaptor subunits , closest to the head domain , and proteo - lysis with trypsin produces a low molecular weight frag - ment , consisting of the hinge and ear domains , and a high molecular weight fragment , consisting of the head frag - ment alone ( SchrOder and Ungewickell , 1991 ) . The elas - tase cleavage site lies at the opposite end of the hinge do - Figure 2 . Identification of the . phosphorylated subunits within each of the CCV coat protein complexes . MDBK cells were la - beled in vivo with [ 32p ] orthophosphate , and components of the CCV coat were immunoprecipitated . The individual subunits of each precipitated complex were separated by SDS - PAGE and analyzed both by Western blotting and autoradiography . ( A ) AP1 immunoprecipitated wit h antibody 100 / 3 and analyzed on an 8 % acrylamide - - SDS gel , com aining 6 M urea , followed by auto - radiography ( lane 1 ) , immurtbblotting with antibody 100 / 3 to de - tect the y subunit ( lane 2 ) , : arid immunoblotting with the antibody 100 / 1 to detect the 131 ( / 3 ' ) subunit ( lane 3 ) . ( B ) AP2 immunopre - cipitated with antibody AP : 6 and analyzed on an 8 % acrylamide - SDS gel , containing 6 M urea , followed by autoradiography ( lane 1 ) , immunobtotting ~ , ith antibody AC1 - Mll to detect the ¢t subunit ( lane 2 ) , and immunoblotting with the antibody 100 / 1 to detect the 132 ( / 3 ) subu ~ t ( lane 3 ) . ( C ) AP1 immunoprecipitated with antibody 100 / 3 and analyzed on a 10 % acrylamide - SDS gel , followed by autoradiography ( lane 1 ) and immunoblotting with antibody RY / 1 against txl ( lane 2 ) . ( D ) AP2 immunoprecipitated using antibody AP . 6 and analyzed on a 10 % acrylamide - SDS gel , followed by autoradiography ( lane 1 ) and immunoblotting with antibody AP50 - 2 against W2 ( lane 2 ) . ( E ) Clathrin immunopre - cipitated using the antibody X22 and analyzed on an 8 % acryl - amide - SDS gel , followed by autoradiography ( lane 1 ) and by im - munoblotting with the clathrin heavy chain - specific antibody TD . 1 ( lane 2 ) . ( F ) Clathrin immunoprecipitated with the anti - body X22 and analyzed on a 12 % acrylamide - SDS gel , followed by autoradiography ( lane 1 ) , immunoblotting with the antibody LCB . 1 that recogn ~ es LCb ( lane 2 ) , and immunoblotting with the antibody X16 that recognizes LCa ( lane 3 ) . main closest to the ear domain . Cleavage with elastase produces a low molecular weight fragment , consisting of the ear domain alone , and a high molecular weight frag - ment , consisting of the head and hinge domains ( Shih et al . , 1995 ) . Analysis of phosphorylated AP1 digested with trypsin revealed a 32p - labeled fragment corresponding to the ear plus hinge domains ( Fig . 4 A ) , while elastase diges - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 135 , 1996 638 Figure 3 . Phosphoamino acid analysis of the phosphoproteins of the CCV coat . Protein complexes of the CCV coat were immuno - precipitated from MDBK cells labeled in vivo with [ 32p ] ortho - phosphate and separated by SDS - PAGE , followed by blotting onto PVDF membranes . Phosphorylated proteins were visual - ized by autoradiography , the corresponding region of the PVDF membrane was excised and hydrolyzed in 6 N HCI , and phospho - amino acids were analyzed by thin - layer electrophoresis . Migra - tion of phosphorylated amino acids was detected by autoradiog - raphy and compared with the migration of standard , nonradioactive phosphoamino acids , phospho - serine ( P - S ) , phospho - threonine ( P - T ) , and phospho - tyrosine ( P - Y ) . ( A ) Analysis of the 100 - kD subunits of AP1 and AP2 : ( lane 1 ) a subunit of AP2 ; ( lane 2 ) 132 subunit of AP2 ; ( lane 3 ) 131 subunit of AP1 . ( B ) Ixl of AP1 ( lane 1 ) and 1 ~ 2 of AP2 ( lane 2 ) . ( C ) Clathrin heavy chain ( lane 1 ) , LCa ( lane 2 ) , and LCb ( lane 3 ) . tion produced a labeled peptide of higher molecular weight corresponding to a fragment containing the head and hinge domains . These results indicate that the hinge region of the 131 subunit becomes phosphorylated in AP1 , as each of the labeled fragments produced only contains the hinge domain in common , which was confirmed by im - munoblotting with a hinge - specific antibody ( data not shown ) . Labeled AP2 yielded similar results upon proteo - lysis , demonstrating that the phosphorylated regions of the et and 132 subunits segregated with the ear or head do - mains , depending on whether trypsin or elastase was used , and thereby mapping phosphorylation of AP2 to the hinge region of both subunits . Immunoblotting of the digested Figure 4 . Phosphorylated domains within the 100 - kD subunits of AP1 and AP2 . AP1 and AP2 were immunoprecipitated from [ 32p ] orthophosphate - labeled MDBK cells and digested with trypsin or elastase . The digested products were separated by SDS - PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose . Labeled peptide fragments were visualized by autoradiography . ( A ) 32p - labeled AP1 digested with elastase ( lane 1 ) , trypsin ( lane 2 ) , and undi - gested ( lane 3 ) . ( Open arrow ) Position of the head plus hinge fragment of 131 in lane 1 ; ( closed arrow head ) position of the ear plus hinge fragment of 131 in lane 2 . ( B ) 32p - labeled AP2 digested with elastase ( lane 1 ) , trypsin ( lane 2 ) , and undigested ( lane 3 ) . Peptides corresponding to the different domains of each of the phosphorylated 100 - kD adaptor subunits were identified by im - munoblotting using domain - specific antibodies as indicated . The star and diamond indicate the positions of the a and 132 head plus hinge fragments , respectively , in lane 1 . The bracket and open circle indicate the position of the ear plus hinge fragments of 132 and a fragments , respectively , in lane 2 . ( C ) Immunoblot of the digest shown in B ( lanes 1 and 2 ) , using the antibody GD / 1 against the 13 - subunit hinge domains . The blot is aligned with the molecular weight markers of B , from which it was produced , and the fragments are designated by the same symbols as in B . Wilde and Brodsky Adaptor Phosphorylation Regulates Clathrin Binding 639 Figure 5 . Adaptors phosphorylated in vivo are impaired in their ability to bind to clathrin cages . ( - 4 ) Cytosol was prepared from [ 32p ] orthophosphate - labeled MDBK cells and incubated in the presence or absence of preformed clathrin cages produced by po - lymerization of purified bovine brain clathrin . Cages were har - vested by centrifugation , and adaptors were first immunoprecipi - tated ( using antibody 100 / 3 for AP1 and antibody AP . 6 for AP2 ) from both the pellet ( P ) and the soluble fraction ( S ) ; then the im - munoprecipitates were analyzed by SDS - PAGE , immunoblotting ( lower panel ) , and autoradiography ( upper panel ) . AP1 was de - tected using the antibody 100 / 3 , and AP2 was detected using the antibody 100 / 2 . ( B ) Cytosol was prepared from MDBK ceils and incubated in the presence or absence of preformed clathrin cages with or without purified adaptors . The solution was centrifuged , and both the pelletable ( P ) and soluble ( S ) material was analyzed directly by SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting . AP1 was detected by immunoblotting with the 100 / 3 antibody . AP2 was detected by immunoblotting with the 100 / 2 antibody . AP2 products with an antibody recognizing the hinge do - main of the 132 subunits ( Traub et al . , 1995 ) showed the hinge region segregated along with the 3Zp - labeled pep - tides into the low molecular weight trypsin fragment and the high molecular weight elastase fragment of the 132 sub - unit ( Fig . 4 C ) . The same digestion patterns were seen for phosphorylated adaptors immunoprecipitated from la - beled normal rat kidney cells , establishing that hinge phos - phorylation was not cell specific ( data not shown ) . Fur - thermore , in vivo - phosphorylated AP1 and AP2 from MDBK and normal rat kidney cells , fragmented using CNBr , produced phosphopeptide maps consistent with the phosphorylation site being in the hinge region ( data not shown ) . The hinge regions of the ~ , 131 , and 132 subunits of adaptors extend approximately between amino acid resi - dues 600 and 750 in each of these 100 - kD subunits ( Kirch - hausen et al . , 1989 ) . As serine residues within these do - mains do not lie within classical kinase consensus sequences , their phosphorylation must be mediated by a novel kinase or a known kinase using a nonclassical consensus site . Phosphorylated Adaptors Have Impaired Binding to Clathrin Cages Phosphorylation of the 131 and 132 subunits within their clathrin - binding hinge region suggested that one role of adaptor phosphorylation might be to regulate the interac - tion between adaptors and clathrin within cells . To investi - gate this possibility , an in vitro clathrin - binding assay was used . Purified bovine brain clathrin was polymerized into polyhedral cages , which were added to cytosol from 32p _ labeled MDBK cells . This cage - binding assay can detect adaptor - clathrin interactions by cosedimentation of adap - tors with preformed clathrin cages ( Ahle and Ungewickell , 1989 ) . The presence of bound ( peUetable ) or unbound ( nonpelletable ) adaptors was assayed by immunoprecipi - ration followed by immunoblotting and autoradiography ( Fig . 5 A ) . Phosphorylated adaptors , derived from MDBK cytosol , were only associated with the supernatant of these reactions and absent from pellets of clathrin cages . Blot - ting for adaptor subunits indicated that no adaptors from the cytosol bound to the preformed cages in this experi - ment , suggesting that cytosolic adaptors were impaired in their ability to associate with clathrin cages . This was con - firmed using cytosol from unlabeled MDBK cells ( Fig . 5 B ) . No adaptors of cytosolic origin bound to clathrin cages , al - though when purified adaptors were added to cytosol in the same reaction , adaptor binding to clathrin cages was detected . This demonstrated that cytosol does not contain inhibitory factors that prevent binding of adaptors to clathrin cages and further suggested that cytosolic , but not purified adaptors , are impaired for clathrin binding , possi - bly as a result of modification . Purified and cytosolic adaptors would be expected to differ in their states of phosphorylation . Adaptors purified from bovine brain CCV have been previously shown to be dephosphorylated by a potent phosphatase activity that copurifies with adaptors and efficiently dephosphorylates adaptors within the time course of purification ( Morris et al . , 1990 ) . Furthermore , the purified adaptors tested for clathrin binding in the above experiment were isolated in the absence of phosphatase inhibitors , while the adaptors present in the cytosol were clearly phosphorylated to some extent ( Fig . 5 A ) . If phosphorylation prevents cytosolic adaptors from binding to clathrin , then dephosphorylation should induce clathrin binding . To test this theory , condi - tions for dephosphorylation of cytosolic adaptors were es - tablished , using CIAP . Dephosphorylation of cytosolic adaptors , detected by loss of 32p - label without comparable loss of protein , was achieved after incubation with 5 U / ml for 30 min at 37°C ( Fig . 6 A ) . Unlabeled cytosol was then prepared from MDBK cells , incubated with CIAP under the same conditions , and the cytosolic adaptors were tested for binding to clathrin cages ( Fig . 6 B ) . The CIAP - treated cytosolic adaptors were rendered competent to bind cages , while mock - treated cytosolic adaptors did not . These experiments indicate that phosphorylated adaptors are impaired in binding to clathrin and suggest that phos - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 135 . 1996 640 Figure 6 . CIAP will dephosphorylate cytosolic adaptor com - plexes , allowing them to bind to clathrin cages . ( A ) Cytosol pre - pared from [ 32p ] orthophosphate - labeled MDBK ceils was treated with ClAP to establish whether the ClAP was effective at de - phosphorylation . AP1 or AP2 was first immunoprecipitated , us - ing the antibodies 100 / 3 and AP . 6 , respectively , from cytosol , and then analyzed by SDS - PAGE , immunoblotting , and autoradiog - raphy . AP1 was detected using the antibody 100 / 3 , and AP2 was detected using the antibody 100 / 2 . ( B ) Cytosol was prepared from MDBK cells , treated or mock treated with calf intestinal phosphatase , and then incubated in the presence or absence of preformed clathrin cages . Material was pelleted by centrifugation and analyzed directly by SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting for AP1 using the antibody 100 / 3 or for AP2 using the antibody 100 / 2 . Figure 7 . Cellular localization of phosphorylated adaptors . MDBK cells were labeled with [ 32p ] orthophosphate , and then membrane and cytosol fractions were isolated . AP1 and AP2 were immunoprecipitated from the fractions using the antibodies 100 / 3 and AP . 6 , respectively , and analyzed by SDS acrylamide gel containing 6 M urea , followed by Western blotting onto nitro - cellulose and autoradiography . ( Lanes 1 and 3 ) Membrane frac - tions . ( Lanes 2 and 4 ) Cytosolic fractions . impaired ability of cytosolic adaptors to bind clathrin ( Fig . 5 ) , suggested that most cytosolic adaptors may be phosphory - lated in the 131 or 132 hinge region that influences clathrin binding . Therefore , the degree of phosphorylation of the [ 32 subunit of AP2 was investigated in membrane and cy - tosolic fractions of MDBK cells , using two - dimensional electrophoresis ( Fig . 8 ) . Isoelectric focusing , followed by SDS - PAGE and autoradiography , revealed that the [ 32 subunit of AP2 , immunoprecipitated from 32P - labeled MDBK cytosol , was present in two phosphorylated forms and phorylation of adaptors could influence the assembly state of CCV coat proteins within the cell . Cellular Localization of Phosphorylated Adaptors Further evidence for a cellular role of adaptor phosphory - lation in regulating adaptor - clathrin interactions was sought in vivo . First , the intracellular distribution of phosphory - lated adaptors was investigated to determine whether phosphorylated adaptors predominated in the cytosol . MDBK cells were labeled with [ 32p ] orthophosphate and , after freeze - thaw lysis , separated by differential centrifu - gation into membrane and cytosol fractions . AP1 or AP2 adaptors were immunoprecipitated from each fraction and analyzed by SDS - PAGE and autoradiography ( Fig . 7 ) . In addition , the degree of phosphorylation of each of the adaptor subunits in each fraction was measured using a Molecular Dynamics phosphorimager . This value was then normalized for protein concentration as determined by es - timating the relative amount of protein in each fraction by quantitative immunoblotting . Phosphorylated adaptor sub - units of both AP1 ( 131 ) and AP2 ( et and 132 ) predominated in the cytosol fraction relative to their presence in the membrane fraction , in ratios of > 3 : 1 . This distribution cor - related with a tendency of dephosphorylated adaptors to be coassembled with clathrin on cellular membranes . The predominance of phosphorylated [ 31 and 132 adap - tor subunits in the cytosol ( Fig . 7 ) , in conjunction with the Figure 8 . Two - dimensional gel electrophoresis of the 132 subunit of AP2 from membrane and cytosolic fractions . 32p - labeled ( A ) or unlabeled ( B ) MDBK cells were lysed by freeze thawing , and membrane and cytosol fractions were prepared . In each of the fractions , AP2 was analyzed by isoelectric focusing in the first di - mension and SDS - PAGE in the second dimension . ( A ) AP2 was immunoprecipitated from the cytosolic fraction of [ 32p ] ortho - phosphate - labeled MDBK cells with the antibody AP . 6 and ana - lyzed by two - dimensional gel electrophoresis , followed by auto - radiography and immunoblotting with the 100 / 1 antibody to detect the 132 subunit of AP2 . ( B ) AP2 was immunoprecipitated with AP . 6 , and the 132 subunit was detected by immunoblotting with the antibody 100 / 1 . ( Lane 1 ) 132 subunit immunoprecipitated from MDBK membranes . ( Lane 2 ) 132 subunit immunoprecipi - tated separately from membrane and cytosolic fractions of MDBK cells . These immunoprecipitates were then mixed and analyzed on the same two - dimensional gel . ( Lane 3 ) 132 subunit immuno - precipitated from MDBK cytosol . ( Arrows ) Equivalent spots in the two experiments ; i . e . , the major form of 132 in the cytosol , which is phosphorylated , but to a lesser extent than the minor form visible in A , which is more acidic and not detected by blot - ting in B . Wilde and Brodsky Adaptor Phosphorylation Regulates Clathrin Binding 641 therefore must have at least two phosphorylation sites ( Fig . 8 A ) . Immunoblotting indicated that no dephosphor - ylated 132 subunit was present in the cytosol , and that the only dectectable 132 subunit protein in the cytosol corre - sponded to the two phosphorylated forms detected by au - toradiography . Blotting also indicated that the hyperphos - phorylated form of [ 32 subunit constituted a minor subpopulation . In contrast , when the 132 subunit of AP2 isolated from the membrane fraction was analyzed , it mi - grated to a less acidic position than either phosphorylated form . When the two samples were mixed ( AP2 from mem - brane and AP2 from cytosol ) and analyzed together on the same gel , it was confirmed that a distinctly charged form of 132 subunit predominated in each of the cellular subfrac - tions . The more acidic form was exclusive to the cytosol , comigrating with the major phosphorylated form ( not the hyperphosphorylated form ) . A less acidic form , which is consistent with migration of dephosphorylated 132 , was ex - clusive to membrane - associated AP2 ( Fig . 8 B ) . These re - suits indicate that all the 132 subunits in the cytosol are phosphorylated , and the membrane - associated 132 is de - phosphorylated . Location of the Adaptor Kinase Previous studies have shown that many different kinase activities are associated with the CCV coat ( Bar - Zvi and Branton , 1986 ; Campbell et al . , 1984 ; Merrese et al . , 1990 ; Pauloin et al . , 1982 ) . Coat proteins were extracted from purified CCV , and their kinase activity was stimulated to determine whether associated kinase activities could phos - phorylate the extracted adaptors and affect their ability to bind clathrin . Kinase activity was low unless polylysine was added to the reaction , an observation consistent with previous studies ( Morris et al . , 1990 ) . Addition of polyly - sine resulted in phosphorylation of 100 - kD adaptor sub - units present in the extracted coat proteins ( data not shown ) . Adaptors phosphorylated in this manner did not bind to preformed clathrin cages , in contrast with adaptors that were extracted from CCV without stimulation of kinase activity ( Fig . 9 ) . This indicates that , within the clathrin coat , there is a kinase capable of modifying adaptors in a manner analogous to that achieved by in vivo phosphory - lation . Discussion The results reported in this study identify the individual CCV coat proteins that become phosphorylated in vivo ( Table II ) . Phosphorylation of adaptors prevents their binding to clathrin . Thus , one physiological function of adaptor subunit phosphorylation is apparently to regulate the assembly state of CCV coat proteins . The a , 131 , 132 , p ~ l , and Ix2 subunits of the adaptors were all identified as phosphoproteins . However , the most likely targets for the phosphorylation that regulates adaptor - clathrin binding in vivo are the 100 - kD adaptor subunits . All three , et , 131 , and 132 subunits , have been implicated in clathrin binding ( Goodman and Keen , 1995 ; Shih et al . , 1995 ; Traub et al . , 1995 ) , and all three are phosphorylated in their hinge re - gions ( Fig . 4 ) . The hinge region of the 131 and 132 subunits have been previously identified as clathrin - binding do - mains ( Shih et al . , 1995 ) , and they are more homologous to each other than to ct , whose counterpart ~ / subunit in AP1 is not phosphorylated . Therefore , we suggest that the site at which phosphorylation regulates interaction between the adaptors and clathrin is most likely the hinge region of both the 131 and 132 subunits . The hinge regions of the 131 and 132 subunits ( approxi - mately residues 600 - 750 ) are rich in proline and glycine . Hinge phosphorylation might influence the orientation of the adaptor head and ear domains , which arc separated by the hinge region and thereby conceal the clathrin - binding site . The differential phosphorylation of the et and ~ / sub - units could have a role in one of several distinct cellular functions attributed to the et and ~ subunits . The ct sub - unit , but not ~ , has been shown to interact with dynamin ( Wang et al . , 1995 ) , as well as clathrin . Differential phos - phorylation of a and ~ is also consistent with the known differential regulation of membrane interactions of AP1 and AP2 adaptors ( Robinson and Kreis , 1992 ; Wong and Brodsky , 1992 ) . Kinase activity that can phosphorylate adaptors and Figure 9 . In vitro , a CCV - associated kinase phosphorylates adap - tors and impairs their binding to preformed clathrin cages . Coat proteins were extracted from CCV with 0 . 5 M Tris , pH 7 . 0 , and diluted 10 - fold . CCV - associated kinase activity was then stimu - lated ( + ) or not ( - ) , by the addition of poly - L - lysine and ATP . Phosphorylated ( + ) or unphosphorylated ( - ) CCV coat proteins were incubated in the presence or absence of preformed clatbrin cages . The clathrin cages were harvested by centrifugation and analyzed directly by SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting to detect the presence of bound adaptors with the anti - AP1 antibody 100 / 3 or the anti - AP2 antibody 100 / 2 . Table 11 . CCV Phosphoprotein Properties Coat protein Phosphoamino acid Domain ct subunit , AP2 S hinge 131 subunit , API S hinge 132 subunit , AP2 S hinge p , 1 of AP 1 S T nd tx2 of AP2 S ( T ) nd LCa S nd LCb S nd Clathrin heavy chain Y S nd S , serine ; T , threonine ; Y , tyrosine ; nd . not done . Parentheses indicate a low level of phosphorylation . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 135 . 1996 642 prevent their binding to clathrin was found to be associ - ated with the CCV coat ( Fig . 9 ) . Taking this observation into account , two possible models can be proposed for how adaptor phosphorylation could regulate the assembly state of the CCV coat in vivo ( Fig . 10 ) . CCV uncoating is believed to be mediated by the cytoplasmic heat shock family protein , hsc 70 ( Schlossman et al . , 1984 ) . This pro - tein catalyzes ATP - dependent depolymerization of the clathrin lattice , leaving adaptors behind on the membrane , which are then removed by an additional uncoating activ - ity ( Hinshaw , J . E . , and S . L . Schmid , unpublished observa - tions ) . Thus , uncoating of the clathrin lattice by hsc 70 might activate the CCV - associated adaptor kinase or re - veal the target site for the kinase ( Model I ) . Alternatively , the kinase involved in adaptor phosphorylation could be activated before CCV uncoating ( Model II ) to contribute to the destabilization of clathrin - adaptor interactions and thereby initiate depolymerization of the clathrin lattice by hsc 70 . Model II is consistent with the observation that stimulation of CCV - associated kinase activity destabilizes the CCV coat ( Georgieva - Hanson et al . , 1988 ) . In both models , phosphorylation of adaptors on the uncoated CCV would prevent clathrin rebinding . Subsequent re - lease of phosphorylated adaptors to the cytosol would fur - ther prevent their nonproductive interaction with cytosolic clathrin . These models are consistent with our finding a low level of adaptor phosphorylation associated with membranes ( Fig . 7 ) , and with the fact that all AP2 adap - tors in the cytosol had phosphorylated 132 subunits ( Fig . 8 ) . In both pathways , adaptor recruitment to membranes dur - ing coated pit formation would have to be accompanied by dephosphorylation by a yet unidentified phosphatase . This suggests a further step at which clathrin polymerization can potentially be regulated . Figure 10 . Models for how adaptor phosphorylation could regu - late the assembly and disassembly of CCV coat proteins . The " X " indicates nonproductive adaptor - clathrin interactions that would be inhibited by adaptor phosphorylation . See text for further details . In previous in vitro studies , each of the 100 - kD adaptor subunits had been shown to be a potential substrate for CCV - associated kinase activities ( Morris et al . , 1990 ) . In vivo , it had not been possible to identify the actual sub - units of the CCV coat that were phosphorylated , as sub - unit - specific antibodies were not available ( Bar - Zvi et al . , 1988 ; Keen and Black , 1986 ) . The two previous in vivo studies of CCV coat phosphorylation had some findings that appear to differ from those reported here . Bar - Zvi et al . ( 1988 ) , studying reticulocytes , found that adaptors with phosphorylated 100 - kD subunits predominated in frac - tions containing assembled clathrin . A second study of phosphoproteins in cultured neurons ( Keen and Black , 1986 ) showed that in vivo - phosphorylated 100 - kD pro - teins would coassemble with purified clathrin and adap - tors in an in vitro assay . These discrepancies with our find - ings might be explained both on the basis of cell type and methodology . Neurons and reticulocytes have high en - docytic rates . Consequently , different patterns of phos - phorylation might be observed when compared with cell types with lower endocytic rates . In addition , reticulocytes develop into erythrocytes , which are endocytically dormant and contain empty clathrin cages ( Bar - Zvi and Branton , 1987 ) . Thus , regulation of CCV assembly in erythrocytes is likely to be highly specialized . In studying neuronal phos - phoproteins , Keen and Black ( 1986 ) used a low pH buffer to drive clathrin cage formation in the presence of coat proteins . The low pH conditions favoring clathrin cage as - sembly may have overidden any regulatory effects that phosphorylation has on adaptor - - clathrin interactions . Our cage - binding experiments , which demonstrate that phos - phorylation has a role in regulating adaptor - clathrin inter - actions , were carried out at a higher pH , allowing us to identify this role for adaptor subunit phosphorylation . The phosphorylation of other CCV coat proteins has yet to be correlated with a function for their modification , but demonstration of their in vivo phosphorylation suggests some interesting possibilities . For example , the medium subunits of both AP1 and AP2 have recently been impli - cated in receptor binding ( Ohno et al . , 1995 ) , in which phosphorylation could have a regulatory role . This is the first report of in vivo phosphorylation of ~ 1 , and it was found to be phosphorylated equally on serine and threo - nine residues . Izl has previously been attributed with an in vitro casein kinase II activity that copurifies with AP1 , in - fluences AP1 recruitment to TGN membranes , and modi - fies TGN - associated mannose - 6 - phosphate receptors ( Mer - rese et al . , 1990 ) . However , it is not yet established whether p . 1 actually has endogenous kinase activity and whether the observed activity functions in vivo . Phosphorylation of ~ z2 in vivo has been observed previously in rat reticulo - cytes ( Bar - Zvi et al . , 1988 ) and found to occur predomi - nantly on threonine residues ( 66 % ) , but with some occur - ring on serine residues ( 33 % ) . In MDBK cells , we also find that Ix2 is phosphorylated , but primarily on serines , with a low level of threonine phosphorylation . The differ - ences in the relative amounts of phosphorylation of the different residues of Ix2 may again be a function of the spe - cialized endocytic processes in reticulocytes and , conse - quently , which kinases are most active in those cells . Previous in vitro studies have demonstrated that the phosphoryla - tion pattern of p . 2 differs according to the assembly state Wilde and Brodsky Adaptor Phosphorylation Regulates Clathrin Binding 643 of AP2 . When in the CCV , ) x2 was observed to be phos - phorylated on threonines , but in the disassembled coat , Ix2 was phosphorylated predominantly on serines with only a minor amount occurring on threonine residues ( Campbell et al . , 1984 ) . This suggests that different kinases may be able to act on 1 ~ 2 depending on its cellular location . It is also worth considering the role that in vivo phos - phorylation might have in influencing clathrin function . A previous study reported that clathrin heavy chain was phosphorylated in Rous sarcoma virus - transformed cells but not in untransformed cells , suggesting it was a sub - strate for pp60 . . . . . ( Martin - Perez et al . , 1989 ) . In MDBK ceils , we observed tyrosine phosphorylation of clathrin heavy chain , implicating cellular tyrosine kinases . Due to the low level of clathrin heavy chain phosphorylation , it was not possible to determine where the phosphorylated form predominated . However , as only a minor population of the clathrin heavy chain was phosphorylated , phosphor - ylation may affect only a specialized function of a subset of cellular clathrin . Several minor pools of clathrin have been described : one being found on endosomes ( Stoorvogel et al . , 1996 ) , another found at sites of cell adhesion ( Nicol and Nermut , 1987 ) , and a third contributing to the forma - tion of pentagons rather than hexagons in the polymerized clathrin lattice ( Crowther et al . , 1976 ; Heuser , 1989 ) . Inter - estingly , pp60 csrc and other SRC family protein tyrosine kinases are localized to endosomes and to adhesion plaques , as well as to the plasma membrane , where they would be available to modify such clathrin subpopulations . In addition , each of the clathrin light chains , LCa and LCb , are phosphorylated in vivo , on serine residues . LCb was more heavily phosphorylated than LCa , as observed in reticulocytes ( Bar - Zvi et al . , 1988 ) , and consistent with the unique casein kinase II consensus site , in the NH2 termi - nus of LCb ( Hill et al . , 1988 ) . The level of clathrin light chain phosphorylation varied between experiments , so it was not possible to establish where phosphorylated forms were localized within the cell . The clathrin light chains are thought to modulate clathrin assembly , and their phosphor - ylation might regulate aspects of this modulating role or again influence the function of specialized subsets of clathrin . The data presented here indicate that adaptor phosphor - ylation and dephosphorylation could influence the assem - bly / disassembly cycle of the CCV coat within the cell . The potential for phosphorylation to control additional steps in CCV formation is also demonstrated . Identification of the kinases and phosphatases involved in the cycling of CCV coat proteins on and off the membrane will provide fur - ther insight into how this process is regulated . We thank D . Riethof for assistance with protein purification . We are also grateful for the helpful discussion from members of the Brodsky labora - tory , in particular S . Morris . This work was supported by grants GM38093 and GM26691 from the National Institutes of Health to F . M . Brodsky . A . Wilde was supported by a postdoctoral fellowship ( 9558 ) from the American Heart Association ( California affiliate ) . Received for publication 4 June 1996 and in revised form 15 August 1996 . References Able , S . , and E . Ungewickell . 1986 . Purification and properties of a new clath - rin assembly protein . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 5 : 3143 - 3149 . Ahle , S . , and E . Ungewickell . 1989 . Identification of a clathrin binding subunit in the HA2 adaptor protein complex . J . Biol . Chem . 264 : 20089 - 20093 . Ahle , S . , A . Mann , U . Eichelsbacher , and E . Ungewickell . 1988 . Structural rela - tionships between clathrin assembly proteins from the Golgi and the plasma membrane . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 7 : 919 - 929 . Bar - Zvi , D . , and D . Branton . 1986 . Clathrin - coated vesicles contain two protein kinase activities . Phosphorylation of clathrin I ~ - light chain by casein kinase II . J . Biol . Chem . 261 : 9614 - 9621 . Bar - Zvi , D . , and D . Branton . 1987 . Assembled clathrin in erythrocytes . J . Biol . Chem . 262 : 17719 - 17723 . Bar - Zvi , D . , S . T . Mosley , and D . Branton . 1988 . In vivo phosphorylation of clathrin - coated vesicle proteins from rat reticulocytes . J . Biol . Chem . 263 : 4408 - - 4415 . Brodsky , F . M . 1985 . Clathrin structure characterized with monoclonal antibod - ies . I . Analysis of multiple antigenic sites . J . Cell Biol . 101 : 2047 - 2054 . Brodsky , F . M . , C . J . Galloway , G . S . Blank , A . P . Jackson , H . - F . Scow , K . Drick - amer , and P . Parham . 1987 . Localization of clathrin light - chain sequences mediating heavy - chain binding and coated vesicle diversity . Nature ( Lond . ) . 326 : 203 - 205 . Campbell , C . , J . Squicciarini , M . Shia , P . F . Pilch , and R . E . Fine . 1984 . Identifi - cation of a protein kinase as an intrinsic component of rat liver coated vesi - cles . Biochemistry . 23 : 4420 - 4426 . Chang , M . P . , W . G . Mallet , K . E . Mostov , and F . M . Brodsky . 1993 . Adaptor self - aggregation , adaptor - receptor recognition and binding of ~ t - adaptin subunits to the plasma membrane contribute to recruitment of adaptor ( AP2 ) compo - nents of clathrin - coated pits . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 12 : 2169 - 2180 . Chin , D . J . , R . M . Straubinger , S . Acton , I . N ~ thke , and F . M . Brodsky . 1989 . 100 - kDa polypeptides in peripheral clathrin - coated vesicles are required for re - ceptor - mediated endocytosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 86 : 9289 - 9293 . Corvera , S . , and R . J . Capocasale . 1990 . Enhanced phosphorylation of a coated vesicle polypeptide in response to insulin stimulation of rat adipocytes . Z Biol . Chem . 265 : 15963 - 15969 . Crowther , R . A . , J . T . Finch , and B . M . F . Pearse . 1976 . On the structure of coated vesicles . J . Mol . Biol . 103 : 785 - 798 . Georgieva - Hanson , V . , W . J . Schook , and S . Puszkin . 1988 . Brain coated vesicle destabilization and phosphorylation of coat proteins . J . Neuroehem . 50 : 307 - 315 . Goodman , O . B . , and J . H . Keen . 1995 . The a chain of the AP - 2 adaptor is a clathrin binding subunit . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 23768 - 23773 . Heuser , J . 1989 . Effects of cytoplasmic acidification on clathrin lattice morphol - ogy . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 401 - 411 . Hill , B . L . , K . Drickamer , F . M . Brodsky , and P . Parham . 1988 . Identification of the phosphorylation sites of clathrin light chain LC b . £ BioL Chem . 263 : 5499 - 5501 . Keen , J . H . 1990 . Clathrin and associated assembly and disassembly proteins . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 59 : 415 - - 438 . Keen , J . H . , and K . A . Beck . 1989 . Identification of the clathrin - binding domain of assembly protein AP - 2 . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 158 : 17 - 23 . Keen , J . H . , and M . M . Black . 1986 . The phosphorylation of coated membrane proteins in intact neurons . J . Cell Biol . 102 : 1325 - 1333 . Kirchhausen , T . , K . L . Nathanson , W . Matsui , A . Vaisberg , E . P . Chow , C . Burne , J . H . Keen , and A . E . Davis . 1989 . Structural and functional division into two domains of the large ( 100 - to ll5 - kDa ) chains of the clathrin - associ - ated protein complex AP - 2 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 86 : 2612 - 2616 . Laemmli , U . K . 1970 . Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4 . Nature ( Lond . ) . 227 : 680 - 685 . Manfredi , J . J . and W . L . Bazari . 1987 . Purification and characterization of two distinct complexes of assembly polypeptides from calf brain coated vesicles that differ in their polypeptide composition and kinase activities . J . Biol . Chem . 262 : 12182 - 12188 Martin - Perez , J . , D . Bar - Zvi , D . Branton , and R . L . Erikson . 1989 . Transforma - tion by Rous sarcoma virus induces clathrin heavy chain phosphorylation . J . Cell BioL 109 : 577 - 584 . Merrese , S . , T . Ludwig , R . Frank , and B . Hoflack . 1990 . Phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic domain of the bovine cation - independent mannose 6 - phosphate receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 265 : 18833 - 18842 . Mooibroek , M . J . , H . - C . Cheng , and J . H . Wang . 1992 . Differential in vitro phos - phorylation of clathrin light chains by epidermal growth factor receptor as - sociated protein tyrosine kinase and a pp60 c - src related tyrosine kiuase . Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 292 : 448 ~ 55 . Morris , S . A . , A . Mann , and E . Ungewickell . 1990 . Analysis of 100 - 180 - kDa phosphoproteins in elathrin - coated vesicles from bovine brain . J . Biol . Chem . 265 : 3354 - 3357 . N ~ ithke , I . S . , J . Heuser , A . Lupas , J . Stock , C . W . Turck , and F . M . Brodsky . 1992 . Folding and trimerization of clathrin subunits at the triskelion hub . Cell . 68 : 899 - 910 . Nicol , A . , and M . V . Nermut . 1987 . A new type of substratum adhesion struc - ture in NRK cells revealed by correlated interference reflection and electron microscopy . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 43 : 348 - - 357 . O ' Farrell , P . H . 1975 . High resolution two - dimensional electrophoresis of pro - teins . J . Biol . Chem . 250 : 4007 - 4021 . Ohno , H . , J . Stewart , M . - C . Fournier , H . Bosshart , I . Rhee , S . Miyatake , T . Saito , A . Galluser , T . Kirchhausen , and J . S . Bonifacino . 1995 . Interaction of tyrosine - based sorting signals with clathrin - associated proteins . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 269 : 1872 - 1875 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 135 , 1996 644 Page , L . J . , and M . S . Robinson . 1995 . Targeting signals and subunit interactions in coated vesicle adaptor complexes . J . Cell Biol . 131 : 619 - 630 . Pauloin , A . , and C . Thurieau . 1993 . The 50 kDa protein subunit of assembly polypeptide ( AP ) AP - 2 adaptor from clathrin - coated vesicles is phosphory - lated on threonine - 156 by AP - 1 and a soluble AP50 kinase which co - purifies with the assembly polypeptides . Biochem . J . 296 : 409 - 415 . Pauloin , A . , I . Bernier , and P . Jolles . 1982 . Presence of cyclic nueleotide - Ca 2 + independent protein kinase in bovine brain coated vesicles . Nature ( Lond . ) . 298 : 574 - 576 . Pearse , B . M . F . , and M . S . Robinson . 1990 . Clathrin , adaptors and sorting . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 6 : 151 - 171 . Peeler , J . S . , W . C . Donzell , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1993 . The appendage do - main of the AP - 2 subunit is not required for assembly or invagination of clathrin - coated pits . J . Cell BioL 120 : 47 - 54 . Pypaert , M . , D . Mundy , E . Souter , J . - C . Labb6 , and G . Warren . 1991 . Mitotic cytosol inhibits invagination of coated pits in broken mitotic cells . J . Cell Biol . 114 : 1159 - 1166 . Robinson , M . S . 1987 . 100 - kD coated vesicle proteins : molecular heterogeneity and intracellular distribution studied with monoclonal antibodies . J . Cell Biol . 104 : 887 - 895 . Robinson , M . S . , and T . E . Kreis . 1992 . Recruitment of coat proteins onto Golgi membranes in intact and permeabilized cells : effects of brefeldin A and G - protein activators . Cell , 69 : 129 - 138 . Schlossman , D . M . , S . L . Schmid , W . A . Braell , and J . E . Rothman . 1984 . An en - zyme that removes clathrin coats : purification of an uncoating ATPase . J . Cell Biol . 99 : 723 - 733 . Schr6der , S . , and E . Ungewickell . 1991 . Subunit interaction and function of clathrin - coated vesicle adaptors from the Golgi and the plasma membrane . Z Biol . Chem . 266 : 7910 - 7918 . Shih , W . , A . Gallusser , and T . Kirchhausen . 1995 . A clathrin - binding site in the hinge of the 132 chain of mammalian AP - 2 complexes . J . Biol , Chem . 270 : 31083 - 31090 . Stoorvogel , W . , V . Oorschot , and H . J . Geuze . 1996 . A novel class of clathrin - coated vesicles budding from endosomes . J . Cell Biol . 132 : 21 - 33 . Traub , L . M . , S . Kornfeld , and E . Ungewickell . 1995 . Different domains of the AP - 1 adaptor complex are required for Golgi membrane binding and clath - rin recruitment . Z BioL Chem . 270 : 4933 - 4942 . Wang , L . H . , T . C . Stidhof , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1995 . The appendage domain of c ~ - adaptin is a high affinity binding site for dynamin . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 10079 - 10083 . Wong , D . H . , and F . M . Brodsky . 1992 . 100 - kD proteins of Golgi and trans - Golgi network - associated coated vesicles have related but distinct membrane bind - ing properties . J . Cell Biol . 117 : 1171 - 1179 . Wilde and Brodsky Adaptor Phosphorylation Regulates Clathrin Binding 645