Molecular & Biochemical Parasitology 185 ( 2012 ) 99 – 105 Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect Molecular & Biochemical Parasitology Trypanosoma brucei transferrin receptor can bind C - lobe and N - lobe fragments of transferrin Dietmar Steverding ∗ , Darren W . Sexton , Nektaria Chrysochoidi , Fuyun Cao Norwich Medical School , BioMedical Research Centre , University of East Anglia , Norwich Research Park , Norwich NR4 7TJ , UK a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 12 January 2012 Received in revised form 11 June 2012 Accepted 29 June 2012 Available online 7 July 2012 Keywords : Trypanosoma brucei Transferrin receptor Transferrin uptake Binding speciﬁcity Iron acquisition a b s t r a c t Transferrin ( Tf ) is a dumbbell - shaped iron transport protein composed of two homologous lobes ( C - lobe and N - lobe ) and is an essential growth factor for the protozoan parasite Trypanosoma brucei . The trypanosomal receptor for Tf uptake ( Tb TfR ) is a heterodimeric complex that bears no structural similarity with the human Tf receptor . As a ﬁrst step in identifying the region of Tf involved in binding to the Tb TfR , C - lobe and N - lobe fragments were assessed for their capability to interact with the receptor . Preparations of C - lobe and N - lobe fragments were obtained by digestion of iron - loaded bovine Tf with proteinase K - agarose . The individual fragments were then puriﬁed by concanavalin A afﬁnity chromatography . Uptake experiments with bloodstream forms of T . brucei demonstrated that both C - lobe and N - lobe fragments were ingested by the parasites . The uptake of the isolated lobes could be inhibited by an excess of Tf and vice versa . Dot blot binding assays showed that both C - lobe and N - lobe fragments were capable of binding to the Tb TfR . Both isolated lobes were also able to support the growth of bloodstream forms of T . brucei when cultured in Tf - depleted medium . However , the C - lobe fragment was more efﬁciently taken up and more potent in supporting parasite growth . The results indicate that the interaction of Tf with the Tb TfR is different from that with the human Tf receptor . This difference may be exploited for the development of agents speciﬁcally interfering with the binding of Tf to the Tb TfR . © 2012 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction Trypanosoma brucei is the causative agent of sleeping sickness in humans and nagana disease in cattle . As for most living organ - isms iron is essential for the viability of bloodstream forms of T . brucei [ 1 , 2 ] . Iron is provided by the host and is delivered to the cir - culating trypanosomes as a complex with host transferrin ( Tf ) [ 3 , 4 ] . Bloodstream forms of T . brucei express a unique Tf receptor ( Tb TfR ) ( for a review on the Tb TfR see [ 5 ] ) which is structurally completely different from the host Tf receptor . Tb TfR is a heterodimeric protein complex encoded by two expression site - associated genes , ESAG6 and ESAG7 [ 6 – 10 ] . Both ESAG6 and ESAG7 are heterogeneously glycosylated proteins of 50 – 60 and 40 – 42 kDa , respectively [ 6 , 8 ] . The amino acid Abbreviations : Con A , concanavalin A ; DAPI , 4 , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ; ESAG , expression site - associated gene ; hTfR , human transferrin receptor ; Lf , lacto - ferrin ; Tb TfR , T . brucei transferrin receptor ; Tf , transferrin ; VSG , variant surface glycoprotein ; Z - FA - DMK , benzyloxycarbonyl - phenylalanyl - arginyl - diazomethyl ketone . ∗ Corresponding author . Tel . : + 44 1603 591291 ; fax : + 44 1603 591750 . E - mail addresses : dsteverding @ hotmail . com , d . steverding @ uea . ac . uk ( D . Steverding ) . sequences of ESAG6 and ESAG7 are almost identical over their N - terminal half but show differences in the C - terminal region [ 11 ] . The hydrophobic C - terminal stretch of ESAG6 is replaced by a glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) anchor which attaches the het - erodimeric Tb TfR to the plasma membrane [ 6 ] . Binding of one molecule of Tf [ 10 ] requires association of both ESAG6 and ESAG7 as was shown by co - expression in heterologous systems [ 7 – 9 ] . The ligand - binding site of the Tb TfR has been identiﬁed within two small stretches at amino acids 205 – 215 and 223 – 238 of ESAG6 and ESAG7 , respectively [ 12 ] . These two stretches form surface - exposed loops [ 5 ] as has been predicted from sequence homology between ESAG6 and ESAG7 , and the N - terminal domain of vari - ant surface glycoprotein ( VSG ) molecules [ 12 , 13 ] . Uptake of Tf by bloodstream forms of T . brucei occurs by a mechanism distinct from the well - established Tf cycle in mammalian cells . For T . brucei , Tf bound to the GPI - anchored Tb TfR is taken up into the cell by bulk ﬂow endocytosis . The low pH of the endosome triggers the release of iron from Tf . At low pH , the resulting apo - Tf has low afﬁnity for the Tb TfR [ 14 ] and is liberated allowing transport to lysosomes where it is proteolytically degraded [ 10 , 15 ] . The resulting peptide fragments are released from the trypanosomes while iron remains associated with the cell [ 10 ] . The unoccupied Tb TfR is recycled to the cell surface to mediate further cycles of Tf uptake [ 16 ] . Thus , 0166 - 6851 / $ – see front matter © 2012 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molbiopara . 2012 . 06 . 007 100 D . Steverding et al . / Molecular & Biochemical Parasitology 185 ( 2012 ) 99 – 105 the mechanism of Tf uptake in T . brucei resembles the uptake of low density lipoprotein and asialoglycoproteins by their speciﬁc receptors in mammalian cells . Tf is a monomeric glycoprotein of a molecular mass of around 78 kDa which can bind two ferric iron ions in association with the binding of bicarbonate [ 17 ] . It presents a bilobal structure with the two lobes representing the C - terminal and N - terminal halves of the protein , with each lobe capable of binding one ferric iron ion [ 18 ] . The two lobes are sequentially and structurally homologous and are connected by an unstructured linker peptide . Each lobe is divided into two dissimilar domains with the iron - binding cen - tre at the domain interface [ 18 ] . Only the C - lobe contains N - linked oligosaccharide side chains that are capable of binding to the jack bean lectin concanavalin A ( Con A ) [ 17 ] . The region of Tf that is recognised by the Tb TfR is unknown . However , as the Tb TfR is embedded in the surface coat of densely packed VSG dimers and as ESAG6 and ESAG7 are about 20 % smaller than a VSG molecule ( ∼ 50 and ∼ 42 kDa vs ∼ 58 kDa ) but folded in a similar fashion as the N - terminal domain of the VSG [ 5 , 12 ] , it is reasonable to assume that the Tb TfR is likely to be recessed into the VSG surface coat leaving only the ligand binding site accessible [ 5 , 19 , 20 ] . Such an arrangement was recently conﬁrmed by molec - ular modelling of the Tb TfR in the VSG coat [ 20 ] . This also implies that Tf only has access to the ligand - binding site of the Tb TfR via one of its lobes [ 19 ] . This is supported by the observation that only anti - Tb TfR antibodies recognising the ligand - binding site are taken up by bloodstream forms of T . brucei [ 10 ] . In this paper we present the results of a study determining which lobe of Tf binds to the Tb TfR . 2 . Materials and methods 2 . 1 . Reagents Alkaline phosphatase - conjugated goat anti - rabbit IgGs , ammo - nium iron ( III ) citrate , bovine lactoferrin ( Lf ) , bovine Tf , Con A - agarose , Con A peroxidase conjugate , dimethyl pimelimidate dihydrochloride , 6 - [ ﬂuorescein - 5 ( 6 ) - carboxamido ] hexanoic acid N - hydroxysuccinimide ester , methyl - (cid:2) - d - mannopyranoside , pro - tein G Sepharose and proteinase K - agarose were obtained from Sigma – Aldrich ( Dorset , England ) . Rabbit anti - bovine Tf antibody was obtained from Fitzgerald ( Acton , MA , USA ) . 2 . 2 . Preparation of C - lobe and N - lobe fragments The commercially available bovine Tf was puriﬁed by Con A afﬁnity chromatography to remove species of Tf that do not bind to Con A [ 21 ] . Prior to afﬁnity chromatography , Tf was saturated with iron by dissolving 50 mg of Tf in 1 ml iron - loading buffer ( 100 mM NaHCO 3 , pH 8 . 5 , 10 mg / ml ammonium iron ( III ) citrate ) . After incu - bation at 4 ◦ C over night , the solution was passed over a PD - 10 column equilibrated with Con A buffer ( 50 mM Na - acetate , 1 mM CaCl 2 , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM MnCl 2 , pH 6 . 9 ) and fractions containing Tf were collected . Then , 1 ml containing 25 mg Tf was applied to a column containing 5 ml Con A - agarose . The column was washed with 15 ml Con A buffer and bound Tf eluted with 200 mM methyl - (cid:2) - d - mannopyranoside in Con A buffer . Eluates containing Tf were concentrated by ultraﬁltration ( Amicon Ultra 50K device ) and then passed over a PD - 10 column equilibrated with reaction buffer ( 100 mM Tris , 25 mM CaCl 2 , pH 8 . 2 ) . Fractions containing Tf were collected and stored at 4 ◦ C . For preparation of individual lobes , 7 . 7 mg Tf in 2 ml reaction buffer was treated with 40 . 5 mg of proteinase K - agarose ( 0 . 2 units per mg Tf ) at room temperature for 49 h . The mixture was passed over a PD - 10 column equilibrated with Con A buffer and then applied to a column containing 5 ml Con A - agarose . The column was washed with 15 ml Con A buffer and N - lobe containing frac - tions were collected . The bound C - lobe was eluted with 200 mM methyl - (cid:2) - d - mannopyranoside in Con A buffer . After concentration by ultraﬁltration ( Amicon Ultra 10K device ) , both fragments were passed over a PD - 10 column equilibrated with PBS . Fractions con - taining C - lobe and N - lobe fragments , respectively , were collected and stored at 4 ◦ C . 2 . 3 . Labelling of proteins with ﬂuorescein Bovine Tf , C - lobe fragments , N - lobe fragments and bovine Lf were labelled at a molar ratio of approximately 1 : 22 with 6 - [ ﬂuorescein - 5 ( 6 ) - carboxamido ] hexanoic acid N - hydroxysuccinimide ester [ 10 ] . Unreacted reagent was removed by passing the mixture over a PD - 10 column equilibrated with PBS . Fractions containing ﬂuorescein - labelled proteins were collected and stored at − 20 ◦ C . 2 . 4 . Tf depletion of culture medium Anti - bovine Tf antibodies bound to protein G - Sepharose were cross - linked to the beads using dimethyl pimelimidate dihy - drochloride as described previously [ 6 ] . Next , 2 ml of Baltz medium [ 22 ] supplemented with 16 . 7 % ( v / v ) heat - inactivated foetal bovine serum ( medium B ) was applied to a column containing 1 . 3 ml of cross - linked beads equilibrated with PBS . The ﬁrst 1 . 5 ml frac - tion was discarded while the next 0 . 5 ml fraction ( ﬁrst medium containing fraction ) was collected . To regenerate the beads , the column was washed with 2 ml PBS followed by three cycles with glycine / NaCl buffer ( 50 mM glycine , 500 mM NaCl , pH 2 . 7 ) and PBS . The regenerated beads were used to obtain another 0 . 5 ml frac - tion of Tf - depleted medium B . This procedure was repeated until enough Tf - depleted medium B was collected . 2 . 5 . Trypanosome cultures Bloodstream forms of T . brucei clone 427 – 221a [ 23 ] were grown in medium B . The cultures were maintained in a humidiﬁed atmo - sphere containing 5 % CO 2 at 37 ◦ C . For growth experiments , trypanosomes were washed three times with Baltz medium supplemented with 2 % BSA and incubated in 200 (cid:3) l of Tf - depleted medium B in the absence or presence of 25 (cid:3) g / ml C - lobe or N - lobe fragments in ﬂat - bottom 96 - well plates . 2 . 6 . Fluorescence microscopy and ﬂow cytometry Bloodstream - form trypanosomes ( 1 × 10 7 / ml ) were incubated with ﬂuorescein - labelled bovine Tf , C - lobe fragments , N - lobe fragments , or bovine Lf in Baltz medium supplemented with 2 % BSA and 100 (cid:3) M benzyloxycarbonyl - phenylalanyl - arginyl - diazomethyl ketone ( Z - FA - DMK ) in the presence or absence of competing , unlabelled bovine Tf , C - lobe fragments , or N - lobe frag - ments . After 2 h incubation , cells were washed two times with PBS / 1 % glucose and ﬁxed with 2 % formaldehyde / 0 . 05 % glutaralde - hyde in PBS . For ﬂuorescence microscopy , cells were applied to poly - l - lysine - coated microscope slides , and treated with 0 . 0001 % 4 , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ( DAPI ) in PBS . Slides were mounted in Vectashield mounting medium ( Vector Laboratories , Peterbor - ough ) and imaged with a Zeiss Axioplan 2 ﬂuorescence microscope using a Plan - Apochromat 100 × / 1 . 4 oil objective . For quantitation of ﬂuorescence , cells were analysed by ﬂow cytometry using a BD Accuri C6 ﬂow cytometer . The excitation wavelength was 488 nm and the ﬁlter set was 530 / 30 nm . Gates D . Steverding et al . / Molecular & Biochemical Parasitology 185 ( 2012 ) 99 – 105 101 were set to exclude cell fragments and debris from the analysis , and 50 , 000 gated cells were analysed . 2 . 7 . Preparation of trypanosome cell lysate Bloodstream - form trypanosomes ( 2 × 10 8 ) were washed with PBS / 1 % glucose and then resuspended in 1 ml lysis buffer ( 50 mM Hepes , 2 . 5 mM EDTA , pH 7 , 2 % Triton X - 100 , 100 (cid:3) M PMSF , 10 (cid:3) M leupeptin , 10 (cid:3) E - 64 ) . After vortexing for 2 min , the lysate was cen - trifuged for 5 min at 14 , 000 × g . The supernatant was used as cell extract for binding assays . 2 . 8 . Binding assay All steps were carried out at room temperature . Five microgram of C - lobe fragment , N - lobe fragments , bovine Tf or bovine Lf were spotted onto nitrocellulose membranes . After drying , the mem - branes were stained with Ponceau S to check that equal amounts of C - lobe and N - lobe fragments have been applied . First , mem - branes were treated with blocking buffer ( 5 % milk powder in TBST ( 50 mM Tris , 150 mM NaCl , pH 7 . 5 , 0 . 05 % Tween 20 ) ) for 1 h . After washing three times with TBST , membranes were incubated with a trypanosome cell extract ( 2 × 10 8 cell equivalents ) diluted in block - ing buffer in the absence or presence of 1 mg / ml bovine Tf for 1 h . Membranes were washed again three times with TBST and then incubated with rabbit anti - Tb TfR antibodies [ 10 ] diluted 1 : 1000 in blocking buffer , for 1 h . After another three washing steps , mem - branes were incubated with alkaline phosphatase - conjugated goat anti - rabbit IgGs diluted 1 : 2000 in blocking buffer for 1 h . After three washing steps with TBST and one washing with water , membranes were developed with nitroblue tetrazolium chloride and 5 - bromo - 4 - chloro - 3 - indolyl phosphate for 2 min . 2 . 9 . Analytical methods Proteins were analysed by SDS - PAGE using precast polyacry - lamide gels ( Bio - Rad Laboratories , Hemel Hempstead ) and stained with Bio - Safe TM Coomassie G - 250 Stain ( Bio - Rad Laboratories , Hemel Hempstead ) or electroblotted onto PVDF membranes . The membranes were blocked with 2 % BSA in TBST , incubated with Con A peroxidase conjugate and developed using an ECL kit . Protein concentrations were determined with the Pierce ® BCA Protein Assay Kit ( Thermo Scientiﬁc , Cramlington ) using bovine serum albumin as standard . 3 . Results 3 . 1 . Isolation of C - lobe and N - lobe fragments from bovine Tf As the C - lobe but not the N - lobe of mammalian transferrins is post - translationally modiﬁed with an N - linked oligosaccharide side chain capable of binding to Con A , C - lobe and N - lobe frag - ments can usually be separated from each other after proteolysis by Con A afﬁnity chromatography . However , preparations of bovine Tf include species that are incapable of binding to Con A , although they contain oligosaccharides [ 21 ] . Therefore , bovine Tf was ﬁrst puriﬁed by Con A afﬁnity chromatography . It was found that only 60 % of the commercially bought bovine Tf was capable of binding to Con A . Treatment of Con A - puriﬁed bovine Tf with proteinase K - agarose resulted in the complete proteolytic cleavage of the protein into C - lobe and N - lobe fragments . Both fragments could be easily separated from each other by a single Con A afﬁnity chromatog - raphy step ( Fig . 1A ) . This is in contrast to previous methods in which additional gel ﬁltration steps were necessary to remove uncleaved Tf and proteases used for proteolysis [ 21 , 24 ] . The purity Fig . 1 . Analysis of C - lobe and N - lobe preparations . Samples of Con A - puriﬁed bovine Tf ( lane 1 ) and isolated N - lobe ( lane 2 ; non - bound Con A fraction ) and C - lobe ( lane 3 ; bound Con A fraction ) fragments were subjected to SDS - PAGE and stained with Coomassie ( A ) or assayed for Con A binding ( B ) . Molecular mass of standard proteins in kDa is indicated . of the C - lobe and N - lobe preparations was further checked by a lectin - binding assay . There were no protein bands in the N - lobe preparation that reacted with Con A ( Fig . 1B , lane 2 ) , indicating that there was no detectable contamination by native Tf or C - lobe fragments . In contrast , all protein bands in the C - lobe preparation reacted with Con A ( Fig . 1B , lane 3 ) , indicating that there was no detectable contamination by N - lobe fragments . In addition , there was no indication that the C - lobe preparation was contaminated with native Tf ( no labelled bands in the molecular mass range of 50 – 100 kDa ; Fig . 1B , lane 3 ) . Thus , using immobilised proteinase K and increasing the incubation time to 49 h enabled us to obtain C - lobe and N - lobe fragment preparations that were essentially free of any detectable contamination by native Tf and the other lobe . The N - lobe fragment appeared as a single band of 36 kDa while the C - lobe fragment appeared as a doublet of 42 and 37 kDa on SDS - PAGE ( Fig . 1A , lanes 2 and 3 ) . These molecular weights are con - sistent with those of authentic N - and C - terminal half - molecules ( calculated molecular weights : N - lobe , 36 . 56 kDa ; large C - lobe , 39 . 28 kDa plus 2 kDa for glycan chain = 41 . 28 kDa ; small C - lobe , 39 . 28 kDa plus 2 kDa for glycan chain minus 6 kDa for clipped carboxyl - terminal peptide ( see below ) = 35 . 28 kDa ) . The molecular weights also indicate that Tf is cleaved within the linker connect - ing both lobes . It has been previously shown that proteases cut proteins of the Tf family within the interlobe connecting peptide [ 25 , 26 ] . The occurrence of the C - lobe fragment as a doublet can be explained by the heterogeneity of bovine Tf ( Fig . 1A , lane 1 ) . This is due to a maturational proteolytic event removing a 6 kDa peptide from the C - terminus of some Tf molecules [ 27 , 28 ] which 102 D . Steverding et al . / Molecular & Biochemical Parasitology 185 ( 2012 ) 99 – 105 gives rise to the two species of bovine Tf of 72 and 78 kDa ( calcu - lated molecular weights : large Tf , 75 . 82 kDa plus 2 kDa for glycan chain = 77 . 82 kDa ; small Tf , 75 . 82 kDa plus 2 kDa for glycan chain minus 6 kDa for clipped carboxyl - terminal peptide = 71 . 85 kDa ) . 3 . 2 . Uptake of C - lobe and N - lobe fragments It is established that in bloodstream forms of T . brucei endo - cytosed Tf is delivered to the lysosome where it is proteolytically degraded [ 10 , 15 , 29 ] . Blockage of lysosomal proteolysis leads to an accumulation of Tf in this cell organelle [ 10 , 15 , 30 , 31 ] . Using ﬂuorescein - labelled TF , the accumulation of the protein results in a ﬂuorescent spot between the nucleus and the kinetoplast the loca - tion of which is identical with that of the lysosome ( i . e . under these conditions Tf is a lysosomal marker [ 10 , 30 , 31 ] ) . Likewise , it is rea - sonable to assume that Tf lobes when taken up by the Tb TfR are also delivered to the lysosome . To determine which of the two Tf lobes contains the receptor - recognition site for binding to the Tb TfR , trypanosomes were incubated with ﬂuorescein - labelled C - lobe and N - lobe fragments in the presence of the cysteine protease inhibitor Z - FA - DMK and subsequently inspected by ﬂuorescence microscopy . Surprisingly , both fragments were taken up by bloodstream - form trypanosomes as indicated by ﬂuorescent spots between the nucleus and the kine - toplast ( Fig . 2 ) . However , the C - lobe fragments produced a more intense ﬂuorescent label than the N - lobe fragments . The position of the labelled region corresponded to the location of accumu - lated Tf ( see Fig . 2 , panel Tf ) and thus with that of lysosomes in T . brucei [ 10 , 15 ] . Weak labelling was observed when the uptake experiments of C - lobe and N - lobe fragments were performed in the presence of a large excess of bovine Tf ( Fig . 2 ) . No labelling was seen with ﬂuorescein - labelled Lf , a multifunctional protein of the transferrin family ( Fig . 2 , panel Lf ) . These latter results conﬁrm that the C - lobe and N - lobe fragments were speciﬁcally taken up by receptor - mediated endocytosis via the Tb TfR . The observation that the C - lobe fragment gave a much stronger ﬂuorescent label than the N - lobe fragment probably indicates that the C - lobe is taken up more efﬁciently by bloodstream - form try - panosomes than the N - lobe . To quantify the number of fragments taken up by the parasites , samples of the cells prepared for ﬂuo - rescence microscopy were also analysed by ﬂow cytometry . This analysis revealed that trypanosomes accumulated signiﬁcantly more C - lobe than N - lobe fragments ( Fig . 3A ) . Based on the mean ﬂuorescence intensity signal , the amount of accumulated N - lobe was only 15 % of that of accumulated C - lobe . In the presence of an excess of Tf , the ﬂuorescence signal for both fragments was just a little above the signal for the blank ( the accumulated amount of C - lobe and N - lobe in the presence of Tf was 2 % and 4 % , respectively , compared to the accumulated amount of C - lobe in the absence of Tf ) ( Fig . 3A ) . This result conﬁrms that both lobes were speciﬁcally taken up by the Tb TfR . Next , the efﬁciency of C - lobe and N - lobe fragments to inhibit the uptake of bovine Tf was investigated by ﬂow cytometry . A 1000 - fold molar excess of the fragments resulted in a strong inhibition in the uptake of ﬂuorescein - labelled bovine Tf ( Fig . 3B ) . However , the C - lobe was more efﬁcient in inhibiting the uptake of Tf than the N - lobe . Based on mean ﬂuorescence intensity signals , the C - lobe inhibited the uptake of Tf by 96 % whereas the N - lobe only by 71 % . This result is in agreement with the above ﬁnding that the N - lobe is less efﬁciently taken up than the C - lobe . Finally , the ability of C - lobe and N - lobe fragments to block the uptake of N - lobe and C - lobe fragments , respectively , was stud - ied . Both fragments were able to inhibit the uptake of the other , ﬂuorescein - labelled lobe ( Fig . 3C ) . However , the C - lobe was again more efﬁcient in preventing the uptake of the N - lobe than the N - lobe was able to impede endocytosis of the C - lobe . Whereas the Fig . 2 . Accumulation of ﬂuorescein - labelled C - lobe , N - lobe , Tf and Lf in the lyso - some of T . brucei . Bloodstream forms of T . brucei were incubated in the presence of 100 (cid:3) M Z - FA - DMK with 2 (cid:3) g / ml ﬂuorescein - labelled C - lobe , N - lobe , Tf or Lf in the absence or presence of 2 mg / ml bovine Tf for 2 h . Fluorescein - ﬂuorescence ( panel FL ) representing accumulated C - lobe , N - lobe , or Tf is located between the kinetoplast ( k ) and nucleus ( n ) ( panel DAPI ) and corresponds to the location of the lysosome . C - lobe almost completely blocked the uptake of the N - lobe , the N - lobe inhibited the uptake of the C - lobe only by 78 % . This result supports the above ﬁndings that the C - lobe is more efﬁciently taken up and is more effective in blocking endocytosis of Tf than the N - lobe . It should be noted that ﬂow cytometry analysis also gave no evidence for the uptake of ﬂuorescein - labelled Lf ( data not shown ) . D . Steverding et al . / Molecular & Biochemical Parasitology 185 ( 2012 ) 99 – 105 103 Fig . 3 . Uptake of ﬂuorescein - labelled C - lobe , N - lobe , and Tf by bloodstream forms of T . brucei . Trypanosomes were incubated in the presence of 100 (cid:3) M Z - FA - DMK with ﬂuorescein - labelled C - lobe , N - lobe or bovine Tf in the absence or presence of unlabelled C - lobe , N - lobe or bovine Tf for 2 h . After washing and ﬁxing of the cells , ﬂuorescein - labelled C - lobe , N - lobe and Tf taken up by trypanosomes were determined by ﬂow cytometry . ( A ) Uptake of ﬂuorescein - labelled C - lobe and N - lobe fragments . Trypanosomes were incubated with 2 (cid:3) g / ml ﬂuorescein - labelled C - lobe or N - lobe fragments in the absence or presence of 2 mg / ml Tf . Blue line , C - lobe ; red line , N - lobe ; green line , C - lobe plus Tf ; orange line , N - lobe plus Tf ; black line , blank ( trypanosomes incubated in the absence of ﬂuorescein - labelled C - lobe or N - lobe ) . ( B ) Inhibition of uptake of ﬂuorescein - labelled bovine Tf by C - lobe and N - lobe fragments . Trypanosomes were incubated with 1 (cid:3) g / ml ﬂuorescein - labelled Tf in the absence or presence of 500 (cid:3) g / ml C - lobe or N - lobe fragments . Black line , Tf ; blue line , Tf plus C - lobe ; red line , Tf plus N - lobe . ( C ) Inhibition of uptake of Fig . 4 . Binding of Tb TfR to C - lobe , N - lobe , Tf and Lf . Five micrograms of C - lobe , N - lobe , bovine Tf or bovine Lf were spotted onto nitrocellulose membranes . To check the amount of protein applied , membranes were stained with Ponceau S . After blocking non - speciﬁc binding sites , membranes were incubated with trypanosome cell extracts ( 2 × 10 8 cell equivalents ) in the absence ( A and C ) and presence ( B ) of 1 mg / ml bovine Tf . Bound Tb TfR was detected by treating membranes with anti - Tb TfR antibodies and alkaline phosphatase - conjugated goat anti - rabbit IgGs followed by assaying for alkaline phosphatase activity using nitroblue tetrazolium chloride and 5 - bromo - 4 - chloro - 3 - indolyl phosphate for 2 min . 3 . 3 . Binding of TbTfR to C - lobe and N - lobe fragments To demonstrate binding of the Tb TfR to C - lobe and N - lobe fragments , both lobes were directly applied to nitrocellulose membranes and exposed to a trypanosome cell extract . The mem - branes were then probed with anti - Tb TfR antibodies and alkaline phosphatase - conjugated goat anti - rabbit IgGs . Strong binding of the Tb TfR was observed for both lobes ( Fig . 4A ) . Binding of Tb TfR in the dot blot assay could be inhibited by the addition of Tf to the try - panosome cell extract ( Fig . 4B ) . In control experiments , Tb TfR did bind strongly to bovine Tf but not to bovine lactoferrin ( Fig . 4C ) . These results show that the Tb TfR binds speciﬁcally to both C - lobe and N - lobe fragments . 3 . 4 . Growth support of trypanosomes by C - lobe and N - lobe fragments To study whether C - lobe and N - lobe fragments can support the growth of bloodstream forms of T . brucei , trypanosomes were cultured in medium depleted of Tf in the presence or absence of 25 (cid:3) g / ml of the lobes . Based on the facts that bloodstream forms of T . brucei require only small amounts of iron for growth [ 4 ] and that they take up Tf at a rate of 1 . 5 ng / 10 6 cells / h [ 10 ] , 25 (cid:3) g / ml of lobes are more than enough to provide the parasite with sufﬁcient iron for optimal growth . Both lobes were able to promote the growth of bloodstream - form trypanosomes ( Fig . 5 ) . The C - lobe supported the growth of trypanosomes to the same extent as intact Tf while the N - lobe was less potent in stimulat - ing the growth of the parasite . In addition , whereas trypanosomes ﬂuorescein - labelled C - lobe and N - lobe fragments by unlabelled N - lobe and C - lobe fragments . Trypanosomes were incubated with 2 (cid:3) g / ml ﬂuorescein - labelled C - lobe or N - lobe fragments in the absence or presence of 500 (cid:3) g / ml unlabelled N - lobe or C - lobe fragments . Blue line , C - lobe ; red line , N - lobe ; green line , C - lobe plus unlabelled N - lobe ; orange line , N - lobe plus unlabelled C - lobe . 104 D . Steverding et al . / Molecular & Biochemical Parasitology 185 ( 2012 ) 99 – 105 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 4 3 2 1 0 T r y p a no s o m es / m l ( x10 4 ) Time ( days ) Fig . 5 . Effect of C - lobe and N - lobe fragments on the growth of T . brucei . Bloodstream forms of T . brucei were incubated in medium B ( closed circles ) or in Tf - depleted medium B in the absence ( open circles ) or presence of 25 (cid:3) g / ml C - lobe frag - ments ( closed triangles ) , 25 (cid:3) g / ml N - lobe fragments ( closed diamonds ) , or 25 (cid:3) g / ml bovine Tf ( closed squares ) . At the indicated times , live trypanosomes were counted using a Neubauer haemocytometer . Data points represent mean values of three independent experiments . cultured in Tf - depleted medium supplement with C - lobe or intact Tf grew to similar maximum cell densities as trypanosomes grown in normal medium ( Tf - undepleted medium ) , parasites cultured in Tf - depleted medium supplemented with N - lobe reached only two - thirds of the cell density of the control culture ( Fig . 5 ) . Fur - thermore , trypanosomes cultured in supplemented Tf - depleted medium grew somewhat slower and peaked one day later than trypanosomes grown in normal medium ( Fig . 5 ) . This may be attributed to the dilution of other growth enhancing factors during Tf depletion of the medium as trypanosomes cultured in normal medium subjected to the same process using Tf - saturated anti - bovine Tf antibody beads also peaked at the third day ( data not shown ) . As previously shown [ 3 ] , in Tf - depleted medium , try - panosomes grew much slower and to much lower cell densities ( Fig . 5 ) . 4 . Discussion In this study we have demonstrated that preparations of isolated C - lobe and N - lobe fragments of bovine Tf are capable of binding to the Tb TfR in direct and competitive uptake and binding assays . This is not the ﬁrst example of an iron binding glycoprotein receptor which interacts with both the C - lobe and N - lobe of its ligand . For example , the lactoferrin receptor of Neisseria meningitides , N . gonor - rhoeae and Moraxella ( Branhamella ) catarrhalis all bind to both the C - lobe and N - lobe fragments of human lactoferrin [ 32 ] . Another example is the transferrin binding protein 2 of Haemophilus para - gallinarum which is capable of interacting with both the C - lobe and N - lobe of ovotransferrin [ 33 ] . It was previously suggested that Tf can interact with the Tb TfR via only one of its lobes because of steric constraints [ 19 ] . As it appears that the Tb TfR can bind its ligand via both lobes inde - pendently of each other , the region of the C - lobe and N - lobe participating in the binding interaction with the Tb TfR should have similar sequential and structural properties . As the two lobes of Tf share about 40 % sequence identity [ 34 ] , this is not impossible . In fact , the sequence identity between the two lobes of Tfs is car - ried over into their three - dimensional structures . Both lobes have a similar folding pattern of secondary structure and their polypep - tide chains can be superposed by a rotation of approximately 167 ◦ with a translation of 23 ˚A [ 18 , 35 ] . In such an overlay , helices and strands superpose fairly well whereas the loops connecting these secondary structural elements show considerable differences [ 18 ] . However , the more avid binding of the C - lobe indicates that there are some differences between the receptor - recognition sites of both lobes . It is also possible that the proteolytic separation of the lobes caused some conformational changes in the isolated N - lobe frag - ment affecting its receptor - recognition site . As both C - lobe and N - lobe fragments are able to support the growth of bloodstream forms of T . brucei in culture , an interaction of Tb TfR with both lobes for iron release can be ruled out . This is in contrast to the Tf binding protein 2 of H . paragallinarum where such an interaction between the N - lobe and C - lobe of ovotransferrin for iron removal was implicated [ 33 ] . That the N - lobe supports the growth of trypanosomes less well than the C - lobe is due to the fact that the N - lobe is less efﬁciently taken up by the parasite . It cannot be attributed to an impediment in releasing iron upon binding to the receptor as was previously suggested for the iron liberation from the N - lobe of human Tf when bound to the human Tf receptor ( hTfR ) [ 36 ] . In contrast to the Tb TfR , the hTfR can bind isolated C - lobe but not N - lobe fragments [ 25 ] . Although the primary receptor recognition site of Tf for the hTfR is on the C - lobe of the protein , the N - lobe is also involved in the ligand – receptor interaction . While the C - lobe makes extensive contact with the helical domain of the hTfR , the N - lobe is sandwiched between the ectodomain of the hTfR and the plasma membrane strengthening the interaction with the receptor [ 36 ] . Thus , the hTfR binds its ligand in a more lateral fashion [ 36 ] whereas the Tb TfR in a more apical orientation [ 19 ] . Whether this difference in ligand binding can be exploited for the development of therapeutic compounds for the treatment of sleeping sickness ( e . g . peptides ) , which interfere with the binding of Tf to the Tb TfR without affecting that of Tf to the hTfR , remains to be shown . Although this study has shown that the Tb TfR can independently bind isolated C - lobe and N - lobe fragments , this does not necessarily rule out the possibility that the receptor may interact with intact Tf via just one lobe . However , this question can only be answered by X - ray crystallography of a Tf – Tb TfR - complex . X - ray structure anal - ysis of complexes of C - lobe and N - lobe fragments with the Tb TfR , respectively , would also be the method of choice for determining the epitope of the ligand involved in receptor binding . Acknowledgements We thank Dr Andrew Goldson for his help in preparing the graphs of the ﬂow cytometry analyses . This work was supported by the John & Pamela Salter Charitable Trust ( R20085 ) . References [ 1 ] Breidbach T , Scory S , Krauth - Siegel RL , Steverding D . Growth inhibition of bloodstream forms of Trypanosoma brucei by the iron chelator deferoxamine . International Journal for Parasitology 2002 ; 32 : 473 – 9 . [ 2 ] Merschjohann K , Steverding D . In vitro growth inhibition of bloodstream forms of Trypanosoma brucei and Trypanosoma congolense by iron chelators . Kineto - plastid Biology and Disease 2006 ; 5 : 3 . [ 3 ] Schell D , Borowy NK , Overath P . Transferrin is a growth factor for bloodstream form of Trypanosoma brucei . Parasitology Research 1991 ; 77 : 558 – 60 . [ 4 ] Steverding D . Bloodstream forms of Trypanosoma brucei require only small amounts of iron for growth . Parasitology Research 1998 ; 84 : 59 – 62 . [ 5 ] Steverding D . The transferrin receptor of Trypanosoma brucei . Parasitology International 2000 ; 48 : 191 – 8 . [ 6 ] Steverding D , Stierhof YD , Chaudhri M , Ligtenberg M , Schell D , Beck - Sickinger AG , et al . ESAG6 and 7 products of Trypanosoma brucei form a transferrin binding protein complex . European Journal of Cell Biology 1994 ; 64 : 78 – 87 . [ 7 ] Chaudhri M , Steverding D , Kittelberger D , Tjia S , Overath P . Expression of a glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored Trypanosoma brucei transferrin - binding protein complex in insect cells . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 1994 ; 91 : 6443 – 7 . [ 8 ] Ligtenberg MJL , Bitter W , Kieft R , Steverding D , Janssen H , Calafat J , et al . Recon - stitution of a surface transferrin binding complex in insect form Trypanosoma brucei . EMBO Journal 1994 ; 13 : 2565 – 73 . D . Steverding et al . / Molecular & Biochemical Parasitology 185 ( 2012 ) 99 – 105 105 [ 9 ] Salmon D , Geuskens M , Hanocq F , Hanocq - Quertier J , Nolan D , Ruben L , et al . A novel heterodimeric transferrin receptor encoded by a pair of VSG expression site - associated genes in T . brucei . Cell 1994 ; 78 : 75 – 86 . [ 10 ] Steverding D , Stierhof YD , Fuchs H , Tauber R , Overath P . Transferrin - binding protein complex is the receptor for transferrin uptake in Trypanosoma brucei . Journal of Cell Biology 1995 ; 131 : 1173 – 82 . [ 11 ] Pays E , Tebabi P , Pays A , Coquelet H , Revelard P , Salmon D , et al . The genes and transcripts of an antigen gene expression site from T . brucei . Cell 1989 ; 57 : 835 – 45 . [ 12 ] Salmon D , Hanocq - Quertier J , Paturiaux - Hanocq F , Pays A , Tebabi P , Nolan DP , et al . Characterization of the ligand - binding site of the transferrin receptor in Trypanosoma brucei demonstrates a structural relationship with the N - terminal domain of the variant surface glycoprotein . EMBO Journal 1997 ; 16 : 7272 – 8 . [ 13 ] Blum ML , Down JA , Gurnett AM , Carrington M , Turner MJ , Wiley DC . A struc - tural motif in the variant surface glycoproteins of Trypanosoma brucei . Nature 1993 ; 362 : 603 – 9 . [ 14 ] Maier A , Steverding D . Low afﬁnity of Trypanosoma brucei transferrin receptor to apotransferrin at pH 5 explains the fate of the ligand during endocytosis . FEBS Letters 1996 ; 396 : 87 – 9 . [ 15 ] Grab DJ , Wells CW , Shaw MK , Webster P , Russo DCW . Endocytosed transferrin in African trypanosomes is delivered to lysosomes and may not be recycled . European Journal of Cell Biology 1992 ; 59 : 398 – 404 . [ 16 ] Kabiri M , Steverding D . Studies on the recycling of the transferrin receptor in Trypanosoma brucei using an inducible gene expression system . European Journal of Biochemistry 2000 ; 267 : 3309 – 14 . [ 17 ] Crichton RR , Charloteaux - Wauters M . Iron transport and storage . European Journal of Biochemistry 1987 ; 164 : 485 – 506 . [ 18 ] Bailey S , Evans RW , Garratt RC , Gorinsky B , Hasnain S , Horsburgh C , et al . Molecular structure of serum transferrin at 3 . 3 - Å resolution . Biochemistry 1988 ; 27 : 5804 – 12 . [ 19 ] Steverding D . Parasites’ receptors for human transferrin and lactoferrin . In : Fuchs H , editor . Iron Metabolism and Disease . Kerala : Research Signpost ; 2008 . p . 421 – 34 . [ 20 ] Mehlert A , Wormald MR , Ferguson MAJ . Modeling of the N - glycosylated trans - ferrin receptor suggests how transferrin binding can occur within the surface coat of Trypanosoma brucei . PLoS Pathogens 2012 ; 8 : e1002618 . [ 21 ] Yu R , Schryvers AB . Transferrin receptors on ruminant pathogens vary in their interaction with the C - lobe and N - lobe of ruminant transferrins . Canadian Jour - nal of Microbiology 1994 ; 40 : 532 – 40 . [ 22 ] Baltz T , Baltz D , Giroud C , Crockett J . Cultivation in a semi - deﬁned medium of animal infective forms of Trypanosoma brucei , T . equiperdum , T . evansi , T . rhodesiense and T . gambiense . EMBO Journal 1985 ; 4 : 1273 – 7 . [ 23 ] Hirumi H , Hirumi K , Doyle JJ , Cross GAM . In vitro cloning of animal - infective bloodstream forms of Trypanosoma brucei . Parasitology 1980 ; 80 : 371 – 82 . [ 24 ] Alcantara J , Yu R , Schryvers AB . The region of human transferrin involved in binding to bacterial transferrin receptors is localized in the C - lobe . Molecular Microbiology 1993 ; 8 : 1135 – 43 . [ 25 ] Zak O , Trinder D , Aisen P . Primary receptor - recognition site of human transfer - rin is in the C - terminal lobe . Journal of Biological Chemistry 1994 ; 269 : 7110 – 4 . [ 26 ] Baker EN , Baker HM . Molecular structure , binding properties and dynamics of lactoferrin . Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 2005 ; 62 : 2531 – 9 . [ 27 ] Maeda K , McKenzie HA , Shaw DC . Nature of the heterogeneity within genetic variants of bovine serum transferrin . Animal Blood Groups and Biochemical Genetics 1980 ; 11 : 63 – 75 . [ 28 ] Tsuji S , Kato H , Matsuoka Y , Fukushima T . Molecular weight heterogeneity of bovine serum transferrin . Biochemical Genetics 1984 ; 22 : 1145 – 59 . [ 29 ] Subramanya S , Hardin CF , Steverding D , Mensa - Wilmot K . Glycosylphosphatidylinositol - speciﬁc phospholipase C regulates trans - ferrin endocytosis in the African trypanosome . Biochemical Journal 2009 ; 417 : 685 – 94 . [ 30 ] Scory S , Caffrey CR , Stierhof YD , Ruppel A , Steverding D . Trypanosoma brucei : killing of bloodstream forms in vitro and in vivo by the cysteine proteinase inhibitor Z - Phe - Ala - CHN 2 . Experimental Parasitology 1999 ; 91 : 327 – 33 . [ 31 ] Nkemngu NJ , Grande R , Hansell E , McKerrow JH , Caffrey CR , Steverding D . Improved trypanocidal activities of cathepsin l inhibitors . International Journal of Antimicrobial Agents 2003 ; 22 : 155 – 9 . [ 32 ] Yu R , Schryvers AB . Regions located in both the N - lobe and C - lobe of human lactoferrin participate in the binding interaction with bacterial lactoferrin receptors . Microbial Pathogenesis 1993 ; 14 : 343 – 53 . [ 33 ] Alcantara J , Schryvers AB . Transferrin binding protein two interacts with both the N - lobe and C - lobe of ovotransferrin . Microbial Pathogenesis 1996 ; 20 : 73 – 85 . [ 34 ] Baker HM , Anderson BF , Baker EN . Dealing with iron : common structural principles in proteins that transport iron and heme . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2003 ; 100 : 3579 – 83 . [ 35 ] Hall DR , Hadden JM , Leonard GA . The crystal and molecular structures of diferric porcine and rabbit transferrins at resolutions of 2 . 15 and 2 . 60 ˚A , respectively . Acta Crystallographica Section D : Biological Crystallography 2002 ; 58 : 70 – 80 . [ 36 ] Cheng Y , Zak O , Aisen P , Harrison SC , Walz T . Structure of the human transferrin receptor – transferrin complex . Cell 2004 ; 116 : 565 – 76 .