Electron Commer Res ( 2010 ) 10 : 43 – 81 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10660 - 010 - 9045 - 1 Electronic community factories : the model and its application in the tourism sector Demosthenes Akoumianakis Published online : 1 April 2010 © Springer Science + Business Media , LLC 2010 Abstract The electronic community factory ( ECF ) is proposed as an archetype for value creating cross - organization virtual communities of practice in which members engage actively and through domain - speciﬁc tools in the practice the community is about . In an ECF the reason for building the community is to appropriate the bene - ﬁts of virtual networking for developing new products of added - value and collective ownership . In terms of engineering an ECF , the normative perspective adopted is that community management is distinctively different from engaging in the practice the community is about . Respectively , the tools needed for each function should embody this philosophy and be designed accordingly . The paper elaborates on the concept of the ECF and demonstrates its value through a pilot in regional tourism . Virtual ethnographic studies provide insights to operational aspects of the ECF and how it fosters community and practice management . Collectively , the results reported in the paper constitute an alternative model for community - based electronic commerce suit - able for value - creating cross organization virtual communities of practice engaging in high quality product assembly in information based industries . Keywords Electronic community factories · Community management · Practice toolkits · Virtual ethnography 1 Introduction Virtual communities of practice are technologically mediated structures which allow virtual teams to undertake a broad range of collaborative practices when engaged in D . Akoumianakis ( (cid:2) ) Department of Applied Information Technology & Multimedia , Faculty of Applied Technologies , Technological Education Institution of Crete , Estavromenos , 71500 Heraklion , Crete , Greece e - mail : da @ epp . teicrete . gr url : http : / / users . epp . teiher . gr / staff / da 44 D . Akoumianakis knowledge - based work . The results of such practices are typically codiﬁed as ‘collec - tive’ artifacts and may range from simple messages and documents to complex design concepts , reusable code segments and virtual prototypes of new products . Over the past few years , the literature reporting empirical ﬁndings and experiences with virtual communities of practice has grown exponentially indicating the promising applica - tions , value and beneﬁts offered by this new virtuality . Nevertheless , the vast majority of recent work is devoted to community management ( i . e . , discovering , building and maintaining communities ) , dismissing or undermining community practices and how they are technologically mediated ( i . e . , the practice - speciﬁc elements , tools and arti - facts involved ) . In the present research , we are concerned with a type of value creating cross - organization virtual communities of practice in which members engage actively and through domain - speciﬁc tools in the practice the community is about . Our exem - plar practice domain is collaborative information - based product development which entails deﬁning , negotiating and ﬁnally assembling information - based products of added value . These are non - material ( intangible ) products or services , such as vaca - tion packages , which cannot be experienced by customers beforehand . As a result , the customers’ purchasing behavior is catalyzed by available information , knowl - edge and experience . Their construction is characterized by assembling assets ( such as accommodation , transportation and reservation services ) of different members of a virtual alliance ( cross - organization virtual community of practice ) using practice - speciﬁc tools so as to devise an information - based product that cannot be produced effectively and efﬁciently by any single member of the alliance . We refer to this model of cooperation as the electronic community factory ( ECF ) to highlight its dual focus on managing virtual communities of practice and enacting software engineering processes and practices for information - based product assem - bly . The ECF stands on two pillars , namely cross - organization community manage - ment and practice - speciﬁc toolkits as media for codifying , transmitting and enact - ing collaborative practices in community settings . Elements of both are fused into a computer - based platform which constitutes the technological setup of the ECF for managing distributed collective practices [ 57 ] and enacting software engineering processes . This paper aims to provide a functional account of the ECF and demon - strate its application in a domain of practice . The approach followed is rooted in the design science paradigm for information systems research [ 32 , 40 ] . We will brieﬂy justify this orientation by explicating the ECF in terms of the six requirements of design science research in the information systems discipline : ( 1 ) Identiﬁcation and clear description of a relevant organizational IT problem . The present research aims to foster cross - organization virtual communities of prac - tice whose members engage in the practice of information - based product assembly . The relevant challenges involved are not only related to what constitutes practice in virtual space , but also how online practice is designed to exhibit locality and bound - ary features so as to become codiﬁed , internalized , transmitted and enacted by cross - organization virtual communities of practice . ( 2 ) Adequacy of existing solutions . Recent research on systems supporting virtual communities of practice focuses almost exclusively on faming online practice solely in social interactions supported by a variety of community support systems and tools Electronic community factories : the model and its application 45 ( i . e . , Blogs and RSS , Wikis , MOOs , etc . ) . Nevertheless , this orientation dismisses elements of practice framed in processes , artifacts and tools which frequently un - dermine and determine engagement in cross - organization collaborative practice . On the other hand , introducing a new virtual practice and devising a suitable informa - tion infrastructure for distributed collective practicing is known to be difﬁcult and challenging [ 57 ] . ( 3 ) Design novelty . To alleviate these problems , the ECF proposes to bridge across two distinct and inseparable constituents , namely community management and prac - tice management . This is achieved by advancing a general model and an archi - tectural abstraction integrating community - support functions with practice - oriented activities . Community support is grounded on augmenting capabilities of an open source enterprise portal ( i . e . , Liferay ) . Practice - oriented activities are embedded in a practice - oriented toolkit which takes the form of a ‘social’ software factory for enacting software engineering processes and facilitating group decision support . ( 4 ) Rigorous evaluation and assessment of its utility . Validity of the ECF is as - sessed by means of a case study illustrating collaborative assembly of vacation pack - ages by virtual communities of practice in a regional tourism industry . Virtual ethnog - raphy and focus workshops were used to evaluate usability and utility of the pilot , resulting in an improved understanding of how virtual communities of practice oper - ationalize goals and engage in the designated practice as well as the social dynamics which undermine cross - organization collaboration in virtual space . ( 5 ) Articulation of value added to the IT knowledge - base and to practice . The results provide sufﬁcient evidence to justify the need for a new category of tool in - tended to foster and facilitate cross - organization collaboration in virtual settings as a new practice rather than as reproduction of existing practices . In this context , the ECF offers new insights to designing , transmitting and executing online practices by vir - tual communities of practice , while it makes several contributions to understanding and supporting engagement of members in the practice the community is about . ( 6 ) Explanation of the implications for IT management and practice . The ECF implicates theoretical , engineering and practical advancements related to conduct of collaborative work in virtual communities of practice . The theoretical contribution amounts to framing online practice as much into the processes , artifacts and tools used for knowledge sharing and management as in the social interactions taking place in a virtual community of practice . In turn , this orientation motivates the engineer - ing contribution of the ECF which is grounded on bridging community management functions with a factory setup exploiting domain - speciﬁc and practice - oriented vo - cabularies for encapsulating meaning and making sense of online collaborative ac - tivity . The resulting general model and architecture extends prevailing conceptions which concentrate almost exclusively on community management , neglecting or of - fering limited insight to the issue of engaging in the practice the community is about . Finally , the ECF as deployed in the tourism sector to facilitate vacation package assembly demonstrates both practical beneﬁts resulting from virtual networking as well as impediments resulting from prevailing conceptions , organizational culture and other non - technological factors . The paper is structured as follows . The next section brieﬂy elaborates on practices in collaborative settings and recapitulates upon communities of practice and software 46 D . Akoumianakis factories , the two themes driving the present work . Then , we present the methodology followed to assess existing practices and envision new online practices in a service in - dustry such as tourism . Our speciﬁc case study addresses information - based products such as vacation packages . Subsequent sections elaborate on the general archetype of the ECF in terms of major functional components and its deployment in the tourism sector in the context of a recent R & D project . Finally , we present a virtual ethnogra - phy of the ECF pilot application , discuss recent evaluation results and conclude with a summary of the main contributions of the present work . 2 Theoretical motivation and research focus 2 . 1 Related work The present work links with prevalent theoretical conceptions of communities of practice as tools for knowledge management , as opposed to learning , as well as re - cent engineering approaches to establishing practice - oriented social technologies for collaborative work . In terms of communities of practice , our reference ground is to be found in the later works by Wenger and Snyder [ 61 ] and Wenger et al . [ 62 ] where the focus shifts from learning to knowledge sharing and knowledge transfer . As for practice - oriented technologies we are interested in computer - mediated tools and en - vironments which either encapsulate elements of a practice domain or establish new practices . Since our reference domain is broadly relevant to enacting software engi - neering processes for assembling information - based products , software factories [ 30 ] and social decision - support systems [ 58 ] provide critical technologies . In order to set the focus of our current research , we will ﬁrst provide a contextual account of practice and the elements it may consist of . Following this , we review relevant works on communities of practice and engineering perspectives on building practice - oriented technologies in order to advance the proposition of the ECF as a technology for practice in community settings . 2 . 1 . 1 Practice elements and types Practice is not easy to deﬁne formally as there is no uniﬁed theory of practice ( see [ 51 ] ) . Nevertheless , there is a diverse and growing literature that has taken prac - tice seriously from theoretical and philosophical standpoints [ 36 , 38 , 46 ] . Particularly useful with regard to the aims of the present work is the view on practice advanced by activity theory scholars . Speciﬁcally , the activity theoretic view considers practice as subsuming activ - ity [ 23 ] . Jarzabkowski in a series of published works [ 34 – 36 ] makes a distinction between activity and practice deﬁning activity as constituted by the actions of and in - teractions between actors as they perform their daily duties and roles , while practice is used to refer to activity patterns across actors , which provides order and meaning to a set of otherwise banal activities . In a similar vein , Schmidt et al . [ 52 ] asserts that practice is performative in the sense that it is accomplished by skilled actors who rely on both codiﬁed knowledge and experience to understand and assess how practices Electronic community factories : the model and its application 47 can be applied , altered or tailored in order to attain speciﬁc goals . In turn , the perfor - mative nature of practice affords variation in its enactment which may be attributed to institutional or technological factors . Practice may be manifested either as on - line or off - line praxis , with the two fre - quently being intertwined . On - line practices represent the information commons pre - vailing in networks of practice [ 11 , 22 ] , especially when the members are not co - located , thus not interacting directly with one another . Through practices , disclosed in some form or language and transmitted online , people are revealed as social peers . Consequently , practices are learnt from others and , although individually adminis - tered , this learning occurs through an ongoing sensitivity to what other practition - ers are doing [ 7 , p . 26 ] . This leads to the conclusion that practices in collaborative settings should not only express an artifacts’ relational possibilities , but also act as mediators between potentially different views of the artifact . For the purposes of the present work we adopt the perspective that practice rep - resents the collective wisdom ( habits , rules of thumb and socially - deﬁned modes of acting ) through which a virtual community articulates common ground . Moreover , we are concerned with practices exhibiting two features , namely ‘locality’ ( i . e . , be - ing meaningful in the micro - practice domain of individual members ) and ‘boundary’ ( i . e . , being recognizable across different social contexts and micro - practice domains ) . We also distinguish between two types of practices , namely those framed in the social interactions of a group of collaborators and those encapsulated in the processes , tools and artifacts used by collaborators to attain a goal . Framing practice in this manner allows us to explore a variety of novel issues related to the design of practice - oriented toolkits for cross - organization virtual communities of practice . 2 . 1 . 2 Value - creating cross organization virtual communities of practice The concept of a community of practice appeared in the literature in 1991 in the works of Lave and Wenger [ 38 ] and Brown and Duguid [ 10 ] . This paper builds on both these seminal works . Speciﬁcally , of particular interest is Brown and Duguid’s concentration on how informal groups form to generate solutions to novel problems through improvisation . At ﬁrst glance this can be contrasted with Lave and Wenger’s early emphasis on reproducing existing knowledge . Nevertheless , in Wenger’s subse - quent works ( i . e . , [ 61 ] ) especially those with McDermott [ 62 ] the focus shifts from learning to knowledge management in groups composed of members drawn from across functional boundaries to enhance organizational performance . Since the introduction of the term in the literature , many authors have presented theoretical and empirical works on how communities of practice ( or variations of the basic concept ) can be deployed in different application domains and institutional settings , including open source software projects [ 49 , 50 ] , new product develop - ment [ 28 ] , service industries such as tourism [ 15 , 55 ] , the automobile and airspace industries [ 53 , 62 ] , national agents and authorities [ 43 ] , large companies such as Siemens [ 24 , 39 ] and Achmea—one of the largest insurance groups in Holland [ 20 ] . The scope of these studies is such that it does not facilitate direct comparisons of results or the consolidation of a widely acceptable code of practice . Moreover , the term ‘community of practice’ is not used consistently by authors . Frequently , it is 48 D . Akoumianakis used to refer to ‘virtual or online communities’ [ 18 ] , ‘best - practice’ and ‘business opportunity’ value - creating networks [ 12 ] or alternative organizational models for customer relationship management [ 14 , 42 ] . Similarly , the range of issues addressed , do not always concentrate on knowledge management but on the conditions required to maintain critical mass of content and participation , reciprocity , trust , commitment and sustainability [ 6 , 47 ] . In this paper we are concerned with value - creating cross - organization virtual com - munities of practice . These are communities whose members are faced with the dual challenge of having to obey to the instituted ‘local’ practices using tools speciﬁc to their business domain , as well as to internalize and perform the ‘boundary’ and ‘col - laborative’ practices established and followed by the virtual community of practice . A more informative account of value - creating cross organization virtual communities of practice can be obtained by relating them to the prevailing notion of a community of practice as knowledge management tool and extracting key differences in three dimensions , namely nature of community ( i . e . , informal versus value - creating social networks ) , community focus ( i . e . , community management versus practicing ) and community scope ( i . e . , single versus cross organization communities of practice ) . Firstly , one characteristic of virtual communities of practice which stands out very promptly in the majority of existing works is their informal nature , which frequently makes the task of managing the community an ‘unmanageable’ endeavor . Recent research seems to recognize this as a shortcoming and propose concepts such as ‘best - practice’ and ‘business opportunity’ value - creating networks [ 12 ] . Advocates of this perspective claim that such value creating knowledge networks extend beyond the traditional concept of communities of practice , as they directly contribute to the creation of value within ﬁrms [ 24 ] and sustain community - based innovation [ 29 ] . Secondly , the majority of the works are devoted to community management ( i . e . , discovering , building and maintaining community ) , dismissing or under servicing the elements of practice [ 57 ] . The few studies available concentrating explicitly on ‘practice - related’ aspects present different approaches towards capturing , codifying , encoding experiences and exercising practices . For instance Franke and Piller [ 28 ] describe the use of virtual prototypes to facilitate end users’ knowledge transfer to - wards improved design . Fuller et al . [ 29 ] assess the effectiveness of virtual design contests allowing creative end user communities to inﬂuence future product designs . Scacchi [ 49 ] concentrates on the use of threaded discussions and reusable code for free and open source software development . These examples indicate that diverse practice domains , such as consumer goods , automotive engineering and software de - sign , obey to distinct rules of engagement and demand different tools ( in terms of type , scope and range ) for practicing . Thirdly , another issue worth noticing is that existing studies on communities of practice analyze community management in single organizations , either public or private [ 37 ] . The more demanding problem of community formation across orga - nizational boundaries—either through inter - organizational partnerships or external communities of practices—is seldom addressed [ 19 ] . In light of the above , cross organization virtual communities of practice can be broadly deﬁned as value - creating social networks formed by cross - sector represen - tatives ( inter - organizational communities ) and empowered by a community support Electronic community factories : the model and its application 49 system and dedicated tools for engaging in the practice the community is about . This concept exhibits several of the characteristics associated with the established conno - tation of a community of practice as a tool for knowledge management . Speciﬁcally , they are devised to sustain ‘dense relations of mutuality’ [ 60 , p . 74 ] , bring about a ne - gotiated , joint enterprise ‘deﬁned by the participants in the very process’ ( p . 77 ) and a shared repertoire including ‘routines , words , tools , ways of doing things , stories , gestures , symbols , genres , actions , or concepts . . . ’ ( p . 83 ) . On the other hand , it does have some distinct properties , with two standing out very promptly . The ﬁrst relates to the commitment to facilitating practices embodied into shared workﬂows , tools and artifacts , thereby extending the prevailing conception which frames practice into interpersonal interaction between members of a community of practice . The second distinct feature is related to what constitutes value creation . Our understanding is that value is created by fostering a dynamic environment in which community - based in - novation may ﬂourish , either as a result of analyzing end users’ purchasing behavior and creative contributions or as proactive envisioning on behalf of the virtual com - munity of practice . In turn , this inﬂuences and determines the practice - speciﬁc tools needed to facilitate the required processes . 2 . 1 . 3 Practice - oriented technologies and toolkits Practice - oriented technologies are deﬁned as the means ( or toolkits ) through which elements of a practice domain are encoded and manifested to facilitate what Wegner refers to as mutual engagement , joint enterprise and a shared repertoire in a com - munity of practice [ 60 ] . Such technologies may include generic tools and practice - speciﬁc and customized components . In the ﬁrst category , typical examples include information sharing ( i . e . , electronic mailing lists , listservs , Wikis , Blogs and RSS , MOOs ) , tools for memory management [ 1 ] , collaboratories [ 45 ] , and tools for idea exploration [ 26 ] and social construction of knowledge [ 25 ] . Typically , these tools are general - purpose and decoupled from practice - speciﬁc properties . Moreover , they tend to frame practice almost entirely to the social interaction between the collabo - rators . The second category , namely practice - speciﬁc tools , assumes that elements of ‘practice’ are embodied into shared processes , tools and artifacts , rather than mere information sharing and social exchanges . Consequently , interpersonal interaction in the form of sharing documents , expressing opinion and exchanging feedback , among the members is necessary but not sufﬁcient . Feed - through becomes equally important ( if not more critical ) and amounts to shared responsibility and exercising inﬂuence on the work of peers . In the present work , practice - speciﬁc tools are conceived as the virtual ‘place’ for engaging in the practice the community is about . They should be designed as tools for creating new—rather than reproducing existing—knowledge and virtual assets . Consequently , the challenge for these tools is not the integration of separate infor - mation systems , using some sort of interoperability mechanism ( i . e . , an ontology ) , but the provision of shared vocabularies for collaborative engagement in designated ‘boundary’ practices . Since in cross - organization virtual communities of practice , boundary and local practices are intertwined ( i . e . , the members’ collaborative behav - ior and praxis is inﬂuenced by local arrangements and vice versa ) , boundary practices 50 D . Akoumianakis become complex and cognitively demanding . Designing practice - oriented toolkits to interactively manifest , transmit and enact a suitable subset of these practices can re - duce the practitioners’ cognitive load and complexity As our interest in this paper is to facilitate new information - based product development two critical technologies are software factories and social decision support systems . Software factories are discussed in the literature for several years with the focus being placed either on the factory support environment ( i . e . , the computerized compo - nents ) or its institutional character [ 17 , 27 , 33 ] . More recent works concentrate on two prominent connotations emphasizing software assembly [ 30 ] and software process improvement [ 8 ] . Software assembly advocates the notion of building software from components by establishing patterns , frameworks and models and integrating them into software schemas and domain - speciﬁc design languages . A software factory of this type might include design patterns , reusable code , solution templates , wizards and design guidance that make it easier to start a new application . In this view , the basic premise of the software factory is that architects customize the various code recipes of the factory and then redeploy them to development teams . This gives ar - chitects a practical mechanism for distributing their own guidance to developers . On the other hand , Basili introduced the notion of the experience factory as a pathway towards software process improvement relying heavily upon reuse and deployment of previous codiﬁed experiences [ 8 ] . In the original formulation of the concept , Basili did not prescribe a particular role for technology or the type of tools needed to support the operation of an experience factory . However , in subsequent publications several examples of codiﬁed and packaged experiences have been described as well as the ingredients of the underlying technological set - up [ 9 , 54 ] . Irrespective of the focus of the factory setup—either product assembly lines or process improvement—a special category of tools of particular relevance to this work is group or social decision support systems [ 58 ] . These are information management tools supporting the expression , integration , and synthesis of diverse views in a man - ner in which : ( a ) participants can come to respect and understand the differences caused by diverse values and interests of the contributors , and ( b ) there can be a movement towards consensus on some of the issues involved . Group decision sup - port systems draw upon a rich theoretical base to facilitate decision making in ill - structured domains . A popular approach was originated by Rittel in the Issue - Based Information System ( IBIS ) framework for argumentation [ 48 ] . Techniques and tools aiming to implement decision - support systems using the IBIS framework provide mechanisms for codifying issues , options , contributions as well as comments and re - lationships between these elements [ 13 ] . A recent trend seeks to develop informative visualizations to capture both structure and content of the underlying decision space [ 1 , 16 , 21 , 44 ] so as to augment human decision making . This is not always easy as decision making processes may be messy , unstructured , and unsuited to support by conventional management information systems [ 31 , 59 ] . 2 . 2 Research questions and focus In light of the above , the present work attempts to integrate fabrics of communi - ties of practice with factory - based assembly of information - based services and social Electronic community factories : the model and its application 51 decision support systems in an effort to support the operation of value creating cross - organization virtual communities of practice . Consequently , the relevant top - level re - search questions include : • What type of activities constitute ‘practice’ in cross - organization virtual commu - nities of practice ? • How is such practice encoded , transmitted and enacted through computer - mediated environments of practice ? • To what extent can computer - mediated environments foster and enable change ( in virtual practices ) rather than merely reconstruct existing well - established prac - tices ? In this endeavor , our aim is not to advance the theoretical thinking behind virtual communities of practice so much as to contribute to the debate regarding the engi - neering ground and the type of tools needed to facilitate the members’ engagement in the practice the community is about . To this end , the paper advances a proposal for the ECF aiming to describe a general model fostering cross - organization virtual communities of practice in information - based industries with emphasis on engag - ing in the practice the community is about . This is particularly timely and appro - priate as the vast majority of studies concentrate on community management and community - support systems . The novelty of the ECF is that it bridges across two distinct functions , namely community management and practice management . This is facilitated by developing practice - oriented environments to establish the required software factory setup and to provide the virtual ‘place’ for engaging in the practice the community is about . 3 Methodology and research approach 3 . 1 Context of the work In the context of recent research we have been examining the challenges introduced above and experimenting with a variety of practice - oriented toolkits in application domains such as collaborative learning in music master classes [ 4 ] and vacation pack - age assembly [ 5 ] . Our work in these areas explores two alternative methodological pathways to designing practice - oriented toolkits . The ﬁrst is grounded on the ob - servation that certain practices are so well - deﬁned and widely established that the toolkit can only encapsulate elements of these practices and facilitate their computer - mediated reproduction . The second option is to design the toolkit so as to reﬂect a new practice . The former , which is representative of our music master class example , promotes the view that the toolkit alters the way in which the practice is enacted , processed , transmitted and socially manifested , but it does not radically change the essence of the practice . The second alternative , representing the case of assembling vacation packages , postulates the design of the toolkit as new practice for attaining goals not previously viable . The new practice amounts to harmonizing ( potentially different and incompatible ) institutionalized ‘local’ practices adopted by members of the cross - organization virtual community of practice . 52 D . Akoumianakis To justify this and to further qualify the distinction between toolkits as encapsu - lated practice and toolkits as enablers for new practice , we will brieﬂy elaborate on a case study aimed to provide insights to what is considered to be new practice in the present context and how it may inﬂuence the design of a practice - speciﬁc toolkit . Our reference domain is the tourism sector and the construction of vacation packages . 3 . 2 Case study : vacation package development practices To address the above questions , a variety of research methods were used to collect data and envision new capabilities for improved practices for building vacation pack - ages . Speciﬁcally , a non - experimental descriptive survey was conducted utilizing in - terviews , on - site visits and scenarios . As our intention was to unfold hidden or im - plicit elements of community practice , interviews and on - site visits were tailored so as to feed envisioning of new ( improved ) practices . In turn , these were contextual - ized using scenarios of use and rapid prototyping techniques . The scenarios of use included detailed description of the actions taken for a task to be performed by all actors involved in building vacation packages . Virtual prototypes , cognitive walk - throughs and interviewing of tour operators and travel agencies provided further ad - ditional insight . 3 . 2 . 1 Established practices Our survey revealed 7 standard practices involved in the development of vacation packages . Some of them are enacted individually ( i . e . , they are performed by one ac - tor alone ) such as “Deﬁne Package Abstract Details” or “Deﬁne Package Services” and some are social ( i . e . , they are performed by a group of collaborators ) such as “Discuss Service Details” or “Package Service Finalization” . Depending on the na - ture of the vacation package the enactment of a designated practice may vary in terms of effort and scope . For instance , “Package Dissemination & Promotion” implicates different set of activities for overseas packages requiring travel documents than inland traveling where the promotion is performed exclusively by the tour operator . Conse - quently , the community actors involved may vary accordingly . In terms of practice - oriented technologies , our survey revealed that there are practices which are mani - fested as ofﬂine local activities performed using traditional tools and artifacts ( i . e . , notebook , drawing board ) and social practices enabled by a blend of conventional communication media such as telephone , fax , e - mail , as well as more advanced tools and collaboration technologies such as portals , bulletin boards , web pages , legacy software such as reservation systems ( CRS ) and costumer relationship management ( CRM ) systems . Summarizing our analysis of the current situation leads to the following con - clusions . First of all , vacation packages undergo distinct stages from conception to population and marketing , with a fair amount of iteration . In each stage there are speciﬁc issues to be addressed with clear milestones and outcomes . Ownership is solely with the creator of the package , not the contributing partners . Thus the con - tributor’s liability amounts to executing part of the plan as delegated to him / her by the owner . Communities exist to facilitate customer - relationship management and Electronic community factories : the model and its application 53 less frequently inter - organizational alliances . In the later case , community formation is largely opportunistic , based on personal contacts and making use of traditional community support media . Community membership does raise implications on local practices , but only marginal . Interaction between community members , if existent , is on a need - driven basis and purely informative ( i . e . , one member informs another about an event ) . Entering or opting out from a community is dissertational and sel - dom follows speciﬁc rules . Consequently sense of community is weak and it can , by no means , be considered a catalyst for new or differentiated vacation packages . 3 . 2 . 2 Synthesizing an online practice for assembling vacation packages In an effort to gain insight to potential improvements , we have also presented the experts with a tentative scenario of a cross - organization community of practice spe - cializing on vacation package assembly and analyzed their response and feedback . Our intention was to concentrate on a particular type of vacation packages which are not widely supported at present . These are packages tightly linked to a geographic region and independent of the pre - packaged solutions available to customers through modern destination management systems . Typically , these packages have short dura - tions ( i . e . , a few days ) and high added value resulting from their locality . They are made up from primitive components such as transportation to and from a designated site , food & beverage , entrance fees , local accommodation ( if needed ) , all blended into one transaction . Such primitive services should be tailorable so as to reﬂect spe - cial requirements and optional offerings . Packages of this sort may be considered either as peripheral supplements of a pre - packaged vacation or as factors stimulating the ultimate choice of destination and / or pre - packaged solution . They are created by responding to informal customer requests , circumstantial incidents or foreseen events taking place within a designated geographic region . These characteristics necessitate that such vacation packages must be innovative ‘collective’ offerings , quickly com - piled ( if possible by reusing assets ) and adaptable so as to suit different needs and re - quirements of the customer base . The qualiﬁcation ‘collective’ is used to convey that no single business actor can provide the vacation package effectively and efﬁciently by account of own resources . It can then be argued that creating such packages is a knowledge management task of a dedicated community of practice . It turns out that the envisioned scenario sets the context of a new practice for building vacation packages of a particular type and scope . This new fully computer - mediated institution of practices results from transforming / expanding existing prac - tices and establishing new elements as needed . For instance , the practice “Find ap - propriate partners” is expanded and subsumes on - line practices such as “Invite ap - propriate partners” and “Formation of community of practice” . In the existing status quo there are previous agreements between the tour operator and service suppliers and thus there is no need for invitations . Instead , tour operators typically choose from a list according to the needs of the package . Another example is “Discuss ac - tivity details” which subsumes “Issue detection” , “Issue resolution proposal” and “Solution selection” . At present , when tour operators face a problem they resolve it by formal or informal communication ( i . e . , telephone , fax or email ) . However , in a computer - mediated environment an issue is raised and addressed through dedicated 54 D . Akoumianakis tools such asynchronous forums and bulletin boards , issue management systems , argumentation - based tools , online discussion visualizations , etc . Synthesizing a new practice out of the pool of empirical evidence entails deci - sions on two primary constituents , namely the package development workﬂows and community management . In terms of package development workﬂows four distinct stages have been identiﬁed representing intertwining activities in the development of a vacation package . These are initiation , elaboration , deployment and tailoring , each hosting separate institutions of practice . Speciﬁcally , the deﬁnition of the package , its duration and the required activities are designated in the initiation phase . Pack - age elaboration entails commitment of resources on behalf of the partners for the activities each can support . This may involve discussion and reﬂection upon tentative proposals as well as negotiation of details of one or more activities . The deployment stage gathers all contributions and packages them into a concrete offering which can be disseminated . Finally the tailoring stage is concentrated on the package retail al - lowing prospective customers to request changes and modiﬁcations so as to suit own requirements and preferences . The second constituent relates to the community management . For our purposes , the community of practice is conceived of as a mission - speciﬁc electronic squad . The mission is the development of the vacation package so as to meet designated constraints . The electronic squad is the cross - organization community of practice in - volved in the vacation package development workﬂows . In this context , three distinct roles are identiﬁed , namely the squad moderator , the squad member and the customer . A typical squad established in the traditional practice environment comprises the tour operator , the travel agent , the service providers and the end - customer . In contrast , an electronic squad is made up from one moderator , several members representing the inter - organizational alliance and the customer ( or villager expressing the demand for the squad’s mission ) . In terms of squad lifecycles , our survey informally conﬁrmed existing sociological accounts rooted in dynamic group stabilization theories [ 56 ] indicating four basic lifecycle stages , namely forming , storming , norming and per - forming . In light of the above , it is now possible to synthesize the vacation package assem - bly practice as follows . Vacation packages are the collective artifact of an electronic squad . The squad’s moderator designates new packages by selecting a correspond - ing package family to be populated by the squad . The squad is formed once the ab - stract package is deﬁned . Squad re - formation continues throughout the package initi - ation and elaboration workﬂows allowing candidates to assess package requirements against own resources and accordingly declare commitment or withdrawal from the package . At the end of the elaboration phase the squad is stabilized and not likely to change until the end of the package lifecycle . The storming stage starts when initial activities are deﬁned and the squad has taken its principal form . Storming is about reaching consensus on the speciﬁc mission and subsuming activities . The stage ends once all relevant issues have been addressed . Devising a common agenda with re - spect to the issues raised is the objective of the norming stage which is in partial overlap with the package elaboration workﬂow , lasting until the end of the deploy - ment workﬂow . Finally , the performing stage is in full temporal overlap with the package tailoring workﬂow . Electronic community factories : the model and its application 55 4 ECF framework and architecture In the previous section we described brieﬂy the methodology followed to gain insight to vacation package assembly , from two distinct perspectives , namely community management and practice - oriented workﬂows . We will now aim to bring together the concepts elaborated so far and brieﬂy describe an architectural model of the ECF which integrates community management and practice - oriented workﬂows . In this effort , our intention is to provide a functional rather than a technical account of the ECF . At the highest conceptual level , the ECF pursues the idea that community manage - ment is distinctively different from engaging in the practice the community is about . Respectively , the tools needed for each function should be designed accordingly . Fig - ure 1 depicts the proposed functional organization . Community management is re - sponsible for building / hosting the community and involves deﬁnition of community roles , setting rules for engagement and participation , electronic member registration , provisions for declaring virtual assets and information sharing . The practice - oriented functions are undertaken by moderated electronic squads ( i . e . , communities of prac - tice ) using dedicated tools . These functions are spread across two constituent roles , namely moderators and squad members , represented by the circular components in Fig . 1 . The assembly line and the squad members’ toolkit constitute the only means through which squads are formed , managed and engage in the practice they are about . It is worth noticing that the two suits of tools interoperate using a common infor - Fig . 1 Architectural model of an electronic community factory 56 D . Akoumianakis mation space comprising plug - ins , shared data models and software components and tools whose primary function is to encapsulate elements of a designated practice ( i . e . , social interaction using a shared message board , members’ negotiation and meta - negotiation on shared artifacts , etc . ) . In subsequent sections we will provide further details on both these software suits . 4 . 1 Community management Community management in the ECF is about building and maintaining sense of com - munity between different target users such as customers , business partners and col - laborators engaged in a joint enterprise , with each type being served and facilitated by different tools . Firstly , end user communities are formed between all kinds of customers interested in the offerings of the ECF . The primary function of end user communities is to engage in social exchanges regarding the ECF’s product offer - ings . Secondly , electronic neighborhoods are online communities comprising busi - ness partners offering particular services of a speciﬁed thematic scope . For instance a department’s learning community may be formed with three neighborhoods rep - resenting , for example , academic stuff , students and the department’s secretariat . Finally , electronic squads constitute the cross - organization virtual communities of practice dynamically formed to engage in the practice of information - based product assembly . We will attempt to further characterize the latter two types of community , as these constitute the cornerstones in the ECF’s operation . Electronic neighborhoods aggregate services of a particular type and support spe - ciﬁc goals depending on the needs of the members or the expectations of the wider market / economic environment . Goals are pursued by members providing contribu - tions governed by policies and rules of engagement . Policies are embedded into processes covering registration and access , acceptance of new members , rules of ac - ceptable behavior , security , privacy , freedom of speech / act and moderation . Such policies are interactively manifested by an electronic neighborhood registration sys - tem responsible for assigning roles and determining access to the neighborhood services . Each neighborhood may provide general - purpose communication services such as notiﬁcation ( SMS , GroupSMS , IM , forums ) , as well as neighborhood - speciﬁc information services ( i . e . , neighborhood news , on - line directory and neighborhood information templates ) . Electronic squads are conceived of as cross - neighborhood , mission - speciﬁc virtual communities of practice . Their mission amounts to the development of a new prod - uct within the scope of the ECF so as to meet designated constraints . An electronic squad of this type comprises one moderator and several squad members from differ - ent neighborhoods . Throughout the virtual life of an electronic squad , squad members operate in a dual mode . On the one hand , members continue to undertake ordinary business as if the community did not exist , while concurrently they are entitled to engage in the distributed collective practice of the virtual community of practice . In effect , this dual mode of operation entails a degree of intertwining between ‘local’ and ‘boundary’ practices . Local practices refer to institutionalized practices followed by individual members in their daily operation as autonomous business entities . On the other hand ‘boundary’ practices are plastic enough to make sense locally , given Electronic community factories : the model and its application 57 the constraints of the several parties employing them , yet robust enough to maintain a common identity across different social contexts . In terms of squad lifecycles , Tuck - man’s theory on social dynamics in small group activities [ 56 ] provides the ground for designing the tools for managing electronic squads . This is further detailed in the following section which is devoted to the ECF’s deployment for vacation package assembly . In summary , the ECF fosters a staged community management model which facil - itates virtual communities of interest , business - oriented online communities ( or elec - tronic neighborhoods ) and cross - organization virtual communities of practice ( i . e . , electronic squads ) . Each type of community is intended to facilitate different purpose and distinct targets . Respectively , registration , virtual presence , content management , access to information and communication services and use of dedicated tools repre - sent virtual assets assigned on the grounds of roles undertaken in each type of virtual community . 4 . 2 Factory set - up The factory set - up constitutes the operational environment of electronic squads and serves as the technological infrastructure encapsulating the functions of a designated practice domain ( upper part in Fig . 1 ) . It is intended to integrate the tools needed to specify , deﬁne and assemble domain - speciﬁc information products and services within the ECF’s scope . These tools provide the only means through which electronic squads engage in the practice they are intended to enact . In the ECF , the factory is conceived as a collaborative software platform ( or practice toolkit ) available only to members of electronic squads ( i . e . , neighbors and moderators ) for contributing to the mission of a squad . As squads comprise two functional roles , namely the moderator and the member , the practice toolkit should preserve this distinction in the functions and services supported . Consequently , the toolkit comes in two versions—one for moderators and one for business partners of an electronic squad—represented by the circular components in Fig . 1 . The assembly line is the primary function of the mod - erator and supports a variety of tasks such as managing the collaborative workﬂows , requesting input from and guiding squad members , packaging and publishing the col - lective outcome of an electronic squad as well as monitoring operational details of a vacation package . On the other hand , the squad members’ toolkit is the medium through which members of the squad engage in the practice of vacation package as - sembly by contributing their assets , responding to the moderator’s requests and nego - tiating properties of a vacation package . The assembly line and the squad members’ toolkit integrate components which allow ( asynchronous and synchronous ) access to a common information space ( see middle part in Fig . 1 ) which drives the process of vacation package assembly . There are four essential components which are required to create an operational instance of a factory , namely ( a ) a deﬁnition of the artifacts to be produced within the scope of the factory , ( b ) workﬂows supporting the lifecycle of an artifact ( c ) a visual design language to manipulate the artifacts and their components across work - ﬂows and ( d ) rendering mechanisms to assemble and build the artifacts . Collectively these components constitute the factory’s common information space . The assembly 58 D . Akoumianakis line , which is a primary function of the moderator , supports the workﬂows deﬁned on a domain - speciﬁc product line speciﬁcation ( or product family ) characterizing the products assembled within the scope of the factory . A product family is considered as a codiﬁed abstract representation which is progressively transformed to a concrete offering ( i . e . , instance of the family ) through the designated workﬂows . This trans - formation is materialized through the distributed collective practice of an electronic squad commissioned to compile and support a speciﬁc product and whose members contribute by responding to the moderator’s requests or by reﬂecting upon the shared artifacts of work - in progress . It is also important to note that a product line speciﬁ - cation can be used to assemble a variety of concrete products , while it can also be reused , extended and modiﬁed as experience grows or as requirements evolve . All deﬁned product families or product line speciﬁcations designate the range of artifacts produced within the scope of the factory . In the ECF the product is assembled in its entirety from XML using different types of tools facilitating collaboration , shared workﬂow management as well as automated product assembly within the scope of a product family . These tools constitute com - ponents of the common information space and include general purpose collaboration software ( i . e . , collaborative message boards , virtual meeting tools , synchronous com - munication , etc . ) and practice - oriented tools ( i . e . , rendering engines , JSPs for pack - aging ) supporting the designated distributed collective practice . Although a technical description of these tools is beyond the scope of the present work , it is important to note that the current implementation of the ECF provides the necessary support for component reuse and customization . Speciﬁcally , recent work [ 3 ] has demon - strated the applicability of ECF’s tools for building information - based products in application domains other than tourism ( i . e . , semester course plans , trade fairs and conference program schedules ) . 5 Deployment of the ECF in tourism The ECF as presented above constitutes an alternative model for community - based electronic commerce and an architectural framework for value creating cross or - ganization virtual communities of practice formed to foster high quality product assembly in information based industries . Information - based industries are those whose products are non - material ( intangible ) —thus , customers cannot experience them beforehand—while knowledge catalyzes purchasing behavior and is central to gaining competitive advantage . One such industry is tourism , which is progressively transformed from a leading application in B2C e - commerce into an information busi - ness . Detailed analysis of current practices in building vacation packages , as discussed in Sect . 3 , revealed a number of challenges which have motivated the deployment of the ECF in this sector of the industry . Speciﬁcally , it turns out that web - based online communities in tourism exist , but their main objective is to provide an alter - native mechanism for customer - relationship management . Cross - sector communities of practice , involving representatives of different business activities are non - existent . Thus , collaboration is informal and using conventional means and custom practices owned by different players . Electronic community factories : the model and its application 59 The above have motivated the deployment of the ECF in the tourism sector and the development of an experimental setup implementing the functions and tools de - scribed in Fig . 1 so as to support and facilitate the new practice of vacation package assembly . This was done in the context of the eKoNES research and development project ( see Acknowledgment ) and is brieﬂy reviewed in the following . 5 . 1 The portal for community management In eKoNES , community management is facilitated by a dedicated community por - tal which hosts all community management functions . Our running prototype is an augmented instance of the LifeRay ( http : / / www . liferay . com ) content management system and application server . As this component was to serve the management of cross - organization virtual communities of practice as well as interoperation with fac - tory setup for vacation package assembly , a number of augmentations were intro - duced . Some of the prominent and demanding augmentations were designed to fa - cilitate neighborhood management , electronic registration , asynchronous notiﬁcation ( using SMS , GroupSMS and Instant Messaging ) and development of dedicated and customized portlets to facilitate interoperation with the practice toolkit as shown in the lower part of Fig . 1 . For the purposes of our example , we will brieﬂy review only the augmented portal components to provide an illustrative account of the eKoNES communityware . One type of augmentations introduced on top of the basic Liferay portal ad - dress the development of dedicated portlets for electronic neighborhood management such as the customized neighborhood forum , the neighborhood search engine and the neighborhood directory service . Figure 2 provides an instance of the eKoNES - Tourism portal ( http : / / www . e - kones / village ) , with the currently selected neighbor - hood being ‘Culture’ , while for the purposes of this discussion we have deleted the content . As shown each neighborhood is organized as a collection of portlets includ - ing the neighborhood news portlet , neighborhood services portlet and neighborhood directory portlet . It is worth noticing the custom portlet ‘Neighborhood news’ which has a different ( two - column ) organization as opposed to the single column organiza - tion of the other portlets . Electronic registration to a neighborhood allows eKoNES villagers ( i . e . , users reg - istered to eKoNES through the standard Liferay registration mechanism ) to incremen - tally obtain neighbor authorities , thus being able to declare competencies , describe their service offerings , gain access to protected neighborhood services , take part in decision - making and manipulate contents . Registration to a neighborhood is a two - step process ( see Fig . 3 ) . In the ﬁrst step , the system allows the candidate to modify details of an existing account or to develop a new account . In the second step , the candidate should declare the neighborhoods of interest and the services supported . Upon successful registration , neighbors are presented in the neighborhood’s direc - tory and obtain access to downloadable software components and dedicated tools which are needed for their effective participation in the collaborative exchanges of eKoNES squads . As for content , we have designed a large gallery of custom informa - tion portlets which can be used to present neighborhood - speciﬁc information services such as service descriptions , package previews , tips of the day , recommendations , the 60 D . Akoumianakis Fig . 2 Neighborhood organization Fig . 3 Stages in electronic neighborhood registration neighborhood’s mall , various ‘search and ﬁnd’ services , etc . One of these portlets is dedicated to hosting the factory’s feed - through in terms of available vacation pack - ages ( see portlet entitled ‘Available packages’ ) . Electronic community factories : the model and its application 61 5 . 2 Components of the practice - speciﬁc toolkit The practice - oriented toolkit provides the ‘mechanics’ of the factory set up and pro - vides the virtual space for compiling and assembling vacation packages of different types . In what follows , we brieﬂy review the basic components of this toolkit empha - sizing the supported functionality and how this is integrated in the factory setup . 5 . 2 . 1 The package family schema A package is manipulated in the squad’s virtual work room . This is a virtuality which offers a synchronization point for all members of a squad and a shared virtual space for collaboration . The tools offered and the contents of a room are adapted depending on the role of the entrant . This type of adaptation is recognized and initiated by the system and covers both adaptation to local computing environment ( i . e . , language ) as well as adaptation of the content of the room and its interactive manifestation . Within a room , squad members have access to active packages to which they have committed resources , the room’s shared message board and the synchronous collaborative ses - sion management tool . On the other hand , moderators have access to additional tools allowing them to carry out some of the practices involved in the package workﬂows . The package family schema deﬁnes the scope of the artifacts produced within the scope of the factory . Devising such a schema requires an analysis of both common - alities and variants that characterize instances of a package family . For example , a common feature in all packages is the notion of an activity , which models an abstract service component offered by a neighborhood . Then , a package can be considered as an aggregation of activities taking place within a day . On the other hand , activities differ in terms of type , duration , execution mode ( i . e . , sequence / parallel execution ) , interdependencies ( i . e . , a transport activity assumes a transportation medium ) . New package development can be accelerated and made more agile by designing a vi - sual language specialized to model structural and spatial semantics of this domain of interest . To this end , eKoNES exploits a set of advanced interaction platform admin - istration mechanisms [ 2 ] , namely toolkit augmentation , expansion and integration , which allow for building metaphor - speciﬁc visual models of vacation packages . Sub - sequent sections provide examples of the application of these strategies in the context of our pilot case . 5 . 2 . 2 Populating packages Package construction takes place in distinct workﬂows each contributing to the trans - formation of an abstraction to a concrete instance within the scope of a designated schema . Typically , a domain - speciﬁc vocabulary ( i . e . , a visual design language ) al - lows manipulation of the package across the workﬂows . For vacation packages , such workﬂows may include package initiation ( i . e . , selection within of family schema and initialization ) ; elaboration ( i . e . , designating neighborhood services such as trans - portation , accommodation , food and beverage , for each day of the package ) ; deploy - ment ( i . e . , deﬁning parameters of the package such as pricing , content details such as images and descriptions , required to publish the package as a collective resource 62 D . Akoumianakis Fig . 4 Workﬂows in the package - speciﬁc toolkit through the portal , and tailoring ( i . e . , reﬂection on package from customers which triggers re - execution of some workﬂows to tailor the package to the customers needs ) . Figure 4 presents the relevant workﬂows and the main technologies involved in each stage / workﬂow . As shown , the workﬂows progressively transform an abstract pack - age to a concrete offering experienced through a speciﬁc devise . Accordingly , the technologies used to implement the corresponding functions in the ECF follow a similar trend—from abstract to speciﬁc . A new package is always initiated by a moderator by designating the package fam - ily and the neighborhood - speciﬁc services required ( i . e . , accommodation , food and beverage , transportation , etc . ) . An initial squad is formed on the grounds of matching members’ declared offerings during electronic registration to neighborhoods ) against package required services . Populating a package family is undertaken only by mature squads comprising members who have committed resources to the package . This in - tertwining between the vacation package development workﬂows and the squad life cycle stages is summarized in Table 1 . Each workﬂow provides an alternative view to the package being developed with suitable exploration - based graphical querying capabilities . Thus , in the forming stage the moderator obtains a visual depiction of the current structure of the squad , indi - cating partners committed , withdrawn and pending . In the elaboration workﬂow the package is presented as a schedule of activities with suitable visual details differenti - ating between different types of neighborhood services . For instance , the top screen in Fig . 5 presents an instance of the moderator’s view of a vacation package in the elaboration stage . The upper part of the screen presents the vacation package using an ‘expanded’ component ( the ActivityPanel container ) . The tabbed pane in the bottom dialog updates the corresponding view of the package . This facility is available only to the moderator , not the members , of the squad . Squad members can access the package through a different user interface ( see bottom screen in Fig . 5 ) available through the business partners’ client toolkit . This Electronic community factories : the model and its application 63 Table 1 Practice development workﬂows versus squad lifecycle stages component implements a different visual layout for the same domain model , while it allows users to select activities owned , as well as to set the designated activity pa - rameters . In this view , activities are laid out so as to indicate parallelism , sequence , containment and overlap . Through the lower dialogue the user can modify / update speciﬁc parameters of an owned activity , thus contributing to the package . Such con - tributions effectively amount to detailing parameters of an activity depending on the partner’s local practices . In this process , the moderator or the squad members can raise issues considered important for the package and subsequently engage in a dia - logue to resolve them . Such social interactions constitute the storming phase in the squad’s life cycle and may address a variety of issues such as discount policies , pay - ment clearance as well as unforeseen events ( i . e . , local strikes ) which may impact a vacation package . Making proposals for these issues and reaching consensus on their resolution is the norming stage in the squad’s lifecycle . Storming and norming are transparent to the squad members . In fact , they only make sense for the moderator , driving a range of decision - supporting interactions through suitable visualizations of archived exchanges . However , there are cases where the above asynchronous exchanges are not suf - ﬁcient to resolve the issues raised . To this end , the eKoNES factory setup supports synchronous collaboration between squad members , using a partially replicated ar - chitecture and allowing for context - speciﬁc rendering of a domain model ( i . e . , pack - age ) . Squad moderators issue collaboration sessions during the elaboration phase ei - ther to resolve conﬂicts or negotiate parts of a package . Moderators also deﬁne the object of collaboration , designating either the entire package or speciﬁc components of the package . In a synchronous session , the eKoNES factory assembles the relevant parts of the model and renders it according to the interactive metaphor assigned to the elaboration stage . Replicas of this model are also rendered to all collaborating clients registered in the session . 64 D . Akoumianakis Fig . 5 Package compilation by the moderator ( top ) and squad members ( bottom ) Electronic community factories : the model and its application 65 Fig . 6 A replicated object as viewed by the moderator ( left ) and the squad members ( right ) This is shown in Fig . 6 which details an instance of the same package rendered in the moderator’s and the collaborating partners’ view respectively , as well as some of the interaction patterns and their effect on the visual layouts of the registered partners . It is worth noting the differences in the two views which however are fully synchro - nized . Access to the replicated object in a collaborative session is moderated by a ﬂoor manager undertaking runtime permission assignment . Floor holders can request speciﬁc information about an object by annotating it , posing questions or requesting clariﬁcation . They can also introduce changes to the model which affects the work of others ( see Fig . 6 ) . As shown , the holder of the ﬂoor ( in the example the ﬂoor is assumed to be with the moderator ) can resize , move , update , create a clone of a com - ponent , with all such changes being propagated to all views registered in the session . For purposes of illustration we have annotated the screens so as to depict both start and end conditions , though red rectangles and yellow arrows respectively , for each interaction object class . In all cases , the visual view of the modiﬁed object is updated with ‘accept / reject’ buttons in the direction of the change . Finally , it is important to mention that the two views although different are fully synchronized within the same collaborative session so as to preserve consistency of the shared workspace . 5 . 2 . 3 Assembling and tailoring a package Package assembly is the process of ‘packaging’ an artifact within the scope of a des - ignated schema and presenting it as a resource through the community portal . This process may be implemented as a rendering engine which assembles the components of a package ( from XML ) , undertakes the required transformations and streams the packaged content into a dedicated portlet . At this stage , all potential customers ( with registered interest on the package ) , are informed via the eKo NE S notiﬁcation ser - vices ( i . e . , email , SMS and Group SMS ) . As the package content is fully separated from its presentation , the package can be manifested through alternative forms and terminals using a context sensitive rendering mechanism , thus allowing alternative 66 D . Akoumianakis Fig . 7 The package in the deployment phase interactive embodiments of the package . Figure 7 depicts the elaboration of a pack - age in a portlet context . As shown the HTML ﬁle generated includes clear indication of the tailoring that the user can undertake which results in different personalized versions of the package . 6 Assessment of the eKoNES pilot and discussion The ECF concept as deployed in eKoNES is now a fully operational pilot with var - ious evaluation scenarios being undertaken to study structural and social aspects of the electronic squads formed to facilitate vacation package assembly . To this end , over a two - year period ( 2006 – 2008 ) , we have built the essential relationships with key actors in the ﬁeld and gained their commitment to a comprehensive evaluation methodology covering both formative assessments aiming to improve early proto - types as well as summative evaluations with expert end users and business partners . Formative assessments of early prototypes was planned and executed using standard techniques such as prototype walkthroughs , laboratory testing and analysis of break downs in the execution of hypothetical scenarios . Despite the fact that the results of these evaluations have been very positive it is strongly believed that the actual value is to be found from observing operating squads over longer periods of time . This will give sufﬁcient data to answer critical questions about eKoNES which amount to un - derstanding the knowledge management that takes place , the way such communities Electronic community factories : the model and its application 67 are cultivated as well as behavioral patterns which emerge as a result of the mem - bers’ social interactions and / or the customers’ purchasing behavior and its impact on individual and community levels . To allow for such assessments we have devised a multilevel / multiphase evaluation scheme which allows us to gain empirical insights to operating squads through vir - tual ethnographies with the researchers becoming active participants as squad mod - erators . This approach offers the opportunity to study a variety of basic questions such as participation , service quality and use and sociability at different community levels , as well as to put into perspective what social interactions are taking place . Table 2 summarizes the above research issues and relates them to different com - munity levels by means of quantiﬁable measures . Some of these measures can be derived directly from the computer - mediated environment , while others require qual - itative techniques , such focus groups , interviewing and administration of question - naires . As our interest extends to intra - and inter - squad dynamic behavior of members we have also planned detailed assessments of squad - level performance across different lifecycle stages . This has led to the identiﬁcation of key issues per stage in the squad’s lifecycle as summarized in Table 3 . As in the case of Table 2 , our intention is to iden - tify quantiﬁable measures that can be related to persistent data collected by the ECF in the course of its operation , while allowing the extraction of both quantitative and qualitative evidence regarding the squad members’ behavior . The above constitute the main research lines of our on - going evaluation agenda . Obviously , a full exposition of all relevant issues in the current paper is not possible , as many assessments are still on - going and expected to provide useful results in due time . Nevertheless , we can provide details of virtual ethnographies of operating squads as well as the qualitative ﬁndings of thematic workshops and focus groups with actors from the ﬁeld . 6 . 1 Virtual ethnographies of operating squads Virtual ethnography [ 41 ] is a technique used for understanding social life in an on - line setting . It entails a process of intermittent engagement , rather than long - term immersion in a virtual space or environment . For our purposes , virtual ethnographies were organized around speciﬁc vacation packages with the researchers becoming ac - tive participants as squad moderators . The objectives were to track and assess social interactions between squad members while engaged in virtual assembly of a vaca - tion package . In what follows , we provide indicative insights offered by the virtual ethnography of the ‘Peloponissos round Trip’ discussed in previous sections . We will concentrate on the moderator’s tasks ( i . e . , functionality of the assembly line in Fig . 1 ) , as these are more demanding and complex but also informative of the capabilities of the ECF . For purposes of simplicity we will not preview the starting workﬂows of deﬁning an abstract package by designating package family and neighborhoods . Running packages can be previewed as shown in Fig . 8 ( top ) which depicts graph - ically the social exchanges between squad members . The custom layout of the graph allows interactive exploration of messages with indication of path . Thus , selecting a leaf node will draw around it the messages of the corresponding tread in a tem - poral fashion ( left to right ) . Entering a package’s room presents the moderator with 68 D . Akoumianakis Table 2 Evaluation issues and assessment Participation Services and use Sociability Business • Number and geographic spread of villagers—measured directly from accounts created • Cross - neighborhood villagers • Rationale for registering—measured by analyzing topic of requests • Frequency of use—measured as number of requests posted , packages purchased • Added value—measured as the number of packages purchased • Percentage of transactions made • Percentage of posts to a thread • Percentage of positive posts • Percentage of negative posts • Percentage accepting a package • Percentage requesting further reﬁnements • Percentage of users making repeated purchases • Percentage of users making repeated posts without purchasing • Popular packages by customer proﬁle over a period of time • Tracking changes in customers’ patterns • Popular business partners by category of package • Popular business partner by customer proﬁle • Popular services by category of package • Popular services by customer proﬁle Neighborhood • Number of active neighborhoods • Size of neighborhood • Role and function of active neighborhoods • Popular versus less popular neighborhoods • Neighborhood tendencies • How is sense of community supported / facilitated in a neighborhood • Reason for participation in an neighborhood • Neighborhood service appropriateness according to thematic goal • Member congregation per service • Preconditions for supporting a service • Service demanded over a period of time • Tracking changes in customer demand • Cross - neighborhood members • Do they exist and what are they concerned with • Members judgment upon neighborhood’s purpose • Who deﬁnes them and how • Number of rules that regulate members’ behavior in a neighborhood • Degree of rule adoption • Percentage of action deemed as improper behavior Squad • No . of different squads created in a given period of time • % of squads completing their mission without problems • % of squads completing the mission with problems and type of problems • Squad formation patterns • Subjective member’s satisfaction from other members • Subjective beneﬁt from participating in a squad • Satisfaction from the collective effort • Subjective opinion on set rules • Percentage of rule adoption by members • Percentage of action towards behavioral rules violation • Subjective member satisfaction from the moderator the room’s tools and the moderator’s ‘to - do’ list for a speciﬁc package ( bottom ) . The ‘to - do’ list is manifested as electronic post - it notes with tasks requiring immediate attention being placed in the forefront . The dialogue on the upper right hand side of the ‘to - do’ frame can be used to create / delete / modify and search for electronic post - it notes . Electronic community factories : the model and its application 69 Table 3 Squad - level quality factors and scope of improvement Forming Storming Norming Performing • Percentage of participants in a squad with active contribution—assessedbycontentanalysisofpostsinthesharedmessageboard • Percentage of squad members opting out—measured from ‘withdrawal’ posts in the message board • Reasons for members’withdrawal—extractedfromcontentanalysis of the corresponding posts • Members remaining in the squad but not actively contributing • Percentage of issues raised per package—measuredbythecorrespondingpostsinthemessageboard • Number of messages exchanged per issue—measured as the number of replies to an issue • Percentage of issue repetition across packages of the same family—extractedfromcontentanalysisofthecorrespondingposts ; it will point out issues emerging regardless of the package • Percentage of irrelevant or inappropriate issues perpackage—extractedfromcontentanalysisofthecorrespondingpost • % of messages consolidated during the norming stage—measured as average time for resolving an issue • Percentage of issues that result in a consensus—measuredfrom the corresponding posts in the message board ; it reveals squad capability to solve problems • % of issues that result to a dead - end—measured from content analysis of the corresponding posts and indicating sensitive issues • % of issues consolidated into rules ; measure of the squad’s ability to combine options • Package activities being tailored by end users • Popularity of activity instances • Cross - activity analysis ( i . e . , how does choice of a certain activity relate to choices made for another activity ) • Percentage of posts reporting successful completion of an assigned activity • Percentage of posts reporting problems in the completion of an assigned activity • Percentage of successfullycompletedpackages • Percentage of unsuccessfullycompletedpackages 6 . 1 . 1 Vacation package neighborhood structure and squad composition Two issues of particular interest to the researcher in our virtual ethnographies are va - cation package neighborhood structure and squad composition . The former provides insight to the squad’s mission by identifying the neighborhoods involved in the pack - age , while the latter indicates the members who have committed resources to a squad and its mission . The squad forming stage tool provides moderators with useful infor - mation on both these items . To facilitate this we have extended an open source 2D graphical toolkit , namely prefuse ( http : / / prefuse . org / ) in order to build dynamic visualizations such as that depicted in Fig . 9 , offering insights to both neighborhood structure ( and substructures ) and squad composition . Leaf nodes in the graph represent business partners registered to a neighborhood and offering speciﬁc type of services . This visual layout may change as the squad proceeds in the forming stage , thus indicating members committing resources and members opting out . Moreover , interactive search is also supported based on key - words and uses color for depicting search results . Similar visualizations can be built for all active squads , thus allowing not only intra - squad structural analysis but also inter - squad comparisons especially for vacation packages having similar or identical 70 D . Akoumianakis Fig . 8 Moderator’s view of social exchanges in a package ( top ) and ‘list - to - do’ items ( bottom ) Electronic community factories : the model and its application 71 Fig . 9 Assessment of structural properties of an eKoNES squad neighborhood demands . A squad moderator can easily deduce members who con - stantly commit or avoid committing resources to squads as well as members who progressively decide to opt out from a squad . Further insight as to the reasons leading to these behaviors may be obtained by content analysis of the corresponding time stamped posts in the squad’s message board . 6 . 1 . 2 Raising issues and making proposals Another key question addressed in our virtual ethnographies relates to the knowl - edge management that takes place in an operating squad . This entails creative and reﬂective responses by all members of the squad leading to persistent posts through the message board . Such exchanges may include requests for clariﬁcations , posting issues to be resolved and taking position against issue resolution proposals . In our current implementation , these are considered as social interaction taking place dur - ing the squad’s storming stage . Moderators can obtain quick overviews of the state of affairs in a storming stage by visualizing the collective contributions of the members . It should be noted that the squad members are not actually aware that such contribu - tions are part of the storming phase . In fact the squad lifecycle stages are transparent 72 D . Akoumianakis Fig . 10 Assessment of issues raised / pending during the storming stage to the squad members . It is the system’s responsibility to classify the contributions and the moderator’s task to make sense of such data and accordingly update the issues to be addressed , propose solutions and solicit contributions . Moderators obtain detailed insight to the state of affairs during the storming phase through a dedicated tool ( see Fig . 10 ) depicting graphically the relevant parts of the asynchronous discussion . This tool visualizes the current topics , issues raised as well as the proposals submitted for consideration in a temporal fashion . Upon start of the storming phase , the moderator deﬁnes a number of “Default Issues” ( see lower section of the graph ) , representing common concerns across packages of the same family . Subsequent posts to message board represent time - stamped contributions to storming . As shown , the moderator can access all the topics ( see upper part of the graph titled “topics” ) identiﬁed by squad members and assess their popularity ( i . e . , number of reports marked as red lines ) , temporal sequence ( time runs from top to bot - tom ) and the corresponding issues . Moderators can also raise issues as needed ( see lower left hand side dialog in Fig . 10 ) . Decoding the information presented to the moderator in Fig . 10 provides useful insights to the running situation . Speciﬁcally , the topic “Bus Strike” was the ﬁrst to be identiﬁed and has gained a high degree of popularity as several reports have being posted ( lines marked in the topics lifeline ) . On the grounds of this evidence , the moderator ( or a squad member ) declares a corre - sponding issue ( oval artifact entitled “Bus strike issue” at the “issues” section ) to be resolved . Similarly , the topic “Bad weather” was initiated after the topic “Bus strike” with no popularity , thus no declaration of corresponding issue . The topic “Payment Electronic community factories : the model and its application 73 problem” represents a squad member’s post reporting inability to handle certain type of payment . It appears that other partners share this concern , which justiﬁes its quali - ﬁcation as an issue ( see oval artifact titled “Payment issue” at the “issues” section ) . It is also useful to notice that issues are color - coded to reﬂect their solution state . Thus green color ( see “Payment issue” ) means that there is consensus on a solution , while yellow color ( see “Bus strike issue” ) means that there is still ongoing discussion about the solution . The above is illustrative of both the kind of information exchanged by squad members in their effort to clarify the mission ( i . e . , vacation package ) as well as the knowledge built and consolidated . The information extracted may be used for a va - riety of purposes . It consolidates social interactions between squad members taking place within a speciﬁed time period . It provides an interactive memory archive of the squad’s progressive accomplishments . It offers a type of design rationale and jus - tiﬁcation for certain decisions such as what issues are raised , when and why , what solutions are suggested and how popular they are . Finally , it may be used to distin - guish active and creative squad members from passive observers , as well as issues and proposals recurring across similar missions . 6 . 1 . 3 Assessing individual and collective response to issues raised Squad members can express their opinion on the issues raised and the proposals sub - mitted by voting positively , negatively or indifferently to a given proposal . Voting is performed through the “Voting for solution” tab ( see top screen in Fig . 11 ) of the business partner client toolkit . Solution proposals are presented in a list ( see mid - dle part of the tool ) and squad members vote using the appropriate “vote selection” control . Squad members are also presented with information on how other members have voted both in textual and graphical form . It is important to mention that the squad members’ behavior as manifested in this stage is package - speciﬁc and does not bind the members’ actions in other packages . This allows , amongst other things , cross - package analysis and may be useful for understanding the behavior of members across different missions . A squad reaches agreement on how the mission is to be executed by consolidat - ing all issues raised and codifying them into norms and rules covering global qual - ity attributes or constraints of the package ( i . e . , discount policies per neighborhood , temporal constraints for neighborhood activities ) . Collectively these norms consti - tute the agreed protocol for compiling the package , thus binding conditions for all squad members engaged in the assembly of the speciﬁc package . To reach and syn - thesize such agreements , the moderator needs overviews of collective social behavior . Figure 11 ( bottom ) provides an example of such collective behavior with regards to issues raised and the submitted proposals . As shown , the graphic presents the mem - bers’ votes on proposals for different issues . Using the corresponding tabbed pane ( see lower left part of the screen in the bottom of Fig . 11 ) , moderators can elabo - rate on the designated issues and the proposals made . The collective opinion of the quad members is presented graphically as shown in the upper part of Fig . 11 ( bot - tom ) . Once again , colors such as green , red and gray are used to denote respectively members supporting , opposing or being indifferent to a proposal . 74 D . Akoumianakis Fig . 11 Business partner voting in the storming stage ( top ) and consensus creation ( bottom ) 6 . 1 . 4 The performing stage and work in progress The ﬁnal stage in the squad life cycle is performing . This overlaps with the tailor - ing workﬂow as well as the execution of the package . Figure 12 is representative Electronic community factories : the model and its application 75 Fig . 12 Visualizing work in progress of the type of information available to moderators during this stage . The graphic on the top of the screen is an interactive visualization of archival data contributed by customers ( circular zones ) regarding speciﬁc activities ( middle linear part ) and the involved squad members ( bottom circle ) . The visualization makes use of the con - cept of social zone to depict progress made by state and status . The moderator can query the graph using direct manipulation to obtain progress - oriented information on activities , squad members and speciﬁc customers . The tabular notation in the lower left part of the user interface offers additional querying capabilities . According to the information extracted , the moderator may initiate the appropriate action related to a speciﬁc activity or squad member . 6 . 1 . 5 Knowledge management with the ECF One primary contribution of the virtual ethnographies described earlier is to provide insights to knowledge management facilitated by the ECF . There are two issues of particular interest in the context of our current work , namely discovering ‘hidden’ or emergent communities and extracting patterns and codifying reusable experience . Identifying ‘hidden’ communities reveals periodic or permanent clusters formed dy - namically as a result of exchanges between members of a social network . In the con - text of our reference scenario two types of clusters have been found to occur . The ﬁrst is unintentional clustering between members from different neighborhoods resulting from customers’ purchasing behaviors as codiﬁed during the vacation package tailor - ing stage . Such clustering can be detected by interactive queries on the visualization of Fig . 12 . Thus , it may turn out that a speciﬁc neighborhood activity is preferred both by elderly people and business travelers with each ‘hidden’ community being 76 D . Akoumianakis designated or implied by choice of neighborhood members . Making this type of in - formation explicitly available is useful for setting , targeting or revising marketing strategies . Another type of clustering is designated by cross - neighborhood coalitions ( i . e . , speciﬁc members of a neighborhood that tend to be associated with speciﬁc members of another neighborhood ) . For instance taverns near by a historical site may be more popular than taverns farther away . In this case , the cluster becomes a com - munity within a community with possible negative implications . Being able to identify or allowing for ‘hidden’ communities may not always be beneﬁcial to the community of practice as a whole . Indeed , there may be negative effects such as community desegregation ( i . e . , establishment of new neighborhoods ) , which in turn , may damage the community’s stability , coherence and members’ trust . Since the practice - speciﬁc toolkit tracks all interactive exchanges between the mem - bers of a squad , it is possible for moderators to proactively prevent such negative consequences . Speciﬁcally , extracting useful information ( such as partner clustering and cliques , active squad members , members constantly disagreeing or withdraw - ing from squads , or deviating from agreed policies ) , allows moderators to eliminate or avoid unfair antagonistic behaviors which may damage the community’s stability leading to providers opting out , internal clustering of members , etc . The second relevant issue amounts to the ECF’s support for recording and ex - tracting patterns of behavior and codifying them as reusable experience by compe - tent moderators . One type of such reusable experience is codiﬁed as new package families . In recent work we have used components of the ECF to build information - based products such as semester course plans , trade fairs and conference program schedules using the basic technologies of the ECF [ 3 ] . Another type of packaged experience is to be found in the reusable toolkit libraries used to build and visu - alize elements of a package family . To this end , the current implementation of the ECF supports a small set of advanced interaction platform administration mecha - nisms , namely toolkit augmentation , expansion and integration , which allow the con - struction of domain - oriented and metaphor - speciﬁc interactive vocabularies [ 2 ] . As these strategies are programming - intensive , it is useful to introduce augmented , ex - panded or integrated objects as parameterized , reusable and extensible software com - ponents allowing for different package families and alternative metaphoric represen - tations . 6 . 2 Thematic workshops & qualitative assessments Virtual ethnographies were followed by thematic workshops in an attempt to feed subjective opinion of participants in virtual ethnographies into the research team . One key outcome of these workshops is the catalytic inﬂuence of non - technological fac - tors in the uptake of the ECF as an operational business model . Each workshop was organized in two stages . In the ﬁrst stage the research team reported the consolidated experience of the virtual ethnography , as revealed by the tools of the ECF discussed earlier . Then workshop members could respond and justify their online behavior , ex - press comments and discuss issues . At the end of the workshop each member should complete a questionnaire and return it back . So far we have organized three thematic workshops corresponding to three virtual ethnographic studies , with each involving different business partners . Electronic community factories : the model and its application 77 It turns out that end users ( i . e . , potential customers ) are highly motivated and very willing to use such tools so as to plan their effective time on vacation and minimize unforeseen or unexpected events . They appreciate the added value of the assembled products , the options offered , the interaction with one moderator rather than the in - dividual partners , as well as the feedback loop established between them and other users as well as the virtual community of practice . Some users addressed the issue of using systems such as eKoNES not only for planning their time on vacation but also for deciding on candidate destinations . However , this scenario could not be practi - cally tested . In terms of shortcomings , end users expressed a concern regarding the lack of guarantee that their request will be processed and responded in due time as well as fear that the actual experience may deviate from the virtual good presented through the community portal . To this end , they would value highly the availability of tools for expressing opinion about a package and assessing other people’s expe - rience prior to deciding . Thus far , the end users’ input although valuable , it has not revealed something which would radically change or inﬂuence the components or the operation of the ECF . In contrast , the experience and feedback of the business partners ( i . e . , members of electronic squads ) as codiﬁed in their responses in the questionnaires but also as ex - pressed openly in the course of the thematic workshops were much more interesting . Our initial assumption was that they would appreciate eKoNES as a complementary line of business to what they are already doing and a medium for building cross - organizational virtual alliances for appropriating the beneﬁts of virtual networking was only partially supported . It turned out that this view is only appreciated by non - market institutions ( i . e . , chamber of commerce , local government agencies and some union representatives ) and very small and medium sized enterprises offering speciﬁc type of services such as accommodation or food and beverage . Representatives of these sectors considered that eKoNES is ideal as a regional information service pro - vided that it is actively supported and maintained . The vast majority of respondents representing tour operators , transportation unions and multi - function vacation estab - lishments such as luxury hotels , expressed the opinion that they would like eKoNES as their own model of operation , empowering liaisons and links with their own exist - ing partners in various sectors of the industry . This opinion was largely attributed to the negative connotation assigned to ‘collective artifacts’ and ‘collective ownership of virtual assets’ . Participants in this category considered that such artifacts are asso - ciated with high risks and cannot be operationally controlled and managed . Consid - ering whether they would be willing to introduce an eKoNES - like operational model in their own organization all of them responded positively and rated highly both the technical approach adopted by the ECF and the new opportunities it offers . 7 Summary and conclusions In this paper , we have described the ECF , its building blocks and how it is substan - tiated in the eKoNES project . The ECF is intended as a model for a speciﬁc type of communities of practice which aim to create value by appropriating the beneﬁts of ‘boundary’ practices for information - based new product development . Such bound - ary practices are disclosed through the design of interactive vocabularies , process 78 D . Akoumianakis and artifacts constituting a new virtual practice to be internalized by members . The results of engaging in boundary practices are both tangible and tacit . Tacit results may be experienced by members as new competence and improvements in both products and processes . Tangible results are codiﬁed as new products of added - value result - ing from the fact that none of the individual members can , by themselves , build and offer the product effectively and efﬁciently . Moreover , as products are assembled within the scope of a product family , they are easily customizable to address diverse customer requirements . Analyzing customer preferences and how the respective elec - tronic squad responds to address them enables the extraction of patterns of success - ful practices which can be appropriated through deﬁning new product families . As a result , the ECF aims to foster innovation by specialization or differentiation , as well as to deepen collective and individual professional knowledge ( as members’ en - counter new opportunities and establish new positions ) by facilitating the required processes . The ECF as proposed and described in the previous sections offers two main con - tributions to the research community . Firstly , it presents an operational model which allows members of value creating cross - organization virtual communities of practice to engage in the practice the community is about and to carry out mission - speciﬁc social and collaborative activities . Secondly , the ECF offers an appropriate software platform and tools which allow the assembly of innovative information - based prod - ucts from models and visual components suited to a designated application domain . In terms of competing models , our experience indicates that the ECF is distinctively different from on - line communities and virtual communities of practice in at least two different dimensions . First of all , an ECF is not only concerned with computer - mediated communication , information sharing or community building and mainte - nance . Instead , it seeks to provide an environment supporting collaborative engage - ment in the practice the community is about . As such , it requires the establishment of a common practice - oriented vocabulary and a framework for executing statements built with this vocabulary . Secondly , moderators in the ECF assume different func - tions ( aimed at attaining squad stability and knowledge management ) than moder - ators of online communities and virtual communities of practice . Thirdly , the ECF frames practices in relation to workﬂows , processes , tools and artifacts in addition to social interactions between members . To this end , it exploits a particular type of a factory setup which smoothly integrates the practice - speciﬁc toolkit with the commu - nity support system ( i . e . , the portal ) . Such a factory setup is not only about assembling applications through patterns , but also about continuous process improvement . In conclusion , the ECF as described in this paper is not without ﬂaws or limita - tions . In spite of its sound engineering baseline , it offers no mechanism to guarantee either effective community management or intuitive engagement in the practice the community is about . It presupposes a certain maturity level on behalf of the mem - bers as well as commitment to collaboration for appropriating the beneﬁts of virtual networking . Consequently , it is likely to be valuable in cultivated communities of practice whose underlying practice is not exhausted in social interaction , while their members exhibit strong sense of community , mutual trust and willingness to share resources and engage in a joint enterprise using a common repertoire . In this sense it is a tool for fostering rather than designing virtual communities of practice . Electronic community factories : the model and its application 79 Acknowledgements The present work was carried out in the context of KP - 25 ( eKoNES project ) which was co - funded by the General Secretariat for Research and Technology of the Greek Ministry of De - velopment , in the context of the Regional Operational Program of Crete , Action line 1 . 2 “Research and Development consortia in strategic priority areas” . The author wishes to acknowledge the support of the members of istlab ( http : / / www . istl . teiher . gr / ) . References 1 . Ackerman , M . S . ( 1998 ) . Augmenting organizational memory—a ﬁeld study of answer garden . ACM Transactions on Information Systems , 16 ( 3 ) , 203 – 224 . 2 . Akoumianakis , D . ( 2009 ) . Managing accessibility requirements in software - intensive projects . Soft - ware Process : Improvement & Practice . doi : 10 . 1002 / spip . 383 . 3 . Akoumianakis , D . ( 2008 ) . Distributed knowledge management in virtual organizations : the ‘social’ experience factory . Electronic Journal of Knowledge Management , 6 ( 1 ) , 13 – 32 . 4 . Akoumianakis , D . , Vellis , G . , Milolidakis , I . , Kotsalis , D . , & Alexandraki , C . ( 2008 ) . Distributed collective practices in collaborative music performance . In Proceedings of 3rd ACM international conference on digital interactive media in entertainment and arts ( DIMEA 2008 ) ( pp . 368 – 375 ) . New York : ACM . 5 . Akoumianakis , D . , Vidakis , N . , Vellis , G . , Milolidakis , G . , & Kotsalis , D . ( 2008 ) . Interaction scenarios in the ‘social’ experience factory : assembling collaborative artefacts through component reuse and social interaction . In Proceedings of the 3rd IASTED international conference on human computer interaction , Innsbruck , Austria . 6 . Ardichvili , A . , Page , V . , & Wentling , T . ( 2003 ) . Motivation and barriers to participation in virtual knowledge sharing teams . Journal of Knowledge Management , 7 ( 1 ) , 64 – 77 . 7 . Barnes , B . ( 2001 ) . Practices as collective action . In T . R . Schatzki , K . Knorr - Cetina , & E . von Savigny ( Eds . ) , The practice turn in contemporary theory ( pp . 17 – 28 ) . London : Routledge . 8 . Basili , V . R . ( 1993 ) . The Experience Factory and its relationship to other improvement paradigms . In LNCS : Vol . 717 . 4th European software engineering conference ( ESEC ) ( pp . 68 – 83 ) . London : Springer . 9 . Basili , V . R . , Lindvall , M . , & Costa , P . ( 2001 ) . Implementing the experience factory concepts as a set of experience bases . In International conference on software engineering and knowledge engineering ( SEKE ’01 ) . Available from http : / / www . cs . umd . edu / ~ basili / publications / proceedings / P90 . pdf . 10 . Brown , J . S . , & Duguid , P . ( 1991 ) . Organizational learning and communities of practice : toward a uniﬁed view of working , learning , and innovation . Knowledge and Communities , 2 ( 1 ) , 40 – 57 . 11 . Brown , J . S . , & Duguid , P . ( 2000 ) . The social life of information . Boston : Harvard Business School Press . 12 . Buchel , B . , & Raub , S . ( 2002 ) . Building knowledge - creating value networks . European Management Journal , 20 ( 6 ) , 587 – 596 . 13 . Buckingham Shum , S . ( 1996 ) . Design argumentation as design rationale . In The encyclopaedia of computer science and technology ( Vol . 35 , pp . 95 – 128 ) . New York : Marcel Dekker . 14 . Bughin , J . , & Hagel , J . I . ( 2000 ) . The operational performance of virtual communities—towards a successful business model ? Electronic Markets , 10 ( 4 ) , 237 – 243 . 15 . Cardoso , J . , & Lange , C . ( 2007 ) . A framework for assessing strategies and technologies for dynamic packaging applications in e - tourism . Information Technology & Tourism , 9 , 27 – 44 . 16 . Chen , H . , Titkova , O . , Orwig , R . , & Nunmaker , J . F . ( 1998 ) . Information visualization for collabora - tive computing . IEEE Computer , 31 , 75 – 82 . 17 . Cusumano , M . A . ( 1989 ) . The software factory : a historical interpretation . IEEE Software , March . 18 . de Souza , C . , & Preece , J . ( 2004 ) . A framework for analyzing and understanding on - line communities . Interacting with Computers , 16 , 579 – 610 . 19 . Dewhurst , F . W . , & Cegarra Navarro , J . G . ( 2004 ) . External communities of practice and relational capital . The Learning Organization : The International Journal of Knowledge and Organizational Learning Management , 11 ( 4 / 5 ) , 322 – 331 . 20 . Dignum , V . , & van Eeden , P . ( 2005 ) . Seducing , engaging and supporting communities at Achmea . In W . Baets ( Ed . ) , Knowledge management and management learning : extending the horizons of knowledge - based management ( pp . 125 – 141 ) . London : Springer . 21 . Donath , J . ( 2002 ) . Supporting community and building social capital : a semantic approach to visual - izing online conversations . Communications of the ACM , 45 ( 4 ) , 45 – 49 . 80 D . Akoumianakis 22 . Duguid , P . ( 2005 ) . The art of knowing—social and tacit dimensions of knowledge and the limits of the community of practice . The Information Society , 21 , 109 – 118 . 23 . Engeström , Y . ( 1999 ) . Activity theory and individual and social transformation . In Y . Engeström , R . Miettinen , & R . L . Punamäki ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on activity theory ( pp . 19 – 38 ) . Cambridge : Cam - bridge University Press . 24 . Enkel , E . , Heinold , P . , Hofel - Alfeis , J . , & Wicki , Y . ( 2000 ) . The power of communities . How to build knowledge management on a corporate level using the bottom up approach . In M . Ackerman , T . Davenport , & G . Probst ( Eds . ) , Knowledge management case book ( pp . 84 – 103 ) . New York : Wiley . 25 . Erickson , T . , & Kellogg , W . ( 2001 ) . Knowledge communities—online environments for supporting knowledge management and its social context . In M . Ackerman , P . Volkmar , & V . Wulf ( Eds . ) , Beyond knowledge management : sharing expertise . Cambridge : MIT Press . 26 . Erickson , T . , Smith , D . N . , Kellogg , W . A . , Laff , M . R . , Richards , J . T . , & Bradner , E . ( 1999 ) . Socially translucent systems : social proxies , persistent conversation , and the design of Babble . In Proceedings of ACM CHI’99 ( pp . 72 – 79 ) . 27 . Fernström , C . , Närfelt , K . - H . , & Ohlsson , L . ( 1992 ) . Software factory principles , architecture , and experiments . IEEE Software , 9 ( 2 ) , 36 – 44 . 28 . Franke , N . , & Piller , F . ( 2004 ) . Value creation by toolkits for user innovation and design : the case of the watch market . The Journal of Product innovation management , 21 , 401 – 415 . 29 . Fuller , J . , Bartl , M . , Ernst , H . , & Muhlbacher , H . ( 2006 ) . Community based innovation : How to inte - grate members of virtual communities into new product development . Electronic Commerce Research , 6 , 57 – 73 . 30 . Greenﬁeld , J . , & Short , K . ( 2004 ) . Software factories : assembling applications with patterns , frame - works , models & tools . New York : Wiley . 31 . Hasan , H . , & Gould , E . ( 2001 ) . Support for the sense - making activity of managers . Decision Support Systems , 31 , 71 – 86 . 32 . Hevner , A . , March , S . T . , Park , J . , & Ram , S . ( 2004 ) . Design science research in information systems . MIS Quarterly , 28 ( 1 ) , 75 – 105 . 33 . Houdek , F . , Schneider , K . , & Wieser , E . ( 1998 ) . Establishing experience factories at Daimler - Benz : an experience report . In Proceedings of 20th international conference on software engineering ( pp . 443 – 447 ) , Kyoto , Japan . 34 . Jarzabkowski , P . ( 2003 ) . Strategic practices : an activity theory perspective on continuity and change . Journal of Management Studies , 40 ( 1 ) , 23 – 56 . 35 . Jarzabkowski , P . ( 2004 ) . Strategy as practice : recursiveness , adaptation , and practices - in - use . Organi - zation Studies , 25 ( 4 ) , 529 – 560 . 36 . Jarzabkowski , P . ( 2005 ) . Strategy as practice : an activity - based approach . London : Sage . 37 . Juriado , R . , & Gustafsson , N . ( 2007 ) . Emergent communities of practice in temporary inter - organisational partnerships . The Learning Organization : The International Journal of Knowledge and Organizational Learning Management , 14 ( 1 ) , 50 – 61 . 38 . Lave , J . , & Wegner , E . ( 1991 ) . Situated learning—legitimate peripheral participation . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 39 . Leal , W . L . M . , & Baêta , A . M . C . ( 2006 ) . The contribution of communities of practice in an innovative enterprise . Journal of Technology Management and Innovation , 1 ( 4 ) , 22 – 29 . 40 . March , T . S . , & Storey , C . V . ( 2008 ) . Design science in the information systems discipline : an intro - duction to the special issue on design science research . MIS Quarterly , 32 ( 4 ) , 725 – 730 . 41 . Markham , A . N . ( 2004 ) . The politics , ethics , and methods of representation in online ethnography . In N . Denzin & Y . Lincoln ( Eds . ) , Handbook of qualitative research ( 3rd edn . ) ( pp . 793 – 820 ) . 42 . McWilliam , G . ( 2000 ) . Building stronger brands through online communities . Sloan Management Review , 41 ( 3 ) , 43 – 54 . 43 . Mitchell , J . , & Young , S . ( 2002 ) . Communities of practice and the national training framework . Melbourne : Australian National Training Authority ( ANTA ) , Retrieved 18 February 2010 from http : / / www . reframingthefuture . net / docs / 2003 / Publications / 4CP _ broch . pdf . 44 . Nardi , B . A . , Whittaker , S . , Isaacs , E . , Creech , M . , Johnson , J . , & Hainsworth , J . ( 2002 ) . Integrating communication and information through ContactMap . Communications of ACM , 45 ( 4 ) , 89 – 95 . 45 . Olson , G . , & Olson , J . ( 2000 ) . Distance matters . Human - Computer Interaction , 15 ( 2 – 3 ) . 46 . Orlikowski , J . W . ( 2002 ) . Knowing in practice : enacting a collective capability in distributed organiz - ing . Organization Science , 13 ( 3 ) , 249 – 273 . 47 . Preece , J . ( 2000 ) . Online communities : designing usability , supporting sociability . Chichester : Wiley . 48 . Rittel , H . W . J . ( 1984 ) . Second generation design methods . In N . Cross ( Ed . ) , Developments in design methodology ( pp . 317 – 327 ) . Chichester : Wiley . Electronic community factories : the model and its application 81 49 . Scacchi , W . ( 2005 ) . Socio - technical interaction networks in free / open source software development processes . In S . T . Acuna & N . Juristo ( Eds . ) , Software process modelling ( pp . 1 – 27 ) . 50 . Scacchi , W . , Feller , J . , Fitzgerald , B . , Hissam , S . , & Lakhani , K . ( 2006 ) . Understanding free / open source software development processes . Software Process—Improvement and Practice , 11 ( 2 ) , 95 – 105 . 51 . Schatzki , T . R . , Knorr - Cetina , K . , & von Savigny , E . ( 2001 ) . The practice turn in contemporary the - ory . London : Routledge . 52 . Schmidt , K . , Wagner , I . , & Tolar , M . ( 2007 ) . Permutations of cooperative work practices : a study of two oncology clinics . In T . Gross et al . ( Eds . ) , GROUP 2007 : proceedings of the international conference on supporting group work ( pp . 1 – 10 ) . New York : ACM . 53 . Schultz , F . , & Pucher , H . F . ( 2003 ) . www . deck—Wissensmanagement bei Volkswagen . Industrie Management , 19 ( 3 ) , 64 – 66 . 54 . Seaman , B . C . , Mendonca , G . M . , Basili , R . V . , & Kim , Y . - M . ( 2003 ) . User interface evaluation and empirically - based evolution of a prototype experience management tool . IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 29 ( 9 ) , 838 – 850 . 55 . Stockdale , R . , & Borovicka , M . ( 2006 ) . Developing an online business community : a travel industry case study . In Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii international conference on system sciences ( pp . 134 – 143 ) . Los Alamitos : IEEE Computer Society . 56 . Tuckman , B . ( 1965 ) . Developmental sequence in small groups . Psychological Bulletin , 63 , 384 – 389 . 57 . Turner , W . , Bowker , G . , Gasser , L . , & Zacklad , M . ( 2006 ) . Information infrastructures for distributed collective practices . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 15 ( 2 – 3 ) , 93 – 110 . 58 . Turoff , M . , Hiltz , S . R . , Cho , H . - K . , Li , & Wang , Y . ( 2002 ) . Social decision support systems . In Proceedings of the 35th Hawaii international conference on system sciences . Los Alamitos : IEEE Computer Society . 59 . Wagner , C . ( 1995 ) . Decision support for messy problems . Information and Management , 28 , 393 – 403 . 60 . Wenger , E . ( 1998 ) . Communities of practice . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 61 . Wenger , E . , & Snyder , W . M . ( 2000 ) . Communities of practice : the organizational frontier . In Harvard business review ( pp . 139 – 145 ) . 62 . Wenger , E . , McDermott , R . , & Snyder , W . M . ( 2002 ) . Cultivating communities of practice . A guide to managing knowledge . Boston : Harvard Business School Press . Demosthenes Akoumianakis is an Associate Professor at the Depart - ment of Applied Information Technology & Multimedia , Technologi - cal Education Institution of Crete . He is also the founder and Director of the interactive Software and Systems Engineering Laboratory ( iST - Lab , http : / / www . istl . teiher . gr / ) . He received a BA ( Hons ) in Computing in Business from The University of Huddersﬁeld ( 1990 ) and MSc and PhD degrees in Human Computer Interaction from the University of Kent at Canterbury , UK in 1995 and 1999 respectively . His work in his ﬁnal year dissertation was awarded the 1st IBM prize from the Depart - ment of Computing & Mathematics of the University of Huddersﬁeld . He is actively involved in various national and European collaborative research and development projects , with emphasis on tools for scenario - based requirements engineering , on - line communities , multiple user in - terfaces and the development of collaborative technologies and toolkits . Prof Akoumianakis has published widely in referred archival scientiﬁc journals , international conferences and workshops and is the author / co - author of several books . He also serves as a member of the scientiﬁc committee for various established archival journals , international con - ferences and national / international standards bodies .