Recent developments in the ﬁ eld of bending rigidity measurements on membranes Rumiana Dimova ⁎ Department of Theory and Bio - Systems , Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces , Science Park Golm , 14424 Potsdam , Germany a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f o Available online xxxx Keywords : Bending rigidity Giant vesicles Fluctuation spectroscopy Micropipette aspiration Vesicle electrodeformation Cholesterol Thisreviewgivesabriefoverviewofexperimentalapproachesusedtoassessthebendingrigidityofmembranes . Emphasis isplaced on techniquesbasedontheuse ofgiant unilamellar vesicles . Wesummarizethe effect on the bending rigidity of membranes as a function of membrane composition , presence of various inclusions in the bilayer and molecules and ions in the bathing solutions . Examples for the impact of temperature , cholesterol , some peptides and proteins , sugars and salts are provided and the literature data are discussed critically . Future directions , open questions and possible developments in this research ﬁ eld are also included . © 2014 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . Contents 1 . Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 2 . Methods for measuring the bending rigidity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 2 . 1 . Fluctuation spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 2 . 2 . Methods based on mechanical deformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 2 . 3 . Scattering techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 2 . 4 . Molecular dynamics simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 3 . Effect of the membrane phase state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 4 . Effects of additives and inclusions on the membrane bending rigidity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 4 . 1 . Cholesterol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 4 . 2 . Charged lipids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 4 . 3 . Other inclusions , anchored and adsorbed species . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 4 . 4 . Sugars and salts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 5 . Concluding remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 1 . Introduction During their course of life , cells and some ( parts of ) cellular organ - elles undergo orchestrated and sometimes dramatic morphological changes involvingthe crucialparticipationof the cell membrane . Exam - ples of such processes are clearly provided by cell division , neuron growing , autophagy , endocytosis , morphological transitions in the Golgi body and the endoplasmic reticulum . The increased interest to - wards understanding membrane shapes and morphological transitions occurring during these processes requires detailed knowledge of the membrane elastic properties . Biological membranes possess a peculiar combination of elastic properties , namely incompressibility and very low bending rigidity . Since the pioneering work of Helfrich [ 1 , 2 ] , this combination of charac - teristics has been the reason for initiating a signi ﬁ cant number of stud - ies and has kept the interest of membrane biophysicists focused on ﬁ nding ways to precisely evaluate the bilayer elastic properties . These efforts have yielded a considerable amount of data collected on lipid bilayer systems , see e . g . Refs . [ 3 – 6 ] and the references therein . In the current review , we will attempt to provide a thorough overview of the available methods and will summarize some general trends in the de - pendence of the bending rigidity on various factors . However , because Advances in Colloid and Interface Science xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx ⁎ Corresponding author . Tel . : + 49 331 5679615 ; fax : + 49 331 5679612 . E - mail address : Rumiana . Dimova @ mpikg . mpg . de . CIS - 01422 ; No of Pages 10 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cis . 2014 . 03 . 003 0001 - 8686 / © 2014 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Advances in Colloid and Interface Science journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / cis Please cite this article as : Dimova R , Recent developments in the ﬁ eld of bending rigidity measurements on membranes , Adv Colloid Interface Sci ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cis . 2014 . 03 . 003 of the increasingly wide expansion of the work in the ﬁ eld observed in recentyears , it is probably unavoidable that there will beunintentional - ly omitted studies . In the following sections we will shortly introduce some of the ex - perimental approaches developed for the assessment of the membrane bending rigidity . We will then discuss a few examples of how certain compounds present in the membrane or in the bathing medium can affect the elasticity of the bilayer . 2 . Methods for measuring the bending rigidity This section gives a brief description of several methods developed for the assessment of the membrane bending rigidity . Not surprisingly , Helfrich ' s contribution has been essential for the development of some of them , starting with his introduction of the role of bending elasticity in membrane systems [ 1 ] . The experimental model systems on which these methods have been developed comprise essentially giant unilamellar vesicles and bilayer stacks , the former being signi ﬁ cantly more popular . In general , bilayer stacks exhibit slightly different properties from those of freely suspended single bilayers . In giant unilamellar vesicles , the membrane is fully hydrated and the bilayer ﬂ uctuations are not constrained by neighboring membranes , contrary to the case of bilayer stacks where steric interactions have been recognized and evaluated already in the early studies of Helfrich [ 7 ] . The approachesfor deducingthe bendingrigidity can beclassi ﬁ ed in the following categories : ( i ) methods based on the analysis of thermal ﬂ uctuations of the membrane of giant vesicles ; ( ii ) techniques relying on measuring the force to actively bend their membrane typically employing micropipettes , optical tweezers , electric or magnetic ﬁ elds , and light ; ( iii ) approaches based on scattering techniques ; and ( iv ) molecular dynamic simulations . Recently , Nagle published a critical discussion about the values obtained with different methods [ 5 ] . Exten - sivereviewssummarizingexperimentalvaluesobtainedonmembranes with different compositions and using different techniques can be found in Refs . [ 3 , 4 , 6 ] . In the following subsections , we will predominantly focusonexperimentaltechniquesappliedtogiantvesiclesandwillbrie ﬂ y describe the rest of the approaches . To illustrate the extent to which the data not only depends on the measuring technique , but also on the envi - ronmental conditions which we will discuss in more detail later ( such as immersing medium and presence of various molecules and salts ) , in Table 1 we have included a summary of measurements performed on one widely used phospholipid , palmitoyloleoylphosphatidylcholine ( POPC ) . 2 . 1 . Fluctuation spectroscopy The most popular method for measuring the membrane bending rigidity seems to be ﬂ uctuation analysis , which was established almost 40 years ago by Brochard and Lennon on erythrocytes [ 19 ] and by Servusset al . on tubularvesicles [ 20 ] . Later it wasextended togiantves - icles [ 21 ] and the theory re ﬁ ned by Helfrich [ 22 ] and Milner and Safran [ 23 ] . The analysis of shape ﬂ uctuations of membranes and vesicles is based on collecting time sequences of snapshots as obtained by optical microscopy . The thermally induced ﬂ uctuations around equilibrium form are monitored and the mean square values of shape deviations are determined . The method has been applied to tubular vesicles [ 20 , 24 , 25 ] , fractions of a vesicle [ 26 , 27 ] , prolate [ 28 ] and quasispherical vesicles [ 10 , 21 , 29 – 35 ] . From an experimental point of view , the ﬂ uctuation spectroscopy method is probably the least demanding because it is based on direct video microscopy observation of giant vesicles , see Fig . 1 . Fluctuation Table 1 A summary of experimental data for the bending rigidity of POPC membranes and the effect of different inclusions or environmental factors . In the column describing the medium , for measurements on giant vesicles , we have indicated cases where the solutions inside and outside are asymmetric . Membrane composition Temperature Medium Measuring technique Bending rigidity ( 10 − 20 J ) Ref . Pure POPC Room Doubly distilled water , 50 – 200 μ M NaN 3 , glue contaminants Electro - deformation 2 . 46 ± 0 . 49 [ 8 ] 24 °C 100 μ M NaN 3 Electro - deformation 5 . 8 ± 1 . 2 [ 9 ] 24 °C 100 μ M NaN 3 Fluctuation analysis 3 . 9 ± 0 . 9 [ 9 ] 25 °C 75 mM sucrose inside , 75 mM glucose outside Fluctuation analysis 21 . 1 ± 0 . 4 [ 10 ] 30 °C Water X - ray scattering 8 . 5 [ 11 ] 25 °C 250 mOsm sucrose inside , 250 mOsm glucose outside Micropipette aspiration 21 . 1 ± 0 . 4 [ 12 ] 30 °C 100 mM NaCl , 10 mM Tris , pH 7 . 4 , 2 mM EDTA Fluctuation analysis 10 [ 13 ] 22 °C Tris / EDTA buffer Fluctuation analysis 12 . 9 ± 0 . 4 [ 14 ] 24 °C Water Fluctuation analysis 14 . 6 [ 15 ] 20 °C Water Fluctuation analysis 15 . 99 ± 0 . 31 [ 16 ] 20 °C 10 mM TRIS ( for effects of other buffers see [ 16 ] Fluctuation analysis 14 . 48 ± 0 . 19 [ 16 ] 20 °C 100 mM NaCl Fluctuation analysis 12 . 55 ± 0 . 33 [ 16 ] 22 °C Deuterated water Neutron spin echo and dynamic light scattering 7 . 7 ± 0 . 8 [ 17 ] 22 °C Various salt solutions Fluctuation analysis Decrease with salt concentration [ 4 ] POPC with cholesterol or sterols 25 °C 250 mOsm sucrose inside , 250 mOsm glucose outside Micropipette aspiration Strong stiffening [ 12 ] POPC with cholesterol 22 °C Deuterated water Neutron spin echo and dynamic light scattering Strong stiffening [ 17 ] POPC with lysolipids 25 °C 75 mM sucrose inside , 75 mM glucose outside Fluctuation analysis Decrease with lysolipid concentration [ 18 ] POPC with magainin 30 °C 100 mM of NaCl , 10 mM of Tris , pH 7 . 4 , 2 mM of EDTA Fluctuation analysis Softening [ 13 ] POPC with ﬂ uorescent membrane probes 22 °C Tris / EDTA buffer Fluctuation analysis Weak effect [ 14 ] POPC with 5 mol % triolein 24 °C Water Fluctuation analysis 6 . 6 [ 15 ] 2 R . Dimova / Advancesin Colloid and Interface Science xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Dimova R , Recent developments in the ﬁ eld of bending rigidity measurements on membranes , Adv Colloid Interface Sci ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cis . 2014 . 03 . 003 spectroscopy of giant vesicles and particularly , phase contrast obser - vations are advantageous as an approach , because no guest mole - cules in the membrane ( such as ﬂ uorescent dyes or deuterated molecules ) are required . One of the few disadvantages of this meth - od lies in the requirement that the vesicles should exhibit visible ﬂ uctuations implying low membrane tension . This method cannot be applied to vesicles in the gel phase . The method has been continuously improved in the last decades [ 28 – 32 , 34 , 36 – 38 ] . Exhaustive overviews on the method development chronologically are provided in references [ 4 , 6 , 39 ] . A more recently reported version of the ﬂ uctuation spectroscopy method is based on detecting the membrane ﬂ uctuations using the so - called light sheet ﬂ uorescence microscopy [ 40 ] , but this approach requires the presence of ﬂ uorescent dye ( at relatively high concentration ) in the membrane . 2 . 2 . Methods based on mechanical deformation This category of methods is probably the most diverse in terms of tools employed to apply a force to the membrane and bend it . One pop - ular approach is the micropipette aspiration technique introduced by Evans and Needham [ 41 – 43 ] applied to membranes of differentcompo - sition [ 44 – 51 ] and ubiquitously used nowadays as a manipulation tech - nique providing a readout of the membrane tension , see e . g . [ 52 – 55 ] . Here , the mechanical tension generated via a suction pressure in the aspirating glass capillary , see Fig . 2 , is used to measure the area stored in membrane undulations . In the low tension regime , the slope of the area dilation versus the logarithm of the tension yields the bending rigidity . One of the measured parameters is the length of the vesicle portion aspirated in the pipette . Compared to phase contrast , here the use of ﬂ uorescence is advantageous for higher precision of the measure - ment , see Fig . 2 . Possible dif ﬁ culties that one has to overcome while using this approach relate to potential adhesion of the membrane to thepipette , whichsometimescanbeovercomewithappropriatecoating . Another method , less employed in the literature , is based on measur - ing the vesicle deformation induced by electric ﬁ elds as introduced by Helfrich and co - workers [ 8 , 9 , 56 ] . During electrodeformation , a selected vesicle is subjected to an AC electric ﬁ eld of increasing strength and the induced shape deformation is recorded [ 8 , 9 , 35 ] , see Fig . 3 . Analogously to the micropipette aspiration method , the vesicle deformation is associ - ated with a change in the apparent area resulting from ﬂ attening of the membraneundulations [ 43 , 57 ] . Thetensionofthedeformedvesicleisob - tained from the electric stresses , for detail see [ 35 , 58 , 59 ] . Typically , the conductivity conditions inthese experiments are selected so that the ves - icles attain prolate deformation [ 60 – 64 ] with elongation along the ﬁ eld direction , see Fig . 3 . This method has not yet been applied to membranes containing charged species as the latter can exhibit inhomogeneous distribution over the vesicle surface upon application of electric ﬁ eld . Measurements based on micropipette aspiration and electrode - formation yield , in general , lower values for the bending rigidity of membranes compared to those obtained with ﬂ uctuation spectroscopy , see e . g . [ 8 , 35 , 48 , 51 ] . The origin of this discrepancy lies in the fact that the relative area change measured via the methods with mechanical deformation may not be uniquely caused by pulling out membrane un - dulations , but also partially arise from stretching . The error in accessing the real surface tension in these micromechanical experiments and the associated arti ﬁ cial reduction in the measured bending stiffness with such methods has been theoretically treated by Henriksen and Ipsen [ 48 ] who introduced a correction factor to account for the observed discrepancy , see also Table 1 . In comparing the results from different methods , one should also take into account potential effects of the solutions in which the measurements were performed . In particular , the presence of sugars in the medium ( typically used to osmotically stabilize vesicles used in methods based on mechanical deformation ) , can lower the bending rigidity , see also Section 4 . 4 . Another popular technique consists of pulling a membrane tube out of a giant vesicle [ 65 – 67 ] . The tube is typically formed via subjecting the vesicle to ﬂ uid drag [ 66 , 68 ] or by exerting a force via a membrane - attached bead which sediments under gravity [ 65 , 69 , 70 ] , or is manipu - latedwithelectromagnetic ﬁ eld [ 67 ] oropticaltweezers [ 71 ] ; forillustra - tion of the last approach see Fig . 4 . The tube radius can be obtained from geometrical parameters using the conservation of membrane area and totalvesiclevolume , seee . g . [ 72 ] . Measuringthetuberadiusasafunction of the axial force on the tube yields the bending rigidity . The tube pulling technique receives increasing popularity in measurements on mem - branes decorated with proteins , see e . g . [ 73 – 77 ] , however the analysis should be performed with caution and the tension associated with spon - taneous curvature should be carefully considered [ 78 ] . A couple of other more unconventional techniques have been applied to evaluate the bending rigidity when the membrane is in the gel phase . They all demand particular experimental requirements in terms of laboratory equipment . One of them , optical dynamometry , is based on bending the membrane of a giant vesicle by displacing two membrane - attached beads away from each other by means of optical Fig . 1 . Phase - contrast images of a vesicle exhibiting shape ﬂ uctuations . The detected vesiclecontourismarkedinred . Thetimelapsebetweenthesnapshotsisseveralseconds . The vesicle diameter is approximately 25 μ m . The solutions across the membrane are identical . Courtesy of Nico Fricke . ( For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁ gure legend , the reader is referred to the web version of this article . ) Fig . 2 . Vesicleaspiratedinamicropipette : anoverlayofphase - contrastandconfocalcross - section images . The membrane was ﬂ uorescently labeled ( false red color ) . The inner diameteroftheglasscapillaryisapproximately10 μ m . CourtesyofNicoFricke . ( Forinter - pretation of thereferences tocolor inthis ﬁ gure legend , the reader isreferred to theweb version of this article . ) Fig . 3 . Deformation of a quasispherical vesicle in electric ﬁ eld : phase contrast images acquired at ﬁ eld amplitudes 2 , 10 and 20 kV / m and frequency of 300 kHz . The scale bar corresponds to 25 μ m . Adapted from reference [ 35 ] ( http : / / pubs . rsc . org / en / content / articlelanding / 2010 / sm / b920629a ) withpermissionfromTheRoyalSocietyofChemistry . 3 R . Dimova / Advancesin Colloid and Interface Science xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Dimova R , Recent developments in the ﬁ eld of bending rigidity measurements on membranes , Adv Colloid Interface Sci ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cis . 2014 . 03 . 003 tweezers [ 79 ] . The beads have an almost point contact with the bilayer and their displacement leads to out - of - plane bending of the membrane , see Fig . 5A . Because of the point - like contact of the beads to the mem - brane , the applied force is not in the plane of the bilayer and thus the contribution from stretching is rather negligible . Another approach , an all - optical method , relies on pressing on a giant vesicle with an optical forceandmeasuringthevesicledeformationunderaconfocalmicroscope using two laser beams [ 80 , 81 ] , for schematic illustration see Fig . 5B . This technique was termed differential confocal microscopy . Yet another ap - plied technique , called optical stretching , is based on manipulating the vesicles with laser beams from two opposing optical ﬁ bers [ 82 , 83 ] . 2 . 3 . Scattering techniques ThescatteringtechniquesmentionedintheintroductionofSection2 comprise diffuse X - ray scattering ( see e . g . [ 84 – 89 ] ) on highly oriented lipid bilayer stacks , neutron and X - ray re ﬂ ectivity on ﬂ oating bilayers [ 90 – 93 ] , andneutron spin echo combined with dynamic lightscattering [ 17 , 94 ] on extruded large unilamellar vesicles . ( Note that the effect of deuterated water usedin some of these studieson themembrane bend - ing rigidity has not been investigated so far , even though it is well known that thehydrogen bondingin thesesystemsand water structure is changed [ 95 ] . ) An approach developed in the group of Sackmann based on the combination of ﬂ ickering and scattering ( dynamic re ﬂ ec - tioninterferencecontrastmicroscopy ) appliedtocellsandgiantvesicles [ 96 , 97 ] can be also grouped in this category . 2 . 4 . Molecular dynamics simulations The calculation of the bending rigidity from molecular dynamics simulations , both from atomistic and coarse - grained models , has been realized by means of different approaches . The most commonly used method , introduced by Goetz et al . [ 98 ] , is based on sampling the height ﬂ uctuation spectrum of a tensionless bilayer from molecular dynamics trajectories , see also [ 99 – 101 ] . Another approach is based on measuring the bending rigidity from a response to a force deforming the mem - brane [ 102 ] or from considering the energy required to deform the membrane [ 103 ] . Yet another method mimics an experimental ap - proach relying on measuring the force necessary to hold a membrane tube and is based on simulating a tubular membrane spanning the simulation box [ 104 ] . 3 . Effect of the membrane phase state It is well known that many molecular species can in ﬂ uence the phase state of the membrane . Temperature is however , the most direct means to modulate the lipid phase state and as a consequence affecting the bending rigidity of the membrane . The majority of the techniques described in the previous section apply to ﬂ uid membranes . For exam - ple , eventhough ﬂ uctuationspectroscopyisconsideredbymanygroups as the most precise technique for measuring the bending rigidity , it cannot be applied to membranes in the gel phase , and probably even to stiffer ﬂ uid membranes such as membranes in the liquid ordered phase with bending rigidity which is an order of magnitude higher than that of “ typical ” ﬂ uid membranes exhibiting bending rigidity around 10 − 19 J . Fluctuation spectroscopy was however used to assess the tempera - ture dependence of the bending rigidity of membranes approaching the main phase transition temperature , T m , of the lipid [ 105 ] . This ap - proach was applied to vesicles made of dimyristoylphosphatidylcholine and a decrease in the bending rigidity at temperatures close and above T m was observed [ 106 ] , see Fig . 6 . This trend was later con ﬁ rmed from diffuse X - ray scattering from bilayer stacks [ 107 ] . In Fig . 6 , the data are presented as a function of the reduced temperature , T − T m ( this way of plotting allows for comparison of data for different lipids ) . Later , the approach of bending gel - phase membranes by means of the method of optical dynamometry as illustrated in Fig . 5A was used to measure the bending rigidity below and close to the main phase transition temperature [ 79 , 108 ] , seeFig . 6 . The bending modulus was found to exhibit an anomalous decrease in the vicinity of T m . This temperature Fig . 4 . Tube pullingas a methodformeasuringthe bendingrigidityofmembranes . Inthis example , a bead manipulated via an optical tweezers is used to pull a tube out of a giant vesicle . The vesicle is held by an aspiration pipette used to measure the membrane tension . The optical trap can be employed to measure the equilibrium pulling force . The bending rigidity can be evaluated from the slope of the increase of the equilibrium tube force with the square root of the tension , see e . g . [ 67 ] . Fig . 5 . Schematic presentation of two unconventional methods for measuring the bending rigidity of gel - phase membranes . ( A ) In the method of optical dynamometry [ 79 ] , the vesicle membrane is bent by means of manipulating two beads with optical tweezers . The plane of the membrane at rest is indicated with the red dashed line and the initial position of the beads is shown with their dashed contours . The beads adhere to the membrane with a point - like contact . One trap ( left ) is kept ﬁ xed , while the second one ( right ) is displaced shifting thecenterofthetrappedbeadtotherightandcreatingout - of - planebendingofthemembrane . Thebentmembraneisshownwiththesolidredcurve . Theradiationpressureforceexerted bytheopticaltweezersisindicatedas F RP . ( B ) Intheall - opticalmethodofdifferentialconfocalmicroscopy [ 80 , 81 ] , anopticalforce ( greenbeam ) isappliedtodeformthevesicle , whilethe deformationisdetectedviaasecondmoretightlyfocusedbeam ( red ) . Thebendingrigidityiscalculatedfromthedeformationandtheworkdonebytheopticalforce . ( Forinterpretationof the references to color in this ﬁ gure legend , the reader is referred to the web version of this article . ) 4 R . Dimova / Advancesin Colloid and Interface Science xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Dimova R , Recent developments in the ﬁ eld of bending rigidity measurements on membranes , Adv Colloid Interface Sci ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cis . 2014 . 03 . 003 dependence was later con ﬁ rmed by another technique based on neu - tron re ﬂ ectivity [ 90 , 109 ] as displayed inFig . 6 , and by differentialconfo - cal microscopy [ 80 ] ( illustrated in Fig . 5B ) . This anomaly in thebehavior of the bendingrigidity was predicted on the bases of analysis of heat ca - pacity data from suspension of small vesicles [ 110 ] . Using micropipette aspiration , the bending rigidity in the gel phase can be also deduced from measurements on the compressibility modulus [ 41 ] , single data point is illustrated with an asterisk in Fig . 6 . The results from different techniques all lead to a view that the bending rigidity decreases considerably near T m on both sides of the transition . Basically , the membrane becomes more ﬂ exible because each monolayer becomes more compressible . It is then easy to locally bend the membrane by decreasing the density of the outside lea ﬂ et and increasing that of the inside one . In the general theory by Hansen et al . [ 111 ] , each monolayer is modeled as a 2D ﬂ uid close to a critical point , which is the source of the diverging compressibility . To close this section , let us mention that an increasing amount of data is now also being reported on ﬂ uid multicomponent membranes . These bilayers can exhibit the coexistence of two ﬂ uid phases : liquid disordered and liquid ordered , see e . g . [ 113 – 117 ] . While the former is close to ﬂ uid single component lipid membranes in terms of bending rigidity , the latter is stiffer as shown with measurements based on ﬂ uctuation analysis and vesicle electrodeformation [ 35 ] or tube pulling [ 75 , 76 ] . 4 . Effects of additives and inclusions on the membrane bending rigidity In this section , we will consider the effect of “ inclusions ” in the membrane , suchascholesterol , chargedlipids , anchoredpolymers , pep - tides which insert in the membrane , proteins and species adsorbing at the membrane . Some of them can strongly modulate the bending rigid - ity of the membrane . Indeed , because ﬂ uid lipid membranes are so soft and ﬂ exible , incertain cases the membrane bendingrigiditycan beused as a direct indicator for the presence or adsorption of certain molecular species in the membrane . Data are available even on how the mem - brane bending rigidity can be affected by the presence of different ﬂ uo - rescent labels commonly used in visualizing membrane domains [ 14 ] . 4 . 1 . Cholesterol Itisapopularperceptionthatcholesterolisunhealthy . However , this molecule is a vital componentof mammaliancell membranes constitut - ingup toabout50mol % of thetotallipidintheanimalcellplasmamem - brane [ 118 , 119 ] . Then , why does the cell need so much of it ? Indeed , cholesterol is a key player in stabilizing membrane domains or rafts whicharebelievedtoberesponsibleforthecorrectfunctioningofmem - brane proteins . Cholesterol also modulates the physical properties of membranes . A widely accepted view in the 90 ' s and the beginning of this century has been that cholesterol increases the membrane bending rigidity [ 12 , 32 , 43 , 70 , 106 ] . However , recently it has become clear that this effect is not universal but rather depends on the speci ﬁ c architecture of the lipid building the membrane [ 35 , 120 , 121 ] . The bending rigidity of membranes made of dioleoylphosphatidylcholine ( DOPC ) and choles - terol does not showany signi ﬁ cantcorrelation with thecholesterol con - tent , see Fig . 7 . This observation was ﬁ rstreported by the group of Nagle [ 120 – 122 ] based on measurements of the diffuse X - ray scattering from DOPC - cholesterol bilayer stacks , and later con ﬁ rmed from ﬂ uctuation analysis and electrodeformation of giant vesicles [ 35 ] ( see also [ 53 ] and the supporting material of Ref . [ 73 ] where data for the bending ri - gidity obtained from tube pulling is reported ) . Furthermore , cholesterol mixtureswithother lipids , such assphingomyelin ( SM ) exhibita reduc - tion in the bending rigidity with increasing cholesterol amounts in the membrane [ 8 , 9 ] , see Fig . 7 . At room temperature , the examined SM - cholesterol mixtures are in the liquid - ordered phase , which is why they exhibit relatively higher bending rigidity . In addition , the trend with increasing cholesterol fractions is neither that of DOPC nor that of other previously studied lipids exhibiting stiffening ( see also Table 1 for data on POPC ) . To summarize , the effect of cholesterol is not universal , but rather speci ﬁ c to the type of lipid . The bending rigidity of saturated or many mono - unsaturated lipids increases with cholesterol content ( see data summarized in [ 4 ] ) , while that of double - unsaturated lipids such as DOPC is independent of the cholesterol fraction . In sphingomyelin membranes the bending rigidity is found to decrease with increasing cholesterol content . We cannot argue that these trends in the behavior of the different membrane types directly couple to and are universal for the speci ﬁ c degree of unsaturation . A more plausible view would be that the effect of cholesterol depends on the individual molecular architecture of the lipid combining the effect of unsaturation and acyl chain length , and probably the lipid interfacial region . Recent simulations indicate that tilt and splay deformations have important contribution to the overall Fig . 6 . Temperaturedependenceofthebendingrigidityclosetothemainphasetransition temperatureT m . TheopencirclesrepresentdataadaptedfromRef . [ 79 ] usingtheapproach of optical dynamometry as shown in Fig . 5A . The red diamonds show data adapted from Ref . [ 106 ] and obtained with ﬂ uctuation spectroscopy . The green asterisk is a single - point data form Ref . [ 41 ] collected from micropipette aspiration . The black dots and solid line represent data adapted from Ref . [ 109 ] from neutron re ﬂ ectivity on ﬂ oating bilayers in the vicinity of a solid support . The solid blue triangles are data calculated from the heat capacity curve of dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine liposome suspension in Refs . [ 110 , 112 ] . ( For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁ gure legend , the reader is referred to the web version of this article . ) Fig . 7 . Bending rigidity of cholesterol - doped DOPC and SM membranes as measured by electrodeformation ( ED ) of giant vesicles ( solid bars ) and by ﬂ uctuation spectroscopy , ( FL ) ( hatched bars ) at 23 °C . The error bars show the standard error from the mean value of a population of vesicles . Adapted from reference [ 35 ] ( http : / / pubs . rsc . org / en / content / articlelanding / 2010 / sm / b920629a ) with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry . 5 R . Dimova / Advancesin Colloid and Interface Science xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Dimova R , Recent developments in the ﬁ eld of bending rigidity measurements on membranes , Adv Colloid Interface Sci ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cis . 2014 . 03 . 003 elasticity of cholesterol - doped membranes [ 123 ] . Potential contribu - tions from changes in the membrane thickness in the presence of cho - lesterol could also play a role in modulating the membrane rigidity . The experimental data con ﬁ rm not only that the old widely accepted view about the rigidifying and stabilizing effect of cholesterol on mem - branes is ungrounded , but also that as a rule , generalization about the effect of cholesterol on the material properties of membranes is not realistic . 4 . 2 . Charged lipids In general , if a membrane molecular species is not electroneutral , it will contribute to the surface charge of the membrane . Increasing sur - face charge is associated with increasing bending rigidity . A substantial bulk of theoretical studies has addressed the effect of the surface charge on the membrane bending rigidity ( including again valuable contribu - tions from Helfrich ) , see e . g . [ 124 – 128 ] . The rise in the bending rigidity with increasing fraction of charged species is expected considering the stronger repulsion in the bilayer plane ( for example between the polar heads of charged lipids ) , which effectively suppresses the mem - brane undulations and thus increases the membrane rigidity [ 125 ] . The presence of the electric double layer surrounding a charged mem - brane is also predicted to give riseto the bendingrigidity [ 125 , 126 , 129 ] . Whilethetheoreticalmodelingfortheeffectofmembranechargeon the bending rigidity has been well documented , systematic experimen - talstudiesongiantvesiclemembranescontainingchargedlipidsarestill rather limited ( note that studies on the electrostatic effects on the bending rigidity in stacks of membranes are complicated because of the multitude of interactions between layers ) . Almost no effect has been detected in phosphatidylcholine ( PC ) membranes doped with phosphatidylserine ( PS ) when employing tube pulling [ 69 ] . A more sig - ni ﬁ cant change in the bending rigidity was detected on PC bilayers where the surface charge was modulated via changes in the pH [ 130 ] . A signi ﬁ cant increase in the bending rigidity of PC / PS membranes at pH 5 as a function of the fraction of the charged lipid has been reported in Refs . [ 6 , 131 , 132 ] . Probably the strongest effect was recently observed onPCvesiclescontainingafractionofphosphatidylglycerol [ 133 ] , where the bending rigidity was observed to increase around threefold com - pared to that of the pure PC membranes . Additional data on the effect of various charged species in the membrane can be found . For example , some experimental studies have investigated the effect of charged sur - factants [ 134 ] and phosphatidic acids [ 135 ] in the membrane . 4 . 3 . Other inclusions , anchored and adsorbed species A number of molecular species which insert or adsorb to the mem - brane are approximately electroneutral or charged but in the presence of salt impart only weakly to electrostatic - based changes in the bending rigidity . In this case , the bending rigidity is effectively modulated by the impact of the molecule on the membrane thickness . Example for such molecules is provided bysome peptides , whoseeffecton themembrane rigidity strongly depends on their conformation and orientation in the bilayer and is pronounced already at small concentrations ( around 1 mol % ) of the peptides in the membrane . For instance , alamethicin and valinomycin are known to induce membrane thinning and thus a strong decrease in the bending rigidity [ 87 , 136 – 138 ] . Magainin was also found to dramatically soften the bilayer , which was interpreted with acontinuummodeltakinginto accountthelocal membrane curva - ture induced by the peptide and the intermolecular peptide – peptide interactions [ 13 ] . Another peptide such as the HIV fusion peptide FP23 , for whichthinningof the membrane ( on the order of 3 Å ) was ob - served was also found to signi ﬁ cantly soften the membrane [ 51 , 139 , 140 ] , see Fig . 8 . This peptide was also suggested to induce decoupling of the composing membrane lea ﬂ ets as deduced from measurements on the bending and stretching elasticity moduli [ 51 ] . The decrease in thebendingrigidity caused by thepresence of this peptide inthebilayer is similar to that observed with co - surfactants [ 141 ] and theoretically expected for transmembrane inclusions , see e . g . references [ 142 – 145 ] . The mechanism behind the membrane softening in this case is related to coupling of the intercalated molecules to the local membrane curva - ture and depends strongly on the molecular geometry . Bulky trans - membrane proteins such as bacteriorhodopsin do not in ﬂ uence the membrane rigidity [ 146 ] , even though their activity can magnify the ﬂ uctuations in the membrane . Other proteins , however , can induce some mechanical effect , see e . g . [ 147 ] . More examples of molecules affecting the bending rigidity of POPC membranes are given in Table 1 . The plasma membrane of living cells possesses a large number of asymmetrically distributed or anchored biomacromolecules . Presum - ably , the simplest mimetic of this macromolecule / membrane architec - ture is provided by ﬂ exible polymers for which one end contains the membrane anchor whereas all other polymer segments experience ef - fectively repulsive interactionswith themembrane [ 148 ] . The anchored polymers can form mushroom state at low surface concentrations and brush states at high surface concentrations [ 149 , 150 ] . Theoretical stud - ies have predicted the increase of the overall bending stiffness of the membrane due to the anchored polymers [ 150 ] , and later this was experimentally con ﬁ rmed [ 148 ] . Peripheral or adsorbed proteins can also lead to the increase of membrane bending rigidity . For example , the binding of avidin to biotinylated bilayers was shown to stiffen the membrane [ 151 ] while the formation of two - dimensional streptavidin crystals on the surface of the vesicles rigidi ﬁ es them [ 152 ] . What is probably most poorly studied and remains to be addressed is the effect of molecules with sugar moieties on the bending rigidity of membranes . Glycolipids are important components in the outer leaf - let of biological membranes . On theonehand , they attractincreasingin - terest in membrane studies due to the development of new synthesis schemes and a broad range of medical applications [ 153 ] . On the other hand , they constitute a large fraction of the lipids in the myelin sheaths of human nerve cells in the brain and some of them such as the gangli - oside GM1 modulate the plasticity of neurons , see e . g . [ 154 ] . The author is not familiar with reported studies evidencingthedirecteffect of these molecules on the membrane bending rigidity . A reasonable presump - tion could be that they would decreasethebendingrigiditysince simple sugars have been already demonstrated to lead to this effect ( see next section ) . Indeed , some recent studies provide evidence in this direction for the ganglioside GM1 [ 155 ] . However , contrary to this expectation , Fig . 8 . Relative changes of the bending rigidity of DOPC bilayers as a function of the concentrationofthetransmembranepeptideFP23 . Thedatawererescaledbythebending rigidity of the pure DOPC bilayer . Two of the datasets correspond to the results obtained with ﬂ uctuation analysis ( solid circles ) and micropipette aspiration ( open squares ) [ 51 ] . The error bars represent standard errors . The third dataset ( solid diamonds ) is collected from diffuse X - ray scattering from Ref . [ 139 ] . The cartoon in the inset illustrates the decoupling effect the peptide has on the bilayer . Data adapted from reference [ 51 ] with the permission of IOP Publishing Ltd . 6 R . Dimova / Advancesin Colloid and Interface Science xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Dimova R , Recent developments in the ﬁ eld of bending rigidity measurements on membranes , Adv Colloid Interface Sci ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cis . 2014 . 03 . 003 the water - soluble polysaccharide chitosan , which adsorbs to the mem - brane , has been recently reported to increase the bending rigidity of neutral and charged membranes [ 133 ] . Obviously , the molecular archi - tecture of the interacting molecules is important and further studies are needed for a clear understanding of the effect of sugar - like molecules to emerge . 4 . 4 . Sugars and salts Here , we will consider how the bending rigidity of membranes is in ﬂ uenced by an important factor – sugars and salts in the solution bathing the membrane . Regarding sugars , studies in this direction are relevant for understanding the stabilizing effect of carbohydrates on membranes . A number of reports provide evidence for the stabilization effect of small sugars in particular ( see e . g . Ref . [ 156 ] and references therein ) , which is employed in protection against drought but also in cryo - and biopreservation . The origin of this stability can be sought in the behavior of physical parameters such as the bending rigidity of lipid bilayers . The only data known to the author is provided from systematic studies of the groups of Mitov and Vitkova [ 6 , 157 – 160 ] ( and supported by a single measurement on DOPC vesicles reported in Ref . [ 51 ] ) . Note that some of the results on the effect of sugars appear contradictory in terms of the magnitude of the effect , probably because of differences in the data analysis and the used experimental tech - niques . Both micropipette aspiration and ﬂ uctuation spectroscopy on giant vesicles revealed a strong decrease in the bending rigidity of membranes when exposed to mono - and oligosaccharide solutions with concentration up to around 0 . 3 M . The impact of sucrose is illus - trated in Fig . 9 with data from Ref . [ 158 ] . The observed decrease in the bendingstiffnesswith increasingsugar concentrations is somewhat consistent with recentstudieson theinter - action of sugars with membranes demonstrating nonmonotonous con - centration dependence , namely adsorption at low concentrations and depletion at high concentrations [ 161 ] . In concentration ranges as those explored in Fig . 9 , membrane thinning as reported in Ref . [ 161 ] couldexplainthe reductionin thebendingrigidity . At higher concentra - tions however , sugars are expelled from the membrane [ 161 ] and one could expect that the trend in Fig . 9 will change . Unfortunately , data are still not available . Obviously , further studies in this direction are required , particularly becauseof thebroaduseof sugars in thepreparation of giant vesicles . In order to increase the optical contrast , to osmotically stabilize the vesicles and to have them settle at the bottom of the experimental chamber for easy observation , giant vesicles are typically grown in sucrose solution and subsequently diluted in isotonic glucose solutions . ( Fluctuation analysis of vesicles with inside – outside asymmetric sugar solutions were performed in Ref . [ 162 ] but only the effect on the spon - taneous curvature was reported . ) The majority of data provided from micropipette aspiration measurements are collected on vesicles pre - paredinsugar solutionswhichareemployed to ensureconstantvolume of the vesicles . Compared to ﬂ uctuation analysis in the absence of sugars , micropipette aspiration was found to yield lower values for the bending rigidity at higher sugar concentrations [ 51 ] . The softening of the membrane by sugars could be expected to have strong impact on measurements where the vesicles are exposed to osmotic swelling or de ﬂ ation [ 163 , 164 ] and this issue has not been addressed so far . Studies on “ third - party ” molecules performed in the presence of sugars could also be in ﬂ uenced , but probably not so much when relative changes in the bending rigidity are discussed . However , it is not obvious whether the presence of sugars does not affect the interaction with the membrane of the molecules of interest when the studies are performed on vesicles grown in sugar solutions . Critical discussion of measurements performed in the presence and absence of sugars is included in the recent article of Nagle [ 5 ] . Clearly , the effect of sugars should not be undermined but considered carefully . During therevision stage of this review , theauthor became aware of systematic studies on the bending rigidity of bilayer stacks measured with diffuse X - ray scattering in the Nagle lab [ 165 ] . They report no signi ﬁ cant effect of glucose on the membrane mechanics which further emphasizes the need to perform more careful studies and clarify differences in the data obtained with bilayer stacks and giant vesicles . Other important solutes to discuss are salts and ions in general , hav - ing in mind the high ionic strength of physiologically relevant solutions . The effectof salts on thebendingrigidity of membranes would of course depend on whether and how strongly these ions adsorb to the membrane . “ Simple ” salts such as NaCl are sometimes simplemindedly considered as inert to the lipid bilayer , but there is abundant evidence for adsorption of the constituting ions to the membrane , see e . g . Ref . [ 166 ] and references therein . For the moment , a uni ﬁ ed vision about the effect of salts on the membrane rigidity is still missing . Studies on multilayer systems indicate swelling of PC bilayers in the presence of 0 . 5 M NaCl , which was interpreted as resulting from rigidifying of the membrane [ 167 ] . No signi ﬁ cant changes in the bending rigidity of mul - tiplePC bilayers inthepresenceof 1M KCland0 . 1 MKBrwere observed [ 168 ] . Somewhat contradictory to these observations , measurements based on ﬂ uctuation spectroscopy of giant vesicles provide direct evidence for the decrease in the bending rigidity of membranes in the presence of various types of salts [ 4 , 169 ] ( once again underlying the difference in the behavior of single membranes as in giant vesicles and multiple layers as in multilayered systems ) . Fig . 10 exempli ﬁ es the effectofNaClonthebendingrigidityofPOPCmembranesintheconcen - tration range 0 – 0 . 1 M NaCl . These measurements exhibit similar trends Fig . 9 . Bending rigidity of stearoyloleoylphosphatidylcholine membranes as a function of sucrose concentration in the bulk : data collected via micropipette manipulation ( solid squares ) and ﬂ uctuationanalysis ( opencircles ) ofgiantvesicles . Dataadaptedfromrefer - ence [ 158 ] with the permission of the publisher ( Taylor & Francis Ltd . ) . Fig . 10 . Bending rigidity of POPC membrane as a function of sodium chloride concentra - tion . Error bars represent standard deviations among a population of vesicles . The data is reproduced from Ref . [ 169 ] . 7 R . Dimova / Advancesin Colloid and Interface Science xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Dimova R , Recent developments in the ﬁ eld of bending rigidity measurements on membranes , Adv Colloid Interface Sci ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cis . 2014 . 03 . 003 as those observed in our lab [ 170 ] . Major decrease in the bending rigid - ity is observed already in the millimolar concentration range of various salts [ 169 ] . Probably , a word of caution should be added at the end of this section . The total lipid concentration in suspension of giant vesicles is typically in the micromolar range . Commercial salts and sugars have , in general , purity of between 98 . 0 % and 99 . 8 % . If one studies the effect of 0 . 1 M salt or 0 . 1 M sugar solution on the bendingrigidity of giant ves - icles , the concentration of the impurities might be already on the order of 0 . 2 mM to 2 mM , i . e . , high compared to the total lipid concentration . Depending on their origin , impurities might actually exert an in ﬂ uence on their own . For example , impurities have been reported to change the phase state of PG membranes [ 171 ] . Effects resulting from the use of lipids from different producers also cannot be excluded . Differences in the material properties of membranes prepared from lipids purchased from two different producers have been already reported [ 172 ] . The use of plasticware in some labs may also turn to be a source of contam - ination [ 173 ] . Sealing agents in experimental chambers has also been recognized to in ﬂ uence the bending rigidity [ 8 , 9 ] . 5 . Concluding remarks This review described very brie ﬂ y the available experimental tech - niques for assessing the bending elasticity of lipid membranes . More emphasis was given to outlining the effect of various molecular species and ions on the membrane bending rigidity , as well as indicating some open questions demanding the attention of membrane biophysicists and requestingcareful studies . On severaloccasions , it wasdemonstrat - ed thatthebendingrigidityof membranes is asensitive indicator for the presence of inclusions or adsorbing species . What is probably still missing in the large bulk of research available in the literature is data resolving potential effects of buffering agents . A couple of studies have suggested that some buffers might indeed affect the mechanical properties of lipid membranes [ 174 , 175 ] . Swelling of multilayered stacks in different buffers was interpreted as resulting frompotentialmembranesoftening [ 174 ] orbuffer - induced electrostat - ic repulsion [ 175 ] . ( Indeed , during the revision stage of this review , Bouvraus et al . published a careful study demonstrating the in ﬂ uence of several buffering agents on the bending rigidity of membranes [ 16 ] . ) Studies in this direction are generally lacking in the literature and are called for , particularly nowadays when a large number of tech - niques for measuring the membrane rigidity have become commodity of many research groups . Acknowledgments For the preparation of this work , I have pro ﬁ ted from numerous experimental contributions and insightful discussions with the skillful members of my group ( for the full list of the current and former mem - bersseewww . dimova . de ) andtheoreticianssuchasReinhardLipowsky . I also thank Karin Riske , Victoria Vitkova and Roland Knorr for their critical readingof the text and appreciate the particularly useful sugges - tions from John Nagle and Stephanie Tristram - Nagle . References [ 1 ] HelfrichW . Elasticpropertiesoflipidbilayers — theoryandpossibleexperiments . Z Naturforsch 1973 ; 28c : 693 – 703 . [ 2 ] Helfrich W . Blocked lipid exchange in bilayers and its possible in ﬂ uence on shape of vesicles . Z Naturforsch 1974 ; 29c : 510 – 5 . [ 3 ] Marsh D . Elastic curvature constants of lipid monolayers and bilayers . Chem Phys Lipids 2006 ; 144 : 146 – 59 . [ 4 ] BouvraisH . Bendingrigiditiesoflipidbilayers : theirdeterminationandmaininputs in biophysical studies . In : Igli č A , editor . Advances in Planar Lipid Bilayers and Liposomes , vol . 15 . Academic Press ; 2012 . p . 1 – 75 . [ 5 ] Nagle JF . Introductory lecture : basic quantities in model biomembranes . Faraday Discuss 2013 ; 161 : 11 – 29 . [ 6 ] VitkovaV , PetrovAG . Lipidbilayersandmembranes : materialproperties . In : Igli č A , Genova J , editors . Advances in planar lipid bilayers and liposomes , Volume 17 . Ac - ademic Press ; 2013 . p . 89 – 138 . [ 7 ] Helfrich W . Steric interaction of ﬂ uid membranes in multilayer systems . Z Naturforsch A 1978 ; 33 : 305 – 15 . [ 8 ] Kummrow M , Helfrich W . Deformation of giant lipid vesicles by electric - ﬁ elds . Phys Rev A 1991 ; 44 : 8356 – 60 . [ 9 ] Niggemann G , Kummrow M , Helfrich W . The bending rigidity of phosphatidylcho - line bilayers — dependences on experimental - method , sample cell sealing and temperature . J Phys II 1995 ; 5 : 413 – 25 . [ 10 ] Henriksen J , Rowat AC , Ipsen JH . Vesicle ﬂ uctuation analysis of the effects of sterols on membrane bending rigidity . Eur Biophys J Biophys Lett 2004 ; 33 : 732 – 41 . [ 11 ] Kucerka N , Tristram - Nagle S , Nagle JF . Structure of fully hydrated ﬂ uid phase lipid bilayers with monounsaturated chains . J Membr Biol 2005 ; 208 : 193 – 202 . [ 12 ] Henriksen J , Rowat AC , Brief E , Hsueh YW , Thewalt JL , Zuckermann MJ , et al . Universal behavior of membranes with sterols . Biophys J 2006 ; 90 : 1639 – 49 . [ 13 ] Bouvrais H , Meleard P , Pott T , Jensen KJ , Brask J , Ipsen JH . Softening of POPC membranes by magainin . Biophys Chem 2008 ; 137 : 7 – 12 . [ 14 ] BouvraisH , PottT , BagatolliLA , IpsenJH , MeleardP . Impactofmembrane - anchored ﬂ uorescent probes on the mechanical properties of lipid bilayers . Biochim Biophys Acta Biomembr 2010 ; 1798 : 1333 – 7 . [ 15 ] Pakkanen KI , Duelund L , Qvortrup K , Pedersen JS , Ipsen JH . Mechanics and dynamicsoftriglyceride - phospholipidmodelmembranes : implicationsforcellular properties and function . Biochim Biophys Acta Biomembr 1808 ; 2011 : 1947 – 56 . [ 16 ] Bouvrais H , Duelund L , Ipsen JH . Buffers affect the bending rigidity of model lipid membranes . Langmuir 2014 ; 30 : 13 – 6 . [ 17 ] Arriaga LR , Lopez - Montero I , Monroy F , Orts - Gil G , Farago B , Hellweg T . Stiffening effect of cholesterol on disordered lipid phases : a combined neutron spin echo plus dynamic light scattering analysis of the bending elasticity of large unilamellar vesicles . Biophys J 2009 ; 96 : 3629 – 37 . [ 18 ] Henriksen JR , Andresen TL , Feldborg LN , Duelund L , Ipsen JH . Understanding detergent effects on lipid membranes : a model study of lysolipids . Biophys J 2010 ; 98 : 2199 – 205 . [ 19 ] BrochardF , LennonJF . Frequencyspectrum of ﬂ ickerphenomenoninerythrocytes . J Phys 1975 ; 36 : 1035 – 47 . [ 20 ] Servuss RM , Harbich W , Helfrich W . Measurement of curvature - elastic modulus of egg lecithin bilayers . Biochim Biophys Acta 1976 ; 436 : 900 – 3 . [ 21 ] SchneiderMB , Jenkins JT , Webb WW . Thermal ﬂ uctuationsoflarge quasi - spherical bimolecular phospholipid - vesicles . J Phys 1984 ; 45 : 1457 – 72 . [ 22 ] Helfrich W . Size distributions of vesicles — the role of the effective rigidity of membranes . J Phys 1986 ; 47 : 321 – 9 . [ 23 ] MilnerST , SafranSA . Dynamic ﬂ uctuationsofdroplet microemulsionsandvesicles . Phys Rev A 1987 ; 36 : 4371 – 9 . [ 24 ] Beblik G , Servuss RM , Helfrich W . Bilayer bending rigidity of some synthetic lecithins . J Phys 1985 ; 46 : 1773 – 8 . [ 25 ] Schneider MB , Jenkins JT , Webb WW . Thermal ﬂ uctuations of large cylindrical phospholipid - vesicles . Biophys J 1984 ; 45 : 891 – 9 . [ 26 ] Mutz M , Helfrich W . Bending rigidities of some biological model membranes as obtained from the Fourier - analysis of contour sections . J Phys 1990 ; 51 : 991 – 1002 . [ 27 ] Semrau S , Idema T , Holtzer L , Schmidt T , Storm C . Accurate determination of elastic parameters for multicomponent membranes . Phys Rev Lett 2008 ; 100 : 088101 . [ 28 ] Dobereiner HG , Gompper G , Haluska CK , Kroll DM , Petrov PG , Riske KA . Advanced ﬂ icker spectroscopy of ﬂ uid membranes . Phys Rev Lett 2003 ; 91 : 4 . [ 29 ] Engelhardt H , Duwe HP , Sackmann E . Bilayer bending elasticity measured by Fourier - analysis of thermally excited surface undulations of ﬂ accid vesicles . J Phys Lett 1985 ; 46 : L395 – 400 . [ 30 ] Bivas I , Hanusse P , Bothorel P , Lalanne J , Aguerrechariol O . An application of the optical microscopy to the determination of the curvature elastic - modulus of biological and model membranes . J Phys 1987 ; 48 : 855 – 67 . [ 31 ] Faucon JF , Mitov MD , Meleard P , Bivas I , Bothorel P . Bending elasticity and thermal ﬂ uctuations of lipid - membranes — theoretical and experimental requirements . J Phys 1989 ; 50 : 2389 – 414 . [ 32 ] Duwe HP , Kaes J , Sackmann E . Bending elastic - moduli of lipid bilayers — modulation by solutes . J Phys 1990 ; 51 : 945 – 62 . [ 33 ] Meleard P , Faucon JF , Mitov MD , Bothorel P . Pulsed - light microscopy applied to the measurement of the bending elasticity of giant liposomes . Europhys Lett 1992 ; 19 : 267 – 71 . [ 34 ] PecreauxJ , Dobereiner HG , Prost J , JoannyJF , Bassereau P . Re ﬁ ned contour analysis of giant unilamellar vesicles . Eur Phys J E 2004 ; 13 : 277 – 90 . [ 35 ] Gracià RS , Bezlyepkina N , Knorr RL , Lipowsky R , Dimova R . Effect of cholesterol on the rigidity of saturated and unsaturated membranes : ﬂ uctuation and electro - deformation analysis of giant vesicles . Soft Matter 2010 ; 6 : 1472 – 82 . [ 36 ] Henriksen JR , Ipsen JH . Thermal undulations of quasi - spherical vesicles stabilized by gravity . Eur Phys J E 2002 ; 9 : 365 – 74 . [ 37 ] Meleard P , Pott T , Bouvrais H , Ipsen JH . Advantages of statistical analysis of giant vesicle ﬂ ickering for bending elasticity measurements . Eur Phys J E 2011 ; 34 . [ 38 ] Genova J , Vitkova V , Bivas I . Registration and analysis of the shape ﬂ uctuations of nearly spherical lipid vesicles . Phys Rev E 2013 ; 88 . [ 39 ] Meleard P , Pott T . Overviewofa quest for bending elasticity measurement . In : Iglic A , Genova J , editors . Advances in Planar Lipid Bilayers and Liposomes . , Volume 17 . Academic Press ; 2013 . p . 55 – 75 . [ 40 ] LoftusAF , NorengS , Hsieh VL , ParthasarathyR . Robust measurement ofmembrane bending moduli using light sheet ﬂ uorescence imaging of vesicle ﬂ uctuations . Langmuir 2013 ; 29 : 14588 – 94 . 8 R . Dimova / Advancesin Colloid and Interface Science xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Dimova R , Recent developments in the ﬁ eld of bending rigidity measurements on membranes , Adv Colloid Interface Sci ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cis . 2014 . 03 . 003 [ 41 ] Evans E , Needham D . Physical - properties of surfactant bilayer - membranes — thermal transitions , elasticity , rigidity , cohesion , and colloidal interactions . J Phys Chem 1987 ; 91 : 4219 – 28 . [ 42 ] Evans EA . Bending elastic - modulus of red - blood - cell membrane derived from buckling instability in micropipet aspiration tests . Biophys J 1983 ; 43 : 27 – 30 . [ 43 ] Evans E , Rawicz W . Entropy - driven tension and bending elasticity in condensed - ﬂ uid membranes . Phys Rev Lett 1990 ; 64 : 2094 – 7 . [ 44 ] Fournier JB , Ajdari A , Peliti L . Effective - area elasticity and tension of micromani - pulated membranes . Phys Rev Lett 2001 ; 86 : 4970 – 3 . [ 45 ] Manneville JB , Bassereau P , Ramaswamy S , Prost J . Active membrane ﬂ uctuations studied by micropipet aspiration . Phys Rev E 2001 ; 64 : 021908 . [ 46 ] Rawicz W , Olbrich KC , McIntosh T , Needham D , Evans E . Effect of chain length and unsaturation on elasticity of lipid bilayers . Biophys J 2000 ; 79 : 328 – 39 . [ 47 ] Dimova R , Seifert U , Pouligny B , Förster S , Döbereiner H - G . Hyperviscous diblock copolymer vesicles . Eur Phys J B 2002 ; 7 : 241 – 50 . [ 48 ] Henriksen JR , Ipsen JH . Measurement of membrane elasticity by micro - pipette aspiration . Eur Phys J E 2004 ; 14 : 149 – 67 . [ 49 ] Bermudez H , Hammer DA , Discher DE . Effect of bilayer thickness on membrane bending rigidity . Langmuir 2004 ; 20 : 540 – 3 . [ 50 ] HeinrichV , RawiczW . Automated , high - resolutionmicropipetaspirationrevealsnew insight into the physical properties of ﬂ uid membranes . Langmuir2005 ; 21 : 1962 – 71 . [ 51 ] Shchelokovskyy P , Tristram - Nagle S , Dimova R . Effect of the HIV - 1 fusion peptide on the mechanical properties and lea ﬂ et coupling of lipid bilayers . New J Phys 2011 ; 13 : 025004 . [ 52 ] Portet T , Gordon SE , Keller SL . Increasing membrane tension decreases miscibility temperatures ; an experimental demonstration via micropipette aspiration . Biophys J 2012 ; 103 : L35 – 7 . [ 53 ] Tian AW , Capraro BR , Esposito C , Baumgart T . Bending stiffness depends on curva - ture of ternary lipid mixture tubular membranes . Biophys J 2009 ; 97 : 1636 – 46 . [ 54 ] Li Y , Lipowsky R , Dimova R . Membrane nanotubes induced by aqueous phase separation and stabilized by spontaneous curvature . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011 ; 108 : 4731 – 6 . [ 55 ] SorreB , Callan - JonesA , Manzi J , Goud B , ProstJ , BassereauP , et al . Nature of curva - turecouplingofamphiphysinwithmembranesdependsonitsbounddensity . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012 ; 109 : 173 – 8 . [ 56 ] Helfrich W . Deformation of lipid bilayer spheres by electric - ﬁ elds . Zeitschrift Fur Naturforschung C - a . J Biosci 1974 ; C 29 : 182 – 3 . [ 57 ] Helfrich W , Servuss RM . Undulations , steric interaction and cohesion of ﬂ uid membranes . Nuovo Cimento D 1984 ; 3 : 137 – 51 . [ 58 ] Yamamoto T , Aranda - Espinoza S , Dimova R , Lipowsky R . Stability of spherical vesicles in electric ﬁ elds . Langmuir 2010 ; 26 : 12390 – 407 . [ 59 ] Vlahovska PM , Gracia RS , Aranda - EspinozaS , Dimova R . Electrohydrodynamicmodel of vesicle deformation in alternating electric ﬁ elds . Biophys J 2009 ; 96 : 4789 – 803 . [ 60 ] Dimova R , Riske KA , Aranda S , Bezlyepkina N , Knorr RL , Lipowsky R . Giant vesicles in electric ﬁ elds . Soft Matter 2007 ; 3 : 817 – 27 . [ 61 ] Aranda S , Riske KA , Lipowsky R , Dimova R . Morphological transitions of vesicles induced by alternating electric ﬁ elds . Biophys J 2008 ; 95 : L19 – 21 . [ 62 ] Dimova R , Bezlyepkina N , Jordo MD , Knorr RL , Riske KA , Staykova M , et al . Vesicles in electric ﬁ elds : some novel aspects of membrane behavior . Soft Matter 2009 ; 5 : 3201 – 12 . [ 63 ] Dimova R . Electrodeformation , electroporation , and electrofusion ofcell - sizedlipid vesicles . In : Pakhomov AG , Miklavcic D , Markov M , editors . Advanced electropora - tion techniques in biology and medicine . Boca Raton : CRC Press ; 2010 . p . 97 – 122 . [ 64 ] DimovaR . Giantvesicles : abiomimetictoolformembranecharacterization . Advances in Planar Lipid Bilayers and Liposomes , Volume 16 . Academic Press ; 2012 . p . 1 – 50 . [ 65 ] Bo L , Waugh RE . Determination of bilayer - membrane bending stiffness by tether formation from giant thin - walled vesicles . Biophys J 1989 ; 55 : 509 – 17 . [ 66 ] Waugh R , Hochmuth R . Mechanical equilibrium of thick , hollow , liquid membrane cylinders . Biophys J 1987 ; 52 : 391 – 400 . [ 67 ] Heinrich V , Waugh RE . A piconewton force transducer and its application to measurement of the bending stiffness of phospholipid membranes . Ann Biomed Eng 1996 ; 24 : 595 – 605 . [ 68 ] Rossier O , Cuvelier D , Borghi N , Puech PH , Derenyi I , Buguin A , et al . Giant vesicles under ﬂ ows : extrusion and retraction of tubes . Langmuir 2003 ; 19 : 575 – 84 . [ 69 ] Song J , Waugh RE . Bilayer - membrane bending stiffness by tether formation from mixed PC - PS lipid vesicles . J Biomech Eng Trans ASME 1990 ; 112 : 235 – 40 . [ 70 ] Song JB , Waugh RE . Bending rigidity of SOPC membranes containing cholesterol . Biophys J 1993 ; 64 : 1967 – 70 . [ 71 ] Cuvelier D , Derenyi I , Bassereau P , Nassoy P . Coalescence of membrane tethers : experiments , theory , and applications . Biophys J 2005 ; 88 : 2714 – 26 . [ 72 ] Hochmuth RM , Wiles HC , Evans EA , Mccown JT . Extensional ﬂ ow of erythrocyte - membrane from cell body to elastic tether . 2 . Experiment . Biophys J 1982 ; 39 : 83 – 9 . [ 73 ] Sorre B , Callan - JonesA , Manneville JB , Nassoy P , Joanny JF , Prost J , et al . Curvature - driven lipid sorting needs proximity to a demixing point and is aided by proteins . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009 ; 106 : 5622 – 6 . [ 74 ] Settles EI , Loftus AF , McKeown AN , Parthasarathy R . The vesicle traf ﬁ cking protein Sar1 lowers lipid membrane rigidity . Biophys J 2010 ; 99 : 1539 – 45 . [ 75 ] Roux A , Cuvelier D , Nassoy P , Prost J , Bassereau P , Goud B . Role of curvature and phase transition in lipid sorting and ﬁ ssion of membrane tubules . EMBO J 2005 ; 24 : 1537 – 45 . [ 76 ] Heinrich M , Tian A , Esposito C , Baumgart T . Dynamic sorting of lipids and proteins in membrane tubes with a moving phase boundary . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 ; 107 : 7208 – 13 . [ 77 ] Baumgart T , Capraro BR , Zhu C , Das SL . Thermodynamics and mechanics of membrane curvature generation and sensing by proteins and lipids . Annu Rev Phys Chem 2011 ; 62 : 483 – 506 . [ 78 ] LipowskyR . Spontaneoustubulationofmembranesandvesiclesrevealsmembrane tension generated by spontaneous curvature . Faraday Discuss 2013 ; 161 : 305 – 31 . [ 79 ] Dimova R , Danov K , PoulignyB , Ivanov IB . Drag of a solid particle trapped ina thin ﬁ lm or at an interface : in ﬂ uence of surface viscosity and elasticity . J Colloid Inter - face Sci 2000 ; 226 : 35 – 43 . [ 80 ] Lee CH , Lin WC , Wang JP . All - optical measurements of the bending rigidity of lipid - vesiclemembranesacrossstructuralphasetransitions . PhysRevE2001 ; 6402 : 020901 . [ 81 ] Lee CH , Wang JP . Noninterferometric differential confocal microscopy with 2 - nm depth resolution . Opt Commun 1997 ; 135 : 233 – 7 . [ 82 ] Solmaz ME , Biswas R , Sankhagowit S , Thompson JR , Mejia CA , Malmstadt N , et al . Optical stretching of giant unilamellar vesicles with an integrated dual - beam opti - cal trap . Biomed Opt Express 2012 ; 3 : 2419 – 27 . [ 83 ] Solmaz ME , SankhagowitS , Biswas R , Mejia CA , Povinelli ML , MalmstadtN . Optical stretching as a tool to investigate the mechanical properties of lipid bilayers . Rsc Adv 2013 ; 3 : 16632 – 8 . [ 84 ] Lyatskaya Y , Liu YF , Tristram - Nagle S , Katsaras J , Nagle JF . Method for obtaining structureandinteractionsfromorientedlipidbilayers . PhysRevE2000 ; 63 : 011907 . [ 85 ] Liu YF , Nagle JF . Diffuse scattering provides material parameters and electron density pro ﬁ les of biomembranes . Phys Rev E 2004 ; 69 : 040901 . [ 86 ] Pabst G . Global properties of biomimetic membranes : perspectives on molecular features . Biophys Rev Lett 2006 ; 01 : 57 – 84 . [ 87 ] Pabst G , Danner S , Podgornik R , Katsaras J . Entropy - driven softening of ﬂ uid lipid bilayers by alamethicin . Langmuir 2007 ; 23 : 11705 – 11 . [ 88 ] PanJ , Tristram - NagleS , Kucerka N , Nagle JF . Temperature dependenceofstructure , bending rigidity , and bilayer interactions of dioleoylphosphatidylcholine bilayers . Biophys J 2008 ; 94 : 117 – 24 . [ 89 ] Pabst G , Kucerka N , Nieh MP , Rheinstadter MC , Katsaras J . Applications of neutron and X - ray scattering to thestudy of biologically relevantmodelmembranes . Chem Phys Lipids 2010 ; 163 : 460 – 79 . [ 90 ] Fragneto G , Charitat T , Graner F , MeckeK , Perino - Gallice L , Bellet - AmalricE . A ﬂ uid ﬂ oating bilayer . Europhys Lett 2001 ; 53 : 100 – 6 . [ 91 ] Daillant J , Bellet - Amalric E , Braslau A , Charitat T , Fragneto G , Graner F , et al . Structure and ﬂ uctuations of a single ﬂ oating lipid bilayer . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005 ; 102 : 11639 – 44 . [ 92 ] Malaquin L , Charitat T , Daillant J . Supported bilayers : combined specular and diffuse X - ray scattering . Eur Phys J E 2010 ; 31 : 285 – 301 . [ 93 ] Hemmerle A , Malaquin L , Charitat T , Lecuyer S , Fragneto G , Daillant J . Controlling interactionsinsupportedbilayersfromweakelectrostaticrepulsiontohighosmot - ic pressure . Proc Natl Acad Sci 2012 ; 109 : 19938 – 42 . [ 94 ] ArriagaLR , Lopez - Montero I , Orts - GilG , FaragoB , HellwegT , MonroyF . Fluctuation dynamics of spherical vesicles : frustration of regular bulk dissipation into subdiffusive relaxation . Phys Rev E 2009 ; 80 : 031908 . [ 95 ] Katsir Y , Shapira Y , Mastai Y , Dimova R , Ben - Jacob E . Entropic effects and slow kinetics revealed in titrations of D ( 2 ) O - H ( 2 ) O solutions with different D / H ratios . J Phys Chem B 2010 ; 114 : 5755 – 63 . [ 96 ] ZilkerA , EngelhardtH , SackmannE . DynamicRe ﬂ ectionInterferenceContrast ( RIC - ) Microscopy — a new method to study surface excitations of cells and to measure membrane bending elastic - moduli . J Phys 1987 ; 48 : 2139 – 51 . [ 97 ] Zilker A , Ziegler M , Sackmann E . Spectral - analysis of erythrocyte ﬂ ickering in the 0 . 3 – 4 - Mu - M - 1 regime by microinterferometry combined with fast image - processing . Phys Rev A 1992 ; 46 : 7998 – 8002 . [ 98 ] Goetz R , Gompper G , Lipowsky R . Mobility and elasticity of self - assembled membranes . Phys Rev Lett 1999 ; 82 : 221 – 4 . [ 99 ] Lindahl E , Edholm O . Mesoscopic undulations and thickness ﬂ uctuations in lipid bilayers from molecular dynamics simulations . Biophys J 2000 ; 79 : 426 – 33 . [ 100 ] Imparato A , Shillcock JC , Lipowsky R . Shape ﬂ uctuations and elastic properties of two - component bilayer membranes . Europhys Lett 2005 ; 69 : 650 – 6 . [ 101 ] Watson MC , Brandt EG , Welch PM , Brown FLH . Determining biomembrane bendingrigiditiesfromsimulationsofmodestsize . PhysRevLett2012 ; 109 : 028102 . [ 102 ] den Otter WK , Briels WJ . The bending rigidity of an amphiphilic bilayer from equi - librium and nonequilibrium molecular dynamics . J Chem Phys 2003 ; 118 : 4712 – 20 . [ 103 ] Farago O , Pincus P . Statistical mechanics of bilayer membrane with a ﬁ xed projected area . J Chem Phys 2004 ; 120 : 2934 – 50 . [ 104 ] HarmandarisVA , DesernoM . Anovelmethodformeasuringthebendingrigidityof model lipid membranes by simulating tethers . J Chem Phys 2006 ; 125 : 204905 . [ 105 ] Fernandez - Puente L , Bivas I , Mitov MD , Meleard P . Temperature and chain - length effects on bending elasticity of phosphatidylcholine bilayers . Europhys Lett 1994 ; 28 : 181 – 6 . [ 106 ] MeleardP , GerbeaudC , PottT , FernandezPuenteL , BivasI , MitovMD , etal . Bending elasticities of model membranes : in ﬂ uences of temperature and sterol content . Biophys J 1997 ; 72 : 2616 – 29 . [ 107 ] Chu N , Kucerka N , Liu YF , Tristram - Nagle S , Nagle JF . Anomalous swelling of lipid bilayer stacks is caused by softening of the bending modulus . Phys Rev E 2005 ; 71 . [ 108 ] Dimova R , Pouligny B . Optical dynamometry to study phase transitions in lipid membranes . In : Dopico A , editor . Methods in Membrane Lipids . , Vol . 400 . Totowa : Humana Press ; 2008 . p . 227 – 36 ( Chapter 15 ) . [ 109 ] Mecke KR , CharitatT , GranerF . Fluctuatinglipidbilayerinanarbitrarypotential : the - ory andexperimentaldetermination of bending rigidity . Langmuir2003 ; 19 : 2080 – 7 . [ 110 ] Heimburg T . Mechanical aspects of membrane thermodynamics . Estimation of the mechanical properties of lipid membranes close to the chain melting transition from calorimetry . Biochim Biophys Acta 1998 ; 1415 : 147 – 62 . [ 111 ] Hansen PL , Miao L , Ipsen JH . Fluid lipid bilayers : intermonolayer coupling and its thermodynamic manifestations . Phys Rev E 1998 ; 58 : 2311 – 24 . [ 112 ] HeimburgT . MonteCarlosimulationsoflipidbilayersandlipidproteininteractions in the light of recent experiments . Curr Opin Colloid Interface Sci 2000 ; 5 : 224 – 31 . 9 R . Dimova / Advancesin Colloid and Interface Science xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Dimova R , Recent developments in the ﬁ eld of bending rigidity measurements on membranes , Adv Colloid Interface Sci ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cis . 2014 . 03 . 003 [ 113 ] LipowskyR , DimovaR . Domainsinmembranesandvesicles . JPhysCondensMatter 2003 ; 15 : S31 – 45 . [ 114 ] Baumgart T , Hess ST , Webb WW . Imaging coexisting ﬂ uid domains in biomem - brane models coupling curvature and line tension . Nature 2003 ; 425 : 821 – 4 . [ 115 ] Feigenson GW . Phase diagrams and lipid domains inmulticomponent lipid bilayer mixtures . Biochim Biophys Acta Biomembr 2009 ; 1788 : 47 – 52 . [ 116 ] Feigenson GW . Phase behavior of lipid mixtures . Nat Chem Biol 2006 ; 2 : 560 – 3 . [ 117 ] Bagatolli L , Kumar PBS . Phase behavior of multicomponent membranes : experi - mental and computational techniques . Soft Matter 2009 ; 5 : 3234 – 48 . [ 118 ] Gennis BG . Biomembranes : molecular structure and function . NewYork : Springer - Verlag ; 1989 . [ 119 ] vanMeerG , VoelkerDR , FeigensonGW . Membranelipids : wheretheyareandhow they behave . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2008 ; 9 : 112 – 24 . [ 120 ] Pan JJ , Mills TT , Tristram - Nagle S , Nagle JF . Cholesterol perturbs lipid bilayers nonuniversally . Phys Rev Lett 2008 ; 100 : 198103 . [ 121 ] PanJJ , Tristram - NagleS , NagleJF . Effectofcholesterolonstructuralandmechanical properties of membranes depends on lipid chain saturation . Phys Rev E 2009 ; 80 . [ 122 ] Mathai JC , Tristram - Nagle S , Nagle JF , Zeidel ML . Structural determinants of water permeability through the lipid membrane . J Gen Physiol 2008 ; 131 : 69 – 76 . [ 123 ] Khelashvili G , Harries D . How cholesterol tilt modulates the mechanical properties of saturated and unsaturated lipid membranes . J Phys Chem B 2013 ; 117 : 2411 – 21 . [ 124 ] Winterhalter M , Helfrich W . Deformation of spherical vesicles by electric - ﬁ elds . J Colloid Interface Sci 1988 ; 122 : 583 – 6 . [ 125 ] Winterhalter M , Helfrich W . Bending elasticity of electrically charged bilayers — coupled monolayers , neutral surfaces , and balancing stresses . J Phys Chem 1992 ; 96 : 327 – 30 . [ 126 ] PincusP , JoannyJF , AndelmanD . Electrostaticinteractions , curvatureelasticity , and steric repulsion in multimembrane systems . Europhys Lett 1990 ; 11 : 763 – 8 . [ 127 ] Andelman D . Electrostatic properties of membranes : the Poisson – Boltzmann theory . In : Lipowsky R , Sackmann E , editors . Handbook of biological physics , Vol . 1 . Amsterdam : Elsevier Science B . V ; 1995 . p . 603 – 42 Chapter 12 . [ 128 ] May S . Curvature elasticity and thermodynamic stability of electrically charged membranes . J Chem Phys 1996 ; 105 : 8314 – 23 . [ 129 ] Mitchell DJ , Ninham BW . Curvature elasticity of charged membranes . Langmuir 1989 ; 5 : 1121 – 3 . [ 130 ] Zhou Y , Raphael RM . Solution pH alters mechanical and electrical properties of phosphatidylcholine membranes : relation between interfacial electrostatics , intramembrane potential , and bending elasticity . Biophys J 2007 ; 92 : 2451 – 62 . [ 131 ] Mitkova D , Stoyanova - Ivanova A , Ermakov YA , Vitkova V . Experimental study of the bending elasticity of charged lipid bilayers in aqueous solutions with pH5 . 17th international school on condensed matter physics , Vol . 398 . Bristol : Iop Pub - lishing Ltd ; 2012 . [ 132 ] Mitkova D , Stoyanova - Ivanova A , Georgieva S , Todorov P , Kozarev N , Ermakov YA , etal . ChargedlipidbilayersinaqueoussurroundingswithlowpH . In : Igli č A , editor . Advancesinplanar lipid bilayers and liposomes , volume18 . AcademicPress ; 2013 . p . 1 – 20 . [ 133 ] MertinsO , Dimova R . Insightsonthe interactions of chitosanwithphospholip - id vesicles . Part II : membrane stiffening and pore formation . Langmuir 2013 ; 29 : 14552 – 9 . [ 134 ] Rowat AC , Hansen PL , Ipsen JH . Experimental evidence of the electrostatic contri - bution to membrane bending rigidity . Europhys Lett 2004 ; 67 : 144 – 9 . [ 135 ] Meleard P , Gerbeaud C , Bardusco P , Jeandaine N , Mitov MD , Fernandez - Puente L . Mechanical properties of model membranes studied from shape transformations of giant vesicles . Biochimie 1998 ; 80 : 401 – 13 . [ 136 ] Vitkova V , Meleard P , Pott T , Bivas I . Alamethicin in ﬂ uence on the membrane bending elasticity . Eur Biophys J Biophys Lett 2006 ; 35 : 281 – 6 . [ 137 ] Hackl W , Seifert U , Sackmann E . Effects of fully and partially solubilized amphi - philes on bilayer bending stiffness and temperature dependence of the effective tension of giant vesicles . J Phys II 1997 ; 7 : 1141 – 57 . [ 138 ] Pan JJ , Tieleman DP , Nagle JF , Kucerka N , Tristram - Nagle S . Alamethicin in lipid bilayers : combined use of X - ray scattering and MD simulations . ( BBA ) - Biomembranes 2009 ; 1788 : 1387 – 97 . [ 139 ] Tristram - Nagle S , Nagle JF . HIV - 1 fusion peptide decreases bending energy and promotes curved fusion intermediates . Biophys J 2007 ; 93 : 2048 – 55 . [ 140 ] Tristram - Nagle S , Chan R , Kooijman E , Uppamoochikkal P , Qiang W , Weliky DP , et al . HIV fusion peptide penetrates , disorders , and softens T - cell membrane mimics . J Mol Biol 2010 ; 402 : 139 – 53 . [ 141 ] Israelachvili J . Intermolecular and surface forces . London : Academic Press ; 1992 . [ 142 ] Leibler S . Curvature instability in membranes . J Phys 1986 ; 47 : 507 – 16 . [ 143 ] Fournier JB . Nontopological saddle - splay and curvature instabilities from anisotropic membrane inclusions . Phys Rev Lett 1996 ; 76 : 4436 – 9 . [ 144 ] Bivas I , Meleard P . Bending elasticity and bending ﬂ uctuations of lipid bilayer containing an additive . Phys Rev E 2003 ; 67 : 012901 . [ 145 ] Ramaswamy S , Toner J , Prost J . Nonequilibrium ﬂ uctuations , travelling waves , and instabilities in active membranes . Phys Rev Lett 2000 ; 84 : 3494 – 7 . [ 146 ] Manneville JB , Bassereau P , Levy D , Prost J . Activity of transmembrane proteins in - duces magni ﬁ cation of shape ﬂ uctuations of lipid membranes . Phys Rev Lett 1999 ; 82 : 4356 – 9 . [ 147 ] Girard P , Prost J , Bassereau P . Passive or active ﬂ uctuations in membranescontain - ing proteins . Phys Rev Lett 2005 ; 94 : 088102 . [ 148 ] Nikolov V , Lipowsky R , Dimova R . Behavior of giant vesicles with anchored DNA molecules . Biophys J 2007 ; 92 : 4356 – 68 . [ 149 ] Lipowsky R . Bending of membranes by anchored polymers . Europhys Lett 1995 ; 30 : 197 – 202 . [ 150 ] Hiergeist C , Lipowsky R . Elastic properties of polymer - decorated membranes . J Phys II 1996 ; 6 : 1465 – 81 . [ 151 ] Ratanabanangkoon P , Gropper M , Merkel R , Sackmann E , Gast AP . Mechanics of streptavidin - coated giant lipid bilayer vesicles : a micropipet study . Langmuir 2003 ; 19 : 1054 – 62 . [ 152 ] Ratanabanangkoon P , Gropper M , Merkel R , Sackmann E , Gast AP . Two - dimensional streptavidin crystals on giant lipid bilayer vesicles . Langmuir 2002 ; 18 : 4270 – 6 . [ 153 ] Seeberger PH , Werz DB . Synthesis and medical applications of oligosaccharides . Nature 2007 ; 446 : 1046 – 51 . [ 154 ] Timiras P , Privat A , Giacobini E , Lauder J , Vernadakis A , Skaper S , et al . Monosialoganglioside GM1 and modulation of neuronal plasticity in CNS repair processes . Plasticity and regeneration of the nervous system , Vol . 296 . Springer US ; 1991 . p . 257 – 66 . [ 155 ] Fricke N , LipowskyR , DimovaR . In ﬂ uenceofGM1onthepropertiesofphospholip - id membranes . submitted . [ 156 ] Crowe JH , Crowe LM , Oliver AE , Tsvetkova N , Wolkers W , Tablin F . The trehalose myth revisited : Introduction to a symposium on stabilization of cells in the dry state . Cryobiology 2001 ; 43 : 89 – 105 . [ 157 ] Genova J , Zheliaskova A , Mitov MD . The in ﬂ uence of sucrose on the elasticity of SOPC lipid membrane studied by the analysis of thermally induced shape ﬂ uctua - tions . Colloids Surf A Physicochem Eng Asp 2006 ; 282 : 420 – 2 . [ 158 ] Vitkova V , Genova J , Mitov MD , Bivas I . Sugars in the aqueous phase change the me - chanicalpropertiesoflipidmono - andbilayers . MolCrystLiqCryst2006 ; 449 : 95 – 106 . [ 159 ] Genova J , Zheliaskova A , Mitov MD . Monosaccharides ( fructose , glucose ) and disaccharides ( sucrose , trehalose ) in ﬂ uence the elasticity of SOPC membranes . J Optoelectron Adv Mater 2007 ; 9 : 427 – 30 . [ 160 ] Genova J , Zheliaskova A , Mitov MD . Does maltose in ﬂ uence on the elasticity of SOPC membrane ? J Phys Conf Ser 2010 ; 253 : 012063 . [ 161 ] Andersen HD , Wang CH , Arleth L , Peters GH , Westh P . Reconciliation of opposing viewsonmembrane – sugarinteractions . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA2011 ; 108 : 1874 – 8 . [ 162 ] Dobereiner HG , Selchow O , Lipowsky R . Spontaneous curvature of ﬂ uid vesicles in - duced by trans - bilayersugarasymmetry . EurBiophys J Biophys Lett1999 ; 28 : 174 – 8 . [ 163 ] Boroske E , Elwenspoek M , Helfrich W . Osmotic shrinkage of giant egg - lecithin vesicles . Biophys J 1981 ; 34 : 95 – 109 . [ 164 ] Oglecka K , Sanborn J , Parikh AN , Kraut RS . Osmotic gradients induce bio - reminiscent morphological transformations in giant unilamellar vesicles . Front Physiol 2012 ; 3 . [ 165 ] Nagle JF , Jablin MS , Tristram - Nagle S , Akabori K . What are the true values of the bending modulus of simple lipid bilayers ? Submitted to Chemistry and Physics of Lipids ; 2014 . [ 166 ] Klasczyk B , Knecht V , Lipowsky R , Dimova R . Interactions of alkali metal chlorides with phosphatidylcholine vesicles . Langmuir 2010 ; 26 : 18951 – 8 . [ 167 ] Pabst G , Hodzic A , Strancar J , Danner S , Rappolt M , Laggner P . Rigidi ﬁ cation of neutral lipid bilayers in the presence of salts . Biophys J 2007 ; 93 : 2688 – 96 . [ 168 ] Petrache HI , Tristram - Nagle S , Harries D , Kucerka N , Nagle JF , Parsegian VA . Swelling of phospholipids by monovalent salt . J Lipid Res 2006 ; 47 : 302 – 9 . [ 169 ] Bouvrais H . Mechanical properties of giant vesicle membranes investigated by ﬂ ickering technique . PhD thesis Odense : University of Southern Denmark ; 2011 . [ 170 ] Klasczyk B . Interactions of ions with membranes . PhD thesis Potsdam : Potsdam University ; 2010 . [ 171 ] Riske KA , Dobereiner HG , Lamy - Freund MT . Comment on “ Gel - Fluid transition in dilute versus concentrated DMPG aqueous dispersions ” . J Phys Chem B 2003 ; 107 : 5391 – 2 . [ 172 ] Karatekin E , Sandre O , Guitouni H , Borghi N , Puech PH , Brochard - Wyart F . Cas - cades of transient pores in giant vesicles : line tension and transport . Biophys J 2003 ; 84 : 1734 – 49 . [ 173 ] McDonald GR , Hudson AL , Dunn SMJ , You HT , Baker GB , Whittal RM , et al . Bioactive contaminants leach from disposable laboratory plasticware . Science 2008 ; 322 : 917 . [ 174 ] Peiro - Salvador T , Ces O , Templer RH , Seddon AM . Buffers may adversely affect model lipid membranes : a cautionary tale . Biochemistry 2009 ; 48 : 11149 – 51 . [ 175 ] KoernerMM , PalacioLA , WrightJW , SchweitzerKS , RayBD , PetracheHI . Electrody - namics of lipid membrane interactions in the presence of zwitterionic buffers . Biophys J 2011 ; 101 : 362 – 9 . 10 R . Dimova / Advancesin Colloid and Interface Science xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Please cite this article as : Dimova R , Recent developments in the ﬁ eld of bending rigidity measurements on membranes , Adv Colloid Interface Sci ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cis . 2014 . 03 . 003