The Temporal Structure of Scientific Consensus Formation Uri Shwed a and Peter S . Bearman b Abstract This article engages with problems that are usually opaque : What trajectories do scientific de - bates assume , when does a scientific community consider a proposition to be a fact , and how can we know that ? We develop a strategy for evaluating the state of scientific contestation on issues . The analysis builds from Latour’s black box imagery , which we observe in scientific citation networks . We show that as consensus forms , the importance of internal divisions to the overall network structure declines . We consider substantive cases that are now consid - ered facts , such as the carcinogenicity of smoking and the non - carcinogenicity of coffee . We then employ the same analysis to currently contested cases : the suspected carcinogenic - ity of cellular phones , and the relationship between vaccines and autism . Extracting meaning from the internal structure of scientific knowledge carves a niche for renewed sociological commentary on science , revealing a typology of trajectories that scientific propositions may experience en route to consensus . Keywords sociology of science , consensus , black boxing , network analysis , citations When and how did we become certain that smoking causes cancer , coffee does not , and human activity is producing global cli - mate change ? Since the coining of scientific consensus as closure ( Pinch and Bijker 1984 ) , various branches of the sociology of science have made great strides in exposing its mechanisms ( e . g . , Collins 2004 ; Frickel and Moore 2006 ; Fujimura 1996 ; Gieryn 1996 ; Latour 1987 ; Shapin 1996 ; Star and Griesemer 1989 ) . Yet such studies fall short of providing a tool to monitor the formation of closure as consensus among relevant sci - entists . Existing work in this area is case spe - cific and limited with respect to comparative research . As such , it has yet to develop an analytic typology of possible patterns of con - sensus formation . This article offers a quantitative strategy to measure scientific consensus / contestation lev - els , which enables comparative research and thus extends the generalizability of the sociol - ogy of science . Such a measure may prove useful to scholars of innovation , and it pro - vides a new tool for anyone interested in network structures and their outcomes . Applying this strategy to several different cases , we identify three trajectories scientific a Ben Gurion University b Columbia University Corresponding Author : Uri Shwed , Department of Sociology and Anthropology , Ben Gurion University of the Negev , PO Box 653 , Beer - Sheva 84105 Israel E - mail : shwed @ bgu . ac . il American Sociological Review 75 ( 6 ) 817 – 840 (cid:2) American Sociological Association 2010 DOI : 10 . 1177 / 0003122410388488 http : / / asr . sagepub . com propositions assume on their way through contestation to consensus among practicing scientists : ( 1 ) spiral , in which substantive questions are answered and revisited at a higher level ; ( 2 ) cyclical , in which similar questions are revisited without stable closure ( Abbott 2001 ) ; and ( 3 ) flat , in which there is no real scientific contestation . This typology emerges from empirical analysis of controver - sies and offers terms for rapprochement between qualitative and quantitative analyses of science . Detecting consensus is not trivial , as some level of contestation is always present in sci - ence . Scholars dispute previous findings or point to literature gaps to establish their own footholds in the field ( Bourdieu 1975 ; Merton 1973 ) . This everyday , normative level of con - testation is benign , particularly compared with debates of epistemic rivalry , in which strongly entrenched camps disagree on core issues . 1 In contexts that harbor extra - scientific interests , such as the hazards of smoking , interested groups may exaggerate normative contesta - tion levels to claim that the extant scientific knowledge is inconclusive ( McCright and Dunlap 2000 ; Proctor and Schiebinger 2008 ) . An important contribution of science and technology studies ( STS ) is to make such political manipulation more transparent and harder to exercise ( Oreskes 2004a ) by delivering science to many publics ( Collins and Evans 2002 ; Latour 2004 ; Moore 1996 ) and delivering lay voices to science ( Epstein 1998 ; Jasanoff 2004 ; Rowe and Frewer 2005 ) . However , qualitative engagement with truth , rather than consensus , can only pass judgment after the fact . A third wave in the sociology of science seeks ways of assess - ing science and promoting informed policy discussions ( Collins and Evans 2007 ; Latour 2009 ; Weinel 2008 ) . This is the task we embark on here . The logic of the strategy we propose is rooted in Collins’s ( 1975 ) ‘‘bottled ships’’ metaphor , which Latour’s conception of black boxing elaborates : When a proposition is sta - ble ( i . e . , a consensual scientific proposition or a functioning machine ) , its internal elements are concealed . While a proposition is in the making and still contested , however , the inter - actions between its internal elements are visi - ble . We export this insight to the macro - structure of scientific citation networks and employ a network community - detection algo - rithm ( Leicht and Newman 2008 ) to evaluate the degree of internal divisions in scientific literatures . The analysis allows us to distin - guish epistemic rivalries from benign contes - tation : When different factions debate a scientific issue , they create distinct regions in a citation network . In epistemic rivalries , such network regions are a defining character - istic of a network’s structure . When consensus over an issue emerges ( and only benign con - testation remains ) , the salience of these re - gions to the overall network structure diminishes . To account for temporality , we develop a novel approach to answer Picker - ing’s ( 1993 ) critique that quantitative analyses are inherently ex - post in their relation to sci - ence . We unfold the emergent temporality of scientific debates by identifying a new prop - erty of such disputes : the relevant temporal length of scholarly interaction . By capturing the temporality of consensus formation , we discover that scientific literatures can follow three trajectories—spiral , cyclical , or flat . We apply our analysis strategy to four cases in which experts’ reports identify the timing of consensus accomplishment : the carcinogenicity of smoking , solar radiation , and coffee , as well as anthropogenic climate change . 2 A fifth validating case is the con - troversy regarding gravitational waves , which Harry Collins ( e . g . , 2004 ) studied extensively . Our analysis reveals consensus earlier than do expert evaluations . Having validated our measure compared with exist - ing authoritative mechanisms , we then apply the method to two additional cases of cur - rent relevance : Do cellular phones cause cancer , and do vaccinations cause autism ? We find that there is no real contestation within the scientific community about these questions . 818 American Sociological Review 75 ( 6 ) EXISTING LITERATURE Studying scientific consensus and closure is a major focus of recent work in the sociology of science . Different streams within the soci - ology of science expose how scientific con - sensus is not a direct consequence of new findings but is shaped by extra - scientific fac - tors such as culture ( Hess 1995 ) , power and funding ( Martin and Richards 1995 ) , politics ( Epstein 1998 ) , and personal credibility ( Leahey 2005 ; Shapin 1994 ) . In addition , consensus results from social processes within the core set of practicing scientists who negotiate results ( Collins 1974 , 1992 , 2004 ) , demarcate knowledge claims ( Gieryn 1999 ; Wynne 1996 ) , construct boundary ob - jects to conceal conflict ( Star and Griesemer 1989 ) , employ micro - politics of translation ( Latour 1987 ) , and fortify bandwagon practi - ces ( Fujimura 1996 ) . A next step is to develop a strategy that allows for easy com - parison across cases . Generally speaking , scholars identify con - sensus by immersing themselves in a cognitive scientific domain and then report their conclu - sions on the status of the field . Studies of sci - entific consensus thus leave its detection entirely in the hands of experts , be they practi - tioners of the issue under scrutiny or expert so - ciologists of science . Oreskes’s ( 2004b ) report of consensus on climate change offers one influential example . However , when deep understanding of each case is required merely to assess its consensus level , comparative research that sorts and qualifies the plethora of consensus forming mechanisms becomes difficult . The sociology of expertise suggests moving beyond expert filtration of knowledge by developing general rules to assess different expert claims ( Collins and Evans 2007 ; Wei - nel 2008 ) . In this article , we provide such a strategy using scientific products as data . Sociologists of science used to quantify consensus either by asking practitioners about it ( Biglan 1973 ; Hargens and Kellywilson 1994 ) , by journal rejection rates ( Hargens 1988 ; Hargens and Kellywilson 1994 ) , by ( inverse ) lengths of published abstracts , by cohesiveness of graduate training ( Ashar and Shapiro 1990 ) , or by agreement between dif - ferent reviewers of grant proposals ( Cole 1983 ) . These studies examine consensus lev - els in disciplines . Disciplines , however , are not the arenas of scientific progress ( Cole 1983 ; Kuhn 1970 ) . While detecting consensus in disciplines answers an interesting question , it is not the central concern here . Science ad - vances around sub - and multi - disciplinary puzzles , as evident by the breadth of contrib - utors to the report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC 2007 ) . Quantitative attempts at measuring scien - tific consensus on issues , rather than disci - plines , are rare ( Cole and Zuckerman 1975 ) . Following their lead , Evans ( 2007a ) recently analyzed discursive - consensus formation on subdebates ( which might proxy the substan - tive consensus we investigate ) . Overall , how - ever , Cole and Zukerman’s effort ended prematurely ( Wray 2005 ) . Before finding a meaningful measure of scientific consensus , sociologists stopped searching . This abandonment of the search for a con - sensus measure followed the emergence of the sociology of scientific knowledge ( SSK ) , which diverted attention from classic , Merto - nian sociology of science ( Zuckerman 1988 ) . SSK mastered a qualitative gaze into scientific knowledge . Classic sociologists of science sought a consensus measure because they were reluctant to engage with scientific con - tent . SSK and later scholars abandoned the search for a consensus measure because they had no reason to short circuit their engage - ment with domain knowledge . In doing so , SSK gave up on the manipulation of scale that makes comparative studies important and influential . Recent works from organizational theory and social movement research offer a system - atic examination of the dynamics of scientific claims and fields , as well as their effects on society ( see Frickel and Gross 2005 ; Frickel and Moore 2006 ; Owen - Smith and Powell 2008 ) . Such studies abandon the distinction Shwed and Bearman 819 between external and internal influences on science , revealing both as crucial . Science op - erates in a co - constitutive environment of or - ganizations and networks that is shaped by social , technical , and economic changes ( Po - well et al . 2005 ; Smith - Doerr , Manev , and Ri - zova 2004 ) , as well as by funding ( Evans 2007b ; Hess 2006 ) , geographical embedded - ness ( Whittington , Owen - Smith , and Powell 2009 ) , and a host of micro strategies ( Powell and Colyvas 2008 ) . Therefore , this tradition may benefit from our conceptualization of consensus . In this article , we supplement such investi - gations of ‘‘why we know’’ with a compara - tive framework to examine ‘‘when we know . ’’ We show that it is possible to time consensus and to compare it across cases without demanding domain expertise of the analyst . The focus on timing opens new ques - tions for organizational theory and the sociol - ogy of science . For science , the simplest of these—and perhaps the most important—is what do the trajectories of scientific proposi - tions look like ? BLACK BOXING FACTS How do we know when something is a fact ? Oreskes ( 2004b ) asserts that science should be evaluated by its inscriptions—that is , when an entire scientific literature agrees on something , we can treat it as a fact . Mak - ing such a claim requires domain - specific expertise . This demand hinders comparative research and introduces potential biases . Oreskes , for example , codes climate change publications into groups characterized as supportive , skeptical , and indifferent . It is not surprising that skeptics challenged her selection and coding schemes . By identifying a structural measure of consensus , we mini - mize experts’ discretion . Actor Network The - ory ( ANT ) shares this goal . Our theoretical model can be traced back to Collins’s ( 1974 ) idea that facts are like ships in bottles and we should study these ships / facts as they are being built ; that is , as a core set of practicing scientists transform several possible answers to a question into one correct and several erroneous answers ( Collins 2004 ) , where correct and erroneous reflect only an agreement in the scientific community at a given time , not some tran - scendental truth . Latour ( 1999 ) elaborated this notion into the broad ANT concept of black boxing and detailed what we may find in its formation process : A black box is an apparatus that conceals its internal elements , which are viewed only through inputs and out - puts ( Latour 1987 , 1999 ) . A working com - puter is a black box with a keyboard ( for inputs ) and a screen ( for output ) . Only when the computer malfunctions , or as it is assem - bled , can we see that it is really a network , tying together chips , magnets , service pro - viders , and so on . Similarly , the proposition ‘‘smoking causes cancer , ’’ stated today , needs no proof ; it works and is tied into a vast net - work of persons , substances , studies , and pol - icies . The entire epoch ( of statistical inference , tragic deaths , chemical processes , and genetics ) that once showed that smoking causes cancer is concealed . Its elaboration is no longer required because the proposition is connected to every cigarette carton and life insurance application . Its internal elements ( e . g . , chemicals and statistics ) already work together , so their connections do not require explication . Consensus formation is a black - boxing process : the weaving together of mul - tiple elements of scientific propositions until their internal divisions are well hidden . We can observe black boxing in citation networks , or more precisely , in representa - tions of scientific papers connected by cita - tions . Empirical and theoretical work suggests that citations most often signal agree - ment . 3 This probabilistic property induces identifiable areas in the citation network characterized by denser interactions—what can be identified as network communities— even when one is blind to citation type ( e . g . , favorable , opposing , or ceremonial ) . Conse - quently , the network structure that emerges from citation networks of contentious 820 American Sociological Review 75 ( 6 ) literatures is characterized by relatively segre - gated communities . Of course , communities are not completely segregated , as not all cita - tions are favorable . Yet both Merton’s and La - tour’s theories , as well as Hanney and colleagues’ ( 2005 ) findings , suggest that con - tentious literatures should exhibit a salient community structure . It follows that the salience of communities to a network’s typol - ogy is measurable ; a reduction in community salience of citation networks over time should point to consensus formation in the literature . In this article , our empirical task is to con - sider this proposition . After empirically show - ing that community salience measures consensus , we can identify patterns of consen - sus formation . The many insights on micro processes of consensus formation reviewed earlier provide little help for identifying the macro patterns of its formation over time . Mulkay , Gilbert , and Woolgar ( 1975 ) argue that there are three stages in the lives of prob - lem areas : exploration , in which unconnected scientists explore a new problem indepen - dently ; followed by unification , in which the explorers become the leaders of a unified , exponentially growing field ; and finally decline / displacement , caused by the institu - tionalization of the field , which restricts new discovery . In passing , Mulkay and colleagues argue that the unification stage may lead to a redefinition of the field , rather than to its decline or displacement . Our findings show that in Khunian normal science controversies , such as the carcinogenicity of solar radiation , Mulkay and colleagues’ model fits well . We call this a spiral pattern , in which many new questions pop up following the unification stage . A different pattern is evident for public controversies that are not really controversial among scientists , such as the carcinogenicity of coffee or the debate over autism and vac - cines . We call these controversies flat because they exhibit the same exponential growth of papers but with flat ( and low ) contestation levels . Finally , scientific controversies such as the carcinogenicity of tobacco exhibit the redefinition of the field mentioned by Mulkay and colleagues in passing . We call these con - troversies cyclical because they reveal how consensus forms , is destroyed , and is rebuilt again around different formulations of similar substantive questions . CONSENSUS AND COMMUNITY The strategy we develop in this article di - verges from previous work by focusing on papers without disciplinary boundaries . Most previous studies that attempt to mea - sure consensus deal with whole disciplines , and the few exceptions focus on a qualitative selection of a core set of scientists ( i . e . , au - thors ) that compose a sub - disciplinarian cog - nitive domain ( e . g . , Cole and Zuckerman 1975 ; Collins 1974 ) . By using papers as our focal units ( see elaboration below and in the online supplement [ http : / / asr . sagepub . com / supplemental ] ) , we avoid reducing pieces of knowledge into their authors’ dynamics or institutions 4 as we observe how the products of science—peer - reviewed papers—obtain verisimilitude ( Latour 1999 ) and become building blocks of a single prop - osition . Measures focusing on author degree or expert opinions are problematic because they select on authors , leading to loss of important information . If , for example , a cru - cial step in the black boxing of ‘‘smoking causes cancer’’ was a statistical innovation , simply following cancer scholars would never reveal it . Although it seems anti - intuitive , brief reflection indicates that when all papers about a subject are black - boxed together , their net - work structure is not defined by the presence of disjoint communities . When papers pro - mote the same views 5 and cite the same sour - ces , the science behind them is conclusive . It may turn out that this science was wrong , or that published consensus was a result of fiat , but regardless of the reasons behind consen - sus , the community structure of research liter - atures’ citation networks can reveal if the Shwed and Bearman 821 scientific questions that produced them are black boxed or contentious . Approaching the problem from this perspective allows us to develop a strategy for observing consensus formation in scientific literatures , without reli - ance on mediating experts’ interpretations . METHODS Since Price ( 1965 ) suggested that the degree distribution of citations could point to impor - tant papers and journals , network analysis has become prominent in evaluating jour - nals’ importance ( Garfield 1972 ) and induc - ing mappings of science ( Moody 2004 ) . Generally speaking , the strategies reflected in the network literature on citations take for granted predetermined categories ( e . g . , disciplines or journals ) and restrict analysis to a predetermined subset of the literature . This is unfortunate . As Figure 1 shows , citation networks are too complex to reveal anything by simple observation . The tools scholars have used to extract meaning from such graphs demand reduction and simplification , for example by removing infrequently cited pa - pers ( Small 2006 ) or predetermining the sample of authors ( Collins 2004 ) . Such automatic deletion distorts network meas - ures and gives citation indexes a critical level of importance . This assumption is not self - evident . If , for example , all papers cit - ing a specific paper in a network were never cited themselves , deleting them would hide this important finding . Our strategy also in - volves data reduction , but one that is data driven and analytic . We model the internal structure of citation networks to reveal con - sensus without classifying papers or authors into membership of different camps . Our measure enables agnosticism toward papers’ content because we extract meaning—that is , the contestation level of scientific debates—from the structure of the networks indexed by their organic community structure . Modularity as a Measure of Scientific Consensus In network terms , a community is a subset of a larger population where internal ties are more prevalent than ties to other subsets . In a network of asphalt roads , for example , communities are villages , cities , and states . In a network of scientific papers linked by ci - tations , communities are groups of papers that deal with the same issues and cite each other . Papers that agree are likely to cite each other much more than their protagonists ( Hanney et al . 2005 ) , giving rise to commu - nities of agreement . The simple intuition underlying our strategy is that when different communities are salient to the global struc - ture , the field is contentious . It follows that changes in a citation net - work’s community structure represent changes in consensus levels on an issue : Con - tentious networks are well defined by commu - nities , and consensual networks are not . Consensus formation exhibits a decline in community salience ; the literature produces a common , core community and many minis - cule communities ( e . g . , in the case of smoking and cancer , miniscule communities are popu - lated by studies that retain smoking as a con - trol variable when studying , say , the hazards of solar radiation ) . A consensual literature set is black boxed , and its internal divisions carry little structural meaning . Statistically , we measure this as the amount of information that communities carry regarding a network’s structure . In the current context , as a domain gains consensus , its citation network’s com - munity salience declines . 6 What does community salience mean , and how does one find communities ? Different methods are suitable for different cases ( Reichardt 2009 ) . Recently , Newman ( 2006 ) introduced a method for partitioning a network into communities by maximizing modularity . For a given network division , modularity compares the odds of within - community ties with these odds after a random rewiring of the network . If a division does not include 822 American Sociological Review 75 ( 6 ) more within - community ties than it would with random ties , it is an artifact of individual - level properties ( i . e . , degree distri - bution ) and harbors no further information about the structure . The division’s modularity in such a case is 0 . Modularity , then , measures the salience of communities for a given divi - sion . Maximizing this property is one way to get a division . Our focus is on the dynamics of commu - nity salience , so the partition that maximizes this property is appropriate for our purposes . Figure 2 presents some simple networks and their modularity scores and shows how mean - ingful internal groupings—groupings that are not defined by a node’s properties—increase modularity . Modularity maximization algorithms iden - tify an important network property : the maximal amount of information that groups carry about a network . We argue that maximal modularity—that is , modularity of the divi - sion obtained by modularity maximization —indexes community salience . If no partition of a network reveals much about it , communi - ties are not salient . Black boxing suggests that community salience—the importance of com - munities to the macro structure—is highest when a proposition is combating objection and lowest when it is consensual fact . When consensus on an issue arises and contestation levels decrease , modularity scores decrease too—which is what we observe . The contesta - tion we wish to reveal , however , is histori - cally - specific epistemic rivalries . Modularity does not distinguish between these and benign contestation . The course of professionaliza - tion in science , regardless of consensus , also Figure 1 . Citation Network of 4 , 276 Papers about Smoking and Cancer , 1920 to 1995 Note : The outside ring is populated by 906 isolated papers that do not cite other papers and were not cited by 1995 . Most of the network is connected in a large crowded component . Different graphic algo - rithms may draw this network differently , but it remains hard to extract meaning from such representations . Shwed and Bearman 823 creates salient network communities that modularity detects . Such benign contestation is a product of network size and reflects scien - tists’ struggles to establish their own niches in growing literatures . To discuss epistemic rivalries , we therefore scale raw modularity scores with a literature’s size ( see the online supplement ) . DATA So far , we have outlined a theoretical concept for thinking about consensus and a way to express it quantitatively . To show that our concept actually measures consensus , we consider five different cases and compare them with expert reports made in real time . Two of the cases we selected because they pertain to scientific issues that were once contentious but became consensual : smoking and cancer , and anthropogenic climate change . We supplement these with two cases that were historically less contentious—the carcinogenicity of solar radiation and coffee ( this was a case of consensus on a null find - ing , as the scientific community quickly exonerated coffee from suspicions of carci - nogenicity ) . Our fifth case provides an iconic example : the claim of gravitational waves , which has had an impressive history in SSK . These five cases validate our strategy across different periods , contexts , and scales . We then apply our strategy to the literatures about the possible carcinogenicity of cellular phones and the possible relationship between vaccinations and autism , both of which lack an authoritative expert report . This analysis suggests that scientists agree that vaccina - tions do not cause autism and that there is consensus on the inconclusiveness of science on cellular radiation . Media reports of these issues overrepresent minority views ( Boykoff and Boykoff 2004 ) . Using keywords , we define our cases by their cognitive domain rather than select on authors . For each case , we use specific Figure 2 . Modularity of Five Artificial Networks of Eight Nodes Note : Modularity is 0 for the two cases in the top panel . While the networks are very different , they have in common the fact that ties are completely dependent on individual properties . In the top panel , random rewiring would only reproduce the same network , and thus communities contribute no information about the network structure . When all ties in a network are within communities , as in the bottom - left network , modularity is high—random rewiring would allocate half of the ties in this case between com - munities , and the original state has all of them within communities , so modularity is . 5 . As more between - community ties are introduced in the original state ( in the two remaining examples ) modularity declines . 824 American Sociological Review 75 ( 6 ) keywords that define a cognitive domain to extract a comprehensive set of all papers in - dexed by ISI Web of Science . We selected keywords with the aim of including every rel - evant paper . For example , the keywords used to construct the ‘‘smoking and cancer’’ dataset are ( Smoking OR nicotine OR cigar * OR Tobacco ) AND ( cancer OR carci * ) . 7 Any paper about cancer and smoking is included . We limit the data to articles and reviews , forming a comprehensive set of peer - reviewed scientific works on a subject . Table 1 presents general properties of these datasets . As noted earlier , defining a cognitive domain by sampling core - set authors ( e . g . , Cole and Zukerman 1975 ; Collins 2004 ) or a broader set of contributing scientists ( Wei - nel 2008 ) may omit important parts of the domain . Our approach , on the other hand , is exposed to the danger of being over inclusive . Selecting only on keywords , we let in some irrelevant papers ( e . g . , Wallace [ 1994 ] dis - cusses carcinogenicity risk evaluation in pesti - cides , noting in the abstract that it is insignificant compared with tobacco ) . Our sense is that inclusion is superior to the risk of exclusion because our method is robust to noise . Theoretically , no other criteria can define a cognitive domain with more accuracy than the terms used by the papers ( indeed , Wallace’s paper takes for granted tobacco’s carcinogenicity , maintaining the consensus ) . If a paper is irrelevant , it will not connect to other relevant papers and will have no effect on the modularity score . Our approach is not immune to deliberate manipulation ( e . g . , con - structing a literature with the keywords ‘‘baby’’ and ‘‘murder’’ and reporting it as a set about abortions ) , but no data collection method is . Our approach , however , is easy to assess through evaluation of keywords . Fur - thermore , a sensitivity analysis shows that ( honest ) changes in keyword selection do not change the results ( see the online supplement ) . Using Garfield’s HistCite (cid:3) software , we generated a graph representation of the data and further modified it in R ( Csardi and Nepusz 2006 ; R Development Core Team 2008 ) to account for temporality , as described below . We then evaluated the salience of community structure over time using the Leicht and Newman ( 2008 ) algorithm , which adds directionality to Newman’s ( 2006 ) algorithm . MODELING TIME Our effort is inherently historical ; we try to answer Pickering’s ( 1993 ) call to understand science in its temporal unfolding . We seek the critical years in which , and the dynamic patterns by which , propositions were black boxed from contentious to consensual litera - tures . Our modeling of time is critical ; we need to be sensitive to new developments without neglecting old papers that remain rel - evant . Our method relies on published pa - pers , which produces a latency period from the moment a discovery is made to its journal publication . How can we define scientific knowledge at a given moment ? Observing only the latest research severs ties to old papers , while observing all previous research greatly ex - tends the latency period . Common strategies are a cumulative approach ( e . g . , Leicht et al . 2007 ) , a cross - sectional method ( e . g . , Cole and Zuckerman 1975 ) , or a moving window strategy ( e . g . , Small 2006 ) that uses sliding , fixed - width observation win - dows . The latter two methods ignore cita - tions to older papers and require an analyst to predetermine either discrete periods or a uniform observation width . By predeter - mining these properties , an analyst imposes an ex - post view of the field ( Pickering 1993 ) . Moreover , these strategies ignore the fact that some papers are more reachable than others , and that this difference in acces - sibility is itself time variant ( Evans 2008 ) . To properly account for temporal unfolding , we need a mechanism to model window width for each point in time . A meaningful observation period improves the moving window approach by determining Shwed and Bearman 825 T ab l e 1 . P r o p o s iti o n s a nd D a t a s e t s V a li d a ti o n C a s e s C u rr e n t C o n t r ov e r s i e s C a s e C o ff ee i s C a n ce r o u s S o l a r R a d i a ti o n i s C a n ce r o u s G r a v it a ti o n a l W a v e s S m ok i n g i s C a n ce r o u s A n t h r o p o ge n i c C li m a t e C h a n ge V acc i n a ti o n s C a u s e A u ti s m M ob il e Ph o n e s a r e C a n ce r o u s A r ti c l e s ( n o d e s ) 1 , 544 4 , 009 5 , 113 8 , 872 9 , 432 245 622 C it a ti o n s ( e d ge s ) 5 , 569 17 , 190 26 , 413 38 , 920 30 , 478 1 , 358 4 , 505 T i m e Sp a n ’ 39 - ’ 08 ’ 14 - ’ 05 ’ 13 - ’ 09 ’ 20 - ’ 00 ’ 75 - ’ 08 ’ 76 - ’ 09 ’ 93 - ’ 09 S ea r c h S t r i n g ( C o ff ee O R ca ff e i n e ) AN D ( C a n ce r O R ca r c i * ) ( Sun O R s o l a r O R ph o t o O R ‘ ‘ U V r a d i a ti o n ’’ O R t a nn i n g ) AN D ( ca n ce r O R ca r c i * O R m e l a n o m a O R s a r c o m a O R b a s a l ) ‘‘ G r a v it a ti o n a l w a v e s ’’ O R ‘‘ g r a v it a ti o n a l r a d i a ti o n ’’ ( s ee C o lli n s 2004 : 1826 ) ( T ob acc o O R c i ga r * O R n i c o ti n e O R s m ok i n g ) AN D ( ca n ce r o r ca r c i * ) ( G l ob a l W a r m i n g O R c li m a t * ) AN D ( G r ee n h o u s e e ff ec t O R G r ee n h o u s e ga s * O R a n t h r o p o ge n i c ) A u ti s * AN D V acc i n * ( C e ll u l a r O R m ob il e ) AN D ( Ph o n e * o r t e l e ph o n e * ) AN D ( ca n ce r O R C a r c i * O R t u m o r O R b r a i n ) T o p C it e d ; Y ea r 3 , 348 ; 1991 970 ; 2001 1 , 256 ; 1962 2 , 336 ; 1991 1 , 246 ; 1999 549 ; 1998 182 ; 2001 M e d i a n C it a ti o n s 15 14 7 21 6 8 7 826 window width from the changing structure of citations . We call this the dynamic window approach . For each year Y , we note a distribu - tion of citation - ages , defined as the difference between Y and the year of publication of each paper cited in Y . The median of this distribu - tion serves as window width for year Y . 8 We then define every paper published within the width years from Y as a focal paper , relevant for the year at the end of the window . We include older papers that are still cited by any focal paper to keep influential papers in our analysis , regardless of their age ; we do not include the papers cited by these older pa - pers . For example , of all citations made in pa - pers about smoking hazards published in 1987 , the median citation - age is 4 . The dynamic network for 1987 , then , contains all papers published from 1984 to 1987 , and all the papers they cited , regardless of year . This procedure is superior to cross - sectional and fixed - width window approaches because its observation window is theoretically justi - fied and sensitive to the varying time frames of scientific activity . To demonstrate the advantage of dynamic windows over the cumulative approach , we mimic Leicht and colleagues ( 2007 ) . They calculated authority scores 9 for each court rul - ing ( paper ) , pointing to its importance in the network ( Kleinberg 1999 ) , and plotted the mean age of top authorities over time . For each year Y , we calculate the mean difference between Y and the publication years of the top 15 authorities , derived from the cumulative network and from our dynamic approach . In years that the set of top authorities is unchanged , mean age increases by one . A smaller increase , or a decline , signifies that new papers became authoritative . If the mean age rises by more than one , older papers that were not authoritative are rediscovered as such . Figure 3 displays this analysis for cumula - tive and dynamic windows in two cases—the carcinogenicity of tobacco and coffee . In the top panels , triangles represent the cumulative approach , and circles represent our dynamic windows . The Y - axis reports mean age of the set of top authorities . The bottom panels simply show the slopes of the top panels , to highlight changes . Dark bars signal the cumu - lative approach , and clear bars represent dynamic windows . In both cases , the cumula - tive networks ( represented by triangles ) reveal early lock - in on a set of authorities . 10 Relying on cumulative networks , one would conclude that no major shifts occurred in the research on coffee and cancer since 1984 , and in research on smoking and cancer since 1953 . The latter , of course , is false . Dynamic window networks , represented by circles and empty bars , tell a different story : These networks reveal critical points in which the set of top authorities as discussed in a spe - cific year change . With respect to smoking , dynamic windows show an exuberant litera - ture , evident by the changing slopes in the empty bars . Here we see that the set of top authorities was stable in only 3 of 53 years . This is not an artifact of the modeling struc - ture . In sluggish literatures , like the carcinoge - nicity of coffee , the dynamic windows approach reports similar results to the cumula - tive approach . Our modeling also produces a relevant variable for future studies—the real - time meaningful observation period—and thus answers the critique that quantitative analyses of science are inherently ex - post . They need not be . RESULTS We test whether scientific consensus forma - tion is observable as a reduction in the com - munity salience of propositions’ citation networks , measured by the network modular - ity score , scaled for size . When communities are no longer a defining characteristic of a citation network , the network works together as a black box ( compared to a past state of contestation ) . To examine this idea , we present scaled modularity dynamics of five sets of scientific literatures , comparing modularity drops to expert reports 11 for Shwed and Bearman 827 calibration . We use monographs of the Inter - national Agency for Research on Cancer ( IARC ) , an agency of the World Health Organization , as indicators of scientific con - sensus regarding suspected carcinogens . 12 Likewise , the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) supplies a consensus indicator regarding climate change . For con - troversies surrounding gravitational waves , we rely on Collins’s ( 2004 ) extensive analy - sis of the field . We start with a simple case to illustrate the analysis framework : the proposition , rejected by experts , that coffee causes cancer . This issue was never really contested , and we expect modularity to be low throughout the proposition’s history . The other cases examine modularity trends vis - a ` - vis experts’ consensus Figure 3 . Top 15 Authorities across Time : Cumulative and Dynamic Time Frames Note : The top panels plot the mean age of the top - 15 ranking papers on Kleinberg ( 1999 ) authority scores . Triangles represent the cumulative approach , and circles represent dynamic windows . The bot - tom panels show the slopes of the top figures , with shaded bars for cumulative networks and empty bars for windowed networks . When the top authorities are fixed , each passing year increases their mean age by one year , and the slope is one . A naive cumulative conception of passing time produces the appearance of lock - in on leaders once a network is larger than the set size ( 15 ) . Dynamic moving windows that capture papers relevant to a specific period ( represented by circles and empty slope bars ) reveal the difference between the cases . The literature on smoking and cancer shows many turn - ing points , likely reversing significant contestation . The research on coffee and cancer is stable over time , maintaining its consensus . 828 American Sociological Review 75 ( 6 ) declarations : carcinogenicity of solar radia - tion ( IARC 1992 ) , gravitational waves ( Collins 2004 ) , tobacco’s carcinogenicity ( IARC 1986 ; U . S . Surgeon General 1964 ) , and anthropogenic climate change ( IPCC 2007 ) . Figure 4 presents modularity analy - ses , noting the timing of experts’ consensus declarations vis - a ` - vis our analysis . Note that modularity trends are driven nei - ther by time ( or any time - dependent process , such as online archiving ) nor by the number of papers in a window ( N ) . 13 This is evident in the simple case of coffee and cancer . Coffee is not cancerous ; this was never hotly debated . We thus expect the figure to show a flat pattern of consensus formation . The solid line in Panel A presents modular - ity scores for the coffee and cancer literature with the number of papers represented by the dashed line . Except for a steep decline between 1984 and 1987 , as the literature grew to more than 30 papers , the trend is sta - ble and hovers around . 1 , even as the number of papers increases . In 1991 , the IARC lumped coffee with several other drinks , announcing they are not carcinogenic ( IARC Figure 4 . Epistemic Rivalry , Size , and Expert Reports in Five Validating Cases Note : The dashed line refers to the number of papers in the dynamic window and to the logarithmic right - hand - side - axis . The solid line refers to the level of epistemic rivalry , estimated as the modularity score scaled for logged network size , on the left - hand - side - axis . The bars show years in which critical expert committees published a consensus report , or , in panel C , the years Collins identifies as marking the end of controversy and the emergence of consensus . Shwed and Bearman 829 1991 ) . The trend and level show no epistemic rivalry since 1985 and are driven by neither time nor N . Panel B considers the proposition that solar radiation causes cancer . At the outset , this case seems to represent normal science— scholars find that the sun causes cancer and then disseminate that knowledge . We expect modularity trends to follow what we call a spiral—some initial epistemic rivalry is quickly resolved , and scholars then move to secondary questions . This leads to increasing numbers of papers linked to a common core , keeping modularity low . The history of skin cancer research confirms this interpretation . In the early 1980s , this literature was conten - tious and its network structure was well defined by communities , with scaled modular - ity fluctuating around . 15 with a peak of . 19 in 1985 . Subsequently , modularity dropped , following a large - scale study relating mela - noma to sun exposure ( Elwood et al . 1985 ) . By 1992 , scaled modularity levels dropped to . 1 . We view such a significant decline over several years as consensus formation . That year , the IARC published its first report on solar radiation , stating sufficient evidence for carcinogenicity . In 1997 , the IARC updated its report with evidence of carcinogenicity of tanning lamps . Note that marked drops in modularity preceded both expert reports . The case of gravitational waves further val - idates modularity as a consensus index . Schol - ars of gravitational waves debate whether and which of their observation tools may detect the waves of gravitational energy emitted from distant astronomical events . This case , recorded by Collins ( 2004 ) , allows one to track periods of relative consensus or contes - tation . Our analysis shows ( see Panel C ) that the history of gravitational waves had three periods of declining epistemic rivalry , in which consensus was formed : 1966 to 1969 , 1970 to 1976 , and 1992 to 1997 , each marked by a steep and consistent decrease in modular - ity scores . The earlier periods are followed by a significant rise in scaled modularity , signaling contestation , while the consensus obtained in the last period is maintained . According to Collins ( 2004 ) , the field underwent three major shifts : from attempts to measure gravitational waves with metal bars , to the use of cryogenic devices , and finally to expensive interferometers . Panel C maps well to these shifts . The first period 14 of decreasing modularity ( from . 14 in 1966 to . 12 in 1969 ) corresponds to the first experi - ments conducted by Joseph Weber , which consolidated the field of experimental gravita - tional waves . The reaction to Weber’s papers instigated the controversy that occupied Col - lins’s early publications on the field and is apparent in the increase of scaled modularity from 1969 to 1971 ( to . 16 ) . Collins ( 2004 ) argued recently that this closure was clear by 1975 , although he did not know it in real time . Our approach suggests that contestation decreased after 1971 and reached its local low ( . 1 ) by 1976 . Collins ( 2004 ) calls the follow - ing period ( late 1970s to late 1990s ) ‘‘the bar wars’’—a dispute over the use of cryo - genic bars versus interferometers . Scaled modularity fluctuates between . 1 and . 12 in that period . Collins ( 2004 ) does not clearly state when this debate ended , although he points to the National Science Foundation review of 1996 . We observe closure signs as early as 1992 , when modularity declined and reached below . 1 in 1995 . Across the board , our analysis of changing contestation levels is consistent with Collins’s narrative . Questions of smoking and climate change ( see Panels D and E ) are intrinsically more interesting because while experts today believe these propositions are true , they used to be very contested and were riddled with claims of inconclusive science ( McCright and Dunlap 2000 ; Samet and Burke 2001 ) . These cases are central to the concept of agno - tology—that is , industries’ deliberate hin - drance of science ( Proctor and Schiebinger 2008 ) . Absent structural analysis , timing con - sensus formation on the hazards of smoking would likely point to 1964 and the first Sur - geon General report , or 1986 , when three 830 American Sociological Review 75 ( 6 ) major reports were published by the IARC ( 1986 ) , Surgeon General Koop ( USDHHS 1986 ) , and the National Academy of Sciences ( NAS ) ( 1986 ) . Timing climate change consen - sus , one would likely point to the IPCC’s ( 2007 ) fourth report or Oreskes’s ( 2004b ) paper that surveyed all relevant abstracts . Our approach identifies consensus earlier , refuting claims of inconclusive science and revealing that the cases are different . Panel D presents analysis of the proposi - tion that smoking causes cancer . This is the iconic cyclical case . Despite huge research ef - forts , consensus was hard to form . Early claims of carcinogenicity ( e . g . , Wynder , Gra - ham , and Croninger 1953 ) spiked fierce debate ; scaled modularity rose to . 13 by 1958 , only to drop to . 08 by 1964 . Looking at modularity trends , one could identify con - sensus as early as 1961 based on the continu - ous decline . Indeed , in 1962 the Royal Academy of Physicians declared that tobacco is carcinogenic , and in two years the U . S . Sur - geon General ( 1964 ) joined this assessment . Following the Surgeon General’s report , con - sensus was shattered . Modularity ascended from 1965 through the early 1980s and re - mained high even as it fluctuated . Here we can observe a combative literature , with research funded in part by the public and in part by tobacco companies . Historical ac - counts describe the period as a series of battles ( Brandt 1998 ) , which inspires our metaphor of a cyclical pattern . The question of tobacco’s carcinogenicity was answered and reopened in different formulations , such as the possibil - ity of safe cigarettes and the role of nicotine . Historians argue that the Koop ( USDHHS 1986 ) and the NAS ( 1986 ) reports resolved the conflict , showing that smoking kills non - smokers . Starting in 1981 ( when the first study to show the hazards of secondhand smoke was published ) , scaled modularity began to sharply drop , from . 15 to . 12 in 1985 . Kabat ( 2008 ) describes how hazards of secondhand smoke remained controversial after the 1986 report , creating the need for the 1992 EPA report . By then , scaled modularity was at . 1 . As with gravitational waves , modularity analysis conveys the gen - eral pattern of historians’ account but identi - fies nascent consensus somewhat earlier . The climate change case ( see Panel E ) re - veals that scientific contestation was evident only until the early 1990s . While the public representation of this debate suggests it is sim - ilar to the tobacco case , Oreskes ( 2004b ) shows that the scientific community reached consensus as early as 1993 . We can observe earlier dynamics : Between 1986 and 1990 , scaled modularity was relatively high , show - ing a significant , stable , but not ultimate decline toward 1992 . IPCC’s ( 1992 ) early report states consensus on climate change but not on its anthropogenic causes , which is not stated until the IPCC’s ( 1995 ) second report , at which point scaled modularity drops below . 1 , echoed in 2001 and 2007 . Our re - sults reject the claim of inconclusive science on climate change and identify the emergence of consensus earlier than previously thought . Given the weight of this case in illustrations of political interventions in science , it is note - worthy that its scientific representation , derived solely from peer - reviewed articles , re - sembles the spiral pattern of cases like skin cancer far more than cyclical cases such as the hazards of smoking . Two Currently Contested Cases The patterns reported in Figure 4 support the idea that the community salience of scientific citation networks describes their epistemic rivalries . To validate the approach , we com - pared it with traditional ways of declaring consensus . Having validated it , we can now use our method to describe cases that still seem contested . Figure 5 presents analysis for the propositions that mobile phones’ radi - ation is cancerous ( Panel A ) and that vacci - nations cause autism ( Panel B ) . With respect to the proposition that cell phones cause cancer , Panel A shows relatively high scaled modularity of . 15 in 1997 . Since Shwed and Bearman 831 then , the literature is characterized by a fairly steady decrease in scaled modularity , reaching . 09 in 2004 and decreasing since . Recall that our strategy measures consensus but does not point to its substance . For that , we exam - ine abstracts of influential papers . By 2004 , most authorities found no significant cancer - ous effects of mobile phones ( e . g . , Wakeford 2004 ) . This particular literature is remarkably cordial ; the few studies that find effects admit their methodological problems , while the majority that do not find effects argue that more research is needed . Neither side conclu - sively argues that the issue is proven . Our re - sults suggest that this case has been consensual since 2002 . The prevailing repre - sentation in the field , exemplified by the com - prehensive INTERPHONE study ( Cardis et al . 2010 ) , is that the science remains inconclu - sive . Yet , in opposition to some media repre - sentations of the subject that portray this inconclusiveness as an epistemic rivalry ( e . g . , Figure 5 . Epistemic Rivalries and Literatures’ Size in Two Publicly Contested Cases Note : The dashed line refers to the number of papers in the dynamic window and to the logarithmic right - hand - side - axis . The solid line refers to the level of epistemic rivalry , estimated as the modularity score scaled for logged network size , on the left - hand - side - axis . Scaled modularity levels in the debate regarding the carcinogenicity of cellular phones decrease until 2004 from . 15 to . 09 and are more stable since . The scientific discussion of vaccinations as a cause of autism was never contested , as scaled mod - ularity levels are very low , between . 06 and . 07 throughout the research period . 832 American Sociological Review 75 ( 6 ) Ketcham 2010 ) , our analysis indicates that the scientific consensus is that no proof for cellu - lar radiation hazards has been identified . The contestation tapped by journalists is entirely benign contestation , while the scientists who find no hazards of cellular radiation argue themselves that more research is needed . Turning to Panel B where we consider the risk of autism posed by the triple vaccination for Measles , Mumps , and Rubella ( MMR ) , it is evident that the scientific community has consensus refuting the relationship . Yet anec - dotal information from parents of children with autism generates strong sentiment in many lay communities that vaccines are caus - ally related to autism . In the case of cellular phones , doubt about the scientific consensus , or belief that it may soon change , may lead in - dividuals to stop using them with few implica - tions aside from one’s social life . In the case of MMR vaccinations and autism , however , doubts about the scientific consensus lead in - dividuals to withdraw from vaccinations , risk - ing the loss of herd immunity for diseases once largely eradicated from the developing world ( Glanz et al . 2009 ; Jansen et al . 2003 ; Salathe and Bonhoeffer 2008 ; Smith et al . 2008 ) . As with other contested issues that are not really contested—for example , the effectiveness of abstinence pledges and DARE programs—identifying when science has got the story right may have important policy implications . DISCUSSION This article provides a new way of measuring scientific consensus . We suggested that con - sensus formation is a form of black boxing , traceable as a decline in the community salience of citation networks . Along the way , we developed a new approach to tem - porality in citation networks . Measuring community salience as modularity , we distin - guish between the component of community salience created by normal fragmentation and specialization , which we name benign contestation , and the epistemic rivalries that are the substance of severe contestation and around which consensus forms . The former is a product of the literatures’ size , while we show that the latter identifies consensus in accordance with expert evaluations . We then analyzed two still - contested cases and revealed emerging ( or consistent ) consensus . Since 2004 , the literature on cellular phone hazards has been consensual . Regarding the idea that MMR vaccinations cause autism , our analysis reveals that this issue has never carried any scientific contestation . While our interpretation of the results pro - vides excellent fit with existing evaluations , there is no single ahistorical decisive empirical threshold between consensus and contestation . Reifying any value to identify such a threshold would be ill advised , as our tool requires sensi - tivity to different citation styles , literature sizes , and periods . The results suggest that a ratio of . 1 between raw modularity and logged network size may provide a useful rule of thumb . But just as blind adherence to the . 05 threshold for statistical significance leads to substantive nonsense in interpreting relationships between variables in extremely large datasets , judgment is necessary here , as well , to make substan - tively meaningful statements . In these analyses , some consensus formation processes did not always remain below . 1 . For example , scien - tific discussion on the carcinogenicity of coffee hovers on either side of . 1 after 1985 . Like other analyses ( e . g . , Bhutani , Johnson , and Si - vieri 1999 ) , marking a threshold of . 1 does not mean that coherent literatures with scaled mod - ularity of . 09 are always consensual , and those with . 11 are always contested . One should focus on the trend and the context more than the number . A quantitative measure of scientific con - sensus reinstates a sociological niche in the field defined by science policy analysts on the one hand and STS scholars on the other . We utilize different approaches . Following Oreskes , we seek consensus in scientific in - scriptions ; following Latour and Collins , we model consensus as black boxing and show Shwed and Bearman 833 that internal divisions are observable in cita - tion networks as competing communities . Noting the unified structural implication of Merton’s and Latour’s theories of citations , we offer a structural measure of real - time sci - entific consensus , with a minimal latency period induced mostly by journal response time . We depart from ANT and SSK’s quali - tative empirical orientation and subject their insights to quantitative modeling , enabling us to evaluate consensus within arcane scien - tific fields . The utility of our approach is evident merely by considering the scope of the scien - tific issues considered , covering a century of research in several different disciplines . Mod - ularity trends not only identify transition peri - ods but also show that scientific literatures adapt to new findings quickly . In cases previ - ously considered by science scholars , the quantitative trends fit the narrative reports . Scientific findings such as modularity never completely speak for themselves . A new method cannot be calibrated without external judgments . Our validation of the analysis presented here has two potential sour - ces of bias . The first is minor : the choice of the IARC and the IPCC as calibration meas - ures . Other benchmarks may exist . The sec - ond source of bias is more challenging : populating the dataset by analyst’s keywords selection . As discussed earlier , this has the advantage of defining a cognitive domain through its substance . It is also robust across different formulations ( see the online supple - ment ) , but like any method it is at risk to mal - feasance . The deepest challenge arises from the fact that a change in science induces change in nomenclature . For scientific contes - tation dynamics operating over the long term , sensitivity to shifting keywords is critical . Public Understanding and the Sociology of Science One of the many virtues of contemporary STS and Public Understanding of Science ( PUS ) studies is their attention to different mechanisms that may limit the scope of our strategy . Consensus may emerge if one side of a controversy strategically changes its lan - guage ( Simon 2002 ) , or consensus may veil contestation by actors with no access to peer - reviewed journals ( Wynne 1996 ) . For PUS scholars , scrutinizing science is only a part of scrutinizing the public engagement with science ( Nelkin 1995 ) . Our strategy is limited to peer - reviewed journals . It is by no means a panacea to scrutinizers of sci - ence . It could , however , help PUS scholars evaluate the academic side of their story . For example , for issues such as climate change and smoking , where scholars argue that a minority of hired experts created a dis - torted view of the scientific literature , our strategy may offer a precautionary com - ment . 15 Future studies might implement our strategy for the blogosphere , extending it beyond peer - reviewed papers . Determining scientific consensus without relying on structural tools typically required expert knowledge . We do not aim at rendering experts obsolete ; rather , we offer a comple - mentary strategy designed to help experts and their audiences . In the future , our approach could be refined , implemented in online search engines , and used by everyone . By allowing anyone to define a literature and assess its dynamics quantitatively , sociol - ogy can partake in the effort to make science public and more democratic . Patterns of Consensus Formation Assessing consensus , of course , has nothing to do with ‘‘the truth . ’’ It is thus encouraging to find that when consensus is achieved , net - works grow exponentially . More studies are published in peer - reviewed journals that use the keywords attached to the recent consen - sus . Evans ( 2007a ) shows that discursive consensus increases scientific production . This anti - intuitive claim comes into clear focus here : If consensus was obtained with 834 American Sociological Review 75 ( 6 ) fragile evidence , it will likely dissolve with growing interest , which is what happened at the onset of gravitational waves research . If consensus holds , it opens secondary ques - tions for scrutiny . This observation gives rise to the three different trajectories of sci - entific propositions—what we call flat , spi - ral , and cyclical . It seems trivial that some people do not drink coffee for fear of cancer , even though the scientific community considers coffee to be a non - carcinogen ( see Figure 4 , Panel A ) ; the belief that MMR vaccinations cause autism ( see Figure 5 , Panel B ) , however , which leads some people to reject vaccination for their children , is not trivial . Despite this difference , both cases show no epistemic rivalry . The world of flat science can mean two main things . In the coffee case there is no coherent research agenda . The coincidence of coffee and cancer in papers is largely the accidental byproduct of large research efforts in cancer and coffee respectively . Contention around the carcinogenicity of coffee does not arise ( IARC 1991 ) , and articles cite other articles seemingly at random . By contrast , the scientific flatness around vaccinations and autism is different—here science speaks with a single voice in opposition to a lay critique . The drive to new studies arises exogenously , but there is no real debate . Articles that refute the connection cite other similar articles . Here too , as a consequence , communities of conten - tion within science fail to arise . The propositions that the sun causes can - cer , people cause climate change , and mobile phones do not cause cancer unfold in a spiral trajectory . In spiral trajectories , initially intense contestation generates rapid settlement and induces a spiral of new questions to which scientists become oriented . Here the settle - ments of earlier contestation provide scaffold - ing for new communities of research . Consequently , the modularity of the founda - tional question—do people cause climate change , for example—remains low because the communities of contestation organized around secondary issues are bridged through citation to a historically evolving core of accepted knowledge . This spiral conforms to our cultural ideal of science in which scien - tists are left to their own devices . The drive to new research arises endogenously , as if a Kuhnian machine were operating just as it should . The case of smoking and cancer looks like Abbott’s ( 2001 ) description of the social sci - ences—a constant return to initial states . Each reduction in contestation levels was fol - lowed by reoccurring contestation—on the same plane , reformulating the same issue of public interest . In cyclic trajectories , refram - ing requires new consensus formation , align - ments , and goal settings . This trajectory—in the case of smoking and cancer it was sus - tained for years around the controversial quest for safer cigarettes—eventually transitioned to a spiral pattern around secondhand smoke in the 1980s . One further sociological insight that our analysis emphasizes is unanticipated differen - ces between cases—for example , between tobacco’s carcinogenicity and climate change . Qualitative analyses of each in tandem are rare because of the expertise required to ana - lyze them . The few attempts at comparison frame both cases similarly—as cases in which powerful groups created public doubts in oth - erwise consensual science ( Michaels 2006 ; see also Proctor and Schiebinger 2008 ) . Our analysis , by contrast , clearly shows that the formation of consensus took different paths : Climate change followed a spiral trajectory , while tobacco research was ( for most of its history ) trapped in a cycle of persistent repeti - tion . Scientific consensus in this literature was solidified only in the late 1980s , more than half a century after initial evidence was pub - lished . Early consensus on tobacco’s carcino - genicity formed in 1959 to 1964 and led to the controversial search for a safer cigarette . Sci - entific consensus on climate change , on the other hand , formed in the early 1990s as evi - dence was still being gathered . Our findings suggest that commentators on these cases should be aware of the different pathways Shwed and Bearman 835 agnotology takes . Tobacco firms directly in - vested in scientific research ( Bero 2003 ) , while climate change skeptics used the media and political office holders to cultivate doubt ( Jacques , Dunlap , and Freeman 2008 ) . Both strategies are effective in creating contestation —in the short run . Our research strategy first asked the ques - tion—are the dynamics of consensus forma - tion the same across these hotly contested propositions—and then answered it . Hope - fully , development of approaches like ours within the sociology of science will lead us out of the cycle of persistent repetition by identifying new problems and new answers . Acknowledgments Comments from the editors of ASR , anonymous re - viewers , and Harry Collins , Jonathan Cole , Gil Eyal , Bruno Latour , Douglas White , Balazs Vedres , Shamus Khan , Dan Lainer - Voss , Martha Poon , Rozlyn Redd , Dan Navon , William McAllister , and participants of the Lazarsfeld - Mellon interdisciplinary workshop and SUNBELT have greatly improved previous drafts . We thank Elizabeth Leicht and Mark Newman for their invaluable help in implementing the algorithm . Funding Support for this project came from the Paul Lazarsfeld Center for the Social Sciences , the Andrew Mellon Foundation , and the NIH Director’s Pioneer Award pro - gram , part of the NIH Roadmap for Medical Research , through grant number 1 DP1 OD003635 - 01 . Notes 1 . The distinction between benign contestation and epistemic rivalries harkens back to Kuhn’s ( 1970 ) distinction between normal science and periods of crisis / revolution . Whereas Kuhn’s focus is on dif - ferent periods , we distinguish between forms of contestation that co - exist temporally . 2 . At this time , consensus holds that smoking and solar radiation cause cancer and that humans are causing climate change . In Sleeper ( 1973 ) , Woody Allen wakes up in a future where the consensus is that smoking improves health . This article is concerned with understanding when scientific consensus is es - tablished , not if it is true in some absolute way . 3 . Merton ( 1957 ) suggests that citations are acts of debt payment , following a market metaphor . Latour ( 1987 ) argues that citations are rhetorical acts of mobilization , following a military metaphor . For current purposes , both lead to the same conclusion : citations are more likely to signal agreement ( shown empirically in Hanney et al . 2005 ) . 4 . Of course , papers have a life of their own . For example , while Merton never explicitly argued that sociology of science should avoid analyzing knowledge , his 1973 book was read in this manner , and the string ‘‘Merton ( 1973 ) ’’ was used to assert this ( Hargens 2004 ) . Reducing knowledge to its practitioners is not solely the vice of Mertonians . SSK added knowledge to the study of scientists , but they accept knowledge only as a property of a human actor . This view prevails in contemporary studies of expertise as Collins and Evans ( 2007 ) and Weinel ( 2008 ) indicate . 5 . Community salience is also low when papers do not promote the same views but discuss different things and have little to do with each other . The nature of the data suggests that this too signals consensus . 6 . While we reached this idea via Latour , it can be framed in Kuhnian ( 1970 ) terms , as the emergence of a paradigm , or in Lakatosian ( 1970 ) terms , that is , in new research programs that have yet to develop a core , auxiliary hypotheses form separate communi - ties . When science matures , practitioners agree on a core and community demarcations dissolve . 7 . Ending a word with a * means that all characters following the previous string are accepted . Key - words are connected by OR within parentheses and AND between parentheses , so that a paper needs at least one word from each parentheses to be included in the dataset . 8 . At the 100th percentile , the network is the cumula - tive network . At the 1st percentile , the network is similar to a sliding window with a width of 1 . The median is akin to citation half - life , which is not only an intuitive cutoff point but also provides intuitive widths , usually of 3 to 6 years with outliers of 2 and up to 11 . 9 . Authority is a centrality measure for directed net - works , assigning nodes with an authority score based on in - degree and a hub score based on out - degree . Each score’s calculation weighs neighbors’ scores on the other measure . This calculates papers’ importance not only by their citation counts but by considering who is citing them . 10 . Initial periods of fluctuating authorities occur when networks are very small . The slopes obtained by the cumulative approach converge to 1 when networks have more than 17 papers . 11 . Experts’ reports are not the only mechanism for consensus declaration , but they are the most 836 American Sociological Review 75 ( 6 ) authoritative and frequently used mechanism , and the one most often cited as proof . 12 . Because the IARC was founded in 1965 , we also note the first U . S . Surgeon General ( 1964 ) report on smoking . We also note the 1992 EPA report because of its importance ( see Kabat 2008 ) . 13 . See also the online supplement . 14 . Collins’s detailed review of the field starts at 1966 . We grayed out the earlier years that our data covers . 15 . As one reviewer noted , if everyone used our strat - egy it may be subjected to Goodhart’s law : inter - ested parties who in the past needed only to hire a well - respected scholar may attempt to publish pa - pers and manipulate citations to create a false sense of consensus . We should be so fortunate . The fact that a useful measure may be manipulated in the future provides little reason to abandon it . References Abbott , Andrew . 2001 . The Chaos of Disciplines . Chi - cago : University of Chicago Press . Allen , Woody . ( Director ) . 1973 . Sleeper . Rollins - Joffe Productions . Ashar , Hanna and Jonathan Z . Shapiro . 1990 . ‘‘Are Retrenchment Decisions Rational ? The Role of Information in Times of Budgetary Stress . ’’ Journal of Higher Education 61 : 121 – 41 . Bero , Lisa . 2003 . ‘‘Implications of the Tobacco Industry Documents for Public Health and Policy . ’’ Annual Review of Public Health 24 : 267 – 88 . Bhutani , Vinod , Lois Johnson , and Emidio Sivieri . 1999 . ‘‘Predictive Ability of a Predischarge Hour - Specific Serum Bilirubin for Subsequent Significant Hyperbi - lirubinemia in Healthy Term and Near - Term New - borns . ’’ Pediatrics 103 : 6 – 14 . Biglan , Anthony . 1973 . ‘‘Characteristics of Subject Mat - ter in Different Academic Areas . ’’ Journal of Applied Psychology 57 : 195 – 203 . Bourdieu , Pierre . 1975 . ‘‘The Specificity of the Scien - tific Field and the Social Conditions of the Progress of Reason . ’’ Social Science Information 14 : 19 – 47 . Boykoff , Maxwell T . and Jules R . Boykoff . 2004 . ‘‘Bal - ance as Bias : Global Warming and the U . S . Prestige Press . ’’ Global Environmental Change : Human and Policy Dimensions 14 : 125 – 36 . Brandt , Allan M . 1998 . ‘‘Blow Some My Way : Passive Smoking , Risk and American Culture . ’’ Pp . 164 – 88 in Ashes to Ashes : The History of Smoking and Health , edited by S . L . Lock , A . Reynolds , and E . M . Tansey . Atlanta : Rodopi . Cardis , E . et al . 2010 . ‘‘Brain Tumour Risk in Relation to Mobile Telephone Use : Results of the INTER - PHONE International Case - Control Study . ’’ Interna - tional Journal of Epidemiology 39 : 675 – 94 . Cole , Jonathan R . and Harriet Zuckerman . 1975 . ‘‘The Emergence of a Scientific Specialty : The Self Exem - plifying Case of the Sociology of Science . ’’ Pp . 139 – 74 in The Idea of Social Structure : Papers in Honor of Robert K . Merton , edited by L . A . Coser . New York : Harcourt Brace Jovanovich . Cole , Stephen . 1983 . ‘‘The Hierarchy of the Sciences . ’’ American Journal of Sociology 89 : 111 – 39 . Collins , Harry M . 1974 . ‘‘The TEA Set : Tacit Knowl - edge and Scientific Networks . ’’ Science Studies 4 : 165 – 86 . ——— . 1975 . ‘‘The Seven Sexes : A Study in the Soci - ology of a Phenomenon , or the Replication of Ex - periments in Physics . ’’ Sociology 9 : 205 – 224 . ——— . 1992 . Changing Order . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . ——— . 2004 . Gravity’s Shadow : The Search for Grav - itational Waves . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Collins , Harry M . and Robert Evans . 2002 . ‘‘The Third Wave of Science Studies : Studies of Expertise and Experience . ’’ Social Studies of Science 32 : 235 – 96 . ——— . 2007 . Rethinking Expertise . Chicago : Chicago University Press . Csardi , Gabor and Tamas Nepusz . 2006 . ‘‘The Igraph Software Package for Complex Network Research . ’’ InterJournal Complex Systems : 1695 . Elwood , J . Mark , Richard P . Gallagher , G . B . Hill , and J . C . G . Pearson . 1985 . ‘‘Cutaneous Melanoma in Rela - tion to Intermittent and Constant Sun Exposure : The Western Canada Melanoma Study . ’’ International Journal of Cancer 35 : 427 – 33 . Epstein , Steven . 1998 . Impure Science : AIDS , Activism and the Politics of Knowledge . Berkeley : University of California Press . Evans , James A . 2007a . ‘‘Consensus and Knowledge Production in an Academic Field . ’’ Poetics 35 : 1 – 21 . ——— . 2007b . ‘‘Start - Ups in Science : Entrepreneurs , Diverse Backing , and Novelty Outside Business . ’’ Pp . 261 – 307 in The Sociology of Entrepreneurship , edited by M . Ruef and M . Lounsbury . Oxford : JAI Press . ——— . 2008 . ‘‘Electronic Publication and the Narrow - ing of Science and Scholarship . ’’ Science 321 : 395 – 99 . Frickel , Scott and Neil Gross . 2005 . ‘‘A General Theory of Scientific / Intellectual Movements . ’’ American Sociological Review 70 : 204 – 232 . Frickel , Scott and Kelly Moore , eds . 2006 . The New Political Sociology of Science . Madison : University of Wisconsin Press . Fujimura , Joan . 1996 . Crafting Science : A Sociohistory of the Quest for the Genetics of Cancer . Cambridge : Harvard University Press . Garfield , Eugene . 1972 . ‘‘Citation Analysis as a Tool in Journal Evaluation : Journals Can Be Ranked by Shwed and Bearman 837 Frequency and Impact of Citations for Science Pol - icy Studies . ’’ Science 178 : 471 . Gieryn , Thomas . 1996 . ‘‘Policing STS : A Boundary - Work Souvenir from the Smithsonian Exhibition on ‘Science in Everyday Life . ’’’ Science , Technol - ogy and Human Values 21 : 100 – 115 . ——— . 1999 . Cultural Boundaries of Science . Chicago : Chicago University Press . Glanz , Jason M . , David L . McClure , David J . Magid , Matthew F . Daley , Eric K . France , Daniel A . Salmon , and Simon J . Hambidge . 2009 . ‘‘Parental Refusal of Pertussis Vaccination Is Associated With an Increased Risk of Pertussis Infection in Children . ’’ Pediatrics 123 : 1446 – 51 . Hanney , Steve , Lain Frame , Jonathan Grant , Martin Buxton , Tracy Young , and Grant Lewison . 2005 . ‘‘Using Categorizations of Citations when Assessing the Outcomes from Health Research . ’’ Scientomet - rics 65 : 357 – 79 . Hargens , Lowell L . 1988 . ‘‘Scholarly Consensus and Journal Rejection Rates . ’’ American Sociological Review 53 : 139 – 51 . ——— . 2004 . ‘‘What is Mertonian Sociology of Sci - ence ? ’’ Scientometrics 60 : 63 – 70 . Hargens , Lowell L . and Lisa Kellywilson . 1994 . ‘‘Deter - minants of Disciplinary Discontent . ’’ Social Forces 72 : 1177 – 95 . Hess , David J . 1995 . Science and Technology in a Multi - cultural World . New York : Columbia University Press . ——— . 2006 . ‘‘Antiangiogenesis Research and the Dynamics of Scientific Fields : Historical and Institu - tional Perspectives in the Sociology of Science . ’’ Pp . 122 – 47 in The New Political Sociology of Sci - ence , edited by S . Frickel and K . Moore . Madison : University of Wisconsin Press . International Agency for Research on Cancer ( IARC ) . 1986 . ‘‘IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Car - cinogenic Risks to Humans . ’’ Tobacco Smoking , Vol . 38 . Lyon , France : World Health Organization . ——— . 1991 . ‘‘IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans . ’’ Coffee , Tea , Mate , Methylxanthines and Methylglyoxa , Vol . 51 . Lyon , France : World Health Organization . ——— . 1992 . ‘‘IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans . ’’ Solar and Ultravi - olet Radiation , Vol . 55 . Lyon , France : World Health Organization . Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) . 1992 . Climate Change : The 1990 and 1992 IPCC Assessment . Canada : IPCC . ——— . 1995 . Summaries for Policymakers of the Three Working Groups Report . Geneva , Switzerland : IPCC . ——— . 2007 . Climate Change 2007 : The Physical Sci - ence Basis : Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Jacques , Peter J . , Riley E . Dunlap , and Mark Freeman . 2008 . ‘‘The Organization of Denial : Conservative Think Tanks and Environmental Skepticism . ’’ Envi - ronmental Politics 17 : 349 – 85 . Jansen , Vincennt , N . Stollenwerk , H . J . Jensen , M . E . Ramsey , W . J . Edmunds , and C . J . Rhodes . 2003 . ‘‘Measles Outbreaks in a Population with Declining Vaccine Uptake . ’’ Science 301 : 804 . Jasanoff , Sheila , ed . 2004 . States of Knowledge . New York : Routledge . Kabat , Geoffrey . 2008 . Hyping Health Risks : Environ - mental Hazards in Daily Life and the Science of Epi - demiology . New York : Columbia University Press . Ketcham , Christopher . 2010 . ‘‘Warning : Your Cell Phone May Be Hazardous to Your Health . ’’ GQ , February , pp . 60 – 63 . Kleinberg , Jon M . 1999 . ‘‘Authoritative Sources in a Hy - perlinked Environment . ’’ Journal of the ACM 46 : 604 – 632 . Kuhn , Thomas S . 1970 . The Structure of Scientific Rev - olutions . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Lakatos , Imre . 1970 . ‘‘Falsification and the Methodol - ogy of Scientific Research Programmes . ’’ Pp . 91 – 197 in Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge , edi - ted by I . Lakatos and A . Musgrave . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Latour , Bruno . 1987 . Science in Action : How to Follow Scientists and Engineers through Society . Cam - bridge : Harvard University Press . ——— . 1999 . Pandora’s Hope : Essays on the Reality of Science Studies . Cambridge : Harvard University Press . ——— . 2004 . Politics of Nature : How to Bring the Sci - ences into Democracy . Cambridge : Harvard Univer - sity Press . ——— . 2009 . ‘‘Is Walter Lippmann’s Phantom Public More Visible on the Web ? ’’ Presented at The Chang - ing Dynamics of Public Controversies , Columbia University , New York , February 7 . Leahey , Erin . 2005 . ‘‘Alphas and Asterisks : The Devel - opment of Statistical Significance Testing Standards in Sociology . ’’ Social Forces 84 : 1 – 24 . Leicht , Elizabeth A . , Gavin Clarkson , Kerby Shedden , and Mark E . J . Newman . 2007 . ‘‘Large - Scale Struc - ture of Time Evolving Citation Networks . ’’ Euro - pean Physical Journal 59 : 75 – 83 . Leicht , Elizabeth A . and Mark E . J . Newman . 2008 . ‘‘Community Structure in Directed Networks . ’’ Physical Review Letters 100 : 118703 . Martin , Brian and Evelleen Richards . 1995 . ‘‘Scientific Knowledge , Controversy , and Public Decision Mak - ing . ’’ Pp . 506 – 526 in Handbook of Science and Technology Studies , edited by S . Jassanoff , G . E . Markle , J . C . Peterson , and T . Pinch . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 838 American Sociological Review 75 ( 6 ) McCright , Aaron M . and Riley E . Dunlap . 2000 . ‘‘Chal - lenging Global Warming as a Social Problem : An Analysis of the Conservative Movement’s Counter - Claims . ’’ Social Problems 47 : 499 – 522 . Merton , Robert K . 1957 . ‘‘Priorities in Scientific Dis - covery . ’’ American Sociological Review 22 : 635 – 59 . ——— . 1973 . The Sociology of Science . Chicago : Uni - versity of Chicago Press . Michaels , David . 2006 . ‘‘Protecting Public Health in the Age of Contested and Product Defense . ’’ Annals of the New York Academy of Science 1076 : 149 – 62 . Moody , James . 2004 . ‘‘The Structure of a Social Science Collaboration Network : Disciplinary Cohesion from 1963 to 1999 . ’’ American Sociological Review 69 : 213 – 38 . Moore , Kelly . 1996 . ‘‘Organizing Integrity : American Science and the Creation of Public Interest Organiza - tions , 1955 – 1975 . ’’ American Journal of Sociology 101 : 1592 – 1627 . Mulkay , M . J . , G . N . Gilbert , and S . Woolgar . 1975 . ‘‘Problem Areas and Research Networks in Sci - ence . ’’ Sociology 9 : 187 – 203 . National Academy of Sciences ( NAS ) , National Research Council Committee on Passive Smoking . 1986 . Environmental Tobacco Smoke : Measuring Exposure and Assessing Health Effects . Washington , DC : National Academy of Sciences . Nelkin , Dorothy . 1995 . ‘‘Science Controversies : The Dynamics of Public Disputes in the United States . ’’ Pp . 444 – 56 in Handbook of Science and Technology Studies , edited by S . Jassanoff , G . E . Markle , J . C . Peterson , and T . Pinch . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Newman , Mark E . J . 2006 . ‘‘Modularity and Community Structure in Networks . ’’ Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 103 : 8577 – 82 . Oreskes , Naomi . 2004a . ‘‘Science and Public Policy : What’s Proof Got To Do With It ? ’’ Environmental Science and Policy 7 : 369 – 83 . ——— . 2004b . ‘‘Beyond the Ivory Tower : The Scien - tific Consensus on Climate Change . ’’ Science 306 : 1686 . Owen - Smith , Jason and Walter W . Powell . 2008 . ‘‘Net - works and Institutions . ’’ Pp . 276 – 98 in The SAGE Handbook of Organizational Institutionalism , edited by R . Greenwood , C . Oliver , R . Suddaby , and K . Sahlin - Andersson . London : Sage . Pickering , Andrew . 1993 . ‘‘The Mangle of Practice : Agency and Emergence in the Sociology of Sci - ence . ’’ American Journal of Sociology 99 : 559 – 89 . Pinch , Trevor J . and Wiebe E . Bijker . 1984 . ‘‘The Social Construction of Facts and Artefacts : Or How the Sociology of Science and the Sociology of Technol - ogy might Benefit Each Other . ’’ Social Studies of Science 14 : 388 – 441 . Powell , Walter W . and Jeannette A . Colyvas . 2008 . ‘‘Microfoundations of Institutional Theory . ’’ Pp . 276 – 98 in The SAGE Handbook of Organizational Institutionalism , edited by R . Greenwood , C . Oliver , R . Suddaby , and K . Sahlin - Andersson . London : Sage . Powell , Walter W . , Douglas R . White , Kenneth W . Koput , and Jason Owen - Smith . 2005 . ‘‘Network Dynamics and Field Evolution : The Growth of Inter - organizational Collaboration in the Life Sciences . ’’ American Journal of Sociology 110 : 1132 – 205 . Price , Derek J . de S . 1965 . ‘‘Networks of Scientific Pa - pers . ’’ Science 149 : 510 – 515 . Proctor , Robert and Londa Schiebinger , eds . 2008 . Ag - notology : The Making and Unmaking of Ignorance . Stanford : Stanford University Press . R Development Core Team . 2008 . R : A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing . Vienna , Austria : R Foundation for Statistical Computing . Reichardt , Jorg . 2009 . Structure in Complex Networks . Berlin : Springer . Rowe , Gene , and Lynn J . Frewer . 2005 . ‘‘A Typology of Public Engagement Mechanisms . ’’ Science , Tech - nology and Human Values 30 : 251 – 90 . Salathe , Marcel , and Sebastian Bonhoeffer . 2008 . ‘‘The Effect of Opinion Clustering on Disease Outbreaks . ’’ Journal of The Royal Society Interface 5 : 1505 – 1508 . Samet , Jonathan M . and Thomas A . Burke . 2001 . ‘‘Turn - ing Science into Junk : The Tobacco Industry and Passive Smoking . ’’ American Journal of Public Health 91 : 1742 – 44 . Shapin , Steven . 1994 . A Social History of Truth : Civility and Science in Seventeenth - Century England . Chi - cago : University of Chicago Press . ——— . 1996 . The Scientific Revolution . Chicago : Uni - versity of Chicago Press . Simon , Bart . 2002 . Undead Science . New Brunswick : Rutgers University Press . Small , Henry . 2006 . ‘‘Tracking and Predicting Growth Areas in Science . ’’ Scientometrics 68 : 595 – 610 . Smith , Michael J . , Susan S . Ellenberg , Louis M . Bell , and David M . Rubin . 2008 . ‘‘Media Coverage of the Measles - Mumps - Rubella Vaccine and Autism Controversy and Its Relationship to MMR Immuni - zation Rates in the United States . ’’ Pediatrics 121 : e836 – 43 . Smith - Doerr , Laurel , Ivan M . Manev , and Polly Rizova . 2004 . ‘‘The Meaning of Success : Network Position and the Social Construction of Project Outcomes in an R & D Lab . ’’ Journal of Engineering and Technol - ogy Management 21 : 51 – 81 . Star , Leigh S . and James R . Griesemer . 1989 . ‘‘Institu - tional Ecology , ‘Translations’ and Boundary Ob - jects : Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology , 1907 – 39 . ’’ Social Studies of Science 19 : 387 – 420 . U . S . Department of Health and Human Services ( USDHHS ) . 1986 . The Health Consequences of Involuntary Smoking : A Report of the Surgeon Gen - eral . Rockville , MD : U . S . DHHS , Public Health Shwed and Bearman 839 Service , Centers for Disease Control , Center for Health Promotion and Education , Office on Smoking and Health . DHHS Publication No . ( CDC ) 87 - 8398 . U . S . Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) . 1992 . ‘‘Respiratory Health Effects of Passive Smoking ( Also Known as Exposure to Secondhand Smoke or Environmental Tobacco Smoke ETS ) . ’’ Washing - ton , DC : U . S . EPA , Office of Research and Develop - ment , Office of Health and Environmental Assessment , EPA / 600 / 6 - 90 / 006F . U . S . Surgeon General . 1964 . Smoking and Health : Report of the Advisory Committee to the Surgeon General of the Public Health Service . Washington , DC : Department of Health , Education , and Welfare . Wakeford , Richard . 2004 . ‘‘The Cancer Epidemiology of Radiation . ’’ Oncogene 23 : 6404 – 6428 . Wallace , A . 1994 . ‘‘Soil Science , Pesticides , and Risk Analysis . ’’ Communications in Soil Science and Plant Analysis 25 : 143 – 48 . Weinel , Martin . 2008 . ‘‘Counterfeit Scientific Contro - versies in Science Policy Contexts . ’’ SOCSI Working Paper 120 . Whittington , Kjersten Bunker , Jason Owen - Smith , and Walter W . Powell . 2009 . ‘‘Networks , Propinquity , and Innovation in Knowledge - Intensive Industries . ’’ Administrative Science Quarterly 54 : 90 – 122 . Wray , Brad K . 2005 . ‘‘Rethinking Scientific Specializa - tion . ’’ Social Studies of Science 35 : 151 – 64 . Wynder , Ernst L . , Evarts A . Graham , and Adele B . Cro - ninger . 1953 . ‘‘Experimental Production of Carcinoma with Cigarette Tar . ’’ Cancer Research 13 : 855 – 64 . Wynne , Brian . 1996 . ‘‘May the Sheep Safely Graze ? A Reflexive View of the Expert - Lay Divide . ’’ Pp . 104 – 137 in Risk , Environment and Modernity , edited by S . Lash , B . Szerszynski , and B . Wynne . London : Sage . Zuckerman , Hariet . 1988 . ‘‘The Sociology of Science . ’’ Pp . 511 – 74 in The Handbook of sociology , edited by N . J . Smelser . Newbury Park , CA : Sage Publications . Uri Shwed is an Assistant Professor of sociology and anthropology at Ben Gurion University of the Negev in Israel . He received his PhD from Columbia Univer - sity in 2010 . His current work focuses on networks in science and social networks of Israeli schoolchildren . Peter S . Bearman is the Cole Professor of the Social Sciences at Columbia University . His current work focuses on understanding the increased prevalence of autism , analytic sociology , and modeling temporal dynamics in complex historical contexts . 840 American Sociological Review 75 ( 6 )