New neurons are continually being generated in the adult brain . Two regions — the olfactory bulb and the den - tate gyrus of the hippocampus — receive and integrate newborn neurons throughout adult life . In these regions , the addition of new neurons represents another means , further to molecular , synaptic or morphological alterations in individual cells , by which the brain can make changes to its own functional circuitry . Indeed , this cell - level reno - vation is not static or merely restorative — instead , adult neurogenesis constitutes an adaptive response to challenges imposed by an animal’s environment and / or its internal state . This raises some important questions about the role of neurogenesis in mature neuronal circuits . Owing to space constraints , we concentrate on the neurogenic systems of vertebrates , and primarily those of mammals . Neurogenesis and plasticity in the adult brain Brain plasticity refers to the brain’s ability to change its structure and function during maturation , learning , environ - mental challenges or pathology . Multiple dissociable plastic changes in the adult brain involve many levels of organiza - tion , ranging from molecules to systems , with changes in neural elements occurring concomitantly with changes in supportive tissue elements such as glia and blood vessels . In restricted areas of the mammalian brain , new functional neurons are constitutively generated from endogenous pools of neural stem cells throughout life . So , the possibility of adding entire new neurons to existing network circuitry must be added to the list of structural changes possible in the adult brain . The potential functional implications of such changes are fascinating , but before addressing such issues it is important that we outline how adult neurogenesis proceeds , and how it is regulated . Mechanisms of adult neurogenesis Post - developmental neurogenesis is conserved across evolutionary boundaries from crustaceans 1 to higher vertebrates , including birds 2 , rodents 3 , primates 4 , 5 and humans 6 . The degree of postnatal neurogenesis decreases with increasing brain complexity , with adult neurogenesis in lower vertebrates , such as lizards , pro - viding an additional supply of neurons capable of regen - erating entire brain parts , whereas in mammals adult neurogenesis is restricted to only a few regions , where it provides neuronal replacement . The degree of post - developmental neurogenesis in a given species might depend on a trade - off between the benefits accrued from newborn neurons and the problems they generate for the network circuitry into which they integrate 7 . It seems that more complex brains have been influenced to a greater extent by the latter issue , as , in mammals , adult neurogenesis under normal conditions is probably confined to just two regions : the subgranular zone ( SGZ ) of the hippocampal dentate gyrus and the subventricular zone ( SVZ ) , which contributes interneurons to the olfac - tory bulb 8 , 9 . Although there is evidence to suggest the presence of constitutive neurogenesis in other regions of the adult brain 10 – 17 ( but for an alternative view , see REFS 18 – 21 ) , here , we concentrate on the two regions where the presence of constitutive adult neurogenesis is uncontroversial . Producing new neurons . The dominant hypothesis is that astrocytes in the adult SVZ , which lines the border between the striatum and the lateral ventricle , act as slow - dividing neural stem cells , capable of generating a progeny of neuroblast precursors 22 – 24 . These neuroblasts Laboratory of Perception and Memory , Institut Pasteur , Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unit de Recherche Associée 2182 , 25 , rue du Docteur Roux , 75724 Paris cedex 15 , France . Correspondence to P . - M . L . e - mail : pmlledo @ pasteur . fr doi : 10 . 1038 / nrn1867 Adult neurogenesis The entire set of events leading to the production of new neurons in the adult brain , from precursor cell division to functionally integrated survival . Precursors CNS stem cells and all progenitors are generally referred to as precursor cells . Adult neurogenesis and functional plasticity in neuronal circuits Pierre - Marie Lledo , Mariana Alonso and Matthew S . Grubb Abstract | The adult brain is a plastic place . To ensure that the mature nervous system’s control of behaviour is flexible in the face of a varying environment , morphological and physiological changes are possible at many levels , including that of the entire cell . In two areas of the adult brain — the olfactory bulb and the dentate gyrus — new neurons are generated throughout life and form an integral part of the normal functional circuitry . This process is not fixed , but highly modulated , revealing a plastic mechanism by which the brain’s performance can be optimized for a given environment . The functional benefits of this whole - cell plasticity , however , remain a matter for debate . NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 7 | MARCH 2006 | 179 REVIEWS Progenitor A mitotic cell with a fast cell - division cycle that retains the ability to proliferate and to give rise to terminally differentiated cells but that is not capable of indefinite self - renewal . proceed towards the olfactory bulb along an intricate path of migration known as the rostral migratory stream ( RMS ) . More than 30 , 000 neuroblasts exit the rodent SVZ for the RMS each day 25 , where they are not guided by radial glia , but migrate tangentially 26 , 27 in chains through tubular structures formed by special - ized astrocytes . After detaching from these chains and migrating radially from the RMS into the olfac - tory bulb , adult - born cells from the SVZ mature into olfactory inhibitory interneurons of two main types — granule cells and periglomerular cells — in their respective olfactory bulb layers . Both cell types make only local contacts in the bulb , directly or indirectly modulating the processing of sensory information by the olfactory bulb’s projection neurons , the mitral and tufted cells . The SGZ of the hippocampus , where the adult pro - genitors of the dentate gyrus are found , lines the hilar side of the granule cell layer of the dentate gyrus . There , SGZ astrocytes give rise to intermediate progenitors , with ~ 9 , 000 new cells being produced per day in young adult rats 28 , although this number seems to be smaller in the macaque hippocampus 5 . These progenitors mature locally into granule neurons of the dentate gyrus 29 , sending axonal projections to area CA3 and dendritic arbours into the molecular layer 30 , 31 . The hippocampal stem cell lineages and microenvironment that support neurogenesis have been extensively reviewed elsewhere ( for examples , see REFS 32 – 34 ) . Maturation and functional integration . As they differ - entiate , the dendrites of newborn dentate gyrus cells become progressively more complex and extend deeper into the molecular cell layer 35 ( FIG . 1 ) . The new neurons express a series of transient markers , such as double - cortin , collapsin response mediator protein 4 ( CRMP4 ; also known as TUC4 ) , polysialic acid – neural cell adhesion molecule ( PSA – NCAM ) and calretinin 36 – 38 , which are also characteristic of immature neurons during development ( BOX 1 ) . Physiological studies of maturing granule cells have recently been carried out using transgenic mice that selectively , and transi - ently , express enhanced green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) under the transcriptional control of particular genomic sequences . In nestin – GFP - positive type II precursor cells , although the expression of functional glutamatergic synapses has been detected 39 , spontane - ous and evoked synaptic input comes only from GABA ( γ - amino butyric acid ) - mediated transmission 39 , 40 . This GABA transmission is depolarizing 213 , as is the case in early developing hippocampal cells 41 , and , possibly through the generation of calcium transients , might control the proliferation and differentiation of neuro - nal precursor cells 40 , 42 . This situation contrasts strongly with that in the SVZ , where stem cells themselves are influenced by extrasynaptic GABA release 43 . In addi - tion , whereas the GABA - releasing neuroblast progeny of SVZ stem cells release the transmitter that controls the division of their ancestors 43 , in the SGZ the GABA that affects type II cell proliferation comes from activity in local mature circuitry 39 , 40 , 213 . Postmitotic newborn neurons in the dentate gyrus show a similar profile of inputs to their dividing pro - genitors . Glutamate receptors do exist in ~ 2 - week - old neurons that are positive for pro - opiomelanocortin ( POMC ) – GFP , but evoked and spontaneous synaptic currents are exclusively GABA - mediated 44 . These GABA - mediated inputs show immature characteristics , including slow kinetics and depolarized reversal poten - tials , and are relatively insensitive to the GABA A ( GABA type A ) receptor modulator zolpidem . Consistent with this , newborn granule cells isolated by fluorescent cell sorting lacked the α 1 GABA A receptor subu - nit 45 . The initial emergence of slow GABA - mediated synaptic input in 2 - week - old cells has also been described using retroviral labelling of newborn den - tate gyrus neurons 46 . Initially , then , newborn granule cells receive only slow depolarizing GABA - mediated input 213 . It is important to stress the difference between this input and the fast GABA - mediated inhibition that occurs onto more mature granule cells 46 . The former might simply have a local , maturational role ( perhaps in migration or neurite outgrowth 41 , 213 ) , whereas the latter probably contributes to information processing in the dentate gyrus network . Figure 1 | Postmitotic maturation of newborn neurons in the adult brain . Shows the anatomical and functional stages through which three types of adult - born neuron progress before becoming fully mature 35 , 39 , 40 , 44 , 47 , 56 – 59 , 117 , 213 ( morphologically simplified and not to scale ) . This simplified state of affairs comes with a number of caveats , as the maturation of individual adult - born neurons has yet to be followed : maturation stages are likely to reflect a continuum rather than discrete steps ; and maturation time points are likely to vary considerably from cell to cell . For this last reason , ages here represent the earliest age at which particular properties have been observed in a given cell type . Note also that maturation certainly does not stop at 28 days of age : arbour complexity and spine density can increase for up to 4 months after the birth of a neuron 35 , 47 . Nevertheless , certain key similarities and differences between maturation of the three cell types stand out . In all three , receptor expression precedes synaptic activation , and GABA ( γ - aminobutyric acid ) - mediated input precedes glutamatergic input . However , olfactory bulb granule cells show atypical maturation in that they only fire sodium - based action potentials after they have begun to receive synaptic input . Olfactory bulb granule cells also appear to mature faster than the other two cell types , although the full maturation of both olfactory bulb periglomerular cells ( dopaminergic phenotype ) and hippocampal granule cells ( spine density and dendritic arbour complexity ) extends for much longer than the month - long timeframe shown here . AMPAR , α - amino - 3 - hydroxy - 5 - methyl - 4 - isoxazole propionic acid receptor ; DCX , doublecortin ; GABAR , GABA receptor ; GAD , glutamate decarboxylase ; NMDAR , N - methyl - d - aspartate receptor ; NeuN , neuronal nuclear antigen ; PSA - NCAM , polysialic acid – neuronal cell adhesion molecule ; TH , tyrosine hydroxylase ; TUC4 , collapsin response mediator protein 4 ; TUJ1 , beta III - tubulin . ▲ R E V I E W S 180 | MARCH 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro Olfactory bulb periglomerular cells Approximate cell age ( days ) : 2 14 28 Approximate cell age ( days ) : 2 14 28 Approximate cell age ( days ) : 2 14 28 Hippocampal granule cells Olfactory bulb granule cells NeuN Calbindin Calretinin Morphology Markers Receptors Sodium currents Synaptic input DCX + PSA - NCAM GABARs GABARs ( Like progenitor cells ? ) AMPARsNMDARs AMPARsNMDARs Small spikes Large , repetitive spikes Granule cell layer With spines ? Morphology Markers Receptors Sodium currents Synaptic input NeuN GABARs GABARs AMPARs AMPARs NMDARs NMDARs No spikes Spikes Rostral migratory stream Granule cell layer External plexiform layer With spines TUJ1 + TUC - 4 DCX + PSA - NCAM Morphology Markers Receptors Sodium currents Synaptic input TH GABARs GABARs AMPARs AMPARs NMDARs NMDARs No spikes Spikes Rostral migratory stream Granule cell layer External plexiform layer Glomerular layer NeuN + GAD / Calbindin / Calretinin TUJ1 + TUC - 4 DCX + PSA - NCAM ? Functional glutamatergic inputs are evident as cells become more mature 46 , 47 and are followed by the final step in synaptic input maturation : the presence of fast , perisomatic GABA - mediated inputs 46 . Glutamatergic inputs , although late - appearing in adult - born neurons , are more easily potentiated in younger adult - born granule cells than in their fully mature neighbours 48 – 50 . This effect might depend on the presence of action potential - boosting calcium spikes in immature cells 50 , or on the paucity of fast inhibitory GABA - mediated input to these neurons 48 , 49 . Organotypic slice cultures might be a useful preparation with which to analyse in further detail how newborn bul - bar cells migrate 51 and acquire neuronal properties 52 , 53 , and , in particular , to provide a complete understanding of the molecular steps that lead adult neural stem cells from the SGZ to become mature neurons . In vivo evidence shows that parvalbumin - positive inhibitory interneurons as well as excitatory granule cells are born in the adult rat dentate gyrus 54 . These cells might be immature granule cells transiently expressing GABA 55 . However , the absence of GABA expression in all granule cells born at the same time contradicts this pos - sibility . Alternatively , the adult - born GABA - containing cells might be small , immature chandelier , axo - axonic or basket cells , as suggested by their location . Further stud - ies are required to unequivocally clarify the mechanisms by which neurogenesis provides the hippocampus with granule cells and inhibitory interneurons . Using replication - incompetent retroviruses to infect newly generated neurons in the SVZ and label them with GFP , it has been possible to characterize the morpho - logical and electrophysiological properties of these newborn olfactory bulb neurons during their migration and differentiation 56 – 58 ( FIG . 1 ) . Morphologically , newly generated cells become more complex within the first few weeks after their birth . Granule cells form more elaborate dendrites that extend into the external plexiform layer of the bulb , becoming fully morphologically mature by as early as 2 weeks of age 56 . By contrast , periglomerular cells take ~ 4 weeks to develop their full dendritic and axonal morphology 57 ; a similar time course is required for the maturation of adult - born hippocampal cells 47 ( FIG . 1 ) . During this maturation , immature bulbar interneurons express transient marker proteins including TUJ1 ( beta III - tubulin ) and TUC4 ( REF . 59 ) . Functionally , as in the adult dentate gyrus , the first synapses made onto new cells are GABA - containing , followed only several days later by glutamatergic inputs 57 , 58 . Remarkably , the developmental sequence of voltage - dependent currents and synaptic connections marks the main difference between newborn periglomerular and granule cells ( and that between bulbar and hippocampal granule cells ; FIG . 1 ) . In periglomerular cells , the maturation of the voltage - dependent sodium current , and consequently the capacity of the newly gen - erated cells to fire action potentials , seems to precede the appearance of synaptic contacts , whereas in granule cells , full development of the sodium current is observed only after synaptic connections are established 57 , 58 . The delayed maturation of granule cell excitability might prevent dis - ruption of the pre - existing adult circuitry while newborn cells insert themselves , although , as even mature granule R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 7 | MARCH 2006 | 181 Retrovirus An RNA virus that uses reverse transcriptase to convert its RNA into DNA . Neurogenic niche Regions where the degree of neurogenesis depends on the interaction of the microenvironment with precursor cells that have neurogenic potential . cells lack an axon , it could be due to morphological dif - ferences between granule and periglomerular neurons . To unequivocally demonstrate their integration into adult networks , future studies will need to determine whether newborn neurons make functional synapses with their downstream target neurons and whether they release appropriate neurotransmitters . Factors regulating adult neurogenesis If it were a static , merely restorative process , adult neuro - genesis could not be regarded as a mechanism for adult brain plasticity . However , as detailed below , we know that every aspect of adult - born cell production is tightly regulated and modulated ( FIGS 2 , 3 ) . This strongly sug - gests that the adult brain can tailor its production of new neurons to match the demands of its environment . Stem cells and cellular niches . Stem cells constantly interact with their environment , occupying a particular neurogenic niche in the adult brain . In ecological terms , an organism’s niche refers to where it lives , what it does , and how it interacts with its close environment . Altering an ecosystem ( or neurogenic environment ) can produce disastrous consequences for an organism ( or stem cell ) . In the two neurogenic areas of the adult brain , neural stem cells occupy niches formed by both astrocytes and endothelial cells . In general , endothelial cells encourage stem cells to renew themselves 60 , and astrocytes instruct them to become neurons 61 . More surprisingly , mamma - lian neural stem cells are not passive elements of their microenvironment : they can , under certain conditions , give rise to endothelial cells 62 . This suggests that , if the need arises , stem cells can populate their niche with the features that they need to thrive . In other words , complex bidirectional interactions between intrinsic programmes and extrinsic cues take place in the two niches . We define intrinsic programmes here as the ensembles of factors expressed by stem cells and progenitors that control dif - ferent neurogenic phases . By contrast , external factors are produced by surrounding tissues to act on stem cells and progenitors . Intrinsic programmes . Given that multipotent precur - sor cells can give rise to neuronal and glial cell types in a characteristic order of birth , it is clear that precursor cell proliferation must be precisely regulated . Indeed , at present much research is focused on teasing apart the biochemical signalling that controls the proliferation of adult stem cells and their progeny ( FIGS 2 , 3 ) . Retinoblastoma , along with its relatives necdin and the E2F family of transcription factors , are important cell cycle factors in the regulation of proliferative activity 63 . Adult mice lacking E2F1 , for example , show a lower level of cell proliferation and a reduction in the number of neurons generated in adult neurogenic areas 64 . Recent interest has concentrated on the ephrins and their Eph receptors , which are well known for their roles in axon guidance , as possible controllers of cell proliferation . The receptor tyrosine kinases EphB1 – 3 and EphA4 are expressed in the SVZ , where their ephrin - B ligands are associated with astrocytes , and infusing either EphB2 or ephrin - B2 into the lateral ventricle has been shown to disrupt the migration of neuroblasts and increase cell proliferation 65 . Ephrin - A2 might also be a key player in the control of proliferation , as adult mice lacking this protein have a shorter SVZ cell cycle , higher proliferation rates and more neurons in the olfactory bulb 66 . Disrupting the interaction between ephrin - A2 and its receptor EphA7 in the adult brain of wild - type mice disinhibits proliferation and results in increased neurogenesis 66 . Like Eph – ephrin signalling , the sonic hedgehog ( SHH ) signalling pathway is not only required for many aspects of development ( for more information , see REF . 67 ) , but is also involved in progenitor cell maintenance dur - ing adulthood . Loss of hedgehog signalling results in abnormalities in the dentate gyrus and olfactory bulb , and stimulation of the hedgehog pathway in the mature brain results in elevated proliferation in adult pro - genitors 68 . Furthermore , adeno - associated viral vector delivery of SHH cDNA to the hippocampus increases cell proliferation , whereas pharmacological inhibition of SHH signalling reduces hippocampal neural progenitor Box 1 | Early versus late neurogenesis — the functional perspective To what extent do the processes of neurogenesis in the adult brain resemble the much more widespread processes of new neuron production in the developing CNS ? Proliferation appears to be similar in both cases , not least in the molecular markers expressed by immature mitotic cells . However , adult stem cells have a longer cell cycle and a higher proportion of quiescent progenitors than their neonatal counterparts . In terms of migration , neuroblasts take much longer to reach the olfactory bulb in neonates 193 , a difference that could be due to intrinsic features of neuroblasts in young versus old mice , or due to maturational changes in the rostral migratory stream extracellular environment . Functionally , many features of adult neurogenesis appear to recapitulate the sequence of events that occurs during neuronal development . The emergence of GABA ( γ - aminobutyric acid ) - mediated inputs prior to glutamatergic influences is strikingly consistent across adult - born 39 , 40 , 44 , 46 , 57 , 58 ( FIG . 1 ) and developing 41 neurons . Furthermore , early GABA - mediated inputs are depolarizing in immature cells in both the developing 41 and adult 40 , 213 hippocampus . However , although the ability to fire action potentials develops early in olfactory bulb granule cells born in postnatal day ( P ) 2 – 4 mice , this ability develops much later in adult - born neurons 58 . Furthermore , newborn neurons in neonatal mice tend to occupy more external positions in the granule cell layer , and are much more likely to survive over long periods of time than their adult - born counterparts . The two cell populations might also subserve different forms of olfactory learning 193 . Whether such large differences exist between early - and late - born neurons in the hippocampus , and whether newborn cells have entirely different roles in the same circuits depending on when they enter the network , remain to be investigated . R E V I E W S 182 | MARCH 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro Antisense oligodeoxynucleo - tide A small deoxynucleotide that is complementary to a select region of the mRNA that encodes the protein of interest . It can potentially interfere with transcription and translation , thereby decreasing gene expression . These molecules have been used in vivo to selectively inhibit the expression of peptides and proteins in the brain . This provides a simple way of studying the effects of the absence of a gene product in simple organisms and in cells . proliferation in vivo 69 . Another extremely important signalling system during development , the WNT sys - tem , also augments neurogenic proliferation in the adult dentate gyrus 70 . Two adhesion molecules are involved in the control of proliferation rates . First , neural cell adhesion mole - cule ( NCAM ) facilitates hippocampal neurogenesis proliferation and the differentiation of neuronal cells through regulation of proneurogenic transcription fac - tors 71 . Second , mice deficient in CD24 , a glycosylphos - phatidylinositol - anchored , highly glycosylated molecule that is expressed in both neurogenic niches in the adult brain , show a significant increase in the number of rap - idly ( in the SVZ and the dentate gyrus ) and slowly ( in the SVZ ) proliferating cells 72 . Even large protein signals can regulate progenitor proliferation . The SVZ is a major binding site for the soluble secreted form of amyloid precursor protein ( sAPP ) , and this binding occurs on progenitor cells expressing the epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor . In vivo , sAPP infusions increase the number of EGF - responsive progenitors through their increased proliferation . Conversely , blocking sAPP secretion , or downregulating APP synthesis , decreases the proliferation of EGF - responsive cells , thereby reduc - ing the pool of progenitors 73 . It is possible that sAPPs in adult neurogenesis provide a link between aberrant APP processing and some of the cognitive impairments that are associated with Alzheimer’s disease . Finally , as discussed above , GABA signalling between neuroblasts and astrocytes limits stem cell proliferation and might , therefore , contribute to maintaining a balance between the amplification and mobilization of progenitors 43 . The results of recent studies suggest that cell fate specification is also under the complex , yet stringent , control of a multitude of molecular signals . Most of the neurogenic factors that have so far been identified are associated with a specific population of local astrocytes in the SVZ and SGZ , which indicates that they specifically instruct the neurogenesis of adult neural stem cells in their respective niches . For instance , neural stem cells express members of the bone morphogenetic protein ( BMP ) family and their receptors in the adult SVZ . The BMP family instructs adult neural stem cells to adopt a glial fate , and , therefore , possibly to adopt the ‘default path’ as astrocytes 74 . Antagonizing BMP signalling causes neuro - genesin 1 ( NG1 ) , a secreted factor from astrocytes , to prevent the adoption of a glial fate but to promote differ - entiation of adult neural stem cells 75 . Similarly , ependymal cells , another type of glial cell , secrete a distinct BMP antagonist , noggin , and therefore divert stem cells from a glial to a neuronal fate . Antisense oligodeoxynucleotides against noggin decrease cell proliferation in the dentate gyrus of adult rats , which indicates that endogenous noggin activity is important for naturally occurring cell proliferation in the structure 76 . However , although noggin blocks gliogenic signals , alone it is insufficient to induce the neuronal differentiation of precursors . WNT signalling might also instruct stem cells to adopt a neuro - nal fate . In the adult dentate gyrus , the WNT inhibitors sFRP2 and 3 ( secreted frizzled - related proteins 2 and 3 ) partially block astroglial - induced neurogenesis of adult stem cells , whereas WNT3 promotes neurogenesis of adult neural stem cells 70 . Together , these studies identify astroglial - derived WNT signalling as a key pathway promoting neurogenesis in adult neural stem cells . In vitro studies have shown that activation of Ca 2 + channels and NMDA ( N - methyl - d - aspartate ) receptors in adult neural stem cells profoundly biases their fate towards neuronal specification , which suggests that Ca 2 + signalling has an important role in neurogenesis 42 . In some cases , stem cells are anchored to their support cells ; here , biochemical signalling might require physical contact between cell - surface receptors . This concerns the Notch pathway , which encourages stem cells to keep dividing to renew themselves . Notch 1 , the effectors of which repress neuronal determination and differen - tiation in cells not destined to become neuroblasts , is a crucial regulator of neural stem maintenance and self - renewal in the SVZ niche 77 . Consistent with this , Notch is involved in determining glial fate 78 . In addition , it was shown recently that BMI1 ( polycomb family transcrip - tional repressor ) is required for the self - renewal of stem cells in the gut and SVZ , but not for their survival or dif - ferentiation 79 , whereas knockout of the orphan nuclear receptor TLX produces a loss of cell proliferation and reduced labelling of nestin in neurogenic areas in the adult brain 80 . TLX can silence glial - specific expression of the astrocyte marker glial fibrillary acidic protein ( GFAP ) in neural stem cells , which suggests that transcriptional repression is crucial in maintaining the undifferentiated state of these cells 80 . Finally , recent work has started to unravel the mole cular mechanisms that determine how and when the fate of newborn cells is specified along the SVZ – olfactory bulb pathway 81 . Two transcription factors , paired box 6 ( PAX6 ) and oligodendrocyte transcription factor 2 ( OLIG2 ) , are expressed in the SVZ in adult - hood , with OLIG2 being exclusively expressed in SVZ transit - amplifying precursor cells . Viral vector - mediated overexpression of mouse OLIG2 in the SVZ facilitated oligodendrocyte maturation , thereby repressing neuronal development . By contrast , PAX6 was scarce in the SVZ but more abundant in neuroblasts that migrate along the RMS , and viral vector - mediated repression 81 and genetic deletion 82 of PAX6 in the SVZ led to a substantial reduc - tion in the proportion of neuronal precursors . These results , which have been extended to adult hippocampal neurogenesis 83 , point to an important role for PAX6 in promoting neurogenesis , which it might achieve together with the ventral telencephalic proneural protein mam - malian achaete - scute homologue 1 ( MASH1 ) ( REF . 84 ) . Interestingly , the neuronal commitment and subtype - specification functions of PAX6 can be experimentally uncoupled 81 , which indicates that these two operations are distinct , although they are mechanistically linked by common transcriptional regulators . We understand little about the intrinsic factors that regulate the route of neuroblast migration in the RMS . However , neuroblasts are known to express functional GABA A receptors , and respond to ambient GABA ( controlled by the action of astrocyte transporters ) with changes in migration speed 85 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 7 | MARCH 2006 | 183 SVZ OB RMS LV DG Hipp Radial migration and survival Proliferation Intrinsic factors Neurogenic factors : PAX6 / WNT neurogenesin / MASH1 Gliogenic factors : OLIG2 / Notch Stem cell renewal : SHH / Notch TXL / BMI1 LV Sensory neurons Mature newborn periglomerularcell Maturepre - existing periglomerularcell Mitral cell Mature newborn granule cell Maturepre - existing granule cell RMS GABA Intrinsic factors Integrins GL EPL GCL RMS Tangential migration Apoptotic cell Stem cells Progression of cell types Neuroblasts Transit amplifying cells To the cortex External factors Transmitters : 5 - HT , DA , ACh , NO Hormones : thyroid hormone , prolactin , pregnenolone , PACAP Growth factors : EGF , HB - EGF , VEGF , FGF , CNTF , TGF α , BDNF Microenvironment external factors PSA - NCAM / Slit - Robo / ephrins / neuroregulins Radial migration external factors Reelin , tenasin - R , PK2 Survival external factors Transmitters : ACh Environmental : sensory activity , odour enrichment , odour exposure E APP BMP GABA BL Eph / Ephrin Noggin E2F1 MCD24 Extrinsic factors . The processes of newborn neuron production , migration , maturation and survival are all subject to modulation by environmental changes ( FIGS 2 , 3 ) . Neurotransmitters , hormonal status , growth factors and injuries are known to influence proliferation , with most of the evidence so far coming from studies in the hippocampus . Many in vivo manipulations that influence electrical activity affect the production of neurons from neural stem cells and / or progenitor cells in the adult forebrain ( for a review , see REF . 86 ) . Recent evidence suggests that hippocampal activity itself can act directly on pro - liferating progenitors , giving rise to a computationally intriguing scenario in which network activity controls the insertion of new network elements 40 , 42 . In terms of fast neurotransmitters , glutamate appears to have com - plex effects on proliferation , acting through NMDA 87 – 89 and metabotropic 90 receptors to inhibit division , but causing an increase in proliferation when acting through AMPA ( α - amino - 3 - hydroxy - 5 - methyl - 4 - isoxazole Figure 2 | Intrinsic programmes and external factors controlling adult neurogenesis in the subventricular zone . Proliferation in the subventricular zone ( SVZ ) takes place in the medial wall of the lateral ventricle ( LV ) , where stem cells divide to generate transit amplifying cells , which , in turn , give rise to neuroblasts that migrate in the rostral migratory stream ( RMS ) to their final destination in the olfactory bulb ( OB ) . Several intrinsic factors expressed by stem cells and progenitors control both proliferation rates and the fate of newborn cells . In addition , external factors such as neurotransmitters , hormones and growth factors might cooperate with intrinsic programmes to modulate these processes . Tangential migration along the RMS is regulated by interactions between neuroblasts and the local RMS microenvironment , which involves different receptors and proteins that are necessary for contact - mediated repulsion or attraction . After reaching the core of the olfactory bulb , chain detachment and radial migration of neuroblasts is regulated by the external factors reelin , tenascin - R , and prokineticin 2 ( PK2 ) . When cells detach from chains , they invade the overlaying layers , where they differentiate into two local interneuron subtypes : granule cells ( located in the deeper layer of the olfactory bulb ) and periglomerular neurons ( located in the most superficial layer ) . Newborn cell survival then depends on sensory input . 5 - HT , 5 - hydroxytryptamine ( serotonin ) ; ACh , acetylcholine ; APP , amyloid precursor protein ; BDNF , brain - derived neurotrophic factor ; BL , basal lamina ; BMI1 , polycomb family transcriptional repressor ; BMP , bone morphogenetic protein ; CNTF , ciliary neurotrophic factor ; DA , dopamine ; DG , dentate gyrus ; E , epidermal cell ; E2F1 , E2F transcription factor 1 ; EGF , epidermal growth factor ; EPL , external plexiform layer ; FGF , fibroblast growth factor ; GABA , γ - aminobutyric acid ; GCL , granular cell layer ; GL , glomerular layer ; HB - EGF , heparin - binding EGF ; Hipp , hippocampus ; MASH1 , mammalian achaete - scute homologue 1 ; MCD24 , glycosylphosphatidyl - inositol - anchored highly glycosylated molecule ; NO , nitric oxide ; OLIG2 , oligodendrocyte transcription factor 2 ; PACAP , pituitary adenylate cyclase - activating polypeptide ; PAX6 , paired box 6 ; PSA - NCAM , polysialic acid – neuronal cell adhesion molecule ; SHH , sonic hedgehog ; TGF α , transforming growth factor - α ; TXL , thioredoxin - like 1 ; VEGF , vascular endothelial growth factor . R E V I E W S 184 | MARCH 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro SVZ OB RMS LV DG Hipp Survival Apoptotic cell Intrinsic factors Neurogenic factors : PAX6 / WNT / MASH1 Gliogenic factors : Notch Stem cell renewal : TXL / SHH Proliferation Differentiation and migration Maturenewborngranulecell Mature pre - existant granule cell To CA3 External factors Environmental : running , isolation , cognitive training , electrical stimulation , stress , alcohol , nicotine , antidepressants , mastication External factors Transmitters : glutamate , 5 - HT , NA , DA , ACh , endogenous opioids , endocannabinoids , NO Hormones : adrenal steroids , oestrogen , pregnenolone , PACAP Growth factors : BDNF , VEGF , IGF1 , FGF , CNTF , HB - EGF Environmental : running , enriched environment , isolation , maternal care and separation , stress , learning , social dominance , sleep deprivation Noggin BMP E2F1 MCD24 Ca 2 + GCL ML SGZ BL Stem cells Progression of cell types Neuroblasts Transit amplifying cells propionic acid ) receptors 91 . GABA , acting through GABA A receptors , appears to decrease proliferation in both the SVZ and dentate gyrus 40 , 43 . Many slower trans - mitters can also regulate neurogenic proliferation in the adult brain . Although it is clear that dopamine signal - ling affects proliferation , it is not entirely clear how ; the effects of selective agonist and antagonist substances suggest that dopamine decreases proliferation 92 – 94 , but conditions that decrease the number of dopaminergic neurons in the brain also appear to decrease prolifer - ation 95 , 96 . Serotonin ( or 5 - hydroxytryptamine , 5 - HT ) , acting through 5 - HT 2A receptors in the dentate gyrus , 5 - HT 2C receptors in the SVZ 97 and 5 - HT 1A receptors in both regions 97 , 98 , upregulates cell proliferation 99 – 101 , whereas cholinergic and noradrenergic activation in the hippocampus facilitate dentate gyrus neuro - genesis 102 , 103 , 214 . Finally , nitric oxide signalling reduces proliferation in the SVZ 104 , 105 . Chronic administration of morphine and heroin , drugs that act on the opioid signalling system , decreases neurogenesis in the adult rat hippocampus 106 . Consistent with this , in vitro experiments have shown that reduced signalling through µ - and δ - opioid receptors decreases proliferation in rat adult hippocampal progenitors 107 . Endocannabinoids and ethanol are newcomers in the field of research into addictive drugs that control progenitor cell proliferation and differentiation 108 – 111 , although their precise mechanisms of action remain to be elucidated . Growth factors can also regulate adult neurogenic proliferation . Stimulating brain - derived neurotrophic factor ( BDNF ) production enhances hippocampal pro - liferation , an effect that is blocked by BDNF - specific antibodies 112 . Chronic ventricular infusion of BDNF has also been shown to increase bromodeoxyuridine ( BrdU ) - labelled cells in the SVZ and olfactory bulb 113 . Other growth factors known to increase either dentate gyrus or SVZ proliferation ( or both ) include ciliary neuro - trophic factor ( CNTF ) 114 , 115 , heparin - binding epidermal growth factor ( HB - EGF ) 116 , basic fibroblast growth factor 2 ( FGF2 ) 117 , 118 , EGF 118 , insulin growth factor 1 ( IGF1 ) 119 , transforming growth factor ( TGF ) 120 , 121 and vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) 122 – 124 . VEGF is also an angiogenic protein , and might constitute an important link between the two processes of blood ves - sel and neuron formation ( see above ) . Indeed , not only are stem cells and endothelial precursors found in close physical proximity , but this contact also appears to govern astrocyte precursor behaviour ( for more information , see Figure 3 | Intrinsic programmes and external factors controlling adult neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus . In the hippocampus ( Hipp ) , stem cells located in the subgranular zone ( SGZ ) of the dentate gyrus ( DG ) produce neuroblasts ( but for an alternative view , see REF . 212 ) , which function as transient precursors , and give rise to new granule neurons ( type A cells , or neuroblasts ) . The proliferation of newborn cells in this niche has been studied extensively , revealing many external and internal factors — including transcription factors , neurotransmitters , hormones , growth factors and environmental stimuli — that are involved in regulating the process . In addition , many external factors modulate newborn neuron survival in the granular cell layer ( GCL ) . 5 - HT , 5 - hydroxytryptamine ( serotonin ) ; ACh , acetylcholine ; BDNF , brain - derived neurotrophic factor ; BL , basal lamina ; BMP , bone morphogenetic protein ; CNTF , ciliary neurotrophic factor ; DA , dopamine ; E2F1 , E2F transcription factor 1 ; FGF , fibroblast growth factor ; HB - EGF , heparin - binding epidermal growth factor ; IGF1 , insulin growth factor 1 ; LV , lateral ventricle ; MASH1 , mammalian achaete - scute homologue 1 ; MCD24 , glycosylphos - phatidyl - inositol - anchored highly glycosylated molecule ; ML , molecular layer ; NA , noradrenaline ; NO , nitric oxide ; OB , olfactory bulb ; PACAP , pituitary adenylate cyclase - activating polypeptide ; PAX6 , paired box 6 ; RMS , rostral migratory stream ; SHH , sonic hedgehog ; SVZ , subventricular zone ; TXL , thioredoxin - like 1 ; VEGF , vascular endothelial growth factor . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 7 | MARCH 2006 | 185 Stereological analyses Classic stereology microscopy has developed along independent pathways as a methodology to provide a quantitative understanding of the structure of the brain . This type of analysis has concentrated on the unbiased numerical estimation of parameters such as length , area , volume and population size that characterize entire regions of the brain as well as individual elements within them , for example , cell volume . REF . 33 ) . Owing to this unique microenvironment , adult stem cell division can be self - replicating : usually at least one of a stem cell’s two descendents is a stem cell itself 33 . All species studied so far have shown this capacity for long - term self - renewal in the adult brain ( for an example , see REF . 125 ) , a feature that could potentially have huge clinical importance for humans ( BOX 2 ) . Among hormones , corticosteroids were the first to be implicated in hippocampal neurogenesis , with evidence coming from various approaches including adrenalectomy , acute administration and stress 88 , 126 – 129 . However , suppres - sion of corticosterone does not affect the SVZ niche 130 . Moreover , stereological analyses of newborn cell numbers have shown that females produce more cells than males in the dentate gyrus but not in the SVZ . This seems to be affected by ovarian hormone levels , as ovariectomy diminishes the number of BrdU - labelled cells , an effect that is reversed by oestrogen replacement 127 . Conversely , the production of neuronal progenitors is stimulated in the SVZ , but not in the dentate gyrus , during pregnancy through the control of prolactin 131 ( see below ) . More recently , thyroid hormone was found to be crucial for neurogenesis in the SVZ 132 . Finally , both in vivo preg - nenolone administration 133 and ventricular infusion of pituitary adenylate cyclase - activating polypeptide ( PACAP ) increase cell proliferation in the SVZ and the dentate gyrus 215 . With regard to environmental influences on neu - rogenesis , physical activity is one of the most reliable promoters of dentate gyrus cell proliferation 134 , 135 , and might predict successful acquisition of new spatial information . Interestingly , physical activity promotes both vascularization and the production of growth fac - tors 136 . Housing in an ‘enriched’ environment can also significantly increase new neuron production in the dentate gyrus 137 , although this effect is not seen in all mouse strains 138 . By contrast , isolated rearing reduces dentate gyrus proliferation 216 . In addition , adverse expe - rience early in life , in the form of maternal separation , produces a decrease in cell proliferation and immature neuron production in the dentate gyrus of adult rats 139 . Behavioural stress reduces dentate gyrus neurogenesis , mainly through glucocorticoid hormones , whereas social status leads to greater production of new neurons in the dentate gyrus of dominant males in a social hierarchy 140 . Finally , sleep deprivation also reduces the proliferation of cells in the adult dentate gyrus 141 . The strong , if complex , links between learning and neurogenesis are discussed below . Among the molecular mechanisms involved in tan - gential migration along the RMS , PSA - NCAM seems to be crucial 142 , 143 . An as yet unidentified chemorepulsive signal that acts through SLIT – ROBO signalling also controls tangential migration , with SLIT1 and SLIT2 expressed in the septum and ventricular zone possibly repelling migrating neuroblasts 144 , 145 . Ephrins 65 and the receptor tyrosine kinase ErbB4 146 also seem to direct migration through the RMS , whereas integrins might be crucial in making the RMS a migration - permissive substrate 147 . Finally , long - range attractants generated in Box 2 | Adult neurogenesis under pathological conditions Pathological conditions can produce dual and concerted actions on adult neurogenesis . Not only do several factors that promote neurogenesis act in neurogenic regions , but non - neurogenic regions also respond to injury or pathological stimuli by allowing newborn neurons to invade and integrate into the lesioned area 194 . Following ischaemia or brain trauma , proliferation is increased in the dentate gyrus and subventricular zone ( SVZ ) 195 – 198 , but newborn neurons can also be found in the striatum and neocortex 195 , 197 – 200 . These latter effects have been attributed to the atypical migration of SVZ neuronal precursors towards damaged areas 201 . Intriguingly , however , the presence of newborn cell clusters in cortical areas in the vicinity of blood vessels also suggests the recruitment of resident quiescent stem - like cells , or the infiltration of blood - borne cells 202 . Pathological conditions might therefore trigger processes of endogenous neurogenesis in regions where adult neurogenesis is usually non - existent ( for more information , see REF . 34 ) . Despite the presence of neural stem cells in the adult mammalian brain , neurons are not replaced in most regions after injury . New data indicate that oligodendrocyte transcription factor 2 ( OLIG2 ) is a natural repressor of neurogenesis in cells reacting to brain injury 203 . Unsurprisingly , evidence of neurogenic upregulation in the damaged brain has led to interest in therapeutic strategies that exploit naturally existing responses . Such approaches could prove fruitful , not only for stroke and trauma patients , but also in patients with degenerative brain diseases for which there is evidence of an increase in neuronal proliferation 204 , 205 . Work has concentrated on the mechanisms that produce pathological increases in neurogenesis , showing that activation of glutamate receptors 89 , mitotic factors such as basic fibroblast growth factor ( bFGF ) 206 and inflammatory metabolites such as nitric oxide synthase 207 or leukotrienes 208 are all involved . Furthermore , in a recent study enhancing bFGF and epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) activity greatly increased the proliferation of endogenous progenitors following ischaemia , produced newly generated neurons that integrated into neuronal circuitry and was associated with reversals of ischaemia - produced cognitive deficits 209 . Although grafts of neural tissue into infarcted areas have been associated with symptomatic improvement 210 , it might be more productive for reconstruction therapies to take advantage of endogenous adult neurogenesis . Indeed , single astrocytes taken from the human SVZ can generate in vitro neurospheres that differentiate into astrocytes , oligodendrocytes and neurons 211 . However , the same study found no evidence in the human brain for the presence of either a rostral migratory stream or precursors organized into clusters of migrating chains , even though rare individual cells expressing specific markers of immature neurons were reported . These findings raise crucial questions about the destination , fate and functions of human SVZ astrocytes , and about their potential interest for auto - transplantation in brain regions of clinical relevance . R E V I E W S 186 | MARCH 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro the olfactory bulb have been proposed to be involved in neuroblast migration 148 , although the results on which this idea is based are still controversial 149 . After reaching the core of the olfactory bulb , neuro - blasts detach from their chains and turn radially to reach the outer layers . Chain detachment is promoted by reelin expressed by mitral cells 150 , while the extra - cellular matrix glycoprotein tenascin - R initiates both the detachment of neuroblasts from chains and their radial migration 151 . Interestingly , the expression of tenascin - R is activity - dependent 151 , and it might act with secreted prokineticin 2 ( PK2 ) , which functions as a chain - detachment signal and a chemoattractant for SVZ - derived neuronal progenitors 152 . Adult neurogenesis is a wasteful process — of the newborn cells that migrate , differentiate and mature successfully , only ~ 50 % survive for longer than a month 56 , 59 , 153 . Despite the clear importance of this sur - vival process , only a comparatively limited number of external cues have been shown to affect the survival rate of newly generated neurons in the dentate gyrus — namely , physical activity , enriched rearing and housing , spatial learning ( see below ) , mossy fibre stimulation , antidepressants and alcohol ( for examples , see REFS 134 , 135 , 138 , 154 , 155 , 217 – 219 ) . In the olfactory bulb , mice lacking the β 2 - subunit of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor show an increased survival of newborn granule cells , but not of newborn periglomerular neurons 156 , and several studies have shown that the survival of newborn bulbar granule cells depends on sensory input 56 , 157 – 161 ( BOX 3 ) . This influence of sensory input does not appear to be long - lasting : the increased survival of newborn neurons produced by an enriched environment ceases immediately after animals are returned to standard raising conditions 162 . Increased newborn cell survival with augmented sensory input might occur through the actions of the anti - apoptotic protein BCL2 : although odour presentation induces an increase in bulbar BCL2 expression 161 , mice that over - express the protein show enhanced survival of newborn hippocampal neurons 163 . Functions of neurogenesis during adulthood It is clear that many factors regulate the production , transport , development and life - death decisions of adult - born neurons . But once a newborn cell has reached its target , has become a mature neuron and has survived , what does it do then ? Why is it there ? Cellular , network and systems levels . Taking an abstract , fundamental approach , newborn neurons might be able to contribute to adult brain function at the cell - ular , network and systems levels 7 . At the cellular level , the function of newborn neurons might seem straight - forward — they are neurons . But are they special types of neuron ? Work on the maturation of newborn cells suggests that their cellular function might differ from that of their older counterparts , at least transiently ( FIG . 1 ) . Young granule cells in the adult dentate gyrus , for example , show a greater propensity for synaptic plasticity compared with older granule cells 48 , 50 , whereas newborn granule and periglomerular cells in the olfactory bulb show markedly different active membrane properties compared with the existing neurons around them 57 , 58 , and show greater plasticity in response to sensory dep - rivation 159 . Adult - born olfactory bulb cells also show different early - gene responses to odours 164 . Functions of adult neurogenesis at the cellular level might also depend on the cells that are replaced by newborn neurons . We do not yet know whether adult - born cells constitute a specialized , specific population of neurons that replace each other , or whether newborn cells fulfil a more general role by replacing the function ( s ) of much older neurons ( FIG . 4 ) . At the network level , newborn neurons might con - tribute to properties that are produced by the concerted activity of groups of cells . In the olfactory bulb and hippocampus , oscillations and synchrony of neuronal activity represent two obvious and important network phenomena that might be influenced by adult neuro - genesis . Individual networks are also capable of a wide range of information coding and storage operations , and models of adult neurogenesis have begun to suggest that Box 3 | Is there a critical period in the olfactory bulb circuit ? Most neuronal circuits are shaped by their activity in critical periods during development 190 . However , olfactory plasticity seems to extend throughout life : removal of afferent input by naris closure causes the deprived olfactory bulb to atrophy 191 . Moreover , strong olfactory plasticity in adulthood is behaviourally adaptive . Female mice form an olfactory memory at the time of mating that programmes spontaneous abortion when a novel male intruder appears ( the Bruce effect ; for more information , see REF . 192 ) , and offspring recognition from olfactory cues occurs within 4 hours after parturition in sheep . Could such adult olfactory plasticity be related to ongoing neurogenesis in the mature system ? Certainly , the ability of a mother rodent to recognize and nurture her young is associated with an increase in newborn neurons that are integrated into olfactory bulb circuitry 131 . But whether large - scale morphological changes 191 or specific olfactory behaviours depend on adult neurogenesis remains unclear . In contrast to the idea of a critical period for plasticity with regard to the life of an organism , critical periods for changes within the brain can also exist with regard to the life of individual cells . The results of a recent study that used naris occlusion at various time points suggest that the survival of newly born olfactory bulb granule cells is affected by sensory experience , but only when those cells are between 14 and 28 days of age 160 . These two ideas of organism - based and cell - based critical periods might not be independent , as newborn neurons in the olfactory bulb show distinct survival rates depending on their postnatal time of production 193 . In the olfactory system , then , early experience remains crucial in shaping brain development , but processes of adult neurogenesis might cause this influence of sensory activity to persist for an unusually long time . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 7 | MARCH 2006 | 187 Leaves existing neurons unchanged Adaptable function Pre - speciﬁed function , different from that of existing cells Simply replaces function of existing dying cells Changes existing network Or Newneuron Newneuron Newneuron Newneuron Newneuron Trace eyeblink conditioning A hippocampus - dependent task in which animals must associate a conditioned stimulus with an eyeblink - producing unconditioned stimulus . The key ‘trace’ aspect comes from the fact that the two stimuli are separated in time . Morris water maze In its most common form , a test of spatial learning and memory , in which animals must use spatial cues to locate a hidden platform in a pool of opaque water . Long - term potentiation ( LTP ) . An enduring increase in the amplitude of excitatory postsynaptic potentials as a result of high - frequency ( tetanic ) stimulation of afferent pathways . LTP is often considered to be the cellular basis of learning and memory in vertebrates . newborn cells might be vital to some of these functions ( see below ) . Finally , in terms of functional plasticity , neurogenesis at the network level should be considered from the viewpoint of permissiveness versus instruc - tion . It is not clear whether , through pre - specified roles , newborn cells instruct changes in the networks that they join , or whether , through a general alterable role , they simply permit changes to occur in those circuits ( FIG . 4 ) . It is , however , at the systems level that most work into the functions of adult neurogenesis has taken place . The role of the hippocampus in learning and memory , and the perceptual and mnemonic functions of the olfactory bulb have understandably led to investigations into the impor - tance of adult neurogenesis in these processes . Although the gap between cell generation and cognitive processes is large , we are beginning to understand how the plas - ticity afforded by adult neurogenesis might contribute to an animal’s behaviour . Roles in information processing and storage . As a first step towards identifying a systems function to which adult neurogenesis contributes , it might seem sensible to ask whether individual performance levels of that function correlate with individual levels of newborn cell production and / or survival . In the hippocampus , indi - vidual performance on tasks known to depend on the structure is positively correlated with adult neurogenesis : trace eyeblink conditioning performance correlates with measures of newborn cell survival 155 and reactions to novelty correlate with levels of proliferation 165 . However , performance on another hippocampus - dependent task , the Morris water maze , varies much less robustly with indices of neurogenesis . No correlations have been found between individual spatial learning and neurogenesis in young rats ( for an example , see REF . 166 ) , and whereas some reports found water maze learning to vary with newborn cell proliferation and survival in aged rats 166 , other studies failed to find similar correlations 167 . Other studies still have found complex relationships between neurogenesis and water maze performance that depend on stages of training and the maturity of newborn cells 168 . A precise knowledge of the functions tested by various stages and aspects of training coupled with a precise knowledge of the neurogenesis features measured will be essential to resolving these inconsistencies . Many studies have reported parallel effects of a part - icular manipulation on both neurogenesis and function , providing further indirect evidence for a link between the two processes . At the cellular / network level , manipula - tions that increase ( running 134 ) or decrease ( methyl - CpG binding domain protein 1 ( MBD1 ) knock - out 169 ) adult neurogenesis cause either increases or decreases , respec - tively , in levels of dentate gyrus long - term potentiation ( LTP ) . At the systems level , physical activity 134 and envi - ronmental enrichment 154 increase both neurogenesis and performance on hippocampus - dependent learning tasks , whereas age 166 , stress 133 , cholinergic lesions 103 and knockout of the Mbd1 gene 169 are associated with deficits in both phenomena . In addition , acquisition of spatial memory in the water maze correlates with the prolif - eration and survival of newborn dentate gyrus neurons across different inbred mouse strains 170 , and the negative effects of environmental enrichment on the retention of contextual fear conditioning are reduced in presenilin 1 - knockout mice that concomitantly lack enrichment - induced increases in hippocampal neurogenesis 171 . In the olfactory bulb , olfactory enrichment links increased newborn cell survival with improvements in olfac - tory memory 158 . By contrast , olfactory discrimination is decreased by genetic manipulations that reduce the number of newborn cells in the adult bulb 121 , 172 . These correlative observations suggest that adult neurogenesis might contribute to the learning and memory functions subserved by the hippocampus , and to the perceptual and memory functions performed by the bulb . However , there are instances in which manipulation - induced changes in neurogenesis are not matched by parallel changes in hippocampal - or bulbar - dependent cognitive function 156 , 173 , 174 . Instead of looking for correlations between neuro - genesis and function , a more direct approach would be to determine whether a particular function regulates neurogenesis . In the female mouse olfactory system , for example , the proliferation of adult newborn cells increases after mating , during gestation and during lactation 131 . This suggests that adult neurogenesis might be important for the high olfactory perceptual and memory demands associated with reproduction ( for Figure 4 | Possible functions of newborn neurons at the cellular and network levels . We offer a basic scheme of the functional possibilities that newborn neurons might bring to the networks they join . New neurons might have an unspecified , flexible function , or they might have a specific , predetermined role in information processing . In addition , they might simply ‘slot in’ to the pre - existing network , playing their part without causing any other changes , or they could alter the characteristics of existing neurons . This alteration could depend crucially on the types of neuron with which newborn cells form connections . Do newborn granule cells , for example , preferentially make contacts with other granule cells , or do they have a preference for excitatory projection neurons ? Finally , newborn neurons might do nothing functionally special at all , and could simply replace the function of existing , but dying cells . Note that these functions need not be mutually exclusive , or individually exclusive to a given neuron : a single newborn cell , for example , might possess a pre - specified specialist function early in its maturation , but then assume a role similar to that of existing cells once it matures fully . Furthermore , it is entirely possible that each stage of maturation shown in FIG . 1 could be associated with its own unique functional role . R E V I E W S 188 | MARCH 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro Barnes maze In its most common form , a challenging test of spatial learning and memory . Animals must locate a single escape tunnel hidden under one of 40 possible entrance holes . more information , see REF . 175 ) . Efforts have been made to influence neurogenesis in the hippocampus by train - ing on learning and memory paradigms that are known to require this structure . However , results have been confusing and contradictory . Overall , the simple story is that spatial learning tasks do not influence newborn cell proliferation 134 , 176 but do enhance newborn cell survival 155 , 168 , 176 . The full story , however , suggests that the influence of spatial learning tasks on hippocampal neuro genesis depends crucially on the specific demands of particular task elements and the precise maturation stage of newborn neurons present during particular learning phases 168 , 177 . Therefore , the exact role of hippo - campal neurogenesis in spatial learning and memory , if any , remains far from clear . The most direct approaches to investigating the functions of adult neurogenesis have involved attempts to specifically abolish the process . Administration of the antimitotic agent methylazoxymethanol acetate ( MAM ) over 2 weeks considerably reduces the number of newborn neurons present in the dentate gyrus , and produces deficits in hippocampal - dependent trace conditioning 178 , 179 . Moreover , at the right concentra - tion , MAM reduces newborn cell proliferation without affecting an animal’s general health , standard measures of hippo campal physiology or performance on non - hippocampus - dependent learning tasks 178 . Despite this , however , the drug is far from specific , and a dependence of learning deficits on non - neurogenic hippocampal influences cannot be completely ruled out . In addition , problems of intervention completeness are raised by the fact that MAM treatment only reduces newborn neu - rons to 20 % of their normal level , and does not impair learning on all hippocampus - dependent tasks 179 . Either certain hippocampus - dependent learning tasks depend more on adult neurogenesis than others , or the hippo - campal side effects of MAM are specific to only certain functions performed by the structure . Adult neurogenesis is almost completely compromised by irradiation of the brain . At the network / cellular level , a severe reduction in newborn neurons produced by clinical levels of irradiation is associated with a complete lack of a particular form of dentate gyrus LTP 49 . This form of syn - aptic plasticity , which is independent of GABA - mediated inhibition , might be particularly important during active behavioural exploration , when it is known that inhibition in the hippocampus is at a high level 180 . At the systems level , irradiation produces deficits in spatial memory retention in the water maze 181 , and on spatial learning in the Barnes maze 182 without affecting water maze learn - ing 181 , 182 or non - hippocampus - dependent learning tasks . It also prevents hippocampus - dependent behavioural responses to antidepressant treatment 101 . However , the specificity of the effects of radiation has been questioned . Irradiation has been shown to decrease neurogenesis owing to effects on the SGZ microenvironment rather than specific effects on dividing cells 183 . So , correlational and intervention evidence con - verge , in the most part , to suggest that neurogenesis in the adult olfactory bulb and hippocampus is important for the very functions — spatial learning and memory in the hippocampus , and olfactory discrimination and memory in the olfactory bulb — for which the struc - tures themselves are believed to be important . This is not surprising , although the possible discrepancies between hippocampus - dependent learning tasks and hippocampal neurogenesis - dependent learning tasks ( for an example , see REFS 179 , 181 ) are intriguing . What is certain is that specifically and completely halting adult neurogenesis , as might soon be offered by con - ditional knockout approaches , should offer the oppor - tunity to more rigorously investigate the functions of adult neurogenesis at the systems level , provided that our approaches to behavioural characterization are extremely well considered . Of course , one way to specifically and completely manipulate adult neurogenesis is to use simulated computational models . In a model of olfactory bulb circuitry , introducing activity - dependent survival of newborn neurons produces better orthogonalization of sensory representations , which are indicative of better olfactory discrimination in changing environmental conditions 184 . Similarly , neuronal turnover in the den - tate gyrus layer of a simulated hippocampal network improves the recall of information by minimizing interference between similar stored items 185 . In terms of learning , simply adding new neurons to a network can threaten the fidelity of both newly and previously stored information 186 . However , if a network possesses homeostatic mechanisms to compensate for increased excitability , adding new excitatory neurons can aid the storage of new information , while simultaneously facilitating the forgetting of old memories 42 , 186 , 187 . Interestingly , these effects of neurogenesis appear similar whether the homeostatic mechanisms involve turnover of existing excitatory neurons or processes to reduce activity in pre - existing connections 186 . These models represent perhaps the best current evidence for a commonly proposed function of adult neurogenesis : that , rather than ( or as well as ) partici - pating in the storage of new information , it endows a network with the ability to adapt to future changes in input 188 . Therefore , adult neurogenesis could represent a form of metaplasticity — a change in the brain that facilitates further changes in the brain . It would certainly be interesting to investigate whether increased neuro - genesis produced by one form of learning facilitates the retention of a different future task . Concluding remarks The two faces of Janus : stability and flexibility . The job of the adult brain is to guide the organism through a changing world , a job that involves being able to adapt to new challenges without compromising the ability to respond to familiar situations . This is simple if the brain possesses unlimited learning and storage capacity , but if we recognize the likely case that learning everything is not possible , it is clear that the twin demands of stability and flexibility are contradictory : learning new infor - mation when your memory is full must involve some forgetting . At first glance , neurogenesis in the adult brain would seem to bias a system in favour of flexibility ; R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 7 | MARCH 2006 | 189 1 . Harzsch , S . & Dawirs , R . R . Neurogenesis in the developing crab brain : postembryonic generation of neurons persists beyond metamorphosis . J . Neurobiol . 29 , 384 – 398 ( 1996 ) . 2 . Goldman , S . A . & Nottebohm , F . Neuronal production , migration and differentiation in a vocal control nucleus of the adult female canary brain . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 80 , 2390 – 2394 ( 1983 ) . 3 . Altman , J . & Das , G . D . Post - natal origin of microneurones in the rat brain . Nature 207 , 953 – 956 ( 1965 ) . 4 . Gould , E . , Reeves , A . J . , Graziano , M . S . & Gross , C . G . Neurogenesis in the neocortex of adult primates . Science 286 , 548 – 552 ( 1999 ) . 5 . Kornack , D . R . & Rakic , P . Continuation of neurogenesis in the hippocampus of the adult macaque monkey . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 5768 – 5773 ( 1999 ) . 6 . Eriksson , P . S . et al . Neurogenesis in the adult human hippocampus . Nature Med . 4 , 1313 – 1317 ( 1998 ) . 7 . Kempermann , G . , Wiskott , L . & Gage , F . H . Functional significance of adult neurogenesis . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 14 , 186 – 191 ( 2004 ) . 8 . Rakic , P . Adult neurogenesis in mammals , an identity crisis . J . Neurosci . 22 , 614 – 618 ( 2002 ) . 9 . Alvarez - Buylla , A . & Garcia - Verdugo , J . M . Neurogenesis in adult subventricular zone . J . Neurosci . 22 , 629 – 634 ( 2002 ) . 10 . Palmer , T . D . , Ray , J . & Gage , F . H . FGF - 2 - responsive neuronal progenitors reside in proliferative and quiescent regions of the adult rodent brain . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 6 , 474 – 486 ( 1995 ) . 11 . Weiss , S . et al . Multipotent CNS stem cells are present in the adult mammalian spinal cord and ventricular neuroaxis . J . Neurosci . 16 , 7599 – 7609 ( 1996 ) . 12 . Tropepe , V . et al . Retinal stem cells in the adult mammalian eye . Science 287 , 2032 – 2036 ( 2000 ) . 13 . Bernier , P . J . , Bedard , A . , Vinet , J . , Levesque , M . & Parent , A . Newly generated neurons in the amygdala and adjoining cortex of adult primates . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 11464 – 11469 ( 2002 ) . 14 . Gritti , A . et al . Multipotent neural stem cells reside into the rostral extension and OB of adult rodents . J . Neurosci . 22 , 437 – 445 ( 2002 ) . 15 . Zhao , M . et al . Evidence for neurogenesis in the adult mammalian substantia nigra . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 7925 – 7930 ( 2003 ) . 16 . Kokoeva , M . , Yin , H . & Flier , J . S . Neurogenesis in the hypothalamus of adult mice : potential role in energy balance . Science 310 , 679 – 683 ( 2005 ) . 17 . Bauer , S . , Hay , M . , Amilhon , B . , Jean , A . & Moyse , E . In vivo neurogenesis in the dorsal vagal complex of the adult rat brainstem . Neuroscience 130 , 75 – 90 ( 2005 ) . 18 . Kornack , D . R . & Rakic , P . Cell proliferation without neurogenesis in adult primate neocortex . Science 294 , 2127 – 2130 ( 2001 ) . 19 . Lie , D . C . et al . The adult substantia nigra contains progenitor cells with neurogenic potential . J . Neurosci . 22 , 6639 – 6649 ( 2002 ) . 20 . Koketsu , D . , Mikami , A . , Miyamoto , Y . & Hisatsune , T . Nonrenewal of neurons in the cerebral neocortex of adult macaque monkeys . J . Neurosci . 23 , 937 – 942 ( 2003 ) . 21 . Frielingsdorf , H . , Schwarz , K . , Brundin , P . & Mohapel , P . No evidence for new dopaminergic neurons in the adult mammalian substantia nigra . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 10177 – 10182 ( 2004 ) . 22 . Doetsch , F . , Caillé , I . , Lim , D . A . , Garcia - Verdugo , J . M . & Alvarez - Buylla , A . Subventricular zone astrocytes are neural stem cells in the adult mammalian brain . Cell 97 , 703 – 716 ( 1999 ) . A classic paper for anyone interested in the fields of adult neural stem cells . after all , it is a drastic step to introduce a completely new cell to an already functional circuit , or to remove an existing neuron from that network . However , certain features of the maturation of adult - born neurons might minimize the instability produced by their addition . In particular , the fact that newborn cells always receive GABA - mediated synaptic input before glutamatergic influences 39 , 40 , 44 , 57 , 58 , 213 ( FIG . 1 ) might allow their integra - tion into existing networks without running the risk of excitation - induced neurotoxicity . In addition , the late development of sodium spikes by maturing olfactory bulb granule cells might allow them to integrate ‘silently’ into the existing network , only contributing to network activity when they are fully mature 58 ( FIG . 1 ) . Computational models suggest that adult neuro - genesis , rather than introducing drastic flexibility to a network , might actually stabilize an already plastic network in the face of a large volume of new incoming information ( see above , and REF . 186 ) . However , it is also possible that in a system with limited capacity that needs to forget old information , producing a large degree of plasticity through adult neurogenesis might represent an ideal solution 42 , 171 , 186 , 187 . Neurogenesis might therefore favour flexibility , stability , or both , in the adult brain . Why only a few brain areas ? Those looking for the func - tional meaning of adult neurogenesis might be inspired by its extremely limited spatial distribution . What is so special about adult neurogenic regions that they alone possess adult - born neurons ? Or , the question could be turned around to ask why , given the relative abundance of neurogenesis in the adult brain of reptiles and birds , do so many regions of the adult mammalian brain not receive newborn neurons ? The olfactory bulb and hippocampus certainly share many similar features , any or all of which could be related to adult neurogenesis . They are both evolutionarily old areas of the brain , and , during develop - ment , both are populated by cells arising from neurogenic zones adjacent to the lateral ventricle . From a functional point of view , it is intriguing that both structures appear to be vital in the temporary storage of information 189 , a role that fits well , if rather vaguely , with the functions of adult neurogenesis discussed above . It has also been suggested that both the olfactory bulb and hippocampus might deal with particularly large amounts of information 187 or use specific coding strategies to deal with that information 184 . However , for every similarity between the olfactory bulb and hippocampus there are large differences , not least in terms of adult neurogenesis ( FIG . 1 ) . Moreover , for every proposed shared function between these two regions , there are other , non - neurogenic regions of the adult brain that have the same attribute . Whether neurogenesis in the adult olfactory bulb and hippocampus has a particular , common role will await more precise investigation of its function . In the meantime , a simple answer to the question above might be that the olfactory bulb and hippo campus are two regions of the mammalian brain in which muta - tions preventing adult neurogenesis were never beneficial , or simply never occurred . Note added in proof In a recent paper , Sawamoto et al . report that the planar polarity of ciliated ependymal cells of the lateral ventricles is essential for the formation of chemorepulsive factor gradients that guide neuroblast migration in the adult brain . They show that polarized epithelia and motile cilia in the brain serve as important conveyors of directional information for neuroblast migration 220 . Ziv and colleagues have identified CNS - specific autoimmune T cells as being important to adult brain plasticity . They found that their involvement occurs , at least in part , by means of crosstalk with resident microglia . This new and important finding suggests that CNS - specific T cells affect adult neurogenesis , both in the dentate gyrus and in the SVZ , primarily through their effect on progenitor cell proliferation 221 . Götz and Huttner cover recent data that shows how neural stem cells and their derivative progenitor cells generate neurons by asymmetric and symmetric divi - sions during the development of the mammalian CNS . The authors discuss the molecular mechanisms that evolve during development from neuroepithelial to radial glial cells , and how this transition affects cell fate and neurogenesis 222 . R E V I E W S 190 | MARCH 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro 23 . Laywell , E . D . , Rakic , P . , Kukekov , V . G . , Holland , E . C . & Steindler , D . A . Identification of a multipotent astrocytic stem cell in the immature and adult mouse brain . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 13883 – 13888 ( 2000 ) . 24 . Garcia , A . D . , Doan , N . B . , Imura , T . , Bush , T . G . & Sofroniew , M . V . GFAP - expressing progenitors are the principal source of constitutive neurogenesis in adult mouse forebrain . Nature Neurosci . 7 , 1233 – 1241 ( 2004 ) . Establishes the cellular identity in vivo of adult multipotent neural progenitors responsible for constitutive adult neurogenesis . 25 . Alvarez - Buylla , A . , Garcia - Verdugo , J . M . & Tramontin , A . D . A unified hypothesis on the lineage of neural stem cells . Nature Rev . Neurosci . 2 , 287 – 293 ( 2001 ) . 26 . Lois , C . & Alvarez - Buylla , A . Long - distance neuronal migration in the adult mammalian brain . Science 264 , 1145 – 1148 ( 1994 ) . 27 . Jankovski , A . & Sotelo , C . Subventricular zone – olfactory bulb migratory pathway in the adult mouse : cellular composition and specificity as determined by heterochronic and heterotopic transplantation . J . Comp . Neurol . 371 , 376 – 396 ( 1996 ) . 28 . Cameron , H . A . & McKay , R . D . Adult neurogenesis produces a large pool of new granule cells in the DG . J . Comp . Neurol . 435 , 406 – 417 ( 2001 ) . 29 . Kuhn , H . G . , Dickinson - Anson , H . & Gage , F . H . Neurogenesis in the DG of the adult rat : age - related decrease of neuronal progenitor proliferation . J . Neurosci . 16 , 2027 – 2033 ( 1996 ) . 30 . Stanfield , B . B . & Trice , J . E . Evidence that granule cells generated in the DG of adult rats extend axonal projections . Exp . Brain Res . 72 , 399 – 406 ( 1988 ) . 31 . Markakis , E . A . & Gage , F . H . Adult - generated neurons in the DG send axonal projections to field CA3 and are surrounded by synaptic vesicles . J . Comp . Neurol . 406 , 449 – 460 ( 1999 ) . 32 . Doetsch , F . The glial identity of neural stem cells . Nature Neurosci . 6 , 1127 – 1134 ( 2003 ) . 33 . Alvarez - Buylla , A . & Lim , D . A . For the long run : maintaining germinal niches in the adult brain . Neuron 41 , 683 – 686 ( 2004 ) . 34 . Ming , G . L . & Song , H . Adult neurogenesis in the mammalian central nervous system . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 28 , 223 – 250 ( 2005 ) . 35 . Zhao , C . , Teng , E . M . , Summers , R . G . Jr , Ming , G . - L . & Gage , F . H . Distinct morphological stages of dentate granule neuron maturation in the adult mouse hippocampus . J . Neurosci . 26 , 3 – 11 ( 2006 ) . 36 . Seki , T . & Arai , Y . Highly polysialylated neural cell adhesion molecule ( NCAM - H ) is expressed by newly generated granule cells in the DG of the adult rat . J . Neurosci . 13 , 2351 – 2358 ( 1993 ) . 37 . Brandt , M . D . et al . Transient calretinin expression defines early postmitotic step of neuronal differentiation in adult hippocampal neurogenesis of mice . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 24 , 603 – 613 ( 2003 ) . 38 . Seri , B . , Garcia - Verdugo , J . M . , Collado - Morente , L . , McEwen , B . S . & Alvarez - Buylla , A . Cell types , lineage , and architecture of the germinal zone in the adult DG . J . Comp . Neurol . 478 , 359 – 378 ( 2004 ) . 39 . Wang , L . P . , Kempermann , G . & Kettenmann , H . A subpopulation of precursor cells in the mouse DG receives synaptic GABAergic input . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 29 , 181 – 189 ( 2005 ) . 40 . Tozuka , Y . , Fukuda , S . , Namba , T . , Seki , T . & Hisatsune , T . GABAergic excitation promotes neuronal differentiation in adult hippocampal progenitor cells . Neuron 47 , 803 – 815 ( 2005 ) . 41 . Ben - Ari , Y . Excitatory actions of GABA during development : the nature of the nurture . Nature Rev . Neurosci . 3 , 728 – 739 ( 2002 ) . 42 . Deisseroth , K . et al . Excitation – neurogenesis coupling in adult neural stem / progenitor cells . Neuron 42 , 535 – 552 ( 2004 ) . 43 . Liu , X . , Wang , Q . , Haydar , T . F . & Bordey , A . Nonsynaptic GABA signaling in postnatal subventricular zone controls proliferation of GFAP - expressing progenitors . Nature Neurosci . 8 , 1179 – 1187 ( 2005 ) . Shows that GABA released from neuroblasts provides a feedback mechanism to control the proliferation of GFAP - expressing progenitors . 44 . Overstreet , L . S . et al . A transgenic marker for newly born granule cells in DG . J . Neurosci . 24 , 3251 – 3259 ( 2004 ) . 45 . Overstreet - Wadiche , L . S . , Bromberg , D . A . , Bensen , A . L . & Westbrook , G . L . GABAergic signaling to newborn neurons in DG . J . Neurophysiol . 94 , 4528 – 4532 ( 2005 ) . 46 . Espósito , M . S . et al . Neuronal differentiation in the adult hippocampus recapitulates embryonic development . J . Neurosci . 25 , 10074 – 10086 ( 2005 ) . 47 . van Praag , H . et al . Functional neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus . Nature 415 , 1030 – 1034 ( 2002 ) . The first paper to show that new neurons in the adult hippocampus become functional . 48 . Wang , S . , Scott , B . W . & Wojtowicz , J . M . Heterogenous properties of dentate granule neurons in the adult rat . J . Neurobiol . 42 , 248 – 257 ( 2000 ) . 49 . Snyder , J . S . , Kee , N . & Wojtowicz , J . M . Effects of adult neurogenesis on synaptic plasticity in the rat DG . J . Neurophysiol . 85 , 2423 – 2431 ( 2001 ) . 50 . Schmidt - Hieber , C . , Jonas , P . & Bischofberger , J . Enhanced synaptic plasticity in newly generated granule cells of the adult hippocampus . Nature 429 , 184 – 187 ( 2004 ) . 51 . Soares , S . & Sotelo , C . Adult neural stem cells from the mouse subventricular zone are limited in migratory ability compared to progenitor cells of similar origin . Neuroscience 128 , 807 – 817 ( 2004 ) . 52 . Raineteau , O . , Rietschin , L . , Gradwohl , G . , Guillemot , F . & Gahwiler , B . H . Neurogenesis in hippocampal slice cultures . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 26 , 241 – 250 ( 2004 ) . 53 . Kamada , M . et al . Intrinsic and spontaneous neurogenesis in the postnatal slice culture of rat hippocampus . Eur . J . Neurosci . 20 , 2499 – 2508 ( 2004 ) . 54 . Liu , S . et al . Generation of functional inhibitory neurons in the adult rat hippocampus . J . Neurosci . 23 , 732 – 736 ( 2003 ) . 55 . Gutierrez , R . et al . Plasticity of the GABAergic phenotype of the ‘glutamatergic’ granule cells of the rat DG . J . Neurosci . 23 , 5594 – 5598 ( 2003 ) . 56 . Petreanu , L . & Alvarez - Buylla , A . Maturation and death of adult - born OB granule neurons : role of olfaction . J . Neurosci . 22 , 6106 – 6113 ( 2002 ) . An elegant study of the maturation and elimination of newborn bulbar interneurons . 57 . Belluzzi , O . , Benedusi , M . , Ackman , J . & LoTurco , J . J . Electrophysiological differentiation of new neurons in the OB . J . Neurosci . 23 , 10411 – 10418 ( 2003 ) . 58 . Carleton , A . , Petreanu , L . T . , Lansford , R . , Alvarez - Buylla , A . & Lledo , P . - M . Becoming a new neuron in the adult OB . Nature Neurosci . 6 , 507 – 518 ( 2003 ) . References 57 and 58 physiologically characterize newborn periglomerular and granular cells , showing that they are functional neurons that synaptically integrate into olfactory bulb circuitry . 59 . Winner , B . , Cooper - Kuhn , C . M . , Aigner , R . , Winkler , J . & Kuhn , H . G . Long - term survival and cell death of newly generated neurons in the adult rat OB . Eur . J . Neurosci . 16 , 1681 – 1689 ( 2002 ) . 60 . Shen , Q . et al . Endothelial cells stimulate self - renewal and expand neurogenesis of neural stem cells . Science 304 , 1338 – 1340 ( 2004 ) . 61 . Song , H . , Stevens , C . F . & Gage , F . H . Astroglia induce neurogenesis from adult neural stem cells . Nature 417 , 39 – 44 ( 2002 ) . One of the first demonstrations that hippocampal neurogenesis requires the proximity of astrocytes . 62 . Wurmser , A . E . et al . Cell fusion - independent differentiation of neural stem cells to the endothelial lineage . Nature 430 , 350 – 356 ( 2004 ) . The first results to show that endothelial cells induce conversion of neural stem cells into an endothelial - like population . 63 . Yoshikawa , K . Cell cycle regulators in neural stem cells and postmitotic neurons . Neurosci . Res . 37 , 1 – 14 ( 2000 ) . 64 . Cooper - Kuhn , C . M . et al . Impaired adult neurogenesis in mice lacking the transcription factor E2F1 . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 21 , 312 – 323 ( 2002 ) . 65 . Conover , J . C . et al . Disruption of Eph / ephrin signaling affects migration and proliferation in the adult subventricular zone . Nature Neurosci . 3 , 1091 – 1097 ( 2000 ) . 66 . Holmberg , J . et al . Ephrin - A2 reverse signaling negatively regulates neural progenitor proliferation and neurogenesis . Genes Dev . 19 , 462 – 471 ( 2005 ) . 67 . McMahon , A . P . , Ingham , P . W . & Tabin , C . J . Developmental roles and clinical significance of hedgehog signaling . Curr . Top . Dev . Biol . 53 , 1 – 114 ( 2003 ) . 68 . Machold , R . et al . Sonic hedgehog is required for progenitor cell maintenance in telencephalic stem cell niches . Neuron 39 , 937 – 950 ( 2003 ) . 69 . Lai , K . , Kaspar , B . K . , Gage , F . H . & Schaffer , D . V . Sonic hedgehog regulates adult neural progenitor proliferation in vitro and in vivo . Nature Neurosci . 6 , 21 – 27 ( 2003 ) . 70 . Lie , D . C . Wnt signalling regulates adult hippocampal neurogenesis . Nature 437 , 1370 – 1375 ( 2005 ) . The first identification of an instructive factor for neurogenesis from adult neural stem cells . 71 . Amoureux , M . C . , Cunningham , B . A . , Edelman , G . M . & Crossin , K . L . N - CAM binding inhibits the proliferation of hippocampal progenitor cells and promotes their differentiation to a neuronal phenotype . J . Neurosci . 20 , 3631 – 3640 ( 2000 ) . 72 . Belvindrah , R . , Rougon , G . & Chazal , G . Increased neurogenesis in adult mCD24 - deficient mice . J . Neurosci . 22 , 3594 – 3607 ( 2002 ) . 73 . Caillé , I . et al . Soluble form of amyloid precursor protein regulates proliferation of progenitors in the adult subventricular zone . Development 131 , 2173 – 2181 ( 2004 ) . 74 . Lim , D . A . et al . Noggin antagonizes BMP signaling to create a niche for adult neurogenesis . Neuron 28 , 713 – 726 ( 2000 ) . One of the first papers to show the molecular signals that are required for the neurogenic lineage to be maintained throughout adult life . 75 . Ueki , T . et al . A novel secretory factor , Neurogenesin - 1 , provides neurogenic environmental cues for neural stem cells in the adult hippocampus . J . Neurosci . 23 , 11732 – 11740 ( 2003 ) . 76 . Fan , X . T . , Xu , H . W . , Cai , W . Q . , Yang , H . & Liu , S . Antisense Noggin oligodeoxynucleotide administration decreases cell proliferation in the DG of adult rats . Neurosci . Lett . 366 , 107 – 111 ( 2004 ) . 77 . Hitoshi , S . et al . Primitive neural stem cells from the mammalian epiblast differentiate to definitive neural stem cells under the control of Notch signaling . Genes Dev . 18 , 1806 – 1811 ( 2004 ) . 78 . Grandbarbe , L . et al . Delta – Notch signaling controls the generation of neurons / glia from neural stem cells in a stepwise process . Development 130 , 1391 – 1402 ( 2003 ) . 79 . Molofsky , A . V . et al . Bmi - 1 dependence distinguishes neural stem cell self - renewal from progenitor proliferation . Nature 425 , 962 – 967 ( 2003 ) . 80 . Shi , Y . et al . Expression and function of orphan nuclear receptor TLX in adult neural stem cells . Nature 427 , 78 – 83 ( 2004 ) . 81 . Hack , M . A . et al . Neuronal fate determinants of adult OB neurogenesis . Nature Neurosci . 8 , 865 – 871 ( 2005 ) . 82 . Kohwi , M . , Osumi , N . , Rubenstein , J . L . & Alvarez - Buylla , A . Pax6 is required for making specific subpopulations of granule and periglomerular neurons in the OB . J . Neurosci . 25 , 6997 – 7003 ( 2005 ) . 83 . Maekawa , M . et al . Pax6 is required for production and maintenance of progenitor cells in postnatal hippocampal neurogenesis . Genes Cells 10 , 1001 – 1014 ( 2005 ) . 84 . Parras , C . M . et al . Mash1 specifies neurons and oligodendrocytes in the postnatal brain . EMBO J . 23 , 4495 – 4505 ( 2004 ) . 85 . Bolteus , A . J . & Bordey , A . GABA release and uptake regulate neuronal precursor migration in the postnatal subventricular zone . J . Neurosci . 24 , 7623 – 7631 ( 2004 ) . One of the first papers to demonstrate the influence of astrocyte - like cells on SVZ - derived precursor migration . 86 . Abrous , D . N . , Koehl , M . & Le Moal , M . Adult neurogenesis : from precursors to network and physiology . Physiol . Rev . 85 , 523 – 569 ( 2005 ) . 87 . Cameron , H . A . , McEwen , B . S . & Gould , E . Regulation of adult neurogenesis by excitatory input and NMDA receptor activation in the DG . J . Neurosci . 15 , 4687 – 4692 ( 1995 ) . 88 . Gould , E . , McEwen , B . S . , Tanapat , P . , Galea , L . A . & Fuchs , E . Neurogenesis in the DG of the adult tree shrew is regulated by psychosocial stress and NMDA receptor activation . J . Neurosci . 17 , 2492 – 2498 ( 1997 ) . 89 . Bernabeu , R . & Sharp , F . R . NMDA and AMPA / kainate glutamate receptors modulate dentate neurogenesis and CA3 synapsin - I in normal and ischemic hippocampus . J . Cereb . Blood Flow Metab . 20 , 1669 – 1680 ( 2000 ) . 90 . Yoshimizu , T . & Chaki , S . Increased cell proliferation in the adult mouse hippocampus following chronic administration of group II metabotropic glutamate receptor antagonist , MGS0039 . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 315 , 493 – 496 ( 2004 ) . 91 . Bai , F . , Bergeron , M . & Nelson , D . L . Chronic AMPA receptor potentiator ( LY451646 ) treatment increases cell proliferation in adult rat hippocampus . Neuropharmacology 44 , 1013 – 1021 ( 2003 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 7 | MARCH 2006 | 191 92 . Dawirs , R . R . , Hildebrandt , K . & Teuchert - Noodt , G . Adult treatment with haloperidol increases dentate granule cell proliferation in the gerbil hippocampus . J . Neural . Transm . 105 , 317 – 327 ( 1998 ) . 93 . Yamaguchi , M . et al . Repetitive cocaine administration decreases neurogenesis in adult rat hippocampus . Ann . NY Acad . Sci . 1025 , 351 – 362 ( 2004 ) . 94 . Kippin , T . E . , Kapur , S . & van der Kooy , D . Dopamine specifically inhibits forebrain neural stem cell proliferation , suggesting a novel effect of antipsychotic drugs . J . Neurosci . 25 , 5815 – 5823 ( 2005 ) . 95 . Baker , S . A . , Baker , K . A . & Hagg , T . Dopaminergic nigrostriatal projections regulate neural precursor proliferation in the adult mouse subventricular zone . Eur . J . Neurosci . 20 , 575 – 579 ( 2004 ) . 96 . Hoglinger , G . U . et al . Dopamine depletion impairs precursor cell proliferation in Parkinson disease . Nature Neurosci . 7 , 726 – 735 ( 2004 ) . 97 . Banasr , M . , Hery , M . , Printemps , R . & Daszuta , A . Serotonin - induced increases in adult cell proliferation and neurogenesis are mediated through different and common 5 - HT receptor subtypes in the DG and the subventricular zone . Neuropsychopharmacology 29 , 450 – 460 ( 2004 ) . 98 . Radley , J . J . & Jacobs , B . L . 5 - HT 1A receptor antagonist administration decreases cell proliferation in the DG . Brain Res . 955 , 264 – 267 ( 2002 ) . 99 . Brezun , J . M . & Daszuta , A . Depletion in serotonin decreases neurogenesis in the DG and the subventricular zone of adult rats . Neuroscience 89 , 999 – 1002 ( 1999 ) . 100 . Malberg , J . E . , Eisch , A . J . , Nestler , E . J . & Duman , R . S . Chronic antidepressant treatment increases neurogenesis in adult rat hippocampus . J . Neurosci . 20 , 9104 – 9110 ( 2000 ) . 101 . Santarelli , L . et al . Requirement of hippocampal neurogenesis for the behavioral effects of antidepressants . Science 301 , 805 – 809 ( 2003 ) . 102 . Cooper - Kuhn , C . M . , Winkler , J . & Kuhn , H . G . Decreased neurogenesis after cholinergic forebrain lesion in the adult rat . J . Neurosci . Res . 77 , 155 – 165 ( 2004 ) . 103 . Mohapel , P . , Leanza , G . , Kokaia , M . & Lindvall , O . Forebrain acetylcholine regulates adult hippocampal neurogenesis and learning . Neurobiol . Aging 26 , 939 – 946 ( 2005 ) . 104 . Packer , M . A . et al . Nitric oxide negatively regulates mammalian adult neurogenesis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 9566 – 9571 ( 2003 ) . 105 . Moreno - Lopez , B . Nitric oxide is a physiological inhibitor of neurogenesis in the adult mouse subventricular zone and OB . J . Neurosci . 24 , 85 – 95 ( 2004 ) . 106 . Eisch , A . J . , Barrot , M . , Schad , C . A . , Self , D . W . & Nestler , E . J . Opiates inhibit neurogenesis in the adult rat hippocampus . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 7579 – 7584 ( 2000 ) . 107 . Persson , A . I . et al . µ - and δ - opioid receptor antagonists decrease proliferation and increase neurogenesis in cultures of rat adult hippocampal progenitors . Eur . J . Neurosci . 17 , 1159 – 1172 ( 2003 ) . 108 . Rueda , D . , Navarro , B . , Martinez - Serrano , A . , Guzman , M . & Galve - Roperh , I . The endocannabinoid anandamide inhibits neuronal progenitor cell differentiation through attenuation of the Rap1 / B - Raf / ERK pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 46645 – 46650 ( 2002 ) . 109 . Herrera , D . G . et al . Selective impairment of hippocampal neurogenesis by chronic alcoholism : protective effects of an antioxidant . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 7919 – 7924 ( 2003 ) . 110 . Aberg , E . , Hofstetter , C . P . , Olson , L . & Brene , S . Moderate ethanol consumption increases hippocampal cell proliferation and neurogenesis in the adult mouse . Int . J . Neuropsychopharmacol . 8 , 557 – 567 ( 2005 ) . 111 . Jiang , W . et al . Cannabinoids promote embryonic and adult hippocampus neurogenesis and produce anxiolytic - and antidepressant - like effects . J . Clin . Invest . 115 , 3104 – 3116 ( 2005 ) . 112 . Katoh - Semba , R . et al . Riluzole enhances expression of brain - derived neurotrophic factor with consequent proliferation of granule precursor cells in the rat hippocampus . FASEB J . 16 , 1328 – 1330 ( 2002 ) . 113 . Zigova , T . , Pencea , V . , Wiegand , S . J . & Luskin , M . B . Intraventricular administration of BDNF increases the number of newly generated neurons in the adult OB . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 11 , 234 – 245 ( 1998 ) . 114 . Emsley , J . G . & Hagg , T . Endogenous and exogenous ciliary neurotrophic factor enhances forebrain neurogenesis in adult mice . Exp . Neurol . 183 , 298 – 310 ( 2003 ) . 115 . Chojnacki , A . , Shimazaki , T . , Gregg , C . , Weinmaster , G . & Weiss , S . Glycoprotein 130 signaling regulates Notch1 expression and activation in the self - renewal of mammalian forebrain neural stem cells . J . Neurosci . 23 , 1730 – 1741 ( 2003 ) . 116 . Jin , K . et al . Neurogenesis and aging : FGF - 2 and HB - EGF restore neurogenesis in hippocampus and subventricular zone of aged mice . Aging Cell 2 , 175 – 183 ( 2003 ) . 117 . Jin , K . et al . Cerebral neurogenesis is induced by intranasal administration of growth factors . Ann . Neurol . 53 , 405 – 409 ( 2003 ) . 118 . Kuhn , H . G . , Winkler , J . , Kempermann , G . , Thal , L . J . & Gage , F . H . Epidermal growth factor and fibroblast growth factor - 2 have different effects on neural progenitors in the adult rat brain . J . Neurosci . 17 , 5820 – 5829 ( 1997 ) . 119 . Aberg , M . A . et al . IGF - I has a direct proliferative effect in adult hippocampal progenitor cells . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 24 , 23 – 40 ( 2003 ) . 120 . Craig , C . G . et al . In vivo growth factor expansion of endogenous subependymal neural precursor cell populations in the adult mouse brain . J . Neurosci . 16 , 2649 – 2658 ( 1996 ) . 121 . Enwere , E . et al . Aging results in reduced epidermal growth factor receptor signaling , diminished olfactory neurogenesis , and deficits in fine olfactory discrimination . J . Neurosci . 24 , 8354 – 8365 ( 2004 ) . 122 . Jin , K . et al . Vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) stimulates neurogenesis in vitro and in vivo . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 11946 – 11950 ( 2002 ) . 123 . Greenberg , D . A . & Jin , K . From angiogenesis to neuropathology . Nature 438 , 954 – 959 ( 2005 ) . 124 . Cao , L . et al . VEGF links hippocampal activity with neurogenesis , learning and memory . Nature Genet . 36 , 827 – 835 ( 2004 ) . 125 . Consiglio , A . et al . Robust in vivo gene transfer into adult mammalian neural stem cells by lentiviral vectors . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 14835 – 14840 ( 2004 ) . 126 . Cameron , H . A . & Gould , E . Adult neurogenesis is regulated by adrenal steroids in the DG . Neuroscience 61 , 203 – 209 ( 1994 ) . The first study identifying an external factor that regulates neuronal birth in the adult dentate gyrus . 127 . Tanapat , P . , Hastings , N . B . , Reeves , A . J . & Gould , E . Estrogen stimulates a transient increase in the number of new neurons in the mk DG of the adult female rat . J . Neurosci . 19 , 5792 – 5801 ( 1999 ) . 128 . Coe , C . L . et al . Prenatal stress diminishes neurogenesis in the DG of juvenile rhesus monkeys . Biol . Psychiatry 54 , 1025 – 1034 ( 2003 ) . 129 . Montaron , M . F . et al . Lifelong corticosterone level determines age - related decline in neurogenesis and memory . Neurobiol . Aging 13 Jun 2005 ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neurobiolaging . 2005 . 02 . 014 ) . 130 . Rodriguez , J . J . et al . Complex regulation of the expression of the polysialylated form of the neuronal cell adhesion molecule by glucocorticoids in the rat hippocampus . Eur . J . Neurosci . 10 , 2994 – 3006 ( 1998 ) . 131 . Shingo , T . et al . Pregnancy - stimulated neurogenesis in the adult female forebrain mediated by prolactin . Science 299 , 117 – 120 ( 2003 ) . 132 . Lemkine , G . F . et al . Adult neural stem cell cycling in vivo requires thyroid hormone and its α receptor . FASEB J . 19 , 863 – 865 ( 2005 ) . 133 . Mayo , W . et al . Pregnenolone sulfate enhances neurogenesis and PSA - NCAM in young and aged hippocampus . Neurobiol . Aging 26 , 103 – 114 ( 2005 ) . 134 . van Praag , H . , Christie , B . R . , Sejnowski , T . J . & Gage , F . H . Running enhances neurogenesis , learning , and long - term potentiation in mice . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 13427 – 13431 ( 1999 ) . 135 . Brown , J . et al . Enriched environment and physical activity stimulate hippocampal but not OB neurogenesis . Eur . J . Neurosci . 17 , 2042 – 2046 ( 2003 ) . 136 . Neeper , S . A . , Gomez - Pinilla , F . , Choi , J . & Cotman , C . Exercise and brain neurotrophins . Nature 373 , 109 ( 1995 ) . 137 . Kempermann , G . , Kuhn , H . G . & Gage , F . H . More hippocampal neurons in adult mice living in an enriched environment . Nature 386 , 493 – 495 ( 1997 ) . One of the first papers to study environmental factors that regulate new neuron birth in the dentate gyrus . 138 . Kempermann , G . , Brandon , E . P . & Gage , F . H . Environmental stimulation of 129 / SvJ mice causes increased cell proliferation and neurogenesis in the adult DG . Curr . Biol . 8 , 939 – 942 ( 1998 ) . 139 . Mirescu , C . , Peters , J . D . & Gould , E . Early life experience alters response of adult neurogenesis to stress . Nature Neurosci . 7 , 841 – 846 ( 2004 ) . 140 . Kozorovitskiy , Y . & Gould , E . Dominance hierarchy influences adult neurogenesis in the DG . J . Neurosci . 24 , 6755 – 6759 ( 2004 ) . 141 . Guzman - Marin , R . et al . Sleep deprivation suppresses neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus of rats . Eur . J . Neurosci . 22 , 2111 – 2116 ( 2005 ) . 142 . Bonfanti , L . & Theodosis , D . T . Expression of polysialylated neural cell adhesion molecule by proliferating cells in the subependymal layer of the adult rat , in its rostral extension and in the OB . Neuroscience 62 , 291 – 305 ( 1994 ) . 143 . Cremer , H . et al . Inactivation of the N - CAM gene in mice results in size reduction of the OB and deficits in spatial learning . Nature 367 , 455 – 459 ( 1994 ) . 144 . Wu , W . et al . Directional guidance of neuronal migration in the olfactory system by the protein Slit . Nature 400 , 331 – 336 ( 1999 ) . 145 . Nguyen - Ba - Charvet , K . T . et al . Multiple roles for slits in the control of cell migration in the rostral migratory stream . J . Neurosci . 24 , 1497 – 1506 ( 2004 ) . 146 . Anton , E . S . et al . Receptor tyrosine kinase ErbB4 modulates neuroblast migration and placement in the adult forebrain . Nature Neurosci . 7 , 1319 – 1328 ( 2004 ) . 147 . Emsley , J . G . & Hagg , T . α 6 / β 1 integrin directs migration of neuronal precursors in adult mouse forebrain . Exp . Neurol . 183 , 273 – 285 ( 2003 ) . 148 . Liu , G . & Rao , Y . Neuronal migration from the forebrain to the OB requires a new attractant persistent in the OB . J . Neurosci . 23 , 6651 – 6659 ( 2003 ) . 149 . Kirschenbaum , B . , Doetsch , F . , Lois , C . & Alvarez - Buylla , A . Adult subventricular zone neuronal precursors continue to proliferate and migrate in the absence of the OB . J . Neurosci . 19 , 2171 – 2180 ( 1999 ) . 150 . Hack , I . , Bancila , M . , Loulier , K . , Carroll , P . & Cremer , H . Reelin is a detachment signal in tangential chain - migration during postnatal neurogenesis . Nature Neurosci . 5 , 939 – 945 ( 2002 ) . 151 . Saghatelyan , A . , de Chevigny , A . , Schachner , M . & Lledo , P . M . Tenascin - R mediates activity - dependent recruitment of neuroblasts in the adult mouse forebrain . Nature Neurosci . 7 , 347 – 356 ( 2004 ) . 152 . Ng , K . L . et al . Dependence of OB neurogenesis on prokineticin 2 signaling . Science 308 , 1923 – 1927 ( 2005 ) . 153 . Dayer , A . G . , Ford , A . A . , Cleaver , K . M . , Yassaee , M . & Cameron , H . A . Short - term and long - term survival of new neurons in the rat DG . J . Comp . Neurol . 460 , 563 – 572 ( 2003 ) . 154 . Nilsson , M . , Perfilieva , E . , Johansson , U . , Orwar , O . & Eriksson , P . S . Enriched environment increases neurogenesis in the adult rat DG and improves spatial memory . J . Neurobiol . 39 , 569 – 578 ( 1999 ) . 155 . Leuner , B . et al . Learning enhances the survival of new neurons beyond the time when the hippocampus is required for memory . J . Neurosci . 24 , 7477 – 7481 ( 2004 ) . 156 . Mechawar , N . , Saghatelyan , A . , Grailhe , R . , Lledo , P . - M . & Changeux , J . P . Nicotinic receptors regulate the survival of newborn neurons in the adult OB . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 9822 – 9826 ( 2004 ) . 157 . Corotto , F . S . , Henegar , J . R . & Maruniak , J . A . Odor deprivation leads to reduced neurogenesis and reduced neuronal survival in the OB of the adult mouse . Neuroscience 61 , 739 – 744 ( 1994 ) . 158 . Rochefort , C . , Gheusi , G . , Vincent , J . D . & Lledo , P . - M . Enriched odor exposure increases the number of newborn neurons in the adult OB and improves odor memory . J . Neurosci . 22 , 2679 – 2689 ( 2002 ) . 159 . Saghatelyan , A . et al . Activity - dependent adjustments of the inhibitory network in the adult OB following early postnatal deprivation . Neuron 46 , 103 – 116 ( 2005 ) . Provides striking evidence that newborn neurons bring unique features to the mature neuronal network . 160 . Yamaguchi , M . & Mori , K . Critical period for sensory experience - dependent survival of newly generated granule cells in the adult mouse OB . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 9697 – 9702 ( 2005 ) . R E V I E W S 192 | MARCH 2006 | VOLUME 7 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro 161 . Miwa , N . & Storm , D . R . Odorant - induced activation of extracellular signal - regulated kinase / mitogen - activated protein kinase in the OB promotes survival of newly formed granule cells . J . Neurosci . 25 , 5404 – 5412 ( 2005 ) . 162 . Rochefort , C . & Lledo , P . M . Short - term survival of newborn neurons in the adult olfactory bulb after exposure to a complex odor environment . Eur . J . Neurosci . 22 , 2863 – 2870 ( 2005 ) . 163 . Kuhn , H . G . et al . Increased generation of granule cells in adult Bcl - 2 - overexpressing mice : a role for cell death during continued hippocampal neurogenesis . Eur . J . Neurosci . 22 , 1907 – 1915 ( 2005 ) . 164 . Magavi , S . S . P . , Mitchell , B . D . , Szentirmai , O . & Macklis , J . D . Adult - born and preexisting olfactory granule neurons undergo distinct experience - dependent modifications of their olfactory responses in vivo . J . Neurosci . 25 , 10729 – 10739 ( 2005 ) . 165 . Lemaire , V . , Aurousseau , C . , Le Moal , M . & Abrous , D . N . Behavioural trait of reactivity to novelty is related to hippocampal neurogenesis . Eur . J . Neurosci . 11 , 4006 – 4014 ( 1999 ) . 166 . Drapeau , E . et al . Spatial memory performances of aged rats in the water maze predict levels of hippocampal neurogenesis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 14385 – 14390 ( 2003 ) . 167 . Merrill , D . A . , Karim , R . , Darraq , M . , Chiba , A . A . & Tuszynski , M . H . Hippocampal cell genesis does not correlate with spatial learning ability in aged rats . J . Comp . Neurol . 459 , 201 – 207 ( 2003 ) . 168 . Dobrossy , M . D . et al . Differential effects of learning on neurogenesis : learning increases or decreases the number of newly born cells depending on their birth date . Mol . Psychiatry 8 , 974 – 982 ( 2003 ) . Highlights the complex interactions between cognitive processes and adult neurogenesis . Depending on the precise demands of the task , and on the age of newborn cells , water maze training can have different effects on cell proliferation and survival . 169 . Zhao , X . et al . Mice lacking methyl - CpG binding protein 1 have deficits in adult neurogenesis and hippocampal function . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 6777 – 6782 ( 2003 ) . 170 . Kempermann , G . & Gage , F . H . Genetic determinants of adult hippocampal neurogenesis correlate with acquisition , but not probe trial performance , in the water maze task . Eur . J . Neurosci . 16 , 129 – 136 ( 2002 ) . 171 . Feng , R . et al . Deficient neurogenesis in forebrain - specific presenilin - 1 knockout mice is associated with reduced clearance of hippocampal memory traces . Neuron 32 , 911 – 926 ( 2001 ) . 172 . Gheusi , G . et al . Importance of newly generated neurons in the adult OB for odor discrimination . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 1823 – 1828 ( 2000 ) . 173 . Gilbert , M . E . , Kelly , M . E . , Samsam , T . E . & Goodman , J . H . Chronic developmental lead exposure reduces neurogenesis in adult rat hippocampus but does not impair spatial learning . Toxicol . Sci . 86 , 365 – 374 ( 2005 ) . 174 . Ueda , S . , Sakakibara , S . & Yoshimoto , K . Effect of long - lasting serotonin depletion on environmental enrichment - induced neurogenesis in adult rat hippocampus and spatial learning . Neuroscience 135 , 395 – 402 ( 2005 ) . 175 . Lledo , P . - M . , Gheusi , G . & Vincent , J . D . Information processing in the mammalian olfactory system . Physiol . Rev . 85 , 281 – 317 ( 2005 ) . 176 . Gould , E . et al . Learning enhances adult neurogenesis in the hippocampal formation . Nature Neurosci . 3 , 260 – 265 ( 1999 ) . 177 . Ambrogini , P . et al . Learning may reduce neurogenesis in adult rat DG . Neurosci . Lett . 359 , 13 – 16 ( 2004 ) . 178 . Shors , T . J . et al . Neurogenesis in the adult is involved in the formation of trace memories . Nature 410 , 372 – 376 ( 2001 ) . One of the most direct attempts to demonstrate a role for adult neurogenesis in learning . Reduced hippocampal neurogenesis due to application of the toxin MAM is associated with impaired hippocampus - dependent trace conditioning . 179 . Shors , T . J . , Townsend , D . A . , Zhao , M . , Kozorovitskiy , Y . & Gould , E . Neurogenesis may relate to some but not all types of hippocampal - dependent learning . Hippocampus 12 , 578 – 584 ( 2002 ) . 180 . Moser , E . I . Altered inhibition of dentate granule cells during spatial learning in an exploration task . J . Neurosci . 16 , 1247 – 1259 ( 1996 ) . 181 . Snyder , J . S . , Hong , N . S . , McDonald , R . J . & Wojtowicz , J . M . A role for adult neurogenesis in spatial long - term memory . Neuroscience 130 , 843 – 852 ( 2005 ) . Another of the most direct attempts to demonstrate a role for adult neurogenesis in learning . Reduced hippocampal neurogenesis due to irradiation treatment is associated with impaired long - term memory in the spatial water maze . 182 . Raber , J . et al . Radiation - induced cognitive impairments are associated with changes in indicators of hippocampal neurogenesis . Radiat . Res . 162 , 39 – 47 ( 2004 ) . 183 . Monje , M . L . , Mizumatsu , S . , Fike , J . R . & Palmer , T . D . Irradiation induces neural precursor - cell dysfunction . Nature Med . 8 , 955 – 962 ( 2002 ) . 184 . Cecchi , G . A . , Petreanu , L . T . , Alvarez - Buylla , A . & Magnasco , M . O . Unsupervised learning and adaptation in a model of adult neurogenesis . J . Comput . Neurosci . 11 , 175 – 182 ( 2001 ) . 185 . Becker , S . A computational principle for hippocampal learning and neurogenesis . Hippocampus 15 , 722 – 738 ( 2005 ) . 186 . Meltzer , L . A . , Yabaluri , R . & Deisseroth , K . A role for circuit homeostasis in adult neurogenesis . Trends Neurosci . 28 , 653 – 660 ( 2005 ) . 187 . Chambers , R . A . , Potenza , M . N . , Hoffman , R . E . & Miranker , W . Simulated apoptosis / neurogenesis regulates learning and memory capabilities of adaptive neural networks . Neuropsychopharmacology 29 , 747 – 758 ( 2004 ) . A computational model in which increased turnover of cells aids the learning of new information and also facilitates the forgetting of old information . 188 . Kempermann , G . Why new neurons ? Possible functions for adult hippocampal neurogenesis . J . Neurosci . 22 , 635 – 638 ( 2002 ) . 189 . Lynch , G . & Granger , R . in Olfaction ( eds Davis , J . L . & Eichenbaum , H . ) 141 – 165 ( MIT Press , Boston , Massachusetts , 1991 ) . 190 . Hensch , T . K . Critical period plasticity in local cortical circuits . Nature Rev . Neurosci . 6 , 877 – 888 ( 2005 ) . 191 . Brunjes , P . C . Unilateral naris closure and olfactory system development . Brain Res . Brain Res . Rev . 19 , 146 – 160 ( 1994 ) . 192 . Brennan , P . , Kaba , H . & Keverne , E . B . Olfactory recognition : a simple memory system . Science 250 , 1223 – 1226 ( 1990 ) . 193 . Lemasson , M . , Saghatelyan , A . , Olivo - Marin , J . C . & Lledo , P . - M . Neonatal and adult neurogenesis provide two distinct populations of granule cells in the mouse OB . J . Neurosci . 25 , 6816 – 6825 ( 2005 ) . 194 . Parent , J . M . Injury - induced neurogenesis in the adult mammalian brain . Neuroscientist 9 , 261 – 272 ( 2003 ) . 195 . Dash , P . K . , Mach , S . A . & Moore , A . N . Enhanced neurogenesis in the rodent hippocampus following traumatic brain injury . J . Neurosci . Res . 63 , 313 – 319 ( 2001 ) . 196 . Yagita , Y . et al . Differential expression of Musashi1 and nestin in the adult rat hippocampus after ischemia . J . Neurosci . Res . 69 , 750 – 756 ( 2002 ) . 197 . Kokaia , Z . & Lindvall , O . Neurogenesis after ischaemic brain insults . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 13 , 127 – 132 ( 2003 ) . 198 . Rice , A . C . et al . Proliferation and neuronal differentiation of mitotically active cells following traumatic brain injury . Exp . Neurol . 183 , 406 – 417 ( 2003 ) . 199 . Arvidsson , A . , Collin , T . , Kirik , D . , Kokaia , Z . & Lindvall , O . Neuronal replacement from endogenous precursors in the adult brain after stroke . Nature Med . 8 , 963 – 970 ( 2002 ) . 200 . Jin , K . et al . Directed migration of neuronal precursors into the ischemic cerebral cortex and striatum . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 24 , 171 – 189 ( 2003 ) . 201 . Zhang , R . et al . Activated neural stem cells contribute to stroke - induced neurogenesis and neuroblast migration toward the infarct boundary in adult rats . J . Cereb . Blood Flow Metab . 24 , 441 – 448 ( 2004 ) . 202 . Zhang , R . L . , Zhang , Z . G . , Zhang , L . & Chopp , M . Proliferation and differentiation of progenitor cells in the cortex and the subventricular zone in the adult rat after focal cerebral ischemia . Neuroscience 105 , 33 – 41 ( 2001 ) . 203 . Buffo , A . et al . Expression pattern of the transcription factor Olig2 in response to brain injuries : implications for neuronal repair . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 18183 – 18188 ( 2005 ) . 204 . Curtis , M . A . et al . Increased cell proliferation and neurogenesis in the adult human Huntington’s disease brain . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 9023 – 9027 ( 2003 ) . 205 . Jin , K . et al . Enhanced neurogenesis in Alzheimer’s disease transgenic ( PDGF - APP ) mice . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 13363 – 13367 ( 2004 ) . 206 . Yoshimura , S . et al . FGF - 2 regulation of neurogenesis in adult hippocampus after brain injury . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 5874 – 5879 ( 2001 ) . 207 . Zhu , D . Y . , Liu , S . H . , Sun , H . S . & Lu , Y . M . Expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase after focal cerebral ischemia stimulates neurogenesis in the adult rodent DG . J . Neurosci . 23 , 223 – 229 ( 2003 ) . 208 . Manev , H . , Uz , T . , Manev , R . & Zhang , Z . Neurogenesis and neuroprotection in the adult brain . A putative role for 5 - lipoxygenase ? Ann . NY Acad . Sci . 939 , 45 – 51 ( 2001 ) . 209 . Nakatomi , H . et al . Regeneration of hippocampal pyramidal neurons after ischemic brain injury by recruitment of endogenous neural progenitors . Cell 110 , 429 – 441 ( 2002 ) . 210 . Nelson , P . T . et al . Clonal human ( hNT ) neuron grafts for stroke therapy : neuropathology in a patient 27 months after implantation . Am . J . Pathol . 160 , 1201 – 1206 ( 2002 ) . 211 . Sanai , N . et al . Unique astrocyte ribbon in adult human brain contains neural stem cells but lacks chain migration . Nature 427 , 740 – 744 ( 2004 ) . 212 . Morshead , C . M . & van der Kooy , D . Disguising adult neural stem cells . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 14 , 125 – 131 ( 2004 ) . 213 . Ge , S . et al . GABA regulates synaptic integration of newly generated neurons in the adult brain . Nature 439 , 589 – 593 ( 2006 ) . 214 . Kulkarni , V . A . , Jha , S . & Vaidya , V . A . Depletion of norepinephrine decreases the proliferation , but does not influence the survival and differentiation , of granule cell progenitors in the adult rat hippocampus . Eur . J . Neurosci . 16 , 2008 – 2012 ( 2002 ) . 215 . Mercer , A . et al . PACAP promotes neural stem cell proliferation in adult mouse brain . J . Neurosci . Res . 76 , 205 – 215 ( 2004 ) . 216 . Lu , L . et al . Modification of hippocampal neurogenesis and neuroplasticity by social environments . Exp . Neurol . 183 , 600 – 609 ( 2003 ) . 217 . Derrick , B . E . , York , A . D . & Martinez , J . L . Jr . Increased granule cell neurogenesis in the adult DG following mossy fiber stimulation sufficient to induce long - term potentiation . Brain Res . 857 , 300 – 307 ( 2000 ) . 218 . Lucassen , P . J . , Fuchs , E . & Czeh , B . Antidepressant treatment with tianeptine reduces apoptosis in the hippocampal DG and temporal cortex . Biol . Psychiatry 55 , 789 – 796 ( 2004 ) . 219 . Jang , M . H . et al . Alcohol and nicotine reduce cell proliferation and enhance apoptosis in DG . Neuroreport 13 , 1509 – 1513 ( 2002 ) . 220 . Sawamoto , K . et al . New neurons follow the flow of cerebrospinal fluid in the adult brain . Science 311 , 629 – 632 ( 2006 ) . 221 . Ziv , Y . et al . , Immune cells contribute to the maintenance of neurogenesis and spatial learning abilities in adulthood . Nature Neurosci . 9 , 268 – 275 ( 2006 ) . 222 . Götz , M . & Huttner , W . B . The cell biology of neurogenesis . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 6 , 777 – 788 ( 2005 ) . Acknowledgements This work was supported by the Pasteur Institute ( GPH ‘stem cells’ ) , the Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale , the Association Française Contre les Myopathies , the Fédération pour la Recherche sur le Cerveau and a grant from Région Ile - de - France ( all in France ) . We apologize to those authors whose references , although relevant to this subject , have not been included in this review owing to space constraints . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . DATABASES The following terms in this article are linked online to : Entrez Gene : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / entrez / query . fcgi ? db = gene BDNF | CNTF | CRMP4 | E2F1 | EGF | EphA4 | EphA7 | EphB1 – 3 | FGF2 | GFAP | MBD1 | NG1 | noggin | Notch 1 | OLIG2 | PACAP | PK2 | PAX6 | SHH | VEGF | WNT3 FURTHER INFORMATION Perception and Memory Laboratory ( Pasteur Institute ) : http : / / www . pasteur . fr / recherche / unites / percmlm / Access to this interactive links box is free online . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 7 | MARCH 2006 | 193