Source URL : https : / / www . cirm . ca . gov / about - cirm / publications / ctcf - and - cohesin - regulate - chromatin - loop - stability - distinct - dynamics California Institute for Regenerative Medicine CTCF and cohesin regulate chromatin loop stability with distinct dynamics . Journal : Elife Publication Year : 2017 Authors : Anders S Hansen , Iryna Pustova , Claudia Cattoglio , Robert Tjian , Xavier Darzacq PubMed link : 28467304 Funding Grants : Single Molecule Biophysics and Biology of Cellular Identity Public Summary : Folding of mammalian genomes into spatial domains is critical for gene regulation . The insulator protein CTCF and cohesin control domain location by folding domains into loop structures , which are widely thought to be stable . Combining genomic and biochemical approaches we show that CTCF and cohesin co - occupy the same sites and physically interact as a biochemically stable complex . However , using single - molecule imaging we find that CTCF binds chromatin much more dynamically than cohesin ( ~ 1 - 2 min vs . ~ 22 min residence time ) . Moreover , after unbinding , CTCF quickly rebinds another cognate site unlike cohesin for which the search process is long ( ~ 1 min vs . ~ 33 min ) . Thus , CTCF and cohesin form a rapidly exchanging ' dynamic complex ' rather than a typical stable complex . Since CTCF and cohesin are required for loop domain formation , our results suggest that chromatin loops are dynamic and frequently break and reform throughout the cell cycle . Scientific Abstract : Folding of mammalian genomes into spatial domains is critical for gene regulation . The insulator protein CTCF and cohesin control domain location by folding domains into loop structures , which are widely thought to be stable . Combining genomic and biochemical approaches we show that CTCF and cohesin co - occupy the same sites and physically interact as a biochemically stable complex . However , using single - molecule imaging we find that CTCF binds chromatin much more dynamically than cohesin ( ~ 1 - 2 min vs . ~ 22 min residence time ) . Moreover , after unbinding , CTCF quickly rebinds another cognate site unlike cohesin for which the search process is long ( ~ 1 min vs . ~ 33 min ) . Thus , CTCF and cohesin form a rapidly exchanging ' dynamic complex ' rather than a typical stable complex . Since CTCF and cohesin are required for loop domain formation , our results suggest that chromatin loops are dynamic and frequently break and reform throughout the cell cycle . 1