Source URL : https : / / www . cirm . ca . gov / about - cirm / publications / high - resolution - map - three - dimensional - chromatin - interactome - human - cells California Institute for Regenerative Medicine A high - resolution map of the three - dimensional chromatin interactome in human cells . Journal : Nature Publication Year : 2013 Authors : Fulai Jin , Yan Li , Jesse R Dixon , Siddarth Selvaraj , Zhen Ye , Ah Young Lee , Chia - An Yen , Anthony D Schmitt , Celso A Espinoza , Bing Ren PubMed link : 24141950 Funding Grants : Mechanisms of chromatin dynamics at enhancers during ES cell differentiation Public Summary : Scientific Abstract : A large number of cis - regulatory sequences have been annotated in the human genome , but defining their target genes remains a challenge . One strategy is to identify the long - range looping interactions at these elements with the use of chromosome conformation capture ( 3C ) - based techniques . However , previous studies lack either the resolution or coverage to permit a whole - genome , unbiased view of chromatin interactions . Here we report a comprehensive chromatin interaction map generated in human fibroblasts using a genome - wide 3C analysis method ( Hi - C ) . We determined over one million long - range chromatin interactions at 5 - 10 - kb resolution , and uncovered general principles of chromatin organization at different types of genomic features . We also characterized the dynamics of promoter - enhancer contacts after TNF - alpha signalling in these cells . Unexpectedly , we found that TNF - alpha - responsive enhancers are already in contact with their target promoters before signalling . Such pre - existing chromatin looping , which also exists in other cell types with different extracellular signalling , is a strong predictor of gene induction . Our observations suggest that the three - dimensional chromatin landscape , once established in a particular cell type , is relatively stable and could influence the selection or activation of target genes by a ubiquitous transcription activator in a cell - specific manner . 1