141 User gains and PD aims : Assessment from a participatory design project Claus Bossen , Christian Dindler , Ole Sejer Iversen Department of Information and Media Studies , Aarhus University Helsingforsgade 14 , DK - 8200 , Aarhus N , Denmark { imvcb , imvcdi , imvoi } @ hum . au . dk ABSTRACT We present a study of user gains from their participation in a participatory design ( PD ) project at Danish primary schools . We explore user experiences and reported gains from the project in relation to the multiple aims of PD , based on a series of interviews with pupils , teachers , administrators , and consultants , conducted approximately three years after the end of the project . In particular , we reflect on how the PD initiatives were sustained after the project had ended . We propose that not only are ideas and initiatives disseminated directly within the organization , but also through networked relationships among people , stretching across organizations and project groups . Moreover , we demonstrate how users’ gains related to their acting within these networks . These results suggest a heightened focus on the indirect and distributed channels through which the long - term impact of PD emerges . Author Keywords User gains ; Assessment ; Long - term impact . . INTRODUCTION Users are at the core of participatory design ( PD ) , but they have rarely been the subject of studies that assess what they gain from participating in design processes . User gains may seem to be primarily indirect : their voices have been heard in the design process , they have contributed to improved technology and work organization , and their involvement contributes to a more democratic technological development . More direct gains , such as personal skills and areas of competence , improved quality of work or life , and influence on the workplace rarely seem to have been assessed . To the extent that PD projects remain research projects without the efforts yielding implemented products , such direct gains are even further away , unless it can be argued that participation itself entails gains . In this paper , we explore the experiences and gains as reported by twelve participants in a PD project at Danish primary schools . The interviews were conducted approximately three years after the project was completed , and focused on the personal gains reported by participants themselves , as well as on more general changes in their working lives . We discuss their experiences and gains in the context of the aims of PD . Based on this study , we propose that one way to ensure that users gain directly from participation and to further PD aims is to focus on participants’ acquisition of new areas of competence and involvement in networks surrounding technology design . We propose this as a supplement that opens other avenues for reflection and action than those emerging from focusing on types , degrees , and arenas of participation . Our study leads us to further reflect on the potential and methodological difficulties in conducting assessment studies such as this . USER GAINS AND PD AIMS As its name implies , participation is crucial to PD . It has therefore been the subject of analytical scrutiny , resulting in different distinctions . One distinction concerns the kinds of people who participate : for example , end - users who will directly use the designed technologies and work practices in their daily work , stakeholders who do not directly use the technologies , but will be affected by their design and use , or decision - makers , such as management , whose perspective is from without and not from within the particular work practices . Participation by the last group can be controversial from a PD perspective , which most often focuses on the concerns of the end - users . Another distinction concerns the type of participation : for example , direct participation by end - users , indirect participation by user representatives , or imagined representation ( e . g . the persona approach , or advocacy ( Grudin and Pruit , 2002 ; Mambrey et al . , 1998 ) . In the case of direct participation , there is the question of the degree of participation : Are the users involved as test subjects , as in the testing of design proposals , as sources of information relating to work practices , as cooperative design partners , or as cooperative project partners who make decisions regarding not only design , but also regarding project directions ? A related concern is the duration of participation : Are users involved in the procurement and initial design phase , or right through to implementation and redesign ( e . g . Suchman , 2002 ; Hartswood et al . , 2002 ) ? Finally , one might consider which arena of participation one has in mind : the project , the organization , or the national arenas ( Gärtner and Wagner , 1996 ) . The question of arena is relevant in two respects . First , a well - known issue associated with design projects is that of how to make the insights and designs developed in projects diffuse into the rest of the organization ( Ibid ; Bødker , 1996 ) . Second , arenas are relevant when considering one’s aims with PD : the Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . PDC’10 , 29 - NOV - 2010 , Sydney , Australia . Copyright 2010 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0131 - 2 / 10 / 0011… $ 10 . 00 . 142 development of tools and techniques that facilitate communication and learning processes between users and designers , or engaging in organizational or societal change processes . In the early years of PD , the former was – at least in the Scandinavian approach to PD – a step towards the latter , and the increasing focus on tools and techniques , to the detriment of organizational and societal change , has been commented upon critically within PD at least since the early 1990s ( e . g . see the 1994 PDC proceedings ) . This discussion resurfaced , for example , in the Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems , prompted by Beck ( 2002 ) , and at the last PD Conferences ( e . g . Balka , 2006 ; Bossen , 2006 ; Bergvall - Kåreborn and Ståhlbrost , 2008 ; Ehn , 2008 ) . A modest common denominator for PD research may be formulated as a concern for how those who are to use technologies may come to play a critical role in their design ( Schuler and Namioka , 1993 : xi ) . A more ambitious aim is that users should be respected regardless of status , and recognized as prime sources of innovation . Projects should address problems articulated by , or in collaboration with users , and improve their lives in concrete ways ( www . cpsr . org / issues / pd / introInfo / ) . Even more ambitious aims are found when striving for the advancement of democracy at the workplace , and taking a stand for marginalized groups ( Bjerknes et al . , 1987 ; Greenbaum and Kyng , 1991 ) . While one may subscribe to utopian ideals , the ‘who’ , ‘how’ , ‘where’ , ‘when’ , and ‘to which extent’ of participation will depend upon the focus , aims , and organizational settings of the particular project in which one engages . The inherent challenges in PD of power relations and different interests ( e . g . among users , supervisors , and management ) must be addressed as situated phenomena ( Wagner , 1993 ; Suchman , 2002 ) . In our view , however , user gains must remain a central concern . The aim of PD should be to design systems that enhance , rather than downgrade user skills , facilitate better quality of , and more influence upon their work lives . Given the centrality of participation and the debate concerning the appropriate forms , it is peculiar that the literature contains relatively few studies assessing users’ long - term gains from participation . Many PD projects seem to be implicitly directed at providing participants with gains through the participation itself . However , how people appropriate the opportunities offered in individual design projects , and how these materialize in ways of working and living remain relatively unexplored . Most PD projects evaluate the process and outcome during the process and at the end . Studies of subsequent effects on working conditions or organizational changes in connection with PD projects are rare , which is partly related to the fact that many projects remain research and exploratory projects . Notable exceptions are Clement and Besselaar’s ( 1993 ) long - term assessment of ten PD projects , and the report of Carroll et al . ( 2000 ) on the use of PD in public schools in the USA . Bardram et al . ( 2006 ) , and Simonsen and Hertzum ( 2008 ) are more recent examples , whose work focuses , however , on assessing improvement of work practices , rather than user gains . Furthermore , since many PD projects are not actually realized and implemented , this raises the question of what users gain , apart from having contributed to the researchers’ project . According to Carroll et al . ( 2000 ) , ‘Participatory design is fundamentally a process of mutual learning , and thus of personal development for participants . ’ ( Ibid . : 249 ) . In this paper , we focus on the long - term gains as perceived by the participants themselves . The purpose is to explore in greater detail what participants gained from participation . As the subject of our study , we have chosen the iSchool project that ended three years ago , and in which two of the present authors participated . THE ISCHOOL PROJECT The iSchool project was a five - year research project ( 2003 - 2007 ) directed at envisioning new learning spaces based on the opportunities provided by new pervasive technologies and new educational insights . The project aimed to develop open and fluid information technologies with sufficient accessibility and robustness to support learning in and outside the physical limits of the primary school . The iSchool project was hosted by Centre for Interactive Spaces at Aarhus University with a national IT grant . The interdisciplinary centre combines architectural , engineering , and computer science research , in a joint effort to envision new interactive school environments . Three hardware providers , an international architectural firm , and a bureau of consulting engineers were our main stakeholders . Furthermore , the municipality of Aarhus and four public schools , including their teachers , pupils , and management , were our design partners , and participated throughout the project . The project efforts were materialized in four research prototypes . The design process of the iSchool project drew heavily on the PD approach that has grown out of the Scandinavian cooperative design tradition ( Bjerknes , et al . , 1987 ; Ehn , 1988 ; Iversen , 2005 ) , and consequently design was seen as a cooperative , iterative process that crosses boundaries between work practices , and involves active participation of design partners . This was reflected in the methods employed to attain a fundamental understanding of the challenges present in the school environment , and to elicit design requirements that eventually led to the prototypes . The process included traditional approaches to gaining insight into use practice ( e . g . a six - month field study in public schools combined with open - ended interviews ) , but also devised new methods for understanding the impact of the introduction of new technology , and to access areas of the children’s lives to which their was no direct access ( i . e . after - school and family activities ) ( e . g . Brodersen and Iversen , 2007 ; Brodersen et al . , 2008 ) . In the process of designing the four prototypes ( described below ) , more than thirty design workshops and prototype evaluations were conducted with the active participation of teachers , pupils , school administrators , designers , architects , educational experts , engineers , programmers and PD researchers . Some workshops were large - scale , with approximately seventy participants . More frequently , workshops were held with about twenty participants , 143 including pupils and their teachers or an invited group of stakeholders , in order to envision , conceptualize , or evaluate various design concepts . The aims of the design process in the iSchool project were two - fold : first , to develop technologies to support educational practices ; second , to experiment with PD beyond work - practice contexts , which was an emerging area during that period . During these five years , the iSchool project received a substantial amount of attention from public media , politicians , and special interest groups . The media were interested in the combination of children and novel technologies , and three prototype evaluations were reported on national television , and followed by a visit from the minister of education . This attention had a positive impact on the recruitment , engagement , and enthusiasm of our stakeholders – especially with regard to the pupils and the commercial partners . Each of the four prototypes developed during the course of the project was evaluated several times in context , for periods ranging from two weeks to one year . Some of the prototypes are still in use today , and others are being developed for market introduction . In the following section we briefly present the four prototypes from the iSchool project : the eCell , the eBag , the HyConExplorer , and the Wisdom Well . The eCell is a temporary collaborative niche for group projects and activities in school environments , consisting of a private , inner display and a public , outer display . The eCell was envisioned as a flexible , IT - supported installation to be placed in the school’s unused public spaces . The intention was to include the entire school premises , including the corridors , in the learning environment , and to create a dynamic school environment in which the students could claim unused space as the need occurred . They could thus work with their private materials in public spaces . In return , the group of students would be able to give something back to the public school environment by placing material on the outer display . The eCell remained a research prototype . The eBag is the student’s personal , digital repository into which he or she may place images videos , music , text documents , and other digital material for use in and outside of school . The eBag is a web - based portfolio system with a seamless , proximity - based login from all interactive surfaces in the physical school environment , for example , mobile phones or traditional PCs . Consequently , it serves as a link between different types of displays , through which its contents can be accessed , and it allows the students to collect , carry , access , and share digital information very easily . With the eBag , the focus is on the ubiquitous aspects of web support in learning environments , which allow digital information to travel seamlessly across technological platforms . Taking advantage of the current location when placing and retrieving information provides the teachers and students with a sense of seamless access to the digital material . The HyconExplorer was developed as a supplement to the eBag , and is a location - based system based on GPS information , which allows children to browse digital material outside the school . After the iSchool project ended , eBag and parts of the HyconExplorer applications were sold to a national IT provider . A final product is the Wisdom Well , a twelve - metre - square , interactive floor situated in the central square of one of the schools , which supports new kinds of kinaesthetic learning and entertainment experiences . The objective of the Wisdom Well is to create an IT - based physical setup for learning that enables users to utilize their bodies as well as their minds in collaborative games and explorative digital simulations . The Wisdom Well is still in use at the school . A ‘light’ version of the Wisdom Well concept has been introduced to the market for educational IT by one of the iSchool project’s commercial partners . METHODOLOGY To address the issue of user gains in the iSchool project , a research design based on eleven interviews with participants was devised ( Flick , 2006 ) . The interviewees were selected by the two authors , who were part of the iSchool project . The selection aimed at interviewees who had had a long - term engagement with the project , came from different groups of end - users and stakeholders , and who , to the best of the two authors’ knowledge , had had different experiences in terms of frustration and satisfaction . Participants included two kinds of end - users – pupils and teachers – while the group of stakeholders included an assistant headmaster , two consultants with the municipality , and a city council member . Table 1 presents an overview of the interviews . Table 1 . Overview of interviews . A guide for the single - person , semi - structured interviews ( Kvale , 1996 ) was developed with a focus on exploring the participants’ and stakeholders’ experiences and gains from the project , and not to assess the perceived success or failure of the project Apart from establishing basic knowledge regarding the part of the project under discussion , and the extent of involvement , the guide concentrated on the interviewees’ perceptions of the following :  Influence on the project and product  Most satisfying and most frustrating experiences  Personal gain from participation  New quality of work , new possibilities discovered , or more influence on own work conditions  New areas of competence acquired Type of interviewee Name Duration ( min : sec ) Pupils Elisa Andy Ben & Tommy 20 : 34 28 : 17 18 : 54 Teachers Peter Joan Ellen David 45 : 22 21 : 32 34 : 56 30 : 06 Administrators and consultants Michael ( assistant headmaster ) , Susan ( consultant at municipality ) John ( consultant at municipality ) 41 ; 00 34 : 16 23 : 27 Politician Anne 34 : 43 144  Subsequent shifts in career or choice of education , owing to the project  Extent of new outlook on technology or personal practices  Overall assessment of participation in project  Newly emerged opportunities in general The interviews thus focused on interviewees’ experiences with regard to events in the past , instead of value , feeling , or sensory questions , and instead of being directed towards the present or future ( Patton , 1990 : 290 - 294 ) . Interviews were conducted by the author of this article , who had not participated in the iSchool project , in order to lessen any possible reluctance to be critical of the project on part of the interviewees , who were , however , aware that all three authors participated in this paper . Interviews were taped and transcribed . They were subsequently read through and categorized thematically , through a process of joint categorization by all three authors . Themes followed those mentioned in the bullet list above , while new issues and themes were added as they arose when reading through the interviews ( networking ; sustaining project ; who - uses - who ) . Thematic categorization of the transcription was subsequently used to bring forward variation in , as well as typical experiences ( Kvale , 1996 : 187 - 209 ) . The interviews provided retrospective views coloured by the most exciting experiences from participation in the project , and by what happened since then , in the lives of the interviewees . One aspect of this was that the project received public attention in local and national newspapers and on television , which , especially to the pupils , was a highlight . For the adults involved , a visit by the minister of education was probably of similar importance . If nothing else , this made the participants feel that they were positively part of something . Another aspect was the distance in time . To spur memory , pictures from workshops and events were brought to the interviews , which worked well in several instances . However , the former pupils in particular found it difficult at times to remember what had happened around five years previously , when they were thirteen or fourteen . Furthermore , the clearest memories were those of being served popcorn and soft drinks at workshops , and of having access to new technology , for example , the newest mobile phones , when mobile phones had not yet become so readily available . Reflections on gains such as new insights into technology , or a feeling of having influenced technological development were difficult for some pupils to articulate explicitly , since this was a more intellectual form of reflecting on experiences than some of them were capable of at the age of thirteen or fourteen . The following excerpt may illustrate these challenges : Interviewer : Did you have any influence on the project and its direction ? Ben : I don’t remember that we were told much . We just got the phones and were told that we should test and use them as we liked . Tommy : I remember that we also used them [ the mobile phones ] to make a newspaper down here at a time when we were to use them . Ben : Down here ? What did we do down here ? Tommy : We were in the basement with lots of popcorn . Ben : I didn’t participate . I would have remembered . Tommy : Cola and popcorn ! 1 At other times , however , the former pupils remembered episodes and experiences with clarity and reflection , as presented below , in the section on analysis . Teachers , administrators , and the council member had the advantage of already being adults at the time of the project and were able to report more reflectively and with more detail on their participation . We consider the case critical ( Flyvberg , 2006 ) , in the sense that if participants did not achieve gains in accordance with the aims of PD in this case , such gains would be difficult to find in other cases : the design process included a high degree of participation , positive public attention spurred motivation , and products emerged that were implemented and evaluated positively , supporting the participants’ perception that their participation had been valuable . ANALYSIS In the following sections , we present the results of the analysis of the interviews , starting with a summary of the participants’ most satisfying and most frustrating experiences with the project in order to provide an initial understanding of their impressions . From there , we move on to presenting their perceived gains from the project , whether or not they felt they had influenced the project’s processes and the products that came out of them , exemplify how participants used the project to pursue their own interests , and lastly , describe a recurring frustration across interviews , concerning how to sustain the initiatives from the project . Most satisfying and most frustrating experiences Overall , interviewees spoke positively about their participation , and eagerly recounted their most satisfying experiences . The frustrating experiences were fewer , and typically of a minor character . For the pupils , the project was a break from ordinary class - work , and made school more fun for a while . They were able to use the newest technology , for example mobile phones with photo and video functionalities , which at that time were attractive novelties . They were given the opportunity to participate in workshops at the university , which was also a positive experience . The only frustration associated with the project was the competition for access to the mobile phones , since there were not enough for all pupils . The teachers , on their part , emphasized three kinds of ‘most satisfying experiences’ . First , the workshops and discussions with the project people from university were opportunities to ‘think thoughts’ , as one teacher explained . They were challenged to present , reflect upon , 1 All quoted text from the interviews translated from Danish by the authors . 145 and discuss their areas of professional competence with professionals with another background , which they felt was rewarding . Second , they stressed how rewarding the enthusiasm of the children was to them , how IT facilitated new ways of teaching , which , among other things , led to instances of usually passive pupils taking the initiative and having central roles . Third , they valued working with the newest technology available . Their frustrating experiences revolved around the difficulties in raising funds for their visions , the resultant gap between vision and actual realization , and the tendency of the project , in its end - phase , to focus on technology rather than teaching methods . The administrators and consultants also identified the experiences of working with researchers , having access to the newest technology , the enthusiasm of the pupils , and the new teaching practices that developed as their most satisfying experiences . Their frustrations revolved around difficulties with obtaining sufficient funding , a perceived lack of a structured approach in the project , and observing how the teachers involved had to struggle to get their colleagues to participate . Finally , the city councillor mentioned the ways in which IT could raise learning levels , bolster pupils’ self - esteem , and minimize social differences as ‘most satisfying experiences’ , while again , there was a sense of frustration with , the difficulty in finding funding for the projects . A recurrent theme during the interviews was the interviewees’ concern for the future of the project results . One teacher , David , expressed his concern for the eBag having been removed from a research context to a commercial development context , in which some of the main visions for IT - supported education might be abandoned . Another teacher , Peter , stated that he was very disappointed in the actual impact of the Wisdom Well prototype . He argued that ‘This could have been the next export adventure for Danish Industry , if additional funding had been granted to finalize the Wisdom Well concept’ . Peter concluded that this lack of ability to finalize a project was characteristic of public innovations , and questioned whether the voluntary investment of time and effort , on his part and that of his colleagues , had been worthwhile . Summing up , the break from normal class - work , the opportunity to think ‘outside the box’ , obtaining access to new technology , and improving teaching methods were the most prominent themes that emerged as ‘most satisfying experiences’ . The difficulties in raising funds were the most common theme that came up as ‘most frustrating experience’ . Gains Going through the responses to questions about what the interviewees had gained from their participation , as well as other relevant remarks , there was a marked difference in themes among the four groups . The pupils generally found it hard to describe their gains from the project which is not surprising , considering that the events occurred up to seven years previously , when they were around thirteen years old . What they did mention , however , was how they became acquainted with using advanced functionalities of mobile phones , creating PowerPoint presentations , and constructing web pages . This did not have any perceivable impact on their subsequent choices of education or job , which , similarly , is not a surprise , since many other influences shaped their lives in the subsequent years . Elisa wanted to study Arabic because she had taken care of a young Arabic - speaking boy , Ben and Tommy did not see any link between their project experiences and their present apprenticeships as auto mechanic and electrician , respectively , while lastly , Andy had finished high school and planned to become an aircraft pilot . The teachers mentioned four different kinds of gains . First , the project provided them with an opportunity to reflect on teaching and teaching methods , and increased their ability to communicate across professional borders . Peter stated : Indeed , the project developed one’s areas of interdisciplinary competence , because one worked closely with other disciplines . One of the things I noticed was that you must improve how you express different terms , as a term may have very different meanings in the other disciplines . So , you are forced to explain what you mean . It makes you reconsider what you actually mean . Second , they became more skilled at understanding and using mobile phones , interactive whiteboards , PowerPoint presentations , and the Internet , and , notably , acquired these areas of competence while teaching . They varied in their perception of the extent to which this had changed their views on teaching . For instance , Peter stated that he knew about different learning styles before the project , but that the project activities showed him how different styles could be supported by IT . Ellen stated that she had almost abandoned books and blackboards , and instead used interactive whiteboards , mobile phones , and the Internet . She stated that in this way she could ‘be contemporary’ with the pupils , for example , using technologies that the pupils themselves used , instead of the ‘old - fashioned’ technologies of printed books and blackboards . David , inspired by the project , began taking part in technology competitions with his 7th grade classes every year . Overall , teachers stated that their job satisfaction had increased because of the projects . Third , they had since the projects gained leverage with management in obtaining access to courses and they were asked for advice when schools acquired new hardware and software . Fourth , two teachers ( Peter and Ellen ) changed career paths following completion of the projects . Peter had commenced a graduate course in Philosophy of Education , and planned to write a thesis on the use of technology in teaching . Ellen had become a part - time consultant with a firm producing interactive whiteboards . For the administrators and consultants it makes sense to distinguish between personal and institutional gains . While teachers also mentioned that they thought that IT developed teaching practices at their school , this was more pronounced among the administrators and consultants , as their jobs inherently involve thinking about the school at a general level . Personally , this group 146 stressed as gains their improved skills in using new technology , and the insights gained into how different kinds of IT could be used when teaching . Depending on their particular jobs , they also mentioned how leadership competence had been improved , owing to the challenge of initiating a project and carrying it forward : the ability to create alliances with other parties , learning how to work as a fund raiser , and how the project provided a network which could be drawn upon . For example , John explained : I have had some of the researchers give lectures at some public conferences , so that people could understand what this was all about . These lectures have had a major impact on the development of these matters nation - wide . ( … ) So , my existing network has also benefited from the project , as , in this way , I introduced new research from the iSchool project into the network . None of them felt that they had acquired more influence in their work settings , since they already had much freedom to carry out their jobs . Institutionally , the gains of the project for public schools were the development of teaching methods and of teaching staff , as well as an increased number of applications by teachers for jobs at the school , owing to perceptions of its advanced technological level . The city councillor mentioned having acquired from the project ‘ammunition for argumentation’ and an increased ability to see the potential of IT for teaching . At the institutional level , the councillor noted new strategic opportunities , improved efficiency , more professionalism , social mobility , and the opportunity for creating enthusiasm for IT in primary schools . New outlooks When asked whether the iSchool project had provided the interviewees with a new outlook , the participants all indicated that the project took place a few years previously , thus it was hard to remember how the project had actually affected them . However , pupils , teachers , and managers did address one particular insight that had provided them with a new outlook on technology . In the words of 19 - year - old Elisa , it came to her as a surprise that ‘real’ people actually shaped technology , and that it was not just something that was dictated by anonymous authorities . A teacher , Peter , shared this view , saying that the project provided him with the ability to engage in and envision new technology , despite of his lack of ability to programme a computer . He realized that technology was a formable material , and that programming skills were not a prerequisite for envisioning how technology could support , and even develop , new learning environments . For Peter , the iSchool project prompted a shift in his attitude towards technology , as something dynamic that could be formed for a particular purpose . Similarly , one of the pupils , Andy , became convinced through the project that the envisioning of new technologies did not require any particular programming skills , which opened his eyes to technology development as something to which even non - programmers could contribute . Ellen ( teacher ) also indicated that the iSchool project provided her with insights into the development of new technology . In her account of the iSchool project , participating in the process reconstructed her prior conception of technology as something that was already determined . During the interview , Ellen provided several examples of how she pursued her new insights into the development of technology , to both the great amusement and benefit of her pupils . For Ellen , participation in the process of developing the eBag was a turning point in her attitude towards technology . The understanding of technology as something that could be moulded into specific educational themes also came as a new insight for some of the educational experts . John , in particular , argued that he did recognize the potential of IT at schools before the project , but that the project provided him with the outlook that education need not only be supported by off - the - shelf technologies . Rather , technology could be modified to fit particular educational arenas . When reflecting on their project participation , the pupils recognized that participation in the initial iSchool workshops , which involved a large number of new technologies , had provided them with a new outlook on the use of technology within their own educational practices . Andy explicitly stated that he developed a new outlook on education , based on the new technologies , an insight that may have helped him during his high school years . Elisa reported that she had treated technology as something uninteresting and somewhat repulsive before entering the project . She reported that the iSchool project opened her eyes to the opportunities of new technology . Andy and Elisa both stated that they gained a more profound knowledge and interest in technology during the project period . The politician and the school administrator did not address their project participation as something that brought about a particularly new outlook . When approached with the question of new outlooks in the project , they stated that the process provided them with new perspectives , and even new opportunities in their existing conceptualization of technology in educational environments . Influence Regarding the issue of how and to what extent they influenced the process , the general consensus among the interviewees was that they had little direct influence on the structure of the process . Workshops , meetings , and evaluations were planned and directed by the researchers . Yet the interviewees did indicate that they felt that their opinions , ideas , and expertise were valued and brought into the process . From the interviews , it is evident that the teachers , administrators , and consultants in particular tended to distinguish between influence , in terms of the overarching structure and focus of the project on the one hand , and on the other hand , the more specific content of particular workshops or design concepts . Teachers and administrators felt that they had relatively little influence on the former , whereas they felt that had a large stake in the latter . As Ellen stated , when asked to what extent she felt that she influenced the process to any great extent : ‘No , and it was my understanding that we [ teachers , ed . ] were not intended to . I was in charge of the pedagogical content , and I’m very pleased with that’ . Peter reported 147 that the lack of influence on the structure of the process did not bother him . He saw his role that of a ‘pedagogical consultant’ with specialized knowledge of this area , and this division of labour suited of him well . The same pattern was found among the pupils , who reported that they did not influence the structure of the process , but felt that their ideas and opinions were valued and came to bear on the project . Regarding their influence on the products that materialized from the project , teachers , administrators , and consultants reported that they did not influence the products as such , but the content . Again , there seems to be a distinction between the products as the technological artefacts in the form of mobile phones and interactive floors , and the content that was ‘put into’ these products . The accounts provided by the administrators , consultants , and politician reflect a particular concern for how they used the project in various ways in their professional lives , and how the project benefited from their participation . Anne reported that the project provided her with ‘ammunition for argumentation’ , and related the ideas of the project specifically to a political agenda . Moreover , she reflected on the significance of her participation in the project : ‘Perhaps I have played the role of an ambassador for the viewpoint that IT should be an integrated part of education’ . Among the administrators and consultants , the project had reportedly been used in several ways . Michael reported that he had used the project as a showcase for colleagues and potential business partners . Moreover , the administrators and consultants reported that an important outcome of the project was an expansion of their professional networks in terms of references , and as resources for further projects . In general , accounts provided by the administrators , consultants , and politician reflected how all the parties involved in the project have used the project and on another as resources in their work . Of the teachers , Ellen used the project as a springboard for a new job as a consultant in the business of interactive whiteboards , and both Peter and Joan used the Wisdom Well as a resource in their further education . Teachers and administrators reported that they were comfortable with having only little influence on the overarching structure of the process . However , they also reflected clearly on the reciprocity of the relationship , as it evolved during and after the project . As Michael stated : I had some new thoughts [ from participating in the project ] but I may also have provided [ Designer 1 ] and [ Designer 2 ] with new thoughts . They may have taken my ideas to a new level , and found a new approach [ for the project ] . That is how innovations occur , and I am convinced that this is the direction we should pursue . DISCUSSION In this section we discuss the results of the study in relation to the field of PD . We focus on the personal gains of the participants , the question of cooperation in PD , sustaining PD initiatives , and finally , we reflect on the methodology , in order to assess participants’ personal gains . Personal and professional gains Based on the interviews , it is clear that several of the interviewees enjoyed a range of personal and professional gains from the project . Most notably , some of the interviewees changed their career paths , owing to the influence of the iSchool project . Joan and Peter enrolled in new educational programmes with strong relationships to the core of the iSchool project . Joan is now working as an IT consultant at the school , and is responsible for educating her colleagues in IT - related matters . Peter is finishing his master’s thesis in educational sociology . In his master’s thesis , he is pursuing the theories of multiple learning styles , which also emerged in the iSchool project . Ellen is working as a part - time IT consultant for one of the commercial partners of the iSchool project , teaching colleagues to use interactive whiteboards in their educational practice . Ellen’s employment was an outcome of the close cooperation between the school and a commercial partner of the iSchool project . All the interviewees changed their personal perspective with regard to technology . Andy and Elisa acquired new IT - related competence that they were able to use in their education . John , Ellen , Peter , and Elisa articulated their altered attitudes towards digital technology as something that can be changed and designed to meet certain needs in an educational setting . Finally , Anne developed new perspectives on her already profound belief in IT - supported education . With the exceptions of Ben and Tommy , all interviewees were able to articulate their personal gains from the project . The project has hence facilitated personal development for many of the participants , as was the case with the teachers discussed by Carroll et al . ( 2000 ) . Cooperative design and division of labour Interestingly , this gain in personal development was accompanied by the assessment by teachers and pupils that they had little direct influence on the overarching process , and that they were content with this . The teachers reported that their influence was restricted to the development of educational issues and to the participation in different design interventions and workshops . They felt that their voices and opinions were heard and valued at the interventions and workshops , but did not feel that this had any direct influence on the overarching process . The assessment is probably correct to the extent that overall project decisions in the iSchool project were made by the design team , of which the teachers were not a part , although decisions were strongly influenced by the participants , according to the two authors of this paper who were part of iSchool . Nonetheless , the degree of participation in the iSchool project is perhaps best described in terms of cooperative design partnership , rather than cooperative project partnership . The lack of direct criticism of this issue during the project and in the interviews seems to stem from a perception of a division of labour between the parties involved : the designers were meant to take care of overall project planning , funding , and technological support , whereas the teachers and consultants saw themselves as developing and shaping the content of the novel teaching technologies . The teacher and consultants - administrator groups maintained their professional integrity , in that they did 148 not feel that they developed their pedagogical and teaching competence because of the project , though they did become aware of how IT could support different styles of learning , for example . In PD , the creation of occasions for mutual learning between users and designers is frequently emphasized ( Bratteteig , 1997 ; Bødker and Grønbæk , 1996 ) . While mutual learning took place , this apparently did not suspend the roles of ‘guide’ and ‘competent peer’ ( Bratteteig , 1997 : 149 ) , but instead created a shift between these roles , wherein the professional competence of designers and teachers was temporarily suspended , but maintained within the overall division of work within the project . In this case , cooperative design rather than cooperative partnership did not become a critical issue . The interviewees indicated that influence on the design process was neither necessarily desirable nor essential for them to have a strong voice in the project . Sustaining PD initiatives Several participants reported frustrating experiences relating to the fact that the initiatives within the organization faded once the project ended . For the teachers , it proved difficult to engage their colleagues’ interest in the ideas and concepts developed during the project . These experiences raise a range of issues relating to the life of PD projects after the projects end . The problem of sustaining the initiatives taken beyond the single projects has surfaced several times in the PD literature ( Bødker , 1996 ; Merkel et al . , 2004 ) , both in terms of declining momentum and the challenge of bringing insights developed during individual projects to the other arenas of the organization or broader society ( Gärtner and Wagner , 1996 ) . However , the interviews do suggest that the project ideas and initiatives extended beyond the project . Perhaps to a minor extent , in the sense of directly changing the school practices and engaging colleagues , but more so in terms of how the ideas from the project have impacted through less direct channels . Of the teachers , Ellen in particular exemplifies how she has brought new competence from the project to her job as a consultant , and thus into a position where her insights come to bear on a wide network of people within schools and other organizations . Of the consultants , John emphasizes how the project not only provided him with a setting for developing his professional competence related to technology and education , but also connected him to a network of people upon whom he could draw in his further career . Clement and Van den Besselaar ( 1993 ) address the issue of sustaining PD initiatives , and from their study conclude that users must gain in their capacity to become ‘animators’ ( i . e . motivate and initiate action ) , and that key actors outside the project group must learn and care about the results . Relating to the issue of sustaining PD initiatives , Merkel et al . ( 2004 ) further describe the situated efforts invested in facilitating community groups’ efforts to take charge of their technology . Carroll et al . ( 2000 ) describe how teachers in a long - term project moved from being practitioner - informants to becoming analysts , designers , and coaches for their colleagues . The teachers in our study made similar moves , though not necessarily within the same organizational units in their career paths . The ideas developed during the project were thus sustained through their personal development , and maintained or carried on to other contexts . As voiced by Joan , Peter , and Susan , sustaining the project within the original setting was at times strenuous , yet the projects spurred the dissemination of ideas across organizations and professional networks . In this sense , a particularly interesting aspect of the project was the establishment of networks of people who shared experiences and an interest in topics related to educational technology . Regarding the challenge of bringing insights from individual projects to the arenas of the organization and beyond ( Kensing and Blomberg , 1998 ; Gärtner and Wagner , 1996 ) , our study suggests that these developments may be dynamic , and that we may identify them across individual organizations and through the establishment of professional networks . This perspective on the establishment of cross - organizational networks complements the focus on how PD initiatives are sustained and developed within particular organizations . Relating to this network perspective , the gain for the interviewees was at least three - fold . First , as reported among the pupils , teachers and administrators - consultants , central gains from the project were insights into new technologies and reflections on how these might be appropriated for educational purposes . In particular , the participants’ ability to engage with technology as something designable even by non - programmers may be perceived as an important prerequisite for engaging in professional networks . Second , participants gained legitimate access to , or were inspired to engage with more or less established networks of people , organizations , and companies related to educational technology . John , in particular , stressed this access as a central gain , but Peter and Joan , too , exemplify how their participation was a contributing factor for pursuing further education . And third , as expressed by Peter , an important part of the project was the development of skills and experiences in interdisciplinary groups . Our study thus complements the work of Gärtner and Wagner ( 1996 ) , and Merkel et al . ( 2004 ) by suggesting that PD initiatives have the potential to be sustained through the relationships that stretch across organizations and project groups . Studying the gains of PD may thus entail a focus on the indirect and distributed channels through which the long - term impact of PD emerges . Agendas and networks across arenas The network perspective further indicates how social relationships and agendas across arenas were part of , and formed the project . The local politician , Anne , was a key stakeholder in disseminating insights from the project beyond the organization , to regional and national debates on education , but she also benefited from the project . She saw the project as part of her political agendas – topics such as social mobility and greater professionalism in public schools – and explained how she could use the project as ‘ammunition for arguments’ in this respect . As noted by Clement and Besselaar ( 1993 ) , enrolling key people within the organization is an important factor in securing the sustainability of PD projects . In several respects , Anne holds such a key position , since she 149 operates across a range of projects and organizations at both regional and national levels , and can disseminate and sustain momentum in initiatives through various organizations . Also , the consultants - administrator group participated in the project for political and organizational ends that stretched beyond the project . In his account of the project , John describes the relationship between researchers and himself in terms of ‘reciprocity’ : that he gave something to the project , and received something in return , in the form of a professional network and access to state - of - the - art research . A similar line of thought is found in Michael’s account , stressing how he and the school , of which he was assistant headmaster , invested resources in the project , and in return received attention and recognition by other schools and private companies . While such project - external agendas may potentially entail conflicts of interest ( Gärtner and Wagner , 1996 ; Wagner , 1993 ) , in this case they supported the sustainability of the project ideas and initiatives . Reflections on methods for assessing user gains Assessing user gains once projects have ended can enrich PD . The ideal end - goal is the enhancement of people’s work , skills , and leverage within existing power relations . But assessments of participants’ gains in the design processes before implementation and redesign must be attended to also , because such assessments may indicate how user gains are enhanced in these phases , too . Assessment is not without its challenges , however . One challenge is the span of time that may elapse after the closure of a project . In this particular case , recollection of the project and experiences was especially difficult for the pupils , but the adult interviewees also found it difficult at times to remember what actually happened , and sometimes confused different part - projects and people from different organizational units . Another challenge is gauging the causality between participation in the project and the participants’ subsequent life trajectories . A research design built upon interviews occurring at semi - annual or annual intervals may mitigate some of these challenges . Finally , teasing apart causes and effects is difficult . Whether , for example , the enthusiasm of the participants in the iSchool project stems from the public attention the project received , the use of the newest technology or from the new active roles they could attain , we do not know . A comparative , critical case study ( Flyvbjerg 2006 ) of , for example , a ‘failed’ project could be instructive here . Such a comparative study might also enhance our understanding of the extent to which the findings of this study may apply to other PD projects : Since the iSchool project must be considered a best case scenario for users to have gains ( See last paragraph in ‘Methodology’ ) , the question arises whether users have gains in worst case scenarios It is necessary to know more about user gains through participation , in order to improve these . In this case , interdisciplinary communicative skills , knowledge , and experience with new technology , linked to their professional practices , were amongst the gains . It was further clear that participation and gains varied amongst the interviewees . New PD projects should therefore consider how to enhance gains and peoples’ different ways of engaging in projects . Assessments of other kinds of projects could provide useful comparative analyses of user gains : for example , projects in other domains , with other kinds of users , and with other outcomes . CONCLUSIONS Our study of user gains from the iSchool project demonstrates that users gained at several levels . At the personal level , participants’ gains ranged from relatively concrete areas of competence relating to the use of novel interactive technologies , to steppingstones to new careers and educational opportunities . At the collective level , the adult participants were offered a venue for discussing and reflecting on their professional practices , and increased their competence in working within interdisciplinary groups . These gains were achieved through a process of mutual learning , and even though there was a division of labour based on the professions of the teachers and the designers , this was not controversial to the participants . Consistent with previous literature within PD , the issues of sustaining PD initiatives beyond the project , and proliferating ideas within the organization proved difficult . However , the ideas and initiatives developed in the project have diffused across organizations and into networks of people who share an interest in educational technologies , through participants in the iSchool project . Our study suggests that an important arena for sustaining and further developing PD initiatives is that of the set of intertwined networks established through the project , which may form the basis of subsequent efforts . This perspective supplements the important task of sustaining PD projects within the organizations . Our motivation for conducting this study was an interest in understanding what users actually gain from participating in PD projects . The study suggests that gains can be achieved through PD , not only through well - designed products that enhance user skills and augment their work practices , or participatory processes that lead to organizational development . Participation itself can contribute to PD’s aims when participants become capable of engaging with , and making their voices heard in interdisciplinary networked design efforts , thus shaping technological developments . While the perhaps - utopian ideal may still be that of fully cooperative design and project partnerships that contribute to organizational and societal development , one may find comfort in the fact that participants can engage in new networks and projects with their augmented areas of competence , and thus continue to contribute to PD’s aims . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This research has been funded by Center for Interactive Spaces ( the iSchool project ) and Center for Digital Urban Living ( the Danish Council for Strategic Research , grant number 2128 - 07 - 0011 ) . We thank the interviewees for sharing their experiences . REFERENCES Balka , E . Inside the belly of the beast : the challenges and successes of a reformist participatory agenda , Proc . of PDC 2006 , 134 - 143 . 150 Bardram , J . E . , Hansen , T . R . , and Soegaard , M . AwareMedia : a shared interactive display supporting social , temporal , and spatial awareness in surgery , Proc . of CSCW 2006 , 109 - 118 . Barki , H . and Hartwick , J . Measuring user participation , user involvement , and user attitude , MIS Quarterly , 1994 , 18 ( 1 ) : 59 - 82 . Beck , E . E . P for political – participation is not enough , Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems , 2002 , 14 : 77 - 92 . Bjerknes , G . , Ehn , P . , and Kyng , M . ( Eds . ) Computers and democracy – a Scandinavian challenge , Avebury Gower Publishing , Aldershot , 1987 . Bossen , C . Participation , power , critique : constructing a standard for electronic patient records , Proc . of PDC 2006 , 95 - 104 . Bratteteig , T . Mutual learning . Enabling cooperation in systems design . In : K . Bras and E . Monteiro , Editors , Proceedings of IRIS 1997 , 1 – 19 . Brodersen , C . Dindler , C . , Iversen , O . S . Staging Imaginative Places for Participatory Prototyping . Journal of CoDesign , 2008 , 4 ( 1 ) : 19 - 30 . Bødker , S . 1996 . Creating conditions for participation : Conflicts and resources in systems development , Human - Computer Interaction , 11 : 215 - 236 . Bødker , S . and Grønbæk , K . Users and designers in mutual activity : an analysis of cooperative activities in systems design . In : Y . Engeström and D . Middleton , Editors , Cognition and Communication at Work , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge ( 1996 ) , 130 - 158 . Carroll , J . M . , Chin , G . , Rosson , M . B . , and Neale , D . C . The development of cooperation : five years of participatory design in the virtual school . Proc . of DIS 2000 . Clement , A . and Besselaar , P . A retrospective look at PD projects , Communications of the ACM , Vol . 1993 , 36 ( 4 ) : 29 - 37 . Ehn , P . Work - oriented design of computer artifacts . Arbetslivscentrum , Falköping , Sweden , 1988 . Ehn , P . Participation in design things , Proc . of PDC 2008 , 92 - 102 . Flick , U . An Introduction to Qualitative Research . Sage Publishing , London , 2006 . Flyvbjerg , B . Five Misunderstandings About Case - Study Research . Qualitative Inquiry , 2006 , 12 ( 2 ) : 219 - 245 . Greenbaum , J . and Kyng , M . ( Eds . ) , Design at work : cooperative design of computer systems . Lawrence Erlbaum Publishing , Hillsdale ( NJ ) , 1991 . Grudin , J . and Pruit , J . Personas , Participatory Design and Product Development : An Infrastructure for Engagement . Proc . of PDC 2002 , 144 - 161 . Gärtner , J . and Wagner , I . Mapping Actors and Agendas : Political Frameworks of Systems Design and Participation . Human - Computer Interaction , 1996 , 11 : 187 - 214 . Hartswood , M . , Procter , R . , Slack , R . , Voss , A . , Büscher , M . , Rouncefield , M . , and Rouchy , P . Co - realisation . Towards a principled synthesis of ethnomethodology and participatory design , Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems , 2002 , 14 ( 2 ) : 9 - 30 . Iversen , O . S . Participatory Design beyond Work Practices - Designing with Children , Ph . D . dissertation , Dept . of Computer Science , University of Aarhus , 2005 . Iversen , O . S . & Brodersen , C . Building BRIDGE between children and users : a socio - cultural approach to child - computer interaction , Cognition , Technology , Work , 2007 , 10 : 83 - 93 . Kensing , F . , Simonsen , J . and Bødker , K . MUST – A method for participatory design , Proc . of PDC 1996 , 129 - 140 . Kensing , F . and Bomberg , J . Participatory design : Issues and Concerns , Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 1998 , 3 ( 4 ) : 167 - 185 . Kvale , S . InterViews . An Introduction to Qualitative Research Interviewing . Sage , Thousand Oaks ( CA ) . 1996 . Mambrey , P . , Mark , G . , and Pankoke - Babatz , U . User Advocacy in Participatory Design : Designers’ Experiences with a New Communication Channel . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 1998 , 7 ( 3 - 4 ) : 291 - 313 . Merkel , C . B . , Xiao , L . , Farooq , U . , Ganoe , C . H . , Lee , R . , Carroll , J . M . , and Rosson , M . B . Participatory design in community computing contexts : Tales from the field , Proc . of PDC 2004 , 1 - 10 . Patton , M . Q . Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods . Sage , Newbury Park , 1990 . Schuler , D . and Namioka , A . ( Eds . ) Participatory Design - Principles and Practices , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Hillsdale ( NJ ) . 1993 . Simonsen , J . and Hertzum , M . Participatory Design and the Challenges of Large - Scale Systems : Extending the Iterative PD Approach , Proc . of PDC 2008 , 1 - 10 . Suchman , L . Located Accountabilities in Technology Production . Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems , 2002 , 1s4 ( 3 ) : 91 - 105 . Vergvall - Kåreborn , B . and Ståhlbrost , A . Participatory Design – one step back or two steps forward ? Proc . of PDC 2008 , 102 - 112 . Wagner , I . A web of fuzzy problems : confronting the ethical issues . Communications of the ACM , 1993 36 ( 6 ) : 94 - 101 .