UT Dallas 2018 Graduate Catalog Innovation and Entrepreneurship ENTP 6102 Professional Development ( 1 semester credit hour ) This course is designed to enhance the student ' s experience such as building networking skills , verbal and written communication skills , business etiquette , and learning how to increase their human capital . Students will learn how to build a personal career portfolio ( an approved resume , a LinkedIn profile , etc . ) , how to market themselves , how to prepare for internship and job placement interviews , and how to utilize professional networking . The goal is to make students more marketable and valuable professionals to the global economy . Pass / Fail only . Credit cannot be received for more than one of the following : BUAN 6102 , ENGY 6102 , ENTP 6102 , FIN 6102 , HM GT 6102 , IMS 6102 , MAS 6102 , MIS 6102 , MKT 6102 , OPRE 6102 , or SYSM 6102 . ( 1 - 0 ) S ENTP 6310 ( BPS 6310 ) Strategic Management ( 3 semester credit hours ) Strategic management consists of the analysis , decisions , and actions that organizations take to create sustainable competitive advantages . The course examines a variety of issues including environmental , competitor , and stakeholder analysis ; strategy formulation ; and strategy implementation and control . The central role of ethics and corporate governance as well as global issues will be addressed . Credit cannot be received for both BPS 6310 and EN TP 6310 . Prerequisites : ( ACCT 6301 and ACCT 6202 ) or ( ACCT 6305 and FIN 6301 and MKT 6301 and OB 63 01 ) . ( 3 - 0 ) S ENTP 6311 ( FIN 6311 ) Valuation Models and Practices ( 3 semester credit hours ) This course examines different models and practices for valuing firms ( both public and private ) , pricing IPOs , and valuing and structuring mergers and acquisitions . Prerequisite : FIN 6301 . ( 3 - 0 ) S ENTP 6315 ( FIN 6315 ) Entrepreneurial Finance ( 3 semester credit hours ) The objective of this course is to build skills and knowledge in the financing of entrepreneurial ventures . Entrepreneurial Finance concerns not only the process of financing and investing in start - up companies , but also the changes to the initial financing mix that may be required as start - up companies mature and grow . Topics include : valuation , capital structure , forecasting , the markets for venture capital and private equity , the decision to go public or remain private , alternative financing arrangements , and the differential marketability and liquidity of the securities used to finance non - public firms . Credit cannot be received for both courses , ENTP 6315 and FIN 6315 . Prerequisite : FIN 6301 . ( 3 - 0 ) Y ENTP 6316 ( FIN 6316 ) Private Equity Finance ( 3 semester credit hours ) This course will cover the investment of capital in the equity of private companies to fund growth or in public companies to take them private . This course includes the study of a broad spectrum of private equity investments , investing in established private firms , buyouts , financial restructuring of distressed firms , and private equity financing by public firms . Prerequisite or Corequisite : FIN 6311 or ENTP 6311 . ( 3 - 0 ) Y ENTP 6352 International Business Plan ( 3 semester credit hours ) Executive Education Course . This course is a capstone that requires the development of a comprehensive business plan for market entry into a foreign country or region . The construct builds upon the core business and international coursework including the successful completion of key courses in accounting , finance , marketing and strategy , as well as , the international entrepreneurship and innovation . The course consists of lectures , research , and faculty coaching and guidance . This course is offered in an online format only . Prerequisites : IMS 6354 and OPRE 6302 and instructor consent required . Prerequisite or Corequisite : OPRE 6250 . ( 3 - 0 ) Y https : / / catalog . utdallas . edu / now / graduate / courses / entp 1 / 5 ENTP 6360 Startup Launch I ( 3 semester credit hours ) This course is designed to refine and validate a specific business concept based upon a student ' s new venture idea . The course utilizes a structured customer discovery / validation methodology that requires early customer engagement and the development and validation of a comprehensive business model . Key assumptions will be validated utilizing primary and secondary market research , interviews with prospective customers and other industry participants , and field testing of Minimum Viable Products . Students or student teams will be selected and enrolled on the basis of a business concept proposal approved by the faculty . Multiple projects will proceed through the course as a cohort , guided by faculty and mentored by experienced entrepreneurs . Cubicle space in the Venture Development Center may be applied for . ENTP 6360 utilizes the same customer discovery / validation process used in ENTP 6365 . Instructor consent required . ( 3 - 0 ) R ENTP 6361 Startup Launch II ( 3 semester credit hours ) Faculty mentored development of a business concept initiated in ENTP 6360 . Prerequisites : ENTP 6360 and instructor consent required . ( 3 - 0 ) R ENTP 6362 Startup Launch III - IV ( 3 semester credit hours ) Faculty mentored development of a business concept initiated in ENTP 6360 . May be repeated for credit as topics vary ( 6 semester credit hours maximum for students in the Startup Launch track ) . Prerequisites : ENTP 6361 and instructor consent required . ( 3 - 0 ) R ENTP 6365 Technology Commercialization and Concept Validation ( 3 semester credit hours ) The course covers background on intellectual property , feasibility analysis , market assessment techniques , and how to evaluate the commercial potential of a range of technologies . Students work in teams to apply the concepts learned to assess the commercial potential of different patents . The analysis includes market research on potential applications for the technology , validation of the value proposition and business model , and recommendations on the best approach for bringing the technology to market , such as licensing or creating a new business . Prerequisite : ENTP 6370 or instructor consent required . ( 3 - 0 ) R ENTP 6370 Innovation and Entrepreneurship ( 3 semester credit hours ) This course provides an introduction to entrepreneurship , with an emphasis on identifying , evaluating and developing new venture opportunities . Topics include opportunity identification and evaluation , startup strategies , business valuation , business plan development , attracting stakeholders , financing the venture , managing the growing business and exit strategies . Case studies and guest lectures by entrepreneurs and venture capital partners provide a real - world perspective . The major deliverable of this course is an early stage feasibility analysis of a venture of the student ' s choosing . ( 3 - 0 ) S ENTP 6375 ( MIS 6375 and OPRE 6394 and SYSM 6332 ) Technology and New Product Development ( 3 semester credit hours ) This course addresses the strategic and organizational issues confronted by firms in technology - intensive environments . The course reflects six broad themes : ( 1 ) managing firms in technology - intensive industries ; ( 2 ) forecasting key industry and technology trends ; ( 3 ) linking technology and business strategies ; ( 4 ) using technology as a source of competitive advantage ; ( 5 ) organizing firms to achieve these goals ; and ( 6 ) implementing new technologies in organizations . Students analyze actual situations in organizations and summarize their findings and recommendations in an in - depth term paper . The course also introduces concepts related to agile engineering . Case studies and class participation are stressed . ( 3 - 0 ) Y ENTP 6378 Managing the Emerging Enterprise ( 3 semester credit hours ) The course focuses on the challenges of growing a small company from early startup to a professionally managed business , as the entrepreneur struggles to maintain the entrepreneurial spirit of the firm while introducing the professional https : / / catalog . utdallas . edu / now / graduate / courses / entp 2 / 5 management disciplines essential to sustained and profitable growth . Topics include shaping and communicating the entrepreneur ' s vision , developing a viable business model , positioning products and services in a broader market , implementing business strategies , building an organization and infrastructure , molding the culture , developing and managing critical relationships with banks , suppliers and customers , and managing growth with limited resources . The course makes extensive use of case studies and visiting lectures by entrepreneurs . Prerequisite : ENTP 6370 . ( 3 - 0 ) Y ENTP 6380 ( MKT 6380 ) Market Entry Strategies ( 3 semester credit hours ) This course addresses the marketing challenges facing the entrepreneurial firm , with specific emphasis on the choice and implementation of an initial market entry strategy . This choice typically involves multiple decisions , each based on critical assumptions about customers , markets and competitors . Early validation of these key assumptions is an essential element of the strategic decision process . Topics include understanding the context and the customer , developing and validating the business concept , defining the product / service offering and customer value proposition , positioning , creating awareness , and developing and implementing the market entry strategy . Credit cannot be received for both courses , ENTP 6380 and MKT 6380 . Prerequisite : ENTP 6370 or MKT 6301 . ( 3 - 0 ) Y ENTP 6382 ( MKT 6382 ) Professional Selling I ( 3 semester credit hours ) Examines the theory and practical application of the principles and art of professional selling . The course places special emphasis on mapping the sales process for new companies and new products . The course includes case studies and learning by doing live case instruction . This course also includes advanced concepts in sales such as major account acquisition , government markets , global markets , request for information , request for proposal , product line sales , adaptive product and service solutions , team selling , long sales cycles , prospecting and networking strategies , implementation and analysis of prospecting strategies , and sales management strategies for the early stage of the product lifecycle . ( 3 - 0 ) Y ENTP 6388 ( SYSM 6316 ) Managing Innovation within the Corporation ( 3 semester credit hours ) Innovators and entrepreneurs within established corporations combine innovation , creativity and leadership to develop and launch new products , new product lines and new business units that grow revenues and profits from within . The course seeks to equip students with the skills and perspectives required to initiate new ventures and create viable businesses in dynamic and uncertain environments in the face of organizational inertia and other sources of resistance to innovation . Course topics include the elements of strategic analysis and positioning for competitive advantage in dynamic markets , and the structuring , utilization and mobilization of the internal resources of existing firms in the pursuit of growth and new market opportunities . ( 3 - 0 ) Y ENTP 6390 Business Model Innovation ( 3 semester credit hours ) Business model innovation is a logical and internally consistent approach to the design and operations of a new venture , capturing the essence of how the business will be focused and providing a concise representation of how an interrelated set of decision variables will be addressed to create sustainable competitive advantage . This course will explore the range and diversity of existing business models and the analytical tools essential to their understanding , define a logical and internally consistent approach to the choice or development of an appropriate business model for a new enterprise , and demonstrate the application of these tools and techniques through case studies and exercises . Prerequisite : ENTP 6370 . ( 3 - 0 ) S ENTP 6392 Entrepreneurship in the Social Sector ( 3 semester credit hours ) This course explores domestic and international social entrepreneurship , including the role and importance of the non - profit sector and the unique place it occupies in twenty - first century life . The course develops theoretical and conceptual https : / / catalog . utdallas . edu / now / graduate / courses / entp 3 / 5 frameworks to enable students to understand how non - profit ventures operate . This project based course provides opportunities for students to get hands - on experience . Student projects involve helping local non - profit entities with mission definition , improving service delivery or business practices , fund - raising , and / or governance . ( 3 - 0 ) Y ENTP 6393 Technology and New Product Development in Dynamic Markets ( 3 semester credit hours ) Executive Education Course . This course uses a combination of instruction - based , team - based case analysis and Socratic Method of case discussions . The intent is to analyze and understand technology and new product development and the associated strategic and organizational issues facing modern organizations in today ' s dynamic global business environment . The course also addresses issues related to product and technology lifecycles , new technology forecasting , linkages between technology development and business strategies as well as issues important to product line management ( PLM ) and business unit ( BU ) management functions . ( 3 - 0 ) Y ENTP 6394 Innovation , Entrepreneurship and Intrapreneurship ( 3 semester credit hours ) Executive Education Course . This course covers entrepreneurship and intrapreneurship , with an emphasis on identifying , evaluating and developing new venture opportunities both independently and within a corporate setting . Course topics include opportunity identification and evaluation , startup strategies , business plan development , financing the venture , positioning a new product line for competitive advantage , and the utilization and mobilization of the internal resources of existing firms in the pursuit of growth and new market opportunities . ( 3 - 0 ) Y ENTP 6395 Seminar - Topics in Innovation and Entrepreneurship ( 3 semester credit hours ) This course will explore special topics of interest to students of Innovation and Entrepreneurship . The content will vary , exploring such topics as opportunities for innovation in Biotechnology , Information Technology , Nanotechnology , and other fields . Extensive use of outside speakers , special readings , and field and library research will be involved . May be repeated for credit as topics vary ( 6 semester credit hours maximum ) . Instructor consent required . ( 3 - 0 ) R ENTP 6398 ( SYSM 6315 ) The Entrepreneurial Experience ( 3 semester credit hours ) This course is designed to provide student teams with practical experience in the investigation , evaluation and recommendation of technology and / or market entry strategies for a significant new business opportunity . Projects will be defined by the faculty and will generally focus on emerging market opportunities defined by new technologies of interest to a sponsoring corporate partner . Teams will be comprised of management and engineering graduate students , mentored by faculty and representatives of the partnering company . Evaluation will be based on papers , presentations and other deliverables defined on a case - by - case basis . ( 3 - 0 ) R ENTP 6V97 Innovation and Entrepreneurship Internship ( 1 - 3 semester credit hours ) Student will gain experience and improve skills through appropriate developmental work assignments in a real business environment . Student must identify and submit specific business learning objectives at the beginning of the semester . The student must demonstrate exposure to the managerial perspective via involvement or observation . At semester end , student prepares an oral or poster presentation , or a written paper reflecting on the work experience . Student performance is evaluated by the work supervisor . Pass / Fail only . May be repeated for credit as topics vary ( 3 semester credit hours maximum ) . JSOM Internship Coordinator consent required . ( [ 1 - 3 ] - 0 ) S ENTP 6V99 Special Topics in Entrepreneurship ( 1 - 6 semester credit hours ) May be lecture , readings , or https : / / catalog . utdallas . edu / now / graduate / courses / entp 4 / 5 individualized study . May be repeated for credit as topics vary ( 6 semester credit hours maximum ) . Instructor consent required . ( [ 1 - 6 ] - 0 ) R ENTP 7300 Foundations of Entrepreneurship ( 3 semester credit hours ) The seminar will uncover theoretical and empirical views of entrepreneurship . Students concentrate on the issues in the field and assess them using different methodologies . Students also examine future research questions and draft a research paper aimed at submission to a top journal . Entrepreneurship is inherently interdisciplinary and students should expect to see influences from the fields of sociology , strategy , economics , and organizational behavior . Prerequisites : International Management Studies PhD majors only and instructor consent required . ( 3 - 0 ) T ENTP 7301 Technology , Innovation and Entrepreneurship ( 3 semester credit hours ) This seminar introduces and examines contemporary research topics in technology , innovation , and entrepreneurship . Students will be exposed to a broad survey of theoretical foundation from disciplinary fields such as economics , sociology , and contemporary works to conduct research in technology , innovation , and entrepreneurship . Prerequisites : International Management Studies PhD majors only and instructor consent required . ( 3 - 0 ) T https : / / catalog . utdallas . edu / now / graduate / courses / entp 5 / 5