Reward synthesis Enlarge and incentivize efforts that examine past discoveries . T he idea that scientists can see to make discoveries only because they stand on the shoulders of giants was popularized by Isaac Newton . Fittingly , he borrowed the idea from a significant figure who had gone before him , probably the twelfth - century French philosopher Bernard of Chartres . It’s a sound principle : build on pre - vious efforts to seek and find truth . But a vast number of previous discoveries are now captured in an overwhelmingly large body of lit - erature — so what is a modern truth - seeker to do ? One strategy is to distil knowledge in a way that empowers those needing to resolve a practical solution . This comes in many forms — from the regular , heroic efforts of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change to the ad - hoc assessments done urgently to help steer decisions on political or environmental crises . Other efforts — largely by not - for - profit organizations committed to evi - dence - based assessment — are driven by a need to ensure that the best possible outcomes will follow any intervention . The Cochrane reviews ( go . nature . com / 2jqocex ) exemplify this assessment for best practice in health contexts , and the Campbell reviews ( go . nature . com / 2k86p1p ) do so in social , educational and behavioural contexts . As societal challenges grow in research priority , there is ever more need for such synthesis . But it takes effort , as described by , for example , a Cornell University Library guide to a systematic review ( go . nature . com / 2k6ftil ) . And , more problematically , the academic ecosystem does not incentivize such work . To help nudge the system in that direction , Nature this week publishes two Comment articles that highlight the importance of such assessments of evidence , and suggest ways to maximize their effective - ness . In the first ( page 361 ) , several experts from policy , funding and publishing ( including Nature ’s editor - in - chief ) present four princi - ples to help make evidence syntheses aimed at policymakers easier to commission , and more powerful in delivery and implementation . The second ( page 364 ) , by two researchers who focus on evidence for conservation biology , discusses a form of evidence synthesis that can provide a more cost - effective way to appraise evidence when data are sparse and patchy . This is a reflection of the reality that , for some interventions , randomized controlled trials aren’t possible , but there is , nevertheless , a need to make sense of the available evidence . More scientists should identify fields for which such an exercise is necessary ( or will be soon ) and , after proper consultation with policy - makers on what questions are most relevant , they should produce a useful assessment of the evidence . We hope that these articles will encourage researchers , and their institutions , funders and publish - ers , to recognize the benefits that good syntheses of knowledge will provide . ■ Bias revisited Women continue to represent too small a proportion of this journal’s authors and referees . B oth in its goals and in its actions , Nature ’s editorial team is trying to address the issue of equity in science . See , for example , an Editorial published earlier this month ( Nature 558 , 5 ; 2018 ) and a collection of content from across the Nature group of journals ( see go . nature . com / 2gjwkkn ) . As a part of this effort , we have previously provided statistics and regular updates on the balance between male and female contributors to Nature content , both as authors and as referees . Consistently , these have shown the involvement of too few women when compared with estimates of the number of females present in research communities . ( As one indicator , data from the United Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organization show that the global average proportion of women in the science workforce is about 29 % ; see go . nature . com / 2koxupq . ) Since we published our first report on this topic in a 2012 Editorial ( Nature 491 , 495 ; 2012 ) , the numbers show we have made some progress , but not enough and too slowly . A key element has been our attempt to counter unconscious bias , by getting senior staff and editors to ask themselves , ‘Who are the outstanding women for this task ? ’ , before commissioning an author or a referee . We cannot claim that this important exercise happens on every occasion , but we have made substantial efforts . So what do the latest statistics reveal ? The sections of Nature that are directly commissioned by in - house editors are where we have most agency , and so have been most responsive to our efforts . In 2017 , in our Comment , World View , Books & Arts and Obituary sections , 29 % of our 255 authors were women . The proportion of women authors in Comment and World View in 2017 was 34 % — an increase since the 19 % recorded in 2012 . These articles are commissioned by a team ( all female , as it happens ) that ( like many others ) works hard to deliver on this agenda . They report a noticeable tendency for senior women to decline invitations . As was detailed in our 2012 Editorial , there are many reasons why women researchers might have less time for such writing than have men . The team also finds that advisers and invitees , whatever their gender , often send all - male suggestions for alternative authors . We are countering this latter tendency by asking all those who suggest authors or referees to “bear diversity in mind” . The News & Views section of Nature has considerably improved its position with com - missions since we started our initiatives in 2012 , when the proportion of women authors stood at 12 % . But over the past 3 years , despite keeping up its efforts , that ratio has plateaued at about 26 % female — 113 out of 442 authors in 2017 . In the 47 Review articles that we published in 2017 , from a total of 217 authors , 42 of them — just over 19 % — were women . Our poorest outcome is in the refereeing of research papers . Counting only individuals whose gender we can attribute from their first names , the proportion of female referees has increased from 12 % in 2011 to 16 % in 2017 . When assigning gender , we used the algorithm from Gender API . We counted records for which the algorithm could not match the name with a gender , or returned an accuracy below 95 % , as ‘unknown gender’ . These results are skewed because the algorithm has a hard time identifying gender in some languages , such as Chinese . We counted the referees for all submissions — if a referee reviewed three different manuscripts in a given year , we counted them as three , not as one . For authors , we counted the total number of corresponding authors in a similar fashion . Counting only authors with an assignable gender , the percentage of female corresponding authors has remained constant at 16 % over time . The editors of Nature and of all the Nature journals have , in recent months , been consolidating existing initiatives on diversity and inclusion , and setting up new ones , to become more systematic and creative about this . We will report on those efforts soon . But the need to work harder is clear for all to see . ■ “There are many reasons why women researchers might have less time for such writing than have men . ” 3 4 4 | N AT U R E | V O L 5 5 8 | 2 1 J U N E 2 0 1 8 EDITORIALS THIS WEEK © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved .