HOW WE TEACH Generalizable Education Research Variation in behavioral engagement during an active learning activity leads to differential knowledge gains in college students X Lara D . LaDage , 1 Samantha L . Tornello , 2 Jennilyn M . Vallejera , 3 Emily E . Baker , 1 Yue Yan , 3 and Anik Chowdhury 3 1 Division of Mathematics & Natural Sciences , Penn State Altoona , Altoona , Pennsylvania ; 2 Department of Human Development and Family Studies , Penn State University , University Park , Pennsylvania ; and 3 Division of Business , Engineering , Information Sciences & Technology , Penn State Altoona , Altoona , Pennsylvania Submitted 3 October 2017 ; accepted in ﬁnal form 12 December 2017 LaDage LD , Tornello SL , Vallejera JM , Baker EE , Yan Y , Chowdhury A . Variation in behavioral engagement during an active learning activity leads to differential knowledge gains in college students . Adv Physiol Educ 42 : 99 – 103 , 2018 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / advan . 00150 . 2017 . —There are many pedagogical techniques used by edu - cators in higher education ; however , some techniques and activities have been shown to be more beneﬁcial to student learning than others . Research has demonstrated that active learning and learning in which students cognitively engage with the material in a multitude of ways result in better understanding and retention . The aim of the present study was to determine which of three pedagogical techniques led to improvement in learning and retention in undergraduate college stu - dents . Subjects partook in one of three different types of pedagogical engagement : hands - on learning with a model , observing someone else manipulate the model , and traditional lecture - based presentation . Students were then asked to take an online quiz that tested their knowledge of the new material , both immediately after learning the material and 2 wk later . Students who engaged in direct manipulation of the model scored higher on the assessment immediately after learning the material compared with the other two groups . However , there were no differences among the three groups when assessed after a 2 - wk retention interval . Thus active learning techniques that involve direct interaction with the material can lead to learning beneﬁts ; however , how these techniques beneﬁt long - term retention of the information is equivocal . active learning ; discovery - based instruction ; evidence - based teaching ; higher education ; STEM INTRODUCTION Students in higher education , particularly those in science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( STEM ) disciplines , predominantly experience acquisition of new material via a traditional lecture - based format ( e . g . , Ref . 6 ) . However , alter - native pedagogical techniques are becoming more common - place , as educators strive to ﬁnd the most effective way to facilitate learning and information retention . These pedagogi - cal techniques vary in how the information is presented , but , broadly , most of these pedagogical techniques are based on active learning . Active learning requires students to participate in the learning process in the classroom , and this can be through engaged activities conducted individually , in small groups , or as an entire class ( e . g . , Refs . 8 , 12 ) . Pedagogical research in college students has demonstrated that active learn - ing is more effective than passive lecture - based learning , likely because active learning activities allow students to make their own connections with the material ( e . g . , Refs . 4 , 16 ) . In STEM disciplines in particular , empirical and meta - analytical studies have demonstrated that active learning increases exam scores ( e . g . , Refs . 4 , 18 ) . The outcome of these and other studies on active learning are important because a change in the presen - tation of information , and hence student engagement with the material , can ultimately lead to increased gains in learning and retention in college students . Therefore , studies examining the success of different presentations of the same information can provide insight on how to reach students in the most effective way . While the beneﬁts of active learning are substantial , it is still unclear which aspect of the active learning experience contrib - utes to increased learning and retention . For instance , even within an active learning context , students may differentially interact with the material , potentially leading to different gains in learning . Chi and Wylie ( 2 ) created the ICAP ( interactive , constructive , active , passive ) framework , which categorizes active learning activities based on observable changes in be - havior and differences in learning outcomes . They categorized behaviors into four distinct levels of engagement with the material : passive , active , constructive , and interactive . First , passive activities involve students receiving information with - out any meaningful cognitive engagement with the material ( e . g . , passively listening to a lecture ) and are the least effective for learning and retention . Active learning activities involve engaging with the material in some way ( e . g . , copying notes verbatim ) , while constructive activities are more advanced because the student is engaging with the material as well as generating new information based on their understanding of the material ( e . g . , constructing a concept map ) . Finally , interact - ive activities involve a collaborative and constructive dialogue between two or more people ( e . g . , debating a peer ) and are thought to be the most effective activities for learning and retention . This framework presents a useful tool to operation - alize variation in students’ behaviors during active learning activities , as well as allows for empirically testing how varia - tion in engagement during active learning activities contributes to differential gains in learning and retention ( e . g . , Ref . 17 ) . Address for reprint requests and other correspondence : L . D . LaDage , Dept . of Biology , Div . of Mathematics & Natural Sciences , 214 Hawthorn Bldg . , 3000 Ivyside Dr . , Altoona , PA 16601 ( e - mail : ldl18 @ psu . edu ) . Adv Physiol Educ 42 : 99 – 103 , 2018 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / advan . 00150 . 2017 . 99 1043 - 4046 / 18 Copyright © 2018 The American Physiological Society With this framework in mind , the goal of the present study was to assess if differential engagement with the same material during an active learning activity would lead to variation in learning and retention in undergraduate students . Speciﬁcally , we asked students to engage in either 1 ) an active learning activity in which the students had direct control over the material with the ability to construct information in a person - ally meaningful way ( active activity with constructive behav - ior ) ; 2 ) an active learning activity in which the students did not have control over the presentation of the material ( active activity with passive behavior ) ; and 3 ) a lecture - based presen - tation as a control ( traditional activity with passive behavior ) . We predicted that the students who engaged in the active learning constructive activity in which they were able to control and manipulate the presentation of the material would exhibit increased learning gains and greater retention of the material compared with the other two groups . MATERIALS AND METHODS Information presentation . To present information that students had likely not previously encountered , we chose to present material on the neural connections of the visual pathway and how damage along the neural pathways can differentially affect the visual ﬁeld . For use with the two groups of active learners , we constructed models of the human neural visual pathway ( Fig . 1 ) . Each model consisted of an acrylic box with an etching of the visual pathway detailing how neural informa - tion travels from the eyes to the visual cortex . The etching was paralleled by hidden electrical circuitry that allowed visualization of which parts of the visual ﬁeld were activated . Nine rocker switches were located at various points along the neural pathway , and switch - ing a switch represented a lesion to the visual pathway , which was reﬂected by a light bulb in the visual ﬁeld turning off . A light bulb that was on in the “eye” indicated normal activity of the visual pathway , whereas a light bulb that was not on was indicative of impairment of the visual pathway that affected that particular portion of the visual ﬁeld . This model allowed for numerous permutations of impairments of the visual pathway , and the resultant disruption to the visual ﬁeld . By assessing how impairments affect the visual ﬁeld , students were able to understand how visual information enters the eyes and is sent to the correct areas of the left and right visual cortices ( see Fig . 1 ) . Subjects and treatment groups . Subjects were students recruited from undergraduate courses in Psychology and Biology at a public 4 - yr institution in the eastern United States . To facilitate participation , students were offered extra credit for participation and the opportunity to be entered into a drawing for a gift card for quiz completion at the second time point ( see below ) . Students were asked to attend a meeting outside of class time , and each meeting had ~ 20 students . On the meeting day , students were given a brief introduction regarding the aim of the study and then randomly assigned to one of three treatment groups . Students in group 1 ( Manipulation group , n (cid:2) 46 ) participated in an active learning activity and had control over the information presentation ; students in group 2 ( Observation group , n (cid:2) 39 ) also participated in the active learning activity , but had no control over how the information was presented . Finally , students assigned to group 3 ( Lecture group , n (cid:2) 33 ) listened to a lecture over the same material that was available to the Manipulation and Observation groups . All methodology was approved by Pennsylvania State Uni - versity’s Institutional Review Board ( protocol no . 00003195 ) . Testing protocol . Students assigned to the Manipulation group were randomly paired with another student who was assigned to the Observation group . The students in the Manipulation and Observation groups were only told that the model represented the visual pathway and that the switches represented lesions to the pathway . Subjects were instructed that they were to learn how lesions to different areas of the neural pathway affected the visual ﬁeld . Students in the Manipulation group were allowed to control the switches on the model in any way they chose for 10 min . Students in the Observation group were asked to passively observe their partner in the Manipula - tion group and were not allowed to have any input in how the student from the Manipulation group controlled the model . Furthermore , student dyads were instructed not to talk to one another to prevent interactive learning . Finally , the students in the Lecture group were taught the same material available in the model , but in a lecture for - mat that lasted ~ 10 min ; the lead author gave the lecture for all students in the Lecture group . The lecture consisted of a PowerPoint slide with the exact same picture of the visual pathway that was etched on the model . The lead author explained how information from the four primary regions of the visual ﬁeld enters the eyes , how that information differentially travels through the visual pathway to the visual cortex , and how lesions to particular areas of the visual pathway would produce deﬁcits in the visual ﬁeld . Information within the lecture did not address anything further than what could be obtained from the model ( e . g . , no information about retinal processing , termi - nology , and anatomy associated with the neural pathway ) . Immediately after the 10 - min manipulation / observation or 10 - min lecture , students were asked to take an online quiz via a laptop provided by the experimenters . The quiz consisted of ﬁve multiple - choice questions that assessed knowledge of how lesions in various areas of the visual pathway affected the visual ﬁeld ( Fig . 2 ) . Students in all three groups received the same quiz questions and answers , but the questions and answers were presented in random order to prevent cheating . The quiz was closed to student viewing immediately after taking the quiz to prevent studying for the second quiz . Two weeks later , an e - mail was sent instructing students from all three groups to take a second quiz to assess retention of the information . The second quiz had the exact same questions as the ﬁrst quiz , but again questions Fig . 1 . Acrylic model representing the human visual ﬁeld and the associated neural pathways within the brain . The nine rocker switches represent lesions at different parts of the pathway . These “lesions” were visualized via green and red light bulbs in the right and left visual ﬁelds that turned on and off . This model allowed for numerous permutations of neural pathway impairments and visualization of the resultant disruption to the visual ﬁeld . 100 VARIATION IN ENGAGEMENT PRODUCES DIFFERENTIAL LEARNING GAINS Advances in Physiology Education • doi : 10 . 1152 / advan . 00150 . 2017 • http : / / advan . physiology . org and answers were presented randomly . Demographic information was also collected so we could assess for demographic - speciﬁc differences that may have affected our results . Statistics . To assess learning and retention , we used a linear mixed model with repeated measures to assess quiz score differences among the three groups at the two different time points . Because some subjects did not take quiz 2 ( quiz 2 sample sizes : Manipulation group , n (cid:2) 39 , Observation group , n (cid:2) 36 , Lecture group , n (cid:2) 25 ) , we had unequal sample sizes across the two time points that precluded use of a repeated - measures general linear model . Demographic data [ age , overall grade point average ( GPA ) , year in school ] were assessed with individual one - way ANOVA tests . RESULTS The majority of participants identiﬁed as women ( 81 . 4 % ) , White / Caucasian ( 72 . 9 % ) , and were , on average , 19 yr of age ( mean (cid:2) 19 . 43 , SD 1 . 70 ) . Roughly one - half of participants were freshman ( 52 . 6 % ) , with the remaining identifying as sophomores ( 29 . 8 % ) , juniors ( 10 . 5 % ) , and seniors ( 7 . 0 % ) . Most students reporting not taking biology - or psychology - speciﬁc courses in which they would have been exposed to the material presented in the study ( 88 . 1 % ) . Participants reported an average overall GPA of 3 . 21 ( SD 0 . 50 ) and major GPA of 3 . 23 ( SD 0 . 54 ) . We found no signiﬁcant differences among the three groups with regard to demographic factors that may have correlated with performance in the present study , including age ( F 2 , 112 (cid:2) 2 . 972 , P (cid:2) 0 . 055 ) , overall GPA ( F 2 , 111 (cid:2) 0 . 154 , P (cid:2) 0 . 857 ) , major GPA ( F 2 , 107 (cid:2) 0 . 337 , P (cid:2) 0 . 714 ) , and year in school ( (cid:3) 2 (cid:2) 5 . 262 , P (cid:2) 0 . 511 ) . Furthermore , sex ( (cid:3) 2 (cid:2) 4 . 318 , P (cid:2) 0 . 365 ) , race / ethnicity ( (cid:3) 2 (cid:2) 4 . 026 , P (cid:2) 0 . 134 ) , and prior exposure to the material ( (cid:3) 2 (cid:2) 2 . 414 , P (cid:2) 0 . 299 ) did not differ across the three groups . The linear mixed model with repeated measures indicated that time point and the interaction between time point and group were statistically signiﬁcant ( time point : F 1 , 108 . 3 (cid:2) 4 . 416 , P (cid:2) 0 . 038 ; interaction F 2 , 107 . 9 (cid:2) 3 . 119 , P (cid:2) 0 . 048 ) , whereas group was not ( F 2 , 114 . 6 (cid:2) 2 . 346 , P (cid:2) 0 . 100 ) . Post hoc tests indicated that the Manipulation group scored higher than the other groups , but only at time point 1 ( P (cid:2) 0 . 023 ; Fig . 3 ) . DISCUSSION We found that students in the Manipulation group scored higher on the ﬁrst quiz than those students in the Observation or Lecture groups , indicating that they learned the material the most effectively ( Fig . 3 ) . However , 2 wk later , we found that there were no statistically signiﬁcant differences among the three groups . Furthermore , we found no statistically signiﬁcant differences in overall or major GPA , age , sex , year in school , race / ethnicity , or prior exposure to the material among our groups , indicating that demographics were similar across the three treatment groups . Thus the variation in performance due to demographic factors was distributed equally across the groups and likely did not contribute to group differences . Overall , our ﬁndings support our hypothesis that active learn - ers who were allowed to control and manipulate the acquisition of the material learned the material more effectively than students in the other two groups . Fig . 2 . The multiple - choice , ﬁve - question quiz used to assess knowledge gains immediately after and 2 wk after presentation of material . Presentation of questions and answers was randomized . 101 VARIATION IN ENGAGEMENT PRODUCES DIFFERENTIAL LEARNING GAINS Advances in Physiology Education • doi : 10 . 1152 / advan . 00150 . 2017 • http : / / advan . physiology . org Active engagement in new material leads to a better under - standing of the material than passively observing , exempliﬁed by increased student learning and retention ( e . g . , Refs . 5 , 7 ) . However , recent studies have also highlighted the importance of how variation in student behavior within an active learning context also has ramiﬁcations on learning gains ( e . g . , Ref . 17 ) . Chi and Wylie ( 2 ) highlighted this issue and developed the ICAP theoretical framework that identiﬁes student behaviors during learning and how these behaviors can lead to differ - ences in learning and retention . Within this framework , we focused on three types of behavior during learning : construc - tive ( Manipulation group ) , active ( Observation group ) , and passive ( Lecture group ) . While the Manipulation and Observation groups both par - ticipated in an active learning activity , the Manipulation group engaged in constructive behavior in which they had direct control over the material and were able to construct informa - tion in a personally meaningful way . Chi and Wylie ( 2 ) indicate that constructive learning requires a higher level of cognitive functioning , as students must make inferences and integrate knowledge , which produces greater gains in learning . Controlling the rocker switches and creating permutations of different types of lesions not only allowed students in the Manipulation group to actively engage with the material , but also allowed students control over how the information was organized . In contrast , students in the Observation group also participated in the active learning activity , but they did not have control over the material . Thus these students were actively engaged in the material and were integrating new information , but they did not have the ability to control or organize the incoming information . Consequently , as predicted by the ICAP framework , these students did not learn the material as well as the Manipulation group . Overall , the results of our study support the ICAP theory and indicate that active constructive learning is more effective then passive observa - tion during an active learning activity . Interestingly , students in the Lecture group , which is a purely passive activity , performed as well as the Observation group . According to ICAP , students in the Observation group should have demonstrated greater learning gains than those in the Lecture group , since they were participating in an active learning activity . There may be several nonmutually exclusive explanations for this result . First , although the Observation group was learning through an active learning activity , students may have been processing the information more similarly to information processing during passive learning activities . Within our learning context , there are several parallels between the Observation and Lecture groups in the way the students learned . For instance , both groups did not have control over the presentation of the material , and neither group was able to manipulate the information in a personally relevant manner . Thus the Observation and Lecture groups may both represent a passive learning context , and we may not expect differences between the two groups . If so , for students in the Observation group , creating more opportunities to interact with the model or with their partner in the Manipulation group may allow for greater gains in learning compared with lecture - based learning . An alternative explanation is that the ﬁve - question quiz that we used to assess learning was too coarse a tool to distinguish learning gains between the two groups . A longer quiz may have allowed discrimination in performance between the two groups . Future studies could examine how variation in model and peer interaction , as well as variation in testing paradigms , can produce variation in learning gains during this activity . While these results are interesting , ultimately educators are primarily interested in knowledge retention and the ability to transfer that knowledge to new situations ( e . g . , Ref . 11 ) . In the present study , we found that the learning gains realized by the Manipulation group immediately after learning the material were lost 2 wk later ; all three groups performed similarly after a 2 - wk retention interval . Many studies have demonstrated that active learning methods can lead to increased retention of knowledge ( e . g . , Ref . 9 ) , yet some loss of knowledge is expected over time due to memory degradation , memory in - terference , lack of rehearsing , and lack of motivation ( 3 , 17 ) . We believe that the reason for the loss of retention in our study may be attributable to several factors . First , retention of information necessitates elaboration and rehearsal ( e . g . , Ref . 16 ) , and retention increases when rehearsal is distributed over time ( 10 ) . In the present study , there were no opportunities to rehearse the material . Students did not have the opportunity to engage with the material beyond the 15 min of testing and thus were not allowed to study and rehearse the new information over the 2 - wk retention interval . As a result , memory retention may not have been reinforced , and loss of information could have occurred . Second , mapping new information on previously learned information produces gains in learning and retention by an - choring the new information to something previously learned ( e . g . , Refs . 1 , 15 ) . In the present study , most of the students had no prior exposure to the new material , and they may not have learned about physiological processes in general . This would prevent mapping of new information on old , precluding mem - Fig . 3 . The average quiz percentage ( (cid:4) SD ) in the Manipulation ( solid bars ) , Observation ( shaded bars ) , and Lecture ( open bars ) groups , immediately after learning the material ( time point 1 ) and 2 wk after learning the material ( time point 2 ) . The Manipulation group scored signiﬁcantly higher than the Obser - vation and Lecture groups immediately after learning the material , but that difference was lost 2 wk later . * Statistically signiﬁcant difference ( P (cid:2) 0 . 023 ) . Sample sizes were as follows : Manipulation group , time point 1 : n (cid:2) 46 , time point 2 : n (cid:2) 39 ; Observation group , time point 1 : n (cid:2) 39 , time point 2 : n (cid:2) 36 ; Lecture group , time point 1 : n (cid:2) 33 , time point 2 : n (cid:2) 25 . 102 VARIATION IN ENGAGEMENT PRODUCES DIFFERENTIAL LEARNING GAINS Advances in Physiology Education • doi : 10 . 1152 / advan . 00150 . 2017 • http : / / advan . physiology . org ory integration ( e . g . , Ref . 15 ) and result in either a lack of memorization or information loss over time . Alternatively , if students did have previous physiology coursework in high school , they may not have been able to make the links between the new and old information . Students did not have explicit instruction on how the new material mapped on previously learned material , and they may not have had the appropriate cognitive strategies to make the links themselves . Thus , al - though mapping new information on previously learned infor - mation does assist with retention of the new information , our students may not have had the knowledge foundation , or they may have lacked the skills to link the new information to the old , subsequently reﬂected by the lack of retention in the present study . Sampling students who are juniors or seniors , or students who have been previously enrolled in Biology and Psychology courses , may produce different gains in memory retention than those in the present study . Finally , based on our means of recruitment and incentive , we may have decreased motivation to either 1 ) participate in the study altogether , or 2 ) participate in the second quiz . While we did offer extra credit , this may not have been a substantial enough incentive to participate in the study , particularly for students who were doing well in their courses . For students who did participate in the study , extra credit was awarded on participation and not quiz score . Consequently , those who participated in the study may not have been motivated to truly attempt to integrate the information , and , because the informa - tion may have been deemed unimportant , there was a higher chance that information would have been forgotten over the 2 - wk retention interval . Furthermore , because extra credit was awarded for completion of the ﬁrst quiz , whereas completion of the second quiz was incentivized via a gift card , the students who completed the second quiz may have been from a self - selected subset of the recruited students and not randomly selected . Future studies may better control for motivational factors that may modulate the relationship between engaging in active learning activities and gains in learning and retention by taking into account the inﬂuences of incentives and rewards for research participation . Overall , we found that short - term gains can be realized with active , constructive learning activities ; however , we did not ﬁnd any differences in long - term learning gains among the three groups . Future studies would beneﬁt from examining if long - term learning gains emerge with a more in - depth assess - ment tool and increasing the importance of learning the mate - rial by linking it to a course grade . Regardless , we found that lecture - based learning as the sole methodology of disseminat - ing information was not the most effective pedagogical tech - nique for initial retention . Furthermore , our study also demon - strated that not all active learning activities produce identical learning outcomes ; the degree to which students interact and make meaningful connections with the material is a more likely predictor of learning gains ( e . g . , Ref . 2 ) . Ultimately , conscien - tious choice of pedagogical techniques , coupled with identify - ing how students interact with the material , will likely drive gains in learning and retention . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Abbigale Bradley , Jacob Hamilton , Courtney Holsinger , Emily Kerner , Carmina Rogelio , Julia Seixas , and Rachel Sholtz for assistance in subject coordination and data collection . DISCLOSURES No conﬂicts of interest , ﬁnancial or otherwise , are declared by the authors . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS L . D . L . , S . L . T . , J . M . V . , Y . Y . , and A . C . conceived and designed research ; L . D . L . , S . L . T . , E . E . B . , Y . Y . , and A . C . performed experiments ; L . D . L . and S . L . T . analyzed data ; L . D . L . , S . L . T . , J . M . V . , and E . E . B . interpreted results of experiments ; L . D . L . prepared ﬁgures ; L . D . L . and E . E . B . drafted manuscript ; L . D . L . , S . L . T . , and J . M . V . edited and revised manuscript ; L . D . L . , S . L . T . , J . M . V . , E . E . B . , Y . Y . , and A . C . approved ﬁnal version of manuscript . REFERENCES 1 . Baker WP , Lawson AE . Complex instructional analogies and theoretical concept acquisition in college genetics . Sci Educ 85 : 665 – 683 , 2001 . doi : 10 . 1002 / sce . 1031 . 2 . Chi MTH , Wylie R . The ICAP Framework : Linking cognitive engage - ment to active learning outcomes . Educ Psychol 49 : 219 – 243 , 2014 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00461520 . 2014 . 965823 . 3 . Custers EJ . Long - term retention of basic science knowledge : a review study . Adv Health Sci Educ Theory Pract 15 : 109 – 128 , 2010 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10459 - 008 - 9101 - y . 4 . Freeman S , Eddy SL , McDonough M , Smith MK , Okoroafor N , Jordt H , Wenderoth MP . Active learning increases student performance in science , engineering , and mathematics . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111 : 8410 – 8415 , 2014 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1319030111 . 5 . Gureckis TM , Markant DB . Self - directed learning : a cognitive and computational perspective . Perspect Psychol Sci 7 : 464 – 481 , 2012 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1745691612454304 . 6 . Henderson C , Dancy MH . Increasing the impact and diffusion of STEM education innovations ( Online ) . Washington , DC : National Academy of Engineering . https : / / www . nae . edu / File . aspx ? id (cid:2) 36304 [ Sept 2017 ] . 7 . James KH , Humphrey GK , Vilis T , Corrie B , Baddour R , Goodale MA . “Active” and “passive” learning of three - dimensional object struc - ture within an immersive virtual reality environment . Behav Res Methods Instrum Comput 34 : 383 – 390 , 2002 . doi : 10 . 3758 / BF03195466 . 8 . Johnson DW , Johnson RT , Smith KA . Active Learning : Cooperation in the College Classroom . Edina , MN : Interaction Book , 1998 . 9 . Kvam PH . The effect of active learning methods on student retent - ion in engineering statistics . Am Stat 54 : 136 – 140 , 2012 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00031305 . 2000 . 10474526 . 10 . Logan JM , Castel AD , Haber S , Viehman EJ . Metacognition and the spacing effect : the role of repetition , feedback , and instruction on judg - ments of learning for massed and spaced rehearsal . Metacogn Learn 7 : 175 – 195 , 2012 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11409 - 012 - 9090 - 3 . 11 . Nuthall G . The role of memory in the acquisition and retention of knowledge in science and social studies . Cogn Instr 18 : 83 – 139 , 2000 . doi : 10 . 1207 / S1532690XCI1801 _ 04 . 12 . Prince M . Does active learning work ? A review of the research . J Eng Educ 93 : 223 – 231 , 2004 . doi : 10 . 1002 / j . 2168 - 9830 . 2004 . tb00809 . x . 13 . Ritchie D , Karge BD . Making information memorable : enhanced knowl - edge retention and recall through the elaboration process . Prev Sch Fail 41 : 28 – 33 , 1996 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 1045988X . 1996 . 9944681 . 14 . Robertson EM . New insights in human memory interference and consolidation . Curr Biol 22 : R66 – R71 , 2012 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2011 . 11 . 051 . 15 . Schlichting ML , Preston AR . Memory integration : neural mechanisms and implications for behavior . Curr Opin Behav Sci 1 : 1 – 8 , 2015 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cobeha . 2014 . 07 . 005 . 16 . Svinicki MD . A theoretical foundation for discovery learning . Am J Physiol 275 : S4 – S7 , 1998 . doi : 10 . 1152 / advances . 1998 . 275 . 6 . S4 . 17 . Wiggins BL , Eddy SL , Grunspan DZ , Crowe AJ . The ICAP active learning framework predicts the learning gains observed in intensely active classroom experiences . AERA Open 3 : 1 – 14 , 2017 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 2332858417708567 . 18 . Wilke RR , Straits WJ . The effects of discovery learning in a lower - division biology course . Adv Physiol Educ 25 : 62 – 69 , 2001 . doi : 10 . 1152 / advances . 2001 . 25 . 2 . 62 . 103 VARIATION IN ENGAGEMENT PRODUCES DIFFERENTIAL LEARNING GAINS Advances in Physiology Education • doi : 10 . 1152 / advan . 00150 . 2017 • http : / / advan . physiology . org