Relational Understanding and Instrumental Understanding Author ( s ) : Richard R . Skemp Reviewed work ( s ) : Source : The Arithmetic Teacher , Vol . 26 , No . 3 ( November 1978 ) , pp . 9 - 15 Published by : National Council of Teachers of Mathematics Stable URL : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 41187667 . Accessed : 23 / 02 / 2013 20 : 23 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use , available at . http : / / www . jstor . org / page / info / about / policies / terms . jsp . JSTOR is a not - for - profit service that helps scholars , researchers , and students discover , use , and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive . We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship . For more information about JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . . National Council of Teachers of Mathematics is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize , preserve and extend access to The Arithmetic Teacher . http : / / www . jstor . org This content downloaded on Sat , 23 Feb 2013 20 : 23 : 13 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Relational Understanding and Instrumental Understanding By Richard R . Skemp Faux Amis Faux amis is a term used by the French to describe words which are the same , or very alike , in two languages , but whose meanings are different . For ex - ample : French word Meaning in English histoire story , not history libraire bookshop , not library chef head of any organisation , not only chief cook agrément pleasure or amusement , not agreement docteur doctor ( higher degree ) not medical practitioner médecin medical practitioner , not medicine parent relations in general , including parents One gzts faux amis between English as spoken in different parts of the world . An Englishman asking in Amer - ica for a biscuit would be given what we call a scone . To get what we call a biscuit , he would have to ask for a cookie . And between English as used in mathematics and in everyday life there are such words as field , group , ring , ideal . A person who is unaware that the word he is using is a faux ami can make inconvenient mistakes . We expect his - tory to be true , but not a story . We take books without paying from a library , but not from a bookshop ; and so on . But in the foregoing examples there are cues which might put one on guard : difference of language , or of country , or of context . If , however , the same word is used in the same language , country and con - text , with two meanings whose differ - ence is non - trivial but as basic as the difference between the meaning of ( say ) ' histoire ' and ' story ' , which is a differ - ence between fact and fiction , one may expect serious confusion . Two such words can be identified in the context of mathematics ; and it is the alternative meanings attached to these words , each by a large following , which in my belief are at the root of many of the difficulties in mathematics education to - day . One of these is ' understanding ' . It was brought to my attention some years ago by Stieg Mellin - Olsen , of Bergen University , that there are in current use two meanings of this word . These he distinguishes by calling them ' relational understanding ' and ' instru - mental understanding ' . By the former is meant what I have always meant by understanding , and probably most readers of this article : knowing both what to do and why . Instrumental un - derstanding I would until recently not have regarded as understanding at all . It is what I have in the past described as ' rules without reasons ' , without real - ising that for many pupils and their teachers the possession of such a rule , and ability to use it , was what they meant by ' understanding ' . Suppose that a teacher reminds a class that the area of a rectangle is given by A = L X B . A pupil who has been away says he does not under - stand , so the teacher gives him an ex - planation along these lines . " The for - mula tells you that to get the area of a rectangle , you multiply the length by the breadth . " " Oh , I see , " says the child , and gets on with the exercise . If we were now to say to him ( in effect ) " You may think you understand , but you don ' t really , " he would not agree . " Of course I do . Look ; I ' ve got all these answers right . " Nor would he be pleased at our de - valuing of his achievement . And with his meaning of the word , he does understand . We can all think of examples of this kind : ' borrowing ' in subtraction , ' turn it upside down and multiply ' for divi - sion by a fraction , ' take it over to the other side and change the sign ' , are obvious ones ; but once the concept has been formed , other examples of instru - mental explanations can be identified in abundance in many widely used texts . Here are two from a text used by a former direct - grant grammar school , now independent , with a high academic standard . Multiplication of fractions To multiply a fraction by a fraction , multiply the two numerators to - This article is reprinted from the December 1 976 issue of Mathematics Teaching , the journal of the Association of Teachers of Mathematics , Great Britain . Richard Skemp is Professor of Education at the University of Warwick , Coventry , England . November 1978 9 This content downloaded on Sat , 23 Feb 2013 20 : 23 : 13 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions gether to make the numerator of the product , and the two denominators to makes its denomi - nator . c 2 r4 2X4 8 c E - g ' 3°f5 = 3 - 3õ = í5 3 10 30 = _ 6 5 13 65 13 The multiplication sign X is generally used in - stead of the word ' of . Circles The circumference of a circle ( that is its perimeter , or the length of its boundary ) is found by measurement to be a little more than three times the length of its diameter . In any circle the circumference is approximately 3 . 1416 times the diameter which is roughly 3 $ times the diameter . Neither of these figures is exact , as the exact number cannot be expressed either as a fraction or a decimal . The number is represented by the Greek letter ж ( pi ) . Circumference = ird or 2жг Area = irr2 The reader is urged to try for himself this exercise of looking for and identi - fying examples of instrumental ex - planations , both in tçxts and in the classroom . This will have three bene - fits , ( i ) For persons like the writer , and most readers of this article , it may be hard to realise how widespread is the instrumental approach , ( ii ) It will help , by repeated examples , to consolidate the two contrasting concepts , ( iii ) It is a good preparation for trying to formu - late the difference in general terms . Re - sult ( i ) is necessary for what follows in the rest of the present section , while ( ii ) and ( iii ) will be useful for the others . If it is accepted that these two cate - gories are both well - filled , by those pu - pils and teachers whose goals are re - spectively relational and instrumental understanding ( by the pupil ) , two ques - tions arise . First , does this matter ? And second , is one kind better than the other ? For years I have taken for granted the answers to both these ques - tions : briefly , ' Yes ; relational . ' But the existence of a large body of experienced teachers and of a large number of texts belonging to the opposite camp has forced me to think more about why I hold this view . In the process of chang - ing the judgement from an intuitive to a reflective one , I think I have learnt something useful . The two questions are not entirely separate , but in the present section I shall concentrate as far as possible on the first : does it mat - ter ? The problem here is that of a mis - match , which arises automatically in any faux ami situation , and does not depend on whether A or B ' s meaning is 4he right one ' . Let us imagine , if we can , that school A send a team to play school В at a game called ' football , but that neither team knows that there are two kinds ( called ' association ' and ' rugby ' ) . School A plays soccer and has never heard of rugger , and vice versa for B . Each team will rapidly decide that the others are crazy , or a lot of foul players . Team A in particular will think that В uses a mis - shapen ball , and commit one foul after another . Unless the two sides stop and talk about what game they think they are playing at , long enough to gain some mutual understanding , the game will break up in disorder and the two teams will never want to meet again . Though it may be hard to imagine such a situation arising on the football field , this is not a far - fetched analogy for what goes on in many mathematics lessons , even now . There is this impor - tant difference , that one side at least cannot refuse to play . The encounter is compulsory , on five days a week , for about 36 weeks a year , over 10 years or more of a child ' s life . Leaving aside for the moment whether one kind is better than the other , there are two kinds of mathe - matical mis - matches which can occur . 1 . Pupils whose goal is to understand instrumental ^ , taught by a teacher who want them to understand relati - onally . 2 . The other way about . The first of these will cause fewer problems short - term to the pupils , though it will be frustrating to the teacher . The pupils just ' won ' t want to know ' all the careful ground - work he gives in preparation for whatever is to be learnt next , nor his careful ex - planations . All they want is some kind of rule for getting the answer . As soon as this is reached , they latch on to it and ignore the rest . If the teacher asks a question that does not quite fit the rule , of course they will get it wrong . For the follow - ing example I have to thank Mr . Peter Burney , at that time a student at Cov - entry College of Education on teaching practice . While teaching area he be - came suspicious that the children did not really understand what they were doing . So he asked them : " What is the area of a field 20 cms by 15 yards ? " The reply was : " 300 square centimetres " . He asked : " Why not 300 square yards ? " Answer : " Because area is al - ways in square centimetres . " To prevent errors like the above the pupils need another rule ( or , of course , relational understanding ) , that both di - mensions must be in the same unit . This anticipates one of the arguments which I shall use against instrumental understanding , that it usually involves a multiplicity of rules rather than fewer principles of more general application . There is of course always the chance that a few of the pupils will catch on to what the teacher is trying to do . If only for the sake of these , I think he should go on trying . By many , probably a ma - jority , his attempts to convince them that being able to use the rule is not enough will not be well received . ' Well is the enemy of better , ' and if pupils can get the right answers by the kind of thinking they are used to , they will not take kindly to suggestions that they should try for something beyond this . The other mis - match , in which pu - 10 Arithmetic Teacher This content downloaded on Sat , 23 Feb 2013 20 : 23 : 13 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions pils are trying to understand relati - onally but the teaching makes this im - possible , can be a more damaging one . An instance which stays in my memory is that of a neighbour ' s child , then seven years old . He was a very bright little boy , with an I . Q . of 140 . At the age of five he could read The Times , but at seven he regularly cried over his mathematics homework . His mis - fortune was that he was trying to un - derstand relationally teaching which could not be understood in this way . My evidence for this belief is that when I taught him relationally myself , with the help of U nifix , he caught on quickly and with real pleasure . A less obvious mis - match is that which may occur between teacher and text . Suppose that we have a teacher whose conception of understanding is instrumental , who for one reason or other is using a text which aim is rela - tional understanding by the pupil . It will take more than this to change his teaching style . I was in a school which was using my own text1 , and noticed ( they were at Chapter 1 oí Book 1 ) that some of the pupils were writing an - swers like 4heset of { flowers } ' . When I mentioned this to the teacher ( he was head of mathematics ) he asked the class to pay attention to him and said : " Some of you are not writing your answers properly . Look at the ex - ample in the book , at the beginning of the exercise , and be sure you write your answers exactly like that . " Much of what is being taught under the description of ' modern mathemat - ics ' is being taught and learnt just as instrumental ^ as were the syllabi which have been replaced . This is pre - dictable from the difficulty of accom - modating ( restructuring ) our existing schémas2 . To the extent that this is so , the innovations have probably done more harm than good , by introducing a mis - match between the teacher and the aims implicit in the new content . For the purpose of introducing ideas such as sets , mappings and variables is the help which , rightly used , they can give to relational understanding . If pupils are still being taught instrumental ^ , then a ' traditional ' syllabus will prob - ably benefit them more . They will at least acquire proficiency in a number of mathematical techniques which will be of use to them in other subjects , and whose lack has recently been the sub - ject of complaints by teachers of sci - ence , employers and others . Near the beginning I said that two faux amis could be identified in the context of mathematics . The second one is even more serious ; it is the word ' mathematics ' itself . For we are not talking about better and worse teach - ing of the same kind of mathematics . It is easy to think this , just as our imagi - nary soccer players who did not know that their opponents were playing a dif - ferent game might think that the other side picked up the ball and ran with it because they could not kick properly , especially with such a mis - shapen ball . In which case they might kindly offer them a better ball and some lessons on dribbling . It has taken me some time to realise that this is not the case . I used to think that maths teachers were all teaching the same subject , some doing it better than others . I now believe that there are two effectively different subjects being taught under the same name , ' mathemat - ics ' . If this is true , then this difference matters beyond any of the differences in syllabi which are so widely debated . So I would like to try to emphasise the point with the help of another analogy . Imagine that two groups of children are taught music as a pencil - and - paper subject . They are all shown the five - line stave , with the curly ' treble ' sign at the beginning ; and taught that marks on the lines are called E , G , B , D , F . Marks between the lines are called F , A , C , E . They learn that a line with an open oval is called a minim , and is worth two with blacked - in ovals which are called crotchets , or four with blacked - in ovals and a tail which are called quavers , and so on - musical multiplication tables if you like . For one group of children , all their learning is of this kind and nothing beyond . If they have a music lesson a day , five days a week in school terms , and are told that it is important , these children could in time probably learn to write out the marks for simple melodies such as God Save the Queen and Auld Lang Syne , and to solve simple problems such as ' What time is this in ? ' and ' What key ? ' , and even ' Transpose this melody from С major to A major ' . They would find it boring , and the rules to be memorised would be so numer - ous that problems like ' Write a simple accompaniment for this melody ' would be too difficult for most . They would give up the subject as soon as possible , and remember it with dislike . The other group is taught to associ - ate certain sounds with these marks on paper . For the first few years these are audible sounds , which they make them - selves on simple instruments . After a time they can still imagine the sounds whenever they see or write the marks on paper . Associated with every se - quence of marks is a melody , and with every vertical set a harmony . The keys С major and A major have an au - dible relationship , and a similar rela - tionship can be found between certain other pairs of keys . And so on . Much less memory work is involved , and what has to be remembered is largely in the form of related wholes ( such as melodies ) which their minds easily re - tain . Exercises such as were mentioned earlier ( ' Write a simple accom - paniment ' ) would be within the ability of most . These children would also find their learning intrinsically pleasurable , November 1978 11 This content downloaded on Sat , 23 Feb 2013 20 : 23 : 13 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions and many would continue it volun - tarily , even after O - level or C . S . E . For the present purpose I have in - vented two non - existent kinds of ' mu - sic lesson ' , both pencil - and - paper exer - cises ( in the second case , after the first year or two ) . But the difference be - tween these imaginary activities is no greater than that between two activities which actually go on under the name of mathematics . ( We can make the anal - ogy closer , if we imagine that the first group of children were initially taught sounds for the notes in a rather half - hearted way , but that the associations were too ill - formed and un - organised to last . ) The above analogy is , clearly , heav - ily biased in favour of relational mathe - matics . This reflects my own viewpoint . To call it a viewpoint , however , implies that I no longer regard it as a self - evident truth which requires no justifi - cation : which it can hardly be if many experienced teachers continue to teach instrumental mathematics . The next step is to try to argue the merits of both points of view as clearly and fairly as possible ; and especially of the point of view opposite to one ' s own . This is why the next section is called Devils Advo - cate . In one way this only describes that part which puts the case for instru - mental understanding . But it also justi - fies the other part , since an imaginary opponent who thinks differently from oneself is a good device for making clearer to oneself why one does think that way . Devil ' s Advocate Given that so many teachers teach instrumental mathematics , might this be because it does have certain advan - tages ? I have been able to think of three advantages ( as distinct from situational reasons for teaching this way , which will be discussed later ) . 1 . Within its own context , instrumental mathematics is usually easier to under - stand ; sometimes much easier . Some topics , such as multiplying two nega - tive numbers together , or dividing by a fractional number , are difficult to un - derstand relationally . ' Minus times minus equals plus ' and 4o divide by a fraction you turn it upside down and multiply ' are easily remembered rules . I f what is wanted is a page of right answers , instrumental mathematics can provide this more quickly and easily . 2 . So the rewards are more immediate , and more apparent . It is nice to get a page of right answers , and we must not under - rate the importance of the feel - ing of success which pupils get from this . Recently I visited a school where some of the children describe them - selves as ' thickos ' . Their teachers use the term too . These children need suc - cess to restore their self - confidence , and it can be argued that they can achieve this more quickly and easily in instrumental mathematics than in rela - tional . 3 . Just becuase less knowledge is in - volved , one can often get the right an - swer more quickly and reliably by in - strumental thinking than relational . This difference is so marked that even relational mathematicians often use in - strumental thinking . This is a point of much theoretical interest , which I hope to discuss more fully on a future occa - sion . The above may well not do full jus - tice to instrumental mathematics . I shall be glad to know of any further advantages which it may have . There are four advantages ( at least ) in relational mathematics . 1 . It is more adaptable to new tasks . Recently I was trying to help a boy who had learnt to multiply two decimal fractions together by dropping the dec - imal point , multiplying as for whole numbers , and re - inserting the decimal point to give the same total number of digits after the decimal point as there were before . This is a handy method if you know why it works . Through no fault of his own , this child did not ; and not unreasonably , applied it also to di - vision of decimals . By this method 4 - 8 ■5 - 0 - 6 came to 0 - 08 . The same pupil had also learnt that if you know two angles of a triangle , you can find the third by adding the two given angles together and subtracting from 180° . He got ten questions right this way ( his teacher believed in plenty of practice ) , and went on to use the same method for finding the exterior angles . So he got the next five answers wrong . I do not think he was being stupid in either of these cases . He was simply extrapolating from what he already knew . But relational understanding , by knowing not only what method worked but why , would have enabled him to relate the method to the problem , and possibly to adapt the method to new problems . Instrumental understanding necessitates memorising which prob - lems a method works for and which not , and also learning a different method for each new class of problems . So the first advantage of relational mathematics leads to : 2 . It is easier to remember . There is a seeming paradox here , in that it is cer - tainly harder to learn . It is certainly easier for pupils to learn that ' area of a 12 Arithmetic Teacher This content downloaded on Sat , 23 Feb 2013 20 : 23 : 13 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions triangle = è base X height ' than to learn why this is so . But they then have to learn separate rules for triangles , rectangles , parallelograms , trapeziums ; whereas relational understanding con - sists partly in seeing all of these in rela - tion to the area of a rectangle . It is still desirable to know the separate rules ; one does not want to have to derive them afresh everytime . But knowing also how they are inter - related enables one to remember them as parts of a connected whole , which is easier . There is more to learn - the connections as well as the separate rules - but the re - sult , once learnt , is more lasting . So there is less re - learning to do , and long - term the time taken may well be less altogether . Teaching for relational understand - ing may also involve more actual con - tent . Earlier , an instrumental ex - planation was quoted leading to the statement ' Circumference = Trď . For relational understanding of this , the idea of a proportion would have to be taught first ( among others ) , and this would make it a much longer job than simply teaching the rules as given . But proportionality has such a wide range of other applications that it is worth teaching on these grounds also . In rela - tional mathematics this happens rather often . Ideas required for understanding a particular topic turn out to be basic for understanding many other topics too . Sets , mappings and equivalence are such ideas . Unfortunately the bene - fits which might come from teaching them are often lost by teaching them as separate topics , rather than as funda - mental concepts by which whole areas of mathematics can be inter - related . 3 . Relational knowledge can be effec - tive as a goal in itself . This is an empiric fact , based on evidence from controlled experiments using non - mathematical material . The need for external rewards and punishments is greatly reduced , making what is often called the ' moti - vational ' side of a teacher ' s job much easier . This is related to : 4 . Relational schémas are organic in quality . This is the best way I have been able to formulate a quality by which they seem to act as an agent of their own growth . The connection with 3 is that if people get satisfaction from rela - tional understanding , they may not only try to understand relationally new material which is put before them , but also actively seek out new material and explore new areas , very much like a tree extending its roots or an animal exploring a new territory in search of nourishment . To develop this idea be - yond the level of an analogy is beyond the scope of the present paper , but it is too important to leave out . If the above is anything like a fair presentation of the cases for the two sides , it would appear that while a case might exist for instrumental mathemat - ics short - term and within a limited con - text , long - term and in the context of a child ' s whole education it does not . So why are so many children taught only instrumental mathematics throughout their school careers ? Unless we can an - swer this , there is little hope of improv - ing the situation . An individual teacher might make a reasoned choice to teach for instrumen - tal understanding on one or more of the following grounds . 1 . That relational understanding would take too long to achieve , and to be able to use a particular technique is all that these pupils are likely to need . 2 . That relational understanding of a particular topic is too difficult , but the pupils still need it for examination rea - sons . 3 . That a skill is needed for use in an - other subject ( e . g . science ) before it can be understood relationally with the schémas presently available to the pu - pils . 4 . That he is a junior teacher in a school where all the other mathematics teaching is instrumental . All of these imply , as does the phrase ' make a reasoned choice ' , that he is able to consider the alternative goals of instrumental and relational under - standing on their merits and in relation to a particular situation . To make an informed choice of this kind implies awareness of the distinction , and rela - tional understanding of the mathematr ics itself . So nothing else but relational understanding can ever be adequate for a teacher . One has to face the fact that this is absent in many who teach math - ematics ; perhaps even a majority . Situational factors which contribute to the difficulty include : 1 . The backwash effect of examinations . In view of the importance of examina - tions for future employment , one can hardly blame pupils if success in these is one of their major aims . The way pupils work cannot but be influenced by the goal for which they are working , which is to answer correctly a sufficient number of questions . 2 . Over - burdened syllabi . Part of the trouble here is the high concentration of the information content of mathe - matics . A mathematical statement may condense into a single line as much as in another subject might take over one or two paragraphs . By mathematicians accustomed to handling such concen - trated ideas , this is often overlooked ( which may be why most mathematics lecturers go too fast ) . Non - mathemati - cians do not realise it at all . Whatever the reason , almost all syllabi would be much better if much reduced in amount so that there would be time to teach them better . 3 . Difficulty of assessment of whether a person understands relationally or in - strumentally . From the marks he makes on paper , it is very hard to make valid inference about the mental proc - esses by which a pupil has been led to make them ; hence the difficulty of sound examining in mathematics . In a teaching situation , talking with the pu - pil is almost certainly the best way to find out ; but in a class of over 30 , it may be difficult to find the time . 4 . The great psychological difficulty for teachers of accommodating ( re - struc - turing ) their existing and longstanding schémas , even for the minority who know they need to , want to do so , and have time for study . From a recent article3 discussing the practical , intellectual and cultural value of a mathematics education ( and I have no doubt that he means rela - tional mathematics ! ) by Sir Hermann Bondi , I take these three paragraphs . ( In the original , they are not con - secutive . ) So far my glowing tribute to mathematics has left out a vital point : the rejection of mathematics by so many , a rejection that in not a few cases turns to abject fright . The negative attitude to mathematics , unhapp - ily so common , even among otherwise highly - educated people , is áurely the greatest measure of our failure and a real danger to our society . This is perhaps the clearest indication that something is wrong , and indeed very wrong , with November 1978 13 This content downloaded on Sat , 23 Feb 2013 20 : 23 : 13 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions the situation . It is not hard to blame education for at least a share of the responsibility ; it is harder to pinpoint the blame , and even more difficult to suggest new remedies . If for ' blame ' we may substitute ' cause ' , there can be small doubt that the widespread failure to teach rela - tional mathematics - a failure to be found in primary , secondary and fur - ther education , and in ' modern ' as well as ' traditional ' courses - can be identi - fied as a major cause . To suggest new remedies is indeed difficult , but it may be hoped that diagnosis is one good step towards a cure . Another step will be offered in the next section . A Theoretical Formulation There is nothing so powerful for di - recting one ' s actions in a complex situ - ation , and for co - ordinating one ' s own efforts with those of others , as a good theory . All good teachers build up their own stores of empirical knowledge , and have abstracted from these some general principles on which they rely for guidance . But while their knowl - edge remains in this form it is largely still at the intuitive level within individ - uals , and cannot be communicated , both for this reason and because there is no shared conceptual structure ( schema ) in terms of which it can be formulated . Were this possible , indi - vidual efforts could be integrated into a unified body of knowledge which would be available for use by new - comers to the profession . At present most teachers have to learn from their own mistakes . For some time my own comprehen - sion of the difference between the two kinds of learning which lead respec - tively to relational and instrumental mathematics remained at the intuitive level , though I was personally con - vinced that the difference was one of great importance , and this view was shared by most of those with whom I discussed it . Awareness of the need for an explicit formulation was forced on me in the course of two parallel re - search projects ; and insight came , quite suddenly , during a recent conference . Once seen it appears quite simple , and one wonders why I did not think of it before . But there are two kinds of sim - plicity : that of naivity ; and that which , by penetrating beyond superficial dif - ferences , brings simplicity by unifying . It is the second kind which a good the - ory has to offer , and this is harder to achieve . A concrete example is necessary to begin with . When I went to stay in a certain town for the first time , I quickly learnt several particular routes . I learnt to get between where I was staying and the office of the colleague with whom I was working ; between where I was staying and the university refectory where I ate ; between my friend ' s office and the refectory ; and two or three oth - ers . In brief , I learnt a limited number of fixed plans by which I could get from particular starting locations to particu - lar goal locations . As soon as I had some free time , I began to explore the town . Now I was not wanting to get anywhere specific , but to learn my way around , and in the process to see what I might come upon that was of interest . At this stage my goal was a different one : to construct in my mind a cognitive map of the town . These two activities are quite differ - ent . Nevertheless they are , to an out - side observer , difficult to distinguish . Anyone seeing me walk from A to В would have great difficulty in knowing ( without asking me ) which of the two I was engaged in . But the most impor - tant thing about an activity is its goal . In one case my goal was to get to B , which is a physical location . In the other it was to enlarge or consolidate my mental map of the town , which is a state of knowledge . A person with a set of fixed plans can find his way from a certain set of start - ing points to a certain set of goals . The characteristic of a plan is that it tells him what to do at each choice point : turn right out of the door , go straight on past the church , and so on . But if at any stage he makes a mistake , he will be lost ; and he will stay lost if he is not able to retrace his steps and get back on the right path . In contrast , a person with a mental map of the town has something from which he can produce , when needed , an almost infinite number of plans by which he can guide his steps from any starting point to any finishing point , provided only that both can be imag - ined on his mental map . And if he does take a wrong turn , he will still know where he is , and thereby be able to correct his mistake without getting lost ; even perhaps to learn from it . The analogy between the foregoing and the learning of mathematics is close . The kind of learning which leads to instrumental mathematics consists of the learning of an increasing number of fixed plans , by which pupils can find their way from particular starting points ( the data ) to required finishing points ( the answers to the questions ) . The plan tells them what to do at each choice point . And as in the concrete ex - ample , what has to be done next is deter - mined purely by the local situation . ( When you see the post office , turn left . When you have cleared brackets , col - lect like terms . ) There is no awareness of the overall relationship between suc - cessive stages , and the final goal . And in both cases , the learner is dependent on outside guidance for learning each new ' way to get there ' . In contrast , learning relational mathematics consists of building up a conceptual structure ( schema ) from which its possessor can ( in principle ) produce an unlimited number of plans for getting from any starting point within his schema to any finishing point . ( I say ' in principle ' because of course some of these paths will be much harder to construct than others . ) This kind of learning is different in several ways from instrumental learn - ing . 1 . The means become independent of particular ends to be reached thereby . 2 . Building up a schema within a given area of knowledge becomes an in - trinsically satisfying goal in itself . 3 . The more complete a pupil ' s schema , the greater his feeling of con - fidence in his own ability to find new ways of ' getting there ' without outside help . 4 . But a schema is never complete . As our schémas enlarge , so our awareness of possibilities is thereby enlarged . Thus the process often becomes self - continuing , and ( by virtue of 3 ) self - rewarding . Taking again for a moment the role of devil ' s advocate , it is fair to ask whether we are indeed talking about two subjects , relational mathematics and instrumental mathematics , or just two ways of thinking about the same subject matter . Using the concrete 14 Arithmetic Teacher This content downloaded on Sat , 23 Feb 2013 20 : 23 : 13 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions analogy , the two processes described might be regarded as two different ways of knowing about the same town ; in which case the distinction made be - tween relational and instrumental un - derstanding would be valid , but hot that between instrumental and rela - tional mathematics . But what constitutes mathematics is not the subject matter , but a particular kind of knowledge about it . The sub - ject matter of relational and instrumen - tal mathematics may be the same : cars travelling at uniform speeds between two towns , towers whose heights are to be found , bodies falling freely under gravity , etc . etc . But the two kinds of knowledge are so different that I think that there is a strong case for regarding them as different kinds of mathematics . If this distinction is accepted , then the word ' mathematics ' is for many chil - dren indeed a false friend , as they find to their cost . The State of Play This is already a long article , yet it leaves many points awaiting further de - velopment . The applications of the the - oretical formulation in the last section to the educational problems described in the first two have not been spelt out . One of these is the relationship between the goals of the teacher and those of the pupil . Another is the implications for a mathematical curriculum . In the course of discussion of these ideas with teachers and lecturers in mathematical education , a number of other interesting points have been raised which also cannot be explored further here . One of these is whether the term ' mathematics ' ought not be to used for relational mathematics only . I have much sympathy with this view , but the issue is not as simple as it may appear . There is also research in progress . A pilot study aimed at developing a method ( or methods ) for evaluating the quality of children ' s mathematical thinking has been finished , and has led to a more substantial study in collabo - ration with the N . F . E . R . as part of the TAMS continuation project . A higher degree thesis at Warwick University is nearly finished ; and a research group of the Department of Mathematics at the University of Quebec in Montreal is investigating the problem with first and fourth grade children . All this will I hope be reported in due course . The aims of the present paper are twofold . First , to make explicit the problem at an empiric level of thinking , and thereby to bring to the forefront of attention what some of us have known for a long time at the back of our minds . Second , to formulate this in such a way that it can be related to existing theoretical knowledge about the mathematical learning process , and further investigated at this level and with the power and generality which theory alone can provide . References 1 . R . R . S kemp : Understanding Mathematics ( U . L . P ) 2 . For a fuller discussion see R . R . Skemp : The Psychology of Learning Mathematics ( Penguin 1972 ) pp . 43 - 46 3 . H . Bondi : The Dangers of Rejecting Mathe - matics ( Times Higher Education Supplement , 26 . 3 . 76 ) D ^ ^ ^ Щ ^ ^ ^ ^ Ц ^ ^ k CONVENTIONS / ^ _ « МЩ ^ AH ^ H ^ HH ^ ЩШк ЩМ ^ ^ ^ TRAVEL it INSURANCE TAN6R ^ _ « МЩ ^ AH ^ H ^ HH ^ AM ЩШк ЩМ ^ ^ ^ X TRAVEL »• it INSURANCE ' * . PUZZLES Ж / gr ^ Ж SQUARE ME ■ PUZZLE a 1 Establish your own I i ^ LŽlVi ^ Z A S personalized inservice program l ^ ny°àdolt ' H Içjpl through NCTM membership . ^ ^ ^ ¿ " ^ J ^ ^ ^ H This special new member у application is valid ^ ^ ^ publications / у until 31 January 1979 . ^ ^ ^ . 1 / / I Piral National Council °f Teachers of Mathematics / ШШ 1906AssociationDriveReston ' Va 22091 / INDIVIDUAL MEMBERSHIP APPLICATION / Name ( please print ) / Address 7 _ _ . ^ L State or ^ ^ ^ City Province Zip ^ ^ ^ L R / Pr / 978A ^ ^ ^ ^ Check one : D $ 15 , U . S . D $ 16 , all other countries ^ ^ ^ ^ D Bill me ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ Individual membership dues include a subscription to the ARITHMETIC ^ ^ ^ ^ TEACHER ( $ 7 ) and the NCTM NEWSLETTER ( 25c ) . Full - time student ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ dues are 1 / 2 the regular membership dues . November 1978 15 This content downloaded on Sat , 23 Feb 2013 20 : 23 : 13 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions