World Journal of Clinical Oncology ISSN 2218 - 4333 ( online ) World J Clin Oncol 2022 November 24 ; 13 ( 11 ) : 866 - 942 Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc WJCO https : / / www . wjgnet . com I November 24 , 2022 Volume 13 Issue 11 World Journal of Clinical Oncology W J C O Contents Monthly Volume 13 Number 11 November 24 , 2022 REVIEW Influence of Helicobacter pylori oncoprotein CagA in gastric cancer : A critical - reflective analysis 866 Freire de Melo F , Marques HS , Rocha Pinheiro SL , Lemos FFB , Silva Luz M , Nayara Teixeira K , Souza CL , Oliveira MV ORIGINAL ARTICLE Basic Study Folate receptor - targeted near - infrared photodynamic therapy for folate receptor - overexpressing tumors 880 Aung W , Tsuji AB , Hanaoka K , Higashi T Retrospective Cohort Study Is it possible to adopt the same oncological approach in urgent surgery for colon cancer ? 896 Yoshida BY , Araujo RLC , Farah JFM , Goldenberg A Epidemiologic risk factors for patients admitted with chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma in the United States 907 Lew D , Kamal F , Phan K , Randhawa K , Cornwell S , Bangolo AI , Weissman S , Pandol SJ Efficacy of texture analysis of pre - operative magnetic resonance imaging in predicting microvascular invasion in hepatocellular carcinoma 918 Sim JZT , Hui TCH , Chuah TK , Low HM , Tan CH , Shelat VG SYSTEMATIC REVIEWS Gut microbiota diversity and composition in predicting immunotherapy response and immunotherapy - related colitis in melanoma patients : A systematic review 929 Oey O , Liu YY , Sunjaya AF , Simadibrata DM , Khattak MA , Gray E WJCO https : / / www . wjgnet . com II November 24 , 2022 Volume 13 Issue 11 World Journal of Clinical Oncology Contents Monthly Volume 13 Number 11 November 24 , 2022 ABOUT COVER Editorial Board Member of World Journal of Clinical Oncology , Mamdouh M El - Shishtawy , Professor , Department of Biochemistry , Faculty of Pharmacy , Mansoura University , Mansoura , 35516 , Dakahlia Governorate , Egypt . mshisht @ mans . edu . eg AIMS AND SCOPE The primary aim of World Journal of Clinical Oncology ( WJCO , World J Clin Oncol ) is to provide scholars and readers from various fields of oncology with a platform to publish high - quality basic and clinical research articles and communicate their research findings online . WJCO mainly publishes articles reporting research results and findings obtained in the field of oncology and covering a wide range of topics including art of oncology , biology of neoplasia , breast cancer , cancer prevention and control , cancer - related complications , diagnosis in oncology , gastrointestinal cancer , genetic testing for cancer , gynecologic cancer , head and neck cancer , hematologic malignancy , lung cancer , melanoma , molecular oncology , neurooncology , palliative and supportive care , pediatric oncology , surgical oncology , translational oncology , and urologic oncology . INDEXING / ABSTRACTING The WJCO is now abstracted and indexed in PubMed , PubMed Central , Emerging Sources Citation Index ( Web of Science ) , Reference Citation Analysis , China National Knowledge Infrastructure , China Science and Technology Journal Database , and Superstar Journals Database . The 2022 edition of Journal Citation Reports ® cites the 2021 Journal Citation Indicator ( JCI ) for WJCO as 0 . 35 . RESPONSIBLE EDITORS FOR THIS ISSUE Production Editor : Xiang - Di Zhang ; Production Department Director : Xu Guo ; Editorial Office Director : Yu - Jie Ma . NAME OF JOURNAL INSTRUCTIONS TO AUTHORS World Journal of Clinical Oncology https : / / www . wjgnet . com / bpg / gerinfo / 204 ISSN GUIDELINES FOR ETHICS DOCUMENTS ISSN 2218 - 4333 ( online ) https : / / www . wjgnet . com / bpg / GerInfo / 287 LAUNCH DATE GUIDELINES FOR NON - NATIVE SPEAKERS OF ENGLISH November 10 , 2010 https : / / www . wjgnet . com / bpg / gerinfo / 240 FREQUENCY PUBLICATION ETHICS Monthly https : / / www . wjgnet . com / bpg / GerInfo / 288 EDITORS - IN - CHIEF PUBLICATION MISCONDUCT Hiten RH Patel , Stephen Safe , Jian - Hua Mao , Ken H Young https : / / www . wjgnet . com / bpg / gerinfo / 208 EDITORIAL BOARD MEMBERS ARTICLE PROCESSING CHARGE https : / / www . wjgnet . com / 2218 - 4333 / editorialboard . htm https : / / www . wjgnet . com / bpg / gerinfo / 242 PUBLICATION DATE STEPS FOR SUBMITTING MANUSCRIPTS November 24 , 2022 https : / / www . wjgnet . com / bpg / GerInfo / 239 COPYRIGHT ONLINE SUBMISSION © 2022 Baishideng Publishing Group Inc https : / / www . f6publishing . com © 2022 Baishideng Publishing Group Inc . All rights reserved . 7041 Koll Center Parkway , Suite 160 , Pleasanton , CA 94566 , USA E - mail : bpgoffice @ wjgnet . com https : / / www . wjgnet . com WJCO https : / / www . wjgnet . com 880 November 24 , 2022 Volume 13 Issue 11 World Journal of Clinical Oncology W J C O Submit a Manuscript : https : / / www . f6publishing . com World J Clin Oncol 2022 November 24 ; 13 ( 11 ) : 880 - 895 DOI : 10 . 5306 / wjco . v13 . i11 . 880 ISSN 2218 - 4333 ( online ) ORIGINAL ARTICLE Basic Study Folate receptor - targeted near - infrared photodynamic therapy for folate receptor - overexpressing tumors Winn Aung , Atsushi B Tsuji , Kenjiro Hanaoka , Tatsuya Higashi Specialty type : Oncology Provenance and peer review : Unsolicited article ; Externally peer reviewed . Peer - review model : Single blind Peer - review report’s scientific quality classification Grade A ( Excellent ) : 0 Grade B ( Very good ) : B , B Grade C ( Good ) : 0 Grade D ( Fair ) : 0 Grade E ( Poor ) : 0 P - Reviewer : Jabbarpour Z , Iran ; Janmohammadi P , Iran Received : August 3 , 2022 Peer - review started : August 3 , 2022 First decision : August 29 , 2022 Revised : September 12 , 2022 Accepted : October 18 , 2022 Article in press : October 18 , 2022 Published online : November 24 , 2022 Winn Aung , Atsushi B Tsuji , Tatsuya Higashi , Department of Molecular Imaging and Theranostics , Institute for Quantum Medical Science , National Institutes for Quantum and Radiological Science and Technology , Chiba 263 - 8555 , Japan Kenjiro Hanaoka , Faculty of Pharmacy and Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences , Keio University , Tokyo 105 - 8512 , Japan Corresponding author : Winn Aung , MBBS , PhD , Senior Researcher , Department of Molecular Imaging and Theranostics , Institute for Quantum Medical Science , National Institutes for Quantum and Radiological Science and Technology , 4 - 9 - 1 Anagawa , Inage - ku , Chiba 263 - 8555 , Japan . winn . aung @ qst . go . jp Abstract BACKGROUND Photodynamic therapy ( PDT ) is a minimally invasive form of cancer therapy , and the development of a novel photosensitizer ( PS ) with optimal properties is important for enhancing PDT efficacy . Folate receptor ( FR ) membrane protein is frequently overexpressed in 40 % of human cancer and a good candidate for tumor - specific targeting . Specific active targeting of PS to FR can be achieved by conjugation with the folate moiety . A folate - linked , near - infrared ( NIR ) - sensitive probe , folate - Si - rhodamine - 1 ( FolateSiR - 1 ) , was previously developed and is expected to be applicable to NIR - PDT . AIM To investigate the therapeutic efficacy of NIR - PDT induced by FolateSiR - 1 , a FR - targeted PS , in preclinical cancer models . METHODS FolateSiR - 1 was developed by conjugating a folate moiety to the Si - rhodamine derivative through a negatively charged tripeptide linker . FR expression in the designated cell lines was examined by western blotting ( WB ) . The selective binding of FolateSiR - 1 to FR was confirmed in FR overexpressing KB cells ( FR + ) and tumors by fluorescence microscopy and in vivo fluorescence imaging . Low FR expressing OVCAR - 3 and A4 cell lines were used as negative controls ( FR - ) . The NIR light ( 635 ± 3 nm ) - induced phototoxic effect of FolateSiR - 1 was evaluated by cell viability imaging assays . The time - dependent distribution of FolateSiR - 1 and its specific accumulation in KB tumors was determined using in vivo longitudinal fluorescence imaging . The PDT effect of FolateSiR - 1 was evaluated in KB tumor - Aung W et al . Folate receptor - targeted NIR - PDT WJCO https : / / www . wjgnet . com 881 November 24 , 2022 Volume 13 Issue 11 bearing mice divided into four experimental groups : ( 1 ) FolateSiR - 1 ( 100 μmol / L ) alone ; ( 2 ) FolateSiR - 1 ( 100 μmol / L ) followed by NIR irradiation ( 50 J / cm 2 ) ; ( 3 ) NIR irradiation ( 50 J / cm 2 ) alone ; and ( 4 ) no treatment . Tumor volume measurement and immunohistochemical ( IHC ) and histological examinations of the tumors were performed to analyze the effect of PDT . RESULTS High FR expression was observed in the KB cells by WB , but not in the OVCAR - 3 and A4 cells . Substantial FR - specific binding of FolateSiR - 1 was observed by in vitro and in vivo fluorescence imaging . Cell viability imaging assays showed that NIR - PDT induced cell death in KB cells . In vivo longitudinal fluorescence imaging showed rapid peak accumulation of FolateSiR - 1 in the KB tumors 2 h after injection . In vivo PDT conducted at this time point caused tumor growth delay . The relative tumor volumes in the PDT group were significantly reduced compared to those in the other groups [ 5 . 81 ± 1 . 74 ( NIR - PDT ) vs 12 . 24 ± 2 . 48 ( Folate - SiR - 1 ) , vs 11 . 84 ± 3 . 67 ( IR ) , vs 12 . 98 ± 2 . 78 ( Untreated ) , at Day 16 , P < 0 . 05 ] . IHC analysis revealed reduced proliferation marker Ki - 67 - positive cells in the PDT treated tumors , and hematoxylin - eosin staining revealed features of necrotic - and apoptotic cell death . CONCLUSION FolateSiR - 1 has potential for use in PDT , and FR - targeted NIR - PDT may open a new effective strategy for the treatment of FR - overexpressing tumors . Key Words : Photodynamic therapy ; Near - infrared ; Photosensitizer ; Folate receptor ; Fluorescence ; Cancer ©The Author ( s ) 2022 . Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc . All rights reserved . Core Tip : Photodynamic therapy ( PDT ) is a minimally invasive cancer therapy and photosensitizers ( PS ) with optimal properties are crucial for enhancing the efficacy of PDT . We evaluated the therapeutic efficacy of a folate receptor ( FR ) - targeted , near - infrared ( NIR ) - sensitive PS ( FolateSiR - 1 ) . FolateSiR - 1 showed FR specificity in vitro and in vivo and functions as a tumor - damaging PS by inducing necrosis , apoptosis , and cell growth inhibition upon activation with NIR light . Our findings suggest that FolateSiR - 1 is effective in FR - targeted NIR - PDT with low side effects and has potential for presenting new and effective treatment options for FR - overexpressing tumors . Citation : Aung W , Tsuji AB , Hanaoka K , Higashi T . Folate receptor - targeted near - infrared photodynamic therapy for folate receptor - overexpressing tumors . World J Clin Oncol 2022 ; 13 ( 11 ) : 880 - 895 URL : https : / / www . wjgnet . com / 2218 - 4333 / full / v13 / i11 / 880 . htm DOI : https : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 5306 / wjco . v13 . i11 . 880 INTRODUCTION Cancer incidence and mortality is continually growing worldwide . GLOBOCAN 2020 estimated that there were 19 . 3 million new cancer cases and almost 10 million cancer deaths in 2020 and the global cancer burden is expected to reach 28 . 4 million cases in 2040 [ 1 ] . Molecular - targeted approaches with various therapeutic modalities are expected to provide effective cancer diagnosis and treatment . Photodynamic therapy ( PDT ) is one of the emerging options to combat various cancer types along with other conventional therapies such as surgery , chemotherapy , radiation therapy , and immuno - therapy [ 2 ] . It is approved for the clinical treatment of several tumor types and certain non - malignant diseases as a minimally invasive therapy [ 3 ] . Although the precise mechanisms of tumor cell death by photodamage are not yet fully understood , they involve necrosis , apoptosis , tumor blood vessel damage , and nonspecific activation of the immune response against tumor cells [ 4 ] . Cell death through PDT generally occurs through a combination of these mechanisms , and no single pathway leads to cell death [ 5 ] . Photodynamic therapy involves the administration of a light - sensitive photosensitizer ( PS ) followed by the irradiation of targeted tumors with light corresponding to the specific absorbance wavelength of the PS [ 3 ] . Light activated PS accumulated in the cancer tissue leads to the local generation of reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) , such as highly reactive singlet oxygen and / or radicals , which kill tumor cells through necrosis and cause tumor regression [ 6 , 7 ] . However , off - target toxicities and PS metabolic problems were encountered in clinical trials , and therefore , only a few PSs have been approved for anti - cancer therapies [ 8 ] . The tumor selectivity of the PS improves tumor localization in PDT , enhances tumor destruction , and reduces the side effects due to off - target localization [ 9 ] . Aung W et al . Folate receptor - targeted NIR - PDT WJCO https : / / www . wjgnet . com 882 November 24 , 2022 Volume 13 Issue 11 Moreover , effective targeting reduces the required PS dose which additionally limits side effects . Tumor - localizing properties are generally dependent on the passive enhanced permeability and retention effect [ 10 ] . More effective active targeting is expected and achieved by diverse approaches such as the conjugation of receptor ligands , antibodies , carrier proteins , carbohydrates , and loading into targeted nanoparticles [ 11 - 14 ] . The first - generation of PSs were hematoporphyrin derivatives , and the first PS to be clinically used for cancer therapy was porfimer sodium ( Photofrin ® ) [ 4 ] . Its poor tissue selectivity , low light absorption , and weak tissue penetration of emission demanded the development of second - generation PSs , porphyrinoids , and non - porphyrin compounds [ 15 ] . Moreover , third - generation PSs were developed by conjugating carrier biomolecules , such as receptor ligands or antibodies , to the second - generation PSs to selectively target tumors [ 4 ] . Nevertheless , the number of new clinically approved PSs remains low , and researchers are developing new improved PSs . Folate receptor ( FR ) membrane protein is frequently overexpressed in 40 % of human cancer types , including ovary , breast , head and neck , endometrium , lung , bladder , pancreatic , colon , and kidney cancer , whereas its expression is restricted to normal tissues [ 16 ] . It binds to extracellular folate with very high affinity and can physically deliver folate into the cell through endocytosis [ 17 ] . Therefore , FR is a good candidate for tumor - specific PS targeting [ 9 , 18 ] . Specific active targeting of PS to FR present on the cancer cell surface can be achieved by conjugation with the folate moiety [ 19 ] . Several studies have shown that some PSs conjugated with folic acid via appropriate linkers increase tumor uptake and enhance the efficacy of PDT . For instance , conjugation of folic acid to meta - tetra ( hydroxyphenyl ) chlorin ( m - THPC ) - like PS [ 20 ] and chlorin - based PS pheophorbide - a [ 21 ] has been reported . In addition , various materials such as polymers , nanomaterials , polysaccharides and cyclodextrins have been explored to overcome the shortcoming of PSs via tissue - specific delivery [ 22 ] . For example , folate - conjugated micelles containing temoporfin [ 23 ] and polydopamine nanoparticles conjugated with folic acid [ 24 ] showed potential for therapeutic applications . Kim et al [ 22 ] showed that ROS - sensitive and FR - targeted nanophotosensitizer conjugates are promising candidates for PDT of cervical cancer . Kato et al [ 25 , 26 ] reported that folate - porphyrin - lipid nanoparticles induced the selective destruction of lung cancer and malignant pleural mesothelioma in a preclinical model based on FR targeting . Baydoun et al [ 27 ] proved the efficacy of a new PS ( pyropheophorbide a - polyethylene glycol - folic acid ) on human ovarian cancer cells . Quilbe et al [ 28 ] developed a new PS targeting FR , protected by patent ( WO2019 016397 - A1 ) and evaluated its PDT efficacy on a mouse model of pancreatic cancer . These latest state - of - the - art studies encourage the use of folate - mediated PSs in tumor - targeted photodynamic therapy . In an alternative approach called photoimmunotherapy ( PIT ) , PSs conjugated with monoclonal antibodies that have high affinity to tumor specific antigens instead of using receptor ligands have also investigated [ 29 , 30 ] . PS targeting was developed or improved by conjugating fluorophores to tumor - seeking molecules [ 31 ] . We previously developed a folate - linked near - infrared ( NIR ) - sensitive probe , folate - Si - rhodamine - 1 ( FolateSiR - 1 , Abs max / Em max = 652 / 674 nm , and fluorescence quantum yield of 7 . 6 % ) using folate glutamate as a tumor - seeking agent , a negatively charged peptide linker , and rhodamine derivative , 2 , 5 - diCOOH SiR650 , as a photoactive component ( Figure 1A ) [ 32 ] . Folate receptor α contains a folate - binding pocket [ 33 ] . The folate pteroate moiety is buried inside the receptor , whereas its glutamate moiety is solvent - exposed and protrudes from the pocket , which allows its conjugation to the fluorophore without adversely affecting FR α binding [ 33 ] . We chose to conjugate the linker to the folate glutamate moiety , as this allowed high affinity - and highly selective binding of FolateSiR - 1 probe to FR [ 34 ] . One of the main drawbacks of currently approved PDTs is the insufficient penetration of light during treatment . This may be overcome by using NIR absorbing PSs [ 32 ] and appropriate NIR light sources because red and infrared light penetrate tissue more deeply than other visible light [ 3 ] . The photophysical properties of FolateSiR - 1 and the wavelength of our laser system ( 635 ± 3 nm ) used in this study resolved this issue . Fluorophores emitting NIR light in the phototherapeutic window ( 650 - 900 nm ) are most suitable due to high tissue penetration and low autofluorescence , which results in a low background signal [ 35 ] . FolateSiR - 1 exhibited very low background fluorescence and showed a high ratio of tumor - to - background fluorescent intensity [ 32 ] . In this study , we evaluated the in vitro and in vivo tumor specific targeting - and photodynamic activity of FolateSiR - 1 using high - FR - expressing - KB cells ( FR + ) and low - FR - expressing - OVCAR - 3 cells ( Low FR ) . We revealed the potential of FolateSiR - 1 as a candidate for use in the PDT of cancer by assessing its phototoxic cell death and antitumor effects . In addition , the cell death mode induced by FolateSiR - 1 - based PDT was investigated . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell lines and culture The human oral epidermoid carcinoma cell line , KB ( a Hela subline ) , and human epithelial ovarian cancer cell line , OVCAR - 3 , were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection ( ATCC ) ( Manassas , VA , United States ) . The KB cells were cultured in Eagles’s minimum essential medium ( EMEM ) ( Wako Pure Chemical Corp . , Osaka , Japan ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) Aung W et al . Folate receptor - targeted NIR - PDT WJCO https : / / www . wjgnet . com 883 November 24 , 2022 Volume 13 Issue 11 Figure 1 Folate - Si - rhodamine - 1 characteristcs . A : Molecular design and chemical structure of folate - Si - rhodamine - 1 ( FolateSiR - 1 ) ; B : Absorption and emission spectra of 1 μmol / L FolateSiR - 1 in 100 mmol / L sodium phosphate buffer ( pH 7 . 4 ) containing 0 . 1 % DMSO : maximum absorption = 652 nm ; maximum emission = 674 nm ; C : Fluorescence images of FolateSiR - 1 at a concentration of 5 , 1 , 0 . 5 , 0 . 25 , and 0 . 125 μmol / L in a 96 - well plate captured using the VISQUE fluorescence imaging system ; D : FolateSiR - 1 concentration vs fluorescence signal intensity . Abs : Absorbance ; FI : Fluorescence signal intensity ; μM : μmol / L . ( Gibco , Life Technologies Japan Ltd . , Tokyo , Japan ) , 100 U / mL penicillin - G sodium , and 100 μg / mL streptomycin sulfate ( Wako ) at 37 ˚C in a humidified incubator containing 5 % CO 2 . The A4 cell line is an immortalized mouse fibroblast cell line established from mouse 3T3 cells and transfected with human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 - expression vector . The OVCAR - 3 cells and A4 cells were similarly cultured in RPMI 1640 medium ( Wako ) supplemented with 10 % FBS ( Gibco ) , 100 U / mL penicillin - G sodium , and 100 μg / mL streptomycin sulfate ( Wako ) . FolateSiR - 1 synthesis FolateSiR - 1 was designed and synthesized using folate glutamate as a tumor - seeking agent , a negatively charged peptide linker , and a rhodamine derivative , 2 , 5 - diCOOH SiR650 , as a photoactive component according to a previously described method [ 32 ] . Fluorescence spectroscopic analyses of FolateSiR - 1 was conducted with a Hitachi F7000 spectrophotometer ( Tokyo , Japan ) using 2 . 5 nm excitation and emission slit widths and 700 V photomultiplier voltage . Different FolateSiR - 1 concentrations ( 5 , 1 , 0 . 5 , 0 . 25 , 0 . 125 μmol / L ) were prepared in 100 μL in a Nunc™ flat - bottom microplate ( 96 well , Black ) ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , Roskilde , Denmark ) . The fluorescence signal intensity ( Fl ) was determined using a VISQUE InVivo Smart fluorescence imaging and analysis system ( Vieworks Co . , Ltd , Gyeonggi , Korea ) equipped with HyperRed light filter set ( Ex / Em = 630 - 680 / 690 - 740 nm ) . Animal and tumor model Ethics Committee - approved animal studies were conducted in accordance with the institutional guidelines of the Animal Care and Use of Committee of National Institutes for Quantum and Radiological Science and Technology . The animal protocol was designed to minimize pain or discomfort to the animals . Four - week - old male BALB / cAJcl - nu / nu mice were obtained from CLEA ( Shizuoka , Japan ) , kept in an air - conditioned facility ( 23 °C ) with an artificial 12 h light - dark cycle , 50 % humidity , and provided autofluorescence - free food and water ad libitum for one week prior to experimentation . Development of tumor models involved subcutaneous inoculation of early passage cells ( 5 × 10 6 KB cells / site , 1 × 10 7 OVCAR - 3 cells / site , or 5 × 10 6 A4 cells / site , all in 100 μL medium ) into both femoral Aung W et al . Folate receptor - targeted NIR - PDT WJCO https : / / www . wjgnet . com 884 November 24 , 2022 Volume 13 Issue 11 regions of nude mice . Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane during the experimental procedure . All animals were euthanized by cervical dislocation under anesthesia ( inhalation of isoflurane ) for tumor tissue collection . Western blot analysis Folate receptor expression in designated cells was examined by western blotting ( WB ) . First , whole - cell lysate was prepared using radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer ( Wako ) containing protease inhibitor cocktail ( P8340 ; Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO , United States ) . Total protein concentration was determined using a NanoDrop One spectrophotometer ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , Wilmington , DE , United States ) . Next , 50 μg of cell lysate protein samples were separated using 4 % - 20 % polyacrylamide gel ( ATTO Corporation , Tokyo , Japan ) and transferred onto an Immobilon - P membrane ( Millipore , Billerica , MA , United States ) . Mouse monoclonal antibody anti - FR of human origin ( E - 11 ) ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Santa Cruz , CA , United States ) ( 1 : 200 dilution ) and goat polyclonal anti - human actin antibody ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) ( 1 : 500 dilution ) were used as primary antibodies . Horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) - linked anti - mouse IgG antibody ( GE Healthcare , Little Chalfont , United Kingdom ) ( 1 : 1000 dilution ) and HRP - linked anti - goat IgG antibody ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) ( 1 : 1000 dilution ) were used as secondary antibodies . The Enhanced Chemiluminescence Plus detection system ( GE Healthcare ) was used to visualize the immunoreactive bands . Fluorescence microscopy KB cells ( 1 × 10 5 cells / well ) were seeded onto an EZVIEW glass bottom culture plate ( 24 well , black ; IWAKI , Shizuoka , Japan ) in complete EMEM medium ( 1 mL ) and incubated for 24 h at 37 °C . The media was removed and each well was washed with PBS , subsequently , fresh medium was added with or without FolateSiR - 1 ( 2 . 5 μmol / L in 0 . 5 % DMSO ) and incubated overnight at 37 ˚C . The medium was discarded , cells were washed with phenol red free EMEM α medium ( Wako ) two times , and each well was refilled with the same medium . The OVCAR - 3 cells ( 5 × 10 5 cells / well ) and A4 cells ( 1 × 10 5 cells / well ) were prepared using RPMI 1640 , and the cells were observed using a Keyence BZ - X700 fluorescence microscope ( Keyence Japan Co , Ltd , Osaka , Japan ) with an Ex / Em 590 - 650 / 665 - 732 nm filter for FolateSiR - 1 . The same exposure time was consistently used . Phase - contrast images were also captured . Cell viability imaging KB cells ( 1 . 5 × 10 5 cells / well ) were seeded onto a EZVIEW glass bottom culture plate ( 24 well , black ; IWAKI ) in complete EMEM medium overnight at 37 °C . Spent medium was replaced with fresh medium with or without FolateSiR - 1 ( 2 . 5 μmol / L in 0 . 5 % DMSO ) and the KB cells were incubated overnight . Next , the medium was discarded , cells were washed with phenol red free medium ( Wako ) , and subsequently irradiated with NIR light from an infrared diode laser system ( Laser Create Co . , Tokyo , Japan ) at 635 ± 3 nm and a power density of 10 J / cm 2 ( 0 . 1 W / cm 2 for 100 s ) . The distance between the sample and light source was set to 3 cm , and the light power was adjusted to 0 . 1 W / cm 2 . The irradiation dose was measured using a Starlite thermal laser power sensor and optical power meter ( OPHIR Japan , Saitama , Japan ) . After irradiation , each well was refilled with the same medium and incubated at 37 °C . Two hours later , two color staining assays were conducted using the ReadyProbes TM cell viability imaging kit ( Thermo Fisher Scientific K . K , Tokyo , Japan ) according to manufacturer’s instructions . Nuclei of the viable cells and dead cells were stained with NucBlue ® Live reagent and NucGreen ® Dead reagent , respectively . Cell images were acquired with a Keyence BZ - X700 microscope ( Keyence Japan Co , Ltd ) with filter sets for NucBlue ® ( Ex / Em = 360 / 460 nm ) , NucGreen ® ( Ex / Em = 475 / 509 nm ) , and FolateSiR - 1 ( red , Ex / Em = 590 - 650 / 665 - 732 nm ) . Image acquisitions were conducted using similar exposure times . Mice NIR fluorescence imaging Intravenous injection of FolateSiR - 1 ( 100 μmol / L in 100 μL saline and 10 % DMSO ) into the tail vein of tumor - bearing mice was followed by anesthetization and acquisition of fluorescent and white light images at the dorsal position . Pre - injection - and post - injection time points ( 5 min , 10 min , 15 min , 20 min , 30 min , 45 min , and 1 h , 2 h , 3 h , 4 h , 4 . 5 h , 5 h , 6 h , 24 h , and 48 h ) were designated for longitudinal imaging . In vivo NIR fluorescence imaging was conducted using the VISQUE imaging system ( Vieworks Co . , Ltd , ) equipped with HyperRed light filter ( Ex / Em = 630 - 680 / 690 - 740 nm ) using constant imaging parameters ( exposure time : 100 ms , binning : 1 × 1 , light intensity : high , mode : low gain ) . Tumor FI was acquired by subtracting nearby background FI using Clevue software ( Vieworks ) . Two mice with OVCAR - 3 and KB tumors in their left and right femoral regions , respectively , were imaged to confirm FR - specific binding . Similarly to the other control samples , KB tumor - bearing mice that did or did not receive the FolateSiR - 1 injection were imaged together , and the A4 ( low FR ) tumor - bearing mouse was imaged after PS injection . In vivo tumor PDT Subcutaneous tumor lengths peaked at approximately 6 - 10 mm nine days after xenografting . These Aung W et al . Folate receptor - targeted NIR - PDT WJCO https : / / www . wjgnet . com 885 November 24 , 2022 Volume 13 Issue 11 mice were randomly assigned to one of the four groups ( n = 5 in each group ) , and treatment was conducted using the designated schedule . FolateSiR - 1 ( 100 μmol / L ) was initially administered intravenously . After 2 h , the tumor was exposed to NIR light from a Diode Laser system ( Laser Create Co . ) at 635 ± 3 nm and 50 J / cm 2 ( 0 . 25 W / cm 2 for 200 s ) . The distance between the tumor and NIR light source was set to 3 cm . Whole body of the mouse , except for the tumor area , was shielded from the light using aluminum foil . Group 1 received PS injection , group 2 received PS injection followed by light irradiation at 2 h post - injection , group 3 was only irradiated , and group 4 received no treatment . Tumors sizes of all mice ( n = 8 for each ) were measured twice a week over 16 d using calipers , and volumes were calculated according to the formula : volume ( mm 3 ) = [ length ( mm ) ] × [ width ( mm ) ] 2 × 0 . 5 . The relative tumor volume was calculated based on the ratio of the volume on the indicated day and the starting volume prior to the treatment . Mice were weighed twice a week , while the skin condition of the light exposed area , and general conditions of the mice were monitored daily . Immunohistochemical - and histological analysis Twenty - four h after irradiation , a mouse from each group was sacrificed . The tumors were excised , fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde , embedded in paraffin , and cut into 5 μm - slices . Serial tissue sections were rehydrated and subjected to antigen retrieval for immunohistochemical ( IHC ) analysis . The sections were then stained for Ki - 67 cell proliferation marker [ 36 ] using anti - human Ki - 67 polyclonal antibody ( Dako Denmark , Glostrup , Denmark ) ( 1 : 200 dilution ) as previously described [ 37 ] . Mouse monoclonal anti - FR antibody of human origin ( E - 11 ) ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) ( 1 : 200 dilution ) was used to investigate tumor FR expression . Serial sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin ( H & E ) dye to examine histopathological changes . Slides were examined with an Olympus BX43 microscope ( Tokyo , Japan ) . Statistical analysis The quantitative results are presented as the mean ± SD . Relative tumor volume differences between groups were determined using ANOVA ( two - factor with replication ; Excel , Microsoft , Redmond , WA , United States ) , followed by Tukey’s test . P values < 0 . 05 were considered statistically significant . RESULTS FolateSiR - 1 conjugate characteristics FolateSiR - 1 probe ( molecular weight 1232 . 78 , Figure 1A ) was developed from a Si - rhodamine derivative containing a carboxy group at the benzene moiety coupled to a folate ligand moiety through a negatively charged tripeptide [ 32 ] . FolateSiR - 1 is expected to possess high affinity to FR with a tumor - seeking character of folate glutamate [ 38 ] . Rhodamine derivative 2 , 5 - diCOOH SiR650 serves as a photoactive component . Maximum absorption and emission wavelengths of 1 μmol / L FolateSiR - 1 in 100 mmol / L sodium phosphate buffer at pH 7 . 4 were 652 nm and 674 nm , respectively ( Figure 1B ) [ 32 ] . FolateSiR - 1 fluorescence emission was most clearly visualized with HyperRed light filter ( Ex / Em = 630 - 680 / 690 - 740 nm ) using the VISQUE imaging system ( Figure 1C ) . The quantitative evaluation of FI revealed that the linear correlation coefficient between fluorescence and FolateSiR - 1 concentration was 0 . 996 ( Figure 1D ) . Folate receptor expression and FolateSiR - 1 accumulation in cultured cells High FR expression was observed in the KB cells by WB , but not in the OVCAR - 3 and A4 cells ( Figure 2A ) . Likewise , FolateSiR - 1 accumulated in the KB cells at the cell membrane and their intracellular localization indicated substantial specific binding of FolateSiR - 1 to FR and its internal - ization using fluorescence microscopy . However , this was not seen in almost any of the OVCAR - 3 and A4 cells ( Figure 2B ) . All three cell lines incubated in medium without FolateSiR - 1 showed no fluorescence activity ( data not shown ) . Folate receptor - specific binding of FolateSiR - 1 in in vivo tumors Using the VISQUE imaging system 2 h after injecting FolateSiR - 1 into tumor - bearing mice , the KB tumors inoculated in the right femoral regions showed high FI , while the OVCAR - 3 tumors inoculated in the left femoral regions showed no FI ( Figure 2C ) . Next , the KB tumor of the mouse that was administered FolateSiR - 1 exhibited FI , but the negative control tumor of the mouse with no FolateSiR - 1 injection did not ( Figure 2D ) . Moreover , a mouse bearing A4 ( low FR ) tumor showed no FI ( Figure 2E ) . After imaging , IHC examination of tumor tissue sections showed high FR expression in the KB tumor ( Figure 2F ) . These results suggest that there was specific binding of FolateSiR - 1 to FR in the tumors . Phototoxic cell death induced by FolateSiR - 1 mediated PDT Immediate cell death induced by NIR - PDT was detected based on green colored cells by fluorescence microscopy , resulting from the staining with the NucGreen ® Dead reagent , whereas viable cell nuclei Aung W et al . Folate receptor - targeted NIR - PDT WJCO https : / / www . wjgnet . com 886 November 24 , 2022 Volume 13 Issue 11 Figure 2 Folate receptor expression in designated cell lines and folate receptor - specific binding of folate - Si - rhodamine - 1 in tumor in vivo . A : Folate receptor ( FR ) expression in cell lines OVCAR - 3 , KB , and A4 examined by western blotting ; B : Cell lines were incubated with or without folate - Si - rhodamine - 1 ( FolateSiR - 1 ) for 24 h and examined under a fluorescent microscope . FolateSiR - 1 fluorescence was detected using the appropriate filters ( Ex / Em 590 - 650 / 665 - 732 nm ) . The uppermost images are magnifications of the indicated portion of the lower image showing KB cells ( scale bar = 20 μm , 40 × magnification , and 120 × magnification for the upper most image ) ; C : Near - infrared ( NIR ) fluorescence image of a representative mouse bearing subcutaneous KB ( right ) and OVCAR - 3 ( left ) tumors at 2 h after receiving the FolateSiR - 1 injection : KB tumor ( FR + ) showed high fluorescence signal intensity ( FI ) , and OVCAR - 3 tumor ( low FR ) did not ; D : NIR fluorescence image of mice bearing KB tumors : the right mouse received the FolateSiR - 1 injection showed FI , while the left mouse did not ( negative control tumor ) show no FI ; E : NIR fluorescence image of a mouse bearing A4 ( low FR ) tumor showed no FI ; F : Immunohistochemical analysis of tumor tissue sections for FR expression : KB tumor ( right column ) , OVCAR - 3 tumor ( left column ) . Scale bar = 100 μm , 20 × magnification for upper panel , and scale bar = 50 μm , 40 × magnification , for lower panel . FR : Folate receptor ; Ex : Excitation ; Em : Emission ; FI : Fluorescence signal intensity ; FolateSiR - 1 : Folate - Si - rhodamine - 1 ; PC : Phase - contrast ; NIR : Near - infrared ; CTR : Control . were stained blue with NucBlue ® Live reagent ( Figure 3 ) . No noticeable phototoxic cell death was observed with FolateSiR - 1 treatment alone , light treatment alone , or no treatment ( Figure 3 ) . In vivo FolateSiR - 1 biodistribution in tumorbearing mice Time - dependent distribution of FolateSiR - 1 and its specific accumulation in the tumors was determined based on serial images of a representative mouse following FolateSiR - 1 injection ( Figure 4A ) . The quantified FI in the tumor rapidly increased , peaking approximately 2 h after injection , and almost disappearing over 24 h ( Figure 4B ) . Moreover , in another experiment , decreased tumor FI was observed in the right tumor that received PDT after 30 min compared with that of the non - irradiated left tumor ( Figure 5A ) . Although there was a time - dependent decrease of FI due to normal washout of the PS from the tumor , the degree of FI reduction in the tumor treated with PDT was greater than in the untreated Aung W et al . Folate receptor - targeted NIR - PDT WJCO https : / / www . wjgnet . com 887 November 24 , 2022 Volume 13 Issue 11 Figure 3 In vitro phototoxicity of folate - Si - rhodamine - 1 after laser irradiation . The cells were stained using the reagents from the Cell viability imaging kit at 2 h after near - infrared photodynamic therapy ( NIR - PDT ) . The nuclei of dead cells were stained with NucGreen ® Dead reagent ( green ) , while the viable cell nuclei were stained with NucBlue ® Live reagent ( blue ) . Rapid cell death - induced by PDT ( 10 J / cm 2 ) and abundant dead cells were clearly noted . ( scale bar = 500 μm , 10 × magnification ) . NIR - PDT : Near - infrared photodynamic therapy ; IR : Laser irradiation ; CTR : Control ; NucGreen : NucGreen ® Dead reagent ; NucBlue : NucBlue ® Live reagent ; PC : Phase - contrast ; μM : μmol / L . tumor . Therefore , the percentage decrease of tumor FI was higher in the PDT - induced tumors ( Figure 5B ) . Mice were euthanized shortly after in vivo imaging , with tumors and other organs removed and analyzed by the VISQUE imaging system . Ex vivo NIR images showed higher FI in tumor tissues compared with major organs , and higher FI in the right tumor compared with that of the left tumor . Meanwhile , FI from organs including the liver and kidney was barely visible ( Figure 5C ) . Ex vivo results showed similar trends in data as that in in vivo imaging data . In vivo PDT efficacy of FolateSiR - 1 on tumor size The tumor - bearing mice were treated according to the scheme shown in Figure 6 . Statistically significant tumor growth inhibition was observed after NIR - PDT treatment vs FolateSiR - 1 treatment alone , NIR irradiation alone , and no treatment ( P < 0 . 05 , Figure 7A ) . No significant differences were observed amongst other groups . There was no significant body weight loss , skin damage , or abnormal general conditions in these mice ( Figure 7B ) . Relatively decreased sizes of PDT - treated tumors were observed ex vivo 16 d after treatment compared with that in the other groups ( Figure 7C ) . Evaluation of tumor tissue response to PDT by IHC and histopathology Proliferative factor Ki67 nuclear staining in the control tumor cells was observed by IHC analysis . In contrast , the tumor tissues treated with PDT showed weak staining and markedly reduced numbers of Ki - 67 - positive cells , suggesting that PDT inhibited tumor growth ( Figure 8 ) . Furthermore , PDT treated tumors showed rapid extensive damage with necrotic - and apoptotic cell death at the irradiated tumor site as indicated by H & E staining . PDT treated tumor cells showed some features of necrosis and apoptosis such as nuclear fading due to DNA degradation ( karyolysis ) , anuclear necrotic cells with a glossier homogenous appearance , nuclear chromatin condensation ( pyknosis ) , and nuclear fragmentation ( karyorrhexis ) . No conspicuous damage was found in the tumors of the other control groups receiving FolateSiR - 1 alone , irradiation alone , or no treatment ( Figure 9 ) . Aung W et al . Folate receptor - targeted NIR - PDT WJCO https : / / www . wjgnet . com 888 November 24 , 2022 Volume 13 Issue 11 Figure 4 In vivo longitudinal near - infrared fluorescence imaging of folate - Si - rhodamine - 1 in a KB tumor - bearing representative mouse . A : Imaging was conducted before and after folate - Si - rhodamine - 1 ( FolateSiR - 1 ) injection . The indicated time points after injection are at 5 min , 10 min , 15 min , 20 min , 30 min , 45 min , 1 h , 2 h , 3 h , 4 h , 4 . 5 h , 5 h , 6 h , 24 h , and 48 h . Time - dependent FolateSiR - 1 distribution and its specific tumor accumulation is shown in serial images ; B : Quantitative fluorescent signal intensity analysis of the tumors . Data are presented as the mean ± SD ( n = 4 ) . NIR : Near - infrared ; FI : Fluorescent signal intensity ; Pre - Inj : Pre - injection ; Post - Inj : Post - injection . DISCUSSION FolateSiR - 1 significantly accumulated in the FR - expressing KB tumors , but not in the FR - negative tumors and normal organs . This PS was activated by NIR light to evoke cytotoxic effects on cells and tumors , resulting in PDT induced necrosis and apoptosis . Our findings suggest that FolateSiR - 1 has potential for application in the PDT of FR - expressing tumors . High FR expression was observed in the KB cells , but not in the OVCAR - 3 and A4 cells ( Figure 2A ) . Furthermore , fluorescence microscopy revealed that KB cells incubated with FolateSiR - 1 showed strong FI which contrasted with that of the other two cell lines ( Figure 2B ) . These results encouraged us to use KB cells as a representative FR - expressing xenograft tumor in a mouse model . Stronger FI was observed in KB tumors , compared to OVCAR - 3 tumors , A4 tumors , and other sites throughout the body , which was attributed to the presence of FolateSiR - 1 ( Figures 2C - E ) . Furthermore , strongly positive FR staining was observed in KB tumor cells , whereas it was almost entirely absent in OVCAR - 3 cells based on IHC ( Figure 2F ) . These findings and ex vivo images of normal tissues ( Figure 5C ) indicate that FolateSiR - 1 binds FR with high specificity in FR - overexpressing cells and tumors . In this study , FolateSiR - 1 accumulation peaked at 2 h after injection in KB tumors , followed by its disappearance over the next 24 h based on quantification of serial fluorescence images . The rapid peak accumulation of FolateSiR - 1 in tumors may be a more convenient clinical setting of PDT than the number of days required for PIT using an antibody as a PS carrier . Furthermore , rapid tumor contrast enhancement within a few hours after PS injection could be advantageous for real - time cancer detection in the intraoperative setting . Moreover , irradiation delivered at a shorter interval when PS is still present in the blood vessels results in a superior tumor response which causes marked vascular damage [ 39 ] . In vivo time - dependent images ( Figure 4 ) and ex vivo images of tissues ( Figure 5C ) showed that FolateSiR - 1 was cleared relatively quickly from normal tissues , including the main excretory organs ( liver and kidney ) , indicating that the phototoxic side effects were minimized . Aung W et al . Folate receptor - targeted NIR - PDT WJCO https : / / www . wjgnet . com 889 November 24 , 2022 Volume 13 Issue 11 Figure 5 In vivo and ex vivo images before and after photodynamic therapy . A : Near - infrared fluorescence images of representative tumor bearing mice : before photosensitizer ( PS ) ( FolateSiR - 1 ) injection ( left ) , 2 h after PS injection ( center ) , and 30 min after photodynamic therapy ( PDT ) ( right ) . The right tumor received PDT while the left tumor did not . Fluorescent signal intensity ( FI ) of the right tumor decreased immediately after PDT , and the extent of FI reduction is larger than that of the left tumor ; B : Bar graph showing the FI of the tumor before - and 30 min after PDT . Data are presented as the mean ± SD ( n = 4 ) ; C : Ex vivo fluorescence images captured 30 min after PDT . NIR : Near - infrared ; Lt : Left ; Rt : Right ; PS inj : photosensitizer injection ; PDT : Photodynamic therapy ; Non - PDT : Without PDT ; FI : Fluorescent signal intensity . KB cells showed extensive bright fluorescence signals , whereas there was no obvious PS binding or uptake in the negative control cells indicating that FolateSiR - 1 was selectively localized in KB cells ( Figure 2B ) . Fluorescent signals were mainly observed at the plasma membrane of KB cells and in some cytoplasmic component sites . The cellular response to photodamage primarily depends on PS localization and PDT dose [ 40 - 42 ] . Photosensitizer localization and activation inside tumor tissues generates ROS which can directly kill malignant tumor cells [ 4 ] . Mitochondria - localized PS induces apoptotic cell death within a certain threshold of oxidative stress [ 6 , 43 ] . Necrosis is more often observed if the cell membrane is the site of action for the PS [ 44 ] . Mild oxidative damage by PS localized in the plasma membrane causes apoptosis , but severe damage leads to the loss of plasma membrane integrity and causes necrotic cell death [ 6 , 41 , 45 ] . Meanwhile , PSs targeting the endoplasmic reticulum , Golgi membranes , and lysosomes mediates necrosis [ 43 ] . Moreover , high PDT doses ( dependent on the amount of PS and the irradiation dose ) inactivate essential enzymes and other components of the apoptotic cascade resulting in increased cellular damage leading to necrosis rather than apoptosis [ 40 , 46 ] . The merged fluorescence - and phase - contrast images showed strong FolateSiR - 1 fluorescence intensity in the KB cell membrane and the cytoplasm , but not in the nucleus ( Figure 2B ) . This finding suggests that FolateSiR - 1 promotes necrosis and is a suitable probe for PDT . The probe alone did not penetrate the nuclear membrane and therefore did not cause genetic damage . Aung W et al . Folate receptor - targeted NIR - PDT WJCO https : / / www . wjgnet . com 890 November 24 , 2022 Volume 13 Issue 11 Figure 6 Experimental treatment scheme . Tumor bearing mice were assigned to four groups : A : folate - Si - rhodamine - 1 injection alone ; B : Near - infrared ( NIR ) photodynamic therapy ( 50 J / cm 2 ) ; C : NIR irradiation alone ( 50 J / cm 2 ) ; and D : no treatment . FolateSiR - 1 : Folate - Si - rhodamine - 1 ; NIR - PDT : Near - infrared photodynamic therapy ; IR : Laser irradiation ; CTR : Control ; wt : Weight ; vol : Volume . Figure 7 Phototherapeutic effects of photodynamic therapy on KB xenografts and body weight in mice . A : Tumor volume change is expressed as the relative tumor volume ( volume on the indicated day / starting volume prior to the treatment . Tumors - treated by near - infrared photodynamic therapy ( NIR - PDT ) ( 50 J / cm 2 ) , irradiation alone ( 50 J / cm 2 ) , folate - Si - rhodamine - 1 alone , and no treatment are shown in pink ( ○ ) , gray ( ■ ) , orange ( ● ) , and blue ( □ ) , respectively . Tumors - treated by NIR - PDT show significantly delayed growth compared to those of other groups . Values represent the mean ± SD ( n = 8 ) , a P < 0 . 05 NIR - PDT vs other groups ; B : Average body weight did not differ significantly among the four groups of mice ; C : Images of ex vivo tumors excised 16 d after treatment . FolateSiR - 1 : Folate - Si - rhodamine - 1 ; NIR - PDT : Near - infrared photodynamic therapy ; IR : Laser irradiation ; CTR : Control . Our NIR - PDT regimen delivered a single dose of NIR light ( 50 J / cm 2 ) to KB tumors after intravenous administration of FolateSiR - 1 ( 100 μg ) . The growth rate of tumors receiving PDT was significantly suppressed even with this single irradiation compared with the control groups ( Figure 7 ) . Complete tumor remission was not achieved with a single irradiation , however , partial remission for three days and delayed relapse was noted after PDT . Therefore , NIR - PDT using FolateSiR - 1 is expected to be as Aung W et al . Folate receptor - targeted NIR - PDT WJCO https : / / www . wjgnet . com 891 November 24 , 2022 Volume 13 Issue 11 Figure 8 Tumor immunohistochemical staining of Ki - 67 at 24 h after near - infrared photodynamic therapy . The weak staining and marked reduction of Ki - 67 - positive cells were detected in tumors treated with near - infrared photodynamic therapy ( scale bar = 100 μm , 20 × magnification ) . FolateSiR - 1 : Folate - Si - rhodamine - 1 ; NIR - PDT : Near - infrared photodynamic therapy ; IR : Laser irradiation ; CTR : Control . Figure 9 Histological examination of the destructive effects of near - infrared photodynamic therapy in tumor tissues 24 h after near - infrared photodynamic therapy . Tumors are stained with hematoxylin and eosin . The left lowermost image is a magnification of the indicated portion of the upper image . Some features of necrotic and apoptotic cells are shown with arrowheads : nuclear fading due to DNA loss , karyolysis ( blue ) , anuclear necrotic cells with a glossier homogenous appearance ( orange ) , nuclear chromatin condensation , pyknosis ( green ) , nuclear fragmentation , and karyorrhexis ( yellow ) . ( Scale bar = 100 μm , 20 × magnification for upper two rows , and scale bar = 50 μm , 40 × magnification for lower row ) . FolateSiR - 1 : folate - Si - rhodamine - 1 ; NIR - PDT : Near - infrared photodynamic therapy ; IR : laser irradiation ; CTR : control . effective as other currently tested PDTs and PITs , because more precise treatment regimens can be easily designed by adjusting PS and irradiation doses , and repeating the treatment to improve the therapeutic efficacy and potentially achieving complete pathological remission . An extended study aiming to optimize the treatment will be performed in the future . Photobleaching is the light - mediated destruction of PS . Linear correlation between protoporphyrin IX photobleaching and necrosis was used as a predictive tool of the PDT response in the rat ovarian cancer model [ 47 ] . Our limited mice experiments showed a tendency for FI reduction in tumors immediately Aung W et al . Folate receptor - targeted NIR - PDT WJCO https : / / www . wjgnet . com 892 November 24 , 2022 Volume 13 Issue 11 after PDT ( Figure 5A and B ) , and this was probably due to some PS photobleaching and necrosis of cancer cells . An extended study is required to confirm this association . Rapid phototoxic cell death - induced by NIR - PDT ( 10 J / cm 2 ) and abundant dead cells stained green with NucGreen ® Dead reagent were clearly observed in viability imaging assays ( Figure 3 ) . In contrast , neither FolateSiR - 1 alone nor irradiation alone induced noticeable cell death , suggesting that FolateSiR - 1 is an effective PS with high phototoxicity and low dark toxicity . Nuclear staining of the proliferative factor Ki67 in tumor cells using IHC indicating that these cells were actively proliferating at 24 h post - PDT . Meanwhile , tumors treated with PDT ( 50 J / cm 2 ) showed weak staining and a marked decrease in Ki - 67 positive cells , suggesting that FolateSiR - 1 mediated PDT inhibited cell proliferation in tumors ( Figure 8 ) . Therefore , some cells stop proliferating , but do not immediately undergo necrosis or apoptosis . In addition , tumors irradiated with targeted PDT exhibited rapid and extensive damage with a phenotype of necrosis and apoptotic cell death at the irradiated site as indicated by H & E staining . Some cells displayed necrotic cell death features such as nuclear fading ( karyolysis ) and anuclear necrotic cells , while other cells showed apoptotic cell death features such as chromatin condensation of the nucleus ( pyknosis ) and nuclear fragmentation ( karyorrhexis ) . No distinct damage was found in the tumors of the other control groups ( Figure 9 ) . These results were consistent with that of tumor growth and revealed the presumptive mechanism of the effects of PDT . The main mechanism of tumor destruction by PDT is the direct damage to cells [ 45 ] , however , there are other indirect mechanisms such as damage to tumor blood vessels and nonspecific activation of the immune response against tumor cells [ 42 , 48 ] . As these mechanisms were not addressed in this study , additional research on this topic is required . Furthermore , only one FR - overexpressing cell line - derived subcutaneous tumor was used . The nature of the xenografted - tumor microenvironment does not reflect all of the characteristics of human cancer tissue . Not all tumors express high FR levels in a clinical setting . These drawbacks may limit the wide use of FR - targeted NIR - PDT . Nevertheless , further research may elucidate these limitations . The fascinating features of FolateSiR - 1 , including selectivity for tumor cells , membranous and subcellular localization , and cytotoxicity in combination with NIR irradiation , prompted the development of an alternative PS for NIR - PDT . The results of this study indicate that FR - targeted NIR - PDT using this PS may have potential for application in the treatment of FR - overexpressing tumors . Moreover , specific binding of FolateSiR - 1 to FRs and emission of near - infrared light may be useful for decision making in various settings including patient screening for treatment selection , theranostic applications such as image - guided cancer detection and PDT , or in combination with other treatments . CONCLUSION FolateSiR - 1 displayed FR - specificity in vitro and in vivo and functioned as a potential PS when irradiated with NIR light , causing cellular tumor damage by provoking the cumulative effect of necrosis , apoptosis , and cell proliferation - inhibition . These findings suggest that FolateSiR - 1 may be effectively utilized in PDT with low side effects , and FR - targeted NIR - PDT can potentially provide new effective strategies for the treatment of FR - overexpressing tumors . ARTICLE HIGHLIGHTS Research background Photodynamic therapy ( PDT ) is one of the emerging options to combat cancer and it requires pho - tosensitizer ( PS ) and corresponding light irradiation . The tumor selectivity of the photosensitizer improves tumor localization in PDT , enhances tumor destruction , and reduces side effects due to off - target localization . Folate receptor ( FR ) membrane protein is frequently overexpressed in human cancer and specific active targeting of PS to FR can be achieved by conjugation with the folate moiety . Research motivation We previously developed a folate - linked , near - infrared ( NIR ) - sensitive probe folate - Si - rhodamine - 1 ( FolateSiR - 1 ) . The feasibility of NIR - PDT using FolateSiR - 1 and appropriate light irradiation had not been determined and reqired elucidation . Research objectives The aim of this study was to evaluate the photodynamic therapeutic efficacy of FolateSiR - 1 in a preclinical cancer model and determine the cell death mode induced by FolateSiR - 1 - based PDT . Research methods FolateSiR - 1 was synthesized by conjugating a folate moiety to the Si - rhodamine derivative through a Aung W et al . Folate receptor - targeted NIR - PDT WJCO https : / / www . wjgnet . com 893 November 24 , 2022 Volume 13 Issue 11 negatively charged tripeptide linker . Utilizing FR - overexpressing cell line KB and low FR - expressing cell lines OVCAR - 3 and A4 , selective binding of FolateSiR - 1 to FR was evaluated by fluorescence microscopy . Cell viability imaging assays was exploited to assess the phototoxic effect of FolateSiR - 1 . In vivo longitudinal fluorescence imaging was conducted to examine the time - dependent biodistribution of FolateSiR - 1 and its specific accumulation in KB tumors . To evaluate PDT efficacy of FolateSiR - 1 , KB tumor - bearing mice were divided into four groups : ( 1 ) FolateSiR - 1 alone ; ( 2 ) FolateSiR - 1 followed by NIR irradiation ; ( 3 ) NIR irradiation alone ; and ( 4 ) no treatment . Tumor volume measurement , as well as immunohistochemical ( IHC ) and histological examinations of tumors were performed to determine the effect of PDT . Research results FR - specific binding of FolateSiR - 1 was observed by fluorescence microscopy and in vivo fluorescence imaging . Cell viability imaging assays indicated that NIR - PDT induced cell death . In vivo longitudinal fluorescence imaging showed rapid peak accumulation of FolateSiR - 1 in KB tumors 2 h after injection . The tumor volumes in the PDT group were significantly reduced compared to the other groups ( P < 0 . 05 ) . IHC analysis revealed reduced numbers of proliferation marker Ki - 67 - positive cells in PDT treated tumors , and hematoxylin - eosin staining revealed features of necrotic - and apoptotic cell death . Research conclusions FolateSiR - 1 may be effectively utilized in PDT with low side effects , and the FR - targeted NIR - PDT can potentially reveal new strategies for the treatment of FR - overexpressing tumors . Research perspectives The fascinating features of FolateSiR - 1 , including specificity to FR , cytotoxicity in combination with NIR irradiation and relatively fast clearance implying low toxicity , prompted the development of an alternative PS for NIR - PDT . The therapeutic effect was significant after a single dose of irradiation and may be optimized to achieve patient - specific clinical effects . Moreover , fluorescence emission from FolateSiR - 1 may be used for real time cancer detection and patient screening for treatment selection . Further research may elucidate these additional details of these processes . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank Aya Sugyo for help with the animal experiments and Tsuneo Saga for providing the A4 cell . FOOTNOTES Author contributions : Aung W designed the study , conducted most of the experiments , analyzed the data , and wrote the manuscript ; Hanaoka K , designed , synthesized , and provided the folate - Si - rhodamine - 1 ; Tsuji AB and Higashi T coordinated the research and contributed to manuscript preparation ; all authors critically reviewed and approved the final version of the article . Supported by a Grant - in - Aid for Scientific Research ( C ) from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science , No . 21K07740 ( to Aung W ) . Institutional animal care and use committee statement : This study was reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board of National Institute for Quantum and Radiological Science and Technology , No . 13 - 1022 - 9 . Conflict - of - interest statement : All the authors report no relevant conflicts of interest for this article . Data sharing statement : All relevant data were presented in the manuscript . Further information is available from the corresponding author . ARRIVE guidelines statement : The authors have read the ARRIVE guidelines , and the manuscript was prepared and revised according to the ARRIVE guidelines . Open - Access : This article is an open - access article that was selected by an in - house editor and fully peer - reviewed by external reviewers . It is distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial ( CC BY - NC 4 . 0 ) license , which permits others to distribute , remix , adapt , build upon this work non - commercially , and license their derivative works on different terms , provided the original work is properly cited and the use is non - commercial . See : https : / / creativecommons . org / Licenses / by - nc / 4 . 0 / Country / Territory of origin : Japan Aung W et al . Folate receptor - targeted NIR - PDT WJCO https : / / www . wjgnet . com 894 November 24 , 2022 Volume 13 Issue 11 ORCID number : Winn Aung 0000 - 0002 - 0896 - 7158 ; Atsushi B Tsuji 0000 - 0003 - 2726 - 288X ; Kenjiro Hanaoka 0000 - 0003 - 0797 - 4038 ; Tatsuya Higashi 0000 - 0002 - 8338 - 4737 . S - Editor : Gong ZM L - Editor : A P - Editor : Wu RR REFERENCES Sung H , Ferlay J , Siegel RL , Laversanne M , Soerjomataram I , Jemal A , Bray F . Global Cancer Statistics 2020 : GLOBOCAN Estimates of Incidence and Mortality Worldwide for 36 Cancers in 185 Countries . CA Cancer J Clin 2021 ; 71 : 209 - 249 [ PMID : 33538338 DOI : 10 . 3322 / caac . 21660 ] 1 Algorri JF , Ochoa M , Roldán - Varona P , Rodríguez - Cobo L , López - Higuera JM . Photodynamic Therapy : A Compendium of Latest Reviews . Cancers ( Basel ) 2021 ; 13 [ PMID : 34503255 DOI : 10 . 3390 / cancers13174447 ] 2 Agostinis P , Berg K , Cengel KA , Foster TH , Girotti AW , Gollnick SO , Hahn SM , Hamblin MR , Juzeniene A , Kessel D , Korbelik M , Moan J , Mroz P , Nowis D , Piette J , Wilson BC , Golab J . Photodynamic therapy of cancer : an update . CA Cancer J Clin 2011 ; 61 : 250 - 281 [ PMID : 21617154 DOI : 10 . 3322 / caac . 20114 ] 3 van Straten D , Mashayekhi V , de Bruijn HS , Oliveira S , Robinson DJ . Oncologic Photodynamic Therapy : Basic Principles , Current Clinical Status and Future Directions . Cancers ( Basel ) 2017 ; 9 [ PMID : 28218708 DOI : 10 . 3390 / cancers9020019 ] 4 Mroz P , Yaroslavsky A , Kharkwal GB , Hamblin MR . Cell death pathways in photodynamic therapy of cancer . Cancers ( Basel ) 2011 ; 3 : 2516 - 2539 [ PMID : 23914299 DOI : 10 . 3390 / cancers3022516 ] 5 Agostinis P , Buytaert E , Breyssens H , Hendrickx N . Regulatory pathways in photodynamic therapy induced apoptosis . Photochem Photobiol Sci 2004 ; 3 : 721 - 729 [ PMID : 15295626 DOI : 10 . 1039 / b315237e ] 6 Hamblin MR , Abrahamse H . Factors Affecting Photodynamic Therapy and Anti - Tumor Immune Response . Anticancer Agents Med Chem 2021 ; 21 : 123 - 136 [ PMID : 32188394 DOI : 10 . 2174 / 1871520620666200318101037 ] 7 Abrahamse H , Hamblin MR . New photosensitizers for photodynamic therapy . Biochem J 2016 ; 473 : 347 - 364 [ PMID : 26862179 DOI : 10 . 1042 / BJ20150942 ] 8 Bugaj AM . Targeted photodynamic therapy - - a promising strategy of tumor treatment . Photochem Photobiol Sci 2011 ; 10 : 1097 - 1109 [ PMID : 21547329 DOI : 10 . 1039 / c0pp00147c ] 9 Shirasu N , Nam SO , Kuroki M . Tumor - targeted photodynamic therapy . Anticancer Res 2013 ; 33 : 2823 - 2831 [ PMID : 23780966 ] 10 Sibani SA , McCarron PA , Woolfson AD , Donnelly RF . Photosensitiser delivery for photodynamic therapy . Part 2 : systemic carrier platforms . Expert Opin Drug Deliv 2008 ; 5 : 1241 - 1254 [ PMID : 18976134 DOI : 10 . 1517 / 17425240802444673 ] 11 Debele TA , Peng S , Tsai HC . Drug Carrier for Photodynamic Cancer Therapy . Int J Mol Sci 2015 ; 16 : 22094 - 22136 [ PMID : 26389879 DOI : 10 . 3390 / ijms160922094 ] 12 Kaščáková S , Hofland LJ , De Bruijn HS , Ye Y , Achilefu S , van der Wansem K , van der Ploeg - van den Heuvel A , van Koetsveld PM , Brugts MP , van der Lelij AJ , Sterenborg HJ , Ten Hagen TL , Robinson DJ , van Hagen MP . Somatostatin analogues for receptor targeted photodynamic therapy . PLoS One 2014 ; 9 : e104448 [ PMID : 25111655 DOI : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0104448 ] 13 St Denis TG , Hamblin MR . Synthesis , bioanalysis and biodistribution of photosensitizer conjugates for photodynamic therapy . Bioanalysis 2013 ; 5 : 1099 - 1114 [ PMID : 23641699 DOI : 10 . 4155 / bio . 13 . 37 ] 14 Ormond AB , Freeman HS . Dye Sensitizers for Photodynamic Therapy . Materials ( Basel ) 2013 ; 6 : 817 - 840 [ PMID : 28809342 DOI : 10 . 3390 / ma6030817 ] 15 Shen J , Hu Y , Putt KS , Singhal S , Han H , Visscher DW , Murphy LM , Low PS . Assessment of folate receptor alpha and beta expression in selection of lung and pancreatic cancer patients for receptor targeted therapies . Oncotarget 2018 ; 9 : 4485 - 4495 [ PMID : 29435118 DOI : 10 . 18632 / oncotarget . 23321 ] 16 Vlahov IR , Leamon CP . Engineering folate - drug conjugates to target cancer : from chemistry to clinic . Bioconjug Chem 2012 ; 23 : 1357 - 1369 [ PMID : 22667324 DOI : 10 . 1021 / bc2005522 ] 17 Li PX , Mu JH , Xiao HL , Li DH . Antitumor effect of photodynamic therapy with a novel targeted photosensitizer on cervical carcinoma . Oncol Rep 2015 ; 33 : 125 - 132 [ PMID : 25376180 DOI : 10 . 3892 / or . 2014 . 3593 ] 18 Stallivieri A , Colombeau L , Jetpisbayeva G , Moussaron A , Myrzakhmetov B , Arnoux P , Acherar S , Vanderesse R , Frochot C . Folic acid conjugates with photosensitizers for cancer targeting in photodynamic therapy : Synthesis and photophysical properties . Bioorg Med Chem 2017 ; 25 : 1 - 10 [ PMID : 27769669 DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . bmc . 2016 . 10 . 004 ] 19 Gravier J , Schneider R , Frochot C , Bastogne T , Schmitt F , Didelon J , Guillemin F , Barberi - Heyob M . Improvement of meta - tetra ( hydroxyphenyl ) chlorin - like photosensitizer selectivity with folate - based targeted delivery . synthesis and in vivo delivery studies . J Med Chem 2008 ; 51 : 3867 - 3877 [ PMID : 18553957 DOI : 10 . 1021 / jm800125a ] 20 Wang J , Liu Q , Zhang Y , Shi H , Liu H , Guo W , Ma Y , Huang W , Hong Z . Folic Acid - Conjugated Pyropheophorbide a as the Photosensitizer Tested for In Vivo Targeted Photodynamic Therapy . J Pharm Sci 2017 ; 106 : 1482 - 1489 [ PMID : 28263847 DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . xphs . 2017 . 02 . 019 ] 21 Kim H , Kim MW , Jeong YI , Yang HS . Redox - Sensitive and Folate - Receptor - Mediated Targeting of Cervical Cancer Cells for Photodynamic Therapy Using Nanophotosensitizers Composed of Chlorin e6 - Conjugated β - Cyclodextrin via Diselenide Linkage . Cells 2021 ; 10 [ PMID : 34571839 DOI : 10 . 3390 / cells10092190 ] 22 Syu WJ , Yu HP , Hsu CY , Rajan YC , Hsu YH , Chang YC , Hsieh WY , Wang CH , Lai PS . Improved photodynamic cancer treatment by folate - conjugated polymeric micelles in a KB xenografted animal model . Small 2012 ; 8 : 2060 - 2069 [ PMID : 23 Aung W et al . Folate receptor - targeted NIR - PDT WJCO https : / / www . wjgnet . com 895 November 24 , 2022 Volume 13 Issue 11 22508664 DOI : 10 . 1002 / smll . 201102695 ] Li H , Jin Z , Cho S , Jeon MJ , Nguyen VD , Park JO , Park S . Folate - receptor - targeted NIR - sensitive polydopamine nanoparticles for chemo - photothermal cancer therapy . Nanotechnology 2017 ; 28 : 425101 [ PMID : 28944765 DOI : 10 . 1088 / 1361 - 6528 / aa8477 ] 24 Kato T , Jin CS , Ujiie H , Lee D , Fujino K , Wada H , Hu HP , Weersink RA , Chen J , Kaji M , Kaga K , Matsui Y , Wilson BC , Zheng G , Yasufuku K . Nanoparticle targeted folate receptor 1 - enhanced photodynamic therapy for lung cancer . Lung Cancer 2017 ; 113 : 59 - 68 [ PMID : 29110850 DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . lungcan . 2017 . 09 . 002 ] 25 Kato T , Jin CS , Lee D , Ujiie H , Fujino K , Hu HP , Wada H , Wu L , Chen J , Weersink RA , Kanno H , Hatanaka Y , Hatanaka KC , Kaga K , Matsui Y , Matsuno Y , De Perrot M , Wilson BC , Zheng G , Yasufuku K . Preclinical investigation of folate receptor - targeted nanoparticles for photodynamic therapy of malignant pleural mesothelioma . Int J Oncol 2018 ; 53 : 2034 - 2046 [ PMID : 30226590 DOI : 10 . 3892 / ijo . 2018 . 4555 ] 26 Baydoun M , Moralès O , Frochot C , Ludovic C , Leroux B , Thecua E , Ziane L , Grabarz A , Kumar A , de Schutter C , Collinet P , Azais H , Mordon S , Delhem N . Photodynamic Therapy Using a New Folate Receptor - Targeted Photosensitizer on Peritoneal Ovarian Cancer Cells Induces the Release of Extracellular Vesicles with Immunoactivating Properties . J Clin Med 2020 ; 9 [ PMID : 32326210 DOI : 10 . 3390 / jcm9041185 ] 27 Quilbe A , Moralès O , Baydoun M , Kumar A , Mustapha R , Murakami T , Leroux B , de Schutter C , Thecua E , Ziane L , Colombeau L , Frochot C , Mordon S , Delhem N . An Efficient Photodynamic Therapy Treatment for Human Pancreatic Adenocarcinoma . J Clin Med 2020 ; 9 [ PMID : 31936786 DOI : 10 . 3390 / jcm9010192 ] 28 Mussini A , Uriati E , Bianchini P , Diaspro A , Cavanna L , Abbruzzetti S , Viappiani C . Targeted photoimmunotherapy for cancer . Biomol Concepts 2022 ; 13 : 126 - 147 [ PMID : 35304984 DOI : 10 . 1515 / bmc - 2022 - 0010 ] 29 Aung W , Tsuji AB , Sugyo A , Takashima H , Yasunaga M , Matsumura Y , Higashi T . Near - infrared photoimmunotherapy of pancreatic cancer using an indocyanine green - labeled anti - tissue factor antibody . World J Gastroenterol 2018 ; 24 : 5491 - 5504 [ PMID : 30622378 DOI : 10 . 3748 / wjg . v24 . i48 . 5491 ] 30 Olivo M , Bhuvaneswari R , Lucky SS , Dendukuri N , Soo - Ping Thong P . Targeted Therapy of Cancer Using Photodynamic Therapy in Combination with Multi - faceted Anti - Tumor Modalities . Pharmaceuticals ( Basel ) 2010 ; 3 : 1507 - 1529 [ PMID : 27713315 DOI : 10 . 3390 / ph3051507 ] 31 Numasawa K , Hanaoka K , Saito N , Yamaguchi Y , Ikeno T , Echizen H , Yasunaga M , Komatsu T , Ueno T , Miura M , Nagano T , Urano Y . A Fluorescent Probe for Rapid , High - Contrast Visualization of Folate - Receptor - Expressing Tumors In Vivo . Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2020 ; 59 : 6015 - 6020 [ PMID : 31984590 DOI : 10 . 1002 / anie . 201914826 ] 32 Chen C , Ke J , Zhou XE , Yi W , Brunzelle JS , Li J , Yong EL , Xu HE , Melcher K . Structural basis for molecular recognition of folic acid by folate receptors . Nature 2013 ; 500 : 486 - 489 [ PMID : 23851396 DOI : 10 . 1038 / nature12327 ] 33 Silva EF , Schaberle FA , Monteiro CJ , Dąbrowski JM , Arnaut LG . The challenging combination of intense fluorescence and high singlet oxygen quantum yield in photostable chlorins - - a contribution to theranostics . Photochem Photobiol Sci 2013 ; 12 : 1187 - 1192 [ PMID : 23584281 DOI : 10 . 1039 / c3pp25419d ] 34 Weissleder R , Ntziachristos V . Shedding light onto live molecular targets . Nat Med 2003 ; 9 : 123 - 128 [ PMID : 12514725 DOI : 10 . 1038 / nm0103 - 123 ] 35 Scholzen T , Gerdes J . The Ki - 67 protein : from the known and the unknown . J Cell Physiol 2000 ; 182 : 311 - 322 [ PMID : 10653597 DOI : 10 . 1002 / ( SICI ) 1097 - 4652 ( 200003 ) 182 : 3 < 311 : : AID - JCP1 > 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - 9 ] 36 Sudo H , Tsuji AB , Sugyo A , Ogawa Y , Sagara M , Saga T . ZDHHC8 knockdown enhances radiosensitivity and suppresses tumor growth in a mesothelioma mouse model . Cancer Sci 2012 ; 103 : 203 - 209 [ PMID : 22017350 DOI : 10 . 1111 / j . 1349 - 7006 . 2011 . 02126 . x ] 37 Low PS , Kularatne SA . Folate - targeted therapeutic and imaging agents for cancer . Curr Opin Chem Biol 2009 ; 13 : 256 - 262 [ PMID : 19419901 DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . cbpa . 2009 . 03 . 022 ] 38 Chen B , Roskams T , de Witte PA . Antivascular tumor eradication by hypericin - mediated photodynamic therapy . Photochem Photobiol 2002 ; 76 : 509 - 513 [ PMID : 12462645 DOI : 10 . 1562 / 0031 - 8655 ( 2002 ) 076 < 0509 : atebhm > 2 . 0 . co ; 2 ] 39 Lavie G , Kaplinsky C , Toren A , Aizman I , Meruelo D , Mazur Y , Mandel M . A photodynamic pathway to apoptosis and necrosis induced by dimethyl tetrahydroxyhelianthrone and hypericin in leukaemic cells : possible relevance to photodynamic therapy . Br J Cancer 1999 ; 79 : 423 - 432 [ PMID : 10027308 DOI : 10 . 1038 / sj . bjc . 6690066 ] 40 Buytaert E , Dewaele M , Agostinis P . Molecular effectors of multiple cell death pathways initiated by photodynamic therapy . Biochim Biophys Acta 2007 ; 1776 : 86 - 107 [ PMID : 17693025 DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . bbcan . 2007 . 07 . 001 ] 41 Piette J , Volanti C , Vantieghem A , Matroule JY , Habraken Y , Agostinis P . Cell death and growth arrest in response to photodynamic therapy with membrane - bound photosensitizers . Biochem Pharmacol 2003 ; 66 : 1651 - 1659 [ PMID : 14555246 DOI : 10 . 1016 / s0006 - 2952 ( 03 ) 00539 - 2 ] 42 Benov L . Photodynamic therapy : current status and future directions . Med Princ Pract 2015 ; 24 Suppl 1 : 14 - 28 [ PMID : 24820409 DOI : 10 . 1159 / 000362416 ] 43 Hsieh YJ , Wu CC , Chang CJ , Yu JS . Subcellular localization of Photofrin determines the death phenotype of human epidermoid carcinoma A431 cells triggered by photodynamic therapy : when plasma membranes are the main targets . J Cell Physiol 2003 ; 194 : 363 - 375 [ PMID : 12548556 DOI : 10 . 1002 / jcp . 10273 ] 44 Oleinick NL , Morris RL , Belichenko I . The role of apoptosis in response to photodynamic therapy : what , where , why , and how . Photochem Photobiol Sci 2002 ; 1 : 1 - 21 [ PMID : 12659143 DOI : 10 . 1039 / b108586g ] 45 Castano AP , Demidova TN , Hamblin MR . Mechanisms in photodynamic therapy : part two - cellular signaling , cell metabolism and modes of cell death . Photodiagnosis Photodyn Ther 2005 ; 2 : 1 - 23 [ PMID : 25048553 DOI : 10 . 1016 / S1572 - 1000 ( 05 ) 00030 - X ] 46 Ascencio M , Collinet P , Farine MO , Mordon S . Protoporphyrin IX fluorescence photobleaching is a useful tool to predict the response of rat ovarian cancer following hexaminolevulinate photodynamic therapy . Lasers Surg Med 2008 ; 40 : 332 - 341 [ PMID : 18563777 DOI : 10 . 1002 / lsm . 20629 ] 47 Juarranz A , Jaén P , Sanz - Rodríguez F , Cuevas J , González S . Photodynamic therapy of cancer . Basic principles and applications . Clin Transl Oncol 2008 ; 10 : 148 - 154 [ PMID : 18321817 DOI : 10 . 1007 / s12094 - 008 - 0172 - 2 ] 48 Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc 7041 Koll Center Parkway , Suite 160 , Pleasanton , CA 94566 , USA Telephone : + 1 - 925 - 3991568 E - mail : bpgoffice @ wjgnet . com Help Desk : https : / / www . f6publishing . com / helpdesk https : / / www . wjgnet . com © 2022 Baishideng Publishing Group Inc . All rights reserved .