3D Trajectories Adopted by Coding and Regulatory DNA Elements : First - Passage Times for Genomic Interactions Joseph S . Lucas , 1 Yaojun Zhang , 2 Olga K . Dudko , 2 , * and Cornelis Murre 1 , * 1 Division of Biological Sciences , Department of Molecular Biology , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , CA 92093 , USA 2 Department of Physics and Center for Theoretical Biological Physics , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , CA 92093 , USA * Correspondence : dudko @ physics . ucsd . edu ( O . K . D . ) , murre @ biomail . ucsd . edu ( C . M . ) http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 05 . 036 SUMMARY During B lymphocyte development , immunoglobulin heavy - chain variable ( V H ) , diversity ( D H ) , and joining ( J H ) segments assemble to generate a diverse anti - gen receptor repertoire . Here , we have marked the distal V H and D H - J H - E m regions with Tet - operator binding sites and traced their 3D trajectories in pro - B cells transduced with a retrovirus encoding Tet - repressor - EGFP . We found that these elements displayed fractional Langevin motion ( fLm ) due to the viscoelastic hindrance from the surrounding network of proteins and chromatin ﬁbers . Using frac - tional Langevin dynamics modeling , we found that , with high probability , D H J H elements reach a V H elementwithin minutes . Spatialconﬁnement emerged as the dominant parameter that determined the frequency of such encounters . We propose that the viscoelastic nature of the nuclear environment causes coding elements and regulatory elements to bounce back and forth in a spring - like fashion until speciﬁc genomic interactions are established and that spatial conﬁnement of topological domains largely controls ﬁrst - passage times for genomic interactions . INTRODUCTION It is now established that chromosomes fold into territories that rarely intermingle ( Rabl , 1885 ; Boveri , 1909 ; Bolzer et al . , 2005 ) . Chromosome territories display a conﬁned geometry revealed by the presence of chromosome arms and bands ( Sedat and Manuelidis , 1978 ) . By comparing experimentally ob - tained spatial distance distributions to spatial distances derived from computer simulations of various chromatin conﬁgurations , it was predicted that the mammalian genome is organized as bundles of loops that fold into distinct domains ( Mu ¨ nkel and Lan - gowski , 1998 ; Jhunjhunwala et al . , 2008 ) . Chromosome - confor - mation - capture approaches have validated these ﬁndings at a global scale , revealing that mammalian genomes fold into clus - ters of loops that assemble into topological domains ( Lieber - man - Aiden et al . , 2009 ; Dixon et al . , 2012 ; Lin et al . , 2012 ) . On average , these domains span genomic distances comparable to the size of the immunoglobulin heavy - chain ( Igh ) locus ( 1 – 3 Mbp ) ( Dixon et al . , 2012 ; Jhunjhunwala et al . , 2008 ) . Antigen receptor assembly in lymphocytes occurs by the random rearrangement of variable ( V H ) , diversity ( D H ) , joining ( J H ) , and constant ( C H ) coding elements of the Igh locus ( Jung et al . , 2006 ) . Antigen receptor genes in pro - B cells undergo or - dered rearrangement with D H J H joining preceding V H to D H J H re - arrangement ( Alt et al . , 1984 ) . Recombinase activating genes 1 and 2 ( RAG - 1 / 2 ) regulate this process . Collectively , the V H re - gions span a genomic distance of (cid:1) 2 . 5 Mbp and fall into two distinct domains , distal and proximal V H clusters . The D H and J H elements then span a genomic distance of 50 kb and are posi - tioned immediately upstream ( (cid:1) 1 kb ) of the intronic enhancer ( E m ) . Finally , constant regions downstream of the J H elements encode the Igh isotypes ( Shimizu et al . , 1982 ; Retter et al . , 2007 ) . Given the conﬁguration of the Igh locus and distance be - tween V H , D H , and J H genomic segments , contraction brings otherwise distant genomic neighbors into close proximity for efﬁ - cient gene rearrangement . Productive V ( D ) J gene rearrangement in developing B cells permits surface expression of a pre - B cell receptor ( pre - BCR ) . Signaling through the pre - BCR suppresses RAG - 1 / 2 activ - ity , halting continued rearrangement ( Nussenzweig et al . , 1988 ; Manz et al . , 1988 ; Grawunder et al . , 1995 ) . Various mecha - nisms , including DNA methylation , chromatin remodeling , histone acetylation , germline transcription , and transcription elongation , control the temporal and lineage speciﬁcity of V ( D ) J rearrangement ( Jung et al . , 2006 ; Cedar and Bergman , 2011 ) . During developmental progression , the Igh locus undergoes large - scale topological changes ( Kosak et al . , 2002 ; Fuxa et al . , 2004 ; Hewitt et al . , 2010 ; Guo et al . , 2011a ) . In progenitor cells , the Igh alleles are sequestered at the transcriptionally repressive nuclear lamina ( Kosak et al . , 2002 ) . As progenitors enter the pre - pro - B cell stage , the locus is released from the lamina to associate with recombination and / or transcription fac - tories . Committed pro - B cells undergo large - scale conforma - tional changes in which distinct classes of anchors merge the distal and proximal V H regions into one cloud of V H regions ( Jhunjhunwala et al . , 2008 ; Medvedovic et al . , 2013 ) . The major - ity of the proximal V H regions are located within close genomic proximity to the chromatin anchor CCCTC - binding factor ( CTCF ) sites ( Degner et al . , 2009 ) . It has been proposed that Cell 158 , 339 – 352 , July 17 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 339 CTCF positions the proximal V H regions at the base of loops that orbit the D H J H elements ( Lucas et al . , 2011 ) . In addition , an insu - lator element that regulates Igh locus rearrangement has been identiﬁed ( Guo et al . , 2011b ; Degner et al . , 2011 ) . The insulator element contains two CTCF binding sites , together named CBE ( CTCF - binding elements ) . Deletion of the CBE leads to loss of ordered and lineage - speciﬁc Igh locus rearrangement involving the most proximal , but not distally located , V H regions ( Guo et al . , 2011b ) . The exact mechanism through which the CBE regulates proximal V H - D H J H joining remains to be elucidated . Here , we describe the 3D trajectories adopted by the Igh locus segments . We found that the trajectories adopted by V H and D H J H elements displayed fractional Langevin motion due to the viscoelastic hindrance from the surrounding network of proteins and chromatin ﬁbers , including the neighboring segments of the chromatin ﬁber . Using fractional Langevin dynamics modeling , we determined ﬁrst - encounter times , known as ﬁrst - passage times , for V H and D H J H elements and found that V H and D H J H elements have a high probability of reaching each other within minutes . We found that spatial conﬁnement imposed by chro - mosomal domains is the dominant factor that determines the encounter times for coding and regulatory DNA elements . Based on these observations , we propose that fLm motion causes coding ( V H , D H , and J H ) , regulatory elements ( enhancers and pro - moters ) , and double - stranded DNA breaks to bounce back and forth in a spring - like fashion until speciﬁc genomic interactions are established . Finally , we suggest that spatial conﬁnement of chromosomal domains largely controls the encounter times of long - range genomic interactions , including those involved in V H D H J H rearrangement , locus contraction , class switch recombi - nation , and DNA repair , as well as chromosomal deletions in cancers . RESULTS Inserting Tet - Operator Binding Sites Adjacent to V H and D H J H Gene Segments The immunoglobulin locus is structured into distinct domains comprised of distal V H , proximal V H , and the D H J H regions . The V H regions are associated with promoters , whereas the D H J H elements are located within close genomic proximity of the E m enhancer . To address how V H regions differ from D H J H elements in terms of chromatin motion , we inserted arrays of Tet - operator binding sites into the V H domains . Speciﬁcally , an array was inserted in the center of the distal V H region cluster , immediately downstream of V8 - 3 ( Figure 1A ) . A second array of either Tet - operator binding sites or Lac - operator binding sites was inserted between the D H J H elements and the E m enhancer ( Figures 1A and S1A available online ) . This region consists of a series of simple repeats involved in class switch recombination . Deletion of this genomic region diminishes class switch recombination ( CSR ) but does not interfere with V ( D ) J recombination ( Luby et al . , 2001 ) . Each construct was inserted into the embryonic stem ( ES ) cell genome . Brieﬂy , ES cells were transfected with a vector in which the Tet - operator binding sites were inserted adjacent to the V H or D H J H regions . Genomic DNA was isolated from transfected ES cells , and clones were examined for insertion into the Igh locus ( Figure 1B ) . ES cells carrying the insertions adjacent to the V H and D H J H regions were used to generate chimeric mice . Mice carrying insertions in the distal V H and D H J H regions readily went germline , establishing two lines of mice that either carry Tet - operator binding sites inserted into the V H or , alternatively , the D H J H regions ( Figure 1C ) . However , mice carrying arrays of Lac - operator binding sites failed to go germline ( Figures S1B and S1C ) . Upon further inspection , we found that ES cells car - rying Lac - operator binding sites display a large degree of chro - mosomal instability , possibly reﬂecting the inability of mice that carry Lac - operator binding sites in the genome to undergo germ - line transmission ( Figure S1D ) . In sum , we generated mice that carry tandem arrays of Tet - operator sites either within the V H cluster or in close genomic proximity to the D H J H region . Characterization of Mice Carrying Arrays of TET - Operator Binding Sites Inserted into the Igh Locus To ensure that the insertion of arrays of TetO binding sites into the Igh locus did not interfere with B cell development , we analyzed the B lineage compartment in wild - type and mutant TetO mice . Bone marrow cells derived from 6 - week - old mice were isolated , analyzed for cellularity , and stained for the expres - sion of CD19 and B220 using ﬂow cytometry . Mice containing Tet - operator binding sites inserted adjacent to either the D H J H segments or the distal V H segments displayed similar numbers of CD19 and B220 double - positive cells as compared to wild - type mice ( Figure 2A ) . Furthermore , the proportions of pro - B versus pre - B cells were similar in the TetO mice as compared to wild - type mice ( Figure 2B ) . These data indicate that insertion of arrays of Tet - operator binding sites at these locations did not interfere with normal production of developing B cells . To determine whether B lineage cells carrying insertions of ar - rays of TetO binding sites in the Igh locus undergo efﬁcient V ( D ) J recombination , DNA was isolated from pro - B cells derived from wild - type , D H J H - TetO , and V H - TetO region mice , as well as recombination - activating gene ( RAG ) - deﬁcient mice . D H J H joints were readily detectable at equal levels in wild - type , D H J H - TetO , and V H - TetO , but not in control RAG - deﬁcient pro - B cells ( Fig - ure 2C ) . Similarly , the abundance of V H D H J H joints involving the distal V H J558 cluster was not affected by the insertion of TetO sites ( Figure 2C ) . In sum , these data indicate that insertion of ar - rays of Tet - operator binding sites does not affect the develop - mental progression of early B cell progenitors and Igh locus rearrangements . Generation of TetR - EGFP Expression Vectors Previous studies have utilized TetR - EYFP fusion proteins to track DNA motion in bacteria ( Lau et al . , 2003 ) . Our initial attempts to detect TetR - EYFP mediated ﬂuorescence in pro - B cells failed , plausibly caused by differences in codon usage in bacterial versus mammalian cells . However , a Tet repressor optimized for mammalian codon usage has been utilized in studies to allow for tightly regulated control of gene expression ( Urlinger et al . , 2000 ) . Hence , we fused the DNA - binding domain of the modiﬁed Tet repressor to enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein ( EGFP ) ( TetR - EGFP ) , along with a nuclear localization signal ( PKKKRKV ) . 340 Cell 158 , 339 – 352 , July 17 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . To optimize the signal - to - noise ratio of TetR - EGFP - medi - ated ﬂuorescence when bound to DNA , we generated and tested multiple vectors . We modiﬁed expression levels using three distinct strategies : ( 1 ) different promoters were inserted upstream of the TetR - EGFP fusion protein ; ( 2 ) TetR - EGFP expression was initiated from an internal ribosomal entry site ( IRES ) rather than directly from a promoter ; ( 3 ) and the Kozak sequence located upstream of the translation initiation site was mutated to dampen expression levels ( Figure 3A ) . B line - age cells were transduced with virus expressing TetR - EGFP driven from either the PGK promoter ( MinV and LMP vectors ) or the Gag promoter ( PCS Ret vector ) and containing either wild - type or mutated forms of the Kozak sequence ( Figure 3A ) . Cells were examined for TetR - EGFP expression using ﬂow cytometry 2 days posttransduction ( Figure 3B ) . Relatively low but detectable levels of TetR - EGFP expression were achieved using the MinV vector , as well as the LMP vector carrying a mutant Kozak sequence , resulting in optimal signal - to - noise ratios of TetR - EGFP - mediated ﬂuorescence upon bind - ing to the Tet operator sites ( Figure 3C ) . The LMP construct containing the mutant Kozak sequence displayed a more uni - form pattern of TetR - EGFP expression ; thus , we utilized this vector for subsequent monitoring of V H and D H J H motion in pro - B cells . Figure 1 . Generation of Igh - TetO - Labeled Mice ( A ) Schematic of the Igh locus showing V H , D H , J H , and C H segments , the intronic enhancer ( E m ) , and switch region repeats ( S m ) . Dashed boxes show genomic regions that were replaced by arrays containing 240 copies of the Tet operator . Southern blot screening strategies are indicated using HindIII ( H ) or KpnI ( K ) restriction enzymes . Blue arrows show positions of genotyping primers . ( B ) Southern blot of embryonic stem cell clones positive for integration of the TetO arrays positioned adjacent to either the V H or D H J H region of the Igh locus . ( C ) PCR - based genotyping results of mice harboring TetO arrays on both ( + / + ) , one ( + / (cid:3) ) , or neither ( (cid:3) / (cid:3) ) alleles of the Igh locus . See also Figure S1 and Table S3 . Cell 158 , 339 – 352 , July 17 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 341 Tracking Igh Locus Motion in B Lineage Cells To describe the trajectories adopted by Igh regions in physical terms , we generated strains of mice carrying TetO binding sites on both alleles . B220 - positive pro - B cells from the bone marrow of V H - TetO and D H J H - TetO mice were cultured in the presence of IL7 and SCF for 5 days and transduced with virus expressing TetR - EGFP . TetO pro - B cells were immobilized by adherence onto poly - lysine - coated optical bottom dishes and imaged 2 days posttransduction ( Figure 3C and Movies S1 and S2 ) . One set of z stacks was acquired every 2 s for 400 s ( 200 time points ) or every 40 s for 4 , 000 s ( 100 time points ) . The centers of mass of the TetO signals were determined for each time point . As a control to account for error due to cell motion , TetO pro - B cells wereﬁxed with formaldehyde to prevent motion andlabeled with Alexa - 488 - conjugated anti - GFP antibodies prior to imaging . Despite attachment of cells with poly - lysine , a signiﬁcant amount of cell motion , primarily cell or nuclear rotation , was observed ( data not shown ) . To eliminate the effect of such mo - tion in the analysis of loci trajectories , the mean squared displacement ( MSD ) was determined by measuring the mean squared change in distance separating the two alleles divided by two , rather than the change in the displacement of each allele . Measured this way , the radial MSD described motion in radial di - rection ( distance between two alleles ) only , thus eliminating con - founding effects of cell movement and rotation ( Vazquez et al . , 2001 ; Cabal et al . , 2006 ) . As expected , the radial MSD values varied within the developing pro - B cell population , reﬂecting dif - ferences in cell cycle , cell size , and other intrinsic variations within the population ( Figure 4B ) . We note that , during imaging in a subset of cells , we observed substantial changes in nuclear shape that resulted in large - scale movements of chromosomes and contribute to the displacement of the Igh locus gene seg - ments . The average radial MSD of pro - B cells for both the V H - TetO and D H J H - TetO alleles were plotted as a function of the time interval t for the values of t between 2 and 2 , 000 s ( Fig - ure 4C ) . As expected , Igh alleles in ﬁxed cells did not show sig - niﬁcant spatial displacement ( Figure 4C ) . Anomalous diffusion coefﬁcients ( D ) and scaling exponents ( a ) were extracted ( radial Figure 2 . Characterization of Igh - TetO - Labeled Mice ( A ) Femoral bone marrow cells from wild - type , D H J H - TetO , and V H - TetO mice stained with B cell markers CD19 and B220 . Bottom shows CD19 + B220 + cell numbers as a fraction of live cells . ( B ) Bone marrow cells stained for CD25 and C - kit . The lineage negative ( CD11b , Gr1 , and Ter119 ) and B220 + CD19 + population is shown . ( C ) D H - J H and V HJ558 - D H J H rearrangements in B220 + cells isolated from wild - type , D H J H - TetO , V H - TetO , and Rag (cid:3) / (cid:3) mice analyzed by Southern blotting using probes corresponding to V H and D H J H gene segments . See also Table S3 . 342 Cell 158 , 339 – 352 , July 17 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . MSD = 2D t a ) for time intervals between 10 and 100 and 40 and 200 s ( Figure 4C and Table S1 ) . For wild - type TetO pro - B cells ( 40 – 200 s ) , we found that V H - TetO motion was character - ized by an anomalous diffusion coefﬁcient ( D ) of 2 . 0 3 10 (cid:3) 3 m m 2 / s 0 . 5 and a subdiffusive ( i . e . , less than unity ) scaling exponent ( a ) of 0 . 49 . For D H J H - TetO motion , we found an anomalous diffu - sion coefﬁcient of 2 . 4 3 10 (cid:3) 3 m m 2 / s 0 . 5 and subdiffusive scaling exponent of 0 . 52 ( Table S1 ) . These data indicate that both V H and D H J H elements in pro - B cells undergo subdiffusive motion with very similar anomalous diffusion coefﬁcients and subdiffu - sive scaling exponents . V H , D H J H , and Enhancer Elements Display Fractional Langevin Motion The observations described above show that the trajectories adopted by V H - and D H J H - TetO segments are associated with an anomalous diffusive motion . Speciﬁcally , the segments are shown to undergo subdiffusion , a process characterized by a nonlinear relationship between the MSD and the elapsed time ( MSD = 2D t a with a < 1 ) , in contrast to normal diffusion in which this relationship is linear ( i . e . , a = 1 ) . What is the underlying mech - anism of the observed subdiffusive motion ? In the crowded cellular environment , several possible molecular mechanisms may give rise to subdiffusive motion of a chromosomal segment ( or any microscopic particle ) . First , when the diffusive motion of the particle is interspersed by pauses due to the encounters with binding partners , a broad distribution of pausing times makes the particle’s motion subdiffusive , as described by the contin - uous time random walk ( CTRW ) model ( Saxton , 1996 ; Montroll and Weiss , 1965 ) . Second , when the particle encounters obsta - cles present at high concentration , the particle’s motion be - comes subdiffusive , as described by the obstructed diffusion Figure 3 . Generation and Optimization of TetR - EGFP Expression ( A ) ConstructionofTetR - EGFP - expressingretroviralvectors . TheNLS - TetR - EGFP codingsequencewasclonedintothreedistinctretroviralvectors , MinV , PCS - Ret , and LMP . PGK or Gag promoters were used to drive EGFP expression in each of the vectors . Each construct was made using either a wild - type or mutant Kozak sequence . In the MinV and LMP vectors , the NLS - TetR - EGFP was inserted 3 0 of an IRES . ( B ) D H J H - TetOB lineage cellswere infected withNLS - TetR - EGFP - expressingretrovirus , and expression levelswere monitored using ﬂowcytometry . Green bars show approximate expression levels leading to high signal to noise ratios of TetO - EGFP - mediated ﬂuorescence . ( C ) D H J H - TetOB lineage cells infectedwithNLS - TetR - EGFPinLMPwithamutantKozak sequence and visualizedby ﬂuorescence microscopy . The dotsineach cell show both Igh alleles . See also Movies S1 and S2 . Cell 158 , 339 – 352 , July 17 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 343 ( OD ) model ( Saxton , 1994 ) . Third , a particle moving through a dense network of proteins and nucleic acids experiences a response from the surroundings that is characterized by both viscous and elastic components and , hence , is s alled visco - elastic response . The viscoelastic response predisposes the particle to bounce back toward its previous position in a spring - like fashion ; these reversals , or negative correlations ( ‘‘memory’’ ) in the particle’s movements lead to subdiffusive Figure 4 . A Viscoelastic Environment Dominates Igh D H J H and V H Motion in Pro - B Cells ( A ) Model depicting fractional Langevin motion across the Igh locus . The Igh locus is organized as bundles of loops , with CTCF ( purple ) positioning the V H segments ( red ) in orbit around the D H J H region ( blue ) . Enlarged region depicts the viscoelastic properties of the chromatin ﬁber caused by interactions with neighboring networks of nucleic acids and proteins , as well as restoring forces within the ﬁber itself ( shown as springs ) . ( B ) Time - averaged radial MSD plotted as a function of time lag ( t ) for the D H J H region in live B220 + B lineage cells isolated from TetO mice . Number of cells ( N ) analyzed is indicated . Cells were imaged once every 2 s for 400 s ( top ) or once every 40 s for 4 , 000 s ( bottom ) . ( C ) Ensemble - andtime - averagedradialMSDplottedasafunctionoftimelag ( t ) fortheV H andD H J H regionsinliveB220 + Blineagecells , aswellasformaldehyde - ﬁxed pro - B cells . Radial MSD is shown for t up to one half of total imaging time . Shaded areas represent SEM . Dashed lines indicate a subdiffusive scaling exponent ( a ) of 0 . 5 . ( D ) Velocity autocorrelation analysis of D H J H regions in live B220 + B lineage cells ( left ) . Average velocity was calculated over discretization intervals ( d ) ranging from2to200sin2sintervals ( top ) or40 – 2 , 000sin40sintervals ( bottom ) . Velocity autocorrelation curvesfordifferentvaluesof d , plottedagainstarescaledtime lag ( t / d ) ( right ) . The color scheme represents the values of d from small ( blue ) to large ( red ) . See also Figures S2 and S3 and Tables S1 and S2 . 344 Cell 158 , 339 – 352 , July 17 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . behavior and can be described by fractional Langevin motion ( fLm ) ( Lutz , 2001 ) . Furthermore , when the ‘‘particle’’ is a chromo - somal segment embedded in a chromatin ﬁber , the rest of the ﬁ - ber itself serves as the viscoelastic environment by exerting restoring forces on the segment . The discussed three mecha - nisms of random motion may contain contributions from nonthermal active ﬂuctuations , which effectively modify the diffusion coefﬁcient in the corresponding models . Despite the distinct origins of these three mechanisms , they can all lead to the subdiffusive relationship between MSD and elapsed time . Therefore , we applied additional diagnostic measures to identify the mechanism for the observed subdiffusion of V H and D H J H - TetO segments . In order to identify the mechanism of subdiffusive motion among the discussed candidate mechanisms ( CTRW , OD , and fLm ) , we compared the time - averaged radial MSD of individual trajectories to the ensemble - averaged radial MSD . Both the time - and ensemble - averaged MSD yielded essentially the same scaling exponent , namely a z 0 . 5 , suggesting that the tra - jectories are ergodic ( i . e . , they display the same time - averaged and ensemble - averaged properties ) , which , in turn , supports an OD or fLm , but not CTRW mechanism that underpins the subdiffusion process observed here . The observed spread of the time - averaged radial MSD for individual trajectories may be attributed to the limited time over which the trajectories were measured , as well as to the inherent heterogeneity of the cells . To obtain a more robust measure of the subdiffusive behavior , we calculated the average velocity autocorrelation function , C d v ( t ) . This function indicates to what degree the average veloc - ity over a time interval d is correlated with the average velocity over another time interval d that is separated by t from the ﬁrst one . We analyze the correlation properties of the average veloc - ity rather than the instantaneous velocity because experimental measurements are performed at ﬁnite time intervals and thus naturally yield the velocity averaged over a time interval . C d v ( t ) was calculated for different values of d and plotted as a function of the time lag t ( Figure 4D , left , and Figure S2 ) . For all d , C d v ( t ) dipped into negative values before decaying to zero . The observed negative values of C d v ( t ) , which are indicative of nega - tive correlations , cannot be explained by CTRW mechanism , which does not lead to correlations . A negative dip in C d v ( t ) can arise in several contexts : ( 1 ) OD , ( 2 ) fLm , and ( 3 ) localization errors in noisy images or ( 4 ) an extreme spatial conﬁnement . To resolve the remaining ambiguity in the origin of the negative dips in the average velocity autocorrelation , we analyzed the behavior of C d v ( t ) as a function of the ratio ( t / d ) of the two temporal param - eters : the time lag ( t ) and the time interval ( d ) over which the velocity was calculated . Remarkably , when plotted against the rescaled time lag , t / d , all of the C d v ( t ) curves collapsed onto a single master curve , indicating that the motion of V H and D H J H segments possesses the property of self - similarity , or similar patterns at different temporal scales ( Figure 4D , right , and Fig - ure S2 ) . Such a collapse is not expected to occur for negative correlations in the average velocity caused by OD , localization errors , or by an extreme conﬁnement but rather is a signature of a fLm , or viscoelastic , mechanism ( Weber et al . , 2010 , 2012 ) . The observed negative values of C d v ( t ) thus indicate a negative correlation ( a reversal ) in velocity of the Igh locus segment caused by the elastic component ( ‘‘push back’’ ) of the viscoelastic response within the cellular environment . As V H and D H J H regions of the chromatin ﬁber collide with a dense network of nucleic acids and proteins , as well as stretch and compress the neighboring segments of the ﬁber , motion in one direction is likely to be followed by motion in the opposite direc - tion—i . e . , the network pushes back ( Figure 4A ) . We conclude that the viscoelastic environment within topological domains is in large part responsible for the subdiffusive motion observed for V H and D H J H coding , as well as regulatory elements such as enhancers and promoters in B lineage cells . 3D Trajectories Adopted by the Immunoglobulin D H J H Segments in B Cell Progenitors Recent studies have identiﬁed an insulator , named the CBE element , acting to suppress V H D H J H gene rearrangement involving the most proximal V H region cluster prior to the forma - tion of a D H J H joint ( Guo et al . , 2011b ; Degner et al . , 2011 ) . To determine whether the CBE affects D H J H motion , D H J H - TetO mice were crossed with RAG - deﬁcient mice . Pro - B cells , derived from the bone marrow of D H J H - TetO RAG - deﬁcient mice , were cultured and transduced with virus expressing TetR - EGFP . D H J H motion was monitored as described above ( Figure 5A ) . As expected , the subdiffusive scaling exponents ( a ) for D H J H motion in RAG - deﬁcient TetO and wild - type TetO pro - B cells were equivalent ( a z 0 . 5 ) ( Table S1 ) . Consistent with these observations , the velocity autocorrelation functions for the D H J H region were nearly identical for wild - type and RAG - deﬁcient TetO pro - B cells ( Figure 5B ) . The apparent diffusion coefﬁcient associated with D H J H motion increased only slightly ( 2 . 4 3 10 (cid:3) 3 versus 1 . 8 3 10 (cid:3) 3 m m 2 / s 0 . 5 ) in wild - type TetO pro - B cells as compared to RAG - deﬁcient TetO pro - B cells ( Figure 5A and Table S1 ) . Taken together , these observations indicate that the CBE insulator does not substantially modulate the diffu - sion coefﬁcients and subdiffusive scaling exponents associated with D H J H elements . Simulating V H and D H J H Encounters To investigate further the underlying mechanisms of motions associated with coding and regulatory DNA elements , V H and D H J H dynamics were modeled as an overdamped fractional Lan - gevin motion in a conﬁned sphere of radius R ( Jeon and Metzler , 2010 ) . The sphere mimicked the conﬁnement imposed by a chromosomal domain , as the majority of genomic interactions have been demonstrated to occur within domains ( Lieberman - Aiden et al . , 2009 ; Dixon et al . , 2012 ; Lin et al . , 2012 ) . The initial positions of the V H and D H J H segments were chosen by randomly drawing from the steady - state distribution ( Figure 6D ) . The correlated fractional Gaussian noise was generated using the circulant embedding method as described previously ( Die - trich and Newsam , 1997 ) . The increment for each of the x , y , and z components of motion was calculated and applied at each time step . Reﬂective boundary condition was applied whenever the diffusing segments were found to be outside of the conﬁnement volume . Parameters in the simulations were chosen such that the anomalous diffusion coefﬁcient D = 2 . 4 3 10 (cid:3) 3 m m 2 / s 0 . 5 and the scaling exponent a = 0 . 5 of the simulated motion match those extracted from the radial MSD of our Cell 158 , 339 – 352 , July 17 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 345 experimental measurements . Two values for the conﬁnement radius were used . The value R = 0 . 5 m m was estimated based on previous 3D FISH measurements ( Jhunjhunwala et al . , 2008 ) of spatial distances between the D H J H and V H elements by matching the steady - state distribution of distances between the D H J H and V H gene segments in simulations ( Figure 6D ) with that measured by 3D - FISH in B lineage cells . The value R = 1 m m was estimated based on the best match between the radial MSD from the simulations and those obtained experimentally in the present study ( Figure 6B ) . Once V H and D H J H segments were within interaction distance r 0 , the corresponding ﬁrst - passage time was recorded . The interaction distance r 0 was chosen to be 30 nm based on the dimensions of the chromatin ﬁber . Sim - ulations were repeated 1 , 000 times ( Figure 6A and Movies S3 and S4 ) . To validate the simulations beyond ensuring a good match be - tween the experimental and simulated MSD and between the experimental and simulated distributions of distances , we calcu - lated the velocity autocorrelation functions ( with R = 1 m m ) derived from the simulated trajectories . When calculated for different values of the discretization interval ( d ) and plotted against the rescaled time lag ( t / d ) , the velocity autocorrelation curves collapsed onto a master curve ( Figure 6C ) , as did their experimentally determined counterparts ( Figure 4D , right ) . Collectively , these results indicate that the simulations per - formed with the experimentally determined physical parameters of V H and D H J H elements reproduce , at the quantitative level , the key aspects of the anomalous diffusion observed in developing B cells . First - Passage Times for V H and D H J H Encounters In the murine bone marrow , pro - B cells proliferate with a turnover rate of (cid:1) 1 to 2 days . Hence , V H - D H J H encounters need to occur within this time , which raises the following question : how long Figure 5 . 3D Trajectories Adopted by the Immunoglobulin Heavy - Chain Locus Motion in Wild - Type and Rag - Deﬁcient Pro - B Cells ( A ) Ensemble - and time - averaged radial MSD plotted as a function of time lag ( t ) for the D H J H regions in live B220 + B lineage cells derived from wild - type and Rag (cid:3) / (cid:3) mice . Cells were imaged once every 2 s for 400 s ( top ) or once every 40 s for 4 , 000 s ( bottom ) . Radial MSD is shown for t up to one half of total imaging time . Shaded areas represent SEM . ( B ) VelocityautocorrelationanalysisofD H J H regionsinwild - typeand Rag (cid:3) / (cid:3) cells . Velocitywascalculatedovertimeintervals ( d ) rangingfrom2to40sin2ssteps ( top ) or 40 – 800 s in 40 s steps ( bottom ) . 346 Cell 158 , 339 – 352 , July 17 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . does it take for D H J H elements to reach a V H region ? This question can be addressed via fractional Langevin dynamics modeling using experimentally determined physical parameters of V H and D H J H elements . We initiated the simulation using a single pair of D H J H and V H elements and a conﬁnement radius of 1 m m . We found that it takes (cid:1) 30 min on average ( Figure 7A ) for a D H J H and a V H element to ﬁnd each other . The mean ﬁrst - passage time decreased more than 100 - fold , to 12 s , when a single copy of D H J H and 100 copies of V H elements were present ( Figure 7B ) . Prior to V ( D ) J recombination , the V H and D H J H regions are con - strained to distinct topological domains ( Jhunjhunwala et al . , 2008 ) . In pro - B cells , at the onset of recombination , locus compaction results in the merging of these domains ( Figure 7C ) . Such events bring into question how the conﬁnement of DNA within topological domains affects ﬁrst - passage times . To deter - mine to what degree the encounter time is affected by conﬁne - ment , we repeated the simulations but now using a conﬁnement radius of 0 . 5 m m ( Figures 7E and 7F ) , i . e . , half the size of that used in Figures 7A and 7B . Notably , decreasing the radius of conﬁne - ment 2 - fold decreased the mean ﬁrst - passage time for V H and D H J H elements by 16 - fold . Simple dimensional analysis allows us to determine the gen - eral scaling of the encounter time with the conﬁnement radius Figure 6 . Modeling Anomalous Diffusion of V H and D H J H Elements as Fractional Langevin Motion ( A ) V H andD H J H segmentsconﬁnedinasphereofradiusRandsubjecttofractionalLangevinmotionusingexperimentallyobtainedvaluesofanomalousdiffusion coefﬁcient ( D ) and subdiffusive exponent ( a ) as physical parameters . ( B ) Radial MSD obtained from simulated ( D = 0 . 0024 m m 2 / s 0 . 5 and R = 1 m m ) and experimental measurements . Black symbols are calculated from simulated trajectories . Gray symbols are D H J H MSD calculated from measurements in wild - type pro - B cells . ( C ) Velocityautocorrelationfunctionsgeneratedfromsimulationswithvelocitycomputedfordifferentvaluesofthediscretizationinterval ( d ) exhibitacollapseona master curve upon rescaling of the time lag t by d , as do their experimentally determined counterparts ( Figure 4D ) . ( D ) The steady - state distribution of distances between a D H J H and a V H segment generated from the simulation ( D = 0 . 0024 m m 2 / s 0 . 5 and R = 0 . 5 m m ) agrees well with the experimental distribution of spatial distances previously measured in pro - B cells by 3D - FISH ( Jhunjhunwala et al . , 2008 ) . See also Movies S3 and S4 . Cell 158 , 339 – 352 , July 17 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 347 and the diffusion coefﬁcient . The dimensions of MSD are [ MSD ] = [ Length ] 2 = [ D ] [ Time ] a ( we use the standard notations [ . ] for ‘‘the dimensions of . ’’ ) , and hence [ Time ] = [ Length ] 2 / a [ D ] (cid:3) 1 / a . Because the relevant parameter with the dimensions of length in this ﬁrst - passage time problem is the radius of conﬁne - ment ( R ) ( Condamin et al . , 2007 ) , we ﬁnd that the interaction fre - quency ( equal to the inverse of the mean ﬁrst - passage time ) scales with the conﬁnement radius as R (cid:3) 2 / a and with the diffu - sion coefﬁcient as D 1 / a . Applying this scaling with the value of a extracted from the radial MSD plot ( Figure 4C ) , we ﬁnd that , upon decreasing the radius of conﬁnement 2 - fold , the interaction frequency is predicted to increase 2 4 = 16 - fold . In contrast , increasing the value of the diffusion coefﬁcient 2 - fold leads to a merely 2 2 = 4 - fold increase in the interaction frequency . Both of these predictions are consistent with the observations from our simulations . We conclude that the size of conﬁnement largely determines the frequency of interactions between coding ele - ments ( such as V H and D H J H regions ) and regulatory elements ( enhancers and promoters ) . Recent observations have suggested that the V H regions lie in an orbit around a cavity containing the D H J H elements ( Lucas et al . , 2011 ) . We modiﬁed the simulations such that V H regions were distributed on the surface of an imaginary sphere with the D H J H elements positioned in the center ( Figure 7D ) . The mean ﬁrst - passage time for V H and D H J H elements was only modestly affected as compared to the initial random conﬁguration , Figure 7 . First - Passage Time Distributions for V H and D H J H Segments Undergoing Fractional Langevin Motion ( A ) Simulating the behavior of a single pair of V H and D H J H segments in aspatial conﬁnement of radius 1 . 0 m m and with initial positions randomly chosen from the distribution shown in Figure 6D generated after the system is given enough time to reach the steady state . Motion of V H and D H J H segments as parts of the polymer chain and constrained by anchors is modeled as fractional Langevin motion in a conﬁned sphere of radius R . The distribution of ﬁrst passage times , the times for the D H J H segment to come within 30 nm of the V H segment , is shown . Red arrow indicates mean ﬁrst passage time ( MFPT ) . ( B ) First - passage time distributions for simulated motion of 100 V H and one D H J H segment in a conﬁnement of radius 1 . 0 m m . ( C ) Left panels show 3D FISH studies revealing the organization and locus contraction of the Igh locus in pre - pro - B and pro - B cells . In pre - pro - B cells , V H and D H J H segments are physically separated into distinct topological domains . Upon differentiating into committed pro - B cells , the proximal and distal V H regions merge . Right panel indicates the entire Igh locus labeled by overlapping ﬂuorescently labeled BAC probes . Note distinct topological domains in pre - pro - B and pro - B cells ( adapted from Jhunjhunwala et al . , 2008 ) . ( D ) Simulation as performed in ( B ) but with V H segments distributed on a sphere with the D H J H segment in the center . ( E and F ) Simulations as performed in ( A ) and ( B ) but with a conﬁnement of radius 0 . 5 m m . 348 Cell 158 , 339 – 352 , July 17 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . although the different initial conditions changed the distribution of ﬁrst - passage times ( Figures 7B and 7D ) . Taken together , this analysis indicates that conﬁnement size is a dominant factor for ﬁrst - passage times of genomic elements and that V H and D H J H elements have a high probability to reach each other within minutes in developing B cells . DISCUSSION Although our insights into the folding patterns of the genome are still rudimentary , recent studies have suggested a highly ordered Igh locus conﬁguration . It has been proposed that anchors such as CTCF act to spatially sequester the V H regions , positioning them ‘‘in orbit’’ around a cavity that contains a D H J H element ( Figure 4A ) ( Lucas et al . , 2011 ) . Such a rosette structure would help to ensure that all of the various V H segments and D H J H seg - ments have the opportunity to ﬁnd each other in a V ( D ) J recom - bination center . Here , we found that the D H J H and V H elements undergo fractional Langevin motion indicative of a viscoelastic environment likely caused by a surrounding network of V H and D H J H DNA segments , neighboring DNA segments , tethers such as CTCF , and other factors associated with the chromatin ﬁber . The value of the scaling exponent a z 0 . 5 in B cells ap - proached those observed for chromosomes in other species , including multiple bacterial species , yeast , and human cells ( Table S2 ) ( Cabal et al . , 2006 ; Bronstein et al . , 2009 ; Weber et al . , 2010 ) . We suggest that fractional Langevin motion pre - vents rapid displacement of the D H J H elements away from the V H region cluster . Thus , fractional Langevin motion may provide a physiological advantage : D H J H regions would be bouncing back and forth against genomic elements across the Igh locus ﬁber until they pair with nearby V H regions in transit ( Figure 4A ) . The process of V ( D ) J gene rearrangement is tightly regulated . Recent studies have demonstrated that ordered rearrangement involving proximal V H regions is enforced by an insulator element ( CBE ) , which separates the V H regions from the D H J H regions ( Guo et al . , 2011b ) . Our measurements revealed only modest dif - ferences in D H J H motion in B cell progenitors that are arrested prior to the onset of D H J H rearrangements versus pro - B cells that carry D H J H joints . How then is proximal V H - D H J H recombina - tion regulated ? It is conceivable that the region containing the CBE insulator element assumes a somewhat stiff conformation or a rod - like structure . Consequently , the proximal V H and D H J H regions and the intervening rod - like structure may display fractional Langevin motion like any other genomic region , but because the CBE region may not be able to fold back upon itself , V H and D H J H interactions would be rare . Alternatively , as sug - gested previously , the CBE may act to form a loop with other CTCF binding sites located downstream of the Igh locus to sequester the D H J H regions away from the V H region cluster or by suppressing antisense transcription across the proximal V H domains preventing proximal V H - D H rearrangement prior to the formation of D H J H joints ( Guo et al . , 2011b ; Degner et al . , 2011 ) . Future studies involving the tracking of D H J H motion in relation to distal V H and proximal V H motion should distinguish between these possibilities . The simulation results indicate that spatial conﬁnement is the dominant factor that regulates the probability of interaction be - tween V H and D H J H elements . Simple dimensional analysis sug - gests that the encounter frequency scales with the conﬁnement radius as R (cid:3) 2 / a and with the diffusion coefﬁcient as D 1 / a . For the value of a ( 0 . 5 ) determined from our measurements , this means that decreasing the radius of conﬁnement 2 - fold increases the interaction frequency 16 - fold , whereas , in contrast , increasing the value of the diffusion coefﬁcient 2 - fold increases interaction frequency merely 4 - fold . We conclude that the degree of conﬁnement largely determines the frequency of interactions between coding elements ( such as V H and D H J H regions ) and regulatory elements ( enhancers and promoters ) . These ﬁndings have implications relating to chromosomal organization , gene regulation , V ( D ) J recombination , class switch recombination , chromosomal translocations , and chromosomal deletions . Chromosome conformation capture studies have demon - strated that the large majority of genomic interactions occur within chromatin domains ( 1 – 3 Mbp ) and with much lower fre - quencies between domains ( Lieberman - Aiden et al . , 2009 ; Dixon et al . , 2012 ; Lin et al . , 2012 ) . Thus , the organization of the genome into topological domains constrains the 3D trajec - tories that are adopted by chromatin ﬁber . We suggest that the spatially conﬁned geometry is also maintained by the visco - elastic properties of mammalian nuclei , suppressing the rapid diffusion of coding and regulatory DNA elements between chro - matin domains . However , topological domains are not static during developmental progression . For example , during the tran - sition from the pre - pro - B to the pro - B cell stage , the genome un - dergoes large - scale changes in domain organization ( Lin et al . , 2012 ) . Prominent among these are the antigen receptor loci . Speciﬁcally , the distal V H and proximal V H regions merge during the transition from the multipotent progenitor to the committed pro - B cell stage ( Kosak et al . , 2002 ; Fuxa et al . , 2004 ; Jhunjhun - wala et al . , 2008 ) . The Ig k locus also undergoes locus contrac - tion in B cell progenitors ( M . C . van Zelm , S . Jhunjhunwala , and C . M . , unpublished data ) . Similarly , the TCR a and b loci contract in cells prone to undergo TCR rearrangement ( Rolda´n et al . , 2005 ) . How does locus contraction affect DNA recombination ? The simulation results indicate that topological domains merge or segregate during developmental progression to modulate the encounter times of genomic elements localized within topo - logical domains . The merging of topological domains during developmental progression is not restricted to antigen receptor loci . An important example involves the EBF1 locus , which , dur - ing the transition from the pre - pro - B to the pro - B cell stage , dis - sociates from the nuclear lamina to merge with transcriptionally active domains and may allow enhancers and promoters located across this vast locus to interact with high frequencies , ultimately leading to the induction of a B - lineage - speciﬁc program of gene expression ( Lin et al . , 2012 ) . In sum , we suggest that the merging or segregation of topological chromatin domains affects the encounter times of V H and D H J H or promoter and enhancer elements to permit rapid changes in gene expression during developmental progression . Somatic recombination during B cell development is not restricted to V ( D ) J recombination . In the peripheral lymphoid or - gans , CSR changes the expression of immunoglobulins from one isotype to another . In activated B cells , switch regions join after double - stranded breaks ( DSBs ) are generated ( Zarrin et al . , Cell 158 , 339 – 352 , July 17 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 349 2007 ) . It has been suggested that DSBs may rapidly diffuse to promote efﬁcient synapse formation and class switch recombi - nation and that topological conﬁnement may play a key role in this process ( Alt et al . , 2013 ; Gostissa et al . , 2014 ) . Our simula - tion results provide support for such a model . In conjunction with previous spatial distance measurements across the switch regions , we predict that DSBs generated across the switch regions reach each other within minutes and that topological conﬁnement is the dominant factor in establishing rapid ﬁrst - passage times ( Jhunjhunwala et al . , 2008 ) . Our ﬁndings also have implications for chromosomal deletions that frequently are associated with cancer . Intrachromosomal interstitial deletions associated with illegitimate rearrangements involving nonantigen receptor genes and cryptic recombination signal sequences are frequently linked with lymphoid cancers ( Onozawa and Aplan , 2012 ) . Recent studies revealed that prox - imity of two DSBs is the critical factor in determining the prefer - ences for DSBs translocating in cis ( Klein et al . , 2011 ; Chiarle et al . , 2011 , Zhang et al . , 2012 ; Alt et al . , 2013 ) . These observa - tions are consistent with the simulation results presented here indicating that spatial conﬁnement is a dominant component in controlling the encounter times of long - range genomic interac - tions . Hence , we suggest that the predisposition of two DSBs to join intrachromosomally might lead to the development of T - ALL and other types of lymphoid malignancies if the chromatin topology associated with such breaks would permit rapid ﬁrst - passage times ( Alt et al . , 2013 ; Bunting and Nussenzweig , 2013 ) . Finally , we note that rapid ﬁrst - passage times of paired DSBs may similarly underpin the physical mechanism by which chromosomal deletions are generated in a wide variety of malig - nancies ( Solimini et al . , 2012 ; Beroukhim et al . , 2010 ) . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES TetR - EGFP Constructs and Retrovirus Production A TetR - EGFP construct was created by fusing a TetR ( tTA2S ) with enhanced GFP ( EGFP ) . tTA2S has been previously described ( Urlinger et al . , 2000 ) . A nuclear localization signal ( PKKKRKV ) was added to the 5 0 end by PCR . EGFP vectors are available from Clontech . An XbaI site was added to the 3 0 end of tTA2S and the 5 0 end of EGFP for fusion . Finally , either a wild - type ( gccaccATG ) or mutant ( gcctccATG ) Kozak sequence was added along with restriction sites for cloning into the MinV , PCS Ret , or LMP vectors . LMP is available from Thermo Scientiﬁc , and the TetR - EGFP was inserted in place of the vector’s EGFP cassette . MinV and PCS Ret have been previously described ( Hawley et al . , 1996 ; Sayegh et al . , 2003 ) . Primers used are listed in Table S3 . Complete vectors were puriﬁed by CsCl gradient and transfected into 293T cells along with retroviral packaging vectors by calcium phosphate transfection . Mediawerereplacedthefollowingmorning , andviralsupernatant was harvested 1 day later and stored at (cid:3) 80 (cid:4) C until used . Imaging Imaging wasperformedundernormalgrowthconditionsusing phenol - redfree media . Cells were plated on Fluorodish poly - D - lysine - coated plates ( World Precision Instruments ) and imaged using a 100 3 1 . 4 NA oil immersion objec - tive onaZeissCSUspinningdisk confocalmicroscopewithaYokogawa spin - ning disk scan head and anEM - CCD camera . 20 – 30Z sections were obtained with a spacing of 0 . 5 m m and acquired at a rate of one stack every 2 s for 200 total time points or one stack every 40 s for 100 total time points . Laser inten - sity was 6 % , and exposure time was 30 ms for 2 s intervals and 45 ms for 40 s intervals . For ﬁxed cell measurements , cells were ﬁxed for 10 min in 4 % para - formaldehyde in PBS and quenched 5 min in 0 . 1 M Tris - HCl ( pH 7 . 4 ) and stained using a 1 : 2 , 000 dilution of Alexa 488 conjugated rabbit monoclonal anti - GFP from Life Technologies ( G10362 ) . Axial elongation was corrected prior to calculating probe - to - probe distances ( Figure S3 ) . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes Extended Experimental Procedures , three ﬁgures , three tables , and four movies and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 05 . 036 . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS J . S . L . initiated the study , designed , and performed the experiments , analyzed the data , and contributed to the writing of the manuscript . Y . Z . analyzed the data , performed the simulations , and contributed to the writing of the manu - script . O . K . D . and C . M . supervised the study and contributed to the writing of the manuscript . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Peter Geiduschek , Alex Bortnick , and Roy Riblet for editing the manuscript . We thank John Sedat , Richard Flavell , Cornelia Zorca , and Lena Koslover for stimulating discussions . Wethank Claudia Bossen , Joe Pogliano , and Ralf Metzler for advice . We thank James Fitzpatrick and Jamie Kasuboski ( Waitt Advanced Biophotonics Center Core Facility ) for help with imaging and image analysis . J . S . L . was supported by a training grant from the National In - stitutes of Health ( Cellular and Molecular Genetics ) . The studies were sup - ported by the National Science Foundation Faculty Early Career Development Award ( MCB - 0845099 ) to O . K . D . , by the grant from the National Institutes of Health ( AI00880 and AI082850 ) to C . M . , and by the National Science Founda - tion Center for Theoretical Biological Physics . Received : January 30 , 2014 Revised : March 19 , 2014 Accepted : May 1 , 2014 Published : July 3 , 2014 REFERENCES Alt , F . W . , Yancopoulos , G . D . , Blackwell , T . K . , Wood , C . , Thomas , E . , Boss , M . , Coffman , R . , Rosenberg , N . , Tonegawa , S . , and Baltimore , D . ( 1984 ) . Ordered rearrangement of immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region segments . EMBO J . 3 , 1209 – 1219 . Alt , F . W . , Zhang , Y . , Meng , F . L . , Guo , C . , and Schwer , B . ( 2013 ) . Mechanisms of programmed DNA lesions and genomic instability in the immune system . Cell 152 , 417 – 429 . Beroukhim , R . , Mermel , C . H . , Porter , D . , Wei , G . , Raychaudhuri , S . , Donovan , J . , Barretina , J . , Boehm , J . S . , Dobson , J . , Urashima , M . , etal . ( 2010 ) . Theland - scape of somatic copy - number alteration across human cancers . Nature 463 , 899 – 905 . Bolzer , A . , Kreth , G . , Solovei , I . , Koehler , D . , Saracoglu , K . , Fauth , C . , Mu¨ller , S . , Eils , R . , Cremer , C . , Speicher , M . R . , and Cremer , T . ( 2005 ) . Three - dimen - sional maps of all chromosomes in human male ﬁbroblast nuclei and prome - taphase rosettes . PLoS Biol . 3 , e157 . Boveri , T . ( 1909 ) . Die Blastomerenkerne von Ascaris meglocephala und die Theorie der Chromosomenindividualitaet . Archiv . fu¨r Zellforschung 3 , 181 – 268 . Bronstein , I . , Israel , Y . , Kepten , E . , Mai , S . , Shav - Tal , Y . , Barkai , E . , and Garini , Y . ( 2009 ) . Transient anomalous diffusion of telomeres in the nucleus of mammalian cells . Phys . Rev . Lett . 103 , 018102 . Bunting , S . F . , and Nussenzweig , A . ( 2013 ) . End - joining , translocations and cancer . Nat . Rev . Cancer 13 , 443 – 454 . Cabal , G . G . , Genovesio , A . , Rodriguez - Navarro , S . , Zimmer , C . , Gadal , O . , Lesne , A . , Buc , H . , Feuerbach - Fournier , F . , Olivo - Marin , J . C . , Hurt , E . C . , and Nehrbass , U . ( 2006 ) . SAGA interacting factors conﬁne sub - diffusion of tran - scribed genes to the nuclear envelope . Nature 441 , 770 – 773 . 350 Cell 158 , 339 – 352 , July 17 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Cedar , H . , and Bergman , Y . ( 2011 ) . Epigenetics of haematopoietic cell devel - opment . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 11 , 478 – 488 . Chiarle , R . , Zhang , Y . , Frock , R . L . , Lewis , S . M . , Molinie , B . , Ho , Y . J . , Myers , D . R . , Choi , V . W . , Compagno , M . , Malkin , D . J . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Genome - wide translocationsequencing reveals mechanisms of chromosome breaks and re - arrangements in B cells . Cell 147 , 107 – 119 . Condamin , S . , Be´nichou , O . , Tejedor , V . , Voituriez , R . , and Klafter , J . ( 2007 ) . First - passage times in complex scale - invariant media . Nature 450 , 77 – 80 . Degner , S . C . , Wong , T . P . , Jankevicius , G . , and Feeney , A . J . ( 2009 ) . Cut - ting edge : developmental stage - speciﬁc recruitment of cohesin to CTCF sites throughout immunoglobulin loci during B lymphocyte development . J . Immunol . 182 , 44 – 48 . Degner , S . C . , Verma - Gaur , J . , Wong , T . P . , Bossen , C . , Iverson , G . M . , Torka - mani , A . , Vettermann , C . , Lin , Y . C . , Ju , Z . , Schulz , D . , et al . ( 2011 ) . CCCTC - binding factor ( CTCF ) and cohesin inﬂuence the genomic architecture of the Igh locus and antisense transcription in pro - B cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 9566 – 9571 . Dietrich , C . R . , and Newsam , G . N . ( 1997 ) . Fast and exact simulation of sta - tionary Gaussian processes through circulant embedding of the covariance matrix . SIAM J . Sci . Comput . 18 , 1088 – 1107 . Dixon , J . R . , Selvaraj , S . , Yue , F . , Kim , A . , Li , Y . , Shen , Y . , Hu , M . , Liu , J . S . , and Ren , B . ( 2012 ) . Topological domains in mammalian genomes identiﬁed by analysis of chromatin interactions . Nature 485 , 376 – 380 . Fuxa , M . , Skok , J . , Souabni , A . , Salvagiotto , G . , Roldan , E . , andBusslinger , M . ( 2004 ) . Pax5 induces V - to - DJ rearrangements and locus contraction of the immunoglobulin heavy - chain gene . Genes Dev . 18 , 411 – 422 . Gostissa , M . , Schwer , B . , Chang , A . , Dong , J . , Meyers , R . M . , Marecki , G . T . , Choi , V . W . , Chiarle , R . , Zarrin , A . A . , and Alt , F . W . ( 2014 ) . IgH class switching exploits a general property of two DNA breaks to be joined in cis over long chromosomal distances . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 111 , 2644 – 2649 . Grawunder , U . , Leu , T . M . , Schatz , D . G . , Werner , A . , Rolink , A . G . , Melchers , F . , and Winkler , T . H . ( 1995 ) . Down - regulation of RAG1 and RAG2 gene expres - sion in preB cells after functional immunoglobulin heavy chain rearrangement . Immunity 3 , 601 – 608 . Guo , C . , Gerasimova , T . , Hao , H . , Ivanova , I . , Chakraborty , T . , Selimyan , R . , Oltz , E . M . , and Sen , R . ( 2011a ) . Two forms of loops generate the chromatin conformation of the immunoglobulin heavy - chain gene locus . Cell 147 , 332 – 343 . Guo , C . , Yoon , H . S . , Franklin , A . , Jain , S . , Ebert , A . , Cheng , H . L . , Hansen , E . , Despo , O . , Bossen , C . , Vettermann , C . , et al . ( 2011b ) . CTCF - binding elements mediate control of V ( D ) J recombination . Nature 477 , 424 – 430 . Hawley , R . G . , Lieu , F . H . , Fong , A . Z . , Goldman , S . J . , Leonard , J . P . , and Haw - ley , T . S . ( 1996 ) . Retroviral vectors for production of interleukin - 12 in the bone marrow to induce a graft - versus - leukemia effect . Ann . N Y Acad . Sci . 795 , 341 – 345 . Hewitt , S . L . , Chaumeil , J . , and Skok , J . A . ( 2010 ) . Chromosome dynamics and the regulation of V ( D ) J recombination . Immunol . Rev . 237 , 43 – 54 . Jeon , J . H . , and Metzler , R . ( 2010 ) . Fractional Brownian motion and motion governed by the fractional Langevin equation in conﬁned geometries . Phys . Rev . E Stat . Nonlin . Soft Matter Phys . 81 , 021103 . Jhunjhunwala , S . , van Zelm , M . C . , Peak , M . M . , Cutchin , S . , Riblet , R . , van Dongen , J . J . , Grosveld , F . G . , Knoch , T . A . , and Murre , C . ( 2008 ) . The 3D struc - ture of the immunoglobulin heavy - chain locus : implications for long - range genomic interactions . Cell 133 , 265 – 279 . Jung , D . , Giallourakis , C . , Mostoslavsky , R . , and Alt , F . W . ( 2006 ) . Mechanism and control of V ( D ) J recombination at the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 24 , 541 – 570 . Klein , I . A . , Resch , W . , Jankovich , M . , Oliveira , T . , Yamane , A . , Nakhashi , H . , Di Virgillio , M . , Bothmer , A . , Nussenzweig , A . , Robbiani , D . F . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Trans - location - capture sequencing reveals the extent and nature of chromosomal rearrangements in B lymphocytes . Cell 147 , 95 – 106 . Kosak , S . T . , Skok , J . A . , Medina , K . L . , Riblet , R . , Le Beau , M . M . , Fisher , A . G . , and Singh , H . ( 2002 ) . Subnuclear compartmentalization of immunoglobulin loci during lymphocyte development . Science 296 , 158 – 162 . Lau , I . F . , Filipe , S . R . , Søballe , B . , Økstad , O . A . , Barre , F . X . , and Sherratt , D . J . ( 2003 ) . Spatial and temporal organization of replicating Escherichia coli chro - mosomes . Mol . Microbiol . 49 , 731 – 743 . Lieberman - Aiden , E . , van Berkum , N . L . , Williams , L . , Imakaev , M . , Ragoczy , T . , Telling , A . , Amit , I . , Lajoie , B . R . , Sabo , P . J . , Dorschner , M . O . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Comprehensive mapping of long - range interactions reveals folding principles of the human genome . Science 326 , 289 – 293 . Lin , Y . C . , Benner , C . , Mansson , R . , Heinz , S . , Miyazaki , K . , Miyazaki , M . , Chan - dra , V . , Bossen , C . , Glass , C . K . , and Murre , C . ( 2012 ) . Global changes in the nuclear positioning of genes and intra - and interdomain genomic interactions that orchestrate B cell fate . Nat . Immunol . 13 , 1196 – 1204 . Luby , T . M . , Schrader , C . E . , Stavnezer , J . , and Selsing , E . ( 2001 ) . The mu switch region tandem repeats are important , but not required , for antibody class switch recombination . J . Exp . Med . 193 , 159 – 168 . Lucas , J . S . , Bossen , C . , and Murre , C . ( 2011 ) . Transcription and recombina - tion factories : common features ? Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 23 , 318 – 324 . Lutz , E . ( 2001 ) . Fractional Langevin equation . Phys . Rev . E Stat . Nonlin . Soft Matter Phys . 64 , 051106 . Manz , J . , Denis , K . , Witte , O . , Brinster , R . , and Storb , U . ( 1988 ) . Feedback inhibition of immunoglobulin gene rearrangement by membrane mu , but not by secreted mu heavy chains . J . Exp . Med . 168 , 1363 – 1381 . Medvedovic , J . , Ebert , A . , Tagoh , H . , Tamir , I . M . , Schwickert , T . A . , Novatch - kova , M . , Sun , Q . , Huis In ‘t Veld , P . J . , Guo , C . , Yoon , H . S . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Flexible long - range loops in the VH gene region of the Igh locus facilitate the generation of a diverse antibody repertoire . Immunity 39 , 229 – 244 . Montroll , E . W . , and Weiss , G . H . ( 1965 ) . Random walks on lattices . II . J . Math . Phys . 6 , 167 – 181 . Mu¨nkel , C . , and Langowski , J . ( 1998 ) . Chromosome structure described by a polymer model . Phys . Rev . E Stat . Phys . Plasmas Fluids Relat . Interdiscip . Topics 57 , 5888 – 5896 . Nussenzweig , M . C . , Shaw , A . C . , Sinn , E . , Campos - Torres , J . , and Leder , P . ( 1988 ) . Allelic exclusion in transgenic mice carrying mutant human IgM genes . J . Exp . Med . 167 , 1969 – 1974 . Onozawa , M . , and Aplan , P . D . ( 2012 ) . Illegitimate V ( D ) J recombination involving nonantigen receptor loci in lymphoid malignancy . Genes Chromo - somes Cancer 51 , 525 – 535 . Rabl , C . ( 1885 ) . U¨ber Zellteilung . Morphologisches Jahrbuch 10 , 214 – 330 . Retter , I . , Chevillard , C . , Scharfe , M . , Conrad , A . , Hafner , M . , Im , T . H . , Lude - wig , M . , Nordsiek , G . , Severitt , S . , Thies , S . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Sequence and char - acterization of the Ig heavy chain constant and partial variable region of the mouse strain 129S1 . J . Immunol . 179 , 2419 – 2427 . Rolda´n , E . , Fuxa , M . , Chong , W . , Martinez , D . , Novatchkova , M . , Busslinger , M . , and Skok , J . A . ( 2005 ) . Locus ‘decontraction’ and centromeric recruitment contribute to allelic exclusion of the immunoglobulin heavy - chain gene . Nat . Immunol . 6 , 31 – 41 . Saxton , M . J . ( 1994 ) . Anomalous diffusion due to obstacles : a Monte Carlo study . Biophys . J . 66 , 394 – 401 . Saxton , M . J . ( 1996 ) . Anomalous diffusion due to binding : aMonte Carlo study . Biophys . J . 70 , 1250 – 1262 . Sayegh , C . E . , Quong , M . W . , Agata , Y . , and Murre , C . ( 2003 ) . E - proteins directly regulate expression of activation - induced deaminase in mature B cells . Nat . Immunol . 4 , 586 – 593 . Sedat , J . , and Manuelidis , L . ( 1978 ) . A direct approach to the structure of eukaryotic chromosomes . Cold Spring Harb . Symp . Quant . Biol . 42 , 331 – 350 . Shimizu , A . , Takahashi , N . , Yaoita , Y . , andHonjo , T . ( 1982 ) . Organizationofthe constant - region gene family of the mouse immunoglobulin heavy chain . Cell 28 , 499 – 506 . Solimini , N . L . , Xu , Q . , Mermel , C . H . , Liang , A . C . , Schlabach , M . R . , Luo , J . , Bur - rows , A . E . , Anselmo , A . N . , Bredemeyer , A . L . , Li , M . Z . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Recurrent Cell 158 , 339 – 352 , July 17 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 351 hemizygous deletions in cancers may optimize proliferative potential . Science 337 , 104 – 109 . Urlinger , S . , Baron , U . , Thellmann , M . , Hasan , M . T . , Bujard , H . , and Hillen , W . ( 2000 ) . Exploring the sequence space for tetracycline - dependent transcrip - tional activators : novel mutations yield expanded range and sensitivity . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 7963 – 7968 . Vazquez , J . , Belmont , A . S . , and Sedat , J . W . ( 2001 ) . Multiple regimes of constrained chromosome motion are regulated in the interphase Drosophila nucleus . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1227 – 1239 . Weber , S . C . , Spakowitz , A . J . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 2010 ) . Bacterial chromosomal loci move subdiffusively through a viscoelastic cytoplasm . Phys . Rev . Lett . 104 , 238102 . Weber , S . C . , Thompson , M . A . , Moerner , W . E . , Spakowitz , A . J . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 2012 ) . Analytical tools to distinguish the effects of localization error , conﬁnement , and medium elasticity on the velocity autocorrelation function . Biophys . J . 102 , 2443 – 2450 . Zarrin , A . A . , Del Vecchio , C . , Tseng , E . , Gleason , M . , Zarin , P . , Tian , M . , and Alt , F . W . ( 2007 ) . Antibody class switching mediated by yeast endonuclease - generated DNA breaks . Science 315 , 377 – 381 . Zhang , Y . , McCord , R . P . , Ho , Y . J . , Lajoie , B . R . , Hildebrand , D . G . , Simon , A . C . , Becker , M . S . , Alt , F . W . , and Dekker , J . ( 2012 ) . Spatial organization of the mouse genome and its role in recurrent chromosomal translocations . Cell 148 , 908 – 921 . 352 Cell 158 , 339 – 352 , July 17 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc .