PAPER Vaccine testing for emerging infections : the case for individual randomisation Nir Eyal , 1 Marc Lipsitch 2 ABSTRACT During the 2014 – 2015 Ebola outbreak in Guinea , Liberia and Sierra Leone , many opposed the use of individually randomised controlled trials to test candidate Ebola vaccines . For a raging fatal disease , they explained , it is unethical to relegate some study participants to control arms . In Zika and future emerging infections , similar opposition may hinder urgent vaccine research , so it is best to address these questions now . This article lays out the ethical case for individually randomised control in testing vaccines against many emerging infections , including lethal infections in low - income countries , even when at no point in the trial do the controls receive the countermeasures being tested . When individual randomisation is feasible — and it often will be — it tends to save more lives than alternative designs would . And for emerging infections , individual randomisation also tends as such to improve care , access to the experimental vaccine and prospects for all participants relative to their opportunities absent the trial , and no less than alternative designs would . That obtains even under placebo control and without equipoise — requiring which would undermine individual randomisation and the alternative designs that opponents proffered . Our arguments expound four often - neglected factors : bene ﬁ ts to non - participants , bene ﬁ ts to participants once a trial is over including post - trial access to the study intervention , participants ’ prospects before randomisation to arms and the near - inevitable disparity between arms in any randomised controlled trial . At the height of the recent Ebola outbreak in West Africa , a debate emerged : How to test the ef ﬁ - cacy of candidate Ebola treatments and vaccina - tions ? Should investigators randomise individual participants to receive either the relevant counter - measure or a control substance ? The debate was partly about statistical ef ﬁ ciency , logistical feasibility and public acceptability and partly about ethics . 1 2 In particular , some commenta - tors argued that given Ebola ’ s high lethality and few , if any , available clinical alternatives , it would be unethical to randomise participants to a control arm . This ethical objection typically affected individu - ally randomised controlled trials ( iRCTs ) . 1 – 6 Critics were softer on cluster - randomised trials . 5 While the objection focused especially on treatment iRCTs and while vaccine iRCTs usually recruit individuals who are uninfected and thus , in the case of Ebola , at much lower risk of imminent death , many points made against treatment iRCTs would seem applic - able to vaccine iRCTs . Ebola vaccine iRCTs often recruited health workers at high risk of infection . 7 Accordingly , ethicist Ruth Macklin wondered whether an argument against ( placebo - controlled ) iRCTs for treatments should not also apply to iRCTs for vaccines . 8 The distinction between treat - ment and vaccine trials was elided in the popular press , 9 and ethical opposition to either placebo - or active - controlled iRCTs undergirded high - level debates on vaccine trials . 1 10 Speci ﬁ cally , it was reported that Doctors Without Borders ( MSF ) , which has treated more Ebola patients in West Africa than any other group , emphatically opposes RCTs in affected countries for either treatments or vaccines . MSF ’ s Annick Antierens , who oversees ‘ investigational platforms ’ for experimental Ebola products , says ‘ this cannot be defended ethically . ’ 2 A recent commentary persists in criticising indi - vidually iRCTs of Ebola vaccines , claiming that ‘ access to experimental interventions should have higher priority over the use of a randomized clin - ical trial design for [ Ebola ] vaccine ef ﬁ cacy studies ’ . 11 As with other aspects of preparedness for Zika and for future infections , the time to debate the ethics of vaccine iRCTs for these emer - ging diseases is now . This article argues that iRCTs made ethical sense in prospect for Ebola vaccines and will typically make ethical sense for testing future emerging - infection vaccines . THE LIKELY EFFICIENCY OF IRCTS MATTERS ETHICALLY Let us revisit the case of vaccine iRCTs for Ebola . At the time of the debate in autumn 2014 , Ebola was out of control in the three affected countries . WHO had projected up to thousands of new infec - tions a week 12 and CDC had projected up to 1 . 4 million infections by the end of that year . 13 The heads of the Wellcome Trust and NIAID were losing hope in traditional public health measures of containment and conjectured that ‘ a vaccine might be the only way left to suppress the outbreak ’ . 13 Any delay in generating credible results from vaccine ef ﬁ cacy trials might have been estimated to cost many deaths from Ebola — potentially in the thousands . Thousands more expectedly died from the consequent loss of other medical and preventa - tive services . 14 Vaccines were already in early stages of development and both iRCT proponents and iRCT opponents agreed that an iRCT is the ‘ gold standard ’ of medical research , which usually pro - duces the quickest credible data on vaccine 62 5 Eyal N , Lipsitch M . J Med Ethics 2017 ; 43 : 62 5 – 63 1 . doi : 10 . 1136 / medethics - 2015 - 103220 Research ethics To cite : Eyal N , Lipsitch M . J Med Ethics 2017 ; 43 : 62 5 – 63 1 . 1 Department of Global Health and Population , Harvard T . H . Chan School of Public Health , Boston , Massachusetts , USA 2 Department of Epidemiology , Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases , Center for Communicable Disease Dynamics , Harvard T . H . Chan School of Public Health , Boston , Massachusetts , USA Correspondence to Professor Nir Eyal , Department of Global Health and Population , Harvard T . H . Chan School of Public Health , FXB Building , 7th floor , 651 Huntington Ave . , Boston , MA 02115 , USA ; neyal @ hsph . harvard . edu Received 14 November 2015 Revised 28 January 2017 Accepted 6 March 2017 Published Online First 10 April 2017 ef ﬁ cacy . 3 15 But at the time , some prominent humanitarian workers , leaders , epidemiologists and ethicists considered iRCTs unnecessary , non - feasible and possibly unethical . 1 No one advocated foregoing altogether either vaccine devel - opment or the assessment of vaccine candidates ’ ef ﬁ cacy before rollout . Instead , four main categories of ‘ alternatives ’ for asses - sing the ef ﬁ cacy of Ebola vaccine candidates were proposed . Two that are not worth a detailed discussion as iRCT alterna - tives are comparison to historical controls , 16 which was quickly seen to be impossible for vaccine trials in view of the abrupt and unpredictable spatiotemporal changes in Ebola transmission during the outbreak 1 and sequential and adaptive designs ( to test treatments ) , 5 which in fact are perfectly compatible with individual randomisation . 17 But two cluster - randomised trial designs were also proposed : the stepped - wedge design 1 and a novel ring - vaccination design . 18 Unlike iRCTs , they were said to avoid randomising any participants to a placebo or other control . Instead they offer vaccine to all participants , using variation of timing for scienti ﬁ c comparison . In a stepped - wedge design , all participants receive the vaccine candidate at different points in time . Investigators compare disease incidence among participants who had not yet received it against the incidence in those who had . iRCT opponents were ‘“ more comfortable ” with the stepped - wedge design , because everyone in such a study would get the Ebola vaccine . ’ 1 Ring vaccination , a strategy previously used for the ﬁ nal stages of smallpox eradication , was ﬁ rst used for a randomised vaccine trial during this Ebola outbreak . A ring - vaccination trial in Guinea enrolled both contacts of a con ﬁ rmed case and these contacts ’ contacts ( together called a ‘ ring ’ ) and randomised each ring to either immediate vaccination or vaccination 3 weeks later , to provide a comparison . When the Guinea ring - vaccination trial yielded evidence of the effectiveness of a candi - date vaccine for Ebola , 18 there were immediate calls to use this investigational strategy for vaccine trials in future disease out - breaks , 19 partly because , by contrast with an iRCT , all partici - pants were offered the candidate vaccine under study at some point in the trial . 19 Nonetheless , the following reasoning would have arguably made sense when the Ebola iRCTs debate began , and analogous reasoning will make sense for many emerging future infections : Fighting this infection to win requires evaluating interventions ‘ in the best possible clinical trials under the circumstances in order to de ﬁ nitively prove their safety and ef ﬁ cacy or provide evidence to stop utilization ’ . 20 If in the circumstances the method likeliest to produce credible - enough data fast turns out to be an iRCT , as it typically is in vaccine ef ﬁ cacy trials , 21 there is a strong pre - sumption in favour of conducting an iRCT . Choosing an iRCT is not ‘ doggedly insisting on gold standards ’ ; 3 rather , successful iRCTs will speed up responsible mass - scale delivery of tested vac - cines . Only some rough estimate of ef ﬁ cacy levels would enable health ministries to match vaccine penetration to herd immunity needs . Only robust trial outcomes would lend earlier credibility to calls on the public to undergo the vaccination and on donors to invest large amounts to buy and deliver vaccines . In this cir - cumstance , non - iRCT designs risk mistaking confounders for vaccine effects or missing a true effect of the vaccine due to inad - equate power . We might vaccinate a large population only to dis - cover that we have burdened or harmed them for little or no protection . 22 Sceptical populations might later come to distrust even countermeasures that had been properly tested before rollout . 23 Alternatively , if the cluster - randomized trial ’ s size or duration is increased to keep It valid in settings of ﬂ uctuating and unpredictable incidence , then more time and more infections in the trial will typically be required before it can draw a conclu - sion . Admittedly , if weaker methods turn out to yield estimates of nearly 100 % effectiveness or nearly 0 % effectiveness with narrow con ﬁ dence bounds , even they could tell us credibly what to do . But if , as is usually the case , 22 they do not , we will have lost months , and many lives , to the disease . This article remains largely agnostic on trial design method - ology and feasibility challenges in iRCTs ( though see Appendix A ) . Indeed , the circumstances of future emerging infections remain somewhat unpredictable . Instead , it argues conditionally that if in Ebola or in a future outbreak , after open - minded con - sideration of statistical and practical challenges and their poten - tial solutions , an iRCT continues to carry by far the greatest promise to help vaccines save as many lives as possible , then normally a vaccine iRCT would be perfectly ethical and should be conducted . Nothing bars vaccine iRCTs from treating ethic - ally everyone , study controls included and even from giving controls the best prospects while maintaining validity . In some ways , iRCTs that give the entire community , and not just study participants , the best prospects under the circumstances are fairer than alternative designs . Our argument proceeds as follows . We start by noting a few common attributes of to all these competing designs for ef ﬁ cacy trials of vaccines against Ebola and against other emerging infec - tions . We then argue that the medical care of all participants , including study controls , may bene ﬁ t indirectly from inclusion in such a trial . We add that participants ’ access to the study intervention may improve in an iRCT more than under the alternative designs . We then show that all participants ’ medical prospects prior to randomisation may improve from inclusion , which we claim is what matters the most . We address the objec - tion that even if participants bene ﬁ t , iRCTs fail at the bar of equipoise . And we end by generalising these conclusions to vaccine tests for most emerging infections . IRCTS AND THE ALTERNATE DESIGNS SHARE SOME PARTIAL JUSTIFICATIONS Table 1 below reviews the compatibility of iRCTs and of the alternate cluster - randomised study designs under consideration with several conditions . The ﬁ rst two columns designate iRCTs , with placebo ( eg , saline injection ) and with active control ( a proven vaccine against another disease ) . The ﬁ nal column designates the cluster - randomised stepped - wedge and ring - vaccination designs . Each row reviews whether some ethically relevant condition could characterise Ebola vaccine ef ﬁ cacy trials during the outbreak , for each trial design . A tick sign means that a trial of the given kind could be designed to ful ﬁ l the criterion ( not that every trial of this kind necessarily would ) , and a minus sign , that it could not . The ﬁ rst three rows state three obvious common denomina - tors . Any of these trial designs would answer a very pressing public health need ( table 1 row 1a ) ; in none of these designs was serious toxicity expected in either arm — all were ef ﬁ cacy trials following a trial to rule out major toxicity ( 1b ) and because no vaccine against Ebola existed when the trials began ( 1c ) , no design ( not even placebo - controlled iRCT ) deprived participants of an intervention to which they would have access or straightforward moral entitlement otherwise . IN AN IRCT , ALL PARTICIPANTS ’ CARE MAY IMPROVE RELATIVE TO NO TRIAL PARTICIPATION Participation in a vaccine iRCT against an emerging infection can be medically bene ﬁ cial to all participants , study controls 62 6 Eyal N , Lipsitch M . J Med Ethics 2017 ; 43 : 62 5 – 63 1 . doi : 10 . 1136 / medethics - 2015 - 103220 Research ethics included . During the 2014 Ebola outbreak , participants in either arm of a vaccine ef ﬁ cacy iRCT would usually receive better supportive care in the trial than they would have in the chaotic surrounding system and better than many others actually received . 24 By nature , trials involve close surveillance for new infections . This could also bene ﬁ t participants in either arm because early treatment of an infection typically improves patient outcomes , 25 and reduces his or her risk of infecting family . 26 Another bene ﬁ t to all participants would be that , as in any experimental vaccine trial , intensive education on protective measures would be necessary so as to counteract a false sense of safety , and such intensive education would rarely be available outside the studies . For Ebola ( and for many future emerging infections in low / middle - income countries ) , neither these bene - ﬁ ts nor a proven active vaccine and the candidate vaccine were ( or will be ) available outside the trial . Indeed , even in the hardest case , that of placebo - controlled trial , no one would forego active vaccination to accept placebo ( table 1 , rows 1b – c ) . 15 And participants randomised to the control arm in an iRCT would accrue additional bene ﬁ ts when the control sub - stance is a proven vaccine against another endemic disease , such as , in the recent outbreak , hepatitis B . 1 IN AN IRCT , ALL PARTICIPANTS ’ ACCESS TO THE EXPERIMENTAL VACCINE MAY IMPROVE RELATIVE TO NO TRIAL PARTICIPATION , NO LESS THAN UNDER ALTERNATIVE DESIGNS Recall that opponents preferred stepped - wedge and the ring - vaccination design primarily because ordinarily in both active — and placebo - controlled iRCTs , no control receives the study intervention during the trial . But compare iRCTs to the proposed alternatives in terms of participant access to the study intervention ( table 1 rows 2a – c ) . All stepped - wedge and ring - vaccination designs withhold vaccines from some participants for some time . 1 27 Indeed , they assess vaccine effectiveness precisely by comparing those who receive the vaccine candidate early to those who receive it late . While opponents could have explained better late than never , for some in the alternate designs vaccination would come too late . Crudely put , some participants in stepped - wedge and ring - vaccination trials will die or get infected , or the trial might end , before the vaccine candidate reaches them ( table 1 row 2a ) . 28 It may still seem as though stepped - wedge and ring - vaccination trials are less harsh : iRCT opponents might insist that although for a few participants of stepped - wedge and ring - vaccination trials , late would mean never , it remains the case that better never for a few and late for some others than never for any study controls . 4 27 But nothing about iRCTs precludes bringing the study inter - vention to everyone at some point , either . Both placebo and active control iRCTs are perfectly compatible with granting access to any available candidate vaccine shortly or immediately after the trial , potentially before vaccine approval ( table 1 row 2b ) . Indeed , the delay in granting participants universal access to the vaccine candidate within an iRCT may be shorter than in stepped - wedge and ring - vaccination trials . This is because , typic - ally , an iRCT is more ef ﬁ cient than cluster - randomised alterna - tives for measuring a particular effect size , so an iRCT can be completed , all else equal , in less time and with fewer infections in the trial population . Hence , typically , the number of partici - pants who will die or get infected before the study intervention reaches them is going to be smaller in participant - friendly iRCTs than in participant - friendly stepped - wedge and ring - vaccination trials ( table 1 row 2c ) . It seems mistaken to focus on the potential of stepped - wedge and ring - vaccination designs to bene ﬁ t participants more while the trial lasts ( table 1 row 2a ) ; iRCTs can be made to bene ﬁ t participants more , overall ( table 1 row 2c ) , and that seems more important . Table 1 During the 2014 – 2015 outbreak , were these conditions consistent ( √ ) or inconsistent ( – ) with placebo individually randomised controlled trials ( iRCT ) , active iRCT and stepped - wedge / ring - vaccination designs of efficacy studies for candidate Ebola vaccines ? PlaceboiRCT ActiveiRCT Stepped - wedge or ring - vaccination trial 1 . General a . The study intervention is needed urgently for many . √ √ √ b . No study assignment involves a procedure that is expected to actively harm any participant more than it directly benefits her . √ √ √ c . No intervention for the condition studied is approved ( and available to candidate participants ) . √ √ √ 2 . Participant access to study intervention a . All participants receive the study intervention during the trial — except ones who die or get infected before the intervention reaches them . – – √ b . All participants receive the study intervention during the trial or shortly thereafter — except ones who die or get infected before the intervention reaches them . √ √ √ c . For any prespecified level of statistical power to detect a given effect size , typically the number of participants who die or get infected before the study intervention reaches them is minimal . √ √ – 3 . Impact on participants ’ prospects a . Participation improves medical prospects for each participant ( both before and immediately after randomisation ) more than any alternative available outside the trial . √ √ √ b . Participation improves medical prospects for each participant ( both before and immediately after randomisation ) more than any alternative , including even alternatives that compromise trial efficiency or validity . – – – c . Participation improves medical prospects for each participant ( both before and immediately after randomisation ) , making their prospects better than those of relevant non - participants . √ √ √ d . Equipoise ( understood here as equal medical prospects in all arms immediately after randomisation ) obtains . – – – e . In no trial arm do the typical participants have grim medical prospects ( immediately after randomisation ) . √ √ √ For simplicity , the table assumes trials with two equally sized arms . 62 7 Eyal N , Lipsitch M . J Med Ethics 2017 ; 43 : 62 5 – 63 1 . doi : 10 . 1136 / medethics - 2015 - 103220 Research ethics Post - trial access to the study intervention is usually debated as a requirement for ethical trials independent of the requirement for a favourable risk – bene ﬁ t ratio . Our argument points out that the former affects the latter . Indeed , as the number of candidate interventions being tested increases , the proportion of partici - pants randomised to the best candidate intervention declines and post - trial access to the best candidate interventions may turn out to be the main bene ﬁ t for most randomised trial parti - cipants . As noted , iRCTs normally require fewer infections in the trial to achieve a given degree of statistical power . Therefore , giving controls an effective study vaccine immedi - ately on the end of an iRCT would ordinarily mean that fewer infections occurred in the trial population ( and , for a given inci - dence rate , less time would have passed ) than would have occurred in a cluster - randomised trial of equivalent power . IN AN IRCT , ALL PARTICIPANTS ’ PROSPECTS PRIOR TO RANDOMISATION MAY IMPROVE RELATIVE TO NO TRIAL PARTICIPATION , NO LESS THAN UNDER ALTERNATIVE DESIGNS In table 1 , rows 3a – e review how the competing trial designs fare on several standards for improvement to participants ’ medical prospects . Table 1 Row 3a registers the capacity of each design to improve medical prospects for all participants more than any alternative available outside the trial . The previous two sections argued that iRCTs can improve the prospects of partici - pants in all arms after randomisation . Even if these sections are wrong , the present section adds that iRCTs can improve pro - spects of participants in all arms prior to randomisation to arms , and that this may be what matters the most . Suppose that for some reason , placebo were used for control , there were no post - trial access , and participants received neither education , money nor accelerated / better treatment if infected , or any other indirect bene ﬁ ts . If safety - tested vaccine candidates were available only in the trial , and only in its active arm , par - ticipation would still usually improve an at - risk individual ’ s prospect of net bene ﬁ t , appropriately assessed , for a simple reason . Before randomisation to arms , every participant of a placebo - controlled ef ﬁ cacy trial gains a substantial chance of winding up on the active arm , with potential protection — if randomised to that arm . Given that no arm ( including control ) exposes partici - pants to worse prospects than they would have outside the trial ( condition 1b in table 1 ) , it follows that all participants achieve medical prospects superior to the ones that they would have had otherwise and superior to those of at - risk non - participants . An in ﬂ uential 2014 letter proclaimed against Ebola treatment iRCTs , ‘ None of us would consent to be randomised in such cir - cumstances ’ ; 3 and others concurred . 5 23 However , for anyone at high risk of exposure and offered either no Ebola countermeas - ure or a substantial chance of getting an experimental counter - measure that showed animal evidence of protection and passed safety tests , declining the offer would be unwise . iRCT opponents might retort to our emphasis on the pro - spects before randomisation that all participants have a right to ‘ actual ’ intervention , not just to dramatically improved advance prospects . We disagree . The point of even clinical care is never simply intervening ; it is improving medical prospects . And better prospects are what iRCTs give to every participant . What more might be owed to participants ? Not improved outcomes . Many promising - looking vaccines and therapeutics turn out on testing to have been ineffective or harmful and that does not make their testing unethical . Even in clinical care , we use proce - dures and drugs known to carry some severe risks , and their utilisation is justi ﬁ ed notwithstanding occasional severe injuries or deaths when their prospect of bene ﬁ ting far exceeds that of harming . On a broader note , recent research in ethics explores multiple potential reasons — of fairness , of compassion , of solidarity and still others — to heed the distribution of personal prospects and that of personal outcomes . 29 It is time that these considerations inform the longstanding debate about the ethics of randomised and placebo control . A high chance of being randomised to the best treatment is important for the same basic reason that getting the best treatment is important : it improves one ’ s medical prospects . Our opponents may reply that what is owed is the very best possible medical prospects available to anyone , for example , per Western standards of care — not just better prospects that would be available to the candidate participant outside the trial . But even the opponents ’ preferred alternatives to iRCTs , including stepped - wedge and ring - vaccination designs , failed to provide the best possible medical prospects ( table 1 row 3b ) . In either stepped - wedge or ring - vaccination designs , participants rando - mised to have the vaccine withheld until a later time would have bene ﬁ ted even more from immediate receipt of the safety - tested vaccine , and the added protection against the outbreak that would come with that . 27 28 Our position is not that improvement in a participant ’ s pro - spects prior to randomisation can justify any treatment after ran - domisation . The following vaccine ef ﬁ cacy study would be unacceptable although it may advance science and improve the candidate participant ’ s prospects compared with his or her alter - natives : in a study of a very promising Ebola vaccine candidate , one small arm among many is injected with that vaccine candi - date , laced with live Ebola virus infection . If the proportion of patients in this diabolical arm was small enough , participations in the trial might improve their prospects prior to randomisa - tion , yet clearly , the trial remains unacceptable . Recall , however , point 1b in table 1 : our entire discussion is premised on the assumption that in no arm are participants expected to experi - ence harm relative to non - participants ; our position is only that when condition 1b is met ( as are conditions 1a and 1c ) , risk – bene ﬁ t ratios are no more adverse in iRCTs than in the alternate designs . We do not weigh in on trials violating these conditions . And while some may insist that individual control ( at least individual placebo control ) is diabolical enough to be treated as if it were causing active harm to controls , that seems deeply implausible in vaccine trials . In such trials , the subjects are pre - sumed uninfected and they are , at worst , treated like uninfected patients outside the trials . Some of our points in the next para - graph further address this response . Some have argued for promoting participants ’ prospects so long as the compromise of scienti ﬁ c validity remains moderate , 4 or nil . 27 But even if validity remains intact , promoting partici - pants ’ prospects further could still substantially compromise trial ef ﬁ ciency , understood as duration and / or number of infec - tions in the trial required to reach the desired degree of statis - tical power . In trials of countermeasures against Ebola ( and in ones against many future infections ) , postponing the degree of knowledge that permits rollout could cost many deaths and injuries , and compassionate 4 researchers will factor in those calamities as well . Indeed , pitting rigour against compassion is simply misguided here . As explained above , iRCTs can be better than the alternative designs even for participants . Moreover , the entire impetus for bene ﬁ ting participants as much as possible has been said to be misguided . 30 And ﬁ nally , because in this setting , participation already improves medical prospects for 62 8 Eyal N , Lipsitch M . J Med Ethics 2017 ; 43 : 62 5 – 63 1 . doi : 10 . 1136 / medethics - 2015 - 103220 Research ethics each participant enough to make them superior to those of non - participants at similar risk ( table 1 row 3c ) , to insist on giving participants more at the expense of bringing protection to non - participants whose prospects are worse ( eg , to non - participating health workers ) would have only exacerbated a disparity . REQUIRING EQUIPOISE WOULD THWART BOTH IRCTS AND THE ALTERNATE STUDY DESIGNS In clinical trial design , Equipoise is the point where there is no preference between treat - ments , i . e . it is thought equally likely that treatment A or B will turn out to be superior … At this point we … would take odds of 1 : 1 in a bet . Equipoise is different from simply not ‘ knowing ’ or being ‘ uncertain ’ , because it implies that we have no ( rational ) preference whatever . 31 In different versions of the equipoise requirement , that lack of rational preference is on the parts of the investigator , the medical community or study participants . 31 – 34 For investiga - tional Ebola vaccines in 2014 , with animal evidence of ef ﬁ cacy , evidence of safety and immunogenicity in humans , and no alter - native vaccine available , prospects were clearly better in the active arm , from any of these viewpoints . 8 iRCT opponents have added , normatively , that this lack of equipoise is unacceptable . 5 6 8 Yet , in the Ebola vaccine case , both iRCTs and alternatively designed trials lacked equipoise ( table 1 row 3d ) . Stepped - wedge and ring - vaccination also involved a comparison between individuals to whom a candidate vaccine was given immediately and individuals from whom it was withheld for a while ; for the reasons mentioned above , the former were clearly dealt better prospects . Ironically , a formal requirement of equipoise in all Ebola clin - ical trials would have also banned the safety and immunogen - icity studies of Ebola vaccines that were performed on volunteers geographically distant from the outbreak earlier than the ef ﬁ cacy trials we are discussing . 35 – 37 For any volunteer at low risk of infection , a lower dose was clearly preferable , and the higher dose sometimes carried negative side effects . 35 38 While few equipoise supporters expect equipoise in toxicity trials , most arguments for equipoise in ef ﬁ cacy trials ( eg , that study participants should be treated as patients ) 39 would condemn even toxicity trials that lack equipoise . Put in the most general way , in any possible randomised con - trolled trial for a promising intervention , allocation to arms almost inevitably prompts a disparity between trial participants . And in practice , virtually any intervention that passes Phase I and Phase II trials and is considered for Phase III would be con - sidered promising , prompting such a disparity . That disparity is as inevitable in individually randomised trials as it is in cluster - randomised ones ; and whether control is temporal or spatial or by type of intervention or based on the difference between intervention and placebo . Any randomised controlled trial of a devaluating intervention ( namely , one that it is better to receive early than late ) that initially seems more promising for partici - pants than placebo must place some participants in a group that immediately on allocation to arms will have worse prospects than some other participants — in violation of equipoise . Shy of fully compensating for that worse prospect , for example , through indirect bene ﬁ ts like money if and when those can fully compensate or through active control that decreases overall risk as much as the study intervention would , that disparity stands . Call this the rule of nearly inevitable disparity within all rando - mised controlled trials . In the case of Ebola vaccine ef ﬁ cacy , prior to every trial con - sidered , the intervention seemed more promising than placebo , and devaluating . As the rule above states , that just meant that trial participation was more promising in some arms than in others , in violation of equipoise — both in iRCTs and in stepped - wedge and ring vaccination trials . The differences between iRCT and other designs lay in the details of how they trans - gressed equipoise , not in whether they did . FOR ZIKA AND FOR MANY FUTURE EMERGING INFECTIONS , EVEN MANY OPPONENTS OF PLACEBO - CONTROLLED TREATMENT TRIALS COULD SUPPORT VACCINE IRCTS Bioethicists suspicious of most placebo control in low / middle - income countries could also support typical vaccine ef ﬁ - cacy iRCTs , both for Ebola and for many other emerging infec - tions . First , some iRCTs lack a placebo arm and may even ful ﬁ l equipoise . Second , even a placebo - controlled iRCT can bene ﬁ t controls , absent compensation and other external bene ﬁ ts , for example when the vaccine is safety - tested and healthcare in the trial is superior to conditions in surrounding clinics , or when detection and treatment are faster for those under surveillance by the trial or when controls receive the candidate vaccine shortly after the trial . Third , rarely , even a placebo - controlled iRCT can ful ﬁ l equipoise — when there is indication that the vaccine , which was safe in unexposed persons , might be unsafe in exposed persons , say by exacerbating risk of infection on exposure . 40 Fourth , in a placebo - controlled trial of a vaccine candidate , even for a highly lethal disease , being in the control arm is no death sentence because participants are rarely , if ever , known to be exposed or infected ( table 1 row 3e ; at the peril of non - interpretability , trials are not the place to provide postexpo - sure prophylaxis or compassionate use ) . Fifth , for an emerging infection , usually no vaccination exists , and even the inter - national research ethics document most doubtful of placebo control , the Declaration of Helsinki , agrees that ‘ Where no proven intervention exists , the use of placebo , or no interven - tion , is acceptable ’ ( § 33 ) ; against one commentator , 8 when a trial seeks to develop pandemic countermeasures , ‘ acceptable ’ should clearly be considered good enough . 41 Finally , when experimental vaccine supply is limited ( as it often will be in emerging infections ) , distributive equality is arguably better served by a randomised scheme of allocation among a larger number of at - risk people than by deterministic allocation to a subset of them . iRCTs achieve that . CONCLUSION Most ethicists agree that public health emergencies can justify some diversion from fairness towards individuals , with or without their informed consent . Fortunately , emerging infection vaccine ef ﬁ cacy iRCTs do not usually demand any such diver - sion . Far from being harmed in the pursuit of lofty scienti ﬁ c standards , iRCT participants would often gain several indirect and direct bene ﬁ ts and privileged prospects compared with their alternatives either outside trials or in trials favoured by iRCT opponents , and compared with those of non - participating indi - viduals at risk . The assumption that there must be something unfair or unethical about iRCTs was false for Ebola vaccines . It will be sheer dogma for vaccines in Zika and in many future outbreaks of emerging infection — especially for ones with high lethality or with no existing cure or vaccination . 62 9 Eyal N , Lipsitch M . J Med Ethics 2017 ; 43 : 62 5 – 63 1 . doi : 10 . 1136 / medethics - 2015 - 103220 Research ethics Contributors NE wrote the ﬁ rst draft . NE and ML both contributed to subsequent drafts . Funding ML was supported by Award Number U54GM088558 from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences . The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the of ﬁ cial views of the National Institute of General Medical Sciences or the National Institutes of Health . Competing interests ML served on the Scienti ﬁ c Advisory Group for the Ebola ça Suf ﬁ t vaccine ef ﬁ cacy trial ( unpaid position ) and has received consulting fees or honoraria from Merck , P ﬁ zer , Antigen Discovery and Af ﬁ nivax . His research has received funding ( through his employer ) from P ﬁ zer and PATH Vaccine Solutions . Provenance and peer review Not commissioned ; externally peer reviewed . APPENDIX A : FEASIBILITY In late 2014 , feasibility challenges to iRCTs were also raised . While the primary focus of the present article is ethics , the fore - most feasibility challenges were arguably resolvable or no worse than ones posed by alternative designs . Obtaining consent to randomisation , tracking who belongs to which arm and keeping participants blinded can prove challen - ging when trust and literacy are low . 3 5 But study participants could be ( and at the time were planned to be ) primarily literate and trusting health workers ; 42 43 anthropologists con ﬁ rmed that participants in the region could be educated about randomisa - tion 44 45 and blinding was impossible under cluster - randomised alternatives to iRCTs proposed at the time in which sites would either deliver or not deliver vaccination during each period . 3 Cluster - randomised approaches were also suggested as ways to bring the trial to areas of high transmission and to use vaccine doses immediately as they became available , but this could be accomplished with an iRCT design . 17 Traditional iRCTs might take long , 3 5 but less - ef ﬁ cient designs typically take longer , and iRCTs could use adaptive and group - sequential elements to expedite evaluation and focus the study where cases are numer - ous . 15 17 Placebo - controlled iRCTs were speci ﬁ cally said in this context to damage trust . 5 46 But iRCTs need not involve placebo control ; in one Ebola vaccine placebo - controlled iRCT , initial distrust 37 turned into high levels of adherence ; and trust could plunge if a suboptimally tested vaccine were rolled out to wide populations then discovered to have been ineffective or toxic . A stepped - wedge trial and standard cluster randomisation between clinics would be spatiotemporally confounded , leading to inef ﬁ ciency , 47 as well as to a risk of bias if such factors were not perfectly accounted for in the analysis . The West African Ebola outbreak , for example , turned out to have unpredictable surges and declines , fading in some places while ﬂ aring in others , making the proposed comparisons of different periods or different sites less interpretable . A hybrid design could incorporate some of the logistical advantages of stepped - wedge into an adaptive iRCT . 17 Ring vaccination is the strategy that successfully demonstrated vaccine effectiveness under very challenging conditions , 18 and it might be deemed most feasible . But in future emerging disease outbreaks , this approach might not provide con ﬁ dent effective - ness estimates . For example , the strategy might be less useful with modestly effective vaccines ; when the identi ﬁ cation and diagnosis of infectious persons is dif ﬁ cult due to asymptomatic or presymptomatic transmission ; when stigma hinders case iden - ti ﬁ cation and when other factors hinder the effective design of a trial . High levels of population or vector mobility could reduce the relevance of geographical or social - contact de ﬁ nitions of rings . The candidate vaccine that worked in a ring delivery model might fail under more standard population - wide vaccin - ation models , for instance if its ef ﬁ cacy is short - lived or is greatest when given postexposure . Given these uncertainties , the cluster - randomised ring - vaccination trial strategy might not be the strategy of choice for all future emerging diseases . Finally , it would , in principle , be possible to test ring vaccination but if done in an individually randomised fashion ( with vaccinees and controls compared within each ring ) . From a scienti ﬁ c and feasibility standpoint , then , iRCTs of some form or another retain great attraction . REFERENCES 1 Cohen J , Kupferschmidt K . Tough choices ahead in Ebola vaccine trials . Sci Mag 2014 [ published Online First : October 7 ] . 2 Cohen J . Issues continue to dog the testing of Ebola drugs and vaccines . Sci Mag 2014 . [ published Online First : October 16 ] . http : / / news . sciencemag . org / health / 2014 / 10 / issues - continue - dog - testing - ebola - drugs - and - vaccines 3 Adebamowo C , Bah - Sow O , Binka F , et al . Randomised controlled trials for Ebola : practical and ethical issues . Lancet 2014 ; 384 : 1423 – 4 . 4 Kass N , Goodman S . Trials tempered by compassion and humility . New York Times December 1 2014 . 5 Caplan AL , Plunkett C , Levin B . Selecting the right tool for the job . Am J Bioeth 2015 ; 15 : 4 – 10 . 6 O ’ Connor D . For immediate help , the ethics of research have to change . Guardian 11 October 2014 . 7 Presidential commission for the study of bioethical issues . Ethics and Ebola : Public health planning and response . Washington DC , 2015 . 8 Macklin R . Research Ethics and Ebola . Huf ﬁ ngton Post , 2014 . 9 Boseley S . Ebola vaccine trials with placebo group would be unethical , scientists say . Guardian , October 10 2014 . 10 Draguez B . Ebola : On Experimental Treatments and Vaccines 2014 [ updated October 17 . http : / / www . doctorswithoutborders . org / article / ebola - experimental - treatments - and - vaccines ( accessed 11 Jun 2016 ) . 11 Folayan MO , Yakubu A , Haire B , et al . Ebola vaccine development plan : ethics , concerns and proposed measures . BMC Med Ethics 2016 ; 17 : 10 . 12 WHO Ebola Response Team . Ebola virus disease in West Africa — the ﬁ rst 9 months of the epidemic and forward projections . N Engl J Med 2014 ; 371 : 1481 – 95 . 13 Meltzer MI , Atkins CY , Santibanez S , et al . Estimating the future number of cases in the Ebola Epidemic — Liberia and Sierra Leone , 2014 – 2015 . Atlanta : Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) , 2014 : 1 – 14 . 14 Takahashi S , Metcalf CJ , Ferrari MJ , et al . Reduced vaccination and the risk of measles and other childhood infections post - Ebola . Science 2015 ; 347 : 1240 – 2 . 15 Cox E , Borio L , Temple R . Evaluating Ebola therapies — the case for RCTs . N Engl J Med 2014 ; 371 : 2350 – 1 . 16 Sissoko D , Laouenan C , Folkesson E , et al . Experimental treatment with favipiravir for Ebola virus disease ( the JIKI Trial ) : a historically controlled , single - arm proof - of - concept trial in Guinea . PLoS Med 2016 ; 13 : e1001967 . 17 Lipsitch M , Eyal N , Halloran E , et al . Vaccine testing : Ebola and beyond . Sci Mag 2015 ; 348 : 46 – 8 . 18 Henao - Restrepo AM , Longini IM , Egger M , et al . Ef ﬁ cacy and effectiveness of an rVSV - vectored vaccine expressing Ebola surface glycoprotein : interim results from the Guinea ring vaccination cluster - randomised trial . Lancet 2015 ; 386 : 857 – 66 . 19 Ebola ca Suf ﬁ t Ring Vaccination Trial Consortium . The ring vaccination trial : a novel cluster randomised controlled trial design to evaluate vaccine ef ﬁ cacy and effectiveness during outbreaks , with special reference to Ebola . BMJ 2015 ; 351 : h3740 . 20 WHO . Ethical considerations for use of unregistered interventions for Ebola viral disease ( EVD ) - - WHO statement . Geneva : WHO , 2014 [ updated August 12 ] . http : / / www . who . int / mediacentre / news / statements / 2014 / ebola - ethical - review - summary / en / ( accessed 12 Aug 2014 ) . 21 Halloran ME , Longini J , Ira M , et al . Design and analysis of vaccine studies . New York : Springer , 2010 . 22 Rid A . The goals of research during an epidemic . Am J Bioeth 2015 ; 15 : 47 – 50 . 23 Toure A . People infected with Ebola would fear a placebo . New York Times 3 December 2014 . 24 Coleman CH . The Ethics of Using Placebo Controls in Ebola Clinical Trials . Health Reform Watch : Seton Hall , 2014 . 25 Qin E , Bi J , Zhao M , et al . Clinical features of patients with Ebola virus disease in Sierra Leone . Clin Infect Dis 2015 ; 61 : 491 – 5 . 26 Pitzer VE , Leung GM , Lipsitch M . Estimating variability in the transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome to household contacts in Hong Kong , China . Am J Epidemiol 2007 ; 166 : 355 – 63 . 27 Rid A , Miller FG . Ethical rationale for the Ebola “ ring vaccination ” trial design . Am J Public Health 2016 ; 106 : 432 – 5 . 28 Doussau A , Grady C . Deciphering assumptions about stepped wedge designs : the case of Ebola vaccine research . J Med Ethics 2016 ; 42 : 797 – – 804 . 29 Cohen IG , Daniels N , Eyal N , eds . Identi ﬁ ed vs . statistical persons . New York : Oxford UP , 2015 . 6 30 Eyal N , Lipsitch M . J Med Ethics 2017 ; 43 : 62 5 – 63 1 . doi : 10 . 1136 / medethics - 2015 - 103220 Research ethics 30 Miller FG . The ethical challenges of human research : selected essays . 1st edn . New York : Oxford UP , 2012 . 31 Lilford RJ , Jackson J . Equipoise and the ethics of randomization . J R Soc Med 1995 ; 88 : 552 – 9 . 32 Fried C . Medical experimentation : personal integrity and social policy . New York : North - Holland Publishing Company , 1974 . 33 Canadian Institutes of Health Research , Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada , Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada . Tri - Council Policy Statement : Ethical Conduct for Research Involving Humans , 2014 . 34 Freedman B . Equipoise and the ethics of clinical research . N Engl J Med 1987 ; 317 : 141 – 5 . 35 Ledgerwood JE , DeZure AD , Stanley DA , et al . Chimpanzee adenovirus vector Ebola vaccine — preliminary report . N Engl J Med 2017 ; 376 : 928 – 38 . 36 Ewer K , Rampling T , Venkatraman N , et al . A Monovalent chimpanzee adenovirus Ebola vaccine boosted with MVA . N Engl J Med 2016 ; 374 : 1635 – 46 . 37 Ruble K . The End of Ebola : Inside the Race to Finish Vaccine Trials in Liberia 2015 [ updated April 19 ] . https : / / news . vice . com / article / the - end - of - ebola - inside - the - race - to - ﬁ nish - vaccine - trials - in - liberia ( accessed 20 Apr 2015 ) . 38 Branswell H . Halted study of Canadian Ebola vaccine resumes with lower dose : CTV News ; 2015 [ updated January 6 ] . http : / / www . ctvnews . ca / health / halted - study - of - canadian - ebola - vaccine - resumes - with - lower - dose - 1 . 2174655 ( accessed 29 Jan 2015 ) . 39 Lemmens T , Miller PB . Avoiding a Jekyll - And - Hyde approach to the ethics of clinical research and practice . Am J Bioeth 2002 ; 2 : 14 – 17 . 40 Duerr A , Huang Y , Buchbinder Y , et al . Extended follow - up con ﬁ rms early vaccine - enhanced risk of HIV acquisition and demonstrates waning effect over time among participants in a randomized trial of recombinant adenovirus HIV vaccine ( Step study ) . J Infect Dis 2012 ; 206 : 258 – 66 . 41 Wasunna M . In Africa , broader ethical considerations are common . New York Times 1 December 2014 . 42 Selgelid M . Ethics Perspective on Proposed Emergency Use of Vaccine in Affected Countries in Parallel with Phase 2 Clinical Trials . Geneva , Switzerland : WHO consultation on Ebola vaccines . 2014 . 43 GSK staff . Our contribution to the ﬁ ght against Ebola 2015 . http : / / www . gsk . com / en - gb / our - stories / health - for - all / our - contribution - to - the - ﬁ ght - against - ebola / ( accessed 29 Jan 2015 ) . 44 Moses L . Don ’ t ignore established research ethics when treating Ebola . New York Times , 1 December 2014 . 45 Fleck F , Lesher A . The race against time . Bull World Health Organ 2015 ; 93 : 7 – 8 . 46 WHO Ethics Working Group . Ethical issues related to study design for trials on therapeutics for Ebola virus disease , 20 - 21 October meeting , 2014 . 47 Bellan SE , Pulliam JR , Pearson CA , et al . Statistical power and validity of Ebola vaccine trials in Sierra Leone : a simulation study of trial design and analysis . Lancet Infect Dis 2015 ; 15 : 703 – 10 . 63 1 Eyal N , Lipsitch M . J Med Ethics 2017 ; 43 : 62 5 – 63 1 . doi : 10 . 1136 / medethics - 2015 - 103220 Research ethics