2 Robots in the Wild : A Time for More Robust Theories of Human - Robot Interaction MALTE JUNG , Cornell University , USA PAMELA HINDS , Stanford University , USA CCS Concepts : • Human - centered computing → Interaction design theory , concepts and paradigms ; Field studies ; • Social and professional topics → Computer supported cooperative work ; • General and reference → Surveys and overviews ; • Computer systems organization → Robotics ; Additional Key Words and Phrases : Human - robot interaction , robots in groups and teams , field research ACM Reference format : Malte Jung and Pamela Hinds . 2018 . Robots in the Wild : A Time for More Robust Theories of Human - Robot Interaction . ACM Trans . Hum . - Robot Interact . 7 , 1 , Article 2 ( May 2018 ) , 5 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3208975 Human - robot interaction ( HRI ) research to date has been dominated by laboratory studies , largely examining a single human interacting with a single robot . This research has helped establish a fundamental understanding about people as they interact with robots , how specific design choices affect interactions with robots , and how novel mechanisms or computational tools can be used to improve HRI . The predominant focus of this growing body of work , however , stands in stark contrast to the complex social contexts in which robots are increasingly placed . Developments in machine learning and tele - robotics , as well as compliant and social robotics , have occasioned more robots in closer proximity and even direct contact with people . Robots , especially mobile autonomous robots , are now deployed across work contexts and “sociable robots” such as Jibo , Cozmo , Kuri , and M . A . X . are increasingly becoming staples of household technology . These robots interact with people in everyday contexts across a wide range of tasks and situations , yet our research reflects a time when studies of HRI were possible almost exclusively only in laboratory settings . As a result , we have a limited understanding of how people will respond to robots in complex social settings and how robots will affect social dynamics in situ . In particular , our theories reflect an oversimplified view of HRI . The time is ripe for studies that tackle HRI in these complex settings and build generalizable theories about what to expect of HRI in the wild . Although there is much to be learned in controlled laboratory settings and they should continue to be a mainstay of HRI studies , we argue that more HRI researchers need to venture into the This material is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation ( NSF ) under grant no . IIS - 1139161 . Any find - ings , recommendations , conclusions , or opinions expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NSF . Authors’ addresses : M . Jung , Information Science , Cornell University , Gates Hall , 220A , Ithaca , NY 14853 ; email : mjung @ cornell . edu ; P . Hinds , Management Science and Engineering , Stanford University , Huang Engineering Center , 207 , Stanford , CA 94305 ; email : phinds @ stanford . edu . Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the Owner / Author . 2018 Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . 2573 - 9522 / 2018 / 05 - ART2 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3208975 ACM Transactions on Human - Robot Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , Article 2 . Publication date : May 2018 . 2 : 2 M . Jung and P . Hinds workplace , the home , and into public settings where people are and will increasingly engage with robots . Further , we call for more studies that examine the effect of robots in multi - person contexts such as work teams , families , or groups in public settings to understand a robot’s influence beyond a single person directly interacting with it . 1 UNDERSTANDING THE CONTEXT WITHIN WHICH THE SOCIAL TAKES PLACE Studies that have examined robots in context have provided vital information about how robots change the way that people work , how people from different professions interact with robots , and how activities surrounding interactions with robots affect people’s behavior and their attitudes toward robots . Research on hospital delivery robots , for example , has demonstrated that how peo - ple respond to a robot depends on patient needs , work practices within a given unit [ 10 ] , and job roles [ 20 ] . The introduction of robots can also alter work practices and occupations . In a study of two pharmacy delivery robots in the United Kingdom , for example , Barrett et al . [ 1 ] found that pharmacy technicians expanded their role by tending to the robot whereas pharmacy assistants lost control over their work tasks , which were increasingly dictated by the demands of the robot and the technicians [ 1 ] . Studies of science teams operating remote rovers also tell us that work - ing with a robot can alter fundamental aspects of scientists’ practices ( e . g . , Vertesi [ 22 ] ) and that increased autonomy can lead to questions about how to interpret a robot’s activities [ 21 ] . Longi - tudinal studies of the Robovie robot in shopping malls also show that people tend to approach a robot in groups and are more likely to act on the robot’s advice about what stores to visit if they feel they have a relationship with it [ 7 ] . Overall , from studies of robots conducted in situ , we have gleaned important insights about how robots fit into and change the social structures at work , at home , and in public settings , and how people behave when robots are intertwined with their daily lives . Unfortunately , studies of robots in context are too few . As a result , we cannot predict with confidence the effects that a robot will have across a variety of complex social contexts . It is hard to know when existing findings from the lab will hold since they tell us little about how people will respond to robots embedded in the complex web of activities and social relationships that characterize our lives . In order to build generalizable theory of HRI “in the wild , ” we need research that provides a principled un - derstanding of what to expect with different types of robots , performing different types of tasks , in different types of social situations and cultures . 2 UNDERSTANDING A ROBOT’S IMPACT ON THE SOCIAL BEYOND THE INDIVIDUAL A growing number of studies have also demonstrated that a robot can affect its social environment beyond the person who is interacting with it . Such influence can play out in multiple ways . We know that robots can take the role of a mediator and actively influence how two or more people relate to or interact with one another . Early studies of robots used in autism therapy , for example , show that robots can shape how children socially interact with others ( for a review , see Scassellati et al . [ 14 ] ) . The work of Hoffman and colleagues also suggests that nonverbal fear expressions by a low anthropomorphic robot can have a moderating effect in diffusing tension in marital conflict [ 4 ] . Expanding the focus from dyads to groups , Short and colleagues showed that intergenerational interactions between older adults and their families could be shaped through a robot’s behavior [ 19 ] . Finally , Mutlu and colleagues [ 11 ] studied groups of museum visitors and demonstrated that even subtle , nonverbal gaze cues are sufficient to impact entire groups by shaping social roles . However , even robots that are not intentionally designed with a moderating role can shape inter - personal interactions , for example , by shaping norms of social conduct through their behavior . Lee and colleagues , for example , documented “ripple effects” of a robot’s behavior as it influenced how people interacted with each other and as it influenced the shared norms that people developed ACM Transactions on Human - Robot Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , Article 2 . Publication date : May 2018 . Robots in the Wild : A Time for More Robust Theories of Human - Robot Interaction 2 : 3 regarding appropriate ways of interacting with the robot [ 8 ] . There is also evidence that a robot’s mere presence can affect how people interact with each other [ 2 , 12 ] . Dole [ 2 ] , for example , showed that participants looked at a nutritionist more and perceived her as less warm when in the presence of a physically embodied social robot as compared to a tablet computer or a nonsocial robot [ 2 ] . Taken together , these studies provide strong evidence that robots can influence how people interact with others , the roles that people assume , and the norms that groups develop . Despite this evidence for a robot’s impact beyond the individual , findings are not yet integrated into theories about how robots will impact groups of people . Having theory that extends beyond a single human and a single robot is important . Without it , we cannot predict how certain design choices will impact the social environment in which the robot is placed and the consequences of such an impact . One area in which our lack of theory is particularly apparent is robot - supported work in teams . Early attempts to theorize the impact of robots on teamwork exist [ 18 , 24 ] but are far too few and limited in scope . We have little understanding about a robot’s influence on processes that are core to a team—such as decision making , conflict , or coordination—despite decades of research on teams that establishes that such processes are crucial for the short - and long - term functioning and performance of teams . Developing theory about a robot’s impact on teamwork is pressing since despite initial doubts [ 3 ] , the idea that robots will become an integral part of teams is increasingly viable . Autonomous robots already support work teams in offices [ 8 ] , hospitals [ 10 ] , manufacturing [ 13 ] , and space exploration [ 22 ] . Especially given recent efforts to develop autonomous robots to support even high - stakes teamwork , such as surgery [ 16 ] and firefighting [ 5 ] , we need to build a principled understanding about how robots are likely to affect group processes and dynamics . The performance of high - stakes teams and sometimes even their survival depends on a team’s social functioning , as has been well established from studies such as Weick’s analysis of the death of a team of firefighters due to a breakdown in team communication and social structure [ 23 ] . 3 WHERE TO GO FROM HERE ? We believe that , as more of these robots permeate our workplaces , homes , and public settings , the time is right for more studies of autonomous mobile robots in the wild . Studies should in - clude qualitative and quantitative approaches but optimally examine behaviors and interactions over long enough periods to see how robots are integrated into and change the context over time . Responses to and effects of robots are likely to be especially sensitive to professional practices , status structures , social identities , and cultural norms . In particular , how people and groups are affected by different levels of autonomy , methods of interaction ( e . g . , voice , text , etc . ) , and the role of the robot are likely to be highly dependent on context . We advocate for studies that examine design elements in multiple different contexts , including different types of workplaces , homes with different types of family structures , and a range of public settings . There are , of course , good rea - sons that field studies are less prevalent in HRI , including limited numbers of mobile autonomous robots deployed and in use , issues with the cost and reliability of robots , and the time and expense of conducting field studies . This is changing , though , as robots become more reliable and more commercially available . We further call for more studies that explore a robot’s influence on processes and dynamics of groups and the consequences of such influence as well as efforts to integrate findings into theory . As “much of the world’s work is done by small groups ( e . g . , juries , work units , army squads , athletic teams ) , ” [ 9 , p . 621 ] , and efforts are underway to support work with robots in a wide variety of areas , we think it is particularly timely to learn more about robots in work teams . A focus on a robot’s impact on group dynamics also opens novel opportunities for design , es - pecially when it comes to robot - supported teamwork . Most existing research on human - robot ACM Transactions on Human - Robot Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , Article 2 . Publication date : May 2018 . 2 : 4 M . Jung and P . Hinds teamwork has been focusing on developing task - centric techniques that allow a robot to support a single human in accomplishing a task , for example , by supplying needed parts to complete an as - sembly [ 17 ] . Focusing on a robot’s impact on group processes acknowledges that work is typically performed by more than one person and opens possibilities for robots to better support teamwork through more social roles . Studies by Jung et al . [ 6 ] and Sebo et al . [ 15 ] , for example , show the potential for robots to shape processes such as conflict and trust in teams even though an impact on group performance has not yet been demonstrated [ 6 , 15 ] . As HRI researchers , we have the opportunity to break new conceptual ground by conducting research on people and robots in the wild . With robots moving increasingly into our workplaces , homes , and public settings , more opportunities will arise to study people and robots in complex social settings characterized by multiple people , roles , tasks , goals , and dependencies . Compar - ative studies in these settings can help to explain variations in responses as a way of building theory . We also advocate for leveraging more theories from the social sciences and assembling interdisciplinary research teams that span robotics , design , and the behavioral sciences . Taking up this challenge , we argue , will lay the foundation for more robust , nuanced , and comprehensive theories of HRI . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation ( NSF ) under Grant No . IIS - 1139161 . Any findings , recommendations , conclusions , or opinions expressed in this ma - terial are those of the author ( s ) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NSF . REFERENCES [ 1 ] M . Barrett , E . Oborn , W . J . Orlikowski , and J . Yates . 2012 . Reconfiguring boundary relations : Robotic innovations in pharmacy work . Organization Science 23 , 5 , 1448 – 1466 . [ 2 ] Lorin Dole . 2017 . The Influence of a Robot’s Mere Presence on Human Communication . Ph . D . Dissertation . Stanford University , CA . [ 3 ] Victoria Groom and Clifford Nass . 2007 . Can robots be teammates ? : Benchmarks in human robot teams . Interaction Studies 8 , 3 , 483 – 500 . [ 4 ] Guy Hoffman , Oren Zuckerman , Gilad Hirschberger , Michal Luria , and Tal Shani Sherman . 2015 . Design and eval - uation of a peripheral robotic conversation companion . In Proceedings of the 10th Annual ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human - Robot Interaction . 3 – 10 . [ 5 ] Ji Hyeon Hong , Julia Taylor , and Eric T . Matson . 2014 . Natural multi - language interaction between firefighters and fire fighting robots . In Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE / WIC / ACM International Joint Conferences on Web Intelligence ( WI ) and Intelligent Agent Technologies ( IAT ) , Vol . 3 . 183 – 189 . [ 6 ] Malte F . Jung , Nikolas Martelaro , and Pamela J . Hinds . 2015 . Using robots to moderate team conflict : The case of repairingviolations . In Proceedingsofthe10thAnnualACM / IEEEInternationalConferenceonHuman - RobotInteraction . 229 – 236 . [ 7 ] T . Kanda , M . Shiomi , Z . Miyashita , H . Ishiguro , and N . Hagita . 2010 . A communication robot in a shopping mall . IEEE Transactions on Robotics 26 , 5 , 897 – 913 . [ 8 ] Min Kyung Lee , Sara Kiesler , Jodi Forlizzi , and Paul Rybski . 2012 . Ripple effects of an embedded social agent : A field study of a social robot in the workplace . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI’12 ) . 695 – 704 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2207776 [ 9 ] John M . Levine and Richard L . Moreland . 1990 . Progress in small group research . Annual Review of Psychology 41 , 1 , 585 – 634 . [ 10 ] B . Mutlu and J . Forlizzi . 2008 . Robots in organizations : The role of workflow , social , and environmental factors in human - robot interaction . In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human - Robot Interaction ( HRI ) . Amsterdam , 287 – 294 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1349822 . 1349860 [ 11 ] Bilge Mutlu , Toshiyuki Shiwa , Takayuki Kanda , Hiroshi Ishiguro , and Norihiro Hagita . 2009 . Footing in human - robot conversations : How robots might shape participant roles using gaze cues . In Proceedings of the 4th ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human - Robot Interaction . 61 – 68 . [ 12 ] N . Riether , F . Hegel , B . Wrede , and G . Horstmann . 2012 . Social facilitation with social robots ? In Proceedings of the 7th Annual ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human - Robot Interaction . 41 – 48 . ACM Transactions on Human - Robot Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , Article 2 . Publication date : May 2018 . Robots in the Wild : A Time for More Robust Theories of Human - Robot Interaction 2 : 5 [ 13 ] A . Sauppé and B . Mutlu . 2015 . The social impact of a robot co - worker in industrial settings . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 3613 – 3622 . [ 14 ] B . Scassellati , H . Admoni , and M . Matarić . 2012 . Robots for use in autism research Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering 14 , 275 – 294 . [ 15 ] Sarah Strohkorb Sebo , Margaret Traeger , Malte Jung , and Brian Scassellati . 2018 . The ripple effects of vulnerability : The effects of a robot’s vulnerable behavior on trust in human - robot teams . In Proceedings of the 13th ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human Robot Interaction ( HRI’18 ) . Chicago , IL . [ 16 ] Azad Shademan , Ryan S . Decker , Justin D . Opfermann , Simon Leonard , Axel Krieger , and Peter C . W . Kim . 2016 . Supervised autonomous robotic soft tissue surgery . Science Translational Medicine 8 , 337 . [ 17 ] Julie Shah , James Wiken , Brian Williams , and Cynthia Breazeal . 2011 . Improved human - robot team performance using Chaski , a human - inspired plan execution system . In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Human - Robot Interaction . 29 – 36 . [ 18 ] Solace Shen , Hamish Tennent , and Malte Jung . 2017 . Robot chameleons and small group decision making : The case of conformity . Paper presented at INGRoup 2017 . [ 19 ] Elaine Short , Katelyn Swift - Spong , Hyunju Shim , Kristi M . Wisniewski , DeanahKim Zak , Shinyi Wu , Elizabeth Zelin - ski , and Maja J . Matarić . 2017 . Understanding social interactions with socially assistive robotics in intergenerational family groups . In IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication ( RO - MAN’17 ) . Lis - bon , Portugal . [ 20 ] R . M . Siino and P . J . Hinds . 2005 . Robots , gender & sensemaking : Sex segregation’s impact on workers making sense of a mobile autonomous robot . In Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation ( ICRA’05 ) . 2773 – 2778 . [ 21 ] Kristen Stubbs , Pamela J . Hinds , and David Wettergreen . 2007 . Autonomy and common ground in human - robot interaction : A field study . IEEE Intelligent Systems 22 , 2 . [ 22 ] J . Vertesi . 2012 . Seeing like a Rover : Visualization , embodiment , and interaction on the Mars exploration Rover mis - sion . Social Studies of Science 42 , 3 , 393 – 414 . [ 23 ] Karl E . Weick . 1993 . The collapse of sensemaking in organizations : The Mann Gulch disaster . ACM Transactions on Human - Robot Interaction 7 , 1 ( 1993 ) , Article 1 , 628 – 652 . [ 24 ] S . YouandL . Robert . 2017 . Teamingupwithrobots : AnIMOI ( inputs - mediators - outputs - inputs ) frameworkofhuman - robot teamwork . International Journal of Robot Engineering 2 , 003 . Received April 2018 ; accepted April 2018 ACM Transactions on Human - Robot Interaction , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , Article 2 . Publication date : May 2018 .