Deconstructing the Cadherin - Catenin - Actin Complex Soichiro Yamada , 1 , 3 Sabine Pokutta , 1 , 2 , 3 Frauke Drees , 1 , 3 William I . Weis , 1 , 2 , * and W . James Nelson 1 , * 1 Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology 2 Department of Structural Biology Stanford University School of Medicine , Stanford , CA 94305 , USA 3 These authors contributed equally to this work . * Contact : bill . weis @ stanford . edu ( W . I . W . ) ; wjnelson @ stanford . edu ( W . J . N . ) DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2005 . 09 . 020 SUMMARY Spatial and functional organization of cells in tissues is determined by cell - cell adhe - sion , thought to be initiated through trans - interactions between extracellular domains of the cadherin family of adhesion proteins , and strengthened by linkage to the actin cy - toskeleton . Prevailing dogma is that cad - herins are linked to the actin cytoskeleton through b - catenin and a - catenin , although the quaternary complex has never been demonstrated . We test this hypothesis and ﬁnd that a - catenin does not interact with ac - tin ﬁlaments and the E - cadherin - b - catenin complex simultaneously , even in the pres - ence of the actin binding proteins vinculin and a - actinin , either in solution or on iso - lated cadherin - containing membranes . Di - rect analysis in polarized cells shows that mobilities of E - cadherin , b - catenin , and a - catenin are similar , regardless of the dy - namic state of actin assembly , whereas actin and several actin binding proteins have higher mobilities . These results sug - gest that the linkage between the cadherin - catenin complex and actin ﬁlaments is more dynamic than previously appreciated . INTRODUCTION The spatial and functional organization of cells in tissues is determined by cell - cell adhesion ( Takeichi , 1995 ) . The cad - herin family of Ca 2 + - dependent cell - cell - adhesion proteins play important roles in initiating adhesion and cell sorting in development ( Takeichi , 1995 ; Foty and Steinberg , 2005 ) . Disruption of cadherin function abrogates normal embryonic development ( Larue et al . , 1994 ; Tepass et al . , 1996 ; Costa et al . , 1998 ) and is a common occurrence in metastatic can - cers ( Thiery , 2002 ) . Regulation of cadherin - mediated cell - cell adhesion is de - termined by distinct protein interactions of the cadherin ex - tracellular and cytoplasmic domains . The extracellular do - main forms homo - and heterophilic bonds with cadherins on adjacent cells , which specify cell - cell recognition and sorting of mixtures of cells ( Gumbiner , 2000 ; Foty and Steinberg , 2005 ) . Binding between cadherin extracellular domains is relatively weak , but cell - cell adhesion may be strengthened by lateral clustering of cadherins mediated by protein linkages between the cadherin cytoplasmic do - main and the actin cytoskeleton ( Jamora and Fuchs , 2002 ) . The cadherin cytoplasmic domain forms a high afﬁn - ity , 1 : 1 complex with b - catenin , and b - catenin binds with lower afﬁnity to a - catenin ( Aberle et al . , 1994 ; Hinck et al . , 1994 ; Pokutta and Weis , 2000 ; Huber and Weis , 2001 ) . Several studies show that a - catenin interacts with the ac - tin cytoskeleton . Puriﬁed a - catenin binds and bundles actin ﬁlaments in vitro , and the actin binding site of a - catenin maps to the C - terminal domain ( Rimm et al . , 1995 ; Pokutta et al . , 2002 ) . In addition to binding actin , a - catenin interacts with actin binding proteins , including vinculin ( Watabe - Uchida et al . , 1998 ; Weiss et al . , 1998 ) , a - actinin ( Knudsen et al . , 1995 ; Hazan et al . , 1997 ) , ZO - 1 ( Itoh et al . , 1997 ) , spectrin ( Pradhan et al . , 2001 ) , Ajuba ( Marie et al . , 2003 ) , afadin ( Pokutta et al . , 2002 ) , and formin ( Kobielak et al . , 2004 ) . However , the key experiment showing that a - catenin binds simultaneously to the cadherin - b - catenin complex and actin , either directly or indirectly through actin binding pro - teins , has not been performed . Here we show that a - catenin binding to b - catenin and a - catenin binding to actin ﬁlaments are mutually exclusive , both in vitro and on isolated cadherin - containing membrane patches , and are independent of E - cadherin clustering . In these assays , we could not estab - lish an indirect link of the cadherin - catenin complex and actin ﬁlaments through vinculin or a - actinin . The cadherin - catenin complex displays dynamics very different from actin or other actin - associated proteins in in vivo imaging experiments . These results indicate that our understanding of how cad - herins interact with the actin cytoskeleton must be reas - sessed . Cell 123 , 889 – 901 , December 2 , 2005 ª 2005 Elsevier Inc . 889 RESULTS Binding of a - Catenin to Actin and b - Catenin Is Mutually Exclusive E - cadherin cytoplasmic domain ( E cyto ) , b - catenin , and a - catenin form a stoichiometric complex in vitro ( see below ) . We tested whether a - catenin could bind simultaneously to the E - cadherin - b - catenin complex and actin ﬁlaments in an actin - ﬁlament pelleting assay ( Figure 1A ) . A small amount of E - cadherin - b - catenin complex pelleted with actin ﬁla - ments , which most likely is due to nonspeciﬁc protein trap - ping in the actin - ﬁlament network . Puriﬁed a - catenin pelleted with actin ﬁlaments ( Rimm et al . , 1995 ; Pokutta et al . , 2002 ) . a - catenin also pelleted with actin ﬁlaments in the presence of increasing concentrations of E - cadherin - b - catenin complex , whereas the E - cadherin - b - catenin complex did not pellet above the background level ( Figure 1A ) , even though the assay was performed at protein concentrations that were sufﬁcient to form a ternary E cyto - b - catenin - a - catenin com - plex . Similar results were obtained when plakoglobin was substituted for b - catenin ( see Figure S1 in the Supplemental Data available with this article online ) . This result indicates that the interaction of a - catenin with actin ﬁlaments signiﬁ - cantly decreases the afﬁnity of a - catenin for the cadherin - catenin complex . It was reported previously that puriﬁed b - catenin pelleted with a - catenin and actin ( Rimm et al . , 1995 ) . In that study , both b - catenin and a - catenin were pre - pared as GST - fusion proteins , which raises the possibility that b - catenin was pelleted through homodimerization of the GST tag rather than a direct a - catenin - b - catenin interaction . Since the afﬁnity of the a - catenin - b - catenin interaction is low , we generated a chimeric b - catenin - a - catenin protein and tested its binding to actin ﬁlaments . The chimera mimics the interaction of the two proteins by covalently linking the a - catenin binding site of b - catenin to the b - catenin binding domain of a - catenin ( Pokutta and Weis , 2000 ) and extends to the C terminus of a - catenin including the actin binding site ( Figure 1B ) ; this creates a high effective concentration of the partners that favors formation of the complex . The chimera failed to bind actin in the pelleting assay ( Figure 1C ) , demonstrating that the interaction of b - catenin with a - catenin strongly affected the afﬁnity of a - catenin for actin . Taken together , these results show that the interaction of a - catenin with the E - cadherin - b - catenin complex and actin ﬁlaments is mutually exclusive . Clustering of E - Cadherin Intracellular Domain Does Not Affect b - Catenin - a - Catenin - Actin Binding Lateral clustering of cadherins is thought to be important in the formation of strong cell - cell adhesions ( Yap et al . , 1997 ) and may increase interactions of the cadherin - catenin complex with the actin cytoskeleton . To mimic cadherin clustering , E - cadherin cytoplasmic domain was fused to the coiled - coil domain of the cartilage oligomeric matrix pro - tein ( COMP ) , which forms a pentamer ( Tomschy et al . , 1996 ) ( Figure 2A ) . Gel ﬁltration chromatography showed that GST - COMP - E cyto eluted at a molecular weight higher than that calculated for the pentamer ( S . P . and F . D . , unpublished data ) , which is most likely due to the unstructured nature of E cyto when not bound to b - catenin ( Huber et al . , 2001 ) and / or further protein oligomerization through the GST tag . In a pull - down assay , we compared binding of increasing amounts of a - catenin to constant amounts of either GST - COMP - E cyto or GST - E cyto and b - catenin and found no de - tectable difference ( Figure 2B ) . This result shows that clus - tering of the E - cadherin - b - catenin complex by COMP did not affect a - catenin binding to b - catenin . We next tested the effect of E - cadherin - b - catenin oligo - merization on a - catenin binding in the presence of actin ﬁla - ments in the actin pelleting assay . Neither GST - COMP - E cyto - b - catenin nor GST - E cyto - b - catenin pelleted with a - catenin and actin ﬁlaments ( Figure 2C ) . This result demonstrates that a - catenin bound to F - actin does not associate with b - catenin bound to E - cadherin , even when oligomerization increased the local concentration of the E - cadherin - b - catenin complex . Reconstitution of b - and a - Catenin Assembly at E - Cadherin Adhesion Sites on Puriﬁed Lateral Membrane Patches Cadherins are transmembrane proteins that become orga - nized into clusters in the plasma membrane in part through trans - interactions with cadherins on the opposing cell ( Gumbiner , 2000 ) . These conditions were not met by the so - lution biochemistry experiments described above . There - fore , we developed a method to reconstitute the catenin complex onto cadherin - containing plasma membranes iso - lated from mammalian epithelial cells . MDCK cells rapidly at - tached and spread on a substratum of correctly oriented , high - density extracellular domain of E - cadherin fused to Fc puriﬁed from HEK293 mammalian cells ( Figure 3A ) ; in this short period , few or no integrin - based adhesions were formed ( Drees et al . , 2004 ) . The ventral cell surface is the in - terface between endogenous cadherin and the cadherin substratum . To access the cytoplasmic side of this ventral cell surface , cell monolayers were sonicated brieﬂy to re - move the dorsal plasma membrane , nucleus , and almost all intracellular membrane organelles , a treatment termed ‘‘un - rooﬁng’’ ( Drees et al . , 2004 ; Heuser , 2000 ; Figure 3A ) . A patchwork of ventral membranes attached to the cadherin substratum was left behind after sonication ( Figure 3B ) . Puncta - like clusters containing E - cadherin , b - catenin , and a - catenin overlayed by actin ﬁlaments were localized at the interface with the E - cadherin substratum ( Figure 3B ) . In order to reconstitute catenin and actin binding at E - cadherin - mediated adhesion sites on these ventral mem - brane patches , membrane - associated proteins were re - moved with 4 M guanidine hydrochloride , including nearly all b - and a - catenin , as judged by immunostaining ( Figure 3C ) , and other membrane - associated proteins , including ac - tin and vinculin ( F . D . , unpublished data ) . Note that mem - brane patches containing E - cadherin remained attached to the substratum and that the exposed cytoplasmic do - main of E - cadherin is natively unfolded ( Huber et al . , 2001 ) and , therefore , would be unaffected by 4 M guanidine 890 Cell 123 , 889 – 901 , December 2 , 2005 ª 2005 Elsevier Inc . hydrochloride . Subsequent incubation of the stripped mem - brane patches with puriﬁed recombinant b - catenin led to the readdition of b - catenin to the membranes , where it colocal - ized precisely with E - cadherin clusters ( Figure 3C ) . As ex - pected , a - catenin did not bind to stripped membranes . However , when membrane patches were preincubated with b - catenin , a - catenin accumulated with b - catenin at E - cadherin clusters ( Figure 3C ) . Quantiﬁcation of the ﬂuores - cent signal of a - or b - catenin added to the patches relative to theE - cadherinimmunoﬂuorescencesignalconﬁrmedthisob - servation ( Figure 3D ) . b - catenin addition to patches reached about 80 % of the prestripped control levels . a - catenin addi - tion in the presence of b - catenin was less efﬁcient , reaching only about 25 % of control levels , perhaps reﬂecting the weaker afﬁnity of the a - catenin - b - catenin interaction under these conditions . We tested whether phosphorylation of catenins affected their binding to E - cadherin . Although phosphorylation of b - catenin by casein kinase II ( CKII ) has been reported to increase its afﬁnity for a - catenin in vitro ( Bek and Kemler , 2002 ) , we did not ﬁnd any increase in binding of a - catenin to phosphorylated b - catenin . We found that a - catenin is also a substrate for CKII ( data not shown ) , but we found that phosphorylation did not affect a - catenin binding to b - catenin on membrane patches ( Figure 3D ) or in an in vitro pull - down assay ( unpublished data ) . In summary , speciﬁc , order - of - addition catenin binding can be reconstituted with - out posttranslational phosphorylation on membrane patches at E - cadherin - mediated adhesion sites . Actin Filaments Do Not Assemble on Reconstituted Lateral Membrane Patches We tested whether the reconstituted cadherin - catenin com - plex on membrane patches could bind actin ﬁlaments . Al - though ﬂuorescein - labeled G - actin bound to membrane patches prior to stripping , we did not detect actin binding to Figure 1 . Reconstitution of the Cadherin - Catenin Complex but Not Actin Binding ( A ) F - actinpelletingassaywiththeE - cadherin - b - catenin - a - catenincomplex . F - actinwasincubatedwithincreasingamountsofE - cadherin - b - catenincom - plex ( control , top gel ) or with 5 m M a - catenin and increasing amounts of preformed E cyto - b - catenin complex ( bottom gel ) . Supernatant and pellet at each concentration point were analyzed by SDS - PAGE and CBB staining . ( B ) Schemeofthe ba - catenin construct . N - andC - terminal residuesofthe b - catenin ( red ) and a - catenin ( yellow ) sequence are indicated onthe bottom and top , respectively . ( C ) Pelleting assay with ba - catenin or a - catenin and F - actin , or ba - catenin or a - catenin without F - actin . S , supernatant containing the unbound protein ; P , pellet containing actin bound protein . Cell 123 , 889 – 901 , December 2 , 2005 ª 2005 Elsevier Inc . 891 strippedmembranepatchesortostrippedmembranepatches preincubated with b - catenin and a - catenin ( Figure 3E ) . Similar results were obtained if prepolymerized ﬁlaments were ad - ded to the membrane or a - or b - catenin was phosphorylated by CKII ( F . D . , unpublished data ) . This result was surprising since actin ﬁlaments were present on the original membrane patch prior to stripping with 4 M guanidine hydrochloride . The simplest explanation , taking into account our failure to reconstitute binding of the cadherin - catenin complex to ac - tin ﬁlaments in solution ( see above ) , is that actin ﬁlaments do not bind the cadherin - catenin complex on membranes . The presence of actin ﬁlaments on membrane patches prior to stripping may be due to their interaction with proteins other than the cadherin - catenin complex , although it remains pos - sible that additional proteins are required for interactions with this complex ( but see below ) . Vinculin and a - Actinin Are Not Sufﬁcient to Mediate Actin Binding to the Cadherin - Catenin Complex Several actin binding proteins interact with a - catenin and could mediate linkage of the cadherin - catenin complex to actin ﬁlaments ( Jamora and Fuchs , 2002 ) . Of these proteins , vinculin and a - actinin are considered good candidates ( see Introduction ) . To test whether vinculin can bridge an interaction between the cadherin - catenin complex and actin ﬁlaments , we Figure 2 . The Interaction of a - Catenin with b - Catenin or F - Actin Is Unaffected by E - Cadherin Clustering ( A ) Scheme of the COMP - E - cadherin cytoplasmic domain construct . N - and C - terminal residues of the COMP ( green ) and the E - cadherin ( blue ) sequence are indicated . ( B ) GST - E - cadherin ( left gel ) or GST - COMP - E - cadherin ( right gel ) , each at a concentration of 10 m M , was incubated with 10 m M b - catenin and increasing amounts of a - catenin . Protein complexes were isolated with glutathione agarose and analyzed by SDS - PAGE and CBB staining . ( C ) F - actin pelleting assay with b - catenin , E cyto , COMP - E cyto , and either E cyto or COMP - E cyto bound to b - catenin and a - catenin ; proteins were incubated with F - actin in a 1 : 1 ratio . After pelleting , the supernatant ( S ) and pellet ( P ) were analyzed by SDS - PAGE and CBB staining . 892 Cell 123 , 889 – 901 , December 2 , 2005 ª 2005 Elsevier Inc . Figure 3 . Reconstitution of the Cadherin - Catenin Complex on Membrane Patches ( A ) Scheme of chemical assembly of E - cadherin : Fc on a cover slip and generation of membrane patches . A glass coverslip is silanized with a long - chain silane containing afreeamino group , towhich sulfo - NHS - biotinislinked . NeutrAvidinandbiotinylatedproteinAareadded sequentially , followed bypuriﬁed E - cadherin : Fc . MDCK GII cells are allowed to adhere through the interaction of cellular E - cadherin with E - cadherin : Fc for 6 hr . After crosslinking with BS3 , cellsareswolleninhypotonicbufferandsonicatedbrieﬂy , leavingbehindthebasalmembranewithitscytoplasmicsideexposed ( fordetails , seeDreesetal . , 2004 ) . ( B ) FluorescentimagesofﬁxedmembranepatchesshowingstainingwiththemembranedyeDiIorantibodiesagainstactin , E - cadherinintracellulardomain , b - catenin , and a - catenin . ( C ) Indirect immunoﬂuorescence of E - cadherin , b - catenin ( b - cat ) , or a - catenin ( a - cat ) on membrane patches after stripping with 4 M guanidine hydrochlo - ride ( GnHCl ) and readdition of puriﬁed protein ( + b - cat or a - cat , or + b - cat and a - cat ) . ( D ) Quantiﬁcationof b - and a - cateninbindingtomembranepatches , measuredastheintensityofimmunoﬂuorescence signalofbothproteinsrelativetothe intensity of anti - E - cadherin immunoﬂuorescence and normalized to their control staining . Gn , 4 M guanidine hydrochloride treated ; b , 1 m M b - catenin added ; a , 5 m M a - catenin added ; P , a - or b - catenin prephosphorylated with casein kinase II . Error bars show SEM . ( E ) Membranes were treated as in ( C ) and subsequently incubated with 5 m M G - actin containing 10 % ﬂuorescein - labeled actin under polymerizing condi - tions . Membranes were ﬁxed before immunostaining with antibodies against E - cadherin intracellular domain . Scale bar , 10 m m . Cell 123 , 889 – 901 , December 2 , 2005 ª 2005 Elsevier Inc . 893 performed actin pelleting assays in the presence of vinculin , a - catenin , b - catenin , and E cyto . Vinculin , b - catenin , and E cyto did not pellet with a - catenin and actin ﬁlaments above back - ground levels ( Figure 4A ) . In the case of vinculin , this result is not surprising since its binding to actin and other ligands is autoinhibited by an intramolecular head - tail interaction ( Johnson and Craig , 1995 ) . Therefore , pull - down assays were used to compare binding of the vinculin head region with full - length vinculin to components of the cadherin - catenin complex . The head domain of vinculin bound directly Figure 4 . Vinculin and a - Actinin Interaction with a - Catenin ( A ) ActinpelletingassaywithGST - E cyto ( E ) , b - catenin ( b ) , a - catenin ( a ) , andfull - lengthvinculin ( VinFL ) . Thesupernatant ( SN ) andpellet ( PE ) wereanalyzedby SDS - PAGE and CBB staining . ( B ) Binding of full - length vinculin ( Vin FL ) or vinculin head domain ( Vin HD ) to His - a - catenin immobilized on Ni - NTA beads or GST - b - catenin immobilized on glutathione agarose beads . The concentration of proteins immobilized on beads and ﬁnal concentration of vinculin and vinculin head domain was 10 m M . Following SDS - PAGE , proteins were blotted with anti - vinculin antibody . Background binding to beads is indicated in the leftmost lanes of each gel . ( C ) Actin pelleting assay with 10 m M full - length vinculin ( Vin FL ) and increasing concentrations of GST - E - cadherin intracellular domain - b - catenin complex from 1 to 30 m M . The gel was stained with Coomassie blue . ( D ) Indirect immunoﬂuorescence staining of cellular E - cadherin and vinculin on membrane patches . Control membranes were ﬁxed after sonication . Other membranes were treated with 4 M guanidine hydrochloride , blocked , incubated with the indicated proteins , and ﬁxed . ( E ) Quantiﬁcation of binding of vinculin , vinculin head domain , or a - actinin to membrane patches , measured as the intensity of immunoﬂuorescence signal relative to the intensity of anti - E - cadherin immunoﬂuorescence and normalized to the control staining of each protein . Error bars show SEM . ( F ) Binding assay of a - actinin to the GST - E cyto - b - catenin - a - catenin complex . All proteins were present at 10 m M . The gel was blotted with anti - a - actinin antibody . ( G ) IndirectimmunoﬂuorescencestainingofcellularE - cadherinand a - actininonmembranepatches . Controlmembraneswereﬁxedaftersonication . Other membranes were treated with 4 M guanidine hydrochloride , blocked , incubated with the indicated proteins and ﬁxed . ( H ) Membranes were treated as in ( D ) and ( F ) and subsequently incubated with 5 m M G - actin containing 10 % ﬂuorescein - labeled actin under polymerizing conditions . Membranes were ﬁxed before immunostaining with antibodies against E - cadherin intracellular domain . Scale bar , 10 m m . 894 Cell 123 , 889 – 901 , December 2 , 2005 ª 2005 Elsevier Inc . to a - catenin ( Figure 4B ) , as shown previously ( Watabe - Uchida et al . , 1998 ; Weiss et al . , 1998 ) , whereas full - length vinculin did not ( Figure 4B ) . b - catenin bound to the vinculin head domain and full - length vinculin in a pull - down assay ( Figure 4B ; Hazan et al . , 1997 ) . To test whether binding of b - catenin to full - length vinculin released the inhibitory head - to - tail interaction and enabled vinculin to bind actin ﬁlaments , we monitored the amount of vinculin that pelleted with actin ﬁlaments in the presence of increasing amounts of the E cyto - b - catenin complex . There was no increase in the fraction of full - length vinculin that pelleted with actin ﬁlaments , nor did the E cyto - b - catenin complex pellet with actin ﬁlaments above back - ground levels ( Figure 4C ) . These results indicate that , even though b - catenin bound full - length vinculin , this interaction did not appear to disrupt the intramolecular head - to - tail in - teraction that masks the actin binding domain of vinculin . We tested vinculin binding to cell - adhesion sites on mem - brane patches to assess whether the presence of native cel - lular membranes would inﬂuence vinculin binding to catenin - cadherin complex . Some vinculin staining was detected on control membrane patches prior to stripping , but there was little or no colocalization with E - cadherin ( Figure 4D ) . Incuba - tion with 4 M guanidine hydrochloride eliminated most of vin - culin staining . Readdition of full - length vinculin in the pres - ence of b - catenin revealed some binding to membrane patches but very little full - length vinculin bound to membrane patches preincubated with b - catenin and a - catenin ( Figures 4D and 4E ) . As expected from the pull - down assays , the vin - culin head domain showed signiﬁcantly higher binding than full - length vinculin to stripped membrane patches preincu - bated with either b - catenin or b - catenin and a - catenin ( Fig - ures 4D and 4E ) . Although a - actinin has been reported to be associated with the cadherin complex ( Knudsen et al . , 1995 ) , we were unable to detect any speciﬁc binding between the cad - herin - catenin complex and a - actinin in pull - down assays ( Figure 4F ) . Similarly , little or no speciﬁc binding of a - actinin was detected on stripped membrane patches preincubated with b - catenin and a - catenin ( Figures 4E and 4G ) . To test whether cytosolic factors might be involved in the linkage of the cadherin - catenin complex to actin ﬁlaments , cytosol was added to stripped membrane patches that had been preincubated with a - catenin and b - catenin fol - lowed by ﬂuorescein - labeled actin . Neither cytosol from con - ﬂuent MDCK cells ( data not shown ) nor bovine brain cytosol ( Figure 4H ) , which is considerably more concentrated than MDCK cell lysate and is therefore potentially a better source of a missing factor , induced binding of actin ﬁlaments to membrane patches ( Figure 4H ) . Likewise , no actin binding was observed when either vinculin or a - actinin was added to membrane patches in the presence of b - catenin and / or a - catenin and cytosol ( Figure 4H ) . Measurement of E - Cadherin , b - Catenin , and a - Catenin Dynamics at Mature Cell - Cell Contacts Since a ternary complex of E cyto - b - catenin - a - catenin but not a quaternary complex of these proteins and actin could be assembled in vitro , we re - examined the dynamics of these proteins in living cells . MDCK cells were stably transfected with E - cadherin , b - catenin , and a - catenin tagged with green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) . In each case , the level of exoge - nous protein expression in stable cell lines was less than that of the endogenous protein ( Figure 5A ) . Stably expressed E - cadherin - GFP and GFP - b - catenin localized at the plasma membrane and accumulated at cell - cell contacts with little or no protein in the cytoplasm ( Figure 5B ; Movies S1 and S2 ) , whereas GFP - a - catenin localized to cell - cell contacts and throughout the cytoplasm ( Figure 5B ; Movie S3 ) , as ex - pected from the distribution of endogenous proteins ( Nathke et al . , 1994 ) . Protein dynamics were measured by monitoring ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) in dense cell monolayers in which mature cell - cell contacts had formed for 24 – 36 hr . At cell - cell contacts , the mobile fractions of membrane bound E - cadherin - GFP ( 22 . 9 % ± 2 . 2 % ) , GFP - b - catenin ( 34 . 2 % ± 2 . 6 % ) , and GFP - a - catenin ( 33 . 7 % ± 2 . 2 % ) were similar ( Figure 5B ; Movies S1 – S3 ) . The immobile fractions of these proteins may be due to trans - interactions between the extracellular domains of E - cadherin on opposing cells . Of these mobile fractions , the half - time of ﬂuorescence re - covery ( t 1 / 2 ) for E - cadherin - GFP ( 0 . 54 ± 0 . 1 min ) , GFP - b - catenin ( 0 . 66 ± 0 . 08 min ) , and GFP - a - catenin ( 0 . 43 ± 0 . 04 min ) was also similar ( Figures 5B and 5D ) . These recov - ery rates are consistent with direct protein - protein interac - tions between E - cadherin , b - catenin , and a - catenin . To test whether linkage of the cadherin - catenin complex to the actin cytoskeleton affects component mobilities , we expressed mutants of E - cadherin lacking the cytoplasmic domain ( E - cadherin D C - tdDsR ) and a - catenin lacking the actin binding domain ( GFP - a - catenin D C ) . E - cadherin D C had a mobile fraction and mobility rate similar to those of full - length E - cadherin ( Figure 5D ; Movie S4 ) , which may be due to interactions with endogenous E - cadherin . GFP - a - catenin D C localized to cell - cell contacts , as expected since it includes the b - catenin binding site , and had a mobile fraction and recovery rate similar to those of full length a - catenin ( Figure 5D ; Movie S5 ) . Thus , breaking potential links between components of the cadherin - catenin com - plex and the actin cytoskeleton did not affect dynamics of the complex . Membrane - Associated Actin Is Highly Dynamic at Cell - Cell Contacts If the cadherin - catenin complex is bound directly and stably to actin at cell - cell contacts , we would expect that mem - brane - associated actin would have a signiﬁcant immobile fraction with a recovery rate similar to those of proteins in the cadherin - catenin complex . MDCK cells expressing a low level of GFP - actin ( < 3 % of the total actin level ; Figure 5A ) showed GFP - actin localization to stress ﬁbers , lamellipo - dia , and cell - cell contacts in addition to a large cytoplasmic pool ( Figure 5B ; Ehrlich et al . , 2002 ) . When GFP - actin was photobleached at cell - cell contacts ( Figure 5B ; Movie S6 ) , its recovery was almost complete ( mobile fraction = 90 . 0 % ± 7 . 2 % ) and rapid ( t 1 / 2 = 0 . 16 ± 0 . 03 min ) , in contrast to the Cell 123 , 889 – 901 , December 2 , 2005 ª 2005 Elsevier Inc . 895 more immobile and relatively slow recovery properties of membrane bound E - cadherin , b - catenin , and a - catenin ( Figure 5D ) . The high mobility of actin observed at the membrane may be due to rapid exchange with the large pool of cytoplasmic actin . To eliminate the high ﬂuorescence signal of cytoplas - mic GFP - actin that might prevent observation of a less dy - namic , membrane - associated pool , we expressed actin tagged with photoactivatible GFP ( PAGFP - actin ) . Photoacti - vation of PAGFP - actin at cell - cell contacts was immediately followed by a rapid loss of the GFP signal from the activated spot at a rate ( t 1 / 2 = 0 . 27 ± 0 . 02 min ) closer to that of GFP - actin than that of the cadherin - catenin complex ( Figure 5B ; Movie S7 ) . Lateral diffusion at the activated spot of PAGFP - actin was not observed . Signiﬁcantly , the signal from minimally activated PAGFP - actin decayed with a single exponential function that reached complete depletion of ﬂuorescence at the contact site ( S . Y . , unpublished data ) , indicating that a there is a single reaction step consistent with the simple exchange of actin between the membrane - associated and cytosolic pools . Although GFP - actin polymerizes inefﬁciently , GFP - actin can copolymerize with endogenous actin ( Westphal et al . , 1997 ) and colocalized with endogenous actin ﬁlaments ( Fig - ures 5 and 6 ) . Nevertheless , to circumvent potential prob - lems associated with drawing conclusions from kinetics of Figure 5 . Dynamics of E - Cadherin , Catenins , and Actin at Cell - Cell Contacts ( A ) Western blots of stable cell lines used in each experiment ; circles and stars indicate endogenous and GFP - tagged proteins , respectively . Percent ex - pression level of GFP - tagged protein of the total GFP - tagged and corresponding endogenous proteins is : Ecad - GFP ( 45 % ) , GFP - b cat ( 31 % ) , GFP - a cat ( 23 % ) , GFP - actin ( 3 % ) , and PAGFP - actin ( 3 % ) . ( B ) Representative examples of photobleaching of GFP - labeled E - cadherin , b - catenin , a - catenin , actin , and microinjected rhodamine - labeled actin and photoactivation of photoactivatable - GFP labeled actin at cell - cell contacts . Arrows point to photobleached or photoactivated spots ; scale bar in ( B ) and ( C ) is 10 m m . Kymographs show the evolution of the GFP intensity proﬁle along cell - cell contacts ( vertical axis ) , and numbers indicate time in minutes after photobleaching or photoactivation ( horizontal axis ) . The ﬂuorescence intensity scale is pseudocolored . ( C ) Saponin - permeabilized cells were incubated with FITC - labeled actin , then ﬁxed and stained with Alexa 546 - phalloidin . ( D ) Quantiﬁcation ofﬂuorescencerecoveryafter photobleaching ( FRAP ) . The numbersofcells ( n ) quantiﬁed are : Ecad - GFP ( n = 30 ) , Ecad D C - tdDsR ( n = 4 ) , GFP - b cat ( n = 28 ) , GFP - a cat ( n = 41 ) , GFP - a cat D C ( n = 28 ) , GFP - actin ( n = 30 ) , and Rhod - actin ( n = 16 ) . Error bars show SEM . 896 Cell 123 , 889 – 901 , December 2 , 2005 ª 2005 Elsevier Inc . GFP - actin , we introduced ﬂuorescently labeled actin into MDCK cells either by microinjection or after permeabilizing cells with a low concentration of saponin . Microinjected ﬂuorescently labeled actin ( Rhod - actin ) localized to cell - cell contacts ( Figure 5B ) and the tips of actin bundles at focal ad - hesions in saponin - treated cells ( Figure 5C ) . After photo - bleaching , microinjected Rhod - actin had recovery kinetics similar to that of GFP - actin ( t 1 / 2 = 0 . 21 ± 0 . 03 min , Figure 5B ; Movie S8 ) . To test the extent of actin exchange between the cyto - plasm and membrane - associated pools , we measured the ﬂuorescence loss of GFP - actin at cell - cell contacts while continuously photobleaching a spot in the cytoplasm ( ﬂuo - rescence loss in photobleaching , FLIP ) . Different periods of photobleaching were tested , with similar results , but the pe - riod used was generally proportional to the level of expres - sion of the GFP - tagged protein . GFP - actin was rapidly and completely depleted from cell - cell contacts when the cyto - plasmic pool was continuously photobleached ( Figure 6A ; Movie S9 ) , consistent with the FRAP experiments ( Figure 5 ) ; in contrast , a - catenin exhibited a much slower loss from the membrane - associated pool ( Drees et al . , 2005 [ this issue of Cell ] ) . Note , however , that GFP - actin exhibited a much slower dissociation from stress ﬁbers associated with focal adhesions at the base of cells to the actin cytoplas - mic pool ( Figure 6A ; Movie S10 ) . Thus , actin associated with cell - cell contacts is unusually dynamic compared to that as - sociated with cell - substratum adhesion . Together these data show that membrane - associated ac - tin at cell - cell contacts rapidly exchanges with a cytoplasmic actin pool . Furthermore , most of the actin at cell - cell con - tacts is highly mobile , with a recovery rate much faster than that of either a - catenin , b - catenin , or E - cadherin , indi - cating that actin ﬁlaments were not stably associated with the cadherin - catenin complex . Actin Binding Proteins Do Not Show a - Catenin - like Turnover We examined the dynamics of several actin binding proteins at cell - cell contacts that might indirectly link the cadherin – catenin complex to the actin cytoskeleton . Stably expressed GFP - vinculin localized intensely to sites of focal adhesions and the cytoplasm , but very weakly to cell - cell contacts ( Fig - ure 6B ) . Continuous photobleaching of the cytoplasmic pool of GFP - vinculin immediately depleted the small amount of GFP - vinculin at the cell - cell contacts ( Figure 6B ; Movie S11 ) but more slowly depleted GFP - vinculin from focal adhe - sions ( Figure 6B ; Movie S12 ) . Stably expressed Arp3 - GFP had a punctate localization along cell - cell contacts , and these spots disappeared rapidly when the cytoplasmic pool of Arp3 - GFP was continuously photobleached ( Figure 6C ; Movie S13 ) . Thus , although some vinculin and Arp2 / 3 complex localized to cell - cell contacts , the results of these experiments indicate that , like actin , they were not stably as - sociated with the plasma membrane and that their recovery rates were very different from those of components of the cadherin - catenin complex . Similar results were obtained with mDia2 - GFP and formin1 - GFP ( S . Y . , unpublished data ) . Disrupting Actin Organization Does Not Affect Cadherin or a - Catenin Dynamics Given that the dynamics of actin at cell - cell contacts differ from those of E - cadherin , a - catenin , and b - catenin , we tested whether disruption of actin at cell - cell contacts af - fected the dynamics of the cadherin - catenin complex using cytochalasin D , which binds to the barbed end of actin ﬁla - ments ( Cooper , 1987 ) , and jasplakinolide , which stabilizes Figure 6 . Fluorescence Loss in Photobleaching ( FLIP ) Re - veals Protein Dynamics at Cell - Cell Contacts Pre - and postbleach images and the corresponding kymographs of rep - resentativeFLIPexperimentswithGFP - actinatcell - cellcontacts ( [ A ] , top ) andalongstressﬁbers ( [ A ] , bottom ) , GFP - vinculinatcell - cellcontacts ( [ B ] , top ) andfocaladhesions ( [ B ] , bottom ) , andArp3 - GFPatacell - cellcontact ( C ) . Stars designate the location of the photobleaching laser spot , and lines indicate the intensity proﬁle plotted in kymographs . The bars on ky - mographs show durations of photobleaching by the laser , and numbers are time in minutes . The ﬂuorescence intensity scale is pseudocolored as shown in ( C ) . Scale bar , 10 m m . Cell 123 , 889 – 901 , December 2 , 2005 ª 2005 Elsevier Inc . 897 actin ﬁlaments ( Cramer , 1999 ) . While these approaches af - fect actin organization globally , they complement our more direct experiments . When an MDCK cell monolayer was treated with 10 m M cytochalasin D for 1 hr , most of the GFP - actin ( Figure 7A ; Movie S14 ) and endogenous actin ( Figure 7B ) redistributed and aggregated in the cytoplasm , though a small fraction remained associated with intact cell - cell contacts . In cytochalasin - treated cells , GFP - actin selectively photobleached at cell - cell contacts had a slower rate of recovery and a lower mobile fraction ( Figure 7A and D ) than in control cells . However , the recovery rate and mobile fraction of E - cadherin - GFP and GFP - a - catenin remained the same as in control cells ( Figures 7C and 7D ; Movies S15 and S16 ) . Treatment of cells with jasplakinolide induced the forma - tion of extensive actin stress ﬁbers ( S . Y . , unpublished data ) and some actin aggregates in the cytoplasm , but cell - cell contacts remained intact ( Figures 7E and 7F ; Movie S17 ) . In the presence of 0 . 2 m M jasplakinolide , GFP - actin became highly immobile , although the small mobile fraction had the same recovery rate as that of GFP - actin in control cells ( Fig - ure 7H ) . Despite the signiﬁcant immobilization of GFP - actin by jasplakinolide , the mobile fraction and recovery rate of ei - ther E - cadherin - GFP or GFP - a - catenin was not statistically different from those of E - cadherin - GFP and GFP - a - catenin in control cells ( Figures 7G and 7H ; Movies S18 and S19 ) . Together these results demonstrate that the mobility of the cadherin - catenin complex at cell - cell contacts is indepen - dent of the state of actin organization or dynamics . DISCUSSION The interaction of cadherins with cytoplasmic proteins and the actin cytoskeleton is thought to underlie many aspects of cell - cell adhesion , including clustering of cadherins , strengthening of adhesive contacts , and downstream ef - fects on membrane and cell organization ( Kobielak and Fuchs , 2004 ) . To understand these processes , it is essential that protein assemblies that link cadherins to the actin cyto - skeleton are rigorously deﬁned . Virtually all of the candidate components of these assemblies ( see Introduction ) were identiﬁed through binary interactions such as yeast two - hybrid , pull - down , or coimmunoprecipitation assays . A gen - eral assumption has been that binding of a given protein to two distinct partners means that all three proteins are in the same complex . In particular , independent binding of a - catenin to b - catenin - E - cadherin and to actin ﬁlaments has led to the assumption that a - catenin binds to both simul - taneously although this quaternary complex has not been demonstrated previously . A direct test of this widely believed conclusion presented here shows , in fact , that this is not the case . Figure 7 . Mobility of E - Cadherin , a - Catenin , and Actin after Cytochalasin D or Jasplakinolide Treatment GFP - actin localized at cell - cell contacts was photobleached before and after additionof 10 m M cytochalasin D ( A ) or 0 . 2 m M jasplakinolide ( E ) . Arrows point tophotobleachedspots , andrespectivekymographsareshown . Afteraddition of10 m Mcytochalasin D ( B ) or 0 . 2 m M jasplakinolide ( F ) , cells were ﬁxedand stained with Alexa 546 phalloidin and anti - a - catenin antibody . The postbleaching images and kymographs of E - cadherin - GFP and GFP - a - catenin at cell - cell contact are shown after addition of 10 m M cytochalasin D ( C ) or 0 . 2 m M jasplakinolide ( G ) . Parameters for recovery kinetics are plotted in ( D ) for cyto - chalasinDand ( H ) forjasplakinolide . Redandbluesymbolsdenotepre - andpost - drugtreatment , respectively . Numbersshownonthekymographsaretime in minutes after photobleaching . The ﬂuorescence intensity scale is pseudocolored as shown in ( G ) . Error bars show SEM . Scale bar , 10 m m . 898 Cell 123 , 889 – 901 , December 2 , 2005 ª 2005 Elsevier Inc . Using puriﬁed proteins in solution or membrane patches containing clustered E - cadherin , we reconstituted , in the correct order of protein - protein interactions , a ternary com - plex of E - cadherin - b - catenin - a - catenin and the interaction between a - catenin and actin ﬁlaments in vitro . However , we were unable to bind a - catenin simultaneously to the E - cadherin - b - catenin complex and to actin ﬁlaments , even when E - cadherin was clustered in vitro ( COMP - E cyto ) or on membrane patches from cells . Similarly , we could reconsti - tute vinculin binding to b - catenin or a - catenin but not to the cadherin - b - catenin complex and actin ﬁlament simulta - neously . a - actinin could not be reconstituted into complexes with either b - catenin or a - catenin . An additional activity might be needed to enable simulta - neous binding of a - catenin or vinculin to E - cadherin - b - catenin complex and actin ﬁlaments or to relieve the head - to - tail autoinhibition of vinculin bound to b - catenin . Neither lipids in the membrane patches nor MDCK or bovine brain cytosol provided such an activity , although we cannot ex - clude that such a factor was missing or inactivated in our cy - tosol preparations . We also tested whether speciﬁc post - translational modiﬁcations shown previously to enhance complex assembly were involved ( Lilien et al . , 2002 ) . Serine / threonine phosphorylation by CKII had no effect on a - or b - catenin interaction or on binding of actin ﬁlaments to reconstituted cadherin - catenin complexes on membrane patches . The small GTPase Rac1 and PI3K have been sug - gested to be transiently activated during initial phases of cell - cell contact formation and cadherin ligation ( Ehrlich et al . , 2002 ; Kovacs et al . , 2002 ; Noren et al . , 2001 ) . However , our preparations of membrane patches would not be able to capture these transient activation states that might be im - portant for actin - ﬁlament interactions with the cadherin - catenin complex . Alternatively , linkage of the E - cadherin - b - catenin complex to actin ﬁlaments could be mediated by other a - catenin and actin binding proteins , including ZO - 1 ( Itoh et al . , 1997 ) , afadin ( Pokutta et al . , 2002 ) , spectrin ( Pradhan et al . , 2001 ) , Ajuba ( Marie et al . , 2003 ) , or formin - 1 ( Kobielak et al . , 2004 ) . However , there is no direct evidence that these proteins can bind simultaneously to a - catenin and actin ﬁlaments . In this context , it is noteworthy that , when membrane extracts of adherent cells are immunoprecipi - tated with anti - cadherin antibody , only b - and a - catenin are coprecipitated stoichiometrically in the complex ( Hinck et al . , 1994 ; Ozawa and Kemler , 1992 ) . Thus , although a number of actin binding proteins are reported to colocalize with cadherins and / or interact with a - catenin , it is unclear whether any of them represents a signiﬁcant structural com - ponent of the cadherin - catenin complex in cells . If the core cadherin - catenin complex does not bind to ac - tin ﬁlaments directly , we would expect that interactions be - tween this complex and underlying the actin cytoskeleton in cells might be very dynamic rather than being relatively static as has been assumed . E - cadherin , b - catenin , and a - catenin had essentially identical mobile fractions and re - covery rates , consistent with an integrated complex of these proteins on the membrane . In contrast , actin , vinculin , and the Arp2 / 3 complex were highly mobile and had recovery rates completely different from those of the cadherin - catenin complex . These data are also inconsistent with a static link - age of the cadherin - catenin complex , either directly or indi - rectly , to the actin cytoskeleton and support our biochemical studies that the cadherin - catenin complex does not bind to actin ﬁlaments . That a stable linkage does not exist between membrane - anchored cadherin cell - adhesion molecules and the under - lying cytoskeleton may be surprising . However , adhesion must be a dynamic process to enable morphogenetic changes during cell and tissue development ( Takeichi , 1995 ) . The interaction of clustered cadherin extracellular do - mains on opposing cells may provide the necessary adhe - sive force as long as the underlying actin cytoskeleton is cor - rectly organized to provide the mechanical properties required for cell and tissue function . Data presented in the accompanying paper ( Drees et al . , 2005 ) provide mechanis - tic evidence of why a - catenin does not bind simultaneously to the E - cadherin - b - catenin complex and actin ﬁlaments and new insights into how a - catenin may regulate actin dynam - ics at cell - cell contacts . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Protein Expression and Puriﬁcation Murine E - cadherin cytoplasmic domain ( Aberle et al . , 1994 ; Huber et al . , 2001 ) , COMP - E - cadherin cytoplasmic domain , murine b - catenin , plako - globin , and ba - catenin were expressed as N - terminal cleavable GST - fusion proteins . Full - length a - catenin ( mouse a ( E ) - catenin ) ( Aberle et al . , 1994 ; Huber et al . , 2001 ) and vinculin head domain ( a kind gift of Dr . Sue Craig , Johns Hopkins University ) were expressed with a C - terminal His 6 tag . Construction of expression vectors and protein puriﬁcations are described inthe SupplementalData . Full - length vinculinand a - actinin were puriﬁed from chicken gizzard as described previously ( Feramisco and Burridge , 1980 ) . Vinculin head domain was also generated by cleav - age of full - length vinculin with Glu - C V8 endoproteinase from Staphylo - coccus aureus , as described previously ( Johnson and Craig , 1995 ) . b - and a - catenin were phosphorylated with casein kinase II ( NEB ) as described previously ( Bek and Kemler , 2002 ) . Bead Binding Assays Binding assays were performed in 20 mM Tris ( pH 8 . 0 ) , 100 mM KCl , 10 mM MgCl 2 , and 1 mM DTT . Proteins were incubated at a 10 m M concen - tration in a total volume of 60 m l . After 1 hr , the protein mix was incubated with60 m lglutathioneagaroseandincubatedfor1additionalhr . Aftercen - trifugationandremovalofthesupernatant , beadswerewashedfourtimes with500 m lwashbuffer containing 20mMTris ( pH8 . 0 ) , 20mMKCl , 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , and 1 mM DTT . After the last wash step , the supernatant wasremovedandthebeadswereresuspendedin60 m lgelloadingbuffer . Binding assays with full - length and the head domain of vinculin were per - formedat8 m Mproteinconcentration . ForbindingassayswithHis - tagged a - catenin , full - lengthandvinculinheaddomainwerepreclearedwith30 m l Ni - NTA beads and incubated with a - catenin coupled to 30 m l Ni - NTA beads in 20 mM Tris ( pH 8 . 0 ) , 150 mM NaCl , and 2 mM imidazole for 1hr . Gel ﬁltration binding assays aredescribedinthe Supplemental Data . Actin Sedimentation Assay Skeletal actin was prepared from chicken pectoral muscle from acetone powder as described previously ( Spudich and Watt , 1971 ) . G - actin was puriﬁed on a Superdex 200 column , and aliquots were frozen at (cid:1) 70ºC in G - actin storage buffer ( 5 mM Tris [ pH 8 . 0 ] , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , and 0 . 5 mM DTT ) . Polymerization was induced by addition of poly - merization buffer toaﬁnal concentration of50mMKCl , 2mMMgCl 2 , and Cell 123 , 889 – 901 , December 2 , 2005 ª 2005 Elsevier Inc . 899 1 mM ATP . After incubation at room temperature for 2 hr , F - actin was mixed with the respective proteins at a 1 : 1 ratio at ﬁnal concentration of 8 or 10 m M . Proteins were incubated at room temperature for 1 hr and thencentrifugedat100 , 000rpm ( TLA100 , Beckman ) for7min . Superna - tant and pellet were analyzed by gel electrophoresis and Coomassie blue staining . Cytosol Preparation and Fractionation 80 % conﬂuent MDCK GII cells were lysed in homogenization buffer ( 20mMHEPES [ pH7 . 2 ] , 90mMKacetate , 2mMMgacetate , 25mMsu - crose , 10 m g / ml leupeptin , antipain , pepstatin , and 0 . 1 mM Pefabloc ) by sonication . Postnuclear supernatant was subjected to ultracentrifugation at 100 , 000 (cid:2) g for 45 min at 4ºC ( TLA 100 , Beckman ) . Bovine brain cy - tosol was prepared as described previously ( Grindstaff et al . , 1998 ) . PreparationofE - Cadherin : FcSubstratumandLateralMembranes E - cadherin : Fc substratum and lateral membranes from MDCK GII cells werepreparedasdescribedpreviously ( Dreesetal . , 2004 ) . Tostripmem - brane - associated proteins , membrane patches were incubated with 4 M guanidine hydrochloride or 0 . 5 M sodium bicarbonate ( pH 11 . 5 ) in Ring - er’s buffer ( 10 mM HEPES [ pH 7 . 5 ] , 154 mM NaCl , 7 . 2 mM KCl , and 1 . 8 mM CaCl 2 ) ( RB ) for 20 min at RT , washed with RB , and ﬁxed or blocked with 2 % BSA for 20 min at RT . Membranes were rinsed with RB and incubated with bovine brain cytosol or puriﬁed proteins for 1 hr as indicated . For actin binding to lateral membranes , patches were incu - batedwith5 m Mactincontaining10 % ﬂuorescein - labeledactin ( Cytoskel - eton ) in polymerization buffer for 30 min at RT ( either G - actin or prepoly - merized ) , rinsed brieﬂy with polymerization buffer , ﬁxed with 1 . 6 % paraformaldehyde in RB , and processed for immunoﬂuorescence . The following antibodies were used for characterization of membrane patches : anti - E - cadherin E 2 4 ( Marrs et al . , 1993 ) , anti - b - catenin ( Trans - duction Lab ) , anti - a - catenin ( Alexis Corp . ) , anti - actin ( Chemicon ) , anti - vinculin 11 - 5 ( Sigma ) , and anti - a - actinin ( Sigma ) . Fluorescent intensities were analyzed in ImageJ ( http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / ij / ) . Stable Cell Lines MDCK G type II cells were transfected with Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invi - trogen ) and selected with G418 ( Invitrogen ) . Construction of expression vectors is described in the Supplemental Data . The antibodies used to characterize stable cell lines are the same as above except E - cadherin antibody : anti - E - cadherin 3G8 ( Shore and Nelson , 1991 ) . Relative ex - pression levels of GFP - tagged and endogenous proteins are shown in Figure 5A . pEGFP - C1 - vinculin and pEGFP - N1 - Arp3 plasmids were gifts from Drs . Susan Craig ( Johns Hopkins University ) and Matt Welch ( Uni - versityofCalifornia , San Francisco ) , respectively . Allplasmids were stably expressed in MDCK GII cells without any apparent change in phenotype . Microscopy and Image Analysis Cells were seeded on collagen - coated coverslips for 24 hr at conﬂuent cell density and visualized in phenol - red - free DMEM media ( Sigma - Aldrich ) with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( Atlas Biologicals ) and 25 mM HEPES ( Invitrogen ) . Live - cell imaging was performed using the Marianas system from Intelligent Imaging Innovations equippedwiththe MicroPoint FRAP laser system ( Photonic Instruments , Inc . ) . Cytochalasin D ( Sigma - Aldrich ) or jasplakinolide ( Molecular Probes ) was applied to cells on the microscope stage to allow comparison between pre - and posttreatment from the same cell population . Kymographs are time ( x axis ) and intensity proﬁles ( y axis ) along ( Figures 5 and 7 ) or across ( Figure 6 ) the cell - cell contact . The ﬂuorescence intensity in the kymographs was expressed inapseudocolorscale ( showninﬁgures ) wherewhiteandblackpixelsde - note maximum and minimum intensity levels . The intensity proﬁles were analyzed for the maximum intensity recovery ( % ) and ﬁtted to a single ex - ponential function up to 2 . 5 min after photobleaching to extract the half - time of intensity recovery ( t 1 / 2 ) . Microinjection and Saponin Permeabilization Rhodamine - labeled actin ( Cytoskeleton ) was microinjected using an Ep - pendorf microinjection system , and cells were observed a few hours later as described above . FITC - labeled actin was also purchased from Cyto - skeleton and was introduced into cells as described ( Symons and Mitch - ison , 1991 ) . Supplemental Data Supplemental Data include Supplemental Experimental Procedures , Supplemental References , 1 ﬁgure , and 19 movies and can be found with this article online at http : / / www . cell . com / cgi / content / full / 123 / 5 / 889 / DC1 / . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank J . Engel for the COMP plasmid ; S . Craig , J . Lippincott - Schwartz , R . Tsien , and M . Welch for reagents ; and S . Fridman for assis - tance with protein puriﬁcations . This work was supported by National In - stitutes of Health grant R01 GM35527 ( to W . J . N . ) , National Institutes of Health grant R01 GM56169 ( to W . I . W . ) , and a predoctoral fellowship from Boehringer Ingelheim Fonds ( to F . D . ) . Received : April 1 , 2005 Revised : July 28 , 2005 Accepted : September 12 , 2005 Published : December 1 , 2005 REFERENCES Aberle , H . , Butz , S . , Stappert , J . , Weissig , H . , Kemler , R . , and Hos - chuetzky , H . ( 1994 ) . Assembly of the cadherin - catenin complex in vitro with recombinant proteins . J . Cell Sci . 107 , 3655 – 3663 . Bek , S . , and Kemler , R . ( 2002 ) . Protein kinase CKII regulates the interac - tion of beta - catenin with alpha - catenin and its protein stability . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 4743 – 4753 . Cooper , J . A . ( 1987 ) . Effectsofcytochalasinandphalloidinonactin . J . Cell Biol . 105 , 1473 – 1478 . Costa , M . , Raich , W . , Agbunag , C . , Leung , B . , Hardin , J . , andPriess , J . R . ( 1998 ) . A putative catenin - cadherin system mediates morphogenesis of the Caenorhabditis elegans embryo . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 297 – 308 . Cramer , L . P . ( 1999 ) . Role of actin - ﬁlament disassembly in lamellipodium protrusioninmotilecellsrevealedusingthedrugjasplakinolide . Curr . Biol . 9 , 1095 – 1105 . Drees , F . , Reilein , A . , andNelson , W . J . ( 2004 ) . Cell - adhesionassays : fab - rication of an E - cadherin substratum and isolation of lateral and basal membrane patches . Methods Mol . Biol . 294 , 303 – 320 . Drees , F . , Pokutta , S . , Yamada , S . , Nelson , W . J . , and Weis , W . I . ( 2005 ) . alpha - Catenin is a molecular switch that binds E - cadherin / beta - catenin and regulates actin - ﬁlament assembly . Cell 123 , this issue , 903 – 915 . Ehrlich , J . S . , Hansen , M . D . , and Nelson , W . J . ( 2002 ) . Spatio - temporal regulationofRac1localizationandlamellipodiadynamicsduringepithelial cell - cell adhesion . Dev . Cell 3 , 259 – 270 . Feramisco , J . R . , and Burridge , K . ( 1980 ) . A rapid puriﬁcation of alpha - actinin , ﬁlamin , and a 130 , 000 - dalton protein from smooth muscle . J . Biol . Chem . 255 , 1194 – 1199 . Foty , R . A . , and Steinberg , M . S . ( 2005 ) . The differential adhesion hypoth - esis : a direct evaluation . Dev . Biol . 278 , 255 – 263 . Grindstaff , K . K . , Yeaman , C . , Anandasabapathy , N . , Hsu , S . C . , Rodriguez - Boulan , E . , Scheller , R . H . , and Nelson , W . J . ( 1998 ) . Sec6 / 8 complex is recruited to cell - cell contacts and speciﬁes transport vesicle deliverytothebasal - lateralmembraneinepithelialcells . Cell 93 , 731 – 740 . Gumbiner , B . M . ( 2000 ) . Regulation of cadherin adhesive activity . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 399 – 404 . 900 Cell 123 , 889 – 901 , December 2 , 2005 ª 2005 Elsevier Inc . Hazan , R . B . , Kang , L . , Roe , S . , Borgen , P . I . , and Rimm , D . L . ( 1997 ) . Vin - culin is associated with the E - cadherin adhesion complex . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 32448 – 32453 . Heuser , J . ( 2000 ) . The production of ‘cell cortices’ for light and electron microscopy . Trafﬁc 1 , 545 – 552 . Hinck , L . , Nathke , I . S . , Papkoff , J . , and Nelson , W . J . ( 1994 ) . Dynamics of cadherin / catenin complex formation : novel protein interactions and path - ways of complex assembly . J . Cell Biol . 125 , 1327 – 1340 . Huber , A . H . , and Weis , W . I . ( 2001 ) . The structure of the beta - catenin / E - cadherin complexandthemolecular basis ofdiverseligandrecognition by beta - catenin . Cell 105 , 391 – 402 . Huber , A . H . , Stewart , D . B . , Laurents , D . V . , Nelson , W . J . , and Weis , W . I . ( 2001 ) . The cadherin cytoplasmic domain is unstructured in the absence of beta - catenin . A possible mechanism for regulating cadherin turnover . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 12301 – 12309 . Itoh , M . , Nagafuchi , A . , Moroi , S . , and Tsukita , S . ( 1997 ) . Involvement of ZO - 1 in cadherin - based cell adhesion through its direct binding to alpha catenin and actin ﬁlaments . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 181 – 192 . Jamora , C . , and Fuchs , E . ( 2002 ) . Intercellular adhesion , signalling and the cytoskeleton . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , E101 – E108 . Johnson , R . P . , andCraig , S . W . ( 1995 ) . F - actinbindingsitemaskedbythe intramolecular association of vinculin head and tail domains . Nature 373 , 261 – 264 . Knudsen , K . A . , Soler , A . P . , Johnson , K . R . , and Wheelock , M . J . ( 1995 ) . Interaction of alpha - actinin with the cadherin / catenin cell - cell adhesion complex via alpha - catenin . J . Cell Biol . 130 , 67 – 77 . Kobielak , A . , and Fuchs , E . ( 2004 ) . Alpha - catenin : at the junction of intercellular adhesion and actin dynamics . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 614 – 625 . Kobielak , A . , Pasolli , H . A . , and Fuchs , E . ( 2004 ) . Mammalian formin - 1 participates in adherens junctions and polymerization of linear actin cables . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 , 21 – 30 . Kovacs , E . M . , Goodwon , M . , Ali , R . G . , Paterson , A . D . , and Yap , A . S . ( 2002 ) . Cadherin - directed actin assembly : E - cadherin physically associ - ates with the Arp2 / 3 complex to direct actin assembly in nascent adhe - sive contacts . Curr . Biol . 12 , 379 – 382 . Larue , L . , Ohsugi , M . , Hirchenhain , J . , and Kemler , R . ( 1994 ) . E - cadherin null mutant embryos fail to form a trophectoderm epithelium . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 91 , 8263 – 8267 . Lilien , J . , Balsamo , J . , Arregui , C . , and Xu , G . ( 2002 ) . Turn - off , drop - out : functional state switching of cadherins . Dev . Dyn . 224 , 18 – 29 . Marie , H . , Pratt , S . J . , Betson , M . , Epple , H . , Kittler , J . T . , Meek , L . , Moss , S . J . , Troyanovsky , S . , Attwell , D . , Longmore , G . D . , and Braga , V . M . ( 2003 ) . TheLIMproteinAjubaisrecruitedtocadherin - depen - dent cell junctions through an association with alpha - catenin . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 1220 – 1228 . Marrs , J . A . , Napolitano , E . W . , Murphy - Erdosh , C . , Mays , R . W . , Reichardt , L . F . , andNelson , W . J . ( 1993 ) . Distinguishingrolesofthemem - brane - cytoskeleton and cadherin mediated cell - cell adhesion in generat - ing different Na + , K ( + ) - ATPase distributions in polarized epithelia . J . Cell Biol . 123 , 149 – 164 . Nathke , I . S . , Hinck , L . , Swedlow , J . R . , Papkoff , J . , and Nelson , W . J . ( 1994 ) . Deﬁning interactions and distributions of cadherin and catenin complexes in polarized epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 125 , 1341 – 1352 . Noren , N . K . , Niessen , C . M . , Gumbiner , B . M . , and Burridge , K . ( 2001 ) . Cadherin engagement regulates Rho family GTPases . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 33305 – 33308 . Ozawa , M . , andKemler , R . ( 1992 ) . Molecular organizationof theuvomor - ulin - catenin complex . J . Cell Biol . 116 , 989 – 996 . Pokutta , S . , Drees , F . , Takai , Y . , Nelson , W . J . , andWeis , W . I . ( 2002 ) . Bio - chemical and structural deﬁnition of the l - afadin - and actin - binding sites of alpha - catenin . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 18868 – 18874 . Pokutta , S . , andWeis , W . I . ( 2000 ) . Structureofthedimerizationandbeta - catenin - binding region of alpha - catenin . Mol . Cell 5 , 533 – 543 . Pradhan , D . , Lombardo , C . R . , Roe , S . , Rimm , D . L . , and Morrow , J . S . ( 2001 ) . alpha - Catenin binds directly to spectrin and facilitates spectrin - membrane assembly in vivo . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 4175 – 4181 . Rimm , D . L . , Koslov , E . R . , Kebriaei , P . , Cianci , C . D . , and Morrow , J . S . ( 1995 ) . Alpha 1 ( E ) - catenin is an actin - binding and - bundling protein me - diating the attachment of F - actin to the membrane adhesion complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 92 , 8813 – 8817 . Shore , E . M . , and Nelson , W . J . ( 1991 ) . Biosynthesis of the cell adhesion moleculeuvomorulin ( E - cadherin ) inMadin - Darbycaninekidneyepithelial cells . J . Biol . Chem . 266 , 19672 – 19680 . Spudich , J . A . , and Watt , S . ( 1971 ) . The regulation of rabbit skeletal mus - cle contraction . I . Biochemical studies of the interaction of the tropomyo - sin - troponin complex with actin and the proteolytic fragments of myosin . J . Biol . Chem . 246 , 4866 – 4871 . Symons , M . H . , andMitchison , T . J . ( 1991 ) . Controlofactinpolymerization in live and permeabilized ﬁbroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 114 , 503 – 513 . Takeichi , M . ( 1995 ) . Morphogeneticrolesofclassiccadherins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 7 , 619 – 627 . Tepass , U . , Gruszynski - DeFeo , E . , Haag , T . A . , Omatyar , L . , Torok , T . , and Hartenstein , V . ( 1996 ) . shotgun encodes Drosophila E - cadherin and is preferentially required during cell rearrangement in the neurectoderm and other morphogenetically active epithelia . Genes Dev . 10 , 672 – 685 . Thiery , J . P . ( 2002 ) . Epithelial - mesenchymaltransitionsintumourprogres - sion . Nat . Rev . Cancer 2 , 442 – 454 . Tomschy , A . , Fauser , C . , Landwehr , R . , and Engel , J . ( 1996 ) . Homophilic adhesion of E - cadherin occurs by a co - operative two - step interaction of N - terminal domains . EMBO J . 15 , 3507 – 3514 . Watabe - Uchida , M . , Uchida , N . , Imamura , Y . , Nagafuchi , A . , Fujimoto , K . , Uemura , T . , Vermeulen , S . , vanRoy , F . , Adamson , E . D . , andTakeichi , M . ( 1998 ) . alpha - Catenin - vinculin interaction functions to organize the apical junctional complex in epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 847 – 857 . Weiss , E . E . , Kroemker , M . , Rudiger , A . H . , Jockusch , B . M . , andRudiger , M . ( 1998 ) . Vinculinispartofthecadherin - cateninjunctionalcomplex : complex formation between alpha - catenin and vinculin . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 755 – 764 . Westphal , M . , Jungbluth , A . , Heidecker , M . , Muhlbauer , B . , Heizer , C . , Schwartz , J . M . , Marriott , G . , and Gerisch , G . ( 1997 ) . Microﬁlament dynamics during cell movement and chemotaxis monitored using a GFP - actin fusion protein . Curr . Biol . 7 , 176 – 183 . Yap , A . S . , Brieher , W . M . , Pruschy , M . , and Gumbiner , B . M . ( 1997 ) . Lat - eral clustering of the adhesive ectodomain : a fundamental determinant of cadherin function . Curr . Biol . 7 , 308 – 315 . Cell 123 , 889 – 901 , December 2 , 2005 ª 2005 Elsevier Inc . 901