Mechanochemical rules for shape - shifting ﬁlaments that remodel membranes Billie Meadowcroft , 1 , 2 , 3 Ivan Palaia , 1 Anna - Katharina Pﬁtzner , 4 Aurélien Roux , 4 , 5 Buzz Baum , 6 and Anđela Šarić 1 , 2 , 3 , ∗ 1 Institute of Science and Technology Austria , 3400 Klosterneuburg , Austria 2 Department of Physics and Astronomy , Institute for the Physics of Living Systems , University College London , London WC1E 6BT , United Kingdom 3 MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology , University College London , London WC1E 6BT , United Kingdom 4 Biochemistry Department , University of Geneva , CH - 1211 Geneva , Switzerland 5 Swiss National Centre for Competence in Research Programme Chemical Biology , CH - 1211 Geneva , Switzerland 6 MRC - Laboratory of Molecular Biology , University of Cambridge , Cambridge CB2 1TN , United Kingdom ( Dated : September 16 , 2022 ) The sequential exchange of ﬁlament composition to increase ﬁlament curvature was proposed as a mechanism for how ESCRT - III polymers deform and cut membranes . The relationship between the ﬁlament composition and its mechanical eﬀect is lacking . We develop a kinetic model for the assembly of composite ﬁlaments that includes protein – membrane adhesion , ﬁlament mechanics and membrane mechanics . We identify the physical conditions for such a membrane remodelling and show this mechanism is eﬃcient because sequential polymer assembly lowers the energetic barrier for membrane deformation . Nanoscale ﬁlaments that can produce work to reshape membranes are key for cell traﬃc , motility , and healing . These include ESCRT - III proteins , which form polymers that reshape and cut membrane surfaces [ 1 , 2 ] and are involved in a range of membrane remodelling events , in - cluding membrane budding , cell division and membrane repair [ 3 – 7 ] . ESCRT - III proteins come in many variants that co - polymerize to form membrane - associated com - posite ﬁlaments . These composite polymers dynamically exchange diﬀerent monomer types with the surrounding cytoplasm . Monomer exchange is driven by the ATPase activity of an enzyme called Vps4 , which extracts certain monomers while new monomers are added to the poly - mers that remain [ 2 , 8 , 9 ] . Recent experiments [ 10 , 11 ] have suggested that the composition of ESCRT - III ﬁlaments changes with time in a precise sequence as monomers assemble , and are re - moved and replaced by monomers of a diﬀerent type , in a ﬁxed order , as shown in Fig . 1a . Additionally , although monomers of diﬀerent types share a similar molecular structure [ 2 , 5 ] , ESCRT - III polymers have been observed to have diﬀerent shapes and diﬀerent membrane binding interfaces , depending on their precise monomer compo - sition [ 5 , 12 – 17 ] . Therefore , as the co - polymers change in composition , their geometry and mechanical proper - ties are also expected to change , allowing ESCRT - III to perform work on the membrane [ 8 , 18 , 19 ] . The time - ordering of this staged assembly / disassembly process is robust and is believed to progressively drive membrane deformation and scission in a variety of biological pro - cesses [ 9 , 17 , 18 , 20 , 21 ] . For instance , in cargo traﬃck - ing , a membrane - bound ESCRT - III ﬁlament polymerises around a cargo in the shape of a ﬂat spiral . As this ﬂat spiral is remodelled over time into a three - dimensional ∗ andela . saric @ ist . ac . at a b time 0 1 R e l a t i v e f l u o r e sc e n c e Monomer 0 ( Snf7 ) Monomer 1 ( Vps2 ) Monomer 2 ( Did2 ) EXPERIMENT PROPOSED MECHANISM FIG . 1 . Shape - shifting by sequential monomer ex - change ( a ) In vitro experiments , tracking the presence of diﬀerent monomer types ( termed Snf7 , Vps2 , Did2 ) in membrane - bound yeast ESCRT - III ﬁlaments , showed that the ﬁlament composition changes according to a precise sequence [ 11 ] , which is accompanied by the membrane deformation . ( b ) The geometry of a membrane - bound ﬁlament has been pro - posed to change together with its composition , driving mem - brane remodelling for cargo transport . helix ( see Fig . 1b ) , the ﬂat membrane is forced to become a tube . The subsequent exchange of monomer types is then believed to progressively increase the polymer cur - vature to constrict the membrane neck . While great progress has been made on understanding this biophysical system , the physicochemical properties that enable diﬀerent monomer types to assemble into dy - namically shape - shifting polymers remain unclear . Here , we develop a kinetic model that can capture the recruit - ment and spontaneous unbinding of monomers with dif - ferent physical properties . We identify rules under which the mechanical and chemical diﬀerences between diﬀer - ent monomer types alone can drive changes in polymer assembly - disassembly kinetics and , consequently , in poly - mer structure . These design rules allow us to make pre - dictions about the physiological properties of ESCRT - III monomers that are diﬃcult to obtain experimen - tally , reveal the yet unexplained purpose of intermediate 2 Monomer 0 Monomer 1 Monomer 2 a Pure - monomer ﬁ lament shapes 1 / C 1 / c 0 p 0 P p 1 p 2 1 / c 1 1 / c 2 b Time evolution of composite ﬁ lament time FIG . 2 . Model set up . ( a ) Pure ﬁlaments made up of type - i monomers ( i = 0 , 1 , 2 ) have in - plane curvature c i and are associated with an eﬀective pitch , p i , causing the preferred membrane deformation depth p i . ( b ) Three examples of the lattice composition over time with the associate overall ﬁla - ment shape , which gives an average pitch P and an average radius 1 / C , and corresponding membrane shape . For a shal - low pitch and large radius the geometry of the membrane is that of a spherical cap , while with increasing pitch or de - creased radius a tube with a spherical cap end forms . monomer types as catalysts for membrane deformation , and can inform eﬀorts towards the generation of artiﬁcial shape - shifting nanomaterials . Model . Filaments of ESCRT - III homologs across evo - lution involve between ∼ 3 and 11 diﬀerent monomer types , as in archea [ 3 ] and animal cells [ 4 ] respectively . In addition , in systems with a large number of ESCRT - III types , some monomer types always bind together , ef - fectively decreasing the number of assemblies [ 11 ] . To model the process , we therefore choose to use three types of monomers ( i = 0 , 1 or 2 ) , as in Fig . 2a , which can bind to the membrane and each other , forming heterogeneous membrane - bound ﬁlaments ( Fig . 2b ) . The ﬁlament is treated as a lattice , where each site can host up to one monomer of each type , such that diﬀerent monomer types can bind side - by - side on a site . Each monomer type is associated with an energy of adhesion E adh i , as well as a preferred curvature c i , and a preferred eﬀective pitch p i ( which is the membrane deformation depth induced by a homogeneous ﬁlament of that type ) . Fig . 2a shows the case in which the pure ﬁlament of type 0 is a completely ﬂat spiral ( p 0 = 0 ) of curvature c 0 , whereas ﬁlaments of types 1 and 2 are helices with larger pitches and curva - tures , such that 0 < p 1 < p 2 and c 0 < c 1 < c 2 . A hetero - geneous ﬁlament , made of monomers of diﬀerent types , is associated with an average curvature ( C ) and pitch ( P ) , which are averages of the curvatures and pitches of all its monomers . Our model considers three energy contributions : ad - hesion energy − E adh , ﬁlament bending energy E ﬁl , and membrane energy E mem . The energy gained by adhe - sion is − E adh = − (cid:80) m , i n m , i E adh i < 0 ( where n m , i = 1 if site m contains a type - i monomer , 0 otherwise ) and always favours monomer binding . A heterogeneous ﬁla - ment has a non - zero bending energy , which results from monomers of diﬀerent preferred curvatures binding to the same site or to neighbouring sites , causing local elastic frustration . Assuming that sections of ﬁlament bend as elastic rods , we estimate the ﬁlament bending energy as E ﬁl = (cid:80) m , i n m , i κ 2 ( C m − c i ) 2 where κ is the ﬁlament rigid - ity and C m is the local ﬁlament curvature averaged over the 8 nearest neighbours of site m . This is based on the observation that individual monomers in ESCRT - III assemblies interact with numerous ( 4 to 8 ) other neigh - bouring monomers via direct contact [ 17 , 22 ] . Finally , we estimate the membrane bending energy using the Helfrich model [ 23 ] : E mem = 12 k mem (cid:82) cap / tube C 2 d A where k mem is the membrane bending rigidity and C is the membrane curvature . We approximate the deformation of the mem - brane as a spherical cap or a cylinder with a spherical cap , thus only 2 quantities ( C and P ) are needed to de - scribe the membrane shape ( Fig . 2b ) . Further details are provided in the SI . Overall , the adhesion term promotes binding , the ﬁla - ment elasticity term disfavours the neighbouring binding of monomers with diﬀerent curvatures , and the mem - brane term penalises the binding of monomers with non - zero pitch and high curvature , which can only become part of the polymer if the membrane bends . We investigate the dynamics of the system using the Gillespie algorithm , a variant of a dynamic Monte Carlo . Monomers bind or unbind according to rates r on and r oﬀ . We assume that monomer concentrations in the cytoplasm are constant , as in in vitro experiments [ 11 ] , and equal for diﬀerent monomers , and that binding is diﬀusion - limited so that r on is constant and sets the timescale of the simulations . The probability of a given unbinding event ( i . e . a given monomer detaching from a given site ) depends exponentially on the energy change associated with it : r oﬀ = r on e β ( − ∆ E adh + ∆ E fil + ∆ E mem ) . These energies depend on the composition of the ﬁla - ment , hence the unbinding rates are not just monomer - type and lattice - site dependent , but also depend on the environment of the monomer , which changes in time . We tested that all our conclusions are robust against the choice of value for r on ( Fig . S3 ) , as long as the ratio between r on and r oﬀ is preserved via standard thermo - dynamics . The length scale for our system is set by the reported curvature of Snf7 [ 12 ] , an ESCRT - III monomer found in yeast that forms spirals of radius ∼ 30 nm , which repre - sents monomer 0 in our model . Membrane rigidity was set to 20 k B T [ 24 ] . Polymer rigidity is compared with indirect experimental estimates of physiological persis - tence lengths [ 13 , 25 ] . Polymer curvatures , pitches and adhesion energies are parameters that we vary , within a range of physiologically plausible values ( see table S1 ) . Our results hold for any value of polymer length within 3 a b c d Monomers 0 1 2 CONTROL SEQUENTIALBINDING SEQUENTIALUNBINDING Different curvatures & binding energies Different pitches SEQUENTIAL BINDING AND UNBINDING 0 2 4 time 0 50 % l a tt i c e c o v e r a g e p 2 = p 1 = p 0 c 2 = c 1 = c 0 E adh2 = E adh1 = E adh0 0 2 4 time 0 50 % l a tt i c e c o v e r a g e p 2 > p 1 > p 0 c 2 = c 1 = c 0 E adh2 = E adh1 = E adh0 0 2 4 time 0 50 100 % l a tt i c e c o v e r a g e p 2 = p 1 = p 0 c 2 > c 1 > c 0 E adh2 > E adh1 > E adh0 0 2 4 time 0 50 100 % l a tt i c e c o v e r a g e p 2 > p 1 > p 0 c 2 > c 1 > c 0 E adh2 > E adh1 > E adh0 FIG . 3 . Geometry and adhesion control sequentiality . The eﬀect of the pitches , curvatures and adhesion energies for the 3 types of monomers on the ﬁlament composition ( % lattice coverage ) . When monomers are all equal ( a ) the ﬁla - ment stabilises as a composite mixture of the 3 monomers in equal parts . When the monomer types have diﬀerent pitches ( b ) , the binding of high - pitch monomers is delayed . Diﬀer - ences in curvature and adhesion energy together ( c ) result in the unbinding of weak - binding monomers , due to bend - ing frustration . ( d ) Diﬀerences in pitch , curvature and ad - hesion energy are all three needed to achieve sequential as - sembly and disassembly . Parameters : equal pitches ( a and c ) , p 0 = p 1 = p 2 = 0 nm ; otherwise ( b and d ) , p 0 = 0 nm , p 1 = 30 nm , p 2 = 45 nm . Equal curvatures ( a and b ) , c 0 = c 1 = c 2 = ( 15 nm ) − 1 and E adh0 = E adh1 = E adh2 = 6 . 5 k B T ; otherwise ( c and d ) , c 0 = ( 30 nm ) − 1 , c 1 / c 0 = 2 . 5 , c 2 / c 0 = 8 , and E adh0 = 6 . 5 k B T , E adh1 / E adh0 = 3 , E adh2 / E adh0 = 12 . Time is in units of 10 3 simulation steps . a physiologically relevant range ( Fig . S3 ) ; here we show results for a 42 - site long lattice . Minimal design rules . In our eﬀorts to explain the experimental data shown in Fig . 1a [ 11 ] , our ﬁrst task is to ﬁnd the conditions that enable monomers to bind and unbind sequentially . To do so , we explored a range of values for the adhesion energies E adh i , curvatures c i and pitches p i of the 3 monomer types . We quantify how much of each monomer type is present on average in the ﬁlament as a function of time , similar to the experimental ﬂuorescence curves ( Fig . 1a ) . In Fig . 3a we ﬁrst verify that monomers of equal prop - erties bind together and reach an equilibrium lattice cov - erage , whose value is determined simply by the ratio of the binding and unbinding rates . Fig . 3b shows that se - quential monomer binding emerges when monomers are assigned diﬀerent pitches , irrespective of their curvatures and adhesion energies ; ﬂat monomer 0 ( blue ) binds be - fore low - pitch monomer 1 ( purple ) , which binds before high - pitch monomer 2 ( pink ) . At time 0 , the membrane is ﬂat , so that binding of high - pitch monomers is penalised . Importantly , this initial state of the membrane creates a time asymmetry that dictates the ordering of bind - ing . The reaction progresses until the energy of mem - brane deformation , induced by late - binding helix - shaped monomers , is balanced out by monomer adhesion energy . In summary , for the sequential binding to occur in the order 0 → 1 → 2 , p 2 > p 1 > p 0 must be satisﬁed . Al - though these conditions result in sequential binding , they are not suﬃcient to signiﬁcantly deform the membrane , which requires the unbinding of the low - pitch monomers . Sequential unbinding in the model is a consequence of monomer frustration within a ﬁlament . If the pre - ferred shape of a particular monomer is very diﬀerent from the local average ﬁlament shape , the monomer pays a substantial cost in elastic energy and will likely spon - taneously unbind . For this eﬀect to cause asymmetric unbinding of the monomers , one monomer type must be favoured . This is the case if the monomers also have diﬀerent adhesion energies , as shown in Fig . 3c . The monomer type with highest membrane - adhesion energy ends up dominating and eventually forcing the other two oﬀ the membrane . Conversely , the ﬁrst monomer to un - bind is the one with the smallest adhesion energy and a curvature most diﬀerent from the monomer type last to be bound . Hence , for unbinding to occur in the or - der 0 → 1 → 2 , c 2 > c 1 > c 0 and E adh2 > E adh1 > E adh0 must be satisﬁed . The sequential disassembly fails if the monomers’ curvatures are too dissimilar , in which case prohibitive ﬁlament frustration causes monomers to un - bind as soon as they bind . Taken together , this analysis suggests that sequential subunit exchange requires increasing pitch , increasing ad - hesion energy and increasing curvature with time ( see Fig . 3d ) . A failure to satisfy any one of these three criteria hinders the sequence of binding or unbinding events . The robustness of this behaviour against changes in curvature and adhesion energies is further quantiﬁed in Fig . S4 . Sequential binding / unbinding . To explore why the sequential assembly / disassembly is needed for mem - brane remodelling , we next analyse diﬀerent possible pathways to the ﬁnal membrane - wrapped tight helix con - ﬁguration . Using the parameters that result in the most pronounced sequential assembly and disassembly of the 4 b c a 0 . 5 1 . 5 2 . 5 Filament rigidity [ k B T m ] 0 0 . 5 1 M e m b r a n e i n d e n t a t i o n / p 2 e s t i m a t e d r i g i d i t y No E ATP 1 E ATP = 13 k B T 3 E ATP = 39 k B T 0 20 40 60 % monomer 2 0 500 1000 1500 En e r g y [ k B T ] 0 10 0 50 Only monomer 2 Actual pathway 0 1 2 0 2 4 6 8 time [ 10 3 ] 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 I n d e n t a t i o n d e p t h / p 2 Full sequentiality c 0 = c 1 = c 2 ( no unbinding ) p 0 = p 1 = p 2 ( little binding ) E adh0 = E adh1 = E adh2 No type 1 FIG . 4 . Sequentiality and membrane deformation . ( a ) The energy of the system as a function of type - 2 monomers in the ﬁlament , when the full 0 → 1 → 2 sequence is present ( turquoise ) , and when monomer 2 is the only one present ( grey ) . The inset shows an energy barrier of 39 k B T for polymerisation of monomer 2 on membrane when no other monomers are involved . ( b ) Dependence of membrane deformation on monomer unbinding . If the earlier monomer types do not unbind ( c 0 = c 1 = c 2 ) , the membrane indentation is decreased . In all the other cases ( p 0 = p 1 = p 2 , E adh0 = E adh1 = E adh2 ) , type - 2 monomers do not dominate in the ﬁnal ﬁlament . The largest membrane deformation is achieved with full sequential binding and unnbinding . ( c ) Absence of activity in our model ( in turquoise ) , leads to sequentiality and optimal membrane indentation only for very large ﬁlament rigidities . Releasing a suﬃciently large energy , 3 E ATP , to elastically frustrated monomers recovers large indentation at physiologically relevant rigidities , estimated from experiments and models [ 13 , 25 ] ( orange band ) . monomers ( Fig . 3d ) , we calculate the average energy of the system as a function of monomer 2 content ( Fig . 4a , turquoise curve ) . We then compute the same quantity by sampling conﬁgurations in which we force monomers of type 2 to bind on their own , without preceding subunits ( grey curve ) . The binding of monomers that prefer to form tight helices ( type - 2 ) exhibits a high energy barrier , which is completely erased when the system evolves in a stepwise fashion from 0 to 1 to 2 . The transient presence of the lower - curvature monomers 0 and 1 act as mechani - cal catalysts and deform the membrane enough to ensure the tight helical monomers can bind without having to dramatically bend the membrane from ﬂat to highly in - dented in one step . This conclusion is further conﬁrmed by two - dimensional time - dependent measurements of the energy landscape ( Fig . S7 ) . As a consequence , the se - quential assembly allows the process to occur in less time ( Fig . S5 ) . If the adhesion energy is high enough , tight helical monomers could in principle overcome the binding bar - rier and deform the membrane spontaneously . However , we expect there to be an upper limit to the adhesion en - ergy , as in any supramolecular system , due both to the physical - chemical constraints of the membrane interac - tion and to the fact that active disassemblers ( e . g . Vps4 ) need to be able to disassemble the ﬁlament to trigger neck ﬁssion using the ﬁnite energy provided by ATP hy - drolysis . Fig . 4a shows that the presence of multiple monomer types renders the binding of a highly membrane - deforming ﬁlament possible through lowering the energy barrier , but it does not explain why earlier monomer types also need to unbind . Fig . 4b shows the depth of membrane indentation for 4 diﬀerent cases where monomer unbinding is suppressed . In all these cases , the ﬁnal composition of the ﬁlament is diﬀerent from the tar - get one ( type - 2 monomers only ) and , as a consequence , the extent of membrane indentation is reduced . Thus the unbinding of monomers of lower curvatures and pitches optimises the mechanical action of the ﬁlament on the membrane , and is also expected to be needed for mem - brane neck scission [ 26 ] . Role of activity . All the parameters in our model are physiologically realistic ( see Table S1 ) , except for the bending rigidity of the ﬁlament . To reproduce the un - binding sequence observed in experiment , we ﬁnd that our ﬁlament rigidity needs to be between 3 and 7 - fold larger than previous estimates [ 13 , 25 ] . This apparent mismatch is due to the fact is that our passive model does not account for active energy supply , while in ex - periments dynamic disassembly is only observed upon addition of ATPase Vps4 , which unfolds monomers and extracts them from the ﬁlament [ 9 , 10 , 27 – 31 ] . This led us to explore whether a Vps4 - like activity that pro - motes stress - dependent polymer disassembly could aid the process . We therefore extended the model so that a monomer with a bending stress above a certain thresh - old receives an additional energy penalty , a multiple of E ATP (cid:39) 13 k B T , making it more likely to unbind ( de - tails are provided in the SI ) . Fig . 4c shows that maximal membrane indentation can be recovered for realistic val - ues of the ﬁlament rigidities ( < 0 . 8 k B T µ m ) if enough energy is provided to frustrated monomers . The amount of energy needed is of the order of 3 E ATP ∼ 39 k B T , which is consistent with the energy consumed by AAA - ATPases such as Vps4 [ 32 ] . Our ﬁndings are hence in line with the hypothesis that frustrated monomers in hetero - geneous polymers could be more favourably exposed to Vps4 , which in turn preferentially extracts them from the polymer [ 18 ] . Discussion . In this work we have shown how the staged assembly and disassembly of nanoscale ﬁlaments 5 can deform membranes . Such polymers function as a dy - namic shape - shifting metamaterial : a ﬁlament changes its composition , and hence its properties , over time to perform a function that each of its parts cannot achieve when acting alone . The overall eﬀect is a membrane - bound elastic structure that becomes more curved with time . Over time the recruitment of high - pitch monomers is favored , which in return facilitate the unbinding of low pitch monomers , generating an increasingly deformed membrane . The dynamics of the structure is governed by the properties of the composite monomers and by membrane mechanics . To generate a deep indentation of the membrane , subunits must have diﬀerent adhesion energies , diﬀerent preferred curvatures , and diﬀerent pre - ferred membrane indentations , which together lowers the energy barriers for binding . Here , we have considered only three types of monomers . However , it is likely that the inclusion of additional monomer types ( as seen in many experimen - tal systems ) can further lower the minimum membrane - adhesion energy required to drive the process to com - pletion . Nevertheless , adding more monomer exchanges costs additional time and adds complexity . It is to be ex - pected that there is an optimal number of subunits that minimises the overall time for membrane deformation by minimising the energy barriers and number of steps in tandem . Within our framework , the unbinding of earlier sub - units is caused by ﬁlament frustration . This frustration could be realised in diﬀerent ways . It could be a result of monomers bound together having diﬀerent curvatures , as shown above , or diﬀerent torsion rigitidies ( explored in Fig . S8 ) or a combination of both . In addition , there is mounting evidence that the mechanical properties of the membrane also modulate ESCRT - III function by aﬀecting the binding dynamics of the monomers [ 33 – 36 ] . Our model quantitatively supports this hypothesis , as monomers are more likely to bind to a membrane that is already deformed according to the ﬁlament’s preferred morphology . Finally , these insights may inform the design of dynamic cell reshaping nanomachines , such as membrane - attached DNA - origami structures [ 37 , 38 ] . Acknowledgements . We thank T . C . T . Michaels and J . Palacci for useful discussions . We acknowledge funding by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska - Curie grant agreement No . 101034413 ( I . P . ) , the Royal Society Grant No . UF160266 ( A . Š . ) , the European Re - search Council ( ERC ) under the European Union’s Hori - zon 2020 research and innovation programme ( Grant No . 802960 ) ( B . M . , I . P . , A . Š . ) and the Volkswagen foun - dation Life grant ( B . B . and A . Š ) . [ 1 ] M . Vietri , M . Radulovic , and H . Stenmark , The many functions of ESCRTs , Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Bi - ology 21 , 25 ( 2020 ) . [ 2 ] J . McCullough , A . Frost , and W . I . Sundquist , Struc - tures , Functions , and Dynamics of ESCRT - III / Vps4 Membrane Remodeling and Fission Complexes , Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology 34 , 85 ( 2018 ) . [ 3 ] G . Tarrason Risa , F . Hurtig , S . Bray , A . E . Hafner , L . Harker - Kirschneck , P . Faull , C . Davis , D . Pap - atziamou , D . R . Mutavchiev , C . Fan , L . Meneguello , A . Arashiro Pulschen , G . Dey , S . Culley , M . Kilkenny , D . P . Souza , L . Pellegrini , R . A . M . de Bruin , R . Hen - riques , A . P . Snijders , A . Šarić , A . - C . Lindås , N . P . Robinson , and B . Baum , The proteasome controls ESCRT - III – mediated cell division in an archaeon , Sci - ence 369 , eaaz2532 ( 2020 ) . [ 4 ] Y . Olmos and J . G . Carlton , The ESCRT machinery : New roles at new holes , Current Opinion in Cell Biology 38 , 1 – 11 ( 2016 ) . [ 5 ] J . H . Hurley , ESCRTs are everywhere , The EMBO Jour - nal 34 , 2398 ( 2015 ) . [ 6 ] K . P . Bohannon and P . I . Hanson , ESCRT puts its thumb on the nanoscale : Fixing tiny holes in endolysosomes , Current Opinion in Cell Biology 65 , 122 ( 2020 ) . [ 7 ] M . L . Skowyra , P . H . Schlesinger , T . V . Naismith , and P . I . Hanson , Triggered recruitment of ESCRT machin - ery promotes endolysosomal repair , Science 360 , aar5078 ( 2018 ) . [ 8 ] M . Remec Pavlin and J . H . Hurley , The ESCRTs - con - verging on mechanism , Journal of cell science 133 , ( 18 ) : jcs240333 ( 2020 ) . [ 9 ] B . E . Mierzwa , N . Chiaruttini , L . Redondo - Morata , J . Moser Von Filseck , J . König , J . Larios , I . Poser , T . Müller - Reichert , S . Scheuring , A . Roux , and D . W . Gerlich , Dynamic subunit turnover in ESCRT - III assem - blies is regulated by Vps4 to mediate membrane remod - elling during cytokinesis , Nature Cell Biology 19 , 787 ( 2017 ) . [ 10 ] J . Schöneberg , M . R . Pavlin , S . Yan , M . Righini , I . - H . Lee , L . - A . Carlson , A . H . Bahrami , D . H . Goldman , X . Ren , G . Hummer , C . Bustamante , and J . H . Hurley , ATP - dependent force generation and membrane scission by ESCRT - III and Vps4 , Science 362 , 1423 ( 2018 ) . [ 11 ] A . K . Pﬁtzner , V . Mercier , X . Jiang , J . Moser von Filseck , B . Baum , A . Šarić , and A . Roux , An ESCRT - III Polymerization Sequence Drives Membrane Deformation and Fission , Cell 182 , 1140 ( 2020 ) . [ 12 ] W . M . Henne , N . J . Buchkovich , Y . Zhao , and S . D . Emr , The endosomal sorting complex ESCRT - II medi - ates the assembly and architecture of ESCRT - III helices , Cell 151 , 356 ( 2012 ) . [ 13 ] Q . T . Shen , A . L . Schuh , Y . Zheng , K . Quinney , L . Wang , M . Hanna , J . C . Mitchell , M . S . Otegui , P . Ahlquist , Q . Cui , and A . Audhya , Structural analysis and mod - eling reveals new mechanisms governing ESCRT - III spi - ral ﬁlament assembly , Journal of Cell Biology 206 , 763 ( 2014 ) . [ 14 ] S . T . Huber , S . Mostafavi , S . A . Mortensen , and C . Sachse , Structure and assembly of ESCRT - III helical Vps24 ﬁlaments , Science Advances 6 , 34 ( 2020 ) . 6 [ 15 ] J . Moser von Filseck , L . Barberi , N . Talledge , I . E . Johnson , A . Frost , M . Lenz , and A . Roux , Anisotropic ESCRT - III architecture governs helical membrane tube formation , Nature Communications 11 , 1516 ( 2020 ) . [ 16 ] M . Alqabandi , N . De Franceschi , S . Maity , N . Miguet , M . Bally , W . H . Roos , W . Weissenhorn , P . Bassereau , and S . Mangenot , The ESCRT - III isoforms CHMP2A and CHMP2B display diﬀerent eﬀects on membranes upon polymerization , BMC Biology 19 , 66 ( 2021 ) . [ 17 ] H . C . Nguyen , N . Talledge , J . McCullough , A . Sharma , F . R . Moss , J . H . Iwasa , M . D . Vershinin , W . I . Sundquist , and A . Frost , Membrane constriction and thinning by sequential ESCRT - III polymerization , Na - ture Structural and Molecular Biology 27 , 392 ( 2020 ) . [ 18 ] A . K . Pﬁtzner , J . Moser von Filseck , and A . Roux , Prin - ciples of membrane remodeling by dynamic ESCRT - III polymers , Trends in Cell Biology 31 , 856 ( 2021 ) . [ 19 ] J . McCullough and W . I . Sundquist , Membrane remodel - ing : ESCRT - III ﬁlaments as molecular garrotes , Current Biology 30 , R1425 ( 2020 ) . [ 20 ] L . Harker - Kirschneck , B . Baum , and A . Šarić , Changes in ESCRT - III ﬁlament geometry drive membrane remod - elling and ﬁssion in silico , BMC Biology 17 , 82 ( 2019 ) . [ 21 ] J . Schöneberg , I . H . Lee , J . H . Iwasa , and J . H . Hur - ley , Reverse - topology membrane scission by the ESCRT proteins , Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 18 , 5 ( 2016 ) . [ 22 ] J . McCullough , A . K . Clippinger , N . Talledge , M . L . Skowyra , M . G . Saunders , T . V . Naismith , L . A . Colf , P . Afonine , C . Arthur , W . I . Sundquist , P . I . Hanson , and A . Frost , Structure and membrane remodeling ac - tivity of ESCRT - III helical polymers , Science 350 , 1548 ( 2015 ) . [ 23 ] W . Helfrich , Elastic Properties of Lipid Bilayers : Theory and Possible Experiments , Zeitschrift für Naturforschung C 28 , 693 ( 1973 ) . [ 24 ] R . Dimova , Recent developments in the ﬁeld of bending rigidity measurements on membranes , Advances in Col - loid and Interface Science 208 , 225 ( 2014 ) . [ 25 ] N . Chiaruttini , L . Redondo - Morata , A . Colom , F . Hum - bert , M . Lenz , S . Scheuring , and A . Roux , Relaxation of Loaded ESCRT - III Spiral Springs Drives Membrane Deformation , Cell 163 , 866 ( 2015 ) . [ 26 ] L . Harker - Kirschneck , A . E . Hafner , T . Yao , C . Vanhille - Campos , X . Jiang , A . Pulschen , F . Hurtig , D . Hryniuk , S . Culley , R . Henriques , et al . , Physical mechanisms of ESCRT - III – driven cell division , Proceedings of the Na - tional Academy of Sciences 119 , e2107763119 ( 2022 ) . [ 27 ] S . Lata , G . Schoehn , A . Jain , R . Pires , J . Piehler , H . G . Gőttlinger , and W . Weissenhorn , Helical Structures of ESCRT - III Are Disassembled by VPS4 , Science 321 , 1354 ( 2008 ) . [ 28 ] B . A . Davies , I . F . Azmi , J . Payne , A . Shestakova , B . F . Horazdovsky , M . Babst , and D . J . Katzmann , Coordina - tion of substrate binding and ATP hydrolysis in Vps4 - mediated ESCRT - III disassembly , Molecular Biology of the Cell 21 , 3396 ( 2010 ) . [ 29 ] B . Yang , G . Stjepanovic , Q . Shen , A . Martin , and J . H . Hurley , Vps4 disassembles an ESCRT - IIIﬁlament by global unfolding and processive translocation , Nature structural & molecular biology 22 , 492 ( 2015 ) . [ 30 ] S . Maity , C . Caillat , N . Miguet , G . Sulbaran , G . Eﬀantin , G . Schoehn , W . H . Roos , and W . Weissenhorn , VPS4 triggers constriction and cleavage of ESCRT - III helical ﬁlaments , Science Advances 5 , aau7198 ( 2019 ) . [ 31 ] A . K . Cada , M . R . Pavlin , J . P . Castillo , A . B . Tong , K . P . Larsen , X . Ren , A . L . Yokom , F . - C . Tsai , J . V . Shiah , P . M . Bassereau , C . J . Bustamante , and J . H . Hurley , Friction - driven membrane scission by the human escrt - iii proteins chmp1b and ist1 , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119 , e2204536119 ( 2022 ) . [ 32 ] J . Schöneberg , M . R . Pavlin , S . Yan , M . Righini , I . - H . Lee , L . - A . Carlson , A . H . Bahrami , D . H . Goldman , X . Ren , G . Hummer , et al . , Atp - dependent force genera - tion and membrane scission by escrt - iii and vps4 , Science 362 , 1423 ( 2018 ) . [ 33 ] V . Mercier , J . Larios , G . Molinard , A . Goujon , S . Matile , J . Gruenberg , and A . Roux , Endosomal membrane ten - sion regulates ESCRT - III - dependent intra - lumenal vesi - cle formation , Nature Cell Biology 22 , 947 ( 2020 ) . [ 34 ] J . Lafaurie - Janvore , P . Maiuri , I . Wang , M . Pinot , J . B . Manneville , T . Betz , M . Balland , and M . Piel , ESCRT - III assembly and cytokinetic abscission are induced by tension release in the intercellular bridge , Science 340 , 1625 ( 2013 ) . [ 35 ] A . Booth , C . J . Marklew , B . Ciani , and P . A . Beales , In Vitro Membrane Remodeling by ESCRT is Regulated by Negative Feedback from Membrane Tension , iScience 15 , 173 ( 2019 ) . [ 36 ] B . Nepal , A . Sepehri , and T . Lazaridis , Mechanisms of negative membrane curvature sensing and generation by ESCRT III subunit Snf7 , Protein Science 29 , 1473 ( 2020 ) . [ 37 ] H . G . Franquelim , A . Khmelinskaia , J . - P . Sobczak , H . Di - etz , and P . Schwille , Membrane sculpting by curved DNA origami scaﬀolds , Nature Communications 9 , 811 ( 2018 ) . [ 38 ] S . Dey , A . Dorey , L . Abraham , Y . Xing , I . Zhang , F . Zhang , S . Howorka , and H . Yan , A reversibly gated protein - transporting membrane channel made of DNA , Nature Communications 13 , 2271 ( 2022 ) .