ORIGINAL ARTICLE Kathleen L . Wilsen Æ Alenka Lovy - Wheeler Boris Voigt Æ Diedrik Menzel Æ Joseph G . Kunkel Peter K . Hepler Imaging the actin cytoskeleton in growing pollen tubes Received : 27 November 2005 / Accepted : 4 January 2006 / Published online : 7 February 2006 (cid:1) Springer - Verlag 2006 Abstract Given the importance of the actin cytoskeleton to pollen tube growth , we have attempted to decipher its structure , organization and dynamic changes in living , growing pollen tubes of Nicotiana tabacum and Lilium formosanum , using three diﬀerent GFP - labeled actin - binding domains . Because the intricate structure of the actin cytoskeleton in rapidly frozen pollen tubes was recently resolved , we now have a clear standard against which to compare the quality of labeling produced by these GFP - labeled probes . While GFP - talin , GFP - ADF and GFP - ﬁmbrin show various aspects of the actin cytoskeleton structure , each marker produces a charac - teristic pattern of labeling , and none reveals the entire spectrum of actin . Whereas GFP - ADF , and to a lesser extent GFP - talin , label the fringe of actin in the apex , no similar structure is observed with GFP - ﬁmbrin . Further , GFP - ADF only occasionally labels actin cables in the shank of the pollen tube , whereas GFP - ﬁmbrin labels an abundance of ﬁne ﬁlaments in this region , and GFP - talin bundles actin into a central cable in the core of the pollen tube surrounded by a few ﬁner elements . High levels of expression of GFP - talin and GFP - ﬁmbrin fre - quently cause structural rearrangements of the actin cytoskeleton of pollen tubes , and inhibit tip growth in a dose dependent manner . Most notably , GFP - talin re - sults in thick cortical hoops of actin , transverse to the axis of growth , and GFP - ﬁmbrin causes actin ﬁlaments to aggregate . Aberrations are seldom seen in pollen tubes expressing GFP - ADF . Although these markers are valuable tools to study the structure of the actin cytoskeleton of growing pollen tubes , given their ability to cause aberrations and to block pollen tube growth , we urge caution in their use . Introduction A pollen tube is the tip - growing cell that extends from a pollen grain once it has landed on a receptive stigma . Its function is to navigate the sperm cells through the style and to present them to the ripe ovule . A dynamic actin cytoskeleton is essential for pollen tube growth ( Taylor and Hepler 1997 ; Gibbon et al . 1999 ; Vidali et al . 2001a ) . First , acto - myosin drives cytoplasmic streaming and thus the transport of vesicles , which are required for growth at the apex . Second , actin polymerization itself plays an integral role in pollen tube growth , insofar as agents that block actin polymerization , such as proﬁlin , DNAse , cytochalasin - D and latrunculin - B , inhibit pollen tube elongation at a substantially lower concentration than they block cytoplasmic streaming ( Vidali et al . 2001a ) . A detailed knowledge of the organization of the actin cytoskeleton is thus crucial for our understanding of the process of pollen tube growth . This issue , which has Electronic Supplementary Material Supplementary material is available for this article at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00497 - 006 - 0021 - 9 and is accessible for authorized users . Communicated by R . Russell Financial Source : National Science Foundation grant Nos . MCB - 0077599 and MCB - 0516852 to PKH EU Research Training Net - work TIPNET ( project HPRN - CT - 2002 - 00265 ) , Brussels , Belgium , to BV K . L . Wilsen Æ A . Lovy - Wheeler Æ P . K . Hepler ( & ) Plant Biology Program , University of Massachusetts , 221 Morrill Science Center South , Amherst , MA 01003 - 9297 , USA E - mail : hepler @ bio . umass . edu Tel . : + 413 - 5452083 Fax : + 413 - 5453243 B . Voigt Æ D . Menzel Institute of Botany , University of Bonn , Kirschallee 1 , Bonn , Germany J . G . Kunkel Biology Department , University of Massachusetts , 221 Morrill Science Center South , Amherst , MA 01003 , USA Present address : K . L . Wilsen Biological Sciences , University of Northern Colorado , Ross Hall 2480 , Greeley , CO 80639 , USA Sex Plant Reprod ( 2006 ) 19 : 51 – 62 DOI 10 . 1007 / s00497 - 006 - 0021 - 9 been recognized for years , has been the focus of numerous studies that have attempted to establish a consistent and clear pattern for actin organization , especially in the apex of the pollen tube ( Hepler et al . 2001 ; Foissner et al . 2002 ) . Unfortunately there is con - siderable variation in the results , which in large measure has been attributed to the problems of ﬁxing a cell that grows very rapidly , together with the realization that actin microﬁlaments themselves are extremely fragile cytoplasmic elements , and thus easily disrupted , or even destroyed by commonly used ﬁxation regimens . In a recent study , Lovy - Wheeler et al . ( 2005 ) , have read - dressed this problem and have provided a detailed and consistent image of the structure and organization of actin microﬁlaments , especially in lily pollen tubes . By stabilizing cell components through rapid freeze ﬁxation , which is known for its ability to preserve cell structure faithfully , and by staining those intact cells with ﬂuo - rescent antibodies , it has been possible to provide a global view of the organization of the actin cytoskeleton ( Fig . 1 ) . Of special note , the confocal images of pollen tubes prepared in this manner consistently reveal the presence of a dense fringe of longitudinally - oriented cortical actin ﬁlaments starting 1 – 5 l m from the apex , and extending for about 5 – 10 l m . By contrast , actin cables in the pollen tube shank are ﬁner than those seen in the fringe , and are dispersed throughout the pollen tube ( Lovy - Wheeler et al . 2005 , Fig . 1 ) . With a much more reﬁned image of actin organization in ﬁxed pollen tubes , it becomes important to resolve the structure in living cells , where in addition it is possible to observe actin dynamics directly . Attempts to resolve the conﬁguration of actin in the pollen tube apex have been made on living cells , but there is much uncertainty and disagreement in the re - sults . Initial studies on live pollen tubes in which small quantities of rhodamine - phalloidin were microinjected , revealed numerous ﬁlamentous structures in the shank of the pollen tube , but few in the apex ( Miller et al . 1996 ) . However , it has subsequently been determined that phalloidin , while initially labeling F - actin , is pro - gressively sequestered into the vacuole in living cells . Since the pollen tube vacuole consists of a dynamic network of ﬁne interconnected tubules ( L . Ca´rdenas , personal communication ) , which moves along actin cables , there is a shift in the identity of the stained compartment from F - actin itself , to the ﬁlamentous vacuole network . As a consequence , the phalloidin injection method becomes unreliable for depicting the actin cytoskeleton in living cells , especially in the ex - treme apical domain of the pollen tube . Numerous attempts to image the actin cytoskeleton of pollen tubes with GFP - labeled actin have failed , even though a variety of diﬀerent actin genes have been tes - ted . GFP - actin either fails to incorporate into the native population of actin , giving rise to a uniform ﬂuorescent background signal ( unpublished observations ) , or it la - bels actin microﬁlaments , but inhibits pollen tube growth ( Kost et al . 1998 ) . Therefore , actin - binding protein based methods of actin visualization are emerging as popular tools to study the actin cytoskele - ton in live pollen tubes . The ﬁrst of these markers to be developed for use in plant cells was GFP - mTn ( Kost et al . 1998 ) , which consists of GFP fused to the actin - binding domain of mouse talin , a protein which has no known homologue in Arabidopsis thaliana . Although this technique has generally been regarded to label the actin cytoskeleton in a non - invasive manner ( Kost et al . 1998 ) , and expression of GFP - talin is claimed not to aﬀect pollen tube growth or morphology ( Fu et al . 2001 ) , it has been noted that expression of GFP - talin may cause actin cables to thicken , cytoplasmic streaming to be retarded , and pollen tube growth to be terminated prematurely ( Kost et al . 1998 ) . The observation that N . tabacum pollen tubes expressing GFP - talin rarely exceed 600 l m in length , even after 12 h of growth ( Laitiainen et al . 2002 ) , shows that GFP - talin expression has an inhibitory eﬀect on pollen tube growth . Furthermore , studies conducted in Dictyostelium discoideum using the GFP - tagged talin fragment show that when levels of talin are high , actin is sequestered and cell division is severely hindered ( Weber et al . 2002 ) . A recent study conducted on Arabidiopsis root hairs shows that the alcohol inducible expression of GFP - talin prevents actin depolymerization and causes pronounced defects in actin organization , resulting in changes of cell shape , termination of growth , and cell death ( Ketelaar et al . 2004a ) . Additional criticism de - rives from recent studies on root ( Wang et al . 2004 ; Voigt et al . 2005 ) and shoot tissues ( Sheahan et al . 2004 ) in which it is emphasized that GFP - talin fails to identify all arrays of actin and , furthermore , induces stabiliza - tion of actin ﬁlaments which may in some cases result in the formation of aberrant actin structures . Transient expression of GFP - talin in tobacco pollen tubes reveals a ring or collar of actin around the orga - nelle exclusion zone and shows the tip to be depleted of an actin network ( Kost et al . 1998 ) . Using an enhanced form of GFP - talin , the presence of F - actin short actin bundles was reported in the extreme apex of tobacco pollen tubes , in addition to the subapical actin collar ( Fu et al . 2001 ) . The authors contend that the short actin bundles and the actin collar are two very dynamic groups of actin belonging to the same population , as the appearance of one of these groups is associated with the disappearance of the other . Fig . 1 Actin organization in a rapidly frozen and immunolabeled L . longiﬂorum pollen tube . Image is a projection of a stack of confocal slices . Bar 10 l m 52 More recently , GFP fused to the actin depolymerizing protein ADF1 , was used to image the actin cytoskeleton of both lily and tobacco pollen tubes ( Chen et al . 2002 ) . An actin meshwork , analogous to the previously reported actin collar , but present throughout the thickness of the pollen tube , was observed within the apex . Given the importance of actin in the regulation of pollen tube growth , we undertook the present study to resolve how F - actin is organized in growing pollen tubes . We evaluated the ability of three diﬀerent GFP - based markers to reveal the intricate structure of actin in live pollen tubes . For the ﬁrst time , we are able to compare the images produced by GFP - based probes with a reliable standard , namely images of rapidly frozen pollen tubes immunolabeled with anti - actin ( Lovy - Wheeler et al . 2005 ) . In addition to the talin and ADF probes , we include GFP fused to the second actin - binding domain of ﬁmbrin from A . thaliana in this study . This probe has been used to image the actin cytoskeleton of plant roots , root hairs , hypocotyls , leaf epidermis , trichomes , guard cells , and mesophyll pro - toplasts ( Sheahan et al . 2004a , b ; Voigt et al . 2004 ; Wang et al . 2004 ) . Our results show that each live cell marker highlights diﬀerent aspects of the pollen tube actin cytoskeleton , however , no one marker faithfully shows the complete range of actin organization . Materials and methods Cell culture Lilium formosanum was grown from seed in growth chambers and transferred to the greenhouse upon bulb formation . L . longiﬂorum bulbs were kindly donated by the Gloeckner Company and grown in the greenhouse in early Spring . Nicotiana tabacum was grown in growth chambers under a standard regimen . Pollen was either used fresh , or frozen at (cid:1) 80 (cid:2) C in the case of Lilium and at (cid:1) 20 (cid:2) C in the case of N . tabacum . Lilium pollen grains were germinated in medium consisting of 15 mM MES , 1 . 6 mM BO 3 H , 1 mM KCl , 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 , and 7 % ( w / v ) sucrose , pH 5 . 5 – 6 , and N . tabacum pollen grains were germinated in medium containing 5 l M CaCl 2 , 5 l M Ca ( NO 3 ) 2 , 1 mM Mg ( SO 4 ) 2 , 0 . 01 % H 3 BO 3 , and 18 % sucrose , pH 6 . 5 – 7 . 0 ( Fu et al . 2001 ) . After a germination period of 45 min to 3 h , the pollen tubes were allowed to settle and then mixed on a cover slip with 1 . 4 % ( w / v ) low melting point agarose in germination medium , at a ratio of 1 : 1 . Excess ﬂuid was wicked away , the agarose was set in the refrigerator for 20 s , and the cells were submerged in pollen germination medium . Pollen tubes recovered for at least 15 min before inspection . Construct preparation Two forms of pLAT52 : : GFP - talin were kindly donated by N . - H . Chua ( Kost et al . 1998 ) and Z . Yang ( Fu et al . 2001 ) . The pZmc13 : : GFP - mTn construct was kindly provided by Hen - ming Wu and Alice Cheung , and consists of the original GFP - mTn construct ( Kost et al . 1998 ) cloned behind the pZmc13 promoter ( Hamilton 1998 ) for expression in lily pollen tubes ( Chen et al . 2002 ) . pLAT52 : : GFP and pZmc13 : : GFP - LlADF1 were kindly provided by Hen - ming Wu and Alice Cheung ( Chen et al . 2002 ) . GFP - ﬁmbrin was ampliﬁed from pGFP - FABD2 ( Ketelaar et al . 2004b , Voigt et al . 2005 ) , which contains GFP fused to the second actin - binding domain of AtFim1 , using the following PCR primers : forward primer , 5 ¢ - CCGCGAATTCCCATGGGTAAA GGAGA - 3 ¢ and reverse primer , 5 ¢ - CCGGGTCGA CACTAGTTCATGACTCGA - 3 ¢ . PCR products were digested with Eco RI and Sal I and cloned into pBlue - script SKII + vectors ( Stratagene , La Jolla , CA , USA ) downstream of the Lat52 ( Twell et al . 1990 ) , and Zmc13 promoters ( Hamilton 1998 ) , for expression in N . tabacum and Lilium pollen , respectively . Plasmid DNA was extracted using a QIAprep Spin Miniprep Kit ( Qiagen , Inc . , Valencia , CA , USA ) and ethanol precip - itated to a ﬁnal concentration of 1 l g / l l . Rapid freeze ﬁxation and immunolabeling Lilium . longiﬂorum pollen tubes where surface germi - nated , plunge frozen , and freeze - substituted in dry ace - tone , as reported by Lovy - Wheeler et al . ( 2005 ) . After ﬁxation , actin was stained with a mouse anti - actin antibody , raised against chicken gizzard actin ( Chem - icon , Temecular , CA , USA ) , and a secondary Cy - 3 goat anti - actin antibody ( Jackson ImmunoResearch Labo - ratories , Inc , West Grove , PA , USA ) , as previously de - scribed ( Lovy - Wheeler et al . 2005 ) . Microprojectile Bombardment Plasmid DNA was coated onto 3 mg tungsten particles ( diameter 1 . 1 l m , Bio - Rad Laboratories , Hercules , CA , USA ) , following the manufacturer’s guidelines . Since the tungsten particles were divided between two macrocar - riers ( Bio - Rad Laboratories , Hercules , CA , USA ) , a microprojectile aliquot is deﬁned here as 1 . 5 mg . Gen - erally , 0 . 5 l g plasmid DNA was used per microprojectile aliquot for expression in N . tabacum pollen , and 1 l g DNA was used for expression in Lilium pollen . For the concentration range experiment , 0 . 25 , 0 . 5 , 1 , 2 . 5 and 5 l g DNA were used per microprojectile aliquot . Approximately 10 mg of pollen was hydrated in 100 l l germination medium for 5 min before bombardment , and plated onto a 25 mm MF - Millipore membrane ( Millipore , Bedford , MA , USA ) , which was placed on a piece of moist Whatman ﬁlter paper in a petri dish . In the concentration range study , several frozen aliquots of pollen were mixed together and then re - aliquoted to produce a uniform sample of pollen for each of the ﬁve bombardments performed on a given day . Pollen grains were transformed by means of microprojectile 53 bombardment , using a Bio - Rad helium - driven Biolistic PDS - 1000 with 1100 - psi rupture discs . The microcarrier launch assembly was positioned in the second slot from the top , and the hydrated pollen in the slot below it . Each sample of pollen was bombarded twice , i . e . with both microprojectile aliquots , delivering a total of 3 mg tungsten . Bombarded pollen was transferred into an eppendorf tube with 1 ml germination medium and al - lowed to germinate on a rotor at room temperature . For regular imaging , pollen tubes were immobilized on 1 . 4 % ( w / v ) low - melting point agarose about 3 h after bom - bardment and inspected 4 – 9 h after bombardment . In the concentration range study , pollen tubes were re - moved from the rotor 5 h post bombardment and placed in the refrigerator to stop further growth . Since trans - formation eﬃciency is low , about 100 l l of pollen was plated between two large coverslips ( 35 · 50 mm ) to facilitate screening . A similar analysis was not per - formed on Lilium pollen , as pollen tubes are too long and entangled to analyze in this manner after 5 h of growth . Image acquisition and processing Confocal images were collected on a Zeiss 510 META laser scanning confocal microscope , using either a plan - neoﬂuor 10X / 0 . 3 N . A . dry objective or a plan - apo - chromat 63X / 1 . 4 N . A . oil immersion objective . GFP images were acquired using an excitation of 488 nm of the argon laser , and an emission of LP505 . Time - series intervals were taken of the medial plane at 3 – 8 s inter - vals , and the pollen tubes presented were growing at good average rates at the time of imaging . Z - series images were collected at approximately 1 l m intervals and projected by LSM 5 Image Browser software . This technique was only used to image pollen tubes that had stopped growing , either due to rapid freeze ﬁxation , or to stabilization of the actin cytoskeleton by a GFP - based marker . The clarity of the images in Fig . 4 was improved using the median ﬁlter function in Metamorph ( Universal Imaging , Downington , PA , USA ) . For the concentration range studies , transformed pollen tubes were identiﬁed using epiﬂuorescence microscopy ( di - chroic at 495LP , emission bandpass at 515 / 30 nm ) . Cells were excited using a DG - 4 ultra high speed wavelength switcher system as an illumination source ( Sutter Instruments ) , with a 175 W ozone - free xenon lamp . Images were acquired with a CCD camera ( Quantix Cool Snap HQ ) coupled to a Nikon TE300 inverted microscope with a 10X / 0 . 3 N . A . dry objective lens and pollen tubes were analyzed using functions on Meta - Morph / MetaFluor software ( Universal Imaging ) . Twenty - ﬁve transformed pollen tubes were observed and measured for each DNA concentration tested . The average growth rate was calculated by dividing the average length of the pollen tubes by the time of growth ( i . e . , time elapsed from bombardment to imaging ) . On a given day , 25 non - transformed pollen tubes were measured as a control . The lengths of transformed pol - len tubes were normalized against the control value to minimize diﬀerences between experiments conducted on diﬀerent days with diﬀerent batches of pollen . Results Fluorescence patterns in cells expressing diﬀerent actin - binding proteins We transiently expressed GFP - talin and GFP - ﬁmbrin in both Lilium ( lily ) and N . tabacum ( tobacco ) pollen tubes , and GFP - ADF in lily pollen , by means of micropro - jectile bombardment . Since Chen et al . ( 2002 ) have extensively examined the use of GFP - NtADF1 as a Fig . 2 Confocal micrographs of actin labeling in Lilium pollen tubes . Typical patterns of actin labeling in pollen tubes expressing GFP - talin ( a , b ) , GFP - ADF ( c , d ) , and GFP - ﬁmbrin ( e , f ) . The pollen tube in ( b ) is from L . longliﬂorum , whereas the others are all from L . formosanum . Images are roughly medial sections . Bar 10 l m 54 marker of actin in tobacco pollen tubes we have not repeated those studies here . In studies with GFP - talin involving tobacco pollen tubes , we used two diﬀerent constructs interchangeably : GFP - mTn ( Kost et al . 1998 ) and enhanced GFP - talin ( Fu et al . 2001 ) . We did not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in signal quality or labeling pattern . In each instance , we found that the pattern of labeling produced by a speciﬁc marker is very similar in lily and tobacco pollen tubes ; however , when compared to tobacco , lily pollen tubes grow an order of magnitude faster , and provide better spatial resolution . Rapidly frozen pollen tubes stained with anti - actin antibodies ( Fig . 1 , Lovy - Wheeler et al . 2005 ) provide a good standard for evaluating the accuracy of the GFP - based probes . A medial optical section of pollen tubes labeled with GFP - talin , frequently reveals a thick central bundle of actin ﬁlaments in the shank of the pollen tube ( Fig . 2a , b , and supplemental material , movie 1 ) . This bundle of actin is also prominent at the wideﬁeld level and appears to undergo a marked retrograde motion , as do the vesicles in this region ( supplemental material , movie 2 and 3 ) . A faintly stained transverse band of actin is frequently present approximately 2 – 5 l m behind the apex of growing pollen tubes transformed with GFP - talin ( Fig . 3 panel A , supplemental material , movie 1 , 2 and 3 ) . Although there is some labeling in the core of the pollen tube , the signal at the cortex dominates . This band is often not apparent ( Fig . 2a ) , or only weakly so ( Figs . 2b , 4a , b ) in confocal sections . Although distinct actin ﬁlaments are not discernable within the band , based on its position and structure we believe that it is an element of the dense actin fringe observed with phalloidin and actin antibody labeling ( Lovy - Wheeler et al . 2005 , Fig . 1 ) . We next transformed lily pollen with GFP - ADF ( provided by Hen - ming Wu and Alice Cheung ) , from L . longiﬂorum ( Chen et al . 2002 ) . Due to the small size of LlADF1 ( 544 bp ) , the entire gene was included in the GFP construct . Expression of GFP - ADF in lily pollen tubes reveals the actin fringe ( Fig . 2c , d ) ; however , this is observed in fewer than half of the transformed cells . Again , as with GFP - talin , the ﬁlamentous nature of the cortical fringe is not depicted in the live cell imaging . The actin fringe appears brightest at the edges of the cell , but is evident in medial optical sections ( Figs . 2c , d , 3 panel B , and supplemental material , movie 4 ) . By con - trast , the actin fringe detected in the apex of immuno - labeled pollen tubes is almost entirely cortical ( Lovy - Wheeler et al . 2005 ) . With GFP - ADF , we also only rarely see labeling of ﬁlaments in the shank of the pollen tube , and when these elements are apparent , they are sparse and variable ( supplemental material , movie 4 ) . More frequently , there is a diﬀuse background ﬂuores - cence , which may either be attributed to free GFP - ADF , or to an association of the ﬂuorescent protein with G - actin . The diﬀuse nature of the GFP - ADF signal in the shank can be further appreciated by its ability to outline the ﬁlamentous forms of vacuoles ( Fig . 2c ) . Because both the labeling intensity in the apex and the distance of the fringe from the tip ﬂuctuate during pollen tube growth when using either GFP - talin or GFP - ADF ( Fig . 3 ) , we made an attempt to discern if there is a repeating pattern that correlates with the well known oscillation in growth rate . We made a variety of measurements including ﬂuorescence intensity in the extreme apex , ﬂuorescence intensity in the region of the fringe , distance of the fringe from the apex , and distance of the cortical contact points of the fringe to the apex . However , attempts to detect a systematic change or oscillation in apical actin were unsuccessful due to the high level of background ﬂuorescence . Furthermore , we found that GFP expression alone produced ﬂuctuations of ﬂuorescence intensity . Finally , we constructed GFP - ﬁmbrin , a fusion of GFP with the second actin - binding domain of ﬁmbrin1 from A . thaliana , in vectors for expression in both lily and tobacco pollen tubes . At the wide ﬁeld microscope level , the ﬂuorescence signal comes to an abrupt halt at the base of the clear zone , leaving the apex dark . Quite Fig . 3 The disposition of actin in the apex undergoes subtle changes in intensity and position relative to the apex . Medial confocal sections of a L . longiﬂorum pollen tube expressing GFP - talin ( A ) and of a L . formosanum pollen tube expressing GFP - ADF1 ( B ) . Successive images in each vertical panel were acquired at (cid:2) 7 s intervals . Bar 10 l m 55 similarly , confocal images present the clear zone of lily pollen tubes expressing GFP - ﬁmbrin as being largely devoid of ﬁlamentous actin ( Fig . 2e , f ) . Although ﬁne ﬁlaments of actin occasionally extend into the clear zone , no fringe of actin is observed within this region . Due to the smaller size of N . tabacum pollen , which has a clear zone of just a few microns , it is hard to determine the exact location of labeling . However , in contrast to studies with GFP - ADF1 , we do not see a consistent labeling pattern in the apex , either at the confocal or the wideﬁeld level . Instead , the confocal sections of pollen tubes expressing GFP - ﬁmbrin , reveal that the region just distal to the clear zone is packed with numerous ﬁne hair - like bundles of actin ( Figs . 2e , f , 4c , d , and sup - plemental material , movie 5 ) . Expression of GFP - talin and GFP - ﬁmbrin aﬀects pollen tube growth and morphology Since it has been established that NtADF1 inhibits pollen tube growth in a dose - dependent manner ( Chen et al . 2002 ) , we decided to quantify the eﬀect on pollen tube growth of increasing the concentration of GFP - talin and GFP - ﬁmbrin DNA used per bombardment . We transformed tobacco pollen grains with a range of DNA concentrations and measured the length of transformed pollen tubes after a ﬁve hour germination period ( Fig . 5 ) . The results of the growth study are ex - pressed as normalized growth rates , obtained by divid - ing the average growth rate of each transformed pollen tube by the average growth rate of non - transformed pollen tubes in the sample , to minimize variability due to diﬀerences between experiments conducted on diﬀerent days and with diﬀerent batches of pollen . The DNA concentrations tested here ( 0 . 25 – 5 l g plasmid DNA per 1 . 5 mg microprojectile particle aliquot ) span the range of concentrations used in previous transient expression studies using GFP - talin . Thus , Kost et al . ( 1998 ) coated 1 . 5 mg of gold particles with 2 . 5 – 5 l g of plasmid DNA ( B . Kost , personal communication ) , whereas Fu et al . ( 2001 ) coated 0 . 5 mg of gold particles with 0 . 8 l g of DNA . Compared with GFP controls , both GFP - talin and GFP - ﬁmbrin inhibit pollen tube growth above concentrations of 0 . 25 l g DNA per tungsten aliquot , with the eﬀect being most signiﬁcant at concentrations of 5 l g . Further , GFP - ﬁmbrin has a more severe eﬀect on pollen tube growth than GFP - talin ( Fig . 5 ) . GFP - marker expression may also alter the structure of the actin cytoskeleton in pollen tubes . It has previ - ously been noted that very high levels of GFP - NtADF1 expression result in highly bundled or patchy regions of actin ( Chen et al . 2002 ) . Here , we ﬁnd that GFP - talin and GFP - ﬁmbrin are prone to induce aberrant actin rearrangements in pollen tubes , and that each marker produces a characteristic pattern of aberration . Since these structures are more likely to be observed in older pollen tubes , they probably form when the GFP - labeled marker accumulates inside the cell above a certain threshold level . Each bombardment yields a range of expression levels , and even the lowest concentrations of transforming DNA tested give rise to a percentage of pollen tubes with obvious deviations . As already mentioned , expression of GFP - talin fre - quently labels a thick central bundle of actin in the core of both Lilium and N . tabacum pollen tubes ( Fig . 2a , b ) . Since such a structure is never seen in pollen tubes that have been rapidly frozen and immunolabeled ( Lovy - Wheeler et al . 2005 , Fig . 1 ) , we consider it to be an eﬀect of GFP - talin . Despite bundling of actin in the shank , pollen tubes continue to exhibit oscillatory growth , al - though the rate of elongation may be diminished . For example , the cell shown in Fig . 2a , which has a very prominent central actin bundle , is growing at 0 . 1 l m / s , or half the rate of the cell shown in Fig . 2b . A more striking eﬀect of GFP - talin expression is the emergence of large coils of actin ( Fig . 6a – c ) . These aberrant structures are most frequently observed in the apex of the pollen tube , speciﬁcally in the region nor - mally occupied by the dense fringe of actin ( Fig . 6a , b ) , but whereas elements of the fringe are parallel to the axis of growth , the coils of actin are oriented transverse to it . However , they may also occur in the shank of the pollen tube ( Fig . 6c ) . As demonstrated by the medial optical section ( Fig . 6b ) of a projection of a stack of confocal images ( Fig . 6a ) , actin coils are strictly cortical . By the time these structures are visible , pollen tube growth has Fig . 4 Confocal micrographs of N . tabacum pollen tubes express - ing moderate levels of GFP - based actin marker . Medial confocal planes of pollen tube tips probed with GFP - talin ( a , b ) and GFP - ﬁmbrin ( c , d ) . Actin ﬁlaments in the shank have a slight helical twist , as seen in pollen tube ( d ) , which is not lying quite ﬂat . Bar 10 l m 56 either slowed down signiﬁcantly , or ceased completely . These coiled structures occur frequently in N . tabacum pollen tubes expressing GFP - talin ( Table 1 ) : after a 5 h growth period , they are present in 8 % of pollen tubes transformed with 0 . 25 l g GFP - talin DNA per 1 . 5 mg microprojectile particle aliquot , and in 44 % of pollen tubes transformed with 5 l g of DNA per aliquot . Please note , however , that these values are an underestimate since they do not include the tubes showing large cables of actin in the shank of the pollen tube . Interestingly , for GFP - talin , both the percentage of pollen tubes exhibit - ing cortical hoops of actin ( Table 1 ) and the inhibitory eﬀect on pollen tube growth ( Fig . 5 ) are proportional to the concentration of transforming DNA . For instance , when bombarding with 5 l g DNA per microprojectile aliquot , growth rate is inhibited by 38 . 2 % , and 44 % of 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 0 0 . 25 0 . 5 1 2 . 5 5 Concentration of DNA per bombardment ( ug DNA / 1 . 5 mg tungsten particles ) N o r m a li z e d g r o w t h r a t e a ft e r 5 hou r s Control GFP - talin GFP - fimbrin Fig . 5 The growth rate of N . tabacum pollen tubes expressing GFP - talin ( square ) or GFP - ﬁmbrin ( striped square ) is inhibited in a dose - dependent manner . Pollen tubes transformed with GFP were used as a control ( ﬁlled square ) . Bars standard error . n = 25 Fig . 6 Common actin cytoskeleton rearrangements caused by high levels of expression of GFP - talin or GFP - ﬁmbrin in N . tabacum pollen tubes . Transverse hoops of actin typically occur near the apex of pollen tubes ( a , b ) , but may also occur at points along the shank of the pollen tube ( c ) . A medial slice ( b ) taken from a stack of confocal images ( projection shown in a ) illustrates that these transverse hoops of actin are cortical . Excessive GFP - ﬁmbrin results in aggregates of actin ( d ) . Images ( a ) , ( c ) , and ( d ) are projections of a z - series . Bar 10 l m 57 the observed pollen tubes exhibit abnormalities of the actin cytoskeleton . Thus , pollen tube growth appears to be sensitive to aberrations in apical actin . Although both GFP - talin and the enhanced GFP - talin construct give rise to cortical hoops in N . tabacum pollen tubes , we have only seen them once in a L . formosanum pollen tube . Less frequently than the coils , pollen tubes expressing GFP - talin may exhibit cables that appear to have bro - ken ( Fig . 7a ) , and small ring - like structures of actin that move about the pollen tube ( Fig . 7b , c ) . The rings ap - pear to arise from broken actin ﬁlaments in the shank of the pollen tube , and several rings may occur in a single pollen tube . Similar rings have also been observed in N . tabacum pollen tubes ( not shown ) . We have only rarely seen evidence of aberrant structures in lily pollen tubes expressing GFP - ADF . In just one case , we observed degraded patches of actin in a L . formosanum pollen tube expressing GFP - ADF ( Fig . 7d ) . This particular pollen tube had exceptionally good labeling of actin ﬁlaments further down the shank , but its growth was inhibited . A few times we observed very bright diﬀuse labeling throughout the apex of pol - len tubes transformed with high levels of DNA ; how - ever , these pollen tubes were growing at very low average rates and were tuberous in shape . Expression of GFP - ﬁmbrin commonly produces yet a diﬀerent set of structural rearrangements of actin ( Figs . 6d , 7e ) , in both L . formosanum and N . tabacum pollen . Actin bundles in the shank of the pollen tube gradually fuse together at localized points , and develop into large aggregates of F - actin . It has previously been reported that AtFim1 transforms plant actin into gelled aggregates in vitro ( Kovar et al . 2000 ) . Here it appears that expression of GFP - ﬁmbrin produces similar struc - tures in growing pollen tubes . Similar aggregates of actin have also been described in D . discoideum amoebae treated with phalloidin or jasplakinolide ( Lee et al . 1998 ) , and in pollen tubes treated with jasplakinolide ( Ca ´ rdenas et al . 2005 ) . The aggregates are highly vari - able in size ; they may either form small patches of actin ( Figs . 6d , 7e ) , or large conglomerates that almost span the width of the pollen tube ( not shown ) . The actin aggregates usually do not invade the extreme apex of the pollen tube . At the earliest stages of actin bundle fusion , pollen tubes are able to maintain good average rates of growth , but by the time distinct aggregates are visible , growth has either slowed signiﬁcantly or stopped com - pletely . The percentage of aberrations occurring in pollen tubes expressing GFP - ﬁmbrin remains consistently high Table 1 Percentage of aberrant pollen tubes per bombardment , over a range of DNA concentrations QuantityDNA ( l g ) 0 . 25 0 . 5 1 . 0 2 . 5 5 GFP - talin ( % ) 8 36 . 67 25 42 44 GFP - ﬁmbrin ( % ) 72 61 . 54 76 66 . 67 86 . 67 In the case of GFP - talin , only pollen tubes exhibiting cortical hoops of actin were scored . If the occurrence of thick central cables of actin were to be included in this survey , the values would be much higher . For GFP - ﬁmbrin , pollen tubes with large actin aggregates were scored Fig . 7 Artifacts found in L . formosanum pollen tubes expressing high levels of GFP - based markers . GFP - talin expression may result in cortical transverse snapping of actin cables ( a ) , or the formation of small mobile rings of actin ( b and c , examples indicated by arrows ) . GFP - ADF1 expression can lead to actin ﬁlament decay ( d ) . GFP - ﬁmbrin expression frequently produces large aggregates of actin within the pollen tube ( d ) . Image ( d and e ) are projections of a z - series , whereas the other images are single confocal slices . Bar 10 l m 58 over the range of DNA concentrations tested ( Table 1 ) , whereas the inhibitory eﬀect on pollen tube growth is greatest at higher transforming concentrations ( Fig . 5 ) . Therefore , pollen tubes are somewhat able to tolerate the artifacts caused by high levels of GFP - ﬁmbrin expression , most probably because ﬁmbrin predomi - nantly decorates elements of actin in the shank of the pollen tube , which are presumably less crucial to the process of pollen tube growth than elements within the apical fringe of actin . Discussion Given the central role that actin plays in the growth of the pollen tube , it is essential that we have a thorough knowledge of its structural organization and dynamic transformations in living cells . Here , three diﬀerent ﬂuorescent probes have been used to image the actin cytoskeleton of living pollen tubes . However , three dis - tinct views have been obtained , and not one entirely conforms to the structure observed in optimally ﬁxed pollen tubes ( Lovy - Wheeler et al . 2005 ) . This may be due to a preference of these markers for a particular isovariant of actin , of which there are ﬁve in A . thaliana pollen tubes ( Kandasamy et al . 1999 ) , or for actin with speciﬁc phys - ical properties . Alternatively , the binding properties of these probes may signiﬁcantly be altered by the concen - tration of certain ions , such as calcium and protons , which are known to vary in the apical region of growing pollen tubes ( Holdaway - Clarke and Hepler 2003 ) . Furthermore , it must be emphasized that these probes are actin - binding proteins , and not actin . Therefore the images represent the distribution of the particular actin - binding protein , and this does not necessarily transcribe into a faithful account of actin distribution . An important feature of optimally ﬁxed pollen tubes is the presence of a cortical fringe of actin , located just behind the pollen tube tip within the clear zone ( Lovy - Wheeler et al . 2005 ; Fig . 1 ) . Although this fringe has only occasionally been reported in previous studies , the high quality of preservation rendered by rapid freeze ﬁxation allows the fringe to be seen in virtually every pollen tube examined . Furthermore , the failure of older , conventional methods to routinely preserve this struc - ture lends support to the notion that it is a fragile , dy - namic structure , easily deformed or destroyed . The location of the fringe suggests that it is involved in actin assembly and turnover , and thus quite likely it partici - pates in the process of growth itself . Importantly , GFP - ADF and GFP - talin detect this structure . However , there are signiﬁcant diﬀerences be - tween the structure as visualized in living cells and in ﬁxed cells ( Lovy - Wheeler et al . 2005 ) . The live cell probes , for example , do not reveal the ﬁbrillar structure of the cortical fringe . In addition they often produce a signal in every plane throughout the pollen tube , whereas the cells prepared by rapid freeze ﬁxation invariably show the actin fringe to be located in the cortex of the cell . Chen et al . ( 2002 ) have clearly re - ported that the ﬂuorescent signal from GFP - ADF oc - curs throughout the thickness of the pollen tube and refer to this as a mesh , rather than a collar or a fringe . When labeling L . formosanum pollen tubes , GFP - ADF frequently produces a stronger signal at the edge of the cell than in the interior . The ﬁnding that GFP - ADF often gives rise to a uniform signal may be explained by the fact that ADF is uniformly distributed throughout the pollen tube , as revealed by antibody labeling in Narcissus pollen tubes ( Allwood et al . 2002 ) . Perhaps , when levels of ADF are elevated above a certain threshold , they preferentially associate with actin in the region of the apical fringe . In summary , therefore , we think that principal ADF activity occurs in the cell cortex , and that it marks re - gions of active actin polymerization and turnover , which must accompany or indeed anticipate pollen tube growth . In this regard it is particularly pertinent that ADF1 is well known for its association with actin remodeling in other systems ( Kuhn et al . 2000 ) . It is additionally relevant that the position of the fringe corresponds to the location of the alkaline band ( Feijo´ et al . 1999 ) ; thus the physiological conditions are primed to enhance the actin remodeling activity of ADF ( Chen et al . 2002 ) . It is therefore possible that expression of GFP - ADF enhances actin turnover in this region , gen - erating more short fragments of actin and providing an over - representation of actin fragments than would nor - mally be present in the fringe . With both GFP - ADF and GFP - talin the fringe ap - pears to undergo changes in conformation , distance from the apex , and intensity , most probably correlating with changes in pollen tube growth rate . However , de - spite considerable eﬀort , we have not been able to de - convolve the changes of ﬂuorescence into a meaningful understanding of actin dynamics . First , the high level of background ﬂuorescence makes it diﬃcult to extract a clear signal . Second , there are other events , notably oscillations in pH in the apical domain ( Feijo´ et al . 1999 ) , and changes in the accessible volume in the clear zone , which may account for ﬂuctuations in signal intensity . Since GFP is sensitive to pH ( Tsien 1998 ) , the presence of oscillatory domains of pH could readily obscure or dominate a signal derived from the purported changes in actin . In addition to the pH changes , there are changes in accessible volume due to the periodic motion of Golgi - derived membrane vesicles and ele - ments of the ER in the pollen tube apex ( Parton et al . 2001 ; Parton et al . 2003 ) . These too could have a pro - found eﬀect on the amount of ﬂuorescence from a single wavelength indicator . Although there is one report on the occurrence of actin oscillations in the apex of to - bacco pollen tubes ( Fu et al . 2001 ) , those data must be considered with caution because the authors did not consider issues of pH and accessible volume . Our observation that the ﬂuorescence from free GFP oscil - lates indicates that changes in GFP signal occur that are independent of actin binding . 59 GFP - ﬁmbrin generously labels ﬁne bundles of actin in the shank of the pollen tube . By comparison , pollen tubes transiently expressing GFP - ADF only rarely ex - hibit the occasional ﬁlament of actin in the shank , and those expressing GFP - talin often reveal a prominent central bundle of actin surrounded by a few ﬁne ﬁla - ments . It is possible that the abundance of actin bundles labeled with GFP - ﬁmbrin is the result of the construct somehow altering the structure of the actin cytoskeleton . Co - injection of stamen hair cells with AtFim1 and ﬂuorescent phalloidin labels much ﬁner bundles of actin than ﬂuorescent phalloidin alone ( Kovar et al . 2001 ) . Kovar et al . ( 2001 ) , suggest that this phenomenon may be an artifact , and that AtFim1 may be inducing poly - merization of actin or splaying apart pre - existing bun - dles of F - actin . However , considering the similarity between GFP - ﬁmbrin and those pollen tubes that have been rapidly frozen and labeled with anti - actin ( Lovy - Wheeler et al . 2005 ) , we conclude that GFP - ﬁmbrin produces the most accurate image of actin in the shank of live pollen tubes . An important aspect of this study is the demonstra - tion that expression of GFP - labeled actin - binding do - mains may inhibit pollen tube growth and cause structural rearrangements of the actin cytoskeleton . Even with relatively low concentrations of transforming DNA , a percentage of transformants exhibits actin cytoskeleton aberrations . This is signiﬁcant , because the isolated C - terminal of talin has been used as an ‘‘unobtrusive’’ marker of the actin cytoskeleton ( Kost et al . 1998 ; Fu et al . 2001 ) . However , it clearly is not an ‘‘unobtrusive’’ marker since it routinely produces a variety of defects in actin cytoskeleton structure and inhibits pollen tube growth . Perhaps this is to be ex - pected , as it has previously been demonstrated that the exact same 197 amino acid C - terminal region of talin present in the GFP - talin construct spontaneously forms homodimers when expressed at physiological conditions , and cross - links F - actin into short bundles . Furthermore , this truncated version of talin binds to actin so strongly that it displaces native talin from its binding site at very low concentrations ( McCann and Craig 1997 ) . It is therefore conceivable that , when GFP - talin reaches a certain level of expression in pollen tubes , it is able to override native actin - binding protein activity and cross - link short actin bundles in the apex into stable structures that undergo coiling . Structural anomalies caused by GFP - talin appear to be present in previous studies . For example , coils of actin were reported in pollen tubes overexpressing Rop , based on studies using GFP - talin as an actin marker ( Fu et al . 2001 ) . Given the propensity for GFP - talin to generate pronounced structural rear - rangements , including especially transverse coils or hoops , it is therefore an unresolved question whether the images reported by Fu et al . ( 2001 ) were primarily due to Rop1 overexpression or whether GFP - talin had the dominant impact . Similarly , steep helical and small ring - like structures of actin found in N . tabacum pollen tubes were attributed to oryzalin treatment , when GFP - talin was being used as a marker for actin ( Laitiainen et al . 2002 ) . GFP - talin is not alone in its ability to modify the actin cytoskeleton . Aggregates of actin resulting from high levels of GFP - ﬁmbrin expression may either result from excessive actin ﬁlament stabilization , or from unusual intraﬁlament binding and buckling . Pollen tubes continue to grow normally in the presence of moderate levels of aggregation . This is possibly because GFP - ﬁmbrin is ineﬀective at binding to the cortical actin fringe within the clear zone , a region that is crucial for tip growth to occur . An isolated actin - binding domain of human T - ﬁmbrin induces a conformational shift in an actin ﬁlament upon merely binding to it , a change that is likely to prevent other actin - binding proteins from binding in the vicinity ( Hanein et al . 1997 ) . Expression of a single actin - binding domain of AtFim1 may there - fore prevent native actin - binding proteins from binding to the actin cables in the shank of the pollen tube , and result in structural rearrangements . When taken to - gether , GFP - ﬁmbrin emerges as the least eﬀective mar - ker to study apical actin , and therefore actin dynamics , in growing pollen tubes . These observations in the pollen tube stand in contrast to recent reports which promote this same GFP - ﬁmbrin ( ABD2 ) construct as an eﬃca - cious probe for dynamic actin networks in a variety of plant tissues , including the tip - growing root hair ( Sheahan et al . 2004 ; Ketelaar et al . 2004b ; Voigt et al . 2005 ) . Due to the negative impact of GFP - based markers on pollen tube growth and actin cytoskeleton structure , we recommend bombarding with the lowest concentration of DNA that still provides a signal strong enough for the imaging technique being used . It is important to note that even the lowest concentrations of transforming DNA tested produce a range of expression levels and result in a fraction of aberrant pollen tubes . Inducible promoters may be an eﬀective mechanism to regulate expression levels of GFP - markers in stable transgenic lines . Perhaps the most eﬀective approach is to use a variety of diﬀerent actin markers when studying changes in the actin cytoskeleton . For instance , had GFP - ADF1 been used as an actin marker in the Rop1 overexpression study ( Fu et al . 2001 ) the results might have been unambiguous , as GFP - ADF1 by itself rarely if ever in - duces the formation of transverse coils of actin . Fur - thermore , in general , structural aberrations are less likely to develop in lily pollen tubes . This may be due to diﬀerences in the strength of the promoters used in these two systems , or to dilution of the probe in the larger accessible volume of the lily pollen tube . Although the ﬁxation methods , especially rapid freeze ﬁxation , followed by immunostaining ( Lovy - Wheeler et al . 2005 ) , oﬀer the most complete view of the pollen tube actin cytoskeleton , they provide just a snapshot and do not reveal how the pollen tube actin cytoskeleton is remodeled during pollen tube growth . The GFP - based markers used in live - cell studies preferentially label distinct elements of the actin cytoskeleton and thus 60 provide only limited details of its structure and dynamic changes . Furthermore , these markers are prone to pro - duce aberrant actin structures and inhibit pollen tube growth , especially in the case of tobacco pollen . It is unfortunate that GFP - actin has not worked thus far ; perhaps future eﬀorts on this approach , or possibly an actin - binding protein or domain that has not yet been tested , will yield an eﬃcacious live cell probe . The ideal probe would detect all arrays of actin present in the growing pollen tube , without interfering with normal actin dynamics . Nonetheless , much may be learnt about the actin cytoskeleton using a combination of these markers currently available if one validates the resulting images by comparison with the best available standard produced by optimally ﬁxed pollen tubes ( Lovy - Wheeler et al . 2005 ) and excludes the pollen tubes exhibiting characteristic aberrations . Acknowledgements We thank Nam - Hai Chua , Zhenbiao Yang , Alice Cheung and Hen - ming Wu for providing us with constructs , and the Gloeckner Company for the donation of L . longiﬂorum bulbs . We thank Alice Cheung for the contribution of Fig . 6a and b . This research was supported by the National Science Founda - tion grant Nos . MCB - 0077599 and MCB - 0516852 to PKH and by the EU Research Training Network TIPNET ( Project HPRN - CT - 2002 – 00265 ) , from Brussels , Belgium , to BV . We acknowledge the National Science Foundation Grant No . BBS 8714235 that sup - ports the UMASS Central Microscopy Facility , where all confocal images were acquired . Finally , we acknowledge the David Delisle Research Grant , of the Plant Biology Graduate Program at UMASS , for its support . References Allwood E , Anthony R , Smertenko A , Reichelt S , Drøbak B , Doonan J , Weeds A , Hussey P ( 2002 ) Regulation of the pollen - speciﬁc actin - depolymerizing factor LlADF1 . Plant Cell 14 : 2915 – 2927 . DOI 10 . 1105 / tpc . 005363 Ca´rdenas L , Lovy - Wheeler A , Wilsen KL , Hepler PK ( 2005 ) Actin polymerization promotes the reversal of streaming in the apex of pollen tubes . Cell Motil Cytoskel 61 : 112 – 127 . DOI 10 . 1002 / cm . 20068 Chen CY , Wong EI , Vidali L , Estavillo A , Hepler PK , Wu HM , Cheung AY ( 2002 ) The regulation of actin organization by actin - depolymerizing factor in elongating pollen tubes . Plant Cell 14 : 2175 – 2190 . DOI 10 . 1105 / tpc . 003038 Feijo ´ JA , Sainhas J , Hackett GR , Kunkel JG , Hepler PK ( 1999 ) Growing pollen tubes possess a constitutive alkaline band in the clear zone and a growth - dependent acidic tip . J Cell Biol 144 : 483 – 496 Foissner I , Grolig F , Obermeyer G ( 2002 ) Reversible protein phosphorylation regulates the dynamic organization of the pollen tube cytoskeleton : eﬀects of calyculin A and okadaic acid . Protoplasma 220 : 1 – 15 . DOI 10 . 1007 / s00709 – 002 – 0032 – 9 Fu Y , Wu G , Yang Z ( 2001 ) Rop GFPase - dependent dynamics of tip - localized F - actin controls tip growth in pollen tubes . J Cell Biol 152 : 1019 – 1032 . DOI 10 . 1083 / jcb . 152 . 5 . 1019 Gibbon BC , Kovar DR , Staiger CJ ( 1999 ) Latrunculin B has dif - ferent eﬀects on pollen germination and tube growth . Plant Cell 11 : 2349 – 2363 Hamilton DA , Schwarz YH , Mascarenhas JP ( 1998 ) A monocot pollen - speciﬁc promoter contains separable pollen - speciﬁc and quantitative elements . Plant Mol Biol 38 : 663 – 669 Hanein D , Matsudaira P , DeRosier DJ ( 1997 ) Evidence for a conformational change in actin induced by ﬁmbrin ( N375 ) binding . J Cell Biol 139 : 387 – 396 Hepler PK , Vidali L , Cheung AY ( 2001 ) Polarized cell growth in higher plants . Annu Rev Cell Devel Biol 17 : 159 – 187 . DOI 10 . 1146 / annurev . cellbio . 17 . 1 . 159 Holdaway - Clarke TL , Hepler PK ( 2003 ) Control of pollen tube growth : role of ion gradients and ﬂuxes . New Phytol 159 : 539 – 563 . DOI 10 . 1046 / j . 1469 – 8137 . 2003 . 00847 . x Kandasamy MK , McKinney EC , Meagher RB ( 1999 ) The late pollen - speciﬁc actins in angiosperms . Plant J 18 : 681 – 691 . DOI 10 . 1046 / j . 1365 - 313x . 1999 . 00487 . x Ketelaar T , Anthony RG , Hussey PJ ( 2004a ) Green ﬂuorescent protein - mTalin causes defects in actin organization and cell expansion in Arabidopsis and inhibits actin depolymerizing protein’s actin depolymerizing activity in vitro . Plant Physiol 136 : 3990 – 3998 . DOI 10 . 1104 / pp . 104 . 050799 Ketelaar T , Allwood EG , Anthony R , Voigt B , Menzel D , Hussey PJ ( 2004b ) The actin - interacting protein AIP1 is essential for actin organization and plant development . Curr Biol 14 : 145 – 149 . DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2004 . 01 . 004 Kost B , Spielhofer P , Chua NH ( 1998 ) A GFP - mouse talin fusion protein labels plant actin ﬁlaments in vivo and visualizes the actin cytoskeleton in growing pollen tubes . Plant J 16 : 393 – 401 Kovar DR , Staiger CJ , Weaver EA , McCurdy DW ( 2000 ) AtFim1 is an actin ﬁlament crosslinking protein from Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant J 24 : 625 – 636 . DOI 10 . 1046 / j . 1365 – 313x . 2000 . 00907 . x Kovar DR , Gibbon BC , McCurdy DW , Staiger CJ ( 2001 ) Fluor - escently - labeled ﬁmbrin decorates a dynamic actin ﬁlament network in live plant cells . Planta 213 : 390 – 395 . DOI : 10 . 1007 / s004250000494 Kuhn T , Meberg P , Brown M , Bernstein B , Minamide L , Jensen J , Okada K , Soda E , Bamburg J ( 2000 ) Regulating actin dynamics in neuronal growth cones by ADF / coﬁlin and Rho family GTPases . J Neurobiol 44 : 126 – 144 . DOI 10 . 1002 / 1097 - 4695 ( 200008 ) 44 : 2 < 126 : : AID - NEU4 > 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - Z Laitiainen E , Nieminen KM , Vihinen H , Raudaskoski M ( 2002 ) Movement of generative cell and vegetative nucleus in tobacco pollen tubes is dependent on microtubule cytoskeleton but independent of the synthesis of callose plugs . Sex Plant Reprod 15 : 195 – 204 . DOI 10 . 1007 / s00497 - 002 - 0155 - 3 Lee E , Shelden EA , Knecht DA ( 1998 ) Formation of F - actin aggregates in cells treated with actin stabilizing drugs . Cell Motil Cytoskelet 39 : 122 – 133 Lovy - Wheeler A , Wilsen KL , Baskin TI , Hepler PK ( 2005 ) En - hanced ﬁxation reveals an apical cortical fringe of actin ﬁla - ments as a consistent feature of the pollen tube . Planta 221 : 95 – 104 . DOI 10 . 1007 / s00425 - 004 - 1423 - 2 McCann RO , Craig SW ( 1997 ) The I / LWEQ module : a conserved sequence that signiﬁes F - actin binding in functionally diverse proteins from yeast to mammals . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94 : 5679 – 5684 Miller DD , Lancelle SA , Hepler PK ( 1996 ) Actin microﬁlaments do not form a dense meshwork in Lilium longiﬂorum pollen tube tips . Protoplasma 195 : 123 – 132 Parton R , Fischer - Parton S , Watahiki M , Trewavas A ( 2001 ) Dynamics of the apical vesicle accumulation and the rate of growth are related in individual pollen tubes . J Cell Sci 114 : 2685 – 2695 Parton R , Fischer - Parton S , Trewavas A , Watahiki MK ( 2003 ) Pollen tubes exhibit regular periodic membrane traﬃcking events in the absence of apical extension . J Cell Sci 116 : 2707 – 2719 . DOI 10 . 1242 / jcs . 00468 Sheahan M , Rose R , McCurdy D ( 2004a ) Organelle inheritance in plant cell division : the actin cytoskeleton is required for unbi - ased inheritance of chloroplasts , mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum in dividing protoplasts . Plant J 37 : 379 – 390 . DOI 10 . 1046 / j . 1365 - 313X . 2003 . 01967 . x Sheahan M , Staiger CJ , Rose RJ , McCurdy DW ( 2004b ) A green ﬂuorescent protein fusion to actin - binding domain 2 of Ara - bidopsis ﬁmbrin highlights new features of a dynamic actin cytoskeleton in live plant cells . Plant Physiol 136 : 3968 – 3978 . DOI / 10 . 1104 / pp . 104 . 049411 Taylor LP , Hepler PK ( 1997 ) Pollen germination and tube growth . Ann Rev Plant Mol Biol 48 : 461 – 491 61 Tsien RY ( 1998 ) The green ﬂuorescent protein . Annu Rev Biochem 67 : 509 – 544 Twell D , Yamaguchi J , McCormick S ( 1990 ) Pollen - speciﬁc gene expression in transgenic plants : coordinate regulation of two diﬀerent tomato gene promoters during microsporogenesis . Development 109 : 705 – 713 Vidali L , McKenna ST , Hepler PK ( 2001 ) Actin polymerization is necessary for pollen tube growth . Mol Biol Cell 12 : 2534 – 2545 Voigt B , Timmers ACJ , Sˇamaj J , Mu¨ller J , Balusˇka F , Menzel D ( 2005 ) GFP - FAB2 fusion construct allows in vivo visualization of the dynamic actin cytoskeleton in all cells of Arabidopsis seedlings . Eur J Cell Biol 84 : 595 – 608 . DOI 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2004 . 11 . 011 Wang YS , Motes CM , Mohamalawari DR , Blancaﬂor EB ( 2004 ) Green ﬂuorescent protein fusions to Arabidopsis ﬁmbrin 1 for spatio - temporal imaging of F - actin dynamics in roots . Cell Motil Cytoskelet 59 : 79 – 93 . DOI 10 . 1002 / cm . 20024 Weber I , Niewo¨hner J , Du A , Ro¨hrig U , Gerisch G ( 2002 ) A talin fragment as an actin trap visualizing actin ﬂow in chemotaxis , endocytosis , and cytokinesis . Cell Motil Cytoskelet 53 : 136 – 149 . DOI 10 . 1002 / cm . 10065 62