Biochem . J . ( 1996 ) 316 , 1 – 11 ( Printed in Great Britain ) 1 REVIEW ARTICLE Collagen ﬁbril formation Karl E . KADLER * (cid:141) , David F . HOLMES * , John A . TROTTER (cid:139) and John A . CHAPMAN (cid:140) * Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell - Matrix Research , School of Biological Sciences , and (cid:140) Department of Medical Biophysics , University of Manchester , Stopford Building 2 . 205 , Oxford Road , Manchester M13 9PT , U . K . , and (cid:139) University of New Mexico School of Medicine , Department of Anatomy , Albuquerque , NM 87131 , U . S . A . Collagen is most abundant in animal tissues as very long ﬁbrils with a characteristic axial periodic structure . The ﬁbrils provide the major biomechanical scaﬀold for cell attachment and anchorage of macromolecules , allowing the shape and form of tissues to be deﬁned and maintained . How the ﬁbrils are formed from their monomeric precursors is the primary concern of this review . Collagen ﬁbril formation is basically a self - assembly process ( i . e . one which is to a large extent determined by the intrinsic properties of the collagen molecules themselves ) but it is also sensitive to cell - mediated regulation , particularly in young or healing tissues . Recent attention has been focused on ‘early ﬁbrils’ or ‘ﬁbril segments’ of (cid:67) 10 l m in length which appear to INTRODUCTION Collagen is distinct from other proteins in that the molecule comprises three polypeptide chains ( a - chains ) which form a unique triple - helical structure . For the three chains to wind into a triple helix they must have the smallest amino acid , glycine , at every third residue along each chain . Each of the three chains therefore has the repeating structure Gly - Xaa - Yaa , in which Xaa and Yaa can be any amino acid but are frequently the imino acids proline and hydroxyproline . More than 20 genetically distinct collagens exist in animal tissues . Collagen types I , II , III , V and XI self - assemble into D - periodic cross - striated ﬁbrils [ 1 – 4 ] ( Figure 1 ) ( where D (cid:175) 67 nm , the characteristic axial periodicity of collagen ) and collectively are the most abundant collagens in vertebrates . The ﬁbril - forming collagen molecules consist of an uninterrupted triple helix of approx . 300 nm in length and 1 . 5 nm in diameter ﬂanked by short extrahelical telopeptides . The telopeptides , which do not have a repeating Gly - Xaa - Yaa structure and do not adopt a triple - helical conformation , account for 2 % of the molecule and are critical for ﬁbril formation ( see below ) . Type I collagen (cid:178) [ a 1 ( I ) ] (cid:35) a 2 ( I ) (cid:180) is found throughout the body except in cartilaginous tissues . It is also synthesized in response to injury and in the ﬁbrous nodules formed in the sequelae of ﬁbrotic disease . Type II collagen (cid:178) [ a 1 ( II ) ] (cid:36) (cid:180) is found in cartilage , developing cornea and vitreous humour . These major collagen ﬁbrils are almost certainly not formed from just one collagen type but instead are co - polymers of two or more ﬁbril - forming collagens . Type III collagen (cid:178) [ a 1 ( III ) ] (cid:36) (cid:180) is found in the walls of arteries and other hollow organs and usually occurs in the same ﬁbril with type I collagen . Type V collagen [ a 1 ( V ) , a 2 ( V ) , a 3 ( V ) ] and type XI collagen [ a 1 ( XI ) , a 2 ( XI ) , a 3 ( XI ) ] are minor components of tissue and occur as heterotypic ﬁbrils with type I and type II collagen respectively ( for a review of collagen distribution , see [ 5 ] ) . Much of what is known about collagen ﬁbril assembly has Abbreviations used : D , the axial periodicity of collagen ﬁbrils ( (cid:175) 67 nm ) ; pNcollagen , procollagen containing the N - propeptides and lacking the C - propeptides ; pCcollagen , procollagen containing the C - propeptides and lacking the N - propeptides ; DPS III , D - periodic symmetrical banding type III . (cid:141) To whom correspondence should be addressed . be intermediates in the formation of mature ﬁbrils that can grow to be hundreds of micrometres in length . Data from several laboratories indicate that these early ﬁbrils can be unipolar ( with all molecules pointing in the same direction ) or bipolar ( in which the orientation of collagen molecules reverses at a single location along the ﬁbril ) . The occurrence of such early ﬁbrils has major implications for tissue morphogenesis and repair . In this article we review the current understanding of the origin of unipolar and bipolar ﬁbrils , and how mature ﬁbrils are assembled from early ﬁbrils . We include preliminary evidence from invertebrates which suggests that the principles for bipolar ﬁbril assembly were established at least 500 million years ago . resulted from studies of the type - I - collagen - containing ﬁbrils in tendonand skin and from studies in which ﬁbrils are reconstituted in (cid:138) itro from puriﬁed type I collagen . Therefore , out of necessity , the present review is concerned primarily with the assembly of Figure 1 Axial structure of D - periodic collagen ﬁbrils ( a ) Schematic representation of the axial packing arrangement of triple - helical collagen molecules in a ﬁbril , as derived from analysis of the positive ( c ) and negative ( b ) staining patterns . ( b ) Collagen ﬁbril negatively stained with sodium phosphotungstic acid ( 1 % , pH 7 ) . The ﬁbril is from a gel of ﬁbrils reconstituted from acetic - acid - soluble calf - skin collagen . The repeating broad dark and light zones are produced by preferential stain penetration into regions of lowest packing ( the gap regions ) . ( c ) Similar ﬁbril positively stained with phosphotungstic acid ( 1 % , pH 3 . 4 ) and then uranyl acetate ( 1 % , pH 4 . 2 ) . The darkly staining transverse bands are the result of uptake of electron - dense heavy - metal ions from the staining solutions on to charged residue side groups of collagen . For a detailed explanation of the band assignments and analysis , see [ 1 ] . 2 K . E . Kadler and others Collagen fibril Procollagen Propeptide cleavage Collagen Fibril formation Lysyl oxidase cross - linking C - Telopeptides C - Propeptides N - Telopeptides N - Propeptides ProcollagenN - proteinase ProcollagenC - proteinase Figure 2 Extracellular events in the synthesis of ﬁbrillar collagens Procollagen consists of a 300 - nm - long triple - helical domain ( comprised of three a - chains each of approx . 1000 residues ) ﬂanked by a trimeric globular C - propeptide domain ( the right - hand side of the diagram ) and a trimeric N - propeptide domain ( the left - hand side of the diagram ) . Procollagen is secreted from cells and is converted into collagen by the removal of the N - and C - propeptides by procollagen N - proteinase and procollagen C - proteinase respectively . The collagen generated in the reaction spontaneously self - assembles into cross - striated ﬁbrils that occur in the extracellular matrix of connective tissues . The ﬁbrils are stabilized by covalent cross - linking , which is initiated by oxidative deamination of speciﬁc lysine and hydroxylysine residues in collagen by lysyl oxidase . The process is shown occurring in cell - surface crypts according to the model generated by Birk and co - workers ( see text for references ) . type I collagen into ﬁbrils . Other collagens will be mentioned only with regard to how their assembly into ﬁbrils diﬀers from that of type I collagen and how they inﬂuence or participate in ﬁbril formation . The assembly of collagen molecules into ﬁbrils is an entropy - driven process , similar to that occurring in other protein self - assembly systems , such as microtubules , actin ﬁlaments and ﬂagella ( for a review , see [ 6 ] ) . These processes are driven by the loss of solvent molecules from the surface of protein molecules and result in assemblies with a circular cross - section , which minimizes the surface area (cid:125) volume ratio of the ﬁnal assembly . Although the broad principles of collagen ﬁbril self - assembly are generally accepted , less is known about the molecular mechanisms of the assembly process . A fundamental feature of ﬁbril - forming collagens is that they are synthesized as soluble procollagens ( Figure 2 ) , which are converted into collagens by speciﬁc enzymic cleavage of terminal propeptidesbytheprocollagenmetalloproteinases . Withoutthese proteinases the synthesis of collagen ﬁbrils would not occur . A suitable cell - free system of assembling ﬁbrils has been developed in which procollagen is sequentially cleaved with the puriﬁed 10000 5000 0 400 800 Axial distance ( D - periods ) M a ss p e r un i t l e ng t h ( k D a / n m ) α - Tip β - Tip ( c ) ( b ) N C C N Figure 3 Bipolar ﬁbrils formed in vitro by cleavage of puriﬁed pCcollagen with procollagen C - proteinase ( a ) Transmission electron micrograph of a positively stained collagen ﬁbril generated by cleavage of pCcollagen ( 50 l g / ml ) with the C - proteinase ( 50 units / ml ) at 37 (cid:176) C . The ﬁbril displays ﬁne ( a - tip ) and coarse ( b - tip ) ends . Scale bar (cid:175) 1 l m . ( b ) Axial mass distribution of an entire unstained ﬁbril similar to the one shown in ( a ) . The ﬁbril shows a near - linear axial mass distribution of the two tips , with no evidence of a limiting diameter . Arrows show orientations of collagen molecules within the ﬁbril ; E / S [ enzyme units / substrate mass ( l g ) ] (cid:175) 50 : 50 . ( c ) Schematic representation of the growth of a bipolar ﬁbril in the cell - free system . The model shows a two - stage model , as indicated by light - microscope observations [ 8 ] , in which growth occurs ﬁrst from a pointed tip ( the a - tip ) and additional growth occurs from the blunt end after the formation of a second pointed tip ( b - tip ) for growth in the opposite direction . The tip proﬁles are shown as sections of parabolas , consistent with the linear axial mass distributions of a ﬁbril with a circular cross - section . ( c ) ( a ) Transition region Figure 4 Transmission electron micrograph of a positively stained bipolar ﬁbril from 18 - day chick embryo metatarsal tendon ( a ) The ﬁbril is 10 . 5 l m long and shows a polarity reversal 3 . 5 l m from one end ( arrowhead ) . ( b ) Enlargement of the banding pattern at the polarity reversal region ( brace ) . The braced region showsfour D - periodswherethestainingpatternillustratesmoleculesinanti - parallelarrangement . The centre two D - periods show a symmetrical pattern with two axial planes of mirror symmetry . These mirror planes occur between the d and c2 staining bands and in the vicinity of the a3 band . ( c ) Analysis of the staining pattern in the transition region indicates an anti - parallel arrangement of molecules . The schematic representation shows that the axial extent of the transition region is about four D - periods . This corresponds to the minimal distance possible to achieve polarity reversal and to maintain the D - periodicity concomitantly . procollagen metalloproteinases to generate collagen de no (cid:138) o [ 6 – 9 ] . Fibrils generated in the system initially have a near - paraboloidal pointed tip [ 10 ] and a blunt end , and growth is exclusively from the pointed tip [ 11 ] . As growth proceeds , the blunt end becomes a new pointed tip for growth in the other 3 Collagen ﬁbril formation Figure 5 Transmission electron micrograph of a positively stained unipolar collagen ﬁbril from 18 - day chick embryo metatarsal tendon The unipolar ﬁbril is positioned from left to right and is seen crossing a larger cross - banded ﬁbril ( running from top to bottom ) . The unipolar ﬁbril is 2 l m in length and shows N - and C - terminal tips with no polarity reversal . direction [ 12 ] . Furthermore , the two pointed tips each have collagen molecules oriented with N - termini closest to the ﬁbril end [ 11 ] ( Figure 3 ) . Thus the ﬁbrils are N – N bipolar , in which a switch in molecular orientation occurs at a region along the ﬁbril . These features had previously not been seen in ﬁbrils formed in (cid:138) i (cid:138) o and initially appeared to be artefacts arising from contaminants in the preparations of procollagen or the pro - collagen metalloproteinases . However , subsequent work has shown that bipolar ﬁbrils having two N - terminal paraboloidal tips occur in developing chick tendon [ 13 ] ( Figure 4 ) . Thus the cell - free system had accurately predicted several fundamental features of the assembly of collagen ﬁbrils , including the para - boloidal shape of the tip and the occurrence of N – N bipolars . Recent data from our laboratories have shown that ﬁbrils in developing chick tendon have features additional to those of ﬁbrils formed in the cell - free system . For example , some ﬁbrils are unipolar , having molecules pointing exclusively in one direction , in which case ﬁbrils have a C - terminal and an N - terminal end [ 13 ] ( Figure 5 ) . UNIPOLAR FIBRIL FORMATION FROM ACID - SOLUBLE COLLAGEN Collagen may be extracted from several tissues into neutral salt buﬀers or , with greater yield , into dilute acidic solutions [ 14 ] . Typical acetic acid extracts of skin and tendon yield milligram quantities of type I collagen , mainly in the form of monomers but also including variable amounts of cross - linked components ( dimers , trimers and some higher components ) . Preparations may also vary in respect of the intactness of the proteinase - susceptible , non - helical , telopeptide regions of the molecule . Such preparations , when neutralized and warmed to temperatures between 20 and 34 (cid:176) C , produce a gel of D - periodic ﬁbrils over the course of several hours ( Figure 6 ) . At 34 (cid:176) C ﬁbril diameters are typically in the range 20 – 70 nm . Lower temperatures generally result in broader ﬁbrils , with diameters of up to 200 nm found at 20 (cid:176) C [ 15 , 16 ] . Samples of these ﬁnal gels show a meshwork of very long ﬁbrils in which ends are not observed ( Figure 6 ) . The rate of assembly of ﬁbrils can be monitored by measuring turbidity which , to a close approxi - mation , is proportional to the amount of ﬁbrillar material formed [ 14 – 17 ] . A typical near - sigmoidal plot shows three regions : a lag region , a growth region and a plateau . Diameter measurements on ﬁbrils obtained during the time course of assembly have demonstrated that a limiting ﬁbril diameter distribution occurs when about 20 % of the collagen molecules have assembled into ﬁbrils , suggesting that the latter stages of assembly must be at the ends of existing ﬁbrils [ 17 ] . Fibrils formed from acid - soluble collagen are unipolar , D - periodic and have two smoothly tapered ends . Early ﬁbrils , ranging in length from 1 to 20 l m , are observed at the end of the lag phase and in the early growth phase ( Figure 6 ) . Such early ﬁbrils showed a well deﬁned shape under particular solution conditions , with the occurrence of a ‘limiting early ﬁbril’ of about 90 D - periods ( 6 l m ) in length and with a maximal cross - section containing about 160 molecules ( Figure 6 ) [ 18 , 19 ] . Such observations imply a greater level of growth control in the self - assembly of these ﬁbrils than is indicated from observations on the ﬁnal ﬁbril gel . Other workers [ 20 ] , however , have reported the occurrence of non - banded ﬁlaments ( of diameter in the range 10 – 20 nm ) during this early phase of ﬁbril assembly , and concluded that the ﬁnal banded ﬁbrils are formed by lateral fusion of the ﬁrst formed ﬁlaments . These apparently conﬂicting observations of the as - sembly pathways were found to be due to diﬀerences in the method used to initiate ﬁbril formation , rather than to diﬀerences in collagen preparation or solution conditions [ 19 ] . The same sample of collagen could show diﬀerent aggregation states depending on the order of warming and neutralizing of the solution . The occurrence of non - banded ﬁlaments required the solution to go through a cold neutral step . The molecular mechanism leading to these diﬀerent assembly routes is likely to involve changes in the conformation of the telopeptides that accompany ﬁbril assembly ( see below ) . Initial oligomer formation in ﬁbril assembly has been studied by photon correlation spectroscopy of solutions [ 21 – 26 ] or by electron microscopy of rotary - shadowed samples adsorbed to support ﬁlms [ 27 , 28 ] . Studies have included experiments starting from either near - monomeric preparations of lathyritic collagen or monomer fractions of rat - tail tendon collagen . ( Lathyritic collagen is obtained from animals fed 2 - aminopropionitrile , which inhibits the enzyme lysyl oxidase , and consequently the animals have collagen with a much decreased cross - linking capacity . ) In both solution and electron microscope studies the formation of a 4 D - staggered dimer has been identiﬁed as a preferred initial aggregation step . Some solution studies have indicated a second stage of assembly involving the lateral aggregation of dimers and trimers into oligomers [ 25 , 26 ] . These species cannot be deﬁnitively assigned to a speciﬁc part of the early ﬁbril assembly pathway such as nucleation or propagation . Some key intermediates may not accumulate in solution , whereas other abundant species may not be true intermediates con - tributing to the ﬁnal ﬁbril . The diﬃculty in experimentally determining a nucleating and accreting species is pronounced if the acid - extracted collagen is warmed prior to being neutralized to initiate ﬁbril growth . In this method of initiating ﬁbril formation there is a rapid onset of heterogeneity of aggregate size , with both dimers and early ﬁbrils ( containing 10 (cid:36) – 10 (cid:37) molecules ) present at the end of the lag phase [ 19 ] . Fourier - transform IR spectroscopy suggests that conform - ational changes occur in the collagen molecule during assembly into ﬁbrils [ 29 ] . Changes in the carbonyl group spectrum ( amide I ; 1700 to 1600 cm − (cid:34) ) were evident in the 22 – 26 (cid:176) C temperature range , under ﬁbril - forming conditions , which led to the hypo - thesis that the triple helix of the semi - ﬂexible collagen molecule is actually perfected during the lag phase , facilitating nucleation and intermolecular interaction . Spectra were also obtained in the amide II and III regions . Further spectral changes after ﬁbrils had formed showed that the molecules are once again distorted as they are bent to ﬁt within the ﬁbrils . Partial loss of the telopeptides of the collagen molecule has major eﬀects on ﬁbril growth [ 30 , 31 ] . These include loss of diameter uniformity , loss of unidirectional packing and changes 4 K . E . Kadler and others Axial distance ( D - periods ) Axial distance ( D - periods ) Figure 6 Unipolar ﬁbrils formed in vitro by reconstitution from acetic - acid - soluble calf - skin collagen ( a ) Transmission electron micrograph of a negatively stained unipolar ﬁbril displaying an N - and a C - terminal tip . The ﬁbril was sampled when approx . 1 % of the collagen had assembled into ﬁbrils . Bar (cid:175) 300 nm . ( b ) Axial mass distribution of an unstained early ﬁbril . Mass determination was by quantitative scanning transmission electron microscopy . ( c ) Set of growth curves obtained by averaging axial mass distributions similar to that shown in ( b ) . The slopes of the N - and C - ends of the ﬁbril remain constant with ﬁbril elongation . Analysis of the slopes of the axial mass distributions indicates an increase of ﬁve collagen molecules per D - period at the N - tip and 10 molecules per D - period at the C - tip . ( d ) Negatively stained sample of the ﬁnal ﬁbril gel shown at the same magniﬁcation as ( a ) . Note that the ﬁnal ﬁbrils are larger in diameter than early ﬁbrils and that the ends of the ﬁbrils are not observed . in the ﬁbril assembly pathway , depending on the extent of removal of each of the N - and C - telopeptides . Experimental approaches include exposure of the collagen solution to pepsin with partial removal of both telopeptides [ 32 , 33 ] , or selective degradation of the N - telopeptide or of the C - telopeptide with , respectively , leucine aminopeptidase and carboxypeptidase [ 30 , 31 ] . Loss of the N - telopeptides has been linked with the formation of D - periodic symmetrical ﬁbrils with molecules in anti - parallel contact , while loss of part of the C - telopeptides has been associated with the formation of D - periodic tactoids . Complete removal of both telopeptides prevents the formation of ﬁbrils , assembly being limited to the formation of small non - banded ﬁbrous aggregates . The experimental data have been interpreted in terms of a simple model where the N - telopeptide is critical for the formation of the polarized 4 D - staggered dimers that occurs as an early stage of assembly , and the C - telopeptide has a dual role , promoting a lateral accretion of linear aggregates as well as participating in the formation of the early linear assemblies [ 31 ] . Electron optical data [ 34 ] and X - ray data [ 35 ] both indicate that the N - telopeptides are axially contracted when the collagen molecules are assembled into ﬁbrils . The X - ray data predict a mean residue spacing of 0 . 7 h , where h is the axial spacing of residues ( (cid:175) 0 . 286 nm ) in the triple helix . Other experimental evidence suggests that the condensed structure is explained by a hairpin conformation of the telopeptides . Thus NMR studies on N - telopeptides in solution indicate the occurrence of b - folds and ﬂexible hinge regions [ 36 , 37 ] , and sequence information points to a hairpin loop conformation for N - telopeptides [ 32 ] . Rotary shadowing of individual procollagen molecules and mass map - ping of assembled pNcollagen ( i . e . procollagen containing the N - propeptides ) molecules conﬁrms that the N - terminal ends are in a bent - back conformation [ 38 – 41 ] . NMR studies of synthetic peptides show no preferred sec - ondary structure of the C - telopeptides [ 42 ] . However , X - ray data do indicate that the C - telopeptides are axially contracted with a mean residue spacing of 0 . 5 h when the collagen molecules are assembled into ﬁbrils . Sequence analysis suggests that the telo - peptides form a hydrophobic cluster [ 31 ] . Theabsenceof structure when the telopeptides are free in solution suggests that the contracted conformation of the C - telopeptides may only occur when molecules are in close association with neighbouring collagen molecules in a ﬁbril . BIPOLAR FIBRIL FORMATION BY CLEAVAGE OF PROCOLLAGEN CONTAINING THE C - PROPEPTIDES ( PCCOLLAGEN ) WITH PROCOLLAGEN C - PROTEINASE Fibrils formed by neutralizing and warming of solutions of extracted collagen do not usually have the same diameters as the ﬁbrils from which the collagen was extracted . Thus cell - mediated control must be exerted over the self - assembly process in (cid:138) i (cid:138) o . 5 Collagen ﬁbril formation Evidence suggests that N - and C - propeptides of procollagen may play a role in such diameter regulation ( see below for references ) . For these and other reasons , a cell - free system of ﬁbril assembly was developed whereby procollagen is sequentially cleaved to collagen by the procollagen metalloproteinases . Fibrils formed by cleavage of puriﬁed type I pCcollagen with procollagen C - proteinase are exclusively bipolar . Early studies showed that ﬁbrils formed by cleavage of pCcollagen with C - proteinase at low temperatures ( 29 – 32 (cid:176) C ) have suﬃciently large diameters to be visualized by dark - ﬁeld light microscopy . The earliest seen aggregates are needle - like , with a pointed end and a blunt end . Growth , observed by time - lapse photography , occurs exclusively at pointed tips . Growth at a blunt end only occurs at high pCcollagen concentrations and , at temperatures above 34 (cid:176) C , by the appearance of a spear - like projection from the blunt end ( as shown schematically in Figure 3 ) , with the projection becoming a new pointed tip for growth in the opposite direction . Smaller - diameter ﬁbrils formed at 37 (cid:176) C have been shown by electron microscopy to have two smoothly pointed tips . Each tip has collagen molecules oriented with their N - termini directed towards the tip , indicating that a reversal in molecular polarity must exist within the central body of the ﬁbril . Furthermore , these bipolar ﬁbrils are usually shape - asymmetrical and have a ﬁne ( a - ) tip and a coarse ( b - ) tip . The tips have linear axial mass distributions , consistent with a paraboloidal shape ( Figure 3 ) . In addition , the ﬁneness of a tip ( slope of the axial mass distribution ) appears to be set at an early stage of growth , such that subsequent ﬁbril growth preserves the shape of the tips . Recent work has shown that the level of C - proteinase has a major eﬀect on the shape of the ﬁbrils in this cell - free system ( D . F . Holmes , R . B . Watson , J . A . Chapman and K . E . Kadler , unpublished work ) . At a constant initial concentration of pCcollagen , increased levels of C - proteinaseledtoincreasedslopesoftheaxialmassdistributions of a - tips . Increasing the C - proteinase levels also resulted in a reduced shape asymmetry , yielding ﬁbrils that were nearly shape - symmetrical . It cannot be assumed that all the features of ﬁbril growth in (cid:138) itro are applicable to the process in (cid:138) i (cid:138) o . However , the recent observation of both unipolar and bipolar early ﬁbrils occurring in (cid:138) i (cid:138) o has given encouragement to the simple working model that some aspects of ﬁbril assembly in tissues can be understood as an intrinsic self - assembly process governed by the interaction properties of the collagen monomer . Since early ﬁbrils formed by reconstitution from acid - extracted collagen are exclusively unipolar [ 43 ] and those formed by cleavage of pCcollagen with C - proteinase are exclusively bipolar , it seems possiblethatthe occurrence of bipolar ﬁbrils is , inpart , dependent on the initial concentration of pCcollagen at the onset of ﬁbril assembly . These studies raise a number of questions . First , do type II , III , V and XI collagens exhibit similar assembly properties ? Limited studies in (cid:138) itro suggest that recombinant type II collagen [ 44 ] assembles into thin ﬁbrils arranged in network - like structures [ 45 ] ; the rate of assembly is lower than that observed for type I collagen under the same experimental conditions [ 45 ] , and the ﬁbrils formed are C – C bipolar ﬁbrils in which most of the central shaft consists of molecules in an anti - parallel orientation [ 4 , 45a ] . Fibrils formed from type III and V collagen appear to have the usual parallel orientation of collagen molecules seen in type I collagen ﬁbrils , but no information is available on the occurrence of unipolar or bipolar ﬁbrils of these collagen types . Secondly , what factors determine the shape of ﬁbrils ? Do ﬁbrils grow at equilibrium with a shape of minimum free energy or is , as seems more likely , their shape determined by kinetic factors ? Computer - generated simulations of ﬁbril growth have been used to seek answers to these questions . Two models have been proposed for a kinetically determined growth process . One is an interface - controlled growth model where the rate of accretion on to the ﬁbril surface is limited by transition processes on that surface ; the shape of the ﬁbril would be determined by the existence of diﬀerent types of binding site with diﬀerent accretion rates [ 46 ] . In another model , ﬁbrils form by diﬀusion - limited aggregation [ 47 , 48 ] . Both models can account for tips with linear axial mass distributions . The model suggested by Silver et al . [ 46 ] adopts a set of growth rules for the formation of a nucleus and the subsequent addition of monomers to the ﬁbril surface . Several growth steps can be deﬁned involving axial growth of microﬁbril units and lateral growth which generates additional microﬁbrils . The model proposed by Parkinson et al . [ 47 , 48 ] involves a general scheme of assembly of rod - shaped molecules where the rate of ﬁbril assembly is limited by the rate of diﬀusion of monomer to the ﬁbril surface . Such a process was shown to generate ﬁbrils with the same structural features as ﬁbrils formed by cleavage of pCcollagen with C - proteinase in (cid:138) itro , in that they had no constant diameter and the tips showed linear axial mass distributions . The combination of these ad - vanced computer modelling methods together with the exper - imental capability of obtaining precise size and shape data on ﬁbrils ( by quantitative scanning transmission electron micro - scopy ) provides a new route to understanding the underlying principles of self - assembly of collagen ﬁbrillar structures . FIBRIL ASSEMBLY AND POLARITY IN VIVO A remarkable feature of ﬁbrils formed in (cid:138) i (cid:138) o ( see Figures 4 and 5 ) is that not all are unipolar ( i . e . with the molecular polarity unchanged throughout the entire length of the ﬁbril ) . In 18 - day chick embryos about half of the early ﬁbrils are bipolar and half are unipolar . Analysis of the positive stain pattern throughout the entire length of the bipolar ﬁbrils reveals the axial zone of molecular polarity reversal to be highly localized [ 13 ] . The transition region contains molecules in anti - parallel contact , of little more than 4 D - periods in extent . Analysis of the staining pattern in the transition region demonstrated that the anti - parallel arrangement of the molecules is such that the C - termini of oppositely directed molecules are in axial register . A similar anti - parallel contact is seen in a D - periodic symmetrical ﬁbril ( where molecules are in anti - parallel arrangement throughout the length of the ﬁbril ) formed in (cid:138) itro from type I collagen ( D - periodic symmetrical banding type III ; DPS - III ) [ 49 , 50 ] . Fur - thermore , this arrangement allows for axial continuity of the intermolecular cross - links in ﬁbrils . As described below , ﬁbrils from echinodermis are also N – N bipolar , with a centrally located molecular switch region in which the transition region is restricted to approx . 10 D - periods [ 51 ] . The mechanical and physical properties of a tissue depend on a hierarchical spatial arrangement of collagen ﬁbrils , whether unipolar or bipolar . Thus narrow ﬁbrils ( (cid:67) 20 nm ) in precise orthogonal array occur in the cornea , where optical transparency is important , whereas mature tendon , where high tensile strength is paramount , displays a high density ( (cid:67) 10 (cid:41) ﬁbrils (cid:125) mm (cid:36) ) of large - diameter ﬁbrils ( (cid:67) 500 nm ) arranged in parallel bundles . Experiments by Birk and co - workers using electron microscopy of serial transverse sections of embryonic chick tendon have shown that cells can have considerable control over the shape of the pericellular space where ﬁbrils occur . Early ﬁbrils are deposited in extracellular compartments formed between cellular protrusions close to the cell body [ 52 ] . Further away from the cell , such compartments ( containing a few ﬁbrils ) anastomose to generate larger spaces containing bundles of ﬁbrils . In 14 - day chick tendon , entire ﬁbrils showing smoothly tapered ends can be 6 K . E . Kadler and others C N N N C N N N C N C N C N N C C N N N N N N N C C N N N C Fusions inconsistent with experimental data : Possible fusions consistent with experimental data : Figure 7 Models of ﬁbril fusion The fusion of ﬁbrils is modelled using the assumption that ﬁbrils can only have either two N - ends or one N - end and one C - end . Extended or multiple regions of asymmetrical orientation of collagen molecules were not allowed . There is the possibility that two unipolar ﬁbrils pointing in opposite directions and with limited overlap could fuse to generate a bipolar ﬁbril with a molecular switch region limited to approx . four D - periods ( not shown ) . Arrows indicate molecular polarity within a ﬁbril . Pink boxes indicate regions of polarity reversal . found within such bundles [ 52 , 53 ] . Moreover , the tips of ﬁbrils are of diﬀerent taper , giving an overall shape asymmetry to the ﬁbril . The ﬁbrils are bipolar , and it has been proposed by Birk and co - workers that end - to - end fusion of these early bipolar ﬁbrils could contribute to ﬁbril elongation , and that their side - by - side fusion may account for the observed increase in ﬁbril diameter during tissue development [ 54 ] . Fibril fusion , it is suggested , may also be inﬂuenced by the presence of surface - bound molecules of decorin [ 54 , 55 ] . End - to - end fusion of bipolar ﬁbrils of type I collagen would seem , however , to be inconsistent with existing experimental data ( Figure7 ) . Bipolar ﬁbrilsoftypeIcollagen observedhitherto have invariably displayed two N - ends , i . e . none with two C - ends have been seen , either in (cid:138) i (cid:138) o or in (cid:138) itro . Moreover , the switch region ( the polarity transition region in which molecules occur in anti - parallel array ) is of limited axial extent and ﬁbrils with multiple switch regions have not been found . Unipolar ﬁbrils can fuse in a number of ways that would accord with the experimental data . For example , two unipolar ﬁbrils with molecules oriented N - to C - from left to right could fuse in side - by - side register ( to result in a thicker ﬁbril ) , or in end - on - end register ( giving a longer ﬁbril ) . End - on - end fusion of two oppositely directed unipolar ﬁbrils ( i . e . one ﬁbril oriented N - to C - from left to right and the other from right to left ) would also seem to be permitted ( yield - ing a bipolar ﬁbril ) . Side - by - side fusion of two oppositely directed unipolar ﬁbrils is , however , disallowed because this would result in axially extended regions of anti - parallel axial packing of collagen molecules , which is not seen in (cid:138) i (cid:138) o or in (cid:138) itro . The need to satisfy these criteria introduces severe limitations on the participation of bipolar ﬁbrils in ﬁbril fusion . In only one special case , where the molecular switch regions of two neigh - bouring bipolar ﬁbrils are perfectly aligned , is the fusion of two bipolar ﬁbrils allowed . In all other combinations , the fusion of two bipolar ﬁbrils would result in extended or multiple regions of anti - parallel molecular packing within the resultant ﬁbril . In a mixed population of unipolar and bipolar ﬁbrils , end - to - end fusion is allowed but would have the eﬀect of decreasing the unipolar population , resulting in a population enriched in bipolar ﬁbrils , unable to fuse further . Could a possible function for bipolar ﬁbrils be to limit the extent of ﬁbril fusion ? DIAMETER MEASUREMENTS OF FIBRILS FORMED IN VIVO Extensive diameter measurements have been made on ﬁbrils in a large range of tissues , mainly from electron micrographs of ﬁbril transverse sections . Diameter distributions are typically narrow and unimodal during early stages of development , but the mean diameters and spread of diameters increase with maturation of the tissue . Parry and Craig [ 56 ] have reported the occurrence of preferred diameters of multiples of 8 nm . This conclusion was based mainly on the mean diameters from unimodal distributions obtained from diﬀerent tissues at various stages of development in a large number of species . In addition , occasional observations have been made of ﬁbril diameters showing a multi - modal distribution with peaks at multiples of 8 nm [ 57 ] . Such diameter measurements have been made on dehydrated , plastic - embedded samples where shrinkage is typically 27 % , as indicated by comparative electron microscopy and X - ray diﬀraction data [ 57 – 59 ] . The corrected value for the preferred diameter increment 7 Collagen ﬁbril formation is then 11 nm , resulting in ﬁbrils of diameter 22 , 33 , 44 , 55 nm , etc . [ 60 , 60a ] . Studies have located partially processed type I collagen molecules retaining N - propeptides at the surface of ﬁbrils [ 61 – 64 ] , and this has led to the suggestion that uncleaved N - propeptides at the ﬁbril surface limit further accretion of collagen molecules on to growing ﬁbrils [ 65 ] . A quantitative model of diameter limitation that predicts the reported quantiﬁcation of diameters has been proposed by Chapman [ 60 , 60a ] . The model is based on the transient retention of N - propeptides . In this model the N - propeptides are constrained to the surface of the growing ﬁbril , leading to an initial limiting diameter , when N - propeptides become close - packed , of about 22 nm ( based on a lateral separation of between 1 . 8 and 2 . 0 nm between N - propeptide units ) . Subsequent cleavage of surface - located N - propeptides and accretion of a further round of pNcollagen molecules leads to a second limiting diameter of about 33 nm . Repetition of this cycle of deposition and cleavage yields ﬁbrils with preferred diameters of multiples of 11 nm . Variants of this type of diameter - limitation process could involve other surface - bound macro - molecules . An alternative mechanism of diameter limitation involving surface - associated small proteoglycans has been proposed [ 66 – 72 ] . Here the glycosaminoglycan chains are ex - tended around the circumference in complexes and act as a molecular ruler to deﬁne the lateral extent of the ﬁbril . Evidence from immunoelectron microscopy and biochemical studies suggests that collagen ﬁbrils in (cid:138) i (cid:138) o are composed of several collagen types , partially processed collagens and other macromolecules , including proteoglycans . For example , it has been suggested that dermal collagen ﬁbrils are hybrids of type I and type III collagens and that the type III collagen is located at the periphery of the ﬁbril . The surface location of type III collagen implies that this collagen may have a diﬀerent role than type I collagen and may have a regulatory function in ﬁbrillo - genesis [ 73 ] . Double immunoelectron microscopy of foetal skin using an antibody directed against the N - propeptide of type III procollagen and another directed against the N - propeptide of type I procollagen revealed labelling of type I and III pNcollagens on the same thin ( 20 – 30 nm ) ﬁbrils . Larger ﬁbrils ( 90 – 100 nm ) were coated with type III collagen and type III pNcollagen but not with type I pNcollagen . The type I N - propeptide was present on thin ﬁbrils only at restricted locations in adult skin . Immuno - blotting of skin extracts revealed the presence of both type III pNcollagen and type I pNcollagen in foetal skin , but only type III pNcollagen in adult skin . These data were interpreted to suggest that type I and type III collagens form hybrid ﬁbrils and that type III pNcollagen is added to mature ﬁbrils [ 74 ] . The data did not , however , exclude the possibility that type III pNcollagen can be deposited on preformed type I collagen ﬁbrils after the ﬁbrils are assembled . Experiments in (cid:138) itro in which mixtures of type III pNcollagen and type I collagen were generated simultaneously by enzymic cleavage of precursor forms of the proteins suggested that type III pNcollagen forms true co - polymers with type I collagen [ 75 ] . In addition , the results demonstrated that co - polymerization of type III pNcollagen with type I collagen generated ﬁbrils that were thinner than ﬁbrils generated under the same conditions from type I collagen alone . Of particular interest is the ﬁnding that co - polymers of type III pNcollagen and type I collagen are apparently circular in outline and are not like the hieroglyphic ﬁbrils formed from mixtures of type I pNcollagen and type I collagen . A further important diﬀerence was that the co - polymerization increased the concentration in solution at equi - librium of type I pNcollagen , whereas co - polymerization with type I collagen decreases the concentration in solution of type III pNcollagen [ 76 ] . These diﬀerences imply important biological roles for types I and III pNcollagen . As a further example of the occurrence of hybrid ﬁbrils , type V collagen has been immunolocalized to the type - I - collagen - containing ﬁbrils and as ﬁne - diameter ﬁbrils in the corneal stroma [ 77 , 78 ] . Corneal stroma has a higher concentration of type V collagen than do other type - I - collagen - containing tissues with large - diameter ﬁbrils . This has led to the suggestion that co - polymerization of type V and type I collagens may limit the diameter of the ﬁbrils formed . It is noteworthy that type V collagen contains a small pepsin - sensitive N - terminal domain , presumably part or whole of the N - propeptide of the molecule . When type I collagen was mixed with type V collagen , the mean ﬁbril diameter decreased with increasing type V (cid:125) I collagen ratio [ 78 ] . Moreover , the N - terminal domain of type V collagen was needed for this regulatory eﬀect , and without the domain little diameter - regulating ability was observed . Type IX , XII , XIV and XIX collagens are members of a subfamily of ﬁbril - associated collagens with interrupted triple helices ( FACITs ) which are found at the surfaces of , and may participate in the formation of , collagen ﬁbrils . Type IX collagen associates with the surfaces of the narrow - diameter ﬁbrils in cartilage , vitreous and developing cornea , where it is covalently bound to chains of type II and XI collagens [ 79 ] . It has been proposed , based on immunolocalization using monospeciﬁc antibodies , that type XI collagen forms a small cylindrical core around which molecules of type II collagen are arranged . Type IX collagen appears to be located exclusively at the ﬁbril surface , where it may act as a molecular linker between collagen ﬁbrils and macromolecules in the extracellular matrix . Type XII and XIV collagens have very large N - terminal domains . These molecules have been implicated in modulating the deformability of the extracellular matrix , as they are localized near the surface of banded collagen ﬁbrils and they can mediate interactions between ﬁbrils in (cid:138) itro [ 80 , 81 ] . FIBRILS IN INVERTEBRATES Collagen ﬁbrils have been major constituents of the connective tissues of animals since the emergence of multicellularity . Because invertebrates comprise approximately 95 % of animal species , it might be expected that their collagens would form a great variety of ﬁbrillar aggregates . Indeed , a number of diﬀerent aggregate forms of ﬁbrillar collagens have been described , and the subject has been reviewed [ 82 – 85 ] . However , the aggregation of triple - helical collagen molecules into unbranched , quasi - crystalline ﬁbrils has been the dominant mode of ﬁbril organization since the sponges ﬁrst evolved . As in vertebrates , the ﬁbrillar aggregates in sponges are stabilized by covalent cross - links , but these cross - links are of unknown chemistry [ 86 ] . In other animals tyrosine - , quinone - , aldimine - , ketoimine - and cysteine - derived cross - links exist [ 87 ] . An obvious extrapolation of these observations is that the pathways for the secretion and extracellular assembly of collagen molecules into ﬁbrils and the processing enzymes required for converting the insoluble aggregates into mechanically and chemically stable structures have , from the beginning , been essential components of collagenous matrices . From their ﬁrst appearance in sponges , collagen ﬁbrils have been associated with other macromolecules , and have been organized into ﬁbre - reinforced composite tissues consisting of stiﬀ and strong collagen ﬁbrils in an isotropic matrix dominated by proteoglycans and water . As is true of all ﬁbrous composites , the mechanical properties of collagenous matrices are determined by the physical – chemical properties , concentrations , spatial 8 K . E . Kadler and others ( a ) ( b ) ( b ) ( a ) Figure 8 Transmission electron micrographs of echinoderm collagenous tissues ( a ) Sea urchin ligament . Fibrils have approximately circular cross - sections and uniform electron density . Diameters are highly variable . ( b ) Sea cucumber dermis . Fibrils are somewhat irregular in outline and possess internal electron - lucent regions . Scale marker (cid:175) 0 . 5 l m . Reproduced from [ 92 ] , with permission . arrangements and interactions of the separate constituents . The phylum Echinodermata has evolved collagenous tissues with mutable mechanical properties that make them interesting from the perspective of their unique physiology , as well as providing a unique opportunity to study collagen ﬁbril structure and inter - ﬁbrillar interactions . The connective tissues of these animals are mechanically regulated by the secretions of resident neuro - secretory cells , and change rapidly from stiﬀ and strong to weak and compliant states [ 88 , 89 ] . These mechanical changes are thought to be due to changes in the strength of associations between adjacent ﬁbrils . The organization of collagen ﬁbrils in the spine ligaments of sea urchins resembles that in vertebrate ligaments ; the relaxed spine ligaments even have a crimp pattern . The ﬁbrils are allowed to slide when the ligament is plastic , and are strongly inter - connected when it is elastic ( stiﬀ ) [ 90 , 91 ] . Electron micrographs of Eucidaris tribuloides ligaments show round ﬁbrils with a uniform interior ( Figure 8 ) . Their diameter distribution is unimodal ; the range is 20 – 750 nm , with a modal value of 100 nm [ 92 ] . The diameter distribution is not unlike the distributions seen in vertebrate tissues composed of type I collagen ﬁbrils , such as tendon and ligament [ 93 ] and , in fact , the isolated collagen resembles type I collagen [ 94 ] . The ﬁbrils in the dermis of the sea cucumber Cucumaria frondosa are basically circular but with irregular perimeters and with numerous electron - lucent interiors [ 92 ] , which is true of some other echinoderm ﬁbrils as well [ 93 , 95 , 96 ] . They also have a wide range of diameters in tissue sections , up to a maximum of about 400 nm [ 92 ] . The isolated collagen is an a 1 trimer , with no compositional or solubility similarities to vertebrate type I collagen , and with no immuno - logical similarity either to vertebrate type I collagen or to E . tribuloides collagen [ 97 ] . The collagenous tissues of several diﬀerent echinoderms have been disaggregated into suspensions of separate intact ﬁbrils [ 51 , 92 , 97 – 99 ] . The ﬁbrils have tapered ends ( Figure 9 ) . Those isolated from the spine ligaments of E . tribuloides and the dermis of C . frondosa have lengths of 30 l m – 1 . 2 mm and 39 – 436 l m respectively [ 92 , 99 ] . Surprisingly , the aspect ratio ( length (cid:125) diameter ) is constant in the ﬁbrils from each species , regardless of length : about 2000 in C . frondosa ﬁbrils and about 2500 in E . tribuloides ﬁbrils , where the diameter was measured at the ( a ) D i a m e t e r ( n m ) Distance ( l m ) ( b ) Figure 9 Isolated collagen ﬁbrils from sea urchin ligament and sea cucumber dermis ( a ) Electron micrograph of an entire positively stained sea urchin ﬁbril . The ends of the 170 - l m - long ﬁbril are marked by arrowheads . The central region of the ﬁbril is boxed . The scatter plot shows the relationship between diameter and length along a similarly prepared sea cucumber ﬁbril . ( b ) The central regions of a positively stained sea cucumber ﬁbril ( top ) and a negatively stained sea urchin ﬁbril ( bottom ) are shown . At the midpoint of these ﬁbrils ( indicated by the bar ) , as in all others examined , the molecular polarity undergoes a reversal ( compare with ﬁbril in Figure 4 ) . Reproduced from [ 51 ] , with permission . midpoint of the ﬁbrils . The constant aspect ratio means that growing ﬁbrils must increase their diameter in proportion to their increase in length , with the result that ﬁbrils of all lengths have the same shape . This observation is all the more interesting when it is considered in the light of the fact that the ﬁbrils are not cylindrical , but are rather symmetrically spindle - shaped , which may be related to their role as the reinforcing ﬁbres in a discontinuous composite material [ 51 , 92 , 99 ] . Free ﬁbrils are isolated from C . frondosa dermis in solutions of both high and low ionic strength [ 100 ] . Similarly , biomechanical tests on C . frondosa dermis have shown that its stiﬀness is many times lower at both low and high ionic strengths than it is at intermediate values ( J . A . Trotter , J . P . Salgado and T . J . Koob , unpublished work ) . The isolated ﬁbrils form aggregates in (cid:138) itro when the ionic strength is in the physiological range . These experiments indicate that the ﬁbrils interact with one another in (cid:138) i (cid:138) o and in (cid:138) itro largely by electrostatic interactions . The ﬁbrils of echinoderms have sulphated glycosaminoglycan moieties associated with their surfaces . The presence and locations of these moieties have been identiﬁed using Cupro - meronic or Cuprolinic Blue , or Ruthenium Red [ 97 , 99 , 101 – 103 ] . In sea urchin and sea cucumber ﬁbrils the precipitates are associated with the middle of the gap zone , where charged amino 9 Collagen ﬁbril formation Table 1 Summary of the growth characteristics of early collagen ﬁbrils Abbreviation : AMD , axial mass distribution . See the text for further details . Developing vertebrate Acid - soluble type I Type I pCcollagen plus Echinoderm ligament and Fibril assembly characteristics tendon ( in vivo 1 ) collagen ( in vitro 1 ) C - proteinase ( in vitro 2 ) dermis ( in vivo 2 ) Linear AMDs of ﬁbril tips (cid:173) (cid:173) (cid:173) (cid:173) Tip shape set at early stage ? (cid:173) (cid:173) (cid:174) Limiting diameter at early stage (cid:173) (cid:173) (cid:174) (cid:174) Unipolar ﬁbrils (cid:173) (cid:173) (cid:174) (cid:174) Bipolar ﬁbrils ( N – N ) (cid:173) (cid:174) (cid:173) (cid:173) acids are concentrated in bands corresponding to the d (cid:125) e bands of vertebrate ﬁbrils [ 97 , 99 ] . In crinoid ﬁbrils there are apparently two glycosaminoglycan sites per D - period , but the banding pattern has not yet been well deﬁned for these ﬁbrils [ 104 ] . The proteoglycans on the surfaces of echinoderm ﬁbrils could be involved in the control of ﬁbril shape and size , as is postulated to occur in vertebrate type I collagen ﬁbrils . They could also be involved in the electrostatic interactions that determine the stiﬀness of echinoderm tissues , although deﬁnitive evidence for this role is lacking . It has recently been shown that the salt - dependent aggregation of C . frondosa ﬁbrils depends on the presence of a protein that is bound to the isolated ﬁbrils [ 100 ] . Fibrils that lack this protein do not aggregate in univalent salt solutions . The protein has been puriﬁed and partially charac - terized . Full characterization , including the deﬁnition of its binding sites on ﬁbrils and the mechanism by which it induces ﬁbril aggregation , should prove useful . This protein is the ﬁrst to have been isolated that plays a crucial role in creating the ﬁbril – ﬁbril interactions that convert an array of individual ﬁbrils into a mechanically functional tissue . When compared with vertebrate ﬁbrils , echinoderm collagen ﬁbrils have greatly reduced intensities in their a3 and b2 bands , and greatly increased intensity in the c3 band [ 92 ] . It is not known whether these changes in charge density are related to ﬁbril functions , for example the binding of the aggregating protein mentioned above . The similarities between vertebrate and echinoderm collagen molecules , including their segment long spacing and ﬁbril - positive and - negative stain patterns , allowed the banding pattern of echinoderm ﬁbrils to be related to the orientation of molecules in the ﬁbril [ 92 ] . This information was used to analyse the molecular orientation in the symmetrically spindle - shaped echinoderm ﬁbrils [ 51 ] . Ultrastructural analyses of many ﬁbrils from both sea urchins and sea cucumbers showed that they are all composed of molecules that have their N - terminal ends oriented towards the nearest ﬁbril end . It follows that the centre of each ﬁbril contains a region in which the polarity is reversed . In ﬁbrils from both species this region contains between one and three D - periods in which the banding pattern is symmetrical , and is identical to the DPS - III [ 50 ] banding pattern that occurs when vertebrate collagens are induced to form ﬁbrils under certain conditions , such as elevated phosphate concentrations ( as discussed above ) . This pattern results from the alignment of equal numbers of anti - parallel molecules in an arrangement that brings the C - telopeptides of anti - parallel molecules into register , where they can both par - ticipate in trivalent cross - links with the same helical hydroxy - lysine residue . In contrast , the N - telopeptides are not in register , and thus could not participate in cross - links between anti - parallel molecules . On either side of the symmetrical D - periods are transitional zones of about three D - periods wide , in which the DPS - III pattern changes into the normal one . These ﬁbrils from adult echinoderms thus resemble those isolated from embryonic chick tendons [ 13 , 54 ] . Although it is clear that equal numbers of molecules of each polarity are present in the DPS - III regions , it is not clear whether the total number of molecules in that region is diﬀerent from the number in adjacent regions . This question is being approached using mass determinations , but no deﬁnitive answers yet exist . The answers are required in order to produce a realistic model of the molecular packing in that region . As was noted above , all the ﬁbrils from sea urchins and sea cucumbers are similarly spindle - shaped , regardless of their lengths . Preliminary results have indicated that the ﬁbrils have linear axial mass distributions , and are therefore similar to the ends of ﬁbrils isolated from foetal chicken tendons and the ﬁbrils formed in (cid:138) itro from vertebrate type I pCcollagen using C - proteinase to control assembly . This means that the ﬁbrils have an essentially paraboloidal shape , with a plane of mirror sym - metry through their centres . The observation that all echinoderm ﬁbrils , regardless of size , are symmetrical about a plane through the central anti - parallel D - period suggests that the assembly of echinoderm bipolars is diﬀerent from that of vertebrate bipolars . A speciﬁc model to account for this growth process has yet to be developed . CONCLUSIONS The evolution of multicellular organisms depended on the formation of an extracellular matrix . Collagen ﬁbrils , which can be several millimetres in length , have played a central role in extracellular matrices for at least 500 million years . Current evidence suggests that collagen ﬁbril formation is intrinsically a self - assembly process but that considerable cellular control is exerted on the process in (cid:138) i (cid:138) o . In this review we have surveyed four diﬀerent systems of ﬁbril formation , two in (cid:138) i (cid:138) o and two in (cid:138) itro ( Table 1 ) . The summary shows that ﬁbrils , whether they occur in (cid:138) i (cid:138) o or in (cid:138) itro , all have growing tips with linear axial mass distributions . In the two systems in (cid:138) itro the tip shape is established at an early time in the assembly pathway and remains unchanged during growth of the ﬁbrils . Our understanding of the corresponding behaviour in (cid:138) i (cid:138) o is incomplete and must await further quantitative studies . A new observation is that early ﬁbrils in developing tissues can be either unipolar or bipolar . This ﬁnding has major implications for our understanding of ﬁbril fusion in young tissues and in healing wounds . Models based on existing experimental data suggest that fusion of a bipolar ﬁbril to a bipolar ﬁbril is unlikely to occur and that the presence of such ﬁbrils may impose a limit on ﬁbril fusion . The exclusivity of short bipolar ﬁbrils in a cell - free system in which pCcollagen is cleaved with procollagen C - 10 K . E . Kadler and others proteinase suggests that the concentration of pCcollagen during early ﬁbril assembly may contribute to the formation of bipolar ﬁbrils . Conversely , long and exclusively unipolar ﬁbrils form when pCcollagen is absent during early ﬁbril formation of acid - soluble collagen in (cid:138) itro . Their occurrence not only in vertebrates but also in inverte - brates suggests that bipolar ﬁbrils could be widespread through - out the animal kingdom . The observation that invertebrate bipolar ﬁbrils are centro - symmetrical ( with the molecular switch region at the midpoint of the ﬁbril ) , whereas those in chick tendon are shape - asymmetrical , implies that the mechanism of assembly of bipolar ﬁbrils could be diﬀerent in vertebrates and invertebrates . Nevertheless , the occurrence of bipolar ﬁbrils in organisms as diverse as echinoderms and chickens points to a common , but as yet unknown , physiological function of bipolar ﬁbrils . FUTURE PROSPECTS A major direction of collagen ﬁbril research will be to understand , at the molecular level , the principles governing the self - assembly of unipolar and bipolar ﬁbrils , to understand how cells regulate this process , to learn how the deposition of early collagen ﬁbrils is orchestrated in embryonic tissues , to understand the processes by which early ﬁbrils are converted into larger ﬁbrils in newly forming tissues , and to understand the role of other collagens and macromolecules in these processes . A number of short - term goals have been set , and these include the understanding of the occurrence of bipolar ﬁbrils in tissues and in healing wounds , and the identiﬁcation of cell - mediated factors in determining collagen ﬁbril size and shape . The longer - term objective must be to place collagen ﬁbril assembly in a broader context involving gene regulation , cytokine induction and cell - matrix signalling events that underpin tissue patterning and the generation of the body form . A recent observation has been that the gene for procollagen C - proteinase [ 105 ] is the same as that for bone morphogenic protein - 1 , which is related to the patterning gene tolloid . Thus the identiﬁcation of a proteinase which is involved in collagen ﬁbril formation , in determining the shape of collagen ﬁbrils in (cid:138) itro , and which also plays a major role in pattern formation in the early embryo , begins to provide new insights into the relationship between extracellular matrix deposition and vertebrate development . D . F . H . and K . E . K . are supported by a grant from the Wellcome Trust ( 19512 ) . J . A . T . ’s research was supported by grants from the National Science Foundation and the Oﬃce of Naval Research . We thank Dr . Rod Watson for providing Figure 2 . The electron microscope work in the laboratories of D . F . H . and K . E . K . was carried out in the Electron Microscope Unit , School of Biological Sciences , University of Manchester . REFERENCES 1 Chapman , J . A . , Tzaphlidou , M . , Meek , K . M . and Kadler , K . E . ( 1990 ) Electron Microsc . Rev . 3 , 143 – 182 2 Veis , A . and George , A . ( 1994 ) in Extracellular Matrix Assembly and Structure ( Yurchenco , P . D . , Birk , D . E . and Mecham , R . P . , eds . ) , pp . 15 – 45 , Academic Press , New York 3 Prockop , D . J . and Hulmes , D . J . S . ( 1994 ) in Extracellular Matrix Assembly and Structure ( Yurchenco , P . D . , Birk , D . E . and Mecham , R . P . , eds . ) , pp . 47 – 90 , Academic Press , New York 4 Prockop , D . J . and Kivirikko , K . I . ( 1995 ) Annu . Rev . Biochem . 64 , 403 – 433 5 Kadler , K . E . ( 1995 ) Protein Proﬁle 2 , 491 – 619 6 Kadler , K . E . , Hojima , Y . and Prockop , D . J . ( 1987 ) J . Biol . Chem . 262 , 15696 – 15701 7 Miyahara , M . , Njieha , F . K . and Prockop , D . J . ( 1982 ) J . Biol . Chem . 257 , 8442 – 8448 8 Miyahara , M . , Hayashi , K . , Berger , J . , Tanzawa , K . , Njieha , F . K . , Trelstad , R . L . and Prockop , D . J . ( 1984 ) J . Biol . Chem . 259 , 9891 – 9898 9 Kadler , K . E . , Hojima , Y . and Prockop , D . J . ( 1988 ) J . Biol . Chem . 263 , 10517 – 10523 10 Holmes , D . F . , Chapman , J . A . , Prockop , D . J . and Kadler , K . E . ( 1992 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 89 , 9855 – 9859 11 Kadler , K . E . , Hojima , Y . and Prockop , D . J . ( 1990 ) Biochem . J . 268 , 339 – 343 12 Kadler , K . E . , Hulmes , D . J . S . , Hojima , Y . and Prockop , D . J . ( 1990 ) Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 580 , 214 – 224 13 Holmes , D . F . , Lowe , M . P . and Chapman , J . A . ( 1994 ) J . Mol . Biol . 235 , 80 – 83 14 Gross , J . and Kirk , D . ( 1958 ) J . Biol . Chem . 233 , 355 – 360 15 Wood , G . C . and Keech , M . K . ( 1960 ) Biochem . J . 75 , 588 – 598 16 Wood , G . C . and Keech , M . K . ( 1960 ) Biochem . J . 75 , 598 – 605 17 Bard , J . B . and Chapman , J . A . ( 1973 ) Nature New Biol . 246 , 83 – 84 18 Holmes , D . F . and Chapman , J . A . ( 1979 ) Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 87 , 993 – 999 19 Holmes , D . F . , Capaldi , M . J . and Chapman , J . A . ( 1986 ) Int . J . Biol . Macromol . 8 , 161 – 166 20 Williams , B . R . , Gelman , R . A . Poppke , D . C . and Piez , K . A . ( 1978 ) J . Biol . Chem . 253 , 6578 – 6585 21 Gelman , R . A . and Piez , K . A . ( 1980 ) J . Biol . Chem . 255 , 8098 – 8102 22 Silver , F . H . ( 1982 ) Collagen Relat . Res . 2 , 219 – 229 23 Silver , F . H . ( 1983 ) Collagen Relat . Res . 3 , 167 – 179 24 Silver , F . H . and Trelstad , R . L . ( 1979 ) J . Theor . Biol . 81 , 515 – 526 25 Silver , F . H . , Langley , K . H . and Trelstad , R . L . ( 1979 ) Biopolymers 18 , 2523 – 2535 26 Silver , F . H . ( 1981 ) J . Biol . Chem . 256 , 4973 – 4977 27 Kadler , K . E . and Chapman , J . A . ( 1985 ) Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 460 , 456 – 460 28 Ward , N . P . , Hulmes , D . J . and Chapman , J . A . ( 1986 ) J . Mol . Biol . 190 , 107 – 112 29 George , A . and Veis , A . ( 1991 ) Biochemistry 30 , 2372 – 2377 30 Leibovich , S . J . and Weiss , J . B . ( 1970 ) Biochim . Biophys . Acta 214 , 445 – 454 31 Capaldi , M . J . and Chapman , J . A . ( 1982 ) Biopolymers 21 , 2291 – 2313 32 Helseth , D . L . , Lechner , J . H . and Veis , A . ( 1979 ) Biopolymers 18 , 3005 – 3014 33 Helseth , D . L . J . and Veis , A . ( 1981 ) J . Biol . Chem . 256 , 7118 – 7128 34 Meek , K . M . , Chapman , J . A . and Hardcastle , R . A . ( 1979 ) J . Biol . Chem . 254 , 10710 – 10714 35 Hulmes , D . J . , Miller , A . , White , S . W . and Doyle , B . B . ( 1977 ) J . Mol . Biol . 110 , 643 – 666 36 Otter , A . , Kotovych , G . and Scott , P . G . ( 1989 ) Biochemistry 28 , 8003 – 8010 37 Otter , A . , Scott , P . G . and Kotovych , G . ( 1988 ) Biochemistry 27 , 3560 – 3567 38 Mould , A . P . , Hulmes , D . J . S . , Holmes , D . F . , Cummings , C . , Sear , C . H . and Chapman , J . A . ( 1990 ) J . Mol . Biol . 211 , 581 – 594 39 Holmes , D . F . , Mould , A . P . and Chapman , J . A . ( 1991 ) J . Mol . Biol . 220 , 111 – 123 40 Watson , R . B . , Wallis , G . A . , Holmes , D . F . , Viljoen , D . , Byers , P . H . and Kadler , K . E . ( 1992 ) J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 9093 – 9100 41 Holmes , D . F . , Watson , R . B . , Steinmann , B . and Kadler , K . E . ( 1993 ) J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 15758 – 15765 42 Liu , X . H . , Scott , P . G . , Otter , A . and Kotovych , G . ( 1990 ) J . Biomol . Struct . Dyn . 8 , 63 – 80 43 Haworth , R . A . and Chapman , J . A . ( 1977 ) Biopolymers 16 , 1895 – 1906 44 Fertala , A . , Sieron , A . L . , Ganguly , A . , Li , S . W . , AlaKokko , L . , Anumula , K . R . and Prockop , D . J . ( 1994 ) Biochem . J . 298 , 31 – 37 45 Fertala , A . , Sieron , A . L . , Hojima , Y . , Ganguly , A . and Prockop , D . J . ( 1994 ) J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 11584 – 11589 45a Fertala , A . , Holmes , D . F . , Kadler , K . E . , Sieron , A . L . and Prockop , D . J . ( 1996 ) J . Biol . Chem . , in the press 46 Silver , D . , Miller , J . , Harison , R . and Prockop , D J . ( 1992 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 89 , 9860 – 9864 47 Parkinson , J . , Kadler , K . E . and Brass , A . ( 1994 ) Phys . Rev . E . Stat . Phys . Plasmas Fluids Relat . Interdiscip . Top . 50 , 2963 – 2966 48 Parkinson , J . , Kadler , K . E . and Brass , A . ( 1995 ) J . Mol . Biol . 247 , 823 – 831 49 Doyle , B . B . , Hukins , D . W . L . , Hulmes , D . J . S . , Miller , A . and Woodhead - Galloway , J . ( 1975 ) J . Mol . Biol . 91 , 79 – 99 50 Bruns , R . R . ( 1976 ) J . Cell Biol . 68 , 521 – 538 51 Thurmond , F . A . and Trotter , J . A . ( 1994 ) J . Mol . Biol . 235 , 73 – 79 52 Birk , D . E . and Trelstad , R . L . ( 1986 ) J . Cell Biol . 103 , 231 – 240 53 Birk , D . E . , Zycband , E . I . , Winkelmann , D . A . and Trelstad , R . L . ( 1989 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 86 , 4549 – 4553 54 Birk , D . E . , Nurminskaya , M . V . and Zycband , E . I . ( 1995 ) Dev . Dyn . 202 , 229 – 243 55 Yu , L . , Cummings , C . , Sheehan , J . K . , Kadler , K . E . , Holmes , D . F . and Chapman , J . A . ( 1993 ) in Dermatan Sulphate Proteoglycans ( Scott , J . E . , ed . ) , pp . 183 – 188 , Portland Press , London 56 Parry , D . A . D . and Craig , A . S . ( 1979 ) Nature ( London ) 282 , 213 – 215 57 Merrilees , M . J . , Tiang , K . M . M . and Scott , L . ( 1987 ) Connect . Tissue Res . 16 , 237 – 257 58 Eikenberry , E . F . , Brodsky , B . and Parry , D . A . D . ( 1982 ) Int . J . Biol . Macromol . 4 , 322 – 328 11 Collagen ﬁbril formation 59 Eikenberry , E . F . , Craig , A . S . and Parry , D . A . D . ( 1982 ) Int . J . Biol . Macromol . 4 , 393 – 398 60 Chapman , J . A . ( 1989 ) Biopolymers 28 , 1367 – 1382 60a Chapman , J . A . ( 1989 ) Biopolymers 28 , 2201 – 2205 61 Fleischmajer , R . , Olsen , B . R . , Timpl , R . , Perlish , J . S . and Lovelace , O . ( 1983 ) Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 80 , 3354 – 3358 62 Fleischmajer , R . , Perlish , J . S . and Olsen , B . R . ( 1987 ) Cell Tissue Res . 247 , 105 – 109 63 Fleischmajer , R . , Perlish , J . S . and Olsen , B . R . ( 1987 ) J . Invest . Dermatol . 89 , 212 – 215 64 Fleischmajer , R . , Perlish , J . S . Timpl , R . and Olsen , B . R . ( 1988 ) J . Histochem . Cytochem . 36 , 1425 – 1432 65 Hulmes , D . J . S . ( 1983 ) Collagen Relat . Res . 3 , 317 – 321 66 Scott , J . E . ( 1980 ) Biochem . J . 187 , 887 – 891 67 Scott , J . E . ( 1984 ) Biochem . J . 218 , 229 – 233 68 Scott , J . E . and Orford , C . R . ( 1981 ) Biochem . J . 197 , 213 – 216 69 Scott , J . E . and Parry , D . A . D . ( 1992 ) Int . J . Biol . Macromol . 14 , 292 – 293 70 Scott , J . E . and Haigh , M . ( 1985 ) Biosci . Rep . 5 , 765 – 774 71 Scott , J . E . and Haigh , M . ( 1988 ) Biochem . J . 253 , 607 – 610 72 Scott , J . E . , Orford , C . R . and Hughes , E . W . ( 1981 ) Biochem . J . 195 , 573 – 581 73 Fleischmajer , R . , MacDonald , E . D . , Perlish , J . S . , Burgeson , R . E . and Fisher , L . W . ( 1990 ) J . Struct . Biol . 105 , 162 – 169 74 Fleischmajer , R . , Perlish , J . S . , Burgeson , R . E . , Shaikh Bahai , F . and Timpl , R . ( 1990 ) Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 580 , 161 – 175 75 Romanic , A . M . , Adachi , E . , Kadler , K . E . , Hojima , Y . and Prockop , D . J . ( 1991 ) J . Biol . Chem . 266 , 12703 – 12709 76 Romanic , A . M . , Adachi , E . , Hojima , Y . , Engel , J . and Prockop , D . J . ( 1992 ) J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 22265 – 22271 77 Birk , D . E . , Fitch , J . M . and Linsenmayer , T . F . ( 1986 ) Invest . Opthalmol . Vis . Sci . 27 , 1470 – 1477 78 Birk , D . E . , Fitch , J . M . , Babiarz , J . P . , Doane , K . J . and Linsenmayer , T . F . ( 1990 ) J . Cell Sci . 95 , 649 – 657 79 Wu , J . J . , Woods , P . E . and Eyre , D . R . ( 1992 ) J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 23007 – 23014 80 Nishiyama , T . , McDonough , A . M . , Bruns , R . R . and Burgeson , R . E . ( 1994 ) J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 28193 – 28199 81 Watt , S . L . , Lunstrum , G . P . , McDonough , A . M . , Keene , D . R . , Burgeson , R . E . and Morris , N . P . ( 1992 ) J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 20093 – 20099 82 Bairati , A . and Garrone , R . ( 1985 ) Biology of Invertebrate and Lower Vertebrate Collagens , Plenum Press , New York 83 van der Rest , M . and Garrone , R . ( 1991 ) FASEB J . 5 , 2814 – 2823 84 Gross , J . ( 1985 ) in Biology of Invertebrate and Lower Vertebrate Collagens ( Bairati , A . and Garrone , R . , eds . ) , pp . 1 – 28 , Plenum Press , New York 85 Har - El , R . and Tanzer , M . ( 1993 ) FASEB J . 7 , 1115 – 1123 86 Garrone , R . ( 1985 ) in Biology of Invertebrate and Lower Vertebrate Collagens ( Bairati , A . and Garrone , R . , eds . ) , pp . 157 – 176 , Plenum Press , New York 87 Tanzer , M . L . ( 1985 ) in Biology of Invertebrate and Lower Vertebrate Collagens ( Bairati , A . and Garrone , R . , eds . ) , pp . 65 – 72 , Plenum Press , New York 88 Motokawa , T . ( 1984 ) Biol . Rev . 59 , 255 – 270 89 Wilkie , I . C . ( 1984 ) Mar . Behav . Physiol . 11 , 1 – 34 90 Smith , D . S . , Wainwright , S . A . , Baker , J . and Cayer , M . L . ( 1981 ) Tissue Cell 13 , 299 – 320 91 Hidaka , M . and Takahashi , K . ( 1983 ) J . Exp . Biol . 103 , 1 – 14 92 Trotter , J . A . , Thurmond , F . A . and Koob , T . J . ( 1994 ) Cell Tissue Res . 275 , 451 – 458 93 Parry , D . A . D . and Craig , A . S . ( 1984 ) in Ultrastructure of the Connective Tissue Matrix ( Ruggeri , A . and Motta , P . M . , eds . ) , pp . 34 – 64 , Martinus Nijhoﬀ , Boston 94 Trotter , J . A . and Koob , T . J . ( 1994 ) Comp . Biochem . Physiol . 107B , 125 – 134 95 Motokawa , T . ( 1982 ) Galaxea 1 , 55 – 64 96 Bailey , A . J . ( 1985 ) in Biology of Invertebrate and Lower Vertebrate Collagens ( Bairati , A . and Garrone , R . , eds . ) , pp . 369 – 388 , Plenum Press , New York 97 Trotter , J . A . , Lyons - Levy , G . , Thurmond , F . A . and Koob , T . J . ( 1995 ) Comp . Biochem . Physiol . 112A , 463 – 478 98 Matsumara , T . , Shinmei , M . and Nagai , Y . ( 1973 ) J . Biochem . ( Tokyo ) 73 , 155 – 162 99 Trotter , J . A . and Koob , T . J . ( 1989 ) Cell Tissue Res . 258 , 527 – 539 100 Trotter , J . A . , Lyons - Levy , G . , Luna , D . , Koob , T . J . , Keene , D . R . and Atkinson , M . A . L . ( 1996 ) Matrix Biol . , in the press 101 Bailey , A . J . , Gathercole , L . J . , Duglosz , J . , Keller , A . and Voyle , C . A . ( 1982 ) Int . J . Biol . Macromol . 4 , 329 – 334 102 Scott , J . E . ( 1988 ) Biochem . J . 252 , 313 – 323 103 Kariya , Y . , Watabe , S . , Ochial , Y . , Murata , K . and Hashimoto , K . ( 1990 ) Connect . Tissue Res . 25 , 149 – 159 104 Erlinger , R . , Welsch , U . and Scott , J . E . ( 1993 ) J . Anat . 183 , 1 – 11 105 Kessler , E . , Takahara , K . , Biniaminov , L . , Brusel , M . and Greenspan , D . S . ( 1996 ) Science 271 , 360 – 362