B R I E F N O T E S EVIDENCE FOR BIASED BIDIRECTIONAL POLYMERIZATION OF ACTIN FILAMENTS USING HEAVY MEROMYOSIN PREPARED BY AN IMPROVED METHOD DIANE T . WOODRUM , STEVEN A . RICH , and THOMAS D . POLLARD . From the Physiology Course , Marine Biological Laboratory , Woods Hole , Massachusetts 02543 . The affiliating institutions of the investigators while taking this course were Northwestern University , Evanston , Illinois , State of New York Department of Health , Albany , New York , and Harvard Medical School , Boston , Massachusetts . D . Woodrum ' s present address is the Anatomy Department , Harvard Medical School , Boston , Massachusetts 02115 . The ubiquitous protein actin polymerizes to form 6 - nm wide filaments . In muscle , thin filaments composed of actin with other proteins play a central role in the generation and transmission of contractile force ( 7 ) . Indirect evidence suggests that actin filaments perform similar functions in nonmuscle cells ( 9 ) . The process of actin filament growth is poten - tially important for understanding the mechanisms of myofibrii assembly and cell movement . Conse - quently , we designed experiments to determine the directionality of actin polymerization . Our results using homogeneous muscle actin indicate that actin filaments can grow bidirectionally , although the addition of actin monomers to the ends of actin filaments " ' decorated " with heavy meromyosin ( HMM ) 1 is strongly biased toward the end at - tached to the Z line in striated muscle . In the course of presenting preliminary accounts of this work ( 12 , 8 ) , we learned that other investigators ( footnote 2 and reference 1 ) independently have carried out experiments similar to some of those t Abbreviations used in this paper . " DDT , dithiothreitoi ; EDTA , ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid ; G - ATP - actin , monomeric actin with bound ATP ; HMM , heavy mero - myosin ; TPCK - trypsin , trypsin treated with L - ( I - tosylamido - 2 - phenyi ) ethyl chloromethyl ketone to in - hibit contaminant chymotryptic activity . s Personal communications : Spudich , J . and R . Cooke , 1974 ; Kondo , H . transmitted by S . Ebashi and F . Oosawa , 1974 . described here . In addition , we report on an improved method for preparing HMM which minimizes the number of peptide bonds cleaved in the myosin heavy chain . MATERIALS AND METHODS Preparation of Proteins HEAVY MEROMYOSIN : HMM was prepared by limited digestion of rabbit skeletal muscle myosin with trypsin treated with t - ( I - tosylamido - 2 - phenyl ) ethyl chlo - romethyl ketone ( TPCK - trypsin ) ( Worthington Bio - chemical Corp . , Freehold , N . J . ) . Myosin purified from rabbit back and leg muscles ( 5 ) was dissolved at a concentration of 14 . 4 mg / ml in 0 . 5 M KCI , 0 . 1 M phosphate buffer , pH 7 , and digested with 0 . I or 0 . 01 vol ofa TPCK - trypsin solution ( 0 . 5 mg / ml in 0 . 001 M HC1 , activity toward p - toluenesulfonyl - L - arginine methylester of 177 U / mg at 25 ~ for 5 min at 25 ~ with constant stirring . The reaction was terminated by the addition of 0 . l vol of a soybean trypsin inhibitor solution ( Worthing - ton ; 1 mg / ml in deionized water ) . After dialysis at 4 ~ against 20 mM imidazole pH 6 . 6 , insoluble material , including undigested myosin and light meromyosin , was removed by centrifugation at 100 , 000 g for 1 h . The yields of HMM were 3 . 5 mg / ml ( 40 % of theoretical maximum yield ) with 0 . 1 vol of TPCK - trypsin and 1 . 3 mg / ml ( 14 % of the theoretical maximum yield ) with 0 . 01 vol of TPCK - trypsin . Polyacrylamide gel r in sodium dodecyl sulfate of these HMM preparations showed that both the heavy chains and light chains were remarkably intact in the preparation made with the lower concentration of TPCK - trypsin , while there was some - what more wide - spread digestion with the higher concen - THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY (cid:12)9 VOLUME 67 , 1975 (cid:12)9 pages 231 - 237 231 tration of TPCK - trypsin ( Fig . I ) ? Each type of HMM had ATPase activity in 0 . 5 M KCI , 2 mM EDTA , l0 mM imidazole , pH 7 at 25 " C of 1 . 5 - 2 . 0 # mol / min per mg and each bound to actin filaments in the same way , judging by electron microscopy . ACTIN : Actin was extracted from an acetone powder of the muscle residue remaining after the myosin extrac - tion and was purified by either of two methods : ( a ) by two cycles of polymerization and sedimentation from 0 . 1 M KCl4 ; or ( b ) by one cycle of polymerization and sedimentation from 0 . 8 M KCI as suggested by Spudich and Watt ( 10 ) . By gel electrophoresis in sodium dodecyl sulfate , the actin purified by both methods was free of tropomyosin and troponin and was more than 99 % pure . Filaments of purified actin were depolymerized by dial - ysis against 0 . 1 mM CaCl ~ , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 2 mM Tris - Cl , pH 7 . 8 , to yield monomeric actin with a bound ATP nucleotide ( G - ATP - actin ) . The experiments described here were carried out with this monomeric actin . Identi - cal results were obtained with actin stored as a lyophi - lized powder and reconstituted with deionized water . Experimental Design It is believed that actin polymerization is a cooperative process initiated by the formation of a nucleus of three or four monomers ( 7 ) . Preformed actin filaments can also serve as nuclei for filament growth ( 4 ) . To determine the direction of polymer growth , we added actin monomers to preformed nuclei consisting of actin filaments deco - rated with HMM . We will refer to these preformed 3The size and proportions of the proteolytic peptides formed from myosin in these experiments suggest that TPCK - trypsin initially attacks myosin in a very discrete region of the tail of the molecule . The HMM thus formed consists largely of a 130 , 000 dalton fragment of the heavy chain without internal cleavages . Secondarily , the TPCK - trypsin appears to attack another discrete region of the heavy chain , roughly in the middle of the 130 , 000 dalton fragment , yielding the 72 , 000 and 66 , 000 dalton fragments . When the low concentration of TPCK - trypsin is used , this second cleavage takes place in about 20 % of the HMM heavy chains . When the higher concentration of TPCK - trypsin is used , most of the heavy chain is cleaved at the second site as well . Our view that the 130 , 000 dalton fragment represents intact HMM heavy chain is supported by our isolation from these myosin digests of light meromyosin with a subunit molecular weight of 70 , 000 daltons . Together the 70 , 000 dalton light meromyosin peptide and the 130 , 000 dalton HMM peptide account for the mass of the whole myosin heavy chain ( 200 , 000 daltons ) . The light chains of myosin appear to be retained quantitatively in the TPCK - trypsin HMM , although the light chain of intermediate electro - phoretic mobility is reduced slightly in molecular weight during the digestion ( Fig . 1 ) . Rich , S . and J . Estes , Manuscript in preparation . HMM - actin filaments as decorated nuclei . The periodic arrowhead configuration distinguished the decorated nuclei from new growth and indicated the polarity of the filaments . It was necessary to use actin monomer solutions devoid of free ATP . Free ATP would have dissociated the HMM from the decorated nuclei and allowed the HMM to redistribute onto other actin filaments after the ATP was hydrolyzed . We used gel filtration to remove unbound ATP from the actin solution . 3 ml of G - ATP - actin were passed through 0 . 9 (cid:141) 25 - cm column of Sephadex G - 25 , fine equilibrated , and eluted with 0 . 1 mM CaCI ~ , 1 mM dithiothreitol ( DTT ) , 2 mM Tris - CI , pH 7 . 8 . The resulting G - ATP - actin in the ATP - free buffer appeared to polymerize normally for several days . Decorated nuclei and monomeric G - ATP - actin were mixed in various proportions . The final concentration of decorated nuclei was varied between 0 . 03 and 0 . 25 mg / ml and the final concentration of added monomers was varied between 0 . 05 and 0 . 5 mg / ml . Immediately after the addition of monomer to the nuclei , the concen - tration of KCI was readjusted to 0 . 1 M with a concen - trated KCI solution to promote optimal polymerization . In addition to variations in the concentrations of nuclei and monomer , we tested the effects of temperature ( 0 or 25 ~ the presence or absence of 1 mM MgCI2 , and pH ( 6 . 0 , 7 . 0 , and 8 . 0 ) . Samples of these solutions were diluted to about 0 . 1 mg / ml actin with 0 . 1 M KC1 and immediately applied to carbon - over - Formvar grids ren - dered hydrophilic by glow discharge . After 20 s , excess sample was removed and the grid was stained with 1 % uranyl acetate . The extent and polarity of polymerization was determined by electron microscopy using a Philips EM - 201 electron microscope ( generously loaned to the Marine Biological Laboratory Physiology Course by Philips Electronic Instruments , Mount Vernon , N . Y . ) . RESULTS The decorated actin filament nuclei used in our experiments were prepared by mixing HMM and actin filaments in a molar ratio of HMM to actin of about 1 : 2 . Under these conditions nearly all of the filaments were decorated from end to end with HMM arrowheads ( Fig . 2 a ) . A small proportion of the filaments was completely bare and the proportion of the bare filaments increased with lower ratios of HMM to actin . No partially decorated filaments were observed when HMM was mixed with preformed actin filaments . These findings indicate that there was no free HMM in the solutions of decorated nuclei . The all or none binding of HMM to each actin filament might be interpreted to mean that the binding process is cooperative . Addition of actin monomers to decorated nuclei was observed to result in the growth of the 232 BRIEF NOTES FIGURE 1 Electrophoresis on 7 . 5 % polyacrylamide gels in 0 . 1 % sodium dodecyl sulfate , 25 mM Tris - glycine buffer , pH 8 . 3 . ( a ) ( 0 ) rabbit skeletal muscle myosin ; ( 5 ) HMM formed by digestion with 5 ~ g / ml of TPCK - trypsin ; ( 45 ) HMM formed by digestion with 45 / ~ g / ml of TPCK - trypsin . ( b ) Comparison of densitometer scans of electrophoresis patterns of myosin ( - - ) and TPCK - trypsin HMM ( - - . ) . Approximately equal weights of the two proteins were applied to the gels so that the molar ratio of HMM to myosin is about 1 . 4 , accounting for the relatively greater areas under the HMM light chain peaks . The main HMM peak ( mobility 1 . 0 cm ) comprises 76 . 5 % of the heavy chain stain density , while the two smaller fragments ( mobilities of about 2 . 1 cm ) comprise 9 . 5 % and 8 . 3 % of the total heavy chain stain density . decorated nuclei and the formation of additional actin filaments . The newly polymerized actin was bare and easily distinguished from the decorated nuclei by electron microscopy . Low Monomer Concentrations When a low concentration ( 0 . 05 - 0 . 1 mg / ml ) of monomeric G - ATP - actin was added to decorated nuclei , about half of the newly formed ( bare ) actin filaments were attached to decorated nuclei and about half were completely bare ( Fig . 2 and Table I ) . Thus , the assembly of about half of the filaments was initiated on decorated nuclei while the rest was initiated on other nuclei . Under the conditions used in the experiments in Fig . 2 and Table I , 60 - 80 % of the decorated nuclei had bare actin extensions from the barbed end . Of hundreds of filaments observed , only one was found with a bare extension from the pointed end of a decorated segment and none had bare actin extensions at both ends . At these low monomer concentrations , neither variation of the pH between 6 and 8 ( Table I ) , variation of the temperature ( 0 ~ or 25 ~ data not shown ) , nor the presence or absence of 1 mM MgC1 , ( Table I ) had a large influence on the extent or direction of nucleated actin polymerization . These and similar experiments indicate that at low monomer concentrations , the polymerization of actin onto nuclei decorated with HMM is limited to the barbed end of the filament . High Monomer Concentrations When a high concentration ( 0 . 5 mg / ml ) of monomeric actin was added to the decorated nuclei in 0 . 1 M KCI at pH 7 and 25 ~ nearly all of the nuclei had bare actin extensions from both ends ( Figure 3 a - c ) . In addition , more than 90 % of the actin filaments were completely bare , indicating BRIEF NOTES 233 FIGURE 2 Electron micrographs of actin filaments negatively stained with I % uranyl acetate . ( a ) An actin filament decorated with HMM , typical of the decorated nuclei used in these experiments . ( b and c ) The result " of mixing decorated nuclei ( 0 . 05 mg / ml ) with a low concentration ( 0 . 1 mg / ml ) of monomeric G - ATP - actin at pH 7 in 0 , 1 M KCI . Note the bare extensions on the barbed end of most of the decorated segments . Bars are O . l ~ m . ( a ) (cid:141) 135 , 000 ; ( b ) (cid:141) 100 , 000 ; ( c ) (cid:141) 73 , 000 . BRIEF NOTES TABLE I Directionality of Nucleated Actin Polymerization * Conditions Un - deco - Barb - Poin - Nei - rated ed ted Both ther ilia - end end ends end ments % % % % % pH 6 . 0 39 0 0 15 46 pH 7 . 0 53 0 0 19 28 pH 8 . 0 43 1 0 20 36 pH 7 . 0 47 0 0 10 43 + 1 mM MgCI ~ In each experiment , approximately 100 filaments were scored and put into one of the following categories : a decorated nucleus with a bare extension at the barbed end , at the pointed end , at both ends or at neither end ; or a completely undecorated filament . * A low concentration ( 0 . 1 mg / ml ) of monomers was added to the same concentration of decorated nuclei , and the KCI concentration adjusted to 0 . 1 M . The pH and MgCI ~ concentrations were varied as indicated . Calcium added with the protein samples gave a final CaCI ~ concentration of about 6 um . reflects a change in the bonding properties of actin upon incorporation into the filament , s A complicating factor in the interpretation of these experiments is the presence of HMM bound to the nuclei . We do not know whether the biased growth of decorated nuclei is a property of the actin itself or imposed upon it by the HMM . Because there is bidirectional growth at high monomer concentrations , the undirectional growth at low monomer concentrations may not be due to steric blockage of the pointed end by HMM . Rather we suspect that the results are due to a very strong concentration dependence for polymeriza - tion at the pointed end and a higher rate of polymerization at the barbed end . In considering the functional meaning of these experiments , it is most interesting that , in striated muscle , actin filaments are attached to the Z line at their barbed ends ( 2 ) and that at least some cytoplasmic actin filaments appear to be attached to membranes at their barbed ends ( 3 , 6 , 8 , 11 ) . In these cases , we presume that only the unattached , pointed ends of the filaments are available for growth . The limited ability of the pointed ends of that many nucleating sites besides the decorated nuclei were active in initiating assembly at these high actin concentrations . In the experiment in Fig . 3 , and in similar experiments , the length of the bare actin extension at the barbed end of a decorated segment was always four to eight times longer than the bare extension at the pointed end . Thus , actin filaments can grow at both ends , but the extent of growth is always greater at the barbed end of the nucleus . DISCUSSION The experiments show that actin filaments can grow bidirectionally , although under the condi - tions examined actin monomers add preferentially to one end of nuclei consisting of actin filaments decorated with HMM . Thus , in addition to the structural polarity of actin filaments revealed by the pattern of myosin binding ( 2 ) , actin filaments have an assembly polarity . The addition of mono - mers to the two ends is clearly not equivalent , so the mechanisms of actin filament elongation may be fundamentally different at the two oppositely polarized ends . The reasons that growth at the " barbed " end is favored are not revealed by these qualitative experiments , but we suspect that it 5 The idea that there is change in the actin - actin binding sites upon the polymerization of actin arises from the following reasoning : If each actin molecule has a polar - ity , B - P ( barbed and pointed ends respectively ) , the actin molecules constituting a filament will be aligned BP ~ BP ~ BP etc . , with axial P ~ B bonds holding them together . Of course , there also will be lateral bonds with the molecules in the parallel chain of the double helix . At the barbed end of the filament a B binding site will be open , while at the pointed end a P binding site will be open . All free monomers will have both B and P binding sites open . If the open B binding site at the barbed end of a filament were equivalent to a B binding site on a free monomer and if the same were true for the P binding sites , one would expect that the addition of monomers to both ends of the filament would be equally favored . Since this is not found , and since all of the monomer B and P sites should be equivalent , one must postulate an altera - tion in the open P or B sites at the ends of the filaments . Our results could be explained if an open B site at the barbed end of a filament were more active than a B site on a free monomer in forming P ~ B bonds , or if an open P site at the pointed end of the filament were less active than a P site of a monomer in forming P ~ B bonds . This difference might be due to a conformational change of the B or P sites upon the incorporation of an actin molecule in a filament . Alternatively , it might arise because the actin molecules at one end of a filament have a bound ADP while the actin molecules at the other end and the free actin monomers have a bound ATP . BRIEF NOTES 235 FIGURE 3 Electron micrographs of actin filaments negatively stained with 1 % uranyl acetate . ln this experiment decorated nuclei ( 0 . 05 mg / ml ) were mixed with a high concentration ( 0 . 5 mg / ml ) of monomeric G - ATP actin at pH 7 in 0 . 1 M KCI . Note the bare actin extensions on both ends of the decorated segments and that the extensions are longer at the barbed ends . Bars are 0 . 1 ~ am . ( a ) (cid:141) 78 , 000 ; ( b ) (cid:141) 62 , 000 ; ( c ) (cid:141) 70 , 000 . actin filaments to nucleate polymerization might thus contribute to the stability of these attached actin filaments , and might allow the cells to maintain a relatively high concentration of free monomers in equilibrium with the filaments . The rapid polymerization of actin filaments in the Thyone sperm acrosomal process presents a special problem ( 11 ) . It is thought that these actin filaments polymerize at a rate of about 9 ~ tm / s from their proximal ( pointed ) ends . The cause of this rapid growth from the pointed end might be a special property of the sperm actin filaments , or it might be due to the exceptionally high concentra - tion of unpolymerized actin in the acrosomal vesicle adjacent to the growing actin filaments , or might be related to the presence of additional proteins . SUMMARY Isolated actin filaments decorated with HMM can grow by addition of actin monomers to either end , although there is a bias toward addition at the end which is normally attached to the Z line in striated muscle . We thank Dr . T . E . Schroeder for his helpful comments on the manuscript . This work was supported by United States Public Health Service Training Grant GM - 00265 to the Marine Biological Laboratory Physiology Course and Research Grant GM - 19654 to Dr . Pollard . Received for publication 26 March 1975 , and in revised form 19 May 1975 . REFERENCES 1 . HAYASHI , T . , and W . IP . 1974 . Polymerization po - larity of rabbit actin . J . Gen . Physiol . 64 : 9 a ( Abstr . ) . 2 . HUXLEY , H . E . 1963 . Electron microscope studies on the structure of natural and synthetic protein fil - aments from striated muscle . J . Mol . Biol . 7 : 281 - 308 . 3 . ISHIKAWA , H . , R . BISCHOFF , and H . HOLTZER . 1969 . Formation of arrowhead complexes with heavy meromyosin in a variety of cell types , d . Cell Biol . 43 : 312 - 328 . 4 . KASAI , M . , S . ASKURA , and F . OOSAWA . 1960 . The cooperative nature of G - F transformation of actin . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 57 : 22 - 30 . 5 . KIELLEY , W . W . , and W . F . HARRINGTON . 1959 . A model for the myosin molecule . Biochim . Biophvs . Acta . 41 : 401 - 421 . 6 . MOOSEKER , M . S . 1974 . Brush border motility : mi - crovillar contraction in isolated brush border models . J . Cell Biol . 63 ( 2 , Pt . 2 ) : 231 a ( Abstr . ) . 7 . OOSAWA , F . , and M . KASAI . 1971 . Actin . In Sub - units in Biological Systems . S . N . Timasheff and G . D . Fasman , editors . Marcel Dekker , Inc . , New York . 261 - 322 . 8 . POLLARD , T . D . 1975 . Functional implications of the biochemical and structural properties of cytoplas - mic contractile proteins . In Molecules and Cell Movement . S . Inou ~ and R . Stephens , editors . Raven Press , New York . 259 - 285 . 236 BRIEF NOTES 9 . POLLARD , T . D . and R . R . WEIHING . 1974 . Actin and myosin and cell movement . CRC Crit . Rev . Biochem . 2 : 1 - 65 . 10 . SPUDICH , J . , and S . WATT . 1971 . The regulation of rabbit skeletal muscle contraction . J . Biol . Chem . 246 : 4855 - 4871 . 11 . T1LNEY , L . G . , S . HATANO , H . ISHIKAWA , and M . S . MOOSEKER . 1973 . The polymerization of actin : its role in the generation of the acrosomal process of certain Echinoderm sperm . J . Cell Biol . 59 : 109 - 126 . 12 . WOODRUM , D . T . , S . RICH , and T . D . POLLARD . 1974 . Evidence for biased bipolar polymerization of actin filaments . Biol . Bull . ( Woods Hole ) . 147 : 503 - 504 . THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY (cid:12)9 VOLUME 67 , 1975 (cid:12)9 pages 237 - 243 237