garden of Eden before the serpent in - troduces science , and with that , the need for natural - kind concepts ) . Those read - ers prepared to stick through this small but densely argued book will be re - warded with a sparkling display of elo - quence , as well as a glimpse of the vast panorama of issues surrounding what you might have thought was a small technical problem , but which Fodor shows us is one of the central out - standing problems of cognitive science . Zenon W . Pylyshyn Rutgers Center for Cognitive Science , Rutgers University , New Brunswick , NJ , USA . tel : + 1 908 445 0635 fax : + 1 908 445 6715 e - mail : zenon @ ruccs . rutgers . edu Books etcetera 82 Trends in Cognitive Sciences – Vol . 3 , No . 2 , February 1999 The Atomic Components of Thought by John R . Anderson and Christian Lebiere , Lawrence Erlbaum , 1998 . $ 34 . 95 ( pbk ) ( xi + 490 pages ) ISBN 0 8058 2816 8 ( hbk ) / 0 8058 2817 6 ( pbk ) Thomas Kuhn’s theory of scientific revo - lutions 1 hasn’t had a good influence on cognitive science . Kuhn depicts the world of science as having periods of normal research in which scientists stick to a fixed paradigm , alternated by revolutions in which the current scien - tific establishment is overthrown . Be - cause normal research in terms of Kuhn seems rather boring , many cognitive scientists present their theories as new Kuhnian paradigms by discrediting others . Now a research community of revolutionaries might lead to exciting debates , but can prevent the synergy of ideas that are not mutually exclusive . In 1993 Anderson 2 presented an ex - ception : the ‘ACT - R’ ( Adaptive Control of Thought – Rational ) theory . It combines ideas from the Newell and Simon 3 sym - bolic framework with concepts from connectionist models . ACT - R is not just a theory , it is an architecture of cog - nition , a platform that can be used to implement models of all kinds of cog - nitive tasks . These models make precise predictions about behavior : reaction times , errors , choices , down to the de - tail of shifting visual attention and motor control . ACT - R has two long - term memory stores , a declarative and a procedural memory . Each of these memories has two layers of representation : a symbolic and a sub - symbolic layer . Declarative memory contains facts and goals , which are , at the symbolic level , repre - sented by a semantic network . The sub - symbolic level has many aspects in com - mon with neural networks : each declarative fact has an activation level , which is in part dependent on acti - vation it receives from other facts through association strengths . The ac - tivation of a fact determines if it can be retrieved from memory at a certain moment , and the time it takes to do so . If several facts are applicable at the same time , the fact with the highest ac - tivation is chosen . So , the sub - symbolic level fills in the gaps left by the sym - bolic level . Similar rules apply to proce - dural memory . All elements of repre - sentation are susceptible to change through learning : achieved goals are stored as new facts in declarative mem - ory , examples can be generalized to new rules and all the sub - symbolic pa - rameters are continuously updated through experience and decay in time . The book not only explicates ACT - R , but also shows the results of five years of modeling . These models are an important source of evidence for the theory , since they provide experimen - tal support for separate aspects of the theory , and for the theory as a whole . The first four chapters of the book ex - plain ACT - R in detail . The nice thing about this explanation is that each de - tail of the theory is supported by a model . For example , the mechanism that takes care of maintaining the acti - vation levels of facts in declarative memory is illustrated by a model of al - phabet arithmetic : an experiment 4 in which participants have to check ex - pressions like A + 3 = D . According to the ACT - R model , there are two ways to do this : by counting down the alphabet , or by retrieving the fact from memory . Becauses people usually do not have facts of alphabet arithmetic in mem - ory , participants in the experiment and the ACT - R model both start with count - ing as their strategy . However , once they get some experience , they might retrieve an answer from memory in - stead , and they become faster as the same example is repeated more often . Both the shift in strategy and the sub - sequent decrease in reaction time are predicted perfectly by the model . After introducing the theory , the two subsequent chapters outline how ACT - R communicates with the outside world using modules for visual percep - tion , motor control , etc . Again , the proposed structures are supported by ample models . The rest of the book is organized around some major themes in cognitive science : list memory , choice , cognitive arithmetic , analogy and scientific discovery . In each of these domains it is shown how a deeper understanding can be gained by explaining ( and modeling ) the most important findings in the domain in terms of the ACT - R theory . ACT - R brings cognitive science back to the essence of science ; that is , to find theories that can make precise predic - tions , and that are general enough to be applicable in many domains and situations . A possible criticism of the theory is that it lacks parsimony – that is has too many mechanisms , too much freedom in representation and too many parameters to tweak . The authors are aware of this problem , and try to find fixed values for parameters and restrictions on the representation of production rules in order to strengthen the theory . Still , ACT - R is a theory in development , as witnessed by the final chapter of the book . A website ( http : / / act . psy . cmu . edu ) further supports the book , containing an extensive ACT - R tutorial and the opportunity to down - load all the software and models in the book . It is even possible to run the models on - line , and see how the out - come of a model changes due to changes in parameters . This is in an important book for everyone interested in the simulation of human intelligent behavior . It puts forward a compelling theory that pro - vides hope that unification in cognitive science is not lost , and it could rescue cognitive science from Kuhnian chaos . Niels Taatgen Department of Cognitive Science and Engineering , University of Groningen , Grote Kruisstraat 2 / 1 , 9712 TS Groningen , The Netherlands . tel : + 31 50 363 6435 fax : + 31 50 363 6304 e - mail : n . a . taatgen @ bcn . rug . nl References 1 Kuhn , T . S . ( 1970 ) The Structure Of Scientific Revolutions , University of Chicago Press 2 Anderson , J . R . ( 1993 ) Rules Of The Mind , Lawrence Erlbaum 3 Newell , A . and Simon , H . A . ( 1972 ) Human Problem Solving , Prentice - Hall 4 Zbrodoff , N . J . ( 1995 ) Why is 9 + 7 harder than 2 + 3 ? Strength and interference as explanations of the problem - size effect Mem . Cognit . 6 , 689 – 700