REVIEW published : 14 September 2017 doi : 10 . 3389 / fcell . 2017 . 00081 Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 1 September 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 81 Edited by : Takaaki Matsui , Nara Institute of Science and Technology , Japan Reviewed by : Kensaku Mizuno , Tohoku University , Japan Thomas Magin , Leipzig University , Germany * Correspondence : Gregory F . Weber gregory . weber @ rutgers . edu Specialty section : This article was submitted to Cell Adhesion and Migration , a section of the journal Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology Received : 30 June 2017 Accepted : 30 August 2017 Published : 14 September 2017 Citation : Sanghvi - Shah R and Weber GF ( 2017 ) Intermediate Filaments at the Junction of Mechanotransduction , Migration , and Development . Front . Cell Dev . Biol . 5 : 81 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fcell . 2017 . 00081 Intermediate Filaments at the Junction of Mechanotransduction , Migration , and Development Rucha Sanghvi - Shah and Gregory F . Weber * Department of Biological Sciences , Rutgers University - Newark , Newark , NJ , United States Mechanically induced signal transduction has an essential role in development . Cells actively transduce and respond to mechanical signals and their internal architecture must manage the associated forces while also being dynamically responsive . With unique assembly - disassembly dynamics and physical properties , cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments play an important role in regulating cell shape and mechanical integrity . While this function has been recognized and appreciated for more than 30 years , continually emerging data also demonstrate important roles of intermediate ﬁlaments in cell signal transduction . In this review , with a particular focus on keratins and vimentin , the relationship between the physical state of intermediate ﬁlaments and their role in mechanotransduction signaling is illustrated through a survey of current literature . Association with adhesion receptors such as cadherins and integrins provides a critical interface through which intermediate ﬁlaments are exposed to forces from a cell’s environment . As a consequence , these cytoskeletal networks are posttranslationally modiﬁed , remodeled and reorganized with direct impacts on local signal transduction events and cell migratory behaviors important to development . We propose that intermediate ﬁlaments provide an opportune platform for cells to both cope with mechanical forces and modulate signal transduction . Keywords : intermediate ﬁlaments , development , migration , mechanotransduction , tension , keratin , vimentin INTRODUCTION The last decade has brought a newfound recognition for the role of physical force on stimulating adhesion responses in cells , activating signal transduction pathways , and regulating cellular functions . These physical forces are recognized to be both externally and internally derived . Since the actomyosin machinery is seen as the primary means by which cells generate force , the focus of the research community thus far has largely been on the tripartite relationship between actin - myosin cytoskeleton , physical parameters such as force , and associated signal transduction pathways . Interestingly , although it is well - accepted that the intermediate ﬁlaments provide mechanical integrity to cells , the relationship of intermediate ﬁlaments to mechanotransduction processes continues to be a new frontier ripe for exploration . Intermediate ﬁlaments remain the least well - understood of the three major cytoskeletal networks . Intermediate ﬁlament polymerization - depolymerization regulation , impact to cell signaling pathways and role in tension management within the cell have only just begun to be investigated . Findings to date provide good reason to anticipate an integral role for intermediate ﬁlaments in cellular processes where signal transduction and cellular mechanics converge . Sanghvi - Shah and Weber Intermediate Filaments in Mechanotransduction In this review article , we provide a summary overview of what is currently known about cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments and their regulation . The interplay of intermediate ﬁlaments with the cellular adhesive network is highlighted through multicellular behaviors such as migration . These cellular functions are put into physiological context by examining their contributions to embryonic development . We suggest that cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments are load - bearing components within cells that both eﬀect and are aﬀected by cells’ physical environments . That is , intermediate ﬁlaments are a centerpiece intracellular component of cell signaling events due to mechanical stimuli . CYTOPLASMIC INTERMEDIATE FILAMENTS - GENERAL OVERVIEW Cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments belong to a superfamily of highly conserved proteins ( ∼ 65 genes ; Hesse et al . , 2001 ) unique to metazoan species ( Herrmann and Strelkov , 2011 ) . These members of the intermediate ﬁlament family likely originated through the divergence of the more ubiquitously expressed , yet highly conserved , nuclear intermediate ﬁlaments—the lamins ( Dodemont and Riemer , 1990 ; Döring and Stick , 1990 ; Peter and Stick , 2015 ; Hering et al . , 2016 ) . The expression and assembly of these 10 – 12 nm ﬁlament forming cytoplasmic proteins is developmentally regulated in a cell - , tissue - , and context - dependent manner . Based upon their expression pattern , structure , and sequence identity , cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlament proteins are classiﬁed into ﬁve diﬀerent gene families ( Table 1 ) , with a sixth intermediate ﬁlament family comprised of lamins which reside in the nucleus ( Type V ) . Type I and II consist of the keratins , which are intermediate ﬁlaments highly expressed by epithelia . Notably keratins are also expressed by several non - epithelial cell types and , of particular relevance to this review , are the earliest expressed intermediate ﬁlament types during embryogenesis ( Franz et al . , 1983 ; Lehtonen et al . , 1983 ) . In humans , keratins are encoded by 28 genes for Type I members and 26 genes for Type II members on only two loci ( Hesse et al . , 2001 ) . While mice have a similar number of keratin genes , the number of keratin genes varies with species , with organisms lower on the phylogenic tree exhibiting fewer keratin genes . For instance , at the other end of the spectrum a single Type I - Type II keratin pair of genes exists in the sea squirt Ciona intestinalis , a diﬀerence indicative of the evolutionary expansion of keratins through gene duplication ( Hesse et al . , 2001 ; Karabinos et al . , 2004 ) . Type III intermediate ﬁlaments are intermediate ﬁlaments , such as vimentin and desmin , that can form homopolymers and also heteropolymers with other Type III intermediate ﬁlament proteins . Type IV intermediate ﬁlaments are expressed mostly by neurons and muscle and includes the various neuroﬁlament subtypes , nestin and synemin . Type VI includes CP49 / phakinin and ﬁlensin , which are lens - speciﬁc intermediate ﬁlaments . Although , CP49 can self - assemble in vitro , in vivo CP49 and ﬁlensin together form heteroligomeric ﬁlaments ( Goulielmos et al . , 1996 ) . Here we will primarily focus on Type I - III cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments , with special emphasis on keratin and vimentin , because of the emerging evidence for their TABLE 1 | General classiﬁcation of intermediate ﬁlament proteins . Intermediate ﬁlament type General categorization Intermediate ﬁlament protein members Type I Acidic Keratins Acidic Keratins ( 28 genes in humans ) Type II Basic Keratins Basic Keratins ( 26 genes in humans ) Type III Homodimerizing intermediate ﬁlaments , some capability of heterodimerizing Vimentin , Desmin , GFAP Type IV Intermediate ﬁlaments mainly expressed in neurons and muscle Neuroﬁlaments , Nestin , Synemin Type V Nuclear intermediate ﬁlaments Lamins Type VI Lens - speciﬁc beaded intermediate ﬁlaments Phakinin ( CP49 ) , Filensin inﬂuence over signal transduction , cellular function in a wide variety of cell types , and role in embryonic development . All cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlament proteins share a common tripartite molecular structure . Intermediate ﬁlament monomers are dominated by a conserved central α - helical domain ( ∼ 310 amino acids ) ﬂanked by highly variable non - α - helical head and tail domains . Variability in the amino terminal head domain and the carboxy terminal tail domains account for much of the diversity , speciﬁcity , and regulation of intermediate ﬁlaments . Meanwhile , the central domain is the primary dimerization region . The central rod domain is periodically interrupted by linker domains ( L1 and L12 ) thus forming four helical subdomains ( coil 1A , coil 1B , coil 2A , and coil 2B ) capable of forming coiled - coils ( Geisler and Weber , 1982 ; Nicolet et al . , 2010 ; Chernyatina et al . , 2012 ) . These sub - helices are predominantly rich in heptad repeats ( abcdefg ) n where a & d are the small apolar residues ( Leu , Ile , Met , or Val ) . This amphipathic nature of the intermediate ﬁlament monomers allows them to readily form highly stable , parallel α - helical coiled - coil dimers without the assistance of any nucleating proteins in vitro ( Quinlan et al . , 1986 ) . Over the last few decades , several laboratories have elucidated the general mechanism for intermediate ﬁlament assembly in vitro . Cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlament protein dimers laterally associate in an antiparallel fashion to form apolar tetramers . Once formed , tetramers further align to form unit length ﬁlaments ( ULF’s ) that anneal longitudinally to yield long , ﬂexible ﬁlaments , and subsequently undergo radial compaction to yield non - polar 10 nm ﬁlaments ( Herrmann et al . , 1996 , 1999 ; Sokolova et al . , 2006 ; Kirmse et al . , 2007 ) . Keratins spontaneously form obligate heterodimers from one Type I and one Type II intermediate ﬁlament protein ( Steinert et al . , 1976 ) , whereas vimentin forms homopolymers ( Steinert et al . , 1981b ) . In both instances , nucleation and polymerization can occur without aid from co - factors or nucleoside triphosphates ( Herrmann et al . , 2004 ) . Although , keratin heteropolymers can be formed from any combination of Type I acidic keratins and Type II basic keratins in vitro , assembly kinetics do show preferential pairing ( Hatzfeld and Franke , 1985 ) . Indeed , speciﬁc Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 2 September 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 81 Sanghvi - Shah and Weber Intermediate Filaments in Mechanotransduction pairs of keratins are expressed in vivo ( Franke et al . , 1981 ) that parallel these assembly preferences . Such in vitro assembly studies of intermediate ﬁlaments , in addition to their remarkable insolubility in physiological buﬀers during in vitro experiments and resilient mechanical properties , led to the initial notion that intermediate ﬁlaments form stable networks in the cytoplasm . While intermediate ﬁlament assemblages certainly have noteworthy physical properties , their assembly and disassembly are hardly static , unregulated , nor inconsequential to cell function . Contrary to in vitro assembly observations , in vivo pulse chase experiments suggest that intermediate ﬁlaments assemble from a soluble pool of tetrameric intermediate ﬁlament precursors / subunits ( Blikstad and Lazarides , 1983 ; Soellner et al . , 1985 ; Schwarz et al . , 2015 ) . Despite the tendency toward polymerization in vitro , in living cells intermediate ﬁlament proteins coexist both in ﬁlamentous form and as detergent - soluble ﬁlament precursors , of various varieties , including tetramers , ULFs , “particles , ” and “squiggles” - short ﬁlamentous structures ( Yoon et al . , 1998 , 2001 ; Schwarz et al . , 2015 ) . Intermediate ﬁlament precursors are most apparent in the peripheral region and protrusions of cells ( Prahlad et al . , 1998 ; Yoon et al . , 1998 , 2001 ; Helfand et al . , 2002 ; Schwarz et al . , 2015 ) . As intermediate ﬁlament particles are transported , a subset of these are selected to elongate to short ﬁlaments otherwise known as squiggles and further assemble into mature ﬁlaments , ﬁnally incorporating into the network ( Yoon et al . , 1998 ; Windoﬀer et al . , 2011 ; Schwarz et al . , 2015 ) . Cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments establish complex networks that form a central cage like structure encapsulating the nucleus and further radiates toward the cell periphery ( Franke et al . , 1978a , b ) . Strikingly , when both the keratin and vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments are expressed in a cell type they display distinct spatial organization of intermediate ﬁlament arrays ( Osborn et al . , 1980 ) . Typically keratin intermediate ﬁlaments are packaged into bundles called tonoﬁbrils ( Steinert et al . , 1981a ) and also form bifurcations ( Nafeey et al . , 2016 ) . On the other hand , vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments are loosely arranged in a parallel or crisscross fashion forming a ﬁne mesh network ( Goldman et al . , 1986 ) . Polymerized ﬁlaments either become a part of the existing peripheral keratin intermediate ﬁlament network or get disassembled . Depolymerized precursors may be recycled in the cytoplasm and readied for the next cycle of assembly and disassembly or else undergo ubiquitin - mediated proteasomal degradation . Evidence points to a soluble pool of intermediate ﬁlament subunits as an important resource for the remodeling of intermediate ﬁlament networks . Keratin cycling uses disassembled soluble subunits for ﬁlament renewal , since inhibition of protein synthesis does not abolish ﬁlament formation nor subunit exchange ( Kolsch et al . , 2010 ) . Similar cycling mechanisms are also seen for vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments , where vimentin precursors are translocated to the peripheral region of the spreading cells and display a stepwise formation of intermediate ﬁlaments ( Prahlad et al . , 1998 ) . In addition to dynamic assembly of intermediate ﬁlaments , established intermediate ﬁlament networks are subject to marked remodeling . Live imaging studies highlight the dynamic and motile properties of the intermediate ﬁlament networks and clearly show that vimentin and keratin ﬁbrils exhibit undulations while constantly changing their conﬁgurations , appearing to collapse , extend , and translocate over relatively short time intervals ( Ho et al . , 1998 ; Yoon et al . , 1998 ; Windoﬀer and Leube , 1999 ) . At the subunit level , the dynamic exchange of intermediate ﬁlament dimers is ever more complex . Predictably , severing and end - to - end annealing are major mechanisms for elongation and refurbishment of ﬁlaments ( Prahlad et al . , 1998 ; Wöll et al . , 2005 ; Winheim et al . , 2011 ; Hookway et al . , 2015 ) . Breaking with typical models of ﬁlament polymerization however , data show that intermediate ﬁlament subunits can also be added and removed from the entire length of the preformed ﬁlament as a mechanism for intermediate ﬁlament turnover ( Ngai et al . , 1990 ; Coleman and Lazarides , 1992 ; Vikstrom et al . , 1992 ) . Microinjection of soluble biotinylated keratin and vimentin ( Vikstrom et al . , 1989 ; Miller et al . , 1991 ) and rhodamine - tagged vimentin followed by Fluorescence Recovery After Photobleaching ( FRAP ) analyses revealed that these subunits can rapidly incorporate in a well - established network ( Vikstrom et al . , 1992 ) . Exchange of intermediate ﬁlament subunits is non - polar and occurs along the entire length of the intermediate ﬁlament . Nevertheless , subunit swapping is highly dependent on the availability of a soluble pool . Collectively , this suggests that established intermediate ﬁlaments exhibit unique dynamic properties that allow for turnover of subunits , along with severing and end - to end annealing to maintain length and ﬂexibility of the preformed ﬁlaments without compromising their structural integrity . Factors regulating and facilitating processes such as severing , reannealing and subunit exchange are largely unknown and the underlying molecular mechanisms demand further attention given the disparate assembly dynamics in vitro compared to in vivo . As with their actin and microtubule counterparts , we speculate that a host of intermediate ﬁlament binding proteins that modulate polymerization are waiting to be elucidated . Despite the ability of keratin and vimentin to polymerize so readily , cells clearly have regulatory controls that determine when and where intermediate ﬁlaments will form . A variety of post - translation modiﬁcations ( PTMs ) of intermediate ﬁlaments such as phosphorylation , ubiquitylation , acetylation , and sumoylation are emerging as crucial controllers of intermediate ﬁlament dynamics , stability , and function ( Table 2 ; for review see Snider and Omary , 2014 ) . Phosphorylation status of cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments is modulated by various kinases and phosphatases ( Omary et al . , 2006 ) depending upon the intermediate ﬁlament protein involved , cell and tissue type and speciﬁc physiological condition . Such phosphorylation / dephosphorylation events in general aﬀect their conformation , solubility , ﬁlament organization , and interaction with other signaling molecules consequently translating into various cellular functions . Site - speciﬁc serine / threonine phosphorylation of the head and tail region of intermediate ﬁlaments facilitate their structural reorganization mainly by promoting intermediate ﬁlament solubility . Conversely , tyrosine phosphorylation of the rod domain ( Tyr 267 ) of K8 facilitates their proper ﬁlament formation and renders them insoluble ( Snider et al . , 2013b ) . Diﬀerent PTMs on intermediate ﬁlaments Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 3 September 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 81 Sanghvi - Shah and Weber Intermediate Filaments in Mechanotransduction TABLE 2 | Post - translational modiﬁcations of cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments . Post - translational modiﬁcation General effect on intermediate ﬁlament References Ser / Thr phosphorylation Increases intermediate ﬁlament solubility Omary et al . , 2006 ; Snider and Omary , 2014 Tyr phosphorylation Promotes keratin insolubility Snider et al . , 2013b Ser phosphorylation Induces compartmentalization of intermediate ﬁlaments Chou et al . , 1991 ; Ku et al . , 2002 ; Toivola et al . , 2002 ; Zhou et al . , 2006 Sumoylation Alters ﬁlament dynamics Snider et al . , 2011 Acetylation Promotes formation of dense perinuclear network Snider et al . , 2013a Glycosylation Protects against stress and injury Ku et al . , 2010 Ubiquitylation Regulates intermediate ﬁlament degradation and turnover Ku and Omary , 2000 can serve as docking sites for protein complexes and allow for altered assembly dynamics or rearrangements of the network . For example , the chaperone protein Hsp27 interacts with K8 in a phosphorylation dependent manner ( Kayser et al . , 2013 ) . Hsp27 manages keratin inter - ﬁlament interactions by inhibiting extensive bundling of ﬁlaments ( Kayser et al . , 2013 ) , in essence by acting as a steric “spacer . ” Such phosphorylation events not only correlate with , but have a functional role in cellular events such as mitosis , cell migration , cell growth , and stress - mediated responses . Spatiotemporal localization of intermediate ﬁlaments is phosphorylation dependent . Diﬀerent forms of intermediate ﬁlament proteins ( e . g . , non - ﬁlamentous particles vs . ﬁlaments ) reside in diﬀerent subcellular compartments . During distinct cellular processes such as mitosis , site - speciﬁc hyperphosphorylation of cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments , as determined by phospho - speciﬁc antibody labeling , aﬀect their organization and distribution ( Chou et al . , 1991 ; Toivola et al . , 2002 ) . Epitope - speciﬁc phosphorylation can also segregate intermediate ﬁlaments to diﬀerent compartments within a cell . In pancreatic acinar cells , K18 phosphorylated on Ser33 is necessary for speciﬁcally basal ﬁlament organization while the non - phosphorylated K18 localizes to the apical domain by default ( Ku et al . , 2002 ) . Moreover , similar site - speciﬁc intermediate ﬁlament phosphorylation can be limited to speciﬁc cells within a tissue . For example , K20 Ser13 phosphorylation occurs speciﬁcally in small intestine goblet cells but not in other K20 expressing enterocytes ( Zhou et al . , 2006 ) . Phosphorylation of intermediate ﬁlaments promotes other PTMs , such as sumoylation of keratins . Both keratins and vimentin are extensively modiﬁed by SUMO2 and SUMO3 in vitro , at multiple conserved rod domain sites . Monosumoylation of keratin increases protein solubility whereas hypersumoylation decreases it ( Snider et al . , 2011 ) . Thus , sumoylation similar to phosphorylation is crucial for regulating solubility of cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments . Similarly , acetylation of the conserved Lys residue ( Lys 207 ) in the rod domain of K8 also decreases K8 solubility . Acetylation thus promotes the formation of a dense perinuclear intermediate ﬁlament network formation altering the mechanical properties of ﬁlaments ( Snider et al . , 2013a ) . A plausible reciprocal relationship exists between glycosylation and phosphorylation PTMs of intermediate ﬁlaments ( Ku et al . , 1996 ) . Glycosylation of K18 ( on Ser30 / 31 / 49 in the head domain ) behaves as a cytoprotective PTM during stress and injury ( Ku et al . , 2010 ) , whereas ubiquitylation is frequently detected in the context of hyperphosphorylated intermediate ﬁlaments . Ubiquitination of intermediate ﬁlament proteins promotes intermediate ﬁlament turnover ; for example , increased K8 and K18 synthesis and phosphorylation predisposes these proteins to ubiquitination - dependent degradation ( Ku and Omary , 2000 ) . Thus , diﬀerent PTMs by themselves or in combination not only alter the intermediate ﬁlament organization but also inﬂuence the recruitment of intermediate ﬁlament accessory proteins , in a context dependent fashion which subsequently regulate various cellular processes . INTERMEDIATE FILAMENTS AND THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A CELLULAR ARCHITECTURAL FRAMEWORK Throughout development , cells both exert and are subject to an array of forces . These physical interactions are initiated not only by the extra - organismal environment , but also by neighboring cells and extracellular matrix . To maintain the integrity of multicellular tissues , cells must ( 1 ) avoid rupturing due to mechanical strain and ( 2 ) remain adherent to one another . Intermediate ﬁlaments have unique features that not only distinguish them from the other two cytoskeletal elements , actin and microtubules , but also make them major contributors in providing mechanical resistance to the cells ( Table 3 ) . The persistence length of intermediate ﬁlaments is much shorter than both actin microﬁlaments and microtubules , thus classifying them as ﬂexible polymers ( Gittes et al . , 1993 ; Mücke et al . , 2004 ; Schopferer et al . , 2009 ; Lichtenstern et al . , 2012 ; Nöding et al . , 2014 ; Pawelzyk et al . , 2014 ) . Cytoplasmic ﬁlaments along with being ﬂexible and elastic are also highly extensible and can be stretched ∼ 2 . 8 - fold without rupturing ( Kreplak et al . , 2005 ) . Microﬁlaments and microtubules are more fragile and tend to rupture at strains < 50 % ( Janmey et al . , 1991 ) . Furthermore , intermediate ﬁlaments exhibit strain - induced strengthening without catastrophic failure , making them very suitable as intracellular load bearing springs ( Ackbarow et al . , 2009 ; Pawelzyk et al . , 2014 ) . Both in vitro and in vivo analyses corroborate this conceptual model of intermediate ﬁlaments as important contributors to cells’ elasticity and tensile strength ( Janmey et al . , 1991 ; Ma et al . , 1999 ; Fudge et al . , 2008 ; Nolting et al . , 2015 ) . The dominant function of intermediate ﬁlaments in deﬁning cell stiﬀness is emphasized in keratinocytes devoid of the entire keratin cytoskeleton ( Ramms et al . , 2013 ; Seltmann et al . , 2013a ) . Indirect perturbation of cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments likewise has detrimental eﬀects on cell stiﬀness . Cells exposed to lipids such as sphingosylphosphorylcholine ( SPC ) , induce perinuclear reorganization of keratins through site - speciﬁc phosphorylation , leading to a marked decrease in the elastic modulus ( Beil et al . , 2003 ) . Studies using keratin mutants that either mimic or abrogate phosphorylation of Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 4 September 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 81 Sanghvi - Shah and Weber Intermediate Filaments in Mechanotransduction TABLE 3 | Comparison of the mechanical properties of cytoskeletal elements . Keratin intermediate ﬁlaments Vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments Actin ﬁlaments Microtubules Lp < L ( ﬂexible ) Lp ∼ L ( semi ﬂexible ) Lp > > L ( rigid ) Persistence length ( Lp ) 0 . 3 – 0 . 65 µ m Lichtenstern et al . , 2012 ; Pawelzyk et al . , 2014 0 . 4 - 2 µ m Mücke et al . , 2004 ; Schopferer et al . , 2009 ; Lin et al . , 2010 ; Nöding et al . , 2014 18 µ m Gittes et al . , 1993 1 , 000 – 5 , 000 µ m Gittes et al . , 1993 Contour length 10 – 20 µ m 10 – 20 µ m ≤ 1 µ m 5 – 15 µ m Extensibility ∼ 280 + % Kreplak et al . , 2005 ∼ 300 % Qin et al . , 2009 ∼ 20 % Janmey et al . , 1991 ∼ 200 % ( native stress ﬁbers ) Labouesse et al . , 2016 ∼ 50 % Janmey et al . , 1991 keratins at speciﬁc sites further underscore the importance of phosphorylation on the mechanical properties of intermediate ﬁlaments ( Fois et al . , 2013 ; Homberg et al . , 2015 ) . Although tensile strength is most often attributed to the keratin ﬁlaments present in epithelial cells , vimentin also contributes to structural integrity , such that cell stiﬀness is reduced in vimentin depleted or disrupted cells ( Wang and Stamenovi´c , 2000 ; Gladilin et al . , 2014 ; Sharma et al . , 2017 ) and stiﬀness is increased in cells overexpressing vimentin ( Liu et al . , 2015 ) . Vimentin further protects ﬁbroblasts against compressive strain ( Mendez et al . , 2014 ) . Along with maintaining the general mechanical integrity of the cytoplasmic volume , cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments are also vital determinants of intracellular organelle organization . Vimentin plays a critical role in inﬂuencing actin and Rac1 driven ( Dupin et al . , 2011 ; Matveeva et al . , 2015 ) localization of cytoplasmic organelles such as endoplasmic reticulum , Golgi complex , nucleus , and mitochondria ( Gao and Sztul , 2001 ; Nekrasova et al . , 2011 ; Guo et al . , 2013 ) . In Xenopus laevis , vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments form a cage around melanophores and are involved in their transport and localization at distinct sites within the cells ( Chang et al . , 2009 ) . Vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments are also involved in endoplasm spreading ( Lynch et al . , 2013 ) . Nuclear position and shape have emerged as important downstream outcomes of mechanical stimuli . Changes in nuclear position relative to other organelles can determine cell polarity , and modulation of nuclear shape inﬂuences gene expression and stability . Cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments physically link to the nuclear envelope via plectin ( an intermediate ﬁlament - interacting protein ) and SUN / nesprin complexes , also known as Linker of Nucleoskeleton and Cytoskeleton ( LINC ) complexes ( Wilhelmsen et al . , 2005 ; Ketema et al . , 2007 ; Burgstaller et al . , 2010 ) . Targeted deletion of nesprin - 3 or expression of dominant negative nesprin alters perinuclear intermediate ﬁlament organization , cell polarization , and migration ( Lombardi et al . , 2011 ; Morgan et al . , 2011 ; Postel et al . , 2011 ) . Plectin knockout or plectin mutations related to severe skin blistering disease ( epidermolysis bullosa simplex ) impair perinuclear keratin architecture , but not the linkages to the nucleus , nonetheless leading to misshapen nuclei and abnormal nuclear deformability ( Almeida et al . , 2015 ) . At the cell periphery , adhesions to neighboring cells and the surrounding extracellular matrix provide the interface with which cells interact . Intermediate ﬁlaments are most commonly known to be anchored to adjacent cells by desmosomes and to the extracellular matrix by hemidesmosomes . The classic view is that intermediate ﬁlaments simply provide internal scaﬀolding attachments to desmosome and hemidesmosome complexes , adhesive junctions that convey relatively long term associations between a cell and its environment . However , the association of keratin intermediate ﬁlaments with desmosomes and hemidesmosomes is also mechanistically supportive of the molecular adhesive complex . That is , keratin ﬁlaments can promote the formation and maintenance of desmosomes and hemidesmosomes ( Kröger et al . , 2013 ; Seltmann et al . , 2015 ; Loschke et al . , 2016 ) . Reciprocally , desmosomal adhesions act as organizing centers for de novo keratin network formation in native state tissues ( Jackson et al . , 1980 ; Schwarz et al . , 2015 ) . In addition to this classical view of intermediate ﬁlaments associating with hemidesmosomes and desmosomes , intermediate ﬁlaments interact with cell adhesions often inaccurately believed to be exclusively actin - linked , including junctions mediated by classical cadherins ( Kim et al . , 2005 ; Leonard et al . , 2008 ; Weber et al . , 2012 ) and focal adhesions ( Tsuruta and Jones , 2003 ; Windoﬀer et al . , 2006 ) . Association of the intermediate ﬁlaments with these otherwise actin - linked adhesions is bolstered in response to physical forces applied to these adhesions ( Tsuruta and Jones , 2003 ; Weber et al . , 2012 ) . As with desmosomes and hemidesmosomes , intermediate ﬁlaments modify the stability of actin - linked focal adhesions and classical cadherin adhesions . In endothelial cells , vimentin regulates the size and adhesive strength of focal adhesions ( Tsuruta and Jones , 2003 ; Bhattacharya et al . , 2009 ) . Vimentin is also implicated in the regulation of vesicular transport of integrin toward the cell membrane ( Ivaska et al . , 2005 ) . Intermediate ﬁlaments are physically linked to these various adhesion complexes . Vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments interact with integrins either directly with binding to β 3 integrin tail ( Kim et al . , 2016 ) or indirectly via linker proteins including plectin ( Bhattacharya et al . , 2009 ; Burgstaller et al . , 2010 ; Bouameur et al . , 2014 ) and BPAG ( bullous pemphigoid antigens 1 and 2 ) by forming dynamic linkages with plakin repeat domains ( Fogl et al . , 2016 ) . In X . laevis mesendoderm ( also known as anterior Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 5 September 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 81 Sanghvi - Shah and Weber Intermediate Filaments in Mechanotransduction head mesoderm ) cells , plakoglobin acts as recruitment signal for keratin intermediate ﬁlament association with cadherins ( Weber et al . , 2012 ) . Similarly , in endothelial cells p120 catenin recruits vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments to cadherins ( Kim et al . , 2005 ) . Both vimentin and keratin precursor assembly show dependence on focal adhesions as recruitment sites for motile precursors ( Burgstaller et al . , 2010 ) . Tethering of adhesion complexes to intermediate ﬁlaments presents an ideal circumstance wherein intermediate ﬁlaments can serve as mediators of both tension and the coincident signaling that we now know occurs as a function of these adhesions . Although intermediate ﬁlaments , microtubules and actin cytoskeletal networks are often viewed as three separate entities , these ﬁlamentous arrays cooperatively interact in more ways than not . Actin ﬁlaments and microtubules both have impacts on intermediate ﬁlament organization through multiple direct , indirect and steric interactions . Bidirectional motility of both mature ﬁlaments and their non - ﬁlamentous precursors of intermediate ﬁlaments can occur on either microtubules or actin microﬁlaments ( Prahlad et al . , 1998 ; Helfand et al . , 2002 ; Liovic et al . , 2003 ; Wöll et al . , 2005 ; Kölsch et al . , 2009 ; Hookway et al . , 2015 ) . The ﬁlament network used to transport intermediate ﬁlament precursors is entirely dependent on context . Neither keratin nor vimentin seems to be exclusively limited to microtubules or actin . Motility of intermediate ﬁlament precursors can be both fast and slow , in retrograde and anterograde . Although the mechanism of transport seems to be well - deﬁned in some cases ( e . g . , entirely dependent on actin or microtubules ) , deﬁning trends have yet to emerge that reliably predict a mechanism of transport for intermediate ﬁlaments . Actin ﬁlaments are essential to retrograde motility of keratin precursors in some epithelial cells ( Kölsch et al . , 2009 ) , yet actin cytoskeleton can restrict microtubule - dependent vimentin precursor movement , establishing a complex three - way cytoskeletal communication ( Robert et al . , 2014 ) . Perturbing either microtubules , microﬁlaments , or their associated molecular motors can lead to intermediate ﬁlament collapse ( Knapp et al . , 1983 ; Wöll et al . , 2005 ) . Absence of vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments alters the microtubule network orientation , thus suggesting a function of vimentin in organizing the cytoskeletal architecture necessary for cell polarity ( Shabbir et al . , 2014 ; Liu et al . , 2015 ) . In addition , vimentin ﬁlaments , but not “non - ﬁlamentous” vimentin negatively regulate actin stress ﬁber assembly and contractility ( Jiu et al . , 2017 ) . In vitro and in vivo studies have highlighted direct interactions between the tail domain of vimentin and actin ( Cary et al . , 1994 ; Esue et al . , 2006 ) . Furthermore , numerous cytoskeletal linkers have been identiﬁed that allow for indirect interaction among the cytoskeletal polymers . These proteins include plectin ( Svitkina et al . , 1996 ; Osmanagic - Myers et al . , 2015 ) , myosin ( Kölsch et al . , 2009 ; Robert et al . , 2014 ) , ﬁmbrin ( Correia et al . , 1999 ) , ﬁlamin A ( Kim et al . , 2010 ) , kinesin ( Prahlad et al . , 1998 ; Kreitzer et al . , 1999 ) , adenomatous polyposis coli ( APC ; Sakamoto et al . , 2013 ) , dynein , and dynactin ( Helfand et al . , 2002 ) . Along with distinct cytoskeletal entities interacting with one another , vimentin and keratin intermediate ﬁlament networks have been observed to interact at the helical 2B domain of vimentin , and mutations in this region negatively impact collective cell migration ( Velez - delValle et al . , 2016 ) . Some data suggest speciﬁc roles for each of the cytoskeletal networks in how a cell normally manages diﬀerent physical forces and stresses . And yet when systems are disrupted , cells often ﬁnd ways to compensate using the available “protein toolkit . ” Mechanical probing of ﬁbroblasts shows that actin contributes to cortical stiﬀness , whereas vimentin dominates cytoplasmic stiﬀness ( Guo et al . , 2013 ) . Disruption of vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments mandates that cells ﬁnd other ways of dealing with imposed forces . In some cases , cells compensate to accommodate self - generated forces by increasing actin stress ﬁbers and myosin activity to facilitate ECM substrate traction while exhibiting disruption of cell - cell adherens junctions ( Osmanagic - Myers et al . , 2015 ; Jiu et al . , 2017 ) . In response to increased externally - derived physical strain and mechanosensing of these forces , keratins can promote stress ﬁber formation and cell stiﬀness by activation of ROCK signaling pathway ( Bordeleau et al . , 2012 ) . These data illustrate great versatility in how cells use the cytoskeletal networks available to facilitate adhesion , cohesion , and balance intracellular tension and externally - derived stresses . In the context of the complex multicellular animal , keratin , and vimentin establish an important scaﬀolding framework inside the cell . Cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments enable the cells to resist deformation , localize organelles , change shape , and are integrally coupled to adhesion complexes ( Figure 1 ) . INTERMEDIATE FILAMENTS AND MODULATION OF SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION PATHWAYS Intriguingly , a wide range of ﬁndings suggest that functions of intermediate ﬁlaments extend well beyond the mechanical and structural to direct participation in signal transduction . Interactions between cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments and other cellular proteins initiate signaling cascades that regulate responses to process such as growth , migration , and apoptosis—all cellular processes fundamental to development and embryogenesis . Cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments diﬀerentially regulate cellular adhesions through eﬀecting signaling pathways . Vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments promote the formation , maturation , and adhesive strength of maturing focal adhesions ( Tsuruta and Jones , 2003 ; Bhattacharya et al . , 2009 ; Burgstaller et al . , 2010 ; Lynch et al . , 2013 ; Liu et al . , 2015 ) . Vimentin regulates VAV2 , a Rac1 GEF , phosphorylation , and localizes phosphorylated VAV2 to focal adhesions to promote Rac1 - mediated focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) stabilization , which further stabilizes focal adhesions ( Havel et al . , 2015 ) . PKC ε - mediated phosphorylation of vimentin governs eﬃcient β 1 - integrin recycling and motility ( Ivaska et al . , 2005 ) , whereas Cdc2 - mediated vimentin phosphorylation promotes β 1 - integrin activation , leading to FAK phosphorylation ( Chang et al . , 2012 ) . Likewise , keratins dynamically regulate focal adhesions through integrin / FAK - dependent signaling mediated either via PKC δ or Akt signaling ( Bordeleau et al . , 2010 ; Sankar et al . , 2013 ) . Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 6 September 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 81 Sanghvi - Shah and Weber Intermediate Filaments in Mechanotransduction FIGURE 1 | Interdependent network model of cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments as a centerpiece between mechanical stimuli and directional cell migration . External forces act on ( arrows ) adhesion molecules on the cell surface to impact a complex network of bidirectional interactions within the cell ( lines ) . Adhesions are linked to the three major cytoskeletal networks . Of these , actin with its myosin motors is the primary force - generating apparatus . Intermediate ﬁlaments can be pre - stressed by actomyosin generated tension . Intermediate ﬁlaments also act to resist strains imposed on the cell . Through modulation of cell signaling pathways , direct and indirect , intermediate ﬁlaments effect cell polarity and protrusive behavior . Stabilization of distinct subcellular locales promotes persistent directional migration . Reciprocally , during collective cell migration FAK is required for cadherin - dependent keratin intermediate ﬁlament organization ( Bjerke et al . , 2014 ) . Keratins display isotype - speciﬁc signaling functions and unique gene expression patterns of keratins can control stability and dynamics of adhesion complexes . For example , K5 / K14 inhibit PKC α - mediated phosphorylation of desmoplakin via RACK1 and thus promote stability and maintenance of desmosomal junctions ( Kröger et al . , 2013 ) . K6 similarly suppresses cell motility by sequestering Src from being activated and targeting focal adhesions ( Rotty and Coulombe , 2012 ) . In contrast , induction of K6 / K17 expression produces PKC α - mediated desmosome disassembly ( Loschke et al . , 2016 ) . Intermediate ﬁlaments are tightly coupled with signaling pathways to modulate cellular adhesions . An ever increasing number of studies implicate intermediate ﬁlaments as signaling platforms and as scaﬀolds for signaling proteins . In ﬁbroblasts , intermediate ﬁlament - associated plectin molecules sequester RACK1 on intermediate ﬁlaments to modulate PKC δ function ( Osmanagic - Myers and Wiche , 2004 ) . Similarly , in keratinocytes , plectin - mediated concentration of RACK1 further regulates ERK1 / 2 pathway ( Osmanagic - Myers et al . , 2006 ) . In HER2 positive tumors , a positive feedback loop exists which induces K19 expression via HER2 / ERK and further stabilizes HER2 on cell membrane by Akt mediated phosphorylation of K19 on Ser35 ( Ju et al . , 2015 ) . Keratin 19 is also involved in shuttling β - catenin / Rac1 complex into the nucleus and thus modulating NOTCH signaling pathway in breast cancers ( Saha et al . , 2017 ) . Collectively , these results support numerous scaﬀolding roles for keratin intermediate ﬁlaments . Vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments also function as scaﬀolds for ERK activation ( Kumar et al . , 2007 ) . An interesting positive feedback loop exists between vimentin and ROCK2 activation . Activation of ROCK2 causes intermediate ﬁlament collapse with simultaneous release of inactive ROCK2 . The released ROCK2 is translocated to the periphery where it gets activated again and acts on phosphorylated intermediate ﬁlaments ( Sin et al . , 1998 ) . The vimentin interacting protein Raf - 1 associated kinase in concert with other vimentin kinases induce extensive vimentin reorganization ( Janosch et al . , 2000 ) . It is well - known that intermediate ﬁlament architecture is reorganized in response to cell migration stimuli . α - Catulin , a scaﬀold for the ROCK signalosome ( Park et al . , 2002 ) , co - localizes with vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments and contributes to vascular endothelial cell migration ( Bear et al . , 2016 ) . In addition , vimentin ﬁlaments are also essential for VASP localization and phosphorylation by cGMP dependent kinase in endothelial cells ( Lund et al . , 2010 ) . Many studies have emphasized the contributions of polymerized intermediate ﬁlaments , but a novel role of soluble vimentin precursors has been proposed that is not necessarily related to biogenesis of intermediate ﬁlament network . Here , soluble vimentin molecules bind to importin - β and phosphorylated ERK and thus enable their retrograde transport in sensory axons ( Perlson et al . , 2005 , 2006 ) . Polymerized intermediate ﬁlaments can function as scaﬀolds while even intermediate ﬁlament precursors can play a role of adaptors to transport signaling molecules . Cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments can also serve as phosphate “sponges or sinks , ” with broad implications to all signal transduction events . In particular , their head and tail domain have been proposed to buﬀer excess kinase activity . Such hyperphosphorylation of intermediate ﬁlaments can be detrimental or advantageous for the cell depending on the biological context ( Lai et al . , 1993 ; Ku and Omary , 2006 ) . Phosphorylated cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments can also act as sequestering reservoirs to accommodate stress response or physiological processes . Both phospho - vimentin and keratin provide binding aﬃnity to sequester proteins like 14 - 3 - 3 and therefore limit their availability to other target proteins in order to regulate processes like mitosis and signal transduction ( Tzivion et al . , 2000 ; Kim et al . , 2006 ; Margolis et al . , 2006 ) . Cell proliferation and size are closely coupled to the binding of adaptor proteins and kinases to cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments serving as either molecular scaﬀolds or sequestration sinks . Perhaps the best example of phosphorylated intermediate ﬁlaments operating as docking sites for proteins is provided by members of the 14 - 3 - 3 protein family . Keratins and vimentin orchestrate the local interaction of 14 - 3 - 3 proteins with their multiple binding partners . 14 - 3 - 3 proteins bind keratin 18 ( K18 ) at Ser33 in a cell - cycle and phosphorylation - dependent fashion ( Ku et al . , 1998 ) and trigger keratin ﬁlament solubilization during hepatocyte mitotic progression ( Ku et al . , 2002 ) . K18 and 14 - 3 - 3 interaction is closely coupled to the association Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 7 September 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 81 Sanghvi - Shah and Weber Intermediate Filaments in Mechanotransduction of 14 - 3 - 3 proteins with a host of phosphorylated signaling molecules that are involved in mitotic progression , such as Raf1 kinase and Akt ( Deng et al . , 2012 ) . In the case of Raf , K8 / K18 ﬁlaments regulate cell signaling via the known K18 and 14 - 3 - 3 complex and recruitment of Raf1 kinase by 14 - 3 - 3 ( Ku et al . , 2004 ) . Similarly , phosphorylated vimentin also provides a binding sink for 14 - 3 - 3 adaptor proteins ( Tzivion et al . , 2000 ) . Physical interaction of K10 with Akt and atypical PKC ζ inhibits intracellular translocation of these kinases , thus modulating PI - 3 kinase signal transduction pathway and enabling K10 to function as a negative modulator cell cycle progression ( Paramio et al . , 2001 ) . K17 / 14 - 3 - 3 complex has the ability to stimulate Akt / mTOR signaling and inﬂuence epithelial cell growth and size by regulating protein synthesis ( Kim et al . , 2006 ) . Thus , phosphorylation of intermediate ﬁlaments has broad impacts to both intermediate ﬁlament polymerization status as well as modulation of cell signaling pathways . ROLE FOR INTERMEDIATE FILAMENTS IN MECHANOTRANSDUCTION Cellular mechanotransduction is an integration of multiple mechanical cues derived from sensing , transmission of force , and transduction into a biochemical response . There is extensive evidence that cell - cell , cell - ECM , and ﬂow forces are actively sensed in diﬀerent cellular contexts by the junctional protein complexes ( Riveline et al . , 2001 ; Weber et al . , 2012 ; Conway et al . , 2013 ) . Diﬀerent mechanical forces alter the structure , assembly , adhesive strength , function , and signaling of these adhesive complexes , which in turn has consequences to the cytoskeleton . Cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments behave as an elastic and conductive network to transmit force and propagate mechanical stimuli within and between cells via adhesion complexes . As we detailed above , cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments emerge as modulators of speciﬁc signal transduction pathways in a variety of biological contexts . Abundant availability , overall cytoplasmic presence and subcellular reorganization dependent on cellular context , allows the cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments to partake in various signaling pathways in a multitude of ways . Such a view presents cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments to be apt to transduce mechanical stimuli during development while integrating an ever changing physical environment with cell signaling ( Figure 1 ) . Fluid ﬂow shear stress plays important roles in the developing vasculature system . Perhaps more surprisingly ﬂuid ﬂow shear stress is also an important mechanical stimulus in tissues not often intuitively associated with exposure to ﬂuid ﬂow shear stresses , such as bone and glandular epithelia . Fluid ﬂow shear stress studies have shed some light on the role of intermediate ﬁlaments in mechanotransduction pathways . Cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments alter their network organization most likely by mechanisms such as conformational change , changes in assembly , PTMs and others . Mechanical forces such as shear stress can induce rapid reorganization of vimentin and keratin intermediate ﬁlament networks in various cell types , suggesting a role in spatial redistribution of intracellular force ( Helmke et al . , 2000 , 2001 ; Yoon et al . , 2001 ; Sivaramakrishnan et al . , 2008 ) . Shear stress increases the keratin intermediate ﬁlament network stiﬀness in the peripheral region of the cytoplasm ( Sivaramakrishnan et al . , 2008 ) . Shearing also dramatically transforms the keratin intermediate ﬁlaments into more “wavy” tonoﬁbril bundles , a process that is promoted by K8 and K18 phosphorylation on serine residues 73 and 33 , respectively ( Flitney et al . , 2009 ; Sivaramakrishnan et al . , 2009 ) . This phosphorylation dependent reorganization of intermediate ﬁlaments is regulated by a variety of protein kinases including PKC δ and PKC ζ ( Ridge et al . , 2005 ; Sivaramakrishnan et al . , 2009 ) . Phosphorylation of keratins in the regulatory head domain ( K18 pSer33 ) recruits binding of 14 - 3 - 3 , which allow for dynamic exchange and remodeling of the network ( Sivaramakrishnan et al . , 2009 ) . In order to control against hyperphosphorylation induced disruption , keratin intermediate ﬁlaments recruit epiplakin , which perhaps serves as a chaperone during ﬁlament reorganization ( Spazierer et al . , 2008 ) . In addition to the local deformation of the intermediate ﬁlaments , there is increased association of vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments with β 3 - integrin focal contacts , further stabilizing cell - matrix adhesions ( Tsuruta and Jones , 2003 ) . Similarly , in response to shear stress , endothelial cells trigger a transition from cell - cell adhesion loading on VE - cadherin to interaction of PECAM ( Platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule - 1 ) with vimentin to stabilize cell - cell junctions ( Conway et al . , 2013 ) . In this manner , mechanical loads may be transferred from one cytoskeletal network to another . Indeed keratin intermediate ﬁlaments exhibit less motion when actin - myosin II rigidity is increased , likely a consequence of stress generated by actomyosin being transmitted to pre - stress the keratin intermediate ﬁlament network ( Nolting and Koster , 2013 ) . Experimentally introduced physical forces , induced by optical tweezers and ﬁbronectin beads on epithelial cells , promote the modulation of both the K8 / K18 intermediate ﬁlaments and the actin network through Rho - ROCK pathway ( Bordeleau et al . , 2012 ) . Tensile forces reinforce stress ﬁbers by joint coordination between Solo protein a RhoA GEF and K8 / K18 intermediate ﬁlament network ( Fujiwara et al . , 2016 ) . Actin stress ﬁber assembly and contractility are likewise modulated by vimentin ﬁlament dependent regulation of RhoA and GEF - H1 ( RhoA GEF protein ; Jiu et al . , 2017 ) . Decoupling the intermediate ﬁlaments from the mechanotransduction pathway has revealed hitherto unrecognized roles of intermediate ﬁlaments in this process . For instance , cells with inhibited vimentin expression display reduced mechanical resistance to the eﬀects of ﬂow ( Tsuruta and Jones , 2003 ) . Likewise mutant keratin intermediate ﬁlament network is unable to withstand mechanical stress ( Ma et al . , 2001 ) , with marked reorganization of the ﬁlaments into discrete aggregates ( Russell et al . , 2004 ) . In the absence of vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments or their displaced anchorage due to loss of plectin , cells display compromised activation of FAK and its downstream targets Src , ERK1 / 2 , and p38 and thus impaired cell migration . Moreover , exploiting stress conditions in the absence of plectin , triggers prominent fragmentation of the intermediate ﬁlament network ( Gregor et al . , 2014 ) . In agreement with these ﬁndings , cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments perceive tension relayed Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 8 September 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 81 Sanghvi - Shah and Weber Intermediate Filaments in Mechanotransduction by the upstream mechanosensors and , in response , initiate rearrangements to function as stress buﬀers . How cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments sense tension remains poorly understood . A speculative possibility is that cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments alter their conformation or assembly upon stress to reveal cryptic sites crucial for sensing tension . For example , vimentin Cys327 site gets blocked under tension ( Johnson et al . , 2007 ; Pérez - Sala et al . , 2015 ) . Cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments of all types exhibit plasticity in their structural folding which may oﬀer both elasticity and potential for cryptic unmasking . These conformational changes in intermediate ﬁlament structure within the polymerized ﬁlament could have profound impacts to cell signaling as detailed earlier , and oﬀers a bridge between managing the physical architecture and biochemical signaling . INTERMEDIATE FILAMENTS AS DETERMINANTS OF MIGRATION With all of the above in mind , intermediate ﬁlaments must be considered as far more than just “intracellular rubberbands . ” Attention must be given to intermediate ﬁlaments’ polymerization state , connections to adhesions , and inﬂuence on signal transduction pathways . Like their actin and microtubule counterparts , intermediate ﬁlaments have profound inﬂuence over cellular functions , with migration being amongst the most dynamic . A traditional view of intermediate ﬁlaments , particularly keratins , is that their association with stable adhesions provides for a general inhibition of migratory potential . And indeed , depletion or mutation of keratin alters , often increasing , migration rates of cancer cells which is likely to contribute to metastasis ( Busch et al . , 2012 ) , aﬀect invasiveness ( Fortier et al . , 2013 ) , and wound healing ( Morley et al . , 2003 ) . Additionally , impaired directional migration has been observed in MCF - 7 , HeLa , and Panc - 1 epithelial cells lacking keratin expression ( Long et al . , 2006 ) . In contrast , upregulation of vimentin is seen during wound healing ( Eckes et al . , 1998 ; Gilles et al . , 1999 ; Rogel et al . , 2011 ; Menko et al . , 2014 ) and carcinoma invasion ( Dmello et al . , 2016 ) . In addition to being an often used general marker of epithelial - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) , vimentin has a direct role in the migratory phenotype of cells having undergone EMT ( Vuoriluoto et al . , 2011 ; Liu et al . , 2015 ) , and declining vimentin levels decrease motility during mesenchymal - epithelial transition ( MET ; Mendez et al . , 2010 ) . Furthermore , treatment of cells with diverse bioactive molecules such as withaferin A ( Grin et al . , 2012 ; Menko et al . , 2014 ) , acrylamide ( Eckert , 1985 ) , okadaic acid ( Strnad et al . , 2001 ) , orthovanadate ( Strnad et al . , 2002 ) , or sphingolipids ( Beil et al . , 2003 ; Hyder et al . , 2015 ) simultaneously disrupts cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlament arrays into to perinuclear collapse or soluble aggregates and alters the migration rates of cells . The aforementioned view of keratins as inhibiting migration and vimentin as promoting migration , while convenient , greatly oversimpliﬁes the actual role that intermediate ﬁlaments play in migration . In fact , some keratins , such as K14 , can promote cell migration , and their expression is correlated with both invasive carcinomas and migration during embryonic development ( Sun et al . , 2010 ; Cheung et al . , 2013 , 2016 ) . Still other keratins , like K19 , seem to have multiple functionalities that may greatly depend on the expression levels and more nuanced roles in modiﬁcation of signal transduction pathways ( Ohtsuka et al . , 2016 ; Saha et al . , 2017 ) . How then might intermediate ﬁlaments impact migration when they are doing more than simply resisting motility ? Diﬀerent modes of migration , whether random or directed , individual or collective , require the cytoskeleton to generate the structures that drive cell movement . Unique cytoskeletal structures determine and diﬀerentiate the protrusive cell front and a retracting rear . Akin to the diﬀerences that one sees in actin organization in the front vs . the back ( branched actin vs . contractile stress ﬁbers ) , it has become evident in recent years that cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments establish a similarly polarized cytoskeletal network that regulates motility of single migratory cells . Intermediate ﬁlaments extend through the rear and the perinuclear region of the cell , whereas vimentin particles are predominantly present in the lamellipodia ( Helfand et al . , 2011 ) . Consistent with this correlational observation , it has been shown that increased presence of vimentin particles precedes lamellipodia formation ( Helfand et al . , 2011 ) . Induced disruption of vimentin intermediate ﬁlament networks by microinjection of vimentin mimetic peptide ( 1A or 2B2 ) induces membrane ruﬄing at cell edges previously devoid of lamellipodia ( Goldman et al . , 1996 ; Helfand et al . , 2011 ) . Furthermore , non - ﬁlamentous vimentin or ULF’s were shown to be in close proximity with smaller FAs while stable vimentin ﬁlaments were in vicinity of large FAs ( Terriac et al . , 2017 ) . This suggests that assembly states of vimentin seems not only aﬀect lamellipodia formation but may also be involved in establishing the anisotropy of focal contacts and focal adhesions to modulate eﬃcient migration . Notably , roles for intermediate ﬁlaments in migration are not limited to vimentin . In isolated keratinocytes , keratin particles primarily reside in the lamellipodia and keratin intermediate ﬁlaments extend through the cell body to the trailing edge ( Kolega , 1986 ; Kolsch et al . , 2010 ) . Furthermore , these cells also exhibit asymmetric keratin dynamics , keratin particles prominently forming in the lamellipodia , further grow by elongation and fusion until integration into the peripheral network ( Kolsch et al . , 2010 ) . In some non - epithelial cells that express keratins such as mesodermal cells , the correlation between cell protrusive polarity and reorganization of keratin intermediate ﬁlament network remains ( Weber et al . , 2012 ) . In single multipolar mesodermal cells , lacking a deﬁnite protrusive polarity , keratin intermediate ﬁlaments span across the cell cytoplasm and yet are notably absent from protrusions ( Weber et al . , 2012 ) . It remains to be determined whether the location of the keratin ﬁlaments per - se is a determinant of protrusive activity . However , in support of this hypothesis computational models predict that lamellipodia formation occurs in the direction opposite to keratin network formation ( Kim et al . , 2012 ) . Keratins mediate stabilization of hemidesmosomes in some cells , and through promotion of these stable contacts , migration is inhibited ( Seltmann et al . , 2013b ) . However , not all Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 9 September 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 81 Sanghvi - Shah and Weber Intermediate Filaments in Mechanotransduction cells that express keratins , especially during development while tissues are still establishing themselves , make hemidesmosomes and / or desmosomes . The inﬂuence of intermediate ﬁlaments on migration may have as much to do with the types of adhesions with which they are associated ( focal contacts vs . hemidesmosomes ) as it does the intermediate ﬁlament subtype expressed ( vimentin vs . keratin ) . How do intermediate ﬁlaments guide migration when cells are moving cohesively ? Front - rear polarization depends on mechanical cues exerted at cell - cell junctions . Formation of adherens junctions , but not desmosomes , generates tensile stress in tissues ( Harris et al . , 2014 ) . Perturbing such intercellular contacts either by function blocking antibodies , chelation of calcium or protein knockdown , attenuates stresses mediated by classical cadherins and collective cell migration ( Ganz et al . , 2006 ; Bazellières et al . , 2015 ; Plutoni et al . , 2016 ) . Application of local tension on single mesodermal cells induces reorganization of the intermediate ﬁlaments at cell - cell adhesion sites via plakoglobin ( Weber et al . , 2012 ) , coincident with the induction of polarized cell protrusions and directional migratory behavior ( Toyoizumi and Takeuchi , 1995 ; Weber et al . , 2012 ) . Similarly , ex - vivo embryonic Xenopus tissue explants arrange keratin intermediate ﬁlaments in a manner similar to single cells under tension ( Weber et al . , 2012 ) . Reorganization of keratin cytoskeleton is also observed during epithelial sheet migration ( Long et al . , 2006 ) . Intercellular tissue tension also contributes to integrin mediated traction forces ( Dzamba et al . , 2009 ) ; and conversely , integrin - ﬁbronectin traction forces contribute to tissue tension and aﬀect cell - cell tension by increasing the size of cadherin mediated cell - cell adhesions ( Liu et al . , 2010 ; Maruthamuthu et al . , 2011 ) . Thus , both cell - cell and cell - ECM interactions establish physicomechanical guidance cues . Extending lamellipodia of repair cells of wound healing are frequently enriched with vimentin particles ( Menko et al . , 2014 ) . Likewise keratin particles are observed in the leading edge lamellipodia of epithelial cells ( Kolsch et al . , 2010 ) . Thus , intermediate ﬁlaments break the symmetry and are arranged in an asymmetrical array to support polarized migration . We argue that this asymmetry may facilitate establishment of diﬀerential front and rear microenvironments necessary for eﬃcient migration . The small GTPase Rac1 is a probable mechanism for the diﬀerential localization of cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments , and has direct implications to regulation of migration and polarity . Optimum levels of Rac1 play a critical role in protrusion formation to ensure directional cell migration ( Pankov et al . , 2005 ) . Spatial and temporal activation of Rac1 is suﬃcient to promote collective cell migration in diﬀerent models ( Theveneau et al . , 2010 ; Wang et al . , 2010 ; Yoo et al . , 2010 ) . Additionally , leader cells of the MDCK collectives not only show elevated levels of Rac1 , integrin β 1 , and PI3k , but also inhibition of any of these molecules disrupt the migratory phenotype . Activation of Rac1 which is downstream of integrin β 1 and PI3k drives the collective migration ( Yamaguchi et al . , 2015 ) . In single migratory ﬁbroblasts , local induction of Rac1 , promotes disassembly of vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments , locally inducing membrane ruﬄes , while the assembled ﬁlaments are maintained in the rear FIGURE 2 | Intermediate ﬁlaments and the establishment of cellular subdomains to drive directional migration . ( A ) Intermediate ﬁlaments exist in cells as monomer , ﬁlament precursors , and mature ﬁlaments . While mature intermediate ﬁlaments connect to cell adhesions , the nuclear lamina and span across the cell body , they are often notably absent from protrusions . Filament precursors are abundant in protrusions where Rac is active . ( B ) Tension ( red arrows ) on cell - cell adhesions recruits intermediate ﬁlaments . Persistent localization of intermediate ﬁlaments proximal to cell - cell adhesions may establish distinct non - protrusive Rac - inhibited zones . Areas of the cell with lesser tension on cell - cell contacts do not recruit intermediate ﬁlaments , creating Rac - permissive zones that promote protrusions that lead to directional migration ( blue arrow ) . Despite this subcellular localization , intermediate ﬁlaments remain dynamic through non - polar subunit exchange ( dashed arrow ) . ( C ) Stable cell - cell adhesions and the differential intercellular tension present across tissues may promote persistent collective cell migration behavior ( blue arrow ) . Intermediate ﬁlaments simultaneously maintain tissue integrity while inﬂuencing cell signaling pathways that determine cell polarity and protrusive behavior . ( Helfand et al . , 2011 ) . Rac1 activity is negatively regulated by cadherin ( Kitt and Nelson , 2011 ) and plakoglobin ( Todorovi´c et al . , 2010 ) , proteins which are both intermediate ﬁlament interacting molecules . These data suggest that cell - cell contacts may serve a mechanosensing and signaling function by stably recruiting intermediate ﬁlaments where they locally suppress Rac activity , and cell protrusions , at the posterior of collectively migrating cells ( Figure 2 ) . The antagonistic relationship between cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments and Rac1 may act as a mechanochemical switch that determines which of two mutually exclusive signaling states will occur . A similar switch exists between merlin and Rac1 . A negative feedback loop between merlin - Rac1 controls the protrusion promoting state in the front end of the cell and protrusion inhibiting state at the rear end of the cells ( Das et al . , 2015 ) . Stable cell - cell adhesions promote persistent directionality through this negative feedback loop ( Das et al . , 2015 ) . Interestingly both intermediate ﬁlaments and Merlin are associated with stable cadherin - mediated cell - cell contacts . Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 10 September 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 81 Sanghvi - Shah and Weber Intermediate Filaments in Mechanotransduction Perhaps future studies will ﬁnd a molecular mechanistic link given their common function in regulating polarity of collectively migrating cells . FUNCTIONAL ROLES FOR INTERMEDIATE FILAMENTS DURING DEVELOPMENT Elucidating the role of many cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments in embryonic development has proven to be challenging due to functional redundancy and complexity within the family . Targeted deletion of K18 failed to block embryonic development in mice because of the presence of K19 , demonstrating the functional redundancy within the protein family ( Magin et al . , 1998 ) . However , double K18 / K19 null mice display embryonic lethality due to disruption of the extraembryonic trophectoderm ( Hesse et al . , 2000 ) . Despite this dominant role in the extraembryonic tissue , various keratin knockouts have surprisingly mild developmental phenotypes considering the known roles intermediate ﬁlaments play in adhesion . Knockout of all Type II keratins ( KtyII − / − ) still produces an embryo that survives through neurulation and begins organogenesis ( Vijayaraj et al . , 2009 ) . Nonetheless it should be noted that there is a signiﬁcant delay in the early development of these KtyII − / − mice up to E8 . 5 that rapidly attempts to recover to E9 . 5 but ultimately ends in embryonic lethality ( Vijayaraj et al . , 2009 ) . Defects in speciﬁc tissues at later stages where keratins are expressed argues a role for keratins in late tissue morphogenesis , homeostasis and physiological function ( Bouameur and Magin , 2017 ) , but a role for keratins in early embryogenesis has largely remained elusive in mouse models . As with many of the keratin knockout mice , mice lacking vimentin surprisingly undergo embryonic development quite normally , however , exhibit impaired wound healing ( Eckes et al . , 2000 ) . In some cases , the role of cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments only becomes evident upon mechanical and / or chemical stresses ( Bouameur and Magin , 2017 ) . Genetic mouse models have yet to indicate a role for keratins or vimentin in early embryogenesis , but knockout mice have unequivocally revealed a deﬁnitive role for keratins in development and maintenance of skin ( Bär et al . , 2014 ; Kumar et al . , 2015 ) . The epidermal skin is broadly comprised of proliferative basal , stratiﬁed suprabasal , and terminally diﬀerentiated corniﬁed layers . Each of these layers expresses a unique combinations of Type I and II keratins . Additional keratins , such as K6 , K7 , K9 , K17 , K76 , have limited expression in the specialized epidermal regions like the palms and hair follicles . In line with prior data that hemidesmosomes and desmosomes provide for mechanical strength of skin , keratin knockout mice have severely fragile skin and the barrier function of the skin is compromised ( Bär et al . , 2014 ; Kumar et al . , 2015 ) . What is more , perturbation of keratin expression in these layers also results in the disruption of the homeostasis of the epidermis as it matures into distinct layers . Although functional redundancy may obscure the role of speciﬁc keratins ( Reichelt et al . , 2001 ; Reichelt and Magin , 2002 ) , dysregulation of cell proliferation is a common theme in several keratin knockouts ( e . g . , K7 − / − , K8 − / − , K9 − / − , K10 − / − ; Bouameur and Magin , 2017 ) . Keratins also coordinate cell growth and protein biosynthesis by accurate localization of GLUT - 1 and - 3 and consequentially optimize regulation of mTOR pathway as evidenced by keratin Type II knockout mice ( Vijayaraj et al . , 2009 ) . Collectively , these data point toward an important role for cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments in modulating cell growth and proliferation through their impact on cell signaling pathways . Cells migrate collectively in a coordinated manner to accomplish various tasks for development of the organism , from gametogenesis to morphogenesis to organogenesis . Collective cell migration allows whole groups of cells to move toward their ﬁnal destination most eﬃciently while maintaining tissue cohesivity and tissue - speciﬁc characteristics . All the while , these cells can transmit signals to each other and eﬀectively navigate the complex and changing environment within the developing embryo . Disruption of the keratin network in the amphibian embryo tells quite a diﬀerent story than mice about the importance of intermediate ﬁlaments in early embryogenesis . Disruption of keratin by either targeting protein expression ( Heasman et al . , 1992 ; Weber et al . , 2012 ) or ﬁlament assembly ( Klymkowsky et al . , 1992 ) impairs mesodermal involution and blastopore closure during gastrulation . Pointing to a role in collective migration events , polarized protrusive cell behavior of the mesoderm is lost in the absence of K8 expression in Xenopus embryos ( Weber et al . , 2012 ) . Collective cell movements are also perturbed in keratin mutant mice , albeit at stages of organogenesis and tissue maintenance . Vimentin plays a role in promoting stemness of mammary epithelial cells which provide the basis for mammary gland growth . Ductal outgrowth is signiﬁcantly delayed in mammary glands from vimentin knockout mice and the lumen is slightly enlarged ( Virtakoivu et al . , 2017 ) . Vimentin expression in stromal and basal epithelial layers is accompanied by expression of keratins in the basal ( K14 ) and luminal ( K8 / 18 ) layers of the mammary epithelia ( Sun et al . , 2010 ; Virtakoivu et al . , 2017 ) . Both populations of mammary cells are involved in the branching morphogenesis of the tissue . Live cell imaging studies have shown that K8 / 18 + mammary epithelial cells collectively migrate during this process ( Ewald et al . , 2008 ) and other studies have indicated a pro - migratory role of K14 expressing mammary cells in collective invasion at the epithelial - stromal boundary ( Cheung et al . , 2013 ) . Interestingly during the initial development of the mammary placode in the embryonic mouse , these invasive migratory cells express both K8 and K14 ( Sun et al . , 2010 ) . Only recently have selective promoters for basal mammary epithelial cells become available . It will be interesting to determine whether knockout of K14 and / or K8 functionally inhibits mammary development . Morphogenesis of epidermal and muscle tissue in Caenorhabditis elegans provides a particular elegant example of the interplay between intermediate ﬁlaments and mechanotransduction pathways during development . Muscle - generated tension within the epidermis induces recruitment of the adaptor protein GIT - 1 and its partner PIX - 1 , a Rac GEF , to hemidesmosomes ( Zhang et al . , 2011 ) . With PIX - 1 at the hemidesmosome , Rac is activated , which further Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 11 September 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 81 Sanghvi - Shah and Weber Intermediate Filaments in Mechanotransduction stimulates PAK - 1 activity and subsequent phosphorylation of intermediate ﬁlaments ( Zhang et al . , 2011 ) . Phosphorylation of intermediate ﬁlaments through this mechanism drives remodeling and maturation of the hemidesmosome and the associated intermediate ﬁlament network ( Zhang et al . , 2011 ) . Hemidesmosomes behave as mechanosensors that further relay the tension by activation of speciﬁc signaling pathway that promotes epithelial morphogenesis ( Zhang et al . , 2011 ) . Indeed , coordination between the epidermis and muscle cells is absolutely essential to epidermal morphogenesis that elongates the worm , and cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments are vital to this process ( Woo et al . , 2004 ) . Migration driven by cell - cell adhesions has roles very early in development , even as early as development of gametes . Tension sensing through E - cadherin plays a critical role in controlling directionality of migration of border cells in the Drosophila ovary ( Cai et al . , 2014 ) . As with many collectively migrating cells , asymmetric Rac activity also plays a key role in the steering of these migrating collectives ( Wang et al . , 2010 ; Yoo et al . , 2010 ) . For some time , cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments were believed to be absent from many non - chordates including arthropods . Recently however , it was found that the tropomyosin - 1 gene ( Tm1 ) produces a unique isoform , Tm1 - I / C , which has many cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlament - like characteristics , including the tripartite head - rod - tail structure and the ability to anneal end - to - end and spontaneously polymerize into ﬁlaments of similar diameter to intermediate ﬁlaments ( Cho et al . , 2016 ) . Knockdown of this Tm1 isoform impairs border cell migration , unlike knockdown of other Tm1 isoforms . Moreover , actin stress ﬁber organization is perturbed in cells lacking Tm1 - I / C , despite that Tm1 - I / C does not co - localize with actin ( Cho et al . , 2016 ) . While the inhibition of border cell migration in Tm1 - I / C knockdown cells could be entirely structurally related to facilitating adhesions and / or enabling protrusions , it certainly is appealing to speculate that Tm1 - I / C , like keratin and vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments , tethers to cell adhesions and allows for mechanotransduction between these adhesions and signaling mechanisms regulating cell protrusive behavior . WHAT IS NEXT FOR INTERMEDIATE FILAMENTS ? Intermediate ﬁlaments are the next frontier for understanding how cells cope with mechanical stimuli and integrate these signals with cellular function . Current data bolsters the notion that cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments provide a unique scaﬀolding framework that regulates major mechanotransduction events initiated through cellular adhesions . Moreover , intermediate ﬁlaments function in these mechanotransduction processes in a non - redundant manner that cannot be compensated by other cytoskeletal networks during development . New innovative methods will have to be devised to tackle the details of how intermediate ﬁlaments are regulated in terms of turnover , dynamic exchange , and other remodeling events in vivo . Although , various signaling pathway relationships to intermediate ﬁlaments have been found , the molecular mechanism by which intermediate ﬁlaments eﬀect signaling is not always clear . For a few proteins , direct interaction with intermediate ﬁlaments are known to exist . The next step will be to determine how strain on intermediate ﬁlaments impacts these binding partners and their activity and / or intermediate ﬁlament polymerization state . Subcellular compartmentalization of the diﬀerent intermediate ﬁlament polymerization states ( i . e . , intermediate ﬁlament proteins as ﬁlaments or particles ) is likely to have important consequences to the local cellular activity . Intermediate ﬁlament ﬁlaments and particles may form a diﬀerential composite network that , in coordination with the other cytoskeletal elements , endures and responds to changing physical parameters that cells experience during development . Signiﬁcant headway has been made to investigate the relationship between intermediate ﬁlaments and the actin and microtubule networks . Still , questions remain particularly related to the in vivo functionality of intermediate ﬁlament elasticity . If intermediate ﬁlaments cannot independently generate force because of the lack of associated motor proteins , is it possible for them to be pre - stressed by nearby actomyosin or microtubule - kinesin / dynein networks ? In this regard , intermediate ﬁlaments could store substantial potential energy and enable cell contractility through a non - actomyosin mechanism . Both actomyosin and intermediate ﬁlaments could work cooperatively as dynamic elastic components . Likewise , nuanced diﬀerences between various keratin proteins and vimentin in regulation , turnover rates , and mechanical properties are likely optimized for diﬀerent cell and tissue - speciﬁc functions . Intermediate ﬁlaments as elastic , but resilient , cytoskeletal structures may undergo conformational changes due to mechanical stresses that unmask cryptic binding sites within the polymerized ﬁlament . If great enough , these stresses might otherwise rupture a cell or another cytoskeletal component , but intermediate ﬁlaments are uniquely suited to cope with these greater forces . For cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments , they become a strain sensor - in essence , only permitting certain cell signaling events to occur when strain is applied . Developmental morphogenesis and cell migration are but two processes for which these signals would be important , yet important ones since dramatic tissue shaping occurs on a rapid timescale . As much as intermediate ﬁlaments have historically been touted as the keepers of cellular mechanical integrity , investigating them as dynamic components of cellular mechanosensor complexes is demanded . If we think about diﬀerent types of adhesions as an interdependent network , then perhaps we can confer a similar thought process to how we think about cytoskeletal networks . Given the coordination in localization , function , and integration with signal transduction pathways , our longstanding conceptual models of discrete adhesive structures with separate cytoskeletal networks may be long overdue for a re - thinking . As much as we have learned about the role of cell adhesions and actomyosin in force - induced signal transduction in the last decade , the potential exists for an equally robust phase of discovery about intermediate ﬁlaments and their role in mechanotransduction during development . Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 12 September 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 81 Sanghvi - Shah and Weber Intermediate Filaments in Mechanotransduction AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS RS and GW shared equally in the conceptual development , literature research , and writing of the manuscript . FUNDING This work was supported by grant HD084254 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development to GW and by a Rutgers University - Newark Dissertation Fellowship to RS . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank the members of the Weber laboratory , especially Shalaka Paranjpe , Richard Mariani , and Huri Mucahit , for helpful discussions leading to the production of this manuscript . REFERENCES Ackbarow , T . , Sen , D . , Thaulow , C . , and Buehler , M . J . ( 2009 ) . Alpha - helical protein networks are self - protective and ﬂaw - tolerant . PLoS ONE 4 : e6015 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0006015 Almeida , F . V . , Walko , G . , McMillan , J . R . , McGrath , J . A . , Wiche , G . , Barber , A . H . , et al . ( 2015 ) . The cytolinker plectin regulates nuclear mechanotransduction in keratinocytes . J . Cell Sci . 128 , 4475 – 4486 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 173435 Bär , J . , Kumar , V . , Roth , W . , Schwarz , N . , Richter , M . , Leube , R . E . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Skin fragility and impaired desmosomal adhesion in mice lacking all keratins . J . Invest . Dermatol . 134 , 1012 – 1022 . doi : 10 . 1038 / jid . 2013 . 416 Bazellières , E . , Conte , V . , Elosegui - Artola , A . , Serra - Picamal , X . , Bintanel - Morcillo , M . , Roca - Cusachs , P . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Control of cell - cell forces and collective cell dynamics by the intercellular adhesome . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 409 – 420 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3135 Bear , M . D . , Liu , T . , Abualkhair , S . , Ghamloush , M . A . , Hill , N . S . , Preston , I . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Alpha - catulin co - localizes with vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments and functions in pulmonary vascular endothelial cell migration via ROCK . J . Cell . Physiol . 231 , 934 – 943 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcp . 25185 Beil , M . , Micoulet , A . , vonWichert , G . , Paschke , S . , Walther , P . , Omary , M . B . , etal . ( 2003 ) . Sphingosylphosphorylcholine regulates keratin network architecture and visco - elastic properties of human cancer cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 803 – 811 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1037 Bhattacharya , R . , Gonzalez , A . M . , DeBiase , P . J . , Trejo , H . E . , Goldman , R . D . , Flitney , F . W . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Recruitment of vimentin to the cell surface by β 3 integrin and plectin mediates adhesion strength . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 1390 – 1400 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 043042 Bjerke , M . A . , Dzamba , B . , Wang , C . , andDeSimone , D . W . ( 2014 ) . FAKisrequired for tension - dependent organization of collective cell movements in Xenopus mesendoderm . Dev . Biol . 394 , 1 – 17 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ydbio . 2014 . 07 . 023 Blikstad , I . , and Lazarides , E . ( 1983 ) . Vimentin ﬁlaments are assembled from a soluble precursor in avian erythroid cells . J . Cell Biol . 96 , 1803 – 1808 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 96 . 6 . 1803 Bordeleau , F . , Galarneau , L . , Gilbert , S . , Loranger , A . , and Marceau , N . ( 2010 ) . Keratin 8 / 18 modulation of protein kinase C - mediated Integrin - dependent adhesion and migration of liver epithelial cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 , 1698 – 1713 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E09 - 05 - 0373 Bordeleau , F . , Lapierre , M . E . , Sheng , Y . , and Marceau , N . ( 2012 ) . Keratin 8 / 18 regulation of cell stiﬀness - extracellular matrix interplay through modulation of rho - mediated actin cytoskeleton dynamics . PLoS ONE 7 : e38780 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0038780 Bouameur , J . - E . , and Magin , T . M . ( 2017 ) . Lessons from animal models of cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlament proteins . Subcell . Biochem . 82 , 171 – 230 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 49674 - 0 _ 7 Bouameur , J . - E . , Favre , B . , Fontao , L . , Lingasamy , P . , Begré , N . , and Borradori , L . ( 2014 ) . Interaction of plectin with keratins 5 and 14 : dependence on several plectin domains and keratin quaternary structure . J . Invest . Dermatol . 134 , 2776 – 2783 . doi : 10 . 1038 / jid . 2014 . 255 Burgstaller , G . , Gregor , M . , Winter , L . , and Wiche , G . ( 2010 ) . Keeping the vimentin network under control : cell - matrix adhesion - associated plectin 1f aﬀects cell shape and polarity of ﬁbroblasts . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 , 3362 – 3375 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E10 - 02 - 0094 Busch , T . , Armacki , M . , Eiseler , T . , Joodi , G . , Temme , C . , Jansen , J . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Keratin 8 phosphorylation regulates keratin reorganization and migration of epithelial tumor cells . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 2148 – 2159 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 080127 Cai , D . , Chen , S . C . , Prasad , M . , He , L . , Wang , X . , Choesmel - Cadamuro , V . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Mechanical feedback through E - cadherin promotes direction sensing during collective cell migration . Cell 157 , 1146 – 1159 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 03 . 045 Cary , R . B . , Klymkowsky , M . W . , Evans , R . M . , Domingo , A , Dent , J . , A , and Backhus , L . E . ( 1994 ) . Vimentin’s tail interacts with actin - containing structures in vivo . J . Cell Sci . 107 ( Pt 6 ) , 1609 – 1622 . Chang , I . A . , Oh , M . - J . , Kim , M . H . , Park , S . - K . , Kim , B . G . , and Namgung , U . ( 2012 ) . Vimentin phosphorylation by Cdc2 in Schwann cell controls axon growth via β 1 - integrin activation . FASEB J . 26 , 2401 – 2413 . doi : 10 . 1096 / fj . 11 - 199018 Chang , L . , Barlan , K . , Chou , Y . - H . , Grin , B . , Lakonishok , M . , Serpinskaya , A . S . , etal . ( 2009 ) . Thedynamicpropertiesofintermediateﬁlamentsduringorganelle transport . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 2914 – 2923 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 046789 Chernyatina , A . A . , Nicolet , S . , Aebi , U . , Herrmann , H . , and Strelkov , S . V . ( 2012 ) . Atomic structure of the vimentin central alpha - helical domain and its implications for intermediate ﬁlament assembly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 109 , 13620 – 13625 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1206836109 Cheung , K . J . , Gabrielson , E . , Werb , Z . , and Ewald , A . J . ( 2013 ) . Collective invasion in breast cancer requires a conserved basal epithelial program . Cell 155 , 1639 – 1651 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 11 . 029 Cheung , K . J . , Padmanaban , V . , Silvestri , V . , Schipper , K . , Cohen , J . D . , Fairchild , A . N . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Polyclonal breast cancer metastases arise from collective disseminationofkeratin14 - expressingtumorcellclusters . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 113 , E854 – E863 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1508541113 Cho , A . , Kato , M . , Whitwam , T . , Kim , J . H . , and Montell , D . J . ( 2016 ) . An atypical tropomyosin in Drosophila with intermediate ﬁlament - like properties . Cell Rep . 16 , 928 – 938 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2016 . 06 . 054 Chou , Y . , Ngai , K . , and Goldman , R . ( 1991 ) . The regulation of intermediate ﬁlament reorganization in mitosis . J . Biol . Chem . 266 , 7325 – 7328 . Coleman , T . R . , andLazarides , E . ( 1992 ) . Continuousgrowthofvimentinﬁlaments in mouse ﬁbroblasts . J . Cell Sci . 103 ( Pt 3 ) , 689 – 698 . Conway , D . E . , Breckenridge , M . T . , Hinde , E . , Gratton , E . , Chen , C . S . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2013 ) . Fluid shear stress on endothelial cells modulates mechanical tension across VE - cadherin and PECAM - 1 . Curr . Biol . 23 , 1024 – 1030 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 04 . 049 Correia , I . , Chu , D . , Chou , Y . H . , Goldman , R . D . , and Matsudaira , P . ( 1999 ) . Integrating the actin and vimentin cytoskeletons : adhesion - dependent formation of ﬁmbrin - vimentin complexes in macrophages . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 831 – 842 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 146 . 4 . 831 Das , T . , Saﬀerling , K . , Rausch , S . , Grabe , N . , Boehm , H . , and Spatz , J . P . ( 2015 ) . A molecular mechanotransduction pathway regulates collective migration of epithelial cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 , 276 – 287 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3115 Deng , M . , Zhang , W . , Tang , H . , Ye , Q . , Liao , Q . , Zhou , Y . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Lactotransferrin acts as a tumor suppressor in nasopharyngeal carcinoma by repressing AKT through multiple mechanisms . Oncogene 32 , 4273 – 4283 . doi : 10 . 1038 / onc . 2012 . 434 Dmello , C . , Sawant , S . , Alam , H . , Gangadaran , P . , Tiwari , R . , Dongre , H . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Vimentin - mediated regulation of cell motility through modulation of beta4 integrin protein levels in oral tumor derived cells . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 70 , 161 – 172 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . biocel . 2015 . 11 . 015 Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 13 September 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 81 Sanghvi - Shah and Weber Intermediate Filaments in Mechanotransduction Dodemont , H . , and Riemer , D . ( 1990 ) . Structure of an invertebrate gene encoding cytoplasmicintermediateﬁlament ( IF ) proteins : implicationsfortheoriginand the diversiﬁcation of IF proteins . EMBO J . 9 , 4083 – 4094 . Döring , V . , and Stick , R . ( 1990 ) . Gene structure of nuclear lamin LIII of Xenopus laevis ; a model for the evolution of IF proteins from a lamin - like ancestor . EMBO J . 9 , 4073 – 4081 . Dupin , I . , Sakamoto , Y . , and Etienne - Manneville , S . ( 2011 ) . Cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments mediate actin - driven positioning of the nucleus . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 865 – 872 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 076356 Dzamba , B . J . , Jakab , K . R . , Marsden , M . , Schwartz , M . A . , and DeSimone , D . W . ( 2009 ) . Cadherin adhesion , tissue tension , and noncanonical Wnt signaling regulate ﬁbronectin matrix organization . Dev . Cell 16 , 421 – 432 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 01 . 008 Eckert , B . ( 1985 ) . Alteration of intermediate ﬁlament distribution in PtK1 cells by acrylamide . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 37 , 169 – 174 . Eckes , B . , Colucci - Guyon , E . , Smola , H . , Nodder , S . , Babinet , C . , Krieg , T . , et al . ( 2000 ) . Impairedwoundhealinginembryonicandadultmicelackingvimentin . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 2455 – 2462 . Eckes , B . , Dogic , D . , Colucci - Guyon , E . , Wang , N . , Maniotis , A . , Ingber , D . , et al . ( 1998 ) . Impaired mechanical stability , migration and contractile capacity in vimentin - deﬁcient ﬁbroblasts . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 1897 – 1907 . Esue , O . , Carson , A . A . , Tseng , Y . , and Wirtz , D . ( 2006 ) . A direct interaction between actin and vimentin ﬁlaments mediated by the tail domain of vimentin . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 30393 – 30399 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M605452200 Ewald , A . J . , Brenot , A . , Duong , M . , Chan , B . S . , and Werb , Z . ( 2008 ) . Collective epithelial migration and cell rearrangements drive mammary branching morphogenesis . Dev . Cell 14 , 570 – 581 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2008 . 03 . 003 Flitney , E . W . , Kuczmarski , E . R . , Adam , S . A . , andGoldman , R . D . ( 2009 ) . Insights into the mechanical properties of epithelial cells : the eﬀects of shear stress on the assembly and remodeling of keratin intermediate ﬁlaments . FASEB J . 23 , 2110 – 2119 . doi : 10 . 1096 / fj . 08 - 124453 Fogl , C . , Mohammed , F . , Al - Jassar , C . , Jeeves , M . , Knowles , T . J . , Rodriguez - Zamora , P . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Mechanism of intermediate ﬁlament recognition by plakin repeat domains revealed by envoplakin targeting of vimentin . Nat . Commun . 7 : 10827 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms10827 Fois , G . , Weimer , M . , Busch , T . , Felder , E . T . , Oswald , F . , Von Wichert , G . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Eﬀects of keratin phosphorylation on the mechanical properties of keratin ﬁlaments in living cells . FASEB J . 27 , 1322 – 1329 . doi : 10 . 1096 / fj . 12 - 215632 Fortier , A . M . , Asselin , E . , and Cadrin , M . ( 2013 ) . Keratin 8 and 18 loss in epithelial cancer cells increases collective cell migration and cisplatin sensitivity through claudin1 up - regulation . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 11555 – 11571 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M112 . 428920 Franke , W . W . , Schmid , E . , Osborn , M . , and Weber , K . ( 1978a ) . Diﬀerent intermediate - sized ﬁlaments distinguished by immunoﬂuorescence microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 75 , 5034 – 5038 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 75 . 10 . 5034 Franke , W . W . , Weber , K . , Osborn , M . , Schmid , E . , and Freudenstein , C . ( 1978b ) . Antibody to prekeratin . Decoration of tonoﬁlament - like arrays in various cells of epithelial character . Exp . Cell Res . 116 , 429 – 445 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0014 - 4827 ( 78 ) 90466 - 4 Franke , W . , Schiller , D . , Schmid , R . , and Engelbrecht , I . ( 1981 ) . Diversity of cytokeratins . J . Mol . Biol . 153 , 933 – 959 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0022 - 2836 ( 81 ) 90460 - 5 Franz , J . K . , Gall , L . , Williams , M . A . , Picheral , B . , and Franke , W . W . ( 1983 ) . Intermediate - size ﬁlaments in a germ cell : expression of cytokeratins in oocytes and eggs of the frog Xenopus . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 80 , 6254 – 6258 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 80 . 20 . 6254 Fudge , D . , Russell , D . , Beriault , D . , Moore , W . , Lane , E . B . , and Vogl , A . W . ( 2008 ) . The intermediate ﬁlament network in cultured human keratinocytes is remarkably extensible and resilient . PLoS ONE 3 : e2327 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0002327 Fujiwara , S . , Ohashi , K . , Mashiko , T . , Kondo , H . , and Mizuno , K . ( 2016 ) . Interplay between Solo and keratin ﬁlaments is crucial for mechanical force - induced stress ﬁber reinforcement . Mol . Biol . Cell 58 , 7250 – 7257 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E15 - 06 - 0417 Ganz , A . , Lambert , M . , Saez , A . , Silberzan , P . , Buguin , A . , Mège , R . M . , etal . ( 2006 ) . Traction forces exerted through N - cadherin contacts . Biol . Cell 98 , 721 – 730 . doi : 10 . 1042 / BC20060039 Gao , Y . S . , and Sztul , E . ( 2001 ) . A novel interaction of the Golgi complex with the vimentin intermediate ﬁlament cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 152 , 877 – 893 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 152 . 5 . 877 Geisler , N . , and Weber , K . ( 1982 ) . The amino acid sequence of chicken muscle desmin provides a common structural model for intermediate ﬁlament proteins . EMBO J . 1 , 1649 – 1656 . Gilles , C . , Polette , M . , Zahm , J . M . , Tournier , J . M . , Volders , L . , Foidart , J . M . , et al . ( 1999 ) . Vimentin contributes to human mammary epithelial cell migration . J . Cell Sci . 112 ( Pt 2 ) , 4615 – 4625 . Gittes , F . , Mickey , B . , Nettleton , J . , and Howard , J . ( 1993 ) . Flexural rigidity of microtubules and actin ﬁlaments measured from thermal ﬂuctuations in shape . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 923 – 934 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 120 . 4 . 923 Gladilin , E . , Gonzalez , P . , and Eils , R . ( 2014 ) . Dissecting the contribution of actin and vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments to mechanical phenotype of suspended cells using high - throughput deformability measurements and computational modeling . J . Biomech . 47 , 2598 – 2605 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jbiomech . 2014 . 05 . 020 Goldman , R . D . , Goldman , A . E . , Green , K . J . , Jones , J . C . , Jones , S . M . , and Yang , H . - Y . ( 1986 ) . Intermediate ﬁlament networks : organization and possible functions of a diverse group of cytoskeletal elements . J . Cell Sci . Suppl . 5 , 69 – 97 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 1986 . Supplement _ 5 . 5 Goldman , R . D . , Khuon , S . , Chou , Y . H . , Opal , P . , and Steinert , P . M . ( 1996 ) . The functionofintermediateﬁlamentsincellshapeandcytoskeletalintegrity . J . Cell Biol . 134 , 971 – 983 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 134 . 4 . 971 Goulielmos , G . , Gounari , F . , Remington , S . , Müller , S . , Häner , M . , Aebi , U . , et al . ( 1996 ) . Filensin and phakinin form a novel type of beaded intermediate ﬁlaments and coassemble de novo in cultured cells . J . Cell Biol . 132 , 643 – 655 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 132 . 4 . 643 Gregor , M . , Osmanagic - Myers , S . , Burgstaller , G . , Wolfram , M . , Fischer , I . , Walko , G . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Mechanosensing through focal adhesion - anchored intermediate ﬁlaments . FASEB J . 28 , 715 – 729 . doi : 10 . 1096 / fj . 13 - 231829 Grin , B . , Mahammad , S . , Wedig , T . , Cleland , M . M . , Tsai , L . , Herrmann , H . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Withaferin A alters intermediate ﬁlament organization , cell shape and behavior . PLoS ONE 7 : e39065 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0039065 Guo , M . , Ehrlicher , A . J . , Mahammad , S . , Fabich , H . , Jensen , M . H . , Moore , J . R . , et al . ( 2013 ) . The role of vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments in cortical and cytoplasmic mechanics . Biophys . J . 105 , 1562 – 1568 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2013 . 08 . 037 Harris , A . R . , Daeden , A . , and Charras , G . T . ( 2014 ) . Formation of adherens junctions leads to the emergence of a tissue - level tension in epithelial monolayers . J . Cell Sci . 127 , 2507 – 2517 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 142349 Hatzfeld , M . , and Franke , W . W . ( 1985 ) . Pair formation and promiscuity of cytokeratins : formation in vitro of heterotypic complexes and intermediate - sized ﬁlaments by homologous and heterologous recombinations of puriﬁed polypeptides . J . Cell Biol . 101 , 1826 – 1841 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 101 . 5 . 1826 Havel , L . S . , Kline , E . R . , Salgueiro , A . M . , and Marcus , A . I . ( 2015 ) . Vimentin regulates lung cancer cell adhesion through a VAV2 - Rac1 pathway to control focal adhesion kinase activity . Oncogene 34 , 1979 – 1990 . doi : 10 . 1038 / onc . 2014 . 123 Heasman , J . , Torpey , N . , andWylie , C . ( 1992 ) . Theroleofintermediateﬁlamentsin early Xenopus development studied by antisense depletion of maternal mRNA . Dev . Suppl . 125 , 119 – 125 . Helfand , B . T . , Mendez , M . G . , Murthy , S . N . P . , Shumaker , D . K . , Grin , B . , Mahammad , S . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Vimentin organization modulates the formation of lamellipodia . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 , 1274 – 1289 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E10 - 08 - 0699 Helfand , B . T . , Mikami , A . , Vallee , R . B . , and Goldman , R . D . ( 2002 ) . A requirement for cytoplasmic dynein and dynactin in intermediate ﬁlament network assembly and organization . J . Cell Biol . 157 , 795 – 806 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200202027 Helmke , B . P . , Goldman , R . D . , and Davies , P . F . ( 2000 ) . Rapid displacement of vimentinintermediateﬁlamentsinlivingendothelialcellsexposedtoﬂow . Circ . Res . 86 , 745 – 752 . doi : 10 . 1161 / 01 . RES . 86 . 7 . 745 Helmke , B . P . , Thakker , D . B . , Goldman , R . D . , and Davies , P . F . ( 2001 ) . Spatiotemporal analysis of ﬂow - induced intermediate ﬁlament displacement in living endothelial cells . Biophys . J . 80 , 184 – 194 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0006 - 3495 ( 01 ) 76006 - 7 Hering , L . , Bouameur , J . E . , Reichelt , J . , Magin , T . M . , and Mayer , G . ( 2016 ) . Novel origin of lamin - derived cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlaments in tardigrades . Elife 5 : e11117 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 11117 Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 14 September 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 81 Sanghvi - Shah and Weber Intermediate Filaments in Mechanotransduction Herrmann , H . , and Strelkov , S . V . ( 2011 ) . History and phylogeny of intermediate ﬁlaments : now in insects . BMC Biol . 9 : 16 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1741 - 7007 - 9 - 16 Herrmann , H . , Häner , M . , Brettel , M . , Ku , N . O . , and Aebi , U . ( 1999 ) . Characterization of distinct early assembly units of diﬀerent intermediate ﬁlament proteins . J . Mol . Biol . 286 , 1403 – 1420 . doi : 10 . 1006 / jmbi . 1999 . 2528 Herrmann , H . , Häner , M . , Brettel , M . , Müller , S . A . , Goldie , K . N . , Fedtke , B . , et al . ( 1996 ) . Structure and assembly properties of the intermediate ﬁlament protein vimentin : the role of its head , rod and tail domains . J . Mol . Biol . 264 , 933 – 953 . doi : 10 . 1006 / jmbi . 1996 . 0688 Herrmann , H . , Kreplak , L . , and Aebi , U . ( 2004 ) . Isolation , characterization , and in vitro assembly of intermediate ﬁlaments . Methods Cell Biol . 78 , 3 – 24 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0091 - 679X ( 04 ) 78001 - 2 Hesse , M . , Franz , T . , Tamai , Y . , Taketo , M . M . , and Magin , T . M . ( 2000 ) . Targeted deletion of keratins 18and19leads totrophoblast fragility andearly embryonic lethality . EMBO J . 19 , 5060 – 5070 . doi : 10 . 1093 / emboj / 19 . 19 . 5060 Hesse , M . , Magin , T . M . , and Weber , K . ( 2001 ) . Genes for intermediate ﬁlament proteins and the draft sequence of the human genome : novel keratin genes and a surprisingly high number of pseudogenes related to keratin genes 8 and 18 . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 2569 – 2575 . Ho , C . L . , Martys , J . L . , Mikhailov , A . , Gundersen , G . G . , and Liem , R . K . ( 1998 ) . Novel features of intermediate ﬁlament dynamics revealed by green ﬂuorescent protein chimeras . J . Cell Sci . 111 ( Pt 1 ) , 1767 – 1778 . Homberg , M . , Ramms , L . , Schwarz , N . , Dreissen , G . , Leube , R . E . , Merkel , R . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Distinct impact of two keratin mutations causing epidermolysis bullosa simplex on keratinocyte adhesion and stiﬀness . J . Invest . Dermatol . 135 , 1 – 29 . doi : 10 . 1038 / jid . 2015 . 184 Hookway , C . , Ding , L . , Davidson , M . W . , Rappoport , J . Z . , Danuser , G . , and Gelfand , V . I . ( 2015 ) . Microtubule - dependent transport and dynamics of vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments . Mol . Biol . Cell 26 , 1675 – 1686 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E14 - 09 - 1398 Hyder , C . L . , Kemppainen , K . , Isoniemi , K . O . , Imanishi , S . Y . , Goto , H . , Inagaki , M . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Sphingolipids inhibit vimentin - dependent cell migration . J . Cell Sci . 128 , 2057 – 2069 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 160341 Ivaska , J . , Vuoriluoto , K . , Huovinen , T . , Izawa , I . , Inagaki , M . , and Parker , P . J . ( 2005 ) . PKCepsilon - mediated phosphorylation of vimentin controls integrin recycling and motility . EMBO J . 24 , 3834 – 3845 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . emboj . 7600847 Jackson , B . W . , Grund , C . , Schmid , E . , Bürki , K . , Franke , W . W . , and Illmensee , K . ( 1980 ) . Formation of cytoskeletal elements during mouse embryogenesis . Intermediate ﬁlaments of the cytokeratin type and desmosomes in preimplantation embryos . Diﬀerentiation 17 , 161 – 179 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1432 - 0436 . 1980 . tb01093 . x Janmey , P . A . , Euteneuer , U . , Traub , P . , and Schliwa , M . ( 1991 ) . Viscoelastic properties of vimentin compared with other ﬁlamentous biopolymer networks . J . Cell Biol . 113 , 155 – 160 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 113 . 1 . 155 Janosch , P . , Kieser , A . , Eulitz , M . , Lovric , J . , Sauer , G . , Reichert , M . , et al . ( 2000 ) . The Raf - 1 kinase associates with vimentin kinases and regulates the structure of vimentin ﬁlaments . FASEB J . 14 , 2008 – 2021 . doi : 10 . 1096 / fj . 99 - 0883com Jiu , Y . , Peränen , J . , Schaible , N . , Cheng , F . , and Eriksson , J . E . ( 2017 ) . Vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments control actin stress ﬁber assembly through GEF - H1 and RhoA . J . Cell Sci . 130 , 892 – 902 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 196881 Johnson , C . P . , Tang , H . - Y . , Carag , C . , Speicher , D . W . , and Discher , D . E . ( 2007 ) . Forced unfolding of proteins within cells . Science 317 , 663 – 666 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1139857 Ju , J . - H . , Oh , S . , Lee , K . - M . , Yang , W . , Nam , K . S . , Moon , H . - G . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Cytokeratin19 induced by HER2 / ERK binds and stabilizes HER2 on cell membranes . Cell Death Diﬀer . 22 , 665 – 676 . doi : 10 . 1038 / cdd . 2014 . 155 Karabinos , A . , Zimek , A . , and Weber , K . ( 2004 ) . The genome of the early chordate Ciona intestinalis encodes only ﬁve cytoplasmic intermediate ﬁlament proteins including a single type I and type II keratin and a unique IF - annexin fusion protein . Gene 326 , 123 – 129 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . gene . 2003 . 10 . 019 Kayser , J . , Haslbeck , M . , Dempﬂe , L . , Krause , M . , Grashoﬀ , C . , Buchner , J . , et al . ( 2013 ) . The small heat shock protein Hsp27 aﬀects assembly dynamics and structureofkeratinintermediateﬁlamentnetworks . Biophys . J . 105 , 1778 – 1785 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2013 . 09 . 007 Ketema , M . , Wilhelmsen , K . , Kuikman , I . , Janssen , H . , Hodzic , D . , and Sonnenberg , A . ( 2007 ) . Requirements for the localization of nesprin - 3 at the nuclear envelope and its interaction with plectin . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 3384 – 3394 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 014191 Kim , H . , Nakamura , F . , Lee , W . , Shifrin , Y . , Arora , P . , McCulloch , C . A . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Filamin A is required for vimentin - mediated cell adhesion and spreading . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 298 , 221 – 236 . doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00323 . 2009 Kim , J . S . , Lee , C . H . , Su , B . Y . , andCoulombe , P . A . ( 2012 ) . Mathematicalmodeling of the impact of actin and keratin ﬁlaments on keratinocyte cell spreading . Biophys . J . 103 , 1828 – 1838 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2012 . 09 . 016 Kim , J . , Yang , C . , Kim , E . J . , Jang , J . , Kim , S . - J . , Kang , S . M . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Vimentin ﬁlaments regulate integrin - ligand interactions by binding to the cytoplasmic tail of integrin β 3 . J . Cell Sci . 129 , 2030 – 2042 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 180315 Kim , S . , Wong , P . , and Coulombe , P . , a ( 2006 ) . A keratin cytoskeletal protein regulates protein synthesis and epithelial cell growth . Nature 441 , 362 – 365 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature04659 Kim , Y . J . , Sauer , C . , Testa , K . , Wahl , J . K . , Svoboda , R . A . , Johnson , K . R . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Modulating the strength of cadherin adhesion : evidence for a novel adhesion complex . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 3883 – 3894 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 02508 Kirmse , R . , Portet , S . , Mücke , N . , Aebi , U . , Herrmann , H . , and Langowski , J . ( 2007 ) . A quantitative kinetic model for the in vitro assembly of intermediate ﬁlaments from tetrameric vimentin . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 18563 – 18572 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M701063200 Kitt , K . N . , and Nelson , W . J . ( 2011 ) . Rapid suppression of activated Rac1 by cadherins and nectins during de novo cell - cell adhesion . PLoS ONE 6 : e17841 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0017841 Klymkowsky , M . W . , Shook , D . R . , and Maynell , L . A . ( 1992 ) . Evidence that the deep keratin ﬁlament systems of the Xenopus embryo act to ensure normal gastrulation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 89 , 8736 – 8740 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 89 . 18 . 8736 Knapp , L . W . , O’Guin , W . M . , and Sawyer , R . H . ( 1983 ) . Rearrangement of the keratin cytoskeleton after combined treatment with microtubule and microﬁlament inhibitors . J . Cell Biol . 97 , 1788 – 1794 . Kolega , J . ( 1986 ) . Eﬀects of mechanical tension on protrusive activity and microﬁlament and intermediate ﬁlament organization in an epidermal epithelium moving in culture . J . Cell Biol . 102 , 1400 – 1411 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 102 . 4 . 1400 Kölsch , A . , Windoﬀer , R . , and Leube , R . E . ( 2009 ) . Actin - dependent dynamics of keratin ﬁlament precursors . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 66 , 976 – 985 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 20395 Kolsch , A . , Windoﬀer , R . , Wurﬂinger , T . , Aach , T . , and Leube , R . E . ( 2010 ) . The keratin - ﬁlament cycle of assembly and disassembly . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 2266 – 2272 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 068080 Kreitzer , G . , Liao , G . , and Gundersen , G . G . ( 1999 ) . Detyrosination of tubulin regulates the interaction of intermediate ﬁlaments with microtubules in vivo via a kinesin - dependent mechanism . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 1105 – 1118 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . 10 . 4 . 1105 Kreplak , L . , Bär , H . , Leterrier , J . F . , Herrmann , H . , and Aebi , U . ( 2005 ) . Exploring the mechanical behavior of single intermediate ﬁlaments . J . Mol . Biol . 354 , 569 – 577 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2005 . 09 . 092 Kröger , C . , Loschke , F . , Schwarz , N . , Windoﬀer , R . , Leube , R . E . , and Magin , T . M . ( 2013 ) . Keratins control intercellular adhesion involving PKC - α - mediated desmoplakin phosphorylation . J . Cell Biol . 201 , 681 – 692 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201208162 Ku , N . O . , and Omary , M . B . ( 2000 ) . Keratins turn over by ubiquitination in a phosphorylation - modulated fashion . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 547 – 552 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 149 . 3 . 547 Ku , N . O . , and Omary , M . B . ( 2006 ) . A disease - and phosphorylation - related nonmechanical function for keratin 8 . J . Cell Biol . 174 , 115 – 125 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200602146 Ku , N . O . , Fu , H . , and Omary , M . B . ( 2004 ) . Raf - 1 activation disrupts its binding to keratinsduringcellstress . J . CellBiol . 166 , 479 – 485 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200402051 Ku , N . O . , Liao , J . , and Omary , M . B . ( 1998 ) . Phosphorylation of human keratin 18 serine 33 regulates binding to 14 - 3 - 3 proteins . EMBO J . 17 , 1892 – 1906 . doi : 10 . 1093 / emboj / 17 . 7 . 1892 Ku , N . O . , Michie , S . A . , Soetikno , R . M . , Resurreccion , E . Z . , Broome , R . L . , Oshima , R . G . , et al . ( 1996 ) . Susceptibility to hepatotoxicity in transgenic mice that express a dominant - negative human keratin 18 mutant . J . Clin . Invest . 98 , 1034 – 1046 . doi : 10 . 1172 / JCI118864 Ku , N . , Michie , S . , Resurreccion , E . Z . , Broome , R . L . , and Omary , M . B . ( 2002 ) . Keratin binding to 14 - 3 - 3 proteins modulates keratin ﬁlaments and Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 15 September 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 81 Sanghvi - Shah and Weber Intermediate Filaments in Mechanotransduction hepatocyte mitotic progression . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 99 , 4373 – 4378 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 072624299 Ku , N . - O . , Toivola , D . M . , Strnad , P . , andOmary , M . B . ( 2010 ) . Cytoskeletalkeratin glycosylation protects epithelial tissue from injury . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 876 – 885 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2091 Kumar , N . , Robidoux , J . , Daniel , K . W . , Guzman , G . , Floering , L . M . , and Collins , S . ( 2007 ) . Requirement of vimentin ﬁlament assembly for beta3 - adrenergic receptor activation of ERK MAP kinase and lipolysis . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 9244 – 9250 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M605571200 Kumar , V . , Bouameur , J . E . , Bär , J . , Rice , R . H . , Hornig - Do , H . T . , Roop , D . R . , et al . ( 2015 ) . A keratin scaﬀold regulates epidermal barrier formation , mitochondrial lipid composition , and activity . J . Cell Biol . 211 , 1057 – 1075 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201404147 Labouesse , C . , Gabella , C . , Meister , J . - J . , Vianay , B . , and Verkhovsky , A . B . ( 2016 ) . Microsurgery - aided in - situ force probing reveals extensibility and viscoelastic properties of individual stress ﬁbers . Sci . Rep . 6 : 23722 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep23722 Lai , Y . K . , Lee , W . C . , and Chen , K . D . ( 1993 ) . Vimentin serves as a phosphate sink duringtheapparentactivationofproteinkinasesbyokadaicacidinmammaliancells . J . Cell . Biochem . 53 , 161 – 168 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcb . 240530209 Lehtonen , E . , Lehto , V . P . , Vartio , T . , Badley , R . A . , and Virtanen , I . ( 1983 ) . Expression of cytokeratin polypeptides in mouse oocytes and preimplantation embryos . Dev . Biol . 100 , 158 – 165 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0012 - 1606 ( 83 ) 90206 - 3 Leonard , M . , Chan , Y . , and Menko , A . S . ( 2008 ) . Identiﬁcation of a novel intermediate ﬁlament - linked N - cadherin / γ - catenin complex involved in the establishment of the cytoarchitecture of diﬀerentiated lens ﬁber cells . Dev . Biol . 319 , 298 – 308 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ydbio . 2008 . 04 . 036 Lichtenstern , T . , Mücke , N . , Aebi , U . , Mauermann , M . , and Herrmann , H . ( 2012 ) . Complex formation and kinetics of ﬁlament assembly exhibited by the simple epithelial keratins K8 and K18 . J . Struct . Biol . 177 , 54 – 62 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2011 . 11 . 003 Lin , Y . C . , Yao , N . Y . , Broedersz , C . P . , Herrmann , H . , MacKintosh , F . C . , and Weitz , D . A . ( 2010 ) . Origins of elasticity in intermediate ﬁlament networks . Phys . Rev . Lett . 104 , 1 – 4 . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 104 . 058101 Liovic , M . , Mogensen , M . M . , Prescott , A . R . , and Lane , E . B . ( 2003 ) . Observation of keratin particles showing fast bidirectional movement colocalized with microtubules . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 1417 – 1427 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 00363 Liu , C . , Lin , H . , Tang , M . , and Wang , Y . ( 2015 ) . Vimentin contributes to epithelial - mesenchymal transition cancer cell mechanics by mediating cytoskeletal organization and focal adhesion maturation . Oncotarget 6 , 15966 – 15983 . doi : 10 . 18632 / oncotarget . 3862 Liu , Z . , Tan , J . L . , Cohen , D . M . , Yang , M . T . , Sniadecki , N . J . , Ruiz , S . A . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Mechanical tugging force regulates the size of cell - cell junctions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 107 , 9944 – 9949 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0914547107 Lombardi , M . L . , Jaalouk , D . E . , Shanahan , C . M . , Burke , B . , Roux , K . J . , and Lammerding , J . ( 2011 ) . The interaction between nesprins and sun proteins at the nuclear envelope is critical for force transmission between the nucleus and cytoskeleton . J . Biol . Chem . 286 , 26743 – 26753 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M111 . 233700 Long , H . A . , Boczonadi , V . , McInroy , L . , Goldberg , M . , and Määttä , A . ( 2006 ) . Periplakin - dependent re - organisation of keratin cytoskeleton and loss of collective migration in keratin - 8 - downregulated epithelial sheets . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 5147 – 5159 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 03304 Loschke , F . , Homberg , M . , and Magin , T . M . ( 2016 ) . Keratin isotypes control desmosome stability and dynamics through PKC α . J . Invest . Dermatol . 136 , 202 – 213 . doi : 10 . 1038 / JID . 2015 . 403 Lund , N . , Henrion , D . , Tiede , P . , Ziche , M . , Schunkert , H . , and Ito , W . D . ( 2010 ) . Vimentin expression inﬂuences ﬂow dependent VASP phosphorylation and regulatescellmigrationandproliferation . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 395 , 401 – 406 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2010 . 04 . 033 Lynch , C . D . , Lazar , A . M . , Iskratsch , T . , Zhang , X . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2013 ) . Endoplasmic spreading requires coalescence of vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments at force - bearing adhesions . Mol . Biol . Cell 24 , 21 – 30 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E12 - 05 - 0377 Ma , L . , Xu , J . , Coulombe , P . A . , and Wirtz , D . ( 1999 ) . Keratin ﬁlament suspensions show unique micromechanical properties . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 19145 – 19151 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . 274 . 27 . 19145 Ma , L . , Yamada , S . , Wirtz , D . , and Coulombe , P . A . ( 2001 ) . A “hot - spot” mutation alters the mechanical properties of keratin ﬁlament networks . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 503 – 506 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 35074576 Magin , T . M . , Schröder , R . , Leitgeb , S . , Wanninger , F . , Zatloukal , K . , Grund , C . , et al . ( 1998 ) . Lessons from keratin 18 knockout mice : formation of novel keratin ﬁlaments , secondary loss of keratin 7 and accumulation of liver - speciﬁc keratin 8 - positive aggregates . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 1441 – 1451 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 140 . 6 . 1441 Margolis , S . S . , Perry , J . A . , Forester , C . M . , Nutt , L . K . , Guo , Y . , Jardim , M . J . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Role for the PP2A / B56 δ phosphatase in regulating 14 - 3 - 3 release from Cdc25 to control mitosis . Cell 127 , 759 – 773 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2006 . 10 . 035 Maruthamuthu , V . , Sabass , B . , Schwarz , U . S . , and Gardel , M . L . ( 2011 ) . Cell - ECM traction force modulates endogenous tension at cell - cell contacts . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 4708 – 4713 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1011123108 Matveeva , E . A . , Venkova , L . S . , Chernoivanenko , I . S . , and Minin , A . A . ( 2015 ) . Vimentin is involved in regulation of mitochondrial motility and membrane potential by Rac1 . Biol . Open 4 , 1290 – 1297 . doi : 10 . 1242 / bio . 011874 Mendez , M . G . , Kojima , S . - I . , and Goldman , R . D . ( 2010 ) . Vimentin induces changes in cell shape , motility , and adhesion during the epithelial to mesenchymal transition . FASEB J . 24 , 1838 – 1851 . doi : 10 . 1096 / fj . 09 - 151639 Mendez , M . G . , Restle , D . , and Janmey , P . A . ( 2014 ) . Vimentin enhances cell elastic behavior and protects against compressive stress . Biophys . J . 107 , 314 – 323 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2014 . 04 . 050 Menko , A . S . , Bleaken , B . M . , Libowitz , A . A . , Zhang , L . , Stepp , M . A . , and Walker , J . L . ( 2014 ) . A central role for vimentin in regulating repair function during healing of the lens epithelium . Mol . Biol . Cell 25 , 776 – 790 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E12 - 12 - 0900 Miller , R . K . , Vikstrom , K . , and Goldman , R . D . ( 1991 ) . Keratin incorporation into intermediate ﬁlament networks is a rapid process . J . Cell Biol . 113 , 843 – 855 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 113 . 4 . 843 Morgan , J . T . , Pfeiﬀer , E . R . , Thirkill , T . L . , Kumar , P . , Peng , G . , Fridolfsson , H . N . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Nesprin - 3 regulates endothelial cell morphology , perinuclear cytoskeletal architecture , and ﬂow - induced polarization . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 , 4324 – 4334 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E11 - 04 - 0287 Morley , S . M . , D’Alessandro , M . , Sexton , C . , Rugg , E . L . , Navsaria , H . , Shemanko , C . S . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Generation and characterization of epidermolysis bullosa simplex cell lines : scratch assays show faster migration with disruptive keratin mutations . Br . J . Dermatol . 149 , 46 – 58 . doi : 10 . 1046 / j . 1365 - 2133 . 2003 . 05493 . x Mücke , N . , Kreplak , L . , Kirmse , R . , Wedig , T . , Herrmann , H . , Aebi , U . , etal . ( 2004 ) . Assessing the ﬂexibility of intermediate ﬁlaments by atomic force microscopy . J . Mol . Biol . 335 , 1241 – 1250 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2003 . 11 . 038 Nafeey , S . , Martin , I . , Felder , T . , Walther , P . , and Felder , E . ( 2016 ) . Branching of keratin intermediate ﬁlaments . J . Struct . Biol . 194 , 415 – 422 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2016 . 03 . 023 Nekrasova , O . E . , Mendez , M . G . , Chernoivanenko , I . S . , Tyurin - Kuzmin , P . A . , Kuczmarski , E . R . , Gelfand , V . I . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments modulate the motility of mitochondria . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 , 2282 – 2289 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E10 - 09 - 0766 Ngai , J . , Coleman , T . R . , and Lazarides , E . ( 1990 ) . Localization of newly synthesized vimentin subunits reveals a novel mechanism of intermediate ﬁlament assembly . Cell 60 , 415 – 427 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 90 ) 90593 - 4 Nicolet , S . , Herrmann , H . , Aebi , U . , and Strelkov , S . V . ( 2010 ) . Atomic structure of vimentin coil 2 . J . Struct . Biol . 170 , 369 – 376 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2010 . 02 . 012 Nöding , B . , Herrmann , H . , and Köster , S . ( 2014 ) . Direct observation of subunit exchange along mature vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments . Biophys . J . 107 , 2923 – 2931 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2014 . 09 . 050 Nolting , J . F . , and Koster , S . ( 2013 ) . Inﬂuence of microﬂuidic shear on keratin networks in living cells . N . J . Phys . 15 : 045025 . doi : 10 . 1088 / 1367 - 2630 / 15 / 4 / 045025 Nolting , J . F . , Mobius , W . , and Koster , S . ( 2015 ) . Mechanics of individual keratin bundles in living cells . Biophys . J . 107 , 2693 – 2699 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2014 . 10 . 039 Ohtsuka , T . , Sakaguchi , M . , Yamamoto , H . , Tomida , S . , Takata , K . , Shien , K . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Interaction of cytokeratin 19 head domain and HER2 in the cytoplasm leads to activation of HER2 - Erk pathway . Sci . Rep . 6 : 39557 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep39557 Omary , M . B . , Ku , N . O . , Tao , G . Z . , Toivola , D . M . , andLiao , J . ( 2006 ) . “Headsand tails” of intermediate ﬁlament phosphorylation : multiple sites and functional insights . Trends Biochem . Sci . 31 , 383 – 394 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tibs . 2006 . 05 . 008 Osborn , M . , Franke , W . , and Weber , K . ( 1980 ) . Direct demonstration of the presence of two immunologically distinct intermediate - sized ﬁlament systems Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 16 September 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 81 Sanghvi - Shah and Weber Intermediate Filaments in Mechanotransduction in the same cell by double immunoﬂuorescence microscopy . Exp . Cell Res . 125 , 37 – 46 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0014 - 4827 ( 80 ) 90186 - X Osmanagic - Myers , S . , and Wiche , G . ( 2004 ) . Plectin - RACK1 ( receptor for activated C kinase 1 ) scaﬀolding : a novel mechanism to regulate protein kinase C activity . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 18701 – 18710 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M312382200 Osmanagic - Myers , S . , Gregor , M . , Walko , G . , Burgstaller , G . , Reipert , S . , and Wiche , G . ( 2006 ) . Plectin - controlled keratin cytoarchitecture aﬀects MAP kinases involved in cellular stress response and migration . J . Cell Biol . 174 , 557 – 568 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200605172 Osmanagic - Myers , S . , Rus , S . , Wolfram , M . , Brunner , D . , Goldmann , W . H . , Bonakdar , N . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Plectin reinforces vascular integrity by mediating crosstalk between the vimentin and the actin networks . J . Cell Sci . 128 , 4138 – 4150 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 172056 Pankov , R . , Endo , Y . , Even - Ram , S . , Araki , M . , Clark , K . , Cukierman , E . , et al . ( 2005 ) . A Rac switch regulates random versus directionally persistent cell migration . J . Cell Biol . 170 , 793 – 802 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200503152 Paramio , J . M . , Segrelles , C . , and Ruiz , S . ( 2001 ) . Inhibition of protein kinase B ( PKB ) andPKC ζ MediateskeratinK10 - inducedcellcyclearrest . Mol . Cell . Biol . 21 , 7449 – 7459 . doi : 10 . 1128 / MCB . 21 . 21 . 7449 - 7459 . 2001 Park , B . , Nguyen , N . T . , Dutt , P . , Merdek , K . D . , Bashar , M . , Sterpetti , P . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Association of Lbc Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor with alpha - catenin - related protein , alpha - catulin / CTNNAL1 , supports serum response factor activation . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 45361 – 45370 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M202447200 Pawelzyk , P . , Mücke , N . , Herrmann , H . , and Willenbacher , N . ( 2014 ) . Attractive interactions among intermediate ﬁlaments determine network mechanics in vitro . PLoS ONE 9 : e93194 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0093194 Pérez - Sala , D . , Oeste , C . L . , Martínez , A . E . , Carrasco , M . J . , Garzón , B . , and Cañada , F . J . ( 2015 ) . Vimentin ﬁlament organization and stress sensing depend on its single cysteine residue and zinc binding . Nat . Commun . 6 , 7287 . Perlson , E . , Hanz , S . , Ben - Yaakov , K . , Segal - Ruder , Y . , Seger , R . , and Fainzilber , M . ( 2005 ) . Vimentin - dependent spatial translocation of an activated MAP kinase in injured nerve . Neuron 45 , 715 – 726 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2005 . 01 . 023 Perlson , E . , Michaelevski , I . , Kowalsman , N . , Ben - Yaakov , K . , Shaked , M . , Seger , R . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Vimentin binding to phosphorylated Erk sterically hinders enzymatic dephosphorylation of the kinase . J . Mol . Biol . 364 , 938 – 944 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2006 . 09 . 056 Peter , A . , and Stick , R . ( 2015 ) . Evolutionary aspects in intermediate ﬁlament proteins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 32 , 48 – 55 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2014 . 12 . 009 Plutoni , C . , Bazellieres , E . , Le Borgne - Rochet , M . , Comunale , F . , Brugues , A . , Séveno , M . , et al . ( 2016 ) . P - cadherin promotes collective cell migration via a Cdc42 - mediated increase in mechanical forces . J . Cell Biol . 212 , 199 – 217 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201505105 Postel , R . , Ketema , M . , Kuikman , I . , de Pereda , J . M . , and Sonnenberg , A . ( 2011 ) . Nesprin - 3 augments peripheral nuclear localization of intermediate ﬁlaments in zebraﬁsh . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 755 – 764 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 081174 Prahlad , V . , Yoon , M . , Moir , R . D . , Vale , R . D . , and Goldman , R . D . ( 1998 ) . Rapid movements of vimentin on microtubule tracks : kinesin - dependent assembly of intermediate ﬁlament networks . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 159 – 170 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 143 . 1 . 159 Qin , Z . , Kreplak , L . , and Buehler , M . J . ( 2009 ) . Hierarchical structure controls nanomechanical properties of vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments . PLoS ONE 4 : e7294 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0007294 Quinlan , R . A . , Hatzfeld , M . , Franke , W . W . , Lustig , A . , Schulthess , T . , and Engel , J . ( 1986 ) . Characterization of dimer subunits of intermediate ﬁlament proteins . J . Mol . Biol . 192 , 337 – 349 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0022 - 2836 ( 86 ) 90369 - 4 Ramms , L . , Fabris , G . , Windoﬀer , R . , Schwarz , N . , Springer , R . , Zhou , C . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Keratins as the main component for the mechanical integrity of keratinocytes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 110 , 18513 – 18518 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1313491110 Reichelt , J . , and Magin , T . M . ( 2002 ) . Hyperproliferation , induction of c - Myc and 14 - 3 - 3 σ , but no cell fragility in keratin - 10 - null mice . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 2639 – 2650 . Reichelt , J . , Büssow , H . , Grund , C . , and Magin , T . M . ( 2001 ) . Formation of a normal epidermis supported by increased stability of keratins 5 and 14 in keratin 10 null mice . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 1557 – 1568 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . 12 . 6 . 1557 Ridge , K . M . , Linz , L . , Flitney , F . W . , Kuczmarski , E . R . , Chou , Y . H . , Omary , M . B . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Keratin 8 phosphorylation by protein kinase c δ regulates shear stress - mediated disassembly of keratin intermediate ﬁlaments in alveolar epithelial cells . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 30400 – 30405 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M504239200 Riveline , D . , Zamir , E . , Balaban , N . Q . , Schwarz , U . S . , Ishizaki , T . , Narumiya , S . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Focal contacts as mechanosensors : externally applied local mechanical force induces growth of focal contacts by an mDia1 - dependent and ROCK - independent mechanism . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 1175 – 1185 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 153 . 6 . 1175 Robert , A . , Herrmann , H . , Davidson , M . W . , and Gelfand , V . I . ( 2014 ) . Microtubule - dependent transport of vimentin ﬁlament precursors is regulated by actin and by the concerted action of Rho - and p21 - activated kinases . FASEB J . 28 , 2879 – 2890 . doi : 10 . 1096 / fj . 14 - 250019 Rogel , M . R . , Soni , P . N . , Troken , J . R . , Sitikov , A . , Trejo , H . E . , and Ridge , K . M . ( 2011 ) . Vimentin is suﬃcient and required for wound repair and remodeling in alveolar epithelial cells . FASEB J . 25 , 3873 – 3883 . doi : 10 . 1096 / fj . 10 - 170795 Rotty , J . D . , and Coulombe , P . A . ( 2012 ) . A wound - induced keratin inhibits Src activity during keratinocyte migration and tissue repair . J . Cell Biol . 197 , 381 – 389 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201107078 Russell , D . , Andrews , P . D . , James , J . , and Lane , E . B . ( 2004 ) . Mechanical stress induces profound remodelling of keratin ﬁlaments and cell junctions in epidermolysis bullosa simplex keratinocytes . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 5233 – 5243 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 01407 Saha , S . K . , Choi , H . Y . , Kim , B . W . , Dayem , A . A . , Yang , G . - M . , Kim , K . S . , etal . ( 2017 ) . KRT19directlyinteractswith β - catenin / RAC1complextoregulate NUMB - dependent NOTCH signaling pathway and breast cancer properties . Oncogene 36 , 332 – 349 . doi : 10 . 1038 / onc . 2016 . 221 Sakamoto , Y . , Boëda , B . , and Etienne - Manneville , S . ( 2013 ) . APC binds intermediate ﬁlaments and is required for their reorganization during cell migration . J . Cell Biol . 200 , 249 – 258 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201206010 Sankar , S . , Tanner , J . M . , Bell , R . , Chaturvedi , A . , Randall , R . L . , Beckerle , M . C . , et al . ( 2013 ) . A novel role for keratin 17 in coordinating oncogenic transformation and cellular adhesion in Ewing sarcoma . Mol . Cell . Biol . 33 , 4448 – 4460 . doi : 10 . 1128 / MCB . 00241 - 13 Schopferer , M . , Bär , H . , Hochstein , B . , Sharma , S . , Mücke , N . , Herrmann , H . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Desminandvimentinintermediateﬁlamentnetworks : theirviscoelastic properties investigated by mechanical rheometry . J . Mol . Biol . 388 , 133 – 143 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2009 . 03 . 005 Schwarz , N . , Windoﬀer , R . , Magin , T . M . , and Leube , R . E . ( 2015 ) . Dissection of keratin network formation , turnover and reorganization in living murine embryos . Sci . Rep . 5 : 9007 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep09007 Seltmann , K . , Cheng , F . , Wiche , G . , Eriksson , J . E . , and Magin , T . M . ( 2015 ) . Keratins stabilize hemidesmosomes through regulation of β 4 - integrin turnover . J . Invest . Dermatol . 135 , 1609 – 1620 . doi : 10 . 1038 / jid . 2015 . 46 Seltmann , K . , Fritsch , A . W . , Käs , J . , a , and Magin , T . M . ( 2013a ) . Keratins signiﬁcantlycontributetocellstiﬀnessandimpactinvasivebehavior . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 110 , 18507 – 18512 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1310493110 Seltmann , K . , Roth , W . , Kröger , C . , Loschke , F . , Lederer , M . , Hüttelmaier , S . , et al . ( 2013b ) . Keratins Mediate Localization of Hemidesmosomes and Repress Cell Motility . J . Invest . Dermatol . 133 , 181 – 190 . doi : 10 . 1038 / jid . 2012 . 256 Shabbir , S . H . , Cleland , M . M . , Goldman , R . D . , andMrksich , M . ( 2014 ) . Geometric control of vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments . Biomaterials 35 , 1359 – 1366 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . biomaterials . 2013 . 10 . 008 Sharma , P . , Bolten , Z . T . , Wagner , D . R . , and Hsieh , A . H . ( 2017 ) . Deformability of human mesenchymal stem cells is dependent on vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments . Ann . Biomed . Eng . 45 , 1365 – 1374 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10439 - 016 - 1787 - z Sin , W . C . , Chen , X . Q . , Leung , T . , and Lim , L . ( 1998 ) . RhoA - binding kinase alpha translocation is facilitated by the collapse of the vimentin intermediate ﬁlament network . Mol . Cell . Biol . 18 , 6325 – 6339 . doi : 10 . 1128 / MCB . 18 . 11 . 6325 Sivaramakrishnan , S . , DeGiulio , J . V . , Lorand , L . , Goldman , R . D . , andRidge , K . M . ( 2008 ) . Micromechanical properties of keratin intermediate ﬁlament networks . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 105 , 889 – 894 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0710728105 Sivaramakrishnan , S . , Schneider , J . L . , Sitikov , A . , Goldman , R . D . , andRidge , K . M . ( 2009 ) . Shearstressinducedreorganizationofthekeratinintermediateﬁlament network requires phosphorylation by protein kinase C zeta . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 2755 – 2765 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E08 - 10 - 1028 Snider , N . T . , and Omary , M . B . ( 2014 ) . Post - translational modiﬁcations of intermediate ﬁlament proteins : mechanisms and functions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 15 , 163 – 177 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3753 Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 17 September 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 81 Sanghvi - Shah and Weber Intermediate Filaments in Mechanotransduction Snider , N . T . , Leonard , J . M . , Kwan , R . , Griggs , N . W . , Rui , L . , and Bishr Omary , M . ( 2013a ) . Glucose and SIRT2 reciprocally mediate the regulation of keratin 8 by lysine acetylation . J . Cell Biol . 200 , 241 – 247 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201209028 Snider , N . T . , Park , H . , and Bishr Omary , M . ( 2013b ) . A conserved rod domain phosphotyrosine that is targeted by the phosphatase PTP1B promotes keratin 8 proteininsolubilityandﬁlamentorganization . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 31329 – 31337 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M113 . 502724 Snider , N . T . , Weerasinghe , S . V . W . , Iñiguez - Lluhí , J . A . , Herrmann , H . , and Omary , M . B . ( 2011 ) . Keratin hypersumoylation alters ﬁlament dynamics and is a marker for human liver disease and keratin mutation . J . Biol . Chem . 286 , 2273 – 2284 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M110 . 171314 Soellner , P . , Quinlan , R . A . , and Franke , W . W . ( 1985 ) . Identiﬁcation of a distinct soluble subunit of an intermediate ﬁlament protein : tetrameric vimentin from living cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 82 , 7929 – 7933 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 82 . 23 . 7929 Sokolova , A . V , Kreplak , L . , Wedig , T . , Mücke , N . , Svergun , D . I . , Herrmann , H . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Monitoring intermediate ﬁlament assembly by small - angle x - ray scattering reveals the molecular architecture of assembly intermediates . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 103 , 16206 – 16211 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0603629103 Spazierer , D . , Raberger , J . , Gross , K . , Fuchs , P . , and Wiche , G . ( 2008 ) . Stress - induced recruitment of epiplakin to keratin networks increases their resistance to hyperphosphorylation - induced disruption . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 825 – 833 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 013755 Steinert , P . M . , Cantieri , J . S . , Teller , D . C . , Lonsdale - Eccles , J . D . , and Dale , B . A . ( 1981a ) . Characterization of a class of cationic proteins that speciﬁcally interact with intermediate ﬁlaments . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 78 , 4097 – 4101 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 78 . 7 . 4097 Steinert , P . M . , Idler , W . W . , and Zimmerman , S . B . ( 1976 ) . Self - assembly of bovine epidermal keratin ﬁlaments in vitro . J . Mol . Biol . 108 , 547 – 567 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0022 - 2836 ( 76 ) 80136 - 2 Steinert , P . M . , Idler , W . W . , Cabral , F . , Gottesman , M . M . , and Goldman , R . D . ( 1981b ) . In vitro assembly of homopolymer and copolymer ﬁlaments from intermediateﬁlamentsubunitsofmuscleandﬁbroblasticcells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 78 , 3692 – 3696 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 78 . 6 . 3692 Strnad , P . , Windoﬀer , R . , and Leube , R . E . ( 2001 ) . In vivo detection of cytokeratin ﬁlament network breakdown in cells treated with the phosphatase inhibitor okadaic acid . Cell Tissue Res . 306 , 277 – 293 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s004410100455 Strnad , P . , Windoﬀer , R . , and Leube , R . E . ( 2002 ) . Induction of rapid and reversible cytokeratin ﬁlament network remodeling by inhibition of tyrosine phosphatases . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 4133 – 4148 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 00096 Sun , P . , Yuan , Y . , Li , A . , Li , B . , and Dai , X . ( 2010 ) . Cytokeratin expression during mouse embryonic and early postnatal mammary gland development . Histochem . Cell Biol . 133 , 213 – 221 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00418 - 009 - 0662 - 5 Svitkina , T . M . , Verkhovsky , A . B . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 1996 ) . Plectin sidearms mediate interaction of intermediate ﬁlaments with microtubules and other components of the cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 991 – 1007 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 135 . 4 . 991 Terriac , E . , Coceano , G . , Mavajian , Z . , Hageman , T . , Christ , A . , Testa , I . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Vimentin levels and serine 71 phosphorylation in the control of cell - matrix adhesions , migration speed , and shape of transformed human ﬁbroblasts . Cells 6 , 2 . doi : 10 . 3390 / cells6010002 Theveneau , E . , Marchant , L . , Kuriyama , S . , Gull , M . , Moepps , B . , Parsons , M . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Collective chemotaxis requires contact - dependent cell polarity . Dev . Cell 19 , 39 – 53 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2010 . 06 . 012 Todorovi´c , V . , Desai , B . V . , Patterson , M . J . S . , Amargo , E . V . , Dubash , A . D . , Yin , T . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Plakoglobin regulates cell motility through Rho - and ﬁbronectin - dependent Src signaling . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 3576 – 3586 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 070391 Toivola , D . M . , Zhou , Q . , English , L . S . , and Omary , M . B . ( 2002 ) . Type II keratins are phosphorylated on a unique motif during stress and mitosis in tissues and cultured cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 1857 – 1870 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . 01 - 12 - 0591 Toyoizumi , R . , andTakeuchi , S . ( 1995 ) . Thebehaviorofchickgastrulamesodermal cells under the unidirectional tractive force parallel to the substrata . J . Cell Sci . 108 ( Pt 2 ) , 557 – 567 . Tsuruta , D . , and Jones , J . C . ( 2003 ) . The vimentin cytoskeleton regulates focal contact size and adhesion of endothelial cells subjected to shear stress . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 4977 – 4984 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 00823 Tzivion , G . , Luo , Z . J . , and Avruch , J . ( 2000 ) . Calyculin A - induced vimentin phosphorylation sequesters 14 - 3 - 3 and displaces other 14 - 3 - 3 partners in vivo . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 29772 – 29778 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M0012 07200 Velez - delValle , C . , Marsch - Moreno , M . , Castro - Muñozledo , F . , Galván - Mendoza , I . J . , and Kuri - Harcuch , W . ( 2016 ) . Epithelial cell migration requires the interaction between the vimentin and keratin intermediate ﬁlaments . Sci . Rep . 6 : 24389 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep24389 Vijayaraj , P . , Kröger , C . , Reuter , U . , Windoﬀer , R . , Leube , R . E . , and Magin , T . M . ( 2009 ) . Keratins regulate protein biosynthesis through localization of GLUT1 and - 3 upstream of AMP kinase and Raptor . J . Cell Biol . 187 , 175 – 184 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200906094 Vikstrom , K . L . , Borisy , G . G . , and Goldman , R . D . ( 1989 ) . Dynamic aspects of intermediate ﬁlament networks in BHK - 21 cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 86 , 549 – 553 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 86 . 2 . 549 Vikstrom , K . L . , Lim , S . S . , Goldman , R . D . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 1992 ) . Steady state dynamics of intermediate ﬁlament networks . J . Cell Biol . 118 , 121 – 129 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 118 . 1 . 121 Virtakoivu , R . , Peuhu , E . , Mai , A . , Wärri , A . , andIvaska , J . ( 2017 ) . Vimentinplaysa functional role in mammary gland regeneration . bioRxiv . doi : 10 . 1101 / 134544 . [ Epub ahead of print ] . Vuoriluoto , K . , Haugen , H . , Kiviluoto , S . , Mpindi , J . - P . , Nevo , J . , Gjerdrum , C . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Vimentin regulates EMT induction by Slug and oncogenic H - Ras and migration by governing Axl expression in breast cancer . Oncogene 30 , 1436 – 1448 . doi : 10 . 1038 / onc . 2010 . 509 Wang , N . , and Stamenovi´c , D . ( 2000 ) . Contribution of intermediate ﬁlaments to cell stiﬀness , stiﬀening , and growth . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 279 , C188 – C194 . Wang , X . , He , L . , Wu , Y . I . , Hahn , K . M . , and Montell , D . J . ( 2010 ) . Light - mediated activation reveals a key role for Rac in collective guidance of cell movement in vivo . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 591 – 597 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2061 Weber , G . F . , Bjerke , M . A . , and DeSimone , D . W . ( 2012 ) . A mechanoresponsive cadherin - keratin complex directs polarized protrusive behavior and collective cell migration . Dev . Cell 22 , 104 – 115 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2011 . 10 . 013 Wilhelmsen , K . , Litjens , S . H . M . , Kuikman , I . , Tshimbalanga , N . , Janssen , H . , and Van Bout , I . , Den , et al . ( 2005 ) . Nesprin - 3 , a novel outer nuclear membrane protein , associates with the cytoskeletal linker protein plectin . J . Cell Biol . 171 , 799 – 810 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200506083 Windoﬀer , R . , and Leube , R . E . ( 1999 ) . Detection of cytokeratin dynamics by time - lapse ﬂuorescence microscopy in living cells . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 4521 – 4534 . Windoﬀer , R . , Beil , M . , Magin , T . M . , and Leube , R . E . ( 2011 ) . Cytoskeleton in motion : the dynamics of keratin intermediate ﬁlaments in epithelia . J . Cell Biol . 194 , 669 – 678 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201008095 Windoﬀer , R . , Kölsch , A . , Wöll , S . , and Leube , R . E . ( 2006 ) . Focal adhesions are hotspots for keratin ﬁlament precursor formation . J . Cell Biol . 173 , 341 – 348 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200511124 Winheim , S . , Hieb , A . R . , Silbermann , M . , Surmann , E . M . , Wedig , T . , Herrmann , H . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Deconstructing the late phase of vimentin assembly by total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy ( TIRFM ) . PLoS ONE 6 : e19202 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0019202 Wöll , S . , Windoﬀer , R . , and Leube , R . E . ( 2005 ) . Dissection of keratin dynamics : diﬀerent contributions of the actin and microtubule systems . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 84 , 311 – 328 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2004 . 12 . 004 Woo , W . M . , Goncharov , A . , Jin , Y . , and Chisholm , A . D . ( 2004 ) . Intermediate ﬁlaments are required for C . elegans epidermal elongation . Dev . Biol . 267 , 216 – 229 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ydbio . 2003 . 11 . 007 Yamaguchi , N . , Mizutani , T . , Kawabata , K . , and Haga , H . ( 2015 ) . Leader cells regulatecollectivecellmigrationviaRacactivationinthedownstreamsignalingofintegrin β 1 and PI3K . Sci . Rep . 5 : 7656 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep07656 Yoo , S . K . , Deng , Q . , Cavnar , P . J . , Wu , Y . I . , Hahn , K . M . , and Huttenlocher , A . ( 2010 ) . Diﬀerential regulation of protrusion and polarity by PI ( 3 ) K during neutrophil motility in live zebraﬁsh . Dev . Cell 18 , 226 – 236 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 11 . 015 Yoon , K . H . , Yoon , M . , Moir , R . D . , Khuon , S . , Flitney , F . W . , and Goldman , R . D . ( 2001 ) . Insights into the dynamic properties of keratin intermediate ﬁlaments in living epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 152 , 503 – 516 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 153 . 3 . 503 Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 18 September 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 81 Sanghvi - Shah and Weber Intermediate Filaments in Mechanotransduction Yoon , M . , Moir , R . D . , Prahlad , V . , and Goldman , R . D . ( 1998 ) . Motile properties of vimentin intermediate ﬁlament networks in living cells . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 147 – 157 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 143 . 1 . 147 Zhang , H . , Landmann , F . , Zahreddine , H . , Rodriguez , D . , Koch , M . , andLabouesse , M . ( 2011 ) . A tension - induced mechanotransduction pathway promotes epithelial morphogenesis . Nature 471 , 99 – 103 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature09765 Zhou , Q . , Cadrin , M . , Herrmann , H . , Chen , C . H . , Chalkley , R . J . , Burlingame , A . L . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Keratin 20 serine 13 phosphorylation is a stress and intestinal goblet cell marker . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 16453 – 16461 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M512284200 Conﬂict of Interest Statement : The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest . Copyright©2017Sanghvi - ShahandWeber . Thisisanopen - accessarticledistributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( CC BY ) . The use , distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted , provided the original author ( s ) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited , in accordance with accepted academic practice . No use , distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms . Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology | www . frontiersin . org 19 September 2017 | Volume 5 | Article 81