Tous droits réservés © Les Presses de l ' Université de Montréal , 2007 Ce document est protégé par la loi sur le droit d’auteur . L’utilisation des services d’Érudit ( y compris la reproduction ) est assujettie à sa politique d’utilisation que vous pouvez consulter en ligne . https : / / apropos . erudit . org / fr / usagers / politique - dutilisation / Cet article est diffusé et préservé par Érudit . Érudit est un consortium interuniversitaire sans but lucratif composé de l’Université de Montréal , l’Université Laval et l’Université du Québec à Montréal . Il a pour mission la promotion et la valorisation de la recherche . https : / / www . erudit . org / fr / Document généré le 20 mai 2019 18 : 50 Meta Journal des traducteurs The Process of Comprehension from a Psycholinguistic Approach – Implications for Translation Anna Hatzidaki Traductologie : une science cognitive Volume 52 , numéro 1 , mars 2007 URI : https : / / id . erudit . org / iderudit / 014715ar DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7202 / 014715ar Aller au sommaire du numéro Éditeur ( s ) Les Presses de l ' Université de Montréal ISSN 0026 - 0452 ( imprimé ) 1492 - 1421 ( numérique ) Découvrir la revue Citer cet article Hatzidaki , A . ( 2007 ) . The Process of Comprehension from a Psycholinguistic Approach – Implications for Translation . Meta , 52 , ( 1 ) , 13 – 21 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7202 / 014715ar Résumé de l ' article Cet article présente l’approche psycholinguistique du processus de compréhension du langage c’est - à - dire la façon dont on représente et utilise le sens littéral et le sens figuré des mots et des phrases , la façon dont on décode l’intention communicative des éléments linguistiques , ainsi que la participation de la mémoire dans ce décodage . L’analyse des recherches psycholinguistiques sur les processus mentaux à la base de la compréhension du langage met en avant le lien étroit entre la traductologie et la psycholinguistique . En effet , les connaissances acquises grâce à la psycholinguistique permettent de développer les théories ainsi que les pratiques utilisées pour la formation des futurs traducteurs . Meta LII , 1 , 2007 The Process of Comprehension from a Psycholinguistic Approach – Implications for Translation anna hatzidaki University of Edinburgh , Edinburgh , United Kingdom annh _ 22 @ yahoo . com RÉSUMÉ Cet article présente l’approche psycholinguistique du processus de compréhension du langage c’est - à - dire la façon dont on représente et utilise le sens littéral et le sens ﬁguré des mots et des phrases , la façon dont on décode l’intention communicative des éléments linguistiques , ainsi que la participation de la mémoire dans ce décodage . L’analyse des recherches psycholinguistiques sur les processus mentaux à la base de la compréhension du langage met en avant le lien étroit entre la traductologie et la psycholinguistique . En effet , les connaissances acquises grâce à la psycholinguistique permettent de développer les théories ainsi que les pratiques utilisées pour la formation des futurs traducteurs . ABSTRACT The present paper provides a psycholinguistic approach to the process of comprehension . Namely , how people represent and make use of the literal and ﬁgurative meaning of words and sentences , how they decode the communicative purpose of linguistic elements , and how memory is involved in this decoding . By explaining the ﬁndings of psycholinguistic studies on the mental processes that underlie the comprehension of language , we show ( i ) how closely related translatology and psycholinguistics can be , and ( ii ) suggest ways in which knowledge of the latter may be used to both enrich theories and practices of the former , and in the instruction of future translators . MOTS - CLÉS / KEYWORDS comprehension processes , literal and ﬁgurative meaning , psycholinguistics , translatology Introduction The main object of research in psycholinguistics is the study of the cognitive processes that underlie the comprehension and production of language , and the way the cul - tural environment interacts with these two ( e . g . , Harley 2005 ) . Among the most frequent experimental methods researchers use in this ﬁeld to explore these issues it is possible to ﬁnd the following ; reaction time measures , that is , the time it takes a person to respond to a stimulus or perform a certain task within which certain lin - guistic variables ( e . g . , semantic and morphophonological properties of language constituents ) and extra - linguistic variables ( e . g . , age of acquisition and learning envi - ronment ) have been manipulated ; priming , whereby the inﬂuence of exposure to previous semantic and / or morphosyntactic information on current language behavior is tested between a prime and a target ; and stroop - like paradigms , within which the properties between two stimuli are manipulated in such a way as to show whether their relationship facilitates ( facilitation effects ) or inhibits ( interference effects ) processing . Physiological and neurodiagnostic techniques commonly used include ; eye - tracking ; 01 . Meta 52 . 1 . indd 13 1 / 7 / 07 3 : 22 : 27 PM 14 Meta , LII , 1 , 2007 ERPs ( Event Related Potentials ) , measuring electrical activity in the brain after a particular event ; and fMRIs ( functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging ) , measuring blood ﬂow change and oxygen use in the brain as a response to a stimulus . ( For the purposes of this paper , we will not address in detail those experimental methods that have been used to test certain assumptions . However , we emphasize that all the theo - ries and models presented here are supported by experimental evidence ) . Given that the focus of research in translatology is the observation and analysis of language processing in translation , it becomes evident that psycholinguistics and translatology are interconnected . Moreover , since translatology has mainly dealt with the competence and performance of bilingual or multilingual speakers during trans - lating , whereas psycholinguistics has dealt with the cognitive aspects of language - use , we propose that translatology may proﬁt in adopting an interdisciplinary approach to the study of translation , thus enriching its current theories and practices while using a wide variety of well - controlled experimental methods . In this paper , we ﬁrst brieﬂy clarify notions relating to meaning , and then discuss the major ﬁndings of psycholinguistic literature on the mental processes of compre - hension at the three levels of language representation ( i . e . , how meaning is repre - sented and decoded at lexical , sentential , and textual level ) . In particular , we introduce established psycholinguistic theories of how people represent the meaning of words and word - pairs ( compound nouns ) , and describe the most inﬂuential models that have been proposed to account for sentence as well as text comprehension during literal and ﬁgurative meaning processing . We also present linguistic , extra - linguistic , and psycholinguistic factors that may affect comprehension by making it either easier or more difﬁcult . Finally , we conclude by discussing the implications of the ﬁndings from psycholinguistic research for translatology . Basic Concepts of Meaning Language comprehension appears to be a very simple and natural process for speak - ers , listeners or readers . However , a great deal of research has been carried out to identify the stages our thought goes through before we are able to construct an inter - pretation of an intended message ( e . g . , Lakoff 1971 ; Jackendoff 1997 ; Fodor 2000 ) . For an utterance to be meaningful , certain requirements have to be met . For instance , people make use of words in different ways depending on communicative situations and their intentions . Consequently , the recipients of oral or written speech must be able to differentiate between the nuances these words convey and the discourse environment within which they are used , to be able to comprehend the meaning and intent of any speech act ( e . g . , Searle 1969 ) . Prior to presenting the main issues that are relevant to the comprehension of meaning , it is worth distinguishing between two concepts that are closely related to meaning ; that is , between a word’s denotation and a word’s connotation . The former refers to the actual meaning of a word ( what is usually provided as a ﬁrst deﬁnition for a word in a dictionary ) . The latter refers to associations people make based on cultural - speciﬁc or other personal factors ( ideological , emotional , and so on ) ( e . g . , Fodor , Bever and Garrett 1974 ) . For example , the denotative meaning of the adjective Mediterranean is “someone who comes from a region between South Europe and North Africa” ( Collins Compact English Dictionary 1993 ) . However , its connotative 01 . Meta 52 . 1 . indd 14 1 / 7 / 07 3 : 22 : 27 PM meaning may relate to people who are more demonstrative than others , warm and friendly . In this paper , I will mainly be concerned with the concept of denotation . Representation of the Meaning of Words Certain theories have been proposed to account for how words are represented in our mind . One of them is the Reference Theory of Meaning which equates a word’s mean - ing with what that word refers to in the world ( Putnam 1975 ) . For example , the noun drawer is identiﬁed with a sliding box - shaped part of a piece of furniture used for storage . On the other hand , the Prototype Theory of Meaning assumes that a word’s meaning can be derived from a bundle of features , no one of which is individually either necessary or sufﬁcient ( Rosch 1973b ) . According to this view , a prototype con - stitutes the way knowledge is organized , and can help people categorize concepts by checking whether these concepts share some features with each other or not . For example , a pigeon may be considered a prototypical bird because it possesses most features other members of its category ( family ) possess – it ﬂies , has feathers , wings , short legs , and so on . However , a number of counterarguments have been expressed against each one of these accounts , which cast doubt on the validity of their premises . With respect to the reference account , it has been argued that many words do not have a concrete reference , yet , they are meaningful , or that two utterances may refer to the same thing but have different meanings . As far as the prototype approach is concerned , the loose category boundaries , posed by the imprecise nature of the features this theory assumes , do not make clear how people are able to understand words that may lack features that would otherwise be considered central to meaning speciﬁcation . The view most researchers agree with regarding the way meaning is represented in the mind is that of the Decompositional Theory of Meaning , which holds that the meaning of an utterance can be derived if the latter is broken down into its component semantic features ( Katz 1972 ) . For example , the word trousers can be decomposed into the following list of features ; + object , + inanimate , – more than one entity , and so on . In particular , it is assumed that the combination of semantic features creates con - ceptual dependencies which , with the help of inferences , lead to comprehension . People draw inferences when they go beyond explicitly presented or verbally stated informa - tion by making use of various domains of knowledge such as encyclopaedic , contex - tual , and situational information ( Bierwisch and Schreuder 1992 ) . We will return to the use of inferences later , in the section relating to ﬁgurative meaning processing . Comprehension of Word Combinations We mentioned above that people derive the meaning of a word through decomposition into semantic features and by drawing inferences from the word’s feature representa - tion . The next question we shall deal with is how comprehension is achieved when two words are put together , and how we are able to understand word combinations , particularly noun phrases which we have never encountered before ( for example , the phrase cumquat bowl ) . It has been suggested in the psycholinguistic literature ( e . g . , Wisniewski 1997 ; Shoben and Gagne 1997 ) that people’s interpretations of word combinations may rely the process of comprehension from a psycholinguistic approach 15 01 . Meta 52 . 1 . indd 15 1 / 7 / 07 3 : 22 : 27 PM 16 Meta , LII , 1 , 2007 on a number of linguistic and extra - linguistic factors such as ; ( i ) thematic relation , that is , what kind of association may exist between two entities ; thus , for a word combination as in the example given above , the relation between the two lexical items would be “a bowl that is full of cumquat” ; ( ii ) property link , referring to the properties of the two entities and how these can combine to lead to a meaningful utterance , e . g . , “a bowl of orange colour like a cumquat” ; ( iii ) hybridization , whereby the meaning of the word combination is equally shaped by both constituents ; for example , a foot - baller doctor is a person who is both a doctor and a footballer ; and ( iv ) past experience , referring to the knowledge people have acquired from previous use of one of the two constituents , with respect to the meaning that each constituent may carry when com - bined with others ; for example , the noun river , when it is used in word combinations , usually denotes a location relation ( e . g . , river bank , river bed ) , hence a similar inter - pretation would be attributed to another combination that would include the word river ( e . g . , river mouth ) . Interestingly , it is assumed that people show a preferable reliance to stereotypical knowledge in order to understand the meaning of word combinations . That is , they tend to resort to the thematic relation ﬁrst , and only when this does not lead to a meaningful interpretation do they bring into play any of the other factors mentioned above ( e . g . , Harley 2005 ) . As we shall see shortly , this pattern of language disambigu - ation also emerges in sentence comprehension both during literal and ﬁgurative meaning processing . Sentence Comprehension during Literal Meaning Processing Now that we have addressed the psycholinguistic perspective on how people represent word meanings and decode lexical information , let us move on to a larger unit of language representation . In order to be able to understand the structure of sentences , people have to com - bine different sources of information relating to language constituents . That is , they have to be able to retrieve ; ( i ) the semantic representation of each lexical item in a sentence , ( ii ) the grammatical information these items carry about their nature , ( iii ) the syntactic information about other items they can combine with ( Chomsky 1980 ; 1986 ) , and ( iv ) the kind of dependencies they may form ( Pickering and Branigan 1998 ) . Thus , thematic roles that specify the relationship between the constituents ( e . g . , agent , theme , recipient , instrument , and so on ) and grammatical relations ( e . g . , sub - ject , object , etc . ) have to be assigned . Finally , people tend to tie the representation that is built through all these processes to the discourse context . In other words , the precise meaning that is assigned to a sentence is highly correlated with the discourse environ - ment within which this sentence is presented . However , natural occurring speech is not always straightforward , a fact that may posit an additional burden to the already complex process of syntactic structure computation ( parsing ) . Sentence ambiguity is a frequently studied example of such occurrences . How do people manage to access the intended meaning of a sentence that admits two different interpretations ? In a sentence such as The girl watched the boy with the binoculars , one possible interpretation is that a girl watched a boy who carried binoculars , and if there were other boys in the scene , the emphasis would be placed on the boy with the binoculars , not anyone else . An alternative interpretation 01 . Meta 52 . 1 . indd 16 1 / 7 / 07 3 : 22 : 27 PM is that a girl watched a boy with the help of binoculars . So what kind of cues do we use to avoid ambiguity ? The most dominant models that have been proposed to account for understand - ing ambiguous sentences are the Garden Path and the Constraint - based models . According to the Garden Path Model ( Frazier and Fodor 1978 ) , language processing operates incrementally in two stages . Initially , readers or listeners construct a single representation of the sentence based on syntactic information by employing certain linguistic principles . The minimal attachment principle favours the simplest syntactic structure , while the late closure principle involves people’s tendency to attach each lexical item to the clause / phrase being currently processed . Thematic role information is only invoked in the second stage . In case the interpretation that is produced based on the above processes does not ﬁt in with further contextual information or people’s expectations , a new parsing follows . In contrast , the constraint - based view assumes that semantic , syntactic , discourse and other extra - linguistic information affects sentence structure computation in one go ( e . g . , Tanenhaus , Carlson and Trueswell 1989 ) . The construction that is mostly activated , that is , the interpretation that receives support from the majority of infor - mation sources , is the one that we ﬁnally select . Although there are a number of studies which provide evidence for this account , support for the Garden Path theory comes from a wider range of research with normal and brain - damaged participants , showing that syntactic processing precedes semantic processing and is independent of it ( e . g . , Ainsworth - Darnell , Shulman and Boland 1998 ) . Sentence Comprehension during Figurative Meaning Processing So far we have presented psycholinguistic views on how listeners and readers process literal meaning , that is , how the essential meaning of expressions is understood . Next , we discuss what is assumed about language processing when the meaning of an utter - ance goes beyond that of common use . Harley ( 2005 ) proposed three main types of ﬁgurative speech ; metaphors , idioms , and indirect requests . Metaphorical expressions comprise ; simile whereby one thing is likened to another of a different category ( e . g . , Ewan drank like a ﬁsh ) ; strict metaphor , namely , a single - use metaphor ( e . g . , Ewan burst into tears ) ; and synecdoche , whereby a part is substituted for a whole or a whole for a part ( e . g . , Fifty head of cattle , for Fifty cows ) . To understand the structure of these sentences the Three - stage Model ( Clark and Lucy 1975 ) postulates that people ﬁrst derive the literal meaning ( in the way we described in the preceding section ) , which they then test against the context to check for its plausibility . In case it appears to be implausible , further interpretations are attempted . For idioms , that is , a combination of words which , when considered as a whole , have a different meaning from the meaning suggested by the individual words ( e . g . , Make shellﬁsh while the sea is out ; Scottish idiom ) , it is assumed that they are repre - sented and stored in memory as a single lexical entry , unrelated to the lexical entries of each one of the components that build a phrase such as the one above ( Clark and Clark 1977 ; Gibbs 1980 ) . With respect to understanding indirect requests such as Can you pass the pepper , whereby the speaker does not ask her interlocutor whether she is physically able to the process of comprehension from a psycholinguistic approach 17 01 . Meta 52 . 1 . indd 17 1 / 7 / 07 3 : 22 : 28 PM 18 Meta , LII , 1 , 2007 perform this particular task but whether she is available or willing to do so , people appear to rely heavily on inferences ( Shank 1976 ) . As mentioned earlier , we draw inferences to construct a coherent meaning of oral or written speech , either by being guided by the actual meaning of words ( logical inferences ) , or by making associations with the contextual environment ( bridging inferences ) , and by employing background knowledge which may be relevant to the current state ( elaborative inferences ) . Above all , as with any other kind of expression , recipients tend to seek the literal meaning ﬁrst , and only when it does not make sense do they seek alternative meanings ( Searle 1979 ) . The same processing seems to apply to other acts of speech ( e . g . , irony and humour ) , which usually mean something else from what is actually stated . Text Comprehension Having presented the cognitive processes that underlie comprehension at the lexical and sentential level , next we describe what is assumed about the way sentences are combined to construct text representation and help in the decoding of a text’s com - municative purpose . As with sentence comprehension , text comprehension also involves inferential activity . That is , during the process we present below , both information from the text itself and from readers’ own world knowledge and expectations is used to build up meaningful representations . The text - comprehension theory that has received the most attention is the Processing Cycles Theory or Construction - Integration Theory ( Kintsch 1988 ; 1994 ) . According to this view , text representation is constructed by integrating each sentence representation into the context that has been formulated by preceding sentences . In this sense , every time a sentence is introduced , the whole text representa - tion is updated . That is , during every sentence occurrence , ideas have to be reorganized and new relationships have to be established to include new information . It is important to note that for this reorganization to take place the role of short - term and long - term memory appears to be crucial ( Tulving 1972 ) . Short - term memory acts as a temporary storage space within which incoming material is processed . During this processing , additional information is provided by long - term memory ( as this is where any kind of permanent linguistic and extra - linguistic information is stored ) . When a representation is constructed , linguistic material that has already been pro - cessed is deleted from short - term memory to allow new input to be processed . Factors that Affect Comprehension In this section , we list some of the factors that may facilitate or inhibit comprehension . These can be distinguished in factors relating to individual differences and in factors relating to the properties of the to - be - understood material . With respect to individual differences , as with any other cognitive ability , com - prehension skills may vary from one person to another , due to people’s varying degrees of competence and performance ( Chomsky 1968 ) . In other words , what makes “good” and “less - good” comprehenders is the fact that some may acquire all the necessary linguistic and extra - linguistic information for understanding , but be unable to apply it because of physiological limitations ( e . g . , restricted short - term memory capacity due to age or brain damage ) , or inadequacy of operating under stressful conditions 01 . Meta 52 . 1 . indd 18 1 / 7 / 07 3 : 22 : 28 PM that may disrupt the process of comprehension ( e . g . , time pressure or noisy environ - ment ) . On the other hand , others may be capable of dealing with external factors but not possess the required knowledge ( e . g . , background knowledge and language - speciﬁc information ) to successfully construct meaning representations . Regarding the factors that are relevant to the to - be - understood material , it is expected that complex structures will be more difﬁcult to understand than simple struc - tures . The former create more relationships among linguistic elements , thus overloading the mind’s processing capacity , whereas the latter do not need any extra cognitive abili - ties to be processed . The nature of a text , for example stylistics , clarity of expressed ideas , and so on , may also determine how successful the process of comprehension can be . Finally , factors such as familiarity and frequency have been found to facilitate compre - hension since the more familiar we are with certain structures and the more frequently we use them the easier it is to understand them when we read or hear them . Conclusion The aim of this paper was to provide a brief introduction to the process of comprehen - sion from a psycholinguistic perspective . We explained that comprehension of literal meaning for words and word combinations is based on the integration of semantic features and inferences . For sentences , meaning representations result from the assign - ment of thematic roles and determination of syntactic categories in combination with semantic information and background knowledge . Text comprehension employs much of the same processes as sentence comprehension , yet entails a more enhanced participation of short - term and long - term memory since the processing task is cog - nitively more demanding . With respect to comprehension of ﬁgurative meaning , we showed that people tend to derive the literal meaning of an utterance ﬁrst , and only when its testing against context does not result in a plausible interpretation do they seek alternative interpretations . Regarding factors that may affect comprehension , we distinguished between comprehender - speciﬁc and material - speciﬁc factors . Taking into account the information on language comprehension provided from a psycholinguistic approach , the following questions can be raised : In what ways can a psycholinguistic perspective contribute to the ﬁeld of translation ? How can knowledge from a different ﬁeld be used in instructing future translators ? We argue that an inter - disciplinary approach to translation is imperative since the contribution of psycholin - guistics can offer insight into cognitive processes translation is not able to tap into on its own . In this way , translation theories can be enriched by including variables that have not been considered until now . Moreover , the use of a wide range of experimental paradigms can provide scientiﬁc evidence to explain the process of comprehension during translation and justify the occurrence of translation problems and translation product variability ( see also Wills 1982 and Lörscher 1991 , for a similar view ) . Also , by experimentally manipulating certain variables , it will be possible to understand how the meaning of a text cannot be resolved based entirely on linguistic and often - cited extra - linguistic factors . Psycholinguistic factors such as frequency , preference , memory load , and so on have been found to play a crucial role as well . Last but not least , this knowledge can be used , not only , to improve machine translation applications , but also as a teaching tool to heighten future translators’ awareness of comprehension pitfalls so that they can translate accurately and avoid nurturing misinterpretations . the process of comprehension from a psycholinguistic approach 19 01 . Meta 52 . 1 . indd 19 1 / 7 / 07 3 : 22 : 28 PM 20 Meta , LII , 1 , 2007 REFERENCES Ainsworth - Darnell , K . , Shulman , H . G . and J . E . Boland ( 1998 ) : “Dissociating Brain Responses to Syntactic and Semantic Anomalies : Evidence from Event - Related Potentials , ” Journal of Memory and Language 38 , pp . 112 - 130 . Bierwisch , M . and R . Schreuder ( 1992 ) : “From Concepts to Lexical Items , ” Cognition 42 , pp . 23 - 60 . Chomsky , N . ( 1968 ) : Language and Mind , New York , Harcourt Brace Jovanovich . Chomsky , N . ( 1980 ) : Rules and Representations , New York , Columbia University Press . Chomsky , N . ( 1986 ) : Barriers , CA , MIT Press . Clark , H . H . and E . V . Clark ( 1977 ) : Psychology and Language , New York , Harcourt Brace Jovanovich . Clark , H . H . and P . Lucy ( 1975 ) : “Inferring What was Meant from What was Said , ” Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 14 , pp . 56 - 72 . Collins Compact English Dictionary ( 1993 ) : London , Harper Collins Publishers . Fodor , J . ( 2000 ) : The Mind Doesn’t Work That Way , CM , MIT Press . Fodor , J . , Bever , T . G . and M . F . Garrett ( 1974 ) : The Psychology of Language : An Introduction to Psycholinguistics and Generative Grammar , New York , McGraw - Hill . Frazier , L . and J . D . Fodor ( 1978 ) : “The Sausage Machine : A New Two - Stage Parsing Model , ” Cognition 6 , pp . 291 - 325 . Gibbs , R . W . ( 1980 ) : “Spilling the Beans on Understanding and Memory for Idioms in Conversation , ” Memory and Cognition 8 , pp . 149 - 156 . Harley , T . ( 2005 ) : The Psychology of Language . From Data to Theory , New York , Psychology Press . Jackendoff , R . ( 1997 ) : The Architecture of the Language Faculty , CM , MIT Press . Katz , J . J . ( 1972 ) : Semantic Theory , New York , Harper and Row . Kintsch , W . ( 1988 ) : “The Use of Knowledge in Discourse Processing : A Construction - Integration Model , ” Psychological Review 95 , pp . 163 - 182 . Kintsch , W . ( 1994 ) : “The Psychology of Discourse Processing , ” in Gernsbacher , M . A . ( ed . ) , Handbook of Psycholinguistics , San Diego , Academic Press , pp . 721 - 740 . Lakoff , G . ( 1971 ) : “On Generative Semantics , ” in Steinberg , D . D . and L . A . Jakobovits ( eds . ) , Semantics : An Interdisciplinary Reader in Philosophy , Linguistics and Psychology , Cambridge , Cambridge University Press , pp . 232 - 296 . Lörscher , W . ( 1991 ) : Translation Performance , Translation Process and Translation Strategies : A Psychological Investigation , Tubingen , Gunter Narr Verlag . Pickering , M . J . and H . P . Branigan ( 1998 ) : “The representation of verbs : Evidence from syn - tactic priming in language production , ” Journal of Memory and Language 39 , pp . 633 - 651 . Putnam , H . ( 1975 ) : “The Meaning of Meaning , ” in Gunderson , K . ( ed . ) , Language , Mind , and Knowledge , Minneapolis , University of Minnesota Press , pp . 131 - 193 . Rosch , E . H . ( 1973b ) : “On the Internal Structure of Perceptual and Semantic Categories , ” in Moore , T . E . ( ed . ) , Cognitive Development and the Acquisition of Language , New York , Academic Press , pp . 111 - 144 . Schank , R . C . ( 1976 ) : Conceptual Information Processing , Amsterdam , North - Holland . Searle , J . R . ( 1969 ) : Speech Acts : An Essay in the Philosophy of Language , New York , Cambridge University Press . Searle , J . R . ( 1979 ) : “Metaphor , ” in Ortony , A . ( ed . ) , Metaphor and Thought , Cambridge , Cambridge University Press , pp . 92 - 123 . Shoben , E . J . and C . L . Gagne ( 1997 ) : “Thematic Relations and the Creation of Combined Concepts , ” in Ward , T . B . , Smith , S . M . and J . Vaid ( eds . ) , Creative Thought : An Investigation of Creative Structures and Processes , Washington , DC , American Psychological Association , pp . 31 - 50 . Tanenhaus , M . K . , Carlson , G . N . and J . C . Trueswell ( 1989 ) : “The Role of Thematic Structure in Interpretation and Parsing , ” Language and Cognitive Processes 4 , pp . 211 - 234 . 01 . Meta 52 . 1 . indd 20 1 / 7 / 07 3 : 22 : 28 PM Tulving , E . ( 1972 ) : “Episodic and Semantic Memory , ” in Tulving , E . and W . Donaldson ( eds . ) , Organization of Memory . New York , Academic Press , pp . 381 - 403 . Wilss , W . ( 1982 ) : The Science of Translation . Problems and Methods , Tübingen , Narr . Wisniewski , E . J . ( 1997 ) : “When Concepts Combine , ” Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 4 , pp . 167 - 183 . the process of comprehension from a psycholinguistic approach 21 01 . Meta 52 . 1 . indd 21 1 / 7 / 07 3 : 22 : 28 PM