Theory Interplay of Cell Shape and Division Orientation Promotes Robust Morphogenesis of Developing Epithelia Fengzhu Xiong , 1 Wenzhe Ma , 1 Tom W . Hiscock , 1 Kishore R . Mosaliganti , 1 Andrea R . Tentner , 1 Kenneth A . Brakke , 2 Nicolas Rannou , 1 Arnaud Gelas , 1 Lydie Souhait , 1 Ian A . Swinburne , 1 Nikolaus D . Obholzer , 1 and Sean G . Megason 1 , * 1 Department of Systems Biology , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA 02115 , USA 2 Mathematics Department , Susquehanna University , Selinsgrove , PA 17870 , USA * Correspondence : megason @ hms . harvard . edu http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 09 . 007 SUMMARY Epithelial cells acquire functionally important shapes ( e . g . , squamous , cuboidal , columnar ) during devel - opment . Here , we combine theory , quantitative im - aging , and perturbations to analyze how tissue geometry , cell divisions , and mechanics interact to shape the presumptive enveloping layer ( pre - EVL ) on the zebraﬁsh embryonic surface . We ﬁnd that , un - der geometrical constraints , pre - EVL ﬂattening is regulated by surface cell number changes following differentially oriented cell divisions . The division pattern is , in turn , determined by the cell shape distri - bution , which forms under geometrical constraints by cell - cell mechanical coupling . An integrated math - ematical model of this shape - division feedback loop recapitulates empirical observations . Surprisingly , the model predicts that cell shape is robust to changes of tissue surface area , cell volume , and cell number , which we conﬁrm in vivo . Further simu - lations and perturbations suggest the parameter link - ing cell shape and division orientation contributes to epithelial diversity . Together , our work identiﬁes an evolvable design logic that enables robust cell - level regulation of tissue - level development . INTRODUCTION Different cell shapes arise in developing tissues with remarkable yet poorly understood precision and coordination . In epithelial layers , cells form shapes ( e . g . , squamous , cuboidal , and co - lumnar ) that carry out distinct functions ( e . g . , protection , me - chanical support , selective permeability , andsecretion ) . Epithelia with different cell shapes are precursors of more elaborate tissue structures ( e . g . , tubes , sacs , and villi ) ( Kolega , 1986 ; Eiraku et al . , 2011 ) , and failure to correctly produce or maintain them causes many defects and diseases ( e . g . , neural tube defects [ NTDs ] and carcinomas ) ( Deramaudt and Rustgi , 2005 ; Ciruna et al . , 2006 ; Thiery et al . , 2009 ) . Many geometrical , cell - behavioral , mechanical , and molecular factors inﬂuence epithelial cell shapes . First , expansion of the layer enlarges the surface area of cells , making them more squa - mous , whereas constriction of tissue surface reduces cell sur - face area , making cells more columnar ( Kane et al . , 2005 ; Martin et al . , 2010 ; Sato and Clevers , 2013 ) . Second , growth of surface cells makes them more columnar , whereas volume depletion by cell extrusion , internalization , or asymmetric divisions promotes more squamous morphologies ( Wolpert and Gustafson , 1961 ; Chalmers et al . , 2003 ; Eisenhoffer et al . , 2012 ) . Third , cell shape is locally regulated by mechanical forces between and within cells ( e . g . , adhesion and cortical tension ) , cell polarity cues , and extracellular matrix molecules ( Lecuit and Lenne , 2007 ; Ka¨ - fer et al . , 2007 ; Fernandes et al . , 2010 ) . Despite extensive research , it is still unclear how these indi - vidual factors interact as an integrated system to generate different epithelial cell shapes . Even more unclear is how devel - oping epithelia produce robust morphogenetic outcomes in response to these many variables , which change concurrently , noisily ( e . g . , variation between individuals ) , and sometimes un - expectedly ( e . g . , injury ) . This complexity raises the possibility that it is the regulatory logic of the interactions , rather than in - dividual factors , that matters ( Nelson et al . , 2005 ; Blankenship et al . , 2006 ; Gibson et al . , 2011 ) . However , the lack of quantita - tive dynamic data has made it difﬁcult to directly address ques - tions of how these factors interact . For example , how does a proliferating epithelium maintain a stable morphology with an increasing number of cells ? How do local mechanical inter - actions between cells inﬂuence the average cell shape ? Which key factors can be regulated to change the direction of mor - phogenesis ( e . g . , from columnar to squamous ) ? How do these interactions increase the robustness and evolvability of the system ? Quantitative models based on high - resolution imaging data ( Keller , 2013 ) may provide a way to address these questions at a cell and tissue level , even when many unresolved molecular complexities still remain ( Megason et al . , 2011 ) . Recent ad - vances in imaging allow simultaneous measurement of many pa - rameters at high spatial - temporal coverage and resolution , providing useful data for model development and validation ( Kel - ler et al . , 2008 ; McMahon et al . , 2008 ; Olivier et al . , 2010 ; Oster - ﬁeld et al . , 2013 ; Xiong et al . , 2013 ) . Theoretical models offer the ability to integrate multiple scales and illuminate key cell - level mechanisms guiding morphogenesis ( Odell et al . , 1981 ; Gibson et al . , 2011 ; Tamulonis et al . , 2011 ) , although they must be used Cell 159 , 415 – 427 , October 9 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 415 carefully because they always require abstractions and approx - imations . In the best cases , using abstractions and experimen - tal knowledge to build a formal model can lead to nonintuitive predictions that can guide experimental tests , and parameter analysis may identify key properties that enable the system to produce a variety of outcomes . Here , we use in toto imaging ( Megason and Fraser , 2003 ) to systematically measure the cell shape changes and divisions in the presumptive enveloping layer ( pre - EVL ) , a squamous surface epithelium that arises in early zebraﬁsh embryos ( Kimmel et al . , 1995 ) . We hypothesize and validate that surface cell shapes are geometrically constrained by tissue surface area , cell num - ber , and cell volume and mechanically regulated by cell - cell in - teractions . In - depth cell lineage tracking indicates that the rate of increase of surface cell number depends exclusively on how cell divisions are oriented : in - plane divisions produce two sur - face cells , while out - of - plane divisions keep the cell number con - stant . In turn , we ﬁnd that division orientation is quantitatively predicted by cell shape . These results constitute a closed feed - back loop : cell shape distribution changes cell number by de - termining the ratio of in - plane / out - of - plane divisions , and cell number in turn changes cell shape distribution by coupling geometrical constraints via mechanical interactions . An inte - grated mathematical model centered on this feedback ( that we call the ‘‘interplay’’ model ) faithfully recapitulates the empirical observations . Surprisingly , this simple interplay logic is sufﬁcient to ensure that cell shapes remain robust to changes of surface area , cell number and cell volume , by over - time compensation and scaling that we conﬁrm with in vivo perturbations . Further parameter analysis of the model suggests that tuning the param - Figure 1 . Quantitative Description of Sur - face Cell Shape Change of Zebraﬁsh Em - bryos ( A ) Schematic illustration of simpliﬁed epithelial monolayer , gray indicates the free surface , cell shape is represented by aspect ratio L / R . ( B ) The morphology of an epithelial layer is repre - sented as a distribution of L / R ratios . ( C ) Zebraﬁsh enveloping layer ( EVL , blue ) in the context of the whole embryo . Sketch represents a lateral cross - section of an oblong ( (cid:1) 4 k cell ) stage embryo . ( D ) Time - lapse imaging data and measurement of surface cell L / R ratios ( dashed cyan lines ) . Scale bars represent 20 m m . See also Figures S1D – S1H . ( E ) Morphogenesis of surface layer over ﬁve cell cycles . n = 860 . Inset : average L / R ± SD . ( F ) Morphogenesis of deep layer over ﬁve cell cy - cles . n = 200 . Inset : average L / R ± SD . The vari - ance of ln ( L / R ) of deep cells is smaller than that of surface cells ( f tests ) . eter linking cell shape and division orien - tation can produce different epithelial cell shapes , which we tested by overex - pressing Crumbs and applying our model to other systems . We postulate that this is a basic design principle of development : interplay between local , simple cell be - haviors collectively allows the tissue to robustly achieve a variety of morphogenetic goals . RESULTS A General Framework for Describing Epithelial Morphogenesis and Zebraﬁsh Pre - EVL System The morphological variety of epithelial layers falls within a deﬁned range of cell shapes ( e . g . , squamous , cuboidal , and columnar ) that arise during development . This allows us to simplify measurements and comparisons by representing cell shapes with a single parameter : the ratio of length scales of the cell’s lateral ( along the surface ) and radial ( perpendicular to the surface ) dimensions ( L / R , Figure 1A ) . The dynamics of the population can thus be described as a temporal evolution of a distribution of L / R ratios of a number of cells ( Figure 1B ) . These simpliﬁcations allow an intuitive , quantitative representation of epithelial morphogenesis , capturing not all but an essential component of the shape changes of the cells . The presumptive EVL ( pre - EVL ) is a monolayer of surface cells of the zebraﬁsh early embryo that have epithelial polarity ( Figures S1A and S1B available online ; Data S1 , Text 1 ) and barrier func - tion ( Figure S1C ) . The pre - EVL arises during early cleavage mainly composed of round / cuboidal cells . Unlike ‘‘mature’’ epithelia that are lineage - separated from other tissues with a basal lamina , the pre - EVL has cells leaving the layer through di - visions as it goes on to become a highly squamous epithelium ( EVL ) ( Figure 1C ) over several metasynchronous cell cycles ( Kimmel et al . , 1995 ) . It thus represents a key early stage of epithelial development that more ‘‘mature’’ epithelia may pass 416 Cell 159 , 415 – 427 , October 9 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . through ( Data S1 , Text 1 ) . To understand the pre - EVL morphoge - netic process , we imaged the pre - EVL using nuclear and mem - brane ﬂuorescent proteins ( Figures S1D and S1E ; Movie S1 ) . We measured cell shapes ( L / R ) at the time point centered be - tween two consecutive cell divisions ( Figures 1D and S1F ; other time points to be discussed later ) between 128 cell and (cid:1) 2 k cell stages ( in this time window the cells have similar widths within the surface plane ) ( Figures S1G and S1H ; Data S1 , Text 2 ) . The measured shape distributions of the surface cells show a ﬂat - tening shift ( to the right on the L / R plot ) with time and a wide range of cell shapes ( Figure 1E ) , whereas the deep cells under the surface keep uniform and roughly spherical shapes ( Fig - ure 1F ) . The ﬂattening is earlier than known lineage restriction or EVL - speciﬁc marker expressions ( Figures S1I and S1J ) ( Ho , 1992 ; Sagerstro¨m et al . , 2005 ) . These results are consistent with previous observations of this system ( Kimmel and Law , 1985 ; Kane et al . , 1992 ; Zhang et al . , 2011 ) and allow a quantita - tive analysis of cell shape changes on both population and sin - gle - cell levels . Tissue Surface Area , Cell Volume , and Cell Number Constrain the Average Surface Cell Shape To understand how the surface layer may become more ﬂat - tened or columnar over time , we assessed the dynamics of key geometrical parameters that are associated with cell shapes , namely the total surface area ( A ) of the layer , the number ( N S ) of surface cells and the volume of individual surface cells ( V C ) . Intuitively , these parameters relate to the average aspect ratio ( < L / R > ) of the cells in the following ways : ﬁrst , the average sur - face area of cells satisﬁes : A / N S z L 2 ; second , the volume of a cell is approximately V C z L 2 R ( see Data S1 , Text 3 for a discus - sion of these simpliﬁcations ) . These equations can be combined to express < L / R > in terms of A , V C , and N S . While the actual value Figure 2 . Surface Area , Cell Volume , and Cell Number Dynamics Constrain Morpho - genesis ( A ) Surface area ( A ) oftheentireblastoderm surface over time . Both estimation methods show changes < 10 % at the ﬁve time - points measured . See also Figures S2A – S2C and Data S1 , Text 3 . ( B ) Average cell volume ( V C ) over time using L 2 R estimation , whole embryo estimation ( V / N ) , and complete membrane segmentation . Errors bars show SD . See also Figures S2A , S2B , S2D – S2F , and Data S1 , Text 3 . ( C ) Surfacecellnumber dynamics . Seealso Figures S2G , S2H , and Data S1 , Text 5 . ( D ) Calculated < L / R > usingEquation1comparedto measurement from Figure 1E and whole embryo estimation compiling numbers from ( A ) – ( C ) . See also Data S1 , Text 4 . may differ slightly depending on the dis - tribution of cell shapes ( Data S1 , Text 4 ) , < L / R > z ( A / N S ) 1 . 5 / V C ( Equation 1 ) serves as a close estimate of the actual < L / R > . Following Equation 1 , we ﬁrst measured A both macroscopically ( Figure S2A ) and using calculated average L 2 from single cell measurements ( Fig - ures S2B and S2C ) . The results are congruent and indicate that A is stable with under 10 % ﬂuctuations between the ﬁve time points of L / R measurements ( Figure 2A ) . Thus , unlike the later epiboly stage ( Kane et al . , 2005 ) , the expansion of the tissue sur - face area contributes little to cell ﬂattening in pre - EVL . Next , we measured V C using global average ( Figure S2A ) , average L 2 R ( Figures S2B and S2D ) , and full membrane segmentations ( Fig - ure S2E ; Movie S2 ) . The results agree on the conclusion that the average V C closely follows an ideal exponential decrease curve ( Figure 2B ) by halving at every cell cycle , indicating no sig - niﬁcant cell growth during this time . Individual cells halve their volumes roughly equally at divisions ( 7 . 3 % ± 5 . 2 % difference from average V C of two daughters , n = 43 pairs ; Figure S2F ) ( Olivier et al . , 2010 ) . According to Equation 1 , a halving V C would double < L / R > after each cell cycle if A and N S do not change . However , the measured increase in < L / R > is less rapid than this ( Figure 1E ) , potentially because of the increase of N S . As a fraction of cells are known to leave the surface layer during divi - sions ( Kimmel et al . , 1995 ) , N S is expected to increase at a slower rate than doubling per cell cycle . We measured N S dynamics ( Figure S2G ) and found that it follows a highly consistent increasing trend ( Figure S2H ) . Interestingly , this trend is slower than predicted by a model ( Data S1 , Text 5 ) where surface cells are rigid and do not change shape ( Figure 2C ) , suggesting that ﬂattening is required for cells to cover the entire surface area . Reassuringly , by combining our A , V C , and N S measurements us - ing Equation 1 , we obtain an increasing trend of < L / R > that is consistent with whole embryo estimation and the actual < L / R > values ( Figure 2D ) . Together , these results show how an epithelial layer of a given morphology obeys the geometrical constraints of surface area , cell volume and cell number . In pre - EVL , the N S parameter Cell 159 , 415 – 427 , October 9 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 417 changes in a speciﬁc manner that quantitatively explains the in - crease of < L / R > ( i . e . , ﬂattening ) . How , then , is N S regulated ? Surface Cell Number Changes through Differentially Oriented Divisions Predicted by Cell Shapes To investigate how N S is regulated , we tracked individual cells through time to follow how their divisions affected N S . Consis - tent with previous studies ( Kimmel and Law , 1985 ) , we found that two types of divisions occur in the surface cells : the sur - face - deep ( S - D ) division , producing one surface daughter and one deep daughter ( Figure 3A ) , and the surface - surface ( S - S ) division , producing two surface daughters ( Figure 3B ) . After an S - D division , the surface daughter’s L / R ratio continues to change but is close to double that of the mother , and the deep daughter becomes spherical ( Figure 3C ) , whereas after an S - S division the L / R ratios of the daughters change in ranges close to half that of the mother ( Figure 3D ) . Thus S - S Figure 3 . Division Patterns Determine N S , and Cell Shape Is Predictive of Division Orientation ( AandB ) TimecoursesofexampleS - D ( A ) andS - S ( B ) divisions . Arrows indicate the tracked cells . ( C and D ) Example S - D ( C ) and S - S ( D ) mother and daughter L / R dynamics throughout the cell cycle . ( E ) Full lineage up to 13 th cell division of a middle blastomere at 16 cell stage ( highlighted yellow cycle ) . For simplicity , deep cell branches are not drawn as the subsequent divisions always make more deep cells . Numbers indicate cell cycle number . ( F ) Relationship between cell shape and division choice . Each marker represents a tracked cell . n = 162 . See also Figures S3A and S3B . ( G ) Fraction of S - D division calculated by binning data in ( F ) according to L / R values . A Hill function switch is used to ﬁt data points . divisions contribute to crowding while S - D divisions contribute to ﬂattening . The balance between these division types at each cell cycle affects both N S and < L / R > . How are division orientations decided ? Is cell division the only factor that affects N S ? To address these questions , we re - constructed full lineage trees of surface cells by tracking future EVL cells from cell cycle 1 to 13 ( Figure 3E ; data not shown ) . We found essentially no in - stances of cell extrusion in unperturbed embryos and no internalization into deep layers without division . We also found that deep cells do not move to the surface ( this is not surprising because the surface cells have already adopted distinct polar - ity and tight junctions ) ( Figures S1A and S1B ) . Thus , the increase of N S only occurs through S - S divisions . Consistent with previous studies ( Ho , 1992 ) , we found that S - D divisions start to appear at the 6 th cell cycle and stop at the 13 th when the EVL becomes a separate lineage compartment from the deep cells . S - D and S - S divisions may appear at different branch levels and their appearance does not follow a ﬁxed lineage pattern . Thus , although S - S and S - D divisions have predictable effects on N S and the shape of daughter cells , the history of di - visions in a lineage is variable and not strongly predictive of the next division type . It seems unlikely that division orientation is determined by lineage . An intriguing possibility is that the shape of the cells deter - mines whether the mother cell undergoes S - S or S - D division . It has long been recognized that cell shape correlates with divi - sion orientation ( Hertwig , 1884 ) and several molecular mecha - nisms have been proposed to account for this relationship ( Grill and Hyman , 2005 ; Kunda and Baum , 2009 ; Wu ¨ hr et al . , 2010 ; Minc et al . , 2011 ) . To test this in our system , we tracked surface 418 Cell 159 , 415 – 427 , October 9 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . cells at different times to their divisions after measuring their L / R ratio . Indeed , highly ﬂattened cells always undergo S - S divisions and highly columnar cells always undergo S - D divisions , while at intermediate L / Rs an overlapping zone of both choices exists ( Figure 3F ) . We calculated the fraction of S - D divisions as a func - tion of L / R and ﬁtted it with a Hill function ( Figure 3G ) . The tran - sition to favoring S - S division occurs when the L / R increases over a Threshold ( Th ) of 1 . 3 , and has a remarkably high Hill coef - ﬁcient of 10 ( Sharpness , Sh ) . Consistent with cell tracking , the centrioles align along the future division axes ( Figure S3A ) and the division orientation is predominantly either parallel or perpen - dicular to the surface ( Figure S3B ) . Furthermore , when cell shape is forced to change by embryo squishing ( Figure S3C ) , or injec - tion of an oil droplet ( Figure S3D ) , the division orientation aligns with the new long axis . These data show that while the cells have established polarity and perhaps cortical cues that might bias division orientation , the cell shape ( L / R ) is the dominant determinant of the probability of S - S / S - D division of surface cells ( the ‘‘division rule’’ ) . Our results imply that many features of pre - EVL development follow directly from the cell shape distribution : because the shape of a single cell strongly correlates with its division orienta - tion , the cell shape distribution ( Figure 1E ) becomes predictive of the fraction of S - S / S - D divisions of the population , which in turn will determine the change in N S . This offers a mechanism for the characteristic N S increase ( Figure 2C ) that explains the dynamics of < L / R > ( Figure 2D ; Equation 1 ) . Thus to understand the behavior of the epithelial layer , we need to understand the fac - tors that inﬂuence the distribution of cell shape . Simple models that do not account for cell - cell interactions , such as pure geometrical partitioning from an initial distribution ( Figure S3E ) , spatial heterogeneity across the embryo ( Figure S3F ) , or shape variation from unevenness of cell volumes ( Figure S3G ) do not explain the observed distributions , indicating that other factors such as mechanical interactions between cells need to be considered . Cell Shapes Form Log - Normal Distributions Mediated by Mechanical Interactions Each cell division signiﬁcantly changes the L / R of the cells re - maining on the surface . An S - S division produces two surface daughters , with L / Rs near 0 . 5 3 that of the mother . An S - D divi - sion , in contrast , produces one surface daughter with an L / R near 2 3 that of the mother ( Figures 3C and 3D ) . This pattern of multiplicative change can produce log - normal distributions ( Lim - pert et al . , 2001 ) ( Data S1 , Text 6 ) , and a log - normal distribution indeed ﬁts the observed L / R data ( Figures 4A and S4A ; Data S1 , Text 6 ) . This allows us to simplify the description of the cell shape distributions with just two parameters : the average ( m ) of ln ( L / R ) and the SD ( s ) of ln ( L / R ) . We ﬁnd that m increases over time as the average cell ﬂattens , while s remains stable ( Figure 4B ) . A direct application of the division rule ( Figure 3G ) to the log - normal distributions , while correctly predicting the change of N S ( Figure S4B ) , does not produce a new log - normal distribution ( Figure S4C ) . This prompted us to examine cell shape changes following cell divisions ( Figure 4C ) . Immediately after cytokinesis most cells are close to spherical but quickly assume a multiple - peak distribution as expected from binary 0 . 5 3 or 2 3 L / R changes from divisions . However , the multiple peaks then merge , producing a single major peak . These data show that the varied initial cell shapes resulting from divisions are homog - enized over time . We hypothesize that the mechanical forces that locally regu - late cell shape ( Heisenberg and Bellaı¨che , 2013 ) are responsible for the changes during and after divisions . Cell - cell interactions such as adhesion tend to increase cell - cell contact surface by modulating the contact surface tension ( Figure S4D ) ( Maıˆtre et al . , 2012 ) . In the absence of adhesion , cells tend to be spher - ical due to cortical tension ( Figure S4E ) ( Manning et al . , 2010 ) . The cell surface angle ( q ) at the contact / no - contact transition point ( Figures 4D and S4D ) increases as adhesion reduces sur - face tension at cell - cell contact surface . We deﬁne the ratio of reduction as g , and g = 1 (cid:3) cos q ( Data S1 , Text 7 ) . In surface cells , g ﬂuctuates during the cell cycle ( Figures S4F and S4G ) as q decreases during mitosis and increases afterward . To investigate the effect of the cell mechanics ( measured by g ) onthecellshapedistribution , wesimulatedthedynamicsofforce - mediated cell shape changes using Surface Evolver ( Brakke , 1992 ) taking into account geometrical constraints , surface ten - sion , and cell - cell interaction ( Figure 4E ; Data S1 , Text 8 ) . This minimal model starts with a two - peak cell shape distribution ( Fig - ure 4F ) analogous to Figure S4C to mimic the condition immedi - ately after divisions . The distribution quickly evolves to have only one major peak and closely ﬁts log - normal for several itera - tions ( Figures 4F and 4G ; Movie S3 ) . Further iterations slowly reduce the ﬁt ( Data S1 , Text 8 ) . Interestingly , larger g drives faster distribution change ( Figure 4H ) , suggesting the increase of g following divisions promotes cell shape homogenization . These data support the idea that cell mechanics reduce energy - unfavor - able cell shapes and re - establish the cell shape distribution following divisions . The Surface Evolver model also predicts that change of g affects < L / R > mildly , which agrees with the observed dynamics of < L / R > after divisions ( Figure 4C , inset ) and results of g perturbations using Nocodazole and cdh1 knockdown ( Figures S4H – S4K ) . Our results are consistent with an origin of the shape of L / R distributions coupling divisions and mechanics . Cell divisions cause large fold changes of L / R of surface cells , which are then modiﬁed during interphase by mechanical force balance between cells and their neighborhoods . A log - normal model characterized by a changing m and stable s ( see Data S1 , Text 9 for a discussion on the nature and value of s ) reasonably de - scribes the cell shape distributions . This understanding of the cell shape distribution ( g , s ) along with the geometrical con - straints ( A , V C , N S ) and the division rule ( Th , Sh ) provides us an opportunity to fully model the morphogenesis of pre - EVL and epithelial layers in general . Quantitative Recapitulation of Surface Morphogenesis Using an Integrated Model To integrate the rules of geometry , cell division and cell - cell inter - action to understand the dynamics of cell shape distributions ( U , Figure 5A ) , we ﬁrst required U to meet both the geometrical con - straints ( A , V C , N S ) and a mechanically determined log - normal shape ( g , s ) . To simplify coding , we implemented the mild inﬂu - ence of g on < L / R > using geometrical correlations ( Figures S5A Cell 159 , 415 – 427 , October 9 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 419 and S5B ; Data S1 , Text 10 ) . An U that satisﬁes all the properties ( A , V C , N S , g , and s ) is mathematically unique ( Figure S5C and Data S1 , Text 11 ) . This allows us to determine < L / R > and recap - Figure4 . MechanicalRegulationsontheCell Shape Distributions ( A ) A log - normal model ﬁt of the cell shape distri - bution data ( 512 cell stage from Figure 1E , log - normalmodelp = 0 . 16 , normalmodel ( rejected ) : p = 2 . 7 3 10 (cid:3) 4 , c 2 tests ) . See also Figure S4A and Data S1 , Text 6 for other time points and statistics . ( B ) Cell shape distributions represented by two parameters under the log - normal assumption . The differences between pairs of m are signiﬁcant ( t tests ) and the differences between pairs of s are not signiﬁcant ( f tests ) . ( C ) Cell shape changes after mitosis . Images show a group of surface cells changing surface areas following division ( green , cell membrane ; red , cell nuclei ) . Asterisks indicate S - D dividing cells in cytokinesis . Arrows show a S - S daughter expand - ing boundaries into a S - D daughter thus reducing their initial differences in L / R after divisions . Plot shows the shape distribution changes following division . Inset : corresponding < L / R > values ( not signiﬁcantly different , t tests on ln ( L / R ) ) . ( D ) Schematicillustrationsofsurfaceconﬁgurations with high / low cortical tension and respective tran - sition point angles ( q ) . The stronger the cortical tension the smaller the value of q . See also Fig - ure S4D and Data S1 , Text 7 . ( E ) Cartoon illustration of mechanical interactions changing cell shapes . The ﬁve cells have variable shapes after division then evolve to reduce surface energy while meeting the constraints of constant total surface area and cell volume . Unfavorable shapes such as very columnar and squamous cells ( corresponding to low and high L / R values ) are reduced . ( F ) Surface Evolver modeling of the change of shapedistributionafterdivision ( 512cellstage ) . The imagesshowthesurfaceviewofthecells , andtheR dimension is perpendicular to the image plane ( equivalent of a top view on the images in [ E ] ) . The conﬁgurations arrive at a near - stable state after approximatelysixiterations . SeealsoMovieS3and Data S1 , Text 8 . ( G ) Evolution of L / R distributions . The log - normal model uses calculated m and s from simulated data at iteration 98 ( stable state ) . Iterations 1 – 4 ﬁt log - normal ( c 2 tests ) . ( H ) Effect of g on L / R distribution change . Note the overlap between solid lines ( iteration 10 ) from smaller g s and dashed lines ( iteration 3 ) from larger g s . See also Data S1 , Text 8 . ture the observed U evolution using measured N S at each cell cycle as input ( Figure 5B ) . We then took one step further to implement the division rule ( Th , Sh ) into the model ( Figure S5C ) to compute the fraction of S - D divisions given a modeled U at one stage and use the predicted N S to compute U at the next cell - cycle stage , leading to a full interplay model . This model satisfactorily repro - duces the morphogenesis process , although it diverges from re - ality at the ﬁnal time point of 2 k cell stage ( Figure 5C ) with an 420 Cell 159 , 415 – 427 , October 9 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . overestimate of N S . One possible explanation for this is that in the simulation we used ﬁxed Th , Sh , and g values while in reality they may change over time . Our interplay model allows us to predict the course of pre - EVL morphogenesis with a small set of rules and initial conditions . Moreover , the feedback cycle between U and N S provides a po - tential self - regulation mechanism for the population . Although it is unlikely to be the only way to achieve surface ﬂattening , this interplay design may confer additional advantages such as developmental robustness and evolvability . Robustness of Morphogenesis from the Interplay between Shape and Division Developmental processes exhibit robustness in reaching teleo - nomic morphological / patterning goals , a phenomenon called ‘‘canalization’’ ( Waddington , 1942 ) . Such robustness can be achieved through feedback interactions at a molecular level ( Alon , 2007 ) that allow regulatory networks to ‘‘steer’’ the dy - namic process to the correct trajectory in the face of noise , er - rors , and varied environments . Our results reveal a system of cellular and mechanical interactions that also contain analogous feedbacks . We therefore hypothesized that the cellular / tissue level interplay between N S and the cell shape distribution provides morphogenetic robustness . For example , when the surface area A reduces under constant N S , the more crowded population will have more columnar cells , biasing their division orientations at the next cell cycle to more S - D . Consequently , N S will be relatively reduced to decrease crowding . To test this Figure 5 . Quantitative Models of Surface Layer Morphogenesis ( A ) DatainFigure1Ereplottedwithfraction / logaxes to facilitate comparison with simulations . ( B ) Simulation results using measured N S under geometrical and mechanical constraints . ( C ) Interplay model simulation results ( adding the division rule to [ B ] ) . idea , we performed yolk extraction on 256 cell stage embryos and followed cell shape changes ( Figures 6A and S6C ) . The loss of a portion of yolk causes imme - diate shrinkage of the surface resulting in a crowding shift of cell shapes ( Figure S6A , data not shown ) . Intriguingly , the embryos recover later to be smaller but develop - mentally normal ( Figure 6C ) with correct surface ﬂattening ( Figures 6E and S6D ) . Similarly , when we remove surface cells via micropipettes to reduce N S ( Figures 6B and S6C ) , the neighbors of the lost cells stretch over to cover the ablation site , effectively biasing their next division choice toward S - S ( Figure S6B ) , thus compensating for the loss ( Figures 6D and S6D ) . These data show that the morphogenesis of the surface layer is robust to changes and variations in A and N S . Our model argues that , without the interplay between cell shape and division orientation , this robustness would not exist ( Figure 6E ; Data S1 , Text 12 ) . The model further predicts that embryos will scale N S to A after A is changed . Indeed , N S of individual embryos perturbed at 128 or 256 cell stages is pro - portionally reduced by (cid:1) 2 k cell stage and follows the predicted N S / A relationship ( Figure 6F ) . Increased cell extrusion at the api - cal surface was also observed in yolk - extracted embryos ( data not shown ) , suggesting additional mechanisms of N S reduction are in place ( Eisenhoffer et al . , 2012 ) to ensure the scaling of A and N S . To test the system’s robustness against changes in V C , we created tetraploids ( Figures 6G , S6E , S6F , and S6H ) ( Fank - hauser , 1945 , Herbst , 2002 ) . In tetraploid embryos , cells un - dergo the maternal - zygotic transition at an earlier cell - cycle stage due to the increased nuclear - cytoplasmic ratio ( Newport and Kirschner , 1982 ) . The resulting advanced cell - cycle slow - down of tetraploid cells ( Figure S6G ) leads to more cell growth before division compared to diploid controls at later stages of surface morphogenesis ( Figure 6H ) . This effectively provides a perturbation on V C . We found tetraploid embryos start to have fewer surface cells at the comparable stages ( Figures 6I and 6J ) , while < L / R > is not signiﬁcantly different from diploid controls and far higher than predicted by assuming no feedback to N S from cell shapes ( Figure 6K ; Data S1 , Text 13 ) . Indeed , the inter - play model predicts an increase in the S - D division rate of tetra - ploid surface cells caused by the change in V C , which agrees with experimental measurements ( Figure 6L ; Data S1 , Text 13 ) . Cell 159 , 415 – 427 , October 9 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 421 Together , these data indicate that the interplay between cell shapes and division orientation of the surface population en - sures the robust arrival at the ‘‘target’’ < L / R > of a speciﬁc epithe - lial type . Many perturbed embryos ( 14 / 20 for yolk extraction , 7 / 16 for cell ablation , and 5 / 8 for tetraploids ) successfully ﬁnished epiboly ( indicating proper EVL differentiation ) . These results imply that , despite being important constraints , the global geometrical properties ( A , V C , N S ) of the epithelial layer do not deﬁne the direction of morphogenesis . Instead , local rules such as division orientation control regulate the dynamics of the population . What , then , is the key factor that determines ﬁnal epithelial type ? The Interplay Model Reveals a General Link between Tissue Morphology and the Division Rule Tounderstandhow the model parameters ( Th , Sh , g , and s ) affect the morphogenetic process , we performed in silico experiments to alter theirvalues ( Data S1 , Text 14 ) . The change of Th produces a full spectrum of resulting epithelial morphologies from squa - mous to columnar ( Figure 7A ) and corresponding N S changes ( data not shown ) . Sh , on the other hand , inﬂuences the system onlymildlyunlessitmovesnear0 ( i . e . , cell - shape - independentdi - vision orientations ) ( Figure 7B ) . g changes can moderately alter < L / R > as we have discussed earlier . However , over time the ef - fect of an early g change is compensated through the interplay Figure 6 . Robustness of Morphogenesis to Geometrical Parameters ( A , B , and G ) Schematic illustration of pertur - bation methods on A ( yolk extraction ) , N S ( cell ablation ) , V C ( tetraploid induction ) , respectively . The plot shows the predicted immediate change of cell shape distribution following perturbation . See also Figures S6A – S6C and Data S1 , Texts 12 and 13 . ( C and D ) Phenotypes of yolk extraction ( 5 hr postfertilization [ hpf ] , perturbed at 256 cell stage ) and cell ablation ( 3 . 3 hpf , perturbed at 128 cell stage ) . The perturbed embryo in ( C ) has a smaller yolk ( 92 % in diameter ) and has an 85 % smaller A ; the perturbed embryo in ( D ) has the same yolk diameter but has a smaller total cell volume ( (cid:1) 80 % ) . Scale bars represent 100 m m . See also Figure S6D . ( E ) < L / R > values after perturbations . Error bars indicate SEM . Dashed line bars are model pre - dictions for corresponding perturbations assuming no feedback . See also Data S1 , Text 12 . ( F ) Scaling of A and N S in single embryos . Each mark represents one embryo . Lines show interplay model predictions . See also Data S1 , Text 12 . ( H ) Surface cell volumes of control and tetraploid embryos over different cell - cycle stages . The ab - solute timing is different between controls and tetraploids as tetraploidcells slow down cell cycles earlier ( Figure S6G ) . Volumes are measured using L 2 R . Error bars indicate SD . * p = 6 . 8 3 10 (cid:3) 4 , * * p = 5 . 4 3 10 (cid:3) 5 . The p values for the other three points are > 0 . 1 ( t tests ) . ( I ) Surfaces of control and tetraploid cells indicat - ing the density of surface cells . Images are 3D - maximum projections from a center - top view on the surface . The difference is subtle by 1 k cell stage and is more apparent at later stages . Scale bar represents 100 m m . ( J ) N S counts of control and tetraploid over time . ( K ) < L / R > of control and tetraploid surface cells over time . Error bars indicate SEM . The No - feed - back model prediction assumes no S - D division ratio change in tetraploid embryos despite V C in - crease . See also Data S1 , Text 13 . ( L ) Change of S - D division ratio as predicted by model and measured in controls and tetraploids . See also Data S1 , Text 13 . 422 Cell 159 , 415 – 427 , October 9 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . ( Figure 7C ) , indicating that as long as other constraints are met , mechanical interactions between cells could vary with little effect on the over - time morphogenetic outcome . s has been between 0 . 25 and 0 . 40 in all conditions we measured . Interestingly , a s that is smaller than 0 . 25 ( tighter distribution ) is predicted to cause oscillations of < L / R > through divisions ( Figure 7D ) . This result suggests that heterogeneity in cell shapes is important for the monotonic , gradual shape change of the population . The modeling results thus suggest that the regulation of parameter Th plays the most important role in morphogenesis by setting its direction . To directly test this prediction not knowing the molecular mechanisms of Th regulation , we per - formed a range of perturbations focusing on the spindle posi - Figure 7 . Effect of Model Parameters on Epithelial Morphogenesis ( A – D ) Interplay model simulations of < L / R > using one variable parameter while ﬁxing other parame - ters as in Figure 5C . ( E ) Crb and control phenotypes at sphere stage . xCrb - GFP is visible as diffuse GFP signal in the image . Embryos are transgenic for H2B - GFP and mem - mCherry2 . Scale bar represents 50 m m . ( F ) L / R ratio measurements for embryos in ( E ) . Error bars are SD . ( G ) N S trends in Crb embryos . The wild - type ( WT ) data is from Figure S2H . At (cid:1) 2 k cell stage , two Crb + data points are larger than 2 3 SD of the WT and two are larger than 1 3 SD ( p = 0 . 002 ) . Error bars are SD . ( H ) Division rule in Crb injected cells . n = 122 . In mother cells that satisfy 1 < L / R < 1 . 3 , SS : SD for Crb + cells is 17 : 27 ( due to oblique divisions ) whereas for WT is 11 : 39 . See also Figures S7E and S7G . ( I ) Interplay model prediction of Crb + dynamics . For simplicity , the only changed parameter compared to WT simulation is Th , despite observations that A , g alsochangedslightlyinCrb + embryos . WTdatais from Figure 1E . n = 400 for Crb + data from four movies . Error bars are SEM . ( J ) Simulation of sea urchin ( Wray 1997 ) and frog ( Chalmers et al . , 2003 ) embryo surface morpho - genesisusinganalteredThvalueanddifferentinitial conditions ( A 1 , V C1 , N S1 ) and compared to ﬁsh . See also Data S1 , Text 14 . ( K ) N S changes of different species as a result of Th differences . The same Th values as ( J ) were used . See also Figures S7I and S7J and Data S1 , Text 14 . tioning machinery and cell polarity compo - nents ( Data S1 , Text 15 ) . Among these , the overexpression of Crumbs ( Crb ) ( Chalm - ers et al . , 2005 ) produces a phenotype of a much less ﬂattened EVL ( Figures 7E and 7F ) . Strikingly , this changed EVL morphology reproducibly persists into later stages ( Figure S7A , data not shown ) in (cid:1) 20 % of embryos ( 18 / 94 , others fail to ﬁnish epiboly ) . After EVL formation ( around sphere stage ) , cells in Crb injected em - bryos pull back from the margin rather than spread out ( Figures S7B and S7H ) , reducing A that might contribute to the reduced < L / R > . In the earlier pre - EVL stages , however , A and V C are similar to controls but cells are more columnar and N S shows a faster increase ( Figures 7F , 7G , and S7B – S7D ) . According to our model , this N S increase at pre - eVL stages and the formation of a stably less squamous EVL at later stages ( Figure S7A ) strongly suggests a change in Th ( g is also reduced in Crb injected embryos [ Figure S7F ] but is insuf - ﬁcient to explain the phenotype ) . To test this , we tracked cells from Crb + embryos . Surprisingly , we observed instances of ‘‘ob - lique’’ divisions ( 16 / 122 , Figure S7G ) ( Chalmers et al . , 2003 ) that are rare in controls in later stages . The oblique divisions have an almost S - D orientation yet the deeper daughter retains a small Cell 159 , 415 – 427 , October 9 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 423 apical surface and remains a surface cell . Consequently , the population has more S - S divisions and Th is effectively reduced to (cid:1) 1 . 2 ( Figures 7H and S7E ) . This changed Th in our interplay model produces a reasonable prediction of pre - EVL morpho - genesis of the Crb + embryos ( Figure 7I ) . While how Crb pro - motes oblique divisions and changes Th remains unknown , this result strongly supports our model that Th is a key parameter in deﬁning cell shapes in pre - EVL / EVL . Can a different Th explain the diverse surface layer shapes in otherembryossuchasseaurchin andfrog ( Wray , 1997 ; Chalmers et al . , 2003 ) ? To answer this question , We input corresponding initialconditions ( nonessential ) andanalteredThvaluetosimulate these systems ( Data S1 , Text 14 ) . We are indeed able to predict exclusive S - S divisions and a columnar epithelium for sea urchin with a low Th ( 0 . 2 ) and a cuboidal surface layer for frog embryos with an intermediate Th ( 0 . 8 ) ( Figure 7J ) . These results arise as different Th values produce different N S trajectories ( Figure 7K ) . The model predicts that for most Th values the S - D division ratio will converge to a steady state of (cid:1) 0 . 41 ( Figure S7I ) . This value can be derived as 2 - 2 2 / 3 under the no - growth and all - divide assumption ( Data S1 , Text 16 ) . In frog embryos , a steady S - D di - vision ratio is indeed observed after 128 cell stage by Chalmers et al . ( 2003 ) at a lower reported value ( Figure S7J ) . These results support the idea that a Th change may underlie apparent differ - ences of cell shapes in different embryonic surface epithelia . DISCUSSION Potential Application of the Interplay Model to Other Systems In this study , we performed systematic imaging of the pre - EVL that was key for obtaining quantitative dynamics of the variables that inﬂuence epithelial cell shape . Using these data , we were able to efﬁciently exclude alternative hypotheses and arrive at the simple interplay model . It is important to note that , given the ubiquity of epithelia that arise in development , cell shapes can change in other ways independent of oriented divisions . For example , in the class of more mature epithelia where S - D di - visions are not present , morphogenesis is likely mainly regulated by other processes such as alternative N S regulation ( e . g . , in - plane proliferation , cell extrusion ) , apical constriction ( e . g . , Drosophila ventral furrow , vertebrate neural fold ) , and tissue nonautonomous expansion by external driving forces ( e . g . , late EVL , growing alveoli ) . Nonetheless , when polarity is perturbed or growth / proliferation rate becomes abnormal ( Th , V C , or N S changes , e . g . , carcinoma initiation , polycystic kidney disease , neural tube defects ) ( Matsuyama et al . , 2009 ) , it is possible that S - D divisions appear in these normally low - Th systems . On the other hand , a number of epithelia exhibit S - D divisions during development and homeostasis and disruption of these division orientations are shown to affect morphogenesis ( e . g . , mammary epithelium , basal epidermis , embryonic lung epithelium ) ( Taddei et al . , 2008 ; El - Hashash et al . , 2011 ) ( see Data S1 , Text 17 for a review ) . These systems resemble pre - EVL in the sense of division modes . However , whether the mother cell shape is correlated with the division choice and whether similar interplay gener - ates / maintains epithelial cell shapes in these systems remain to be elucidated . More generally , we suggest that the interplay logic does not necessarily need to be implemented on division orien - tation . In other systems , similar regulatory effects could be achieved by cell shape feedback on N S via proliferation rate or extrusion / internalization rate . To test these possibilities , it is essential to acquire quantitative dynamic data as presented here , which remains technically challenging for many systems . Molecular Mechanisms Linking Cell Shape and Division Orientation Consistent with other studies ( Hertwig , 1884 ; Chalmers et al . , 2003 ; Baena - Lo´pez et al . , 2005 ; Gibson et al . , 2011 ) , our results show that the division orientation of surface cells is strongly biased by cell shape ( in our case L / R along the orthogonal - to - surface axis ) . Our model predicts that tuning the threshold relating cell shape to division orientation can produce distinct morphogenetic behaviors leading to different epithelial types . Consistent with this idea , in Crumbs - injected embryos where threshold is lowered , the embryos obtain an EVL of stably different cell shapes into later stages . However , it remains un - clear how the threshold is set in the EVL or other tissues . Appar - ently , it is a tunable parameter in nature considering the wide range of division modes in different epithelia that emerge in the same embryo and across different species . To measure its own shape , a cell may utilize a microtubule network to probe the cortex that in turn generates forces on the nucleus and spin - dle to determine the division plane ( Wu¨hr et al . , 2010 ; Minc et al . , 2011 ) . This mechanism allows spatially restricted molecular cues to inﬂuence the force balance , which can cause polarized anchoring of centrosomes and rotation of the spindle ( Galli and van den Heuvel , 2008 ; Rebollo et al . , 2009 ; Peyre et al . , 2011 ) . Therefore the observed threshold values are likely reﬂective of how such molecular polarity cues interact with or sometimes override the ‘‘default’’ cell shape / long axis determinant ( Gillies and Cabernard , 2011 ) . In addition to spindle orientation , the par - titioning of junctions and / or polarized membranes might also play a role . The oblique divisions in the Crumbs phenotype may reﬂect an excessive amount of apical membrane that pre - vents the presumptive deep daughter cell to leave the surface layer , as Crumbs is known to promote apical polarity and adhe - rens junctions ( Wodarz et al . , 1995 ; Pocha and Knust , 2013 ) . Understanding how the polarity of surface cells mechanically in - ﬂuences the cytoskeleton , spindle , and cell content partitioning may reveal the molecular basis of variation in threshold values and explain the observed differences between various epithelial tissues and between systems such as ﬁsh , frog , and sea urchin . Improved Compensation , Scaling , and Evolvability from the Interplay Design Developmental systems generate consistent forms in the face of variations and perturbations , yet are capable of evolving to pro - duce new forms , two apparently opposed goals . Our interplay model offers insights into how both robustness and evolvability are achieved in epithelial development . First , cell - cell interac - tions equilibrate cell shapes into a deﬁned distribution . Drastic changes of individual cell shapes are quickly compensated and have little impact on the population . Second , through feed - back the epithelium will aim for a deﬁned morphology and ap - propriate size regardless of changes in global conditions . For 424 Cell 159 , 415 – 427 , October 9 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . example , we show that N S scales with A to ensure that < L / R > is robust to egg size and blastoderm / yolk ratio , hence individuals could recover from damage and species could evolve new life history strategies ( e . g . , small clutch of large eggs versus large clutch of small eggs ) without having to acquire complex compensatory mutations to maintain proper EVL shape and cell number . Third , the change of Th alone allows generation of the full range of cell shapes without the need to coordinately evolve other parameters , an example of facilitated variation to promote evolvability ( Gerhart and Kirschner , 2007 ) . For example , with a reduction of Th , the surviving Crumbs - injected embryos become essentially ‘‘thick - skinned . ’’ Finally , collective cell shape changes mediated by the interplay may build up mechan - ical stresses that can be used to do morphogenetic work ( e . g . , buckling , invagination , spreading ) ( Eiraku et al . , 2011 ; Sato and Clevers , 2013 ) , providing a means of developing new tissue structures just by modifying a few cellular parameters . In summary , our work reveals an interplay design principle that allows tissue properties to emerge robustly from simple interac - tions of similar individual cells . The importance of local , cellular rather than global properties in driving morphogenesis renders tissue - level , populational goals under the control of single cell behaviors that can be exploited by molecular changes during development and evolution . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Zebraﬁsh Strains and Maintenance See Extended Experimental Procedures for protocols and references for transgenic strains used in this study . All ﬁsh - related procedures were carried out with the approval of Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee ( IACUC ) at Harvard University . Time - Lapse Confocal Imaging 1 – 64 cell stage embryos ( transgenic or injected ) were dechorionated and mounted animal pole up ( or sideways ) into a dorsal mount ( Megason , 2009 ) . Live imaging was performed using a Zeiss 710 confocal microscope ( objectives : Plan - Apochromat 20 3 1 . 0 NA , C - Apochromat 40 3 1 . 2 NA ) with a home - made heating chamber maintaining 28 (cid:4) C . Laser lines 488 nm , 514 nm , 561 nm , and 594 nm were used . See Figure S1 and Extended Exper - imental Procedures for details . Image Data Analysis Segmentation and tracking were performed using GoFigure 2 ( http : / / ww . goﬁgure2 . org ) and ACME ( Mosaliganti et al . , 2012 , Xiong et al . , 2013 ) . For a detailed protocol , see Extended Experimental Procedures . Measurement of L / R ratios was carried out using ZEN ( Carl Zeiss ) software 3D distance func - tionality . Measurements were analyzed and plotted with MATLAB ( Math - Works ) and Microsoft Excel . See also Figure S2 , Movie S2 , and Extended Experimental Procedures . Modeling Simple geometry models were drawn on paper . The mechanical model was coded using Surface Evolver ( Brakke , 1992 ) . The full interplay model and its simulations were coded using MATLAB ( MathWorks ) . See Data S1 and Extended Experimental Procedures for details . See also documentation of the scripts in the supplemental ﬁles . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION SupplementalInformationincludesExtendedExperimentalProcedures , seven ﬁgures , threemovies , andonedataﬁleandcanbefoundwiththisarticleonline at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 09 . 007 . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS F . X . and S . G . M . conceived this study . F . X . performed most experiments and analyzed the data . F . X . and W . M . built the models . T . W . H . and A . R . T per - formed experiments . K . A . B . contributed to the Evolver model . K . R . M . , N . R . , A . G . , and L . S . contributed to data analysis . I . A . S . and N . D . O . provided re - agents . F . X . and S . G . M . wrote the manuscript . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS WethankD . D’Indiaforﬁshcare . H . Otsuna , M . Wuhr , J . Zhang , K . Ishihara , M . Yajima , C . Heisenberg , P . Keller , N . Papalopulu , T . Mitchison , M . Kirschner , R . Ward , and theS . G . M . laboratorymembersforreagents , communications , and comments . This work is supported by NIH grants HG004071 , DC010791 , and GM026875 . I . A . S . acknowledges NIH fellowship 5F32HL097599 , a Hearing Health Foundation Emerging Research Grant , and a Novartis Fellowship in Systems Biology . F . X . isalso supportedby the graduate program of Biological Sciences in Dental Medicine at Harvard University . Received : February 17 , 2014 Revised : May 29 , 2014 Accepted : September 3 , 2014 Published : October 9 , 2014 REFERENCES Alon , U . ( 2007 ) . Network motifs : theory and experimental approaches . Nat . Rev . Genet . 8 , 450 – 461 . Baena - Lo´pez , L . A . , Baonza , A . , and Garcı´a - Bellido , A . ( 2005 ) . The orientation of cell divisions determines the shape of Drosophila organs . Curr . Biol . 15 , 1640 – 1644 . Blankenship , J . T . , Backovic , S . T . , Sanny , J . S . , Weitz , O . , and Zallen , J . A . ( 2006 ) . Multicellular rosette formation links planar cell polarity to tissue morphogenesis . Dev . Cell 11 , 459 – 470 . Brakke , K . ( 1992 ) . The Surface Evolver . Expo . Math . 1 , 141 – 165 . Chalmers , A . D . , Strauss , B . , and Papalopulu , N . ( 2003 ) . Oriented cell divisions asymmetrically segregate aPKC and generate cell fate diversity in the early Xenopus embryo . Development 130 , 2657 – 2668 . Chalmers , A . D . , Pambos , M . , Mason , J . , Lang , S . , Wylie , C . , and Papalopulu , N . ( 2005 ) . aPKC , Crumbs3 and Lgl2 control apicobasal polarity in early verte - brate development . Development 132 , 977 – 986 . Ciruna , B . , Jenny , A . , Lee , D . , Mlodzik , M . , and Schier , A . F . ( 2006 ) . Planar cell polarity signalling couples cell division and morphogenesis during neurulation . Nature 439 , 220 – 224 . Deramaudt , T . , and Rustgi , A . K . ( 2005 ) . Mutant KRAS in the initiation of pancreatic cancer . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1756 , 97 – 101 . Eiraku , M . , Takata , N . , Ishibashi , H . , Kawada , M . , Sakakura , E . , Okuda , S . , Sekiguchi , K . , Adachi , T . , and Sasai , Y . ( 2011 ) . Self - organizing optic - cup morphogenesis in three - dimensional culture . Nature 472 , 51 – 56 . Eisenhoffer , G . T . , Loftus , P . D . , Yoshigi , M . , Otsuna , H . , Chien , C . B . , Morcos , P . A . , and Rosenblatt , J . ( 2012 ) . Crowding induces live cell extrusion to main - tain homeostatic cell numbers in epithelia . Nature 484 , 546 – 549 . El - Hashash , A . H . , Turcatel , G . , Al Alam , D . , Buckley , S . , Tokumitsu , H . , Bellusci , S . , and Warburton , D . ( 2011 ) . Eya1 controls cell polarity , spindle orientation , cell fate and Notch signaling in distal embryonic lung epithelium . Development 138 , 1395 – 1407 . Fankhauser , G . ( 1945 ) . Maintenance of normal structure in heteroploid sala - mander larvae , through compensation of changes in cell size by adjustment of cell number and cell shape . J . Exp . Zool . 100 , 445 – 455 . Fernandes , I . , Chanut - Delalande , H . , Ferrer , P . , Latapie , Y . , Waltzer , L . , Affolter , M . , Payre , F . , and Plaza , S . ( 2010 ) . Zona pellucida domain proteins remodel the apical compartment for localized cell shape changes . Dev . Cell 18 , 64 – 76 . Cell 159 , 415 – 427 , October 9 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 425 Galli , M . , andvandenHeuvel , S . ( 2008 ) . Determinationofthecleavageplanein early C . elegans embryos . Annu . Rev . Genet . 42 , 389 – 411 . Gerhart , J . , and Kirschner , M . ( 2007 ) . The theory of facilitated variation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 ( Suppl 1 ) , 8582 – 8589 . Gibson , W . T . , Veldhuis , J . H . , Rubinstein , B . , Cartwright , H . N . , Perrimon , N . , Brodland , G . W . , Nagpal , R . , and Gibson , M . C . ( 2011 ) . Control of the mitotic cleavage plane by local epithelial topology . Cell 144 , 427 – 438 . Gillies , T . E . , andCabernard , C . ( 2011 ) . Celldivisionorientationinanimals . Curr . Biol . 21 , R599 – R609 . Grill , S . W . , and Hyman , A . A . ( 2005 ) . Spindle positioning by cortical pulling forces . Dev . Cell 8 , 461 – 465 . Heisenberg , C . P . , and Bellaı¨che , Y . ( 2013 ) . Forces in tissue morphogenesis and patterning . Cell 153 , 948 – 962 . Herbst , E . C . ( 2002 ) . Induction of tetraploidy zebraﬁsh ( Danio rerio ) and Nile tilapia ( Oreochromis niloticus ) . Thesis . ( Charlotte : University of North Carolina at Charlotte ) . Hertwig , O . ( 1884 ) . Das Problem der Befruchtung une der Isotropie des Eies , eine Theory der Vererbung ( Jenaische Zeitschrist ) . Ho , R . K . ( 1992 ) . Cell movements and cell fate during zebraﬁsh gastrulation . Dev . Suppl . 1992 , 65 – 73 . Ka¨fer , J . , Hayashi , T . , Mare´e , A . F . , Carthew , R . W . , and Graner , F . ( 2007 ) . Cell adhesion and cortex contractility determine cell patterning in the Drosophila retina . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 18549 – 18554 . Kane , D . A . , Warga , R . M . , andKimmel , C . B . ( 1992 ) . Mitoticdomainsintheearly embryo of the zebraﬁsh . Nature 360 , 735 – 737 . Kane , D . A . , McFarland , K . N . , andWarga , R . M . ( 2005 ) . Mutationsinhalfbaked / E - cadherin block cell behaviors that are necessary for teleost epiboly . Devel - opment 132 , 1105 – 1116 . Keller , P . J . ( 2013 ) . Imaging morphogenesis : technological advances and bio - logical insights . Science 340 , 1234168 . Keller , P . J . , Schmidt , A . D . , Wittbrodt , J . , and Stelzer , E . H . ( 2008 ) . Reconstruc - tion of zebraﬁsh early embryonic development by scanned light sheet micro - scopy . Science 322 , 1065 – 1069 . Kimmel , C . B . , and Law , R . D . ( 1985 ) . Cell lineage of zebraﬁsh blastomeres . I . Cleavage pattern and cytoplasmic bridges between cells . Dev . Biol . 108 , 78 – 85 . Kimmel , C . B . , Ballard , W . W . , Kimmel , S . R . , Ullmann , B . , and Schilling , T . F . ( 1995 ) . Stages of embryonic development of the zebraﬁsh . Dev . Dyn . 203 , 253 – 310 . Kolega , J . ( 1986 ) . The cellular basis of epithelial morphogenesis . Dev . Biol . ( N . Y . 1985 ) 2 , 103 - 143 . Krens , S . F . , Mollmert , S . , and Heisenberg , C . P . ( 2011 ) . Enveloping cell - layer differentiation at the surface of zebraﬁsh germ - layer tissue explants . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A 108 , E9 – 10 , author reply E11 . Kunda , P . , and Baum , B . ( 2009 ) . The actin cytoskeleton in spindle assembly and positioning . Trends Cell Biol . 19 , 174 – 179 . Lecuit , T . , and Lenne , P . F . ( 2007 ) . Cell surface mechanics and the control of cell shape , tissue patterns and morphogenesis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 633 – 644 . Limpert , E . , Stahel , W . A . , andAbbt , M . ( 2001 ) . Log - normaldistributionsacross the sciences – keys and clues . Bioscience 51 , 341 – 352 . Maıˆtre , J . L . , Berthoumieux , H . , Krens , S . F . , Salbreux , G . , Ju¨licher , F . , Paluch , E . , and Heisenberg , C . P . ( 2012 ) . Adhesion functions in cellsorting by mechan - ically coupling the cortices of adhering cells . Science 338 , 253 – 256 . Manning , M . L . , Foty , R . A . , Steinberg , M . S . , and Schoetz , E . M . ( 2010 ) . Coac - tion of intercellular adhesion and cortical tension speciﬁes tissue surface ten - sion . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 12517 – 12522 . Martin , A . C . , Gelbart , M . , Fernandez - Gonzalez , R . , Kaschube , M . , and Wie - schaus , E . F . ( 2010 ) . Integrationofcontractileforcesduringtissueinvagination . J . Cell Biol . 188 , 735 – 749 . Matsuyama , M . , Aizawa , S . , and Shimono , A . ( 2009 ) . Sfrp controls apicobasal polarity and oriented cell division in developing gut epithelium . PLoS Genet . 5 , e1000427 . McMahon , A . , Supatto , W . , Fraser , S . E . , andStathopoulos , A . ( 2008 ) . Dynamic analyses of Drosophila gastrulation provide insights into collective cell migra - tion . Science 322 , 1546 – 1550 . Megason , S . G . ( 2009 ) . In toto imaging of embryogenesis with confocal time - lapse microscopy . Methods Mol . Biol . 546 , 317 – 332 . Megason , S . G . , and Fraser , S . E . ( 2003 ) . Digitizing life at the level of the cell : high - performance laser - scanning microscopy and image analysis for in toto imaging of development . Mech . Dev . 120 , 1407 – 1420 . Megason , S . G . , Srinivas , S . , Dickinson , M . E . , and Hadjantonakis , A . K . ( 2011 ) . Microscopy to mechanism across the scales of development . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 21 , 519 – 522 . Minc , N . , Burgess , D . , and Chang , F . ( 2011 ) . Inﬂuence of cell geometry on di - vision - plane positioning . Cell 144 , 414 – 426 . Mosaliganti , K . R . , Noche , R . R . , Xiong , F . , Swinburne , I . A . , and Megason , S . G . ( 2012 ) . ACME : automated cell morphology extractor for comprehensive reconstruction of cell membranes . PLoS Comput . Biol . 8 , e1002780 . Nelson , C . M . , Jean , R . P . , Tan , J . L . , Liu , W . F . , Sniadecki , N . J . , Spector , A . A . , and Chen , C . S . ( 2005 ) . Emergent patterns of growth controlled by multicellular form and mechanics . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 11594 – 11599 . Newport , J . , and Kirschner , M . ( 1982 ) . A major developmental transition in early Xenopus embryos : I . characterization and timing of cellular changes at the midblastula stage . Cell 30 , 675 – 686 . Odell , G . M . , Oster , G . , Alberch , P . , and Burnside , B . ( 1981 ) . The mechanical basis of morphogenesis . I . Epithelial folding and invagination . Dev . Biol . 85 , 446 – 462 . Olivier , N . , Luengo - Oroz , M . A . , Duloquin , L . , Faure , E . , Savy , T . , Veilleux , I . , Solinas , X . , De´barre , D . , Bourgine , P . , Santos , A . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Cell lineage reconstruction of early zebraﬁsh embryos using label - free nonlinear micro - scopy . Science 329 , 967 – 971 . Osterﬁeld , M . , Du , X . , Schu¨pbach , T . , Wieschaus , E . , and Shvartsman , S . Y . ( 2013 ) . Three - dimensional epithelial morphogenesis in the developing Drosophila egg . Dev . Cell 24 , 400 – 410 . Peyre , E . , Jaouen , F . , Saadaoui , M . , Haren , L . , Merdes , A . , Durbec , P . , and Morin , X . ( 2011 ) . AlateralbeltofcorticalLGNandNuMAguidesmitoticspindle movements and planar division in neuroepithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 193 , 141 – 154 . Pocha , S . M . , and Knust , E . ( 2013 ) . Complexities of Crumbs function and regu - lation in tissue morphogenesis . Curr . Biol . 23 , R289 – R293 . Rebollo , E . , Rolda´n , M . , and Gonzalez , C . ( 2009 ) . Spindle alignment is achievedwithoutrotationaftertheﬁrstcellcycleinDrosophilaembryonicneu - roblasts . Development 136 , 3393 – 3397 . Sagerstro¨m , C . G . , Gammill , L . S . , Veale , R . , and Sive , H . ( 2005 ) . Speciﬁcation oftheenvelopinglayerandlackofautoneuralizationinzebraﬁshembryonicex - plants . Dev . Dyn . 232 , 85 – 97 . Sato , T . , and Clevers , H . ( 2013 ) . Growing self - organizing mini - guts from a single intestinal stem cell : mechanism and applications . Science 340 , 1190 – 1194 . Taddei , I . , Deugnier , M . A . , Faraldo , M . M . , Petit , V . , Bouvard , D . , Medina , D . , Fa¨ssler , R . , Thiery , J . P . , and Glukhova , M . A . ( 2008 ) . Beta1 integrin deletion from the basal compartment of the mammary epithelium affects stem cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 716 – 722 . Tamulonis , C . , Postma , M . , Marlow , H . Q . , Magie , C . R . , de Jong , J . , and Kaan - dorp , J . ( 2011 ) . A cell - based model of Nematostella vectensis gastrulation including bottle cell formation , invagination and zippering . Dev . Biol . 351 , 217 – 228 . Thiery , J . P . , Acloque , H . , Huang , R . Y . , and Nieto , M . A . ( 2009 ) . Epithelial - mesenchymal transitions in development and disease . Cell 139 , 871 – 890 . 426 Cell 159 , 415 – 427 , October 9 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Waddington , C . H . ( 1942 ) . Thecanalization ofdevelopmentandtheinheritance of acquired characteristics . Nature 150 , 563 – 565 . Wodarz , A . , Hinz , U . , Engelbert , M . , and Knust , E . ( 1995 ) . Expression of crumbsconfersapicalcharacteronplasmamembranedomainsofectodermal epithelia of Drosophila . Cell 82 , 67 – 76 . Wolpert , L . , and Gustafson , T . ( 1961 ) . Studies on the cellular basis of morpho - genesis of the sea urchin embryo . The formation of the blastula . Exp . Cell Res . 25 , 374 – 382 . Wray , G . A . ( 1997 ) . Echinoderms . In Embryology : Constructing the Organism , S . F . Gilbert and A . Raunio , eds . ( Sunderland , MA : Sinauer Associates ) , pp . 309 – 329 . Wu¨hr , M . , Tan , E . S . , Parker , S . K . , Detrich , H . W . , 3rd , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 2010 ) . A model for cleavage plane determination in early amphibian and ﬁsh embryos . Curr . Biol . 20 , 2040 – 2045 . Xiong , F . , Tentner , A . R . , Huang , P . , Gelas , A . , Mosaliganti , K . R . , Souhait , L . , Rannou , N . , Swinburne , I . A . , Obholzer , N . D . , Cowgill , P . D . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Spec - iﬁed neural progenitors sort to form sharp domains after noisy Shh signaling . Cell 153 , 550 – 561 . Zhang , J . , Webb , S . E . , Ma , L . H . , Chan , C . M . , andMiller , A . L . ( 2011 ) . Necessary role for intracellular Ca 2 + transients in initiating the apical - basolateral thinning of enveloping layer cells during the early blastula period of zebraﬁsh develop - ment . Dev . Growth Differ . 53 , 679 – 696 . Cell 159 , 415 – 427 , October 9 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 427