Figure 1 : My dissertation investigates questions of how to help novices follow the diamond approach of engaging in divergent exploration and convergent exploitation . Overcoming Satisﬁcing : Scaffolds for Amplifying Creativity Tricia J . Ngoon The Design Lab University of California , San Diego La Jolla , CA , USA tngoon @ ucsd . edu Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . CC ’19 , June 23 – 26 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5917 - 7 / 19 / 06 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3325480 . 3326566 Abstract Creative work combines exploratory thinking to ﬁnd novel solutions and exploitative thinking to reﬁne those solutions . People often assume that the idea they come up with has to be the “correct solution , ” leading to under - exploration and preemptive exploitation . Despite advances in the practi - tioner literature , a cognitive and empirical basis of explo - ration strategies remains sparse . My dissertation exam - ines scaffolding methods to enhance exploration in creative tasks . I investigate this through two interventions at differ - ent stages of the creative process . First , interactive guid - ance and adaptive suggestions embodied in the CritiqueKit system to improve evaluation of creative work . Second , problem - framing scaffolds that attune people towards the phases of exploration and exploitation during ideation . My research demonstrates content and process scaffolds with applications in the design of creativity support tools and creative education pedagogy . Author Keywords creativity ; feedback ; scaffolds ; learning CCS Concepts • Human - centered computing → Laboratory experi - ments ; Session : Graduate Student Symposium CC ’19 , June 23 – 26 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 670 Creativity as Annealing “Hot” & “Cool” Thinking in Creativity Creative thinking can be viewed as analogous to annealing , starting with an exploratory ( “hot” ) phase before gradually shifting to an exploitative ( “cool” ) phase [ 5 ] . However , peo - ple often have a cognitive bias to satisﬁce , ﬁxating on the ﬁrst adequate solution they come up with and not wanting to “waste time” on paths unknown [ 10 ] . For more structured problems , this strategy works well enough . However , for the complex problems that make up much of creative work , the tendency to satisﬁce means that potentially better paths are never explored or considered . Effective exploration comprises of knowing what to explore as well as how to explore . My dissertation aims to provide concrete guidance to enhance exploration at for different stages of the creative process . My thesis statement is that more explicitly connecting the process of exploration to exploitation catalyzes creative learning and ideas . I examine content and process scaffolds to help people move forward in creative work and make sense of the exploratory and exploitative process . This research aims to contribute to a theoretical understanding of creative learning that sup - ports human - computer synergy . Figure 2 : The CritiqueKit interface features 1 ) interactive guidance of feedback attributes ( speciﬁc , actionable , and justiﬁed ) , and 2 ) adaptive examples of previously generated expert feedback . Figure 3 : We found in a controlled experiment that participants with interactive guidance and adaptive suggestions provided signiﬁcantly more Speciﬁc , Actionable , and Justiﬁed ( 53 % ) feedback than participants without these scaffolds ( 30 % ) . p = . 01 A Challenge of Creative Thinking The practitioner literature has made compelling advances towards providing psychological safety nets and struc - ture for exploratory thinking through brainstorming . Pro - cess models like the Double Diamond and design thinking strategies seek to encourage wild ideas early , and exam - ples and iteration can facilitate inspiration by providing con - crete analogies of existing artifacts [ 3 , 4 ] . Despite such ex - plicit prompting and encouragement , novices especially still ideate narrowly . A challenge of amplifying exploration is giving an appropri - ate structure for exploration while maintaining the beneﬁts of unstructured thinking . This thesis addresses this chal - lenge with both content and process scaffolds that attune people towards the stages of exploration and exploitation in both generative and evaluative creative tasks . I do this in two interventions : heuristic alignment for helping people take concrete steps in creative work and problem - framing scaffolds for enhancing awareness of exploratory and ex - ploitative thinking processes in problem - solving . Interactive Guidance Techniques for Improving Creative Feedback ( Completed Work ) Giving and receiving feedback for improvement are crucial components of learning . Giving feedback is itself a creative problem of exploration and exploitation ; it requires explor - ing a piece of work for areas of improvement and then ex - ploiting on relevant features to provide detailed , effective critique [ 8 ] . However , novices often do not know how to ex - plore creative work for improvement and exploit on surface - level features . To help novice reviewers more effectively explore creative work to provide better feedback , we investigate two scaf - folding methods . First , interactive guidance of structural fea - tures of effective feedback , and second , adaptive examples of previously generated expert feedback . These scaffolds are embodied in the CritiqueKit system through checkboxes that check whether draft feedback meets three attributes ( speciﬁc , actionable , and justiﬁed ) and a suggestions box that displays contextually - relevant examples of good feed - back for users to reuse ( Figure 2 ) . Through two classroom deployments and two controlled ex - periments , we found that participants with the scaffolds of interactive guidance and adaptive suggestions gave more Session : Graduate Student Symposium CC ’19 , June 23 – 26 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 671 speciﬁc , actionable , and justiﬁed feedback than participants without these scaffolds ( Figure 3 ) [ 6 ] . These ﬁndings sug - gest that adaptive feedback suggestions can attune novices to the relevant features of creative work while interactive guidance can direct people’s attention towards the struc - tural characteristics of effective feedback . In addition , our results demonstrate how adaptive suggestions can help novices better explore creative work and exploit on relevant features for more effective feedback . Problem - Framing Scaffolds for Improving Exploration ( Ongoing & Future Work ) In order to come up with unique and creative ideas , one must ﬁrst see them . To overcome the strong tendency to exploit too soon , this work investigates several questions of how problem - framing scaffolds can provide people with strategies for productive exploration ( Figure 1 ) . Figure 4 : The green thinking hat represents exploration ; the blue thinking hat represents exploitation . Can We Set the Creative “Temperature” ? In this study , we examined whether providing scaffolds that frame problems as exploratory or exploitative can inﬂuence creative thought . We adapted DeBono’s [ 2 ] Thinking Hats as our problem frame scaffolds ( Figure 4 ) . In this between - subjects study , 34 participants were recruited from a Cali - fornia research university , half were randomly assigned to the Explore frame , the other half to the Exploit frame . The task asked participants to redesign an aspect of the student eating experience that could be made more enjoyable . Designs from the Explore scaffold earned signiﬁcantly higher originality ratings than those from the Exploit scaf - fold . Interestingly , Explore participants also demonstrated greater intra - exploration , brainstorming more diverse ideas than Exploit participants ( Figure 5 ) . Explore participants noted that the explore scaffold challenged or allowed them to think differently while Exploit participants mentioned Figure 5 : Signiﬁcantly more Explore designs earned high originality ratings than Exploit designs ( left ) . Explore participants also brainstormed more diverse ideas ( right ) . * * * * p < . 001 * p < . 05 that the exploit scaffold helped organize and structure their thought process . Our ﬁndings suggest that simple metaphor - ical problem frames can attune people towards the “roles” of exploration or exploitation and that the perception or safety of feeling challenged to think differently can bolster greater creative thought . Does Order of Exploration & Exploitation Matter ? This experiment will investigate if the order of exploration and exploitation affects creative outcomes . The shift from exploration to exploitation is proposed to be ideal for ﬁnd - ing unusual hypotheses [ 5 ] . However , exploration may be most fruitful if people are “cognitively ready” for exploration [ 1 ] . In two brainstorming phases , participants will be given either the explore or exploit scaffold , the order of which will be counterbalanced between participants . I hypothesize that an exploration - ﬁrst ideation process will lead to more original designs than early exploitation . An alternative hy - pothesis is that scaffolding exploration at any stage in the ideation process will aid creativity regardless of order be - cause of the perceived safety of feeling challenged . These Session : Graduate Student Symposium CC ’19 , June 23 – 26 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 672 results will provide empirical evidence of how process scaf - folds connect with design outcomes . Can Physical Metaphors of Hot & Cool Thinking Inﬂuence Creative Thought ? This study will investigate how physical metaphors of “hot” and “cool” thinking embedded within creativity support tools might serve as process scaffolds for creative thinking . Such metaphors could literally represent temperature such as faucets or thermometers or consist of more subtle analo - gies to encourage either exploratory or exploitative thinking during creative problem - solving . These results will have practical implications for the design of creativity support interfaces as well as theoretical contributions of how tech - nology can scaffold creative thought . About Me : I am a 4th - year Ph . D candidate in Cognitive Science at UC San Diego . My career goals following my doc - toral program include faculty positions in learning sciences departments or information school and industry research positions at companies that focus on creativity support . Dissertation Trajectory : I have completed one set of studies , which has been pub - lished at CHI 2018 ( Honorable Mention Award ) . I am currently working on the ﬁnal four studies of my dissertation , one of which has been completed . I plan to ﬁnish my dissertation work by the end of 2020 . Acknowledgements : Thanks to my advisor Dr . Scott Klem - mer , collaborator Dr . Caren Walker , research assistants , and colleagues in the Design Lab and Cognitive Science Department . How Might We Teach Exploratory Thinking Strategies ? A ﬁnal component of my thesis will examine how problem - framing scaffolds can translate to creative learning . The grand challenge within learning sciences is to ﬁnd instruc - tional methods that facilitate transfer . Exploratory learning strategies , such as inventive scaffolds , enable learners to explore and invent solutions to problems , often leading to greater problem - solving ﬂexibility and transfer to novel con - texts [ 7 , 9 ] . This experiment will investigate a similar ques - tion of whether process - oriented scaffolds can facilitate far transfer in open - ended creative work . A potential experi - mental task might be to provide problem - framing scaffolds and examine creative performance on a subsequent task to demonstrate learning effects . These results will have both theoretical contributions about the generalizability of creative scaffolding as well as practical contributions to the design of creative learning pedagogy . Current & Expected Contributions My dissertation investigates both content and process scaf - folds to facilitate more productive exploration and exploita - tion in creative thinking . This research contributes a theo - retical perspective on scaffolding creativity and how these scaffolds can be instantiated in software . I hope to inﬂuence the design of creativity support tools , pedagogical methods for teaching creative thinking , and innovation practices in professional settings . References [ 1 ] Joel Chan , Steven P Dow , and Christian D Schunn . 2015 . Do the best design ideas ( really ) come from conceptually distant sources of inspiration ? Design Studies 36 ( 2015 ) , 31 – 58 . [ 2 ] Edward De Bono . 1985 . Six thinking hats . Little Brown and Company . [ 3 ] Steven P Dow , Kate Heddleston , and Scott R Klemmer . 2009 . The efﬁcacy of prototyping under time constraints . In Proceedings of the seventh ACM conference on Creativity and cognition . ACM , 165 – 174 . [ 4 ] Chinmay Kulkarni , Steven P Dow , and Scott R Klemmer . 2012 . Early and repeated exposure to examples improves creative work . In Proceedings of the Cognitive Science Society . [ 5 ] Christopher G . Lucas , Sophie Bridgers , Thomas L . Grifﬁths , and Alison Gopnik . 2014 . When children are better ( or at least more open - minded ) learners than adults : Developmental differences in learning the forms of causal relationships . Cognition 131 , 2 ( May 2014 ) , 284 – 299 . [ 6 ] Tricia J . Ngoon , C . Ailie Fraser , Ariel S . Weingarten , Mira Dontcheva , and Scott Klemmer . 2018 . Interactive Session : Graduate Student Symposium CC ’19 , June 23 – 26 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 673 Guidance Techniques for Improving Creative Feedback . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . [ 7 ] Ido Roll , Vincent Aleven , Ken Koedinger , and Kenneth R Koedinger . 2011 . Outcomes and Mechanisms of Transfer in Invention Activities . In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society , Vol . 33 . [ 8 ] D . Royce Sadler . 1989 . Formative assessment and the design of instructional systems . Instrcutional Science 18 ( 1989 ) , 119 – 144 . [ 9 ] Daniel L . Schwartz and Taylor Martin . 2004 . Inventing to Prepare for Future Learning : The Hidden Efﬁciency of Encouraging Original Student Production in Statistics Instruction . Cognition and Instruction 22 , 2 ( jun 2004 ) , 129 – 184 . [ 10 ] Herbert A Simon . 1979 . American Economic Association Rational Decision Making in Business Organizations . Technical Report 4 . 493 – 513 pages . Session : Graduate Student Symposium CC ’19 , June 23 – 26 , 2019 , San Diego , CA , USA 674