Effects of Substrate Stiffness on Cell Morphology , Cytoskeletal Structure , and Adhesion Tony Yeung , 1 Penelope C . Georges , 1 Lisa A . Flanagan , 2 Beatrice Marg , 2 Miguelina Ortiz , 1 Makoto Funaki , 1 Nastaran Zahir , 1 Wenyu Ming , 1 Valerie Weaver , 1 and Paul A . Janmey 1 , 2 * 1 Institute for Medicine and Engineering , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia 2 Hematology Division , Brigham and Women’s Hospital , Boston , Massachusetts The morphology and cytoskeletal structure of ﬁbroblasts , endothelial cells , and neutrophils are documented for cells cultured on surfaces with stiffness ranging from 2 to 55 , 000 Pa that have been laminated with ﬁbronectin or collagen as adhesive ligand . When grown in sparse culture with no cell - cell contacts , ﬁbro - blasts and endothelial cells show an abrupt change in spread area that occurs at a stiffness range around 3 , 000 Pa . No actin stress ﬁbers are seen in ﬁbroblasts on soft surfaces , and the appearance of stress ﬁbers is abrupt and complete at a stiffness range coincident with that at which they spread . Upregulation of (cid:1) 5 integrin also occurs in the same stiffness range , but exogenous expression of (cid:1) 5 integrin is not sufﬁcient to cause cell spreading on soft surfaces . Neutrophils , in contrast , show no dependence of either resting shape or ability to spread after activation when cultured on surfaces as soft as 2 Pa compared to glass . The shape and cytoskeletal differences evident in single cells on soft compared to hard substrates are eliminated when ﬁbroblasts or endothelial cells make cell - cell contact . These results support the hypothesis that mechanical factors impact different cell types in fundamentally different ways , and can trigger speciﬁc changes similar to those stimulated by soluble ligands . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 60 : 24 – 34 , 2005 . © 2004 Wiley - Liss , Inc . Key words : substrate stiffness ; cell morphology ; ﬁbroblasts ; mechanosensing ; cell - matrix interaction ; actin cytoskeleton ; integrin expression INTRODUCTION Most cells in multicellular organisms are at - tached to much softer materials than the glass and plastic surfaces on which nearly all studies are done in vitro . The most common attachment site for a mam - malian cell is another similar cell or the extracellular matrix , and these materials have elastic moduli on the order of 10 to 10 , 000 Pa [ Bao and Suresh , 2003 ; Wakatsuki et al . , 2000 ] . Forces generated by cytoskel - etal motors applied to membrane attachment sites can deform materials with this range of stiffness but can - not move an attachment site on a rigid surface . Con - sequently , cell morphology and functions can depend strongly on substrate stiffness under conditions where chemical signals are constant . The acute signal and transcriptional changes mediating cells’ responses to stiffness are beginning to be characterized . Previous studies using ﬁbroblasts have shown that cells generate more traction force and develop a broader and ﬂatter morphology on stiff substrates than they do on * Correspondence to : Paul Janmey , Institute for Medicine and Engineering ( IME ) , University of Pennsylvania , 1010 Vagelos Laboratories , 3340 Smith Walk , Philadelphia , PA 19104 . E - mail : janmey @ mail . med . upenn . edu Received 22 April 2004 ; accepted 27 August 2004 Published online in Wiley InterScience ( www . interscience . wiley . com ) . DOI : 10 . 1002 / cm . 20041 Cell Motility and the Cytoskeleton 60 : 24 – 34 ( 2005 ) © 2004 Wiley - Liss , Inc . soft but equally adhesive surfaces and that cells will preferentially migrate from a soft to a hard surface [ Lo et al . , 2000 ] . Cell growth and survival also depend on substrate stiffness , as gelatin - coated materials softer than 100 Pa do not support survival of non - transformed cells but do support growth of transformed cell types [ Wang et al . , 2000a ] . Large changes in the extent of protein ty - rosine phosphorylation and cytoskeletal structure corre - late with stiffness , and are presumably part of the stiff - ness - sensing apparatus [ Pelham and Wang , 1997 ] . Responses to mechanical stimuli may be cell - type spe - ciﬁc . Motor neurons derived from embryonic mouse spinal cord extend neurites with extensive branches on soft but not hard surfaces [ Flanagan et al . , 2002 ] . In contrast , smooth muscle cells , like ﬁbroblasts , extend processes more avidly on hard surfaces and are rounded on soft materials [ Engler et al . , 2004 ] . In this study , we extend the range of cell types examined on materials with well - controlled stiffness by employing protein - laminated polyacrylamide gels to study GFP - actin and GFP - (cid:1) 5 integrin - expressing NIH 3T3 ﬁbroblasts , bovine aorta endothelial cells , and hu - man neutrophils . The results show that the morphologies of different cell types differ both quantitatively and qual - itatively with substrate stiffness , that the stiffness re - sponse depends on the nature of the adhesion ligand bound to the surface , and that changes in stiffness can initiate speciﬁc transcription events leading to upregula - tion of adhesion receptors . MATERIALS AND METHODS Preparation of Glass Cover Slips The substrate is prepared by allowing polyacryl - amide solutions to polymerize between two chemically modiﬁed glass cover slips . Brieﬂy , 200 (cid:2) L of a 0 . 1 N NaOH solution is pipetted to cover the surface of a 25 - mm - diameter glass cover slip ( Fisherbrand , catalog no . 12 - 545 - 102 ; Fisher Scientiﬁc , Pittsburgh , PA ) for 5 min . The NaOH solution is then aspirated , and 200 (cid:2) L of 3 - APTMS ( 3 - Aminopropyltrimethoxysilane , Sigma no . 28 - 1778 , Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) is applied for 3 min . The glass cover slip is thoroughly rinsed with de - ionized water to wash away any remaining 3 - APTMS solution . Then , 200 (cid:2) L of 0 . 5 % v glutaraldehyde ( Sigma no . G7651 ) in H 2 O is added onto the cover slip for 20 min . The glass cover slip is subsequently rinsed with water . An 18 - mm - diameter glass cover slip is placed on top of a piece of paraﬁlm inside a tissue culture dish . A small amount of a 10 % by volume Surfasil solution ( Pierce no . 42800 , Pierce , Rockford , IL ) in chloroform is pipetted onto the paraﬁlm near the cover slip . The tissue culture dish with a half - closed lid is placed inside a vacuum desiccator for 10 min . Preparation of Polyacrylamide Gel A 30 % w / v acrylamide stock solution is prepared by mixing 15 g of acrylamide powder ( FisherBiotech CAS no . 79061 ) with 35 mL of deionized H 2 O . A 1 % w / v bis - acrylamide stock solution is prepared by mixing 500 mg bis - acrylamide powder ( FisherBiotech CAS no . 110269 ) with 49 . 5 mL H 2 O . Polyacrylamide gel solutions are prepared with acrylamide at ﬁnal concen - trations of 3 , 5 , 7 . 5 , or 12 % w / v and bis - acrylamide from 0 . 05 to 0 . 6 % w / v . To polymerize the solution , 1 . 5 (cid:2) L TEMED ( FisherBiotech CAS no . 110189 ) and 5 (cid:2) L of 10 % ammonium persulfate are added with the appropri - ate amount of H 2 O to yield a ﬁnal volume of 1 , 000 (cid:2) L . A ﬁxed volume of 45 (cid:2) L of the polyacrylamide solution is immediately pipetted onto the center of the 25 - mm - diameter glass cover slip . The 18 - mm - diameter cover slip is then carefully placed on top of the polyacrylamide solution . The polymerization is completed in about 10 min and the top coverslip is slowly peeled off . The bottom cover slip with the attached polyacrylamide gel is immersed in a multi - well plate ( 6 Well Cell Culture Cluser , Costar 3516 , Corning Inc . , Corning , NY ) with 3 mL PBS . Polyacrylamide gels with a wide range of shear storage moduli , G (cid:3) , can be prepared using the concentration scheme described above . The most ﬂexible gel with 3 % w / v acrylamide and 0 . 05 % w / v bis - acryl - amide has a shear elastic modulus ( G (cid:3) ) of 2 Pa while the stiffest gel with 12 % w / v acrylamide and 0 . 60 % w / v bis - acrylamide yields a G (cid:3) of 55 , 000 Pa . Crosslinking of Adhesion Proteins A heterobifunctional crosslinker , sulfo - SANPAH ( sulfosuccinimidyl6 ( 4 (cid:3) - azido - 2 (cid:3) - nitrophenyl - amino ) hex - anoate , Pierce no . 22589 ) , is used to crosslink extracel - lular matrix molecules onto the surface of the gel . A small amount ( about 1 mg / ml ) of sulfo - SANPAH is dissolved in H 2 O , and 200 (cid:2) L of this solution is pipetted onto the gel surface . The polyacrylamide gel is then placed 6 inches under an ultraviolet lamp and irradiated for 10 min . It is then washed three times each with 3 mL of 200 mM HEPES at pH 8 . 6 . After the last HEPES solution is aspirated , 200 (cid:2) L of a 0 . 14 mg / ml ﬁsh ﬁ - bronectin solution ( Sea Run Holdings , South Freeport , ME ) [ Wang et al . , 2000b ] or 0 . 14 mg / ml type I collagen is pipetted on top of the polyacrylamide gel . The multi - well plate housing the gels is then incubated at 5°C for at least 4 h . Viscoelastic Characterization The viscoelastic properties of polyacrylamide gels were quantiﬁed by measuring the dynamic shear moduli using an RFS II ﬂuids spectrometer ( Rheometrics Inc . , Piscataway , NJ ) . A 500 - (cid:2) L sample was polymerized Cell Morphology and Substrate Stiffness 25 between two 25 - mm stainless steel parallel plates with a corresponding sample thickness of approximately 1 mm . The shear storage modulus G (cid:3) , corresponding to the elastic resistance of the gels , was determined from the shear stress in phase with an oscillatory ( 1 rad / s ) shear strain of 2 % maximal amplitude , by standard techniques . Similar measurements were conducted using cone and plate geometries where the thickness of the sample was between 50 – 200 (cid:2) m , similar to that of gels on which cells are grown , and nearly identical G (cid:3) were recorded ( data not shown ) . Cell Culture GFP - actin expressing NIH - 3T3 mouse ﬁbroblasts prepared as previously described [ Cunningham et al . , 2001 ] were incubated in Dulbecco’s Modiﬁed Eagle Me - dium ( Cellgro no . 10 - 013CV ) with high glucose , L - glutamine , no sodium pyruvate , phenol red , and 10 % bovine calf serum ( Hyclone Cat No . SH30072 . 03 Lot No . AJH10711 Bottle No . 1007 , Hyclone , Logan , UT ) at a 5 % CO 2 environment . Bovine aortic endothelial cells were kindly pro - vided by Peter Davies , and incubated in DMEM with high glucose , L - glutamine , no sodium pyruvate , phenol red , and 10 % bovine calf serum at a 5 % CO 2 environ - ment . Human blood neutrophils were isolated from whole blood from healthy volunteers . Collected blood samples were immediately transferred to sodium - heparin - contain - ing polypropylene tubes . Neutrophils were isolated by centrifuging 3 mL whole blood through 3 mL Mono - Poly resolving media ( ICN Biomedical , Irvine , CA ) to resolve a distinct neutrophil layer . Neutrophils were washed two times with Dulbecco’s phosphate - buffered saline ( DPBS ) ( Gibco , Gaithersburg , MD ) , and contaminating erythrocytes lysed by 40 - sec incubation in sterile dis - tilled water . Final neutrophil pellets were resuspended in RPMI 1640 medium ( Gibco , Gaithersburg , MD ) and kept on ice prior to plating on substrates . Morphological Measurements Phase contrast and ﬂuorescence microscopy were conducted using a Leica DM IRBE microscope and a Hamamatsu C - 4742 digital camera . The multi - well plate was brieﬂy removed from the tissue culture incubator for microscopy work . Area and circumference measure - ments were obtained by tracing cell boundaries manually using NIH Image software . Time - Lapse Movies A temperature - controlled chamber ( Bioptechs FCS2 Chamber ) was used for time - lapse movies to main - tain temperature at 37°C . Two milliliters of a 10 , 000 cell / ml solution were injected into the temperature - controlled chamber using a Bio - Rad Econo - Column pump ( Bio - Rad , Richmond , CA ) . Microscopy began within 3 min after ﬂow was stopped . 3T3 ﬁbroblasts were allowed to grow on either a 180 - or 55 , 000 - Pa gel . Cells on the 55 , 000 - Pa gel were incubated with CO 2 independent medium ( GibcoBRL Cat No . 18045 - 088 Lot No . 1099754 ) with 10 % bovine calf serum to maintain phys - iological pH in the absence of a rich CO 2 environment . Cells on the 180 - Pa gel were incubated with 50 % CO 2 independent medium , 40 % DMEM , and 10 % bovine calf serum . The rate of cell spreading was analyzed by taking images of sparsely distributed cells at 30 - sec intervals . Quantiﬁcation of Integrin Expression NIH 3T3 GFP - actin expressing ﬁbroblasts grown on polyacrylamide gels with varying stiffnesses for 24 h were used for the quantiﬁcation of (cid:1) 5 integrin expression by Western blotting . Polyacrylamide gels on top of the 25 - mm glass cover slips were gently scraped off in one piece by a razor blade . The gels were immersed in a Laemmli lysis buffer solution ( 50 mM Tris - HCL , pH 6 . 8 , 5 mM EDTA , 2 % SDS containing 1 mM sodium ﬂuo - ride , 1 mM sodium orthovanadate , and a cocktail of protease inhibitors ) in an Eppendorf tube for 15 min . The cell lysate solution with the addition of non - reducing buffer was then run on an 8 % SDS - PAGE gel . The electrophoresis gel was then transferred and blocked using standard protocols . The primary antibody used was (cid:1) 5 integrin , rabbit sera ( Chemicon International , Te - mecula , CA ) , and the secondary used was a horseradish peroxidase - linked anti - rabbit IgG polyclonal antibody ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech , Arlington Heights , IL ) . Protein was detected with an ECL - Plus system ( Amer - sham Pharmacia Biotech ) . In order to normalize the Western blot result by the number of cells per sample , microscopy was performed to estimate the number of cells grown on each gel substrate before the Western blot procedure . The intensity value of each band after sub - traction of the background was then normalized by the number of cells estimated in each sample . cDNA Constructs The (cid:1) 5 integrin EGFP fusion ( generous gift of Rick Horowitz , University of Virginia ) [ Laukaitis et al . , 2001 ] was excised as a XhoI - NotI fragment from pEGFP - N3 ( Clontech , Palo Alto , CA ) and subcloned into the retro - viral vector Hermes HRS puro GUS ( generous gift of Helen Blau , Stanford University , CA ) [ Rossi et al . , 1998 ] replacing the GUS cDNA between SalI and NotI sites using standard techniques and bringing the fusion under control of a tetracycline ( tet ) regulated promoter . To produce retrovirus , 3 (cid:4) 10 6 HEK 293 cells were seeded in gelatin - coated 60 - mm dishes , and 24 h later the Hermes HRS puro (cid:1) 5 integrin EGFP construct was co - 26 Yeung et al . transfected with pVSVG and pCgp ( generous gift of Alan Kingsman , Oxford University , UK ) , which express the VSVG protein and gag - pol genes , respectively , using calcium phosphate . Transfected cells were incubated 8 h at 37°C , media was replaced and returned to 37°C for a further 16 h , after which they were transferred to a 32°C humidiﬁed incubator . After 24 h at 32°C media was collected , made 8 (cid:2) g / ml in polybrene ( Sigma ) , and cen - trifuged at 3 , 000 g for 5 min to pellet cells and debris . NIH - 3T3 cells in a 6 - cm dish were incubated with 1 . 5 ml of retrovirus containing supernatant at 32°C for 8 h , after which the supernatant was replaced with 3 ml of regular media and returned to a 37°C humidiﬁed incubator for 36 – 48 h . Retrovirally transduced cells were selected in media supplemented with 1 (cid:2) g / ml puromycin until a resistant population grew out . Polyclonality was judged visually by the number of puromycin - resistant colonies and speed of outgrowth , and only pooled populations deemed sufﬁciently polyclonal were used in experiments . Cells from the pooled population were subsequently in - fected as above with a high titer MFG - based retrovirus that expresses the tet repressor fused to the HPV16 activation domain ( a derivative of the tet off transactiva - tor construct provided by Helen Blau [ Rossi et al . , 1998 ] , generated in the laboratory of V . Weaver , unpublished data , which has wild type DNA binding activity ) , pre - pared by transfection in 293GPG cells ( generous gift of Richard Mulligan , Whitehead Institute , MIT , Cambridge , MA ) as described in Ory et al . [ 1996 ] . Transduced cells were maintained in 1 (cid:2) g / ml tetracycline to keep (cid:1) 5 integrin EGFP in the uninduced state . Expression of (cid:1) 5 integrin EGFP was induced in cells by culturing in the absence of tetracycline in medium containing Tet System Approved FBS ( Clontech ) for 48 h prior to experiments . EGFP Expression Analysis Cells were directly ﬁxed using 2 % paraformalde - hyde and visualized using a scanning confocal laser ( model 2000 - MP ; Bio - Rad Laboratories ) attached to a ﬂuorescence microscope ( Nikon Eclipse TE - 300 ) . Con - focal images were recorded at 120 (cid:4) . RESULTS The large range of physiologically relevant stiffness that can be produced using polyacrylamide gels is shown in Figure 1 . The softest gels that can reproducibly be formed and handled for cell studies are made with 3 % acrylamide . At low crosslinker concentrations , gels can be produced with elastic moduli below 10 Pa , the consistency of mucus . The upper limit to 3 % gels appears to be near 600 Pa . Higher moduli require greater concentrations of acrylamide , and as seen in Figure 1 , 5 . 5 and 7 . 5 % gels allow large variations of elastic moduli as the crosslinker concentration is varied . Gels with a concentration above 7 . 5 % in partic - ular show a remarkably linear dependence of elastic mod - ulus on crosslinker concentration spanning nearly two or - ders of magnitude in stiffness . For crosslinked rubberlike networks like these acrylamide gels , the elasticity is theo - retically predicted to be related to the concentration of crosslinks by the relation G (cid:5) nRT / V where n is the number of crosslinks per volume V , and R is the gas constant [ Flory , 1953 ] . This theoretical limit , shown by the solid line in Figure 1 , is very close to the experimental values measured at high total [ polyacryl - amide ] where each bisacrylamide subunit is most likely to make an elastically effective crosslink . Figure 2 shows the large dependence of ﬁbroblast morphology on FN - coated gel stiffness . Previous studies have shown that the density of adhesion protein bound to the gel surface is independent of gel stiffness [ Flanagan et al . , 2002 ] , and imaging of the gel surface with ﬂuo - rescently labeled FN showed a constant amount of pro - tein bound to both the softest and stiffest gels and a uniformity of coverage that was at least as good as that on plastic ( data not shown ) . The shapes of NIH3T3 ﬁbroblasts after one day in culture range from round , nearly spherical cells with a few irregular protrusions seen on gels of 180 Pa stiffness to large spread cells on gels stiffer than 16 , 000 Pa , which were indistinguishable from those grown on glass or the plastic surfaces sur - rounding the gel in the culture dish . As visualized by Fig . 1 . Mechanical properties of polyacrylamide substrates . The shear modulus of polyacrylamide gels with a range of acrylamide ( indicated as percents near data lines ) to bis - acrylamide ( indicated as crosslinker ) proportions was measured . The shear modulus ( G (cid:3) ) , ex - pressed in Pascal , increases at constant polymer mass with increasing crosslinker . Increasing the concentration of acrylamide from 3 to 12 % also creates a large stiffness range from 10 to 50 , 000 Pa . The solid line denotes the theoretical stiffness of a rubberlike network if every crosslink was elastically effective . Cell Morphology and Substrate Stiffness 27 GFP - actin , ﬁbroblasts grown on gels softer than 1 , 600 Pa had no detectable stress ﬁbers or other actin bundles visible by ﬂuorescence microscopy . At stiffnesses above 3 , 600 Pa , such actin ﬁbers were a nearly universal feature of these cells . The absence of stress ﬁbers on soft gels was not an indication of toxicity since cell growth rates were only slightly slower on 180 - Pa gels compared to the rates on the stiffest gels ( 55 , 000 Pa ) and rates on gels between 1 , 600 and 3 , 600 Pa were equal to or greater than those on the stiffest gels . The absence of stress ﬁbers was also only evident on single cells on the soft gels . As the cell density increased over time , cells that made cell - cell contact frequently became elongated and developed stress ﬁbers . Figure 2g , h shows two examples of ﬁbro - blasts grown 48 h on a 180 - Pa gel and stained with rhodamine phalloidin . The single cell ( Fig . 2g ) shows phalloidin staining consistent with the images of GFP - actin under these conditions showing amorphous F - actin distribution and no evidence of stress ﬁbers . Comparable cells ( Fig . 2h ) on the same gel stiffness that had made intercellular contact show a more ﬂattened morphology and abundant stress ﬁbers . A similar dependence of cell shape on stiffness was also seen with bovine aorta endothelial cells . These cells , shown after 1 day in culture in Figure 3 , also ranged from round to well spread as the stiffness was increased about a few thousand Pa . As with ﬁbroblasts , the round cells on soft surfaces were capable of division and were able to form conﬂuent monolayers indistinguishable from those formed by cells on stiffer surfaces . Figure 3d – f shows monolayers developed after 3 days of culture on surfaces of stiffness varying from 180 to 29 , 000 Pa . Unlike the obvious difference in shape of single cells , these endo - thelial cells lose their morphologic difference once they make cell - cell contact . The density of cells in the mono - layers also was independent of substrate stiffness , with 927 , 898 , and 895 adherent cells counted on equal - size areas ( 600 (cid:4) 490 (cid:2) m ) of gels with elastic moduli of 180 , 2 , 900 , and 28 , 600 Pa , respectively . The dependence of cell shape on stiffness is shown quantitatively in Figure 4 . Figure 4a shows the average circumference of 3T3 ﬁbroblasts grown for 1 day on gels of varying stiffness that were laminated with either ﬁbronectin ( circles ) or type 1 collagen ( triangles ) . The circumference of these cells changes by more than a factor of 4 as the Fig . 2 . Effect of substrate mechanical properties on ﬁbroblast actin cytoskeleton . a – f : NIH 3T3 ﬁbroblasts expressing EGFP - actin were plated on polyacrylamide gels with rigidities ranging from 180 Pa ( a ) to 16 , 000 Pa ( f ) . Fibroblasts on soft materials had no stress ﬁbers compared with ﬁbro - blasts on stiffer materials that do have articulated stress ﬁbers . Scale bar (cid:5) 10 (cid:2) m . g , h : NIH 3T3 ﬁbroblasts on soft gels ( 180 Pa ) are ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde and their F - actin stained with rhodamine phalloidin . The isolated ﬁbroblast ( g ) appears to have no stress ﬁbers as in a . When the ﬁbroblasts are able to make cell - cell contact ( h ) , stress ﬁbers form . Scale bar (cid:5) 15 (cid:2) m . 28 Yeung et al . substrate stiffness increases and reached a value almost identical to that on glass for FN - laminated gels with stiff - ness above 10 , 000 Pa . On soft gels , 3T3 ﬁbroblasts have approximately the same size when bound either to FN or collagen , but on gels with 10 , 000 Pa , they show more mod - est spreading on collagen than when bound to FN . Similar results were obtained when plotting adherent area instead of circumference ( data not shown ) . Controls on glass could not be done for collagen since in this case FN from the serum - containing medium would also bind the glass surface and provide these cells with an additional adhesion protein . The non - monotonic dependence of circumference ( or area ) with gel stiffness is unexplained but apparently not simply an artifact of measuring mean areas of populations with a large variance , since in repeated studies using different ﬁbroblast samples and gel preparations , maxima in cell spreading were seen at intermediate stiffnesses around 3 , 000 Pa . Endothelial cells also show a stiffness - dependent spreading , but the change is not as large as for ﬁbroblasts as quantiﬁed either by cell circumference ( Fig . 4b ) or area ( data not shown ) . As with ﬁbroblasts , spreading on collagen is somewhat less than on FN - coated gels . In contrast to both ﬁbroblasts and endothelial cells , human neutrophils exhibit no dependence of cell shape on substrate stiffness over the stiffness range accessible by this system . Figure 4c shows that the circumference of neutrophils is constant on gels with stiffness from 2 to 1 , 000 Pa and equal to that seen on glass . Moreover , the fMLP - stimulated increase in cell spreading is as large on the softest gel that could be made ( 2 Pa ) as it is on glass . The difference in morphology observed after prolonged incubation on gels with different stiffness arises initially from large differences in the rates of spreading after initial adhesion of cells to the surface . Figure 5 shows time courses of the spreading of two representative ﬁbroblasts after initial binding to gels with stiffness of 180 ( Fig . 5a ) or 55 , 000 Pa ( Fig . 5b ) . The change in adherent area with time for 5 such cells under each condition are shown in Figure 5C and D . There is a rather broad range of spreading rates under both conditions , but , on average , cells on soft gels do not spread fast or very far compared to cells on stiffer gels . On the stiff gels , a few cells fail to spread after Fig . 3 . Effect of substrate mechanical properties on endothelial cell morphology . Bovine aortic endo - thelial cells ( BAECs ) were plated on polyacrylamide gels . Projected cell area increases with substrate stiffness ( a – c ) . As cells reach conﬂuence ( d – f ) a monolayer forms in all groups and the morphologies become indistinguishable . Cell Morphology and Substrate Stiffness 29 initial attachment but most spread at a rate never observed on the soft gel . The average rate of spreading as quantiﬁed by the initial rate of area versus time ( Fig . 5c , inset ) is more than 5 times larger on the stiffer gel . Coincident with the rather abrupt spreading of ﬁbroblasts on FN - coated surfaces stiffer than 2 , 000 Pa was a large increase in expression of (cid:1) 5 integrin ( Fig . 6a ) . The increase in (cid:1) 5 integrin expression on stiff gels may indicate an increase in adhesivity on stiffer materials . To determine if (cid:1) 5 integrin expres - sion was sufﬁcient to cause cell spreading , even on soft surfaces , the (cid:1) 5 subunit was expressed as an EGFP fusion in NIH 3T3 ﬁbroblasts . The exogenous expression of EGFP - (cid:1) 5 had no obvious effect on cell spreading , as cells on soft and stiff gels followed the Fig . 4 . Measurement of cell cir - cumference for different cell types on substrates of varying rigidities . NIH 3T3 ﬁbroblasts ( a ) and BAECs ( b ) were plated on ﬂexible substrates coated with ﬁbronectin ( circles ) or type I collagen ( triangles ) and im - aged after 24 h in culture . Both ﬁ - broblasts and BAECs increased in circumference as substrate stiffness increased . Cells plated on ﬁbronec - tin reached a larger apparent circum - ference than those plated on colla - gen . A histogram of circumference measurements ( inset in a ) shows that despite a large variation in cell cir - cumference within a given cell pop - ulation , the distributions measured at different stiffnesses overlap very lit - tle . Human blood neutrophils ( c ) were also plated on varying rigidities and left untreated ( open circles ) or stimulated ( ﬁlled circles ) with fMLP . Neutrophil circumference re - mains essentially stable despite gel stiffness . Error bars denote S . E . M . from measurements of 10 to 200 cells for each data point . 30 Yeung et al . same morphological trend as untransfected cells ( Fig . 6b , c ) . On soft gels , (cid:1) 5 was evident along the plasma membrane , but the cell did not spread as it did on stiff gels where the adherent area was larger and the (cid:1) 5 had a punctate distribution . DISCUSSION Most cell types in multicellular organisms are at - tached to soft materials , either other cells or extracellular matrices , but most of what is known about cell structure Fig . 5 . Cell spreading dependence on substrate stiffness . The initial cell spreading as measured by cell area of NIH3T3 ﬁbroblasts on soft ( a , c ) and stiff gels ( b , d ) shortly after plating . a , b : Representative phase images of ﬁbroblasts spreading on both gels show that cells on soft gels ( a ) spread very little compared with the extent of spreading on stiff gels ( b ) . Quantiﬁcation of adherent cell area shows that cells on soft gels are smaller and exhibit a slower spreading rate ( c ) compared to the average of cells on stiff gels ( d ) . Inset in c : Rate of spreading as quantiﬁed by initial rate of area versus time on soft and stiff gels . Cell Morphology and Substrate Stiffness 31 and function in vitro derives from studies of cells plated on rigid substrates such as plastic or glass , laminated with a thin ﬁlm of protein . As a result , some prominent aspects of cell structure , such as the fan - shaped morphol - ogy of cultured ﬁbroblasts or the prevalence of large actin - containing stress ﬁbers that are commonly studied in vitro , are rarely if ever seen in vivo . One well - recog - nized and studied reason to account for such differences is that many cell types in vivo function within a three - dimensional matrix , in contrast to the growth of cultured cells at a solid / liquid interface [ Bard and Hay , 1975 ; Greenburg and Hay , 1982 ] , but an additional indepen - dent difference relates to differences in elasticity of bio - logical surfaces [ Lo et al . , 2000 ; Pelham and Wang 1997 ; Wang et al . , 2000a ] . The studies reported here show that cellular response to matrix stiffness may be very different in different cell types and depends on the nature of the adhesion receptor by which the cell binds its substrate . There are also important differences between cells grown on two - and three - dimensional adhesive materials , but even when conﬁned to adhesion on ﬂat surfaces , the elastic constant of the surface can determine cell mor - phology and protein expression over a very wide range . Recent studies with aortic smooth muscle cells have shown that substrate stiffness is a more important deter - minant for cell shape than is the density of adhesive ligand to which the cell binds [ Engler et al . , 2004 ] . In addition to relatively well - recognized mechani - cal signals produced at cell - matrix adhesion sites , cells in mechanically active environments also form extensive , cadherin - mediated intercellular junctions that are impor - tant in tissue remodeling and differentiation . A relevant Fig . 6 . Role of (cid:1) 5 - integrin in ﬁbro - blasts on ﬂexible substrates . a : Fibro - blasts plated on varying rigidities were lysed after 24 h in culture , and (cid:1) 5 ex - pression was determined by Western blot analysis as shown in the inset . Fi - broblasts on stiff materials show a 5 - fold increase in protein expression compared with cells on softer gels . b , c : Exogenous expression of (cid:1) 5 by transfection with GFP - (cid:1) 5 had no effect on cell spreading . Cells on soft gels ( b ) showed that (cid:1) 5 was present and localized to the cell membrane , but cells remained small and rounded . In contrast , cells on stiff gels expressing exogenous (cid:1) 5 ( c ) were well spread . 32 Yeung et al . ﬁnding in the work reported here is that when endothelial cells or ﬁbroblasts make cell - cell junctions on soft sub - strates , they convert to the morphology seen on stiffer substrates . Speciﬁcally , ﬁbroblasts in contact with other cells spread and develop stress ﬁbers even on surfaces of 100 - Pa stiffness , when neighboring single cells maintain a radically distinct rounded morphology ( Fig . 2h ) . Like - wise , endothelial cells when conﬂuent have indistin - guishable morphologies on soft and hard substrates while their structures are easily distinguishable when they are sparse enough to lack cell - cell junctions . The simplest explanation for this change is that cells have a binary sensor at their membrane junction sites that signals for a relaxed rounded morphology when the surface is softer than the cell’s intrinsic elastic modulus , and signals for another phenotype with increased contractility and stress ﬁber formation when the external material , either another cell or an extracellular matrix , is stiffer than the cell or as stiff as the cell itself . An alternate but not exclusive expla - nation is that the signals for mechanically induced morpho - logic differences come only from extracellular ligand - acti - vated integrins , and that activated cadherins override these signals to establish a distinct program . Adherens junctions in connective tissue ﬁbroblasts or other cell types may transmit mechanical signals and coordinate multicellular adaptations to physical forces [ Ko et al . , 2001 ; Nelson and Chen , 2003 ; Philippova et al . , 1998 ] . The involvement of cadherin - based adhesions sites in sensing and responding to the mechanical properties of the tissue is strongly suggested by the ﬁnding that in wound healing , intercellular contacts involving interactions between cadherins , actin , and myosin are implicated in generating the forces required for wound closure [ Adams and Nelson , 1998 ] . Notably , maintenance of the structure of intercellular contacts critically depends upon contractile forces generated by the actin cytoskeleton [ Danjo and Gipson 1998 ] that act on intercellular contacts in adjacent cells [ Gloushankova et al . , 1998 ] , and the magni - tude and spatial distribution of these forces depend on the viscoelastic properties of the cells as well as the underlying matrix . One clear outcome of these studies is that not all cells appear to use stiffness as a cue for morphology or motility , and the well - documented increase in spread area in ﬁbroblasts [ Lo et al . , 2000 ] as matrix stiffness or density of adhesions sites increases is not universally observed . Figure 4 , for example , shows that , unlike ﬁ - broblasts or endothelial cells , neutrophils appear to be insensitive to matrix stiffness . In the inactive state , they are relatively round on all surfaces tested and can spread and protrude after stimulation by a chemotactic peptide equally well on a gel with elastic modulus 2 Pa as they do on glass . The ability of neutrophils to spread on such a soft matrix is remarkable because it means that the cell extends its cortical actin - rich periphery without being able to generate large traction forces that it can generate during phagocytosis [ Evans et al . , 1993 ] and that appear to be essential for extension of ﬁbroblast cytoskeletons . Another example that runs counter to the expectation that cell protrusion requires traction forces exerted on a stiff material is observed with neurons derived from embry - onic murine spinal cord . These cells extend processes that branch most effectively on soft surfaces with maxi - mal branching on gels with stiffness of 50 Pa [ Flanagan et al . , 2002 ] . The detailed differences in how neutrophils and other cell types employ actin polymerization and acto - myosin contractility to move are not known , but they must be variable enough to allow robust spreading and motility of neutrophils and neurons on surfaces that are far too soft to allow ﬁbroblasts or endothelial cells to spread . There are clearly deﬁned differences in the num - ber , size , and stability of integrin - based adhesions in different cell types [ Entschladen and Zanker , 2000 ] , and it seems probable that large focal adhesions characteristic of ﬁbroblasts on stiff surfaces do not form nor could they function on soft gels [ Balaban et al . , 2001 ] . Different cell types may have adapted responses to different ranges of stiffness to match their function in vivo . The magnitude of stiffness over which ﬁbroblasts switch from being round and free of stress ﬁbers to the fan - shaped form with abundant stress ﬁbers seen when grown on rigid surfaces may help differentiate among dif - ferent possible structures responsible for stiffness sensing . For ﬁbroblasts on ﬁbronectin - coated surfaces , the transition occurs around a value for the shear modulus of 1 , 000 to 3 , 000 Pa . This stiffness is similar to the elastic modulus of the ﬁbroblast itself . Measurements by atomic force micros - copy of Young’s modulus ( equal to 3 times the shear mod - ulus for simple incompressible solids ) of an NIH 3T3 ﬁ - broblasts on a rigid surface are between 3 and 12 kPa [ Rotsch et al . , 1999 ] . The similarity of these elastic con - stants suggests that ﬁbroblasts may undergo spreading only when internally generated forces , which are reported to be independent of collagen matrix stiffness [ Freyman et al . , 2002 ] , are exerted on a surface that is stiff enough so that the resulting deformation is partly within the cytoskeleton and not only within the external matrix . The measured shear moduli of the polyacrylamide - based gels used in these studies is somewhat smaller than the elastic moduli reported from measurements of uniaxial extension or indentation reported in other studies . The forces that cells apply to a ﬂat surface are shear forces , and therefore the shear modulus measured here is the relevant parameter quantifying resistance of the material to this geometry of force application . The Young’s modulus , as measured by extensional or indentation methods , is related to the shear modulus by a function that requires knowledge of the Poisson’s ratio of the material . The somewhat smaller values of shear modulus measured directly may help resolve Cell Morphology and Substrate Stiffness 33 a question related to the mechanism by which cells produce the internal stress that allows them to probe matrix mechan - ical properties . Magnitudes of this stress , reported to be as large as 30 kPa in some studies , are difﬁcult to account for by a purely acto - myosin dependent process because the concentration of cellular myosin and the known range of forces each motor can generate are not sufﬁcient to produce this level of force per surface area , suggesting that other force - generating mechanisms such as osmotic stress may be involved . However , the relevant elastic constants may be smaller than those used to calculate internal stress , and the transition from round to spread morphology of ﬁbroblasts shown in Figure 4 suggests that internal stresses of 3 , 000 Pa may be sufﬁcient for mechanosensing . CONCLUSION The stiffness of the surface to which cells adhere can have a profound effect on cell structure and protein expression , but these mechanical effects vary with dif - ferent cell types , and depend on the nature of the adhe - sion receptors by which the cells bind their substrate . Fibroblasts and endothelial cells develop a spread mor - phology and actin stress ﬁbers only when grown on surfaces with an elastic modulus greater than 2 , 000 Pa , with a greater effect seen when bound to ﬁbronectin compared to collagen . In contrast , neutrophils appear to be insensitive to stiffness changes over a very wide range . The stiffness - dependence of ﬁbroblasts and endo - thelial cells is no longer evident when cells become conﬂuent , or in the case of ﬁbroblasts even when two cells make contact suggesting either that mechanosens - ing uses the cells’ internal stiffness as a criterion or else that signaling from cadherins in cell - cell contacts over - rides signals from the cell - matrix adhesion complexes . REFERENCES Adams CL , Nelson WJ . 1998 . Cytomechanics of cadherin - mediated cell - cell adhesion . Curr Opin Cell Biol 10 : 572 – 577 . Balaban NQ , Schwarz US , Riveline D , Goichberg P , Tzur G , Sabanay I , Mahalu D , Safran S , Bershadsky A , Addadi L , Geiger B . 2001 . Force and focal adhesion assembly : a close relationship studied using elastic micropatterned substrates . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 466 – 472 . Bao G , Suresh S . 2003 . Cell and molecular mechanics of biological materials . Nat Mater 2 : 715 – 725 . Bard JB , Hay ED . 1975 . The behavior of ﬁbroblasts from the devel - oping avian cornea . Morphology and movement in situ and in vitro . J Cell Biol 67 : 400 – 418 . Cunningham CC , Vegners R , Bucki R , Funaki M , Korde N , Hartwig JH , Stossel TP , Janmey PA . 2001 . Cell permeant polyphosphoi - nositide - binding peptides that block cell motility and actin assembly . J Biol Chem 276 : 43390 – 43399 . Danjo Y , Gipson IK . 1998 . Actin “purse string” ﬁlaments are anchored by E - cadherin - mediated adherens junctions at the leading edge of the epithelial wound , providing coordinated cell movement . J Cell Sci 111 : 3323 – 3332 . Engler A , Bacakova L , Newman C , Hategan A , Grifﬁn M , Discher D . 2004 . Substrate compliance versus ligand density in cell on gel responses . Biophys J 86 : 617 – 628 . Entschladen F , Zanker KS . 2000 . Locomotion of tumor cells : a mo - lecular comparison to migrating pre - and postmitotic leuko - cytes . J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 126 : 671 – 681 . Evans E , Leung A , Zhelev D . 1993 . Synchrony of cell spreading and contraction force as phagocytes engulf large pathogens . J Cell Biol 122 : 1295 – 1300 . Flanagan LA , Ju YE , Marg B , Osterﬁeld M , Janmey PA . 2002 . Neurite branching on deformable substrates . Neuroreport 13 : 2411 – 2415 . Flory P . 1953 . Principles of polymer chemistry . Ithaca : Cornell Uni - versity Press . 672 p . Freyman TM , Yannas IV , Yokoo R , Gibson LJ . 2002 . Fibroblast contractile force is independent of the stiffness which resists the contraction . Exp Cell Res 272 : 153 – 162 . Gloushankova NA , Krendel MF , Alieva NO , Bonder EM , Feder HH , Vasiliev JM , Gelfand IM . 1998 . Dynamics of contacts between lamellae of ﬁbroblasts : essential role of the actin cytoskeleton . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95 : 4362 – 4367 . Greenburg G , Hay ED . 1982 . Epithelia suspended in collagen gels can lose polarity and express characteristics of migrating mesen - chymal cells . J Cell Biol 95 : 333 – 339 . Ko KS , Arora PD , McCulloch CA . 2001 . Cadherins mediate intercel - lular mechanical signaling in ﬁbroblasts by activation of stretch - sensitive calcium - permeable channels . J Biol Chem 276 : 35967 – 35977 . Laukaitis CM , Webb DJ , Donais K , Horwitz AF . 2001 . Differential dynamics of alpha 5 integrin , paxillin , and alpha - actinin during formation and disassembly of adhesions in migrating cells . J Cell Biol 153 : 1427 – 1440 . Lo CM , Wang HB , Dembo M , Wang YL . 2000 . Cell movement is guided by the rigidity of the substrate . Biophys J 79 : 144 – 152 . Nelson CM , Chen CS . 2003 . VE - cadherin simultaneously stimulates and inhibits cell proliferation by altering cytoskeletal structure and tension . J Cell Sci 116 : 3571 – 3581 . Ory DS , Neugeboren BA , Mulligan RC . 1996 . A stable human - derived packaging cell line for production of high titer retrovirus / vesicular stomatitis virus G pseudotypes . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93 : 11400 – 11406 . Pelham RJ , Jr . , Wang Y . 1997 . Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by substrate ﬂexibility . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94 : 13661 – 13665 . Philippova MP , Bochkov VN , Stambolsky DV , Tkachuk VA , Resink TJ . 1998 . T - cadherin and signal - transducing molecules co - localize in caveolin - rich membrane domains of vascular smooth muscle cells . FEBS Lett 429 : 207 – 210 . Rossi FM , Guicherit OM , Spicher A , Kringstein AM , Fatyol K , Blakely BT , Blau HM . 1998 . Tetracycline - regulatable factors with distinct dimerization domains allow reversible growth inhibition by p16 . Nat Genet 20 : 389 – 393 . Rotsch C , Jacobson K , Radmacher M . 1999 . Dimensional and me - chanical dynamics of active and stable edges in motile ﬁbro - blasts investigated by using atomic force microscopy . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96 : 921 – 926 . Wakatsuki T , Kolodney MS , Zahalak GI , Elson EL . 2000 . Cell mechanics studied by a reconstituted model tissue . Biophys J 79 : 2353 – 2368 . Wang HB , Dembo M , Wang YL . 2000a . Substrate ﬂexibility regulates growth and apoptosis of normal but not transformed cells . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 279 : C1345 – C1350 . Wang LZ , Gorlin J , Michaud SE , Janmey PA , Goddeau RP , Kuuse R , Uibo R , Adams D , Sawyer ES . 2000b . Puriﬁcation of salmon clotting factors and their use as tissue sealants . Thromb Res 100 : 537 – 548 . 34 Yeung et al .