Sustainably Unpersuaded : How Persuasion Narrows O ur Vision of Sustainability Hrönn Brynjarsdóttir 1 , Maria Håkansson 1 , James Pierce 2 , Eric P . S . Baumer 1 , Carl DiSalvo 3 , and Phoebe Sengers 1 1 Cornell University Ithaca , NY 14850 , USA { hb47 , mch267 , ericpsb , pjs54 } @ cornell . edu 2 Carnegie Mellon University HCI Institute Pittsburgh , PA 15213 - 3891 , USA jjpierce @ cs . cmu . edu 3 Georgia Institute of Technology Digital Media Program Atlanta , GA 30332 , USA carl . disalvo @ lcc . gatech . edu ABSTRACT In this paper we provide a critical analysis of persuasive sustainability research from 2009 - 2011 . Drawing on critical sociological theory of modernism , we argue that persuasion is based on a limited framing of sustainability , human be - havior , and their interrelationship . This makes supporting sustainability easier , but leads to characteristic patterns of breakdown . We then detail problems that emerge from this narrowing of vision , such as how the framing of sustainabil - ity as the optimization of a simple metrics places technolo - gies incorrectly as objective arbiters over complex issues of sustainability . We conclude by suggesting alternative ap - proaches to move beyond these problems . Author Keywords Persuasive sustainability ; sustainable HCI ; reflective HCI ; critical reflection ; modernism ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . [ Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) ] : Miscellaneous ; INTRODUCTION Environmental sustainability is a popular topic in HCI re - search , and one that is frequently addressed through persua - sion . 86 papers contain the terms “environmental” and “sus - tainability” in CHI 2009 - 2011 ; of these , 38 , or almost half , also include the term “persuasive . ” DiSalvo et al . found a similar emphasis ; persuasive sustainability comprised 45 % of their sustainable HCI corpus [ 11 ] . Froehlich et al . found that 56 of 139 sustainable HCI papers were in the related genre of eco - feedback [ 21 ] . Given the prevalence of persua - sive approaches in sustainable HCI , it is worthwhile to con - sider the nature of this area and how it may be shaping sus - tainable HCI as a research enterprise . Here , we offer a criti - cal analysis of persuasive sustainability from 2009 - 2011 , addressing three key questions : ( 1 ) How is persuasion being framed within sustainable HCI ? ( 2 ) How is persuasive sus - tainability shaping how we conceive of and address sustain - ability in HCI ? and ( 3 ) How should we approach sustain - ability in the future ? To answer these questions , we integrate empirical , theoreti - cal , and critical methodologies . First , we ground our discus - sion in an analysis of the persuasive sustainability literature , identifying themes such as the framing of sustainability as reducing resource consumption and a focus on measuring and reporting information about individuals’ activities . Se - cond , we use sociological theory on modernism to develop a theoretical lens that helps us understand how persuasive sustainability is conceptualized . Our key argument is that persuasive sustainability works by narrowing its focus to a limited framing of sustainability , human behavior , and their interrelationship . While this may help make the problem of sustainability manageable as an engineering enterprise , it also makes designs susceptible to breakdown . We then identify key problems that result from this narrowing of vision . For example , we articulate how the framing of sus - tainability as optimization of a simple metric places tech - nologies incorrectly as objective arbiters over more com - plex issues of sustainability . Many issues we highlight have been noted in prior works which inform and motivate this argument [ 2 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 13 , 21 , 27 , 44 , 46 , 54 , 55 , 58 ] . Here we synthesize these is - sues and explain how they fit together conceptually , offer - ing a comprehensive treatment of persuasive sustainability and its problems . Our aim is not to argue that persuasive sustainability is inherently bad . Rather , our goal is to ex - plain how it is organized as a modernist enterprise and un - derstand the consequences for sustainable HCI research . Through our argument , we also draw attention to strengths of persuasive sustainability and suggest ways to improve it . WHAT IS PERSUASIVE SUSTAINABILITY ? Persuasive sustainability has its roots in the application of Fogg’s framework for “computers as persuasive technolo - gies” [ 16 , 17 ] to the topic of environmental sustainability . Fogg draws on psychological theories of persuasion , defin - ing persuasion as “an attempt to shape , reinforce , or change behaviors , feelings , or thoughts about an issue , object , or action” [ 16 , p . 225 ] , and going on to argue that “behavior change is a more compelling metric than attitude change” Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . CHI’12 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA . Copyright 2012 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 1015 - 4 / 12 / 05 . . . $ 10 . 00 . Session : Critical Perspectives on Design CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 947 [ 16 , p . 230 ] . According to Fogg , persuasive technologies are explicitly designed “to change attitudes or behaviors or both ( without using coercion or deception ) ” [ 17 , p . 15 ] . In their 2010 analysis of sustainable HCI , DiSalvo et al . [ 11 ] describe the emerging genre of persuasive sustainabil - ity . Roughly half of the literature surveyed by DiSalvo et al . derives its orientation from Fogg in that they are broadly aligned with the goal of “design [ ing ] systems that attempt to convince users to behave in a more sustainable way” ( p . 1977 ) . DiSalvo et al . characterize this large cluster of work as drawing primarily from the disciplines of psychol - ogy / communication and to a lesser extent design , providing information about user behavior related to sustainability , defining “sustainability” largely in terms of resource con - servation , and defining success in terms of changing users’ behavior in ways predetermined by designers . In this paper , we build on this prior analysis by critically examining persuasive sustainability papers published since that review . First , we searched the ACM Digital Library for peer - reviewed HCI conference publications from 2009 through July 2011 for the term “sustainability” , excluding work not specifically related to environmental sustainabil - ity . The conferences searched were CHI , CSCW , DIS , TEI , ACE , Ubicomp , OzCHI , and Persuasive . Second , we searched within the initial results for work in which the authors describe their primary goal in terms of changing users’ behavior to make it more sustainable ( rather than , for example , changing local cultures or stimulating debate ) . 36 papers met the final selection criteria . As in [ 11 ] , not all the papers self - identify as “persuasive” . In 22 out of the 36 papers , the authors explicitly identify the work using the term “persuasive” in the keywords , title , or body of the pa - per , or use the persuasive literature as theoretical ground - ing . The remaining 14 “implicit” papers in our sample did not explicitly describe themselves as persuasive but still aimed for behavior change . We found both sets of papers shared similarities in the way the framed and approached the problem of sustainability ; differences are noted where relevant . While the following analysis is based on these 36 papers that we have labeled as “persuasive” , it is important to note that certain papers are much more strongly focused on per - suading behavior change than others . Some papers , while explicitly focused on persuading people to alter their behav - iors , additionally engage with design issues and goals that may be considered as falling outside of a more pure “per - suasive approach—including engaging with concerns such as privacy [ 32 ] , aesthetic [ e . g . 34 ] , and curiosity [ 5 ] . As such , our designation of each of these papers as a “persua - sive” paper should be considered with this caveat in mind . Sustainability as resource management The papers in our review covered a range of systems in - cluding in - situ ambient displays using pervasive sensor technology [ e . g . 31 , 36 ] , ambient computer widgets [ 33 , 34 ] , social network applications for sharing environmental data [ 18 ] , persuasive games [ 23 ] and interactive visual displays [ 38 ] . According to Fogg’s notion of persuasion , profes - sional or researcher designers are depicted as being ulti - mately responsible for deciding what constitutes desirable behavior change and how this is to be accomplished . We found that our corpus was largely aligned with this perspec - tive , with only 3 papers reporting participatory design , 2 of which are from the same research group [ 8 , 41 , 52 ] . There is a remarkable unanimity among the papers with respect to the types of environmental issues addressed and the ways in which they are framed . Like [ 21 ] , we found energy con - sumption to be the most commonly identified issue , a topic which was addressed in half of the papers reviewed ( 18 / 36 ) [ e . g . 18 , 23 ] . Of the remaining papers , half ( 9 ) involve other forms of resource consumption , including water [ e . g . 31 , 36 ] , printing paper [ 59 ] , and gasoline [ 39 ] . The remain - ing papers deal with making green transportation choices [ 20 ] , improving indoor air quality [ e . g . 32 ] , reducing CO2 emissions [ e . g . 51 ] , or are not tied to any one specific , eas - ily demarcated topic [ e . g . 8 ] . Except for [ 20 ] , all papers that mention a specific area aim to improve 1 - 3 well - defined metrics . Most of the papers follow a fairly standard presen - tation of a brief justification ( a paragraph or a sentence ) of why the identified issue is significant in terms of global environmental concerns , followed by an argument framing the designed technology as a possible solution . Indirectly changing individuals’ behavior The systems presented in this corpus are overwhelmingly designed to intervene at an individual level [ e . g . 18 , 19 , 20 , 22 , 33 , 34 , 39 ] , with some aimed at individual be - havior defined as occurring in a community context such as in a family [ e . g . 5 , 23 , 38 , 51 ] or company [ e . g . 30 , 40 ] . All the papers mention changing individual behavior in some form , although some papers discuss how behavior change using softer , less direct , terms such as “motivate” [ 35 ] , “en - courage” [ 42 ] , “educate” [ 33 ] , “promote” [ 31 ] , or “influ - ence” [ 40 ] . Some papers focus on relatively specific behav - iors like using less water in the shower [ e . g . 38 ] , but most focus on more general behavior change . This was particu - larly true for the 18 papers focusing on energy conservation in the home , which generally did not clearly define targeted behaviors . In the majority ( though certainly not all ) of these papers , users are given no specific direction on how to de - crease their resource consumption or how much decrease is enough . Sensing and reporting information Of the 29 papers we reviewed that reported full system de - signs , 23 automatically sensed the result of user activity , often in real - time . Sensing electricity consumption was the most common area of focus [ e . g . 18 , 19 , 26 , 33 , 34 , 40 , 43 ] ; other areas included water usage [ e . g . 31 ] gasoline and CO2 emissions from driving [ 39 ] , and printing [ e . g . 59 ] . A few papers do not directly sense user behavior , e . g . a computer game to educate users about resource consumption [ 23 ] , a design framework for persuasive services [ 60 ] . Session : Critical Perspectives on Design CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 948 All but 1 of the sensing systems feed the sensed data back to users . This feedback is , for the most part , provided in real - time to aid conscious decision - making [ e . g . 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 , 36 , 39 ] . A few papers also describe influencing behavior without conscious awareness , including feedback through subliminal information [ 25 ] , influencing “uncon - scious behaviors” [ 53 ] and influencing behaviors by mak - ing them easier [ 60 ] . In other words , some systems aim to provide information for reflective decision - making , while others aim to deliver information to produce behavioral effect without conscious decision - making . Although the papers all allude to behavior change as their general goal , many seemed to focus more on increasing “awareness , ” describing their systems using language such as “motivating teenagers towards energy awareness” [ 23 ] , “mak [ ing ] the public become aware of the connection be - tween their everyday activities and global climate change” [ 33 ] , or “increas [ ing ] awareness of electricity consumption in everyday life” [ 30 ] . As also found in [ 11 ] , in many cases the causal relationship between awareness and behavior seems only loosely articulated , suggesting that increasing an individuals’ awareness of energy consumption ( e . g . , how much she is consuming or how much other individuals are consuming ) can or will lead to conservation behavior [ e . g , 40 , 43 ] . A few papers use an explicit causal model in which information leads to motivation leads to behavior change [ e . g . 26 ] . Evaluating behavior change So , does persuasive sustainability lead to intended changes in behavior ? Of the 36 papers in our corpus , almost half ( 17 ) have no user evaluation . Of these , 12 cannot evaluate , e . g . because they explore a design methodology or are in the early stages of design . [ 1 ] evaluates using performance tests ; the other 4 that do not evaluate impact on users are implicit , designerly papers . Of the 19 papers that do report on a system evaluation , 5 discuss preliminary evaluations , mostly usability studies that do not address behavioral change . The remaining 14 report on field studies that look at use in situ . One study has 52 participants [ 34 ] , 2 have 14 , and the rest have 10 or fewer participants . Twelve of the 14 studies report some kind of behavior change , although in at least two cases this is only for a small subset of participants [ 20 , 33 ] . In some cases , metric changes are reported without any discussion of what behavioral changes might have led to them ; in others , behavioral changes are claimed but without any statistically significant effect on the intended metric . Generally speaking , when behavioral changes are claimed , anecdotal evidence of behavior changes is related , but it is difficult to determine what behaviors changed or by how much . Little evidence for long - term behavioral change is offered in any of the papers we reviewed . The typical duration of a field study is 3 - 4 weeks , which is likely not long enough to go beyond novelty effects . Some studies argue for a poten - tial longer - term effect based on the fact that the metrics had stabilized before the end of the study [ e . g . 31 ] . Only 2 of the studies are longer than one month ; 1 is 5 weeks [ 36 ] ; and 1 is a 3 month study [ 5 ] . This is the only study that could truly be considered long - term ; the authors state that behavioral changes took place , but what changes , how fre - quent or effective they were , and how many participants had them was unclear . Summary Persuasive sustainability papers are by no means homoge - neous in their approach . For example , some papers aim for a scientific approach in which the goal is explicitly to con - trol variables and optimize particular metrics [ e . g . 23 ] , while others take a more designerly orientation , in which system design and evaluation proceed in an open - ended , exploratory fashion [ e . g . 5 ] . Nevertheless , our analysis de - scribed in this section identifies properties that are over - whelmingly shared across persuasive sustainability papers of all orientations . Persuasive sustainability aims to change behavior related to sustainability , generally understood as reducing individual resource consumption ; the nature of the expected behavioral change is often unspecified . Persuasive sustainability systems generally aim to do so by raising individuals’ awareness of the consequences of their activity . In order to do so , these systems typically sense and measure human activity , especially as related to resource usage . The method of persuasion is to provide information , usually about the sensed usage of resources . The type of behavior to be changed , and the metric by which that change is measured , are chosen in a top - down fashion , rather than in a bottom - up , participatory or user - centered fashion . Evalua - tion tends to be short - term and with small groups , and there is limited evidence of lasting behavioral impact . A CRITICAL LENS ON PERSUASIVE SUSTAINABILITY Unsurprisingly given the potential for broad impact of the persuasive sustainability approach , it has been subject to various criticisms . Such criticisms include overly focusing on incremental over systemic change [ 2 , 11 , 13 , 45 , 54 , 55 , 58 ] and individual consumption [ 11 , 13 , 28 , 42 ] . A main contri - bution of this paper is to build on these previous works and demonstrate how issues with persuasive sustainability are not isolated problems but rather are necessary consequences of the problem framing of persuasive sustainability . Dour - ish [ 13 ] and Strengers [ 55 ] have similarly traced a variety of these problems to an underlying liberal assumption of a rational , economically calculating actor . We complement their analyses by arguing that persuasive sustainability sys - tems can be usefully understood as an example of modern - ist technology design , which have been argued to have par - ticular modes of breakdown . Based on these critiques , we will demonstrate how these theoretically - expected modes of breakdown appear empirically in the literature . What is modernism ? By “modernism” we refer to a broad cultural movement that rose to prominence in the 20th century . It avows that people can and should change the world for the better by analyzing present conditions and improving them through Session : Critical Perspectives on Design CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 949 scientific and technical knowledge . Modernism rejects the idea that tradition should be the guide for action and seeks instead to rethink and optimize our life conditions through rational planning . Modernism aims to improve life through technical means ; it is associated with the idea of “progress” and embraces scientific perspectives as the grounds for new definitions of value . There is a wide array of literature describing the nature and characteristics of modern societies . Here , we draw on an influential understanding of modern society arising from the work of Weber [ 57 ] and popularized by Ritzer [ 48 ] . This work emphasizes 4 values central to modernist ap - proaches : ( 1 ) calculability , or framing human endeavors with respect to values that can be numerically computed or measured ; ( 2 ) predictability , or being able to ascertain be - forehand the precise outcome of actions or decisions ; ( 3 ) efficiency , or accomplishing goals through the least use of resources ; and ( 4 ) top - down ( technological ) control , or achieving desired outcomes by controlling what might oth - erwise be unruly or unknown situations . Technology plays a central role in modernist approaches as a method for im - proving the human condition . Modernist approaches to technology tend to be predicated on quantifying aspects of human life , focus on improving the efficiency of everyday processes , intend to have predictable effects , and in order to do so necessarily aim to increase control over the vagaries of those processes . Modernist approaches tend to be ori - ented around three axioms : ( 1 ) trust in technoscientific rea - soning and top - down , expert knowledge as a way to organ - ize our lives ; ( 2 ) orientation around means - end thinking , maximizing efficiency , and exerting control as ground prin - ciples to optimize everyday processes ; and ( 3 ) trust that formal , rational methods capture essentially everything that matters about a given situation . Persuasive sustainability as a modernist enterprise We previously described contemporary persuasive sustain - ability systems as technologies that sense , interpret , and respond to human activity by providing information in - tended to change the behavior of individual consumers ac - cording to a metric selected in a top - down fashion , usually defined as reducing resource consumption . In this defini - tion , we recognize several of the attributes of modernism . These technologies embody trust that through scientific and technical intervention , we can solve the problem of sustain - ability . The use of sensing to automatically track and report on human behavior reflects trust that calculable , formal measures can capture the essential aspects of sustainability . The intended change of behavior is an example of attempt - ing to control vagaries in order to lead to a predicted and desired outcome . The top - down selection of a metric re - flects an emphasis on expert knowledge as the driving force in finding solutions . These attributes of modernism are not only reflected in the overall orientation of persuasive sustainability , they deeply inform specifics in system design . We aim to give a feel for modernist aspects of design through a fictional design an - chored in design decisions made in the literature ( this strat - egy is similar to [ 47 ] ) . Consider a mobile phone app that uses GPS traces to determine the user’s mode of transporta - tion , e . g . , whether the user is driving a car , walking , biking , or riding a bus [ 20 ] . The system can also use the proximity of other Bluetooth - enabled devices to determine , when driving , whether or not the user is carpooling . The system then allows the user to view miles traveled and tons of CO2 emitted , aggregated in a variety of ways , such as by week , month , or year , or by transportation type [ 43 ] . The system also aggregates data across all users to indicate whether a given user is above , near , or below average transportation - related carbon emissions , optionally scoped by such means as geographic region or social network [ 18 ] . This social comparison is presented via a “thermometer” display , which reminds the user of the global warming s / he is caus - ing or preventing [ 36 ] . If the user is above the norm , the app provides tailored daily tips to reduce transit emissions , such as recommending public transit options or suggesting carpooling buddies [ 26 ] . In this concept , we see many modernist traits . The system is designed around the improvement of efficiency , where effi - ciency is specifically defined in terms of emission of CO2 as a result of transportation . The system’s proscriptions are based in scientific authority embodied in the carbon - counting and sensing algorithms and the personalized sug - gestions that interpret their consequences . The GPS trace and transportation mode detection not only make emissions calculable , these features also make it predictable ; the sys - tem can tell the user just how much carbon she will cut by taking a different mode of transportation . Furthermore , by choosing a different mode of transportation , the user can control her emissions , thereby optimizing her behavior . In practice , persuasive sustainability papers vary in how and to what degree they embody a modernist orientation . For example , while some papers focus in evaluation on tracking and optimizing a single metric in ways consonant with modernism , others engage in more open - ended evalua - tions which aim to uncover unexpected and unanticipated uses , and therefore do not fit as neatly into a modernist frame [ e . g . 21 , 5 ] . Nevertheless , our analysis of the common traits of the persuasive sustainability literature suggests that the rhetorical frame that drives problem statements and solutions in the research area as a whole is strongly mod - ernist . Indeed , there is much that is laudable about modernism as a frame for technology design . For example , by structuring “sustainability” as the more manageable problem of “re - source minimization” , persuasive sustainability provides an actionable framework for developing novel solutions , rather than becoming paralyzed because the problem seems so complex . For users who want to reduce their resource con - sumption but are unsure of how to do so , the real - time measurement and judgment provided by persuasive sustain - Session : Critical Perspectives on Design CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 950 ability systems can usefully inform their decisions . The use of expert data , rather than individuals’ preferences , to drive decisions about metrics to aim for and the behavior that should result may increase confidence that we are building systems that will really make a difference in global prob - lems of sustainability . The problem is that modernist tech - nologies are susceptible to breakdown . In the next section , we describe this breakdown and explain how it manifests itself in contemporary persuasive sustainability . NARROWING THE VISION The possibilities and limitations of modernist approaches are cataloged in Scott’s classic work Seeing Like a State [ 49 ] ( similar critiques are embodied in [ 14 ] and [ 57 ] ) . As Scott argues , modernist solutions to problems are based on a “narrowing of vision” ( p . 11 ) that “brings into sharp focus certain limited aspects of an otherwise far more complex and unwieldy reality . This very simplification , in turn , makes the phenomenon at the center of the field of vision more legible and hence more susceptible to careful meas - urement and calculation . Combined with similar observa - tions , an overall , aggregate , synoptic view of a selective reality is achieved , making possible a high degree of sche - matic knowledge , control , and manipulation” ( p . 11 ) . While this narrowing of vision makes possible a wide range of technical solutions , those solutions tend to break down in the face of ecological issues outside of the ‘selective real - ity’ constructed through the problem framing . In one example , Scott analyzes the development of scien - tific production forestry in late - 18th century Germany . The goal of scientific forestry was to maximize how much sale - able wood could be extracted from a given plot of land . This aim was achieved by analyzing and measuring forests solely in terms of the amount of saleable wood they con - tained , then controlling forests to maximize this measure . Species of wood that were not saleable were removed from the forest and replaced by saleable species , while animals , plants , and human practices such as foraging for firewood that might affect individual trees’ health were removed from the forest . The result , in the short term , was an improvement in the predictability and yield of the forest . But in the long term— over the lifecycle of the forest , about 80 years—the forests began to die off . The fundamental problem was that aspects that had been sidelined in the narrowing of vision underly - ing scientific forestry turned out to be key to the health of the forest . For example , the quality of the soil began to suf - fer with the loss of underbrush and plant and animal spe - cies ; the monocultured forests planted only with saleable wood were prone to blowdowns and blights ; and the peas - ants , whose subsistence practices of firewood gathering and hunting had been banned , both openly and covertly under - mined the restrictions . All designs have unintended consequences , but these cause greater problems for modernist designs because their suc - cess is often predicated on an assumption that all factors have been taken into account . They tend to be blind - sided by factors outside of what was formally modeled . Also , their reliance on expert knowledge and use of mechanisms of control means they tend to place technologies in a posi - tion of authority over user’s lives . This control is authoritar - ian , imposed through a centralized scheme based on the conceiver’s frame of reference , which will solve the prob - lem only to the degree that it achieves compliance . The control is illusory , however , because it focuses only on those aspects of reality that are within view—those that are of interest to the modeler , rather than to the modelee . A similar narrowing of vision is imminent in persuasive sustainability . Rather than tackling the complex problem of sustainability as a whole , most persuasive sustainability has chosen a small subset : individual consumer behaviors which have a fairly clear and direct impact on “sustainabil - ity” understood as a form of resource management . This narrowing of vision has a benefit in giving us a handle on an otherwise unmanageable problem . Just as scientific for - estry made “keeping a healthy forest” approachable by framing it as a maximization problem over the number of saleable - wood trees , in persuasive models “sustainability” becomes framed as a minimization problem over the amount of a resources used by an individual or other metric chosen by the designer ; the lens here is focused in particular on optimizing individual decisions in order to achieve that goal . Like scientific forestry , persuasive sustainability has the potential to achieve well - defined changes in those choices . Yet , also like scientific forestry , persuasive sus - tainability’s long - term success is susceptible to being un - dermined by factors outside of what it aims to measure and control . In the next sections , we describe ways these prob - lems manifest themselves in persuasive sustainability . Defining sustainability too narrowly A key attribute of modernist technologies is that they nar - row their focus in order to be able to make measurable pro - gress along known dimensions . In persuasive sustainability , we often see such a refocusing of the topic of “sustainabil - ity” leaving projects unable to deal , as others have argued , with the systemic nature of sustainability as a problem [ 2 , 28 , 42 , 55 ] . First , the emphasis on sensing users’ behavior means that these technologies limits their focus to aspects of sustainability that are clearly measurable , such as the amount of electricity that a person uses . Although the ac - tions that a person takes are frequently measurable , the meaning of those actions and their causes often lie outside of the frame of persuasive sustainability . Problems come about , for example , when the technology’s necessarily lim - ited judgments are seen and presented to users as absolute values which reflect the true sustainability of their behavior , rather than as partial views of a much larger and more com - plex problems . The orientation of persuasive sustainability towards technology automatically evaluating human activ - ity also results in a focus on aspects of sustainability that appear to be non - controversial . This leaves out many defi - nitions of sustainability that HCI could address . It also Session : Critical Perspectives on Design CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 951 means that persuasive technologies are framed as objective arbiters of the truth , with sustainability tending to be por - trayed as fixed , known , and stable . This is a where the au - thoritarianism which is endemic to modernist technology plays out ; an expert decides what is or is not “sustainable” and embodies this view in a technology which will judge users’ behavior along the expert’s lines . As others have argued as well [ 2 , 11 , 13 , 27 , 28 , 44 ] , this framing has diffi - culty dealing with varying local definitions of sustainability and tends to sideline the politics involved , for example , in who gets to use resources , for what , and why . Focusing too strongly on individuals and behaviors Another way in which persuasion has narrowed the vision of sustainability is through its framing of “users” as indi - vidual , isolated consumers and bracketing of the complex social , cultural , and institutional contexts in which they live . A variety of critiques have demonstrated that when we expand our lens to understand the institutional , social , and cultural influences and constraints on individuals , persua - sive solutions begin to fall apart [ 2 , 10 , 13 , 46 , 54 , 55 ] . One problem commonly identified [ 10 , 27 , 46 , 54 , 55 ] is that the focus on individuals and their responsibility to make wise choices with respect to sustainability neglects the ways in which social dynamics outside the system condition what is possible , e . g . , who is actually able to make changes , or how this will change political relationships or social norms . Be - cause of this , persuasive sustainability interventions tend to assume that individuals have a greater capacity for action than they actually do in practice . Dillahunt et al , for exam - ple , showed that even sustainably focused renters have rela - tively little control over their appliances , heating , and other major factors in their electricity use [ 9 ] . And when focusing on what the individual is capable of doing , persuasive sus - tainability tends to marginalize aspects of the design con - text that the individual cannot alter [ 9 , 10 , 55 ] . This means persuasive sustainability tends to neglect the need for change at other scales beyond the individual consumer , as argued by [ 11 , 13 , 28 , 42 ] . Assuming rational actors swayed by information A remarkable difference between what we might expect from Fogg’s [ 16 ] articulation of persuasive technology and its instantiation in persuasive sustainability systems is that most are not directly aimed at behavioral change but instead aim to provide information and raise awareness , in the hopes that this will lead in some way to altered behavior . This change in emphasis from Fogg’s notion of changing behaviors and beliefs to focusing on providing information may be because the latter is easier to aim toward and evalu - ate , lends itself to HCI’s existing strengths in information display , and may be a better fit to a user - centered design philosophy by avoiding to the appearance of aiming to con - trol user behavior . But the emphasis on providing informa - tion as a driver for behavior change rests on a common modernist assumption that people are rational actors seek - ing to optimize activity based on what they know . Even if we focus exclusively on changing individual behavior , it is not clear that providing information is the best lever to do so . Approaches where humans are framed as using informa - tion to maximize the utility of their behavior have been critiqued for not taking account of cognitive limitations and the role of emotion in decision - making , and the role that habit plays in many of our everyday behaviors [ 29 ] . So , for example , [ 44 ] have argued that sustainability - related behav - ior is influenced as much or more strongly by material as - pects of design as by explicitly provided information . Too distant from lived use A characteristic of modernist technologies is that they are designed from the perspective of an expert , orient towards his or her formal models , and tend to abstract away from the details on the ground . Because of this , they deal poorly with socio - cultural particularities . By not fully taking into account the nuance and complexities of everyday life , sev - eral researchers have argued that persuasive sustainability is prone to leaving out important concerns and values that undermine the long - term effectiveness of these interven - tions [ 9 , 21 , 44 , 54 , 55 ] . For example , Chetty et al [ 7 ] find that the complexity of household activity makes it difficult to save computing energy , and persuasive technology is there - fore unlikely to speak to household dwellers’ motivations . One particular kind of socio - cultural difference that mod - ernist regimes have difficult handling is power differences ; they tend to presume that the system applies to everyone , but that intended universality frequently masks the fact that systems are designed with one group in mind and may map poorly onto the experiences of others . In the case of persua - sive sustainability , as [ 9 ] has shown , the primary target au - dience is white , middle - to upper - class , urban consumers who have a great deal of discretionary power and whose motivations map onto those of typical HCI researchers . Trouble dealing with the dynamics of change over time One consequence of the narrowing of vision on which modernist technologies rely is that their models tend to be rigid and deal poorly with changing circumstances over time . Persuasive sustainability systems tend to be oriented towards a specific change which users are intended to make . Once users have absorbed the “lessons” of the sys - tem , it is difficult to imagine what the value of the system will be [ 58 ] . In households that are given feedback about electrical usage , there tends to be an initial phase of explo - ration and alteration of habits , but in the longer run the feedback becomes uninteresting [ 55 ] . One response has been to break up behavior change into multiple stages and design interventions for each stage [ 26 ] . Even such ap - proaches may fail to counteract the ways in which users’ preferences and practices form a moving target shaped by external cultural forces . Strengers [ 55 ] , for example , found that eco - feedback systems do lead to increased efficiency of existing practices , but do not work against the adoption of new , more resource - intensive practices . BLIND SPOTS : CONSEQUENCES FOR HCI Having made the argument that common forms of persua - sive sustainability are problematic , the question we now to Session : Critical Perspectives on Design CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 952 turn to is “So what ? ” Beyond just identifying methodologi - cal issues , what are the consequences for HCI research and practice ? Individual and simple acts limit how we imagine change Although individual behavior change may be one means for instigating a sustainable society , it is not the only means . Turning off lights , unplugging unused appliances , and con - serving water are all important . But focusing only on simple acts sidesteps more difficult lifestyle choices that may in fact be necessary to work toward a more sustainable soci - ety . Instead the common tactic is to tweak behaviors , with the goal of adjusting actions to be more in line with bench - marks of sustainability . It’s notable how few persuasive sustainability projects attempt to eliminate behaviors en - tirely . Absent from this work are fundamental questions such as “What is to be sustained ? ” As others have argued [ 2 , 11 , 13 , 45 , 54 , 55 , 58 ] , what we find instead is incremental change . Granting undo authority and expertise to designers In persuasive sustainability , designers are entrusted with the responsibility to decide what is or is not appropriate behav - ior . Indeed , in the process of designing any system , the de - signer configures dependencies and delegates responsibili - ties between people and objects . What is surprising in the persuasive sustainability literature is how little this is dis - cussed . Instead of working toward equitable configurations of responsibility and accountability—e . g . as argued for by Suchman [ 56 ] —persuasive sustainability reinstates the au - thority of the designer and the technical object . The de - signer seems to be de facto more knowledgeable about sus - tainability than the users of persuasive sustainability sys - tems . But little evidence is provided that either the designer is actually an expert or that the user is uninformed . Constraining HCI The primary consequence of the dominant framing of per - suasive sustainability and its narrowed visions is that it con - strains what sustainable HCI can imagine being and doing . The focus on individual behavior not only sets bounds for what might be imagined and designed , but it does this by granting privilege to the literatures of psychology and eco - nomics . Much of the persuasive research draws upon so - cial - psychological research , but this is not the only litera - ture that exists on either persuasion or shaping sustainment . Moreover , the emphasis on behavior change through arti - facts and systems neglects other areas or possibilities for design [ 11 , 13 ] . Given the prevalence of persuasive sustain - ability as a frame for sustainable HCI research , these issues may have a substantial impact on how a larger group of researchers conceives their work . The question we are faced with is how to reconsider persuasive sustainability in a more open manner . MOVING FORWARD Our intention with this analysis is to provide critical insight into issues around persuasive sustainability as currently pursued . But there is an important place for persuasion in sustainable HCI . We first consider how one might do per - suasive sustainability without being unduly encumbered by a modernist approach . Next , we consider alternative ap - proaches to sustainable HCI that are neither persuasive nor modernist and thereby may overcome some of the limita - tions of those two approaches . Persuasion Redux We provide here three specific suggestions as to how persuasive sustainability may be adapted to address some of its shortcomings , as well as examples of each . Broaden our understanding of persuasion . Within design it is common to frame design in relation to rhetoric , as the art of persuasion [ 6 ] . Design is considered rhetorical because every product can be interpreted as an argument for how we should live in the world [ 6 ] . This notion of the rhetorical qualities of objects and systems is echoed in the fields of digital rhetoric and media studies . For example , [ 4 ] Bogost explores how video games provide unique opportunities to produce simulations that enact arguments . What is common across these approaches is the idea that persuasion is a pro - cess through which an audience is presented with perspec - tives that inform and shape their beliefs and actions . This is different from the common techniques of persuasive tech - nology , which as Bogost notes are more akin to coercion than rhetoric [ 4 ] . These ideas from design , digital rhetoric and media studies can be used to shape alternative forms of persuasion in sustainable HCI . For example , drawing ex - plicitly from these fields , Hirsch and Anderson [ 27 ] devel - oped a game that allows varied stakeholders to explore is - sues and consequences of water allocation and usage . Through the design of the game a particular perspective is expressed and reinforced with the objective of persuading the stakeholders toward a specific course of action , but without dogmatism . Include users in the design process . Rather than making technology designers arbiters of all things sustainable , there is an opportunity to more deeply involve users in the design of persuasive systems . We can draw both inspiration and techniques from existing work in HCI and design involving sensing systems and environmental technologies [ 12 , 37 ] . Davis [ 8 ] provides a strong argument for this approach , suggesting participatory design as a method for engaging community members in the design process for a persuasive system [ see also 40 , 52 ] . Such approaches can maintain or increase the sense of agency that is a strength of persuasive sustainability while bringing systems closer to the defini - tion of sustainability that users enact in daily life . More strongly considered users’ values on the ground could lead to more acceptable , satisfying , effective designs . Consider - ing the potential ( arguably inevitable ) imposition of values through persuasive design is a responsible practice . Kuznet - sov and Paulos [ 37 ] and Hirsch and Anderson [ 27 ] provide exemplars of broadening participation in the design process . Move beyond the individual . Unsustainability arises from complex interactions among individuals , social groups , Session : Critical Perspectives on Design CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 953 corporations , organizations , governments , etc . Although , as noted above , persuasive sustainability has focused primarily on the individual , it could benefit by also considering com - munity , political , and infrastructural engagement . Hirsh and Anderson’s previously mentioned water game provides one example : rather than focusing on individual behaviors , it strives to enact change through policy reform [ 27 ] . As an - other example , rather than an app to calculate my carbon footprint , one can envision calculating the carbon footprint of a vote , of my elected representatives [ 13 ] , of my stock portfolio , or of my national government or its military . The - se and other community - oriented approaches [ 2 ] provide examples for how sustainable HCI can grow beyond the modernist persuasive paradigm to engage with societal and cultural change . Beyond Persuasion The above suggestions , to varying degrees , still exhibit modernist tendencies . A carbon calculator for a vote still requires calculability , an expert perspective , etc . These suggestions are meant as ways of revising persuasive approaches to address some of the pitfalls of modernism . However , we also want to suggest alternatives approaches . Shift from prescription to reflection . Most current work in sustainable HCI adopts a specific definition of sustainabil - ity , usually chosen by the technology designer , and attempts to persuade the user to take actions consistent with that def - inition—a definition that may not connect with users’ actual lived experiences . Such systems need not be so prescriptive . For example , Strengers [ 55 ] describes how eco - feedback can provide people with material resources to talk about and socially negotiate their use . So , one way to approach the design of persuasive sustainability systems would be to frame them less as means of prescribing behavior and more as a kind of provocation or boundary object for eliciting issues of sustainability , drawing on the literature in open - ended reflection [ 24 , 50 ] . Recent work in the area of health technology suggests that such an open - ended system can lead users to considerations of what it actually means to be healthy and how health is defined [ 3 ] . A similar approach to sustainable HCI may encourage users to reflect on what it actually means to be sustainable in a way that makes sense in the context of their own lives . Shift from behaviors to practices . As argued above , the narrowed vision of persuasive sustainability focuses on individual , specific behaviors , often in isolation . Such behaviors , though , are rarely isolated in actuality , but rather connect to larger , complex sets of social and cultural practices . For example , home heating is not simply a matter of energy consumption ; though it does consume energy , it also creates a certain environment for the home dwellers and , at times , their guests [ 35 ] . In general , energy - consuming behaviors in the home seem rarely to be thought about primarily , if at all , in terms of the energy they consume [ 46 ] . Similarly , sustainability itself is rarely practiced in isolation but rather connects to a broad constellation of concerns [ 58 ] . These examples demonstrate approaches that , rather than focusing on specific , isolated behaviors , consider energy in the context of broader sociocultural practices . CONCLUSION In this paper we present a critical analysis of persuasive sustainability . We argue that persuasive sustainability can understood as a modernist technology that works by nar - rowing its vision to define sustainability as resource optimi - zation pursued by individual rational actors conceptualized apart from the messy realities of everyday life . We identi - fied key shortcomings of persuasive sustainability with re - gard to sustainability , and proposed a series of alternatives that might be useful in redirecting research . The challenges we describe are not limited to persuasive sustainability . The narrowing of vision and subsequent problems manifested by a modernist approach potentially affect all sustainable HCI research that frames sustainability around values of efficiency , calculability , predictability , and control . Arguably , these problems are also present in persuasive health [ 47 ] . The challenges we present are there - fore not limited to persuasion or sustainable HCI , but con - nect to broader issues in HCI research . We have argued that persuasive sustainability follows a modernist agenda . But why is modernism so attractive to HCI ? Modernism provides a seductive role for HCI : it pro - poses technical solutions to social problems . Ironically , a key aspect of our critique is that most persuasive sustain - ability research is not producing solutions . There is little evidence of efficacy , while the problem space has been so restrained that what we frequently witness is repetition ra - ther than inventiveness . What is needed are new approaches to framing the issues and opportunities of sustainability— from which we might better be able to employ HCI to meet these challenges . The list of problems manifested by a modernist approach and blind spots , therefore , potentially have broader applicability throughout HCI , as themes for the analysis of existing research . Likewise , the alternative approaches we delineate may be applicable across domains of HCI as ways of discovering and pursuing new , more resilient , vectors of research . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Funded in part by NSF Grants IIS - 1018340 , IIS - 1049405 , ISS - 0847293 and the Hans Werthén Foundation . Thanks to Eric Paulos , Geri Gay , Tad Hirsch , and Steve Jackson for their support and suggestions , and to the anonymous re - viewers for helpful criticisms . REFERENCES 1 . Amsel , N . , and Tomlinson , B . 2010 . Green tracker : a tool for estimating the energy consumption of software . Proc CHI EA ' 10 . ACM , 3337 - 3342 2 . Aoki , P . M . , Honicky , R . J . , Mainwaring , A . , Myers , C . , Paulos , E . , Subramanian , S . , and Woodruff , A . 2009 . A vehicle for research : using street sweepers to explore the Session : Critical Perspectives on Design CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 954 landscape of environmental community action . Proc CHI ' 09 . ACM , 375 - 384 3 . Baumer , E . P . S . , Katz , S . J . , Freeman , J . E . , Adams , P . , Gonzales , A . L . , Pollak , JP , Retelny , D . , Niederdeppe , J . , Olson , C . , and Gay , G . 2012 . Prescriptive persuasion and open - ended social awareness : Expanding the design space of mobile health . Proc . CSCW ’12 . ACM . 4 . Bogost , I . Persuasive Games . MIT Press . 2007 . 5 . Broms , L . , Katzeff , C . , Bång , M . , Nyblom , Å . , Ilstedt Hjelm , S . , and Ehrnberger , K . 2010 . Coffee maker pat - terns and the design of energy feedback artefacts . Proc DIS ' 10 . ACM , 93 - 102 . 6 . Buchanan , R . 1985 . Declaration by design : Rhetoric , argument , and demonstration in design practice . Design Issues , 2 ( 1 ) : 4 – 22 . 7 . Chetty , M . , Bernheim Brush , A . J . , Meyers , B . R . , and Johns , P . 2009 . It ' s not easy being green : understanding home computer power management . Proc CHI ' 09 . ACM , 1033 - 1042 . 8 . Davis , J . 2009 . Design methods for ethical persuasive computing . Proc Persuasive ' 09 . ACM , Article 6 , 8 pag - es . 9 . Dillahunt , T . , Mankoff , J . , Paulos , E . , and Fussell , S . 2009 . It ' s not all about " Green " : energy use in low - income communities . Proc Ubicomp ' 09 . ACM , 255 - 264 . 10 . Dillahunt , T . , Mankoff , J . , and Paulos , E . 2010 . Under - standing conflict between landlords and tenants : impli - cations for energy sensing and feedback . Proc Ubicomp ' 10 . ACM , 149 - 158 . 11 . DiSalvo , C . , Sengers , P . , and Brynjarsdóttir , H . 2010 . Mapping the landscape of sustainable HCI . Proc CHI ' 10 . ACM , 1975 - 1984 . 12 . DiSalvo , C . , Louw , M . , Coupland , J . , and Steiner , M . 2009 . Local issues , local uses . Proc . Creativity & Cog - nition ' 09 . ACM : 245 - 254 . 13 . Dourish , P . 2010 . HCI and environmental sustainability : The politics of design and the design of politics . Proc DIS ' 10 . ACM , 1 - 10 . 14 . Edwards , P . 1996 . The closed world : Computers and the politics of discourse in Cold War America . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . 15 . Ferris , B . , Watkins , K . , and Borning , A . 2010 . OneBu - sAway : results from providing real - time arrival informa - tion for public transit . Proc CHI ' 10 . ACM , 1807 - 1816 . 16 . Fogg , BJ . 1998 . Persuasive computers : perspectives and research directions . Proc CHI ' 98 , ACM , 225 - 232 . 17 . Fogg , BJ . 2003 . Persuasive technology : Using com - puters to change what we think and do . Morgan Kauf - mann Publishers , 2003 . 18 . Foster , D . , Blythe , M . , Cairns , P . , and Lawson , S . 2010 . Competitive carbon counting : can social networking sites make saving energy more enjoyable ? Proc CHI EA ' 10 . ACM , 4039 - 4044 . 19 . Foster , D . , Linehan , C . , Lawson , S . , and Kirman , B . 2011 . Power ballads : deploying aversive energy feed - back in social media . Proc CHI EA ' 11 . ACM , 2221 - 2226 . 20 . Froehlich , J . , Dillahunt , T . , Klasnja , P . , Mankoff , J . , Consolvo , S . , Harrison , B . , and Landay , J . A . 2009 . UbiGreen : investigating a mobile tool for tracking and supporting green transportation habits . Proc CHI ' 09 . ACM , 1043 - 1052 . 21 . Froehlich , J . , Findlater , L . , and Landay , J . 2010 . The design of eco - feedback technology . Proc CHI ' 10 . ACM , 1999 - 2008 . 22 . Gartland , A . A . , and Piasek , P . 2009 . Weigh your waste : a sustainable way to reduce waste . Proc CHI EA ' 09 . ACM , 2853 - 2858 . 23 . Gustafsson , A . , Bång , M . , and Svahn , M . 2009 . Power explorer : a casual game style for encouraging long term behavior change among teenagers . Proc ACE ' 09 . ACM , 182 - 189 . 24 . Gaver , W . , Jacob Beaver and S . Benford . 2003 . Ambi - guity as a Resource for Design . Proc CHI ' 09 . ACM , 233 - 240 . 25 . Ham , J . , Midden , C . , and Beute , F . 2009 . Can ambient persuasive technology persuade unconsciously ? : Using subliminal feedback to influence energy consumption ratings of household appliances . Proc Persuasive ' 09 . ACM , Article 29 , 6 pages . 26 . He , H . A . , Greenberg , S . , and Huang , E . M . 2010 . One size does not fit all : applying the transtheoretical model to energy feedback technology design . Proc CHI ' 10 . ACM , 927 - 936 . 27 . Hirsch , T . , and Anderson , K . 2010 . Cross currents : wa - ter scarcity and sustainable CHI . Proc CHI EA ' 10 . ACM , 2843 - 2852 . 28 . Hirsch , T . , Sengers , P . , Blevis , E . , Beckwith , R . , and Parikh , T . 2010 . Making food , producing sustainability . Proc CHI EA ' 10 . ACM , 3147 - 3150 . 29 . Jackson , T . 2005 . Motivating sustainable consumption : a review of evidence on consumer behavior and behav - ioral change . Sustainable Development Research Net - work . Policy Studies Institute , London . 30 . Jönsson , L . , Broms , L . , and Katzeff , C . 2010 . Watt - Lite : energy statistics made tangible . Proc DIS ' 10 . ACM , 240 - 243 . 31 . Kappel , K . , and Grechenig , T . 2009 . " show - me " : water consumption at a glance to promote water conservation in the shower . Proc Persuasive ' 09 . ACM , Article 26 , 6 pages . Session : Critical Perspectives on Design CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 955 32 . Kim , S . , and Paulos , E . 2010 . InAir : sharing indoor air quality measurements and visualizations . Proc CHI ' 10 . ACM , 1861 - 1870 . 33 . Kim , T . , Hong , H . , and Magerko , B . 2009 . Coralog : use - aware visualization connecting human micro - activities to environmental change . Proc CHI EA ' 09 . ACM , 4303 - 4308 . 34 . Kim , T . , Hong , H . , and Magerko , B . 2010 . Design re - quirements for ambient display that supports sustainable lifestyle . Proc DIS ' 10 . ACM , 103 - 112 . 35 . Kuijer , L . , and Jong , A . de . 2011 . Exploring Practices of Thermal Comfort for Sustainable Design . Everyday Practice and Sustainable HCI , Workshop at CHI Conf . Vancouver , BC . 36 . Kuznetsov , S . and Paulos , E . 2010 . Upstream : motivat - ing water conservation with low - cost water flow sensing and persuasive displays . Proc CHI ' 10 . ACM , 1851 - 1860 . 37 . Kuznetsov , S . and Paulos , E . 2010 . Participatory sensing in public spaces : activating urban surfaces with sensor probes . Proc DIS ' 10 . ACM , 21 - 30 . 38 . Laschke , M . , Hassenzahl , M . , Diefenbach , S . , and Tippkämper , M . 2011 . With a little help from a friend : a shower calendar to save water . Proc CHI EA ' 11 . ACM , 633 - 646 . 39 . Lee , H . , Lee , W . , and Lim , Y - K . 2010 . The effect of eco - driving system towards sustainable driving behav - ior . Proc CHI EA ' 10 . ACM , 4255 - 4260 . 40 . Lehrer , D . , and Vasudev , J . 2011 . Evaluating a social media application for sustainability in the workplace . Proc CHI EA ' 11 . ACM , 2161 - 2166 . 41 . Miller , T . M . , Rich , P . , and Davis , J . 2009 . ADAPT : audience design of ambient persuasive technology . Proc CHI EA ' 09 . ACM , 4165 - 4170 . 42 . Odom , W . 2010 . " Mate , we don ' t need a chip to tell us the soil ' s dry " : Opportunities for designing interactive systems to support urban food production . Proc DIS ' 10 . ACM , 232 - 235 . 43 . Petersen , D . , Steele , J . , and Wilkerson , J . 2009 . Watt - Bot : A residential electricity monitoring and feedback system . Proc CHI EA ' 09 . ACM , 2847 - 2852 . 44 . Pierce , J . , Fan , C . , Lomas , D . , Marcu , G . , and Paulos , E . 2010 . Some consideration on the ( in ) effectiveness of residential energy feedback systems . Proc DIS ' 10 . ACM , 244 - 247 . 45 . Pierce , J . , and Paulos , E . 2010 . Materializing energy . Proc DIS ' 10 . ACM , 113 - 122 . 46 . Pierce , J . , Schiano , D . J . , and Paulos , E . 2010 . Home , habits , and energy : examining domestic interactions and energy consumption . Proc CHI ' 10 . ACM , 1985 - 1994 . 47 . Purpura , S . , Schwanda , V . , Williams , K . , Stubler , W . , and Sengers , P . 2011 . Fit4life : the design of a persuasive technology promoting healthy behavior and ideal weight . Proc CHI ' 11 . ACM , 423 - 432 . 48 . Ritzer , G . 1993 . The McDonaldization of American so - ciety : An investigation into the changing character of contemporary social life . Newbury Park , CA : Pine Forge Press . 49 . Scott , J . C . 1999 . Seeing Like a State : How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed . Yale University Press . 50 . Sengers , P . , Boehner , K . , David , S . and Kaye . J . 2005 . Reflective Design . Proc . Critical Computing ' 05 . ACM , 49 - 58 . 51 . Shiraishi , M . , Washio , Y . , Takayama , C . , Lehdonvirta , V . , Kimura , H . , and Nakajima , T . 2009 . Using individ - ual , social and economic persuasion techniques to re - duce CO2 emissions in a family setting . Proc Persua - sive ' 09 . ACM , Article 13 , 8 pages . 52 . Shrubsole , P . , Lavrysen , T . , Janse , M . , and Weda , H . 2011 . Flo : raising family awareness about electricity use . Proc CHI EA ' 11 . ACM , 669 - 672 . 53 . Sohn , M . , Nam , T . , and Lee , W . 2009 . Designing with unconscious human behaviors for eco - friendly interac - tion . Proc CHI EA ' 09 . ACM , 2651 - 2654 . 54 . Strengers , Y . 2008 . Smart metering demand manage - ment programs : challenging the comfort and cleanliness habitus of households . Proc OZCHI ' 08 . ACM , 9 - 16 . 55 . Strengers . Y . A . A . 2011 . Designing eco - feedback sys - tems for everyday life . Proc CHI ' 11 . ACM , 2135 - 2144 56 . Suchman , L . 2002 . Located Accountabilities in Tech - nology Production . Scand . J . Inf . Syst . 14 , 2 , 91 - 105 . 57 . Weber , M . 2002 . Baehr , P . R . , and Wells , G . C . , ed . , trans . , The Protestant ethic and the " spirit " of capitalism and other writings . Penguin . 58 . Woodruff , A . , Hasbrouck , J . , and Augustin , S . 2008 . A bright green perspective on sustainable choices . Proc CHI ' 08 . ACM , 313 - 322 . 59 . Xiao , J . and Fan , J . 2009 . PrintMarmoset : Redesigning the print button for sustainability . Proc . CHI ’09 . ACM , New York , 109 - 112 . 60 . Zapico , J . L . , Turpeinen , M . , and Brandt , N . 2009 . Cli - mate persuasive services : changing behavior towards low - carbon lifestyles . Proc Persuasive ' 09 . ACM , Arti - cle 14 , 8 pages . Session : Critical Perspectives on Design CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 956