Y . Shi et al . ( Eds . ) : MCDM 2009 , CCIS 35 , pp . 209 – 212 , 2009 . © Springer - Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009 Extension of the Framework of Knowledge Process Analysis : A Case Study of Design Research Process Georgi V . Georgiev , Kozo Sugiyama , and Yukari Nagai Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology , 1 - 1 , Asahidai , Nomi , Ishikawa 923 - 1292 , Japan georgiev @ jaist . ac . jp Abstract . This study undergoes the approach of Knowledge process analysis in an academic research project . It investigates the knowledge creation primitives of KPA used in previous studies and tests other possible primitives from the domain of design studies . This is a step improving KPA with design research experience . 1 Introduction The Knowledge process analysis ( KPA ) is a framework under development . It aims to provide a tool for studying the knowledge work in scientific research projects [ 1 ] . This is achieved by elaboration of various theories from field of knowledge science and developing of knowledge creation model specific to research project . The main clues for development of KPA are found in analysis the process of organizational knowledge creation in research projects . This analysis framework elaborates various knowledge creation theories in an exploratory approach to academic research , aiming to improve future research projects and education . The employed theories in the work guide for KPA [ 1 ] are : Theory of tacit thought ; Equivalent transformation theory ; Knowledge management theory ; Non - explicit knowledge process support with model of knowledge categorization ; KJ method ; Concept synthesis in creativity ; and accidental discovery with Serendipity ( for further reference see [ 1 ] ) . These knowledge creation theories are utilized in order to explain certain aspects of research activities , however , not the whole process . The applied primitives concern knowledge creation generally . Sugiyama and Meyer [ 1 ] synthesize the concepts from above theories in factors influencing the knowledge creation through tacit knowledge process . Here we undergo the KPA in a project , aiming to investigate the existing primitives , to test possible candidates for primitives from the design studies domain , improving the KPA [ 1 ] . 2 Elaboration of Primitives from Design Studies Focusing on the primitives’ extraction , such candidate theories from design studies are : Iterative linear design process by Goldschmidt [ 2 ] ; Function – Behavior – Struc - ture framework by Gero [ 3 ] ; General model of creative process strategies by Cross [ 4 ] ; and Design insight model by Taura and Nagai [ 5 ] ( in Table 1 ) . 210 G . V . Georgiev , K . Sugiyama , and Y . Nagai 1 Iterative linear design process : Iterative model [ 2 ] is a sequence of analysis , syn - thesis , and evaluation as linear design process . This sequence builds a spiral of design decisions from abstract to concrete levels . This model represents one of the models of design , focused on its iterative nature . Function – behavior – structure framework de - scribes the fundamental processes involved in designing [ 3 ] as a set of processes link - ing together . Function ( F ) describe what the object is for ; Behavior ( B ) describe the attributes that are expected from the object - structure ( S ) ; and S describe the compo - nents and relationships of the object . General model of creative process strategies : The importance of the strategic knowledge of the outstanding designers’ creative work is illustrated as a leveled General model of creative process strategies in design [ 4 ] . The levels are : 1 ) taking a broad ‘systems approach’ to the problem ; 2 ) ‘framing’ the problem in a distinctive way ; and 3 ) designing from ‘first principles’ . Design in - sight theory [ 5 ] expresses a driving force of design through knowledge operation is from inner criteria of the designers . A power of inner criteria was expressed as “push” a design process ( concept generation perspective ) and pull ( problem solving perspec - tive ) towards the goal . Table 1 . Selection of primitives based on Sugiyama [ 1 ] and new primitives from design theories Knowledge Creation Theory Primitives Tacit dimension ( Polanyi ) Tacit foreknowing Equivalent transformation the - ory ( Ichikawa ) Equivalent finding ; Equivalent transformation ; Analog route ; Digital route Knowledge creation theory ( Nonaka et al ) SECI model ; Ba ( shared context ) ; Knowledge leadership ; Knowledge assets Non - explicit knowledge process support ( Meyer et al ) Social network ; Knowledge categorization ; Knowledge exchange ; Knowledge inventory Creative cognition ( Finke et al ) Concept synthesis KJ method ( Kawakita ) Ideas exhaustion ; Knowledge structure mapping KC theories in KPA ( for further reference see [ 1 ] ) Serendipity ( Roberts ) Accidental discovery Iterative linear process ( Goldschmidt ) Analysis , synthesis , and evaluation iterations FBS framework ( Gero et al ) Function – Behavior – Structure linking General model of creative process strategies ( Cross ) Problem solution leveling Theories from design studies ( Basic primi - tives “formu - lated” from the models ) Design insight ( Taura , Nagai ) Two side process 3 Case Study Project This case study is adopting the methodology of KPA [ 1 ] – knowledge process model - ing , primitives’ synthesis and reflective verification . It is focusing on analyzing own research process through reflective verification of events and knowledge exchange between participants . Extension of the Framework of Knowledge Process Analysis 211 Fig . 1 . Social network and course of the project with phases and SECI modes The small research project’s theme is “Method of Design Focusing on the Network Structure of Meanings” [ 6 ] , aiming at methodology supporting meanings in design . The initial investigation towards evaluation of meanings showed possibilities for analysis . This led to an original method , evolving concept analysis with similarity measures from a concept database . This approach further is applied in design method in conceptual design . The project is analyzed with KPA ( Table 1 ) . The discussed ongoing project was collaboration with individuals’ roles in time shown in Figure 1 . This clarifies the social network among the involved persons as basis for further analysis of knowledge processes . The course of the project [ 6 ] with phases and SECI modes is shown in Figure 1 . The first participant A is a PhD student , having been supervised by B - leader of the project . The expertise of B in design crea - tivity ; design research are in the base of the research theme . Member C’s knowledge is base for the ideas , course of the project and realizations . Member D’s experience is enriching the analysis approach and methodology . Fig . 2 . Thinking flow map on analog and digital routes 212 G . V . Georgiev , K . Sugiyama , and Y . Nagai 1 The next stage of analysis describes the environment of the research project according Nonaka’s theory as the most essential factor for a project [ 1 ] . The main context of A is as follows : Social Context : Support of the process of designing are es - sential ; Stimulation : The work background of A is stimulating the ideas for the pro - ject ; Intuition and skills : Graduated engineering design major ; design skills . The representation of total thinking flow map with identified primitives ( as in Table 1 ) is shown in Figure 2 for analog and digital routes [ 1 ] . The newly added de - sign primitives are clearly expressed in different phases : e . g . FBS , IDP and DI . 4 Discussion and Conclusion The framework of KPA [ 1 ] was applied in an academic research project , along with primitives from the domain of design theory . This application is exploratory and con - tributes to the accumulation of cases towards integrated knowledge creation theory in academic environment . The results show good elaboration with previous applications [ 1 ] . The majority of differences are connected with the specifics of the presented aca - demic project . However , the discussed project accents on the different knowledge creation primitives , thus showing the importance of all elaborated theories . The newly explored design theory primitives show potential to contribute to the KPA framework in form of Iterative design process , FBS framework and Design insight theory . In our case the model of CPS is not fully applicable . References [ 1 ] Sugiyama , K . , Meyer , B . : Knowledge process analysis : Framework and experience . Jour - nal of Systems Science and Systems Engineering 17 ( 1 ) , 86 – 108 ( 2008 ) [ 2 ] Goldschmidt , G . : Design . Encyclopedia of Creativity 1 , 525 – 535 ( 1999 ) [ 3 ] Gero , J . , Kannengiesser , U . : The situated function – behaviour – structure framework . Design Studies 25 ( 4 ) , 373 – 391 ( 2004 ) [ 4 ] Cross , N . : Creative cognition in design : Processes of exceptional designers . In : 4th CC conference , NY , USA ( 2002 ) [ 5 ] Taura , T . , Nagai , Y . : Design insight - A key for studying design creativity . In : Taura , T . , Nagai , Y . ( eds . ) NSF 2008 conference ( 2008 ) [ 6 ] Georgiev , G . V . , Taura , T . , Chakrabarti , A . , Nagai , Y . : Method of design through structur - ing of meanings . In : ASME IDETC / CIE 2008 conference , New York , USA ( 2008 )