Filipin - sensitive Caveolae - mediated Transport in Endothelium : Reduced Transcytosis , Scavenger Endocytosis , and Capillary Permeability of Select Macromolecules Jan E . Schnitzer , Phil Oh , Emmett Pinney , * and Jenny Allard * Department of Pathology , Harvard Medical School , Beth Israel Hospital , Boston , Massachusetts 02215 ; and * Department of Medicine and Pathology , University of California at San Diego , School of Medicine , La Jolla , California 92093 - 0651 Abstract . Caveolae or noncoated plasmalemmal vesi - cles found in a variety of cells have been implicated in a number of important cellular functions including en - docytosis , transcytosis , and potocytosis . Their func - tion in transport across endothelium has been espe - cially controversial , at least in part because there has not been any way to selectively inhibit this putative pathway . We now show that the ability of sterol bind - ing agents such as filipin to disassemble endothelial noncoated but not coated plasmalemmal vesicles selec - tively inhibits caveolae - mediated intracellular and transcellular transport of select macromolecules in en - dothelium . Filipin significantly reduces the transcellu - lar transport of insulin and albumin across cultured endothelial cell monolayers . Rat lung microvascular permeability to albumin in situ is significantly de - creased after filipin perfusion . Conversely , paracellular transport of the small solute inulin is not inhibited in vitro or in situ . In addition , we show that caveolae mediate the scavenger endocytosis of conformationally modified albumins for delivery to endosomes and lysosomes for degradation . This intracellular transport is inhibited by filipin both in vitro and in situ . Other sterol binding agents including nystatin and digitonin also inhibit this degradative process . Conversely , the endocytosis and degradation of activated tx2 - macro - globulin , a known ligand of the clathrin - dependent pathway , is not affected . Interestingly , filipin appears to inhibit insulin uptake by endothelium for transcyto - sis , a caveolae - mediated process , but not endocytosis for degradation , apparently mediated by the clathrin - coated pathway . Such selective inhibition of caveolae not only provides critical evidence for the role of cav - eolae in the intracellular and transcellular transport of select macromolecules in endothelium but also may be useful for distinguishing transport mediated by coated versus noncoated vesicles . C LATHRIN - COated vesicles are the best characterized of the vesicular carriers and with the clustering of receptors at the cell surface provide a specific deliv - ery system for a multitude of ligands from the plasmalemma to endosomes for cellular processing ( Goldstein et al . , 1985 ) . For many years , the smaller noncoated plasmalem - mal vesicles ( also known as caveolae ) received a second bill - ing to the larger and more structurally impressive coated va - riety . Although the existence of caveolae has been known for 40 years ( Yamada , 1955 ; Palade , G . E . 1953 . J . Appl . Phys - ics . 24 : 1424 ; and Palade , G . E . , Anat . Rec . 1958 . 130 : 467 ) , defining their precise function ( s ) has been somewhat difficult . For decades , noncoated vesicles were thought at best to function only in fluid - phase endocytosis and because of this conception , they were frequently called pinocytic or Address all correspondence to J . E . Schnitzel Harvard Medical School / Beth Israel Hospital , Department of Pathology , Research North , 99 Brook - line , MA 02215 . Ph . : ( 617 ) 735 - 3577 . Fax : ( 617 ) 735 - 3591 . " drinking " vesicles ( for review see Silverstein et al . , 1977 ) . One of the interesting functions originally ascribed to these structures upon their discovery in endothelium was a poten - tial role in the transport of " quanta " of molecular cargo from the blood across the endothelium to the tissue interstitium ; again , fluid phase uptake was envisioned ( Palade and Bruns , 1968 ) . In the interim , more studies have focused on the dis - covered role of clathrin - coated vesicles in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Recent studies have brought renewed interest in caveolae because they may be responsible for various important cellu - lar processes ranging from signal transduction to a variety of receptor - mediated transport processes including transcy - tosis , endocytosis and potocytosis . Distinct endocytosis in - dependent of the clathrin - coated pathway has been described in a variety of cell types for various probes including fluid - phase markers such as sucrose , ferritin , and horseradish per - oxidase ( Oliver , 1982 ; Van Deurs and Nicausen , 1982 ) and membrane - bound probes such as cationized ferritin , ricin ( Van Deurs et al . , 1990 ) , Con A ( Hansen et al . , 1991 ) , toxins © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 94 / 12 / 1217 / 16 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 127 , Number 5 , December 1994 1217 - 1232 1217 on O c t obe r 20 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m ( Montesano et al . , 1982 ; Trans et al . , 1987 ) , low - density ii - poprotein ( LDL ) ~ ( Mommaas - Kienhuis et al . , 1985 ) , vi - ruses ( Kartenbeck et al . , 1989 ) , and specific antibodies recognizing ~ - adrenergic receptors ( Raposo et al . , 1989 ) , glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored cell membrane pro - teins ( Keller et al . , 1992 ; Bamezai et al . , 1992 ) , and human lymphocyte antigens class I antigens ( Huet et al . , 1980 ) . It is not at all clear that one type of noncoated vesicle is in - volved in the endocytosis of all of these molecules . Caveolae located abundantly on the surface of certain con - tinuous vascular endothelium may be involved not only in fluid - phase and receptor - mediated endocytosis but also transcytosis ( for review see Schnitzer , 1993 ) . Binding sites and in some cases specific proteins have been identified on the endothelial cell surface that appear to be responsible for receptor - mediated transcytosis of a variety of blood - borne ligands including insulin ( King and Johnson , 1985 ) and the carrier proteins , transferrin ( Wagner et al . , 1983 ; Jeffries et al . , 1984 ) and albumin ( Schnitzer and Oh , 1994 ) . Native and modified albumins bind the cell surface ( Schnitzer et al . , 1988 ; Schnitzer and Bravo , 1993 ) via distinct receptor pro - teins ( Schnitzer et al . , 1992 ; Schnitzer and Oh , 1994 ) . Modified albumins bind gp30 and gpl8 and are internal - ized for degradation ( Schnitzer and Bravo , 1993 ) . In con - trast , native albumin , acting as a carrier for fatty acids and other small ligands ( Galis et al . , 1988 ) , binds albondin for caveolae - mediated delivery across the cell to the underlying tissue cells ( Milici et al . , 1987 ; Schnitzer and Oh , 1994 ) . Anderson et al . ( 1992 ) propose that caveolae also participate in a different form of transport called potocytosis wherein small molecules bind to receptors which localize within cav - eolae to create a specialized environment with a high ligand concentration that facilitates its transmembrane transport directly into the cytoplasm by distinct protein channels . Caveolae are found most abundantly in certain endothelia of the continuous type but are also found to varying degrees in many , if not all , cell types including fibroblasts , adipo - cytes , and muscle cells . Cholesterol is a very important com - ponent of caveolae that appears to be required to maintain the structural integrity of this vesicular complex . At equilib - rium , the plasmalemma contains about 90 % of the total cho - lesterol found in many cells . Caveolae disappear in cells that are depleted of cholesterol and exposure of cells to sterol - binding agents such as filipin preferentially removes choles - terol from the plasmalemma which causes disassembly of caveolae and unclustering of receptors found in caveolae ( Rothberg et al . , 1990 and 1992 ) . Most endothelia of the continuous type contain a very abundant population of cav - eolae that have been implicated in the endocytosis or transcy - tosis of select macromolecules ( for review see Schnitzer , 1993 ) . Although many recent studies provide support for a role of caveolae in transport , this function , especially for en - dothelium , has remained controversial , at least in part be - cause there has not been any way to selectively inhibit this pathway . Therefore , based on this information , we decided to examine the effects of exposing endothelium to filipin on the cell surface density of caveolae and on their putative 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : BAEC , bovine aortic endothelial cells ; BLMVEC , bovine lungs microvascular cells ; LDL , low - density lipopro - tein ; PS , permeability - surface area ; RFC , rat epididymal fat pads . function in endocytosis and transcytosis both in situ and in vitro . Materials and Methods Materials Reagents and other supplies were obtained from the following sources : FCS , and PBS from GIBCO - BR ( Grand Island , NY ) ; gelatin from Difco Laboratories ( Detroit , MI ) ; crystallized BSA and [ 14C ] inulin from ICN Biochemicals ( Cleveland , OH ) ; filipin , nystatin , digitonin , FITC con - jugated BSA , bovine insulin , and ovalbumin from Sigma Chemical ( St . Louis , MO ) ; DME from Irvine Scientific ( Irvine , CA ) ; Iodogen ( 1 , 4 , 5 , 6 - tetrachloro - 3a , 6a - diphenylglycouril ) , Triton X - 100 , BCA protein assay from Pierce Chemical Co . ( Rockford , IL ) ; Nal25I from Amersham Corp . ( Arlington Heights , IL ) ; ~ 2 - macroglobulin from Boehringer - Mannheim Biochemicals ( Indianapolis , IN ) ; 14C - labeled BSA from Du Pont / New En - gland Nuclear ( Boston , MA ) ; Kodachrome , Kodacolor , and Tri - X Pan films from Eastman Kodak ( Rochester , NY ) and all tissue culture plasticware from Costar Corp . ( Cambridge , MA ) or Corning ( Wilmington , DE ) . Cell Culture Microvascular cells , derived from rat epididymal fat pads ( RFC ) and bovine lungs microvascular ( BLMVEC ) , along with bovine aortic endothelial cells ( BAEC ) were obtained , grown in culture , and tested periodically for en - dothelial markers as in our past work ( Schnitzer , 1992 ; Schnitzer and Oh , 1994 ; Schnitzer et al . , 1994 ) . Albumin Probes As described and characterized previously ( Schnitzer et al . , 1992 ) , BSA was modified in the following ways : ( a ) conjugation to 5 - 10 - nm colloidal gold particles ( A - Au ) ; and ( b ) maleic anhydride treated ( MaI - BSA ) . These probes along with native , unmodified BSA were radioiodinated using Iodo - gen as in our previous work ( Schnitzer and Pinney , 1992 ) . Surface Binding Assay Binding assays were performed as described previously ( Schnitzer et al . , 1988a ; Schnitzer and Pinney , 1992 ) . Briefly , confluent cell monolayers grown on 6 - well trays were washed extensively , incubated for 10 rain with filipin in DME or DME alone , and then incubated for 20 rain at 4°C with 1251 - labeled BSA , 125I - labeled A - Au or t25I - labeled Mal - BSA in DME . Af - ter washing ( 3 × 1 min ) with ice - cold DME , the cells were lysed using 5 % Triton X - 100 and 1 % SDS , scraped from the wells , and then pipetted into vials for counting of radioactivity using a Beckman Gamma 5500B . Dupli - cate wells were run for each concentration used . Specific binding was quantified and final calculations were performed as in Schnitzer and Pinney ( 1992 ) . Cell - associated Binding , Uptake , and Degradation Assay at 37°C As per our past protocol ( Schnitzer and Bravo , 1993 ) , confluent BLMVEC , RFC , and BAEC monolayers were washed extensively before incubation at 37°C for various times with 125I - ligand . For insulin degradation studies , the BLMVEC were kept in DME without fetal calf serum at 37°C for 1 h before starting the assay . At specified times , all of the media from each well was removed and saved . The cells were immediately washed with ice - cold DME , lysed , and counted for radioactivity as described above . The media saved from each well was subjected to 10 % TCA precipitation to determine the extent of ligand degradation . As shown in Schnitzer and Bravo ( 1993 ) , the TCA - soluble counts were degradation products from cellular processing of the radioactive ligand whereas the TCA insoluble counts ( pellet ) repre - sented the undegraded ligand remaining in the medium . Fluorescence Microscopy Washed BLMVEC grown on gelatin - coated glass coverslips were incubated at 37°C for 10 min with DME plus 1 mg / ml BSA as the control or DME plus BSA supplemented with the potential inhibitor ( 1 - 5 t ~ g / ml of filipin or 1 mg / ml MaI - BSA ) . Then , this media was removed and replaced with The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 127 , 1994 1218 on O c t obe r 20 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m FITC - conjugated A - Au ( OD at 515 nm = 0 . 2 ) in DME plus BSA . After 30 min the cells were washed ( 3x ice cold DME for 1 min ) and fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS for 1 h . The coverslips with the cells were mounted on a glass slide and then were examined with a Zeiss Axiophot fluorescence microscope set for the appropriate excitation / emission viewing and photography ( Kodachrome , Kodacolor , and / or Tri - X Pan films ) . Electron Microscopy After incubation with A - Au for 5 , 10 , 30 min at 37°C , confluent BLMVEC and BAEC monolayers were washed , fixed , and processed on the 35 - ram plastic dishes for standard transmission electron microscopy as in our previ - ous work ( Schnitzer et al . , 1988a ) . Other BLMVEC monolayers were treated with filipin at 5 / ~ g / mi in DME for 0 to 60 min before processing for electron microscopy . The cell surface density of caveolae for untreated and treated BLMVEC was assessed quantitatively as in Schnitzer et al . ( 1994a ) . Some BLMVEC ( control and filipin treated ) were incubated with A - Au before processing for electron microscopy . In Vitro Transport across Endothelial Cell Monolayers As in our previous work ( Schnitzer and Oh , 1994 ) , BLMVEC seeded onto Transwell filters were used to measure transport across confluent cell monolayers . 125I - labeled insulin , 125I - labeled BSA and [ 14C ] inulin were used as probes to assess transport across BLMVEC monolayers either treated or untreated with filipin in DME for 10 min at 37°C . Transport and Permeability Measurements in the Rat Lung In Situ The capillary permeability of BSA in the rat lung was assessed as in our past work ( Schnitzer and Oh , 1994 ) . The tissue uptake of 1251 - labeled A - Au , 125I - labeled BSA , t4C - labeled BSA , and [ 14C ] inulin was measured similarly by perfusion through the pulmonary artery except that a 3 - rain perfusion of radiolabeled tracer was used instead of a 2 - min perfusion . Briefly , for all tracers , the lung vasculature was flushed for 3 min with oxy - genated Ringer ' s solution containing 30 / ~ M of nitroprusside , for 90 s with Ringer ' s solution with or without filipin , for 3 min with radioactive tracer in Ringer ' s , and then for 3 min with Ringer ' s . Rat lung tissue samples were weighed and measured for radioactivity so that transport and capillary permeabilities could be calculated and compared with control lungs not treated with filipin . Results Examination of Modified Albumin Endocytosis in Cultured Endothelial Cells Recently , we provided evidence that gp30 and gp18 mediate the avid binding , internalization , and degradation of mod - ified albumins ( Schnitzer et al . , 1992 ; Schnitzer and Bravo , 1993 ) ; however , the intracellular mechanism and pathway for the processing of these ligands remains unclear . Here , we first examined the kinetics of the binding , endocytosis and degradation of modified albumins by cultured monolayers of BLMVEC and BAEC . The BLMVEC are advantageous be - cause relative to other endothelial cells , they have a more abundant population of caveolae ( Schnitzer et al . , 1994 ) and interact more avidly with modified albumins . We then fo - cused on A - Au as a typical modified albumin probe to assess its subcellular distribution and movement between specific intracellular compartments . Analysis of Surface Binding , Internalization , and Deg - radation of Modified Albumins . Modified albumin bind - ing to the surface of BLMVEC and BAEC was assessed at 4°C using confluent monolayers that were incubated with ~ 25I - labeled A - Au or ~ 25I - labeled Mal - BSA . Cellular pro - cessing of these ligands was also assessed at 37°C to evaluate uptake and degradation ( see Materials and Methods ) . Be - cause the observed surface binding , internalization , and degradation profiles were very similar to our past findings using the RFC cell monolayers ( Schnitzer and Bravo , 1993 ) , we report here only the significant differences which were : ( a ) a slightly slower equilibration time for BLMVEC and BAEC surface binding of ~ 2SI - labeled A - Au and t25I - labeled Mal - BSA which required 30 - 40 min in comparison to the 20 - 30 min necessary for the RFC monolayers ( data not shown ) ; and ( b ) a larger capacity ( approximately fivefold ) of high affinity binding sites for the BLMVEC with a greater affinity ( - 5 - 10 - fold ) than the RFC cells . Fig . 1 shows the Scatchard analysis of the high affinity binding of MaI - BSA . The apparent equilibrium binding constant ( Ks ) for the higher affinity binding was 5 . 7 nM ( 0 . 38 / zg / ml ) with a maxi - mum number of binding sites ( Bmax ) of 63 ng / 106 cells ( 570 , 000 binding sites / cell or 65 / zg / m2 ) . Scatchard analysis of ~ 25I - labeled A - Au binding also revealed higher affinity binding with a Kd of 15 nM ( 1 . 0 / zg / ml ) , about fourfold more than that for the RFC cells . We also examined BAEC monolayers and found , relative to the BLMVEC , similar high affinity binding with about a twofold decrease in Bm ~ . In addition to possible variations among species and in mor - phological differences between the cells including cell sur - face densities of caveolae ( Schnitzer et al . , 1994a ) , our use of bovine albumins in all of the binding experiments may provide at least a partial explanation for the greater affinities and number of binding sites of the bovine cells in comparison with the rat cells . CD CD v - ~ " * H 2 K O = 5 . 7nM . N . t , Bmax = 63 . 2 ng T ' N , , ' = 6 . 4 ng / cm * * 2 - - , , _ = 570 , 000 sites / cell - , , , : • , . , . , . , . , . , • 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 BOUND - ng / 106cells Figure 1 . High affinity binding of modified albumins to BLMVEC . Confluent BLMVEC monolayers were assayed for surface binding of Mal - BSA ( see Materials and Methods ) . The data was analyzed using a Scatchard plot . The ratio of bound to free Mal - BSA is presented on the ordinate axis while the abscissa presents the total specific bound Mal - BSA . The linear regression equation for the high affinity binding after subtraction of the moderate affinity bind - ing component is Y = 16 . 64 - 0 . 263 x ( R 2 = 0 . 995 ) . Each point represents the mean of multiple observations ( 6 > / ~ 2 ) with stan - dard deviations given as error bars for both axes . 20 " N 15 10 5 0 Schnitzer et al . Filipin Inhibits Caveolae - mediated Transport 1219 on O c t obe r 20 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Figure 2 . Electron microscopy of cellular processing of A - Au . BLMVEC monolayers were washed and incubated at 37°C with A - Au for 5 , 10 , or 30 min in the presence of 1 mg / ml of BSA in DME . After washing , the monolayers were processed and sectioned for electron microscopy . ( A , B , and F ) 5 min A - Au incubation . A - Au detected within noncoated pits ( np ) , apparently in the initial stages of forming caveolae and at the introit of formed noncoated plasmalemma vesicles ( pv ) , possibly restricted by vesicle diaphragms . The forming plas - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 127 , 1994 1220 on O c t obe r 20 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Table L A - Au Interaction with the Endothelial Cell Surface and Its Invaginated Coated and Noncoated Vesicles Number examined Number with A - Au Percent with A - Au A - Au / vesicles A - Au / / ~ m * Enriched : . t Caveolae 342 133 39 3 . 8 9 . 8 9 . 0 Coated vesicles 22 1 4 . 5 . 09 . 39 . 36 BLMVEC were incubated with A - Au for 5 - 10 min and processed for electron microscopy . Random pictures of each sample were taken in 20 different cells . We examined 110 / . , m of luminal - equivalent cell surface membrane ( non - plastic side ) and counted invaginated vesicles as in Schnitzer et al . ( 1994 ) . * Average number of A - Au detected per total membrane length for total vesicles examined . Relative to examination of plasmalemma proper ( no invaginations ) which revealed I . 1 A - Au / / ~ m . Electron Microscopy . The cellular processing of A - Au at 37°C was examined by standard electron microscopy . Fig . 2 shows typical results demonstrating the endocytosis of A - Au by noncoated plasmalemma vesicles . After just 5 - min incu - bation of A - Au with the cells at 37°C , most of the A - Au is located at the cell surface with small levels of accumulation within apparent endosomes inside the cell ( range of 1 - 5 A - Au per occupied endosome ; most endosomes were unoc - cupied ) . Noncoated vesicles with A - Au can be found on the cell surface in various stages of invagination from noncoated pits to fully formed , flask - shaped plasmalemma vesicles . The A - Au is found : ( a ) as single particles on the outer sur - face of the diaphragms of clearly formed caveolae ( one to two gold particles per diaphragm ) ; ( b ) as clusters of three to seven particles not usually attached to each other as ag - gregates but attached individually to the cell surface , all within small " dimples " in the membrane that could be non - coated pits forming noncoated plasmalemma vesicles ; ( c ) within a subset of fully formed noncoated plasmalemma vesicles which are either attached directly to the cell surface or adjacent to the plasmalemma within 1 , 000A ; and ( d ) as random solitary particles on the plasmalemma proper . Larger numbers of A - Au were found in noncoated pits than in fully formed plasmalemma vesicles . The large size of the A - Au and the small radius of the introit to the vesicles ap - pears to prevent easy access to fully formed , flask - shaped vesicles , especially those with diaphragms . A similar profile is observed when A - Au is interacted with the cells for 30 min at 4°C including : ( a ) solitary gold particles on the cell sur - face and the outside of vesicle diaphragms ; and ( b ) very few formed caveolae containing more than one gold particle ( data not shown ) . With longer incubations of 10 min at 37°C , more caveolae with many more gold particles ( > - - 5 ) are found , suggesting that , if this accumulation and clustering of A - Au within vesicles is a dynamic process , then vesicles may have formed from the noncoated pits in this time frame . Af - ter a 10 - min incubation , multivesicular bodies and endo - somes contain not only A - Au more frequently but also much more A - Au than detected after just a 5 ~ min incubation with the cells . At 30 - min incubation , there is ample A - Au visible within small to large endosomes , multivesicular bodies and lysosomes . Quantitative analysis of the A - Au subcellular distribution indicates that after short exposure times , A - Au is associated primarily with the cell surface , especially cav - eolae , and with longer incubations is progressively delivered to endosomes , multivesicular bodies and lysosomes ( see Fig . 7 ) . At all time points , coated pits and vesicles contain A - Au infrequently and when labeled , only one to two particles were found . Fig . 2 E shows a typical coated vesicle without A - Au . Table I shows our quantitative analysis of the interac - tion of A - Au with the cell surface and its invaginated coated and noncoated vesicles . In examining each distinct vesicle population as a whole , we find significant enrichment of nearly 10 - fold for A - Au localization to caveolae relative to the plasmalemma proper whereas almost a threefold decre - ment in relative binding to coated vesicles is noted . Direct comparison of vesicular types shows about 25 - fold more A - Au binding to caveolae than to coated vesicles . Because a significant portion of the caveolae do not appear to interact with A - Au , there may be differences in caveolae so that sub - populations of caveolae may exist . If so , then the surface binding density for that subpopulation reactive with A - Au is actually greater than that for the general population . With a density of about 25 A - Au / # m , the enrichment found in these select caveolae relative to the plasmalemma proper would in - crease from 10 - to nearly 25 - fold . Regardless of mathemati - cal manipulation , it is clear that A - Au preferentially interact with caveolae . It is curious to note that we found less A - Au at the cell sur - face after a 30 - min incubation than a 10 - min incubation even though these studies were not " warm - up " protocols but con - stant 37°C incubations . This observation suggests the possi - bility that the A - Au receptors and / or the vesicular carriers may be diminished at the cell surface after ligand internaliza - tion . A - Au binding could initiate a strong vectorial transport of itself into the cell with slow recycling of the vesicles and / or A - Au receptors back to the cell surface . Unfortu - nately , we cannot definitively address this issue until mono - specific antibodies are produced to the surface receptors malemma vesicles have several A - Au particles , many of which are bound next to the cell membrane . A - Au in pv not directly attached to the cell membrane is noted . Generally , pv contain one to two A - Au particles . Possible initial stages of pv fusions with forming early spherical endosomes ( see F ) . The pv appear to be docking with larger vesicle , possible early endosome . ( C and D ) 10 min A - Au incubation . More extensive accumulation of A - Au in formed plasmalemma vesicles at cell surface ( See C ) and apparently within cytoplasm ( see D ) with many A - Au / vesicle . ( E ) 10 min A - Au incubation . Represents typical coated vesicle without A - Au . ( G ) 10 min A - Au incubation . Multivesicular body ( mvb ) studded with A - Au . Note many A - Au associated with internal vesicles . This micrograph represents most A - Au seen in mvb at this time point . ( H and / ) 30 min A - Au incubation . Very extensive accumulation of A - Au within multivesicular bodies ( H ) and lysosomes ( I ) . Bars , 0 . 2 # m . Schnitzer et al . Filipin Inhibits Caveolae - mediated Transport 1221 on O c t obe r 20 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m along with markers specific for the vesicles . We did , how - ever , notice in the 30 - min incubations that the plasmalemma directly adjacent to small and large endosomes containing ample A - Au was in almost all cases devoid of caveolae . This was not true for the cell membrane " above " empty endo - somes found in cells exposed for 5 or l0 min to the A - Au and many endosomes found in cells not incubated with A - Au . Our observations suggest that : ( a ) caveolae contain - ing A - Au can detach from the cell surface and deliver their contents to endosomes ; ( b ) A - Au binding may initiate vesi - cle formation and rapid detachment of vesicles from the cell surface for vectorial delivery to endosomes ; and ( c ) these vesicles with their A - Au receptors may not be recycled quickly from the endosomes back to the cell surface . Sterol Binding Agents Reversibly Inhibit Caveolae - mediated Endocytosis and Degradation Filipin is a macrolide pentene polyene antibiotic , a class of drugs that binds sterols such as cholesterol ( Bolard , 1986 ) and can disrupt caveolae in fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells ( Severs and Simons , 1986 ; Rothberg et al . , 1990 ; Davis and Shivers , 1992 ) . It is now clear that endothelial cells can endocytose and degrade modified albumins apparently via specific interaction with gp30 and gpl8 ( Schnitzer and Bravo , 1993 ) and that this scavenger endocytosis is medi - ated by caveolae ( see above ) . BLMVEC have an abundant population of caveolae ( Schnitzer et al . , 1994 ) of which a subpopulation avidly endocytose modified albumins for deg - radation and apparently others transport native albumin transcellularly ( Schnitzer and Oh , 1994 ) . Therefore , we de - 3 . 0 E " N ~ n 2 . 5 2 . 0 > 1 . 5 1 . 0 m 0 . 5 0 . 0 100 O 80 09 N 60 @ 0 4O 0 U 0 2o 15 30 45 60 Time - min Figure 3 . Filipin reduces the cell surface density of noncoated plas - malemma vesicles . BLMVEC monolayers were treated with 5 # g / ml of filipin in DME for the indicated times , processed , and ex - amined by electron microscopy for quantitation of cell surface den - sity of caveolae as described previously ( Schnitzer et al . , 1994 ) . The results are given as a mean value with a standard error bar for both the density of caveolae ( number per / ~ m ( left Y - axis ) ) and the percentage of the zero time point ( right Y - axis ) . cided to investigate the possible effects of filipin on caveolae and their processing of modified albumins . Filipin Reduces BLMVEC Surface Density of Caveolae . Confluent BLMVEC were incubated with filipin and exam - ined by electron microscopy to assess caveolae density at the cell surface . Fig . 3 shows that filipin treatment of BLMVEC reduces the cell surface density of caveolae in a time depen - dent manner . Both 30 - and 60 - min incubations decrease the number of noncoated plasmalemma vesicles per length of cell membrane by about 90 % . Even exposures as short as 5 min result in about a 50 % reduction . The caveolae density at the zero time point agrees well with our previous results ( Schnitzer et al . , 1994 ) . Inhibition of A - Au Uptake and Degradation but Not Surface Binding . To assess biochemically filipin ' s effects on caveolae - mediated processing , BLMVEC treated or un - treated with filipin were incubated with ~ 25I - labeled A - Au . Fig . 4 shows a dose response curve illustrating that filipin greatly inhibits both the internalization and degradation of 125I - labeled A - Au by BLMVEC in a concentration depen - dent manner . The A - Au associated with the cells after a 30 - min incubation at 37°C was maximally decreased by 70 % . Degradation of A - Au was decreased by a maximum of more than 80 % . A concentration as low as 0 . 5 # g / ml decreased degradation by greater than 70 % and was nearly as effective as 5 # g / ml . The effective inhibition of caveolae - mediated processing at these concentrations is quite consistent with our morphological observations that caveolae begin to disas - semble in just minutes at 5 / zg / ml of filipin ( see above ) . o O 100 80 60 40 20 0 • 0 Xylazine Cell - associated A - Au Filipin Degradation of A - Au 1 2 3 4 5 Concentration - gg / rnl Figure 4 . Dose response curve for filipin inhibition of endocytosis and degradation of A - Au . Confluent RFC , BAEC , and BLMVEC monolayers in six - well trays were washed , preincubated for 10 min at 37°C in DME containing the indicated concentration of filipin or xylazine as a control , and then incubated fo 30 min with 235I - labeled A - Au . After washing , the cells and media were processed as usual to determine the cell - associated and - degraded A - Au ( see Materials and Methods ) . The results were normalized to the control without filipin . They were quite similar for each endothelial cell type and therefore , were combined . Each point represents the mean of multiple observations ( 4 < N < 11 ) with SD given as error bars ( N = 2 for each xylazine point ) . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 127 , 1994 1222 on O c t obe r 20 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Because filipin ' s inhibitory effect potentially could result from its direct interactions with the receptor and / or ligand so as to prevent cell surface binding , we tested the effects of filipin on A - Au interaction with the BLMVEC surface . These experiments were performed by preincubating the cells with filipin for 10 min at 4°C or at 37°C before per - forming the usual binding assay ~ at 4°C . We found no evi - dence for interference with the bfttding . In fact , we observed a 25 - 50 % increase in detected binding with filipin treatment which is consistent with the possible unmasking of receptors normally found inside fully formed noncoated plasmalemma vesicles . As discussed earlier in our electron microscopy studies , direct access of A - Au to fully formed plasmalemma vesicles may be limited so that filipin - induced flattening or " devagination " of the vesicles to the cell surface may cause more direct exposure of the A - Au binding sites . Further - more , consistent with these results , we found that filipin does not affect direct A - Au binding of gp30 and gpl8 electrotrans - ferred onto nitrocellulose from gels after SDS - PAGE of cell lysates ( data not shown ) . From these results , it would appear that at 37°C the 70 % decrease in cell - associated A - Au after filipin treatment is consistent with a significant prevention of ligand endocytosis but not cell surface binding . We have noted previously that about 25 % of A - Au associated with the cells at 37°C is nor - mally cell surface bound and sensitive to Pronase digestion whereas at 4°C greater than 90 % is Pronase sensitive ( Schnitzer and Bravo , 1993 ) . When we performed similar experiments with filipin - treated cells , we found a significant increase in the cell - associated A - Au that was sensitive to Figure 5 . Fluorescence microscopy of processing of A - Au . BLMVEC were incubated at 37°C for 30 min with DME containing FITC - A - Au and 1 mg / ml of either native albumin BSA ( A ) or the modified albumin Mal - BSA ( B ) . After washing , the cells were fixed and processed for fluorescence microscopy ( see Materials and Methods ) . In C , the cells were pretreated with filipin ( 5 # g / ml ) before the addition of the FITC - A - Au . In D , immediately after the filipin treatment , the cells were incubated in DME containing 10 % FCS for 30 min to reverse the effects of filipin before examining FITC - A - Au processing . Note that in both B and C , the exposure time for the film was two to three times that for the control . Bar , 30 # m . Schnitzer et al . Filipin Inhibits Caveolae - mediated Transport 1223 on O c t obe r 20 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Pronase digestion ( 87 . 9 + 6 . 4 % ) . As in the studies per - formed at 4°C , this Pronase sensitivity indicates a lack of cellular uptake to a Pronase - protected compartment consis - tent with a predominant cell surface distribution . Fluorescence Microscopy . The effect of filipin on the cel - lular processing was examined by fluorescence microscopy using A - Au made from FITC conjugated to albumin ( FITC - A - Au ) . Fig . 5 shows that incubation of BLMVEC with FITC - A - Au creates a punctate signal consistent with its accumulation in endosomes or lysosomes as shown earlier by electron microscopy . There are also finer punctate sig - nals , especially visible in the peripheral regions of the cells , which may represent clusters of A - Au within caveolae ( also as shown by electron microscopy ) . As expected from our radiobiochemical assays ( Schnitzer and Bravo , 1993 ) , the modified albumin MaI - BSA is an able competitor and pre - vents binding and internalization of the FITC - A - Au as indi - cated by the lack of signal on or in the cells ( note that all ex - periments are performed in the presence of 1 mg / ml of BSA which is not inhibitory ) . With filipin treatment , both large and fine punctate signals disappear and a rather weak dif - fuse signal is apparent on the cell surface . There is little , if any , evidence for clustering , internalization , and accumula - tion of the probe which is quite apparent in the control . Electron Microscopy . We have shown earlier that A - Au interacts preferentially with caveolae , resulting in endocyto - sis . Here , we use electron microscopy to show directly that filipin inhibits this uptake by caveolae . Fig . 6 shows control and flipin - treated BLMVEC incubated with A - Au . Clearly , the number of caveolae is decreased tremendously and the A - Au associated with the cells is not found , as in the control , within caveolae at the cell surface or even inside the cells but bound only to the outside of the cell at the plasmalemma proper . Fig . 7 shows a graphical summary Of our quantitative analysis performed on cells incubated with A - Au for 5 and 30 min . There is a signifcant difference in the subcellular distribution of A - Au processed by control and filipin - treated cells . After filipin treatment of the cells , A - Au interaction is limited to the cell surface with a very significant decrease in cellular uptake as indicated by a lack of A - Au found in cav - eola , endosomes and multivesicular bodies . After 5 - min in - cubation of the BLMVEC with A - Au at 37°C , both treated and untreated cells have greater than 80 % of the A - Au as - sociated with the cell surface . However , even at this early time point , there is a major difference in the distribution at the cell surface . For control cells , most A - Au is found as - sociated with caveolae attached to the cell membrane or un - derneath it ; however , for the treated cells , A - Au is almost ex - clusively bound to the plasmalemma proper with only a small percentage of the total A - Au found in the few caveolae that remain after treatment . Even at this early time point , significant reductions with filipin treatment are evident in delivery toendosomes and multivesicular bodies . Longer in - cubation of the cells with A - Au to 30 min extensively Figure 6 . Electron microscopy of A - Au endocytosis by control and filipin - treated BLMVEC . BLMVEC exposed for 20 rain to DME alone ( A ) or DME plus 5 # g / ml of filipin ( B ) were incubated with A - Au in DME for 5 min , washed , fixed , and processed for electron microscopy . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 127 , 1994 1224 on O c t obe r 20 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 100 I : ; 1 5 min incubation w / A - Au ' ~ , 80 Filipin - treated cells o < \ \ 30rain \ \ ¢ ~ 60 ~ . , . . ~ , ~ , ~ 4o 0 5 zZ : ~ 0 ' ' ' P1 . proper Caveolae Endosomes MVB Figure 7 . Filipin ' s effect on A - Au processing by BLMVEC . Before incubation with A - Au for the indicated times , BLMVEC were ex - posed for 20 min to DME alone ( control ; solid line and symbols ) or DME plus 5 ~ g / ml of filipin ( dotted line and empty symbols ) , and then fixed and processed for electron microscopy . Quantitative analysis of the subcellular distribution of A - Au was performed by counting and localizing each A - Au to the plasmalemma proper , caveolae , endosomes or multivesicular bodies / lysosomes ( MVB ) . Results for each category are expressed as the mean percentage of the total cell - associated A - Au . Q o ¢d O o . = 100 ' 50 ¸ " / / / / / / / , ~ . . . . / Y / / / / / / / ~ . . . . i , / / / / / / / / / . . . . / " / / / 6 . . . . i III1 ~ None Nystatin Digitonin Filipin Rev - filipin Figure 8 . Filipin reversibility and effect of other sterol binding agents on A - Au degradation . Confluent RFC , BAEC , and BLMVEC monolayers in six - well trays were preincubated for 10 min at 37°C in DME alone or containing 5 ~ g / ml of filipin , nysta - tin , or digitonin and then processed as in the legend of Fig . 2 . Rev - filipin represents the degradation achieved after attempting to reverse the filipin effects using a 30 - min incubation of the cells with DME plus 20 % FCS as described in the text . The results were nor - malized to the controls without filipin . Each bar gives the percent - age of degradation detected in the control and represents the mean of multiple observations ( 2 ~ < N ~ < 6 ) with standard deviations given as error bars . changes the distribution profile for A - Au associated with the control but not filipin - treated ceils . BLMVEC normally ac - cumulate A - Au within endosomes , multivesicular bodies and lysosomes ( Fig . 7 ) ; however , with treatment , A - Au re - mains predominantly associated with the cell surface with greatly reduced levels of endocytosis and delivery to intra - cellular compartments . These results show that filipin - treated cells : ( a ) have fewer caveolae ; ( b ) can still bind A - Au at the cell surface but in this case primarily to the plas - malemma proper and not caveolae ; and ( c ) have a significant reduction in A - Au internalization . Our results to date indi - cate that filipin ' s ability to disassemble caveolae can indeed prevent the endocytosis and degradation of caveolae - specific ligands such as A - Au . Inhibitory Effect Is Reversible . We examined the reversi - bility of the effects of filipin treatment on the cells . BLMVEC monolayers treated with filipin for 15 min were washed ' , in - cubated for 30 min in standard cell culture media containing 20 % FCS and then processed through the usual assay ex - amining A - Au degradation . Fig . 8 shows that this short reversal treatment resulted in restoration of normal , if not slightly elevated , levels of A - Au degradation by the cells . Similar reversibility was also demonstrated by fluorescence microscopy ( see Fig . 5 D ) . Other Cholesterol - binding Agents Inhibit A - Au Degra - dation . We also tested other sterol / cholesterol binding agents . Like filipin , nystatin is also a polyene antibiotic ( Bolard , 1986 ) whereas digitonin is a cardiac glycoside ( Elias et al . , 1978 ) . Both agents bind cholesterol and can re - move it from cell membranes . Fig . 5 shows that nystatin and digitonin inhibited A - Au degradation by more than 50 and 85 % , respectively . Other agents known to interact with lipids in the cell membrane such as xylazine ( see Fig . 4 ) and polymyxin B ( data not shown ) were ineffective . Inhibition of a2 - Macroglobulin Endocytosis and Degra - dation . Activated a2 - macroglobulin is internalized by re - ceptor - mediated endocytosis via clathrin - coated pits / vesi - cles ( Dickson et al . , 1981 ; Trans et al . , 1987 ) . Fig . 9 shows that under equivalent conditions , filipin inhibits significantly the endocytosis and degradation of A - Au by about 70 % but does not reduce the uptake and degradation of methylamine - activated ct2 - macroglobulin . These results suggest that the coated vesicular degradative pathway with its associated coated pits , vesicles , endosomes , and lysosomes is not detri - mentally altered by filipin . The compartments of this path - way are functionally intact , unlike the early stages of the noncoated vesicular pathway . Partial Inhibition of Insulin Endocytosis but Not Degra - dation . Insulin classically is thought to be internalized by the clathrin pathway but more recent evidence indicates that at least in endothelium it can be endocytosed by both clathrin - coated and noncoated vesicular pathways ( Roberts and San - dra , 1992 ; King and Johnson , 1985 ) . Interestingly , Fig . 9 shows that filipin partially prevents BLMVEC uptake of in - sulin by about 50 % ; however , insulin degradation is not di - minished . These results are consistent with past observations that coated pits internalize insulin for degradative purposes and that in endothelium , insulin can be internalized not only for degradation but also for other purposes such as transcy - tosis ( King and Johnson , 1985 ; Rabkin et al . , 1993 ) . The Schnitzer et al . Filipin Inhibits Caveolae - mediated Transport 1225 on O c t obe r 20 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Figure 9 . Selectivity in filipin ' s inhibition of endocytosis and degra - dation of various macromolecules by BLMVEC monolayers . Confluent BLMVEC monolayers in six - well trays were prein - cubated for 10 min at 37°C in DME with 1 mg / ml of BSA ( DBSA ) or DBSA containing either 5 # g / ml of filipin or 1 mg / ml of unla - beled ligand ( for ~ 2SI - labeled A - Au , Mal - BSA was used ) . The cells were incubated for 30 - 60 min at 37°C with m25I - labeled ligands ( A - Au , insulin , or methylamine - activated c ~ 2 - macroglo - bulin [ Mac ] ) in DBSA supplemented as in the pre - incubation period , washed , and then processed to assess cell association and degradation ( see Materials and Methods ) . The results were normal - ized to the controls ( DME alone ; untreated ) . Each bar gives the percentage of degradation detected in the control and represents the mean of multiple observations ( 3 ~ < N ~ < 6 ) with standard deviations given as error bars• filipin - resistant coated pits / vesicles could be responsible for insulin endocytosis and degradation whereas caveolae , which disassemble after filipin treatment , could internalize insulin not for degradation but ultimately for transcytosis ( see below ) . Filipin Inhibits Caveolae - mediated Transcytosis Endothelial cells form an attenuated monolayer lining blood vessels that in many tissues is the critical barrier controlling the transport of molecules from the blood to the interstitium harboring the tissue cells . Receptors located on the en - dothelial cell surface may play a very important role in the selective delivery of essential nutrients to the underlying tissue cells . Receptors for carrier proteins such as transfer - rin , albumin , orosomucoid , and ceruloplasmin have been defined kinetically through binding experiments and in some cases specific binding proteins have been identified ( for review see Schnitzer , 1993 ) . Other studies have shown that insulin receptors contribute signficantly to the transendothe - lial transport of insulin by demonstrating that antibodies recognizing insulin receptors on the endothelial cell surface inhibit not only insulin internalization but also its transport across cultured endothelium ( King and Johnson , 1985 ) . Since endothelium can have a very abundant population of caveolae , it has largely been presumed that these noncoated plasmalemmal vesicles mediated the transport of these select blood - borne macromolecules . Immunogold electron micros - copy has shown that endothelial caveolae mediate the trans - cytosis of albumin ( Milici et al . , 1987 ) . We recently have de - veloped a model for evaluating receptor - mediated effects on transendothelial transport in vitro and in situ and have shown that antibodies to the albumin binding protein , albondin signifcantly inhibit the transcytosis of albumin ( Schnitzer and Oh , 1994 ) . BLMVEC form a monolayer when grown on filters in culture that exhibit albondin - mediated transen - dothelial transport of albumin . Therefore , in this study , we attempted to test the effects of filipin using this in vitro trans - port system and both albumin and insulin as specific probes for caveolae - mediated transcytosis . Because concentrations as low as 0 . 5 / zg / ml were quite effective in preventing caveolae - mediated intracellular trans - port of A - Au by BLMVEC , we tested filipin ' s effects on transcellular transport at levels - < < 1 / ~ g / ml . Fig . 10 shows that both BSA and insulin transport was reduced in a manner de - pendent on filipin concentration . We also used an inert small solute probe , inulin ( 5 , 000 - 5 , 550 molecular weight ) , that is transported across endothelium paracellularly via intercellu - lar junction and is not expected to interact with the cell sur - face . Filipin at 1 / zg / ml appears to reduce insulin and BSA transport by about 50 - 60 % while not affecting inulin trans - port . We have previously shown that BSA transport across these monolayers was 50 % dependent on albondin binding and transcytosis whereas the remainder appeared to be inde - 110 " • Inulin , 5 lOOf O 90 " 3 o 8o - 70 6O 5O BSA 40 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 Filipin - gg / ml Figure 10 . Filipin inhibits the transport of insulin and albumin ( but not inulin ) across confluent BLMVEC monolayers . BLMVEC grown on Transwell filters were used to examine the effects of filipin at the concentration indicated on the transport of t25I - labeled BSA , 125I - labeled insulin , and [ J4C ] inulin across monolayers in vitro ( see Materials and Methods ) . The results were normalized to the control without filipin . Each point represents the mean of multiple observa - tions ( 4 ~ < N ~ < 18 ) with a SD ~ < 20 % . The asterisk shows the mean normalized t25I - labeled BSA transport when assessed in the pres - ence of excess unlabeled BSA ( 1 mg / ml ) . The transport of m25I - labeled insulin was reduced to 42 % of control in the presence of 1 mg / ml of unlabeled insulin . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 127 , 1994 1226 on O c t obe r 20 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m pendent of cell surface binding , probably being transported by paracellular and / or fluid phase mechanisms ( Schnitzer and Oh , 1994 ) . Others have shown that about 60 % of insulin transport across endothelial cell monolayers is inhibited by the interaction of antibodies with the insulin receptor and therefore , is dependent on cell surface binding and receptor - mediated transcytosis . It would appear that ablation of cav - eolae with filipin can inhibit the specific transcytosis of both albumin and insulin at levels that are quite consistent with past in vitro findings . Filipin does not appear to affect paracellular transport . Filipin can reduce transport by 60 % which is nearly equivalent to the effect elicited by low temperatures which minimize vesicular transport and only allow paracellular transport ( Schnitzer and Oh , 1994 ) . When the experiments are performed at 4 - 8°C , filipin does not further reduce trans - port in vitro and , as in the case for A - Au discussed above , it does not reduce surface binding of albumin ( data not shown ) . These findings are consistent with filipin inhibiting a temperature - sensitive transcytotic component while not affecting paracellular transport . Filipin Inhibits Caveolae - mediated but Not Paracellular Transport In Situ So far , all our studies have focused on cultured endothelial cell monolayers in vitro . Therefore , we extended the testing of filipin by evaluating its effect on transport in situ . Inhibition of Capillary Permeability of Albumin in the Rat Lung In Situ . First , we tested for possible effects of filipin in situ by examining albumins permeability in the rat lung vasculature by pulmonary artery perfusion as deter - mined in our past work ( Schnitzer and Oh , 1994 ) . Fig . 11 shows that filipin was very effective in a dose - dependent < r ~ rdb P . - , < rd3 0009 - 0 . 008 0 . 007 0 . 006 0 . 005 0 . 004 0 003 0 . 00 0 . 10 0 . 20 0 . 30 0 . 40 0 . 50 Filipin - gg / ml 60 Z o ~ , 50 ca 0 ' 40 ~ 0 < 0 ' 30 ~ g o • 10 g f , ~ Z o Figure I1 . Filipin lowers capillary permeability to albumin in the rat lung . The capillary permeability of ~ 25I - labeled BSA was mea - sured in situ in rat lungs treated with filipin at the indicated concen - tration ( see Materials and Methods ) . The permeability - surface area product ( left ordinate and open circles ) and the percent inhibi - tion of t25I - labeled BSA transport ( right ordinate and solid circles ) are presented . Each point with SD given as error bars represents the mean of multiple observations from 28 or more tissue samples ( 28 ~ < N ~ < 42 ) from at least two rats . manner in reducing the transcapillary transport of albumin and the calculated capillary permeability - surface area ( PS ) product for albumin . The PS product for albumin attains a maximum reduction of 50 - 60 % at concentrations greater than or equal to 0 . 3 # g / ml . It should be noted that with filipin treatment , we did not observe any changes in hemodynamic parameters such as vascular resistance , perfusion pressures and flows nor any evidence for edema formation as indicated by water content per gram of tissue . It was not surprising un - der the harsher conditions inherent to the transport assays in situ with convective hydrodynamic flow and pressure gra - dients that the transport observed was more sensitive to filipin than in the studies in vitro . The maximal effect was achieved with much shorter exposure times and about two - fold lower concentrations . At least part of the explanation for this increased sensitivity in situ probably relates to the inher - ent diffusive nature of the system in vitro versus the higher pressure and convective nature of vascular perfusions in situ . Selective Inhibition of Tissue Uptake in the Rat Lung In Situ . The tissue uptake after vascular perfusion of various probes was also examined in the rat lung in order to test vari - ous endothelial cell transport pathways in situ . Inulin is small enough to be transported paracellularly across the en - dothelial barrier via intercellular junctions while A - Au was used to assess caveolae - mediated endocytosis . Fig . 12 shows that filipin inhibited the tissue accumulation of A - Au , BSA ( both n25I - labeled and ~ 4C - labeled ) but not inulin in the rat lung after perfusion via the pulmonary artery . A - Au trans - port was reduced by 60 % . In agreement with the studies per - formed in vitro , filipin effectively inhibits the caveolae - mediated pathways in situ including both transcytosis and endocytosis without affecting paracellular transport via in - tercellular junctions . Membrane Permeabilization at Higher Filipin Concen - trations . At sufficiently high concentrations and long enough 120 - lOO 80 60 - ID 40 Inulin " 1251 - BSA 14C - BSA A - Au Figure 12 . Selective inhibition of capillary transport in rat lung in situ . The endothelial transport of [ z4C ] inuliu , ~ 2 ~ I - labeled BSA , ~ 4C - labeled BSA , and 125I - labeled A - Au were assessed in rat lungs either untreated ( blank bars ) or treated with 0 . 3 / zg / ml of filipin ( hatched bars ) . The results were normalized to the control without filipin . Each bar represents the mean of multiple observations ( 6 ~ < N ~ < 28 ) with the SD given as an error bar . Schnitzer et al . Filipin Inhibits Caveolae - mediated Transport 1227 on O c t obe r 20 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m exposure times , cholesterol binding agents such as filipin and nystatin are well - known for their ability to permeabilize cells by disrupting the plasmalemma . When we increased by sev - eral - fold the exposure times and concentrations of filipin used in our in situ and in vitro assays , we also found evidence for sufficient cell membrane permeabilization that the over - all transport observed was greatly increased . With 10 - fold increases over the optimum conditions described above , both inulin and albumin transport increased many times over the control . In situ perfusions at higher concentrations also re - suited in significant edema with large increases in lung weight and percent water weight ( data not shown ) . Discussion Specific vesicular transport of macromolecules is a fun - damental cellular process that is well documented in a vari - ety of cells for intracellular trafficking , receptor - mediated endocytosis , and to a lesser extent transcytosis . At least two morphologically distinct types of vesicles exist on the cell surface of many cells , albeit in disparate proportions ranging from cells such as hepatocytes with a plethora of coated vesi - cles / pits and few noncoated ones to many endothelia with an abundance of noncoated plasmalemma vesicles and few coated vesicles . Even endothelia in different tissues have a wide spectrum of distributions of these vesicles with most endothelia of the continuous type having many caveolae and few coated vesicles ( except for brain where both types are underrepresented ) whereas sinusoidal endothelia have many coated vesicles with noticeably fewer noncoated ones . Non - coated plasmalemmal vesicles and caveolae are interchange - able terms for the same structure . By electron microscopy , they appear in many cells types as invaginated pits or vesicles that do not have a thick electron - dense fuzzy coat ( distinct for coated vesicles ) but have a uniform diameter of about 800 - 1 , 000 / ~ . In some cells , much larger noncoated plas - malemma vesicles have been described ( Oliver , 1982 ) . In other cells , especially endothelium , many individual non - coated plasmalemma vesicles exist but also several vesicles can be connected to each other in a stringlike fashion form - ing a racemose , treelike vesicular structure . Caveolae - mediated Scavenger Endocytosis When ligands such as LDL and albumin are modified to cer - tain nonnative states , they interact selectively with a new set of cell surface proteins called scavenger receptors that medi - ate endocytosis of these aberrant proteins ( Brown and Gold - stein , 1983 ; Sparrow et al . , 1989 ; Schnitzer et al . , 1992 ; Schnitzer and Bravo , 1993 ) . As a group , scavenger receptors bind proteins that have been modified appropriately by a va - riety of means such as oxidation , nonenzymatic glycation , acetylation , maleylation , or even surface adsorption . Scav - enger endocytosis of modified but not native proteins appear to serve a protective function necessary to maintain local tis - sue integrity by removing old , damaged , or possibly delete - rious proteins for selective degradation or catabolism ( Stein - berg et al . , 1989 ) . Such scavenging may remove proteins that become damaged within tissues by either normal aging or protective or pathological responses such as oxidation dur - ing inflammation or hyperglycation in diabetes . Binding to scavenger receptors is classically thought to initiate li - gand internalization via endocytotic mechanisms involving clathrin - coated plasmalemmal vesicles ( Pitas et al . , 1985 ; Mommaas - Kienhuis et al . , 1985 ) . In this study , we demon - strate a novel filipin - sensitive pathway for the scavenger en - docytosis of modified protein involving caveolae . Our elec - tron microscopy studies show that modified albumins preferentially interact with endothelial caveolae . They are in - ternalized , not by coated vesicles , but almost exclusively by caveolae , and are then shuttled through a series of early to late endosomes to multivesicular bodies and lysosomes . It is now becoming clear that modified albumins such as A - Au can be internalized via either coated or noncoated vesicles depending on the cell type . Very recently Faustmann et al . ( 1992 ) showed that subarachnoid macrophages endocy - tose A - Au via coated vesicles . In situ studies in liver , bone marrow , and adrenal tissue , which have microvascular beds lined with a noncontinuous type of endothelium with few caveolae , showed that coated vesicles mediate A - Au endocy - tosis ( Geoffrey and Becker , 1984 ; De Bruyn et al . , 1985 ; Bumbasirevic et al . , 1990 ) . However , in other vascular beds with a continuous endothelium ( lung , heart , and dia - phragm ) , modified albumins such as glycated A - Au can bind within caveolae and in some cases , accumulation within lysosomes has been noted ( Villaschi et al . , 1986 ; Predescu et al . , 1988 ) . Like coated vesicles ( Bretscher et al . , 1980 ) , noncoated vesicles appear to have the ability to act as a mo - lecular filter that screens the endocytosis of select molecular cargo . Albumin Receptors and Caveolae - mediated Transcytosis vs . Endocytosis Three cell membrane - associated albumin binding proteins called albondin , gp30 and gpl8 have been identified ( Schnit - zer et al . , 1988b ; Ghinea et al . , 1988 ; Schnitzer and Oh , 1994 ) ; however , more recent studies indicate that two of these proteins , gp30 and gpl8 , actually interact much more avidly with modified albumins including A8 - Au than with native albumin ( Schnitzer et al . , 1992 ) . Because albumin ' s native conformation is modified when it is absorbed to sur - faces such as colloidal gold particles ( Schnitzer et al . , 1992 ) , A - Au is not an equivalent probe for native albumin . The binding behavior of gp30 and gpl8 closely resembles that of other known scavenger receptors ( Schnitzer et al . , 1992 ) . Conversely , albondin , formerly named gp60 , interacts with native albumin ( Schnitzer and Oh , 1994 ) and appears to share a common albumin binding domain with another known albumin binding protein , SPARC ( Schnitzer and Oh , 1992 ) . Antibodies specific for albondin inhibit cell surface binding and internalization of native but not modified albu - mins by BLMVEC . Moreover , anti - albondin antibodies along with unlabeled native but not modified albumins significantly inhibit radiolabeled albumin transport across lung microvascular endothelium both in situ and in culture ( Schnitzer and Oh , 1994 ) . Although both native and modified albumins can be inter - nalized by caveolae , only modified albumins are directed pri - marily to endosomes and lysosomes for degradation ( Schnit - zer and Bravo , 1993 ; Schnitzer and Oh , 1994 ) . Studies done in situ show that continuous endothelium transport " native " monomeric albumin across the cell via caveolae without evi - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 127 , 1994 1228 on O c t obe r 20 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m dence of accumulation in endosomes or lysosomes ( Milici et al . , 1987 ; Ghitescu and Bendayan , 1992 ) . The extent of specific transcytosis of modified albumins such as A - Au re - mains controversial . In the murine lung , Ghitescu et al . ( 1986 ) have observed transcytosis of A - Au with some ac - cumulation in endosomes . But in the rat lung , Villaschi et al . ( 1986 ) found little transport across the endothelium of surface bound A - Au with most of it eventually being found in endosomes and lysosomes . Herein , our electron micros - copy studies found caveolae - mediated endocytosis of A - Au directed to endosomes and lysosomes . Furthermore , our re - cent studies ( Schnitzer et al . , 1992 ; Schnitzer and Bravo , 1993 ; Schnitzer and Oh , 1994 ) have shown that : ( a ) greater than 90 % of the modified albumin internalized by cultured endothelium is exocytosed degraded whereas greater than 90 % of internalized native albumin is exocytosed in non - degraded form ; ( b ) unlike their endocytosis and degradation which is strongly dependent on cell surface binding , mod - ified albumins such as Mal - BSA cross BLMVEC mono - layers in a manner independent of cell surface binding by fluid - phase and / or paracellular transport ; and ( c ) native al - bumin can be transported transcellularly in a facilitative manner via its specific interaction with the cell surface pro - tein , albondin . Although at this time , it is unclear if the control of cav - eolae - mediated transport is dependent on ligand binding to its receptor , our work shows that caveolae , like coated vesicles , can mediate scavenger endocytosis of conforma - tionaUy modified proteins for lysosomal degradation . Mod - ified albumins may bind via their receptors , gp30 and gpl8 , to a select subpopulation of noncoated pits / vesicles that are involved in receptor - mediated endocytosis and degradation whereas native albumin may bind another set of vesicles mediating transcytosis . Alternatively , modified albumin binding could cause vesicles to follow a degradative pathway whereas the binding of native albumin to albondin results in transcytosis . Selective binding to each set of receptors may result in the clustering of ligand - receptor complexes and the formation of distinct vesicles destined for different sites in the cell . Selective Inhibition of Caveolae - mediated Transport The effects of exposing endothelium to cholesterol - binding agents are quite significant and include ablation of en - dothelial caveolae and reduction of endothelial transcytosis , scavenger endocytosis and capillary permeability in a man - ner that appears to be quite selective for the noncoated vesicular - mediated pathways . Filipin treatment of endo - thelial cells both in vitro and in situ inhibits the intracellu - lar and transceUular transport of select macromolecules . The transport of two important blood proteins , namely insulin and albumin , are inhibited greatly . Native albumin is trans - cytosed via caveolae from the blood to the interstitium in many endothelia of the continuous type ( Milici et al . , 1987 ; Ghitescu and Bendayan , 1992 ) , apparently through its inter - actions with albondin ( Schnitzer and Oh , 1994 ) . Filipin significantly reduces albumin ' s transendothelial transport both in situ and in vitro . Albumins permeability in the rat lung vasculature is reduced significantly . Conversely , the paracellular transport of the small solute inulin is not af - fected in situ or in vitro . These results indicate that caveo - lae play an important role in the transport of macromolecules circulating in the blood and that filipin can prevent caveolae - mediated transcellular transport without significantly dis - rupting paracellular transport . Intracellular transport mediated by caveolae can also be inhibited by filipin both in culture and in situ . Direct A - Au degradation studies performed in vitro show strong inhibi - tion with filipin , nystatin and digitonin . Filipin inhibits A - Au uptake and degradation in a dose - dependent manner . Many different experimental approaches show that filipin reversi - bly prevents A - Au internalization and delivery to endosomal and lysosomal compartments . Conversely , both morphologi - cal and functional studies indicate that the clathrin - coated vesicular pathway is not disrupted significantly by the treat - ment of the endothelial cells . Here , we show that the degra - dation of ligands of the coated vesicular endocytic pathway , insulin and activated ot2 - macroglobulin , is not affected by filipin treatment . Moreover , subcellular localization of trans - ferrin receptors ( known endogenous resident markers of coated pits , vesicles , and early endosomes ) is not altered in BLMVEC by filipin ( our unpublished observations ) . Roth - berg et al . ( 1992 ) also provide evidence that cholesterol bind - ing agents disrupt noncoated vesicles but not coated vesicles . Just a 5 - 10 min treatment of fibroblasts causes almost total loss of noncoated vesicles on the cell surface with little effect on other membrane structures such as clathrin - coated pits . Sterol binding agents remove cholesterol from cell mem - branes and cause vesicle flattening from disassembly of the infrastructure of the caveolae ( Rothberg et al . , 1990 , 1992 ) . Using electron microscopy , we also describe a large decrease in the number of caveolae on the endothelial cell surface when BLMVEC are treated with filipin . The time course for the effect of filipin on endothelial cell caveolae is slightly longer ( about 15 - 30 min ) than observed for fibroblasts prob - ably because of the much greater density of caveolae in endothelium ( at least 10 - fold ) . Furthermore , our studies us - ing fluorescence and electron microscopy indicate that af - ter filipin treatment , A - Au is located diffusely over the BLMVEC surface with little , if any , evidence of its internali - zation by caveolae and delivery to endosomes and lysosomes ( see Figs . 3 and 4 ) . Together , our studies provide evidence that the coated vesicle - mediated degradation pathway , in - cluding coated pits / vesicles , endosomes and lysosomes , re - mains sufficiently unaltered by filipin treatment to remain structurally and functionally intact . Conversely , our studies with A - Au and those of Rothberg et al . ( 1990 ) examining the 5 - methyltetrahydrofolate receptor show that filipin treatment permits ligand binding at the cell surface but effectively pre - vents receptor clustering within caveolae . Filipin also in - hibits A - Au degradation by selectively preventing endocyto - sis through the noncoated vesicular pathway . Caveolae as Transport Structures Our knowledge about the standard mechanisms for the trans - port of molecular cargo from one compartment to another in the cell has evolved largely from studies examining the clathrin - coated vesicular pathways . This transport generally is thought to involve the dynamic " shuttling " of vesicles from one membrane surface to another . Vesicles form through the indentation of the membrane to form a " pit " which in - vaginates further to create a " flask - shaped " vesicle that even - Schnitzer et al . Filipin Inhibits Caveolae - mediated Transport 1229 on O c t obe r 20 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m tually " buds off " from the membrane to become a free vesicle in the cytoplasm . Such vesicles can be delivered to a specific destination within the cell for membrane fusion and release of their contents by a specific set of targeting receptors and fusion proteins ( Sollner et al . , 1993 ) . For endocytosis and protein trafficking , it is clear that vesicles can deliver their discrete packages through a " shuttling " process . This is also probably true for at least some caveolae which appear to be able to deliver their cargo either to endosomes or across the cell to the opposite cell membrane surface . Because this " fission - fusion " model of vesicular transport has held true for many different types of vesicles in many different cellu - lar processes including endocytosis , exocytosis , protein trafficking , and even the very specialized case of synaptic transmission , it appears logical that caveolae are not an ex - ception to the rule but adhere to this general mechanism . However , some investigators believe that caveolae are all static or permanent structures that can not function in en - docytosis or transcytosis because they can neither arise de novo by invagination of the cell membrane , detach from the cell membrane to form free cytoplasmic vesicles , nor fuse with other cellular components ( Frokjaer - Jensen , 1980 ; Bundgaard , 1983 ) . Serial sectioning of endothelium indi - cates that very few vesicles can be found free in the cyto - plasm and unattached to other vesicles which is interpreted as evidence against the existence of vesicular budding ( Frokjaer - Jensen , 1980 ) . An alternate interpretation might be that in the time frame of specimen processing , few free vesicles can be found because the budding and fusion pro - cess once initiated is very rapid and the thermodynamic ten - dency favors fusion with cell membranes . In this study , it ap - pears that vesicles containing A - Au can be found on the cell surface in various stages of invagination from noncoated pits to fully formed vesicles , suggesting a more dynamic role for caveolae . The A - Au preferentially accumulated within cav - eolae is internalized to endosomes . Favorable sections show single vesicles attached to , or apparently docking with , spherical endosomes several times the diameter of caveolae . Moreover , Ghitescu et al . ( 1986 ) have noted that A - Au may be transported across endothelium by caveolae . Once inside a vesicle , A - Au are discrete large particles that cannot directly permeate the cell membrane and therefore , can only be delivered to intracellular endosomes or even across the cell by the movement and / or fusion of hte vesicles with the targeted cellular components . It seems unlikely that static vesicles without any ability to bud from , and / or fuse to , membrane could accomplish endocytosis and transcytosis . It is still conceivable that caveolae could remain attached to the cell surface and also deliver their contents to nearby en - dosomes by intermittent fusions without budding of the vesi - cles from the surface . However , Hansen et al . ( 1991 ) used serial thin sectioning and rapid labeling of vesicles with Con A to establish that coated and noncoated vesicles both can endocytose by pinching off completely from the plasmalem - ma . We do not wish to imply that all noncoated plasmalem - mal vesicles must be dynamic ; it is quite possible that not all caveolae are equivalent and a subpopulation may be less dynamic , which may be necessary for a different function , such as potocytosis ( Anderson et al . , 1992 ) . Our observation that only a subset of the vesicles ( ~ 40 % , see Table I ) interact with the A - Au also provides evidence that subpopulations of caveolae may indeed exist . The static view for caveola seems quite incongruous with the observations that discrete large protein - gold complexes found preferentially within caveolae are ultimately delivered to intracellular organelles . Furthermore , if caveolae are in - deed static without a role in transcytosis or endocytosis , then the ablation of caveolae should have little , if any , affect on cellular transport . To the contrary , we show here that disas - sembly of caveolae with sterol binding agents is associated with not only a very significant loss in the transport into and across endothelial cells but also reduced capillary perme - ability . Although at this time we can not rule out the possibil - ity of confounding multiplicity of effects elicited by filipin resulting in altered transport by other as yet unknown mecha - nisms , it seems most logical to accept the simplest apparent explanation based on the current available data . Filipin reduces the caveolae density in endothelium which inhibits caveolae - mediated endocytosis , transcytosis and capillary permeability of select macromolecules . It is interesting to note that unlike coated vesicles , non - coated plasmalemmal vesicles , especially in the endothelium , can join together to form strings of vesicles in a racemose , treelike structure . In a logical permutation of the classic " fer - ryboat " or " shuttling " hypothesis for vesicular transcytosis , Michel ( 1992 ) has proposed that the racemose caveolae may indeed be more permanent structures with only the termi - nally attached vesicles being involved in actual transport or transcytosis . This so - called " fission - fusion " hypothesis maintains that vesicles do not form de novo nor move from one side of the cell all the way across to the other side of the cell but merely far enough to fuse with the most immediate , neighboring caveolar tree so as to allow release of their con - tents back to the outside milieu on the other side of the cell not directly but by diffusion through the " pores " of the other linked vesicles of the caveolar tree . This mechanism represents a refined permutation describing transcytosis and appears to involve " shuttling " in a more limited fashion be - tween the terminal ends of neighboring caveolar trees lo - cated on opposite sides of the cell . Lastly , vesicles may par - ticipate in transport across the cell by forming patent transendothelial channels through the fusion of interconnect - ing luminal and abluminal caveolae ( Wagner and Chen , 1991 ) . Although this latter mechanism may provide passage for some molecules , it seems an unlikely pathway for provid - ing direct specific transport of select molecules into or across the cell . The controversy over transport via discrete vesicular car - riers is an old one that has existed not only in the area of microvascular transport and capillary permeability but also in many other fields such as coated vesicular endocytosis and protein trafficking and secretion in general . In these latter cases , the vesicular carrier hypothesis has held true and is now widely accepted . It may now be time to accept caveolae as another type of transport vesicle which like clathrin - coated vesicles can function in both intracellular and trans - cellular transport . Furthermore , caveolae may resemble other vesicles involved in subcellular trafficking in other ways . Our recent studies indicate that caveolae - mediated en - docytosis and transcytosis described in this study can also be inhibited by N - ethylmaleimide , suggesting as previously described for other vesicular processes that this transport pathway requires membrane fusion dependent on a NEM - sensitive factor ( s ) ( Schnitzer et al . , 1995 ) . Lastly , purifica - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 127 , 1994 1230 on O c t obe r 20 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m tion of caveolae from the luminal endothelial cell membrane derived directly from rat lungs shows that they have the ap - propriate molecular machinery for the specific transport of albumin via binding to albondin ( Schnitzer , J . E . , P . Oh , B . S . Jacobson , and A . M . Dvorak . 1994 . Mol . Biol . Cell . 5 : 75A ) . In summary , modified albumins such as A - Au bind the en - dothelial cell surface with high affinity , preferentially within caveolae to initiate their internalization to endosomes and lysosomes for degradation . Caveolae provide a novel mecha - nism for scavenger endocytosis of nonnative proteins such as modified albumins apparently via selective interactions with gp30 and gpl8 . The selective disassembly of caveolae with cholesterol binding agents such as filipin significantly re - duces caveolae - mediated scavenger endocytosis and degra - dation without functionally disrupting the coated vesicular degradative pathway . Likewise , caveolae - mediated transcy - tosis of albumin and insulin is significantly inhibited whereas paracellular transport through the intercellular junctions is not affected by filipin treatment . Albumins capillary perme - ability in the rat lung is reduced significantly . Although this study does not discern between the various models of vesicu - lar transcytosis , it does show that ablation of caveolae with filipin treatment is associated with inhibition of the transport of select macromolecules not only into the cell ( endocytosis ) but also across the cell ( transcytosis ) . Furthermore , filipin ' s selectivity in the disruption of caveolae may provide a useful tool for separating not only intracellular transport mediated by coated vs . noncoated vesicles but also transvascular trans - port in endothelium occurring via paracellular or transcellu - lar pathways . Caveolae not only transport many molecules by fluid - phase uptake as originally proposed at their discov - ery in endothelium but now it is clear that they can also pro - vide an independently regulated , receptor - mediated pathway for specific intracellular and transcellular processing of a va - riety of select ligands . This work was presented in part at the 1992 ASCB meeting in Denver ( Schnitzer , J . E . , J . Bravo , A . Sung , and E . Pinney . 1992 . Mol . Biol . Cell . 3 : 59a ) and the 1993 and 1994 Federation of American Societies for Ex - perimental Biologists meetings ( Schnitzer , J . E . , and E . Pinney . 1993 . FASEB [ Fed . Am . Soc . Exp . Biol . ] J . 7 : A639 ; Schnitzer , J . E . , J . Allard , and P . Oh . 1994 . FASEB [ Fed . Am . Soc . Exp . Biol . ] J . 8 : A1057 ) . It was supported in part by National Institutes of Health grants HL43278 and HL52766 and a Grant - In - Aid from the American Heart Association , Na - tional and California affiliates . Much of this work was done during the ten - ure of an Established Investigator Award from the American Heart Associ - ation and Genentech . Received for publication 2 September 1994 . References Anderson , R . G . W . , B . A . Kamen , K . G . Rothberg , and S . W . Lacey . 1992 . Potocytosis : sequestration and transport of small molecules by caveolae . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 255 : 410 - 411 . Bamezai , A . , V . S . Goldmacher , and K . L . Rock . 1992 . Internalization of glycosyl phosphatidylinositol ( GPl ) - anchored lymphocyte proteins II . GPI - anchored and transmembrane molecules internalize through distinct path - ways . Eur . J . lmmunol . 22 : 15 - 21 . Bolard , J . 1986 . How do polyene macrolide antibiotics affect the cellular mem - brane properties ? Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 864 : 257 - 304 . Bretscher , M . S . , J . N . Thomson , and B . M . F . Pearse . 1980 . Coated pits act as molecular filters . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 77 : 4156 - 4159 . Brown , M . S . , and J . L . Goldstein . 1983 . Lipoprotein metabolism in the macro - phage : implications for cholesterol deposition in atherosclerosis . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 52 : 223 - 261 . Bumbasirevic , V . , G . D . Pappas , and R . P . Becker . 1990 . Endocytosis of se - rum albumin - gold conjugates by microvascular endothelial cells in rat adre - nal gland : regional differences between cortex and medulla . J . Submicrosc . Cytol . Pathol . 22 : 135 - 145 . Bundgaard , M . 1983 . Vesicular transport in capillary endothelium : does it oc - cur ? FEBS ( Fed . Eur . Biochem . Soc . ) Proc . Meet . Fed . Proc . 42 : 2425 - 2430 . Davis , E . C . , and R . R . Shivers . 1992 . Ordered distribution of membrane - associated dense plaques in intact quail gizzard smooth muscle cells revealed by freeze - fracture following treatment with cholesterol probes . Anat . Rec . 232 : 385 - 392 . De Bruyn , P . P . H . , S . Michelson , and P . W . Bankston . 1985 . In - vivo endocy - tosis by bristle - coated pits and intracellular transport of endogenous albumin in the endothelium of the sinuses of liver and bone marrow . Cell Tissue Res . 240 : 1 - 7 . Dickson , R . B . , M . C . Willingham , and I . Pastan . 1981 . ~ 2 - Macroglobulin adsorbed to colloidal gold : a new probe in the study of receptor - mediated endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 89 : 29 - 34 . Elias , P . M . , J . Goerke , and D . S . Friend . 1978 . Freeze - fracture identification of sterol - digitonin complexes in cell and liposome membranes . J . Cell Biol . 78 : 577 - 594 . Faustmann , P . M . , S . Teutrine , D . Kranse , and R . Dermietzel . 1992 . Subarach - niodal macrophages share a common epitope with the resident non - cerebral macrophages and show receptor - mediated endocytosis of albumin - gold and lgG - gold complexes . J . Neuroimmunol . 35 : 79 - 88 . Frokjaer - Jensen , J . 1980 . Three - dimensional organization of plasmalemmal vesicles in endothelial cells . An analysis by serial sectioning of frog mesen - teric capillaries . J . Ultrastr . Res . 73 : 9 - 20 . Galis , Z . , L . Ghitescu , and M . Simionescu . 1988 . Fatty acids binding to albu - min increase its uptake and transcytosis by the lung capillary endothelium . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 47 : 358 - 365 . Geoffrey , J . S . , and R . P . Becker . 1984 . Endocytosis by endothelial phago - cytes : uptake of bovine serum albumin - gold in bone marrow . J . Ultrastruct . Res . 89 : 223 - 239 . Ghinea , N . , A . Fixman , D . Alexandru , D . Popov , M . Hasu , L . Ghitescu , M . Eskenasy , M . Simionescu , and N . Simionescu . 1988 . Identification of albu - min binding proteins in capillary endothelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 107 : 231 - 239 . Ghinea , N . , M . Eskenasy , M . Simionescu , and N . Simionescu . 1989 . En - dothelial albumin binding proteins are membrane - associated components ex - posed on the cell surface . J . Biol . Chem . 264 : 4755 ~ , 758 . Ghitescu , L . , and M . Bendayan . 1992 . Transendothelial transport of serum al - bumin : a quantitative immunocytochemical study . J . Cell Biol . 117 : 745 - 755 . Ghitescu , L . , A . Fixman , M . Simionescu , and N . Simionescu . 1986 . Specific binding sites for albumin restricted to plasmalemmal vesicles of continuous capillary endothelium : receptor - mediated transcytosis . J . Cell Biol . 102 : 1304 - 1311 . Goldstein , J . L . , M . S . Brown , R . G . W . Anderson , D . N . Russel , and W . J . Schneider . 1985 . Receptor - mediated endocytosis : concepts emerging from the LDL receptor system . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 1 : 1 - 39 . Hansen , S . H . , K . Sandvig , and B . van Deurs . 1991 . The preendosomal com - partment comprises distinct coated and noncoated endocytic vesicle popula - tions . J . Cell Biol . 113 : 731 - 741 . Huet , C . , J . F . Ash , and S . J . Singer . 1980 . The antibody - induced clustering and endocytosis of HLA antigens on cultured human fibroblasts . Cell . 21 : 429 - 438 . Jeffries , W . A . , M . R . Brandon , S . V . Hunt , A . F . Williams , K . C . Gatter , and D . Y . Mason . 1984 . Transferrin receptor on endothelium of brain capil - laries . Nature ( Lond . ) . 312 : 162 - 163 . Kartenbeck , J . , H . Stukenbrock , and A . Helenius . 1989 . Endocytosis of Simiam virus 40 into the endoplasmic reticulum . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 2721 - 2729 . Keller , G . - A . , M . W . Siegel , and I . W . Caras . 1992 . Endocytosis of glycosylphospholipid - anchored and transmembrane forms of CD4 by differ - ent endocytic pathways . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 3 : 863 - 874 . King , G . L . , and S . M . Johnson . 1985 . Receptor - mediated transport of insulin across endothelial cells . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 227 : 1583 - 1586 . Michel , C . C . 1992 . The transport of albumin : a critique of the vesicular system in transendothelial transport . Am . Rev . Respir . Dis . 146 : $ 32 - 36 . Milici , A . J . , N . E . Watrous , H . Stukenbrock , and G . E . Palade . 1987 . Trans - cytosis of albumin in capillary endothelium . J . Cell Biol . 105 : 2603 - 2612 . Mommaas - Kienhuis , A . M . , J . F . Nagelkerke , B . J . Vermeer , W . T . Daems , and T . J . C . van Berkel . 1985 . Visualization of the interaction of native and modified low density lipoproteins with isolated rat liver cells . Fur . J . Cell Biol . 38 : 42 - 50 . Montesano , R . , J . Roth , A . Robert , and L . Orci . 1982 . Non - coated membrane invaginations are involved in binding and internalization of cholera and teta - nus toxins . Nature ( Lond . ) . 296 : 651 - 653 . Oliver , C . 1982 . Endocytic pathways at the lateral and basal cell surfaces of exocrinne acinar cells . J . Cell Biol . 95 : 154 - 161 . Palade , G . E . , and R . R . Bruns . 1968 . Structural modulations of plasmalemma vesicles . J . Cell Biol . 37 : 633 - 649 . Pitas , R . E . , J . Boyles , R . W . Mahley , and D . M . Bissell . 1985 . Uptake of chemically modified low density lipoproteins in vivo is mediated by specific endothelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 100 : 103 - 117 . Schnitzer et al . Filipin Inhibits Caveolae - mediated Transport 1231 on O c t obe r 20 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Predescu , D . , M . Simionescu , N . Simionescu , and G . E . Palade . 1988 . Binding and transcytosis of glycoalbumin by microvascular endothelium of the mu - fine myocardium : evidence that glycoalbumin behaves as a bifunctional ligand . J . Cell Biol . 107 : 1729 - 1738 . Rabkin , R . , T . Tsan , S . J . Elliot , L . J . Striker , and G . E . Striker . 1993 . Insulin uptake and processing by cultured mouse glomerular endothelial cells . Am . J . Physiol . 265 : C453 - C459 . Raposo , G . , I . Dunia , C . Delavier - Klutchko , S . Kaveri , A . D . Strosberg , and E . L . Benedetti . 1989 . Internalization of # - adrenergic receptor in A431 cells involves non - coated vesicles . Fur . J . Cell Biol . 50 : 340 - 352 . Roberts , R . L . , and A . Sandra . 1992 . Receptor - mediated endocytosis of insulin by cultured endothelial cells . Tissue & Cell . 24 : 603 - 611 . Rothberg , K . G . , Y . - S . Ying , B . A . Kamen , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1990 . Cholesterol controls the clustering of the glycophospholipid - anchored mem - brane receptor for 5 - methyltetrahydrofolate . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 2931 - 2938 . Rothberg , K . G . , J . E . Heuser , W . C . DonzeU , Y . - S . Ying , J . R . Glenney , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1992 . Caveolin , a protein component of caveolae membrane coats . Cell . 68 : 673 - 682 . Schnitzer , J . E . 1992 . Gp60 is an albumin binding glycoprotein expressed by continuous endothelium involved in albumin transcytosis . Am . J . Physiol . 262 : H246 - 254 . Schnitzer , J . E . 1993 . Update on the cellular and molecular basis of capillary permeability . Cardiovasc . Med . 3 : 124 - 130 . Schnitzer , J . E . , and E . Pinney . 1992 . Quantitation of specific binding of orosomucoid to cultured microvascular endothelium : role in capillary per - meability . Am . J . Physiol . 263 : H48 - H55 . Schnitzer , J . E . , and P . Oh . 1992 . Antibodies to SPARC inhibit albumin bind - ing to SPARC , gp60 and microvascular endothelium . Am . J . Physiol . 263 : H1872 - 1879 . Schnitzer , J . E . , and J . Bravo . 1993 . High al ~ nity binding , endocytosis and degradation of conformationally - modified albumins : potential role of gp30 and gpl8 as novel scavenger receptors . J . Biol . Chem . 268 : 7562 - 7570 . Schnitzer , J . E . , and P . Oh . 1994 . Albondin - mediated capillary permeability to albumin : differential role of receptors in endothelial transcytosis and en - docytosis of native and modified albumins . J . Biol . Chem . 269 : 6072 - 6082 . Schnitzer , J . E . , W . W . Carley , and GH . E . Palade . 1988a . Specific albumin binding to microvascular endothelium in culture . Am . J . Physiol . 254 : H425 - 437 . Schnitzer , J . E . , W . W . Carley , and G . E . Palade . 1988b . Albumin interacts specifically with a 60 - kDa microvascular endothelial glycoprotein . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 85 : 6773 - 6777 . Schnitzer , J . E . , A . Sung , R . Horvat , and J . Bravo . 1992 . Preferential interac - tion of albumin binding proteins , gp30 and gplg , with modified albumins : presence in many cells and tissues with a possible role in catabolism . J . Biol . Chem . 264 : 24544 - 24553 . Schnitzer , J . E . , A . Siflinger - Birnboim , P . J . Del Vecchio , and A . B . Malik . 1994 . Segmental differentiation of permeability , protein glycosylation , and morphology of cultured bovine lung vascular endothelium . Biochem . Bio - phys . Res . Commun . 199 : 11 - 19 . Schnitzer , J . E . , P . Oh , E . Pinney , and J . Allard . 1995 . NEM inhibits transcyto - sis , endocytosis and capillary permeability : implication of caveolae fusion in endothelia . Am . J . Physiol . In press . Severs , N . J . , and H . L . Simons . 1986 . Caveolar bands and the effects of sterol - binding agents in vascular smooth muscle plasma membranes . Lab . Invest . 55 : 295 - 307 . Silverstein , S . C . , R . M . Steinman , and Z . A . Cohn . 1977 . Endocytosis . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 46 : 669 - 722 . Sollner , T . , S . W . Whitehead , M . Brunner , H . Erdjument - Bromage , S . Ger - amanos , P . Tempst , and J . E . Rothman . 1993 . SNAP receptors implicated in vesicle targeting and fusion . Nature ( Lond . ) . 362 : 318 - 324 . Sparrow , C . P . , S . Parthasarathy , and D . Steinberg . 1989 . A macrophage receptor that recognizes oxidized low density lipoprotein but not acetylated low density lipoprotein . J . Biol . Chem . 264 : 2599 - 2604 . Steinberg , D . , S . Parthasarathy , T . E . Carew , J . C . Khoo , and J . L . Witztum . 1989 . Beyond cholesterol : modification of low - density lipoprotein that in - creases its atherogenicity . New Engl . J . Med . 320 : 915 - 924 . Trans , D . , J . - L . Carpentier , F . Sawano , P . Gorden , and L . Orci . 1987 . Ligands internalized through coated or noncoated invaginations follow a common in - tracellular pathway . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 84 : 7957 - 7961 . Van Deurs , B . , and K . Nilausen . 1982 . Pinocytosis in mouse L - fibroblasts : ul - trastructural evidence for a direct membrane shuttle between the plasma membrane and the lysosomal compartment . J . Cell Biol . 94 : 279 - 286 . Van Deurs , B . , S . H . Hansen , O . W . Petersen , E . L . Melby , and K . Sandvig . 1990 . Endocytosis , intracellular transport and transcytosis of the toxic pro - tein ricin by a polarized epithelium . Fur . J . Cell Biol . 51 : 96 - 109 . Villaschi , S . , L . Johns , M . Cirigliano , and G . G . Pietra . 1986 . Binding and uptake of native and glycosylated albumin - gold complexes in perfused rat lungs . Microvasc . Res . 32 : 190 - 199 . Wagner , R . C . , and S . - C . Chert . 1991 . Transcapillary transport of solute by the endothelial vesicular system : evidence from serial thin section analysis . Microvasc . Res . 42 : 139 - 150 . Wagner , R . C . , C . S . Robinson , P . J . Cross , andJ . J . Devenney . 1983 . Endocy - tosis and exocytosis of transferrin by isolated capillary endothelium . Microvasc . Res . 25 : 387 - 396 . Yamada , E . 1955 . The fine structure of the gall bladder epithelium of the mouse . J . Biophys . Biochem . Cytol . 1 : 445 - 458 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 127 , 1994 1232 on O c t obe r 20 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m