research bodily interaction , or seat 20 to 30 people attending a per - formance of an opera singer inter - actively creating 3 - D scenography with his voice . Next door we have our virtual studio , where we can combine digital 3 - D models and animation with physical objects and people in real time . We do not use it much for conventional film production , but instead as a visu - alization tool in design process - es—for instance , for making vir - tual video prototypes . In our third space we research experimental design , using things such as sen - sor boards , interactive tables , and most of whom have backgrounds in interaction design or digital aes - thetics , although some have back - grounds in computer science . A lot of people work at CAVI—only a few are on our payroll . Or , as I over - heard a kid from a visiting school say to his friend : “Do they really get paid for working here ? ” What kind of facilities do you have ? Our lab was originally established 10 years ago as a 3 - D visualization center , so we have a large 6 . 4 × 3 . 6 - meter 3 - D stereo display in a space without permanent chairs , which permits us to remove them and how would you describe your lab ? The Centre for Advanced Visualization and Interaction ( CAVI ) is an interdisciplinary lab for the arts and sciences at Aarhus University in Denmark . We have a small core staff of two software engineers , an interaction designer , a 3 - D graphics designer , an electri - cal engineer , a production man - ager , and a number of student interns who all work with archi - tects , opera singers , digital artists , museum staff , school kids , physi - cians , interior decorators , and light engineers . Last but not least , we have large number of researchers , CAvI collaborated with an architectural firm and a lighting company to create the media facade for the Danish Pavilion at the 2010 World Expo in Shanghai . day in The LaB i n t e r a c t i o n s J u l y + A u g u s t 2011 92 CAVI : An Interaction ferent areas of interaction design , including design processes , interfaces , and use . Many of our researchers have backgrounds in participatory design , which explains our concern with the contexts for which we design . A strong interest in exploring the design of engaging experiences is a persistent thread throughout our project portfolio . In almost all of our projects , we work closely with external part - ners , such as technology providers and other businesses . In the area of cultural computing , we work with independent artists as well 3 - D projection on physical objects . In our foyer we have a temporary installation of 6 × 2 - meter LED panels . Our computers may be as small as matchboxes , or—until we recently trashed our Onyx comput - ers—as big as refrigerators . We work with displays one pixel wide ( Flexdots ) , as well as with displays of several hundred square meters , as parts of media architecture . What makes your lab unique ? We carry out research through design , in the sense of making practical design experiments aimed at gaining insight into dif - as cultural institutions , such as museums . Collaborating closely with external partners pushes us to take context seriously and to make full - scale installations that may be put into the real world—we do not do any controlled lab exper - iments . Our recent experimental research cases include the design and implementation of the media facade for the Danish Pavilion at Expo 2010 in Shanghai ( shown below ) , a collaboration with the Danish architectural firm Bjarke Ingels Group ( BIG ) , and Martin Professional , a market leader in light technology . Last year , day in The LaB i n t e r a c t i o n s J u l y + A u g u s t 2011 93 Design Research Lab As told by Kim Halskov http : / / www . cavi . dk / | halskov @ CAVI . dk together with BIG and Kollision , a local design and architectural studio , we also created “Loop City , ” a 3 - D projection installation for the 2010 Architectural Biennale in Venice . This past winter , one of our cultural heritage installations , “The Mejlby Stone , ” was on display at the World Creativity Forum in Oklahoma . Now it is back at a local cultural history museum . As I mentioned , we also focus on design processes—for example , we developed our own creative technique called “Inspiration Card Workshops , ” and we are currently developing a tool that supports reflection on design processes . day in The LaB Media Architecture . Media architecture projects explore the potential of integrating interactive media into architecture . Through collaboration with architectural companies and display manufacturers , we seek to understand the design process of media architecture , the perception and use of media architecture in practice , and the wider impacts of media architecture for urban living . Our projects range from small - scale interventions to the integration of interactive facades into new buildings , such as the Danish Pavilion at the 2010 Expo in Shanghai . Contact : Peter Dalsgaard | Dalsgaard @ CAVI . dk Cultural Heritage . We investigate how digital technology creates engaging experiences that enable museum guests to express their emotions and ideas about the exhibitions as part of their efforts to understand and interpret them . 3 - D projections on museum objects , interactive multitouch tables , and tracking technologies are some of the technologies we investigate in museum environments . We also approach the question of how new technology challenges the museum’s role as a place for reflection and learning . Contact : Ole Sejer Iversen | oiversen @ cs . au . dk Interface Aesthetics . Our interface aesthetics projects deal with how choices , conduct , and , ultimately , values and aesthetics are embedded in interface design and technical infrastructures . In collaboration with the British artists group , The People Speak , we recently produced an installation , “Planetary Pledge Pyramid , ” for the UN climate summit , COP 15 . The installation was an experiment with community action and decision making , involving a pyramid scheme , a cell phone , a talk show , a Facebook application , and a live game show . Contact : Christian Ulrik Andersen | imvcua @ hum . au . dk Sensor - based Interaction . DUL Radio is a small , wireless tool kit for sketching sensor - based interaction . We developed a platform that balances ease of use ( learning , setup , initialization ) , size , speed , flexibility , and cost , and is aimed at wearable and ultra - mobile prototyping when a fast response is needed—for instance , when controlling sound . The target audience includes designers , students , and artists , who have limited programming and hardware skills . Contact : Martin Brynskov | brynskov @ CAVI . dk SELECTED PROJECTS i n t e r a c t i o n s J u l y + A u g u s t 2011 94 How would you describe a day in the life of CAVI ? Every day is different . If you were to take a look at our calendar this week , you would see that Monday , a digital artist is coming to see the visuals we have developed for projection on mannequins as part of a dance performance , and Tuesday , a high school class is vis - iting us ; annually , we have more than 1 , 500 visitors from schools , industry , universities , city admin - istration , and so on . Wednesday we meet with a design company to review a 3 - D projection setup . Thursday is the last day for one of our student interns , who recently graduated , and we are probably going to have muffins together . Friday , we have a meeting with a potential partner about financing a joint project . Who are your neighbors ? CAVI is part of IT - City Katrinebjerg , where the IT campus of Aarhus University is located . Next door is the Department of Information and Media Studies and the Computer Science Department—each with around 1 , 000 students . CAVI col - laborates closely with the Center for Digital Urban Living and the Digital Aesthetics Research Center . Across the street , a number of start - up companies are located in the same building as Google and other major companies . A key player at Katrinebjerg is the Alexandra Institute , a private applied - research company mediating collaboration between industry and the university . What is your next step ? Our next step is to further develop research collaboration , in particular with labs and companies outside of Denmark , so if anybody out there wants to collaborate with us , please drop us a line . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 1978822 . 1978841 © 2011 ACM 1072 - 5220 / 11 / 07 $ 10 . 00 day in The LaB • Clockwise from top left : Opera singer Jesper Brun - Jensen creating 3 - D sce - nography with his voice , Aarhus By Light—an interac - tive media facade invites citizens to be part of a shared experience , CAVI’s 3D Panorama Lab , a CAVI studio , and Flexdots .