Triggering memories with online maps S . Tejaswi Peesapati , Victoria Schwanda , Johnathon Schultz , Dan Cosley Cornell University Information Science 301 College Ave . , Ithaca NY 14850 { stp53 , vls48 , jts228 , drc44 } @ cornell . edu ABSTRACT The increasing popularity of applications that share location information over the internet enables the mapping of people’s pictures and activities . Such applications often focus on the now , ignoring the importance of places and stories from the past . Inspired by recent work in HCI around reminiscing , in this paper we present a study in which 16 people used Google My Maps to write about their past , using place as a trigger for memories . People had a wide variety of strategies for choosing which places they remembered and the stories they told about those places ; on balance they liked the idea of using maps as a tool for reminiscing , suggesting that this is a promising line of inquiry for further work . Keywords Online maps , reminiscence , memories , user interfaces . INTRODUCTION The physical nature of the world shapes us in fundamental ways . Aspects of our lives such as “home” , “work” , “school” , “vacation” , “friends” , and “fun” are often tied to specific places . People attach meaning to place , both as groups ( Harrison & Dourish , 1996 ) and individuals ( Rubinstein & Parmelee , 1992 ) . Thinking of these places can then be used to support reminiscence and identity building ( Chaudhury , 2003 ) , while our memories in turn influence the meanings we attach to a place ( Rowles , 1983 ) . We believe that the intersection of technology , place , and reminiscing is a rich space to explore , both for better understanding the ways people remember the past and for developing systems that might improve people’s lives . Research prototypes such as GeoNotes ( Persson et al . , 2003 ) and PlaceMail ( Ludford et al . , 2006 ) , along with commercial products such as Google My Maps and foursquare , support the annotation of places and the recording of one’s presence at a place . Cameras also often annotate pictures with location information . However , these tools , and social media more generally , are focused on the now ( Peesapati et al . , 2010 ) . Their interfaces show the most recent picture , the newest location , and the latest blog entry , while earlier data is rarely reviewed . This is unfortunate , because reminiscing has psychological benefits for both older adults ( Webster & McCall , 1999 ) and across the lifespan ( Bryant et al . , 2005 ) . Recent HCI research explores people’s practices around reminiscing , including how they use both digital and traditional media and artifacts to reminisce ( Petrelli et al . , 2008 ; Petrelli et al . , 2009 ) . That work in turn has informed the development of technologies that support both lifelogging—the capture and review of data about everyday life experience ( Li et al . , 2010 ) from photos ( Kalnikate et al . , 2010 ) to spending data ( Schwarz et al . , 2009 ) —and reminiscing , both for families ( Stevens et al . , 2003 ; Petrelli et al . , 2010 ) and individuals ( Peesapati et al . , 2010 ; Kalnikate et al . , 2010 ) . In this paper we take a first step in exploring technologies that use place to support reminiscing . As a proof - of - concept , we asked 16 people to use Google My Maps ( Figure 1 ) to mark and describe places that were important to them , focusing on three main questions that might inform research and design around such systems : • How did people choose places to tell stories about ? • What kinds of stories did they tell ? • Did they value the idea of reminiscing using My Maps ? For places and stories , we found variety : variety about what counted as important and worth marking and a wide range of styles for naming and describing places . Overall , however , there was agreement : on balance people enjoyed and valued using a map to write and think about their past . STUDY DESIGN The study was conducted online with remote participants using Google My Maps , which allows users to create Figure 1 . A placemark describing a childhood memory , taken from a participant’s map . ASIST 2010 , October22 – 27 , 2010 , Pittsburgh , PA , USA . Copyright is held by the authors . personal maps that contain “placemarks”—places people tag , then describe with text , photos , videos , or URLs . Figure 1 shows an example placemark from the study . During each session , a researcher and the participant communicated using Google Chat , an IM client . Our pilot participants were unfamiliar with My Maps , so after obtaining consent , we asked people to view a five minute tutorial video about the interface . We then asked participants to mark locations that were important to them and to add a description of or story about the place if they wished . Participants were told they could stop at any time . While the experiment was in progress , the researcher was able to view the map , allowing us to observe participants’ actions . After the participant finished , we followed up with a short interview about their reasons for marking certain locations , the order they followed , and their overall experience . We interviewed a total of 16 participants ( 12 female , 4 male ) . All were undergraduates solicited through an experiment recruiting website at a large U . S . university , and they received course credit for participating . They spent about 17 minutes and marked about 10 locations on average . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION In this section we discuss people’s use of and reactions to reminiscing with My Maps , focusing on three themes . The first is how people made their maps : what places did they choose to mark , and which did they choose to avoid ? The second is how people described these places : what did they talk about , and how much did they say ? And the third is how people felt about My Maps : what did they think it might be good for ? Was it fun or useful for reminiscing , and would they use it , or similar tools , in the future ? Marking Places Participants marked between 3 and 32 placemarks , with an average of 10 . Figure 2 shows that most participants marked close to the average number of placemarks with only a few participants marking many more or fewer placemarks than average . Corresponding descriptions ranged in length from 0 to 167 words , with an average of 24 . Although the length varied widely between participants , individuals tended to write descriptions of about the same length . There was a weak negative correlation between the number of placemarks a person tagged and the average length of descriptions ( r = - 0 . 34 ) . Places have a number of associations . Participants used a number of strategies for deciding what to mark . Place names often served as memory triggers , as participants were reminded about their attachment with a place by seeing the name of the place on the map . “If I saw a name of a city it may have triggered a memory and that’s when I marked it . ” Some participants followed chronological ordering , starting with places from their childhood and moving toward the present day . Others followed chains of reminiscence , as the act of marking a place may have triggered another memory which was then marked ; as one participant said , “Certain memories triggered other memories . ” A few had trouble getting started thinking of places at all , while others used a variety of strategies and reminders : “It mostly went by theme : daily places , ballet , summer places , friends ( homes and hang - out places ) , places away from New York . ” Many participants started their virtual journey into the past by marking “home” as their first placemark . This home often referred to their childhood home or that of their parents or grandparents to which they felt emotionally attached . A few participants marked their current home . Not all places are worth remembering . People avoided marking some places , such as those with bad memories . When people did mark such places , they described them as funny and adventurous when they look back today , in keeping with Webster & McCall ( 1999 ) ’s finding that reminiscing helps people work through the past . “ [ I marked it ] because it was a funny experience . It was pretty bad and low at the time being , but then it got stuck to my memory which I can laugh at with my friends later . ” Many people also avoided marking places related to routines that they consider boring : “I was thinking about marking my home town too but it was kind of a boring stuff so I decided not to . It’s like school—after school—after school private tutoring— homework—repeat . ” However , not all routines are boring : “ [ I tagged ] whatever came to mind in regards to my daily routine . . . like places I run . ” Describing Places People’s descriptions of places were also quite varied . We developed a codebook consisting of hierarchical categories Figure 2 . Number of placemarks tagged and average placemark description length for each participant , ordered by number of placemarks added . of “things” ( like swimming , concerts and cheesecake ) , “people” ( like father , John , boyfriend ) and “places” ( like playground , garage , home ) with one level of subcategories . Though descriptions often had aspects of multiple categories , each was assigned to only one primary category . Two people independently coded the descriptions , and disagreements were settled by one of the researchers . 1 Places , things , and people all mattered . Table 1 shows that , as might be expected given the use of place as a memory trigger , “place” was often the dominant theme . “Things” and “people” were reminisced about less often ( 24 % and 18 % of placemarks respectively ) . Figure 3 shows that participants varied widely in whether they focused on places associated with things , people , or some of both . As Table 1 shows , most “things” were important activities in people’s lives : places one participant ran , or where another practiced and performed ballet . “People” were family and friends , who had close relationships and shared experiences with participants : “Actually it was usually a trip that first came to mind . Then some people followed usually my family . ” People tell different kinds of stories . Figure 2 showed that people varied widely in the length of their descriptions . People also varied in the ways they described their placemarks . Personal stories , as in Figure 1 , were common , as were short descriptions of the function of the place . People also varied on how they named their placemarks . Some people used a proper place name , like “New York , NY” ; others described the type of place , like “library” ; a 1 Intercoder agreement ranged from 85 – 91 % ( mean 88 % ) for parent and 80 – 91 % ( mean 86 % ) for child categories . Krippendorf’s Alpha ranged from 0 . 68 – 0 . 71 ( mean 0 . 70 ) for parent and 0 . 63 – 0 . 73 ( mean 0 . 69 ) for child categories . third group used names that emphasized their personal relationship to the place , like “relatives’ home” . This variety suggests that probably there isn’t a single system for helping people to reminisce with place , but that many different systems or interfaces may be needed to effectively facilitate reminiscing . We also speculate that being able to see examples of other people’s maps might influence the way people name and describe placemarks . Reactions to reminiscing with places People had a number of reactions to the idea of reminiscing using maps . People saw a variety of potential uses . Our initial vision was to help people reminisce , but people saw a variety of potential uses for these maps , including trip and vacation planning and daily activity logging , not unlike a diary or journal . People also suggested social uses , sharing with friends and family for trip advising and group reminiscing . This suggests that designs should allow people sufficient flexibility to appropriate the application for their own needs , and that providing social features like sharing may improve both mapping tools and tools for reminiscing . Media elements enrich the experience . We asked people to add text descriptions , but some would have liked to add additional media elements like photos and videos to their descriptions of placemarks . One participant used the “Street View” feature of Google Maps to virtually revisit places , creating a sense of nostalgia : “When I used street view to look for the specific locations that I marked , I was reminded of how I felt when I was actually there . ” This suggests that making it easy for people to add personal content to placemark descriptions may better support their storytelling needs . Many people liked the idea of reminiscing using maps . Overall , people’s reactions were positive . People described Figure 3 . Percentage of individual participants’ descriptions categorized as things , people , and places , sorted by balance between things and people . Category # of Descriptions Percentage Places 97 58 % School / Work 26 27 % Vacations 25 26 % Home 18 19 % Other Places 16 16 % Outdoors 12 12 % Things 40 24 % Activities 26 65 % Events 8 20 % Food 6 15 % People 30 18 % Family 19 63 % Friends 9 30 % Loved Ones 2 6 % Table 1 . Placemark descriptions by category . The table displays hierarchical nesting of categories . the system as a diary and a tool for connecting to other people , and though a few people didn’t see a use for a system like this , people were on balance positive : “It was fun to take the time to reminisce . And I enjoyed charting my memories on a map—it almost made the memories more concrete , and I was more easily able to remember them . It was also a neat way to chart my travels . ” Several people suggested that they might go back and add more places to their map . However , eight weeks after the experiment concluded , no one had marked a new place , suggesting that reminders may be needed to encourage continued use of these kinds of lifelogging applications . CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK This study suggests that place may be valuable for reminiscing , but raises a number of further questions . It would be useful to compare place to other kinds of triggers and media for supporting reminiscing . Maps focused on reminiscing may also be different from maps created for other uses such as recording individual trips and lists of favorite places , and those differences might give us insight into reminiscing behavior . Our findings also suggest specific design choices to explore . People wanted to add their own pictures and videos to the map , so priming them to reminisce by using geo - tagged content they already create in other systems might be useful . Likewise , as in Peesapati et al . ( 2010 ) , people wanted to have social , shared elements in their maps and reminiscing . We also would like to explore how changing the conditions of mapping affects people’s behavior . We wonder if showing people long , evocative example descriptions might encourage them to also tell more detailed stories about their past . The idea of embodiment ( Dourish , 2001 ) suggests that using a mobile phone and reminiscing in the physical world may be more engaging than reminiscing using a My Maps - like interface . Finally , we would like to see how explicit reminders would affect people’s use of a system like this , and of reminiscing and lifelogging tools more generally . These questions , and people’s reactions , suggest there is real value in joining technology , place , and reminiscence . People’s experiences are rarely recorded and eventually lost to them , to their families , and to future generations looking to understand them . Supporting this kind of memory is an understudied question in information science , and we hope this work helps to take a step in this direction . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Meethu Malu for her tireless interviewing work , and NSF for support through grant number IIS 0845351 . REFERENCES Bryant , F . , Smart , C . , King , S . ( 2005 ) . Using the past to enhance the present : Boosting happiness through positive reminiscence . J . Happiness Studies , 6 : 227 – 260 . Chaudhury , H . ( 2002 ) . Place - biosketch as a tool in caring for residents with dementia . Alzheimer’s Care Quarterly , 3 ( 1 ) , 42 – 45 . Dourish P ( 2001 ) Where the action is : the foundations of embodied interaction . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA Harrison , S . & Dourish , P . ( 1996 ) . Re - place - ing space : the roles of place and space in collaborative systems . In Proc . CSCW 1996 , 67 – 76 . Kalnikaite , V . , Sellen , A . , Whittaker , S . , & Kirk , D . ( 2010 ) . Now let me see where I was : understanding how lifelogs mediate memory . In Proc . CHI 2010 , 2045 – 2054 . Li , I . , Dey , A . , & Forlizzi , J . ( 2010 ) . A stage - based model of personal informatics systems . In Proc . CHI 2010 , 557 – 566 . Ludford , P . J . , Frankowski , D . , Reily , K . , Wilms , K . , & Terveen , L . ( 2006 ) . Because I carry my cell phone anyway : functional location - based reminder applications . In Proc . CHI 2006 , 889 – 898 . Peesapati , S . T . , Schwanda , V . , Schultz , J . , Lepage , M . , Jeong , S . , & Cosley , D . ( 2010 ) . Pensieve : supporting everyday reminiscence . In Proc . CHI 2010 , 2027 – 2036 . Persson , P . , Espinoza , F . , Fagerberg , P . , Sandin , A . , & Cöster , R . ( 2003 ) . GeoNotes : a location - based information system for public spaces . In Designing Information Spaces : the Social Navigation Approach , K . Höök et al . , Eds . Springer - Verlag , London , 151 – 173 . Petrelli , D . Hoven , E . , & Whittaker , S . ( 2009 ) . Making History : Intentional Capture of Future Memories . In Proc . CHI 2009 , 1723 – 1732 . Petrelli , D . , Villar , N . , Kalnikaite , V . , Dib , L . , & Whittaker , S . ( 2010 ) . FM radio : family interplay with sonic mementos . In Proc . CHI 2010 , 2371 – 2380 . Petrelli , D . , Whittaker , S . , & Brockmeier , J . ( 2008 ) . Autotopography : what can physical mementos tell us about digital memories ? In Proc . CHI 2008 , 53 – 62 . Rowles , G . D . ( 1983 ) . Place and personal identity in old age : Observations from Appalachia . Journal of Environmental Psychology , 3 ( 4 ) , 299 – 313 . Rubinstein , R . L . & Parmelee , P . A . ( 1992 ) . Attachment to Place and the Representation of the Life Course by the Elderly . In Place Attachment , I . Altman & S . M . Low , Eds . Plenum , New York . Schwarz , J . , Mankoff , J . , & Matthews , H . S . ( 2009 ) . Reflections of everyday activities in spending data . In Proc . CHI 2009 , 1737 – 1740 . Stevens , M . M . , Abowd , G . D . , Truong , K . N . , & Vollmer , F . ( 2003 ) . Getting into the Living Memory Box : Family archives & holistic design . Pers . Ubiquitous Computing , 7 ( 3 - 4 ) : 210 – 216 . Webster , J . D . & McCall , M . E . ( 1999 ) . Reminiscence functions across adulthood : A replication and extension . J . Adult Dev . , 6 ( 1 ) : 73 – 85 .