Improving productivity and creativity in online groups through social comparison process : New evidence for asynchronous electronic brainstorming Nicolas Michinov a , * , Corine Primois b a Universit (cid:1) e de Poitiers ( MSHS ) 99 Avenue du Recteur Pineau , 86022 Poitiers Cedex , France b Centre National d’Enseignement (cid:2) a Distance ( EIFAD ) , Arobase 3 , T (cid:1) e l (cid:1) e port 1 , Av . du Futuroscope BP 30241 , 86963 Futuroscope , Chasseneuil Cedex , France Available online 17 March 2004 Abstract This article extends the ﬁndings in synchronous room - based electronic brainstorming about the impact of social comparison process on productivity and creativity in a web - based context of asynchronous electronic brainstorming . Social comparison was manipulated with a feedback informing group members of their respective contributions on the electronic brainstorming task through a shared table regularly updated by a facilitator . In another group , although partici - pants had the possibility to identify each contribution within the newsgroup , they did not receive any feedback in a shared table . Results showed that both group productivity and group crea - tivity are better in the social comparison feedback condition than in the other condition . It appears that social comparison process has a positive impact on productivity and creativity in a web - based context of asynchronous electronic brainstorming , but only when participants have access toasharedtablefacilitating thecomparison amonggroupmembers . Thisﬁndingprovides some useful recommendations for learning facilitators to improve productivity and creativity in the context of computer - supported collaborative learning over the Internet . It also invites to future innovative technological developments to improve participation in online groups . (cid:1) 2004 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . Keywords : Social comparison ; Electronic brainstorming ; Computer - supported collaborative learning ; Creativity ; Internet * Corresponding author . E - mail address : nicolas . michinov @ univ - poitiers . fr ( N . Michinov ) . 0747 - 5632 / $ - see front matter (cid:1) 2004 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2004 . 02 . 004 www . elsevier . com / locate / comphumbeh Computers in Human Behavior 21 ( 2005 ) 11 – 28 Computers in Human Behavior 1 . Introduction The use of computers and communication systems as support for human coop - erative work dates back to the early 1980s ( e . g . , Huber , 1980 ) . From that date , new forms of computer technology – called Group Support Systems ( GSS ) – have in - creasingly developed . Such systems , often called groupware , are deﬁned as computer - based network systems which support group work on a common task and provide a shared interface for participating groups ( see Ellis , Gibbs , & Rein , 1991 ) . DeSanctis and Gallupe ( 1987 ) deﬁned GSS as combining ‘‘ communication , computer , and de - cision technologies to support problem formulation and solution in group meetings ’’ ( p . 589 ) . These systems were initially developed for commercial use , usually to support decision making processes in organization . They have been widely used for research on electronic brainstorming in groups in which participants generate ideas on computers ( see Fjermestad & Hiltz , 1998 , for a review ) . A large majority of studies examined electronic brainstorming in a synchronous room - based context , although the development of Internet has provided over the last years a web - based context without space nor time constraints for testing new forms of electronic brainstorming . The present study does not only extend electronic brainstorming research , shifting from synchronous room - based context to an asynchronous web - based one , but also provides a new test for the impact of social comparison process on productivity and creativity in on - line groups during an asynchronous electronic brainstorming . 1 . 1 . Room - based studies With electronic GSS , group members communicate by exchanging typed messages , instead of verbally speaking in a meeting room ( e . g . , Nunamaker , Dennis , Valacich , Vogel , & Georges , 1991 ) . Numerous laboratory and ﬁeld studies have used GSS to facilitate diﬀerent types of work and learning methods in diﬀerent tasks such as communication , planning , voting , negotiation , decision - making , problem - solving , idea generation , and so on . These tasks can be accomplished by using speciﬁc in - struments such as electronic brainstorming , idea organization , vote , and group writing . GSS (cid:1) s have been essentially used for electronic brainstorming in groups 1 and have proven useful in improving group performance , particularly for creativity tasks such as idea generation ( e . g . , Gallupe , Bastianutti , & Cooper , 1991 ; Nunamaker , Applegate , & Konsyski , 1987 ; Pinsonneault , Barki , Gallupe , & Hoppen , 1999 ) . This form of brainstorming consists in groups of various sizes simultaneously and anon - ymously generating ideas on a speciﬁc issue on individual computers located in a same electronic meeting room . Individual computers are connected to a central computer which collects the generated ideas and controls their display on a large screen at the 1 Group brainstorming is a popular technique for creative idea generation developed by Osborn ( 1957 ) . This technique consists in following a set of four rules designed to establish a non - evaluative setting and to enhance the idea generation process : ( a ) criticism is ruled out , ( b ) free thinking is welcome , ( c ) quantity is wanted , and ( d ) combination and improvement are sought . 12 N . Michinov , C . Primois / Computers in Human Behavior 21 ( 2005 ) 11 – 28