Growth Activity of Neurites without Filopodial or Lamellipodial in the Presence of Cytochalasin B L . MARSH and PAUL C . LETOURNEAU * Department of Genetics and Cell Biology and * Department of Anatomy , University of Minnesota , Minneapolis 55455 ABSTRACT TO examine the role in neurite growth of actin - mediated tensions within growth cones , we cultured chick embryo dorsal root ganglion cells on various substrata in the presence of cytochalasin B . Time - lapse video recording was used to monitor behaviors of living cells , and cytoskeletal arrangements in neurites were assessed via immunofluorescence and electron microscopic observations of thin sections and whole , detergent - extracted cells decorated with the $ 1 fragment of myosin . On highly adhesive substrata , nerve cells were observed to extend numerous ( though peculiarly oriented ) neurites in the presence of cytochalasin , despite their lack of both filopodia and lamellipodia or the orderly actin networks characteristic of typical growth cones . We concluded that growth cone activity is not necessary for neurite elongation , although actin arrays seem important in mediating characteristics of substratum selectivity and neurite shape . Elaborate networks and bundles of actin filaments are preva - lent throughout the growth cone regions , and particularly characterize the filopodial extensions , of neurite tips in cul - ture . These filamentous arrays are readily demonstrated in whole - mount and detergent - extracted cytoskeletal prepara - tions in which actin filaments are only occasionally identified more proximally along neurites ( 15 - 17 , 26 ) . Thus it seems that there is a state of neuronal actin that is rather unique to growth cones and that presumably is reflected in the dynamic motile activities of these structures . The growth cones of living nerve cells appear to actively explore their environments , cyclically protruding and retract - ing ( 1 ) to make successive tentative contacts with their sub - strata and with other cells ( 14 ) . They may be observed , upon establishing cellular contacts , to exert forces capable of dis - placing those processes to which they adhere ( 14 ) , and they may be observed to make " choices " among variably adhesive substrata , such that their preferred sites of attachment select the paths to be followed by growing fibers ( 13 - 15 ) . It is thus intuitively appealing to suppose that filopodial / lamellipodial activity is essential for neurite initiation and extension , and it is proposed that actin - mediated tensions within adherant growth cones may be mechanically translated into more proximal cytoskeletal rearrangements , thereby ini - tiating appropriate cell shape changes and / or directing trans - port processes necessary for growth ( 3 , 4 , 13 - 17 , 26 ) . Indeed a cessation of neurite growth has been reported to accompany THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY • VOLUME 99 DECEMBER 1984 2041 - 2047 © The Rockefeller University Press . 0021 - 9525 / 84 / 12(cid:127)2041 / 07 $ 1 . 00 the disorganization of actin filaments and retraction of filo - podia induced by cytochalasin B ( CB ) 1 ( 26 ) . However , the growth of neurons on sufficiently adhesive substrata is here shown to be not inhibited by CB , and indeed , neurons initially plated in the presence of CB are shown to extend profuse neuritic arborizations , unaided by morphologically identifia - ble filopodia or lamellipodia , or by any actin organization resembling their characteristic filament bundles . Pulling ac - tions of growth cones are thus apparently not requisite for nerve fiber elongation per se . Morphological peculiarities and stringent substratum requirements of neurons cultured with CB , however , suggest more subtle ways in which actin fila - ments might participate in neurite extension . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell Cultures : Dorsal root ganglia from 9 - 1 l - d - old chick embryos were trypsin - dissociated and cultured as previously described ( 13 ) in an equal mixture of Ham ' s F l2 and heart conditioned medium ( 9 ) , supplemented with 10 % calf serum ( Sterile Systems , Inc . , Logan , UT ) and l0 ng / ml nerve growth factor ( a gilt of Dr . Eric Shooter , Stanford University ) . For fluorescent staining and detergent extraction , cells were plated in Petri dishes on , respectively , glass coverslips or gold electron microscope grids overlayed with Formvar films , which had been carbon - coated and treated with polyornithine ( 13 , 15 ) . Other cells were cultured directly on either polyornithine - treated or untreated Petri and tissue culture plastic . A stock solution of CB ( Sigma Chemical Co . , St . Louis , MO ) was prepared Abbreviations used in this paper : CB , cytochalasin B . 2041 in DMSO at 1 mg / ml ; further dilutions were made with FI2 culture medium . 0 . 01 - 10 . 00 ug / ml ( final concentration ) of CB was added to experimental cultures , either initially or after 1 d in culture , with control cultures receiving equivalent doses of DMSO . Cells were cultured for 1 - - 4 d in 5 % CO2 at 37 " C . Observation of Living Cells : For observation of living cells , glass coverslips were glued over 22 - mm holes drilled in Falcon 1006 50 - ram Petri dishes ( Falcon Labware , Div . of Becton , Dickinson & Co . , Oxnard , CA ) , and cultures were prepared as above . Immediately before viewing , culture medium was replaced with a small amount of warm HEPES - buffered FI2 ( similarly supplemented with serum and nerve growth factor ) , and a second coverslip was mounted over chips of glass to create a small chamber , which was then sealed with silicone grease . The microscope stage was wanned to 37 " C by an air - stream incubator ( Nicholson Precision Instruments , Inc . , Gaithersburg , MD ) , and either neurites were photographed directly on Tech - Pan film , or neurite behavior was recorded with a model 65 SIT camera ( Dage - MTl , Inc . , Michigan City , IN ) and a Panasonic NV - 8030 time - lapse video recorder . Individual frames from videotapes were photographed from the video monitor on Pan - X film with a 35 - mm SLR camera . Addition of CB to Previously Established Cultures : We identified cells growing directly on tissue culture and petri dishes by etching the bottoms of the dishes with a diamond objective and then photographed them before addition of 10 # g / ml of CB to the culture medium . The same cells were photographed again 1 d later . Actin Immunofluorescent Staining : Cellsoncovcrslipswerefixed at 37 " C for 30 rain with 1 % glutaraldehyde in PBS , rinsed , and quenched with 0 . 5 mg / ml NaBI - L in Ca÷÷ / Mg÷÷ - free PBS for 15 min . A solution of 0 . 4 % Triton X - 100 in PBS with 10 mg / ml BSA was used to permeabilize the fixed cells for 10 rain before a 30 - min incubation with rabbit antiactin antibodies ( a gift of Dr . Judith Schoilmeyer , Roman Hruska Meat Research Center ) diluted 1 : 200 with the same solution ( 16 , 17 ) . Cells were then rinsed thoroughly and incubated another 30 min with fluorescent goat anti - rabbit antisera ( Cappel Laboratories , Inc . , Cochranville , PA ) , similarly diluted . E / C8 Immunofluorescent Staining : Cultures were stained with a reportedly neuron - specific monoclonal antibody , E / C8 ( provided by Dis . Gary Ciment and James Weston , University of Oregon ) ( 8 ) , to verify their neuronal character . After a 30 - rain fixation at 37 " C with 4 % paraformaldehyde in Ca÷÷ / Mg÷ + - free PBS , they were incubated for 60 min with 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 in Ca÷ + / Mg + + - free PBS that contained 5 mg / ml BSA , then for 45 min with E / C8 - conditioned medium diluted 1 : 50 with the permeabilizing solution , rinsed , incubated 15 min more with the same solution , and finally incubated for 30 rain with a 1 : 80 dilution of fluorescent rabbit anti - mouse antisera ( Cappel Laboratories , Inc . ) . Phase - contrast and Fluorescent Microscopy : Following fixa - tion and staining , coverslips were rinsed several times and mounted in Elvanol for examination with a Zeiss IM microscope or GFL microscope equipped for fluorescence observations with epi - illumination . Photographs were made on 35 - ram Tri - X film , using a 63x planapochromat objective . Cytoskeleton Preparation and S1 Decoration : Extraction and fixation for electron microscopy were carried out in a cytoskeleton - stabilizing " PHEM " buffer ( 23 ) consisting of 60 mM PIPES , 25 mM HEPES , l0 mM EGTA , and 2 mM MgCI2 . Cells on electron microscope grids were rinsed with the PHEM buffer and extracted for 4 min with 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 in PHEM containing 20 % glycerol and l mg / ml of the S 1 fragment of heavy meromyosin ( a gift from Dr . David Thomas , University of Minnesota ) . They were then rinsed twice more and fixed for 30 min with 0 . 2 % glutaraldehyde in PHEM . Fixed cytoskeletons were stained with 0 . 4 % tannic acid in water for 30 rain and with 2 % aqueous uranyl acetate for 30 min , and then rinsed , dehydrated through ethanol , critical . point dried , and coated with carbon . Grids were examined at 80 kV with a JEOL 100 CX electron microscope . Thin - section Electron Microscopy : For transmission electron microscopy , cells in polyornithine - treated culture dishes were fixed for 30 gain with 1 % glutaraldehyde and for l h with 1 % OsO4 , then dehydrated through ethanol and embedded in resin ( Polybed , Polysciences , Inc . , Warrington , PA ) . Blocks were then removed from the dishes , and sections that were cut parallel to the substratum were stained with 2 % aqueous uranyl acetate and lead citrate . Observation was made at 60 kV . RESULTS Morphology and Behavior Cells were consistently observed to extend long , neurite - like processes on polyornithine - treated substrata in the pres - ence of CB in concentrations of up to l0 ~ g / ml , for periods of up to 4 d in culture . ( No attempt was made to sustain 2042 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY • VOLUME 99 , 1984 FIGURE 1 Fibers ( F ) initiated by nerve cells in the presence of CB ( 5 # g / ml ) stained intensely with the neuron - specific antibody , E / C8 . Other cells , lacking such processes , were unlabeled . Note ( see also Figs . 2 - 5 ) the large number of fibers fraying from the cell body and the looping neurites . Filopodia and lamellipodia , or growth cone - like structures , are not evident , x 870 . cultures for longer periods . ) Their distinct expression ( Fig . 1 ) of the neuronal antigen , E / C8 ( 8 ) , was taken as evidence that such cells were indeed neurons . ( Work of Ciment , G . , A . H . Ressler , P . C . Letourneau , and J . A . Weston , in preparation , indicates that the antigen is a neurofilament - associated pro - tein . ) Neurites achieved lengths of several hundred microm - eters ( Fig . 2 ) , displaying elaborate loopy contortions and an excessive degree of branching , but no filopodia or lamellipo - dia . The previous demonstration ( 26 ) , on untreated plastic , of CB - induced paralysis of growing nerve fibers was verified here . That is , further growth was not apparent following the addition of CB to cultures already established on unmodified tissue culture or Petri dishes . Indeed , as noted in the earlier study , the majority of such neurites actually retracted . Like - wise , neurites were rarely produced by cells initially plated in CB - containing medium on untreated surfaces . However polyornithine - treated surfaces undoubtedly did support con - tinued neurite elongation after addition of CB ( Fig . 3 ) . Neu - rites thus subjected to cytochalasin following their initial growth in its absence tended to acquire rounded tips and looping shapes like those continuously exposed to the drug . Time - lapse films of living neurons in the presence of CB clearly demonstrated the elongation of these blunt - ended processes ( Fig . 4 ) , without any apparent tensile activity sugges - tive of growth cones . Thus , in contrast to the flailing about and substratum " sampling " which filopodia and lamellipodia typically do ( 14 ) , and the neurite stretching that commonly appears subsequent to the establishment of filopodial adhe - sions , the tips of neurites in CB gave the impression of simply extruding material . This sometimes seemed to occur in a pulsatile fashion , but with no suggestion of the cyclic pattern of protrusion and retraction typical of filopodia - and lamelli - podia - bearing growth cones ( 1 ) . Certain of the peculiar looping processes typical of these cells appeared to be thus generated by the simple deposition of material along circular paths . But curiously , others evolved not from " ends " at all , but from flattened out areas at more proximal positions along neurites . Fig . 5 illustrates a video sequence in which one such loop was generated by the appar - ent tearing of a hole in a sheet of membrane . Saltatory , bidirectional , intracellular particle movements were commonly evident all along neurites , around circular processes , and across flattened extensions . Clearly these sorts of morphological and behavioral effects of CB do not readily lend themselves to precise characteriza - FIGURE 2 Neurons cultured for 4 d in the continu - ous presence of 10 # g / ml CB generated elaborate neuritic formations several hundred micrometers long . Illustrated is the arborization of a single nerve cell ; the arrow indicates the cell body . x 230 . FIGURE 3 ( a ) A nerve cell cultured for 1 d on polyornithine - treated plastic was photographed before the addition of 10 / ~ g / ml CB . ( b ) The same cell , photographed 15 h later , has grown ~ 90 / ~ m ( from arrow ) in the presence of the CB . x 480 . tion of their dose dependency . However it was qualitatively noted that lower concentrations of CB permitted closer ap - proximations to typical growth cone structures and activities ( Fig . 6 ) . Thus , with increasing doses ofCB , neurite tips tended to appear more round and smooth , and the dramatic ruffling and probing activities of filopodial and lamellipodial protru - sions tended to give way to localized twitching and quivering along neurites and at their tips . Immunofluorescent Localization of Actin Whereas in control cells actin fluorescence was weak and diffuse along neurites and concentrated only at growth cones ( Fig . 7 , inset , and references 16 and 17 ) , neurons cultured with CB were peppered with discrete concentrations of actin along their processes ( Fig . 7 ) . This atypical actin distribution in neurons was correlated with a lack of typical stress fiber staining in fibroblast - like cells , which displayed similar blotches of actin fluorescence ( Fig . 7 ) . Actin concentrations FIGURE 4 TWO frames from a video sequence illustrate the growth of a blunt - ended nerve fiber ( arrows ) in the presence of 5 / ~ g / ml CB . Time is displayed at the upper left . The process extended 15 / ~ m over a period of 41 min , and at no time did it protrude any semblance of lamellipodia or filopodia , x 640 . were sometimes , but not consistently , observed at the tips of CB - cultured neurons , despite the absence there of filopodia . Again , the CB concentration dependence of actin distribution was subtle and continuous ; a critical concentration for anom - alous staining was not detectable . Ultrastructure As in the neurites of untreated cells and those exposed to CB subsequent to neurite extension ( 26 ) , microtubules and neurofilaments were numerous throughout the lengths of neurites generated in the presence of CB . These were evident in electron micrographs of both thin sections ( Figs . 8 and 9 ) and cytoskeletons ( Fig . 10c ) , consistent with intense immu - nofluorescent demonstrations of the purported neuroflla - ment - associated E / C8 protein ( Fig . l ) and of tubulin ( not MARSH AND [ ETOURNEAU Neurite Growth in Cgtochalasin B 2043 associated with aggregates of extraction - resistant material ( Fig . 10 , a and b ) whose distribution resembled that of the above - noted concentrations of actin fluorescence ( Figs . 7 and 10c ) . Similar aggregates were never noted in control cells . DISCUSSION it seems clear that under certain conditions , neurons in cul - ture are quite capable of elaborating neuritic processes without the participation of filopodia or lamellipodia . Furthermore , the exhibition of particulate motion and the undisputable deposition of material at their distal ends , by neurons devoid of their usual arrangements of filamentous actin , indicate that FIGURE 5 A sequence spanning 30 s illustrates the generation of a loop via the tearing of a flattened region ( arrows ) along a neurite growing in the presence of C8 ( 2 pg / ml ) . Time appears at the upper left . ( a ) Material has accumulated in a broad lamellar extension , in which ( b ) a tiny hole appears and ( c ) rapidly widens , until ( d ) only the boundary remains , x 640 . shown ) . Also , as in typical growth cones and in those blunted by CB - induced filopodia retraction ( 26 ) , bundled microtu - bules and neurofilaments terminated somewhat proximally to the neurite tip ( Fig . 9 ) . However , the microfilament lattice , which in untreated neurons dominates the growth cone mar - gin and its protrusions ( 16 , 17 ) , was absent in cells grown with CB , and in its place an indistinct granular matrix en - closed a heterogeneous collection of vesicles . This organiza - tion , too , was reminiscent of that described following treat - ment of previously extended growth cones with CB ( 26 ) . In extracted cytoskeletons , the S 1 myosin fragment failed to identify orderly networks of actin in either neurons or fibroblast - like cells cultured with high doses ( 5 t , g / ml ) of CB , although short decorated filaments were occasionally ob - served in both . In such cases , the filaments tended to be 2044 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY • VOLUME 99 , 1984 FIGURE 6 Neurite tips displayed increasingly unusual morpholo - gies in the presence of increasing doses of CB . ( a ) Cells in 0 . 01 / Lg / ml C8 had quite typical growth cones , bearing lamellipodia and filopodia ( arrows ) which demonstrated vigorous ruffling and protru - sion / retraction activities in video recordings . ( b ) Cells cultured with 0 . 10 / ~ g / ml CB retained filopodia - like structures ( arrows ) , but ap - peared " shriveled " and lacking in veil - like lamellipodia . Ruffling activity was less dramatic in time - lapse recordings . ( c ) Cells cultured with 0 . 30 pg / ml CB showed little semblance of filopodia , and only flacid flattened areas spreading out along neurites and at termini . Activity was evident only at the ends of processes , and resembled pulsatile " twitching . " ( d ) At CB concentrations of up to 10 / ~ g / ml , neurons generated long , blunt - ended fibers , with quivering at neu - rite tips . x 870 . FIGURE 7 Control neurons ( inset ) exhibited weak and diffuse actin staining along fibers , with more intense labeling at their growth cones ( GC ) . Neurons cultured with CB ( 5 p . g / ml ) displayed flecks of actin fluorescence ( arrows ) along their processes and throughout flattened regions . Actin concentrations were sometimes , but not always , apparent at the ends of neurites . Fibroblast - like cells ( F ) in the CB - containing cultures also displayed blotchy concentrations of actin , as opposed to typical stress fiber formations , x 870 . FIGURE 8 Neuronal processes generated in the presence of CB were ultrastructurally similar to typical neurites . Neurofilaments ( NF ) and microtubules ( MT ) were evident throughout their lengths , x 55 , 500 . insertion of nascent membrane or protrusion of cytoskeletal branches . For example , subjective impressions prompted by behaviors such as those illustrated in Fig . 5 are that the membranes of neurons cultured with CB may be unusually fluid and fragile , and that their excessive branching may reflect a lack of intramembrane tensions , as opposed to transmem - brane pulling forces . The significance of the apparent actin aggregates in the CB - cultured cells is unclear . Similar aggregates appear after treat - ment of previously spread fibroblasts with cytochalasins ( 11 , 22 , 25 ) , and CB induces a condensation of the actin lattice in previously extended neurites ( 26 ) . In such cases , the actin accumulations are commonly supposed to represent the foci of a hypercontraction of formerly extended actin networks , which occurs within minutes of exposure to the drug . It is thus particularly curious that a similar distribution is estab - lished by cells grown in the continuous presence of CB . The mechanisms of cytochalasin action and of actin assem - bly in cells are not well characterized , but there is considerable evidence that cytochalasin interacts directly with actin fila - at least certain components of the neuronal transport mech - anism are not dependent upon a CB - sensitive actin assembly . Nonetheless , the grossly atypical configurations assumed by these filament - deficient neurites do suggest some manner of participation by actin filaments in the regulation of cell shape , and their requirement for a highly adhesive substratum would seem to confirm that cell surface and cytoskeletal organiza - tions are intimately interrelated . Certain non - neuronal cells cultured with CB assume ar - bored , neuron - like morphologies in a manner said to depend upon the integrity of microtubules ( 2 , 24 ) and possibly inter - mediate filaments ( 21 ) . The capacity for extending cylindrical processes , then , is clearly not uniquely intrinsic to neurons nor does it require growth cone - like specializations . Rather , it may simply reflect cytoskeletal activities of growing , adher - ant cells which are subject to moderation by actin - mediated tendencies for spreading and flattening . However arborization in the presence of CB is not the rule among non - neuronal cells ; it was rarely exhibited by the non - neuronal cells in these primary cultures . Where reported in fibroblasts ( 21 ) , CB - initiated processes are distinct from neu - rites in their dense and orderly arrays of intermediate fila - ments and their sparcity of microtubules . Other reports ( 2 , 24 ) , involving cell lines , do not offer ultrastructural data , but suggest , on pharmacological grounds , that process extension requires microtubules . It is thus unnecessary to presume that a common mechanism of process extension exists among non - neurons or that fibroblastic arbors share any features with neurites other than their cylindrical shapes and their lack of actin networks . Certainly neurites , with or without growth cones , are at least set apart from the CB - induced processes of other cells by the overwhelmingly greater lengths they attain . The unusually profuse elaboration of neuritic fibers by neurons cultured with CB would perhaps be consistent with the notion that actin - mediated tensions play some restrictive role in neurite formation . One could imagine , for example , that actin arrays might regulate cytoplasmic turgor or mem - brane integrity in ways that can modulate the transport and FIGURE 9 The tips of neurites produced in the continuous pres - ence of CB resembled growth cones pictured by others ( 26 ) sub - sequent to CB - induced retraction of their filopodia . Microtubules ( MT ) and neurofilaments ( NF ) terminate in the proximal region , and numerous vesicles populate the terminal area , where an indistinct granular matrix ( G ) replaces the microfilament lattice typical of untreated growth cones , x 27 , 000 . MARSH AND LETOURNEAU Neurite Growth in Cytochalasin B 2045 F , GURE 10 ( a ) The $ 1 decoration of a neurite generated in the presence of 5 / ~ g / ml CB reveals sparse , short actin filaments ( arrows ) associated with clumps of detergent - resistant material along the extracted nerve fiber . ( b ) In the cytoskeleton of a fibroblast - like cell from a CB - containing culture , numerous short Sl - labeled filaments radiate from a detergent - resistant aggregate . ( c ) The extracted terminal segment of a neuronal process generated in the presence of CB ( 5 ~ . g / ml ) displays a periodic distribution of extraction - resistant aggregates such as in a , which may correspond to the fluorescent actin peppering noted in Fig . 7 . Microtubules and neurofilaments extend between the aggregates and frequently fray out along the sides of the neurite . ( a } x 74 , 750 ; ( b ) x 41 , 500 ; { c ) x 6 , 600 . ments ( 5 - 7 , 10 , 12 , 18 - 20 ) , and at least in vitro , inhibits further monomer addition at the " preferred " end for polym - erization ( 5 , 6 , 10 , 18 , 19 ) . Polymerization at the " less pre - ferred " end , however , is thought not to be cytochalasin sen - sitive ( 5 , 19 ) . Perhaps , then , the actin aggregates along neurites that grow in the presence of CB represent nuclei for some aborted filament assembly process - - whether they be newly established or the transported remnants of a formerly ex - panded network . The question , of course , remains , for what are filopodia and lamellipodia used , if not for pulling out growing fibers ? The failure of growth cone - deficient neurites to grow on less than optimally adhesive substrata certainly suggests some anchoring function for these structures . Additionally , their lack of substratum sampling and selecting behaviors , and their tortuous shapes , suggest that sensing and steering func - tions of filopodia and lamellipodia may be necessar3 ' for properly orienting neurites as they grow . Furthermore , the three - dimensional protrusion of filopodia and lamellipodia , not restricted to the cell ' s substratum , may enable a growth cone to cross physical or chemical boundaries , and thus reach areas otherwise inaccessible to a cell limited to flowing along a continuously adhesive surface . Thus , while filopodial and lamellipodial activities may typically select adhesive contacts and determine paths along which nerve fibers are assembled , the undaunted growth of neurites without filopodia or lamel - lipodia clearly indicates that tensions generated by these pro - jections are not necessary for eliciting neurite assembly . Alice Ressler provided technical assistance with the electron micros - copy . This work was supported by grants from the Muscular Dystrophy Association , grant number PCM - 8203855 from the National Science Foundation , and grant HD 17192 - 01 from the National Institute of Health . Received for publication 18 November 1983 , and in revised form 27 July 1984 . 2046 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY • VOLUME 99 , 1984 REFERENCES 1 . Argiro , V . , M . B . Bunge , and M . I . Johnson . 1983 . Predominance of filopodia or laraellipodia is correlated with rate of growth cone translocation . J . Cell Biol . 97 ( 5 , Pt . 2 ) : 248a . ( Abstr . ) 2 . Bliokh , Z . L . , L . V . Domnina , O . Y . Ivanova , O . W . Pletjushkina , T . M . Svitkina , V . A . Smolyaninov , J . M . Vasiliev , and L M . Gelfand . 1980 . Spreading of fibroblasts in medium containing cytochalasin B : formation of lamellar cytoplasm as a combination of several functionally different processes . Proc . Natl . Acad . ScL USA . 77 : 5919 - 5922 . 3 . Bray , D . 1979 . Mechanical tension produced by nerve cells in tissue culture . J . Cell SoL 37 : 3914 - 410 . 4 . Bray , D . 1982 . Filopodial contraction and growth cone guidance . In Cell Behaviour . R . Bellairs , A . Curtis , and G . Dunn , editors . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . 299 - 317 . 5 . Brenner , S . L . , and E . D . Korn . 1980 . The effects of c ' / tochalasins on actin polymeri - zation and actin ATPaso provide insights into the mechanism of polymerization . J . Biol . Chem . 255 : 841 - 844 . 6 . Brown , S . S . , and J . A . Spudich . 1979 . Cytochalasin inhibits the rate of elongation of actin filament fragments . J . Cell Biol . 83 : 657 - 662 . 7 . Brown , S . S . , and J . A Spudich . 1981 . Mechanism of action of cytochalasin : evidence that it binds to actin filament ends . J . Cell Biol . 88 : 487 - 491 . 8 . Ciment , G . , and J . A . Weston . 1982 . Early appearance in neural crest and crest - derived cells of an antigenic determinant present in avian neurons . Dev . Biol . 93 : 355 - 367 . 9 . Collins , F . 1978 , Axon initiation by ciliary neurons in culture . Dev . Biol . 65 : 50 - 57 . 10 . Ranagan , M . D . , and S . Lin . 1980 . Cytochalasins block actin filament elongation by binding to high affinity sites associated with F - actin . J . Biol . Chem . 255 : 835 - 838 . 11 . Goodman , G . , B . Woda , and R . Kolberg . 1980 . Redistribution of contractile and cytockeletal components induced by cytochalasin . I . In Hmf cells , a non - transformed fibrohlastoid line . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 22 : 733 - 744 . 12 . Hartwig , J . H . , and T . P . Stossel . 1979 . Cytochalasin B and the structure of actin gels . , I . MoL Biol . 134 : 539 - 553 . 13 . Letourneau , P . C . 1975 . Possible roles for cell substratum adhesion in neuronal mor - phogenesis . Dev . Biol . 44 : 77 - 91 . 14 . Letourneau , P . C . 1975 . Cell - to - substratum adhesion and guidance ofaxonal elongation . Dev . Biol . 44 : 92 - 101 . 15 . Letourneau , P . C . 1979 . Cell - substratum adhesion of neurite growth cones , and its role in neurite elongation . Exp . Cell Res . 124 : 127 - 138 . 16 . Letourneau , P . C . 1981 . Immunocytochemical evidence for co - localization in nerve growth cones of actin and myosin and their relationship to cell - substratum adhesions . Dev . Biol . 85 : 113 - 122 . 17 . Letourueau , P . C . , and A . H . Ressler . 1983 . Differences in the organization of actin in the growth cones compared with the neurites of cultured neurons from chick embryos . J . Cell Biol . 97 : 963 - 973 . 18 . Lin , D . C . , K . D . Tobin , M . Grummet , and S . Lin . 1980 . Cytochalasins inhibit nuclei - induced actin polymerization by blocking filament elongation . J . Cell Biol . 84 : 455466 . 19 . MacLean - Fletcher , S . , and T . D . Pollard . 1980 . Mechanism of action of cytochalasin B on actin . Cell . 20 : 329 - 341 . 20 . Maruyama , K . , J . H . Hartwig and T . P . StosseL 1980 . Cytochaiasin B and the structure of actin gels . II . Further evidence for the splitting of F - actin by cytochalasin B . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 626 : 494 - 500 . 21 . Menko , A . S . , Y . Toyama , D . Boettiger , and H . Holtzer . 1983 . Altered cell spreading in cytochalasin B : a possible role for intermediate filaments . MoL Cell . Biol . 3 : 113 - 125 . 22 . Schliwa , M . 1982 . Action of cytochalasin D on cytoskeletal networks . J . Cell Biol . 92 : 79 - 91 . 23 . Schliwa , M . , and L van Blerkom . 1981 . Structural interaction of cytoskeletal compo - nents . J . Cell Biol . 90 : 222 - 235 . 24 . Vasiliev , J . M . 1982 . Pseudopodial attachment reactions . In Cell Behaviour . R . Bellairs , A . Curtis , and G . Dunn , editors . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . 135 - 158 . 25 . Weber , K . , P . C . Rathke , M . Osborn , and W . W . Franke . 1976 . Distribution of actin and tubulin in cells and in glycerinated cell models after treatment with cytochalasin B ( CB ) . Exp . Cell Res . 102 : 285 - 297 . 26 . Yamada , K . M . , B , S . Spooner , and N . K . Wessells . 1971 . Ultrastructure and function of growth cones and axons of cultured nerve cells . J . Cell Biol . 49 : 614 - 635 . MARSH AND LEI " OURNEAU Neurite Growth in Cytochalasin B 2047