©2016 THE BIOPHYSICAL SOCIETY OF JAPAN Biophysics and Physicobiology https : / / www . jstage . jst . go . jp / browse / biophysico / Regular Article ◄ Significance ► Vol . 13 , pp . 321 – 331 ( 2016 ) doi : 10 . 2142 / biophysico . 13 . 0 _ 321 Actin binding domain of filamin distinguishes posterior from anterior actin filaments in migrating Dictyostelium cells Keitaro Shibata 1 , 4 , Akira Nagasaki 1 , Hiroyuki Adachi 2 and Taro Q . P . Uyeda 1 , 3 1 Biomedical Research Institute , National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology , Tsukuba , Ibaraki 305 - 8562 , Japan 2 Department of Biotechnology , University of Tokyo , Bunkyo - Ku , Tokyo 113 - 8657 , Japan 3 Department of Physics , Faculty of Science and Engineering , Waseda University , Shinjuku , Tokyo 169 - 8555 , Japan 4 Present address : Department of Biology , University of Padova , Padova 35121 , Italy Received August 25 , 2016 ; accepted November 28 , 2016 Corresponding author : Taro Q . P . Uyeda , Department of Physics , Faculty of Science and Engineering , Waseda University , 3 - 4 - 1 Okubo , Shinjuku , Tokyo 169 - 8555 , Japan . e - mail : t - uyeda @ waseda . jp Actin filaments in different parts of a cell interact with specific actin binding proteins ( ABPs ) and perform dif - ferent functions in a spatially regulated manner . However , the mechanisms of those spatially - defined interactions have not been fully elucidated . If the structures of actin filaments differ in different parts of a cell , as suggested by previous in vitro structural studies , ABPs may distin - guish these structural differences and interact with spe - cific actin filaments in the cell . To test this hypothesis , we followed the translocation of the actin binding domain of filamin ( ABD FLN ) fused with photoswitchable fluorescent protein ( mKikGR ) in polarized Dictyostelium cells . When ABD FLN - mKikGR was photoswitched in the middle of a polarized cell , photoswitched ABD FLN - mKikGR rapidly translocated to the rear of the cell , even though actin fila ments were abundant in the front . The speed of trans - location ( > 3 µm / s ) was much faster than that of the retro - grade flow of cortical actin filaments . Rapid transloca - tion of ABD FLN - mKikGR to the rear occurred normally in cells lacking GAPA , the only protein , other than actin , known to bind ABD FLN . We suggest that ABD FLN recog - nizes a certain feature of actin filaments in the rear of the cell and selectively binds to them , contributing to the posterior localization of filamin . Key words : photoswitchable fluorescent protein ( mKikGR ) , structural polymorphism Actin is a ubiquitous cytoskeletal protein that plays impor - tant roles in various cellular activities such as cell migration , cell division and intracellular transport in eukaryotic cells [ 1 – 4 ] . Each of the multiple functions of actin is dependent on interactions with specific actin binding proteins ( ABPs ) . Interaction with the Arp2 / 3 complex , for example , produces a dendric meshwork of actin filaments in sheet - like pseu - dopods called lamellipods at the front of migrating cells , and polymerization of actin filaments in this dendric meshwork extends the lamellipods forward . The length of lamellipods is controlled by cofilin , which severs and depolymerizes actin filaments at the back of lamellipods . Additionally , actin filaments form a cortical network underlying the cell mem - brane , and interact with focal adhesions through linker pro - teins . Myosin II filaments produce a contractile force at the rear of the cell by pulling the network of actin filaments [ 5 , 6 ] . An advance of the leading lamellipods and contraction It is not well understood how different actin filaments interact with different actin binding proteins ( ABPs ) in a spatially regulated manner . Here , we demonstrate that the actin binding domain of filamin ( ABD FLN ) in the middle of elongated , polarized Dictyostelium cells rapidly and specifically binds to posterior actin filaments . The speed of translocation was much faster than the retrograde flow of actin cortex , suggesting that ABD FLN dif - fusing in the cytoplasm was captured by posterior actin filaments . We suggest that this specific interaction depends on structural polymorphism of actin filaments , and a similar mechanism may contribute to intracellular localization of other ABPs . 322 Biophysics and Physicobiology Vol . 13 sin motor domain [ 39 ] . Thus , the structure of actin protomers in filaments is potentially an important factor for selective binding of ABPs . Here , we hypothesized that ABD FLN accumulates in the rear of polarized cells by recognizing a certain structural feature of specific actin filaments in the rear of cells . To test this hypothesis , we followed the translocation of ABD FLN using a photoswitchable fluorescent protein , monomeric kikume green - red ( mKikGR ) , in polarized Dictyostelium cells [ 40 ] . Use of ABD , pioneered by Washington and Knecht [ 19 ] , eliminates the possible contribution of dimeric filamin molecules by recognizing the orthogonal arrangement of actin filaments [ 2 , 15 , 16 , 21 ] , and may reduce the contribu - tion of biochemical regulation in actin binding because Dictyo stelium ABD FLN is not known to be influenced by phosphorylation or by other biochemical regulations . Photo - switching of mKikGR from green to red fluorescence by local irradiation with purple light allows observation of translocation of ABD FLN from the irradiated area to other places . We found that the majority of red ABD FLN - mKikGR molecules generated in the middle of an elongated cell trans - located to the cell rear at a much faster speed than the retro - grade flow of cortical actin filaments , even though actin fila ments were equally or more abundant in the front of cells . The result suggests that ABD FLN recognizes a certain feature of actin filaments in the cell rear , and selectively binds to those filaments . Materials and Methods Construction of plasmids pTX / ABD - fluorescent protein : Coding sequences of ABDs of filamin and α - actinin of Dictyostelium discoideum were subcloned into a modified pTX - GFP vector [ 41 ] , from which sequences coding 8xHis , GFP and myc had been removed . Then , the coding sequence of GFP ( from pTX - GFP ) or mKikGR ( from CoralHue ® phmKikGR1 - MCLinker , Molecular and Biological Laboratories ) preceded by a linker ( GSGGGGS ) was inserted downstream of the ABD sequence of pTX / ABD . pDdBsr / mCherry - lifeact : Lifeact [ 42 ] fused to the C - terminus of mCherry , was subcloned in pDdBsr [ 5 ] , and expressed under the control of the actin15 promoter . pBIG GFP - GAPA : The coding sequence of Dictyostelium gapA was inserted downstream of GFP in pBIG GFP [ 43 ] . Cell culture and expression of ABD - fluorescent protein Wild - type D . discoideum AX2 cells and GAPA null cells [ 44 ] were cultured in HL5 medium supplemented with penicillin and streptomycin [ 45 ] , and transfected by electro - poration with the pTX / ABD - fluorescent protein , pDdBsr / mCherry - Lifeact and / or pBIG GFP - GAPA as described pre - viously [ 46 ] . Transfectants were selected by 20 µg / mL G418 and / or 6 µg / mL blasticidin S in HL - 5 medium at 22°C . of the rear cooperatively drives movement of an amoeboid cell . Thus , actin filaments interact with various ABPs and perform different functions in a spatially regulated manner in a cell . It is generally believed that the spatially - defined interactions between actin filaments and ABPs are controlled by local biochemical regulation of each ABP , but there are a number of cases in which such simple biochemical explana - tions are unknown or insufficient . Notably , the cortical actin network continuously moves toward the rear of a polarized cell during cell migration , in part driven by contraction of actin and myosin in the rear [ 7 – 10 ] . Recent measurements in the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum demonstrated that the speed of this rearward cortical flow , or retrograde flow , is similar to that of the forward movement of polarized cells [ 6 ] , such that the cortical actin meshwork is stationary relative to the substrate during movement . Nonetheless , there is a rapid turnover of cortical actin filaments within seconds , and it is not that the same group of actin filaments remain stationary to the substrate [ 6 ] . Dictyostelium filamin , an orthologue of human filamin , is a dimeric ABP with actin cross - linking activity . The mesh - work of actin filaments cross - linked by filamin is important for cell migration , chemotaxis and mechanosensing [ 11 – 14 ] . Each filamin polypeptide has an actin binding domain ( ABD ) consisting of two calponin homology ( CH ) domains at the N - terminus , a rod domain , and a dimerization domain at the C - terminus [ 15 , 16 ] . ABD FLN interacts with actin filaments with high affinity allowing ABD FLN to be fused with green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) to visualize actin filaments in vivo [ 6 , 17 , 18 ] . In polarized cells , filamin is localized in the poste - rior region [ 14 , 19 , 20 ] . Moreover , filamin tends to localize at stretched actin filaments in vivo [ 13 ] . It is possible that this property contributes to the control of force transmission and rigidity sensing by filamin [ 11 , 12 , 21 ] . However , it is not known how filamin distinguishes and interacts with specific actin filaments in a cell . Each actin protomer in a filament assumes one of the mul - tiple structures depending on its nucleotide state , applied mechanical stress and / or interactions with ABP [ 22 – 32 ] . Binding of cofilin induces a cooperative structural change of actin protomers in filaments that involves supertwisting of the helix . This cooperative structural change enhances the affinity of affected actin protomers for cofilin , resulting in cooperative binding of cofilin [ 26 , 28 , 30 ] . Conversely , stretch - ing actin filaments inhibits their interaction with cofilin but enhances their interaction with myosin II [ 5 , 28 , 33 , 34 ] . Additionally , there is some evidence that certain ABPs , including cortexilin [ 35 , 36 ] , fimbrin [ 24 , 37 ] , and drebrin [ 29 , 38 ] , selectively interact with actin filaments of a specific structure . Along this line , we recently showed that binding of the motor domain of myosin II in the presence of ATP induces a conformational change in actin filaments to reduce the affinity for cofilin , while the supertwisted actin filaments induced by cofilin binding has a lower affinity for the myo - Shibata et al . : Filamin ABD binds specific actin filaments 323 with 405 nm light ( Supplementary Fig . S1 ) . This coefficient and the fluorescence intensity in the green channel at each pixel were used to estimate fluorescence intensity in the red channel that derived from ABD - mKikGR that was not photo switched by irradiation . This value was subtracted from the fluorescence intensity in the red channel at that pixel . Observation of fixed cells Polarized cells prepared as above were permeabilized and fixed by changing the K + - Na + - phosphate buffer ( pH 6 . 4 ) to PF buffer ( 10 mM Pipes - KOH pH 6 . 8 , 3 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM EGTA , 1 mM DTT , 0 . 05 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 1 % glutaralde - hyde , 1 % formaldehyde ) and incubated for 5 min at 22°C , followed by incubation in 10 mM Tris - HCl pH 7 . 0 , 3 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM EGTA , and 1 mM DTT for 5 min . Then , they were stained for 1 h in PBS containing 3 nM rhodamine - phal - loidin ( Invitrogen ) , rinsed in PBS containing 10 mM DTT , and observed with an LSM 700 microscope . Results Localization of ABD - GFP Localization of ABD FLN fused with GFP at the C terminus ( ABD FLN - GFP ) via a Gly - based linker ( GSGGGGS ) was observed in polarized Dictyostelium cells with a confocal fluorescence microscope ( Fig . 1A and Supplementary Fig . S2 ) . Actin filaments were visualized by expression of life - act [ 42 ] fused with mCherry at the N terminus ( mCherry - lifeact ) . To compare the localization of ABD FLN with that of actin filaments more quantitatively , the fluorescence intensi - ties of the images of Figure 1A were measured along the cell cortex ( Fig . 1B ) . Although ABD FLN - GFP colocalized with actin filaments , it localized more intensely in the rear of the cell ( Fig . 1B : at ~ 0 µm ) than in the front ( Fig . 1B : at ~ – 20 and ~ 20 µm ) . This is indicated by the magenta color of the cell front in the merged image ( Fig . 1A ) , as well as by the ratio of GFP fluorescence intensity to that of mCherry ( Fig . 1E : purple line , and Supplementary Fig . S3A ) , and is consis - tent with the previous study by Washington and Knecht [ 19 ] . Next , the localization of α - actinin ABD ( ABD ACTN ) was observed ( Fig . 1 , C and D and Supplementary Fig . S2 ) to compare with the localization of ABD FLN - GFP , because ABD ACTN consists of two CH domains and is homologous to ABD FLN . A previous report showed that accumulation of GFP - ABD ACTN in actin - rich structures is weaker than that of GFP - ABD FLN , and discernable localization in actin - rich structures was observed only when the ABD ACTN is in oligo - mers such as dimers and tetramers [ 20 ] . In this study , mono - meric ABD ACTN - GFP showed almost the same distribution as actin filaments along the cortex ( Fig . 1 , C and D and orange line in E ) , although the localization signal along the cortex was not very strong relative to that of cytosol ( Supplemen - tary Fig . S3 , D and H ) . GFP alone was only diffusely distrib - uted in the cytoplasm ( Fig . 1F ) . These results suggest that ABD FLN shows strong preference for rear actin filaments , but Live cell imaging and photoswiching of mKikGR under a confocal microscope Cells expressing ABD - fluorescent proteins and / or mCherry - Lifeact were settled on glass - bottomed dishes ( Matsunami , 35 mm dish , hole size : 27 mm , uncoated ) . To obtain polar - ized cells , the cells were then starved in 10 mM K + - Na + - phosphate buffer ( pH 6 . 4 ) until chemotaxis started ( ~ 11 – 12 h at 22°C or ~ 14 – 16 h at 11°C ) . To obtain images of flattened cells , the polarized cells were overlaid with a thin agarose sheet , as described previously [ 47 ] . The flattened and polarized cells were observed with a confocal micro - scope ( Zeiss , LSM700 ) equipped with a 100x objective lens ( Zeiss , Plan - Neofluar 100x / 1 . 30 Oil Iris ) . LED lasers ( 488 nm : 10 mW , 555 nm : 10 mW ) were used for scanning the cells , and images were acquired with ZEN imaging soft - ware ( Zeiss ) . The duration for a single frame acquisition was 4 ~ 5 s , depending on the size of scanned area . The pinhole size was 1 AU ( airy unit ) ( 1 AU = 74 . 20 µm for the 488 nm laser , 79 . 74 µm for the 555 nm laser ) . To prevent photo - bleaching and affecting cell motility , the excitation laser power was set at minimum value ( 0 . 5 % ) . Cells expressing both ABD - GFP and mCherry - Lifeact were irradiated with the 488 nm and 555 nm laser light simultaneously , and those expressing ABD - mKikGR were sequentially irradiated with the 488 nm and 555 nm laser light . The resultant green fluorescence from GFP or mKikGR and red fluorescence from mCherry or mKikGR were sepa - rated by a variable secondary dichroic beam splitter ( Carl Zeiss ) and emission filters , and also a differential inter - ference contrast ( DIC ) image was simultaneously acquired with each frame . For photoswitching of mKikGR , square areas were scanned four times repeatedly by 405 nm LED laser light ( 5 mW , 100 % laser power ) . Fluorescence intensi - ties along the cell cortex were analyzed with ZEN and ZEN lite imaging software ( Zeiss ) , as follows . For each cell image , a 1 µm wide band was drawn manually along the cell periphery in the DIC image , such that the cell periphery ran along the center of the band . This band is shown as a thick white line in each cell image . Then the intensities of red and green fluorescence were measured along the length of the band . Each cell type in this report was analyzed in 4 – 5 inde - pendent experiments , and more than 3 cells were observed in each experiment . Rapidly migrating and well - separated polarized cells were selected for observation . Correction of red fluorescence intensity of ABD - mKikGR There was weak but non - negligible fluorescence in the red channel from ABD FLN - mKikGR - expressing cells not irradiated with 405 nm laser light . It was thus necessary to subtract this red fluorescence from the image of irradiated cells , in order to extract red fluorescence intensity that was derived from photoswitching by irradiation . For this pur - pose , a correction coefficient was obtained for each cell from a plotted graph of the green and red fluorescence intensities at the same points along the cell cortex before irradiation 324 Biophysics and Physicobiology Vol . 13 due to ambient light or by spontaneous conversion . To locally photoswitch ABD FLN - mKikGR in a polarized cell , the area bound by the yellow square in Figure 2A and B was scanned by 405 nm laser light for ~ 0 . 4 s . The red fluo - rescent ABD FLN - mKikGR generated near the center of the polarized cell spread in the area slightly posterior to the irra - diated area and more intensely at the rear of the cell ( Fig . 2 , A and B ) . Fluorescence intensity along the cell cortex was measured to reveal the movement of ABD FLN during this process ( Fig . 2 , C and D ) . In addition , the intensity profile of the observed red fluorescence of ABD FLN - mKikGR was corrected by subtracting the red fluorescence that was unre - lated to irradiation with 405 nm light ( see Materials and Methods ) . Since neighboring cells in the same microscopic field not irradiated with the 405 nm laser light did not show an increase in red fluorescence , the 488 or 555 nm laser light did not contribute to the generation of red fluorescent ABD FLN - mKikGR ( Supplementary Fig . S5 ) . Therefore , this procedure extracted the red fluorescence of ABD FLN - mKikGR generated by 405 nm laser light irradiation in the boxed area ( Fig . 2D ) . Accumulation of red fluorescent ABD FLN - mKikGR in the this is not a general property of ABDs consisting of two CH domains . Localization of ABD FLN - mKikGR To investigate the mechanism by which ABD FLN localizes at the rear of a cell , we next followed the translocation of ABD FLN real time by observing ABD FLN - mKikGR in polar - ized cells with a confocal microscope ( Fig . 2 , A and B and Supplementary Fig . S4 ) . A pair of green and red fluores - cence images was obtained by scanning with 488 nm laser light followed by 555 nm laser light . The green fluorescent ABD FLN - mKikGR , which is the native state of this fluores - cent protein in the absence of photoswitching by irradiation with 405 nm light , showed stronger accumulation in the rear of a cell than ABD FLN - GFP ( Fig . 2A ; at – 4 . 9 s ) . Additionally , weak red fluorescence was also detected in the rear even without photoswitching ( Fig . 2B ; at – 4 . 9 s ) . This is presum - ably due to very strong accumulation of ABD FLN - mKikGR in the cell rear . Red fluorescence might derive from native mKikGR that is weakly excited by 555 nm light and bled through the red emission filter . Alternatively , a small , back - ground fraction of mKikGR was in the red fluorescent state Figure 1 Localization of actin filaments and ABDs fused with GFP . ( A ) Fluorescence micrographs of a polarized cell expressing ABD FLN - GFP ( top ) , mCherry - lifeact ( middle ) and the merged image ( bottom ) . ( B ) Intensity profile of each fluorescence along the cortex , measured along the white line in the direction of the arrow in the merged image ( inset , the same cell as in A ) with the 0 µm set at the rear end . Green and magenta lines show the intensity of ABD FLN - GFP and mCherry - lifeact , respectively . ( C ) Fluorescence micrographs of a polarized cell expressing ABD ACTN - GFP ( top ) , mCherry - lifeact ( middle ) and the merged image ( bottom ) . ( D ) Intensity profile of each fluorescence along the cell cortex , measured along the white line in the direction of the arrow in the merged image ( inset , the same cell as in C ) with the 0 µm set at the rear end . Green and magenta lines show the intensity of ABD ACTN - GFP and mCherry - lifeact , respectively . ( E ) Ratio of the fluorescence intensity of ABD - GFP to that of mCherry - lifeact along the white lines in the merged images . The purple line shows ABD FLN - GFP : mCherry - lifeact , and the orange line shows ABD ACTN - GFP : mCherry - lifeact . The intensity ratios at the rear end of the cells are set at 1 . ( F ) Fluorescence micrographs of polarized cells expressing GFP ( left ) , mCherry - lifeact ( middle ) and the merged image ( right ) . Cells of ( A ) and ( C ) migrated toward the right of the images and cells of ( F ) migrated downward . Scale bars : 10 µm . Additional representative cells of each condition are shown in Supplementary Figure S2 . Shibata et al . : Filamin ABD binds specific actin filaments 325 ABD FLN - mKikGR mainly moved by diffusion , and specifi - cally interacted with and was trapped by actin filaments in the rear of the cell . In addition , there were two minor peaks of red fluores - cence along both sides of the cell near the irradiation site ( white arrowhead at – 13 . 5 µm and black arrowhead at 10 . 5 µm from the rear end at 0 . 9 s after irradiation ) . The cell cortex around – 13 . 5 µm was close to the irradiated area , but was not directly irradiated . Presumably cortical actin fila - ments in this area trapped a small fraction of red ABD FLN - mKikGR generated close by . These minor peaks in polar - ized cells moved back to the rear relative to the cells at 0 . 30±0 . 19 µm / s ( mean±S . D . , n = 7 ) . These velocities are at the same level as the migration velocity of the cells ( 0 . 18±0 . 11 µm / s : measured at the rear end of four cells ) , and equivalent to the retrograde flow estimated in a previous rear of the cell was evident in the first image , which was scanned between 0 . 9 and 5 . 5 s after the irradiation . More specifically , the red fluorescence image of the rear end of this cell was scanned at 3 . 9 s after the start of the irradiation . The irradiated site was ~ 12 µm away from the rear end of the cell , implying that the red fluorescent ABD FLN - mKikGR moved at a velocity faster than 3 . 1 µm / s . This velocity is ~ 9 times faster than the retrograde flow of cortical actin fila - ments in polarized Dictyostelium cells reported previously ( 0 . 34±0 . 15 µm / s ) [ 6 ] . Ruchira et al . ( 2004 ) demonstrated that a diffusion coefficient ( D ) of GFP in a polarized Dictyo stelium cell was 32±6 µm 2 / s [ 48 ] . Diffusion time ( T dif ) , calculated by an equation ( T dif ≈ x 2 / 2D ) was 2 . 3 s for 12 µm of diffusion distance x . This value is slightly shorter the interval between the irradiation and the acquisition of the first image ( 3 . 9 s ) , suggesting that the red fluorescent Figure 2 Translocation of ABD FLN - mKikGR . Time lapse images of a polarized cell expressing ABD FLN - mKikGR and migrating toward the right ( A , B and C ) . ( A ) and ( B ) show the green and red fluorescence images of mKikGR , respectively , and ( C ) shows the merged images . The region bound by the yellow square was irradiated by 405 nm laser light for 0 . 38 s immediately after taking the pre - irradiation image ( – 4 . 9 s ) . Scanning for subsequent images were started at 0 . 9 , 5 . 5 , 10 . 1 , and 14 . 7 s after starting the 405 nm laser irradiation , which was set as time = 0 . Scale bar : 10 µm . ( D ) Profiles of fluorescence intensity along the cell cortex shown by the white arrows in ( C ) , with the 0 µm set at the rear end . The green and magenta lines show fluorescence intensities of ABD FLN - mKikGR in the green and red channels , respectively . The cyan lines show red fluorescence intensities of ABD FLN - mKikGR after subtracting the fluorescence intensities in the red channel that were unrelated to stimulated photoswitching . The purple vertical bar in the – 4 . 9 s graph shows the irradiated region on the cell cortex . The white and black arrowheads show two minor peaks along both cell sides near the irradiation site . Two additional cells analyzed in a similar way are shown in Supplementary Figure S4 . 326 Biophysics and Physicobiology Vol . 13 polarized cells expressing ABD FLN - mKikGR were fixed with glutaraldehyde and formaldehyde , and their actin filaments were stained with rhodamine - phalloidin ( Fig . 4B ) . The stain - ing patterns were largely consistent with live - cell imaging of ABD FLN - mKikGR and mCherry - lifeact , except that cyto - plasmic staining with rhodamine - phalloidin was very weak . Localization of actin filaments in cells expressing ABD ACTN - mKikGR was also observed using the same two methods ( Fig . 4 , C and D ) . The localization of actin filaments was similar to that in cells expressing ABD FLN - mKikGR or in cells expressing ABD FLN - GFP or ABD ACTN - GFP . These results suggest that the expression of ABD - mKikGR does not noticeably influence the localization of actin filaments , and it was clear that ABD FLN preferentially localizes at the rear of polarized cells even though actin filaments are abun - dant , not only in the rear of cells , but also in lamellipodia at the front of cells . GAPA hardly influences the localization of ABD FLN Although ABD FLN is a relatively small domain ( 240 amino acids ) with a high affinity for actin filaments , some other protein that is localized at the rear of polarized cells may also bind to ABD FLN and mediate its posterior localization . GAPA , an IQGAP - related protein of D . discoideum , is the only other protein that has been shown or suggested to bind to ABD FLN [ 49 ] . We thus observed the localization of GFP - GAPA in polarized wild type cells , and that of ABD FLN in polarized GAPA - null cells ( Fig . 5 and Supplementary Fig . S7 ) . GFP - GAPA localized at the lamellipodia and weakly along the cortex in polarized cells , and posterior enrichment of GFP - GAPA was rarely observed ( Fig . 5 , A and B ) . More - over , ABD FLN - mKikGR localized at the rear of polarized GAPA - null cells . When ABD FLN - mKikGR in the middle of a polarized GAPA - null cell was photoswitched by irradiation with the 405 nm laser , red fluorescent ABD FLN - mKikGR was rapidly and specifically localized at the rear of the cell ( Fig . 5 , C – F ) , as occurred in wild type cells ( Fig . 2 ) . These results demonstrate that GAPA hardly influences the localization of ABD FLN in polarized cells . Discussion In this study , we revealed two separate mechanisms with distinct velocities for the translocation of ABD FLN from the cytosol to the rear of a polarized cell . Even though actin fila - ments were abundant in the front of a cell , the majority of red fluorescent ABD FLN - mKikGR newly generated in the middle of an elongated cell moved very rapidly to the rear , but not to the front . The speed of this translocation was ~ 9 times faster than the retrograde flow of cortical actin fila - ments . In contrast , the speed of the translocation was similar to that of diffusion of GFP , and therefore , we concluded that this translocation depends on diffusion , rather than on active transport . ABD ACTN , which is homologous to ABD FLN , showed the same distribution as actin filaments , strongly supporting study ( 0 . 34±0 . 15 µm / s ) [ 6 ] . This coincidence suggests that the red fluorescent ABD FLN - mKikGR that was bound to the lateral cortical actin filaments was transported to the rear by the retrograde flow of cortical actin filaments . Apparently , total amounts of red fluorescence of ABD FLN - mKikGR increased gradually over the time course of 15 s after the irradiation ( Fig 2 , Supplementary Figs . S4 and S5 ) . This is presumably because fractions of newly generated red ABD - FLN - mKikGR was initially in the cytoplasm or bound to the dorsal or ventral cortex outside the thin confocal plane , and these fractions gradually became detectable as it bound to the side cortices or transported to the rear end , which was in the confocal plane . Localization of ABD ACTN - mKikGR We next followed the translocation of ABD ACTN using the same method as above . Green fluorescent ABD ACTN - mKikGR showed stronger localization along the cortex and in the lamellipodia , and weaker distribution in the cyto - plasm , than ABD ACTN - GFP ( Fig . 3A and Supplementary Fig . S6 ) . Red fluorescent ABD ACTN - mKikGR was undetectably low before irradiation with 405 nm light ( Fig . 3B ) . This is presumably because the local concentration of ABD ACTN - mKikGR never reached the levels of ABD FLN - mKikGR at the rear of a cell , and consequently , the red fluorescence of ABD ACTN - mKikGR rarely exceeded the background . After irradiation with 405 nm light near the center of the cell , red fluorescent ABD ACTN - mKikGR spread along the length of the cell , with slight enrichment along the cortex ( Fig . 3 , B and C ) . The red fluorescence was somewhat stronger in the central region at 1 . 2 s after irradiation , but was nearly uni - form along the cell length at 10 . 4 s . The localization of green and red fluorescence of ABD ACTN - mKikGRs were eventually similar at ~ 33 . 4 s after irradiation ( Fig . 3D ) . This localiza - tion is in sharp contrast to that of ABD FLN - mKikGR , which was rapidly and specifically translocated to the rear of the cell . Localization of actin filaments In polarized cells expressing ABD FLN - GFP , actin filaments were abundant in the lamellipodia , localized along the entire cortex , and enriched in the front and rear ( Fig . 1E ) . How - ever , because ABD FLN - mKikGR showed much stronger pos - terior accumulation ( Fig . 2A ) than ABD FLN - GFP ( Fig . 1A : top ) , it was possible that the expression of ABD FLN - mKikGR drove the accumulation of actin filaments at the rear , and ABD FLN - mKikGR simply co - localized with these actin fila - ments . To rule out this possibility , localization of actin fila - ments was observed in cells expressing ABDs - mKikGR using two methods . First , mCherry - lifeact was co - expressed with ABD FLN - mKikGR , and was observed simultaneously with the green fluorescence of ABD FLN - mKikGR . As shown in Figure 4A , ABD FLN - mKikGR was exclusively localized in the rear of the cell , while actin filaments were localized not only in the rear , but also in lamellipodia at the front . Second , Shibata et al . : Filamin ABD binds specific actin filaments 327 binding between ABD FLN and the posterior actin filaments . However , we and others have proposed that certain ABDs can distinguish actin filaments with different conformations . This hypothesis is based on recent discoveries that actin fila ments are inherently polymorphic [ 32 , 50 ] , and that exter - nal stimuli , including interactions with certain ABPs and mechanical tension , further expands the repertoire of confor - mational variations [ 22 , 23 , 26 , 27 , 30 , 51 – 54 ] . Naturally , actin filaments with different conformations would have different affinities for each ABD . Indeed , stretched actin filaments have a lower affinity for cofilin in vivo and in vitro , and a the argument against the possibility that some other ABD that competes with ABD FLN for actin binding inhibits ABD FLN from localizing at the front of the cell . It is also evident that the physical size of ABD FLN - GFP or ABD FLN - mKikGR should not hinder its penetration into the actin meshwork at the front of the cell . Taken together , it is suggested that ABD FLN diffusing in the cytoplasm recognized some fea - ture ( s ) of actin filaments in the rear of the cell and interacted specifically with these filaments ( diffusion and specific cap - ture mechanism , Fig . 6A ) . It is beyond the scope of this study to elucidate the molecular mechanism of the specific Figure 3 Translocation of ABD ACTN - mKikGR . Time lapse images of a polarized cell expressing ABD ACTN - mKikGR and migrating toward the right ( A , B and C ) . ( A ) and ( B ) show the green and red fluorescence image of mKikGR , respectively , and ( C ) shows the merged images . The region bound by the yellow square was irradiated by 405 nm laser light for 0 . 7 s immediately after taking the pre - irradiation image ( – 4 . 8 s ) . Scanning for the subsequent images were started at 1 . 2 , 5 . 8 , 10 . 4 , and 33 . 4 s after starting the 405 nm laser irradiation set as 0 s . Scale bar : 10 µm . ( D ) Profile of fluorescence intensity along the cortex , measured along the white arrows in the merged image ( width : 1 µm ) in ( C ) , with 0 µm set at the rear end . The green and magenta lines show green and red fluorescence intensity of ABD ACTN - mKikGR , respectively . The cyan lines show red fluorescence intensities of ABD ACTN - mKikGR after subtracting the fluorescence intensities in the red channel that were unrelated to stimulated photoswitching . Two additional cells analyzed in a similar way are shown in Supplementary Figure S6 . 328 Biophysics and Physicobiology Vol . 13 lateral cortex is carried to the rear of the cell by a retrograde flow of the cortical actin filaments ( Fig . 6B ) . Ratios of fluo - rescence intensities between the cytosol and cortex ( Supple - mentary Fig . S3 ) suggest that association of ABD FLN with cortical actin filaments is stronger than that of ABD ACTN , and this may be one reason why ABD ACTN does not accumulate in the rear , as weakly interacting ABD ACTN cannot be stably carried to the rear by this cortical flow . It should be noted , however , that ABD FLN is not stably carried to the rear by binding to one actin filament , because the turnover of corti - cal actin filaments is very rapid during retrograde flow . For instance , based on a FRAP experiment using GFP - ABD FLN as the fluorescent probe , Yumura et al . ( 2013 ) reported that the recovery half - time was only 0 . 62±0 . 12 s [ 6 ] . This is much shorter than the time required to carry ABD FLN - mKikGR from the middle to the rear of a polarized cell at a rate of 0 . 34±0 . 15 µm / s . Furthermore , in the presence of jasplakino lide , a membrane - permeable actin - stabilizer , the half - time of fluorescence recovery was 1 . 82±0 . 39 s , which represents the off - rate of GFP - ABD FLN from cortical actin filaments . This is three times slower than the recovery rate in the absence of jasplakinolide , implying that cortical actin fil - aments turn over before bound GFP - ABD FLN dissociates [ 6 ] . Lemieux et al . ( 2014 ) have shown that artificially dimeric ABD FLN localizes to the rear of a cell , although monomeric ABD FLN does not appreciably localize there [ 20 ] . GFP tends to form a dimer weakly and it is believed that certain linker sequences between GFP and the fusion partner enhance dimerization [ 20 , 56 , 57 ] . mKikGR is reportedly a mono - meric fluorescent protein while the parent KikGR forms tetramers [ 40 ] . Therefore , if mKikGR retains a weak ten - dency to form oligomers , ABD FLN - mKikGR in this study ( Fig . 2 ) might be assembled to oligomers by the influence of the fused proteins and / or the linker peptide . Since the oligo - merized ABD FLN can remain tethered to the cortical actin meshwork more stably than the monomeric ABD FLN even when actin filaments turnover rapidly , oligomeric ABD FLN may be transported to the rear of a cell by the retrograde flow of cortical actin filaments more efficiently than monomeric ABD FLN . The ABD FLN - GFP in this study ( Fig . 1 ) might not be significantly assembled to an oligomer and is thus primarily translocated to the rear of the cells by diffusion and a spe - cific capture mechanism . This is because our linker peptide is not hydrophobic and the posterior localization of ABD FLN - GFP was weaker than that of ABD FLN - mKikGR . This corti - cal actin flow mechanism is presumably physiologically rel - evant , however , since the parent molecules , filamin and α - actinin , are naturally dimers . It is possible that these two mechanisms contribute to the localization of various other ABPs in vivo . In particular , if actin filaments at different sites in a cell have unique struc - tural features caused by biochemical modulation , nucleotide state , ABP binding , tension , twisting or bending , the diffu - sion and specific capture mechanism can be applied to ABP localization at various sites in a cell . Since differential local - higher affinity for the motor domain of myosin II in vivo [ 5 , 28 , 34 ] . Furthermore , certain ABPs also localize in regions where the structure of actin filaments is changed in vivo . For example , when a cell is aspirated locally by a microcapillary , myosin II and filamin accumulate at the aspirated site where actin filaments are tensed and bent [ 5 , 13 , 33 , 34 , 55 ] . In a polarized cell , myosin II and filamin mainly colocalize with posterior actin filaments . Those posterior actin filaments should be stretched by a pulling force exerted by myosin II filaments , unlike those in the front that should be compressed and bent by a pushing force for migration . We thus propose that ABD FLN can recognize the stretched conformation of actin filaments , and specifically binds to them . Irrespective of these proposals , our findings strongly suggest that filamin can distinguish some feature of actin filaments in the rear of a cell , and this contributes to the specific localization of fila - min in cells . In the second mechanism , which is relatively minor based on the red fluorescence intensity of ABD FLN - mKikGR , ABD FLN that strongly interacts with actin filaments in the Figure 4 Localization of actin filaments in cells expressing ABD - mKikGR . ( A and C ) Fluorescence micrographs of polarized cells expressing ABD FLN - mKikGR and mCherry - lifeact ( A ) , or ABD ACTN - mKikGR and mCherry - lifeact ( C ) . The top and middle of each set show fluorescence images of mKikGR and mCherry , respectively , and the bottom of each set is the merged image of the two . ( B and D ) Permea - bilized and fixed polarized cells expressing ABD FLN - mKikGR ( B ) or ABD ACTN - mKikGR ( D ) stained with rhodamine - phalloidin . The top and middle images show fluorescence of mKikGR and rhodamine , respectively , and the bottom of each set is the merged image of the two . All cells migrated toward the right . Scale bars : 10 µm . Shibata et al . : Filamin ABD binds specific actin filaments 329 Acknowledgments This work was supported in part by a Grant - in - Aid from the Ministry of Education , Culture , Sports , Science and Technology No . 24117008 to TU . ization of multiple ABPs to specific actin filaments in cells leads to functional differentiation of actin filaments , it is important to elucidate the mechanisms by which ABPs rec - ognize structural features of actin filaments . Figure 5 Localization of GAPA and translocation of ABD FLN - mKikGR in a GAPA null cell . ( A ) Fluorescence micrographs of a polarized cell expressing GFP - GAPA . The cell migrated toward the right of the images . ( B ) Intensity profile of GFP along the cortex , measured along the white line in the direction of the arrow in the inserted image ( same as A ) . Another representative cell is shown in Supplementary Figure S7 , A and B . ( C – E ) Time lapse images of a GAPA null cell expressing ABD FLN - mKikGR and migrating toward the right . ( C ) and ( D ) show the green and red fluores - cence images of mKikGR , respectively , and ( E ) shows the merged images . The region bound by the yellow square was irradiated by 405 nm laser light for 2 . 4 s immediately after taking the pre - irradiation image ( – 4 . 9 s ) . Scanning of the subsequent images were started at 2 . 9 , 7 . 6 , 12 . 2 , and 16 . 9 s after starting the 405 nm irradiation set as 0 s . Scale bars : 10 µm . ( F ) Profiles of fluorescence intensities along the cell cortex in the region and direc - tion shown by the white arrows in ( E ) , with the 0 µm set at the rear end . The green and magenta lines show fluorescence intensities of ABD FLN - mKikGR in the green and red channels , respectively . The cyan line shows red fluorescence intensity of ABD FLN - mKikGR after subtracting the fluores cence intensity in the red channel that was unrelated to the stimulated photoswitch . The purple vertical bars in the – 4 . 9 s graph shows the irradiated region on the cell cortex . Two additional cells analyzed in a similar way are shown in Supplementary Figure S7 C – J . 330 Biophysics and Physicobiology Vol . 13 [ 9 ] Yumura , S . Myosin II dynamics and cortical flow during con - tractile ring formation in Dictyostelium cells . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 137 – 146 ( 2001 ) . [ 10 ] Renkawitz , J . , Schumann , K . , Weber , M . , Lämmermann , T . , Pflicke , H . , Piel , M . , et al . Adaptive force transmission in amoeboid cell migration . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 , 1438 – 1443 ( 2009 ) . [ 11 ] Byfield , F . J . , Wen , Q . , Levental , I . , Nordstrom , K . , Arratia , P . E . , Miller , R . T . , et al . Absence of filamin A prevents cells from responding to stiffness gradients on gels coated with col - lagen but not fibronectin . Biophys . J . 96 , 5095 – 5102 ( 2009 ) . [ 12 ] Lynch , C . D . , Gauthier , N . C . , Biais , N . , Lazar , A . M . , Roca - Cusachs , P . , Yu , C . H . , et al . Filamin depletion blocks endo - plasmic spreading and destabilizes force - bearing adhesions . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 , 1263 – 1273 ( 2011 ) . [ 13 ] Luo , T . , Mohan , K . , Iglesias , P . A . & Robinson , D . N . Molec - ular mechanisms of cellular mechanosensing . Nat . Mater . 12 , 1064 – 1071 ( 2013 ) . [ 14 ] Sun , C . , Forster , C . , Nakamura , F . & Glogauer , M . Filamin - A Regulates Neutrophil Uropod Retraction through RhoA during Chemotaxis . PLoS ONE 8 , e79009 ( 2013 ) . [ 15 ] McCoy , A . J . , Fucini , P . , Noegel , A . A . & Stewart , M . Struc - tural basis for dimerization of the Dictyostelium gelation fac - tor ( ABP120 ) rod . Nat . Struct . Biol . 6 , 836 – 841 ( 1999 ) . [ 16 ] Nakamura , F . , Stossel , T . P . & Hartwig , J . H . The filamins : organizers of cell structure and function . Cell Adh . Migr . 5 , 160 – 169 ( 2011 ) . [ 17 ] Bretschneider , T . , Diez , S . , Anderson , K . , Heuser , J . , Clarke , M . , Müller - Taubenberger , A . , et al . Dynamic actin patterns and Arp2 / 3 assembly at the substrate - attached surface of motile cells . Curr . Biol . 14 , 1 – 10 ( 2004 ) . [ 18 ] Lénárt , P . , Bacher , C . P . , Daigle , N . , Hand , A . R . , Eils , R . , Terasaki , M . , et al . A contractile nuclear actin network drives chromosome congression in oocytes . Nature 436 , 812 – 818 ( 2005 ) . [ 19 ] Washington , R . W . & Knecht , D . A . Actin binding domains direct actin - binding proteins to different cytoskeletal loca - tions . BMC Cell Biol . 9 , 10 ( 2008 ) . [ 20 ] Lemieux , M . G . , Janzen , D . , Hwang , R . , Roldan , J . , Jarchum , I . & Knecht , D . A . Visualization of the actin cytoskeleton : dif - ferent F - actin - binding probes tell different stories . Cytoskeleton ( Hoboken ) . 71 , 157 – 169 ( 2014 ) . [ 21 ] Ciobanasu , C . , Faivre , B . & Le Clainche , C . Integrating actin dynamics , mechanotransduction and integrin activation : the multiple functions of actin binding proteins in focal adhe - sions . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 92 , 339 – 348 ( 2013 ) . Conflicts of Interest All the authors declare that they have no conflict of interest . Author Contributions K . S . and T . U . conceived and planned the experiments . K . S . , A . N . and T . U . performed the experiments . K . S . analyzed the data . K . S . , A . N . , H . A . and T . U . contributed reagents and materials . K . S . , H . A . and T . U . wrote the manu - script . All the authors reviewed the result and agreed the final manuscript . References [ 1 ] Pantaloni , D . , Le Clainche , C . & Carlier , M . F . Mechanism of actin - based motility . Science 292 , 1502 – 1506 ( 2001 ) . [ 2 ] Small , J . V . , Stradal , T . , Vignal , E . & Rottner , K . The lamel - lipodium : where motility begins . Trends Cell Biol . 12 , 112 – 120 ( 2002 ) . [ 3 ] Le Clainche , C . & Carlier , M . F . Regulation of actin assembly associated with protrusion and adhesion in cell migration . Physiol . Rev . 88 , 489 – 513 ( 2008 ) . [ 4 ] Pollard , T . D . & Cooper , J . A . Actin , a central player in cell shape and movement . Science 326 , 1208 – 1212 ( 2009 ) . [ 5 ] Uyeda , T . Q . P . , Iwadate , Y . , Umeki , N . , Nagasaki , A . & Yumura , S . Stretching actin filaments within cells enhances their affinity for the myosin II motor domain . PLoS ONE 6 , e26200 ( 2011 ) . [ 6 ] Yumura , S . , Itoh , G . , Kikuta , Y . , Kikuchi , T . , Kitanishi - Yumura , T . & Tsujioka , M . Cell - scale dynamic recycling and cortical flow of the actin - myosin cytoskeleton for rapid cell migration . Biol . Open 2 , 200 – 209 ( 2013 ) . [ 7 ] DeBiasio , R . L . , LaRocca , G . M . , Post , P . L . & Taylor , D . L . Myosin II transport , organization , and phosphorylation : evi - dence for cortical flow / solation - contraction coupling during cytokinesis and cell locomotion . Mol . Biol . Cell 7 , 1259 – 1282 ( 1996 ) . [ 8 ] Henson , J . H . , Svitkina , T . M . , Burns , A . R . , Hughes , H . E . , MacPartland , K . J . , Nazarian , R . , et al . Two components of actin - based retrograde flow in sea urchin coelomocytes . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 4075 – 4090 ( 1999 ) . Figure 6 Schematic illustration of the two mechanisms of ABD FLN translocation from the cytosol in the middle to the rear cortex of a polarized cell . ( A ) Diffusion and specific capture mechanism . The affinity between actin filaments and ABD FLN differs depending on the position in the cell , as indicated by the graded intensity of the red color of actin filaments . Since the affinity of the rear actin filaments for ABD FLN is stronger than other actin filaments , ABD FLN that is rapidly diffusing in the cytoplasm is specifically captured by the rear actin filaments and accumulates there . ( B ) Cortical actin flow mechanism . Cytosolic ABD FLN interacts with cortical actin filaments and is carried to the rear of the cell by retrograde flow ( black arrows ) of the cortical actin filaments . In both schemes , the front of the cell is to the right . Shibata et al . : Filamin ABD binds specific actin filaments 331 exclusive binding with cofilin and myosin . Sci . Rep . 6 , 1 – 11 ( 2016 ) . [ 40 ] Habuchi , S . , Tsutsui , H . , Kochaniak , A . B . , Miyawaki , A . & van Oijen , A . M . mKikGR , a monomeric photoswitchable fluo rescent protein . PLoS ONE 3 , e3944 ( 2008 ) . [ 41 ] Levi , S . , Polyakov , M . & Egelhoff , T . T . Green fluorescent protein and epitope tag fusion vectors for Dictyostelium dis - coideum . Plasmid 44 , 231 – 238 ( 2000 ) . [ 42 ] Riedl , J . , Crevenna , A . H . , Kessenbrock , K . , Yu , J . H . , Neukirchen , D . , Bista , M . , et al . Lifeact : a versatile marker to visualize F - actin . Nat . Methods 5 , 605 – 607 ( 2008 ) . [ 43 ] Asano , Y . , Mizuno , T . , Kon , T . , Nagasaki , A . , Sutoh , K . & Uyeda , T . Q . P . Keratocyte - like locomotion in amiB - null Dictyostelium cells . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 59 , 17 – 27 ( 2004 ) . [ 44 ] Adachi , H . , Takahashi , Y . , Hasebe , T . , Shirouzu , M . , Yokoyama , S . & Sutoh , K . Dictyostelium IQGAP - related protein specifically involved in the completion of cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 137 , 891 – 898 ( 1997 ) . [ 45 ] Sussman , M . Cultivation and synchronous morphogenesis of Dictyostelium under controlled experimental conditions . Methods Cell Biol . 28 , 9 – 29 ( 1987 ) . [ 46 ] Egelhoff , T . T . , Titus , M . A . , Manstein , D . J . , Ruppel , K . M . & Spudich , J . A . Molecular genetic tools for study of the cyto - skeleton in Dictyostelium . Methods Enzymol . 196 , 319 – 334 ( 1991 ) . [ 47 ] Yumura , S . , Mori , H . & Fukui , Y . Localization of actin and myosin for the study of ameboid movement in Dictyostelium using improved immunofluorescence . J . Cell Biol . 99 , 894 – 899 ( 1984 ) . [ 48 ] Ruchira , Hink , M . A . , Bosgraaf , L . , van Haastert , P . J . M . & Visser , A . J . W . G . Pleckstrin homology domain diffusion in Dictyostelium cytoplasm studied using fluorescence correla - tion spectroscopy . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 10013 – 10019 ( 2004 ) . [ 49 ] Mondal , S . , Burgute , B . , Rieger , D . , Müller , R . , Rivero , F . , Faix , J . , et al . Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton by an interaction of IQGAP related protein GAPA with filamin and cortexillin I . PLoS ONE 5 , e15440 ( 2010 ) . [ 50 ] Egelman , E . H . , Francis , N . & DeRosier , D . J . F - actin is a helix with a random variable twist . Nature 298 , 131 – 135 ( 1982 ) . [ 51 ] Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . & Egelman , E . H . Actin filaments as tension sensors . Curr . Biol . 22 , R96 - 101 ( 2012 ) . [ 52 ] Miki , M . , Wahl , P . & Auchet , J . C . Fluorescence anisotropy of labeled F - actin : influence of divalent cations on the interaction between F - actin and myosin heads . Biochemistry 21 , 3661 – 3665 ( 1982 ) . [ 53 ] Ressad , F . , Didry , D . , Xia , G . X . , Hong , Y . , Chua , N . H . , Pantaloni , D . , et al . Kinetic analysis of the interaction of actin - depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) / cofilin with G - and F - actins . Comparison of plant and human ADFs and effect of phosphorylation . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 20894 – 20902 ( 1998 ) . [ 54 ] Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , Lukoyanova , N . , Wriggers , W . & Egelman , E . H . Actin depolymerizing factor stabilizes an existing state of F - actin and can change the tilt of F - actin subunits . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 75 – 86 ( 2001 ) . [ 55 ] Pramanik , M . K . , Iijima , M . , Iwadate , Y . & Yumura , S . PTEN is a mechanosensing signal transducer for myosin II localiza - tion in Dictyostelium cells . Genes Cells 14 , 821 – 834 ( 2009 ) . [ 56 ] Yang , F . , Moss , L . G . & Phillips , G . N . The molecular struc - ture of green fluorescent protein . Nat . Biotechnol . 14 , 1246 – 1251 ( 1996 ) . [ 57 ] Zacharias , D . A . , Violin , J . D . , Newton , A . C . & Tsien , R . Y . Partitioning of lipid - modified monomeric GFPs into mem - brane microdomains of live cells . Science 296 , 913 – 916 ( 2002 ) . [ 22 ] Loscalzo , J . , Reed , G . H . & Weber , A . Conformational change and cooperativity in actin filaments free of tropomyosin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 72 , 3412 – 3415 ( 1975 ) . [ 23 ] Matsushita , S . , Inoue , Y . , Hojo , M . , Sokabe , M . & Adachi , T . Effect of tensile force on the mechanical behavior of actin fil - aments . J . Biomech . 44 , 1776 – 1781 ( 2011 ) . [ 24 ] Hanein , D . , Matsudaira , P . & DeRosier , D . J . Evidence for a conformational change in actin induced by fimbrin ( N375 ) binding . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 387 – 396 ( 1997 ) . [ 25 ] Huang , R . , Grabarek , Z . & Wang , C . L . A . Differential effects of caldesmon on the intermediate conformational states of polymerizing actin . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 71 – 79 ( 2010 ) . [ 26 ] McGough , A . , Pope , B . , Chiu , W . & Weeds , A . Cofilin changes the twist of F - actin : implications for actin filament dynamics and cellular function . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 771 – 781 ( 1997 ) . [ 27 ] Tsaturyan , A . K . , Koubassova , N . , Ferenczi , M . A . , Narayanan , T . , Roessle , M . & Bershitsky , S . Y . Strong binding of myosin heads stretches and twists the actin helix . Biophys . J . 88 , 1902 – 1910 ( 2005 ) . [ 28 ] Hayakawa , K . , Tatsumi , H . & Sokabe , M . Actin filaments function as a tension sensor by tension - dependent binding of cofilin to the filament . J . Cell Biol . 195 , 721 – 727 ( 2011 ) . [ 29 ] Sharma , S . , Grintsevich , E . E . , Phillips , M . L . , Reisler , E . & Gimzewski , J . K . Atomic force microscopy reveals drebrin induced remodeling of f - actin with subnanometer resolution . Nano Lett . 11 , 825 – 827 ( 2011 ) . [ 30 ] Ngo , K . X . , Kodera , N . , Katayama , E . , Ando , T . & Uyeda , T . Q . P . Cofilin - induced unidirectional cooperative confor - mational changes in actin filaments revealed by high - speed atomic force microscopy . Elife 4 , e04806 ( 2015 ) . [ 31 ] Sharma , S . , Grintsevich , E . E . , Hsueh , C . , Reisler , E . & Gimzewski , J . K . Molecular cooperativity of drebrin1 - 300 binding and structural remodeling of F - actin . Biophys . J . 103 , 275 – 283 ( 2012 ) . [ 32 ] Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , Schröder , G . F . & Egelman , E . H . Structural polymorphism in F - actin . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 17 , 1318 – 1323 ( 2010 ) . [ 33 ] Merkel , R . , Simson , R . , Simson , D . A . , Hohenadl , M . , Boulbitch , A . , Wallraff , E . , et al . A micromechanic study of cell polarity and plasma membrane cell body coupling in Dictyostelium . Biophys . J . 79 , 707 – 719 ( 2000 ) . [ 34 ] Kim , J . H . , Ren , Y . , Ng , W . P . , Li , S . , Son , S . , Kee , Y . S . , et al . Mechanical tension drives cell membrane fusion . Dev . Cell 32 , 561 – 573 ( 2015 ) . [ 35 ] Ren , Y . , Effler , J . C . , Norstrom , M . , Luo , T . , Firtel , R . A . , Iglesias , P . A . , et al . Mechanosensing through cooperative interactions between myosin II and the actin crosslinker cortexil lin I . Curr . Biol . 19 , 1421 – 1428 ( 2009 ) . [ 36 ] Stock , A . , Steinmetz , M . O . , Janmey , P . A . , Aebi , U . , Gerisch , G . , Kammerer , R . A . , et al . Domain analysis of cortexillin I : actin - bundling , PIP ( 2 ) - binding and the rescue of cytokinesis . EMBO J . 18 , 5274 – 5284 ( 1999 ) . [ 37 ] Vignjevic , D . , Kojima , S . , Aratyn , Y . , Danciu , O . , Svitkina , T . & Borisy , G . G . Role of fascin in filopodial protrusion . J . Cell Biol . 174 , 863 – 875 ( 2006 ) . [ 38 ] Takahashi , H . , Sekino , Y . , Tanaka , S . , Mizui , T . , Kishi , S . & Shirao , T . Drebrin - dependent actin clustering in dendritic filo - podia governs synaptic targeting of postsynaptic density - 95 and dendritic spine morphogenesis . J . Neurosci . 23 , 6586 – 6595 ( 2003 ) . [ 39 ] Ngo , K . X . , Umeki , N . , Kijima , S . T . , Kodera , N . , Ueno , H . , Furutani - Umezu , N . , et al . Allosteric regulation by cooperative conformational changes of actin filaments drives mutually