Emergent Boundary Objects and Boundary Zones in Collaborative Design Research Projects Peter Dalsgaard , Kim Halskov and Ditte Amund Basballe CAVI , PIT Aarhus University { dalsgaard , halskov , basballe } @ cavi . au . dk ABSTRACT This paper examines how the dynamics between design and research interests shape and influence the development of design concepts in collaborative design projects . We introduce the concepts of boundary zones and emergent boundary objects in order to account for how different project stakeholders align their interests and move towards shared project goals . Though the study is of a specific case , namely the collaboration between interaction design researchers and architects to develop interactive com - ponents in a new metro station , we show how the concepts of boundary zones and emergent boundary objects can support the articulation and analysis of the way that design concepts emerge and are shaped through ongoing negotiations and reifications . Author Keywords Boundary object ; boundary negotiating artifacts ; boundary zone ; Research through Design ; media architecture ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : INTRODUCTION A central issue for the DIS community is developing and refining understandings of how design projects unfold and why the end results , often in the shape of products or services , end up the way they do . In order to shed light on this pertinent subject , design researchers are often engaged in design projects as part of their research practice . Commonly , these are collaborative projects in which not only design researchers but also multiple stakeholders are involved , for instance end users and public authorities . A central question in such projects is to understand how different stakeholders can be aligned so that shared objectives can be achieved . In order to investigate how such collaborative processes unfold we propose the concepts of boundary zones and emergent boundary objects . A boundary zone is a conceptual space , rather than a physical space , in which interests of different stakeholders in a design project – be they individuals or groups – overlap , and shared agendas can be negotiated and acted upon . The concept of emergent boundary objects is closely related to boundary objects , originally proposed by Star and Griesemer [ 24 ] . In direct continuation of Star and Griesemer we investigate how such objects have different meanings in the world of research and in the world of design , but at the same time entail common structures that can facilitate and maintain coherence across intersecting social worlds . In contrast to the majority of boundary object research , we primarily examine how boundary objects emerge and are dynamically transformed – therefore the term emergent boundary objects – throughout Research through Design processes [ 26 ] . In order to demonstrate the potentials and limits of the concepts of boundary zones and emergent boundary objects , we present and analyze a case in which a design research group ( including the authors ) collaborated with an architectural firm to design an interactive installation for a new metro station . In this way we investigate the explanatory force of boundary zones and emergent boundary objects in the specific , and narrow , context of interaction design research , but collaboration in the context of Research through Design , which shares many similarities with other kinds of collaborative activities , including computer supported cooperative work activities ( CSCW ) and group activities in general . Among the core interest of CSCW research we find studying and analyzing : ‘ situated action ’ , ‘ articulation work ’ , ‘ distributed cognition ’ , ‘ activity systems’ [ 23 ] important in order to gain an insight into collaborative practices . One particular area of interest includes representational artifacts , for instance in cooperative design , and we assume , without directly addressing it in this paper , that boundary zones and emergent boundary objects may contribute to the understanding of how representational artifacts emerge and are transformed in collaborative practices . More broadly , collaboration has been studied in terms of objects and , as a prominent example , Nicolini , Mengis and Swan [ 21 ] offer four theoretical perspectives in order to provide insight into how objects function in collaborative activities . A typical example of research into the role of shared objects is a study by Muller et al . of a collaboration technology which bridges the gaps between a number of aspects of collaborative activities , for instance a small versus large number of activities [ 20 ] . In contrast to the Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . DIS ' 14 , June 21 - 25 2014 , Vancouver , BC , Canada Copyright 2014 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 2902 - 6 / 14 / 06… $ 15 . 00 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2598510 . 2600878 Design Research DIS 2014 , June 21 – 25 , 2014 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 745 predominant research into ‘objects’ , which focus on the qualities of such objects and how they function in collaborative practices , the concepts of boundary zones and emergent boundary objects underscore that objects emerge and are dynamically being transformed in collaborative practices . Our intent is furthermore to shift attention from how the use of objects organize activities towards a reciprocal understanding of how design activities shape and form objects and are in return affected by these objects , which is at the essence of designing interactive systems . While the original CSCW research program is concerned with approaches to technology development and use , our research interest revolved around coming to grip with the nature of design research practice . Hence , intended for interaction design researchers , the main contributions of the paper are 1 ) the concepts of boundary zones and emergent boundary objects in design , 2 ) the proposition that design concepts in collaborative design projects can be construed as emergent boundary objects , 3 ) the metro station case study , in which we analyze the development of an interactive component of the metro station as an emergent boundary object in the boundary zone between a series of involved stakeholders , including researchers , designers , end users and municipal authorities . In order to pursue this endeavor , the paper is organized in the following way . First we provide a compact overview of the field of Research through Design and of the basic concepts of social worlds , boundary objects and boundary negotiating artifacts in order to position our own research in relation to these areas of previous research , which provides the platform for – in the subsequent section – introducing the concepts of boundary zones and emergent boundary objects . Next we account for our research methodology before turning to an analysis of the metro station research - through - design process . We conclude with a reflection on the potentials on insights gained through boundary zones and emergent boundary objects . RESEARCH THROUGH DESIGN AND COLLOABORATIVE DESIGN RESEARCH PROJECTS Since Christopher Frayling [ 11 ] in 1993 introduced the research approach research through art and design , it has gained increasing interest as a platform for analysing and reflecting on design research . Much work in the Research through Design community has focused on design products [ 26 , 27 , 18 ] , although there have also been studies of macro aspects of the design process , for instance in terms of the model of the relation between ‘question’ , ‘programme’ , and ‘experiment’ proposed by Redström , Binder and Brandt [ 4 , 6 , 8 ] . In this paper we adopt a micro perspective on design processes [ 1 ] . The Encounter Between Research Interests and Design Interests in Collaborative Design Projects In our research group [ 14 ] we have a long tradition for working together with a wide range of external partners like architects , cultural heritage institutions , and retail stores in designing for example media facades , cultural heritage installations and marketing communication [ e . g . 9 , 17 ] In these joint projects we use a variety of design artifacts and materials to communicate , make decisions and advance the design project . Design artifacts like inspiration cards , 3D models , scenarios , and mock - ups help us to strengthen the relation to and communicate with our own partners , but they also assist us on an internal level to navigate between the design interests of our partners and our research interests in terms of the questions that the researchers involved want to pursue . To understand collaborative design research projects and the role of the mentioned design artefacts we adopt a micro perspective on the Research through Design process . We understand the micro perspective as one where we distinguish between research interests and design interests and their dynamic interplay . We define design interests as interests that relates directly to the end product or installation being designed , whereas research interests first and foremost relate to research questions asked by the researchers with the purpose of generating new knowledge for the research community of interaction design . External partners may also have research interests , but these are focused on informing the current design itself or future designs . More recently , Basballe and Halskov [ 1 ] have addressed the same tensions in the design process , exploring the dynamics of designer - researcher collaborations with respect to the coupling , interweaving and decoupling of design and research interests during a design process . In order to establish a platform for analysing the dynamics of Research through Design as unfolding across the communities of research practice and design practice , we have found it productive to look into boundary objects and artifacts as negotiating objects , which is the subject for the following section . SOCIAL WORLDS , BOUNDARY OBJECTS AND NEGOTIATING BOUNDARY ARTIFACTS Social Worlds Our understanding of relations and dynamics between different stakeholders , who in various ways influence and / or take part in a design process , is rooted in the notion of social worlds from symbolic interactionism . A social world can be understood as group of individuals “with shared commitments to certain activities , sharing resources of many kinds to achieve their goals , and building shared ideologies about how to go about their business . ” [ 25 ] In a design project , for instance as in the case of the kind of project we will analyze later in this paper , this can refer to different groupings such as a design agency carrying out a design project , a research group involved in the design project with the objective of creating new knowledge , a group of citizens that will end up using the designed Design Research DIS 2014 , June 21 – 25 , 2014 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 746 product , a municipality that funds the project and acts as project owner , etc . In his pivotal work on social worlds , Strauss [ 25 ] describes how tensions can play out both inside and between social worlds . The same often holds true for stakeholders in collaborative design projects , e . g . there may be discussions and negotiations internally in a design team , just as there can be negotiations between researchers , designers , end users and decision makers . There are no definite conditions for what constitutes a social world . It is an analytical construct intended to serve as a tool for identifying and understanding different groups of actors and their interrelations . This means that a large social world can be analytically divided into different sub - worlds , and that individuals can be part of many social worlds . Boundary Objects Susan Leigh Star and James R . Griesemer [ 23 ] originally coined the term boundary object in 1989 . A boundary object is “an object that lives in multiple social worlds and which has different identities in each” . Star and Griesemer stated that “the creation and management of boundary objects is a key process in developing and maintaining coherence across intersecting social worlds” . Further , they state that the nature of a boundary object needs to be plastic enough to adapt to local needs as well as “robust enough to maintain a common identity across sites” . In the field of interaction design , Olav Bertelsen [ 3 ] adopted the concept to explain how design artifacts may be understood as boundary objects by functioning as mediators among different groups in design processes . Boundary objects have been used and developed by numerous researchers such as Bechky [ 2 ] , Lee [ 19 ] , and Kimble et . al . [ 16 ] . In 2003 , Bechky introduces a transformative perspective on sharing knowledge across boundaries and reaching a synthesis . Transformation occurs when a member of one community understands how knowledge from another community fits within the context of his own , enriching and altering what he knew . In transformations , an individual’s understanding of a product , process , or organization is expanded , not merely by the introduction of new knowledge , but by placing that knowledge within his own locus of practice in such a way that it enhanced the individual’s understanding of her own work , enabling her to see the world in a new light . In 2010 , Kimble et . al . [ 15 ] points to the fact that much work on boundary objects suggests that the selection of boundary objects is more or less technical in nature : a matter of choosing the right boundary object for a particular set of circumstances . They suggest that this process is more complex , dynamic and can be explicitly politic in nature . According to Kimble et al . changes in boundary objects occur when the former boundary object is no longer able to sustain the innovation process because of its inability to support a discussion that includes a wider range of competences . Thus a second boundary object is chosen specifically in order to embrace these competencies . Changes in boundary objects can also be a political act directed towards maintaining or redefining the direction of the specific group’s activities . In a similar vein , we examine the role of boundary objects in dynamic processes , however in contrast , we look not at how boundary objects are replaced , but rather how boundary objects emerge and are transformed . While boundary objects are individual entities , much collaborative work is also supported by what Bowker and Star refer to as boundary infrastructures [ 5 ] . Boundary infrastructures serve multiple communities of practice simultaneously and often contain a selection of boundary objects . Boundary infrastructures are developed over the course of time to provide stable support for collaborative activities . While the concept of boundary zones , which we present here , also addresses the alignment of interests and activities among different stakeholders , it differs in the respect that a boundary zone refers to the overlapping interests of said stakeholders and does not necessarily entail any stable infrastructure . Over the course of time , ongoing collaboration among stakeholders with boundary zones may result in the formation of boundary infrastructures , but in the early phases of design projects , such structures are often not yet in place . Boundary Negotiating Artifacts In 2007 , Lee points out that the outset for Star and Griesemers term originates in a “somewhat routine and fairly simple project ( … ) with an explicit project goal and a simple organizational context” [ 19 ] . Lee’s point is that the term boundary object has been applied to almost anything not taking the original definition into account . Building on her own analysis of an exhibition design , Lee suggests that the term Boundary Negotiating Artifacts might be better suited for projects that are fairly non - routine and fairly complex . Boundary Negotiating Artifacts are created when collaborators lack standardized processes and objects for collaboration ( ibid . ) . However , the Boundary Negotiating Artifacts addressed by Lee can primarily be considered to be auxiliary artifacts , in the sense that they mediate work on a specific object , rather than being the object of work itself . In contrast , the emergent boundary objects that we examine in this paper are the central objects of the design work , namely design concepts . BOUNDARY ZONES AND EMERGENT BOUNDARY OBJECTS Inspired by the aforementioned work on social worlds , boundary objects , and boundary negotiating artifacts , we present and discuss two concepts , which we propose can improve the understanding of how design concepts emerge and evolve through collaborative design research projects : boundary zones and emergent boundary objects . These concepts have been developed in response to the Metro Station design case . In previous work , we have addressed the dynamics between research and design interests in Research Design Research DIS 2014 , June 21 – 25 , 2014 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 747 through Design as unfolding over time [ 1 , 8 ] . The Metro Station case presented us with an opportunity to further develop these understandings , particularly as they pertain to hybrid spaces and constructs shared by the different stakeholders in the project . To clarify , the concepts have been developed in subsequent analyses of the case , and have thus not been employed in the design process itself . Boundary Zones We define a boundary zone as a conceptual space in which interests of different stakeholders in a design project – be they individuals or groups – overlap , and shared agendas can be negotiated and acted upon . We use the term conceptual space to denote an analytical construct , rather than a physical space . By their very nature , collaborative design projects often contain several boundary zones . There may be boundary zones between major project partners , e . g . a design company , a project owner , and prospective users ; there may also be boundary zones within social worlds , e . g . different designers in a design company may discuss and negotiate how to address a design problem internally , while maintaining their coherence as a group and still acting as one entity in relation to other stakeholders in a collaborative project . The formation of a boundary zone almost always entails some form of alignment work in order to examine , manage and negotiate shared interests and objectives among parties with boundary zones , e . g . in the form of meetings , workshops , email exchanges etc . It also often involves shared artifacts , such as project plans , and physical spaces , for instance design labs , which can scaffold joint exploration and action . We propose a simple way of illustrating boundary zones between stakeholders in a design project , see Figure 1 . This is inspired by Clark’s [ 7 ] representation of social worlds , but differs in that it focuses on boundary zones , and in that it also incorporates boundary objects and emergent boundary objects . Emergent Boundary Objects We define an emergent boundary object as a boundary object whose structure and meaning is not yet stable . In this paper , we will use the term to address design concepts , understood as more or less well - developed ideas and concepts about what the product of a design process may become . We introduce the concept of emergent boundary objects in order to add a processual perspective to the established concept of boundary objects , which can account for the emergence , evolution and transformation of design concepts through the course of a design process . In design projects , design concepts rarely , if ever , present themselves as fully formed constructs , ready to be implemented . Rather , they are in a state of flux as stakeholders articulate , negotiate , form , and develop them . We base our work on previous research contributions on boundary objects but find it necessary to refine and develop an understanding that better resonates with the practice of interaction design , particularly in relation to how different stakeholders influence the development of design concepts throughout a design process . Common to all of the aforementioned uses of the term is that boundary objects are not transformed during the process but rather are interpreted or translated differently by different communities of practice or simply changed into new ones , as pointed out by Kimble et . al . [ 16 ] In interaction design , many projects , are complex , often address wicked problems [ 22 ] and revolve around design concepts that are anything but stable . Indeed , one of the key characteristics of this approach to design is that the pivotal object of attention , the design concept , is continuously evolving , and thus does adequately fit with the existing descriptions of boundary objects . In this respect , we seek to develop a more process - related understanding , inspired by the work of Lee [ 19 ] , one in which we focus on the dynamic properties of the object of the work itself – in our case the design concept – rather than on the tools that mediate work on this object . What we gain with the concept of emergent boundary objects is the recognition of design concepts as being ‘in the making’ throughout most , if not all , of the design process . If they are successful , they become evermore robust so that they can be understood and acted upon by different stakeholders in joint sessions , as well as by the stakeholders individually . They evolve over the course of a project , as the design concept is being developed and come to embody design negotiations and decisions made in the process . Such emergent boundary objects are therefore of ideas and notions explored and developed in design processes . Reification – or externalization in the terminology of cultural - historical activity theory [ e . g . 3 ] – is a necessary process in making a concept stable enough for multiple parties to establish shared understandings about an emergent boundary object . A key aspect of reification is that it is not just when a concept is concrete that it serves to mediate among different stakeholders ; the process of reification in itself is equally important , since it is often the focal point for key discussions and negotiations among participants who seek to make their interests form the design concept . Figure 1 : Example diagram of boundary zone and emergent boundary objects . The boundary zones are represented by overlaps between the three stakeholders : researchers , designers , and users . An emergent boundary object is illustrated in the boundary zone between the stakeholders . THE METRO STATION CASE The findings presented in this paper are the results of an analysis of a particular design process , namely the collaboration between an architectural firm and a design research group to develop interactive components for a new metro station . Due to the blind review process , we shall Design Research DIS 2014 , June 21 – 25 , 2014 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 748 refer to these entities as the Metro Station , the Architects , and the Design Researchers . Figure 2 : The projected Metro Station building . Specifically , the interactive components were intended to be a media façade , an umbrella term for installations in which displays are integrated into architectural structures [ 9 , 12 ] . The integration is often accomplished with LED displays or digital projectors , but the term also covers the use of mechanical displays . The main plans for the entry building of the Metro Station had been designed by the Architects , who had won the tender for the building . The Architects then approached the Design Researchers to discuss potential media façades for the Metro Station , either for the roof inside or somewhere outside . For the analysis of the Research through Design process , we will mainly discuss the boundary zones and emergent boundary objects in the intersection between two communi - ties of practice : the Architects and the Design Researchers . Both groups are of a dual nature with respect to research and design . While the Design Researchers act as designers in their experimental research practice , their ultimate goal is to generate new knowledge to be presented in academic publications . In contrast , the Architects carry out research as part of their practice , which may be applied in current or future designs , but their ultimate objective is to create new architecture . The case thus offers a good opportunity for investigating how design and research interests intersect and influence an on - going project . RESEARCH APPROACH AND EMPIRICAL DATA All of the authors are part of the Design Researcher group . Two of the authors participated in all parts of the design process , including the ongoing communication with the architects involved . One author participated only in the internal activities in the design research group . The documentation of the process was accomplished via PRT - a collaborative web service developed specifically for design documentation [ 10 ] . This system was employed to capture data from all events , meetings and exchanges in the project in the form of notes , photos , diagrams , sketches , videos etc . , including brief annotations of telephone conversations , short e - mail exchanges etc . , providing a rich source of empirical data to draw upon in our subsequent analysis of the case . The Metro Station design process was relatively brief and comprised of seven major design events , which took place from April to June 2012 . The data from the project has been analysed and codified by the authors in different ways , with the primary focus being the emergence and transformation of design concepts throughout the design process and the ongoing negotiations and discussions between the involved stakeholders in the project . In these analyses , we have focused on which elements of the design process emerged from design interests , which elements emerged from a research interests , and how these elements interacted and affected the ongoing process and decision - making . Building upon these analyses , and informed by the related literature outlined in the previous sections , we have developed the concepts of emergent boundary objects and boundary zones in design to account for the ways in which stakeholder interests and interactions influence the formation of the design concepts in collaborative design research projects . ANALYSIS OF THE METRO STATION PROCESS For the analysis we focus on five key parts of the process : 1 ) Initial discussions about potential collaboration , 2 ) Meeting between design researchers and architects , 3 ) Internal research workshop , 4 ) Development of three design concepts , 5 ) Discussion of design concepts between design researchers and architects . For each of the five key parts of the process we investigate the boundary zones at play as well as the selected key emergent boundary objects . We look into how the research interest and design interest , through dialog , collaboration and negotiation , shape and transform the design space and the design vision . The ultimate goal of the analysis is to identify the mechanisms involved in the establishment and transformation of the design concept as boundary objects . Initial Discussions About Potential Collaboration The project is initiated by discussions between the research project manager and a partner of the architectural firm . As part of a larger research consortium , the architectural firm has committed to take part in a series of design experi - ments . The research project manager and the architectural partner set up two phone meetings to discuss how the project may unfold . In the first phone meeting – illustrated by Figure 3a – the main part of the discussions concern the current agendas of the research group and architectural firm , respectively . Design Research DIS 2014 , June 21 – 25 , 2014 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 749 Figure 3 : Initial discussions : a ) initial positions and limited boundary zone between Design Researchers and Architects . b ) a broader boundary zone and three emergent boundary objects in the shape of potential projects are proposed by the Architects . The emergent boundary objects are illustrated with a dotted line to illustrate that they are not yet fully developed . c ) the selection of one emergent boundary object in the form of the Metro Station project that the Design Researchers and Architects agree to develop together . Since both parties have agreed to collaborate but have had little contact for approximately a year , this meeting serves to establish a boundary zone in which potential collaborative cases could be introduced and discussed . The meeting is successful , in that the two parties agree that there is a potential for developing one or more media architecture installations , which could both fulfill the research agenda and enrich projects that the Architects are engaged in . The research manager subsequently sends the Architects examples of media architecture projects that could inspire the collaboration . For a second meeting the architect partner has selected three potential projects for collaboration , each of which are potential emergent boundary objects and thus illustrated as dotted boxes in Figure 3 - b . The research manager and architect partner discuss the intentions and characteristics of the three projects in their current state . After touching upon a series of issues – the progression of the projects , their geographical location , the type of architecture , the timeframe etc . – the two parties agree on moving forward with one of the projects , namely a Metro Station . While the project has hitherto been developed solely by the Architects , both parties agree that it has the potential to become an interesting joint project , thus forming an emergent boundary object illustrated by the dotted box in Figure 3 - c Emergent Boundary Object The Metro Station and the surrounding plaza ( see Figure 2 ) now form an emergent object . The principle interests of the Architects were quite naturally to ensure that the Metro Station becomes a fine work of architecture but also to find ways of turning it into a prominent part of the city of Stockholm by integrating a media facade into the building . From a research perspective , the interests revolved around the potential to do research into media architecture based on a full - scale , real - life case . The design vision was at this point in time quite vague and the design space had barely been explored . For this initial part of the collaboration only two aspects of the design space , the location and the physical form of the building , had been touched upon . The emergent boundary object was therefore still very open to further development and negotiation . Meeting Between Researchers and Architects Figure 4 : Meeting between Design Researchers and Architects : a ) illustrates the proposed project in the boundary zone which now includes two important , but vicarious , stakeholders , namely the local authorities and citizens . The two vicarious stakeholders are greyed out to illustrate that they are not active co - designers , but that their interests are being addressed . b ) illustrates the result of the meeting in which the project has been discussed further and is now situated evenly in the boundary zone between all four main stakeholders . At a subsequent meeting at the architectural firm , the project is discussed in greater detail . At this meeting , two lead researchers and two architects , including the partner , take part . The main drawings of the building have been developed and accepted by the local authorities , who are project owners and fund the development and operation of the Metro Station . Since the building is placed in the middle of a prominent plaza and will service thousands of citizens , there are a number of concerns that have to be addressed in the project . As such , the local authorities and citizens are vicarious stakeholders in the ongoing discussions . While they are not present at the meeting , the discussions are very much influenced by them since both the researchers and architects are aware that the project ultimately has to satisfy both these parties . Emergent Boundary Object In particular , one document with images of the interior and exterior appearance of the metro station ( Figure 5 ) constituted a pivotal refinement of the emergent boundary object . During the course of the meeting , the researchers and architects discuss how interactive components can be integrated into the building . At this point , many options are discussed , including indoor and outdoor projections , various forms of sensor input and camera tracking and embedded displays . The researchers were attracted by the unique shape of the metro station and the transitional spaces both inside and outside the building , which constitute a rich opportunity to conduct research into the design of media architecture . Previous research in the area has identified eight challenges for media architecture design [ 9 ] and the Metro Station case could provide material , which could Design Research DIS 2014 , June 21 – 25 , 2014 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 750 inform several of these challenges , e . g . integration of media architecture into physical structures and surroundings , and emerging and unforeseen uses of places and systems . Figure 5 : The interior of the Metro Station . The main part of the meeting focused on the interior of the metro station and the researchers were excited about the opportunities offered by the dramatic open space with large plain white walls , which initially seemed to be obvious candidates for media architecture projections . At the same time , a large glass façade allowing for sunshine pouring in , challenged the possibility for using projection technology inside the building . Moreover , the architects pointed out that government regulations presented further constraints by putting high standards with respect to light conditions in public spaces with large numbers of people . Other constraints concerned the mounting of projectors inside the metro station . The architects were concerned about where to mount projectors so that that they would not interfere or obstruct the ‘clean’ appearance of the building . At this point in the process , the design vision was quite loose and was merely formulated as creating some kind of media architecture either inside or outside the metro station . The meeting concluded with an agreement to pursue this joint project , and the researchers commit to examining the potentials and drawbacks of the various concepts that have been discussed . Through these discussions and negotiations , the Metro Station as an emergent boundary object was thus made more concrete and established in the boundary zone between the four main stakeholders . Internal Research Workshop For analytical reasons , we have thus far treated the researchers and architects as two internally homogeneous groups . However , this is a simplification that obscures the fact that there may well be internal tensions and negotiations . This was particularly evident once the agreement to develop a media architecture installation had been reached between the two main stakeholders . The group of researchers was composed of seven individual researchers . Although they all had a joint interest in pursuing media architecture research , they were driven by different research questions and interests , as illustrated in Figure 6 - a . Therefore , a meeting was held to determine if and how these agendas could be aligned within the project . These agendas spanned from developing an understanding of the site as a resource in interaction design from a phenomenological perspective to exploring technological potentials for integrating media façades into architecture . In Figure 6 , the architects , local authorities and citizens served as three vicarious stakeholders ; they were not present , but the discussions were very much influenced by the researchers discussing if and how they could align their own interests with the potentials of developing media architecture components for the metro station and its users . The meeting was comprised of presentations of the individual research agendas and synthesizing discussions . In this case , the group of researchers came to the conclusion that the metro station could in fact serve as an interesting case , which could be examined from different perspectives , as well as form the basis of shared research initiatives . This is illustrated in Figure 6 - b , which shows the move towards individual research agendas aligned with the Metro Station project . The main part of the workshop was organized by the research team , who at the same time had an eye for the design interest of the architects . The process was shaped by the participants’ research interest , which included the site as a resource in design processes , the three - dimensional qualities of space , sources of inspiration for ideation , and sketching . At the same time the workshop was organized in order to address research areas related to the specific challenges when designing media architecture [ 9 ] . Figure 6 : Internal workshop : a ) The interests of the members of the Design Researcher group are initially diverse , and there is no shared understanding of how individual interests can be aligned with the project . The other takeholders are vicarious , therefore greyed out in the illustration . b ) The internal workshop leads to an alignment of the individual researchers around a shared emergent boundary artifact . Emergent Boundary Object The workshop is discussed in more detail in [ 17 ] . Here we highlight one element of the workshop , namely the use of sources of inspiration , which reflected several of the researchers’ interest in the inspiration card design technique Design Research DIS 2014 , June 21 – 25 , 2014 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 751 [ 13 ] . One of the sources of inspiration was a series of works by artist Pablo Valbuena entitled Augmented Sculptures in which the conjunction of angular and clear - cut geometrical shapes and 3D projections enables the painting of an outline of the installation’s edges . The Augmented Sculptures were chosen for the workshops because they both represented the potential of media architecture projections and related to the architects’ profession . Development of Three Design Concepts During the ideation workshop , 12 concepts were developed , which subsequently were discussed by the team of researchers . The evaluation of the twelve concepts revolved around the researchers’ interests into exploring media architecture design challenges , but was also weighed against an assessment of their communicative qualities and the ability to reflect the potentials for the Metro Station media façade . Furthermore , it was taken into consideration how the stakeholders would receive the concepts . It was decided to create three concept videos , aiming at simplicity and ease of communication in order to show what can be done with an LED media façade integrated into the outer staircase above the Metro Station . One of the concepts , Contours , presented visual effects on the façade , and two others , Playhead and Traces , showing different levels of interaction with the façade . Contours plays with the spatial features of the stairs by drawing lines along the stairs emphasizing the architectural expression . It begins with lines drawn around the edge of the stairs , followed by each step being lit slowly upwards , and a similar fade out after a few seconds , see Figure 8 . Figure 7 : Concept development . a ) 12 concepts and their relations to four main stakeholders ; a number of concepts address the interests of one or two main shareholders , but only a few occupy the boundary zone between all four main stakeholders . b ) three concepts were selected because of their potential to tie together the interests of the four stakeholders . In the case of Playhead , the stairs act as a musical score sheet with each step representing pitch in relation to the key . A playhead moves horizontally along the stairs and plays a note for each person occupying the stairs . The note is accompanied by a visual effect , such as a bursting bubble or fireworks . Traces revolves around the footprint or traces that the users of the stairs leave behind . When a person or group of people are seated on the stairs , they generate an aura or circular light around where they sit . If they move to another part of the stairs or leave , they light up new parts of the stairs as long as they are in the given area . The aura itself fades away slowly when no one is sitting in it . Figure 8 : Concept example Traces , captured from video Emergent Boundary Object The researchers decided to visualize Contours , because they believed the succinct style would appeal to the architects , whereas the interactive qualities of Playhead and Traces were a reification of the researchers’ interests in using design to transform social relations in emergent and unforeseen uses . The three concepts all embrace the need for integrating the media architecture into the Metro Station building structure - which was of principal interest to the architects . At the same time the three concepts time all satisfy the researchers’ interests . The three concepts can each be construed as emergent boundary objects , each of which are a concretization of the main design concept . Through a series of negotiations and an alignment of research and design interests , the main concept of the Metro Station media architecture installations has been developed and stabilized . Discussion of Design Concepts Between Researchers and Architects Figure 9 : Meeting between researchers and architects . Through the design process , the emergent boundary object has now been developed to the point of being a proper boundary object , illustrated by an unbroken line . The three concept videos were shown by the researchers to the architects at a short meeting . The researchers consciously decided to show Contours as the first video since they believed that the style and idea of this particular concept would appeal the most to the architects , but it actually turned out that the two other concept videos were also well received . Throughout the design process a series Design Research DIS 2014 , June 21 – 25 , 2014 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 752 of meetings , negotiation of interests , and design investigation has transformed numerous emergent boundary objects ( design ideas and concepts ) into boundary objects entailing a common structure to facilitate coherence across the social world of research and that of design . DISCUSSION The issue of how design projects unfold and why the design concepts end up the way they do is central to design research . While the issue may be addressed from a number of perspectives , we have in this paper sought to demonstrate how the concepts of boundary zones and emergent boundary objects , informed by symbolic interactionism , can support the analysis of the issue in collaborative design projects . Our intent has been to propose the concepts that will guide the analytical gaze towards two aspects that are central to collaborative design projects , namely the intersection between different spheres of interest and the negotiations necessary to align joint efforts , and the highly dynamic and evolving nature of design concepts . While the two concepts share traits with existing concepts , e . g . boundary objects and boundary infrastructures , we find that they help identify , articulate , and recognize the importance of understanding design concepts as dynamic and emergent entities that emerge through negotiation and contest in overlapping spheres of interest . Our intent is not to displace existing concepts from symbolic interactionism , but rather to supplement them in order to better understand the dynamics of design . The concept of boundary zones is intended as a fairly straightforward way of identifying and mapping the overlaps and convergences between involved parties , and the shared interests and conflicts that they potentially entail . As an analytical construct , boundary zones make it easy to switch between levels of analysis , as exemplified in the case in which it was employed both to examine the intersections between major stakeholder groups and internally in the design research group . In the Metro Station case , boundary zones furthermore supported the analysis of which stakeholders hold important design and research agendas to the project and other actors who had been on the sideline . While we have employed it here as a tool for analysis after the project , we hypothesize that boundary zones may also be of value underway in a project as a means for understanding and managing differing agendas . In our treatment of the concept thus far , emergent boundary objects are intended specifically to examine design concepts . While we owe a great debt to existing contributions to symbolic interactionism , we find that the current concepts in the field do not adequately seem to capture the dynamic and evolving nature of design concepts . By introducing emergent boundary objects we meet some of the challenges that interaction designers face when having to put into words the complex nature of the emergence of ideas . In the Metro Station case , the articulation of the design concept as a transforming object helped us identify which particular design artifacts supported ongoing negotiations and underwent reifications . We have introduced the two concepts in parallel because we consider them to be intertwined : an evolving design concept in a collaborative project is a result of ongoing negotiation and alignment in the intersection between different spheres of interest . The annotation technique proposed in this paper has also been developed to encompass both boundary zones and emergent boundary objects . While there are clearly limitations to the concepts – they primarily serve to guide and frame an analysis , rather than provide prescriptive recommendations for design practice or generalizable accounts of how a design concept evolves – in combination they have the benefit of both addressing the interrelations between stakeholders as well as the design concept . Other ways of addressing and annotating design processes often favour one over the other , and specifically focus on the evolution of the design concept , while saying little about the interplay between stakeholders in the process . We have strived to offer a fairly simple way of annotating the concepts in combination . These annotations are intended as an auxiliary means to support analysis . In the Metro Station case , one thing that the annotations helped us reflect upon was the level of stakeholder involvement and the project’s shortcomings in terms of involving end users and local authorities to a very limited degree . CONCLUSION In order to advance the area of Research through Design we have analysed the collaboration between two communities of practice , research and design . By drawing on the concepts of boundary object and negotiating design artefacts we have proposed the notion of boundary zones and emergent boundary object and subsequently investigated how emergent boundary objects dynamically emerge and are transformed in boundary zones throughout the process . The two concepts have enabled us at a micro level to study the dynamic exchange between research interests and design interests in the development of a design concept . In particular , the concepts have shed light on the coupling and interweaving of design and research interests during a design process and how the emergent nature of design artifacts and boundary zone strengthen these relations . We find emergent boundary objects and boundary zones to be promising concepts in our search for a framework for conducting micro analysis of the dynamics of Research through Design . We are encouraged by this study to investigate additional examples of emergent boundary objects in future studies in order to find out more about their nature , for instance when they occur and who takes the lead in creating them , which , in turn , can potentially enrich our understanding of Research through Design processes . While we have not treated the theory of distributed cognition [ 15 ] here , we speculate that it will offer an approach to better understanding the interplay Design Research DIS 2014 , June 21 – 25 , 2014 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 753 between the different entities and actors at play in specific design situations . In continuation , we also intend to examine if and how the concepts can be actively employed to further a research through design process itself , in addition to serving as a means for analyzing it . Our analysis has been limited to investigating a small number of emergent boundary objects and an obvious extension for future research would be to study the emergence of , for example , collections of boundary objects to form a boundary infrastructure [ 5 ] , which facilitates keeping things moving along because they deal in networks of boundary objects serving multiple communities of practice simultaneously [ 5 ] . Finally , as briefly touched upon in the introduction , we speculate that the two concepts may offer insight into the unfolding of collaborative design processes in general . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We would like to thank our industry collaborator , 3XN . Michael J . Muller for feedback on a previous version of this paper . REFERENCES 1 . Basballe , D . A . and Halskov , K . Dynamics of Research through Design . Proc . Designing Interactive Systems 2012 , ACM Press ( 2012 ) 58 - 67 . 2 . Bechky , B . A . Transformation of understanding on a Production Floor . Organization Science vol . 14 no 3 ( 2003 ) 312 - 330 . 3 . Bertelsen , O . W . Elements of a Theory of Design Artefacts . PhD . Dissertation , Aarhus University , Denmark ( 1998 ) . 4 . Binder , T . and Redström , J . Exemplary Design Research . Proc . Wonderground ( 2006 ) 1 - 13 . 5 . Bowker , G . C . , Star , S . L . Sorting Things Out : Classification and Its Consequences . MIT Press ( 1999 ) . 6 . Brandt , E . and Binder , T . Experimental design research : genealogy – intervention – argument . International association of societies of design research : emerging trends in design ( 2007 ) . 7 . Clarke , A . Situational Analysis—Grounded Theory After the Postmodern Turn . Thousand Oaks , Sage ( 2005 ) . 8 . Dalsgaard , P . Research in and through design : an interaction design research approach . Proc . OZCHI ‘10 , ACM Press ( 2010 ) , 200 - 203 . 9 . Dalsgaard , P . , Halskov , K . Designing Urban Media Façades : Cases and Challenges . Proc . CHI 2010 , ACM Press ( 2010 ) 2277 - 2286 . 10 . Dalsgaard , P . , Halskov , K . 2012 . Reflective design documentation . Proc . Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ' 12 ) , ACM Press ( 2012 ) 428 - 437 . 11 . Frayling , C . Research in Art and Design , Royal College of Art Research Papers series 1 , 1 ( 1993 ) , 1 - 5 . 12 . Haeusler , M . H . Media facades : history , technology , content . Avedition , Ludwigsburg , 2009 . 13 . Halskov , K . and Dalsgård , P . Inspiration card workshops . Proc . DIS ' 06 , ACM Press ( 2006 ) 2 - 11 . 14 . Halskov , K . CAVI - An interaction design research lab . interactions , ( 2011 ) , 92 - 95 . 15 . Hutchins , E . Cognition in the wild , MIT Press , Cambridge , 1995 . 16 . Kimble , C . , Grenier , C . and Goglio - Primard , K . Innovation and knowledge sharing across professional boundaries : Political interplay between boundary objects and brokers . International Journal of Information Management 30 ( 2010 ) 437 - 444 . 17 . Korsgaard , H . , Hansen , N . B . , Basballe , D . A . , Dalsgaard , P . and Halskov , K . Odenplan : a media façade design process . Proc . MAB ' 12 , ACM ( 2012 ) 23 - 32 . 18 . Koskinen , I . , Zimmerman , J . , Binder , T . , Redstrom , J . , and Wensveen , S . Design Research Through Practice : From the Lab , Field , and Showroom . Morgan Kaufmann ( 2011 ) . 19 . Lee , C . P . Boundary Negotiating Artifacts : Unbinding the Routine of Boundary Objects and Embracing Chaos in Collaborative Work . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , Springer ( 2007 ) , 16 : 307 - 339 . 20 . Muller , M . J . , Geyer , W . , Brownholtz , B . , Wilcox , E . Millen , D . R . One - hundred days in an activity - centric collaboration environment based on shared objects . Proc CHI 2004 : 375 - 382 21 . Nicolini , D . , Mengis , J . and Swan , J . Understanding the Role of Objects in Cross - Disciplinary Collaboration Organization Science ( 2012 ) 23 : 3 , 612 - 629 . 22 . Rittel , H . W . J . and Webber , M . M . Dilemmas in general theory of planning’ , Policy Sciences 4 / 2 ( 1973 ) : 155 - 169 . 23 . Schmidt , K . , and Bannon , L . Constructing CSCW : The First Quarter Century . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , ( 2013 ) Vol . 22 , Nr . 4 - 6 , 8 . pp . 345 - 372 . 24 . Star , S . L . and Griesemer , J . R . Institutional Ecology , ‘Translations’ and Boundary Objects : Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology , 1907 - 39 . In Social Studies of Science . Sage ( 1989 ) , 19 : 387 - 420 . 25 . Strauss , A . A social worlds perspective . Studies in Symbolic Interaction , 1 , ( 1978 ) 119 - 128 . 26 . Zimmerman , J . , Forlizzi , J . and Evenson , S . Research through design as a method for interaction design research in HCI . Proc . CHI ‘07 , ACM ( 2007 ) , 493 - 502 . 27 . Zimmerman J . , Stolterman , E . and Forlizzi . J . An analysis and critique of Research through Design : towards a formalization of a research approach . Proc . DIS ‘10 , ACM ( 2010 ) , 310 - 319 . Design Research DIS 2014 , June 21 – 25 , 2014 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 754