Crafting Communication Protocols with a San Community in Namibia Peter Kaulbach peter _ kaulbach @ hotmail . de Flensburg University of Applied Sciences Germany , Flensburg Helena Afrikaner Namibia University of Science and Technology Windhoek , Namibia helena @ ictechhub . com . na Brit Stichel brit . stichel @ googlemail . com Flensburg University of Applied Sciences Flensburg , Germany Heike Winschiers - Theophilus hwinschiers @ nust . na Namibia University of Science and Technology Windhoek , Namibia ABSTRACT Researchanddevelopmentcollaborationprojectsbetweenresearchersandruralindigenouscommunitieshavethepotentialtosubstan - tially contribute to knowledge creation while at the same time carrying the risk of miscommunications . As such it is of impor - tance to jointly establish communication protocols considering the vast cultural differences between University procedures and community etiquette . In this paper we present efforts undertaken towards crafting a communication protocol with a collaborating San community in Namibia . Exploring interventions within run - ning projects contributed towards practical resolutions . It has to be noted that a communication protocol needs to continuously evolve throughout the collaboration . CCS CONCEPTS • Social and professional topics → Cultural characteristics . KEYWORDS San , Namibia , communication protocols ACM Reference Format : Peter Kaulbach , Helena Afrikaner , Brit Stichel , and Heike Winschiers - Theophilus . 2021 . CraftingCommunicationProtocolswithaSanCommunity in Namibia . In 3rd African Human - Computer Interaction Conference ( AfriCHI 2021 ) , March 8 – 12 , 2021 , Maputo , Mozambique . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 4 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3448696 . 3448747 1 INTRODUCTION Collaborationsbetween indigenouscommunitiesandresearchteams have great potential to advance knowledge and to be equally bene - ficial for both parties involved if fair partnerships are established . However , all too often , researchers embedded in their own aca - demic and institutionalised ethical procedures , are ill - equipped in establishing and maintaining non - discriminatory cooperation agreements with rural and indigenous communities . Similarly , the Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . AfriCHI 2021 , March 8 – 12 , 2021 , Maputo , Mozambique © 2021 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 8869 - 6 / 21 / 03 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3448696 . 3448747 later have either no previous research partnership experiences and therefore equally rely on their previously formed assumptions about the aliens . Or the community has been " over researched " in which case the mostly bad memories often lead to hostility towards new researchers . While code of ethics can guide the research process communication protocols are needed to enable two parties from such diverse cultural contexts to work together . The understanding of “culture” varies widely . While we acknowledge it to be an ab - stract and analytical construct , we presume that we could describe a sub - culture with a set of incomplete descriptors , such as communi - cation practices , etc . [ 9 ] . We are promoting a transcultural approach , which involves intervention designs beyond simple cultural and logistic constraints but strive for pluriversality by encompassing more than one culture [ 9 ] . In this study we are crafting a com - munication protocol with a remote San community in Donkerbos , Namibia . The community has engaged in a long - term collaboration with the inclusive and collaborative Tech Innovation Hub , under the Faculty of Computing and Informatics at the Namibia Univer - sity of Science and Technology under which numerous projects are being conducted . In this study , data was gathered and analysed regarding the implementation of communication techniques and projects communication needs while exploring community’s moti - vation and suggestions to participate in projects . The development of the communication protocol is a continuous process . 2 RELATED WORK Different perceptions , expectations and understanding of processes can lead to communication barriers [ 2 ] , while differing conventions hinder effective and sustainable collaboration with local African communities [ 5 ] . Researchers collaborating with indigenous com - munities agree that power structures and reciprocity need to be addressed [ 1 ] . Considering past transgressions of researchers in re - gard to research with or rather of San people in Southern Africa , the South African San Institute ( SASI ) spearheaded the development of a San Code of Research ethics [ 4 ] . It promotes the values of respect , honesty , justice and fairness , care as well as following an agreed upon process . However , [ 3 ] have shown in their study that half of the research student participants reverted back to a " generic " good behaviour intend overwriting indigenous ethics protocols . Thus " meaning well " and being respectful but only in one’s own institutionalised conceptualisations of right and wrong behaviour , will not lead to empowered partnerships [ 6 ] . Thus communication 170 AfriCHI 2021 , March 8 – 12 , 2021 , Maputo , Mozambique Peter Kaulbach , Helena Afrikaner , Brit Stichel , and Heike Winschiers - Theophilus and interaction protocols are to be negotiated within each research context [ 9 ] . Populated with practical guidelines , the San code of research ethics can guide the crafting of such communication pro - tocols in - situ . For example , it states " Honesty requires an open and continuous mode of communication between the San and re - searchers " [ 4 ] , which could be in form of community meetings but also remote conversations . 3 METHODOLOGY 3 . 1 The Donkerbos community Donkerbos is a Namibian San resettlement Farm 216km east from Gobabis . Their livelihood is sustained by crop and livestock farming as well as support from the office of the Vice President , Division of the Marginalized Communities with education and drought relief programs . The community consists of 200 San people from the Naro and the Ju / ’hoansi tribe , but all speak Ju / ’hoansi . Beside their home language few of the elders speak Afrikaans , Otjiherero and Damara - nama , and only a hand full speak English . They cannot read and write their home language and most of the elders are not formally educated . Most of the youth are school dropouts , but understand and speak basic English and Afrikaans . A few community mem - bers own cellphones and a number of smart phones were handed out under the collaboration projects . However , there are network challenges in the area . The community can only make calls during the evening and has to walk up the mountain to get connected . So the only way of remote communication is via messages or calls in the evening . 3 . 2 Established research collaboration The community collaborates with the Inclusive Collaborative Tech Innovation Hub , under the Namibia University of Science and Tech - nology . Since 2018 different types of projects have been running concurrently , such as a socio - developmental project promoting resilience among San children to reduce school dropouts , a profit - based inclusive innovation project of augmented reality fridge magnet souvenirs [ 8 ] , and a research - based digital exploration of self - representations of the San [ 7 ] . All community members were involved in media productions , and reflections on how they are and would like to be perceived by " outsiders " . Much focused on their lack of resources and opportunities . Two new projects were jointly conceptualised , a crowdfunding system and a digital pro - motional support for a community campsite . Each research project is constituted by different researchers , for the exception that all infield research activities are led by one of the San Youth activist , co - researcher and co - author of our team . This study was undertaken by a visiting bachelor student in communications , supported by a previously visiting master graduate in intermedia studies , under the supervision of a local professor in computer science . 3 . 3 Intervention approach The study was conducted alongside running and newly initiated projects , with a focus on determining communication needs , explor - ing communication techniques and observing and documenting researcher - community meetings . Two community members served as representatives and mediators , speaking fluent English , and be - ing respected among their community . Communication activities were recorded with audio , video , photographs and field notes . Ad - ditionally to the field work , researcher interviews and a researcher preparation workshop were held at the University , to understand their relation , expectations and behaviour intends in a community setting . The research methodology consisted of two stages each comprising of pre - field , in - field and post - field activities . Figure 1 : Methodology 3 . 4 Sanstarter crowdfunding project communication The aim of the Sanstarter crowdfunding platform is to help the community generate money through their own ideas and support them to start a business . Two community members were previously trained in the creation of crowdfunding campaigns . However , with the aim to include all community members , the parameters of the project and the concept of crowdfunding needed to be communi - cated to all before launching the media production . The concept of crowdfunding was introduced to the community by our San re - searcher . An interactive engaging method of introducing successful crowdfunding projects was realised through participants selecting associative terms from a list ( e . g . pictures , story , purpose , etc . ) . Most agreed that the project story and idea are the most significant , fol - lowed by the ethnic group , pictures and videos . To demonstrate the meaning of the terms , real projects from a crowdfunding platform ( Indiegogo ) were introduced . The community selected project ex - amples they could relate to and was disappointed when learning that those were the least funded campaigns . One community mem - ber : “The housing project which is our biggest need didn’t receive any money at all [ on Indiegogo ] . You see guys this won’t work like we might thought it will . ” Community member 2 added , “if this project did not gather any money at all we should just cancel ours as well . ” Other community members responded : “For you it is easy to say , you live in a good house but for others it is really important . We need the money for housing . ” Researcher 1 interfered , “please remember what we told you earlier about having patience . Not every project will generate money . That does not mean that yours will not . You just need to make a proper plan on how to present . As you can see this housing project , we showed you does not have any information at all . It has one picture and two sentences . That is the reason nobody wants to donate . It looks unprofessional and like a scam . That confirms our explanation from earlier . It is not only the idea that is important or how much you think somebody needs help . It is about the execution and dedication . ” As of next , people discussed in smaller groups possible crowdfunding projects for the community . Eventually the community decided on three projects that benefit the community at large , namely transportation , housing and a small grocery shop . The community successfully created campaigns uploaded on the Sanstarter crowdsourcing plat - form ( sanstarter . ictechhub . com ) . However , technical challenges in regard to on - line payments have yet to be resolved as well as the promotion of the site among possible funders . 171 Crafting Communication Protocols with a San Community in Namibia AfriCHI 2021 , March 8 – 12 , 2021 , Maputo , Mozambique 3 . 5 MTC E - Voucher The aim of this project was to explore whether local telecommunica - tion e - vouchers would be a viable service in such a remote area and whether it could be beneficial to local vendors . Thus a pilot study was agreed on , with MTC providing a start capital of NAD 1000 for two community members from Donkerbos , speaking English and in charge of project phones . In order to create a sustainable operation the basic principles of the business needed to be communicated in a suitable manner . We explored role - play as a communication technique , whereby the two future local vendors played the ven - dors and members of the community played potential customers . First the metaphor of a chicken was used in terms of laying eggs as along as there is a chicken . One of the participants pointed out , “I wouldn’t sell or eat the chicken immediately ; I would rather have it lay eggs and through that we can supply ourselves with eggs and we can sell them . That leads to an income , am I right ? ” Then community members were handed game money , which they used to buy play airtime from the vendors . For every sales a certain per - centage profit , was placed in the " resell account " using coins . After they sold their 1000 NAD they had to decide how much they would re - deposit in the MTC sales account . One community member said , “Let’s sit down and have a meeting about which groceries to buy . ” Another community member stated , “We should not spend all of the money immediately . That means we would have food for a few days but then we are back to zero . I would reinvest the money in more airtime ( prepaid credit ) . ” To be noted is that months after the introduction of the service , the two community members have sustained operation , are regularly selling and depositing money on their sales accounts . 4 COMMUNICATION PROTOCOL In the following we share preliminary communication conventions which have been adopted . It is important to note that the estab - lishment of the communication protocol is an on - going activity , whereby both parties learn while collaborating on diverse projects . 4 . 1 Pre - field Communications Before travelling to the site , the community representatives have to be informed about the arrival , the reasons for the visit , as well as number of sessions to be held , expected participants ( e . g . youth or elders or women ) , and the number of days intended to stay . This communication is considered extremely important to help the community to prepare physically and mentally for the arrival and the sessions . One community member further suggested that “it would make sense , we as a community choose one person per project and this person comes to Windhoek in advance . This person can give an update about the community and we as a community can develop new ideas too , so the person coming to Windhoek can present those . ” . 4 . 2 Community Communications 4 . 2 . 1 Official Communication . The Donkerbos community does not have a chief or councilor in vicinity , but a headman for the San community close by , with community representatives reporting to him . At our first visit we introduced ourselves to the headman and obtained permission to conduct our research and establish a long term collaboration . At all subsequent visits communication was via community representatives only . 4 . 2 . 2 Arrival Community Meeting . At arrival of the research team , the community is always excited as they know they are about to learn something new from the visitors and they are also willing to share their cultural knowledge and skills . Researchers and commu - nity members greet and introduce themselves , both parties report back on the progress and challenges of running projects and discuss the upcoming planned sessions . It is at this point that community members express interest to participate in the sessions and projects of their choice . A schedule is agreed on for the time of the visit . Also to be noted is that this remote community has developed collective interests which need to be accounted for in the communication and planning . 4 . 2 . 3 Departure Community Meeting . Before departure , the com - munity and researchers congregate to discuss the activities and feedback , what they have learned and how they will apply this for the development of the community . During this time , they also talk about their expectation for the project in the long run , this is also time for giving appreciation from both the community and our side . Future project activities as well as new project ideas are presented for each party to think about . No promises are made but options and possibilities are explored . It is of great importance that expectations are managed at all times to avoid disappointments on either side . 4 . 3 Project Communications Considering the diversity of the projects , it is mandatory to clar - ify participants’ expected benefits . Some projects have budgets for professional payments , others only for participant’s compen - sations and other none at all . Equally some projects have short or long - term benefits for individuals or the entire community . The community expressed that they should be consulted in advance , clarifying whether a new project is research - based , political , or support livelihood . For example , following the commercial project of the magnets , where dancers were paid and recorded , the perform - ers complaint that they were no longer asked to dance assuming that it was because they had asked for payment . However , the per - formances were bound to the one project and not included in any other projects . Furthermore , if the projects are conceptually new to the community , additional communications should ensure a full understanding by the community . Such communications can be in form of role - plays , games and other methods as demonstrated above . 4 . 4 Translations Translators play an important role in facilitating communication and interactions . Translators from the community are very impor - tant people as they co - facilitate session and help the community to understand what the session are about . They understand and speak English and Afrikaans and they are trusted by the commu - nity to help during the session as they are seen as educators . Our experience has shown that translators from outside the community have only focused on the language yet were not involved or interest in the success of the projects . On our research team , we have one 172 AfriCHI 2021 , March 8 – 12 , 2021 , Maputo , Mozambique Peter Kaulbach , Helena Afrikaner , Brit Stichel , and Heike Winschiers - Theophilus invested San person , who not only translates in the field but who also interprets in and post - field data , providing recommendations to maintain a lasting and fair partnership . 4 . 5 Socio - cultural Communication A good working relationship with the community was established over time and multiple visits . It has been very important to build relationships and gain mutual trust , as well as understanding differ - ent socio - cultural norms . For example , the ( young ) men are eager to participate and learn new technologies , they are usually fast learners and they take part in the discussions and sessions . They mostly open up to new researchers from the second day onward . On the other hand , woman have been very shy to take part in the discussions and to open up especially in mixed groups . Some of them have over time increased their participation and added valuable contributions , and are now raising their voices . On the visiting researchers side , we equally observe differences in terms of their ability to connect with community members . One researcher mentioned during the interview that “the understanding is missing . I think we need someone else to do these things , not me , because they just want to please me . They are not honest with me” . It is important that every researcher builds their own relationship and as such different levels of researcher preparation workshops should be designed and helped . Non - project related conversations and support activities such as facilitating connections or helping to write grant applications are expected in community work . To be developed is also a conflict resolution technique which is acceptable for both parties . So far misunderstandings have been resolved after one of the parties has brought it to the attention of the other . 4 . 6 Digital Communication As seen in our projects , the community is very much interested in learning and using new communication technologies . [ 7 ] devel - oped a mediated intermedia platform promoting an asynchronous dialogue between the Donkerbos community and other Namibians , to counterfeit stereotyping . While [ 8 ] developed a digital market - ing campaign with community members . In both occasions the community members were trained in media production as well as reflected on their digital footprints . In several projects the commu - nity communicates values and principles through the co - design of apps . Considering that the resettlement will soon be connected to the internet , much more digital communication literacy needs to be transferred to avoid cyber - threats and ensure they can effectively use digital communication to their benefits . 4 . 7 Remote Communication It is very important to maintain the relationship with the com - munity after the visit . Once back , regular remote communication allows to share information about the project status , unrelated fund - ing opportunities , news like covid - 19 , demonstrating commitment to the partnership and general interest in supporting each other . Communication after a field trip or project is a requirement for a sustainable collaboration . Only if there is a continuous conver - sation between research team and community , trust is build and community goals are met . However , it has been a challenge to stay in regular contact with such a remote community considering the bad telecommunication connection . 5 CONCLUSION Communication protocols need to be jointly developed over time to cater for the specifics of a collaboration . While one can be guided by existing ethics codes such as the [ 4 ] , we equally promote a bottom - up approach where protocols are developed concurrently to projects within long term collaborations . This study provided an insight in different communication aspects during intercultural interactions and how interactive methods in a community setting can be conducted successfully . The communication protocol will be finalised during the next field visits . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Margot Brereton , Paul Roe , Ronald Schroeter , and Anita Lee Hong . 2014 . Beyond ethnography : Engagement and reciprocity as foundations for design research out here . In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 1183 – 1186 . [ 2 ] AmyColquhoun , JanisGeary , andKarenJ . Goodman . 2013 . Challengesinconduct - ing communitydriven research created by differing ways of talking and thinking about science : A researcher’s perspective . International Journal of Circumpolar Health ( 2013 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3402 / ijch . v72i0 . 21232 [ 3 ] Naska Goagoses , Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , and Tariq Zaman . 2019 . Com - munity protocols for researchers : using sketches to communicate interaction guidelines . AI & SOCIETY ( 2019 ) , 1 – 13 . [ 4 ] South African San Institute . 2017 . SAN CODE OF RESEARCH ETHICS . http : / / trust - project . eu / wp - content / uploads / 2017 / 03 / San - Code - of - RESEARCH - Ethics - Booklet - final . pdf [ 5 ] Anicia N . Peters , Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , Kagonya Awori , Nicola J . Bidwell , Edwin Blake , Arun Kumar , and Shilumbe Chivuno - Kuria . 2014 . Collaborating with Communities in Africa : A Hitchhikers Guide . In CHI ’14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Toronto , Ontario , Canada ) ( CHI EA ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1969 – 1974 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2559206 . 2581313 [ 6 ] Yvonne Rogers and Gary Marsden . 2013 . Does He Take Sugar ? Moving beyond the Rhetoric of Compassion . Interactions 20 , 4 ( July 2013 ) , 48 – 57 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2486227 . 2486238 [ 7 ] Brit Stichel , Edwin Blake , Donovan Maasz , Colin Stanley , Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , and Helena Afrikaner . 2019 . Namibian Indigenous Communities Reflecting on Their Own Digital Representations . In Proceedings of the 9th Interna - tional Conference on Communities and Technologies - Transforming Communities ( Vienna , Austria ) ( C & T ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 51 – 59 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3328320 . 3328378 [ 8 ] Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , Veera Virmasalo , Marly M Samuel , Brit Stichel , and Helena E Afrikaner . 2020 . Facilitating Design for the Unknown : an Inclusive Innovation Design Journey with a San Community in the Kalahari Desert . In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Design Creativity ( ICDC 2020 ) . The Design Society , 263 – 270 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 35199 / ICDC . 2020 . 33 [ 9 ] Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , Tariq Zaman , and Colin Stanley . 2017 . A classifi - cation of cultural engagements in community technology design : introducing a transcultural approach . AI & SOCIETY ( 6 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00146 - 017 - 0739 - y 173