V . Pipek et al . ( Eds . ) : IS - EUD 2009 , LNCS 5435 , pp . 275 – 284 , 2009 . © Springer - Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009 Observing End - User Customisation of Electronic Patient Records Cecily Morrison and Alan F . Blackwell University of Cambridge , Computer Laboratory JJ Thompson Avenue , Cambridge , UK , CB3 9EU { Cecily . Morrison , Alan . Blackwell } @ cl . cam . ac . uk Abstract . The contemporary practice of medicine , which is concerned both with national standards of audit and innovation through local customisation , is a prime domain for end - user development . In this paper we describe four experi - ences of end - user development in this domain that offer interesting empirical examples . We look at existing practices through considering end - user customi - sation of paper charts ( 1 ) , compare the end - user customisation facilities provided by two applications for electronic patient records ( 2 ) , assess the struc - ture of an actual end - user development using one of these ( 3 ) , and propose a longitudinal study of end - user customisation building on this work ( 4 ) . Keywords : Patient records , Healthcare , End - user customization . 1 Introduction Contemporary medical practice is fundamentally concerned with the definition and execution of standardised procedures . The creation of new standard procedures by individual hospitals or units , and the local refinement of existing procedures , is com - monplace . Such local customization , even if minor , can be seen in a positive light , encouraging reflective professional practice [ 1 ] , as well as innovation . Despite these potential benefits that procedural diversity carries , it causes problems for the applica - tion of information technology to clinical practice , which for economic reasons is often deployed across a large number of client institutions . This conflict is well illus - trated by the significant difficulties encountered in the implementation of the British National Program for Information Technology , a very large scale deployment of stan - dardised clinical administration software [ 2 ] . The combination of requirements , for both standardisation and customisation , means that Electronic Patient Record ( EPR ) systems are a natural target for end - user development or end - user customisation . ( In this paper , we will refer to both as EUD . ) Indeed , leading EPR products offer in addition to their standardised set of procedures and record formats , significant capabilities to support local end - user development . The already established medical practice of defining and refining procedures makes EUD application use in medical environments particularly interesting to study , as the practitioners are familiar with the process but not the technology . Such a situation provides the opportunity to assess customisation procedures without the use 276 C . Morrison and A . F . Blackwell of technology as well as a capability to home in on the problems stemming from the technology use , as we can assume that the process of negotiating customised proce - dures is already smoothly established . This paper highlights a number of examples from our experiences with customisa - tion procedures and EUD technology employed in healthcare environments . We begin by investigating the process of customisation without technology , by detailing how paper charts were developed in an intensive care unit ( 1 ) . Moving on to look at customisation of technology , we present a comparison of the initial customisation procedures of two EPR systems , GE Healthcare Centricity EMR [ 3 ] and IMDsoft Metavision [ 4 ] ( 2 ) . We then focus on a single system , Metavision , and explore how system structure affects end - user development ( 3 ) . Finally , we change focus from the initial to the long - term practice of customisation , and propose how one might study long - term EUD usage in a medical environment ( 4 ) . Despite the brevity of these examples , we aim to demonstrate in our conclusion that studies in the medical environment can offer insight into a wide variety of issues in the EUD application development process . 2 Customisation on Paper ( Case 1 ) As noted in the introduction , the creation and refinement of new procedures in medi - cal contexts is both common and productive . Indeed it is considered an important skill for senior clinical practitioners and a way to provide innovative patient care . These procedures are traditionally deployed through the development of appropriate charts . Below we look at the customisation of paper charts found in an intensive care unit ( ICU ) of a cardiothoracic specialist , research - oriented hospital in the UK . We first detail a brief example of process and then discuss the end - result . 2 . 1 Customisation of the CCOC Paper Chart A tremendous amount of data about a patient ' s state is collected from the many ma - chines to which she is attached – heart rate , fluid balance , oxygen levels and blood results to name just a few . This data is organized in various charts , perhaps as many as 10 , for use by different kinds of practitioners ( e . g . nurses vs . doctors ) . In order to utilize such a wealth of information , the director of this ICU discouraged narrative observations on charts , in favour of formalised tabular formats that could be easily reviewed and compared . The most commonly used chart shared by all practitioners , the Critical Care Observation Chart ( CCOC ) , became , as a result , formalised to an extent that it did not accommodate the more diverse aspects of patient care with which nurses are concerned . In response , nurses developed the habit of turning the CCOC over , to write less structured observations on the back . However , as unstructured text presents problems in consistency and standard interpretation , the ICU nursing staff decided to define a standardised structure for nursing observations too . They revised the CCOC by print - ing another grid on the reverse side , providing another , but different , knowledge structure for use by nurses .