Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) Group Decision and Negotiation ( 2020 ) 29 : 747 – 801 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10726 - 020 - 09678 - y 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer‑Mediated Group Communication and Performance : An Empirical Study Viju Raghupathi 1 · Raquel Benbunan‑Fich 2 Published online : 2 June 2020 © Springer Nature B . V . 2020 Abstract In light of the pervasiveness of collaborative decision making and technology in organizations , this research examines computer mediated collaboration using the lens of social capital . We draw from the Distributed Cognition Theory and others for our socio - technical investigation that incorporates the technical component as the artifact of electronic memory ( group memory ) , and the social component as the history of interactions between members ( group history ) . We study these under the mediating influence of the relational social capital dimensions of relational close - ness and relational trust . Our study shows how social capital adds an important flavor to collaborative performance . We highlight how the traditional premise of memory being an unequivocal enhancer of group performance gets altered if one fails to consider the influence of relational social capital in the equation . We propose to practitioners that collaborative technology that offers memory cannot be viewed independently , but as a vehicle that impacts performance through the dynamics of social capital of the group . Most importantly , our research reinforces the need for a novel perspective to collaborative development . With the diaspora of technological advancement , there needs to be a transition in perceiving collaborative development as a concurrent , rather than a sequential , process of discussion and development of group activity . Keywords Social capital · Group performance · Group history and group memory · Distributed cognition · Relational closeness and relational trust · Artifact * Viju Raghupathi Vraghupathi @ brooklyn . cuny . edu Raquel Benbunan - Fich Raquel . Benbunan - Fich @ baruch . cuny . edu 1 Koppelman School of Business , Brooklyn College of the City University of New York , 2900 Bedford Avenue , Brooklyn , NY 11210 , USA 2 Zicklin School of Business , Baruch College of the City University of New York , One Bernard Baruch Way , New York , NY 10010 , USA 748 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 1 Introduction Current trends in organizations highlight the widespread deployment of collabo - rative structures including virtual teams , self - managed teams and team - based organizations ( Cheng et al . 2016 ; Friar and Meyer 2003 ; Klotz et al . 2014 ; Muth - usamy et al . 2005 ; Strubler and York 2007 ) . Teams or groups offer multiple per - spectives and combined efforts when compared to individuals , to such an extent that the difference between the success and failure for organizations may no longer lie in technology or methods alone , but in how groups contribute , perform and adapt to evolving technologies . Even though a group is composed of individuals , group performance is not a mere aggregate of individual member capabilities , due to the presence of group dynamics . A standing example is from the 1980 Winter Olympics at Lake Placid in which the United States hockey team with its novice , inexperienced , collegiate players won over the renowned Soviet Union team composed of the most profes - sional players who had won every championship game from 1954 ( Mojzisch et al . 2014 ) . The United States team was able to compensate for their relative inexperi - ence simply because of their superior group dynamics . This game , referred to as the ‘miracle on ice’ is often cited as a pinnacle for group dynamics in group per - formance ( Lewin 1945 ) . Naturally , investigation into the core elements of groups is critical to both academia and industry ( Benbunan - Fich et al . 2002 ; Cheng et al . 2016 ; Smith and McKeen 2011 ; Wagner 2004 ) . Advancement in technology has enabled organizations to bring about new ways of collaboration and interaction for groups ( Klotz et al . 2014 ) . Group members can now communicate from the same or different place ( collocated vs . dispersed ) , and at the same or different times ( synchronous vs . asynchronous ) . Organizations deploy teams both for the purpose of coordinating work and at the same time helping employees accomplish more than they would individually ( Ilgen et al . 2005 ; McGrath et al . 2000 ; Millhiser et al . 2011 ) . Based on their needs and func - tional requirements , organizations form different kinds of teams . Teams can be formed on a long - term basis with members who work together on multiple pro - jects . In these established teams , members have the opportunity to develop a rich history of interactions with one another . Alternatively , teams can be formed on a short - term basis with members who come together only for the gestation of the project . Members in such ad hoc teams do not have sufficient time to interact and develop a history . Selecting the optimum type of team that will maximize perfor - mance remains a challenge to managers . And , research has provided inconsistent findings in this aspect . In the deployment of established teams , organizations can recoup advantages such as information sharing ( Carley 1986 ; Stasser et al . 1995 ) , cohesion ( Yoo and Alavi 2001 ) , decision quality ( Mennecke and Valacich 1998 ) , trust ( Meyerson et al . 1996 ) and shared mental models ( Carlson and Zmud 1999 ; Kock 2004 ) , but can face limitations such as groupthink ( Janis 1982 ) , evaluation apprehension , conformance pressure ( Nunamaker et al . 1991 ) , and domination by a few members . With ad hoc teams , they may gain diversity in viewpoints ( Guzzo and Dickson 1996 ; McGrath 1984 ; Shaw and Barrett - Power 1998 ) , but suffer 749 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… losses from low cohesion ( Shaw and Barrett - Power 1998 ) and lack of integration . Adding to the challenge is the resulting turnover from environmental factors such as transfers , mergers , layoffs , bankruptcies or other natural calamities , necessitat - ing iterative recruitment efforts ( Millhiser et al . 2011 ) . A critical element in groups is the cognitive component arising from the infor - mation processing capabilities of members . Since the objective of teams is to effectively synthesize and process information for decision making , this aspect undoubtedly takes on added importance . In collaboration , members have the dual function of recalling other members’ information and of bringing their own ideas to the group table ( Nunamaker et al . 1991 ) . The latter function involves keeping the information one wants to contribute in an active state , while simultaneously paying attention to the contributions of other members ( Mojzisch et al . 2014 ; Tyran and George 2002 ) . The information overload arising from the multiplicity of views and perspectives inherent in groups can further inhibit processing . Additionally , tasks can vary in the kind of cognitive processing required from members . In McGrath’s circumplex model , group tasks are classified on a continuum of the degree to which they entail cognitive versus behavioral performance requirements from members ( McGrath 1984 ; Straus and McGrath 1994 ) . Certain types such as decision making tasks ( that have no correct or objective solutions ) or cognitive conflict tasks ( that require resolving conflicting viewpoints ) may need higher cognitive performance from members ( Pucher and Lehner 2011 ) , in comparison to others such as planning or brainstorming tasks ( that require idea generation ) that may require higher behav - ioral coordination than cognitive performance from members ( Straus and McGrath 1994 ) . In this context , the Information Processing Theory proposes a multitude of factors that can facilitate group information processing and recall—such as role of individual preferences , amount of information processed , extent of familiarity with the information ( Hightower and Sayeed 1996 ) and cognitive limitations on chunks of information that can be recalled by an individual at a time ( Stasser et al . 1995 ) . Organizations offer artifacts such as documentations , analysis and design patterns , source code , requirements and test cases , to function as cognitive or memory aids in enabling processing and recall ( Fach 2001 ; Fowler 1997 ; Frakes and Terry 1996 ; Gamma et al . 1994 ; Sarmiento and Stahl 2008 ; Schmidt 1995 ; Sugumaran et al . 2000 ) . However , there is debate within the research community on whether provi - sion of memory aids or memory equivalents actually enhance or inhibit group per - formance . While some studies show that collective memory is efficient in tasks that entail recall and recognition ( Hinsz 1990 ; Vollrath et al . 1989 ) as well as problem solving ( Libby et al . 1987 ; Littlepage and Silbiger 1992 ) , others claim that it actu - ally promotes the phenomenon of collaborative inhibition that results in members recalling less than they would nominally ( Barber et al . 2010 ; Foley et al . 2014 ; Har - ris et al . 2008 ; Rajaram 2011 ; Rajaram and Pereira - Pasarin 2010 ; Weldon and Bell - inger 1997 ) . Most of these studies however focus on members’ working memory . More research and clarity is warranted , particularly in the area of group memory offered by the collaborating technology . Research in computer - mediated communication ( CMC ) has traditionally evolved around several theoretical foundations . The Social Presence Theory ( SPT ) by Short et al . ( 1976 ) , for one , focuses on the ability of collaborating media to offer nonverbal 750 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 cues that communicate the salience of the other members in interaction . This theory has been used in understanding media choice , media use , and the influence of vari - ous media capabilities on the degree of perception of social presence ( Hess et al . 2009 ; Schumann et al . 2017 ; Tang et al . 2013 ) . The Media Richness Theory by Daft and Lengel ( 1986 ) is yet another theory that looks at the efficiency of different com - munication media to reduce equivocality ( which is the degree to which the informa - tion is subject to multiple interpretations ) in decision making . It proposes that rich media are those that provide more nonverbal cues than lean media and can reduce the equivocality of a situation . The theory has been used to examine the effects of factors in the communication system such as multiplicity of cues and immediacy of feedback on decision quality ( Kahai and Cooper 2003 ; Pollach 2008 ; Vasquez et al . 2017 ) and in terms of enriching the mobile experience of consumers ( Davis 2010 ; Li et al . 2012 ) . The Media Synchronicity Theory ( MST ) , along the lines of MRT , focuses on the ability of the media to support synchronicity which is a shared pattern of coordinated behavior among individuals working together towards a com - mon objective ( Dennis et al . 2008 , p . 575 ) . The theory has been used to evaluate and describe physical capabilities of media ( DeLuca and Valacich 2006 ; Muhren et al . 2009 ) and to explore the impact on social presence or user satisfaction on group per - formance ( Munzer and Holmer , 2009 ; Tang et al . 2013 ) . The Social Influence The - ory ( Fulk et al . 1987 ) and the Social Information Processing Theory ( Walther 1992 ) respectively focus on the communication medium being socially constructed in the member interactions within a social network , and the nature of the interactions man - ifesting relational dimensions that need to be emphasized . These theories emphasize the social processes that occur from members’ interactions . Within the multiplic - ity of theories enveloping CMC , two broad themes emerge—a technical media - dependent perspective ( Yoo and Alavi 2001 ) and a social construction of technol - ogy perspective ( Pinch and Bijker 1984 ) . The technical media - dependent approach purely focuses on the characteristics of the communication medium ( the technology ) in collaboration . The social construction of technology perspective focuses on the social factors that influence the way in which the technology is perceived and used by the group in collaboration ( Bijker 1995 ) . The media - dependent approach , while highlighting the technical factors , overlooks the contextual and social factors in col - laboration . The social construction perspective , while looking at the social factors , fails to consider the technical factors of the medium in collaboration ( Yoo and Alavi 2001 ) . There is , therefore , potential for an integrative approach that considers both the social and technical factors in collaboration . We address this potential as we adopt an integrative socio - technical approach and draw from the tenets of the Distributed Cognition Theory ( DCT ) . We find DCT to be an appropriate umbrella theory for our research context . Collabora - tion is inherently a cognitive endeavor as it entails processing information from multiple members in addressing a group task . The DCT extends the concept of cognition as distributed in the collaboration system in the interactions between the components of technology , tools / artifacts , and people . There are two aspects to distributed cognition—social and structural ( Hansen and Lyytinen 2009 ; Hol - lan et al . 2000 ) . The social distribution of cognition arises from the interac - tions between members , while the structural distribution occurs in the exchange 751 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… between a member and an artifact ( in collaboration ) with task - related information ( Mangalaraj et al . 2014 ) . Since computer - mediated collaboration includes inter - actions with members and with technical artifacts ( Flor and Hutchins 1991 ; Sharp and Robinson 2008 ; Sharp et al . 2009 ) and the DCT emphasizes the collabora - tive process as distributed across individuals and artifacts ( Hollan et al . 2000 ) , an analysis of cognitive activities that incorporates the role of artifacts is appro - priate . Accordingly , in our research we perceive social distribution of cognition as manifested in the interactions between members ( the history of interactions or group history ) , and structural distribution of cognition in the interactions of members with a technological artifact that contains task - related information . In our research we conceptualize the artifact of an electronic group memory that is offered by the collaborative technology . This artifact contains task - related infor - mation since it serves as a repository of task - related interactions , and members interact with it to retrieve and process / reprocess information . The structural dis - tribution of cognition therefore lies in the interactions of members with this elec - tronic memory ( artifact ) . Accordingly , our research evaluates the social aspect of collaboration using the presence or absence of group history , and the struc - tural / technical aspect of collaboration using the presence or absence of electronic group memory , within a synchronous computer - mediated environment . Most importantly , we conduct this socio - technical investigation of computer - mediated performance by introducing the role of relational social capital in col - laboration . Any form of collaboration entails a fundamental element of relation - ship development as members interact and exchange resources with each other . Social capital is founded on the patterns of the linkages and relationships arising from such exchange ( Nahapiet and Ghoshal 1998 ) . It encompasses factors ( such as interpersonal relationships , shared sense of identity , shared norms , and reci - procity of communication ) that enable groups to function effectively in accom - plishing a group task ( Bourdieu 1986 ) . Among the many dimensions including structural , cognitive and relational social capital ( Nahapiet and Ghoshal 1998 ) , in this research we focus on the relational social capital . For details on the structural and cognitive dimensions refer to Nahapiet and Ghoshal ( 1998 ) . Relational social capital relates to the characteristics and qualities of interpersonal relationships such as trust , trustworthiness , shared norms , and sense of identity with others ( Nahapiet and Ghoshal 1998 ) . We study the influence of relational social capital on the impact of group history and group memory on performance . While most CMC studies look at aspects such as the mode of communica - tion ( face - to - face versus online or hybrid ) , the software in communication , or the importance of anonymity and cues in communication , our study induces a novel social capital lens to study group performance . In addition , in contrast to most studies that look at working memory and recall ( Mojzisch et al . 2014 ) , ours focuses on the role of memory that is offered by technology , as an artifact in col - laboration . Our research adds an interesting flavor in demonstrating that the tra - ditional paradigm of group memory unequivocally enhancing group performance gets altered , if one fails to consider the social capital dynamics within the group setting . Our overarching research question therefore is : 752 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 “What is the relative impact of group memory and group history , in conjunc - tion with relational social capital , on synchronous computer - mediated group performance ? ” Our paper is organized as follows : Sect . 2 provides a background for the research by drawing from relevant theoretical foundations ; Sect . 3 describes the research framework ; Sect . 4 details the research methodology ; Sect . 5 discusses the data anal - yses and results ; Sect . 6 offers an integrative discussion , synthesizing the results ; Sect . 7 provides the scope and limitations of the study ; and finally , Sect . 8 concludes with directions for future research . 2 Research Background Collaboration can occur in interactions with or without technology . In this study , we focus on technology - enabled collaboration , also referred to as computer - medi - ated communication ( CMC ) . Prior work on groups and technology has emphasized the relevance of teamwork quality ( Easley et al . 2003 ) , communication and trust ( Burgoon 2010 ; Sarker et al . 2011 ; Wang and Benbasat 2008 ) , and navigability and visual impact of the technology ( Vance et al . 2008 ) . It has been proposed that in the domain of collaborative technologies , multiple models with different theoreti - cal perspectives need to be considered so as to avoid a streetlamp effect—which is a myopic search for solutions performed under the light cast by one particular model ( Poltrock and Handel 2010 ) . These multiple models should not be purely technolog - ically deterministic but should recognize the social dimensions as well . We endorse this view as we describe the main constructs of our socio - technical approach . 2 . 1 Technical Perspective to Collaboration : Group Memory The technical or the media dependent perspective focuses on the communication medium ( technology ) as an important element in collaboration . For the theoretical rationale for this perspective we draw from the Distributed Cognition Theory ( DCT ) and the Media Synchronicity Theory ( MST ) . The landscape of collaboration has evidenced certain trends . First , there is more social interaction among actors or members within a network . Second , there is a quest to introduce external augments and artifacts to foster enhanced communica - tion and feedback into the collaborative process . Such an environment therefore pre - sents potential for emergence of cognitive perspectives that transcend the traditional ones associated with individuals alone ( Flor and Hutchins 1991 ; Mangalraj et al . 2014 ) . The DCT defines distributed cognition as “a broader conception that includes phenomena that emerge in social interactions as well as in interactions between people and structure in their environments” ( Hollan et al . 2000 , p . 177 ) . Clearly this conception extrapolates the traditional view of cognition as something con - fined to an individual’s internal processes . It is evident that collaboration involves both aspects of social and structural distribution of cognition . In the technical per - spective , we incorporate the structural distribution of cognition as an outcome of 753 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… information processing interlaced between internal cognitive processes and external artifacts with task - related information . In our research , the external artifact is the group memory that is provided by the technology , and structural cognition is what arises in the interactions between members and group memory in storing , retriev - ing , and processing information related to the collaborative task . In trying to recall information in solving a group task , in addition to searching their memory , members may consult an external artifact such as group memory to retrieve relevant material either from past discussions or from other member contributions . In this manner , cognition is distributed in the structure of the interactions between the members and the memory artifact . There have been studies that have used different kinds of arti - facts to demonstrate the influence of structural cognition ( Flor and Hutchins 1991 ; Mangalraj et al . 2014 ; Sharp and Robinson 2008 ; Sharp et al . 2009 ) . Mangalraj et al . ( 2014 ) examined the performance of cognitive structures arising from the interplay between levels of structural distribution using design patterns ( in programming ) as the artifact . Sharp and Robinson ( 2008 ) and Sharp et al . ( 2009 ) incorporated DCT to study extreme programming teams and agile development teams respectively with the use of artifacts such as story cards and flipcharts . We also draw from the Media Synchronicity Theory ( MST ) primarily because of its focus on the capabilities of the technology medium . The MST proposes a medium as having certain characteristics that enable synchronicity , which is a shared pattern of coordinated behavior among members working on a task ( Dennis et al . 2008 ) . The theory breaks down the ability of a medium in terms of the char - acteristics of conveyance ( transmitting large amounts of information ) and conver - gence ( communicating a shared understanding of information ) . The theory proposes capabilities such as transmission velocity , parallelism in transmission , symbol sets in communication , rehearsability , and reprocessability of information , as contribut - ing to the features of conveyance and convergence ( Tang et al . 2013 ) . Out of these , in our research we focus on the characteristic of reprocessability , which is the ability of the medium to reprocess information after exchange , to represent the technical aspect to collaboration . Reprocessability offers the opportunity to revisit , reexam - ine , and reprocess information from other members before contributing to a group decision . Reprocessability is relevant to our research context as it impacts computer - mediated collaboration in two specific ways : first , it allows members to revisit prior messages for additional consideration before exchange ( Dennis et al . 2008 ) ; and sec - ond , it allows members to follow the communication thread after exchange ( Nunam - aker et al . 1991 ) . It therefore represents an equivalent to human memory in a group context and is sometimes referred to as group remembering ( Sarmiento and Stahl 2008 ) . We conceptualize this construct using the artifact of group memory that is offered by the collaborative technology . Prior research on group memory has been in the context of the impact of ano - nymity on idea generation ( Connolly et al . 1990 ; Hayne et al . 2003 ) , information exchange in hidden profile task , information recall in collaboration ; the influ - ence of individual differences in working memory capacity on group performance ( Mozjzisch et al . 2014 ) ; the role of emotional salience of information on collective memory ( Choi et al . 2017 ) ; the role of underlying mechanisms on social remember - ing ( Rajaram and Maswood 2017 ; Rajaram and Pereira - Pasarin 2010 ) ; and the role 754 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 of social contagion in spread of false memory among members ( Hirst and Echter - hoff 2012 ; Rajaram and Pereira - Pasarin 2010 ; Roediger et al . 2009 ) . Most of these studies are on working memory . Among the few empirical ones , Tyran and George ( 2002 ) compare and contrast group memory in software inspection meeting process for face - to - face groups with and without memory ( non - electronic ) and computer - mediated groups with electronic memory . While they found that all groups reported satisfaction with the process , computer - mediated groups with the electronic memory performed better than all others . However , even this study did not compare com - puter - mediated groups with memory with those without . There is therefore pau - city in research that is empirical and on electronic memory within the computer - mediated scenario . We aim to fill this void by conducting an empirical study and by focusing on electronic memory in the context of CMC . Additionally , in today’s digital era with the pervasiveness of technology , users are increasingly reliant on technology for information retrieval / processing to such an extent that they do not make any conceivable effort to store / retain information in human memory ( this has been referred to as digital amnesia ) . Therefore , research that explores the role of memory in collaboration is imperative and offers insight on the evolving transition in collaborative work . In this research the term ‘group memory’ refers to the elec - tronic memory artifact that is provided by the collaborative technology . 2 . 2 Social Perspective to Collaboration : Group History In contrast to the technical perspective that focuses on the medium of communica - tion , the social perspective focuses on the social or contextual factors in collabora - tion ( Carlson and Zmud 1999 ; Chidambaram 1996 ; McGrath et al . 1993 ; Pinch and Bijker 1984 ; Walther 1995 ; Yoo and Alavi 2001 ) . Research has proposed that , in groups , social factors such as cohesion ( Yoo and Alavi 2001 ) , familiarity between members ( Chidambaram 1996 ) , and social presence ( Carlson and Zmud 1999 ; Walther 1995 ) are relevant in terms of the utilization of the technological medium of collaboration . The emphasis is on how different groups adapt the same technol - ogy in different ways and develop customized routines for collaboration ( Nunam - aker et al . 1991 ; Orlikowski and Iacono 2001 ; Pentland and Feldmanm 2007 ; Yoo and Alavi 2001 ) . For the theoretical foundations for this perspective , we draw from the DCT ( Hollan et al . 2000 ) and the social construction of technology perspective ( Pinch and Bijker 1984 ) . The DCT ( Hollan et al . 2000 ) emphasizes cognition as socially distributed in the interactions and dynamic exchange between members engaged in a collaborative task . As members work together over a period of time ( group history ) , they develop a cognitive system that is distributed in their interactions and which facilitates infor - mation exchange and processing ( social distribution of cognition ) . The longer the group history and the interaction between members , the more sophisticated the cog - nition is socially distributed , facilitating efficient exchange of even complex and equivocal information . In our research we represent the social distribution of cogni - tion using the group history in groups . 755 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… In addition to DCT , we draw from the tenets of the social constructive of technol - ogy perspective ( Bijker 1995 ; Orlikowski 1992 ) to computer - mediated communica - tion which proposes that the social context of technology ( the way in which technol - ogy is used and by whom it is used ) can alter the perception of the strength of the collaborating medium ( Carlson and Zmud 1999 ) . Studies that use this perspective propose that media in use can exhibit different characteristics than media as con - ceived ( e . g . , DeSanctis and Poole 1994 ; Fulk 1993 ; Fulk et al . 1987 ; 1990 ; Lee 1994 ; Markus 1994 ; Ngwenyama and Lee 1997 ; Walther 1995 ; Yates and Orlikowski 1992 ) . Due to the presence of certain social factors such as cohesion ( Yoo and Alavi 2001 ) or familiarity with each other ( Chidambaram 1996 ) , groups can perceive and utilize even lean media to be rich in processing information ( Carlson and Zmud 1999 ; Walther 1995 ) . Familiarity of members with each other arises from a history of interactions from working together ( group history ) . Groups in which members have a rich history of interactions ( established groups ) can develop working routines that help them appropriate the technological medium more effectively than groups in which members are relatively new to each other ( ad hoc groups ) . In comparing groups with history ( established ) and those without history ( ad hoc ) , research however shows contradictory findings . While some empirical studies propose the advantages of ad hoc groups in terms of the diversity of views , others pose the same diversity as resulting in intragroup conflict , adversely impacting per - formance ( Maznevski and Chudoba 2000 ) . Even though there are studies on vari - ous aspects of established and ad hoc teams ( Carlson and Zmud 1999 ; Hayne et al . 2003 ; Yoo and Alavi 2001 ) , to our knowledge , there is not much empirical work in terms of an integrated socio - technical approach combining the factors of group his - tory and group memory on group performance . In this research , henceforth , we will refer to groups with history as established and groups without history as ad hoc . 2 . 3 Social Capital Lens to Group Performance Group collaboration involves an underlying element of relationship development . Relationships are generally created through exchanges between group members . It is the pattern of linkages and relationships built through such exchanges between members that form the foundation for social capital ( Nahapiet and Ghoshal 1998 ) . In the broadest sense , ‘social capital’ encompasses those social relationships that help people get along with each other , and act more effectively , than they could as isolated individuals . The term social capital was originally coined by Jacobs ( 1961 ) to represent the network of strong personal relationships that develop over time and form the basis for trust , cooperation , and collective action in the development of city neighbor - hoods . Early usage of the concept was confined to resources inherent in family rela - tions and in community social organizations . Later on , Coleman ( 1990 ) developed a comprehensive theory of social capital which was applied in relation to the study of actors who are pursuing any interest - driven goals . Bringing social capital to a group context reflects that group members need to network or interact with each other to exchange , transfer , and diffuse knowledge or 756 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 information necessary to complete a task . The networks of relationships constitute a valuable resource for the conduct of social affairs , providing team members with the collectively owned capital ( Bourdieu 1986 ) . Four levels of analysis have been suggested for studying social capital namely individual , group , organizational , and national ( Gabbay and Leenders 1999 ) . In the current research , we apply social capital at a group level within a network ( group ) through which the members have access to needed resources for collabo - ration . Proponents of social capital focus on the significance of relationships as a resource for social action ( Bourdieu 1986 ; Burt 1992 ; Coleman 1990 ) . Nahapiet and Ghoshal ( 1998 ) identified three dimensions of social capital—structural , cognitive and relational—based on Granovetter’s ( 1992 ) concept of structural and relational embeddedness . Structural social capital is the configuration of linkages or con - nections between the people ( actors ) in a network ( Burt 1992 ) . Cognitive capital refers to those resources providing shared norms , representations , interpretations , and systems of meaning among parties such as shared language and codes ( Arrow 1974 ; Cicourel 1973 ; Monteverde 1995 ) and shared narratives ( Orr 1990 ) . Rela - tional social capital describes the kind of personal relationships people develop with each other through a history of interactions ( Granovetter 1992 ) , such as respect and friendship , which in turn , influence their behavior . Research on relational social capital has included concepts such as trust and trust - worthiness ( Putnam 1993 ) , norms and sanctions ( Coleman 1990 ; Putnam 1995 ) , and obligations and expectations ( Burt 1992 ; Coleman 1990 ; Granovetter 1992 ) . In an empirical study on the relationship between the three dimensions in terms of social interaction , trust and shared goals , Tsai and Ghoshal ( 1998 ) found that they were linked . Though structural social capital determines the potential for a person to access resources that are within reach , relational social capital shapes the will - ingness of the other party to actually make such resources available for exchange . For example , although an actor may have access to several people who are poten - tially critical sources of information ( structural ) , one’s personal experience and the quality of past interactions ( relational ) will often influence whom he or she is likely to approach and who is likely to offer or exchange information . From an organiza - tional view , social relationships , as a source of relational capital , are considered to be valuable capital in business networks ( Dyer and Singh 1998 ) . Relational capital helps inter - firm collaboration and enables provision of accurate and timely informa - tion about other firms’ competence . It is also relevant for new venture creation ( De Carolis et al . 2009 ) . Attributes that research has used to characterize relational social capital include relational closeness ( Dillow et al . 2009 ; Miller and Thomas 2005 ; Moran 2005 ) and relational trust ( Dyer and Chu 2003 ; Moran 2005 ; Saparito et al . 2004 ; Zahra et al . 2006 ) . These represent progressively deeper degrees of relational quality from propensity to provide resources via personal familiarity ( relational closeness ) to a deep sense of the contact’s reliability and faithfulness in resource exchange ( relational trust ) . In our research we focus on relational social capital since our locus of interest lies in the relationships between members in the group ( relational aspect ) , rather than the structure of linkages ( structural aspect ) in a group . We incorporate the work of Nahapiet and Ghoshal ( 1998 ) and Tsai and Ghoshal ( 1998 ) as we conceptualize 757 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… the relational dimension of social capital ( relational social capital ) as encompass - ing social interactions ( relational closeness ) and trusting relations ( relational trust ) ( Chen and Wang 2008 ) . Relational closeness is the extent of personal familiarity in a relationship ( Moran 2005 ) . Relationships can be classified on a continuum , from arm’s length to close relationships ( Uzzi 1996 ; 1997 ) . The relevance of relational social capital arises from lasting and durable social relations that require expending significant time and energy ( Bourdieu 1986 ) . Relational closeness has been investigated in the context of managerial performance ( Moran 2005 ) , innovative ventures ( Nohria 1992 , De Caro - lis et al . 2009 ) , information exchange in terms of willingness to take time to explain or listen to novel ideas ( Granovetter 1985 ; Uzzi 1996 ; Hansen 1999 ) , and willing - ness to disclose unethical behavior of team members ( Miller and Thomas 2005 ) . The relevance of social capital arises from lasting and durable social relations that require expending significant time and energy . In this research , we define relational closeness in terms of the extent to which members feel close to each other , and we investigate its direct and mediating impact on group performance . Relational trust is another component of relational capital . For most forms of interdependent relationships trust is an essential prerequisite . It assures a person to rely on the intentions and behavior of others in the face of uncertainty and vulnera - bility , to make decisions and act ( March and Simon 1958 ) . Trust is both an outcome and an antecedent of relationships . It is the basis on which relationships are built and therefore generates social capital . At the same time , it is also built from rela - tionships ( Zahra et al . 2006 ) and therefore arises out of social capital ( Nooteboom 2007 ) . Trust can be built within relationships on a personal basis ( interpersonal or relational trust ) or on the basis of institutions ( institutionalized trust ) ( Bachmann 2000 ; Nooteboom 2007 ) or imported as expectations from settings with which they are familiar ( swift trust ) ( Meyerson et al . 1996 ) . However , swift trust de - emphasizes the interpersonal dimensions and is based purely on categorical social structures and action , while traditional trust is primarily based on interpersonal relationships ( Jarv - enpaa and Leidner 1999 ) . Also , according to the Time Interaction and Performance Theory ( McGrath 1991 ) , teams engage in the activities of member support ( mem - ber inclusion , loyalty , commitment ) and group well - being ( interaction and member roles ) , both of which are overlooked in swift trust . The functions of member sup - port and group well - being are said to relate directly to relationship development which describes the relational links between the members . These relational links between the members and the rest of the group are of paramount importance espe - cially for new teams with no common past ( McGrath 1991 ) . Based on this , there is a high need to investigate the phenomenon of relational trust or interpersonal trust in teams . By facilitating transfer and exchange of information ( Saparito et al . 2004 ) , relational trust can be viewed as the basic ingredient of social capital that allows a person to reliably expect to obtain and use the resources made available through contacts ( e . g . , McAllister 1995 ; Nahapiet and Ghoshal 1998 ) . Trust creates antici - pation of value through social interaction with others and thus motivates actors to deepen relations and pursue interactions ( Nahapiet and Ghoshal 1998 ) . Additionally , trust has a positive effect on information sharing ( Dyer and Chu 2003 ) by mitigating the information asymmetries that are inherent in information exchange . Relational 758 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 trust has a cognitive and an affective element ( Lewis and Weigert 1985 ; McAllister 1995 ) . The cognitive element includes individual beliefs about competence , reliabil - ity , and professionalism , while the affective element includes emotional investment in the relationship leading to reciprocal feelings of caring , benevolence and shared goals ( McAllister 1995 ) . The cognitive component focuses on member beliefs about one another’s ability and reliability to carry out the task ( Kanwattanachai and Yoo 2007 ) . Affective foundations consist of people making emotional investments in relationships , leading to feelings of care and concern for the partners , in a mutually reciprocal manner ( Pennings and Woiceshyn 1987 ; Rempel et al . 1985 ) . We include both the affective and cognitive components in our research . 2 . 4 Group Performance Although organizations are eager to integrate collaborative technology into group work , they are at the same time concerned with the performance outcomes from such an endeavor . In this regard , studies compare the performance and effective - ness of computer - mediated and face - to - face groups ( Adams et al . 2005 ; Baltes et al . 2002 ; Becker - Beck et al . 2005 ; Flanagin et al . 2004 ) . In evaluating performance on the basis of the type of task , studies suggest that CMC groups are superior to face - to - face groups in brainstorming and decision - making tasks ( Dennis and Valacich 1993 ; Gallupe et al . 1991 ; Sambamurthy et al . 1993 ) , but less adept at conflict man - agement and problem - solving ones ( Straus and McGrath 1994 ) . Others have evalu - ated performance in terms of the degree of conformity in members ( Adrianson and Hjelmquist 1991 ) , group decision quality ( Smith and Hayne 1997 ) , group participa - tion , effective group leadership behavior ( Smith and Hayne 1997 ) , satisfaction with the decision outcome or decision process ( Benbasat and Lim 1993 ; Dennis and Gar - field , 2003 ; Dennis et al . 2001 ; Fjermestad and Hiltz 1998 – 99 ; Huang et al . 2003 ; Martz and Shepherd 2000 ) , and amount of information exchanged ( Dennis 1996 ; Murthy and Kerr 2003 ) . However , findings are inconclusive and sometimes even conflicting in terms of performance . With the advent of the global economy , organi - zations are increasingly relying on computer - mediated collaboration . Selecting the appropriate type of team to maximize performance therefore takes on a critical role . Part of the reason for inconsistency in research findings arises from lack of a holistic focus in most studies . The fact that the same technology with the same task may result in differential performance results points to the importance of the group ( in addition to the technology ) in collaboration . Accordingly , in our research we focus on both the social and technical aspects of collaboration in evaluating per - formance . We assign the same task to several groups and evaluate the group output as an objective construct of performance . We use judges to evaluate group perfor - mance using several criteria . Details of the performance measure and evaluation are included in the research methodology section . Before discussing our research framework , we integrate the theoretical founda - tions outlined in this section . Figure 1 depicts a mapping of the different theories with our research framework . The Distributed Cognition Theory offers an overarch - ing framework for the role of cognition in collaboration . In collaboration , cognition 759 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… is both socially and structurally distributed . Structural distribution of cognition arises from the interactions between internal cognitive processes of members and an artifact offered by the collaborative technology ( group memory ) . Social distribution of cognition lies in the manner of interactions and exchanges between the members themselves . Members who have worked together in the past and have a history of interactions ( group history ) acquire a better understanding of each other’s cognitive and interpretive styles . In assessing the role of collaborative performance , the Media Synchronicity Theory applies to the ability of the collaborative medium in facilitat - ing reprocessing of information , which is integral to collaborative performance . And lastly , since collaboration involves a human component , there is an inherent element of relationship development . Social capital theory lends itself well in this context since relational social capital is founded on the pattern of linkages and relationships developed between members in collaboration , in terms of the level of closeness ( relational closeness ) and the level of interpersonal trust ( relational trust ) between members . 3 Research Framework Our research empirically investigates the impact of the independent variables of group memory and group history on the dependent variable of group performance , within a synchronous computer - mediated environment . We conduct this investiga - tion with the mediating effects of relational social capital represented by relational closeness and relational trust . Figure 2 depicts the research framework . We now explain our research model by analyzing different sets of variables and their interaction . 3 . 1 Group History and Relational Closeness Group history refers to the extent to which the group members have worked together in the past . CMC research has suggested that members of established groups , due to the history of interactions , have well - developed feelings about other members and Social Distribution of Cognition Structural Distribution of Cognition Group History Group Memory Group Performance ( computer interaction via chat ) Media SynchronicityTheory Social Capital Theory ( Relational Capital ) Distributed Cognition Theory Fig . 1 Mapping of theoretical foundations to the research framework 760 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 the group as a whole ( Mennecke and Valacich 1998 ) . The theory of social capital states that social capital resides in the relationships between members , and that a lasting social relationship requires significant investment of time and energy of the members ( Bourdieu 1986 ) . The more the exposure and time spent by the members with each other , the more the potential for a high degree of familiarity and mutual regard ( Bourdieu 1986 ; Moran 2005 ) , which translates to relational closeness . The Social Capital Theory focuses on the concept of tie strength ( Granovetter 1973 ) , which characterizes the closeness and interaction frequency of the relation - ship between two parties . Tie strength can range on a continuum from strong ties to weak ties ( Granovetter 1973 ) . Strong ties represent the high frequency of interaction and closeness of relationship . These strong ties are important because they represent accessibility and willingness to help and exchange information ( Krackhardt 1992 ) . Strong ties are also important conduits of knowledge ( Ghoshal et al . 1994 , Hansen 1999 ; Szulanski 1996 ; Uzzi 1996 , 1997 ) . Established groups that have a history of interaction will have strong ties and therefore high relational closeness ( Moran 2005 ) . Based on the above , we hypothesize that : H1 Established groups will have a higher degree of relational closeness than ad hoc groups . 3 . 2 Relational Closeness and Performance While the existence of a tie ( Granovetter 1992 ) or relationship between two parties only offers the potential to exchange or share resources or information , it is the level of relational closeness that provides the willingness to actually do such exchange or sharing ( Nohria 1992 ) . The Information Sampling Model ( Stasser and Titus 1987 ) shows that both shared and unshared information need to be discussed in order for teams to make effective decisions . In order for teams to get to the level of sharing , there needs to be a willingness to exchange information in each member . Teams that have a high degree of relational closeness will have members with a high level of willingness to share and exchange information . These members will take the time to listen , discuss and explain each other’s suggestions ( Moran 2005 ) . Group History Group Memory Relational Closeness Relational Trust Group Performance H1 H2 H3 H4 H6 H7 H5 Fig . 2 Research framework 761 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… Granovetter ( 1985 , 1992 ) refers to contacts with high relational closeness as strong ties and those with low relational closeness as weak ties . While weak ties pro - vide access to information and resources beyond those available in their own social circle , strong ties are the ones that offer the real motivation to make such resources available . This motivation to make resources available and willingness to exchange the resources leads to better performance in terms of less time taken to arrive at a decision , better quality of report , satisfaction with process , and satisfaction with task . In summary , information and resources can be exchanged mutually more effec - tively in groups with high relational closeness . We also draw from the role played by social capital within the domain of knowl - edge management . Strong ties indicate high relational closeness that lead to better exchange of tacit knowledge ( Levin and Cross 2004 ) and useful knowledge ( Ghoshal et al . 1994 , Hansen 1999 ; Szulanski 1996 ; Uzzi 1996 , 1997 ) which in turn , results in better performance . High level of closeness leads to more positive performance with process and solution ( Dorfman and Stephen 1984 ; Evans and Dion 1991 ) . The literature on CMC shows that established groups have a high degree of cohe - sion , which refers to the members’ attraction to the group ( Hogg 1992 ; Yoo and Alavi 2001 ) . Cohesion meets the group’s affiliative needs . Cohesive groups will have warm , sociable and personal interactions between members ( Yoo and Alavi 2001 ) . Based on this , we draw an analogy between cohesion and relational close - ness . Group cohesion also appears to influence task participation and performance ( Evans and Dion 1991 ; Hogg 1992 ; Spink and Carron 1994 ) . Due to increased positive , personal , and favorable interactions ( Hogg 1992 ) , established groups exhibit increased performance since communication is less inhibited and more task related . Based on the above theoretical backing for rela - tional closeness and performance , we hypothesize that : H2 Groups that exhibit a high level of relational closeness will outperform groups with lower levels of relational closeness . 3 . 3 Group History and Relational Trust Relational trust is interpersonal trust that is constructed through personal interac - tions and experiences with the other party ( McAllister 1995 ; Rousseau et al . 1998 ; Moran 2005 ) . The theory of social capital relies on the fundamental premise that people often require resources that are controlled and held by others , thereby intro - ducing an element of interdependence and uncertainty ( Coleman 1990 ) . Most inter - dependent relationships or group activities entail some form of trust ( Moran 2005 ) . Trust offers people some assurance that one can rely on the intentions and behav - ior of others to take decisions and act ( March and Simon 1958 ) . Trust develops when there is a history of favorable past interactions that lead participants to expect positive future interactions ( Preece 2002 ) . Repeated interactions between mem - bers develop interpersonal or relational trust , as the values and goals of the mem - bers become mutually intertwined ( Uzzi 1996 ) . As members work with each other , trust is built among individual members because of the close personal ties ( Kale 762 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 et al . 2000 ) . Established groups in which members have interacted previously will therefore have more interactions and by virtue of that , more relational trust ( Zahra et al . 2006 ) . Members of established groups that have a history of interaction and an expectation that they will interact again in the future , will consider it rational to cooperate . Additionally , this decreases the potential for members to act opportunisti - cally , leading to increased trust . From the point of view information assimilation , members in established teams accumulate detailed information about each other over time ( Gabarro 1987 ) offering more chances to instill trust and confidence in each other ( Blau 1986 ) . This will motivate members to make greater contribution to the social exchange of the group ( Mayer and Gavin 2005 ) . Members of ad hoc teams are not as familiar with one another and are therefore at a disadvantage in interpreting one another’s behavior , when compared to established teams . There are more opportunities for these members to misinterpret one another’s contribution to be disrespectful or undermining one’s expertise , thus being detri - mental to relational trust ( Mayer et al . 1995 ) . Groups with an established history of interaction therefore will have a higher level of relational trust , compared to ad hoc teams with very little or no history of interaction ( Rousseau et al . 1998 ) . Based on all these we hypothesize that : H3 Established groups will have a higher degree of relational trust than ad hoc groups . 3 . 4 Relational Trust and Performance Research on CMC suggests that teams with a high level of trust are proactive , have frequent interactions with substantive feedback and have shared goals ( Jarven - paa et al . 1999 ) , all of which positively impact performance . On the other hand , teams with a low level of trust tend to be more reactive , have infrequent interactions with non - substantive feedback , and look at task goals with an individual approach rather than a shared view ( Jarvenpaa et al . 1999 ) , all of which adversely impact performance . Trust also mitigates the information asymmetries that are inherent in informa - tion exchanges by encouraging open sharing of information ( Tsai and Ghoshal 1998 ; Wu 2008 ) which leads to better performance . Trust enables members to reliably expect to obtain and utilize the resources held by another member through one’s contacts ( McAllister 1995 ; Nahapiet and Ghoshal 1998 ; Ring and Van de ven 1994 ) . This has a positive impact on the performance of the group . Established groups that have a high degree of relational trust and shared goals therefore will have better performance . A team with high levels of relational trust makes better decisions ( McEvily et al . 2003 ) due to the fact that they share more information and feel safe expressing their opinion ( Dyer and Chu 2003 ) . Relational trust increases the extent to which the members can predict each other’s behavior , thereby increasing their capability to coordinate activities and willingness to help each other . Conflict resolution becomes 763 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… easier with open information exchange thereby improving the overall decision - mak - ing performance ( Zahra et al . 2006 ) . Drawing from social capital literature in the knowledge management domain , trust can lead actors to establish relations and deliver knowledge more efficiently ( Granovetter 1973 ) . A stronger relationship between entrepreneurial team mem - bers can lead to a stronger emotional attachment and further influence them to share knowledge and information ( Reagans and McEvily 2003 ) . Based on all of the above , we hypothesize that : H4 Groups with a high degree of relational trust will outperform groups with lower levels of relational trust . 3 . 5 Interaction of Group History , Group Memory and Performance The CMC literature suggests that groups with history will engage in an information sharing process that is different from newly formed groups ( Carley 1986 ; Stasser 1992 ) . Members who have a history of working together have prior knowledge of relevant cues such as other members’ status , expertise , authority , role , conflict , opin - ions , and language styles ( Hancock et al . 2010 ) . The concept of channel expansion ( Carlson and Zmud 1999 ) posits that prior familiarity and experience with partners ( as a result of history ) increases the ability to utilize a medium for wider range of communication purposes . Through repeated interactions ( history ) users can develop personal impressions of other participants ( Walther 1995 ) . These personal impres - sions help in facilitating information sharing and communication . Groups that have a history of working together establish a set of self - reinforcing rules governing what actions are appropriate to enable the group to coordinate the activities suc - cessfully ( Weber 2006 ) which leads to better performance . Yoo and Alavi ( 2001 ) suggest that for established groups , the cohesion among the members influences social presence and task participation , both of which positively impact group per - formance . The Functional Theory which represents an explanation for the relation - ship between communication and group effectiveness , states that several critical task requirements have to be performed for a group to achieve effective decision mak - ing . The group relies on group interactions to satisfy these critical task requirements ( Hirokawa 2003 ) . Established groups , being characterized by high level of interac - tions , should therefore be more capable of successfully satisfying these task require - ments ( Hirokawa 2003 ) and performing well , when compared to ad hoc groups . In group process , there is the potential for collaborative inhibition which is the phenomenon by which members recall less as a group than they would nominally . This is because , members in trying to retrieve from working ( human ) memory , can cause disruption to each other’s retrieval / recall strategies ( Barber et al . 2010 , 2015 ; Foley et al . 2014 ; Harris et al . 2011 , 2017 ; Rajaram 2011 ; Rajaram and Pereira - Pasarin 2010 ; Weldon and Bellinger 1997 ) . Research has proposed that , in addi - tion to memory at the individual level , there exists memory at a collective level . This collective memory , referred to as group memory , exists in groups that strive to achieve a common task ( Haseman et al . 2005 ) . Just as individuals recall from human 764 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 memory , group members recall from the collective artifact of group memory . The shared group memory stores the knowledge and experiences of group members in the context of decision - making activities , along with interactions , rules , policies and standard procedures in collaboration ( Haseman et al . 2005 ) . With the group memory therefore , the potential to retain and recall is enhanced . However , most studies on memory explore member recall in groups using working memory ( human ) and not electronic or digital memory . In our research , we have group memory that , in comparison to non - electronic memory , offers additional stor - age capacity and retrieval mechanisms for effective processing of task - related infor - mation for making decisions . On this basis , it is our expectation that an electronic artifact of group memory will contribute to group performance by reducing collabo - ration inhibition and facilitating retrieval and processing . Additionally , since group memory can retain not only task - related information , but also member interactions , rules , policies and standard procedures in collaboration , groups that have a rich his - tory of interactions will have a larger information base in the electronic memory , contributing to positive performance . In other words , the combination of history of interactions and group memory will positively influence performance of the group . We therefore hypothesize that : H5 Groups with both history and memory will outperform all other groups . 3 . 6 Group Memory and Performance According to the Information Processing Theory , individuals seldom have access to all relevant information and therefore when critical decisions need to be made , organizations typically deploy a team to work collaboratively . Information recall , which is a critical aspect in information processing , is affected by factors such as individual preferences , amount of information , the extent of familiarity with the information ( Hightower and Sayeed 1996 ; Stasser and Titus 1987 ) , and other cogni - tive limitations such as cognitive load , all of which pose restrictions on the amount of information sets one can recall ( Stasser et al . 1995 ) . Having a group memory can mitigate these cognitive limitations and recall by offering a repository for members to refer to and recall from ( Rao and Jarvenpaa 1991 ) , thereby enhancing the perfor - mance of the group . For example , a member can choose to search for a particular member’s contributions or look for all contributions from the group relating to a particular issue . Group research suggests that CMC group members sometimes have difficulty processing others’ contributions due to the intense focus on either trying to recall information or in making their own contribution ( Nunamaker et al . 1991 ) , thereby overlooking the varied perspectives from others ( Tyran and George 2002 ) . A group memory feature can enable members to focus on making their contribution without having to make the cognitive effort to simultaneously focus on others’ contributions . Additionally , it enables members to recollect others’ contributions at their own pace . The memory can also facilitate new participants to join the discussion at any time and still follow the thread ( Nunamaker et al . 1991 ) . Additionally , in groups , due to 765 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… the multiple sources of information , there is often an element of overload . Group memory helps counter information overload by facilitating filtering and reviewing information with modularity ( Tyran and George 2002 ) . It offers an opportunity for group members to revisit prior messages for additional consideration ( Dennis et al . 2008 ) . Revisiting and reconsidering information enhances group decision mak - ing since it enables them to consider a gamut of alternatives rather than go with the most - discussed ones , thereby decreasing groupthink , which is favorable for performance . According to the Distributed Cognition Theory ( Hutchins 1995a ) which is our umbrella theoretical base , cognition is viewed as distributed across people , tools and environment ( Hutchins 1995b ) . Groups of people are likely to accrue performance benefits when they work together since they enhance their cognitive skills by using external representations as artifacts ( Flor and Hutchins 1991 ) . Group memory is one such external representation that is used by the group . The recording of meet - ing interactions offered by group memory can be taken as evidence of the extent to which ideas represent cognitions that have been more or less processed by group discussions . Also , the memory supports the group interaction process by offering the facilities of referencing , remembering and bridging ( Sarmiento and Stahl 2008 ) by offering a larger span of alternatives ( Flor and Hutchins 1991 ) , all of which enhance performance . Based on the above , we hypothesize that : H6 Groups with memory will outperform groups without memory . 3 . 7 Group Memory and Relational Trust Knowledge contribution in groups can occur with exploratory or exploitative knowl - edge ( March 1991 ) . While exploratory knowledge can create novel solutions that are different from the existing knowledge base ( Kang et al . 2007 ) , exploitative knowl - edge builds on an existing base to create incremental solutions . Exploitative knowl - edge will best be served by having a foundation of shared understanding in the form of shared goals and trust . Group memory can help members have a shared understanding , shared trust or goals . We draw from the literature on team mental model ( Cannon - Bowers and Salas 1990 ) to elucidate this . Team mental models are the members’ shared , organ - ized understanding and mental representation of knowledge on key elements of the group’s environment . Team mental model works on the premise that team effective - ness will improve if members have an adequate shared understanding of the task , team , equipment , and situation . In our research , we operationalize shared under - standing of goals and interpersonal trust in the variable ‘relational trust’ , and there - fore team effectiveness will improve if members have a high degree of relational trust . Group memory helps achieve relational trust and shared understanding by offer - ing a repository that enables members to retrieve , process , recall and reprocess task - related information . In addition to storing member discussions that are task related , memory has the potential to embed information on group norms , policies 766 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 and procedures which can then be retrieved for processing and decision making . Research has indicated a positive relationship between memory and relational trust in groups working towards a shared goal ( Brandon and Hollingshead 2004 ; Oshri et al . 2008 ; Lewis et al . 2005 ; Moreland and Myaskovsky 2000 ) . On the basis of the above , we hypothesize that : H7 Groups with memory will have higher levels of relational trust than groups without memory . We now describe our research methodology . 4 Research Methodology 4 . 1 Research Design and Participants An experiment following a 2 × 2 factorial design with 4 treatment conditions was used to study the impact of group history ( with and without ) and group memory ( with and without ) on group performance ( Table 1 ) . In addition to the independ - ent variables , there are two mediator variables of relational social capital—relational closeness and relational trust . A between - subjects research design was deployed with a different sample in each condition to avoid practice and carry - over effects . Participants for the experiment were recruited from an undergraduate subject pool in Information Systems classes at a large public university in the Northeast - ern United States . Credit was given for participation . Students who opted out of the experiment were given an alternate assignment that was equitable in terms of time and effort . Since the experiment was a class assignment , the subjects were motivated to perform well in order to earn credit . A simple power analysis revealed that in order to detect a medium effect size ( delta = 0 . 75 ) at an 80 % confidence level , what was needed was a minimum of 8 groups per treatment condition totaling 32 groups ( 3 subjects per group ) and 96 subjects . To detect a smaller effect size ( delta = 0 . 50 ) at an 80 % confidence level , we needed a minimum of 18 groups per treatment total - ing 72 groups with 216 subjects ( considering 3 - subjects per group ) . However , in our experiment , we recruited a total of 119 groups with 357 subjects ( 3 - subjects per group ) , which is well over the limit needed for an acceptable effect size . Table 1 Experimental design Group memory Group history With history ( established ) Without history ( ad hoc ) With memory Condition I Condition II Without memory Condition III Condition IV 767 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… 4 . 2 Manipulation of Independent Variables The first factor , group history ( the history of interaction between members ) is deployed at two levels—with history ( established ) and without history ( ad hoc ) . We operationalize group history as follows : first , the members should have worked together , on at least one collaborative activity prior to the current experi - ment ; second , the collaborative activity should have been formal ( university - related ) and not personal ; and third , the history of interaction between members was only estimated using the existence rather than the frequency ( high or low ) or nature ( positive or negative ) of interaction . Out of the total of 357 subjects , 180 were asked to self - organize into groups of three with others they had worked with , to represent 60 groups in the estab - lished condition . The remaining 177 subjects were assigned to the ad hoc condi - tion as 59 groups of three per group . In contrast to established groups , the ad hoc groups were created by random assignment of members during the experiment . The strength of the history manipulation was tested using questions at the start of the experimental task . The second factor , group memory , was represented as a technological artifact that is used by group members for the experimental task ( Dennis et al . 2008 ) . We operationalized group memory using a digital transcript ( chat transcript ) of the interactions that is generated by the collaborative technology . The transcript contains a record of all the interactions between members . It is an artifact that includes direct messages from members to group conversations and allows teams to collaborate easily and efficiently . With an array of features such as threaded conversations and time logs , it allows users to track the progress of the collabora - tion and follow up on the collaborative tasks . Out of the net total of 119 groups , 31 established and 29 ad hoc groups were given access to memory , while the remaining 29 established and 30 ad hoc groups did not get access . We give more details on how the transcript is generated and what exactly it entails in Sect . 4 . 6 ( Procedure ) where we elucidate on how we set up the collaborative technology for the experiment . 4 . 3 Experimental Task All groups were assigned a common task that entailed collaborative decision making . The task required groups to use the collaboration technology to discuss and come up with a written report containing recommendations for a university’s emergency management website . The recommendations had to address the ele - ments of design and content of the website . The task represents a scenario that is current and relevant to students , and further necessitates collaboration . It also fosters a rich discussion that can be analyzed for future research . “Appendix 1” shows the task . 768 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 4 . 4 Measurement of Variables Each construct shown in the research framework was operationalized and meas - ured using a post - task questionnaire ( “Appendix 2” ) . Relational closeness was measured using an adaptation of scales from Wheeless ( 1978 ) , Moran ( 2005 ) , and Berscheid et al . ( 1989 ) . These questions were designed to elicit the extent to which a group member felt close to the group . The relational trust measure was adapted from Moran ( 2005 ) and included the dimensions of cognitive and affec - tive trust . Group history was measured using an adaptation of scales from Jarv - enpaa et al . ( 2004 ) and group memory from Mangalraj ( 2006 ) . The wording of the items was analyzed for fit with the current task and slightly modified in cases where the task in the original study was not similar . The items in each instrument were in the form of a sentence that required participants to rate , on a 5 - point Likert scale , the extent to which they agreed or disagreed with the statement ( 1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree ) . A manipulation check for group his - tory was also included in the post - task questionnaire . Performance was measured at the group level based on the group report pro - duced by each group from the experimental task . A panel of two external judges was formed to assess each report independently . The judges were blind to the experimental conditions and the reports were reviewed to remove any information identifying the condition in which they were produced . The judges were asked to evaluate the overall quality of the reports to reflect presentation , strength , breadth , and depth . They had to assign a numeric score ranging from 0 to 100 ( “Appendix 3” ) . This was used as the measure of performance for the group . The judges were trained on the evaluation criteria . 4 . 5 Software The software for the experiment was Google applications ( apps ) ( also known as G - suite ) with its combination of applications for messaging ( mail , chat / hang - outs , google calendar ) and collaboration ( google docs , google sites ) . We selected Google apps over other document management systems due to its user - friendly interface that required no training for usage , as well as its broad accessibility . The software has high external validity since it is widely adopted by students and other populations . Additionally , the software is freely available without licensing restrictions . Within Google apps , we selected google chat ( also known as Google hangouts ) as the discussion interface , and google docs as the report development interface , for the task . In this paper we will use the nomenclatures Google chat and Google apps . Google chat allows multiple members to log in , send messages and chat interactively with each other . It generates a chat transcript that contains a discussion of the group chat . We used this transcript to operationalize group memory . The software allows us to manipulate the availability or otherwise of the transcript to the group . Google docs interface allows all members in a group to collaboratively work on the task and develop a group report . Groups in the 769 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… memory condition were provided access to this chat transcript , to use it for report development . 4 . 6 Procedure In order to prepare the infrastructure for synchronous communication during the experiment , the researchers set up accounts in each condition using different domains and servers . For each group three accounts were created—one per member . The accounts were created with appropriate security and access privileges to only allow communication between member - accounts . Each account was given a userid that identified the experimental condition , group # , and member # ( members were assigned numbers 1 to 3 ) . The nomenclature was only decipherable to the research - ers . For example , in the established - no - memory condition ( EN ) , a group , say group 1 , would have the accounts EN1MEMB1 ( for member1 ) , EN1MEMB2 ( for mem - ber2 ) , and EN1MEMB3 ( for member3 ) . The 3 accounts were set up to only allow communication with each other . The person who was assigned the account ending in MEMB1 was designated to be the chat starter for the group . Customized instruction handouts were prepared for each experimental condition . In total , 3 handouts were developed—the experimental task , the instructions for performing the task ( custom - ized by condition ) , and the instructions to start a chat . The length of the handouts was kept to a page to instill attention retention and avoid information overload . The directions were designed to be accurate and specific , allowing no room for ambi - guity or misinterpretation . Subjects did the pre - task ( initial questionnaire ) , exper - imental task ( chat and report development sessions ) , and post - task sessions ( final questionnaire ) . A pilot test was conducted prior to the main experiment to verify the experimen - tal protocol . A total of 12 groups ( 36 subjects ) —3 groups per condition—partici - pated in the pilot . Based on the feedback from the participants , minor modifications were made to the handouts for the experiment and to the time allotted for the task . The materials were calibrated and readied for the experiment . Prior to the experiment , sign - up sheets for various days / times were made availa - ble , and subjects were required to sign in for one session only . The subjects who had self - selected their groups for the established condition ( as explained earlier ) were instructed to sign in collectively as a group for the same session . This was verified by the researcher , prior to the experiment . On the day of the experiment , all subjects participated by coming to a laboratory which was reserved for the purpose . This lab was equipped with workstations that had access to google apps ( specifically google chat and google docs ) . Upon arrival , each subject was required to sign a consent form that was authorized by the Insti - tutional Review Board of the institution . The researcher then checked the sign - up sheet to see if the subject was in the self - selected established condition . If so , the subject was assigned an appropriate account , and the other two group members were also assigned the associated group accounts as they came in . The three accounts ( subjects ) in the group were then randomly assigned to one of the two conditions of with - memory or without - memory . 770 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 If a subject’s name was not found in the sign - up sheet for the established con - dition , the subject was randomly grouped with two other subjects ( who were also not in the established condition ) for the ad hoc condition , and the entire group was randomly assigned to one of the two conditions of with - memory or without - mem - ory . Appropriate member - accounts were then assigned to the group . In the ad hoc groups , the members did not know the identity of the other members except for their account numbers . In this manner , the lack of history was appropriately reinforced . Example of account assignment was as follows : a group ( say group 1 ) in the ad hoc - with - memory condition was assigned the accounts AM1MEMB1 ( for member1 ) , AM1MEMB2 ( for member2 ) , and AM1MEMB3 ( member3 ) . In all groups , the per - son with the account ending in MEMB1 was designated to be the chat starter . This person was given the additional handout containing instructions to start the group chat . Each subject was given two handouts—the task , and the customized instruction sheet for performing the task by condition . The chat starter for each group received an additional handout—the instructions for starting the chat . All subjects were given an index card containing the account login and password information . All account assignments were recorded by the researcher in order to provide appropriate credit for subjects . Every effort was made to have the group members sit apart to prevent verbal , and ensure online , communication . Screen partitions were installed between the workstations as an added measure . The entire duration of the experiment was 60 min , broken down as 10 min for the pre - task , 40 min for the experimental task , and 10 min for the post - task . The experi - mental task was structured as two sessions—chat session and report development session . In the chat session , subjects ( in groups ) discussed the task using Google chat . In the report development session , subjects ( in groups ) developed a report using Google docs . In doing so , the groups in the with - memory condition were given access to the chat transcript that they developed in the chat session . Groups in the without - memory condition were not given access to the transcript in developing the report . During the experiment , the subjects had to check - off items on the instruc - tion sheet , as they completed each of the three parts of pre - task , the experimental task , and the post - task . The researchers assisted and timed the subjects in their tran - sition from one part to another . In this manner , it was ensured that all groups fol - lowed the sequence and were assigned equitable time assigned for all the parts . To begin the experiment , after receiving the handouts and being assigned to workstations , all participants started the first part which had the pre - task questions . On completion , they were directed to the second part which was the experimental task ( “Appendix 1” ) . They were asked to refer to the customized instructions ( by condition ) for performing the task—which was to create a group report with recom - mendations for design and content of a university’s emergency management web - site . Each subject signed into the assigned account with the username and password provided on the index card . The first session in the experimental task was a chat session using Google chat . In this , the chat starter in each group initiated the group chat session using the provided instructions and invited the other two members to the chat . If the account had been assigned a memory , then a chat transcript was auto - matically generated and saved in the account . 771 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… After the chat session concluded , the groups moved on to the report devel - opment session and used the Google docs interface . In this , each group had to develop a report containing recommendations on the design and content of a uni - versity emergency management website . The instruction sheet for each member had customized directions to complete this part . In this session , only the groups that were in the with - memory condition were provided access to the chat tran - script that was generated during the chat . At the end of this session , the group member who had been assigned as the chat starter was required to save the group report . After working on the report development session of the task , the participants were directed to the final part of the experiment—the post task ( “Appendix 2” ) . The post - task had questions that each participant was required to answer . In order to ensure completeness , all questions in the questionnaire were deemed required and denoted with an asterisk . Upon finishing the post task , the participants were thanked for their contribution and dismissed . The researchers collected back all the instruction sheets and index cards . During the experiment , the researchers walked around to ensure that the procedures were followed judiciously . Figure 3 depicts the research procedure . Participant recruitment and sign - up for lab sessions Group organization ( established vs ad hoc ) Random assignment of groups to memory treatment Pre - task Experimental task Post task Chat session Report development session Fig . 3 Research procedure 772 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 5 Analysis and Results The 357 participants were distributed among the four experimental conditions in 3 - member groups as follows . About half , 180 participants ( 60 groups ) were assigned with members they had worked with before , to constitute the established ( with his - tory ) condition . Of these , 93 participants ( 31 groups ) were given access to the group chat transcript ( established / with memory ) and 87 participants ( 29 groups ) had no access to the transcript ( established / without memory ) . The remaining 177 partici - pants ( 59 groups ) were assigned with members they had not worked with before to constitute the ad hoc ( without - history ) condition . Of these , 87 participants ( 29 groups ) had access to the chat transcript ( ad hoc / with memory ) , and the balance 90 participants ( 30 groups ) had no access to the chat transcript ( ad hoc / without mem - ory ) . The distribution is summarized in Table 2 . Demographic information was collected using pre - task questions . These vari - ables are used to describe the sample and the assignment of subjects to conditions ( Table 3 ) . The sample was almost equally distributed between the genders ( 51 % male and 49 % female ) and was all at the undergraduate level . A majority of the par - ticipants ( 76 % ) were in the age group of 18 – 24 , with 21 % in the range 25 – 34 and about 3 % in the older range of 35 – 44 . In order to detect any potential effects from chat or google docs , questions included the typing skills , frequency of , and comfort - level with , using the feature of chat or google docs ( see Table 3 for the breakdown ) . In order to accommodate the small minority that expressed either discomfort or no experience with chat or google docs , a brief training session was held before the beginning of the experiment to demonstrate the basic usage features and facilitate their progress with the experiment . 5 . 1 Controls In order to ensure true randomization of the sample , we checked for systematic dif - ferences among experimental conditions for each individual characteristic ( Trochim 2000 ) . The individual characteristics of gender and age are categorical in nature . Gender is divided between male and female categories , and age is recorded in sev - eral ranges ( actual age was not recorded ) . Of the remaining pre - task variables , typ - ing skill , frequency with chat , and frequency with google docs are ordinal , because Table 2 Distribution of sample by condition With history ( established ) Without history ( ad hoc ) With memory Individual = 93 Individual = 87 Individual = 180 Group = 31 Group = 29 Group = 60 Without memory Individual = 87 Individual = 90 Individual = 177 Group = 29 Group = 30 Group = 59 Individual = 180 Individual = 177 Group = 60 Group = 59 773 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… Table 3 Demographic information of sample a Age was measured with an ordinal scale Characteristic Percentages Age a 18 – 24 76 25 – 34 21 35 – 44 3 45 – 50 0 > 51 0 . 3 Gender Male 51 Female 49 Typing skills Hunt and peck 2 Rough and casual 30 Neutral 0 Good 49 Excellent 19 Chat Frequency of using Never 31 Often 32 Very rarely 24 Very often 12 Neutral 1 Comfort level with using Very uncomfortable 2 Uncomfortable 29 Neutral 2 Comfortable 50 Very comfortable 17 Google Docs Frequency of using Never 47 Often 29 Very rarely 1 Very often 21 Neutral 2 Comfort level with using Very uncomfortable 8 Uncomfortable 46 Neutral 3 Comfortable 39 Very comfortable 4 774 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 they represent an incremental progression from one response to another . Comfort with chat and comfort with google docs are interval variables because the responses are incremental with equal intervals between responses . Each variable was appro - priately tested in order to determine its distribution among experimental conditions . We performed a Chi square test for the categorical variables to determine if the individual characteristic was randomly distributed among the conditions , or if one experimental cell had a greater frequency of the characteristic than the others . Based on the frequencies per cell of gender and age range , the Chi squares were not found to be significant . Therefore , none of the categorical variables were used as controls in the experimental analysis . For the ordinal variables ( typing skill , frequency of chat , and frequency of using google docs ) , we did the Kruskal – Wallis test , calculat - ing a Chi square value to compare the Wilcoxon ranked order to an expected distri - bution . None of the variables resulted in a significant Chi square value , and there - fore they were not used as controls in the data analyses . The interval variables ( comfort level with chat and comfort level with google docs ) were tested using the Analysis of Variance ( ANOVA ) to detect if the means differed among the four experimental conditions . Neither characteristic was found to be significantly different among cells , eliminating the need to use them as controls in the experimental analyses . 5 . 2 Instrument Validation Each theoretical construct was operationalized and measured using a scale consist - ing of several items in the form of survey questions ( “Appendix 2” ) . Even though the scales were adapted from ones that were previously used and validated , in order to ensure appropriateness of application for this context , the validity of each was assessed . For the factor analysis , we conducted a Principal Component Analysis ( PCA ) with a rotation of Promax with Kaiser normalization ( Table 4 ) . PCA reduces multidimensional constructs to their underlying components by creating a correla - tion matrix with factor loadings for each item . The PCA produced four factors with eigenvalues greater than one , indicating that four components could be extracted from the dataset . Table 4 is a comprehensive listing of the factor loadings and cross - loadings with the variances explained for each factor . The results in the table reveal four factors with multiple items loading on each factor . Table 5 shows the validity testing for the items . We checked for convergent and discriminant validity using Bartlett’s test of sphe - ricity in SPSS ( Table 5 ) . The results in Table 5 show that the Kaiser measure is high ( 0 . 881 ) , the Bartlett’s test of sphericity is significant ( p < 0 . 01 ) , and the average loading for each factor is greater than 0 . 70 ( Hair et al . 2010 ) . This confirms the con - vergent validity of the items in each factor . To test for discriminant validity , we per - formed correlation analysis and compared the variances between factors . As shown in Table 5 , between each pair of factors the extracted variance ( noted as ( a ) in each cell ) is greater than the calculated variance from the squared correlation between them ( noted as ( b ) in each cell ) . This establishes the presence of discriminant valid - ity for all the factors . 775 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… We used the results of the factor analysis to further check for common method bias in the research constructs . Common method bias is defined as the “variance that is attributable to the measurement method rather than to the constructs the measures represent” ( Podsakoff et al . 2003 , p . 879 ) , and is a major contributor to systematic measurement error . Like all forms of measurement error , if common method bias is sufficiently high , then incorrect conclusions may be drawn about relationships between constructs . Accordingly , we conducted the Harman’s one - factor test in SPSS with Principal Axis Factoring and no rotation ( Table 6 ) , to check for the emergence of a single factor that explains the majority of variance ( Siponen and Vance 2010 ) . The results in Table 6 show that the first factor only explains 38 . 5 % of the total variance , which is considerably less than 50 % . This proves that a single factor did not explain majority of the variance , thus confirm - ing that common method bias does not confound our results . Table 4 Factor loadings and Eigenvalues ( PCA with Promax Rotation ) Extraction method : principal component analysis Rotation method : Promax with Kaiser normalization Rotation converged in 6 iterations RC Relational closeness , RT Relational trust , GM Group memory ; GH Group history Items Components 1 2 3 4 RC4 0 . 868 − . 005 . 047 − . 064 RC1 0 . 860 − . 020 − . 013 . 071 RC3 0 . 837 − . 061 − . 052 . 147 RC5 0 . 754 . 028 . 118 − . 134 RC2 0 . 728 . 186 . 001 − . 008 RC6 0 . 853 − . 315 − . 076 . 227 RT1 . 306 0 . 720 . 078 − . 198 RT6 − . 064 0 . 845 − . 033 . 013 RT3 − . 256 0 . 781 . 054 . 130 RT5 . 253 0 . 654 − . 221 − . 160 RT2 . 045 0 . 628 . 110 . 143 RT4 . 235 0 . 698 − . 011 . 127 GM3 − . 017 − . 059 0 . 851 . 047 GM1 . 053 . 071 0 . 833 − . 078 GM2 . 039 − . 077 0 . 823 − . 004 GH3 − . 045 . 107 − . 141 0 . 825 GH2 . 113 − . 061 . 031 0 . 817 GH1 − . 009 . 185 . 152 0 . 683 Eigenvalues 6 . 938 2 . 110 1 . 616 1 . 342 Variance explained % 38 . 547 11 . 720 8 . 975 7 . 456 Cumulative variance % 38 . 547 50 . 267 59 . 243 66 . 699 776 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 Each factor from the factor analysis has the potential to be used as a scale to measure a theoretical construct , if the factor proves to exhibit internal consist - ency . So , to this extent , we conducted a reliability analysis of the items in each factor , in order to assess the extent at which the items measure the same con - struct . We used the Cronbach’s alpha in SPSS . A scale with a Cronbach’s alpha coefficient of 0 . 7 or higher is considered reliable ( Nunnally 1978 ) . Table 7 shows that all the factors extracted from PCA have an acceptable coefficient for Cron - bach’s alpha , and therefore qualify as reliable . The individual items in each of these scales are shown in detail in “Appendix 2” . Table 5 Convergent and discriminant validity Kaiser – Meyer – Olkin measure of sampling adequacy = 0 . 881 Bartlett’s Test of Sphericity Approx . Chi Square = 3394 . 992 ; df = 153 ; Sig . = . 000 Variance extracted by factor is shown in the diagonal ; shown below the diagonal is the variance extracted between factors ( a ) and the square of the correlations between those factors ( b ) Note that ( a ) is greater than ( b ) in all cases Factor 1 2 3 4 Convergent validity Average loadings and variances extracted Average loading 0 . 809 0 . 721 0 . 836 0 . 775 Variance extracted 0 . 655 0 . 520 0 . 698 0 . 601 Discriminant validity 1 0 . 655 2 . 587 ( a ) 0 . 520 . 222 ( b ) 3 . 677 ( a ) . 349 ( a ) 0 . 698 . 048 ( b ) . 091 ( b ) 4 . 628 ( a ) . 560 ( a ) . 649 ( a ) 0 . 601 . 183 ( b ) . 130 ( b ) . 067 ( b ) Table 6 Harman’s one factor test for common methods bias Extraction method : principal axis factoring Factor Initial Eigenvalues Extraction sums of squared loadings Total % of variance Cumulative % Total % of variance Cumulative % Total variance explained 1 6 . 938 38 . 547 38 . 547 6 . 938 38 . 547 38 . 547 2 2 . 110 11 . 720 50 . 267 3 1 . 616 8 . 975 59 . 243 4 1 . 342 7 . 456 66 . 699 777 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… In the current research , all factors were perceptual measures that were col - lected at an individual level from the participants . In order to ascertain whether it was appropriate to aggregate these measures at the group level , we used the James Index ( r WG ) that measures the homogeneity of member perceptions within a group ( Table 7 ) . Within - group aggregation is considered appropriate if the median of the scale is above the threshold of 0 . 70 ( George 1990 ) . As shown in the table , since all the medians are above 0 . 70 , the individual level measures for these factors were aggregated to group level measures . These composite group level measures were then used for hypothesis testing at the group level . Table 7 presents the consolidated testing results from Cronbach’s alpha for scale reliability and James Index for aggre - gation to group level . It also presents the means and standard deviation of the inde - pendent variables . 5 . 3 Dependent Variable : Performance Our dependent variable of group performance was measured on the basis of the judges’ evaluations of the group reports . Each group report was evaluated on an overall score ( from 0 to 100 ) reflecting presentation , strength , breadth and depth . In order to aggregate the judges’ scores for a report , we tested for the level of agree - ment between the judges . We computed the inter - rater reliability in SPSS with the Intraclass Correlation Coefficient ( ICC ) reliability analysis . The inter - rater reliabil - ity for performance was high ( 0 . 885 ) , confirming the appropriateness to aggregate the judges’ scores and get a cumulative performance measure for each group . 5 . 4 Levels of Analysis The hypotheses are primarily tested using Analysis of Variance ( ANOVA ) . Our experiment involves an unbalanced design in which the number of observations in each cell is unequal ( see Table 2 ) . The GLM procedure is appropriate for this ( Cody and Smith 1997 , p . 171 ) . Since the data for relational closeness , relational trust , group history , and group memory are all perceptual measures collected at the individual level , an individual level of analysis is appropriate . However , the treat - ments have been applied in a group setting . Therefore , an appropriate statistical Table 7 Scale reliability and james index testing for aggregation to group level * Valid If median > 0 . 70 Factor Scale name # of items Cronbach’s alpha James index median Aggregation * Average means SD 1 Relational closeness 6 0 . 913 0 . 89 Valid 2 . 997 0 . 828 2 Relational trust 6 0 . 868 0 . 94 Valid 3 . 882 0 . 517 3 Group memory 3 0 . 926 0 . 93 Valid 3 . 815 0 . 477 4 Group history 3 0 . 784 0 . 93 Valid 2 . 905 1 . 073 778 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 method for this is a form of ANOVA that takes into account any effect attributable to the group—namely , the Hierarchical Analysis of Variance ( HANOVA ) ( Gallivan and Benbunan - Fich 2005 ; Walczuch and Watson 2001 ) . HANOVA calculates the effects of the group and treats it as an error term , reducing the main effect to account for it . This ensures that we do not mistakenly attribute significant differences to the treatments when they are instead coming from the participants working together as a group . In our research , all hypotheses that use a dependent variable which is a perceptual measure collected at the individual level—such as relational closeness ( H1 ) or relational trust ( H3 and H7 ) —are tested using HANOVA . The hypotheses that link individually collected perceptions of relational closeness and relational trust , with group outcomes of performance ( H2 , H4 ) are tested by aggregating at the group level following the procedure in Gallivan and Benbunan - Fich ( 2005 ) . 5 . 5 Results of Hypothesis Testing We now discuss the results of each hypothesis in our research model . Hypothesis 1 states that established groups will have a higher degree of relational closeness than ad hoc groups . H1 Established groups will have a higher degree of relational closeness than ad hoc groups . As outlined in the Levels of Analysis section , since this hypothesis uses a depend - ent variable ( relational closeness ) which is a perceptual measure that is collected at the individual level , we use HANOVA to test it . HANOVA , with the experimental factor ( group history ) and the group factor , tests for the effects of history on rela - tional closeness , while controlling for the effects of the group . Instead of arithmetic means and standard deviations , least square means ( LSMeans ) and standard errors are reported due to the unequal number of observations in each condition . By using LSMeans , the means are adjusted for the unbalanced design . Table 8 shows the test - ing for H1 . The results in Table 8 show that there is a significant impact of history on relational closeness ( F ( 118 , 238 ) = 5 . 39 , p < 0 . 0001 ) . The two factors history and group are also significant , both at p < 0 . 0001 . The distribution of the means shows that groups with history have a higher degree of relational closeness than those without ( 3 . 62 vs . 2 . 36 ) . Therefore , H1 was supported . Hypothesis 2 states that groups that exhibit a high level of relational closeness will perform better than those with lower levels . H2 Groups that exhibit a high level of relational closeness will outperform groups with lower levels of relational closeness . Since this hypothesis links individually collected perceptions of relational close - ness with the group outcome of performance , we use the group - level measure of relational closeness that was aggregated as explained in the “Level of Analy - sis” section . Linear regression analysis was used to test this hypothesis ( Table 9 ) . 779 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… Performance was used as a dependent variable in the regression model . The results of the test indicate that the model is significant at p < . 01 , with an R 2 of 0 . 132 . We note that the R 2 is only about 13 % because this regression is conducted at the group Table 8 HANOVA results of relational closeness a History is still significant at 1 % when the group is considered as the error term * * * Significant at 0 . 1 % LSMeans by history Condition means by history With history Without history LSMeans 3 . 62 2 . 36 Std . error 0 . 05 0 . 05 N 180 ( 60 ) 177 ( 59 ) HANOVA results ( R 2 = 73 % ) F p Model 5 . 39 < . 0001 * * * History 373 . 69 < . 0001 * * * Group effect a 2 . 24 < . 0001 * * * Table 9 Regression model for relational closeness and performance a Dependent variable : performance b Predictors : ( constant ) , average relational closeness , memory , history , history * memory Model R R square Adjusted R square Std . error of the estimate Model summary a 1 . 363 a . 132 . 121 10 . 040 Model Sum of Squares Df Mean Square F Sig . Results Regression 1745 . 263 4 436 . 316 4 . 329 . 003 b Residual 11 , 491 . 132 114 100 . 799 Total 13 , 236 . 395 118 Model Unstandardized coefficients Standardized coefficients B Std . error Beta t Sig . Coefficients ( Constant ) 64 . 373 4 . 388 14 . 671 . 000 Avg relational closeness 7 . 270 1 . 864 . 568 3 . 899 . 000 Memory − 6 . 612 2 . 747 − . 313 − 2 . 407 . 088 History − 12 . 181 4 . 026 − . 577 − 3 . 026 . 063 History * memory 7 . 169 3 . 942 . 298 1 . 819 . 072 780 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 level and the only control variables that can be added are those measured at the group level . This shows that about 13 % of the variance in performance is explained by the model . The coefficient of relational closeness is positive and significant ( Beta = 0 . 568 ; p < . 0001 ) . Therefore , H2 is supported . Hypothesis 3 states that established groups will have a higher degree of relational trust than ad hoc groups . H3 Established groups have a higher degree of relational trust than ad hoc groups . Similar to H1 , since this hypothesis uses a perceptual measure of relational trust that is collected at the individual level , we used HANOVA to test it . See Table 10 . The results show that the model is significant ( F ( 118 , 238 ) = 2 . 69 , p < . 0001 ) . The distribution of the means emphasizes the fact that groups with history ( established groups ) certainly have higher relational trust than those without history ( 4 . 01 vs . 3 . 63 ) . Therefore , H3 is supported . Hypothesis 4 states that groups with high relational trust will outperform those with low levels . H4 Groups with a high degree of relational trust will outperform groups with lower levels of relational trust . Since this hypothesis links the individually collected perceptual measure of rela - tional trust with the group measure of performance , we use the aggregated group level measure of relational trust ( as described in the “Levels of Analysis” section ) . Performance was used as a dependent variable in the regression model ( Table 11 ) . The results of the test indicate that the model is significant at p < . 01 , with an R 2 of 0 . 288 . This shows that about 29 % of the variance in performance is explained by the Table 10 HANOVA results of relational trust a History is still significant at 1 % when the group is considered as the error term * * * Significant at the 0 . 1 % level LSMeans by history Condition means by history With history Without history LSMeans 4 . 01 3 . 63 Std . error 0 . 04 0 . 04 N 180 ( 60 ) 177 ( 59 ) HANOVA results ( R 2 = 73 % ) F p Model 2 . 69 < . 0001 * * * History 44 . 5 < . 0001 * * * Group effect a 2 . 34 < . 0001 * * * 781 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… model , using as controls other variables at the group level ( such as memory , history , and their interaction ) . Further , the coefficient of relational trust is positive significant ( Beta = . 455 p < . 0001 ) , and the entire model is significant at p < . 01 . Therefore , H4 is supported . Hypothesis 5 posits that groups with history and memory will perform better than all other groups . H5 Groups with both history and memory will outperform all other groups . The treatments ( group history and group memory ) and the dependent variable ( performance ) are all measures that are shared by the members in each group . Since the level of analysis for all of these measures is the group , the number of observa - tions ( N ) in each cell will be the number of groups and not the number of individuals ( see Table 12 ) . A two - factor test of Analysis of Variance ( ANOVA ) for the impact of history and memory on performance was used . The resulting marginal and cell means are shown . From the table , we see that the overall model is not significant , F ( 3 , 113 ) = . 626 , p > . 05 . Neither is the model for history , F ( 1 , 115 ) = . 095 , p < . 05 , nor the model for memory , F ( 1 , 115 ) = 1 . 621 , p > . 05 . The interaction of memory and history therefore does not seem to have a significant impact on performance . Although the overall model is not significant , there are some noteworthy patterns in the distribution of means from Table 12 . The means in the table come from the numeric scores ( based on 100 points ) assigned by the judges to the group reports . Of Table 11 Regression model for relational trust on performance a Dependent variable : performance b Predictors : ( constant ) , average relational trust , memory , history , history * memory Model R R square Adjusted R square Std . error of the estimate Model summary a 1 . 536 a . 288 . 159 9 . 712 Model Sum of squares df Mean square F Sig . Results Regression 2482 . 804 4 620 . 701 6 . 580 . 000 b Residual 10 , 753 . 591 114 94 . 330 Total 13 , 236 . 395 118 Model Unstandardized coefficients Standardized coefficients B Std . error Beta t Sig . Coefficients ( Constant ) 45 . 533 7 . 230 6 . 298 . 000 Average relational trust 9 . 326 1 . 901 . 455 4 . 906 . 000 Memory − 2 . 222 2 . 539 − . 105 − . 875 . 383 History − 4 . 389 2 . 667 − . 208 − 1 . 646 . 103 History * memory 2 . 706 3 . 569 . 113 . 758 . 450 782 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 all the conditions , the best performance is from ad hoc groups without memory , fol - lowed by established groups without memory . This runs contrary to our hypothesis that groups with both history and memory will outperform others . Ad hoc groups appeared to do best without memory , and not well enough when they have access to memory . On the other hand , established groups do not show much variation in performance whether they had access to memory or not . Although these patterns are worthy of note , the results are not significant , and therefore H5 is not supported . Hypothesis 6 looks at the main effect of memory on performance and posits that groups with memory perform better than others . H6 Groups with memory will outperform groups without memory . We use one - way ANOVA at the group level to test this hypothesis ( Table 13 ) . The results show that the overall model is not significant , F ( 1 , 117 ) = 1 . 618 , p > . 05 . Although the means for the groups without memory are higher than those for groups with memory , the difference between them is not significant . Therefore , H6 is not sup - ported . Memory does not have a significant impact on performance , for groups with and without history . We would like to reinforce the relevance and distinctness of the two hypotheses H5 and H6 . While both hypotheses consider memory , H5 tests for the interaction effects of memory and history on performance—we test to see if established groups with mem - ory perform better than groups in the other 3 conditions . On the other hand , hypothesis Table 12 ANOVA results for interaction of history and memory on performance With history Without history Total N Mean Std Dev N Mean Std Dev N Mean SD With memory 31 78 . 03 13 . 357 29 76 . 59 8 . 688 60 77 . 33 11 . 273 Without memory 29 79 . 67 8 . 244 30 79 . 92 11 . 226 59 79 . 80 9 . 790 Total 60 78 . 55 10 . 591 59 78 . 28 10 . 113 119 78 . 55 10 . 591 GLM results ( R 2 = 2 % ) F p Model 0 . 626 0 . 600 Memory 1 . 621 0 . 205 History 0 . 095 0 . 759 Interaction 0 . 187 0 . 666 Table 13 ANOVA results of memory on performance N Mean SD F p value Performance With memory 60 77 . 33 11 . 273 1 . 618 0 . 206 ( NS ) Without memory 59 79 . 80 9 . 790 783 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… H6 tests for the main effects of memory on performance ( without consideration of his - tory ) . This hypothesis tests to see if all groups with memory ( established and ad hoc groups with memory ) perform better than groups in the other two conditions ( please refer to Fig . 2 for the various experimental conditions ) . Hypothesis 7 proposes that memory has a positive impact on the level of rela - tional trust in groups . H7 Groups with memory have higher levels of relational trust than groups without memory . Since this hypothesis has a dependent variable ( relational trust ) which is a per - ceptual measure collected at the individual level , we used HANOVA to test it . Table 14 shows the least square means and standard errors reported with HANOVA . The results show that the model is significant F ( 118 , 238 ) = 2 . 69 , p < . 0001 . How - ever , the distribution of the means offers some insight . Groups without memory have higher levels of trust than groups with memory . The impact of memory on relational trust is therefore significant , but in the reverse direction to what was predicted in the hypothesis . The implications of this finding will be addressed in the Discussions section . Since the means indicate a direction that is contrary to the one predicted in the hypothesis , H7 is not supported . Table 15 summarizes the results of all the tests of hypotheses presented above . 5 . 6 Results of Mediation Analysis Although the direct link between history and performance ( H5 ) and memory and performance ( H6 ) was not significant , we retested these two hypotheses consider - ing the mediating role of relational trust and relational closeness . Hayes Process Table 14 HANOVA results of relational trust * Significant at the 5 % level ; * * Significant at the 1 % level ; * * * Significance at the . 1 % level LSMeans by memory Condition means by memory With Memory Without Memory LSMeans 3 . 741 3 . 905 Std . error 0 . 041 0 . 041 N 180 ( 60 ) 177 ( 59 ) HANOVA results ( R 2 = 73 % ) F p Model 2 . 69 < . 0001 * * * Memory 8 . 07 0 . 0049 * * Group effect 2 . 65 < 0 . 0001 * * * 784 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 module in SPSS was used for this testing . Results confirmed full mediation effect of both variables for the impact of performance , as explained below . 5 . 6 . 1 Mediation in the Impact of Group History on Performance The analysis confirmed that the relationship between group history and perfor - mance was fully mediated by relational closeness . The standardized regression coefficient between group history and relational closeness was statistically sig - nificant ( . 89 , p < . 01 ) , and so was the standardized regression coefficient between relational closeness and performance ( . 61 , p < . 01 ) . The standardized indirect effect was ( . 89 ) ( . 61 ) = . 54 . We tested the significance of this indirect effect using bootstrapping procedures . Unstandardized indirect effects were computed for each sample along with the 95 % confidence interval . The bootstrapped unstand - ardized indirect effect was . 04 , and the 95 % confidence interval ranged from . 25 , . 82 . Thus , the indirect effect of group history on performance ( through relational closeness ) was statistically significant . Similarly , the analysis confirmed that the relationship between group history and performance was also fully mediated by relational trust . The standardized regression coefficient between group history and relational trust was statisti - cally significant ( . 65 , p < . 01 ) . The standardized regression coefficient between relational trust and performance was also statistically significant ( 9 . 95 , p < . 01 ) . The standardized indirect effect was ( . 65 ) ( 9 . 95 ) = 6 . 47 . We tested the significance of this indirect effect using bootstrapping procedures . Unstandardized indirect effects were computed for each sample and the 95 % confidence interval was com - puted . The bootstrapped unstandardized indirect effect was 3 . 47 , and the 95 % confidence interval ranged from . 18 , . 45 . Thus , the indirect effect of group history on performance ( through relational trust ) was statistically significant . Table 15 Summary of hypotheses testing S Supported , NS Not supported * Significant in the opposite direction Hypothesis Result H1 Established groups will have a higher degree of relational closeness than ad hoc groups S H2 Groups that exhibit a high level of relational closeness will outperform groups with lower levels of relational closeness S H3 Established groups have a higher degree of relational trust than ad hoc groups S H4 Groups with a high degree of relational trust will outperform groups with lower levels of relational trust S H5 Groups with both history and memory will outperform all other groups NS H6 Groups with memory will outperform groups without memory NS H7 Groups with memory will have higher levels of relational trust than groups without memory NS * 785 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… 5 . 6 . 2 Mediation in the Impact of Group Memory on Performance With regards to group memory , the testing confirmed that the relationship with per - formance was fully mediated by relational closeness . The standardized regression coefficient between group memory and relational closeness was statistically signifi - cant ( . 07 , p < . 05 ) , as was the standardized regression coefficient between relational closeness and performance ( . 60 , p < . 01 ) . The standardized indirect effect was ( . 07 ) ( . 60 ) = . 04 . We tested the significance of this indirect effect using bootstrapping pro - cedures . Unstandardized indirect effects were computed for each sample and the 95 % confidence interval was computed . The bootstrapped unstandardized indirect effect was . 04 , and the 95 % confidence interval ranged from . 25 , . 32 . Thus , the indi - rect effect of group memory on performance ( through relational closeness ) was sta - tistically significant . Likewise , the analyses also confirmed that the relationship between group mem - ory and performance was mediated by relational trust . The standardized regression coefficient between group memory and relational trust was negative and statistically significant ( − . 04 , p < . 01 ) , and the standardized regression coefficient between rela - tional trust and performance ( 8 . 74 , p < . 01 ) . The standardized indirect effect was ( − . 04 ) ( 8 . 74 ) = − . 35 . We tested the significance of this indirect effect using boot - strapping procedures . Unstandardized indirect effects were computed for each sam - ple and the 95 % confidence interval was computed . The bootstrapped unstandard - ized indirect effect was . 35 and the 95 % confidence interval ranged from . 18 , . 40 . Thus , the indirect effect of group memory on performance ( through relational trust ) was statistically significant . Therefore , both relational closeness and relational trust ( as indicators of relational social capital ) fully mediated the impact of group history and group memory on per - formance and provide support for the essence of the proposed research model . 6 Discussion In the current research , we explored the impact of group history and group memory , mediated by relational social capital , on group performance within a synchronous computer - mediated environment . We used a 2 × 2 factorial design with 4 condi - tions comprising presence or absence of group history , and presence or absence of group memory . Group history was operationalized as prior interaction between the members in a group . Group memory was operationalized using the availability of a technology - generated transcript of group discussion . The collaborative technology deployed was google apps with the modules of google chat and google docs . The experimental task was to discuss and develop a group report containing recommen - dations on the content and design of a fictional university’s emergency management website . The task represents a scenario that is current and relevant and fosters a rich discussion that can be analyzed for future research . A total of 119 three - member groups ( 357 subjects ) were recruited from a large public university over a span of two semesters . The distribution of the groups across the four experimental conditions was as follows . About 180 subjects self - selected 60 786 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 three - member groups to represent the established ( with - history ) condition . Of these , 31 groups were given access to memory , vis - à - vis the chat transcript , to represent the established / with - memory condition ; the remaining 29 groups had no access to the transcript , constituting the established / without - memory condition . Out of the total of 119 groups , the remaining 59 groups ( 177 subjects ) were assigned to the ad hoc ( without - history ) condition . Of these , 29 groups were given access to the chat transcript to represent the ad hoc / with - memory condition , and the balance 30 had no access to the chat transcript constituting the ad hoc / without - memory condition . Figure 4 shows the results of our hypotheses testing . It depicts the hypotheses that were supported using bold lines , the hypotheses that were not supported using solid lines , and those that had results in the direction opposite to that predicted , using dot - ted lines . We structure our discussion to first cover the hypotheses that were supported . Our predictions for the impact of group history on the relational social capital variables of relational closeness ( H1 ) and relational trust ( H3 ) were both supported . Estab - lished groups had high levels of relational closeness and relational trust . These find - ings are consistent with the postulates of the Social Capital Theory which states that , the more the exposure and time spent by members with each other ( history ) , the more the potential for the relationship to have a higher degree of relational closeness ( Bourdieu 1986 ) , and the more the capacity for members to assimilate information about other members over a period of time ( Gabarro 1987 ) . This , in turn instills trust and confidence of each other in members ( Blau 1986 ) . Ad hoc groups , by virtue of having less exposure and interaction with each other exhibited lower levels of both relational closeness and relational trust . Both our mediator variables show a significant impact on the dependent variable of performance . Relational closeness had a significant effect on performance ( H2 ) . This is in line with the literature on the strength of ties from Social Capital Theory ( Granovetter 1973 , 1985 ) , which states that contacts with high relational closeness have strong ties that provide the motivation to share and exchange information . Such an exchange can encourage positive performance , as evidenced in our results . In addition , knowledge management literature states that strong ties or high relational Group History Group Memory Relational Closeness Relational Trust Group Performance H1 H2 H3 H4 H6 H7 H5 Supported Supported in the opposite direction Not Supported Fig . 4 Results of hypotheses testing 787 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… closeness allows open exchange of tacit and useful knowledge ( Ghoshal et al . 1994 ) which in turn leads to better performance . With respect to relational trust and per - formance , the findings indicate that groups with a high degree of relational trust per - formed better than other groups ( H4 ) . Trust between members , by reducing infor - mation asymmetries , can encourage open information sharing ( Wu 2008 ) , which in turn can lead to better performance . A high level of trust also increases the mem - bers’ ability to coordinate and synergize their efforts towards better performance . We now explore the hypotheses that were not supported . Our hypothesis on the interaction of group history and group memory on performance ( H5 ) was not sup - ported . Interaction effect typically reveals how the level of one factor is affected by the other factor , in its impact on the dependent variable . In our research , there was neither an interaction effect ( H5 ) nor a direct effect of group memory on perfor - mance ( H6 ) . This reveals that , contrary to traditional perception , group memory in collaborative technology may not always induce a positive impact on performance , if extenuating factors are not considered . This finding offers , to practitioners , two perspectives that can serve as lessons in the utilization of memory in collaboration . The first perspective relates to the manner of appropriation of technology by members ( Yoo and Alavi 2001 ) . In our research , the groups that did not have access to memory ( chat transcript ) improvised by developing an ongoing exchange of infor - mation within the report development interface ( Google docs ) thereby compensat - ing for the unavailability of memory . They adapted the Google docs interface as a chat interface and used it to ask and answer questions related to the task . They cus - tomized the interface to facilitate discussion . While failing to offer support for our hypothesis , this nevertheless highlights the dexterity and skill of groups in adapting the technology to their needs . This further reinforces the tenets of the Social Con - struction of Technology perspective that members influence and shape the adoption and usage of communication technology ( Pinch and Bijker 1984 ; Fulk and Yuan 2017 ; Yoo and Alavi 2001 ) . This offers invaluable insight to industry in decisions regarding collaborative technology choice and deployment . The second perspective relates to the role played by the nature of the task in the influence of memory on performance . Memory is relevant for tasks that require a certain degree of member - interdependence during implementation ( Ghaznavi et al . 2011 ; Lewis et al . 2005 ) . In our task , the process of emergency management was defined using the phases of planning , notification and recovery , and the members were able to work independently on each phase with little to no interdependence . It is possible that if the assigned task had been one that was characterized by linear , sequential completion , entailing interdependence in member function , we may have seen differential results for the influence of memory on performance—for example , a programming task with interlinked modules in which the output of one module serves as an input for another . In addition to the sequence and interdependence func - tions , task completion time plays an important role . Memory may be significant for tasks that have a longer completion time or have participants interacting asyn - chronously ( joining in at their own convenience at different times ) . In contrast , in our study , the completion time for the task was short , and the interaction was syn - chronous with all members participating in the meeting in real - time . We therefore emphasize the implication to practitioners to holistically consider task dimensions 788 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 such as nature of the task , length of time for completion , and the synchronicity in communication , as factors in the selection and allocation of collaborative technol - ogy with memory . In the impact of relational trust , we hypothesized that groups with memory will have higher levels of relational trust ( H7 ) . Although the overall model for this test was not significant , the distribution of the means reveals an effect in the direction opposite to the one predicted—that is , groups with memory actually showed lower levels of relational trust than other groups . To explain this phenomenon , we draw from knowledge contribution literature relating to two kinds of knowledge—exploit - ative and exploratory ( March 1991 ) . According to this literature , exploitative knowl - edge uses an existing knowledge base to produce incremental solutions that differ minimally from the base ( Dewar and Dutton 1986 ) . A repository such as memory can serve as an existing knowledge base to build upon and would facilitate contribu - tion of exploitative knowledge . Exploratory knowledge , on the other hand , produces radical solutions that are drastically different from the base ( Kang et al . 2007 ) and so the role of the knowledge base , in this case , is not as strong as in the case of exploit - ative knowledge . Extrapolating this to our research , our task is not one that requires members to build on an existing base , but one that requires developing recommen - dations from scratch . The task therefore entails exploratory rather than exploita - tive knowledge , which may explain the less - than - expected significance assigned to memory . Additionally , organizational research has indicated a positive relationship between memory and trust in groups that work on a task with a certain degree of interdependence ( Brandon and Hollingshead 2004 ; Oshri et al . 2008 ; Lewis et al . 2005 ; Moreland and Myaskovsky 2000 ) , and as pointed out earlier , our task does not have interdependence . Despite the lack of direct effects between group memory and performance and between group history and performance , additional mediation analyses show that our two indicators of social capital ( relational closeness and relational trust ) fully mediated the impact of group history and group memory on group performance . These additional tests provide support for the essence of the proposed research model and underscore the importance of adopting a social capital lens to understand the dynamics between socio - technical group characteristics and group performance . 7 Scope and Limitations While we draw strength from the experimental nature of our research , some limita - tions are nevertheless introduced by the laboratory setting . There are certain logisti - cal and technological issues that prevent achieving ideal experimental conditions . First , in our research , any group that had worked together prior to the current experi - ment was designated as a group with history , when in fact the degree to which these groups were truly established could not be strictly controlled . Second , the unbal - anced number of observations in each condition was unavoidable due to the nature of the experiment and the logistics of scheduling lab sessions . However , the actual number of participants and groups is similar , and the total number of subjects pro - vides adequate power for the statistical analyses . Third , as with any research that 789 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… uses student subjects , the generalization of results to other setting and populations should be made with caution . However , it is not uncommon to find student subjects being used in other Information Systems studies ( see , for example , Kumar and Ben - basat 2004 ) . Different subject pools or tasks may entail different results . Testing the research model with other subject populations and in other contexts , will certainly extend the findings reported here . Fourth , as is common in experimental settings , some external validity was traded off in favor of high internal validity . However , our power analysis does reinforce high statistical validity with our sample size . Fifth , as in any empirical research , the use of particular software for memory ( Google apps ) restricts the replication of the results in other systems with different implementa - tions of this feature . Lastly , due to logistical challenges our research does not incor - porate contextual factors of members such as good grades or personality characteris - tics that may affect the investigated relationships and influence group performance . Future studies can , however , consider these or other variables and increase the scale of the investigation . 8 Conclusions and Future Research Our research adds to group literature in the areas of synchronous computer - medi - ated collaboration and social capital . Our results primarily emphasize the dynamics between the group , the technology and the task . It shows that deploying the same technology with the same task may have differential results , depending on the group that is appropriating it . We emphasize the social dynamics of the group as an inte - gral component in collaboration . In addition , our research incorporates a socio - tech - nical approach which offers a holistic , rather than a myopic outlook to computer - mediated collaboration . We highlight the appropriateness of using social capital as a lens for collaboration and reinforce how this lens alters the traditional postulates of group memory and group history in collaboration . Group memory , as a medium for reprocessability , and an artifact for structural distribution of cognition in collaboration , assumes a new perspective in our research . We propose that , in group communication and decision making , memory should not be viewed as an independent entity but as a vehicle that affects performance through the medium of the relational social capital of the group . Since memory lowers the degree of relational trust among members , it will have to be carefully calibrated in the technology offered to ad hoc groups . Members in these groups need to exert the effort to acquire knowledge about and trust each other . If they have access to technology with memory , the members may end up relying solely on it to assimilate knowledge about each other , rather than investing in the cognitive effort to build and develop personal ties , all of which can help foster trust . For such teams , we recom - mend that practitioners consider additional trust - building mechanisms or artifacts . We show how group memory , if appropriately deployed and calibrated , can effec - tively modulate the group dynamics in collaboration . We also reveal the significance of the task in selecting appropriate groups and technology for collaboration . If a task entails asynchronous interaction and inter - dependence between members in execu - tion , it would be ideal to deploy collaborative technology with electronic group 790 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 memory . On the other hand , if a task is characterized by modularity in performance , the role of memory might not be as critical , particularly if the group interaction is synchronous . While most studies look at the generation of relational social capital in a non - elec - tronic communication medium , we focus on its role within an electronic medium . Lastly and most importantly , our research reinforces the need for a novel perspec - tive to collaborative development . With the diaspora of technological advancement , there needs to be a transformation in viewing collaborative development as a con - current and iterative , rather than , a sequential and linear process , of discussion and production . This approach defines a new collaboration paradigm worthy of further research . There is a plethora of opportunities for future research . While the current study was an exploratory one using collaborative technology such as google docs , future research can explore alternative file - sharing environments for group communication and decision making . Since the current software enabled documenting and saving the group communications , a content analysis of the transcripts would help analyze the extent of group memory that was utilized in the decision making . In addition , a comparison can be made between the amount of information that was exchanged during the discussions and the amount that got transferred to the actual group deci - sion ( report ) . Such an investigation may reveal other underlying phenomena in group dynamics . Finally , since this study empirically tests reprocessability within the context of synchronous collaboration , there is great potential in extending this line of research to asynchronous settings deploying multiple artifacts and / or using different tasks . A potentially fruitful area for future research particularly in the uti - lization of artifacts arises from the concept of tangible information systems . There is a need to integrate the positive benefits of the ways in which tangible artifacts provide visual cues ( needed to support collaborative work ) into the design of digital artifacts ( Lederman and Beynon - Davies 2018 ) , so as to push collaboration seam - lessly into the background of everyday living ( Weisser 1991 ) . Appendix 1 : Experimental Task Recommendations for Emergency Management Web Site for ABC University Emergencies can arise in universities at any time and from various natural or man - made causes . University personnel need to have access to information in case of emergencies such as hurricanes , snow storms , fires , or terrorist acts , etc . With this objective in mind , you are part of a Special Team that has been assigned to develop an emergency management web page for the university . Your responsibility is to ensure that the university provides information on how it can plan for , respond to , and recover from disasters that could adversely affect everyone . Your task is to discuss with your group members via chat and develop a report with recommendations on how the university’s Emergency Management ( EM ) web - site should be designed . 791 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… Your group report should be 2 typed pages . Please be as creative as possible in incorporating Web 2 . 0 features . Your report should have : 1 . Location of the overall emergency management link Indicate where within the university’s homepage you want the general emergency management link to be shown ( e . g . , within Student Safety or Human Resources etc . ) 2 . Emergency planning What measures can be taken to plan for different kinds of emergencies . Make sure you think of the different kinds of emergencies that can arise in a university setting ( examples : fire , shootings using guns etc . ) . Show your recommendations in terms of what information you will show ( content ) and what features of web 2 . 0 you will use to show it ( design ) . 3 . Emergency Notification / Alert How to notify the people before or after an emer - gency . What measures do you suggest to make the students , staff , and faculty aware ( you can think about ways in which you can spread emergency messages ) Show your recommendations in terms of what information you will show ( content ) and what features of web 2 . 0 you will use to show it ( design ) . 4 . Emergency Recovery After the occurrence of an emergency , what resources does the university offer to restore the campus to a functional stage so that people can return to school / work . Show your recommendations in terms of what information you will show ( content ) and what features of web 2 . 0 you will use to show it ( design ) . Remember to save report for the others to see your changes . Appendix 2 : Measures and Scales Index / variable name Survey items Relational closeness ( Adapted from Wheeless 1978 ; Moran 2005 ; and Berscheid et al . 1989 ) My team members and I are very close to each other ( estimate this as an average for all members ) ( RC4 ) I understand my team members and who they really are ( estimate this as an average for all members ) ( RC1 ) I feel this close to my team members in my working relationship ( estimate this as an average for all members ) ( RC3 ) In the past I have spent a lot of time with my team members ( estimate this as an average for all members ) ( RC6 ) My team members share my overall goals and values ( RC2 ) I have worked often with the other members in my team , before today ( RC5 ) 792 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 Index / variable name Survey items Relational trust ( Adapted from Moran 2005 ) My team members influence me in everyday things in my life ( estimate this as an average for all members ) ( RT1 ) . My team members are generally honest and truthful in the infor - mation provided ( estimate this as an average for all members ) ( RT3 ) My team members are very competent in the projects in which we interact ( estimate this as an average for all members ) ( RT2 ) My team members have a shared vision of the team’s future achievements ( estimate this as an average for all members ) ( RT4 ) My teams members have a clear view to team’s directions ( esti - mate this as an average for all members ) ( RT5 ) My team members have a shared vision to team’s goals ( estimate this as an average for all members ) ( RT6 ) Group memory ( Adapted from Mangalraj 2006 ) Memory groups The chat transcript was very useful for our task ( GM1 _ rev ) We referred to the chat transcript often ( GM2 _ rev ) Without the chat transcript , we would have been lost in preparing our final report ( GM3 _ rev ) No memory groups Having access to a chat transcript that showed the group discus - sion would have been useful for our task ( GM1 _ rev ) If we had access to a chat transcript , we would have referred to it often ( GM2 _ rev ) Having access to a chat transcript would have added to our task performance ( GM3 _ rev ) Group history ( Adapted from Jarvenpaa et al . 2004 ) My team works together better than most other teams on which I have worked ( GH2 ) My teammates and I help each other better than most other teams on which I have worked ( GH3 ) My teammates and I get along better than most other teams on which I have worked ( GH1 ) For each statement , participants were asked to indicate the extent to which they agree or disagree with each statement ( 1 = strongly disagree ; 5 = strongly agree ) Negatively worded items were reverse coded 793 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… Appendix 3 : Judges Reporting Form References Adams SJ , Roch SG , Ayman R ( 2005 ) Communication medium and member familiarity : the effects on decision time , accuracy , and satisfaction . Small Group Res 36 ( 3 ) : 321 – 353 794 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 Adrianson L , Hjelmquist E ( 1991 ) Group processes in face - to - face and computer - mediated communica - tion . Behav Inf Technol 10 ( 4 ) : 281 – 296 Arrow KJ ( 1974 ) The limits of organization . W . W . Norton , New York Bachmann R ( 2000 ) Conclusion : trust - conceptual aspects of a complex phenomenon . In : Lane C , Bach - mann R ( eds ) Trust within and between organizations . Oxford University Press , Oxford Baltes BB , Dickson MW , Sherman MP , Bauer CC , LaGanke JS ( 2002 ) Computer - mediated communica - tion and group decision making : a meta - analysis . Org Behav Hum Dec Process 87 : 156 – 179 Barber SJ , Rajaram S , Aron A ( 2010 ) When two is too many : collaborative encoding impairs memory . Mem Cogn 38 ( 3 ) : 255 – 264 Barber SJ , Harris CB , Rajaram S ( 2015 ) Why two heads apart are better than two heads together : multi - ple mechanisms underlie the collaborative inhibition effect in memory . J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 41 ( 2 ) : 559 – 566 Becker - Beck U , Wintermantel M , Borg A ( 2005 ) Principles of regulating interaction in teams practic - ing face - to - face communication versus teams practicing computer - mediated communication . Small Group Res 36 ( 4 ) : 436 – 499 Benbasat I , Lim LH ( 1993 ) The effects of group , task , context , and technology variables on the use - fulness of group support systems : a meta - analysis of experimental studies . Small Group Res 24 ( 4 ) : 430 – 462 Benbunan - Fich R , Hiltz SR , Turoff M ( 2002 ) A comparative content analysis of face - to - face vs . asyn - chronous group decision making . Decis Support Sys 34 : 457 – 469 Berscheid E , Snyder M , Omoto AM ( 1989 ) The relationship closeness inventory : assessing the closeness of interpersonal relationship . J Personal Social Psychol 57 ( 5 ) : 792 – 807 Bijker WE ( 1995 ) Of bicycle , bakelites and bulbs : toward a theory of sociotechnical change . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA Blau PM ( 1986 ) Exchange and power in social life , 2nd edn . Wiley , New York Bourdieu P ( 1986 ) The forms of capital . In : Richardson JG ( ed ) Handbook of theory and research for the sociology of education . Greenwood Press , Westport , pp 241 – 258 Brandon DP , Hollingshead AB ( 2004 ) Transactive memory systems in organizations : matching tasks , expertise , and people . Organ Sci 15 : 633 – 644 Burgoon JK , Chen F , Twitchell DP ( 2010 ) Deception and its detection under synchronous and asynchro - nous computer - mediated communication . Group Decis Negot 19 : 345 – 366 Burt RS ( 1992 ) Structural holes : the social structure of competition . Harvard University Press , Cambridge Cannon - Bowers JA and Salas E ( 1990 ) Cognitive psychology and team training : shared mental models in complex systems . In : Paper presented at the annual meetings of the society for industrial and organizational psychology , Miami , FL Carley K ( 1986 ) Knowledge acquisition as a social phenomenon . Instr Sci 14 : 381 – 438 Carlson JR , Zmud RW ( 1999 ) Channel expansion theory and the experiential nature of media richness perceptions . Acad Manag J 42 ( 2 ) : 153 – 170 Choi H , Kensinger EA , Rajaram S ( 2017 ) Mnemonic transmission , social contagion , and emergence of collective memory : influence of emotional valence , group structure , and information distribution . J Exp Psychol 146 ( 9 ) : 1247 – 1265 Chen M , Wang M ( 2008 ) Social networks and a new venture’s innovative capability : the role of trust within entrepreneurial teams . R & D Manag 38 ( 3 ) : 253 – 264 Cheng X , Yin G , Azadegan A , Kolfschoten G ( 2016 ) Trust evolvement in hybrid team collaboration : a longitudinal case study . Group Decis Negot 25 : 267 – 288 Chidambaram L ( 1996 ) Relational development in computer - supported groups . Manag Inf Syst Q 20 ( 2 ) : 143 – 165 Cicourel AV ( 1973 ) Cognitive sociology . Penguin Books , Harmondsworth Cody RP , Smith JK ( 1997 ) Applied statistics and the SAS programming language , 4th edn . Prentice Hall , Upper Saddle River Coleman JS ( 1990 ) Foundations of social theory . Harvard University Press , Cambridge Connolly T , Jessup LM , Valacich JS ( 1990 ) Effect of anonymity and evaluative tone on idea generation in computer - mediated groups . Manag Sci 36 ( 6 ) : 689 – 703 Daft RL , Lengel RH ( 1986 ) Organizational information requirements , media richness and structural design . Manag Sci 32 : 554 – 571 Davis R ( 2010 ) Conceptualizing fun in mobile commerce environments . Int J Mob Commun 8 ( 1 ) : 21 – 40 De Carolis DM , Litzky BE , Eddleston KA ( 2009 ) Why networks enhance the progress of new venture creation : the influence of social capital and cognition . Entrep Theory Pract 33 ( 2 ) : 527 – 545 795 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… DeLuca D , Valacich J ( 2006 ) Virtual teams in and out of synchronicity . Inf Technol People 19 ( 4 ) : 323 – 344 Dennis AR ( 1996 ) Information exchange and use in group decision making : you can lead a group to information but you can’t make it think . Manag Inf Syst Q 20 ( 4 ) : 433 – 457 Dennis AR , Garfield MJ ( 2003 ) The adoption and use of GSS in project teams : toward more participative processes and outcomes . Manag Inf Syst Q 27 ( 2 ) : 289 – 323 Dennis AR , Valacich JS ( 1993 ) Computer brainstorms : more heads are better than one . J Appl Psychol 75 ( 4 ) : 531 – 537 Dennis AR , Wixom B , Vandenberg R ( 2001 ) Understanding fit and appropriation effects in group support systems via meta - analysis . Manag Inf Syst Q 25 ( 2 ) : 167 – 193 Dennis AR , Fuller RM , Valacich JS ( 2008 ) Media , tasks , and communication processes : a theory of media synchronicity . MIS Q 32 ( 3 ) : 575 – 600 DeSanctis G , Poole MS ( 1994 ) Capturing the complexity in advanced technology use : adaptive structura - tion theory . Organ Sci 5 ( 2 ) : 121 – 147 Dewar RD , Dutton JE ( 1986 ) The adoption of radical and incremental innovations : an empirical analysis . Manag Sci 32 : 1422 – 1434 Dillow MR , Dunleavy KN , Weber KD ( 2009 ) The impact of relational characteristics and reasons for topic avoidance on relational closeness . Commun Q 57 ( 2 ) : 205 – 223 Dorfman PW , Stephen WG ( 1984 ) The effects of group performance on cognition , satisfaction , and behavior : a process model . J Manag 10 ( 2 ) : 173 – 192 Dyer JH , Chu W ( 2003 ) The role of trustworthiness in reducing transaction costs and improving perfor - mance : empirical evidence from the United States , Japan , and Korea . Organ Sci 14 : 57 – 68 Dyer JF , Singh H ( 1998 ) The relational view : cooperative strategy and sources of interoganizational com - petitive advantage . Acad Manag Rev 23 ( 4 ) : 669 – 679 Easley RF , Devaraj S , Crant M ( 2003 ) Relating collaborative technology use to teamwork quality and performance : an empirical analysis . J Manag Inf Syst 19 ( 4 ) : 247 – 268 Evans CR , Dion KL ( 1991 ) Group cohesion and performance : a meta - analysis . Small Group Res 22 ( 2 ) : 203 – 216 Fach PW ( 2001 ) Design reuse through frameworks and patterns . IEEE Softw 18 ( 5 ) : 71 – 76 Fjermestad J , Hiltz SR ( 1998 – 99 ) . An assessment of group support systems experimental research : meth - odology and results . J Manag Inf Syst 15 ( 3 ) : 7 – 149 Flanagin AJ , Park HS , Seibold DR ( 2004 ) Group performance and collaborative technology : a longitudi - nal and multilevel analysis of information quality , contribution equity , and members’ satisfaction in computer - mediated groups . Commun Monogr 71 : 352 – 372 Flor NV , Hutchins EL ( 1991 ) Analyzing distributed cognition in software teams : a case study of team programming during perfective software maintenance . In : Koenemann - Belliveau J , Moher T , Rob - ertson S ( eds ) Empirical studies of programmers : fourth workshop . Ablex , Norwood , pp 36 – 64 Foley MA , Fried AR , Cowan E , Bays RB ( 2014 ) Collaborative encoding and memory accuracy : examin - ing the effects of interactive components of co - construction processes . J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 40 ( 1 ) : 25 Fowler M ( 1997 ) Analysis patterns : reusable object models . Addison - Wesley , Boston Frakes WB , Terry C ( 1996 ) Software reuse : metrics and models . ACM Comput Surv 28 ( 2 ) : 415 – 435 Friar JH , Meyer MH ( 2003 ) Entrepreneurship and startups in the Boston region : factors differentiating high - growth ventures from micro - ventures . Small Bus Econ 21 ( 2 ) : 145 – 152 Fulk J ( 1993 ) Social construction of communication technology . Acad Manag J 36 ( 5 ) : 921 – 950 Fulk J , Yuan YC ( 2017 ) Social construction of communication technology . In : Scott CR , Lewis L ( eds ) The international encyclopedia of organizational communication . Wiley , Hoboken Fulk J , Steinfield C , Schmitz J , Power JG ( 1987 ) A social information processing model of media use in organizations . Commun Res 14 ( 5 ) : 529 – 552 Fulk J , Schmitz J , Steinfield CW ( 1990 ) A social influence model of technology use . In : Fulk J , Steinfield C ( eds ) Organizations and communications technology . Sage , Newbury Park , pp 117 – 140 Gabarro JJ ( 1987 ) The development of working relationships . In : Lorsch JW ( ed ) The handbook of organ - izational behavior . Prentice , Engelwood Cliffs , pp 172 – 189 Gabbay SM , Leenders R ( 1999 ) CSC : the structure of advantage and disadvantage . In : Leenders RTAJ , Gabbay SM ( eds ) Corporate social capital and liability . Kluwer Academic Publishers , London , pp 1 – 14 Gallivan MJ , Benbunan - Fich R ( 2005 ) A framework for analyzing levels of analysis issues in studies of e - collaboration . IEEE Trans Prof Commun 48 ( 1 ) : 87 – 104 Gallupe RB , Bastianutti L , Cooper WH ( 1991 ) Brainstorming electronically . J Appl Psychol 76 : 137 – 142 796 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 Gamma E , Helm R , Johnson R , Vissides J ( 1994 ) Design patterns : elements of reusable object - oriented software . Addison - Wesley , Boston George JM ( 1990 ) Personality , affect , and behavior in groups . J Appl Psychol 75 ( 2 ) : 107 – 116 Ghaznavi M , Perry M , Logan K , Toulson P ( 2011 ) Knowledge sharing in ego - centered knowledge net - works of professionals : role of transactive memory , trust , and reciprocity . In : 8th International con - ference on intellectual capital , knowledge management & organisational learning ( ICICKM ) , pp 681 – 688 Ghoshal S , Korine H , Szulanski G ( 1994 ) Interunit communication in multinational corporations . Manag Sci 40 : 96 – 110 Granovetter MS ( 1973 ) The strength of weak ties . Am J Soc 78 ( 6 ) : 1360 – 1380 Granovetter MS ( 1985 ) Economic action and social structure : the problem of embeddedness . Am J Soc 91 ( 3 ) : 481 – 510 Granovetter MS ( 1992 ) Problems of explanation in economic sociology . In : Nohria N , Eccles RG ( eds ) Networks and organizations . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , pp 25 – 56 Guzzo R , Dickson MW ( 1996 ) Teams in organizations : recent research on performance and effectiveness . Ann Rev Psychol 47 : 307 – 338 Hair J , Black W , Babin B , Anderson R ( 2010 ) Multivariate data analysis , 7th edn . Prentice - Hall , Inc . , Upper Saddle River Hancock JT , Woodworth MT , Goorha S ( 2010 ) See no evil : the effect of communication medium and motivation on deception detection . Group Decis Negot 19 : 327 – 343 Hansen MT ( 1999 ) The search - transfer problem : the role of weak ties in sharing knowledge across organ - ization subunits . Adm Sci Q 44 : 82 – 111 Hansen S , Lyytinen K ( 2009 ) Distributed cognition in the management of design requirements . In : Jarke M , Lyytinen K , Mylopoulos J ( eds ) AMCIS 2009 proceedings . Article ID 266 Harris BC , Paterson HM , Kemp RI ( 2008 ) Collaborative recall and collective memory : what happens when we remember together ? Memory 16 ( 3 ) : 213 – 220 Harris CB , Keil PG , Sutton J , Barnier AJ , McIlwain DJ ( 2011 ) We remember , we forget : collaborative remembering in older couples . Discourse Process 48 ( 4 ) : 267 – 303 Harris CB , Barnier AJ , Sutton J , Keil PJ , Dixon RA ( 2017 ) Going episodic : collaborative inhibition and facilitation when long - married couples remember together . Memory 25 ( 8 ) : 1148 – 1159 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09658 211 . 2016 . 12744 05 Haseman WD , Nazareth DL , Paul S ( 2005 ) Implementation of a group decision support system utilizing collective memory . Inf Manag 42 : 591 – 605 Hayne SC , Pollard CE , Rice RE ( 2003 ) Identification of comment authorship in anonymous group sup - port systems . J Manag Inf Sys 20 ( 1 ) : 301 – 329 Hess T , Fuller M , Campbell D ( 2009 ) Designing interfaces with social presence : using vividness and extraversion to create social recommendation agents . J Assoc Inf Sys 10 ( 12 ) : 889 – 919 Hightower R , Sayeed L ( 1996 ) Effects of communication mode and prediscussion information distribu - tion characteristics on information exchange in groups . Inf Syst Res 7 ( 4 ) : 451 – 465 Hinsz VB ( 1990 ) Cognitive and consensus processes in group recognition memory performance . J Per - sonal Soc Psychol 59 ( 4 ) : 705 – 718 Hirokawa RY ( 2003 ) Communication and group decision - making efficacy . In : Hirokawa RY , Cathcart RS , Samovar LA , Henman LD ( eds ) Small Group Communications , 8th edn . Roxbury Publishing Company , Los Angeles , pp 125 – 133 Hirst W , Echterhoff G ( 2012 ) Remembering in conversations : the social sharing and reshaping of memo - ries . Annu Rev Psych 63 : 55 – 79 Hogg MA ( 1992 ) The social psychology of group cohesiveness : from attraction to social identity . New York University Press , New York Hollan J , Hutchins E , Kirsch D ( 2000 ) Distributed cognition : towards a new foundation for human – com - puter interaction research . ACM Trans Comput Hum Interact 7 ( 2 ) : 174 – 196 Huang W , Wei KK , Watson RT , Tan CY ( 2003 ) Supporting virtual team - building with a GSS : an empiri - cal investigation . Decis Support Syst 34 ( 4 ) : 359 – 367 Hutchins E ( 1995a ) How a cockpit remembers its speed . Cognitive Sci 19 : 265 – 288 Hutchins E ( 1995b ) Cognition in the wild . MIT Press , Mass Ilgen DR , Hollenbeck JR , Johnson M , Jundt D ( 2005 ) Team in organizations : from input - process - output models to IMOI models . Annu Rev Psychol 56 : 517 – 543 Jacobs J ( 1961 ) The death and life of great American cities . Vintage Books , New York Janis IL ( 1982 ) Groupthink , 2nd edn . Houghton Mifflin , Boston 797 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… Jarvenpaa SL , Leidner DE ( 1999 ) Communication and trust in global virtual teams . Organ Sci 10 ( 6 ) : 791 – 815 Jarvenpaa SL , Shaw TR , Stapels DS ( 2004 ) Towards contextualized theories of trust : the role of trust in global virtual teams . Inf Syst Res 15 ( 3 ) : 250 – 267 ( noted source : Chidambaram L ( 1996 ) Relational development in computer - supported groups . MIS Q 20 ( 2 ) : 143 – 165 ) Kahai SS , Cooper RB ( 2003 ) Exploring the core concepts of media richness theory : the impact of cue multiplicity and feedback immediacy on decision quality . J Manag Inf Syst 20 ( 1 ) : 263 – 299 Kale P , Singh M , Perlmutter H ( 2000 ) Learning and protection of proprietary assets in strategic alliances : building relational capital . Strat Manag J 21 ( 3 ) : 217 – 237 Kang S , Morris S , Snell S ( 2007 ) Relational archetypes , organizational learning , and value creation : extending the human resource architecture . Acad Manag Rev 32 : 236 – 256 Kanwattanachai P , Yoo Y ( 2007 ) The impact of knowledge coordination on virtual team performance over time . Manag Inf Sci Q 31 ( 4 ) : 783 – 808 Klotz AC , Hmieleski KM , Bradley BH , Busenitz LW ( 2014 ) New venture teams a review of the literature and roadmap for future research . J Manag 40 ( 1 ) : 226 – 255 Kock N ( 2004 ) The psychological model : towards a new theory of computer - mediated communication based on darwinian evolution . Organ Sci 15 ( 3 ) : 327 – 348 Krackhardt D ( 1992 ) The strength of strong ties : the importance of philos in organizations . In : Nohria N , Eccles R ( eds ) Networks and organizations : structures , form and action . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , pp 216 – 239 Kumar N , Benbasat I ( 2004 ) The effect of relationship encoding , task type , and complexity on infor - mation representation : an empirical evaluation of 2D and 3D line graphs . Manag Inf Syst Q 28 ( 2 ) : 255 – 281 Lederman R , Beynon - Davies P ( 2018 ) Understanding the tangible within IS . In : Thirty - ninth interna - tional conference on information system , San Francisco , pp 1 – 17 Lee AS ( 1994 ) Electronic mail as a medium for rich communication : an empirical investigation using hermeneutic interpretation . Manag Inf Syst Q 18 ( 2 ) : 143 – 157 Levin DZ , Cross R ( 2004 ) The strength of weak ties you can trust : the mediating role of trust in effective knowledge transfer . Manag Sci 50 ( 11 ) : 1477 – 1490 Lewin K ( 1945 ) The research center for group dynamics at Massachusetts Institute of Technology . Soci - ometry 8 : 126 – 136 Lewis JD , Weigert A ( 1985 ) Trust as a social reality . Soc Forces 63 ( 4 ) : 967 – 985 Lewis K , Lange D , Gillis L ( 2005 ) Transactive memory systems , learning , and learning transfer . Organ Sci 16 : 581 – 598 Li M , Dong ZY , Chen X ( 2012 ) Factors influencing consumption experience of mobile commerce . Intern Res 22 ( 2 ) : 120 – 141 Libby R , Trotman KT , Zimmer I ( 1987 ) Member variation , recognition of expertise , and group perfor - mance . J Appl Psychol 72 : 81 – 87 Littlepage GE , Silbiger H ( 1992 ) Recognition of expertise in decision - making groups : effects of group size and participation patterns . Small Group Res 23 : 344 – 355 Mangalaraj G , Nerur S , Mahapatra R , Price KH ( 2014 ) Distributed cognition in software design : an experimental investigation of the role of design patterns and collaboration . Manag Inf Syst Q 38 ( 1 ) : 249 – 274 Mangalraj G ( 2006 ) Influence of codified knowledge on software design task performance : a comparison of pairs with individuals . Dissertation , University of Texas at Arlington , TX , USA March JG ( 1991 ) Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning . Organ Sci 2 : 71 – 87 March JG , Simon HA ( 1958 ) Organizations . Wiley , Hoboken Markus ML ( 1994 ) Electronic mail as the medium of managerial choice . Organ Sci 5 ( 4 ) : 502 – 527 Martz WB Jr , Shepherd MM ( 2000 ) A discussion of process losses in GSS : exploring the consensus gap . Informatica 24 ( 2 ) : 167 – 174 Mayer R , Gavin M ( 2005 ) Trust for management and performance : who minds the shop while the employees watch the boss . Acad Manag J 48 : 874 – 888 Mayer RC , Davis JH , Schoorman FD ( 1995 ) An integrative model of organizational trust . Acad Manag Rev 20 : 709 – 734 Maznevski ML , Chudoba KM ( 2000 ) Bridging space over time : global virtual team dynamics and effec - tiveness . Organ Sci 11 : 473 – 492 McAllister DJ ( 1995 ) Affect - and cognition - based trust as foundations for interpersonal cooperation in organizations . Acad Manag J 38 ( 1 ) : 24 – 59 798 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 McEvily B , Perrone V , Zaheer A ( 2003 ) Trust as an organizing principle . Organ Sci 14 : 91 – 103 McGrath JE ( 1984 ) Groups : interaction and performance . Prentice Hall , Engelwood Cliffs McGrath JE ( 1991 ) Time , interaction , and performance ( TIP ) : a theory of groups . Small Group Res 22 ( 2 ) : 147 – 174 McGrath JE , Arrow H , Gruenfeld DH , Hollingshead AB , O’Connor KM ( 1993 ) Groups , tasks , and tech - nology : the effects of experience and change . Small Group Res 24 : 406 – 420 McGrath JE , Arrow H , Berdahl J ( 2000 ) The study of groups : past , present , and future . Personal Soc Psychol Rev 4 ( 1 ) : 95 – 105 Mennecke BE , Valacich JS ( 1998 ) Information is what you make of it : the influence of group history and computer support on information sharing , decision quality , and member perceptions . J Manag Inf Syst 15 ( 2 ) : 173 – 197 Meyerson D , Weick KE , Kramer RM ( 1996 ) Swift trust and temporary groups . In : Kramer RM , Tyler TR ( eds ) Trust in organizations : frontiers of theory and research . Sage Publications , Thousand Oaks , pp 166 – 195 Miller DL , Thomas S ( 2005 ) The impact of relative position and relational closeness . J Bus Ethics 61 ( 4 ) : 315 – 328 Millhiser WP , Coen CA , Solow D ( 2011 ) Understanding the role of worker interdependence in team selection . Organ Sci 22 ( 3 ) : 772 – 787 Mojzisch A , Krumm S , Schultze T ( 2014 ) Do high working memory groups perform better ? A concep - tual approach linking individual differences in working memory capacity to group performance . J Pers Psychol 13 ( 3 ) : 134 – 145 Monteverde K ( 1995 ) Applying resource - based strategic analysis : making the model more accessible to practitioners . Working Paper No . 95 - 1 , Department of Management and Information Systems , St . Joseph’s University , Philadelphia , PA Moran P ( 2005 ) Structural vs . relational embeddedness : social capital and managerial performance . Strat Manag J 26 ( 12 ) : 1129 – 1151 Moreland RL , Myaskovsky L ( 2000 ) Exploring the performance benefits of group training : transactive memory or improved communication ? Organ Behav Hum Decis Process 82 : 117 – 133 Muhren W , Van Den Eede G , Van de Walle B ( 2009 ) Making sense of media synchronicity in humanitar - ian crises . IEEE Trans Prof Commun 52 ( 4 ) : 339 – 377 Munzer S , Holmer T ( 2009 ) Bridging the gap between media synchronicity and task performance . Com - mun Res 36 ( 1 ) : 76 – 103 Murthy US , Kerr DS ( 2003 ) Decision making performance of interacting groups : an experimental inves - tigation of the effects of task type and communication mode . Inf Manag 40 ( 5 ) : 351 – 360 Muthusamy SK , Wheeler JV , Simmons BL ( 2005 ) Self - managing work teams : enhancing organizational innovativeness . Organ Dev J 23 ( 3 ) : 53 – 66 Nahapiet J , Ghoshal S ( 1998 ) Social capital , intellectual capital , and the organizational advantage . Acad Manag Rev 22 ( 2 ) : 242 – 286 Ngwenyama OK , Lee AS ( 1997 ) Communication richness in electronic mail : critical social theory and the contextuality of meaning . Manag Inf Syst Q 21 ( 2 ) : 145 – 167 Nohria N ( 1992 ) Information and search in the creation of new business ventures . In : Nohria N , Eccles RG ( eds ) Networks and organizations : structure , form and action . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , pp 240 – 261 Nooteboom B ( 2007 ) Social capital , institutions and trust . Rev Soc Econ 65 ( 1 ) : 29 – 53 Nunamaker JF Jr , Dennis A , Valacich J , Vogel D , George J ( 1991 ) Electronic meeting systems to support group work . Commun ACM 34 ( 7 ) : 40 – 61 Nunnally JC ( 1978 ) Psychometric Theory . New York : McGraw - Hill Orlikowski WJ ( 1992 ) The duality of technology : rethinking the concepts of technology in organizations . Organ Sci 3 ( 3 ) : 398 – 427 Orlikowski WJ , Iacono SC ( 2001 ) Research commentary : desperately seeking “IT” in IT research—a call to theorizing the IT artifact . Inf Syst Res 12 ( 2 ) : 121 – 134 Orr J ( 1990 ) Sharing knowledge , celebrating identity : community memory in a service culture . In : Mid - dleton D , Edwards D ( eds ) Collective remembering . Sage , London , pp 169 – 189 Oshri I , Van Fenema P , Kotlarsky J ( 2008 ) Knowledge transfer in globally distributed teams : the role of transactive memory . Inf Syst J 18 : 593 – 616 Pennings JM , Woiceshyn J ( 1987 ) A typology of organizational control and its metaphors . In : Bacharach SB , Mitchell SM ( eds ) Research in the sociology of organizations , vol 5 . Jai Press , Greenwich , pp 75 – 104 799 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… Pentland BT , Feldman MS ( 2007 ) Narrative networks : patterns of technology and organization . Organ Sci 18 ( 5 ) : 781 – 795 Pinch TJ , Bijker WE ( 1984 ) The social construction of facts and artefacts : or how the sociology of sci - ence and the sociology of technology might benefit each other . Soc Stud Sci 14 : 399 – 441 Podsakoff PM , MacKenzie SB , Lee JY , Podsakoff NP ( 2003 ) Common method biases in behavio - ral research : a critical review of the literature and recommended remedies . J Appl Psychol 88 ( 5 ) : 879 – 903 Pollach I ( 2008 ) Media richness in online consumer interactions : an exploratory study of consumer - opin - ion web sites . Inf Res Manag J 21 ( 4 ) : 49 – 65 Poltrock S , Handel M ( 2010 ) Models of collaboration as the foundation for collaboration technologies . J Manag Inf Syst 27 ( 1 ) : 97 – 122 Preece J ( 2002 ) Supporting community and building social capital . Commun ACM 45 ( 4 ) : 36 – 39 Pucher R , Lehner M ( 2011 ) Project based learning in computer science—a review of more than 500 pro - jects . Procedia Soc Behav Sci 29 : 1561 – 1566 Putnam RD ( 1993 ) Making democracy work : civic traditions in modern Italy . Princeton University Press , Princeton Putnam RD ( 1995 ) Bowling alone : America’s declining social capital . J Democr 6 : 65 – 78 Rajaram S ( 2011 ) Collaboration both hurts and helps memory : a cognitive perspective . Curr Dir Psychol Sci 20 ( 2 ) : 76 – 81 Rajaram S , Maswood R ( 2017 ) Collaborative memory : a selective review of data and theory . In : Byrne JH ( ed ) Learning and memory : a comprehensive reference , vol 2 , 2nd edn . Academic Press , Oxford , pp 53 – 70 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 80932 4 - 5 . 21050 - X Rajaram S , Pereira - Pasarin LP ( 2010 ) Collaborative memory : cognitive research and theory . Perspect Psychol Sci 5 : 649 – 663 Rao VS , Jarvenpaa SL ( 1991 ) Computer support of groups : theory - based models for GDSS research . Manag Sci 37 ( 10 ) : 1347 – 1362 Reagans R , McEvily B ( 2003 ) Network structure and knowledge transfer : the effects of cohesion and range . Adm Sci Q 48 ( 2 ) : 240 – 267 Rempel JK , Holmes JG , Zanna MD ( 1985 ) Trust in close relationships . J Personal Soc Psychol 49 ( 1 ) : 95 – 112 Roediger HL , Zaromb FM , Butler AC ( 2009 ) The role of repeated retrieval in shaping collective memory . In : Boyer P , Wertsch JV ( eds ) Memory in mind and culture . Cambridge University Press , Cam - bridge , pp 29 – 58 Rousseau DM , Sitkin SB , Burt RS , Camerer C ( 1998 ) Not so different after all : a cross - discipline view of trust . Acad Manag Rev 23 ( 3 ) : 393 – 404 Sambamurthy V , Poole MS , Kelly J ( 1993 ) The effects of variations in GDSS capabilities on decision - making processes in groups . Small Group Res 24 : 523 – 546 Saparito PA , Chen CC , Sapienza HJ ( 2004 ) The role of relational trust in bank - small firm relationships . Acad Manag J 47 ( 3 ) : 400 – 410 Sarker S , Ahuja M , Sarker S , Kirkeby S ( 2011 ) The role of communication and trust in global virtual teams : a social network perspective . J Manag Inf Syst 28 ( 1 ) : 273 – 309 Sarmiento JH , Stahl G ( 2008 ) Group creativity in interaction : collaborative referencing , remembering , and bridging . Int J Hum Comput Interact 24 ( 5 ) : 492 – 504 Schmidt DC ( 1995 ) Using design patterns to develop reusable object - oriented communication software . Commun ACM 38 ( 10 ) : 65 – 76 Schumann S , Klein O , Douglas K , Hewstone M ( 2017 ) When is computer - mediated intergroup contact most promising ? Examining the effect of out - group members’ anonymity on prejudice . Comput Hum Behav 77 : 198 – 210 Sharp H , Robinson H ( 2008 ) Collaboration and coordination in mature extreme programming teams . Int J Hum Comput Stud 66 ( 7 ) : 506 – 518 Sharp H , Robinson H , Petre M ( 2009 ) The role of physical artefacts in agile software development : two complementary perspectives . Interact Comput 21 ( 1 – 2 ) : 108 – 116 Shaw JB , Barrett - Power E ( 1998 ) The effects of diversity on small work group processes and perfor - mance . Hum Relat 51 ( 10 ) : 1307 – 1325 Short J , Williams E , Christie B ( 1976 ) The social psychology of telecommunications . Wiley , London Siponen M , Vance A ( 2010 ) Neutralization : new insights into the problem of employee information sys - tems security policy violations . Manag Inf Syst Q 34 ( 3 ) : 487 – 502 800 V . Raghupathi , R . Benbunan - Fich 1 3 Smith CAP , Hayne SC ( 1997 ) Decision making under time pressure : an investigation of decision speed and decision quality of computer - supported groups . Manag Commun Q 11 ( 1 ) : 97 – 126 Smith HA , McKeen JD ( 2011 ) Enabling collaboration with IT . Commun Assoc Inf Syst 28 : 243 – 254 SpinkK S , Carron AV ( 1994 ) Group cohesion effects in exercise classes . Small Group Res 25 ( 1 ) : 26 – 42 Stasser G ( 1992 ) Information salience and the discovery of hidden profiles by decision - making groups : “a thought experiment” . Organ Behav Hum Decis Process 52 ( 1 ) : 156 – 181 Stasser G , Titus W ( 1987 ) Effects of information load and percentage of shared information on the dis - semination of unshared information during group discussion . J Personal Soc Psychol 53 ( 1 ) : 81 – 93 Stasser G , Stewart DD , Wittenbaum GM ( 1995 ) Expert roles and information exchange during discus - sion : the importance of knowing who knows what . J Exp Soc Psychol 31 ( 3 ) : 244 – 265 Straus SG , McGrath JE ( 1994 ) Does the medium matter ? The interaction of task type and technology on group performance and member reactions . J Appl Psychol 79 : 87 – 97 Strubler DC , York KM ( 2007 ) An exploratory study of the team characteristics model using organiza - tional teams . Small Group Res 38 ( 6 ) : 670 – 695 Sugumaran V , Tanniru M , Storey V ( 2000 ) Supporting reuse in systems analysis . Commun ACM 40 ( 11 ) : 312 – 322 Szulanski G ( 1996 ) Exploring internal stickiness : impediments to the transfer of best practice within the firm . Strat Manag J 17 : 27 – 43 Tang F , Wang X , Norman CS ( 2013 ) An investigation of the impact of media capabilities and extraver - sion on social presence and user satisfaction . Behav Inf Technol 32 ( 10 ) : 1060 – 1073 Trochim WMK ( 2000 ) The research methods knowledge base , 2nd edn . Atomic Dog , Cincinnati Tsai W , Ghoshal S ( 1998 ) Social capital and value creation : the role of intrafirm networks . Acad Manag J 41 ( 4 ) : 464 – 476 Tyran CK , George JF ( 2002 ) Improving software inspections with group process support . Commun ACM 45 ( 9 ) : 87 – 92 Uzzi B ( 1996 ) The sources and consequences of embeddedness for the economic performance of organi - zations : the network effect . Am Soc Rev 61 : 674 – 698 Uzzi B ( 1997 ) Social structure and competition in interfirm networks : the paradox of embeddedness . Adm Sci Q 42 : 35 – 67 Vance A , Elie - Dit - Cosaque C , Staub DW ( 2008 ) Examining trust in information technology artifacts : the effects of system quality and culture . J Manag Inf Syst 24 ( 4 ) : 73 – 100 Vazquez D , Dennis C , Zhang Y ( 2017 ) Understanding the effect of smart retail brand—consumer com - munications via mobile instant messaging ( MIM ) —an empirical study in the Chinese context . Comput Hum Behav 77 : 425 – 436 Vollrath DA , Sheppard BH , Hinsz VB , Davis JH ( 1989 ) Memory performance by decision - making groups and individuals . Organ Behav Hum Decis Process 43 ( 3 ) : 289 – 300 Wagner C ( 2004 ) Wiki : a technology for conversational knowledge management and group collaboration . Commun Assoc Inf Syst 13 : 265 – 289 Walczuch R , Watson R ( 2001 ) Analyzing group data in MIS research : including the effect of the group . Group Decis Negot 10 ( 1 ) : 83 – 94 Walther JB ( 1992 ) Interpersonal effects in computer - mediated interaction : a relational perspective . Com - mun Res 19 : 52 – 90 Walther JB ( 1995 ) Relational aspects of computer - mediated communication : experimental observations over time . Organ Sci 6 ( 2 ) : 186 – 203 Wang W , Benbasat I ( 2008 ) Attributions of trust in decision support technologies : a study of recommen - dation agents for E - commerce . J Manag Inf Syst 24 ( 4 ) : 249 – 273 Weber RA ( 2006 ) Managing growth to achieve efficient coordination in large groups . Am Econ Rev 96 ( 1 ) : 114 – 126 Weiser M ( 1991 ) The computer for the 21st century . Sci Am 265 : 94 – 104 Weldon MS , Bellinger KD ( 1997 ) Collective memory : collaborative and individual processes in remem - bering . J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 23 : 1160 – 1175 Wheeless LR ( 1978 ) A follow - up study of the relationships among trust , disclosure , and interpersonal solidarity . Hum Commun Res 4 : 143 – 157 Wu W ( 2008 ) Dimensions of social capital and firm competitiveness improvement : the mediating role of information sharing . J Manag Stud 45 ( 1 ) : 122 – 146 801 1 3 A Social Capital Perspective on Computer - Mediated Group… Yates J , Orlikowski WJ ( 1992 ) Genres of organizational communication : a structurational approach to studying communication and media . Acad Manag Rev 17 ( 2 ) : 299 – 326 Yoo Y , Alavi M ( 2001 ) Media and group cohesion : relative influences on social presence , task participa - tion , and group consensus . MIS Q 25 ( 3 ) : 371 – 390 Zahra SA , Yavuz I , Ucbasaran D ( 2006 ) How much do you trust me ? The dark side of relational trust in new business creation in established companies . Entrep Theory Pract 30 ( 4 ) : 541 – 559 Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations .