Designing for Collaborative Sensemaking : Leveraging Human Cognition For Complex Tasks Participant : Nitesh Goyal , Supervisor : Susan R . Fussell Cornell University Dept . of Information Science Ithaca , NY 14850 , USA ngoyal @ cs . cornell . edu , sfussell @ cornell . edu Research Area . Collaborative Sensemaking , Crowdsourcing , User Interfaces for Web Applications Research Topic . My research aims to design systems for complex sensemaking by remotely located non - expert collaborators ( crowds ) , to solve computationally hard problems like crimes . 1 Research Problem and Related Work While sensemaking has been studied in the past , designing interfaces for relatively complex sensemaking where experts and non - experts may collaborate remains a challenge . I am interested in how such collaborative sensemaking by crowds ( non - experts ) may help us better solve unstructured problems , where traditional computational techniques have failed . In particular , I am researching how to design for experts and non - experts ( crowds ) in the crime - solving domain , where solutions are often found through serendipity , instead of rules . Crowdsourcing for somewhat complex tasks has been pursued in the past . Collaborative document editing in Soylent [ 2 ] , creating taxonomy of colours in Cascade [ 3 ] , suggesting a travel itinerary under constraints using Mobi [ 4 ] , and mining sentiments by crowds for text analytics in OpinionBlocks [ 12 ] are some recent forays where crowdsourcing has shown to be performant and / or efficient . However , more open - ended domains like crime solving , requiring serendipitous discovery of clues and criminals , have yet to be crowd - sourced successfully . As number of workers and associated workflows grow in complexity , crowdsourcing can be challenging [ 1 ] . Crowdsourcing for complex workflows has been pursued also . For example , CrowdForge by Kittur et al [ 5 ] explains how map - reduce framework popularized by Google may be used to partition bigger complex tasks into smaller tasks dynamically by workers . Further , Malone et al ‘s [ 6 ] aggregation dimension suggests that crowd - workers can either work alone independently or depend upon each other to work together . Little et al [ 7 ] ’s INTERACT 2015 , Bamberg , 14 - 18 Sept . 2015 2 TurKit can further help decide what to present to each worker such that the flow of results of tasks between dependent workers can be controlled . As such crowd - workflows become complex , researchers must identify the level of crowd - supervision needed for optimal output . Kulkarni et al [ 8 ] designed Turkomatic based on price - divide - loop such that real time visualization of the workflow - design is evident because unsupervised crowds failed to produce proper workflows resulting in a less than optimal output . On the other hand , supervised crowds in a conversational - agent , Chorus by Lasecki et al [ 9 ] made users believe that a single user exist behind Chorus . Instead , Chorus employs multiple crowd workers who collectively create response possibilities , such that Crowd workers can learn and remember collectively . To summarize , while relatively complex tasks and workflows using crowds have been attempted , we have yet been unable to design a system that may structure non - experts ( lesser trained crowds ) and experts ( trained workers ) together in an interface to solve complex challenges like crime solving . 2 Research Hypothesis The core aim of this research is to pursue a user centred design approach to designing a web - interface , and underlying system , that may enable collaborations between experts and non - experts , and within non - experts . I hypothesize that a user - centered - designed web - interface that supports collaboration between non - expert crowds for solving carefully broken down micro - tasks would help leverage distributed human crowd - cognition to solve complex tasks like crimes . 3 Proposed Method I plan to integrate my findings based on a mixed - methods study . First , I will understand how trained - non - experts ( trained students , through video and usage - log analysis ) solve complex problems singularly and collaboratively . Consequently , I will extract important features that result in success and failure in problem solving . Based on these features , I propose to create a web - interface for collaborative problem solving . Finally , I will design a study to validate whether the identified features lead to success or failure with non - expert crowds ? So , based on the iterative nature of design process , my proposed solution would involve multiple iterations and steps before I design the final interface : Step 1 . Understand role of currently used features for solo sensemaking . Step 2 . Explore effects of information - sharing collaborative sensemaking . Step 3 . Extract features to identify micro - tasks , and workflows for success . Step 4 . Design web - interface for experts and non - experts to collaborate . Step 5 . Design a set of user - studies to measure user - experience , and performance achieved by non - experts with the web - interface at solving crimes . INTERACT 2015 , Bamberg , 14 - 18 Sept . 2015 3 4 Progress So - far I have completed two iterations of system building of SAVANT tool to support solo [ 10 ] and collaborative sensemaking [ 11 , 12 ] to better understand role of different design features : In Iteration 1 ( Step 1 ) , I tested the utility of system - generated visualization of data links and a notepad for collecting annotations , and found system - generated visualizations to be significantly important in solving crimes [ 10 ] . In Iteration 2 ( Step 2 ) , I explored value of implicitly sharing insights by self - created visualizations of annotations , without explicitly pushed / requested information by collaborators . When implicit sharing of notes and self - created visualization of these notes was available , users identified more clues [ 11 , 12 ] . 5 Next Steps I am presently working on Task Analysis for Step 3 . I am conducting a qualitative video - analysis , and usage - log analysis of the actions performed by successful and unsuccessful pairs in Step 2 . Based on video - analysis , 3 design goals seem promising for success : externalizing insights ; shoe - boxing visually ; and iterating over previously collected information . I am also identifying user - actions , based on interface - log analysis , when pursued multiple times by users would lead to successful resolution of the task . Based on preliminary findings , I am designing the web - interface ( SAVANT ) for non - experts and experts with recommended steps associated with success . Based on these findings , I’d be better equipped with knowledge of micro - tasks , workflows , and atomicity of the dataset that would enable success in task - resolution . So , I’d propose using the lessons learnt to design the next SAVANT version where users using the full SAVANT suite might be able to collaborate and auto - direct micro - tasks to crowds that would support / challenge their own insights and help resolve the crime - solving task . Finally , I would like to use the INTERACT 2015 Doctoral Consortium to help design user - studies and determine measures to evaluate user - experience , and features of SAVANT like system - generated micro - tasks vs . manually generated micro - tasks ; and presence of messaging with the crowds vs . no messaging . 6 Proposed Solution My proposed solution would include features identified in Section 4 , and more importantly would leverage the interaction between these features to aid collaborative sensemaking . These features are : visualizations : system generated , and user - generated ; and information sharing : implicitly by the system , and user - mediated . Further , based on the design goals identified in Section 5 , the proposed solution would suggest recommendations to non - experts to aid sensemaking . INTERACT 2015 , Bamberg , 14 - 18 Sept . 2015 4 7 Expected Contributions This doctoral work will have design contribution of creating an interface where micro - tasks may be auto - generated for the crowds and results produced are fed back into the original system for analysis . Theoretical contribution of my work would be understanding how micro - task based crowd - supported system may enhance task - resolution of complex tasks , and support collaboration . References [ 1 ] Bernstein , M . S . ( 2010 , October ) . Crowd - powered interfaces . In Adjunct proceedings of UIST 2010 ( pp . 347 - 350 ) . ACM ( 2010 ) . [ 2 ] Bernstein , M . S . , Little , G . , Miller , R . C . , et al . Soylent : a word processor with a crowd inside . Proceedings of UIST 2010 , ACM ( 2010 ) , 313 – 322 . [ 3 ] Chilton , L . B . , Little , G . , Edge , D . , Weld , D . S . , & Landay , J . A . ( 2013 , April ) . Cascade : crowdsourcing taxonomy creation . In Proceedings of the CHI 2013 ( pp . 1999 - 2008 ) . ACM . [ 4 ] Zhang , H . , Law , E . , Miller , R . , Gajos , K . , Parkes , D . , & Horvitz , E . ( 2012 , May ) . Human computation tasks with global constraints . In Proceedings of the CHI 2012 ( pp . 217 - 226 ) . ACM . [ 5 ] Kittur , A . , Smus , B . , Khamkar , S . , & Kraut , R . E . CrowdForge : Crowdsourcing Complex Work . Proceedings of UIST 2011 , ACM ( 2011 ) , 43 . 52 [ 6 ] Malone , T . , Laubacher , R . , & Dellarocas , C . ( 2009 ) . Harnessing crowds : Mapping the genome of collective intelligence . [ 7 ] Little , G . , Chilton , L . B . , Goldman , M . , and Miller , R . C . TurKit : human computation algorithms on mechanical turk . Proceedings of UIST 2010 , ACM ( 2010 ) , 57 – 66 . [ 8 ] Kulkarni , A . , Can , M . , Hartmann , B . Collaboratively Crowdsourcing Workflows with Turkomatic . [ 9 ] Lasecki , W . S . , Wesley , R . , Nichols , J . , Kulkarni , A . , Allen , J . F . , & Bigham , J . P . ( 2013 , October ) . Chorus : a crowd - powered conversational assistant . In Proceedings of the UIST 2013 ( pp . 151 - 162 ) . ACM . [ 10 ] Goyal , N . , Leshed , G . , & Fussell , S . R . ( 2013 ) . Effects of Visualization and Note - Taking on Sensemaking and Analysis . In Proceedings of the CHI 2013 , ACM . [ 11 ] Goyal , N . , Leshed , G . , Cosley , D . , & Fussell , S . R . ( 2014 ) . Effects of Implicit Sharing in Collaborative Sensemaking . In Proceedings of the CHI 2014 , ACM . [ 12 ] Goyal , N . , Leshed , G . , & Fussell , S . R . ( 2013 ) . Leveraging partner ' s insights for distributed collaborative sensemaking . CSCW Companion 2013 . ACM . [ 13 ] Hu , Mengdie , et al . " OpinionBlocks : a crowd - powered , self - improving interactive visual analytic system for understanding opinion text . " Human - Computer Interaction – INTERACT 2013 . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , 2013 . 116 - 134 .