Reconstitution of an Actin Cortex Inside a Liposome Le´a - Laetitia Pontani , Jasper van der Gucht , Guillaume Salbreux , Julien Heuvingh , Jean - Franc¸ois Joanny , and Ce´cile Sykes * Laboratoire Physicochimie Curie , CNRS / Institut Curie / Universite´ Paris , Paris , France ABSTRACT The composite and versatile structure of the cytoskeleton confers complex mechanical properties on cells . Actin ﬁlaments sustain the cell membrane and their dynamics insure cell shape changes . For example , the lamellipodium moves by actin polymerization , a mechanism that has been studied using simpliﬁed experimental systems . Much less is known about the actin cortex , a shell - like structure underneath the membrane that contracts for cell movement . We have designed an exper - imental system that mimicks the cell cortex by allowing actin polymerization to nucleate and assemble at the inner membrane of a liposome . Actin shell growth can be triggered inside the liposome , which offers a useful system for a controlled study . The observed actin shell thickness and estimated mesh size of the actin structure are in good agreement with cellular data . Such a system paves the way for a thorough characterization of cortical dynamics and mechanics . INTRODUCTION Characterizing the mechanical properties of cells has been of growing interest in the last 10 years with the motivation of understanding how cytoskeletal polymers dynamically rear - range to produce cell shape changes . However , the mechan - ical characterization of whole cells is difﬁcult to interpret due to their various complex cytoskeletal structures . In vitro reconstitution of ‘‘functional modules’’ of the cytoskeleton has been developed over the last few years with the goal of building up , step by step , the complexity of cells ( 1 ) . Once integrated into the cellular context , these modules can give highly versatile properties to the cell and organize the various constituents of the cytoskeleton for highly spe - cialized functions . During cell motility , for example , two actin structures are involved , a lamellipodium that elongates and constitutes the advancing front and an actomyosin cortex that contracts , detaches the cell rear from the cell cortex , and moves the cell mass forward . In both structures , actin poly - merization is nucleated in the presence of actin nucleation activating factors . Among these are the Wiskott Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) family of proteins and formins that act locally next to the membrane ( see ( 2 ) for a review ) . Proteins from the WASP family activate a protein complex , Arp2 / 3 , which was found to localize at both the leading edge of Acanthamoeba and at its cortex ( 3 ) , a feature that was also found in animal cells ( 4 ) . Mimicking actin polymerization that occurs in the extend - ing lamellipodium has been achieved in the last 10 years with the biomimetic study of Listeria motility ( 5 ) , which consists of designing and characterizing stripped - down systems that reproduce the same behavior in vitro ( 6 ) . Such biomimetic systems have well - controlled physical properties and are powerful tools to decipher cellular dynamics and the impor - tance of the gel - like structure of actin assemblies . Actin gels have mechanical properties characterized by in vitro experi - ments in three dimensions ( 1 ) . The actin cortex of cells has received far less attention than lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia , although its role is physiologi - cally important for cell division or cell movements through narrow gaps of three - dimensional networks ( 7 ) . A cell cortex is a thin shell roughly 1 m m thick located just underneath the plasma membrane and made up of short branched ﬁlaments that can lie from parallel to orthogonal to the plasma mem - brane , as observed by electron microscopy ( 8 ) . It is an actin meshwork put under tension by molecular motors such as myosin ﬁlaments ( in particular myosin II ) . The resulting contraction of the actin cortex is one of the key steps for cell motility . How the actin cortex is formed at the plasma membrane is not yet clear , although it appears that actin dy - namics takes place preferentially close to the plasma mem - brane , suggesting that there must be an actin polymerization promoting factor there ( 9 ) . Some of the proteins that partic - ipate in the linkage of the cytoskeleton to the membrane in cells have been identiﬁed as being part of the ERM ( ezrin - radixin - moesin ) family of proteins that are activated at the membrane and linked indirectly to microﬁlaments . Moreover , ezrin was found to be present in cell blebs , membrane extensions that retract under the action of cortical contraction ( 9 ) . The interactions between actin ﬁlaments and an artiﬁcial membrane have been addressed by the encapsulation in giant liposomes of actin networks made of long actin ﬁlaments cross - linked by proteins like ﬁlamin and a - actinin ( 10 ) . In that case , actin ﬁlaments assemble into rings conﬁned inside the liposome and sometimes appear next to the membrane Submitted July 21 , 2008 , and accepted for publication September 25 , 2008 . * Correspondence : cecile . sykes @ curie . fr Jasper van der Gucht’s present address is Laboratory of Physical Chemistry and Colloid Science , Wageningen University , Wageningen , The Nether - lands Julien Heuvingh’s present address is Laboratoire de Physique et Me´canique des Milieux He´te´roge ` nes , CNRS UMR 7636 , ESPCI , Paris , France , and Universite´ Paris Diderot , Paris , France . Editor : Cristobal G . dos Remedios . (cid:2) 2009 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 09 / 01 / 0192 / 7 $ 2 . 00 doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2008 . 09 . 029 192 Biophysical Journal Volume 96 January 2009 192 – 198 when ﬁlaments are longer than the liposome size , which is explained by bending - energy arguments . However , these ﬁlaments are long ( about ten micrometers ) compared to the ones of a cell cortex ( % 1 m m ) . We designed a new experi - mental setup that allows to reproduce an actin structure mim - icking the actin cortex by activating actin polymerization speciﬁcally at the inner liposome membrane . Actin polymer - ization occurs in situ as it is triggered by ATP and salts delivered inside the liposome through pores inserted in the membrane . The actin structure is cortical , as shown by ﬂuorescence labeling of actin , and relies on local actin poly - merization at the membrane . The actin shell thickness under - neath the membrane can be explained by a mechanical model that takes into account actin gel growth inward in spherical geometry . Note that the goal of our work is not to study spontaneous actin assembly at an interface , but rather to re - constitute , as closely as possible to that of a cell , an actin meshwork that grows speciﬁcally from the inner leaﬂet of a liposome membrane , and thus build a controlled system for the study of cell mechanics . MATERIALS AND METHODS Proteins and reagents Actin , the Arp2 / 3 complex , gelsolin , actin depolarizing factor ( ADF ) - coﬁlin , and proﬁlin were purchased from Cytoskeleton ( Denver , CO ) and used with - out further puriﬁcation . Protein concentrations did not always correspond to product data , and were determined by SDS - PAGE using a bovine serum albumin standard . Alexa Fluor 568 - labeled actin ( red actin ) and Alexa Fluor 488 - labeled actin ( green actin ) , obtained by labeling amine residues on F - actin before depolymerization , were purchased from Molecular Probes ( Eugene , OR ) . All commercial proteins were delivered in buffers indicated by the manufacturers . N - WASP fragment WWA ( aa400 – 501 , also called VVCA ) was expressed as a recombinant protein with an N - terminal his 6 tag out of a plasmid given by D . Mullins’ laboratory ( 11 ) . We call this frag - ment VVCA - His in the following . The fragment was expressed in Escheri - chia coli BL21 ( DE3 ) Codon Plus cells ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) . Proteins were expressed in the presence of 1 mM IPTG for 2 h at 37 (cid:2) C and puriﬁed by chromatography on Ni - NTA Agarose ( Qiagen , Venlo , The Netherlands ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . The proteins were then dia - lyzed with phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) , pH 7 . 4 ( PBS , 130 mM NaCl , 2 . 7 mM KCl , 5 . 4 mM Na2HPO4 , 1 . 8 mM KH2PO4 ) and stored at (cid:3) 80 (cid:2) C . Rhodamine - labeled phalloidin , latrunculin A , casein ( b - casein from bovine milk ) , dextran ( from Leuconostoc mesenteroides average mol wt 35 , 000 – 45 , 000 ) , and the pore - forming protein a - hemolysin ( powder ) from Staphylococcus aureus were obtained from Sigma Aldrich ( St . Louis , MO ) . The protein a - hemolysin was dissolved in 150 mM KCl , 10 mM HEPES and kept at 4 (cid:2) C for up to 6 months . Lipids L - a - phosphatidylcholine from egg yolk ( EPC ) , 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - { [ N ( 5 - amino - 1 - carboxypentyl ) iminodiacetic acid ] succinyl } nickel salt ( DOGS - NTA - Ni ) , cholesterol ( ovine wool ) were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids ( Alabaster , AL ) . Buffers , inside and outside solutions The solution inside the liposomes must correspond to nonpolymerizing conditions with the constraint that the histidine - nickel interaction used for binding the protein to the membrane had to be preserved . The inside buffer ( I - buffer ) was thus made of 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 , 10 mM HEPES ( pH 7 . 6 ) , 100 mg / mL dextran , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 6 mM dithiothreitol ( DTT ) , 0 . 13 mM diazabicyclo [ 2 , 2 , 2 ] octane ( Dabco ) , 280 mM sucrose . The inside solution ( I - solution ) consisted of proteins diluted in I - buffer at the ﬁnal concentra - tions of 0 . 12 m M for Arp2 / 3 , 50 nM for gelsolin , 2 m M for ADF - coﬁlin , 1 m M for proﬁlin , 6 . 5 m M for G - actin ( including 20 % ﬂuorescently la - beled actin ) and 0 . 64 m M VVCA - His . Experiments were also carried out with twice those protein concentrations . Note that the ﬁnal solute con - centrations of the I - solution were slightly changed after protein incorpo - ration from the ones of the I - buffer ( since proteins are kept in different buffers ) to 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 , 9 . 4 mM HEPES , 94 mg / mL dextran , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 5 . 6 mM DTT , 0 . 12 mM diazabicyclo [ 2 , 2 , 2 ] octane ( Dabco ) , 271 mM sucrose CaCl 2 , as calculated from the manufacturer’s buffer de - scription . The outside buffer ( O - buffer ) for liposome production con - tained 10 mM HEPES ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 2 mM ATP , 6 mM DTT , 0 . 13 mM Dabco , 275 mM glucose , and 0 . 5 mg / mL ca - sein . The polymerization buffer ( P - buffer ) consisted of 150 mM KCl , 2 mM CaCl 2 and 5 mM HEPES ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 2 mM ATP , 6 mM DTT , 0 . 13 mM Dabco . For liposome observation in actin polymerization condi - tions , one - third of the O - buffer was replaced by P - buffer . The osmolarity of all three buffers ( I - buffer , O - buffer , and P - buffer ) was kept constant at 320 mOsm . Unless otherwise stated , all products were obtained from Sigma Aldrich . Liposome preparation Lipids ( EPC , DOGS - NTA - Ni phospholipids , and cholesterol ) were ﬁrst dis - solved in mineral oil in a molar ratio EPC / DOGS - NTA - Ni / cholesterol of 95 : 5 : 0 or 58 : 5 : 37 at a total concentration of 0 . 5 mg / mL . A volume of 5 – 10 mL of oil - lipid mixture was then sonicated in a bath at room temper - ature for 30 min at a power of 30 W . Then , the oil - lipid mixture was heated to 50 (cid:2) C for 3 h and ﬁnally cooled to room temperature and stored at 4 (cid:2) C for up to a week . A few microliters of I - solution was added to the phospholipid - containing oil at a ratio of 1 / 200 and suspended by gentle back - and - forth pumping with a syringe . At this step , vortexing or sonicating must be avoided to preserve protein integrity . The obtained emulsion looks cloudy and is stabilized by lipid adsorption within a few minutes . In the meantime , 30 m l of the oil - lipid mixture was placed in a tube on top of the same volume of O - buffer to allow for the assembly of a monolayer of lipids at the interface . A volume of 50 m L of the emulsion was then slowly poured on top of the oil - lipid mixture , thus resulting in a three - level sample with O - buffer at the bottom , the oil - lipid mixture in the middle , and the emulsion on top . The whole tube was then centrifuged allowing the emulsion drops to pass through the lipid monolayer ( 100 (cid:4) g for 12 min then 350 (cid:4) g for 8 min , to progressively centrifuge droplets of all sizes ) . Finally , I - solution - ﬁlled liposomes were obtained in a bath of O - buffer ( see Fig . 1 ) . To induce actin polymerization , one third of the O - buffer was replaced by P - buffer and 0 . 6 m L of 1 mg / mL a - hemolysin solution was added directly to a 6 - m L sample on the microscope slide . Note that the addition of the a - he - molysin solution decreased the ﬁnal concentrations of ATP , DTT , and Dabco by 10 % . All the same , the ﬁnal solute concentrations of the O - and P - buffer mix were reduced by 10 % except for KCl and HEPES , which were already in the a - hemolysine buffer . The mixture was observed by either phase contrast or epiﬂuorescence microscopy . Observation and quantiﬁcation of the actin cortex inside liposomes Liposomes were observed with an IX70 Olympus inverted microscope and an Olympus 100 / N . A . 1 . 35 phase - contrast objective ( Olympus , Tokyo , Ja - pan ) . Fluorescently labeled molecules were excited by a 200 - W mercury lamp ( OSRAM , Munich , Germany ) . Images were recorded with a charge - coupled device camera ( Roper Scientiﬁc , Trenton , NJ ) driven by Meta - Morph software ( Universal Imaging , Downingtown , PA ) . Biophysical Journal 96 ( 1 ) 192 – 198 Actin Cortex Reconstitution 193 Fluorescent images were deconvoluted with the corresponding point - spread function and analyzed using ImageJ software ( http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / ij ) . The maximum intensity value along a radius starting from the center of the liposome was measured 360 times by rotating the radius , and the mean maximal intensity ( (cid:2) M ) was calculated ( see Supplementary Material ) . The background intensity ( m ) inside the liposome was measured as the average ﬂuorescence intensity of a centered disk of half the diameter of the liposome ( see Fig . S1 in the Supplementary Material ) . For each experimental condi - tion , 10 – 30 liposomes were analyzed , and results were gathered in a histo - gram . The thickness of the actin shell inside the liposome was measured as the thickness of the shell on an image where the intensity threshold was set at half maximum ð (cid:2) M (cid:3) m Þ = 2 ( see Supplementary Material ) . The actin con - trast in a liposome was deﬁned as C ¼ ð (cid:2) M (cid:3) m Þ = ð (cid:2) M þ m Þ , where (cid:2) M and m were measured on rough images ( before deconvolution ) . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Strategy for the design of an artiﬁcial actin cortex To reconstitute actin dynamics underneath the membrane , we chose to use the ( N - WASP ) subdomain WWA ( or VVCA ) , an activation - promoting factor of actin polymeriza - tion that is well characterized in other in vitro systems , such as motile beads ( 12 ) . Moreover , WASP - family proteins recruit the ARP2 / 3 complex that has been detected in cell cortices ( 3 ) . An alternative possibility would have been to use formin , another well studied activator of actin polymer - ization ( 2 ) , but in vitro , formins form long and bundled actin ﬁlaments that do not resemble those of the cell cortex ob - served by electron microscopy ( 8 ) . Instead , the use of the WASP - family proteins provides a branched actin network . The addition of gelsolin limited the ﬁlament length by cap - ping the ﬁlament barbed ends . We used the histidine tag to bind VVCA to the membrane through a complexation with nickel lipid heads in the liposome membrane ( see Materials and Methods ) . Besides having VVCA localized at the mem - brane , the liposome internal solution must contain the actin machinery needed for actin dynamics . A minimal protein medium that is able to reconstitute actin - based artiﬁcial movements was incorporated into the liposomes and con - sisted of G - actin , the Arp2 / 3 complex , gelsolin , ADF - coﬁlin , and proﬁlin ( 13 ) , in concentrations given in Materials and Methods . The actin machinery dynamics inside the liposome must be triggered by the presence of salt and ATP that must be delivered inside the liposome . We chose to allow salt and ATP to exchange through pores inserted in the bilayer . The pores must be big enough to allow salt and ATP to ﬂow through , but small enough to keep the proteins trapped in - side . We chose a - hemolysin , an extracellular protein se - creted by Staphylococcus aureus , which assembles into a ring structure on a membrane and forms transmembrane pores ( 14 ) , previously used by Noireaux et al . ( 15 ) to render liposomes selectively permeable for nutrients . Those pores are permeable to ions and small metabolites and have a mo - lecular mass cutoff of 3 kDa , which is smaller than for any protein of the actin machinery . Encapsulation of the actin machinery inside a liposome using an inverted emulsion technique We used an inverted emulsion technique ﬁrst proposed by Pautot et al . ( 16 ) . This technique is well adapted to incorpo - rate precious quantities of proteins inside liposomes . Moreover , this technique allows the use of drastically differ - ent buffers inside and outside the liposome , unlike other techniques like electroformation or spontaneous swelling . FIGURE 1 Schematic illustration of liposome preparation . ( A ) Assembly of the outer layer . ( B ) The inner layer , cre - ated by emulsion that was sedimented through the monolayer . ( C ) The liposome obtained by the assembly described in A and B , with different solutions inside and outside . ( D ) Poly - merization wastriggeredwhenthepores were added , thus allowing salt and ATP to ﬂow into the liposome . This ﬁgure is adapted from Pautot et al . ( 16 ) . Biophysical Journal 96 ( 1 ) 192 – 198 194 Pontani et al . In addition , the inverted emulsion technique preserves protein integrity , whereas proteins might be altered during the electroformation process . The experimental principle of liposome production is schematized in Fig . 1 . Our goal was to obtain liposomes ﬁlled with the I - solution and place them in an O - buffer con - taining salt and ATP , corresponding to actin polymerization conditions . The compositions of I - solution and O - buffer are given in Materials and Methods . A volume of phospholipid - containing oil was placed on top of an equal volume of O - buffer to allow the formation of a single phospholipid layer at the interface ( Fig . 1 A ) . At the same time , an inverted emulsion was made consisting of droplets of I - solution dis - persed in phospholipid - containing oil by gentle syringe pumping . This emulsion was centrifuged through the single phospholipid layer ( Fig . 1 B ) to ﬁnally obtain liposomes con - taining I - solution and surrounded with O - buffer ( Fig . 1 C ) . Liposomes were monolamellar ( see below ) , with a size dis - tribution ranging from 1 to 8 m m in diameter , and were easily observed by phase contrast microscopy ( Fig . 2 A ) due to the refractive index difference between sucrose ( inside ) and glu - cose ( outside ) . Such liposomes ( Fig . 1 C and Fig . 2 A ) ﬁlled with I - solution containing 1 / 5 ﬂuorescently labeled actin displayed a bulk actin ﬂuorescence ( Fig . 2 B ) , because the I - solution maintains actin in its globular form . Triggering actin polymerization inside the liposomes To trigger actin polymerization , the inside buffer must be changed into a higher salt concentration solution that favors actin polymerization . We simultaneously loaded the outside buffer with a polymerization buffer containing KCl , magne - sium , calcium , and ATP ( see Materials and Methods ) and incorporated pores ( a - hemolysin ) to allow salt and ATP to ﬂow into the liposome ( Fig . 1 D ) . The pores were incorpo - rated into the membrane by adding 0 . 6 m L of 1 mg / mL a - he - molysin directly into the sample before sealing the slide and coverslip chamber for observation . a - Hemolysin was in large excess , which allowed instantaneous exchange . In these conditions , we observed a loss of phase contrast due to sucrose leakage ( compare Fig . 2 , A and D ) . Note that this observation conﬁrms that the liposomes are monolamel - lar . Indeed , if they were multilamellar , a - hemolysin could in - sert in the outer membrane , but would not trigger liposome leakage , since the content of the liposome would be pro - tected by the other membrane layers . The loss of contrast correlated with the appearance of a ﬂuorescent shell at the membrane ( Fig . 2 , D and E ) . Cortices were determined by actin shells displaying a contrast of C > 0 . 01 . The time at which pores were added to the sample was the zero time ref - erence for experiment characterization , since it corresponds to the addition of salt and ATP allowing actin polymeriza - tion . Experiments were performed in two lipid conditions , either in the absence of cholesterol ( Figs . 2 and 3 A ) or in the presence of cholesterol ( Fig . 3 B ) , which was found to reduce the nonspeciﬁc interactions ( see below ) . Characterization of the actin cortex inside the liposomes The speciﬁcity of actin recruitment at the membrane through VVCA - His was checked by carrying out experiments in the FIGURE 2 Triggering polymeriza - tion at the membrane . ( A – D ) Phase contrast microscopy ( A and D ) and epiﬂuorescence microscopy ( B and E ) of actin . Without pores ( A ) , the inside of the liposomes appeared denser and correlated to mass ﬂuorescence of the actin ( B ) . ( C ) Fluorescence proﬁle along the yellow line drawn in B . In the pres - ence of pores ( D ) , sucrose left the lipo - some , and the contrast observed in phase contrast vanished , whereas actin ﬂuorescence was localized at the mem - brane ( E ) , which is shown by peaks ( F ) on the proﬁle along the line shown in E . A fraction of 10 % of actin was marked with Alexa Fluor 488 ( G ) and actin ﬁlaments were revealed by rhoda - mine - phalloidin staining ( H ) that colo - calized with the actin shell ( I ) . Scale bars : ( A and B ) 10 m m ; ( D and E ) 5 m m , ( G – I ) 10 m m . Biophysical Journal 96 ( 1 ) 192 – 198 Actin Cortex Reconstitution 195 same conditions as described , but without VVCA - His and then without either VVCA - His or the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Fig . 3 ) . In the presence of all proteins , under epiﬂuorescence microscopy , 95 % or 80 % of the liposomes displayed a clear actin shell in the absence or presence , respectively , of choles - terol ( Fig . 3 , solid bars ) . In both cases , the removal of VVCA from the membrane , and of Arp2 / 3 complex from the solution , caused a decrease in the number of liposomes dis - playing an actin shell ( Fig . 3 , solid and shaded bars ) , accom - panied with a decrease of the ﬂuorescence contrast that was more pronounced in the presence of cholesterol ( Fig . 3 , hatched bars ) . These data show that actin shell assembly sig - niﬁcantly depends on the presence of actin polymerization activation at the liposome membrane . In the absence of cholesterol , the observation that ~ 60 % of the liposomes still display an actin cortex in the absence of VVCA ( Fig . 3 A ) indicates that there are nonspeciﬁc interactions between the membrane and the actin ﬁlaments grown in the bulk of the liposome . When cholesterol was added , we found that this nonspeciﬁc interaction was drastically reduced , an effect that was observed with long actin ﬁlaments encapsulated in giant vesicles ( 17 ) . Finally , in the presence of cholesterol , no cortex was observed when the Ni - lipid was absent in the membrane ( counted on 15 liposomes ) , thus preventing VVCA from attaching to the membrane . To conﬁrm that the actin cortex was the result of a dynamic polymerization of actin , the assay was carried out in the pres - ence of 4 . 7 m M latrunculin A , which inhibits actin polymer - ization by sequestering G - actin . The drug was introduced into the outside solution after 20 min and is small enough to travel through the pores . The number of liposomes dis - playing an actin shell after the incorporation of latrunculin was signiﬁcantly reduced in the presence of the drug ( Fig . 3 A , open bar ) . This inhibition shows that the actin shell is dynamic and that ﬁlaments are constantly polymerizing . Moreover , in the presence of 2 m M rhodamine - phalloidin , which speciﬁcally marks F - actin , the ﬂuorescence signal was colocalized with the actin signal underneath the mem - brane ( Fig . 2 , G – I ) . The actin shell thicknesses were constant after 5 min ( see Fig . S2 ) , at which time they were measured on a population of various sized liposomes . As displayed in Fig . 4 , the thickness globally increases with liposome size . Note that increasing the protein concentration by a factor of 2 slightly increased the shell thickness ( Fig . 4 , shaded crosses versus solid ‘‘ (cid:4) ’’ symbols ) . Actin shell thickness modeling To estimate the structural characteristics of the actin shell , we derive from a study using a slightly different geometry ( 18 ) a simple geometrical model in which actin growth might be limited not only by monomer diffusion or stress - induced depolymerization but also by the restricted amount of actin due to conﬁnement in the liposome . FIGURE 3 Effect of the presence of cholesterol , the Arp2 / 3 complex , and VVCA - His or drugs on cortex forma - tion in the absence ( A ) and presence ( B ) of cholesterol ( x ¼ 0 . 37 ) , in the lipid composition . Plain bars represent the percentage of liposomes displaying a ﬂuorescent shell ( actin contrast , C > 0 . 01 ) , and hatched bars refer to the contrast . Solid bars , the complete system of proteins ( see Materials and Methods ) ; dark shaded bars , VVCA - His is omitted ; light shaded bars , both VVCA and Arp2 / 3 com - plex are omitted ; open bar , in the presence of latrunculin A . For each condition , we give the total number , n , of observed liposomes . The shell ﬂuorescence percentages in the different conditions either in the absence or in the presence of cholesterol were proven to differ signiﬁcantly using the c 2 statistic . FIGURE 4 Evolution of the gel thickness as a function of liposome size . Solid squares or open circles correspond to one single liposome measure - ment . Solid - square points were obtained under concentration conditions of 0 . 12 m M for the Arp2 / 3 complex , 50 nM for gelsolin , 2 m M for ADF - coﬁlin , 1 m M for proﬁlin , 6 . 5 m M for G - actin ( including 20 % ﬂuorescently labeled actin ) , and 0 . 64 m M VVCA - His . Solid ‘‘ (cid:4) ’’symbols are thickness values averaged over each 0 . 5 - m m radius increase . Shaded crosses are thickness values averaged over each 0 . 5 - m m radius increase in the case of twice the protein concentration . Open circles are shell thicknesses for liposomes in the presence of cholesterol in the same protein conditions as solid points . Most points lie between the slopes 0 . 08 and 0 . 2 ( dashed lines ) . ( Inset ) Scheme of notations used in the text . Biophysical Journal 96 ( 1 ) 192 – 198 196 Pontani et al . Polymerization occurs at the liposome membrane with a velocity V p : V p ¼ a cos 4 dn dt ¼ a cos 4 k p C ð 0 Þ ; where the z axis is perpendicular to the membrane ( origin ) , a is the size of a monomer , 4 represents an angle of polymer - ization relative to the z axis , dn / dt is the number of monomers polymerized per unit time , k p the rate constant of polymerization at the barbed end , and C ( z ) the concentra - tion . For the sake of simplicity , we take in the following cos 4 ¼ 1 , which corresponds to perpendicular polymerization at the membrane surface . The conservation of the total number of monomers in the vesicle reads : 4 p R 2 e r gel M þ 4 p R 3 C i 3 ¼ 4 p R 3 C 0 i 3 ; where e is the actin gel thickness inside the liposome , R the liposome radius , r gel the mass density of actin inside the gel , M the mass of one actin monomer , C 0 i the initial bulk unpo - lymerized monomer concentration , and C i the bulk monomer concentration ( e < z < R ) . All values are expressed in SI units . We have assumed here that e < < R , which is indeed the case experimentally ( see Fig . 4 ) . We then calculate C ( 0 ) at steady state considering that the monomer consumption at the mem - brane is equal to the diffusive ﬂux of monomers J through the actin layer : J ¼ dn dt 1 x 2 ¼ k p C ð 0 Þ 1 x 2 ¼ DC ð e Þ (cid:3) C ð 0 Þ e ¼ DC i (cid:3) C ð 0 Þ e : Here , x is the average distance between activators , which we consider the same as the gel mesh size . Then the polymerization velocity reads : V p ¼ ak p C 0 i 1 (cid:3) 3 r gel M C 0 i e R ! 1 þ k p D x 2 e : The depolymerization velocity is given by V d ¼ ak d ; where k d is the rate constant of depolymerization at the pointed end , which we consider as constant , thus neglecting its dependence on stress . Note that k p depends on the stress of a second order in eR , and is also considered here as con - stant . At steady state , the polymerization and depolymerization velocities are equal , which leads to k p k d C 0 i (cid:2) 1 (cid:3) 3 r gel M C 0 i e R (cid:3) ¼ 1 þ k p D x 2 e : For e < < e (cid:5) ¼ D x 2 k p , the thickness is proportional to R , e ¼ pR , with a slope p ¼ M C 0 i 3 r gel (cid:2) 1 (cid:3) k d k p C 0 i (cid:3) : For an estimate of k d k p C 0 i , we take k d y 0 : 27 s (cid:3) 1 , k p y 11 : 6 m M (cid:3) 1 s (cid:3) 1 ( 19 ) , and C 0 i ¼ 6 : 5 m M ¼ 3 : 9 (cid:4) 10 21 m (cid:3) 3 ( or twice C 0 i ) in our experiments , and ﬁnd that k d k p C 0 i y 3 : 6 (cid:4) 10 (cid:3) 3 ð or 1 : 8 (cid:4) 10 (cid:3) 3 for 2 C 0 i Þ < < 1 , and thus p simpliﬁes to p ¼ M C 0 i 3 r gel ¼ 1 3 x 2 a C 0 i for geometrical reasons . In experiments ( Fig . 4 ) , p lies between 0 . 08 and 0 . 2 , lead - ing ( with a ¼ 5 nm ) to a mesh size on the order of 150 nm , which is a reasonable value compared to the measured mesh size in a cell cortex ( 8 ) . Note that the effect of increasing C 0 i by a factor of 2 does not double the value of p , thus indicat - ing that x slightly decreases , which could be explained by the presence of more branches due to increasing amounts of Arp2 / 3 complex . Note that a lower estimate of the mesh size can be obtained simply by considering that all the actin inside a liposome is consumed in the actin shell of thickness e grown next to the membrane . In these conditions , the sur - face S of the liposome reads S ¼ N fil (cid:4) x 2 with N ﬁl the total number of ﬁlaments on the liposome , which is given by the total number of actin monomers in the liposome divided by the number of monomers in a ﬁla - ment of length e . The number of monomers per ﬁlament is given by the length of a ﬁlament ( e ) divided by the monomer size ( a ¼ 2 . 5 nm ) . With e on the order of 250 nm and a lipo - some of radius R ¼ 5 m m , one ﬁnds N fil ¼ C 0 i 43 p R 3 a e ¼ 2 (cid:4) 10 4 ; and thus , a lower limit of x equal to 100 nm , which is in good agreement with the value found above . For e > > e * , the thickness is diffusion - limited and satu - rates to a plateau e p ¼ D x 2 k 0 d C 0 i : With the same values as above , a diffusion coefﬁcient of 10 (cid:3) 8 cm 2 s (cid:3) 1 ( 20 ) and the estimated value of x , we ﬁnd e p to be on the order of 400 m m , which is outside the range of our experiments . CONCLUSION We used here a protein mixture that provides an actin struc - ture mimicking that of the cell cortex . Such an actin shell can be reconstituted inside a liposome by triggering actin Biophysical Journal 96 ( 1 ) 192 – 198 Actin Cortex Reconstitution 197 dynamics at the liposome membrane . This system constitutes an important step toward the reconstitution of the different actin structures in well - controlled systems that would then be compared with cells . Such an approach will allow for unraveling cytoskeletal functions in important cellular events like cell motility and division . SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL Two ﬁgures are available at http : / / www . biophysj . org / biophysj / supplemental / S0006 - 3495 ( 08 ) 00038 - 6 . We thank Sophie Pautot for fruitful discussions , Arkun Akin and Dyche Mullins for the gift of the VVCA - his plasmid , Julie Plastino for many fruit - ful discussions , and John Manzi for the puriﬁcation of the VVCA - His pro - tein . We thank the lab of Laurent Blanchoin for their advice on biochemistry , and the lab of Loı¨c Auvray for advice on the use of a - hemolysin . We thank Timo Betz and Ewa Paluch for critical reading . This work was funded by a grant from the Human Frontiers Science Program and a grant from the Agence Nationale pour la Recherche , France . REFERENCES 1 . Bausch , A . R . , and K . Kroy . 2006 . A bottom - up approach to cell me - chanics . Nat . Phys . 2 : 231 – 238 . 2 . Chhabra , E . S . , and H . N . Higgs . 2007 . The many faces of actin : matching assembly factors with cellular structures . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 : 1110 – 1121 . 3 . Machesky , L . M . , S . J . Atkinson , C . Ampe , J . Vandekerckhove , and T . D . Pollard . 1994 . Puriﬁcation of a cortical complex containing two unconventional actins from Acanthamoeba by afﬁnity chromatography on proﬁlin agarose . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 107 – 115 . 4 . Machesky , L . M . , E . Reeves , F . Wientjes , F . Mattheyse , A . Grogan , et al . 1997 . Mammalian Arp2 / 3 complex localizes to regions of lamel - lipodial protrusion and is composed of conserved subunits . Biochem . J . 328 : 105 – 112 . 5 . Loisel , T . P . , R . Boujemaa , D . Pantaloni , and M . F . Carlier . 1999 . Re - constitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature . 401 : 613 – 616 . 6 . Plastino , J . , and C . Sykes . 2005 . The actin slingshot . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 17 : 62 – 66 . 7 . Lammermann , T . , B . L . Bader , S . J . Monkley , T . Worbs , R . Wedlich - Soldner , et al . 2008 . Rapid leukocyte migration by integrin - independent ﬂowing and squeezing . Nature . 453 : 51 – 55 . 8 . Morone , N . , T . Fujiwara , K . Murase , R . S . Kasai , H . Ike , S . Yuasa , et al . 2006 . Three - dimensional reconstruction of the membrane skeleton at the plasma membrane interface by electron tomography . J . Cell Biol . 174 : 851 – 862 . 9 . Charras , G . T . , C . K . Hu , M . Coughlin , and T . J . Mitchison . 2006 . Reassembly of contractile actin cortex in cell blebs . J . Cell Biol . 175 : 477 – 490 . 10 . Limozin , L . , and E . Sackmann . 2002 . Polymorphism of cross - linked actin networks in giant vesicles . Phys . Rev . Lett . 89 : 168103 . 1 – 168103 . 4 . 11 . Zalevsky , J . , L . Lempert , H . Kranitz , and R . D . Mullins . 2001 . Different WASP family proteins stimulate different Arp2 / 3 complex - dependent actin - nucleating activities . Curr . Biol . 11 : 1903 – 1913 . 12 . Bernheim - Groswasser , A . , S . Wiesner , R . M . Golsteyn , M . - F . Carlier , and C . Sykes . 2002 . The dynamics of actin - based motility depend on surface parameters . Nature . 417 : 308 – 311 . 13 . van der Gucht , J . , E . Paluch , J . Plastino , and C . Sykes . 2005 . Stress release drives symmetry breaking for actin - based movement . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 102 : 7847 – 7852 . 14 . Song , L . , M . R . Hobaugh , C . Shustak , S . Cheley , H . Bayley , et al . 1996 . Structure of Staphylococcal a - hemolysin , a heptameric transmembrane pore . Science . 274 : 1859 – 1865 . 15 . Noireaux , V . , and A . Libchaber . 2004 . A vesicle bioreactor as a step toward an artiﬁcial cell assembly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 101 : 17669 – 17674 . 16 . Pautot , S . , B . J . Frisken , and D . A . Weitz . 2003 . Production of unilamel - lar vesicles using an inverted emulsion technique . Langmuir . 19 : 2870 – 2879 . 17 . Limozin , L . , M . Barmann , and E . Sackmann . 2003 . On the organization of self - assembled actin networks in giant vesicles . Eur . Phys . J . E . 10 : 319 – 330 . 18 . Noireaux , V . , R . M . Golsteyn , E . Friederich , J . Prost , C . Antony , et al . 2000 . Growing an actin gel on spherical surfaces . Biophys . J . 278 : 1643 – 1654 . 19 . Pollard , T . D . 1986 . Rate constants for the reactions of ATP - and ADP - actin with the ends of actin ﬁlaments . J . Cell Biol . 103 : 2747 – 2754 . 20 . Plastino , J . , I . Lelidis , J . Prost , and C . Sykes . 2004 . The effect of diffu - sion , depolymerization and nucleation promoting factors on actin gel growth . Eur . Biophys . J . 33 : 310 – 320 . Biophysical Journal 96 ( 1 ) 192 – 198 198 Pontani et al .