273 The Baobab as a Shared Canvas Beate Zorn P . O . Box 6434 Windhoek Namibia rainbow @ cartech - namibia . com Naska Winschiers P . O . Box 31562 Windhoek Namibia winschiersnaska @ gmail . com Elia Theophilus P . O . Box 31562 Windhoek Namibia eliatheophilus @ gmail . com ABSTRACT The Baobab tree , indigenous to Africa and Australia , represents principle values of Participatory Design through its usage . In Africa , participative community meetings are held under the umbrella of this tree , as well as many interior and exterior decors of the tree emerged . Worldwide trees have been etched , leaving messages for others to come . In our project , we have merged the current African practice of participatory community meetings with a global practice of tree engraving . An African hand crafted , wired , baobab is placed at the conference site , while participants are provided with clay to contribute to an overall shared design space on the trunk of the tree . The joint effort results in a colourful , aesthetic , lasting masterpiece unique through the participants . Author Keywords Participatory Art , African community meetings , tree engravings ACM Classification Keywords H5 . m . Socio - technical Design : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION The clay - imprinted tree , as created by a participatory community , represents an un - destroyable life bond and sustainable design , reinforced through the metaphor of the Baobab . An indigenous tree to Africa and Australia , which survives in equally harsh environments , has similarly provided Aborigines , San and other indigenous Africans with nutrition , health products and shelters . Different designs around the Baobab emerged over decades in the two continents ; with this piece of art , the African concepts of participatory meetings under the tree are propagated to Australia and a wider participatory design community at the conference . The clay imprints are an analogy to a universal long - standing tradition of visitors engraving trees , thereby leaving lifelong traces of self , with thoughts and emotions for the ones to come . TECHNIQUE AND AUDIENCE PARTICIPATION The tree will be a hand - wired trunk ( 1 . 5 meters ) with branches ( 0 . 5 meters ) following the model made by African street - artists as pictured in figure 1 . The participants will be provided with Craft Clay ( soft , light , mixable colours ) and Pens to imprint the tree with their own design ideas . Cushions are placed under the tree for participants to sit under the tree and palaver while kneading . Clay was chosen as material of sensual tranquillity unlocking infinite creativity . The joint effort will result in a colourful , aesthetic , unique and lasting masterpiece , as the clay air - dries 1 . Figure 1 . Baobab prototype RELEVANCE TO PARTICIPATORY DESIGN The relation of the project to PD is twofold ; on the one hand , the Baobab tree in itself symbolizes many characteristics and visions embraced by the principles and philosophy of PD . On the other hand , we believe the technique of joint clay imprinting can also be used in a new and creative way , within the context of socio - technical design . Significance of the baobab The usage of the Baobab has been explored to the fullest by the indigenous people of both continents . It provides inhabitants with nutritional and pharmaceutical ( or medicinal ) resources . The San have been known to drain the tree for water in times of droughts and the seeds , fruit , leaves , flowers and even twigs are incorporated into customary cuisine ( Gebauer et . al . , 2002 ) . Medicinally the bark of the Baobab has been used to treat fevers and 1 The final piece will be donated to the local University , in memory of the successful conference . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . PDC‟10 , 29 - NOV - 2010 , Sydney , Australia . Copyright 2010 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0131 - 2 / 10 / 0011… $ 10 . 00 . 274 malaria , while the leaves are used against coughing and asthma or rubbed onto open wounds ( Von Koenen , 2001 ) . The Baobabs‟ simplistic yet majestic form has led to it being used in numerous original ways , such as toilets , jails , shelters , post - boxes , and merely for shade . In a broader context , Baobabs are used as landmarks , ritual places of treatment , social events and are even believed to be the home of spirits . Especially in Africa , the tree has become an essential phenomenon of the communities , representing the spirit of connectedness of all and inclusive participatory practices as further expressed in the African proverb ( Grant and Asimeng - Boahene , 2006 ) : “Knowledge is like a baobab tree ; no one person can embrace it with both arms . ” Figure 2 : Holistic and sustainable community meeting ( Africa Ahead , 2010 ) Much knowledge exchange and decision making takes place under the umbrella of the trees in the spirit of participatory design . Figure 3 : Meeting held under a Baobab tree ( SolarAid Tanzania , 2010 ) Tree engravings “If human depictions of Baobabs on cave walls are inexplicably scarce , mankind has left many signs of his passing on the actual tree , sometimes etched deep enough in its trunk to last the rest of its life . … . and Livingstone is said to have etched „DL‟ into the bark of both Chapman‟s Baobab and a tree near Victoria Falls…” ( Watson , 2007 ) . All over the world , trees can be found with engraved messages , symbols , initials , love declarations and other inspirational statements . Succeeding visitors could gather new information but also add to the engravings for further pass - a - bys . Thus , the tree becomes like a joint diary of visitors over time with one definite common point within their different life paths . CONCLUSIONS In our project , we have merged and synchronised a current African practice of participatory community meetings with a global practice of tree engraving . The result is a unique and lasting participative art installation of a hand crafted baobab decorated with colourful clay imprints . REFERENCES Africa Ahead , A . H . E . A . D : The Community Health Club Approach to Sustainable Development , www . africaahead . org , retrived July 2010 Gebauer , J . , El - Siddig , K . and Ebert , G . Baobab ( Adansonia digitata L . ) : a review on a multipurpose tree with promising future in the Sudan . Gartenbauwissenschaft , 67 ( 4 ) : 155 – 160 , 2002 . Grant , R . and Asimeng - Boahene , L . Culturally responsive pedagogy in citizenship education : using African proverbs as tools for teaching in urban schools . Multicultural Perspectives , 8 ( 4 ) : 17 – 24 , 2006 . SolarAid Tanzania , Chole Island becomes a solar island . http : / / solar - aid . org / project _ solar _ for _ children / 2010 / 06 / chole - island - becomes - solaraids . html , retrieved July 2010 Von Koenen , E . Medicinal Poisonous and edible plants in Namibia . Klaus Hess Publisher . 2001 . Watson , R . The African Baobab . Struik Publishers . 2007