ELSEVIER Decision Support Systems 16 ( 1996 ) 181 - 194 Information technology support for collaborative decision making in auditing : An experimental investigation Vijay Karan a , David S . Kerr b , Uday S . Murthy b , Ajay S . Vinze c , . a Department of Accounting , College of Business and Management , University of Maryland , College Park , AID 20742 , USA b Department of Accounting , College of Business Administration and Graduate School of Business , Texas A & M Unit , ersity , College Station , TX 77843 - 4353 , USA Department of Business Analysis and Research , College of Business Administration and Graduate School of Business , Texas A & M University , College Station , TX 77843 - 4217 , USA Abstract Several studies in behavioral decision making have found that decisions made by interacting groups tend to " shift " from the mean judgment for the same task when performed individually . While this " choice - shift " phenomenon has been documented in experiments where group participants interact face - to - face , the impact of Group Decision Support Systems ( GDSS ) on this phenomenon has not been investigated . GDSS permit simultane - ous and anonymous interaction and provide a structured environment for group discussion . This paper reports the results of an experiment investigating whether decisions reached by groups using GDSS technology differ from those made by traditional " face - to - face " groups for the same judgment task . The results revealed that GDSS - mediated communication , whether anonymous or non - anonymous , resulted in no significant choice shift while the face - to - face communication mode resulted in a significant cautious shift . The results also revealed that GDSS - mediated communication was more efficient , and that there was no significant difference in subjects ' perceived satisfaction with the group process between GDSS - mediated and face - to - face groups . Keywords : Group decision support systems ; Collaborative decision making ; Auditing ; Choice shift Information technology advances of the eight - ies resulted in the development of a wide array of tools aimed at improving individual productivity . There has recently been considerable interest in providing computer - based support for group work . Electronic mail , group word processing software , and group decision support systems * Corresponding author . Email : vinze @ tamu . edu ( GDSS ) are some of the tools that facilitate col - laborative work . Many decisions in auditing are made in team settings rather than by individuals acting alone . Auditors typically spend consider - able time in group meetings discussing issues ranging from client acceptance / continuance and audit planning , to determination of the appropri - ate audit report 16 . While the importance of multi - auditor judgment / decision making re - search is widely recognized 1 , 19 , very little work has been done in this area . Prior research in 0167 - 9236 / 96 / $ 15 . 00 © 1996 Elsevier Science B . V . All rights reserved SSDI 0167 - 9236 ( 95 ) 00007 - 0 182 1A Karan et aL / Decision Support Systems 16 ( 1996 ) 181 - 194 auditing has focused mainly on the judgments and decisions made by individuals . Recently , re - searchers have shown increased interest in com - puter - based support for group work in auditing contexts 3 - 5 . The purpose of this study is to examine some of the effects of GDSS on team decisions in an audit setting . Decisions made by audit teams are potentially superior to those made by individuals because of the sharing of expertise , the elicitation of many different points of view , and the consideration of alternatives that individuals acting alone might overlook . However , when the decision involves risk , there could be a tendency for the group decision to shift in either a risky or cautious direction in comparison to the same decision made individually . This tendency is known as the choice - shift phenomenon 2 , 14 , 16 . Face - to - face meetings are also often criticized for their inher - ent inefficiencies resulting from personality con - flicts and distracting comments that tend to waste time . GDSS tools have the potential of improving the efficiency of group meetings and of mitigating the choice - shift phenomenon . This paper reports the results of an experi - ment investigating the effects of GDSS technol - ogy on the following aspects of audit team deci - sions : the extent of choice shift , efficiency of the group meeting , and satisfaction with the process . Subjects ' task involved the assessment of an ac - ceptable level of audit risk for a hypothetical client . In stage one of the experiment , subjects performed the task either interacting face - to - face or using the GDSS with their interaction being anonymous . In stage two , a different set of sub - jects performed the same task using the GDSS , without anonymity . Results from stage one indi - cated that the groups interacting face - to - face shifted significantly from their prior individual assessments of acceptable audit risk while the groups interacting anonymously using the GDSS did not shift significantly from their prior individ - ual assessments . The GDSS - mediated groups took significantly less time than the face - to - face groups to reach consensus . However , there was no signif - icant difference in the degree of satisfaction with the group process in comparing face - to - face and GDSS - mediated groups . Results from stage two of the experiment revealed that GDSS - mediated groups interacting non - anonymously did not sig - nificantly shift from their prior individual assess - ments , suggesting that the absence of choice shift in the GDSS - mediated communication mode can be attributed to GDSS technology rather than anonymous interaction . These results have impor - tant implications for accounting firms contem - plating the use of GDSS technology to support collaborative work of their audit teams . The next section reviews prior research on multi - auditor judgment / decision making with specific reference to the choice - shift phe - nomenon and also discusses the advantages of GDSS for group work . This is followed by discus - sion of the hypotheses , experimental design , and administration and results of each of the two stages of the experiment . The final section sum - marizes the paper and indicates future directions in this line of research . I . Background and motivation 1 . 1 . Collaboratiue decision - making in auditing The auditor ' s work environment is becoming increasingly volatile and complex , due in part to increased concern about litigation and competi - tion , the intricacy of reporting and accounting issues , and advances in information technology . These increases in volatility and complexity are compelling auditors to spend an increasing per - centage of their time in group meetings dis - cussing issues ranging from client acceptance / continuance and audit planning , to determination of the appropriate audit report 16 . Although most audits are conducted by audit teams , the vast majority of previous audit judgment / deci - sion making studies focuses exclusively on the judgments and decisions of individuals . Since judgments made by groups are frequently differ - ent from those made by individuals , the ability to generalize the results of such studies to multi - person settings is severely limited 19 . There have been recent calls in the literature for studies of multi - auditor judgment / decision making to v . Karan et al . / Decision Support Systems 16 ( 1996 ) 181 - 194 183 enhance the usefulness and relevance of auditing research 1 , 19 . Group discussions by members of the audit team results in the pooling of group members ' individual knowledge and expertise . The synergy resulting from such pooling frequently causes an increase in the number of relevant issues and alternatives considered , and gives the team the potential for outperforming individuals on a given audit judgment task . In addition , group discus - sions may improve commitment to and confi - dence in decisions , and may bolster auditors ' legal defense if called upon to defend their deci - sions in court 14 . Although the benefits of group interaction in audit judgment / decision making are appealing , concerns have been raised about the decision outcomes resulting from group discussion , espe - cially when the task involves risk . Researchers in psychology , and to some extent in auditing , have noted a tendency for group judgments / decisions to " shift " either in the direction of greater risk or greater caution in comparison to individual judg - ments / decisions 2 , 14 , 16 . This concern regarding the " choice - shift " phenomenon is especially rele - vant in auditing since many audit team decisions involve risk ( e . g . , going concern evaluation , deter - mining the level of acceptable audit risk , assess - ing inherent and control risk ) . Other concerns with respect to group work center around the inefficiencies inherent in traditional face - to - face group meetings . Group meetings are criticized because they typically result in a considerable amount of wasted time and because meetings tend to be dominated by one or more individuals 7 , 17 . 1 . 2 . Research on the choice - shift phenomenon The choice - shift phenomenon has been inves - tigated extensively in the psychology literature ( Myers and Lamm 12 provide a comprehensive review of the psychology studies ) . The findings have not been consistent - - some studies have reported a choice shift in the direction of greater caution while others have found a choice shift in the direction of greater risk . The psychology liter - ature in general indicates that group interaction frequently results in members changing their prior beliefs in a more extreme direction ( either to - wards a more risky position or a more cautious position ) . In the auditing literature , Barrett and O ' Mal - ley 2 investigated whether the audit opinion decision shifted significantly when performed by groups of auditors in comparison to the same decision performed individually . Student subjects were used and the task involved determining whether to issue a qualified opinion or a dis - claimer based on uncertainty surrounding a law - suit initiated against a hypothetical client . They found evidence indicating both risky and cautious shifts as a function of the dollar amount under litigation and the likelihood that the client com - pany will lose the lawsuit ( cautious shifts given large dollar amounts and small probabilities that the client will lose the lawsuit , and risky shifts given small dollar amounts and high probabilities that the client will lose the lawsuit ) . Reckers and Shultz 14 investigated the choice - shift phenomenon , again using student subjects , in a task involving the disclosure of an uncertainty for an audit client . Subjects first per - formed the task individually , then in groups , and then again individually . Materiality ( high vs . low ) , client size ( large vs . small ) , authoritative capacity of the subjects ( advisory vs . decisive ) and commu - nication channel ( telephone vs . face - to - face ) were varied in the experiment . Similar to the findings of Barrett and O ' Malley , subjects in the Reckers and Shultz study exhibited a cautious shift under high materiality conditions and a risky shift under low materiality conditions . Rutledge and Harrell 15 explored the effects of the framing of decision alternatives and the level of responsibility on the nature of group choice shifts . Student subjects were asked to indi - cate their preference for continuing or discontin - uing an investment project with an uncertain fu - ture . Subjects ' responsibility for the original in - vestment was varied at two levels ( high or low ) and the framing of the decision was varied , also at two levels ( positive or negative ) . They found evidence of a risky shift when subjects were sup - plied with negatively framed information and a cautious shift when subjects were supplied with 184 v . Karan et al . / Decision Support Systems 16 ( 1996 ) 181 - 194 positively framed information . Further , when faced with high responsibility for a decision , the group shift was in the direction of greater risk , but faced with low responsibility , the shift was in the direction of greater caution . The subjects in all of these experiments inter - acted in " face - to - face " groups in the group por - tion of the experiment . Thus , the extent to which their decisions were influenced by certain individ - uals in the group or the extent to which ineffi - ciencies in face - to - face meetings caused the re - suits remains an open question . In the current study , we investigate whether anonymous group interaction ( where the participants do not know who made each comment ) has an effect on the tendency of group interactions to result in a group shift ( risky or a cautious ) in comparison to " face - to - face " group interaction where the discussions are not anonymous . Anonymous group interac - tion is facilitated by GDSS technology . 1 . 3 . Capabilities of GDSS technology Advances in information technology over the last several years have resulted in the develop - ment of computer - based decision aids to support group work . A Group Decision Support System ( GDSS ) is an interactive computer - based system that combines communication , computer , and de - cision technologies to support the formulation and solution of unstructured or semi - structured problems by a group 10 . GDSSs have been developed as a tool for improving the efficiency and effectiveness of meetings involving group problem solving and decision making by reducing or eliminating the inefficiencies and other prob - lems associated with such meetings 7 , 10 , 13 . The two primary distinctions between traditional face - to - face groups and GDSSs are the potential for anonymity of individual members ' inputs in GDSS - mediated groups and the presence of au - tomated decision aids which permit simultaneous input to the group discussion . The potential advantages of GDSSs over tradi - tional group meetings have been noted in the literature 7 , 9 , 10 , 17 . The advantages generally can be divided into two categories : efficiencies created by the technology , and efficiencies result - ing from the nature of the interaction . Efficien - cies created by the technology result from soft - ware tools for eliciting group members ' ideas and suggestions , rating and ranking of ideas and sug - gestions , and voting on selected alternatives . Since the nature of the GDSS software tends to add structure to the task , groups using a GDSS tend to have fewer distractions and diversions than traditional face - to - face groups 10 , 13 . Efficien - cies resulting from the nature of the interaction generally arise from the fact that , in a GDSS , group members can make their comments , sug - gestions , and votes anonymously 6 , 13 . Thus , groups members often are less inhibited in their expression of ideas , since there is no risk of embarrassment or loss of face for making what others might believe is a worthless comment . Further , since comments can be made anony - mously , they tend to be evaluated based on their merit , rather than on the status of the person making the comment 8 , 10 , 22 . Given these fea - tures of GDSS , there is the potential for differen - tial effects on choice shifts , efficiency of the group process , satisfaction with the group process , and confidence in the group decision for GDSS - medi - ated groups in comparison to face - to - face groups in audit judgment / decision making situations . Similar to the work by Kiesler et al . 11 and Siegel et al . 17 who studied the impact of com - puter - mediated communication on uninhibited behavior , we conducted an experiment to investi - gate the effects of GDSS - mediated group interac - tion on the process and outcomes of collaborative decision making in auditing . The experiment was conducted in two stages . Stage one investigates the effects of anonymous GDSS - mediated com - munication on the degree to which the group decision differs from , or " shifts " from , the group members ' mean individual choice , and the effi - ciency of the group process in terms of the time taken to reach consensus . Additionally , partici - pants ' satisfaction with the group process was examined . Stage two investigates whether the ef - fects observed in stage one were due to ( 1 ) the presence of the automated decision aids , or ( 2 ) the anonymity of individual members ' inputs . In both stages of the experiment , the group decision making context examined was that of determining E Karan et aL / Decision Support Systems 16 ( 1996 ) 181 - 194 185 the level of acceptable audit risk for a hypotheti - cal client . 2 . Hypotheses m stage one GDSS - mediated communication can be either anonymous or non - anonymous depending on the nature of the decision and participant character - istics . For example , anonymous interaction on the GDSS is likely to yield better results for brain - storming tasks even in established teams 6 . On the other hand , there are many decision making situations in practice where it is critical to iden - tify the source of each comment . In such cases , non - anonymous GDSS - mediated interaction would be more appropriate . In stage one we investigate the effects of anonymous GDSS - medi - ated interaction on the choice - shift phenomenon and in stage two we explore whether non - anony - mous GDSS - mediated interaction produces dif - ferential results . Given the mixed results of prior studies , it is difficult to predict whether anonymous GDSS - mediated groups will be more or less prone to choice shift than face - to - face groups . On the one hand , an argument can be made that anonymous GDSS - mediated groups should exhibit a greater degree of choice shift because anonymous partici - pation enables a group member ' s case in favor of a more cautious or a more risky decision to be evaluated on its merit . On the other hand , if participation is anonymous , there is a greater chance for the group " consensus " decision to be brought forth since the group is less likely to be " swayed " by one particular member who may have a forceful personality ( as is possible in a face - to - face group ) . Thus , an equally compelling argument could be made for anonymous GDSS - mediated groups to exhibit choice shift to a lesser degree than face - to - face groups . The first hypoth - esis , regarding the extent of choice shift in GDSS - mediated versus face - to - face groups is stated below in the null form : HI : GDSS - mediated groups will exhibit the same degree of choice shift as face - to - face groups . The next research question deals with the effi - ciency of the group process in terms of the time required to reach consensus . As stated earlier , a significant advantage of GDSS over face - to - face meetings is that group members can focus on the task better with little distraction caused by irrele - vant comments . Face - to - face meetings often tend to deviate from the task at hand based on tangen - tial or distracting comments by individual mem - bers , especially if the person making the com - ment is a dominant member of the group . Since GDSS - mediated communication is more likely to focus group members ' attention on the task at hand , the group process should be more efficient , resulting in significantly less time to reach con - sensus . The second hypothesis regarding the time required to reach consensus is stated below in the null form : H2 : The time required to reach consensus will not be significantly different between GDSS - mediated and face - to - face groups . With respect to satisfaction with the group process , it is difficult to predict which communi - cation mode will result in a greater extent of satisfaction . Findings with regard to satisfaction with the use of GDSS have been inconsistent 9 . Steeb and Johnston 18 found a greater extent of satisfaction with the process of GDSS - mediated interaction . Given the efficiencies inherent in the GDSS - mediated communication mode , and the comfort of anonymity afforded to participants , it seems reasonable to expect a greater extent of satisfaction for subjects in the GDSS - mediated mode . However , Watson et al . 21 and Gallupe et al . 8 found that groups using GDSS were less satisfied with the process . Perhaps the interper - sonal interactions inherent in face - to - face com - munication could make participants in face - to - face gi ' oups more satisfied with their group delib - erations . The hypothesis regarding satisfaction with the group process is stated below in the null form : H3 : Satisfaction with the group process will not be significantly different between GDSS - mediated and face - to - face groups . An experiment was performed to test these hypotheses . The next section provides details of the research method employed . 186 V . Karan et al . / Decision Support Systems 16 ( 1996 ) 181 - 194 3 . Research method - - stage one 3 . 1 . Subjects Subjects first completed an audit judgment task individually and then repeated the task in a group setting . Communication mode in the group setting was varied at two levels : face - to - face com - munication vs . GDSS - mediated communication . Subjects consisted of 80 students in a senior - level auditing course . On the first day of class , students completed and returned a questionnaire concern - ing each student ' s previous work experience , ac - counting GPA , membership in Beta Alpha Psi ( the honorary accounting fraternity ) , career inter - ests , and work load . This information was used by the instructor to form groups of four students per group . To " spread the talent " across groups , stu - dents with the highest GPAs were assigned to different groups , as were students with previous accounting - related work experience , resulting in heterogeneous within - group characteristics , and homogeneous characteristics between - groups . The same groups were used throughout the semester . Since the students met several times in their groups to work on auditing - related tasks prior to the experiment , the experimental groups constitutes " traditional " groups as opposed to " ad hoc " groups . Thus , the groups in the experi - ment resembled " real - world " audit teams in which the members typically work with one an - other from the inception of the audit . Prior to administration of the experiment , groups were randomly assigned to experimental conditions . Students were motivated to take the experimental task seriously since their responses to the case were graded and formed the basis for a portion of their course grade . Determination of an appropriate level of accept - able audit risk is a critical step in the audit , as it determines the extent of testing that the auditor performs during the course of the audit 1 . If acceptable audit risk is set too high , then the auditor runs the risk of performing a substandard audit which increases the auditor ' s exposure to legal liability and subsequent possible financial losses . On the other hand , if acceptable audit risk is set too low , then it would be prohibitively expensive to perform the audit . Since the purpose of this study is to examine the effects of GDSS - mediated communication on groups ' decisions , the choice of task was crucial to the study ' s internal validity . The benefits and usefulness of group decision support systems are a function of the complexity of the task to be performed . While GDSS can be applied to a wide variety of group judgment tasks , their use is most appropriate for relatively complex , unstructured tasks . The choice of an appropriate task is a function of the users of the GDSS . In audit contexts , tasks appropriate for the use of GDSS will vary as a function of experience . For pur - poses of the experiment ' s internal validity , it was important that subjects ' experience level be con - sidered when selecting the task . That is , the task should be sufficiently complex , given the subjects ' level of experience level , that the use of GDSS is warranted . The assessment of acceptable audit risk for a client is a relatively complex task for subjects with limited or no experience such as auditing students . Accordingly , the assessment of acceptable audit risk is deemed to be an appro - priate task for the experiment . To provide stu - dents with a foundation on which to make a decision regarding an appropriate level of risk , the topic of acceptable audit risk was discussed in 3 . 2 . Task Subjects ' task involved determination of the level of acceptable audit risk for a hypothetical client . Audit risk is the probability that the audi - tor will fail to find one or more existing misstate - ments in the client ' s accounting records and , as a result , issue a clean ( unqualified ) audit report on financial statements that are materially misstated . 1 The extent of testing is determined by the level of allow - able detection risk ( ADR ) . According to generally accepted auditing standards , the level of ADR is a function of the predetermined level of acceptable audit risk ( AAR ) , and the assessed levels of inherent risk ( IR ) and control risk ( CR ) . That is , ADR = AAR / ( IR X CR ) . If ADR is relatively high then the auditor can afford to perform less extensive tests but if ADR is low the auditor must perform extensive tests of transactions and balances . V . Karan et al . / Decision Support Systems 16 ( 1996 ) 181 - 194 187 class approximately one week prior to the admin - istration of the experiment . The use of student subjects in the current study can be justified on several grounds . Al - though the importance of multi - auditor judg - ment / decision making research is widely recog - nized 1 , 19 , very little work has been done in this area and the current study can therefore be con - sidered to be exploratory . In the initial stages of this line of research it is critical to maintain internal validity at a high level . Students repre - sent a homogeneous set of subjects relative to practitioners who may have very divergent work experiences with respect to the experimental task . Additionally , the inherent difficulty in obtaining and coordinating a large number of practitioner subjects is a deterrent , given the extremely ex - ploratory nature of the study . Of course , the findings in a controlled laboratory experiment with high internal validity should then be corrob - orated using practitioner subjects to enhance the external validity of those findings . In the current study , the focus is on the effects of GDSS - mediated communication on groups ' choice shift , the time required to reach consen - sus , satisfaction with the group process , and con - fidence in the group ' s decision relative to face - to - face communication . In effect , the face - to - face groups serve as " control " groups , while the GDSS - mediated groups act as " treatment " groups . Audit experience can reasonably be ex - pected to influence issues such as time required to reach consensus and confidence in the group ' s decision . However , audit experience should not have a differential impact on GDSS - mediated communication relative to face - to - face communi - cation . Since the focus of the current study is on differences between the two modes of communi - cation , the lack of practical experience of the student subjects is not a limiting factor . The acceptable audit risk decision was dis - cussed in class to familiarize students with the relevant issues and the impact of the acceptable audit risk level on subsequent audit planning decisions ( i . e . , the effect on the extent of testing ) . Information about a hypothetical client had been provided to the students early in the semester and the same case was used to perform a series of audit related tasks in logical succession ( de - termining whether to accept the client , formulat - ing the engagement letter , and performing pre - liminary analytical procedures ) . The next step in the case was the determination of the level of acceptable audit risk for the hypothetical client . Thus , students were somewhat familiar with the client prior to the experiment . For the task itself , subjects were provided with the client ' s permanent file ( background informa - tion ) , comparative financial statements ( providing three years of data ) , a ratio fluctuation analysis , and a form to be used for evaluating the level of overall acceptable audit risk . An instruction packet provided to the subjects included a CPA firm ' s policy statement concerning overall accept - able audit risk . This policy statement discussed the implications of setting acceptable audit risk too high or too low . Subjects were instructed to read the policy statement , study the client ' s finan - cial statements and background information , and to indicate their decision regarding the level of acceptable audit risk on a 10 point scale ( " 1 " indicating a very low level of acceptable audit risk and " 10 " indicating a very high level of accept - able audit risk ) . 3 . 3 . Administration of experiment Subjects first completed the case involving the determination of the level of acceptable audit risk individually , in class . One of the researchers was present when the subjects completed the individ - ual portion of the experiment . Thus , control was exercised to ensure that there was no interaction between subjects as they completed the task indi - vidually . Immediately following the individual portion of the experiment , subjects repeated the assessment of acceptable audit risk task , this time with their group . The groups were randomly as - signed to one of two communication modes : face - to - face communication or GDSS - mediated com - munication . Groups in the face - to - face communi - cation mode were asked to discuss the case and reach consensus regarding the level of acceptable audit risk . Each group was assigned to a separate room and their group discussions were audio taped so that their decision making process could 188 V . Karan et al . / Decision Support Systems 16 ( 1996 ) 181 - 194 be further analyzed . Groups in the GDSS - media - ted communication mode used the GDSS tools to " discuss " the case and reach consensus . Commu - nication among group members in the GDSS mode was captured electronically . Other instruc - tions and materials provided to subjects were the same for both communication modes . Face - to - face and GDSS - mediated groups performed the group portion of the task concurrently . The time taken to reach consensus in each of the two communication modes was recorded . Partici - pants ' reactions regarding their satisfaction with the group process were measured using a debrief - ing questionnaire adapted from a validated in - strument used to measure perceived effectiveness of an expert system 20 2 3 . 4 . GDSS software For the experiment , the VisionQuest GDSS developed by Collaborative Technologies Corpo - ration was utilized . VisionQuest allows partici - pants in a GDSS session to interact simultane - ously , and enables group members to provide their input to the group process electronically and simultaneously view the comments made by the other group members on their computer screen . Comments made by subjects were anony - mous - - group members were unaware of the individual who made each comment ( although they knew who was in their group ) . Each subject was assigned to a computer in a large computer lab , with their other group mem - bers being dispersed throughout the room ( the VisionQuest software kept track of which specific computers were in each group ) . The mechanics of using the VisionQuest software was explained to subjects and assistance was available for any sub - ject needing help . Subjects apparently found the 2 The satisfaction metric used in 20 addresses the effec - tiveness of information systems in general . Therefore , its utility is technology independent . This metric focuses on the user ' s perception of the effectiveness of technology from a satisfaction and task orientation . Vinze 20 used this metric primarily with expert systems , but the validation of the instru - ment indicates its utility for other technologies as well . software easy to use since some groups generated over 100 comments . Instructions displayed on the screen directed each participant to type in and discuss factors to be considered in determining the level of acceptable audit risk ( i . e . , client back - ground factors , trends in certain financial state - ment ratios , etc . ) . Subjects were also instructed that they should each propose a level that they felt the acceptable audit risk ( AAR ) for the en - gagement should be set at , after having consid - ered all factors that they and the other group members had entered on the common " electronic blackboard " . Each participant could see their teammates ' proposals regarding the AAR level and could then justify why he / she thought the acceptable audit risk level should be set at a certain level . Each group reached " consensus " when they agreed about the level at which AAR should be set . 4 . Results - - stage one To test the first hypothesis , the extent of " shift " in the AAR levels for the two communication modes was examined . For each group , the mean was computed of the group members ' individual ratings of AAR . This " mean individual AAR " was then compared to the group AAR for each of the two communication modes ( GDSS - mediated and face - to - face ) . The mean AAR ratings for individuals and groups in each of the two commu - nication modes are shown in Table 1 . As Table 1 reveals , the mean individual ratings and the " GDSS - mediated " group ratings were quite close to one another . In contrast , the mean individual Table 1 Mean ratings of acceptable audit risk - - Stage One Mean ( n = 10 ) Std . Dev . Individual vs . anonymous " GDSS - mediated " groups Individual ratings 6 . 03 1 . 06 Group ratings 6 . 00 1 . 33 Individual vs . " face - to - face " groups Individual ratings 6 . 03 0 . 54 Group ratings 5 . 60 0 . 97 V . Karan et al . / Decision Support Systems 16 ( 1996 ) 181 - 194 189 Table 2 Comparison of individual versus group means for acceptable audit risk : Results of paired - samples t - tests - - Stage One Pair - wise Paired mean t - value df 2 - tail comparison difference prob . ( n = 10 ) Individual vs . 0 . 033 0 . 14 9 0 . 891 anonymous ( 0 . 743 ) GDSS groups Individual vs . 0 . 433 2 . 56 9 0 . 031 face - to - face ( 0 . 535 ) groups Standard deviations of paired differences shown in parenthe - ses . ratings and the " face - to - face " group ratings were further apart . Coincidentally , the mean individual ratings were exactly the same in each communica - tion mode , indicating that the " prior beliefs " in each communication mode were very similar . Also of interest in Table 1 is the finding that the variance in the mean ratings was higher for the GDSS - mediated groups , indicating that GDSS technology may not necessarily result in a higher degree of consistency in the decisions . Paired - samples t - tests were performed to test the first null hypothesis that the mean individual AAR was not significantly different from the group AAR in each of the two communication modes 3 . The results are shown in Table 2 . As Table 2 reveals , the difference between the indi - vidual and group means for the GDSS - mediated groups was not significant , but the difference between the individual and group means for the face - to - face groups was significant ( p = 0 . 031 ) . These results indicate a significant " cautious 3 To examine whether the results were driven by differ - ences in the degree of homogeneity of individual AAR ratings within groups , we calculated the standard deviation of the individual AAR ratings within each of the 30 groups . Scheffe ' s test for post hoc multiple pair - wise comparisons was then used to examine whether the means of these standard devia - tions differed across any of the experimental conditions . There were no statistically significant differences in the degree of homogeneity of individual AAR ratings across experimental conditions . shift " for the " face - to - face " groups in compari - son to no significant choice shift for the GDSS - mediated groups , indicating the use of GDSS may mitigate the choice - shift phenomenon 4 To test the second null hypothesis , the time taken to reach consensus in each of the two communication modes was compared . The GDSS - mediated groups took an average of 20 minutes to reach consensus . In contrast , the face - to - face groups took an average of 29 . 35 minutes . An independent - samples t - test revealed that sub - jects in the face - to - face communication mode took significantly longer to reach consensus than sub - jects in the GDSS - mediated communication mode ( t = 3 . 51 , df = 18 , p < 0 . 01 ) , indicating that the use of GDSS may improve the efficiency of group meetings . The third hypothesis was tested by comparing subjects ' ratings of their satisfaction with the group process based on their responses to certain questions in the debriefing questionnaire . The debriefing questionnaire measured subjects ' reac - tions to the task when it was completed individu - ally , when working with his / her group , and sub - jects ' previous experiences with computers . Re - sponses to seven questions were combined to form a composite measure of subjects ' percep - tions of satisfaction with or effectiveness of the group process . A reliability analysis revealed a 4 Two parts of the instructions to subjects were as follows : " List factors from the client ' s background and financial infor - mation that you feel should be considered in determining acceptable audit risk for the engagement . Be very specific . " , and " Explain / justify your decision regarding overall accept - able audit risk " . Analysis of students ' responses to these two requirements provided an effective check of whether they understood the nature of the task , and revealed three stu - dents who misunderstood the task . In all three cases , students had rated actual , rather than acceptable , audit risk . This distinction is of practical importance since several factors influencing acceptable audit risk are inversely related to ac - tual audit risk . Accordingly , each of these three students ' individual ratings of AAR were excluded from the calculation of the mean individual AAR rating for their groups . The data were also analyzed after completely excluding the three stu - dents ' groups ' AAR ratings and their groups ' mean individual AAR ratings from the data set . Results did not differ signifi - cantly in either case . 190 V . Karan et al . / Decision Support Systems 16 ( 1996 ) 181 - 194 Cronbach ' s a score of . 79 for this composite mea - sure , indicating that it can be considered a reli - able measure of subjects ' reactions to the group process . The mean scores for satisfaction with the group process , as indicated by the composite measure , were 2 . 52 for the GDSS - mediated groups and 2 . 33 for the face - to - face groups ( lower numbers indicate a greater degree of satisfaction with the process ) . An independent - samples t - test indicated that this difference was not statistically significant . 4 . 1 . Discussion With respect to the choice - shift phenomenon , the results of stage one of the experiment indi - cate that subjects were more willing to " shift " from their priors in face - to - face groups . Appar - ently , in face - to - face meetings , individuals were convinced to shift from their prior decisions , whereas subjects in the GDSS - mediated commu - nication condition exhibited a degree of reluc - tance to shift from prior beliefs ( i . e . , individuals " stuck to their positions " in the GDSS communi - cation mode ) . Thus , the preliminary results from this experiment indicate that GDSS technology may mitigate the tendencies of groups to " shift " from their individual beliefs or decisions . Whether this result is due to the use of the GDSS technol - ogy itself , or stems from the anonymity afforded by the GDSS - mediated process , is investigated in stage two . With respect to the time required to reach consensus , our findings indicated that GDSS - mediated communication is more efficient than face - to - face communication . Presumably , GDSS - mediated communication allows participants to focus better on the task at hand . Preliminary analyses of the audio tape transcripts indicates that face - to - face groups had a considerably greater proportion of irrelevant comments . Regarding satisfaction with the process , there was no significant difference in the degree of satisfaction between face - to - face groups and GDSS - mediated groups . Perhaps the capabilities of the GDSS software resulted in subjects having a favorable attitude towards their group delibera - tions in the GDSS - mediated mode , despite the fact that they interacted anonymously . It appears that the nature of interpersonal interactions in - herent in face - to - face communication caused sub - jects in the face - to - face communication mode to be very satisfied with their deliberations . The above results indicate that GDSS - mediated com - munication mitigates the choice - shift phe - nomenon and is more efficient relative to face - to - face communication with no significant reduc - tion in participants ' satisfaction with the group process . However , it is unclear whether the lack of choice shift in the GDSS - mediated communi - cation mode stems from anonymous interaction or from the presence of automated decision aids . In stage two , we investigate whether anonymous interaction or GDSS technology mitigates the choice - shift phenomenon . 5 . Stage two To investigate whether the difference in the extent of choice shift observed between the GDSS - mediated and face - to - face groups was due to the presence of the automated decision aids or was due to the anonymity of individual members ' inputs , in stage two of the experiment anonymity was manipulated ( anonymous vs . non - anony - mous ) while holding communication condition constant ( i . e . , GDSS - mediated ) . Given the mixed results of prior studies , it is difficult to make a directional prediction concerning the effect of anonymity on the choice - shift phenomenon . If the difference in the extent of choice shift be - tween GDSS - mediated and face - to - face groups observed in stage one was due to the effects of anonymity ( non - anonymity ) in the GDSS - media - ted ( face - to - face ) condition , then one would pre - dict a significantly greater cautious shift in the non - anonymous GDSS - mediated condition than in the anonymous GDSS - mediation condition . However , if the difference in stage one was due to the presence of automated decision aids , and not to anonymity , then one would predict there would be no significant difference in extent of choice shift between the anonymous and non - anonymous conditions . V . Karan et al . / Decision Support Systems 16 ( 1996 ) 181 - 194 191 6 . Research method - - stage two This stage of the experiment was performed to allow comparison of the extent of choice shift in anonymous GDSS - mediated interaction with non - anonymous GDSS - mediated interaction in four - person groups . Forty student subjects com - pleted the same audit judgment task completed by subjects in stage one . All subjects were en - rolled in a senior - level auditing course . None of the stage two subjects participated in , or were otherwise involved in , stage one of the experi - ment . Experimental procedures in stage two were virtually identical to those in stage one with the following exception : during group interactions , all subjects in stage two interacted with their group members in a non - anonymous GDSS condition 5 . In the GDSS anonymous condition ( stage one ) , comments typed by subjects were entered anony - mously - - group members were unaware of the individual who made each comment ( although they knew who was in their group ) . In the GDSS non - anonymous condition ( stage two ) , subjects preceded each comment by typing their name . 7 . Results - - stage two To test whether the difference in the extent of choice shift observed between the anonymous GDSS - mediated groups and face - to - face groups in stage one of the experiment was due to differ - ences in anonymity , the extent of " shift " in the AAR levels for the non - anonymous GDSS - medi - ated groups in stage two was examined . For each group , the mean of the group members ' individ - ual ratings of AAR was computed . The means 5 In stage two , a total of 80 subjects completed the experi - mental task . Forty of these subjects performed the task in a non - anonymous GDSS - mediated condition . The other forty performed the task in an anonymous GDSS - mediated condi - tion , replicating the anonymous GDSS - mediated portion of the stage one experiment . The results of the replication were not significantly different from the results observed for anony - mous GDSS - mediated groups in stage one . For reasons of brevity , the paper reports the results of anonymous GDSS interaction from stage one only . Table 3 Mean ratings of acceptable audit risk - - Stage Two Mean ( n = 10 ) Std . deviation Indit : idual t : s . " non - anonymous " GDSS groups Individual ratings 5 . 96 1 . 08 Group ratings 5 . 80 1 . 55 and standard deviations of the individual and group AAR ratings are shown in Table 3 . As Table 3 reveals , the mean individual and group ratings were fairly close to one another , with a slight cautious shift observed . A paired - samples t - test was performed to test the significance of the shift , the results of which are shown in Table 4 . As Table 4 reveals , the difference between the individual and group means for the non - anonymous GDSS - mediated groups was not significant . Thus , no significant choice shift was observed for non - anonymous GDSS - mediated groups . This result should be interpreted with caution since failure to reject the null hypothesis is not conclusive evidence in sup - port of the alternative . However , in light of the findings from stage one of the experiment , it appears likely that communication mode ( GDSS - mediated vs . face - to - face ) , but not interaction mode ( anonymous vs . non - anonymous ) , affects the extent of choice shift in the group decision task examined in this study . Specifically , the use of GDSS technology may serve to mitigate the choice - shift phenomenon commonly observed in the outcome of group decision processes . These results hold regardless of whether communication in GDSS - mediated meetings is anonymous or non - anonymous . Table 4 Comparison of individual versus group means for acceptable audit risk : Results of paired - samples t - tests - - Stage Two Pair - wise Paired mean t - value df 2 - tail comparison difference prob . ( n = 10 ) Individual vs . 0 . 162 0 . 53 9 0 . 606 non - anonymous ( 0 . 958 ) GDSS groups Standard deviation of paired differences shown in parenthe - ses . 192 V . Karan et al . / Decision Support Systems 16 ( 1996 ) 181 - 194 7 . 1 . Discussion With respect to the choice - shift phenomenon , results indicate that the use of GDSS technology may mitigate the tendencies of groups to " shift " from their individual beliefs or decisions . A sig - nificant " cautious choice shift " was observed in face - to - face groups , whereas no choice shift was observed in either the anonymous or the non - anonymous GDSS - mediated groups . These re - suits suggest that the mitigating effects of GDSS technology on the choice - shift phenomenon stem from the presence of the automated decision aids , and not from the anonymity of individual group members ' comments . 8 . Summary and conclusion This study extends previous research on group decision making in auditing by investigating the effects of GDSS on the outcome of audit teams ' decision processes . The extent of choice shift , time to reach consensus , satisfaction with the group process , and confidence in the group deci - sion were compared between GDSS - mediated groups and face - to - face groups . Empirical re - search on the impact of GDSS on decision - mak - ing processes in domains outside of accounting and auditing has been ongoing for the past decade . However , research on the usefulness and effects of GDSS in auditing is non - existent . This study makes a start in filling this void . Results of the experiment reveal that GDSS - mediated communication resulted in no apprecia - ble " choice shift " in comparison to face - to - face groups which shifted significantly in the direction of caution . The direction of the shift was consis - tent with the cautious shift exhibited under high materiality conditions in both the Barrett and O ' Malley and Reckers and Shultz studies 2 , 14 . The mitigation of the choice - shift phenomenon observed in the GDSS - mediated communication mode occurred in both the anonymous and non - anonymous conditions . While it is difficult to foresee precisely how the implementation of GDSSs would affect public accounting firms , the results of this research provide initial evidence concerning the degree to which accounting firms might benefit from GDSSs . Specifically , the find - ings indicate that GDSS technology has the po - tential to mitigate the " choice - shift " phe - nomenon which has been documented extensively in the psychology literature and to some extent in the auditing literature . Results also reveal that GDSS - mediated com - munication is more efficient than face - to - face communication in terms of the time required to reach consensus . There was no significant differ - ence in participants ' levels of perceived satisfac - tion with the group process in comparing the face - to - face communication mode and the GDSS - mediated communication mode . Since GDSS was found to be more efficient than tradi - tional face - to - face meetings , the use of GDSS could improve audit teams ' productivity by de - creasing the number and length of necessary meetings . The greater efficiencies afforded by GDSS technology , and the lack of choice shift , were observed with no significant decline ( or in - crease ) in satisfaction with the group process . While this study focused on the task of deter - mining the level of acceptable audit risk , future research could explore the impact of GDSS tech - nology in other group decision making contexts such as determination of the acceptability of a prospective audit client and going concern evalu - ation . Future research could also explore the effects of geographically dispersed team members and group meetings that are " attended " at differ - ent times by the participants , since GDSS tech - nology is capable of " saving " a partially com - pleted group session which one or more team members can " call up " at a later time for review - ing team members ' comments and also to add to their prior input . References 1 R . H . Ashton , D . N . Kleinmuntz , J . B . Sullivan and L . A . Tomassini , Audit Decision Making , in A . R . Abdel - khalik and I . Solomon , Eds . , Research Opportunities in Audit - ing ( American Accounting Association , 1988 ) . 2 M . J . Barrett and J . O ' Mailey , Choice Shifts and Auditor Opinions , in Symposium on Auditing Research , pp . 187 - V . Karan et al . / Decision Support Systems 16 ( 1996 ) 181 - 194 193 206 ( University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign : Depart - ment of Accountancy , 1975 ) . 3 Chang , A . D . Bailey , Jr . and A . B . Whinston , Multi - Audi - tor Decision Making on Internal Control System Reliabil - ity , Auditing : A Journal of Practice and Theory ( Fall , 1993 ) . 4 Chang , A . D . Bailey , Jr . and A . B . Whinston , Multi - Audi - tor Cooperation : A Model of Distributed Reasoning , IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 40 , No . 4 ( Nov . 1993 ) . 5 Chang , A . D . Bailey , Jr . , J . F . Mutchler and A . B . Whin - ston , Modeling the Going - Concern Judgment Using Ar - gumentation Theory , Journal of Organizational Comput - ing 3 , No . 1 ( 1993 ) . 6 T . Connolly , L . M . Jessup and J . S . Valacich , Effects of Anonymity and Evaluative Tone on Idea Generation in Computer - Mediated Groups , Management Science 36 , No . 6 ( Jun . 1990 ) . 7 A . R . Dennis , J . F . George , L . M . Jessup , J . F . Nunamaker , Jr . and D . R . Vogel , Information Technology to Support Electronic Meetings , MIS Quarterly 12 , No . 4 ( Dec . 1988 ) . 8 R . B . Gallupe , G . DeSanctis and G . W . Dickson , Com - puter - Based Support for Group Problem - Finding : An Experimental Investigation , MIS Quarterly 12 , No . 2 ( Jun . 1988 ) . 9 J . F . George , G . K . Easton , J . F . Nunamaker , Jr . and G . B . Northcraft , A Study of Collaborative Group Work With and Without Computer - Based Support , Information Sys - tems Research 1 , No . 4 ( Dec . 1990 ) . 10 L . M . Jessup , T . Connolly and D . A . Tansik , Toward a Theory of Automated Group Work : The Deindividuating Effects of Anonymity , Small Group Research 21 , No . 3 ( Mar . 1990 ) . 11 S . Kiesler , J . Siegel and T . W . McGuire , Social Psycholog - ical Aspects of Computer - Mediated Communication , American Psychologist 39 , No . 10 ( Oct . 1984 ) . 12 D . G . Myers and H . Lamm , The Group Polarization Phe - nomenon , Psychological Bulletin 83 , ( 1976 ) . 13 J . F . Nunamaker , Jr . , L . Applegate and B . Konsynski , Facilitating Group Creativity : Experience with a Group Decision Support System , Journal of Management Infor - mation Systems 3 , No . 4 ( Dec . 1987 ) . 14 P . M . J . Reckers and J . J . Schultz , Jr . , Individual Versus Group Assisted Audit Evaluation . Auditing : A Journal of Practice and Theory 2 , No . 1 , ( Fall 1982 ) . 15 R . W . Rutledge and A . M . Harrell , Group Shifts : An Examination of the Explanatory Power of Responsibility and Framing of Accounting Information , Working Paper ( Florida International University , 1991 ) . 16 J . J . Schultz , Jr . and P . M . J . Reckers , The Impact of Group Processing on Selected Audit Disclosure Deci - sion , Journal of Accounting Research 19 , No . 2 , ( Spring 1981 ) . 17 J . Siegel , V . Dubrovsky , S . Kiesler and T . W . McGuire , Group Processes in Computer - Mediated Communica - tion , Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Pro - cesses 37 ( 1986 ) . 18 R . Steeb and S . C . Johnston , A Computer - Based Interac - tive System for Group Decision Making , IEEE Transac - tions on Systems , Man and Cybernetics 8 ( 1981 ) . 19 1 . Solomon , Multi - Auditor Judgment / Decision Making Research , Journal of Accounting Literature 6 ( 1987 ) . 20 A . S . Vinze , Empirical Verification of Effectiveness for a Knowledge - Based System , International Journal of Man - Machine Studies 37 ( 1992 ) . 21 R . Watson , G . DeSanctis and M . S . Poole , Using a GDSS to Facilitate Group Consensus : Some Intended and Un - intended Consequences , MIS Quarterly 12 , No . 3 ( Sept . 1988 ) . 22 I . Zigurs , M . S . Poole and G . DeSanctis , A Study of Influence in Computer - Mediated Group Decision Mak - ing , MIS Quarterly 12 , No . 4 ( Dec . 1988 ) . V ~ ay Karan received his undergradu - ate degree in engineering from Osma - nia University ( India ) and his MPA and Ph . D . degrees from The Univer - sity of Texas at Austin . Dr . Karan ' s teaching and research interests are in the area of judgment and decision making in Accounting Information ~ Systems , Financial and Managerial Accounting , and Auditing . His re - search papers have been published in Auditing : A Journal of Practice and Theory , Journal of Information Systems , International Journal of Intelligent Systems in Accounting , Finance , and Manage - ment , and Financial Management . Dr . Karan has taught at New York University , Texas A & M University , and University of Maryland at College Park . David Kerr is an Associate Professor in the Department of Accounting at Texas A & M University . He received his Ph . D . from Michigan State Uni - versity in 1989 . Dr . Kerr ' s research interests include behavioral decision making in accounting and auditing , ~ group judgment / decision making , and t audit planning . His research has been published in the Journal of Informa - tion Systems , Behacioral Research in Accounting , Journal of Business Ethics , and Internal Auditing . Dr . Kerr is a member of the American Accounting Association and the Canadian Academic Ac - counting Association . 194 V . Karan et al . / Decision Support Systems 16 ( 1996 ) 181 - 194 . . . . Uday Murthy is an Associate Profes - sor in the Department of Accounting at Texas A & M University . He re - ceived his Ph . D . degree from Indiana University . His research interests are in computer auditing , expert systems , data modeling , and group decision ~ / support systems . His research has been published in a number of jour - nals including the Journal of Informa - tion Systems , Adt , ances in Accounting Information Systems , Expert Systems with Applications : An International Journal , and Interna - tional Journal of Intelligent Systems in Accot ~ nting , Finance , and Management . & jay Vinze received his Ph . D . degree from the University of Arizona , Tuc - son in 1988 . He has been with the Department of Business Analysis and Research at Texas A & M University since 1988 . He is presently an Associ - ate Professor of Management Infor - mation Systems ( MIS ) . His research interests include business applications artificial intelligence and computer supported collaborative work . His publications have appeared in leading MIS journals like the Information Systems Research , IEEE - Transactions on Systems , Man and Cybernetics , Journal of Management Information Systems , Information and Manage - ment , International Journal of Man - Machine Studies . Prior to joining the academic environment , Dr . Vinze was a manage - ment ( MIS ) consultant in the Philippines . Dr . Vinze is a member of the Association of Computing Machinery , The Institute of Management Sciences , American Association of Artificial Intelligence and the IEEE Computer Society .