Review : How dynamic prestress governs the shape of living systems , from the subcellular to tissue scale Alexander Erlich 1 , 2 , 3 , Jocelyn ´Etienne 3 , * , Jonathan Fouchard 4 , * , and Tom Wyatt 5 1 Institut de Recherche sur les Ph´enom ` enes Hors ´Equilibre ( IRPH´E ) , Aix - Marseille Universit´e ( ORCID Erlich : https : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 2294 - 1894 ) 2 Institut de Biologie du D´eveloppement de Marseille ( IBDM ) , Aix - Marseille Universit´e 3 Univ . Grenoble Alpes , CNRS , LIPHY , 38000 Grenoble , France ( ORCID ´Etienne : https : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 1866 - 5604 ) 4 Laboratoire de Biologie du D´eveloppement , Institut de Biologie Paris Seine ( IBPS ) , Sorbonne Universit´e , CNRS ( UMR 7622 ) , INSERM ( URL 1156 ) , 7 quai Saint Bernard , 75005 Paris , France ( ORCID Fouchard : https : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 9976 - 462X ) 5 Wellcome Trust - Medical Research Council Cambridge Stem Cell Institute , University of Cambridge , Cambridge , UK ( ORCID Wyatt : https : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 2589 - 2370 ) * Corresponding authors : jocelyn . etienne @ univ - grenoble - alpes . fr , jonathan . fouchard @ sorbonne - universite . fr September 8 , 2022 Abstract Cells and tissues change shape both to carry out their function and during pathology . In most cases , these deformations are driven from within the systems themselves . This is permitted by a range of molecular actors , such as active crosslinkers and ion pumps , whose activity is biologically controlled in space and time . The resulting stresses are propagated within complex and dynamical architectures like networks or cell aggregates . From a me - chanical point of view , these eﬀects can be seen as the generation of prestress or prestrain , resulting from either a contractile or growth activity . In this review , we present this con - cept of prestress and the theoretical tools available to conceptualise the statics and dynamics of living systems . We then describe a range of phenomena where prestress controls shape changes in biopolymer networks ( especially the actomyosin cytoskeleton and ﬁbrous tissues ) and cellularised tissues . Despite the diversity of scale and organisation , we demonstrate that these phenomena stem from a limited number of spatial distributions of prestress , which can be categorised as heterogeneous , anisotropic or diﬀerential . We suggest that in addition to growth and contraction , a third type of prestress – topological prestress – can result from active processes altering the microstructure of tissue . 1 Introduction A peculiarity of living systems is their ability to constantly rearrange their structure in order to perform biological function . Cells , for example , transition from static to migrating while changing shape , or split in the process of cell division . At the tissue scale , speciﬁc shapes are acquired during development and maintained at adult age to accomplish organ function , but can be lost as in the case of cancer . These rearrangements are in most cases the result of active 1 a r X i v : 2 2 09 . 01440v2 [ phy s i c s . b i o - ph ] 7 S e p 2022 processes taking place within the cells or tissues themselves , rather than being imposed from the exterior through boundary conditions . Across the scales and speciﬁcities of systems , one ﬁnds a number of ways for these internal stresses to be generated , ranging from protein synthesis or pumping of ions that give rise to osmotic pressure gradients to ATP hydrolysis - fuelled changes of conformation of crosslinkers within biopolymer networks . One common point of these mechanisms is that they are controlled by biological pathways , and that they can be triggered or modulated dynamically , enabling systems to change shape or state . In this review , we aim to show how these very diﬀerent force - generation mechanisms can be usefully understood with a common concept of prestress ( and prestrain ) . While this concept has been useful in describing stable tissue shape in adult tissues [ Taber , 1995 ] , here we focus on how dynamic changes in prestress can alter shape . Often , prestress generation interplays with other less speciﬁc properties of living systems like their complex rheological properties , thin - sheet geometry and foam or network architecture . In some cases , it appears challenging to distinguish between phenomena stemming from dynamic prestress and those stemming from these complex material properties . An example developed below is the cell neighbour exchange ( also called T1 transition ) occurring in epithelia , which can have either active or passive origins . In section 2 of the review , we will present the concept of prestress and the theoretical frame - works available to describe prestress in statics and dynamics . Following on , we will brieﬂy present in section 3 the strategies available to experimentalists to identify and measure prestress in living systems . Then , in the ﬁnal two sections , we will describe strategies of prestress generation in biological systems and the macroscopic eﬀects obtained . On our way , we will show that common categories of spatial regulation of prestress ( heterogeneous , anisotropic or diﬀerential ) are used in systems with diﬀerent compositions and scales . Two key concepts will be used throughout this review : growth and contraction . By growth , we mean any active process that leads to increase the equilibrium size of some of the components of a system . This can be due to the addition of material within the system by some out - of - equilibrium process , e . g . the polymerisation of ﬁlaments fed by monomers diﬀusing into it . This can also be more simply due to osmotically - driven attraction of more water into the system . By contraction , we mean any active process that leads to the reduction of the equilibrium size of some of the components of a system . In section 4 of the review , we will focus on crosslinked networks of semiﬂexible biopolymers , either within cells—they are in this case part of the cytoskeleton —or external to them—then part of the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) . These networks can be remodelled and crosslinked by other proteins which have out - of - equilibrium dynamics , fuelled by active processes . We will show how contraction and growth of these networks govern shapes and deformations of subcellular compartments , cells and ﬁbrous tissue . Within the cytoskeleton , one network of particular interest is the one formed by actin and the crosslinker ( and molecular motor ) myosin . Finally , in section 5 , we will describe how prestress aﬀects the shape of cellularised tis - sue . Here , the material is formed by cells of regulated volume and mechanically connected through adhesions , molecular bonds joining their plasma membranes . The adhesions are formed of transmembrane complexes , allowing tension to be transmitted between the cytoskeletons of neighbouring cells . In this section , the elements experiencing growth and contraction interact with these other elements , making the material heterogeneous and bringing additional eﬀects . Prestress can also be built through topological changes of the cell contours . We refer to this type of prestress as topological prestress . In particular , we suggest that , from a mechanical point of view , morphogenesis through cell proliferation is conveniently described if one distin - guishes within the eﬀect of cell division between growth prestress ( increase of volume of cells ) and topological prestress ( due to the apprearance of new cell – cell junctions following cytokinesis 2 events ) . 2 Concept of prestress in living systems In engineering , generally , “pre” in “prestress” refers to the fact that it is due to an operation done before establishing the system , for instance imposing boundary conditions such as tension on a structure such as wires , called tendons , before putting them in parallel with a compression - bearing material , e . g . by casting concrete . This results in a system whose reference conﬁguration is not compatible with the reference conﬁguration of each of its components , which are thus prestressed . In systems of linear elastic components , one can equivalently consider that they are prestrained , the prestress and prestrain being simply related by the elastic modulus . The source of prestress is not necessarily an externally imposed force applied to a component of the system , but can also be due to an internal change in the system . Prestress can thus arise in a system which is already connected and is originally stress - free , if one of the components , which we will call the active component , changes its equilibrium conﬁguration . As an example , a porous material ( passive component ) whose pores are occupied by a liquid will become prestressed if that liquid ( active component ) changes volume due to freezing or crystallisation . In that case , “pre” is not understood anymore as referring to a process in time , but rather as making reference to the fact that prestrain corresponds to the deformation between the initial conﬁguration and a virtual conﬁguration where the active component has assumed its new equilibrium shape . However , this stress - free conﬁguration is virtual because the shapes of the active and passive components are not compatible anymore . The actual conﬁguration in the absence of external load results from the mechanical balance between the active and the passive components , neither of which will be stress - free : the observed stress ﬁeld in the absence of external loads is called residual stress [ Fung , 2013 , Taber , 1995 , Goriely , 2017 ] . While residual stress has this narrow deﬁnition , the term prestress is somewhat broader . In the engineering community , prestress is typically due to external loads [ Gower et al . , 2017 ] . The prestressed conﬁguration is then used as a reference conﬁguration , from which another elastic deformation ( for instance the wave propagation in the prestressed body ) is studied [ Parnell , 2012 ] . In biophysical models , prestress can also be of active origin , for instance due to a morphogenetic event [ Ben Amar et al . , 2018 ] . We take advantage from this relative freedom to deﬁne prestress so that it corresponds to the notion of active stress which was deﬁned in the context of actomyosin systems [ J¨ulicher et al . , 2007 ] . Indeed , if one chooses to describe the prestressed material with respect to its original shape , that is , the conﬁguration it would have in the absence of prestress , as a reference conﬁguration , then one ﬁnds that there is now a stress ﬁeld associated to it , which for this choice is a prestress ﬁeld [ Salen¸con , 1994 ] . Since this prestress does not need to preexist the system , it can be adjusted at any time by nonmechanical processes , such as biological pathways , so that it can drive dynamics . We now illustrate the concept using elementary mechanical elements . In order to describe the behaviour of individual cells within tissue , a leading approach is to use cell - based discrete models , which can capture cell – cell interactions and dynamical changes in topology . On the other hand , continuum descriptions oﬀer the beneﬁt of giving access to quantities such as the Young’s modulus or Poisson’s ratio , and oﬀer a vast array of tools for simpliﬁcation through mathematical analysis [ Jones and Chapman , 2012 ] . For the sake of simplicity of presentation , we present ideas in terms of continuum models when possible , and discrete models when necessary . 3 Figure 1 : Prestrain and prestress in simple 1D systems . ( a ) Illustration of deformation gradient decomposition for contractile prestrain . An active element ( red ) and a passive one ( gray ) are put in parallel in between force - bearing walls ( black vertical lines ) . The active element is composed of a spring whose length is actively decreased ( or increased ) from L 0 to L , with an anelastic stretch , or prestrain , λ a ( here λ a < 1 ) imposed via a crank . In the virtual conﬁguration , both elements remain stress - free but the system’s topology ( dashed line connections ) is not respected . In the current conﬁguration , even at equilibrium ( no net force on the walls ) , the structure is under stress . Operating the crank the other way , λ a > 1 , gives the eﬀect of growth prestrain . ( b ) A system equivalent to the one in a can be obtained by replacing the active crank and spring element by a stress generator element ( pulleys and weight system ) whose magnitude is the prestress . ( c ) For topological prestress , no active spring is necessary ; the activity consists of disconnecting and reconnecting elements into a new network . Initially , springs k 1 and k 2 are in parallel , and the pair is connected in series with k 3 . The topological change reconnects the springs , such that k 1 and k 3 are in series , this pair connected in parallel with k 2 . Due to the change of topology ( see directed graph insets ) the initially stress - free structure becomes prestressed ; spring k 2 is in tension , springs k 1 and k 3 are in compression . ( d ) A viscous passive element ( dashpot ) in parallel with a stress generator gives a permanent regime of contraction at a constant strain rate . 4 2 . 1 Static description We illustrate the concept of a virtual conﬁguration in Fig . 1 a based on a 1D example , meaning that we only consider deformations in the horizontal direction . An active element ( red ) is connected in parallel to a passive element ( gray ) . The vertical black lines represent force - bearing walls . In the initial conﬁguration , both elements have length L 0 , and the system is unstressed . A contraction reduces the length of the active element to L , acting eﬀectively like a spring that reduces its rest length through an active process . We refer to this active stretch as λ a = L / L 0 . In this example , λ a < 1 , since an active contraction occurs . In the virtual conﬁguration , the system is still stress - free , but incompatible , since the two elements now have diﬀerent rest lengths making their existing connection impossible [ Eckart , 1948 ] . Compatibility is restored through building stress : in the current conﬁguration , both elements have length l , which is the new equilibrium length . The elastic stretch of the active element is λ e = l / L . In this new equilibrium conﬁguration , the active element is in tension ( λ e > 1 ) , and the passive spring is in compression ( its elastic stretch is l / L 0 < 1 ) . In this framework , growth can be treated the same way , with one crucial diﬀerence : the active element increases , rather than decreases , its rest length , so that the active stretch is λ a > 1 . It is useful to understand the relationship between prestrain and prestress , since it allows to make a link with the work on active stress in the context of contractile networks [ J¨ulicher et al . , 2007 ] . To understand this relationship , let us consider one active element in isolation , with initial length L 0 , virtual length L , and current length l . The Hookean stress – strain relationship of this element is σ = E (cid:18) l L 0 λ − 1 a − 1 (cid:19) , ( 1 ) where E is Young’s modulus . If we now deform the spring to the formerly stress - free state ( l = L 0 ) , we will be met with resisting stress σ equal to the prestress σ = σ a = E ( λ − 1 a − 1 ) . In this simple case , there is thus an explicit relation that can be written between the prestress ﬁeld σ a and the active stretch that characterises prestrain λ a = L / L 0 . How can this be made sense of in the context of the stress – strain relationship of the spring , Eq . ( 1 ) ? It is possible to split ( 1 ) as follows : σ = ˜ E (cid:18) l L 0 − 1 (cid:19) + σ a . ( 2 ) This shows a Hookean behaviour near the initial , formerly stress - free state , with the modiﬁed Young’s modulus ˜ E = E + σ a . At the formerly stress - free conﬁguration l = L 0 , we recover the prestress σ = σ a . Up to the change of elastic modulus , we thus see the equivalence between a system in which the active element is a growing ( σ a < 0 ) or contracting ( σ a > 0 ) elastic material and a system in which the active element is a ”stress generator” of magnitude σ a , see Fig . 1 b . In order to describe more generally mechanical systems with prestress , and to allow the prestrain to be either due to growth or active contraction , we use a framework of anelasticity [ Rodriguez et al . , 1994 , Lubarda , 2004 , Epstein , 2012 ] . At its core is the decomposition of the de - formation gradient as F = F e F a , where F is decomposed into an anelastic part F a and an elastic part F e , see Fig . 1 . The elastic deformation is taken to be hyperelastic and isotropic , for example neo - Hookean , captured by a strain - energy density W = W ( F e ) . The anelastic deformation is associated with an irreversible process that in some way modiﬁes the microstructure : F a can mean active contraction , like energy - consuming contraction due to myosin , in which mass is con - served or reduced ( i . e . transferred from the solid phase to an extracellular reservoir ) , det F a ≤ 1 . Alternatively , it could mean growth , in which mass is added into the solid phase from an extra - cellular reservoir , det F a ≥ 1 . Cauchy stress is then deﬁned as σ = ( det F e ) − 1 ( ∂W / ∂ F e ) F T e and mechanical equilibrium is div σ = 0 in the absence of body forces and respecting that anelasticity 5 scaled residual stress heterogeneousprestrain anisotropicprestrain di ﬀ erential prestrain i n i t i a l c o n ﬁ g u r a t i o n v i r t u a l c o n ﬁ g u r a t i o n c u rr e n t c o n ﬁ g u r a t i o n r e s i du a l s t r e ss p r e s t r a i n p r e s t r a i n r e s i du a l s t r e ss r e s i du a l s t r e ss p r e s t r a i n ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) Figure 2 : Creating residual stress from diﬀerent patterns of prestrain in the anelastic frame - work for a disk . The disk is incompressible ( det F e = 1 ) and of neo - Hookean material . The boundary conditions are no traction , σ e R = 0 . We denote the components of the prestrain in polar coordinates F a = diag ( γ R , γ θ ) . Here we illustrate contraction , γ < 1 , however equivalent situations are found for growth , γ > 1 . ( a ) We consider spatially heterogeneous prestrain which is isotropic ( γ : = γ R = γ θ ) . The initial conﬁguration shows the undeformed , uncontracted , stress - free disk . In the virtual conﬁguration , most contraction occurs towards the periphery , leading to an incompatible body . The prestrain is explicitly shown in the inset , where γ = 1 ( no prestrain ) at the center and γ = 0 . 5 ( contraction ) at the boundary of the disk . The result in the current conﬁguration is a residually stressed body , with tensile hoop stress ( σ θ > 0 ) at the disk boundary , and compressive stress ( σ R < 0 , σ θ < 0 ) at the disk center . Due to the tensile hoop stress at the boundary , the disk would open if incised in the periphery . ( b ) We consider the case of anisotropic ( γ R (cid:54) = γ θ ) but spatially homogeneous ( d γ R / d R = d γ θ / d R = 0 ) prestrain . This corresponds to pizza slice shaped pieces being cut out in the virtual conﬁguration . The resulting stress ﬁeld is qualitatively the same as in the heterogeneous case . ( c ) We consider the case in which the outer part of the disk has a diﬀerent prestrain than the inner part , prestrain being isotropic . The scenario is a discrete version of the heterogeneous case . The hoop stress is discontinuous . 6 ( active contraction or growth ) occurs at time scales much larger than elastodynamics . In this view , prestress will exist in the system due to the incompatibility [ Eckart , 1948 , Skalak et al . , 1997 , Aharoni et al . , 2016 , Truskinovsky and Zurlo , 2019 , Lee et al . , 2021 ] of the anelastic strain F a : for instance , if the system is composed of multiple components with diﬀerent incompatible reference conﬁgurations ( F a in layer 1 is diﬀerent from F a in layer 2 ) , or anisotropy ( F a in , e . g . , radial direction does not match F a in hoop direction ) , or some heterogeneity in the anelastic strain ( say , F a ( x ) (cid:54) = F a ( x + ∆ x ) ) , which could capture a spatial gradient in growth or active contraction . Fig . 2 illustrates how residual stress from diﬀerent patterns of prestress can be created from the anelastic point of view . A distinctly diﬀerent possibility for building prestress is through changes in the microstruc - ture due to rearrangements in the network . An example are T1 transitions , which are neighbour exchanges between cells in epithelial tissues , see section 5 . 3 . We oﬀer to name this type of prestress topological prestress . We deﬁne it as prestress that is added to or removed from an interconnected network of mechanical elements by breaking and reconnecting network elements rather than prestressing individual elements . For instance , a passive T1 transition relaxes the stress in the system purely by exchanging which cell is connected to which , and not through modifying the reference conﬁguration of any of the cells . The concept of a microstructural rearrangement leading to topological prestress is illustrated in Fig . 1 c . A network of three springs is presented in the initial conﬁguration , but breaking and reconnecting bonds changes the network topology in the virtual conﬁguration ( topology refers to the connectivity of a network ) . Such changes of connectivity , which are meant to describe net - works of discrete elements such as cell adhesions or polymer crosslinks , are challenging to describe with a continuum ﬁeld like F a that is meant to describe the larger tissue scale . For example , discrete deformations like slip lines in crystal plasticity have been successfully described with the continuum framework F = F e F a where F a describes the macroscopic plastic deformation , F e the elastic deformation , and F the total deformation [ Reina and Conti , 2014 , Reina et al . , 2016 ] . But for biological tissue , which is generally amorphic and has no crystalline structure , the deﬁnition of macroscopic topological prestrain has not fully been achieved yet , although it is an active area of research [ Chenchiah and Shipman , 2014 , Murisic et al . , 2015 , Erlich et al . , 2020 , Kupferman et al . , 2020 ] . 2 . 2 Dynamic description Both the active and passive elements of the system can exhibit a time - dependent behaviour . The growth rate and actomyosin contractility both depend on some nonmechanical processes , such as protein synthesis , nutrient intake , or ATP hydrolysis . All these are tightly regulated by biochemical pathways in physiological conditions , and in a large part the dynamics of the mechanical systems can be enslaved to biochemical clocks [ Michaux et al . , 2018 , Nishikawa et al . , 2017 , Heer et al . , 2017 , Blanchard et al . , 2018 ] . Active elements are also sensitive to the mechanical context . For instance , individual molecular motors are known to stall beyond some maximal load [ Liepelt and Lipowsky , 2009 ] . In the context of growth , the timescale is rather large , since it is the one of the cycle of cell division which takes place over hours or days . Therefore , the passive elements are considered to be always at equilibrium . On the other hand , regimes of cell motility often rely on the dynamics of the passive com - ponent with a constant prestress . This may be required to achieve movements which are faster than the rates at which prestress can be created . This is the case e . g . for carnivorous plants [ Forterre et al . , 2005 ] where an elastic instability is being used to suddenly release elastic energy that had been stored by the slow build - up of prestress . While the full complexity of interacting timescales between the active prestress one and the 7 passive viscoelastic ones is encountered in some cases , we will focus here on models that describe cases where they are suﬃciently well separated . In the case of growth , the system is often considered to be purely elastic and the models thus focus on the timescale of the evolution of prestrain . In the case of contractile networks , viscous dissipation in the microstructure is often important for the observed dynamics and sets their timescale , whereas the active stress is often assumed to be slowly varying . 2 . 2 . 1 Dynamics governed by the active component : the example of growth laws The timescale of elastodynamics in soft tissue ( i . e . wave propagation in soft elastic media ) is on the order of milliseconds , and a typical viscous time scale due to internal friction is on the order of seconds to minutes . The timescale of growth , on the other hand , varies from minutes ( doubling time of Escherichia coli ) to years ( slow growing tumours ) . Growth is thus a case where the separation of timescales is generally suﬃcient to consider that the passive components are instantaneously reaching their equilibrium conﬁguration [ Goriely , 2017 ] . The dynamics is then governed by a law that prescribes the evolution of the active compo - nent’s prestrain as a function of the current conﬁguration . Thermodynamic arguments based on the entropy inequality or a dissipation principle motivate appropriate forms of such a law [ Epstein and Maugin , 2000 , Lubarda and Hoger , 2002 , DiCarlo and Quiligotti , 2002 , Ambrosi and Guillou , 2007 , Ganghoﬀer , 2010 ] . By following a standard set of arguments and derivations , one arrives at a variant of the growth law ˙ F a F − 1 a = K ( σ ∗ E − σ E ) , ( 3 ) where σ E = (cid:0) W 1 − det ( F e ) F T e σ F − T e (cid:1) / ρ r is the Eshelby stress , W is the strain - energy density , and ρ r the density in the virtual conﬁguration . The homeostatic Eshelby stress is σ ∗ E and K is a positive - deﬁnite coeﬃcient matrix . The principle of homeostasis states that organisms have the ability to self - regulate some of their properties so as to optimise function in a physiological state , such as the ability of mammals to maintain a constant body temperature . In the context of mechanics , homeostasis can be understood as a living tissue’s ability to grow and remodel to accommodate a preferred ( homeostatic ) stress , i . e . to reshape itself to reduce the diﬀerence between its actual stress and the a priori known or genetically encoded homeostatic stress [ Di - Carlo and Quiligotti , 2002 , Erlich et al . , 2019 ] . Growth laws of the type ( 3 ) which employ a homeostasis mechanism have been applied to morphogenesis problems , like sea urchin gastrula - tion [ Taber , 2009 ] , the formation of ribs in Ammonite’s seashells [ Erlich et al . , 2018 ] , and the intestinal crypt [ Almet et al . , 2021 ] , as well as other applications such as wound healing [ Bowden et al . , 2015 , Taber , 2009 ] and discrete networks such as plant cell networks [ Erlich et al . , 2020 ] . 2 . 2 . 2 Dynamics governed by the passive component : the example of contractile networks On the other hand , there are systems in which the limiting rate of strain is set by the passive component . Large amplitude motion , such as muscle contraction or intracellular retrograde ﬂow , could not take place in a purely elastic medium . Indeed , in the elastic models of Fig . 1 a , an obvious upper bound for the amplitude of strain is the magnitude of the prestrain . However , if the passive spring is replaced by a viscous dashpot ( Fig . 1 d ) , then a constant rate of strain is achieved . This modelling is consistent for instance with the theory of sliding ﬁlaments for muscles , as delineated by [ Huxley , 1957 ] , where the regime of maximum contraction speed is explained in terms of a balance between active stress and a sliding friction . This compound 8 element is thus governed by an equation of the form : σ − σ a = η ˙ ε . ( 4 ) Here we ﬁnd striking similarity with Eq . ( 3 ) , with the diﬀerence that the strain rate of the whole system appears directly . In both cases , as long as the stress diﬀers from a given homeostatic stress ( σ ∗ ) or active stress ( σ a ) , an internal length , the virtual length L or a length of ‘telescoping’ of ﬁlaments , is being adjusted at a rate set by a parameter which has the dimensions of a viscosity . We will come back to the molecular - scale understanding of the sliding friction in section 4 . 1 . 2 . In eﬀect , this sliding friction can be likened to the ﬂuidisation of any viscoelastic liquid beyond its relaxation time . In transiently reticulated networks , such as the actomyosin network , this relaxation time is related to the residence time of crosslinkers [ Larson , 1999 ] and thus the maximum speed of actomyosin contraction can be related to these crosslinker dynamics [ ´Etienne et al . , 2015 ] , yielding a Maxwell model for the passive component : τ a (cid:79) σ + σ − 2 τ a E ˙ ε = σ a , ( 5 ) where ˙ ε is the rate of strain tensor , E the elastic modulus of the crosslinked actin network , and τ a a characteristic relaxation time . The time derivative (cid:79) σ has to be an objective time derivative of the stress tensor σ , starting from rubber elasticity theory one obtains an upper - convected Maxwell derivative [ Yamamoto , 1956 , ´Etienne et al . , 2015 ] . This can be related to the fact that the network structure is based on linear elements under stretch deformation [ Hinch and Harlen , 2021 ] . Note that corotational derivatives are widely used in the ﬁeld . This constitutive relation is consistent with the general framework of active gels [ J¨ulicher et al . , 2007 ] , which provides a thermodynamic framework relating the active prestress σ a to the chemical potential diﬀerence associated with the myosin activity . At the molecular scale , the corresponding continuous injection of energy drives these system out - of - equilibrium and is at the origin of a spectacular violation of the ﬂuctuation – dissipation relation [ Mizuno et al . , 2007 ] , although eﬀective equilibrium descriptions can be restored at higher scales [ O’Byrne et al . , 2022 ] . Contrary to growing systems , contractile ones generally deform while keeping a constant mass . In order to sustain a deformation rate that will in general not be volume - preserving , the density ρ of the network needs to be actively regulated to a constant value ρ 0 by a reaction term , which in its simplest expression writes , in one dimension : τ n ( ˙ ρ + ρ∂ x v ) = ρ 0 − ρ , ( 6 ) where v is the velocity in x direction . Here τ − 1 n provides another bound for the maximum rate of sustained ﬂow . On the other hand , the reaction term in the mass balance can itself be a source of growth - related prestress . Assuming a density - dependent rheology of the material , such as σ = − E ( ρ − ρ ∗ ) / ρ ∗ in its simplest form , with ρ ∗ an equilibrium density . When density is close to this equilibrium , ρ (cid:39) ρ ∗ , we ﬁnd again Eq . ( 4 ) with η = τ n E and σ a = E ( ρ ∗ − ρ 0 ) / ρ ∗ [ Putelat et al . , 2018 ] . Finally , one situation which is encountered in several living systems is a stationary system size emerging from an enduring permanent internal ﬂow regime . It can be easily seen e . g . that a closed system governed by Eq . ( 6 ) , but with diﬀerent regulation densities ρ a 0 < ρ b 0 in diﬀerent geometrical regions a and b , will establish a ﬂow from the region b to a . The system total size will adjust as the combination of the local growth and shrinkage , and there can be geometries and parameters for which this balances yields a constant total size . This sort of dynamic equilibrium will be exempliﬁed below in actomyosin networks and cell spheroids . 9 3 Measuring prestress and prestrain in living systems Obtaining detailed and reliable expositions of the prestresses which shape living matter has presented a great technical and conceptual challenge . A major diﬃculty is the large number of components which are in fact represented by the simpliﬁed components of Fig . 1 . In every cell and tissue , numerous stress - bearing and - generating elements are mechanically coupled in complex ( and often unknown ) arrangements . Current techniques typically allow us to probe only small subsets of those components at once , so we are liable to overlook the many connected parts which remain invisible . On top of this , of course , the reference conﬁguration of the components of Fig . 1 cannot be deduced from the reference conﬁguration of the ensemble alone , they can only be revealed through perturbations . But living matter has a great propensity to react and adapt to the perturbations we introduce in order to measure , so that there is always a real risk of measuring artefacts . In order to face these challenges , in recent years , a multiplicity of experimental methods have been developed by biologists and physicists to study dynamic prestress . The most commonly used approaches are : • live imaging of molecular actors generating prestress and subsequent strain of the biological material ; • biological perturbation of prestress generators via drugs or molecular loss of function ; • prestress release by cutting and ablation followed by measurement of resulting strains ; • insertion of or embedding into stress - sensing deformable elements , functioning from the tissue scale down to the subcellular scale . These developments have been reviewed in detail elsewhere for both cell [ Polacheck and Chen , 2016 ] and tissue scale measurements [ G´omez - Gonz´alez et al . , 2020 ] and will be described when required in the sections below . 4 Prestress in biopolymer networks 4 . 1 Prestress in the actin cytoskeleton The cytoskeleton is made of three categories of dynamic ﬁlaments ( namely actin , microtubules and intermediate ﬁlaments ) but only actin and microtubules are found to interact with molecular motors , which are major actors in prestress generation . We focus here on the actin cytoskeleton , although the framework deﬁned above can be applied to the microtubule network , for instance to understand the force - balance within the mitotic spindle [ Gay et al . , 2012 ] . The actin cytoskeleton is made of polar semiﬂexible ﬁlaments composed of G - actin monomers , which turnover within ﬁlaments in time - scales ranging from seconds to minutes depending on cell types and actin structures considered [ Amato and Taylor , 1986 , Elkhatib et al . , 2014 , Fritzsche et al . , 2013 , Saha et al . , 2016 , Cl´ement et al . , 2017 ] . Growth rate and geometry of the actin networks are regulated by a variety of actin - binding proteins which can either nucleate , elongate or sever actin ﬁlaments , or cap their ends [ Pollard , 2016 ] . Actin also binds to a speciﬁc type of crosslinker , the myosin molecular motors , which walk along actin ﬁlaments by using ATP hydrolysis ( Fig . 3 b ) . Myosin II ﬁlaments in particular can attach to two actin ﬁlaments thanks to head domains at their two ends . Actin and myosins form together a zoology of network structures which range from the crystalline structure found in muscle sarcomeres to the less ordered actomyosin cortex , a thin actin gel lying underneath the cell 10 Sh o r t - t i m e s c o n ﬁ g u r a t i o n L o n g - t i m e s c o n ﬁ g u r a t i o n I n i t i a l c o n ﬁ g u r a t i o n V i r t u a l c o n ﬁ g u r a t i o n Sh o r t - t i m e s c o n ﬁ g u r a t i o n ( c ) Cell growth ( f ) Oriented cell division prestress I n i t i a l c o n ﬁ g u r a t i o n V i r t u a l c o n ﬁ g u r a t i o n ( g ) Cell neighbour exchange prestress L o n g - t i m e s c o n ﬁ g u r a t i o n ( b ) Myosin powerstroke ( a ) Polymer meshwork growth I n i t i a l c o n ﬁ g u r a t i o n V i r t u a l c o n ﬁ g u r a t i o n Sh o r t - t i m e s c o n ﬁ g u r a t i o n L o n g - t i m e s c o n ﬁ g u r a t i o n ( e ) Di ﬀ erential apicobasal prestress newly ( de ) polymerised part of ﬁ laments myosin actin ﬁ lament crosslinker past con ﬁ guration turnover of actin ﬁ lament and crosslinkers ( molecular scale ) , of cytoskeleton ( cell scale ) turnover of adhesion junction ( adhesions ) cell apical surface ( actin ) cell lateral surface cell basal surface growingcell wedge - shapedcells dividingcells T1 cells ( d ) Anisotropic cell prestress elongatedcells ( f ' ) ( g ' ) ( f ' ' ) ( g ' ' ) Growth prestress Contractile prestress Topological prestress Key Figure 3 : Examples of ( a , b ) subcellular and ( c - g ) tissue scale deformations due to active prestress related ( a - e ) to microscale rest shape change or ( f , g ) to a change of connectivity , which we refer to as topological prestress . ( f ’ , f ” ) and ( g ’ , g ” ) represent how the topological change in the tissue can be obtained by a subcellular active process , involving myosin prestress , however this level of detail can usefully be ignored when modelling tissue - scale deformations using the concept of topological prestress . 11 membrane . Intermediate in terms of organisation are linear bundles of actin enriched in myosin , such as the so - called stress ﬁbres [ Burnette et al . , 2014 ] and junctional cortex in epithelia [ Bertet et al . , 2004 ] . The signalling pathways controlling the formation of these respective organisations is beyond the scope of this review and has been reviewed elsewhere [ Tojkander et al . , 2012 ] . 4 . 1 . 1 Mechanical balance of prestressed actomyosin Contractile prestress . Importantly , myosin generates contractile prestress within actin net - works . The contractile nature of stress ﬁbres was demonstrated by measuring the rate and amplitude of the viscoelastic recoil of individual stress ﬁbres after laser ablation . These two quantities were shown to be reduced when Myosin II activity was inhibited by drug treatment [ Kumar et al . , 2006 ] . Furthermore , dose - dependent treatments of Blebbistatin ( an inhibitor of Myosin II contractile activity ) on single cells isolated in a parallel plates traction force apparatus revealed that cell - scale traction exerted by the actomyosin cortex is proportional to Myosin II ATPase activity , indicating that myosin is the main generator of contractile prestress in the cell cortex [ Mitrossilis et al . , 2009 ] . It can thus be established that the actomyosin meshwork is exerting a contractile active stress , proportional to the chemical potential of myosin [ J¨ulicher et al . , 2007 ] , which can be understood as a prestress . How is it that contraction at the cell scale dominates over expansion despite the disordered nature of these networks ? Various hypotheses have been proposed . The most documented one posits that because actin ﬁlaments buckle under compression , myosin activity will result only in a tensile contribution [ Lenz , 2014 , Belmonte et al . , 2017 , Koenderink and Paluch , 2018 ] . This contractile prestress can be balanced by the mechanical resistance of three types of other mechanical elements : the cell environment , the other cytoskeletal networks and the ﬂuid component of the cytoplasm ( or cytosol ) . The tension – compression balance between tensile actomyosin and the external environment to which cells adhere was revealed thanks to the development of deformable substrates ( elastomers , hydrogels , or micro - posts arrays ) . It was shown that adherent cells seemingly “at rest” apply tensile stresses radially directed towards the cell center [ Harris et al . , 1980 , Pelham and Wang , 1997 , Dembo and Wang , 1999 , Tan et al . , 2003 ] . This stress is transmitted to the substrate at the sites of focal adhesions , mechano - sensitive protein aggregates connecting cells to the ECM [ Tan et al . , 2003 , Burridge and Guilluy , 2016 ] . Larger deformations are observed in the direction parallel to stress ﬁbres [ Mandal et al . , 2014 ] . In line with this , the recoil of the cell substrate away from the site of incision after ablation of stress ﬁbres demonstrated the mechanical connection between those dense actomyosin ﬁbres and the ECM [ Kumar et al . , 2006 ] . Actomyosin tensile stress could also be balanced by compression of other cytoskeletal com - ponents . Among them , the microtubule network was suggested as a major mechanical actor bearing actomyosin tensile prestress , forming a biological illustration of the tensegrity model [ Ingber , 1993 , Ingber et al . , 2014 ] . Depolymerising microtubules using a drug increases traction forces on the substrate , suggesting that the compression borne by microtubules is transferred to the substrate [ Stamenovi´c et al . , 2002 ] . Actomyosin pretension can however also be biochemically aﬀected by microtubule depolymerisation [ Rape et al . , 2011 ] . Finally , the tension developed within the actomyosin cortex can be balanced by the cytosol , an incompressible ﬂuid which permeates the whole cytoplasm of the cell [ Salbreux et al . , 2012 ] . The cytosol is restricted from escaping by the cell plasma membrane to which the actomyosin cortex is adhered via the ERM family of proteins [ Mangeat et al . , 1999 ] . This mechanical balance is spectacularly broken when this cortex or its adhesion with the plasma membrane is locally ruptured : in such occasions , a high - curvature spherical protrusion , called a bleb , forms at the wounded site and inﬂates with cytosol from the cell body [ Charras et al . , 2008 , Tinevez et al . , 12 σ a σ a ( a ) Podosome – substrate ( b ) Cell – substrate v p 500 nm Δ P 10 µm Epithelial tissue – ECM ( c ) 10 µm Δ P σ a 10 µm Figure 4 : Growth and / or contractile prestress governs the shape of subcellular , cellular and tissue - scale structures through mechanical connection between active and passive elements . ( a ) In podosomes , protruding forces applied by the actin core ( growing at a rate v p ) onto the substrate are balanced by a contractile actomyosin network of prestress ( σ a ) , organised as a dome and attached to the substrate at the periphery via adhesion proteins [ Labernadie et al . , 2014 ] . ( b ) In adherent cells , actomyosin prestress ( σ a ) is balanced by cytosol pressure ( ∆P ) and substrate deformation . Cell shape is further reﬁned by anisotropic and heterogeneous actomyosin network contraction . Here , orthoradial stress ﬁbres are connected to radial stress ﬁbres , which are attached to the substrate via adhesion proteins at the cell periphery [ Burnette et al . , 2014 ] . ( c ) In the zebraﬁsh semicircular canal , pressure ( ∆P ) is generated within the ECM via synthesis of hyaluronan , pumping in interstitial ﬂuid . This deforms the overlying epithelium which is further shaped by an anisotropic prestress ( σ a ) generated by actin - and cadherin - rich protrusions [ Munjal et al . , 2021 ] . 2009 ] . Reducing myosin activity , e . g . with the ﬁttingly - named drug Blebbistatin , decreases the volume and rate of expansion of blebs , evidencing that the pressure driving the ﬂow is due to the prestressed actomyosin cortex . The actomyosin cortex and stress ﬁbres constitute a continuous network and both contribute to cell - scale prestress [ Labouesse et al . , 2015 , Vignaud et al . , 2021 ] , although their mechanical properties and regulatory pathways are diﬀerent [ Labouesse et al . , 2015 ] . The spatial arrange - ment of these prestressed structures in equilibrium with the passive elements described above give rise , for instance , to the typical three - dimensional shape of crawling cells . In these cells , a ﬂat compartment is formed at the cell front and an inversion of curvature of the cell pro - ﬁle is observed at the junction between this compartment and the dorsal cortex ( see Fig . 4 b ) . This speciﬁc shape results from the presence of orthoradial ﬁbres whose pretension opposes cy - tosol pressure . These ﬁbres are then connected to radial stress ﬁbres which are attached to the substrate near the cell edge via focal adhesions . Depolymerising the orthoradial ﬁbres via biochemical treatment restores a constant curvature along the cell proﬁle [ Burnette et al . , 2014 ] . Growth prestress . The actin cytoskeleton can also exert growth prestress . This was shown in vitro where actin networks nucleated by Arp2 / 3 under an AFM cantilever [ Bieling et al . , 2016 ] or at the surface of spaced magnetic cylinders [ Bau¨er et al . , 2017 ] were shown to generate compression within the network . This eﬀect can be conceptualised as in Eq . ( 6 ) ( also Fig . 3 a ) , although the growth is often localised at the boundary . In vitro and in vivo , the mechanical 13 activity of network growth is mechanosensitive as shown by a force – velocity relationship in line with an increase of the network density in response to load [ Bieling et al . , 2016 , Mueller et al . , 2017 ] . The generation of such growth prestress is involved in various biological functions . First , it is at the origin of the motility of the Listeria pathogen [ Theriot et al . , 1992 ] . Here , like on spherical beads immersed in actin in vitro [ Marcy et al . , 2004 ] , growth occurs ﬁrst homogeneously at the surface , which generates residual stress at the periphery of the network . The network ultimately fails via an elastic instability [ John et al . , 2008 ] . This symmetry breaking thus forms an anisotropic gel at the surface of the object resulting in a directional movement . In mammalian cells , a length increase of actin ﬁlaments can increase cortical thickness and more importantly counteract tension generated by myosin in the network [ Chugh et al . , 2017 ] . The best known example of a cell function in which actin network growth is involved is cell protrusivity , where actin can form a variety of structures pushing the cell membrane forward . This topic is a ﬁeld of research in itself and we refer the reader to reviews treating it speciﬁcally [ Blanchoin et al . , 2014 ] . Example : podosomes are shaped by growth and contractile prestress . An example of a prestressed structure combining growth and tensile prestress at the subcellular scale is the podosome , whose mechanics have recently been clariﬁed ( see Fig . 4 a ) . Podosomes are micron - scale structures present in various cell types ( macrophages , cancer cells , endothelial cells ) known to probe cell substrate mechanical properties and to be the site of ECM digestion . They are formed of a dense core of actin ﬁlaments , oriented normally to the substrate , and bound to a corona of radially - oriented ﬁlaments which are tangential to the substrate and adhere to it thanks to focal adhesion proteins [ Luxenburg et al . , 2012 , van den Dries et al . , 2019 ] . Protruding forces generated by actin polymerisation within the podosome’s core were proposed to be a major contributor to the compression of the substrate [ Labernadie et al . , 2014 ] . While this growth - related prestress remains a possible player , recent ﬁndings show that the mechanical balance is dominated by the peripheral actomyosin ﬁlaments , which are exerting tensile forces between the tip of the core and the substrate , and hence press the core into the substrate [ Jasnin et al . , 2021 ] . This system shows that despite their complexity , the mechanical equilibrium of biological structures can be unravelled by combining force measurements , imaging and careful biological perturbation experiments . 4 . 1 . 2 Dynamics As mentioned in section 2 . 2 , the dynamics of the system can come either from an evolution of the prestress or from a passive relaxation of the material . With some notable exceptions [ Fierling et al . , 2022 ] , the evolution of the prestress is generally slower than the relaxation of the material . Indeed , biopolymer networks are in general very dynamic as they are being constantly remod - elled by processes of ( de ) reticulation and ( de ) polymerisation . While the time scales of ECM proteolysis and synthesis remain largely unknown , the rapid turnover time of actin ﬁlaments entails its long times liquid - like behaviour [ Kruse et al . , 2006 ] . Its eﬀective viscosity scales like the product of the network short - times elastic modulus E and its characteristic turnover time τ a , see Eq . ( 5 ) . In the muscle , the only crosslinkers between actin and thick ﬁlaments are the myosin heads themselves . In order to function as sliding ﬁlaments , myosin needs to cycle from attached to detached from the actin in order to perform repeated steps [ Caruel and Truskinovsky , 2018 ] , and the dissipation associated with maximal contraction velocity is due to an internal friction associated with the rate of detachment [ Huxley , 1957 ] . This is also the case in most motile and tissue cells , where the turnover time of myosin was found to be close to that of actin monomers 14 in actin ﬁlaments and of α - actinin ( one of the major actin crosslinkers ) [ Khalilgharibi et al . , 2019 ] . This explains persistent ﬂows such as the retrograde ﬂow observed in migrating and spreading cells , whose maximal rate of strain is thus set by the ratio of the prestress σ a to the viscosity , as in Eq . ( 4 ) [ Kruse et al . , 2006 , ´Etienne et al . , 2015 ] . This is also what sets the rate at which actomyosin - rich subcellular components or tissues straighten after having been buckled by external compressive forces [ Tofangchi et al . , 2016 , Wyatt et al . , 2020 ] . It is also of interest to consider the case in which macroscopic - scale deformation of the network is prevented by the boundary conditions . In those conditions , forces at the boundaries will need to balance the internal tension of the network . The energy input from myosin motors will then be dissipated internally by a microscopic scale creep , corresponding to the elastic energy loss incurred when elements in the network detach while under tension [ Huxley , 1957 , ´Etienne et al . , 2015 ] . In this case , the stress measured at the boundaries will be equal to the prestress . Note that in energetic terms , there is work being continuously performed internally by the myosin in both the cases of zero external load or zero contraction of the system , the corresponding energy being respectively dissipated by internal friction and by internal creep [ ´Etienne et al . , 2015 ] . These observations demonstrate a peculiarity of actomyosin networks where prestress and dissipation possess common molecular origins . At the microscopic scale , active processes increase the intensity of ﬂuctuations in the medium . This has been evidenced both for the out - of - equilibrium ( de ) polymerisation of cytoskeletal ﬁlaments [ Robert et al . , 2010 ] and for myosin activity [ Mizuno et al . , 2007 ] , by comparing the ﬂuctuations to those that would be expected from thermal forces only . The actomyosin cortex and myosin contractility also participate in dynamic equilibration of prestress when substrate stiﬀness is varied . Cell traction assays in parallel plate geometry performed in various contractile cell types revealed that the loading rate during traction in - creased with substrate stiﬀness , with the same trend as the maximum traction force [ Mitrossilis et al . , 2009 , Lam et al . , 2011 ] . While the models most often evoked to explain the variations of cell tractions in response to changes in substrate stiﬀness at long time - scale rely on mechano - transduction and subsequent changes in biochemical activity , it was found that the loading rate adapted to real - time changes of cantilever stiﬀness in a sub - second time - scale [ Mitrossilis et al . , 2010 , Crow et al . , 2012 ] , making purely mechanical explanations appealing [ Fouchard et al . , 2011 ] . Independently of the adaptation of myosin prestress to mechanical cues , a simple model such as Eq . ( 5 ) already predicts a biphasic behaviour with a maximal traction for very large stiﬀness of the exterior and a traction proportional to that stiﬀness when it is below a threshold [ ´Etienne et al . , 2015 ] . When the actomyosin cortex is continuously adhering to a deformable sub - strate , the interplay of this system with the elastic length scale of the substrate yields complex interactions which translate into a biphasic behaviour of the cell crawling velocity as a function of the elastic modulus of the substrate [ Chelly et al . , 2022 ] . The combination of growth at the leading edge of cells and active contraction to the back is the hallmark of cell crawling on a ﬂat substrate [ Mitchison and Cramer , 1996 , Kruse et al . , 2006 , Recho and Truskinovsky , 2013 ] , these two eﬀects giving rise to a dynamic equilibrium setting the size of the system [ ´Etienne et al . , 2015 , Ambrosi and Zanzottera , 2016 ] . 4 . 2 Prestress in ﬁbrous tissues The ECM is a biopolymer network which is made of assemblies of ﬁlamentous proteins ( the most abundant being collagen I ) , proteoglycans and glycosaminoglycans ( GAGs ) . It is the main component of ﬁbrous tissues—also called soft connective tissues—and of the basement membrane on which bidimensional epithelial tissues lie . In most tissues , matrix content is dominated by collagen ( especially type I collagen ) , which has the ability to self - organise into ﬁbrils and ﬁbres 15 through physical bonds [ Giraud - Guille et al . , 2008 ] . These ﬁbres can measure up to dozens of microns and often form a crosslinked gel in vivo . In soft ﬁbrous tissues , the ECM is synthesised by cells of the ﬁbroblast family which are embedded and mechanically connected to the matrix . Here , both cells and ECM lie in an interstitial ﬂuid . Mechanical interactions between these three phases generate a large variety of architectures [ Wershof et al . , 2019 ] and mechanical properties [ Levental et al . , 2007 ] , which vary from organ to organ and according to patho - physiological conditions . The diﬃculty of performing live imaging in these three - dimensional systems , combined with their physical and biological complexity , has so far impaired the understanding of their active mechanical properties . Nevertheless , recent data show how prestress can be generated in ﬁbrous tissues and aﬀects tissue development and pathology . Despite being largely composed of inert protein , the ECM is not mechanically passive . Contractile prestress . First , contraction of the ECM can result from variation in water content within the interstitial ﬂuid . In particular , collagen molecules , known to resist tensile stresses in ﬁbrous tissues , change conformation with decreasing water content of the surrounding medium . This eﬀect induces high contraction of the network , which could be important for the function of the load - bearing tendon [ Masic et al . , 2015 , Bertinetti et al . , 2015 ] . But the ECM is also made contractile through the traction forces that ﬁbroblasts exert within it . Since ﬁbroblasts are polarised mechanically and bound to the ECM through focal adhesions , they apply force dipoles on the collagenous network , acting like active crosslinkers . Isometric contraction of ﬁbroblast assemblies self - organising in collagenous matrix could be measured in between parallel cantilevers and was shown to be dependent on myosin activity [ Delvoye et al . , 1991 , Legant et al . , 2009 ] . In these systems , like in the actomyosin cortex , the nonlinear mechanical properties of collagenous networks resulting from the semiﬂexible nature of the ﬁbres are thought to play a major role in the propagation and ampliﬁcation of contractile stress at the tissue scale [ Ronceray et al . , 2016 , Han et al . , 2018 ] . Because cell traction forces are sensitive to the stiﬀness of the extracellular environment [ Discher et al . , 2005 , Mitrossilis et al . , 2009 ] , stiﬀening of the ECM ﬁbres generated by cell traction forces triggers a positive feedback loop amplifying stiﬀening in ﬁbrotic reactions [ Calvo et al . , 2013 ] or during directed cell migration [ Van Helvert et al . , 2018 ] . This mechanical activity of ﬁbroblasts contracting the ECM inﬂuences tissue function during developement and in adulthood . First , in conﬁrmation of a long - standing hypothesis [ Harris et al . , 1984 ] , recent work shows that the patterning of multicellular aggregates in the chick der - mis initiating feather follicles depends on ﬁbroblast cell contractility , preceding diﬀerentiation of the epidermis [ Shyer et al . , 2017 ] . This indicates that ﬁbroblast contractile activity can indeed act as an organising factor of ﬁbrous tissues during development . Second , during lymph node physiological function , immune cells signal their arrival to the ﬁbroblast reticular cells and tune their contractility in order to relax the tissue . This is thought to help maintaining lymph node integrity while the lymph node expands [ Acton et al . , 2014 ] . Finally , cancer - associated ﬁbrob - lasts , which shape the ﬁbrous tissue of the tumour microenvironment and are more contractile than normal ﬁbroblasts [ Sahai et al . , 2020 ] , could also apply active stresses at the global scale of the tumour . Along this line , it was shown that their collective contraction concomitant with an orthoradial assembly around tumour aggregates compress tumour compartments in vivo , as well as cylindrical micropillars in vitro [ Barbazan et al . , 2021 ] . Growth prestress . The interstitial ﬂuid can generate growth prestress within the ECM . In - deed , the osmotic pressure within the ECM can be tuned in particular by the presence of GAGs and proteoglycans , thanks to their long , negatively charged chains . This property is used during 16 developmental morphogenesis where localised synthesis of hyaluronan ( a common GAG ) con - tributes to the bulging of an epithelial monolayer laying on top of the swelling ECM [ Munjal et al . , 2021 ] ( see Fig . 4 c ) . Such water inﬂux is then balanced by the matrix ﬁbres under tensile load [ Ehret et al . , 2017 ] . Thus , in contrast to the poro - elastic behaviour observed in the cell cortex [ Moeendarbary et al . , 2013 ] , tension relaxation correlates with expelled interstitial ﬂuid [ Ehret et al . , 2017 ] . In the context of cancer , the deregulated ﬁbrous tissue deﬁning the mechan - ical properties of the tumour stroma ( i . e the tumour micro - environment ) is also aﬀected by an increase in hyaluronan synthesis and subsequent elevated interstitial ﬂuid pressure . In pancreatic adeno - carcinoma , this eﬀect generates collapse of blood vessels , which could participate in organ loss of function and impairs delivery of therapeutic agents [ Provenzano et al . , 2012 ] . 5 Prestress in cellularised tissue At the tissue scale , a new structural unit becomes fundamental : the cell . From a purely mechan - ical view point , one crucial aspect is that cells tessellate the space occupied by a tissue into units of regulated volume , which have interactions via adhesion molecules . Being functional units , cells may have individual biochemical activity which can translate into mechanical activity , in turn giving rise to strains that can alter the tissue geometry . This biochemical activity can be patterned at the scale of single cells . For example , in epithelial tissues , which typically form thin sheets of a single cell layer , apical ( cell ‘top’ surface ) , basal ( ‘bottom’ ) and lateral ( where cells are in contact ) surfaces are , to some extent , independent biological and hence mechanical units . Since tight junctions between cells allow tissues to form impermeable layers , cells which ac - tively and directionaly pump ions can in this way impose a pressure diﬀerence between apical and basal surfaces , which can generate and maintain a liquid - ﬁlled cavity called lumen . Lumens , like neighbouring tissues and the ECM network synthesised by cells , in turn impact tissue mechanics by boundary conditions that vary in space and time . Cells also deﬁne a tissue topology via the neighbour relations created by cell – cell adhesion . This topology can evolve over the course of time as cell – cell junctions are assembled and disas - sembled , which can in turn give rise to further tissue - scale strain that can be modelled as the result of a topological prestress , as opposed to contractile or growth prestress . With these diﬀerences in microstructure come processes with new timescales [ Khalilgharibi et al . , 2016 ] . While a single actin ﬁlament may turn - over in seconds , a cell – cell junction requires at least minutes to disassemble and reassemble when a cell changes neighbour [ Tlili et al . , 2020 , Cl´ement et al . , 2017 ] . The creation of a new junction during cell division similarly occurs over minutes . However , the full timescale of the cell cycle , which we may consider to encompass the prestress changes associated with cell growth and cytokinesis , varies greatly between animal cell types , from minutes to years . These cell - level processes may be synchronised throughout a tissue , generating tissue - level deformations at a similar timescale , or they may be asynchronous and so add up gradually over longer timescales . 5 . 1 Contractile prestress 5 . 1 . 1 Supracellular scale prestressed networks in interaction with their environ - ment Although actomyosin is restricted to the cell cytoplasm , it can form supracellular structures by means of adhesion molecules that mechanically connect one subcellular network to that of a neighbouring cell , forming multicellular structures under tension [ Fernandez - Gonzalez et al . , 2009 , Chanet et al . , 2017 ] . The emergence of such a mechanical continuum is illustrated during 17 the reformation of a dissociated epithelial monolayer in vitro by an increase of apparent tissue stiﬀness , which is coincident with the development of cell – cell junctions and dependent on ac - tomyosin activity [ Harris et al . , 2014 ] . The tissue - level prestress generated by the continuous actomyosin network can be measured directly in in vitro epithelial monolayers devoid of ECM and suspended between the arms of a force cantilever [ Wyatt et al . , 2020 ] . Here , a ramp of compressive strain imposed at the tissue boundary results in a linear decrease of tissue stress . As would be the case for a prestressed thin elastic plate , the tissue then buckles when it reaches a compressed state . Strikingly , the dynamics of stress recovery upon a rapidly applied com - pressive strain match those of an isolated actomyosin network , indicating that , in this case , the cellularised structure has little impact on the overall mechanics [ Wyatt et al . , 2020 ] . Such a response , consistent with a continuous model of an epithelium , has also been observed in vivo , in several Drosophila epithelia , where anisotropies of prestress were revealed by the recoil of circular regions of tissue after laser - cutting [ Bonnet et al . , 2012 ] . Just as epithelia can change length and generate prestress through their actomyosin networks , they can also be connected to an active element and play a passive role . Their challenge is then to bear the stress generated in order to maintain epithelial integrity [ Bonfanti et al . , 2022 ] . This is illustrated by the blisters that epithelia form under active ion pumping directed towards their basal side . In analogy with the pressure in the cell cytoplasm , the pressure within the blister is balanced by the tension in the actomyosin network . Under increased stress , cell deformations can reach hundreds of percents . When the actin pool is exhausted so that the ﬁlament network can no longer cover the cell surface area , the keratin network ( an intermediate ﬁlament network connected through an other type of cell – cell junctions called desmosomes ) takes over to resist mechanical stress [ Latorre et al . , 2018 ] . While the passive response of an epithelium leads to a dome shape in the system above , an active participation of the epithelium is required to generate a tubular shape , as is the case in the zebraﬁsh inner ear [ Munjal et al . , 2021 ] . Here , anisotropic multicellular cables which are both contractile and adhesive form in the direction orthoradial to the cylinder axis , and so by breaking the symmetry of prestress allows an anisotropic shape to arise . Notably in this example , the element driving growth is an increase of osmotic pressure in the ECM actively regulated by cell synthesis of hyaluronan . 5 . 1 . 2 Spatially patterned prestress and tissue bending The generation of anisotropic prestress , as in the zebraﬁsh inner ear , is one example of a com - mon strategy of spatially organising prestress in order to control tissue shape . The most studied example is perhaps epithelial tissues where prestress , tangential to the plane of the tissue , varies along its transverse direction and drives bending via diﬀerential prestress . This aspect is particu - larly important during animal development and detailed reviews of this process have been made by others [ Pearl et al . , 2017 , Tozluoˇglu and Mao , 2020 ] . For the sake of this review , note that a variety of ﬁne - tuned prestress regulation have been documented , including increase of prestress in the apical domain [ Martin et al . , 2009 ] , increase or decrease of prestress in the basal domain [ Sidhaye and Norden , 2017 , Krueger et al . , 2018 ] , and increase in lateral prestress [ Brodland et al . , 2010 , Gracia et al . , 2019 ] . This diﬀerential prestress can be revealed by laser ablation in cultured suspended epithelia by measuring the spontaneous curvature generated orthogonal to tissue plane at a newly created free edge . This too allows for measurement of the out - of - plane forces involved by unfurling the curled tissue with a force cantilever [ Fouchard et al . , 2020 ] . Three - dimensional geometries other than linear folds can be produced through the same mechanism , via patterning of diﬀerential prestress throughout the plane of an epithelium . For 18 instance in 2D - cultured gut organoids , three cell types are organised within the tissue plane into concentric circular islands . Traction force microscopy and laser ablations revealed that these regions display diﬀerent mechanical behaviours , with apical – basal myosin polarisation in the central region leading to the doming of crypts ( cup - shaped structures of the digestive tracts ) [ P´erez - Gonz´alez et al . , 2021 ] . In 3D gut organoids , in which cells embedded in ECM form cysts , experiments revealed that crypt morphogenesis is also driven by membrane transporters which cause liquid transfer from the crypt cavity to the tissue [ Yang et al . , 2021 ] . Interestingly , the apical – basal polarisation of the crypt region was found to be large enough in comparison to that outside of the crypt region for the overall morphology to be robust to organoid volume changes [ Yang et al . , 2021 ] . Recent advances in optogenetics ( optical activation of engineered biomolecules ) have also allowed for the experimental control of this patterned diﬀerential prestress . For example , at the stage preceding gastrulation in Drosophila , localised apical activation of RhoA , an activator of myosin contractility , was shown to be suﬃcient to initiate folding in a variety of directions and locations where invagination does not normally occur [ Izquierdo et al . , 2018 ] . In vitro measurements showed that the spontaneous curvature generated by active diﬀerential prestress is so high ( on the order of the inverse of tissue thickness ) that a competition between in - plane elastic energy and bending energy takes place . In this way , tissue folding is continuously modulated by external tension and reciprocally [ Recho et al . , 2020 ] . Nevertheless , diﬀerential prestress is not the only way to achieve folding . Recent data from the ventral furrow formation in Drosophila embryo showed the importance of the global ellipsoidal geometry of the embryo for an elongated ventral patch of myosin to achieve a fold along its long axis [ Chanet et al . , 2017 ] . Indeed , heterogeneneous prestress at the surface of a thin shell respecting this geometry leads to surface buckling initiating folding with the correct pattern of strain and dynamics [ Fierling et al . , 2022 ] . 5 . 2 Growth prestress Physiological growth in living tissues often results in material added ( or lost ) in a non - uniform manner , forcing neighbouring tissue to accommodate the newly added material through elastic deformation . These nonuniformities , as illustrated in Fig . 2 , include heterogeneous , anisotropic and diﬀerential prestrain F a . As discussed in Section 2 , this nonuniform prestrain is revealed by residual stress : an internal stress that remains when all external loads of an originally unloaded conﬁguration are removed . Tissues actively build these internal stresses both during morphogen - esis ( when they rapidly change shape and add mass ) and in the adult physiological state ( when mass and volume changes serve the purpose of maintenance and are comparatively small ) . A classic example is the residual stress in arteries , which has been theoretically and ex - perimentally described by Fung and others [ Fung , 1991 , Vaishnav and Vossoughi , 1987 ] . The observation is that arteries , when radially cut , open up due to compressive stress built in the hoop ( circumferential ) direction . The opening angle can be used to quantify residual stress [ Fung , 1991 ] . Experiments also suggest that arteries are residually stressed in the axial direction [ Goriely and Vandiver , 2010 ] . In a series of seminal studies , Fung and co - workers demonstrated residual stress in other cardiovascular systems such as the heart [ Omens and Fung , 1990 ] , veins [ Xie et al . , 1991 ] , and the trachea [ Han and Fung , 1991 ] . Residual stress was also identiﬁed in other physiological tissues and organs such as the brain [ Budday et al . , 2014 ] and bones [ Yamada et al . , 2011 ] , as well as morphogenetic systems such as the optic cup [ Oltean et al . , 2016 ] and the developing embryo [ Beloussov and Grabovsky , 2003 ] . It was also found in pathological tissue such as solid tumours [ Ambrosi and Mollica , 2004 ] . Proliferation also produces compression within the core of tumours and orthoradial tension at the periphery as revealed by cutting of an excised tumour along its radius [ Stylianopoulos et al . , 2012 ] . In this context , growth - related 19 prestress is referred to as ’solid stress’ . Apart from physiological systems , growth - induced prestress has been measured in a multi - tude of ways in cultured systems . Stress in growing multicellular spheroids has been measured with great precision : the growing cells were encapsulated inside permeable , elastic , hollow mi - crospheres which deformed as the spheroids grew inside of them , allowing to reconstruct the traction forces [ Alessandri et al . , 2013 ] . The external pressure applied on the spheroid by the elastic coating leads to a steady - state size of the spheroid , in which there is an equilibrium be - tween a necrotic core and a proliferating rim . The existence of a pressure at which spheroids reach a stationary size was theoretically proposed by Basan et al . [ 2009 ] and independently experimentally addressed by applying osmotic pressure to the spheroid [ Montel et al . , 2011 ] . A similar technique for measuring growth - induced stress , by the elastic deformation of the environment , was demonstrated for yeast cell colonies ( which do not form cell – cell junctions ) [ Delarue et al . , 2016 ] . A distinctly diﬀerent method was used in [ Cheng et al . , 2009 ] , where three - dimensional aggregates of tumour cells were co - embeded with ﬂuorescent micro - beads in agarose gels . The displacement of the beads allows a reconstruction of the spatial stress distribution . Prestress generated by proliferation can also be observed in two - dimensional tissues , for example during the early development of the Drosophila wing disc . In a 3D ﬁnite element sim - ulation of the wing disc as one heterogeneous layer , the growth rate and mechanical coupling to the elastic basement membrane of the tissue provoke the formation of spatially regulated folds [ Tozluoˇglu et al . , 2019 ] . The doming of a part of the wing disc , the wing pouch , was recently ex - plained through a combination of diﬀerential growth and diﬀerential growth anisotropy between tissue layers [ Harmansa et al . , 2022 ] . Similarly , diﬀerential growth rates between adhered tissues has been shown to regulate the looping of the chick gut [ Savin et al . , 2011 ] , the formation of villi in the chick gut [ Shyer et al . , 2013 ] and the gyriﬁcation of the brain [ Tallinen et al . , 2016 ] . Until here , we considered growth to be dictated by proliferation rate , but an increase of cell density can occur independently to proliferation . For instance , during the formation of the zebraﬁsh optic cup , migration of cells from the outside of the organ is analogue to a local tissue growth . This process increases tissue curvature and is required to produce correct bending of the organ , in parallel to diﬀerential contractility [ Sidhaye and Norden , 2017 ] . Finally , the removal of cells , through cellular processes such as apoptosis , can be seen as a reverse growth and can play equally important roles during tissue morphogenesis . For example , in a transient extra - embryonic epithelial tissue named the amnioserosa , which sits between two embryonic epithelia during Drosophila embryogenesis , the gradual apoptosis of amnioserosa cells drives the ﬁnal stage of dorsal closure in which those two sheets are brought together [ Pasakarnis et al . , 2016 ] . 5 . 3 Topological prestress The cellular microstructure of tissues oﬀers a further mechanism through which to generate or relax prestress via changing the topology through cell – cell neighbour exchange events , termed intercalations ( or T1 transitions in foam literature ) [ Blanchard et al . , 2009 , Blanchard , 2017 ] . At the subcellular scale , this process requires the coordinated action of many biomolecular players to disassemble and reassemble cell – cell junctions and has often been found to depend on the active generation of stress to shrink or expand junctions [ Bertet et al . , 2004 , Nestor - Bergmann et al . , 2022 ] . The resulting T1 deﬁnes an orientation , as speciﬁed by the orientation of the removed and of the added junctions . In some tissues , T1 transitions occur throughout tissues with no preferred orientation , in which case they relieve local cell packing stresses , allowing tissue ordering [ Curran et al . , 2017 ] or facilitating ﬂow during migration [ Tlili et al . , 2020 ] . The transition from such a liquid - like state to a ‘jammed’ state has been shown theoretically to relate to cell density , 20 junctional tension and ﬂuctuations [ Lawson - Keister and Manning , 2021 ] . However , the most dramatic examples occur when intercalations are globally aligned throughout a tissue , such as during Drosophila germband extension [ Zallen and Wieschaus , 2004 , Tetley et al . , 2016 ] . This results in creating neighbour relations which , in the initial conﬁguration of the tissue , strain the cells in the transverse direction : their relaxation thus entails a tissue - scale deformation in the longitudinal direction [ Collinet et al . , 2015 ] , see Fig . 3g . Similarly , multilayered epithelia can expand ( here isotropically in the plane ) through ‘radial intercalation’ in which cells in lower layers intercalate into upper layers creating a precompression which is relaxed by expansion [ Szab´o et al . , 2016 ] . Since these are relaxation processes following out - of - equilibrium topological changes , they can be conceptualised as topological prestress . A major challenge in the analysis of such deformations is to disentangle this process from boundary stresses that may also act on the tissue [ Butler et al . , 2009 , Lye et al . , 2015 , Collinet et al . , 2015 ] . Although epithelial topology is often represented as a two - dimensional network , a full three - dimensional treatment revealed diﬀerent connectivity in the apical and basal domains [ G´omez - G´alvez et al . , 2018 ] . Topological transitions were indeed observed along the apico - basal axis in a range of in vivo tissues , resulting in a three - dimensional cell shape named a scutoid . This solution is favourable when tissues are curved by diﬀerent amounts with respect to their principle planar axes ( i . e . tubular rather than spherical ) unless the radius of curvature is large compared with the tissue thickness . It remains to be found whether these intercalations could drive bending itself , rather than simply relax stress . A separate class of topological change which aﬀects prestress is the introduction of a new junction into the network , which occurs during cytokinesis , see Fig . 3 f . Again this is an oriented process , as the degree of freedom is the orientation of the new interface . Indeed , much has been discovered about the cell - and tissue - level signals read by a cell when choosing a division orientation . These signals include biochemical cues such as tissue polarisation [ Gong et al . , 2004 , Gho and Schweisguth , 1998 ] , as well as mechanical and geometrical signals such as tissue stress [ Niwayama et al . , 2019 , Fink et al . , 2011 , Scarpa et al . , 2018 ] and cell shape [ Wyatt et al . , 2015 , Bosveld et al . , 2016 ] . In turn , the choice of division orientation alters prestress . A prestrained mother cell , depending on the choice of division orientation , could be divided into two daughter cells with either an increased or reduced anisotropy in shape . In tissues , the latter choice is usually observed , so as to homeostatically regulate cell shape anisotropy [ Mao et al . , 2013 , Wyatt et al . , 2015 , Xiong et al . , 2014 ] . In the zebraﬁsh , this alignment of division with cell shape ( which coincides with the principal axis of tissue stress ) , was shown using laser ablations to reduce the stress that builds up as a cell layer migrates over the embryo’s surface [ Campinho et al . , 2013 ] . Similarly , alignment of cytokineses along a given axis can contribute to driving directional growth [ da Silva and Vincent , 2007 , Li et al . , 2014 ] . Altogether , a complete description of tissue morphogenesis can be achieved by a linear com - bination of the active and passive mechanical modules we have described so far ( cell stretching , oriented cell division , T1 transitions ) , provided that one has a good knowledge of the boundary conditions , which can often be dynamic in living systems [ Etournay et al . , 2015 ] . 6 Conclusions and future directions Living organisms have evolved a large number of controllable processes able to drive deforma - tions from within the system itself . In this review , we have tentatively brought together the understanding of those systems under the generic banner of prestressed materials . Beyond the convenience of relating these working principles with a known engineering concept , this allows us to oﬀer a classiﬁcation into heterogeneous , anisotropic or diﬀerential prestress systems driven by 21 v p c o n t r a c t i o n g r o w t h di ﬀ erential prestress anisotropicprestress heterogeneousprestress ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) ( e ) ( f ) Figure 5 : Example biophysical systems where mechanics is governed by heterogeneous , anisotropic or diﬀerential prestress of either sign , corresponding to contraction or growth . ( a ) Contractile actomyosin with local accumulation , in parallel with a length - regulating element and in continuous adhesion with a substrate , generates a friction pattern that enables motility [ Recho et al . , 2013 ] . ( b ) Anisotropic pretension of the apical surface of cells regulates their shape [ Burnette et al . , 2014 ] . ( c ) Diﬀerential prestress between the weakly contractile apical ( top ) surface and strongly contractile basal ( bottom ) surface causes tissue curling [ Recho et al . , 2020 ] ( d ) Residual stress due to heterogeneous growth is characterised by cutting experiments in tumours , revealing tensile hoop stress at the periphery [ Stylianopoulos et al . , 2012 ] ( e ) The core of podosomes grows within a conﬁned space , generating anisotropic prestress [ Labernadie et al . , 2014 ] ( f ) Arteries change curvature if cut , this is believed to be caused by diﬀerential growth and remodelling of concentric layers [ Goriely and Vandiver , 2010 ] either contractile or growth activity . Figure 5 provides an example for each of the six typologies that thus emerge . Additionally , we deﬁne topological prestress as the prestress that is added to , or removed from , an interconnected network of mechanical elements not through prestressing individual elements , but purely by breaking and creating connections between the network elements . This latter type of prestress corresponds to a higher level of phenomenology , since it does not in itself describe by which ( active ) process the connectivity is being changed , see the examples in Fig . 3 f , g . It also has the property that it is always providing anisotropic prestress . From an experimental point of view , characterising living systems as active materials is highly challenging . One diﬃculty is linked with the necessity to test systems while they are maintained in a state of function as close as possible to physiological conditions . For this , recent developments in organoid systems present great opportunities , since elements of tissue morphogenesis can now be recapitulated in an in vitro setting which is much simpliﬁed and much more amenable to experimental pertubations . Observing the system simultaneously at diﬀerent scales , especially combining global - scale stress and strain measurements with very local measurements could allow a better characteri - sation of how the microstructure dynamics give rise to emergent properties . For instance , tools measuring strain at the molecular scale , like F¨orster resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) [ Borghi et al . , 2012 ] , or at the meso - scale , like micro - magnets [ Laplaud et al . , 2021 ] , micro - droplets [ Mon - 22 gera et al . , 2018 ] or optical tweezers [ Han et al . , 2018 ] , could be coupled to cell - scale techniques , like parallel plate rheometry or TFM , to decipher the subcellular contributions to cell shape changes . On the other hand , cell - scale in parallel to tissue - scale mechanical testing appears necessary to understand the cellular origins of tissue ﬂows [ Moisdon et al . , 2022 ] . In all cases , the interpretation of force – displacement relation measurements must be sup - ported by careful modelling , as exempliﬁed by the violation of the ﬂuctuation – dissipation rela - tion [ O’Byrne et al . , 2022 ] . This sheds light on the vital need for combining any experimental approach with a theoretical understanding and of testing this by employing multiple modalities . Notably , extending the existing models towards geometric or material nonlinearities is a necessity given the large deformations that are commonly encountered in real systems . How the prestrain and prestress ﬁelds relate in a nonlinear context also remains to be clariﬁed . Solving mechanical models coupling diﬀerent biological structures , in relevant geometries in three dimensions also remains an important challenge : for example , a full understanding of the three - dimensional me - chanical balance of single or tissue cells , or of the dynamics of ﬁbrous tissues which is governed both by cells and ECM are still lacking . Another challenging theoretical task is to describe topological prestrain and prestress in a continuum framework . A missing intermediate step is the linking between the cellular and tissue scales . At the scale of several cells , vertex models [ Farhadifar et al . , 2007 ] are a highly studied family of models for biological tissue , both for their strength at capturing various tissue properties [ Alt et al . , 2017 , Cheddadi et al . , 2019 , Latorre et al . , 2018 ] and for their interesting physical behaviour [ Bi et al . , 2015 , Farhadifar et al . , 2007 , Schoetz et al . , 2013 ] . However , the coarse - graining of vertex models to continuum descriptions , such as anelasticity , remains highly challenging , and is being tackled with approaches based on nearly periodic lattices [ Murisic et al . , 2015 , Chenchiah and Shipman , 2014 , Kupferman et al . , 2020 ] and discrete calculus [ Jensen et al . , 2020 , Nestor - Bergmann et al . , 2018 ] . These eﬀorts may in the long term lead to the possibility of encoding topological transitions , like active or passive neighbour exchanges ( T1 transitions ) , into a continuum ﬁeld usable , for instance , in anelasticity approaches . Seventy percent of the total cell volume is water , and there is growing evidence in favour of a coupling between cell mechanics and osmotic gradients controlling volume [ Xie et al . , 2018 , Cadart et al . , 2019 ] . Cells maintain a prestress inside the membrane by carefully controlling the ﬂow of water : water mobility in and out of cells relies on the permeation of water through the plasma membrane , which can be regulated by aquaporin channels [ Kedem and Katchalsky , 1958 ] , as well as ion pumps which actively consume energy . Therefore , there has been recently considerable interest in the modelling of water mobility . This has been approached via a ﬂuid phase in the framework of poroelasticity [ Ambrosi et al . , 2017 , Fraldi and Carotenuto , 2018 , Xue et al . , 2016 ] , as well as by explicitly tracking water ﬂuxes in a vertex model [ Cheddadi et al . , 2019 ] . In parallel , there are new developments coupling the electrochemistry of ion ﬂuxes , mechanics of cell volume regulation , and active pumping [ Cadart et al . , 2019 , Deshpande et al . , 2021 ] . Water mobility should ultimately add contributions to coarse - grained models such as anelasticity . From the experimental side , this requires the development of non - perturbative pressure sensors which is an important challenge for the future . References Sophie E Acton , Aaron J Farrugia , Jillian L Astarita , Diego Mour˜ao - S´a , Robert P Jenkins , Emma Nye , Steven Hooper , Janneke Van Blijswijk , Neil C Rogers , Kathryn J Snelgrove , et al . Dendritic cells control ﬁbroblastic reticular network tension and lymph node expansion . Nature , 514 ( 7523 ) : 498 – 502 , 2014 . 23 Hillel Aharoni , John M Kolinski , Michael Moshe , Idan Meirzada , and Eran Sharon . Internal stresses lead to net forces and torques on extended elastic bodies . Physical review letters , 117 ( 12 ) : 124101 , 2016 . K´evin Alessandri , Bibhu Ranjan Sarangi , Vasily Val´er¨ı´evitch Gurchenkov , Bidisha Sinha , To - bias Reinhold Kießling , Luc Fetler , Felix Rico , Simon Scheuring , Christophe Lamaze , Anthony Simon , et al . Cellular capsules as a tool for multicellular spheroid production and for investi - gating the mechanics of tumor progression in vitro . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 110 ( 37 ) : 14843 – 14848 , 2013 . Axel A Almet , Helen M Byrne , Philip K Maini , and Derek E Moulton . The role of mechan - ics in the growth and homeostasis of the intestinal crypt . Biomechanics and Modeling in Mechanobiology , 20 ( 2 ) : 585 – 608 , 2021 . Silvanus Alt , Poulami Ganguly , and Guillaume Salbreux . Vertex models : from cell mechanics to tissue morphogenesis . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences , 372 ( 1720 ) : 20150520 , 2017 . Philip A Amato and D Lansing Taylor . Probing the mechanism of incorporation of ﬂuorescently labeled actin into stress ﬁbers . The Journal of cell biology , 102 ( 3 ) : 1074 – 1084 , 1986 . D Ambrosi and A Guillou . Growth and dissipation in biological tissues . Continuum Mechanics and Thermodynamics , 19 ( 5 ) : 245 – 251 , 2007 . D Ambrosi and F Mollica . The role of stress in the growth of a multicell spheroid . Journal of mathematical biology , 48 ( 5 ) : 477 – 499 , 2004 . D . Ambrosi and A . Zanzottera . Mechanics and polarity in cell motility . Physica D , 2016 . D Ambrosi , Simone Pezzuto , Davide Riccobelli , T Stylianopoulos , and Pasquale Ciarletta . Solid tumors are poroelastic solids with a chemo - mechanical feedback on growth . Journal of Elas - ticity , 129 ( 1 ) : 107 – 124 , 2017 . Jorge Barbazan , Carlos P´erez - Gonz´alez , Manuel G´omez - Gonz´alez , Mathieu Dedenon , Sophie Richon , Ernest Latorre , Marco Serra , Pascale Mariani , St´ephanie Descroix , Pierre Sens , et al . Cancer - associated ﬁbroblasts actively compress cancer cells and modulate mechanotransduc - tion . BioRxiv , 2021 . Markus Basan , Thomas Risler , Jean - Fran¸cois Joanny , Xavier Sastre - Garau , and Jacques Prost . Homeostatic competition drives tumor growth and metastasis nucleation . HFSP journal , 3 ( 4 ) : 265 – 272 , 2009 . Pierre Bau¨er , Joseph Tavacoli , Thomas Pujol , Jessica Planade , Julien Heuvingh , and Olivia Du Roure . A new method to measure mechanics and dynamic assembly of branched actin networks . Scientiﬁc reports , 7 ( 1 ) : 1 – 11 , 2017 . Julio M Belmonte , Maria Leptin , and Fran¸cois N´ed´elec . A theory that predicts behaviors of disordered cytoskeletal networks . Molecular systems biology , 13 ( 9 ) : 941 , 2017 . Lev V Beloussov and Vassily I Grabovsky . Morphomechanics : goals , basic experiments and models . International Journal of Developmental Biology , 50 ( 2 - 3 ) : 81 – 92 , 2003 . Martine Ben Amar , Paul Qiuyang - Qu , Thanh Thi Kim Vuong - Brender , and Michel Labouesse . Assessing the contribution of active and passive stresses in c elegans elongation . Physical Review Letters , 121 ( 26 ) : 268102 , 2018 . 24 C . Bertet , L . Sulak , and T . Lecuit . Myosin - dependent junction remodelling controls planar cell intercalation and axis elongation . Nature , 429 : 667 , 2004 . Luca Bertinetti , Admir Masic , Roman Schuetz , Aurelio Barbetta , Britta Seidt , Wolfgang Wa - germaier , and Peter Fratzl . Osmotically driven tensile stress in collagen - based mineralized tissues . Journal of the Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials , 52 : 14 – 21 , 2015 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmbbm . 2015 . 03 . 010 . Dapeng Bi , JH Lopez , Jennifer M Schwarz , and M Lisa Manning . A density - independent rigidity transition in biological tissues . Nature Physics , 11 ( 12 ) : 1074 – 1079 , 2015 . Peter Bieling , Tai - De Li , Julian Weichsel , Ryan McGorty , Pamela Jreij , Bo Huang , Daniel A . Fletcher , and R . Dyche Mullins . Force Feedback Controls Motor Activity and Mechanical Properties of Self - Assembling Branched Actin Networks . Cell , 164 ( 1 ) : 115 – 127 , January 2016 . ISSN 0092 - 8674 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 11 . 057 . URL https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S0092867415015767 . G . B . Blanchard , A . J . Kabla , N . L . Schultz , L . C . Butler , B . Sanson , N . Gorﬁnkiel , L . Mahade - van , and R . J . Adams . Tissue tectonics : morphogenetic strain rates , cell shape change and intercalation . Nature Methods , 6 : 458 – 464 , 2009 . Guy B . Blanchard . Taking the strain : quantifying the contributions of all cell behaviours to changes in epithelial shape . Phil . Trans . R . Soc . B , 372 : 20150513 , 2017 . doi : 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2015 . 0513 . Guy B Blanchard , Jocelyn ´Etienne , and Nicole Gorﬁnkiel . From pulsatile apicomedial contrac - tility to eﬀective epithelial mechanics . Current Opinion in Genetics & Development , 51 : 78 – 87 , 2018 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . gde . 2018 . 07 . 004 . Laurent Blanchoin , Rajaa Boujemaa - Paterski , C´ecile Sykes , and Julie Plastino . Actin dynam - ics , architecture , and mechanics in cell motility . Physiological reviews , 94 ( 1 ) : 235 – 263 , 2014 . Publisher : American Physiological Society Bethesda , MD . Alessandra Bonfanti , Julia Duque , Alexandre Kabla , and Guillaume Charras . Fracture in living tissues . Trends in Cell Biology , 2022 . Publisher : Elsevier . Isabelle Bonnet , Philippe Marcq , Floris Bosveld , Luc Fetler , Yohanns Bella¨ıche , and Fran¸cois Graner . Mechanical state , material properties and continuous description of an epithelial tissue . Journal of The Royal Society Interface , 9 ( 75 ) : 2614 – 2623 , 2012 . Publisher : The Royal Society . Nicolas Borghi , Maria Sorokina , Olga G Shcherbakova , William I Weis , Beth L Pruitt , W James Nelson , and Alexander R Dunn . E - cadherin is under constitutive actomyosin - generated tension that is increased at cell – cell contacts upon externally applied stretch . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 109 ( 31 ) : 12568 – 12573 , 2012 . Floris Bosveld , Olga Markova , Boris Guirao , Charlotte Martin , Zhimin Wang , Ana¨elle Pierre , Maria Balakireva , Isabelle Gaugue , Anna Ainslie , Nicolas Christophorou , et al . Epithelial tricellular junctions act as interphase cell shape sensors to orient mitosis . Nature , 530 ( 7591 ) : 495 – 498 , 2016 . L G Bowden , H M Byrne , P K Maini , and D E Moulton . A morphoelastic model for dermal wound closure . Biomechanics and modeling in mechanobiology , pages 1 – 19 , August 2015 . 25 G . Wayne Brodland , Vito Conte , P . Graham Cranston , Jim Veldhuis , Sriram Narasimhan , M . Shane Hutson , Antonio Jacinto , Florian Ulrich , Buzz Baum , and Mark Miodownik . Video force microscopy reveals the mechanics of ventral furrow invagination in Drosophila . Proceed - ings of the National Academy of Sciences , 107 ( 51 ) : 22111 – 22116 , 2010 . Publisher : National Acad Sciences . Silvia Budday , Charles Raybaud , and Ellen Kuhl . A mechanical model predicts morphological abnormalities in the developing human brain . Scientiﬁc reports , 4 ( 1 ) : 1 – 7 , 2014 . Dylan T . Burnette , Lin Shao , Carolyn Ott , Ana M . Pasapera , Robert S . Fischer , Michelle A . Baird , Christelle Der Loughian , Helene Delanoe - Ayari , Matthew J . Paszek , and Michael W . Davidson . A contractile and counterbalancing adhesion system controls the 3D shape of crawl - ing cells . Journal of Cell Biology , 205 ( 1 ) : 83 – 96 , 2014 . Publisher : The Rockefeller University Press . Keith Burridge and Christophe Guilluy . Focal adhesions , stress ﬁbers and mechanical tension . Experimental cell research , 343 ( 1 ) : 14 – 20 , 2016 . L . C . Butler , G . B . Blanchard , A . J . Kabla , N . J . Lawrence , D . P . Welchman , L . Mahadevan , R . J . Adams , and B . Sanson . Cell shape changes indicate a role for extrinsic tensile forces in drosophila germ - band extension . Nature Cell Biol . , 11 : 859 – 864 , 2009 . Clotilde Cadart , Larisa Venkova , Pierre Recho , Marco Cosentino Lagomarsino , and Matthieu Piel . The physics of cell - size regulation across timescales . Nature Physics , 15 ( 10 ) : 993 – 1004 , 2019 . Fernando Calvo , Nil Ege , Araceli Grande - Garcia , Steven Hooper , Robert P Jenkins , Shahid I Chaudhry , Kevin Harrington , Peter Williamson , Emad Moeendarbary , Guillaume Charras , et al . Mechanotransduction and yap - dependent matrix remodelling is required for the gen - eration and maintenance of cancer - associated ﬁbroblasts . Nature cell biology , 15 ( 6 ) : 637 – 646 , 2013 . Pedro Campinho , Martin Behrndt , Jonas Ranft , Thomas Risler , Nicolas Minc , and Carl - Philipp Heisenberg . Tension - oriented cell divisions limit anisotropic tissue tension in epithelial spread - ing during zebraﬁsh epiboly . Nat Cell Biol , 15 : 1405 – 1414 , 2013 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2869 . M Caruel and L Truskinovsky . Physics of muscle contraction . Rep . Prog . Phys . , 81 : 036602 , 2018 . doi : 10 . 1088 / 1361 - 6633 / aa7b9e . Soline Chanet , Callie J . Miller , Eeshit Dhaval Vaishnav , Bard Ermentrout , Lance A . Davidson , and Adam C . Martin . Actomyosin meshwork mechanosensing enables tissue shape to orient cell force . Nat Comms , 8 : 15014 , 2017 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms15014 . Guillaume T . Charras , Margaret Coughlin , Timothy J . Mitchison , and L . Mahadevan . Life and Times of a Cellular Bleb . Biophysical Journal , 94 ( 5 ) : 1836 – 1853 , March 2008 . ISSN 0006 - 3495 . doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 107 . 113605 . URL https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S0006349508706222 . Ibrahim Cheddadi , Michel G´enard , Nadia Bertin , and Christophe Godin . Coupling water ﬂuxes with cell wall mechanics in a multicellular model of plant development . PLoS computational biology , 15 ( 6 ) : e1007121 , 2019 . 26 H . Chelly , A . Jahangiri , M . Mireux , J . ´Etienne , D . K . Dysthe , C . Verdier , and P . Recho . Cell crawling on a compliant substrate : A biphasic relation with linear friction . International Journal of Non - Linear Mechanics , 139 : 103897 , 2022 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ijnonlinmec . 2021 . 103897 . Isaac Vikram Chenchiah and Patrick D Shipman . An energy - deformation decomposition for morphoelasticity . Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids , 67 : 15 – 39 , 2014 . Gang Cheng , Janet Tse , Rakesh K Jain , and Lance L Munn . Micro - environmental mechanical stress controls tumor spheroid size and morphology by suppressing proliferation and inducing apoptosis in cancer cells . PLoS one , 4 ( 2 ) : e4632 , 2009 . Priyamvada Chugh , Andrew G . Clark , Matthew B . Smith , Davide AD Cassani , Kai Dierkes , Anan Ragab , Philippe P . Roux , Guillaume Charras , Guillaume Salbreux , and Ewa K . Paluch . Actin cortex architecture regulates cell surface tension . Nature cell biology , 19 ( 6 ) : 689 – 697 , 2017 . Publisher : Nature Publishing Group . R . Cl´ement , B . Dehapiot , Claudio Collinet , Thomas Lecuit , and Pierre - Fran¸cois Lenne . Vis - coelastic dissipation stabilizes cell shape changes during tissue morphogenesis . Current Biol - ogy , 2017 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2017 . 09 . 005 . C . Collinet , M . Rauzi , P . - F . Lenne , and T . Lecuit . Local and tissue - scale forces drive oriented junction growth during tissue extension . Nature Cell Biol . , 17 : 1247 – 1258 , 2015 . Ailey Crow , Kevin D Webster , Evan Hohlfeld , Win Pin Ng , Phillip Geissler , and Daniel A Fletcher . Contractile equilibration of single cells to step changes in extracellular stiﬀness . Biophysical journal , 102 ( 3 ) : 443 – 451 , 2012 . Scott Curran , Charlotte Strandkvist , Jasper Bathmann , Marc de Gennes , Alexandre Kabla , Guillaume Salbreux , and Buzz Baum . Myosin ii controls junction ﬂuctuations to guide epithelial tissue ordering . Developmental Cell , 43 ( 4 ) : 480 – 492 . e6 , 2017 . ISSN 1534 - 5807 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2017 . 09 . 018 . URL https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S1534580717307712 . Sara Morais da Silva and Jean - Paul Vincent . Oriented cell divisions in the extending germband of drosophila . Development , 134 : 3049 – 3054 , 2007 . doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 004911 . Morgan Delarue , J¨orn Hartung , Carl Schreck , Pawel Gniewek , Lucy Hu , Stephan Herminghaus , and Oskar Hallatschek . Self - driven jamming in growing microbial populations . Nature physics , 12 ( 8 ) : 762 – 766 , 2016 . Pierre Delvoye , Philippe Wiliquet , Jean - Luc Levˆeque , Betty V . Nusgens , and Charles M . Lapi ` ere . Measurement of mechanical forces generated by skin ﬁbroblasts embedded in a three - dimensional collagen gel . Journal of Investigative Dermatology , 97 ( 5 ) : 898 – 902 , 1991 . Publisher : Elsevier . M . Dembo and Y . - L . Wang . Stresses at the cell - to - substrate interface during locomotion of ﬁbroblasts . Biophys . J . , 76 : 2307 – 2316 , 1999 . Vikram Deshpande , Antonio DeSimone , Robert McMeeking , and Pierre Recho . Chemo - mechanical model of a cell as a stochastic active gel . Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids , 151 : 104381 , 2021 . Antonio DiCarlo and Sara Quiligotti . Growth and balance . Mechanics Research Communica - tions , 29 ( 6 ) : 449 – 456 , 2002 . 27 Dennis E Discher , Paul Janmey , and Yu - li Wang . Tissue cells feel and respond to the stiﬀness of their substrate . Science , 310 ( 5751 ) : 1139 – 1143 , 2005 . Carl Eckart . The thermodynamics of irreversible processes . iv . the theory of elasticity and anelasticity . Physical Review , 73 ( 4 ) : 373 , 1948 . Alexander E . Ehret , Kevin Bircher , Alberto Stracuzzi , Vita Marina , Manuel Z¨undel , and Edoardo Mazza . Inverse poroelasticity as a fundamental mechanism in biomechanics and mechanobiology . Nature communications , 8 ( 1 ) : 1 – 10 , 2017 . Publisher : Nature Publishing Group . Nadia Elkhatib , Matthew B Neu , Carla Zensen , Kurt M Schmoller , Daniel Louvard , Andreas R Bausch , Timo Betz , and Danijela Matic Vignjevic . Fascin plays a role in stress ﬁber organi - zation and focal adhesion disassembly . Current Biology , 24 ( 13 ) : 1492 – 1499 , 2014 . Marcelo Epstein . The elements of continuum biomechanics . John Wiley & Sons , 2012 . Marcelo Epstein and G´erard A Maugin . Thermomechanics of volumetric growth in uniform bodies . International Journal of Plasticity , 16 ( 7 - 8 ) : 951 – 978 , 2000 . Alexander Erlich , Rowan Howell , Alain Goriely , R´egis Chirat , and DE Moulton . Mechanical feedback in seashell growth and form . The ANZIAM Journal , 59 ( 4 ) : 581 – 606 , 2018 . Alexander Erlich , Derek E Moulton , and Alain Goriely . Are homeostatic states stable ? dynam - ical stability in morphoelasticity . Bulletin of mathematical biology , 81 ( 8 ) : 3219 – 3244 , 2019 . Alexander Erlich , Gareth W Jones , Fran¸coise Tisseur , Derek E Moulton , and Alain Goriely . The role of topology and mechanics in uniaxially growing cell networks . Proceedings of the Royal Society A , 476 ( 2233 ) : 20190523 , 2020 . Jocelyn ´Etienne , Jonathan Fouchard , D´emosth ` ene Mitrossilis , Nathalie Buﬁ , Pauline Durand - Smet , and Atef Asnacios . Cells as liquid motors : Mechanosensitivity emerges from collective dynamics of actomyosin cortex . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA , 112 : 2740 – 2745 , 2015 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1417113112 . Rapha¨el Etournay , Marko Popovi´c , Matthias Merkel , Amitabha Nandi , Corinna Blasse , Benoˆıt Aigouy , Holger Brandl , Gene Myers , Guillaume Salbreux , Frank J¨ulicher , et al . Interplay of cell dynamics and epithelial tension during morphogenesis of the drosophila pupal wing . Elife , 4 : e07090 , 2015 . Reza Farhadifar , Jens - Christian R¨oper , Benoit Aigouy , Suzanne Eaton , and Frank J¨ulicher . The inﬂuence of cell mechanics , cell - cell interactions , and proliferation on epithelial packing . Current Biology , 17 ( 24 ) : 2095 – 2104 , 2007 . R . Fernandez - Gonzalez , S . de Matos Simoes , J . - C . R¨oper , S . Eaton , and J . A . Zallen . Myosin ii dynamics are regulated by tension in intercalating cells . Dev . Cell , 17 : 736 – 743 , 2009 . Julien Fierling , Alphy John , Barth´el´emy Delorme , Alexandre Torzynski , Guy B . Blanchard , Claire M . Lye , Anna Popkova , Gr´egoire Malandain , B´en´edicte Sanson , Jocelyn ´Etienne , Philippe Marmottant , Catherine Quilliet , and Matteo Rauzi . Embryo - scale epithelial buckling forms a propagating furrow that initiates gastrulation . Nat Commun , 13 : 859864 , 2022 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 30493 - 3 . 28 Jenny Fink , Nicolas Carpi , Timo Betz , Angelique B´etard , Meriem Chebah , Ammar Azioune , Michel Bornens , Cecile Sykes , Luc Fetler , Damien Cuvelier , et al . External forces control mitotic spindle positioning . Nature cell biology , 13 ( 7 ) : 771 – 778 , 2011 . Yo¨el Forterre , Jan M . Skotheim , Jacques Dumais , and L . Mahadevan . How the venus ﬂytrap snaps . Nature , 433 : 421 – 425 , 2005 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature03185 . Jonathan Fouchard , D´emosth ` ene Mitrossilis , and Atef Asnacios . Acto - myosin based response to stiﬀness and rigidity sensing . Cell Adhesion & Migration , 5 ( 1 ) : 16 – 19 , January 2011 . ISSN 1933 - 6918 , 1933 - 6926 . doi : 10 . 4161 / cam . 5 . 1 . 13281 . URL http : / / www . tandfonline . com / doi / abs / 10 . 4161 / cam . 5 . 1 . 13281 . Jonathan Fouchard , Tom P . J . Wyatt , Amsha Proag , Ana Lisica , Nargess Khalilgharibi , Pierre Recho , Magali Suzanne , Alexandre Kabla , and Guillaume Charras . Curling of epithelial mono - layers reveals coupling between active bending and tissue tension . Proceedings of the Na - tional Academy of Sciences , 117 ( 17 ) : 9377 – 9383 , April 2020 . ISSN 0027 - 8424 , 1091 - 6490 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1917838117 . URL https : / / pnas . org / doi / full / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1917838117 . Massimiliano Fraldi and Angelo R Carotenuto . Cells competition in tumor growth poroelasticity . Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids , 112 : 345 – 367 , 2018 . M . Fritzsche , A . Lewalle , T . Duke , K . Kruse , and G . Charras . Analysis of turnover dynamics of the submembranous actin cortex . Mol . Biol . Cell , 24 : 757 – 767 , 2013 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E12 - 06 - 0485 . Yuan Cheng Fung . What are the residual stresses doing in our blood vessels ? Annals of biomedical engineering , 19 ( 3 ) : 237 – 249 , 1991 . Yuan - cheng Fung . Biomechanics : motion , ﬂow , stress , and growth . Springer Science & Business Media , 2013 . Jean - Fran¸cois Ganghoﬀer . Mechanical modeling of growth considering domain variation—part ii : volumetric and surface growth involving eshelby tensors . Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids , 58 ( 9 ) : 1434 – 1459 , 2010 . Guillaume Gay , Thibault Courtheoux , C´eline Reyes , Sylvie Tournier , and Yannick Gachet . A stochastic model of kinetochore – microtubule attachment accurately describes ﬁssion yeast chromosome segregation . Journal of Cell Biology , 196 ( 6 ) : 757 – 774 , 2012 . Michel Gho and Fran¸cois Schweisguth . Frizzled signalling controls orientation of asymmetric sense organ precursor cell divisions in drosophila . Nature , 393 ( 6681 ) : 178 – 181 , 1998 . Marie Madeleine Giraud - Guille , Gervaise Mosser , and Emmanuel Belamie . Liquid crystallinity in collagen systems in vitro and in vivo . Current Opinion in Colloid & Interface Science , 13 ( 4 ) : 303 – 313 , 2008 . Manuel G´omez - Gonz´alez , Ernest Latorre , Marino Arroyo , and Xavier Trepat . Measuring me - chanical stress in living tissues . Nature Reviews Physics , 2 ( 6 ) : 300 – 317 , 2020 . Ying Gong , Chunhui Mo , and Scott E Fraser . Planar cell polarity signalling controls cell division orientation during zebraﬁsh gastrulation . Nature , 430 ( 7000 ) : 689 – 693 , 2004 . Alain Goriely . The mathematics and mechanics of biological growth , volume 45 . Springer , 2017 . 29 Alain Goriely and Rebecca Vandiver . On the mechanical stability of growing arteries . IMA journal of applied mathematics , 75 ( 4 ) : 549 – 570 , 2010 . Artur L Gower , Tom Shearer , and Pasquale Ciarletta . A new restriction for initially stressed elastic solids . The Quarterly Journal of Mechanics and Applied Mathematics , 70 ( 4 ) : 455 – 478 , 2017 . M´elanie Gracia , Sophie Theis , Amsha Proag , Guillaume Gay , Corinne Benassayag , and Magali Suzanne . Mechanical impact of epithelial - mesenchymal transition on epithelial morphogenesis in Drosophila . Nature communications , 10 ( 1 ) : 1 – 17 , 2019 . Publisher : Nature Publishing Group . Pedro G´omez - G´alvez , Pablo Vicente - Munuera , Antonio Tagua , Cristina Forja , Ana M . Castro , Marta Letr´an , Andrea Valencia - Exp´osito , Clara Grima , Marina Berm´udez - Gallardo , ´Oscar Serrano - P´erez - Higueras , Florencia Cavodeassi , Sol Sotillos , Mar´ıa D . Mart´ın - Bermudo , Al - berto M´arquez , Javier Buceta , and Luis M . Escudero . Scutoids are a geometrical solution to three - dimensional packing of epithelia . Nature Communications , 9 ( 1 ) : 2960 , July 2018 . ISSN 2041 - 1723 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 05376 - 1 . URL https : / / www . nature . com / articles / s41467 - 018 - 05376 - 1 . Number : 1 Publisher : Nature Publishing Group . HC Han and YC Fung . Residual strains in porcine and canine trachea . Journal of biomechanics , 24 ( 5 ) : 307 – 315 , 1991 . Yu Long Han , Pierre Ronceray , Guoqiang Xu , Andrea Malandrino , Roger D . Kamm , Martin Lenz , Chase P . Broedersz , and Ming Guo . Cell contraction induces long - ranged stress stiﬀening in the extracellular matrix . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 115 ( 16 ) : 4075 – 4080 , 2018 . Publisher : National Acad Sciences . Stefan Harmansa , Alexander Erlich , Christophe Eloy , Giuseppe Zurlo , and Thomas Lecuit . Growth anisotropy of the extracellular matrix drives mechanics in a developing organ . bioRxiv , 2022 . A . K . Harris , P . Wild , and D . Stopak . Silicone rubber substrata : a new wrinkle in the study of cell locomotion . Science , 208 : 177 – 179 , 1980 . Albert K . Harris , Patricia Warner , and David Stopak . Generation of spatially periodic patterns by a mechanical instability : a mechanical alternative to the Turing model . Development , 1984 . Publisher : The Company of Biologists Limited . Andrew R . Harris , Alicia Daeden , and Guillaume T . Charras . Formation of adherens junctions leads to the emergence of a tissue - level tension in epithelial monolayers . Journal of cell science , 127 ( 11 ) : 2507 – 2517 , 2014 . Publisher : The Company of Biologists Bidder Building , 140 Cowley Road , Cambridge , CB4 . . . . Natalie C . Heer , Pearson W . Miller , Soline Chanet , Norbert Stoop , J . Dunkel , and Adam C . Mar - tin . Actomyosin - based tissue folding requires a multicellular myosin gradient . Development , 144 : 1876 – 1886 , 2017 . doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 146761 . John Hinch and Oliver Harlen . Oldroyd b , and not a ? Journal of Non - Newtonian Fluid Mechanics , 298 : 104668 , 2021 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jnnfm . 2021 . 104668 . A . F . Huxley . Muscle structure and theories of contraction . Prog . Biophys . Biophys . Chem . , 7 : 255 – 318 , 1957 . 30 Donald E Ingber , Ning Wang , and Dimitrije Stamenovi´c . Tensegrity , cellular biophysics , and the mechanics of living systems . Reports on Progress in Physics , 77 ( 4 ) : 046603 , 2014 . Donovan E . Ingber . Cellular tensegrity : deﬁning new rules of biological design that govern the cytoskeleton . Journal of cell science , 104 ( 3 ) : 613 – 627 , 1993 . Publisher : Citeseer . Emiliano Izquierdo , Theresa Quinkler , and Stefano De Renzis . Guided morphogenesis through optogenetic activation of Rho signalling during early Drosophila embryogenesis . Nature com - munications , 9 ( 1 ) : 1 – 13 , 2018 . Publisher : Nature Publishing Group . Marion Jasnin , Jordan Hervy , St´ephanie Balor , Anais Bouissou , Amsha Proag , Rapha¨el Voi - turiez , Isabelle Maridonneau - Parini , Wolfgang Baumeister , Serge Dmitrieﬀ , and Renaud Poincloux . Elasticity of dense actin networks produces nanonewton protrusive forces . bioRxiv , 2021 . Publisher : Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory . Oliver E Jensen , Emma Johns , and Sarah Woolner . Force networks , torque balance and airy stress in the planar vertex model of a conﬂuent epithelium . Proceedings of the Royal Society A , 476 ( 2237 ) : 20190716 , 2020 . Karin John , Philippe Peyla , Klaus Kassner , Jacques Prost , and Chaouqi Misbah . Nonlinear study of symmetry breaking in actin gels : implications for cellular motility . Physical review letters , 100 ( 6 ) : 068101 , 2008 . Publisher : APS . Gareth Wyn Jones and S Jonathan Chapman . Modeling growth in biological materials . Siam review , 54 ( 1 ) : 52 – 118 , 2012 . F . J¨ulicher , K . Kruse , J . Prost , and J . - F . Joanny . Active behavior of the cytoskeleton . Phys . Rep . , 449 : 3 – 28 , 2007 . Ora Kedem and Aharon Katchalsky . Thermodynamic analysis of the permeability of biological membranes to non - electrolytes . Biochimica et biophysica Acta , 27 : 229 – 246 , 1958 . Nargess Khalilgharibi , Jonathan Fouchard , Pierre Recho , Guillaume Charras , and Alexandre Kabla . The dynamic mechanical properties of cellularised aggregates . Current Opinion in Cell Biology , 42 : 113 – 120 , October 2016 . ISSN 09550674 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2016 . 06 . 003 . URL https : / / linkinghub . elsevier . com / retrieve / pii / S0955067416301119 . Nargess Khalilgharibi , Jonathan Fouchard , Nina Asadipour , Ricardo Barrientos , Maria Duda , Alessandra Bonfanti , Amina Yonis , Andrew Harris , Payman Mosaﬀa , Yasuyuki Fujita , Alexan - dre Kabla , Yanlan Mao , Buzz Baum , Jos´e J Mu˜noz , Mark Miodownik , and Guillaume Charras . Stress relaxation in epithelial monolayers is controlled by the actomyosin cortex . Nat . Phys . , 15 : 839 – 847 , 2019 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41567 - 019 - 0516 - 6 . Gijsje H Koenderink and Ewa K Paluch . Architecture shapes contractility in actomyosin net - works . Current opinion in cell biology , 50 : 79 – 85 , 2018 . Daniel Krueger , Pietro Tardivo , Congtin Nguyen , and Stefano De Renzis . Downregulation of basal myosin - II is required for cell shape changes and tissue invagination . The EMBO journal , 37 ( 23 ) : e100170 , 2018 . K . Kruse , J . - F . Joanny , F . J¨ulicher , and J . Prost . Contractility and retrograde ﬂow in lamel - lipodium motion . Phys . Biol . , 3 : 130 – 137 , 2006 . 31 Sanjay Kumar , Iva Z . Maxwell , Alexander Heisterkamp , Thomas R . Polte , Tanmay P . Lele , Matthew Salanga , Eric Mazur , and Donald E . Ingber . Viscoelastic Retraction of Single Living Stress Fibers and Its Impact on Cell Shape , Cytoskeletal Organization , and Extracellular Matrix Mechanics . Biophysical Journal , 90 ( 10 ) : 3762 – 3773 , May 2006 . ISSN 0006 - 3495 . doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 105 . 071506 . URL https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S0006349506725565 . Raz Kupferman , Ben Maman , and Michael Moshe . Continuum mechanics of a cellular tissue model . Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids , 143 : 104085 , 2020 . Anna Labernadie , Anais Bouissou , Patrick Delobelle , St´ephanie Balor , Raphael Voituriez , Amsha Proag , Isabelle Fourquaux , Christophe Thibault , Christophe Vieu , and Renaud Poincloux . Protrusion force microscopy reveals oscillatory force generation and mechanosens - ing activity of human macrophage podosomes . Nature communications , 5 ( 1 ) : 1 – 10 , 2014 . Pub - lisher : Nature Publishing Group . C´eline Labouesse , Alexander B . Verkhovsky , Jean - Jacques Meister , Chiara Gabella , and Benoˆıt Vianay . Cell shape dynamics reveal balance of elasticity and contractility in peripheral arcs . Biophysical journal , 108 ( 10 ) : 2437 – 2447 , 2015 . Publisher : Elsevier . Wilbur A . Lam , Ovijit Chaudhuri , Ailey Crow , Kevin D . Webster , Tai - De Li , Ashley Kita , James Huang , and Daniel A . Fletcher . Mechanics and contraction dynamics of single platelets and implications for clot stiﬀening . Nature Materials , 10 ( 1 ) : 61 – 66 , January 2011 . ISSN 1476 - 1122 , 1476 - 4660 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmat2903 . URL http : / / www . nature . com / articles / nmat2903 . Valentin Laplaud , Nicolas Levernier , Judith Pineau , Mabel San Roman , Lucie Barbier , Pablo J S´aez , Ana - Maria Lennon - Dum´enil , Pablo Vargas , Karsten Kruse , Olivia Du Roure , et al . Pinching the cortex of live cells reveals thickness instabilities caused by myosin ii motors . Science Advances , 7 ( 27 ) : eabe3640 , 2021 . R . G . Larson . The structure and rheology of complex ﬂuids . Topics Chem . Engng . Oxford Univ . Press , 1999 . Ernest Latorre , Sohan Kale , Laura Casares , Manuel G´omez - Gonz´alez , Marina Uroz , L´eo Valon , Roshna V Nair , Elena Garreta , Nuria Montserrat , Ar´anzazu Del Campo , et al . Active su - perelasticity in three - dimensional epithelia of controlled shape . Nature , 563 ( 7730 ) : 203 – 208 , 2018 . Elizabeth Lawson - Keister and M . Lisa Manning . Jamming and arrest of cell motion in biological tissues . Current Opinion in Cell Biology , 72 : 146 – 155 , 2021 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2021 . 07 . 011 . Taeksang Lee , Maria A Holland , Johannes Weickenmeier , Arun K Gosain , and Adrian Buganza Tepole . The geometry of incompatibility in growing soft tissues : Theory and numerical char - acterization . Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids , 146 : 104177 , 2021 . Wesley R . Legant , Amit Pathak , Michael T . Yang , Vikram S . Deshpande , Robert M . McMeeking , and Christopher S . Chen . Microfabricated tissue gauges to measure and manipulate forces from 3D microtissues . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 106 ( 25 ) : 10097 – 10102 , June 2009 . ISSN 0027 - 8424 , 1091 - 6490 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0900174106 . URL https : / / pnas . org / doi / full / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0900174106 . Martin Lenz . Geometrical origins of contractility in disordered actomyosin networks . Physical Review X , 4 ( 4 ) : 041002 , 2014 . 32 Ilya Levental , Penelope C . Georges , and Paul A . Janmey . Soft biological materials and their impact on cell function . Soft Matter , 3 ( 3 ) : 299 – 306 , 2007 . ISSN 1744 - 683X , 1744 - 6848 . doi : 10 . 1039 / B610522J . URL http : / / xlink . rsc . org / ? DOI = B610522J . Yingzi Li , Hammad Naveed , Sema Kachalo , Lisa X Xu , and Jie Liang . Mechanisms of regulating tissue elongation in drosophila wing : Impact of oriented cell divisions , oriented mechanical forces , and reduced cell size . PLoS One , 9 ( 2 ) : e86725 , 2014 . S . Liepelt and R . Lipowsky . Operation modes of the molecular motor kinesin . Phys . Rev . E , 79 : 105 , 2009 . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 79 . 011917 . Vlado A Lubarda . Constitutive theories based on the multiplicative decomposition of deforma - tion gradient : Thermoelasticity , elastoplasticity , and biomechanics . Appl . Mech . Rev . , 57 ( 2 ) : 95 – 108 , 2004 . Vlado A Lubarda and Anne Hoger . On the mechanics of solids with a growing mass . International journal of solids and structures , 39 ( 18 ) : 4627 – 4664 , 2002 . Chen Luxenburg , Sabina Winograd - Katz , Lia Addadi , and Benjamin Geiger . Involvement of actin polymerization in podosome dynamics . Journal of cell science , 125 ( 7 ) : 1666 – 1672 , 2012 . Publisher : Company of Biologists . C . M . Lye , G . B . Blanchard , H . Naylor , L . Muresan , J . Huisken , R . Adams , and B . Sanson . Mechanical coupling between endoderm invagination and axis extension in drosophila . PLoS Biol . , 13 : e1002292 , 2015 . Kalpana Mandal , Ir ` ene Wang , Elisa Vitiello , Laura Andreina Chac ` on Orellana , and Martial Bal - land . Cell dipole behaviour revealed by ECM sub - cellular geometry . Nature communications , 5 ( 1 ) : 1 – 10 , 2014 . Publisher : Nature Publishing Group . Paul Mangeat , Christian Roy , and Marianne Martin . Erm proteins in cell adhesion and mem - brane dynamics . Trends in cell biology , 9 ( 5 ) : 187 – 192 , 1999 . Y . Mao , A . L . Tournier , A . Hoppe , L . Kester , B . J . Thompson , and N . Tapon . Diﬀerential proliferation rates generate patterns of mechanical tension that orient tissue growth . EMBO J . , 32 : 2790 – 2803 , 2013 . Yann Marcy , Jacques Prost , Marie - France Carlier , and C´ecile Sykes . Forces generated dur - ing actin - based propulsion : a direct measurement by micromanipulation . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 101 ( 16 ) : 5992 – 5997 , 2004 . Publisher : National Acad Sciences . Adam C Martin , Matthias Kaschube , and Eric F Wieschaus . Pulsed contractions of an actin – myosin network drive apical constriction . Nature , 457 ( 7228 ) : 495 – 499 , 2009 . Admir Masic , Luca Bertinetti , Roman Schuetz , Shu - Wei Chang , Till Hartmut Metzger , Markus J Buehler , and Peter Fratzl . Osmotic pressure induced tensile forces in tendon collagen . Nature communications , 6 ( 1 ) : 1 – 8 , 2015 . Jonathan B Michaux , Fran¸cois B Robin , William M McFadden , and Edwin M Munro . Excitable rhoa dynamics drive pulsed contractions in the early c . elegans embryo . Journal of Cell Biology , 217 ( 12 ) : 4230 – 4252 , 2018 . T . J . Mitchison and L . P . Cramer . Actin - based cell motility and cell locomotion . Cell , 84 : 371 – 379 , 1996 . 33 D´emosth ` ene Mitrossilis , Jonathan Fouchard , Axel Guiroy , Nicolas Desprat , Nicolas Rodriguez , Ben Fabry , and Atef Asnacios . Single - cell response to stiﬀness exhibits muscle - like behavior . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 106 ( 43 ) : 18243 – 18248 , October 2009 . ISSN 0027 - 8424 , 1091 - 6490 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0903994106 . URL https : / / pnas . org / doi / full / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0903994106 . D´emosth ` ene Mitrossilis , Jonathan Fouchard , David Pereira , Fran¸cois Postic , Alain Richert , Michel Saint - Jean , and Atef Asnacios . Real - time single - cell response to stiﬀness . Proceed - ings of the National Academy of Sciences , 107 ( 38 ) : 16518 – 16523 , September 2010 . ISSN 0027 - 8424 , 1091 - 6490 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1007940107 . URL https : / / pnas . org / doi / full / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1007940107 . D . Mizuno , C . Tardin , C . F . Schmidt , and F . C . MacKintosh . Nonequilibrium mechanics of active cytoskeletal networks . Science , 315 : 370 – 373 , 2007 . Emad Moeendarbary , L´eo Valon , Marco Fritzsche , Andrew R . Harris , Dale A . Moulding , Adrian J . Thrasher , Eleanor Stride , L . Mahadevan , and Guillaume T . Charras . The cyto - plasm of living cells behaves as a poroelastic material . Nature materials , 12 ( 3 ) : 253 – 261 , 2013 . Publisher : Nature Publishing Group . ´ Etienne Moisdon , Pierre Seez , Camille Noˆus , Fran¸cois Molino , Philippe Marcq , and Cyprien Gay . Mapping cell cortex rheology to tissue rheology , and vice - versa . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2204 . 10907 , 2022 . Alessandro Mongera , Payam Rowghanian , Hannah J Gustafson , Elijah Shelton , David A Keal - hofer , Emmet K Carn , Friedhelm Serwane , Adam A Lucio , James Giammona , and Otger Camp ` as . A ﬂuid - to - solid jamming transition underlies vertebrate body axis elongation . Na - ture , 561 ( 7723 ) : 401 – 405 , 2018 . Fabien Montel , Morgan Delarue , Jens Elgeti , Laurent Malaquin , Markus Basan , Thomas Risler , Bernard Cabane , Danijela Vignjevic , Jacques Prost , Giovanni Cappello , et al . Stress clamp experiments on multicellular tumor spheroids . Physical review letters , 107 ( 18 ) : 188102 , 2011 . Jan Mueller , Gregory Szep , Maria Nemethova , Ingrid De Vries , Arnon D . Lieber , Christoph Winkler , Karsten Kruse , J . Victor Small , Christian Schmeiser , and Kinneret Keren . Load adaptation of lamellipodial actin networks . Cell , 171 ( 1 ) : 188 – 200 , 2017 . Publisher : Elsevier . Akankshi Munjal , Edouard Hannezo , Tony Y . - C . Tsai , Timothy J . Mitchison , and Sean G . Mega - son . Extracellular hyaluronate pressure shaped by cellular tethers drives tissue morphogenesis . Cell , 184 ( 26 ) : 6313 – 6325 , 2021 . Publisher : Elsevier . Nebojsa Murisic , Vincent Hakim , Ioannis G Kevrekidis , Stanislav Y Shvartsman , and Basile Audoly . From discrete to continuum models of three - dimensional deformations in epithelial sheets . Biophysical journal , 109 ( 1 ) : 154 – 163 , 2015 . Alexander Nestor - Bergmann , Emma Johns , Sarah Woolner , and Oliver E Jensen . Mechanical characterization of disordered and anisotropic cellular monolayers . Physical Review E , 97 ( 5 ) : 052409 , 2018 . Alexander Nestor - Bergmann , Guy B Blanchard , Nathan Hervieux , Alexander G Fletcher , Joce - lyn ´Etienne , and B´en´edicte Sanson . Adhesion - regulated junction slippage controls cell inter - calation dynamics in an apposed - cortex adhesion model . PLoS computational biology , 18 ( 1 ) : e1009812 , 2022 . 34 Masatoshi Nishikawa , Sundar Ram Naganathan , Frank J¨ulicher , and Stephan W Grill . Con - trolling contractile instabilities in the actomyosin cortex . eLife , 6 : 058101 , 2017 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 19595 . Ritsuya Niwayama , Prachiti Moghe , Yan - Jun Liu , Dimitri Fabr ` eges , Frank Buchholz , Matthieu Piel , and Takashi Hiiragi . A tug - of - war between cell shape and polarity controls division orientation to ensure robust patterning in the mouse blastocyst . Developmental Cell , 51 ( 5 ) : 564 – 574 . e6 , 2019 . ISSN 1534 - 5807 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2019 . 10 . 012 . URL https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S1534580719308561 . Alina Oltean , Jie Huang , David C Beebe , and Larry A Taber . Tissue growth constrained by extracellular matrix drives invagination during optic cup morphogenesis . Biomechanics and modeling in mechanobiology , 15 ( 6 ) : 1405 – 1421 , 2016 . Jeﬀrey H Omens and Yuan - Cheng Fung . Residual strain in rat left ventricle . Circulation research , 66 ( 1 ) : 37 – 45 , 1990 . J´er´emy O’Byrne , Yariv Kafri , Julien Tailleur , and Fr´ed´eric van Wijland . Time irreversibility in active matter , from micro to macro . Nature Reviews Physics , pages 1 – 17 , 2022 . William J Parnell . Nonlinear pre - stress for cloaking from antiplane elastic waves . Proceedings of the Royal Society A : Mathematical , Physical and Engineering Sciences , 468 ( 2138 ) : 563 – 580 , 2012 . Laurynas Pasakarnis , Erich Frei , Emmanuel Caussinus , Markus Aﬀolter , and Damian Brunner . Amnioserosa cell constriction but not epidermal actin cable tension autonomously drives dorsal closure . Nature cell biology , 18 ( 11 ) : 1161 – 1172 , 2016 . Esther J . Pearl , Jingjing Li , and Jeremy B . A . Green . Cellular systems for epithelial invagi - nation . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences , 372 ( 1720 ) : 20150526 , May 2017 . ISSN 0962 - 8436 , 1471 - 2970 . doi : 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2015 . 0526 . URL https : / / royalsocietypublishing . org / doi / 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2015 . 0526 . Robert J . Pelham and Yu - li Wang . Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by substrate ﬂexibility . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 94 ( 25 ) : 13661 – 13665 , December 1997 . ISSN 0027 - 8424 , 1091 - 6490 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 94 . 25 . 13661 . URL https : / / pnas . org / doi / full / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 94 . 25 . 13661 . Carlos P´erez - Gonz´alez , Gerardo Ceada , Francesco Greco , Marija Matejˇci´c , Manuel G´omez - Gonz´alez , Natalia Castro , Anghara Menendez , Sohan Kale , Denis Krndija , Andrew G Clark , et al . Mechanical compartmentalization of the intestinal organoid enables crypt folding and collective cell migration . Nature cell biology , 23 ( 7 ) : 745 – 757 , 2021 . William J Polacheck and Christopher S Chen . Measuring cell - generated forces : a guide to the available tools . Nature methods , 13 ( 5 ) : 415 – 423 , 2016 . Thomas D . Pollard . Actin and actin - binding proteins . Cold Spring Harbor perspectives in biology , 8 ( 8 ) : a018226 , 2016 . Publisher : Cold Spring Harbor Lab . Paolo P . Provenzano , Carlos Cuevas , Amy E . Chang , Vikas K . Goel , Daniel D . Von Hoﬀ , and Sunil R . Hingorani . Enzymatic targeting of the stroma ablates physical barriers to treatment of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma . Cancer cell , 21 ( 3 ) : 418 – 429 , 2012 . Publisher : Elsevier . 35 T . Putelat , P . Recho , and L . Truskinovsky . Mechanical stress as a regulator of cell motility . Phys . Rev . E , 97 , 2018 . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 97 . 012410 . Andrew Rape , Wei - hui Guo , and Yu - li Wang . Microtubule depolymerization induces traction force increase through two distinct pathways . Journal of Cell Science , 124 ( 24 ) : 4233 – 4240 , December 2011 . ISSN 0021 - 9533 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 090563 . URL https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 090563 . P . Recho and L . Truskinovsky . An asymmetry between pushing and pulling for crawling cells . Phys . Rev . E , 87 : 022720 , 2013 . P . Recho , T . Putelat , and L . Truskinovsky . Contraction - driven cell motility . Phys . Rev . Lett . , 111 : 108102 , 2013 . P . Recho , J . Fouchard , T . Wyatt , N . Khalilgharibi , G . Charras , and A . Kabla . Tug - of - war between stretching and bending in living cell sheets . Physical Review E , 102 ( 1 ) : 012401 , July 2020 . ISSN 2470 - 0045 , 2470 - 0053 . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 102 . 012401 . URL https : / / link . aps . org / doi / 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 102 . 012401 . Celia Reina and Sergio Conti . Kinematic description of crystal plasticity in the ﬁnite kinematic framework : A micromechanical understanding of F = FeFp . Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids , 67 : 40 – 61 , 2014 . Celia Reina , Anja Schl¨omerkemper , and Sergio Conti . Derivation of F = FeFp as the continuum limit of crystalline slip . Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids , 89 : 231 – 254 , 2016 . Damien Robert , Thi - Hanh Nguyen , Fran¸cois Gallet , and Claire Wilhelm . In vivo determination of ﬂuctuating forces during endosome traﬃcking using a combination of active and passive microrheology . PloS one , 5 ( 4 ) : e10046 , 2010 . Edward K Rodriguez , Anne Hoger , and Andrew D McCulloch . Stress - dependent ﬁnite growth in soft elastic tissues . Journal of biomechanics , 27 ( 4 ) : 455 – 467 , 1994 . Pierre Ronceray , Chase P . Broedersz , and Martin Lenz . Fiber networks amplify active stress . Proceedings of the national academy of sciences , 113 ( 11 ) : 2827 – 2832 , 2016 . Publisher : National Acad Sciences . Arnab Saha , Masatoshi Nishikawa , Martin Behrndt , Carl - Philipp Heisenberg , Frank J¨ulicher , and Stephan W Grill . Determining physical properties of the cell cortex . Biophysical journal , 110 ( 6 ) : 1421 – 1429 , 2016 . Erik Sahai , Igor Astsaturov , Edna Cukierman , David G . DeNardo , Mikala Egeblad , Ronald M . Evans , Douglas Fearon , Florian R . Greten , Sunil R . Hingorani , and Tony Hunter . A framework for advancing our understanding of cancer - associated ﬁbroblasts . Nature Reviews Cancer , 20 ( 3 ) : 174 – 186 , 2020 . Publisher : Nature Publishing Group . Guillaume Salbreux , Guillaume Charras , and Ewa Paluch . Actin cortex mechanics and cellular morphogenesis . Trends in cell biology , 22 ( 10 ) : 536 – 545 , 2012 . Publisher : Elsevier . Jean Salen¸con . M´ecanique des milieux continus . Tome II , Thermo´elasticit´e . ´Ecole polytechnique , 1994 . Thierry Savin , Natasza A Kurpios , Amy E Shyer , Patricia Florescu , Haiyi Liang , L Mahadevan , and Cliﬀord J Tabin . On the growth and form of the gut . Nature , 476 ( 7358 ) : 57 – 62 , 2011 . 36 Elena Scarpa , C´edric Finet , Guy B Blanchard , and B´en´edicte Sanson . Actomyosin - driven tension at compartmental boundaries orients cell division independently of cell geometry in vivo . Developmental cell , 47 ( 6 ) : 727 – 740 , 2018 . Eva - Maria Schoetz , Marcos Lanio , Jared A Talbot , and M Lisa Manning . Glassy dynamics in three - dimensional embryonic tissues . Journal of The Royal Society Interface , 10 ( 89 ) : 20130726 , 2013 . Amy E Shyer , Tuomas Tallinen , Nandan L Nerurkar , Zhiyan Wei , Eun Seok Gil , David L Kaplan , Cliﬀord J Tabin , and L Mahadevan . Villiﬁcation : how the gut gets its villi . Science , 342 ( 6155 ) : 212 – 218 , 2013 . Amy E . Shyer , Alan R . Rodrigues , Grant G . Schroeder , Elena Kassianidou , Sanjay Kumar , and Richard M . Harland . Emergent cellular self - organization and mechanosensation initiate follicle pattern in the avian skin . Science , 357 ( 6353 ) : 811 – 815 , 2017 . Publisher : American Association for the Advancement of Science . Jaydeep Sidhaye and Caren Norden . Concerted action of neuroepithelial basal shrinkage and active epithelial migration ensures eﬃcient optic cup morphogenesis . elife , 6 : e22689 , 2017 . Publisher : eLife Sciences Publications Limited . R Skalak , DA Farrow , and A14782930883 Hoger . Kinematics of surface growth . Journal of mathematical biology , 35 ( 8 ) : 869 – 907 , 1997 . D . Stamenovi´c , S . M . Mijailovich , I . M . Toli´c - Nørrelykke , and N . Wang . Cell prestress . II . Contribution of microtubules . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . , 282 : C617 – C624 , 2002 . Triantafyllos Stylianopoulos , John D Martin , Vikash P Chauhan , Saloni R Jain , Benjamin Diop - Frimpong , Nabeel Bardeesy , Barbara L Smith , Cristina R Ferrone , Francis J Hornicek , Yves Boucher , et al . Causes , consequences , and remedies for growth - induced solid stress in murine and human tumors . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 109 ( 38 ) : 15101 – 15108 , 2012 . Andr´as Szab´o , Isidoro Cobo , Sharif Omara , Sophie McLachlan , Ray Keller , and Roberto Mayor . The molecular basis of radial intercalation during tissue spreading in early development . De - velopmental cell , 37 ( 3 ) : 213 – 225 , 2016 . Larry A . Taber . Biomechanics of Growth , Remodeling , and Morphogenesis . Applied Mechanics Reviews , 48 ( 8 ) : 487 – 545 , 08 1995 . ISSN 0003 - 6900 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 3005109 . URL https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1115 / 1 . 3005109 . Larry A Taber . Towards a uniﬁed theory for morphomechanics . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A : Mathematical , Physical and Engineering Sciences , 367 ( 1902 ) : 3555 – 3583 , 2009 . Tuomas Tallinen , Jun Young Chung , Fran¸cois Rousseau , Nadine Girard , Julien Lef ` evre , and Lakshminarayanan Mahadevan . On the growth and form of cortical convolutions . Nature Physics , 12 ( 6 ) : 588 – 593 , 2016 . John L . Tan , Joe Tien , Dana M . Pirone , Darren S . Gray , Kiran Bhadriraju , and Christopher S . Chen . Cells lying on a bed of microneedles : An approach to isolate mechanical force . Pro - ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 100 ( 4 ) : 1484 – 1489 , February 2003 . ISSN 0027 - 8424 , 1091 - 6490 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0235407100 . URL https : / / pnas . org / doi / full / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0235407100 . 37 R . J . Tetley , G . B . Blanchard , A . G . Fletcher , R . J . Adams , and B . Sanson . Unipolar distributions of junctional myosin ii identify cell stripe boundaries that drive cell intercalation throughout drosophila axis extension . eLife , 5 : e12094 , 2016 . Julie A . Theriot , Timothy J . Mitchison , Lewis G . Tilney , and Daniel A . Portnoy . The rate of actin - based motility of intracellular Listeria monocytogenes equals the rate of actin polymer - ization . Nature , 357 ( 6375 ) : 257 – 260 , 1992 . Publisher : Nature Publishing Group . Jean - Yves Tinevez , Ulrike Schulze , Guillaume Salbreux , Julia Roensch , Jean - Fran¸cois Joanny , and Ewa Paluch . Role of cortical tension in bleb growth . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 106 ( 44 ) : 18581 – 18586 , 2009 . Publisher : National Acad Sciences . S . Tlili , M . Durande , Cyprien Gay , B . Ladoux , F . Graner , and H . Delano¨e - Ayari . Migrating epithelial monolayer ﬂows like a Maxwell viscoelastic liquid . Physical Review Letters , 125 ( 8 ) : 088102 , 2020 . Publisher : APS . Alireza Tofangchi , Anthony Fan , and M Taher A Saif . Mechanism of axonal contractility in embryonic drosophila motor neurons in vivo . Biophysical journal , 111 ( 7 ) : 1519 – 1527 , 2016 . Sari Tojkander , Gergana Gateva , and Pekka Lappalainen . Actin stress ﬁbers – assembly , dynamics and biological roles . Journal of cell science , 125 ( 8 ) : 1855 – 1864 , 2012 . Publisher : Company of Biologists . Melda Tozluoˇglu and Yanlan Mao . On folding morphogenesis , a mechanical problem . Philo - sophical Transactions of the Royal Society B : Biological Sciences , 375 ( 1809 ) : 20190564 , Octo - ber 2020 . doi : 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2019 . 0564 . URL https : / / royalsocietypublishing . org / doi / full / 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2019 . 0564 . Publisher : Royal Society . Melda Tozluoˇglu , Maria Duda , Natalie J . Kirkland , Ricardo Barrientos , Jemima J . Burden , Jos´e J . Mu˜noz , and Yanlan Mao . Planar diﬀerential growth rates initiate precise fold positions in complex epithelia . Developmental cell , 51 ( 3 ) : 299 – 312 , 2019 . Publisher : Elsevier . Lev Truskinovsky and Giuseppe Zurlo . Nonlinear elasticity of incompatible surface growth . Physical Review E , 99 ( 5 ) : 053001 , 2019 . Ramesh N Vaishnav and Jafar Vossoughi . Residual stress and strain in aortic segments . Journal of biomechanics , 20 ( 3 ) : 235 – 239 , 1987 . Koen van den Dries , Stefan Linder , Isabelle Maridonneau - Parini , and Renaud Poincloux . Probing the mechanical landscape – new insights into podosome architecture and mechanics . Journal of Cell Science , 132 ( 24 ) : jcs236828 , 2019 . Publisher : The Company of Biologists Ltd . Sjoerd Van Helvert , Cornelis Storm , and Peter Friedl . Mechanoreciprocity in cell migration . Nature cell biology , 20 ( 1 ) : 8 – 20 , 2018 . Timoth´ee Vignaud , Calina Copos , Christophe Leterrier , Mauricio Toro - Nahuelpan , Qingzong Tseng , Julia Mahamid , Laurent Blanchoin , Alex Mogilner , Manuel Th´ery , and Laetitia Kurzawa . Stress ﬁbres are embedded in a contractile cortical network . Nature materials , 20 ( 3 ) : 410 – 420 , 2021 . Publisher : Nature Publishing Group . Esther Wershof , Danielle Park , Robert P . Jenkins , David J . Barry , Erik Sahai , and Paul A . Bates . Matrix feedback enables diverse higher - order patterning of the extracellular matrix . PLOS Computational Biology , 15 ( 10 ) : e1007251 , October 2019 . ISSN 1553 - 7358 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1007251 . URL https : / / dx . plos . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1007251 . 38 Tom P . J . Wyatt , Andrew R . Harris , Maxine Lam , Qian Cheng , Julien Bellis , Andrea Dim - itracopoulos , Alexandre J . Kabla , Guillaume T . Charras , and Buzz Baum . Emergence of homeostatic epithelial packing and stress dissipation through divisions oriented along the long cell axis . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 112 ( 18 ) : 5726 – 5731 , May 2015 . ISSN 0027 - 8424 , 1091 - 6490 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1420585112 . URL https : / / pnas . org / doi / full / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1420585112 . Tom PJ Wyatt , Jonathan Fouchard , Ana Lisica , Nargess Khalilgharibi , Buzz Baum , Pierre Recho , Alexandre J . Kabla , and Guillaume T . Charras . Actomyosin controls planarity and folding of epithelia in response to compression . Nature materials , 19 ( 1 ) : 109 – 117 , 2020 . Pub - lisher : Nature Publishing Group . J . P . Xie , S . Q . Liu , R . F . Yang , and Y . C . Fung . The zero - stress state of rat veins and vena cava . Journal of Biomechanical Engineering , 113 : 36 – 41 , 1991 . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 2894083 . Kenan Xie , Yuehua Yang , and Hongyuan Jiang . Controlling cellular volume via mechanical and physical properties of substrate . Biophysical journal , 114 ( 3 ) : 675 – 687 , 2018 . Fengzhu Xiong , Wenzhe Ma , Tom W Hiscock , Kishore R Mosaliganti , Andrea R Tentner , Ken - neth A Brakke , Nicolas Rannou , Arnaud Gelas , Lydie Souhait , Ian A Swinburne , et al . In - terplay of cell shape and division orientation promotes robust morphogenesis of developing epithelia . Cell , 159 ( 2 ) : 415 – 427 , 2014 . Shi - Lei Xue , Bo Li , Xi - Qiao Feng , and Huajian Gao . Biochemomechanical poroelastic theory of avascular tumor growth . Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids , 94 : 409 – 432 , 2016 . Satoshi Yamada , Shigeru Tadano , and Kazuhiro Fujisaki . Residual stress distribution in rabbit limb bones . Journal of biomechanics , 44 ( 7 ) : 1285 – 1290 , 2011 . M . Yamamoto . The visco - elastic properties of network structure : I . General formalism . J . Phys . Soc . Jpn , 11 : 413 – 421 , 1956 . doi : 10 . 1143 / JPSJ . 11 . 413 . Qiutan Yang , Shi - Lei Xue , Chii Jou Chan , Markus Rempﬂer , Dario Vischi , Francisca Maurer - Gutierrez , Takashi Hiiragi , Edouard Hannezo , and Prisca Liberali . Cell fate coordinates mechano - osmotic forces in intestinal crypt formation . Nature Cell Biology , 23 ( 7 ) : 733 – 744 , July 2021 . ISSN 1465 - 7392 , 1476 - 4679 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41556 - 021 - 00700 - 2 . URL http : / / www . nature . com / articles / s41556 - 021 - 00700 - 2 . J . A . Zallen and E . Wieschaus . Patterned gene expression directs bipolar planar polarity in drosophila . Dev . Cell , 6 : 343 – 355 , 2004 . 39