Mixed - Initiative Co - Creativity Georgios N . Yannakakis Institute of Digital Games University of Malta Msida , Malta georgios . yannakakis @ um . edu . mt Antonios Liapis Center for Computer Games Research IT University of Copenhagen Copenhagen , Denmark anli @ itu . dk Constantine Alexopoulos Department of Philosophy University of Edinburgh Edinburgh , United Kingdom constantine . alexopoulos @ ed . ac . uk ABSTRACT Creating and designing with a machine : do we merely cre - ate together ( co - create ) or can a machine truly foster our creativity as human creators ? When does such co - creation foster the co - creativity of both humans and machines ? This paper investigates the simultaneous and / or iterative process of human and computational creators in a mixed - initiative fashion within the context of game design and attempts to draw from both theory and praxis towards answering the above questions . For this purpose , we ﬁrst discuss the strong links between mixed - initiative co - creation and theories of human and computational creativity . We then introduce an assessment methodology of mixed - initiative co - creativity and , as a proof of concept , evaluate Sentient Sketchbook as a co - creation tool for game design . Core ﬁndings suggest that tools such as Sentient Sketchbook are not mere game author - ing systems or mere enablers of creation but , instead , foster human creativity and realize mixed - initiative co - creativity . Categories and Subject Descriptors I . 2 . 1 [ Artiﬁcial Intelligence ] : Applications and Expert Systems ; J . 6 [ Computer Applications ] : Computer - Aided Engineering General Terms Algorithms , Design , Human Factors Keywords mixed - initiative design , computational creativity , lateral think - ing , diagrammatic reasoning , co - creation , co - creativity 1 . INTRODUCTION Computer - aided design ( CAD ) tools have introduced new creation practices through which the computer and the hu - man user collaborate to create new artifacts — be they ar - chitectural designs , industrial components , toys or computer games . This paper identiﬁes mixed - initiative co - creation ( MI - CC ) as the task of creating artifacts via the interac - tion of a human initiative and a computational initiative . Although mixed - initiative lacks a concrete deﬁnition [ 22 ] , MI - CC in this paper considers both the human and the com - puter proactively making contributions to the problem solu - tion , although the two initiatives do not need to contribute to the same degree . MI - CC thus diﬀers from other forms of co - creation , such as the collaboration of multiple human cre - ators or the interaction between a human and non - proactive computer support tools ( e . g . spell - checkers or image editors ) or non - computer support tools ( e . g . artboards or idea cards ) . This paper focuses on game development tasks — in par - ticular on level design — where co - creation occurs between a human and a machine in a mixed - initiative fashion . Level editors such as the Garden of Eden Creation Kit ( Bethesda 2009 ) or game engines such as the Unreal Development Kit ( Epic Games 2009 ) limit the computer’s initiative to inter - polations , pathﬁnding and rendering ; while they are very eﬃcient at speeding up game development tasks , human ini - tiative is the sole driver in the creative process . On the other end of the scale , procedural content generators specialized to a type of artifact such as trees with SpeedTree ( IDV 2002 ) or First Person Shooter levels with Oblige ( Apted 2007 ) can create large amounts of game content but limit the human’s initiative to choosing parameters for the generation algo - rithms ; granted that the user has no control during the com - puter’s generative process except before it starts ( customiz - ing its parameters ) or after it concludes ( editing the gener - ated artifact ) , there is no actual co - creation between human and machine . For the task of game development ( and level design in particular ) , mixed - initiative tools include Tanagra [ 30 ] which allows the human designer to specify the position of key platforms in a platformer level with the computa - tional designer generating the remaining level topology , and Sentient Sketchbook [ 17 ] which allows human designers to edit a strategy game level while computational creators are simultaneously creating variations of the user’s level . In this paper we argue not solely for the use of mixed - initiative co - creation tools but for their ability to foster cre - ativity . We argue that MI - CC can support and realize mixed - initiative co - creativity , thus fostering human creativity . Due to the very nature of the MI - CC type examined ( level de - sign ) , creativity in this paper refers to aspects of lateral thinking [ 10 ] and diagrammatic reasoning [ 6 ] . Our hypoth - esis is that a human designer interacting with a computa - tional designer that is deemed to be creative is not merely assisted during the creation process ; instead , under those cir - cumstances MI - CC fosters the designer’s creativity . A cre - ative human designer iteratively deﬁnes the possibility space of the computational designer which , in turn , inﬂuences the lateral path of the human designer . While mixed - initiative co - creativity implies that the creativity of both initiatives is fostered , this initial study focuses on and evaluates the human initiative . To support our hypothesis we initially draw from theories on human creativity , outline the theoret - ical links to MI - CC functionalities and introduce a creativ - ity assessment methodology for MI - CC . The paper’s core hypothesis is validated via an empirical evaluation of the Sentient Sketchbook tool [ 17 ] for level design , which satis - ﬁes the above key condition of mixed - initiative co - creativity . The key ﬁndings of the evaluation suggest that MI - CC ( via its Sentient Sketchbook instance ) can foster aspects of dia - grammatic lateral thinking . 2 . THE HUMAN INITIATIVE The understanding of human creativity has relied on di - verse philosophical ( e . g [ 33 ] ) , neuroscientiﬁc ( e . g . [ 9 ] ) and psychological ( e . g . [ 31 ] ) perspectives . While MI - CC can po - tentially be linked to several theories of human creativity , this paper focuses on aspects of lateral thinking and at - tempts to draw the direct connections between principles of diagrammatic cognitive reasoning and MI - CC . 2 . 1 MI - CC and Lateral Thinking Mixed - initiative co - creation — as demonstrated through the level design tool of this paper — is aligned with the general principles of lateral thinking [ 10 ] and creative emo - tive reasoning [ 27 ] , the latter being an instance and special - ization of the former . Lateral thinking [ 10 ] is the process of solving seemingly unsolvable problems or tackling non - trivial tasks through an indirect , non - linear , creative ap - proach . According to De Bono [ 10 ] , lateral thinking skills can be taught . MI - CC realizes the very nature of lateral thinking which , as a creativity process , is boosted through ( increasingly ) constrained spaces of solutions [ 10 ] . Co - creation with computational creators of visual art and de - sign ( e . g . for game level design ) encapsulates the very core principles of diagrammatic reasoning as human creativity , and especially lateral thinking creativity , is often associated with construction and the principles of customization [ 10 ] . The random stimulus principle of lateral thinking [ 2 ] re - lies on the introduction of a foreign conceptual element with the purpose of disrupting preconceived notions and habitual patterns of thought , by forcing the user to integrate and / or exploit the foreign element in the creation of an idea or the production of a solution . Randomness within lateral think - ing is the main guarantor of foreignness and hence of stim - ulation of creativity [ 2 ] . According to creative emotive rea - soning — which enriches the basic notions of lateral thinking with semantic , diagrammatic and emotive dimensions — the creative act is understood as an intervention that results in re - framing ; frames can be viewed as systems or established routes , that divide the possibility space ( e . g . the game de - sign space ) into bounded , meaning - bearing sub - areas . On that basis , the random stimulus and the re - framing princi - ples have one element in common : they are enablers of a change in the lateral path . The re - framing and the random stimulus principles are embedded in the MI - CC paradigm as machine creativity oﬀers heuristically - driven stimuli that are often altered through e . g . mutations within a genetic algorithm ; that can , in turn , alter the user’s framing on a particular task / problem . An artiﬁcial mutation to a visual diagram , an image , or a game map , resembles the random stimulus that can act as a potentiator of creativity and cause an alteration of lateral thinking . 2 . 2 MI - CC and Diagrammatic Reasoning Diagrammatic reasoning can be deﬁned as reasoning via the use of visual representations ; a cognitive process which is enabled during game level design , interaction design and visual art . These representations can include all forms of imagery incorporating visual features ( object shape , size , color , spatial orientation etc . ) [ 6 ] . Literature suggests that complex information processing is beneﬁted by the use of di - agrams , due e . g . to the fact that information in diagrams is indexed by spatial location , thus preserving explicitly the ge - ometric and topological relations of the problem’s elements ( see e . g . [ 14 ] ) . Diagrammatic reasoning is premised on the background knowledge of the relevant domain , as well as the speciﬁc nature of the diagram and its interconnections with the context within which one encounters it [ 6 ] . Diagrammatic Lateral Thinking fuses the principles of di - agrammatic reasoning and lateral thinking . Diagrammatic lateral thinking builds upon the extended mind theory [ 7 ] and its core idea is that a diagram , through its use , serves as a vehicle of cognitive processes , embodying the various aspects of the problem . The user’s ( e . g . designer’s ) mind is extended onto the diagram and reasoning proceeds through structural ( rather than semantic or syntactical ) entailment . One therefore thinks through the diagram rather than its use as a simple image . According to diagrammatic lateral think - ing , the process of constructing a diagram ( an image , a map , or a character ) is more important that the ﬁnal product [ 32 ] . Moreover , the possibilities one sees for constructing , altering or transforming a given diagram are part of one’s compre - hension of the diagram itself ; the functions of the diagram both on the semantic and pragmatic level are determined in part by these possibilities [ 28 ] . MI - CC can not only be viewed as being closely related to lateral thinking but furthermore that it often constitutes a type of diagrammatic lateral thinking : MI - CC occurring through diagrammatic representations ( e . g . in level design ) oﬀers visual ( diagrammatic ) alternative paths that satisfy a number of conditions . These deﬁne non - linear lateral paths within the creative ( possibility ) space as they promote deep exploration of the space of possibilities which is , in turn , a core lateral thinking characteristic . Diagrammatic lateral thinking , as MI - CC , does not necessarily embed transforma - tional creativity processes as identiﬁed by [ 3 ] . The MI - CC instance presented in this paper ( Sentient Sketchbook ) re - alizes diagrammatic lateral thinking since co - creativity in game level design occurs mainly on the visual ( diagram - matic ) level , at least in the way levels are presented in Sen - tient Sketchbook . MI - CC expands the very notion of dia - grammatic lateral thinking as it dichotomizes diagrammatic lateral thinking into two main creativity dimensions : one that is based on analogical thinking from diagrams and im - ages and one that works purely on the visual level through imagistic lateral thinking pathways [ 27 ] . In the case of mixed - initiative level design as realized by Sentient Sketch - book [ 17 ] , MI - CC encapsulates both analogical and visual diagrammatic lateral thinking : the ﬁrst by constraining the possibility space to playable levels and allowing designers to make analogies to game - speciﬁc qualities via diagrams ; the latter by targeting visual diversity in the suggestions it provides to the human designer . 3 . THE COMPUTATIONAL INITIATIVE Some of the fundamental questions within computational creativity research are “what does it mean to be creative ? ” and “does creativity emerge within the individual , the pro - cess , the product , or some combination of all three ? ” . The questions are as relevant to human as to machine creativity [ 3 , 8 ] . Computational creativity , however , seeks creativity generated by , enhanced or fostered via algorithmic means . The computational creativity literature suggests that value ( or usefulness ) and novelty are the key elements character - izing a creative process ( e . g . see [ 3 ] ) . An autonomous gen - erative system is able to try out exhaustively many possible novel combinations of elements , often resulting in largely uninteresting outcomes or artifacts . For that very reason , computational creativity not only requires the generated ar - tifacts to be novel , but also valuable . While other aspects of creativity have been discussed and proposed ( such as sur - prise [ 20 ] ) , novelty and value deﬁne the common denomina - tors accepted by most theories within computational creativ - ity . If the space of possibilities within MI - CC is constrained for both the machine and the human , the creative process is ultimately of value for both given the problem constraints as those are set by either the human or an external observer ( e . g . domain expert ) . Moreover , if the generative process of the machine searches within the constrained space of possi - bilities for orthogonally possible solutions then the computer interacts with the human user by oﬀering both useful and novel suggestions throughout the creative process [ 3 ] . The end outcome of MI - CC ( both novel and useful ) is ultimately a result of iterative co - creation . The autonomous creative system , in that case , ﬁnds novel ways to navigate a search space , by e . g . looking at orthogonal aspects of the human creative process , which are suggested back to the human . Computational creativity has been classiﬁed by Boden [ 3 ] in three types : combinatorial , exploratory and transforma - tional . Combinatorial creativity revolves around the com - bination of diﬀerent elements which is often trivially ac - complished by a computer . Computers are also well suited for exploratory creativity , which involves traversing a well - deﬁned search space . In contrast , transformational creativ - ity requires the computer to ‘break the rules’ of that pre - existing conceptual space . Among the three types of com - putational creativity identiﬁed by Boden , MI - CC realizes mainly exploratory creativity . While it could potentially achieve transformational creativity , mere exploration of the solution space can often result in more creative outcomes than transformation [ 4 , 24 ] . Pease et al . [ 23 ] provide the example of an unusual but legal chess move as often being more creative than changing the rules of chess . According to Bundy [ 4 ] an outcome is considered creative if the possibility space in which it lies is large ( and complex ) and if it is generated from a little explored area . MI - CC tools that generate feasible solutions within a small feasi - ble space capture the complexity expressed by Bundy . The harder it is to ﬁnd a solution within a complex and small feasible search space , the more novel it is deemed [ 4 ] . The notion of complexity has also been expressed via a number of alternative computational metrics including rarity and im - pressiveness [ 15 ] that can be considered in a MI - CC tool which involves diagrammatic aspects of creativity . Autonomous creative systems in the form of procedural content generation ( PCG ) have been used by the game in - dustry in specialized roles to create engaging but unpre - dictable game experiences , and to lessen the burden of man - ual game content generation through automating parts of it [ 34 ] . PCG is the backbone and core technique of several MI - CC tools for game design [ 29 , 30 , 17 ] . From a computational creativity perspective , while PCG can be viewed as artifact generation , PCG algorithms are rarely classiﬁed as creative . Evaluating commonly used PCG algorithms based on the creative tripod of skill , appreciation and imagination [ 8 ] , a case can be made that most existing algorithms possess only skill . This paper attempts to evaluate the degree to which a PCG algorithm which generates valuable and novel content for the human designer to consider can contribute to human creativity . The next section discusses approaches for eval - uating the creativity of the MI - CC paradigm , investigating both initiatives ( human and computer ) and their fusion . 4 . HOW TO EVALUATE THE CREATIVITY OF MI - CC Evaluating the impact of a mixed - initiative tool on com - putational creativity or human creativity is far from trivial and needs to be further supported empirically , via quanti - tative metrics and qualitative studies . Proposals have been put forth for evaluating the results of an autonomous com - putational creator [ 26 ] as well as the usability of“traditional” CAD tools [ 5 , 11 ] . While any of these proposed metrics could arguably be relevant when evaluating MI - CC tools , they fail to capture the impact of the proactive computational initiative of MI - CC on human creativity and vice versa — computational creativity assumes minimal human initiative and human - computer interaction assumes minimal compu - tational initiative . This paper oﬀers a ﬁrst step towards the evaluation of mixed - initiative co - creation , focusing on its ability to foster human creativity . While the interac - tion between human and computer arguably also fosters the computational creativity of the MI - CC tool , supporting or evaluating such a claim is outside the scope of this paper as it requires diﬀerent theoretical frameworks and experiments . Generally there are two types of creativity evaluation to be considered when a computational creator is involved such as in MI - CC : the evaluation of the ﬁnal ( or possibly interme - diate ) outcomes and the evaluation of the co - creative process for the generation of outcomes , solutions , or items . The for - mer can be evaluated through a number of heuristics for the task at hand ( such as novelty and usefulness ) or through crowdsourced estimates of creativity from a human ( or even a computational ) audience [ 26 ] . The latter is less straightfor - ward to evaluate as the exact human creativity processes are either completely unknown or only partially known [ 12 ] . It would , thus , require either ( a ) identifying milestones within the ( co - ) creative process through the heuristics of novelty and value ( and surprise [ 20 ] or other relevant heuristics ) which may approximate aspects of the underlying creative process or ( b ) some type of meta - level ( or self - predictive ) mechanism of the quality of the process or , alternatively , ( c ) an evaluation based on a temporal model of the co - creative process [ 21 ] . We argue that , supplementary to fostering the creativity of the ﬁnal co - creative outcome , MI - CC supports and fosters the creative process towards that outcome . Figure 1 : The interface of Sentient Sketchbook while a user edits a map sketch . The editing window covers the left half of the screen , while the computer generated suggestions are shown in the far right edge . Between the two are the tile palette , options for alternative displays of the map , and eval - uations of the user - created map . Within MI - CC , it is the human creator herself that implic - itly judges the quality and degree of use of the computational creator . However , it is an unbiased ( and potentially na¨ıve ) human audience that judges the quality of this use within the creative lateral path . On that basis the creativity capac - ity of MI - CC is evaluated in two quantitative ways in this study : through ( a ) the degree of use of the computational creations and ( b ) the quality of their use within the lateral path of creation . For this purpose , a human audience ( game designers ) is used both to reveal the usefulness of MI - CC ( through its use ) and to annotate milestones ( i . e . enablers of a change ) in the lateral path that have potentially been caused by the interaction with the computational creator . This paper investigates and evaluates the Sentient Sketch - book tool for game level design as an instance of MI - CC . 5 . SENTIENT SKETCHBOOK Sentient Sketchbook is a mixed - initiative tool for the de - sign of game levels [ 17 ] . Using map sketches as a low - ﬁdelity representation of a game level , Sentient Sketchbook allows its users to create content in substantially less time than if they were given full control of the design process . Map sketches are minimal abstractions of game levels consisting of a small number of tiles , and can represent several types of game levels [ 19 ] ; this paper will focus on levels for strategy games . A map sketch has tiles that allow movement ( pass - able ) or obstruct it ( impassable ) , and passable tiles can con - tain player bases and resources . These simple sketches are quick to comprehend , evaluate , and edit , allowing the user to playfully interact with the tool and try diﬀerent level se - tups with minimal investment in time and eﬀort . Once the sketching process is complete or at any time during the inter - action , the computer can convert these simple map sketches into complete , playable levels in 2D or 3D ( see Fig . 2 ) . Apart from the conversion of sketches into playable game levels , the computer assists the human designer via an intu - itive interface and automated evaluation of their sketches on domain - speciﬁc properties . Due to the small size and com - plexity of map sketches , evaluating navigational and topo - logical properties of the user’s level is lightweight and can be performed on real - time with every user interaction . The ( a ) Sketch of a strategy game level . ( b ) Final game level of Fig . 2a . ( c ) 3D strategy game level of Fig . 2a . Figure 2 : Sample map sketch of a strategy game level and the maps it creates . Tiles can be impassable ( dark ) passable ( orange ) , bases ( white ) or resources ( cyan ) . evaluations are generic and pertain to proximity , branching paths and balance [ 19 ] . Apart from numerical evaluations , which are shown as colored horizontal bars ranging from 0 % to 100 % ( see Fig . 1 ) , the tool also oﬀers visual representa - tions , including a navigational grid , optimal paths between bases , or “safe” resources around each player base . The most promising feature of Sentient Sketchbook for prompting actual human - machine co - creativity is the gener - ation of suggestions by the computer . These suggestions are generated in real - time while the users edit their lev - els ; up to twelve suggestions are presented on the edge of the user’s editing window ( see Fig . 1 ) , and the user can se - lect any of these suggestions to substitute their current map sketch . Suggestions are generated via genetic algorithms , a computational simulation of Darwinian evolution centered around survival of the ﬁttest . In Sentient Sketchbook , map sketches are evolved via a feasible - infeasible two - population genetic algorithm [ 13 ] which ensures that all shown sugges - tions are constrained to be playable , i . e . that all special tiles are connected via a passable path . The genetic algorithm evolves permutations of the user’s sketch either to optimize the domain - speciﬁc level evaluations used by the tool , or to create maps that are visually diverse from the user’s sketch . Due to the need for immediate user feedback , the evolution - ary sprint is short ; this results in maps which may not be op - timal , yet retain suﬃcient structural properties of the origi - nal user’s sketch to appear“familiar” . In the current version of the tool , 6 of the generated suggestions evolve to optimize numerically deﬁned ﬁtness functions which match the 6 eval - uations of level quality shown to the user via the interface . The remaining 6 generated suggestions evolve towards visual diversity via feasible - infeasible novelty search [ 16 ] which cre - ates diverse yet feasible individuals . While these suggestions do not explicitly improve a game level as they have no notion of level quality — except for the constraint on playability — they have been shown to provide inspiration in cases where a user does not have a level concept in mind . 6 . EVALUATION For an initial study of Sentient Sketchbook , ﬁve expert users ( employed in the game industry ) were asked to create strategy game levels using the tool [ 17 ] . These expert users were acquaintances of the authors who were sent the tool via e - mail with a request to create a few maps and provide feed - back ; the participants’ usage logs were sent back via e - mail after approximately a week , during which time they used the tool at their leisure . Additional questions on usability were asked and answered via e - mails . 1 2 3 4 15 6 7 8 19 10 1 1 11 1 1 1 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 ( a ) Session 1 1 2 3 4 15 6 7 8 19 10 1 11 12 13 ( b ) Session 2 1 2 3 4 15 6 7 8 19 10 ( c ) Session 3 1 2 3 4 15 6 7 8 19 10 1 1 11 1 1 1 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 ( d ) Session 4 1 2 3 4 15 6 7 8 19 10 1 1 11 1 1 1 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 ( e ) Session 5 1 2 3 4 15 6 7 8 19 10 1 1 11 1 1 1 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 24 23 ( f ) Session 6 1 2 3 4 15 6 7 8 19 10 1 1 11 1 1 1 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 ( g ) Session 7 Figure 3 : Complete creation paths of seven design sessions on small maps , displaying all steps taken . Each step corresponds to a user’s interaction , and causes the transition from the previous map to the next . Steps where a generated suggestion replaced the user’s sketch are shown as red arrows . Steps tagged as milestones in the creation process by two designers are indicated with a white circle above the arrow ; those tagged by three designers are indicated with a black circle . Overall , participants of this user survey responded pos - itively to the editing interface , while the evaluations and diﬀerent visualizations of map properties were considered relevant to the domain of strategy games and helpful to the creative process . This section follows the creativity assess - ment scheme introduced in Section 4 and presents ﬁndings on the use and the quality of use of the computational ini - tiative of Sentient Sketchbook . 6 . 1 Degree of Use Regarding the suggestions generated by the computational creator , participants made use of them in 15 out of 24 de - sign sessions . According to user feedback , cases where sug - gestions did not prove useful included ( a ) instances where a user had preplanned a map layout before starting their design session , ( b ) instances where the strict visual sym - metries of human maps were not retained in the generated suggestions , ( c ) instances where suggestions did not retain the number of bases of the user’s sketch and ( d ) instances where suggestions appeared disconnected to what the user was focusing on at that time . While there is a clear way of amending instances of type ( c ) and — to an extent — ( b ) , in - stances of type ( a ) will never beneﬁt from MI - CC processes , while instances of type ( d ) require an elaborate model of the designer’s goals , processes and preferences [ 18 ] . In the design sessions where computer - generated sugges - tions were selected to substitute the user’s sketch , partici - pants predominantly used map suggestions evolved to max - imize a map property . This veriﬁes , in a way , that the tool’s map evaluations are appropriate to the domain of strategy game level design and useful to designers . Sug - gestions evolving to maximize a map property were selected mostly towards the end of the level design process , in order to “ﬁnetune” an almost ﬁnished map sketch . From the cur - rent ﬁndings , it is hard to deduce whether this behavior is an inherent property of the creative process itself , i . e . that users focused on the task or vision they had contrived and only noticed evaluations or suggestions once their own creative drive had run its course , or whether it is an artifact of the user interface and quality of suggestions . While map sug - gestions evolving towards visual diversity were selected only in 6 out of 22 cases where suggestions were used , such sug - gestions were predominantly selected during the early stages of the creative process . This deviation indicates that while users can use targeted suggestions , which are conscious of strategy game level quality , to“ﬁnetune”a map created pre - dominantly by their own creative spark , suggestions which target visual novelty , despite perhaps being worse in terms of level quality than those explicitly targeting it , can provide inspiration and alter the visual lateral path of the designer . 6 . 2 Quality of Use To illustrate the impact of mixed - initiative design in the creative process — and due to space considerations — we will only focus on small maps of 64 tiles ( 8 by 8 ) , as they are more concise in terms of discrete user actions taken from empty map to ﬁnal map . During the user study detailed both above and in [ 17 ] , 7 design sessions on small maps were undertaken by multiple expert designers . 6 . 2 . 1 Qualitative Observation of Creation Paths The creation path of each map is shown on Fig . 3 ; every map instance , before and after the user’s action , is displayed sequentially from the session’s start to its ﬁnish . With the exception of session 1 , the patterns in user actions in the sessions shown indicate a preference towards symmetry , not only on the ﬁnal map but also on the process ; that is shown often in the initial placement of bases ( sessions 4 and 6 ) , re - Figure 4 : Tiles changed on each step for the design sessions shown in Figure 3 . Steps tagged as milestones by 2 users are shown in gray , and by 3 users in black . Steps with sug - gestions are shown in yellow ( not tagged by multiple users ) , red ( tagged by 2 users ) and dark red ( tagged by 3 users ) . sources ( session 2 ) or impassable regions ( sessions 3 and 5 ) . In sessions 1 , 2 , 4 and 5 , no computer - generated suggestions are chosen to replace the user’s design ; the designer’s ten - dency towards symmetry is never broken ( excluding session 1 , which did not include symmetry at any point in the pro - cess ) . On the other hand , in sessions 3 and 6 the designer used a suggestion to change their current design once ( at steps 7 and 24 respectively ) , while in session 7 the designer used the suggestions multiple times in a row ( steps 19 to 22 ) , changing their design thoroughly . In session 6 , the sug - gestion caused a minor change in the map structure : while the diagonal symmetry of the map is broken , the suggestion does not seem to result in a better map or inspire the user to continue working on it . In session 3 , the suggestion caused all necessary game elements to be added to the map ( i . e . two bases and multiple resources ) , acting as a form of shortcut to speed up the creation process ; the designer then proceeds to manually “correct” the generated suggestion by creating multiple paths between bases and balancing the placement of resources around each base . Finally , session 7 is inter - esting in the fact that the user created a very symmetrical initial map and then proceeded to explore other possibil - ities via the suggestions ; steps 19 and 22 saw the use of suggestions targeting novelty , which lead to big changes in the map , while steps 20 and 21 saw the use of suggestions targeting speciﬁc map qualities , which caused more subtle changes which can be considered “ﬁnetuning” . 6 . 2 . 2 Quantitative Evaluation of Creation Paths While the qualitative evaluation of the design process is quite informative , the question of quantitatively evaluating the creation path ( and its creativity ) remains to be an - swered . A mathematically deﬁned heuristic could poten - tially be used to evaluate the process ; in the domain of tile - based map sketches , the number of tiles changing within a step could perhaps be a good abstraction of how humans qualitatively measure map change . Fig . 4 displays the tiles changed from one step ( i . e . one user action ) . As the in - terface of Sentient Sketchbook mostly supports “painting” a single tile , most user actions result in one tile changed ; all steps of sessions 1 , 4 and 5 see one tile changed per step . The designer can also paint a larger passable or impassable area , leading to a handful of tiles changing ( step 5 of session 2 , step 1 of session 3 and step 15 of session 6 ) . However , only the replacement of the user’s sketch with a computer - generated suggestion causes large changes in the number of tiles . For instance , 21 tiles change at step 7 of session 3 , when the user chooses a computer - generated suggestion that adds bases and resources ; despite the fact that the sug - gestion was not evolved towards visual diversity , the large change is due to the playability constraint that computer - generated maps must possess multiple bases and resources . In session 6 , the generated suggestion at step 24 does not change many of the map’s tiles , as is directly visible in Fig . 3 . In session 7 , generated suggestions evolved via novelty search change the map substantially ( steps 19 and 22 ) while those generated towards optimizing a map quality less so ( steps 20 and 21 ) . The fact that novelty search makes more signiﬁcant changes to maps is not surprising , since it explicitly targets tile diﬀerence in the novelty score of the genetic algorithm . 6 . 2 . 3 Human Audience Another evaluation which combines both the subjective properties of qualitative human evaluation and quantitative , data - driven evaluations comes from the feedback of a human audience regarding the creation process . In this context , the expert users participating in the presented user survey were asked to tag which of the steps displayed in Fig . 3 consti - tuted milestones in the creation process — i . e . enablers of lateral path change . All survey participants were asked to tag all creation paths ( excluding theirs ) for small maps . The user’s responses were unsurprisingly varied : some designers tagged numerous steps as milestones ( as high as 8 . 4 mile - stones on average per session ) while others identiﬁed mile - stones sparsely ( 1 . 17 milestones on average per session ) . To the same eﬀect , diﬀerent designers arguably selected mile - stones based on diﬀerent underlying criteria . This study will investigate steps classiﬁed as milestones by two or more users , excluding the map’s creator . Both Fig . 3 and Fig . 4 highlight which steps were classiﬁed as milestones by two or three designers ( no milestones had the consensus of all four designers ) . While many of these milestones are common - sensical to a casual , human observer , it is interesting to note that they are not often detected by the tile change heuristic . The steps which place the ﬁrst or second base ( e . g . step 2 of session 4 , step 10 of session 7 ) or the steps which turn an asymmetrical map into a symmetrical one ( e . g . step 14 of session 4 , step 20 of session 5 ) are often identiﬁed as milestones , yet they involve a single tile change and are not identiﬁed as signiﬁcant by the heuristic . How - ever , the designer’s analogical reasoning behind the pure visual representation of the strategy game level identiﬁes that bases are signiﬁcant for gameplay and that symmetrical maps result in “fair” games . Designers are thus not tagging milestones solely for their potential as visual diagrammatic lateral paths , but also as analogical diagrammatic lateral paths . Although several steps were tagged as milestones by multiple users , suggestions are particularly prevalent among them , considering their rarity . Out of the 6 computer sug - gestions in the sessions investigated , 4 were tagged as mile - stones by two or more users , out of a total of 28 milestones on 134 steps , while 2 suggestions were tagged as milestones by three users out of a total of 8 milestones on 134 steps . It is important to note that identifying a computer gen - erated suggestion is not particularly diﬃcult for casual ob - servers and users of Sentient Sketchbook alike ; the tile change heuristic can also detect suggestions with a low margin of error . The fact that generated maps are not symmetrical is a tell - tale sign of a computer generated suggestion , as well as the fact that multiple tiles change in a single step . While in cases where designers were focusing on symmetrical maps these generated asymmetrical patterns did not always resonate with them , in the context of MI - CC the fact that generated suggestions do not appear similar to something a human designer would have created is not in any way detri - mental . Instead , the asymmetries act as a stimulus neces - sary to disrupt the user’s habitual pattern of thought and , to a degree , the ingrained attraction of humans to symmetry [ 1 , 25 ] . By targeting map qualities such as balance , gener - ated suggestions which are asymmetrical , yet of high quality and balanced , disrupt preconceived notions of level design - ers that “fairness” between opponents in a strategy game can only be achieved through symmetry in the levels . As can be expected , the foreignness of the generated sugges - tions is often rebelled against and suggestions are ignored , especially in cases where users are not necessarily open to non - linear diagrammatic lateral thinking . However , even the presentation of such suggestions while the user is edit - ing the level can lead to a certain didactic experience in dia - grammatic lateral thinking skills ; as a participant of the user survey commented regarding their experience using Sentient Sketchbook , “I’ve started to like the tool a lot . Instead of doing something symmetrical and intricate , I started just working with some high level abstract ideas for the maps , like ‘this one should be scattered’ or ‘in this one the play - ers should be 3 vs . 1’ or whatever . Suddenly the tool starts pushing you to places you didn’t really consider . ” 7 . DISCUSSION AND CRITIQUE The main line of criticism that can be leveled against the notion of mixed - initiative co - creativity can be summed up in the following objection : “The user merely chooses from al - ternatives , i . e . the suggestions presented by Sentient Sketch - book . There is no real creativity on the part of the human user . ” An additional key critique is : “The computer merely follows a random process” . While we do not focus on or eval - uate the computational end of MI - CC in this paper ( latter objection ) , we will try to decompose and answer to the ﬁrst objection by analyzing its diﬀerent parts . The theoretical foundation of diagrammatic lateral think - ing , and consequently of MI - CC , is the notion of the extended mind [ 7 ] . An external object ( e . g . a notebook , software , etc . ) that is consistently involved in and relied upon in order for a human subject to perform some cognitive or reasoning func - tion , can be understood as an essential constituent of that subject’s mind . If we take the example of a person suﬀer - ing from memory problems who consistently uses and relies upon a notebook in order to carry out everyday tasks ( either simple or complex ) , then we can understand the example’s notebook as a constituent of that person’s mind , an exten - sion of it . It is in this sense that the MI - CC tool presented in this paper , which aims for more use , and is meant to be consistently relied upon in a creative process ( which in - volves cognitive / reasoning skills ) , deﬁnes such an extension . This is important as it considerably reduces the distance between human user and machine , which the objection re - lies upon . There is no outside party doing the real work , and a human subject “merely choosing , ” but an integrated cognitive / reasoning system . This distance is further reduced when we take into ac - count the iterative process of suggestion generation . As the creative process unfolds , the user is constantly guiding the MI - CC tool as it , in turn , guides the human user . The no - tion of co - creation is key . Furthermore , this casts doubts as to whether the simple concept of choice is applicable here . The suggestions ( and consequent selections ) are a product of a human - machine interaction , and they have meaning as links within a chain , that takes us from the user’s initial de - signs / intentions to the ﬁnal creative product . The human user is not “merely choosing” but shaping the space which generates the suggestions themselves . Even if we disregarded this and use choice in the limited interpretation of this ob - jection , we still ﬁnd a place for “merely choosing” in our common - sensical notion of a creative process . A signiﬁcant part of any creative process consists of choosing between al - ternatives . What makes it creative is how we further exploit this choice and the reasons for choosing as we chose . Even if we did not view MI - CC under the extended mind theory , we can still understand the human user and the com - putational creator as forming a group . Within a group , co - creativity can take many forms and is not constrained by the narrow , individualistic perspective underlying the objection under discussion . In a group , one is often labeled creative if she stirs the group’s creativity by making the right choices between alternatives produced by the group as a whole . One obvious critique against the evaluation scheme used is the lack of a control experiment . While controlling for the use of the computational initiative in a very direct man - ner could potentially provide additional information on the usefulness of MI - CC , it would not necessarily address the question of fostering creativity . The proposed experimen - tal protocol instead allows users to freely choose to apply or ignore suggestions provided to their designs and then , in a post - experience manner , evaluate the milestones of other designer’s lateral paths . Such an evaluation validates the key hypothesis of this paper directly . Another critique that MI - CC evaluation faces is its very focus on the creative process — and the use of the computa - tional creator — instead of the evaluation on the ﬁnal arti - fact [ 26 ] . While the outcome of a creative process may reveal aspects of creativity , we argue ( and literature suggests [ 23 ] ) that it is the lateral path itself ( i . e . the creative design pro - cess ) that is more important and potentially more relevant to evaluate . The iterative co - creation properties of MI - CC for creative design ( such as level design and visual art ) of - ten allow for transparent and observable creation paths to be available and , thus , oﬀer richer underlying information about the co - creativity of humans and machines . 8 . CONCLUSIONS In this paper we attempt to shed light on the creativity capacity of mixed - initiative co - creation in and for games . We thus situate mixed - initiative co - creation within the lit - erature of human and computational creativity , identifying clear links to both diagrammatic lateral thinking and ex - ploratory creativity . As MI - CC uniquely fuses aspects of human and computational creativity , we propose an assess - ment methodology of the potential of MI - CC as an enabler for diagrammatic lateral path change . The evaluation is per - formed on the Sentient Sketchbook MI - CC tool and the key results indicate that the computational initiative is useful to humans on the task of strategy game level design and , most importantly , that the selected computer - generated level de - signs deﬁne milestones in the creative lateral path of the human designers surveyed . Through the study of mixed - initiative co - creativity we aim to advance our understanding of human creativity and de - velop software capable of fostering it . The main motivation behind MI - CC is that the potential of human creativity is often undermined because users ( e . g . designers or players ) lack the appropriate co - creation tools . The core ﬁndings of this paper suggest that the mixed - initiative co - creation paradigm is more than an enabler for human creativity , a mere computer - assisted design tool or a facilitator of hu - man co - creativity such as any CAD tool or an implicit co - creation enabler such as social media . Instead , through the mixed - initiative perspective we assume an autonomous com - putational system that explores the possibility space in its own ways as guided by human lateral decisions during the creative process , realizing and fostering human - machine co - creativity . 9 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank the participants of the user study for their valuable feedback . The research is supported , in part , by the FP7 ICT project C2Learn ( project no : 318480 ) and the FP7 Marie Curie CIG project AutoGameDesign ( project no : 630665 ) . 10 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] R . Arnheim . Art and visual perception : a psychology of the creative eye . University of California Press , revised and expanded edition , 2004 . [ 2 ] M . Beaney . Imagination and creativity . Open University Milton Keynes , UK , 2005 . [ 3 ] M . A . Boden . The creative mind : Myths and mechanisms . Routledge , 2003 . [ 4 ] A . Bundy . What is the diﬀerence between real creativity and mere novelty ? Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 17 ( 03 ) : 533 – 534 , 1994 . [ 5 ] E . A . Carroll , C . Latulipe , R . Fung , and M . Terry . Creativity factor evaluation : Towards a standardized survey metric for creativity support . In Proceedings of the Seventh ACM Conference on Creativity and Cognition , pages 127 – 136 , 2009 . [ 6 ] P . C . - H . Cheng , R . K . Lowe , and M . Scaife . Cognitive science approaches to understanding diagrammatic representations . Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review , 15 ( 1 - 2 ) : 79 – 94 , 2001 . [ 7 ] A . Clark . Being there : Putting brain , body , and world together again . MIT press , 1998 . [ 8 ] S . Colton . Creativity versus the perception of creativity in computational systems . In AAAI Spring Symposium : Creative Intelligent Systems , pages 14 – 20 , 2008 . [ 9 ] A . R . Damasio . Some notes on brain , imagination and creativity . The origins of creativity , pages 59 – 68 , 2001 . [ 10 ] E . De Bono . Lateral thinking : Creativity step by step . Harper Collins , 2010 . [ 11 ] T . Hewett , M . Czerwinski , M . Terry , J . Nunamaker , L . Candy , B . Kules , and E . Sylvan . Creativity support tool evaluation methods and metrics . In Report of Workshop on Creativity Support Tools , pages 10 – 24 , 2005 . [ 12 ] D . R . Hofstadter . Fluid concepts and creative analogies : Computer models of the fundamental mechanisms of thought . Basic Books , 2008 . [ 13 ] S . O . Kimbrough , G . J . Koehler , M . Lu , and D . H . Wood . On a feasible - infeasible two - population ( ﬁ - 2pop ) genetic algorithm for constrained optimization : Distance tracing and no free lunch . European Journal of Operational Research , 190 ( 2 ) : 310 – 327 , 2008 . [ 14 ] J . H . Larkin and H . A . Simon . Why a diagram is ( sometimes ) worth ten thousand words . Cognitive science , 11 ( 1 ) : 65 – 100 , 1987 . [ 15 ] J . Lehman and K . O . Stanley . Beyond open - endedness : Quantifying impressiveness . In Artiﬁcial Life , volume 13 , pages 75 – 82 , 2012 . [ 16 ] A . Liapis , G . Yannakakis , and J . Togelius . Enhancements to constrained novelty search : Two - population novelty search for generating game content . In Proceedings of Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference , 2013 . [ 17 ] A . Liapis , G . Yannakakis , and J . Togelius . Sentient sketchbook : Computer - aided game level authoring . In Proceedings of ACM Conference on Foundations of Digital Games , 2013 . [ 18 ] A . Liapis , G . N . Yannakakis , and J . Togelius . Designer modeling for personalized game content creation tools . In Proceedings of the AIIDE Workshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence & Game Aesthetics , 2013 . [ 19 ] A . Liapis , G . N . Yannakakis , and J . Togelius . Towards a generic method of evaluating game levels . In Proceedings of the AAAI Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Interactive Digital Entertainment Conference , 2013 . [ 20 ] L . Macedo and A . Cardoso . Modeling forms of surprise in an artiﬁcial agent . Structure , 1 ( C2 ) : C3 , 2001 . [ 21 ] M . L . Maher , K . Brady , and D . H . Fisher . Computational models of surprise in evaluating creative design . In Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Computational Creativity , 2013 . [ 22 ] D . Novick and S . Sutton . What is mixed - initiative interaction ? In Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Symposium on Computational Models for Mixed Initiative Interaction , 1997 . [ 23 ] A . Pease , D . Winterstein , and S . Colton . Evaluating machine creativity . In Workshop on Creative Systems , 4th International Conference on Case Based Reasoning , pages 129 – 137 , 2001 . [ 24 ] J . Pind . Computational creativity : What place for literature ? Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 17 ( 03 ) : 547 – 548 , 1994 . [ 25 ] V . S . Ramachandran and W . Hirstein . The science of art : a neurological theory of aesthetic experience . Journal of consciousness Studies , 6 : 15 – 51 , 1999 . [ 26 ] G . Ritchie . Some empirical criteria for attributing creativity to a computer program . Minds and Machines , 17 ( 1 ) : 67 – 99 , 2007 . [ 27 ] T . Scaltsas and C . Alexopoulos . Creating creativity through emotive thinking . In Proceedings of the World Congress of Philosophy , 2013 . [ 28 ] A . Sloman . Diagrams in the Mind ? Springer , 2002 . [ 29 ] R . M . Smelik , T . Tutenel , K . J . de Kraker , and R . Bidarra . A declarative approach to procedural modeling of virtual worlds . Computers & Graphics , 35 ( 2 ) : 352 – 363 , 2011 . [ 30 ] G . Smith , J . Whitehead , and M . Mateas . Tanagra : Reactive planning and constraint solving for mixed - initiative level design . IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in Games , ( 99 ) , 2011 . [ 31 ] R . J . Sternberg . Handbook of creativity . Cambridge University Press , 1999 . [ 32 ] A . Vile and S . Polovina . Thinking of or thinking through diagrams ? The case of conceptual graphs . In Thinking with Diagrams Conference , The University of Wales , Aberystwyth , 1998 . [ 33 ] L . Wittgenstein . Philosophical investigations . John Wiley & Sons , 2010 . [ 34 ] G . N . Yannakakis and J . Togelius . Experience - driven procedural content generation . IEEE Transactions on Aﬀective Computing , 2 ( 3 ) : 147 – 161 , 2011 .