EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER 26 Based on research on out - of - school expertise in workplaces and hobby activities , this commentary attempts to reconceptualize school learning and suggest desirable changes in it . Two topics are discussed in relation to the contributions of this special issue : ( a ) aspects of re - search on expert - novice differences and processes of gaining exper - tise that can be applied to school learning readily and proﬁtably , and ( b ) situational and individual determinants of expertise differing in lev - els and types and their implications for learning in basic schooling . T he four very interesting articles in this special issue by au - thors who have conducted a series of empirical studies on students’ expertise in academic domains serve to en - rich our understanding of expertise , if not to reconceptualize it , because expertise has been studied mostly in contexts outside basic schooling such as work places and hobby activities . Inves - tigations of accumulated learning in academic subjects have some unique methodological advantages , for instance , offering natural experimental settings for longitudinal or intervention studies . Moreover , these authors’ perspectives , models , and ﬁnd - ings will be very useful to the educational community because they deal directly with school learning . In this commentary , however , we reverse the point of view , based on research on expertise in non - academic settings , and discuss each article in an attempt to reconceptualize school learning and suggest desirable changes in it . Because these stud - ies on expertise suggest what the consequences of successful learning look like ( Bransford , Brown , & Cocking , 1999 ) , their ﬁndings are relevant to such issues as school reform , improving instructional design , and more dynamic assessment of what stu - dents know . We analyze two issues in relation to the preceding contributions : ( a ) aspects of the knowledge accumulated in ex - pertise research that can be applied to school learning readily and proﬁtably ; and ( b ) situational and individual determinants of ex - pertise differing in levels and types and their implications for learning in basic schooling . We hope this attempt , together with the authors’ contributions , will enhance the cross - fertilization between expertise research and studies on school learning . Applying What We Know From Expertise Research to School Learning There are a large number of domains in which people gain ex - pertise , and these domains vary with respect to several important Commentary : Reconceptualizing School Learning Using Insight From Expertise Research by Giyoo Hatano and Yoko Oura Educational Researcher , Vol . 32 , No . 8 , pp . 26 – 29 dimensions . What is required to be qualiﬁed as an expert tends to vary accordingly . Previous studies , however , have shown that several characterizations can be applied to all ( or almost all ) do - mains of expertise , as aptly pointed out by the guest editor of this special issue in her introduction . Here , we summarize what we know from studies on expert - novice differences and the processes of gaining expertise . The ﬁrst two points are well - established ﬁndings ( Chi , Glaser , & Farr , 1988 ; Ericsson , 1996 ) that can be regarded as a paraphrase of Alexander’s ( 2003a ) descriptions . The third , which is of a socioemotional nature , and the last three , of a sociocultural na - ture , are less often recognized , except among cultural psychology researchers ( Shweder , Goodnow , Hatano , LeVine , Markus , & Miller , 1998 ) . Yet , when they are presented , very few investiga - tors would disagree with them . The six points are : 1 . Experts possess rich and well - structured domain knowl - edge ( consisting of “chunks” ) that can readily be used . 2 . Gaining expertise requires years of experience in solving problems in the domain , with concentration ( often taking the form of deliberate practice ) . 3 . The acquisition of knowledge and skills is accompanied by socioemotional changes ( such as in interest , values , and identity ) . 4 . The process of gaining expertise is assisted by other people and artifacts ( unlike in school learning , novices are not ex - pected to solve problems all by themselves ) . 5 . Expertise occurs in socioculturally signiﬁcant contexts ; as a result , in expertise , learning is not clearly separated from solving socially signiﬁcant problems and performing tasks ( expertise occurs in the process of producing the target out - comes of the activity [ e . g . , goods in the market ] ) . 6 . Expertise is distributed ( because there are a large number of domains in which people can gain expertise and exper - tise in each domain takes time ) . Which of these characteristics can be applied to school learn - ing , and , if applied , can contribute to “educational reform ? ” To put it differently , in which features is it possible and productive to approximate school learning to expertise in out - of - school con - texts ? Unlike the processes of gaining expertise , learning activities in basic schooling are usually directed toward preparation for the future in general . However , the ﬁrst three characterizations of ex - pertise are completely compatible with school learning—students are also expected to develop interest in and acquire rich and well - structured knowledge of academic domains through deliberate practice . These characterizations can readily be applied , without chang - ing the basic character of school learning . For example , Alexander’s NOVEMBER 2003 27 ( 2003b ) domain learning model assumes that students can ac - cumulate knowledge , elaborate skills using the knowledge , and develop a corresponding interest in academic domains proba - bly through deliberate practice . In a large number of studies conducted with collaborators , Lajoie ( 2003 ) also emphasizes the acquisition of domain - specific knowledge through deliber - ate practice in making academic progress , although she pays spe - cial attention to the role played by the dynamic assessment of emerging competence in facilitating the effectiveness of the edu - cational programs . Although she does not explicitly consider in - terest or values , probably because most of the participants in her experiments were interested in the target domain from the be - ginning , she refers to the importance of learners’ conﬁdence , an - other socioemotional variable . The fourth characterization implies that students’ learning should be helped by peers and tools ( physical and symbolic ) . This implication is not incompatible with school learning , inso - far as those forms of assistance make learning efficient . In fact , even in the United States where individualized learning used to be considered ideal , various forms of peer collaboration have in - creasingly been encouraged ( e . g . , Rogoff , Turkanis , & Bartlett , 2001 ) . Schoolteachers are willing to rely on educational materi - als , including textbooks and software , because they facilitate learning . Lajoie’s ( 2003 ) simulation - based intelligent tutoring system is a very advanced kind of tool assisting the acquisition of expertise in academic disciplines . Therefore , only two characteristics of expertise seem alien to typical learning activities in schools . Distributed expertise is not sought in schools , because students are seldom expected to be - come experts in any particular domain . Rather , they are expected to learn uniformly in a number of prescribed subject - matter do - mains . Because students are to acquire basic literacy and other foundational skills , their learning occurs in contexts that have no social signiﬁcance . What they learn is considered essential only for later learning . In contrast , the process of gaining expertise in an occupation or hobby , due to these features , does not seem to suffer from the difficulties of school learning , such as lowered motivation and lack of transfer . Do we have to conclude that , without changing the basic char - acteristics of “learning in school , ” these two features of expertise cannot be transplanted to school learning ? We are not totally pessimistic : To approximate learning activities in school to the process of gaining expertise is not easy ; but it is not impossible , at least to some extent . Let us consider the notion of “community of learners” ( Rogoff , 1994 ) as a successful application of instruc - tional principles obtained from expertise research that includes these sociocultural features . Among others , Ann Brown ( 1997 ) and her associates ( Brown , Ash , Rutherford , Nakagawa , Gordon , & Campione , 1993 ) demonstrated that by locating a school in the larger community and also making the school itself a com - munity in which students investigate , teach , and monitor their progress as well as learn , students become “experts” of their own domains or topics . More speciﬁcally , through the jigsaw method of cooperative learning , students not only are assigned part of a classroom topic to study but also share what they have learned with other students subsequently . Their distributed system of knowledge is no longer evaluated by traditional tests of retained facts but is used as the basis for their presentations at whole - class or even larger meetings , and for ﬁnding interesting research top - ics in their projects . Of course , facilitating such distributed ex - pertise and placing acquired knowledge in socially signiﬁcant contexts may not be possible in every part of basic schooling , but the goals of students’ learning activities can involve these processes to a considerable extent . We believe that this is the most productive and ambitious use of the ﬁndings of expertise research in educational reform . Implications of Studies on Experts Differing in Levels and Types In the preceding section , we were concerned with the implica - tions of expertise research in general for improving school learn - ing . Like many other topics , expertise has been studied from several different perspectives and approaches , and thus is charac - terized differently . Among others , formulations of expertise are different depending on the levels of experts chosen as the target for each study . Conditions that produce grand masters may well be different from conditions that facilitate the emergence of or - dinary masters . The educational implications of these studies vary accordingly . Studies that examine how novices become ordinary experts tend to neglect individual and situational variables in the course of gaining expertise . They often adopt a view that , unlike school learning , learning through participation in practice ( e . g . , appren - ticeship ) is failure proof ( because learners are helped by other peo - ple and artifacts ) , and that almost all newcomers become experts as they become old - timers . Thus , the question of who becomes an expert is irrelevant . ( For example , according to Lave [ 1990 ] , almost all apprentice tailors in Liberia become masters within sev - eral years . ) Only studies of the extraordinary performance of grand experts have paid attention to individual and situational differences in gaining expertise : they may be concerned with the old nature - nurture problem ( Howe , Davidson , & Sloboda , 1998 ) to explain why even among those who have had years of practice , there are only a limited number of experts who are distinguished by their excellence . One reason expertise investigators have often ignored indi - vidual differences is that beginning learners in a given domain are all equipped with the needed competence and interest . In other words , the process of gaining expertise usually starts with a restricted pool of participants in terms of aptitudes , because those who obviously lack those aptitudes will not enter that do - main of expertise . This is in sharp contrast with learning in basic schooling , which is compulsory , the ease and speed of which may vary greatly according to students’ aptitudes even at the rudi - mentary level . Ackerman’s ( 2003 ) ﬁndings are interesting in that even in learning in academic domains up to the high - school graduate level students’ attained levels of mastery are predictable from their trait complexes . Moreover , his results suggest the possibil - ity of grouping a very large number of individual characteristics into a small number of clusters signiﬁcant as aptitudes for aca - demic learning . Yet , further studies are needed to show that these ﬁndings can be used in adjusting instructional procedures de - pending upon students’ aptitude complexes and thus have sig - niﬁcant educational implications . EDUCATIONAL RESEARCHER 28 When we review and derive implications from studies on ex - pertise , not only levels but also types of experts are important . A majority of studies on expertise ( see VanLehn , 1989 , for review ) have shown that experts , who have had years of problem - solving experiences in a given domain , can solve familiar types of problems quickly and accurately , but often fail to go beyond procedural ef - ﬁciency . However , a substantive number of studies ( to be de - scribed below ) strongly suggest that some experts can go beyond the routine competencies , and can be characterized by their ﬂexi - ble , innovative , and creative competencies within the domain , rather than in terms of speed , accuracy , and automaticity of solv - ing familiar problems . These experts may apply their schemas in more adaptive and tuned ways ( Lesgold , Glaser , Rubinson , Klopfer , Feltovich , & Wang , 1988 ) . They may understand why their procedures work , modify known procedures , or even invent new procedures ( Hatano , 1982 ) . They may respond quite ﬂexi - bly to contextual variations . They may also be able to cross a boundary between domains to ﬁnd better solutions ( Engeström , Engeström , & Kärkkäinen , 1995 ) . Let us call them “adaptive ex - perts , ” as opposed to “routine experts . ” Because we may ﬁnd these different types of experts even in the same domains , there must be situational and individual determinants of types of expertise . What experiences or conditions of solving problems lead to such ﬂexible , innovative competencies ? Identifying particular kinds of learning experiences that develop adaptive expertise is a serious challenge for educational researchers ( Bransford et al . , 1999 ) . Hatano and Inagaki ( 1992 ) propose a few motivational conditions that promote sustained comprehension activity that is likely to lead to adaptive expertise . Here , we assume that when people repeatedly participate in a practice that requires meeting varied and changing demands ( e . g . , making new , fashionable products ) , their prior knowledge must be applied ﬂexibly , and they are likely to acquire adaptive skills . Successful participation in such a practice may involve exploration and reﬂection . Oura and Hatano ( 2001 ) investigated the learning process un - derlying the expertise in piano playing , a domain that requires skills and creativity . They asked amateur collegiate pianists , all of whom started piano lessons at 6 years of age or younger , to prac - tice a short piece of music , and found that the successful learn - ers who had reached the junior expert level checked and reﬁned their performance from the perspective of the audience in mind , whereas their less successful counterparts who had stayed at the novice level tried just to perform accurately and smoothly . The authors interpret these observed differences in terms of daily ac - tivities in which they engaged . While the less successful students were expected , after practicing a piece at home , to play the piece for the teacher , who would evaluate how smoothly and how ac - curately their performance was , the successful students probably had to create their own expression for playing a piece in public – to the real audience , not just the teacher . This necessitated their en - gagement in exploration and reﬂection . Different learning activities in academic domains also produce knowledge and skills that differ in ﬂexibility and adaptiveness . For example , Boaler ( 1997 ) compared two secondary schools in Britain that were similar in terms of the characteristics of their students ( e . g . , socioeconomic status , ethnicity ) , but that taught mathematics very differently . She found that in one school stu - dents thought that mathematics was just a subject in which they had to solve presented problems . In contrast , in the other school , where mathematics was learned through engaging in a project , students saw mathematics as a tool for solving real problems . We believe that the latter students were on the trajectory toward adaptive expertise . As with Bransford et al . ( 1999 ) , we are convinced that the concept of adaptive expertise “provides an important model of successful learning” ( p . 36 ) , irrespective of attained levels of competence . Since the acquisition of ﬂexible , innovative com - petencies is much desired but seldom achieved in school learn - ing , understanding this issue must be highly relevant to the effective design of instruction . While basic schools cannot make students real experts , they can place students on a trajectory to - ward expertise or prepare them for future learning ( Bransford & Schwartz , 1999 ) . In this sense , an important goal of basic school - ing is to make each student a “baby adaptive expert” of the do - main or topic of choice . Needless to say , there are a few alternative ideas to the edu - cation for adaptive expertise . A strong alternative is teaching for intelligence ( s ) . When Sternberg ( 2003 ) indicates that , unlike experts , a majority of students possess fragmentary , inert pieces of knowledge they do not know how to use , and that we should give students tasks similar to those performed by experts , he seems to be discussing the possibility of approximating school learning to expertise . But he is probably more ambitious . He has attempted to train students to think creatively , analytically , and practically . To be sure , ( adaptive ) experts think creatively , analytically , and practically in their own domain , and a few of them may go further , crossing domain boundaries . However , Sternberg’s training gives students opportunities to use the same set of skills in a variety of disciplines , enabling them to think creatively , analytically , and practically always and everywhere . In that sense , his attempt is to enhance domain - general intelligence , not domain - speciﬁc ex - pertise . We believe that his training for intellectual skills and our idea of educating for adaptive expertise are complementary . Another alternative is to educate students to be accomplished ( or intelligent ) novices ( e . g . , Bruer , 1993 ) rather than baby adap - tive experts . It is certainly a tempting idea to enhance all students’ metacognitive awareness of what they know and do not know and to improve their monitoring skills to cope with their learning difficulties , so that they can develop effective learnership that is domain general . Again , such an attempt does not exclude the ne - cessity of education for adaptive expertise . We doubt whether stu - dents can be intelligent novices before becoming adaptive experts at least in one domain . NOTES The authors would like to thank Kayoko Inagaki for her valuable com - ments on an earlier draft of this commentary . REFERENCES Ackerman , P . L . ( 2003 ) . Cognitive ability and non - ability trait deter - minants of expertise . Educational Researcher , 32 ( 8 ) , 15 – 20 . Alexander , P . A . ( 2003a ) . Can we get there from here ? Educational Re - searcher , 32 ( 8 ) , 3 – 4 . NOVEMBER 2003 29 Alexander , P . A . ( 2003b ) . The development of expertise : The journey from acclimation to proﬁciency . Educational Researcher , 32 ( 8 ) , 10 – 14 . Boaler , J . ( 1997 ) . Experiencing school mathematics : Teaching styles , sex , and setting . Buckingham , UK : Open University Press . Bransford , J . D . , Brown , A . L . , & Cocking , R . R . ( 1999 ) . How people learn . Washington , DC : National Academy Press . Bransford , J . D . , & Schwartz , D . L . ( 1999 ) . Rethinking transfer : A sim - ple proposal with multiple implication . Review of Research in Educa - tion , 24 , 61 – 100 . Brown , A . L . ( 1997 ) . Transforming schools into communities of think - ing and learning about serious matters . American Psychologist , 52 ( 4 ) , 399 – 413 . Brown , A . L . , Ash , D . , Rutherford , M . , Nakagawa , K . , Gordon , A . , & Campione , J . C . ( 1993 ) . Distributed expertise in the classroom . In G . Salomon ( Ed . ) , Distributed cognition ( pp . 188 – 228 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Bruer , J . T . ( 1993 ) . Schools for thought : A science of learning in the class - room . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Chi , M . T . H . , Glaser , R . , & Farr , M . J . ( 1988 ) . The nature of expertise . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Engestöm , Y . , Engeström , E . , & Kärkkäinen , M . ( 1995 ) . Polycontex - tuality and boundary crossing in expert cognition : Learning and problem solving in complex work activities . Learning and Instruction , 5 , 319 – 336 . Ericsson , K . A . ( Ed . ) . ( 1996 ) . The road to excellence . Mahwah , NJ : Erl - baum . Hatano , G . ( 1982 ) . Cognitive consequences of practice in culture spe - ciﬁc procedural skills . The Quarterly Newsletter of the Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition , 4 , 15 – 18 . Hatano , G . , & Inagaki , K . ( 1992 ) . Desituating cognition through the construction of conceptual knowledge . In P . Light & G . Butterworth ( Eds . ) , Context and cognition ( pp . 115 – 133 ) . Hemel Hempstead , UK : Harvester . Howe , M . J . A . , Davidson , J . W . , & Sloboda , J . A . ( 1998 ) . Innate tal - ents : Reality or myth ? Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 21 , 399 – 442 . Lajoie , S . P . ( 2003 ) . Transitions and trajectories for studies of expertise . Educational Researcher , 32 ( 8 ) , 21 – 25 . Lave , J . ( 1990 ) . The culture of acquisition and the practice of under - standing . In J . W . Stigler , R . A . Shweder , & G . Herdt ( Eds . ) , Cultural psychology : Essays on comparative human development ( pp . 309 – 327 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Lesgold , A . , Glaser , R . , Rubinson , H . , Klopfer , D . , Feltovich , P . , & Wang , Y . ( 1988 ) . Expertise in a complex skill : Diagnosing X - ray pic - tures . In M . T . H . Chi , R . Glaser , & M . J . Farr ( Eds . ) , The nature of expertise ( pp . 311 – 342 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Oura , Y . , & Hatano , G . ( 2001 ) . The constitution of general and speciﬁc mental models of other people . Human Development , 44 , 144 – 159 . Rogoff , B . ( 1994 ) . Developing understanding of the idea of community of learners . Mind , Culture , and Activity , 1 , 209 – 229 . Rogoff , B . , Turkanis , C . G . , & Barlett , L . ( 2001 ) . Learning together . New York : Oxford University Press . Sternberg , R . J . ( 2003 ) . What is an “expert student ? ” Educational Re - searcher , 32 ( 8 ) , 5 – 9 . Shweder , R . A . , Goodnow , J . J . , Hatano , G . , LeVine , R . A . , Markus , H . , & Miller , P . J . ( 1998 ) . The cultural psychology of development : One mind , many mentalities . In W . Damon ( Ed . ) , Handbook of child psychology ( 5th ed . ; Vol . 1 , pp . 865 – 938 ) . New York : Wiley . VanLehn , K . ( 1989 ) . Problem solving and cognitive skill acquisition . In M . I . Posner , ( Ed . ) , Foundations of cognitive science ( pp . 527 – 579 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . AUTHORS GIYOO HATANO is a Professor at University of the Air , Human De - velopment and Education Program , Chiba City 261 - 8586 , Japan ; giyoo - h @ qb3 . so - net . ne . jp . He is a foreign associate of the National Academy of Education , and is now on the editorial board of AERJ . His research interests include conceptual development , expertise , and liter - acy / numeracy acquisition . YOKO OURA is a Professor at Niigata University , Faculty of Educa - tion & Human Sciences , Niigata City 950 - 2181 , Japan ; oura @ ed . ni - igata - u . ac . jp . Her research interests include expertise in creative domains and the acquisition of music skills . Manuscript received January 14 , 2003 Final revision received May 24 , 2003 Accepted May 27 , 2003