Rethinking Regenerative Medicine From a Transplant Perspective ( and Vice Versa ) Giuseppe Orlando , MD , PhD , 1 Sean V . Murphy , PhD , 2 Benedetta Bussolati , MD , PhD , 3 Marc Clancy , MD , 4 Paolo Cravedi , MD , PhD , 5 Giovanni Migliaccio , PhD , 6 and Patricia Murray , PhD 7 Abstract : No field in health sciences has more interest than organ transplantation in fostering progress in regenerative medicine ( RM ) because the future of no other field more than the future of organ transplantation will be forged by progress occurring in RM . In fact , the most urgent needs of modern transplant medicine , namely , more organs to satisfy the skyrocketing demand and immunosuppression - free transplantation , cannot be met in full with current technologies and are at risk of remaining elusive goals . Instead , in the past few decades , groundbreaking progress in RM is suggesting a different approach to the problem . New , RM - inspired technologies among which decellularization , 3 - dimensional printing and interspecies blastocyst complementation , promise organoids manufactured from the patients ' own cells and bear potential to render the use of currently used allografts ob - solete . Transplantation , a field that has traditionally been immunology - based , is therefore destined to become a RM - based disci - pline . However , the contours of RM remain unclear , mainly due to the lack of a universally accepted definition , the lack of clarity of its potential modalities of application and the unjustified and misleading hype that often follows the reports of clinical application of RM technologies . All this generates excessive and unmet expectations and an erroneous perception of what RM really is and can offer . In this article , we will ( 1 ) discuss these aspects of RM and transplant medicine , ( 2 ) propose a definition of RM , and ( 3 ) illustrate the state of the art of the most promising RM - based technologies of transplant interest . ( Transplantation 2019 ; 103 : 237 – 249 ) R egenerative medicine ( RM ) has shown an immense po - tential to profoundly impact transplant medicine ( TM ) by meeting its 2 most urgent needs : a new and potentially in - exhaustible source of organs and the achievement of an immunosuppression - free status . 1 Through the development of technologies that will make organ fabrication possible using patient - derived biomaterials — cells and supporting scaffolding materials — RM promises to enable organ - on - demand whereby patients will receive organs that will not be rejected and in a timely fashion . This will make registration in the waiting list and antirejection medications unnecessary and , as the new organs will be implanted immediately after fabrication , ischemia - reperfusion injury secondary to organ preservation will not be a problem anymore . However , the contours of RM remain unclear , mainly due to the lack of a universally accepted definition , the lack of clarity of its potential modalities of application and the unjus - tified and misleading hype that often follows the reports of clinical application of RM technologies . All this generates ex - cessive ( and unmet ) expectations and an erroneous percep - tion of what RM really is and can offer . With the present article , we intend to address these con - cerns , propose a definition of RM pertinent to TM and eluci - date the RM technologies that may be applied to and serve Received 6 January 2018 . Revision received 17 June 2018 . Accepted 20 June 2018 . 1 Section ofTransplantation , DepartmentofSurgery , WakeForestUniversitySchool of Medicine , Winston Salem , NC . 2 Wake Forest Institute for Regenerative Medicine , Winston Salem , NC . 3 Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences , University of Turin , Turin , Italy . 4 Transplant Unit , Queen Elizabeth University Hospital , Glasgow , United Kingdom . 5 Translational Transplant Research Center , Department of Medicine , Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai , New York , NY . 6 Consorzio per Valutazioni Biologiche e Farmacologiche , Bari , Italy . 7 DepartmentofCellularandMolecularPhysiology , CentreforPreclinicalImaging , In - stitute ofTranslational Medicine , University ofLiverpool , Liverpool , United Kingdom . The authors declare no funding or conflicts of interest . G . O . conceivedtheworkandthedesignofthearticle , wasresponsibleforitsundertaking and completion , wrote the introduction , the paragraph on decellularization technology , and the conclusions and approved the final draft . S . M . participated in the design of the article , wrote the part on 3D printing , and approved the final draft . B . B . participated in the design of the article , wrote the part on stem cells , regeneration and blastocyst complementation , and approved the final draft . M . C . participated in the design of the article , wrote the part on ischemia - reperfusion , and approved the final draft . P . C . wrote the part on the regenerative immunology and approved the final draft . G . M . wrote the part on product development and translation and approved the final draft . P . M . participated to the design of the article , wrote the part on stem cells , regeneration and blastocyst complementation , and approved the final draft . Correspondence : Giuseppe Orlando , MD , PhD , Section of Transplantation , Department of Surgery , Wake Forest University Health Sciences , Winston Salem , NC . ( gorlando @ wakehealth . edu ) . Copyright © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . All rights reserved . ISSN : 0041 - 1337 / 19 / 10302 - 0237 DOI : 10 . 1097 / TP . 0000000000002370 Review Transplantation ■ February 2019 ■ Volume 103 ■ Number 2 www . transplantjournal . com 237 the mission of TM . We will also briefly discuss the most rele - vant product development challenges and the immunological implications of the biomaterials currently under development . DEFINITION “ Regenerative medicine ” is an umbrella term of still un - clear significance . For example , in 2006 , the United Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organization defined RM as a super - discipline whose contours are still being de - fined ( http : / / unesdoc . unesco . org / images / 0014 / 001454 / 145409e . pdf ) . In the document , it was stated that the defini - tion of RM “ can be either narrow or very wide ” and that the field “ is generally about replacement , repair and regen - eration to address deficient organ function resulting from congenital defects , disease , trauma or wear and tear . ” From this definition , it may be inferred that RM and TM share the same interests and pursue the same goal , namely the re - placement of terminally diseased organs with new func - tioning organs . However , although the term replacement is intimate to organ transplantation , repair and regeneration are not , unless we consider the case of auxiliary heterotopic liver transplantation , performed to allow the native liver devastated by an acute damage to regenerate and resume normal function . 2 More recently , the term RM has been used to define — more succinctly — a field in the health sciences that aims to re - place or regenerate human cells , tissues , or organs to restore or establish normal function . 3 The process of regenerating body parts can occur in vivo or ex vivo and may require cells , natural or artificial scaffolding materials , growth factors , gene manipulation , or combinations of all the 4 elements . However , RM is commonly used as synonymous to “ tissue engineering , ” but it has been noted that “ tissue engineering ” is “ narrower in scope and strictly defined as manufacturing body parts ex vivo , by seeding cells on or into a supporting scaffold ” . 4 According to the National Institutes of Health , “ tissue engineering evolved from the field of biomaterials de - velopment and refers to the practice of combining scaffolds , cells , and biologically active molecules into functional tissues , ” with the ultimate goal of assembling “ functional constructs that restore , maintain , or improve damaged tissues or whole organs . ” 4a The National Institutes of Health also defines RM as “ the process of creating living , functional tissues to repair or re - place tissue or organ function lost due to age , disease , dam - age , or congenital defects . This field holds the promise of regenerating damaged tissues and organs in the body by stim - ulating previously irreparable organs to heal themselves ; [ … ] empowers scientists to grow tissues and organs in the labo - ratory and safely implant them when the body cannot heal itself . Importantly , regenerative medicine has the potential to solve the problem of the shortage of organs available through donation compared to the number of patients that require life - saving organ transplantation . ” 4b This definition is quite comprehensive but neglects 2 critical aspects of mod - ern TM , namely immunosuppression - free transplantation and ischemia - reperfusion damage deriving from organ preser - vation and storage . In fact , RM research aims at building au - tologous tissues and organs from patient ' s own cells with the ultimate goal of bypassing the need for lifelong antirejection therapy , with consequent obvious clinical and financial benefits . Moreover , by enabling physicians to implant bioengineered organs immediately after maturation , ischemia - reperfusion damage is prevented . Lastly , to the best of our knowledge , none of the societies that may claim parenthood to the field of RM has ever re - leased an official definition of the term . Therefore , we herein propose the following definition : RM is a field in the health sciences that aims to regen - erate , repair or replace functionally impaired tissues and organs to restore normal function . The process of regenerating body parts can occur in vivo or ex vivo and may require cells , natural or artificial scaffolding materials , growth factors , genetic manipulation , or combinations of them . RM promises to address the longest standing limitations of organ transplantation , namely the identification of an inexhaustible source of transplantable organs , immunosuppression - free transplantation and organ - on - demand , whereby a pa - tient in need and deemed suitable for transplantation is enabled to promptly receive an organ that will be bioengineered from his / her own cells . This will rule out the need for lifelong immunosuppression and , by allowing implantation of the graft immediately after production , will likely prevent the damage resulting from organ preservation , storage and ischemia - reperfusion . As a corollary , RM will eliminate the waiting list . RM TECHNOLOGIES APPLIED TO ORGAN TRANSPLANTATION Decellularization The term decellularization refers to a process whereby the cellular compartment of living tissues is removed by chemical or physical means . 5 The end product of this process is an acellular scaffold consisting of the innate extracellular matrix ( ECM ) of the original tissue that is being used for different purposes . For example , acellular scaffolds may serve as tem - plate for the ex vivo bioengineering of implantable organs , or to promote functional tissue restoration after implantation in vivo . 6 In the first case , the scaffold will be recellularized with progenitor or adult cells first , and either allowed to mature in bioreactors before implantation or implanted directly in pa - tients thereafter . 7 In the second case , the acellular scaffold is implanted in the diseased tissue to orchestrate a constructive remodeling in situ . 6 The rationale behind these applications is that the ECM is the fundamental 3 - dimensional ( 3D ) net - work that not only provides structural support to cells , but by interacting with cell surface molecules and serving as a res - ervoir for growth factors , also plays a critical role in tissue and organ development , homeostasis and regeneration after damage . 8 Although the decellularization process does produce some damage to the innate ECM , the scaffolds produced with current technology retain most of the biochemical complexity , nanostructure , and bioinductive properties of the native ma - trix that are essential for cells to attach , migrate , proliferate and function , and have been shown to promote the creation of site - specific , functional tissue in vivo . 9 Moreover , as the framework of the innate vasculature is preserved , patent , and able to sustain the physiological blood pressure , 10 acellu - lar ECM scaffolds ( aECMs ) seem ideal for the bioengineering of transplantable organs . aECMs may also be a source of 238 Transplantation ■ February 2019 ■ Volume 103 ■ Number 2 www . transplantjournal . com hydrogel and used as such as cell delivery tool . Notably , more than 80 ECM based products are currently available in the market for a variety of clinical applications . 11 From a TM perspective , the use of aECMs as a template for whole organ bioengineering undoubtedly holds immense potential . Since the milestone report on the bioengineering of a functional heart in 2008 , 12 more than 200 articles have proven that aECMs may be produced from virtually all transplantable organs from clinically relevant animal 10 , 13 - 15 and human donors , 15 - 22 including the human hand , face , and face subunits . 23 - 27 As one of the major objectives of RM is to identify an inexhaustible source of organs , animals may be considered an ideal source of aECMs for intra - abdominal and intrathoracic bioengineering , whereas human donors should provide organs for limb , face , and face subunit bioengineering for obvious reasons . Interestingly , the term semi - xenotransplantation has been proposed to indicate the bioengineering of implantable organs whereby aECMs of an - imal origin are seeded with human cells . 28 Despite the fact that viable and functioning bioengineered tissues and / or organs supplied with their own vascular pedi - cle have never previously been described in animal models , the literature reports a few anecdotal cases 7 , 29 , 30 or small studies in humans 31 where relatively complex tissues were transplanted without any vascular pedicle , and therefore lacked an immediate connection to the recipient ' s vascula - ture . Although some short - term success has been reported , the morbidity and mortality are extremely high . 32 This prob - ably reflects our incomplete understanding of the biology of organ regeneration and underestimation of the true anatom - ical and physiological complexity of the organs in question . 33 As recently stigmatized by Badylak in an illuminating edito - rial , the big mistake that has been reiterated by tissue engi - neers in the past decade is the erroneous belief that organs can be manufactured without the critical elements required to maintain the viability and function of all living tissues ; namely , adequate lymphatic and innervation networks , and — more importantly — vascularization . 34 Moreover , most clinical and experimental studies report that after cells are seeded on aECMs , the so - obtained construct is allowed to mature in bioreactors for conventional periods of 1 or a few weeks , which is probably insufficient as this is much shorter than the time needed for any given organ to develop in utero . 3D Printing Technology Three - dimensional bioprinting promises to have a disrup - tive impact in TM and represents a significant technological advancement in the manufacturing processes used for tissue and organ engineering . Where the conventional manufactur - ing approach requires the manual fabrication by a skilled technician , 3D bioprinting is automating this process , with subsequent improvements in standardization , reproducibil - ity , resolution and accuracy . These advances have arisen from the adoption of design and manufacturing techniques used in the nonbiological manufacturing sector , such as the use of im - aging and design software , and the increased availability , and reduced cost of 3D printing hardware . Three - dimensional – printed medical devices have already been transplanted into patients , 35 , 36 and simple bioprinted tissues such as cartilage and bone have been successfully transplanted in preclinical animal studies . 37 - 39 However , just like above , current 3D bioprinted tissues lack essential functional elements , such as vasculature , innervation , lymphatics , and the number and diversity of functional and supporting cell types re - quired for more complex or larger tissues and organs . In healthcare , 3D printing has been applied for the manufacturing of surgical guides , anatomical models and prosthetics , 35 and more recently , for custom implants . 40 Medical uses of 3D printing have usually been confined to static , nonliving constructs , including patient - specific cranio - facial implants and hip and mandibular prostheses . 36 In 2013 , the clinical application of 3D printing was expanded , with the implantation of a 3D - printed , bioresorbable exter - nal airway splint into an infant with tracheobronchomalacia , which was followed up with a 2015 report of a further 3 in - fants receiving patient - matched 3D - printed splints . 41 These constructs , although nonliving , were designed to prevent ex - ternal airway compression over a predetermined time period before bioresorption to accommodate airway growth . 42 Al - though these advances have demonstrated the promise of 3D printing technology for medical applications , the progres - sion from nonliving constructs to 3D - printed living cellular constructs has not been as rapid . Significant challenges sur - rounding the formation of complex , heterogeneous tissues , with sufficient vasculature , innervation , and function , means that we are currently years away before even simple con - structs make their way into clinical use . It is likely that the first advances in the clinical transplantation of 3D - printed living tissues will be made in relatively simple tissues before advancing to tissues with more complex geometries , cell types and functions . In contrast to many other tissues , cartilaginous tissues are avascular and aneural structures containing a relatively low density of cells , potentially minimizing 3 of the most difficult hurdles in the field . For this reason , cartilaginous tissues are likely to be one of the first types of 3D - printed tissues to prog - ress to clinical transplantation , and multiple examples of 3D - printed cartilage tissue have been described at the preclinical stage of development . Cui and colleagues 37 have applied inkjet 3D printing technology to repair human articular car - tilage , achieving a tissue construct with a compressive modu - lus in the same order of magnitude as hyaline cartilage . 43 Another novel approach involves the fabrication of tissue constructs using self - assembling spheroids of chondrocytes to form cartilage strands , significantly increasing cellular density and improving posttransplantation maturation and function . 44 Recently , the biofabrication and implantation of human - sized 3D - printed cartilage tissues has been reported , with tissue constructs possessing histological and mechanical characteristics of human auricles after animal implantation in vivo . 45 Bone has been well studied by the materials engineering community due to its unique structure and mechanical prop - erties . Biomaterial scaffolds that exploit the inherent proper - ties of nanoparticles have been developed that meet the physicomechanical requirements of bone regeneration , for - mulated to control the mechanical properties and degradabil - ity of scaffolds upon transplantation . 46 In 1 example , Inzana and coworkers 39 fabricated a calcium phosphate , collagen composite bone scaffold using a modified inkjet - based 3D printer . The implants were confirmed to be osteoconductive and biodegradable in a critical sized murine femoral defect . However , to date , many 3D printing approaches rely only © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Orlando et al 239 on hard scaffolds to reproduce the appropriate mechanical properties for cortical bone , but fail to fully recapitulate the cellular , spongy component of cancellous bone . One ap - proach to overcome this limitation includes incorporating bone marrow - derived mesenchymal stromal cells ( MSCs ) into osteoconductive hydrogel bioinks . These soft bioinks are then supported by a network of reinforcing poly ( ε - caprolactone ) microfibers to enable the fabrication of mechanically rein - forced constructs with decoupled biological and mechanical functionality . These 3D - printed constructs mimic the geome - try and bulk mechanical properties of trabecular - like endo - chondral bone with a supporting marrow structure and undergo endochondral ossification over time after implanta - tion . 47 Using a similar approach , human - scale mandible and calvarial structures have been 3D printed , with size and shape similar to what would be needed for facial reconstruc - tion after traumatic injury . Implantation of 3D - printed bone constructs into animal defect models resulted in the forma - tion of mature , vascularized bone tissue in implants retrieved up to 5 months later . 45 The application of 3D printing technology to fabricate rel - atively simple tissues such as cartilage and bone has been fa - cilitated by the development of new biomaterials and 3D printing technology that can accurately and reproducibly de - posit these materials . Three - dimensional bioprinting tech - niques can be broadly classified by their mechanism of cell deposition into inkjet , 48 microextrusion , 45 , 49 - 51 or laser - assisted bioprinting . 52 - 54 The basic technologies and their ap - plications have been extensively reviewed . 55 , 56 Recent advances in bioprinter technology have facilitated the patterning of multi - component constructs containing both synthetic and natural materials capable of resolution down to 2 μ m for biomate - rials alone and down to 50 μ m for encapsulated cells . 45 Fur - ther progress in the field will require the ability to deposit an even wider range of material types concurrently with in - creases in print resolution and speed . Some progress has been made in this area , such as the use of microfluidic switching nozzles that swap between 2 different inks on demand , 57 as well as mixing nozzles that can be used to print materials at the microscale with tunable gradients of differing material properties . 58 Additionally , there has been remarkable achieve - ments in the high - resolution patterning of matrix materials using light - based free - form fabrication . One example of this is 2 - photon lithography , where transparent photoresist materials are photopolymerized with multiphoton absorption events with highly controllable focal volumes and print speed . 59 The combination of materials that provide mechanical strength and those that are compatible with cell function has resulted in the successful fabrication of human scale , cel - lular tissues that have shown long - term function posttrans - plantation . Biomaterials commonly used for bioprinting are predominantly based on either naturally derived polymers ( such as tissue - based extracellular matrix proteins including alginate , gelatin , collagen , chitosan , fibrin , and hyaluronic acid ) or synthetic molecules ( polyethylene glycol [ PEG ] ) . Of - ten , the synthetic materials provide physical integrity at the at the macro level , while softer materials , such as hydrogels , provide an appropriate environment for cell encapsulation and placement . However , synthetic materials often fail to provide physiological interactions with the cellular compo - nent . On the other hand , the weak mechanical properties of hydrogels are a considerable limitation for their contribution to the physical properties of the tissue . Further advances in the development of biological materials are needed to improve control of the structural , mechanical , and biological properties of constructs to replicate tissue structure and function . 60 , 61 One approach toward overcoming this challenge include chemical modification of the hydrogels to enable the materials to crosslink with other materials , therefore , controlling its mechanical strength or other parameters such as degradation times . Synthetic hydrogels like PEG - based hydrogels have been modified to covalently tether ECM - derived biomole - cules . 62 Similarly , there is a need for the continued develop - ment of 3D printers that are specifically designed for these biological materials , combined with the decreased cost of these technologies . However , before we can expect to see successful 3D print - ing of larger , or more complex tissue types , several significant limitations and obstacles need to be overcome . For larger tis - sues , the incorporation of intact vasculature will be essential for the survival and function of the implanted tissues . One potential approach to overcome this bottleneck is the utiliza - tion of light - based 3D printing technology , capable of photopolymerizing a wide range of biological materials , with significantly improved speed and resolution . For example , microscale continuous optical bioprinting has been used to create prevascularized tissue constructs within a soft hydro - gel network . 63 The ability to pattern increasingly complex cellular structures with increased resolution would provide many opportunities to incorporate other functional tissue components and architectures , such as vascular , neural and lymphatic networks , and potentially lumens , tubules and ducts . Another limitation to the fabrication of larger , more complex tissues is the requirement for increased quantity and diversity of cell types . Many studies have utilized either primary cells or tissue - derived multipotent stem cells , but the limited expansion and differentiation capacity of these cell types may limit their application for larger or more com - plex tissues . Potential approaches to overcome this problem include involve viral transfection 64 or use of small molecules to induce cell proliferation or differentiation . 65 , 66 Stem Cell Technology Cells within the inner cell mass of blastocyst - stage em - bryos give rise to all adult cell types and are thus termed “ plu - ripotent . ” In 1981 , it was discovered that these “ embryonic stem cells ” ( ESC ) could be isolated from mouse embryos and expanded in culture without losing their pluripotency . 67 After the isolation of the first human ESC lines in 1998 , 68 there was huge optimism that these cells could not only re - place cells lost in degenerative diseases , such as Parkinson disease , but could also be combined with natural or bio - engineered scaffolds to generate replacement tissues and or - gans . 69 However , apart from the ethical issues surrounding the use of human embryos , several challenges facing the de - velopment and application of ESC - based therapies were soon identified , including ( 1 ) their tumorigenic risk , ( 2 ) the need for reliable culture conditions to direct their differentiation to fully functional specialized cells , and ( 3 ) strategies to pre - vent immune rejection . Much progress has been made , for instance , methods to identify and remove undifferentiated ESCs from adminis - tered cell populations have now been developed , 70 reducing the risk of tumor formation ; and although some ESC 240 Transplantation ■ February 2019 ■ Volume 103 ■ Number 2 www . transplantjournal . com derivatives remain functionally immature , 71 , 72 others , such as ESC - derived retinal pigment epithelial cells , dis - play the typical characteristics of their adult counter - parts 73 and have already been applied in clinical trials . 74 Some ESC - based therapies can involve the transplantation of progenitor cells which then further differentiate in vivo to generate functionally mature cell types ; for example , ESC - derived dopaminergic neuron progenitors can un - dergo maturation in rats with chemically induced Parkinson disease and can ameliorate motor deficits . 75 The problems with immune rejection , however , still re - main , because ESC are nonautologous . Therefore , unless ESC - based therapies are applied to immune - privileged sites like the retina and brain , immune - suppressant therapies or other strategies to prevent immune rejection are required . Reports that pluripotent stem cells could be isolated from bone marrow 76 appeared to circumvent the aforementioned ethical issues as well as the problems with immune rejection as these cells can be self - derived . Although it is now clear that the bone marrow does not harbor pluripotent stem cells , there is good evidence that multipotent MSCs isolated from various sources , including bone marrow , adipose tissue and umbilical cord , have the potential to generate bone - , cartilage , and adipocyte - like cells after in vitro culture under specific condi - tions . 77 This has led to much enthusiasm regarding the use of autologous MSC - derived cells in combination with biomate - rial scaffolds to generate replacement tissues for transplanta - tion , an example being the use of MSC - derived chondrocytes to regenerate cartilage in the upper airway . 33 However , al - though such constructs have been used in human patients under “ compassionate use , ” data from animal studies indi - cate that MSC - derived chondrocytes fail to engraft and there is no evidence of cartilage regeneration , 78 which might partly explain the high mortality rates observed in the clinic . 79 Most studies now show that while MSC and other somatic cell - based RM therapies can have significant beneficial effects , these are mediated by paracrine factors that either directly or indirectly stimulate endogenous re - pair . 80 - 82 Thus , although MSC could be useful for promot - ing the repair and regeneration of transplanted tissues and organs , it is unlikely that they will be able to directly re - place damaged tissues . 83 For instance , liver MSC - derived exosomes administered in an ex vivo normothermic liver per - fusion system displayed regenerative functions and promoted in vivo repair . 84 The seminal work of Yamanaka , who showed that somatic cells could be reprogrammed to generate induced pluripotent stem cells ( iPSC ) that have the same plasticity as ESC , 85 , 86 ad - dressed some of the problems encountered with ESC and MSC ; for instance , iPSC generation does not require human embryos , they can be patient - derived , and unlike MSC , they are pluripotent . The plasticity of iPSC raises the possibility that they could be used as a source of specialized cell types for the recellularization of tissue and organ scaffolds for transplantation . Indeed , iPSC appear to represent a poten - tially unlimited supply of pluripotent cells that could over - come cellular challenges related to quantity and specificity of cell sources for recellularization . 87 Improvement in plurip - otent stem cell differentiation techniques are continuously in development . 88 Further optimization has to be determined exploiting the local cues and the functional stimuli occurring in the in vivo setting to acquire functional maturation . Although some progress has been made with decellularization and recellularization of kidney , 89 heart , 20 pancreas , 90 and liver scaffolds , 91 at present , an adequate kidney scaffold recellularization in vivo appears challenging and available infusion protocols inadequate . 92 Overall , several additional key points need to be clarified to make stem cell research more realistic and practical . The extent and quality of vascularization required by tissue - engineered constructs for their in vivo stabilization and main - tenance still needs to be determined . Regenerative medicine would benefit from methods to allow a constant in vivo track - ing of cell viability and functions . Magnetic resonance imaging and optical imaging appear the more suitable approaches for high spatial resolution and high sensitivity , respectively . 93 Organoids and Blastocyst Complementation Apart from the potential of using iPSC in combination with scaffolds for tissue replacement , recent progress has been made toward generating 3D iPSC - derived organoids in vitro representative of several different organ systems , in - cluding renal , liver and heart organoids . 94 Exciting break - throughs have been made with renal organoid development in particular , where it has been shown that iPSC - derived re - nal progenitor cells can generate organoids comprising all key renal cell types . 93 Although organoids could potentially open the door to the development of bioengineered tissues and organs for transplantation in the future , many problems first need to be overcome , including appropriate vasculariza - tion . This is actually a major challenge because in the devel - oping embryo , the major organ systems develop together with their capillary network and main feed arteries , ensuring that blood is supplied at the correct pressure . This problem is exemplified by a previous study showing that fetal rat kidneys do not mature beyond a neonatal stage after transplantation into adult rats , likely due to their abnormal vasculature and failure to develop a renal artery . 95 A potentially more promising iPSC - based technology for generating autologous tissues and organs for transplantation is interspecies blastocyst complementation ( IBC ) . In this ap - proach , genetic manipulation of the host precludes the devel - opment of an organ which is then compensated by stem cells from a donor that produce the missing organ . Proof of prin - ciple for this approach was demonstrated in 1993 to generate T and B lymphocyte lineages by implanting murine ESC into the blastocysts of Rag2 − / − mice . 96 Using host blastocysts de - rived from Pdx1 − / − mice that display pancreatic agenesis , Melton ’ s group showed that complementation with wild - type mouse ESCs resulted in the pancreatic epithelium being derived from the donor Pdx1 + / + cells . 97 A later study showed that complementation of Pdx1 − / − mouse blastocysts with rat iPSC resulted in the development of functional rat pancreases within the adult mice hosts , thus demonstrating interspecies complementation . 98 These groundbreaking studies raise the possibility that , by genetically modifying pig blastocysts so that they are unable to generate specific organs , and then complementing with patient - derived human iPSC , it could be possible to generate autologous organs for transplantation within the host pig . A key advantage of this approach is that apart from being autologous , functional and of the correct size , the organs could be transplanted with their own vascular pedicle . However , a number of challenges need to be addressed . For instance , although rat iPSC could generate a pancreas © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Orlando et al 241 within mouse hosts , they were unable to generate kidneys in Sal1 − / − mice that display renal agenesis , 99 suggesting that for some organs , additional modification of the donor iPSC might be required to enable them to interact appropriately with the developing host embryo . Furthermore , previous at - tempts to undertake interspecies complementation using hu - man pluripotent stem cells and mouse blastocysts have had limited success . 100 , 101 Nevertheless , using a “ primed ” plurip - otent state , Belmonte ' s group has shown that human plurip - otent stem cells could contribute to developing mouse embryos after grafting into gastrulating mouse embryos , 102 thus providing proof of principle for IBC using human iPSC . Importantly , although decellularization and 3D printing rely on bioreactors for the maturation of the bioengineered con - structs , with this technology , the organs develop in utero , which presents the most convenient and physiologically appropriate conditions . However , some issues related to the generation of IBC - derived organs need to be faced . The purity of the generated organs , in terms of cell composition , need to be addressed . In fact , endothelial cells or other cell types derived from the host could contaminate the donor - derived organ . In addition to the technical problems , ethical concerns have been empha - sized in relation to the possibility that human cells could con - tribution to the formation of nontargeted organs , such as brain or germ cells , generating chimeric brains or fetuses . 103 Expanding the Donor Pool by the Application of RM Strategies The narrowest concept of RM presumes the creation of neotissues from a cell source . This presumptive approach en - tails addressing barriers that may take decades to overcome including those related to manufacturing practicality , safety , regulation , and cost / reimbursement . However , established solid organ transplantation may be considered to already encompass a truly RM approach best illustrated by the normothermic ex vivo lung perfusion platform proposed by the University of Toronto . This system was developed to facilitate functional assessment and implementation of advanced therapies to re - pair marginal donor lungs before transplantation . 104 Given the exceptionally successful results of solid organ transplants and the global “ mantra ” that this excellent selec - tion of treatments is limited only by organ availability , it is possible to reason that managed regenerative treatment of the many thousands of deceased donor organs currently de - clined for transplant worldwide may represent a rapid route for clinical translation of the variety of regenerative therapies currently being developed . This diverges from the assump - tion that the generation of functioning neo - tissue is essential for patient benefit and instead uses regenerative cells or alter - native therapies to protect the intrinsic regenerative capability of the solid organs from damage and promote its aug - mented activation , during and after the multifaceted phase of peritransplant graft injury . This indication is evidently a major arena of clinical need . Candidate regenerative interventions — with the potential for multiple mechanisms of action — may be more effective and are already in phase 1 studies with particular promise for the application of MSC or pleomorphic regenerative cell populations such as those derived from adipose tissue . The former have been widely administered for immunoregulatory purposes but increasingly the focus of such therapies is more regenerative with a recent study in ex vivo perfused human livers confirming up to 50 (cid:1) 10 6 cells can be delivered safely via the hepatic artery . The latter have been safely administered intra - arterially or intraportally , without vascular complications in animal models of kidney , 105 lung , and liver , as well as directly into porcine and human coronary arteries . 106 - 108 These interventions have the added advantage of ex vivo applicability in the context of organ storage or normothermic machine perfusion . This latter scenario offers the opportunity for regenerative therapy in the context of optimized biodistribution and preimplantation efficacy / safety assessment . An alternative RM - based approach may be molecule - based , despite the fact that multiple small molecule ap - proaches for the indication that we are herein discussing have already failed to show clinical benefit . Although , on one hand , this failure is likely to reflect the extensive redundancy in mechanisms of peritransplant injury , on the other hand , failure may simply tell us that we have not picked the right drug ( s ) ! Ideally , we should consider molecules possessing high regenerative potential rather than molecules that target this or that pathway of the inflammatory response complicat - ing ischemia - reperfusion . For instance , recent groundbreak - ing work from MDI Biological Laboratories identified MSI - 1436 as a first - in - class RM drug candidate . 109 In fact , in adult zebrafish , administration of MSI - 1436 stimulated the rate of regeneration of caudal fin tissue and heart muscle by twofold to threefold without apparent tissue overgrowth or malformation . Moreover , administration of the drug to adult mice for 4 weeks beginning 24 hours after inducing car - diac ischemia increased survival , improved heart function , re - duced infarct size , reduced ventricular wall thinning and increased cellular proliferation in the infarct border zone . In a phase 1 and 1b clinical trials attesting the potential of MSI - 1436 for treating obesity and diabetes , good tolerability was demonstrated , and it was found that doses effective at stim - ulating regeneration were 5 to 50 times lower than the maxi - mum well - tolerated human dose ; hence , this molecule shows great promise for applications in multiple TM scenarios . Alternatively , given the detrimental role of inflammation in ischemia - reperfusion injury , the administration of strong anti - inflammatory molecules has been contemplated . For example , the group in Toronto has investigated the poten - tial to use gene therapy with an adenoviral vector encoding human interleukin - 10 ( IL - 10 ) to repair injured donor lungs ex vivo before transplantation . 110 IL - 10 exerts a potent anti - inflammatory effect through the inactivation of antigen - presenting cells ( APCs ) and consequent inhibition of proinflammatory cytokine secretion . Preclinical large animal survival studies have shown that ex vivo treatment of damaged lung allografts with in situ delivery of IL - 10 is safe and improves posttransplant lung function over ex vivo lung perfusion alone . 111 Given the major financial effects associated with delayed graft function of solid organ transplants , regenerative thera - pies in this context will play a critical role in reducing peritransplant injury and — ultimately — organ discard rate , as well as in augmenting post implantation regeneration even in those organs currently utilized for transplant . The vision - ary idea of an Organ Repair Center conceived and imple - mented by the University of Toronto is a testament of the application ante literam of RM technologies to TM . This 242 Transplantation ■ February 2019 ■ Volume 103 ■ Number 2 www . transplantjournal . com idea proposes a paradigm shift in the organ acceptance deci - sion making process . Currently the decision of whether or not an organ should be transplanted is made at the time of procurement or within the first few hours from the procure - ment . According to the new paradigm proposed by the Uni - versity of Toronto , marginal organs should be subjected to ad hoc tests to assess the potential to “ repair ” and ultimately transplant them ( Figure 1 ) . At this point , if the organ is deemed “ repairable , ” it is subjected to “ repair treatments ” first and then reevaluated to determine whether or not the treatment has been successful and the organ as become transplantable . This strategy has allowed the University of Toronto to use more than 400 lungs that would have otherwise been discarded and to increase their volume by more than 70 % in the last decade ( unpublished data , courtesy of Dr . Shaf Keshavjee ) . Product Development Challenges for Cell - based Therapies ( A ) Scaling - up production . The scaling up of cell produc - tion is not a trivial process as the physical environment where the bioengineered tissue will be implanted will exert a num - ber of known and unknown effects on the physiologic and phenotypic characteristic of the final product . The type , di - mension , and material where cells are grown are known to impact their characteristic , including cell proliferation rate and differentiation potential . Using standardized modular unit in parallel is usually the simplest and safest approach to scaling up from laboratory to industrial production for products dedicated to single individuals . However , this ap - proach results also in an increase of cost , labor , and risk of failure for single units ( http : / / www . bioprocessintl . com / manufacturing / cell - therapies / streamlining - cell - therapy - man - ufacture - 328083 / ) . As illustrated above , the integration in a tridimensional structure of different cell types can be obtained using ECM as an instructing guide . However , the timing , composition , and degree of differentiation of the cell populations used to regenerate the cellular compartment of these structure re - mains unclear , as well as the stimuli needed to obtain a com - plete differentiation before ( or after ) implantation . Because of the complexity of the function of complex modular organs like the kidney or the heart , 112 the issue of scaling out is depending on the ability to replicate the essential manufactur - ing characteristics in different physical location and / or time . This in turn depends on the ability to identify the key factors regulating the consistency of the manufacturing process and control them 113 ( https : / / nam . edu / manufacturing - cell - therapies - the - paradigm - shift - in - health - care - of - this - century / ) . Single - use modular apparatus are likely to be the simplest answer to this particular need . Assessing a complex construct requires the understanding of the specific characteristic desired for any given clinical ap - plication and the technologies to measure them . Both nonin - vasive approaches and surrogate biomarkers will have to be developed to perform the identity qualification of the final product , both in terms of functionality and expected half - life after transplantation . However , although it is possible to standardize production , it may be difficult to apply the principle of “ one - size - fits - all ” to the recipient due to the in - trinsic interindividual variability but also to environmental effects . Adaptation of the process to a finite number of possi - ble recipients is likely to be a necessary step . ( B ) Key attributes of proposed RM interventions / products that demonstrate their readiness to be advanced into clinical trials . 1 ) Critical Quality Attributes To progress to application in humans , any new RM prod - uct should have a clear indication in terms of expected functions in vivo , the definition of surrogate biomarkers for the estimation oftheefficacyandanimagingtechnologytoassesstheintegrationandbiodistribution . Theexpected half - lifein vivo shouldbeclear , and remedial approaches in case offailure should be well defined . The choice of parameters defining the products ( ie , identity ) should be justified by a risk assessment and the intended use ( https : / / www . fda . gov / downloads / BiologicsBloodVaccines / GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation / Guidances / CellularandGeneTherapy / ucm081670 . pdf and http : / / www . ema . europa . eu / docs / en _ GB / document _ library / Scientific _ guideline / 2009 / 10 / WC500003987 . pdf ) . 2 ) Critical Process Parameters The critical process parameters are strictly depending on the cell type and need to cover basic safety and efficacy in FIGURE 1 . Flowchart of the decision - making process for organ acceptance in the setting of organ repair centers . © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Orlando et al 243 vivo after transplantation . Both donor and recipient charac - teristics should be included in the evaluation of these param - eters . Usually , these parameters encompass at least cell number , viability , and proliferative index , which per se do not exclude the necessity of more specific biomarker testing . 3 ) Material Attributes As the cells respond in a complex — yet , still not fully understood — manner to the materials present in the culture media and containers used during the manufacturing pro - cess , any substitution or alteration has to be carefully assessed against the panel of final desired characteristics . De - pending on their complexity , such assurance could be ob - tained by either testing the materials before accepting them for the manufacturing process , or by the full qualification of the supply chain . A strict definition of the materials sourc - ing should be established early in the development process . ( C ) What are the key regulatory science questions that should be addressed in the next 5 years ? The understanding of the expansion limit of the different stem cell lines with potential for clinical applications is the first knowledge gap to be filled . Stem cells should be ex - panded and harvested without incurring in genomic alter - ations that would obviously undermine safety . Such limit is now defined in a conservative way for MSC 114 but remains unclear for ESC and iPS . However , the necessity to obtain and qualify new donor cell population regularly constitutes a strong limitation to the application on a large scale of RM . Information about the stability of the transplanted organ / tissue and its response to environmental stimuli in vivo is fun - damental for progress in the field but will be obtained only after a more substantial number of applications will be done . Currently , it is not possible to predict the fate of an artificial tis - sue in vivo , which could engraft permanently while exerting ( some ) function , but may also fail in time , or be colonized and replaced by endogenous cell . The long - term stability and theabilitytoexert ( tosomeextent ) physiologicalfunction ( s ) af - ter implantation will therefore have to be determined . In this scenario , it will be critical for authors to disclose with honesty and integrity not only short - or mid - term results , but also the long - term results . On their side , journals should require au - thors to provide outcome updates on a regular basis . As discussed above , so far , it has been common practice to implant bioengineered tissues without the reconnection to the blood stream of the recipient or the nervous system . For solid organs or vascularized composite allografts , this is not an option . Therefore , research should devise strategies to al - low the integration of the vascular and nervous system of the host with the bioengineered tissue . Regenerative Immunology In the context of standard organ transplantation , alloreactive T cells are mainly activated by donor - derived passenger APCs ( direct pathway of allorecognition ) or by recipient APCs pre - senting donor HLA peptides in the context of self - HLA ( indirect pathway ) . 115 A newly recognized pathway of allorecognition is called the semidirect pathway . It occurs when intact donor HLA antigens are physically transferred to the membrane of host APCs and are then recognized by host Tcells . 115 Host APCs appear to acquire intact HLA molecules from exosomes secreted by donor APCs or through cell - to - cell contact . Less clear are the pathways leading the immune re - sponse against bioengineered cellular constructs . A bioengineered construct consists of 2 elements , both with immune properties : the cellular compartment and the cell - supporting system , namely , the ECM . Implantation of acellular xenogeneic and allogeneic scaffolds in both humans and mice leads to an acute cellular infiltrate , as would be ex - pected with introduction of a foreign body . 116 The composi - tion of cellular infiltrates varies depending on the source and processing of the scaffold . Both neutrophilic and giant cell in - filtrations have been seen after implantation of porcine and human scaffolds into mammal species . 10 , 117 Mononuclear cells invade the peri - implant space as early as at 24 hours of implantation , and this process can continue for several months leading to chronic inflammation and encapsulation or scar formation . 118 Multiple studies have shown that tran - sition from a proinflammatory macrophage phenotype ( M1 ) to an M2 phenotype , associated with wound healing and tis - sue repair , occurs 1 to 2 weeks after implantation of the biolog - ical scaffold . 119 In the case of suboptimal decellularization , the presence of cellular debris within the scaffold or chemical crosslinking leads to an extended M1 type immune response , poor remodeling outcomes , encapsulation and scarring . Deg - radation of the ECM scaffold appears necessary for the switch from an M1 to M2 phenotype , thus implying that the breakdown products may be important for this transi - tion . In vitro studies showed that biological ECM scaffolds induce differentiation of macrophages into reparative M2 macrophages , whereas artificial biomaterials favored differ - entiation into the M1 phenotype . 120 Importantly , even ECM scaffolds obtained from diseased organs offer a more protolerogenic profile compared to synthetic materials . The other , more important source of immune reactivity is the cellular component of the bioengineered graft . Although a fully developed laboratory - grown organ consisting of well - differentiated cells deriving from a genetically different donor will certainly be subjected to an acute rejection re - sponse , it was initially speculated that tissues derived from al - logeneic pluripotent stem cells ( PSCs ) were not immunogenic and could therefore evade allorecognition . 121 This hypothe - sis was based on the observation that undifferentiated cells like PSC express no or low levels of MHC . Moreover , laboratory - engineered biological constructs lack dendritic cells and a lymphatic system that are primary drivers of direct pathway of alloimmune response . However , a growing body of literature has clearly shown that PSCs are not immune privileged and that even tissues derived from autologous iPS may elicit an inflammatory reaction and succumb to rejec - tion . 121 Therefore , strategies to promote local or systemic toler - ance or immunomodulation are currently under investigations . One approach to solve the problem of graft immunogenicity is the cloaking of laboratory - grown ( allo - or auto - ) grafts in immune - neutral substances , such as nanofilms . 122 - 125 Alternatively , researchers are assessing whether the consti - tutive secretion of immune - modulating cytokines , including transforming growth factor ( TGF ) - beta , by tissues differentiated from PSC promotes polarization of alloreactive / xenoreactive T cells toward a regulatory T ( Treg ) cell , immune modulatory phenotype . 121 , 126 - 128 Indeed , when cognate interaction with alloantigens occurs in the presence of IL - 2 and TGF - beta , naive CD4 + T cells convert into Treg cell , a cell subset able to control activation of alloreactive conventional T cells . 244 Transplantation ■ February 2019 ■ Volume 103 ■ Number 2 www . transplantjournal . com Interestingly enough , natural ECM - based scaffolds obtained from human organs that are being used as supporting scaffold - ing material for bioengineered tissues , have been reported to contain significant amount of TGF - beta 16 , 17 , 120 , 129 , 130 and to be able to induce T - cell apoptosis and promote conversion of naïve CD4 + T cells into CD4 + CD25 + Foxp3 + Treg cell . 17 , 129 This observation is consistent with the evidence showing that the ECM possesses strong immunomodulatory properties . Studies in rats , showed that rabbit decellularized muscle scaf - folds down - regulated T - cell xenogeneic responses and T H 1 ef - fector function compared with fresh tissue by inducing a state of peripheral T cell hyporesponsiveness . 131 Although immune response can damage the bioengineered grafts , there is also an increasing recognition that immune cells directly participate in the process of organ regeneration and are essential to proper restoration of tissue function . 132 Therefore , in contrast to materials designed to evade an im - mune response , well - designed immunomodulatory materials capable of orchestrating the immunological response could be instrumental in the regenerative process . 133 , 134 Although studies to date have mostly focused on using materials to direct the immune response to induction of tolerance , 135 , 136 lessons learned from programming immune cells with biomaterials can be harnessed to improve stem cell therapeutic outcomes by coordinating the immune response during regeneration . 137 CONCLUSIONS The transplant era began in 1902 in Vienna , with the suc - cessful autotransplantation of a kidney in the neck of a dog performed by Hungary - born surgeon Emerich Ullman who however did not succeed in performing any transplant in humans . It took 52 years before the first successful renal transplant could be executed in humans , and more than 7 de - cades before transplantation became standard of care for a myriad of clinical settings requiring replacement surgery . In the past few decades , a new field of health science referred to as RM offers the potential to deliver to the bedside organs manufactured from the patient ' s own cells thus bypassing allorecognition and ultimately rendering antirejection medi - cation unnecessary . In doing so , RM promises to meet the more urgent needs of our field , proposes a new Holy Grail FIGURE 2 . In the history of organ transplantation , we identify 3 phases or eras . The first can be referred to as the surgery phase and spans from the early days to the advent of cyclosporine . The in - troductionofthis potent immunosuppressantallowed transplantation to become a lifesaving procedure for a myriad of clinical scenarios characterized by irreversible organ failure . The second phase ( immu - nology ) spans from the advent of cyclosporine to nowadays . During that phase , we have learned how to manage antirejection medica - tions and their impact on patient ’ s quality of life . Importantly , given the burden of side effects that comes with lifelong immunosuppres - sion , we have realized that we should devise strategies to minimize the immunosuppression if not withdrawing it completely sometime after the transplant . Unfortunately , immunosuppression - free trans - plantation remainsunrealistic , despite intense research and multiple at - tempts to translate promising laboratory findings into the clinic . 138 , 139 The third phase has just begun and can be referred to as the RM phase . RM promises to meet the most urgent needs of modern transplantation , namely , the identification of a new potentially inex - haustible source of organs and immunosuppression - free transplan - tation ( adapted from Salvatori et al Xenotransplantation 2015 and Orlando G . Transplantation 2017 , with permission ) . FIGURE 3 . Roadmap for ex vivo solid organ bioengineering using decellularization and 3 - dimensional printing technologies . The figure briefly summarizes the milestones to reach on the path toward the Holy Grail . However , the cartoon does not contemplate interspecies blastocyst com - plementation , which — to the authors — bears the greatest potential for the field because all steps of organ ontogenesis occur in vivo and are strictly regulated by the surrogate animal , without any need for any intervention from the outside . Instead , based on current views , in the case of decellularization and 3 - dimensional printing , cells and supporting scaffolding materials need to go through a maturation phase whose duration , dynamic , and physiology remain largely unknown . © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Orlando et al 245 T A B L E 1 . S t a t e o f t h e a r t , p e r s p ec t i v e a n d hu r d l e s t o o v e r c o m e i n t h e m a j o r R M t ec hn o l og i e s o f t r a n s p l a n t i n t e r e s t S t a t e o f t h e a r t P e r s pe c ti v e and hu r d l e s t o o v e r c o m e D e c e ll u l a r i z a t i o n 1 . V i r t u a ll y a ll o r g a n s f r o m a ll c li n i c a ll y r e l e v a n t m a mm a li a n s p e c i e s i n c l ud i ng hu m a n s c a n b e d e c e ll u l a r i z e d t o o b t a i n a c e ll u l a r E C M s 2 . a E C M s p r e s e r v e s m o s t y e t n o t a ll m o l e c u l a r a nd ph y s i c a l c h a r a c t e r i s t i c s o f t h e i nn a t e E C M , a s t h e d e c e ll u l a r i z a t i o n p r o c e ss d a m a g e s t h e E C M t o a n e x t e n t t h a t d e p e nd s o n t h e m e t h o d a nd t h e o r g a n 3 . P a r t i a l r e g e n e r a t i o n o f t h e e nd o t h e li a l a n d p a r e n c h y m a l c o m p a r t m e n t s h a s b ee n r e p o r t e d , y e t r e s u l t s a r e i n c o n s i s t e n t a nd d i ff i c u l t t o r e p r o du c e 4 . Th e m a t u r a t i o n ph a s e r e p o r t e d i n t h e li t e r a t u r e f o r t h e d i ff e r e n t o r g a n s w a s a l w a y s f a r i n f e r i o r t o t h e t i m e n ee d e d i n u t e r o t o d e v e l o p t h e o r g a n s i n qu e s t i o n s 5 . Th e i m p l a n t a t i o n i n v i v o o f a v i a b l e a nd f un c t i o n i ng b i oe ng i n ee r e d o r g a n h a s n e v e r b ee n r e p o r t e d 1 . I n - d e p t h und e r s t a nd i ng o f t h e m e c h a n i s m s und e r l y i ng o r g a n d e v e l o p m e n t , r e g e n e r a t i o n , a nd h o m eo s t a s i s 2 . I n - d e p t h und e r s t a nd i ng o f t h e m e c h a n i s m s o f E C M - c e ll i n t e r a c t i o n s 3 . C e ll s e l e c t i o n f o r r e c e ll u l a r i z a t i o n 4 . H a r m o n i o u s h a r n e ss i ng o f l y m p h a t i c , n e r v o u s , a nd v a s c u l a r c o m p o n e n t s 5 . I m p r o v i ng t h e d e s i gn o f a d h o c b i o r ea c t o r s t o s upp o r t m a t u r a t i o n 6 . S t r a t e g i e s t o a c h i e v e a d e qu a t e r e c e ll u l a r i z a t i o n 3 D 1 . S u cc e ss f u l i s o l a t i o n a nd e x p a n s i o n o f m a n y f un c t i o n a l a nd s upp o r t i v e c e ll t y p e s 2 . R e p li c a t i o n o f m e c h a n i c a l a nd b i o ph y s i c a l p r o p e r t i e s o f s i m p l e t i ss u e s a t t h e m a c r o l e v e l 3 . B i o p r i n t i ng o f c e ll s w i t h n a t u r a l a nd s y n t h e t i c b i o m a t e r i a l s w i t h h i gh r e s o l u t i o n 4 . I m p l a n t a t i o n a nd i n v i v o m a t u r a t i o n o f s m a ll a v a s c u l a r t i ss u e s 1 . P r o du c t i o n o f a n a d e qu a t e nu m b e r o f r e g e n e r a t i o n - c o m p e t e n t c e ll s t h a t d o n o t e li c i t a n i mm un e r e p o s e a ft e r t r a n s p l a n t a t i o n 2 . E C M - b a s e d m a t e r i a l s t h a t p r o v i d e m u c h s t r o ng e r m e c h a n i c a l s t r e ng t h w h il e m a i n t a i n i ng t h e c e ll - s upp o r t i v e e n v i r o n m e n t 3 . I m p r o v e m e n t s i n s p ee d , r e s o l u t i o n , m a t e r i a l f l e x i b ili t y a nd s c a l a b ili t y o f b i o p r i n t e r s 4 . B i o p r i n t i ng o f m u l t i s c a l e v a s c u l a r n e t w o r k s w i t h i n i n s t r u c t i v e b i o i n k t h a t p r o m o t e s a ng i o g e n i c s p r o u t i ng a nd n eo v a s c u l a r i z a t i o n i PS C s 1 . G e n e r a t i o n o f v a r i o u s t y p e s o f c o m p l e x o r g a n o i d s i n v i t r o ( e g , r e n a l , li v e r , h ea r t , p a n c r ea s ) f r o m hu m a n i PS C s 2 . G e n e r a t i o n o f hu m a n p a n c r ea t i c t i ss u e i n v i v o a ft e r t r a n s p l a n t a t i o n o f i PS C - d e r i v e d o r g a n o i d s i n m i c e 3 . i PS C s c a n b e g e n e r a t e d f r o m i nd i v i du a l p a t i e n t s , c i r c u m v e n t i ng t h e n ee d f o r i mm un o s upp r e ss a n t s a ft e r t r a n s p l a n t a t i o n i n t o p a t i e n t s 1 . i PS C - d e r i v e d o r g a n o i d s t y p i c a ll y r e s e m b l e f e t a l t i ss u e s / o r g a n s a nd a r e un li k e l y t o m a t u r e i n t o f un c t i o n i ng a du l t o r g a n s 2 . i PS C - d e r i v e d o r g a n o i d s g e n e r a t e d i n v i t r o d o n o t h a v e t h e b l oo d v e ss e l s , l y m ph a t i c s , a nd n e u r o n a l i nn e r v a t i o n r e qu i r e d f o r t h e m t o f un c t i o n i n v i v o I B C 1 . D e v e l o p m e n t o f f un c t i o n a l r a t p a n c r ea t a a ft e r I B C o f P d x 1 - / - m o u s e b l a s t o c y s t s 2 . G e n e r a t i o n o f a b i a ll e li c k n o ck o u t i n p i g s u s i ng nu c l ea s e - b a s e d g e n o m e e d i t i ng s h o w s i t c o u l d b e p o ss i b l e t o g e n e r a t e p i g e m b r y o s f o r I B C t h a t l a ck s p e c i f i c o r g a n s 3 . D e v e l o p m e n t o f m o u s e - hu m a n a nd p i g - hu m a n c h i m e r i c e m b r y o s u s i ng “ p r i m e d ” hu m a n i PS C s 1 . Lo w y i e l d a nd e ff i c i e n c y : c h i m e r i s m i s e x t r e m e l y l o w ( < 1 % ) 2 . T o i m p r o v e t h e e ff i c i e n c y o f g e n e r a t i ng hu m a n - p i g c h i m e r i c e m b r y o s , w e n ee d a g r ea t e r und e r s t a nd i ng o f h o w t h e s t a t u s o f hu m a n i PS C s ( i e , w h e t h e r t h e y a r e “ n a ï v e , ” “ p r i m e d , ” o r “ i n t e r m e d i a t e ” ) a ff e c t s t h e i r a b ili t y t o i n t e g r a t e i n t o p o s t i m p l a n t a t i o n p i g e m b r y o s 3 . Th e c o n t r i bu t i o n o f hu m a n i PS C s t o d e v e l o p i ng p i g e m b r y o s i s li m i t e d a nd i t h a s n o t y e t b ee n p o ss i b l e t o g e n e r a t e hu m a n o r g a n s u s i ng I B C 4 . E v e n i f t h e a b o v e c h a ll e ng e s w e r e a dd r e ss e d , a f u r t h e r p r o b l e m i s t h a t hu m a n o r g a n s d e v e l o p e d u s i ng I B C w o u l d h a v e p i g b l oo d v e ss e l s , l y m ph a t i c s , a nd n e u r o n a l i nn e r v a t i o n , w h i c h w o u l d l ea d t o i mm un e r e j e c t i o n R M f o r I R 1 . M u l t i p l e c a nd i d a t e c e ll p o pu l a t i o n s s h o w i n g e ff i c a c y b e y o nd p r e v i o u s s m a ll m o l e c u l e a l t e r n a t i v e s 2 . E m e r g i ng e v i d e n c e o f f a v o r a b l e b i o d i s t r i b u t i o n a v o i d i ng o ff - s i t e e ff e c t s 3 . N a t u r a l o r g a n a r c h i t e c t u r e a v a il a b l e i n t r a n s p l a n t c o n t e x t 4 . C o m p l e m e n t a r y b e n e f i t s w i t h n o r m o t h e r m i c , e x v i v o p e r f u s i o n 1 O b t a i n i ng a d e qu a t e nu m b e r s o f p o i n t o f c a r e - d e r i v e d a u t o l o g o u s c e ll s 2 . O b t a i n i ng a d e qu a t e nu m b e r s o f e ff i c a c i o u s , n o n i mm un o g e n i c G L P - m a nu f a c t u r e d a ll o g e n e i c c e ll s 3 . R ea ss u r a n c e r e g a r d i ng p o t e n t i a l v a s c u l a r / m i c r o v a s c u l a r c o m p li c a t i o n s a E C M , a c e ll u l a r e x t r a c e ll u l a r m a t r i x ; E C M , e x t r a c e ll u l a r m a t r i x ; G L P , g oo d l a b o r a t o r y p r a c t i c e ; I B C , i n t e r s p e c i e s b l a s t o c y s t c o m p l e m e n t a t i o n ; I PS C , i ndu c e d p l u r i p o t e n t s t e m c e ll s ; I R , i n t e r v e n t i o n a l r a d i o l o g y ; R M , r e g e n e r a t i v e m e d i c i n e . 246 Transplantation ■ February 2019 ■ Volume 103 ■ Number 2 www . transplantjournal . com for modern TM 1 and identifies a field of investigation of im - mense interest to transplantation ( Figure 2 ) . Few patients have truly benefited from the successful im - plantation of bioengineered organs , whereas in the majority of others , the graft did not work . Moreover , the anatomical and physiological complexities of modular organs , like the liver , the kidney , and so on , has not been replicated yet , and a lot of work remains to be done before organ bioengineering will approach the bedside and so change the paradigm that has dominated transplant medicine for more than a century using laboratory - grown organs rather than organs procured from deceased or living donors . However , the proof of con - cept has been provided , and researchers are now studying how to fully develop its potential and allow translation . De - spite the road to the ultimate objective appears long , wind - ing , and difficult ( Figure 3 ) , the different RM technologies are still immature and several questions will have to be an - swered before translation may occur ( Table 1 ) , the days when success will be the usual outcome are ahead of us and closer are the days when TM , a discipline that traditionally has been immunology - based , 140 , 141 will realize that RM should be - come its major research core . If we agree on this , then TM should allocate more funds to RM - inspired research , trans - plant societies should twin with RM societies and established RM community of practices and committees , transplant journals and conferences should grant the due consideration and visibility to RM articles . The good news is that most of this is already being done . To the authors of the present article , it is clear that no field in health sciences has more interest than organ transplanta - tion in fostering progress in RM simply because the future of no other field more than the future of TM will be deter - mined and forged by progress occurring in RM . However , it is important to bear in mind that the gold - standard treat - ments for end stage organ failure that are used with good ef - fect today have developed from a very strong science base , where good evidence for safety and efficacy was established in a relevant preclinical model before being tried in patients . Likewise , bone marrow transplantation was made possible thanks to the slow and painstaking work of E . Donnell Thomas , who concluded his Nobel Prize acceptance speech by emphasizing how the clinical successes would not have been possible without the slow but steady progress made with animal models ( https : / / www . nobelprize . org / mediaplayer / index . php ? id = 1686 , accessed on June 12 , 2018 ) . REFERENCES 1 . Orlando G , Soker S , Stratta RJ . Organ bioengineering and regeneration as the new Holy Grail for organ transplantation . Ann Surg . 2013 ; 258 : 221 – 232 . 2 . Rela M , Kaliamoorthy I , Reddy MS . Current status of auxiliary partial orthotopic liver transplantation for acute liver failure . Liver Transpl . 2016 ; 22 : 1265 – 1274 . 3 . Mason C , Dunnill P . A brief definition of regenerative medicine . Regen Med . 2008 ; 3 : 1 – 5 . 4 . OrlandoG , WoodKJ , StrattaRJ , et al . Regenerative medicine andorgan transplantation : past , present , and future . Transplantation . 2011 ; 91 : 1310 – 1317 . 4a . National Institute ofBiomedicalImagingand Bioenginerring . TissueEngi - neering and Regenerative Medicine . www . nibib . nih . gov / science - educa - tion / science - topics / tissue - engineering - and - regenerative - medicine . Accessed January 12 , 2019 . 4b . National Institutes of Health . Regenerative Health . https : / / report . nih . gov / nihfactsheets / viewfactsheet . aspx ? csid = 62 . Accessed January 12 , 2019 . 5 . Badylak SF , Taylor D , Uygun K . Whole - organ tissue engineering : decellularization and recellularization of three - dimensional matrix scaf - folds . Annu Rev Biomed Eng . 2011 ; 13 : 27 – 53 . 6 . Badylak SF , Weiss DJ , Caplan A , et al . Engineered whole organs and complex tissues . Lancet . 2012 ; 379 : 943 – 952 . 7 . Elliott MJ , De Coppi P , Speggiorin S , et al . Stem - cell - based , tissue engineered tracheal replacement in a child : a 2 - year follow - up study . Lancet . 2012 ; 380 : 994 – 1000 . 8 . Hynes RO . The extracellular matrix : not just pretty fibrils . Science . 2009 ; 326 : 1216 – 1219 . 9 . Saldin LT , Cramer MC , Velankar SS , et al . Extracellular matrix hydrogels from decellularized tissues : Structure and function . Acta Biomater . 2017 ; 49 : 1 – 15 . 10 . OrlandoG , FarneyAC , IskandarSS , etal . Productionandimplantationof renal extracellular matrix scaffolds from porcine kidneys as a platform for renal bioengineering investigations . Ann Surg . 2012 ; 256 : 363 – 370 . 11 . NaranjoJD , ScarrittME , HuleihelL , etal . RegenerativeMedicine : lessons from Mother Nature . Regen Med . 2016 ; 11 : 767 – 775 . 12 . Ott HC , Matthiesen TS , Goh SK , et al . Perfusion - decellularized matrix : using nature ' s platform to engineer a bioartificial heart . Nat Med . 2008 ; 14 : 213 – 221 . 13 . Mirmalek - Sani SH , Orlando G , McQuilling JP , etal . Porcine pancreas ex - tracellular matrix as a platform for endocrine pancreas bioengineering . Biomaterials . 2013 ; 34 : 5488 – 5495 . 14 . JankBJ , GovermanJ , GuyetteJP , etal . CreationofaBioengineeredSkin Flap Scaffold with a Perfusable Vascular Pedicle . Tissue Eng Part A . 2017 ; 23 : 696 – 707 . 15 . Zhou H , Kitano K , Ren X , et al . Bioengineering Human Lung Grafts on Porcine Matrix . Ann Surg . 2018 ; 267 : 590 – 598 . 16 . PelosoA , PetrosyanA , DaSaccoS , etal . RenalExtracellularMatrixScaf - folds From Discarded Kidneys Maintain Glomerular Morphometry and VascularResilienceandRetainsCriticalGrowthFactors . Transplantation . 2015 ; 99 : 1807 – 1816 . 17 . Peloso A , Urbani L , Cravedi P , et al . The human pancreas as a source of protolerogenicextracellularmatrixscaffold foranew - generationbioartificial endocrine pancreas . Ann Surg . 2016 ; 264 : 169 – 179 . 18 . Orlando G , Booth C , Wang Z , et al . Discarded human kidneys as a source of ECM scaffold for kidney regeneration technologies . Biomate - rials . 2013 ; 34 : 5915 – 5925 . 19 . GilpinSE , GuyetteJP , GonzalezG , etal . Perfusiondecellularizationofhu - man and porcine lungs : bringing the matrixtoclinicalscale . J Heart Lung Transplant . 2014 ; 33 : 298 – 308 . 20 . Guyette JP , Charest JM , Mills RW , et al . Bioengineering human myocar - dium on native extracellular matrix . Circ Res . 2016 ; 118 : 56 – 72 . 21 . Mazza G , Al - Akkad W , Telese A , et al . Rapid production of human liver scaffolds for functional tissue engineering by high shear stress oscillation - decellularization . Sci Rep . 2017 ; 7 : 5534 . 22 . MazzaG , RomboutsK , RennieHallA , etal . Decellularized humanliveras a natural 3D - scaffold for liver bioengineering and transplantation . Sci Rep . 2015 ; 5 : 13079 . 23 . DuisitJ , MaistriauxL , TaddeoA , etal . Bioengineeringahumanfacegraft : the matrix of identity . Ann Surg . 2017 ; 266 : 754 – 764 . 24 . Duisit J , Amiel H , Debluts D , et al . Single - artery human ear graft procure - ment : a simplified approach . Plast Reconstr Surg . 2017 ; 140 : 599 – 603 . 25 . Duisit J , Amiel H , Orlando G , et al . Face graft scaffold production in a rat model . Plast Reconstr Surg . 2018 ; 141 : 95 – 103 . 26 . Duisit J , Amiel H , Wuthrich T , et al . Perfusion - decellularization of human ear grafts enables ECM - based scaffolds for auricular vascularized com - posite tissue engineering . Acta Biomater . 2018 ; 73 : 339 – 354 . 27 . Duisit J , Orlando G , Debluts D , et al . Decellularization of the porcine ear generates a biocompatible , nonimmunogenic extracellular matrix plat - form for face subunit bioengineering . Ann Surg . 2018 ; 267 : 1191 – 1201 . 28 . Salvatori M , Peloso A , Katari R , et al . Semi - xenotransplantation : the re - generativemedicine - basedapproachtoimmunosuppression - freetrans - plantation and to meet the organ demand . Xenotransplantation . 2015 ; 22 : 1 – 6 . 29 . Fulco I , Miot S , Haug MD , et al . Engineered autologous cartilage tissue for nasal reconstruction after tumour resection : an observational first - in - human trial . Lancet . 2014 ; 384 : 337 – 346 . 30 . Mumme M , Barbero A , Miot S , et al . Nasal chondrocyte - based engineered autologous cartilage tissue for repair of articular carti - lage defects : an observational first - in - human trial . Lancet . 2016 ; 388 : 1985 – 1994 . 31 . Atala A , Bauer SB , Soker S , et al . Tissue - engineered autologous blad - ders for patients needing cystoplasty . Lancet . 2006 ; 367 : 1241 – 1246 . © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Orlando et al 247 32 . Vogel G . Trachea transplants test the limits . Science . 2013 ; 340 : 266 – 268 . 33 . Delaere PR , Van Raemdonck D . The trachea : the first tissue - engineered organ ? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2014 ; 147 : 1128 – 1132 . 34 . Badylak S . Perspective : work with , not against , biology . Nature . 2016 ; 540 : S55 . 35 . TackP , VictorJ , GemmelP , etal . 3D - printingtechniquesinamedicalset - ting : a systematic literature review . Biomed Eng Online . 2016 ; 15 : 115 . 36 . Ventola CL . Medical applications for 3D printing : current and projected uses . P T . 2014 ; 39 : 704 – 711 . 37 . Cui X , BreitenkampK , Finn MG , etal . Direct human cartilagerepair using three - dimensional bioprinting technology . Tissue Eng Part A . 2012 ; 18 : 1304 – 1312 . 38 . Gao G , Schilling AF , Yonezawa T , et al . Bioactive nanoparticles stimulate bone tissue formation in bioprinted three - dimensional scaffold and hu - man mesenchymal stem cells . Biotechnol J . 2014 ; 9 : 1304 – 1311 . 39 . Inzana JA , Olvera D , Fuller SM , et al . 3D printing of composite calcium phosphate and collagen scaffolds for bone regeneration . Biomaterials . 2014 ; 35 : 4026 – 4034 . 40 . Hoang D , Perrault D , Stevanovic M , et al . Surgical applications of three - dimensional printing : a review of the current literature & how to get started . Ann Transl Med . 2016 ; 4 : 456 . 41 . Zopf DA , Hollister SJ , Nelson ME , et al . Bioresorbable airway splint created with a three - dimensional printer . N Engl J Med . 2013 ; 368 : 2043 – 2045 . 42 . MorrisonRJ , HollisterSJ , NiednerMF , etal . Mitigationoftracheobronchomalacia with 3D - printed personalized medical devices in pediatric patients . Sci Transl Med . 2015 ; 7 : 285ra64 . 43 . Gao G , Schilling AF , Hubbell K , et al . Improved properties of bone and cartilage tissue from 3D inkjet - bioprinted human mesenchymal stem cells by simultaneous deposition and photocrosslinking in PEG - GelMA . Biotechnol Lett . 2015 ; 37 : 2349 – 2355 . 44 . Yu Y , Moncal KK , Li J , et al . Three - dimensional bioprinting using self - assembling scalable scaffold - free " tissue strands " as a new bioink . Sci Rep . 2016 ; 6 : 28714 . 45 . Kang HW , Lee SJ , Ko IK , et al . A 3D bioprinting system to produce human - scale tissue constructs with structural integrity . Nat Biotechnol . 2016 ; 34 : 312 – 319 . 46 . Burg KJ , Porter S , Kellam JF . Biomaterial developments for bone tissue engineering . Biomaterials . 2000 ; 21 : 2347 – 2359 . 47 . DalyAC , CunniffeGM , SathyBN , et al . 3Dbioprintingofdevelopmentally inspiredtemplatesforwholeboneorganengineering . AdvHealthcMater . 2016 ; 5 : 2353 – 2362 . 48 . Klebe RJ . Cytoscribing : a methodfor micropositioningcells andthe con - struction of two - and three - dimensional synthetic tissues . Exp Cell Res . 1988 ; 179 : 362 – 373 . 49 . Cohen DL , Malone E , Lipson H , et al . Direct freeform fabrication of seeded hydrogels in arbitrary geometries . Tissue Eng . 2006 ; 12 : 1325 – 1335 . 50 . Iwami K , Noda T , Ishida K , et al . Bio rapid prototyping by extruding / aspirating / refilling thermoreversible hydrogel . Biofabrication . 2010 ; 2 : 014108 . 51 . Shor L , Güçeri S , Chang R , et al . Precision extruding deposition ( PED ) fabrication of polycaprolactone ( PCL ) scaffolds for bone tissue engineer - ing . Biofabrication . 2009 ; 1 : 015003 . 52 . Barron JA , Wu P , Ladouceur HD , et al . Biological laser printing : a novel technique for creating heterogeneous 3 - dimensional cell patterns . Biomed Microdevices . 2004 ; 6 : 139 – 147 . 53 . Guillemot F , Souquet A , Catros S , et al . High - throughput laser printing of cells andbiomaterialsfortissueengineering . Acta Biomater . 2010 ; 6 : 2494 – 2500 . 54 . Guillotin B , Souquet A , Catros S , et al . Laser assisted bioprinting of engineered tissue with high cell density and microscale organization . Biomaterials . 2010 ; 31 : 7250 – 7256 . 55 . Murphy SV , Atala A . 3D bioprinting of tissues and organs . Nat Biotechnol . 2014 ; 32 : 773 – 785 . 56 . Derby B . Printing and prototyping of tissues and scaffolds . Science . 2012 ; 338 : 921 – 926 . 57 . Hardin JO , Ober TJ , Valentine AD , et al . Microfluidic printheads for multimaterial 3D printing of viscoelastic inks . Adv Mater . 2015 ; 27 : 3279 – 3284 . 58 . Ober TJ , Foresti D , Lewis JA . Active mixing of complex fluids at the mi - croscale . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2015 ; 112 : 12293 – 12298 . 59 . Wu W , DeConinck A , Lewis JA . Omnidirectional printingof 3Dmicrovas - cular networks . Adv Mater . 2011 ; 23 : H178 – H183 . 60 . Hollister SJ . Porous scaffold design for tissue engineering . Nat Mater . 2005 ; 4 : 518 – 524 . 61 . Ji S , Guvendiren M . Recent advances in bioink design for 3d bioprinting of tissues and organs . Front Bioeng Biotechnol . 2017 ; 5 : 23 . 62 . Skardal A , Zhang J , McCoard L , et al . Dynamically crosslinked gold nanoparticle — hyaluronan hydrogels . Adv Mater . 2010 ; 22 : 4736 – 4740 . 63 . Zhu W , Qu X , Zhu J , et al . Direct 3D bioprinting of prevascularized tissue constructs with complex microarchitecture . Biomaterials . 2017 ; 124 : 106 – 115 . 64 . Hamm A , Krott N , Breibach I , et al . Efficient transfection method for pri - mary cells . Tissue Eng . 2002 ; 8 : 235 – 245 . 65 . Okumura N , Ueno M , Koizumi N , et al . Enhancement onprimate corneal endothelialcellsurvivalinvitrobyaROCKinhibitor . Invest OphthalmolVis Sci . 2009 ; 50 : 3680 – 3687 . 66 . Yu Z , Liu M , Fu P , et al . ROCK inhibition with Y27632 promotes the pro - liferation and cell cycle progression of cultured astrocyte from spinal cord . Neurochem Int . 2012 ; 61 : 1114 – 1120 . 67 . Evans MJ , Kaufman MH . Establishment in culture of pluripotential cells from mouse embryos . Nature . 1981 ; 292 : 154 – 156 . 68 . Thomson JA , Itskovitz - Eldor J , Shapiro SS , et al . Embryonic stem cell lines derived from human blastocysts . Science . 1998 ; 282 : 1145 – 1147 . 69 . CohenS , LeshanskiL , Itskovitz - EldorJ . Tissueengineeringusinghuman embryonic stem cells . Methods Enzymol . 2006 ; 420 : 303 – 315 . 70 . MaleckiM . ‘ Aboveall , donoharm ’ : safeguardingpluripotentstemcellther - apy against iatrogenic tumorigenesis . Stem Cell Res Ther . 2014 ; 5 : 73 . 71 . Keung W , Boheler KR , Li RA . Developmental cues for the maturation of metabolic , electrophysiological and calcium handling properties of hu - man pluripotent stem cell - derived cardiomyocytes . Stem Cell Res Ther . 2014 ; 5 : 17 . 72 . BaxterM , WitheyS , HarrisonS , etal . Phenotypicandfunctionalanalyses show stem cell - derived hepatocyte - like cells better mimic fetal rather than adult hepatocytes . J Hepatol . 2015 ; 62 : 581 – 589 . 73 . ChoudharyP , BoothH , GutteridgeA , etal . Directingdifferentiationofplu - ripotent stem cells toward retinal pigment epithelium lineage . Stem Cells Transl Med . 2017 ; 6 : 490 – 501 . 74 . Schwartz SD , Regillo CD , Lam BL , et al . Human embryonic stem cell - derived retinal pigment epithelium in patients with age - related macular degeneration and Stargardt ' s macular dystrophy : follow - up of two open - label phase 1 / 2 studies . Lancet . 2015 ; 385 : 509 – 516 . 75 . Grealish S , Diguet E , Kirkeby A , et al . Human ESC - derived dopamine neurons show similar preclinical efficacy and potency to fetal neurons when grafted in a rat model of Parkinson ' s disease . Cell Stem Cell . 2014 ; 15 : 653 – 665 . 76 . Jiang Y , Jahagirdar BN , Reinhardt RL , et al . Pluripotency of mesenchy - mal stem cells derived from adult marrow . Nature . 2002 ; 418 : 41 – 49 . 77 . Dominici M , Le Blanc K , Mueller I , et al . Minimal criteria for defining multipotentmesenchymalstromalcells . TheInternationalSocietyforCel - lular Therapy position statement . Cytotherapy . 2006 ; 8 : 315 – 317 . 78 . Zang M , Zhang Q , Chang EI , et al . Decellularized tracheal matrix scaffold for tracheal tissue engineering : in vivo host response . Plast Reconstr Surg . 2013 ; 132 : 549e – 559e . 79 . Cyranoski D . Investigations launched into artificial tracheas . Nature . 2014 ; 516 : 16 – 17 . 80 . de Windt TS , Vonk LA , Slaper - Cortenbach ICM , et al . Allogeneic MSCs and Recycled autologous chondrons mixed in a one - stage cartilage cell transplantion : a first - in - man trial in 35 patients . Stem Cells . 2017 ; 35 : 1984 – 1993 . 81 . Caplan AI . Mesenchymal stem cells : time to change the name ! Stem Cells Transl Med . 2017 ; 6 : 1445 – 1451 . 82 . Santeramo I , Herrera Perez Z , Illera A , et al . Human Kidney - derived cells ameliorate acute kidney injury without engrafting into renal tissue . Stem Cells Transl Med . 2017 ; 6 : 1373 – 1384 . 83 . Keating A . Mesenchymal stromal cells : new directions . Cell Stem Cell . 2012 ; 10 : 709 – 716 . 84 . RigoF , DeStefanoN , Navarro - TablerosV , etal . Extracellularvesiclesfrom human liver stem cells reduce injury in an ex vivo normothermic hypoxic rat liver perfusion model . Transplantation . 2018 ; 102 : e205 – e210 . 85 . Okita K , Ichisaka T , Yamanaka S . Generation of germline - competent in - duced pluripotent stem cells . Nature . 2007 ; 448 : 313 – 317 . 86 . Takahashi K , Tanabe K , Ohnuki M , et al . Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined factors . Cell . 2007 ; 131 : 861 – 872 . 87 . Cieslar - Pobuda A , Knoflach V , Ringh MV , et al . Transdifferentiation and reprogramming : Overview of the processes , their similarities and differ - ences . Biochim Biophys Acta . 1864 ; 2017 : 1359 – 1369 . 88 . Shi Y , Inoue H , Wu JC , et al . Induced pluripotent stem cell technology : a decade of progress . Nat Rev Drug Discov . 2017 ; 16 : 115 – 130 . 248 Transplantation ■ February 2019 ■ Volume 103 ■ Number 2 www . transplantjournal . com 89 . Peloso A , Tamburrini R , Edgar L , et al . Extracellular matrix scaffolds as a platform for kidney regeneration . Eur J Pharmacol . 2016 ; 790 : 21 – 27 . 90 . Wan J , Huang Y , Zhou P , etal . Culture ofiPSCsderived pancreatic β - like cells in vitro using decellularized pancreatic scaffolds : a preliminary trial . Biomed Res Int . 2017 ; 2017 : 4276928 . 91 . Wang B , Jakus AE , Baptista PM , et al . Functional maturation of induced pluripotent stem cell hepatocytes in extracellular matrix — a comparative analysis of bioartificial liver microenvironments . Stem Cells Transl Med . 2016 ; 5 : 1257 – 1267 . 92 . RemuzziA , FigliuzziM , BonandriniB , etal . Experimentalevaluationofkidney regeneration by organ scaffold recellularization . Sci Rep . 2017 ; 7 : 43502 . 93 . WilmB , TamburriniR , OrlandoG , etal . Autologouscellsforkidneybioen - gineering . Curr Transplant Rep . 2016 ; 3 : 207 – 220 . 94 . Orqueda AJ , Gimenez CA , Pereyra - Bonnet F . iPSCs : a minireview from bench to bed , including organoids and the CRISPR system . Stem Cells Int . 2016 ; 2016 : 5934782 . 95 . Dilworth MR , Clancy MJ , Marshall D , et al . Development and functional capacity of transplanted rat metanephroi . Nephrol Dial Transplant . 2008 ; 23 : 871 – 879 . 96 . ChenJ , LansfordR , StewartV , etal . RAG - 2 - deficientblastocystcomple - mentation : an assay of gene function in lymphocyte development . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 1993 ; 90 : 4528 – 4532 . 97 . Zhou Q , Brown J , Kanarek A , et al . In vivo reprogramming of adult pan - creatic exocrine cells to beta - cells . Nature . 2008 ; 455 : 627 – 632 . 98 . Kobayashi T , Yamaguchi T , Hamanaka S , et al . Generation of rat pan - creas in mouse by interspecific blastocyst injection of pluripotent stem cells . Cell . 2010 ; 142 : 787 – 799 . 99 . UsuiJ , KobayashiT , YamaguchiT , etal . Generationofkidneyfromplurip - otent stem cells via blastocyst complementation . Am J Pathol . 2012 ; 180 : 2417 – 2426 . 100 . Theunissen TW , Powell BE , Wang H , et al . Systematic identification of culture conditions for induction and maintenance of naive human pluripotency . Cell Stem Cell . 2014 ; 15 : 471 – 487 . 101 . Theunissen TW , Friedli M , He Y , et al . Molecular criteria for defining the naive human pluripotent state . Cell Stem Cell . 2016 ; 19 : 502 – 515 . 102 . Wu J , Okamura D , Li M , et al . An alternative pluripotent state confers in - terspecies chimaeric competency . Nature . 2015 ; 521 : 316 – 321 . 103 . Freedman BS . Hopes and difficulties for blastocyst complementation . Nephron . 2018 ; 138 : 42 – 47 . 104 . Cypel M , Yeung JC , Liu M , et al . Normothermic ex vivo lung perfusion in clinical lung transplantation . N Engl J Med . 2011 ; 364 : 1431 – 1440 . 105 . FengZ , TingJ , Alfonso Z , etal . Fresh andcryopreserved , uncultured ad - ipose tissue - derived stem and regenerative cells ameliorate ischemia - reperfusion - induced acute kidney injury . Nephrol Dial Transplant . 2010 ; 25 : 3874 – 3884 . 106 . Houtgraaf JH , de Jong R , Kazemi K , et al . Intracoronary infusion of allo - geneic mesenchymal precursor cells directly after experimental acute myocardial infarction reduces infarct size , abrogates adverse remodel - ing , and improves cardiac function . Circ Res . 2013 ; 113 : 153 – 166 . 107 . Bobi J , Solanes N , Fernandez - Jimenez R , et al . Intracoronary adminis - tration of allogeneic adipose tissue - derived mesenchymal stem cells im - proves myocardial perfusion but not left ventricle function , in a translational model of acute myocardial infarction . J Am Heart Assoc . 2017 ; 6 : e005771 . 108 . MaT , Sun J , ZhaoZ , etal . A brief review : adipose - derived stem cellsand their therapeutic potential in cardiovascular diseases . Stem Cell Res Ther . 2017 ; 8 : 124 . 109 . Smith AM , Maguire - Nguyen KK , Rando TA , et al . The protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B inhibitor MSI - 1436 stimulates regeneration of heart and multiple other tissues . NPJ Regen Med . 2017 ; 2 : 4 . 110 . Cypel M , Liu M , Rubacha M , et al . Functional repair of human donor lungs by IL - 10 gene therapy . Sci Transl Med . 2009 ; 1 : 4ra9 . 111 . MachucaTN , CypelM , BonatoR , etal . Safetyandefficacy ofex vivodo - nor lung adenoviral IL - 10 gene therapy in a large animal lung transplant survival model . Hum Gene Ther . 2017 ; 28 : 757 – 765 . 112 . OrlandoG , BaptistaP , BirchallM , etal . Regenerativemedicineasapplied to solid organ transplantation : current status and future challenges . Transpl Int . 2011 ; 24 : 223 – 232 . 113 . De Vos P , De Haan BJ , Van Schilfgaarde R . Upscaling the production of microencapsulatedpancreaticislets . Biomaterials . 1997 ; 18 : 1085 – 1090 . 114 . Lechanteur C , Briquet A , Giet O , et al . Clinical - scale expansion of mes - enchymal stromal cells : a large banking experience . J Transl Med . 2016 ; 14 : 145 . 115 . Afzali B , Lombardi G , Lechler RI . Pathways of major histocompatibility complex allorecognition . Curr Opin Organ Transplant . 2008 ; 13 : 438 – 444 . 116 . Wilshaw SP , Kearney J , Fisher J , et al . Biocompatibility and potential of acellularhuman amniotic membrane tosupport theattachment andpro - liferation of allogeneic cells . Tissue Eng Part A . 2008 ; 14 : 463 – 472 . 117 . Muhamed J , ReviD , RajanA , etal . Biocompatibility andimmunophenotypic characterization of a porcine cholecyst - derived scaffold implanted in rats . Toxicol Pathol . 2015 ; 43 : 536 – 545 . 118 . Tondreau MY , Laterreur V , Vallières K , et al . In vivo remodeling of fibroblast - derived vascular scaffolds implanted for 6 months in rats . Biomed Res Int . 2016 ; 2016 : 3762484 . 119 . BrownBN , Ratner BD , GoodmanSB , et al . Macrophagepolarization : an opportunity for improved outcomes in biomaterials and regenerative medicine . Biomaterials . 2012 ; 33 : 3792 – 3802 . 120 . PetrosyanA , DaSaccoS , TripuraneniN , etal . Asteptowardsclinicalap - plication of acellular matrix : a clue from macrophage polarization . Matrix Biol . 2017 ; 57 - 58 : 334 – 346 . 121 . FairchildPJ , HortonC , LahiriP , etal . BeneaththeswordofDamocles : re - generative medicine and the shadow of immunogenicity . Regen Med . 2016 ; 11 : 817 – 829 . 122 . Brasile L , Glowacki P , Castracane J , et al . Pretransplant kidney - specific treatmenttoeliminatetheneedforsystemicimmunosuppression . Trans - plantation . 2010 ; 90 : 1294 – 1298 . 123 . Brasile L , Glowacki P , Stubenitsky BM . Bioengineered skin allografts : a newmethod to prevent humoral response . ASAIO J . 2011 ; 57 : 239 – 243 . 124 . Brasile L , Henry N , Stubenitsky B . Underlying mechanisms of protection involved in immunocloak . Transplantation . 2017 ; 101 : e49 – e56 . 125 . Orlando G . ImmunoCloak as a paradigm of the biomaterial approach to immunomodulation : where regenerative medicine meets organ trans - plantation . Transplantation . 2017 ; 101 : 234 – 235 . 126 . de Almeida PE , Meyer EH , Kooreman NG , et al . Transplanted terminally differentiated induced pluripotent stem cells are accepted by immune mechanisms similar to self - tolerance . Nat Commun . 2014 ; 5 : 3903 . 127 . Robertson NJ , Brook FA , Gardner RL , et al . Embryonic stem cell - derived tissues are immunogenic but their inherent immune privilege promotes the induction of tolerance . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2007 ; 104 : 20920 – 20925 . 128 . Oh SA , Li MO . TGF - β : guardian of Tcell function . J Immunol . 2013 ; 191 : 3973 – 3979 . 129 . Cravedi P , Farouk S , Angeletti A , et al . Regenerative immunology : the im - munological reaction to biomaterials . Transpl Int . 2017 ; 30 : 1199 – 1208 . 130 . Petrosyan A , Zanusso I , Lavarreda - Pearce M , et al . Decellularized renal matrix and regenerative medicine of the kidney : a different point of view . Tissue Eng Part B Rev . 2016 ; 22 : 183 – 192 . 131 . Fishman JM , Lowdell MW , Urbani L , et al . Immunomodulatory ef - fect of a decellularized skeletal muscle scaffold in a discordant xe - notransplantation model . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2013 ; 110 : 14360 – 14365 . 132 . Madl CM , Heilshorn SC , Blau HM . Bioengineering strategies to acceler - ate stem cell therapeutics . Nature . 2018 ; 557 : 335 – 342 . 133 . Rice JJ , Martino MM , De Laporte L , et al . Engineering the regenerative microenvironment with biomaterials . Adv Healthc Mater . 2013 ; 2 : 57 – 71 . 134 . Vishwakarma A , Bhise NS , Evangelista MB , et al . Engineering immuno - modulatory biomaterials to tune the inflammatory response . Trends Biotechnol . 2016 ; 34 : 470 – 482 . 135 . Getts DR , Martin AJ , McCarthyDP , etal . Microparticles bearingenceph - alitogenic peptides induce T - cell tolerance and ameliorate experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis . Nat Biotechnol . 2012 ; 30 : 1217 – 1224 . 136 . Yoon YM , Lewis JS , Carstens MR , et al . A combination hydrogel microparticle - based vaccine prevents type 1 diabetes in non - obese dia - betic mice . Sci Rep . 2015 ; 5 : 13155 . 137 . Spiller KL , Nassiri S , Witherel CE , et al . Sequential delivery of immuno - modulatory cytokines to facilitate the M1 - to - M2 transition of macro - phages and enhance vascularization of bone scaffolds . Biomaterials . 2015 ; 37 : 194 – 207 . 138 . OrlandoG , HemattiP , StrattaRJ , etal . Clinicaloperationaltoleranceafter renal transplantation : current status and future challenges . Ann Surg . 2010 ; 252 : 915 – 928 . 139 . Orlando G , Soker S , Wood K . Operational tolerance after liver transplan - tation . J Hepatol . 2009 ; 50 : 1247 – 1257 . 140 . Peloso A , Katari R , Zambon JP , etal . Sisyphus , the Giffen ' sparadox and theHolyGrail : timefororgantransplantationtotransitiontowardaregen - erative medicine - focused type of research . Expert Rev Clin Immunol . 2013 ; 9 : 883 – 885 . 141 . Rogers J , Katari R , Gifford S , et al . Kidney transplantation , bioengineer - ingandregeneration : anoriginallyimmunology - baseddisciplinedestined to transitiontowards ad hoc organ manufacturing and repair . Expert Rev Clin Immunol . 2016 ; 12 : 169 – 182 . © 2018 Wolters Kluwer Orlando et al 249