Cytoskeletal Tension Inhibits Hippo Signaling through an Ajuba - Warts Complex Cordelia Rauskolb , 1 , 2 Shuguo Sun , 1 , 2 Gongping Sun , 1 Yuanwang Pan , 1 and Kenneth D . Irvine 1 , * 1 Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Waksman Institute , and Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry , Rutgers University , Piscataway , NJ 08854 , USA 2 Co - ﬁrst author * Correspondence : irvine @ waksman . rutgers . edu http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 05 . 035 SUMMARY Mechanical forces have been proposed to modu - late organ growth , but a molecular mechanism that links them to growth regulation in vivo has been lacking . We report that increasing tension within the cytoskeleton increases Drosophila wing growth , whereas decreasing cytoskeletal tension decreases wing growth . These changes in growth can be ac - counted for by changes in the activity of Yorkie , a transcription factor regulated by the Hippo pathway . The inﬂuence of myosin activity on Yorkie depends genetically on the Ajuba LIM protein Jub , a negative regulator of Warts within the Hippo pathway . We further show that Jub associates with a - catenin and that its localization to adherens junctions and association with a - catenin are promoted by cyto - skeletal tension . Jub recruits Warts to junctions in a tension - dependent manner . Our observations delin - eate a mechanism that links cytoskeletal tension to regulation of Hippo pathway activity , providing a molecular understanding of how mechanical forces can modulate organ growth . INTRODUCTION Elucidating the mechanisms that regulate growth to generate organs of correct size and proportion remains a fundamental goal of developmental biology . Much attention has focused over recent decades on intercellular signaling pathways that modulate growth , and many such pathways have been identiﬁed and characterized . However , mechanical forces can also inﬂu - ence proliferation of cultured cells ( Curtis and Seehar , 1978 ; Huang and Ingber , 1999 ) , and models incorporating a role for physical forces in modulating growth during development have been proposed ( Aegerter - Wilmsen et al . , 2007 , 2012 ; Hufnagel et al . , 2007 ; Shraiman , 2005 ) . While it seems clear that cells in developing organs must experience mechanical forces , it has been difﬁcult to assess the potential contribution of these forces to the regulation of growth , because a mechanistic understand - ing of how mechanical forces are connected to molecular pro - cesses that control growth has been lacking . Here , we describe a molecular mechanism that links tension in the apical actin cyto - skeleton to the growth - regulatory Hippo signaling pathway . The Hippo pathway was discovered through tumor suppres - sor mutations in Drosophila but is now known to be a crucial regulator of both normal and oncogenic growth across a range of species , including humans ( Harvey et al . , 2013 ; Staley and Irvine , 2012 ; Yu and Guan , 2013 ) . The central core of the pathway comprises the protein kinase Warts ( Wts , LATS in mammals ) and its substrate Yorkie ( Yki , YAP , and TAZ in mam - mals ) ( Figure 1A ) . Yki is a transcriptional coactivator protein , and Wts inhibits Yki by promoting its cytoplasmic localization ( Oh and Irvine , 2010 ) . Several distinct regulatory mechanisms can impinge on Wts , including pathways that inﬂuence the activity of kinases that promote ( Hippo ) or inhibit ( Minibrain ) Wts activity ( Degoutin et al . , 2013 ; Hamaratoglu et al . , 2006 ; Yu et al . , 2010 ) , pathways that inﬂuence Wts stability ( Fat ) ( Cho et al . , 2006 ) , pathways that inﬂuence Wts localization ( Merlin ) ( Yin et al . , 2013 ) , pathways that act through Wts - binding proteins ( Jub ) ( Das Thakur et al . , 2010 ) , and pathways that act through as yet ill - deﬁned mechanisms . Several of these Wts - regulatory mecha - nisms have been linked to cell - cell junctions or intercellular signaling pathways , and these connections implicate Hippo signaling as an integrator of diverse inputs regulating organ growth ( Enderle and McNeill , 2013 ; Yu and Guan , 2013 ) . Recently , evidence for regulation of Yki , YAP , and TAZ by mechanical forces has been described . This includes differences in localization and transcriptional activity of YAP and TAZ when cultured cells are grown under conditions of varied attachment to the extracellular matrix or varied cell density or after genetic or pharmacological perturbations of the actin cytoskeleton ( Aragona et al . , 2013 ; Dupont et al . , 2011 ; Ferna´ndez et al . , 2011 ; Sansores - Garcia et al . , 2011 ; Wada et al . , 2011 ; Zhao et al . , 2012 ) . Some studies of cultured cells have indicated that YAP / TAZ activity could be inﬂuenced by mechanical perturba - tions in an actin - dependent fashion independent of LATS activity , with the actual mechanism remaining elusive ( Aragona et al . , 2013 ; Dupont et al . , 2011 ) . Other studies have identiﬁed inﬂuences on YAP / TAZ that depend on the actin cytoskeleton and are mediated by LATS , but how LATS is regulated is un - known ( Wada et al . , 2011 ; Zhao et al . , 2012 ) . Similarly , studies Cell 158 , 143 – 156 , July 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 143 in Drosophila have reported that accumulation of F - actin can increase Yki activity through an unknown mechanism that is nonetheless sensitive to Wts ( Ferna´ndez et al . , 2011 ; San - sores - Garcia et al . , 2011 ) . Additionally , Zyxin , a protein known to be regulated by mechanical forces in mammalian cells ( Hirata et al . , 2008 ) , was found to participate in Fat pathway regulation of Yki activity in Drosophila ( Rauskolb et al . , 2011 ) , but so far no evidence for participation of Zyxin in mechanical regulation of Yki activity has been described . While these studies suggest that mechanical regulation of Yki could occur , absent an under - standing of the molecular mechanism by which this is achieved , it has not been possible to assess its role and signiﬁcance in vivo . Here , we utilize the developing wing imaginal discs of Drosophila to investigate regulation of Yki activity by mechanical tension . Wing discs are clusters of undifferentiated epithelial cells that will give rise to the wing and notum of the ﬂy . They have long been used as models for studies of growth and patterning during development , including investigations of the role and regulation of Hippo signaling . We describe a molecular mechanism that links tension in the actin cytoskeleton to organ growth through the regulation of Hippo signaling . We report that Yki activity is sensitive to cytoskeletal tension within the developing wing disc . This regulation of Yki requires Jub , a nega - tive regulator of Wts activity within the Hippo pathway . We show that Jub localization is regulated by cytoskeletal tension and implicate a - catenin as a mechanotransducer responsible for Jub localization . We also describe Wts localization in vivo and show that Jub interacts with Wts in a tension - dependent fashion . Our studies thus delineate a molecular mechanism linking mechanical tension to the regulation of Yki activity through the Hippo pathway . RESULTS Cytoskeletal Tension Declines during Wing Development A characteristic feature of Drosophila wing development is that as the wing disc grows , cells appear to become more com - pressed in the central region that will give rise to the wing blade ( Aegerter - Wilmsen et al . , 2012 ) . This is visible through the transi - tion to progressively more columnar cells within the wing pouch ( Figures 1B and 1C ) . This change in cell architecture is intriguing in light of models that have proposed that mechanical compres - sion could contribute to reduced disc growth at the end of larval development ( Aegerter - Wilmsen et al . , 2007 , 2012 ; Hufnagel et al . , 2007 ; Shraiman , 2005 ) . Relative cytoskeletal tension can be estimated by the recoil of intercellular vertices after laser cut - ting of cell junctions ( Farhadifar et al . , 2007 ) . Recent applications of this technique in wing discs demonstrated that peripheral cells are more stretched than cells near the center of the wing pouch ( Legoff et al . , 2013 ; Mao et al . , 2013 ) . We applied this technique Figure 1 . Cytoskeletal Tension Declines during Wing Development ( A ) ThecentralcoreoftheHippopathwaycomprisesthekinasesHpoandWts , which negatively regulate the transcriptional coactivator Yki . ( B and C ) Horizontal ( upper ) and vertical ( lower , marked by prime symbols ) confocalsectionsthroughyounger ( B ) orolder ( C ) third - instarwingdiscs , stained for E - cad ( green ) , DNA ( blue ) , and Discs large ( Dlg , red ) . Insets show lower magniﬁcation views of DNA staining ( white ) with the entire wing pouch visible . ( D and E ) Confocal sections through live younger ( D ) or older ( E ) third - instar wing discs , expressing for E - cad : GFP ( green ) and UAS - BFP ( blue ) marking dorsal and A - P boundary cells . ( F and G ) High - magniﬁcation views of the discs in ( D ) and V , 1 sbefore and 8 s after laser cutting of cell junctions between the white arrows . See also Movies S1 and S2 . ( H ) Quantitation of mean displacement velocities of vertices adjacent to cut junctions withintheﬁrst 300ms after cutting . Averages are based on 36 ( older ) or 37 ( younger ) cuts , and error bars show SEM . See also Movies S1 and S2 . 144 Cell 158 , 143 – 156 , July 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . to compare cytoskeletal tension in younger ( (cid:1) 84 hr , mid - third instar ) versus older ( (cid:1) 120 hr , late third instar ) wing discs . Cell junctions were visualized using GFP - tagged E - cadherin ( E - cad : GFP ) ( Figures 1D and 1E ) . We estimated relative position and avoided cells at or near compartment boundaries , which are known to exhibit increased tension ( Aliee et al . , 2012 ; Lands - berg et al . , 2009 ; Major and Irvine , 2006 ) , using BFP - expressing transgenes that mark compartment boundaries , and also restricted our analysis to cell junctions roughly perpendicular to the proximal distal axis . These studies revealed that from mid - to late third instar , during which growth rates decrease ( Bryant and Levinson , 1985 ; Martı´n et al . , 2009 ; Wartlick et al . , 2011 ) , there is a decrease in cytoskeletal tension ( Figures 1F – 1H ; Movies S1 and S2 available online ) . The results obtained by laser cutting of cell junctions , indicating a higher tension in younger versus older wing discs and a higher tension in the periphery versus the center , are consistent with inferences of tissue compression by stress - birefringence in wing discs ( Nien - haus et al . , 2009 ) . Cytoskeletal Tension Modulates Wing Growth To examine the possibility that cytoskeletal tension could inﬂu - ence growth in vivo , we manipulated the activity of the major nonmuscle myosin , Myosin II ( Myo II ) , which controls tension within the actin cytoskeleton . Myo II activity is regulated by Rho - associated protein kinase ( ROCK ) , encoded in Drosophila by the Rho - kinase gene ( rok ) . ROCK phosphorylates the regula - tory light chain of Myo II ( Sqh , encoded in Drosophila by spaghetti squash , sqh ) to increase myosin contractility ( Amano et al . , 1996 ; Winter et al . , 2001 ) . Although dynamic myosin activ - ity is essential for multiple cellular processes , cells can tolerate modest global decreases or increases in myosin activity . We manipulated myosin activity by expressing UAS transgenes under the control of nub - Gal4 , which drives the expression throughout the developing wing ( Figure S1F ) . Decreasing ROCK levels using RNAi resulted in ﬂies with smaller wings ( Figures 2A , 2B , and 2M ) . Conversely , increasing ROCK activity by expressing an activated form of ROCK comprising the cata - lytic domain ( ROCK . CAT ) resulted in ﬂies with larger wings ( Fig - ures 2C and 2M ) . To conﬁrm that the effect of rok RNAi on wing size was mediated through the inﬂuence of ROCK on Sqh , we coexpressed an activated form of Sqh ( Sqh . EE ) containing phos - phomimetic Ser to Glu mutations at regulatory sites normally phosphorylated by ROCK ( Bertet et al . , 2009 ; Winter et al . , 2001 ) . Expression of Sqh . EE reversed the reduced wing growth associated with rok RNAi ( Figures 2D and 2M ) . Our observations are consistent with a recent report that physically stretching wing discs could stimulate cell proliferation ( Schluck et al . , 2013 ) . Cytoskeletal Tension Modulates Yki Activity To investigate whether the modulation of wing growth caused by changes in ROCK activity is associated with altered Hippo signaling , we assayed markers of Yki activity in developing wing discs . For these experiments , we expressed transgenes Figure 2 . Cytoskeletal Tension Modulates Wing Growth ( A – L ) Adult wings from ﬂiesexpressingnub - Gal4 UAS - dcr2 and ( A ) control , ( B ) UAS - rok - RNAi , ( C ) UAS - rok . CAT , ( D ) UAS - rok - RNAi UAS - sqh . EE , ( E ) UAS - sqh . EE , ( F ) UAS - rok - RNAi jub E1 / + , ( G ) jub E1 / + , ( H ) UAS - jub - RNAi , ( I ) UAS - bsk - RNAi , ( J ) UAS - rok . CAT UAS - bsk . RNAi , ( K ) UAS - rok . CAT jub E1 / + , and ( L ) UAS - rok . CAT UAS - jub . RNAi . ( M ) Mean wing areas for the indicated genotypes ( lettered according to ge - notypes displayed in ﬁgure panels above ) , calculated from 9 to 15 wings per genotype . Error bars indicate SEM , and statistical signiﬁcance of selected pairwise combinations are indicated by colored lines . See also Figure S1 . Cell 158 , 143 – 156 , July 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 145 ( legend on next page ) 146 Cell 158 , 143 – 156 , July 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . under the control of en - Gal4 , which drives expression in poste - rior cells . In this situation , anterior cells , which do not express transgenes , serve as an internal control . Reduction of ROCK levels in posterior cells by RNAi reduced growth within wing discs ( Figures S1B and S1E ) and reduced the expression of a direct transcriptional target of Yki , ex - lacZ ( Figures 3B and 3I ) . Another target of Yki activity , Diap1 , was also reduced in poste - rior cells by rok RNAi ( Figure 3C ) . We also examined the subcel - lular localization of Yki protein , as activity of Yki is correlated with its nuclear localization . Reduction of ROCK was associated with a slight decrease in nuclear Yki ( Figures 3D and 3J ) . As a further test , we quantiﬁed phosphorylation of Yki at the major Wts site ( Ser168 ) ( Dong et al . , 2007 ; Oh and Irvine , 2008 ) by western blotting . In whole - wing disc lysates with rok RNAi expressed under nub - Gal4 control , the relative fraction of phosphorylated Yki was increased ( indicating decreased Yki activity ) by 24 % ( Figure 3K ) , which , as the nub domain comprises roughly half of the wing disc ( Figure S1F ) , understates the increased Yki phosphorylation within rok RNAi - expressing cells . In complementary experiments , ROCK activity was increased in posterior cells by expression of ROCK . CAT . This increased growth within wing discs and increased ex - lacZ expression ( Figures 3E , 3I , S1C , and SCE ) . Quantiﬁcation of Yki Ser168 phosphorylation in discs expressing ROCK . CAT un - der nub - Gal4 revealed that the relative fraction of phosphory - lated Yki was reduced ( indicating increased Yki activity ) by 17 % ( Figure 3L ) . As for technical reasons these experiments were again done using nub - Gal4 , this understates the decreased Yki phosphorylation within ROCK . CAT - expressing cells . An inactive version of ROCK , ROCK . CAT . KG ( Winter et al . , 2001 ) , had no effect on ex - lacZ ( Figure 3F ) . Direct activa - tion of Myo II activity by expression of Sqh . EE could also in - crease disc growth ( Figures S1D and S1E ) , induce ex - lacZ expression ( Figures 3G and 3I ) , and decrease Yki phosphoryla - tion ( Figure 3K ) . Moreover , Sqh . EE was epistatic to rok RNAi for ex - lacZ regulation ( Figure 3H ) . We note that adult wings from ﬂies expressing Sqh . EE under nub - Gal4 control were not signiﬁcantly larger than control wings , even though Sqh . EE could suppress rok RNAi ( Figures 2E and 2M ) . As Sqh . EE has stronger effects than does ROCK . CAT in other respects ( e . g . , myosin accumulation and JNK activation , see below ) , we spec - ulate that the inﬂuence of constitutive high Sqh activity on other cellular and morphogenetic processes partially obscures our ability to detect its inﬂuence on Yki activity by examination of wing size in adult ﬂies . Nonetheless , taken together , our ob - servations on ROCK and Sqh establish that Myo II activity pro - motes Yki activity in vivo . Moreover , the observation that phos - phorylation of Ser168 is affected implies that Yki activity is regulated by Myo II through the Hippo pathway ( i . e . , by affecting Wts activity ) . The induction of ex - lacZ associated with expression of sqh . EE or ROCK . CAT was not uniform . Instead , it was most evident near the center of the wing disc ( except along the D - V boundary , where ex - lacZ cannot be activated by Yki ) , where endogenous levels of ex - lacZ are generally lower . Intriguingly , this also ap - pears to be where tension is lower ( Legoff et al . , 2013 ; Mao et al . , 2013 ; Nienhaus et al . , 2009 ) , which might explain why the consequences of increased Myo II activity appear greater here . Cellular Consequences of Altered ROCK Activity To conﬁrm the inﬂuence of altered ROCK activity on Myo II under our conditions , we examined the accumulation of Myo II using Sqh : GFP and Zip : GFP ( for Myo II heavy chain , encoded in Drosophila by zipper [ zip ] ) . As expected , expression of rok RNAi in posterior cells reduced junctional accumulation of Myo II , whereas expression of ROCK . CAT or Sqh . EE in posterior cells increased junctional accumulation of Myo II ( Figures S1G – S1J ) , consistent with observations that Myo II activity correlates with Myo II accumulation ( Fernandez - Gonzalez et al . , 2009 ) . As a further test , we assessed relative tension using laser ablation of cell junctions . Comparing pairs of cells with corresponding proximal - distal locations in the posterior versus anterior com - partments of discs with altered ROCK or Sqh activity in poste - rior cells revealed consistent differences in cytoskeletal tension ( Figure 4A ) . Strong accumulation of F - actin , as induced , for example , by mutation or downregulation of actin - capping proteins , can be associated with activation of Yki ( Ferna´ndez et al . , 2011 ; San - sores - Garcia et al . , 2011 ) . The decreased tension associated with rok RNAi reduced F - actin accumulation ( Figures 4B and 4C ) , but the increased tension associated with expression of ROCK . CAT or Sqh . EE had little effect on F - actin levels ( Figures 4B , 4D , and 4E ) , suggesting that their inﬂuence on Yki could Figure 3 . Cytoskeletal Tension Modulates Yki Activity ( A – H ) Third - instar wing imaginal discs expressing en - Gal4 UAS - dcr2 UAS - GFP or UAS - RFP ( green ) and ( A ) control ( B – D ) UAS - rok - RNAi , ( E ) UAS - rok . CAT , ( G ) UAS - rok . CAT - KG , ( H ) UAS - sqh . EE , and ( I ) UAS - sqh . EE UAS - rok - RNAi stained forexpressionof ex - lacZ ( magenta ) , Diap1 ( red ) , DNA ( blue / white ) , or Yki ( red / white ) as indicated . Lower panels for ( B ) , ( D ) , and ( G ) show vertical sections through the same discs . Dashed yellow line marks A - P compartment boundary . Panels marked prime show individual stains of discs to the left . ( I ) Quantitationof ex - lacZ expressionindiscsofthegenotypesdepictedherein ( A ) , ( B ) , ( E ) , and ( G ) , representedasthemeanintensityofnuclear b - galstaininginP compartmentregionsdividedbymeanintensityofnuclear b - galstaininginAcompartmentregions ; meanDNAstainingintensitypernuclearvolumeisalsoshown for comparison ( n = 22 [ wild - type ] , 22 [ rok RNAi ] , 10 [ ROCK . CAT ] , 30 [ Sqh . EE ] ) . ( J ) Quantitation of Yki in en - Gal4 UAS - dcr2 UAS - rok - RNAi UAS - GFP discs , represented as the mean intensity of nuclear Yki staining in P compartment regions dividedbymean intensityofnuclearYkistaininginAcompartmentregions ; mean DNAstainingintensityper nuclearvolumeisalso shownfor comparison ( n = 22 [ wild - type ] , 19 [ rok RNAi ] ) . ( K and L ) Representative western blots and results of quantitation of four independent blots performed on wing disc lysates ( 20 discs per lane ) from nub - Gal4UAS - dcr2 ( labeledascontrol ) and ( K ) nub - Gal4UAS - dcr2 with UAS - rok - RNAi ( labeledasrokRNAi ) or UAS - sqh . EE ( labeledasSqh . EE ) or ( L ) nub - Gal4UAS - dcr2UAS - rok . CAT ( labeledasROCK . CAT ) . Thephospho - Yki ( pYki ) toYkiratiowasnormalizedtotheaverageratioinwild - typelysates , using b - tubulin ( Tub ) asa loading control . See also Figure S2 . Cell 158 , 143 – 156 , July 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 147 be distinct from the inﬂuence of mutations that directly and strongly modulate F - actin . It has been reported that strong activation of Myo II can lead to activation of JNK ( Warner et al . , 2010 ) . As JNK can promote Yki activation ( Grusche et al . , 2011 ; Shaw et al . , 2010 ; Staley and Irvine , 2010 ; Sun and Irvine , 2011 ; 2013 ) , we considered the possibility that JNK might be responsible for the Yki activa - tion induced by ROCK . CAT or Sqh . EE . However , under our experimental conditions , activation of JNK was limited and not distributed in a manner consistent with the observed Yki activa - tion ( Figures S2A – S2D ) . Moreover , inhibition of JNK activity by expressing a dominant - negative form of Drosophila JNK ( Bas - ket , Bsk ) or Bsk RNAi did not prevent ex - lacZ induction or increased wing growth induced by Sqh . EE or ROCK . CAT ( Figures 2 and S2 ) . Thus , increased cytoskeletal tension can elevate Yki activity in wing discs through a JNK - independent mechanism . Jub Is Required for the Inﬂuence of Cytoskeletal Tension on Yki Activity To gain further insight into how Myo II activity inﬂuences Yki , we examined genetic interactions of rok and sqh with Hippo pathway components . The key direct negative regulator of Yki activity within the Hippo pathway is Wts ( Figure 1A ) . Downregu - lation of Wts in posterior cells by RNAi leads to strong upregula - tion of Yki activity , readily visualized by increased ex - lacZ expression ( Figure 5A ) . This activation of Yki was neither impaired by rok RNAi nor was the obvious overgrowth of the posterior compartment suppressed by rok RNAi ( Figure 5B ) . These observations suggest that rok acts at or upstream of wts . In complementary experiments , we examined whether activation of Yki triggered by ROCK . CAT or Sqh . EE could be suppressed by reduction of Ajuba LIM protein ( Jub ) . Jub is a negative regulator of Wts activity that binds directly to Wts ( Fig - ure 1A ) ( Das Thakur et al . , 2010 ) . ROCK . CAT or Sqh . EE were un - able to increase wing growth or Yki activity in the presence of jub RNAi ( Figures 2L , 2M , and 5C – 5E ) , consistent with the inference that cytoskeletal tension inﬂuences Yki activity through the Hippo pathway , and implying that it does so upstream of , or in parallel to , Jub . A signiﬁcant connection between jub and rok was further supported by genetic interactions . Heterozygosity for jub normally has little effect on wing size but signiﬁcantly enhanced the reduced wing size observed in rok RNAi and slightly suppressed the increased size of ROCK . CAT - express - ing wings ( Figure 2 ) . Similarly , heterozygosity for yki enhanced the reduced wing growth of ﬂies expressing rok RNAi ( Figure S3 ) . Apical Localization of Jub Is Promoted by Cytoskeletal Tension The genetic requirement for jub in tension - dependent regulation of Yki prompted us to re - examine Jub localization in vivo . Jub has been reported to localize apically , near cell junctions , in disc epithelial cells ( Sabino et al . , 2011 ; Das Thakur et al . , 2010 ) . Moreover , a mammalian homolog of Jub , Ajuba , can localize to cell junctions in cultured cells and can bind a - catenin , which links the actin cytoskeleton to adherens junctions ( Marie et al . , 2003 ) . Figure 4 . Cellular Consequences of Altered ROCK Activity ( A ) Quantitation of relative retraction velocity between junctions in the posterior versusanteriorcompartmentincontrolwingdiscsorwingdiscsexpressing UAS - rok - RNAi , UAS - rok . CAT , or UAS - sqh . EE , as indicated , in posterior cells under en - Gal4 control . Junctions of similar orientation and location in A and P com - partmentswerecutinthesamedisc , andtherelativevelocitiesofmatchedpairs weredetermined ( n = 12 [ wild - type ] , 21 [ rokRNAi ] , 10 [ ROCK . CAT ] , 25 [ Sqh . EE ] ) . ( B ) Quantitation of relative F - actin levels between P and A compartments in discs of the genotypes depicted in ( C ) – ( E ) ( n = 8 for all genotypes ) . ( C – E ) Third - instar wing imaginal discs expressing en - Gal4 UAS - dcr2 UAS - GFP or UAS - RFP ( green ) and ( C ) UAS - rok - RNAi , ( D ) UAS - rok . CAT , or ( E ) UAS - sqh . EE , stained for F - actin using phalloidin ( red ) . Lower panels show vertical sections through the same discs . Dashed yellow line marks A - P compartment boundary . Error bars indicate SEM . See also Figure S3 . 148 Cell 158 , 143 – 156 , July 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Jub localization was examined using a genomic construct encoding a GFP - tagged Jub protein , which rescues jub mutants ( Sabino et al . , 2011 ) . Close examination of Jub : GFP in wild - type wing discs revealed two striking features . First , although Jub : GFP overlaps E - cadherin and a - catenin staining along cell junctions , Jub : GFP localization is less even , as it accumulates in bright puncta , whereas other areas exhibit low Jub : GFP ( Fig - ures 6 and S4 ) . Second , elevated Jub : GFP accumulation is evident along compartment boundaries ( Figures 6B , 6C , S4A , and S4B ) . As compartment boundaries are sites of increased cytoskeletal tension ( Aliee et al . , 2012 ; Landsberg et al . , 2009 ; Major and Irvine , 2005 , 2006 ) , this elevated Jub : GFP suggests that Jub localization to junctions is promoted by tension . Indeed , decreasing Myo II activity by expression of rok RNAi decreased apical Jub ( Figures 6D , 6F , and S4E ) , whereas increasing Myo II activity by expression of ROCK . CAT or Sqh . EE increased apical Jub ( Figures 6E , 6F , S4C , and S4F ) . At higher magniﬁcation , this increase was evident as brighter and more numerous puncta of Jub : GFP along cell junctions ( Figure S4C ) . Increased apical localization of Jub was not suppressed by reduction of JNK activity ( Figure S4H ) . expanded ( ex ) , an upstream regulator of the Hippo pathway , had little effect on Jub : GFP ( Figure S4G ) , suggesting that altered Jub localization in response to increased Myo II activity does not occur as a consequence of altered Hippo pathway activity but rather reﬂects a response to altered tension . As an independent test of this , we used a ROCK inhib - itor , Y - 27632 , known to decrease myosin activity in wing discs ( Legoff et al . , 2013 ) . Jub : GFP localization to apical junctions was visibly decreased after a 90 min incubation with Y - 27632 ( Figures S5A – S5E ) . Together , our observations identify Jub as a protein whose subcellular localization is regulated by cytoskel - etal tension . One of the mammalian homologs of Jub , Ajuba , has been reported to bind a - catenin ( Marie et al . , 2003 ) . Jub localization to apical junctions in wing discs requires a - catenin , as it was suppressed by RNAi - mediated reduction of a - catenin ( Figures 6H , S5F , and S5G ) . a - catenin is also required for retention of E - cadherin and b - catenin at adherens junctions , but not other junctional proteins , including Discs large , Echinoid , and Bazooka ( Figures 6H and S5G ) ( Sarpal et al . , 2012 ) . Thus , the a - catenin dependence of Jub localization indicates that it requires adhe - rens junctions . We conﬁrmed that Jub could physically associate in a complex with a - catenin in vivo through coimmunoprecipita - tion experiments . Although the signal in terms of speciﬁcally coprecipitated a - catenin was low , this likely stems from the small amount of starting material , which comprised lysates of hand - dissected Drosophila wing imaginal discs . Jub : GFP - spe - ciﬁc precipitation of a - catenin was statistically signiﬁcant ( Fig - ures 6G and S5H ) . Figure 5 . Jub Is Genetically Required for the Inﬂuence of Cytoskeletal Tension on Yki Activity ( A – F ) Third - instar wing imaginal discs expressing en - Gal4 UAS - dcr2 with or without UAS - GFP and ( A ) UAS - wts - RNAi , ( B ) UAS - wts - RNAi UAS - rok - RNAi , ( C ) UAS - jub - RNAi , ( D ) UAS - jub - RNAi UAS - rok . CAT , ( E ) UAS - jub - RNAi UAS - sqh . EE , and ( F ) UAS - a - cat - RNAi stained for expression of ex - lacZ ( magenta ) . Posterior cells were marked by expression of Dcr2 or GFP ( green ) . Panels marked prime show individual stains of discs to the left . See also Figure S4 . Cell 158 , 143 – 156 , July 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 149 ( legend on next page ) 150 Cell 158 , 143 – 156 , July 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Notably , a - catenin at junctions in cultured mammalian cells appears to undergo a force - dependent conformational change , mediated by pulling from the actin cytoskeleton , such that a - cat - enin at junctions can bind Vinculin under conditions of high ten - sion , but not under conditions of low tension ( Yonemura et al . , 2010 ) . We hypothesized that the tension - dependent recruitment of Jub to adherens junctions that we observe in vivo ( Figures 6 , S4 , and S5 ) might similarly be mediated by a tension - dependent modulation of Drosophila a - catenin . In support of this , we found that coprecipitation of a - catenin with Jub : GFP was elevated in lysates of wing discs in which half the cells have elevated cyto - skeletal tension ( nub - Gal4 UAS - Sqh . EE ) ( Figure 6G ) . Quantita - tive western blotting also revealed that total levels of Jub were not affected by this increase in myosin activity ( Figure S4D ) . Thus , we propose that the tension - dependent localization of Jub to cell junctions in vivo could be mediated by a tension - dependent conformational change in a - catenin that enhances its binding to Jub . Jub Recruits Wts to Adherens Junctions The role of Jub within the Hippo pathway is to bind and inhibit Wts ( Das Thakur et al . , 2010 ) . To investigate the relationship be - tween tension - dependent localization of Jub and its inﬂuence on Hippo signaling , we sought to examine Wts localization in vivo . Endogenous Wts localization has not been described previously , as available Wts antisera do not work for immunostaining . We used a V5 - tagged wts genomic construct within a Bac clone that was transformed into Drosophila and also used a MIMIC insertion ( Venken et al . , 2011 ) to GFP - tag wts at its normal cyto - logical location ( Figure S6 ) . Based on complementation tests with wts mutant alleles , both of these provide normal wts activity . Moreover , both Wts : V5 and GFP : Wts exhibit similar localization proﬁles , except that Wts : V5 staining is weaker . Strikingly , both Wts : V5 and GFP : Wts accumulate at adherns junctions of wing disc cells in a punctate distribution , reminiscent of Jub : GFP localization ( Figures 7 and S6 ) . Indeed , when examined together , Jub : GFP and Wts : V5 apical puncta frequently colocalize ( Fig - ures 7B and S6F ) , and signiﬁcant colocalization was conﬁrmed by calculation of Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient ( Figure S6G ) . Coimmunoprecipitation of endogenous Wts with Jub : GFP from wing disc lysates conﬁrmed that this colocalization is reﬂective of physical association ( Figures 7C and S6E ) . Junctional Wts was lost from jub mutant clones , indicating that Jub is required to recruit Wts into these apical complexes ( Figure 7D ) . Moreover , under conditions of elevated cytoskeletal tension , localization of junctional Wts was increased ( Figures 7F and 7G ) , and copreci - pitation of Wts with Jub : GFP was enhanced ( Figure 7C ) . In contrast , junctional Wts was decreased when ROCK levels were reduced by RNAi ( Figures 7E and 7G ) . Together , these re - sults demonstrate that Wts is recruited into a complex with the Wts - inhibitor Jub in a tension - dependent manner . Recently , it has been reported that Wts or LATS proteins expressed in cultured cells could localize to the plasma mem - brane in a Merlin - dependent manner , and that forced membrane localization via myristylation could activate Wts ( Yin et al . , 2013 ) . These observations , together with prior studies on the localiza - tion of Wts regulatory proteins , implicate the apical membrane as a site of Wts activation . To begin to explore the relationship between localization of endogenous Wts and Wts activators , we compared Wts : GFP to two key Wts activators in the wing , Ex and Salvador ( Sav ) . Ex is largely apical to Wts ( Figures 7H and S6F ) , and moreover when their distributions are overlayed by projecting through several confocal sections , Ex immunoﬂu - orescence exhibits an irregular distribution with no evident corre - lation to that of Wts ( Figure 7H ) . The lack of colocalization was conﬁrmed by calculation of Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient , which was negative ( Figure S6G ) . Sav exhibits a more contin - uous distribution but predominantly overlaps with Ex rather than Wts ( Figure 7H ) . Thus , in vivo Wts exhibits little or no detect - able overlap with these Wts - activators . DISCUSSION Mechanical forces have long been known to modulate the pro - liferation of cultured cells in vitro ( Curtis and Seehar , 1978 ; Huang and Ingber , 1999 ) and have received attention as an attractive mechanism for modulating organ growth in vivo ( Aegerter - Wilmsen et al . , 2007 , 2012 ; Hufnagel et al . , 2007 ; Shraiman , 2005 ) . Moreover , increased stiffness is well known to correlate with tumor progression ( Butcher et al . , 2009 ) . Although progress has been reported in identifying components of growth regulatory pathways that could respond to mechanical Figure 6 . Apical Localization of Jub Is Promoted by Cytoskeletal Tension ( A and B ) Third - instar wing discs expressing Jub : GFP ( green ) and stained for expression of E - cad ( red ) . ( A ) High - magniﬁcation view showing Jub : GFP puncta along cell junctions . ( B ) Mid - third - instar disc , with D - V compartment boundary marked by arrows . Wg ( blue ) marks the D - V boundary and proximal wing . ( C ) Quantitation of Jub : GFP and E - cad along the D - V compartment boundary in early to mid - third instar , presented as the ratio of junctional staining along the boundary compared to random cell junctions ( n = 13 pairs of measurements ) . ( D and E ) Third - instar wing discs stained for expression of E - cad or a - cat ( red ) as indicated , expressing Jub : GFP ( green ) and en - Gal4 UAS - dcr2 UAS - RFP ( blue ) and ( D ) UAS - rok - RNAi or ( E ) UAS - rok . CAT . Panels to the right ( - z ) show vertical sections . ( F ) Quantitation of Jub : GFP and E - cad at adherens junctions in discs of en - Gal4 UAS - dcr2 UAS - RFP plus , where indicated , UAS - rok - RNAi , UAS - rok . CAT , or UAS - sqh . EE represented as the mean intensity of junctional ﬂuorescence in P compartment regions divided by the mean intensity in A compartment regions ( n = 12 [ wild - type ] , 32 [ rok RNAi ] , 30 [ ROCK . CAT ] , 25 [ Sqh . EE ] ) . ( G ) Western blots and quantitation of coprecipitation of a - catenin with Jub : GFP from third - instar wing disc lysates ( 200 discs per lane ) . Lysates were made on discs dissected from nub - Gal4 Jub : GFP , nub - Gal4 Jub : GFP UAS - sqh . EE , or w - . Upper two panels show amounts in lysates ( input ) , and lower two panels show amounts precipitated by GFP - TrapA beads . Some nonspeciﬁc precipitation of a - catenin occurs , but precipitation from animals expressing Jub : GFP is consistently greater . Histogram shows the average ratio of a - catenin in IP over that in input after background subtraction from three biological replicates , normalized to the ratio in nub - Gal4 Jub : GFP . For both input and IP blots , the level of a - catenin was normalized to the Jub : GFP level . ( H ) Third - instarwingdiscsstainedforexpressionofDlg ( red ) , expressingJub : GFP ( green ) and en - Gal4UAS - dcr2UAS - RFP ( blue ) UAS - a - cat - RNAi . Panelstothe right ( - z ) show vertical sections . Yellow dashed lines mark the A - P compartment boundary . Error bars show SEM . See also Figure S5 . Cell 158 , 143 – 156 , July 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 151 ( legend on next page ) 152 Cell 158 , 143 – 156 , July 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . force ( Halder et al . , 2012 ; Samuel et al . , 2011 ) , our understand - ing of how mechanical signals are integrated into growth regula - tory pathways has remained poor . Here , we have documented an inﬂuence of cytoskeletal tension on wing growth in Drosophila and delineated a molecular pathway linking this cytoskeletal ten - sion to the regulation of growth through inhibition of the Hippo pathway . Our observations identify Jub as a protein regulated by mechanical tension , as its localization to foci at adherens junc - tions is elevated during normal development along compartment boundaries , which are sites of increased tension , and its localiza - tion to junctions can be increased or decreased by increasing or decreasing , respectively , Myo II activity . Because this localiza - tion requires a - catenin , which associates with Jub , and a - cate - nin has been identiﬁed as a mechanotransducer ( Yonemura et al . , 2010 ) , we propose that this modulation of Jub localization occurs as a consequence of a tension - induced conformational change of a - catenin that increases its binding to Jub ( Figure 7I ) . a - catenin is well positioned to act as a mechanotransducer ( Huveneers and de Rooij , 2013 ) : it interacts with the b - cate - nin : E - cad complex , which is effectively anchored through bind - ing E - cad in neighboring cells , and it also associates with the F - actin cytoskeleton , which could pull on a - catenin through myosin - mediated contraction ( Yonemura et al . , 2010 ) ( Figure 7I ) . We further propose that association with a - catenin increases the binding of Jub to Wts , leading to an inhibitory recruitment of Wts to apical junctions and consequently increased Yki activity ( Figure 7I ) . This proposal is supported by the observations that Wts colocalizes with and physically associates with Jub in vivo , the promotion of this physical association by Myo II activity , and genetic and biochemical evidence that wts and jub are required for tension - dependent modulation of Yki activity . Cytoskeletal tension has previously been reported to increase YAP activity in cultured mammalian cells ( Aragona et al . , 2013 ; Dupont et al . , 2011 ) . The molecular mechanism that mediates this mechanoregulation of YAP is unknown but was determined to be independent of Hippo signaling , because it did not involve LATS ( the mammalian homolog of Wts ) . This clearly distin - guishes it from the Hippo - pathway - dependent mechanoregula - tion of Yki in wing discs that we describe here . Among many differences in experimental conditions , we note that experiments on cultured cells frequently involve manipulating cytoskeletal tension through cell - extracellular matrix attachment , whereas cytoskeletal tension at cell - cell attachments of epithelial cells was manipulated in our experiments . Whether this accounts for the distinct mechanisms involved remains to be determined , but just as there are multiple ligand - regulated biochemical signal transduction pathways that inﬂuence organ growth , there are likely also multiple mechanically - regulated pathways that in - ﬂuence organ growth . Indeed , other experimental regimes of altered attachment of cultured cells to matrix in vitro have been associated with LATS - dependent effects on YAP activity ( Wada et al . , 2011 ; Zhao et al . , 2012 ) . Moreover , in Drosophila , increased accumulation of F - actin elevates Yki activity ( Ferna´n - dez et al . , 2011 ; Sansores - Garcia et al . , 2011 ) , also potentially consistent with mechanical regulation of Hippo signaling . However , it has recently been reported that F - actin levels modu - late interaction between Wts and the Wts activator Merlin ( Yin et al . , 2013 ) , and further studies are needed to address the mechanisms by which changes in F - actin levels associated with genetic or pharmacological manipulations impinge on Hippo signaling . Despite the crucial role of Wts as the key direct regulator of Yki within the Hippo pathway , the endogenous localization of Wts protein in vivo has not previously been characterized . Our obser - vations that Wts associates with Jub at cell junctions , and that this association is increased under conditions leading to elevated Yki activity , indicate that recruitment of Wts to junctions is associated with inhibition of Wts . Several positive upstream regulators of Wts also localize near cell junctions ( Enderle and McNeill , 2013 ; Staley and Irvine , 2012 ; Yu and Guan , 2013 ) , and it was recently proposed that recruitment of Wts to the mem - brane is associated with Wts activation ( Yin et al . , 2013 ) . How - ever , as we show here , at least some membrane - associated activators exhibit distinct localization proﬁles from Wts . These observations suggest that there could be distinct sites for Wts activation and Wts inhibition at apical junctions , with most junc - tional Wts localized to an inhibitory complex . It could be that only a small fraction of endogenous Wts is normally active or that Wts activation involves transient association of Wts with activators , as opposed to the stable association of Wts with Jub revealed by our studies . Figure 7 . Jub Recruits Wts to Adherens Junctions ( A ) Wing disc expressing GFP : Wts ( green ) and stained for E - cad ( red ) . ( B ) Wing disc expressing Jub : GFP ( green ) and stained for Wts : V5 ( red ) . ( C ) Western blots and quantitation of coimmunoprecipitation of Wts with Jub : GFP from third - instar wing disc lysates ( 200 discs per lane ) . Lysates were made on discs dissected from nub - Gal4 Jub : GFP , nub - Gal4 Jub : GFP UAS - sqh . EE , or w - . Upper two panels show amounts in lysates ( input ) , and lower two panels show theamountsprecipitated byGFP - TrapAbeads . SomenonspeciﬁcprecipitationofWtsoccurs , butprecipitationfromanimalsexpressingJub : GFPisconsistently greater . Histogram shows the average ratio of Wts in input over that in IP from three biological replicates , normalized to the ratio in nub - Gal4 Jub : GFP . For both input and IP blots , the level of Wts was normalized to the Jub : GFP level . ( D ) Wing disc expressing GFP : Wts ( green ) , with jub mutant clones marked by absence of arm - lacZ ( blue ) . ( E and F ) Wing discs expressing GFP : Wts ( green ) and en - Gal4 UAS - dcr2 UAS - RFP ( blue ) and ( E ) UAS - rok - RNAi or ( F ) UAS - sqh . EE and stained for E - cad ( red ) . ( G ) Quantitation of Wts : GFP and E - cad at adherens junctions in discs of en - Gal4 UAS - dcr2 UAS - RFP plus , where indicated , UAS - rok - RNAi or UAS - sqh . EE represented as the mean intensity of junctional ﬂuorescence in P compartment regions divided by the mean intensity in A compartment regions ( n = 5 discs per genotype , with ﬁve measurements per disc ) . ( H ) Wing disc expressing GFP : Wts ( green ) and stained for Ex ( magenta ) and Sav ( red ) , as indicated . Panels marked - z show vertical sections , and white arrow points to location of a GFP : Wts puncta . ( I ) Model for regulation of Hippo signaling by cytoskeletal tension through Jub ; see text for details . Error bars show SEM . See also Figure S6 . Cell 158 , 143 – 156 , July 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 153 Whereas the results described here identify Jub as a key player in mechanoregulation of Hippo signaling , other recent studies have identiﬁed Jub , and two its mammalian homologs , LIMD1 and WTIP , as targets for cross - regulation of Hippo signaling by the EGFR and JNK signaling pathways ( Reddy and Irvine , 2013 ; Sun and Irvine , 2013 ) . These observations emphasize the importance of Ajuba family proteins as a key regulatory node within the Hippo signaling pathway and as a point of convergence between mechanical and biochemical signaling pathways . Indeed , organ growth in vivo must integrate multiple inputs . For example , the dorsal - ventral compartment boundary is not only a region of elevated cytoskeletal tension but is also , in late third - instar discs , a region of low cell prolifer - ation ( O’Brochta and Bryant , 1987 ) , due to repression of cell proliferation downstream of Notch signaling ( Herranz et al . , 2008 ) . Thus , at late third instar , Notch activation might override or bypass the inﬂuence of tension on growth along the compart - ment boundary . Our observation of Wts complexing with Jub at apical junctions has implications for how growth is controlled in devel - oping tissues . These complexes are promoted by cytoskeletal tension , which provides a mechanism for tension - dependent regulation of growth . However , even under conditions of con - stant tension , an increase in the apical perimeter of cells at junctions could result in more of these Wts - inhibitory Jub com - plexes , whereas a decrease in apical perimeter could lead to fewer of these Wts - inhibitory complexes . This suggests the po - tential of shape - dependent regulation of Hippo - signaling , with cells of small apical perimeter having higher Hippo signaling and consequently reduced growth . Reduced apical area ( and consequently perimeter ) correlates with reduced cell prolifera - tion , both in vivo and in cell culture models ( Aegerter - Wilmsen et al . , 2012 ; Aragona et al . , 2013 ; Puliaﬁto et al . , 2012 ) . Apical area is also expected to be affected by relative mechanical forces ( e . g . , how much is a cell stretched by its neighbors ) , and thus we speculate that it could be used by cells to assess not only their own tension but also the mechanical environment in which they reside . Effects of tension on shape and the formation of junctional Wts - inhibitory complexes could thus provide a mechanism for cell density - dependent regulation of organ size . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Histology and Imaging Discs were ﬁxed in 4 % paraformaldehyde and stained using as primary anti - bodies rabbit anti - Yki ( Oh and Irvine , 2008 ) , mouse anti - b - galacotsidase ( b - gal ) ( DSHB ) , mouse anti - Wg ( DSHB ) , mouse anti - Diap1 ( B . Hay ) , rat anti - E - cad ( DCAD2 ; DSHB ) , rabbit anti - Dcr2 ( Abcam ) , guinea pig anti - a - catenin ( U . Tepass ) , mouse anti - Dlg ( DSHB ) , rabbit anti - cleaved caspase ( Dcp - 1 ; Cell Signaling Techonology ) , mouse anti - V5 ( Invitrogen , R960 - 25 ) , guinea pig anti - Ex ( R . Fehon ) , and rabbit anti - Sav ( J . Jiang ) . Secondary antibodies were purchased from Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories and Invitrogen . F - actinwasstainedusingAlexaFluor546 - phalloidin ( Invitrogen ) , andDNAwas stained using Hoechst ( Invitrogen ) . Confocal images were captured on aLeica SP5 or a PerkinElmer Ultraview . Immunoblotting and Immunoprecipitation To examine effects of tension on Jub : GFP - Wts or a - catenin binding , UAS - sqh . E20E21 or w - ( control ) females were crossed to nub - Gal4 UASdcr2 ; Jub : GFP or w - ( control ) males and cultured at 29 (cid:3) C . Lysates from approxi - mately 200 wing discs of third - instar larvae were used for each genotype per coimmunoprecipitation , and at least three repetitions were performed . For Yki blots , lysates from 20 discs were used for each blot , and four repetitions were performed . Discs were lysed in 50 mM Tris ∙ HCl ( pH 7 . 4 ) , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % TritonX - 100 , 0 . 1 % CHAPS , 0 . 1 % NP - 40 , 1mMEDTA , and5 % glyc - erol , supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail ( Roche ) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail ( Calbiochem ) . For coimmunoprecipitation , protein samples were incubated with GFP - Trap _ A agarose beads ( Chemotek ) for 3 hr at 4 (cid:3) C and then washed . Protein samples were applied to 4 % – 15 % gradient gels ( Bio - rad ) . Antibodies used for immunoblotting include rabbit anti - Wts ( 1 : 10 , 000 ) ( Choetal . , 2006 ) , rabbitanti - Yki ( 1 : 2 , 000 ) ( OhandIrvine , 2008 ) , rab - bit anti - phospho - Yki ( 1 : 1 , 000 , D . Pan ) , rabbit anti - GFP ( 1 : 2 , 000 , Life Technol - ogies ) , and mouse anti - tubulin ( 1 : 8 , 000 , Sigma ) . Blots were visualized and quantiﬁed using ﬂuorescent - conjugated secondary antibodies and an Odys - sey Imaging System ( Li - Cor Biosciences ) . Additional experimental procedures are in the Extended Experimental Procedures . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes Extended Experimental Procedures , six ﬁgures , and two movies and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 05 . 035 . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Y . P . contributed tension measurements by laser cutting ; G . S . contributed coimmunoprecipitation and western blotting ; S . S . contributed all analysis of Wts localization ; C . R . contributed all other experiments and manuscript preparation ; and K . D . I . contributed experimental design , data analysis , and manuscript preparation . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS WethankYongqiangFengforWts : V5 - expressingﬂies , SpencerIrvineforinitial characterization of rok RNAi phenotypes , and Martha Soto for helpful discussion insuggesting a - catenin experiments . We thank R . Basto , C . Bo¨kel , R . Fehon , B . Hay , J . Jiang , D . Kiehart , L . Luo , G . Longmore , T . Lecuit , D . Pan , U . Tepass , J . Zallen , the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank , the Gene Disruption Project , the Bloomington Stock Center for antibodies and Drosophila stocks , and the Drosophila Genomics Resource Center for plas - mids . This research was supported by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the National Institutes of Health ( R01 GM078620 ) . Received : November 4 , 2013 Revised : February 18 , 2014 Accepted : May 8 , 2014 Published : July 3 , 2014 REFERENCES Aegerter - Wilmsen , T . , Aegerter , C . M . , Hafen , E . , and Basler , K . ( 2007 ) . Model for the regulation of size in the wing imaginal disc of Drosophila . Mech . Dev . 124 , 318 – 326 . Aegerter - Wilmsen , T . , Heimlicher , M . B . , Smith , A . C . , de Reuille , P . B . , Smith , R . S . , Aegerter , C . M . , and Basler , K . ( 2012 ) . Integrating force - sensing and signaling pathways in a model for the regulation of wing imaginal disc size . Development 139 , 3221 – 3231 . Aliee , M . , Ro¨per , J . - C . , Landsberg , K . P . , Pentzold , C . , Widmann , T . J . , Ju¨licher , F . , and Dahmann , C . ( 2012 ) . Physical mechanisms shaping the Drosophila dorsoventral compartment boundary . Curr . Biol . 22 , 967 – 976 . Amano , M . , Ito , M . , Kimura , K . , Fukata , Y . , Chihara , K . , Nakano , T . , Matsuura , Y . , and Kaibuchi , K . ( 1996 ) . Phosphorylation and activation of myosin by Rho - associated kinase ( Rho - kinase ) . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 20246 – 20249 . 154 Cell 158 , 143 – 156 , July 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Aragona , M . , Panciera , T . , Manfrin , A . , Giulitti , S . , Michielin , F . , Elvassore , N . , Dupont , S . , and Piccolo , S . ( 2013 ) . Amechanicalcheckpoint controls multicel - lulargrowththroughYAP / TAZregulationbyactin - processingfactors . Cell 154 , 1047 – 1059 . Bertet , C . , Rauzi , M . , and Lecuit , T . ( 2009 ) . Repression of Wasp by JAK / STAT signalling inhibits medial actomyosin network assembly and apical cell constriction in intercalating epithelial cells . Development 136 , 4199 – 4212 . Bryant , P . J . , and Levinson , P . ( 1985 ) . Intrinsic growth control in the imaginal primordia of Drosophila , and the autonomous action of a lethal mutation causing overgrowth . Dev . Biol . 107 , 355 – 363 . Butcher , D . T . , Alliston , T . , and Weaver , V . M . ( 2009 ) . A tense situation : forcing tumour progression . Nat . Rev . Cancer 9 , 108 – 122 . Cho , E . , Feng , Y . , Rauskolb , C . , Maitra , S . , Fehon , R . , and Irvine , K . D . ( 2006 ) . Delineation of a Fat tumor suppressor pathway . Nat . Genet . 38 , 1142 – 1150 . Curtis , A . S . G . , and Seehar , G . M . ( 1978 ) . The control of cell division by tension or diffusion . Nature 274 , 52 – 53 . Das Thakur , M . , Feng , Y . , Jagannathan , R . , Seppa , M . J . , Skeath , J . B . , and Longmore , G . D . ( 2010 ) . Ajuba LIM proteins are negative regulators of the Hippo signaling pathway . Curr . Biol . 20 , 657 – 662 . Degoutin , J . L . , Milton , C . C . , Yu , E . , Tipping , M . , Bosveld , F . , Yang , L . , Bel - laı¨che , Y . , Veraksa , A . , and Harvey , K . F . ( 2013 ) . Riquiqui and minibrain are regulators of the hippo pathway downstream of Dachsous . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 , 1176 – 1185 . Dong , J . , Feldmann , G . , Huang , J . , Wu , S . , Zhang , N . , Comerford , S . A . , Gayyed , M . F . , Anders , R . A . , Maitra , A . , and Pan , D . ( 2007 ) . Elucidation of a universal size - control mechanism in Drosophila and mammals . Cell 130 , 1120 – 1133 . Dupont , S . , Morsut , L . , Aragona , M . , Enzo , E . , Giulitti , S . , Cordenonsi , M . , Zan - conato , F . , Le Digabel , J . , Forcato , M . , Bicciato , S . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Role of YAP / TAZ in mechanotransduction . Nature 474 , 179 – 183 . Enderle , L . , and McNeill , H . ( 2013 ) . Hippo gains weight : added insights and complexity to pathway control . Sci . Signal . 6 , re7 . Farhadifar , R . , Ro¨per , J . - C . , Aigouy , B . , Eaton , S . , and Ju¨licher , F . ( 2007 ) . The inﬂuenceofcellmechanics , cell - cellinteractions , andproliferationonepithelial packing . Curr . Biol . 17 , 2095 – 2104 . Ferna´ndez , B . G . , Gaspar , P . , Bra´s - Pereira , C . , Jezowska , B . , Rebelo , S . R . , and Janody , F . ( 2011 ) . Actin - Capping Protein and the Hippo pathway regulate F - actin and tissue growth in Drosophila . Development 138 , 2337 – 2346 . Fernandez - Gonzalez , R . , Simoes , S . deM . , Ro¨per , J . - C . , Eaton , S . , andZallen , J . A . ( 2009 ) . Myosin II dynamics are regulated by tension in intercalating cells . Dev . Cell 17 , 736 – 743 . Grusche , F . A . , Degoutin , J . L . , Richardson , H . E . , and Harvey , K . F . ( 2011 ) . The Salvador / Warts / Hippo pathway controls regenerative tissue growth in Drosophila melanogaster . Dev . Biol . 350 , 255 – 266 . Halder , G . , Dupont , S . , andPiccolo , S . ( 2012 ) . Transductionofmechanicaland cytoskeletal cues by YAP and TAZ . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 13 , 591 – 600 . Hamaratoglu , F . , Willecke , M . , Kango - Singh , M . , Nolo , R . , Hyun , E . , Tao , C . , Jafar - Nejad , H . , and Halder , G . ( 2006 ) . The tumour - suppressor genes NF2 / Merlin and Expanded act through Hippo signalling to regulate cell proliferation and apoptosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 8 , 27 – 36 . Harvey , K . F . , Zhang , X . , and Thomas , D . M . ( 2013 ) . The Hippo pathway and human cancer . Nat . Rev . Cancer 13 , 246 – 257 . Herranz , H . , Pe ´ rez , L . , Martı´n , F . A . , andMila ´ n , M . ( 2008 ) . AWinglessandNotch double - repression mechanism regulates G1 - S transition in the Drosophila wing . EMBO J . 27 , 1633 – 1645 . Hirata , H . , Tatsumi , H . , and Sokabe , M . ( 2008 ) . Zyxin emerges as a key player in the mechanotransduction at cell adhesive structures . Commun . Integr . Biol . 1 , 192 – 195 . Huang , S . , and Ingber , D . E . ( 1999 ) . The structural and mechanical complexity of cell - growth control . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , E131 – E138 . Hufnagel , L . , Teleman , A . A . , Rouault , H . , Cohen , S . M . , and Shraiman , B . I . ( 2007 ) . On the mechanism of wing size determination in ﬂy development . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 3835 – 3840 . Huveneers , S . , and de Rooij , J . ( 2013 ) . Mechanosensitive systems at the cad - herin - F - actin interface . J . Cell Sci . 126 , 403 – 413 . Landsberg , K . P . , Farhadifar , R . , Ranft , J . , Umetsu , D . , Widmann , T . J . , Bittig , T . , Said , A . , Ju¨licher , F . , and Dahmann , C . ( 2009 ) . Increased cell bond tension governscellsorting attheDrosophila anteroposteriorcompartmentboundary . Curr . Biol . 19 , 1950 – 1955 . Legoff , L . , Rouault , H . , and Lecuit , T . ( 2013 ) . A global pattern of mechanical stress polarizes cell divisions and cell shape in the growing Drosophila wing disc . Development 140 , 4051 – 4059 . Major , R . J . , and Irvine , K . D . ( 2005 ) . Inﬂuence of Notch on dorsoventral compartmentalization and actin organization in the Drosophila wing . Develop - ment 132 , 3823 – 3833 . Major , R . J . , and Irvine , K . D . ( 2006 ) . Localization and requirement for Myosin II atthedorsal - ventral compartmentboundary oftheDrosophila wing . Dev . Dyn . 235 , 3051 – 3058 . Mao , Y . , Tournier , A . L . , Hoppe , A . , Kester , L . , Thompson , B . J . , and Tapon , N . ( 2013 ) . Differential proliferation rates generate patterns of mechanical tension that orient tissue growth . EMBO J . 32 , 2790 – 2803 . Marie , H . , Pratt , S . J . , Betson , M . , Epple , H . , Kittler , J . T . , Meek , L . , Moss , S . J . , Troyanovsky , S . , Attwell , D . , Longmore , G . D . , and Braga , V . M . ( 2003 ) . TheLIM protein Ajuba is recruited to cadherin - dependent cell junctions through an association with alpha - catenin . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 1220 – 1228 . Martı´n , F . A . , Herrera , S . C . , and Morata , G . ( 2009 ) . Cell competition , growth and size control in the Drosophila wing imaginal disc . Development 136 , 3747 – 3756 . Nienhaus , U . , Aegerter - Wilmsen , T . , and Aegerter , C . M . ( 2009 ) . Determination of mechanical stress distribution in Drosophila wing discs using photoelastic - ity . Mech . Dev . 126 , 942 – 949 . O’Brochta , D . A . , and Bryant , P . J . ( 1987 ) . Distribution of S - phase cells during the regeneration of Drosophila imaginal wing discs . Dev . Biol . 119 , 137 – 142 . Oh , H . , andIrvine , K . D . ( 2008 ) . InvivoregulationofYorkiephosphorylationand localization . Development 135 , 1081 – 1088 . Oh , H . , and Irvine , K . D . ( 2010 ) . Yorkie : the ﬁnal destination of Hippo signaling . Trends Cell Biol . 20 , 410 – 417 . Puliaﬁto , A . , Hufnagel , L . , Neveu , P . , Streichan , S . , Sigal , A . , Fygenson , D . K . , and Shraiman , B . I . ( 2012 ) . Collective and single cell behavior in epithelial contact inhibition . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 739 – 744 . Rauskolb , C . , Pan , G . , Reddy , B . V . V . G . , Oh , H . , and Irvine , K . D . ( 2011 ) . Zyxin links fat signaling to the hippo pathway . PLoS Biol . 9 , e1000624 . Reddy , B . V . V . G . , and Irvine , K . D . ( 2013 ) . Regulation of Hippo signaling by EGFR - MAPK signaling through Ajuba family proteins . Dev . Cell 24 , 459 – 471 . Sabino , D . , Brown , N . H . , and Basto , R . ( 2011 ) . Drosophila Ajuba is not an Aurora - A activator but is required to maintain Aurora - A at the centrosome . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 1156 – 1166 . Samuel , M . S . , Lopez , J . I . , McGhee , E . J . , Croft , D . R . , Strachan , D . , Timpson , P . , Munro , J . , Schro¨der , E . , Zhou , J . , Brunton , V . G . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Actomy - osin - mediated cellular tension drives increased tissue stiffness and b - catenin activation to induce epidermal hyperplasia and tumor growth . Cancer Cell 19 , 776 – 791 . Sansores - Garcia , L . , Bossuyt , W . , Wada , K . , Yonemura , S . , Tao , C . , Sasaki , H . , and Halder , G . ( 2011 ) . Modulating F - actin organization induces organ growth by affecting the Hippo pathway . EMBO J . 30 , 2325 – 2335 . Sarpal , R . , Pellikka , M . , Patel , R . R . , Hui , F . Y . W . , Godt , D . , and Tepass , U . ( 2012 ) . Mutational analysis supports a core role for Drosophila a - catenin in adherens junction function . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 233 – 245 . Schluck , T . , Nienhaus , U . , Aegerter - Wilmsen , T . , and Aegerter , C . M . ( 2013 ) . Mechanical control of organ size in the development of the Drosophila wing disc . PLoS ONE 8 , e76171 . Cell 158 , 143 – 156 , July 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 155 Shaw , R . L . , Kohlmaier , A . , Polesello , C . , Veelken , C . , Edgar , B . A . , and Tapon , N . ( 2010 ) . TheHippo pathway regulatesintestinal stem cell proliferation during Drosophila adult midgut regeneration . Development 137 , 4147 – 4158 . Shraiman , B . I . ( 2005 ) . Mechanical feedback as a possible regulator of tissue growth . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 3318 – 3323 . Staley , B . K . , and Irvine , K . D . ( 2010 ) . Warts and Yorkie mediate intestinal regeneration by inﬂuencing stem cell proliferation . Curr . Biol . 20 , 1580 – 1587 . Staley , B . K . , and Irvine , K . D . ( 2012 ) . Hippo signaling in Drosophila : recent advances and insights . Dev . Dyn . 241 , 3 – 15 . Sun , G . , and Irvine , K . D . ( 2011 ) . Regulation of Hippo signaling by Jun kinase signaling during compensatory cell proliferation and regeneration , and in neoplastic tumors . Dev . Biol . 350 , 139 – 151 . Sun , G . , and Irvine , K . D . ( 2013 ) . Ajuba family proteins link JNK to Hippo signaling . Sci . Signal . 6 , ra81 . Venken , K . J . T . , Schulze , K . L . , Haelterman , N . A . , Pan , H . , He , Y . , Evans - Holm , M . , Carlson , J . W . , Levis , R . W . , Spradling , A . C . , Hoskins , R . A . , and Bellen , H . J . ( 2011 ) . MiMIC : a highly versatile transposon insertion resource for engineering Drosophila melanogaster genes . Nat . Methods 8 , 737 – 743 . Wada , K . , Itoga , K . , Okano , T . , Yonemura , S . , and Sasaki , H . ( 2011 ) . Hippo pathway regulation by cell morphology and stress ﬁbers . Development 138 , 3907 – 3914 . Warner , S . J . , Yashiro , H . , and Longmore , G . D . ( 2010 ) . The Cdc42 / Par6 / aPKC polarity complex regulates apoptosis - induced compensatory proliferation in epithelia . Curr . Biol . 20 , 677 – 686 . Wartlick , O . , Mumcu , P . , Kicheva , A . , Bittig , T . , Seum , C . , Ju¨licher , F . , andGon - za´lez - Gaita´n , M . ( 2011 ) . Dynamics of Dpp signaling and proliferation control . Science 331 , 1154 – 1159 . Winter , C . G . , Wang , B . , Ballew , A . , Royou , A . , Karess , R . , Axelrod , J . D . , and Luo , L . ( 2001 ) . Drosophila Rho - associated kinase ( Drok ) links Frizzled - medi - ated planar cell polarity signaling to the actin cytoskeleton . Cell 105 , 81 – 91 . Yin , F . , Yu , J . , Zheng , Y . , Chen , Q . , Zhang , N . , and Pan , D . ( 2013 ) . Spatial organization of Hippo signaling at the plasma membrane mediated by the tumor suppressor Merlin / NF2 . Cell 154 , 1342 – 1355 . Yonemura , S . , Wada , Y . , Watanabe , T . , Nagafuchi , A . , and Shibata , M . ( 2010 ) . alpha - Catenin as a tension transducer that induces adherens junction devel - opment . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 533 – 542 . Yu , F . - X . , and Guan , K . - L . ( 2013 ) . The Hippo pathway : regulators and regula - tions . Genes Dev . 27 , 355 – 371 . Yu , J . , Zheng , Y . , Dong , J . , Klusza , S . , Deng , W . M . , and Pan , D . ( 2010 ) . Kibra functions as a tumor suppressor protein that regulates Hippo signaling in conjunction with Merlin and Expanded . Dev . Cell 18 , 288 – 299 . Zhao , B . , Li , L . , Wang , L . , Wang , C . - Y . , Yu , J . , and Guan , K . - L . ( 2012 ) . Cell detachment activates the Hippo pathway via cytoskeleton reorganization to induce anoikis . Genes Dev . 26 , 54 – 68 . 156 Cell 158 , 143 – 156 , July 3 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc .