Experiences from Employing Evernote as a Tool for Documenting Collaborative Design Processes Florian Geyer and Harald Reiterer University of Konstanz , Germany { firstname . lastname } @ uni - konstanz . de ABSTRACT In this paper we report from a case study investigating the use of digital tools for documenting collaborative design processes . We employed the note - taking system Evernote in interaction design projects with six teams of students over a period of four months . By observing the use and appropriation of the tool and by questioning participants we strived toward understanding collaborative documentation and communication activities in more detail . Our experiences show that the core functionality of such tools seems adequate for most documentation tasks , but improvements seem necessary regarding support for more informal information management , visualization as well as communication and collaboration . Author Keywords Design process , documentation , tool , case study INTRODUCTION The documentation of design processes is usually a tedious task that is currently not very well supported by digital tools . However , a systematic and comprehensive documentation of design artifacts , activities and ( intermediate ) results over the course of a design process may have various benefits . It enables designers to capture design knowledge and to reflect upon decisions for analyzing the rationale that led to a certain outcome . It may also serve as a source of inspiration or reuse when employed across different projects or teams . However , the type of documentation and its effort in maintenance also determine if and how it is useful . In our research we wanted to explore the use of digital tools for supporting documentation activities . From work of others we know that dedicated tools for the documentation of design processes are rare and often not specialized for the unique characteristics of design practice [ 2 ] . For example , the role of physical artifacts and informal information management in design are well documented and considered a key ingredient of successful design practices [ 3 ] . However , the material nature of artifacts and also their spatial and situational context are hard to transfer to digital repositories . Regularly , digital photos of design artifacts end up in the hierarchies of file systems , thereby losing many of their characteristics like visibility , accessibility and fluency that are important for potential reuse . However , also traditional practices have their drawbacks , as physical artifacts are hard to archive and share within ( distributed ) design teams . Figure 1 . Notes in Evernote can be structured using notebooks , tags , metadata and a timeline with thumbnails . Evernote 1 is a note - taking software that promises to ease the capturing and archiving of informal information artifacts like notes , lists , ideas , sketches , images or other multi - media files such as video or audio . The Evernote system is centered on a traditional desktop application ( see Figure 1 ) and local storage , but was recently extended for use on different mobile devices ( smartphones , tablets ) in combination with cloud synchronization and a web interface . Therefore , it now cannot only be used for keeping private notes , but also for sharing notes with a group of collaborators via a cloud service and ubiquitous access . Notes in Evernote are structured using a combination of notebooks ( cf . folders ) , tags and a timeline view . When capturing notes with Evernote clients , metadata such as a timestamp , location , and author as well as modification history is added . Evernote further provides search and filtering functionality for retrieving notes based on their content ( e . g . ocr text recognition ) , metadata and tags . Based on these powerful features , we wanted to explore the usefulness of Evernote for documenting design processes . CASE STUDY We conducted an exploratory case study with six teams of students ( N = 18 , 3 students per group ) over a four - month interaction design project . The project was embedded into an interaction design course and encompassed an analysis phase ( field study & observation ) , modeling activities ( user roles , personas , task models ) , a design phase ( scenarios & 1 http : / / www . evernote . com / sketching ) as well as a prototyping phase ( implementation ) . Students were free to design an application around certain themes like shopping , leisure and cooking . They were further advised to use Evernote for documenting and sharing their progress in the group . Students met weekly in dedicated rooms but many design activities were also carried out in the field or at home . We did set up premium Evernote accounts for all groups so that participants could make use of advanced features such as notebook sharing and larger uploads . By observing the use and appropriation of the tool and by questioning participants we strived toward understanding collaborative documentation and communication activities . Due to the scope of this paper , we will only briefly describe some findings from the study . The groups did take documentation seriously ; however , this may also be due to the fact that they were also graded based on the quality of their group work . From a post - study questionnaire ( N = 16 ) we know that most participants ( 14 ) actively engaged in documentation activities . 75 % of the participants stated that documentation tasks were equally distributed among the members of the groups and 18 . 8 % stated that coordination regarding the actual procedure of documentation was required . Participants judged the documentation as rather important for their individual work ( 4 . 94 , SD = 1 . 39 , 7 point Likert scale ) but more important for sharing results in the group ( 5 . 8 , SD = 1 . 08 , N = 15 ) . They mostly agreed that some effort needs to be put into keeping it ( 3 . 94 , SD = 1 . 24 ) . We were expecting hesitations in contributions due to social factors like evaluation apprehension or social loafing , but surprisingly , the students did mostly share all their individual artifacts ( 6 . 38 , SD = 0 . 72 ) . This however , may be due to the trust and relationship that the groups did build up during the four month period . The students mostly agreed that they felt comfortable in their group ( 6 . 19 , SD = 1 . 42 ) . Students stated that they shared digital artifacts ( 81 . 3 % , e . g . images from Photoshop ) , TODO - lists ( 75 % ) , still images or scans captured from paper artifacts ( 68 . 8 % ) , questions or claims ( 56 . 3 % ) , digital diagrams or models ( 56 . 3 % ) , videos ( 50 % ) , summaries ( 25 % ) , inspirations ( 25 % ) and audio recordings ( 6 . 25 % ) . We found that the documentation was not only used for reflection ( 93 . 8 % ) and reuse of results ( 75 % ) but also for specific communication and coordination tasks ( 37 . 5 % ) . For example , participants said that they used the shared documentation for distributing tasks within the group and for setting up agendas for meetings . Participants modified the documentation about once a week and typically checked it before meetings . However it was less used during the meetings . Not surprisingly , the use of Evernote alone was not considered sufficient for all coordination tasks , so other communication tools such as Skype and email were used as well as other file sharing tools such as Dropbox and SVN . When asked why Dropbox was used even though Evernote basically supports file sharing , students said that the sync feature of Evernote did not work quite as well and that it is easier to share a larger number of files with Dropbox . We also explain this behavior due to the fact that only one of the students did use Evernote before and that Dropbox is much more popular among students . Regarding the different Evernote clients that are available for accessing and sharing notes , participants tried most platforms ( 50 % web , 68 . 8 % desktop , 56 . 3 % mobile ) but eventually only used the desktop ( 73 . 3 % ) and web ( 26 . 7 % ) clients . Students noted that the mobile apps were rarely synchronizing and that data was frequently lost due to dropped connections . We also asked our students about the way they managed their documentation with Evernote . Only one group of students used the tagging functionality and found it rather useful ( 5 . 67 , SD = 1 . 53 , N = 3 ) . The search functionality was only used by 4 students and had a rating of 5 . 0 ( SD = 1 . 83 , N = 4 ) . However , we found that such functionality might be more useful for larger collections of artifacts . CONCLUSION In this paper we briefly presented preliminary findings from an exploratory case study investigating the use of digital tools for documenting design processes . The presented findings are based on the post - study questionnaire only and we yet have to analyze the collected artifacts . We expect to gain further knowledge from this analysis . Our results indicate that the basic functionality and infrastructure of note - taking software is largely adequate for documenting design processes . We however think that more informal , more physical and spatial information management techniques beyond tags and folders might be necessary . We are therefore interested in exploring novel ways of visualizing and interacting with design process documentations [ cf . 1 ] . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank the participants of our study and the German Research Foundation ( DFG ) for funding this research . REFERENCES 1 . Mendels , P . , Frens , J . & Overbeeke K . : Freed : a system for creating multiple views of a digital collection during the design process . In Proceedings of CHI ' 11 . ACM Press . 1481 - 1490 . ( 2011 ) 2 . Sharmin , M . , Bailey , B . P . , Coats , C . & Hamilton , K . : Understanding knowledge management practices for early design activity and its implications for reuse . In Proceedings of CHI ' 09 . ACM Press . 2367 - 2376 . ( 2009 ) 3 . Vyas , D . , Heylen , D . , Nijholt , A . & Van Der Veer , G . : Collaborative practices that support creativity in design . In Proceedings of ECSCW’09 . Springer . 151 - 170 . ( 2009 )