Contents lists available at ScienceDirect BBA - General Subjects journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / bbagen Iron transport kinetics through blood - brain barrier endothelial cells Aminul Islam Khan , Jin Liu , Prashanta Dutta ⁎ School of Mechanical and Materials Engineering , Washington State University , Pullman , WA 99164 - 2920 , United States A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords : Blood - brain barrier Apo - transferrin Holo - transferrin Transferrin receptors A B S T R A C T Background : Transferrin and its receptors play an important role during the uptake and transcytosis of iron through blood - brain barrier ( BBB ) endothelial cells ( ECs ) to maintain iron homeostasis in BBB endothelium and brain . Any disruptions in the cell environment may change the distribution of transferrin receptors on the cell surface , which eventually alter the homeostasis and initiate neurodegenerative disorders . In this paper , we developed a comprehensive mathematical model that considers the necessary kinetics for holo - transferrin in - ternalization and acidi ﬁ cation , apo - transferrin recycling , and exocytosis of free iron and transferrin - bound iron through basolateral side of BBB ECs . Methods : Ordinary di ﬀ erential equations are formulated based on the ﬁ rst order reaction kinetics to model the iron transport considering their interactions with transferrin and transferrin receptors . Unknown kinetics rate constants are determined from experimental data by applying a non - linear optimization technique . Results : Using the estimated kinetic rate constants , the presented model can e ﬀ ectively reproduce the experi - mental data of iron transports through BBB ECs for many in - vitro studies . Model results also suggest that the BBB ECs can regulate the extent of the two possible iron transport pathways ( free and transferrin - bound iron ) by controlling the receptor expression , internalization of holo - transferrin - receptor complexes and acidi ﬁ cation of holo - transferrin inside the cell endosomes . Conclusion : The comprehensive mathematical model described here can predict the iron transport through BBB ECs considering various possible routes from blood side to brain side . The model can also predict the transferrin and iron transport behavior in iron - enriched and iron - depleted cells , which has not been addressed in previous work . 1 . Introduction The central nervous system is protected by three principal barrier sites at the interface between blood vessel and brain tissue : the blood - brain barrier ( BBB ) , blood - cerebrospinal ﬂ uid barrier and the arachnoid barrier [ 1 ] . Among them , the BBB ensures the safety and proper func - tioning of brain by regulating the penetration of di ﬀ erent nutrients / molecules from blood to brain and vice versa . This dynamic and highly selective membrane prohibits the direct contact of circulating blood with the brain extracellular ﬂ uid in the central nervous system and protects the brain against invading organisms and unwanted substances [ 2 ] . The BBB is comprised of brain endothelial cells , which are con - nected by tight junctions [ 3 ] and adherens junctions [ 4 ] . Although all blood capillaries are separated from surrounding tissue by endothelial cells , the tight junctions between endothelial cells are only present in brain - blood capillaries [ 5 ] . These tight junctions are facilitated by dif - ferent transmembrane and cytoplasmic proteins [ 2 , 6 ] , and have the capability to restrict paracellular di ﬀ usion of water - soluble substances from luminal ( apical ) side to the abluminal ( basolateral ) side of BBB [ 7 ] . Moreover , the BBB endothelial cells do not provide any direct passageways such as fenestrations or channels , and have the minimal rate of pinocytosis for large lipophilic compounds [ 6 ] . These properties make the BBB highly selective to transport of biologics from cerebral capillaries to the brain parenchyma and vice versa . Although the BBB tight junction helps to protect the brain from unnecessary intrusions , it makes the drug delivery across the BBB ex - tremely challenging for treatment of brain diseases . As a result , the treatment of many neurodegenerative disorders is still ine ﬀ ective , even though many potential drugs were screened out . One potential solution is to understand the transport mechanism of nutrients , such as iron , insulin , ca ﬀ eine etc . across the BBB , and then mimic the mechanism for drug . Moreover , understanding the details of nutrient transport across BBB would help to prevent some neurodegenerative disorders like Alzheimer ' s and Parkinson ' s diseases . Iron is a crucial element for fundamental metabolic processes of brain cells . Iron can serve as an electron acceptor and donor , which https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbagen . 2018 . 02 . 010 Received 24 January 2018 ; Accepted 14 February 2018 ⁎ Corresponding author . E - mail address : prashanta @ wsu . edu ( P . Dutta ) . BBA - General Subjects 1862 ( 2018 ) 1168 – 1179 Available online 18 February 2018 0304 - 4165 / © 2018 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . T makes it vital for various physiological and metabolic processes such as oxygen transport in the cell and energy production in mitochondria . However , a change in iron concentration may cause malfunctions in important organs such as liver and brain . For instance , in case of Parkinson ' s , Alzheimer ' s and some other neurodegenerative disorders , an abnormally high level of irons has been reported in the brain [ 8 – 10 ] . On the other hand , millions of people are a ﬀ ected by so called anemia due to a signi ﬁ cant de ﬁ ciency of irons . Therefore , to maintain the homeostasis , the transport of iron across BBB and the iron level in the brain parenchyma must be properly regulated . It has been reported that irons are primarily transported through cells via transferrin regulated processes . The receptors for transferrin regulated transport were discovered in the middle of 20th century for red blood cells [ 11 ] . Later it was found that many other types of cells also use these receptors for iron transport , and subsequently , the re - ceptors were named as transferrin receptors [ 12 – 15 ] . For BBB en - dothelial cells , the transferrin receptors were ﬁ rst identi ﬁ ed by Je ﬀ eries et al . [ 16 ] in 1984 . They hypothesized that the transferrin receptors are expressed on brain endothelium to facilitate the transport of transfer - rins and thus irons into the brain . After their initial ﬁ ndings , numerous experimental works were undertaken to address the iron transport mechanism in BBB endothelial cells [ 17 – 23 ] . These works have estab - lished that the brain derive its irons by the receptor - mediated transport of holo - transferrin through the brain capillary endothelium , although there are some debates on the exact pathway [ 24 ] . The ﬁ rst receptor - mediated transport of iron across the BBB was examined by Fishman et al . [ 17 ] with rat brain . Later , this receptor - mediated transcytosis was further validated by Raub and Newton [ 19 ] , Descamps et al . [ 21 ] and Burdo et al . [ 22 ] with bovine brain and retinal endothelial cells . During the receptor - mediated transcytosis , irons transport uni - directionally from blood to brain , while transferrin can follow two routes : recycling to blood or transport to brain [ 18 ] . Burdo et al . [ 22 ] demonstrated that the transport of irons from blood to brain can occur in two forms : as free irons and transferrin bound irons . They have hypothesized that the free irons come from the acidi ﬁ cation of holo - transferrin in the endosome . Although there are numerous experimental works on iron transport through di ﬀ erent kind of cells , only a few theoretical works addressed the transferrin kinetics during iron transport into brain or other cells . This is , perhaps , due to the lack of information about the endocytosis and exocytosis mechanisms of iron - loaded ligand - receptor complex . Ciechanover et al . [ 25 ] experimentally determined a few parameters such as the rate of internalization , the rate of association and dis - sociation etc . for transferrin kinetics in human hepatoma cell , and proposed a mathematical model based on these parameters to study internalization and recycling of transferrin and transferrin receptors following the laws of mass action . Later , many researchers have worked on the transferrin kinetics with di ﬀ erent kinds of cell lines , such as isolated rabbit reticulocytes [ 26 ] , epidermoid carcinoma cells [ 27 ] , Madin - Derby canine kidney epithelial cells [ 28 ] to determine the transferrin kinetics parameters experimentally . Mayle et al . [ 29 ] re - viewed the parameter determination procedures and proposed an in - tracellular tra ﬃ cking pathway of transferrin for a general cell , in which only transferrin endocytosis and recycling exist . However , in case of BBB endothelial cells , this pathway is not appropriate because these cells need irons for their own metabolism processes and , at the same time , they must supply irons to the brain side to meet iron requirements of neuron and other brain cells for proper functioning of brain [ 30 ] . To date , no mathematical model exists for the transcytosis of iron and trans - ferrin though BBB endothelium . In this study , a comprehensive mathematical model is proposed for transferrin transcytosis and iron transport through BBB endothelial cells . The rest of the paper is organized as follows . In following section , we present the overall transport process for iron and transferrin through the BBB endothelium . Next , mathematical models are formulated based on mass - action laws for iron uptake , endosomal dissociation , and exo - cytosis of free and transferrin - bound irons . In Section 4 , a non - linear optimization technique is used for ﬁ nding kinetic parameters for iron , Fig . 1 . Iron transport through transferrin receptor - mediated pathway across BBB endothelium . A . I . Khan et al . BBA - General Subjects 1862 ( 2018 ) 1168 – 1179 1169 transferrin and transferrin receptor complexes . Next , we validate the proposed model using the estimated kinetic rate parameters . We then investigate the e ﬀ ect of transferrin concentration in the apical side on iron transcytosis considering the normal operating condition in the cell . Finally , we extend the developed model to investigate iron transport from the apical side to the basolateral side for the iron - enriched and iron - depleted endothelial cells . 2 . Overall transport system In literature , there are di ﬀ erent opinions on iron transport through BBB endothelial cells . Some researchers [ 20 , 31 ] found in experiments that irons can only cross BBB endothelial cells as ions . While others experimentally demonstrated that irons can be transported through the basolateral membrane as bounded with transferrin , as well as free irons [ 22 , 32 , 33 ] . Radiolabeling of transferrin with 59 Fe demonstrated that transferrin bound irons can cross the BBB endothelial cells [ 21 ] . Here we consider all possible pathways for iron transport though BBB en - dothelial cells as shown in Fig . 1 . Transferrin receptors are transmembrane glycoproteins having two homologs : transferrin receptor 1 and transferrin receptor 2 . Transferrin receptor 1 is a ubiquitously expressed receptor , and their expression on the cerebral capillary surface is regulated by the intracellular iron concentrations . On the other hand , the expression of transferrin re - ceptor 2 is restricted to certain cell types such as liver , small intestine , and their expression is una ﬀ ected by the intracellular iron concentra - tions . Thus , throughout this work , only transferrin receptor 1 is con - sidered since there is no evidence of transferrin receptor 2 expression on the endothelial cell surface [ 34 , 35 ] . Transferrin , an iron - binding protein , has a high binding a ﬃ nity to the transferrin receptor ( K d = 1 – 110 nM ) . The binding a ﬃ nity of transferrin largely depends on its association with ferrous or ferric iron and pH of the medium [ 36 ] . Iron - loaded transferrin ( holo - transferrin ) binds with transferrin receptor at pH 7 . 0 [ 36 ] . It has been well estab - lished that once a holo - transferrin binds with the transferrin receptors on the endothelial cells surface at the apical side , the holo - transferrin - receptor ( HTR ) complex is internalized into endothelial cells by cla - thrin - mediated endocytosis [ 37 ] as shown in Fig . 1 . After the en - docytosis , vesicles are tra ﬃ cked and directed to early or sorting en - dosome where they are fused with early endosome . Once vesicles reach to the early endosome , the acidi ﬁ cation of early endosome occurs by proton pumps and ferric irons are released from the HTR in an acidic pH 5 – 6 [ 38 ] . The released ferric irons are then reduced by the STEAP ( six - transmembrane epithelial antigen of the prostate ) and transported to the cytosol labile iron pool ( LIP ) by the divalent metal transporter 1 ( DMT1 ) [ 39 ] . LIP is the main compartment for iron and iron - containing com - pounds ' metabolic pathway , and it reduces the availability of free iron inside the cells . From LIP , some irons are used by mitochondria and other organelles , some are stored inside the endothelial cells as heme - ferritin , and the others are exported to the brain side by ferroportin [ 40 ] . At the acidi ﬁ ed endosome ( pH 5 – 6 ) , apo - transferrins ( transferrins without irons ) bind with transferrin receptors tightly . These apo - transferrins are recycled back to the cell surface following either a fast route ( directly from endosome to cell membrane ) , or a slower route where apo - transferrin - receptor complexes ﬁ rst go to recycling endo - some and then to the cell membrane [ 41 ] . Cargoes intended for de - gradation reside in the vacuolar domains of the acidi ﬁ ed endosome and continue through the endosome - lysosome maturation process , and ﬁ - nally , degrade in the lysosome . On the other hand , cargoes containing intact holo - transferrin - receptor complex reside in the tubular domains of early endosome , and eventually are directed to the abluminal side of endothelial cells through recycling endosome [ 42 ] . Similar to synaptic vesicle exocytosis in neuron , the exocytosis of vesicular carriers in en - dothelial cells involves soluble NSF ( N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive factor ) attachment protein receptor ( SNARE ) proteins [ 43 ] . The proposed iron pathways contain iron transport mechanisms across the basolateral membrane considering both free iron and holo - transferrin , which will be useful to test the competing hypotheses provided by experimental studies . 3 . Mathematical modeling The endocytosis of transferrin - bound iron into the endothelial cell and the exocytosis through the basolateral membrane involves highly complex biochemical and biophysical processes . These complex pro - cesses are dictated by various events , such as expression of receptors on the endothelial cell surfaces , binding of receptors with ligands , mem - brane deformation , protein - protein and protein - lipid interaction for membrane fusion , etc . which are occurring at multiple time scales . So , it is not possible to include all the details of transport mechanism in the mass - action based mathematical modeling . However , all the important steps of iron transport and transferrin kinetics across the BBB are con - sidered in this model . 3 . 1 . Biological processes involved in iron transport The overall process of iron transport through endothelial cell is shown in Fig . 2 , where the biological processes are separated into four sub - categories : Uptake / endocytosis of holo - transferrin by endothelial cells , dissociation of iron from holo - transferrin - receptor complex and transferrin recycling , exocytosis of free ( non - transferrin - bound ) iron , and exocytosis of transferrin - bound iron . 3 . 1 . 1 . Uptake / endocytosis of holo - transferrin by endothelial cells The cellular uptake of irons is initiated with the binding of ferric irons to transferrins in the circulatory ( blood ) system . It has been found Fig . 2 . The overall modeling scheme depicting the essential pathways and parameters for the receptor - mediated transcytosis of iron across the BBB endothelial cells . A . I . Khan et al . BBA - General Subjects 1862 ( 2018 ) 1168 – 1179 1170 that one transferrin can bind with two molecules of ferric iron , Fe 3 + , to form diferric - transferrin ( aka holo - transferrin ) as + → + AT 2Fe HT bl bl3 k bl 0 ( 1 ) where k 0 is the association rate constant of apo - transferrin ( AT ) and Fe 3 + ; the subscript bl stands for blood side . The holo - transferrins binds speci ﬁ cally with the transferrin receptors on the apical surface ( as ) of the endothelial cells . The binding of holo - transferrins to surface re - ceptor can be presented as + ←→ − R HT HTR bl k k as 1 1 ( 2 ) This is a bi - directional process , where the hollo - transferrin - receptor ( HTR ) complex is formed on the apical surface . Next the HTR complex is internalized ( i ) into the cell with the help of clathrin , adapter protein 2 , and dynamin → HTR HTR as k i 2 ( 3 ) Throughout the manuscript , k with positive and negative subscripts represent forward and backward rate constants , respectively . 3 . 1 . 2 . Dissociation of iron from holo - transferrin - receptor complex and transferrin recycling After the internalization , clathrin coats dissociate from vesicles due to interaction between hsc protein family and clathrin [ 44 ] . Vesicles are then directed to early endosome , where some of them are acidi ﬁ ed and ferric irons are released from the HTR i complex as → + + HTR ATR Fe k i i i3 3 ( 4 ) Then the ATR i ( apo - transferrin - receptor ) complex recycles back to apical surface , → ATR ATR i k as 4 ( 5 ) and subsequently dissociates from the transferrin receptors as → + ATR AT R as k 5 ( 6 ) This apo - transferrin ( AT ) is now ready to bind with ferric irons to form new holo - transferrin , while the transferrin receptor returns to the apical surface and is available to bind with holo - transferrin . This completes the transferrin recycling process . The irons released inside the endosome ( see Eq . ( 4 ) ) eventually reach the labile iron pool ( LIP ) in the cytosol by crossing endosome membrane through DMT1 . But , before crossing the endosomal mem - brane , the ferric irons are reduced by the STEAP protein , a metal re - ductase , as . ⎯ → ⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯ + + Fe Fe i3 reduction i2 ( 7 ) In our model , we assume that all the ferric iron reduces to ferrous iron before crossing the endosomal membrane . 3 . 1 . 3 . Exocytosis of non - transferrin - bound iron As stated earlier , labile iron pool acts as a source for cellular iron uptake , usage , storage , and export . Based on the demand of energy production , some irons are used by mitochondria and other organelles in the endothelial cell as , → + + Fe Fe i 2 k u2 6 ( 8 ) Some are usually stored by the cells if there is no immediate usage [ 45 ] , while the rest are exported across the basolateral membrane through ferroportin for brain cells . It has been reported that at the time of crossing the basolateral membrane , these irons are oxidized from ferrous to ferric form by ceruloplasmin for brain use . → + + Fe Fe i2 k br2 7 ( 9 ) ⎯ → ⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯ + + Fe Fe br2 oxidization br3 ( 10 ) 3 . 1 . 4 . Exocytosis of transferrin - bound iron It has been well established that SNARE proteins are the main ele - ments responsible for the membrane fusion in di ﬀ erent kinds of cells [ 46 , 47 ] . Three SNARE proteins have been identi ﬁ ed for docking and fusion of vesicles with the target compartment : vesicle - associated membrane proteins , synaptosomal - associated proteins and plasma membrane proteins ( Syntaxin ) . Di ﬀ erent homologs of these proteins are responsible for vesicle secretion in di ﬀ erent kind of cells . In case of endothelial cells , SNAP23 , Syntaxin 3 or 4 and VAMP 3 or 8 regulate the docking and membrane fusion [ 43 , 48 , 49 ] . However , residency of Syntaxin 3 is restricted to apical membrane , whereas residency of Syntaxin 4 is limited to basolateral membrane [ 50 ] . Thus , Syntaxin 3 is responsible for recycling through apical membrane and Syntaxin 4 is involved in exocytosis through basolateral membrane . In an experi - mental study , Pulido et al . [ 47 ] found that VAMP 8 did not form stable ternary complex with SNAP 23 and Syntaxin 4 , whereas VAMP 3 were able to form stable ternary complex during membrane fusion . Thus , their results suggest that the endothelial cells select VAMP 3 over VAMP 8 to interact with SNAP 23 and Syntaxin 4 during exocytosis . Therefore , in our model we assume that the hollo - transferrin bound vesicles attach to VAMP 3 while escaping from the endosomal compartment as + → HTR V HTRV i k i 8 ( 11 ) Later these vesicles are tra ﬃ cked towards basolateral surface ( bs ) where they interact with target SNARE ( t - SNARE ) and form the full SNARE complex as + → HTRV tS HTRVT i k bs 9 ( 12 ) The t - SNARE is synthesized from the interactions between SNAP23 and Syntaxin 4 proteins as + ←→⎯ − S Syn tS k k 10 10 ( 13 ) The assembly of the full SNARE complex ( HTRVT ) brings the vesicle and basolateral membrane close to each other and open the fusion pores . During the fusion process , holo - transferrins are released from the vesicle into the brain side ( Fig . 1 ) , and all other associated proteins are directed to their respective positions . ⎯→⎯ + + + + HTRVT HT Syn S R V bs k br 11 ( 14 ) This fusion process is catalyzed by some other regulatory proteins such as NSF , small GTPase Rab27a , Slp4a ( e ﬀ ector of GTPase rab27a ) , Syntaxin binding proteins ( STXBP1 and 5 ) , MyRIP , UNC13 in an un - determined way [ 48 ] . In our model , e ﬀ ects of these proteins are ac - counted for via the fusion rate constant k 11 . Moreover , in our model , it is assumed that as much receptors released on the basolateral surface are available on the apical membrane . In other words , there is no generation or degradation of transferrin receptors . 3 . 2 . Conversion of biochemical equations into di ﬀ erential equations To model all the processes listed in Eqs . ( 1 ) – ( 14 ) , we develop a system of ODEs based on the law of mass action : = − + + d [ HT ] dt k [ AT ] [ Fe ] k [ HT ] [ R ] k [ HTR ] bl 0 bl bl 3 1 bl ‐1 as ( 15 . 1 ) = − + + + d [ R ] dt k [ R ] [ HT ] k [ HTR ] k [ ATR ] k [ HTRVT ] 1 bl ‐1 as 5 as 11 bs ( 15 . 2 ) = − − − d [ HTR ] dt k [ R ] [ HT ] k [ HTR ] k [ HTR ] as 1 bl 1 as 2 as ( 15 . 3 ) A . I . Khan et al . BBA - General Subjects 1862 ( 2018 ) 1168 – 1179 1171 = − − d [ HTR ] dt k [ HTR ] k [ HTR ] k [ HTR ] [ V ] i 2 as 3 i 8 i ( 15 . 4 ) = − d [ ATR ] dt k [ HTR ] k [ ATR ] i 3 i 4 i ( 15 . 5 ) = − d [ ATR ] dt k [ ATR ] k [ ATR ] as 4 i 5 as ( 15 . 6 ) = − + d [ AT ] dt k [ ATR ] k [ AT ] [ Fe ] bl 5 as 0 bl bl3 ( 15 . 7 ) = − + + d [ Fe ] dt k [ AT ] [ Fe ] bl3 0 bl bl3 ( 15 . 8 ) = − + + + d [ Fe ] dt k [ HTR ] ( k k ) [ Fe ] i2 3 i 6 7 i2 ( 15 . 9 ) = + + d [ ( Fe ) ] dt k [ Fe ] u2 6 i2 ( 15 . 10 ) = + + d [ ( Fe ) ] dt k [ Fe ] br3 7 i2 ( 15 . 11 ) = − d [ HTRV ] dt k [ HTR ] [ V ] k [ HTRV ] [ tS ] i 8 i 9 i ( 15 . 12 ) = − + d [ V ] dt k [ HTR ] [ V ] k [ HTRVT ] 8 i 11 bs ( 15 . 13 ) = − + − − d [ tS ] dt k [ HTRV ] [ tS ] k [ S ] [ Syn ] k [ tS ] 9 i 10 10 ( 15 . 14 ) = − d [ HTRVT ] dt k [ HTRV ] [ tS ] k [ HTRVT ] bs 9 i 11 bs ( 15 . 15 ) = d [ HT ] dt k [ HTRVT ] br 11 bs ( 15 . 16 ) = − + − d [ S ] dt k [ HTRVT ] k [ S ] [ Syn ] k [ tS ] 11 bs 10 10 ( 15 . 17 ) = − + − d [ Syn ] dt k [ HTRVT ] k [ S ] [ Syn ] k [ tS ] 11 bs 10 10 ( 15 . 18 ) where the notation [ ⋅ ] represents the concentration of species . Symbols used to denote di ﬀ erent chemical compounds are given in Table 1 . 4 . Estimation of model parameters The mathematical model presented in Eqs . ( 15 . 1 ) – ( 15 . 18 ) involves many rate constants , some of which are not readily available in the literature for BBB endothelial cells . There are some inverse techniques [ 51 , 52 ] available in the literature to estimate those parameters , how - ever , these techniques are very computationally involved for cases like this . Moreover , those techniques fail to provide a speci ﬁ c value for any parameter . Rather they provide a very large range for a parameter , which is practically useless . For instance , Chen et al . [ 53 ] applied an inverse technique to estimate kinetic parameters for synaptic vesicle exocytosis ( based on the work of [ 51 ] ) , but their estimated parameters vary in several orders of magnitude ( 4 . 40 × 10 3 ~ 2 . 30 × 10 6 M − 1 s − 1 ) . In this work , the unknown parameters are determined by applying a non - linear least square ﬁ t [ 54 ] . This method requires a range for searching the true value . In our study , this range is ﬁ rst sought for any endothelial cells . If data is not available in the literatures , reported value of that parameter for other type of cells is used . Moreover , if a speci ﬁ c rate constant is not reported for any kind of cells , we either considered a range that is reported for their homologs or determined the maximum and minimum values of that constant using the Debye - Smoluchowski equation as : ∑ ∑ = k 4πN 1000 R D max av j , i j , i ( 16a ) = k k / 10 min max 4 ( 16b ) where R j , i is the radius of encounter in meter , D j , i is the di ﬀ usion coe ﬃ cients of the reactants in cm 2 / sec and N av is Avogadro number . Next , we present our method for ﬁ nding the kinetic rate constant from a predetermined range . Let us consider the binding rate constant of holo - transferrin and transferrin receptors , k 1 which has been reported as low as 1 . 0 × 10 6 M − 1 min − 1 [ 55 ] to as high as 1 . 0 × 10 8 M − 1 min − 1 [ 56 ] for di ﬀ erent type of cells . So , we start from lowest value of k 1 which is ~ 1 . 0 × 10 4 M − 1 s − 1 and run the model to ﬁ t the predicted values with the ex - perimental results by minimizing the squared deviation per experi - mental point ( SD ) while keeping other rate parameters as constant at their ﬁ xed reported value or at their lowest reported value . The SD is given by the following equation . ∑ = ⎛ ⎝⎜ − ⎞ ⎠⎟ SD ( A A ) / N 0 N exp model 2 ( 17 ) where N is the number of experimental data points available for any parameter A , A exp is the experimental value of any parameter at time t , and A model is the value of that parameter predicted by the model at time t . Next , we change its value by a random amount and then recalculate the new squared deviation . If this new squared deviation is less than the previous squared deviation , then the new parameter value is kept . Otherwise , the previous value is used , and we move forward to ﬁ nd another rate constant until all the parameter values are selected . The program searches both upward and downward for more favorable va - lues of those rate parameters by adding and subtracting a di ﬀ erential amount to those rate parameters for minimization of SD . Fig . 3 shows the plot for ﬁ nding of two rate constants . As seen from Fig . 3a , for k 1 = 1 . 7 × 10 4 M − 1 s − 1 the model predicts the experimental results with minimum SD . Similarly , as shown in Fig . 3b , the minimum SD occurs for k 2 = 7 . 5 × 10 − 3 s − 1 . So , we select these ( k 1 = 1 . 7 × 10 4 M − 1 s − 1 and k 2 = 7 . 5 × 10 − 3 s − 1 ) rate constants and do the same analysis for all other unknown rate constants . Later this set of data is further re ﬁ ned by a search within a narrow range of one order of magnitude . Here , it is noteworthy to mention that the estimated para - meters are not necessarily the unique value , rather they are a possible set of parameters that can reproduce experimental results . Although the method used in this paper is not the best one , it can provide speci ﬁ c values for each unknown parameters . All the rate constants ( known and Table 1 Symbols used for di ﬀ erent molecules , ions , proteins and protein complex . Notation Description Fe bl3 + Free ferric ion in blood capillaries R Transferrin receptors AT bl Iron - free transferrin in blood capillaries HT bl Iron - loaded transferrin in brain capillaries HTR as Complex of holo - transferrin and transferrin receptor on apical surface HTR i Complex of holo - transferrin and transferrin receptor inside the cell ATR i Complex of apo - transferrin and transferrin receptor inside the cell ATR as Complex of apo - transferrin and transferrin receptor on apical surface Fe i3 + Ferric ion inside the cell Fe i2 + Ferrous ion in labile iron pool Fe u2 + Ferrous ion used by cells Fe br2 + Ferrous ion exported to brain side Fe br3 + Ferric ion exported to brain side V Vesicle associated membrane protein 3 ( VAMP3 ) HTRV i Complex of holo - transferrin and transferrin receptor that is attached with VAMP3 tS t - SNARE , a complex of SNAP23 and Syntaxin 4 proteins HTRVT bs HTRV protein complex that is bonded with t - SNARE on basolateral surface HT br Holo - transferrin in the brain side S Synaptosomal associated protein 23 ( SNAP23 ) Syn Syntaxin 4 A . I . Khan et al . BBA - General Subjects 1862 ( 2018 ) 1168 – 1179 1172 estimated ) used in this analysis are listed in Table 3 , while the initial concentrations of required components are provided in Table 2 . 5 . Results and discussion 5 . 1 . Model validation We ﬁ rst validate our model and parameters through comparison with experiments . Fig . 4 shows the numerically predicted ( solid line ) accumulation of transferrin inside the microvessel endothelial cells for di ﬀ erent level of initial holo - transferrin concentration on the apical surface . Experimental data ( symbol ) from Raub and Newton [ 19 ] are also presented . In the experiments , cells were grown on matrix - coated plastic , and there was no transport of holo - transferrin to the basolateral side . For transferrin accumulation at di ﬀ erent time , cells ( at day 6 in culture ) were incubated with 10 nM 125 I - transferrin at 37 °C and the amount of cell - associated radioactivity were measured . As shown the model results agree well with the experimental data up to 1000 ng / ml of holo - transferrin in the apical side . However , experimental data in - dicate a saturation of transferrin accumulation above 800 ng / ml ( 10 nM ) , which is not re ﬂ ected in our model result . Later , Descamps et al . [ 21 ] did similar experiments with the same brain capillary en - dothelial cells but no evidence of saturation was found for concentra - tions of holo - transferrin ranging from 100 to 1400 ng / ml ( 1 . 25 to 17 . 5 nM ) in apical side . They argued that the di ﬀ erences were from di ﬀ erent experimental protocols . For instance , in the work of Descamps et al . , cells were transferred to another well at various time to avoid possible re - endocytosis of transferrin from the abluminal side of the endothelial cells . On the other hand , Raub and Newton [ 19 ] did the experiments with continuous incubation . In addition , the cells in Raub and Newton ' s [ 19 ] experiments were grown on a matrix coated plastic , the complete transcytosis was not possible and holo - transferrins accu - mulated at basolateral membrane . As a result , a large amount of re - ceptors were occupied by the transferrins at basolateral surface and reduced the availability of free receptors at the apical surface for fur - ther endocytosis of holo - transferrin . Fig . 3 . Calibration curve for a ) binding rate constant of holo - transferrin and transferrin receptors , k 1 , and b ) internalization rate constant of holo - transferrin - receptor complex , k 2 . Numerical solutions for di ﬀ erent value of k 1 and k 2 are shown as color lines and experimental results from Raub and Newton [ 19 ] are shown as green circles . The experiment was performed by culturing the brain microvessel endothelial cells with 10 . 0nM of holo - transferrin in the apical side . Similar condition is considered in the numerical simulation to ﬁ nd out the optimized rate constants . Table 2 Initial conditions for the ODEs system ( Eqs . ( 15 . 1 ) – ( 15 . 18 ) ) . Protein and protein complex Value Reference HT bl 10nM – 17 . 5nM [ 19 , 21 ] R 35 , 000 receptors / cell [ 21 ] V 10 . 0nM [ 63 ] S 20 . 0nM Calculated from [ 43 ] a Syn 66 . 4nM Calculated from [ 64 ] b Note : The initial values of other ions , proteins or protein complexes are considered as zero . Since the developed model is applied for in vitro conditions , this assumption works well for most of the variables . All the calculations are done by considering cell volume equals 3000 μ m 3 . a The calculation is done by considering 36 , 000 proteins per cell . b The calculation is done by considering 120 , 000 proteins per cell . Fig . 4 . Accumulation of transferrin inside the brain microvessel endothelial cells for di ﬀ erent initial concentration of holo - transferrin at the apical side at 60 mins . Experimental result of Raub and Newton [ 19 ] are used for comparison of our model results . The experimental values are converted from ng / dish to ng / cm 2 by dividing the area of dish . For numerical results , the accumulations are converted from ng / ml to ng / cm 2 by considering volume to surface area ratio as 390 . Here term ‘ volume ’ refers the volume occupied by a single cell and term ‘ surface area ’ refers the apical or basolateral surface area of a single cell . It has been reported that volume and surface area of an endothelial cell varies from 1000 to 3000 μ m 3 and from 35 to 350 μ m 2 [ 68 ] respectively . In this study , we have considered the cell volume as 3000 μ m 3 and the surface area of a cell is 120 μ m 2 . A . I . Khan et al . BBA - General Subjects 1862 ( 2018 ) 1168 – 1179 1173 Another reason for the discrepancy between model prediction and experimental data may be due to the assumption used for the trans - ferrin receptors . In our model , we assume that as much receptors fuses with basolateral membrane during the secretion of holo - transferrin , the same number of receptors are expressed on the apical surface ( see Eqs . ( 13 ) and ( 15 . 2 ) ) . This assumption is reasonable if there is substantial recruitment of transferrin receptors from the intracellular pool to the active endocytotic pool as noted by Burdo et al . [ 22 ] . But it may not hold in some scenarios . For instance , Visser et al . [ 57 ] and Gelder et al . [ 58 ] experimentally found that the expression of transferrin receptors on the endothelial cell surface largely depends on the cellular iron concentration . As the intracellular iron concentration increases , the expression of transferrin receptors decreases and vice - versa . Thus , with the uptake of holo - transferrin from apical surface , the expression of transferrin receptor should decrease and , hence , the iron internalization capacity should also decrease . To account for this e ﬀ ect in a model , a relationship between intracellular iron concentration and transferrin receptor expression at cell surface is needed . Another possible explanation for discrepancy between experiments and simulation is due to the considerations for very large number re - ceptors per cell . A very large number of receptors can facilitate linear transport by providing excess free receptors at the surface of cells . However , the proper selection of receptors per cell was not very easy because for di ﬀ erent kind of cells the number of receptors per cell is di ﬀ erent . Even for the same kind of cell , di ﬀ erent researchers reported di ﬀ erent receptor density . For instance , Raub and Newton [ 19 ] re - ported there were 10000 ± 600 receptors / cell , whereas Descamps et al . [ 21 ] reported there were 35 , 000 receptors / cell for bovine brain endothelial cell . As a matter fact , Ciechanover et al . [ 59 ] reported even higher ( 50 , 000 receptors / cell ) for human hepatoma cell line . Never - theless , presence of large number receptors per cell and / or substantial recruitment of transferrin receptors from intracellular pool to active endocytic pool can prevent saturation of holo - transferrin accumulation even for higher level of hollo - transferrin ( 1200 ng / ml ) at the apical side . Our model is further validated by comparing with another in - dependent experimental work [ 21 ] , where 17 . 5 nM of holo - transferrin initially present on the apical surface of the cells . The transport of holo - transferrin through endothelial cells ( from apical side to basolateral side ) as a function of time is shown in Fig . 5 . An excellent agreement is obtained between the experimental and numerical results . In the ex - periment [ 21 ] , re - endocytosis of transferrin via the abluminal com - partment was avoided by transferring the cells to another well at var - ious time . Their experimental setup is in line with our model , where we have neglected the re - endocytosis through the abluminal side . Fig . 5 also shows that the transcytosis of holo - transferrin into the brain side is insigni ﬁ cant during the ﬁ rst 15 min of incubation . This time scale in - dicates the required period for holo - transferrin to cross the BBB en - dothelial cells . 5 . 2 . Transferrin kinetics and iron transport in cell under normal condition 5 . 2 . 1 . Recycling vs exocytosis Next , we study the asymmetric e ﬄ ux of transferrin from the en - dothelial cells and compare the results with experimental data [ 21 ] at 30 min . In the experiments [ 21 ] , pulse - chase measurements were made to quantify the possible ligand recycling to the apical side of the cells after endocytosis . To model the experimental observation , we ran the model for 1 h with 1400 ng / ml ( 17 . 5 nM ) of holo - transferrin in the apical side to mimic the same experimental conditions of Descamps et al . [ 21 ] . All the other parameters used during the ﬁ rst 1 h simulation were kept same as in Tables 2 and 3 . Then the results are taken as the initial condition for most of the variables except the following com - pounds : HT bl , AT bl , HT br , Fe bl3 + and Fe br3 + . The initial values of these variables are set to zero , which is similar to washing of the cells and / or incubating with a new medium in experiments . After that we run the model for 30 more mins using the rate constants given in Table 3 . The results predicted by the model are presented in Fig . 6 . The percentage of transferrin that goes to the upper or apical compartment ( apo - trans - ferrin ) is presented with red color line , while the percentage of holo - transferrin that exocytose to lower or basolateral compartment is shown with blue color line and the percentage of holo - transferrin remains inside the cell is presented with magenta color line . Our modeling re - sults indicate that after 30 min 68 % of the transferrin is exocytosed to the basolateral side whereas 11 % is recycled to the apical side . Our simulation results are consistent with experimental data , where they found that 10 % of the transported transferrin was recycled to the apical side , whereas 75 % was exocytosed to the basolateral side at 30 mins [ 21 ] . However , Raub and Newton [ 19 ] found that at 37 °C only 15 % of the endocytosed was exocytosed to the basolateral side , whereas 48 % of the endocytosed was recycled back to the apical side . The contradicting results from the two experimental studies come from the di ﬀ erences in cell culture conditions and experimental protocols . Former experiment ( Descamps et al . [ 21 ] ) cocultured endothelial cells with astrocytes whereas later experiment took the response of endothelial cells in culture with C 6 glioma cells . The glioma cell reduces the transcytosis across BBB whereas astrocytes may facilitate the transcytosis across BBB [ 21 ] . Moreover , former experimentalists worked with post con - ﬂ uent cells ( 5 days after visualization of the con ﬂ uence ) and they used saponin to gain access to intracellular transferrin receptors pool ( 90 % of the receptors are located in the intracellular receptors pool [ 60 ] ) . As a result , they reported receptor density of 35 , 000 receptors / cell , which is much higher than the value reported by Raub and Newton [ 19 ] . This di ﬀ erence in receptor density indicates that the intracellular iron con - centration was di ﬀ erent in those two cell preparations because receptor expression depends on the intracellular iron concentration [ 22 ] . In our model we have used receptor density of 35 , 000 receptors / cell , which is similar to the reported value of Descamps et al . [ 21 ] . 5 . 2 . 2 . E ﬀ ect of initial concentration of holo - transferrin on intermediate complexes Experimental studies have limitations in quantifying various protein complexes that forms during transport of iron across the BBB . For in - stance , transferrin forms several complexes such holo - transferrin - re - ceptor complex , apo - transferrin - receptor complex etc . at membrane Fig . 5 . Holo - transferrin transported to brain side ( basolateral side ) as a function of time for an initial holo - transferrin concentration of 1400ng / ml ( 17 . 5nM ) in the blood side ( apical side ) . Experimental result from Descamps et al . [ 21 ] is shown as green circles , where they cultured their brain capillary endothelial cells with 17 . 5nM of holo - trans - ferrin in the apical side . A . I . Khan et al . BBA - General Subjects 1862 ( 2018 ) 1168 – 1179 1174 surface and inside the cell by interacting with transferrin receptors and other proteins , which cannot be captured experimentally . However , an appropriately calibrated numerical model can predict the concentration of intermediate complexes at di ﬀ erent time points . Here , using our model we study the e ﬀ ect of holo - transferrin concentration in apical side on the transcytosis of irons . For our numerical investigation , we keep all the initial concentrations and rate constants same as in Tables 2 and 3 , respectively , and vary the concentration of the holo - transferrin in the apical side . Fig . 7a shows the amount of holo - transferrin inter - nalized by the endothelial cell over a period of 120 min . This inter - nalized transferrin is computed by subtracting the holo - transferrin re - maining in blood side from the initial value . As the concentration of holo - transferrin in the blood side increases , the internalized holo - transferrin also increases during the 2 h period . However , as the holo - transferrin concentration increases in the apical side , the percent of internalized holo - transferrin decreases . As shown in Fig . 7a , for 2 nM of holo - transferrin in apical side , 1 . 71 nM ( or 85 . 5 % ) of holo - transferrin is internalized by the endothelial cells in 2 h . Whereas , for 40 nM of holo - transferrin in the apical side , 29 . 52 nM ( or 73 . 8 % ) of holo - transferrin is internalized in 2 h . Higher percentage of uptake with lower con - centration of holo - transferrin is due to the fact that it is easier for ligands to ﬁ nd a free receptor at lower concentration . The number of free surface receptors remaining on the apical sur - face of cell is shown in Fig . 7b . As the holo - transferrin concentration increases in the blood side , the number of free receptors on the cell surface decreases . This is due to the fact that with increasing holo - transferrin concentration in blood side , the internalization of trans - ferrin - receptors complex increases , leading to less free receptors . In all cases , the number of free receptors on the cell surface ﬁ rst decreases , reaches minimum at around 20 min , and then increases . This is due to the fact that the internalization rate is much higher compared to exo - cytosis rate at the beginning . After 20 min , the exocytosis of holo - transferrin to brain side increases and the internalized receptors recycle back to the apical surface , which increases the number of free receptors at the surface . Fig . 7b also indicates that even with 40 nM of holo - transferrin , there is a large number of free receptors on the apical surface . This result also explains why the accumulation of holo - trans - ferrin is not saturated even at high concentrations of holo - transferrin in the apical side ( Fig . 4 ) . As the ligand concentration increases , the internalization also in - creases ( Fig . 7a ) . This results in a sharp increase in both recycling of apo - transferrin ( Fig . 7c ) and transcytosis of holo - transferrin ( Fig . 7d ) . Fig . 7 ( c ) and ( d ) also show that during the ﬁ rst ~ 20 min , the recycling and transcytosis of transferrin are almost undetectable . This indicates the time needed for recycling or transcytosis of transferrin through BBB endothelial cells . The predicted cycling time is comparable with other type of cells such as human hepatoma cell [ 25 ] and human chor - iocarcinoma cell [ 61 ] . 5 . 3 . Transferrin kinetics and iron transport in iron - enriched and iron - depleted cell According to the World Health Organization ( WHO ) , serum ferritin concentrations of < 15 μ g / l indicate depleted iron states , whereas serum ferritin concentrations > 200 μ g / l suggest severe risk of iron overload [ 62 ] . The intracellular iron concentration is generally related to the plasma iron level , which controls the surface receptors for transferrin binding at the apical side . Descamps et al . [ 21 ] reported 35 , 000 receptors for a normal endothelial cell . But this number will be higher and lower for the iron - depleted and iron - enriched cells . For our model , we have estimated the surface receptor density based on the existing experimental ﬁ ndings . Gelder et al . [ 58 ] experimentally quanti ﬁ ed the number of transferrin binding sites per mg of transferrin receptors for iron - depleted and iron - enriched cells as 2 . 79 × 10 11 and 2 . 25 × 10 11 respectively . Literatures also suggest that each cell might contain 8 . 3 × 10 − 8 [ 19 ] to 2 . 5 × 10 − 7 [ 25 ] mg of transferrin re - ceptors . If we consider 1 . 425 × 10 − 7 mg of transferrin receptors per cell , the corresponding surface receptors ( per cell ) become 39 , 857 and 32 , 143 for iron - depleted and iron - enriched cell , respectively . We use these values of transferrin receptors per cell for iron - depleted and iron - Table 3 Rate constants used in this study for normal cell . Rate constants De ﬁ nition Values Reference k 1 Association rate of HT and R proteins 1 . 7×10 4 M − 1 s − 1 [ 55 ] k − 1 Dissociation rate of HTR as complex 1 . 5×10 − 3 s − 1 [ 25 ] k 2 Internalization rate of HTR as complex 7 . 5×10 − 3 s − 1 [ 26 ] k 3 Dissociation rate of iron from HTR i complex 1 . 125×10 − 3 s − 1 [ 56 ] k 4 Rate of recycling of ATR i complex on surface 1 . 08×10 − 3 s − 1 [ 27 ] k 5 Dissociation rate of AT from ATR as complex 4 . 3×10 − 2 s − 1 [ 25 , 65 ] k 6 Rate of utilization of iron by cells 0 . 5×10 − 4 s − 1 This work k 7 Rate of transport of iron across basolateral membrane 1 . 8×10 − 4 s − 1 This work k 8 Binding rate of HTR i and V 7 . 5×10 5 M − 1 s − 1 This work k 9 Binding rate of tS with HTRV i complex 1 . 0×10 5 M − 1 s − 1 [ 53 , 66 ] k 10 Association rate of S and Syn 2 . 0×10 6 M − 1 s − 1 [ 53 ] k − 10 Dissociation rate of tS 1 . 0×10 − 2 s − 1 [ 67 ] k 11 Rate of dissociation of HTRVT bs 1 . 15×10 − 3 s − 1 This work Fig . 6 . Temporal distribution of transferrin recycles to apical side , exocytoses to baso - lateral side and remains inside the endothelial cell . Here all concentrations are normal - ized with initially endocytosed holo - transferrin amount after ﬁ rst 1h of incubation . The pulse - chase experiments of Descamps et al . [ 21 ] reported that 10 % of the transferrin is recycled to the apical side , while 75 % of the transferrin is exocytosed to the basolateral side at 30mins . The concept of apical and basolateral side in a cell culture is shown in inset . A . I . Khan et al . BBA - General Subjects 1862 ( 2018 ) 1168 – 1179 1175 enriched cells , respectively . These values are consistent with the ex - perimental works of Descamps et al . [ 21 ] . To predict the iron transport for iron - depleted and iron - enriched cells , we also need to re - adjust some of the kinetic rate constants . The internalization rate constant , k 2 is changed for iron - depleted and iron - enriched cells according to the work of Gelder et al . [ 58 ] . They de - termined the half - life of internalization as 2 . 3 min ( k 2 = 0 . 3 min − 1 ) and 1 . 1 min ( k 2 = 0 . 62 min − 1 ) for iron - depleted and iron - enriched cultured cells , respectively . They also determined the half - life of exo - cytosis for transferrin recycling as 11 . 6 min ( k out = 0 . 06 min − 1 ) and 14 . 6 min ( k out = 0 . 05 min − 1 ) for iron - depleted and iron - enriched cul - tured cells , respectively . The dissociation rate of apo - transferrin from apo - transferrin - re - ceptor complex , k 5 depends on the pH of the apical medium solution . Thus , we consider the value of k 5 the same as normal cell . From = + 1k 1k 1k out 4 5 , we determine the rate of recycling of apo - transferrin - receptor complex , k 4 on the apical surface . Finally , we have modi ﬁ ed the acidi ﬁ cation rate , k 3 for iron enriched and iron depleted cell . Since iron - enriched cells already have su ﬃ cient irons , acidi ﬁ cation in the endosomal compartment is greatly reduced . On the other hand , iron - depleted cells are su ﬀ ering from iron de ﬁ ciency , so they need more irons to regain the normal functions . As a result , a high acidi ﬁ cation rate in the endosomal compartment is necessary in iron - depleted cells . Here , we determine the acidi ﬁ cation rates for both iron - enriched and iron - depleted cell by comparing the model output with the experi - mental results of Burdo et al . [ 22 ] . The rate constants used for iron transport in iron - depleted cell and iron - enriched cell are given in Fig . 7 . E ﬀ ect of ligand ( holo - transferrin ) concentration variation on ( a ) holo - transferrin internalization through the apical side , ( b ) number of surface receptors ( free ) per cell on apical surface , ( c ) recycled apo - transferrin concentration in the apical side and , ( d ) amount of holo - transferrin transported to the basolateral side . Related rate constants and initial con - centrations of presented in Tables 2 and 3 . Table 4 Rate constants used in this study for iron - depleted and iron - enriched cells . Rate constants Cell types Reference Iron - depleted cell Iron - enriched cell k 1 1 . 7×10 4 M − 1 s − 1 1 . 7×10 4 M − 1 s − 1 [ 55 ] k − 1 1 . 5×10 − 3 s − 1 1 . 5×10 − 3 s − 1 [ 25 ] k 2 4 . 8×10 − 3 s − 1 10 . 5×10 − 3 s − 1 [ 58 ] k 3 3 . 9×10 − 3 s − 1 2 . 25×10 − 4 s − 1 This work k 4 1 . 1×10 − 3 s − 1 8 . 5×10 − 4 s − 1 [ 58 ] k 5 4 . 3×10 − 2 s − 1 4 . 3×10 − 2 s − 1 [ 25 , 65 ] k 6 5 . 0×10 − 4 s − 1 0 . 5×10 − 4 s − 1 This work k 7 1 . 8×10 − 5 s − 1 1 . 8×10 − 5 s − 1 This work k 8 7 . 5×10 5 M − 1 s − 1 7 . 5×10 5 M − 1 s − 1 This work k 9 1 . 0×10 5 M − 1 s − 1 1 . 0×10 5 M − 1 s − 1 [ 53 , 66 ] k 10 2 . 0×10 6 M − 1 s − 1 2 . 0×10 6 M − 1 s − 1 [ 53 ] k − 10 1 . 0×10 − 2 s − 1 1 . 0×10 − 2 s − 1 [ 67 ] k 11 1 . 15×10 − 3 s − 1 1 . 15×10 − 3 s − 1 This work A . I . Khan et al . BBA - General Subjects 1862 ( 2018 ) 1168 – 1179 1176 Table 4 , whereas for normal cell all rate constants are the same as listed in Table 3 . The initial concentrations are kept the same as normal cell ( Table 2 ) except the number of receptors / cell . Various forms of iron and transferrin concentrations are shown in Fig . 8 for normal , iron - depleted and iron - overloaded endothelial cells during 2 h of incubation with 17 . 5 nM of holo - transferrin in the apical sides . Fig . 8 ( a ) indicates that in comparison to normal cell , the iron - depleted cell has higher amount of apo - transferrin recycling to blood side whereas iron - enriched cell has lower amount of recycling of apo - transferrin . Since the iron - depleted cell needs more irons than iron - enriched cell to maintain the proper cell functioning , the acidi ﬁ cation rate in endosomal compartment is higher for iron - depleted cell than iron - enriched cell [ 22 ] . This leads to higher amount of apo - transferrin recycling in iron - depleted case . However , to meet the brain needs of iron and transferrin , the transferrin - bound iron is not signi ﬁ cantly changed in di ﬀ erent types of cells ( see Fig . 8 ( b ) ) . On the other hand , due to low acidi ﬁ cation rate in endosome , in an iron - enriched cell , the non - transferrin bound iron is greatly reduced in the brain side ( see Fig . 8 ( d ) ) . The accumulation rate of free irons in the LIP is shown in Fig . 8 ( c ) . Due to high acidi ﬁ cation rate of holo - transferrin in iron - de - pleted cell , the irons accumulate quickly during the ﬁ rst hour , and then the accumulation decreases to meet the high demand of irons in mi - tochondria and other cytoplasmic iron - dependent organelles . For iron - Fig . 8 . Comparison of transport processes among normal , iron - enriched and iron - depleted cells . Concentration of a ) apo - transferrin recycled back to blood side , b ) holo - transferrin transported to brain side , c ) ( free ) iron accumulated in LIP and d ) free iron transported to brain side . In all cases , the cell is incubated with 17 . 5nM of holo - transferrin in apical side for 2h . Fig . 9 . Bar chart showing transferrin bound ( holo - transferrin ) and free iron transport in the brain side . All simulation conditions are same as in Fig . 8 . A . I . Khan et al . BBA - General Subjects 1862 ( 2018 ) 1168 – 1179 1177 enriched cell , a low iron accumulation is observed throughout the 2 h period . Fig . 9 shows the bar chart of transferrin - bound ( holo - transferrin ) and non - transferrin bound ( free ) iron for three di ﬀ erent cell types after 2 h incubation with 17 . 5 nM of holo - transferrin in the apical side . For normal cell , 2 . 1 ng / cm 2 of holo - transferrin is transported to the brain side by the endothelial cells . Since 1 g holo - transferrins contain 1 . 375 mg of iron , there are 2 . 9 pg / cm 2 of irons transported as bound to transferrin , and only 0 . 32 pg / cm 2 iron is transported to brain side as free iron . In other words , 10 % of total irons are transported to the brain side as ion and the rest are transported as transferrin - bound iron . The free iron transported to the brain side becomes 2 % and 14 % for iron - enriched and iron - depleted cell , respectively . The changes in iron transport ( both as free and transferrin - bound ) from the normal cell condition are shown in Table 5 for iron - depleted and iron - enriched cell . Our model shows that there is nearly 75 % decrease in free iron in iron - rich cell , while there is approximately 20 % increase in free iron in iron - depleted cells . These changes in iron contents qualitatively agree with experimental observations of Brudo et al . [ 22 ] . 6 . Conclusions A comprehensive mathematical model is developed for kinetics of transferrin endocytosis , recycling , and exocytosis during the iron transport through the BBB endothelial cells . The model takes into ac - count two possible pathways of iron transport from blood to brain in an in - vitro scenario . Unknown kinetic parameters are determined by a non - linear optimization technique by comparing our model prediction with experimental data . Based on the estimated rate constants , our model was able to predict the iron and transferrin transport behavior in a number of in vitro scenarios . Like any parameter estimation process , our predicted rate constants are valid for the speci ﬁ c scenarios pre - sented and assumptions used . We have shown that our model can be used to predict the time - dependent asymmetric e ﬄ ux of transferrin through apical and baso - lateral surface of brain capillary endothelial cells . Although some ex - perimental observations suggest saturation of transferrin accumulation inside the endothelial cell for higher holo - transferrin concentration ( > 10 nM ) in the blood , this transferrin saturation can be prevented by altering the receptor expression . Transferrin accumulation inside the cell can also be enhanced by recruiting transferrin receptors from in - tracellular pool to active endocytic pool . Our pathway based model was used to predict the concentration of various compounds at di ﬀ erent compartments during the transport of iron through BBB endothelial cells . Our results indicate that , for a healthy cell , iron transport rate through brain side increases with in - creasing holo - transferrin concentration in the blood side . A similar ﬁ nding is obtained for recycling of apo - transferrin with change in holo - transferrin concentration in the blood side . We also studied the iron transport mechanism in iron - rich and iron - de ﬁ cient cells . Our results indicate that the cell iron status controls the acidi ﬁ cation rate in the endosome and determines the extent of two possible iron transport pathways in BBB endothelium . Model results also suggest that the free iron transport to the brain side signi ﬁ cantly reduced in iron - enriched cell , whereas , a slightly increased free iron transport is predicted in an iron - depleted cell . Our numerical results also show that due to high utilization of the iron in iron - depleted cell , a large quantity of irons are not transported in the brain side although there is a high acidi ﬁ cation rate in the endosome . The rate of transferrin recycled to the blood side is higher for iron - depleted cell compare to iron - enriched cell . This results in a higher iron accumulation in LIP for iron - de ﬁ cient cells . Transparency document The http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbagen . 2018 . 02 . 010 associated with this article can be found , in online version . Acknowledgement This work was supported by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number R01GM122081 . The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the o ﬃ cial views of the National Institutes of Health . References [ 1 ] N . J . Abbott , Dynamics of CNS barriers : evolution , di ﬀ erentiation , and modulation , Cell . Mol . Neurobiol . 25 ( 1 ) ( 2005 ) 5 – 23 . [ 2 ] N . J . Abbott , A . A . Patabendige , D . E . Dolman , S . R . Yusof , D . J . Begley , Structure and function of the blood – brain barrier , Neurobiol . Dis . 37 ( 1 ) ( 2010 ) 13 – 25 . [ 3 ] U . Kniesel , H . Wolburg , Tight junctions of the blood – brain barrier , Cell . Mol . Neurobiol . 20 ( 1 ) ( 2000 ) 57 – 76 . [ 4 ] C . Schulze , J . A . Firth , Immunohistochemical localization of adherens junction components in blood - brain - barrier microvessels of the rat , J . Cell Sci . 104 ( 1993 ) 773 – 782 . [ 5 ] H . E . de Vries , J . Kuiper , A . G . de Boer , T . J . Van Berkel , D . D . Breimer , The blood - brain barrier in neuroin ﬂ ammatory diseases , Pharmacol . Rev . 49 ( 2 ) ( 1997 ) 143 – 156 . [ 6 ] B . T . Hawkins , T . P . Davis , The blood - brain barrier / neurovascular unit in health and disease , Pharmacol . Rev . 57 ( 2 ) ( 2005 ) 173 – 185 . [ 7 ] W . M . Pardridge , Molecular Trojan horses for blood – brain barrier drug delivery , Curr . Opin . Pharmacol . 6 ( 5 ) ( 2006 ) 494 – 500 . [ 8 ] D . Berg , H . Hochstrasser , Iron metabolism in parkinsonian syndromes , Mov . Disord . 21 ( 9 ) ( 2006 ) 1299 – 1310 . [ 9 ] H . Jiang , J . Wang , J . Rogers , J . Xie , Brain iron metabolism dysfunction in Parkinson ' s disease , Mol . Neurobiol . ( 2016 ) 1 – 24 . [ 10 ] W . - Y . Ong , A . A . Farooqui , Iron , neuroin ﬂ ammation , and Alzheimer ' s disease , J . Alzheimers Dis . 8 ( 2 ) ( 2005 ) 183 – 200 . [ 11 ] J . H . Jandl , J . K . Inman , R . L . Simmons , D . W . Allen , Transfer of iron from serum iron - binding protein to human reticulocytes , J . Clin . Investig . 38 ( 1 Pt . 1 – 2 ) ( 1959 ) 161 . [ 12 ] F . M . van Bockxmeer , E . Morgan , Identi ﬁ cation of transferrin receptors in re - ticulocytes , Biochim . Biophys . Acta Biomembr . 468 ( 3 ) ( 1977 ) 437 – 450 . [ 13 ] T . A . Hamilton , H . G . Wada , H . H . Sussman , Identi ﬁ cation of transferrin receptors on the surface of human cultured cells , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 76 ( 12 ) ( 1979 ) 6406 – 6410 . [ 14 ] P . A . Seligman , R . B . Schleicher , R . H . Allen , Isolation and characterization of the transferrin receptor from human placenta , J . Biol . Chem . 254 ( 20 ) ( 1979 ) 9943 – 9946 . [ 15 ] W . P . Faulk , B . - L . Hsi , P . Stevens , Transferrin and transferrin receptors in carcinoma of the breast , Lancet 316 ( 8191 ) ( 1980 ) 390 – 392 . [ 16 ] W . A . Je ﬀ eries , M . R . Brandon , S . V . Hunt , A . F . Williams , K . C . Gatter , D . Y . Mason , Transferrin receptor on endothelium of brain capillaries , Nature 312 ( 5990 ) ( 1984 ) 162 – 163 . [ 17 ] J . Fishman , J . Rubin , J . Handrahan , J . Connor , R . Fine , Receptor - mediated trans - cytosis of transferrin across the blood - brain barrier , J . Neurosci . Res . 18 ( 2 ) ( 1987 ) 299 – 304 . [ 18 ] E . M . Taylor , E . H . Morgan , Developmental changes in transferrin and iron uptake by the brain in the rat , Dev . Brain Res . 55 ( 1 ) ( 1990 ) 35 – 42 . [ 19 ] T . J . Raub , C . R . Newton , Recycling kinetics and transcytosis of transferrin in pri - mary cultures of bovine brain microvessel endothelial cells , J . Cell . Physiol . 149 ( 1 ) ( 1991 ) 141 – 151 . [ 20 ] C . Morris , A . Keith , J . Edwardson , R . Pullen , Uptake and distribution of iron and transferrin in the adult rat brain , J . Neurochem . 59 ( 1 ) ( 1992 ) 300 – 306 . [ 21 ] L . Descamps , M . - P . Dehouck , G . Torpier , R . Cecchelli , Receptor - mediated transcy - tosis of transferrin through blood - brain barrier endothelial cells , Am . J . Phys . Heart Circ . Phys . 270 ( 4 ) ( 1996 ) H1149 – H1158 . Table 5 Comparison of model results with experimental observations for iron - enriched and iron - depleted cell . Results are presented for percentage change in iron concentration with respect to normal cell . Cell type Transferrin - bound iron in brain side Free iron in brain side Iron - enriched Iron - depleted Iron - enriched Iron - depleted Experiment a + 15 . 7 % − 25 . 7 % − 73 . 5 % + 19 . 2 % Model + 13 . 9 % − 24 . 5 % − 76 . 7 % + 21 . 3 % Note : A negative sign indicates reduction whereas a positive sign indicates increase with respect to normal cell . a Experimental values are calculated from the data provided in reference [ 22 ] . A . I . Khan et al . BBA - General Subjects 1862 ( 2018 ) 1168 – 1179 1178 [ 22 ] J . R . Burdo , D . A . Antonetti , E . B . Wolpert , J . R . Connor , Mechanisms and regulation of transferrin and iron transport in a model blood - brain barrier system , Neuroscience 121 ( 4 ) ( 2003 ) 883 – 890 . [ 23 ] M . Hersom , H . C . Helms , N . Pretzer , C . Goldeman , A . I . Jensen , G . Severin , M . S . Nielsen , R . Holm , B . Brodin , Transferrin receptor expression and role in transendothelial transport of transferrin in cultured brain endothelial monolayers , Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 76 ( 2016 ) 59 – 67 . [ 24 ] T . A . Rouault , S . Cooperman , " Brain iron metabolism , ” , Proc . Seminars in Pediatric Neurology 13 ( 3 ) ( 2006 ) 142 – 148 Elsevier . [ 25 ] A . Ciechanover , A . Schwartz , A . Dautry - Varsat , H . Lodish , Kinetics of internaliza - tion and recycling of transferrin and the transferrin receptor in a human hepatoma cell line . E ﬀ ect of lysosomotropic agents , J . Biol . Chem . 258 ( 16 ) ( 1983 ) 9681 – 9689 . [ 26 ] B . J . Iacopetta , E . H . Morgan , The kinetics of transferrin endocytosis and iron uptake from transferrin in rabbit reticulocytes , J . Biol . Chem . 258 ( 15 ) ( 1983 ) 9108 – 9115 . [ 27 ] N . Gironès , R . J . Davis , Comparison of the kinetics of cycling of the transferrin re - ceptor in the presence or absence of bound diferric transferrin , Biochem . J . 264 ( 1 ) ( 1989 ) 35 – 46 . [ 28 ] Y . Shitara , Y . Kato , Y . Sugiyama , E ﬀ ect of brefeldin A and lysosomotropic reagents on intracellular tra ﬃ cking of epidermal growth factor and transferrin in Madin - Darby canine kidney epithelial cells , J . Control . Release 55 ( 1 ) ( 1998 ) 35 – 43 . [ 29 ] K . M . Mayle , A . M . Le , D . T . Kamei , The intracellular tra ﬃ cking pathway of trans - ferrin , Biochim . Biophys . Acta Gen . Subj . 1820 ( 3 ) ( 2012 ) 264 – 281 . [ 30 ] D . F . Leitner , J . R . Connor , Functional roles of transferrin in the brain , Biochim . Biophys . Acta Gen . Subj . 1820 ( 3 ) ( 2012 ) 393 – 402 . [ 31 ] R . Roberts , A . Sandra , G . Siek , J . Lucas , R . Fine , Studies of the mechanism of iron transport across the blood - brain barrier , Ann . Neurol . 32 ( S1 ) ( 1992 ) S43 – S50 . [ 32 ] S . Skarlatos , T . Yoshikawa , W . M . Pardridge , Transport of [ 125 I ] transferrin through the rat blood - brain barrier , Brain Res . 683 ( 2 ) ( 1995 ) 164 – 171 . [ 33 ] S . Parkkila , A . Waheed , R . S . Britton , B . R . Bacon , X . Y . Zhou , S . Tomatsu , R . E . Fleming , W . S . Sly , Association of the transferrin receptor in human placenta with HFE , the protein defective in hereditary hemochromatosis , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 94 ( 24 ) ( 1997 ) 13198 – 13202 . [ 34 ] T . R . Daniels , T . Delgado , J . A . Rodriguez , G . Helguera , M . L . Penichet , The trans - ferrin receptor part I : biology and targeting with cytotoxic antibodies for the treatment of cancer , Clin . Immunol . 121 ( 2 ) ( 2006 ) 144 – 158 . [ 35 ] A . Calzolari , L . M . Larocca , S . Deaglio , V . Finisguerra , A . Boe , C . Raggi , L . Ricci - Vitani , F . Pierconti , F . Malavasi , R . De Maria , Transferrin receptor 2 is frequently and highly expressed in glioblastomas , Transl . Oncol . 3 ( 2 ) ( 2010 ) 123 – 134 . [ 36 ] A . Dautry - Varsat , A . Ciechanover , H . F . Lodish , pH and the recycling of transferrin during receptor - mediated endocytosis , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 80 ( 8 ) ( 1983 ) 2258 – 2262 . [ 37 ] B . M . Pearse , M . S . Robinson , Clathrin , adaptors , and sorting , Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 6 ( 1 ) ( 1990 ) 151 – 171 . [ 38 ] D . J . Yamashiro , F . R . Max ﬁ eld , Acidi ﬁ cation of endocytic compartments and the intracellular pathways of ligands and receptors , J . Cell . Biochem . 26 ( 4 ) ( 1984 ) 231 – 246 . [ 39 ] H . Gunshin , B . Mackenzie , U . V . Berger , Y . Gunshin , M . F . Romero , W . F . Boron , S . Nussberger , J . L . Gollan , M . A . Hediger , Cloning and characterization of a mam - malian proton - coupled metal - ion transporter , Nature 388 ( 6641 ) ( 1997 ) 482 – 488 . [ 40 ] M . W . Hentze , M . U . Muckenthaler , B . Galy , C . Camaschella , Two to tango : regula - tion of mammalian iron metabolism , Cell 142 ( 1 ) ( 2010 ) 24 – 38 . [ 41 ] B . D . Grant , J . G . Donaldson , Pathways and mechanisms of endocytic recycling , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 ( 9 ) ( 2009 ) 597 – 608 . [ 42 ] E . Mills , X . P . Dong , F . D . Wang , H . X . Xu , Mechanisms of brain iron transport : insight into neurodegeneration and CNS disorders , Future Med . Chem . 2 ( 1 ) ( 2010 ) 51 – 64 . [ 43 ] S . A . Predescu , D . N . Predescu , K . Shimizu , I . K . Klein , A . B . Malik , Cholesterol - de - pendent syntaxin - 4 and SNAP - 23 clustering regulates caveolar fusion with the en - dothelial plasma membrane , J . Biol . Chem . 280 ( 44 ) ( 2005 ) 37130 – 37138 . [ 44 ] S . E . Holstein , H . Ungewickell , E . Ungewickell , Mechanism of clathrin basket dis - sociation : separate functions of protein domains of the DnaJ homologue auxilin , J . Cell Biol . 135 ( 1996 ) 925 – 937 . [ 45 ] M . W . Hentze , M . U . Muckenthaler , N . C . Andrews , Balancing acts : molecular control of mammalian iron metabolism , Cell 117 ( 3 ) ( 2004 ) 285 – 297 . [ 46 ] S . Rodrigues , M . Desroches , M . Krupa , J . M . Cortes , T . J . Sejnowski , A . B . Ali , Time - coded neurotransmitter release at excitatory and inhibitory synapses , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 113 ( 8 ) ( 2016 ) E1108 – E1115 . [ 47 ] I . R . Pulido , R . Jahn , V . Gerke , VAMP3 is associated with endothelial Weibel - Palade bodies and participates in their Ca2 + - dependent exocytosis , BBA - Mol . Cell . Res . 1813 ( 5 ) ( 2011 ) 1038 – 1044 . [ 48 ] Q . Y . Zhu , M . Yamakuchi , C . J . Lowenstein , SNAP23 regulates endothelial exocytosis of von Willebrand factor , PLoS One 10 ( 8 ) ( 2015 ) . [ 49 ] M . Schillemans , D . van Breevoort , M . Hofman , M . Wahedi , A . Gangaev , H . Meems , M . van den Biggelaar , R . Adam , H . Janssen , S . Meijer , J . Voorberg , R . Bierings , Regulation of weibel - palade body exocytosis from endothelial cells by syntaxin - 3 and stxbp5 containing snare complexes , Haematologica 101 ( 2016 ) 312 – 313 . [ 50 ] S . H . Low , S . J . Chapin , T . Weimbs , L . G . Komuves , M . K . Bennett , K . E . Mostov , Di ﬀ erential localization of syntaxin isoforms in polarized Madin - Darby canine kidney cells , Mol . Biol . Cell 7 ( 12 ) ( 1996 ) 2007 – 2018 . [ 51 ] C . R . Vogel , Computational Methods for Inverse Problems , SIAM , 2002 . [ 52 ] L . Gilles , C . Vogel , J . Bardsley , Computational methods for a large - scale inverse problem arising in atmospheric optics , Inverse Prob . 18 ( 1 ) ( 2002 ) 237 . [ 53 ] W . Chen , W . Zhou , T . Xia , X . Gu , A computational analysis framework for molecular cell dynamics : case - study of exocytosis , PLoS One 7 ( 7 ) ( 2012 ) e38699 . [ 54 ] R . J . Ritchie , T . Prvan , Current statistical methods for estimating the K m and V max of Michaelis - Menten kinetics , Biochem . Educ . 24 ( 4 ) ( 1996 ) 196 – 206 . [ 55 ] J . Sainte - Marie , M . Vidal , P . Bette - Bobillo , J . R . Philippot , A . Bienvenüe , The in - ﬂ uence of transferin binding to L2C guinea pig leukemic lymphocytes on the en - docytosis cycle kinetics of its receptor , FEBS J . 201 ( 1 ) ( 1991 ) 295 – 302 . [ 56 ] J . A . Lebron , M . J . Bennett , D . E . Vaughn , A . J . Chirino , P . M . Snow , G . A . Mintier , J . N . Feder , P . J . Bjorkman , Crystal structure of the hemochromatosis protein HFE and characterization of its interaction with transferrin receptor , Cell 93 ( 1 ) ( 1998 ) 111 – 123 . [ 57 ] C . C . Visser , L . H . Voorwinden , D . J . A . Crommelin , M . Danhof , A . G . de Boer , Characterization and modulation of the transferrin receptor on brain capillary en - dothelial cells , Pharm . Res . 21 ( 5 ) ( 2004 ) 761 – 769 . [ 58 ] W . van Gelder , M . I . E . Huijskes - Heins , M . I . Cleton - Soeteman , J . P . van Dijk , H . G . van Eijk , Iron uptake in blood - brain barrier endothelial cells cultured in iron - depleted and iron - enriched media , J . Neurochem . 71 ( 3 ) ( 1998 ) 1134 – 1140 . [ 59 ] A . Ciechanover , A . L . Schwartz , H . F . Lodish , The asialoglycoprotein receptor inter - nalizes and recycles independently of the transferrin and insulin - receptors , Cell 32 ( 1 ) ( 1983 ) 267 – 275 . [ 60 ] W . Vangelder , M . I . E . Huijskesheins , J . P . Vandijk , M . I . Cletonsoeteman , H . G . Vaneijk , Quanti ﬁ cation of di ﬀ erent transferrin receptor pools in primary cul - tures of porcine blood - brain - barrier endothelial - cells , J . Neurochem . 64 ( 6 ) ( 1995 ) 2708 – 2715 . [ 61 ] A . van der Ende , A . du Maine , A . L . Schwartz , G . J . Strous , Modulation of transferrin - receptor activity and recycling after induced di ﬀ erentiation of BeWo chor - iocarcinoma cells , Biochem . J . 270 ( 2 ) ( 1990 ) 451 – 457 . [ 62 ] W . H . Organization , Serum Ferritin Concentrations for the Assessment of Iron Status and Iron De ﬁ ciency in Populations , ( 2011 ) . [ 63 ] A . Mezer , E . Nachliel , M . Gutman , U . Ashery , A newplatform to study themolecular mechanisms of exocytosis , J . Neurosci . 24 ( 40 ) ( 2004 ) 8838 – 8846 . [ 64 ] H . Fujita , P . L . Tuma , C . M . Finnegan , L . Locco , A . L . Hubbard , Endogenous syntaxins 2 , 3 and 4 exhibit distinct but overlapping patterns of expression at the hepatocyte plasma membrane , Biochem . J . 329 ( 1998 ) 527 – 538 . [ 65 ] R . J . Davis , M . Faucher , L . K . Racaniello , A . Carruthers , M . P . Czech , Insulin - like growth factor - i and epidermal growth - factor regulate the expression of transferrin receptors at the cell - surface by distinct mechanisms , J . Biol . Chem . 262 ( 27 ) ( 1987 ) 13126 – 13134 . [ 66 ] D . Fasshauer , M . Margittai , A transient N - terminal interaction of SNAP - 25 and syntaxin nucleates SNARE assembly , J . Biol . Chem . 279 ( 9 ) ( 2004 ) 7613 – 7621 . [ 67 ] A . V . Pobbati , A . Stein , D . Fasshauer , N - to C - terminal SNARE complex assembly promotes rapid membrane fusion , Science 313 ( 5787 ) ( 2006 ) 673 – 676 . [ 68 ] B . Garipcan , S . Maenz , T . Pham , U . Settmacher , K . D . Jandt , J . Zanow , J . Bossert , Image analysis of endothelial microstructure and endothelial cell dimensions of human arteries – a preliminary study , Adv . Eng . Mater . 13 ( 1 – 2 ) ( 2011 ) B54 – B57 . A . I . Khan et al . BBA - General Subjects 1862 ( 2018 ) 1168 – 1179 1179