36 KU MASC 2019 Research Retreat Making Mountains out of Molehills : Challenges for Implementation of Cross - Disciplinary Research in the Big Data Era Daniel Andresen and Eugene Vasserman Department of Computer Science , Kansas State University { dan , eyv } @ ksu . edu W e present a “Researcher’s Hierarchy of Needs” ( loosely based on Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs ) in the context of interdisciplinary research in a “big data” era . We discuss multiple tensions and difficulties that researchers face in today’s environment , some current efforts and suggested policy changes to address these shortcomings and present our vision of a future interdisciplinary ecosystem . Big data , as noted by Dr . Francine Berman of the San Diego Supercomput - er Center , is crucial to maintaining com - petitiveness in today’s research environ - ment . She notes , “More scientists will depend on exabyte data than on exaflop machines . ” Big data is also a new strate - gic advantage , and the new shared envi - ronments for scientists and researchers to explore . Virtually all of the NSF’s 10 Big Ideas for 2019 relate to interdisciplinary research on big data . Several overarching issues come to mind when considering interdisciplinary research centered around big data . For example , interdisciplinary communica - tion is challenging , as similar terms may mean different things , and each party is to develop a sufficiently sophisticated vo - cabulary to be able to communicate across the research areas . Also , finding the right people with the right skills is particular - ly challenging . For example , each of the authors is in the department of computer science , yet even with our own discipline we had difficulty finding collaborators with the skills necessary to deal with large quantities of data in an efficient , effective manner . In addition , that funding agency has emphasized the importance of inter - disciplinary collaboration , even going so far as insisting on it in any calls for pro - posals , yet adding significant barriers in the form of legislation such as CUI , ITAR , and other regulations . Cybersecurity and privacy also come heavily into play , as large datasets become increasingly likely to contain data which is plausibly per - sonally identifiable , leading to dangers both in researchers learning information which is supposed to be hidden , and hackers causing potentially embarrass - ing and financially ruinous data leaks . Finally , comprehensive institutional sup - port is frequently lacking , where the in - frastructure is inadequate to support the desired scale and types of research , and the rewards systems for researchers fails to incentivize interdisciplinary research . In examining interdisciplinary re - search , particularly in the academic en - vironment , one must take into account the whole environment , and not simply focus on skills , Cyberinfrastructure , or other more easily tackled subproblems . In this paper we first present a mod - el for interdisciplinary research in a big data environment . We then discuss two overarching issues , interdisciplinary communication ( both at the data and in - terpersonal levels ) , and the effects of the need for cybersecurity and privacy . We finish by offering several suggestions and observations for changes at the insti - tutional level . 37 KU MASC 2019 Research Retreat A Research Hierarchy of Needs That realization drives us to intro - duce a Research Hierarchy of Needs loosely modeled on Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs 1 . And Maslow’s hierarchy of needs , needs which are underserved at the lower levels of the hierarchy prevent the full expression of needs at higher lev - els in the hierarchy . So for instance if a person is in danger , the need for self es - teem is substantially diminished . Similar - ly , in research , if the two researchers have a strong shared vision but lack the data on which to base their research , they will be unsuccessful . 1 . Shared Vision The end goal for a relationship among researchers is that moment when they agree on the shared vision containing the research goal , outline the general plan , and realize they have the re - sources to accomplish it . 2 . Social capital / relationships The shared vision is built on the ability to work together , to communicate well , and develop sufficient trust in the other to warrant risking valuable resources ( e . g . , time , ef - fort , and expertise ) . Such relation - ships typically evolve over time , motivated by mutual respect , shared interests , and shared goals – frequently developing from loose , unofficial ties . Conversely , they can develop quickly if suffi - cient incentives ( positive or nega - tive ) are introduced . 3 . Domain expertise Frequently , par - ticularly for larger projects , much of the actual work will be accom - plished by a pool of experts – typ - ically post - doctoral associates or graduate students – who are well - versed in the theory and experi - ence in the associated research areas . However , in a big - data en - vironment , we have noticed a seri - ous shortage of qualified person - nel with sufficient experience and knowledge of big data tools , leav - ing significant data analysis either unaccomplished or unattempted . 4 . Technical expertise The domain experts cannot accomplish their goals , however , without a rich cyberinfrastructure ecosystem . 2 It is impossible to accomplish rich , large - scale data analysis on a typ - ical academic IT infrastructure consisting of personal computers , Wi - Fi , and an Internet connec - tion . Specialized hardware and Figure 1 . A Research Hierarchy of Needs ( left ) , and Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs ( right ) . 38 KU MASC 2019 Research Retreat software environments that can easily handle multi - terabyte - to petabyte - level data analysis ( both storage and computation ) are re - quired – and these require sup - port staff ( frequently referred to as “HPC Facilitators” 3 ) who are experts at helping researchers ef - fectively use these tools at scale . These facilitators are frequently domain scientists with doctoral degrees in related fields who have accumulated sufficient training and expertise to be effective in their hybrid role . 5 . Data Clearly the basis for any re - search with the foundation in big data is the data itself . There are multiple issues that arise typical - ly when acquiring the data need - ed to accomplish the research in question . The first issue is , of course , getting permission to ac - quire the data . As noted below , security , privacy , and tradition can all conspire to make getting permission difficult . Also , as the data is acquired , frequently suf - ficient metadata is not collected to make the easily searchable and curatable . Finally , after the data is collected , metadata attached ( if this vital step is not effectively ignored – many researchers con - sider naming a directory ‘lab3 _ day4 _ ir _ rat _ exp1’ to be sufficient labeling ) , the cost of storing the data and making it available can prove prohibitive . 6 . Software / hardware In the end , all data and analysis must occur in a sufficiently - scaled software and hardware environment . With local HPC compute resources available at every Top - 100 research institu - tion 4 , and the benefits in produc - tivity and prestige accrued 5 , most institutions have cyberinfrastruc - ture in place for previous - gener - ation science . However , given the massive increase in scale required by today’s research , institutions are scrambling to find the right mix of local and cloud resources , while also seeking effective fund - ing models to support this vital expansion . Cyberinfrastructure is the new laboratory environment , and resources allocations ( such as F & A ) need to reflect this on par with more traditional efforts . Interdisciplinary Communication My colleague at Kansas State Uni - versity , Dr . Doina Caragea , noted when asked about the toughest part of interdis - ciplinary research , “ I can’t understand your problems , and you can’t under - stand my possibilities . ” Building the vocabulary and depth of understanding for sound interdisciplinary research is generally extraordinarily challenging , requiring significant investments in time and energy . However , university envi - ronments tend to be heavily siloed , typ - ically by department , and as Kleinbaum notes , “…pairs of individuals that are in the same business unit , subfunction , and office location communicate at an esti - mated rate that is 1 , 000 times higher . ” 6 Overcoming a 1000x communication dis - advantage is challenging , and workers even 30 meters apart have a perceived 1KM of distance between them . 7 Over - coming the siloes to build the social capi - tal is needed to overcome the remorseless logic that in general , the short - term , an - nual - report - driven return on incremental efforts invested is likely to be better as extensions on existing domain successes rather than risky large - scale new projects . Building an understanding of each disci - plines’ vocabulary , workflows , rewards / 39 KU MASC 2019 Research Retreat priorities , and arranging these into a mu - tually - beneficial project structure flows significantly more easily when the prin - cipals have an established foundation of trust and respect to build upon . Cybersecurity and Privacy Data sharing , and even data coex - istence is challenging , especially as the data volumes increase and the amount of trust and collaboration between research groups decreases . The data may contain all kinds of sensitive information , from personally identifiable information , to financial records , to intellectual proper - ty , sensitive but unclassified , export con - trolled , etc . Careful design at the domain expertise level , and special security con - trols at the software level are required . An extreme case is that of complete sep - aration ( no group is allowed to interact with another ) or even allow data analysis processes to coexist on the same physical hardware , which makes data sharing im - possible but provides an excellent level of information leakage protection . The level of special controls and the associat - ed difficulty in navigating them must be agreed upon at the level of shared vision ( in terms of benefits and trade - offs ) . In general , the more data sharing is allowed , the higher the risk of unforeseen information leakage . Pre - processing data before it is shared is an effective way to preserve privacy , but it is highly work - in - tensive , and is sometimes difficult to re - use once prepared : different methods of pre - processing are required depending on the types of analyses that collabora - tors would like to run on the data set . An example of pre - processing is an al - gorithm that adds noise to the original data while preserving desired statistical properties . Data redaction as pre - pro - cessing can also be effective , but requires significant domain knowledge to per - form correctly , as the privacy properties of the redacted data set are heavily de - pendent on the type of data being shared . For instance , simple de - identification ( re - moving names and identifiers ) is usually not enough , and additional work is re - quired to provide better anonymization 8 as demonstrated in practice by assigning names to user IDs in the Netflix chal - lenge data set , which only contained film star ratings and randomly assigned user identifiers . 9 This was made possible by comparing the Netflix dataset ( public but deidentified ) to the IMDb data set ( pub - lic but not deidentified ) and inferring the Netflix user identities through similari - ties in watched films and star rankings . Shared databases are fundamentally vulnerable to data extraction through the combination of multiple queries . 10 Some modern alternatives allow non - experts to query a database while the frame - work enforces privacy constraints . 11 This appears to be one of the more usable al - ternatives as of the time of writing , and allows the database to be fully shared , as long as it can only be queried using the PINQ platform . 4 Institutional Support We find the current research environ - ments lacking in providing the type of comprehensive , universal support need - ed for today’s interdisciplinary research . Steve Blank comments , “ [ I ] nnovation is not a point activity , it’s an end - to - end process . You need a pipeline . ” 12 We also see a strong competitive advantage for those institutions who can best enable their researchers ( both professionals and students ) in discovery , funding , and rep - utation . As such , we have several specific recommendations : 1 . Continue deliberately building oppor - tunities for bridges across disciplines . Funding – e . g . , new NIH / NSF in - terdisciplinary CFPs – can certain - ly be a strong motivator , but build - 40 KU MASC 2019 Research Retreat ing other opportunities for ties to organically form can pay off . One company deliberately reduced the number of coffee machines by a factor of 20 to force interac - tion among different groups – and sales increased by 20 % ! 13 While this approach may not work for faculty ( we suspect there would be a sudden explosion in in - of - fice coffeemakers ) , variations like shared coffee machines between departments or university - fund - ed coffeeshop accounts could help relationships develop . 2 . Make big data competence universal . Given the need for competence ( or at least familiarity ) with big data tools in virtually every research area and job occupation today , from astronomy to zoology , we suggest that every student and postdoc be trained early in their tenure at the university . For exam - ple , at Kansas State University , we have made use of remote work - shops offered through XSEDE which last two days , require no prior programming experience , and introduce participants to tools like Hadoop / Spark and Ten - sorFlow . 14 These have been pop - ular across multiple colleges and departments , and we have sug - gested that they form a basis for requiring every student in the Col - lege of Engineering at least be ex - posed to these tools . Longer - term workshops ( typically one week ) through Data Carpentry can offer another quality option . 15 3 . Build the community of experi - enced interdisciplinary researchers . We recommend that institutions incentivize interdisciplinary research . At present , there rep - resents an implicit penalty for an interdisciplinary grant – e . g . , giv - en that most departments are as - sessed based on research expen - ditures , a grant with a colleague in the same department is better ( at least in the short term ) than a grant with a colleague outside the department . Similarly , add - ing young researchers to a grant proposal may strategically grow the number of experienced inter - disciplinary researchers , in the short term it may decrease the odds of an individual proposal’s success . Institutions may find it advantageous to weight interdis - ciplinary achievements ( papers , grants , and other artifacts ) more heavily in evaluations for tenure or promotion ; they may also want to set an expectation that larger interdisciplinary efforts will have a certain percentage ( say , 10 % ) of faculty who are relatively new to these environments . Conclusion In light of our “Research Hierarchy of Needs” , we suggest that both researchers and their institutions recognize both the difficulty and rewards in interdisciplin - ary research , and the need to adapt in the modern research era to the size , speed , and scale of data and its contribution to sci - ence . We need to convert the “molehills” to “mountains” of resources at every level of the hierarchy : hardware / storage / cyber - infrastructure should be well resourced with dedicated staff ; human capital with training in big data should be ubiquitous across disciplines ; and there should be an institutional commitment to replacing a culture of scarcity with planned , systemic infrastructure on par with traditional sci - ence environments like laboratories and other physical resources . 41 KU MASC 2019 Research Retreat References 1 Maslow , A . H . ( 1943 ) . A theory of human motivation . Psychological Review , 50 ( 4 ) , 370 - 396 . 2 Lowndes , Julia S . Stewart , et al . “Our path to better science in less time using open data science tools . ” Nature ecology & evolution 1 . 6 ( 2017 ) : 0160 . 3 Neeman , H . . “A Case Study for HPC Workforce Development and Workforce Me - ta - Development . ” ( 2015 ) . 4 Neeman , H . , personal communication , June , 2018 . 5 Apon , Amy W . , et al . “Assessing the effect of high performance computing capabil - ities on academic research output . ” Empirical Economics 48 . 1 ( 2015 ) : 283 - 312 . 6 Kleinbaum , Adam M . , Toby Stuart , and Michael Tushman . Communication ( and co - ordination ? ) in a modern , complex organization . Boston , MA : Harvard Business School , 2008 . 7 Kraut , Robert E . , Carmen Egido , and Jolene Galegher . “Patterns of contact and com - munication in scientific research collaborations . ” Intellectual teamwork . Psychology Press , 2014 . 163 - 186 . 8 Clete A . Kushida , Deborah A . Nichols , Rik Jadrnicek , Ric Miller , James K . Walsh , and Kara Griffin . ( 2012 ) “Strategies for de - identification and anonymization of elec - tronic health record data for use in multicenter research studies . ” Medical care vol . 50 Suppl : S82 - 101 . 9 Arvind Narayanan and Vitaly Shmatikov . ( 2008 ) “Robust De - anonymization of Large Sparse Datasets . ” In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy ( S & P ) . 10 Dorothy Elizabeth Robling Denning . ( 1982 ) “Cryptography and Data Security . ” Addison - Wesley . 11 Frank D . McSherry . ( 2009 ) “Privacy integrated queries : An extensible platform for privacy - preserving data analysis . ” In ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of data ( SIGMOD ) . 12 Blank , Steve , and Pete Newell . “What your innovation process should look like . ” Harvard Business Review ( 2017 ) . 13 Waber , Ben , Jennifer Magnolfi , and Greg Lindsay . “Workspaces that move people . ” Harvard business review 92 . 10 ( 2014 ) : 68 - 77 . 14 Maiden , T . , “XSEDE HPC Workshop : BIG DATA , ” https : / / psc . edu / hpc - work - shop - series / big - data , accessed 9 / 9 / 19 . 15 Teal , Tracy K . , et al . “Data carpentry : workshops to increase data literacy for re - searchers . ” International Journal of Digital Curation 10 . 1 ( 2015 ) : 135 - 143 . https : / / data - carpentry . org /