Cognitive ﬂexibility in young children : General or task - speciﬁc capacity ? Gedeon O . Deák a , ⇑ , Melody Wiseheart b a Department of Cognitive Science , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , CA 92093 , USA b Department of Psychology and LaMarsh Centre for Child and Youth Research , York University , Toronto , Ontario M3J 1P3 , Canada a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 25 June 2014 Revised 8 April 2015 Keywords : Causal reasoning Cognitive ﬂexibility Executive functions Individual differences Inhibition Rule switching Word learning Working memory a b s t r a c t Cognitive ﬂexibility is the ability to adapt to changing tasks or problems . To test whether cognitive ﬂexibility is a coherent cognitive capacity in young children , we tested 3 - to 5 - year - olds’ performance on two forms of task switching , rule - based ( Three Dimension Changes Card Sorting , 3DCCS ) and inductive ( Flexible Induction of Meaning – Animates and Objects , FIM - Ob and FIM - An ) , as well as tests of response speed , verbal working memory , inhibition , and reasoning . Results suggest that cognitive ﬂexibility is not a globally coherent trait ; only the two inductive word - meaning ( FIM ) tests showed high inter - test coherence . Task - and knowledge - speciﬁc factors also determine children’s ﬂexibility in a given test . Response speed , vocabulary size , and causal reasoning skills further predicted individual and age differences in ﬂexibility , although they did not have the same predictive relation with all three ﬂexibility tests . (cid:2) 2015 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Introduction Cognitive ﬂexibility is the capacity to modify working memory , attention , and response selection in response to changing endogenous and exogenous task demands . Cognitive ﬂexibility has been the focus of behavioral and neuropsychological studies ( e . g . , Eslinger & Grattan , 1993 ; Kramer , Cepeda , & Cepeda , 2001 ; Smith & Blankenship , 1991 ) using a variety of tasks and contexts and wide age ranges http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jecp . 2015 . 04 . 003 0022 - 0965 / (cid:2) 2015 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . ⇑ Corresponding author . E - mail address : gdeak @ ucsd . edu ( G . O . Deák ) . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 138 ( 2015 ) 31 – 53 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Experimental Child Psychology journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / jecp ( Ionescu , 2012 ) . Age - related changes in cognitive ﬂexibility have been reported in tests of rule switch - ing ( Zelazo , Frye , & Rapus , 1996 ) , word learning ( Deák , 2003 ) , spatial reasoning ( Hermer - Vazquez , Moffet , & Munkholm , 2001 ) , categorization ( Blaye & Bonthoux , 2001 ) , and problem solving ( Chen , 1999 ) . Many studies and paradigms suggest that ﬂexibility improves signiﬁcantly from 3 to 6 years of age . If ﬂexibility develops similarly across multiple tasks , it might mean that ﬂexibility is a generalized cognitive capacity—an ‘‘executive’’ control process that operates over a wide range of task contexts ( e . g . , Martin & Rubin , 1995 ; Zelazo & Frye , 1998 ) . The idea of general cognitive capacities has a long history in psychology ( e . g . , Ackerman , 1988 ; Engle & Kane , 2004 ; Humphreys , 1979 ) . Many researchers have argued that a few general executive functions ( EFs ) control cognition in a variety of tasks and contexts ( but see Barkley , 2012 ; Jurado & Rosselli , 2007 ) . Many proposed EF frameworks incorporate a function of cognitive ﬂexibility or ‘‘set shifting’’ ( e . g . , Miyake et al . , 2000 ) . A related hypothesis is that EFs are stable endogenous traits of individuals ( Friedman et al . , 2008 ) . This implies that individual differences in cognitive ﬂexibility should be constant across tasks , times , and content . Some authors have suggested that these general EFs , including ﬂexibility , mature and stabilize during early childhood ( Carlson , Moses , & Breton , 2002 ; Davidson , Amso , Anderson , & Diamond , 2006 ) . That hypothesis is controversial ; an alternative is that ﬂexibility develops in a domain - speciﬁc fashion as children gain task - speciﬁc skills and knowledge ( Luwel , Verschaffel , Onghena , & De Corte , 2003 ; Ravizza & Carter , 2008 ) . By this view , ﬂexibility might improve in many tasks between 3 and 5 years of age simply because children acquire a great deal of varied knowledge and skills during that time . That is , ﬂexibility might improve due to parallel gains in knowledge and skills across domains , not to the development of a generalized EF . If this is true , older children’s ﬂexibility should relate to individual domain - speciﬁc skills . For example , it has been shown that school - aged children’s ﬂexibility in reading - related tasks is partly predicted by their reading skill ( Cartwright , Marshall , Dandy , & Isaac , 2010 ) . It is also possible that children’s ﬂexibility is determined by both a general EF and task - or domain - speciﬁc skills and knowledge . Another related possibility is that there are several dissociable , moderately general ﬂexibility capacities , and each is more relevant to ( or more heavily recruited for ) some tasks than others ( Kim , Johnson , Cilles , & Gold , 2011 ) . Both of these alternatives would predict limited between - test intra - individual coherence of ﬂexibility . Determining whether children’s cognitive ﬂexibility depends on general capacities , on task - speciﬁc knowledge and skills , or on both would go some way towards explaining developmental changes in cognitive control . However , there is little evidence concerning the coherence of children’s ﬂexibility . Most studies implicitly treat ﬂexibility as a general capacity that can be assessed by a single rule - switching test despite the fact that external validity and construct validity of most tests has not been established . To address this question , we gave preschool children three tests of ﬂexibility representing two types of cognitive skills or domains . If individual children’s ﬂexibility is similar across all tests , it will imply a general capacity . If it is consistent only between two tests from the same task domain , it will suggest that ﬂexibility is determined by task - speciﬁc skills , or by several moderately speciﬁc capacities , or both . If ﬂexibility is inconsistent across all three tests , it will suggest that ﬂexibility is largely determined by task - speciﬁc knowledge . Selecting comparable tests with different content domains and task demands is challenging because most studies of young children use one test , the Dimensional Change Card Sorting test or DCCS ( Zelazo , 2006 ) . This is a rule - switching test ; children learn two deductive binary rules for sorting two stimuli . They are told to follow one rule and , at some later time , to switch to the other rule . The test yields robust age differences ; most 3 - year - olds fail to follow an instruction to switch to the second rule , but most 5 - year - olds correctly switch . The test classiﬁes each child as ﬂexible or inﬂexible with little further differentiation . Although recent studies have explored more sensitive measures of rule - switching efﬁciency in older children ( e . g . , Cepeda , Kramer , & Gonzalez de Sather , 2001 ) , these paradigms are not well - suited for preschool children . Other researchers have , however , tested preschoolers using age - appropriate tests that yield parametric estimates of ﬂexibility . These tests involve more subtasks and switches , as well as more trials and response options , than the DCCS ( Deák & Narasimham , 2003 , 2014 ; Narasimham , Deák , & 32 G . O . Deák , M . Wiseheart / Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 138 ( 2015 ) 31 – 53 Wiseheart , 2015 ) . Notably , the tests also represent a different type of task , cue induction , rather than rule switching . Cue induction is the common process of selecting and integrating multiple sources of information that are probabilistically related to some task or judgment ; such a judgment is inductive ( i . e . , indeterminate ) . Cue - induction ﬂexibility is needed for making different inferences based on different subsets of available information or cues . Cue - induction tests of ﬂexibility are useful because rule - switching tests might not capture young children’s common everyday cognitive activities . Rule - switching tests demand arbitrary reversals of symbolic mappings , which play a small role in preschoolers’ everyday experience ( Deák , 2003 ; see also Burgess et al . , 2006 ) . These reversals are analogous to solving an algebra problem with the pre - mises ‘‘Let x = 4 and y = 3’’ then getting another problem with the ( switched ) premises ‘‘Let x = 3 and y = 4 . ’’ Such arbitrary mapping reversals are an unusual sort of symbol manipulation ; in fact , they are confusing for adolescents learning algebra ( Knuth , Alibali , McNeil , Weinberg , & Stephens , 2011 ) . If these reversals are unfamiliar to preschoolers , rule - switching tests might be assessing a fairly peculiar skill , not one that generalizes to everyday tasks that require ﬂexibility . This might explain why brief feedback or practice can eliminate preschoolers’ switching errors ( Bohlmann & Fenson , 2005 ; Perner & Lang , 2002 ) . It can also explain why rule switching improves from 3 to 5 years , an interval when many children start attending preschool classes that impose an expanding , increasingly elaborate schedule of rules . If cognitive ﬂexibility reﬂects task - speciﬁc skills rather than a generalized EF , rule switching might be an acquired skill—a learned ability to process , adopt , and reverse arbitrary rule - to - response map - pings . However , many everyday situations instead require children to shift attention and modify behavior in response to probabilistic social or linguistic cues that are associated with the prevailing task context . These social and linguistic cues seldom reverse or change arbitrarily ; instead , new cues are usually related to some social event ( e . g . , topic shift , new interlocutor , new information ) . In addition , the cues are seldom explicitly stated or explained . Thus , everyday ﬂexible cue induction requires sen - sitivity to changeable , probabilistic , implicit , and pragmatically constrained contextual information . Preschool children can ﬂexibly use such cues to make inductive judgments ( e . g . , Nguyen & Murphy , 2003 ) . For example , between 3 and 5 years of age , children become more ﬂexible at using changing semantic cues to infer novel word meanings ( Deák , 2000 , 2003 ; Deák & Narasimham , 2003 , 2014 ) . When told that an object is ‘‘made of molap , ’’ most preschoolers infer that molap refers to its material . Later , when told that the same object ‘‘has a fodi , ’’ most children will infer that fodi refers to a salient part , not its material . These inferences require children to constrain the possible meanings of succes - sive words according to each one’s speciﬁc semantic context . This paradigm encapsulates a pervasive demand of children’s language learning : ﬂexibly using implicit cues to interpret unfamiliar words . Cue - induction ﬂexibility improves from 3 to 5 years of age , parallel to improvement in rule - switching ﬂexibility . This parallel development might suggest a generalized capacity for ﬂexibil - ity . Alternately , it might be circumstantial , given that most cognitive tests show improvement from 3 to 5 years . Suggestively , there is evidence that cue - induction ﬂexibility and rule - switching ﬂexibility rely on distinct neural substrates . Studies of adult humans and rats suggest a partial dissociation between hippocampal mechanisms for learning speciﬁc , well - deﬁned contingencies ( i . e . , rules ) and striatal mechanisms for learning probabilistic cue – outcome associations ( Frank , O’Reilly , & Curran , 2006 ; O’Reilly & Frank , 2006 ) . The former might contribute more to rule - switching ﬂexibility and the latter to cue - induction ﬂexibility ( Thompson - Schill , Ramscar , & Evangelia , 2009 ) . Both develop during early childhood ( Ramscar , Dye , Gustafson , & Klein , 2013 ) , but no study has directly compared children’s rule - switching ﬂexibility and cue - induction ﬂexibility . One issue to consider in comparing ﬂexibility across tests is subtask difﬁculty —that is , the difﬁculty ( based on discriminability , speciﬁcity , etc . ) of speciﬁc cues for each problem type within a test . Children’s ability to comprehend and use a particular cue or rule will affect their performance on speciﬁc questions or subtasks , and their overall ﬂexibility on the test . Errors ( e . g . , perseverating on a rule ) might be due not to general inﬂexibility but rather to poor comprehension of a cue or rule . For example , 3 - year - olds’ comprehension of words in the DCCS ( e . g . , ‘‘color , ’’ ‘‘shape’’ ) predicts whether they perseverate ( Munakata & Yerys , 2001 ) . In addition , the strength of preschoolers’ work - ing memory representation of rules determines their rule - switching speed even when they do not make errors ( Holt & Deák , 2015 ) . Children’s conceptual knowledge also affects how readily they G . O . Deák , M . Wiseheart / Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 138 ( 2015 ) 31 – 53 33 switch between subtasks ( Blaye , Bernard - Peyron , Paour , & Bonthoux , 2006 ; Deák , Ray , & Pick , 2004 ) . Thus , speciﬁc knowledge affects ﬂexibility , and it is important to control or assess the speciﬁc difﬁ - culty of each ( cue - or rule - based ) subtask , and of each test overall , in order to interpret similarities and differences between tests . To minimize this problem , we applied several strategies in our design . First , tests were designed to be similar in difﬁculty so that differences in ﬂexibility would not be entirely due to between - test dif - ferences in subtask difﬁculty . However , it can be challenging to equate cue or rule difﬁculty across tests for young children . Thus , a second strategy was to make subtasks within each test sequenced similarly , starting with the easiest cue / rule ﬁrst , then the next harder cue / rule , and ﬁnally the hardest cue / rule . This is necessary because subtask order can affect ﬂexibility ( e . g . , Deák , Ray , & Pick , 2004 ; Ellefson , Shapiro , & Chater , 2006 ) . If order effects were inconsistent across tests , it would complicate or invalidate between - test comparisons . Third , we assessed ﬂexibility in each test using a measure that partly corrects for differences in subtask difﬁculty , [ Correct Switches ] (cid:2) [ Opportunities to Switch ] or CORSWOPS ( see below ) . Fourth , in some analyses each child’s accuracy on the ﬁrst cue / rule of each ﬂexibility test was treated as a covariate . This separates some variance due to task - related cue / rule comprehension . Finally , children completed tests of conceptual and linguistic knowledge ( e . g . , receptive language ; see below ) to determine whether these factors predicted test - by - test vari - ability in ﬂexibility . The last strategy also supports a secondary goal of this investigation—to determine whether ﬂex - ibility ( rule switching , cue induction , or both ) relates to children’s EFs . Many EFs change greatly from 3 to 5 years of age while cognitive ﬂexibility is developing . Perhaps changes in EFs contribute to changes in ﬂexibility ( Davidson et al . , 2006 ; Thompson - Schill et al . , 2009 ) . Miyake and colleagues ( 2000 ) argued that ﬂexibility is distinct from , but related to , other EFs , including working memory and cog - nitive inhibition . It has been suggested that children’s ﬂexibility might also be related to EFs—to cog - nitive inhibition ( Zelazo , Müller , Frye , & Marcovitch , 2003 ) , to inhibition and working memory ( e . g . , Carlson , 2005 ) , and / or to processing speed ( Cepeda , Cepeda , & Kramer , 2000 ) . Currently , the relation remains unclear . Most previous studies have tested only rule - switching ﬂexibility , so the relation of EFs to cue - induction ﬂexibility as well as rule - switching ﬂexibility has not been explored . However , two studies have found no reliable relation between cue - induction ﬂexibility and verbal inhibition ( Deák & Narasimham , 2003 , 2014 ) . The current study examined relations between both types of ﬂex - ibility and three EFs : working memory , inhibition , and processing speed . In sum , this study addressed three main questions . First , we investigated whether there is a gen - eralized capacity for ﬂexibility , as indicated by within - child consistency between rule - switching and cue - induction tests . A ﬁnding of consistency between two tests of the same type ( e . g . , cue - induction ﬂexibility ) , but not with one of another type ( e . g . , rule - following ﬂexibility ) , would sug - gest distinct task - related ﬂexibility mechanisms but no global capacity . Second , we investigated whether shared variance in ﬂexibility could be attributable to linguistic and conceptual knowledge . If ﬂexibility is predicted by receptive vocabulary , for example , it would imply that cue comprehension mediates cognitive ﬂexibility . Third , we investigated whether three EFs—working memory , inhibition , and processing speed—predict children’s ﬂexibility across tests . To assess ﬂexibility , 3 - and 4 - year - olds completed a test of rule - following ﬂexibility and two tests of cue - induction ( word - meaning ) ﬂexibility . 1 All tests provided parametric and nonparametric mea - sures of ﬂexibility because , unlike binary two - alternative forced - choice tests ( e . g . , DCCS ) , each test switched among three rules or cues with larger sets of more complex stimuli and more response options . These features provide more test sensitivity and more differentiated responses ( e . g . , both perseverative and haphazard errors ; see Barceló & Knight , 2002 ) . The parametric rule - switching test was the Three Dimension Changes Card Sorting ( 3DCCS ) test , which uses three sorting rules—size , color , and shape—and two rule switches ( Cepeda & Munakata , 2007 ; Deák , 2003 ) . This requires more complex stimuli than the DCCS . Children sort test cards with four different values for each of three properties , as in Fig . 1 . Thus , there are four possible sorting 1 Ideally , children would have completed two tests of each type ; however , only one test of rule - following ﬂexibility was available that yields parametric estimates of ﬂexibility in children as young as 3 years . 34 G . O . Deák , M . Wiseheart / Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 138 ( 2015 ) 31 – 53 responses ( boxes ) per trial . The test can yield both perseveration and haphazard - switching errors . However , overall ﬂexibility in the 3DCCS is strongly correlated with ﬂexibility in the DCCS ( Narasimham et al . , 2015 ) , indicating convergent validity between the tests . Children’s cue - induction ﬂexibility was measured in two FIM ( Flexible Induction of Meaning ) tests . The FIM – Objects ( FIM - Ob ) test ( Deák , 2000 ) presents words for object properties . Children hear three novel words for the same novel objects ( see Fig . 2 ) . Each word can refer to one of three properties : shape , material , or a part . The three words for each standard object follow three different phrase cues : ‘‘is made of , ’’ ‘‘is shaped like a ( n ) , ’’ and ‘‘has a ( n ) . ’’ Children must infer each word’s referent property and identify another object with that property . Because the cue and word change on each trial with a given set , children should generalize each word to a different property . The FIM - Ob test reveals robust age and individual differences in ﬂexible use of cues for word learn - ing ( Deák , 2000 , 2003 ) . Few 3 - year - olds ﬂexibly use phrase cues to infer different meanings , whereas most 4 - year - olds and nearly all 5 - year - olds do so . Variability across this age range is comparable to the 3DCCS . This allows us to assess between - test similarities in individual ﬂexibility . Any similarities can be ‘‘triangulated’’ by comparing each test with a third test . The other FIM test presents words for properties of animate creatures or FIM - An ( Deák & Narasimham , 2014 ) . Children hear three novel words for pictorial stimuli , each showing a creature in an alien environment holding a novel object ( Fig . 3 ) . The novel words for each standard follow , on different trials , three different phrase cues : ‘‘is a ( n ) , ’’ ‘‘lives in / on a ( n ) , ’’ and ‘‘holds a ( n ) . ’’ Again , children can use the cues to infer each word’s referent and identify another picture with that property . This tests a similar kind of ﬂexibility as the FIM - Ob but with different stimulus categories , materials , Fig . 1 . Sample 3DCCS stimuli . Test cards ( to be sorted ) varied in shape ( i . e . , animal ) , color , and size . Each card could be sorted in a different box with a distinct target card , depending on the current rule ( i . e . , game ) : ‘‘shape game , ’’ ‘‘color game , ’’ or ‘‘size game . ’’ ( For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend , the reader is referred to the web version of this article . ) G . O . Deák , M . Wiseheart / Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 138 ( 2015 ) 31 – 53 35 Fig . 2 . One of ﬁve FIM - Ob test sets with example prompts from 3 trials . Top left object : standard . Comparison objects ( bottom ) from left : same shape , same material , same part , and distracter . Blocks include 5 trials , 1 per set , with the same cue . In the example , turob would generalize to the object second from left , inrom to the left - most object , and fodi to the object second from right . Fig . 3 . One of ﬁve FIM - An test sets with example prompts from 3 trials . Top left image : standard . Comparison items ( bottom ) from left : same species , same habitat , same possession , and distracter . Blocks include 5 trials , 1 per set , with the same cue . In the example , ﬁnnet , toma , and eland would generalize to the ﬁrst , second , and third items from left , respectively . 36 G . O . Deák , M . Wiseheart / Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 138 ( 2015 ) 31 – 53 cues , and properties . Preschoolers’ ﬂexibility in the FIM - Ob and their ﬂexibility in the FIM - An are moderately strongly correlated ( Deák & Narasimham , 2014 ) even with age and receptive vocabulary controlled . The current study attempted to replicate that ﬁnding with minor procedural modiﬁcations . Although the FIM - An and FIM - Ob both are cue - induction tests and the 3DCCS is a rule - switching test , the FIM - An and 3DCCS share other features : their stimuli come from the same domain ( biological kinds ) and share the same medium ( colored pictures ) . These similarities might contribute to between - test associations . However , all tests differ in speciﬁc cues / rules , stimuli , and properties , so if they are correlated it could imply a general cognitive trait . All three tests require receptive language ability to process cues or rules . This ability varies across children , so participants completed the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test ( PPVT ) , a normed receptive language test ( Dunn & Dunn , 1997 ) . To assess whether conceptual knowledge predicts ﬂexibility , we selected an age - appropriate test of conceptual knowledge . Das Gupta and Bryant ( 1989 ) showed children object transformations of varying typicality and asked them to select the likely instrument of transformation . Although it directly assesses only a narrow range of conceptual content , this test might assess variance in conceptual knowledge more broadly . In addition , children’s accuracy in the ﬁrst block of each ﬂexibility test provides converging evidence of their task - relevant linguistic and conceptual knowledge . Children completed several EF tests . Based on a hypothesis that task switching demands inhibitory processes ( Miyake et al . , 2000 ; Zelazo et al . , 2003 ) , children completed two age - appropriate tests of cognitive and behavioral inhibition : one that requires inhibiting strong verbal associations , the Stroop Day – Night test ( Gerstadt , Hong , & Diamond , 1994 ) , and one that requires inhibiting an imitative tendency , Luria’s Tapping test ( Luria , 1962 / 1966 ) . In addition , based on models that task switching requires working memory activation and maintenance of the current rule ( e . g . , Baddeley , Chincotta , & Adlam , 2001 ; Cepeda et al . , 2000 ) , children completed a test of verbal working memory ( vWM ) , Memory for Names ( Woodcock & Johnson , 1989 ) . Finally , processing speed is a task - general individual difference that modulates cognitive control ( Kail , 1991 ; Kail & Hall , 1994 ) ; here we consid - ered it an EF parameter . Response speed was assessed with the Box Completion test ( Salthouse , 1994 ) , which can be administered to young children . Although these measures barely tap the range of cognitive capacities that might relate to cognitive ﬂexibility , 2 they serve as a starting point ; if any are consistently associated with the ﬂexibility tests , they will suggest relations that merit further investigation . Method Participants A total of 93 3 - and 4 - year - olds were recruited from local preschools , and 85 completed all three sessions ( 8 children were excluded due to absence or refusal to participate in one or more sessions ) . In addition , a replication group of 12 3 - and 4 - year - olds was recruited after the main study to test for the possibility of order effects ; these children completed all tests in a different order . Two children did not complete all sessions , leaving 10 children ( 6 girls ) in the replication group ( 5 3 - year - olds and 5 4 - year - olds ) . Extensive comparisons for differences between the main group and the replication group revealed almost identical performance on all tests . Thus , their data were pooled and analyzed as a sin - gle group of N = 95 children 3 ( 47 girls , mean age = 49 months , range = 36 – 59 ) . Children were tested in their preschool . All procedures were approved by the university’s institutional review board . 2 We assessed one other capacity , namely children’s awareness of indeterminacy ( Klahr & Chen , 2003 ) . Deák and Enright ( 2006 ) found that this was correlated with children’s ability to switch answers to similar but distinct questions . Therefore , we administered an expanded set of questions like those in Deák and Enright ( 2006 ) . However , the results showed a large ﬂoor effect , suggesting that the expanded test was too difﬁcult . Thus , the results , unfortunately , are not and will not be considered further . 3 This does not affect any of the results below ; it simply increases statistical power . Nonetheless , details of group performance are available from the corresponding author . The reason for this design was that if there were order effects , randomizing test order would have rendered the data ambiguous . A consistent test order allowed comparison of individual differences . The replication group provided a check for order effects that could have limited the interpretability of the results . G . O . Deák , M . Wiseheart / Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 138 ( 2015 ) 31 – 53 37 Most parents ( 79 % ) completed and returned a questionnaire about family demographics and child history . ( Children whose parents did not return it performed no differently on any test than children whose parents did return it . ) Children’s ethnic distribution was 7 % Asian , 23 % multiracial or ‘‘other’’ , 3 % Hispanic , and 68 % White and non - Hispanic . Parents’ mean age was 39 years ( SD = 4 ) , with 17 years of education ( SD = 2 ) . Most children ( 89 % ) lived with two caregivers . Most children ( 61 % ) had one sib - ling , 13 % were singletons , and 25 % had two or more siblings . No child had any known sensory or cog - nitive problems except one child with corrected vision . Mean gestational age was – 0 . 6 weeks from term ( SD = 1 . 8 ) , and birth weight ( reported for only 58 children ) averaged 3 . 3 kg ( SD = 0 . 6 ) , compara - ble to the U . S . median in 2012 ( 3 . 25 kg ; Centers for Disease Control . , 2013 ) . One child had a ( minor ) birth complication . All children spoke English ﬂuently , and 38 % had exposure to a second language . PPVT - 3 scores indicated that children with second - language exposure did not differ from those with - out it ( second - language exposure mean = 108 . 4 , SD = 11 . 7 ; English - only mean = 109 . 3 , SD = 11 . 0 ) . Overall design and procedure Children participated in a quiet room in their preschool . Each child completed three sessions ( typ - ically 30 – 45 min long ) within a 2 - week period . Tests were presented in the same order to all children to avoid order effects . The orders for the main and replication samples are shown in Appendix A . Orders were quasi - randomly determined with the following constraints . Flexibility tests were admin - istered in different sessions . The replication order was also constrained such that each test was switched to a new session , in a different ordinal position , with different preceding and following tests . ( Another test not reported here measured children’s tool - using ﬂexibility . There were no strong asso - ciations between it and the other ﬂexibility tests . For that reason , and because it was rather elaborate , it will be described in Deák & Boddupalli , 2015 ) . One concern was that children might respond similarly across ﬂexibility tests if the testing situa - tion primes response strategies from the previous test session ( s ) . Any such between - session situa - tional priming could spuriously increase between - test correlations . To control this , we changed the context across sessions . First , a different experimenter administered each session ( experimenters were randomly assigned to Sessions 1 , 2 , and 3 for each child ) . To ensure consistency across experimenters , a senior researcher watched videos of every session . Second , the testing table was rotated and covered with a different color tablecloth to alter the visual context . These changes in the social and perceptual contexts across sessions should reduce between - session contextual priming . To our knowledge , no other study of children’s cognition has taken such measures to control spurious shared variance due to priming over repeated testing . Cognitive ﬂexibility tests Children completed three verbally cued ﬂexibility tests : 3DCCS , FIM - Ob , and FIM - An . Each test included three blocks of trials deﬁned by different phrase cues or rules . The same stimuli were shown in each block , and across blocks children could switch responses correctly or incorrectly or repeat a prior response . To ensure that ﬁrst - block responses were accurate , and that children built a response habit in this block , the strongest ( i . e . , easiest ) cue from each test was assigned to the ﬁrst block , the next - strongest cue to the second block , and the weakest cue to the last block ( cue strength was based on data from Deák , 2000 ; Deák & Narasimham , 2003 , 2014 ; Narasimham et al . , 2015 ) . This design holds order - by - difﬁculty interactions constant across children and tests . It also maximizes the prob - ability that every child has many opportunities to switch responses . This is critical for making mea - sures of ﬂexibility ( described below ) interpretable . The cue order in the FIM - Ob was ‘‘is made of , ’’ ‘‘has a ( n ) , ’’ and ‘‘is shaped like a ( n ) ’’ ; the cue order in the FIM - An was ‘‘is a ( n ) , ’’ ‘‘holds a ( n ) , ’’ and ‘‘lives in / on a ( n ) . ’’ The rule order in the 3DCCS was shape , color , and size . Stimulus order in each test was randomized for each child and repeated across blocks . Children received nonspeciﬁc feedback for every response ( i . e . , ‘‘thank you’’ ) . The experimenter maintained eye contact with the child in every trial and used a uniform tone of voice to avoid providing differen - tial feedback . 38 G . O . Deák , M . Wiseheart / Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 138 ( 2015 ) 31 – 53 Three Dimension - Changes Card Sorting Photoshop - modiﬁed clip art images printed on laminated 21 - cm 2 cards depicted prototypical familiar animals ( dog , ﬁsh , and bird ) in three focal colors ( red , blue , and yellow ) and three sizes ( approximately 3 . 3 cm 2 , 8 . 9 cm 2 , and 17 . 2 cm 2 ) . A fourth distracter showed a medium – large green frog . ( Stimuli are available at http : / / cogdevlab . ucsd . edu / resources / . ) Distracters were used in each test to check whether children were attentive and compliant . Children sorted ﬁve test cards into four white cardboard boxes , each with a different standard on top . For each test card , one standard had the same shape , one the same color , and one the same size , as shown in Fig . 1 . Standards differed in all property values , so any match was unambiguous . Each test card had different combinations of properties than any standard , so it would go in a different box under every rule . Test cards were ran - domized for each child , but any property occurred no more than twice , and no two properties ( e . g . , small + blue ) were combined more than once . Before the test , children were asked to label the animal , color , and size properties of each card to ensure that they knew the relevant labels ( e . g . , ‘‘blue , ’’ ‘‘ﬁsh’’ ) and understood the game labels ( e . g . , ‘‘color game’’ ) . All children demonstrated comprehension . The rules of the ﬁrst game were stated three times using different phrasings . Key instructions from the ﬂexibility tests are provided in Appendix B . Before the test trials children were asked to restate the rules and answer several rule comprehension questions ( based on Zelazo , 2006 ) . Before the second and third blocks , children were told ( three times ) to stop playing the old game and start playing a new game . The new rule was explained , and children’s comprehension was checked . Children sorted each of the ﬁve cards three times , once per rule ( animal , color , or size game ) . Speciﬁc subtask rules ( e . g . , ‘‘dogs go in this box’’ ) explicitly indicated where to place each card in a given block . Flexible Induction of Meaning – Objects Five sets of novel objects each included a standard and four comparison objects . Each standard matched one of three comparison objects on one of three novel properties : shape , material , or afﬁxed part . The fourth object in each set was a distracter ( see Fig . 2 and Deák , 2000 ) . In each of 15 test trials , children were told to look at all of the objects , and then the experimenter said ( twice ) of the standard either , ‘‘This is made of [ Word 1 ] , ’’ ‘‘This is shaped like a ( n ) [ Word 2 ] , ’’ or ‘‘This has a ( n ) [ Word 3 ] . ’’ The experimenter then indicated the comparison objects and asked , ‘‘Which one of these also [ Cue ] [ Word ] ? ’’ The prompt was repeated after 8 s if a child did not answer . Each block featured a different phrase cue . Object positions were randomized on each trial , and words were randomly assigned to properties . Flexible Induction of Meaning – Animates The FIM - An test used ﬁve sets of ﬁve color pictures ( 12 . 5 cm 2 ) of novel creatures ( some from Barlowe & Summer , 1979 ) holding novel objects in novel habitats ( see Fig . 3 in Deák & Narasimham , 2014 ) . ( Stimuli are available at http : / / cogdevlab . ucsd . edu . ) Each set’s standard matched one of three comparison pictures on one of three properties : species , habitat , or held object . The fourth distracter had different properties . In each of 15 trials , children were ﬁrst told to look at the pictures , and then the experimenter said of the standard either , ‘‘This is a ( n ) [ Novel Word 1 ] , ’’ ‘‘This lives in / on a ( n ) [ Word 2 ] , ’’ or ‘‘This holds a ( n ) [ Word 3 ] . ’’ The experimenter then indicated the comparison pic - tures and asked , ‘‘Which of these also [ Cue ] [ Word ] ? ’’ Each block featured a different phrase cue . Picture positions and words were randomized as in the FIM - Ob test . Scoring : ﬂexibility tests Each ﬂexibility test was evaluated using three measures . First , accuracy was coded as the number of cue - or rule - appropriate responses in each block and in total . Total accuracy indicates sensitivity to cues or rules . In addition , accuracy in the ﬁrst block across tests provides an index of children’s ability to comprehend cues or rules . Second , ﬂexibility was assessed using a more focused measure that allows comparison across tests , CORSWOPS ( correct switches / opportunities ; Deák & Narasimham , 2014 ) , or the proportion of correct switches in later blocks corrected for opportunities to switch correctly . This is the proportion of trials in Blocks 2 and 3 when the child chose a cue - or rule - appropriate item that was different from the G . O . Deák , M . Wiseheart / Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 138 ( 2015 ) 31 – 53 39 previous item chosen from that set . Because accuracy in Blocks 1 and 2 can vary , the proportion of pos - sible correct switches can differ in Blocks 2 and 3 . Correcting for the actual number of opportunities to switch correctly provides an index of ﬂexibility that is less biased by age and other factors . 4 Although CORSWOPS is strongly correlated with total correct responses , it controls for variability in initial accu - racy across children . CORSWOPS is a general index that can be compared across any ﬂexibility test that meets a few assumptions : discrete correct and incorrect responses and sufﬁcient post - switch opportu - nities to derive proportional scores . These assumptions are met by all three tests . For example , even the youngest quartile of our sample ( 43 months or younger ) had enough opportunities to switch ( means = 94 % of post - switch 3DCCS trials , 79 % of FIM - Ob trials , and 99 % of FIM - An trials ) to derive mean - ingful CORSWOPS proportions . Third , children’s responses across trials of any ﬂexibility test usually ﬁt some sequential pattern . In previous studies ( Deák , 2000 ; Deák & Narasimham , 2014 ) , children’s response patterns could be clas - siﬁed as ﬂexible ( in the current design with three blocks of 5 trials , this entails 13 or more correct choices with 7 or more correct switches ) , partly ﬂexible ( 9 – 12 correct choices with 5 or more correct switches ) , perseverative ( 7 or fewer correct choices with 3 or fewer switches [ correct or not ] ) , or indis - criminate ( 10 or fewer correct choices with 4 or more switches but 3 or fewer correct switches ) . These categories might reﬂect different approaches to the test ; ﬂexible patterns indicate adaptation to each cue / rule ; partly ﬂexible patterns reﬂect adaptation to two of three cues / rules or inconsistent use of each cue / rule ( perhaps with high uncertainty ) , perseverative patterns reﬂect either failure to encode cue / rule changes or failure to weight later cues / rules higher than previous responses , and indiscrim - inate patterns might reﬂect high uncertainty about mappings of cues / rules to stimulus properties . These patterns , therefore , suggest different sources of error that are not differentiated by parametric measures . Cognitive tests : executive functions and knowledge Response speed : Box Completion Children saw a page with 35 three - sided boxes ( Salthouse , 1994 ) , each missing a randomly chosen side . Children were instructed to ‘‘close’’ each box by drawing a line across the open side . After doing a practice row , children completed as many boxes as possible within 60 s . We report the number com - pleted within the ﬁrst 30 s , which is less affected by conﬂating variables such as vigilance , distraction , and boredom . Working memory : Memory For Names Children heard names for a series of alien creatures and then identiﬁed each alien by name ( Woodcock & Johnson , 1989 ) . After each trial , a new name was added , so memory load gradually increased . Testing continued until children exceeded a speciﬁed number of errors ( see Dean & Woodcock , 1999 ) . Inhibition ( lexical ) : Stroop Day – Night Children were instructed to say the word ‘‘day’’ when shown a picture of the moon or to say the word ‘‘night’’ when shown a picture of the sun ( Diamond , Kirkham , & Amso , 2002 ; Gerstadt et al . , 1994 ) . After completing up to 6 practice trials with feedback , children completed two blocks of 10 tri - als in quasi - random order without feedback . Inhibition ( action ) : Tapping Following Luria ( 1962 / 1966 ; see also Diamond & Taylor , 1996 ) , children were instructed to tap once ( with a plastic rod ) if the experimenter tapped twice and to tap twice if the experimenter tapped 4 CORSWOPS does not count trials in which a child repeats a response that was ﬁrst inappropriate but became appropriate after the cue switch . Even if the second response is ‘‘correct , ’’ it is not counted as a correct switch because there was no opportunity to switch correctly and no way to distinguish ﬂexible responding from perseverative responding . It is most conservative to exclude these responses entirely . Fortunately , these cases are rare ( mean = 5 . 4 % of post - switch responses overall ) and do not affect the results . 40 G . O . Deák , M . Wiseheart / Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 138 ( 2015 ) 31 – 53 once . After practice trials with feedback , children completed two blocks of 10 trials in quasi - random order without feedback . Lexical knowledge : receptive vocabulary The PPVT - 3 was administered according to standard procedures ( Dunn & Dunn , 1997 ) . Conceptual knowledge : causal inference Based on Das Gupta and Bryant ( 1989 ) , we showed children photographs ( 16 cm 2 ) that implied events in which objects underwent changes ( e . g . , broken ﬂowerpot and glued - together ﬂowerpot ) . The experimenter described the pictures in general terms ( ‘‘Look at this . First it looked like this . . . . Then I did something to it , and now it looks like this . ’’ ) . Children then were shown photographs of four possible instruments ( e . g . , hammer , light bulb , brush , glue ) and were asked to choose the one that caused the change ( ‘‘Which of these things . . . [ made ] it like this ? ’’ ) . Children completed 2 practice tri - als with feedback and then eight test problems without feedback . The latter included four easier prob - lems and four harder ones ( see Das Gupta & Bryant , 1989 ) , to increase variability . Items are described in Appendix C . Item order and picture position were randomized for every child . Scoring All responses were coded online by a second researcher . Videotapes were recoded for accuracy by an independent researcher . Online accuracy was greater than 98 % . Box Completion scores were the number of boxes ‘‘closed’’ within 30 s . Standard scoring rules were used for Memory for Names and PPVT - 3 . Total correct was calculated for Stroop Day – Night , Tapping , and causal reasoning . Results The main and replication groups performed nearly identically on all tests ( all t s < 1 . 5 ) , so they were combined in all further analyses ( N = 95 ) . There were no gender effects on any task ( all t s < 1 ) , so girls and boys were combined . Flexibility task performance Cue / rule accuracy is shown in Fig . 4 . Mean accuracy in each test was higher in Block 1 than in Blocks 2 and 3 . This could be due to limitations in ﬂexibility , increasing difﬁculty of later cues / rules , or both . All three tests show a negative quadratic trend across blocks in repeated - measures analyses of variance ( ANOVAs ) with Greenhouse – Geisser correction . The within - participants effect was signiﬁ - cant in the 3DCCS , F ( 1 . 3 , 124 ) = 38 . 4 , p < . 001 , g 2 = . 29 , in the FIM - Ob , F ( 1 . 9 , 179 ) = 16 . 8 , p < . 001 , g 2 = . 15 , and in the FIM - An , F ( 1 . 7 , 159 ) = 92 . 6 , p < . 001 , g 2 = . 50 . Although the tests were designed to have similar difﬁculty , FIM - Ob accuracy was lower ( mean cor - rect = 57 . 4 % , SD = 22 . 6 ) than FIM - An accuracy ( M = 67 . 3 % , SD = 27 . 2 % ) or 3DCCS accuracy ( M = 68 . 4 % , SD = 29 . 6 % ) , one - way ANOVA , F ( 2 , 188 ) = 10 . 6 , p < . 001 . However , this does not present a major inter - pretive problem because the mean difference is only 11 % , and variance is similar across tests , with no ceiling or ﬂoor effects . Flexibility was similar across tests ; mean CORSWOPS was 54 . 6 % in the 3DCCS ( SD = 42 . 3 % ) , 47 . 1 % in the FIM - Ob ( SD = 32 . 7 % ) , and 53 . 2 % in the FIM - An ( SD = 39 . 5 % ) , F ( 2 , 188 ) = 1 . 9 , p = . 148 , ns , one - way ANOVA . Correlations between age and ﬂexibility ( CORSWOPS ) also were similar across tests ( r = . 498 in FIM - Ob , r = . 532 in FIM - An , and r = . 500 in 3DCCS , all p s < . 001 ) . Fig . 5 shows the distribu - tion of CORSWOPS by age in each test . No test shows a nonlinear inﬂection or bimodal distribution that would indicate a qualitative shift from 3 to 4 years of age . Individual differences in ﬂexibility are also evident in qualitative response patterns . The number of children producing each of four patterns in each test , and in each pair of tests , is shown in Appendix D . The distribution differs across tests , v 2 ( df = 6 , N = 95 ) = 22 . 5 , p < . 001 . The distribution was similar in the FIM - An and 3DCCS , where 42 ( or 45 % ) of children were ﬂexible , 13 ( 14 % ) were partly ﬂexible , 25 G . O . Deák , M . Wiseheart / Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 138 ( 2015 ) 31 – 53 41 ( 29 % ) were perseverative , and 13 ( 19 % ) were indiscriminate . By contrast , in the FIM - Ob only 22 % were ﬂexible , 54 % were partly ﬂexible , and 37 % were indiscriminate , conﬁrming that this test was harder . Despite this , as described below , children tended to produce the same response pattern in both FIM tests . Coherence between ﬂexibility tasks Partial correlations , with age removed , between CORSWOPS on the three ﬂexibility tests and EF and language / knowledge test scores , are shown in Table 1 . Critical levels were set at a = . 01 to reduce test - wise Type I error rate . FIM - Ob and FIM - An were strongly related ( r Part = . 61 , p < . 001 , R 2 = . 37 ) . FIM - Ob and 3DCCS were reliably but weakly correlated ( r Part = . 27 , p = . 009 , R 2 = . 07 ) . FIM - An and 3DCCS were not signiﬁcantly related ( r Part = . 12 , p = . 255 ) . To verify the robustness of these results , we explored partial correlations using alternate measures , including number of correct switches in ﬂexibility tests uncorrected for number of opportunities , z - scores instead of totals for the inhibition tests , and raw PPVT - 3 scores . In all cases , the coefﬁcients were nearly identical and retained the same level of statistical signiﬁcance . We also tested whether verbal knowledge ( e . g . , cue / rule comprehension ) could explain the strong association between FIM tests . Partial correlations among ﬂexibility tests ( CORSWOPS ) were calcu - lated , with age , vocabulary , and correct Block 1 responses on all three tests ( indicating cue / rule com - prehension ) partialled out . The correlation between FIM tests remained strong ( r Part = . 64 , p < . 001 , R 2 = . 41 ) . The relation between FIM - Ob and 3DCCS remained reliable but weak ( r Part = . 28 , p = . 007 , Fig . 4 . Mean appropriate responses to each rule or cue in the 3DCCS , FIM - Ob , and FIM - An tests and total appropriate responses . A decline in later blocks is apparent . Error bars represent standard errors . 42 G . O . Deák , M . Wiseheart / Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 138 ( 2015 ) 31 – 53 Fig . 5 . Scatterplots of CORSWOPS in three ﬂexibility tests , with regression lines : FIM - Ob ( top ) , FIM - An ( middle ) , and 3DCCS ( bottom ) . Scoresarearrangedbyage . Thebest - ﬁttingtrendforeachtestisnearlylinear . Nodiscontinuitybetween3 - and4 - year - olds ( e . g . , perseverativevs . ﬂexible ) isevident , contrarytoapossibleinterpretationofresultsfrombinaryrule - switchingtests ( e . g . , DCCS ) . G . O . Deák , M . Wiseheart / Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 138 ( 2015 ) 31 – 53 43 R 2 = . 08 ) . The relation between FIM - An and 3DCCS remained nonsigniﬁcant ( r Part = . 08 , ns ) . These results indicate that cue comprehension cannot fully explain consistency between FIM tests . We also examined consistency in individual children’s response patterns ( ﬂexible , partly ﬂexible , perseverative , and indiscriminate ) between tests . Appendix D shows the number of children who pro - duced the same patterns on each pair of tests . On the FIM - Ob and FIM - An tests , 48 . 4 % of children ( n = 46 ) produced the same pattern—twice the percentage expected ( 24 . 7 % ) based on marginal cross - products and nearly identical to the proportion ( 50 % ) reported by Deák and Narasimham ( 2014 ) . By contrast , only 30 . 5 % of children ( n = 29 ) produced the same pattern on the FIM - Ob and 3DCCS , just slightly above the expected number ( 23 . 9 % ) . Finally , 38 . 9 % ( n = 37 ) produced the same pattern on the FIM - An and 3DCCS , also just slightly above the expected number ( 30 . 6 % ) . Thus , only the FIM tests yielded more concordant response patterns than expected . Executive function and reasoning tests Results from EF tests and language / conceptual knowledge tests are shown in Table 2 . Age was sig - niﬁcantly related to response speed , lexical and action inhibition , vWM , and causal inference . Table 1 Partial correlations , controlling for age , among ﬂexibility tests ( bold outline ) , EF measures ( Box Completion [ speed ] , Stroop Day – Night [ verbal inhibition ] , Tapping [ action inhibition ] , and Memory for Names [ working memory ] ) , and knowledge tests ( PPVT - 3 and causal inference ) . 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Causal inference 1 . FIM - Ob . 61 ⁄⁄⁄ . 27 ⁄ . 31 ⁄⁄ . 28 ⁄ . 30 ⁄⁄ . 13 . 30 ⁄⁄ . 31 ⁄⁄ 2 . FIM - An . 12 . 30 ⁄⁄ . 19 . 23 . 04 . 35 ⁄⁄⁄ . 27 ⁄ 3 . 3DCCS . 26 . 17 . 24 . 06 . 31 ⁄⁄ . 41 ⁄⁄⁄ 4 . Boxes . 16 . 07 . 08 . 07 . 21 5 . Stroop Day – Night . 43 ⁄⁄⁄ . 32 ⁄⁄ . 21 . 05 6 . Tapping . 33 ⁄⁄ . 51 ⁄⁄⁄ . 26 7 . Memories for Names . 32 ⁄⁄ – . 02 8 . PPVT - 3 . 38 ⁄⁄⁄ Note : Dependent measures ( FIM - Ob , FIM - An , and 3DCCS ) : CORSWOPS ; Boxes : boxes completed in 30 s ; Stroop Day – Night and Tapping : total correct ; Memory for Names and PPVT - 3 : standardized scores ; causal inference : total correct . * p < . 01 . * * p < . 005 . * * * p < . 001 . Table 2 Children’s performance on EF and language / conceptual knowledge tests . Test Mean score ( SD ) Correlation with age FIM - Ob predictor b FIM - An predictor b 3DCCS predictor b Response speed ( Box Completion ) 13 . 6 ( 4 . 8 ) r = . 55 p < . 001 . 22 . 29 . 18 Inhibition ( verbal ) ( Stroop Day – Night ) 13 . 4 ( 5 . 0 ) r = . 29 p = . 005 . 29 Inhibition ( action ) ( Luria Tapping ) 13 . 0 ( 5 . 7 ) r = . 63 p < . 001 . 19 . 25 Verbal working memory ( Memory for Names ) 34 . 3 ( 14 . 1 ) r = . 33 p < . 001 PPVT - 3 ( lexical knowledge ) 109 . 8 ( 12 . 5 ) r = . 16 p = . 122 . 18 . 53 Causal inference ( Das Gupta & Bryant , 1989 ) 4 . 94 ( 1 . 86 ) r = . 55 p < . 001 . 50 . 56 Note : Pearson’s correlations withageareshownwithp values . Thelastcolumns summarizeregressions ( seetext ) . Scores : boxes completed ( in 30 s ) , inhibition tests ( total correct ) , Memory for Names ( calculated score ) , PPVT - 3 ( standardized score ) , and causal inference ( total correct ) . Regression summary columns show marginal or signiﬁcant adjusted b weights ( all others ns ) . 44 G . O . Deák , M . Wiseheart / Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 138 ( 2015 ) 31 – 53 Standardized PPVT - 3 scores indicate that the sample had somewhat higher lexical knowledge than norming samples . To explore how these measures related to ﬂexibility , we ran stepwise regressions on CORSWOPS in each test , entering age and the main dependent measure from each EF or knowledge test . The criterion for entry was set at a = . 05 . For FIM - Ob , three factors signiﬁcantly and uniquely predicted ﬂexibility : causal inference ( Step 1 , b Std = . 50 , t = 5 . 3 , R 2 = . 249 , p < . 001 ) , verbal inhibition / Stroop Day – Night ( Step 2 , b Std = . 295 , t = 3 . 2 , R 2change = . 083 , p = . 002 ) , and response speed / boxes ( Step 3 , b Std = . 22 , t = 2 . 2 , p = . 031 , R 2change = . 037 , p = . 031 ) . The three - factor model accounted for R 2Adj = . 346 ( SE = . 26 ) , F ( 1 , 83 ) = 16 . 2 , p < . 001 . Two other factors were marginally signiﬁcant : vocabulary / PPVT ( b = . 182 , t = 1 . 7 , p = . 086 ) and action inhibition / Tapping ( b = . 195 , t = 1 . 7 , p = . 089 ) . For FIM - An , two factors signiﬁcantly and uniquely predicted ﬂexibility : vocabulary ( Step 1 , b Std = . 53 , t = 5 . 7 , R 2Adj = . 271 , p < . 001 ) and response speed ( Step 2 , b Std = . 29 , t = 3 . 1 , R 2change = . 075 , p < . 001 ) . The two - factor model accounted for R 2Adj = . 339 ( SE = . 319 ) , F ( 1 , 84 ) = 23 . 1 , p < . 001 . Another factor , age , was marginally signiﬁcant , b = . 215 , t = 1 . 9 , p = . 057 . For 3DCCS , two factors predicted ﬂexibility : causal inference ( Step 1 , b Std = . 56 , t = 6 . 2 , R 2Adj = . 304 , p < . 001 ) and action inhibition / Tapping ( Step 2 , b Std = . 25 , t = 2 . 5 , R 2change = . 047 , p = . 015 ) . These accounted for R 2Adj = . 344 ( SE = . 341 ) , F ( 1 , 84 ) = 23 . 5 , p < . 001 . Another factor , response speed / boxes , was marginally signiﬁcant ( b = . 184 , t = 1 . 9 , p = . 066 ) . The regression results suggest that some common predictor abilities might explain the correlation between FIM tests . To assess this , we calculated partial correlations among ﬂexibility tests ( CORSWOPS ) , removing not only age but also all factors that predicted signiﬁcant variance in multiple ﬂexibility tests : response speed , action inhibition , causal reasoning , and vocabulary . With all of these factors partialled out , the strong association between FIM tests remained ( r Part = . 63 , p < . 001 , R 2 = . 40 ) , as did the weak partial correlation between the FIM - Ob and 3DCCS tests ( r Part = . 22 , p = . 037 , R 2 = . 05 ) . The former is signiﬁcantly stronger than the latter ( z = 3 . 5 by Fisher transformation , p < . 001 ) . The correlation between FIM - An and 3DCCS remained nonsigniﬁcant ( r Part = . 03 ) . Discussion This study compared English - speaking preschool children’s performance on three ﬂexibility tests in relation to executive functions and verbal and conceptual knowledge . There was a strong correlation between two tests of ﬂexible induction of word meanings , independent of variance due to age , response speed , inhibition , or verbal knowledge . Flexibility in one cue induction test , the FIM - Ob , was also correlated with ﬂexibility in the rule - switching 3DCCS test . However , this correlation was signiﬁcantly weaker ( R 2 = . 05 ) . In addition , children tended to produce the same response patterns on both FIM tests , but were no more likely than chance to produce the same pattern on an FIM test and the 3DCCS . Thus , parametric and categorical measures both suggest that individual cue - induction ﬂexibility for word meanings was highly stable across tests , but was at best weakly related to ﬂexibility of rule switching . This was true even though the FIM - An was more similar to the 3DCCS in overall difﬁculty and in some methodological factors ( e . g . , stimulus material , stimulus domain ) . One interpretation is that some underlying capacity contributes to high individual stability of cue - induction ﬂexibility for meaning interpretation , but not to rule - switching ﬂexibility . We cannot say how general the capacity is ; it might pertain just to word meanings , or to broader semantic inferences , or perhaps to a wide variety of probabilistic cues ( e . g . , nonverbal behaviors ) . Regardless , the results show that it is inappropriate to treat a single test of ﬂexibility in children as measuring some general capacity . This conﬁrms other recent evidence ; Ramscar and colleagues ( 2013 ) showed that at least two processes contribute to children’s rule - switching ﬂexibility , explain - ing why different DCCS versions yield different results ( e . g . , Perner & Lang , 2002 ) . In addition , adult studies suggest that ﬂexibility is task dependent ( e . g . , Kim et al . , 2011 ; Luwel et al . , 2003 ; Ravizza & Carter , 2008 ) . G . O . Deák , M . Wiseheart / Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 138 ( 2015 ) 31 – 53 45 Could the correlation between FIM - An and FIM - Ob ﬂexibility be due to shared method variance instead of cue - induction ﬂexibility ? We cannot rule this out entirely , but it is noteworthy that all stimulus items , the stimulus medium ( pictures vs . objects ) , key stimulus properties , verbal cues , the content domain , and the words themselves were all entirely different between tests . In addition , the tests were administered on different days by different experimenters in a different visual envi - ronment . Thus , many aspects of the test were changed . However , some aspects were similar across FIM tests : on every trial , the experimenter presented a novel multidimensional stimulus , told the child a new fact about it ( including a novel word ) , and asked the child to generalize the word to one of four other stimuli . These methodological similarities might have contributed to the between - test correlation . It will require further investigation to completely separate the causes of shared variance . However , even if some portion of shared variance is due to shared methods vari - ance , that would strengthen one conclusion from this study : that cognitive ﬂexibility cannot be con - sidered a global executive capacity in children and should not be estimated from a single test measure . After all , when intercorrelated factors are partialled out , even the FIM tests share less than 40 % of variance . Relations to executive functions The results also address how several EFs ( processing speed , inhibition , and vWM ) relate to chil - dren’s ﬂexibility . If any EF had a consistent relation with all ﬂexibility tests , it would suggest a stable underlying factor or contributor to task - general ﬂexibility processes ( Miyake et al . , 2000 ) . The results are equivocal in this regard : on one hand , regression analyses showed a different subset of predictors of each ﬂexibility test , failing to conﬁrm a general processing model . On the other hand , response speed was a signiﬁcant or marginal unique predictor of ﬂexibility in all three tests . This supports the view that processing speed is a general predictor of higher order cognitive and linguistic processes and ﬂuid intelligence ( e . g . , Kail & Hall , 1994 ; Li et al . , 2004 ; Salthouse , Fristoe , McGuthry , & Hambrick , 1998 ) . Notably , it is also a predictor of older children’s cognitive ﬂexibility , at least in rule - switching tests ( Cepeda et al . , 2000 ) . A recent study ( Holt & Deák , 2015 ) extended this ﬁnding to preschool - aged children . However , in the current study , response speed in a visuomotor test ( Box Completion ) only marginally predicted rule - switching ﬂexibility . Similarly , Cepeda and Munakata ( 2007 ) did not ﬁnd that 5 - and 6 - year - olds’ speed uniquely predicted ﬂexibility in a computerized 3DCCS test . Thus , even the relation between response speed and rule switching is not consistent across studies . Because stud - ies have used different measures of speed and ﬂexibility as well as different ages , it is currently impos - sible to determine why this is so . That would require a study with multiple measures of both factors with varied task demands . Cognitive inhibition has been hypothesized to contribute to cognitive ﬂexibility . However , the current results suggest that children’s ﬂexibility is not restricted by their ability to inhibit verbal associations or responses . The Stroop Day – Night test , which requires inhibiting and reversing verbal associations ( Simpson & Riggs , 2005 ) , predicted 8 % of variance in FIM - Ob and did not predict unique FIM - An or 3DCCS variance . Deák and Narasimham ( 2003 , 2014 ) found no relation between the Stroop Day – Night test and the FIM - Ob or FIM - An test . Because the current ﬁnding of a weak but reliable correlation between the Stroop Day – Night and FIM - Ob tests is inconsistent with those pre - vious results , it might indicate a context - speciﬁc association , or sampling or Type I error . Regardless , the sum of available evidence does not suggest that verbal inhibition is a limiting factor in young children’s ﬂexibility . Luria’s Tapping test , which requires children to inhibit action imitation , was a reliable but minor predictor ( R 2 = . 05 ) of 3DCCS ﬂexibility and a marginal predictor of FIM - Ob ﬂexibility . In spite of this , there are limitations to inhibition - based accounts of cognitive ﬂexibility . One is that cognitive inhibi - tion itself might not be a coherent trait . Although the Stroop Day – Night and Tapping tests were cor - related in the current data ( see also Montgomery & Koeltzow , 2010 ) , they shared only 18 % of variance , suggesting mostly non - shared rather than shared processes . This conﬁrms other evidence that chil - dren’s performance varies considerably across inhibition tests ( Carlson et al . , 2002 ) . One possible explanation is that there are multiple inhibitory processes that are all elicited to varying degrees by different tests of inhibition and ( less directly ) by different tests of ﬂexibility , such that the association 46 G . O . Deák , M . Wiseheart / Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 138 ( 2015 ) 31 – 53 between any two tests cannot currently be predicted . This hypothesis has not been explored , but it is consistent with existing evidence ( Blackwell , Chatham , Wiseheart , & Munakata , 2014 ; Cepeda et al . , 2000 ; Holt & Deák , 2015 ) . In addition , although Zelazo and colleagues ( 2003 ) claimed that negative priming , an inhibitory process , affects preschoolers’ rule switching , Ramscar and colleagues ( 2013 ) showed that the relevant ﬁndings can be explained by associative learning processes . In sum , previous and current results do not point to a clear speciﬁc causal relation between developing inhibitory mechanisms and children’s cognitive ﬂexibility . Recent evidence has suggested a relation between vWM efﬁciency and cognitive ﬂexibility in children as well as adults ( Cepeda & Munakata , 2007 ; Gruber & Goschke , 2004 ; Holt & Deák , 2015 ; Schneider & Logan , 2009 ) . However , we found no relation between Memory for Names per - formance and any ﬂexibility measure . This is notable because the FIM tests could require vWM for novel words , and the 3DCCS requires vWM for the current rule . Yet these negative results con - verge with prior ﬁndings that children’s vWM capacity does not predict their ﬂexibility in verbally cued tests ( Deák & Narasimham , 2003 ; Zelazo et al . , 2003 ) . One possible reason for these negative ﬁndings is that vWM capacity is dissociated from vWM efﬁciency or speciﬁcity of retrieval and / or maintenance ( e . g . , Postle , Berger , & D’Esposito , 1999 ) . It seems that children’s cognitive ﬂexibility is unrelated to variability in vWM capacity , but perhaps it is still somehow related to vWM efﬁ - ciency or speciﬁcity . A question for future study is whether cue - induction ﬂexibility and rule - switching ﬂexibility are equally sensitive to differences in vWM processes related to updating , maintenance , or retrieval . Relations to knowledge Cognitive ﬂexibility is critical for everyday language use ( Deák , 2003 ) and requires semantic knowledge , at least when task cues are linguistic ( see Hermer - Vazquez et al . , 2001 ) . The ﬂexibility tests used here required comprehension of , and response to , verbal cues . Thus , any correlations between ﬂexibility tests could have been due to receptive language knowledge . To test this , receptive vocabulary was assessed ( Sattler , 2002 ) . PPVT - 3 vocabulary predicted 27 % of variance in FIM - An ﬂex - ibility and marginally predicted FIM - Ob ﬂexibility . Deák and Narasimham ( 2003 ) also found a margin - ally signiﬁcant relation of vocabulary with FIM - Ob ﬂexibility , but a nonsigniﬁcant ( positive ) correlation with FIM - An ﬂexibility . Thus , there is some converging evidence that individual differ - ences in receptive vocabulary predict children’s word - induction ﬂexibility . However , even with vocab - ulary partialled out—along with accuracy in the ﬁrst blocks of ﬂexibility tests—a strong correlation remained between FIM tests , suggesting that verbal knowledge did not mediate the association . This is not too surprising , as cues and rules were chosen to be comprehensible to typical 3 - year - olds . Still , differences in children’s certainty or speed of cue / rule processing might have affected their ability to use cues ﬂexibly . However , the results do not support this hypothesis . Another interpretation of the correlation between vocabulary and FIM scores is that word - learning ﬂexibility makes a small but cumulative contribution to children’s vocabulary . That is , children who can more ﬂexibly select changeable , probabilistic contextual cues to infer novel word meanings might acquire new words faster , all else being equal , than less ﬂexible children . It is also possible that conceptual knowledge contributes to cognitive ﬂexibility . This hypothesis has received little attention ( but see Bilalic , McLeod , & Gobet , 2008 ) . A test of causal inferences of object effects ( Das Gupta & Bryant , 1989 ) , with no ﬂexibility demands and minimal verbal demands , uniquely predicted ﬂexibility in the FIM - Ob and 3DCCS . This is not predicted by current accounts ( Deák , 2003 ; Zelazo et al . , 2003 ) . How can we explain it ? One possibility is that all three tests share a demand to select one abstract similarity , out of sev - eral compelling options , that is most relevant to the given problem , and to ignore at least two con - ﬂicting options . The selections cannot rely on habitual responses or repetition , but require trial - by - trial inductive reasoning . Children might vary in this capacity , which is consistent with a description of ‘‘ﬂuid intelligence’’ by Horn and Cattell ( 1966 ) : ‘‘perceiving relations , educing corre - lates , maintaining . . . awareness in reasoning , and abstracting . . . ﬁgural , symbolic , and semantic content’’ ( p . 268 ) . Although this explanation is descriptive rather than explanatory , it points to other relevant efforts to elucidate the relation between concepts of ﬂuid intelligence and executive G . O . Deák , M . Wiseheart / Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 138 ( 2015 ) 31 – 53 47 functions ( e . g . , Decker , Hill , & Dean , 2007 ; Kane & Engle , 2002 ) . These efforts have yet to extend to research on the development of cognitive ﬂexibility , but the current result suggests that this might be a fruitful research direction . However , note that the causal inference test was not signiﬁcantly correlated with the FIM - An test , so the ﬁnding might not be very general . In addition , when causal inference scores were partialled out , the association between the FIM tests remained strong , so it cannot fully explain the between - test coherence . General implications An interpretation consistent with all available data is that children’s ﬂexibility is determined by multiple factors , including ( a ) processing factors related to task type , for example , cue induction for inferences of meaning , or rule switching ; ( b ) subtask - speciﬁc factors ( e . g . , understanding speciﬁc cues or rules ; Munakata & Yerys , 2001 ) ; ( c ) cognitive moderators , including response speed ( Cepeda , Blackwell , & Munakata , 2013 ; Cepeda et al . , 2001 ) , working memory efﬁciency ( Cepeda & Munakata , 2007 ; Holt & Deák , 2015 ) , and possibly ( d ) a faculty for selecting abstract relations for novel inferences ( i . e . , ‘‘ﬂuid intelligence’’ ) . These factors together predict considerable variability in chil - dren’s ﬂexibility . The current results also conﬁrm that children should not be classiﬁed simply as ‘‘ﬂexible’’ or ‘‘per - severative . ’’ That dichotomy is an artifact of low - sensitivity test paradigms ( e . g . , DCCS ) . Young chil - dren , like adults , produce distinct perseverative and indiscriminate error patterns . Barceló and Knight ( 2002 ) speculated that adult frontal patients’ indiscriminate errors are related to working memory inefﬁciency , but it remains to be determined whether children produce indiscriminate response patterns due to inefﬁcient vWM . However , most children ( 80 % ) did not produce the same pattern on all three tests , suggesting that children’s performance on a given ﬂexibility test cannot be assumed to indicate a generalized deﬁcit or immaturity . The results also disconﬁrm an impression from the literature that cognitive ﬂexibility improves qualitatively between 3 and 4 years of age . All three ﬂexibility tests show a positive age - related trend that was nearly linear , with no inﬂections or discontinuity ( Fig . 5 ) . In addition , there was high inter - individual variability at any age stratum . Thus , although age predicts ﬂexibility , it is a poor pre - dictor by itself . The results leave unanswered questions for future research . One limitation is that this sample was restricted to healthy , English - speaking , middle - class North American children . It is unknown whether the results generalize to other populations . In addition , we could not collect response times , eye movements , or physiological measures ( e . g . , electroencephalogram , EEG ) that might reveal sub - tler but potentially predictive indicators of age and individual differences . A third limitation is that we used only single measures of executive functions ( e . g . , response speed , action inhibition ) . Single measures are nonoptimal because any single test brings idiosyncratic measurement error ; a latent variables approach is preferable . The current results , therefore , provide suggestions for future inves - tigations rather than generalizable estimates of the associations among latent cognitive factors . Another limitation is that in all three ﬂexibility tests the cue / rule order got progressively harder . Although this made between - test individual differences interpretable , it introduces the possibility that the results will not generalize to other subtask orders ( e . g . , hard - to - easy test situations ) . However , Deák and Narasimham ( 2014 ) also found a strong correlation between the FIM - An and FIM - Ob tests without this constraint . Nonetheless , order - speciﬁc between - test correlations should be evaluated in future studies . Finally , in future studies it would be ideal to obtain independent esti - mates of each child’s comprehension of each cue or rule . Although adequate cue - comprehension estimates are almost never obtained in studies of children’s EF or cognitive ﬂexibility , they provide important information ( Munakata & Yerys , 2001 ) . Fortunately , the correlation between FIM tests persisted when Block 1 accuracy ( an index of cue comprehension ) and vocabulary were partialled out , indicating that these were not determining factors . This result , therefore , conﬁrms very limited cross - test consistency of ﬂexibility in young children , particularly in cue - based induction of word meanings . 48 G . O . Deák , M . Wiseheart / Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 138 ( 2015 ) 31 – 53 Acknowledgments This work was supported by grants from the National Science Foundation ( NSF - BCS0902027 ) and from the UCSD Academic Senate to G . Deák . Thanks go to Elaine Blank , Sean Marco , Ali Moeller , Sam Sedlik , Mieke VanderBourght , Cherry Vu , and Rachel Weisser for assistance in data collection and cod - ing . Thanks also go to Gabriel Catalano and Annelise d’Souza for helpful comments on earlier drafts . Special thanks go to all of the children who participated . Appendix A . Test order in main sample and replication sample Main sample Session 1 Session 2 Session 3 [ Matching game ] Luria Tapping Box Completion 3DCCS FIM - Ob Stroop Day – Night [ Flexible Tool - Use test ] PPVT - 3 FIM - An ID ( Contents 1 ) ID ( Words ) ID ( Object 1 , then Color ) Memory for Names Causal reasoning ID ( Contents 2 ) ID ( Object 2 ) Replication sample Stroop Day – Night Memory for Names Luria Tapping PPVT - 3 [ Flexible Tool - Use test ] FIM - Ob Box Completion ID ( Object 2 ) [ Matching game ] ID ( Color ) Causal reasoning ID ( Words ) FIM - An 3DCCS ID ( Object 1 ) ID ( Contents 2 ) Note : The number of tests is not matched across days because the tests varied widely in duration ( e . g . , from 1 – 3 min for ID test to > 20 min for FIM - Ob test ) . ID , Indeterminacy detection . Appendix B . Key instructions in the cognitive ﬂexibility tests Test Instruction FIM - Ob initial instruction ‘‘First look at this one [ E is holding standard up for child to see ] . Let me tell you something about it . This one is made of [ Word 1 ] . See , it’s made of [ Word 1 ] . Now look at these [ second experimenter hands ﬁrst experimenter the ﬁrst box of objects with the lid already removed ] . Can you ﬁnd me another one that is made of [ Word 1 ] just like this one ? [ E holds up standard when she says ‘‘just like this one’’ and keeps it held above the comparison objects ] . ’’ Switch instruction ( example ) ‘‘Now I am going to show you these things again , but I am going to tell you something new about them . Remember this one ? [ touching standard ] . Let me tell you something new about it . This one is shaped like a ( n ) [ Word 2 ] . See , it’s shaped like a ( n ) [ Word 2 ] . Now look at these [ presenting comparison objects ] . Can you ﬁnd me another one that is shaped like a ( n ) [ Word 2 ] just like this one ? ’’ ( continued on next page ) G . O . Deák , M . Wiseheart / Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 138 ( 2015 ) 31 – 53 49 Appendix B ( continued ) Test Instruction FIM - An initial instruction ‘‘Now we are going to play a game with some cool pictures of space creatures . I am going to show you some pictures , and then I am going to tell you something about them . Let’s try it ! [ placing standard picture ] . See this one ? This one is a ( n ) [ Word 1 ] . See , he is a ( n ) [ Word 1 ] . Now let me show you some more pictures [ placing comparison pictures ] . Can you ﬁnd me another one that is a [ Word 1 ] just like this one ? ’’ Switch instruction ( example ) ‘‘Now I am going to tell you something new about these creatures . Are you ready ? Look at this one [ placing standard ] . Remember this one ? This one is holding a ( n ) [ Word 2 ] . See , he is holding a ( n ) [ Word 2 ] . Now look at these [ placing comparison pictures ] . Can you ﬁnd me another one that is holding a ( n ) [ Word 2 ] just like this one ? ’’ 3DCCS initial instruction ‘‘Now we are going to play the animal game . Let me tell you how to play the animal game . In the animal game , all dogs go in here , all ﬁsh go in here , and all birds go in here [ pointing ] . So , do you see this picture of a dog here ? That’s to remind you that all dogs go in here . And do you see this picture of a ﬁsh . . . [ etc . ] ? So , all dogs go in here , all ﬁsh go in here , and all birds go in here . Are you ready to play the animal game ? ’’ Switch instruction ( example ) ‘‘Are you ready to play a new game ? We’re going to play the color game . Let me tell you how to play the color game . In the color game , all blue things go in here , all red things go in here , and . . . [ pointing ] . So , do you see this blue thing here ? That’s to remind you that all blue things go in here . Do you see this red thing . . . [ etc . ] ? So , all blue things go in here , all red things go in here , and all yellow things go in here . Are you ready to play the color game ? ’’ Appendix C . Items in causal inference test Pre ? Post event photographs Choices Practice problems tomato ? sliced tomato WHISK , SPATULA , MEASURING CUPS , KNIFE torn shirt ? sewn shirt TEAPOT , ROLLERSKATE , MUG , NEEDLE / THREAD Test problems : Easier spilled dirt ? swept dirt CHAIR , TISSUE , CLOCK , BROOM raw egg ? cooked egg BLENDER , DRYING RACK , NAPKIN HOLDER , STOVE messy hair ? brushed hair SPONGE , TOOTHBRUSH , ROLLING PIN , HAIRBRUSH torn paper ? taped paper KEYS , TOY BLOCKS , CRAYONS , TAPE Test problems : Harder wet plate ? dry plate SINK , MICROWAVE , CALCULATOR , TOWEL chalkboard with writing ? erased board CHALK , SCISSORS , STAPLER , ERASER broken ﬂowerpot ? ﬁxed pot HAMMER , LIGHT BULB , PAINT BRUSH , GLUE dirty shirt ? clean shirt KETCHUP , PURSE , IRON , DETERGENT Note . Based on Das Gupta and Bryant ( 1989 ) . 50 G . O . Deák , M . Wiseheart / Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 138 ( 2015 ) 31 – 53 Appendix D . Cross tabulation of individual response patterns in the FIM - Ob , FIM - An , and 3DCCS Note : Cells on concordant diagonal , indicating numbers of children who produced the same pattern on both tasks , are indicated in bold . References Ackerman , P . L . ( 1988 ) . Determinants of individual differences during skill acquisition : Cognitive abilities and information processing . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 117 , 288 – 318 . Baddeley , A . , Chincotta , D . , & Adlam , A . ( 2001 ) . Working memory and the control of action : Evidence from task switching . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 130 , 641 – 657 . Barceló , F . , & Knight , R . T . ( 2002 ) . Both random and perseverative errors underlie WCST deﬁcits in prefrontal patients . Neuropsychologia , 40 , 349 – 356 . Barkley , R . ( 2012 ) . Executive functions : What they are , how they work , and why they evolved . New York : Guilford . Barlowe , W . , & Summer , I . ( 1979 ) . Barlowe’s guide to extraterrestrials . New York : Workman . Bilalic´ , M . , McLeod , P . , & Gobet , F . ( 2008 ) . Inﬂexibility of experts—reality or myth ? Quantifying the Einstellung effect in chess masters . Cognitive Psychology , 56 , 73 – 102 . Blackwell , K . A . , Chatham , C . H . , Wiseheart , M . , & Munakata , Y . ( 2014 ) . A developmental window into trade - offs in executive function : The case of task switching versus response inhibition in 6 - year - olds . Neuropsychologia , 62 , 356 – 364 . Blaye , A . , Bernard - Peyron , V . , Paour , J . L . , & Bonthoux , F . ( 2006 ) . Categorical ﬂexibility in children : Distinguishing response ﬂexibility from conceptual ﬂexibility—The protracted development of taxonomic representations . European Journal of Developmental Psychology , 3 , 163 – 188 . Blaye , A . , & Bonthoux , F . ( 2001 ) . Thematic and taxonomic relations in preschoolers : The development of ﬂexibility in categorization choices . British Journal of Developmental Psychology , 19 , 395 – 412 . G . O . Deák , M . Wiseheart / Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 138 ( 2015 ) 31 – 53 51 Bohlmann , N . L . , & Fenson , L . ( 2005 ) . The effects of feedback on perseverative errors in preschool aged children . Journal of Cognition and Development , 6 , 119 – 131 . Burgess , P . W . , Alderman , N . , Forbes , C . , Costello , A . , Coates , L . M . , Dawson , D . R . , et al ( 2006 ) . The case for the development and use of ‘‘ecologically valid’’ measures of executive function in experimental and clinical neuropsychology . Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society , 12 , 194 – 209 . Carlson , S . M . ( 2005 ) . Developmentally sensitive measures of executive function in preschool children . Developmental Neuropsychology , 28 , 595 – 616 . Carlson , S . M . , Moses , L . J . , & Breton , C . ( 2002 ) . How speciﬁc is the relation between executive function and theory of mind ? Contributions of inhibitory control and working memory . Infant and Child Development , 11 , 73 – 92 . Cartwright , K . B . , Marshall , T . R . , Dandy , K . L . , & Isaac , M . C . ( 2010 ) . The development of graphophonological – semantic cognitive ﬂexibility and its contribution to reading comprehension in beginning readers . Journal of Cognition and Development , 11 , 61 – 85 . Centers for Disease Control . ( 2013 , December ) . Births : Final data for 2012 . National Vital Statistics Reports . Available online : < http : / / www . cdc . gov / nchs / data / nvsr / nvsr62 / nvsr62 _ 09 . pdf > . Cepeda , N . J . , Blackwell , K . A . , & Munakata , Y . ( 2013 ) . Speed isn’t everything : Complex processing speed measures mask individual differences and developmental changes in executive control . Developmental Science , 16 , 269 – 286 . Cepeda , N . J . , Cepeda , M . L . , & Kramer , A . F . ( 2000 ) . Task switching and attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder . Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology , 28 , 213 – 226 . Cepeda , N . J . , Kramer , A . F . , & Gonzalez de Sather , J . C . ( 2001 ) . Changes in executive control across the life - span : Examination of task switching performance . Developmental Psychology , 37 , 715 – 730 . Cepeda , N . J . , & Munakata , Y . ( 2007 ) . Why do children perseverate when they seem to know better : Graded working memory or directed inhibition ? Psychonomic Bulletin and Review , 14 , 1058 – 1065 . Chen , Z . ( 1999 ) . Schema induction in children’s analogical problem solving . Journal of Educational Psychology , 91 , 703 – 715 . Das Gupta , P . , & Bryant , P . E . ( 1989 ) . Young children’s causal inferences . Child Development , 60 , 1138 – 1146 . Davidson , M . C . , Amso , D . , Anderson , L . C . , & Diamond , A . ( 2006 ) . Development of cognitive control and executive functions from 4 to 13 years : Evidence from manipulations of memory , inhibition , and task switching . Neuropsychologia , 44 , 2037 – 2078 . Deák , G . O . ( 2000 ) . The growth of ﬂexible problem solving : Preschool children use changing verbal cues to infer multiple word meanings . Journal of Cognition and Development , 1 , 157 – 191 . Deák , G . O . ( 2003 ) . The development of cognitive ﬂexibility and language abilities . In R . Kail ( Ed . ) . Advances in child development and behavior ( Vol . 31 , pp . 271 – 327 ) . San Diego : Academic Press . Deák , G . O . , & Boddupalli , G . ( 2015 ) . Flexible reasoning about object functions by young children . San Diego : University of California . Deák , G . O . , & Enright , B . ( 2006 ) . Choose and choose again : Appearance – reality errors and the logic of questioning . Developmental Science , 9 , 323 – 333 . Deák , G . O . , & Narasimham , G . ( 2003 ) . Is perseveration caused by inhibition failure ? Evidence from preschool inferences about word meanings . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 86 , 194 – 222 . Deák , G . O . , & Narasimham , G . ( 2014 ) . Young children’s ﬂexible use of semantic cues to word meanings : Converging evidence of individual and age differences . Journal of Child Language , 41 , 511 – 542 . Deák , G . O . , Ray , S . D . , & Pick , A . D . ( 2004 ) . Effects of age , reminders , and task difﬁculty on young children’s rule - switching ﬂexibility . Cognitive Development , 19 , 385 – 400 . Dean , R . S . , & Woodcock , R . W . ( 1999 ) . The WJ - R and Batería - R in neuropsychological assessment ( Research Report No . 3 ) . Itasca , IL : Riverside . Decker , S . L . , Hill , S . K . , & Dean , R . S . ( 2007 ) . Evidence of construct similarity in executive functions and ﬂuid reasoning abilities . International Journal of Neuroscience , 117 , 735 – 748 . Diamond , A . , Kirkham , N . , & Amso , D . ( 2002 ) . Conditions under which young children can hold two rules in mind and inhibit a prepotent response . Developmental Psychology , 38 , 352 – 362 . Diamond , A . , & Taylor , C . ( 1996 ) . Development of an aspect of executive control : Development of the abilities to remember what I said and to ‘‘Do as I say , not as I do’’ . Developmental Psychobiology , 29 , 315 – 334 . Dunn , L . M . , & Dunn , L . M . ( 1997 ) . Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test - Third Edition . Circle Pines , MN : American Guidance Service . Ellefson , M . R . , Shapiro , L . R . , & Chater , N . ( 2006 ) . Asymmetrical switch costs in children . Cognitive Development , 21 , 108 – 130 . Engle , R . W . , & Kane , M . J . ( 2004 ) . Executive attention , working memory capacity , and a two - factor theory of cognitive control . Psychology of Learning and Motivation , 44 , 145 – 200 . Eslinger , P . J . , & Grattan , L . M . ( 1993 ) . Frontal lobe and frontal – striatal substrates for different forms of human cognitive ﬂexibility . Neuropsychologia , 31 , 17 – 28 . Frank , M . J . , O’Reilly , R . C . , & Curran , T . ( 2006 ) . When memory fails , intuition reigns : Midazolam enhances implicit inference in humans . Psychological Science , 17 , 700 – 707 . Friedman , N . P . , Miyake , A . , Young , S . E . , DeFries , J . C . , Corley , R . P . , & Hewitt , J . K . ( 2008 ) . Individual differences in executive functions are almost entirely genetic in origin . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 137 , 201 – 225 . Gerstadt , C . L . , Hong , Y . J . , & Diamond , A . ( 1994 ) . The relationship between cognition and action : Performance of children 3½ – 7 years old on a Stroop - like Day - Night test . Cognition , 53 , 129 – 153 . Gruber , O . , & Goschke , T . ( 2004 ) . Executive control emerging from dynamic interactions between brain systems mediating language , working memory , and attentional processes . Acta Psychologica , 115 , 105 – 121 . Hermer - Vazquez , L . , Moffet , A . , & Munkholm , P . ( 2001 ) . Language , space , and the development of cognitive ﬂexibility in humans : The case of two spatial memory tasks . Cognition , 79 , 263 – 299 . Holt , A . E . , & Deák , G . O . ( 2015 ) . Children’s task - switching : Missing our cue ? Journal of Cognition and Development , 16 , 261 – 285 . Horn , J . L . , & Cattell , R . B . ( 1966 ) . Reﬁnement and test of the theory of ﬂuid and crystallized general intelligences . Journal of Educational Psychology , 57 , 253 – 270 . Humphreys , L . G . ( 1979 ) . The construct of general intelligence . Intelligence , 3 , 105 – 120 . Ionescu , T . ( 2012 ) . Exploring the nature of cognitive ﬂexibility . New Ideas in Psychology , 30 , 190 – 200 . 52 G . O . Deák , M . Wiseheart / Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 138 ( 2015 ) 31 – 53 Jurado , M . B . , & Rosselli , M . ( 2007 ) . The elusive nature of executive functions : A review of our current understanding . Neuropsychology Review , 17 , 213 – 233 . Kail , R . ( 1991 ) . Processing speed declines exponentially during childhood and adolescence . Developmental Psychology , 27 , 259 – 266 . Kail , R . , & Hall , L . K . ( 1994 ) . Processing speed , naming speed , and reading . Developmental Psychology , 30 , 949 – 954 . Kane , M . J . , & Engle , R . W . ( 2002 ) . The role of prefrontal cortex in working - memory capacity , executive attention , and general ﬂuid intelligence : An individual - differences perspective . Psychonomic Bulletin and Review , 9 , 637 – 671 . Kim , C . , Johnson , N . F . , Cilles , S . E . , & Gold , B . T . ( 2011 ) . Common and distinct mechanisms of cognitive ﬂexibility in prefrontal cortex . Journal of Neuroscience , 31 , 4771 – 4779 . Klahr , D . , & Chen , Z . ( 2003 ) . Overcoming the positive - capture strategy in young children : Learning about indeterminacy . Child Development , 74 , 1275 – 1296 . Knuth , E . J . , Alibali , M . W . , McNeil , N . M . , Weinberg , A . , & Stephens , A . C . ( 2011 ) . Middle school students’ understanding of core algebraic concepts : Equivalence + variable . In J . Cai & E . J . Knuth ( Eds . ) , Early algebraization ( pp . 259 – 276 ) . Berlin : Springer . Kramer , A . F . , Cepeda , N . J . , & Cepeda , M . L . ( 2001 ) . Methylphenidate effects on task - switching performance in attention - deﬁcit / hyperactivity disorder . Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry , 40 , 1277 – 1284 . Li , S . , Lindenberger , U . , Hommel , B . , Aschersleben , G . , Prinz , W . , & Baltes , P . B . ( 2004 ) . Transformations in the couplings among intellectual abilities and constituent cognitive processes across the life span . Psychological Science , 15 , 155 – 163 . Luria , A . R . ( 1966 ) . Higher cortical functions in man ( B . Haigh , Trans . ) . New York : Basic Books . ( Original work published 1962 ) . Luwel , K . , Verschaffel , L . , Onghena , P . , & De Corte , E . ( 2003 ) . Strategic aspects of numerosity judgment : The effect of task characteristics . Experimental Psychology , 50 , 63 – 75 . Martin , M . M . , & Rubin , R . B . ( 1995 ) . A new measure of cognitive ﬂexibility . Psychological Reports , 76 , 623 – 626 . Miyake , A . , Friedman , N . P . , Emerson , M . J . , Witzki , A . H . , Howerter , A . , & Wager , T . D . ( 2000 ) . The unity and diversity of executive functions and their contributions to complex ‘‘frontal lobe’’ tasks : A latent variable analysis . Cognitive Psychology , 41 , 49 – 100 . Montgomery , D . E . , & Koeltzow , T . E . ( 2010 ) . A review of the Day - Night task : The Stroop paradigm and interference control in young children . Developmental Review , 30 , 308 – 330 . Munakata , Y . , & Yerys , B . E . ( 2001 ) . All together now : When dissociations between knowledge and action disappear . Psychological Science , 12 , 335 – 337 . Narasimham , G . , Deák , G . O . , & Wiseheart , M . ( 2015 ) . Measuring age and individual variability in rule - switching ﬂexibility : The Three Dimension Changes Card Sorting test ( 3DCCS ) . Vanderbilt University . Nguyen , S . P . , & Murphy , G . L . ( 2003 ) . An apple is more than just a fruit : Cross - classiﬁcation in children’s concepts . Child Development , 74 , 1783 – 1806 . O’Reilly , R . , & Frank , M . ( 2006 ) . Making working memory work : A computational model of learning in the prefrontal cortex and basal ganglia . Neural Computation , 18 , 283 – 328 . Perner , J . , & Lang , B . ( 2002 ) . What causes 3 - year - olds’ difﬁculty on the Dimensional Change Card Sorting task ? Infant and Child Development , 11 , 93 – 105 . Postle , B . R . , Berger , J . S . , & D’Esposito , M . ( 1999 ) . Functional neuroanatomical double dissociation of mnemonic and executive control processes contributing to working memory performance . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 96 , 12959 – 12964 . Ramscar , M . , Dye , M . , Gustafson , J . W . , & Klein , J . ( 2013 ) . Dual routes to cognitive ﬂexibility : Learning and response conﬂict resolution in the Dimensional Change Card Sort task . Child Development , 84 , 1308 – 1323 . Ravizza , S . M . , & Carter , C . S . ( 2008 ) . Shifting set about task switching : Behavioral and neural evidence for distinct forms of cognitive ﬂexibility . Neuropsychologia , 46 , 2924 – 2935 . Salthouse , T . A . ( 1994 ) . The nature of the inﬂuence of speed on adult age differences in cognition . Developmental Psychology , 30 , 240 – 259 . Salthouse , T . A . , Fristoe , N . , McGuthry , K . E . , & Hambrick , D . Z . ( 1998 ) . Relation of task switching to speed , age , and ﬂuid intelligence . Psychology and Aging , 13 , 445 – 461 . Sattler , J . M . ( 2002 ) . Assessment of children ( 4th ed . ) . La Mesa , CA : Sattler . Schneider , D . W . , & Logan , G . D . ( 2009 ) . Selecting a response in task switching : Testing a model of compound cue retrieval . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 35 , 122 – 136 . Simpson , A . , & Riggs , K . J . ( 2005 ) . Factors responsible for performance on the Day - Night task : Response set or semantics ? Developmental Science , 8 , 360 – 371 . Smith , S . M . , & Blankenship , S . E . ( 1991 ) . Incubation and the persistence of ﬁxation in problem solving . American Journal of Psychology , 104 , 61 – 87 . Thompson - Schill , S . , Ramscar , M . , & Evangelia , C . ( 2009 ) . Cognition without control : When a little frontal lobe goes a long way . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 8 , 259 – 263 . Woodcock , R . W . , & Johnson , M . B . ( 1989 ) . Woodcock - Johnson psychoeducational battery - revised . Allen , TX : DLM Teaching Resources . Zelazo , P . D . ( 2006 ) . The Dimensional Change Card Sort ( DCCS ) : A method of assessing executive function in children . Nature Protocols , 1 , 297 – 301 . Zelazo , P . D . , Müller , U . , Frye , D . , & Marcovitch , S . ( 2003 ) . The development of executive function in early childhood . Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development , 68 ( 3 , Serial No . 274 ) . Zelazo , P . D . , & Frye , D . ( 1998 ) . Cognitive complexity and control : II . The development of executive function in childhood . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 7 , 121 – 126 . Zelazo , P . D . , Frye , D . , & Rapus , T . ( 1996 ) . An age - related dissociation between knowing rules and using them . Cognitive Development , 11 , 37 – 63 . G . O . Deák , M . Wiseheart / Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 138 ( 2015 ) 31 – 53 53