The integrity of the actin cytoskeleton is essential for cells to form and maintain their shape and structure . The remodelling of the cytoskeleton in dynamic cellular processes produces changes in cell shape and motility in response to external stimuli , and is therefore involved in signal transduction . These features of the actin cytoskeleton are regulated by a cohort of actin - binding proteins ( ABPs ) , which were initially considered to be structural components that organize a stable actin cytoskeleton , but are now known to be regulators of cellu - lar dynamics and key components of signalling processes . Our increasing understanding of actin dynamics has revealed the biological complexity of cell behaviour and prompted us to investigate cell functions in a whole tis - sue or organ . For instance , actin dynamics are required for the absorptive function of the intestinal epithelium , for mechanosensing in the inner ear , for orientated nerve and capillary growth , and during defence processes that involve PHAGOCYTOSIS , migration and the activation of immunologically competent cells . The actin cytoskeleton is also essential for cell - motility events that are required for normal organogenesis and that occur in pathophysiological processes such as wound repair or tumour - cell migration ( metastasis ) . In this review , we tackle the issue of the complexity of the actin cytoskeleton in plasma - membrane special - izations , as well as actin dynamics and their regulation by ABPs . We first describe the structure of different actin networks that support cellular specializations , and then focus on the ABPs that are implicated in these networks , illustrating their roles and regulation both in actin orga - nization and in the integration of signals that lead to actin dynamics ( BOX 1 ) . Surface specializations and underlying networks Differentiated cells have morphological features that cor - relate with their specialized functions in the organs and organisms that they are part of . These features include membrane protrusions such as MICROVILLI , STEREOCILIA , bristles , FILOPODIA and LAMELLIPODIA , which are all formed and maintained by the underlying actin cytoskeleton ( FIG . 1 ) . Microvilli and microvilli - like structures are observed in a variety of polarized cells such as intestinal epithelial cells , kidney cells , hepatocytes and SCHWANN CELLS , but also are present in lymphocytes . Stereocilia and bristles , which are observed in the inner ear of verte - brates and the thorax of Drosophila melanogaster , respec - tively , are involved in mechanosensing . Lamellipodia and filopodia are membrane extensions at the LEADING EDGE of cells ; their formation is involved in either motility or interactions with other cell types . The study of the actin - filament networks in these different membrane processes has uncovered two main types of organization : parallel , unbranched bunches of filaments and highly branched , interlaced filament net - works ( FIG . 1 ) . THE CO - WORKERS OF ACTIN FILAMENTS : FROM CELL STRUCTURES TO SIGNALS Céline Revenu , Rafika Athman , Sylvie Robine and Daniel Louvard Cells have various surface architectures , which allow them to carry out different specialized functions . Actin microfilaments that are associated with the plasma membrane are important for generating these cell - surface specializations , and also provide the driving force for remodelling cell morphology and triggering new cell behaviour when the environment is modified . This phenomenon is achieved through a tight coupling between cell structure and signal transduction , a process that is modulated by the regulation of actin - binding proteins . PHAGOCYTOSIS An actin - dependent process by which cells engulfexternal particulate material by extension and fusion ofpseudopods . MICROVILLI Small , finger - like projections ( 1 – 2 µ m long and 100 nm wide ) that occur on the exposed surfaces ofepithelial cells to maximize the surface area . STEREOCILIA Tapered , finger - like projections from hair cells ofthe inner ear that respond to mechanical displacement with alterations in membrane potential , and thereby mediate sensory transduction . NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 5 | AUGUST 2004 | 1 UMR144 Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique / Institut Curie , Paris , France . email : daniel . louvard @ curie . fr doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm1437 F O C U S O N C Y T O S K E L E T A L D Y N A M I C S 2 | AUGUST 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S Each type of protrusion is precisely determined as assessed by the homogeneity of its morphology . However , protrusions vary in their number per cell , the number of filaments per bundle ( which influences the width of the protrusion ) and their length . These differences are thought to be correlated with the ABP content of the cell . Among ABPs , actin - bundling pro - teins are indeed implicated in the organization of the bundles ( BOX 1 ) . For example , intestinal microvilli range between 1 and 2 µ m long and are 0 . 1 µ m wide , and consist of 20 – 30 bundled actin filaments to which the bundling proteins villin 1 , fimbrin 2 and , though less abundantly expressed , small espin 3 localize . Compared to microvilli , stereocilia have a tapered shape — owing to a pinching in of the end that is in contact with the apical surface of the cell — and are aligned into rows of increasing height , which resemble a staircase . The properties of stereocilia vary according to their location in the inner ear : there can be 50 – 450 stereocilia per HAIR CELL ; the length of stereocilia ranges between 1 . 5 and 5 . 5 µ m ; and each actin bun - dle comprises up to 900 actin filaments 4 . The actin - bundling proteins that are found in stereocilia are espin and fimbrin 5 , 6 . A single D . melanogaster mechanosensory cell produces only one bristle that is 400 µ m in length . Each of the 11 bundles that sup - ports the bristle is composed of approximately 500 – 700 actin filaments , in which the bundling pro - teins fascin and forked are found 7 . At least two non - redundant actin - bundling pro - teins are present in the bundles that support these types of protrusion . This is true not only for the three structures described above , but also for other actin - bundle - based features . These include microvilli - like protrusions in sea urchin eggs ( which contain fascin and a villin - like protein ) , filopodia ( which contain α - actinin and fascin ) , D . melanogaster NURSE - CELL STRUT bundles ( which contain the villin - like protein quail , and fascin ) and ECTOPLASMIC SPECIALIZATIONS of SERTOLI CELLS ( which contain espin and , potentially , a fimbrin - related protein ) . For a review of these structures , see REF . 8 . The need for several actin crosslinkers to form the bundles has been studied in D . melanogaster bris - tles by Tilney and colleagues 9 . The crosslinking protein forked is first recruited to tiny bundles of actin and can cause their aggregation . However , the filaments remain loosely organized and twisted until the recruitment of fascin , which correlates with the tight packing of filaments into a hexagonal lattice and ensures that the bristle has a straight morphology . This scheme might be extended to other bundled cel - lular protrusions , as , on the whole , the generation occurs in two phases — the initial appearance of poorly ordered bundles and their subsequent packing into a straight functional structure ( such as microvilli 10 , stereocilia 11 or D . melanogaster nurse - cell struts 12 ) . The mechanism of nucleation of the initial actin bundles still needs to be unravelled . The bundles emerge from a dense patch on the plasma membrane and elongate further at barbed ends . They remain attached to this membrane nucleation site when Parallel bundles of filaments . To illustrate the first group of actin filaments , we have chosen to focus on intestinal microvilli , hair - cell stereocilia and D . melanogaster neurosensory bristles . These apical cellular structures are thin membrane protrusions that are supported by one , or several , bundles of parallel actin filaments : a single axial bundle supports each microvillus or stere - ocilium , whereas 11 membrane - associated actin bun - dles maintain a bristle . Within a bundle , the filaments are straight and appear to be tightly packed into a hexagonal structure . They are uniformly polarized , with their barbed ends ( BOX 1 ) towards the tip of the protrusion , and are linked to the membrane both at the bundle tip and laterally . FILOPODIA Thin cellular processes containing long , unbranched , parallel bundles ofactin filaments . LAMELLIPODIA Broad , flat protrusions at the leading edge ofa moving cell that are enriched with a branched network ofactin filaments . Box 1 | Actin filaments : structure and dynamics Globular ( G ) - actin monomers can associate to form a helical filament . As filaments are formed , the concentration of free monomers falls until it reaches the critical concentration at which monomers and filaments are at equilibrium . Below this concentration , no new filaments form and any that are present depolymerize . Filamentous ( F ) - actin is , however , asymmetric and the two extremities retain different kinetic characteristics . Actin monomers assemble much more rapidly at the ‘barbed end’ compared to the ‘pointed end’ ( these names correspond to the arrowhead appearance of myosin heads bound to actin filaments ) . The critical concentration of the pointed end is higher than that of the barbed end . When F - actin and G - actin are at equilibrium , the global critical concentration is intermediate between those of the two ends separately . So , at this stage , there is a net loss of molecules at the pointed end and a net addition at the barbed end . The two rates balance , which leads to treadmilling — a net flow of actin subunits through the filament . Monomeric actin binds either ATP or ADP . ATP monomers assemble at a far higher rate than ADP ones . Following assembly on a treadmilling filament , ATP is hydrolysed to ADP and this induces a change in the filament conformation , resulting in a less stable form at the pointed end , which depolymerizes . A treadmilling filament therefore contains ATP - bound subunits at the barbed end , whereas the ones at the pointed end are ADP - bound . Many proteins bind to actin and influence its dynamics or state . We refer to these proteins as actin - binding proteins ( ABPs ) . Among ABPs , some link actin filaments in a loose network ( crosslinking proteins ) or in a tight bundle ( bundling proteins ) , or anchor filaments to membranes . Others bind to the barbed end of the filament and prevent further elongation ( capping proteins ) , whereas some cause fragmentation of filaments ( severing proteins ) or might favour the depolymerization of pointed ends . ABPs also regulate the addition of monomers by sequestering them or favouring ADP / ATP exchange . The figure is modified from REF . 136 © ( 2002 ) The American Physiological Society . Depolymerization Polymerization ADP ATP Bundling protein Depolymerizing protein Sequestering protein ADP / ATP exchange Capping protein Severing protein Barbed end Pointed end F O C U S O N C Y T O S K E L E T A L D Y N A M I C S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 5 | AUGUST 2004 | 3 lamellipodium . The pointed ends are associated with the side of a second filament , which results in branching 17 . Most of the branches occur at an angle of around 70° ( referred to as Y - junctions ) but some occur at higher angles ( producing X - junctions ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex — the main crosslinker that is associated with lamellipodia — has been identified at Y - junctions 16 and is responsible for branching 18 . Another actin - crosslink - ing protein , filamin A , localizes at X - junctions all along the lamellipodium and is thought to stabilize the den - dritic network 19 . Capping proteins localize at the leading edge of the lamellipodium and are responsible for the maintenance of short actin filaments 20 , 21 . The severing / capping protein gelsolin is also associated with actin filaments in lamellipodia 22 . Members of the ADF ( actin - depolymerizing factor ) / cofilin family are found associated with the rear of the lamellipodium , where Arp2 / 3 dissociates from the network 16 . forming short , bundled structures such as microvilli and stereocilia , whereas the head - to - tail alignment of these bundle units is needed for the long actin - bun - dled structures of bristles ( for a review , see REF . 13 ) . The aligned modules grow until they partially overlap and further elongation of the overlapping filaments smoothes the link and thickens the bundle — a process described as a graft by Guild and colleagues 14 . Branched networks of filaments . The second type of actin network , the branched network , supports lamel - lipodia and might structure the IMMUNOLOGICAL SYNAPSE at the site of interaction between a lymphocyte and an ANTIGEN - PRESENTING CELL ( APC 15 ; discussed in more detail below ) . Within lamellipodia , filament branches are sep - arated by , at most , several tens of nm and they mainly consist of short actin filaments 16 . Numerous barbed ends of actin filaments face the leading edge of the SCHWANN CELLS Supporting cells ofthe peripheral nervous system that associate with peripheral axons and can contribute to their myelination . LEADING EDGE The thin margin ofa lamellipodium spanning the area ofthe cell from the plasma membrane to about 1 µm back into the lamellipodium . HAIR CELLS The sensory cells in the organ of Corti from the inner ear . NURSE - CELL STRUT D . melanogaster nurse cells are auxiliary cells that supply the oocyte with synthesized mRNAs and proteins during insect oogenesis . Nurse - cell struts are the cytoplasmic actin bundles in these cells that prevent the nucleus from blocking the canals that allow the delivery of cytoplasmic components to the oocyte . ECTOPLASMIC SPECIALIZATION An intercellular junction that tightly attaches the elongate spermatid head to the membrane ofa Sertoli cell . It is characterized by the presence of a junctional plaque which contains a layer oftightly packed actin bundles under the Sertoli - cell plasma membrane . SERTOLI CELLS Non - dividing supporting cells that extend from the base ofthe seminiferous epithelium to the tubule lumen . They surround germ cells and provide a microenvironment in which germ cells develop and differentiate . IMMUNOLOGICAL SYNAPSE A junction that forms at the contact region between a T cell and its target cells . T - cell activation occurs here . ANTIGEN - PRESENTING CELL A cell , generally a macrophage or dendritic cell , that presents an antigen to activate a T cell . Figure 1 | Actin networks in cellular protrusions . Bristles , microvilli and stereocilia are supported by bundled actin filaments , whereas lamellipodia spread on a substrate with underlying branched actin networks . In between these two extremes are filopodia , which contain highly bundled filaments that emerge from branched networks . a | Drosophila melanogaster bristles are revealed by scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ; top ; courtesy of Y . Bellaiche , Institut Curie , Paris , France ) . Animals expressing green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) – actin allow observation of the underlying actin bundles ( bottom ; courtesy of G . Guild , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , USA ) . b | Intestinal microvilli are revealed by SEM ( top ) and associated actin bundles by transmission EM ( TEM ; bottom ) . c | Stereocilia in the inner ear are illustrated by SEM ( top ; courtesy of P . Gillespie , Oregon Hearing Research Center and Vollum Institute , Portland , USA ) and actin staining ( bottom ; red ; courtesy of I . A . Belyantseva and T . B . Friedman , National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders , Rockville , USA ) . d , e | Actin in filopodia and lamellipodia was observed using EM of platinum replicas . The image in part d was reproduced with permission from REF . 21 © ( 2003 ) the Rockefeller University Press . The image in part e was reproduced with permission from REF . 16 © ( 1999 ) the Rockefeller University Press . The structures of the actin filaments are also shown diagrammatically below the images . The main actin - binding proteins that are associated with these structures are included — red indicates crosslinking and bundling proteins , blue represents actin – membrane linkers , and yellow indicates proteins that are neither bundling proteins , nor actin – membrane linkers . Fascin , forked Villin , fimbrin , espin BBM1 , ezrin Espin , fimbrin Myosins , radixin Fascin , α - actinin Myosins , Ena / VASP , ERM Arp2 / 3 , filamin ERM Capping protein , cofilin , gelsolin a Bristles b Microvilli c Stereocilia d Filopodia e Lamellipodia Bundled Branched 4 | AUGUST 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S T - fimbrin . The correlation between the level of expres - sion of espin and the length of the protrusion has also been analysed in inner - ear hair cells in situ , where a gra - dient of espin protein was found to correspond with the gradient in stereocilial length 29 . Overexpressed fascin in LLC - PK1 cells did not localize to microvilli but to filopodia - like protrusions , which indicates that different actin - bundling events might occur in filopodia com - pared to those in microvilli and stereocilia . It has never - theless previously been reported that the microvilli in LLC - PK1 cells lengthen in the presence of fascin 24 . However , the influence of the level of expression of dif - ferent actin - bundling proteins on the length of protru - sions still remains to be explained . Actin bundles and branched networks are linked to the plasma membrane , and this linkage is important for the formation and maintenance of protrusions , and therefore for their morphology . Members of the ERM ( ezrin / radixin / moesin ) family of proteins are widely distributed actin – membrane - protein linkers 30 . In fibroblast lamellipodia , ERM proteins bind actin fila - ments to the membrane Na – H exchanger isoform - 1 . The disruption of this interaction results in the exten - sion of numerous small protrusions instead of one broad lamellipodium but also impairs the directionality of the cells and remodelling of focal adhesions 31 . This effect could be the result of defects in the tethering of actin filaments at the leading edge as well as perturba - tions in the clustering of membrane proteins and in the subsequent integration of polarization and guid - ance signals . In support of the relevance of this actin – membrane anchorage , laser inactivation of ezrin in fibroblast lamellipodia 32 or of radixin in growth - cone lamellipodia 33 resulted in the retraction or splitting of these structures . The existence of other actin – mem - brane linkers within lamellipodia remains controversial and requires further investigation . ERMs are also implicated in the growth and preserva - tion of bundled protrusions , where they show different tissue distributions , the significance of which is not understood . Ezrin is associated with gut microvilli and filopodia , moesin is found in hepatocyte microvilli , and both are detected in kidney microvilli 30 . Radixin is found in the microvilli of the BILE CANALICULI and has recently been described in the lower shaft and the tapered end of stereocilia where it might help to anchor the pointed ends of actin filaments to the membrane 34 . Different MYOSIN proteins are essential for the proper formation and function of stereocilia . Mutations in the genes that encode these proteins are associated with alterations in the shape of stereocilia and are responsible for deafness . Among them , myosin XVa is important for the formation of the staircase pattern 35 , and myosin VIIa , in association with the ABP harmonin b , ensures the structural integrity of stereocilia bundles , probably by mediating the anchorage of cadherin - 23 crosslinks between adjacent stereocilia to their actin bundles 36 . Unconventional myosins are also implicated in actin – membrane linkage in other protrusions — for example , BBM1 ( REF . 37 ) in intestinal microvilli and myosin X in lamellipodia , ruffles and filopodia 38 . From branched to bundled . As suggested by Svitkina and colleagues 21 , we will consider that filopodia and microspikes ( filopodia that have not protruded beyond the membrane ) are interconvertible structures and will refer to them collectively as filopodia . They are observed at the edge of lamellipodia in moving cells such as fibroblasts , and are also associated with the GROWTH CONES of neuronal cells , with the sprouting of new blood ves - sels 23 and , probably , at immunological synapses 15 . Filopodia are thin cellular processes that are organized by a bundle of actin . The actin filaments within each bundle are of uniform polarity and are crosslinked by at least two proteins — α - actinin at the rear of the protru - sion and fascin along its length . Fascin is the essential crosslinker that underpins the straightness and stiffness of filopodial actin bundles 24 . We could have included filopodia in the ‘bundled - actin network’category . However , these structures form from a pre - existing lamellipodial actin network 21 — unlike the structures that were discussed above , which form anew 13 . Filopodia originate from actin filaments of the branched network that are prevented from capping and , as a result , can elongate at the leading edge of the lamellipodium . Because of the branched organization , some elongating filaments are likely to collide and seem to cluster on collision . Further elongation of those fila - ments that are linked at their tips and binding of fascin result in the formation of parallel actin bundles , which can be joined laterally by other elongating filaments and protrude at the leading edge of the lamellipodium 21 . The Ena / VASP ( Enabled / vasodilator - stimulated phos - phoprotein ) proteins , which bind to barbed ends of actin filaments , are present at the tips of filopodia and are good candidates for protecting the filaments from capping 25 ; through their oligomerization , these proteins might also cause clustering of actin filaments 26 . This model for the formation of filopodia from a branched network has been nicely documented by an in vitro approach using pure proteins in a reconstituted medium , which showed that a shift from a branched network to filopodia - like bundles could be produced merely by altering the concentration of capping proteins 27 . Controlling the morphology of a protrusion . Except in the case of filopodia , the length of actin bundles is very precisely determined , as is clearly illustrated by the homogeneity of intestinal microvilli , as well as by the positive correlation between the length of a stere - ocilium and the position of the hair cell in which the stereocilium is found . This regulation seems to be due , at least in part , to the type and concentration of the crosslinking protein that generates the bundle . A high level of expression of the ABP villin can induce the for - mation of microvilli on the dorsal surface of fibroblastic cells ; the length of these microvilli was similar to the length of microvilli in intestinal epithelial cells 28 . Moreover , Loomis and colleagues 29 reported a lengthen - ing of the microvilli of the kidney epithelial cell line LLC - PK1 by modulating the level of transfected espin and , to a lesser extent , by overexpression of villin and GROWTH CONE Motile tip ofthe axon or dendrite ofa growing nerve cell , which spreads out into a cone - shaped outgrowth . BILE CANALICULI Tiny channels on the surface of liver cells that collect the bile that they produce . MYOSIN Molecular motors that move along actin filaments and have several cellular roles in contraction or protein transport . F O C U S O N C Y T O S K E L E T A L D Y N A M I C S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 5 | AUGUST 2004 | 5 actin - filament precursors , and , for increased stability , the maximization of filament bridging by reducing the bundle surface : volume ratio — must also influence the localization , length , width and number of bundles 4 , 40 . Dynamics of‘stable’structures . The actin cytoskeleton , whether it forms bundles or branched networks , is responsible for cell shape . However , actin filaments are never fixed molecular structures , despite the fact that cellular structures such as microvilli or stereocilia seem to be stable . Of course this becomes obvious when lamellipodia and filopodia , which are associated with cell movement , are studied . Within filopodia and lamel - lipodia , actin monomers are commonly described as cycling from the uncapped , pointed filament ends at the rear of the branched network , towards the barbed ends at the extreme leading edge , which results in the tread - milling of the whole network 41 ( BOX 1 ) . The stable shape of actin - bundle - based protrusions is the result of a dynamic steady - state owing to a precise balance between actin polymerization and depolymer - ization . In fact , this turnover was described many years ago for microvilli 42 and stereocilia 4 . More recently , it has been shown that microvilli constantly incorporate actin monomers at their tips , as assessed by fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) studies of cells that express actin labelled with green fluorescent protein 43 . This is also the case for stereocilial filament bundles , which treadmill towards the base of the stereocilium 44 , where the stereocilium is attached to the cell . The rate of treadmilling differs between parallel actin bundles . The treadmilling rate of stereocilia bundles is 10 – 100 × slower than microvilli 43 , 45 , which treadmill 1 . 5 – 20 × slower than filopodia in nerve growth cones 46 . The actin - bundling - protein content of the bundles is , in part , responsible for these discrepancies , as transfection of an intestinal cell line with espin correlates with a 5 – 6 - fold increase in the actin - treadmilling rate in microvilli 29 . However , filopodia of a single growth cone show varying treadmilling rates that correlate with their dynamic behaviour 46 — which must be essential for their impli - cated role in pathfinding . Furthermore , the treadmilling rates in stereocilia are proportional to their length , which results in the synchronous turnover of a staircase 45 . Other factors are therefore essential for this regulation — they remain to be investigated , but myosins are already good candidates . The importance of the balance between polymerization and depolymerization has been demon - strated in the growth and breakdown of D . melanogaster bristles : in these structures , actin - filament depolymer - ization is essential for eliminating bundles that are not stabilized by tight packing and association with the plasma membrane 40 , 47 . Not lost , or produced , but remodelled Regulation of ABPs . The dynamic steady - state nature of the actin cytoskeleton allows cells to adapt rapidly to external stimuli by perturbing the equilibrium between polymerization and depolymerization . This occurs through modulation of the activity of the ABPs that main - tain actin filaments . Post - translational modifications , Actin – membrane linkers are key components in con - trolling bristle shape 39 , but the relevant proteins have not yet been identified in these structures . Finally , para - meters that can be considered as physical constraints — such as the area of the cell surface , the availability of Box 2 | Molecular features implicated in actin crosslinking and bundling The diagram shows the organization of the main crosslinking and bundling proteins — the different actin - binding domains ( ABDs ) are highlighted . Villin comprises six repeats ( 1 – 6 ) of a module that is common to those gelsolin - family members that retain an ability to sever and cap actin . Three Ca 2 + - dependent ABDs have been identified : repeat 1 and repeats 4 – 6 bind actin monomers ; repeats 2 – 3 bind actin filaments . Villin can bundle actin filaments because of an additional Ca 2 + - independent filament - binding domain , the headpiece ( HP ) , in which a cluster of basic residues , the KKEK motif , is essential . The espin and forked proteins share a carboxy - terminal peptide , the forked / espin - homology domain ( F / E ) , which causes actin - filament bundling and must therefore contain two ABDs to bind to two different filaments . Proline - rich regions ( Pro ) and amino - terminal ankyrin repeats ( AAAA ) are found in the large espin isoform and the large forked protein , forked C ( the forked gene encodes at least six different transcripts , forked A being the main one ) . A third espin ABD has been identified between the two proline - rich modules . α - actinin , fimbrin and filamin ABDs are formed by a pair of calponin - homology ( CH ) domains . α - actinin forms an anti - parallel homodimer to crosslink actin filaments . A rod domain that is composed of four spectrin repeats ( S ) , which is responsible for homodimer formation , separates the two ABDs , resulting in loose filament crosslinking . Filamins form parallel dimers that contain the same features : two ABDs separated by repeated , stiff , rod - like domains . The insertion of flexible regions could allow filamins to crosslink widely dispersed actin filaments at perpendicular angles . Fimbrin is a monomeric actin - filament - bundling protein that contains two tandem ABDs , with no spacer , which results in the organization of Ca 2 + - dependent densely packed bundles . Fascins are monomeric actin - bundling proteins . The carboxy - terminal half of fascins contains one ABD ; a second ABD could be located in a highly conserved region that shares similarities with the ABD of the myristoylated alanine - rich C - kinase substrate ( MARCKS ) . Filamin A 1 2 3 4 5 6 Pro Pro F / E Pro Pro F / E Pro F / E F / E AAAA AAAA S S S S CH CH CH CH C H C H CH CH CH CH S S S S CH CH Villin Espin Small espin Forked C Forked A α - actinin Fimbrin Fascin Flexible regions Calcium - binding region MARCKS homology motif KKEK motif HP 6 | AUGUST 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S levels , which occur when cells are stimulated with epi - dermal growth factor ( EGF ) , release gelsolin and acti - vate its severing activity 22 . Gelsolin - knockout mice have normal embryonic development and longevity 56 . However , in addition to a delayed HAEMOSTATIC RESPONSE and defects in the retraction of growth - cone filopodia , these mice show reduced motility of their neutrophils , fibroblasts and osteoclasts 56 , 57 . Motility normally requires highly dynamic actin . Severing and uncapping of actin filaments by gelsolin therefore increases the number of actin filaments and generates many ends that can polymerize and so increases actin treadmilling . Phosphoinositides are also known to inhibit other ABPs , such as the capping protein 58 , ( see also the article by Paul A . Janmey and Uno Lindberg in this issue ) and the severing / depolymerizing proteins of the ADF / cofilin family 59 . In addition , phosphoinositides dissociate actin from profilin 60 , a small actin - monomer - sequestering protein that catalyses the exchange of ADP for ATP on actin monomers and thereby provides a pool of polymerization - competent monomers . This indicates that phosphoinositides might control the net growth of actin filaments by increasing the rates of uncapping and polymerization , while decreasing the rates of depolymerization ( FIG . 2 ) . ADF / cofilin proteins increase the turnover of actin fil - aments . They bind to two longitudinally associated actin subunits along an actin filament , locally modify the twist of the filament 61 and disrupt the interaction between the two actin subunits 62 , 63 . ADF / cofilin proteins are regulated by the phosphorylation of a single serine residue 64 , which inactivates their actin - depolymerizing / severing activi - ties 65 . In response to various stimuli such as growth fac - tors or chemotactic peptides , they are dephosphorylated and become active 66 , 67 . Slingshot proteins represent the only family of phosphatases that is known to dephospho - rylate ADF / cofilin 68 . In unstimulated quiescent cells , ADF / cofilin proteins are diffusely distributed in the cyto - plasm , whereas after stimulation , the activated proteins translocate to regions of the cells where actin filaments are highly dynamic 69 . Dephosphorylation of ADF / cofilin increases the turnover of actin filaments by either enhancing the release of actin monomers from filament pointed - ends for barbed - end polymerization , or by sev - ering existing filaments and thereby creating new barbed ends for polymerization . The evidence that ADF / cofilin increases the rate of disassembly of pointed ends 70 , 71 and / or severs 67 , 69 , 72 actin filaments to enhance treadmilling is controversial . Zebda and colleagues 67 have proposed that ADF / cofilin activities could depend on the cellular context ; in con - tinuously motile cells , where globular ( G ) - actin is limit - ing , they would enhance the depolymerization of pointed ends , whereas in cells that are initiating move - ment in response to a stimulus , the massive production of new barbed ends that are needed for lamellipodial extension would be generated by severing . Moreover , Ghosh and colleagues 73 have recently proposed that active cofilin polymerizes actin and determines the direction of cell migration . Cofilin phosphorylation is mediated by LIM ( for LIN11 , ISL1 and MEC3 ) kinases , ion binding and interactions with co - factors are some of the molecular cues that regulate the actin - binding domains of ABPs ( BOX 2 ) , either by competing with actin for ABPs or by causing conformational changes in the ABPs . Such regulation can result in the acceleration of actin treadmilling , the breakdown of a specialized archi - tecture to mobilize actin to another structure , or the cre - ation of new cellular domains to complement the change in environment . Below we describe a few exam - ples that illustrate the regulation of ABPs in some cir - cumstances of cellular remodelling . However , the pro - teins presented cannot be reduced to a unique function but participate in several cytoskeletal processes even if each of them has been chosen only to illustrate a partic - ular one here . Increasing actin dynamics . Gelsolin has Ca 2 + - dependent filament - capping and - severing activities 48 . The binding of Ca 2 + in vitro induces a conformational change in gelsolin that leads to the exposure of its actin - binding site 49 . A low pH can also activate gelsolin — although to a lesser extent — in the absence of Ca 2 + ( REF . 50 ) . The binding of gelsolin to actin filaments weakens bonds between actin subunits , which causes the filament to break . After severing , gelsolin remains attached to the barbed end of the actin filament , which therefore can - not re - anneal or elongate , and so the actin network is disassembled by pointed - end depolymerization 51 . The binding of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) to gelsolin induces a conformational change in gelsolin 52 and is required for its dissociation from the barbed ends 53 , 54 . In addition , lysophosphatidic acid has been shown to regulate gelsolin in a very similar manner to PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( REF . 55 ) . In quiescent cells , gel - solin binds to PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 at the plasma membrane . PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 hydrolysis and the subsequent rise in Ca 2 + FRAP ( fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ) . This technique involves the irradiation ofa limited region containing fluorescent molecules , such that the fluorescent molecules inside the region become non - fluorescent . The subsequent reappearance offluorescent molecules from the surrounding non - bleached region gives information on their dynamic parameters such as diffusion coefficient , immobile fraction and binding or residence time . HAEMOSTATIC RESPONSE The process that allows platelets to carry out coagulation . Figure 2 | Phosphoinositides and actin filaments . Binding to phosphoinositides inhibits pointed - end depolymerization by ADF / cofilin , actin - monomer - sequestration by profilin and the capping of barbed filament ends by gelsolin and capping protein . Inactivation of cofilin reduces pointed - end depolymerization . Inhibition of profilin releases ATP - bound actin monomers , which therefore become available for barbed - end polymerization . Inhibition of gelsolin and capping protein liberates free barbed ends , which allows filaments to elongate . So the binding of phosphoinositides to these actin - binding proteins favours the growth of actin filaments . Phosphoinositidebinding ADF / cofilin Profilin Depolymerizing Sequestering Pointed - end stabilization Release of ATP – actin - monomers Barbed - end uncapping Gelsolin , capping protein Capping Actin - filament growth F O C U S O N C Y T O S K E L E T A L D Y N A M I C S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 5 | AUGUST 2004 | 7 the need for a high Ca 2 + concentration 81 . Interestingly , phosphorylated villin has been shown to bind to phos - pholipase C γ1 ( PLC γ 1 ) 82 and increase its enzymatic activity in vitro 83 . PLC γ 1 activation in vivo , which occurs as a result of cellular stimulation with hepatocyte growth factor , correlates with an increase in the amount of villin that is bound to PLC γ 1 . The active PLC γ 1 then cleaves PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 into diacylglycerol and inositol - 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate , which results in the release of Ca 2 + from intracellular stores . This can again activate the sev - ering activity of villin and leads to enhanced dynamic cellular processes such as remodelling and motility 84 ( FIG . 3 ) . This implies the existence of a regulation loop in which phosphorylation of villin induces villin - severing activation . ERM proteins can exist in an inactive conformation as a result of an intramolecular association between their filament - binding domain and their FERM ( pro - tein 4 . 1 / ERM ) domain , which contains binding sites for several membrane - associated proteins 85 , 86 . Phosphorylation on an essential threonine residue induces the conformational change that is necessary to disrupt this association and to activate the proteins 87 – 89 . This phosphorylation is thought to be downstream of Rho kinase 87 , 90 and protein kinase C ( PKC ) 91 , and , for ezrin , it occurs after the protein binds to PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 at the plasma membrane 92 , 93 . Active ERMs allow the for - mation of microvilli - like structures 90 and filopodia 94 ; microvilli break down following the dephosphorylation and consequent inactivation of ERMs 95 . ERM proteins , and moesin in particular , were described to maintain the polarity of epithelial cells by acting antagonistically to the Rho pathway 96 . This implies the existence of a negative - feedback loop between ERM activation and Rho - pathway activity . However , a positive effect of ERMs on the Rho pathway , through the binding of Rho guanine nucleotide - dissociation inhibitor , has previ - ously been reported 97 . These results must therefore be interpreted with caution . PKC - mediated ezrin activa - tion and its association at membrane protrusions is required for PKC - dependent cell migration 91 . By regu - lating the association between ezrin and the transmem - brane receptor CD44 , PKC controls directional cell motility 98 . Furthermore , in response to cellular stimula - tion with growth factors 99 , ezrin is tyrosine phosphory - lated and triggers cell motility and morphogenesis 100 . Ezrin is therefore not only responsible for the forma - tion and maintenance of protrusions but is a key com - ponent in transducing signals from extracellular cues that lead to cytoskeleton remodelling , shape changes and motility . The route to protrusions . Filamin , a large actin - crosslinking protein , is emerging as an important com - ponent in actin remodelling . In vivo , a direct interaction between filamin and the serine / threonine kinase p21 - acti - vated kinase - 1 ( PAK1 ) has been reported to occur after cellular stimulation by molecules that activate PAK1 , such as the mitogen heregulin and sphingolipids 101 . The activation of PAK1 , a downstream effector of the small GTPases Rac1 and Cdc42 , induces polarized cytoskeletal which , in turn , are activated by signalling pathways that involve RHO - FAMILY GTPases and that also lead to lamellipodial extension , probably by stabilizing actin filaments 74 – 76 . Cofilin regulation in actin dynamics must therefore involve a complex balance between phosphatases and LIM kinases that leads to an equilibrium between actin - net - work maintenance and treadmilling enhancement . Breaking down and rebuilding . The many activities of villin nicely illustrate how a cell can regulate an ABP to carry out a particular function . Villin belongs to the same family of ABPs as gelsolin and is the only ABP to show actin - bundling , - capping and - severing proper - ties . In vitro , its filament - severing activity is observed at high Ca 2 + concentrations , whereas actin bundling occurs at low Ca 2 + concentrations 77 . Variations in the levels of intracellular Ca 2 + occur in various cell systems following injury . A Ca 2 + - triggered switch between the bundling and severing activities of villin could explain how , following injury to the intestinal epithelium , epithelial cells break down and redistribute their microvillar actin filaments so as to change from a highly polarized to a motile morphology 78 . PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 nega - tively regulates the severing and capping activities of villin and enhances its bundling functions 79 , whereas tyrosine phosphorylation is an additional way for cells to regulate the ability of villin to bind and sever actin fil - aments 80 . In vitro tyrosine phosphorylation of recombi - nant villin enhances its severing activity and overcomes RHO - FAMILY GTPases Ras - related small GTPases that function as GDP / GTP - regulated binary switches and regulate signal - transduction pathways that control actin organization . RhoGTPase function is required for both the establishment ofa fully polarized state and a motile phenotype on epithelial – mesenchymal transition . Figure 3 | Model of villin regulation in actin remodelling . The left - hand diagrams show cellular architecture . Part a depicts a highly polarized morphology whereas part b represents a motile cell ; the diagrams on the right show the events that produce this change . a | In resting epithelial cells , villin is mainly associated with actin bundles in microvilli , and a small pool of villin binds to phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) at membranes . b | Following stimulation of membrane receptors ( R ) , a pool of villin becomes tyrosine phosphorylated and associates with phospholipase C γ 1 ( PLC γ 1 ) . This association triggers the activation of PLC γ 1 , which then cleaves PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 into diacylglycerol ( DAG ) and inositol - 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( Ins ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ) . Ins ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 , in turn , releases Ca 2 + from stores in the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) . The increase in intracellular Ca 2 + concentration induces actin severing by villin , which allows actin bundles within microvilli to dissociate , and dynamic protrusions that lead to cell migration to form . R PLC γ 1 P P P PLC γ 1 P P P P R Stimulus Villin Actin severing PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 Ins ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 DAG Ca 2 + channel ( inactive ) Ca 2 + release ER a b 8 | AUGUST 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S The actin cytoskeleton and ABPs are important for delivering membrane proteins to , and clustering them at , the interaction site , but are also responsible for the exclusion of other proteins from this site . For example , myosins and ERM proteins cluster receptors to the contact site , which might result in signal amplification and therefore participate in synapse formation 110 , 111 ; moreover , ERM proteins are neces - sary for the removal of CD43 ( a large molecule of the GLYCOCALYX that would prevent proper T - cell – APC interaction ) from the forming synapse 111 , 112 . The interaction of T - cell antigen receptors with complementary antigen – MAJOR - HISTOCOMPATIBILITY - COM - PLEX ( MHC ) molecules on an APC induces signalling cascades that allow numerous kinases and ADAPTOR PROTEINS , such as SLP76 , VAV and NCK , to be recruited to the forming immunological synapse on the T - cell side 113 . This results in PAK1 activation . NCK , in turn , would recruit inactive Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome pro - tein ( WASP ) , and VAV activates Cdc42 and Rac 113 , 114 . Activated Cdc42 induces conformational changes in WASP that allow it to recruit and activate the Arp2 / 3 complex 115 , 41 . Other pathways that are independent of Cdc42 have recently been implicated in WASP activa - tion 116 . This leads to actin polymerization at the inter - face and implies the formation of a branched network that supports the immunological synapse . Moreover , activation of LIM kinase by PAK1 ( REF . 117 ) might , as described above , inhibit ADF / cofilin by phosphorylat - ing it , and thereby increase the stability of the actin net - work . So , when a T cell and an APC interact , a set of ABPs is recruited and regulated to form a stable actin network that functions as a scaffold for the assembly of signalling complexes ( FIG . 5 ) . Cells must also be able to defend themselves against mechanical stress . Their response to tension is medi - ated , in part , by cytoskeletal rearrangement — in par - ticular , through an increase in the amount of filamen - tous actin and therefore a stiffening of the actin cytoskeleton . This allows membrane integrity and cell shape to be maintained 118 . The process is likely to be mediated by ABPs , and filamin A has been identified as an essential regulator . For instance , the appliance of a force through the integrins — transmembrane recep - tors for components of the extracellular matrix — induces the accumulation of actin filaments and of active filamin A at the site at which the force is applied . This mechanical stress induces PKC - mediated serine phosphorylation of filamin A , which results in its asso - ciation with integrins 119 , 120 . The accumulation of actin filaments is probably due to the crosslinking properties of filamin . How to study microfilament functions Integrating the complexity of ABP regulation in the study of actin - filament functions is essential and it has therefore influenced the nature of experimental approaches . To illustrate this , we have chosen two exam - ples of strategies that have allowed a better under - standing of either the treadmilling of branched actin networks , or the role of villin in actin remodelling . rearrangements such as ruffles , lamellipodia and filopo - dia 102 , and regulates cell motility 103 ( FIG . 4 ) . The interac - tion between filamin and PAK1 is reciprocal — with fil - amin being phosphorylated by PAK1 and PAK1 being activated by filamin binding — and is necessary for PAK1 - mediated ruffle formation 101 . Filamin also crosslinks actin filaments and binds numerous other proteins , such as transmembrane receptors and several small GTPases 104 . Consequently , it could be involved in the integration of external stimuli and function as a platform that would bring together downstream effec - tors such as small GTPases and PAK1 . Fascin induces dynamic protrusions such as filopo - dia and ruffles at the leading edge of a motile cell 24 . Fascin is phosphorylated on serine 39 by PKC α and this phosphorylation inhibits the actin - binding properties of fascin 105 , 106 , leading to a loss of fascin from these actin - rich protrusions 107 . The phosphorylated form of fascin remains associated with PKC α and this interac - tion is important for full cell spreading ; it also reduces cell migration 108 . Conversely , in melanoma cells , stimu - lation with the growth factor neurotrophin induces migration and a concomitant redistribution of fascin to actin - rich protrusions such as lamellipodia and filopo - dia — probably after fascin is dephosphorylated . A dominant - negative ( constitutively phosphorylated ) mutant of fascin inhibits this neurotrophin - induced cell migration 108 . The localization of fascin to filopodia and lamellipodia might occur downstream of Rac and Cdc42 ( REF . 109 ; FIG . 4 ) . Organizing cell defence . The cytoskeleton is inti - mately involved in determining the efficiency and fidelity of the immune response . For instance , the actin cytoskeleton is essential for T - cell shape devel - opment , movement and polarization . Polarization includes the formation of the immunological synapse — a specialized and complex domain that results from the interaction of a T cell with an APC 15 ( FIG . 5 ) . MEMBRANE RUFFLES Processes that are formed by lamellipodia that have lifted from the substratum on which they previously extended . GLYCOCALYX The carbohydrate - rich region at the surface ofmany plant and animal cells that is rich in glycoproteins and glycolipids . MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX A complex ofgenetic loci in higher vertebrates that encodes a family ofcellular antigens that allow the immune system to recognize selffrom non - self . ADAPTOR PROTEINS Proteins that usually have several protein – protein interaction domains and increase cellular responses by recruiting other proteins to a complex . Figure 4 | Filamin , fascin and the formation of protrusions . In response to extracellular signals , an interaction between p21 - activated kinase - 1 ( PAK1 ) and filamin is essential for PAK1 to mediate cytoskeletal rearrangements . This interaction allows filamin to be phosphorylated by PAK1 and PAK1 to be activated by filamin , which results in the formation of MEMBRANE RUFFLES and lamellipodia . Conversely , phosphorylation of serine residues in fascin by protein kinase C α ( PKC α ) inhibits the binding of fascin to actin and its ability to organize filopodia and lamellipodia . Filamin - and fascin - mediated formation of protrusions both seem to occur downstream of Rac and Cdc42 . PAK1 PKC α PAK1 Filamin Fascin Filamin Fascin P P Rac Cdc42 Ruffles , lamellipodia , filopodia F O C U S O N C Y T O S K E L E T A L D Y N A M I C S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 5 | AUGUST 2004 | 9 that are present , in vitro approaches are of great value in the analysis of complex phenomena . However , the importance of both post - translational modifications and interactions with several cellular components urges the use of cell - culture models . Such models allow the study of cytoskeletal rearrangements and cell movements in response to controlled external stimuli , or after the expression of exogenous proteins or silencing of endogenous proteins . These models also allow the biochemical analysis of subsequent signalling pathways . By establishing primary cul - tures , we can obtain conditions that more closely resemble those found in vivo , although such cultures remain cumbersome to use routinely . Numerous transgenic animal models , particularly mice , have been established for in vivo analysis . Several ABPs have been knocked out in mice , including villin , gel - solin and espin . These models allow the in vivo analysis of the role of the protein in question in development and in organ / cell function , and are becoming especially promising as in vivo imaging techniques are developed . Actin treadmilling allows cells to move , by generat - ing lamellipodia and filopodia . It also allows bacteria such as Listeria monocytogenes and Shigella flexneri to be propelled around inside cells , by forming actin ‘comets’ . These actin - based movements were first observed in cell cultures , but important steps that have advanced our understanding of the underlying mechanisms have been made as a result of in vitro reconstitution assays . These assays have allowed the determination of the minimal set of purified proteins that is required for actin - based motility of L . monocytogenes and S . flexneri 121 . Further progress with these reconstitution assays has been achieved by the use of beads that are coated with an activator of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( such as ActA 122 or the VCA — verprolin homology , cofilin homology , and acidic — domain of WASP ) . These beads , when added to cell extracts or reconstituted media , can recruit and polymerize actin networks and even form actin comets that propel the beads in the solution 123 . Using these strate - gies , the question of the impact of a protein on actin - based movement or on the structure of actin networks can be addressed directly 27 , 124 , 125 , and the physical parame - ters that explain the generation of the force that is neces - sary for movement can be modified and studied 126 , 127 . Our second example concerns villin , which was first discovered to be associated with actin bundles in intesti - nal microvilli 1 . Subsequent in vitro studies allowed the determination of the activities of villin towards actin and the characterization of its functional domains 77 , 128 . At the time , villin was the only protein of the gelsolin family that was known to possess a domain that is responsible for actin bundling , and so was thought to be preponderant in the formation of core bundles in microvilli . This role was further studied in cell - culture models , by transfecting villin genes into cell lines that do not normally express villin 28 , 129 or by silencing villin in cell lines that develop BRUSH BORDERS 130 . This seemed to confirm the essential role of villin in the formation and maintenance of microvilli . The challenge , however , was to demonstrate this role in vivo . Unexpectedly , villin - knockout mice did not show a detectable deterioration in the morphology of microvilli 78 . Nevertheless , they did seem to be unable to repair their intestinal epithelium — a process that , as described above , requires polarized epithelial cells to change to a motile form that can move towards a wound . This indicated an in vivo role for villin in the remodelling of the actin cytoskeleton . It was interpreted to be the result of the actin - severing activity of villin , which would enhance actin remodelling and dynamics . This role of villin in the enhancement of actin dynamics was further demonstrated in transfected cell lines and in primary cultures of intestinal epithelial cells , in which expression of villin induced enhanced motility and morphogenesis following stimulation with hepatocyte growth factor 84 . Finally , this understanding of villin function allowed abnormalities in its expression to be identified as the cause of human liver diseases that are characterized by malformed microvilli in the bile canaliculi 131 . By greatly simplifying the system that is being stud - ied and allowing a precise control of the components BRUSH BORDER The apical surface ofepithelial intestinal or kidney cells . It is involved in absorption , and is characterized by the presence of abundant microvilli . Figure 5 | Regulation of Arp2 / 3 and cofilin in the formation of immunological synapses . The interaction between a T - cell antigen receptor ( TCR ) and an antigen - major - histocompatibility - complex ( MHC ) molecule from an antigen - presenting cell ( APC ) leads to the recruitment of SLP76 , NCK and VAV to the TCR . NCK recruits Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) , which , after activation by Cdc42 , binds to and activates the Arp2 / 3 complex . This results in the polymerization of actin filaments . At the same time , VAV and SLP76 activate LIM kinase through PAK1 , which leads to the inhibition of the severing / depolymerization activities of ADF / cofilin . This increases the stability of the forming actin network . PAK1 SLP76 LIM NCK VAV W ASP Arp2 / 3 Arp2 / 3 ADF / cofilin APC T cell MHC TCR Cdc42 10 | AUGUST 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S focused on , but they might quickly emerge as important regulatory components . Furthermore , new functions of ABPs are also being identified . For example , the ABPs that organize microvilli are also involved in nutrient uptake or protein secretion and in the modulation of ion transport across membranes , and it will be interesting to investigate how they do this . ABPs are also emerging as co - activators of gene transcription 133 , which could be consistent with a role in transducing signals from mem - brane receptors . Filopodia also seem to be cellular sen - sors that are involved in contact - mediated inhibition of neuronal differentiation in D . melanogaster 134 , and in orientated cell growth , in response to extracellular sig - nals , at the tips of sprouting blood vessels or nerves 23 . This actin - dependent orientation hints at a finely tuned integration of signal gradients by ABPs that warrants further investigation . Finally , the interaction between actin filaments and another cytoskeletal component , microtubules , is fundamental in diverse dynamic processes including cell motility and growth - cone guid - ance . The analysis of the mechanisms that underlie this interaction will certainly shed light on highly regulated actin and microtubule - binding proteins 135 . Conclusions and perspectives In this review we have tried to illustrate the extent of the regulation of ABPs in cell protrusions , and how ABPs are implicated in cellular dynamics and signalling . ABPs organize the actin cytoskeleton to maintain stable cellular protrusions or dynamic processes . However , they also mediate the formation or breakdown of these structures by regulating and adjusting actin dynamics according to stimuli in the environment . ABPs are indeed highly regulated downstream of numerous signalling pathways and integrate signals that drive actin remodelling . However , these features are part of a very broad research field and other important aspects such as the formation of phagocytic cups or bacterial infectious processes have not been discussed here . Neither did we discuss neuronal synapses or growth cones as , to our knowledge , there is currently no information regarding the regulation of ABPs that are specific to these cellular specializations . Formins , which are newly identified capping proteins of actin ( although they are slightly ‘leaky’ ) and which potentially also nucleate actin 132 have not yet been definitively implicated in the formation and regulation of the cellular protrusions that we have 1 . Bretscher , A . & Weber , K . Villin : the major microfilament - associated protein of the intestinal microvillus . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 76 , 2321 – 2325 ( 1979 ) . 2 . Bretscher , A . & Weber , K . Fimbrin , a new microfilament - associated protein present in microvilli and other cell surface structures . J . Cell Biol . 86 , 335 – 340 ( 1980 ) . 3 . Bartles , J . R . , Zheng , L . , Li , A . , Wierda , A . & Chen , B . Small espin : a third actin - bundling protein and potential forked protein ortholog in brush border microvilli . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 107 – 119 ( 1998 ) . 4 . Tilney , L . G . , Tilney , M . S . & DeRosier , D . J . Actin filaments , stereocilia , and hair cells : how cells count and measure . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 8 , 257 – 274 ( 1992 ) . 5 . Zheng , L . et al . The deaf jerker mouse has a mutation in the gene encoding the espin actin - bundling proteins of hair cell stereocilia and lacks espins . Cell 102 , 377 – 385 ( 2000 ) . 6 . Tilney , M . S . et al . Preliminary biochemical characterization of the stereocilia and cuticular plate of hair cells of the chick cochlea . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 1711 – 1723 ( 1989 ) . 7 . Tilney , L . G . , Tilney , M . S . & Guild , G . M . F actin bundles in Drosophila bristles . I . Two filament cross - links are involved in bundling . J . Cell Biol . 130 , 629 – 638 ( 1995 ) . 8 . Bartles , J . R . Parallel actin bundles and their multiple actin - bundling proteins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 72 – 78 ( 2000 ) . 9 . Tilney , L . G . , Connelly , P . S . , Vranich , K . A . , Shaw , M . K . & Guild , G . M . Why are two different cross - linkers necessary for actin bundle formation in vivo and what does each cross - link contribute ? J . Cell Biol . 143 , 121 – 133 ( 1998 ) . Studies the impact of forked and fascin in the formation of actin bundles that support a bristle , and highlights their non - redundant roles . 10 . Ezzell , R . M . , Chafel , M . M . & Matsudaira , P . T . Differential localization of villin and fimbrin during development of the mouse visceral endoderm and intestinal epithelium . Development 106 , 407 – 419 ( 1989 ) . 11 . Tilney , L . G . & DeRosier , D . J . Actin filaments , stereocilia , and hair cells of the bird cochlea . IV . How the actin filaments become organized in developing stereocilia and in the cuticular plate . Dev . Biol . 116 , 119 – 129 ( 1986 ) . 12 . Cant , K . , Knowles , B . A . , Mahajan - Miklos , S . , Heintzelman , M . & Cooley , L . Drosophila fascin mutants are rescued by overexpression of the villin - like protein , quail . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 213 – 221 ( 1998 ) . 13 . DeRosier , D . J . & Tilney , L . G . F - actin bundles are derivatives of microvilli : what does this tell us about how bundles might form ? J . Cell Biol . 148 , 1 – 6 ( 2000 ) . 14 . Guild , G . M . , Connelly , P . S . , Ruggiero , L . , Vranich , K . A . & Tilney , L . G . Long continuous actin bundles in Drosophila bristles are constructed by overlapping short filaments . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 1069 – 1077 ( 2003 ) . 15 . Dustin , M . L . & Cooper , J . A . The immunological synapse and the actin cytoskeleton : molecular hardware for T cell signaling . Nature Immunol . 1 , 23 – 29 ( 2000 ) . 16 . Svitkina , T . M . & Borisy , G . G . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymerizing factor / cofilin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin filament array in lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 1009 – 1026 ( 1999 ) . Describes the organization of the actin network in lamellipodia and supports the dendritic - nucleation model by the analysis of pointed - end protection and depolymerization by the Arp2 / 3 complex and ADF / cofilin , respectively . 17 . Svitkina , T . M . , Verkhovsky , A . B . , McQuade , K . M . & Borisy , G . G . Analysis of the actin - myosin II system in fish epidermal keratocytes : mechanism of cell body translocation . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 397 – 415 ( 1997 ) . 18 . Mullins , R . D . , Heuser , J . A . & Pollard , T . D . The interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high affinity pointed end capping , and formation of branching networks of filaments . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 6181 – 6186 ( 1998 ) . The first proposal of a dendritic - nucleation model , which describes the treadmilling of a whole array of branched filaments to explain actin treadmilling at the leading edge of motile cells . 19 . Flanagan , L . A . et al . Filamin A , the Arp2 / 3 complex , and the morphology and function of cortical actin filaments in human melanoma cells . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 511 – 517 ( 2001 ) . 20 . Blanchoin , L . et al . Direct observation of dendritic actin filament networks nucleated by Arp2 / 3 complex and WASP / Scar proteins . Nature 404 , 1007 – 1011 ( 2000 ) . 21 . Svitkina , T . M . et al . Mechanism of filopodia initiation by reorganization of a dendritic network . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 409 – 421 ( 2003 ) . Analyses filopodia formation and proposes a model in which filopodia emerge from uncapped filaments of a dendritic network . 22 . Chou , J . , Stolz , D . B . , Burke , N . A . , Watkins , S . C . & Wells , A . Distribution of gelsolin and phosphoinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate in lamellipodia during EGF - induced motility . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 34 , 776 – 790 ( 2002 ) . Investigates the recruitment of gelsolin to the actin cytoskeleton in lamellipodia following hydrolysis of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 in response to stimulation with hepatocyte growth factor . Supports the regulation of gelsolin downstream of the PLC γ pathway . 23 . Gerhardt , H . et al . VEGF guides angiogenic sprouting utilizing endothelial tip cell filopodia . J . Cell Biol . 161 , 1163 – 1177 ( 2003 ) . 24 . Yamashiro , S . , Yamakita , Y . , Ono , S . & Matsumura , F . Fascin , an actin - bundling protein , induces membrane protrusions and increases cell motility of epithelial cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 993 – 1006 ( 1998 ) . 25 . Bear , J . E . et al . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin filament capping regulates fibroblast motility . Cell 109 , 509 – 521 ( 2002 ) . 26 . Bachmann , C . , Fischer , L . , Walter , U . & Reinhard , M . The EVH2 domain of the vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein mediates tetramerization , F - actin binding , and actin bundle formation . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 23549 – 23557 ( 1999 ) . 27 . Vignjevic , D . et al . Formation of filopodia - like bundles in vitro from a dendritic network . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 951 – 962 ( 2003 ) . 28 . Friederich , E . , Huet , C . , Arpin , M . & Louvard , D . Villin induces microvilli growth and actin redistribution in transfected fibroblasts . Cell 59 , 461 – 475 ( 1989 ) . 29 . Loomis , P . A . et al . Espin cross - links cause the elongation of microvillus - type parallel actin bundles in vivo . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 1045 – 1055 ( 2003 ) . Shows a correlation between the concentration of espin and the length of microvilli in cultured cell lines , or the length of stereocilia in vivo . 30 . Berryman , M . , Franck , Z . & Bretscher , A . Ezrin is concentrated in the apical microvilli of a wide variety of epithelial cells whereas moesin is found primarily in endothelial cells . J . Cell Sci . 105 , 1025 – 1043 ( 1993 ) . 31 . Denker , S . P . & Barber , D . L . Cell migration requires both ion translocation and cytoskeletal anchoring by the Na – H exchanger NHE1 . J . Cell Biol . 159 , 1087 – 1096 ( 2002 ) . 32 . Lamb , R . F . et al . Essential functions of ezrin in maintenance of cell shape and lamellipodial extension in normal and transformed fibroblasts . Curr . Biol . 7 , 682 – 688 ( 1997 ) . 33 . Castelo , L . & Jay , D . G . Radixin is involved in lamellipodial stability during nerve growth cone motility . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 1511 – 1520 ( 1999 ) . 34 . Pataky , F . , Pironkova , R . & Hudspeth , A . J . Radixin is a constituent of stereocilia in hair cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 2601 – 2606 ( 2004 ) . 35 . Belyantseva , I . A . , Boger , E . T . & Friedman , T . B . Myosin XVa localizes to the tips of inner ear sensory cell stereocilia and is essential for staircase formation of the hair bundle . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 13958 – 13963 ( 2003 ) . 36 . Boeda , B . et al . Myosin VIIa , harmonin and cadherin 23 , three Usher I gene products that cooperate to shape the sensory hair cell bundle . EMBO J . 21 , 6689 – 6699 ( 2002 ) . 37 . Mooseker , M . S . & Coleman , T . R . The 110 - kD protein – calmodulin complex of the intestinal microvillus ( brush border myosin I ) is a mechanoenzyme . J . Cell Biol . 108 , 2395 – 2400 ( 1989 ) . 38 . Berg , J . S . , Derfler , B . H . , Pennisi , C . M . , Corey , D . P . & Cheney , R . E . Myosin - X , a novel myosin with pleckstrin homology domains , associates with regions of dynamic actin . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 3439 – 3451 ( 2000 ) . F O C U S O N C Y T O S K E L E T A L D Y N A M I C S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 5 | AUGUST 2004 | 11 39 . Tilney , L . G . , Connelly , P . S . , Vranich , K . A . , Shaw , M . K . & Guild , G . M . Regulation of actin filament cross - linking and bundle shape in Drosophila bristles . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 87 – 100 ( 2000 ) . 40 . Tilney , L . G . , Connelly , P . S . , Ruggiero , L . , Vranich , K . A . & Guild , G . M . Actin filament turnover regulated by cross - linking accounts for the size , shape , location , and number of actin bundles in Drosophila bristles . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 3953 – 3966 ( 2003 ) . 41 . Pollard , T . D . & Borisy , G . G . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 ( 2003 ) . 42 . Stidwill , R . P . , Wysolmerski , T . & Burgess , D . R . The brush border cytoskeleton is not static : in vivo turnover of proteins . J . Cell Biol . 98 , 641 – 645 ( 1984 ) . 43 . Tyska , M . J . & Mooseker , M . S . MYO1A ( brush border myosin I ) dynamics in the brush border of LLC - PK1 - CL4 cells . Biophys . J . 82 , 1869 – 1883 ( 2002 ) . 44 . Schneider , M . E . , Belyantseva , I . A . , Azevedo , R . B . & Kachar , B . Rapid renewal of auditory hair bundles . Nature 418 , 837 – 838 ( 2002 ) . Using transient expression of fluorescent actin , this paper analyses the rapid and continuous incorporation of actin monomers in the tips of stereocilia actin bundles . 45 . Rzadzinska , A . K . , Schneider , M . E . , Davies , C . , Riordan , G . P . & Kachar , B . An actin molecular treadmill and myosins maintain stereocilia functional architecture and self - renewal . J . Cell Biol . 164 , 887 – 897 ( 2004 ) . 46 . Mallavarapu , A . & Mitchison , T . Regulated actin cytoskeleton assembly at filopodium tips controls their extension and retraction . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 1097 – 1106 ( 1999 ) . 47 . Guild , G . M . , Connelly , P . S . , Vranich , K . A . , Shaw , M . K . & Tilney , L . G . Actin filament turnover removes bundles from Drosophila bristle cells . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 641 – 653 ( 2002 ) . 48 . Janmey , P . A . et al . Interactions of gelsolin and gelsolin – actin complexes with actin . Effects of calcium on actin nucleation , filament severing , and end blocking . Biochemistry 24 , 3714 – 3723 ( 1985 ) . 49 . Lin , K . M . , Mejillano , M . & Yin , H . L . Ca 2 + regulation of gelsolin by its C - terminal tail . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 27746 – 27752 ( 2000 ) . 50 . Lagarrigue , E . et al . The activation of gelsolin by low pH : the calcium latch is sensitive to calcium but not pH . Eur . J . Biochem . 270 , 4105 – 4112 ( 2003 ) . 51 . McGough , A . M . , Staiger , C . J . , Min , J . K . & Simonetti , K . D . The gelsolin family of actin regulatory proteins : modular structures , versatile functions . FEBS Lett . 552 , 75 – 81 ( 2003 ) . 52 . Xian , W . & Janmey , P . A . Dissecting the gelsolin – polyphosphoinositide interaction and engineering of a polyphosphoinositide - sensitive gelsolin C - terminal half protein . J . Mol . Biol . 322 , 755 – 771 ( 2002 ) . 53 . Janmey , P . A . & Stossel , T . P . Modulation of gelsolin function by phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . Nature 325 , 362 – 364 ( 1987 ) . 54 . Yamamoto , M . et al . Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate induces actin stress - fiber formation and inhibits membrane ruffling in CV1 cells . J . Cell Biol . 152 , 867 – 876 ( 2001 ) . 55 . Meerschaert , K . , De Corte , V . , De Ville , Y . , Vandekerckhove , J . & Gettemans , J . Gelsolin and functionally similar actin - binding proteins are regulated by lysophosphatidic acid . EMBO J . 17 , 5923 – 5932 ( 1998 ) . 56 . Witke , W . et al . Hemostatic , inflammatory , and fibroblast responses are blunted in mice lacking gelsolin . Cell 81 , 41 – 51 ( 1995 ) . This article was the first analysis of gelsolin - knockout mice and reports reduced neutrophil and fibroblast motility as well as defects in platelet shape changes . 57 . Chellaiah , M . et al . Gelsolin deficiency blocks podosome assembly and produces increased bone mass and strength . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 665 – 678 ( 2000 ) . 58 . Schafer , D . A . , Jennings , P . B . & Cooper , J . A . Dynamics of capping protein and actin assembly in vitro : uncapping barbed ends by polyphosphoinositides . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 169 – 179 ( 1996 ) . 59 . Yonezawa , N . , Nishida , E . , Iida , K . , Yahara , I . & Sakai , H . Inhibition of the interactions of cofilin , destrin , and deoxyribonuclease I with actin by phosphoinositides . J . Biol . Chem . 265 , 8382 – 8386 ( 1990 ) . 60 . Lassing , I . & Lindberg , U . Specific interaction between phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate and profilactin . Nature 314 , 472 – 474 ( 1985 ) . 61 . McGough , A . , Pope , B . , Chiu , W . & Weeds , A . Cofilin changes the twist of F - actin : implications for actin filament dynamics and cellular function . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 771 – 781 ( 1997 ) . 62 . Bobkov , A . A . et al . Structural effects of cofilin on longitudinal contacts in F - actin . J . Mol . Biol . 323 , 739 – 750 ( 2002 ) . 63 . Galkin , V . E . et al . ADF / cofilin use an intrinsic mode of F - actin instability to disrupt actin filaments . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 1057 – 1066 ( 2003 ) . 64 . Agnew , B . J . , Minamide , L . S . & Bamburg , J . R . Reactivation of phosphorylated actin depolymerizing factor and identification of the regulatory site . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 17582 – 17587 ( 1995 ) . 65 . Morgan , T . E . , Lockerbie , R . O . , Minamide , L . S . , Browning , M . D . & Bamburg , J . R . Isolation and characterization of a regulated form of actin depolymerizing factor . J . Cell Biol . 122 , 623 – 633 ( 1993 ) . 66 . Moon , A . & Drubin , D . G . The ADF / cofilin proteins : stimulus - responsive modulators of actin dynamics . Mol . Biol . Cell 6 , 1423 – 1431 ( 1995 ) . 67 . Zebda , N . et al . Phosphorylation of ADF / cofilin abolishes EGF - induced actin nucleation at the leading edge and subsequent lamellipod extension . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 1119 – 1128 ( 2000 ) . Supports a role for dephosphorylated ADF / cofilin in the generation of barbed ends associated with actin dynamics that allow lamellipodial extension . 68 . Niwa , R . , Nagata - Ohashi , K . , Takeichi , M . , Mizuno , K . & Uemura , T . Control of actin reorganization by Slingshot , a family of phosphatases that dephosphorylate ADF / cofilin . Cell 108 , 233 – 246 ( 2002 ) . 69 . Chan , A . Y . , Bailly , M . , Zebda , N . , Segall , J . E . & Condeelis , J . S . Role of cofilin in epidermal growth factor - stimulated actin polymerization and lamellipod protrusion . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 531 – 542 ( 2000 ) . 70 . Carlier , M . F . et al . Actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF / cofilin ) enhances the rate of filament turnover : implication in actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 1307 – 1322 ( 1997 ) . 71 . Ressad , F . , Didry , D . , Egile , C . , Pantaloni , D . & Carlier , M . F . Control of actin filament length and turnover by actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF / cofilin ) in the presence of capping proteins and ARP2 / 3 complex . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 20970 – 20976 ( 1999 ) . 72 . Ichetovkin , I . , Grant , W . & Condeelis , J . Cofilin produces newly polymerized actin filaments that are preferred for dendritic nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 12 , 79 – 84 ( 2002 ) . 73 . Ghosh , M . et al . Cofilin promotes actin polymerization and defines the direction of cell motility . Science 304 , 743 – 746 ( 2004 ) . 74 . Arber , S . et al . Regulation of actin dynamics through phosphorylation of cofilin by LIM - kinase . Nature 393 , 805 – 809 ( 1998 ) . Together with reference 77 , this study shows that cofilin is physiologically phosphorylated by LIM kinase downstream of Rac and that this phosphorylation stabilizes actin structures . 75 . Yang , N . et al . Cofilin phosphorylation by LIM - kinase 1 and its role in Rac - mediated actin reorganization . Nature 393 , 809 – 812 ( 1998 ) . 76 . Sumi , T . , Matsumoto , K . , Shibuya , A . & Nakamura , T . Activation of LIM kinases by myotonic dystrophy kinase - related Cdc42 - binding kinase α . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 23092 – 23096 ( 2001 ) . 77 . Bretscher , A . & Weber , K . Villin is a major protein of the microvillus cytoskeleton which binds both G and F actin in a calcium - dependent manner . Cell 20 , 839 – 847 ( 1980 ) . 78 . Ferrary , E . et al . In vivo , villin is required for Ca 2 + - dependent F - actin disruption in intestinal brush borders . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 819 – 830 ( 1999 ) . This analysis of villin - knockout mice is the first report of the in vivo role of villin in cellular remodelling . 79 . Kumar , N . , Zhao , P . , Tomar , A . , Galea , C . A . & Khurana , S . Association of villin with phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate regulates the actin cytoskeleton . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 3096 – 3110 ( 2004 ) . 80 . Zhai , L . , Zhao , P . , Panebra , A . , Guerrerio , A . L . & Khurana , S . Tyrosine phosphorylation of villin regulates the organization of the actin cytoskeleton . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 36163 – 36167 ( 2001 ) . 81 . Kumar , N . & Khurana , S . Identification of a functional switch for actin severing by cytoskeletal proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 24915 – 24918 ( 2004 ) . 82 . Khurana , S . , Arpin , M . , Patterson , R . & Donowitz , M . Ileal microvillar protein villin is tyrosine - phosphorylated and associates with PLC - γ 1 . Role of cytoskeletal rearrangement in the carbachol - induced inhibition of ileal NaCl absorption . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 30115 – 30121 ( 1997 ) . Reports the tyrosine phosphorylation of villin and its association with PLC γ 1 and implies a role for villin in signalling cascades that control sodium chloride absorption . 83 . Panebra , A . et al . Regulation of phospholipase C - γ 1 by the actin - regulatory protein villin . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 281 , C1046 – C1058 ( 2001 ) . 84 . Athman , R . , Louvard , D . & Robine , S . Villin enhances hepatocyte growth factor - induced actin cytoskeleton remodeling in epithelial cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 4641 – 4653 ( 2003 ) . Investigates the ability of villin to enhance actin remodelling in cellular processes such as hepatocyte growth factor ( HGF ) - induced motility and morphogenesis . 85 . Gary , R . & Bretscher , A . Ezrin self - association involves binding of an N - terminal domain to a normally masked C - terminal domain that includes the F - actin binding site . Mol . Biol . Cell 6 , 1061 – 1075 ( 1995 ) . 86 . Reczek , D . & Bretscher , A . The carboxyl - terminal region of EBP50 binds to a site in the amino - terminal domain of ezrin that is masked in the dormant molecule . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 18452 – 18458 ( 1998 ) . 87 . Matsui , T . et al . Rho - kinase phosphorylates COOH - terminal threonines of ezrin / radixin / moesin ( ERM ) proteins and regulates their head - to - tail association . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 647 – 657 ( 1998 ) . 88 . Nakamura , F . , Amieva , M . R . & Furthmayr , H . Phosphorylation of threonine 558 in the carboxyl - terminal actin - binding domain of moesin by thrombin activation of human platelets . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 31377 – 31385 ( 1995 ) . 89 . Gautreau , A . , Louvard , D . & Arpin , M . Morphogenic effects of ezrin require a phosphorylation - induced transition from oligomers to monomers at the plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 193 – 203 ( 2000 ) . 90 . Oshiro , N . , Fukata , Y . & Kaibuchi , K . Phosphorylation of moesin by rho - associated kinase ( Rho - kinase ) plays a crucial role in the formation of microvilli - like structures . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 34663 – 34666 ( 1998 ) . 91 . Ng , T . et al . Ezrin is a downstream effector of trafficking PKC - integrin complexes involved in the control of cell motility . EMBO J . 20 , 2723 – 2741 ( 2001 ) . 92 . Yonemura , S . , Matsui , T . & Tsukita , S . Rho - dependent and - independent activation mechanisms of ezrin / radixin / moesin proteins : an essential role for polyphosphoinositides in vivo . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 2569 – 2580 ( 2002 ) . 93 . Fievet , B . T . et al . Phosphoinositide binding and phosphorylation act sequentially in the activation mechanism of ezrin . J . Cell Biol . 164 , 653 – 659 ( 2004 ) . Describes the sequential requirement for PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding and threonine phosphorylation in ezrin activation and its role in epithelial - cell morphogenesis . 94 . Nakamura , N . et al . Phosphorylation of ERM proteins at filopodia induced by Cdc42 . Genes Cells 5 , 571 – 581 ( 2000 ) . 95 . Kondo , T . et al . ERM ( ezrin / radixin / moesin ) - based molecular mechanism of microvillar breakdown at an early stage of apoptosis . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 749 – 758 ( 1997 ) . 96 . Speck , O . , Hughes , S . C . , Noren , N . K . , Kulikauskas , R . M . & Fehon , R . G . Moesin functions antagonistically to the Rho pathway to maintain epithelial integrity . Nature 421 , 83 – 87 ( 2003 ) . 97 . Takahashi , K . et al . Direct interaction of the Rho GDP dissociation inhibitor with ezrin / radixin / moesin initiates the activation of the Rho small G protein . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 23371 – 23375 ( 1997 ) . 98 . Legg , J . W . , Lewis , C . A . , Parsons , M . , Ng , T . & Isacke , C . M . A novel PKC - regulated mechanism controls CD44 ezrin association and directional cell motility . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 399 – 407 ( 2002 ) . 99 . Krieg , J . & Hunter , T . Identification of the two major epidermal growth factor - induced tyrosine phosphorylation sites in the microvillar core protein ezrin . J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 19258 – 19265 ( 1992 ) . 100 . Crepaldi , T . , Gautreau , A . , Comoglio , P . M . , Louvard , D . & Arpin , M . Ezrin is an effector of hepatocyte growth factor - mediated migration and morphogenesis in epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 423 – 434 ( 1997 ) . 101 . Vadlamudi , R . K . et al . Filamin is essential in actin cytoskeletal assembly mediated by p21 - activated kinase 1 . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 681 – 690 ( 2002 ) . Provides evidence for a reciprocal activation of filamin and PAK1 , which is necessary for PAK1 - mediated formation of dynamic protrusions . 102 . Sells , M . A . et al . Human p21 - activated kinase ( Pak1 ) regulates actin organization in mammalian cells . Curr . Biol . 7 , 202 – 210 ( 1997 ) . 103 . Sells , M . A . , Boyd , J . T . & Chernoff , J . p21 - activated kinase 1 ( Pak1 ) regulates cell motility in mammalian fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 837 – 849 ( 1999 ) . 104 . Stossel , T . P . et al . Filamins as integrators of cell mechanics and signalling . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 138 – 145 ( 2001 ) . 105 . Yamakita , Y . , Ono , S . , Matsumura , F . & Yamashiro , S . Phosphorylation of human fascin inhibits its actin binding and bundling activities . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 12632 – 12638 ( 1996 ) . 106 . Ono , S . et al . Identification of an actin binding region and a protein kinase C phosphorylation site on human fascin . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 2527 – 2533 ( 1997 ) . 12 | AUGUST 2004 | VOLUME 5 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S 107 . Adams , J . C . et al . Cell – matrix adhesions differentially regulate fascin phosphorylation . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 4177 – 4190 ( 1999 ) . 108 . Anilkumar , N . , Parsons , M . , Monk , R . , Ng , T . & Adams , J . C . Interaction of fascin and protein kinase C α : a novel intersection in cell adhesion and motility . EMBO J . 22 , 5390 – 5402 ( 2003 ) . Reports a direct interaction between phosphorylated fascin and PKC α , which favours cell spreading and decreases fascin protrusions and cell motility . 109 . Adams , J . C . & Schwartz , M . A . Stimulation of fascin spikes by thrombospondin - 1 is mediated by the GTPases Rac and Cdc42 . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 807 – 822 ( 2000 ) . 110 . Wulfing , C . & Davis , M . M . A receptor / cytoskeletal movement triggered by costimulation during T cell activation . Science 282 , 2266 – 2269 ( 1998 ) . 111 . Roumier , A . et al . The membrane - microfilament linker ezrin is involved in the formation of the immunological synapse and in T cell activation . Immunity 15 , 715 – 728 ( 2001 ) . 112 . Allenspach , E . J . et al . ERM - dependent movement of CD43 defines a novel protein complex distal to the immunological synapse . Immunity 15 , 739 – 750 ( 2001 ) . 113 . Bubeck Wardenburg , J . et al . Regulation of PAK activation and the T cell cytoskeleton by the linker protein SLP - 76 . Immunity 9 , 607 – 616 ( 1998 ) . 114 . Cannon , J . L . et al . Wasp recruitment to the T cell : APC contact site occurs independently of Cdc42 activation . Immunity 15 , 249 – 259 ( 2001 ) . 115 . Machesky , L . M . et al . Scar , a WASp - related protein , activates nucleation of actin filaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 3739 – 3744 ( 1999 ) . 116 . Badour , K . et al . Fyn and PTP - PEST - mediated regulation of Wiskott – Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( WASp ) tyrosine phosphorylation is required for coupling T cell antigen receptor engagement to WASp effector function and T cell activation . J . Exp . Med . 199 , 99 – 112 ( 2004 ) . 117 . Edwards , D . C . , Sanders , L . C . , Bokoch , G . M . & Gill , G . N . Activation of LIM - kinase by Pak1 couples Rac / Cdc42 GTPase signalling to actin cytoskeletal dynamics . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 253 – 259 ( 1999 ) . 118 . Glogauer , M . et al . Calcium ions and tyrosine phosphorylation interact coordinately with actin to regulate cytoprotective responses to stretching . J . Cell Sci . 110 , 11 – 21 ( 1997 ) . 119 . Glogauer , M . et al . The role of actin - binding protein 280 in integrin - dependent mechanoprotection . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 1689 – 1698 ( 1998 ) . 120 . Tigges , U . , Koch , B . , Wissing , J . , Jockusch , B . M . & Ziegler , W . H . The F - actin cross - linking and focal adhesion protein filamin A is a ligand and in vivo substrate for protein kinase C α . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 23561 – 23569 ( 2003 ) . 121 . Loisel , T . P . , Boujemaa , R . , Pantaloni , D . & Carlier , M . F . Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 , 613 – 616 ( 1999 ) . 122 . Cameron , L . A . , Footer , M . J . , van Oudenaarden , A . & Theriot , J . A . Motility of ActA protein - coated microspheres driven by actin polymerization . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 4908 – 4913 ( 1999 ) . 123 . Noireaux , V . et al . Growing an actin gel on spherical surfaces . Biophys . J . 78 , 1643 – 1654 ( 2000 ) . 124 . Yarar , D . , D’Alessio , J . A . , Jeng , R . L . & Welch , M . D . Motility determinants in WASP family proteins . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 4045 – 4059 ( 2002 ) . 125 . Samarin , S . et al . How VASP enhances actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 163 , 131 – 142 ( 2003 ) . 126 . Bernheim - Groswasser , A . , Wiesner , S . , Golsteyn , R . M . , Carlier , M . F . & Sykes , C . The dynamics of actin - based motility depend on surface parameters . Nature 417 , 308 – 311 ( 2002 ) . 127 . Wiesner , S . et al . A biomimetic motility assay provides insight into the mechanism of actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 387 – 398 ( 2003 ) . 128 . Friederich , E . , Vancompernolle , K . , Louvard , D . & Vandekerckhove , J . Villin function in the organization of the actin cytoskeleton . Correlation of in vivo effects to its biochemical activities in vitro . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 26751 – 26760 ( 1999 ) . 129 . Friederich , E . et al . An actin - binding site containing a conserved motif of charged amino acid residues is essential for the morphogenic effect of villin . Cell 70 , 81 – 92 ( 1992 ) . 130 . Costa de Beauregard , M . A . , Pringault , E . , Robine , S . & Louvard , D . Suppression of villin expression by antisense RNA impairs brush border assembly in polarized epithelial intestinal cells . EMBO J . 14 , 409 – 421 ( 1995 ) . 131 . Phillips , M . J . et al . Abnormalities in villin gene expression and canalicular microvillus structure in progressive cholestatic liver disease of childhood . Lancet 362 , 1112 – 1119 ( 2003 ) . 132 . Zigmond , S . H . Formin - induced nucleation of actin filaments . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 , 99 – 105 ( 2004 ) . 133 . Loy , C . J . , Sim , K . S . & Yong , E . L . Filamin - A fragment localizes to the nucleus to regulate androgen receptor and coactivator functions . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 4562 – 4567 ( 2003 ) . 134 . De Joussineau , C . et al . Delta - promoted filopodia mediate long - range lateral inhibition in Drosophila . Nature 426 , 555 – 559 ( 2003 ) . 135 . Rodriguez , O . C . et al . Conserved microtubule – actin interactions in cell movement and morphogenesis . Nature Cell Biol . 5 , 599 – 609 ( 2003 ) . 136 . Athman , R . et al . The epithelial cell cytoskeleton and intracellular trafficking III . How is villin involved in the actin cytoskeleton dynamics in intestinal cells ? Am . J . Physiol . Gastrointest . Liver . Physiol . 283 , G496 – G502 ( 2002 ) . Acknowledgements We sincerely thank J . Srivastava and D . Vignjevic for careful reading of the manuscript and helpful comments . This work was supported by funds from the French ministry of research , Action Concertée Incitative Biologie du développement et physiologie intégrative . C . R . is supported by a Ph . D . fellowship from the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique and R . A . is supported by a post - doctoral fellowship from the Institut Pasteur . Competing interests statement The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests . Online links DATABASES The following terms in this article are linked online to : Flybase : http : / / flybase . bio . indiana . edu / Ena | fimbrin | quail Interpro : http : / / www . ebi . ac . uk / interpro / ActA | FERM | VCA Swiss - Prot : http : / / us . expasy . org / sprot / ezrin | fascin | filamin A | gelsolin | harmonin b | moesin | myosin VIIa | myosin XVa | NCK | PAK | radixin | SLP76 | villin | VASP | VAV | WASP Access to this links box is available online .