The cellular phosphoinositide signalling system , an intricate network of enzymes and phospholipid mes - sengers , is a crucial regulator of most , if not all , cellular processes . The importance of phosphoinositide signal - ling and metabolism in cell function is emphasized by the many diseases that result from alterations in genes that encode phosphoinositide - modifying enzymes . Additionally , alterations in several enzymes that have not yet been linked to human diseases show striking phenotypes in animal models . A key role in cancer is now well established for the enzymes PI3K and PTEN that regulate the levels of phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 , 5 - tri - sphosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ) . Notably , these enzymes are among the most frequently mutated proteins in cancer . Several recent studies of the phosphoinositide signalling system have consolidated evidence that several other components , including some phosphoinositide kinases , phosphatases and phospholipase C ( PLC ) enzymes could have a role in the generation and progression of tumours . In this Review we summarize and discuss the multiple links between the phosphoinositide signal - ling system and cancer . Particular emphasis is placed on those components for which efforts to evaluate the extent and mechanisms of their involvement in cancer are ongoing . The phosphoinositide signalling system Phosphatidylinositol ( PtdIns ) is a membrane phos - pholipid that can be phosphorylated at the 3 , 4 and 5 positions of the inositol ring to generate seven phospho - inositides : PtdIns3P , PtdIns4P , PtdIns5P , PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 , PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P 2 and PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ( FIG . 1a ) . Phosphorylation and dephosphorylation by lipid kinases and phosphatases can rapidly interconvert phosphoinositide species resulting in their dynamic production 1 . In addition , PLC - dependent hydro - lysis of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 generates the second messenger molecules diacylglycerol ( DAG ) and inositol - 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( Ins ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ) , which in turn stimulate several DAG effectors and Ins ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 - mediated cal - cium mobilization 2 . This second - messenger system originally established the importance of phospho - inositide metabolism in cell regulation . More recently , PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and other phosphoinositides have been found to be important and active in their own right , rather than just as PLC substrates or intermediates in the synthesis of other phosphorylated species . These regulatory roles are mainly due to phosphoinositide – protein interactions 3 , 4 . The phosphorylated head groups of phosphoinositides bind with variable affin - ity and specificity to various protein modules or to unique protein surfaces ( FIG . 1b ) . Specific membrane compartments are characterized by the presence of spe - cific phosphoinositide species , and phosphoinositide binding often functions together with other membrane proteins , such as small GTPases of the Ras superfamily , to recruit cytosolic proteins to these compartments 5 , 6 . In some instances the interaction of the protein with the lipid regulates the activity of the protein , as occurs in the activation of 3 - phosphoinositide - dependent protein kinase 1 ( PDK1 ) by PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ( ReF . 7 ) . Through these interactions , phosphoinositides have a major role in recruiting and regulating proteins at the membrane interface and so control a wide range The Institute of Cancer Research , Section for Cell and Molecular Biology , Chester Beatty Laboratories , Fulham Road , London SW3 6JB , UK . Correspondence to M . K . e - mail : Matilda . Katan @ icr . ac . uk doi : 10 . 1038 / nrc2842 Phosphoinositide signalling in cancer : beyond PI3K and PTEN Tom D . Bunney and Matilda Katan Abstract | There are numerous studies that suggest multiple links between the cellular phosphoinositide system and cancer . As key roles in cancer have been established for PI3K and PTEN — enzymes that regulate the levels of phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate — compounds targeting this pathway are entering the clinic at a rapid pace . Several other phosphoinositide - modifying enzymes , including phosphoinositide kinases , phosphatases and phospholipase C enzymes , have been implicated in the generation and progression of tumours . Studies of these enzymes are providing new insights into the mechanisms and the extent of their involvement in cancer , highlighting new potential targets for therapeutic intervention . R E V I E W S 342 | MAy 2010 | VoLuME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 of processes , including the assembly and activity of signalling scaffolds , membrane budding and fusion , actin and microtubule dynamics and the transport of ions and metabolites across the membrane 6 . Generation and functions of different phosphoinositides . The parent lipid PtdIns is synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum and can be further phosphorylated to different PtdIns monophosphates . Phosphorylation to PtdIns4P mainly occurs in two cellular compartments : the Golgi complex and the plasma membrane . In the Golgi com - plex PtdIns4P has an important role in the biogenesis of transport vesicles 8 . However , at the plasma membrane the major function of PtdIns4P is as a substrate for further phosphorylation to PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( ReF . 6 ) . PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 is a precursor of second messengers and also binds and regulates various proteins at the cell surface . PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 also helps to define the plasma membrane as a target for secretory vesicles and functions as a co - receptor in the recruitment of clathrin coats and other endocytic factors 6 , 9 . Another important function of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 is as a cofactor in actin polymerization through binding to actin regulatory proteins 10 . Several other processes , including the formation and turnover of focal contacts and cell – cell adhesion are also affected by PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . Synthesis of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 by PtdIns4P - 5 kinases at the plasma membrane is reversed through dephosphory - lation by 5 - phosphatases such as synaptojanins , a proc - ess that is tightly coupled to endocytosis and removal from the plasma membrane 6 , 11 . PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 can be further phosphorylated by PI3K to PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 , which is another lipid with key sig - nalling functions and a major role in the control of cell survival , growth and proliferation 12 , 13 . Several proteins propagate different cellular signals following binding to PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 , and these include Ser / Thr kinases Akt ( or PKB ) , PDK1 and BTK . The rapid production of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 by PI3K in response to cell stimulation is reversed by PtdIns - 3 and PtdIns - 5 phosphatases with dif - ferent signalling outcomes 14 , 15 . The 3 - phosphatase PTEN regenerates PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 but instead of terminating the signal , 5 - phosphatases can propagate PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 sig - nalling by generating another phospholipid messenger , PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 ( ReF . 16 ) . Phosphorylation of PtdIns at the 3 position gener - ates the bulk of PtdIns3P that is localized at endosomes . PtdIns3P is also generated from PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 by 4 - phos - phatase activity . PtdIns3P , the signature phosphoinositide for early endosomes , is a ligand for a large number of endosomal proteins 6 . Subsequently , phosphorylation of PtdIns3P to PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P 2 on endosomes is thought to generate docking sites for the recruitment of cytosolic factors that control outgoing traffic from early endo - somes 17 . The third PtdIns monophosphate PtdIns5P is likely to be generated by multiple pathways and could be further phosphorylated to PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 as a quantitatively minor route of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 generation 18 . Dysfunctions of the phosphoinositide system . The importance of maintaining a tight balance between the activities of the various phosphoinositide - metabolising enzymes is highlighted by the severe consequences aris - ing from defects in phosphoinositide metabolism . Several enzymes , notably phosphatases ( encoded by MTM1 , MTMR2 , SBF2 , OCRL1 and SNJ1 ) that remove either the 3 or 5 phosphate from different phosphoinositides , including endosomal PtdIns3P and PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P 2 , are frequently mutated in a range of disorders 19 , 20 . These disorders represent a heterogeneous group of conditions , many of which affect the nervous system ( examples include lethal contractural syndrome , Lowe syndrome and Marie – Charcot – Tooth disease ) , with others affect - ing muscle ( myopathy ) , eye ( fleck corneal dystrophy and Lowe syndrome ) and kidney ( Lowe syndrome ) . In most cases , we do not understand in depth the links connect - ing the genetic defects with the clinical manifestations of these diseases . An attractive working hypothesis is that the diseases share some common pathological mecha - nisms involving abnormal membrane trafficking . In contrast to this group of disorders , the understanding of the enzymes involved in PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 metabolism and its alteration is much more extensive owing to their well - established role in inflammation , diabetes and cancer 21 . In the following sections , which focus on the links between the phosphoinositide system and cancer , we discuss the regulation of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 signalling and cover enzymes that stringently control its metabolism and those that modulate PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 pathways . We also describe links between the regulation of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and cancer , including the roles of this lipid messenger in cancer cell motility . The properties of some of the phos - phoinositide - modifying enzymes that are implicated in cancer are summarized in FIG . 2 . At a glance • The phosphoinositide signalling system can be viewed as a network of interconverting enzymes , phospholipid messengers and their binding proteins . Interactions between phosphoinositides and their binding proteins are key to their regulatory actions . • Control of phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ) signals in cell survival , proliferation and growth is frequently dysfunctional in cancer , resulting in enhanced PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 signalling . The phosphoinositide enzymes PI3KI α and 3 - phosphatase PTEN stringently control this signalling . • Some important downstream targets of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 , such as the protein kinase Akt , are also regulated by PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 . The phosphoinositide enzymes that generate PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 from PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 , phosphoinositide 5 - phosphatases , and enzymes that degrade PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 to PtdIns3P , phosphoinositide 4 - phosphatases , are also implicated in cancer . • The most abundant phosphoinositide , PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , binds to proteins important for actin polymerization , formation and turnover of focal contacts and cell – cell adhesion . These proteins could be regulated by local changes in the PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 levels through the action of enzymes such as PtdIns4P - 5 kinases ( PIPKI γ ) and PLC ( PLC γ ) that are implicated in the regulation of cancer cell motility . • In addition to the local regulation of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 levels , diverse functions of PLC enzymes in cancer could be mediated by the generation of the second messengers diacylglycerol and inositol - 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate or in some instances by their function as signalling scaffolds . • The most important outstanding task is to further evaluate the role and extent of involvement of different phosphoinositide enzymes in the generation and progression of human tumours . R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEWS | CanCer VoLuME 10 | MAy 2010 | 343 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Nature Reviews | Cancer P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P PtdIns3P 4 - Ptase PI4K PTEN PI3KII PtdIns4P PI4K 4 - Ptase PtdIns PIK - Fyve ? PtdIns5P 4 - Ptase PI4K PI5K 5 - Ptase PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P 2 PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 PI5K ( PIK - Fyve ) Jumpy / MTM / MTMR Jumpy / MTM / MTMR PI5K 5 - Ptase ( SHIP ) PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 PI - PLC DAG PTEN PI3KIAPI3KIB Ins ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 Ca 2 + signalling Other inositol polyphosphates PI3KII a b Membrane Akt - PH FERM Cofilin Binding site Figure 1 | The phosphoinositide metabolic cycle and target proteins . a | Schematic representation of the phosphoinositide metabolic cycle . The parent lipid phosphatidylinositol ( PtdIns ) represents the core structure of phosphoinositides , and phosphate groups can be attached to any permutation of 3 - , 4 - and 5 - hydroxyl groups . Phosphorylation ( solid arrows ) and dephosphorylation ( dashed arrows ) reactions and enzymes involved in the interconversion of phosphoinositide species are indicated . Also shown is phospholipase C ( PLC ) - catalysed production of the second messengers diacylglycerol ( DAG ) and inositol - 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( Ins ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ) . Grey arrows represent less well - characterized pathways , or pathways through which a minority of the phosphoinositide is generated . Nomenclature and alternative names of specific kinases and phosphatases are described in ReF . 1 . b | Target proteins for phosphoinositides . The regulatory actions of phosphoinositides are mainly due to phosphoinositide – protein interactions . The phosphoinositides bind to various protein modules or , in some cases , to unique protein surfaces . An example of a module that is frequently involved in the binding of phosphoinositide headgroups , the PH domain , is illustrated by the interaction of the PH domain from Ser / Thr kinase Akt with the headgroup of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ( PDB ID : 1UNQ ) ( left panel ) . A module with a more complex structure that is involved in PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 recognition , the FERM domain ( PDB ID : 1GC6 ) , is present in proteins mediating plasma membrane – cytoskeleton interactions , including ezrin , radixin , moesin and talin ( middle panel ) . Some proteins such as cofilin ( PDB ID : 1TVJ ) have specific surfaces involved in binding of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , with both the headgroup and a portion of a lipid chain bound to the protein ( right panel ) . 4 - Ptase , phosphoinositide 4 - phosphatase ; 5 - Ptase , phosphoinositide 5 - phosphatase ; PI3KI , type I PI3K ; PI3KII , type II PI3K ; PI3KIII , type PI3K ; PI4K , phosphoinositide 4 - kinase ; PI5K , phosphoinositide 5 - kinase ; PIK - Fyve , type III PtdInsP kinase ; PI - PLC , phosphoinositide - specific phospholipase C . R E V I E W S 344 | MAy 2010 | VoLuME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Nature Reviews | Cancer PIK3CA PTEN C2 PEST PDZ - binding SHIP1A INPP5E CAAX INPP4B CKSAKDR PIP5K1C PLCB3 PLCG1 spPH PLCE1 Main regulatory interactions Enzyme class Gene Regulation unclear PIK3R1 Phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase type I Phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate 5 - phosphatase 1 Phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate 3 - phosphatase and dual specificity protein phosphate Phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate 5 - phosphatase type IV Type II inositol - 3 , 4 - bisphosphate 4 - phosphatase Phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase type - 1 γ 1 - phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate phosphodiesterase γ - 1 1 - phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate phosphodiesterase ε - 1 1 - phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate phosphodiesterase β - 3 PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 PtdIns ( 3 ) P PtdIns ( 4 ) P PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 Ins ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 and DAG PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 Ins ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 and DAG PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 Ins ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 and DAG PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 Many activation signals Regulatory interactions could be mediated by PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 and PA High activity when bound to membrane PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and acidic lipids ; regulated by post - translational modification Activation through binding to immunoreceptors and Src kinases Regulation by small GTPases , lipid binding and Ser / Thr and Tyr phosphorylation Numerous receptor and non - receptor TKs contribute to activation Activated by Ras and Rho family GTPases ; can function as a GEF Activated though G protein - coupled receptors , interacts with SHP1 and STATs SH3 p85 binding Ras - GEF Ptase PR C2 Kinase Helical SH2 RhoGAP EF - hands PLC PH Tail RA 724 aa 1686 aa 403 aa 1189 aa 644 aa 924 aa 661 aa 1290 aa 2302 aa 1234 aa Proteinlength Preferredreaction Regulation of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 signals As PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 is a major regulator of cell survival , cell proliferation and cell growth , dysfunctions in the control of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 signalling , resulting in its enhance - ment , can often cause cancer 22 ( FIG . 3 ) . The components of the PI3K pathway include upstream regulators of PI3K enzymes ( such as epidermal growth factor recep - tor ( EGFR ) and Ras ) , 3 - phosphatase PTEN , and several Ser / Thr kinases and transcription factors 23 , 24 . PI3K and PTEN stringently control signalling from PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 . There is clear genetic evidence for a central role for these enzymes in tumorigenesis : somatic mutations in human cancer that target PTEN 25 and the α catalytic subunit of PI3K ( PIK3CA ) 26 occur frequently , resulting in increased activity of the PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 signalling pathway ( the Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer website ; see Figure 2 | Some phosphoinositide - modifying enzymes relevant to human cancer . Phosphoinositide kinases , phosphatases and phospholipase C ( PLC ) enzymes are families of multidomain proteins participating in signalling networks through complex regulatory interactions . Some of the enzymes that are known or could be potentially involved in the generation and progression of human tumours are shown . Boxes on the left summarize the main input signals that control enzyme activities . Regulatory and catalytic regions of each enzyme are shown in the central panel . As many of these enzymes can act on several phosphoinositides , at least in vitro , only the preferred reaction is shown . Enzymes that regulate the production and degradation of phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ) signals are shown on a blue background and those linked to the diverse signalling roles of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 are shown on a yellow background . PLC γ , PLC ε and PLC β all generate second messenger signalling . PLC β might also function as a scaffold protein to prevent neoplasia in the haemotopoietic system . aa , amino acid ; C2 , conserved 2 domain ; DAG , diacylglycerol ; GEF , guanine nucleotide exchange factor ; PA , phosphatic acid ; PH , pleckstrin homology domain ; Ptase , phosphatase domain ; PR , proline - rich ; PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ; RBD , Ras binding domain ; STAT , signal transducer and activator of transcription ; TK , tyrosine kinase . R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEWS | CanCer VoLuME 10 | MAy 2010 | 345 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Nature Reviews | Cancer p110 PI3K PTEN p85 PI - 5Ptases INPP4 Growth , proliferation , survival and motility RTK Other targets Othertargets Cancer cell PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 PtdIns3P PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 AKT P P P P P P P P P P P P P Ras Further information ) . Mutations in the α - isoform of the regulatory subunit of PI3K ( PIK3R1 ) 27 and amplifications of PI3KCΑ and , in some instances , PI3KCB have also been described 23 . The lipid kinase activity of the mutant PI3K proteins is substantially upregulated , resulting in oncogenic activity 28 – 30 . As an antagonist of PI3K signal - ling , impaired function of PTEN leads to PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 accumulation in cells and unrestrained activation of its downstream signals 31 , 32 . Loss of function of this tumour suppressor is associated with inherited cancer predispo - sition syndromes ( such as Cowden’s disease , Bannayan – Zonana syndrome and Lhermitte – Duclos disease ) and with sporadic cancers , including gliomas , melanomas , prostate , endometrial , lung , renal , ovarian and breast cancer 33 . Downstream targets of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 . Consistent with the concept that proteins binding the rare 3 - phosphorylated phosphoinositides must have high affinity and spe - cificity , downstream targets of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 typically possess pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domains with such properties 3 . The main target of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 in the regulation of cell survival , cell proliferation and cell growth , Akt , is one of the PH domain - containing pro - teins with specific recognition that is compatible with the binding of both PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 and PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 . Another kinase that is closely involved in Akt regulation , PDK1 , shares this property . Many of the 5 - phosphatases hydrolyse PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 to form PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 ( FIG . 3 ) . As PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 not only binds but also facilitates Akt activation 34 – 36 , 5 - phosphatases could be expected to promote cell survival , cell proliferation and cell growth . However , there are other target proteins with different functions , some of which possess PH domains that selec - tively bind PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 ( for example , TAPP proteins and lamellipodin ) 14 . As a consequence , 5 - phosphatase signalling can be redirected in a cell type - specific man - ner , resulting in different functional outcomes or the termination of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 signalling . unlike PTEN , which as a stringent regulator stops PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 sig - nalling , the 5 - phosphatases could function as modula - tors of the PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 signals . In keeping with these considerations the analysis of 5 - phosphatases in cancer suggests that , in some cancers , specific 5 - phosphatases exhibit increased expression that is associated with tum - origenic potential and that they can function as tumour suppressors only in some instances . Although it is likely that their role in cancer is linked to their ability to mod - ulate PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 signals , further studies expanding observations from gene expression profiling of human cancers are needed to consolidate current support - ing data . Several 5 - phosphatases are described further below to illustrate their roles in cancer ; these include the SH2 domain - containing inositol 5 - phosphatase 1 ( SHIP1 ; encoded by INPP5D ) and SHIP2 ( encoded by INPPL1 ) that preferentially act on PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 , and 5 - phosphatases INPP5E , SKIP and proline - rich inositol polyphosphate 5 - phosphatase ( PIPP ) that hydrolyse a broader range of 5 - phosphoinositides . SHIP1 and SHIP2 . SHIP1 is a haematopoietic - specific inhibitory molecule that has been extensively studied for its regulatory role in B cells , T cells , macrophages and mast cells 37 , 38 . There are several lines of evidence that suggest that alterations to SHIP1 function could contribute to the development of some specific types of cancer . Inpp5d – / – mice develop a myeloproliferative disease with some resemblance to chronic myelog - enous leukaemia ( CML ) 39 . These mice have splenom - egaly and extramedullary haematopoiesis , and die from massive myeloid infiltration of the lungs . Interestingly , SHIP1 levels are reduced in primary cells from patients with CML , and the BCR – ABL1 oncogene , which causes CML , inhibits SHIP1 expression 40 . Expression of SHIP1 is also reduced in the human Jurkat T cell line that was derived from a patient with acute lymphoblastic leukae - mia , and in adult T cell leukaemia or lymphoma 41 , 42 . In addition , re - expression of SHIP1 in Jurkat T cells down - regulates constitutively active Akt and causes delayed cellular transit through the G1 phase of the cell cycle , restricting cell growth 41 . Similarly , activation of SHIP1 by small molecules has an inhibitory effect and reduces PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 levels in haematopoietic and myeloma cells 43 , 44 . These observations support a mechanism in which SHIP1 functions as a negative regulator of the PI3K – Akt pathway by hydrolysis of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 . In addition , SHIP1 could function by regulating the expres - sion of other proteins , such as by upregulating expression of Krupple - like factor 2 ( KLF2 ) , a negative regulator of T cell proliferation 45 . SHIP1 might also mediate the inhibition of cell growth 45 . Mutations in INPP5D have been identified in patients with acute myeloid leukae - mia , and data indicate that these SHIP1 mutations could Figure 3 | Signalling through PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 . On stimulation of PI3K type I and production of phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ) , several phosphatases are involved in subsequent dephosphorylation steps ( dashed arrows ) . PTEN hydrolyses the 3 - phosphate of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 to regenerate phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) , thus terminating PI3K signalling . 5 - phosphatases such as SHIP , however , generate PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 that , like PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 , can facilitate the activation of Akt . 4 - phosphatases ( INPP4A and INPP4B ) act on PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 to generate PtdIns3P , a phosphoinositide not involved in PI3K signalling , thus contributing to its termination . The key reaction steps outlined are integrated into complex signalling networks in which Akt and other targets of 3 - phosphorylated phosphoinositides , together with further downstream components , regulate cell growth , proliferation , survival and motility . The complexity of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 signalling 32 and , in particular , the regulation of cell motility and interconnectivity with regulation of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( ReFs 14 , 123 ) have recently been reviewed . P , phosphate ; RTK , receptor tyrosine kinase . R E V I E W S 346 | MAy 2010 | VoLuME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 contribute to its pathogenesis , possibly by modulating the PI3K pathway 46 , 47 . In particular , one single somatic missense mutation in the phosphatase domain reduced catalytic activity of SHIP1 , and leukaemia cells with this mutation showed enhanced Akt phosphorylation fol - lowing stimulation . Exogenous expression of this SHIP1 mutant also led to enhanced cell proliferation 47 . Studies of the other widely expressed SHIP isoform , SHIP2 , suggest a different function , and consequences such as possible deregulation in cancer , from those described for SHIP1 . Notably , it has been reported that the expression of SHIP2 is increased in a panel of breast cancer cell lines 48 . Furthermore , depletion of SHIP2 expression in the MDA - 231 breast cancer cell line resulted in decreased cell proliferation as well as tumour formation and metas - tasis in nude mice , suggesting that SHIP2 might have a positive role in promoting breast cancer . Some of these biological outcomes seem to be linked to SHIP2 - mediated changes in EGFR levels . It has also been shown that SHIP2 silencing in MDA - 231 cells decreases EGF - induced Akt activation and suppresses the expression of C - X - C chem - okine receptor type 4 ( CXCR4 ) , which is important for cell migration and metastasis and functions downstream of EGF – Akt signalling 49 . As SHIP2 is known to negatively regulate insulin signalling and its genetic knockout pre - vents high - fat diet - induced obesity in mice 50 , it is possible that SHIP2 provides an important molecular link between diet , obesity and cancer . Indeed , obesity is a risk factor for some cancers , such as breast , endometrial , kidney , gastrointestinal tract , pancreatic and prostate 51 , 52 . Other 5‑phosphatases . Several 5 - phosphatases with a somewhat broader substrate specificity , INPP5E , SKIP and PIPP , show changes in expression levels in differ - ent cancer types and in most cases show higher expres - sion . For example , in cervical cancer samples analysed by gene - expression profiling INPP5E is in the top 5 of 74 genes with altered expression , being upregulated more than 50 - fold 53 . Expression of this 5 - phosphatase is also increased in samples from patients with non - Hodgkin’s lymphoma following treatment 54 , in uterine leiomyosa - rcoma samples 55 and , together with SKIP , in gemcitab - ine - resistant pancreatic cancer cell lines 56 . By contrast , INPP5E is downregulated in stomach cancer and expres - sion levels are reduced in metastatic adenocarcinomas compared with primary tumours 57 , 58 . PIPP is expressed at higher levels in oestrogen receptor - positive tumours relative to oestrogen receptor - negative , more invasive tumours 59 , 60 . Additionally , PIPP has been identified as one of several genes in which higher levels of expres - sion are associated with a better prognosis 60 . Although functional characterization of these 5 - phosphatases in cancer is lacking , their characterization in other sys - tems demonstrates their potential to modulate the PI3K pathway 61 , 62 . Termination of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 signals . Another point of control of the PI3K pathway is the termination of PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 signals by degradation to PtdIns3P , a lipid messenger that does not contribute to the PI3K pathway ( FIG . 3 ) . The enzyme inositol polyphosphate 4 - phosphatase type II ( INPP4B ) preferentially cataly - ses this dephosphorylation 63 . In contrast to the com - plex picture obtained from studies of 5 - phosphatases , the expected outcome of downregulation of INPP4B is the generation of cellular phenotypes similar to those observed in cells that are depleted of PTEN function . Indeed , several recent studies are consistent with the possibility that INPP4B can function as a tumour sup - pressor in human cancers . Similar to the loss of PTEN expression , knocking down the expression of INPP4B in human epithelial cells results in increased Akt acti - vation , anchorage - independent growth and overall motility . Importantly , overexpression of INPP4B in xenografts results in reduced tumour growth 63 . Further supporting evidence includes that INPP4B is silenced in malignant proerythroblasts that have high levels of phosphorylated Akt 64 , that INPP4B is frequently deleted in breast cancers 65 – 67 and that loss of heterozygosity also maps to this region in breast cancers 68 . Following up these observations , loss of heterozygosity at the INPP4B locus has been found in most basal - like breast cancers , as well as in a substantial proportion of ovarian cancers , and this correlates with lower overall patient survival 63 . Furthermore , there is evidence that the related enzyme , 4 - phosphatase type I ( INPP4A ) , can control the activa - tion of Akt and thereby cell proliferation , survival and tumorigenesis 69 . Although this study mainly examines the effects of INPP4A knockout in mouse embryonic fibroblasts , it is conceivable that this enzyme could have similar roles in human cancer consistent with tumour suppression . Local PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 generation and motility PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and its binding proteins . Although PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 accounts for approximately 1 % of lipid in the plasma membrane of a typical mammalian cell , it is the most abundant ( by a factor of at least 25 ) of the phosphoinositides known to bind cellular pro - teins . There are many proteins that bind PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 with different degrees of specificity and affinity . This might be because of the relative abundance of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 domains and unique features involved in its binding , which are more diverse and less stringent than domains that must target the rare 3 - phosphoinositides 4 . The PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 target pro - teins have important roles in controlling endocytosis , exocytosis and cytoskeletal rearrangements 6 . Several observations , including the findings that PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 diffuses rapidly and that global concentrations in most cellular systems do not undergo large fluctuations , led to the hypothesis that the PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 signals are highly localized and generated in close proximity to its binding proteins 70 , 71 . These signals are generated by the action of PtdIns4P - 5 kinases , 5 - phosphatases and PLC , either directly or possibly through sequestra - tion 6 , 72 . The involvement of these enzymes in processes important for cancer is shown by studies of specific PtdIns4P - 5 kinases and some of the isoforms of PLC . As discussed further below , in the case of PLC , the local reduction of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 is coupled with second messenger production . R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEWS | CanCer VoLuME 10 | MAy 2010 | 347 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Focal adhesion complex A multiprotein complex of more than 150 distinct components that links the extracellular matrix to the actin cytoskeleton . Phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinases type I ( PIPKI ) . PIPKI phosphorylates PtdIns4P to PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and exists as three isoforms : PIPKIα , PIPKIβ and PIPKIγ 73 – 75 . Although there is evidence for the involvement of all isoforms in the regulation of cell motility , their gen - eral function and possible links to cancer are well documented by studies of PIPKIγ . The local synthesis of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 is regulated by targeting and further activation of the PIPKI enzymes at specific sites , with the targeting dependent on specific protein – protein interactions . one example of this is the regulation of the dynamics of the focal adhesion complex through the site - specific generation of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 by PIPKIγ 76 , 77 . Focal adhesions , which are sites of integrin - mediated cellular contact with the extracellular matrix , are dependent on the assembly of a multitude of struc - tural and signalling molecules to effectively link the actin cytoskeleton to integrins 78 . Assembly of focal adhesions is dependent on the scaffolding molecule talin that binds PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and integrins — PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding enhances the interaction of talin with integrins . Through an association of the carboxy - terminus of PIPKIγ with talin , PIPKIγ is targeted to focal adhesions , and the PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 generated at these sites activates and / or recruits other proteins to the adhesion complex 75 – 77 . Another example of the association of PIPKs with a targeting protein in a specific subcellular domain is the recruitment of PIPKIγ to adherens junctions , an extensively studied subset of intracellular adhesion complexes present at basolateral zones of epithelial cells . The formation of adherens junctions is dependent on the proper sorting of proteins such as E - cadherin 79 . The clathrin adaptor protein ( AP ) family , that binds and can be regulated by PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( ReF . 80 ) , is thought to be the primary mediator of these protein - sorting events . It has been shown that PIPKIγ directly associates and co - localizes with E - cadherin at cell – cell contacts in epithelial cells 81 , 82 . Importantly , PIPKIγ seems to be required for adherens junction assembly . The knock - down of PIPKIγ induced the accumulation of E - cadherin in a cytoplasmic compartment , and overexpression of PIPKIγ enhanced the targeting of E - cadherin to cell – cell contacts 81 . Furthermore , PIPKIγ - depleted cells had a dramatic morphological transformation from that of polarized epithelia to a migratory mesenchy - mal phenotype 81 . Further analysis of this system has shown that the regulation of E - cadherin trafficking by PIPKIγ is due to its ability to simultaneously bind AP1B and E - cadherin , and so functions as a scaffold protein . Localized generation of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 by PIPKIγ in these complexes regulates the activities of AP complexes and other trafficking proteins . The kinase activity of PIPKIγ is necessary for E - cadherin transport and the forma - tion of adherens junctions . Therefore , in this model , PIPKIγ functions as a scaffold and a kinase that gener - ates PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 . one of the Pipkig - knockout mouse studies supports the physiological importance of the PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - generating enzyme in the formation of adherens junctions 83 . Embryonic cardiomyocytes had a loss of actin cable organization in the sarcomere and fail - ure of actin cables to associate with the fascia adherens , which coincided with the absence of N - cadherin from this region . In addition , Pipkig – / – mouse embryos formed shorter and poorly organized adherens junctions in the central nervous system . Control of adherens junctions and their dissolution during epithelial – mesenchymal transition is of par - ticular importance for cancer 84 . In many cancers , the cellular systems that regulate epithelial – mesenchymal transition can be subverted . Consequently , misregula - tion of these systems leads to the dissociation of cells from the primary tumour , invasion into the vasculature and the establishment of metastases . The importance of the PIPKIγ association with E - cadherin in cancer is underscored by the discovery of a germline mutation in patients with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer 85 . A V832M mutation in the cytoplasmic tail of E - cadherin that binds PIPKIγ reduced the ability of cells expressing the mutant to form cell – cell contacts and increased the invasion of cells into a collagen matrix 81 , 86 . These pheno - types indicate that this mutant is unable to form effective cell – cell contacts . Direct binding studies also confirmed that the V832M mutation inhibited the association of PIPKIγ with E - cadherin and most of the V832M E - cadherin accumulated in cytoplasmic compartments , indicating a failure of the protein to be efficiently deliv - ered to the plasma membrane 81 . Interestingly , other com - ponents of the phosphoinositide system have been linked to the regulation of cell polarity in epithelia ; PTEN , for example , is enriched at the apical domain of polarized cells and could also be involved in the regulation of the epithelial – mesenchymal transition 14 , 87 . Diverse functions of PLC enzymes in cancer Diverse functions of PLC enzymes in cancer could be mediated by the local regulation of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 lev - els , by the generation of second messengers or in some instances by their function as signalling scaffolds . These different functions are supported by recent studies of several PLC families , in particular PLCγ , PLCε and PLCβ . PLC γ in cancer cell motility . one well - documented example of the involvement of PLC in the local regu - lation of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 is provided by the studies of the PLCγ 1 isoform in mammary tumour cells . In this model , tumour cell invasion and metastasis are under the control of EGF that is supplied by cells present in the tumour microenvironment . A distinct regula - tory feature of PLCγ enzymes is that their activation is linked to an increase in the phosphorylation of specific tyrosine residues . Multiple protein – protein interactions ( mainly mediated by the SH2 domains ) also contribute to activation and have an important role in localizing PLCγ to different protein complexes 88 . PLCγ 1 recruit - ment and stimulation at the sites of EGFR activation , which is mediated by direct binding to the active recep - tor , is one of the crucial steps required for directional migration and chemotaxis by mammary tumour cells in response to EGF ( FIG . 4a ) . PLC activity is required for the early steps of cell migration , in particular for the actin polymerization that drives the formation of cell R E V I E W S 348 | MAy 2010 | VoLuME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Nature Reviews | Cancer P P P c Haematopoieticcell Cancercell Stromalfibroblast Cancer cell Extracellular signal RapGEF Rap IL - 1 IL - 1 IL - 1 IL - 1 IL - 1 IL - 1 CXCL2 CXCL2 CXCL2 CXCL2 CXCL2 EGFR Secondmessengers Secondmessengers Rac P P Cofilin bound to PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 Localized actin polymerization Cancer cell Directionalcell movement Protrusion EGF EGF EGF EGF EGF EGF EGF EGF Free cofilin a b Immune response supporting cancer progression Ras RalGDS PI3K Raf JAK STAT STAT P STAT SHP1 PLC β 3 SHP1 PLC β 3 P STAT P STAT P P PLC γ PLC ε PLC ε PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 Actin - nucleation activity Property of a protein to generate new free high - affinity actin filament ends , also known as free barbed ends , which are required for actin polymerization . On - rate A rate of association ( binding ) , the measurement of which allows the determination of the association ( Ka ) constant . protrusions that are used to adhere to the extracellular matrix , define the direction of migration and initiate cell crawling 89 . Actin polymerization occurs mainly at one end of the filament , named the ‘barbed end’ , and it is through the regulation of the number of barbed ends by various actin - binding proteins that the cell is able to control the assembly of filamentous actin ( F - actin ) . one of the key proteins in this process is the actin - binding protein cofilin , which can increase the number of barbed ends by severing existing F - actin and possibly also by its intrinsic actin - nucleation activity 90 . The activity of cofilin is tightly regulated in the cell by several mechanisms , with the most important and best studied including phosphorylation and binding of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , both of which inactivate cofilin 91 . Insights into the mechanism of cofilin activation in mammary tumour cells were obtained using different methods , including cofilin variants that have altered phosphorylation sites and affinities to bind PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , and the use of fluorescence microscopy techniques to monitor the movement of cofilin 92 – 95 . Cofilin molecules move between the plasma membrane , cytosol and F - actin compartments , and these experiments showed that unphosphorylated cofilin is present in both the plasma membrane and F - actin compartments , whereas phosphorylated cofilin is localized in the cytosol 93 . At the plasma membrane , unphosphorylated cofilin binds to and is inactivated by PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( ReFs 92 , 96 ) . Stimulation of mammary tumour cells by EGF results in the activation of PLCγ 89 and a subsequent decrease in the level of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( ReF . 93 ) . The inactive and unphosphorylated cofilin molecules that are bound to PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 in the plasma membrane compartment are released and diffuse to the nearby F - actin compart - ment . PLCγ - mediated translocation of cofilin from the plasma membrane is not the result of a direct release of cofilin from PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , but rather of a lower on - rate as a result of a lower PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 concentration combined with the normal fast off - rate 93 . Therefore , a local reduc - tion of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 levels , not the hydrolysis of cofilin - bound PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 by PLCγ , releases cofilin from the plasma membrane . once in the F - actin compartment , cofilin binds to and severs actin filaments , thereby increasing the number of free barbed ends and leading to the first barbed - end transient . Almost at the same time as the PLCγ - mediated hydrolysis of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and local activation of cofilin , EGF stimulation results in the activation of LIM kinase that phosphorylates cofilin throughout the cytoplasm , resulting in a net increase in phosphorylated cofilin 92 . The localized activation com - bined with the global inactivation of cofilin confines its severing activity to an asymmetrical region of the cell , thereby defining the site of protrusion formation . This concept is also supported by experiments that show that the localized activation of cofilin by photoactivation of caged cofilin 97 generates the same response as localized EGF stimulation by a micropipette 93 , 98 , which results in localized activation of cofilin , actin polymerization and directional cell protrusion . Recently , work in similar sys - tems , such as signalling through the ERBB2 receptor , has supported the link between PLCγ and cofilin in cancer cell motility 99 . Several studies of PLCγ isoforms have demonstrated that PLCγ is more widely involved in processes related to cell motility than originally anticipated . In addition to chemotaxis that is triggered by growth factor recep - tors , PLCγ is stimulated through integrin activation in various cell types 100 , 101 . Interestingly , these studies also suggested additional or alternative links between PLC activation and the formation of protrusions . Studies of invasion by diverse cancer cell types and the morphogen - esis of endothelial cells on basement membranes indi - cate that PLC - generated Ins ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 - mediated calcium Figure 4 | Diverse functions of phospholipase C ( PLC ) enzymes in cancer . a | PLC γ has been implicated in the regulation of directional cell movement of cancer cells . This regulation could be mediated by a local reduction of phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) concentration and subsequent activation of cofilin . Another possible link is the activation of Rac and CDC42 through PLC - generated second messengers . b | The role of PLC ε as a downstream effector of Ras in cancer cells has not been directly demonstrated ( dashed arrow ) . However , PLC ε could facilitate tumour growth by regulating the expression of proinflammatory cytokines in dermal fibroblasts thus leading to inflammation . c | Growth inhibitory activity of PLC β is due to its function not as a PLC enzyme but as a signalling scaffold ; PLC β facilitates dephosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 ( STAT5 ) by the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP1 , which is required to prevent neoplasia in the haematopoietic system . CXCL2 , chemokine C - X - C ligand 2 ; EGFR , epidermal growth factor receptor ; IL - 1 ; interleukin - 1 ; P , phosphate . R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEWS | CanCer VoLuME 10 | MAy 2010 | 349 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 Off - rate A rate of dissociation , the measurement of which allows the determination of the dissociation ( Kd ) constant . Barbed - end transient A tightly regulated time period when barbed ends ( free high - affinity actin filament ends ) are formed . Caged cofilin A protein or compound , in this case cofilin , conjugated with a chromophore that allows for the controlled photorelease of a biologically active protein or compound with high temporal and spatial precision . De novo nucleation One of three well - defined mechanisms of actin assembly through the formation of barbed ends ( free high - affinity actin filament ends ) ; de novo nucleation is mainly mediated by the Arp2 / 3 complex . mobilization could provide a link with CDC42 and RAC1 activation , known regulators of actin polymerization 101 . These small GTPases regulate actin polymerization by de novo nucleation ( mediated by the Arp2 / 3 complex ) or in some instances by severing of F - actin 102 . In addition to the studies of PLCγ signalling net - works that are involved in the control of cell motility , several studies using mouse models and analysis of PLCγ expression in different types of cancer support its role in tumour progression and possibly the development of metastasis 103 – 109 . For example , one recent study shows that downregulation of PLCγ1 expression inhibits the devel - opment of human breast cancer cell line MDA - MB - 231 - derived lung metastases in nude mice 109 . Furthermore , inducible downregulation of PLCγ1 expression after injection of MDA - MB - 231 cells is able to almost com - pletely prevent metastasis formation . The role of PLCγ 1 in the dissemination of metastases is also indicated by an analysis of 60 tissue samples from patients with breast cancer that revealed an increase of PLCγ1 expression in metastases compared with the primary tumour in 50 % of the samples . However , a broader and more detailed analysis is required to support the significance of such correlations in this and other studies . Despite the dem - onstration that PLC activity can be greatly enhanced by point mutations in a mouse model 110 , 111 , whether the activity of PLCγ can be upregulated in tumours owing to mutation has not yet been fully investigated . It is pos - sible that increased PLCγ1 signalling in cancer might not require the overexpression or upregulation of PLC as a result of mutation , as EGFRs and other receptors are overexpressed or mutated in many human cancers 112 , potentially leading to increased PLCγ1 signalling . one also needs to consider that the importance of PLCγ in cancer cells could be simply due to its function as a key , rate - limiting , common component involved in cell motility that is triggered by several growth factors and integrins . Other PLC families . Different PLC families ( PLCβ , PLCγ , PLCδ , PLCε , PLCη and PLCζ ) share catalytic properties and are characterized by distinct regulatory interactions 113 . Recent studies of the PLCε and PLCβ iso - forms that can be recruited to and activated in specific signalling complexes indicate that these PLC enzymes could have quite diverse roles in cancer , that are unre - lated to tumour cell motility ( FIG . 4b , c ) . PLCε binds to and can be activated by Ras family GTPases 114 , and its role in KRAS - induced carcinogenesis has been tested using a mouse model of skin cancer 115 . The two - stage skin chemical carcinogenesis protocol involves the use of a carcinogen and a phorbol ester ( TPA ) as a promoter . PLCε - deficient mice had a delayed onset and mark - edly reduced incidence of squamous cell skin carcino - mas 115 . From this type of study , however , it was not clear whether PLCε is required in the tumour cells themselves or in cells that constitute the tumour microenvironment . In follow - up studies , it was shown that one stage in which PLCε is crucial is TPA - induced skin inflammation 116 , which could be closely involved in tumour promotion 117 . Further evidence supports the important role of PLCε in dermal fibroblasts in which the activation of PLCε and second messenger production leads to the expression of proinflammatory cytokines , such as interleukin - 1α ( IL - 1α ) and CXCL2 ( ReF . 116 ) ( FIG . 4b ) . A similar , indirect role for PLCε was suggested by studies of spontaneous intestinal tumorigenesis with an aetiological connection with inflammation using an Apc Min / + mouse model 118 . It is , however , still important to establish whether in addition to the role in the tumour microenvironment , PLCε also has a role in cells containing activated Ras , functioning as a direct effector of the Ras oncogene . As suggested for PI3K , targeting components with a role in both cancer cells and the tumour microenvironment could provide important therapeutic benefits 119 . The diverse roles of PLC enzymes in cancer are fur - ther illustrated by recent findings that one of the PLCβ isoforms ( PLCβ3 ) can , unexpectedly for a PLC enzyme , function as a tumour suppressor 120 . The initial obser - vation came from the finding that mice deficient for PLCβ3 frequently developed myeloproliferative diseases that are often caused by mutations that activate signal - ling molecules such as BCR – ABL , NRAS , SHP2 and JAK2 ( ReF . 121 ) . Follow - up experiments addressed the signalling mechanisms and linked the PLCβ3 deficiency to hyperphosphorylation of signal transducer and acti - vator of transcription 5 ( STAT5 ) , a key regulator of pro - liferation and survival downstream of activated cytokine receptors that are aberrantly activated in many myeloid malignancies . Importantly , expressing not only wild - type PLCβ3 , but also a PLCβ3 protein lacking catalytic activ - ity reduced proliferation and STAT5 phosphorylation . Subsequently , a C - terminal fragment unique to the PLCβ family was identified as a site required to recruit the pro - tein tyrosine phosphatase SHP1 to STAT5 , resulting in its dephosphorylation . This growth inhibitory activity of PLCβ3 , functioning as a signalling scaffold , is required to prevent neoplasia in the haematopoietic system . The importance of these findings is further supported by the identification of a subset of human chronic lymphocytic leukaemia samples that showed increased levels of phosphorylated STAT5 and low PLCβ3 expression 120 . Analysis of another PLCβ isoform , PLCβ1 , in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes has shown that mono - allelic deletion of PLCB1 is associated with an increased risk of developing acute myeloid leukaemia 122 . In addition to being a useful prognostic tool , it has been suggested that altered expression of this enzyme could have a role in the pathogenesis of this disease by causing an imbalance between proliferation and apoptosis . However , the under - lying molecular mechanisms and possible similarities to those described for PLCβ3 remain unclear . Conclusions and perspectives Through the work carried out in the past 10 years , we now have a considerable understanding of the molecular details of the regulation and roles of several components of the phosphoinositide signalling system in cancer . Furthermore , a growing body of work suggests that sev - eral other components of this system could have impor - tant roles in cancer . The first important task regarding this new information is to further evaluate the functions R E V I E W S 350 | MAy 2010 | VoLuME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 of these components and the extent of their involvement in the generation and progression of human tumours . It is also important that , in addition to the studies of individual enzymes and lipid messengers , we investigate the system as a whole to obtain a comprehensive picture of the functional organization and coordination of the phosphoinositide system in a physiological and cancer cell signalling network . It is hoped that a better under - standing of these signalling networks will reveal the relationships and interconnectivity between different 1 . Sasaki , T . et al . Mammalian phosphoinositide kinases and phosphatases . Prog . Lipid Res . 48 , 307 – 343 ( 2009 ) . 2 . Katan , M . New insights into the families of PLC enzymes : looking back and going forward . Biochem . J . 391 , e7 – e9 ( 2005 ) . 3 . Lemmon , M . A . Phosphoinositide recognition domains . Traffic 4 , 201 – 213 ( 2003 ) . 4 . Lemmon , M . A . Membrane recognition by phospholipid - binding domains . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 99 – 111 ( 2008 ) . 5 . Behnia , R . & Munro , S . Organelle identity and the signposts for membrane traffic . Nature 438 , 597 – 604 ( 2005 ) . 6 . Di Paolo , G . & De Camilli , P . Phosphoinositides in cell regulation and membrane dynamics . Nature 443 , 651 – 657 ( 2006 ) . 7 . Mora , A . , Komander , D . , van Aalten , D . M . & Alessi , D . R . PDK1 , the master regulator of AGC kinase signal transduction . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 15 , 161 – 170 ( 2004 ) . 8 . D’Angelo , G . , Vicinanza , M . , Di Campli , A . & De Matteis , M . A . The multiple roles of PtdIns ( 4 ) P — not just the precursor of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 1955 – 1963 ( 2008 ) . 9 . Zoncu , R . et al . Loss of endocytic clathrin - coated pits upon acute depletion of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 3793 – 3798 ( 2007 ) . 10 . Yin , H . L . & Janmey , P . A . Phosphoinositide regulation of the actin cytoskeleton . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 65 , 761 – 789 ( 2003 ) . 11 . Di Paolo , G . et al . Impaired PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 synthesis in nerve terminals produces defects in synaptic vesicle trafficking . Nature 431 , 415 – 422 ( 2004 ) . 12 . Katso , R . et al . Cellular function of phosphoinositide 3 - kinases : implications for development , homeostasis , and cancer . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 17 , 615 – 675 ( 2001 ) . 13 . Engelman , J . A . , Luo , J . & Cantley , L . C . The evolution of phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinases as regulators of growth and metabolism . Nature Rev . Genet . 7 , 606 – 619 ( 2006 ) . 14 . Leslie , N . R . , Batty , I . H . , Maccario , H . , Davidson , L . & Downes , C . P . Understanding PTEN regulation : PIP2 , polarity and protein stability . Oncogene 27 , 5464 – 5476 ( 2008 ) . 15 . Ooms , L . M . et al . The role of the inositol polyphosphate 5 - phosphatases in cellular function and human disease . Biochem . J . 419 , 29 – 49 ( 2009 ) . 16 . Majerus , P . W . , Kisseleva , M . V . & Norris , F . A . The role of phosphatases in inositol signaling reactions . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 10669 – 10672 ( 1999 ) . 17 . Michell , R . H . , Heath , V . L . , Lemmon , M . A . & Dove , S . K . Phosphatidylinositol 3 , 5 - bisphosphate : metabolism and cellular functions . Trends Biochem . Sci . 31 , 52 – 63 ( 2006 ) . 18 . Clarke , J . H . , Richardson , J . P . , Hinchliffe , K . A . & Irvine , R . F . Type II PtdInsP kinases : location , regulation and function . Biochem . Soc . Symp . 74 , 149 – 159 ( 2007 ) . 19 . Vicinanza , M . , D’Angelo , G . , Di Campli , A . & De Matteis , M . A . Phosphoinositides as regulators of membrane trafficking in health and disease . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 65 , 2833 – 2841 ( 2008 ) . 20 . Krauss , M . & Haucke , V . Phosphoinositide - metabolizing enzymes at the interface between membrane traffic and cell signalling . EMBO Rep . 8 , 241 – 246 ( 2007 ) . 21 . Wymann , M . P . & Schneiter , R . Lipid signalling in disease . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 162 – 176 ( 2008 ) . 22 . Yuan , T . L . & Cantley , L . C . PI3K pathway alterations in cancer : variations on a theme . Oncogene 27 , 5497 – 5510 ( 2008 ) . 23 . Liu , P . , Cheng , H . , Roberts , T . M . & Zhao , J . J . Targeting the phosphoinositide 3 - kinase pathway in cancer . Nature Rev . Drug Discov . 8 , 627 – 644 ( 2009 ) . 24 . Engelman , J . A . Targeting PI3K signalling in cancer : opportunities , challenges and limitations . Nature Rev . Cancer 9 , 550 – 562 ( 2009 ) . 25 . Ali , I . U . , Schriml , L . M . & Dean , M . Mutational spectra of PTEN / MMAC1 gene : a tumor suppressor with lipid phosphatase activity . J . Natl Cancer Inst . 91 , 1922 – 1932 ( 1999 ) . 26 . Samuels , Y . et al . High frequency of mutations of the PIK3CA gene in human cancers . Science 304 , 554 ( 2004 ) . This study reported the discovery that somatic mutations in PIK3CA are a common event in human cancers . 27 . Jaiswal , B . S . et al . Somatic mutations in p85 α promote tumorigenesis through class IA PI3K activation . Cancer Cell 16 , 463 – 474 ( 2009 ) . 28 . Samuels , Y . & Velculescu , V . E . Oncogenic mutations of PIK3CA in human cancers . Cell Cycle 3 , 1221 – 1224 ( 2004 ) . 29 . Ikenoue , T . et al . Functional analysis of PIK3CA gene mutations in human colorectal cancer . Cancer Res . 65 , 4562 – 4567 ( 2005 ) . 30 . Kang , S . , Bader , A . G . & Vogt , P . K . Phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase mutations identified in human cancer are oncogenic . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 802 – 807 ( 2005 ) . 31 . Suzuki , A . , Nakano , T . , Mak , T . W . & Sasaki , T . Portrait of PTEN : messages from mutant mice . Cancer Sci . 99 , 209 – 213 ( 2008 ) . 32 . Chalhoub , N . & Baker , S . J . PTEN and the PI3 - kinase pathway in cancer . Annu . Rev . Pathol . 4 , 127 – 150 ( 2009 ) . 33 . Maehama , T . PTEN : its deregulation and tumorigenesis . Biol . Pharm . Bull . 30 , 1624 – 1627 ( 2007 ) . 34 . Franke , T . F . , Kaplan , D . R . , Cantley , L . C . & Toker , A . Direct regulation of the Akt proto - oncogene product by phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 - bisphosphate . Science 275 , 665 – 668 ( 1997 ) . This study described regulation of Akt by PtdIns ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 . 35 . Ma , K . , Cheung , S . M . , Marshall , A . J . & Duronio , V . PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 and PI ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 levels correlate with PKB / akt phosphorylation at Thr308 and Ser473 , respectively ; PI ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 levels determine PKB activity . Cell . Signal . 20 , 684 – 694 ( 2008 ) . 36 . Scheid , M . P . et al . Phosphatidylinositol ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 is essential but not sufficient for protein kinase B ( PKB ) activation ; phosphatidylinositol ( 3 , 4 ) P 2 is required for PKB phosphorylation at Ser - 473 : studies using cells from SH2 - containing inositol - 5 - phosphatase knockout mice . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 9027 – 9035 ( 2002 ) . 37 . Leung , W . H . , Tarasenko , T . & Bolland , S . Differential roles for the inositol phosphatase SHIP in the regulation of macrophages and lymphocytes . Immunol . Res . 43 , 243 – 251 ( 2009 ) . 38 . Rohrschneider , L . R . , Fuller , J . F . , Wolf , I . , Liu , Y . & Lucas , D . M . Structure , function , and biology of SHIP proteins . Genes Dev . 14 , 505 – 520 ( 2000 ) . 39 . Helgason , C . D . et al . Targeted disruption of SHIP leads to hemopoietic perturbations , lung pathology , and a shortened life span . Genes Dev . 12 , 1610 – 1620 ( 1998 ) . 40 . Sattler , M . et al . BCR / ABL directly inhibits expression of SHIP , an SH2 - containing polyinositol - 5 - phosphatase involved in the regulation of hematopoiesis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 19 , 7473 – 7480 ( 1999 ) . 41 . Horn , S . et al . Restoration of SHIP activity in a human leukemia cell line downregulates constitutively activated phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase / Akt / GSK - 3 β signaling and leads to an increased transit time through the G1 phase of the cell cycle . Leukemia 18 , 1839 – 1849 ( 2004 ) . 42 . Fukuda , R . et al . Alteration of phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase cascade in the multilobulated nuclear formation of adult T cell leukemia / lymphoma ( ATLL ) . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 15213 – 15218 ( 2005 ) . 43 . Ong , C . J . et al . Small - molecule agonists of SHIP1 inhibit the phosphoinositide 3 - kinase pathway in hematopoietic cells . Blood 110 , 1942 – 1949 ( 2007 ) . 44 . Kennah , M . et al . Activation of SHIP via a small molecule agonist kills multiple myeloma cells . Exp . Hematol . 37 , 1274 – 1283 ( 2009 ) . 45 . Garcia - Palma , L . et al . Up - regulation of the T cell quiescence factor KLF2 in a leukaemic T - cell line after expression of the inositol 5’ - phosphatase SHIP - 1 . Br . J . Haematol . 131 , 628 – 631 ( 2005 ) . 46 . Luo , J . M . et al . Mutation analysis of SHIP gene in acute leukemia . Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi 12 , 420 – 426 ( 2004 ) . 47 . Luo , J . M . et al . Possible dominant - negative mutation of the SHIP gene in acute myeloid leukemia . Leukemia 17 , 1 – 8 ( 2003 ) . 48 . Prasad , N . K . , Tandon , M . , Badve , S . , Snyder , P . W . & Nakshatri , H . Phosphoinositol phosphatase SHIP2 promotes cancer development and metastasis coupled with alterations in EGF receptor turnover . Carcinogenesis 29 , 25 – 34 ( 2008 ) . 49 . Prasad , N . K . SHIP2 phosphoinositol phosphatase positively regulates EGFR - Akt pathway , CXCR4 expression , and cell migration in MDA - MB - 231 breast cancer cells . Int . J . Oncol . 34 , 97 – 105 ( 2009 ) . 50 . Sleeman , M . W . et al . Absence of the lipid phosphatase SHIP2 confers resistance to dietary obesity . Nature Med . 11 , 199 – 205 ( 2005 ) . 51 . Calle , E . E . & Kaaks , R . Overweight , obesity and cancer : epidemiological evidence and proposed mechanisms . Nature Rev . Cancer 4 , 579 – 591 ( 2004 ) . 52 . Prasad , N . Two diseases with one hit : inhibiting a potential diabetes target to reduce cancer risk and to improve anti - cancer therapy . Curr . Cancer Ther . Rev . 5 , 111 – 121 ( 2009 ) . 53 . Yoon , J . H . et al . cDNA microarray analysis of gene expression profiles associated with cervical cancer . Cancer Res . Treat 35 , 451 – 459 ( 2003 ) . 54 . Chow , K . U . et al . In vivo drug - response in patients with leukemic non - Hodgkin’s lymphomas is associated with in vitro chemosensitivity and gene expression profiling . Pharmacol . Res . 53 , 49 – 61 ( 2006 ) . 55 . Quade , B . J . et al . Molecular pathogenesis of uterine smooth muscle tumors from transcriptional profiling . Genes Chromosom . Cancer 40 , 97 – 108 ( 2004 ) . 56 . Akada , M . et al . Intrinsic chemoresistance to gemcitabine is associated with decreased expression of BNIP3 in pancreatic cancer . Clin . Cancer Res . 11 , 3094 – 3101 ( 2005 ) . 57 . Kim , B . et al . Expression profiling and subtype - specific expression of stomach cancer . Cancer Res . 63 , 8248 – 8255 ( 2003 ) . 58 . Ramaswamy , S . , Ross , K . N . , Lander , E . S . & Golub , T . R . A molecular signature of metastasis in primary solid tumors . Nature Genet . 33 , 49 – 54 ( 2003 ) . 59 . Gruvberger , S . et al . Estrogen receptor status in breast cancer is associated with remarkably distinct gene expression patterns . Cancer Res . 61 , 5979 – 5984 ( 2001 ) . potential targets for therapeutic intervention . Taking as an example recent advances in therapeutics target - ing the PI3K – Akt pathway , it is likely that targeting this alone will not be sufficient to produce many cures for patients with advanced cancer or overcome emerging resistance to specific treatments . Therefore , the iden - tification of complementary targets and therapies will be important to combat complexity and the ongoing adaptation of cancers to produce greater benefits for cancer patients . R E V I E W S NATuRE REVIEWS | CanCer VoLuME 10 | MAy 2010 | 351 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 60 . van ‘t Veer , L . J . et al . Gene expression profiling predicts clinical outcome of breast cancer . Nature 415 , 530 – 536 ( 2002 ) . 61 . Ooms , L . M . et al . The inositol polyphosphate 5 - phosphatase , PIPP , Is a novel regulator of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase - dependent neurite elongation . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 607 – 622 ( 2006 ) . 62 . Kisseleva , M . V . , Cao , L . & Majerus , P . W . Phosphoinositide - specific inositol polyphosphate 5 - phosphatase IV inhibits Akt / protein kinase B phosphorylation and leads to apoptotic cell death . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 6266 – 6272 ( 2002 ) . 63 . Gewinner , C . et al . Evidence that inositol polyphosphate 4 - phosphatase type II is a tumor suppressor that inhibits PI3K signaling . Cancer Cell 16 , 115 – 125 ( 2009 ) . This study showed involvement of a phosphoinositide 4‑phosphatase in tumour suppression . 64 . Barnache , S . , Le Scolan , E . , Kosmider , O . , Denis , N . & Moreau - Gachelin , F . Phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphatase type II is an erythropoietin - responsive gene . Oncogene 25 , 1420 – 1423 ( 2006 ) . 65 . Naylor , T . L . et al . High resolution genomic analysis of sporadic breast cancer using array - based comparative genomic hybridization . Breast Cancer Res . 7 , R1186 – R1198 ( 2005 ) . 66 . Bergamaschi , A . et al . Distinct patterns of DNA copy number alteration are associated with different clinicopathological features and gene - expression subtypes of breast cancer . Genes Chromosom . Cancer 45 , 1033 – 1040 ( 2006 ) . 67 . Chin , S . F . et al . Using array - comparative genomic hybridization to define molecular portraits of primary breast cancers . Oncogene 26 , 1959 – 1970 ( 2007 ) . 68 . Johannsdottir , H . K . et al . Deletions on chromosome 4 in sporadic and BRCA mutated tumors and association with pathological variables . Anticancer Res . 24 , 2681 – 2687 ( 2004 ) . 69 . Ivetac , I . et al . Regulation of PI ( 3 ) K / Akt signalling and cellular transformation by inositol polyphosphate 4 - phosphatase - 1 . EMBO Rep . 10 , 487 – 493 ( 2009 ) . This study shows that phosphoinositide 4‑phosphatase can control the activation of Akt and thereby cell proliferation , survival and tumourigenesis . 70 . Anderson , R . A . , Boronenkov , I . V . , Doughman , S . D . , Kunz , J . & Loijens , J . C . Phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinases , a multifaceted family of signaling enzymes . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 9907 – 9910 ( 1999 ) . 71 . Heck , J . N . et al . A conspicuous connection : structure defines function for the phosphatidylinositol - phosphate kinase family . Crit . Rev . Biochem . Mol . Biol . 42 , 15 – 39 ( 2007 ) . 72 . McLaughlin , S . , Wang , J . , Gambhir , A . & Murray , D . PIP 2 and proteins : interactions , organization , and information flow . Annu . Rev . Biophys Biomol . Struct . 31 , 151 – 175 ( 2002 ) . 73 . van den Bout , I . & Divecha , N . PIP5K - driven PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 synthesis : regulation and cellular functions . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 3837 – 3850 ( 2009 ) . 74 . Mao , Y . S . & Yin , H . L . Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton by phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate 5 kinases . Pflugers Arch . 455 , 5 – 18 ( 2007 ) . 75 . Ling , K . , Schill , N . J . , Wagoner , M . P . , Sun , Y . & Anderson , R . A . Movin’ on up : the role of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 in cell migration . Trends Cell Biol . 16 , 276 – 284 ( 2006 ) . 76 . Ling , K . , Doughman , R . L . , Firestone , A . J . , Bunce , M . W . & Anderson , R . A . Type I gamma phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase targets and regulates focal adhesions . Nature 420 , 89 – 93 ( 2002 ) . 77 . Di Paolo , G . et al . Recruitment and regulation of phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase type 1 γ by the FERM domain of talin . Nature 420 , 85 – 89 ( 2002 ) . References 76 and 77 identified the role of local PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 synthesis in regulation of focal adhesions . 78 . Ginsberg , M . H . , Partridge , A . & Shattil , S . J . Integrin regulation . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 17 , 509 – 516 ( 2005 ) . 79 . Yap , A . S . , Crampton , M . S . & Hardin , J . Making and breaking contacts : the cellular biology of cadherin regulation . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 19 , 508 – 514 ( 2007 ) . 80 . Collins , B . M . , McCoy , A . J . , Kent , H . M . , Evans , P . R . & Owen , D . J . Molecular architecture and functional model of the endocytic AP2 complex . Cell 109 , 523 – 535 ( 2002 ) . 81 . Ling , K . et al . Type I γ phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase modulates adherens junction and E - cadherin trafficking via a direct interaction with μ 1B adaptin . J . Cell Biol . 176 , 343 – 353 ( 2007 ) . 82 . Akiyama , C . et al . Phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase γ is associated with cell – cell junction in A431 epithelial cells . Cell Biol . Int . 29 , 514 – 520 ( 2005 ) . 83 . Wang , Y . , Lian , L . , Golden , J . A . , Morrisey , E . E . & Abrams , C . S . PIP5KI γ is required for cardiovascular and neuronal development . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 11748 – 11753 ( 2007 ) . 84 . Polyak , K . & Weinberg , R . A . Transitions between epithelial and mesenchymal states : acquisition of malignant and stem cell traits . Nature Rev . Cancer 9 , 265 – 273 ( 2009 ) . 85 . Yabuta , T . et al . E - cadherin gene variants in gastric cancer families whose probands are diagnosed with diffuse gastric cancer . Int . J . Cancer 101 , 434 – 441 ( 2002 ) . 86 . Suriano , G . et al . The intracellular E - cadherin germline mutation V832 M lacks the ability to mediate cell - cell adhesion and to suppress invasion . Oncogene 22 , 5716 – 5719 ( 2003 ) . 87 . Wodarz , A . & Nathke , I . Cell polarity in development and cancer . Nature Cell Biol . 9 , 1016 – 1024 ( 2007 ) . 88 . Katan , M . , Rodriguez , R . , Matsuda , M . , Newbatt , Y . M . & Aherne , G . W . Structural and mechanistic aspects of phospholipase C γ regulation . Adv . Enzyme Regul . 43 , 77 – 85 ( 2003 ) . 89 . Mouneimne , G . et al . Phospholipase C and cofilin are required for carcinoma cell directionality in response to EGF stimulation . J . Cell Biol . 166 , 697 – 708 ( 2004 ) . This study described the connection between cofilin‑regulation and activation of PLC . 90 . Andrianantoandro , E . & Pollard , T . D . Mechanism of actin filament turnover by severing and nucleation at different concentrations of ADF / cofilin . Mol . Cell 24 , 13 – 23 ( 2006 ) . 91 . Wang , W . , Eddy , R . & Condeelis , J . The cofilin pathway in breast cancer invasion and metastasis . Nature Rev . Cancer 7 , 429 – 440 ( 2007 ) . 92 . Song , X . et al . Initiation of cofilin activity in response to EGF is uncoupled from cofilin phosphorylation and dephosphorylation in carcinoma cells . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 2871 – 2881 ( 2006 ) . 93 . van Rheenen , J . et al . EGF - induced PIP2 hydrolysis releases and activates cofilin locally in carcinoma cells . J . Cell Biol . 179 , 1247 – 1259 ( 2007 ) . 94 . Frantz , C . et al . Cofilin is a pH sensor for actin free barbed end formation : role of phosphoinositide binding . J . Cell Biol . 183 , 865 – 879 ( 2008 ) . 95 . Leyman , S . et al . Unbalancing the phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate - cofilin interaction impairs cell steering . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 4509 – 4523 ( 2009 ) . 96 . Gorbatyuk , V . Y . et al . Mapping the phosphoinositide - binding site on chick cofilin explains how PIP2 regulates the cofilin - actin interaction . Mol . Cell 24 , 511 – 522 ( 2006 ) . 97 . Ghosh , M . et al . Cofilin promotes actin polymerization and defines the direction of cell motility . Science 304 , 743 – 746 ( 2004 ) . 98 . Mouneimne , G . et al . Spatial and temporal control of cofilin activity is required for directional sensing during chemotaxis . Curr . Biol . 16 , 2193 – 2205 ( 2006 ) . 99 . Meira , M . et al . Memo is a cofilin - interacting protein that influences PLC γ 1 and cofilin activities , and is essential for maintaining directionality during ErbB2 - induced tumor - cell migration . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 787 – 797 ( 2009 ) . 100 . Jones , N . P . , Peak , J . , Brader , S . , Eccles , S . A . & Katan , M . PLC γ 1 is essential for early events in integrin signalling required for cell motility . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 2695 – 2706 ( 2005 ) . 101 . Jones , N . P . & Katan , M . Role of phospholipase C γ 1 in cell spreading requires association with a beta - Pix / GIT1 - containing complex , leading to activation of Cdc42 and Rac1 . Mol . Cell . Biol . 27 , 5790 – 5805 ( 2007 ) . 102 . Sun , C . X . , Magalhaes , M . A . & Glogauer , M . Rac1 and Rac2 differentially regulate actin free barbed end formation downstream of the fMLP receptor . J . Cell Biol . 179 , 239 – 245 ( 2007 ) . 103 . Noh , D . Y . et al . Elevated content of phospholipase C - γ 1 in colorectal cancer tissues . Cancer 73 , 36 – 41 ( 1994 ) . 104 . Arteaga , C . L . et al . Elevated content of the tyrosine kinase substrate phospholipase C - γ 1 in primary human breast carcinomas . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 88 , 10435 – 10439 ( 1991 ) . 105 . Nomoto , K . et al . Expression of phospholipases γ 1 , β 1 , and δ 1 in primary human colon carcinomas and colon carcinoma cell lines . Mol . Carcinog . 12 , 146 – 152 ( 1995 ) . 106 . Park , J . G . et al . Overexpression of phospholipase C - γ 1 in familial adenomatous polyposis . Cancer Res . 54 , 2240 – 2244 ( 1994 ) . 107 . Thomas , S . M . et al . Epidermal growth factor receptor - stimulated activation of phospholipase C γ - 1 promotes invasion of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma . Cancer Res . 63 , 5629 – 5635 ( 2003 ) . 108 . Shepard , C . R . , Kassis , J . , Whaley , D . L . , Kim , H . G . & Wells , A . PLC γ contributes to metastasis of in situ - occurring mammary and prostate tumors . Oncogene 26 , 3020 – 3026 ( 2007 ) . 109 . Sala , G . et al . Phospholipase C γ 1 is required for metastasis development and progression . Cancer Res . 68 , 10187 – 10196 ( 2008 ) . 110 . Yu , P . et al . Autoimmunity and inflammation due to a gain - of - function mutation in phospholipase C γ 2 that specifically increases external Ca 2 + entry . Immunity 22 , 451 – 465 ( 2005 ) . 111 . Everett , K . L . et al . Characterization of phospholipase C γ enzymes with gain - of - function mutations . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 23083 – 23093 ( 2009 ) . 112 . Hynes , N . E . & MacDonald , G . ErbB receptors and signaling pathways in cancer . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 21 , 177 – 184 ( 2009 ) . 113 . Suh , P . G . et al . Multiple roles of phosphoinositide - specific phospholipase C isozymes . BMB Rep . 41 , 415 – 434 ( 2008 ) . 114 . Bunney , T . D . & Katan , M . Phospholipase C epsilon : linking second messengers and small GTPases . Trends Cell Biol . 16 , 640 – 648 ( 2006 ) . 115 . Bai , Y . et al . Crucial role of phospholipase Cepsilon in chemical carcinogen - induced skin tumor development . Cancer Res . 64 , 8808 – 8810 ( 2004 ) . 116 . Ikuta , S . , Edamatsu , H . , Li , M . , Hu , L . & Kataoka , T . Crucial role of phospholipase C epsilon in skin inflammation induced by tumor - promoting phorbol ester . Cancer Res . 68 , 64 – 72 ( 2008 ) . 117 . Coussens , L . M . & Werb , Z . Inflammation and cancer . Nature 420 , 860 – 867 ( 2002 ) . 118 . Li , M . , Edamatsu , H . , Kitazawa , R . , Kitazawa , S . & Kataoka , T . Phospholipase C ε promotes intestinal tumorigenesis of Apc Min / + mice through augmentation of inflammation and angiogenesis . Carcinogenesis 30 , 1424 – 1432 ( 2009 ) . 119 . Yuan , T . L . et al . Class 1A PI3K regulates vessel integrity during development and tumorigenesis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 9739 – 9744 ( 2008 ) . 120 . Xiao , W . et al . Tumor suppression by phospholipase C - β 3 via SHP - 1 - mediated dephosphorylation of Stat5 . Cancer Cell 16 , 161 – 171 ( 2009 ) . This study showed a tumour suppressor role of a PLC enzyme , functioning as a signalling scaffold . 121 . Van Etten , R . A . & Shannon , K . M . Focus on myeloproliferative diseases and myelodysplastic syndromes . Cancer Cell 6 , 547 – 552 ( 2004 ) . 122 . Follo , M . Y . et al . Phosphoinositide - phospholipase C β 1 mono - allelic deletion is associated with myelodysplastic syndromes evolution into acute myeloid leukemia . J . Clin . Oncol . 27 , 782 – 790 ( 2009 ) . 123 . Kolsch , V . , Charest , P . G . & Firtel , R . A . The regulation of cell motility and chemotaxis by phospholipid signaling . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 551 – 559 ( 2008 ) . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . DATABASES UniProtKB : http : / / www . uniprot . org EGFR | INPP4A | INPP4B | INPP5E | PDK1 | PIK3CA | PIK3R1 | PIPP | PTEN | SHIP1 | SHIP2 FURTHER INFORMATION Matilda Katan’s homepages : http : / / www . lipidsignalling . org . uk / | http : / / www . icr . ac . uk / research / research _ sections / cell _ and _ molecular _ biology / cell _ and _ mol _ biology _ teams / lipid _ signalling / index . shtml Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer : http : / / www . sanger . ac . uk / genetics / CGP / cosmic / aLL LInkS are aCTIve In The onLIne PDf R E V I E W S 352 | MAy 2010 | VoLuME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / cancer © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10