PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . Gig Platforms , Tensions , Alliances and Ecosystems : An Actor - Network Perspective ELISCIA KINDER , University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , USA MOHAMMAD HOSSEIN JARRAHI , University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , USA WILL SUTHERLAND , University of Washington , USA Abstract  The algorithm - based management exercised by digital gig platforms contributes to information and power asymmetries that are pervasive in the gig economy . Although the design of these platforms may foster unbalanced relationships , in this paper , we outline how freelancers and clients on the gig platform Upwork can leverage a network of alliances with external digital platforms to repossess their displaced agency within the gig economy . Building on 39 interviews with Upwork freelancers and clients , we found a dynamic ecosystem of digital platforms that facilitate gig work through and around the Upwork platform . We use actor - network theory to : 1 ) delineate Upwork’s strategy to establish a comprehensive and isolated platform within the gig economy , 2 ) track human and nonhuman alliances that run counter to Upwork’s system design and control mechanisms , and 3 ) capture the existence of a larger ecosystem of external digital platforms that undergird online freelancing . This work explicates the tensions that Upwork users face , and also illustrates the multiplicity of actors that create alliances to work with , through , around , and against the platform’s algorithmic management . CCS Concepts : • Social and professional topics → Computer supported cooperative work KEYWORDS Gig economy , gig platforms , information asymmetry , Upwork , actor - network theory , ecosystems ACM Reference format : ELISCIA KINDER , MOHAMMAD HOSSEIN JARRAHI and WILL SUTHERLAND . 2019 . Gig Platforms , Tensions , Alliances and Ecosystems : An Actor - Network Perspective . In Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , November 2019 . ACM , New York , NY , USA . 26 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359314 1 INTRODUCTION Gig work has been on the rise in recent years due to changing labor norms and the proliferation of gig platforms [ 58 ] . Digital labor platforms such as Uber , TaskRabbit and Upwork play a central role in organizing and managing gig work by providing affordances like creating access Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . 2573 - 0142 / 2019 / November – ART212 $ 15 . 00 Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359314  212 212 : 2 Eliscia Kinder , Mohammad Hossein Jarrahi , & Will Sutherland PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . to gigs and connecting providers and recipients of various services [ 17 , 55 ] . The gig economy has been lauded as the vanguard of a new era in work and employment that brings about new business models and mega platform - organizations such as Uber and Airbnb [ 10 ] . Businesses are reaping the benefits of the gig economy by saving labor costs and accessing human resources on demand [ 1 ] , while new labor platforms are flourishing , delivering business values and profits to shareholders [ 53 ] . Specifically , these platforms are seen as engines of the new ( platform ) economy characterized by flexible work environments and opportunities to work independently [ 37 ] . However , recent research sheds light on unintended ( and intended ) consequences of the digital platform’s method of managing workers and clients , which has been termed ‘algorithmic management . ’ [ 64 ] Indeed , most management functions are completed automatically by a suite of algorithms , web forms , and other automated processes [ 36 , 46 ] . These decision - making processes may create and maintain information asymmetries between workers and the platform ; for example , workers remain unaware of how the platform makes key choices regarding ranking and evaluation [ 32 , 45 ] . These studies further discuss how gig workers that directly contribute to the gig economy may not reap the same level of benefits it in comparison to the organizer of the platform ( like most traditional forms of for - profit organizations in a neo - liberal , growth based economic system ) [ 13 , 29 , 64 ] . For example , Ma et al . [ 38 ] recently integrated a stakeholder perspective to highlight the ways algorithmic decision - making marginalizes Uber drivers who consequently struggle against power asymmetries maintained by the platform . This line of research makes it clear that platforms may be skewed towards the interests of only one party ( the platform organizers and shareholders ) at the expense of others ( often the gig worker ) [ 49 , 64 ] . The emerging literature on the impact of digital labor platforms to date focuses on identifying roots of power and information asymmetries between the centralized platform and gig workers [ 13 , 46 ] or the worker and the customer [ 24 , 39 ] . However , less attention has been paid to how gig workers exert and manifest their agency in the above noted power imbalance by working around the digital labor platform and by forging alliances and enlisting external tools or platforms . In doing so , research on gig work needs to go beyond dyadic ( asymmetric ) relationships between the platform and gig workers or the customer and gig workers , and establish heterogeneities of players and digital platforms that explicate their roles within a broader ecosystem . This ecosystem emerges at the confluence of a diversity of technological options beyond the centralized platform . It thus reflects the divisions of work and power between various parties who carry divergent interests but may form alliances to advance their agenda [ 48 , 55 ] . Multiple parties , including transacting parties and external digital platforms , come together and actively shape and organize the gig economy . To address these issues , we focus on the platform Upwork , which is considered the world’s largest online freelancer platform . Upwork facilitates knowledge work carried out by skilled workers , ranging from web design or digital marketing to strategic business consulting and intellectual property law . To broaden the focus of current research on the asymmetric relationship between platform and gig workers , we draw on interviews with both freelancers and clients of Upwork . A majority of extant studies of gig work and digital labor focus only on the perspective of the worker ( with a few exceptions such as Kumar , Jafarinaimi , and Morshed [ 30 ] ) . In conceptualizing relationships among different parties , we build on actor - network theory ( ANT ) , which incorporates various human and nonhuman actants . ANT specifically Gig Platforms , Tensions , Alliances and Ecosystems : An Actor - Network Perspective 212 : 3 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . helps explain how networks of alliances between multiple actants may develop through the concept of translation . The research questions pursued in the article are : • What are the sources of power and information asymmetries in gig work conducted on Upwork ? • How do various stakeholders work to strengthen their positions within the gig ecosystem formed around Upwork ? 2 RELATED RESEARCH 2 . 1 Information and Power Asymmetries in the Gig Economy The autonomy paradox is cited as a commonplace characteristic of gig work within CSCW and other intellectual communities [ 4 , 15 , 17 ] . While gig workers are provided with certain flexibility and autonomy ( e . g . to work versatilely across time and space ) , the way gig platforms manage their work may displace aspects of workers’ autonomy [ 40 , 49 ] . For example , workers may have to constantly overcome the opacity of algorithms and other systems that manage their work [ 2 , 27 , 45 ] . As such , gig labor platforms may be sources of tensions when users face information and power asymmetries [ 2 , 23 ] . These frictions are often the result of algorithms , which intentionally or unintentionally favor the interest of the platform over users [ 9 , 40 , 46 ] . Platforms frequently relay little information to users regarding algorithmic decision - making , despite these systems functioning as virtual replacements for middle - management roles in traditional working environments [ 13 , 40 ] . By strategically obfuscating algorithmic information , platforms’ lack of transparency contributes to low rates of algorithmic literacy on the part of platform users [ 2 , 61 ] . Ma et al . [ 38 ] critique the opaque nature of gig economy algorithms , arguing that “while platforms and the algorithms that enable them are clearly necessary to enable these types of exchanges , it is not clearly necessary for the mediation to be opaque , where stakeholders have limited knowledge , agency , and autonomy over how it mediates their interactions” ( p . 10 ) . Due to the limiting factors of platform algorithms , users may attempt to recover some semblance of lost agency by subverting algorithmic control [ 27 , 36 ] . Research repeatedly demonstrates that power asymmetries typically favor users positioned as clients over those employed as workers [ 3 , 41 , 46 ] . This imbalance manifests in various ways : in the case of Uber , Lee et al . [ 36 ] found that not only do drivers pay more attention to ratings than riders , but ratings negatively impact drivers psychologically and monetarily . Alkhatib et al . [ 3 ] identify the inability for communication between platform clients and workers as an exercise in oppressing the ability to foster community relations , which could shift the balance of asymmetries . Importantly , platform organizers may strategically design and embed power asymmetries within the platform to retain the overall control and governance of the platform [ 30 , 59 ] . Indeed , there may be little incentive for platform owners to implement systemic changes that bring about more equitable relationships between various parties to accommodate the precarious reality of gig work [ 38 ] . Therefore in many cases , despite marketing themselves as sites for flexible gig work , the algorithmic control of these technologies functions as an automated manifestation of managerial power [ 30 , 46 , 61 ] . Importantly , the alleged “flexibility” of gig working platforms—regardless of how platforms actually implement “flexible” work structures—is not always synonymous with agency or versatility [ 37 , 41 ] . Despite directing attention to various forms of information and power asymmetries , the current literature provides little conceptualization of multiple stakeholders and their role within 212 : 4 Eliscia Kinder , Mohammad Hossein Jarrahi , & Will Sutherland PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . the gig economy . Most of the relevant work tends to construe platform relationships as dyadic , emphasizing relationships as primarily between a singular platform and its workers or workers and clients . As an exception , Kumar et al . [ 30 ] provide a more balanced perspective on the engagement of multiple stakeholders by including both drivers and riders of a gig platform in their analysis . Studies of the gig economy are also commonly constrained to the boundaries of a single platform ( e . g . Uber drivers or Mechanical Turkers ) and offer limited understanding of other platforms , which are maligned to the peripheries of gig labor [ 55 ] . Our approach in this study is inspired by the tenets of an ecological perspective espoused by HCI / CSCW research [ e . g . , 6 , 18 , 42 , 60 ] , which examines the interaction among multiple technologies within an artifact or communicative ecology . In the context of the gig economy , Sutherland and Jarrahi [ 54 ] have recently highlighted the presence of an ecosystem of platforms and applications in the way digital nomads carry out their work . Furthermore , the CSCW / HCI literature has been more attentive to the roles and agency of platforms themselves in shaping opportunities or constraints for gig workers [ e . g . , 2 , 11 , 22 , 32 , 57 ] . Following Lee et . al . [ 21 ] , a number of scholars have examined how algorithmic management impacts or is applied to workers . For instance , Rosenblat and Stark [ 46 ] point to information asymmetries as a specific mechanism for platforms to exert power over workers . Comparatively little attention has been paid to precisely how workers and other stakeholders might redress tensions rooted in the platform work and recover agency that platform asymmetries displace . This noted , we follow a line of inquiry that aspires to understand the heterogeneity of roles and agencies of various stakeholders implicated in platform - mediated labor . For instance , research on Mechanical Turk makes it clear that crowdworkers actively collaborate and share administrative overhead by helping each other find work and sharing alternate tasks in order to use platforms more effectively and fulfill technical and social needs [ 19 ] . In doing so , Turkers embark on ‘articulation work’ to organize and collectively make sense of platform work at a global scale [ 21 , 39 ] . This engagement with the platform can take an active form such as providing mutual aid in evaluating and publicizing employers , as observed by Irani and Silberman [ 24 ] in a study of Turkopticon ( an activist system that helps Turkers rate employers ) . Because algorithmic control typically leaves workers with little recourse within the platform [ 45 , 64 ] , framing workers as isolated or autonomous may present them as passive or helpless participants within the gig economy [ 19 ] . As a result , we build upon the current HCI / CSCW research that treats gig workers and other participants as ‘social actors’ with agency to act and change certain conditions [ e . g . , 12 , 28 , 39 , 44 ] . Moreover , we delineate the creative strategies these participants deploy to address tensions and recover agency that platform asymmetries displace while also incorporating various digital tools and platforms as key players in the gig economy . 2 . 2 Actor - Network Theory ( ANT ) ANT originated within the sociology of science during the 1980s , most notably by Latour , Law , and Callon [ 8 , 34 , 35 ] . ANT illustrates relationships—how they are created , sustained , and broken—between actants ( a term used to capture the role of both human and nonhuman actors ) within networks [ 26 ] . ANT highlights the processes that gather previously separate entities together and how they become mobilized through the work of spokespeople . Negotiations , relationship tensions , and compromises are not extinguished once a network is formed ; actant motives , goals , and alliances frequently shift , reflecting a state of network instability and fragility [ 33 ] . Although these actants can be human or nonhuman , their relative agency is Gig Platforms , Tensions , Alliances and Ecosystems : An Actor - Network Perspective 212 : 5 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . equally treated , establishing a “generalized symmetry” during the construction of and negotiations that take place within a given network . Specifically , ANT encourages “analytical impartiality” when dealing with human and nonhuman actants , allowing for an equal analysis of human and nonhuman roles within the creation or disruption of networks [ 56 ] . There are many affordances that ANT provides , but significant to our application here is the conceptual framework of actant agency and network creation [ 47 ] . Specifically , this paper is concerned with tensions and alliances between humans and nonhumans directly engaged with or peripheral to Upwork’s gig working platform that frequently result in the forging of new heterogeneous networks . Significant to the process of network creation is ANT’s concept of translation , which specifically delineates how an entity ( here the Upwork platform ) positions itself to represent an entire network of other actants . Importantly , as Callon notes , “to translate is to displace , ” suggesting that the establishment of new networks inherently supplants other relationships or degrees of agency [ 8 ] . This notion of displacement repeatedly occurs throughout our findings below and we frame these tensions ( and the subsequent shifts in alliances ) against translation’s individual phases . Through the steps of translation – problematization , interessement , enrolment , and mobilization – compromises are made in the creation of this new representative entity . Translation’s displacements highlight which goals , motivations , and actants are prioritized over others . First , problematization involves finding a possible solution to a problem and making it appear essential to other actants . Through essentializing , problematization fosters the idea that certain actions are required from actants . In other words , the process of translation generates obligatory passage points that , as the name implies , actants must pass through to engage with the mobility of this new network . Partnerships are forged during interessement , which involves defining identities , motivations , and goals while simultaneously blocking off other parties that could break the creation of the new network . As this article is concerned with the reality of an ecosystem of networks surrounding Upwork , the platform’s approaches to interessement , including its methods to attempt to hinder such an ecosystem , are noteworthy . When these phases of interessement are successful , however , enrolment occurs . Enrolment is primarily concerned with explicating the roles of the various actants and entities involved within the network . Finally , mobilization refers to the deployment of a spokesperson for the allied groups enrolled in the network . This also denotes the more direct mobility of actants and entities that were previously immobile before translation occurred . While translation can displace particular concepts of agency , it ultimately describes the assemblage of previously immobile actants in relation to a set of defined objectives . Moreover , although translation is presented as a series of steps , it is never fixed ; relationships , motivations , identities , and goals are constantly being negotiated and are therefore capable of disrupting networks [ 33 ] . A translation - oriented approach to ANT encourages an analysis of agency distributed across human and nonhuman actants [ 50 ] . This further allows us to investigate the proliferation of related networks ( what we refer to as an ecosystem ) despite the platform’s systemic tactics to quell such an environment . Our deployment of ANT therefore affords an ecosystemic perspective of Upwork while emphasizing the agency of actants within this particular platformic setting . Furthermore , ANT helps us understand the heterogeneity of actors and explains the generalized symmetry that networked relationships afford to humans and nonhumans [ 63 ] . As we demonstrate below , the agency of nonhuman actants ( i . e . external digital platforms ) plays a prominent role in the disruption of Upwork’s ideal operations . Conceptually , ANT provides a useful language to delineate between Upwork as a platform and 212 : 6 Eliscia Kinder , Mohammad Hossein Jarrahi , & Will Sutherland PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . the emergence and multiplicity of a larger ecosystem of external digital platforms . In utilizing this theory , we are less concerned with furthering ANT as a theory of social science . Rather , we primarily aim to describe the scope of the gig economy environment and the functions of actants within it . 3 METHODS The data used in this study centers around the freelancing labor platform Upwork , and includes interviews with people using the platform , discussions collected from forums where people talk about working on the Upwork platform , and policy documents collected from the platform ' s website itself . This data reflects three major positions in the platform space : the worker who finds work on the platform in order to earn money ; the client , who hires workers on the platform in order to accomplish tasks and projects ; and the platform itself , which is an array of material constraints , as well as dynamic , human and algorithmic reconfigurations . We interviewed 20 workers and 19 clients . However , 13 of the clients related that they had also used the platform as workers , and were able to provide perspective on performing both roles . The participants are indicated in this paper as Freelancer 1 - 20 , and Client 1 - 19 . The authors contacted people on Upwork and on other social media sites , including reddit . com , quora . com , twitter . com , and through personal professional websites . Individuals were selected for a variety of professions , which include animation , photojournalism , voice acting , industrial design , blogging , copywriting , marketing , and user experience design , among others . The kinds of jobs clients brought to the platform were similarly varied . They included web development , software programming , writing , marketing , data entry , book layout design , and virtual assistance . The ages of all participants ranged from 20 to 59 . Interviews were semi - structured , following a protocol that focused on the participants’ encounters and breakdowns with the platform , and with other workers and clients . This included how they fit the platform into their work processes , and their use or avoidance of specific platform features . Interviews lasted about an hour , and all were conducted via video conferencing software . Forum discussions were pulled from two sources . The first was Upwork ' s " Community Discussions " forum , which includes separate sections for both workers and clients . Upwork representatives are present on this forum , and they participate in discussions and answer questions . The second source was / r / Upwork , a forum on the website reddit . com . This forum was selected because it was highly active , and because Upwork representatives were not overtly present on this forum , in contrast to the Community Discussions forum . The Upwork forum is a context in which workers are able to communicate with each other , but are under the supervision of Upwork moderators , and often interact with these moderators directly . The reddit forum is a space in which users are not supervised by Upwork moderators and cannot be connected to their Upwork accounts , meaning that they are able to speak more frankly about activities which contravene Upwork’s Terms of Service . The third author scanned the forums and collected posts that had at least one response , and which had some relevance to the Upwork platform itself , rather than focusing solely on the worker’s trade . Posts were collected and analyzed iteratively , until new posts were no longer introducing new concepts . The data collected from the two forums and from Upwork totaled 125 documents , ranging from 2015 , after Upwork’s rebranding from oDesk , to 2018 . The people exchanging information on these forums were not made aware of this data collection effort , as the information on these pages was publicly available ( without a need for creating an Upwork or Reddit accounts ) . Gig Platforms , Tensions , Alliances and Ecosystems : An Actor - Network Perspective 212 : 7 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . The documents collected directly from Upwork numbered 26 and included both policy statements putting forward expectations about how workers and clients could interact with the platform , as well as technical help pages , which explain to a certain level of detail how the platform ' s various mechanisms work . This included Upwork’s official terms of service document , as well as help pages about how to become top rated , how to end a contract , how to dispute feedback from a client , and the rules and policies of Upwork’s escrow system , among other topics . The goal of this part of the data collection effort was to collect perspectives from different discursive contexts , and to triangulate findings from the interviews ( e . g . , discerning how Upwork offers an explanation on the way badges such as Job Success Score is calculated versus how the interviewees interpret it ) . In addition , the official documents were used to represent Upwork’s official stances and policies . All of the documents , including both interviews and documents collected from the forums and Upwork website , were used in data analysis . The analysis was inductive and thematic [ 7 ] , but was sensitized by the focal points of ANT : instances of tensions and alliances , the leveraging of various representations , and points of translation . Coding was used in the qualitative coding software , Dedoose , which subsequently allowed the three researchers to produce themes for the data collected . The first two authors were actively engaged in the analysis of interviews while the third author contributed more to data collection and the analysis of other sources of data . These larger themes were facilitated by the goals for the research and were revisited as the researchers collectively made sense of the data . Comparison of the sources was an integral part of the iterative and collective coding process , and facilitated data triangulation . 4 FINDINGS Upwork’s platform provides a wide variety of features that facilitate transactions between freelancers and clients . Matchmaking algorithms ( which include ratings , evaluations , and feedback ) connect freelancers and clients , and profiles allow workers to promote themselves through skill tests , certifications , and proficiencies . Upwork collects service fees through secured monetary transactions and an escrow service . If necessary , it can handle on - platform mediation and dispute resolution between users . In short , in lieu of traditional middle management , Upwork utilizes various automatic features and algorithms that manage and communicate with gig workers . Although Upwork intends these features to be beneficial to freelancers and clients , users interacting with the platform may develop strategies to work around it when it does not align with their interests . We identified three core spaces within the platform wherein tensions may impact other stakeholders , namely freelancers and clients : 1 ) informational spaces , 2 ) transactional spaces , and 3 ) evaluative spaces . These spaces are akin to three functions identified by Lee et al . [ 36 ] ( informational , decisional , and evaluational ) , which are performed by algorithms managing work on gig platforms . To overcome these tensions , freelancers and clients may integrate other digital platforms and external relationships into their Upwork workflows . In what follows , we provide an overview of these three spaces and illustrate how users address tensions and strengthen their position on the platform . 4 . 1 Informational Spaces Initial information dissemination between clients and freelancers occurs through self - presentation on platform profiles . Although freelancers can control their profiles’ visibility 212 : 8 Eliscia Kinder , Mohammad Hossein Jarrahi , & Will Sutherland PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . settings , they may not always be aware that their profiles can display differently for clients . Freelancer 3 only realized this by creating a separate client profile on Upwork . He subsequently added client - view aggregates ( e . g . , “only top rated freelancer in Upwork who’s based in the US and has a top 20 % score on the UX design test” ) to his job proposals as a self - marketing tactic . Freelancer profiles are constructed from numerous fields , which allow various levels of control . We have categorized freelancer profile components based on control limitations as follows : customizable information , Upwork generated information , and client - supplied information . Where customizable information spaces afford freelancers particular agency to present themselves to potential clients , client and Upwork generated information is more constrained through negotiations with clients as well as the platform’s algorithms . Customizable Information . On Upwork profiles , freelancers can customize their profile photo , title , overview , introductory video , portfolio , location , education , and other experiences to a limited extent . We observed freelancers using this section of their profile to sell themselves as trustworthy , capable workers while simultaneously demonstrating their range of skills . We also observed instances of interviewees linking potential clients to external portfolios or to their professional websites where they design and reproduce work according to their own aesthetics and structural designs . Users repeatedly highlighted the necessity of maintaining multiple online profiles , or “high visualization” and self - marketing , when freelancing . This kind of social marketing encourages freelancer visibility across platforms , but also deviates from Upwork’s more isolated platform design , which largely ignores social aspects of self - presentation . Other reported self - promotional activities included facilitating email marketing campaigns , utilizing other job - related websites ( e . g . , LinkedIn , Fiverr , AngelList ) , and hiring agents to promote job skills . Even though Upwork does not encourage external networking , we observed users utilizing social media profiles ( such as Facebook , Twitter , Instagram , and Tumblr ) to increase their self - image . Freelancer 8 , for example , occasionally advertised a client’s company on Twitter to demonstrate her willingness to promote the client outside of their relationship on Upwork . Freelancers who use Instagram noted that they can showcase their work and reach larger audiences than they could through Upwork alone . We observed freelancers attempting to harness larger audiences on social platforms and redirect them to Upwork , including Freelancer 18 who advertises his Upwork profile on his LinkedIn profile . Interviewees also noted that social media facilitates relationships better than Upwork , which has fewer influential community - building opportunities for platform users . Information Generated By Upwork . Freelancers have less power over Upwork - specific information , which is generated by the platform’s algorithms . Many of these sets of information correspond with a visual demarcation , allowing clients to quickly sort through a freelancer pool without reviewing each freelancer’s profile . These include skill test results , certifications , Top Rated status , and Job Success Score ( JSS ) . JSS , reflected as a percentile out of 100 , indicates freelancers’ contract completion rate and client feedback , and requires workers to have been on the platform for a certain period of time . Consequently , newer users on the platform will not have a high JSS until they complete a set number of contracts that result in good reviews ( platform newcomers can instead earn Rising Talent status ) . That said , Upwork does not advertise the exact calculations it uses to generate JSS . Those within the 90th JSS percentile can attempt to achieve Top Rated status , which also requires further obligations from freelancers . These include prolonged and sustained activity on the platform , minimum earnings , profile completion , etc . Top Rated status is also visually reflected within the platform as a prominent badge on the freelancer’s profile . Gig Platforms , Tensions , Alliances and Ecosystems : An Actor - Network Perspective 212 : 9 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . These forms of information stand out on freelancers’ profiles and strongly affect their ability to secure work . We observed clients highly valuing JSS as a limiting facet when searching through freelancer pools—because a JSS icon appears on brief profiles within search results , clients can quickly glean the quality of potential freelancers without clicking into each profile . Client 3 described searching through freelancers as follows : “JSS is so important ; you don’t even need to click on the profile of the freelancer . The score is on the snippet of their profile , so I just scroll through the applicants . If it’s above 80 % it will just show it , so I tend to just look at those people” ( Client 3 ) . From a freelancer perspective , we observed two sentiments in both interviews and forum posts : 1 ) frustration with the unfair or arbitrary nature of JSS and 2 ) pragmatic acceptance at JSS value on Upwork , which then leads to attempts at improving or even gaming their rating . Correspondingly , we also noticed freelancer anxiety over achieving and sustaining a high JSS . This behavior was exhibited in forums off the Upwork platform wherein freelancers discuss how the algorithm is potentially calculated , how to recover from a low JSS , and approaches to offset a less than desirable JSS . On Reddit , one freelancer noted that his “score is currently sitting at about 85 % ” , but speculated that his JSS is “scaring away some clients after seeing others with a 95 + % . ” Another freelancer reported visiting Upwork’s community forum to gain insight into finding and securing jobs without a specific JSS requirement ( many postings specify a preferred JSS to , again , limit the pool of perceived qualified applicants ) . This form of communication indicates a mode of collective sensemaking that otherwise does not exist on the platform itself . Confusion over how Upwork calculates JSS is central in this communal sensemaking , with numerous online threads dedicated to the score and with one poster noting that “ [ JSS ] is like alchemy , nobody really has a clear formula on how it works except Upwork . ” Due to its high value on freelancer profiles , JSS also encourages transactional and evaluative behaviors , which we discuss in more detail in the sections below . Client - Supplied Information . Similar to the fields Upwork automatically generates , client fields are largely outside of the freelancer’s control . These client - supplied fields appear after job completion on a freelancer’s profile as a 5 - star rating and a written description of their job performance . The freelancer can post a response to any feedback , but once submitted , only the client can change the rating unless the freelancer proves the client violated Upwork’s Terms of Service or if the freelancer is Top Rated . Although feedback can be removed from a freelancer’s profile during the latter circumstance , the review still remains visible on the client’s profile . From an informational perspective , these fields are the most restrictive , leaving freelancers with few options . Because Upwork does not fully disclose its algorithms , we observed freelancers connecting with other workers through online communities unassociated with Upwork’s forums to share methods of recovering from negative client feedback . Examples of recommended solutions included joining other digital labor platforms ( such as Fiverr , Freelancer , Toptal ) , improving their communication and job vetting skills , creating another Upwork profile from scratch , and taking multiple lower paying jobs that will likely end with favorable reviews to both raise their JSS and push the bad review to a less noticeable location on the worker’s profile . We also observed that some workers recommended completing contracts , but not officially closing them on the platform to build a backlog . They could then strategically close these contracts , thereby prompting a series of feedback requests to potentially offset a negative review . Not only do these behaviors indicate a platform learning curve for freelancers , but it also highlights Upwork’s own non - disclosure policy regarding this algorithm ( particularly , how it impacts JSS ) 212 : 10 Eliscia Kinder , Mohammad Hossein Jarrahi , & Will Sutherland PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . and the limited options freelancers have to adapt and respond to a primary indicator of “quality” labor . Social Aspects of Information Sharing . Upwork provides a public communication channel , the Community Forums , for users to gain platform literacies and connect with their global colleagues . As an extension of the platform’s job searching / creating function , these forums are monitored by the platform and forum moderators frequently respond to posts from users . Since interactions are not anonymous ( Community Forum activity requires an Upwork account ) , certain topics , particularly any that may imply violating Terms of Service , are not discussed . Community Forums are the only way for clients and freelancers to interact freely , as a messaging feature between users is absent from the platform . As a result , user - to - user communication is limited to clients connecting with freelancers through the specific jobs they have posted . Despite providing a Community Forum , dynamic freelancer and client communities are missing from the platform . Such collective gatherings are significant aspects of information seeking as they facilitate the social function of information sharing . Social gatherings also influence how users inform other users ( especially newer ones ) about Upwork functionality , particularly JSS and other algorithms that are more obscure . We observed that external forums had consistent exchanges regarding unclear JSS algorithms and topics that would violate Upwork’s Community Forum Guidelines , such as discussing alternative payment methods . The Upwork subreddit has over 5 , 000 members and the comment threads on Upwork - focused YouTube videos demonstrate an active Upwork community that exists external from the platform itself . 4 . 2 Transactional Spaces Finding Work . To apply for job postings , freelancers on Upwork use the “connects” currency to submit proposals for gigs . Those signed up with “Freelancer Basic” ( the free account ) are allowed 60 connects per month with no rollover and those with “Freelancer Plus” ( the paid account ) with 70 and the option to pay for more connects , which can roll over up to a maximum limit . Most proposals require two connects , so Basic workers can apply for up to 30 gigs per month . However , some freelancers get frustrated with clients wasting their connects by supposedly not hiring anyone for posted jobs . In the Community Forum one worker complained : “Clients who don ' t hire are destroying freelancers . [ They ] need to step in and do something about clients posting jobs and not hiring . ” Freelancer 3 admitted to creating a separate client account to post jobs and get estimates on price points for different tasks . Since the quoted prices were outside of their price range , they ended up not hiring any of the freelancers who applied , but instead retained some of their contact information for possible future collaborations . Freelancers may also use other gig platforms and social media sites to supplement their Upwork jobs . We noticed workers’ tendency to use these alternative sources because they could access larger and likely more diverse audiences , even at the risk of less commitment from job posters and losing the opportunity to strengthen their Upwork portfolio and ratings . For example , Freelancer 9 notes : “Most of my work I get through my social media accounts . My Tumblr account is the place where I get most of my work because I have been there the longest with a larger audience . I’ve been building up a Twitter following too . ” Freelancer 11 , who also uses Twitter to locate prospective jobs , found the social media site a “great place” to holistically review job postings , field trends , and to network with other workers in their field . Gig Platforms , Tensions , Alliances and Ecosystems : An Actor - Network Perspective 212 : 11 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . Others indicate that specialized fields have robust resources , either on forums , Facebook groups , or specific websites , that Upwork’s more generalized platform does not . Freelancer 12 , a photographer , mentioned using the global production platform Blink to quickly find location - based jobs that align with her self - described “digital nomad” lifestyle . Freelancer 8 , a writer , indicated the value not only in joining Facebook groups and forums , but also in building communities to foster relationships that can lead to job opportunities . She also expressed concern at the prospect of solely using Upwork to locate gigs , both because it does not allow for networking and also because it is too difficult to establish high ratings on the platform , particularly as a new user . Clients also make use of external platforms while using Upwork’s features selectively . Some participants only access Upwork to transfer payments , and others only use it to find freelancers before moving off - platform to conduct transactions . They also integrate Upwork into larger workflows , which involve finding work by word of mouth , through social media , and on other platforms . In particular , a number of clients used the freelance marketplace Fiverr for smaller or simpler tasks such as one - time video creation or web research . For example , Client 17 notes : “I prefer Upwork for certain tasks . If it’s somebody that’s going to be writing stuff for me , I wouldn’t go to Fiverr , I would go to Upwork . But if it’s for jobs where I know exactly one specific task , then I go to Fiverr . " Payment . Upwork provides resources , which legitimize clients and freelancers while also protecting both groups against abuse of their time , money , and labor . We found that freelancers frequently use the platform’s “verified payment method” feature as an indicator of a client’s trustworthiness . Transactions that take place on Upwork qualify for the platform’s escrow service and mediation assistance in case disputes arise from either transacting party . However , we observed tensions around these resources because of the way they were leveraged by different groups . For instance , the design of the bidding system can encourage new freelancers to work for little pay . Client 3 noted that talented freelancers who are new to the platform can appear competitive and get hired by bidding lower than more established workers . While this process allows newer freelancers to build their Upwork profile , it highly favors clients , who pay less for work without anxiety over developing and sustaining platform metrics . Although freelancers can see when clients have verified payment methods , there are incidents of freelancers being “scammed” or performing unpaid labor in situations when the client did not have verified payments . Some of these circumstances occur early in a freelancer’s time on the platform before they developed a higher level of platform literacy . Other workers admit to being scammed by clients they suspected were untrustworthy , but they felt they had few options because they could not secure positions with verified clients . Freelancer 1 sought help from Upwork after her client’s credit card was declined . However , the platform said nothing could be done since she did most of her work on a tablet and the Work Log application only functioned on a desktop or a laptop . The freelancer ultimately received her payment from the client after contacting a freelancer union , who sent the client a strongly - worded letter . Upwork jobs can be billed as hourly work or at a flat price per project , and the platform provides invoicing to streamline payments processes . Hourly contracts have the option of monitoring freelancers’ work through a Work Log and Time Tracker . When active , the Work Log application randomly takes screenshots of a freelancer’s work throughout the day . This can benefit both the client and the freelancer – clients can remotely confirm work that is logged and freelancers can document the work they completed though Upwork’s system . However , workers often find the tracker clunky and incompatible with their personal devices , or simply 212 : 12 Eliscia Kinder , Mohammad Hossein Jarrahi , & Will Sutherland PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . too intrusive . Clients similarly substitute external time tracking and task management tools which are more developed , such as ticketing systems and team management software like Asana . Client 14 described a programming job through Upwork during which he never communicated directly with his team members or with the client , but rather completed all of his work through an external issue - tracking system . Freelancers and clients also circumvent Upwork’s secured payment system by using platforms like Stripe , Payoneer , Venmo , or CashApp in order to avoid the platform’s transaction fees . Upwork charges freelancers a service fee on a sliding scale , which decreases as the freelancer earns more money with a single client ( 20 % for the first $ 500 , 10 % between $ 500 - $ 10 , 000 , and 5 % beyond that ) . After establishing trust , Freelancer 11 and her client were able to successfully move their transactions off the platform , affording the client to pay less and the freelancer to earn more : “I had a client who had a pretty big job ( it was like $ 300 ) . But Upwork usually take 20 % as profit . So , for me to have gotten that $ 300 , the client would have had to pay $ 350 or $ 360 , which was a bit out of her budget . She we completed everything on Upwork , she had a $ 5 placeholder on Upwork , but she paid me through PayPal . Most people are fine using Upwork , but every so often if it’s a long term relationship where you’re going to be doing a lot of work or a lot of business , sometimes people will ask , once they’ve built that trust , if it’s okay if they pay on PayPal . ” ( Freelancer 11 ) Unless they have paid Upwork an “opt - out” fee , clients and freelancers risk account suspension and possible monetary loss for moving transactions off - platform . Furthermore , these external financial transactions increase the risk of getting scammed ( out of either labor or finances ) , as the money is not in Upwork’s escrow system and is consequently uninsured by the platform . Upwork attempts to curb this behavior because it cannot reap transaction fees from off - platform exchanges . In fact , users may have their accounts deactivated or suspended after mentioning “PayPal” in Upwork’s chat or messaging system , which could result in a loss of earnings that the platform was processing or holding in escrow . Communication & File Sharing . Upwork offers important communication functions such as internal emails , chats , video conferencing , and file sharing . Since the platform uses these communications as possible evidence during client / freelancer disputes , users are encouraged to utilize these for most , if not all , communications . However , we observed users incorporating external communication and cloud services into their workflows . Client 15 indicated that he will “try to get off the system as much as possible” because Upwork’s video and chatting options don’t “fit into” his work practices . Both clients and freelancers frequently mention Skype as a preferred communication application . Freelancer 4 uses it because it is “almost universal” to online freelancers and easily functions across device types and operating systems . Client 11 uses Skype to interview freelancers for projects . Several Upwork users described Skype or Google Hangouts as more well - established communication tools as opposed to Upwork’s embedded communication features . File sharing also takes place on external cloud - based platforms , despite Upwork’s file sharing capabilities . Freelancer 14 , a photographer , noticed that Upwork would reduce the size of his higher resolution images when transferred through the site , impacting the quality of his work product . Although a client hired him through Upwork , this photographer sought external file sharing methods ( in this case , linking to a Dropbox folder ) to adequately display and deliver his final deliverables . Similarly , Freelancer 12 , also a photographer , uses Chrome Photos due to Upwork’s size restrictions on her files . Freelancer 20 was hired through Upwork to create a Gig Platforms , Tensions , Alliances and Ecosystems : An Actor - Network Perspective 212 : 13 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . lengthy video , which the platform ultimately could not support : “I did a job that required two hours’ worth of video . I can’t deliver that through Upwork ; I’ve got to deliver that on Dropbox . . . . that’s the only way we can do it” ( Freelancer 20 ) . Freelancer 15 uses a combination of Dropbox , for easy access and file size capacity , and Dropbox Paper for collaborative document editing , commenting , and downloading between clients . 4 . 3 Evaluative Spaces Platform Evaluations . Through Upwork’s evaluative mechanisms , competition and power asymmetries between workers and clients emerge on the platform . Both workers and clients rate each other once a job is completed , and the client’s feedback is then processed through Upwork’s algorithm to generate a JSS for freelancers . A worker’s success in competing against many other freelancers is contingent upon maintaining a higher JSS , a system that Freelancer 3 described as “five stars or fail . ” Additionally , because evaluations are constructed through singular individuals ( the contracted client ) and then fed through an algorithm ( the structure of which Upwork does not fully disclose ) , there are fewer options for freelancers to work around negative feedback . Although clients are also rated , their ratings are not as critical to their success on the platform as workers’ are . When questioning clients about their ratings from previous freelancers , we observed a range of nonchalance . Several clients vaguely knew about the client rating system on the platform but noted that they either did not care about it or they rarely tracked its progress . These comments were framed as comparisons to freelancers’ ratings with Client 1 noting that workers are “very active and aggressive about guarding their reputation and that’s not true for me . ” Others were sympathetic towards freelancers due to this power imbalance and took their evaluations of freelancers as a moral obligation . Ultimately , the pool of freelancers is larger than that of clients , so the latter have a greater advantage in finding workers regardless of their reputation than vice versa . Client 8 commented on the “crazy” environment of freelancers panicking over a 4 out of 5 score , but was unconcerned when asked about their own ratings “because people will bid regardless , even if half of the people said oh , ‘really difficult client to work with’ I would still get 100 applications . I’m not that concerned there . ” If client ratings drop too low , one client noted that anyone can just create another Upwork profile without inquiry from the platform , thereby erasing any history of negative feedback . Freelancers attempting to change their JSS either go directly through the client who provided the feedback or through the Upwork platform . The former approach involves contacting the client and asking them to change the score . Because feedback is optional when closing a contract , freelancers will frequently remind clients to leave comments / ratings if they anticipate a good review . We found others , however , were willing to exchange money earned through the contract—in one case , the freelancer offered a full refund for their work—to avoid potentially negative feedback . Client 9 described giving a freelancer a lower score before the worker offered to complete additional jobs for free if the client would be willing to change their review . Some barter with the client for mutual positive reviews or no reviews entirely from both parties . Workers also noted that some clients simply refuse to give five - star reviews as a matter of principle , and no amount of conversation or high - quality work can change this . Other clients are happy to help workers artificially inflate their ratings by closing and opening jobs or logging their payment in shorter , higher - pay hours . Still , the asymmetry regarding the importance of client and worker ratings puts freelancers at a disadvantage in these negotiations . 212 : 14 Eliscia Kinder , Mohammad Hossein Jarrahi , & Will Sutherland PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . Freelancers approaching JSS from a systemic perspective are more experimental , primarily due to Upwork’s refusal to disclose its algorithm for calculating JSS . Freelancer 3 described attempting to “reverse engineer” the algorithm by roughly calculating the value of time spent on the platform , testimonials versus rated feedback , and reviews on worker profiles as opposed to reviews on the client’s profile , amongst other possible criteria . External forums , such as Reddit , contain numerous threads on maintaining a good JSS and managing poor reviews . Freelancer 4 described a common tactic for new users on the platform , but also applied it to workers trying to boost their JSS : “Go in cheap , start off cheap , start getting small projects . ” Speaking from experience as a former freelancer , Client 18 disapproved of this practice because it capitalizes on low - paying work and manipulates workers by holding their reputation on the platform hostage . While we encountered both freelancers and clients who do not trust online rating systems entirely , many clients noted the value of JSS and correspondingly , many freelancers felt pressure to maintain this assessment tool . Extending Platform Evaluations . Both clients and workers found the platform’s evaluations unsatisfactory in some ways and extended their evaluative measures to other resources and processes , often in conflict with Upwork’s Terms of Service . Some clients , for instance , pointed out that freelancers’ ratings were inflated , and subsequently , they implemented their own evaluations to ensure that they were hiring good workers . These tests ranged from minor tasks designed to ensure the freelancer actually read the job description to performing smaller pilot jobs before taking on more involved assignments . Freelancers also sought to extend the platform’s evaluative mechanisms by merging them with their larger online reputation . Online reputation for a freelancer is holistic and materializes across multiple platforms . Admittedly , some freelancers feel frustrated trying to integrate the work history and evaluations they built on Upwork with those they developed elsewhere : “I think that a lot of these freelance websites are kind of gardens where they kind of treat it as we’re the only place you’re going to get any work . . . you can’t import reviews from some other site , it has to be all reviews from within Upwork , or you can’t export Upwork test results to another site” ( Freelancer 3 ) . Unlike the customizable information fields above which are user - populated , online reputation incorporates evaluative aspects generated by multiple parties . Despite Upwork’s closed platform design , one freelancer advertised a 5 - star Upwork review that he received on his Twitter profile . This both reached a large audience ( some 10 , 000 of his Twitter followers ) while also signaling his work on Upwork’s specific platform through a screenshot of the review and the # upwork hashtag . In this way , he influenced his reputation by utilizing a metric ( the 5 - star rating ) that was designed to be limited to and internalized within Upwork’s platform . Other freelancers share and link to their Upwork profile across platforms . One worker not only linked to their Upwork profile , but also included Upwork - specific metrics , such as jobs completed and JSS ( see Fig . 1 ) . This Twitter thread also inadvertently allowed for community feedback on the freelancer’s reputation , including advice on setting a higher hourly rate . Instagram also factors into online reputation , with users posting photos of their Upwork achievements ( e . g . earning Top Rated status ) , examples of their work , or advertisements of their services . Gig Platforms , Tensions , Alliances and Ecosystems : An Actor - Network Perspective 212 : 15 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . Fig . 1 . Example of promoting Upwork profile on Twitter ( from https : / / twitter . com / PovilasKorop / status / 1028959105153748992 ) It is important to note that workers in niche markets may have a different experience and subsequently different behaviors than reflected in the above discussion . For example , they may pay less attention to the platform’s algorithms and experience fewer tensions since the platform works relatively well for them ; some of our interviews indicated many clients actually seek them ( rather than them bidding for projects ) . As such , workers in niche markets do not have to constantly learn about , navigate and work around the platform ; for this reason , some of the activities outlined above may not completely apply to these users . 5 DISCUSSION Within the context of Upwork’s platform , our findings reflect two perspective models of online freelancing : 1 ) Upwork as its own self - contained , idealized platform that provides a comprehensive gig economy to users , and 2 ) a larger ecosystem of stakeholders and digital platforms beyond the Upwork platform . The latter reflects the reality of Upwork - in - practice not as an isolated platform , but as part of a complex ecosystem , or as ANT suggests a heterogeneous assemblage . In the following section , through ANT’s concept of translation , we examine the former perspective model reinforced by Upwork’s platformic control before describing the larger ecosystem that has arisen from coopetition ( simultaneous competition and cooperation [ 62 ] ) between humans and nonhumans alike . 212 : 16 Eliscia Kinder , Mohammad Hossein Jarrahi , & Will Sutherland PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . 5 . 1 The Idealized Notion of a Self - Contained Platform Fig . 2 presents Upwork as perceived and organized by the owner of the platform ( Upwork Global Inc . ) . This may be akin to the picture depicted by much of the literature on the gig economy , which focuses on the relationship between the labor platform and workers within the bounds of a single platform , and implicitly treats the platform as operating independently from broader relationships and alliances . However , an application of ANT helps illuminate how Upwork attempts to lock in users , and importantly , how tensions arising from the platform spur alliances between other stakeholders ( human and nonhuman actants ) , thus resulting in a larger ecosystem ( see Fig . 3 - 4 ) . Fig . 2 . The gig platform as a self - contained system When what we have labeled as informational , transactional , and evaluative spaces operate seamlessly , Upwork’s sociotechnical relationships , like other information infrastructures , are rendered invisible [ 52 ] . Moreover , Upwork’s design of these spaces is intended to manifest as obligatory passage points , creating a cyclical pattern of mandatory indispensability of the platform for users , particularly for freelancers . High valued profile badges depend upon sustained freelancer engagement with specific aspects of the platform ( ability tests , connects , proposals , etc . ) , which then earn them access to quality , legitimate clients . By enticing people to utilize the platform’s convenient resources , Upwork makes itself an obligatory passage point within its network through a strategically designed closed system that prevents disintermediation of the platform . For example , JSS is a material transformation , which acts as a lever to let Upwork control the means of reputation building . Unless freelancers are looking for a one - off job , this pattern continues indefinitely and ensures worker interaction within the platform while Upwork reshapes how the larger freelancing economy conceives of work and organizing . Upwork’s promotional marketing clearly demonstrates how it intends to become an indispensable one - stop shop for freelancers and their clients ( in other words , problematization , during which a problem is identified and a solution is positioned as essential to this particular issue ) : “Upwork makes it fast , simple , and cost - effective to find , hire , work with , and pay the best professionals anywhere , any time . ” In this narrative , it is assumed that clients have a hard time finding quality , creative gig work and it is difficult for freelancers to find reliable and trustworthy jobs . Upwork then positions itself as an independent and self - sufficient platform Gig Platforms , Tensions , Alliances and Ecosystems : An Actor - Network Perspective 212 : 17 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . that can handle every step of the gig economy for clients and freelancers alike : “Contract talent , track work , and pay freelancers from a single platform . ” Its marketing highlights multiple membership levels ranging from a basic account—“Top - skilled freelancers and the essentials to find and work with them”—to an enterprise account—“End - to - end technology and service solution customized to fit your company . ” Upwork also includes a spectrum of hiring options , including short - term projects and contracted positions , and platform features that include job posting , recruiting , mobile and desktop collaborative tools , and secured transactions . Once Upwork provides its solution to the freelancing economy , it then classifies the different identities and objectives of actants , while also attempting to obstruct any competitors who could possibly detract from its own isolated network ( or , interessement ) . This process of interessement is both fluid , as identities and motivations shift , and also dualistic through its method of blocking off nonhuman actants that could potentially detract from its problematization . First , Upwork defines the roles of freelancers and clients . Freelancers are financially motivated to earn income for their labor , which incorporates both their identity as gig workers as well as their financial goals . Clients , according to Upwork’s above marketing tagline , are motivated by labor costs ( “cost - effective” ) , project timelines ( “fast , ” “any time” ) , and quality deliverables ( “the best professionals” ) . Once Upwork defines freelancers and clients ( and reinforces these roles through control mechanisms , such as its Terms of Service ) , the platform can then block other parties from creating new alliances . In this way , Upwork maintains the structural stability of its network through a power asymmetry that largely favors the platform . For example , it surveils chats and intervenes when transacting parties mention potential alliances with external platforms such as Skype or PayPal . Upwork also sustains platform - bound relationships between clients and freelancers through its Terms of Service , which aim to restrict the assemblage of a larger ecosystem through the threat of , for example , expulsion from the platform . Once interessement is successful , enrolment , or the coordination of specific roles , is then relatively straightforward from Upwork’s perspective . Freelancers produce work , clients select , hire , and pay workers , and the platform and its stockholders reap financial benefits from transaction fees . Upwork maintains this equilibrium of relationships through , as mentioned above , various levels of surveillance and threats of monetary loss . Payment is contingent upon screenshots observing hourly work and conversations that occur on the platform’s messaging channels are monitored to ensure that external transacting actants remain inaccessible . Moreover , Upwork can suspend accounts and render freelancers invisible in search results if they do not behave in certain ways and maintain specific levels of engagement on the platform . After Upwork entices clients and freelancers to its platform , defines their motivations , and coordinates their roles , the platform is then an acting spokesperson ( or , translation’s final step , mobilization ) . Herein , Upwork seeks to be the spokesperson for its own platformic interest and the users operating within it . As spokesperson , Upwork advocates for its users through mediation services , protected monetary transactions via escrow and payment verification , and collating and disseminating labor . Additionally , it is also the spokesperson for the quality of workers , as its algorithms for ratings and badges become the accepted measure of freelancer caliber . This , in turn , fosters dynamic exchanges of creative outputs that continue to generate and evolve on the platform over time . In this way , the platform grants mobility to previously immobile actants . However , our findings make it clear that Upwork’s problematization is considered insufficient as the interests of other stakeholders are not satisfactorily fulfilled due to various 212 : 18 Eliscia Kinder , Mohammad Hossein Jarrahi , & Will Sutherland PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . tensions depicted in Fig . 3 . The subsequent ecosystemic responses of these actants are broached further in the remainder of this paper . 5 . 2 A Robust Ecosystem of Platforms The Upwork platform aims to be perceived in simplistic terms as a resource ( or in ANT’s terminology as an obligatory passage point ) for quick , easy , and cheap labor . This asymmetric design can be understood as a “heteromated system , ” through which value is unproportionally accrued to an enterprise [ 14 ] . However , the existence of a larger ecosystem reveals numerous tensions scattered throughout this idealized structure of the platform . Indeed , the platform ' s structure facilitates information and power asymmetries that favor Upwork over clients and freelancers ( although , significantly more so for workers than clients ) ( see Fig . 3 ) . Importantly , Upwork’s systemic displacements—displaced autonomy and displaced power symmetry—are the very tensions that foster the creation of new alliances and a larger ecosystem of actants beyond its idealized notion of the gig platform ( depicted in Fig . 2 ) . Fig . 3 . Tensions surrounding the gig platform Maintaining an active presence on the platform is a significant tension for some freelancers . As success on Upwork is driven by sustained activity , the platform reinforces itself as an obligatory passage point while simultaneously discouraging the establishment of relationships with other platforms . Not only must freelancers log onto the platform , but in order to avoid Upwork automatically rendering their profile invisible to clients , workers are required to earn money every 30 days . Rewards and badges , such as Top Rated and Rising Talent , also stipulate various on - platform activity levels ( numbers of proposals submitted , work delivered , ratings averages ) within specific time frames . While profile features such as JSS and Top Rated status highly impact freelancer success on Upwork and are marketed as beneficial profile components , they also operate as control mechanisms designed to contain both freelancers and clients to Upwork’s platform . Users engaging with a larger ecosystem must therefore consider the costs and benefits of any freelancing activities that take place off the platform . Gig Platforms , Tensions , Alliances and Ecosystems : An Actor - Network Perspective 212 : 19 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . Despite this imperative to maintain levels of platform activity , the relationship between clients , freelancers , and Upwork is neither binding nor exclusively contained within the boundaries of the platform . This undercuts Upwork’s position as an obligatory passage point . As much as Upwork’s Terms of Service and activity mechanisms attempt to systemically lock users into place , our findings illustrate a drastic difference in the platform’s interessement methods and the reality that Upwork is only one player within a broader network of alliances and relationships . For many freelancers , Upwork is one channel amongst a number of others for finding work and conducting transactions . The same applies to clients as they would typically find and recruit online freelancers through different digital avenues . As such , those knowledgeable about different platforms’ networks , for instance , could benefit by moving between them or signing up for multiple services . Since freelancers are not strongly bound to the gig platform or its technical systems , they therefore have a greater degree of autonomy in conducting work than perceived in current literature on the gig economy [ 13 , 45 ] . We observed many online freelancers may also start building their reputation on Upwork , but once they establish the quality of their work , they may not need resources provided by the platform over time and can use their client base independently of the platform . Similarly , once clients have vetted the legitimacy of a freelancer , they may not depend upon Upwork to contact new workers and can then begin negotiating their own projects . Whether condoned by Upwork or not , other nonhuman actants in the form of external platforms can enable clients and freelancers to creatively accomplish transactions by the most effective means available . In fact , once clients and freelancers establish a trustworthy relationship , there are fewer reasons to remain committed to the platform when compared to the benefits of conducting some or all transactions off the platform where there is no surveillance and fewer fees imposed on financial transactions . The ability for clients and workers to use Upwork not as a sole source of locating freelancers or freelance work , but instead as only one part of a patchwork approach to online gig work , dismantles Upwork’s perceived ideal isolation , thereby questioning the sustainability of the platform’s translation mechanisms . Our findings highlight tensions that markedly run against Upwork’s projection of itself as sole spokesperson and the reality of a robust network surrounding the platform . The intrinsic asymmetries ( between clients and workers and between workers and the platform ) built into the platform further propel workers to seek other resources not provided by Upwork . Power asymmetries include the impact of freelancer ratings vs . client ratings , the ratio of freelancers to clients on the platform , and the platform’s surveillance and fee - based payment mechanisms . Our findings demonstrate that information asymmetries entailed unclear algorithm function and impact , a lack of community building , and a sharp information literacy learning curve on navigating the platform . These information and power asymmetries are the impetus for Upwork users assembling their own ecosystem through human and nonhuman negotiations . Such a gathering of actants demonstrates the agency of gig economy users , which is often glossed over in the current literature [ 27 ] . Indeed , when users subvert the platform or seek solutions outside of it , they reclaim some of their agency lost to Upwork’s algorithmic management and control . Notably , this impacts freelancers more than clients , as clients have more autonomy within the platform and , as we observed , are less pressured to maintain a well - developed reputation . While this does not necessitate that all clients have a laissez - faire attitude towards the platform’s asymmetries—indeed , we observed notable exceptions to this generalization in our Findings above—and conversely , that clients will not take advantage of 212 : 20 Eliscia Kinder , Mohammad Hossein Jarrahi , & Will Sutherland PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . this imbalance , but systemically , they are far less pressured to adhere to the performance quality and quantity standards Upwork enforces upon freelancers . Despite Upwork’s power imbalance , both freelancers and clients repeatedly subvert Upwork’s imposed communication channels , transaction fees , and file sharing services , prompting an array of alliances between clients , freelancers , and nonhumans ( external digital platforms ) . Upwork’s fees on client payments repeatedly drove both clients and freelancers to use PayPal , CashApp , or Venmo transactions , despite the risk of getting “scammed” or Upwork suspending their account for violating its Terms of Service . In this case , Upwork’s designed obligatory passage point for financial transactions is in direct competition with other monetary services and applications . The viability of nonhuman actants such as PayPal or Venmo’s digital platforms , particularly their perceived trustworthiness and familiarity , factored into client and freelancer decisions to circumvent Upwork’s payment method . Instances of clients transferring nominal payments to freelancers on the platform while paying larger amounts through these external payment applications suggests that clients understand the site’s inherent power imbalance when it comes to modes of financial transactions . Furthermore , the indispensability of these digital actants positions them as more successful spokespeople within the arena of financial transactions . Such instances of nonhuman actant agency subsequently bolster the alliances between clients and workers that constitute a larger ecosystem beyond the Upwork platform . Similarly , external communication and file sharing resources such as personal email accounts , Skype , DropBox , and Google Drive , maintained a competitive advantage over Upwork’s features . Despite Upwork’s instantaneous communication tools and the ability to link communications with specific projects , numerous clients preferred external digital platforms and technological resources with which they had already stabilized a relationship . In these instances , the ubiquity of applications like Skype and Google Drive held competitive advantages over Upwork , even with the latter’s added benefits of using communication and collaboration records for synchronous project design and as evidence for possible disputes . Moreover , a significant tension between visual freelancers and Upwork’s platform resulted in workers using external digital platforms by necessity . For example , the inability to transfer large files was cited as a considerable flaw in Upwork’s platform . Despite marketing itself as a synchronous gig working environment , Upwork’s inability to transfer particular files made it susceptible to other established , reliable , and similarly collaborative platforms to forge alliances with Upwork users , which , as our Findings illustrate , readily aligned themselves with the needs of Upwork users . Within such ecosystemic alliances , these external technological actants afford freelancers and clients the ability to both defy and protect themselves against the control and surveillance exercised by Upwork’s intended design , functionality , and often Terms of Service . Where relationships—and subsequent alliances—between clients and freelancers are expected , Upwork provides only one option for freelancers to connect with other freelancers ( and clients with other clients ) through the platform’s Community Forum . Dynamic freelancer - freelancer and client - client relationship building therefore conflicts with Upwork’s platform design , which only allows communication between clients and freelancers once the latter has submitted a proposal to a posted job . Freelancers in particular , already under time constraints to sustain their activity levels on Upwork , gain no benefit from helping other freelancers , especially on external digital platforms that , again , divert attention away from their activity Upwork . And yet , prevalent freelancer communities on sites like Reddit emphasize the importance of information seeking and sharing . This coopetition between freelancers illustrates Gig Platforms , Tensions , Alliances and Ecosystems : An Actor - Network Perspective 212 : 21 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . the value of community building for gig workers . Furthermore , the popularity of external forums , especially those that afford a level of anonymity , forge networks of freelancer - forum - freelancer alliances and attempt to redress Upwork’s information asymmetry . Social media platforms’ recurring presence in informational , evaluative , and transactional spaces is indicative of their wide influence for gig workers wishing to compensate for Upwork’s intentional asymmetries . As nonhuman actants , social media afford freelancers the ability to connect with other freelancers and clients , supplement Upwork job searches with niche postings , foster relationships with specific communities within the gig economy , and share deliverables and ideas with a wider audience than Upwork can provide . Despite Upwork’s largely successful presence within the field of online freelancing [ 20 , 43 ] , this accomplishment does not result in Upwork’s goal of platformic isolation or serving as spokesperson for all involved stakeholders . In this way , Upwork has attempted to construct a sustainable system that facilitates online freelancing within the bounds of its own platform . However , our analysis informed by tenets of ANT demonstrates that tensions rooted in information and power asymmetries as well as other constraints of the platform propel workers and clients to seek alliances with other digital platforms outside Upwork . This conceptualization of stakeholders stands in contrast to the common understanding of gig workers as helpless ‘users’ that forgo their agency . Gig workers ( and clients ) reclaim some of their agency as social actors [ 5 , 31 ] by enlisting external digital actants , giving rise to a larger ecosystem . The presence of an ecosystem of external digital platforms ( see Fig . 4 ) first and foremost demonstrates the comparative advantage of external actants , while also highlighting the instability of Upwork’s intended isolation . Fig . 4 . The larger ecosystem of digital platforms facilitating online freelancing The ecosystem that we have illustrated is less a result of the direct implementation of Upwork’s algorithmic control , and more of a product of shifting alliances and negotiations between clients 212 : 22 Eliscia Kinder , Mohammad Hossein Jarrahi , & Will Sutherland PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . and freelancers . When stakeholders , particularly freelancers , are faced with tensions – power asymmetry , information asymmetry , and Upwork’s technical limitations—on Upwork’s platform , they seek out and negotiate alliances as ecosystemic support . While the notion of the platform represents the will and interest of the organizer / owner of the platform ( an idealized narrative from its perspective ) , the larger ecosystem epitomizes the agency of the workers and clients in negotiating alliances with other external digital platforms that subsequently perforates Upwork’s attempt at platformic isolation . While others have distinguished between the two concepts of platforms and ecosystems in other research contexts [ e . g . , 16 , 48 , 51 ] , the distinction needs to be integrated in the research on the gig economy to reveal important dynamic of competition and cooperation between various involved stakeholders . 6 CONCLUSION Freelancers and clients on Upwork circumvent the platform’s various control mechanisms . ANT allowed us to map the existence of two divergent perspectives of Upwork’s platform : Upwork’s own idealistic , isolated , one - stop - shop platform and the reality of a complex and robust ecosystem of digital platforms . ANT also afforded us the language to delineate the shifting alliances , negotiations , and coopetition between an array of human and nonhuman actors that surround Upwork’s workflows . These two pictures , and the actants within them , illustrate the multiplicity of relationships present within a platform intended to operate in strict isolation . This ANT - based analysis adds to the current ecological conceptualizations of gig work [ e . g . , 54 ] by formulating how the design of platforms may give rise to tensions ( by reinforcing a single system of organizing work ) and how other participants may break out of these restrictions and enlist the help of other platforms . Upwork is one of many gig working platforms that prioritize its own position as stakeholder while obscuring its algorithmic controls from users . Considering the data collected for this paper , larger implications for further studies include examining digital platform ecosystems throughout the gig economy . Relationships between gig platforms , users , and external digital platforms , while constantly in flux , reflect dynamic negotiations and coopetition at work . Moreover , our study found that users actively aim to protect agency and subvert algorithmic control , complicating the generalization that platform users are passive recipients of algorithmic management . Our analysis provides implications for the design and management of labor platforms . First , a perspective only concerned with the interests of shareholders of the platform may leave other stakeholders disenfranchised . The interests of the platform are subsequently embedded within the algorithmic management of transactions and relationships . Even though algorithms automatically manage millions of transactions , their opaque nature may also displace the autonomy of gig workers . Clearer guidelines on how certain badges are computed could assist workers aiming to raise their understanding of algorithmic evaluation . Second , algorithmic control may also lower the flexibility of gig work as Upwork strives to bring many workflows under the same umbrella . This is at odds with the digitally - mediated work practices of knowledge workers , which are materially supported by a multiplicity of tools and platforms , as outlined by the artifact ecology perspective [ 25 ] . Promoting the labor platform as a one - stop shop has clear benefits , but an ecosystemic perspective , outlined in this paper , calls for giving the user the option to draw on other technological platforms . External platforms such as Dropbox or Skype enjoy economies of scale and consequently a higher quality and critical mass in offering of their specialized services . Recognizing the unique affordances of Gig Platforms , Tensions , Alliances and Ecosystems : An Actor - Network Perspective 212 : 23 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . other platforms helps transacting parties more cohesively and effectively conduct transactions . In this way , the platform gives users the liberty to construct their own artifact ecologies based on varying social and technological needs . After all , both workers and clients perceive online freelancing as an ecosystem beyond the Upwork platform and may treat concepts like online reputation as broader than one’s activities within the bounds of a single platform . Third , the design of platforms may require a pragmatic approach , ceding some of the control and retaining it wherever absolutely necessary . Espousing a policy that is too restrictive and control - centric could propel workers to either abandon the platform altogether ( particularly those with more experience who enjoy an already established network ) , or more actively circumvent the platforms and its control mechanisms . For example , Upwork can continue reinforcing the use of its own payment system ( as it directly impacts the business bottom - line ) , but allow workers and clients to choose their own preferred ways of communication and file sharing . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We appreciate all the interview participants who took the time to share with us their experience with online freelancing and Upwork . We also acknowledge the contribution of Sarah Beth Nelson and Steve Sawyer to this research study . Finally , we thank the four anonymous reviewers whose comments have greatly improved this manuscript . 7 REFERENCES [ 1 ] Muhammed Abdullahi . 2018 . Four Statistics Showing How Business Can Benefit From The Gig Economy . Forbes . Retrieved February 15 , 2019 from https : / / www . forbes . com / sites / abdullahimuhammed / 2018 / 07 / 31 / four - statistics - showing - how - business - can - benefit - from - the - gig - economy / # 1f0299b8752f [ 2 ] Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed , Nicola J . Bidwell , Himanshu Zade , Srihari H . Muralidhar , Anupama Dhareshwar , Baneen Karachiwala , Cedrick N . Tandong , and Jacki O’Neill . 2016 . Peer - to - peer in the Workplace : A View from the Road . In Proceedings of the 34th Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI 2016 , ACM , NY , 5063 – 5075 . [ 3 ] Ali Alkhatib , Michael S . Bernstein , and Margaret Levi . 2017 . Examining Crowd Work and Gig Work Through The Historical Lens of Piecework . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) , ACM , NY , 4599 – 4616 . [ 4 ] Ali Alkhatib , Justin Cranshaw , and Andrés Monroy - Hernandez . 2015 . Laying the Groundwork for a Worker - Centric Peer Economy . Microsoft Research . Retrieved February 15 , 2019 from https : / / www . microsoft . com / en - us / research / publication / laying - groundwork - worker - centric - peer - economy / [ 5 ] Liam J . Bannon . 1995 . From Human Factors to Human Actors : The Role of Psychology and Human - Computer Interaction Studies in System Design . In Readings in Human – Computer Interaction , Ronald M . Baecker , Jonathan Grudin , William A . S . Buxton and Saul Greenberg ( eds . ) . Morgan Kaufmann , 205 – 214 . [ 6 ] Susanne Bødker and Clemens Nylandsted Klokmose . 2012 . Dynamics in Artifact Ecologies . In Proceedings of the 7th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Making Sense Through Design ( NordiCHI ’12 ) , ACM , NY , 448 – 457 . [ 7 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2006 . Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative research in psychology 3 , 2 : 77 – 101 . [ 8 ] Michel Callon . 1986 . A New Sociology of Knowledge , . In Power , Action and Belief : A New Sociology of Knowledge , John Law ( ed . ) . Routledge , London , 196 – 233 . [ 9 ] Mingming Cheng and Carmel Foley . 2019 . Algorithmic management : The case of Airbnb . International Journal of Hospitality Management 83 : 33 – 36 . [ 10 ] Gerald F . Davis . 2015 . What might replace the modern corporation : Uberization and the web page enterprise . Seattle UL Rev . 39 : 501 . [ 11 ] Tawanna Dillahunt , Airi Lampinen , Jacki O’Neill , Loren Terveen , and Cory Kendrick . 2016 . Does the Sharing Economy Do Any Good ? In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing Companion ( CSCW ’16 Companion ) , ACM , NY , 197 – 200 . 212 : 24 Eliscia Kinder , Mohammad Hossein Jarrahi , & Will Sutherland PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . [ 12 ] Lynn Dombrowski , Adriana Alvarado Garcia , and Jessica Despard . 2017 . Low - Wage Precarious Workers’ Sociotechnical Practices Working Towards Addressing Wage Theft . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) , ACM , NY , 4585 – 4598 . [ 13 ] Niels van Doorn . 2017 . Platform labor : on the gendered and racialized exploitation of low - income service work in the “on - demand” economy . Information , Communication and Society 20 , 6 : 898 – 914 . [ 14 ] Hamid Ekbia and Bonnie Nardi . 2014 . Heteromation and its ( dis ) contents : The invisible division of labor between humans and machines . First Monday 19 , 6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5210 / fm . v19i6 . 5331 [ 15 ] Ingrid Erickson , Deepti Menezes , Raghav Raheja , and Thanushree Shetty . 2019 . Flexible Turtles and Elastic Octopi : Exploring Agile Practice in Knowledge Work . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : CSCW . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 019 - 09360 - 1 [ 16 ] Annabelle Gawer . 2014 . Bridging differing perspectives on technological platforms : Toward an integrative framework . Research policy 43 , 7 : 1239 – 1249 . [ 17 ] Mareike Glöss , Moira McGregor , and Barry Brown . 2016 . Designing for Labour : Uber and the On - Demand Mobile Workforce . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , NY , 1632 – 1643 . [ 18 ] Joseph A . Gonzales , Casey Fiesler , and Amy Bruckman . 2015 . Towards an Appropriable CSCW Tool Ecology : Lessons from the Greatest International Scavenger Hunt the World Has Ever Seen . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’15 ) , ACM , NY , 946 – 957 . [ 19 ] Mary L . Gray , Siddharth Suri , Syed Shoaib Ali , and Deepti Kulkarni . 2016 . The Crowd is a Collaborative Network . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’16 ) , ACM , NY , 134 – 147 . [ 20 ] Daryl D . Green , Craig Walker , Abdulrahman Alabulththim , Daniel Smith , and Michele Phillips . 2018 . Fueling the Gig Economy : A Case Study Evaluation of Upwork . com . Management and Economics Research Journal 4 : 104 – 112 . [ 21 ] Neha Gupta , David Martin , Benjamin V . Hanrahan , and Jacki O’Neill . 2014 . Turk - Life in India . In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Supporting Group Work ( GROUP ’14 ) , ACM , NY , 1 – 11 . [ 22 ] Anikó Hannák , Claudia Wagner , David Garcia , Alan Mislove , Markus Strohmaier , and Christo Wilson . 2017 . Bias in Online Freelance Marketplaces : Evidence from TaskRabbit and Fiverr . In Proceedings of the 20th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’17 ) , ACM , NY , 1914 – 1933 . [ 23 ] Benjamin V . Hanrahan , Ning F . Ma , and Chien Wen Yuan . 2018 . The Roots of Bias on Uber . In Proceedings of 15th European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work - Exploratory Papers . Retrieved 20 Jan 2018 from http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 1803 . 08579 [ 24 ] Lilly C . Irani and M . Six Silberman . 2013 . Turkopticon : Interrupting Worker Invisibility in Amazon Mechanical Turk . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) , ACM , NY , 611 – 620 . [ 25 ] Mohammad Hossein Jarrahi , Sarah Beth Nelson , and Leslie Thomson . 2017 . Personal artifact ecologies in the context of mobile knowledge workers . Computers in human behavior 75 : 469 – 483 . [ 26 ] Mohammad Hossein Jarrahi and Steve Sawyer . 2019 . Networks of innovation : the sociotechnical assemblage of tabletop computing . Research Policy : X : 100001 . [ 27 ] Mohammad Hossein Jarrahi and Will Sutherland . 2019 . Algorithmic Management and Algorithmic Competencies : Understanding and Appropriating Algorithms in Gig work . In iConference 2019 . [ 28 ] Shagun Jhaver , Yoni Karpfen , and Judd Antin . 2018 . Algorithmic Anxiety and Coping Strategies of Airbnb Hosts . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) , ACM , NY , 421 . [ 29 ] Arne L . Kalleberg and Michael Dunn . 2016 . Good jobs , bad jobs in the Gig Economy . LERA For Libraries 20 , 1 - 2 . Retrieved 2 Aug 2019 from http : / / lerachapters . org / OJS / ojs - 2 . 4 . 4 - 1 / index . php / PFL / article / viewFile / 3112 / 3087 [ 30 ] Neha Kumar , Nassim Jafarinaimi , and Mehrab Bin Morshed . 2018 . Uber in Bangladesh : The Tangled Web of Mobility and Justice . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 2 , CSCW : 98 : 1 – 98 : 21 . [ 31 ] Roberta Lamb and Rob Kling . 2003 . Reconceptualizing Users as Social Actors in Information Systems Research . MIS Quarterly 27 , 2 : 197 – 236 . [ 32 ] Airi Lampinen , Christoph Lutz , Gemma Newlands , and Ann Light . 2018 . Power Struggles in the Digital Economy : Platforms , Workers , and Markets . Retrieved 1 Aug 2019 from https : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 3273004 [ 33 ] Bruno Latour . 2005 . Reassembling the Social : An Introduction to Actor - Network - Theory . Oxford University Press , USA . [ 34 ] Bruno Latour . 1990 . Drawing things together . In Michael Lynch and Steve Woolgar ( eds . ) , Representation in Scientific Practice , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA [ 35 ] John Law and John Hassard . 1999 . Actor Network Theory and After . Blackwell Publishers . [ 36 ] Min Kyung Lee , Daniel Kusbit , Evan Metsky , and Laura Dabbish . 2015 . Working with Machines : The Impact of Algorithmic and Data - Driven Management on Human Workers . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , NY , 1603 – 1612 . Gig Platforms , Tensions , Alliances and Ecosystems : An Actor - Network Perspective 212 : 25 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . [ 37 ] Vili Lehdonvirta . 2018 . Flexibility in the gig economy : managing time on three online piecework platforms . New Technology , Work and Employment 33 , 1 : 13 – 29 . [ 38 ] Ning F . Ma , Chien Wen Yuan , Moojan Ghafurian , and Benjamin V . Hanrahan . 2018 . Using Stakeholder Theory to Examine Drivers’ Stake in Uber . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) , ACM , NY [ 39 ] David Martin , Jacki O’Neill , Neha Gupta , and Benjamin V . Hanrahan . 2016 . Turking in a Global Labour Market . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : CSCW 25 , 1 : 39 – 77 . [ 40 ] Mareike Möhlmann and Lior Zalmanson . 2017 . Hands on the wheel : Navigating algorithmic management and Uber drivers’ autonomy . In proceedings of the International Conference on Information Systems ( ICIS 2017 ) , Seoul , South Korea . [ 41 ] Srihari Hulikal Muralidhar , Claus Bossen , and Jacki O’Neill . 2019 . Rethinking Financial Inclusion : from Access to Autonomy . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : CSCW https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10606 - 019 - 09356 - x [ 42 ] Gerard Oleksik , Natasa Milic - Frayling , and Rachel Jones . 2012 . Beyond Data Sharing : Artifact Ecology of a Collaborative Nanophotonics Research Centre . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’12 ) , ACM , NY , 1165 – 1174 . [ 43 ] Premilla D’Cruz and Ernesto Noronha . 2016 . Positives outweighing negatives : the experiences of Indian crowdsourced workers . Work Organisation , Labour & Globalisation 10 , 1 : 44 – 63 . [ 44 ] Noopur Raval and Paul Dourish . 2016 . Standing out from the crowd : Emotional labor , body labor , and temporal labor in ridesharing . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing , ACM , NY , 97 – 107 . [ 45 ] Alex Rosenblat . 2018 . Uberland : How Algorithms Are Rewriting the Rules of Work . Univ of California Press . [ 46 ] Alex Rosenblat and Luke Stark . 2016 . Algorithmic labor and information asymmetries : A case study of Uber’s drivers . International Journal of Communication 10 : 3758 – 3784 . [ 47 ] Steve Sawyer and Mohammad Hossein Jarrahi . 2014 . Sociotechnical Approaches to the Study of Information Systems . In Computing Handbook , Third Edition , Heikki Topi and Allen Tucker ( eds . ) . Chapman and Hall / CRC , 5 – 1 – 5 – 27 . [ 48 ] Maximilian Schreieck , Manuel Wiesche , and Helmut Krcmar . 2016 . Design and Governance of Platform Ecosystems - Key Concepts and Issues for Future Research . In Proceedings of ECIS , ResearchPaper76 . [ 49 ] Aaron Shapiro . 2018 . Between autonomy and control : Strategies of arbitrage in the “on - demand” economy . New Media & Society 20 , 8 : 2954 – 2971 . [ 50 ] John Shiga . 2007 . Translations : Artifacts from an Actor - Network Perspective . Artifact 1 , 1 : 40 – 55 . [ 51 ] Susan Leigh Star and Karen Ruhleder . 1996 . Steps Toward an Ecology of Infrastructure : Design and Access for Large Information Spaces . Information Systems Research 7 , 1 : 111 – 134 . [ 52 ] Arun Sundararajan . 2013 . From Zipcar to the sharing economy . Harvard business review 1 . Retrieved 15 July 2019 from http : / / oz . stern . nyu . edu / SharingEconomy2013HBR . pdf [ 53 ] Will Sutherland and Mohammad Hossein Jarrahi . 2017 . The Gig Economy and Information Infrastructure : The Case of the Digital Nomad Community . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 1 , 1 . Article No . 97 [ 54 ] Will Sutherland and Mohammad Hossein Jarrahi . 2018 . The Sharing Economy and Digital Platforms : A Review and Research Agenda . International Journal of Information Management , 43 , 328 - 341 . [ 55 ] Arthur Tatnall . 2005 . Actor - Network Theory in Information Systems Research . Encyclopedia of Information Science and Technology , First Edition , 42 – 46 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4018 / 978 - 1 - 59140 - 553 - 5 . ch009 [ 56 ] Jacob Thebault - Spieker , Loren Terveen , and Brent Hecht . 2017 . Toward a Geographic Understanding of the Sharing Economy : Systemic Biases in UberX and TaskRabbit . ACM transactions on computer - human interaction : a publication of the Association for Computing Machinery 24 , 3 : 21 . [ 57 ] The Economist . 2018 . How governments should deal with the rise of the gig economy . The Economist . Retrieved February 15 , 2019 from https : / / www . economist . com / leaders / 2018 / 10 / 06 / how - governments - should - deal - with - the - rise - of - the - gig - economy [ 58 ] Amrit Tiwana . 2013 . Platform Ecosystems : Aligning Architecture , Governance , and Strategy . Newnes . [ 59 ] Thea Turner , Pernilla Qvarfordt , Jacob T . Biehl , Gene Golovchinsky , and Maribeth Back . 2010 . Exploring the Workplace Communication Ecology . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’10 ) , ACM , NY , 841 – 850 . [ 60 ] Susann Wagenknecht , Min Lee , Caitlin Lustig , Jacki O’Neill , and Himanshu Zade . 2016 . Algorithms at Work : Empirical Diversity , Analytic Vocabularies , Design Implications . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing Companion , ACM , NY , 536 – 543 . 212 : 26 Eliscia Kinder , Mohammad Hossein Jarrahi , & Will Sutherland PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 3 , No . CSCW , Article 212 , Publication date : November 2019 . [ 61 ] Keith Walley . 2007 . Coopetition : an introduction to the subject and an agenda for research . International Studies of Management & Organization 37 , 2 : 11 – 31 . [ 62 ] Geoff Walsham . 1997 . Actor - Network Theory and IS Research : Current Status and Future Prospects . Information Systems and Qualitative Research , 466 – 480 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 0 - 387 - 35309 - 8 _ 23 [ 63 ] Alex J . Wood , Mark Graham , Vili Lehdonvirta , and Isis Hjorth . 2018 . Good gig , bad gig : autonomy and algorithmic control in the global gig economy . Work , Employment and Society . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0950017018785616 Received April 2019 ; revised June 2019 ; accepted August 2019 .