© The Authors . Published by BCS Learning and Development Ltd . Proceedings of BCS - HCI 2013 . Towards a Tool for Design Ideation : Insights from Use of SketchStorm Siân Lindley α , Xiang Cao β , John Helmes α , Richard Morris ε and Sam Meek δ α Microsoft Research Cambridge Cambridge , UK β Microsoft Research Asia Beijing , China ε The Open University Milton Keynes , UK δ University of Nottingham Nottingham , UK { sianl ; xiangc ; v - johelm } @ microsoft . com ; richard . morris @ open . ac . uk ; psxsm6 @ nottingham . ac . uk We present findings from a deployment of SketchStorm , a tool for designers that supports sketch in a central canvas , whilst streaming images relating to a search query around the periphery . Our overarching goal was to explore the potential for combining sketching and use of examples , two activities that are associated with design ideation . Initial interviews with designers suggested that a tool that supports encounters with non - designerly content , that supports awareness of what has already been collected , and that allows this content to be laid out , manipulated , and integrated into the process of working out of ideas , would be of value . A month - long deployment allowed us to examine these ideas in more depth , through ‘research through prototypes in practice’ ( Keller et al . , 2009 ) . Our findings highlight two ways in which web - based images can be utilised . On the one hand , they can serve as examples and , where this is the case , encounters with them should be rich and memorable , and tools should support a range of actions such as triaging , annotation , and manipulation . On the other hand , images can be used to create a backdrop to on - going activity , so as to underpin serendipitous encounters . Where this is the case , enabling designers to engineer these encounters , so that they are framed by moments of idleness and latent goals , is key . Sketch , image search , image collection , encountering information , flexibility , appropriation . 1 . INTRODUCTION It is widely accepted that the early stages of the design process , in which designers generate and explore initial ideas , can have important ramifications on the quality of a final design . This phase of design ideation involves investigating potential problem spaces , considering multiple possibilities , evaluating tentative solutions , and iterating these to allow for the reformulation of solutions ( e . g . Bonnardel and Sumner , 1996 ) . HCI researchers have explored in depth some of the activities associated with design ideation , including sketching , which has been postulated as central to creative output ( Buxton , 2007 ) , and the use of examples ( Herring et al . , 2009 ) , which can serve as a source of inspiration . This research has typically led to the development of new tools which focus on either sketching or the use of examples . However , recent advances in technology have the potential to draw these two activities closer together . For example , pen - enabled tablet computers offer a means of combining sketch and web search , which is often used when collecting examples ( Sharmin et al . , 2009 ) . Indeed , innovation may eventually support web searches that are initiated through the act of sketching itself . In this paper , we begin to explore what a technology that combines both processes might offer , and what the challenges of integration are . We follow Keller et al . ( 2009 ) in conducting ‘research through prototypes in practice’ by firstly , developing a tool that allows designers to sketch and collect examples and , secondly , deploying it in the field for a month . In this paper , we report findings regarding the combination of these activities , highlighting implications for tools to support design ideation . 2 . RELATED WORK Before detailing our own work , we briefly review research into the process of design , and give an overview of tools that have been developed to support it . Design is generally understood to be an iterative cycle , through which ideas are investigated and successive partial solutions are evaluated ( Bonnardel and Sumner , 1996 ; Schön , 1991 ) . As already noted , examples play an important role in the early stages of this process ; their collection is a central part of researching and iterating ideas ( Sharmin et al . , 2009 ) . The role of sketching has also been highlighted . It has been argued that sketching enhances the restructuring of imagery , which is difficult to perform mentally and is an important element of creativity ( Verstijnen et al . , 1998 ) . Furthermore , sketches have been highlighted as an external medium that ‘talks back’ to the designer ( Schön , 1991 ) , that supports analogical or metaphorical thought ( Goldschmidt , 2003 ) , and that permits sufficient ambiguity for new interpretations to emerge ( Purcell and Gero , 1998 ) . Within HCI , various efforts have been aimed at supporting the generation and representation of ideas , in design work and more broadly . Examples include SILK ( Landay and Myers , 1995 ) and DENIM ( Lin et al . , 2000 ) , both of which allow designers to Towards a Tool for Design Ideation : Insights from Use of SketchStorm Siân Lindley ● Xiang Cao ● John Helmes ● Richard Morris ● Sam Meek 2 create interactive user interface prototypes through digital sketching , K - Sketch ( Davis et al . , 2008 ) , which supports novice animators in creating kinetic animations through simple sketching , and ILoveSketch ( Bae et al . , 2008 ) , a virtual sketchbook for creating 3D curve models . A second set of projects focuses on providing inspiration , often directly from the web . Examples include InkSeine ( Hinckley et al . , 2007 ) , which interleaves inking , search and content gathering , Adaptive Ideas ( Lee et al . , 2010 ) , which supports faceted browsing of example web galleries , and Idea Expander ( Wang et al . , 2010 ) , which automatically presents pictures to facilitate online brainstorming based on a language processor . Also worth highlighting here is combinFormation ( Kerne et al . , 2008 ) , a tool that supports information discovery in knowledge creation tasks through the actions of an agent , which collects and composes information for and with the user . Finally , a third set of projects aims to support designers in building and managing collections of content . Freed ( Mendels et al . , 2011 ) allows design students to spatially organise their digital collections , while Cabinet ( Keller et al . , 2009 ) is an appliance that helps designers merge digital and physical collections of visual material . These technologies tend to have been evaluated either in constrained settings ( Bae et al . , 2008 ; Lee et al . , 2010 ; Lin et al . , 2000 ) or with non - professionals , such as students ( Lee et al . , 2010 ; Mendels et al . , 2011 ) , with the notable exception of Cabinet . Keller et al . ( 2009 ) argue for doing “research through prototypes in practice” ( p . 85 ) , and deployed their own device with three designers for four weeks . They were particularly struck by the way the device was used to organise existing visual material with the designers’ own solutions , highlighting this as an area worthy of further exploration . In this paper , we build upon Keller et al . ’s work in two ways . Firstly , we follow their lead in deploying a prototype . This enables us to explore design in practice , and to consider with some degree of rigour the possibilities offered by a technology that supports both sketch and the use of examples . In doing so , we also explore one area that Keller et al . point to as being of especial interest : the possibility for designers to organise existing material with their own solutions , and further , to combine these in a single artefact . 3 . INFORMING THE DESIGN To inform our design , we interviewed 12 designers , 7 individually and 5 as a focus group . We focused on their methods for seeking inspiration and developing ideas , their approaches to sketching , and their use of technology , the web and image collections . We interviewed 5 web designers , 3 interaction designers , 1 product designer , 1 graphic designer , and 2 design leads . They were 3 females and 9 males , in the UK and USA , ranging from recent graduates to senior professionals . Transcripts from the interviews ( denoted I ) and focus groups ( denoted FG ) were analysed and key themes identified using open and axial coding ( Strauss and Corbin , 1998 ) . Findings that informed our design are presented below . Firstly , it was clear that designers rarely used the web to directly seek inspiration : “I find it hard to explicitly find inspiration . . at the moment I’m relying on just remembering things that I encounter when I browse” ( I4 ) ; “I don’t look for specific explicit inspiration , it’s whatever is there . . it’s at the whim of whatever someone is serving up on the [ RSS ] feeds” ( FG9 ) . Instead , designers browsed design sites and followed design feeds . These activities had the potential to facilitate encounters with interesting content , which could then be drawn upon later . This resonates with the design studies literature , where it has been posited that new ideas are linked to old situations ( including those not related to the current context ; Bonnardel , 2000 ) , and that creativity is built upon episodic knowledge ( Visser , 1995 ) . However , search engines , and the web more generally , were noted as being useful when breaking away from familiar sources and those considered “too designerly” ( I8 ) . While designers regularly browsed design - related content , they also highlighted this practice as problematic : “creative magazines are a really dangerous trap . . loads of these same ideas emerge , if everybody’s working from the same set of references” ( I6 ) ; “sometimes the ideas are too finished or too strongly themed . . it’s completely assembled design” ( I8 ) . Similarly , when looking for sources to feed design work , the risk of using content too similar to the intended product was noted . The designers of a web portal avoided looking at similar sites : “it’s like pop will eat itself , everything starts to look the same” ( FG10 ) . This resonates with Herring et al . ’s ( 2009 ) observation that examples can result in design fixation , and the web is a way of circumventing this . A third observation relates to the collections that designers created . As part of their explorations of online content , some designers built image banks that were “scrolled through intermittently” , but “going back and browsing all of them” was noted to be a “big problem” ( FG9 ) . The content these contained was sometimes explicitly used , for example , I8 drew on his collections for creating mood boards . Lucero ( 2012 ) has underlined the value of this activity , and Eckert and Stacey ( 2000 ) have shown that collections of content can be used to identify elements or relationships for a new design context , as well as to furnish a vocabulary for thinking about and describing new designs . However , the difficulty of browsing digital collections meant that participants in this study rarely did so if not motivated by a task that would require it . Towards a Tool for Design Ideation : Insights from Use of SketchStorm Siân Lindley ● Xiang Cao ● John Helmes ● Richard Morris ● Sam Meek 3 4 . SKETCHSTORM Drawing on our initial findings and the literature described above , we identified three functions that we wished to explore through a prototype technology . Firstly , as encounters with less designerly content were valued , we chose to support the streaming of images derived from a search engine . Secondly , as designers struggled to revisit their digital collections , but spoke of familiarity with them as being essential to inspiration , we chose to support the streaming of collected materials to reinforce designers’ awareness of them . Thirdly , as we aimed to explore the potential for integrating sketch and use of examples , we chose to support the collection , manipulation , laying out and triaging of images , and to incorporate this with sketch functionality . The subsequent development of our tool , named SketchStorm , was an iterative process that incorporated further interviews with designers in our research group , in order to minimise feature and usability issues prior to deployment . As we wanted to deploy the tool with designers at work , and so learn from its use in practice , it needed to be robust and flexible . Consequently , it was built to run on Microsoft Windows™ , to be used with a Wacom tablet or mouse , and to have different modes that could be appropriated for different purposes : Regular , Thumbnail and Full Screen . The prototype that we deployed comprised of a canvas for sketching and two image streams on either side , which drew content from the web and from local collections . These drifted past , and could be dragged onto the canvas and used in sketches , or saved . The functionality and interface are described in more detail below . 4 . 1 . Functionality and interface In Regular mode ( Fig . 1a ) , the interface comprises a canvas in the centre and an image stream on each side . The canvas can be used for freehand input while the image streams deliver results from a search query . New images appear at the bottom of the streams and flow upwards at a rate of approximately three seconds per image . This means that images can be encountered somewhat passively , while the user is using the canvas or is engaged in some other activity . A new query can be initiated by typing into the search box or circling a handwritten word on the canvas . In addition , the system can be set to continuously recognise handwriting and use this to update the query . Should the user wish to navigate the streams , they can scroll backwards or forwards , to review prior images or fetch new ones quickly . Double - clicking an image opens a higher - resolution preview . Both streams can be customised to display content from four sources : Bing ( general image search ) , Figure 1 : SketchStorm interfaces : ( a ) Regular ( b ) Thumbnail ( c ) Full Screen ( images not to scale ) . Flickr ( user - contributed images ) , Getty ( professional stock images ) , or a local folder . By default , the left stream delivers results from Bing and the right stream presents images from a local folder . Both streams present content that is relevant to the current search query , but images delivered from a search become gradually less relevant over time , and those from a folder include random images once all those with names or tags that are relevant to the query have been presented . Consequently , the two streams mix directed search and unanticipated browsing , including of one’s own image collection . It was hoped that the combination of these two sources could be appropriated to deliver content that is ‘less designerly’ than design - oriented websites , yet different and less precise than interaction with an image search engine . Images displayed in the streams can be dragged onto the canvas , where the user can apply basic manipulations such as repositioning , resizing , rotating , horizontal / vertical flips , and cutting out sections . In addition , users can draw on top of images , allowing them to combine sketches and image elements when exploring ideas . Elements on the canvas , either alone or in combination , can be saved to the local folder , as can images in the web stream , which can be dragged there directly . Saved content is tagged with the original image file name and the search query used to retrieve it ; sketches are tagged with any handwritten notes . The addition Towards a Tool for Design Ideation : Insights from Use of SketchStorm Siân Lindley ● Xiang Cao ● John Helmes ● Richard Morris ● Sam Meek 4 of these tags supports later re - finding and presentation in the local stream ; if the same search query is entered twice , images saved during the first search will be presented in the local stream during the second search . We anticipated that different designers would have different needs for a tool like SketchStorm . Two additional modes were developed to place more or less emphasis on sketching with and around images . When SketchStorm is resized below a certain threshold , it switches to Thumbnail mode ( Fig . 1b ) , where both the canvas and the image streams are hidden , and only one image is displayed at a time . This image can be set to come from either one of the streams or both . Thumbnail mode allows SketchStorm to be used in a peripheral fashion , but continues to support encounters with and saving of images ; images can still be placed on the canvas or in the local folder via two drop boxes . Additionally , to support placement in the periphery of the screen , SketchStorm sits ‘on top’ of other applications while in Thumbnail and Regular mode . The final mode is Full Screen , accessed by double - clicking the light green border ( Fig . 1c ) . Here , the maximum canvas area and number of streamed images is provided . In both Regular and Full Screen mode , the user can pan and zoom the canvas and flip between different pages using the Prev and Next buttons . Individual sketches or the entire canvas can be deleted using the Del and Clear buttons . 5 . FIELD DEPLOYMENT As already mentioned , little of the prior work in HCI aimed at supporting design ideation has resulted in technologies deployed with designers at work . This was an important goal with SketchStorm ; we wanted to learn from how it would be used in design practice . Accordingly , we deployed the prototype with nine designers to use on their work computers over the course of a month . In this section , we focus on how SketchStorm was ( and was not ) incorporated into processes associated with design ideation , and what this can tell us about designing new tools aimed at supporting this . 5 . 1 . Participants Our participants were six males and three females , ranging from recent graduates to senior design leads . There were three in China , three in the UK , two in the USA and one in the Netherlands . Four ( D4 , D5 , D7 , D8 ) were interviewed as part of our initial study ( I4 , I5 , FG7 , I8 ) . D1 - 3 were working on concept development , D4 prototypes user interfaces , D5 is a systems designer , D6 is a touch interaction designer , D7 designs wireframes and modules for the web , D8 is a graphic designer for print and web , and D9 is a design researcher . 5 . 2 . Method The designers were interviewed using semi - structured interviews on three occasions : at the beginning of the deployment , for us to demonstrate the prototype and find out about their existing design practice ; after one week , to understand initial impressions of SketchStorm and how it fitted their design practice ; and after one month , to understand if and how use had changed over time . Questions included what circumstances triggered use of the prototype , whether it had become part of a routine , whether it had disrupted the designer’s practice , whether it was used to discover visual content , whether it was used to store or archive material , whether it was used for sketching , and how it was used across the three modes of the interface . Interviews typically lasted between 30 minutes and one hour and were conducted either in person or via internet calls , in the latter case facilitated by screen sharing . Canvasses and images saved by designers were used to ground the discussion . 5 . 3 . Analysis The interviews were transcribed and analysed in order to identify emergent themes using open and axial coding ( Strauss and Corbin , 1998 ) . It is worth highlighting that while some of the designers used SketchStorm enthusiastically ( and continued to do so after the period of study ) , others did not so readily take to it . Our analysis focuses as much on reasons underpinning adoption of SketchStorm as on reasons for low usage . As the analysis developed , the core theme of ‘mastery of a tool’ , which was relevant to both types of response , was identified and iterated on . We now describe four key sets of findings that emerged from this analysis . 5 . 4 . Findings 5 . 4 . 1 . Inspiration ‘seeking’ can be secondary The first theme we report relates to how designers appropriated SketchStorm to encounter interesting images . As noted earlier , inspiration is rarely explicitly ‘sought’ . Nevertheless , designers were able to use SketchStorm to encounter interesting content serendipitously , as well as to build collections of images that would serve as a resource in the design process . If we consider use of SketchStorm to underpin serendipitous encounters first , it is interesting to see how this circumstance was engineered by designers . Indeed , this highlights a subtle contrast with our initial interviews , which indicated that designers felt unable to ‘search’ for inspiration . In contrast , our deployment showed that designers could , and did , explicitly facilitate encounters with interesting content . This was achieved by positioning SketchStorm at the periphery of the screen and using search queries such as ‘sunshine’ , Towards a Tool for Design Ideation : Insights from Use of SketchStorm Siân Lindley ● Xiang Cao ● John Helmes ● Richard Morris ● Sam Meek 5 ‘sky’ and ‘green’ to stream content . Furthermore , D4 developed a tactic to display random images ; by selecting an arbitrary part of a sketch to be ( mis ) interpreted by the handwriting recognition , she triggered uncalculated searches . While such behaviours were described in quite passive terms , such as “procrastination” ( D2 ) , “idleness” ( D4 ) , and “like looking outside of the window” ( D1 ) , the experience was , in a sense , framed quite deliberately , and was sometimes driven by a specific aim . For example , D1 set SketchStorm to run “inspirationally in the background” while sketching on paper ( “you keep an eye on what’s happening on the screen . . it’s like you catch what’s interesting” ) , and D9 placed it on the margins of his monitor to prompt some work that needed to be done whilst engaging in a separate task : “It was the pressure to keep thinking about something … I had the idea at the beginning of the day that I wanted to start thinking about logos . So at the beginning I put the widget on there with the keyword ‘phone switchboard’ . . this one popped up and I started to sketch” ( see Fig . 2 ) . Figure 2 : Image of a switchboard and sketch of a logo . Despite this use of SketchStorm to stream content , few of our participants used it to then build collections . The exception here was D8 , who undertook directed research for each project he worked on . He compared the passive search experience offered by SketchStorm to “cruise control” in a car , and much preferred it to the “tedious” experience of “trawling an endless amount of images” via a search engine . He saw SketchStorm as offering an “opportunity to step back” when momentarily stuck on some other task , allowing him to “multi - task” and find more images with reduced effort : “the search that I did before . . turned out 80 images , with SketchStorm I got 184 , it’s a massive difference” . Common to these different examples is that , by repositioning image search as a peripheral activity , designers could use it to encounter inspirational content in a way that is difficult with search tools . ‘Searching’ for inspiration was accomplished as a secondary , yet intentional , activity . 5 . 4 . 2 . The design process is demarcated by tools The second theme of our analysis relates to how SketchStorm performed and was understood as a tool that slotted into the design process , a finding that is particularly relevant to our aim of considering the possibilities offered by integrating sketch and use of examples . Indeed , and counter to the notion of integration , our findings highlighted that designers value having the “right kind of tool for the right kind of job” ( D7 ) , one that is specifically tailored to a given activity . One consequence of the combination of sketch and image search in SketchStorm was that it was seen as “too broad” ( D2 ) . As D6 noted , “I haven’t gotten into a rhythm where . . it was the perfect tool for a specific task” . D6’s observation is partly bound up with the technical limitations of our prototype ; digital sketching is not as satisfying as sketching on paper ( described as “familiar” ( D3 ) , having a “rhythm” ( D6 ) , even as making a “nice noise” ( D1 ) ) , and SketchStorm was not as powerful as other , existing , digital sketch technologies ( such as Illustrator , noted by D2 for providing “this power” that allowed him to “play” , “reformulate” and “transform” his work in a manner that was “comfortable” , “easy” and “fast” ) . Furthermore , while we had not intended to create a perfect search tool with SketchStorm , its lack of exactness meant that it sometimes drew unfavourable comparisons with other tools used by the designers , which were underpinned by values such as “precision” and “control” ( D2 ) . Nevertheless , the deployment of SketchStorm allowed us to consider whether combining sketching and use of examples could be of value more broadly . Indeed , their integration was a factor that divided opinion throughout the study , as we will now illustrate . Where integration was viewed positively , reduced effort was noted as one of the most straightforward benefits that SketchStorm offered . It made it easy to “integrate picture material into sketches” ( D4 ) . D9 described how he used images sourced from SketchStorm as the backdrop for sketches of a watering system ( Fig . 3 ) , saying “I wouldn’t have taken the effort to start Photoshop and search an image . . and save it and open it . . and create a layer to start sketching on it” , and D4 integrated web images into the design of an interface ( Fig . 4 ) . She noted that it was valuable to be able to save these image and sketch combinations , as well as the component parts themselves : “you can use the whole thing that you draw , so the integration of that one [ image ] with the actual sketch can be then used as a whole . . which I can’t do on paper” ( D4 ) . More fundamentally , D8 felt that SketchStorm offered a way for him to combine elements of the design process that were related but normally done separately : “those three things , you know , the collecting of images , the reviewing of images and making notes are all done at the same time and at the same place for me , and exactly the same , definitely the same stage of my project” . As already noted , he used the tool for searching for images for Towards a Tool for Design Ideation : Insights from Use of SketchStorm Siân Lindley ● Xiang Cao ● John Helmes ● Richard Morris ● Sam Meek 6 specific projects , a highly structured and time - consuming process . His normal practice was to search for images using a search engine , save these to project - specific reference folders , and then use them in the process of building ideas and clarifying communication with clients . SketchStorm offered advantages over his usual way of doing this . On noticing an interesting image , he would move it to the local folder , or if it was particularly significant , onto the canvas as well . From there he could outline “parts of the image that I like by drawing over the top” , and make “notes , and . . a little montage of different images and noted things that I like about that image” ( Fig . 5a ) . SketchStorm offered a “good way to put all the found images together in one place . . and view them all at the same time” ( Fig . 5b ) , resulting in a “board of visual thinking . . loads of visual reference material based on key words which I then use to create designs” . Figure 3 : Combinations of image and drawing used as a backdrop for sketches of a balcony watering system . Figure 4 : Sketches of interfaces utilising web images . Figure 5 : Images ( a ) annotated to highlight points of interest and ( b ) arranged as an “idea board” . While for D8 SketchStorm was “definitely a work - related tool” because it allowed him to combine activities he normally had to do separately , other designers saw SketchStorm as mixing activities that were better kept separate . As D6 explains , “I’ll do some sketches or I’ll do some thinking and then . . my second step . . is like finding the resources , finding the images , and then the last step is kind of . . execution , finalising things . . it tries to merge all those into one place” . Relatedly , designers showed little interest in creating sketches that could be exported to the next phase of the design process . Digitising a sketch was part of the process of refining ideas , and if the opportunity to create high - fidelity sketches too early on was present , this could be seen as introducing the pressure to create something of too high quality : “I would have to spend more time on sketches and then it defeats the purpose” ( D4 ) . The demarcation of the design process was bound up with the use of separate tools at different stages . 5 . 4 . 3 . There is little value in revisiting collections A third theme , which was common across all participants , was that little value was perceived in the ability to revisit already - collected materials . Most changed the settings for the image stream that , by default , displayed local content , to show images derived from the web . This reflected more general practices surrounding the perusal of archives , which was also noted as being rare . One of the reasons underpinning this was quite straightforward . Some designers simply did not have an archive that could be used to feed SketchStorm . Collections might be on “scattered hard drives and various computers” ( D7 ) , or had been abandoned because they were difficult to maintain and search : “the folder just got too big , I wasn’t really referring back to it . . if you just keep a general folder everything can get out of date so quickly , it’s just low value” ( D8 ) . The web offered a valuable alternative here : “deviantART and Dropular have such a huge library stored online that I can enter a search term and know that they are going to find it” ( D7 ) . This resonates with prior work ( Sharmin et al . , 2009 ) , where it has been noted that the cost of access via the web is lower than retrieval from personal collections . However , even designers who did archive tended not to “browse through” ( D1 ) their collections . Instead , they would look to them only if they remembered content worth retrieving : “if I could recall that I found something . . I would go back , but I wouldn’t do it to get inspiration and start browsing those folders” ( D9 ) . In general , the web was a first port of call , with archives being “a safe point” ( D2 ) , like “my collection of tools in my garage … I don’t need it all that often , but when I do . . it’s awesome to have” ( D5 ) . An interesting observation that came out of these discussions is that the act of saving images , within SketchStorm and more generally , was felt to make them memorable in itself : “sometimes it’s just the effect of going through the process of saving it made it more memorable , so sometimes I don’t need to go back” ( D4 ) . This has practical implications if archived material is recalled rather than revisited : “you’re thinking about things you’ve seen somewhere , or Towards a Tool for Design Ideation : Insights from Use of SketchStorm Siân Lindley ● Xiang Cao ● John Helmes ● Richard Morris ● Sam Meek 7 you remember what [ is . . ] relevant” ( D4 ) . Support for recall of material , rather than re - finding it , may be paramount in design . 5 . 4 . 4 . Image search is not just about imagery The final theme relates to the content that SketchStorm dealt with : images . SketchStorm was built around a visual search mechanism that delivers images as streams that are linked by a search query but are otherwise unrelated to one another . We intended that this would support interesting encounters with images and wondered if surprising juxtapositions might be of use when building ideas , in the same way that brainstorming techniques utilise synonyms and place material out of context . However , our data demonstrate that the context in which images are encountered is important . Context provides narrative and a sense of currency , qualities that SketchStorm were said to remove . For the designers that we interviewed , images were typically encountered on blogs , articles , and in design forums . Delivering images outside of these sources was described as “like news without any context” ( D6 ) . Furthermore , presenting images in isolation meant that knowledge of the source was lost . Source underpinned a sense of “freshness” ( D2 ) and trust : “the ones on the blog . . are picked by human beings with similar design interests , when you search for a term , you get different results than if you ask someone what is inspiring to them ; they’ll come up with things that you would have never thought to search” ( D6 ) . Thus , contemporary and curated sources gave a sense of being up to date . These findings may at first glance seem odd ; designers clearly encounter images out of context whenever they use image search engines ( which they did , frequently ) . However , the designers that we studied do not generally use search tools as a way of discovering or encountering interesting material ; this is something that was achieved through browsing . Instead , search tools were used to specifically find an image for a particular reason . Two factors are key here . Firstly , the usual process of image search was noted for giving a sense that one is exploring and understanding a space through the ability to dynamically alter and refine search terms . Images in search engines were viewed like signposts , allowing one to navigate and make sense of an online landscape : “when you do searches through Google Images or Flickr or whatever you constantly adapt your keywords to find more specific images” ( D9 ) . Secondly , designers wish to know much more about an image than simply what it looks like when searching , and these requirements are bound up with what they intend to do with that image . Images are materials that can be printed , projected , or shared with others , and when this is the case properties such as image resolution or the provision of a creative commons license are central : “if I have to make a presentation it should be at least . . 800 by 600 [ pixels ] , if I have to print it , it should be even bigger , so for . . the way I use images . . this is key” ( D1 ) . Of course , SketchStorm does give some indication of context via the sources that images are streamed from . Indeed , the fact that Flickr was shaped by “people passionate about photography” ( D1 ) meant that it was favoured by some : “someone’s selected images to put them on there” ( D4 ) . However , the way in which the images were displayed was felt to undermine a sense of narrative . Interestingly , this was even true of the local stream . D2 reflected on his own local folder , containing images from different designers : “each of them has one very specific type of work , and I like to visualise them separately because it doesn’t make sense for me to combine them” . He went on to describe their combination in SketchStorm as “like mixing horror movies with comedy . . it’s strange to see them together” . This contrasts with images viewed within folders , where the materials can be made sense of as a collection . 5 . DISCUSSION In this section we consider what our deployment of SketchStorm reveals for the development of tools for design ideation , as well as for their deployment in design settings . 5 . 1 . Implications for design Our first aim in designing SketchStorm was to support encounters with interesting and less designerly images , in line with the notion that inspiration is not explicitly sought . However , the deployment revealed that , by repositioning search as secondary , designers were able to engage in quite deliberate acts of seeking inspirational content . Furthermore , this was often done to underpin encounters in moments of inactivity . This resonates with prior work on creativity , which suggests that insights often occur when breaking the workflow ( Keller et al . , 2009 ) or when one is idle , and that these insights are preceded by periods of preparation and incubation ( Csikszentmihalyi and Sawyer , 1995 ) . Similarly , attempts to design for serendipity highlight the importance of identifying information that is relevant to a latent goal ( de Bruijn and Spence , 2008 ) . This has led André et al . ( 2009 ) to highlight the notion of ‘ ( un ) serendipity’ ; they argue that serendipitous discoveries are the product of mental preparation and of an open and questioning mind . Our findings lend support to this view , and highlight the value of supporting designers in engineering situations that allow them to make the most of idle moments , and to peripherally attend to latent goals . Through SketchStorm , they could exert control over when to stream content , in line with when they expected to be able to respond to it in an open and insightful way . Towards a Tool for Design Ideation : Insights from Use of SketchStorm Siân Lindley ● Xiang Cao ● John Helmes ● Richard Morris ● Sam Meek 8 However , while SketchStorm could be used to potentially engineer interesting encounters with images , this was somewhat undermined by the lack of context it provided in relation to these . By removing details such as image source , SketchStorm was unable to provide the sense of being ‘connected’ to the world that designers associated with browsing the web . This suggests the importance of semantics , and the notion of journeying , when images form a backdrop to other activities . Semantics are not typically associated with image search , with tools such as Google Images allowing the user to filter by aesthetic qualities such as size , colour and ‘type’ ( face , photo , clip art or line drawing ) . In contrast , design for serendipitous encounters has highlighted the possibility of incorporating semantic search ( Maxwell et al . , 2012 ) , and of making interesting connections ( André et al . , 2009 ) . Our findings suggest that semantic search tools could also be used in the generation of image streams , by creating threads of images that are meaningfully connected and that allow ideas to be explored . The use of SketchStorm to support serendipitous encounters contrasts with the way in which it was used for more focused acts of collecting examples and researching a problem space . Here , images might be thought of as artefacts to be gathered and manipulated , combined and annotated . Ways of supporting these activities have been highlighted before ; our findings are in line with analyses of the ways in which existing tools , such as mood boards , are used ( Lucero , 2012 ) , as well with recommendations that highlight the need to support the management and laying out of collected examples ( Keller et al . , 2009 ; Mendels et al . , 2011 ) and their flexible annotation ( Herring et al . , 2009 ; Sharmin et al . , 2009 ) . We will not reiterate those arguments here . However , we do think it worth highlighting that , while most research has positioned annotation as being of value at the moment of retrieval , the designers in our study showed little interest in revisiting their own collections . Instead , and as Sharmin et al . also report , inspiration was often seeded from memory . Therefore , we argue for the importance of making encounters with content memorable , by supporting richer ways of interacting with it at the moment of collection . In this view , actions such as annotation and tagging might be valued because they offer a deeper means of engaging with an image , rather than because they may later support re - finding . This proposal draws on findings from psychology , which show that deeper cognitive processing of stimuli supports better recall of it in the future ( Craik and Lockhart , 1972 ) , as well as research on collecting , which suggests that the act of collecting in itself is a way of creating meaning ( Koh and Kerne , 2006 ) . Other possibilities for deeper engagement include revealing more information about the images themselves , such as their online context or source , which may serve the additional purpose of avoiding problems associated with the lack of context provided by SketchStorm . Collectively , these features may enable the creation of rich collections that are memorable to their curators and that can be perused by others , the importance of the latter being highlighted by Sharmin et al . ( 2009 ) . It is also worth noting that more complex features would fit the distinctions that designers made with regard to images when interacting with them through SketchStorm , for example by pulling them onto the canvas or into a folder , depending on what they intended to do with them . The challenge here is to support the deeper processing that could allow designers to imbue their materials with meaning , whilst keeping the interface simple and intuitive . As a final observation , the distinction between images as artefacts to be used vs . as underpinning serendipitous encounters also relates to our aim to explore the potential for integrating sketch and use of examples . Here we saw instances demonstrating the usefulness of placing sketch in the digital realm for working out ideas and design solutions , but the word ‘sketch’ does not totally capture the different activities that our participants engaged in . While on the one hand , designers used the sketch functionality to make notes or annotate mood boards , on the other , they integrated images into sketches themselves , or sketched on paper whilst SketchStorm streamed images in their peripheral vision . Both processes are ways of exploring ideas ( see Lucero , 2012 , for a consideration of how sketching is similar to creating mood boards ) and designers in our study were able to appropriate SketchStorm for both purposes . Yet it may be of value to attend to them separately when developing tools for design ideation . This is because , as our study makes clear , designers use different tools as a way of demarcating stages of the design process : the adoption of specialised tools , from sketches on paper to digital mock - ups , functioning prototypes and eventual deliverables , was a progression that reflected the narrowing of the problem space and the refining of ideas . A tool for sketch might focus on providing a means of flexibly and powerfully working through ideas , for example by offering greater support for the malleability of digital materials through colour manipulations , or by supporting richer editing and mashing up of images copied onto the canvas . In contrast , a tool for dealing with examples might offer ways of visualising collections and providing notes that are specific to points within an image . This runs counter to another assumption that underpinned our design . We intentionally developed SketchStorm as a flexible tool , with the expectation that this would fit the openness that characterises Towards a Tool for Design Ideation : Insights from Use of SketchStorm Siân Lindley ● Xiang Cao ● John Helmes ● Richard Morris ● Sam Meek 9 the early design process , and further , support appropriation in a profession that encompasses a range of specialisms and methods . What we observed , however , was that designers wanted a tool to suit a particular purpose and that was tailored accordingly . The designers that used SketchStorm the most saw it as a work - related tool that opened up new possibilities within their existing practice . Those that saw SketchStorm as being ‘too broad’ felt that it failed to offer the power and mastery that other tools , both software and pen and paper , enabled . 5 . 2 . Implications for research Related to the above , in our deployment we adopted a strategy that no doubt compounded the perception of SketchStorm as being too open : we were unwilling to specify what it was for . In reporting on their own research through prototypes in practice , Keller et al . ( 2009 ) draw on the idea that a design tool reveals itself only in use . They argue that the open - ended structure of the deployment of Cabinet led to many different uses and interpretations of the device . In this study , we also found that designers put SketchStorm to a variety of uses . Furthermore , those uses that we had expected were often under - represented , whereas others emerged that had not been anticipated . However , in some cases , our experience resonated more with that reported by Gaver et al . ( 2009 ) . They note that , although intended to encourage appropriation , a lack of specificity can sometimes backfire . We speculate that openness was particularly problematic in this study because of the workplace setting . Participants were trying to find a role for SketchStorm in an existent toolkit of sophisticated software and pen and paper , an established workflow , and a set of expectations regarding how image search and digital sketch should work . Unlike many technologies that are deliberately ambiguous ( e . g . Gaver et al . , 2003 ) , it was essential that SketchStorm should slot into current practice and provide some kind of advantage over available tools . So while some designers noted improvements in efficiency and the ease with which they could combine image and sketch , the lack of a transparent advantage over existing practices meant that for others , use of SketchStorm was problematic . The challenges of testing technologies with designers at work are perhaps made most evident through the lack of reported deployments in the literature ; Cabinet is the exception to the rule here . While our own deployment was certainly valuable , with SketchStorm serving as a resource for discussion about design practice , future deployments of tools for design ideation may be more enthusiastically received if they are more precisely focused , catering for a particular design specialism or activity . One possibility here would be to prototype a range of plug - ins for existing tools , in order to flexibly introduce specific features , while removing the need for designers to adopt a totally new technology . Alternatively , taking an approach akin to that outlined by Hutchinson et al . ( 2003 ) , where technology probes are deployed with a view to being iterated upon and improved with participant input , could be of value when working in this space . 6 . CONCLUSION We have presented insights from a field deployment of SketchStorm , a tool to support design ideation that combines sketch and use of examples . Our findings suggest that while web - based tools can and do support encounters with interesting image - based content , this content should be treated in two distinct ways . On the one hand , images can be used as examples to be kept or drawn upon in the future . Where this is the case , encounters with images should be made rich and memorable , and tools should support a range of actions such as triaging , annotation , and manipulation . On the other hand , images can be used to create a backdrop to on - going activity , so as to potentially enable serendipitous encounters . Here it is important to allow designers to engineer the nature of those encounters , so that they can underpin moments of idleness and be framed with regard to latent goals . Our findings also emphasise that tools for design should reflect the demarcation of the design process , supporting a progression from early ideas to an eventual solution . Thus , simply integrating functionality for sketch and the use of examples can prove problematic , but combining specific aspects of these activities , such as sketching to a stream of inspirational content , or annotating images to be used as examples , could serve to reinforce the two ways of treating web - based images we highlight here , opening up rich possibilities for design . 7 . REFERENCES André , P . , schraefel , m . c . , Teevan , J . , Dumais , S . Discovery is never by chance : Designing for ( un ) serendipity . ( 2009 ) C & C , Berkeley , CA , USA , 305 - 314 . ACM , NY . Bae , S . - H . , Balakrishnan , R . , Singh , K . ( 2008 ) ILoveSketch : As - natural - as - possible sketching system for creating 3D curve models . UIST , Monterey , CA , USA , 2008 , 151 - 160 . ACM , NY . Bonnardel , N . ( 2000 ) Towards understanding and supporting creativity in design : Analogies in a constrained cognitive environment . Knowledge - Based Systems , 13 , 505 - 513 . Bonnardel , N . , Sumner , T . ( 1996 ) Supporting evaluation in design . Acta Psychologica , 91 , 221 - 244 . Towards a Tool for Design Ideation : Insights from Use of SketchStorm Siân Lindley ● Xiang Cao ● John Helmes ● Richard Morris ● Sam Meek 10 Buxton , B . ( 2007 ) Sketching User Experiences . Morgan Kaufmann , London . Craik , F . I . M . , Lockhart , R . S . ( 1972 ) Levels of processing : A framework for memory research . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 11 , 671 - 684 . Csikszentmihalyi , M . , Sawyer , K . ( 1995 ) Creative insight : The social dimension of a solitary moment . In R . J . Sternberg , J . E . Davidson ( eds ) , The Nature of Insight . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Davis , R . C . , Colwell , B . , Landay , J . A . ( 2008 ) K - Sketch : A ‘kinetic’ sketch pad for novice animators . CHI , Florence , Italy , 2008 , 413 - 422 . ACM , NY . de Bruijn , O . , Spence , R . ( 2008 ) A new framework for theory - based interaction design applied to serendipitous information retrieval . ACM Transactions on Information Systems , 15 , 1 , 5 . Eckert , C . , Stacey , M . ( 2000 ) Sources of inspiration : A language of design . Design Studies , 21 , 523 - 538 . Gaver , W . W . , Beaver , J . , Benford , S . ( 2003 ) Ambiguity as a resource for design . CHI , Ft . Lauderdale , Florida , USA , 233 - 240 . ACM , NY . Gaver , W . W . , Bowers , J . , Kerridge , T . , Boucher , A . , Jarvis , N . ( 2009 ) Anatomy of a failure : How we knew when our design went wrong , and what we learned from it . CHI , Boston , MA , USA , 2213 - 2222 . ACM , NY . Goldschmidt , G . ( 2003 ) The backtalk of self - generated sketches . Design Issues , 19 , 72 - 88 . Herring , S . R . , Chang , C . - C . , Krantzler , J . , Bailey , B . P . ( 2009 ) Getting inspired ! Understanding how and why examples are used in creative design practice . CHI , Boston , MA , USA , 87 - 96 . ACM , NY . Hinckley , K . , Zhao , S . , Sarin , R . , Baudisch , P . , Cutrell , E . , Shilman , M . , Tan , D . ( 2007 ) InkSeine : In situ search for active note taking . CHI , San Jose , California , USA , 251 - 260 . ACM , NY . Hutchinson , H . et al . ( 2003 ) Technology probes : inspiring design for and with families . CHI , Ft . Lauderdale , Florida , USA , 17 - 24 . ACM , NY . Keller , I . , Visser , F . S . , van der Lugt , R . , Stappers , P . J . ( 2009 ) Collecting with Cabinet : Or how designers organise visual material , researched through an experiential prototype . Design Studies , 30 , 1 , 69 - 86 . Kerne , A . , Koh , E . , Smith , S . M . , Webb , A . , Dworaczyk , B . ( 2008 ) combinFormation : Mixed - initiative composition of image and text surrogates promotes information discovery . ACM Transactions on Information Systems , 27 , 1 - 45 . Koh , E . , Kerne , A . ( 2006 ) I keep collecting : College students build and utilize collections in spite of breakdowns . ECDL , Alicante , Spain , 303 - 314 . Springer - Verlag , Berlin Heidelberg . Landay , J . A . , Myers , B . A . ( 1995 ) Interactive sketching for the early stages of user interface design . CHI , Denver , Colorado , USA , 43 - 50 . ACM , NY . Lee , B . , Srivastava , S . , Kumar , R . , Brafman , R . , Klemmer , S . R . ( 2010 ) Designing with interactive example galleries . CHI , Atlanta , Georgia , USA , 2257 - 2266 . ACM , NY . Lin , J . , Newman , M . W . , Hong , J . I . , Landay , J . A . ( 2000 ) DENIM : Finding a tighter fit between tools and practice for web site design . CHI , The Hague , The Netherlands , 510 - 517 . ACM , NY . Lucero , A . ( 2012 ) Framing , aligning , paradoxing , abstracting , and directing : How design mood boards work . DIS , Newcastle Upon Tyne , UK , 438 - 447 . ACM , NY . Maxwell , D . , Woods , M . , Makri , S . , Bental , D . , Kefalidou , G . , Sharples , S . ( 2012 ) Designing a semantic sketchbook to create opportunities for serendipity . BCS HCI , Birmingham , UK , 2012 , 357 - 362 . British Computer Society . Mendels , P . , Frens , J . , Overbeeke , K . ( 2011 ) Freed : A system for creating multiple views of a digital collection during the design process . CHI , Vancouver , BC , Canada , 2011 , 1481 - 1490 . ACM , NY . Purcell , A . T . , Gero , J . S . ( 1998 ) Drawings and the design process . Design Studies , 19 , 389 - 430 . Schön , D . A . ( 1991 ) The Reflective Practitioner . Ashgate , London . Sharmin , M . , Bailey , B . P . , Coats , C . , Hamilton , K . ( 2009 ) Understanding knowledge management practices for early design activity and its implications for reuse . CHI , Boston , MA , USA , 2367 - 2376 . ACM , NY . Strauss , A . C . , Corbin , J . ( 1998 ) Basics of Qualitative Research . Sage , London . Verstijnen , I . M . , Hennessey , J . M . , van Leeuwen , C . , Hamel , R . , Goldschmidt , G . ( 1998 ) Sketching and creative discovery . Design Studies , 19 , 519 - 546 . Visser , W . ( 1995 ) Use of episodic knowledge and information in design problem solving . Design Studies , 16 , 171 - 187 . Wang , H . - C . , Cosley , D . , Fussell , S . R . ( 2010 ) Idea Expander : Supporting group brainstorming with conversationally triggered visual thinking stimuli . CSCW , Savannah , Georgia , USA , 103 - 106 . ACM , NY .