P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 CHAPTER 22 Intelligence and the Cognitive Unconscious Scott Barry Kaufman The deﬁnition of genius is that it acts unconsciously ; and those who have produced immortal works , have done so without knowing how or why . The greatest power operates unseen , and executes its appointed task with as little ostentation as difﬁculty . – William Hazlitt 1 Intelligence tests were originally created with the practical goal of identifying stu - dents in need of alternative education ( Binet & Simon , 1916 ) . Because intelligence tests were originally devised to predict school grades , the items were intention - ally designed to measure a general ability to proﬁt from explicit instruction , concen - trate on a task , and engage in intellectual material . Indeed , research shows that such a general ability does seem to exist . Over a century ago , Spearman ( 1904 ) discovered that when a wide range of cognitive tests 1 William Hazlitt ( 1846 ) , “Essay IV . Whether Genius Is Conscious of Its Powers ? ” in Table Talk : Opinions on Books , Men , and Things , Second Series , Part I ( pp . 37 – 49 ) . New York , NY : Wiley & Putnam . that have explicit instructions and require effortful concentration is administered to a diverse group of people , all of the tests tend to be positively correlated with one another , a ﬁnding often referred to as a “positive man - ifold . ” Spearman labeled the factor on which all individual tests loaded g , for general intel - ligence . Over the past 100 years , the existence of g as a statistical phenomenon is one of the most replicable ﬁndings in all of psychology ( Carroll , 1993 ; Chabris , 2007 ; Jensen , 1998 ) . Nonetheless , there is still work to be done to determine what explains the positive man - ifold ( see Maas et al . , 2006 ) , the cognitive mechanisms that support g ( see Chapter 20 , Working Memory and Intelligence , this vol - ume ; Kaufman , DeYoung , Gray , Brown , & Mackintosh , 2009 ; Sternberg & Pretz , 2005 ) , and whether there are other forms of cog - nition that display meaningful individual differences and predict intelligent behavior above and beyond g and the cognitive mech - anisms that support g . This chapter presents evidence that mechanisms relating to the cognitive uncon - scious – “mental structures , processes , and 442 P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 INTELLIGENCE AND THE COGNITIVE UNCONSCIOUS 443 states 2 that can inﬂuence experience , thought , and actions outside phenomenal awareness and voluntary control” ( Dorf - man , Shames , & Kihlstrom , 1996 , p . 259 ) also make an important contribution to intelligent behavior . Although intelligence testers have done a remarkable job devel - oping tests that measure individual dif - ferences in explicit , controlled cognitive processes , the investigation of individual dif - ferences in implicit , nonconscious processes has not received nearly as much attention ( Kaufman , 2009 a , b ) . Furthermore , researchers have created clever experiments to probe the nature of the cognitive unconscious by looking at implicit memory , implicit perception , and other forms of implicit cognition and thought 3 ( for reviews , see Kihlstrom , 1987 , and Litman & Reber , 2005 ) , but they have focused primarily on group - level data , ignoring individual differences ( see Cron - bach , 1957 ) . Additionally , some researchers have downplayed the existence of continu - ous individual differences in the cognitive unconscious that are meaningfully related to important life outcomes ( Reber , 1993 ; Stanovich , 2009 ) . There have been some recent studies , however , that look at individual differences in the cognitive unconscious . This chap - ter focuses on individual differences and reviews recent empirical work on relations among the cognitive processes underlying psychometric intelligence and the cognitive processes underlying the cognitive uncon - scious , attempting to bridge two major research programs that , until recently , have traveled on separate but parallel paths . 2 I include “implicit thought” in this deﬁnition as well , although Kihlstrom tends to refer to “implicit cog - nition” differently from the “cognitive unconscious” ( Dorfman , Shames , & Kihlstrom , 1996 ) . 3 I assume in this chapter that intelligent “thought” can operate either with or without awareness of that thought . As Dorfman , Shames , and Kihlstrom ( 1996 ) astutely note , the idea of “implicit thought” is a difﬁcult concept because the notion of think - ing has traditionally been equated with notions of consciousness . For instance , William James ( 1890 ) thought the notion of “unconscious thought” was a contradiction in terms ! Integrating Two Research Traditions The 20 th century witnessed at least two major paradigm shifts within psychological science . One major shift was from behav - iorism to the “cognitive revolution , ” which brought along with it a shift in focus from learning and conditioning toward investigat - ing the mental processes involved in con - scious thought , including memory , think - ing , and problem solving ( Miller , 2003 ) . This shift has had an enduring effect on concep - tualizations of human intelligence as well as research methodology . Indeed , one of the earliest investigators of the develop - ment of intelligence in children was Jean Piaget ( 1952 ) , whose focus was on conscious higher order reasoning and how children at different ages think . This emphasis on age differences in thought as well as the notion that intelligence involves conscious , deliberate reasoning also underlies the logic behind the ﬁrst widely administered intel - ligence test , the Binet - Simon Scale ( Binet & Simon , 1916 ) . Furthermore , the discovery that performances on diverse tests of explicit cognitive ability tend to correlate with one another – Spearman’s ( 1904 ) so - called pos - itive manifold – further supported the idea that intelligence tests are tapping into a “gen - eral cognitive ability . ” Around the same time the shift from behaviorism to the cognitive revolution was taking place , another dramatic shift in psy - chology was occurring . The conceptual - ization of the unconscious that was pre - dominant with psychodynamic theories of personality was slowly being transformed into an unconscious recognized to serve many adaptive functions among both modern - day humans and our evolutionary ancestry ( Epstein , 1991 ; Hassin , Uleman , & Bargh , 2005 ; Wilson , 2004 ) . Over 30 years of research in cognitive science reveals that a considerable amount of information pro - cessing takes place on a daily basis automat - ically – without our intent , awareness , and deliberate encoding – and plays an impor - tant role in structuring our skills , percep - tions , and behavior ( Epstein , 1991 ; Hassin et al . , 2005 ; Kihlstrom , 1987 ; Lewicki & Hill , P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 444 SCOTT BARRY KAUFMAN 1987 ; Reber , 1993 ; Stadler & Frensch , 1997 ) as well as facilitating problem solving and creativity ( Dijksterhuis & Nordgren , 2006 ; Dorfman , Shames , & Kihlstrom , 1996 ; Lit - man & Reber , 2005 ) . Kihlstrom ( 1987 ) distinguishes between three types of nonconscious mental struc - tures that together constitute the domain of the “cognitive unconscious . ” Unconscious representations ﬁt within the domain of pro - cedural knowledge and are inaccessible to introspection under any circumstances . “By virtue of routinization ( or perhaps because they are innate ) , such procedures operate on declarative knowledge without either conscious intent or conscious awareness , in order to construct the person’s ongoing experience , thought , and action” ( p . 1450 ; also see Anderson , 1982 ) . Subliminal percep - tion , implicit memory , and implicit learn - ing ﬁt the category of preconscious declar - ative knowledge structures . In contrast to unconscious representations , preconscious structures can be available to phenomenal awareness and can be introspected upon , but they can also inﬂuence ongoing experience , thought , and action without ever entering into working memory . Finally , Kihlstrom describes subconscious declarative knowl - edge mental representations such as those activated during hypnosis , which can be quite available to introspection but inacces - sible to phenomenal awareness . 4 Note that even though some noncon - scious representations have such high lev - els of activation that they enter working memory , they still might not meet the criteria of conscious awareness . As noted by Kihlstrom , William James ( 1890 ) sug - gested over a century ago in his Principles of 4 Note that only Kihlstrom’s ( 1987 ) notion of “uncon - scious” mental structures meets all four of Bargh’s ( 2004 ) horsemen of automaticity : lack of aware - ness , lack of intention , high efﬁciency , and inability to control . Kihlstrom’s notion of the preconscious lacks intention , but only under some circumstances is efﬁcient , lacks awareness , and can’t be controlled . Kihlstrom’snotionofthesubconsciouscanbeinten - tional and efﬁcient , and even can be controlled , but the key to deﬁning the subconscious according to Kihlstrom is the lack of phenomenal awareness . Psychology that the key to consciousness is self - reference : In order for ongoing experience , thought , and action to become conscious , a link must be made between its mental repre - sentation and some mental representation of the self as agent or experiencer – as well , perhaps , as some representation of the envi - ronment in which these events take place . These episodic representations of the self and context reside in working memory , but apparently the links in question are nei - ther automatic nor permanent , and must be actively forged . . . without such linkages certain aspects of mental life are dissoci - ated from awareness , and are not accom - panied by the experience of consciousness . ( Kihlstrom , 1987 , p . 1451 ) A great deal of research has demonstrated the sophisticated and intelligent nature of the cognitive unconscious ( Epstein , 2001 ; Lewicki , Hill , & Czyzewska , 1992 ; Loftus & Klinger , 1992 ) . For instance , after reviewing the literature on the nonconscious acqui - sition of information , Lewicki , Hill , and Czyzewska ( 1992 ) asked , “Is the noncon - scious information - processing system ‘intel - ligent’ ? ” – to which they concluded : The answer to the question about intelli - gence would be afﬁrmative if intelligence is understood as “equipped to efﬁciently pro - cess complex information . ” In this sense , our nonconscious information - processing system appears to be incomparably more able to process formally complex knowl - edge structures , faster and “smarter” over - all than our ability to think and identify meanings of stimuli in a consciously con - trolled manner . ( p . 801 ) The idea that the unconscious can be smart is also illustrated by the title of a recent popular summary of the fast - and - frugal heuristics literature : Gut Feelings : The Intelligence of the Unconscious ( Gigerenzer , 2007 ) . 5 Today there is a strong consensus 5 But note that Gigerenzer ( 2007 ; Gigerenzer & Brighton , 2009 ) , in contrast to those who view the cognitive unconscious as able to process complex information , views the cognitive unconscious as operating by the principle “less is more , ” selecting the right rule of thumb for the right situation . P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 INTELLIGENCE AND THE COGNITIVE UNCONSCIOUS 445 among contemporary researchers in cog - nitive science , philosophy , cognitive psy - chology , social psychology , reasoning , and morality that humans possess two quite dis - tinct modes of thought – one controlled and the other more automatic ( Epstein , 2003 ; Evans & Frankish , 2009 ; Stanovich & West , 2002 ) . Indeed , dual - process theories of cognition are becoming increasingly nec - essary for explaining a wide variety of cogni - tive , personality , social developmental , and cross - cultural phenomena ( Evans & Frank - ish , 2009 ) . For instance , Klaczynski ( 2009 ) makes a case for adopting and develop - ing a comprehensive dual - process theory of development , reviewing studies from such diverse research topics as memory , judg - ments and decisions , reasoning , motivated reasoning , stereotypes , and magical reason - ing to support his argument . Dual - Process Theories of Cognition Type 1 processes 6 are thought to com - prise a set of autonomous subsystems ( Stanovich , 2004 ) that include both innate input modules ( Fodor , 1983 ) and domain - speciﬁc knowledge acquired by domain - general learning mechanisms that operate automatically and efﬁciently ( Reber , 1993 ) . Type 1 processes process information fast ( relative to type 2 processes ) ; are heavily inﬂuenced by context , biology , and past experience ; and aid humans in mapping and assimilating newly acquired stimuli into pre - existing knowledge structures . An advantage of type 1 processes over type 2 processes is that the former require lit - tle conscious cognitive effort and free atten - tional resources for computationally com - plex reasoning . According to Lewicki , Hill , and Czyzewska ( 1992 ) , 6 Many dual - process theorists refer to two “systems” ( see Kahneman & Frederick , 2002 ) . In recent years , however , critics of dual - system theorists have called for the use of a different name , arguing that “sys - tem” carries with it a lot of conceptual baggage ( see Evans , 2008 ; Keren & Schul , 2009 ) . In line with Evans’s ( 2008 ) suggestion , I refer here to “types” of thought processes instead of “systems . ” Data indicate that as compared with con - sciously controlled cognition , the noncon - scious information - acquisition processes are not only much faster but are also structurally more sophisticated , in that they are capable of efﬁcient processing of multidimensional and interactive relations between variables . Those mechanisms of non - conscious acquisition of information provide a major channel for the develop - ment of procedural knowledge that is indis - pensable for such important aspects of cog - nitive functioning as encoding and inter - pretation of stimuli and the triggering of emotional reactions . ( p . 796 ) The advantages of type 1 processes can also become disadvantages under certain circum - stances . When thinking is dominated by type 1 processes , task representations are highly contextualized . This contextualiza - tion can lead to the thoughtless applica - tion of judgment and decision heuristics . According to Stanovich and West ( 2000 ) , this mode of thought is in fact the “default” mode in humans . They refer to this ten - dency toward automatic contextualization of problems as the “fundamental computa - tional bias” in human cognition ( Stanovich & West , 2000 ) . A similar idea can be found in Chaiken’s ( 1987 ) heuristic systematic model of persuasion , according to which people are guided in part by a “principle of least effort . ” Because people have limited cog - nitive resources , and because heuristic pro - cessing is easy and adequate for most tasks , heuristic processing from type 1 is generally used unless there is a special need to engage in systematic processing ( see also Simon , 1979 ) . In line with this idea , Klaczynski and Cottrell ( 2004 ) have argued that “metacog - nitive intercession” often occurs , whereby responses derived from intuition are avail - able in working memory , where reﬂection is possible . However , according to Klaczyn - ski , most people do not take advantage of the opportunity to reﬂect on the con - tents of working memory , taking the con - tents from the experiential system as self - evidently valid . Finally , the view of type 1 processes as the default mode of human cognition is also present in Haidt’s ( 2001 ) P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 446 SCOTT BARRY KAUFMAN social intuitionist model of moral reasoning , in which it is posited that intuitive process - ing is the default process , with deliberate reasoning called upon only when intuitions conﬂict with reason ( see also Stanovich & West , 2000 ) . In contrast , type 2 processes are typ - ically characterized by deliberately con - trolled , effortful , and intentional cognition . Individual differences in this system have been linked in the past to psychometric intelligence ( see Stanovich , 2009 ) . Accord - ing to Stanovich and West ( 1997 ) , a hallmark of this type of thought is the ability to decon - textualize task representations . 7 Type 2 pro - cesses can deal with abstract content under conditions of awareness 8 and are not domi - nated by the goal of attributing intentional - ity nor by the search for conversational rel - evance ( Margolis , 1987 ) . It has been posited that type 2 processes are evolutionarily more recent and uniquely developed in humans than type 1 processes ( Epstein , 2003 ; Evans , 2008 ; Gabora & Kaufman , 2009 ) . Note that while some aspects are com - mon across most dual - process theories , there are also distinct differences ( Evans , 2008 ) . Most dual - process theorists agree on the automatic / controlled distinction between the two modes of thought , as well as the idea that type 2 processes are constrained by a central working memory system whereas type 1 processes are uncon - strained by a central pool of resources . Dual - process theorists differ , however , in terms of other features they attribute to the two modes of thought . For instance , some dual - process theorists emphasize the affective nature of type 1 processes ( Epstein , 1994 ; Metcalfe & Mischel , 1999 ; Zajonc , 1980 ) , whereas emotions are not a key component of other models of implicit cognition ( e . g . , Reber , 1993 ) . Also , as Evans ( 2008 ) rightly points out , some of the distinctions between the two 7 Although note that this system can also deal with contextualized content ( see Cokely & Kelley , 2009 ; Cokely , Parpart , & Schooler , 2009 ) . 8 Although note that some researchers have argued that aspects of System 1 ( e . g . , implicit learning ) can also deal with abstract material ( see Reber , 1989 ) . modes of thought ( e . g . , abstract vs . contex - tualized , associative vs . rule - based , shared with other animals vs . unique to humans ) are not as neat and clear - cut when one con - siders that type 1 isn’t a unitary system , but includes a set of autonomous systems , some of which are innately speciﬁed and some of which come about through learn - ing and practice ( Stanovich , 2004 ; but see Epstein , 2010 ) . Evans ( 2008 ) also points out that “type 2 ” is most likely not a unitary system , suggesting that not all type 2 pro - cesses are consciously controlled . Addition - ally , Cokely and Kelley ( 2009 ) and Cokely , Parpart , and Schooler ( 2009 ) have noted that even controlled processes may rely on auto - matic processes for processing , even at the stage of early attentional selection . Other criticisms ( see Aczel , 2009 ; Gigerenzer & Regier , 1996 ; Keren & Schul , 2009 ) have been leveled against dual - system models , a sign that the study of the dual - process nature of the mind is an active area of research and debate . In line with these criticisms , the remainder of this chapter will refer to “dual - process” theories instead of “dual - system” theories and will assume that the various processes are not completely independent but can interact with each other and facil - itate ( or inhibit ) each other in important ways . Indeed , in his review of dual - process accounts of reasoning , judgment , and social cognition , Evans ( 2008 ) notes two distinct kinds of dual - process theories . One kind , which he refers to as “parallel - competitive” forms of dual - process theory , states that there are two forms of learning that lead to two forms of knowledge ( explicit and implicit ) and each form competes for the control of behavior . Evans refers to another category of dual - process researchers as the “default - interventionists , ” who assume that rapid preconscious processes supply content for conscious processing and that the explicit system can intervene with the application of controlled processes . It should be noted that not all dual - process theories fall neatly into one category or the other . For instance , Epstein ( 2003 ) assumes that the two systems operate in parallel and are bi - directionally P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 INTELLIGENCE AND THE COGNITIVE UNCONSCIOUS 447 interactive . As the implicit system has a faster reaction time it is more likely to initi - ate an action sequence . Nonetheless , Evans ( 2008 ) does offer a useful classiﬁcation of different dual - process theories . There is evidence for both categories ; fMRI evidence suggests that the type of processes are independent – under process - ing conditions that favor automatic process - ing , automatic cognitive processes and the brain regions supporting those processes are more active than the brain regions support - ing controlled cognition . Conversely , under conditions that favor controlled processing , controlled cognitive processes and the brain regions supporting those processes ( such as the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ) are more active than the brain regions supporting automatic cognitive processes ( Lieberman , 2007 ) . There is also support for the default - interventionists’ view in that humans on average have a tendency to contextual - ize information ( i . e . , automatic cognition is the default mode in most humans ) and that in some instances it is impor - tant for controlled cognition to reﬂect on that contextualization and potentially over - ride the outputs of automatic cognition ( Kahneman & Frederick , 2002 ; Chapter 22 , Intelligence and Rationality , this volume ) . Nonetheless , in some situations the output of the automatic system is beneﬁcial for intelligent behavior , and controlled cogni - tion is not necessary , or can even get in the way . Interestingly , a number of neuroimag - ing studies in humans and lesion stud - ies on rodents have found that the basal ganglia and medial temporal lobe ( mTL ) function competitively ( Packard , Hirsh , & White , 1989 ; Poldrack & Packard , 2003 ) . In an interesting study , Packard , Hirsh , and White ( 1989 ) found that rats with basal gan - glia lesions performed better than normal rats on an mTL - speciﬁc task , and rats with mTL lesions performed better than nor - mal on the basal ganglia – speciﬁc task . These results suggest that the presence of a nor - mally functioning medial temporal lobe may interfere with performance on tasks that strongly recruit basal ganglia functions , and performance is thus improved on these tasks when the medial temporal lobe is removed ( Lieberman , 2007 ) . Therefore , intelligence and the cognitive unconscious mostly work in concert with each other during our daily lives , but in some situations they may be competitive – and depending on the situation , either con - trolled or spontaneous cognitions will be the more important contributor to intelligent behavior . Interestingly , while various dual - process theories of cognition have been proposed over the years , only two are explicitly theo - ries of human intelligence . Below I will review both : Anderson’s ( M . Anderson , 2005 ) theory of the minimal cognitive architecture under - lying intelligence and development and the recent dual - process ( DP ) theory of human intelligence ( Kaufman , 2009 a ) . The Theory of the Minimal Cognitive Architecture underlying Intelligence and Development Based on Fodor’s ( 1983 ) distinction between central processes of thought and dedi - cated processing input modules , Anderson’s ( 2005 ) theory synthesizes the idea of gen - eral and speciﬁc abilities and incorporates the notion of development . Anderson argues that knowledge is acquired through two dif - ferent “processing routes , ” with central pro - cesses ( route 1 ) being tied to individual dif - ferences and input modules being tied to cognitive development ( route 2 ) . Accord - ing to Anderson , route 1 involves “thought - ful problem solving” and is constrained by the speed of a basic processing mechanism . Anderson argues that “it is this constraint that is the basis of general intelligence and the reason why manifest speciﬁc abilities are correlated” ( p . 280 ) . Anderson’s basic pro - cessing mechanism comprises both a ver - bal and a spatial processor that are nor - mally distributed , uncorrelated with each other , and each having their own predictive powers . In contrast , the second route for acquiring knowledge in Anderson’s model is tied to P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 448 SCOTT BARRY KAUFMAN dedicated information - processing modules , such as perception of three - dimensional space , syntactic parsing , phonological encoding , and theory of mind . According to Anderson , this route is tied to cognitive development as these modules undergo developmental changes in cognitive com - petence across the life span . Anderson acknowledges that modular processes can be acquired through extensive practice , but both are similar in that they operate automatically and independently of the ﬁrst route and are therefore unconstrained by the speed of the basic processing mecha - nism . Anderson makes the case that the modu - lar component of his cognitive theory allows for an integration of Gardner’s “multiple intelligences” and “general intelligence , ” as the theory includes domain - speciﬁc mod - ular functions as well as a basic process - ing mechanism . Anderson also argues that his theory explains how low - IQ individu - als can be capable of remarkable cognitive feats ( e . g . , “savant” abilities ) , including var - ious practical skills , such as the ability to acquire language or see in three dimen - sions that are considerably more compu - tationally complex than the abilities that are tapped by IQ tests . Anderson argues that his theory also can explain how devel - opmental disabilities such as dyslexia and autism can exist in the presence of typi - cal or even above - average IQ ( Anderson , 2008 ) . Note that in Anderson’s model there is little room for individual differences in route 2 . Furthermore , Anderson does not propose any domain general learning mechanisms that are part of route 2 , focusing instead on the Fodorian deﬁnition of modules . By limiting the cognitive mechanisms associ - ated with each “route , ” the total amount of other research that could be brought to bear on the cognitive processes under - lying the two information - processing routes becomes unnecessarily restricted . Nonethe - less , Anderson’s model makes an important contribution to investigation of intelligence by expanding modes of thought and incor - porating development . Dual - Process ( DP ) Theory of Human Intelligence The dual - process theory of human intelli - gence aims to integrate modern dual - process theories of cognition ( e . g . , Evans & Frankish , 2009 ) with research on intelligence ( Kauf - man , 2009 a ) . The theory is an organizing framework for various constructs relating to human cognition that are at least par - tially separable and display individual differ - ences that are meaningfully related to a wide range of socially valued intelligent behav - iors . A main goal of the theory is to expand both the range of methodologies and the dependent measures traditionally studied by intelligence researchers in order to more clearly deﬁne the cognitive mechanisms underlying each construct and to develop interventions to increase these abilities in everyone . According to the theory , performance across a wide range of intelligent behav - iors can be predicted through a hierarchical structure of controlled and spontaneous cog - nitive processes . Controlled cognitions are goal directed and consume limited central executive resources , whereas spontaneous cognitions aren’t constrained by the same limited pool of attentional resources . An assumption of the theory is that both con - trolled and spontaneous cognitive processes to some degree jointly determine all intelli - gent behaviors , although in varying degrees . For instance , prediction of performance on an IQ test will maximize the measurement of controlled cognitive processes whereas performance on a test that requires the inci - dental learning of a complex pattern or per - formance in a domain in which someone has acquired a large body of expertise will max - imize the measurement of spontaneous cog - nitive processes . Echoes of this idea can be found in Hammond , Hamm , Grassia , and Pearson ( 1987 ) when they argue that different decision - making situations will draw on dif - ferent strategies in a continuum between pure intuition and pure rational analysis . According to the dual - process theory , nei - ther component is more important than the P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 INTELLIGENCE AND THE COGNITIVE UNCONSCIOUS 449 other , but what is important is the ability to ﬂexibly switch between modes of cog - nition depending on the task requirements ( for applications of this idea to creativity , see Chapter 17 , The Evolution of Intelli - gence , this volume ; Gabora & Kaufman , 2009 ; Howard - Jones & Murray , 2003 ; Martindale , 1995 ; Vartanian , 2009 ) . Accord - ing to the theory , what has traditionally been labeled general intelligence ( g ) is pri - marily tapping into explicit cognitive abil - ity , and the theory predicts that individual differences in spontaneous cognition will pre - dict variance in a wide variety of intelligent behaviors above and beyond the variability in g , which itself is thought to be only a part of controlled cognition . Both forms of cognition involve the abil - ity and the tendency to engage in each mode of thought . The two are related because people tend to engage in things they are good at and avoid engaging in things they aren’t good at . A key assumption of the dual - process theory is that abilities are not static entities but are constantly changing through the life span as the person contin - ually engages with the world . The more a person engages in a mode of thought , the more that individual will develop skills in that modality , which in turn increases the desire for engaging with that skill . Indeed , research on expertise skill acquisition shows that engagement in a domain through many hours of deliberate practice contributes to the generation of mental structures that can surpass information - processing limitations when performing within that domain ( Eric - sson & Charness , 1994 ; Ericsson & Kintsch , 1995 ; Ericsson & Lehmann , 1996 , but see Kaufman , 2007 ) . Controlled cognition is at the top of the hierarchy ( alongside spontaneous cognition ) because the capacity for goal - directed action is an important component of human intel - ligence . Controlled cognition consists of a class of cognitive processes that involve the ability and tendency across situations to think about thinking ( i . e . , “metacogni - tion” – see Dennett , 1992 ; Hertzog & Robin - son , 2005 ) , reﬂect on prior behavior , and use that information to modify behavior and plan for the future . 9 Constructs that are part of the controlled cognition hier - archy include central executive functions ( updating , cognitive inhibition , and mental ﬂexibility ) , reﬂective engagement , explicit cognitive ability ( the skill sets that lie at the heart of highly g - loaded tasks ) , intellec - tual engagement , and elementary cognitive tasks that support explicit cognitive ability . 10 What links all of the processes together is that they all draw on a limited capacity pool of attentional resources . The second main component ( alongside controlled cognition ) of the dual - process the - ory , and the component that contains pro - cesses relating to the cognitive unconscious , is spontaneous cognition . At the broadest level , individual differences in spontaneous cognition reﬂect the ability to acquire infor - mation automatically and the tendency to engage in spontaneous forms of cognition . For instance , whereas most people have the ability to spontaneously experience emo - tions and daydream , there may be indi - vidual differences in the extent to which people are willing to engage in their emo - tions and to daydream ( see Pacini & Epstein , 1999 ; Zhiyan & Singer , 1997 ) . 11 Constructs that are part of the spontaneous cogni - tion hierarchy include spontaneous informa - tion acquisition abilities ( implicit learning , reduced latent inhibition , etc . ) , spontaneous forms of engagement ( affective engagement , 9 Note that other deﬁnitions of “controlled cognition” have been put forward ( see Schneider & Shiffrin , 1977 ) . 10 It should be noted , however , that elementary cogni - tive tasks ( ECTs ) are not process pure , and motiva - tion , strategy use , and the allocation of attentional resources play an important role in performance ( see Chapter 38 , Intelligence and Motivation , this volume ; Cokely , Kelley , & Gilchrist 2006 ; Fox , Roring , & Mitchum , 2009 ) . 11 Note that the distinction between controlled and spontaneous cognition is not always the same as the distinction between conscious and uncon - scious modes of thought . Spontaneous cognitions can be either conscious , such as when individuals are consciously aware of their daydreaming , fan - tasy , or mind wandering , or nonconscious such as when individuals are dreaming , daydreaming with - out conscious awareness , or implicitly learning the underlying rule structure of the environment with - out awareness of how that tacit knowledge is affect - ing their behavior . P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 450 SCOTT BARRY KAUFMAN aesthetic engagement , and fantasy engage - ment ) , and various implicit domains of mind that are universal human domains pertaining to knowledge of people , language , numbers , animals , music , visual images , aesthetics , or the inanimate physical world ( see Carey & Spelke , 1994 ; Feist , 2001 ; Hirschfeld & Gel - man , 1994 ) . 12 Other technical details about the the - ory , including the hierarchical nature of the model can be found in Kaufman ( 2009 a ) . Thus far , there is support for the theory from different branches of psychology and neu - ropsychology . The theory has not received many criticisms , but it is still new ; thus , the extent to which the dual - process the - ory of human intelligence advances the ﬁeld by making new , testable predictions and the extent to which the theory more clearly deﬁnes various constructs relating to intel - ligence is still to be determined . The rest of this chapter reviews recent empirical work on linkages between the cog - nitive processes underlying psychometric intelligence and various aspects of the cog - nitive unconscious . First , relations between individual differences in controlled cognitive processing and individual differences in two forms of preconscious processing , implicit learning , and latent inhibition will be dis - cussed . Because intuitions and insights gen - erally follow preconscious processing , the next section of this chapter reviews evi - dence on the relation between intelligence and individual differences in both intuition and insights . The following section will then look at the implications of intelligence and the cognitive unconscious for two major 12 Implicit domains of mind are similar to group fac - tors in hierarchical models of intelligence . Indeed , research shows that group factors , such as mathe - matical , spatial , and verbal reasoning abilities pro - vide incremental validity for predicting associated vocations above and beyond general intelligence ( Achter , Lubinski , Benbow , & Eftekhari - Sanjani , 1999 ; Humphreys , Lubinski , & Yao , 1993 ) . These domains of mind are also related to Howard Gard - ner’s “multiple intelligences” ( Gardner , 1993 , 1999 ) , although the dual - process theory acknowledges that there are also more general forms of cognition that contribute to intelligent behavior , a criticism that is often leveled against theories of multiple intelli - gences ( see Lohman , 2001 ) . domains of human cognitive functioning : social cognition and creative cognition . The chapter will then conclude with a call for more research . The review of studies in this chapter is by no means exhaustive but is meant to highlight some of the latest think - ing and research on the relation between individual differences in psychometric intel - ligence and individual differences in the cog - nitive unconscious . Intelligence and Preconscious Processing Intelligence and Implicit Learning According to Reber ( 1993 ) , implicit learn - ing is “a fundamental root process . . . that lies at the very heart of the adaptive behav - ioral repertoire of every complex organism” and can be characterized as “the acquisition of knowledge that takes place largely inde - pendent of conscious attempts to learn and largely in the absence of explicit knowledge about what was acquired” ( p . 5 ; for a sim - ilar view see Epstein & Meier , 1989 ) . We frequently encounter many complex contin - gencies and patterns , and the ability to pre - consciously learn patterns and then use that knowledge to recognize and detect patterns in the future is an important component of intelligence ( see Hawkins , 2005 ) . What is the link between psychometric intelligence and implicit learning ? Accord - ing to Reber ( 1993 ) and Epstein and Meier ( 1989 ) , individual differences in implicit learning should be unrelated to individual differences in measures of explicit cognition . Applying principles of evolutionary biology , they argue that the capacity for explicit cognition arrived later on the evolutionary scene than did implicit cognition . Nonethe - less , the older implicit learning mecha - nisms were unaffected by the emergence of explicit thought and continue to function autonomously . Thus far , the majority of the evidence supports the notion that implicit learning ability is independent of IQ . Some implicit learning tasks have never demonstrated a relation with explicit cognitive ability P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 INTELLIGENCE AND THE COGNITIVE UNCONSCIOUS 451 ( e . g . , artiﬁcial grammar learning ; Gebauer & Mackintosh , 2007 ; McGeorge , Crawford , & Kelly , 1997 ; Reber , Walkenfeld , & Hern - stadt , 1991 ) , whereas other tasks have not shown a signiﬁcant association in the major - ity of the studies ( e . g . , serial reaction time learning ; Feldman , Kerr , & Streissguth , 1995 ; Kaufman , DeYoung , Gray , Jim´enez , Brown , & Mackintosh , 2010 ; Pretz , Totz , & Kauf - man , 2010 ; Unsworth & Engle , 2005 – but see Salthouse , McGuthry , & Hambrick , 1999 ) . One other implicit learning task , which involves unintentional exposure to pictures , did show an association once with explicit cognitive ability ( Fletcher , Maybery , & Ben - nett , 2000 ) . These results may be mixed as different implicit learning tasks are only weakly correlated with each other ( Gebauer & Mackintosh , 2007 , 2009 ; Salthouse et al . , 1999 ) . Further , some implicit learning paradigms may better capture implicit cog - nition than others , which may draw more on explicit cognition ( e . g . , Seger , 1994 ) . An important future line of research to better understand the relation of implicit learn - ing to psychometric intelligence will be to construct reliable measures that more accu - rately assess implicit learning . Then , the fac - torial structure of implicit learning tasks can be assessed and the convergent - discriminant validity can be compared to other measures of psychometric intelligence . Another methodology with which to investigate the link between implicit and explicit cognition is to compare implicit and explicit versions of the same task . In one condition , experimenters instructed participants to ﬁnd the pattern , whereas in another condition participants received no such instruction , thereby making learn - ing unintentional . When this methodol - ogy is employed , psychometric intelli - gence is more highly correlated with the task under explicit instructions compared with the condition in which participants are not instructed to intentionally search for the pattern ( Gebauer & Mackintosh , 2007 ; Unsworth & Engle , 2005 ) . Using a similar methodology , Feldman , Kerr , and Streissguth ( 1995 ) separated an inten - tional declarative component of an implicit learning task from the procedural compo - nent using a sample of 455 adolescents ; they found that while the declarative learn - ing component signiﬁcantly correlated with explicit cognition , the procedural compo - nent did not . In another line of research , using a population of individuals with autis - tic spectrum condition ( ASC ) , Brown et al . ( 2010 ) found that matching for IQ , there was statistical equivalence between participants with ASC and typically developing individ - uals on four implicit learning tasks . Further , this ﬁnding was not a consequence of com - pensation by explicit learning ability or IQ . Taken together , the research supports the separation of explicit and implicit cognition and the notion that individual differences in psychometric intelligence are only weakly if at all associated with individual differences in implicit learning ( e . g . , McGeorge et al . , 1997 ; Reber et al . , 1991 ) . Recent research has found that individ - ual differences in implicit learning make an independent contribution to complex cogni - tion above and beyond psychometric intel - ligence . Gebauer and Mackintosh ( 2009 ) administered a large battery of implicit learning and intelligence tests to 195 Ger - man students . A factor analysis of all the tasks revealed two second - order principal components : the ﬁrst consisting primarily of the intelligence measures and the second consisting of the measures of implicit learn - ing . Both factors were only weakly related to each other . Additionally , the implicit learn - ing second - order factor was signiﬁcantly related to math and English grades , subjects that were foreign languages for the German students in the sample . Controlling for the intelligence second - order factor , the associ - ation between the implicit learning factor and English remained whereas the associa - tion with math was no longer signiﬁcant . Consistent with this ﬁnding , Pretz , Totz , and Kaufman ( 2010 ) found a relation between a probabilistic sequence learning task and both the American College Test - ing ( ACT ) math and English scores , and these effects were in the middle third of effect sizes reported in psychology ( r = . 2 to . 3 ; Hemphill , 2003 ) . In another recent P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 452 SCOTT BARRY KAUFMAN study , Kaufman et al . ( 2009 ) investigated the association of individual differences in implicit learning with a variety of cogni - tive and personality variables in a sample of English 16 - to 17 - year - olds . Probabilistic sequence learning was related to intentional associative learning more strongly than psy - chometric intelligence , and it was not asso - ciated with working memory . Furthermore , structural equation modeling revealed that individual differences in implicit learning were independently related to verbal ana - logical reasoning and processing speed , and implicit learning was signiﬁcantly corre - lated with academic performance on two foreign language exams ( French and Ger - man ) . Implicit learning also was positively related to self - report measures of personal - ity , including intuition , Openness to Expe - rience , and impulsivity . Also , a double dissociation was found between a latent Intellect factor and a latent Openness to Experience factor – with Intellect relating to working memory ( . 29 ) but not implicit learning ( . 00 ) and Openness to Experience relating to implicit learning ( . 31 ) but not working memory ( . 13 ) . This lack of association between implicit learning and working memory is consistent with other research on attention and execu - tive functioning . Research shows that those high in working memory are better able to control their attention and stay on task when there is interference ( Kane , Bleckley , Con - way , & Engle , 2001 ) and this ability is asso - ciated with psychometric intelligence ( see Chapter 20 , Working Memory and Intel - ligence , this volume ) . There is an emerg - ing consensus that implicit learning requires selective attention to the relevant stimuli but then learning about the selected stim - uli operates automatically , independent of an intention to learn and without drawing on further central executive processing ( e . g . , Baker , Olson , & Behrmann , 2004 ; Frensch & Miner , 1995 ; Jiang & Chun , 2001 ; Jim´enez & Mendez , 1999 ; Turke - Browne , Junge , & Scholl , 2005 ) . Indeed , researchers have proposed that central executive functions should be engaged only under intentional learning conditions to aid in focusing attention , whereas only selective attention processes are necessary for learning stimuli inciden - tally ( Cowan , 1988 ; Frensch & Miner , 1995 , Johnson & Hirst , 1993 ) . In support of this view , Unsworth and Engle ( 2005 ) found that variations in working memory were asso - ciated with an implicit learning task only when participants were instructed to explic - itly detect the covariation , but no associa - tion with working memory was found when participants were not given that instruction . Feldman , Kerr , and Streissguth ( 1995 ) also found no relation between implicit learning and measures of working memory . In sum , while the literature is not large , the evidence that does exist suggests that implicit learning is often unrelated to psy - chometric intelligence or working memory but is independently associated with spe - ciﬁc forms of complex cognition , academic achievement , and particular aspects of per - sonality related to Openness to Experience and impulsivity . Future research on the topic is needed to clarify and extend these ﬁndings . Intelligence and Latent Inhibition It can be important in our everyday lives to be able to automatically distinguish relevant from irrelevant stimuli and to ﬁlter out information irrelevant to the task at hand . For instance , when trying to concentrate on writing poetry , it’s important to ﬁlter out the rattle of the radiator . Such a mechanism has been investigated and is called latent inhibition ( Lubow , 1989 ) . Latent inhibition is often characterized as a preconscious gating mechanism that screens from current focus those stimuli that have previously been regarded as irrelevant ( Lubow , 1989 ) . Those with increased latent inhibition show higher levels of this form of inhibition ( Peterson , Smith , & Carson , 2002 ) . Variation in latent inhibition has been documented across a variety of mammalian species and , at least in other animals , has known biolog - ical substrates ( Lubow & Gewirtz , 1995 ) . Prior research has shown a relation between decreased latent inhibition and acute - phase P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 INTELLIGENCE AND THE COGNITIVE UNCONSCIOUS 453 schizophrenia ( Baruch , Hemsley , & Gray , 1988 a , 1988 b ; Lubow , Ingberg - Sachs , Zalstein - Orda , & Gewirtz , 1992 ) . People with schizophrenia also tend to have reduced ability for central executive functioning ( Barch , 2005 ) . Recent research suggests that reduced latent inhibition can also have its advan - tages . In students with a high IQ ( and pre - sumably a high level of central executive functioning ) , decreased latent inhibition is associated with higher scores on a self - report measure of creative achievement ( Carson , Peterson , & Higgins , 2003 ) . Interestingly , the researchers did not ﬁnd a correlation between ﬂuid intelligence and latent inhi - bition . Kaufman ( 2009 a ) also did not ﬁnd an association between variations in g and variations in latent inhibition . Additionally , Kaufman ( 2009 a , b ) examined the relation - ship between latent inhibition and individ - ual differences in the tendency to rely on intuition to make decisions . Indeed , latent inhibition is conceptually related to intu - ition : Jung’s original conception of intuition is “perception via the unconscious” ( Jung , 1921 / 1971 , p . 538 ) . Kaufman hypothesized that an intuitive cognitive style would be related to reduced latent inhibition . Results showed that those with higher scores on a faith in intuition factor ( consisting of intu - ition items related to affect ) tended to have reduced latent inhibition . Further , latent inhibition was not associated with an intu - ition factor consisting of items having to do with holistic processing of information or a rational cognitive style . There was also a ten - dency for those scoring high ( as compared to medium or low ) on the faith in intu - ition factor to beneﬁt more from a preexpo - sure condition where participants received the relevant stimuli in the ﬁrst part of the task . Therefore , current research suggests that decreased latent inhibition is unrelated to general intelligence or a rational cognitive style . Since decreased latent inhibition may make an individual more likely to perceive and make connections that others do not see , this ability in combination with high psycho - metric intelligence can lead to the highest levels of creative achievement . Intelligence , Intuition , and Insight Various researchers have come to the con - clusion that in many naturalistic situations , such as decision making in groups , very lit - tle controlled cognition is required ( Klein , 1999 ; also see Gladwell , 2007 , for a summary of relevant research ) . Instead , they note that expertise seems to be related to recognition of a situation that had been encountered previously and the retrieval of schemas that match the situation . 13 They argue that while controlled cognition is sometimes impor - tant , the key to intelligent behavior is the automatic retrieval process . Similarly , Reyna ( 2004 ) argued that experts acquire knowledge that allows them to make fast , intuitive , and effective deci - sions whereas novices need to rely on deliberate , effortful reasoning . Reyna noted , however , that automatic processes can lead to bias and error when experts are presented with novel problems ( also see Chabris & Simons , 2010 , for a summary of research showing the potential perils of relying on intuition when making expert as well as novel decisions ) . Wilson and Schooler ( 1991 ) also showed the importance of automatic processing in decision making – they demon - strated that when making a decision that is complex and multi - attributed , people do better when conscious deliberation is inten - tionally prevented . This idea is also a major tenet of the unconscious thought theory ( UTT ) , in which it is argued that decisions about simple issues can be better tackled by conscious thought , whereas decisions about complex matter can be better approached with unconscious thought ( Dijksterhuis & Nordgren , 2006 , but see Aczel , 2009 ; Newell , Wong , & Cheung , 2009 ; Payne , Samper , Bettman , & Luce , 2008 ; Thorsteinson & Withrow , 2009 ) . 13 For more on the relations between intelligence and the acquisition of expertise more generally , see Ackerman ( Chapter 41 , Intelligence and Exper - tise , this volume ) . In this section I focus instead on the relation between intelligence and intuition , particularly from an individual differences perspec - tive . P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 454 SCOTT BARRY KAUFMAN Along similar lines , Hogarth ( 2005 ) distin - guished between deliberate and tacit cog - nitive processes . According to Hogarth , complex decisions will beneﬁt from tacit processing whereas less complex decisions will beneﬁt from deliberate processing . An additional component in Hogarth’s model is the degree of bias in the original learn - ing environment . If the feedback presented in the original learning environment regard - ing decision accuracy is clear and immedi - ate , the environment is considered “kind , ” and accurate causal relationships can be learned . Environments in which feedback is unclear and not available in a timely man - ner are considered “wicked” and are consid - ered highly biased . In wicked learning envi - ronments , the intuitive system is prone to errors . According to Hogarth , intentional , deliberate thought is best suited to biased learning environments where the complex - ity of the task is low , whereas intuitive pro - cessing is best suited to learning environ - ments in which bias is low and complexity of the task is high ( see Epstein , 2003 , and Kah - neman , 2009 , for related ideas , including the notion that the quality of an intuitive judg - ment is dependent upon the predictability of the environment in which the judgment is made and the individual’s opportunity to learn the regularities in that environment ) . Recently , researchers have investigated the role of individual differences in the use of intuition . With the aim of integrating the psychodynamic focus on unconscious pro - cessing with the cognitive focus on ratio - nal conscious thinking , Seymour Epstein put forth the cognitive - experiential self - theory ( CEST ; Epstein , 1994 ) , which was an out - growth of ideas presented in Epstein ( 1973 ) . The theory posits that humans have two par - allel but interacting modes of information processing . The rational system is analytic , logical , abstract , experienced actively and consciously , is slower to process informa - tion , and requires justiﬁcation via logic and evidence . In contrast , the experiential system is holistic , affective , concrete , experienced passively , processes information automati - cally , and is self - evidently valid ( experience alone is enough for belief ) . Epstein’s experiential system is related to intuition in the sense of “gut - feelings” that guide behavior . Based on his theory , Epstein developed the Rational - Experiential Inven - tory ( REI ; Pacini & Epstein , 1999 ) , which measures individual differences in the ten - dency to rely on each mode of thought . His research program has discovered that the intelligence of each system is indepen - dent of , or very weakly correlated with , the intelligence of the other ( Epstein & Meier , 1989 ) , and each subscale ( analyti - cal and experiential ) has unique predictive validity for a wide range of intelligent behav - iors ( see Epstein , 2003 , for a review ) . In general , the rational scale is more strongly positively related to measures of intellectual performance such as scores on the Scholas - tic Aptitude Test ( SAT ) and grade point averages ( GPA ) than is the experiential scale , whereas the experiential scale is more strongly positively related to extroversion , agreeableness , favorable interpersonal rela - tionships , empathy , creativity , emotionality , sense of humor , and art appreciation than is the rational scale . The rational scale is more strongly negatively associated with neuroti - cism , depression , anxiety , stress in college life , subtle racism , extreme conservatism , alcohol abuse , and na¨ıve optimism than is the experiential scale , whereas the experien - tial scale is more strongly negatively associ - ated with distrust and intolerance than is the rational scale . Many of these relations held even after controlling for the NEO Five Fac - tor Inventory ( NEO - FFI ; Costa & McCrae , 1989 ) , which measures the Big Five fac - tors of personality . Other researchers have used the REI to investigate human cogni - tion . For instance , Klaczynski ( 2009 ) reviews a number of studies he and his collaborators conducted using the REI to investigate the development of dual processes across the life span . Pretz ( 2008 ) has extended both the exper - imental work on intuition and the cognitive styles approach by looking at the effects of individual differences in an analytical ver - sus intuitive strategy and level of experience on practical problem solving . Pretz reasoned that the more experienced an individual is P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 INTELLIGENCE AND THE COGNITIVE UNCONSCIOUS 455 with a task , the less complex the task and the more decomposable the problem will appear to that individual . Pretz noted that the relevant knowledge associated with an everyday problem - solving task is likely to be acquired through informal experience , and individuals with more experience will there - fore have more tacit knowledge but will also be able to better articulate that knowledge . As a result , the expert can use metacognitive skills to explicitly identify the main prob - lem , identify the most relevant information , and identify the consequences of various courses of action ( Antonakis et al . , 2002 ) . In Pretz’s study , college students were instructed to use either holistic intuition ( bringing to mind all relevant information and trusting hunches ) or analysis ( deﬁn - ing the problem , distinguishing the relevant from irrelevant information , and monitoring the problem carefully ) when solving vari - ous practical problems dealing with college life . Pretz found that the effectiveness of the strategy on task performance interacted with the participant’s level of experience : analysis worked better for more experienced individ - uals whereas novices were slightly more suc - cessful when they employed a holistic , intu - itive strategy . A similar pattern was found looking at existing individual differences in strategy preference . Pretz’s study suggests that among indi - viduals with an intermediate level of exper - tise , analytical problem solving can be help - ful in perceiving the logic and structure of the problem , and intuition can distract the expert from this critical information . In contrast , intuitive , holistic thought may be best suited for novices in a domain who see the task as ill - deﬁned and need to bring to mind the relevant information . An impli - cation of Pretz’s study is that intermediate experts should rely on an analytical strategy when solving complex , practical problems . Full - blown experts who have fully automa - tized their task may beneﬁt from an intuitive mode of thought . This distinction between holistic intu - ition ( of the sort studied in Pretz’s study ) and inferential intuition ( full automatiza - tion ) was made by Hill ( 1987 – 1988 ) ; the ideas are consistent with Baylor’s ( Baylor , 2001 ) U - shaped model of expertise and intuition and research showing the facilitation of intuition for complex , high - stakes decision making ( Klein , 1999 ) . Indeed , Pretz and Totz ( 2007 ) have developed a scale to measure individ - ual differences in the tendency to rely on three different forms of intuition : affective , heuristic , and holistic . Another implication of Pretz’s study is that many social prob - lems may be better suited to the cognitive unconscious , as they may be more complex than nonsocial problems . Whereas individ - ual differences in the cognitive unconscious can be adaptive for some social problems , there may be instances of social cognition in which the cognitive unconscious can lead to undesirable outcomes ( see Implicit Social Cognition section ) . Another line of research has investigated the intimate connection between intuition and insight . Anecdotally , insight has played a crucial role in the generation of cre - ative ideas . The great French mathemati - cian Henri Poincar´e ( 1921 ) described inci - dents in which an answer came to him only after his conscious attention was directed away from the problem and he wasn’t consciously deliberating on the problem . Poincar´e argued that these moments of sud - den inspiration are the result of unconscious thinking . Based on reﬂections of his creative thought process , he argued that the cre - ative process starts with conscious work on a problem , followed by unconscious work , and then , if insight is successful , another stage of conscious work to verify that the ideas makes sense and to work out the impli - cations of the idea . Indeed , insight is consid - ered an important component of the cre - ative process ( Wallas , 1926 ) . Empirical work supports these anecdotes . In reviewing a number of experiments relating to implicit thought , intuition , and insights , Kihlstrom , Shames , and Dorfman ( 1996 ) have this to say about the nature of intuition : From the experiments described in this chapter , it appears that the processes underlying intuitions closely resemble those P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 456 SCOTT BARRY KAUFMAN which underlie implicit memory . In recog - nition , people’s intuitions about the past – the feeling of familiarity , in the absence of full recollection – seems to be based on the perceptual ﬂuency that comes with prim - ing . . . . We actually think of these men - tal states as implicit thoughts : instances in which an idea or image inﬂuences experi - ence , thought , or action in the absence of conscious awareness of what that idea or image is . As for the link between intuitions and insight , they then go on to say : . . . it is clear that problem solutions , like memories , are not discontinuous , all - or - none affairs , remaining entirely uncon - scious until they emerge full - blown into the full light of consciousness . There is a point , as they approach and cross what Wallas ( 1926 ) , following William James ( 1890 ) , called the “fringe” of consciousness , when we know they are coming , even when we do not know what they are . This is the point , between preparation and insight , where intuitions occur . ( p . 19 ) Other researchers have investigated the con - trolled and spontaneous cognitive mecha - nisms that underlie insight ( see Sternberg & Davidson , 1995 , for a review of research on insight ) . A methodology that is often employed is the Accumulated Clues Task ( ACT ) , in which participants must discover a word , but are given clues ( e . g . , words that are associated with the answer ) along the way . After each clue is presented , partic - ipants are required to provide an answer . The clues get increasingly helpful ( are more related to the answer ) and the answers given by the participants get objectively closer to the answer in an incremental fashion that occurs before their subjective ratings of feel - ing close to an answer , which they often report occurring to them in a sudden ﬂash of insight ( Bowers , Farvolden , & Mermigis , 1995 ; Dorfman , Shames , & Kihlstrom , 1996 ) . Research has shown that individual differ - ences in how long it takes participants to arrive at the correct answer correlate with verbal intelligence . Recent research , however , suggests that different components of the task may differentially relate to controlled cognition . Reber , Ruch - Monachon , and Perrig ( 2007 ) ﬁrst replicated earlier research on the ACT by ﬁnding that participants often under - estimated their degree of closeness to the answer ; these subjective reports of close - ness exhibited a positive slope , suggesting that participants possessed implicit knowl - edge about the task and indeed felt hunches about their progress that weren’t necessarily aligned with objective incremental progress . The researchers then distinguished between performance level , processing style , implicit knowledge , and subjective feeling of close - ness to the solution on the ACT . While performance level correlated with verbal intelligence , processing style and implicit knowledge were not correlated with ver - bal intelligence . Further , a faith in intu - ition cognitive style and the Big Five per - sonality traits Openness to Experience and Conscientiousness were all correlated with processing style , but not with implicit knowledge on the task . These results sug - gest that a promising research direction is to decompose problem - solving tasks into their processing style and intuitive components and investigate relations between individual differences in these components and indi - vidual differences in various processes and thinking styles relating to intelligence and the cognitive unconscious . Domains Implicit Social Cognition There is an emerging consensus in the social cognition literature that many of our social behaviors and judgments are made automatically , without intention , effort , or awareness ( Bargh & Chartrand , 1999 ; Bargh & Morsella , 2008 ) . Research on automatic evaluation , impression formation , and auto - matic characterization all demonstrate the prevalence of automaticity in social life . It is generally thought now that mere percep - tion of a stimulus can lead instantly and P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 INTELLIGENCE AND THE COGNITIVE UNCONSCIOUS 457 automatically to a judgment without any conscious reﬂection or reasoning . Indeed , until the 1980 s , attitudes were mostly assumed to rely on consciously available information ( Nosek , Greenwald , & Banaji , 2007 ) . Recently , researchers have investigated individual differences in implicit social cognition , using a variety of measures “that avoid requiring introspective access , decrease the mental control available to pro - duce the response , reduce the role of con - scious intention , and reduce the role of self - reﬂective , deliberative processes” ( Nosek et al . , 2007 , p . 267 ) . Greenwald and Banaji ( 1995 ) have been among the most active researchers investigating the role of implicit cognition in various social psychology con - structs such as attitudes , stereotypes , and self - esteem . In their research , they attempt to “reveal traces of past experience that peo - ple might explicitly reject because it con - ﬂicts with values or beliefs , or might avoid revealing because the expression could have negative social consequences . Even more likely , implicit cognition can reveal infor - mation that is not available to introspec - tive access even if people were motivated to retrieve and express it” ( Nosek et al . , 2007 , p . 266 ; see Wilson , Lindsey , & Schooler , 2000 , for related ideas about attitudes ) . One of the best - validated measures of implicit social cognition is the Implicit Asso - ciation Test ( IAT ; Greenwald , McGhee , & Schwartz , 1998 ) . The IAT requires the participant to categorize various stimu - lus exemplars representing four concepts ( e . g . , men , women , good , bad ) using two response options . When concepts that share a response are strongly associated , it is expected that the sorting task will be eas - ier for the participant ( as indexed by faster responses and fewer errors ) than when the concepts are weakly associated . Thus , the IAT affords insight into automatic associa - tive processes that are introspectively inac - cessible . Over the last decade , the IAT has been adapted for use in various disciplines ( see Nosek et al . , 2007 , for a review ) and to assess implicit attitudes related to categories such as race , gender , and even insects . In studies that involve some measure of dis - crimination toward a social group , both explicit and IAT measures predict behav - ior , with the IAT offering superior pre - diction ( Greenwald , Poehlman , Uhlmann , & Banaji , 2009 ) . Furthermore , it has been demonstrated that people with the strongest automatic racial biases are most likely to engage in a wide variety of discriminatory behavior , including overt behavior ( Rudman & Ashmore , 2007 , but see van Ravenzwaaij , van der Maas , & Wagenmakers for an alter - native account ) . Therefore , research on how individual differences in intelligence and the cognitive unconscious interact to produce stereotyp - ing and attitude formation is of both theoret - ical and practical interest . Recent research utilizing fMRI techniques provides some clues . Chee , Sriram , Soon , and Lee , 2000 ) used fMRI to examine participants while these individuals were taking the IAT . The researchers found that the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and to a lesser degree the anterior cingulate were most active dur - ing conditions in which items from incon - gruent categories ( e . g . , insect + pleasant ) shared a response key than when items from congruent categories ( e . g . , ﬂower + pleasant ) shared a key . According to the researchers , this suggests that greater con - trolled cognition was required in condi - tions in which it was necessary to overcome the prepotent tendency to map emotion - ally congruent items to the same response key . In another study , Phelps et al . ( 2000 ) had White participants view faces of unfa - miliar Black and White males . Participants who showed greater activation of the amyg - dala ( a region of the brain associated with fear and negative emotions ) while viewing Black faces relative to White faces tended to score higher on two measures of uncon - scious race evaluation : the IAT and the eye - blink response . In a second experiment , the researchers did not ﬁnd the same pattern of brain activation when the faces were familiar and the participants regarded the Black and White individuals positively . In a P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 458 SCOTT BARRY KAUFMAN related study , Cunningham et al . ( 2004 ) had participants view Black and White faces either subliminally or supraliminally dur - ing fMRI . When presented subliminally , the amygdala was more active for Black faces relative to White faces . This effect was reduced when the faces were presented supraliminally . Further , control regions in the prefrontal cortex ( which are also acti - vated during working memory and psycho - metric intelligence tests ) showed greater activation for Black faces than White faces when presented supraliminally . Race bias as assessed by the IAT was related to a greater difference in amygdala activation for Black faces relative to White faces , and activity in the prefrontal cortex predicted a reduc - tion in amygdala activation from the sublim - inal to the supraliminal condition . Accord - ing to the researchers , this provides evidence for neural distinctions between automatic and controlled processing of social groups , suggesting that controlled processes ( which support performance on measure of psy - chometric intelligence ) may modulate auto - matic evaluation . These results suggest that individual dif - ferences in measures of controlled cogni - tion may predict the extent to which auto - matic evaluations inﬂuence behavior . To expand the range of individual differences in implicit social cognition investigated , it may be useful to construct new implicit learning tasks that consist of stimuli relating to the learning of real - world contingencies in the social domain . Tasks that already exist that could be adapted include the task used by Lewicki , Hill , and Sasaki ( 1989 ) , in which participants implicitly learn to judge the intelligence of individuals from brain scans or the adaptation of that task employed by Woolhouse and Bayne ( 2000 ) , in which par - ticipants implicitly learn to judge the job suitability of job candidates based on their personality proﬁle . Such research can help distinguish between situations in which indi - vidual differences in the cognitive uncon - scious contribute to intelligent behavior ( for example , when a person is engaging in an area of expertise or generating novel ideas ) , and situations in which controlled cognition may be the better predictor of intelligent behavior ( since it helps override generaliza - tions that can lead to explicit prejudice and stereotyping ) . Such research would further illustrate the need for measuring individual differences in both controlled and automatic cognitive processes in order to predict vari - ous forms of intelligent behavior . Creative Cognition Creativity requires both novelty and useful - ness ( Kaufman , 2007 ) . The Creative Cog - nition Approach endeavors to identify and investigate the role of mental processes in creative cognition at various stages in the creative process ( Finke , Ward , & Smith , 1992 , 1995 ; Ward , Smith , & Finke , 1999 ) . Creative cognition researchers have identi - ﬁed two main phases of creative invention that occur in a cyclical fashion in ordinary individuals . During the generative phase , the individual generates numerous candi - date ideas or solutions and forms a men - tal representation ( referred to as a preinven - tive structure ) . Then during the exploratory stage , the individual examines the can - didate mental representations and ideas and consciously and sometimes painstak - ingly works out their implications . Cognitive unconscious processes activated through defocused attention most likely play more of a role during the generative stage , whereas controlled cognitive processes acti - vated through focused attention most likely play more of a role during the exploratory stage . The highest levels of creativity , how - ever , most likely require the ability for both modes of thought and the ﬂexibility to switch modes of thought throughout the creative process . On the one hand , behavioral and brain studies suggest that creative people are char - acterized by a lack of inhibition ( Eysenck , 1995 ; Martindale , 1999 ) , and case studies repeatedly show that creative people do describe the creative process as effortless and lacking in deliberation ( Csikzentmiha - lyi , 1996 ) . However , studies also show that creative individuals defocus their attention when approaching a creative task but they P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 INTELLIGENCE AND THE COGNITIVE UNCONSCIOUS 459 are capable of focusing their attention when it comes time to make the ideas practical ( Martindale , 1999 ) . In recent years , Oshin Vartian and colleagues have extended this research by showing in a series of clever experiments that creative people are able to adjust their focus of attention , depending on the demands of the task . In one study , Vartanian , Martindale , and Kwiatkowski ( 2007 ) found a negative corre - lation between creative potential ( measured by ﬂuency scores ) and speed of informa - tion processing on two tasks that did not involve interference or ambiguity , and a pos - itive correlation between creative potential and speed of information processing on two tasks that did require the inhibition of inter - fering information . Therefore , subjects with greater creative potential were better able to slow down or speed up their information processing , depending on the task demands . A follow - up study found similar results and extended the earlier results in a sample of high school students in Russia ( 2008 ) . The same pattern was found between creative potential ( as measured by ﬂuency , ﬂexibil - ity , and originality ) and response latency as in the earlier study , and the ﬁndings held , correcting for IQ . In a third study , partici - pants were instructed to judge whether two concepts were related or unrelated ( Varta - nian , Martindale , & Matthews , 2009 ) . The rationale was that creativity is frequently deﬁned as the novel and useful association of concepts that are not traditionally related . Therefore , this important cognitive process relies at least in part on a person’s ability to quickly assess the degree of relationship between concepts . The researchers manip - ulated the degree of association between word pairs . Participants with greater cre - ative potential ( assessed by a measure of divergent thinking ) exhibited a faster reac - tion time when judging the relatedness of the concepts . Psychometric intelligence didn’t account for additional variance above and beyond divergent thinking scores in pre - dicting the variability in reaction time per - formance . The researchers conclude that the ability of individuals with higher creative potential to more quickly judge the degree of association between words can lead to an advantage over time in the total number of potentially relevant conceptual associa - tions that can be considered . The researchers argued that the task they used involved unambiguous task instructions and associa - tions and that it is just these conditions in which those with better divergent thinking skills focus their attention , which can result in a faster reaction time . An interesting question raised by Var - tanian , Martindale , and Matthews ( 2009 ) is whether the mechanism that regulates the focus of attention is itself automatic or requires self - control . They have argued that the unambiguous nature of their task led to automatic regulation of attention . They point to evidence that in other circum - stances , top - down processing can also play an important role in creative cognition . Var - tanian , Martindale , and Kwiatkowski ( 2003 ) investigated the role of strategic ﬂexibility in creative problem solving . They adminis - tered a rule discovery task and found that participants with higher creative potential ( as measured by ﬂuency scores ) were better at discovering the rules . Further , the strat - egy of generating disconﬁrmatory hypothe - ses played an important role for successful participants in the later stages of hypothe - sis testing after the ﬁrst feedback was given . Having already formed a representation of the problem space after feedback , successful participants were ﬂexibly able to switch to a more successful strategy following initial feedback . Similar results have been found by Gilhooly , Fiortou , Anthony , and Wynn ( 2007 ) , who found that using think - aloud protocols that alternative uses for a task had generated earlier in the course of the task drew primarily on memory - based strategies , whereas uses generated later drew on a more limited range of strategies requiring exec - utive processes , such as imagining the dis - assembly of the object and using the parts or recombining the parts into other objects that could be applied in other ways . Simi - lar to the results of the Vartanian , Martin - dale , and Kwiatkowki ( 2003 ) study , novelty of responses was affected by the ability to use a speciﬁc strategy later in the course of P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 460 SCOTT BARRY KAUFMAN problem solving , supporting the view that creative people switch strategies during the course of a task but also suggesting that top - down processing can play an important role in creative problem solving . Vartanian , Mar - tindale , and Kwiatkowski ( 2003 ) suggested a bi - directional model of creativity in which the focus of attention is modulated accord - ing to top - down as well as bottom - up pro - cesses , with the use of bottom - up process - ing determined by the stage of the problem ( bottom - up processing primarily during the earlier stages , and top - down processing pri - marily during the later stages ) . Both Var - tanian , Martindale , and Kwiatkowski ( 2003 ) and Vartanian ( 2009 ) mentioned that an important future line of research will be to investigate the underlying mechanism ( s ) that enable the modulation of information - processing strategies during the course of creative problem solving . Drawing more on the memory and brain literature , Bristol and Viskontas ( 2006 ) came to similar conclusions . They proposed that creative individuals are good at modulat - ing inhibitory processes , so that they have both the capability for cognitive control and the capacity for disinhibition and can switch ﬂuidly from one mode to another . In par - ticular , they argue that creative individu - als can defocus their attention at the early stages of creative cognition so that they grasp the whole set of potential covaria - tions ; then , during the retrieval and elabo - ration stage , they can control attention so that they can inhibit prepotent responses and thereby allow remote associations to enter into consciousness without intrusions . Therefore , the researchers argue that cre - ative individuals are both able to overcome cognitive inhibition and are capable of sup - pressing undesired responses . They claim that this skill requires the ability to acti - vate the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and inhibit retrieval - related processes that may interfere with accessing remote associations , as well as to deactivate the dorsolateral pre - frontal cortex , depending on the context of the task and the goals of the individual . They also left as an interesting open question determining the precise brain mechanisms that can modulate between the different brain activations and deactivations depend - ing on the demands of the task . Conclusion In his 1957 presidential address to the Amer - ican Psychological Association , Lee Cron - bach pleaded his case for uniting the bur - geoning ﬁeld of cognitive psychology , with its focus on the experimental psychology of higher order information processing , with the study of individual differences in Spear - man’s g . Cronbach’s call set off a great deal of research that would demonstrate that the newer theories regarding the nature of intelligence and the burgeoning ﬁeld of information - processing psychology were indeed quite compatible . The work by Hunt ( Hunt , Frost , & Lunneborg , 1973 ) and Stern - berg ( 1977 ) helped lay the foundation for the experimental study of intelligent reasoning processes that are deliberate and effortful . Subsequent research has tended to focus on both lower level as well as higher level cor - relates of general intelligence . One particular set of cognitive processes that has not been investigated as thoroughly as the others from an individual differences perspective is the set related to the cogni - tive unconscious . This situation of mutual neglect has had the unfortunate conse - quence of limiting our picture of the nature of both human intelligence and the cognitive unconscious , thus potentially limiting our understanding of the role of individual dif - ferences in information processing in com - plex cognition more generally . The study of individual differences in the cognitive unconscious can increase our understanding of the nature of intelligence by helping us ﬁnd boundary conditions for so - called gen - eral intelligence ( g ) and by doing so , dis - covering where g breaks down . Similarly , the study of individual differences in gen - eral intelligence and its associated cognitive mechanisms can elucidate the nature of the cognitive unconscious by helping to clarify and delineate automatic , spontaneous , and rapid information - processing mechanisms . P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 INTELLIGENCE AND THE COGNITIVE UNCONSCIOUS 461 By charting new terrains , researchers can increase understanding of the determinants of intelligent behavior . A potentially fruit - ful line of research is to adapt already exist - ing experimental paradigms and construct new tests that tap the cognitive uncon - scious . Individual differences in such tasks may not be strongly related to psycho - metric intelligence but may still explain intelligent behavior independent of psycho - metric intelligence . Researchers can then investigate the precise cognitive and neural mechanisms that underlie measures of the cognitive unconscious and develop interven - tions to raise these skills in everyone . By fostering collaborations across the various areas of psychology and related disciplines , and incorporating dual - process theory into our thinking , we should be able to come to a fuller , more complete understanding of human intelligence . Acknowledgments I would like to thank Edward Cokely , Seymour Epstein , Jean Pretz , and Robert Sternberg for their insightful suggestions on an earlier draft . References Achter , J . A . , Lubinski , D . , Benbow , C . P . , & Eftekhari - Sanjani , H . ( 1999 ) . Assessing voca - tional preferences among gifted adolescents adds incremental validity to abilities : A dis - criminant analysis of educational outcomes over a 10 - year interval . Journal of Educational Psychology , 91 , 777 – 786 . Aczel , B . ( 2009 ) . Attention and awareness in human learning and decision making ( Unpub - lished doctoral dissertation ) . University of Cambridge , Cambridge , UK . Anderson , J . R . ( 1982 ) . Acquisition of cognitive skill . Psychological Review , 89 , 369 – 406 . Anderson , M . ( 2005 ) . Marrying intelligence and cognition : A developmental review . In R . J . Sternberg & J . E . Pretz ( Eds . ) , Cognition & intelligence : Identifying the mechanisms of the mind ( pp . 268 – 288 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cam - bridge University Press . Anderson , M . ( 2008 ) . What can autism and dyslexia tell us about intelligence ? Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 61 , 116 – 128 . Antonakis , J . , Hedlund , J . , Pretz , J . , & Stern - berg , R . J . ( 2002 ) . Exploring the nature and acquisition of tacit knowledge for military lead - ership ( Research Note 2002 – 04 ) . Alexandria , VA : Army Research Institute for the Behav - ioral and Social Sciences . Baker , C . I . , Olson , C . R . , & Behrmann , M . ( 2004 ) . Role of attention and perceptual grouping in visual statistical learning . Psycho - logical Science , 15 , 460 – 466 . Barch , D . M . ( 2005 ) . The cognitive neuroscience of schizophrenia . Annual Review of Clinical Psychology , 1 , 321 – 353 . Bargh , J . A . ( 2004 ) . The four horsemen of auto - maticity : Awareness , intention , efﬁciency , and control in social cognition . In R . S . Wyer & T . K . Srull ( Eds . ) , Handbook of social cognition ( pp . 1 – 41 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Bargh , J . A . , & Chartrand , T . L . ( 1999 ) . The unbearable automaticity of being . American Psychologist , 54 , 462 – 479 . Bargh , J . A . , & Morsella , E . ( 2008 ) . The uncon - scious mind . Perspectives on Psychological Sci - ence , 3 , 73 – 79 . Baruch , I . , Hemsley , D . R . , & Gray , J . A . ( 1988 a ) . Latent inhibition and “psychotic proneness” in normal subjects . Personality and Individual Differences , 9 , 777 – 783 . Baruch , I . , Hemsley , D . R . , & Gray , J . A . ( 1988 b ) . Differential performance of acute and chronic schizophrenics in a latent inhibition task . Jour - nal of Nervous and Mental Disease , 176 , 598 – 606 . Baylor , A . L . ( 2001 ) . A U - shaped model for the development of intuition by level of expertise . New Ideas in Psychology , 19 , 237 – 244 . Binet , A . , & Simon , T . ( 1916 ) . The development of intelligence in children ( E . S . Kite , Trans . ) . Baltimore , MD : Williams & Wilkens . Bowers , K . S . , Farvolden , P . , & Mermigis , L . ( 1995 ) . Intuitive antecedents of insight . In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 27 – 51 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Bristol , A . S . , & Viskontas , I . V . ( 2006 ) . Dynamic processes within associative memory stores : Piecing together the neural basis of creative cognition . In J . C . Kaufman & J . Baer ( Eds . ) , Creativity and reason in cognitive development ( pp . 60 – 80 ) . New York , NY : Cambridge Uni - versity Press . P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 462 SCOTT BARRY KAUFMAN Brown , J . B . , Aczel , B . , Jimenez , L . , Kaufman , S . B . , Mackintosh , N . , & Plaisted , K . ( 2010 ) . Intact implicit learning in autism spectrum conditions . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 1 , 1 – 24 . Carey , S . , & Spelke , E . ( 1994 ) . Domain - speciﬁc knowledge and conceptual change . In L . A . Hirschfeld & S . A . Gelman ( Eds . ) , Mapping the mind : Domain speciﬁcity in cognition and culture ( pp . 169 – 200 ) . New York , NY : Cam - bridge University Press . Carroll , J . B . ( 1993 ) . Human cognitive abilities : A survey of factor - analytic studies . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Carson , S . H . , Peterson , J . B . , & Higgins , D . M . ( 2003 ) . Decreased latent inhibition is associ - ated with increased creative achievement in high - functioning individuals . Journal of Per - sonality and Social Psychology , 85 , 499 – 506 . Chabris , C . F . ( 2007 ) . Cognitive and neurobiolog - ical mechanisms of the Law of General Intel - ligence . In M . J . Roberts ( Ed . ) , Integrating the mind : Domain general vs . domain speciﬁc pro - cesses in higher cognition ( pp . 449 – 491 ) . New York , NY : Psychology Press . Chabris , C . F . , & Simons , D . ( 2010 ) . The invisible gorilla : And other ways our intuitions deceive us . New York , NY : Crown Archetype . Chaiken , S . ( 1987 ) . The heuristic model of per - suasion . In M . P . Zanna , J . M . Olson , & C . P . Herman ( Eds . ) , Social inﬂuence : The Ontario symposium ( vol . 5 , pp . 3 – 39 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Chee , M . W . L . , Sriram , N . , Soon , C . S . , & Lee , K . M . ( 2000 ) . Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and the implicit association of concepts and attributes . Neuroreport : For Rapid Communi - cation of Neuroscience Research , 11 , 135 – 140 . Cokely , E . T . , & Kelley , C . M . ( 2009 ) . Cognitive abilities and superior decision making under risk : A protocol analysis and process model evaluation . Judgment and Decision Making , 4 , 20 – 33 . Cokely , E . T . , Parpart , P . , & Schooler , L . J . ( 2009 ) . On the link between cognitive control and heuristic processes . In N . A . Taatgen & H . v . Rijn ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 31 st Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 2926 – 2931 ) . Austin , TX : Cognitive Sci - ence Society . Cokely , K . , Kelley , C . M . , & Gilchrist , A . L . ( 2006 ) . Sources of individual differences in working memory : Contributions of strategy to capacity . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 13 , 991 – 997 . Costa , P . T . , & McCrae , R . R . ( 1989 ) . The NEO - PI / NEO - FFI manual supplement . Odessa , FL : Psychological Assessment Resources . Cowan , N . ( 1988 ) . Evolving conceptions of memory storage , selective attention , and their mutual constraints within the human information - processing system . Psychological Bulletin , 104 , 163 – 191 . Cronbach , L . J . ( 1957 ) . The two disciplines of sci - entiﬁc psychology . American Psychologist , 12 , 671 – 684 . Csikzentmihalyi , M . ( 1996 ) . Creativity : Flow and the psychology of discovery and invention . New York , NY : Harper Collins . Cunningham , W . A . , Johnson , M . K . , Raye , C . L . , Gatenby , J . C . , Gore , J . C . , & Banaji , M . R . ( 2004 ) . Separable neural components in the processing of black and white faces . Psy - chological Science , 15 , 806 – 813 . Dennett , D . C . ( 1992 ) . Consciousness explained . New York , NY : Back Bay Books . Dijksterhuis , A . , & Nordgren , L . F . ( 2006 ) . A theory of unconscious thought . Perspectives on Psychological Science , 1 , 95 – 109 . Dorfman , J . , Shames , V . A . , & Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1996 ) . Intuition , incubation , and insight : Implicit cognition in problem solving . In G . D . M . Underwood ( Ed . ) , Implicit cognition ( pp . 257 – 296 ) . New York , NY : Oxford Uni - versity Press . Dorfman , L . , Martindale , C . , Gassimova , V . , & Vartanian , O . ( 2008 ) . Creativity and speed of information processing : A double dissociation involving elementary versus inhibitory cogni - tive tasks . Personality and Individual Differ - ences , 44 , 1382 – 1390 . Epstein , S . ( 1973 ) . The self - concept revisited or a theory of a theory . American Psychologist , 28 , 404 – 416 . Epstein , S . ( 1991 ) . Cognitive - experiential self - theory : An integrative theory of personality . In R . Curtis ( Ed . ) , The relational self : Conver - gences in psychoanalysis and social psychology ( pp . 111 – 137 ) . New York , NY : Guilford Press . Epstein , S . ( 1994 ) . Integration of the cognitive and the psychodynamic unconscious . Ameri - can Psychologist , 49 , 709 – 724 . Epstein , S . ( 2001 ) . Manual for the Constructive Thinking Inventory . Odessa , FL : Psychological Assessment Resources . Epstein , S . ( 2003 ) . Cognitive - experiential self - theory of personality . In T . Millon & M . J . Lerner ( Eds . ) , Comprehensive handbook of psy - chology ( Vol . 5 , pp . 159 – 184 ) . Personality and social psychology . Hoboken , NJ : Wiley . P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 INTELLIGENCE AND THE COGNITIVE UNCONSCIOUS 463 Epstein , S . ( 2010 ) . Demystifying intuition : What it is , what it does , and how it does it . Psycho - logical Inquiry , 21 , 295 – 312 . Epstein , S . , & Meier , P . ( 1989 ) . Constructive thinking : A broad coping variable with spe - ciﬁc components . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 57 , 332 – 349 . Ericsson , K . A . , & Charness , N . ( 1994 ) . Expert performance : Its structure and acquisition . American Psychologist , 49 , 725 – 747 . Ericsson , K . A . , & Kintsch , W . ( 1995 ) . Long - term working memory . Psychological Review , 102 , 211 – 245 . Ericsson , K . A . , & Lehmann , A . C . ( 1996 ) . Expert and exceptional performance : Evi - dence of maximal adaptation to task con - straints . Annual Review of Psychology , 47 , 273 – 305 . Evans , J . S . B . T . ( 2008 ) . Dual - processing accounts of reasoning , judgment , and social cognition . Annual Review of Psychology , 59 , 255 – 278 . Evans , J . S . B . T . , & Frankish , K . ( 2009 ) . In two minds : Dual processes and beyond . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Eysenck , H . J . ( 1995 ) . Creativity as a product of intelligence and personality . In D . Saklofske & M . Zeidner ( Eds . ) , International handbook of personality and intelligence : Perspectives on individual differences ( pp . 231 – 247 ) . New York , NY : Plenum Press . Feist , G . J . ( 2001 ) . Natural and sexual selection in the evolution of creativity . Bulletin of Psychol - ogy and the Arts , 2 , 11 – 16 . Feldman , J . , Kerr , B . , & Streissguth , A . P . ( 1995 ) . Correlational analyses of procedural and declarative learning performance . Intelli - gence , 20 , 87 – 114 . Finke , R . A . , Ward , T . B . , & Smith , S . M . ( 1992 ) . Creative cognition : Theory , research , and appli - cations . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Fletcher , J . , Maybery , M . T . , & Bennett , S . ( 2000 ) . Implicit learning differences : A question of developmental level ? Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 26 , 246 – 252 . Fodor , J . ( 1983 ) . The modularity of mind . Boston , MA : MIT Press . Fox , M . C . , Roring , R . W . , & Mitchum , A . L . ( 2009 ) . Reversing the speed - IQ correla - tion : Intra - individual variability and atten - tional control in the inspection time paradigm . Intelligence , 37 ( 76 – 80 ) . Frensch , P . A . , & Miner , C . S . ( 1995 ) . Zur Rolle des Arbeitsged¨achtnisses beim impliziten Sequenzlernen [ The role of working mem - ory in implicit sequence learning ] . Zeitschrift f¨ur Experimentelle Psychologie , 42 , 545 – 575 . Gabora , L . , & Kaufman , S . B . ( 2009 ) . Evolution - ary approaches to creativity . In J . C . Kauf - man & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , Cambridge handbook of creativity . Cambridge , UK : Cam - bridge University Press . Manuscript in pre - paration . Gardner , H . ( 1993 ) . Frames of mind : The theory of multiple intelligences ( 2 nd ed . ) . New York , NY : Basic Books . Gardner , H . ( 1999 ) . Intelligence reframed : Multiple intelligences for the 21 st century . New York , NY : Basic Books . Gebauer , G . F . , & Mackintosh , N . J . ( 2007 ) . Psy - chometric intelligence dissociates implicit and explicit learning . Journal of Experimental Psy - chology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 33 , 34 – 54 . Gebauer , G . F . , & Mackintosh , N . J . ( 2009 ) . Implicit learning and intelligence : A princi - pal component analysis . Manuscript submit - ted for publication . Gigerenzer , G . ( 2007 ) . Gut feelings : The intel - ligence of the unconscious . New York , NY : Viking . Gigerenzer , G . , & Brighton , H . ( 2009 ) . Homo heuristicus : Why biased minds make better inferences . Topics in Cognitive Science , 1 , 107 – 143 . Gigerenzer , G . , & Regier , T . ( 1996 ) . How do we tell an association from a rule ? Comment on Sloman ( 1996 ) . Psychological Bulletin , 119 , 23 – 26 . Gilhooly , K . J . , Fiortou , E . , Anthony , S . H . , & Wynn , V . ( 2007 ) . Divergent thinking : Strate - gies and executive involvement in generating novel uses for familiar objects . British Journal of Psychology , 98 , 611 – 625 . Gladwell , M . ( 2007 ) . Blink : The power of think - ing without thinking . New York , NY : Back Bay Books . Greenwald , A . G . , & Banaji , M . R . ( 1995 ) . Implicit social cognition : Attitudes , self - esteem , and stereotypes . Psychological Review , 102 , 4 – 27 . Greenwald , A . G . , McGhee , D . E . , & Schwartz , J . L . K . ( 1998 ) . Measuring individual differ - ences in implicit cognition : The Implicit Asso - ciation Test . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 74 , 1464 – 1480 . Greenwald , A . G . , Poehlman , T . A . , Uhlmann , E . , & Banaji , M . R . ( 2009 ) . Understanding and P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 464 SCOTT BARRY KAUFMAN using the Implicit Association Test : III . Meta - analysis of predictive validity . Journal of Per - sonality and Social Psychology , 97 , 17 – 41 . Haidt , J . ( 2001 ) . The emotional dog and its ratio - nal tail : A social intuitionist approach to moral judgment . Psychological Review , 108 , 814 – 834 . Hammond , K . R . , & Hamm , R . M . , Grassia , J . , & Pearson , T . ( 1987 ) . Direct comparison of the efﬁcacy of intuitive and analytical cognition in expert judgment . IEEE Transactions on Sys - tems , Man , and Cybernetics , SMC , 17 , 753 – 770 . Hassin , R . R . , Uleman , J . S . , & Bargh , J . A . ( 2005 ) . The new unconscious . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Hawkins , J . ( 2005 ) . On intelligence . New York , NY : Holt . Hemphill , J . F . ( 2003 ) . Interpreting the mag - nitudes of correlation coefﬁcients . American Psychologist , 58 , 78 – 79 . Hertzog , C . , & Robinson , A . E . ( 2005 ) . Metacog - nition and intelligence . In O . Wilhelm & R . W . Engle ( Eds . ) , Handbook of understanding and measuring intelligence ( pp . 101 – 123 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Hill , O . W . ( 1987 – 1988 ) . Intuition : Inferential heuristic or epistemic mode ? Imagination , Cognition and Personality , 7 , 137 – 154 . Hirschfeld , L . A . , & Gelman , S . A . ( 1994 ) . Map - ping the mind : Domain speciﬁcity in cognition and culture . New York , NY : Cambridge Uni - versity Press . Hogarth , R . M . ( 2005 ) . Deciding analytically or trusting your intuition ? The advantages and disadvantages of analytic and intuitive thought . In T . Betsch & S . Haberstroh ( Eds . ) , Routines of decision making ( pp . 67 – 82 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Howard - Jones , P . A . , & Murray , S . ( 2003 ) . Ideational productivity , focus of attention , and context . Creativity Research Journal , 15 , 153 – 166 . Humphreys , L . G . , Lubinski , D . , & Yao , G . ( 1993 ) . Utility of predicting group member - ship and the role of spatial visualization in becoming an engineer , physical scientist , or artist . Journal of Applied Psychology , 78 , 250 – 261 . Hunt , E . , Frost , N . , & Lunneborg , C . ( 1973 ) . Individual differences in cognition : A new approach to intelligence . In G . H . Bower ( Ed . ) , The psychology of learning and motiva - tion : Advances in research and theory . Oxford , UK : Academic Press . James , W . ( 1890 ) . The principles of psychology . New , York , NY : Dover . Jensen , A . R . ( 1998 ) . The g factor : The science of mental ability . Westport , CT : Praeger . Jiang , Y . , & Chun , M . M . ( 2001 ) . Selective atten - tion modulates implicit learning . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 54 A , 1105 – 1124 . Jim´enez , L . , & Mendez , C . ( 1999 ) . Which atten - tion is needed for implicit sequence learning ? Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 25 , 236 – 259 . Johnson , M . K . , & Hirst , W . ( 1993 ) . MEM : Mem - ory subsystems as processes . In A . F . Collins , S . E . Gathercole , M . A . Conway , & P . E . Morris ( Eds . ) , Theories of memory ( pp . 241 – 286 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Jung , C . G . ( 1921 / 1971 ) . Psychological types ( H . G . Baynes , Trans . ) . Princeton , NJ : Princeton Uni - versity Press . ( revised by R . F . C . Hull ) . Kahneman , D . , & Klein , G . ( 2009 ) . Conditions for intuitive expertise . American Psychologist , 64 , 515 – 526 . Kahneman , D . , & Frederick , S . ( 2002 ) . Represen - tativeness revisited : Attribute substitution in intuitive judgment . In T . Gilovich , D . Grif - ﬁn , & D . Kahneman ( Eds . ) , Heuristics and biases : The psychology of intuitive judgment ( pp . 49 – 81 ) . New York , NY : Cambridge Uni - versity Press . Kane , M . J . , Bleckley , M . K . , Conway , A . R . A . , & Engle , R . W . ( 2001 ) . A controlled - attention view of working - memory capacity . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 130 , 169 – 183 . Kaufman , S . B . ( 2007 ) . Creativity . In C . R . Reynolds & E . Fletcher - Janzen ( Eds . ) , Encyclo - pedia of special education ( 3 rd ed . ) . New York , NY : Wiley . Kaufman , S . B . ( 2007 ) . Investigating the role of domain general mechanisms in the acquisi - tion of domain speciﬁc expertise . High Ability Studies , 18 , 71 – 73 . Kaufman , S . B . ( 2009 a ) . Beyond general intelli - gence : The dual - process theory of human intelli - gence ( Doctoral dissertation ) . Yale University , New Haven , CT . Kaufman , S . B . ( 2009 b ) . Faith in intuition is asso - ciated with decreased latent inhibition in a sample of high - achieving adolescents . Psychol - ogy of Aesthetics , Creativity , and the Arts , 3 , 28 – 34 . Kaufman , S . B . , DeYoung , C . G . , Gray , J . R . , Brown , J . , & Mackintosh , N . ( 2009 ) . Asso - ciative learning predicts intelligence above and beyond working memory and processing speed . Intelligence , 37 , 374 – 382 . P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 INTELLIGENCE AND THE COGNITIVE UNCONSCIOUS 465 Kaufman , S . B . , DeYoung , C . G . , Gray , J . R . , Jim´enez , L . , Brown , J . B . , & Mackintosh , N . ( 2009 ) . Implicit learning as an ability . Cogni - tion , 116 , 321 – 340 . Keren , G . , & Schul , Y . ( 2009 ) . Two is not always better than one : A critical evaluation of two - system theories . Perspectives on Psychological Science , 4 , 533 – 550 . Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1987 ) . The cognitive uncon - scious . Science , 237 ( 4821 ) , 1445 – 1452 . Kihlstrom , J . F . , Shames , V . A . , & Dorfman , J . ( 1996 ) . Intimations of memory and thought . In L . M . Reder ( Ed . ) , Implicit memory and metacognition . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum . Klaczynski , P . A . ( 2009 ) . Cognitive and social cognitive development : Dual - process research and theory . In S . B . T . Evans & K . Frank - ish ( Eds . ) , In two minds : Dual processes and beyond . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Klaczynski , P . A . , & Cottrell , J . M . ( 2004 ) . A dual - process approach to cognitive development : The case of children’s understanding of sunk cost decisions . Thinking & Reasoning , 10 , 147 – 174 . Klein , G . ( 1999 ) . Sources of power : How people make decisions . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Lewicki , P . , & Hill , T . ( 1987 ) . Unconscious pro - cesses as explanations of behavior in cognitive , personality , and social psychology . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 13 , 355 – 362 . Lewicki , P . , Hill , T . , & Czyzewska , M . ( 1992 ) . Nonconscious acquisition of information . American Psychologist , 47 , 796 – 801 . Lewicki , P . , Hill , T . , & Sasaki , I . ( 1989 ) . Self - perpetuating development of encoding biases . [ Empirical Study ] . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 118 , 323 – 337 . Lieberman , M . D . ( 2007 ) . The X - and C - systems : The neural basis of automatic and controlled social cognition . Social neuroscience : Integrat - ing biological and psychological explanations of social behavior , 290 – 315 . Litman , L . , & Reber , A . S . ( 2005 ) . Implicit cog - nition and thought . In K . J . Holyoak & R . G . Morrison ( Eds . ) , The Cambridge handbook of thinking and reasoning ( pp . 431 – 453 ) . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Loftus , E . F . , & Klinger , M . R . ( 1992 ) . Is the unconscious smart or dumb ? American Psy - chologist , 47 , 761 – 765 . Lohman , D . F . ( 2001 ) . Fluid intelligence , induc - tive reasoning , and working memory : Where the theory of multiple intelligences falls short . In N . Colangelo & S . G . Assouline ( Eds . ) , Talent development IV : Proceedings from the 1998 Henry B . and Jocelyn Wallace National Research Symposium on Talent Development ( pp . 219 – 227 ) . Scottsdale , AZ : Gifted Psychol - ogy Press . Lubow , R . E . ( 1989 ) . Latent inhibition and condi - tioned attention theory . Cambridge , UK : Cam - bridge University Press . Lubow , R . E . , & Gewirtz , J . C . ( 1995 ) . Latent inhibition in humans : Data , theory , and impli - cations for schizophrenia . Psychological Bul - letin , 117 , 87 – 103 . Lubow , R . E . , Ingberg - Sachs , Y . , Zalstein - Orda , N . , & Gewirtz , J . C . ( 1992 ) . Latent inhibition in low and high “psychotic - prone” normal sub - jects . Personality and Individual Differences , 13 , 563 – 572 . Maas , H . L . J . , Dolan , C . V . , Grasman , P . P . P . , Wicherts , J . M . , Huizenga , H . M . , & Rai - jmakers , M . E . J . ( 2006 ) . A dynamical model of general intelligence : The positive mani - fold of intelligence by mutualism . Psycholog - ical Review , 113 , 842 – 861 . Margolis , H . ( 1987 ) . Patterns , thinking , and cogni - tion : A theory of judgment . Chicago , IL : Uni - versity of Chicago Press . Martindale , C . ( 1995 ) . Creativity and connection - ism . In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 249 – 268 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Martindale , C . ( 1999 ) . Biological bases of creativ - ity . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of cre - ativity ( pp . 137 – 152 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cam - bridge University Press . McGeorge , P . , Crawford , J . R . , & Kelly , S . W . ( 1997 ) . The relationships between psychome - tric intelligence and learning in an explicit and an implicit task . Journal of Experimental Psy - chology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 23 , 239 – 245 . Metcalfe , J . , & Mischel , W . ( 1999 ) . A hot / cool - system analysis of delay of gratiﬁcation : Dynamics of willpower . Psychological Review , 106 , 3 – 19 . Miller , G . A . ( 2003 ) . The cognitive revolution : A historical perspective . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 7 , 141 – 144 . Newell , B . R . , Wong , K . Y . , & Cheung , J . C . H . ( 2009 ) . Think , blink or sleep on it ? The impact of modes of thought on complex decision making . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psy - chology , 62 , 707 – 732 . Nosek , B . A . , Greenwald , A . G . , & Banaji , M . R . ( 2007 ) . The Implicit Association Test at age P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 466 SCOTT BARRY KAUFMAN 7 : A methodological and conceptual review . In J . A . Bargh ( Ed . ) , Social psychology and the unconscious : The automaticity of higher mental processes ( pp . 265 – 292 ) . New York , NY : Psy - chology Press . Pacini , R . , & Epstein , S . ( 1999 ) . The relation of rational and experiential information process - ing styles to personality , basic beliefs , and the ratio - bias phenomenon . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 76 , 972 – 987 . Packard , M . G . , Hirsh , R . , & White , N . M . ( 1989 ) . Differential effects of fornix and cau - date nucleus lesions on two radial maze tasks : Evidence for multiple memory systems . Jour - nal of Neuroscience , 9 , 1465 – 1472 . Payne , J . W . , Samper , A . , Bettman , J . R . , & Luce , M . F . ( 2008 ) . Boundary conditions on uncon - scious thought in complex decision making . Psychological Science , 19 , 1118 – 1123 . Peterson , J . B . , Smith , K . W . , & Carson , S . ( 2002 ) . Openness and extraversion are asso - ciated with reduced latent inhibition : Repli - cation and commentary . Personality and Indi - vidual Differences , 33 , 1137 – 1147 . Phelps , E . A . , O’Connor , K . J . , Cunningham , W . A . , Funayama , E . S . , Gatenby , J . C . , Gore , J . C . , et al . ( 2000 ) . Performance on indirect measures of race evaluation predicts amygdala activation . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 12 , 729 – 738 . Piaget , J . ( 1952 ) . The origins of intelligence in chil - dren . Madison , CT : International Universities Press . Poincar´e , H . ( 1921 ) . The foundations of science ( G . B . Halstead , Trans . ) . New York , NY : Science Press . Poldrack , R . A . , & Packard , M . G . ( 2003 ) . Com - petition among multiple memory systems : Converging evidence from animal and human brain studies . Neuropsychologia , 41 , 245 – 251 . Pretz , J . E . ( 2008 ) . Intuition versus analysis : Strat - egy and experience in complex everyday prob - lem solving . Memory & Cognition , 36 , 554 – 566 . Pretz , J . E . , & Totz , K . S . ( 2007 ) . Measuring indi - vidual differences in affective , heuristic , and holistic intuition . Personality and Individual Differences , 43 , 1247 – 1257 . Pretz , J . E . , Totz , K . S . , & Kaufman , S . B . ( 2010 ) . The effects of mood , cognitive style , and cog - nitive ability on implicit learning . Learning and Individual Differences , 20 , 215 – 219 . Reber , A . S . ( 1989 ) . Implicit learning and tacit knowledge . Journal of Experimental Psychol - ogy : General , 118 , 219 – 235 . Reber , A . S . ( 1993 ) . Implicit learning and tacit knowledge : An essay on the cognitive uncon - scious . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Reber , A . S . , Walkenfeld , F . F . , & Hernstadt , R . ( 1991 ) . Implicit and explicit learning : Individ - ual differences and IQ . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 17 , 888 – 896 . Reber , R . , Ruch - Monachon , M . - A . , & Perrig , W . J . ( 2007 ) . Decomposing intuitive compo - nents in a conceptual problem solving task . Consciousness and Cognition : An International Journal , 16 , 294 – 309 . Reyna , V . F . ( 2004 ) . How people make decisions that involve risk : A dual - processes approach . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 13 , 60 – 66 . Rudman , L . A . , & Ashmore , R . D . ( 2007 ) . Dis - crimination and the Implicit Association Test . Group Processes & Intergroup Relations , 10 , 359 – 372 . Salthouse , T . A . , McGuthry , K . E . , & Hambrick , D . Z . ( 1999 ) . A framework for analyzing and interpreting differential aging patterns : Appli - cation to three measures of implicit learning . Aging , Neuropsychology , and Cognition , 6 , 1 – 18 . Schneider , W . , & Shiffrin , R . M . ( 1977 ) . Con - trolled and automatic human information processing : I . Detection , search , and attention . Psychological Review , 84 , 1 – 66 . Seger , C . A . ( 1994 ) . Implicit learning . Psychologi - cal Bulletin , 115 , 163 – 196 . Simon , H . A . ( 1979 ) . Models of thought . New Haven , CT : Yale University Press . Smith , S . M . , Ward , T . B . , & Finke , R . A . ( 1995 ) . The creative cognition approach . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Spearman , C . ( 1904 ) . “General intelligence , ” objectively determined and measured . Ameri - can Journal of Psychology , 15 , 201 – 293 . Stadler , M . A . , & Frensch , P . A . ( 1997 ) . Handbook of implicit learning . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Stanovich , K . ( 1999 ) . Who is rational ? Studies of individual differences in reasoning . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum Stanovich , K . E . ( 2004 ) . The robot’s rebellion : Find - ing meaning in the age of Darwin . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Stanovich , K . E . ( 2009 ) . Distinguishing the reﬂec - tive , algorithmic , and autonomous minds : Is it time for a tri - process theory . In J . S . B . T . Evans & K . Frankish ( Eds . ) , In two minds : Dual processes and beyond . Oxford , UK : Oxford University Press . P 1 : PHB Trim : 7 in × 10 in Top : 0 . 5 in Gutter : 0 . 875 in CUUS 1280 - 22 cuus 1280 / Sternberg ISBN : 978 0 521 51806 2 February 11 , 2011 17 : 57 INTELLIGENCE AND THE COGNITIVE UNCONSCIOUS 467 Stanovich , K . E . , & West , R . F . ( 1997 ) . Reasoning independently of prior belief and individual differences in actively open - minded thinking . Journal of Educational Psychology , 89 , 342 – 357 . Stanovich , K . E . , & West , R . F . ( 2000 ) . Individ - ual differences in reasoning : Implications for the rationality debate ? Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 23 , 645 – 726 . Stanovich , K . E . , & West , R . F . ( 2002 ) . Individual differences in reasoning : Implications for the rationality debate ? In T . Gilovich , D . Grifﬁn , & D . Kahneman ( Eds . ) , Heuristics and biases : The psychology of intuitive judgment ( pp . 421 – 440 ) . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Sternberg , R . J . ( 1977 ) . Component processes in analogical reasoning . Psychological Review , 84 , 353 – 378 . Sternberg , R . J . , & Davidson , J . E . ( 1995 ) . The nature of insight . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Sternberg , R . J . , & Pretz , J . E . ( 2005 ) . Cognition & intelligence : Identifying the mechanisms of the mind . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Thorsteinson , T . J . , & Withrow , S . ( 2009 ) . Does unconscious thought outperform conscious thought on complex decisions ? A further examination . Judgment and Decision Making , 4 , 235 – 247 . Turke - Browne , N . B . , Junge , J . A . , & Scholl , B . J . ( 2005 ) . The automaticity of visual statistical learning . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 134 , 552 – 564 . Unsworth , N . , & Engle , R . W . ( 2005 ) . Individ - ual differences in working memory capacity and learning : Evidence from the serial reaction time task . Memory & Cognition , 33 , 213 – 220 . van Ravenzwaaij , D . , van der Maas , H . L . , & Wagenmakers , E . J . ( in press ) . Does the name - race implicit association test measure racial prejudice ? Experimental Psychology , doi : 10 . 1027 / 1618 - 3169 / a 000093 . Vartanian , O . ( 2009 ) . Variable attention facili - tates creative problem Psychology of Aesthetics , Creativity , and the Arts , 3 , 57 – 59 . Vartanian , O . , Martindale , C . , & Kwiatkowski , J . ( 2003 ) . Creativity and inductive reasoning : The relationship between divergent think - ing and performance on Wason’s 2 – 4 – 6 task . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 34 , 1370 – 1380 . Vartanian , O . , Martindale , C . , & Kwiatkowski , J . ( 2007 ) . Creative potential , attention , and speed of information processing . Personality and Individual Differences , 43 , 1470 – 1480 . Vartanian , O . , Martindale , C . , & Matthews , J . ( 2009 ) . Divergent thinking ability is related to faster relatedness judgments . Psychology of Aesthetics , Creativity , and the Arts , 3 , 99 – 103 . Wallas ( 1926 ) . The art of thought . New York , NY : Harcourt Brace . Ward , T . B . , Smith , S . M . , & Finke , R . A . ( 1999 ) . Creative cognition . In R . J . Stern - berg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of creativity ( pp . 189 – 212 ) . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Wilson , T . ( 2004 ) . Strangers to ourselves : Discover - ing the adaptive unconscious . Boston , MA : Har - vard University Press . Wilson , T . D . , Lindsey , S . , & Schooler , T . Y . ( 2000 ) . A model of dual attitudes . Psychologi - cal Review , 107 , 101 – 126 . Wilson , T . D . , & Schooler , J . W . ( 1991 ) . Think - ing too much : Introspection can reduce the quality of preferences and decisions . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 60 , 181 – 192 . Woolhouse , L . S . , & Bayne , R . ( 2000 ) . Person - ality and the use of intuition : Individual dif - ferences in strategy and performance on an implicit learning task . European Journal of Per - sonality , 14 , 157 – 169 . Zajonc , R . B . ( 1980 ) . Feeling and thinking : Pref - erences need no inferences . American Psychol - ogist , 35 , 151 – 175 . Zhiyan , T . , & Singer , J . L . ( 1997 ) . Daydreaming styles , emotionality and the Big Five person - ality dimensions . Imagination , Cognition and Personality , 16 , 399 – 414 .