Enhancing Multimodal Interaction Between Performers and Audience Members During Live Music Performances Kouyou Otsu Saitama University , Saitama , Japan otsu @ cv . ics . saitama - u . ac . jp Yoshinori Kobayashi Saitama University , Saitama , Japan yosinori @ hci . ics . saitama - u . ac . jp Jinglong Yuan Saitama University , Saitama , Japan enkeiryuu @ yahoo . com Yoshinori Kuno Saitama University , Saitama , Japan kuno @ cv . ics . saitama - u . ac . jp Hisato Fukuda Saitama University , Saitama , Japan fukuda @ cv . ics . saitama - u . ac . jp Keiichi Yamazaki Saitama University , Saitama , Japan BYI06561 @ nifty . com ABSTRACT Live performance provides a good example of enthusiastic inter - action between people gathered together in a large group and one or more performers . In this research , we focused on elucidating the mechanism of such enthusiastic group interaction ( collective efervescence ) and how technology can contribute to its enhance - ment . We propose a support system for co - experience and physical co - actions among participants to enhance enthusiastic interaction between performers and audiences during live performances . This system focuses on a physical synchronization between the per - former and the audience as the key that generates enthusiastic interaction during a live performance . Also , it supports enhanced bidirectional communication of the performer’s actions and the audience’s cheering behaviors . An experiment in an actual live performance environment in which collective efervescence was already occurring demonstrated that the bidirectional communi - cation and visualization of physical movements in the proposed system contributed to the further unifcation of the group . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Human computer interaction ( HCI ) ; Interaction devices ; ; Collaborative and social computing ; Collaborative and social computing devices . KEYWORDS interaction support system , live music performance , collective ef - fervescence ACM Reference Format : Kouyou Otsu , Jinglong Yuan , Hisato Fukuda , Yoshinori Kobayashi , Yoshinori Kuno , and Keiichi Yamazaki . 2021 . Enhancing Multimodal Interaction Be - tween Performers and Audience Members During Live Music Performances . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Ab - stracts ( CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts ) , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 6 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411763 . 3451584 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . 1 INTRODUCTION Multiparty interaction has special value based on shared experience that cannot be replicated individually . In such multi - party interac - tions , people gather and interact based on their common experience , promoting unifed action as a group with a shared purpose ; in the feld of psychological study , this is called collective efervescence [ 3 ] . Collective efervescence in the real world can be seen in various events involving large groups , such as political rallies and concerts . Social networking systems ( SNS ) such as Twitter and YouTube have become a powerful means to bring about energetic emotional con - nections among masses of people with specifc values in the virtual environment [ 13 , 26 ] . Such collective efervescence has a strong efect on motivation , especially in situations where a huge group of people has the ability to interact . Therefore , technological support to promote or guide it would open doors to many possibilities , such as contributing to the realization of valuable interactions and the prevention of conficts within various large groups , such as at live events , political rallies , etc . One example where collective efervescence directly promotes the enhancement of user experience can be seen in live music per - formance . The number of live concerts where people can interact with actual performers has increased worldwide [ 8 , 19 ] . This in - crease indicates that many audience members think it important to feel the empathy gained by meeting a real performer and enjoying music with him / her and friends who are fans supporting the same performer . Not only on - site support but interaction through com - ments on live streaming , such as on YouTube Live , are avenues that contribute to collective efervescence among participants of live performances [ 13 , 24 ] . However , how collective efervescence is formed online difers from how it can occur in on - site interactions and does not provide the same participatory experience as in the local environment [ 12 , 27 ] . In a live performance by a pop musician , the audience dances , sings , and claps along with the performance , interacting with the performer and other audience members . Some fans also use cheering items , such as light sticks , to express their belonging and support for a group of performers . The common ex - perience among on - site participants during a live performance and the imitation and synchronization of physical actions that provoke it enhances a sense of solidarity among participants and promotes enthusiastic interaction [ 16 , 23 ] . Even for remote participants in live streaming environments , promoting the synchronization of CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan participants with each other’s actions , as with those at the site , can © 2021 Association for Computing Machinery . enhance the participation of diverse people by breaking down the ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 8095 - 9 / 21 / 05 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411763 . 3451584 CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Kouyou Otsu et al . barriers of distance and making everyone feel like a part of the event . In this study , we focus on live music performances as a good example of many people gathering and causing a collective energy and aim to realize a framework for promoting enthusiastic interac - tion by providing a common support system that involves “physical synchronization” for people in both remote and local environments . The key motivation of this framework is to provide an equivalent system of participation in both environments . By enhancing the experience at the site and providing the same sense of participation for those online , the framework aims to break down barriers in addition to enhancing the value of each individual’s experience . As a technology to support live performance , some consumer products , such as Xirobands [ 30 ] and GlowMotion [ 17 ] , attempt to realize integrated performance using light - emitting devices through wireless control . As mentioned earlier , cheering items , such as light sticks , can provide active engagement with the other participants . However , the automated staging by the event organizer included in these systems impairs the opportunity for the audience to par - ticipate voluntarily . Similarly , there are proposals for methods to collect input from the audience [ 1 , 6 ] , refect this in the performance , and integrate the movements of a performer or the audience as CG efects [ 4 , 5 , 15 , 22 , 25 ] . However , these attempts do not focus on improving the interaction between the audience and the performer and supporting co - experience or co - action . Many studies have been conducted in the context of telecommu - nication support to enhance the connection between individuals by supporting the cognition of others through sensory feedback such as haptics [ 2 , 10 , 11 , 18 ] . Such sensory - sharing technology can be applied to support co - experience and co - activity that brings about collective efervescence , as it facilitates the recognition of the other person’s presence and experience and may also be used to provide a common experience between the local and remote en - vironments . In the context of game entertainment , several attempts have been made to support user co - experience - based interaction by incorporating the psychological concept of mirroring [ 9 , 14 , 20 , 21 ] . It has also been suggested that such a framework for inducing phys - ically synchronized experiences can enhance intimacy in personal communication . In this paper , we clarify whether using our interactive devices to support bidirectional communication would be able to enhance collective efervescence and induce new behaviors of participants . We frst focus on collective efervescence at the local site of live performances as an initial study and we examined whether the proposed system could enhance this interaction system , which has already formed a collective energy . The feld experiments in this study were conducted before the COVID - 19 pandemic , and the experiments were conducted with attention to the safety of the participants . 2 LIVE PERFORMANCE SUPPORTING SYSTEM 2 . 1 SYSTEM OVERVIEW Fig . 1 shows an overview of the proposed system . This system aims to improve the sense of unity and the experience value in multi - party interaction by supporting an information transfer between the Figure 1 : Overview of the proposed system . performer and audience that is inherent in a live performance . As previously mentioned , one of the goals of this research is to provide a support framework that allows both local and remote audiences to feel a common participation experience . This study focused on the cheering item ( a light stick device ) , which is often used by audiences in live performances . We constructed a system that enables the audience to experience a performer’s actions as vibration and light from the device ; an audience member can also communicate their support more explicitly for a performer and others by physically swinging the device . In this system , the physical movement and the performer’s singing voice are acquired respectively from a wireless accelerometer and microphone attached to the performer’s costume . The information is fed back to the audience member’s device as vibration and lighting in real time . The system also obtains the swinging of the device by the audience member from the built - in accelerometer and feeds it back to the performer’s costume as a lighted element . In this paper , we have developed a prototype of the proposed system and conducted an evaluation experiment . In the following , we describe the implementation of the prototype system . 2 . 2 HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION To implement the prototype system , we developed a dedicated user device , see Fig . 2 ( left ) , by modifying a consumer light stick ( King Blade X10 III , Ruifan Ltd . ) that is often used in live music performances . The user device consists of an input device ( built - in accelerometer ) , feedback devices ( RGB - full - color LED and vibration motor ) , and a microcontroller ( TWE - Lite , Mono - Wireless Inc . ) that supports Zigbee - based 2 . 4GHz wireless communication . The user device is in constant communication with an external control PC . The external control PC manages the built - in feedback module on user devices in real time via wireless communication . It can also acquire data from the built - in accelerometer on user devices in real time . Through this user device , the system can communicate the performer’s physical activity to the user and obtain information about the user’s physical activity . Fig . 2 ( right ) shows the setting of the performer’s side of the pro - totype system . This consists of a wireless wristband - type accelera - tion sensor that captures the physical movements of the performer’s actions and an electrically lighted stage costume that feeds back the Enhancing Multimodal Interaction Between Performers and Audience Members During Live Music Performances CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Figure 2 : The user device ( left ) and the performer’s setting ( right ) for the prototype system intensity of the audience’s swinging actions . A small accelerometer tag ( TWE - Lite 2525A , Mono - Wireless Inc . ) that supports 2 . 4GHz wireless communication was used as a sensor to acquire the per - former’s actions . Through this sensor , it is possible to acquire in - formation on the performer’s arm swing in real time at a speed of about 30 Hz . The performer’s illuminated costume is composed of about 200 LEDs , and it is possible to control the color and lighting state by wireless communication in real time . 2 . 3 SOFTWARE IMPLEMENTATION The activity information of the performer and the audience ob - tained through the devices mentioned in the previous section are transmitted wirelessly to the control PC . The control PC manages the communication between the performer and the audience . The software implemented on the PC is responsible for converting the modality of the information from the performer to the audience and aggregating the audience members’ activity information . The software acquires the average value of the acceleration variations obtained from the accelerometer worn by the performer and the audio intensity of the microphone in real time and transmits control commands containing the converted vibration motor and emission intensity information to up to 100 user devices in real time . In the data conversion process , the magnitudes of the two types of in - formation acquired from the performer are rescaled ( to a range of 0 – 255 ) . These rescaled values are set as the intensity of vibration and luminescence transmitted to the audience member devices . The acceleration data transmitted from all the user devices are also sequentially acquired . The total value acquired from each au - dience member’s acceleration data is then used as the intensity of the audience’s cheering action at that moment . The intensity value is utilized as a reference value to determine the lighting intensity of the performer’s costume and the number of LEDs to be lit . In this way , the light feedback to the performer’s costume is provided according to the audience’s physical action obtained from the audi - ence member’s devices . The feedback time between the performer’s performance and the audience’s support was designed to be within a maximum of one second in the two experimental environments described below . 3 EXPERIMENT UNDER A CONTROLLED LIVE PERFORMANCE SITUATION We frst experimented with a form of live music performance with some restrictions , including two types of tests to evaluate the ef - fectiveness of vibration feedback to the audience synchronized Figure 3 : Experiment scene ( above ) and experimental setup ( below ) with the performer’s action and the usefulness of the interactive information transmission . The experiment was conducted on Jan - uary 10 , 2018 , in a university hall ; Fig . 3 ( above ) shows the scene of the experiment . For the experiments , a temporary stage and audience seats were prepared , and an environment that resembles an actual live music concert was built . Five students belonging to a dance club assisted the experiment as performers . Also , 24 students participated as audience members . Of the 24 participants , 19 had previously attended a live performance , and 13 of them attended at least one a year . In the experiments , the 24 participants were divided into three groups of eight participants each . In the experi - ment , three of the fve performers were each individually assigned to one of the groups . Therefore , the 24 participants were instructed to specifcally support the performer to which they were assigned ( i . e . , they were “fans” of that particular entertainer ) . Fig . 3 ( below ) shows the setting of the venue and how the audience was divided based on their assigned performer to support . 3 . 1 Experiment 1 : Survey of the validity of vibration feedback synchronized with the performer’s actions In this experiment , we evaluated the efectiveness of vibration feedback in the devices linked to the performers’ movements in four CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Kouyou Otsu et al . Table 1 : The order of the songs and feedback patterns from Experiment 1 No . Song Feedback pattern 1 Song A Synchronized with the performer’s actions 2 Song B Constant rhythm 3 Song A Constant rhythm 4 Song B Synchronized with the performer’s actions Table 2 : Items in the questionnaire Question No . Question Q - 1 Did you feel more immersed by using the system ? Q - 2 Were you able to concentrate on the live music performance ? Q - 3 Did you feel a sense of unity with the assigned performer ? Q - 4 Did you feel a sense of unity with other audience members ? Q - 5 Did you feel a sense of unity with audience members in your assigned group ? Figure 4 : Mean scores of the questionnaire items and p - values of Experiment 1 ( left ) and Experiment 2 ( right ) . separate trials ( i . e . , four diferent songs with diferent conditions ) . The order of the performances and the type of feedback are shown in Table 1 . The audience members experienced two vibration patterns , one linked to the performer’s performance and the other vibrating at a constant rhythm regardless of the performer’s motions . They then completed a questionnaire that used a 7 - point evaluation scale ( 1 : completely disagree , 7 : completely agree ) , as shown in Table 2 . For the questionnaire to the participants , we translated the concept of collective efervescence and asked questions about enthusiasm , concentration , and sense of unity with others , which may be factors in forming it in live performance . Because this experiment was designed to evaluate the difer - ences in the audience’s impressions due to the diferences in the vibration patterns , the system was operated only for the unidi - rectional transmission of information from the performers to the audience ( without audience feedback to the performers’ illumina - tion costumes ) . Fig . 4 ( left ) shows the mean scores and p - values derived from Mann – Whitney U tests for each item from the ques - tionnaire . As shown in the result for Q - 3 , the vibration linked to the performer’s body movement made a signifcant diference in the audience member feeling a better sense of unity with the performer . 3 . 2 Experiment 2 . Survey of the validity of bidirectional communication support and its efectiveness This experiment was conducted following Experiment 1 . In this ex - periment , the same song was sung by the performer twice , and the participants experienced two diferent systems in each . In the frst trial , the system was operated as a unidirectional system that only provided the audience with vibration and light feedback from the performers ( i . e . , the electric costumes were lit at a constant bright - ness ) . The second trial was operated as a bidirectional system that supported bidirectional communication between the performers and the audience in which the audience member’s support altered the illumination of the costumes ( proposed method ) . After the ex - periment , the questionnaire shown in Table 2 was completed again . Fig . 4 ( right ) shows the mean scores and the p - values derived from the Mann – Whitney U tests for each item from the questionnaire . Signifcant diferences were observed in all the questions between the unidirectional and bidirectional uses of the system . The greatest increases were seen for Q - 4 and Q - 5 . The results showed that the bidirectional information transmission contributed more to enhanc - ing the connection between the performers and audience and the sense of unity among the audience than the unidirectional mode . Enhancing Multimodal Interaction Between Performers and Audience Members During Live Music Performances CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan Figure 5 : Experiment scene ( left ) and Mean scores from the questionnaire ( right ) . 4 EVALUATION UNDER A REALISTIC LIVE PERFORMANCE SITUATION The initial two experiments constituted a basic verifcation of the system with students as audience members . A more thorough in - vestigation of the system’s efectiveness required verifcation with professional performers and actual fans in a realistic setting . There - fore , we evaluated the system with professional performers and their fans in a way that was faithful to an actual live music per - formance . The evaluation was conducted on January 16 , 2019 , at a university hall equipped with a stage and sound equipment . A total of 50 members of the performers’ fan club were recruited via a website as participants in the evaluation . Five of the seven performers were each individually assigned to 50 participants as in the previous experiments . The audience’s seating position was not specifed , but they were informed of the performer assigned to them in advance . In this evaluation , the participants experienced two types of devices : a normal light stick ( without enhancement ) and our proposed system , which supported the vibration feedback synchronized with the performers’ actions and the lighting feed - back to each assigned performer’s illuminated costume based on the intensity of the swinging action of the device . After the event , the participants were asked to complete the items Q - 1 to Q - 4 of the questionnaire shown in Table 2 from the viewpoint of “How did you feel the proposed system compared to using the normal light stick ? ” There were 46 valid responses ( 40 males and 6 females , aged 16 – 57 , mean age of 30 . 4 ) . The average scores for the questionnaire are shown in Fig . 5 ( right ) . As in the previous preliminary experiments , the audience reported that our proposed system contributed to a sense of unity when asked to compare it to the use of ordinary light sticks . 5 DISCUSSION From the experiments and evaluation , it was shown that the trans - mission of a performer’s physical action via the vibration of a wear - able device contributed to a sense of unity between the performer and the audience . The feedback from other people’s activities in a group experience is considered to have a secondary efect of strengthening the empathic experience among the audience , as well as making the presence of others ( performers ) felt strongly , as in some attempts that focus on the dialogue between individuals in previous research [ 2 , 10 , 11 , 18 ] . The sharing of physical activities in a group experience provides a powerful interface for connecting with content and the infuencers sharing it . It could also have useful value as a tool for creating co - experiences . From the comparison of the unidirectional and bidirectional sys - tems , it was found that the refection of the audience’s cheering behavior on the illuminated costumes contributed to the enhance - ment of the sense of unity among the audience . In the proposed system , the support focused on audience members’ common physi - cal behavior , such as swinging cheering items . This accelerated the sharing of a sense of purpose in the group and promoted the unifca - tion of behavior . This kind of framework for supporting unifcation in groups is also applicable to supporting other cases where collec - tive efervescence is observed , such as at sporting events . Moreover , collective co - actions involving physical activity , such as toasting and applauding at receptions , are events that make individuals perceive that they are there as part of a group . The framework of afording physical co - actions has the potential to be applied as a means of involving various individuals in a wide variety of group settings with diverse group membership . In addition , a unique feature of our system is the use of cheering items as user devices . In the context of live entertainment , there have been several proposals involving the smartphones of audience members [ 28 , 29 ] , but directing the audience’s attention to a tool that is not part of the existing live performance scheme interferes with the experience value and concentration . In this system , a cheering item that was already included in interaction schemes to express one’s support was used as a device to provide feedback and assistance to the audience members and improve their experience and participation . Feedback to physical devices used specifcally in group interaction and enhancing their functions can enhance the sense of immersion in the content and provide a means for active self - expression and recognition of the other person’s state in various group communications . Although in this paper we have focused our investigation on the system’s contribution to collective efervescence in a local live performance environment , the proposed method can extend easily to support remote participants by transmitting over the Internet . The extension of the system addresses the scalability problem asso - ciated with the capacity of the communication system regarding a local venue and could facilitate the contribution of diverse people to the collective energy . This would help remove local and remote barriers with a schema that involves the same physical movement as that found in the local environment . The feedback to the physical user device and the mechanism of afording physical movements that are encapsulated in our system can be used to extend existing systems of interaction between participants in remote live stream - ing that are currently limited to interacting through comments . Furthermore , the incorporation of a framework that contributes to the realization of enthusiastic on - site interaction into the support of remote participants , where the presence of others is difcult to sense due to the constraints of the experience modalities , may CHI ’21 Extended Abstracts , May 08 – 13 , 2021 , Yokohama , Japan contribute to the promotion of a sense of participation more than in the local environment . 6 CONCLUSION In this study , we focused on the feld of live performance as a place where a large number of people gather and interact with each other and proposed a support system for co - experience and physical co - actions among participants to enhance enthusiastic interaction between performers and audiences during live performances . From experiments and an evaluation in the form of live performances , we found that the interactive communication supports of physical actions contributed to the mutual integration of the performer and the audience . In the future , we plan to study how such a framework afects the sense of participation , presence , and coexistence with other audiences for participants in remote environments . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by JSPS Topic - Setting Program to Ad - vance Cutting - Edge Humanities and Social Sciences Research Grant Number JPJS00117942693 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Louise Barkhuus and Tobias Jørgensen . 2008 . Engaging the Crowd : Studies of Audience - Performer Interaction . In CHI’08 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Florence , Italy ) ( CHI EA ’08 ) . Association for Comput - ing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2925 - 2930 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1358628 . 1358785 [ 2 ] Scott Brave , Hiroshi Ishii , and Andrew Dahley . 1998 . Tangible Interfaces for Remote Collaboration and Communication . In Proceedings of the 1998 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( Seattle , Washington , USA ) ( CSCW ’98 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 169 - 178 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 289444 . 289491 [ 3 ] Emile Durkheim . 1912 . The elementary forms of the religious life . University of Alabama Press . [ 4 ] Gy¨orgy Fazekas , Mathieu Barthet , and Mark B . Sandler . 2014 . Novel Methods in Facilitating Audience and Performer Interaction Using the Mood Conductor Framework . In Sound , Music , and Motion , Mitsuko Aramaki , Olivier Derrien , Richard Kronland - Martinet , and Sølvi Ystad ( Eds . ) . Springer International Pub - lishing , Cham , 122 – 147 . [ 5 ] M . Feldmeier and J . A . Paradiso . 2007 . An Interactive Music Environment for Large Groups with Giveaway Wireless Motion Sensors . Computer Music Journal 31 , 1 ( 2007 ) , 50 – 67 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1162 / comj . 2007 . 31 . 1 . 50 [ 6 ] Jason Freeman . 2005 . Large audience participation , technology , and orchestral performance . In Proceedings of the 2005 International Computer Music Confer - ence . 757 – 760 . [ 7 ] Jason Freeman and Mark Godfrey . 2008 . Real - time Notation , and Audience Partic - ipation in Flock . In Proceedings of the International Computer Music Conference ( ICMC ’08 ) . [ 8 ] Ifpi . 2019 . global music report 2019 . https : / / www . ifpi . org / wp - content / uploads / 2020 / 07 / Global _ Music _ Report - the _ Industry _ in _ 2019 - en . pdf [ 9 ] Katherine Isbister . 2012 . How to Stop Being a Buzzkill : Designing Yamove ! , A Mobile Tech Mash - up to Truly Augment Social Play . In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services Companion ( San Francisco , California , USA ) ( MobileHCI ’12 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 - 4 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2371664 . 2371666 [ 10 ] Joseph ’Jofsh’ Kaye and Liz Goulding . 2004 . Intimate Objects . In Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Designing Interactive Systems : Processes , Practices , Meth - ods , and Techniques ( Cambridge , MA , USA ) ( DIS ’04 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 341 - 344 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1013115 . 1013175 [ 11 ] Kaiko Kuwamura , Kurima Sakai , Takashi Minato , Shuichi Nishio , and Hiroshi Ishiguro . 2013 . Hugvie : A medium that fosters love . Proceedings - IEEE Inter - national Workshop on Robot and Human Interactive Communication , 70 – 75 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ROMAN . 2013 . 6628533 [ 12 ] Zhicong Lu , Haijun Xia , Seongkook Heo , and Daniel Wigdor . 2018 . You Watch , You Give , and You Engage : A Study of Live Streaming Practices in China . In Pro - ceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Kouyou Otsu et al . ( Montreal QC , Canada ) ( CHI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 - 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174040 [ 13 ] Mufan Luo , Tifany W . Hsu , Joon Sung Park , and Jefrey T . Hancock . 2020 . Emo - tional Amplifcation During Live - Streaming : Evidence from Comments During and After News Events . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 4 , CSCW1 , Article 047 ( May 2020 ) , 19 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3392853 [ 14 ] Elena M´arquez Segura , Annika Waern , Jin Moen , and Carolina Johansson . 2013 . The Design Space of Body Games : Technological , Physical , and Social Design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Paris , France ) ( CHI ’13 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 3365 - 3374 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2466461 [ 15 ] Dan Maynes - Aminzade , Randy Pausch , and Steve Seitz . 2002 . Techniques for Interactive Audience Participation . In Proceedings of the 4th IEEE International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces ( ICMI ’02 ) . IEEE Computer Society , USA , 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ICMI . 2002 . 1166962 [ 16 ] Heath McDonald and Adam J . Karg . 2014 . Managing co - creation in professional sports : The antecedents and consequences of ritualized spectator behavior . Sport Management Review 17 , 3 ( 2014 ) , 292 – 309 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . smr . 2013 . 07 . 004 [ 17 ] Glow Motion . 2021 . GlowMotion Technologies . https : / / www . glowmotiontechnologies . com / [ 18 ] Hideyuki Nakanishi , Kazuaki Tanaka , Ryoji Kato , Xing Geng , and Naomi Ya - mashita . 2017 . Robotic Table and Bench Enhance Mirror Type Social Telepresence . In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( Edin - burgh , United Kingdom ) ( DIS ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 779 - 790 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3064663 . 3064709 [ 19 ] Pwc . 2020 . global entertainment & media outlook 2020 - 2024 . [ 20 ] Raquel Robinson , Zachary Rubin , Elena M´arquez Segura , and Katherine Is - bister . 2017 . All the Feels : Designing a Tool That Reveals Streamers’ Biomet - rics to Spectators . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on the Foundations of Digital Games ( Hyannis , Massachusetts ) ( FDG ’17 ) . Asso - ciation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 36 , 6 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3102071 . 3102103 [ 21 ] Raquel Breejon Robinson , Elizabeth Reid , James Collin Fey , Ansgar E . Depping , Katherine Isbister , and Regan L . Mandryk . 2020 . Designing and Evaluating ’In the Same Boat’ , A Game of Embodied Synchronization for Enhancing Social Play . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI , USA ) ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 - 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376433 [ 22 ] Gerard Roma , Anna Xamb´o , and Jason Freeman . 2017 . Handwaving : Gesture Recognition for Participatory Mobile Music . In Proceedings of the 12th Inter - national Audio Mostly Conference on Augmented and Participatory Sound and Music Experiences ( London , United Kingdom ) ( AM ’17 ) . Association for Comput - ing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 26 , 7 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3123514 . 3123538 [ 23 ] Sebastian Schuler . 2017 . Aesthetics of Immersion : Collective Efervescence , Bodily Synchronization and the Sensory Navigation of the Sacred : A Connective Concept . 367 – 388 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / 9783110461015 - 016 [ 24 ] Joseph Seering , Robert Kraut , and Laura Dabbish . 2017 . Shaping Pro and Anti - Social Behavior on Twitch Through Moderation and Example - Setting . In Pro - ceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( Portland , Oregon , USA ) ( CSCW ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 111 - 125 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998181 . 2998277 [ 25 ] Masahito Shiba , Asako Soga , and Jonah Salz . 2010 . A CG Projection Method of Sup - porting to Stage Live Performances . In Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGGRAPH Conference on Virtual - Reality Continuum and Its Applications in Industry ( Seoul , South Korea ) ( VRCAI ’10 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 67 - 70 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1900179 . 1900192 [ 26 ] Cristian Vaccari , Andrew Chadwick , and Ben O’Loughlin . 2015 . Dual Screening the Political : Media Events , Social Media , and Citizen Engagement . Journal of Communication 65 , 6 ( 10 2015 ) , 1041 – 1061 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / jcom . 12187 [ 27 ] Femke Vandenberg , Michael Berghman , and Julian Schaap . 2020 . The ’lonely raver’ : music livestreams during COVID - 19 as a hotline to collective conscious - ness ? European Societies ( 09 2020 ) , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14616696 . 2020 . 1818271 [ 28 ] Nathan Weitzner , Jason Freeman , Yan - Ling Chen , and Stephen Garrett . 2013 . massMobile : towards a fexible framework for large - scale participatory col - laborations in live performances . Organised Sound 18 , 1 ( 2013 ) , 30 - 42 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S1355771812000222 [ 29 ] Yongmeng Wu , Leshao Zhang , Nick Bryan - Kinns , and Mathieu Barthet . 2017 . Open Symphony : Creative Participation for Audiences of Live Music Perfor - mances . IEEE MultiMedia 24 , 1 ( Jan . 2017 ) , 48 - 62 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MMUL . 2017 . 19 [ 30 ] Xylobands . 2021 . Xylobands - Bringing Light to Life . http : / / xylobands . com /