Review Charming neighborhoods on the cell surface : Plasma membrane microdomains regulate receptor tyrosine kinase signaling Ralph Christian Delos Santos , Camilo Garay , Costin N . Antonescu ⁎ Department of Chemistry and Biology , Ryerson University , 350 Victoria Street , Toronto , Ontario M5B 2K3 , Canada Graduate Program in Molecular Science , Ryerson University , 350 Victoria Street , Toronto , Ontario M5B 2K3 , Canada a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 18 May 2015 Accepted 7 July 2015 Available online 9 July2015 Keywords : Receptor signaling Spatial organization Lipid rafts Clathrin Tetraspanin Dorsal ruf ﬂ e Signal transduction Receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTK ) are an important family of growth factor and hormone receptors that regulate many aspects of cellular physiology . Ligand binding by RTKs at the plasma membrane elicits activation of many signaling intermediates . The spatial and temporal regulation of RTK signaling within cells is an important determinant of receptor signaling outcome . In particular , the compartmentalization of the plasma membrane intoanumberofmicrodomainsallowscontext - speci ﬁ ccontrolofRTKsignaling . IndeedvariousRTKsarerecruited to and enriched within speci ﬁ c plasma membrane microdomains under various conditions , including lipid - ordereddomains such as caveolae and lipidrafts , clathrin - coated structures , tetraspanin - enrichedmicrodomains , and actin - dependent protrusive membrane microdomains such as dorsal ruf ﬂ es and invadosomes . We examine the evidence for control of RTK signaling by each of these plasma membrane microdomains , as well as molecular mechanisms for how this spatial organization controls receptor signaling . © 2015 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Contents 1 . Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1964 2 . Lipid - ordered microdomains and lipid rafts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1965 2 . 1 . Recruitment and regulation of RTKs in caveolae . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1965 2 . 1 . 1 . Caveolae enhance IR signaling via caveolin binding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1966 2 . 1 . 2 . Caveolins also enhance signaling of EphR , TrkA and other RTKs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1966 2 . 1 . 3 . Caveolins negatively regulate EGFR signaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1966 2 . 2 . Localization and regulation of RTKs within non - caveolar rafts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1967 2 . 3 . Other lipid - dependent signaling assemblies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1967 3 . Plasma membrane clathrin microdomains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1967 3 . 1 . Many early ligand - stimulated RTK signaling events occur during receptor residence within CCPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1967 3 . 2 . PM clathrin structures are unique microenvironments for lipid regulation and are enriched in proteins with signal transduction capabilities . . . 1968 3 . 3 . Clathrin , but not receptor endocytosis , is required for certain aspects of RTK signaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1968 4 . Tetraspanin - enriched microdomains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1968 4 . 1 . Control of RTK signaling by interactions with the tetraspanin web . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1969 4 . 1 . 1 . Negative regulation of RTK signaling by CD82 and other tetraspanins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1969 4 . 1 . 2 . Enhancement of RTK signaling by CD151 and other tetraspanins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1969 4 . 2 . Mechanisms of control of RTK signaling by the tetraspanin web and TEMs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1970 5 . Actin - dependent protrusive membrane microdomains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1970 5 . 1 . Dorsal Ruf ﬂ e ( DR ) formation is controlled by RTKs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1971 5 . 2 . Dorsal ruf ﬂ es regulate certain aspects of RTK signaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1971 5 . 2 . 1 . RTK signaling intermediates are enriched within DRs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1971 5 . 2 . 2 . Regulation of RTK signaling by DRs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1972 5 . 3 . Regulation of RTK signaling in invadosomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1972 6 . Other microdomains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1972 Cellular Signalling 27 ( 2015 ) 1963 – 1976 ⁎ Corresponding author at : Department of Chemistry and Biology , Ryerson University , 350 Victoria Street , Toronto , Ontario M5B 2K3 , Canada . E - mail address : cantonescu @ ryerson . ca ( C . N . Antonescu ) . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cellsig . 2015 . 07 . 004 0898 - 6568 / © 2015 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Cellular Signalling journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / cellsig 6 . 1 . Primary cilia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1972 6 . 2 . Galectin - based lattices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1973 7 . Conclusions and future perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1973 Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1974 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1974 1 . Introduction Receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) are a family of transmembrane pro - teins that control numerous cellular functions including proliferation , dif - ferentiation , migration , adhesion , and metabolism and as such are critical regulators of development and tissue homeostasis . Furthermore , most human tumors have a disruption of at least one RTK , either as a result of mutation , genomic ampli ﬁ cation or other alteration ; these disruptions contribute to tumor growth and metastasis . With few exceptions , RTK binding to speci ﬁ c hormone ligands via their exofacial domains controls their intrinsic cytosolic kinase activity , in some cases as a result of en - hanced receptor dimerization . Autophosphorylation of RTKs as well as thephosphorylationof secondarysignalingmolecules allows recruitment of cytosolic proteins that bind motifs containing phosphotyrosine resi - dues , including phosphotyrosine binding ( PTB ) and Src - homology 2 ( SH2 ) domains [ 1 ] . These proteins then engage a number of additional secondary signals which facilitate the activation of many signal transduc - tion pathways , including Ras - MAPK , phosphatidylinositol - 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) - Akt - mTOR , phospholipase C ( PLC ) , JAK - STAT , and Rho - family GTPases , thus allowing RTKs to control various aspects of cell physiology ( Fig . 1 ) [ 2 ] . In many cases , ligand binding by RTKs also enhances receptor inter - nalization , which can either lead to receptor degradation in the lyso - some , receptor signaling from within endosomal compartment ( s ) or the nucleus , or eventual recycling of the receptor to the plasma mem - brane ( reviewed by [ 3 ] ) . The internalization of many RTKs occurs through clathrin - mediated endocytosis , asdemonstrated for the epider - mal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor ( EGFR ) [ 4 ] , MET [ 5 ] , the Insulin ( IR ) and IGF - 1 ( IGF1R ) receptors [ 6 , 7 ] , RET [ 8 ] and several others ; however , clathrin - independent endocytosis of EGFR and other RTKs also occurs under some conditions , such as through formation of dorsal ruf ﬂ es or lipid - dependent pathways ( reviewed by [ 3 ] ) . The compartmentaliza - tion of RTKs into plasma membrane versus endosomes can control the signaling output of the receptor [ 9 – 14 ] , although this may be at least in part cell - context speci ﬁ c , as some studies have reported no effect on signaling by perturbation of receptor internalization to endosomes [ 15 , 16 ] . These studies highlight the importance of signaling by RTKs local - ized within the plasma membrane . It has become clear that the plasma membrane is not a uniform membrane compartment ; instead , it is highly heterogeneous , from the nano - to micro - scale and beyond , and is thus comprised of many dis - tinct domains that for the sake of simplicity we will henceforth collec - tively refer to as plasma membrane microdomains ( PM μ Ds ) . These membrane microdomains include those de ﬁ ned by lipids ( e . g . lipid rafts , glycosynapses ) , microdomains de ﬁ ned by protein scaffolds ( e . g . by clathrin or tetraspanins ) and larger microdomains de ﬁ ned by inter - action with the cytoskeleton . Here , we ﬁ rst explore the general mecha - nisms by which PM μ Ds may impact RTK signaling , and then examine the regulation of speci ﬁ c RTKs by various PM μ Ds . In general terms , there are several possible mechanisms by which recruitment of RTKs to PM μ Ds may control their function , as follows : ( i ) Clustering of RTKs within PM μ Ds . Certain RTKs such as EGFR exhibit trans - phosphorylation of unliganded receptors by nearby ligand - bound receptors [ 17 – 19 ] , a phenomenon which depends on EGFR density within the membrane [ 17 ] . As such , increasing the local concentration of an RTK within a PM μ D may facilitate trans - phosphorylation of nearby receptors , whether the latter are ligand - bound or not . Indeed stimulation with low concentra - tions of EGF elicits only partial phosphorylation of the comple - ment of cytosolic tyrosine residues in each individual ligand - bound EGFR , while ef ﬁ cient multi - phosphorylation of each recep - tor occurred preferentially at higher EGF concentrations [ 20 ] . This suggests that ligand binding by an individual receptor or receptor dimer is insuf ﬁ cient to effect phosphorylation of a receptor ' s en - tire complement of tyrosine residues . Instead , higher order struc - tures formed by RTKs [ 21 ] , such as clustering of receptors within PM μ Ds , may be required to enhance the repertoire of phosphory - lated tyrosine residues within RTKs upon ligand binding . Consis - tent with this , EphA2 receptors bind to soluble Ephrin ligands but do not elicit robust signaling unless receptors are cross - linked with antibodies [ 22 ] or signal in a juxtacrine manner [ 23 ] . These Fig . 1 . Receptor tyrosine kinase signaling pathways control cell physiology . Shown is a diagramdepicting a summaryof some of thecommon signal transduction pathwaysacti - vated by receptor tyrosine kinases . With few exceptions , ligand binding induces receptor phosphorylation , whichleadstothebindingandrecruitmentofsignalingadaptorproteins harboringphosphotyrosinebinding ( PTB ) or Srchomology2 ( SH2 ) domains . Whilesome receptor - speci ﬁ c variations exits , RTKs can activate the following pathways : ( i ) Janus Kinase ( JAK ) , which phosphorylates Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription ( STAT ) family proteins , ( ii ) son - of - sevenless ( SOS ) , which controls the activation of Ras and Raf GTPases , thus activating the mitogen activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) pathway , ( iii ) phospholipase C γ , which hydrolyses phosphatidylinositol - ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate ( PIP2 ) toproduceinositoltrisphosphate ( IP3 ) anddiacylglycerol ( DAG ) , whichinturncon - trolactivationofcertainisoformsofproteinkinaseC ( PKC ) , ( iv ) phosphatidylinositol - 3 - ki - nase ( PI3K ) , whichcatalyzesformationofphosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( PIP3 ) , which controls the activation of Akt , thus leading to activation of other signals such as mTOR , ( v ) Rho - family GTPases including Cdc42 , Rho , Rac and TC10 , which together with other proteins such as Neuronal Wiskott – Aldrich Syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) , co ﬁ lin andWASP - familyverprolin - homologousprotein ( WAVE ) controlthedynamicremodeling of the actincytoskeleton . Together , these signalingpathways combine andcross - regulate to effect control of cellular physiology . 1964 R . C . Delos Santos et al . / Cellular Signalling 27 ( 2015 ) 1963 – 1976 studies show that clustering of RTKs , as would occur in given PM μ D , may be required to promote speci ﬁ c signaling outcomes . ( ii ) Concentration of signaling intermediates within PM μ Ds . As we de - scribe for speci ﬁ c microdomains below , many PM μ Ds have high rel - ative local concentration of speci ﬁ c signal transduction proteins and lipids . This can in turn impact RTK signaling in at least two general ways : by enhancing the phosphorylation of speci ﬁ c tyrosine resi - dues on the receptor or signal intermediates ( e . g . by non - receptor tyrosine kinases ) , or by altering the protein – protein interactions of signaling proteins . While receptor tyrosine kinases largely undergo auto - phosphorylation on multiple tyrosine residues , non - receptor tyro - sinekinasessuchasc - Srcalsoenhancetherepertoireofphosphorylat - ed tyrosines on each RTK or on associated signaling proteins . Src - family kinases ( SFKs ) thus contribute to the phosphorylation of many RTKs and their downstream signaling intermediates [ 24 ] . As we will discuss below , speci ﬁ c SFKs are recruited to several PM μ Ds , suggesting local control of RTK signaling therein . Similarly , some protein – protein interactions involved in the regula - tion of signal transduction are of relatively low af ﬁ nity and / or may be competitive with other interactions . Such interactions may only or preferentially occur upon localization of both binding partners to a particular microdomain , allowing ef ﬁ cient protein – protein in - teraction to occur on the basis of coincidence detection . Further , en - richment of speci ﬁ c lipids within PM μ Ds also underlies spatially restricted control of signal transduction . As we will discuss for each PM μ D in turn , one of the general features ofmicrodomainsthatareenrichedinRTKsisthattheseoftenalsore - cruit and enrich integrins . Integrins are heterodimers comprised of one of 18 α - and one of 8 β - subunits . Speci ﬁ c integrin dimers medi - ate interaction with the extracellular matrix . Integrins also regulate the activation of numerous intracellular signaling events , such as focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) , integrin - linked kinase ( ILK ) , Src , PI3K - Akt , andRhofamilyGTPases [ 25 ] . Assuch , integrinsignalinghassub - stantial overlap with the signals typically activated by RTKs . There are numerous examples of integrin association with RTKs , including that of α 5 β 1 with vascular endothelial growth factor receptor ( VEGFR ) [ 26 ] or EGFR / ErbB3 [ 27 ] , both of which enhance activation of PI3K - Akt signaling , reviewed by [ 25 ] . While the nature of the in - teraction of integrins with RTKs is complex and sometimes contro - versial , there is abundant evidence that integrins amplify RTK signaling . Hence , the enrichment of speci ﬁ c integrins with some PM μ Ds may be a common mechanism of control of RTK signaling . ( iii ) ImpairmentofnegativesignalingregulatorswithinPM μ Ds . Thereare many tyrosine phosphatases that act on RTKs , including DEP - 1 on EGFR [ 28 ] and VEGFR [ 29 ] , PTP1B on EGFR [ 30 ] , IR [ 31 ] and MET [ 32 ] , and LAR on EphA2 [ 33 ] . The recruitment of RTKs to PM μ Ds may potentiate signaling by enhanced local production of reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) , which in turn inhibits protein tyrosine phosphatases within a limited spatial range [ 34 ] . Furthermore , PM μ Ds may alter ac - cess of tyrosine phosphatases to their RTK signaling substrates by ste - ric exclusion . For example , PTP1B is localized exclusively to the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) and dephosphorylates EGFR through ER contact sites with other membrane compartments [ 35 ] . Hence , re - cruitment of RTKs to PM μ Ds that either exclude or promote certain organellar contact sites may alter the access of a particular phospha - tase to RTKs [ 36 ] . ( iv ) Alteration in RTK endocytosis , endosomal signaling and receptor degradation . Enrichment of RTKs within speci ﬁ c PM μ Ds is linked to receptor endocytosis , which can lead to signal termination via degradation in the lysosome or receptor recycling to potentiate fur - ther signaling ( reviewed by [ 3 ] ) . Furthermore , RTK signaling is sustained within endosomes , and the regulation of this phenomenon on intracellular membranes is complex and extensively reviewed elsewhere [ 9 – 14 ] . While many of the PM μ Ds we discuss also control RTK internalization , here we focus on the mechanisms by which PM μ Ds directly control receptor signaling at the plasma membrane . With these general mechanisms by which PM μ Ds may control RTK signaling in mind , we examine several distinct microdomains : lipid - ordered domains , clathrin microdomains , tetraspanin - enriched mi - crodomains , and actin - based protrusive membrane microdomains and we brie ﬂ y examine other structures such as cilia and galectin lattices . 2 . Lipid - ordered microdomains and lipid rafts Lipid rafts are distinct cholesterol - and sphingolipid - rich ordered lipid microdomains [ 37 – 43 ] . Lipid rafts are highly dynamic and variable in size ranging from 10 to 200 nm [ 40 , 44 ] , and with lifetimes in the μ s – ms to min range [ 45 , 46 ] . In addition to enrichment of speci ﬁ c lipids , these structures are also enriched in speci ﬁ c proteins [ 46 – 48 ] , many of which harbor covalent lipid modi ﬁ cations such as long - chain saturated fatty acids , thus anchoring the protein on the inner PM lea ﬂ et . Other raft - localized proteins have glycophosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) anchors anchoring them on the outer lea ﬂ et of the PM , while yet others have in - trinsic binding domains for sterols or other raft lipids ( e . g . , caveolin and ﬂ otillin ) [ 49 , 50 ] . While lipid rafts are high heterogeneous , they can be divided into two broad groups : caveolae and non - caveolar , planar lipid rafts [ 51 ] . The former exhibits an invaginated structure marked by caveolin pro - teins , while thelatter lacks caveolins and represents an ensemble of ﬂ at - ter membrane microdomains which may be further sub - classi ﬁ ed , including some that still exhibit some curvature [ 46 , 52 ] . Many lipid rafts are enriched in speci ﬁ c signaling proteins such as RTKs , other ki - nases and phosphatases [ 41 ] , and thus can spatially and temporally compartmentalize some aspects of RTK signaling ( Fig . 2 ) . Many experi - ments examining the localization of speci ﬁ c proteins to lipid rafts were based on monitoring solubility in non - ionic detergents at 4 °C ; however , these conditions can cause aggregation of raft domains , leading to con - cern about use of these approaches [ 46 , 53 ] . We focus here largely on studies examining localization of RTKs using mostly detergent - free methods or microscopic techniques . 2 . 1 . Recruitment and regulation of RTKs in caveolae Caveolae are invaginated , ﬂ ask - shaped50 – 80 nmstructuresthatare found in many cells and are highly abundant in adipocytes , endothelial and muscle cells [ 54 ] . In addition to cholesterol and sphingolipids , cave - olae are enriched in speci ﬁ c proteins such as caveolins ( Cav1 - 3 ) that contribute to the membrane curvature of caveolae [ 40 , 55 ] . Cav - 1 harbors a membrane - inserting hairpin loop , thus exposing the N - and C - termini to the cytoplasm [ 55 , 56 ] . The C - terminus of Cav - 1 is palmitoylated , while the N - terminus harbors the caveolin - scaffolding domain ( CSD ) which facilitates interaction with other proteins [ 54 – 56 ] . Some proteins such as RTKs ( e . g . EGFR , IR ) have conserved caveolin - binding motifs [ 57 ] ; however , these motifs may be located within the internal core of the protein kinase domains [ 51 ] . Nonethe - less , IR associates with caveolae , as shown by biochemical co - fractionation in detergent - free solutions and qualitative EM analyses [ 58 – 60 ] , and IR phosphorylates caveolin [ 61 , 62 ] , although other studies showednoenrichmentofIRincaveolae [ 63 ] . Ultrastructuralanalysisre - vealed actin - dependent localization of IR to the neck but not the bulb of caveolae [ 64 ] . The platelet - derived growth factor receptor ( PDGFR ) , TrkA and Ephrin receptors ( EphR ) similarly localized to caveolae by im - muno ﬂ uorescence or electron microscopy [ 51 , 57 , 65 – 68 ] . 1965 R . C . Delos Santos et al . / Cellular Signalling 27 ( 2015 ) 1963 – 1976 2 . 1 . 1 . Caveolae enhance IR signaling via caveolin binding The localization of IR to caveolaeenhances receptor signaling [ 64 , 69 , 70 ] . Insulin binding leads to IR tyrosine phosphorylation as well as that of insulin receptor substrate ( IRS ) adaptor proteins , leading to activa - tion of signals such as the PI3K – Akt pathway [ 71 ] . Caveolin overexpres - sion enhances IR kinase activity leading to IRS - 1 phosphorylation [ 72 , 73 ] and caveolin null mice exhibit decreased IR - dependent IRS - 1 phos - phorylation in skeletal muscle cells [ 72 , 74 , 75 ] . IR mutants unable to bind caveolin are not autophosphorylated and are poorly expressed on the PM [ 76 ] . Peptides corresponding to caveolin ' s CSD rescued IR ex - pression levels in Cav - 1 de ﬁ cientMEFs and directly stimulated IRkinase activity in HEK - 293T cells [ 72 , 73 , 75 , 77 ] . CaveolaeandcaveolinsmayalsodirectlycontrolRho - familyGTPases suchasTC10 [ 78 , 79 ] . Uponinsulinbinding , TC10 , CblandIRformacom - plex , leading to Cbl phosphorylation and recruitment to lipid raft domains [ 51 , 78 , 80 ] . Caveolin functions as a guanosine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor ( GDI ) for TC10 , maintaining low basal activity [ 79 ] ; caveolins also function as GDIs for Cdc42 [ 81 , 82 ] . Hence , caveolins functiontocontrolIRkinaseactivityaswellasthatofdownstreamsignals such as Rho family GTPases . Disruption of caveolae by cholesterol chelation is widely used to probe the requirement for caveolae and lipid rafts for RTKs signaling [ 51 ] . Cholesterol depletion by methyl - β - cyclodextrin ( M β CD ) treat - ment has little effect on insulin binding , IR autophosphorylation and caveolin - 1 binding in adipocytes [ 51 , 58 , 59 ] , but impaired TC10 activa - tion [ 83 , 84 ] , and the downstream signaling to IRS and activation of PI3K - Akt and MAPK signaling pathways [ 51 , 57 – 59 , 76 , 85 ] . However , it should benotedthatcholesterolchelationhas broad impactontheplas - ma membrane , such as alteration of membrane ﬂ uidity [ 53 ] . 2 . 1 . 2 . Caveolins also enhance signaling of EphR , TrkA and other RTKs EphRs also exhibit signaling that is enhanced by caveolin [ 57 , 86 ] , such that EphRs binding to caveolin - 1 enhances the receptor ' s intrinsic kinase activity [ 73 , 87 ] . As was observed for IR , MC β D treatment did not impact EphR ligand binding , autophosphorylation or interaction with caveolin - 1 [ 57 ] . This suggests that direct caveolin binding to the recep - tor , and not recruitment of the receptor to caveolae per se , may be suf - ﬁ cient for regulation of EphR and IR by caveolins . The nerve growth factor ( NGF ) receptor TrkA also interacts with cav - eolin in PC12 cells [ 67 , 88 – 91 ] and is recruited to caveolae upon ligand stimulation [ 92 ] , although electron tomography showed little localization of TrkA to caveolae [ 93 ] . TrkA signaling intermediates such as PI3K , Grb2 , Ras , and MAPK were found in caveolae [ 88 ] , and cholesterol depletion blocks NGF - stimulated TrkA autophosphorylation and MAPK activation [ 67 , 88 ] . Incontrast , overexpressionof caveolin - 1 inPC12 cells diminished TrkAactivation , resultinginsuppresseddifferentiation [ 90 ] . Thus , thereg - ulation of TrkA signaling within caveolae may be complex . 2 . 1 . 3 . Caveolins negatively regulate EGFR signaling Some studies have reported EGFR interaction with caveolins and re - ceptor localization to caveolae [ 94 , 95 ] . In contrast , many others have found no enrichment of EGFR within caveolae , instead suggesting that the raft - localized complement of EGFR is found in non - caveolar planar rafts [ 96 – 100 ] . Caveolin - 1 is capable of forming immobile oligomers distinct from caveolae [ 101 ] , such that caveolins may bind to and regu - late EGFR signaling independently of caveolae [ 102 ] . IncontrasttoIR , thebindingofcaveolin - 1toEGFRislargelyinhibitory . Mammary tumor cells lacking caveolin - 1 exhibited a hyperactivation of EGFR signals such as MAPK , which was reversed upon re - expression of caveolin - 1 [ 103 ] . Consistentwiththis , caveolinsuppressesEGFRsignaling , such as to MAPK [ 104 – 106 ] and cholesterol depletion increased ligand binding , dimerization and phosphorylation of EGFR [ 107 ] . Furthermore , caveolin - 1 is required for the interaction between EGFR , the ganglioside GM3 and the tetraspanin CD82 [ 108 ] ; these signals together effect PKC - mediated phosphorylation on T654 and receptor internalization [ 108 ] . PDGFR is localized to caveolae , as detected by immunoelectron microsco - py [ 66 ] , andcaveolinbindingtoPDGFRstabilizesaninactivereceptorcon - formation [ 109 ] . Taken together , these studies indicate that caveolin proteins may control EGFR signaling by controlling receptor kinase activ - ity and membrane traf ﬁ c through direct interaction with caveolins out - side of caveolae [ 101 ] . Caveolin binding also negatively regulates PDGFR signaling [ 109 ] , althoughincontrast toEGFR , PDGFR was indeed detected within caveolae by immunoelectron microscopy [ 66 ] . Collectively , these studies indicate that caveolae have complex roles inregulating RTKsignaling . Caveolaeresidentproteinssuchascaveolins enhance IR , EphR and TrkA activity , while suppressing EGFR and PDGFR through direct interaction , and some of these caveolin – RTK complexes may occur outside of caveolae . In addition , caveolae may propagate sig - nalingofallRTKsbycompartmentalizationofsignalingintermediatesto potentiate certain RTK - elicited signaling pathways . Fig . 2 . Control of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling within lipid - ordered membrane domains . Shown is a diagram depicting the heterogeneous lipid - ordered domains found within the plasma membrane . These domains can be grouped into ﬂ ask - shaped , invaginated caveolae , that contain caveolin proteins , and planar lipid rafts that do not contain caveolins but some of whichare enriched in ﬂ otillin proteins . Shown is the recruitment of RTKs to caveolae or speci ﬁ cally the caveolae neck structure , as well as other lipid - ordered domains . As discussed inthetext , variousspeci ﬁ creceptortyrosinekinasesareselectivelyrecruitedtocaveolaeorplanarlipidrafts . Inaddition , anumberofRTKscanberegulatedbydirectbindingtocaveolins , either insideoroutsideofcaveolae . Also shown istherecruitment and binding ofTC10 tocaveolinand thebinding of Cbl - associatedprotein ( CAP ) and ﬁ broblast growth factor receptor substrates ( FRS ) by binding to ﬂ otillins . Lipid - ordered domains are enriched in certain signals such as the Src - familykinases Lyn and Fyn . 1966 R . C . Delos Santos et al . / Cellular Signalling 27 ( 2015 ) 1963 – 1976 2 . 2 . Localization and regulation of RTKs within non - caveolar rafts Non - caveolar lipid rafts are enriched in cholesterol and sphingolipids [ 39 – 43 ] , lack caveolins , and are highly heterogeneous , ranging in size from 10 to 200 nm [ 53 ] . Several proteins are enriched in planarlipid rafts ( e . g . ﬂ otillin ) [ 50 ] , someof which exert structuralal - terations in raft morphology [ 77 ] . Hence , non - caveolar lipid rafts may be further sub - classi ﬁ ed depending on the type of resident proteins they harbor [ 77 , 110 ] ; however , we will discuss how non - caveolar lipid rafts control RTK signaling without explicit distinction of subtypes of these structures . While EGFR is not robustly detected within caveolae , some EGFR is found in detergent - resistant membrane fractions and exhibits proximi - ty to GPI - anchored raft marker proteins [ 96 – 98 , 100 , 111 – 113 ] . Choles - terol depletion enhances EGF binding , dimerization and activation , enhancing EGFR phosphorylation as well as that of its effectors includ - ing MAPK [ 99 , 100 , 111 ] . However , other studies instead reported that cholesterol depletion impaired EGF - stimulated EGFR signaling to Akt and MAPK [ 114 – 116 ] . Hence , thenature ofthe control of EGFR signaling by organization into lipid rafts may be context speci ﬁ c , re ﬂ ecting that cholesterol - dependent rafts may both enhance EGFR dimerization to promote signaling , yet also provide EGFR with a microenvironment that negatively regulates signaling [ 112 , 113 , 117 ] . RET receptor is activated by binding to glial - cell - derived neuro - trophic factor ( GDNF ) family ligands . Upon GDNF binding , RET forms a complex with its co - receptor , the GPI - linked protein GFR α [ 118 , 119 ] . Removal of the GPI - anchor from GFR α altered GDNF - stimulated signal - ing , suggesting partitioning to raft membrane microdomains controls some aspects of RET signaling [ 120 ] , such as that of the activation of raft - localized c - Src [ 121 ] . Similarly , cholesterol depletion also altered signaling by the Kit receptor [ 122 ] . Theproteinsandlipidsenrichedinnon - caveolarplanarlipidraftscon - trol the formation and function of these structures . The stomatin / prohinitin / ﬂ otillin / H ﬂ K / C ( SPFH ) - domain containing proteins are small , membrane associated or membrane - anchored proteins that oligomerize and localize to lipid rafts [ 123 ] . Of these , ﬂ otillins are be the best charac - terized and form unique microdomains for RTK signaling [ 50 , 123 – 125 ] . Upon ligand binding , EGFR interacts with and controls the phosphoryla - tion of ﬂ otillins in HeLa cells [ 126 , 127 ] . Silencing of ﬂ otillin - 1 impaired EGF - stimulated translocation of EGFR to lipid rafts and MAPK activation [ 126 ] . Consistent with this observation , silencing of ﬂ otillin - 1 also im - paired ﬁ broblast growth factor ( FGF ) - stimulated MAPK and Akt phos - phorylation in HeLa cells [ 128 ] as well as NGF - stimulated MAPK phosphorylation in PC12 cells [ 92 ] . FGF receptor ( FGFR ) and TrkA each phosphorylate the key adaptor protein FGFR substrate 2 ( FRS2 ) , thus facilitating MAPK phosphorylation . Flotillin - 1 interacts with FRS2 [ 128 – 129 ] , and thus may contribute to enrichment of FGF - or NGF - stimulated signaling intermediates in lipid rafts . Flotillins also bind to c - Cbl associated protein ( CAP ) via the sorbin homology domain ( SoHo ) on CAP [ 130 ] . CAP forms a complex with ﬂ otillin upon NGF stimulation , and expression of a mutant CAP lacking the SoHo domain impaired NGF - stimulated MAPK phosphorylation [ 92 ] , supporting a role for ﬂ otillin - enriched lipid rafts in scaffolding sig - nal transduction by TrkA . Certain signaling intermediates activated by the IR also localize to ﬂ otillin lipid rafts . Insulin stimulation elicits the formation and membrane recruitment of a complex of c - Cbl and CAP , which by interaction with ﬂ otillin localizes to lipid rafts [ 78 ] . The Cbl / CAPcomplexfacilitatesTC10activationbyrecruitmentoftheguanylex - change factor C3G . The scaffolding of these signaling intermediates within ﬂ otillinlipidraftsmaythuscontribute tothecontrolof themem - brane traf ﬁ c of the insulin - responsive glucose transporter GLUT4 and the actin cytoskeleton in adipocytes [ 78 , 83 ] . The localization of RTKs to lipid rafts also provides access to many additional signaling intermediates enriched therein , including non - receptor tyrosine kinases and actin - binding proteins [ 41 ] , and many others as revealed by proteomic approaches [ 131 ] . Some of the best characterized of these include the Src family kinases ( SFKs ) , all of which are myristoylated at the N - terminus . Additional palmitoylation of certain SFKs , such as Hck and Fyn ( but not Src ) confers localization of these speci ﬁ c RTKs to lipid rafts [ 132 , 133 ] . The localization of Lyn to lipid rafts may protect the kinase from dephosphorylation by phospha - tases , thuspromotingkinaseactivity [ 134 ] . Indeedselectiveimpairment of the raft - localized subpopulation of SFK activity impaired cell adhe - sion and cell cycle progression [ 135 ] , suggesting that raft - localized SFK activity has unique functions , perhaps to potentiate RTK signaling . 2 . 3 . Other lipid - dependent signaling assemblies The signaling GTPase Ras is organized into small , ~ 9 nm plasma membrane nanodomains [ 136 ] . Ras isoforms are each farnesylated , yet differ by the presence of palmitoylation ( H - Ras ) or polylysine ( K - Ras ) domains [ 137 ] . H - Ras exhibits partial localization to cholesterol - dependent lipid rafts in the GDP - bound state , but is localized preferen - tially within non - raft membranes in the GTP - bound form . K - Ras is found predominantly in the non - raft fraction . Interestingly , K - Ras and H - Ras are organized into largely distinct nanoclusters with unique lipid enrichment and perturbation of phosphatidylserine impairs segre - gation of Ras isoforms [ 136 ] . Interestingly , the Ras effector Raf was recruited largely to Ras nanoclusters , showing that organization of Ras into these domains is required for MAPK signaling [ 137 ] . Collectively , these results indicate that multiscale lipid - dependent organization of the plasma membrane , such as cholesterol - dependent lipid - ordered domains as well as phosphatidylserine - dependent Ras nanoclusters , contribute to the regulation of RTK signaling . 3 . Plasma membrane clathrin microdomains Clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) is the principal method of internalization of receptors from the cell surface [ 3 ] . CME initiates by the recruitment of clathrin , the adaptor protein AP - 2 and other cytosolic proteins to small , invaginating regions of the plasma mem - brane harboring various transmembrane proteins destined for inter - nalization , termed clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) . CCPs that undergo scission from the plasma membrane by the GTPase dynamin yield in - tracellular vesicles . Within CCPs , clathrin assembles into 50 – 200 nm lattice - like structures , and together with AP - 2 acts as a scaffold for the recruitment of an additional ~ 30 – 50 cytosolic proteins . Interest - ingly , the majority of CCPs do not undergo scission and instead un - dergo disassembly at the plasma membrane [ 138 – 143 ] . These CCPs have been termed abortive as they do not yield successful internali - zation events , and re ﬂ ect the existence of a checkpoint that monitors successful CCP assembly to gate endocytosis [ 140 ] . In addition to these diffraction - limited clathrin structures , some cells exhibit larg - er , ﬂ at clathrin assemblies at the plasma membrane , termed plaques [ 144 ] or ﬂ at clathrin lattices [ 145 ] . The existence of abortive CCPs and long - lived clathrin plaques may re ﬂ ect some additional func - tions of clathrin assemblies at the plasma membrane separate from endocytosis . 3 . 1 . Many early ligand - stimulated RTK signaling events occur during receptor residence within CCPs In the absence of ligand , many RTKs exhibit relatively inef ﬁ cient re - cruitment to CCPs and a slow rate of internalization via CME [ 3 ] . For RTKs such as EGFR [ 4 ] , MET [ 5 ] , IR and IGF1R [ 6 , 7 ] , and RET [ 8 ] , ligand - binding induces receptor recruitment to CCPs and eventual re - ceptor internalization via CME . The lifetime of individual CCPs is ~ 20 – 60 s [ 142 , 146 ] . Further , considering that most plasma membrane CCPs are abortive and disassemble without leading to receptor endocytosis [ 138 , 139 , 141 , 142 , 146 ] , individual RTKs may sequentially visit several abortive CCPs upon ligand binding and thus reside largely within CCP microenvironments for the ﬁ rst few minutes after ligand stimulation . 1967 R . C . Delos Santos et al . / Cellular Signalling 27 ( 2015 ) 1963 – 1976 Since many receptor - proximal signaling events such as Akt or PLC γ 1 phosphorylation peak within 1 – 2 min of ligand addition [ 147 ] , the acti - vation of these signaling events occurs concomitantly to receptor resi - dence within CCPs . 3 . 2 . PMclathrin structuresare uniquemicroenvironmentsfor lipidregulation and are enriched in proteins with signal transduction capabilities Several of the 30 – 50 proteins that are recruited to CCPs via interac - tion with clathrin or with AP - 2 have functions that suggest direct regu - lationofsignaltransduction . Theseincludenon - receptorkinasessuchas AAK1 [ 148 ] , which regulates ErbB4 signaling independently of receptor endocytosis [ 149 ] and Ack1 [ 150 ] . In addition , clathrin components in - teract with various key signaling adaptor proteins , including TOM1L1 , which binds Src - family kinases ( SFKs ) [ 151 ] , intersectin , which stimu - lates Ras activation via SOS binding , as well as CIN85 , which binds PI3K and Src [ 152 , 153 ] ( Fig . 3 ) . In addition , plasma membrane CCPs are enriched in speci ﬁ c lipid kinases such as PI3K - C2 α [ 154 ] , which locally produces phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 - bisphosphate ( PI ( 3 , 4 ) P2 ) within CCPs [ 155 ] , as well as 5 - inositol phosphatases such as synaptojanins 1 and 2 , OCRL , and SHIP2 . PI ( 3 , 4 ) P2 and phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate ( PI ( 4 ) P ) produced by these enzymes regulate various aspects of signal transduction , such as by binding Akt [ 156 ] or K - Ras [ 157 , 158 ] . Further - more , phosphatidic acid ( PA ) regulates multiple aspects of EGFR inter - nalization via CME [ 141 ] as well as membrane binding and activation of SOS leading to Ras activation [ 159 ] . Diacylglycerol kinase δ ( which produces PA ) binds to AP - 2 and is thus recruited to CCPs [ 160 ] . Hence , CCPs function as lipid - enriched microdomains or structures that uniquely control the production and turnover of lipids that diffuse throughout the rest of the plasma membrane . 3 . 3 . Clathrin , but not receptor endocytosis , is required for certain aspects of RTK signaling We have recently shown that clathrin , but not receptor endocytosis , is required for EGF - stimulated activation of Akt [ 161 ] . Perturbation of clathrin , through siRNA gene silencing , pharmacological inhibition or knocksideways silencing impaired EGF - stimulated Akt phosphorylation . In contrast , perturbation of dynamin , which allows formation of clathrin structures at the plasma membrane but not vesicle scission , was without impact on EGF - stimulated Akt phosphorylation . EGF - stimulated Gab1 phosphorylation was the most EGFR - proximal signaling event identi ﬁ ed that exhibited dependence on clathrin , and phosphorylated Gab1 was found partly enriched within CCPs upon EGF stimulation [ 161 ] . Thus , in addition to receptor endocytosis , CCPs serve to scaffold key signaling molecules that can regulate speci ﬁ c signaling pathways at the cell surface . Consistent with this , ﬂ at clathrin lattices that may not read - ily lead to endocytic events recruit G - protein coupled receptors such as CCR5 [ 145 ] andCCPs functionassignalingplatformsfortheactivationof G α i protein signaling by the delta opioid receptor [ 162 ] . Hence , plasma membrane clathrin structures are emerging as key signaling microdo - mains , and future research into the molecular mechanisms by which clathrin structures control signaling will provide valuable insight into the regulation of RTK function . 4 . Tetraspanin - enriched microdomains Tetraspanins are a family of small proteins that each span the cell membrane four times and are abundant in virtually every mammalian cell [ 163 ] . Tetraspanins readily exhibit homo - or hetero - multimerization with other tetraspanins , forming an interaction network termed the Fig . 3 . Clathrin - coatedpitsareuniquemicrodomainsfortheregulationofreceptortyrosinekinasesignaling . Manyspeci ﬁ cRTKsundergointernalizationviaclathrin - mediatedendocytosis uponbindingtoligand . Shownistherecruitmentofligand - boundRTKstoclathrin - coatedpits , invaginatedmembranestructuresformedbybindingoftheheterotetramericadaptorpro - tein AP - 2 and the assembly of clathrin into a lattice - like structure on the inner lea ﬂ et of the plasma membrane . Some clathrin - coated pits eventually undergo scission from the plasma membrane to form intracellular vesicles . Clathrin and AP - 2 collectively bind and recruit between 30 – 50 cytosolic proteins . Shown are proteins that bind AP - 2 or clathrin ( directly or indirectly ) that have roles that suggest function as regulators of signaling , including TOM1L1 , Src - family kinases ( SFKs ) , class II phosphatidylinositol - 3 - kinase ( PI3K - C2 α ) , activated Cdc42 kinase 1 ( Ack1 ) , intersectin 1 ( ITSN ) , diacylglycerol kinase δ ( DGK δ ) , synaptojanin 1 ( Sjn1 ) , Cbl - interacting protein of 85 kDa ( CIN85 ) . Collectively , these signals contribute to the activation of speci ﬁ c signals , such as the activation of PI3K and Akt upon EGF stimulation . 1968 R . C . Delos Santos et al . / Cellular Signalling 27 ( 2015 ) 1963 – 1976 tetraspanin web . This tetraspanin web underlies the formation of tetraspanin - enriched microdomains ( TEMs ) within the plasma mem - brane [ 163 ] . Tetraspanins are able to simultaneously bind other tetraspanins and receptors such as RTKs and integrins , as well as interact with and locally enrich certain lipids and recruit cytoplasmic signaling proteins . Theseabilities of tetraspanins underliethe role of plasma mem - brane TEMs in the regulation of RTK signaling . There are more than 30 human tetraspanins that contribute to for - mation of the tetraspanin web ( reviewed by [ 163 ] ) . The most studied tetraspanins are those that have some antigenic properties , including tetraspanin 24 ( CD151 ) , 27 ( CD82 ) , 28 ( CD81 ) , 29 ( CD9 ) and 30 ( CD63 ) . The molecular and structural basis of tetraspanin – tetraspanin interactions are poorly understood , although these likely involve inter - actions of cytoplasmic or extracellular regions of these proteins , as has been reported for CD81 [ 164 ] . Immunoprecipitation of tetraspanins in nonionic detergents such as Brij - 96 ( preserving the tetraspanin web ) has allowed identi ﬁ cation of many other proteins that associate with tetraspanins [ 165 – 167 ] . These include cell adhesion proteins such as many speci ﬁ c integrins , and other proteins such as CD9P - 1 and EWI - 2 [ 163 ] , whichalso bridges interaction withtheactincytoskel - eton [ 168 ] . The organization of the tetraspanin web into discrete TEMs withinthe plasmamembraneisevincedbyanumberofstudiesusingavarietyofmi - croscopy approaches . Tetraspanins form punctate structures at the cell surface as observed by ﬂ uorescence microscopy [ 169 ] . Immunoelectron microscopy detecting CD63 in HeLa cells revealed the existence of tetraspanin clusters with a diameter of ~ 200 nm 2 , although these were highly heterogeneous [ 170 ] . Importantly , TEMs are largely functionally and spatially distinct from lipid rafts ( reviewed by [ 171 ] ) , demonstrated by : 1 ) their distinct sensitivity to cholesterol chelation and treatment withnonionicdetergents suchasBrij - 96 [ 172 ] , 2 ) theirvirtuallycomplete lack of shared associated proteins detected by proteomic approaches [ 131 , 165 , 166 ] , and 3 ) the lack of colocalization of tetraspanins with lipid rafts markers such as GPI - anchored proteins [ 169 , 173 ] . Despite being largely distinct from lipid rafts , TEMs associate with speci ﬁ c lipids , in par - ticular glycosphingolipids ( GSLs ) , such as GM2 and GM3 [ 174 ] . While TEMs have lifetimes on the order of minutes or longer , the partitioning of tetraspanin web components within TEMs is very dy - namic . About one - third of CD9 and CD151 exhibited uncon ﬁ ned diffu - sion , while the tetraspanins that exhibited con ﬁ ned motion consistent with TEMs exhibited dwell times of mostly between 3 and 20 s [ 169 , 173 ] . In addition to plasma membrane localization , many tetraspanins undergo internalization and are found on a number of intracellular or - ganelles , including multivesicular bodies and lysosomes ( reviewed by [ 175 , 176 ] ) . Here , we focus on the role of tetraspanins and TEMs at the plasma membrane in the regulation of RTK signaling ( Fig . 4 ) . 4 . 1 . Control of RTK signaling by interactions with the tetraspanin web Numerous studies have demonstrated that various RTKs can be immunoprecipitated with tetraspanins , including : c - kit with CD9 , CD63 or CD81 [ 177 ] , Met with CD82 [ 178 ] and with CD151 [ 179 ] , and EGFR with CD9 [ 180 ] and with CD82 [ 181 , 182 ] . Other studies demon - strated interaction of tetraspanins and RTKs in situ , such as the interac - tion of VEGFR and CD63 detected by proximity ligation [ 183 ] . Importantly , RTK association can be regulated by binding to ligand , such as dissociation of CD82 and EGFR upon stimulation with EGF [ 181 ] . RTKs are thus conditional constituents of the tetraspanin web . The regulation of RTKinteraction withtetraspaninscan elicit either pos - itive or negative regulation of RTK signaling . 4 . 1 . 1 . Negative regulation of RTK signaling by CD82 and other tetraspanins Numerous studies found negative regulation of RTK signaling by speci ﬁ c tetraspanins . CD82 overexpression suppresses Met signaling leading to activation of Rho family GTPases , thus impacting cytoskeletal dynamics and cell migration [ 178 , 184 ] , and activation of PI3K and Ras [ 178 ] . The fraction of c - Kit that co - precipitated with CD9 , CD63 or CD81 had impaired ligand - stimulated receptor phosphorylation [ 177 ] . Consistent with this , EGFR signaling was impaired by CD82 overexpres - sion [ 181 ] or by antibody - induced clustering of CD9 [ 180 ] . 4 . 1 . 2 . Enhancement of RTK signaling by CD151 and other tetraspanins In contrast to the suppression of RTK signaling by CD82 and other tetraspanins , CD151inparticularlargelyenhancesRTKsignaling . Silenc - ingofCD151impairsMetsignalingleadingtoassociationwithGab1and activation of the MAPK pathway [ 185 ] , as well as Met - driven prolifera - tion [ 185 ] andmigration [ 186 ] . Thealterationof MetsignalingbyCD151 silencing occurred as a result of disruption of CD151 - dependent Met as - sociation with α 3 / α 6 integrins [ 186 ] or β 4 integrin [ 185 ] . Similarly , VEGFR associates with β 1 - integrin and CD63 , and CD63 attenuates VEGFR signaling leading to phosphorylation of FAK , Src , Akt and MAPK [ 183 ] . Also , CD151 controls ErbB2 signaling and the ability of the recep - tor to drive tumor growth and metastasis , possibly via control of recep - tor interaction with α 6 β 4 integrins [ 187 ] . Hence , in contrast to CD82 , some tetraspanins such as CD151 enhance RTK signaling . Fig . 4 . Tetraspanin - enriched microdomains recruit some receptor tyrosine kinases and regulate signaling . Shown are tetraspanins and the formation of tetraspanin - enriched microdo - mains ( TEMs ) , which are formed by tetraspanin – tetraspanin interactions . TEMs are dynamic , with robust exchange of tetraspanins between highly mobile diffusive population and morestaticpopulationsthatlikelyrepresentTEMs . Tetraspaninsinteractionsformthebasisofatetraspaninweb , whichleadstorecruitmentofmanyspeci ﬁ cproteinsandlipids , including glycosphingolipids , phosphatidylinositol - 4 - kinase ( PI4K ) , proteinkinaseC ( PKC ) , CUBdomain - containingprotein - 1 ( CDCP - 1 ) , andSrc - familykinases ( SFKs ) . Alsoshownisthefacilitation ofjuxtacrinesignalingbycomponentsofTEMs , includingglycosphingolipids . SomeproteinsenrichedwithinTEMs , suchasintegrins , arenotshowninthisimage , butarediscussedinthe text . 1969 R . C . Delos Santos et al . / Cellular Signalling 27 ( 2015 ) 1963 – 1976 4 . 2 . Mechanisms of control of RTK signaling by the tetraspanin web and TEMs There are several possible mechanisms by which RTK entanglement withinatetraspaninweband / orrecruitmenttoTEMscanmodulateRTK signaling , as follows : ( i ) TEMs as platforms for recruitment of cytosolic signaling intermedi - ates . In addition to interaction with RTKs , many tetraspanins also as - sociate with cytosolic proteins and thus may locally enrich speci ﬁ c signaling molecules within TEMs . Several tetraspanins , including CD9 , CD81 , CD82 and CD151 associate with protein kinase C ( PKC ) [ 188 ] , and the local enrichment of PKC controls RTK signaling . In - deed PKC phosphorylates EGFR at T654 [ 189 ] , a phenomenon en - hanced by CD82 and GM3 [ 108 ] , thus controlling EGFR tyrosine phosphorylation [ 108 ] and Cbl - dependent ubiquitinylation [ 190 ] . Tetraspanins may also represent unique microdomains for localized remodeling of phosphoinositides that impact RTK signaling . Many tetraspanins , including CD9 , CD63 , CD81 , CD82 and CD151 bind to phosphatidylinositol - 4 - kinase ( PI4K ) [ 191 – 194 ] , a lipid kinase that catalyzes the synthesis of PI4P [ 157 ] . PI4P recruits proteins harbor - ing a polybasic motif to the plasma membrane , such as the signal transduction protein K - Ras [ 158 ] , and Shc [ 193 ] , and the activation of the MAPK pathway by CD81 cross - linking was ablated by expres - sion of a Shc mutant de ﬁ cient in PI4P binding [ 193 ] . PI4P is also used as a substrate to synthesize other important signaling lipids such as PIP2 and phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( PIP3 ) . Indeed CD82 overexpression reduced PIP2 levels , which correlated with a disruption of Rho GTPase signaling and actin cytoskeleton dynamics [ 195 ] . From these studies emerges a model of localized control of PI4P synthesis withinTEMsthat controls various signalingpathways activated by RTKs , although PI4P is also synthesized elsewhere , such as in the Golgi [ 157 ] . Additionally , CD9 associates with CUB domain - containing protein - 1 ( CDCP1 ) [ 166 , 196 ] , an adaptor that binds and regulates several ki - nases including c - Src and PKC δ [ 197 , 198 ] . Indeed CDCP1 contributes to EGF - stimulated cell migration [ 199 ] . Importantly , the association ofCDCP1 withtetraspaninsmodulatestheabilityofCDCP1 tocontrol Src activity , evinced by the observation that CD82 overexpression blocks CDCP1 - enhanced Src activation [ 200 ] . Hence , TEMs represent a unique RTK signaling microenvironment as a result of enrichment of speci ﬁ c proteins and local synthesis of certain signaling lipids . ( ii ) TEMs regulate RTK association with other microdomains and alter RTK endocytosis . Tetraspanins exhibit speci ﬁ c and complex internali - zation , such as the clathrin - dependent internalization of CD63 [ 201 ] or clathrin - independent internalization of CD63 [ 202 ] , CD81 [ 176 ] , CD82 [ 203 ] andCD151 [ 204 ] , reviewedby [ 176 ] . Asmanytetraspanins undergo speci ﬁ c recruitment to these various endocytic structures , the association of RTKs with tetraspanins or with TEMs may alter the parameters of RTK internalization , thus altering RTK signaling speci ﬁ city , duration and magnitude . Overexpression of CD82 results in increased internalization of EGFR [ 181 ] , as does antibody - induced clustering of CD9 [ 180 ] ; each of these correlated with alterations in EGFR signaling . CD82 overex - pression impairs EGFR dimerization required for signaling and alters thedistributionofEGFRwithintheplaneoftheplasmamembrane , fa - voring EGFR enrichment towards the cell margins [ 182 ] . Consistent with this , silencing of CD82 altered EGFR diffusion , increased EGFR localization to clathrin structures , and impaired early EGF - stimulated MAPK phosphorylation [ 205 ] . Furthermore , CD82 negatively regulates ligand - stimulated EGFR ubiquitinylation and c - Cbl tyrosine phosphorylation [ 190 ] . Hence , tetraspanins such as CD82 control EGFR distribution within the PM and impair recruitment of EGFR to other PM μ Ds , thus altering EGFR signaling and internalization . ( iii ) Tetraspanins , glycosphingolipids ( GSLs ) and control of RTK signal - ing . In addition to association with speci ﬁ c proteins , tetraspanins also interact with speci ﬁ c lipids , in particular GSLs . Indeed virtually all GSLs found within a cell arewithin PM μ Ds , many of whichappear to overlap with TEMs [ 206 – 208 ] . Together with the recruitment of proteins such as integrins , the ability of speci ﬁ c GSLs found in TEMs to mediate interactions such as with the surface - exposed pro - teinsofothercellstoformcell – cell contactsunderlies thefunctionof at least a subset of TEMs as microdomains termed glycosynapses [ 209 , 210 ] . Hence , GSL - enriched TEMs control RTK signaling as a re - sult of lipidic interactions within a single microdomain in a particu - lar cell , or may provide RTKs localized therein with a unique pro ﬁ le of juxtacrine ligands on other cells . Tetraspanins interact with GSLs , including the direct interaction of CD82 with GM2 [ 211 ] . The interaction of GSLs with tetraspanins al - ters the interactions of tetraspanins with other proteins , such as of CD9 with α 3 integrin [ 212 ] , indicating that GSL incorporation into TEMs controls their protein complement . Indeed GSLs also contribute to the enrichment of cytoplasmic proteins such as c - Src to PM μ Ds [ 206 ] . In addition to control of the complement of signaling proteins within TEMs , GSLs can also directly control RTK function . GM3 direct - ly inhibits ligand - dependent EGFR kinase activation [ 213 , 214 ] . Con - sistent with this , CD82 overexpression impaired EGFR and MET signaling , and this was dependent on GM2 / GM3 [ 201 , 215 ] . GM3 alsocontributestoCD82 - dependentenhancementofEGFRendocyto - sis by recruitment of PKC [ 108 ] . Furthermore , GM2 association with CD82 impaired HGF - stimulated MET signaling [ 211 ] . As such , the in - teractions of RTKs with GSLs or the GSL - dependent regulation of the tetraspanin web allows the enrichment of GSLs within TEMs to play a key role in the regulation of signal transduction . The ability of TEMs and glycosynapses to mediate cell – cell contacts also suggests that these microdomains may play a role in controlling juxtacrine signaling of certain RTKs . EGFR has several ligands such as HB - EGF and TGF α , which can signal either as soluble ligands following proteolytic cleavage of a transmembrane precursor by metalloproteases or in a juxtacrine manner requiring cell – cell contact [ 216 ] . Bothjuxtacrinesignalingaswellascleavageofsolublehormone products activate EGFR in a highly spatially restricted manner [ 217 ] . Hence , regulation of RTK localization within TEMs at sites of cell – cell contacts and regulation of proteolytic cleavage of transmembrane li - gands within TEMs contribute to regulation of RTK signaling . Interest - ingly , CD9 impaired the proteolysis of TGF α , and the CD9 - dependent increase in transmembrane TGF α increased EGFR phosphorylation and signaling in juxtacrine assays [ 218 ] . Hence , TEMs may also play an important role in the control of RTK signaling by controlling cleav - age of soluble RTK ligands or by controlling juxtacrine signaling . 5 . Actin - dependent protrusive membrane microdomains A number of distinct types of membrane microdomains are formed by the dynamic remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton in close apposition to the plasma membrane , including dorsal ruf ﬂ es , peripheral ruf ﬂ es , lamellipodia , and invadosomes . These structures are formed or regulated upon RTK stimulation , and a some control RTK signaling by recruitment and spatial organization of RTKs themselves or of a subset of their signal - ing intermediates . Despite some similarities , these actin - dependent pro - trusive structures differ in morphology , lifetime , and regulation [ 219 , 220 ] . Here , we focus on the actin - dependent microdomains that are 1970 R . C . Delos Santos et al . / Cellular Signalling 27 ( 2015 ) 1963 – 1976 enriched in speci ﬁ c RTKs and control RTK - proximal signaling , namely dorsal ruf ﬂ es and invadosomes ( Fig . 5 ) . 5 . 1 . Dorsal Ruf ﬂ e ( DR ) formation is controlled by RTKs DRs are actin - dependent membrane - associated domains ranging in size from 5 to 15 μ m that form in response to RTK ligand binding [ 221 ] . DRs are heterogeneous and can be circular , linear and / or wave - like and are observed in numerous cell types and occur upon ligand binding by RTKs , such as EGFR , PDGFR , VEGFR , MET and IR [ 222 , 223 ] . Formation of DRs is time - dependent , appearing b 5 min after stimula - tion with RTK ligands and persisting for an average lifetime of 10 – 20 min [ 224 , 225 ] . DR collapse is linked to internalization , as evinced by the formation of a tubulo - vesicular network on the dorsal surface of Panc1 cells [ 224 ] . DR are devoid of protein markers for clathrin - mediated endocytosis or caveolae [ 224 ] , and some studies have instead indicated that DR collapse is clathrin - independent [ 224 ] and linked to RTK - stimulated micropinocytosis [ 226 , 227 ] . DR formation is dependent on dynamic actin polymerization and re - modeling , mediated by the recruitment of the Arp2 / 3 complex therein [ 219 , 228 ] ; DRs also require or are enriched in other actin cytoskeleton regulators such as dynamin , cortactin , N - WASP , WAVE1 , Rac , Rab5 , actinin - 4 , RN - tre , ARAP1 , Arf1 and 5 and Arl13b ( Fig . 5 ) [ 219 , 221 , 222 , 228 – 230 ] . RTK - induced DR formation does not occur in all cell types . Indeed , exogenous expression of certain proteins such as Gab1 or Pak1 in HeLa cells enhances formation of DRs upon HGF or PDGF stimulation [ 231 ] , and substrate stiffnessenhances the formation of DRs in response to PDGF in vascular smooth muscle cells [ 232 ] . DRs have been proposed to contribute to therapid remodelingof cells with robuststress ﬁ bers to allow a transition to a migration phenotype [ 222 , 230 ] . This suggests that the cell - type speci ﬁ city for DR formation may re ﬂ ect expression of speci ﬁ c cellular proteins or cell growth conditions . Moreover , while some RTKs can localize to DRs upon ligand binding [ 224 , 225 ] , this re - cruitment is receptor - speci ﬁ c , as EGF stimulation elicited the recruit - ment of EGFR but not transferrin receptor or PDGFR to DRs [ 224 ] . DRs contribute to the internalization of speci ﬁ c RTKs . Fluorescently - tagged EGF can be observed within puncta emanatingfrom dorsal ruf ﬂ e structures , consistent with internalization of EGFR at or near DRs [ 224 ] . Similarly , MET is recruited to DRs inMDCKcells , andMET is co - localized with the endosomal protein EEA1 at the base of collapsing ruf ﬂ es [ 225 ] , suggesting MET endocytosis at these sites . Indeed , enhancement of MET - dependentformationofDRsbyoverexpressionofGab1 orPak1in - creased MET internalization and degradation [ 225 ] . Hence , RTK recruitment to DRs results in their sequestration from other PM regions , and eventual RTK internalization upon DR collapse [ 222 ] . As such , speci ﬁ c RTKs may reside within DRs for some or all of the lifetime of DRs ( 10 – 20 min ) , thus allowing localized control of RTK signaling within this specialized PM μ D during this time . 5 . 2 . Dorsal ruf ﬂ es regulate certain aspects of RTK signaling 5 . 2 . 1 . RTK signaling intermediates are enriched within DRs RTKs localized within DRs are phosphorylated and have active ki - nase domains [ 224 , 225 ] , suggesting RTKs signal speci ﬁ cally within DRs . Indeed many proteins with signal transduction properties are enriched within DRs [ 219 , 222 ] . These include cytoskeletal remodeling proteins required for the formation of DRs ( as discussed above ) , and also speci ﬁ c lipids with roles in signal transduction , several serine / thre - onine and tyrosine kinases , signaling adaptors , protein phosphatases , and theireffector ( s ) . It should benoted thatDRsare likely cell - typespe - ci ﬁ c and heterogeneous ; thus , the lipids and proteins recruited to DRs discussed below may not all be found within all DRs concurrently . Several phosphoinositides are enriched in DRs , each of which has role ( s ) insignaltransduction . ClassIPI3K ( p85andP110 α subunits ) isre - cruited to DRs formed up insulin stimulation in L6 myotubes [ 223 , 233 ] . This allows local production and enrichment of PIP3 and Akt activation in membranes within these structures [ 223 , 233 ] . DRs formed upon EGF - stimulation of A431 cells exhibited enrichment of PIP2 and PIP3 [ 234 ] , as did ruf ﬂ es formed in macrophages in response to M - CSF [ 235 ] . The adaptor protein SH3YL1 , which binds PIP3 , was recruited to dorsal ruf ﬂ es upon PDGF stimulation in NIH3T3 cells [ 236 ] . SH3YL1 recruits the lipid phosphatase SHIP2 , resulting in enrichment of PI ( 3 , 4 ) P2 within DRs . In addition to activation of speci ﬁ c signals within DRs ( e . g . Akt ) , PIP3 is im - portant for formation of DRs , as PI3K inhibitors block DR formation [ 237 ] and the phosphoinositide phosphatase PTEN negatively regulates PDGF - induced circular dorsal ruf ﬂ e formation in rat aortic smooth muscle cells [ 238 ] . ArelatedsignalingmodulecomprisedofGrb2andGab1isalsorecruit - ed to DRs . Upon stimulation of MDCK or mouse ﬁ broblast cells , the re - cruitment of Nck to Gab1 allows activation of Rac1 , effecting N - WASP - dependent actin remodeling for DR formation [ 225 , 237 ] . Gab1 is a multi - valent signaling adaptor capable of recruitment of PLC γ 1 , PI3K and SHP - 2 [ 239 ] ; hence , Gab1 enrichment within DRs may be related to that of PI3K . There are several non - receptor protein kinases that can be recruited toDRs . ConsistentwiththeactivationofRac1withinDRs [ 225 , 237 ] , Rac - activated p21 - activated kinase 1 ( PAK1 ) is recruited to dorsal ruf ﬂ es in Swiss 3T3 cells upon stimulation with PDGF [ 231 ] . The atypical PKC λ is Fig . 5 . Speci ﬁ c RTKs control formation of dorsal ruf ﬂ es ( DRs ) that inturn control receptor signalingand internalization . Ligandbinding by speci ﬁ c RTKscoordinatesdramatic actinrear - rangementsthatleadtoformationofanumberofprotrusiveactin - basedstructuressuchasdorsalruf ﬂ esinacell - andcondition - speci ﬁ cmanner . ShownarethesignalsactivatedbyRTKs that control dorsal ruf ﬂ e formation , including cortactin ( cort ) , Rac , Neuronal Wiskott – Aldrich Syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) , WASP - family verprolin - homologous protein ( WAVE ) , dynamin ( dyn ) , p21 - activated kinase ( PAK1 ) . A number of signaling proteins are recruited to dorsal ruf ﬂ es , some of which further regulate dorsal ruf ﬂ e formation : protein kinase C λ ( PKC λ ) , phosphatidylinositol - 3 - kinase ( PI3K , which controls the formation of phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate , PIP3 ) , Tandem PH Domain - Containing Protein 1 ( TAPP1 ) , SH3 And SYLF Domain Containing 1 ( SH3YL1 ) , Cbl , Cyld , Src , Grb2 - associated binder ( Gab1 ) , protein tyrosine phosphatase 2A ( PP2A ) , protein tyrosine phosphatase 2C ( PTP2C ) , Abl , NADPH oxidase ( NOX ) . PP2A and PTP2C contribute to dorsal ruf ﬂ e collapse , which leads to internalization of RTKs to endosomes containing early endosome antigen 1 ( EEA1 ) . 1971 R . C . Delos Santos et al . / Cellular Signalling 27 ( 2015 ) 1963 – 1976 recruited to insulin - stimulated DRs in L6 myotubes [ 233 ] and PKC λ is required for formation of DRs upon stimulation of MEFs with PDGF [ 240 ] . PDGF stimulation of MEFs resulted in recruitment of several Src - family kinases to dorsal and peripheral membrane ruf ﬂ es [ 241 ] , and c - Src was recruited to DRs upon stimulation of NIH 3T3 cells with PDGF [ 242 ] . Src phosphorylates the deubiquitylating enzyme Cyld , and Cyld is recruited to DRs upon stimulation of ﬁ broblasts with EGF [ 243 ] . Inter - estingly , Src also phosphorylates the E3 - ubiquitin ligase Cbl , and Cbl is robustly localized to DRs upon PDGF stimulation of NIH - 3T3 cells [ 244 ] . Hence , DRs may be sites of dynamic Src - dependent cycles of ubiquitinylationandde - ubiquitinylationofvariouscomponentproteins . Another tyrosine kinase , Abl , is required for formation of DRs in pri - mary ﬁ broblasts [ 245 ] and in NIH - 3T3cells [ 242 ] , suggestingit mayalso be localized within DRs . Furthermore , Abl controls recruitment of the NADPH oxidase subunit p47Phox to DRs upon PDGF stimulation in NIH3T3 cells [ 246 ] and p47Phox was also recruited to VEGFR - stimulated DRs [ 247 ] . Several phosphatases can also be enriched within DRs , including PP2A and PTP2C [ 248 , 249 ] , and PTP2C contributes to termination of DRs [ 249 ] . PP2A regulates heat shock protein - 27 ( Hsp27 ) phosphoryla - tion within DRs in smooth muscles cells ( SMC ) , which in turn controls induction of apoptosis and NF κ B signaling [ 248 ] . Hence , DRs are micro - domainsenrichedinspeci ﬁ clipidsandproteinsthatundergocoordinat - ed remodeling over their 10 – 20 min lifetimes . 5 . 2 . 2 . Regulation of RTK signaling by DRs The recruitment of numerous speci ﬁ c signaling intermediates to DRs suggests that DRs may be functionally required for and / or regu - late signal transduction . DRs may thus function to limit diffusion of proteins , thus forming a positive feedback loop for activation of speci ﬁ c signaling intermediates such as Rac1 [ 250 ] . Indeed the actin - disrupting agent Latrunculin B prevented the activation of Rac1 following M - CSF stimulation [ 250 ] . MET localizes to DRs upon HGF stimulation in MDCK cells and inhi - bition of DR formation blocks HGF - induced kidney morphogenesis [ 237 ] . In human umbilical vein endothelial cells ( HUVECs ) , VEGF stimu - lation elicits DR formation and JNK phosphorylation , which required NADPH oxidase , WAVE and PAK - 1 [ 247 ] . Expression of a kinase - dead Pak1 mutant or incubation with an antioxidant inhibitor of NADPH ox - idase inhibited VEGF - induced DR formation and JNK2 activation [ 247 ] , suggesting that DRs are required for VEGF - stimulated JNK2 activation in HUVECs . Signaling from DR microdomains is required for PI3K - and Akt - dependent insulin signaling in muscle cells , in turn regulating the mem - brane traf ﬁ c of the facilitative glucose transporter GLUT4 . Inhibition of DR formation with actin disrupting small molecules or perturbation of Rac prevented the ef ﬁ cient recruitment of PI3K [ 223 , 251 ] . The remodeled actincytoskeletonwithinDRsinmyotubesmaythusfunctionasa “ mesh ” to restrict the distribution of PIP3 , thus allowing activation of Akt [ 233 ] . Interestingly , while some protein components of DRs can also be recruited to other PM μ Ds , the pool ( s ) recruited to DR may have speci ﬁ c function ( s ) . For example , PDGF stimulation results in recruitment of c - Src to both caveolae and to DRs , and PDGF - induced formation of DRs requires c - Src [ 242 , 252 ] . Importantly , DR formation is directed by a dis - tinct pool of c - Src that is insensitive to cholesterol depletion , thus not regulated by caveolae . Instead , activation of the DR - speci ﬁ c pool of Src upon PDGF stimulation requires PLCy1 and sphingosine - 1 - phosphate ( S1P ) - dependent signaling pathways which are not required for mito - genic PDGF signaling [ 242 ] . Therefore , this suggests the existence of separate Src - directed signaling cascades within distinct PM μ Ds , each with distinct functions . 5 . 3 . Regulation of RTK signaling in invadosomes Invadosomesis atermused to describe both podosomes ( invascular or myelomonocytic cells ) and invadopodia ( in cancer cells ) , whichhave speci ﬁ cfunctionsinthedegradationofextracellularmatrixandthuscell migration [ 253 ] . Like DRs , invadosomes are also actin - dependent struc - tures that range from 5 to 25 μ m in size and require many of the same factors that remodel the actin cytoskeleton as dorsal ruf ﬂ es ( e . g . N - WASP , Arp2 / 3 , cortactin , dynamin , gelsolin and co ﬁ lin , reviewed by [ 253 ] ) . However , invadosomes are distinct from DRs due to their posi - tioning vis - à - vis the extracellular matrix and their high level of enrich - ment of matrix metalloproteases ( MMPs ) [ 219 , 254 , 255 ] . Despite these differences , invadosomes , speci ﬁ cally invadopodia , can be also enhanced by stimulation of speci ﬁ c RTKs . For instance , EGF stimulation induces invadopodia formation in MDA - MB - 231 cells , which requires Arg - dependent cortactin phosphorylation [ 256 ] . HGF stimulation also elicits invadopodia formation following cortactin re - cruitment via binding to Gab1 [ 257 ] . While many studies have examined the speci ﬁ c recruitment of var - ious RTKs to DRs , relatively few studies have similarly examined the re - cruitment of RTKs to invadosomes . Recent work has begun to elucidate that speci ﬁ c RTKs are indeed recruited to invadopodia . Upon HGF stim - ulation of MKN45 human gastric cancer cells , MET is recruited to cortactin - positive invadopodia [ 257 ] . EGFR was also found enriched within invadopodia in MDA - MB - 231 and HT1080 cells [ 258 ] . Interest - ingly , the recruitment of EGFR and Src to invadopodia required SNARE - dependent vesicle traf ﬁ c , suggesting that delivery of EGFR to invadopodia requires internalization and recycling , rather than lateral sequestration of the receptor within the plasma membrane [ 258 ] . Con - sistent with a requirement for EGFR localization to nascent structures for invadopodia formation , perturbation of speci ﬁ c SNAREs impaired invadopodia formation [ 258 ] . 6 . Other microdomains InadditiontothePM μ Ds thatwehaveexamined thus far , severalad - ditional microdomains control receptor signaling , although these mi - crodomains may not be found in all cell types . 6 . 1 . Primary cilia Cilia are polarized microtubule - based protrusions found in quies - cent cells that extend from the cell body into the extracellular space [ 259 , 260 ] . In contrast to motile cilia that function primarily in moving mucus and ﬂ uids , quiescent cells have a single non - motile cilia or pri - mary cilia ( PC ) [ 259 ] . PCs are sensory organelles and signaling domains [ 260 ] that are comprised of a nucleated region at the basal body just be - neath the plasma membrane ( the cilia pocket ) , and thecore axoneme , a structureenvelopedbyalipidbilayerthatiscontinuouswiththeplasma membrane [ 260 , 261 ] . The PC membrane is enriched in lipids and receptors providing a distinct highly regulated microdomain for signaling events which are relayed from the extracellular space into the cell [ 260 , 262 ] . Sev - eral RTKs are enriched within PCs , including PDGFR , IGF1R , and EGFR [ 262 – 264 ] . While PDGFR αα homodimers localize to the PC , PDGFR ββ homodimers localize to the cell body , demonstrating that RTK recruitment to the PC is highly speci ﬁ c [ 264 ] . Expression of var - ious mutants that impair PC function and transport resulted in an im - pairment of Akt phosphorylation by PDGFR αα [ 265 ] . Similar strategies resulting in disruption of PCs impaired IGF1R - dependent Akt phosphorylation in 3T3 - L1 preadipocytes [ 262 ] . Within PCs , EGFR forms a complex with OFD1 ( oral – facial – digital syndrome type 1 ) and ﬂ otillin proteins [ 263 ] , suggesting that PCs are also enriched in this lipid raft subtype of signaling microdomain . While we provide an overview of some recent studies that demon - strated unique regulation of RTK signaling within PCs , we direct the reader to some recent comprehensive reviews on signaling within PCs [ 260 , 261 ] . 1972 R . C . Delos Santos et al . / Cellular Signalling 27 ( 2015 ) 1963 – 1976 6 . 2 . Galectin - based lattices Many RTKs such as EGFR have N - linked glycans , which allows inter - action with lectins . One such lectin , Galectin - 3 , can oligomerize , leading totheformationof agaletcinlatticepreferentiallyenrichedinRTKswith speci ﬁ c branched N - glycans , such as EGFR [ 266 , 267 ] . Perturbation of N - acetylglucosaminyltransferase ( GnT - V , also known as Mgat - 5 ) , which prevents the formation of N - glycans preferred by Galectin - 3 , impaired EGF - stimulated signaling , such as that leading to SHP - 2 phosphoryla - tion [ 268 ] . Moreover , perturbation of GnT - V dramatically enhances the rate of EGFR endocytosis [ 266 ] and also increases EGFR diffusion and interaction with Cav1 , thus limiting EGFR signaling [ 269 ] . This indi - cates that galectin lattices restrict EGFR diffusion at the cell surface and limititsincorporationintootherPM μ Ds . Recently , itwas uncoveredthat Galectin - 3 binding by EGFR and incorporation into galectin lattices was required for EGF - stimulated activation of RhoA , thus leading to DR for - mation and control of cell migration [ 267 ] . The galectin lattice also in - corporates speci ﬁ c integrins , depending on their N - glycans , indicating that these structures may also facilitate RTK signaling by promoting sig - nal ampli ﬁ cation with that of integrins [ 267 ] . In addition to the domains that we have discussed here , there are many other membrane microdomains that may contribute to control of receptor signaling , including cell – cell junctions and microvilli . Fur - thermore , the emerging insight into plasma membrane contacts sites with other organellesindicates that thesemayalsorepresent uniquere - ceptor signaling microdomains . For example , IGF1R was found within plasma membrane invaginations which contact the nucleoplasmic en - velope , thus controlling Ca 2 + signaling selectively in the nucleus [ 270 ] . While we have limited our discussion here to lipid - ordered PM μ Ds such as lipid rafts , clathrin structures , tetraspanin - enriched mi - crodomains , dorsal ruf ﬂ es and invadosomes , cilia and galectin - based structures , many of the mechanisms of regulation that we discuss likely have parallels in regulation of RTK signaling in other microdomains . Moreover , while we focus here on RTKs , many parallels can also be drawn about therole of PM μ Ds in the regulation of other signalingcom - plexes , such as immune receptors and G - protein coupled receptors . 7 . Conclusions and future perspectives There is abundant evidence that many RTKs localize to a number of different PM μ Ds , and that receptor localization within these structures imparts upon them unique signaling properties . However , this recruit - ment to speci ﬁ c microdomains appears to be controversial for some types of RTKs , such as EGFR , in that ligand binding induces recruitment to lipid - ordered domains , clathrin - coated pits , TEMs and dorsal ruf ﬂ es . How might one explain this apparent contradiction of one speci ﬁ c type of RTK being recruited to several different PM μ Ds ? ( i ) Unique properties ofspeci ﬁ c cell types . Anobvious possibilityis that speci ﬁ c cell types have intrinsic properties that allow selective routing of a particular RTK to a given microdomain . This could occur as a result of abundance of a given PM μ D in a cell type , or by cell - speci ﬁ c receptor routing mechanisms . Consistent with this in - terpretation , actin - dependent protrusive microdomains such as dor - salruf ﬂ es are restricted to certain cell types and potentiated by Gab1 expression [ 231 ] and are impacted by substrate stiffness [ 232 ] . Moreover , skeletal and heart muscle express high levels of Cav - 3 [ 39 , 40 , 271 ] , suggesting unique abundance or function of caveolae in these cells . These ﬁ ndings indicate that cell type differences in - deed may contribute in part to the ability of certain RTKs to partition into speci ﬁ c PM μ Ds upon ligand binding . ( ii ) RTKs exist in equilibrium between different microdomains . For an RTK such as EGFR that can partition into several distinct PM μ Ds upon ligand binding , the distribution of each receptor type within various microdomains controls signaling outcome . Hence , different subpopulations of EGFR may be recruited to spe - ci ﬁ c PM μ Ds , such that microdomains “ compete ” for RTKs recruit - ment . Indeed silencing of the tetraspanin CD82 resulted in increased association of EGFR within plasma membrane clathrin structures [ 205 ] . In a series of seminal studies by di Fiore & col . , the distribution of ligand - bound EGFR within plasma membrane clathrin structures and cholesterol , raft - like structures was shown to depend on the concentration of EGF ligand [ 272 , 273 ] . At low [ EGF ] , the receptor lo - calizedprimarilytoclathrinstructures , whileathigher [ EGF ] , EGFRis ef ﬁ ciently ubiquitinylated and routed to raft membranes devoid of clathrin [ 20 ] . Hence , while a particular receptor such as EGFR may be localized to lipid rafts , clathrinstructuresorTEM , there arespecif - ic conditions that facilitate preferential recruitment to a particular microdomain , thus allowing context - speci ﬁ c signaling . ( iii ) Certain PM μ Ds may exhibit spatial and compositional overlap . While there is abundant evidence that lipid rafts , clathrin structures , TEMs and actin - based ruf ﬂ es are largely distinct and have unique enrichmentpro ﬁ lesforlipidsandproteins , RTKsarenotpassivelyin - corporated into PM μ Ds . Indeed speci ﬁ c signaling functions of RTKs may remodel certain properties of PM μ Ds , thus effecting partial overlap of these microdomains . In the absence of EGF stimulation , EGFR is found inlipid microdomainsenriched in GM1 , and EGF stim - ulation results in coalescence of these lipid PM μ Ds with GPI - enriched cholesterol microdomains [ 112 ] . Interestingly , EGF stimu - lation also results in the formation of plasma membrane clathrin structuresrichinthelipidraftmarkerGM1 [ 96 ] . Interestingly , nearly all EGFR - positive clathrin structures contained GM1 , while other clathrin structures were not selectively enriched in GM1 . Plasma membrane clathrin structures are indeed highly heterogeneous in size , lifetime , and composition [ 139 , 141 , 143 , 146 , 274 , 275 ] . Taken to - gether , this suggests that a subset of clathrin structuresmay bemore lipid - ordered and harbor lipid raft components upon EGF stimula - tion . These studies begin to suggest that a straightforward view of purely independent PM μ Ds may be too simplistic , and instead sug - gest that PM μ Ds form more of a continuum , with highly dynamic , partial spatial overlap of certain component proteins and / or lipids . Many studies to date have examined how a single , particular PM μ D controls receptor signaling . While much has been learned from this , systematic study of the dynamic localization of RTKs and acti - vated signaling intermediates within multiple PM μ Ds at the same time will greatly further our understanding of how PM μ Ds control receptor signaling . Study of the context - speci ﬁ c signaling of RTKs within speci ﬁ c microdomains will greatly bene ﬁ t from the contin - ued development of ﬂ uorescent signaling biosensors that allow spa - tiotemporal visualization of individual signaling events within de ﬁ ned PM μ Ds at high resolution . Given the role that RTKs play in human physiology and the impact that disruption of RTKs has in human diseases such as cancer , it is of great interest to understand the spatiotemporal regulation of RTK signaling within a range of speci ﬁ c PM μ Ds . Many of the proteins and lipids that underlie the formation of PM μ Ds are associated with altered RTK signaling and speci ﬁ c diseases in vivo [ 276 ] ; however , these proteins are also found outside of PM μ Ds and may have many other possible functions . Future studies that will continue to expand our understanding of how the spatial and temporal organi - zationofreceptorsignalingcontrolscellularandsystemicphysiology will provide crucialinformation aboutthecontext - dependentrole of receptor tyrosine kinases in diseases such as cancer and diabetes . 1973 R . C . Delos Santos et al . / Cellular Signalling 27 ( 2015 ) 1963 – 1976 Acknowledgments We would like to acknowledge themanyexcellent studies related to controlof receptortyrosinekinase signalingthatwe were notabletoin - clude in this work . C . N . A . is supported by Operating Grant No . 125854 from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research . References [ 1 ] T . Pawson , Eur . J . Cancer 38 ( 2002 ) S3 . [ 2 ] M . A . Lemmon , J . Schlessinger , Cell 141 ( 2010 ) 1117 . [ 3 ] L . K . Goh , A . Sorkin , Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 5 ( 2013 ) a017459 . [ 4 ] A . Sorkin , L . K . Goh , Exp . Cell Res . 315 ( 2009 ) 683 . [ 5 ] N . Li , M . Lorinczi , K . Ireton , L . A . Elferink , J . Biol . Chem . 282 ( 2007 ) 16764 . [ 6 ] A . S . Martins , J . L . Ordóñez , A . T . Amaral , F . Prins , G . Floris , M . Debiec - Rychter , P . C . W . Hogendoorn , E . de Alava , PLoS One 6 ( 2011 ) e19846 . [ 7 ] B . P . Ceresa , A . W . Kao , S . R . Santeler , J . E . Pessin , Mol . Cell . Biol . 18 ( 1998 ) 3862 . [ 8 ] M . J . F . Crupi , D . S . Richardson , L . M . Mulligan , Cancer Res 74 ( 2014 ) 3450 . [ 9 ] C . Le Roy , J . L . Wrana , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 6 ( 2005 ) 112 . [ 10 ] A . Sorkin , M . von Zastrow , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 ( 2009 ) 609 . [ 11 ] J . E . Murphy , B . E . Padilla , B . Hasdemir , G . S . Cottrell , N . W . Bunnett , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 106 ( 2009 ) 17615 . [ 12 ] H . W . Platta , H . Stenmark , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 23 ( 2011 ) 393 . [ 13 ] K . E . Cosker , R . A . Segal , Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 6 ( 2014 ) a020669 . [ 14 ] P . P . Di Fiore , M . von Zastrow , Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 6 ( 2014 ) . [ 15 ] J . Omerovic , D . E . Hammond , I . A . Prior , M . J . Clague , J . ProteomeRes . 11 ( 2012 ) 5157 . [ 16 ] L . P . Sousa , I . Lax , H . Shen , S . M . Ferguson , P . De Camilli , J . Schlessinger , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 109 ( 2012 ) 4419 . [ 17 ] A . Sawano , S . Takayama , M . Matsuda , A . Miyawaki , Dev . Cell 3 ( 2002 ) 245 . [ 18 ] P . J . Verveer , F . S . Wouters , A . R . Reynolds , P . I . Bastiaens , Science 290 ( 2000 ) 1567 . [ 19 ] G . Jentsch , R . Kree , ( 2008 ) . [ 20 ] S . Sigismund , V . Algisi , G . Nappo , A . Conte , R . Pascolutti , A . Cuomo , T . Bonaldi , E . Argenzio , L . G . G . C . Verhoef , E . Maspero , F . Bianchi , F . Capuani , A . Ciliberto , S . Polo , P . P . Di Fiore , EMBO J . 32 ( 2013 ) 2140 . [ 21 ] A . H . A . Clayton , F . Walker , S . G . Orchard , C . Henderson , D . Fuchs , J . Rothacker , E . C . Nice , A . W . Burgess , J . Biol . Chem . 280 ( 2005 ) 30392 . [ 22 ] S . Davis , N . Gale , T . Aldrich , P . Maisonpierre , V . Lhotak , T . Pawson , M . Goldfarb , G . Yancopoulos , Science 266 ( 80 - ) ( 1994 ) 816 . [ 23 ] K . Salaita , P . M . Nair , R . S . Petit , R . M . Neve , D . Das , J . W . Gray , J . T . Groves , Science 327 ( 2010 ) 1380 . [ 24 ] P . A . Bromann , H . Korkaya , S . A . Courtneidge , Oncogene 23 ( 2004 ) 7957 . [ 25 ] Y . H . Soung , J . L . Clifford , J . Chung , BMB Rep . 43 ( 2010 ) 311 . [ 26 ] X . Zhang , J . E . Groopman , J . F . Wang , J . Cell . Physiol . 202 ( 2005 ) 205 . [ 27 ] J . W . Lee , R . L . Juliano , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1542 ( 2002 ) 23 . [ 28 ] G . Tarcic , S . K . Boguslavsky , J . Wakim , T . Kiuchi , A . Liu , F . Reinitz , D . Nathanson , T . Takahashi , P . S . Mischel , T . Ng , Y . Yarden , Curr . Biol . 19 ( 2009 ) 1788 . [ 29 ] C . Chabot , K . Spring , J . - P . Gratton , M . Elchebly , I . Royal , Mol . Cell . Biol . 29 ( 2009 ) 241 . [ 30 ] A . J . Flint , T . Tiganis , D . Barford , N . K . Tonks , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 94 ( 1997 ) 1680 . [ 31 ] A . Salmeen , J . N . Andersen , M . P . Myers , N . K . Tonks , D . Barford , Mol . Cell 6 ( 2000 ) 1401 . [ 32 ] V . Sangwan , G . N . Paliouras , J . V . Abella , N . Dubé , A . Monast , M . L . Tremblay , M . Park , J . Biol . Chem . 283 ( 2008 ) 34374 . [ 33 ] H . Lee , A . M . Bennett , Mol . Cell . Biol . 33 ( 2013 ) 1430 . [ 34 ] A . R . Reynolds , C . Tischer , P . J . Verveer , O . Rocks , P . I . H . Bastiaens , Nat . Cell Biol . 5 ( 2003 ) 447 . [ 35 ] E . R . Eden , I . J . White , A . Tsapara , C . E . Futter , Nat . Cell Biol . 12 ( 2010 ) 267 . [ 36 ] C . J . Stefan , A . G . Manford , S . D . Emr , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 25 ( 2013 ) 434 . [ 37 ] K . Simons , G . van Meer , Biochemistry 27 ( 1988 ) 6197 . [ 38 ] K . Simons , E . Ikonen , Nature 387 ( 1997 ) 569 . [ 39 ] C . J . Fielding , Lipid Rafts Caveolae From Membr . Biophys . to Cell Biol , 2006 . 1 . [ 40 ] A . Cambi , D . S . Lidke , Cell Membrane and Nanodomains : From Biochemistry to Nanoscopy , 1st ed . CRC Press , Boca Raton , FL , 2014 . [ 41 ] K . Simons , D . Toomre , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 1 ( 2000 ) 31 . [ 42 ] L . Anchisi , S . Dessì , A . Pani , A . Mandas , Front . Physiol . 3 ( JAN 2013 ) 1 . [ 43 ] L . J . Pike , J . Lipid Res . 50 ( Suppl . ) ( 2009 ) S323 . [ 44 ] L . J . Pike , J . Lipid Res . 47 ( 2006 ) 1597 . [ 45 ] S . Mukherjee , F . R . Max ﬁ eld , Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 20 ( 2004 ) 839 . [ 46 ] S . Sonnino , A . Prinetti , Curr . Med . Chem . 20 ( 2013 ) 4 . [ 47 ] K . Simons , J . Sampaio , Cold Spring Harb . ( 2011 ) 1 . [ 48 ] D . Lingwood , K . Simons , Science 327 ( 2010 ) 46 . [ 49 ] I . Levental , M . Grzybek , K . Simons , Biochemistry 49 ( 2010 ) 6305 . [ 50 ] G . P . Otto , B . J . Nichols , J . Cell Sci . 124 ( 2011 ) 3933 . [ 51 ] L . J . Pike , Biochim . Biophys . Acta , Mol . Cell Res . 1746 ( 2005 ) 260 . [ 52 ] M . P . Mattson , Membrane Microdomain Signaling : Lipid Rafts in Biology and Med - icine , 2005 . [ 53 ] K . Simons , M . J . Gerl , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 ( 2010 ) 688 . [ 54 ] R . G . Parton , K . Simons , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 ( 2007 ) 185 . [ 55 ] T . M . Williams , M . P . Lisanti , Genome Biol . 5 ( 2004 ) 214 . [ 56 ] C . L . Hoop , V . N . Sivanandam , R . Kodali , M . N . Srnec , P . C . vanderWel , Biochemistry51 ( 2012 ) 90 . [ 57 ] M . M . Vihanto , C . Vindis , V . Djonov , D . P . Cerretti , U . Huynh - Do , J . Cell Sci . 119 ( 2006 ) 2299 . [ 58 ] S . Parpal , M . Karlsson , H . Thorn , P . Strålfors , J . Biol . Chem . 276 ( 2001 ) 9670 . [ 59 ] M . Karlsson , H . Thorn , A . Danielsson , K . G . Stenkula , A . Öst , J . Gustavsson , F . H . Nystrom , P . Strålfors , Eur . J . Biochem . 271 ( 2004 ) 2471 . [ 60 ] J . Gustavsson , S . Parpal , M . Karlsson , C . Ramsing , H . Thorn , M . Borg , M . Lindroth , K . H . Peterson , K . - E . Magnusson , P . Strâlfors , FASEB J . 13 ( 1999 ) 1961 . [ 61 ] C . C . Mastick , M . J . Brady , A . R . Saltiel , J . Biol . Chem . 129 ( 1995 ) 1523 . [ 62 ] A . Kimura , S . Mora , S . Shigematsu , J . E . Pessin , A . R . Saltiel , J . Biol . Chem . 277 ( 2002 ) 30153 . [ 63 ] R . P . Souto , G . Vallega , J . Wharton , J . Vinten , J . Tranum - Jensen , P . F . Pilch , J . Biol . Chem . 278 ( 2003 ) 18321 . [ 64 ] M . Foti , G . Porcheron , M . Fournier , C . Maeder , J . - L . Carpentier , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 104 ( 2007 ) 1242 . [ 65 ] J . Liu , P . Oh , T . Horner , R . A . Rogers , J . E . Schnitzer , J . Biol . Chem . 272 ( 1997 ) 7211 . [ 66 ] P . Liu , Y . Ying , Y . G . Ko , R . G . W . Anderson , J . Biol . Chem . 271 ( 1996 ) 10299 . [ 67 ] S . Peiró , J . X . Comella , C . Enrich , D . Martín - Zanca , N . Rocamora , J . Biol . Chem . 275 ( 2000 ) 37846 . [ 68 ] K . Brückner , J . Pablo Labrador , P . Scheiffele , A . Herb , P . H . Seeburg , R . Klein , Neuron 22 ( 1999 ) 511 . [ 69 ] H . Wang , A . X . Wang , E . J . Barrett , Endocrinol . Metab . 300 ( 2011 ) E134 . [ 70 ] S . Vainio , S . Vainio , S . Heino , S . Heino , J . - E . Mansson , J . - E . Mansson , P . Fredman , P . Fredman , E . Kuismanen , E . Kuismanen , O . Vaarala , O . Vaarala , E . Ikonen , E . Ikonen , EMBO Rep . 3 ( 2002 ) 95 . [ 71 ] A . Klip , Y . Sun , T . T . Chiu , K . P . Foley , Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 306 ( 2014 ) C879 . [ 72 ] A . W . Cohen , T . P . Combs , P . E . Scherer , M . P . Lisanti , Am . J . Physiol . Endocrinol . Metab . 285 ( 2003 ) E1151 . [ 73 ] M . Yamamoto , Y . Toya , C . Schwencke , M . P . Lisanti , M . G . Myers , Y . Ishikawa , J . Biol . Chem . 273 ( 1998 ) 26962 . [ 74 ] K . Fecchi , D . Volonte , M . P . Hezel , K . Schmeck , F . Galbiati , FASEB J . 20 ( 2006 ) 705 . [ 75 ] A . W . Cohen , B . Razani , X . B . Wang , T . P . Combs , T . M . Williams , P . E . Scherer , M . P . Lisanti , Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 285 ( 2003 ) C222 . [ 76 ] F . H . Nystrom , H . Chen , L . N . Cong , Y . Li , M . J . Quon , Mol . Endocrinol . 13 ( 1999 ) 2013 . [ 77 ] A . W . Cohen , R . Hnasko , W . Schubert , M . P . Lisanti , Physiol . Rev . 84 ( 2004 ) 1341 . [ 78 ] C . A . Baumann , V . Ribon , M . Kanzaki , D . C . Thurmond , S . Mora , S . Shigematsu , P . E . Bickel , J . E . Pessin , A . R . Saltiel , Nature 407 ( 2000 ) 202 . [ 79 ] D . Bridges , L . Chang , I . J . Lodhi , N . A . Clark , A . R . Saltiel , PLoS One 7 ( 2012 ) 1 . [ 80 ] J . Liu , A . Kimura , C . A . Baumann , R . Alan , A . R . Saltiel , Society 22 ( 2002 ) 3599 . [ 81 ] Z . J . Cheng , R . D . Singh , E . L . Holicky , C . L . Wheatley , D . L . Marks , R . E . Pagano , J . Biol . Chem . 285 ( 2010 ) 15119 . [ 82 ] A . Grande - García , A . Echarri , J . De Rooij , N . B . Alderson , C . M . Waterman - Storer , J . M . Valdivielso , M . A . Del Pozo , J . Cell Biol . 177 ( 2007 ) 683 . [ 83 ] R . T . Watson , S . Shigematsu , S . H . Chiang , S . Mora , M . Kanzaki , I . G . Macara , A . R . Saltiel , J . E . Pessin , J . Cell Biol . 154 ( 2001 ) 829 . [ 84 ] A . R . Saltiel , J . E . Pessin , Traf ﬁ c 4 ( 2003 ) 711 . [ 85 ] K . Podar , Y . T . Tai , C . E . Cole , T . Hideshima , M . Sattler , A . Hamblin , N . Mitsiades , R . L . Schlossman , F . E . Davies , G . J . Morgan , N . C . Munshi , D . Chauhan , K . C . Anderson , J . Biol . Chem . 278 ( 2003 ) 5794 . [ 86 ] L . R . Gauthier , S . M . Robbins , Life Sci . 74 ( 2003 ) 207 . [ 87 ] M . E . Pitulescu , R . H . Adams , Genes Dev 15 ( 2010 ) 2480 . [ 88 ] C . S . Huang , J . Zhou , A . K . Feng , C . C . Lynch , J . Klumperman , S . J . DeArmond , W . C . Mobley , J . Biol . Chem . 274 ( 1999 ) 36707 . [ 89 ] E . J . Jung , C . W . Kim , Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 402 ( 2010 ) 736 . [ 90 ] T . R . Bilderback , V . Gazula , M . P . Lisanti , R . T . Dobrowsky , 274 ( 1999 ) 257 . [ 91 ] C . Wu , S . Butz , Y . S . Yingt , R . G . W . Anderson , J . Biol . Chem . 272 ( 1997 ) 3554 . [ 92 ] A . S . Limpert , J . C . Karlo , G . E . Landreth , Mol . Cell . Biol . 27 ( 2007 ) 5686 . [ 93 ] T . Nishida , T . Arii , A . Takaoka , R . Yoshimura , Y . Endo , ActaHistochem . Cytochem . 40 ( 2007 ) 93 . [ 94 ] A . Abulrob , S . Giuseppin , M . F . Andrade , A . McDermid , M . Moreno , D . Stanimirovic , Oncogene 23 ( 2004 ) 6967 . [ 95 ] M . O . Parat , G . J . Riggins , Neuro - Oncology 14 ( 2012 ) 679 . [ 96 ] C . Puri , D . Tosoni , R . Comai , A . Rabellino , D . Segat , F . Caneva , P . Luzzi , P . P . DiFiore , C . Tacchetti , Mol . Biol . Cell 16 ( 2005 ) 2704 . [ 97 ] J . Z . Rappoport , S . M . Simon , J . Cell Sci . 122 ( 2009 ) 1301 . [ 98 ] M . Kazazic , K . Roepstorff , L . E . Johannessen , N . M . Pedersen , B . van Deurs , E . Stang , I . H . Madshus , Traf ﬁ c 7 ( 2006 ) 1518 . [ 99 ] C . Mineo , G . N . Gill , G . Richard , W . Anderson , R . G . W . Anderson , 274 ( 1999 ) 30636 . [ 100 ] T . Ringerike , F . D . Blystad , F . O . Levy , I . H . Madshus , E . Stang , J . Cell Sci . 115 ( 2002 ) 1331 . [ 101 ] M . Sargiacomo , P . E . Scherer , Z . Tang , E . Kübler , K . S . Song , M . C . Sanders , M . P . Lisanti , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 26 ( 1995 ) 9407 . [ 102 ] B . P . Head , P . A . Insel , Trends Cell Biol . 17 ( 2007 ) 51 . [ 103 ] T . M . Williams , F . Medina , I . Badano , R . B . Hazan , J . Hutchinson , W . J . Muller , N . G . Chopra , P . E . Scherer , R . G . Pestell , M . P . Lisanti , J . Biol . Chem . 279 ( 2004 ) 51630 . [ 104 ] J . A . Engelman , C . Chu , A . Lin , H . Jo , T . Ikezu , T . Okamoto , D . S . Kohtz , M . P . Lisanti , FEBS Lett . 428 ( 1998 ) 205 . [ 105 ] J . Couet , M . Sargiacomo , M . P . Lisanti , J . Biol . Chem . 272 ( 1997 ) 30429 . [ 106 ] W . Y . Park , J . S . Park , K . A . Cho , D . I . Kim , Y . G . Ko , J . S . Seo , S . C . Park , J . Biol . Chem . 275 ( 2000 ) 20847 . [ 107 ] S . Lambert , H . Ameels , R . Gniadecki , M . Hérin , Y . Poumay , J . Cell . Physiol . 217 ( 2008 ) 834 . [ 108 ] X . Wang , Q . Yan , P . Sun , J . - W . Liu , L . Go , S . M . McDaniel , A . S . Paller , Cancer Res . 67 ( 2007 ) 9986 . [ 109 ] M . Yamamoto , Y . Toya , R . A . Jensen , Y . Ishikawa , Exp . Cell Res . 247 ( 1999 ) 380 . [ 110 ] A . I . Magee , I . Parmryd , Genome Biol . 4 ( 2003 ) 234 . [ 111 ] K . Roepstorff , P . Thomsen , K . Sandvig , B . Van Deurs , J . Biol . Chem . 277 ( 2002 ) 18954 . 1974 R . C . Delos Santos et al . / Cellular Signalling 27 ( 2015 ) 1963 – 1976 [ 112 ] E . G . Hofman , M . O . Ruonala , A . N . Bader , D . van den Heuvel , J . Voortman , R . C . Roovers , A . J . Verkleij , H . C . Gerritsen , P . M . P . van Bergen En Henegouwen , J . Cell Sci . 121 ( 2008 ) 2519 . [ 113 ] C . Y . Lin , J . Y . Huang , L . - W . Lo , Biochim . Biophys . Acta Biomembr . 1848 ( 2015 ) 886 . [ 114 ] M . E . Irwin , K . L . Mueller , N . Bohin , Y . Ge , J . L . Boerner , J . Cell . Physiol . 226 ( 2011 ) 2316 . [ 115 ] Y . O . Hea , J . L . Eun , S . Yoon , H . C . Byung , S . C . Kang , J . H . Sung , Prostate67 ( 2007 ) 1061 . [ 116 ] Y . C . Li , M . J . Park , S . - K . Ye , C . - W . Kim , Y . - N . Kim , Am . J . Pathol . 168 ( 2006 ) 1107 . [ 117 ] R . G . W . Anderson , K . Jacobson , Science 296 ( 2002 ) 1821 . [ 118 ] L . M . Mulligan , Nat . Rev . Cancer 14 ( 2014 ) 173 . [ 119 ] D . S . Richardson , A . Z . Lai , L . M . Mulligan , Oncogene 25 ( 2006 ) 3206 . [ 120 ] M . G . Tansey , R . H . Baloh , J . Milbrandt , E . M . Johnson , Neuron 25 ( 2000 ) 611 . [ 121 ] M . Encinas , M . G . Tansey , B . A . Tsui - Pierchala , J . X . Comella , J . Milbrandt , E . M . Johnson , J . Neurosci . 21 ( 2001 ) 1464 . [ 122 ] T . Jahn , E . Leifheit , S . Gooch , S . Sindhu , K . Weinberg , Blood 110 ( 2007 ) 1739 . [ 123 ] M . F . Langhorst , A . Reuter , C . A . Stuermer , Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 62 ( 2005 ) 2228 . [ 124 ] O . O . Glebov , N . A . Bright , B . J . Nichols , Nat . Cell Biol . 8 ( 2006 ) 46 . [ 125 ] I . Fernow , A . Icking , R . Tikkanen , Eur . J . Cell Biol . 86 ( 2007 ) 345 . [ 126 ] M . Amaddii , M . Meister , A . Banning , A . Tomasovic , J . Mooz , K . Rajalingam , R . Tikkanen , J . Biol . Chem . 287 ( 2012 ) 7265 . [ 127 ] C . Neumann - Giesen , I . Fernow , M . Amaddii , R . Tikkanen , J . CellSci . 120 ( 2007 ) 395 . [ 128 ] A . Tomasovic , S . Traub , R . Tikkanen , PLoS One 7 ( 2012 ) e29739 . [ 129 ] A . Banning , N . Kurrle , M . Meister , R . Tikkanen , Cells 3 ( 2014 ) 129 . [ 130 ] A . Kimura , C . A . Baumann , S . H . Chiang , A . R . Saltiel , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 98 ( 2001 ) 9098 . [ 131 ] L . J . Foster , C . L . De Hoog , M . Mann , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 100 ( 2003 ) 5813 . [ 132 ] S . M . Robbins , N . A . Quintrell , J . M . Bishop , Mol . Cell . Biol . 15 ( 1995 ) 3507 . [ 133 ] A . M . Shenoy - Scaria , D . J . Dietzen , J . Kwong , D . C . Link , D . M . Lublin , J . Cell Biol . 126 ( 1994 ) 353 . [ 134 ] R . M . Young , D . Holowka , B . Baird , J . Biol . Chem . 278 ( 2003 ) 20746 . [ 135 ] T . Hitosugi , M . Sato , K . Sasaki , Y . Umezawa , Cancer Res . 67 ( 2007 ) 8139 . [ 136 ] Y . Zhou , H . Liang , T . Rodkey , N . Ariotti , R . G . Parton , J . F . Hancock , Mol . Cell . Biol . 34 ( 2014 ) 862 . [ 137 ] T . Tian , A . Harding , K . Inder , S . Plowman , R . G . Parton , J . F . Hancock , Nat . Cell Biol . 9 ( 2007 ) 905 . [ 138 ] M . Mettlen , M . Stoeber , D . Loerke , C . N . Antonescu , G . Danuser , S . L . Schmid , Mol . Biol . Cell 20 ( 2009 ) 3251 . [ 139 ] C . N . Antonescu , F . Aguet , G . Danuser , S . L . Schmid , Mol . Biol . Cell 22 ( 2011 ) 2588 . [ 140 ] F . Aguet , C . N . Antonescu , M . Mettlen , S . L . Schmid , G . Danuser , Dev . Cell 26 ( 2013 ) 279 . [ 141 ] C . N . Antonescu , G . Danuser , S . L . Schmid , Mol . Biol . Cell 21 ( 2010 ) 2944 . [ 142 ] D . Loerke , M . Mettlen , D . Yarar , K . Jaqaman , H . Jaqaman , G . Danuser , S . L . Schmid , PLoS Biol . 7 ( 2009 ) e57 . [ 143 ] M . Mettlen , D . Loerke , D . Yarar , G . Danuser , S . L . Schmid , J . CellBiol . 188 ( 2010 ) 919 . [ 144 ] S . Saffarian , E . Cocucci , T . Kirchhausen , PLoS Biol . 7 ( 2009 ) e1000191 . [ 145 ] J . Grove , D . J . Metcalf , A . E . Knight , S . T . Wavre - Shapton , T . Sun , E . D . Protonotarios , L . D . Grif ﬁ n , J . Lippincott - Schwartz , M . Marsh , Mol . Biol . Cell 25 ( 2014 ) 3581 . [ 146 ] M . Ehrlich , W . Boll , A . Van Oijen , R . Hariharan , K . Chandran , M . L . Nibert , T . Kirchhausen , Cell 118 ( 2004 ) 591 . [ 147 ] A . Kiyatkin , E . Aksamitiene , N . I . Markevich , N . M . Borisov , J . B . Hoek , B . N . Kholodenko , J . Biol . Chem . 281 ( 2006 ) 19925 . [ 148 ] S . D . Conner , S . L . Schmid , J . Cell Biol . 156 ( 2002 ) 921 . [ 149 ] L . Kuai , S . - E . Ong , J . M . Madison , X . Wang , J . R . Duvall , T . A . Lewis , C . J . Luce , S . D . Conner , D . A . Pearlman , J . L . Wood , S . L . Schreiber , S . A . Carr , E . M . Scolnick , S . J . Haggarty , Chem . Biol . 18 ( 2011 ) 891 . [ 150 ] H . Shen , S . M . Ferguson , N . Dephoure , R . Park , Y . Yang , L . Volpicelli - Daley , S . Gygi , J . Schlessinger , P . De Camilli , Mol . Biol . Cell 22 ( 2011 ) 493 . [ 151 ] N . S . Liu , L . S . Loo , E . Loh , L . - F . Seet , W . Hong , EMBO J . 28 ( 2009 ) 3485 . [ 152 ] I . Dikic , FEBS Lett . 529 ( 2002 ) 110 . [ 153 ] K . H . Kirsch , M . - M . Georgescu , S . Ishimaru , H . Hanafusa , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 96 ( 1999 ) 6211 . [ 154 ] J . Domin , J . Biol . Chem . 275 ( 2000 ) 11943 . [ 155 ] Y . Posor , M . Eichhorn - Gruenig , D . Puchkov , J . Schöneberg , A . Ullrich , A . Lampe , R . Müller , S . Zarbakhsh , F . Gulluni , E . Hirsch , M . Krauss , C . Schultz , J . Schmoranzer , F . Noé , V . Haucke , Nature 499 ( 2013 ) 233 . [ 156 ] K . Ma , S . M . Cheung , A . J . Marshall , V . Duronio , Cell . Signal . 20 ( 2008 ) 684 . [ 157 ] E . L . Clayton , S . Minogue , M . G . Waugh , Prog . Lipid Res . 52 ( 2013 ) 294 . [ 158 ] G . R . V . Hammond , M . J . Fischer , K . E . Anderson , J . Holdich , A . Koteci , T . Balla , R . F . Irvine , Science 337 ( 2012 ) 727 . [ 159 ] C . Zhao , G . Du , K . Skowronek , M . A . Frohman , D . Bar - Sagi , Nat . Cell Biol . 9 ( 2007 ) 706 . [ 160 ] T . Kawasaki , T . Kobayashi , T . Ueyama , Y . Shirai , N . Saito , Biochem . J . 409 ( 2008 ) 471 . [ 161 ] C . Antonescu , C . Garay , R . C . Delos Santos , G . Judge , S . Bautista , S . Lucarelli , R . Pandey , FASEB J 28 ( 1 Supplement ) ( 2014 ) 603 . 2 . [ 162 ] E . Elenko , T . Fischer , I . Niesman , T . Harding , T . McQuistan , M . Von Zastrow , M . G . Farquhar , Mol . Pharmacol . 64 ( 2003 ) 11 . [ 163 ] M . Yáñez - Mó , O . Barreiro , M . Gordon - Alonso , M . Sala - Valdés , F . Sánchez - Madrid , Trends Cell Biol . 19 ( 2009 ) 434 . [ 164 ] K . Kitadokoro , D . Bordo , G . Galli , R . Petracca , F . Falugi , S . Abrignani , G . Grandi , M . Bolognesi , EMBO J . 20 ( 2001 ) 12 . [ 165 ] F . Le Naour , M . André , C . Greco , M . Billard , B . Sordat , J . - F . Emile , F . Lanza , C . Boucheix , E . Rubinstein , Mol . Cell . Proteomics 5 ( 2006 ) 845 . [ 166 ] M . André , J . - P . Le Caer , C . Greco , S . Planchon , W . El Nemer , C . Boucheix , E . Rubinstein , J . Chamot - Rooke , F . Le Naour , Proteomics 6 ( 2006 ) 1437 . [ 167 ] F . Le Naour , M . André , C . Boucheix , E . Rubinstein , Proteomics 6 ( 2006 ) 6447 . [ 168 ] M . Sala - Valdés , A . Ursa , S . Charrin , E . Rubinstein , M . E . Hemler , F . Sánchez - Madrid , M . Yáñez - Mó , J . Biol . Chem . 281 ( 2006 ) 19665 . [ 169 ] C . Espenel , E . Margeat , P . Dosset , C . Arduise , C . LeGrimellec , C . A . Royer , C . Boucheix , E . Rubinstein , P . - E . Milhiet , J . Cell Biol . 182 ( 2008 ) 765 . [ 170 ] S . Nydegger , S . Khurana , D . N . Krementsov , M . Foti , M . Thali , J . Cell Biol . 173 ( 2006 ) 795 . [ 171 ] M . E . Hemler , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 6 ( 2005 ) 801 . [ 172 ] C . Claas , C . S . Stipp , M . E . Hemler , J . Biol . Chem . 276 ( 2001 ) 7974 . [ 173 ] O . Barreiro , M . Zamai , M . Yáñez - Mó , E . Tejera , P . López - Romero , P . N . Monk , E . Gratton , V . R . Caiolfa , F . Sánchez - Madrid , J . Cell Biol . 183 ( 2008 ) 527 . [ 174 ] O . E , B . T . , M . E , S . H . , van M . G . , B . F , ( 2006 ) . [ 175 ] F . Berditchevski , E . Odintsova , Traf ﬁ c 8 ( 2007 ) 89 . [ 176 ] E . Odintsova , F . Berditchevski , Proteins Cell Regul . 9 ( 2013 ) 109 . [ 177 ] N . Anzai , Y . Lee , B . - S . Youn , S . Fukuda , Y . - J . Kim , C . Mantel , M . Akashi , H . E . Broxmeyer , Blood 99 ( 2002 ) 4413 . [ 178 ] M . Takahashi , T . Sugiura , M . Abe , K . Ishii , K . Shirasuna , Int . J . Cancer 121 ( 2007 ) 1919 . [ 179 ] R . P . Devbhandari , G . - M . Shi , A . - W . Ke , F . - Z . Wu , X . - Y . Huang , X . - Y . Wang , Y . - H . Shi , Z . - B . Ding , Y . Xu , Z . Dai , J . Fan , J . Zhou , PLoS One 6 ( 2011 ) e24901 . [ 180 ] Y . Murayama , Y . Shinomura , K . Oritani , J . - I . Miyagawa , H . Yoshida , M . Nishida , F . Katsube , M . Shiraga , T . Miyazaki , T . Nakamoto , S . Tsutsui , S . Tamura , S . Higashiyama , I . Shimomura , N . Hayashi , J . Cell . Physiol . 216 ( 2008 ) 135 . [ 181 ] E . Odintsova , T . Sugiura , F . Berditchevski , Curr . Biol . 10 ( 2000 ) 1009 . [ 182 ] E . Odintsova , J . Voortman , E . Gilbert , F . Berditchevski , J . Cell Sci . 116 ( 2003 ) 4557 . [ 183 ] S . Tugues , S . Honjo , C . König , N . Padhan , J . Kroon , L . Gualandi , X . Li , I . Barkefors , V . L . Thijssen , A . W . Grif ﬁ oen , L . Claesson - Welsh , J . Biol . Chem . 288 ( 2013 ) 19060 . [ 184 ] A . Mela , J . E . Goldman , J . Neurosci . 33 ( 2013 ) 7952 . [ 185 ] M . Franco , C . Muratori , S . Corso , E . Tenaglia , A . Bertotti , L . Capparuccia , L . Trusolino , P . M . Comoglio , L . Tamagnone , J . Biol . Chem . 285 ( 2010 ) 38756 . [ 186 ] S . K . Klosek , K . - I . Nakashiro , S . Hara , S . Shintani , H . Hasegawa , H . Hamakawa , Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 336 ( 2005 ) 408 . [ 187 ] X . Deng , Q . Li , J . Hoff , M . Novak , H . Yang , H . Jin , S . F . Erfani , C . Sharma , P . Zhou , I . Rabinovitz , A . Sonnenberg , Y . Yi , P . Zhou , C . S . Stipp , D . M . Kaetzel , M . E . Hemler , X . H . Yang , Neoplasia 14 ( 2012 ) 678 . [ 188 ] X . A . Zhang , A . L . Bontrager , M . E . Hemler , J . Biol . Chem . 276 ( 2001 ) 25005 . [ 189 ] R . J . Davis , M . P . Czech , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 82 ( 1985 ) 1974 . [ 190 ] E . Odintsova , G . van Niel , H . Conjeaud , G . Raposo , R . Iwamoto , E . Mekada , F . Berditchevski , J . Biol . Chem . 288 ( 2013 ) 26323 . [ 191 ] F . Berditchevski , K . F . Tolias , K . Wong , C . L . Carpenter , M . E . Hemler , J . Biol . Chem . 272 ( 1997 ) 2595 . [ 192 ] R . L . Yauch , M . E . Hemler , Biochem . J . 351 ( Pt 3 ) ( 2000 ) 629 . [ 193 ] V . Carloni , A . Mazzocca , K . S . Ravichandran , Oncogene 23 ( 2004 ) 1566 . [ 194 ] C . Claas , J . Wahl , D . J . Orlicky , H . Karaduman , M . Schnölzer , T . Kempf , M . Zöller , Biochem . J . 389 ( 2005 ) 99 . [ 195 ] W . M . Liu , F . Zhang , S . Moshiach , B . Zhou , C . Huang , K . Srinivasan , S . Khurana , Y . Zheng , J . M . Lahti , X . A . Zhang , PLoS One 7 ( 2012 ) e51797 . [ 196 ] D . J . Orchard - Webb , T . C . Lee , G . P . Cook , G . E . Blair , BMC Cancer 14 ( 2014 ) 754 . [ 197 ] S . M . Alvares , C . A . Dunn , T . A . Brown , E . E . Wayner , W . G . Carter , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1780 ( 2008 ) 486 . [ 198 ] H . Liu , S . - E . Ong , K . Badu - Nkansah , J . Schindler , F . M . White , R . O . Hynes , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 ( 2011 ) 1379 . [ 199 ] Y . Dong , Y . He , L . deBoer , M . S . Stack , J . W . Lumley , J . A . Clements , J . D . Hooper , J . Biol . Chem . 287 ( 2012 ) 9792 . [ 200 ] J . - J . Park , Y . B . Jin , Y . - J . Lee , J . - S . Lee , Y . - S . Lee , Y . - G . Ko , M . Lee , BMCCancer12 ( 2012 ) 81 . [ 201 ] X . Huang , Y . Li , J . Zhang , Y . Xu , Y . Tian , K . Ma , J . Cell . Biochem . 114 ( 2013 ) 1616 . [ 202 ] M . S . Pols , J . Klumperman , Exp . Cell Res . 315 ( 2009 ) 1584 . [ 203 ] C . Xu , Y . H . Zhang , M . Thangavel , M . M . Richardson , L . Liu , B . Zhou , Y . Zheng , R . S . Ostrom , X . A . Zhang , FASEB J . 23 ( 2009 ) 3273 . [ 204 ] L . Liu , B . He , W . M . Liu , D . Zhou , J . V . Cox , X . A . Zhang , J . Biol . Chem . 282 ( 2007 ) 31631 . [ 205 ] L . Danglot , M . Chaineau , M . Dahan , M . - C . Gendron , N . Boggetto , F . Perez , T . Galli , J . Cell Sci . 123 ( 2010 ) 723 . [ 206 ] S . Hakomori , An . Acad . Bras . Cienc . 76 ( 2004 ) 553 . [ 207 ] S . Hakomori , K . Handa , FEBS Lett . 531 ( 2002 ) 88 . [ 208 ] S . Hakomori , FEBS Lett . 584 ( 2010 ) 1901 . [ 209 ] A . Regina Todeschini , S . Hakomori , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1780 ( 2008 ) 421 . [ 210 ] S . Hakomori Si , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 99 ( 2002 ) 225 . [ 211 ] A . R . Todeschini , J . N . Dos Santos , K . Handa , S . - I . Hakomori , J . Biol . Chem . 282 ( 2007 ) 8123 . [ 212 ] Y . Kawakami , K . Kawakami , W . F . A . Steelant , M . Ono , R . C . Baek , K . Handa , D . A . Withers , S . Hakomori , J . Biol . Chem . 277 ( 2002 ) 34349 . [ 213 ] S . - J . Yoon , K . Nakayama , T . Hikita , K . Handa , S . Hakomori , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 103 ( 2006 ) 18987 . [ 214 ] Ü . Coskun , M . Grzybek , D . Drechsel , K . Simons , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 ( 2011 ) 9044 . [ 215 ] Y . Li , X . Huang , J . Zhang , Y . Li , K . Ma , Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 45 ( 2013 ) 2349 . [ 216 ] A . B . Singh , R . C . Harris , Cell . Signal . 17 ( 2005 ) 1183 . [ 217 ] J . Yoshioka , R . N . Prince , H . Huang , S . B . Perkins , F . U . Cruz , C . MacGillivray , D . A . Lauffenburger , R . T . Lee , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 102 ( 2005 ) 10622 . [ 218 ] W . Shi , J . Cell Biol . 148 ( 2000 ) 591 . [ 219 ] R . Buccione , J . D . Orth , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 ( 2004 ) 647 . [ 220 ] S . Suetsugu , D . Yamazaki , S . Kurisu , T . Takenawa , Dev . Cell 5 ( 2003 ) 595 . [ 221 ] J . Hasegawa , K . Tsujita , T . Takenawa , T . Itoh , Mol . Biol . Cell 23 ( 2012 ) 2481 . [ 222 ] J . - L . Hoon , W . - K . Wong , C . - G . Koh , Mol . Cell . Biol . 32 ( 2012 ) 4246 . [ 223 ] Z . A . Khayat , P . Tong , K . Yaworsky , R . J . Bloch , A . Klip , J . Cell Sci . 113 ( Pt 2 ) ( 2000 ) 279 . 1975 R . C . Delos Santos et al . / Cellular Signalling 27 ( 2015 ) 1963 – 1976 [ 224 ] J . D . Orth , E . W . Krueger , S . G . Weller , M . A . McNiven , Cancer Res . 66 ( 2006 ) 3603 . [ 225 ] J . V . Abella , C . A . Parachoniak , V . Sangwan , M . Park , J . Biol . Chem . 285 ( 2010 ) 24956 . [ 226 ] Z . Gu , E . H . Noss , V . W . Hsu , M . B . Brenner , J . Cell Biol . 193 ( 2011 ) 61 . [ 227 ] P . Dowrick , P . Kenworthy , B . McCann , R . Warn , Eur . J . Cell Biol . 61 ( 1993 ) 44 . [ 228 ] E . W . Krueger , J . D . Orth , H . Cao , M . A . Mcniven , 14 ( 2003 ) 1085 . [ 229 ] L . Lanzetti , A . Palamidessi , L . Areces , G . Scita , P . P . Di Fiore , Nature 429 ( 2004 ) 309 . [ 230 ] C . Casalou , C . Seixas , A . Portelinha , P . Pintado , M . Barros , J . S . Ramalho , S . S . Lopes , D . C . Barral , J . Cell Sci . 127 ( 2014 ) 2709 . [ 231 ] S . Dharmawardhane , L . C . Sanders , S . S . Martin , R . H . Daniels , G . M . Bokoch , 138 ( 1997 ) 1265 . [ 232 ] J . Huynh , F . Bordeleau , C . M . Kraning - Rush , C . A . Reinhart - King , Cell . Mol . Bioeng . 6 ( 2013 ) . [ 233 ] N . Patel , A . Rudich , Z . A . Khayat , R . Garg , A . Klip , Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 ( 2003 ) 4611 . [ 234 ] N . Araki , Y . Egami , Y . Watanabe , T . Hatae , Exp . Cell Res . 313 ( 2007 ) 1496 . [ 235 ] S . Yoshida , A . D . Hoppe , N . Araki , J . A . Swanson , J . Cell Sci . 122 ( 2009 ) 3250 . [ 236 ] J . Hasegawa , E . Tokuda , T . Tenno , K . Tsujita , H . Sawai , H . Hiroaki , T . Takenawa , T . Itoh , J . Cell Biol . 193 ( 2011 ) 901 . [ 237 ] J . V . Abella , R . Vaillancourt , M . M . Frigault , M . G . Ponzo , D . Zuo , V . Sangwan , L . Larose , M . Park , J . Cell Sci . 123 ( 2010 ) 1306 . [ 238 ] L . J . Payne , R . L . Eves , L . Jia , A . S . Mak , PLoS One 9 ( 2014 ) e108257 . [ 239 ] H . Gu , B . G . Neel , Trends Cell Biol . 13 ( 2003 ) 122 . [ 240 ] B . Xing , L . Wang , D . Guo , J . Huang , C . Espenel , G . Kreitzer , J . J . Zhang , L . Guo , X . - Y . Huang , J . Biol . Chem . 288 ( 2013 ) 32827 . [ 241 ] E . Sandilands , V . G . Brunton , M . C . Frame , J . Cell Sci . 120 ( 2007 ) 2555 . [ 242 ] L . Veracini , M . Franco , A . Boureux , V . Simon , S . Roche , C . Benistant , J . Cell Sci . 119 ( 2006 ) 2921 . [ 243 ] S . B . Azimifar , R . T . Bottcher , S . Zanivan , C . Grashoff , M . Kruger , K . R . Legate , M . Mann , R . Fassler , J . Cell Sci . 125 ( 2012 ) 435 . [ 244 ] R . M . Scaife , J . Cell Sci . 116 ( 2002 ) 463 . [ 245 ] R . Plattner , L . Kadlec , K . A . DeMali , A . Kazlauskas , A . M . Pendergast , Genes Dev . 13 ( 1999 ) 2400 . [ 246 ] A . Boureux , O . Furstoss , V . Simon , S . Roche , J . Cell Sci . 118 ( 2005 ) 3717 . [ 247 ] R . F . Wu , Y . Gu , Y . C . Xu , F . E . Nwariaku , L . S . Terada , J . Biol . Chem . 278 ( 2003 ) 36830 . [ 248 ] E . Berrou , M . Bryckaert , Exp . Cell Res . 315 ( 2009 ) 836 . [ 249 ] L . Cossette , O . Hoglinger , L . Mou , S . Shen , Exp . Cell Res . 466 ( 1996 ) 459 . [ 250 ] T . P . Welliver , S . L . Chang , J . J . Linderman , J . A . Swanson , J . Cell Sci . 124 ( 2011 ) 4106 . [ 251 ] L . JeBailey , A . Rudich , X . Huang , C . Di Ciano - Oliveira , A . Kapus , A . Klip , Mol . Endocrinol . 18 ( 2004 ) 359 . [ 252 ] S . Li , J . Couet , M . P . Lisanti , 271 ( 1996 ) 29182 . [ 253 ] E . Génot , B . Gligorijevic , Eur . J . Cell Biol . 93 ( 2014 ) 367 . [ 254 ] H . Nakahara , L . Howard , E . W . Thompson , H . Sato , M . Seiki , Y . Yeh , W . - T . Chen , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 94 ( 1997 ) 7959 . [ 255 ] R . Poincloux , F . Lizárraga , P . Chavrier , J . Cell Sci . 122 ( 2009 ) 3015 . [ 256 ] C . C . Mader , M . Oser , M . A . O . Magalhaes , J . J . Bravo - Cordero , J . Condeelis , A . J . Koleske , H . Gil - Henn , Cancer Res . 71 ( 2011 ) 1730 . [ 257 ] C . V . Rajadurai , S . Havrylov , K . Zaoui , R . Vaillancourt , M . Stuible , M . Naujokas , D . Zuo , M . L . Tremblay , M . Park , J . Cell Sci . 125 ( 2012 ) 2940 . [ 258 ] K . C . Williams , M . G . Coppolino , J . Cell Sci . 127 ( 2014 ) 1712 . [ 259 ] P . Satir , S . T . Christensen , Annu . Rev . Physiol . 69 ( 2007 ) 377 . [ 260 ] Y . - C . Hsiao , K . Tuz , R . J . Ferland , Cilia 1 ( 2012 ) 4 . [ 261 ] S . T . Christensen , C . A . Clement , P . Satir , L . B . Pedersen , ( 2012 ) 172 . [ 262 ] D . Zhu , S . Shi , H . Wang , K . Liao , J . Cell Sci . 122 ( 2009 ) 2760 . [ 263 ] S . Jermanm , H . H . Ward , R . Lee , C . A . M . Lopes , A . M . Fry , M . MacDougall , A . Wandinger - Ness , PLoS One 9 ( 2014 ) e106330 . [ 264 ] L . Schneider , C . A . Clement , S . C . Teilmann , G . J . Pazour , E . K . Hoffmann , P . Satir , S . T . Christensen , Curr . Biol . 15 ( 2005 ) 1861 . [ 265 ] N . L . Umberger , T . Caspary , Mol . Biol . Cell 26 ( 2015 ) 350 . [ 266 ] E . A . Partridge , C . LeRoy , G . M . DiGuglielmo , J . Pawling , P . Cheung , M . Granovsky , I . R . Nabi , J . L . Wrana , J . W . Dennis , Science 306 ( 2004 ) 120 . [ 267 ] P . Lajoie , J . G . Goetz , J . W . Dennis , I . R . Nabi , J . Cell Biol . 185 ( 2009 ) 381 . [ 268 ] H . - B . Guo , M . Randolph , M . Pierce , J . Biol . Chem . 282 ( 2007 ) 22150 . [ 269 ] P . Lajoie , E . A . Partridge , G . Guay , J . G . Goetz , J . Pawling , A . Lagana , B . Joshi , J . W . Dennis , I . R . Nabi , J . Cell Biol . 179 ( 2007 ) 341 . [ 270 ] C . Ibarra , J . M . Vicencio , M . Estrada , Y . Lin , P . Rocco , P . Rebellato , J . P . Munoz , J . Garcia - Prieto , A . F . G . Quest , M . Chiong , S . M . Davidson , I . Bulatovic , K . - H . Grinnemo , O . Larsson , G . Szabadkai , P . Uhlén , E . Jaimovich , S . Lavandero , Circ . Res . 112 ( 2013 ) 236 . [ 271 ] R . G . Parton , M . Hanzal - Bayer , J . F . Hancock , J . Cell Sci . 119 ( 2006 ) 787 . [ 272 ] S . Sigismund , T . Woelk , C . Puri , E . Maspero , C . Tacchetti , P . Transidico , P . P . Di Fiore , S . Polo , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 102 ( 2005 ) 2760 . [ 273 ] S . Sigismund , E . Argenzio , D . Tosoni , E . Cavallaro , S . Polo , P . P . Di Fiore , Dev . Cell 15 ( 2008 ) 209 . [ 274 ] K . Jaqaman , D . Loerke , M . Mettlen , H . Kuwata , S . Grinstein , S . L . Schmid , G . Danuser , Nat . Methods 5 ( 2008 ) 695 . [ 275 ] D . Nunez , C . Antonescu , M . Mettlen , A . Liu , S . L . Schmid , D . Loerke , G . Danuser , Traf - ﬁ c , 2011 . [ 276 ] J . B . Casaletto , A . I . McClatchey , Nat . Rev . Cancer 12 ( 2012 ) 387 . 1976 R . C . Delos Santos et al . / Cellular Signalling 27 ( 2015 ) 1963 – 1976