303 uCampus : Can an open source 3D interactive virtual campus modelling platform support institutional learning and innovation ? Chengzhi Peng issue 03 , volume 09 international journal of architectural computing 06 _ Peng 24 / 11 / 11 12 : 03 pm Page 303 304 uCampus : Can an open source 3D interactive virtual campus modelling platform support institutional learning and innovation ? Chengzhi Peng Abstract This paper reports and reflects on the key findings from the UK JISC funded weCAMP - uCampus project undertaken at the University of Sheffield in which a Web - based 3D interactive campus visualization modelling platform was developed and deployed using the latest Java and XML - based open source technologies . The project evolved rapidly along three strands of development on software design , content generation , and user / stakeholder engagement . One of the key outcomes is a novel approach to visualising large complex datasets in conjunction with multi - scale and multi - layered 3D campus modelling . To test the adaptability of uCampus , the Augustine House Experiment was later carried out in collaboration with the iBorrow project based at the Canterbury Christ Church University campus . The question on the prospect of uCampus to support learning and innovation at an institutional level is discussed by revisiting the earlier works of the Oregon Experiment and the Seeding - Reseeding Meta - Design Framework . 06 _ Peng 24 / 11 / 11 12 : 03 pm Page 304 1 . INTRODUCTION The University of Sheffield ( TUOS ) has undergone an intense period of campus regeneration during the past 10 years . The regeneration investments have made significant improvements in the campus environment through both new - built and refurbishing existing buildings . However , like many other higher education institutions in the UK and abroad , TUOS is facing a multitude of challenges in achieving sustainable campus development while addressing emerging local , national and global financial and environmental constraints . Funded by the UK JISC Institutional Innovation Programme [ 1 ] , the weCAMP project team was assembled in January 2009 to investigate how Web - based 3D interactive virtual campus modelling could be developed to support participatory and collaborative planning and design of learning , teaching and other spaces across the campus [ 2 - 3 ] . Although rooted in the specific TUOS context , the project has delivered demonstrable exemplars that other universities may find useful and adaptable . The final result of the project was the public release of uCampus 1 . 1 on the Web in March 2010 [ 4 ] . At an early stage of shaping the project proposal , an institution - wide consultation was undertaken to identify the issues and needs for institutional learning and innovation , especially concerning effective planning for and use of future learning and other spaces . We have thus identified some topical areas which could be of a common interest to other universities in the UK and abroad : • Interlink learning , teaching and research strategies / policies with spatial / facility management through a more effective and transparent mediation ; • Better manage the creative tension between allowing for open participative planning and design processes and the imperative of meeting financial constraints ; • Ensure that new physical spaces are designed and built , and existing ones re - fitted , to meet the current and anticipated future needs of all its stakeholders and services , taking into account of a range of issues relating to technology , environmental and social factors in the process of planning , consultation and design ; • Ensure future learning spaces and other estates assets are appropriately planned and designed not as isolated individualistic projects but coherent sustainable solutions to the campus as a holistic macro learning environment ; • Keep accurate up - to - date records of its estates assets over time and to make them easily accessible as the institution’s contextual basis for effective planning and design of future learning spaces ; and • To be well - informed of new trends in the design of technology - rich learning spaces . 305 uCampus : Can an open source 3D interactive virtual campus modelling platform support institutional learning and innovation ? 06 _ Peng 24 / 11 / 11 12 : 03 pm Page 305 During the pre - project consultation exercise , most representative users appeared in favour of 3D modelling of the campus environment as it supports intuitive understanding of spaces by a wider population of the community without the special skill of reading 2D technical drawings . This was then recognised as one of the main objectives of the project to facilitate widening participation and collaboration in the design decision - making processes as well as in recording lessons learned from campus development projects . A number of research questions naturally arise from the initial survey : ( 1 ) How can we model a university campus as a common 3D visual reference easily accessible to a wide cross section of stakeholders and end users in knowing more about the campus and its city surroundings ? ( 2 ) Can we build 3D campus models useful not only to the Estates Department’s facility management team but also to other user groups such as architectural students when developing their design studio projects on campus sites ? ( 3 ) Can Web - based 3D virtual campus models play a social media role to raise campus - wide awareness of environmental issues such as energy or water consumptions ? A number of 3D virtual modelling projects dedicated to university campuses have been reported recently . Employing MultiGen - Paradigm’s MultiGen and Vega , Alexei Sourin led a team and built a VRML - based model of the real campus of Nanyang Technological University in Singapore [ 5 ] . Apart from being a university social media space , the NTU model has been used for research on crowd simulation and shared cyberspaces [ 6 ] . As a subset of the “City in the Palm of Your Hand” project [ 7 ] , the Liverpool University Virtual Campus model was tested on mobile devices [ 8 ] . For the Lancaster University campus , an interactive 3D model has been developed by Arup Manchester in association with the university’s Facilities Division . The Lancaster model is designed to be accessed through a Web browser installed with the TurnTool Viewer on a PC platform [ 9 ] . In 2007 - 08 , the Google Earth platform has attracted world - wide participation in the “Model Your Campus Contest” , resulting in sixteen winning entries of university campuses [ 10 ] . Meanwhile in Canada , 3D virtual photorealistic model of the Keele and Glendon Campuses of York University in Toronto was developed by the i CAMPUS project where an in - house 3D reconstruction software system was developed to derive photo - realistic 3D cityscapes from airborne LIDAR datasets [ 11 - 12 ] . As seen from previous attempts at 3D university campus modelling , it is rightly to ask the question in an era of Google Earth ( GE ) and Second Life ( SL ) : Why is it necessary to create yet another 3D virtual world modelling platform ? Why can’t we simply adopt GE / SL as the underlying platform to host the TUOS campus models ? One of the main reasons that we decided not to use GE / SL in this project was the issue of representation and visualisation of the campus environment . Adopting existing 3D modelling platforms such as GE / SL means that we have to subscribe to the graphic 306 Chengzhi Peng 06 _ Peng 24 / 11 / 11 12 : 03 pm Page 306 conventions , rendering technologies and other usability decisions imposed by the existing platforms , which we and , more importantly , end users may not necessarily agree with . To use GE , for instance , one has to model with SketchUp and comply with the rules specified in the uploading procedure which can take up to weeks’ waiting for an administrative decision on accepting the 3D models to be displayed on GE . Likewise , SL has a specific approach and design about the visual media afforded by a virtual world platform that is complicated and difficult to remember all the features built into the user interface . Furthermore , from a research point of view , we consider a number of issues to be explored in developing a bespoke 3D university campus modelling platform : ( a ) use of open source Web friendly data standards , ( b ) use of a variety of 3D modelling tools , ( c ) supporting rapid acceptance of user - generated content , ( d ) extensibility of interactive domain - specific data visualisation , and ( e ) simple and memorable user experiences . In response to this set of criteria , we opted for Java and XML - based technologies to build the uCampus platform as an open source Web - based virtual campus modelling application . 2 . BUILDING AN OPEN VIRTUAL CAMPUS MODELLING PLATFORM WITH JAVA AND XML - BASED TECHNOLOGIES Our overall platform - building methodology can be described in three interwoven strands : Software Development ( SD ) , Content Development ( CD ) , and User Engagement and Evaluation ( UE ) . From an early stage of the project , the project team worked on SD , CD and UE in a closely coordinated manner following a similar approach advocated by the Agile Methodology [ 13 ] . As soon as the first version of uCampus was released in early March 2009 , SD , CD and UE have been pursued in parallel with one another , leading to rapid cycles of development , refinement and deployment of uCampus on the University’s campus - wide Managed Desktop Service [ 14 ] . 2 . 1 . Design of the JX3DD Framework The creation of a specification provided the basis for the software design and development and the choice of platform and infrastructure necessary to support the intended user base . It was clear that in order to satisfy all requirements the application needed to be Web - based with both a client and server side implementation . The salient factors influencing the choice of platform proved to be interoperability , concurrency , a unified development language and scalability . It was envisaged that there may be several hundred users at a time , so scalability through concurrency was particularly important . For these reasons , the Java Enterprise Edition ( Java EE ) environment deemed the best fit . Its Servlet based architecture would provide the concurrency that was required , and the SD work would benefit from both the client and server sides being developed in a common 307 uCampus : Can an open source 3D interactive virtual campus modelling platform support institutional learning and innovation ? 06 _ Peng 24 / 11 / 11 12 : 03 pm Page 307 language with the potential for the use of a common source - code base and shared libraries [ 15 ] . A Java Enabled X3D Delivery ( JX3DD ) system architecture was designed and implemented to meet the needs of both project team and prospective user community ( Figure 1 ) . From early on , professional planners , architects as well architectural students have been considered a major group of stakeholders who were most likely to become advanced users themselves . To this end , a user management feature was developed to allow end - users to register with uCampus to open their own user accounts . Being private to the owner , an activated user account can be used to host any X3D models uploaded by the users , which can then be combined with the uCampus architectural and data models . The development of the uCampus User Account feature is to address the usability issue reported earlier by Alan Day where professional architects were found rather reluctant to release any 3D design models publicly that were still undergoing development [ 16 ] . Therefore , we consider that designers are more likely to use uCampus if they are allowed to carry out their own design experiments directly with the campus contextual models in privacy while accessing the platform over the Web . This was later confirmed with a trial use of uCampus by a member of the RMJM team who were the project architect of Information Commons – the University’s newest library and learning centre . 2 . 2 . Open Source Content Development Central to our campus modelling methodology is to address the question of how to visualise spaces of the University’s estates in such a way that a wide (cid:1) Figure 1 . A Multi - tiered Java Enabled X3D Delivery ( JX3DD ) framework as the foundation for implementing the uCampus software platform . 308 Chengzhi Peng 06 _ Peng 24 / 11 / 11 12 : 03 pm Page 308 range of stakeholders and end users could access the visualisation with ease and flexibility . We have since experimented with a novel approach to interrelating three types of 3D modelling : ( a ) Contextual Architectural Modelling , ( b ) Domain - Specific Data Visualisation Modelling , and ( c ) Overlay of data visualisation on contextual architectural models . At present , the domain of data visualisation is specific to the spatial uses as audited throughout the campus buildings . We consider that there can be datasets from other domains such as energy uses , operational costs , carbon footprints and others to be collected and visualised in a similar approach . The uCampus map is the main interface to the platform and a primary piece of data content ( Figure 2 ) . This is the first artifact users see when launching uCampus and is the means by which they can visualise the area covered by the system and then go on to navigate within it . Therefore , while designing the map interface it was crucial to keep in mind user friendliness and clarity in illustration . The uCampus map was generated in Adobe Illustrator and then exported as the Scalable Vector Graphic ( SVG ) format to be overlaid on top of a GIF image depicting the larger urban region . Our experience shows that the SVG engine provided by the SVG Salamender Project was particularly suited to drive uCampus’s small size interactive map [ 17 ] . The uCampus map covers the central area of the University of Sheffield campus . A 3D DWG model of the city landscape and building surfaces was initially acquired from Zmapping Ltd to serve as a base model for further editing . This area is then divided into terrain squares pertaining to the Ordinance Survey national grid naming system . Each square covers an area of 100m x 100m and is named according to the national grid . These grid squares also (cid:2) Figure 2 . The uCampus interactive SVG map implemented with the svgsalamander library is supplemented with a drop - down menu displaying entries of University building floors . 309 uCampus : Can an open source 3D interactive virtual campus modelling platform support institutional learning and innovation ? 06 _ Peng 24 / 11 / 11 12 : 03 pm Page 309 represent the geographic terrain respective to the area which is selectable through the uCampus interactive SVG map . The development of 3D University building models was undertaken in two phases . The first was a less detailed phase , which allowed us to populate the entire uCampus area , creating an initial prototype for demonstrations , and progressing with other areas of the project that were dependent on the building modelling method . From early on , a decision was made to adopt the latest X3D ( eXtensible 3D Graphics ) open standards file format in the production of all uCampus models [ 18 ] ( Figure 3 ) . The second phase was more detailed modelling of the university buildings ( up to 5mm accuracy level ) , which were constructed from the drawings provided by the University’s Estates Department . The modelling of university buildings created a significant volume of workload , which called for participation from the postgraduate students at the School of Architecture to work on the project as extra 3D modellers . A number of exemplar models , covering the basic building typologies , were developed by the project team , which was then standardized into a number of technical specifications which , in combination with a number of workshops , prepared the student modellers well enough to contribute to 3D building modelling effectively . All 3D models submitted by the student modellers were examined according to the specifications before being entered into the system . In order for the platform to communicate with the data sets , a data - feed structure had to be set . The chosen format for the data - feed structure was XML due to its usability and adaptability , as well as its compatibility and similarity in design philosophy to X3D [ 19 ] [ 20 ] . (cid:1) Figure 3 . An assembly of ( official ) uCampus models built entirely in X3D . 310 Chengzhi Peng 06 _ Peng 24 / 11 / 11 12 : 03 pm Page 310 Creating 3D visualisation for the University’s space usage was seen as a continuation of the detailed building modelling process ; it however involved developing a separate methodology from the aforementioned architectural modelling , which we called Spatial Taxonomical Modelling ( STM ) . Based on the datasets provided by the Estates Department , the basic categories of room uses were established and colour - coded , for instance , blue to indicate rooms used as academic offices ( Figure 4 ) . The specification for making the colour - coded volumes to build up the STM datasets was simple to follow , and required only basic 3D modelling skills . To display the University’s current spatial usages more efficiently , we simplified the entire range of spaces into six basic categories : Teaching , Learning Support , Offices , Shops & Leisure , User Support and Building Services . A content filtering feature was implemented for users to retrieve STM models according to certain spatial use categories ( Figure 5 ) . (cid:2) Figure 4 . An example of Spatial Taxonomical Modelling retrieved for the Information Commons building . (cid:2) Figure 5 . An example of filtering spatial taxonomical models to display only Teaching - related spaces across the selected campus area . 311 uCampus : Can an open source 3D interactive virtual campus modelling platform support institutional learning and innovation ? 06 _ Peng 24 / 11 / 11 12 : 03 pm Page 311 2 . 3 . Users and Stakeholders Engagement The uCampus initiative has taken the form of institution - wide inter - departmental collaboration since its inception . A Project Board chaired by the Pro - Vice - Chancellor for Learning and Teaching was convened at the beginning with board members drawn from various departments including Estates , Learning and Teaching Services , Corporate Information and Computing Services , and the Library . Regular meetings between the Project Board and the Project Team were held to review progress and to steer the emerging trend of the software and content developments . A string of user engagement and evaluation activities were rolled out to coincide with stages of software engineering and content development . This institution - wide collaboration has proved highly effective in delivering project outcomes far beyond originally planned . By March 2010 , there have been three major releases of uCampus and rapid deployment of 3D models covering 48 + hectares of the campus terrain , 38 clusters of Non - university buildings , 71 University buildings , 124 detailed University building floors , and 79 case studies of spatial usage of selected University building floors , which we believe laying down a solid foundation built for future growth . The first releases were used within the development team to explore basic interface issues as well as helping to discuss potential uses and user groups . Following the release of uCampus version 0 . 03a , the user groups were focused in order of priority engagement through a discussion session between the project team and the external evaluators . This allowed the development of a programme for consultation that responded to the specific development needs of the platform , helping to refine the next stage of development whilst keeping an overview of the overall aims of uCampus . The Project Team met regularly with various stakeholder groups to discuss their requirements and expectations of the project . The stakeholder base was relatively wide with a number of interests that needed to be addressed . Presentations and interviews were undertaken when we had needed to engage users with limited time available to them . The team has presented the platform at its current stage of development and asked a series of questions based on predetermined issues that required external guidance whilst responding to other in line with the questioning arising during the session ( Figure 6 ) . This pattern of analysis and development lead to an integrated approach to evaluation and implementation that has enabled a rapid and responsive approach to evolution of the platform . In this way it was identified that there were several main common requirement strands that should be focused upon . Corresponding use - case scenarios were developed which then fed into the development specification . In addition to the cycles of internal evaluation , two external evaluators have worked with the project team and the stakeholder groups throughout the project lifetime [ 21 ] . 312 Chengzhi Peng 06 _ Peng 24 / 11 / 11 12 : 03 pm Page 312 3 . APPLYING UCAMPUS TO THE AUGUSTINE HOUSE EXPERIMENT Through a separate funding awarded by the JISC Institutional Innovation Benefits Realisation Programme , the Augustine House Experiment ( AHE ) project was later undertaken by the uCampus team in collaboration with the iBorrow project team based at the Canterbury Christ Church University [ 22 ] . The AHE project aimed to produce a synthesis of the outcomes from the weCAMP and iBorrow projects to further demonstrate how patterns of spatial uses in technology - rich learning centres could be captured and better understood . An important part of the iBorrow project was concerned with how the Augustine House performed as the University’s brand new learning centre , which was awarded the UCISA Higher Education Award for Excellence 2010 [ 23 ] . The iBorrow project provided a large - scale demonstrator of the use of tracking software and location - aware technology to aid the configuration of facilities within flexible learning spaces , and eventually an insight into the way students use flexible learning spaces . By overlaying location information with additional data it can provide insights into the way students use electronic and virtual resources at an individual level or within a group context and thus answer the questions that arise when designing new learning spaces [ 24 ] . The approach we adopted to visualise the iBorrow dataset can be summarised in three steps : ( 1 ) Architectural and Urban Context Modelling : 3D Augustine House Models built in the X3D format . An aerial - photo derived 3D urban model with the Augustine House at the centre was sourced from Zmapping Ltd . The 3D urban model was then used by the weCAMP team as the starting point for producing a Web - based 3D model sets in the X3D format . A user account “AUGUSTINE” was created on uCampus to host the X3D models . For each floor of the Augustine House , three X3D models have been built to represent ( a ) architectural floor , ( b ) furniture and ( c ) space functions based on the drawings and information provided by the (cid:2) Figure 6 . A session of user engagement and evaluation held with students at the Students’ Union . 313 uCampus : Can an open source 3D interactive virtual campus modelling platform support institutional learning and innovation ? 06 _ Peng 24 / 11 / 11 12 : 03 pm Page 313 iBorrow team . The basic 3D modelling produced here is intended to provide an intuitively recognisable architectural and spatial contexts for displaying the iBorrow data models ( Figure 7 ) . ( 2 ) iBorrow Data Modelling : Representation of the data captured by the iBorrow team in the X3D format . A software package “xml2x3d” was developed to convert the iBorrow datasets into X3D models with location reference to the architectural floor models developed previously . Each tracked position is represented as a coloured geo - referenced sphere . Various schemes of data visualisation were devised to work with different combinations of data fields such as Male - Female , Times of a Day , PG - UG level of study , Full - Part Time etc ( Figure 8 ) . Due to the limited funding , generating the iBorrow X3D data models remains a combined software and manual process : XML files need to be manually created according to a specific format as inputs to xml2x3d . Meaningful viewpoints of the resultant X3D iBorrow data models are inserted manually before uploading onto the uCampus platform . Overlay of iBorrow Data Models on the AHE Floors . We use the user account facility provided on uCampus to set up a number of accounts for uploading the X3D models created in steps ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) into different user content folders ( Figure 9 ) . Although these accounts are user name and password controlled , collaborative viewing over the Web can take place (cid:1) Figure 7 . The AHE architectural floors and furniture models created in X3D hosted in the AUGUSTINE account on uCampus . (cid:3) Figure 8 . A small portion of the iBorrow netbook tracking datasets – a total of 65535 entries of data were collected by the tracking system during the one week period of 24 / 02 – 03 / 03 2010 . 314 Chengzhi Peng 06 _ Peng 24 / 11 / 11 12 : 03 pm Page 314 easily by sharing the login details . The overlaying of the iBorrow tracking data on the AH floors can be performed simply by selecting relevant data and floor models from the check boxes of the containing accounts , and an assembly of all the X3D models selected will be generated and delivered to the user’s desktop in real - time for direct user 3D navigation ( Figure 10 ) . On the basis of the 3D modelling approach described above and the uCampus platform , it is relatively straightforward to construct a dedicate website that makes the Augustine House Experiment results even more readily accessible . The AHE website lists links to 33 pre - assembled X3D model sets in 8 categories of selected iBorrow data fields [ 25 ] ( Figure 11 ) . (cid:2) Figure 9 . Overlay of iBorrow data models on the AH Floor and furniture models on uCampus . (cid:2) Figure 10 . Direct user navigation inside the Augustine House as a multi - layered X3D model . 315 uCampus : Can an open source 3D interactive virtual campus modelling platform support institutional learning and innovation ? 06 _ Peng 24 / 11 / 11 12 : 03 pm Page 315 The website shows an example of how a user’s viewing and navigating the AHE models can be enhanced with the themes and associated colour keys of the visualisation . It should be noted that it was not possible to convert exhaustively the one week iBorrow tracking datasets as supplied into X3D models within the time frame of the AHE project . The six user tracking patterns assembled above are intended as examples of demonstrating how the visualisation modelling approach has generated results from selected combinations of user characteristics , time and space ( AHE architectural floors ) . The same principle of data visualisation can be applied to many other possible combinations . Despite the current data modelling limited to some snap shots of the one week long iBorrow tracking dataset , some correspondences between the current AHE visualisation results and the previous iBorrow pedagogic study can be drawn [ 26 ] : • When the AH Architectural Floor models overlaid with the Furniture models of each floor , we can see that there appear no mix uses of iBorrow netbooks with fixed desktops . These two IT resources are used separately across space and time . Few iBorrow netbooks are seen around the fixed desktop areas , and the notebooks are predominantly used in the informal flexible areas of the Library and the Group Study Rooms . • Clearly , far more full - time students used the iBorrow netbooks then part - timers . Part - timers used them more on the 2nd and 3rd floors . More female students used them on Ground and 1st Floors , and increased male students used them on the 2nd and 3rd Floor . A lot more undergraduate uses are seen across the floors and times . The Disable - Able model shows that the devices were used by disabled students across all floors – the AH seems performing (cid:1) Figure 11 . The AHE website containing 8 categories of selected iBorrow datasets . 316 Chengzhi Peng 06 _ Peng 24 / 11 / 11 12 : 03 pm Page 316 very well in accessibility design . In age ranges , the under 25 group used the devices most , followed by the 30 - 65 group ; few 26 - 30 were seen on this particular Monday ( 1 st March 2010 ) . • Café and the flexible spaces were mostly seen uses of the netbooks . But the Café area on the Ground floor saw very little uses of the iBorrow netbooks . 4 . ‘GROWING’ UCAMPUS TO SUPPORT INSITUTIONAL LEARNING AND INNOVATION The uCampus system architecture has been designed with a view into future growth both in terms of its system capabilities and data scopes . In fact , many new features such as linking uCampus with University’s existing on - line room booking system have been envisaged for further development beyond the JISC funding period . The emergence of a vibrant on - line uCampus user community over time was considered by the project team as a real test of the success of the platform . During the period of the first 12 months since the project ended in March 2010 , there appears a growing uCampus usage in terms of the amount of X3D content generated by the end users 1 . However , to plan for the platform’s longer - term sustainable future , it is necessary to reflect on the guiding principle that will sustain the system’s open participatory features . In this aspect , we consider two previously proposed frameworks particularly relevant : The Oregon Experiment and Meta - Design . 4 . 1 . On the six principles of the Oregon Experiment While developing the uCampus platform , one of our key references in mind was the Oregon Experiment [ 27 ] . In early 1970’s , a team based at the Berkeley Center for Environmental Structure led by Christopher Alexander was commissioned by the University of Oregon to revamp the University’s master planning system . Instead of producing yet another conventional master plan as a solution to the problems encountered , Alexander’s team developed and deployed a user - centred participatory planning and design framework which had a pattern language established at its core . The Oregon Experiment hence stipulated six principles : organic order , participation , piecemeal growth , patterns , diagnosis , and coordination . Our revisiting these principles concludes that they are still highly relevant today from the perspective of institutional learning and innovation . For instance , the principle of diagnosis requires that “The well - being of the whole will be protected by an annual diagnosis which explains , in detail , which spaces are alive and which ones dead , at any given moment in the history of the 317 uCampus : Can an open source 3D interactive virtual campus modelling platform support institutional learning and innovation ? 1 The X3D content of the TUOS campus as developed and released by the uCampus project team in late March 2010 amounts to 72 . 7 MB with 673 files . At the time of writing this paper in early April 2011 , the user generated X3D content amounts to 704 MB with 2687 files . 06 _ Peng 24 / 11 / 11 12 : 03 pm Page 317 community” [ 27 , p . 6 ] . Given the radical change in UK university funding to be introduced in 2012 , one would argue that the kind of annual diagnosis of spaces across a university campus could lead to significant efficiency savings as well as improved user experiences even if exact readings of dead or alive spaces are subject to local contexts . However , a genuine fulfillment of the diagnosis principle will demand putting a mechanism in place such that annual diagnoses are properly carried out , recorded and made available to a university community as a whole . All universities are constantly undertaking projects of new build or redevelopments . Yet , the question is if institutions are learning from projects over time as the basis for achieving innovation in campus planning and design . What the Alexander’s team did not have is the universal access to the digital world technology that most universities are equipped with nowadays . Could the development and wider uses of a virtual campus modelling platform lead to an effective institutional learning process akin to the Oregon principles ? In our present case of uCampus , assuming that the institution is committed to grow the virtual campus modelling application into the future , would the institution ever need to invest on master planning every now and then , which has not really led to significant institutional learning ? Could the challenge of sustaining meaningful interactions of parts and whole over time be played out more transparently through participatory uses of uCampus ? 4 . 2 . Meta - design through seeding and reseeding Another conceptual framework for guiding future development of uCampus can be sought from the Meta - Design approach developed by Gerhard Fischer and co - workers [ 28 ] . Fisher and others are interested in exploring how users of information systems or digital design environments could be enabled to continuously adapt the systems / environments once they have been created initially by the software developers . A particular approach to supporting the meta - design was formulated as the SER process model : Seeding , Evolutionary Growth and Reseeding [ 29 ] . Following SER , a seed is initially introduced as “a piece of knowledge , content , or code that can be fundamentally created , evolved and recombined by means of mechanisms that allow its sharing and modifications” ; evolutionary growth occurs when users generate additional domain - specific information at use time which may not be well integrated with the existing system information or functionality contained in the seed ; and reseeding is the phase where large - scale evolutionary changes occur in order to reorganize and formalize the information artifact resulting from the evolutionary growth . Clearly , the SER process model of meta - design is concerned with the development and use of social - technical systems where ‘social creativity’ cannot be anticipated and encapsulated completely in the initial production of the software . Indeed , open source software has been identified by Fischer as an exemplar 318 Chengzhi Peng 06 _ Peng 24 / 11 / 11 12 : 03 pm Page 318 of meta - design that allows for a more community approach to system development and evolutionary changes [ 30 ] . We consider it appropriate that uCampus is classified as a social - technical system and to be mapped out in the SER - like process model . The initial seeding phase has led to the public release of uCampus 1 . 1 through a concentrated period of software / content development in connection with user / stakeholder engagement and evaluation . uCampus is open source both in terms of platform - building and in content generation using the SVG and X3D open standards . A second version of uCampus for running on the Apple Mac platform has already been implemented by another software developer team based at the epiGenesys by adapting the original Java source codes ( Figure 12 ) . We have also seen architectural student users download and adapt official uCampus models in various ways to conduct their own design visualisation modelling exercises ( Figure 13 ) . Therefore , the open source approach and technologies adopted can potentially facilitate domain - specific information gathering from evolutionary growth as a basis for launching a reseeding phase as required at some stage in the future . However , we consider that attempts at reseeding the uCampus platform need not always involve large - scale changes but piece - meal extensions and / or enhancements open to institution - wide participation from academic and professional departments such as Computer Science , Landscape , Architecture , Estates , Computing and Learning Resources Services etc . The extent to which the uCampus application could be embedded in university’s planning and decision - making processes is yet to be explored in consultation with further stakeholders . We suggest at least in theory that a (cid:2) Figure 12 . The uCampus Mac version implemented by the epiGenesys team’s adapting uCampus 1 . 1 . 319 uCampus : Can an open source 3D interactive virtual campus modelling platform support institutional learning and innovation ? 06 _ Peng 24 / 11 / 11 12 : 03 pm Page 319 synthesis of the Oregon Experiment principles , the seeding - reseeding meta - design framework , and an open source virtual campus modelling platform like uCampus can generate sustainable social - technical resources fostering institutional learning and innovation in campus planning , design and management ( Figure 14 ) . 5 . DISCUSSIONS AND FURTHER STUDIES A university campus is a complex living entity and , as shown through the uCampus modelling project , in many ways the process is not dissimilar to modelling a small city . The project reported above provided an opportunity to explore how an interactive 3D virtual campus modelling platform can be built with Web - based open source technologies within a relatively short 320 Chengzhi Peng (cid:1) Figure 13 . An example of end user adaption of uCampus models to include texture mapping . (cid:1) Figure 14 . A strategy for growing uCampus to support institutional learning and innovation . 06 _ Peng 24 / 11 / 11 12 : 03 pm Page 320 period of design time . Why didn’t we just use Google Earth and Street View instead ? Whilst working with different stakeholders this has been a question that has been asked regularly . uCampus offers both the interior and exterior of buildings and information on how individual spaces are used , allowing different perspectives to be gained and explored in 3D . The uCampus 3D building models are accurate to be used for a variety of purposes . Users can upload models in real time and decide whether their designs should be private or in the public domain . Working with two university campuses as real user / stakeholder contexts , we tested the methodology of combining rapid software and content development with user engagement in iterations . One of the key features achieved in uCampus is free juxtaposition of 3D spaces within buildings ( at the meso scale ) and between different parts of the university ( at the macro scale ) . This variety of scale applications enables visualisation modelling to be performed by users across the entire campus or a single building floor . Another feature of overlaying 3D data visualisation on architectural floors and volumes has been extensively applied to visualizing the spatial uses of building floors in the Sheffield campus context and the spatial - temporal locations of the iBorrow netbooks in the Augustine House context . In both applications , 3D architectural representations of the campus real estates are intended as contextual support for intuitive understanding of complex domain - specific data sets . Reflecting on the question if uCampus as a social - technical system can be deployed to support institutional learning and innovation in campus planning and design , we consider how the wider issues of participation and sustainable platform development could be addressed after the project funding came to an end . A potential strategy is drawn on synthesizing the principles identified by the Oregon Experiment and the SER process model based meta - design framework . The proposal is that if the growth of a real physical university campus environment can be sustained through the six principles founded in the Oregon Experiment so does a virtual campus environment created as social - technical resources for institutional learning and innovation . And that a university community is ideally suited to apply the seeding - reseeding meta - design framework for growing the uCampus platform into future both in terms of virtual campus modelling capabilities and scope of content development . Since the first public release of uCampus 1 . 1 , we have however identified three specific areas for immediate further research : ( 1 ) Incorporating user comments into 3D virtual campus model sets – users’ comments on their experiences of the exterior or interior campus environments could be potentially useful to planning and design if the comments elicited , aggregated and analysed can be further linked up with 3D models . A new multi - modal user interface is required to enable interactive overlay of 3D virtual navigation and textual commenting . 321 uCampus : Can an open source 3D interactive virtual campus modelling platform support institutional learning and innovation ? 06 _ Peng 24 / 11 / 11 12 : 03 pm Page 321 ( 2 ) Raising social awareness of energy uses in university buildings – As smart metering technologies are getting deployed more widely , energy uses in buildings can now be tracked more extensively and efficiently to give accurate spatial and temporal profiling of energy consumptions . Similar to the Augustine House Experiment , real - time data visualisation of energy uses in campus buildings could be developed on uCampus as a means to raise campus - wide social awareness of areas in need of greening behaviour change . ( 3 ) Can uCampus modelling become part of professional digital design workflows ? As mentioned earlier , a limited user evaluation of uCampus by a professional architectural practice has been carried out . We consider that further possibilities lie in the kind of “new hybrid design workflows” as reported by Christian Derix at the Aedas R & D in which an “in - between system of light applications” has been implemented to aid communication and sharing across workflow stages [ 31 ] . However , a more in - depth collaborative study is required to explore how open source based virtual campus modelling could be adopted by professional digital design workflows . Acknowledgements The weCAMP - uCampus and the Augustine House Experiment projects were funded by the UK JISC Institutional Innovation Programme . Other researchers of the uCampus project team were Adrian Powell , Leo Care , Howard Evans , Darren Roberts , Panagiotis Patlakas , and Puja Basu . Many discussions have been held with Phil Poole , Wayne Barry , Adrian Wheal and Peter Rand at the Canterbury Christ Church University , and Richard Jones and Justin Luker at the Bucks New University , who have assisted our undertaking the AHE project . This paper is developed with regard to the comments received for an earlier paper presented at the 10 th International Conference on Design & Decision Support Systems in Architecture and Urban Planning , 19 - 22 July 2010 , The Netherlands . References 1 . Phipps , L . and Wentworth , C . , Institutional Innovation Programme , 2008 , http : / / www . jisc . ac . uk / whatwedo / programmes / institutionalinnovation . aspx 2 . Peng , C . , Web - Based Interactive Visualisation Modelling Platform to Effect Participative & Collaborative Planning & Design of Future Learning Spaces , Project Plan , 2008 http : / / www . jisc . ac . uk / whatwedo / programmes / institutionalinnovation / wecamp . aspx 3 . Peng , C . and Care , L . , weCAMP Project Website , 2011 , http : / / www . wecamp . group . shef . ac . uk / 4 . Peng , C . , Powell , A . , Roberts , D . , Patlakas , P . , Basu , P . , Evans , H . and Care , L . , weCAMP - uCampus Final Report , March 2010 , http : / / www . wecamp . group . shef . ac . uk / weCAMP _ FinalReport . pdf 322 Chengzhi Peng 06 _ Peng 24 / 11 / 11 12 : 03 pm Page 322 5 . Sourin , Al . , Nanyang Technological University Virtual Campus , IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications , 24 ( 6 ) : 6 - 8 , 2004 . 6 . Sourin , A . , From a Small Formula to Cyberworlds , Proceedings of International Conference on Computational Science and Applications , Singapore , May 9 - 12 , 2005 , Lecture Notes in Computer Science , LNCS , Springer - Verlag Heidelberg , ISSN 0302 - 9743 , Volume 3482 / 2005 , pp . 983 - 992 , 2005 . 7 . http : / / www . liv . ac . uk / lsa / caadru / projects / city . html 8 . Brown , A . , Knight , M . and Winchester , M . , Representation and Delivery of City Models , Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Computer Aided Architectural Design Research in Asia , University of New Delhi , New Delhi pp . 344 - 352 , 2005 . 9 . http : / / www . lancs . ac . uk / estates / 3dmap / index . htm 10 . http : / / sketchup . google . com / competitions / previouscompetitions . html 11 . Armenakis , C . and Sohn , G . , iCAMPUS : 3D Modelling of York Uuniveristy Campus , American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing Annual Conference , Baltimore , Maryland , March 9 - 13 , 2009 . 12 . Li - Chee - Ming , Gumerov , D . , Ciobanu , T . and Armenakis , C . , Generation of Three Dimensional Photo - Realistic Models from LiDAR and Image Data , IEEE International Toronto Conference - Science and Technology for Humanity , Ryerson University , Toronto , September 26 - 27 , 2009 . 13 . Cockburn , A . , Agile Software Development : The Cooperative Game , Addison Wesley , 2006 . 14 . http : / / www . shef . ac . uk / cics / desktop / software 15 . Horstmann , C . S . , and Cornell , G . , Core Java Volume II : Advanced Features , 8th Edition , Sun Microsystems Press , San Francisco , 2008 . 16 . Day , A . , A Digital Model of a Heritage City : the Bath Experience , Insights of Digital Cities , Mao - Lin Chiu ( ed . ) , Archidata Co . , Ltd , Taipei , Taiwan , p . 57 - 74 , 2005 . 17 . http : / / svgsalamander . java . net / 18 . http : / / www . web3d . org / about / overview / 19 . Harold , E . R . and Means , W . S . , XML in a Nutshell : A Desktop Quick Reference , O’Reilly & Associates Inc , Sebastopol , CA USA , 2001 . 20 . Brutzman , D . and Daly , L . , X3D : Extensible 3D graphics for web authors , Morgan Kaufmsan , San Francisco , 2007 . 21 . Hart , D . and Pinder , J . , weCAMP external evaluation report , March 2010 , http : / / www . wecamp . group . shef . ac . uk / weCAMP _ ExternalEvaluationReport . pdf 22 . http : / / www . jisc . ac . uk / whatwedo / programmes / institutionalinnovation / iborrow . aspx 23 . http : / / www . canterbury . ac . uk / projects / iborrow / 24 . Poole , P . , Ellery , I . and Wheal , A . , iBorrow Project Final Report , 2010 , http : / / www . jisc . ac . uk / media / documents / programmes / institutionalinnovation / iborrowfinalreport . pdf 25 . http : / / www . wecamp . group . shef . ac . uk / AHE / 26 . Graham - Matheson , L . , iBorrow Research Report ( Pedagogy ) , Canterbury Christ Church University , 2009 , http : / / www . canterbury . ac . uk / projects / iborrow / documents / iBorrow - Pedagogic - Research - Report . pdf 27 . Alexander , C . , Silverstein , M . , Angel , S . , Ishikawa , S . , and D . Abrams , The Oregon Experiment , Oxford University Press , 1975 . 323 uCampus : Can an open source 3D interactive virtual campus modelling platform support institutional learning and innovation ? 06 _ Peng 24 / 11 / 11 12 : 03 pm Page 323 28 . Fischer , G . , End - User Development and Meta - Design : Foundations for Cultures of Participation , Journal of Organizational and End User Computing , 22 ( 1 ) , pp . 52 - 82 , 2010 . 29 . Fischer , G . , McCall , R . , Ostwald , J . , Reeves , B . and Shipman , F . , Seeding , evolutionary growth and reseeding : supporting the incremental development of design environments , Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems : celebrating interdependence , pp . 292 - 298 , 1994 . 30 . Fischer , G . , Giaccardi , E . , Ye , Y . , Sutcliffe , A . G . and Mehandjiev , N . , Meta - design : a manifesto for end - user development , Communications of the ACM , 47 ( 9 ) , pp . 33 - 37 , 2004 . 31 . Derix , C . , In - Between Architecture Computation , International Journal of Architectural Computing , 4 ( 7 ) , pp . 565 - 585 , 2009 . 324 Chengzhi Peng Chengzhi Peng University of Sheffield School of Architecture Arts Tower , Western Bank , Sheffield S10 2TN , UK c . peng @ sheffield . ac . uk 06 _ Peng 24 / 11 / 11 12 : 03 pm Page 324