Concept Validation during Collaborative Ideation and Its Effect on Ideation Outcome Maximilian Mackeprang Human - Centered Computing Freie Universit¨at Berlin 14195 Berlin , Germany maximilian . mackeprang @ fu - berlin . de Abderrahmane Khiat Human - Centered Computing Freie Universit¨at Berlin 14195 Berlin , Germany abderrahmane . khiat @ fu - berlin . de Claudia M¨uller - Birn Human - Centered Computing Freie Universit¨at Berlin 14195 Berlin , Germany clmb @ inf . fu - berlin . de Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . CHI’18 Extended Abstracts , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montreal , QC , Canada ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5621 - 3 / 18 / 04 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3170427 . 3188485 Abstract A major goal of collaborative ideation is improving the cre - ativity of the ideas generated . Recent approaches enhance creativity by showing users similar ideas during productive ideation and diverse ideas when they reach an impasse . However , related work either demands a higher mental ef - fort from users to assess similarity or yields only a limited number of similarity values . Furthermore , idea relationship is only considered in one dimension ( similarity ) . In our re - search in progress , we introduce a new approach called concept validation . It enables us to ( 1 ) capture the concep - tualization of users’ ideas and ( 2 ) assess multi - dimensional relationships between all ideas in near real - time . We con - ducted a study with 90 participants to validate the suitability of our approach . The results indicate that adding the ex - traction of semantic concepts to the ideation process has no negative impact on number and creativity of ideas gen - erated . This signiﬁes an important step towards our vision of an idea - based knowledge graph used by an interactive system to improve computer - supported human creativity . Author Keywords creativity support tools ; collaborative ideation ; semantics ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . 3 [ Group and Organization Interfaces ] : Computer - supported cooperative work , Organizational design CHI 2018 Late - Breaking Abstract CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada LBW033 , Page 1 Introduction and Related Work Leveraging the crowd for idea generation has attracted a lot of attention recently , especially with the emergence of ideation platforms such as Quirky ( www . quirky . com ) and OpenIDEO ( www . openideo . com ) . These platforms introduced new challenges , for example , many ideas generated by the crowd are mundane and repetitive . It is economically unfea - sible to ﬁlter out low quality ideas manually due to the high volume of ideas [ 1 ] . Therefore , improving the creativity of ideas provided for these platforms has become a focus of research in recent years . One way to increase the creativity in ideation processes ( i . e . idea generation processes ) is to expose others’ ideas to users [ 7 , 3 ] . Recent research has focused on lever - aging similarity measures between ideas , leading to the Dual Pathways theory [ 3 ] . This theory asserts that cog - nitive ideation processes can beneﬁt from both the ex - posure of similar ideas during productive ideation and di - verse ideas when reaching an impasse [ 6 ] . Thus , a crucial step to enhance creativity during ideation is measuring the semantic distance , i . e . similarity , between ideas . This is needed to identify and provide similar / diverse ideas in near real - time [ 7 , 3 ] . However , obtaining similarity ratings from ideators is challenging because they spend limited time within the ideation process . Furthermore ideators rejected performing similarity ratings after the ideation session [ 7 ] . Recent research integrates the similarity assessment within the ideation to tackle this problem . User submit idea System show inspiring ideas show images for concepts save concepts Read problem description Select concepts based on images View inspiring ideas Generate idea Extract concepts from idea Store validated concepts Calculate similarity values Select inspiring ideas Figure 1 : Process of the Proposed Approach . Siangliulue et al . [ 7 ] , for example , propose calculating the similarities of ideas based on ideators building a spatial ar - rangement of their own ideas and those of others . However , it turned out that this approach requires a higher mental effort from the ideators . Girotto et al . propose similarity as - sessment by mixing human - based similarity evaluation with the ideation [ 4 ] . Each time users request an inspiration , they are asked to rate the similarity of one idea to three other ideas randomly obtained from all ideas . However , this task computes similarity values only if users request inspi - ration , thus , it does not involve all ideas . Furthermore , both approaches consider only one dimension of idea relation - ship ( similarity ) . However , in order to enhance computational support for ideation , we need a multi - dimensional model of the rela - tions between ideas . We hypothesize that such a model will lead to additional approaches to enhance creativity , bet - ter suited to users’ mental models . One way to realize this model , is by annotating the ideas with semantic information that expresses their meaning . The prerequisite for using a semantic model is to elicit the semantic concepts from the ideas . Therefore , in this research in progress , we evaluate the applicability of a concept validation approach that allows us to extract and validate this necessary information . This approach is described in the following in more detail . Concept Validation Approach We extract concepts from the users’ ideas using NLP 1 and link them to entities found in external knowledge graphs ( Wikidata ( www . wikidata . org ) and DBpedia ( www . dbpedia . org ) ) . We obtain an image and a short description from the linked entities ( an example of this data is described in sec - tion Methodology ) . Based on this information the ideators are asked to validate the concepts ( the validation task is il - lustrated in Figure 1 and described in more detail in Section ‘System and Workﬂow’ ) . As a proof of concept , we calcu - late the similarity between all ideas based on the validated 1 Natural Language Processing provides algorithms that analyze the gram - matical structure of sentences to obtain nouns , verbs , etc . CHI 2018 Late - Breaking Abstract CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada LBW033 , Page 2 concepts 2 . We justify the use of images with short descrip - tion as follows : We believe that images are more stimulating for the users than reading text and could be understood better than a technical deﬁnition of a concept . In our ﬁrst prototype , we used one image per concept to present to the users and have them click only on those which are related to their idea . However , in early tests we found that some of the images in the external knowledge base did not capture the corresponding concept well . Therefore , we combined image and description . The validation task is a prerequisite for our overarching goal of building a semantic model . Thus , we need to understand the impact of this task on users’ creativity . On the one hand , the task is carried out during the ideation , thus raising the complexity of the process . This could require a higher men - tal effort from the ideators which might impact the ideation outcome negatively . On the other hand , the impact of the validation task on the ideation outcome could be similar to a peripheral micro - task . According to Girotto et al . [ 4 ] , micro - tasks encourage ideators to think about their ideas more deeply , mitigating the negative impact of the added com - plexity . We conducted a study to evaluate the impact of the validation task on the outcome of the ideation process . baseline interface baseline interface concept validation interface baseline interface rating interface start start start / add _ idea ( ) ; / add _ idea ( ) ; / add _ inspiration ( ) ; / add _ inspiration ( ) ; submit / add _ inspiration ( ) ; Submit Button Submit Button Inspiration Button Inspiration Button Inspiration Button time up time up time up Exposure Rating Concept Validation submit / add _ idea ( ) ; Submit Button time up Figure 2 : State transitions for the conditions used in the study . Methodology Following the methodology of related work [ 4 ] , we com - pared the ideation outcome of our approach with two other conditions using a between subjects study design . We built on existing research in the baseline condition , by choosing an ideation system that provided inspiring examples to the ideators upon request . This pull approach for inspiration is supported by the SIAM ( Search for Ideas in Associative Memory ) model [ 8 ] . We selected the rating similarity task 2 For technical details about the system and the matching mechanism used we refer to our previous work [ 5 ] . proposed by Girotto et al . [ 4 ] ( subsequently called rating ) for the second condition as a representative for a peripheral micro - task for similarity assessment . We explain the system and workﬂows for the conditions in the following . System and Workﬂow We employed the user interface shown in Figure 3a for all three conditions . The interface consists of panel ( A ) , show - ing the problem description . In panel ( B ) ideators can type and submit their ideas using the button ‘Submit Idea’ . Panel ( C ) presents an overview of a user’s submitted ideas . On the right side , the button ‘Need Inspiration’ used to request inspiration is shown ( D ) . The buttons have different effects depending on the condition ( Figure 2 illustrates the corre - sponding interface state transitions ) ; The effects are de - scribed subsequently . Exposure : If the ‘Need Inspiration’ button is clicked the panel is expanded and three randomly selected ideas are shown without any additional task ( illustrated in Figure 3a panel ( E ) ) . If the ‘Submit Idea’ button is clicked , the ideas entered by the users are added to the ideas overview ( C ) . Rating : If the ‘Need Inspiration’ button is clicked , the inter - face shown in Figure 3b is opened . It presents the ideators with four randomly selected ideas : A so called ‘seed idea’ ( F ) and three other ideas . The ideators have to select the idea most similar to the seed idea from these ideas by quantifying the similarity using a three - point scale . After measuring the similarity , the ideators return to the main in - terface . The ‘Submit Idea’ button behavior is equal to the exposure condition . Concept validation : The ‘Need Inspiration’ button behavior is equal to the exposure condition . However , if users submit an idea via the ‘Submit Idea’ button , they are requested to select images that reﬂect the meaning of the concepts in CHI 2018 Late - Breaking Abstract CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada LBW033 , Page 3 A B C D E ( a ) Exposure of inspiring ideas without additional tasks . F ( b ) Exposure of inspiring ideas with rating their similarity . G ( c ) Interface used for the concept validation task . Figure 3 : Ideation interfaces across different conditions . their ideas ( illustrated in Figure 3c ) . Each concept found in the users’ idea is highlighted in the submitted idea text ( three concepts are detected in panel ( G ) of Figure 3c ) . Furthermore each concept is represented by its associated image and description in a grid below the idea . The second concept ‘message’ , for example , refers to the entity ( http : / / dbpedia . org / page / Message ) which is de - scribed as : “A message is a discrete unit of communication [ . . . ] . ” The ideators would select an image if they think it is suitable in the context of their idea . After selecting the image , the corresponding highlight turns green . Once the ideators have selected all suitable images , they click on ‘Submit Task’ . The concepts selected along with their par - ent entities obtained from the external knowledge graphs ( e . g . message , information , etc . ) are stored . Mechanical Turk currently lacks a dedicated mobile app for performing HITs on smartphones ( iPhone , Androids , etc . ) or tablets ( e . g . , the iPad ) . Brainstorm features for a mobile app to Mechanical Turk that would improve the worker’s experience when performing HITs on mobile devices . Figure 4 : The input challenge used for the user study ( from [ 4 ] ) . Task We recruited participants via Amazon Mechanical Turk ( MTurk , https : / / www . mturk . com / ) and asked them to gener - ate ideas for the problem stated in Figure 4 . This challenge was chosen , because it enables MTurk workers to provide domain knowledge and may increase motivation because of relatedness to the problem [ 4 ] . The overall task consisted of a short text introduction , followed by an ideation session of 25 minutes . At the end of the study , participants were asked to provide key demographics , i . e . age group and gender , and optionally provide free text qualitative feedback . Participants We recruited 30 participants ( 90 in total ) for each condition via Amazon MTurk . All participants were in the U . S . and were required to have completed at least 1 , 000 MTurk tasks with a task approval rate of at least 97 % . Participants were paid 4 $ for their time . Metrics We employed Fluency ( Ideas / Worker ) to capture the num - ber of ideas generated by users , as used in [ 4 ] . The ﬂuency is reported in terms of mean ( M ) and standard deviation ( SD ) . We also constructed a so - called idea tree by com - paring the ideas of one user : If the similarity between two ideas is higher than a threshold ( we chose 0 . 5 ) , the ideas CHI 2018 Late - Breaking Abstract CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada LBW033 , Page 4 are associated as parent / child in a tree 3 . Based on this idea tree , we calculated the Breadth , which captures the di - versity of ideas that a user has by measuring the number of children in the root node . Furthermore , we deﬁne the Depth as the number of nodes in the branch with the most nodes , to capture iteration and reﬁnement of ideas . The similarity between ideas is measured using Latent Semantic Analysis ( LSA ) 4 . Condition Ideas / Worker Exposure 13 . 06 ( 60 . 27 ) Rating 12 . 56 ( 38 . 18 ) CV 13 . 76 ( 35 . 77 ) Table 1 : Fluency ( Ideas / Worker ) in average and standard deviation , partitioned by condition ( CV = concept validation ) . Condition Breadth Exposure 5 . 06 ( 14 . 61 ) Rating 5 . 66 ( 24 . 16 ) Concept validation 5 . 66 ( 13 . 67 ) Table 2 : Idea Tree Breadth , partitioned by condition . Condition Depth Exposure 7 . 66 ( 27 . 47 ) Rating 7 . 1 ( 15 . 12 ) Concept validation 8 . 03 ( 24 . 86 ) Table 3 : Idea Tree Depth , partitioned by condition . Results We received a total of 1 , 182 ideas from 90 participants . The ﬂuency results for all three conditions are presented in Ta - ble 1 . The constructed idea tree metrics are presented in Table 2 for breadth and in Table 3 for depth across all con - ditions . We analyzed the results by using the exposure con - dition as the baseline . We then compared the differences in ﬂuency , inspiration , breadth and depth for the concept vali - dation and the rating condition with the exposure condition . A one - way ANOVA test shows no signiﬁcant difference in ﬂuency and inspiration across conditions ( F = 0 . 24 , p = 0 . 78 and F = 2 . 30 , p = 0 . 106 , respectively ) . How - ever , Table 1 illustrates marginal differences in the mean number of ideas generated between concept validation ( M = 13 . 76 ) and rating ( M = 12 . 56 ) . We also calculated a one - way ANOVA test to evaluate the breadth and depth across conditions . The results show no signiﬁcant differences in breadth and depth ( F = 0 . 20 , p = 0 . 81 and F = 0 . 29 , p = 0 . 74 , respectively ) . Table 3 indicates a marginal difference in depth between ideas generated using concept validation ( M = 8 . 03 ) and rating ( M = 7 . 1 ) against exposure condition ( M = 7 . 66 ) . 3 For a detailed construction algorithm see [ 4 ] . 4 Based on a corpus of 3 , 525 ideas ( shared by authors of [ 2 ] ) for the same problem described in Figure 4 . Discussion We conducted a study , comparing our proposed approach to two conditions established in existing research [ 4 , 8 ] . The goal was to evaluate the impact of the validation task on the outcome of the ideation process . The metrics cho - sen for comparison were ﬂuency , i . e . number of ideas , and creativity of ideas , i . e . depth and breadth of the idea tree generated . The results yield two insights . Firstly , we were able to reproduce existing research [ 4 ] . The results for the Exposure and Rating condition show no signiﬁcant differ - ence in ﬂuency which is in line with experiments conducted previously . Secondly , we found no signiﬁcant differences in ﬂuency , breadth and depth when comparing the Concept validation task to the other conditions . These results indi - cate that the integration of the concept validation task has no negative impact on the ideation outcome while simul - taneously enabling the extraction of semantic information about each idea . Nevertheless , the results were somewhat counterintuitive to us . One key component for peripheral micro - tasks is the fact that they are applied during inspira - tion requests . This means that the user purposefully inter - rupts his ideation . In contrast to this approach , the valida - tion task interrupts the ideation ﬂow each time an idea is submitted . Therefore we expected a lower ﬂuency for the validation condition . Furthermore , related work analyzed different ideator groups separately [ 4 ] , ﬁnding differences in the impact of micro - tasks between low and high ﬂuency ideators , i . e . ideators that generated a low / high number of ideas . The complexity of the validation task could impact high ﬂuency ideators , therefore this aspect has to be ana - lyzed in future research . This early stage study is subject to several limitations : We did not evaluate the quality of the concepts selected in the concept validation condition . An - other important aspect that was not considered was the user experience ( especially the additional mental effort , as observed in related work [ 7 ] ) . CHI 2018 Late - Breaking Abstract CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada LBW033 , Page 5 Conclusion and Future Work Using inspiring examples to enhance the creativity of crowd ideation has shown promising results in the past [ 7 , 2 ] . However , existing approaches are limited to statistical sim - ilarity as a model for idea relation . In order to expand this model , we envision an idea - based knowledge graph , lever - aging semantic meaning about ideas . This knowledge graph will help us to evaluate more sophisticated models for inspiration improving computer - supported human cre - ativity . An important step towards this vision is to obtain and validate semantic information elicited from the ideas . In this research in progress , we proposed a concept vali - dation approach , that enables us to obtain this information during ideation . We conducted a study using Amazon Mturk to evaluate the impact of integrating the concept validation task on ideation outcome . The results indicated no nega - tive impact on ﬂuency and creativity of the ideas . Still , this approach has limitations that need to be addressed by fu - ture work : Images are subject to cultural and personal in - terpretation ( for example the depiction of funeral is highly culture - dependent ) . This effect could be mitigated by show - ing multiple images for one concept . Another assumption made is the beneﬁcial effect of the images . Thus , an eval - uation should be conducted to compare the image - based concept validation approach to a description - only condition both for ideation metrics and user experience . To advance our vision , the next step is to apply the concept validation as a baseline to evaluate the impact of different idea rela - tionships on the efﬁciency of inspirations . Acknowledgements . The authors would like to thank the authors of [ 2 ] for the provision of the idea - pool used as training data . The authors also acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of the Federal Ministry of Education and Research of Germany under the project Ideas to Market 03IO1617 . REFERENCES 1 . Osvald M Bjelland and Robert Chapman Wood . 2008 . An Inside View of IBM’s Innovation Jam . MIT Sloan Management Review 50 , 1 ( 2008 ) , 32 – 40 . 2 . Joel Chan , Steven Dang , and Steven P . Dow . 2016 . Improving Crowd Innovation with Expert Facilitation . In Proc . of the 19th Conference on CSCW & Social Computing . ACM , 1223 – 1235 . 3 . Joel et al . Chan . 2017 . Semantically Far Inspirations Considered Harmful ? : Accounting for Cognitive States in Collaborative Ideation . In Proc . of the ACM SIGCHI C & C . ACM , 93 – 105 . 4 . Victor Girotto , Erin Walker , and Winslow Burleson . 2017 . The Effect of Peripheral Micro - tasks on Crowd Ideation . In Proc . of CHI . ACM , 1843 – 1854 . 5 . Abderrahmane Khiat , Maximilian Mackeprang , and Claudia M¨uller - Birn . 2017 . Semantic Annotation for Enhancing Collaborative Ideation . In Proc . of the 13th Semantics . ACM , 173 – 176 . 6 . Bernard A Nijstad , Carsten KW De Dreu , Eric F Rietzschel , and Matthijs Baas . 2010 . The dual pathway to creativity model : Creative ideation as a function of ﬂexibility and persistence . European Review of Social Psychology 21 , 1 ( 2010 ) , 34 – 77 . 7 . Pao Siangliulue , Joel Chan , Steven P Dow , and Krzysztof Z Gajos . 2016 . IdeaHound : Improving Large - scale Collaborative Ideation with Crowd - powered Real - time Semantic Modeling . In Proc . of UIST . ACM , 609 – 624 . 8 . Pao Siangliulue , Joel Chan , Krzysztof Z Gajos , and Steven P Dow . 2015 . Providing timely examples improves the quantity and quality of generated ideas . In Proc . of the ACM SIGCHI C & C . ACM , 83 – 92 . CHI 2018 Late - Breaking Abstract CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada LBW033 , Page 6