Coordination - Artifacts Suiting : When Plans are in the Midst of Ordering Systems Ilaria Redaelli Università della Svizzera italiana G . Buffi , 9 Lugano , Switzerland ilaria . redaelli @ usi . ch Antonella Carassa Università della Svizzera italiana G . Buffi , 9 Lugano , Switzerland antonella . carassa @ usi . ch ABSTRACT This paper addresses the received understanding of the status of plans in cooperative work—that is , artefacts that anticipate future ways of performing activities , to challenge the received understanding of the plan’s capacity to anticipate interdependencies as an immutable feature of plans . We propose conceptualizing the plan’s capacity to anticipate interdependencies at work as an emergent , distributed and artifact - mediated activity that might be uncovered studying plans , planning and the plans application as work objects and activities occurring within a multiplicity of coordinative artifacts and protocols . This way we can expand our knowledge on how the plans anticipation is maintained in changing environments to support work coordination and we might support designers of computer - supported cooperative work ( CSCW ) ’ efforts for the design of CSCW systems . Author Keywords Artifacts ; Anticipation ; Coordination ; Ordering Systems ; Plans ; Planning ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . 3 [ Group and organization interfaces ] : Computer supported cooperative work ; theory and models INTRODUCTION The objective of this paper is to contribute to the understanding of the role of plans in supporting coordination at work by proposing an approach that focuses on how the plan’s capacity to anticipate interdependencies at work is maintained in face of changes in surroundings to ensure stability in the coordination of different stakeholders . Several computer - supported - cooperative work ( CSCW ) scholars [ 7 ; 13 ; 15 ; 29 ; 43 ; 16 ] have examined how the plans’ executors deal with the anticipated courses of events that plans set up in real settings . This stream of research has significantly contributed to our understanding of how plans are used within work settings . Previous researchers have always taken as an object of inquiry plans as “static artifacts” that one person develops and another one has to use or , said in other words , as artifacts whose capacity to define in advance interdependencies at work can never be changed by the plan executors . But what happens when plans change over time ? Is it possible to conceptualize the plans capacity to anticipate interdependencies among work activities as an emergent , distributed and artifact - mediated activity that still ensure stability in the coordination of complex work activities ? This is the research question that inspired this paper and that we answer focusing on how plans are used in combination with other artifacts , thus approaching the study of plans in a way that still needs to be exploited by CSCW scholars . In particular , we take the concept of “ordering system” developed by Schmidt and Wagner [ 44 ] as particularly inspiring in that it promotes the necessity to study specialized coordinative practices as essentially linked with coordinative artifacts and to understand practices and artifacts designed to address very specific coordinative issues as interrelated . This way , the study of work must include the understanding of the complex interconnections actors establish to interrelate specific objects and practices to ensure order at work . We propose the term “coordination - artifacts suiting” to focus on the set of local practices and coordinative artifacts that permit individuals to keep plans on track— that is , to ensure the usability of plans over time , even if changes in surroundings occur . In order to develop our argument , we first present and comment on coordination - artifacts studies , then we examine coordination dynamics studies in airport and traffic control settings , and finally we focus on research on plans and planning in CSCW . We then present the ethnographic study used as a meaningful case and we conclude by providing insights into the design of CSCW systems . ARTIFACTS AND WORK COORDINATION The preoccupation with coordination that is at the basis of CSCW research has fostered the study of how artifacts contribute to the realization of cooperative work . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CSCW ' 15 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada . Copyright 2015 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 2922 - 4 / 15 / 03… $ 15 . 00 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675136 Framing Collaboration : Systems and Analysis CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 165 Exemplar in this sense is Schmidt and Simone’s work [ 42 ] . Drawing on Strauss’ work [ 49 ] , these scholars defined cooperative work as the kind of work “constituted by multiple actors who are interdependent in their work in that they interact through changing the state of the common field . ” They further defined articulation work as the means to “curb the distributed nature of complexly interdependent activities . ” Based on these definitions , they identified coordination mechanisms as the “protocols encompassing a set of explicit conventions and prescribed procedures and supported by distinct artifacts with a standardized format , that stipulate and mediate the articulation of distributed activities so as to reduce the complexity of articulating distributed activities of cooperative ensembles” ( pp . 16 - 21 ) . The role of the artifacts in the coordination mechanism is thus “to provide persistence to the precomputations of the protocol and to make them publicly available” ( p . 35 ) . Several CSCW scholars have examined interrelated material artifacts vis - à - vis coordinative practices . Among others [ 2 ] , Schimidt and Wagner [ 44 ] explored the fundamental concept of “coordination mechanisms” and developed the concept of “ordering systems” to address clusters of coordinative protocols and concomitant coordinative artifacts . In their study , they sought to overcome the biases that the study of coordination through the study of coordination mechanisms could engender [ 45 ; pp . 17 - 21 ] as well as outline an approach that “supports the analyst in embracing the motley of coordinative practices required in highly complex cooperative work settings” [ 25 ; p . 23 ] . Other scholars have instead focused on the role of “boundary objects” [ 11 ; 48 ] as material artifacts that mediate the relationship among different cooperating groups . Such studies , focusing on how objects mediate the relationship among different communities of practices , developed the concepts of “prototypes” [ 51 ] , “intermediary objects” [ 9 ] , “boundary negotiating artifacts” [ 30 ] , boundary - object trimming [ 8 ] and boundary objects as punctuated crystallizations [ 31 ] . These studies have not only highlighted the functions of boundary objects in facilitating the crossing , pushing , and establishing of boundaries [ 30 ; p . 333 ] and the role of objects in knowledge dynamics [ 9 ] ; but they have also—and most relevantly—introduced the study of how boundary objects are created and used within information flows . In other words , they have discussed the processes by which such objects are made progressively intelligible to members of the receiving communities . We draw on such conceptualizations and put ourselves within the stream of research interested in the study of the creation and management of coordination artifacts for the understanding of plans as coordination mechanisms , focusing on the change and crystallization of artifacts in instable environments , instead of the processes involved in the standardization of their informational content . Among the studies quoted above , we find particularly inspiring Bossen et al . ’s study [ 8 ] on boundary - object trimming in that it highlights the kind of articulation work necessary to “keep - on - course boundary - objects whose structural form and informational content need to be maintained and updated during their use” to ensure the smooth execution of work and stresses “the dynamic and directional aspects of work” ( p . 101 ) . ARTIFACTS AND WORK COORDINATION IN FLIGHT AND AIRPORT MANAGEMENT Several studies investigated how coordination is achieved in the management of airport activities and flight execution since these activities are highly distributed in space and need to be coordinated in time following the trajectories [ 50 ] of the flights execution . The Lancaster group’ s studies [ among others 4 . ; 26 ; 27 ] strongly impacted the CSCW community for their focus on how to link the ethnographic study of the setting with the development of software design while other research provided insights into the functioning of the flight management and particularly how flight strips are used by air traffic controllers . Such studies investigated the coordinative functions of flight strips wondering how to replace the papered versions of flight strips by software [ 5 ; 6 ; 17 ; 25 ; 33 ; 34 ] . They highlighted different aspects of the flight strip use , such as their being aids to memory [ 33 ] ; their supporting peripheral awareness among colleagues within the room [ 34 ] ; their being the means by which flight scheduling is achieved when they are used in conjunction with other equipment , namely the radar and the radio connection with pilots [ 24 ] . Information provided by strips , radar and radio with the controllers’ knowledge of the kind of reasons that might determine planes not being in the place indicated at the time indicated allow to foresee their position in the next future thus “solving the sequencing problem as a matter of moment - to - moment problem , ” more than as a matter of following procedurally defined rules [ 24 ; p . 142 ] . Other research projects [ 5 ; 17 ; 22 ; 23 ] focused on the use of boundary objects between the air traffic control and the flight control tower and between the airport control tower and other ground services . Halverson , [ 22 ] and Halverson and Ackerman [ 23 ] showed that artifacts work as intermediary objects when they recontextualize expert knowledge across organizational boundaries and work as memory aids in that they crystallize previous solutions to routine problems . Similarly , Berndtsson and Normark [ 5 ] analyzed the coordinative function of a closed - circuit television - system that transmits the view of the flight strip rack between adjacent sectors , such as the apron tower and the air traffic control centers . They noticed that such a system worked as an “awareness mediator” that supported coordination among services reducing the necessity to draw on other form of communication , such as telephone calls . Framing Collaboration : Systems and Analysis CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 166 Last but not least , it is possible to identify studies that focused on the activities necessary to the execution of flights that occur on the ground [ 21 ; 54 ; 55 ] . Goodwin and Goodwin [ 21 ] showed that to see a plane in a manner that is relevant for the task at hand ( i . e . to load baggage ) it is necessary to situate it within organizational networks and that this is possible only drawing on an heterogeneous collection of technological artifacts and a social organization that allows the transformation of individual expertise into an element of the working culture of the operation room . Suchman [ 54 ] studied the activity of the operators of an operations room who have to participate in the ground traffic control . She noticed that operators coordinate pilots and operators on the ramp by means of “embodied articulation” in that they craft messages and their timing to such stakeholders in different ways to achieve the orderly movement of planes given what video cameras allow them to see as regarding the movements of planes on the ground . Suchman [ 55 ] also showed how the interplay between the structure of the workplace , the assigned location of operators within the room and their interactions allow for the continuous transformation of restricted and public areas thus supporting both joint activities and different structure of attention among the operators . Another of Suchman’s concerns was the understanding of how “prescriptive devices , ” such as airline schedules , operate [ 56 ; p . 23 ] . She noticed that “any normative prescript requires , for its routine enactment , the management of inevitable contingencies of actual events . ” Schedules thus are both resources for the actors’ organizing of their activities and regimes created elsewhere to which participants’ activities are accountable [ 56 ; p . 28 ] . We consider Suchman [ 56 ] and Harper and Hughes’s [ 24 ] studies particularly relevant for the analysis of how the stand and gate allocation plan are set up and changed in that they face the problem of how prescriptive devices are enacted . We will refer to these papers in the following sections . PLANS , PLANNING AND RE - PLANNING To date , several CSCW scholars have focused on how plans and planning are used in work settings focusing alternately on planning as a process and plans as artifacts . Highlighting that actions are inevitably situated in that they depend in essential ways upon the material and social circumstances of their occurrence , Suchman [ 53 ] , recognized that the efficacy of plans inevitably depends on their relationship with the circumstances in which actions occur . Plans , in fact , cannot represent all the changing circumstances of their occurrence ; thus , they should be considered “weak resources” for the execution of actions as their usefulness depends only on their bringing “past experience and projected outcome to bear on our present actions” [ 53 ; p . 185 ] . This implies that — in order to get the work done well , it is necessary to deviate from the plan . Schmidt [ 43 ] strongly criticized Suchman’s conceptualization of plans by demonstrating that plans might or might not determine our actions . The role of plans , in fact , depends on the extent to which it is possible to identify and model interdependencies in advance . In addition , he asserted that Suchman had underestimated the normative dimension of plans as constructs that provide criteria for whether or not a particular action is correctly executed [ 46 ; p . 366 ] . Bardram [ 1 ] suggested that plans could be conceptualized as planning—that is , a situated activity . Bardram’s analysis of the daily clinical work showed that hospital patients’ assistance draws on a socially constructed planning activity that is enhanced by and simultaneously shapes the work activities . As a result , plan implementation allows for the adjustment of the plan to the conditions of the specific situation . Bardram also identified the “anticipation of future ways of performing activities as the strength of plans” [ 1 ; p . 24 ] . Dourish [ 16 ; p . 52 ] highlighted the role of plans as “organizational accounting devices . ” Focusing on workflow technologies he examined how such technologies are taken to be effective for the coordination of work despite the fact that their pre - defined formal descriptions of working processes do not match with the improvised accomplishment of work [ on this topic see , among others 52 ; 10 ] . In Dourish’s opinion , workflows are so widespread because they do not act as mere coordination technologies , but instead as “organizational accounting devices”—that is , they render work activities “observable - and - reportable as being the activity they describe” [ 16 ; p . 55 ] . Said in other words : workflow helps explain work . Such a conceptualization of workflow permits them to be designed as systems that support the visualization of work thus overcoming the conceptualization of workflow as technologies that pre - specify work , in favour of their conceptualization as technologies that visualize the order of work . Rönkkö et al . [ 41 ; p . 433 ] argued the necessity to study “the way plans become an accountable matter in organization activity” to understand how they help co - ordinate the development of work . They draw on Gerson and Star’s s definition of “due process” [ 19 ] , that sustained the necessity to study the articulation and coordination process around planning documentation to understand how inconsistencies that might arise in the accomplishment of work that formal description cannot fully anticipate and provide for , might be resolved . Other researchers [ 7 ; 15 ] showed that plans do not themselves ensure that work is done in an orderly manner , but that such orderliness depends on everyday work . This means that efforts have to be made to deal with planned Framing Collaboration : Systems and Analysis CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 167 deadlines [ 8 ] , to give significance to formal plans within the situated rationality of social actions [ 4 ] or to make sense of work [ 11 ] . Redaelli and Carassa [ 39 ; 40 ] instead focused on how a team sets up and modifies plans showing that plans might be set up so as to make the realization of the planned work activities feasible . If , in fact , plans might define deadlines in an inconsistent manner , they might also be designed and changed so as to promote the organizations’ capability to deal with disruptions both at the level of work coordination and at the level of the maintenance of the organizational functioning on the whole . On the other hand , Bardram and Hansen [ 3 ] investigated the relationship between plans and situated actions to understand how and why plans are changed . They suggested considering planning in hospitals as a continuous activity adjusted to the conditions of specific situations . Continuous planning is therefore necessary when it is impossible to anticipate every contingency that might arise in carrying out a series of tasks . Consequently , the distinction between the planning phase and the execution phase fades as planning never ends , even if it might be carried out following different priorities over time , such as the optimization for utilization during the planning phase and the optimization for performance during the execution phase . Similarly , Munkvold et al . [ 35 ] investigated the process of planning , showing that planning is a collective and ongoing achievement that needs to be supported as such even though this might be in detriment to the standardization of work practice that plans usually support . In summary , plans have mainly been studied as “static artifacts” whose capacity to define in advance interdependencies at work can never be changed by the plan executors . CSCW studies have thus focused on how such artifacts are used by people who have to apply or realize them . As such , plans like checklists might be useful resources that help execute the planned activities or artifacts that might fail to adequately support courses of action if particular adaptive efforts devoted to match the plan content with the real situation are not made . When the focus of attention is instead on the process of planning rather than on plans as artifacts , planning is conceptualized as the adjustment to the concrete conditions of the context [ 3 ] and the relevance of plans as tools that might support the execution of action is minimized or even dismissed . In such cases , in fact , plans are conceptualized as trajectories that are the outcome of continual articulation work [ 35 ] . This undermines the possibility to study them as interdependent . Furthermore , the studies discussed thus far have been oriented to the study of such artifacts and processes in a disconnected manner from the other artifacts that inhabit the organizational settings . Only Rönkkö et al . [ 41 ] attempted to link the study of plans with other planning documents , showing that the members’ reference to the project plan and the company - wide project models make it possible for people not to cease to orient to plans even as they change . Indeed , the combined use of such documents makes the project plan useful even when it does not work out as it contributes to the identification of deviations between the plan and the project’s reality . However , a systematic attempt to understand how plans work as coordination mechanisms when used in combination with other artifacts is still missing . All this suggests that our understanding of plans might be incomplete . RESEARCH SITE The study was carried out in the ramp control tower ( RCT ) of an Italian airport where the operators plan the use of parking areas for aircrafts ( i . e . , the stands ) to ensure a proper area will be available when planes arrive for the entire duration of handling activities on the ground . Such operators also plan the use of gates to ensure the availability of gates when boarding has to start and for the duration of passengers’ boarding . Their planning activities not only play a key role in ensuring the orderly movements of planes on ground , but also ensures the orderly execution of flights in that they support the timely execution of the planes’ assistance on the ground which is crucial for the execution of flights as scheduled . In particular , the stand and allocation plan work as coordination mechanisms in that they permit the convergence of personnel involved in assisting the plane on the ground ( bus , fuelling , and towing truck drivers ; ramp agents ; utility workers for aircraft cleaning and luggage loading and unloading ; drivers of follow - me trucks and of belt - loader vehicles ) upon the planes’ arrivals and the convergence of airport personnel and passengers at the gates . The airport it is home to both passenger and cargo flights ; thus it is active 24 hours a day meaning the RCT operators have to ensure the continuity of planning over time . They do this both by planning in advance twice a day and engaging in re - planning whenever necessary . The operators’ advance planning consists of planning before the plan is executed . The operators match stands and gates with flights when the airline companies send them the rotation lists ( i . e . , documents in which scheduled flights are assigned to planes ) . This way , the RCT operators know how long each plane will stay on the ground between the execution of subsequent flights and can therefore allocate stands and gates as necessary . The operators’ re - planning occurs during the plan’s execution and it is devoted to compensating for changes in the execution of flights or in the rotation lists . As a result , the most frequent causes of changes to plans are flight delays or arrivals ahead of time , flight cancellations or the addition of charter flights , changes in the size of aircrafts used to carry out flights , or changes in the match between flights and planes . Framing Collaboration : Systems and Analysis CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 168 The RCT operators match planes with stands by considering the size of the aircrafts and the technical features of stands . Planes have different and varied sizes while stands offer different features . Some of them allow for the self - maneuvering of aircraft while others do not , and sometimes the possibility for using certain stands depends on whether adjacent stands are in use or not as access to some stands overlap with other parking areas . In addition , stands offer different capacities and can be used to park aircrafts of various dimensions , up to their maximum capacity . Similarly , gates have different capacities and might allow for boarding solely by bus , solely on foot , or both . This implies that the RCT operators have to match flights with gates while also respecting the number of passengers to board and the security requirements that might involve boarding by bus for certain flights . In addition , some stands are structurally linked with gates ; RCT operators have to take this into consideration when planning . Thus , the way stands and gates might be used depends on choices made when planning . It is also worth considering that , during the last ten years , the airport has ensured a progressive increase in air transport movements and that low - cost companies provide the majority of flights hosted by the airport . As a result , the operators have to handle aircrafts on the ground while respecting short turnaround times . The stand allocation plan is set up using software available to the RCT that represents the stand plan in the form of a Gantt’s chart for the occupation of stands over time . The operators drag and drop flight numbers from a list over to the Gantt’s chart , where icons representing the length of planes’ stay on ground appear . The software highlights potential conflicts in the stand allocation—namely , the mismatch between the dimension of the stand and those of the plane as well as the overlapping of allocations for each stand during both the plan setup and execution if changes in the execution of flights occur . The gate allocation plan is set up and printed once finished , without the support of any alarm system . As a result , the operators must pay attention to overlaps or mismatch in the use of gates . The RCT operators work in an environment full of artifacts . As the image below shows , the operators have two workspaces at their disposal for the set up and change of the gate and stand allocation plans and for the coordination of all the ground activities connected with the departure and arrival of planes . The operators sit at their workstations where one of them manages incoming flights , while the other manages departures . Some tools are available to both operators , while others are not . Big windows in front of the operators’ workspaces permit the direct view of most of the ramp and taxiway .       Taxiway and ramp RCT tower             1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 OP 1 ( departures ) OP2 ( arrivals )  13  14 15  Entrance LEGEND Operator’s 1 workspace Operator’s 2 workspace 1 Telex 8 Radio 2 Computer 9 Stand allocation plan ( paper version ) 3 Telephone 10 Gate allocation plan ( electronic version ) 4 Gate allocation plan ( paper version ) 11 Computer 5 Radio 12 Telephone 13 Close circuit camera Shared tools 6 Strip rack 14 Printer 7 Block - notes 15 Airport map Figure 1 . Layout of the RCT The RCT uses a closed - circuit system for the surveillance of the parking areas , a monitor showing the electronic strip - rack , and software for the allocation of stands and gates . The electronic strip rack offers various information on flights , such as the estimated block - off time ( EOTB ) and the calculated take - off time ( CTOT ) for departing flights , which allows the operator to know at what time the flight is scheduled to depart and at what time the plane will actually depart . The strip rack also provides information about flight status for incoming planes . Such statuses change from inactive to active , radar , and landed , corresponding with the plane’s approach to the airport . The strip - rack also provides different evaluations of the estimated time of arrival ( ETA ) so that the closer the plane is to the airport , the more accurate and reliable the estimations of the arrival time are . Meanwhile , the software for the allocation of gates allows the operator to have an overview of the gate allocations and to monitor the number of passengers boarded for each flight . The data on the scheduled flights included in the system for the gate and stand allocation need to be manually updated when changes in the scheduled time or the numbers of planes occur . The airline companies send such information in the form of telex or e - mail messages to the operation room where the operators update the database Framing Collaboration : Systems and Analysis CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 169 information . RCT also uses a block - note that lists the messages that refer to daily occurrences , such as ongoing maintenance procedures at gates , stands and aircrafts ; particular messages received by airline companies ; to - do lists ( i . e . messages to send or to receive ) that the RCT operators progressively update . The operators might also consult documents glued on furniture that provide the list of gates and stands whose allocations need to be coupled ; security protocols that specify which gates and stands can be used for extra - Schengen flights ; a big map of the airport on the wall that provides information on the technical features of stands . RESEARCH METHODS The study is an ethno - methodologically oriented ethnography [ 14 ; 18 ; 38 ] . The objective of the data collection was the study of the operators’ planning practices in allocating resources . We followed Llewellyn and Spence’s [ 32 ] conceiving practices as members’ phenomenon . Therefore , data collection was oriented to the identification of patterns of activities that are intersubjectively organized and recognized by operators as embodying ( or not ) a certain practice . Our main goal was to understand how RCT operators carry out such activities and how they make those activities “accountable” to others in order to understand how such artifacts contribute to the coordination of ground activities . We did this in accordance with the ethnomethodologically inspired studies of work that take as topic the study of work as “lived experience” [ 38 ] . Empirical materials were collected within the RCT where 18 people ( 12 males and 6 females , aged from 30 to 40 ) work . The majority of them started working in the airport ten years before the beginning of the research , while only two of them started working in the service more recently . Some of the operators are part of teams that define the organization of the ground activities , others in teaching professional courses , but each of them is equally able to manage the routine work in the RCT . The data collection was carried out by means of the direct observation of the operators’ planning and re - planning activities . Data collection lasted eight months by spending at least two days a week in the service for a total amount of more than 500 hours . The operators were observed at different times of the day and night according to the operators’ shifts to catch their planning and re - planning strategies during the occurrence of hourly , daily and seasonal variations . After one month the direct observation was accompanied by the audio - recordings of naturally occurring conversations . Due to security requirements , we were not allowed to videotape and take pictures of work activities . This , of course , makes the fine - grained analysis of how discourses relate with activities as , for example , Nevile [ 36 ] did studying the flight execution , impossible . Detailed notes were taken regarding the activities carried out by the operators and were linked with the discourses that occurred during their execution and we made drawings to fix the layout of tools and documents . Field notes and the majority of the recorded conversations were transcribed for a total amount of 223 pages of field notes and 197 pages of transcripts . We decided to transcribe all conversations occurring between the operators during planning and re - planning , but not all the ones with pilots , who transmit data regarding the kind of maintenance planes need once on the ground , and the operators on the ramp with whom they talk about the execution of ground activities . We transcribed conversations drawing on a modified orthography ( see the table 1 ) that allowed for us to keep track of the “sounds as uttered” [ 57 ] to catch the operators’ inferential work that emerges in lexical choices , in the way words and utterances are produced and sequentially organized . But it is worth specifying that we decided to use the standard numeric symbols for the representation of numbers to make the reading and the analysis of transcripts easier . Transcripts of conversations are presented here following Jordan’s [ 28 ] presentation of the ethnographic study conducted at the San Jose international Airport [ 12 ] to show the relationship between discourses and actions . We also carried out 47 unstructured ethnographic interviews [ 47 ] while observing the operators’ setting up and changing the plans . The questions were devoted to the understanding of how the operators realized the necessity to change the plans , of how they reached a solution to re - allocation problems and to the identification of the strategies they usually adopt for the plans setup . The interviews thus were carried out at the workplace making it possible to discuss the features and functions of artifacts . We interviewed all the operators with the exception of one who refused to be interviewed and audio - recorded . Field notes were verified with participants and the analysis of data was carried out triangulating all collected empirical materials . The empirical materials presented here were selected to highlight the issue of how the plans capacity to anticipate interdependencies is maintained despite contingencies that might arise in carrying out a series of tasks so as to help the coordination and development of work . PLANNING AND RE - PLANNING IN THE APRON TOWER As previously explained , both the stand and gate allocation plans are coordination mechanisms . The stand and gate allocation plans are sent to all personnel involved in providing plane assistance on the ground and to the airport’s personnel to ensure the convergence of ground personnel at stands and of airport personnel and passengers at gates . This means that changes in such plans might create disruptions in the execution of airport activities . But plans also have to compensate for changes in the execution of flights or in the airlines’ efforts to match planes and flights . The RCT operators who work to match the airport with the flight activities are bound to Framing Collaboration : Systems and Analysis CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 170 deal with conflicting exigencies ; plans are at the interface of such a tension between stability and flexibility . This is why we focused on how the operators set up and modify plans . Planning Practices and the Anticipation of Events Planning for the Likely Case Scenario and Preventing Delays As Suchman noticed [ 56 ] , the RCT operators are oriented to achieving a normal order of on - time arrivals and departures as prescribed by the flight schedule . They participate in the achievement of such a goal by means of planning the allocation of stands and gates . Using Suchman’s words [ 56 ; p . 27 ] , like other operators involved in the flight execution [ 24 ] , they work “to maintain a consistent relationship between an order of events prescribed via the schedule and events at the local site . ” They do this by means of precise planning and re - planning practices . The RCT operators , in fact , are able to anticipate the occurrence of some events on the basis of their knowledge of “how things usually go . ” As a consequence , they are able to plan so as to provide resources to compensate for changes in the flight execution and to ensure the execution of the ground activities as planned . The interviews indicated that RCT operators , unlike what Bardram and Hansen noted [ 3 ] , do not plan based on the best - case scenario ( i . e . , all flights will be carried out as scheduled ) , but rather on the basis of their knowledge of how flights are usually executed . Thus , for example the operators set up the stand allocation plan , ensuring the availability of slack space , i . e . at least one free stand on the ramp , and of slack time between subsequent flights to compensate for changes in the number or timetable of flights . But the RCT operators not only plan to adapt to likely - to - occur changes in the execution of flights . In fact , they , on the basis of their knowledge of how planning the use of stands and gates impact on the timely execution of the ground activities , also plan so as to prevent the occurrence of delays in the execution of flights thus contributing to their execution as planned . They do this planning to ensure the timely execution of the handling activities—that is , by planning to avoid delays in the execution of boarding , favouring the exchanges of crews and allocating planes in order to avoid bottleneck situations . The operators avoid delays in the execution of boarding by maximizing the use of stands that allow the boarding and disembarkation on foot and matching the gate dimensions with the number of passengers to board . All of us here know that you have to exploit at maximum the stands that allow boarding and disembarkation on foot so we do not need to use busses and such procedures are carried out quicker than by bus . So , for example I assign the flights that depart first in the morning to those stands so that they will be free for subsequent flights . If I put there flights that depart late in the morning , then I block their use ( Track 5 10 / 07 / 2011 ) . With the Sxxair we have to start boarding a long time before the flight departure , so you need the space to place the passengers in ; otherwise , you board 6 passengers and then you have to stop . This way , you do not gain time . So we have to avoid assigning crowded flights to gates that have a small fingers ( Track 36 10 / 25 / 2011 ) . The operators also plan in such a way to shorten the time necessary to exchange crews ( i . e . , move from one plane to another one ) . When looking at the rotation lists and we detect an aircraft change , we try to put the two planes next to each other so the crew will not take a long time to move from one plane to the other one . You know , the low cost companies do not provide vehicles for the crews to move on the ground , so if we do not do this it might take a long time for them to walk from one side of the ramp to the opposite one , increasing the risk of a delay in the flight departure ( Track 14 10 / 07 / 2011 ) . Moreover , the operators allocate planes and gates so as to avoid overlaps in the aircrafts’ and passengers’ movement on ground . This is another thing you have to keep in mind . If I assign the plane that departs first in the morning to the gate 16 instead of 14 , I risk having to stop the boarding for stand 14 if the plane at stand 16 is ready to go . Stand 16 , in fact , is a self - manoeuvring and its exit way overlaps the path passengers use to reach stand 14 ( Track 14 10 / 07 / 2011 ) . If we cannot avoid using the stand 24 , we put there the flight that departs first because this stand has to be free as soon as possible . It is a pushback stand and it is on the exit way of all these other self - manoeuvring stands . So if it is not free , we have to push back all the flights that , as a consequence , cannot leave the stands in self - manoeuvring so we risk causing delays because we have few pushback tractors and we have to push all those planes that , early in the morning , depart almost at the same time ( Track 37 10 / 14 / 2011 ) . Such planning practices contribute to the execution of flights as planned in a significant way , even though they are not enough to compensate for changes in the flight execution . The RCT operators are therefore forced to engage in re - planning . Re - planning Practices and the Anticipation of Events Planning and re - planning are different activities in that during planning the RCT operators can repeatedly change the allocations until they are satisfied—that is , until they think that the plans allow for the optimization of the use of airport resources and the orderly movement of planes on the ground . Framing Collaboration : Systems and Analysis CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 171 First , I assign stands to be sure that flights fit in them ; then I cancel everything and I start assigning the crowded flights with the gates that allow boarding on foot , and I put the international flights on the other side next to the gates dedicated to international flights ( Track 37 10 / 1472011 ) . In this way , the operators make the plans resistant to changes thus reducing the need to re - plan , which is a costly activity for planners who have to re - plan while executing other activities . Moreover , changes in the allocation of stands and gates might disrupt airport activities because , for example , passengers have to move from one gate to another ; and airport operators have to make additional efforts to re - coordinate their activities according to the change . In addition , during re - planning , it is more difficult to change plans while ensuring the optimization of resources in that they do not have the possibility to use whatever stand or gate , but only those not in use at that moment or in the near future . Yet , changes to the plans cannot always be avoided . Thus the operators have to recognize the necessity to change plans and decide how to change them in advance so as to ensure the smooth execution of flights and ground activities . The RCT operators do this according to shared discursive practices and the use of artifacts as emerging from the analysis of the naturally occurring conversations between them . The transcripts analyzed here are translated from Italian . The following fragments represent routine talk within the RCT . Transcription conventions . Falling intonation ? Rising intonation , Flat or slightly rising intonation , talk which sounds incomplete ( 2 . 0 ) , ( 0 . 5 ) Silence measured in seconds and tenths of seconds word _ word Bounded words ( xx ) Incomprehensible talk [ writing ] Description of actions occurring during the talk Pronunciation of numbers 1 One 9 8 7 5 Nine eight seven five 12 Twelve References of numbers 9 8 7 5 Flight number 12 Stand number 11 Gate number * 21 * Time ( hours and minutes ) Table 1 : Transcription conventions In the following transcript one of the two operators detects the necessity to change the stand and allocation plans and involves the colleague in the solution of the re - allocation problem . Extract 1 ( Track 18 11 / 25 / 2011 ) 1 . FRANK It’s too narrow for us here with the 4 7 0 6 [ Looking at the stand allocation plan ( electronic version ) ] 2 . TINA Even there ? [ Inserting data into the database ] 3 . FRANK It’s at 16 . 4 8 8 6 , 4 7 0 7 is it already there ? [ Looking at the stand allocation plan ( electronic version ) ] 4 . TINA * 18 * and * 22 * but it’s inactive [ Looking at the strip rack ] 5 . FRANK The 4 8 8 6 is already on ground the 4 8 8 5 [ Looking at the stand allocation plan ( electronic version ) ] 6 . TINA Yes _ yes . The 4 7 0 7 is arriving * 10 * minutes ahead of time at 16 [ Looking at the strip rack ] 7 . FRANK Okay . Let’s see , Tina , let’s see [ Looking at the stand allocation plan ( electronic version ) ] 8 . TINA Can we switch them with another flight ? [ Looking at Frank ] 9 . FRANK Not here , they’re all full . 14 18 it should go at 13 . Shall we change the gate immediately and put it at 13 ? It leaves at * 19 * and * 50 * . Can we take it easy ? Let’s change it [ Looking at the stand allocation plan ( electronic version ) ] 10 . TINA We can wait until it goes on radar and then we’ll decide [ Looking at Frank ] 11 . FRANK Okay , let’s wait until it goes radar and then we’ll decide [ Looking at Tina ] 12 . TINA Okay [ ( any record ) ] 13 . FRANK But the 13 is free . Let’s check for another gate . Mh ( 13 . 0 ) [ Looking at the software ( opening the manager of gate allocation ) ] 14 . TINA 14 , 15 [ Looking at the gate allocation plan ] 15 . FRANK No there is also the 19 [ Looking at the software ( manager of gate allocation ) ] 16 . TINA But if the passengers are already at the gate it’ll be a mess moving them [ Looking at Frank ] 17 . FRANK 16 they’re already there , you are right , then 15 [ Looking at the software ( manager of gate allocation ) ] Framing Collaboration : Systems and Analysis CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 172 18 . TINA 15 is the closest [ ( any record ) ] 19 . FRANK 15 is the closest . So in the end we’ll change it [ ( any record ) ] Does a Contingency Matter ? As explained above , the stand and gate allocation plans are set up to ensure the availability of slack space and time so as to compensate for changes in the flight execution . This means that not all the contingencies require changes to the plans . The RCT operators detect the necessity to change the stand allocation plan in that its representation as a Gannt’s chart allows for the detection of the shortening of the slack time between subsequent flights even before the activation of the alarm color code in that such a representation shows time in terms of space ( extract 1 , turn 1 ) . Assessing a Viable Solution Once the operators detect the necessity to change the plans , they have to find a viable solution to the re - allocation problem . They re - allocate stands by both looking at the stand allocation plan and at the representation of the strip rack . This way , in fact , they are able to identify the free stands at disposal ( extract 1 , turns 5 and 9 ) and to assess which planes might be moved from their original allocations . Planes that are already on ground might be moved but this is a time consuming activity whose occurrence interferes with the movement of planes on the taxiway . This is the reason why the operators solve re - allocation problems by changing the allocation of flights that are going to arrive . They select the plane to move on the basis of the distance of the aircraft from the airport . Usually the farthest , the better in that it is unlikely that the re - allocation negatively impacts the execution of’ ground activities . The operators assess the planes positions looking at the strip rack and in particular focusing on the status of flights ( extract 1 , turn 4 ) . Inactive flights are the farthest while the radar flights are the closest to the ground . To Re - plan or not to Re - plan ? Drawing on the information provided by the strip rack the RCT operators can also decide to postpone the change to the plan up to the achievement of more reliable information about the time of arrival of planes ( extract 1 , turns 9 , 10 , 11 ) . Usually , in fact , the estimations of the arrival time change with the plane approaching the airport thus making the re - allocation no longer necessary . The operators , in fact , might decide to use the slack time between subsequent flights to compensate for changes in the scheduled flight time . To do this safely they check the strip - rack for the estimations of the arrival time that are more and more accurate with the time passing . In addition they might use the statuses of flights as deadlines along which to organize their re - planning activity ( extract 1 , turn 11 ) . Changing the flight status from “inactive” to “radar” is a means to balance the RCT operators’ concern of preserving the plan as it was set up as much as possible with the necessity to inform the operator on ground in time to avoid disruptions in the execution of ground activities . In particular the RCT operators consider “inactive flights” as sort of mere hypothesis of how thing will go , while they consider the status “radar” as highly reliable and as fixing the optimal deadline for re - planning . The status “radar” occurring 30 minutes before the arrival of the plane permits the change of plans and the re - coordination of ground activities . Re - allocating Gates Once the RCT operators have re - allocated stands , they re - allocate gates if necessary . Similarly with the gate re - allocation , they need to know the location of passengers ( already at the gate or not ) in order to find the less disruptive solution . They can monitor the passengers’ position looking at the software at their disposal for the allocation of gates . They , in fact , can check the foreseen time of boarding to assess the presence of passengers at the gate and , on the basis of their knowledge of the airport structure and of the stands available at that moment , decide which is the less disruptive solution in the given circumstances ( extract 1 , turns 16 , 17 ) . Departing Flight The use of artifacts not only supports re - allocation when incoming flights change their scheduled times , but also supports the identification of delays in planes leaving the stands . As the extract 2 shows , Freddy asked the colleague to check whether they might have problems at stand 31 since the plane is next to land and the plane previously assigned to that stand is still on ground . It , in fact , is on the strip rack but not ready for departure . Extract 2 ( Track 66 11 / 04 / 2011 ) 1 . FREDDY Check the 31 , does it fit ? [ Looking at strip rack ] 2 . MARK Maybe let’s say maybe [ Looking at the stand allocation plan ( electronic version ) ] 3 . FREDDY Maybe ? ( 10 . 0 ) let’s put this on ice [ Looking at Mark ] 4 . MARK If it fits ok otherwise I see that there is the yellow air at 9 that we could put at 7 that is beside . The red air ( XX ) is going to leave first , isn’t it ? it is still sixty [ Looking at the software ( boarding page surveillance ) ] The colleague shares with the colleague the developed back - up plan . He thinks that it is possible to use the stand 7 since the plane at that stand is going to leave . That plane , in fact , arrived ahead of time thus permitting the timely beginning of boarding procedure . Mark is saying Framing Collaboration : Systems and Analysis CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 173 that the plane is going to leave because , looking at the boarding page surveillance he notices that only 60 passengers have yet to be to boarded . Tidying the Plans Extract 3 ( Track 37 11 / 09 / 2011 ) 1 . ALAN The Stansted is bothering me . In any case there is a stand free [ Looking at the strip rack ] 2 . TINA A stand free ? [ Looking at the stand allocation plan ( electronic version ) ] 3 . ALAN My 13 is free [ Looking at the stand allocation plan ( paper version ) ] 4 . TINA Because there is 28 to move to 13 . That won’t do there , we have to use 13 or we should move this one down . Oh no this is 14 . This one ? No because it is the first one to leave . Can’t we put something there ? This one ? Let’s move this Stansted . Oh no we can’t . Guess what we can do ? Move this one and this down there [ Moving the cursor on the stand allocation plan ( electronic version ) ] 5 . ALAN In fact I was moving it to 14 , if possible [ Looking at Tina ] 6 . TINA Yes but what do you care ? Oh yes let’s have the disembarkation , let’s do that . But at what time does that one leave though ? * 20 * and * 40 * . And this will arrive at ? * 20 * and * 45 * , no I cannot . No , why is that ? Yes it fits . Okay let’s put the 4 1 9 7 at 14 . Then here at 13 we can put another flight . Let’ s see . Otherwise we could have moved this one up and the other one down , you see ? We could have put this one down and moved this one [ Moving the cursor on the stand allocation plan ( electronic version ) ] When re - planning , the RCT operators try to optimize the use of airport resources and to maintain the possibility of changing plans over time as much as possible . This means that very often for the operators the simplest solution— finding a free stand for an unexpected plane—is not the best solution even though this means to change several allocations to solve a single re - allocation problem ( extract 3 , turns 4 , 6 ) . In addition , due to the possibility to change the plans , optimizations in the use of airport resources impossible during its set up might become viable in the course of the day . Again the use of the representations of plans and of the strip rack plays a key role in such processes . In other words , the operators always “tidy up” the plans to maintain them as optimal working tools for themselves and next colleagues . Extract 4 ( Track 1 11 / 25 / 2011 ) 1 . FRANK I’m moving the 8 7 8 6 that was at 14 to 13 [ Changing the stand allocation plan ( electronic version ) ] 2 . LISA But [ Looking at the stand allocation plan ( papered version ) ] 3 . FRANK What ? [ ( any record ) ] 4 . LISA This other one swaps . Cannot we put this one closer to the16 ? ( XX ) The crew that has to board on the 12 now is at 15 and then at 22 but now we have space here [ Looking at the stand allocation plan ( papered version ) and then pointing at the stand allocation plan ( electronic version ) ] 5 . FRANK At 12 well done [ Looking at the stand allocation plan ( electronic version ) ] 6 . LISA At 13 [ ( any record ) ] 7 . FRANK Wait isn’t it already at 13 ? [ Looking at the stand allocation plan ( electronic version ) ] 8 . LISA No here it is written at 11 . It’s departing as 4 5 6 1 [ Looking at the stand allocation plan ( paper version ) ] The papered and electronic version of the stand allocation plan , in fact , representing the changes in the plan at different speed ( the electronic version is updated as new data are received and inserted into the system , while the papered version is updated by the operators at any re - allocation ) permit both an overview of the decisions made during planning ( the papered version ) and an image of events in real time ( the electronic version ) thus allowing the review of the plan and therefore the identification of areas of improvement that re - allocation have made possible ( extract 4 , turn 4 ) . Different representations of the stand allocation plans allow for the evaluation of whether pre - planned solution are still good enough and to crosscheck whether “first glance sound solutions” are feasible or not thus avoiding mistakes in the re - allocation of stands ( extract 4 , turn 8 ) . DISCUSSION The RCT operators’ work , similarly to the work of other operators involved in flight execution , is bound by the requirements of the flight plan . Other researchers [ 24 ; 56 ] have highlighted the kinds of efforts that operators have to accomplish to execute the flight plan despite the occurrence of inevitable contingent events to enact the plan . Our work does the same , focusing on the relationship between the coordination of ground activities and the execution of flight schedules as well as on the role of plans in such a process . It shows that the stand and gate allocation plans not only are supposed to not only compensate for changes in the execution of flights , but also promote the execution of flights as expected . They Framing Collaboration : Systems and Analysis CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 174 reach this objective thanks to both to planning and re - planning practices that draw on different principles . Planning is developed based on the implementation of preferred scenarios , such as the movement of aircrafts on ground , while re - planning is implemented based of “what - if scenarios”—that is , the evaluation of possible consequences determined by the change of the plan . Yet despite these differences , both planning and re - planning are oriented to the anticipation of the courses of events . Anticipation in the planning phase draws on the operators’ local knowledge [ 37 ] of how flight schedules are changed and how ground activities are executed . Anticipation is characterized by two elements : It is oriented to ensuring slack resources with which to deal with contingencies ( at least a certain amount of them ) and to the prevention of disruptions in the execution of the planned activities . Re - planning , instead , anticipates events successfully because it is carried out based on the basis of the detection of the necessity to re - plan in advance ; it is oriented to the identification of successful solutions to emergent problems and it is carried out in a timely manner in terms of the execution of the ground activities it coordinates . Such activities are possible in that RCT operators can use a set of tools to support their execution . It is worth noting is that the majority of such tools are not designed to support re - planning , but to monitor the flight execution . Nevertheless , the RCT operators use the information provided by such tools and transform them into information useful for re - planning purposes . In particular , RCT operators transform data provided by the equipment in terms of changes in the timetable of scheduled flights into data regarding the position of planes . Similarly , they exploit instruments developed to control the ground activities ( i . e . , the CCC ) and the functions provided by the software system for gate allocation to assess the position of passengers . In this way , they determine the availability of stands and gates and identify the elements on which it is possible to act so as to solve contingent problems . In addition , the operators use the information regarding flight status to fix the timing of re - planning , thereby reducing the occurrences of re - planning and avoiding disruptions in the execution of the re - planned activities . Last but not least , the different representations of the same plan support the recursive optimization of the use of airport resources and the maintenance of the possibility to change the plan over time despite the recurring changes to its content that , in turn , ensure the reliability of the plans . This means that the successful use of the stand and gate allocation plans depends on the combined use of artifacts and the deployment of local knowledge coupled with the constant monitoring of the execution of the flight plan . Anticipation is recognized as one of the features of plans supporting coordination , but researchers still need to understand how anticipation for planning purposes is achieved in changing environments . Anticipation has also been seen as the “Achilles’ heel” of plans in that they cannot foresee all contingencies ahead of time . Thus , when several changes occur , plans cannot do anything else but fail to support the execution of course of actions . Our data instead show that anticipation can be an emergent , distributed and artifact - mediated activity that , at the same time , does not undermine the possibility to determine the action of its users—namely , the RCT operators and the ground personnel . Anticipating events in the RCT is a complex set of interrelated planning and re - planning practices supported by the use of a composite set of tools . This means that anticipation emerges as the outcome of complex interconnections established by RCT operators to interrelate specific objects and practices to ensure order at work . RCT operators’ combined use of specialized coordinative artifacts is instrumental in maintaining anticipation . As a result , even if plans in the RCT change , they never cease to ensure stability in the coordination of complex work activities and they never cease to be used to pre - compute interdependencies during the allocation of stands and gates . Thus , anticipation even if depending on the use of different tools , essentially draws on the use of the representations of plans . Our study suggests that the understanding of how plans can maintain their capability to anticipate events in changing environments is possible by taking a precise analytical stance . Indeed , when we extend the analytical focus over the study of the specific purposes , plans serve to encompass the understanding of the relationship they have with all the artifacts that support the orderly accomplishment of work ; thus , we can understand how plans are kept on track despite the changes that might occur in the work conditions . This is the reason why we think that we should conceptualize the study of plans as part of ordering systems [ 44 ] —that is , clusters of artifacts and practices necessary to ensure order at work . In our case , this refers to the tools and practices necessary to coordinate the execution of flights with the accomplishment of ground activities . When we adopt such a perspective , we might understand not only how consistency is maintained across distributed and interdependent activities , such as the flight execution and ground activities but also how ordering systems might support the maintenance of one of the artifacts of the cluster . We are mulling over efforts to keep the plans on track by using the term “coordination - artifact suiting . ” We know that our definition of the kind of work necessary to prevent the deterioration of plans might be understood as echoing the concept of “boundary - object trimming” developed by Bossen et al . [ 8 ] , but we contend that these concepts are radically different . Bossen et al . ’ s study , like ours , involved a group whose core task is the articulation work necessary to keep an artifact on course , and coined the term “boundary - object trimming” to Framing Collaboration : Systems and Analysis CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 175 address the kind of articulation work necessary for the maintenance of a boundary object . The term “coordination - artifact suiting” instead refers to both the participants’ articulation work and the broader “artifact’s landscape” in which single artifacts are included for the dynamic maintenance of artifacts . In addition , the term “coordination - artifacts suiting” refers to the prevention of artifacts going off use , while the concept “boundary - object trimming” refers to the activities necessary to maintain optimal working tools which according to Bossen et al . includes their orderly completion and registration . We contend that the concept of “coordination - artifact suiting” can be as used a descriptive and a heuristic concept . In fact , the term “coordination - artifact suiting” can be used to describe all the cases in which ensembles of coordinative artifacts and practices are functional to the dynamic maintenance of one or more coordination mechanisms belonging to a cluster . It can also work as a sensitizing concept in that it carries a precise methodological insight—namely , that the understanding of how coordination artifacts are updated when their information content needs to be changed during their use might require expanding the analytical focus beyond the study of a single artifact . CONCLUSION Our data suggest that anticipation , which plays a key function in the coordination of work and is often crystallized in plans , needs to be studied by focusing on the set of coordinating artifacts that always inhabit complex work settings . In this way , the utility of plans might be understood even when they need to be changed throughout the day . Contrary to the results of studies by Bardram and Hansen [ 3 ] and Munkvold et al . [ 35 ] , our data indicate that the reference to artifacts remains the basis of the possibility to progressively pre - compute interdependencies during both the planning and re - planning phases when the dynamic anticipation of events is possible . Our findings thus suggest the need to distinguish between cases in which continuous planning is associated with the possibility to anticipate events for all practical purposes from the cases in which this is not possible as it requires approaching software design in different ways . Indeed , our findings , even if not oriented to the development of software , open the question on how to design software to support anticipation as a cooperative and mediated activity . The study of plans as articulation artifacts that have highlighted the need to support users’ possibility to skip the prescriptions of the plan and monitor such deviations [ 1 ; 3 ; 42 ] cannot be applied to support RCT operators’ activities as planning in the RCT depends on the use of several tools . Thus software should be designed not to produce a single workflow system , but to make planning and re - planning possible by distributing meta - content over a cluster of technologies to permit the transformation of the information provided for planning purposes . We recognize that “awareness technologies , ” such as the strip rack , the software for the gate allocation and boarding monitoring and the CCC , thereby affording information regarding work activities carried out in related and distributed settings ( on the ground and in the flight control tower ) , play a key role in the operators’ capability to anticipate events . However , they are not enough . All the information about the timing of events and positions of stakeholders is useless if not transformed into information about the possibility to act upon objects and persons to solve allocation problems . Distributing affordances [ 20 ] such as alarm systems over several tools based on the recurrent patterns of planning and re - planning , as highlighted in the previous sections , might help operators both compute interdependencies and display aspects of their activities of relevance for colleagues . In this way , operators might be adequately supported in the identification of the need to revise the plans , in developing provisional solutions and identifying them as such , in assessing the timing of re - planning , and in evaluating the appropriateness of solutions to allocation problems as necessary to address slack resources and to prevent delays during both the planning and re - planning phases . We think that the concept of “coordination - artifact suiting” helps CSCW scholars understand the interplay of work practices and the use of tools for the dynamic change of artifacts’ information content , and we hope that other CSCW scholars will try out our insights . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank all the reviewers for their valuable comments on earlier versions of this paper and Dave Randall for stimulating discussions and feedback on early thought . REFERENCES 1 . Bardram J . E . Plans as situated action : an activity theory approach to workflow systems . In Proc . ECSCW 1997 , Kluwer Academic , ( 1997 ) , 17 - 34 . 2 . Bardram , J . E . , Bossen , C . A web of coordinative artifacts : collaborative work at a hospital ward . In Proc . SIGGROUP 2005 , ACM Press ( 2005 ) , 168 - 176 . 3 . Bardram , J . E . , Hansen , T . R . Why the plan doesn ' t hold : a study of situated planning , articulation and coordination work in a surgical ward . In Proc . CSCW 2010 , ACM Press ( 2010 ) , 331 - 340 . 4 . Bentley , R . , Hughes , J . A . , Randall , D . , Rodden , T . , Shapiro , D . , Sommerville I . Ethnographically - informed systems design for air traffic control . Proc . CSCW , ACM ( 1992 ) , 123 - 129 . 5 . Berndtsson , J . , Normark , M . The coordinative functions of flight strips : air traffic control work revisited . In Proc . SIGGROUP 1999 , ACM Press ( 1999 ) , 101 - 110 . Framing Collaboration : Systems and Analysis CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 176 6 . Berndtsson , J . , & Normark , M . Coordination in Air Traffic Control . Internal report , Center for Tele - Information , Technical University of Denmark , Lyngby , Denmark ( 1999 ) . 7 . Bossen C , Markussen R . Infrastructuring and ordering devices in health care : medication plans and practices on a hospital ward . Computer Supported Cooperative Work 19 , 6 ( 2010 ) , 615 – 637 . 8 . Bossen , C . , Jensen , L . G . , Udsen , F . W . Boundary - Object Trimming : On the Invisibility of Medical Secretaries’ Care of Records in Healthcare Infrastructures . Computer Supported Cooperative Work 23 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 75 - 110 . 9 . Boujut , J . F . , Blanco , E . Intermediary objects as a means to foster co - operation in engineering design . Computer Supported Cooperative Work 12 , 2 ( 2003 ) , 205 - 219 . 10 . Bowers , J . , Button , G . , Sharrock , W . Workflow from within and without : technology and cooperative work on the print industry shopfloor . In Proc . ECSCW’95 , Springer ( 1995 ) , 51 - 66 . 11 . Bowker , G . C . , Star , S . L . Sorting things out : Classification and its consequences . MIT press ( 1999 ) . 12 . Brun - Cottan , F . , Forbes , K . , Goodwin , C . , Goodwin , M . , Jordan , B . , Suchman , L . , & Trigg , R . H . The workplace project : Designing for diversity and change ( Videotape ) . Xerox Palo Alto Research Center , 3333 ( 1991 ) . 13 . Button , G . , Sharrock , W . The organizational accountability of technological work . Social Studies of Science 28 , 1 ( 1998 ) , 73 - 102 . 14 . Carassa , A . La conoscenza entra in azione . In : Mantovani G . ( ed ) Ergonomia . Il Mulino , Bologna ( 2000 ) , 123 – 150 . 15 . Dant , T . , Francis , D . Planning in Organisations : Rational Control or Contingent Activity ? ' Sociological Research Online 3 , 2 ( 1998 ) , http : / / www . socresonline . org . uk / 3 / 2 / 4 . html . 16 . Dourish , P . Process descriptions as organizational accounting devices : the dual use of workflow technologies . In Proc . SIGGROUP 2001 , ACM Press ( 2001 ) , 52 - 60 . 17 . Fields , B . , Amaldi , P . , Tassi , A . Representing collaborative work : the airport as common information space . Cognition , Technology & Work 7 , 2 ( 2005 ) , 119 - 133 . 18 . Garfinkel , H . Studies in ethnomethodology . Prentice Hall , Englewood Cliffs ( NJ ) ( 1967 ) . 19 . Gerson , E . M . , Star , S . L . Analyzing due process in the workplace . Transactions on Information Systems ( TOIS ) , 4 , 3 ( 1986 ) , 257 - 270 . 20 . Gibson , J . J . The ecological approach to visual perception . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , New Jersey ( 1979 ) . 21 . Goodwin , C . , Goodwin , M . H . Seeing as situated activity : Formulating planes . In Engeström , Y . , Middleton , D . ( eds ) Cognition and communication at work . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , ( 1998 ) , 61 - 95 . 22 . Halverson , C . A . Traffic management in air control : Collaborative management in real time . ACM SIGOIS Bulletin , 15 , 2 ( 1994 ) , 7 - 11 . 23 . Halverson , C . A . , Ackerman , M . S . Yeah , the Rush ain ' t here yet - Take a break : Creation and use of an artifact as organizational memory . In Proc . Annual Hawaii International Conference , IEEE ( 2003 ) , 10 pp . 24 . Harper , R . H . , Hughes , J . A . What a F - ing System ! Send ' em All to the Same Place and Then Expect Us to Stop ' em Hitting . Making Technology Work in Air Traffic Control . In ( ed ) Button , G . Technology in Working Order . Routledge , London , ( 1993 ) , 127 - 144 . 25 . Harper , R . R . , Hughes , J . A . , Shapiro D . Z . " Harmonious working and CSCW : Computer Technology and Air Traffic Control . " Studies in Computer Supported Cooperative Work . North - Holland Publishing Co . ( 1990 ) . 26 . Hughes , J . A . , Randall , D . , Shapiro , D . Faltering from ethnography to design . Proc . CSCW , ACM ( 1992 ) , 115 - 122 . 27 . Hughes , J . A . , King , V . , Rodden , T . , Andersen , H . Moving out from the control room : Ethnography in system design . Proc . CSCW , ACM ( 1994 ) . 28 . Jordan , B . Technology and social interaction : Notes on the achievement of authoritative knowledge in complex settings . Talent Development & Excellence 6 , 1 ( 1992 ) , 95 - 132 . 29 . Koskinen , I . Plans , Evaluation , and Accountability at the Workplace . Sociological Research Online 4 , 4 ( 2000 ) http : / / www . socresonline . org . uk / 4 / 4 / koskinen . html . 30 . Lee , C . P . Boundary negotiating artifacts : Unbinding the routine of boundary objects and embracing chaos in collaborative work . Computer Supported Cooperative Work 16 , 3 ( 2007 ) , 307 - 339 . 31 . Lutters , W . G . , Ackerman , M . S . Beyond boundary objects : collaborative reuse in aircraft technical support . Computer Supported Cooperative Work 16 , 3 ( 2007 ) , 341 - 372 . Framing Collaboration : Systems and Analysis CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 177 32 . Llewellyn , N . , Spence , L . Practice as a members’ phenomenon . Organization Studies 30 , 12 ( 2009 ) , 1419 - 1439 . 33 . Mackay , W . E . , Fayard , A . L . , Frobert , L . , Médini , L . Reinventing the familiar : exploring an augmented reality design space for air traffic control . In Proc . SIGCHI 1998 , ACM Press ( 1998 ) , 558 - 565 . 34 . MacKay , W . E . Is paper safer ? The role of paper flight strips in air traffic control . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) , 6 , 4 ( 1999 ) , 311 - 340 . 35 . Munkvold , G . , Ellingsen , G . , Monteiro , E . From plans to planning : the case of nurse care plans . In Proc . CSCW 2007 , ACM Press ( 2007 ) , 21 - 30 . 36 . Nevile , M . Beyond the black box : Talk - in - interaction in the airline cockpit . Ashgate Pub Ltd , ( 2004 ) . 37 . Randall , D . , O’Brien , J . , Rouncefield , M . , Hughes , J . A . Organizational Memory and CSCW : Supporting the ‘Mavis’ Phenomenon . In Grundy , J . , Apperley , M . ( eds . ) Proc . HCI ( OzCHI ’96 ) , IEEE ( 1996 ) , 26 - 35 . 38 . Randall , D . , Harper , R . , Rouncefield , M . Fieldwork for design . Springer , London ( 2007 ) . 39 . Redaelli , I . , Carassa , A . Temporality in planning : the case of the allocation of parking areas for aircrafts . In : Proc . ECSCW 2013 , Springer ( 2013 ) , 45 – 62 . 40 . Redaelli , I , Carassa , A . Reconsidering the Role of Plans and Planning in the Management of the Unexpected . In : Proc . COOP 2014 , Springer ( 2014 ) . 41 . Rönkkö , K . , Dittrich , Y . , & Randall , D . When plans do not work out : How plans are used in software development projects . Computer Supported Cooperative Work 14 , 5 ( 2005 ) , 433 - 468 . 42 . Schmidt , K . , Simone , C . Coordination mechanisms : Towards a conceptual foundation of CSCW systems design . Computer Supported Cooperative Work 5 , 2 - 3 ( 1996 ) , 155 - 200 . 43 . Schmidt , K . Of maps and scripts : The status of formal constructs in cooperative work . Information and software technology 41 , 6 ( 1999 ) , 319 - 329 . 44 . Schmidt , K . , Wagner , I . Ordering systems : Coordinative practices and artifacts in architectural design and planning . Computer Supported Cooperative Work 13 , 5 - 6 ( 2004 ) , 349 - 408 . 45 . Schmidt , K . Cooperative work and coordinative practices . In Schmidt , K . ( ed ) Cooperative Work and Coordinative Practices . Springer , London , ( 2011 ) 3 – 27 . 46 . Schmidt , K . Frail foundations . In Schmidt , K . ( ed ) Cooperative Work and Coordinative Practices . Springer , London , ( 2011 ) , 359 – 389 . 47 . Sherman , Heyl , B . Ethnographic interviewing . In P . Atkinson , A . Coffey , S . Delamont , J . Lofland , L . Lofland ( eds ) Handbook of ethnography , Sage , London , ( 2001 ) , 369 - 383 . 48 . Star , S . L . This is not a boundary object : Reflections on the origin of a concept . Science , Technology & Human Values , 35 , 5 ( 2010 ) , 601 - 617 . 49 . Strauss , A . Work and the division of labor . The Sociological Quarterly , 26 , 1 , ( 1985 ) , 1 - 19 . 50 . Strauss , A . L . , Fagerhaugh , S . Y . Social organization of medical work . Transaction Publisher ( 1997 ) . 51 . Subrahmanian , E . , Monarch , I . , Konda , S . , Granger , H . , Milliken , R . , & Westerberg , A . Boundary objects and prototypes at the interfaces of engineering design . Computer Supported Cooperative Work 12 , 2 ( 2003 ) , 185 - 203 . 52 . Suchman , L . A . Office procedure as practical action : models of work and system design . ACM Transactions on Information Systems ( TOIS ) , 1 , 4 ( 1983 ) , 320 - 328 . 53 . Suchman , L . A . Plans and situated actions : the problem of human - machine communication . Cambridge University Press , New York ( 1987 ) . 54 . Suchman , L . Supporting articulation work . In ( ed ) Kling , R . Computerization and controversy : Value Conflicts and Social Choices , 2 Academic Press ( 1996 ) , 407 - 423 . 55 . Suchman , L . ( 1996 ) . Constituting shared workspaces . In Engeström , Y . , Middleton , D . ( eds ) Cognition and communication at work . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge ( 1998 ) , 35 - 60 . 56 . Suchman , L . Practice and its overflows : reflections on order and mess . TECNOSCIENZA : Italian Journal of Science & Technology Studies , 2 , 1 ( 2011 ) , 21 - 30 . 57 . Ten Have , P . Understanding qualitative research and ethnomethodology . Sage ( 2004 ) Framing Collaboration : Systems and Analysis CSCW 2015 , March 14 - 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 178