1 Alveolar Repair Following Lipopolysaccharide - induced Injury Requires Cell - Extracellular Matrix Interactions Jennifer M . S . Sucre 1 , 4 , Fabian Bock 2 , Nicholas M . Negretti 1 , John T . Benjamin 1 , Peter M . Gulleman 1 , Xinyu Dong 4 , Kimberly T . Ferguson 1 , Christopher S . Jetter 1 , Wei Han 3 , Yang Liu 3 , Seunghyi Kook 1 , Jason J . Gokey 3 , Susan H . Guttentag 1 , Jonathan A . Kropski 3 , 4 , 5 , Timothy S . Blackwell 3 , 4 , 5 , Roy Zent 2 , 4 , 5 , Erin J . Plosa 1 * 1 Department of Pediatrics , Division of Neonatology , Vanderbilt University Medical Center , Nashville , TN , USA . 2 Department of Medicine , Division of Nephrology and Hypertension , Vanderbilt University Medical Center , Nashville , TN , USA . 3 Department of Medicine , Division of Allergy , Pulmonary , and Critical Care Medicine , Vanderbilt University Medical Center , Nashville , TN , USA . 4 Department of Cell and Developmental Biology , Vanderbilt University Medical Center , Nashville , TN , USA . 5 Nashville Veterans Affairs Medical Center , Nashville , TN , USA . * Correspondence : Erin Plosa , MD 2215 B Garland Ave 1125 Light Hall / MRB IV Nashville , TN 37232 - 0656 + 1 615 - 343 - 4876 erin . plosa @ vumc . org The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists . 2 Abstract During alveolar repair , alveolar type 2 ( AT2 ) epithelial cell progenitors rapidly proliferate and differentiate into flat type 1 alveolar epithelial cells . Failure of normal alveolar repair mechanisms can lead to loss of alveolar structure ( emphysema ) or development of fibrosis , depending on the type and severity of injury . To test if b 1 - containing integrins are required during repair following acute injury , we administered E . coli lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) by intratracheal injection to mice with a post - developmental deletion of b 1 integrin in AT2 cells . While control mice recovered from LPS injury without structural abnormalities , b 1 - deficient mice had more severe inflammation and developed emphysema . In addition , recovering alveoli were repopulated with an abundance of rounded epithelial cells co - expressing type 2 , type 1 , and mixed intermediate cell state markers , with few mature type 1 cells . b 1 - deficient AT2 cells showed persistently increased proliferation after injury , which was blocked by inhibiting NF - k B activation in these cells . Lineage tracing experiments revealed that b 1 - deficient AT2 cells failed to differentiate into mature type 1 alveolar epithelial cells . Together , these findings demonstrate that functional alveolar repair after injury with terminal alveolar epithelial differentiation requires b 1 - containing integrins . 3 Introduction During lung development , primordial epithelial cells proliferate , migrate , and change phenotypic identity with precise timing , anchored by signals from the basement membrane ( BM ) , a specialized extracellular matrix ( ECM ) structure , that is precisely remodeled at specific developmental check points ( 1 ) . Once lung development is complete , targeted replacement of epithelial cells and slow turnover of the alveolar basement membrane protects the alveolar structure during homeostasis in the mature lung . However , epithelial cells lose capacity for efficient proliferation and differentiation as the BM ages ( 2 ) , increasing susceptibility to chronic lung diseases over time . In contrast to temporally precise development and the relatively quiescent adult lung , repair of acute lung injury must occur rapidly in order to restore a gas - exchanging epithelium to maintain survival . The immediacy of repair results in epithelial proliferation and differentiation that occurs in bulk . For a wild - type mouse , the mild lung injury induced by a single dose of intratracheal lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) is easily recoverable in days , overcoming inflammation - derived proteolytic damage to the basement membrane that occurs within hours ( 3 , 4 ) . LPS , as a model of acute inflammatory lung injury , tests the regenerative potential of the alveolus , exposing impairments in epithelial - ECM interactions that could exacerbate lung injury or predispose to accelerated aging . Integrins are heterodimeric transmembrane protein receptors composed of an a and b subunit that bind ECM ligands . Integrins provide physical connections between cells and the ECM , and they propagate signaling to and from the surrounding matrix ( 5 - 7 ) . Of the 24 integrin heterodimers , 12 contain the b 1 subunit , and many of the 12 b 1 - containing integrins are present in epithelial tissues . Integrin function is dependent upon developmental and microenvironmental 4 context , a concept consistent with our previous work . We previously reported that epithelial b 1 integrins are required for normal lung development and in their absence airway branching and alveolarization are impaired , associated with incomplete epithelial differentiation in the later stages of lung development ( 8 ) . However , in the homeostatic post - developmental adult alveolus , b 1 integrins are completely dispensable for alveolar epithelial differentiation ( 9 ) . Function of the alveolar stem cell niche during repair depends on the rapid proliferation of distal epithelial progenitors , followed by en masse differentiation . The degree of differentiation in this context is profound , and any inefficiencies in this process will create structural vulnerability and abnormal repair . Whether or not b 1 - containing integrins are required for the epithelial repair cycle in the acutely injured adult alveolus is unknown . The adult alveolar BM is primarily composed of collagen IV and laminin and facilitates gas exchange between the airspace and the capillary network . The vast majority of the BM is covered with very thin and outspread type 1 alveolar epithelial cells ( AT1 cells ) , interspersed with single cuboidal type 2 alveolar epithelial cells ( AT2 cells ) . Each cell type has essential functions : AT2 cells secrete surfactant to reduce alveolar surface tension , and function in an immunoregulatory role , while the thin AT1 cells allow gas exchange , maintain water homeostasis , and produce BM components ( 10 ) . Following alveolar injury in both human lung disease and murine models , multiple types of epithelial progenitors restore epithelial coverage of the BM ( 11 , 12 ) . The most proximate and immediate epithelial progenitors for alveolar repair are AT2 cells themselves , a subset of which proliferate upon alveolar injury ( 13 - 15 ) . Over - proliferation of AT2 cells is restrained by various proteins including the tight junction protein Claudin - 18 ( 16 ) . After proliferation , the AT2 progenitors attain an AT2 - to - AT1 transitional cell 5 state with characteristic expression of genes such as Krt8 , Hbegf , or Areg ( 11 , 17 , 18 ) , on their way to becoming replacement AT1 cells . Less is understood about the molecular mechanisms that govern the final point of transition in alveolar repair , the acquisition of the AT1 transcriptional phenotype and the full extension of the AT1 outspread cell shape . Here , we compared distal lung epithelium restoration after acute lung injury induced by intratracheal LPS administration in normal adult mice to those carrying a b 1 - integrin inactivation targeted to SP - C – expressing AT2 cells . From this modest acute lung injury , b 1 - deficient mice exhibited increased inflammation and had exacerbated lung injury , followed by emphysema . Impaired alveolar repair mechanisms in injured b 1 - deficient mice resulted in excessive AT2 proliferation , progressive accumulation of AT2 / AT1 intermediate cells , and large - scale failure of AT1 differentiation . In these studies , the degree of cell - shape block in b 1 - deficient mice demonstrates that AT2 - to - AT1 differentiation is tightly integrated with cell shape change . Further , we show that epithelial differentiation during repair bears a particular requirement for b 1 integrin - mediated cell - ECM interactions , more than AT2 - to - AT1 differentiation in other contexts . Unlike the assumption that AT2 - to - AT1 epithelial differentiation processes employ similar basic mechanistic pathways no matter the context , our data suggest a different paradigm for adult injury repair wherein the rapidity with which differentiation must occur and / or the condition of the ECM leads to distinct differentiation mechanisms . 6 Results b 1 integrin deletion in AT2 cells increases susceptibility to injury and abnormal repair . To determine the role of epithelial b 1 integrin in alveolar repair after injury , we generated mice with a b 1 - integrin deletion in AT2 cells in the adult lung utilizing the SP - C – rtTA ; TetO - Cre doxycycline - inducible system ( 9 , 19 ) and floxed b 1 - integrin ( b 1 f / f ) , hereafter referred to as b 1 AT2 - KO mice . We previously reported the efficient deletion of b 1 integrin in AT2 cells and sustained b 1 integrin expression in b 1 f / f littermate control mice ( then termed b 1 rtTA mice ) and confirmed normal histology in SP - C rtTA ; TetO - Cre ; b 1 f / f mice not receiving doxycycline at three months of age ( 9 , 19 ) . While doxycycline toxicity has been reported with embryonic administration ( 20 ) , we observed no overt histologic or biological toxicity from the rtTA system or from doxycycline itself in this post - developmental model ( 9 ) . After one month off doxycycline to minimize side effects from possible doxycycline tissue storage , we challenged b 1 AT2 - KO and littermate b 1 f / f controls with a single intratracheal ( IT ) dose of lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) at three months of age ( Figure 1A ) . b 1 AT2 - KO mice exhibited decreased survival compared to b 1 f / f control mice ( 44 % survival at 21 days for b 1 AT2 - KO versus 93 % for b 1 f / f , n = 15 b 1 AT2 - KO and 14 b 1 f / f mice , p = 0 . 0051 , Supp . Figure 1A ) , with 100 % survival for both PBS - treated b 1 AT2 - KO and b 1 f / f mice ( data not shown ) . Three days post - injury , histological examination revealed an expected increase in inflammatory cells in both LPS - treated b 1 AT2 - KO and control b 1 f / f lungs and markedly increased edema in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs ( Figure 1A ) . Whereas LPS - treated b 1 f / f lungs returned to a normal histological appearance by day 7 , edema and inflammation remained prominent in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs , consistent with an exacerbation of acute lung injury . Failed alveolar repair was evident at 21 days in b 1 AT2 - KO mice , whose lungs exhibited a marked increase in 7 airspace size and septal destruction . Emphysema was quantified by increased mean linear intercept ( 28 . 5±0 . 9 µ m in b 1 f / f lungs vs . 40 . 2±2 . 8 µ m in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs ) ( Figure 1B ) . To evaluate alveolar barrier function , we measured bronchoalveolar lavage ( BAL ) fluid protein levels at all time points ( Figure 1C ) . b 1 AT2 - KO BAL fluid contained increased protein in the unchallenged state , as well as at three and seven days post - LPS compared to control b 1 f / f BAL fluid . By 21 days post - injury , protein levels were similar in both mouse strains , indicating restoration of alveolar barrier function in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs . We collected BAL fluid to characterize the inflammatory response to LPS and found no significant differences in immune / inflammatory cells between b 1 AT2 - KO and b 1 f / f lungs at three days , during the expected peak of inflammation following LPS ( 21 ) ( Figure 1D ) . However , in b 1 AT2 - KO mice , there was a delayed inflammatory peak at seven days post - injury characterized by persistently increased neutrophils in BAL fluid from b 1 AT2 - KO lungs ( Supp . Figure 1B ) . Although the BAL cell count decreased towards baseline at 21 days in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs , increased numbers of macrophages remained . These findings were confirmed by quantification of immunostaining for the macrophage marker CD68 ( Supp . Figure 1C - D ) . Since chronic inflammation predisposes to emphysema , we tested if the exaggerated acute inflammatory response contributed to airspace expansion in LPS - treated b 1 AT2 - KO lungs . We delayed doxycycline administration for five days after IT LPS dosing , thereby inducing b 1 integrin deletion after acute inflammation . Lungs were harvested 21 days after LPS treatment ( and 16 days after the initiation of doxycycline ) . On histological examination , b 1 AT2 - KO lungs retained emphysematous structural deficits , quantified by an increased mean linear intercept ( Supp . Figure 1E - F ) . 8 We next investigated whether LPS - treated b 1 AT2 - KO mice exhibited fibrosis , an additional manifestation of abnormal alveolar repair apart from emphysema . By Masson’s trichrome stain , b 1 AT2 - KO and b 1 f / f lungs did not exhibit gross differences in fibrillar collagen deposition ( Supp . Figure 2A ) . The alveolar basement membrane also appeared similarly composed between genotypes , with comparable pan - laminin localization in the alveolar septum 21 days after LPS treatment ( Supp . Figure 2B ) . As loss of one integrin may result in the upregulation of alternative integrin subunits , we examined LPS - treated b 1 AT2 - KO and b 1 f / f lungs for differences in RGD - binding integrins . In this subgroup of integrins , heterodimers comprised of varied b subunits , bind ECM proteins containing the highly conserved Arg - Gly - Asp ( RGD ) motif ( 22 ) . We first confirmed continued absence of b 1 at 21 days after LPS in b 1 AT2 - KO AT2 cells ( Supp . Figure 2B , arrows ) . Integrin a 5 , which partners only with b 1 to form a fibronectin receptor , was also decreased throughout injured b 1 AT2 - KO lungs compared to b 1 f / f lungs ( Supp . Figure 3A ) . In contrast to a 5 b 1 , the a v RGD - binding integrins were increased ( Supp . Figure 3B - E ) , particularly the b 5 and b 8 subunits , suggesting compensation by a v b 5 and a v b 8 without overt fibrosis in the injured b 1 AT2 - KO lung . Taken together , these findings indicate that loss of b 1 - containing epithelial integrins drive increased LPS - induced inflammation and lung injury , followed by emphysema and abnormal alveolar repair . b 1 - deficient AT2 cells increase in number post - LPS injury To determine how b 1 - deficiency in AT2 cells alters alveolar repair , we performed an in - depth histological and transcriptomic examination of alveolar epithelial cells in b 1 AT2 - KO and b 1 f / f lungs . Lung sections immunostained for the AT2 marker pro - SP - C and AT1 marker T1 a demonstrate accumulation of pro - SP - C + AT2s in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs by day seven following LPS 9 injury ( Supp . Figure 4A ) . By day 21 , b 1 AT2 - KO lungs contained increased numbers of pro - SP - C + AT2 cells throughout the lung parenchyma ( Figure 2A - B , quantified in 2C ) . Moreover , severely injured areas exhibited alveolar septa lined by abundant pro - SP - C + AT2s ( Supp . Figure 4A ) . The increase in AT2 number was accompanied by decreased expression of the AT1 markers T1 a and HOPX in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs ( Figure 2A - B , HOPX quantified in 2D ) , suggesting loss of AT1s and large expansion of the AT2 population . We captured the increased imbalance between AT2 and AT1 cells in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs throughout repair by calculating the number of pro - SP - C + cells as a percentage of total cells ( Figure 3A ) . Whereas the percentage of AT2 cells remained stable from day three into late repair in the b 1 f / f lungs , the percentage of pro - SP - C + AT2 cells progressively increased throughout later repair in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs . The increased AT2 number in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs prompted an examination of proliferation and apoptosis . We assessed AT2 proliferation by co - immunostaining lung sections for the proliferation marker Ki67 and pro - SP - C . b 1 AT2 - KO lungs exhibited increased proliferation in pro - SP - C + AT2 cells at all sampled time points from uninjured lungs to day 21 post - injury ( Figure 3B ) , with peak proliferation at day 7 ( representative images shown in Figure 3C ) . We previously reported that b 1 deficient AT2 cells exhibited increased NF - k B inflammatory signaling in the absence of injury ( 9 ) . As NF - k B activation promotes cell survival and mitosis ( 23 ) , we next tested whether the observed excess AT2 proliferation was due in part to upregulated NF - k B activation in b 1 deficient AT2 cells . We measured AT2 proliferation in LPS - treated precision - cut lung slices ( PCLS ) generated from b 1 AT2 - KO and b 1 f / f lungs in the presence / absence of the NF - k B inhibitor BAY 11 - 7082 . Proliferation was detected after 48 hours of treatment using incorporated BrdU , co - localized with pro - SP - C in immunostained PCLS . We confirmed induction of NF - k B activation with LPS ex vivo in PCLS by immunostaining for nuclear phospho - p65 , signaling mediator in NF - k B 10 activation ( Supp . Figure 5A ) . Consistent with in vivo LPS dosing , b 1 AT2 - KO PCLS exhibited increased AT2 proliferation with LPS treatment ( Figure 3D - E , individual values presented in Supp . Figure 5B ) , which was mitigated by concurrent NF - k B inhibition . For b 1 f / f PCLS , AT2 proliferation rates remained similar in all four conditions . These data suggest that increased AT2 proliferation in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs post - injury is in part due to excess NF - k B activation intrinsic to b 1 - null AT2 cells . Analyzing cell survival by TUNEL assay co - immunostained with pro - SP - C , we identified a small but significant increase in the total number of apoptotic AT2 cells per field in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs on day 21 after LPS ( Supp . Figure 6A - C ) . Although we were not able to capture large - scale AT2 apoptosis by TUNEL assay at these time points , early AT2 apoptosis remains a possibility . Further , the near - absence of AT1 cells seven days after injury strongly argues that AT1 apoptosis occurred early during acute LPS - induced injury . Overabundant AT2s are transcriptionally distinct during repair in b 1 AT2 - KO mice . To investigate the transcriptional phenotype of b 1 - deficient epithelial cells that could explain the development of emphysema and other features of abnormal repair in b 1 AT2 - KO mice , we performed single - cell RNA sequencing ( scRNAseq ) on unchallenged and LPS - treated b 1 f / f and b 1 AT2 - KO lungs , seven days after LPS exposure . From single - cell suspensions from digested whole lung ( n = 3 - 4 mice / group pooled into a single sample for each condition ) , we collected CD45 - / Ter119 - viable cells by fluorescence - activated cell sorting ( FACS ) , thereby excluding immune and red blood cells . We performed scRNAseq using the 10x Genomics platform , and doublet removal , normalization , and scaling led to 2 , 926 cells being analyzed . Initially , we 11 integrated our dataset with recently published scRNAseq data from LPS injury ( 12 ) , and we found similar alveolar epithelial cell types in both datasets ( Supp . Figure 7 ) . To further define our epithelial populations throughout alveolar repair , we analyzed our transcripts utilizing the epithelial markers reported by Strunz et al with a label - transfer technique ( 11 ) . In both LPS - treated and uninjured mice , we identified all major alveolar epithelial populations in both b 1 AT2 - KO and b 1 f / f lungs ( Figure 4A ) . Despite differential AT1 cell number difference in injured b 1 AT2 - KO lungs by histology , AT1 cells were isolated in low abundance in all four groups , uninjured and LPS - treated b 1 AT2 - KO and b 1 f / f lungs , likely due to cell loss by FACS because of their relatively fragile structure ( 24 ) . UMAP embedding identified a distinct epithelial population in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs seven days after injury ( Figure 4B ) . Visualizing the UMAPs of the four individual groups , most of the epithelial cells were classified as AT2 cells or activated - AT2 cells , a cell state marked by inflammation - induced genes . In LPS - treated b 1 AT2 - KO lungs , the mixed AT2 and activated - AT2 cells were transcriptionally distinct from the other three groups . Because this defined b 1 AT2 - KO cluster comprised both AT2 and activated - AT2 cells , we combined these populations for further analysis in all four groups . We examined the top differentially expressed genes in the combined AT2 groups between uninjured and LPS - treated b 1 AT2 - KO or b 1 f / f mice ( Figure 4C - D and Supp . Figure 8A - B ) . In uninjured mice , the most enriched pathways were an upregulation of the oxidative stress - response pathway in the b 1 AT2 - KO AT2 group , followed by senescence , JAK / STAT , and IL - 6 signaling pathway . All four of these top pathways being relevant to emphysema and lung senescence ( 25 , 26 ) , suggesting baseline conditions that favor accelerated aging in these three - month - old mice . In LPS - injured lungs from both genotypes , the top eight differentially up - regulated pathways included regulatory signaling networks related to adherens junctions , actin cytoskeleton , and Rho GTPases . As remodeling of adherens junctions 12 is necessary for elongation of cell shape and Rho GTPases are intermediary signaling effectors between integrins and the actin cytoskeleton , these data suggest that b 1 integrin regulates the transition in cell shape during AT1 - cell differentiation . b 1 integrin regulates actin expression and RhoA GTPase activation during alveolar repair . To investigate how b 1 integrin regulates the actin cytoskeleton during alveolar repair , we examined AT2 cell shape by confocal microscopy . Surface rendering of pro - SP - C + AT2 cells demonstrates a field of globular AT2 cells in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs , whereas b 1 f / f pro - SP - C + AT2 cells exhibited a flattened elongated cell shape ( Figure 5A ) . We next imaged thick 50 µ m cryosections detecting F - actin with phalloidin probe concurrent with pro - SP - C immunodetection . The injured b 1 f / f pro - SP - C + AT2 cells formed actin - based protrusions at the areas of their lateral extensions ( arrows in Figure 5B ) , a feature shared with differentiating AT2 ( to AT1 ) epithelial progenitors during development ( 27 ) . By contrast , AT2s in injured b 1 AT2 - KO lungs were larger and rounded with cortical F - actin . We quantified AT2 cell shape at seven days post - injury by calculating cell area and a cell roundness score . Given the persistent macrophage inflammation during repair in LPS - treated b 1 AT2 - KO lungs , we specifically excluded the occasional macrophage that has efferocytosed an injured pro - SP - C + cell from this analysis by calculating the day seven cell shape metrics on pro - SP - C + / CD68 - cells only ( Supp . Figure 9A ) . AT2 cells were significantly larger in injured b 1 AT2 - KO lungs ( 66 . 8 ± 3 . 0 µ m 2 ) compared to b 1 f / f lungs ( 48 . 4 ± 1 . 8 µ m 2 ) ( Figure 5C ) . Since lateral extension is necessary for cells to transition from AT2 to AT1 and we demonstrated that cell shape is b 1 - dependent in AT2 cells , we calculated a roundness score , which quantifies the degree of smooth cellular contours in an unbiased manner ( 28 ) . The roundness score in b 1 AT2 - KO AT2 cells on day seven after injury , as they failed to elongate and 13 change shape into flattened AT1 cells , was significantly increased compared to b 1 f / f AT2 cells ( Figure 5D ) . AT2 cells from LPS - treated b 1 AT2 - KO lungs maintained an elevated roundness score throughout repair , based on pro - SP - C + cells ( Supp . Figure 9B ) . This finding is consistent with an inability to form lateral extensions and impaired actin remodeling . By contrast , b 1 f / f AT2 cell roundness decreased at times of rapid differentiation during repair , indicative of differentiation into a flattened AT1 cell shape . Since our scRNA - seq data suggested upregulation of actin - cytoskeleton signaling pathways , we next applied a G - actin probe , JLA20 , along with F - actin phalloidin and pro - SP - C to study actin remodeling ( Figure 5E ) . We found increased G - actin and F - actin in injured b 1 AT2 - KO lungs , with F - actin primarily cortically localized ( arrowheads in Fig . 5E ) in the b 1 AT2 - KO lungs . We confirmed these increases by calculating the relative fluorescence of the JLA20 and phalloidin probes in pro - SP - C + cells using corrected total cell fluorescence to normalize fluorescence to total cell area ( Figure 5F - G ) . Because actin remodeling and localization are mediated in part by the cytoskeletal protein ezrin , we immunodetected ezrin in b 1 AT2 - KO and b 1 f / f lungs on day seven post - injury combined with Sftpc RNA in situ hybridization to mark AT2 cells . Ezrin was as expected localized to points of lateral cellular protrusion in elongating AT2 cells in control mice ( Figure 5H ) , while being much more widespread along the cell membrane in AT2s in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs , suggesting an impaired ability to direct actin localization in concert with loss of lateral elongation . We validated the linkage to small GTPases ( 29 ) suggested by scRNAseq analysis above using protein assays for specific GTPases . AT2 cells from LPS - injured b 1 AT2 - KO lungs exhibited increased RhoA and Cdc42 GTPase activation , as would be anticipated for a cell undergoing efficient actin remodeling ( Figure 5I - J ) . By contrast , GTPase activation was decreased for Rac1 ( Figure 5K ) , a related GTPase involved in forming smaller actin - based structures such as microvilli . Taken together , these data indicate 14 RhoA and Cdc42 GTPase activation in AT2 cells is enhanced in b 1 integrin deficient AT2 cells , as would be expected for a cell with active actin remodeling . However , evidence of actin remodeling at the site of lateral extension is absent , suggesting a block downstream of GTPase signaling events propagated by the b 1 intracellular tail in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs . Thus , b 1 integrin is a critical component for proper actin production and localization in differentiating AT2 cells during repair . Post - injury b 1 - deficient AT2s exhibit an AT2 - AT1 mixed transcriptomic phenotype . Our observation of increased AT2 cells and decreased AT1 cells ( Fig . 2 ) suggested impairment in AT2 to AT1 differentiation during alveolar repair . To define this defect at the transcriptional level we quantified lung epithelial cell sub - types as previously defined by Strunz et al ( 11 ) . Consistent with our histology of the LPS - injured mice ( Fig . 2 ) , there was a significant increase in the representation of AT2 and activated AT2 cells in day seven post - LPS - injury b 1 AT2 - KO lungs , but not control b 1 f / f ( Figure 6A ) . We next compared the AT2 , AT1 , and cytokeratin 8 – positive “intermediate cell” transcriptomic profiles in our uninjured and LPS - treated b 1 AT2 - KO and b 1 f / f lungs . Strunz et al . ( 9 ) defined an intermediate cell state with features of both AT2 and AT1 cells as a “Krt8 - positive alveolar differentiation intermediate ( ADI ) ” . Both uninjured and LPS - treated b 1 AT2 - KO and b 1 f / f AT2 / activated - AT2 cells expressed AT2 hallmark genes ( e . g . , Sftpc , Sftpa1 , and Abca3 ) , as expected ( Figure 6B ) . The Krt8 + ADI hallmark genes Krt8 , Hbegf , and Areg were moderately increased in uninjured b 1 AT2 - KO AT2 cells and this increase was accentuated post - LPS . By contrast , there was minimal expression of these markers in uninjured or LPS - treated b 1 f / f AT2 cells . Finally , uninjured b 1 AT2 - KO AT2 / activated AT2 cells exhibited enhanced AT1 - cell marker expression compared to uninjured b 1 f / f AT2 cells , which 15 was also accentuated post - LPS . We validated increased AT1 marker expression in injured b 1 - deficient pro - SP - C + AT2 cells by co - immunostaining for AGER , the AT1 marker with the highest expression by our transcriptional analysis . In injured b 1 f / f lungs , AGER localized to the typical AT1 distribution throughout the lung parenchyma , largely distinct from pro - SP - C + AT2 cells ( Figure 6C , insets 1 - 3 ) . By contrast , injured b 1 AT2 - KO lungs exhibited notably less AGER throughout the lung parenchyma compared to b 1 f / f lungs . Importantly , the small amount of AGER present in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs co - localized with large , rounded pro - SP - C + AT2 cells ( insets 4 - 6 , single channel images in Supp . Figure 10 ) . The robust acquisition of AT1 markers in injured rounded , large b 1 AT2 - KO AT2 cells suggests that requisite b 1 integrin - dependent mechanisms , such as cell shape change , occur subsequent to initial AT1 marker acquisition . In summary , absence of b 1 increases the proportional representation of intermediate cell state markers , even in cells that remain classified as AT2 cells , indicating a significant block in the progression of differentiation . Mixed - phenotype AT2 cells persist , proliferate , and maintain an enlarged , rounded cell shape in late alveolar repair . Since our histological and scRNA - seq analysis showed impaired AT2 differentiation at day 7 post - LPS , we characterized the blockage in differentiation in late repair . As described above ( Fig . 3 ) , we performed scRNA - sequencing on uninjured and LPS - treated b 1 f / f and b 1 AT2 - KO lungs , 21 days post - LPS . Knowing that alveolar epithelial cells of mixed transcriptomic phenotype exist at day 7 post - LPS in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs , we investigated persistence of these cells at day 21 post - LPS by RNA sequencing of CD45 - / Ter119 - single - cell suspensions enriched for CD326 + epithelial cells . UMAP embedding with label transfer from Strunz et al . revealed 16 similarities between b 1 f / f and b 1 AT2 - KO alveolar cells ( Figure 7A - B ) . By pro - SP - C / Ki67 co - immunostaining , we demonstrated increased AT2 proliferation even during late repair ( Figure 3B ) . Our scRNA - seq data confirmed that the AT2 population from day 21 LPS - treated b 1 AT2 - KO lungs exhibited a significantly increased G2M proliferation score compared to AT2 cells from day 21 LPS - treated b 1 f / f lungs ( Supp . Figure 11A ) . Similar to the scRNA - seq data from day seven , we next analyzed the expression of AT2 , Krt8 + ADI , and AT1 hallmark genes in day 21 LPS - treated b 1 AT2 - KO and b 1 f / f alveolar epithelial cells . We identified enhanced AT2 markers , Sftpc , Sftpa1 , and Abca3 , in AT2 and activated AT2 cell populations from b 1 AT2 - KO mice compared to b 1 f / f mice ( Figure 7C ) . In addition , b 1 AT2 - KO Krt8 + ADI cells retained AT2 hallmark gene expression compared to b 1 f / f Krt8 + ADI cells , exhibited markedly enhanced expression of the three intermediate state markers ( Krt8 , Hbegf , and Areg ) , and increased expression of AT1 hallmark genes , Aqp5 and Ager . These b 1 AT2 - KO Krt8 + ADI cells simultaneously expressed transcriptional markers from all three stages of transition , providing a transcriptional rationale for failed repair in b 1 - deficient mice . We validated the persistent mixed transcriptional phenotype in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs by immunodetection . In day 21 LPS - treated b 1 AT2 - KO lungs , remodeled areas exhibited numerous large , rounded pro - SP - C + / cytokeratin 8 + cells with less AGER in the AT1 distribution compared to injured b 1 f / f lungs ( Figure 7D ) . High - power images demonstrate pro - SP - C + / cytokeratin 8 + cells with occasional cells also positive for the AT1 marker AGER ( arrows in Figure 7E ) . By contrast , triple positive cells ( pro - SP - C + / cytokeratin 8 + / AGER + ) were rare in injured b 1 f / f lungs ( arrowheads in Figure 6E ) . The number of triple positive cells was quantified as a percent of total pro - SP - C + cells in Figure 7F . Given the disparate cellular morphology of b 1 - deficient AT2 cells at earlier time points , we quantified differences in cell area in pro - SP - C + AT2 cells . At 21 days after LPS , injured AT2 cells from 17 b 1 AT2 - KO lungs remained enlarged with a significantly increased cell area ( Supp . Figure 11B ) . These findings demonstrate that b 1 - mediated ECM interactions are essential during alveolar repair for maintenance of alveolar structure , epithelial cell shape change , and progression of their transcriptomic phenotype . b 1 - deficient AT2 cells fail to repopulate the alveolus with AT1 morphology . To prove that AT2 cells from b 1 AT2 - KO mice cannot repopulate the alveolus after injury , we crossed b 1 AT2 - KO mice with the mTmG Cre - recombinase reporter , labeling Cre - recombinase active AT2 cells beginning at P28 . Mice were then maintained on doxycycline for a month and treated with LPS at three months - of - age . We confirmed the presence of GFP labeled AT2 cells prior to injury in b 1 AT2 - KO ; mTmG and Cre + ; mTmG mice ( Supp . Figure 11A ) . As anticipated , histological examination of lungs harvested 21 days after LPS demonstrates GFP positive cells in both AT2 and AT1 distributions in all the control Cre + ; mTmG mice ( Figure 7A ) , indicating patches of AT2 to AT1 alveolar repopulation post injury . By contrast , GFP labeled cells in b 1 AT2 - KO ; mTmG lungs retained almost exclusively a rounded AT2 morphology , with only rare acquisition of an elongated AT1 cell shape . We quantified the degree to which GFP labeled AT2 cells repopulated injured b 1 AT2 - KO ; mTmG and Cre + ; mTmG lungs by fluorescence intensity per low field section ( Figure 7B and Supp . Figure 11B ) . Immunostained sections for pro - SP - C and AGER confirmed the rounded GFP + cells in b 1 AT2 - KO ; mTmG lungs were pro - SP - C + and frequently AGER positive ( Figure 7C ) . In Cre + ; mTmG lungs , GFP labeling co - localized with AGER , confirming successful AT2 to AT1 differentiation in control mice . These data demonstrate failed AT2 to AT1 differentiation associated with impaired cell shape change and incomplete phenotypic epithelial marker differentiation in the absence of epithelial b 1 integrin . 18 Discussion b 1 integrin is exquisitely required for differentiation during repair , in contrast to development or alveolar homeostasis . Since progenitor AT2 proliferation precedes differentiation in the injury - repair cycle , the overabundance of incompletely differentiated AT2 in b 1 AT2 - KO mice reveals a substantial block in differentiation post - injury . We previously reported increased AT2 proliferation with deletion of epithelial b 1 in both the developing and adult lung in the absence of injury ( 8 , 9 ) . The degree of AT2 accumulation in b 1 - deficient repair reported here far exceeds the developmental and homeostatic contexts . This relative difference in AT2 surplus , coupled with successful AT2 to AT1 differentiation in uninjured aged b 1 AT2 - KO mice ( 9 ) , shows that b 1 - ECM interactions are even more critical for differentiation during repair of adult injury than during development or homeostasis . This comparison suggests that b 1 - dependent differentiation mechanisms are specifically adjusted to fit the requirements of the peripheral stem - cell niche . One possible explanation is that the time interval over which cells change shape and differentiate differs between the three contexts of development , homeostasis , and repair . Developmental AT2 to AT1 differentiation occurs over weeks , and sporadic AT2 replacement of AT1 cells in the adult lung occurs without the urgency of replacing a widely denuded BM . By contrast , AT2 differentiation post - LPS happens en masse with the BM exposed within hours and repopulated within days . This shorter time interval makes robust upregulation of facultative differentiation pathways less likely , exposing a dependence on b 1 - mediated mechanisms for regulating differentiation . Another possible reason for the b 1 requirement during repair may be related to the condition of the BM . It is well known that changes in the relative amounts of ECM components will push the 19 alveolar epithelium towards proliferation or differentiation ( 30 ) , although less is known about how structural changes to the BM itself drives epithelial behavior in the alveolar stem cell niche . The mature uninjured lung has a relatively stable BM with slow turnover of BM proteins ( 31 ) . However , during LPS - induced injury , inflammatory - cell – associated proteases partially degrade the alveolar BM within hours ( 3 , 4 , 32 ) . Numerous proteases degrade ECM components preferentially , thereby significantly modifying the carefully balanced alveolar BM composition ( 4 ) . As different injuries induce varying types of protease - release , damage to the BM components will change depending on type and severity of insult , further shifting b 1 - ECM interactions in the stem - cell niche away from homeostatic conditions . In addition , individual b 1 - containing integrin pairs preferentially bind their preferred ECM ligands , thereby setting up a situation where injury - induced changes to b 1 - ECM interactions can either restrict or augment epithelial differentiation . The progressive increase in AT2 cell number that escalates late in repair in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs indicates that b 1 - ECM interactions may serve as a brake on AT2 progenitor cell proliferation , could be a requisite step for progression from proliferation to differentiation during the alveolar injury repair cycle , and that this stalled differentiation stimulates a feed - forward loop that creates a continued abnormal call for progenitor proliferation . The lung is unique among branched organs in that there exists a distal ( in fact , intra - alveolar ) epithelial progenitor representing an indigenous contributor to tissue regeneration ( 13 - 15 , 33 ) , whereas no such epithelial progenitor has been reported for the kidney , mammary gland , or pancreas . Activation of the NF - k B pathway is pro - survival and pro - proliferative in many contexts , initially reported in hyperproliferative keratinocytes with constitutive NF - k B activation ( 23 ) . While multiple 20 signaling pathways have been proposed as positive and negative regulators of AT2 progenitor proliferation in the adult lung ( 13 - 16 , 34 - 37 ) , their interaction with the NF - k B pathway in the injured lung remains largely undefined . Although a recent study by Sieber et . al reports NF - k B - driven airway proliferation in human IPF airway epithelial / fibroblast co - cultures ( 38 ) . In other organs , b 1 - containing integrins have been reported to negatively regulate epithelial proliferation , with an EGFR - activation dependent mechanism identified in the intestinal epithelium ( 39 ) , but these studies do not consider progenitor proliferation in the context of repair . Consideration of our data in light of this published work suggests that b 1 integrin restricts proliferative potential in progenitor AT2s in the injured distal lung . Failed differentiation in injured b 1 - deficient mice reveals that cell shape change is intimately tied to progression of differentiation . We demonstrate that b 1 - ECM interactions are a requisite component for epithelial cell shape change through actin remodeling in the injured alveolus . The connection between integrins and cellular extension comes from studies in Drosophila epithelium and murine podocytes , both in the uninjured state ( 40 - 44 ) . Our scRNA - sequencing analysis supports the concept that cell shape change is linked to progression of differentiation , as actin remodeling pathways were enhanced in LPS - treated b 1 - deficient AT2 cells , but differentiation remained blocked with an overabundance of large , rounded AT2 cells . It is possible that loss of integrin clustering at the cell membrane disrupts the spatial specificity of Rho - GTPase signaling ( 45 ) . Certainly , diffuse ezrin expression associated with persistence of a rounded cell shape and loss of lateral cellular extensions observed in LPS - treated b 1 AT2 - KO AT2 cells is consistent with impaired actin nucleation . 21 Historically , cellular identity has been defined by histological shape and directly observable characteristics of function ( e . g . , lamellar body synthesis by electron microscopy ) . The advent of single - cell transcriptomics increases the granularity with which we can group similar cells together . While this advance augments our understanding of cellular transitional states , the question of how to define groups of similar cells and the boundary between different cell identities is perhaps murkier . Previously published injury models report similar temporary and resolvable transitional cell states after bleomycin injury and other inflammatory stimuli ( 17 , 18 ) , which are marked by high Krt8 expression . Our transcriptomic data demonstrated persistently blocked AT2 - to - AT1 differentiation in injured b 1 AT2 - KO lungs , suggesting that they are stuck in a transitional state even in late repair . Although our model is unique in the degree and persistence of failed differentiation , our transcriptomic data has some similarities and differences with recently published single - cell sequencing data from LPS injury ( 12 ) . The observed differences in the transitional cell - state populations identified are possibly linked to technical differences in how epithelial cells were sorted ; Riemondy et al . used AT2 cells selected by expression of a fluorescent reporter for Sftpc - expression prior to scRNAseq , removing transitional cells with lower Sftpc expression . Loss of b 1 - mediated epithelial - ECM interactions increases susceptibility for emphysematous abnormal repair and accelerates aging . Loss of b 1 integrin in AT2 cells generates a senescent transcriptional signature in an otherwise uninjured youthful lung that translates into emphysematous abnormal repair with injury . Emphysema is a principal component of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( COPD ) , one of the most common human pulmonary diseases that increases in incidence with age ( 46 , 22 47 ) . Although airspace expansion has been reported with either two - hit injury models or chronic repetitive low - dose LPS exposure ( 48 - 52 ) , our b 1 - deficient mice are the first targeted epithelial deletion that results in subacute alveolar destruction following a single LPS exposure , underscoring the importance of epithelial b 1 integrin in senescence and its associated pulmonary pathologies . Our scRNA - sequencing pathway analysis demonstrates uninjured b 1 - deficient AT2 cells possess an inherent susceptibility to injury , as uninjured b 1 AT2 - KO mice exhibit upregulation of oxidative stress , senescence , and inflammatory pathways , all contributing factors to emphysema pathogenesis . LPS - challenged b 1 AT2 - KO mice also exhibit increased inflammation during repair , an associated finding in COPD ( 53 ) , with a sustained increase in neutrophils at day 7 after LPS , potentially making prolonged exposure to elastase a contributing factor for emphysema development . At 21 days post - injury , b 1 AT2 - KO lungs retain elevated numbers of macrophages , a significant source of matrix metalloproteinase - 9 ( MMP - 9 ) , which remodels alveolar matrix in COPD ( 50 ) . It is unlikely that increased AT2 apoptosis in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs is the primary mechanism for the development of emphysema as it was only present late in repair at day 21 , when emphysematous structural changes had already occurred . The etiology for emphysematous alveolar remodeling in young b 1 deficient mice is likely multi - factorial , but rooted in the preexisting upregulation of senescence , oxidative stress , and inflammatory pathways . Additional studies addressing how b 1 integrin regulates these pathways would elucidate if and how b 1 - dependent mechanisms could increase susceptibility of human COPD . In conclusion , this study shows that b 1 integrin - mediated mechanisms are a requisite component of rapid and complete alveolar repair following even mild LPS - induced lung injury , and involve regulation of AT2 proliferation , differentiation , and cell - shape change . In the latter , 23 we propose that cytoarchitectural changes , such as the formation of actin - rich lateral cellular extensions , are specifically tied to progression of AT2 to AT1 differentiation during repair . Loss of b 1 integrin results in upregulation of senescence , oxidative stress and inflammatory pathways already pre - injury , thereby increasing susceptibility to emphysema , a common age - related lung structural deficit . 24 Methods Mice and LPS injury : We induced b 1 integrin in AT2 cells in the adult murine lung by crossing transgenic mice with inducible Cre recombinase expression by the doxycycline - inducible reverse tetracycline transactivator under control of the SP - C promoter ( SP - C rtTA ; Tet - O - Cre ) with integrin b 1 flox / flox ( b 1 f / f ) mice ( 54 , 55 ) . Littermate rtTA negative ; Tet - O - Cre negative ( b 1 f / f mice were used as control mice . Doxycycline drinking water ( 2 g / L ) was administered for 4 weeks beginning at P28 to triple transgenic SP - C rtTA ; Tet - O - Cre ; b 1 f / f mice ( called b 1 AT2 - KO mice ) and littermate b 1 f / f controls , as previously described ( 9 ) . Following proposed guidelines to limit Cre leak with the doxycycline - inducible system ( 20 ) , we used the more faithful line 2 strain , employed a breeding strategy to keep the rtTA allele hemizygous , and utilized an injury model that targets the peripheral lung rather than the airway epithelium . After a 1 - month period off doxycycline to minimize any potential toxicity from tissue stored doxycycline , we challenged 3 - month - old b 1 AT2 - KO and b 1 f / f mice with a single intratracheal dose of LPS or PBS ( 3 µ g / g mouse weight , equivalent volume for PBS ) and harvested tissue at the indicated dates . For b 1 AT2 - KO and b 1 f / f mice administered delayed doxycycline , intratracheal LPS was given at three months of age as above , then doxycycline drinking water was provided from five days after LPS until harvest at 21 days after LPS . SP - C rtTA ; Tet - O - Cre ( no floxed alleles ) and b 1 AT2 - KO mice were crossed to the mTmG Cre recombinase reporter . Doxycycline drinking water and LPS were administered as above . SP - C rtTA , Tet - O - Cre , and mTmG mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratory . Integrin b 1 f / f mice were generously gifted by Elaine Fuchs ( Howard Hughes Medical Institute , The Rockefeller University , New York , NY ) . All mice were maintained on the C57BL / 6 background . 25 Histology and morphological analysis : For histological analysis on paraffin sections , mice were sacrificed , right ventricle was flushed with PBS , and lungs were inflation fixed at 25 cm with 10 % formalin . After paraffin processing , embedding , and sectioning , lungs were hematoxylin and eosin stained for morphological analysis by mean linear intercept , which was calculated from images ( ³ 10 non - overlapping images per mouse ) obtained using a x40 objective on a Keyence BZ - X710 inverted fluorescence phase contrast microscope . Immunofluorescence staining was performed on paraffin or frozen sections . Frozen blocks were prepared from lung sections inflation fixed with a 2 : 1 PBS / O . C . T . ( Tissue - Tek ) mixture , embedded , and sectioned at either 8 µ m or 50 µ m thickness . Frozen section slides were then fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde , permeabilized with . 1 % Triton - X , and blocked with 5 % donkey serum for 2 hours at 37 degrees . Slides were incubated in primary antibody overnight at 4 degrees , followed by secondary antibody incubation for 2 hours at room temperature . For sequential primary antibody staining , a second intervening blocking step was utilized . Nuclei were stained with Dapi , ProLong Gold mountant was applied , and sections were imaged . High - power images were obtained using a Nikon Spinning Disk TiE inverted fluorescent confocal microscope attached to an Andor DU - 897 EMCCD camera ( x100 objective , 8 µ m sections ) . All other images were obtained using the Keyence BZ - X710 microscope as above . The following primary antibodies and probes were used : anti - pro - SP - C ( Abcam ab90716 ) , anti - ABCA3 ( Abcam ab24751 ) , anti - T1 a ( podoplanin , Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank 8 . 1 . 1 ) , anti - ezrin ( Cell Signaling Technologies 3145S ) , anti - cytokeratin 8 ( Origene BP5074 ) , anti - Ki67 - FITC ( eBioscience 11 - 5698 - 90 ) , anti - CD68 ( Abcam ab53444 and ab125212 ) , anti - Ager ( R and D AF1145 ) , anti - Hopx - 647 ( Santa Cruz sc - 398703 ) , anti - BrdU ( Sigma B2531 ) , anti - GFP ( Abcam ab13970 ) , anti - pan - laminin ( Millipore AB2034 ) , anti - integrin b 1 ( Millipore MAB1997 ) , anti - integrin a 5 ( Abcam 26 ab150361 ) , anti - integrin a v ( Abcam ab179475 ) , anti - integrin b 5 ( Invitrogen PA5 - 118499 ) , anti - integrin b 6 ( Invitrogen PA5 - 47309 ) , anti - integrin b 8 ( Invitrogen PA5 - 100843 ) , anti - phospho - p65 ( Abcam ab194726 ) , JLA20 ( Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank JLA20 - s ) , and phalloidin ( Invitrogen A12380 ) . We applied the following secondary antibodies : anti - rabbit Alexa Fluor 405 ( Invitrogen A48258 ) , anti - rabbit Alexa Fluor 488 ( Invitrogen A21206 ) , anti - rabbit Alexa Fluor 594 ( Invitrogen A21207 ) , anti - rabbit Alexa Fluor 647 ( Invitrogen A32795 ) , anti - rat Alexa Fluor 405 ( Invitrogen A48268 ) , anti - hamster Alexa Fluor 488 ( Invitrogen A21110 ) , anti - goat Alexa Fluor 488 ( Invitrogen A11055 ) , anti - goat Alexa Fluor 647 ( Invitrogen A21447 ) , anti - chicken Alexa Fluor 488 ( Invitrogen A11039 ) , anti - guinea pig Alexa Fluor 647 ( Invitrogen A21450 ) . TUNEL staining was performed on paraffin sections co - immunostained with pro - SP - C , per manufacturer’s kit instructions ( Roche 11684795910 ) . RNA in situ hybridization for mouse Sftpc was used in conjunction with immunofluorescent staining for the anti - ezrin antibody . RNA in situ hybridization was performed per manufacturer’s instructions ( RNAScope , ACDBio ) , including positive and negative control probes . Quantification of immunostained sections was performed on ³ 10 nonoverlapping images obtained with a 40x objective . JLA20 and phalloidin probe detection was quantified on lung sections ( 10 sections / mouse ) imaged with equivalent settings using the corrected total cell fluorescence feature from ImageJ , which corrects fluorescence integrated density for the area of the region of interest ( pro - SPC + cells ) . Cell morphometry : Day 7 and day 21 AT2 cell area and roundness were calculated using the shape descriptor feature of ImageJ with pro - SP - C + / CD68 - cells used to define the region of interest . 27 Precision - cut lung slices ( PCLS ) : PCLS of 300 µ m were generated from the lungs of 3 - month - old b 1 AT2 - KO and b 1 f / f mice , as previously described ( 56 - 58 ) . Briefly , Slices were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium : F12 for 12 hours , then incubated with BrdU ( 1 mM , Sigma B5002 ) for 4 hours prior to 48 hours of treatment with LPS ( Sigma L2880 , 62 . 5 ng / ml ) and / or BAY 11 - 7082 ( 100 µ M , Biotechne / Tocris Bay11 - 7821 ) . Slices were then fixed , paraffin - embedded , and sectioned . Bronchoalveolar lavage : After sacrifice , lungs were lavaged with 1 ml sterile PBS . The cells present in lavage fluid were collected by centrifugation , resuspended , and counted . Protein content in lavage fluid was measured by BCA protein assay ( Pierce cat # 23225 ) per manufacturer’s instructions . AEC isolation and GLISA assay : Primary AT2 cells were collected at indicated time points as previously described ( 8 , 9 ) , which yields > 90 % AT2s ( 59 , 60 ) . Briefly , single cell lung suspension was generated after dispase digestion and serial filtration . Cells were then applied to plates coated with CD - 32 and CD - 45 for negative selection . Epithelial cells were then collected from medium after a 2 hour incubation . Cell lysates were then used for G - LISA small GTPase activation assay ( Cytoskeleton cat # BK135 ) , where levels of activated RhoA , Cdc42 , and Rac1 were detected colorimetrically per manufacturer’s instructions . 28 Single - cell data collection : Sample collection and single - cell sequencing was performed as previously described ( 61 ) . Briefly , lung lobes were harvested , minced , and incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C in dissociation media ( RPMI - 1640 with 0 . 7 mg / ml collagenase XI and 30 mg / ml type IV bovine pancreatic DNase ) . After incubation , tissue was disassociated into a single - cell suspension by passage through a wide bore pipet tip and filtration through a 40 µm filter . The single - cell lung suspension was then counted , aliquoted , and blocked with CD - 32 Fc block ( BD cat # 553142 ) for 20 minutes on ice . After a 2 % FBS staining buffer wash , cells were incubated with the conjugated primary antibodies anti - CD45 ( BD cat # 559864 ) and anti - Ter119 ( Biolegend cat # 116211 ) . Samples from day 21 after LPS were also incubated with anti - CD326 antibody ( BD cat # 563477 ) for epithelial enrichment . scRNA - seq library preparation and next - generation sequencing : scRNA - seq libraries were generated using the Chromium Single Cell 5’ library preparation kits ( 10X Genomics ) following the manufacturer ' s recommendations and targeting 10 , 000 - 20 , 000 cells per sample . Sequencing was performed on an Illumina Novaseq 6000 . CellRanger Count v3 . 1 ( 10X Genomics ) was used to align reads onto the mm10 reference genome . Analysis of single cell sequencing data : Ambient background RNA was cleaned from the scRNA - seq data with “SoupX” ( 62 ) as described previously ( 61 ) using the following genes to estimate the non - expressing cells , calculate the contamination fraction , and adjust the gene expression counts : Dcn , Bgn , Aspn , Ecm2 , Fos , Hbb - bs , Hbb - bt , Hba - a1 , Hba - a2 , Lyz1 , Lyz2 , Mgp , Postn , Scgb1a1 . For all datasets , quality filtering was then used to remove cells with > 15 % or < 0 . 1 % mitochondrial mRNA , and to remove cells with < 700 detected genes . 29 Dimensionality reduction , clustering , and visualization was performed using Seurat v4 . 0 . 5 and SCTransform v0 . 3 . 2 . 9008 with glmGamPoi v 1 . 6 . 0 ( 63 - 65 ) . SCTransform was run with each sequencing run as a batch variable , and with the percentage of mitochondrial RNA as a regression variable . Further data cleaning was done to remove gene counts for Gm42418 , which is likely a rRNA ( 66 ) . Epithelial cells ( i . e . , Epcam + cell clusters ) were sorted in silico for downstream analysis . Epithelial cells were annotated with manual inspection of the following marker genes : Epcam , Sftpa1 , Sftpc , Hopx , Aqp5 , Col4a3 , Ager , Foxj1 , Dynlrb2 , Mki67 , Scgb1a1 , Scgb3a2 , Cdkn1a , Cldn4 , Ascl1 , and Scg5 . All charts and heatmaps as part of the scRNAseq analysis were generated with ggplot2 , and all parts of the analysis were run in R 4 . 1 . 1 . Data integration was performed using a previously published dataset ( 12 ) . Reads were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus ( GSE113049 ) and processed using CellRanger Count v3 . 1 with the mm10 genome , followed by dimensionality reduction , clustering , and visualization as described above . Data were integrated with non - SoupX processed data using the ‘IntegrateData’ function in Seurat , following the workflow for data normalized with SCTransform . Samples from all experiments were combined , and clusters were annotated using marker genes described in the initial publication ( 12 ) , and other canonical marker genes . Cell label transfer was also utilized with a second published dataset ( 11 ) . The annotated data matrix ( h5ad file ) was accessed as directed in the analysis code published as part of the methods ( 11 ) . The raw counts from this annotated dataset were then processed using the Seurat workflow 30 described above , while maintaining the published cell annotations . The Seurat “TransferData” function was then used to transfer the cell annotations onto the dataset generated here . A complete collection of all package versions , and code for all steps of the analysis is available at https : / / github . com / SucreLab . All sequencing data have been deposited to the NCBI GEO database ; the reviewer link is available upon request . Statistics : Comparison between two groups was performed by two - tailed t - test and 4 - way comparison was done by one or two - way ANOVA , as indicated . Individual p - values , t - values , F values , degrees of freedom , and sample size for each group is included in the figure legends and provided in Supp . Table 1 . ScRNA - sequencing analysis was completed as above . Study approval : All animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Vanderbilt University Medical Center . 31 Author contributions : EJP conceived the study , performed in vivo experiments , histological analysis , image analysis , interpreted the data , and wrote the manuscript . JMSS interpreted the scRNA - sequencing data and wrote the manuscript . FB , JG , JTB , and KTF performed histological analysis . PMG performed in vivo experiments , histological analysis , and protein assays . XD and SK performed protein assays . WH , CSJ performed in vivo experiments . JAK , NMN , and YL analyzed the scRNA - sequencing data . SHG assisted in manuscript preparation . RZ and TSB conceived of the study , interpreted the data , and wrote the manuscript . Acknowledgements : The authors would like to thank Matt Tyska and Christopher V . E . Wright for content expertise and Brittany Matlock , Angela Jones , Kari Seedle , Caitlin McCormick , Cristina Harmelink , Annica Alwine , and David Nichols for technical assistance . This work was supported by NIH grants K08 HL127102 ( EJP ) , R03 HL 154287 ( EJP ) , R01 HL163195 ( EJP ) , K08 HL143051 ( JMSS ) , P01 HL092870 ( TSB ) , R01 HL151016 ( TSB ) , R01 DK069921 ( RZ ) , R01 DK127589 ( RZ ) , R01 DK088327 ( RZ ) , R01 HL157373 ( JTB ) , R01 HL150617 ( SHG ) , R01 HL153246 ( JAK ) , R38 HL143619 ( trainee : KTF ) , Merit Review Grant 2 I01 BX002378 ( TSB ) , I01 BX002196 ( RZ ) , the Parker B . Francis Family Foundation ( JMSS , JJG ) , American Society of Nephrology Ben J . Lipps Research Fellowship ( FB ) , and the Vanderbilt Faculty Research Scholars award ( JJG ) . Experiments were performed utilizing the Vanderbilt Cell Imaging Shared Resource ( supported by NIH grants CA68485 , DK20593 , DK58404 , DK59637 , and EY08126 ) . ScRNA - sequencing experiments were performed using the Vanderbilt Technologies for Advanced Genomics Core facility . Flow cytometry experiments were performed in the VUMC Flow Cytometry Shared Resource ( supported by the Vanderbilt Ingram Cancer Center P30 CA68485 and the Vanderbilt Digestive Disease Research Center DK058404 ) . 32 References 1 . Mizikova I , Morty RE . The Extracellular Matrix in Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia : Target and Source . Front Med ( Lausanne ) . 2015 ; 2 : 91 . 2 . Sokocevic D , Bonenfant NR , Wagner DE , Borg ZD , Lathrop MJ , Lam YW , et al . The effect of age and emphysematous and fibrotic injury on the re - cellularization of de - cellularized lungs . Biomaterials . 2013 ; 34 ( 13 ) : 3256 - 69 . 3 . Liang Q , Lin Q , Li Y , Luo W , Huang X , Jiang Y , et al . Effect of SIS3 on Extracellular Matrix Remodeling and Repair in a Lipopolysaccharide - Induced ARDS Rat Model . J Immunol Res . 2020 ; 2020 : 6644687 . 4 . Roychaudhuri R , Hergrueter AH , Polverino F , Laucho - Contreras ME , Gupta K , Borregaard N , et al . ADAM9 is a novel product of polymorphonuclear neutrophils : regulation of expression and contributions to extracellular matrix protein degradation during acute lung injury . J Immunol . 2014 ; 193 ( 5 ) : 2469 - 82 . 5 . Humphrey JD , Dufresne ER , Schwartz MA . Mechanotransduction and extracellular matrix homeostasis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . 2014 ; 15 ( 12 ) : 802 - 12 . 6 . Hynes RO . Integrins : bidirectional , allosteric signaling machines . Cell . 2002 ; 110 ( 6 ) : 673 - 87 . 7 . Sun Z , Guo SS , Fassler R . Integrin - mediated mechanotransduction . J Cell Biol . 2016 ; 215 ( 4 ) : 445 - 56 . 8 . Plosa EJ , Young LR , Gulleman PM , Polosukhin VV , Zaynagetdinov R , Benjamin JT , et al . Epithelial beta1 integrin is required for lung branching morphogenesis and alveolarization . Development . 2014 ; 141 ( 24 ) : 4751 - 62 . 9 . Plosa EJ , Benjamin JT , Sucre JM , Gulleman PM , Gleaves LA , Han W , et al . beta1 Integrin regulates adult lung alveolar epithelial cell inflammation . JCI Insight . 2020 ; 5 ( 2 ) . 10 . Negretti NM , Plosa EJ , Benjamin JT , Schuler BA , Habermann AC , Jetter CS , et al . A single - cell atlas of mouse lung development . Development . 2021 ; 148 ( 24 ) . 11 . Strunz M , Simon LM , Ansari M , Kathiriya JJ , Angelidis I , Mayr CH , et al . Alveolar regeneration through a Krt8 + transitional stem cell state that persists in human lung fibrosis . Nat Commun . 2020 ; 11 ( 1 ) : 3559 . 12 . Riemondy KA , Jansing NL , Jiang P , Redente EF , Gillen AE , Fu R , et al . Single cell RNA sequencing identifies TGFbeta as a key regenerative cue following LPS - induced lung injury . JCI Insight . 2019 ; 5 . 13 . Zacharias WJ , Frank DB , Zepp JA , Morley MP , Alkhaleel FA , Kong J , et al . Regeneration of the lung alveolus by an evolutionarily conserved epithelial progenitor . Nature . 2018 ; 555 ( 7695 ) : 251 - 5 . 14 . Desai TJ , Brownfield DG , Krasnow MA . Alveolar progenitor and stem cells in lung development , renewal and cancer . Nature . 2014 ; 507 ( 7491 ) : 190 - 4 . 15 . Nabhan AN , Brownfield DG , Harbury PB , Krasnow MA , Desai TJ . Single - cell Wnt signaling niches maintain stemness of alveolar type 2 cells . Science . 2018 ; 359 ( 6380 ) : 1118 - 23 . 16 . Zhou B , Flodby P , Luo J , Castillo DR , Liu Y , Yu FX , et al . Claudin - 18 - mediated YAP activity regulates lung stem and progenitor cell homeostasis and tumorigenesis . J Clin Invest . 2018 ; 128 ( 3 ) : 970 - 84 . 33 17 . Choi J , Park JE , Tsagkogeorga G , Yanagita M , Koo BK , Han N , et al . Inflammatory Signals Induce AT2 Cell - Derived Damage - Associated Transient Progenitors that Mediate Alveolar Regeneration . Cell Stem Cell . 2020 ; 27 ( 3 ) : 366 - 82 e7 . 18 . Kobayashi Y , Tata A , Konkimalla A , Katsura H , Lee RF , Ou J , et al . Persistence of a regeneration - associated , transitional alveolar epithelial cell state in pulmonary fibrosis . Nat Cell Biol . 2020 ; 22 ( 8 ) : 934 - 46 . 19 . Haake SM , Plosa EJ , Kropski JA , Venton LA , Reddy A , Bock F , et al . Ligand - independent integrin beta1 signaling supports lung adenocarcinoma development . JCI Insight . 2022 ; 7 ( 15 ) . 20 . Perl AK , Zhang L , Whitsett JA . Conditional expression of genes in the respiratory epithelium in transgenic mice : cautionary notes and toward building a better mouse trap . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol . 2009 ; 40 ( 1 ) : 1 - 3 . 21 . Saxon JA , Cheng DS , Han W , Polosukhin VV , McLoed AG , Richmond BW , et al . p52 Overexpression Increases Epithelial Apoptosis , Enhances Lung Injury , and Reduces Survival after Lipopolysaccharide Treatment . J Immunol . 2016 ; 196 ( 4 ) : 1891 - 9 . 22 . Hynes RO , Naba A . Overview of the matrisome - - an inventory of extracellular matrix constituents and functions . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol . 2012 ; 4 ( 1 ) : a004903 . 23 . Beg AA , Sha WC , Bronson RT , Baltimore D . Constitutive NF - kappa B activation , enhanced granulopoiesis , and neonatal lethality in I kappa B alpha - deficient mice . Genes Dev . 1995 ; 9 ( 22 ) : 2736 - 46 . 24 . Lake BB , Codeluppi S , Yung YC , Gao D , Chun J , Kharchenko PV , et al . A comparative strategy for single - nucleus and single - cell transcriptomes confirms accuracy in predicted cell - type expression from nuclear RNA . Sci Rep . 2017 ; 7 ( 1 ) : 6031 . 25 . Fischer BM , Pavlisko E , Voynow JA . Pathogenic triad in COPD : oxidative stress , protease - antiprotease imbalance , and inflammation . Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis . 2011 ; 6 : 413 - 21 . 26 . Kaur G , Batra S . Regulation of DNA methylation signatures on NF - kappaB and STAT3 pathway genes and TET activity in cigarette smoke extract - challenged cells / COPD exacerbation model in vitro . Cell Biol Toxicol . 2020 ; 36 ( 5 ) : 459 - 80 . 27 . Li J , Wang Z , Chu Q , Jiang K , Li J , Tang N . The Strength of Mechanical Forces Determines the Differentiation of Alveolar Epithelial Cells . Dev Cell . 2018 ; 44 ( 3 ) : 297 - 312 e5 . 28 . Takashimizu Y , Iiyoshi M . New parameter of roundness R : circularity corrected by aspect ratio . Progress in Earth and Planetary Science . 2016 ; 3 ( 1 ) : 2 . 29 . Nobes CD , Hall A . Rho , rac , and cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress fibers , lamellipodia , and filopodia . Cell . 1995 ; 81 ( 1 ) : 53 - 62 . 30 . Rannels DE , Rannels SR . Influence of the extracellular matrix on type 2 cell differentiation . Chest . 1989 ; 96 ( 1 ) : 165 - 73 . 31 . Jandl K , Mutgan AC , Eller K , Schaefer L , Kwapiszewska G . The basement membrane in the cross - roads between the lung and kidney . Matrix Biol . 2022 ; 105 : 31 - 52 . 32 . Zhang F , Fan D , Mo XN . Prohibitin and the extracellular matrix are upregulated in murine alveolar epithelial cells with LPSinduced acute injury . Mol Med Rep . 2018 ; 17 ( 6 ) : 7769 - 73 . 33 . Rawlins EL . Lung epithelial progenitor cells : lessons from development . Proceedings of the American Thoracic Society . 2008 ; 5 ( 6 ) : 675 - 81 . 34 34 . Basil MC , Katzen J , Engler AE , Guo M , Herriges MJ , Kathiriya JJ , et al . The Cellular and Physiological Basis for Lung Repair and Regeneration : Past , Present , and Future . Cell Stem Cell . 2020 ; 26 ( 4 ) : 482 - 502 . 35 . Juul NH , Stockman CA , Desai TJ . Niche Cells and Signals that Regulate Lung Alveolar Stem Cells In Vivo . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol . 2020 ; 12 ( 12 ) . 36 . Liberti DC , Kremp MM , Liberti WA , 3rd , Penkala IJ , Li S , Zhou S , et al . Alveolar epithelial cell fate is maintained in a spatially restricted manner to promote lung regeneration after acute injury . Cell Rep . 2021 ; 35 ( 6 ) : 109092 . 37 . Yuan T , Klinkhammer K , Lyu H , Gao S , Yuan J , Hopkins S , et al . Temporospatial Expression of Fgfr1 and 2 During Lung Development , Homeostasis , and Regeneration . Front Pharmacol . 2020 ; 11 : 120 . 38 . Sieber P , Schafer A , Lieberherr R , Caimi SL , Luthi U , Ryge J , et al . NF - kappaB drives epithelial - mesenchymal mechanisms of lung fibrosis in a translational lung cell model . JCI Insight . 2023 ; 8 ( 3 ) . 39 . Xu C , Li X , Topham MK , Kuwada SK . Regulation of sonic hedgehog expression by integrin beta1 and epidermal growth factor receptor in intestinal epithelium . IUBMB Life . 2014 ; 66 ( 10 ) : 694 - 703 . 40 . Santa - Cruz Mateos C , Valencia - Exposito A , Palacios IM , Martin - Bermudo MD . Integrins regulate epithelial cell shape by controlling the architecture and mechanical properties of basal actomyosin networks . PLoS Genet . 2020 ; 16 ( 6 ) : e1008717 . 41 . Dominguez - Gimenez P , Brown NH , Martin - Bermudo MD . Integrin - ECM interactions regulate the changes in cell shape driving the morphogenesis of the Drosophila wing epithelium . J Cell Sci . 2007 ; 120 ( Pt 6 ) : 1061 - 71 . 42 . Randles MJ , Lausecker F , Humphries JD , Byron A , Clark SJ , Miner JH , et al . Basement membrane ligands initiate distinct signalling networks to direct cell shape . Matrix Biol . 2020 ; 90 : 61 - 78 . 43 . Ron A , Azeloglu EU , Calizo RC , Hu M , Bhattacharya S , Chen Y , et al . Cell shape information is transduced through tension - independent mechanisms . Nat Commun . 2017 ; 8 ( 1 ) : 2145 . 44 . Hunter MP , Zegers MM . Pak1 regulates branching morphogenesis in 3D MDCK cell culture by a PIX and beta1 - integrin - dependent mechanism . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol . 2010 ; 299 ( 1 ) : C21 - 32 . 45 . Muller PM , Rademacher J , Bagshaw RD , Wortmann C , Barth C , van Unen J , et al . Systems analysis of RhoGEF and RhoGAP regulatory proteins reveals spatially organized RAC1 signalling from integrin adhesions . Nat Cell Biol . 2020 ; 22 ( 4 ) : 498 - 511 . 46 . Rivas M , Gupta G , Costanzo L , Ahmed H , Wyman AE , Geraghty P . Senescence : Pathogenic Driver in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease . Medicina ( Kaunas ) . 2022 ; 58 ( 6 ) . 47 . MacNee W . Is Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease an Accelerated Aging Disease ? Ann Am Thorac Soc . 2016 ; 13 Suppl 5 : S429 - S37 . 48 . Brass DM , Hollingsworth JW , Cinque M , Li Z , Potts E , Toloza E , et al . Chronic LPS inhalation causes emphysema - like changes in mouse lung that are associated with apoptosis . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol . 2008 ; 39 ( 5 ) : 584 - 90 . 49 . Ghorani V , Boskabady MH , Khazdair MR , Kianmeher M . Experimental animal models for COPD : a methodological review . Tob Induc Dis . 2017 ; 15 : 25 . 35 50 . Ishii T , Hosoki K , Nikura Y , Yamashita N , Nagase T , Yamashita N . IFN Regulatory Factor 3 Potentiates Emphysematous Aggravation by Lipopolysaccharide . J Immunol . 2017 ; 198 ( 9 ) : 3637 - 49 . 51 . Shu J , Lu W , Yang K , Zheng Q , Li D , Li Y , et al . Establishment and evaluation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease model by chronic exposure to motor vehicle exhaust combined with lipopolysaccharide instillation . Exp Physiol . 2018 ; 103 ( 11 ) : 1532 - 42 . 52 . Singla E , Puri G , Dharwal V , Naura AS . Gallic acid ameliorates COPD - associated exacerbation in mice . Mol Cell Biochem . 2021 ; 476 ( 1 ) : 293 - 302 . 53 . Wright JL , Churg A . Animal models of COPD : Barriers , successes , and challenges . Pulm Pharmacol Ther . 2008 ; 21 ( 5 ) : 696 - 8 . 54 . Perl AK , Tichelaar JW , Whitsett JA . Conditional gene expression in the respiratory epithelium of the mouse . Transgenic Res . 2002 ; 11 ( 1 ) : 21 - 9 . 55 . Raghavan S , Bauer C , Mundschau G , Li Q , Fuchs E . Conditional ablation of beta1 integrin in skin . Severe defects in epidermal proliferation , basement membrane formation , and hair follicle invagination . J Cell Biol . 2000 ; 150 ( 5 ) : 1149 - 60 . 56 . Alsafadi HN , Staab - Weijnitz CA , Lehmann M , Lindner M , Peschel B , Konigshoff M , et al . An ex vivo model to induce early fibrosis - like changes in human precision - cut lung slices . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol . 2017 ; 312 ( 6 ) : L896 - L902 . 57 . Sucre JMS , Vickers KC , Benjamin JT , Plosa EJ , Jetter CS , Cutrone A , et al . Hyperoxia Injury in the Developing Lung Is Mediated by Mesenchymal Expression of Wnt5A . Am J Respir Crit Care Med . 2020 ; 201 ( 10 ) : 1249 - 62 . 58 . Uhl FE , Vierkotten S , Wagner DE , Burgstaller G , Costa R , Koch I , et al . Preclinical validation and imaging of Wnt - induced repair in human 3D lung tissue cultures . Eur Respir J . 2015 ; 46 ( 4 ) : 1150 - 66 . 59 . Rice WR , Conkright JJ , Na CL , Ikegami M , Shannon JM , Weaver TE . Maintenance of the mouse type II cell phenotype in vitro . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol . 2002 ; 283 ( 2 ) : L256 - 64 . 60 . Young LR , Gulleman PM , Bridges JP , Weaver TE , Deutsch GH , Blackwell TS , et al . The alveolar epithelium determines susceptibility to lung fibrosis in Hermansky - Pudlak syndrome . Am J Respir Crit Care Med . 2012 ; 186 ( 10 ) : 1014 - 24 . 61 . Schuler BA , Habermann AC , Plosa EJ , Taylor CJ , Jetter C , Negretti NM , et al . Age - determined expression of priming protease TMPRSS2 and localization of SARS - CoV - 2 in lung epithelium . J Clin Invest . 2021 ; 131 ( 1 ) . 62 . Young MD , Behjati S . . SoupX removes ambient RNA contamination from droplet based single - cell RNA sequencing data . bioRxiv . 2020 ; 303727 . 63 . Hao Y , Hao S , Andersen - Nissen E , Mauck WM , 3rd , Zheng S , Butler A , et al . Integrated analysis of multimodal single - cell data . Cell . 2021 ; 184 ( 13 ) : 3573 - 87 e29 . 64 . Hafemeister C , Satija R . Normalization and variance stabilization of single - cell RNA - seq data using regularized negative binomial regression . Genome Biol . 2019 ; 20 ( 1 ) : 296 . 65 . Ahlmann - Eltze C , Huber W . glmGamPoi : fitting Gamma - Poisson generalized linear models on single cell count data . Bioinformatics . 2021 ; 36 ( 24 ) : 5701 - 2 . 66 . Kimmel JC , Hwang AB , Scaramozza A , Marshall WF , Brack AS . Aging induces aberrant state transition kinetics in murine muscle stem cells . Development . 2020 ; 147 ( 9 ) . 36 Figure 1 . b 1 integrin deletion in AT2s results in increased inflammation , abnormal repair , and decreased survival after LPS - induced injury . ( A ) Representative images of lung histology demonstrate increased edema at 3 and 7 days post - injury in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs compared to b 1 f / f lungs , as well as persistent inflammation and emphysematous remodeling in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs by 21 days post - LPS . - LPS refers to uninjured mice ; D3 , D7 , and D21 refer to 3 , 7 , and 21 days post - LPS injury , respectively . ( B ) Mean linear intercept quantified emphysematous alveolar remodeling at 21 days post - LPS , 28 . 5±0 . 9 µ m in b 1 f / f lungs vs . 40 . 2±2 . 8 µ m in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs ( n = 6 - 7 mice / group , p = 0 . 0014 by two - tailed t - test ) . ( C ) Bicinchoninic Acid protein assay quantified increased bronchoalveolar lavage ( BAL ) fluid protein in uninjured b 1 AT2 - KO lungs and at 3 and 7 days post - LPS injury in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs compared to b 1 f / f lungs at the same time points ( n = 6 - 14 mice / group , two - tailed t - test comparing genotypes at each time point , p = 0 . 0485 for uninjured mice ; p = 0 . 0036 at D3 ; p = 0 . 005 at D7 ; p = 0 . 2628 at D21 ) . ( D ) BAL cell counts are significantly increased in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs compared to b 1 f / f littermates in uninjured mice and at 7 and 21 days post - LPS . Peak inflammation is present at 7 days in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs , 55 , 663 ± 3306 cells / ml in b 1 f / f BALF versus 624 , 000 ± 118 , 753 cells / ml in b 1 AT2 - KO BAL ( n = 6 - 26 mice / group , two - tailed t - test comparing genotypes at each time point , p = 0 . 0002 for uninjured mice ; p = 0 . 0730 at D3 ; p = 0 . 0007 at D7 ; p < 0 . 0001 at D21 ) . Total numbers of BALF macrophages are significantly increased in uninjured b 1 AT2 - KO mice and at day 7 and day 21 , lymphocytes and neutrophils are significantly increased in b 1 AT2 - KO BAL at day 7 only . Scale bar = 50 µ m for ( A ) . * p < 0 . 05 . 37 Figure 2 . b 1 - deficient lungs have increased AT2 cell number and decreased AT1 cells at 21 days after LPS injury . ( A ) Representative low - power ( 10x ) and inset high - power images ( 40x , denoted by yellow boxes ) of b 1 f / f and b 1 AT2 - KO lungs 21 days after LPS ( D21 ) , immunostained for AT2 marker pro - SP - C ( red ) and AT1 marker T1 a ( green ) . ( B ) Representative images of D21 b 1 f / f and b 1 AT2 - KO lungs immunostained for pro - SP - C ( red ) with the AT1 marker HOPX ( green ) , insets as in ( A ) . ( C ) Quantification of the number of pro - SP - C + AT2 cells per field ( n = 8 mice / group , ten 40x sections / mouse ; p = 0 . 0086 ) . ( D ) HOPX + cells per field ( n = 6 mice / group , six 20x sections / mouse ; p = 0 . 0003 ) . * p < 0 . 05 . Scale bar = 100 µ m for 10x in A and B ; scale bar = 50 µ m for 40x in A and B . Two - tailed t - test was used to compare genotypes in C and D . 38 Figure 3 . b 1 AT2 - KO mice have increased AT2 proliferation during alveolar repair . ( A ) Quantification of pro - SP - C + cells per total cells ( n = 6 - 8 mice / group ; 5 sections per mouse ; p = 0 . 0247 for uninjured ( no LPS ) mice ; p = 0 . 8220 at D3 ; p = 0 . 0001 at D7 ; p = 0 . 0009 at D21 ) . ( B ) Quantification of proliferating AT2 cells by percentage of total pro - SP - C + AT2s ( n = 6 - 8 mice / group , 10 sections / mouse ; p = 0 . 0003 for uninjured mice ; p = 0 . 0311 at D3 ; p = 0 . 0310 at D7 ; p = 0 . 0128 at D21 ) . ( C ) Immunodetection of the proliferation marker Ki67 ( green ) and pro - SP - C ( red ) show peak AT2 proliferation in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs at day 7 ( arrows ) as merged or single - channel panels . ( D ) Representative images of BrdU incorporated precision - cut lung slices ( PCLS ) treated with LPS and / or NF - k B inhibitor BAY 11 - 7082 for 48 hours . Slices were immunostained for BrdU ( cyan ) and pro - SP - C ( magenta ) with DAPI nuclear marker ( white ) . ( E ) Quantification of proliferating AT2 cells by percent of total AT2 cells ( BrdU + pro - SP - C + over 39 total number of SP - C + cells ) by condition as indicated ( n = 6 - 8 mice / group , 1 slice per mouse per condition , imaged and quantified ten 40x sections / mouse per condition , data from five separate experiments ; p = 0 . 0010 , F value = 6 . 3 for treatment variation ; p < 0 . 0001 , F value = 26 . 1 for genotype variation ) . Two - tailed t - test was used to compare genotypes at each time point for A and B . Two - way ANOVA was used to compare treatment conditions and genotype in E . * p < 0 . 05 . Scale bar = 200 µ m for low - power in C and 50 µ m for inset in C ; scale bar = 100 µ m for low - power in D and 50 µ m for inset in D . 40 Figure 4 . Overabundant AT2s are transcriptionally distinct during repair in b 1 AT2 - KO mice . ( A ) UMAP of all epithelial cells from b 1 f / f and b 1 AT2 - KO lungs ± LPS clustered by label transfer from Strunz et al ( 11 ) . ( B ) Individual epithelial populations by group reveal transcriptionally distinct AT2s and activated AT2s in day 7 LPS - treated b 1 AT2 - KO lungs . ( C ) Ingenuity Pathway Analysis on combined AT2 groups from uninjured b 1 f / f and b 1 AT2 - KO lungs demonstrate upregulation of oxidative stress , senescence , and inflammatory pathways in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs compared to b 1 f / f lungs . ( D ) Ingenuity Pathway Analysis shows upregulation of actin cytoskeleton signaling pathways in b 1 AT2 - KO AT2 cells compared to b 1 f / f AT2 cells at seven days after LPS treatment . 41 Figure 5 . b 1 integrin regulates actin localization and RhoA GTPase activation during alveolar repair . ( A ) Surface rendering high - power images of pro - SP - C immunostained thick frozen sections from day 7 ( D7 ) LPS - treated b 1 f / f and b 1 AT2 - KO lungs . ( B ) High - power images of thick frozen sections from D7 LPS - treated b 1 f / f and b 1 AT2 - KO lungs immunostained for pro - SP - C ( green ) with phalloidin F - actin probe ( magenta ) , arrows indicate areas of actin - rich lateral protrusions . ( C ) Area of pro - SP - C + / CD68 - AT2 cells from D7 LPS - treated b 1 f / f and b 1 AT2 - KO mice ( 46 . 8 ± 2 . 0 µ m 2 in b 1 f / f lungs compared to 69 . 6 ± 2 . 8 µ m 2 in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs , n = 6 mice / group , ³ 40 cells measured / mouse imaged from 5 different sections , two - tailed t - test , p < 0 . 0001 ) . ( D ) Roundness score calculated from pro - SP - C + / CD68 - cells from D7 LPS - treated b 1 f / f and b 1 AT2 - KO mice ( 38 - 60 cells measured / mouse from 5 different sections , n = 6 mice / group , two - tailed t - test comparing genotypes , p = 0 . 0009 ) . ( E ) High - power images of frozen sections prepared at D7 after LPS b 1 f / f and b 1 AT2 - KO lungs immunostained for pro - SP - C ( gold ) with JLA20 ( cyan ) and phalloidin ( magenta ) probes applied to detect G - actin and F - actin , respectively . Membrane localization of G - actin denoted by arrows and F - actin by arrowheads . ( F - G ) Quantification of JLA20 ( F ) and phalloidin ( G ) expression in pro - SP - C + AT2 cells in b 1 f / f and b 1 AT2 - KO lungs D7 after LPS ( n = 5 - 6 mice / group , 10 sections / mouse , two - tailed t - test with p = 0 . 0088 for JLA20 42 and p = 0 . 0482 for phalloidin ) . ( H ) Representative high - power images from day 7 LPS - treated b 1 f / f and b 1 AT2 - KO lungs immunostained for ezrin ( cyan ) with AT2 cells identified by RNA in situ hybridization for Sftpc ( gold ) . Arrows indicate ezrin expression localized to lateral extensions in b 1 f / f AT2 cells , whereas diffuse , non - focal ezrin expression along the cell membrane is seen in b 1 AT2 - KO AT2 cells . ( I - K ) GTPase activation assay performed on AT2 cell lysates collected from uninjured and D7 LPS - treated b 1 f / f and b 1 AT2 - KO lungs ( n = 6 - 8 mice / group for each assay ; RhoA one - way ANOVA p < 0 . 0001 , F value 53 . 42 , df = 3 ; Cdc42 one - way ANOVA p < 0 . 001 , F value 17 . 46 , df = 3 ; Rac1 one - way ANOVA p < 0 . 0001 , F value 31 . 09 , df = 3 ) . * p < 0 . 05 . Scale bar = 5 µ m for A , B and E ; scale bar = 25 µ m for panels in H . 43 Figure 6 . Post - injury b 1 deficient AT2s exhibit an AT2 - AT1 mixed epithelial transcriptomic phenotype . ( A ) Stacked bar graph of epithelial proportions demonstrates an expansion of the AT2 and activated AT2 populations in day 7 ( D7 ) LPS - treated b 1 AT2 - KO lungs . ( B ) Marker gene expression by genotype and treatment group in AT2 / activated AT2 cluster , in which higher expression is represented with a darker color and the size of the dot reflects the proportion of cells expressing that marker . ( C ) Representative low - power images from day 7 LPS - treated lung sections immunostained for the AT1 marker AGER ( purple ) and AT2 marker pro - SP - C ( gold ) demonstrate overall decreased AGER in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs . Three insets per low - power field show co - localization of AGER with pro - SP - C + AT2 cells in D7 b 1 AT2 - KO lungs . Scale bar = 100 µ m for low - power in C , 50 µ m for middle inset and 10 µ m for high - power inset . 44 Figure 7 . AT2s of mixed transcriptomic phenotype persist , proliferate , and maintain an enlarged , rounded cell shape in late alveolar repair . ( A ) UMAP of all epithelial cells from b 1 f / f and b 1 AT2 - KO lungs 21 days after LPS treatment clustered by label transfer from Strunz et al ( 11 ) . ( B ) Individual epithelial populations by group reveal transcriptionally abundant AT2s and activated AT2s in day 21 LPS - treated b 1 AT2 - KO lungs . ( C ) Hallmark gene expression by genotype in AT2 , activated AT2 , and Krt8 ADI clusters , in which higher expression is represented with a darker color and the size of the dot reflects the proportion of cells expressing that marker . ( D ) Representative low - power images of b 1 f / f and b 1 AT2 - KO lungs 21 days after LPS co - immunostained for pro - SP - C ( red ) , cytokeratin 8 ( gold ) , AGER ( cyan ) , and CD68 ( blue ) . b 1 AT2 - KO lungs are notable for enlarged airspaces , increased numbers of round , large pro - SP - C + AT2 cells , that are distinct from alveolar macrophages . ( E ) High - power images of lung sections immunostained for pro - SP - C , cytokeratin 8 , AGER , and CD68 , as above , demonstrate round , 45 large pro - SP - C + AT2 cells that co - localize with cytokeratin 8 , with a subset also triple positive for pro - SP - C + / cytokeratin 8 + / AGER + . Arrow denotes occasional triple + cells in b 1 AT2 - KO lungs and arrowhead marks AGER - AT2 cell in b 1 f / f lungs . ( F ) Quantification of pro - SP - C + / cytokeratin 8 + / AGER + triple positive cells as a percent of total pro - SP - C + cells in day 21 LPS - treated lungs ( n = 6 mice / group , ten 60x sections / mouse , p < 0 . 0001 ) . * p < 0 . 05 . Scale bar = 100 µ m in D and 10 µ m in E . 46 Figure 8 . b 1 AT2 - KO mice fail to repopulate alveolar with cells of AT1 morphology . ( A ) Low - power images of Cre + ; mTmG control mice demonstrate Cre - recombinase reporter labeled GFP positive cells of both AT1 and AT2 cell shape repopulate the injured alveolus 21 days after LPS . GFP labeled cells in b 1 AT2 - KO ; mTmG mice retain only AT2 morphology and fail to attain an AT1 cell shape at 21 days . ( B ) Quantification of mean GFP fluorescence intensity shows decreased area of lung repopulated by GFP labeled cells at 21 days post - LPS in b 1 AT2 - KO ; mTmG mice ( n = 4 Cre + ; mTmG and 6 b 1 AT2 - KO ; mTmG mice ; ten 20x sections / mouse , p = 0 . 0087 ) . ( C ) High - power images of Cre + ; mTmG and in b 1 AT2 - KO ; mTmG lung sections immunostained for pro - SP - C ( red ) and AGER ( blue ) , tomato omitted in imaging . Large , round GFP + labeled cells acquire both AT2 ( pro - SP - C + ) and AT1 ( AGER + ) markers in b 1 AT2 - KO ; mTmG lungs . GFP + labeled cells possess either AT2 or AT1 markers at 21 days post - LPS in Cre + ; mTmG lungs . * p < 0 . 05 . Scale bar = 200 µ m in A and 25 µ m in C .