Distinct functional constraints driving conservation of the cofilin N - terminal regulatory tail Joel A . Sexton 1 , Tony Potchernikov 2 , Jeffrey P . Bibeau 2 , Gabriela Casanova - Sepúlveda 2 , Wenxiang Cao 2 , Hua Jane Lou 1 , Titus J . Boggon 1 , 2 , Enrique M . De La Cruz 2 , and Benjamin E . Turk 1 , * 1 Department of Pharmacology , Yale School of Medicine , New Haven , CT 06520 2 Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry , Yale University , New Haven , CT 06520 * Corresponding author . Email : ben . turk @ yale . edu 2 Summary Cofilin family proteins have essential roles in remodeling the cytoskeleton through filamentous actin depolymerization and severing . The short unstructured N - terminal region of cofilin is critical for actin binding and harbors the major site of inhibitory phosphorylation . Atypically for a disordered sequence , the N - terminal region is highly conserved , but the aspects of cofilin functionality driving this conservation are not clear . Here , we screened a library of 16 , 000 human cofilin N - terminal sequence variants for their capacity to support growth in S . cerevisiae in the presence or absence of the upstream regulator LIM kinase . Results from the screen and subsequent biochemical analysis of individual variants revealed distinct sequence requirements for actin binding and regulation by LIM kinase . While the presence of a serine , rather than threonine , phosphoacceptor residue was essential for phosphorylation by LIM kinase , the native cofilin N - terminus was otherwise a suboptimal LIM kinase substrate . This circumstance was not due to sequence requirements for actin binding and severing , but rather appeared primarily to maintain the capacity for phosphorylation to inactivate cofilin . Overall , the individual sequence requirements for cofilin function and regulation were remarkably loose when examined separately , but collectively restricted the N - terminus to sequences found in natural cofilins . Our results illustrate how a regulatory phosphorylation site can balance potentially competing sequence requirements for function and regulation . 3 Introduction Phosphorylation is perhaps the most common reversible post - translational protein modification and has widespread roles in regulating cell behavior . Sites of phosphorylation evolve rapidly , in part because kinase recognition motifs can be introduced by a small number of mutations in flanking residues [ 1 , 2 ] . However , regulatory sites of phosphorylation are necessarily under additional sequence constraints beyond those required for kinase recognition . For example , intracellular environments harbor many protein kinases – up to ~ 500 for human cells [ 3 ] . Accordingly , just as the sequence surrounding the site must be tuned to its cognate kinase , there is also selective pressure to evade phosphorylation by the “wrong” kinases [ 4 - 6 ] . Furthermore , regulatory phosphorylation often occurs in functionally important regions , so that variability in the local sequence may be limited to maintain basic function [ 7 , 8 ] . Finally , the specific sequence context of a phosphorylation site may dictate how phosphorylation modifies protein behavior , for example by generating a binding site for a phosphopeptide interaction module [ 9 ] . These factors are potentially in competition with one another , but there is currently limited insight into how they are balanced in any given phosphorylation site . One example of a phosphoregulatory event occurring at a highly conserved site involves proteins in the cofilin / ADF ( actin depolymerizing factor ) family ( hereafter referred to collectively as cofilin ) . Cofilin is a small actin - binding protein important for dynamic regulation of the actin cytoskeleton in eukaryotes [ 10 - 12 ] . Cofilin binds cooperatively to actin filaments , promoting severing at junctions between bare and decorated segments , as well as depolymerization , to produce new filament ends and a pool of actin monomers 4 for reassembly [ 13 - 18 ] . Cofilin - dependent cytoskeletal remodeling is essential for multiple actin - dependent processes , including cytokinesis , cell polarity , migration , neurite extension , and mechanosensing [ 11 ] . Due to its major impact on the actin cytoskeleton , cofilin activity is tightly regulated by several mechanisms . Principal among these is phosphorylation at Ser3 within its disordered N - terminal region , catalyzed in most animals and some protists by members of the LIM kinase family ( LIMK1 / 2 and TESK1 / 2 ) [ 19 ] . The N - terminal tail is an essential part of the actin - binding interface , and Ser3 phosphorylation inactivates cofilin by dramatically decreasing its affinity for actin [ 20 ] . The phosphomimetic cofilin S3D mutant binds to filamentous actin weakly but with higher cooperativity than the WT protein , and it severs filaments poorly even when bound [ 20 - 22 ] . The N - terminus of animal cofilins contains a conserved acetyl - Ala2 - Ser3 - Gly4 - Val5 sequence ( by convention , we use residue numbering based on the unprocessed precursor ) [ 11 ] . Orthologs from other kingdoms vary in the sequence upstream of Ser3 and may have other β - branched or aliphatic residues in place of Val5 , but the phosphoacceptor residue and Gly4 are invariant . Factors driving conservation of this sequence are currently unclear . Aside from full N - terminal deletion mutants that are non - functional , only the phosphomimetic S3D and phosphorylation resistant S3A variants have been examined with respect to their effects on actin in vitro or in cells [ 20 - 24 ] . Recognition by LIMK occurs through a docking interaction between the cofilin globular domain and a site adjacent to the kinase catalytic cleft on the kinase C - terminal lobe [ 25 , 26 ] . Consequently , the N - terminal region projects into the LIMK active site in a non - canonical orientation that lacks complementary binding interactions typically observed in 5 other protein kinase - substrate complexes . Limited mutational analyses have suggested loose sequence requirements surrounding the phosphorylation site , save for an unusually strict exclusion of Thr as a phosphoacceptor residue [ 26 ] . Attempts to identify a LIMK phosphorylation site sequence motif using peptide libraries have been unsuccessful , presumably because the docking interaction is essential for efficient phosphorylation [ 25 , 27 ] . A platform for evaluation of large numbers of N - terminal sequence variants would facilitate discovery of those features important for the various aspects of cofilin functionality . Here we exploit the widespread requirement for cofilin to establish a budding yeast system for high - throughput evaluation of sequence variants . S . cerevisiae lacking their sole cofilin ortholog , Cof1 , are inviable [ 28 , 29 ] , but ectopic overexpression of mammalian cofilin - 1 can rescue growth [ 20 , 25 , 30 ] . In this context , we have reported that inducible expression of human LIMK1 suppresses growth in a manner dependent on Ser3 phosphorylation [ 25 ] . With this system , we can evaluate in parallel the impact of a mutation on either core cofilin function or its regulation by LIMK based on its ability to support growth in the absence or presence of LIMK induction , respectively . Here , we have applied the system to screen a comprehensive collection of N - terminal sequence variants , and subsequently conducted biochemical analysis of a panel of mutants . We found unexpectedly loose sequence requirements for each of the various aspects of cofilin function and regulation , with each dominated by its own unique position within the N - terminal sequence . Overall conservation of the N - terminal region thus appears to be constrained by the collective requirements imposed by the full complement of cofilin 6 functionality . These observations may have general implications for how regulatory phosphorylation sites emerge and are maintained through evolution . Results A dual - functionality cofilin library yeast competitive growth screen To define cofilin N - terminal sequence requirements for actin severing and phosphoregulation , we leveraged the capacity of mammalian cofilin to substitute for yeast Cof1 in supporting growth [ 20 ] . We used a yeast strain in which the endogenous COF1 gene is placed under control of a tetracycline - repressible promoter ( TeTO 7 - COF1 ) [ 31 ] . This strain grew poorly in the presence of doxycycline ( DOX ) due to loss of endogenous Cof1 expression , but ectopic expression of either yeast Cof1 or human cofilin - 1 rescued growth ( Fig . 1A ) . Our previous work with a temperature sensitive cof1 mutant strain demonstrated that ectopic expression of the LIMK1 catalytic domain ( LIMK1 CAT ) completely blocked growth in the context of human cofilin - 1 [ 25 ] . Likewise , we found that inducible expression of LIMK1 CAT inhibited growth of TeTO 7 - COF1 yeast expressing human cofilin - 1 in a manner dependent on its phosphorylation at Ser3 ( Fig . S1 ) . Expression of full length ( FL ) LIMK1 , which has lower cofilin kinase activity than LIMK1 CAT , caused only partial growth suppression ( Fig . 1B ) . We chose to use FL LIMK1 for our screens as lower activity should allow us to better distinguish cofilin mutants that impact LIMK regulation to varying degrees . We next constructed a saturation mutagenesis library of the human cofilin - 1 N - terminal region in which Ala2 , Gly4 , and Val5 were combinatorially randomized as all twenty potential canonical amino acids ( Fig . 1C ) . Ser3 was maintained as either a serine or threonine residue to preserve a potential 7 phosphorylation site , producing a library with 16 , 000 ( 20 3 x 2 ) unique sequences . The library was introduced into a constitutive yeast expression plasmid with an N - terminal His 6 tag included to prevent potential sequence - dependent post - translational modifications ( e . g . initiator methionine removal and acetylation ) and to help normalize levels of expression . The His 6 tag did not prevent cofilin from rescuing yeast growth , severing actin , or being phosphorylated by LIMK1 ( Fig . 1A , Fig . S2 ) . TeTO 7 - COF1 yeast harboring the LIMK1 plasmid were transformed with the cofilin library and expanded in liquid media with a portion of the culture reserved as a starting point sample . The remaining cells were grown in raffinose to derepress the LIMK1 expression construct and treated with DOX to repress Cof1 expression . The culture was then split and propagated in either glucose or galactose to repress or induce LIMK1 expression , respectively ( Fig . 1D ) . At various times , the cultures were sampled for plasmid DNA extraction . The variable library sequence within the recovered plasmids was PCR - amplified and subjected to next - generation sequencing . This analysis indicated how the relative abundance of each component of the library changed over time ( Fig . 1E , Datasets S1 and S2 ) . In the context of competitive growth , DOX + glucose conditions should enrich for viable cells expressing functional library variants . Growth in DOX + galactose should deplete the culture of functional cofilin variants that could be phosphorylated and inhibited by LIMK1 . We first analyzed our data from the DOX + glucose condition to identify core determinants of cofilin function . Functional constraints on the cofilin N - terminal sequence in supporting growth Yeast grown in glucose were analyzed for enrichment of cofilin sequences that could presumably bind and sever actin filaments . We compared sequence representation 8 between the beginning of culture in glucose and ~ 6 population doublings later ( Fig . 1E and 2A ) , beyond which changes were less pronounced . We ranked each sequence by its average log 2 fold change in the normalized read count across three independently performed replicate screens ( Fig . 2A ) . When analyzed this way , 4 , 099 of the 16 , 000 library sequences were enriched in the population , suggesting that the majority of N - terminal substitutions were deleterious to cofilin function . As anticipated , native cofilin sequences performed well , including those from yeast ( Arg - Ser - Gly - Val , rank 27 ) , human ( Ala - Ser - Gly - Val , rank 87 ) and Arabidopsis ( Ala - Ser - Gly - Met , rank 262 ) , though the most enriched sequence was non - native ( Phe - Thr - Gly - Leu ) ( Fig . 2A , Dataset S2 ) . Examination of the 400 most enriched sequences overall identified a Leu - X - Gly - Met consensus motif . ( Fig . S3A ) . Within the N - terminal sequence , the fifth position was the most stringently selective , with aliphatic or β - branched amino acids ( 73 % of enriched sequences ) being apparently required for function ( Fig . 2B , C , D ) and Met being most commonly enriched ( 17 % of enriched sequences ) . By comparison , other positions within the sequence were less selective . Despite being highly conserved in plants and animals , the second residue ( Ala2 in human ) was effectively indiscriminate , with modest enrichment for non - native hydrophobic over charged residues ( Fig . 2D ) . Likewise , enriched sequences had roughly equal representation of Ser and Thr at the phosphoacceptor ( third ) position . Finally , selection at the fourth residue was intermediate . As found in all wild - type ( WT ) cofilin sequences , Gly was overrepresented at this position in enriched sequences ( 8 % overall ) . Despite being absent from all native cofilin sequences , hydrophobic residues were generally selected at this position , with charged residues and most small residues being depleted . 9 Because our combinatorial library includes all possible combinations of residues at the random positions , it has the potential to reveal cases where there is functional cooperativity between specific pairs of residues . In such cases , two residues would be co - enriched more frequently than expected if they behaved independently . We found several instances where residues appeared to co - vary in this manner . For example , Leu and Gly residues are represented similarly at position 4 within the 400 most enriched sequences . However , Gly4 sequences showed enhanced selection of Ile or Val residues at position 5 , while Leu4 sequences were more likely to be co - enriched with Met5 ( Fig . S3A - C ) . Likewise , sequences with Val5 more prominently included Gly4 compared to those sequences containing Met5 ( Fig . S3D , E ) . The Gly4 - Val5 pair , which is found invariably in animals and fungi , was uniquely over - represented within these most highly enriched sequences ( Fig . S3F ) and may provide a fitness advantage over sequences combining independently favorable residues . We also noted covariation of Thr5 with Thr3 at the phosphoacceptor position , where there was a large difference in mean log 2 fold change for Thr3 / Thr5 variants compared with Ser3 / Thr5 variants ( 1 . 7 vs . - 0 . 28 ) ( Fig . S4 ) . To confirm results from the screen , we selected a number of mutants with varying degrees of enrichment for further analysis ( Table 1 ) . We initially assayed these mutants for their ability to support yeast growth on solid media , a format distinct from the competitive growth scheme used for the screen . Human cofilin - 1 single or double point mutants were expressed in TeTO 7 - COF1 yeast and grown with or without DOX to control endogeneous Cof1 expression . In keeping with their enrichment in the screen , cofilin V5M supported growth similarly to WT human cofilin ( Fig . 3A ) , while yeast expressing cofilin V5E failed to grow . In contrast , Ala2 mutations had little effect on yeast growth , with both 10 cofilin A2L and cofilin A2D supporting growth in the presence of DOX . Growth of yeast expressing the “consensus” double mutant cofilin A2L , V5M was indistinguishable from that of yeast expressing cofilin WT or cofilin V5M . Substitutions to Gly4 displayed a range of growth phenotypes that generally correlated with behavior in the screen ( Fig . 3B ) . Yeast expressing cofilin G4L grew similarly to yeast with cofilin WT . Cofilin G4A , which was slightly depleted in the screen , and cofilin G4F , which was in the bottom half of enriched sequences , each supported growth at a rate ~ 5 - fold slower than cofilin WT . The more substantially depleted variants , G4P , G4E and G4K , provided at best a marginal amount of growth . Overall , we found that for most variants enriched in the context of competitive growth in liquid culture , apparent differences in fitness did not translate into overt differences in growth rate on solid media . Furthermore , mutants that can support growth on solid media but at lower rates than cofilin WT were likely depleted in the screen due to being outcompeted by higher fitness variants . We note that the extent of growth rescue did not generally correlate with the level of cofilin expression ( Fig . S5 ) . However , one of the most damaging mutations , cofilin V5E , expressed to very low levels suggesting that it and perhaps other non - functional Val5 substitutions may destabilize the protein . We next examined how the ability of a cofilin variant to support growth correlated with its biochemical behavior in vitro . We expressed and purified cofilin mutants using a system that produces untagged protein with the native N - terminal sequence ( initiating with Ala2 or the desired substitution ) . We initially evaluated the panel of mutants for binding to actin filaments measured in a fluorescence quenching assay , and further analyzed a subset of these mutants for their capacity to sever actin filaments in a TIRF microscopy - based assay . Phosphorylated cofilin WT and phospho - mimetic cofilin S3D were 11 used as weak binding controls [ 21 , 24 , 32 ] . We used the cofilin concentration producing half maximal occupancy ( K 0 . 5 ) as a proxy for relative overall binding affinity [ 33 ] . Cofilin WT bound to actin filaments with a K 0 . 5 value of approximately 0 . 6 µM ( Fig . 3C - E , Table 1 ) whereas cofilin S3D required ~ 8 - fold higher concentrations to bind actin filaments . As anticipated , phosphorylated cofilin WT displayed almost no detectable binding at the concentrations tested . Almost all mutants that had supported growth on solid media , including the G4F , A2D , V5M and the double mutant A2L / V5M , displayed actin binding comparable to cofilin WT ( Fig . 3 ) , and where tested these mutants likewise severed actin filaments similarly to WT ( Fig . S6 , S7 ) . Cofilin G4A , which supported growth at a lower rate than cofilin WT , showed somewhat weaker actin binding ( K 0 . 5 = 3 . 2 μM ) , as did the G4K variant that failed to support growth ( K 0 . 5 = 3 . 5 μM ) . Of all variants tested , only cofilin G4E showed essentially no binding to actin filaments ( Fig . 3E ) , and accordingly it had no detectable severing activity ( Fig . S6 ) . Consistent with its low level of expression in yeast , cofilin V5E formed soluble aggregates when expressed in bacteria , and we were unable to isolate monomeric protein . Overall , we found a general correlation between yeast growth rate and actin binding , with a threshold K 0 . 5 of ~ 2 μM being required to support maximal growth . Identification of cofilin variants inhibited by LIMK1 To identify cofilin variants susceptible or resistant to LIMK1 , we examined the relative abundance of functional variants in our screen following induction of the kinase by growth in galactose . We noted that depletion of the cofilin WT sequence from the culture lagged 1 – 2 population doublings behind induction of LIMK1 . We therefore followed variant representation from this time point onward over the course of 10 population doublings in 12 the presence of either glucose or galactose ( Fig . 1E ) , and we ranked sequences by the log 2 - fold change in abundance . We found that that approximately 1 / 3 rd of functional cofilin sequences ( those enriched in glucose ) became depleted in the presence of galactose , suggesting that they were phosphorylated and inhibited by LIMK1 , with the remaining 2 / 3 rds persisting in the presence of galactose and thus presumably resistant to LIMK1 expression ( Dataset S2 and Fig . S8 ) . Functional sequences depleted in galactose overwhelmingly had Ser3 as the phosphoacceptor residue and were dominated by small residues at the Gly4 position , while conversely the majority of LIMK1 - resistant sequences contained Thr3 and large hydrophobic residues ( primarily Leu and Phe ) in position 4 ( Fig . 4A , B and Fig . S8 ) . We initially examined the impact of phosphorylation site residue substitutions LIMK1 - induced phosphorylation and growth inhibition in yeast ( Fig . 5A ) . In contrast to yeast expressing cofilin WT ( with Ser3 ) , those expressing cofilin S3T were unaffected by LIMK1 induction and grew similarly to yeast harboring cofilin S3A . Because our cofilin library did not include Tyr3 variants , we also examined growth of yeast expressing cofilin S3Y . While cofilin S3Y only partially rescued growth in the presence of DOX , growth was further inhibited by galactose - induced expression of LIMK1 . Matching these observations , both cofilin WT and cofilin S3Y became phosphorylated upon LIMK1 induction ( Fig . 5B ) as judged by mobility shift on Phos - tag SDS - PAGE , while only a trace amount of cofilin S3T phosphorylation was observed . In similar experiments performed with yeast expressing the hyperactive LIMK1 CAT , cofilin S3T was still phosphorylated to only a small extent and fully supported growth ( Fig . S9 ) . Consistent with these results and a recent report [ 26 ] , LIMK1 phosphorylation of cofilin was blocked by either S3A or S3T mutation 13 and was reduced but not eliminated when Ser3 was substituted with Tyr ( Fig . 5D ) . LIMK2 was similarly unable to phosphorylate cofilin S3T ( Fig . S9D ) , indicating that this strong phosphoacceptor residue preference is conserved across isoforms . Collectively , these results confirm that while LIMKs are “dual - specificity” kinases in the sense that they can phosphorylate both Ser and Tyr , they are almost entirely devoid of activity on Thr residues . Cofilin / ADF proteins are members of a larger family of actin - binding proteins having an ADF fold . Theoretically other ADF domain proteins could be regulated by phosphorylation at sites analogous to Ser3 . For example , the N - terminal region of twinfilin proteins , which consist of two ADF domains arranged in tandem , has a potential phosphoacceptor residue at position 5 , analogous to cofilin Ser3 ( Fig . 5F ) . Notably , this residue is Thr in mammalian twinfilins , but is a Ser in the single ortholog from budding yeast , which lack LIMKs . Furthermore , the LIMK docking region of cofilin centered on helix α5 is well conserved to the N - terminal ADF domain of twinfilin ( Fig . S10 ) [ 25 ] . We therefore wondered whether the identity of the phosphoacceptor residue might serve to insulate twinfilin from phosphoregulation by LIMKs . We examined if LIMK1 could phosphorylate mouse or budding yeast twinfilin in vitro and whether phosphorylation was influenced by the identity of the putative phosphoacceptor . We found that LIMK1 robustly phosphorylated budding yeast twinfilin at ~ 40 % of its cofilin phosphorylation rate yet had barely detectable activity on mouse twinfilin - 1 ( Fig . 5G ) . As anticipated , substituting Ser5 of yeast twinfilin with Thr abolished phosphorylation , confirming Ser5 to be the site of LIMK1 phosphorylation and suggesting flexibility in the identity of that residue in an organism lacking LIMKs . However , LIMK1 did not substantially phosphorylate mouse 14 twinfilin - 1 T5S , indicating a Ser phosphoacceptor residue is necessary but not sufficient for LIMK phosphorylation of ADF fold proteins . Collectively these results suggest that insulating twinfilin from inhibition by LIMK1 involves both the phosphoacceptor and additional structural features that prevent phosphorylation . Identification of phosphoregulatory constraints on the cofilin N - terminal sequence In our screen , LIMK1 - resistant variants were dominated by those having a Thr phosphoacceptor residue . However , Ser3 sequences having Leu , Phe or Trp at position 4 also persisted despite LIMK1 expression , while Ser3 sequences depleted upon LIMK1 induction were enriched for Gly and other small residues at position 4 ( Fig . 4B ) . We confirmed in growth assays on solid media that cofilin G4L and cofilin G4F , but not cofilin G4A , protected yeast from LIMK1 - induced growth inhibition ( Fig . 6A , Fig . S11 ) . The most straightforward explanation for these results would be if variants with bulky hydrophobic residues at position 4 were poor substrates of LIMK1 . However , we found instead that cofilin G4L and cofilin G4F became highly phosphorylated upon expression of LIMK1 in yeast , as did cofilin G4A ( Fig . 6B , C ) . Furthermore , LIMK1 phosphorylated cofilin G4A , cofilin G4L , and cofilin G4F at rates faster than cofilin WT in vitro , while cofilin G4P was not detectably phosphorylated ( Fig . 6D ) . A comparison of steady - state kinetic parameters confirmed that cofilin G4F ( k cat = 0 . 55 ± 0 . 05 s - 1 , K M = 12 ± 3 µM ) was a more efficient LIMK1 substrate than cofilin WT ( k cat = 0 . 20 ± 0 . 03 s - 1 , K M = 9 ± 3 µM ) over the full range of substrate concentrations ( Fig . 6F , G ) . The LIMK1 preference for cofilin G4F over its wild - type 15 substrate and the extent of cofilin G4F phosphorylation in vivo suggested that the cofilin G4F growth phenotype in yeast was not due to reduced phosphorylation . As cofilin G4F is not impaired as a LIMK1 substrate , an alternative explanation for its ability to support growth in the presence of LIMK1 is that it alleviates the inhibitory effect of Ser3 phosphorylation . To investigate this possibility , we used cofilin variants harboring a phosphomimetic S3D mutation to model constitutive phosphorylation . Consistent with its inability to sever actin , cofilin S3D as previously shown [ 20 ] was unable to support yeast growth ( Fig . 7A ) . In contrast , yeast expressing cofilin S3D , G4F grew at an equivalent rate to those expressing the cofilin G4F single mutant . When examined in vitro , cofilin S3D , G4F bound actin similar to cofilin G4F , effectively correcting the phospho - mimetic S3D substitution ( Fig . 7C ) . Together , these results suggest that the presence of a large hydrophobic residue immediately downstream of the phosphoacceptor residue uncouples cofilin inhibition from phosphorylation . Accordingly , the absolute conservation of a Gly residue at position 4 may be due at least in part because it is required for phosphoregulation of actin binding and severing . Discussion Cofilin regulation of actin depolymerization is essential for normal cytoskeletal function [ 10 - 12 ] . Much of the functional regulation of cofilin converges on its N - terminal site of phosphorylation , yet how this short four amino acid stretch simultaneously impacts its relationship with its regulators , the LIM kinases , and its effector , actin , have not been explored . We used a yeast - based dual - functionality screen of a cofilin N - sequence library and subsequent functional analysis to simultaneously determine the fitness of all possible combinations of N - terminal residues and to assess the importance of each of these amino 16 acids . We identified features required for maintenance of cofilin core functionality , targeting of cofilin phosphorylation by its kinases , evasion of non - cognate kinase phosphorylation , and phosphoregulation of its ability to bind and sever actin . We found that each aspect of cofilin functionality is mediated by distinct sequence features of its N - terminal sequence , which collectively restrain sequence variation across the entire tail ( Fig . 7D ) . This system allowed us to simultaneously determine the fitness of all possible combinations of N - terminal residues . Previous mutagenesis library screens have similarly used yeast growth as a readout for kinase activity and docking interactions [ 34 - 36 ] . Other approaches such as phage display or droplet - based screening could theoretically allow high - throughput analysis of actin binding , with a potential advantage of consistent levels of expression and a single readout [ 37 ] . However , it would be difficult to conduct large scale in vitro screens examining actin severing or phosphorylation by LIMK . Some potential advantages of our approach are that all interactions occur in a eukaryotic cellular environment , that selection requires actin severing ( and not simply binding ) activity , and that we are able to simultaneously screen for cofilin function and regulation by LIMK . Given the high degree of conservation of the cofilin N - terminal sequence , we were surprised to find relative loose constraints on the sequence for maintaining sufficient activity to support growth . The deleterious effect of most substitutions was largely due to selectivity for aliphatic and β - branched amino acids at the fifth position . This range of residues is reflected in various cofilin orthologs , including those from mammals ( Val ) , Arabidopsis ( Met ) , maize ( Leu ) , Acanthamoeba ( Ile ) , and starfish ( Thr ) [ 20 , 38 , 39 ] . In all three - dimensional structures of cofilin solved to date , the sidechain of this residue 17 contacts the globular domain of cofilin , suggesting that it may stabilize the protein ( Fig . S12 ) . Indeed , cofilin V5E aggregated readily during expression and purification . The suitability of variants at other positions was not readily predicted from known structures . For example , despite allowing interaction with actin , the presence of bulky residues in place of Gly4 is incompatible with the actin - binding mode observed by cryo - EM and would thus require an alternative conformation . By contrast , a more conservative Ala substitution was deleterious . Substitutions to Ala2 were most tolerated overall and had little effect on cofilin severing activity . This residue is absent from Acanthamoeba actophorin and is thus dispensable for actin binding [ 40 ] . We conjecture that the conservation of small residues at this position may be important for maintaining N - terminal processing that would be dispensable in the context of our screen . We note that in our viability - based screen , variants promoting the fastest growth would not necessarily be those that bind actin with the highest affinity , and that a “hyperactive” cofilin could be deleterious for growth . However , when examined individually , mutations that imparted fitness defects consistently reduced actin binding , and there was a general correlation between rank in the screen and affinity . Finally , we note that many variants capable of supporting growth did appear to have fitness defects evident in a pooled competitive growth format , but a large number were indistinguishable from the WT sequence . Our finding that almost all cofilin variants with a Thr3 phosphoacceptor residue were resistant to LIMK1 expression and our subsequent biochemical analysis agree with a recent report that cofilin S3T could not be phosphorylated by LIMK [ 26 ] . The few Thr3 cofilin sequences selectively depleted by LIMK1 are strongly enriched for Tyr residues at the adjacent position ( ~ 40 % of sequences , Fig . S13 ) . As LIMK1 can efficiently 18 phosphorylate cofilin S3Y it would seem likely that these variants are phosphorylated on Tyr4 rather than Thr3 [ 26 ] . Ser / Thr kinase phosphoacceptor specificity is canonically determined by the identity of the residue immediately downstream of the DFG motif in the kinase activation loop ( DFG + 1 ) , which appears to promote a conformation facilitating phosphate transfer [ 41 ] . However , due to the non - canonical nature of the interaction , cofilin Ser3 is too distant from the LIMK DFG + 1 residue for it to impart substrate specificity [ 25 ] . Furthermore , the relative openness of the LIMK active site and the flexibility of the cofilin N - terminus suggest that steric clashes with the Thr3 sidechain are unlikely to preclude phosphorylation . Alternatively , LIMK and cofilin S3T may form a non - productive complex that sequesters the phosphoacceptor from the catalytic center . The majority of Ser / Thr kinases across species prefer Ser over Thr , potentially explaining why Ser3 is conserved even in organisms lacking LIMK [ 42 ] . In addition to optimizing a substrate for its cognate kinase , a phosphorylation site sequence may also be tuned to avoid the large number of other kinases present within the cell . For example , autophosphorylation sites in the human epidermal growth factor receptor appear to be suboptimal as a means to avoid phosphorylation by multiple non - receptor Tyr kinases [ 5 ] . As most kinases make extended interactions on either side of the phosphosite , the location of the cofilin Ser3 so close to the N - terminus may facilitate evasion of non - cognate kinases [ 43 ] . By contrast , LIMK - cofilin binding does not require these canonical interactions as demonstrated by its ability to phosphorylate the N - terminal Ser1 of actophorin [ 39 ] . Notably , the extended N - terminal sequences of yeast and plant cofilin orthologs may facilitate a more canonical mode of interaction in organisms lacking LIMKs . By a similar token , because it lacks selective pressure to evade LIMKs , yeast 19 twinfilin can be an efficient LIMK substrate , which we could attribute to its Ser phosphoacceptor . Because LIMK - induced growth suppression appears entirely reversed in the context of a cofilin S3A mutation , twinfilin phosphorylation does not appear to confer a growth defect , but its potential phosphoregulation under other conditions warrants further investigation . Though conservation of Thr at the N - terminus of mammalian twinfilin does not appear necessary to evade phosphorylation by LIMK , it may contribute to its insulation from other pathways . Save for exclusion of Pro residues , LIMK1 was promiscuous for the surrounding sequence the cofilin phosphorylation site , consistent with a prior report examining a small panel of mutants [ 44 ] . Indeed , LIMK - resistant sequences having bulky hydrophobic residues in place of Gly4 were phosphorylated faster by LIMK1 . Our observation that G4F substitution can “correct” the phosphomimetic S3D mutation in vitro and in cells suggests that Gly4 is critical for cofilin to be regulated by phosphorylation . We postulate that this phenomenon underlies the widespread conservation of Gly4 in all cofilins . How might Gly4 optimize phosphoregulation ? In molecular dynamics ( MD ) simulations , Ser3 - phosphorylation or S3D mutation increases the dynamics of the N - terminal region and compromise its docking to actin [ 21 ] . If the hydrophobic binding site for the N - terminal tail repels a charged phospho - Ser3 , the sidechain of Leu or Phe could recapitulate the N - terminal binding interaction if bound in a distinct conformation . Alternatively , a flexible Gly4 residue could be required for phosphorylation to increase dynamics , which may contribute substantially to undocking of the N - terminus . It has also been suggested that phospho - Ser3 participates in intramolecular interactions with one or more basic patches within the cofilin globular domain to sequester the N - terminus away from actin [ 45 , 46 ] . In 20 this scenario , reducing flexibility of the N - terminal sequence by Gly4 substitution might preclude these intramolecular interactions , leaving the N - terminus free to interact with actin through the canonical binding mode . Further research will be required to distinguish between these models . Overall , our studies reveal specific determinants of cofilin regulation and how it interacts with and severs actin filaments . Materials and Methods Plasmids The high - copy constitutive yeast expression vector ( pRS423 - GPD ) for His 6 - tagged human cofilin - 1 , the bacterial expression vector for N - terminally His 6 - SUMO - tagged human cofilin - 1 ( in pEBDuet28a ) , and the galactose - inducible yeast expression vectors ( pRS415 - GAL1 ) for N - terminally FLAG - tagged LIMK1 CAT and full length LIMK1 were previously described [ 25 ] . The cofilin - 1 library and all cofilin mutants expressed in yeast using the pRS423 - GPD vector were His 6 - tagged ( MASHHHHHHGAGA ) N - terminal to the initiator methionine . The bacterial expression vector for N - terminally His 6 - tagged human cofilin - 1 was generated by excising the SUMO coding sequence from pEBDuet28a - His 6 - SUMO - cofilin - 1 by Gibson assembly . The high - copy yeast expression vector for yeast Cof1 was generated by shuttling the genomic DNA fragment from pRS316 - COF1 ( produced by Mark Hochstrasser’s laboratory ) [ 30 ] into pRS423 . Bacterial expression vectors for GST - tagged mouse twinfilin - 1 and yeast twinfilin were a gift from the Bruce Goode laboratory [ 47 , 48 ] . Point mutations in all plasmids were made by either QuikChange site directed mutagenesis or by Gibson assembly following amplification with mutagenic primers . 21 To generate the cofilin - 1 N - terminal mutagenesis library , an oligonucleotide pool spanning the region was synthesized with phosphoramidate trimer mixtures encoding all 20 amino acids at the sites encoding Ala2 , Gly4 and Val5 , and an ACC / AGC mixture ( encoding a mix of Ser and Thr ) in place of Ser3 ( core DNA sequences encoding the four residues are provided in Dataset S1 ) . Oligonucleotides were PCR amplified and inserted into pRS423 - GPD - His 6 - cofilin - 1 plasmid using the 5’ BamHI restriction site upstream of the start codon and a 3’ SalI restriction sites that was introduced by silent mutagenesis within the cofilin - 1 coding sequence . Electrocompetent DH10β E . coli ( Invitrogen ElectroMAX ) were transformed with ligation products , providing at least 1000 transformants per library variant . Plasmid library DNA was recovered from the pool of transformed bacterial colonies , PCR amplified and sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq instrument to confirm full representation of all variants . Cofilin library screening The S . cerevisiae TeTO 7 - COF1 strain [ 31 ] ( Horizon Discovery TH _ 5610 ) was transformed sequentially with pRS415 - GAL1 - FLAG - LIMK1 and the cofilin library plasmid pool and frozen in aliquots to conduct replicate screens . For each screen , transformed yeast were pooled and grown at 30 °C with shaking in liquid culture with selective media ( SC - His - Leu ) containing 2 % glucose at a starting OD 600 of 0 . 1 . After 4 - 5 population doublings , a portion was diluted to an OD 600 of 0 . 1 with SC - His - Leu media containing 2 % raffinose and 10 mg / L DOX . After the culture reached an OD 600 of 1 - 1 . 5 , a portion was reserved for plasmid recovery ( T 0 sample ) , and the remaining culture was split and diluted into SC - His - Leu liquid media containing 10 mg / L DOX and either 2 % glucose or 2 % raffinose / 1 % 22 galactose to OD 600 = 0 . 1 . Cultures were subjected to three growth and dilution cycles in which they were grown to an OD 600 of 1 - 2 and diluted back to an OD 600 of 0 . 1 , saving a portion for plasmid recovery at each step ( T 1 – T 3 samples ) . After the screen was complete , plasmids were recovered from cell pellets using a QIAGEN Spin Miniprep kit . The N - terminal variable region of the plasmid pool was PCR amplified to attach sequencing adaptors and add barcodes and sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq instrument . The relative representation of each cofilin variant at each timepoint was calculated by dividing the number of reads that variant by the total read count . The enrichment or depletion of a cofilin - 1 library sequence in the absence of LIMK1 induction was calculated as the ratio of its relative representation at T 0 and T 2 in glucose . Enrichment or depletion following LIMK1 induction was calculated from timepoints T 1 and T 3 in glucose or galactose . Sequences were ranked by the average log fold changes in representation across three replicate screens . Data were processed using Microsoft Excel and sequence logos were generated using pLogo [ 49 ] . Immunoblotting Yeast lysates were fractionated by either conventional SDS - PAGE or Mn 2 + Phos - tag SDS - PAGE before transfer to polyvinylidene difluoride ( PVDF ) membranes . Membranes were blocked with 5 % powdered milk in Tris - buffered saline solution with 0 . 05 % Tween - 20 ( TBST ) for 2 hr at room temperature and incubated with primary antibodies diluted 1 : 2000 in TBST containing 5 % milk overnight at 4 ° C . Primary antibodies included : anti - Penta - His ( QIAGEN , # 34650 ) , anti - FLAG M2 ( Sigma - Aldrich , # F3165 ) , and anti - Kss1 23 ( Santa Cruz , # sc - 6775 - R ) . Membranes were washed with TBST before incubation with fluorophore - labeled secondary antibodies ( 1 : 20 , 000 dilution ) in TBST containing 5 % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) for 1 hr at room temperature . Membranes were washed with TBST and imaged with an Odyssey CLx imager ( LI - COR Biosciences ) . Fluorescence signals were quantified using Image Studio software . Yeast growth assays To evaluate the ability of cofilin variants to support growth , overnight cultures of TeTO 7 - COF1 yeast transformed with the indicated expression vectors were diluted to OD 600 of 0 . 1 in selective media and grown in a shaking incubator at 30 °C until 3 - 4 additional doublings had occurred . Portions of each culture were reserved for immunoblotting , and a series of 5 - fold dilutions ( OD 600 range from 0 . 5 to 0 . 0008 ) were spotted onto SC - His agar plates with or without 10 mg / L DOX . Plates were incubated at 30 °C for 3 - 4 days before imaging . Lysates for immunoblotting were prepared by pelleting cells at 4700 x g for 2 min and vortexing the cell pellet with glass beads in TCA extraction buffer ( 10 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 10 % TCA , 25 mM NH 4 OAc , 1 mM EDTA ) . Proteins were pelleted by centrifugation and resuspended in 100 mM Tris ( pH 11 . 0 ) with 3 % SDS before boiling for 5 min . Protein concentrations were determined by BCA assay , and equal amounts were separated by SDS - PAGE and subjected to immunoblotting as described above . The effect of LIMK1 expression on cofilin phosphorylation and yeast growth was evaluated using TeTO 7 - COF1 yeast co - transformed expression vectors for the indicated cofilin variants and pRS415 - GAL1 - FLAG - LIMK1 , pRS415 - GAL1 - FLAG - LIMK1 CAT or empty pRS415 - GAL1 vector as a control . Yeast were grown overnight in SC - His - Leu 24 containing 2 % raffinose to derepress the GAL promoter , diluted to an OD 600 of 0 . 1 , and allowed to grow through 3 - 4 population doublings at 30 °C . A portion of the cells were spotted and grown as described above on SC - His - Leu agar plates containing 2 % glucose , 2 % glucose with 10 mg / L DOX , or 2 % raffinose / 1 % galactose with 10 mg / L DOX . The remaining culture was split , and LIMK1 expression was either induced or repressed either galactose to 1 % or glucose to 2 % . After 12 hr , equal OD 600 units of each culture were pelleted and lysates prepared by TCA extraction as described above . Lysates were fractionated by both conventional SDS - PAGE and Mn 2 + Phos - tag SDS - PAGE before immunoblotting . Phos - tag acrylamide gels were prepared with 12 % acrylamide , 100 µM Mn 2 + , and 50 µM Phos - tag Acrylamide ( Fujifilm AAL - 107 ) . Protein purification Human cofilin - 1 variants were expressed in E . coli Rosetta ( DE3 ) cells overnight at 16 °C after induction with 0 . 5 mM IPTG . Cells were pelleted , snap - frozen on dry ice / EtOH , thawed on ice , and resuspended in bacterial lysis buffer ( 20 mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 , 140 mM NaCl , 1 mM DTT , 0 . 4 % Igepal CA - 630 , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 200 µg / ml lysozyme , 10 µg / ml pepstatin A , Roche cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail , and 30 U / ml DNAse 1 ) . Cells were lysed by sonication and pelleted by centrifugation ( 13 , 870 x g for 30 min . at 4 °C ) . The supernatant was extracted and incubated with TALON affinity resin ( Takara Bio ) while rotating at 4 °C for 1 - 2 hr . The resin was transferred to a gravity flow column , drained , and washed once with 0 . 5 % Igepal CA - 630 in PBS and once in 10 mM imidazole , 20 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 140 mM NaCl . His 6 - SUMO - tagged cofilin variants were washed an additional time with cofilin storage buffer ( 10 mM HEPES , 100 mM NaCl , 1 mM DTT , 10 % 25 glycerol ) and eluted from the resin by overnight digestion with SUMO protease at 4 °C . N - terminally His 6 - tagged cofilin variants were eluted by imidazole wash ( 20 mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 , 250 mM imidazole , 100 mM NaCl , 1 mM DTT ) and dialyzed into cofilin storage buffer overnight at 4 °C . Cofilin used for actin binding and severing assays was further purified by size exclusion chromatography on a Superdex200 10 / 300 GL column in 25 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 5 mM DTT , 0 . 25 mM EGTA . Cofilin eluted as a single peak across multiple fractions , which were pooled and concentrated using Amicon Ultra centrifugal filter concentrators ( 3 kDa cutoff ) . Protein concentration was determined by A 280 absorbance using a Thermo Scientific 2000 nanodrop instrument . GST - tagged yeast and mouse twinfilin variants were expressed in E . coli and cells were lysed as described above . Clarified cell lysate was incubated with glutathione Sepharose resin for 2 hr at 4 °C . The resin was washed once with 0 . 5 % Igepal CA - 630 in PBS and once with cofilin storage buffer . Proteins were eluted by overnight digestion with GST - tagged HRV 3C protease at 4 °C . Twinfilin concentration was determined by comparison to BSA standards following SDS - PAGE and Coomassie - staining . FLAG - tagged human LIMK1 CAT for in vitro kinase assays was purified using a yeast expression system . Budding yeast strain TeTO 7 - COF1 transformed with pRS423 - GPD - His 6 - cofilin - 1 S3A ( to support growth of yeast during LIMK induction ) and pRS415 - GAL1 - FLAG - LIMK1 CAT were grown in selective liquid media ( SC - His - Leu ) containing 2 % raffinose at 30 °C with shaking to an OD 600 of 2 . LIMK1 expression was induced by the addition of galactose and nutrient - rich yeast extract peptone ( YP ) broth , bringing the final concentrations of media to 1xYP media and 1 % galactose . Cells were induced for 12 hr . at 30 °C before cells were harvested , pelleted , washed once with water , and snap - frozen . 26 The cell pellet was thawed on ice and resuspended in yeast lysis buffer ( 50 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 4 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM EDTA , 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 , 10 % glycerol , 0 . 5 mM DTT , 10 µg / ml leupeptin , 2 µg / ml pepstatin A , 2 . 5 mM NaPP i , 10 µg / ml aprotinin , 1 mM βGP and 1 mM Na 3 VO 4 ) . Cells were lysed by vortexing with glass beads at 4 °C . Cell lysates were pelleted , and the recovered supernatant was incubated with M2 anti - FLAG affinity resin in batch for 1 - 2 hr at 4 °C . The resin was washed twice with yeast lysis buffer and twice with FLAG wash buffer ( 50 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 4 , 100 mM NaCl , 1 mM DTT , 0 . 01 % Igepal CA - 630 , 10 % glycerol , 1 mM βGP , and 100 µM Na 3 VO 4 ) before the protein was eluted with FLAG wash buffer containing 0 . 5 mg / mL 3xFLAG peptide ( Sigma ) . LIMK1 concentration was determined by running alongside BSA standards on SDS - PAGE with Coomassie staining . To generate Ser3 - phosphorylated cofilin , FLAG - LIMK1 catalytic domain was expressed in yeast and purified as described above but not eluted from the resin . Purified cofilin WT was incubated with resin - bound LIMK1 catalytic domain overnight at 4 ° C in 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 , 100 mM NaCl , 5 mM MgCl 2 , 5 mM MnCl 2 , 1 mM DTT , and 1 mM ATP . The resin was then pelleted and the supernatant dialyzed overnight at 4 ° C into 50 mM Tris , pH 6 . 8 with 1 mM DTT . Phosphorylated and unphosphorylated cofilin species were separated by cation - exchange chromatography using a MonoS 5 / 50 GL column . Cofilin phosphorylation was assessed by Mn 2 + Phos - tag SDS - PAGE . Actin filament binding assays The binding affinity of cofilin variants for actin filaments was compared using in vitro pyrene quenching assays as previously reported [ 21 , 33 , 50 ] . Serial dilutions of purified 27 cofilin variants were incubated with polymerized pyrene - labeled actin ( 1 µM , ~ 83 % labeled ) in 1X KMI buffer ( 20 mM imidazole , pH 7 . 0 , 50 mM KCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 2 mM DTT , 200 µM ATP , 1 mM NaN 3 ) for 1 hr at 25 °C . Pyrene quenching was measured in a plate reader ( excitation 366 nm , emission scan 409 nm ) . Data were normalized to the signal for unquenched pyrene - actin alone and fit to a model - independent sigmoidal 4 parameter dose - response curve using GraphPad Prism . Actin severing assays The severing activity of cofilin variants was assessed using TIRF microscopy as previously described [ 21 ] . Alexa - 647 labeled actin filaments ( 5 % labeled ) were polymerized for 1 hour in 1X KMI buffer . Serial dilutions of purified cofilin variants were incubated with the polymerized actin for 1 hr before placement on poly - L - lysine coated glass slips and imaged directly by TIRF microscopy . The recorded images were skeletonized using ImageJ FIJI and analyzed with Persistence Software version 4 . 2 . 3 to quantify the actin filament lengths [ 51 ] . Persistence Software is available to download for free at delacruzlab . yale . edu / persistence - software . Radiolabel kinase assays Purified cofilin or twinfilin ( 2 µM ) was incubated with LIMK1 catalytic domain ( 2 nM ) and ATP ( 12 . 5 µM with 0 . 1 µCi / µL [ γ - 32 P ] ATP ) in reaction buffer ( 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 , 100 mM NaCl , 5 mM MgCl 2 , 5 mM MnCl 2 , and 1 mM DTT ) at 30 °C . At 5 min and 10 min incubation , aliquots were removed and quenched with 4x SDS - PAGE loading buffer . Samples were boiled 5 min and fractionated by 15 % acrylamide SDS - PAGE . Gels were Coomassie 28 stained and dried before exposure to a phosphor screen . Phosphor imaging and quantification of radiolabel incorporation was conducted using a BioRad Molecular Imager FX Pro Plus . Images shown are from the 10 min timepoint . Phosphorylation rates were calculated from the full time course and normalized to that of wild - type cofilin - 1 . Michaelis - Menten parameters for cofilin WT and cofilin G4F were determined from reactions run at seven substrate concentrations ranging from 50 to 0 . 5 μM . To calculate absolute rates , a [ γ - 32 P ] ATP standard curve ( 2 . 5 , 5 , and 10 nCi ) was imaged alongside the Coomassie - stained gel . Reaction kinetics were calculated using Microsoft Excel and GraphPad Prism . Acknowledgments We thank Cameron Schmitz for technical assistance in generating cofilin mutants . This research was supported by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under awards R01 GM102262 ( to BET and TJB ) and R35 GM136656 ( to EMDLC ) . JS and GCS were supported by National Institutes of Health training grant T32 GM007324 , and GCS was supported by American Heart Association grants 835293 and 23DIVSUP1058562 . 29 Table 1 . Properties of cofilin variants chosen for individual evaluation . For growth on solid media : + + + , equal growth in the presence or absence of DOX ; + + , ~ 5 - fold lower growth on DOX ; + , some detectable growth on DOX ; - , no growth on DOX . For actin binding : * , none detectable ; * * , not assayed due to protein aggregation . ND , not determined . Rank and log 2 fold change values for all variants are provided in Dataset S2 . Cofilin Variant Growth on plate Actin binding K 0 . 5 , μM K 0 . 5 95 % confidence interval μM Screen rank Log 2 fold change WT + + + 0 . 61 0 . 54 – 0 . 67 87 3 . 19 A2L + + + 0 . 53 0 . 48 – 0 . 57 182 3 . 05 A2D + + + 1 . 5 1 . 4 – 1 . 6 822 2 . 55 S3D - 4 . 65 4 . 43 - 4 . 86 ND ND S3D , G4F + + 1 . 06 1 . 02 – 1 . 09 ND ND G4A + + 3 . 15 3 . 03 – 3 . 26 4424 - 0 . 45 G4L + + + ND ND 1260 2 . 33 G4P + ND ND 5800 - 2 . 41 G4F + + 1 . 0 0 . 9 – 1 . 1 2292 1 . 76 G4E - * * 9618 - 4 . 45 G4K - 3 . 5 3 . 3 – 3 . 7 8153 - 3 . 98 V5E - * * * * 10647 - 4 . 70 V5M + + + 0 . 48 0 . 45 – 0 . 52 262 2 . 95 A2L , V5M + + + 0 . 85 < 0 . 93 197 3 . 02 30 Figure 1 . A dual - functionality screen of a cofilin - 1 N - terminal mutagenesis library . ( A ) Growth of TeTO 7 - COF1 yeast exogenously expressing the indicated cofilin in the presence or absence of doxycycline . Image representative of n = 2 . ( B ) Yeast harboring the indicated expression plasmids were grown on either glucose or galactose to induce LIMK1 expression in the presence or absence of doxycycline . Image representative of n = 7 . ( C ) Design of cofilin N - terminal combinatorial mutagenesis library . X indicates any of the 20 natural amino acids . ( D ) Schematic of the cofilin library dual - functionality screen . ( E ) Graphs show change in relative representation of the indicated cofilin variants over time during culture in either glucose ( no LIMK1 ) or galactose ( LIMK1 induction ) . Data are from three replicate screens performed independently . Blue circles indicate timepoints used to identify functional sequences . Orange circles indicate timepoints used to identify sequences inhibited by LIMK1 . Time zero is after de - repression of P GAL - LIMK1 over the course of 1 - 2 population doublings in raffinose + DOX media . 31 Figure 2 . Cofilin library screen results for yeast growth rescue . ( A ) Waterfall plot depicting enrichment or depletion of all 16 , 000 cofilin library sequences expressed in TeTO 7 - COF1 yeast grown in doxycycline . Sequences are ordered left to right from highest to lowest average enrichment from three independent screens . ( B ) Probability logo of cofilin N - terminal library sequences enriched in the screen . ( C ) Heat map of cofilin N - terminal library sequence enrichment or depletion . Color scale indicates the mean enrichment score of the 800 ( positions 2 , 4 and 5 ) or 8000 ( position 3 ) library sequences containing the indicated residue across 3 independent replicates . ( D ) Distribution of cofilin sequences by enrichment scores according to identity of residues at the indicated positions . Boxes indicate 2 nd and 3 rd quartile of distribution with median line . Bars indicate sequences in the 10 – 90 percentile range . 32 Figure 3 . Impact of cofilin N - terminal mutations on yeast growth and actin binding . ( A , B ) Growth assay comparing cofilin mutants containing substitutions of residues Ala2 , Gly4 , or Val5 . Images representative of n = 3 . ( C - E ) Pyrene quenching assays comparing cofilin WT to the indicated cofilin mutants . Actin concentration pre - polymerization was 1 µM . Replicates for binding assays are as follows : cofilin WT ( n = 4 ) , cofilin A2L ( n = 3 ) , cofilin A2D ( n = 4 ) , cofilin S3D ( n = 3 ) , phospho - cofilin WT ( n = 2 ) , cofilin G4A ( n = 3 ) , cofilin G4F ( n = 2 ) , cofilin G4E ( n = 2 ) , cofilin G4K ( n = 3 ) , cofilin V5M ( n = 3 ) , and cofilin A2L , V5M ( n = 2 ) . 33 Figure 4 . Cofilin library screen results for yeast growth rescue with and without LIMK1 . ( A ) Scatter plot depicting change in representation of Ser3 cofilin library sequences with and without LIMK1 expression . Data points show average enrichment in glucose and galactose across three replicates . ( B ) Logo of sequences supporting growth in yeast but are selectively inhibited by LIMK1 ( lower right quadrant in panel A ) on the background of all sequences that support yeast growth in the absence of LIMK1 ( upper and lower right quadrants in panel A ) . ( C ) Distribution of cofilin sequences by enrichment scores with and without LIMK1 expression according to identity of the phosphoacceptor residue . Boxes indicate 2 nd and 3 rd quartiles , and bars indicate sequences with 10 - and 90 - percentiles of distribution with median line . 34 Figure 5 . Effects of cofilin Ser3 substitutions on phosphorylation by LIMK1 . ( A ) TeTO 7 - COF1 yeast expressing the indicated human cofilin - 1 mutants were grown in the presence of doxycycline to repress endogenous Cof1 expression and / or galactose to induce LIMK1 expression . Images are representative of n = 3 independent experiments . 35 ( B ) Immunoblots with the indicated antibodies of lysates corresponding to yeast plated in panel A . Samples in the cofilin blot were separated on Phos - tag SDS - PAGE to resolve phosphorylated ( upper band ) from unphosphorylated protein ( lower band ) . Kss1 serves as a loading control . The chart shows the fraction of cofilin phosphorylated , calculated from quantified intensities of the upper and lower bands . Error bars , SD for n = 3 independent experiments . ( C ) In vitro radiolabel kinase assay comparing phosphorylation of purified cofilin ( 2 µM ) by LIMK1 CAT ( 2 nM ) for 10 min at 30 °C . Catalytically inactive LIMK1 D460N kinase domain serves as a negative control . The chart shows quantification of phosphorylation rates of cofilin mutants normalized to cofilin WT . Error bars , SD for n = 4 independent experiments . ( F ) N - terminal sequences of mammalian and yeast isoforms of cofilin and twinfilin . ( G ) In vitro radiolabel kinase assay showing phosphorylation of the indicated forms of cofilin - 1 or twinfilin ( 2 µM ) by LIMK1 kinase domain ( 2 nM ) for 10 min at 30 °C . LIMK1 D460N kinase domain serves as a negative control . The graph shows quantification of phosphorylation rates normalized to cofilin WT . Error bars , SD for n = 3 independent experiments . 36 Figure 6 . Effects of cofilin Glycine 4 substitutions on LIMK1 substrate suitability . ( A ) Yeast growth assay with the TeTO 7 - COF1 strain expressing the indicated cofilin variants with or without LIMK1 expression . Representative of n = 3 independent experiments . ( B ) Immunoblots with the indicated antibodies of lysates corresponding to yeast plated in panel A separated by standard or Phos - tag PAGE . ( C ) Quantification of immunoblots measuring the fraction of total cofilin phosphorylated by LIMK1 . Error bars show SD for n = 3 independent experiments . ( D ) In vitro radiolabel kinase assay comparing phosphorylation of purified 2 µM cofilin by 2 nM LIMK1 kinase domain for 10 min at 30 °C . Catalytically inactive LIMK1 D460N kinase domain serves as a negative control . ( E ) Quantification of phosphorylation rates of cofilin mutants normalized to cofilin WT . Error bars show SD for n = 6 independent experiments . ( F ) In vitro radiolabel kinase assay comparing phosphorylation of cofilin WT and cofilin G4F by 2 nM LIMK1 kinase domain across a range of concentrations . Reactions performed for 10 min at 30 °C . ( G ) Quantification of phosphorylation rates of cofilin mutants . Error bars show SD for n = 3 independent experiments . Kinetic parameters include SE for k cat and K m . 37 Figure 7 . Cofilin G4F mutation counters the inhibitory effects of phosphomimetic S3D substitution . ( A ) Yeast growth assay with TeTO 7 - COF1 strain expressing the indicated cofilin variants in the presence or absence of doxycycline . ( B ) Immunoblots of cofilin protein levels corresponding to yeast plated in panel A . Kss1 serves as a loading control . Images are representative of n = 3 independent experiments . ( C ) Pyrene quenching assays comparing cofilin WT to cofilin variants with a phosphomimetic substitution or phosphorylation modification at residue Ser3 . Actin concentration pre - polymerization was 1 µM . WT and G4F single mutant data are the same as shown in Fig 3 and are included here for comparison . Binding parameters are listed in Table 1 . Replicates for binding assays are as follows : cofilin WT ( n = 4 ) , cofilin S3D ( n = 3 ) , phospho - cofilin WT ( n = 2 ) , cofilin G4F ( n = 2 ) , and cofilin S3D , G4F ( n = 3 ) . ( D ) Overlapping constraints promoting conservation of the cofilin phosphosite motif sequence . 38 Figure S1 . Growth inhibition of yeast by galactose - induced LIMK1 CAT expression . Yeast harboring the indicated expression plasmids were grown on either glucose or galactose to induce LIMK1 CAT expression in the presence or absence of doxycycline . Image representative of n = 7 independent experiments . 39 Figure S2 . N - terminal His 6 - tagged cofilin can sever actin and be phosphorylated by LIMK1 . ( A ) TIRF microscopy Alexa647 - labeled actin filaments by N - terminally His 6 - tagged cofilin - 1 . Cofilin concentrations listed in upper right corner of each image . ( B ) Quantification of actin filament length at concentrations for His 6 - tagged cofilin - 1 . ( C ) In vitro radiolabel kinase assay comparing phosphorylation of purified 2 µM tagged and un - tagged cofilin WT and cofilin S3T by 2 nM LIMK1 kinase domain for 10 min at 30 °C . Kinase inactive mutant ( D460N ) was assayed alongside . n = 2 . ( D ) Quantification of phosphorylation rates normalized to untagged cofilin WT . 40 Figure S3 . Cofilin N - terminus combinatorial motifs identified by library screen . ( A ) Sequence logo of the top 400 sequences enriched in the screen shows selection for Gly and Leu residues at position 4 . Logos of all sequences within the top 400 containing Gly4 ( B ) , Leu4 ( C ) , Val5 ( D ) , and Met5 ( E ) . ( F ) Sequence distribution of cofilin sequences containing an L - V , L - M , G - V , or G - M combination of residues . Box es indicate 1 st and 3 rd quartile of distribution . Bars indicate sequences with minimum and maximum enrichment . Bars indicate sequences with 10 - and 90 - percentiles of distribution . 41 Figure S4 . Cofilin N - terminus x - T - x - T motif identified by library screen . Consensus logos of all sequences within the top 400 that contain a Thr5 ( A ) or Thr3 ( B ) residue . ( C ) Sequence distribution of cofilin sequences containing an x - T - x - T motif or an x - S / T - G - V motif . Boxes indicate 1 st and 3 rd quartile of distribution . Bars indicate sequences with 10 - and 90 - percentiles of distribution . 42 Figure S5 . Protein expression levels of cofilin variants in yeast . ( A , B ) Immunoblots ( top ) and quantified protein levels ( bottom ) of cofilin protein levels in lysates corresponding to yeast plated in Fig 3A and C . Kss1 serves as a loading control . Quantified protein levels were normalized to the Kss1 signal as a fraction of the cofilin WT signal . Error bars show SD for n = 3 independent experiments . 43 Figure S6 . In vitro actin severing assays comparing cofilin mutants . TIRF microscopy images of Alexa647 - labeled actin filaments incubated with the indicated concentration of WT or mutant cofilin . 44 Figure S7 . Quantification of i n vitro actin severing assays comparing cofilin mutants . Average Alexa647 - labeled actin filament length at the indicated cofilin concentrations quantified from TIRF microscopy images shown in Fig S6 . 45 Figure S8 . Distributions of Ser3 and Thr3 cofilin library sequences . Plots show the change in relative abundance of Ser3 ( A ) and Thr3 ( B ) cofilin library sequences with and without LIMK1 induction . Average log 2 fold change across three replicates is shown . 46 Figure S9 . Exacerbated effects of LIMK1 CAT on growth inhibition of yeast expressing cofilin Ser3 substitutions . ( A ) Growth of yeast expressing the indicated cofilin variants with ( galactose ) or without ( glucose ) induction of LIMK1 CAT . Representative of n = 3 independent experiments . ( B ) Immunoblots of lysates corresponding to yeast plated in A . Cofilin species are separated based on phosphorylation state by Phos - tag SDS - PAGE . Kss1 serves as a loading control . ( C ) Quantification of immunoblots in B showing the fraction of total cofilin phosphorylated . Error bars show SD for n = 3 independent experiments . ( D ) Phosphorylation of WT or S3T cofilin by LIMK2 catalytic domain . 47 Figure S10 . The LIMK binding interface of cofilin is conserved to twinfilin . ( A ) Diagram showing domain organization of human cofilin - 1 and twinfilin - 1 . ( B ) Conserved cofilin residues ( orange ) ( PDB ID : 5YU8 ) [ 52 ] important for LIMK1 binding are also conserved in the twinfilin - 1 N - terminal ADF homology domain ( C ) ( PDB ID : 7CCC ) [ 53 ] . 48 Figure S11 . Exacerbated effects of LIMK1 CAT expression on growth inhibition in the context of cofilin Gly4 cofilin mutations . ( A ) Growth of yeast expressing the indicated cofilin variants with or without LIMK1 CAT . Representative of n = 3 independent experiments . ( B ) Immunoblots of lysates corresponding to yeast plated in A . Cofilin species are separated based on phosphorylation state by Phos - tag SDS - PAGE , with the slower migrating species corresponding to phosphorylated cofilin . ( C ) Fraction of cofilin phosphorylated in panel B from quantified immunoblot . Error bars show SD for n = 3 independent experiments . 49 Figure S12 . Comparison of N - terminal structures of cofilin orthologs . X - ray crystal structures are shown for ( A ) human cofilin - 1 ( from its complex with LIMK1 CAT , PDB ID : 5HVK [ 25 ] ) , ( B ) Arabidopsis ADF ( PDB ID : 1F7S [ 38 ] ) , and ( C ) Acanthamoeba actophorin ( PDB ID : 1AHQ [ 54 ] ) . 50 Figure S13 . Distributions of x - T - Y - x cofilin library sequences . ( A ) Plot shows change in abundance of cofilin library sequences containing a x - T - Y - x motif ( blue ) compared to all sequences contain a Thr residue at position 3 ( orange ) grown with ( galactose ) or without ( glucose ) LIMK1 induction . Data show the average value across three replicates . ( B ) Consensus sequence logo of cofilin sequences containing a Thr3 phosphoacceptor residue selectively depleted by LIMK1 induction when compared to a background of all Thr3 cofilin sequences supporting yeast growth . 51 References 1 . Studer , R . A . , Rodriguez - Mias , R . A . , Haas , K . M . , Hsu , J . I . , Vieitez , C . , Sole , C . , Swaney , D . L . , Stanford , L . B . , Liachko , I . , Bottcher , R . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Evolution of protein phosphorylation across 18 fungal species . Science 354 , 229 - 232 . 2 . Landry , C . R . , Freschi , L . , Zarin , T . , and Moses , A . M . ( 2014 ) . Turnover of protein phosphorylation evolving under stabilizing selection . Front Genet 5 , 245 . 3 . Manning , G . , Whyte , D . B . , Martinez , R . , Hunter , T . , and Sudarsanam , S . ( 2002 ) . The protein kinase complement of the human genome . Science 298 , 1912 - 1934 . 4 . Shah , N . H . , Lobel , M . , Weiss , A . , and Kuriyan , J . ( 2018 ) . Fine - tuning of substrate preferences of the Src - family kinase Lck revealed through a high - throughput specificity screen . Elife 7 . 5 . Cantor , A . J . , Shah , N . H . , and Kuriyan , J . ( 2018 ) . Deep mutational analysis reveals functional trade - offs in the sequences of EGFR autophosphorylation sites . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115 , E7303 - E7312 . 6 . Johnson , J . L . , Yaron , T . M . , Huntsman , E . M . , Kerelsky , A . , Song , J . , Regev , A . , Lin , T . Y . , Liberatore , K . , Cizin , D . M . , Cohen , B . M . , et al . ( 2023 ) . An atlas of substrate specificities for the human serine / threonine kinome . Nature 613 , 759 - 766 . 7 . Strumillo , M . J . , Oplova , M . , Vieitez , C . , Ochoa , D . , Shahraz , M . , Busby , B . P . , Sopko , R . , Studer , R . A . , Perrimon , N . , Panse , V . G . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Conserved phosphorylation hotspots in eukaryotic protein domain families . Nat Commun 10 , 1977 . 8 . Ochoa , D . , Jarnuczak , A . F . , Vieitez , C . , Gehre , M . , Soucheray , M . , Mateus , A . , Kleefeldt , A . A . , Hill , A . , Garcia - Alonso , L . , Stein , F . , et al . ( 2020 ) . The functional landscape of the human phosphoproteome . Nat Biotechnol 38 , 365 - 373 . 9 . Seet , B . T . , Dikic , I . , Zhou , M . M . , and Pawson , T . ( 2006 ) . Reading protein modifications with interaction domains . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 , 473 - 483 . 10 . Mizuno , K . ( 2013 ) . Signaling mechanisms and functional roles of cofilin phosphorylation and dephosphorylation . Cell Signal 25 , 457 - 469 . 11 . Maciver , S . K . , and Hussey , P . J . ( 2002 ) . The ADF / cofilin family : actin - remodeling proteins . Genome Biol 3 , reviews3007 . 12 . Kanellos , G . , and Frame , M . C . ( 2016 ) . Cellular functions of the ADF / cofilin family at a glance . J Cell Sci 129 , 3211 - 3218 . 13 . Maciver , S . K . , and Weeds , A . G . ( 1994 ) . Actophorin preferentially binds monomeric ADP - actin over ATP - bound actin : consequences for cell locomotion . FEBS Lett 347 , 251 - 256 . 14 . De La Cruz , E . M . ( 2009 ) . How cofilin severs an actin filament . Biophys Rev 1 , 51 - 59 . 15 . Suarez , C . , Roland , J . , Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , Kang , H . , McCullough , B . R . , Reymann , A . C . , Guerin , C . , Martiel , J . L . , De la Cruz , E . M . , and Blanchoin , L . ( 2011 ) . Cofilin tunes the nucleotide state of actin filaments and severs at bare and decorated segment boundaries . Curr Biol 21 , 862 - 868 . 16 . Bibeau , J . P . , Gray , S . , and De La Cruz , E . M . ( 2021 ) . Clusters of a Few Bound Cofilins Sever Actin Filaments . J Mol Biol 433 , 166833 . 17 . Oosterheert , W . , Klink , B . U . , Belyy , A . , Pospich , S . , and Raunser , S . ( 2022 ) . Structural basis of actin filament assembly and aging . Nature 611 , 374 - 379 . 18 . Elam , W . A . , Kang , H . , and De la Cruz , E . M . ( 2013 ) . Biophysics of actin filament severing by cofilin . FEBS Lett 587 , 1215 - 1219 . 19 . Ribba , A . S . , Fraboulet , S . , Sadoul , K . , and Lafanechere , L . ( 2022 ) . The Role of LIM Kinases during Development : A Lens to Get a Glimpse of Their Implication in Pathologies . Cells 11 . 20 . Moriyama , K . , Iida , K . , and Yahara , I . ( 1996 ) . Phosphorylation of Ser - 3 of cofilin regulates its essential function on actin . Genes Cells 1 , 73 - 86 . 52 21 . Elam , W . A . , Cao , W . , Kang , H . , Huehn , A . , Hocky , G . M . , Prochniewicz , E . , Schramm , A . C . , Negron , K . , Garcia , J . , Bonello , T . T . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Phosphomimetic S3D cofilin binds but only weakly severs actin filaments . J Biol Chem 292 , 19565 - 19579 . 22 . Nagaoka , R . , Abe , H . , and Obinata , T . ( 1996 ) . Site - directed mutagenesis of the phosphorylation site of cofilin : its role in cofilin - actin interaction and cytoplasmic localization . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 35 , 200 - 209 . 23 . Lappalainen , P . , Fedorov , E . V . , Fedorov , A . A . , Almo , S . C . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 1997 ) . Essential functions and actin - binding surfaces of yeast cofilin revealed by systematic mutagenesis . EMBO J 16 , 5520 - 5530 . 24 . Huehn , A . R . , Bibeau , J . P . , Schramm , A . C . , Cao , W . , De La Cruz , E . M . , and Sindelar , C . V . ( 2020 ) . Structures of cofilin - induced structural changes reveal local and asymmetric perturbations of actin filaments . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 117 , 1478 - 1484 . 25 . Hamill , S . , Lou , H . J . , Turk , B . E . , and Boggon , T . J . ( 2016 ) . Structural Basis for Noncanonical Substrate Recognition of Cofilin / ADF Proteins by LIM Kinases . Mol Cell 62 , 397 - 408 . 26 . Salah , E . , Chatterjee , D . , Beltrami , A . , Tumber , A . , Preuss , F . , Canning , P . , Chaikuad , A . , Knaus , P . , Knapp , S . , Bullock , A . N . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Lessons from LIMK1 enzymology and their impact on inhibitor design . Biochem J 476 , 3197 - 3209 . 27 . Mezna , M . , Wong , A . C . , Ainger , M . , Scott , R . W . , Hammonds , T . , and Olson , M . F . ( 2012 ) . Development of a high - throughput screening method for LIM kinase 1 using a luciferase - based assay of ATP consumption . J Biomol Screen 17 , 460 - 468 . 28 . Lappalainen , P . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 1997 ) . Cofilin promotes rapid actin filament turnover in vivo . Nature 388 , 78 - 82 . 29 . Nakano , K . , Satoh , K . , Morimatsu , A . , Ohnuma , M . , and Mabuchi , I . ( 2001 ) . Interactions among a fimbrin , a capping protein , and an actin - depolymerizing factor in organization of the fission yeast actin cytoskeleton . Mol Biol Cell 12 , 3515 - 3526 . 30 . Kang , H . , Bradley , M . J . , Cao , W . , Zhou , K . , Grintsevich , E . E . , Michelot , A . , Sindelar , C . V . , Hochstrasser , M . , and De La Cruz , E . M . ( 2014 ) . Site - specific cation release drives actin filament severing by vertebrate cofilin . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111 , 17821 - 17826 . 31 . Mnaimneh , S . , Davierwala , A . P . , Haynes , J . , Moffat , J . , Peng , W . T . , Zhang , W . , Yang , X . , Pootoolal , J . , Chua , G . , Lopez , A . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Exploration of essential gene functions via titratable promoter alleles . Cell 118 , 31 - 44 . 32 . Moriyama , K . , and Yahara , I . ( 2002 ) . The actin - severing activity of cofilin is exerted by the interplay of three distinct sites on cofilin and essential for cell viability . Biochem J 365 , 147 - 155 . 33 . De La Cruz , E . M . ( 2005 ) . Cofilin binding to muscle and non - muscle actin filaments : isoform - dependent cooperative interactions . J Mol Biol 346 , 557 - 564 . 34 . Ahler , E . , Register , A . C . , Chakraborty , S . , Fang , L . , Dieter , E . M . , Sitko , K . A . , Vidadala , R . S . R . , Trevillian , B . M . , Golkowski , M . , Gelman , H . , et al . ( 2019 ) . A Combined Approach Reveals a Regulatory Mechanism Coupling Src ' s Kinase Activity , Localization , and Phosphotransferase - Independent Functions . Mol Cell 74 , 393 - 408 e320 . 35 . Shi , G . , Song , C . , Torres Robles , J . , Salichos , L . , Lou , H . J . , Lam , T . T . , Gerstein , M . , and Turk , B . E . ( 2023 ) . Proteome - wide screening for mitogen - activated protein kinase docking motifs and interactors . Sci Signal 16 , eabm5518 . 36 . Bhaduri , S . , and Pryciak , P . M . ( 2011 ) . Cyclin - specific docking motifs promote phosphorylation of yeast signaling proteins by G1 / S Cdk complexes . Curr Biol 21 , 1615 - 1623 . 37 . Rossenu , S . , Leyman , S . , Dewitte , D . , Peelaers , D . , Jonckheere , V . , Van Troys , M . , Vandekerckhove , J . , and Ampe , C . ( 2003 ) . A phage display - based method for determination of relative affinities of mutants . Application of the actin - binding motifs in thymosin beta 4 and the villin headpiece . J Biol Chem 278 , 16642 - 16650 . 53 38 . Bowman , G . D . , Nodelman , I . M . , Hong , Y . , Chua , N . H . , Lindberg , U . , and Schutt , C . E . ( 2000 ) . A comparative structural analysis of the ADF / cofilin family . Proteins 41 , 374 - 384 . 39 . Blanchoin , L . , Robinson , R . C . , Choe , S . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2000 ) . Phosphorylation of Acanthamoeba actophorin ( ADF / cofilin ) blocks interaction with actin without a change in atomic structure . J Mol Biol 295 , 203 - 211 . 40 . Quirk , S . , Maciver , S . K . , Ampe , C . , Doberstein , S . K . , Kaiser , D . A . , VanDamme , J . , Vandekerckhove , J . S . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1993 ) . Primary structure of and studies on Acanthamoeba actophorin . Biochemistry 32 , 8525 - 8533 . 41 . Chen , C . , Ha , B . H . , Thevenin , A . F . , Lou , H . J . , Zhang , R . , Yip , K . Y . , Peterson , J . R . , Gerstein , M . , Kim , P . M . , Filippakopoulos , P . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Identification of a major determinant for serine - threonine kinase phosphoacceptor specificity . Mol Cell 53 , 140 - 147 . 42 . Mok , J . , Kim , P . M . , Lam , H . Y . , Piccirillo , S . , Zhou , X . , Jeschke , G . R . , Sheridan , D . L . , Parker , S . A . , Desai , V . , Jwa , M . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Deciphering protein kinase specificity through large - scale analysis of yeast phosphorylation site motifs . Sci Signal 3 , ra12 . 43 . Miller , C . J . , and Turk , B . E . ( 2018 ) . Homing in : Mechanisms of Substrate Targeting by Protein Kinases . Trends Biochem Sci 43 , 380 - 394 . 44 . Amano , T . , Tanabe , K . , Eto , T . , Narumiya , S . , and Mizuno , K . ( 2001 ) . LIM - kinase 2 induces formation of stress fibres , focal adhesions and membrane blebs , dependent on its activation by Rho - associated kinase - catalysed phosphorylation at threonine - 505 . Biochem J 354 , 149 - 159 . 45 . Narita , A . ( 2020 ) . ADF / cofilin regulation from a structural viewpoint . J Muscle Res Cell Motil 41 , 141 - 151 . 46 . Pope , B . J . , Zierler - Gould , K . M . , Kuhne , R . , Weeds , A . G . , and Ball , L . J . ( 2004 ) . Solution structure of human cofilin : actin binding , pH sensitivity , and relationship to actin - depolymerizing factor . J Biol Chem 279 , 4840 - 4848 . 47 . Johnston , A . B . , Collins , A . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2015 ) . High - speed depolymerization at actin filament ends jointly catalysed by Twinfilin and Srv2 / CAP . Nat Cell Biol 17 , 1504 - 1511 . 48 . Hilton , D . M . , Aguilar , R . M . , Johnston , A . B . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2018 ) . Species - Specific Functions of Twinfilin in Actin Filament Depolymerization . J Mol Biol 430 , 3323 - 3336 . 49 . O ' Shea , J . P . , Chou , M . F . , Quader , S . A . , Ryan , J . K . , Church , G . M . , and Schwartz , D . ( 2013 ) . pLogo : a probabilistic approach to visualizing sequence motifs . Nat Methods 10 , 1211 - 1212 . 50 . Cao , W . , Goodarzi , J . P . , and De La Cruz , E . M . ( 2006 ) . Energetics and kinetics of cooperative cofilin - actin filament interactions . J Mol Biol 361 , 257 - 267 . 51 . Graham , J . S . , McCullough , B . R . , Kang , H . , Elam , W . A . , Cao , W . , and De La Cruz , E . M . ( 2014 ) . Multi - platform compatible software for analysis of polymer bending mechanics . PLoS One 9 , e94766 . 52 . Tanaka , K . , Takeda , S . , Mitsuoka , K . , Oda , T . , Kimura - Sakiyama , C . , Maeda , Y . , and Narita , A . ( 2018 ) . Structural basis for cofilin binding and actin filament disassembly . Nat Commun 9 , 1860 . 53 . Mwangangi , D . M . , Manser , E . , and Robinson , R . C . ( 2021 ) . The structure of the actin filament uncapping complex mediated by twinfilin . Sci Adv 7 . 54 . Leonard , S . A . , Gittis , A . G . , Petrella , E . C . , Pollard , T . D . , and Lattman , E . E . ( 1997 ) . Crystal structure of the actin - binding protein actophorin from Acanthamoeba . Nat Struct Biol 4 , 369 - 373 .