User - Like Bots for Cognitive Automation : A Survey Habtom Kahsay Gidey 1 , Peter Hillmann 1 , Andreas Karcher 1 , and Alois Knoll 2 1 Universit¨at der Bundeswehr M¨unchen , Germany { habtom . gidey , peter . hillmann , andreas . karcher } @ unibw . de 2 Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen , M¨unchen , Germany { knoll } @ in . tum . de Abstract . Software bots have attracted increasing interest and popular - ity in both research and society . Their contributions span automation , digital twins , game characters with conscious - like behavior , and social media . However , there is still a lack of intelligent bots that can adapt to the variability and dynamic nature of digital web environments . Un - like human users , they have difficulty understanding and exploiting the affordances across multiple virtual environments . Despite the hype , bots with human user - like cognition do not currently exist . Chatbots , for instance , lack situational awareness on the digital platforms where they operate , preventing them from enacting meaningful and autonomous intelligent behavior similar to human users . In this survey , we aim to explore the role of cognitive architectures in supporting efforts towards engineering software bots with advanced gen - eral intelligence . We discuss how cognitive architectures can contribute to creating intelligent software bots . Furthermore , we highlight key ar - chitectural recommendations for the future development of autonomous , user - like cognitive bots . Keywords : software bot · cognitive architecture · cognitive automation . 1 Introduction Software bots are becoming an integral part of automation and social comput - ing . Digital platforms , including software ecosystems and cyber - physical systems , are growing increasingly complex . The complexity of diverse digital systems can overwhelm even expert human users [ 1 ] . In such scenarios , software agents act - ing as autonomous users can assist in automating human user activities . As a result , there is a growing interest in augmenting bots into software - intensive busi - ness , social , or industrial environments for cognitive automation [ 2 ] . In Industry 4 . 0 ( I4 . 0 ) and digital twins ( DTs ) , software agents are playing a crucial role in enabling smart factories with higher flexibility , efficiency , and safety [ 3 – 5 ] . Ad - ditionally , in the service industry , robotic process automation ( RPA ) leverages bots to automate business processes [ 6 ] . a r X i v : 2311 . 12154v1 [ c s . H C ] 20 N ov 2023 2 H . K Gidey et al . Software development bots , also known as DevBots , are making their mark in automated software engineering [ 7 , 8 ] . It has become common to see bots assist - ing in code review and bug - fixing on platforms like GitHub [ 8 , 9 ] . Wessel et al . [ 8 ] identified 48 bots used for this purpose . From committing code to coordinating open - source projects , bots are increasingly becoming a part of the software de - velopment life cycle [ 8 , 9 ] . Their impact on development can significantly affect how future digital innovation ecosystems are managed and governed [ 10 – 12 ] . So - cial platforms and games also serve as environments for social bots and virtual avatars [ 13 , 14 ] . Although claims of political intent and the influence of social bots on social media are exaggerated , bots are also prevalent on social platforms nowadays [ 15 ] . The diverse applications of bots highlight the desiderata and requirements for advanced cognitive agents [ 16 ] . However , the reality falls short of the expectations , and advanced social bots do not exist today [ 15 , 17 ] . First , the level of autonomy in industrial software agents and robotic process automation ( RPA ) is minimal [ 18 , 19 ] . Agents of - ten have architectures that are tightly coupled with specific service platforms . As a result , bots are designed and optimized for these specific platforms , lim - iting their adaptability . They lack the ability to autonomously recognize the variability and then function effectively across diverse web or service environ - ments . Consequently , they lack a sense of awareness and the ability to adapt to different contexts . Second , bots have very limited or no autonomy in their be - havior . Addressing these challenges requires a focus on identifying and resolving architectural concerns [ 20 – 23 ] . It is important to note that bots in social media , games , industry , and business use cases may differ , but the software systems architecture and engineering challenges can span domains [ 24 , 25 ] . Thus , by reviewing and synthesizing existing works , this study aims to ex - plore two architectural aspects of bots through two research questions . The first question investigates the role of cognitive architectures in bot behavior , while the second question examines the strict separation of bots and their operational environment . In our context , the second question is operationalized by evaluat - ing user - likeness or similarity . A user - like bot refers to the level of similarity a bot possesses compared to a human user [ 26 ] . The subsequent sections are structured as follows : Section 2 provides the foundational background on bots and cognition , Section 3 describes the approach employed in surveying bots , Section 4 presents the evaluated results , Section 5 discusses the implications of the obtained results , and finally , Section 6 concludes the study . 2 Bots and Cognition 2 . 1 Software Bots Software bot , or simply bot , is an umbrella term for diverse software agents [ 27 ] . The term is used loosely in domains such as RPA . RPA , robotic process automa - tion , is an automation approach that employs software bots , sometimes referred User - Like Bots for Cognitive Automation : A Survey 3 to as digital workers [ 6 ] . RPAs and digital twins utilize various toolsets and development paradigms from agent - based systems [ 5 , 28 ] . Lebeuf [ 29 ] conducted a comprehensive study proposing a broad definition and general taxonomy of bots . She defines software bots as interfaces that con - nect users to software services and describes them as a “ new [ user ] interface paradigm ” . According to this perspective , users can access software services through a bot , where the user interface takes the form of a conversational in - terface . The user is typically human , although other programs and systems can also utilize the bot . Software services , in this context , refer to applications or digital platforms that provide additional functionalities . While these services are typically external , they can also be integrated as internal components of the bot . Furthermore , Lebeuf [ 29 ] classifies bots based on their observable properties and behaviors . The taxonomy defines three dimensions : environment , intrinsic , and interactions . The environment dimension refers to the software service prop - erties that bots operate on . Ideally , a software bot is separate from a specific platform and can operate on multiple platforms . However , most bots are tailored to a specific platform , such as a Twitter bot . The intrinsic dimension describes the internal abilities of the bot . Lebeuf also puts anthropomorphism as an in - trinsic dimension , which specifies if the bot has human user - like features , such as name , visualization , and persona . The interaction dimension specifies how the bot accesses and interacts with the environment . Lebeuf’s taxonomy is based solely on observable properties and does not con - sider the architectural aspects and components of bots [ 29 ] . In our context , the interaction dimension concerns perception , action , and autonomy , which impact the system architecture and environment of the bot . Therefore , in this study , we introduce another term to restrict the scope to bots that are similar to users . User - like Software Bots Today , the web is an operational environment for human users and software user agents [ 26 ] . Unlike virtual reality environments , where agents are typically manifested as conscious - like avatars , the web repre - sents a different kind of mixed - reality environment . In this environment , both human users and software bots interact , tying virtual elements with real - world extensions , as exemplified by the Web of Things ( WoT ) [ 30 – 32 ] . A diverse set of software agents interact with the web as their environment [ 29 , 32 ] . In this study , we refer to these classes of mixed - reality software agents as user - like bots [ 26 ] . The term user - like implies that these bots exhibit similarities to human users . User - like bots use graphical user interfaces to perceive and act within a software service environment . They interact with keyboard and mouse operations . As Gibson’s theory of visual perception suggests , perception is not merely about passive observation ; it’s also about actively distinguishing the potential actions or “ affordances ” that an environment offers to an agent [ 33 ] . The environ - ment , in this context , presents affordances [ 34 ] . Affordances refer to possibilities for interaction and action [ 26 ] . Platform services or features can be analogous 4 H . K Gidey et al . to affordances in the real world . User - like bots are expected to understand or perceive these affordances and act on them similar to human users . While the web is the primary context , a software service environment can also refer to any desktop application . 2 . 2 Cognitive Architectures Research in engineering machine intelligence , particularly Artificial General In - telligence ( AGI ) , aims to endow software systems with cognitive abilities that enable machines to think at or beyond the level of humans [ 23 ] . To achieve this goal , efforts to understand the brain from disciplines such as cognitive and neu - roscience have led to various promising approaches . One such approach is the study of cognitive architectures , which focuses on designing high - level cognitive functions [ 26 , 35 ] . Cognitive architectures serve as essential architectural design foundations for artificial intelligence research . The ultimate objective of cognitive architectures is to enable software with cognitive abilities equal to or greater than human - like intelligence . Cognitive architectures can be described as a set of specifications or theories of cognition that outline the essential structural elements and capa - bilities of a cognitive system [ 36 , 37 ] . Metzler and Shea [ 38 ] compiled a list of cognitive functions as components that constitute a cognitive architecture , such as learning , reasoning , decision - making , perception , planning , and acting . Cognitive architectures are designed to handle a broader set of cognitive tasks or cognitive functions . They can enable perpetual learning from the environment , adapting to changes , and reasoning based on available information . Due to this universal approach , an agent implementing a cognitive architecture may operate successively and simultaneously in various applications . While most cognitive architectures remain theoretical specifications , some , such as ACT - R , LIDA , and SOAR , have implementations and active communities [ 36 ] . Duch et al . [ 39 ] have conducted an in - depth comparison on a technical level of these architectures , among others . Fig . 1 : Schematic Structure of the Standard Model of Cognition [ 40 ] . Currently , efforts are being made in the cognitive modeling research commu - nity to establish a comprehensive understanding of the architectural assumptions User - Like Bots for Cognitive Automation : A Survey 5 that define aspects of human - like cognition , whether natural or artificial [ 40 ] . Fig . 1 shows a schematic structure of the Standard Model of Cognition [ 40 ] . The Standard Model of Cognition aims to consolidate knowledge from all exist - ing cognitive architectures and establish a unified understanding of the generic aspects of cognition , such as perception and motor functions , common to all cognitive architectures . 2 . 3 Cognitive Automation Traditional automation methods and approaches , such as process automation and RPA , have played crucial roles in automating repetitive tasks and work - flows [ 2 , 41 , 42 ] . However , as organizations strive for increased agility , efficiency , and even hyper - automation , the increased complexity of cyber - physical systems necessitates additional layers of automation , i . e . , cognitive automation [ 2 ] . Cognitive automation aims to advance the capabilities of traditional automa - tion and RPA by combining them with other technologies in artificial intelligence . This integrated approach enables the automation of more complex and cogni - tive tasks that traditionally require human intervention . Cognitive automation aims to automate knowledge and service work that involves decision - making , problem - solving , and other cognitive activities [ 2 , 43 ] . It focuses on alleviating the burden of cognitive tasks on humans by automating their roles or enhancing mixed reality collaborations [ 2 , 42 , 44 ] . Similarly , advanced user - like bots or software agents can be employed to achieve generalizable intelligence or cognitive capabilities on digital platforms comparable to human users [ 26 ] . As autonomous users , software agents can then assist in automating human user activities . Consequently , one prominent appli - cation of cognitive automation can be utilizing user - like bots . Bots with gen - eralizable intelligence , matching human users , are one way to address the aug - mentation of autonomous digital workers to cyber - physical systems . These bots can enhance efficiency in various domains , such as RPA , knowledge platforms , digital twins , and smart factories [ 5 , 26 ] . 3 Research Approach In this section , we describe the study method and its execution . 3 . 1 Planning We conducted a literature review to examine the integration of cognitive archi - tectures into the engineering of user - like software bots . This approach allows us to investigate and challenge existing architectural assumptions of software bot development , which fail to enact meaningful , intelligent behavior . The method also uses specific criteria to narrow the review’s scope and establish a clear and replicable methodology . The survey is executed by systematically searching , se - lecting , and evaluating relevant works . 6 H . K Gidey et al . 3 . 2 Initial Selection Initially , we collected various bots , agents , software tools , and personal digital assistants to get an overview . Since terms such as agent , bot , software bot , user - agent , and chatbot are interchangeably used in literature , the initial efforts resulted in an extensive collection of sources . However , this initial process helped explore and map the software bots already developed throughout all time . We then limited the collection to the bots that use some form of cognitive architecture or cognitive model . Furthermore , we determined the search to in - clude works that distinctively show some similarity to a way a human user would access and with software service platforms , hence only user - like software bots . First , we systematically selected relevant works from comprehensive databases , such as Scopus . To that end , specific keywords , including variations of “software bot , ” “cognitive architecture , ” and “user - like or user - agent , ” were devised and conducted . Next , we used forward and backward snowball sam - pling [ 45 ] to find citation chains of relevant studies that claim the development of bots with cognitive capabilities . Our initial collection resulted in approximately 190 works . With a closer look , we found that many were unrelated to the distinct interest . The initial results are then narrowed to a representative selection of software bots for further investigation and evaluation . 3 . 3 Selection and Evaluation Criteria The representative selection , also called candidates , is evaluated with four essen - tial selection criteria . The four criteria used to evaluate the selection are derived to ensure the proper implementation of the interest and objective of the study . Each candidate bot selected is evaluated against all four criteria and the corre - sponding sub - criteria . Fig . 2 depicts the four criteria and subcriteria of the first two : Software Bot and User Similarity . Fig . 2 : Criteria used to evaluate the bots applying cognitive models . ( 1 ) Software bot : this criterion evaluates bot capability . It helps exclude con - versational interfaces or chatbots that do little or no autonomous action on User - Like Bots for Cognitive Automation : A Survey 7 service platforms . The criterion has three subcriteria : a . Automate a Task , b . Proactive Initiation , and c . External integration . One of the three aspects is the necessity that the bots automate a task in a digital environment ( a . Automate a Task ) . In this context , the scope of the environment and the complexity of the task are neglected . To differentiate the candidate from other programs and scripts , as a second aspect , independence from the user is required ( b . Proac - tive Initiation ) . Changes to other elements of the environment , combined with intrinsic motivations , should trigger the behavior and actions the bot performs . Indirect reactions to the actions of the user are permitted . For the third aspect , the candidate bot should operate externally in the targeted digital environment ( c . External integration ) . Direct integration into the environment , as a fixed part of a system , is not considered user - like . ( 2 ) User Similarity : Equal to the first criterion , this criterion stems from the distinction set regarding user - like software bots in Sect . 2 . User - like is used to denote agents who either resemble human users or act on behalf of users . We focus on drawing a clear distinction between the bots that autonomously enact user - like behavior and others . ( 3 ) Cognitive Architecture : While claiming the implementation of a cognitive architecture is relatively easy , its practical application poses a challenge . ( 4 ) Cognitive Abilities : Implementing a cognitive architecture does not nec - essarily result in cognitive behavior . Consequently , this criterion unites various aspects regarding a candidate’s cognitive abilities . The list aims at excluding narrowly set low - level heuristics from the selection while considering the desired high - level cognitive functions or generalized cognitive capabilities . 4 Results This section presents the selected agents , personal assistants , and applied cog - nitive models . Their evaluation is based on the criteria outlined in Sect . 3 . Fur - thermore , descriptions of notable selected results from the corresponding review are provided . Table 1 shows the main results of the software bots analyzed and evaluated . The entries are ordered by the year of the publication . However , other arrangements are also feasible . The meaning of the encoded column captions is provided in Sect . 3 . 3 and Fig . 2 . The elements of the selection cover diverse research domains . In the following , we highlight the significant bases of the ele - ments in Table 1 . It is worth noting that none of the candidates in the related publications are described as “ user - like software bots ” as termed in this study . They were included because their implicit descriptions in the literature align with the previously set criteria and guidelines . 4 . 1 IDA and Virtual Mattie The agent Virtual Mattie was developed by Franklin et al . in 1996 to perform clerical tasks related to the organization of seminar schedules [ 46 ] . Human semi - nar organizers are contacted via email . The primary cognitive abilities of Virtual 8 H . K Gidey et al . T a b l e 1 : O v e r v i e w o f s e l ec t e d b o t s , ag e n t s , o r a ss i s t a n t s , w i t h e v a l u a t i o n r e s u l t s . S t ud y R e f . D e s c r i p t i o n S o f t w a r e B o t U s e r S i m il a r i t y C og n i t i v e A r c h i t e c t u r e C og n i t i v e A b ili t i e s a . b . c . a . b . F r a n k li n e t a l . 1996 [ 46 ] V i r t u a l M a tt i e i s a c l e r i c a l a g e n t t h a t c o ll e c t s a nd s h a r e s w ee k l y e m a il i n f o r m a t i o n w i t h a d e s - i g n a t e d g r o up . ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ . E x t e nd e d v e r s i o n s o f M a e s ’ b e h a v i o r n e t [ 47 ] a nd H o f s t a d t e r a nd M i t c h e ll’ s C o p y - c a t a r c h i t e c t u r e [ 48 ] . X F r a n k li n e t a l . 1998 [ 49 ] I D A : I n t e lli g e n t d i s t r i bu t i o n a g e n t f o r U S N a vy s a il o r b ill e t a ss i g n m e n t s v i a e m a il . ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ . A r c h i t e c t u r e b a s e d o n g l o b a l w o r k s p a c e t h e o r y . T h e b a s i s f o r L I D A [ 50 ] . ✓ K n o b l o c k e t a l . 2003 [ 51 ] A p e r s o n a l i n f o r m a t i o n ag e n t t h a t ga t h e r s i n f o r - m a t i o n f r o m s o u r c e s o n t h e i n t e r n e t a nd li n k s t h e m t o t h e s p e c i fi c t a s k . ✓ ✓ ✓ X X ✓ . E m p l o y s , i n c o m b i n a t i o n w i t h o t h e r s , t h e r u l e - b a s e d a pp r oa c h , P l a n i n g b y R e w r i t - i n g [ 52 ] . ✓ B e rr y e t a l . 2004 [ 53 ] P C a l M i s a p e r s o n a li z e d c a l e nd a r ag e n t t h a t m a n - ag e s t h e c a l e nd a r o f a n i nd i v i du a l a nd c oo r d i n a t e s a s w e ll a s s c h e du l e s m ee t i n g s . ✓ ✓ ✓ X X ✓ . U t ili z e s t h e O p e n A g e n t A r c h i t e c t u r e t o c o nn e c t t h e c og n i t i v e c o m p o n e n t s d i - r e c t l y [ 54 ] . ✓ F r ee d e t a l . 2008 [ 55 ] R A D A R i s a p e r s o n a l a ss i s t a n t t h a t r e du c e s e m a il o v e r l oa d b y i d e n t i f y i n g t a s k - r e l e v a n t c o n t e n t a nd m a n ag i n g e m a il s . ✓ ✓ ✓ X X X . I n t e r c o nn e c t e d s t r u c t u r e o f t a s k - s p e c i fi c , A I - e nh a n c e d m o du l e s / ag e n t s . X B e rr y e t a l . 2011 [ 56 ] P T I M E i s a l e a r n i n g c og n i t i v e a ss i s t a n t ag e n t t h a t r e p r e s e n t s a p e r s o n a li z e d t i m e m a n ag e r . ✓ ✓ ✓ X X ✓ . E m p l o y s a p r e f e r e n c e m o du l e , w h i c h i s c o nn e c t e d t o v a r i o u s s c h e du l e r s . ✓ S R I I n t e r n a - t i o n a l [ 57 ] C A L O i s a n e x t e n s i v e c og n i t i v e ag e n t t h a t l e a r n s a nd o r ga n i z e s . I t i s a p r e d e c e s s o r o f A pp l e S i r i . ✓ ✓ ✓ X X ✓ . C oo p e r a t i n g c og n i t i v e ag e n t s i n c l ud i n g , f o r e x a m p l e , P T I M E f o r l a n g u ag e p r o c e ss - i n g , s ee [ 58 ] . ✓ S t r a i n e t a l . 2014 [ 59 ] M e d i c a l A g e n t X , a n ag e n t f o r c li n i c a l d i ag n o s t i c s . ✓ X X X X ✓ . E m p l o y s t h e c og n i t i v e a r c h i t e c t u r e L I D A [ 50 ] . ✓ L e b i e r e e t a l . 2015 [ 60 ] A n a u t o m a t e d a pp r oa c h t o d e t e r m i n e t h e t a s k o f a p i e c e o f m a l w a r e . ✓ X X X X ✓ . P a r t i a ll y e m p l o y s t h e c og n i t i v e a r c h i t e c - t u r e A CT - R [ 61 ] . X Sh i e t a l . 2017 [ 62 ] A n e x p e r i m e n t a l p l a t f o r m w h e r e ag e n t s l e a r n t o i n t e r a c t w i t h w e b e n v i r o n m e n t s u s i n g o n l y k e y - b oa r d a nd m o u s e o p e r a t i o n s . ✓ ✓ ✓ X ✓ X T r a i n i n g m o d e l s b a s e d o n s up e r v i s e d a nd r e i n f o r c e m e n t l e a r n i n g [ 62 ] . X W e nd t e t a l . 2018 [ 63 ] A c og n i t i v e ag e n t f o r bu il d i n g e n e r g y m a n ag e - m e n t . ✓ ✓ ✓ X X ✓ . E m p l o y s t h e K O R E c og n i t i v e a r c h i t e c - t u r e f o r bu il d i n g a u t o m a t i o n [ 64 ] . ✓ User - Like Bots for Cognitive Automation : A Survey 9 Mattie are aimed at understanding the free - form and probably incomplete mes - sages . While Virtual Mattie implements mechanisms for goals and attention , the small number of cognitive abilities does not meet the respective criteria . The other criteria are satisfied . IDA , the intelligent distribution agent designed by Franklin et al . in 1998 for the US Navy , is the successor of Virtual Mattie and the predecessor of the cog - nitive architecture LIDA [ 65 ] . The agent assigns new long - term tasks to sailors who have finished their current ones . A notable feature of the architecture is its working memory , based on the global workspace theory [ 66 ] . In comparison to Virtual Mattie , IDA possesses more enhanced cognitive abilities . In addition to decision - making and attention modules , IDA also includes a module for emo - tions . Due to the communication by email and similar related access to human coworkers , IDA , at a basic level , satisfies the criteria set that evaluates the sys - temic architectural perspective of integrating behavior and user similarity . 4 . 2 The CALO program ( CALO , PTIME ) The Cognitive Assistant that Learns and Organizes ( CALO ) project brought together researchers from 22 organizations to advance research in cognitive soft - ware systems by developing a long - lasting , personalized cognitive agent [ 67 ] . The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency ( DARPA ) funded it under the Per - ceptive Assistant that Learns ( PAL ) program . This project led to the CALO meeting assistant as well as a variety of related cognitive agents . One example developed to build on the foundation of CALO is PTIME [ 56 ] . With its ability to reason , plan schedules , and learn user preferences , PTIME meets the cognitive ability criteria set out in our methodology at a basic level . However , due to the implementation of the system with a user interface , it lacks the requested user similarity . The CALO meeting assistant integrates multiple previously developed cognitive concepts and possesses various cognitive abilities . It is the predecessor of Apple Siri . Nevertheless , in this study context , such systems are classified as conversational user interfaces rather than autonomous user agents . 4 . 3 Lebiere et al . 2015 and Wendt et al . 2018 Cognitive architectures can be directly applied to solve cognitive tasks previously performed by humans . In Lebiere et al . 2015 , the cognitive architecture ACT - R is used to identify malware tasks [ 60 ] . The corresponding model was trained with historical malware data . While the agent system can perform its task by employ - ing ACT - R , no other cognitive abilities were apparent . Additionally , the system must be initiated manually on the data , not meeting the respective criteria . Wendt et al . 2018 present a cognitive model capable of building energy manage - ment [ 63 ] . To achieve that , they employed the KORE cognitive architecture [ 64 ] . The agent is capable of being integrated externally into a building management interface . It processes data from physical sensors and establishes management rules based on that data . Like Lebiere et al . ’s system , the agent does not employ all of the cognitive abilities in the criteria . However , some criteria , such as user 10 H . K Gidey et al . similarity , are satisfied with the active perception of the environment and the decision - making . 4 . 4 World of Bits ( WoB ) WoB is an experimental learning platform to train software bots in open - domain web environments [ 62 ] . Agents in WoB perceive the web environments in the form of the Document Object Model ( DOM ) and rendered pixels . Interestingly , though benchmark results are low compared to human users , the approach ac - complished some web tasks by sending mouse and keyboard actions . Further - more , agents are separated from the environments in which they interact . Tasks and activities are low - level operations and lack high - level cognitive capabilities . As a result , it falls short of the evaluation criteria . 5 Discussion The study’s results have important implications for the field of cognitive ar - chitectures and user - like software bots . Of the eleven agents and applied cog - nitive architectures examined in the previous section , Sec . 4 , only one satisfied the established criteria . Interestingly , the agent , IDA by Franklin et al . [ 49 ] , was developed a little over two decades ago . Except for the first two candidates , which both precede the year 2000 , all the systems featured missed the second criterion of user similarity . The two systems satisfying the criteria were limited by their time and would have been implemented as standalone systems if they had been designed a few years later . Presumably , due to a lack of alternatives , they both use email to communicate with their environment . This limitation likely led to them satisfying the user similarity criteria , not necessarily through the designer’s intent . The trend shown by the other candidates moved towards applications without user similarity . 5 . 1 Bots and Cognitive Architectures One central question arising from the results is the absence of software bots currently employing cognitive architectures . To the best of our knowledge , it appears highly unlikely to find an agent or bot in current use that meets all the criteria established for this study . Despite significant advancements in other areas of artificial intelligence , the fact that only one bot , IDA by Franklin et al . [ 49 ] , satisfied all the criteria suggests that the field of user - like intelligent bots is still nascent and in its early stages . These findings and observations align with existing literature , which indicates that integrating cognitive architectures into software bots is a complex and challenging endeavor [ 26 , 68 ] . However , these results also underscore the potential that cognitive archi - tectures hold for enhancing the capabilities of software bots . From a simplified architectural perspective , the example of IDA , which met all the criteria , demon - strates how a cognitive architecture can enable advanced autonomous behavior and user similarity in software bots . User - Like Bots for Cognitive Automation : A Survey 11 These findings also have practical implications . These findings highlight the need for developers and researchers to focus their efforts on integrating cognitive architectures into software bots . For industry professionals , the results can guide the development of more advanced software bots that align with the requirements of cognitive automation , enabling more effective automation of various tasks across different domains . 5 . 2 Autonomy and Behavior : Architectural Perspectives The architectural aspects that can address the observed shortcomings in this study , particularly regarding the level of autonomy and generalized behavior , can be viewed from two perspectives : the strict separation of bots and their environment and the integration of a separate behavior model [ 26 ] . First , as mentioned earlier , the strict separation of agents and their environ - ment facilitates architectural possibilities for autonomy [ 26 ] . By decoupling bots from a single environment , they can gain the ability to interact with multiple environments dynamically , achieving higher levels of variability and adaptability . This separation also enables the design of software bots with a user - like orien - tation , treating bots as if they were human users . Consequently , this orientation opens up possibilities for alternative architectural design patterns , allowing soft - ware bots with user - like characteristics to seamlessly integrate into existing user interfaces or operate on digital platforms without the need for APIs or integra - tion protocols . The separation already places the bots in a position where they can potentially establish their own intentions , goals , and deliberate interactions , access , and actions . Second , an agent’s capacity for self - awareness , contextual awareness , and other high - level cognitive functions arises from holistic behavior models [ 26 ] . These behavior models are typically formulated using cognitive architectures or similar integrative models and architectures . Consequently , the componenti - zation and integration of cognitive architectures into the system architecture of software bots become essential architectural considerations . The scientific under - standing of machine intelligence , along with related models and principles , is still evolving and has not yet reached a crystallized state [ 17 ] . As a result , models of intelligent behavior will evolve over time , and older ones may require changes and modifications . Componentization can facilitate separation and change . Addition - ally , through this componentization , bots can potentially dynamically integrate separate behavior models in real - time . Adopting these architectural perspectives can contribute to addressing the challenges related to autonomy and generalized behavior in bots , enabling them to operate with greater flexibility , adaptability , and user - like characteristics . 5 . 3 Study Limitations Despite the study’s important findings and insights into integrating cognitive ar - chitectures into user - like software bots , the study has limitations . The review was limited to publicly available literature and may not capture all existing software 12 H . K Gidey et al . bots that employ cognitive architectures . Furthermore , the criteria for evalu - ating software bots may not encompass all possible features and capabilities . Future research could expand on our work by investigating databases further , employing different evaluation criteria , or examining the evolution of cognitive architectures in software bots over time . 6 Conclusion The review highlights the importance of developing user - like software bots . These bots integrate cognitive architectures , enabling advanced autonomous behavior and user similarity . These requirements have significant implications for the en - gineering aspects of cognitive bots , particularly in cognitive automation . Through the analysis of architectural recommendations and perspectives , this study has provided insights into achieving these goals at a design level . The distinctive view of bots and their environment , along with the dynamic integra - tion of componentized behavior models , arise as key approaches to support both desiderata . Consequently , implementing these architectural approaches can lead to in - creased autonomy and adaptability in software bots . This opens up new possi - bilities for developing autonomous user - like bots that can effectively perform a wide range of tasks . These findings contribute to the growing understanding of how to enhance the cognitive capabilities of software bots through architectural references . Acknowledgement We would like to thank Lorenz Bobber for his valuable support in the initial stages of the survey . References 1 . Jianjun Jiang , Yiqun Wang , Li Zhang , Daqing Wu , Min Li , Tian Xie , Pengcheng Li , Licao Dai , Peiyao Li , Xianyun Shi , et al . A cognitive reliability model research for complex digital human - computer interface of industrial system . Safety science , 108 : 196 – 202 , 2018 . 2 . Christian Engel , Philipp Ebel , and Jan Marco Leimeister . Cognitive automation . Electronic Markets , 32 ( 1 ) : 339 – 350 , 2022 . 3 . Paulo Leitao , Stamatis Karnouskos , Luis Ribeiro , Jay Lee , Thomas Strasser , and Armando W Colombo . Smart agents in industrial cyber – physical systems . Pro - ceedings of the IEEE , 104 ( 5 ) : 1086 – 1101 , 2016 . 4 . Jay Lee , Hossein Davari , Jaskaran Singh , and Vibhor Pandhare . Industrial artificial intelligence for industry 4 . 0 - based manufacturing systems . Manufacturing letters , 18 : 20 – 23 , 2018 . 5 . Stamatis Karnouskos , Paulo Leitao , Luis Ribeiro , and Armando Walter Colombo . Industrial agents as a key enabler for realizing industrial cyber - physical systems : Multiagent systems entering industry 4 . 0 . IEEE Industrial Electronics Magazine , 14 ( 3 ) : 18 – 32 , 2020 . User - Like Bots for Cognitive Automation : A Survey 13 6 . Lucija Ivanˇci´c , Dalia Suˇsa Vugec , and Vesna Bosilj Vukˇsi´c . Robotic process au - tomation : systematic literature review . In BPM , pages 280 – 295 . Springer , 2019 . 7 . Linda Erlenhov , Francisco Gomes de Oliveira Neto , Riccardo Scandariato , and Philipp Leitner . Current and future bots in software development . In 2019 IEEE / ACM 1st International Workshop on Bots in Software Engineering ( BotSE ) , pages 7 – 11 . IEEE , 2019 . 8 . Mairieli Wessel , Bruno Mendes De Souza , Igor Steinmacher , Igor S Wiese , Ivanilton Polato , Ana Paula Chaves , and Marco A Gerosa . The power of bots : Characterizing and Understanding Bots in OSS Projects . PACM : HCI , 2 ( CSCW ) : 1 – 19 , 2018 . 9 . Martin Monperrus . Explainable software bot contributions : Case study of au - tomated bug fixes . In 2019 IEEE / ACM 1st international workshop on bots in software engineering ( BotSE ) , pages 12 – 15 . IEEE , 2019 . 10 . Olivia B Newton , Samaneh Saadat , Jihye Song , Stephen M Fiore , and Gita Suk - thankar . Everyboty counts : Examining human – machine teams in open source soft - ware development . Topics in Cognitive Science , 2022 . 11 . Dimitrios Platis . Software development bot ecosystems . 2021 . 12 . Likoebe Maruping and Yukun Yang . Governance in digital open innovation plat - forms . In Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Business and Management . 2020 . 13 . Jim Hendler and Tim Berners - Lee . From the semantic web to social machines : A research challenge for ai on the world wide web . Artificial intelligence , 174 ( 2 ) : 156 – 161 , 2010 . 14 . Ra´ul Arrabales , Agapito Ledezma , and Araceli Sanchis . Towards conscious - like behavior in computer game characters . In 2009 IEEE symposium on computational intelligence and games , pages 217 – 224 . IEEE , 2009 . 15 . Florian Gallwitz and Michael Kreil . The Rise and Fall of ’Social Bot’ Research . SSRN , 2021 . 16 . Kelsey R McDonald and John M Pearson . Cognitive bots and algorithmic humans : toward a shared understanding of social intelligence . Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences , 29 : 55 – 62 , 2019 . 17 . Patrick Butlin , Robert Long , Eric Elmoznino , Yoshua Bengio , Jonathan Birch , Axel Constant , George Deane , Stephen M Fleming , Chris Frith , Xu Ji , et al . Con - sciousness in artificial intelligence : Insights from the science of consciousness . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2308 . 08708 , 2023 . 18 . Stefan Kugele , Ana Petrovska , and Ilias Gerostathopoulos . Towards a taxonomy of autonomous systems . In Software Architecture : 15th European Conference , ECSA 2021 , Sweden , 2021 , pages 37 – 45 . Springer , 2021 . 19 . Marialena Vagia , Aksel A Transeth , and Sigurd A Fjerdingen . A literature review on the levels of automation during the years . what are the different taxonomies that have been proposed ? Applied ergonomics , 53 : 190 – 202 , 2016 . 20 . Gianluca Baldassarre , Vieri Giuliano Santucci , Emilio Cartoni , and Daniele Cali - giore . The architecture challenge : Future artificial - intelligence systems will require sophisticated architectures , and knowledge of the brain might guide their construc - tion . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 40 : e254 , 2017 . 21 . Gerhard Kraetzschmar and D Deliverable . Software engineering factors for cogni - tive robotics . 2018 . 22 . Jan Bosch , Helena Holmstr¨om Olsson , and Ivica Crnkovic . Engineering ai systems : A research agenda . Artificial Intelligence Paradigms for Smart Cyber - Physical Systems , pages 1 – 19 , 2021 . 23 . Ben Goertzel , Cassio Pennachin , and Nil Geisweiller . Engineering General Intelli - gence , Part 1 . Atlantis Thinking Machines , 5 , 2014 . 24 . Michael Wooldridge and Nicholas R Jennings . Pitfalls of agent - oriented develop - ment . In Proceedings of the second international conference on Autonomous agents , pages 385 – 391 , 1998 . 25 . Silverio Mart´ınez - Fern´andez , Justus Bogner , Xavier Franch , Marc Oriol , Julien Siebert , Adam Trendowicz , Anna Maria Vollmer , and Stefan Wagner . Software engineering for ai - based systems : a survey . ACM Transactions on Software Engi - neering and Methodology ( TOSEM ) , 31 ( 2 ) : 1 – 59 , 2022 . 14 H . K Gidey et al . 26 . Habtom Kahsay Gidey , Peter Hillmann , Andreas Karcher , and Alois Knoll . To - wards cognitive bots : Architectural research challenges . In International Confer - ence on Artificial General Intelligence , pages 105 – 114 . Springer , 2023 . 27 . Carlene Lebeuf , Margaret - Anne Storey , and Alexey Zagalsky . Software bots . IEEE Software , 35 ( 1 ) : 18 – 23 , 2017 . 28 . Michael Wooldridge and Nicholas R Jennings . Agent theories , architectures , and languages : a survey . In Intelligent Agents : ECAI - 94 Workshop on Agent Theo - ries , Architectures , and Languages Amsterdam , The Netherlands August 8 – 9 , 1994 Proceedings 1 , pages 1 – 39 . Springer , 1995 . 29 . Carlene R . Lebeuf . A taxonomy of software bots : towards a deeper understanding of software bot characteristics . PhD thesis , UVic , 2018 . 30 . Thomas Holz , Abraham G Campbell , Gregory MP O’Hare , John W Stafford , Alan Martin , and Mauro Dragone . Mira—mixed reality agents . IJHC , 69 ( 4 ) , 2011 . 31 . Paul Milgram and Fumio Kishino . A taxonomy of mixed reality visual displays . IEICE TRANSACTIONS on Information and Systems , 77 ( 12 ) : 1321 – 1329 , 1994 . 32 . Victor Charpenay , Tobias K¨afer , and Andreas Harth . A unifying framework for agency in hypermedia environments . In Engineering Multi - Agent Systems : 9th International Workshop , EMAS 2021 , Virtual Event , May 3 – 4 , 2021 , Revised Se - lected Papers , pages 42 – 61 . Springer , 2022 . 33 . James J Gibson . The theory of affordances . Hilldale , USA , 1 ( 2 ) : 67 – 82 , 1977 . 34 . Benjamin D Nye and Barry G Silverman . Affordances in ai , 2012 . 35 . David Vernon . Cognitive Architectures . In Cognitive Robotics . MIT Press , 2022 . 36 . David Vernon . Artificial cognitive systems : A primer . MIT Press , 2014 . 37 . Iuliia Kotseruba , Oscar J Avella Gonzalez , and John K Tsotsos . A review of 40 years of cognitive architecture research : Focus on perception , attention , learning and applications . arXiv , pages 1 – 74 , 2016 . 38 . Torsten Metzler , Kristina Shea , et al . Taxonomy of cognitive functions . In DS 68 - 7 : Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Engineering Design ( ICED 11 ) , Impacting Society through Engineering Design , Vol . 7 : Human Behaviour in Design , Lyngby / Copenhagen , Denmark , 15 . - 19 . 08 . 2011 , pages 330 – 341 , 2011 . 39 . Wlodzislaw Duch , Richard Jayadi Oentaryo , and Michel Pasquier . Cognitive Ar - chitectures : Where do we go from here ? In AGI , volume 171 , pages 122 – 136 , 2008 . 40 . John E Laird , Christian Lebiere , and Paul S Rosenbloom . A standard model of the mind : Toward a common computational framework across artificial intelligence , cognitive science , neuroscience , and robotics . A Magazine , 38 ( 4 ) : 13 – 26 , 2017 . 41 . Wil Van Der Aalst and Kees Max Van Hee . Workflow management : models , meth - ods , and systems . 2004 . 42 . Wil MP Van der Aalst , Martin Bichler , and Armin Heinzl . Robotic process au - tomation , 2018 . 43 . Dietmar Bruckner , Heimo Zeilinger , and Dietmar Dietrich . Cognitive automa - tion—survey of novel artificial general intelligence methods for the automation of human technical environments . IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics , 8 ( 2 ) : 206 – 215 , 2011 . 44 . Santiago Aguirre and Alejandro Rodriguez . Automation of a business process using robotic process automation ( rpa ) : A case study . In Applied Computer Sciences in Engineering : 4th Workshop on Engineering Applications , WEA 2017 , Cartagena , Colombia , September 27 - 29 , 2017 , Proceedings 4 , pages 65 – 71 . Springer , 2017 . 45 . Claes Wohlin . Guidelines for snowballing in systematic literature studies and a replication in software engineering . In Proceedings of the 18th international con - ference on evaluation and assessment in software engineering , pages 1 – 10 , 2014 . 46 . Stan Franklin , Art Graesser , Brent Olde , Hongjun Song , and Aregahegn Negatu . Virtual mattie – an intelligent clerical agent . In AAAI Symposium on Embodied Cognition and Action , Cambridge MA , 1996 . 47 . Pattie Maes . Situated Agents can have Goals . Robotics and autonomous systems , 6 ( 1 - 2 ) : 49 – 70 , 1990 . 48 . Douglas R Hofstadter and Melanie Mitchell . The Copycat Project : A model of mental fluidity and analogy - making . 1994 . User - Like Bots for Cognitive Automation : A Survey 15 49 . Stan Franklin , Arpad Kelemen , and Lee McCauley . Ida : A cognitive agent archi - tecture . In SMC’98 Conference Proceedings . IEEE Conference on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics , volume 3 , pages 2646 – 2651 . IEEE , 1998 . 50 . Stan Franklin , Steve Strain , Javier Snaider , Ryan McCall , and Usef Faghihi . Global workspace theory , its lida model and the underlying neuroscience . Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures , 1 : 32 – 43 , 2012 . 51 . Craig A Knoblock . Deploying Information Agents on the Web . In IJCAI , pages 1580 – 1586 . Citeseer , 2003 . 52 . Jos´e Luis Ambite and Craig A Knoblock . Planning by rewriting . Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 15 : 207 – 261 , 2001 . 53 . Pauline Berry , Melinda Gervasio , Tomas Uribe , Karen Myers , and Ken Nitz . A Personalized Calendar Assistant . In Working notes of the AAAI Spring Symposium Series , volume 76 , 2004 . 54 . Adam Cheyer and David Martin . The Open Agent Architecture . Autonomous Agents and Multi - Agent Systems , 4 ( 1 ) : 143 – 148 , 2001 . 55 . Michael Freed , Jaime G Carbonell , Geoffrey J Gordon , Jordan Hayes , Brad A My - ers , Daniel P Siewiorek , Stephen F Smith , Aaron Steinfeld , and Anthony Tomasic . RADAR : A personal assistant that learns to reduce email overload . In AAAI , volume 8 , pages 1287 – 1293 , 2008 . 56 . Pauline M Berry , Melinda Gervasio , Bart Peintner , and Neil Yorke - Smith . PTIME : Personalized assistance for calendaring . ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology ( TIST ) , 2 ( 4 ) : 1 – 22 , 2011 . 57 . Apple Inc . Siri Intelligent Personal Assistant . https : / / www . apple . com / uk / siri / . Accessed : 18 . 06 . 2021 . 58 . Gokhan Tur , Andreas Stolcke , Lynn Voss , Stanley Peters , Dilek Hakkani - Tur , John Dowding , Benoit Favre , Raquel Fern´andez , Matthew Frampton , Mike Frandsen , et al . The CALO Meeting Assistant System . IEEE Transactions on Audio , Speech , and Language Processing , 18 ( 6 ) : 1601 – 1611 , 2010 . 59 . Steve Strain , Sean Kugele , and Stan Franklin . The learning intelligent distribution agent ( lida ) and Medical Agent X ( MAX ) : Computational intelligence for medi - cal diagnosis . In IEEE Symposium on Computational Intelligence for Human - like Intelligence ( CIHLI ) , pages 1 – 8 . IEEE , 2014 . 60 . Christian Lebiere , Stefano Bennati , Robert Thomson , Paulo Shakarian , and Eric Nunes . Functional cognitive models of malware identification . Proceedings of ICCM , ICCM , pages 9 – 11 , 2015 . 61 . Frank E Ritter , Farnaz Tehranchi , and Jacob D Oury . ACT - R : A cognitive archi - tecture for modeling cognition . Wiley Reviews : Cognitive Science , 10 ( 3 ) , 2019 . 62 . Tianlin Shi , Andrej Karpathy , Linxi Fan , Jonathan Hernandez , and Percy Liang . World of bits : An open - domain platform for web - based agents . In ICML , pages 3135 – 3144 . PMLR , 2017 . 63 . Alexander Wendt , Stefan Kollmann , Lydia Siafara , and Yevgen Biletskiy . Usage of cognitive architectures in the development of industrial applications . In proceedings of ICAART 2018 , 2018 . 64 . Gerhard Zucker , Alexander Wendt , Lydia Siafara , and Samer Schaat . A cognitive architecture for building automation . In IECON 2016 - 42nd Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society , pages 6919 – 6924 . IEEE , 2016 . 65 . Stan Franklin and FG Patterson Jr . The LIDA architecture : Adding new modes of learning to an intelligent , autonomous , software agent . pat , 703 : 764 – 1004 , 2006 . 66 . Bernard J Baars . Global workspace theory of consciousness : Toward a cognitive neuroscience of human experience . Progress in brain research , 150 : 45 – 53 , 2005 . 67 . Sri international : Artificial Intelligence Center - The CALO project . http : / / www . ai . sri . com / project / CALO . Accessed : 18 . 06 . 2021 . 68 . David Vernon . The architect’s dilemmas . Cognitive Architectures , 2019 .