UC Merced Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society Title Enhancing the Comprehension of Science Text through Visual Analogies Permalink https : / / escholarship . org / uc / item / 6fq355bv Journal Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society , 33 ( 33 ) ISSN 1069 - 7977 Authors Matlen , Bryan Vosniadou , Stella Jee , Benjamin et al . Publication Date 2011 Peer reviewed eScholarship . org Powered by the California Digital Library University of California Enhancing the Comprehension of Science Text through Visual Analogies Bryan J . Matlen ( bmatlen @ andrew . cmu . edu ) Carnegie Mellon University , Department of Psychology 5000 Forbes Avenue , Pittsburgh , PA 15213 USA Stella Vosniadou ( svosniad @ phs . uoa . gr ) National and Kapodistrian University of Athens , Department of Philosophy and History of Science University Town , Athens 161 21 , Greece Benjamin D . Jee ( bjee @ holycross . edu ) College of the Holy Cross , Department of Psychology 1 College Street , Worcester , MA 01610 USA Maria Ptouchkina ( mptouchkina @ u . northwestern . edu ) Northwestern University , Department of Psychology 2029 Sheridan Road , Evanston , IL 60208 USA Abstract Instructional analogies are commonly used in science and mathematics text , yet students may have difficulty understanding analogies in the absence of adequate instructional support . In spatially rich domains like geoscience , visual depictions of both the base and target concepts of text analogies ( i . e . visual analogies ) may provide crucial support for students . To test whether visual analogies would be beneficial for learning , 72 fourth - and fifth - grade students were provided a short analogy - enhanced instructional text on plate tectonics that included either pictures of both the base and target concepts ( Visual Analogy condition ) or the pictures of the target concept only ( Target Picture condition ) . Results indicated that children in the Visual Analogy condition outperformed children in the Target Picture condition on both near and far transfer measures . These results are consistent with recent research suggesting that factors that promote comparison – such as side - by - side presentation of examples – facilitate learning from text . Keywords : Analogy . Instruction . Science Education . Cognitive Development . Geoscience Education . Introduction Analogies pervade thought , thus , they are often used as scaffolds for student learning . Many studies have documented the effectiveness of analogies in math and science learning ( Braasch & Goldman , 2010 ; Clement , 1993 ; Glynn & Takahashi , 1998 ; Iding , 1997 ; McDaniel & Donnely , 1996 ; Thompson & Opfer , 2010 ; Vosniadou & Schommer , 1988 ) and a review on the topic concluded that 12 of 15 studies showed positive effects for analogies in science education ( Dagher , 1995 ) . However , while there is general consensus that analogies support learning , substantially fewer studies have addressed how to optimize learning from analogies . Without adequate instructional support – such as guidance during the mapping process ( Richland , Holyoak , & Stigler , 2004 ) or indications of “where the analogy breaks down” ( Glynn , 1991 ) – students may fail to benefit from analogical comparisons ( Richland , Zur , & Holyoak , 2007 ) . The present study addresses what design characteristics lead to optimal learning outcomes from analogies . In particular , we assess how visual representations may be used to enhance analogical learning in elementary science education . Analogical comparison involves aligning two or more representations on the basis of their common relational structure ( Gentner , 1983 , 2010 ) . When one of the analogs is better understood than the other – as is often the case in analogies used for instruction – information from the familiar case ( by convention , termed the base ) can be projected to the unfamiliar case ( by convention , termed the target ) . These analogical inferences provide a powerful way to acquire new knowledge from prior experience . Research on analogy has revealed that factors that promote analogical comparison also facilitate relational learning ( Brown , Kane , & Long , 1989 ; Christie & Gentner , 2010 ; Gentner & Namy 1999 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ; Kotovsky & Gentner , 1986 ) . For example , Camtrambone & Holyoak ( 1989 ) found that when college undergrads were prompted to compare two semantically dissimilar problems that shared a common solution , students were more likely to transfer the solution to a distant analog than students who received the same base examples without prompts to compare them . Recent research has demonstrated that comparison is effective for promoting learning in topics as diverse as mathematics ( Rittle - Johnson & Star , 2009 ) , biology ( Gadgil , Chi , & Nokes , submitted ) , architecture ( Gentner , Levine , Dhillon , & Poltermann , 2009 ) , and business negotiation ( Gentner , Loewenstein , & Thompson , 2001 ) , and that even relatively mild manipulations that promote comparison – such as side - by - side presentation of examples – can facilitate relational learning ( Christie & Gentner , 2010 ; Gentner , Loewenstein , & Hung , 2007 ; Loewenstein & Gentner , 2002 ; Oakes & Ribar , 2005 ) . Although comparison in general has been found to promote learning across a diverse range of topics , the quality of the comparison can be an important factor in 2910 influencing students’ transfer performance ( Gentner et al . , 2003 ) . Analogies are most effective when the learner engages in a deep processing of the relational commonalities between base and target concepts ( Kurtz , Miao , & Gentner , 2001 ) . In the case of analogy - enhanced science text , learners may require additional cognitive supports to abstract relevant structural relationships . Research on multimedia learning has suggested the graphical representations in combination with text can aid students’ understanding of relationally complex material ( Mayer , 1993 ; Mayer & Anderson , 1992 ) . However , we suggest that providing a visual representation of both the base and target – a visual analogy - - could facilitate comparison and support analogical learning . Visual analogies may provide more support to processing a text - based analogy compared to viewing an image of the target domain alone . For one , the visual analogy could clarify the properties of the base domain that are relevant to the analogy , potentially highlighting the common relational structure . In addition , by providing an externally available representation of the analogy , the learner can devote fewer cognitive resources to maintaining information about the analogs in memory and more resources to understanding the analogical mapping ( Richland , et al . , 2007 ; Sweller , 1994 ) . This may be especially important for analogies involving relatively complex examples . Furthermore , presenting side - by - side images of the base and target may increase the probability that students will engage in comparison . Despite the potential utility of visual analogies , no studies to our knowledge have systematically assessed whether visual analogies do in fact enhance learning . Our first question was whether science educators commonly use visual analogies . In order to assess the prevalence of visual analogies in real - world educational materials , we conducted an informal analysis of six K – 12 and college textbooks in the fields of geoscience and biology . This analysis revealed that visual analogies were quite rare . For instance , of all analogies found in the text , only 32 % were represented graphically 1 . Furthermore , when analogies were accompanied by a graphic , they were most likely to be representations of the target domain ( 78 % ) . Of all analogies accompanied by a graphic , only a very small proportion of analogies consisted of visual representations of both the base and the target concepts together ( 19 % ) . Thus , testing the effectiveness of visual analogies could have important implications for improving the use of analogies in science texts . To assess whether visual analogies enhance learning , in the present study we contrasted the learning outcomes for students who received text - based analogies accompanied by visual analogies ( the Visual Analogy condition ) with students who received the same text - based analogies accompanied by a picture of the target concept only ( Target 1 In prior work , Curtis & Reigeluth ( 1984 ) found that 16 % of text analogies were represented graphically in science textbooks , and Newton ( 2002 ) found a rate of 22 % . Picture condition ) . If visual analogies support learning , children in the visual analogy condition should evidence better retention and transfer of material than children in the target picture condition . We conducted this research within the context of teaching children about plate tectonics , which appears in many state science standards for 5 th and 6 th grade students . Plate tectonics are a fundamental mechanism involved in formation of volcanoes and mountains , however , despite its importance , students typically exhibit a variety of misconceptions about the domain ( Gobert & Clement , 1998 ; Gobert , 2004 ; May , Hammer , & Roy , 2006 ) . Geoscience is also a relatively relationally complex domain , making it a good candidate for analogical instruction ( Jee et al . , 2010 ) . Given that students’ understanding of geoscience 1 ) is often limited to their everyday experiences , 2 ) involves relatively relationally complex visuospatial concepts , and 3 ) is an important component of elementary science education , plate tectonics proved to be a ripe area in which to address whether visual analogies could promote student learning . Method Participants Forty - two 4 th grade students ( M = 9 . 97 years , SD = 0 . 41 years , 19 girls , 23 boys ) and thirty - five 5 th grade students ( M = 10 . 74 years , SD = 0 . 48 years , 14 girls , 21 boys ) from a middle to upper class private elementary school in the Pittsburgh area participated . Five students were excluded from analysis because they did not participate in both the pre - test and post - test phases . Design The experiment followed a 2 ( condition : Visual Analogy vs Target Picture ) x 2 ( grade : 4 th vs 5 th ) x 3 ( test phase : pre - test , post - test , and extended post - test ) mixed design , with test phase as a within - subjects factor . Materials and Procedure The study consisted of four phases : 1 ) the pre - test phase , 2 ) the instruction phase , 3 ) the post - test phase , and 4 ) the extended post - test phase . These phases occurred one day apart from each other , with the exception of phases 2 and 3 that occurred on the same day . In each phase , students sat at desks in their regular science classroom and were told that they would be answering questions about how the Earth’s surface changes over time . During the pre - test phase on day 1 , students answered open - ended questions that asked them to 1 ) indicate the layers of the Earth , 2 ) describe how volcanoes form , and 3 ) describe how mountains form . For all questions , students were encouraged to use both drawings and written explanations to describe each process . Students were given as much time as they needed in order to complete the pre - test . On day 2 , students received instruction about plate tectonics and the mechanisms of volcano and mountain formation . Students were randomly assigned to be either in 2911 the Visual Analogy condition ( VA ) or the Target Picture condition ( TP ) . Students in the VA condition received analogy - enhanced text accompanied with pictures of the both the base and target of each analogy , while students in the TP condition received the same analogy - enhanced text accompanied by pictures of each target concept ( see Figure 1 for an example of visual analogy graphics ; in the TP condition , the same target images were presented without the bases ) . Instruction for both groups consisted of five analogies pertaining to 1 ) the earth’s layers , 2 ) tectonic plates , 3 ) convection currents , 4 ) volcano formation , and 5 ) mountain formation . Students read through the instruction for 10 minutes , and were encouraged to reread it if they finished early . After the instruction portion , the post - test was administered which was identical in materials and procedure to the pre - test . A ) B ) Figure 1 . Example of visual analogy graphics for instructions that compare A ) Earth’s convection currents and plate movement to a boiling pot of water and B ) Earth’s layers to the layers of a Peach . On the third and final day , students answered questions on the extended post - test , which consisted of three open - ended questions and three mapping questions . The open - ended questions required short answer responses consisting of one recall question ( i . e . “what causes tectonic plate movements ? ” ) and two generative questions , which required students to use the information they had acquired during the instruction in novel ways ( i . e . “what would happen if the Earth’s core stopped generating heat ? ” and “what would happen if Earth’s plates stopped moving ? ” ) . The mapping questions asked students to connect corresponding elements for three of the five analogies and to provide a short written explanation of how each pair of elements was related . For example , in the analogy , “the earth is like a peach” , elements of the peach ( e . g . , the pit , the skin , etc . ) appeared in written form on the left side of the page , and the relevant elements of Earth ( the core , the crust , etc . ) were placed to the right in a jumbled order . The students’ job was to draw arrows between the analogous parts of the earth and the peach ( e . g . the core and the pit ) and detail how they were related ( e . g . both are solid and / or at the center ) ( see Figure 2 for an example of a mapping question as it appeared on the test ) . Figure 2 . Example mapping assessment : the students’ task was to draw arrows between parts of the base domain and the target domain and to specify how each part was similar . Scoring To score the pre - and post - tests , an ideal answer was generated for each question and then broken down into separate “knowledge components” ( knowledge components are equivalent to concepts , principles , facts , or skills , etc . ) . For example , for the question about how mountains form , the ideal answer consisted of indicating that plates move towards each other , that they collide and produce an upward force , that convection currents move the plates , and that each plate is of equal density . Students were assigned a 1 or a 0 for each knowledge component depending on whether it was correctly stated in their response . This same scoring system was used for the three open - ended response questions on the extended post - test . For example , for the question “what would happen if the earth’s core stopped producing heat ? ” students were given a point if they correctly indicated that no new mountains or volcanoes would form , and for whether they indicated that convection currents / plate movements would cease . For the mapping questions , students received a point for correctly drawing an arrow from one concept to the corresponding concept , and a point for correctly indicating how these two concepts were similar . All other responses were assigned a 0 . Results We first conducted a 2 ( condition ) x 2 ( grade ) x 2 ( test phase ) mixed ANOVA on students’ pre - and post - test data . This analysis revealed a main effect of condition F ( 1 , 68 ) = 6 . 47 , p < . 05 , η 2 = . 087 ( M VA = . 30 , M TP = . 24 ) , a main effect of grade F ( 1 , 68 ) = 4 . 59 , p < . 05 , η 2 = . 063 ( M fourth = Boiling Pot of Water Connecting Arrows The Earth In what way are these two parts similar ? Surface of the Water Crust Water in Pot Tectonic Plates Rising and Falling Water Mantle Stove Convection Currents Wood Blocks Core ! 2912 . 24 , M fifth = . 29 ) , a main effect of test phase F ( 1 , 68 ) = 264 , p < . 05 ( M pre = . 11 , M post = . 42 ) , η 2 = . 795 , and a significant interaction between grade and test phase F ( 1 , 68 ) = 11 . 96 , p < . 05 , η 2 = . 15 . Because some research has suggested that analogies might be particularly effective for helping lower ability students ( Bean , Singer , & Cowen , 1985 ; Duit , 1991 ; Iding , 1997 ) , we conducted separate analyses for 4 th and 5 th graders . Within the 5 th graders , a 2 ( condition ) x 2 ( test phase ) mixed ANOVA revealed only a main effect of test phase F ( 1 , 32 ) = 151 , p < . 05 , η 2 = . 826 , but the effect of condition and the interaction were not significant . However , in the 4 th grade students , this same analysis revealed a main effect of test phase F ( 1 , 36 ) = 106 , p < . 05 , η 2 = . 748 , a main effect of condition F ( 1 , 36 ) = 5 . 39 , p < . 05 , η 2 = . 13 and a significant interaction F ( 1 , 36 ) = 5 . 05 , p < . 05 , η 2 = . 123 . Post - hoc tests revealed that , for fourth graders , the effect of condition was significant at the post - tests ( p < . 05 ) , but not at the pre - tests ( see Figure 3 ) . A ) B ) Figure 3 . Results of pre - and post - tests by condition in A ) 5 th graders and B ) 4 th graders . Sixty - eight of the 72 students participated in the extended post - test phase . A 2 ( condition ) x 2 ( grade ) between subjects ANOVA on the extended post - test scores revealed significant main effects of both grade F ( 1 , 64 ) = 9 . 76 , p < . 005 , η 2 = . 13 ( M fourth = . 59 , M fifth = . 74 ) and condition F ( 1 , 64 ) = 7 . 87 , p < . 01 , η 2 = . 11 ( M VA = . 73 , M TP = . 60 ) , however , the interaction was not significant ( see Figure 4 ) . Figure 4 . Results of the extended post - tests by grade and condition . Finally , in order to better understand children’s ability to compare aspects of both the base and target concepts , students’ scores on the mapping assessments of the extended post - test were analyzed in a 2 ( condition ) x 2 ( grade ) between subjects ANOVA . This revealed a significant main effect grade F ( 1 , 64 ) = 8 . 22 , p < . 01 , η 2 = . 11 ( M fourth = . 71 , M fifth = . 86 ) and condition F ( 1 , 64 ) = 8 . 39 , p = . 005 , η 2 = . 13 ( M VA = . 86 , M TP = . 71 ) , but the interaction was not significant . We had hypothesized that visual analogies might be more effective for understanding relationally complex concepts . Therefore , we predicted that VA students might outperform TP students on mapping topics such as convection currents ( i . e . a more relationally complex concept ) as to mapping a topic such as the Earth’s layers ( i . e . a more relationally simplistic concept ) . However , independent t - tests of students’ performance on the mapping assessment showed that students in the VA condition outperformed students in the TP condition on all analogical mapping assessments ( all p ’s < . 05 ) . Discussion The aim of the present experiment was to explore whether it is possible for visual analogies to enhance learning more so than pictures of the target concept alone . Across a number of assessment measures , we found that visual analogies were effective for promoting understanding of early geoscience concepts . Specifically , 4 th graders retained more information about volcano and mountain formation when they were tested immediately after instruction : this might be considered relatively near transfer , because both materials and time from learning were close to the instruction . However , on a relatively farther transfer test ( i . e . the extended post - test ) – where students had to apply their 2913 knowledge in novel ways – both 4 th and 5 th grade students who learned from the visual analogy materials outperformed students who received materials with visualizations of only the target picture . The present study is the first to report an advantage for visual analogies in enhancing students’ comprehension of science text . However , it is currently an open question as to why visual analogies led to greater learning . On the one hand , these results are consistent with the notion that factors such as side - by - side presentation of base and target graphics prompts students to engage in analogical comparison . This process would allow students to structurally align the base and target concepts and abstract their relevant relational commonalities . However , the present results could also stem from the fact that the VA condition got to see two pictures , where the TP condition only saw one . Research on multimedia learning has revealed that comprehension of text involving complex relationships is often enhanced by the simultaneous presentation of graphics ( e . g . Mayer , 1993 ) . Additionally , students in the VA condition may have simply gotten better at processing the images during the course of the instruction as a result of seeing twice as many images . Our future work hopes to tease apart these possibilities by replicating the above results and also adding a third condition where students will see base and target images that are difficult to align . Prior research has indicated that comparisons that are highly alignable – representations that share many structural relationships – lead to better learning than comparisons that have low alignability ( Gentner , Loewenstein , & Hung , 2007 ; Gentner et al . , 2009 ) . If visual analogies do help students to engage in analogical comparison , we would expect that a high alignability VA condition would outperform a low alignability VA condition on our transfer assessments . It is interesting to note that , at least on our near transfer assessments , visual analogies helped fourth grade students’ comprehension of the text , but they were not more effective than target pictures in helping fifth grade students . It is unlikely that fifth grade students had more prior knowledge of the topic , since both groups scored equally low on the pre - tests . Instead , we surmise that a more general ability , such as reading level , may explain why older students benefited equally from visual analogies and target pictures . However , because we did not have access to students’ reading scores or any other measure of general intelligence , this hypothesis remains to be examined in future research . Both 4 th and 5 th graders showed higher performance on the extended post - tests when they learned from VA instructions . In particular , our data suggest that the VA group was better able to map relationships from the base and target concepts on our mapping assessments . This finding is consistent with our view that visual analogies might be facilitating students’ analogical comparison process . Moreover , we introduce a novel way of assessing learning from analogies : that is , using analogy as an assessment tool rather than just as an instructional tool . The former practice is relatively rare in the literature . Finally , we caution that it is unlikely that any visual analogy – without careful attention to its design – will help students learn from text . In the present study , we took meticulous care to ensure that relevant relationships between base and target concepts were represented in such a way that their relational attributes were supported by their presentation ( e . g . relevant relationships were physically aligned on the page ) . To these ends , we went through multiple iterations with a designer in order to come up with visual analogy graphics . Without great care in designing visual analogies and attention to relational commonalities , graphics may fail to support students learning from science text . In sum , while the present study is preliminary in nature , it supports the conclusion that carefully designed visual analogies can be effective in helping students learn from science text . Given that visual analogies are used sparsely in real - world contexts , this finding offers promising suggestions for the design of educational materials and adds to a growing body of literature that addresses how analogies can be presented such that they optimize learning in education . Future work will address mechanistic explanations underlying these effects . Acknowledgments This work was funded by the Institute of Education Sciences , U . S . Department of Education , under grant R305B040063 to Carnegie Mellon University . We thank Chad Edwards for designing the instructional graphics and the parents , children , school administration and staff that made this research possible . References Braasch , J . L . G . & Goldman , R . S . ( 2010 ) . The role of prior knowledge in learning from analogies in science texts . Discourse Processes , 47 , 447 – 479 . Bean , T . W . , Singer , H . & Cowan , S . ( 1985 ) . Analogical study guides : Improving comprehension in science . Journal of Reading , 246 – 250 . Brown , A . L . , Kane , M . J . , & Long , C . ( 1988 ) . Analogical transfer in young children : Analogies as tools for communication and exposition . Applied Cognitive Psychology , 3 , 275 - 293 . Camtrambone , R . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1989 ) . Overcoming contextual limitations on problem - solving transfer . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 15 , 1147 – 1156 . Clement , J . ( 1993 ) . Using bridging analogies and anchoring intuitions to deal with students’ preconceptions in physics . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 30 , 1241 – 1257 . Curtis , R . V . , & Reigeluth , C . M . ( 1984 ) . The use of analogies in written text . Instructional Science , 13 , 99 - 117 . Dagher , Z . R . ( 1995 ) . Review of studies on the effectiveness of instructional analogies in science education . Science Education , 79 , 295 – 312 . 2914 Duit , R . ( 1991 ) . On the role of analogies and metaphors in learning science . Science Education , 75 , 649 – 672 . Gadgil , S . M . , Nokes , T . J . , & Chi , M . T . H . ( submitted ) . Effectiveness of holistic mental model confrontation in driving conceptual change . Gentner , D . , Levine , S . , Dhillon , S . , & Poltermann , A . ( 2009 ) . Using structural alignment to facilitate learning of spatial concepts in an informal setting . In B . Kokinov , K . Holyoak , & D . Gentner ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the second analogy conference ( pp . 175 – 182 ) . Sofia , Bulgaria : NBU Press . Gentner , D . , Loewenstein , J . , & Hung , B . ( 2007 ) . Comparison facilitates children’s learning of names for parts . Journal of Cognition and Development , 8 , 285 – 307 . Gentner , D . & Namy , L . L . ( 2006 ) . Analogical processes in language learning . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 15 ( 6 ) , 297 - 301 Gentner , D . , Loewenstein , J . , Thompson , L . ( 2003 ) . Learning and transfer : A general role for analogical encoding . Journal of Educational Psychology , 95 ( 2 ) , 393 - 408 Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - Mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy . Cognitive Science , 7 , 155 – 170 . Gentner , D . ( 2010 ) . Bootstrapping the mind : Analogical processes and symbol systems . Cognitive Science , 34 , 752 – 775 . Gick , M . L . & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 - 38 . Glynn , S . M . ( 1991 ) . Explaining science concepts : A teaching - with - analogies model . In S . Glynn , R . Yeany , & B . Britton ( Eds . ) , The psychology of learning science ( pp . 219 - 240 ) . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum . Glynn , S . M . & Takahashi , T . ( 1998 ) . Learning from analogy - enhanced science text . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 35 , 1129 – 1149 . Gobert , J . D . ( 2004 ) . The effects of different learning tasks on model - building in plate tectonics : Diagramming versus explaining . Journal of Geoscience Education , 53 , 444 – 455 . Gobert & Clement ( 1999 ) . Effects of student - generated diagrams versus student - generated summaries on conceptual understanding of causal and dynamic knowledge in plate tectonics . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 36 , 39 – 53 . Iding , M . K . ( 1997 ) . How analogies foster learning from science texts . Instructional Science , 25 , 223 – 253 . Jee , B . D . , Uttal , D . H . , Gentner , D . , Manduca , C . , Shipley , T . , Sageman , B . , Ormand , C . J . , & Tikoff , B . ( 2010 ) . Analogical thinking in geoscience education . Journal of Geoscience Education , 58 , 2 - 13 . Kurtz , K . J . , Miao , C . - H . , & Gentner , D . ( 2001 ) . Learning by analogical bootstrapping . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 10 , 417 – 446 . Loewenstein , J . , & Gentner , D . ( 2001 ) . Spatial mapping in preschoolers : Close comparisons facilitate far mappings . Journal of Cognition and Development , 2 ( 2 ) , 189 - 219 . May , Hammer , & Roy ( 2006 ) . Children’s analogical reasoning in a third - grade science discussion . Science Education , 90 , 316 – 330 . Mayer , R . E . ( 1993 ) Illustrations that instruct . In Robert Glaser ( Ed ) Advances in Instructional Psychology ( vol . 4 ) . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Hillsdale , New Jersey , USA . Mayer , R . E . & Anderson , R . B . ( 1992 ) . The instructive animation : Helping students build connections between words and pictures in multimedia learning . Journal of Educational Psychology , 84 , 444 - 452 . McDaniel , M . A . & Donnelly , C . M . ( 1996 ) . Learning with analogy and elaborative interrogation . Journal of Educational Psychology , 88 , 508 – 519 . Namy , L . L , . & Gentner , D . ( 2002 ) . Making a silk purse out of two sow ' s ears : Young children ' s use of comparison in category learning . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 131 , 5 - 15 . Newton ( 2003 ) . The occurrence of analogies in elementary school science books . Instructional Science , 31 , 353 – 375 . Oakes & Ribar ( 2005 ) . A comparison of infants’ categorization in paired and successive presentation familiarization tasks . Infancy , 7 , 85 – 98 . Richland , L . E . , Holyoak , K . J . , & Stigler J . W . ( 2004 ) . Analogy use in eighth - grade mathematics classrooms . Cognition and Instruction , 22 , 37 – 60 . Richland , L . E . , Zur , O . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2007 ) . Cognitive supports for analogies in the mathematics classroom . Science , 316 , 1128 – 1129 . Rittle - Johnson & Star ( 2009 ) . Compared with what ? The effects of different comparisons on conceptual knowledge and procedural flexibility for equation solving . Journal of Educational Psychology , 101 , 529 – 544 . Sweller , J . ( 1994 ) . Cognitive load theory , learning difficulty , and instructional design . Learning and Instruction , 4 , 295 – 312 . Thompson , C . A . & Opfer , J . E . ( 2010 ) . How 15 hundred is like 15 cherries . Child Development Vosniadou , S . & Schommer , M . ( 1988 ) . Explanatory analogies can help children acquire information from expository text . Journal of Educational Psychology , 80 , 524 – 536 . 2915