p - ISSN : 2685 - 9106 e - ISSN : 2686 - 0384 ADI International Conference Series Staynomics : The Near One… 76 Staynomic : The Near One , The Easy one , The Small One Riyono Gede Trisoko 1 , Elti Martina 2 , Sri Febrina 3 riyonogedetrisoko @ gmail . com 1 , eltimartina2 @ gmail . com 2 , febdarina01 @ gmail . com 3 Riau Institute Of Tourism , 1 , 2 , 3 To cite this document : Martina , E . , Trisoko , R . G . , & Febrina , S . ( 2021 ) . Staynomic : The Near One , The Easy one , The Small One . Conference Series , 3 ( 2 ) , 76 – 84 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 34306 / conferenceseries . v3i2 . 579 . Abstract Currently , the pandemic is still an unavoidable part or close to us . Everything is related to service businesses , especially tourism , will have an impact . Therefore , this is critical to address it as information and an effort to provide solutions for the development of tourism service businesses significantly affected by the spread of this virus . Services in the developed theories like the Soul of service say [ 1 ] it represents a creation of taste from an activity . In the Soul of service , the taste is rooted in the sense of security and comfort . It requires much consideration in the development of the affected tourism business . Through this paper , the author tries to provide solutions for the development of tourism service businesses by observing the socio - economic situation and subsequently employing an analogy and developing it into several existing social theories . Hence , it enhances a tourism development concept during this pandemic . Keywords : behavior , anxiety ; socio economy ; service and commoditization I . INTRODUCTION This writing is an effort to provide a solution to the development of the tourism business situation during this pandemic . It is paramount because many parties are involved and feel its impact , especially in the tourism business . Therefore , the study model proposed in this research aims to provide information as a description or design of the development of the affected tourism business . It is due to changes in behavior , values , and consumption patterns that affect the production process in the tourism service business . The source of this writing uses various literatures relating to a myriad of socio - economic events in the community . Subsequently , it employs an analogy [ 2 ] , resulting in a design that the author uses as a pattern or idea as the subject of this research . Staynomic is an analog of the stay at home , which through this writing will lead to a new awareness of the growth of social - economic activities based on the immediate environment as producers and markets . p - ISSN : 2685 - 9106 e - ISSN : 2686 - 0384 ADI International Conference Series Staynomics : The Near One… 77 II . LITERATURE REVIEW 1 . Logic and Analytics The current restrictions on the mobility of people ' s activities become a burden on many people both socially and economically . It causes immense pressure on the activities of daily life . Several opinions say that how the influence of mobility on meeting people ' s needs affects particular pressure such as psychology . It is in line with Riyono ' s thought [ 3 ] , people ' s decisions to travel or having a massive digital influence on people ' s decisions will influence people ' s interests by more than 85 % . This information emerges a certain impetus that can change a decision made later . It is in line with a behavioral theory that behavior change is influenced by environmental situations such as socio - cultural , technological , and economic [ 4 ] . With elements of this situation , the author considers the need to change behavior as the most significant part of the decision system and its change in the value of life . Those are operationalized which leads to economic activities in general . For example , because there are changes in behavior so that people ' s choices also change . Therefore , the most substantial part of the concept of behavior is to know the possible channels that influence behavior and how the strength of the influence of a choice on behavior changes . This consideration is an important part because changes in behavior , in general , will affect the things that form the basis of a choice of values [ 4 ] . It can put immense pressure on people ' s decisions . Therefore , the prevailing values and life will describe how the behavior of the community . For example , in this study , a person ' s interest will affect the recognized value . In this case , what we can observe is a person ' s need for an item . It will cause new behavior . It will become a new value for the item because of or from the new value . The level of need will be known so that it can be a substitute or a compliment . Through this research , it illustrates that changes in behavior will affect changes in circulating values . Consequently , the changes in behavior affect the amount of information about a disease . For example , zoning , the death rate , or objects that affects the needs of people doing outdoor activities [ 5 ] . Therefore , it leads to the formation of value . In this study , it explores something needs to be formed from the existence of culture and the environment . Hence , with news about things that make people depressed , It creates value in society . Changes , in the results of this study , are the shift changes from the value of need as a pleasure to safety [ 6 ] . Because this change in value represents a value as meaning , it impacts the next pattern as a choice of consumption pattern . In other words , consumption that occurs provides a substitute or a compliment . It depends on the effect that occurs through the diagram below . Thus , if someone requires an item , then it receives pressure so that a certain value is formed . The consumption pattern will change indirectly . It means it will also alter the pattern of production . p - ISSN : 2685 - 9106 e - ISSN : 2686 - 0384 ADI International Conference Series Staynomics : The Near One… 78 Changes that occur between behavior and the production process are formed due to changes in value and consumption . The author believes is more in the form of anxiety [ 5 ] , as a caution in behaving and determining values . This concept is what the author concludes with caution by shopping and travels carefully in the nearest place or called with staynomic . Figure . 1 . Framework of Staynomic 2 . Intuition This research is an analogous process of several theories about how the occurrence or influences of behavior on the value beliefs hold that encourage behavior change [ 2 ] . The key thing from this analogy is how to combine several theories , as shown in the image below , into a new assumption or a new theory applied in society . Figure 2 . Behavior illustrates value Behavior as an act formed from the existing information and environmental situations will directly or indirectly reflect on the expectations [ 7 ] and beliefs or values as a quality life [ 6 ] . For example , a process psychologically will consistently be a consideration for humans to act for their lives to attain happiness [ 8 ] . Figure . 3 . Belief in value affects consumption Behavior Value Consumption The near one , The easy one , The small one Production Behavior Value Social Media Environment Regulation Value Consumption p - ISSN : 2685 - 9106 e - ISSN : 2686 - 0384 ADI International Conference Series Staynomics : The Near One… 79 In line with that , the tendency occurs to receive a meaningful value . What happened in choosing is always trying to be realistic to get what is needed [ 6 ] . In this condition , the author believes the existence of a habit is a new pattern , which constitutes the basis for service changes . Figure . 4 . Production Pattern is formed by Consumption Ways . The marketing concept will also affect the production model after recognizing the new consumption pattern [ 4 ] , especially in the service businesses . It has intangible , perishability , and variability [ 1 ] characteristics . From these patterns , the author will place it into the research by employing an analogy that the availability of goods is constructed due to changes in behavior that occur . Therefore , the situation formed is critical to know as a new lifestyle service that occurs in the community because it will affect socially and economically , or demonstrates the potential to become a pattern as a spirit of commoditization due to its presence as an option for easy things that are close to small or staynomic . III . RESEARCH METHODS In this study , the authors point to ideas that become operational concepts because of the need for information to be carried out immediately and communicated to tourism service actors to determine attitudes as a contemporary thing . Therefore , this method is more directed at the productive age group of 18 to 45 years old with 50 respondents . The research methodology begins with a literature study and continues to a simple descriptive quantitative method with tabulations analyzed for easy reading as practical knowledge . IV . FINDINGS AND RESULTS As a study of behavior practice , this paper describes the situation that occurs and can be taken as an idea that tourism business actors need to know as a business strategy . As shown in Table 1 , this contains a comprehensive knowledge base that this Covid 19 virus is substantive . Therefore , this position presents a strong impression of the community attitude of respondents Consumption Production p - ISSN : 2685 - 9106 e - ISSN : 2686 - 0384 ADI International Conference Series Staynomics : The Near One… 80 who are aware of the potential threats , where 80 % of respondents have confidence that the virus exists . Table . 1 Following such a situation , it becomes a belief in the respondent ' s choice of how overpowering social media influences this behavior . In table 2 , it is reflected which is 71 % , thus making social media the information needed . Table . 2 Likewise , with the public , the role of the task force report on COVID - 19 regarding the spread is also paramount . Table 3 shows that government news is still a preferable measure for the public to seek information to guide them . Table . 3 80 % 15 % 3 % 2 % Do you believe in the existence of the Covid 19 Virus ? Believe Uncertain Not Believe Nothing 71 % 23 % 4 % 2 % Does news in social media affect you ? Yes Uncertain All the same No p - ISSN : 2685 - 9106 e - ISSN : 2686 - 0384 ADI International Conference Series Staynomics : The Near One… 81 In line with table 3 above , then in table 4 , which because of the dominance of news [ 10 ] , it turns out to be able to form anxiety [ 6 ] , so that it will constitute certain behaviors as value beliefs [ 7 ] , where anxiety is not fomo but more as being uncertain , afraid of being infected . Table . 4 Anxiety as a result of the influence of information [ 11 ] , in society , will form the value to be careful . It is because people perceive that information is followed because it is accurate . This can be noted in table 5 with the prudence of 69 % , meaning the magnitude of behavior acknowledging the prevailing values , making values a fundamental thing that happens in society so that it is important to pay attention to . 70 % 22 % 6 % 2 % Does the Covid - 19 task force report affect your behavior ? Yes Uncertain All the same No 6 % 8 % 18 % 68 % How do you feel about the news and info about Covid 19 ? Scared Fine Normal Worried p - ISSN : 2685 - 9106 e - ISSN : 2686 - 0384 ADI International Conference Series Staynomics : The Near One… 82 Table . 5 With the strength of values that occur in the community , it can be perceived that the needs happen . It means the value of prudence is an important new market to be addressed . It can be identified in table 6 with a reasonably considerable influence , namely 73 % of respondents who transform the way of spending or consume [ 6 ] . Table . 6 Subsequent consequences that arise are a result of changes in consumption or spending patterns . It will form a contemporary production pattern with less or more modest volume . Table . 7 describes almost 81 % change in how to produce or trade . This choice can occur because of the economic value [ 4 ] or the safety value [ 5 ] . 8 % 69 % 7 % 16 % What values drive that to happen ? No effect Cautious Ignore Necessity 73 % 12 % 11 % 4 % Does it affect the way you shop ? Yes Uncertain Normal No p - ISSN : 2685 - 9106 e - ISSN : 2686 - 0384 ADI International Conference Series Staynomics : The Near One… 83 Table . 7 V . DISCUSSION From the results of this study , the analogous process explains there has been a change in behavior to services as a result of this pandemic . It impacts changes in consumption patterns and how to produce goods , in this case , in the tourism service and business sector . With the occurrence of diversification products as an effort to develop a business amidst the importance of the value of life [ 12 ] , their needs are fulfilled by carrying out economic activities closest to the necessities of life [ 13 ] through various commoditization of needs as a market . VI . CONCLUSION The fundamental part of the discussion in this research is an activity by analogizing several contemporary theories by observing the daily socio - economic activities of the community that forms from Covid 19 . That people ' s behavior that reflects the values they hold has changed the way of consumption , which then is this way of consumption also change the production process , this is because the people who require it change , events as an effort to develop an effort to stay alive , therefore the theory that concludes is that the occurrence is easy for the existing goods , staynomic : the near one , the easy one , the small one . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Leonard Berry , “Discovering The Soul Of Service , ” New York , 1999 . [ 2 ] Lindsey Engle Richland , ” Reducing Cognitive Load in Learning by Analogy , ” ”International Journal Of Psychological Studies” , Vol 5 . h1 , 2013 . ISSN : 1918 – 7211 . [ 3 ] Riyono Gede Trisoko , “Kekuatan Digital dalam Membentuk Perilaku Berwisata dan 81 % 12 % 5 % 2 % What is your attitude towards shopping ? Less shopping Rarely shopping Change shopping No shopping p - ISSN : 2685 - 9106 e - ISSN : 2686 - 0384 ADI International Conference Series Staynomics : The Near One… 84 Platform Usaha Kepariwisataan , ” Jurnal Daya Saing , Vol . 6 , no . 2 pp . 149 - 156 , June , 2020 . [ 4 ] Rhenald Kasali , “The Great Shifting , ” Kompas - Gramedia , Jakarta . 2018 [ 5 ] Stuart & Sundeen , ”Psychiatric Nursing , ” Elsevier . 2016 [ 6 ] Darli Fahlevi , “ Paradigma , ” Gramedia , Jakarta . 2016 [ 7 ] Roseno , “Revolution of Hope , ” Renebook . Jakarta . 2014 [ 8 ] Iman , “Psilkologi Profit , ” Gramedia . Jakarta . 2016 [ 9 ] Scott Belsky , “Making IdeasHappens , ” Mizan , Jakarta , 2013 . [ 10 ] Rowles & Brown , “Building Digital Culture , ” Koganpage , USA , 2007 . [ 11 ] Dan Ariely , “Irrational Consumer , ” BIP , Jakarta , 2008 . [ 12 ] Mittal & Sheth , “Value Space , ” McGraw Hill , New York , 2001 [ 13 ] Rhenald Kasali , “Agility , ” Gramedia , Jakarta , 2017 . [ 14 ] Pine & Gilmore , “The Experience Economy” , Harvard Business Review Press , Boston , 2011 . Powered by TCPDF ( www . tcpdf . org )