RESEARCH ARTICLE The potent effect of mycolactone on lipid membranes Mil è ne Nitenberg 1 ☯ , Ana ï s Be´narouche 2 ☯ , Ofelia Maniti 1 , Estelle Marion 3 , Laurent Marsollier 3 , Julie Ge´an 4 , Erick J . Dufourc 4 , Jean - Franc¸ois Cavalier 2 , 5 , Ste´phane Canaan 2 , 5 * , Agn è s P . Girard - Egrot 1 * 1 Univ . Lyon , Universite´Lyon 1 , CNRS , Institut de Chimie et BiochimieMole´culaires et Supramole´culaires , ICBMS—UMR 5246 , GEMBAS team , Lyon , France , 2 Aix - Marseille Univ , CNRS , EIPL , Marseille , France , 3 CRCINA , INSERM , Universite´de Nantes , Universite´d’Angers , Angers , France , 4 Univ . Bordeaux , CNRS , BordeauxINP , Chemistry and Biology of Membranes and Nano - objects , CBMN UMR 5248 , Pessac , France , 5 Aix - Marseille Univ , CNRS , LISM , Marseille , France ☯ These authors contributedequallyto this work . * agnes . girard - egrot @ univ - lyon1 . fr ( APGE ) ; canaan @ imm . cnrs . fr ( SC ) Abstract Mycolactone is a lipid - like endotoxin synthesized by an environmental human pathogen , Mycobacterium ulcerans , the causal agent of Buruli ulcer disease . Mycolactone has pleio - tropic effects on fundamental cellular processes ( cell adhesion , cell death and inflamma - tion ) . Various cellular targets of mycolactone have been identified and a literature survey revealed that most of these targets are membrane receptors residing in ordered plasma membrane nanodomains , within which their functionalities can be modulated . We investi - gated the capacity of mycolactone to interact with membranes , to evaluate its effects on membrane lipid organization following its diffusion across the cell membrane . We used Langmuir monolayers as a cell membrane model . Experiments were carried out with a lipid composition chosen to be as similar as possible to that of the plasma membrane . Mycolac - tone , which has surfactant properties , with an apparent saturation concentration of 1 μ M , interacted with the membrane at very low concentrations ( 60 nM ) . The interaction of myco - lactone with the membrane was mediated by the presence of cholesterol and , like deter - gents , mycolactone reshaped the membrane . In its monomeric form , this toxin modifies lipid segregation in the monolayer , strongly affecting the formation of ordered microdomains . These findings suggest that mycolactone disturbs lipid organization in the biological mem - branes it crosses , with potential effects on cell functions and signaling pathways . Microdo - main remodeling may therefore underlie molecular events , accounting for the ability of mycolactone to attack multiple targets and providing new insight into a single unifying mech - anism underlying the pleiotropic effects of this molecule . This membrane remodeling may act in synergy with the other known effects of mycolactone on its intracellular targets , poten - tiating these effects . PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 1 / 30 a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111a1111111111 OPEN ACCESS Citation : Nitenberg M , Be´naroucheA , Maniti O , Marion E , Marsollier L , Ge´an J , et al . ( 2018 ) The potent effect ofmycolactone on lipid membranes . PLoS Pathog14 ( 1 ) : e1006814 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 Editor : MarcelA . Behr , McGillUniversityHealth Centre , CANADA Received : October 2 , 2017 Accepted : December 14 , 2017 Published : January 10 , 2018 Copyright : © 2018 Nitenberg et al . This is an open access article distributedunder the terms of the Creative CommonsAttribution License , which permits unrestricted use , distribution , and reproductionin any medium , provided the original authorand source are credited . Data Availability Statement : All relevantdata are withinthe paper and its Supporting Information files . Funding : Financial supportwas obtainedfrom the LISA Carnot Institute ( ANRno . 07 - CARN - 009 - 01 ) , Aix - Marseille University ( AB ) , Universityof Lyon and the CNRS . The funders had no role in study design , data collection and analysis , decision to publish , or preparationof the manuscript . Competinginterests : The authorshave declared that no competinginterestsexist . Author summary Buruli ulcer is a necrotizing skin disease caused by an environmental mycobacterial path - ogen . The pathogenesis of this neglected tropical disease involves the production of a toxin , mycolactone , which spreads through the tissues , away from the infecting organisms . Mycolactone has pleiotropic effects on fundamental cellular processes , resulting in pro - nounced cytotoxicity and immunosuppressive effects that together drive progressive ulceration . The molecular mechanisms underlying its cellular effects have been partly deciphered , but multiple cellular targets have been identified . A literature survey revealed that most of the identified targets of mycolactone are membrane receptors residing in par - ticular domains of the plasma membrane . Despite its lipid - like nature , mycolactone has been shown to be intracellular , implying that it can cross the plasma membrane . We describe here a surprising membrane - reshaping effect of mycolactone due to effects on lipid domain formation . By reversing lateral lipid segregation , mycolactone may disrupt the formation of domains with well - established roles in the regulation of cellular signaling pathways . This remodeling of the cell plasma membrane may underlie the molecular events enabling mycolactone to attack multiple targets . Introduction Buruli ulcer ( BU ) is the third most common human mycobacterial infection in the world , after tuberculosis and leprosy [ 1 , 2 ] . BU is a neglected tropical disease of the skin and subcutaneous tissue caused by an environmental pathogen , Mycobacterium ulcerans ( M . ulcerans ) . This dis - ease , which can affect all age groups and both sexes , is commonest in West Africa and parts of Australia , but has been reported in over 30 countries worldwide [ 3 , 4 ] . These painless ulcers affect at least 5 , 000 patients per year and are thought to be heavily underreported [ 5 ] . Infection with M . ulcerans results in persistent severe necrosis with no acute inflammatory response . The ulcer begins as a painless nodule or papule on the skin , which , if left untreated , progresses to massive ulceration that may cover 15 % of the skin of the patient , resulting in significant morbidity [ 5 , 6 ] . BU is not lethal , but patients may suffer lifelong disfigurement , functional impairment and disability unless the infection is recognized and treated at an early stage . M . ulcerans pathogenesis is mediated by a necrotizing immunosuppressive toxin , mycolac - tone ( S1 Fig ) . This lipid - like polyketide macrolide has been identified as the main virulence factor produced by M . ulcerans and is responsible for the skin lesions and tissue necrosis [ 6 , 7 ] . After its production [ 8 , 9 ] , this diffusible toxin is excreted in vesicles derived from the bacterial membrane and enriched in extracellular matrix , which acts as a reservoir of the toxin [ 10 ] . In vitro , mycolactone has been shown to localize in the cytosol of cultured murine fibroblasts , through non - saturable and non - competitive uptake in the presence of excess mycolactone [ 11 , 12 ] . Mycolactone has also been reported to accumulate in a time - and dose - dependent manner in the cytoplasm of human epithelial cells and lymphocytes , but not in the plasma or nuclear membranes of the cell [ 13 ] . These findings suggest that mycolactone can diffuse across cell membranes by non - cell - specific passive diffusion to reach its intracellular targets [ 11 , 14 ] . Mycolactone A / B ( a 3 : 2 ratio of Z - / E - isomers of the C4’ - C - 5’ bond in the long “Southern” polyketide side chains , S1 Fig ) , which is produced by the most virulent strains of M . ulcerans , has been shown to have pleiotropic effects on fundamental cellular processes , such as cell division , cell death and inflammation , depending on toxin dose and exposure time [ 14 , 15 ] . Exposure to pure mycolactone is cytotoxic for many cell lines , but the dose and exposure required for cell death are highly variable [ 15 ] . Early studies on cell lines suggested a role for Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 2 / 30 mycolactone in cell - cycle arrest in the G 1 / G 0 phase and apoptosis [ 7 , 16 ] . However , recent studies have suggested that anoïkis , due to cytoskeleton rearrangements , leading to changes in cell adhesion and detachment , is a much more likely mechanism of cell death in vivo [ 3 , 17 ] . By inducing changes to the cytoskeleton and disrupting tissue structure , this toxin compromises cell structure and homeostasis through the impairment of extracellular matrix biosynthesis [ 18 ] . In addition to its cytotoxicity , mycolactone has immunosuppressive activity , resulting in a lack of local inflammation despite extensive tissue damage , together with inhibition of the local immune response [ 19 – 23 ] . At low concentrations , this molecule has been found to be a powerful analgesic , due to its stimulatory effect on the angiotensin receptor [ 24 ] . These effects may account for the painlessness of BU lesions . The precise molecular mode of action of myco - lactone in eukaryotic cells remains unclear , but a number of cellular targets have been identi - fied . A literature survey revealed most of these targets to be membrane receptors residing in ordered plasma membrane nanodomains known to modulate the functionalities of membrane proteins [ 25 , 26 ] . Mycolactone can impair the migration of naïve T cells to peripheral lymph nodes [ 27 ] , where they make contact with antigen - presenting cells during T - cell receptor activation . This alteration of T - cell homing is accompanied by a decrease in L - selectin receptor ( CD62 - L ) lev - els . The downregulation of this receptor normally involves proteolytic cleavage upon stimula - tion , but the cleavage of L - selectin seems to involve membrane microdomains , which act as a signaling platform [ 28 ] . Similarly , the chemokine receptors involved in T - cell inflammatory responses also reside in membrane domains and , the depletion of cholesterol from membranes decreases chemokine binding and abolishes chemokine receptor signaling [ 29 ] . Another effect of mycolactone A / B is hyperactivation of the Src - family kinase , leading to the depletion of intracellular calcium and a downregulation of T - cell receptor ( TCR ) expres - sion , limiting the T - cell response to stimulation and potentially contributing to apoptosis [ 3 , 14 ] . This hyperactivation is initiated by the relocalization of Lck in the microdomains of the plasma membrane , triggered by the action of the toxin [ 30 ] . Mycolactone has been reported to inhibit angiotensin II binding , in a dose - dependent manner , and to elicit signaling through human type 2 angiotensin II receptors ( AT 2 Rs ) , leading to a potassium - dependent hyperpolar - ization of neurons , accounting for the painlessness of BU lesions [ 24 ] . AT 2 R , like AT 1 R , is a G protein - coupled receptor ( GPCR ) . Microdomains ( both lipid rafts and caveolae ) have been reported to be involved in regulating GPCR signaling , by affecting both signaling selectivity and coupling efficacy [ 31 , 32 ] . Mycolactone has recently been shown to modulate Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) and neural WASP ( N - WASP ) , two members of a family of scaffold proteins that transduce various endogenous signals in dynamic remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton [ 17 ] . In immune cells , WASP regulates ordered lipid domain dynamics during immunological syn - apse formation , which involves clustering of the microdomains of the plasma membrane for optimal T - cell activation . WASP , which is recruited to lipid domains immediately after TCR stimulation , is required for the movements of these microdomains [ 33 ] . By disrupting WASP autoinhibition [ 17 ] , mycolactone can hijack actin - nucleating factors , leading to uncontrolled activation of the ARP2 / 3 - mediated assembly of actin , and a deregulation of lipid domain dynamics . Similarly , mycolactone provokes a disruption of the protein C anticoagulant path - way , with a depletion of thrombomodulin ( TM ) receptors at the surface of endothelial cells [ 34 ] . Nevertheless , the receptors of the protein C activation and activated protein C ( APC ) sig - naling pathways are colocalized in the lipid microdomains of endothelial cells [ 35 , 36 ] . Finally , it has recently been reported that mycolactone inhibits the function of the Sec61 translocon [ 37 – 39 ] , a transmembrane channel located in the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) membrane [ 40 ] . This ubiquitous complex is responsible for cotranslational protein Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 3 / 30 translocation , a universally conserved process in the biosynthesis of secretory and membrane proteins that operates for most of the 30 – 50 % of mammalian proteins carrying a canonical sig - nal peptide [ 41 ] . In investigations of transmembrane proteins ( TNF ) , monotypic proteins ( COX - 2 ) and conventionally secreted proteins ( IL - 6 ) , Hall et al . showed that mycolactone pre - vents ER protein translocation , with the proteins concerned being translated in the cytosol , where they are marked for rapid destruction by the proteasome . In this way , mycolactone causes a selective ~ 30 % decrease in membrane - associated proteins and prevents the produc - tion of the vast majority of N - glycosylated proteins [ 37 , 38 ] . Cholesterol and sphingolipid levels are lower in the ER than in the plasma membrane and other organelles , but it has been sug - gested that ER membranes nevertheless contain lipid domains [ 42 , 43 ] . The fractionation of rough ER integral membrane proteins with 0 . 18 % Triton X - 100 ( similar to the treatment of cytoplasmic membranes with 1 % Triton X - 100 , which has successfully revealed the presence of lipid domains in the cytoplasmic membrane ) showed that the 0 . 18 % Triton X - 100 fraction contained mostly ER - resident proteins , including , in particular , the Sec61alpha subunit [ 44 ] , the central transmembrane component of the sec 61 ER translocon targeted by mycolactone [ 38 , 39 , 45 ] . Thus , mycolactone has diverse complex effects on a range of cells and tissues , and the underlying mechanism unifying its pleiotropic effects seems to be its action through microdo - main - associated proteins [ 14 ] . In this study , we aimed to characterize in more detail the effects of pure mycolactone on biological membranes , focusing , in particular , on the effects of this toxin on microdomain segregation . Indeed , no molecular - scale description of the effects of this toxin on the cell plasma membrane before it reaches its cellular targets , most of which are located in the ordered plasma membrane nanodomains , has ever been reported . We investigated the capacity of mycolactone to interact with membranes and its effects on lipid organization when crossing the membrane , with several biophysical techniques , includ - ing Langmuir monolayers , which we used as an in vitro model of cell membranes , together with fluorescence and Brewster angle microscopy . Langmuir monolayers consist of supramo - lecular lipid films that form at an air - buffer interface . They can mimic biological membranes and are , thus , attractive membrane models , because the thermodynamic relationship between monolayer and bilayer membranes is direct , and monolayers overcome , independently of their lipid composition , the limitations associated with the regulation of lateral lipid packing encountered in model bilayer systems [ 46 ] . They are widely used in studies of peptide or mem - brane probe / lipid interactions [ 47 – 52 ] , and in studies of membrane - protein association [ 53 – 61 ] . Brewster angle microscopy ( BAM ) , which was used for the in situ characterization of Langmuir monolayers , provides additional information about membrane morphology and lipid organization at the air - water interface [ 62 – 64 ] . In our system , we used a lipid composi - tion closely resembling that of the plasma membrane , including among others , 33 % sphingo - myelin ( SM ) and 19 % cholesterol ( Chol ) , which was considered to be a biologically normal concentration ( natural membranes contain 5 – 50 mol % cholesterol [ 65 , 66 ] ) . Using this experi - mental approach , we demonstrated marked effects of mycolactone on membranes , and were able to visualize , for the first time , the capacity of this molecule to disrupt membranes at the molecular level . Results We investigated the interaction of mycolactone with biological membranes and evaluated the possible influence of lipid composition ( i . e . , with or without cholesterol ) , by exploring the binding properties of the toxin with a model membrane reconstituting lipid monolayers at the air / water interface . These so - called Langmuir monolayers are half - membrane models [ 46 ] , Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 4 / 30 and they can be used not only to characterize protein – membrane interactions , but also to determine the mechanism of action of bioactive molecules on cell membranes . We chose this model for study on the basis of its simple experimental design , the possibility of changing lipid composition easily and its suitability for evaluations of the membrane insertion capacity of membranotropic molecules [ 47 – 61 , 67 ] . Interfacial behavior of mycolactone at an air / buffer interface We characterized the surfactant properties of mycolactone , by evaluating its interfacial behav - ior at the air / buffer interface and in the absence of lipids . Experiments without lipids at the air / buffer interface can be used to determine : i ) the con - centration at which amphiphilic molecules saturate the lipid - free interface ( i . e . , surface satura - tion concentration ) and ii ) the concentration range minimizing aggregation and , therefore , useful for experiments . It is widely accepted that the analytical concentrations to be injected into the subphase for subsequent molecule / lipid interaction analyses should be based on such pre - evaluations and lower than the surface saturation concentration , to prevent artifacts due to molecule aggregation [ 51 , 67 – 69 ] . The surface saturation concentration was determined by tensiometry [ 70 , 71 ] . Various mycolactone concentrations , from 60 nM to 6 μM , were injected into the PBS subphase . For each concentration , the adsorption of mycolactone at the air / buffer interface was monitored by continuous surface pressure measurement until the equilibrium value , π e , was reached . The curve of π e as a function of mycolactone concentration rapidly increased to reach a plateau at 34 mN / m ( Fig 1 ) . At this surface pressure , the interface was saturated with mycolactone mole - cules , regardless of the concentration of the toxin in the subphase . The surface saturation con - centration of mycolactone was then determined at the start of the plateau , and was found to be 1 μM . Brewster angle microscopy ( BAM ) images recorded at π e with a final mycolactone concen - tration of 0 . 6 μM ( a ) , 1 . 2 μM ( b ) or 6 μM ( c ) ( Fig 1 , Inset ) confirmed the ability of this mole - cule to accumulate in a concentration - dependent manner at the air / PBS ( pH 7 . 4 ) interface , Fig 1 . Adsorption of mycolactone at the air / buffer interface . Equilibriumsurface pressures ( π e ) reached at the end of the adsorptionkinetics for different concentrations of mycolactoneinjectedinto the subphase ( PBS pH 7 . 4 ) . Each point corresponds to the mean value of three kinetic experiments . The surface saturation concentration ( 1 μ M ) was determined at the start of the plateau . Inset : BAM images at equilibriumsurface pressure ( π e ) , after the injectionof mycolactone at a final concentration of 0 . 6 μ M ( a ) , 1 . 2 μ M ( b ) or 6 μ M ( c ) . Image scale : 483 × 383 μ m 2 . All measurements were repeatedat least three times for each concentration , with a satisfactory reproducibility , and the mean values are presentedhere . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 . g001 Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 5 / 30 and to form a very thick film ( 3 . 7 ± 0 . 3 nm thick ) at very high concentrations ( 6 μM ) . At a con - centration of 0 . 6 μM , below the apparent surface saturation concentration of 1 μM , mycolac - tone formed a homogeneous interfacial film , but with some bright nuclei also visible ( spots , Fig 1 , Inset a ) . These bright nuclei resulted from aggregate formation , as demonstrated by dynamic light scattering ( DLS ) for mycolactone solutions in PBS pH 7 . 4 in S1 Appendix . Thus , mycolactone displayed surfactant properties at a nude interface . To prevent the asso - ciation of molecules into aggregates in the next experiments , we used a low concentration of mycolactone , 60 nM . At this concentration , mycolactone interacts with lipids as a monomer ( see S1 Appendix ) . Influence of cholesterol on the packing and stability of the membrane - mimicking monolayers The aim of this study was to analyze the interaction of mycolactone with biological mem - branes . We studied two membrane models : i ) a monolayer consisting of a lipid mixture resem - bling that of the plasma membrane ( given in mol % ) [ 72 – 75 ] : 39 % POPC , 33 % SM , 9 % POPE , 19 % Chol ( mixture 1 ) , and ii ) a monolayer with the same lipids but without cholesterol ( given in mol % ) : 48 % POPC , 41 % SM , 11 % POPE ( mixture 2 ) . Cholesterol is known to regulate lipid segregation in plasma membranes [ 25 , 26 ] . Mycolactone receptors have been reported to be located in ordered plasma membrane microdomains . We therefore investigated the effects of this particular membrane lipid on the ability of mycolactone to bind to membranes . We first studied the interfacial properties of the two monolayers alone , and the impact of cholesterol on lipid organization in particular , at 20 and 25˚C . Effect of cholesterol on surface pressure ( π ) —molecular area ( A ) isotherms Whatever the temperature , the π - A isotherms of mixture 1 ( Fig 2A ) showed the monolayer to be in liquid - condensed ( LC ) phase throughout compression . The beginning of the steep rise started at a molecular area of 70 Å 2 , and the monolayer was compressed up to a lateral pressure of π coll = 45 mN / m , corresponding to collapse . The molecular area at collapse , A coll , was 31 Å 2 . This area was smaller than expected for two fatty acyl chains of phospholipids ; the area per CH 2 chain in a close - packed configuration is approximately 20 Å 2 [ 76 ] . This discrepancy can be explained by the condensing effect of the cholesterol . The molecular area of a pure expanded monolayer of POPC ( the major component of mixtures 1 and 2 ) at a lateral pressure of π coll = 40 mN / m is ~ 40 Å 2 at 20 or 25˚C , consistent with the T m value ( - 4˚C ) of POPC ( S2 Fig ) . The addition of 19 % cholesterol to the POPC monolayer , resulted in the same A coll for the 81 % POPC / 19 % cholesterol mixture at 25˚C , but this area decreased to ~ 32 Å 2 at 20˚C . This suggests that the presence of 19 % cholesterol lead to extensive condensation of the POPC monolayer in the liquid - expanded state ( S2 Fig ) . Cholesterol has been shown to dehydrate lipid bilayers , resulting in lipid condensation [ 77 ] . The much lower level of condensation observed in the presence of mixture 1 ( ~ 37 Å 2 at π = 40 mN / m ) in terms of the area of POPC ( ~ 40 Å 2 ) may be due to the presence of 9 % POPE in mixture 1 , at least partly preventing the condensing effect of cholesterol . BAM images recorded during compression revealed that the small lipid domains ( shown in light gray ) present at the start of compression ( Fig 2A , image A , white arrows ) increased in size and coalesced ( Fig 2A , image B ) to form a homogeneous inter - facial film at the end of compression ( Fig 2A , image C ) , regardless of temperature . This obser - vation is consistent with the behavior of a condensed monolayer . Finally , the monolayer was homogeneous at 30 mN / m ( Fig 2A , Image C ) , the lateral surface pressure reported for biologi - cal membranes [ 78 ] . Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 6 / 30 A different pattern was observed for the isotherms of mixture 2 ( Fig 2B ) , with the monolay - ers displaying a phase transition at both temperatures . Surface pressure began to increase at a higher molecular area , 98 Å 2 . BAM images taken at 20˚C revealed the presence of holes ( gray - scale level identical to the background ) in a continuous lighter phase ( Fig 2B , image A , white arrows ) for surface pressures below 3 mN / m . These holes gradually disappeared during com - pression until a short plateau was reached at about 5 mN / m . Beyond this point , the monolayer was homogeneous ( Fig 2B , image B ) and in a liquid - condensed state until collapse ( π coll = 45 mN / m ; A coll = 25 Å 2 ) . At 25˚C , the phase transition , which could be attributed to the liquid - expanded / liquid - condensed ( LE / LC ) transition phase of monolayers incorporating SM [ 79 , 80 ] , was attenuated . Consequently , the monolayer remained homogeneous ( absence of holes at low surface pressures ) throughout compression ( Fig 2B , image C ) , until collapse ( π coll = 44 mN / m ; A coll = 30 Å 2 ) . In the absence of cholesterol , no lipid domains were observed in the monolayers . The apparent condensing effect observed for mixture 2 ( S2 Fig ) relative to the pure monolayer of POPC in the expanded state is due to the presence of 41 % SM , a high - melt - ing lipid ( Tm = 41 . 4˚C ) . The shift in A coll values observed when the temperature was increased from 20 to 25˚C could be explained , in all cases , by the disordering effect of the higher temper - ature on acyl chain packing , tending to fluidize the monolayer . Superimposition of the isotherms recorded at 20 and 25˚C ( Fig 2C ) highlighted the effect of cholesterol on the condensation state of the monolayer . At surface pressures below 10 mN / m , Fig 2 . Surface pressure ( π ) – molecular area ( A ) isotherms and corresponding BAM images of monolayers with and without cholesterol . ( A ) π - A isotherms of mixture 1 ( 39 % POPC , 33 % SM , 9 % POPE , 19 % Chol given in mol % ) recordedat 20˚C ( solid line ) or 25˚C ( dashedline ) . ( B ) π - A isothermsof mixture 2 ( 48 % POPC , 41 % SM , 11 % POPE given in mol % ) recordedat 20˚C ( dashed - dotted line ) or 25˚C ( dotted line ) . ( C ) Comparisonof isotherms of the above - mentioned monolayers . Isotherms were recordedon PBS subphase ( pH 7 . 4 ) . Each isotherm correspondsto the mean of three experiments . BAM images were recordedduringcompression of the monolayerat a constant rate of 0 . 045 nm 2 . molecule - 1 . min - 1 . Images A and B were recordedat 20˚C . The images obtainedfor C were identicalfor 20 and 25˚C . The estimated error for monolayers is ± 0 . 05mN / m for π and (cid:20) 0 . 01 nm 2 for ( A ) . Image scale : 483 × 383 μ m 2 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 . g002 Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 7 / 30 the isotherms of mixture 1 ( with cholesterol ) were shifted towards lower molecular areas than those of mixture 2 ( without cholesterol ) . By contrast , at high surface pressures ( above 25 – 30 mN / m ) , the isotherm of mixture 1 at 20˚C was shifted towards larger areas than those of mix - ture 2 at the same temperature . This clear difference between the two mixtures was consistent with the modulation of membrane fluidity by cholesterol , through modification of the order - ing of lipid acyl chains [ 81 ] : cholesterol tends to condense fluid phases ( i . e . , it increases the lipid chain ordering of the liquid - crystalline disordered phase ) and to fluidize condensed phases ( i . e . , it decreases the lipid chain ordering of the solid - ordered phase ) [ 82 – 85 ] . A com - parison of the four isotherms also revealed that , in the absence of cholesterol at 20˚C , the monolayer was extremely condensed . This condensation state may be directly due to the pres - ence of 41 % SM in mixture 2 . Indeed , sphingolipids generally form a solid gel phase and are fluidized by sterols , which interact preferentially with them in the membrane [ 66 , 86 ] . Further - more , the domains observed in mixture 1 ( Fig 2A , image A ) were probably characteristic of the liquid - ordered phase resulting from a ternary mixture of a high chain - melting lipid ( like SM ) and a low chain - melting lipid ( like POPC ) with cholesterol , and preferential interactions between Chol and SM [ 65 , 79 , 82 , 87 – 92 ] . Stability of model lipid monolayers at a working surface pressure of 30 mN / m We analyzed the interaction of mycolactone with monolayers at a working surface pressure of 30 mN / m , to mimic the lateral pressure of biological membranes [ 46 , 78 ] . As a control , and to decipher the effect of mycolactone more effectively , we checked the stability over time of the mixed monolayers in the presence of ethanol , the solvent used for mycolactone . For this purpose , we injected a volume of ethanol equivalent to that used for mycolactone solu - tion ( 4 . 45 μL ) into the subphase underneath the stabilized monolayer at 30 mN / m . We then recorded changes in surface pressure over a period of about seven hours . At 20˚C , the mono - layers were highly stable , with only small surface pressure variations ( ± 2 mN / m ) over time ( S3 Fig ) . At 25˚C , a greater variation of surface pressure was observed ( from - 2 to - 5 mN / m ) , pos - sibly due to subphase evaporation . We used BAM images for simultaneous characterization of the morphology and lipid orga - nization of the mixed monolayers at 20˚C ( Figs 3A and 4A , rows a ) and 25˚C ( Figs 3B and 4B , rows a ) . All the monolayers were homogeneous after one hour of relaxation , just before injec - tion . After injection , the changes in monolayer morphology differed between temperatures and membrane lipid compositions . At 20˚C , the mixed films displayed a phase segregation that differed according to the pres - ence or absence of cholesterol . In the presence of cholesterol ( Fig 3A , row a ) , lipid organization gradually changed , after about 3 h , with the formation of circular domains of an expanded fluid phase ( dark phase ) trapped within a more condensed phase ( white phase ) . The same change in monolayer morphology was obtained without the injection of ethanol ( S4 Fig , row a ) . This segregation , observed at 20˚C , and leading to a new thermodynamic equilibrium with no loss of stability , could therefore be attributed to preferential interactions between choles - terol and the high - melting lipid SM in the mixed monolayer [ 65 , 82 , 83 , 87 ] , with an expulsion of low - melting lipids such as POPC / POPE , resulting in the formation of round domains of fluid phase , as already reported for ternary mixtures of PC / SM / Chol [ 81 , 88 , 89 ] . In the absence of cholesterol , ordered domains appeared earlier , from the start of the experiment , and pro - gressively grew in the form of “stars” ( bright clusters , Fig 4A , row a ) . These domains resembled the condensed domains observed in the liquid - expanded / liquid - condensed ( LE / LC ) transition phase during the compression of a pure monolayer of SM on a PBS subphase ( pH 7 . 4 ) at 20˚C Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 8 / 30 ( S5 Fig ) . These findings suggest that SM molecules retain their ability to segregate over time in the mixed monolayer , but only in the absence of cholesterol . Conversely , no segregation occurred at the higher temperature . Indeed , at 25˚C , in the pres - ence ( mixture 1 – Fig 3B , row a ) or absence ( mixture 2 – Fig 4B , row a ) of cholesterol , the two monolayers remained homogeneous throughout the entire experiment . The interaction of mycolactone with mixed monolayers modifies lipid segregation in membranes We investigated the membrane - binding properties of mycolactone and evaluated the effect of this interaction on lipid organization in mixed films , by injecting a solution of mycolactone in ethanol into the subphase at a final concentration of 60 nM , beneath the monolayers of mix - ture 1 ( with cholesterol ) or mixture 2 ( without cholesterol ) , compressed at an initial surface pressure π i of 30 mN / m . Upon injection , regardless of lipid composition and temperature , the interaction of myco - lactone with the monolayer resulted in a rapid increase in surface pressure up to ~ 36 mN / m within the first 15 – 20 minutes ( Fig 5 ) . After a stabilization period of about 1 – 1 . 5 h , π gradually decreased over time . The absence of cholesterol clearly did not affect the ability of mycolactone to penetrate into the monolayer ; it simply delayed the decrease in surface pressure . BAM images were taken before and after mycolactone injection , throughout the adsorption period ( Figs 3 and 4 , rows b ) . In all cases , monolayers were homogeneous at the initial surface Fig 3 . Effect of mycolactone on the lipid organization of mixed monolayers in the presenceof cholesterol . BAM images of 39 % POPC , 33 % SM , 9 % POPE , 19 % Chol ( mixture 1 ) monolayers after the injection ( 4 . 45 μ L ) of ethanol ( row a ) or mycolactone ( row b ) into the PBS subphase ( pH 7 . 4 ) beneaththe interfacial film compressed at an initial surface pressureof 30 mN / m at 20˚ ( A ) or 25˚C ( B ) . The injectionwas performed after a relaxation time of one hour , with the surface area kept constant ( mobile barriers were stopped ) . The final concentration of mycolactone was 60 nM . Image scale : 483 × 383 μ m 2 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 . g003 Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 9 / 30 pressure of 30 mN / m . Mycolactone injection modified lipid segregation in the monolayers independently of temperature , but differently according to the presence or absence of choles - terol in the monolayers . For mixture 1 at 20˚C ( Fig 3A , row b ) , lipid organization changed rapidly over the first 15 min towards the formation of circular domains in a more condensed state ( light gray phase ) , trapped within a less condensed phase ( dark gray phase ) . This reorganization is essentially the opposite of the organization observed with the pure monolayer ( Fig 3A , row a ) . A similar pat - tern was observed if the mycolactone was injected at the apparent saturation concentration of 1 μM ( S4 Fig , row b ) . The time required for mycolactone to reverse the segregation pattern in membranes ( 15 minutes ) corresponds to the time required for toxin penetration into the monolayer until stabilization . At 25˚C ( Fig 3B , row b ) , this segregation pattern occurred 3 h after injection , whereas no segregation was observed for the control monolayer at 25˚C . Highly luminous structures ( Fig 3 , row b , t = 15 min or 85 minutes at 20˚C and t = 30 min at 25˚C ) , similar to those observed for mycolactone at the air / buffer interface ( Fig 1 , image b ) were also observed . This feature indicated the presence of the toxin within the monolayer in the presence of cholesterol . For mixture 2 at 20˚C , no star - shaped domains were visible , contrasting with observations for the monolayer alone . Very small domains ( small bright dots ) became visible much later , 4 h after mycolactone injection ( Fig 4A , row b , white arrows ) . At 25˚C , no significant change in the morphology of the monolayer relative to the control was observed upon mycolactone Fig 4 . Effect of mycolactone on the lipid organization of mixed monolayers without cholesterol . BAM images of 48 % POPC , 41 % SM , 11 % POPE ( mixture 2 ) monolayers after the injection ( 4 . 45 μ L ) of ethanol ( row a ) or mycolactone ( row b ) in the PBS subphase ( pH 7 . 4 ) beneaththe interfacial film compressed at an initial surface pressure of 30 mN / m at 20˚C ( A ) or 25˚C ( B ) . The injectionwas performed after a relaxation time of one hour , with the surface area kept constant ( mobile barriers were stopped ) . The final concentration of mycolactone was 60 nM . Image scale : 483 × 383 μ m 2 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 . g004 Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 10 / 30 injection ( Fig 4B ) . Again , only the presence of bright objects corresponding to mycolactone at different time points ( Fig 4B , rows b ) attested to the interaction of the toxin with the mono - layer . In the absence of cholesterol , the presence of the toxin within the monolayer therefore prevented SM molecules from aggregating , thereby fluidizing the condensed and extremely rigid mixture 2 monomolecular film ( Fig 2B ) . At 25˚C , the monolayer was fluid enough to pre - vent SM aggregation , and this attenuated the potential fluidizing effect of the mycolactone . Influence of cholesterol on the membrane - binding properties of mycolactone We analyzed the influence of lipid organization on the membrane - binding properties of the toxin further , by investigating the effect of initial surface pressure on the interaction of myco - lactone with the monolayers . For this purpose , we monitored the maximal increase in surface pressure Δ π max immediately following toxin injection at various π i values , ranging from 5 to 30 mN / m . This relationship has been widely used to assess lipid - protein interactions and to dis - tinguish between electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions [ 53 , 55 , 57 , 58 , 60 , 61 , 68 , 93 ] . The Δ π max = f ( π i ) plot shown in Fig 6 was used to evaluate the binding parameters of myco - lactone on both types of Langmuir monolayers . Linear extrapolation to an increase in surface pressure of zero ( Δ π max = 0 ) can be used to determine i ) the maximum insertion pressure ( MIP ) , reflecting the influence of initial lipid packing density on the ability of the molecule to penetrate into the monolayer , and ii ) the synergy factor " a " [ 50 , 56 , 93 , 94 ] . This factor , first Fig 5 . Interaction of mycolactone with mixed monolayers in the presenceor absence of cholesterol . Adsorption kinetics ( π - t ) curves of mycolactone on monolayers composedof ( A ) mixture 1 ( 39 % POPC , 33 % SM , 9 % POPE , 19 % Chol ) or ( B ) mixture 2 ( 48 % POPC , 41 % SM , 11 % POPE ) at 20˚C ( solid line ) or 25˚C ( dashedline ) . Mycolactone was injected ( 4 . 45 μ L ) into the PBS subphase ( pH 7 . 4 ) beneaththe monolayer compressed at an initialsurface pressure π i of 30 mN / m after a relaxationtime of one hour ( arrows ) . Surface area was kept constant duringthe run . The final concentrationof mycolactone was 60 nM . Each measurement was performed at least three times for each condition , and a representative curve is presented here . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 . g005 Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 11 / 30 described by Salesse et al . [ 56 , 94 ] , provides insight into the mechanisms governing the interac - tion with lipid monolayers . A positive a value indicates favorable interactions , as further dem - onstrated by MIP values exceeding the estimated membrane lateral pressure ( ~ 30 mN / m ) . A null synergy factor reveals a stationary state , with no favoring or disfavoring of membrane binding . A negative synergy factor indicates unfavorable binding to the monolayer , corre - sponding to a repulsion of the molecule as a function of the compactness of the monolayer . Here , MIP and a provided useful information about the effect of lipid composition on the abil - ity of mycolactone to interact with membranes . For mixture 1 , pressure variation profiles were similar at the two temperatures , with a linear decrease as a function of initial surface pressure π i . MIP and the a synergy factor were above 30 – 35 mN / m and positive , respectively , at both temperatures . These findings are consistent with strong insertion / penetration into the interfacial film and favorable interactions between mycolac - tone and the monolayer ( Fig 6A and 6B ) . Furthermore , both MIP and a values were higher at 20˚C ( MIP = 45 . 9 ± 2 . 8 mN / m ; a = 0 . 58 ± 0 . 02 ) than at 25˚C ( MIP = 38 . 7 ± 1 . 1 mN / m ; a = 0 . 32 ± 0 . 02 ) , suggesting that , in the presence of cholesterol , decreases in temperature leading to a rigidifi - cation of the monolayer may favor the interaction of mycolactone with the mixed film . By contrast , the curve profiles for mixture 2 differed considerably between temperatures . At 20˚C ( Fig 6C ) , the plot obtained was split into two distinct phases : an initial plateau , for which Δ π max remained constant at π i values below 17 . 5 mN / m , with a synergy factor of 0 . 93 ± 0 . 09 , and a second phase in which Δ π max decreased at π i values greater than 17 . 5 mN / m , associated with an MIP value of 34 . 8 ± 1 . 6 mN / m and a synergy factor close to 0 ( a = 0 . 01 ± 0 . 07 ) . Such Fig 6 . Influence of lipid packing on the membrane - binding properties of mycolactone . Changein surface pressure ( Δπ , mN / m ) when mycolactone interacts with mixed monolayers at different initial surface pressures ( π i , mN / m ) . The nature of the lipid membranewas as follows : ( A ) and ( B ) mixture 1 consistingof 39 % POPC , 33 % SM , 9 % POPE , 19 % Chol . ( C ) and ( D ) mixture 2 consistingof 48 % POPC , 41 % SM , 11 % POPE ( given in mol % ) . Experiments were performed at 20˚C ( A ) and ( C ) , or 25˚C ( B ) and ( D ) . Each point correspondsto an independentmeasurement with a new lipid monolayerformed on PBS subphase ( pH 7 . 4 ) . The final concentration of mycolactone was 60 nM . Representative data from two or three independent assays are shown . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 . g006 Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 12 / 30 ‘biphasic’ behavior was recently reported by Ha¨dicke and Blume for the binding of small cat - ionic peptides to anionic phospholipid monolayers [ 95 ] , and may be related to the physical state of the monolayer . As shown by these authors , incorporation , through hydrophobic inter - actions , into the loosely packed monolayer in the LE phase can lead to a constant Δ π value , depending on the nature of the lipids making up the monolayer . By contrast , in the LC phase , Δ π and π i display an inverse linear relationship , due to lipid condensation . For mixture 2 , the monolayer displayed a LE / LC phase transition , as shown on the isotherms ( Fig 2B ) , with the presence of holes in the loosely packed monolayer , as revealed by BAM ( Fig 2B , image A ) . We therefore suggest that behavior similar to that proposed for small hydrophobic peptides may account for the unusual results obtained with mycolactone . Indeed , this toxin is also a small hydrophobic molecule ( MW : 743 . 021 ) , and , when it penetrates into a loosely packed mono - layer in the LE phase by hydrophobic interactions , it triggers no increase in surface pressure because the monolayer is too weakly compressed ( loosely packed ) and the molecular area of the toxin is too small to cause lipid condensation at the interface . In addition , mycolactone was probably able to fill the space , i . e . , the holes observed in the monolayer , due to its own sur - face activity , leading to an absence of surface pressure variation ( Δ π max remained constant ) as long as the monolayer was weakly compressed . Beyond 17 . 5 mN / m , the monolayer was sufficiently tightly packed to attain its condensed state ( observed on the isotherm Fig 2B ) , yielding a negative slope of the Δ π max = f ( π i ) plot ( Fig 6C , part 2 ) , with a synergy factor close to 0 ( a = 0 . 01 ± 0 . 07 ) . This value indicates that , even in a stationary state in which mycolactone was able to penetrate the monolayer at 20˚C , no spe - cific interactions ( either favorable or unfavorable ) occurred between mycolactone and lipids . The decrease in the ability of the molecule to penetrate the membrane was therefore entirely due to the physical condensation of the monolayer as a result of the increase in lipid packing density during compression [ 56 , 94 ] . At 25˚C ( Fig 6D ) , the curve profile and the MIP ( 41 . 8 ± 2 . 2 mN / m ) were similar to those obtained for mixture 1 at the same temperature , but the a value ( 0 . 45 ± 0 . 02 ) was different . At the higher temperature ( 25˚C vs . 20˚C ) , the monolayer was more fluid , as revealed by the shift of the π - A isotherm towards larger molecular areas due to the disordering effect of the higher temperature on acyl chain packing ( Fig 2B ) , and favorable interactions occurred between the toxin and the monolayer . As previously observed for π - A isotherms ( Fig 2A and 2B ) , the effect of temperature on monolayer fluidity was more pronounced for mixture 2 . This difference may account for the difference in synergy values . At 25˚C , the interaction of mycolactone with monolayers seems to be governed by greater monolayer fluidity . However , the presence of cholesterol in the monolayer enabled the myco - lactone to penetrate into a more condensed monolayer . Indeed , if mycolactone insertion were regulated solely by monolayer fluidity ( as observed at 25˚C ) , then its insertion should increase with temperature , which was found to be the case in the absence ( Fig 6C and 6D ) , but not in the presence of cholesterol ( Fig 6A and 6B ) . Conversely , the binding parameters ( MIP and syn - ergy ) were highest at 20˚C in the presence of cholesterol ( Fig 6A ) . As the synergy factor mea - sures sensitivity to lipid acyl chain packing , we can conclude that the insertion of mycolactone into the monolayer was favored by the presence of cholesterol at lower temperatures , which favored increases in monolayer rigidity . Mycolactone reverses the lipid organization of the liquid - ordered ( Lo ) phase in membranes We investigated the effects of mycolactone on lipid segregation in the monolayer in the presence of cholesterol , by performing the same experiments ( π i = 30 mN / m , 20˚C ) by Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 13 / 30 fluorescence microscopy ( FM ) , with mixture 1 labeled with TopFluor Cholesterol probe . This molecular probe can be used to study intracellular cholesterol dynamics , because its diffusion in the plasma membrane is free and unhindered [ 96 ] . In this context , the fluorescent domains observed were , thus , those containing the TopFluor Cholesterol molecule . In our study , the use of this fluorescent marker made it possible to track the localization of cholesterol in the monolayer and its distribution in domains . Lipid segregation in the control monolayer was observed 3 h after ethanol injection ( 4 . 45 μL ) , with the appearance of circular dark domains trapped within a light phase ( Fig 7 , row a ) . Segregation occurred more rapidly in the presence of the toxin ( in 1h15 ) , but with a pattern opposite to that in the control , with the formation of circular fluorescent domains within a dark phase ( Fig 7 , row b ) . In ternary mixtures , SM is known to interact preferentially with cholesterol to form domains of liquid - ordered ( L o ) phase , corresponding to a phase inter - mediate between the liquid - condensed phase ( L c ) and the fluid liquid - expanded ( L e ) phase [ 91 , 92 ] . It can therefore be inferred from our measurements that the green fluorescent areas correspond to domains of liquid - ordered phase , whereas the dark areas correspond to domains of fluid phase [ 96 ] . Thus , these FM experiments yielded results identical to those obtained with BAM for the pure monolayer or after the injection of mycolactone ( Fig 3A ) , in support of our conclusion . A similar correlation between the results of BAM and FM was reported in another recent study [ 79 ] . By modifying the interactions between SM molecules , and , probably , between SM and cho - lesterol , through physical insertion in the monolayer ( the toxin impeded the segregation of SM in mixture 2 at 20˚C without specific interaction , a = 0 ) , mycolactone reversed the segregation of the Lo phase in the monolayer . Thus , mycolactone probably interacts preferentially with the Lo phase , which is intermediate between the highly condensed phase of SM and the fluid phase of POPC . This conclusion is consistent with the results obtained for the two mixtures at 20˚C , and with the synergic interaction observed only in the presence of cholesterol ( a > 0 for Fig 7 . Influence of mycolactone interaction on the distribution of the liquid - ordered ( L o ) phase in the membrane . Fluorescence images of monolayers consistingof 39 % POPC , 33 % SM , 9 % POPE , 19 % Chol and including0 . 5 % BODIPY - cholesterol ( TopFluor Cholesterol ) , after the injection ( 4 . 45 μ L ) of ethanol ( row a ) or mycolactone ( row b ) into the PBS subphase ( pH 7 . 4 ) beneaththe interfacial film compressed at an initial surface pressure of 30 mN / m at 20˚C . The injectionwas performed after a relaxationtime of one hour , and surface area was kept constant ( mobile barriers were stopped ) . The final concentration of mycolactone was 60 nM . Scale bar : 50 μ m . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 . g007 Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 14 / 30 mixture 1 at 20˚C – Fig 6A ) . This preferential interaction with the Lo phase may also explain why the presence of cholesterol enhanced the penetration capacity of mycolactone at lower temperatures , which were associated with lower levels of fluidity ( highest MIP and a value for mixture 1 at 20˚C – Fig 6A ) . Mycolactone has a detergent - like membrane - reshaping activity The adsorption kinetic ( π - t ) curves showed a progressive decrease in surface pressure after the injection of mycolactone , at both temperatures ( Fig 5 ) . This suggests that the toxin affects monolayer stability and may have a detergent - like effect . Indeed , detergents are amphiphilic molecules with surfactant properties that can solubilize lipids , depending on membrane phase and composition [ 97 ] . We tested this hypothesis , by performing interaction assays with a final concentration of 60 nM Tween 20 or Triton X - 100 ( i . e . , non - ionic detergents ) at 20˚C , with a monolayer of mix - ture 1 compressed at a π i of 30 mN / m . Tween 20 is known to solubilize lipid membranes regardless of their aggregation state [ 98 ] , whereas Triton X - 100 solubilizes the liquid - disor - dered ( L d ) phase but not the liquid - ordered phase ( L o ) [ 81 , 88 , 97 , 99 ] . The kinetic curves recorded were then compared with that obtained with mycolactone ( Fig 8A ) . Fig 8 . Detergent effect on mixed monolayers in the presence of cholesterol . Adsorption kinetics ( π - t ) curves of detergent on monolayers consistingof 39 % POPC , 33 % SM , 9 % POPE , 19 % Chol ( mixture 1 ) at 20˚C , and the correspondingBAM images . ( A ) Tween 20 or Triton X - 100 was injectedinto the PBS subphase ( pH 7 . 4 ) beneaththe monolayerat a final concentration of 60 nM . ( B ) Tween 20 or Triton X - 100 was injectedinto the PBS subphase ( pH 7 . 4 ) beneaththe monolayerat a constant final “Active concentration / CMC ratio” of 0 . 06 . ( C ) BAM images corresponding to the adsorption kinetics ( π - t ) curves after the injectionof Tween 20 ( b ) and ( d ) , or Triton X - 100 ( c ) and ( e ) , at a constant final concentration of 60 nM ( b ) and ( c ) , or an “Active concentration / CMC ratio” of 0 . 06 ( d ) and ( e ) . ( a ) Images recordedafter the injectionof a 60nM mycolactone ( final concentration ) . In all experiments , the monolayerwas compressed at an initial surface pressure π i of 30 mN / m and detergentswere injectedafter a relaxationtime of one hour ( arrows ) . Surface area was kept constant during the run . Each measurement was performed at least three times for each condition , and a representative curve is presentedhere . Image scale : 483 × 383 μ m 2 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 . g008 Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 15 / 30 When Tween 20 was injected beneath the monolayer , the surface pressure π increased to a plateau value of about 34 mN / m , gradually decreasing thereafter ( Fig 8A ) . Investigations of monolayer morphology by BAM ( Fig 8C , row b ) revealed that , upon interaction , lipid organi - zation shifted towards the formation of circular condensed domains ( white phase ) trapped within a fluid phase ( dark phase ) , as in the case of mycolactone ( Fig 8C , row a ) . However , this lipid reorganization occurred 2h40 after detergent injection , later than for the toxin ( Fig 8C , row b ) . The surface pressure π remained constant after Triton X - 100 injection ( Fig 8A ) . The absence of an effect on the surface pressure stability of mixture 1 was therefore compatible with an absence of L o phase solubilization ( a property of Triton X - 100 ) . However , BAM images revealed that Triton X - 100 provoked the same pattern of lipid segregation as mycolac - tone ( condensed domains in a fluid phase ) , but with the same time - shift ( 2h50 ) as for Tween 20 ( Fig 8C , row c ) . Similar changes in the morphology of monolayers containing SM and cho - lesterol upon interaction with Triton X - 100 have already been reported [ 100 ] , and this deter - gent , which can induce L o / L d phase segregation in a typical raft - like ternary mixture , was recently described as a potent membrane - reshaping agent [ 97 , 99 ] . All these findings reveal , therefore , that the presence of 60 nM detergent or toxin in the sub - phase modifies lipid segregation in the POPC / SM / POPE / Chol monolayer in a manner oppo - site to that in the control . In these experiments , both the detergents and the toxin were injected into the subphase at the same final concentration ( 60 nM ) . However , the solubilizing action of a detergent depends on its critical micellar concentration ( CMC ) and on the detergent / membrane ratio at which it is used [ 101 ] . The CMC of Tween 20 is 50 – 60 μM [ 102 ] , and that of Triton X - 100 is 0 . 2 mM , at 25˚C [ 98 , 103 ] . For mycolactone , the apparent saturation concentration of 1 μM determined by tensiometry ( Fig 1A ) may be considered equivalent to an apparent CMC . Under these condi - tions , the two detergents and mycolactone may behave differently at an effective ( active ) con - centration of 60 nM . Thus , to maintain a constant ratio between the effective concentration injected in the subphase and the CMC , we further investigated the effect of each detergent on monolayer stability with an “effective concentration / CMC ratio” of 0 . 06 ( i . e . , 60 nM divided by 1 μM , as for mycolactone ) . To respect this new experimental constraint , Tween 20 or Triton X - 100 , at final concentra - tions of 3 . 6 μM and 12 μM , respectively , were injected in the subphase of the mixture 1 mono - layer ( Fig 8B ) . The use of these new detergent concentrations had no significant effect on interaction kinetics . The main difference concerned the formation of condensed domains , which occurred more rapidly at this constant “effective concentration / CMC ratio” of 0 . 06 than following the injection of a 60 nM solution : 1h30 for Tween 20 ( Fig 8C , row d ) and 1h40 for Triton X - 100 ( Fig 8C , row e ) . However , these times remains longer than the 15 min for lipid segregation triggered by mycolactone with the same constant ratio of 0 . 06 ( Fig 8C , row a ) . At an “effective concentration / CMC ratio” of 0 . 06 , at which each molecule acts as a monomer , the same effects on lipid morphology were observed by BAM for Tween 20 , Triton X - 100 and mycolactone . Under these conditions , the toxin penetrated and destabilized the monolayer just like the detergents , but more efficiently , acting as a reshaping agent [ 97 , 99 ] . As shown in this study , mycolactone preferentially binds to monolayers containing cholesterol , and this interaction induces a destabilization of the L o phase by fluidizing the monolayer , modifying the preferential interactions between SM and cholesterol , like a detergent , but not like Triton X - 100 [ 88 , 97 ] . Similar results were recently reported for glycyrrhizin , a molecule of the sapo - nin class extracted from plants and recognized as a natural detergent , which causes membrane perturbations after its migration toward SM / sterol - enriched membrane domains [ 79 ] . Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 16 / 30 Discussion Mycolactones form a family of highly related macrocyclic polyketides identified as the primary virulence factors responsible for Buruli ulcer ( BU ) , a neglected tropical disease of the skin and subcutaneous tissue caused by the environmental human pathogen Mycobacterium ulcerans [ 4 ] . Despite the wealth of research describing the pathogenic mechanism [ 14 , 34 , 37 ] , there is still no molecular explanation of the necrosis seen in the ulcers , over and above cytopathic activity , and the immunomodulatory or analgesic properties of mycolactone [ 13 , 24 ] . The effects of the toxin on the cell plasma membranes they cross have never been described . In this study , we investigated , for the first time , the membrane - binding properties of myco - lactone , with Langmuir monolayers , which were used as membrane models for the fine analy - sis of membrane binding kinetics . We chose to use this system because its experimental design is simple and it can be adapted for investigations of the molecular insertion properties of mem - branotopic molecules . We studied monolayers with a lipid composition of 39 % POPC , 33 % SM , 9 % POPE and 19 % cholesterol ( % mol ) , which was considered representative of the plasma membrane [ 72 – 75 ] . These monolayers were compressed at an initial surface pressure ( π i ) of 30 mN / m , a value considered representative of the lateral pressure of biological mem - branes [ 46 , 78 ] . The results obtained provided new insight into the mechanism of membrane interaction and the effect of the toxin on membrane lipid organization . By studying the behavior of the pure toxin at an air / buffer interface , we found that mycolac - tone , like detergents , has surfactant properties , with an apparent surface saturation concentra - tion of 1 μM , after which , the toxin is no longer in the monomer form ( Fig 1 ) . Experiments were conducted at a final concentration of 60 nM , to prevent artifacts during monolayer inves - tigations . At this concentration , mycolactone interacts with the membrane as a monomer . The concentrations of mycolactone naturally present in the lesions during the course of the disease and leading to progressive ulceration are not always known . Determinations of the concentra - tions of mycolactone A / B in the various untreated pre - ulcerative nodules and plaques , ulcers and edematous lesions in M . ulcerans - infected human skin ( biopsies ) have revealed consider - able variability [ 104 ] . The median concentration in all types of lesions or within the lesion itself ( center or periphery ) varied from 35 nM ( i . e . , 26 ng / mL ) for pre - ulcerative lesions or the periphery of the lesions , to 596 nM ( i . e . , 443 ng / mL ) in ulcers or 1 . 2 μM ( i . e . , 895 ng / mL ) in edematous lesions . Mycolactone can also be detected in ulcer exudates obtained non - inva - sively from wound swabs , at concentrations of 67 – 270 nM ( i . e . , 50 – 200 ng / mL ) [ 105 ] . Finally , it has been shown that the toxin concentration rapidly increases following inoculation with M . ulcerans in a mouse model of disease , from 385 ± 142 nM ( i . e . , 286 ± 105 ng / mL ) on day 3 , to 1 . 28 ± 0 . 29 μM ( i . e . , 948 ± 215 ng / mL ) on day 7 and 4 . 85 ± 0 . 63 μM ( i . e . , 3603 ± 478 ng / mL ) on day 62 [ 106 ] . Analyses of the ability of low biological concentrations ( 60 nM ) of mycolac - tone to interact with the membrane provide information about the initial effects of the toxin on the plasma membrane , the first barrier that the toxin must cross to reach its intracellular targets . Presumably , these effects are progressively amplified during disease development , with the gradual increase in mycolactone concentration . Mycolactone can bind to membranes regardless of their lipid composition ( Fig 5 ) . How - ever , the presence of cholesterol promotes toxin insertion into the monolayer ( Fig 6 ) , highlighting the key role of this sterol in the interaction of the toxin with the membrane . Cho - lesterol modulates membrane fluidity and influences the organization of other lipids by chang - ing their ordering , available area and the formation of domains of characteristic composition [ 107 ] . We also found that mycolactone had a strong effect on lateral lipid segregation in the membrane and the formation of distinct domains in monolayers containing cholesterol ( Figs 5 and 7 ) . Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 17 / 30 In the monolayer with a composition resembling that of the plasma membrane ( mixture 1 ) , preferential interactions between cholesterol ( 19 % ) and one high - melting lipid , SM ( 33 % ) , which were mixed with the low - melting lipids POPC ( 39 % ) and POPE ( 9 % ) [ 65 , 90 , 108 ] , led to L o / L d segregation ( Figs 3A and 7 ) mimicking the lateral heterogeneity of cell membranes , with the coexistence of ordered and non - ordered lipid domains [ 66 , 79 , 81 – 83 , 87 – 89 , 92 , 109 , 110 ] . This lateral heterogeneity , with the coexistence of L d and L o phases , would compartmentalize cellular membranes and play a key role in the lateral segregation of various classes of mem - brane proteins to facilitate the various cellular functions and processes occurring at the mem - brane [ 81 , 92 , 108 , 111 – 113 ] . We show here that mycolactone acts as a reshaping agent at very low concentrations and that , in its monomer form , it disturbs lipid segregation in monolayers ( Figs 3A , 7 and 8 ) . A similar effect has been described for penetratin , a cell - penetrating peptide known to cross cell membranes . Penetratin recruits specific lipids locally for the formation of fluid membrane patches dispersed within ordered domains [ 114 ] . The reshaping induced by mycolactone may have a direct effect on the cellular functions modulated by lipid domains , by affecting the for - mation of these domains . This hypothesis is supported by the promotion of mycolactone / lipid interactions within the monolayer by cholesterol and by results concerning the membrane - flu - idizing effect of the toxin preventing SM aggregation ( in the absence of cholesterol , Fig 4A ) . Using a fluorescent derivative with a biological activity one tenth that of mycolactone , Sny - der & Small showed , in 2003 , that mycolactone was localized in the cytosol of murine fibro - blasts cultured in vitro [ 11 , 12 ] . Similar results have been obtained with human epithelial cells and lymphocytes exposed to a 14 C - labeled form of the toxin ; the mycolactone accumulates in the cytoplasm , and not in cell plasma or nuclear membranes [ 13 ] . Overall , these results are consistent with non - cell - specific passive diffusion of the toxin through the plasma membrane to reach its intracellular targets . We show here that mycolactone , in its monomer form ( i . e . , 60 nM final concentration ) , can modify membrane lipid organization by reversing lipid segrega - tion . Thus , if it crosses the plasma membrane at concentrations below its apparent CMC , mycolactone may disturb the natural distribution of lipids in the membrane and the formation of lipid nanodomains , with consequences for metabolic pathways involving ordered mem - brane domains . As mentioned in the introduction , most of cellular targets of mycolactone are membrane protein receptors residing in ordered plasma membrane nanodomains , where their functional - ities can be modulated . Mycolactone can bind and modulate the activity of two members of a family of scaffold proteins , Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) and neural WASP ( N - WASP ) , which transduce various endogenous signals through a dynamic remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton [ 17 ] . However , sphingolipid - cholesterol domains have been shown to be the preferred platforms for membrane - linked actin polymerization mediated by in situ phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) synthesis and tyrosine kinase signaling through the WASP - ARP2 / 3 pathway ( PIP 2 stimulates de novo actin polymerization by activating the pathway involving WASP and the actin - related protein complex ARP2 / 3 [ 115 ] ) . Mycolactone binding to WASP involves a lysine - rich basic region ( BR ) [ 17 ] that has also been implicated in the activation of WASP / N - WASP by PIP 2 in both the allosteric and the oligomerization domains [ 116 ] . The L o phase reversion triggered by the membrane insertion of mycolactone may therefore play an important role in modulating the WASP - Arp 2 / 3 pathway . Could myco - lactone replace PIP 2 in the disorganized sphingolipid - cholesterol microdomains and bind to WASPs ? Mycolactone also triggers a depletion of thrombomodulin ( TM ) receptors on the surface of endothelial cells , leading to disruption of the protein C anticoagulation pathway . This deple - tion has been observed in vitro in human dermal microvascular endothelial cells ( HDMVECs ) Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 18 / 30 exposed to a very low dose ( 2 ng / mL i . e . , 2 . 69 nM ) of mycolactone and , in vivo , in the subcuta - neous tissues of punch biopsies , and is strongly associated with the fibrin deposition com - monly observed in BU skin lesions [ 34 ] . Nevertheless , TM receptors for protein C activation and activated protein C ( APC ) signaling pathways are colocalized in the lipid microdomains of endothelial cells [ 35 , 36 ] . This localization in the same domain is the key requirement for APC signaling pathways in endothelial cells [ 35 , 36 ] . Again , the change in lipid segregation , in addition to the observed depletion of TM receptors , due to the interaction of mycolactone with the plasma membrane during its passage into the cell , may disturb lipid microdomain for - mation in the membrane , thereby modifying the various signaling pathways requiring lipid membrane domains as signaling platforms [ 111 ] . Could the TM depletion observed in endo - thelial cells exposed to mycolactone [ 34 ] also be due to changes in lipid segregation in the plasma membrane , to which this receptor is targeted for functional activity ? Finally , many of the pathogenic effects of mycolactone could potentially be explained by a blockade of protein translocation [ 14 ] . Nevertheless , no unifying molecular mechanism under - lying the pleiotropic actions of mycolactone has yet been identified . It remains , unclear , for example , how mycolactone blocks ER translocation at the molecular level ? Baron et al . recently showed that mycolactone targets the α subunit of the Sec61 translocon , thereby strongly block - ing the production of secreted and integral membrane proteins [ 38 ] . However , it is now widely accepted that the signal sequence of secreted proteins is clipped off during translation by a sig - nal peptide peptidase ( SPP ) . After chaperone - assisted folding , the mature protein is then released into the lumen of the ER immediately after its synthesis [ 41 ] . However , it has been suggested that SPP cleavage may be regulated through the control of substrate entry into the microdomains of the membrane containing SPP [ 117 , 118 ] . During the fractionation of rough ER integral membrane proteins with 0 . 18 % Triton X - 100 , most ER - resident proteins , and the Sec61alpha subunit in particular , were found to be present in the microdomain - like fraction [ 44 ] . Little is known about the role of cholesterol in basic ER functions , but recent studies have clearly suggested that cholesterol may act with ER membrane proteins to regulate several important functions of the ER , including the folding , degradation , compartmentalization , and segregation of ER proteins , and sphingolipid biosynthesis [ 119 ] . McKenna et al . have provided biochemical evidence that mycolactone induces a conformational change in the transmem - brane pore - forming Sec61alpha subunit of the translocon [ 39 ] . Hence , taking into account the potentially important contribution of cholesterol to the effect of mycolactone on membrane lipid segregation , we cannot exclude the possibility that the ER membrane may also be re - shaped by mycolactone , abolishing the functions of the ER membrane - resident proteins . In the case of the Sec61 translocon , this hypothesis is consistent with the induction of a stabilized closed conformation of the Sec61alpha unit ( forming the central gated protein - conducting channel across the ER membrane ) [ 39 , 45 ] mediated by lipid redistribution in microdomains to facilitate the interaction of mycolactone close to the luminal plug of Sec61alpha , as recently suggested by Baron et al . [ 38 ] . The redistribution of lipid microdomains from the plasma membrane to mitochondria has recently been demonstrated in other contexts and diseases and is robust to this hypothesis [ 120 ] . The alteration of ER lipid microdomains initiates lipotoxicity in pancreatic β - cells , dis - turbing protein trafficking and initiating ER stress , thereby contributing to type 2 diabetes [ 121 ] . In the same way , the disruption of lipid microdomains stimulates phospholipase D activity in human lymphocytes , and this activation conveys antiproliferative signals in lym - phoid cells , by impairing the transduction of mitogenic signals [ 122 ] . The gastrointestinal symptoms observed in patients suffering from Niemann - Pick type C disease are the conse - quence of changes in the composition of membrane lipid domains , resulting in impaired traf - ficking and an apical sorting of the major intestinal disaccharidases to the plasma membrane Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 19 / 30 with a decrease in their functional capacities [ 123 , 124 ] . Edelfosine , an alkylphospholipid ana - log ( APL ) belonging to a family of synthetic antitumor compounds , induces apoptosis in sev - eral hematopoietic cancer cells , by targeting various subcellular structures at the membranes [ 125 , 126 ] . By recruiting death receptor and downstream apoptotic signaling molecules to ordered lipid domains , it displaces survival signaling molecules from these membrane domains . Edelfosine - induced apoptosis in solid tumor cells is mediated by an ER stress response and evidence has been obtained in vitro and in vivo to suggest that edelfosine treat - ment induces a redistribution of lipid domains from the plasma membrane to mitochondria , suggesting a raft - mediated link between the plasma membrane and mitochondria [ 120 ] . All these examples suggest that membrane reshaping can occur in different diseases , and that the disturbance of lipid segregation observed here with mycolactone is not an isolated case . In summary , all the cellular targets of mycolactone are membrane - bound proteins , and , with the exception of the Sec61 translocon , all are known to be regulated by ordered microdo - mains , which provide a platform for the assembly of signaling complexes and prevent cross - talk between pathways [ 25 , 110 ] . By disturbing lipid segregation in membranes containing cho - lesterol , mycolactone affects many cell functions and signaling pathways . This membrane remodeling may occur in synergy with the previously demonstrated effects of mycolactone on its intracellular targets , possibly even potentiating these effects . It is tempting to speculate that microdomain remodeling in membranes underlies the molecular events via which mycolac - tone affects multiple targets , but further studies are required to confirm this . Materials and methods Chemicals Ultrapure water was obtained from a PURELAB option Q7 system ( VEOLIA WATER STI , France ) . Phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS , 2 . 8 mM KCl , 140 mM NaCl and 10 mM phosphate , pH 7 . 40 ± 0 . 05 at 25˚C ) was prepared by dissolving tablets purchased from AppliChem GmbH ( Darmstadt , Germany ) in ultrapure water . We obtained 1 - palmitoyl - 2 - oleoyl - sn - glycerophosphocholine ( POPC ) , 1 - palmitoyl - 2 - oleoyl - sn - glycerophosphoethanolamine ( POPE ) , cholesterol ( Chol ) from ovine wool ( (cid:21) 98 % ) and 23 - ( dipyrrometheneboron difluoride ) - 24 - norcholesterol or TopFluor Cholesterol from Avanti Polar Lipids ( Alabaster , Alabama , USA ) . Sphingomyelin ( SM ) from chicken egg yolk ( (cid:21) 95 % ) was purchased from Sigma - Aldrich ( Saint - Quentin Fallavier , France ) . All chemicals were used as received . The solvents were of analytical grade ( Sigma - Aldrich , Saint - Quentin Fallavier , France ) . The lipid mixtures were prepared at a concentration of 1 mg / mL in chloro - form ( or chloroform / methanol , 9 : 1 v / v , when containing SM ) and stored at - 20˚C under argon to prevent lipid oxidation . Polyethylene glycol sorbitan monolaurate ( Tween 20 ) and polyethylene glycol tert - octyl - phenyl ether ( Triton X - 100 ) were also purchased from Sigma - Aldrich ( Saint - Quentin Falla - vier , France ) . Mycolactone extraction and purification Mycolactones A / B were purified from M . ulcerans extracts as previously described [ 6 , 127 ] . Briefly , S4018 , an African strain of Mycobacterium ulcerans obtained from a patient in Benin , was grown in Middlebrook 7H10 agar supplemented with oleic albumin dextrose catalase growth supplement . The bacteria were resuspended in chloroform - methanol ( 2 : 1 , v / v ) and cell debris was removed by centrifugation . Folch extraction was performed by adding 0 . 2 volumes of water . The organic phase was dried and phospholipids were precipitated with ice - cold ace - tone . The acetone - soluble lipids were loaded onto a thin layer chromatography plate and Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 20 / 30 eluted with chloroform - methanol - water ( 90 : 10 : 1 , v / v / v ) as the mobile phase . The yellow band with a retention factor of 0 . 23 was scraped off the plate , filtered , evaporated , resuspended in absolute ethanol and then stored in amber glass tubes in the dark . Its concentration was deter - mined by measuring absorbance ( λ max = 362 nm , log ε = 4 . 29 ) , and its purity ( > 98 % ) was evaluated with a Shimadzu Ultra - Fast Liquid Chromatograph ( UFLC XR system with a CBM - 20A controller , a CTO - 10AS Prominence column oven , LC - 20AB pumps , an SPD M20A diode array detector ( Shimadzu , Japan ) ) and a reverse C18 column ( Zorbax 23 Eclipse XDB - C18 , 9 . 4×250mm , Particle Size : 5 μm ( Agilent , USA ) ) . Langmuir monolayer experiments Monolayers were prepared on a KSV 2000 Langmuir - Blodgett trough ( 3 multi - compart - ments , KSV NIMA , Biolin Scientific , Finland ) , with a symmetric compression system . The rectangular trough had a volume of 80 mL and a surface area of 119 . 25 cm 2 . A Wilhelmy plate attached to an electronic microbalance was used to measure the surface pressure ( π ) , with an accuracy of ± 0 . 5 mN / m . The trough was cleaned with successive baths of dichloro - methane , ethanol and ultrapure water , and filled with a filtered PBS solution . The subphase buffer was maintained at the desired temperature ( 20˚C or 25˚C ) throughout the experi - ment , with an Ecoline RE106 low - temperature thermostat ( LAUDA , Germany ) . It was not possible to work at a higher temperature , due to subphase evaporation , which can falsify sur - face pressure measurement during the run . Lipid mixtures in chloroform were gently spread at the air / liquid interface of the PBS subphase . The solvent was allowed to evaporate off for 15 minutes , and the monolayer was then slowly compressed by two mobile barriers at a con - stant rate of 0 . 045 nm 2 . molecule - 1 . min - 1 until an initial surface pressure ( π i ) of 5 to 30 mN / m was reached . A lag time of about 1 h was then applied to allow the monolayer to relax and stabilize . The surface area was then kept constant by stopping the movement of the mobile barriers . Mycolactone ( 1 mg / mL in ethanol ) was injected ( 4 . 45 μL ) into the subphase just beneath the lipid monolayer at a final concentration of 60 nM . The changes in surface pressure induced by the interaction of mycolactone with the monolayer were recorded continually , as a function of time , with a computer - controlled Langmuir film balance KSV NIMA ( Biolin Scientific , Fin - land ) , until the equilibrium surface pressure ( π e ) was reached , indicating the end of the adsorp - tion process . All measurements were repeated at least three times for each set of conditions , with a satisfactory reproducibility , and the mean values are reported here . We used a monolayer with a lipid concentration closely resembling that of the plasma membrane , according to several authors [ 72 – 75 ] . This monolayer contained 39 % phosphati - dylcholine ( POPC ) , 33 % sphingomyelin ( SM ) , 9 % phosphatidylethanolamine ( POPE ) and 19 % cholesterol ( Chol ) ( in mol % ) . For evaluation of the influence of cholesterol on both the membrane - binding capacity and effects of mycolactone on phospholipid membrane organiza - tion , we also analyzed monolayers with a different composition devoid of cholesterol but with the molar ratios of the other lipids maintained . This second monolayer contained 48 % POPC , 41 % SM , and 11 % POPE . Adsorption kinetics of the mycolactone The surface pressure increase ( Δ π in mN / m ) after the mycolactone injection corresponds to π e - π i . The curve of surface pressure increase ( Δ π ) as a function of time ( t ) recorded during the adsorption of mycolactone onto lipid monolayers corresponds to the adsorption kinetics of the molecule . Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 21 / 30 Determination of the binding parameters of mycolactone The parameters characterizing the binding of mycolactone to different lipid membranes were further determined , as previously described [ 50 , 56 , 93 , 94 ] . Briefly , Δ π was plotted against different initial surface pressures π i to determine : i ) the critical surface pressures π c , also known as the maximum insertion pressure ( MIP ) , which is calculated by extrapolation of the linear regression line to the x - axis ( Δ π max = 0 ) and , ii ) the synergy factor , a , measured by add - ing 1 to the slope obtained from the linear regression of Δ π as a function of π i . The uncertainty on MIP and the synergy factor , a , were determined as previously described [ 50 , 94 ] . The un - certainty on MIP was calculated with a 95 % confidence interval from the covariance of the experimental data for the linear regression [ 50 ] . The uncertainty on synergy was calculated as previously described [ 94 ] . These experimental errors were directly determined with the free binding parameters calculator software ( http : / / www . crchudequebec . ulaval . ca / BindingParametersCalculator ) developed by Salesse’s group . Brewster angle microscopy Brewster angle microscopy ( BAM ) was used to characterize the lipid domain morphology of monolayers at the air / water interface [ 62 , 64 ] . Monolayer morphology was determined before and after mycolactone injection , with an EP 3 SW Brewster angle microscope ( Accurion , Ger - many ) equipped with a 532 nm laser , a polarizer , an analyzer and a CCD camera . BAM image size was 483 × 383 μm 2 . For ultrathin films , reflectance depends on both the thickness and refractive index of the monolayer . The different views of the interfacial film were reconstituted with EP 3 viewer BAM software ( Accurion , Germany ) , based on the brightness of the BAM pic - tures . For a constant refractive index , reflectance is directly linked to the thickness of the inter - facial film . Fluorescence microscopy Langmuir films were generated in a custom - built cylindrical Teflon trough with a quartz win - dow , containing 25 mL of filtered buffer , connected to a peristaltic pump . The system was mounted on the stage of a Zeiss Observer Z1 microscope ( Carl Zeiss Vision , Germany ) for fluorescence microscopy ( FM ) experiments . Samples were prepared for FM by replacing 0 . 5 mol % of the cholesterol with 0 . 5 mol % of the sterol fluorescent probe , TopFluor Cholesterol [ 96 ] . The images were acquired at excitation and emission wavelengths of 495 and 507 nm , respectively . Images were processed and ana - lyzed with dedicated Zeiss software ( Axio Vision 4 . 8 ) . We used a Hamilton syringe to spread a few microliters of a 1 mg / mL phospholipid solu - tion in chloroform onto the buffer subphase until the desired π i was reached . One hour later , after the solvent had evaporated and the lipid monolayer had stabilized at the desired initial surface pressure ( π i ) , the mycolactone A / B solution was injected , with a Hamilton syringe , into the subphase through the lipid monolayer , with gentle stirring . During the time course of the experiment , changes in surface pressure ( π ) were also recorded simultaneously and continu - ously with a KSV NIMA computer - controlled Langmuir film balance . Supporting information S1 Fig . Chemical structure of mycolactone A / B showing the cyclic lactone core ( C1 - C11 ) and the two polyketide side chains , i . e . , the C12 - C20 “Northern” chain and the longer C1’ - C16’ “Southern” chain . The most virulent strains of M . ulcerans generate mycolactone A / B ( Z - / E - isomers of the C4’ - C - 5’ bond in the long “Southern” polyketide side chains ) in a 3 : 2 Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 22 / 30 ratio , and most research into the biological functions of this toxin has focused on mycolactone A / B [ 15 ] . ( TIF ) S2 Fig . Surface pressure ( π ) – molecular area ( A ) isotherms of pure POPC and mixed mono - layers recorded at 20˚ or 25˚C . All the monolayers were prepared with the same chloroform solutions . The compositions are given in mol % . Mixture 1 corresponded to 39 % POPC , 33 % SM , 9 % POPE , 19 % Chol . Mixture 2 corresponded to 48 % POPC , 41 % SM , 11 % POPE . Iso - therms were recorded on PBS subphase ( pH 7 . 4 ) at a constant compression rate of 0 . 045 nm 2 . molecule - 1 . min - 1 . The estimated error is ±0 . 05 mN / m for π and (cid:20) 0 . 01 nm 2 for ( A ) . Each iso - therm corresponds to the mean of three experiments . The isotherms of POPC , recorded at 20 or 25˚C , are consistent with a liquid - expanded ( LE ) phase for all compression values and can be superimposed , consistent with the T m value ( - 4˚C ) of POPC . The molecular area at collapse ( A coll = 40 mN / m ) is close to the expected value of ~ 40 Å 2 / molecule for two acyl chains . A similar area is obtained for the 81 % POPC / 19 % cholesterol mixture at 25˚C . This area decreases to ~ 32 Å 2 at 20˚C . The values obtained for the monolayers of mixtures 1 and 2 formed with the same solution of POPC were lower than those for pure POPC , due to the condensing effect of Chol and high - melting lipids , such as SM ( T m = 41 . 4˚C ) , present in mixtures 1 and 2 , respectively . These isotherms illustrate the effects of temperature and cholesterol in the mixed monolayers . ( TIF ) S3 Fig . Stability of model lipid monolayers at the working surface pressure . Changes in sur - face pressure π as a function of time after the injection of ethanol ( the solvent for mycolactone ) beneath the monolayer consisting of ( A ) mixture 1 ( 39 % POPC , 33 % SM , 9 % POPE , 19 % Chol ) or ( B ) mixture 2 ( 48 % POPC , 41 % SM , 11 % POPE ) at 20˚C ( solid line ) or 25˚C ( dashed line ) . Ethanol was injected into the PBS subphase ( pH 7 . 4 ) after a relaxation time of one hour ( arrows ) . Surface area was kept constant during the run . Each measurement was performed at least three times for each condition , and a representative curve is presented here . ( TIF ) S4 Fig . Effect of mycolactone on the lipid organization of mixed monolayers in the pres - ence of cholesterol . BAM images of 39 % POPC , 33 % SM , 9 % POPE , 19 % Chol ( mixture 1 ) monolayers without ethanol injection ( row a ) or after the injection ( 4 . 45 μL ) of mycolactone at a final concentration of 1 μM ( row b ) into the PBS subphase ( pH 7 . 4 ) beneath the interfa - cial film compressed at an initial surface pressure of 30 mN / m at 20˚C . The injection was per - formed after a relaxation time of one hour , and the surface area was kept constant ( mobile barriers were stopped ) . Image scale : 483 × 383 μm 2 . ( TIF ) S5 Fig . π - A isotherm of a pure sphingomyelin monolayer . The isotherm was recorded on PBS subphase ( pH 7 . 4 ) . ( A ) & ( B ) : BAM images were recorded during compression of the monolayer at a constant rate of 0 . 045 nm 2 . molecule - 1 . min - 1 . The estimated error is ± 0 . 05 mN / m for π and (cid:20) 0 . 01 nm 2 for A . LE : liquid expanded ; LC : liquid condensed . Image scale : 483 × 383 μm 2 . ( TIF ) S1 Appendix . Mycolactone aggregation state determination by DLS . ( DOCX ) Acknowledgments DLS experiments were performed by D . Byrne at the protein expression facility platform in Marseille ( FR3479 , IMM ) . Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 23 / 30 Author Contributions Conceptualization : Ofelia Maniti , Julie Ge´an , Erick J . Dufourc , Jean - Franc¸ois Cavalier , Ste´ - phane Canaan , Agnès P . Girard - Egrot . Data curation : Milène Nitenberg , Anaïs Be´narouche , Agnès P . Girard - Egrot . Formal analysis : Milène Nitenberg , Anaïs Be´narouche , Ofelia Maniti , Jean - Franc¸ois Cavalier , Agnès P . Girard - Egrot . Funding acquisition : Erick J . Dufourc , Jean - Franc¸ois Cavalier , Ste´phane Canaan , Agnès P . Girard - Egrot . Investigation : Milène Nitenberg , Anaïs Be´narouche . Methodology : Milène Nitenberg , Anaïs Be´narouche , Ofelia Maniti , Estelle Marion , Jean - Fran - c¸ois Cavalier , Agnès P . Girard - Egrot . Project administration : Ste´phane Canaan , Agnès P . Girard - Egrot . Resources : Estelle Marion , Laurent Marsollier . Supervision : Jean - Franc¸ois Cavalier , Ste´phane Canaan , Agnès P . Girard - Egrot . Validation : Ofelia Maniti , Agnès P . Girard - Egrot . Writing – original draft : Milène Nitenberg , Agnès P . Girard - Egrot . Writing – review & editing : Ofelia Maniti , Julie Ge´an , Jean - Franc¸ois Cavalier , Ste´phane Canaan , Agnès P . Girard - Egrot . References 1 . Weir E . Buruli ulcer : the third most common mycobacterial infection . Can Med Assoc J . 2002 ; 166 : 1691 – 1691 . 2 . Simpson C , O’Brien DP , McDonald A , Callan P . Mycobacterium ulcerans infection : evolutionin clinical management . ANZ J Surg . 2013 ; 83 : 523 – 526 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1445 - 2197 . 2012 . 06230 . x PMID : 22989109 3 . Chany A - C , Tresse C , Casarotto V , BlanchardN . History , biologyand chemistry of Mycobacterium ulcerans infections ( Buruli ulcer disease ) . Nat Prod Rep . 2013 ; 30 : 1527 – 1567 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / c3np70068b PMID : 24178858 4 . Bratschi MW , Ruf M - T , AndreoliA , Minyem JC , Kerber S , Wantong FG , et al . Mycobacteriumulcerans persistenceat a villagewater source of Buruli ulcer patients . PLoS Negl Trop Dis . 2014 ; 8 : e2756 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pntd . 0002756PMID : 24675964 5 . Walsh DS , Portaels F , Meyers WM . Buruli ulcer : advancesin understanding Mycobacteriumulcerans infection . Dermatol Clin . 2011 ; 29 : 1 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . det . 2010 . 09 . 006 PMID : 21095521 6 . George KM , ChatterjeeD , Gunawardana G , Welty D , HaymanJ , Lee R , et al . Mycolactone : a polyke - tide toxin from Mycobacterium ulcerans requiredfor virulence . Science . 1999 ; 283 : 854 – 857 . PMID : 9933171 7 . George KM , Pascopella L , Welty DM , Small PLC . A Mycobacterium ulcerans toxin , mycolactone , causes apoptosisin Guinea pig ulcers and tissue culture cells . Infect Immun . 2000 ; 68 : 877 – 883 . PMID : 10639458 8 . Stinear TP , Mve - ObiangA , Small PLC , Frigui W , Pryor MJ , Brosch R , et al . Giant plasmid - encoded polyketidesynthases producethe macrolidetoxin of Mycobacterium ulcerans . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2004 ; 101 : 1345 – 1349 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0305877101 PMID : 14736915 9 . JohnsonPDR , Stinear T , Small PLC , PluschkeG , Merritt RW , PortaelsF , et al . Buruli ulcer ( M . ulcer - ans infection ) : new insights , new hope for diseasecontrol . PLoS Med . 2005 ; 2 : e108 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pmed . 0020108PMID : 15839744 10 . MarsollierL , Brodin P , Jackson M , Kordula´kova´ J , Tafelmeyer P , Carbonnelle E , et al . Impact of Myco - bacteriumulcerans biofilm on transmissibility to ecologicalniches and Buruli ulcer pathogenesis . PLoS Pathog . 2007 ; 3 : e62 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 0030062 PMID : 17480118 Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 24 / 30 11 . Snyder DS , Small PLC . Uptake and cellularactions of mycolactone , a virulencedeterminant for Myco - bacteriumulcerans . Microb Pathog . 2003 ; 34 : 91 – 101 . PMID : 12623277 12 . Chany A - C , Casarotto V , Schmitt M , Tarnus C , Guenin - Mace´ L , DemangelC , et al . A diverted total synthesis of mycolactone analogues : an insightinto Buruli ulcer toxins . Chem Eur J . 2011 ; 17 : 14413 – 14419 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / chem . 201102542 PMID : 22127975 13 . Hong H , DemangelC , Pidot SJ , Leadlay PF , Stinear T . Mycolactones : immunosuppressive and cyto - toxic polyketides producedby aquatic mycobacteria . Nat Prod Rep . 2008 ; 25 : 447 – 454 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / b803101k PMID : 18497894 14 . Sarfo FS , PhillipsR , Wansbrough - Jones M , Simmonds RE . Recent advances : role of mycolactone in the pathogenesis and monitoring of Mycobacterium ulcerans infection / Buruli ulcer disease . Cell Micro - biol . 2016 ; 18 : 17 – 29 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / cmi . 12547 PMID : 26572803 15 . Hall B , Simmonds R . Pleiotropicmoleculareffects of the Mycobacterium ulcerans virulence factor mycolactoneunderlying the cell death and immunosuppression seen in Buruli ulcer . BiochemSoc Trans . 2014 ; 42 : 177 – 183 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1042 / BST20130133 PMID : 24450648 16 . Bozzo C , Tiberio R , Graziola F , Pertusi G , Valente G , ColomboE , et al . A Mycobacterium ulcerans toxin , mycolactone , inducesapoptosisin primary humankeratinocytes and HaCaT cells . Microbes Infect . 2010 ; 12 : 1258 – 1263 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . micinf . 2010 . 08 . 005 PMID : 20800104 17 . Guenin - Mace´L , Veyron - Churlet R , Thoulouze MI , Romet - Lemonne G , Hong H , Leadlay PF , et al . Mycolactoneactivation of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome proteins underpins Buruli ulcer formation . J Clin Investig . 2013 ; 123 : 1501 – 1512 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1172 / JCI66576PMID : 23549080 18 . Gama JB , Ohlmeier S , Martins TG , Fraga AG , Sampaio - MarquesB , CarvalhoMA , et al . Proteomic analysisof the action of the Mycobacterium ulceranstoxin mycolactone : targeting host cells cytoskele - ton and collagen . PLoS Negl Trop Dis . 2014 ; 8 : e3066 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pntd . 0003066 PMID : 25101965 19 . PahlevanAA , Wright DJ , Andrews C , George KM , Small PL , Foxwell BM . The inhibitoryaction of Mycobacterium ulcerans solublefactor on monocyte / T cell cytokine productionand NF - kappa B func - tion . J Immunol . 1999 ; 163 : 3928 – 3935 . PMID : 10490994 20 . CoutanceauE , Marsollier L , Brosch R , Perret E , Goossens P , Tanguy M , et al . Modulation of the host immune response by a transient intracellular stage of Mycobacterium ulcerans : the contribution of endogenousmycolactone toxin . Cell Microbiol . 2005 ; 7 : 1187 – 1196 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 5822 . 2005 . 00546 . x PMID : 16008585 21 . CoutanceauE , Decalf J , Martino A , Babon A , Winter N , Cole ST , et al . Selectivesuppression of den - dritic cell functions by Mycobacteriumulcerans toxin mycolactone . J Exp Med . 2007 ; 204 : 1395 – 1403 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 20070234 PMID : 17517970 22 . Torrado E , AdusumilliS , Fraga AG , Small PL , Castro AG , Pedrosa J . Mycolactone - mediated inhibition of tumour necrosis factor productionby macrophages infected with Mycobacterium ulcerans has impli - cations for the control of infection . Infect Immun . 2007 ; 75 : 3979 – 3988 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / IAI . 00290 - 07PMID : 17517872 23 . Torrado E , Fraga AG , LogarinhoE , Martins TG , CarmonaJA , Gama JB , et al . IFN - γ – dependent acti - vation of macrophages duringexperimental infectionsby Mycobacterium ulceransis impairedby the toxin mycolactone . J Immunol . 2010 ; 184 : 947 – 955 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 0902717PMID : 20008288 24 . Marion E , Song O - R , ChristopheT , BabonneauJ , FenisteinD , Eyer J , et al . Mycobacterial toxin induces analgesia in Buruli ulcer by targeting the angiotensin pathways . Cell . 2014 ; 157 : 1565 – 1576 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 04 . 040 PMID : 24949969 25 . NicolsonGL . The Fluid—Mosaic Model of MembraneStructure : Still relevant to understanding the structure , function and dynamics of biological membranes after more than 40 years . BiochimBiophys Acta Biomembr . 2014 ; 1838 : 1451 – 1466 . 26 . SezginE , LeventalI , Mayor S , EggelingC . The mystery of membraneorganization : composition , regu - lation and roles of lipid rafts . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . 2017 ; 18 : 361 – 374 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm . 2017 . 16PMID : 28356571 27 . Guenin - Mace´L , Carrette F , Asperti - Boursin F , Le Bon A , Caleechurn L , Di Bartolo V , et al . Mycolac - tone impairs T cell homing by suppressing microRNAcontrol of L - selectinexpression . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2011 ; 108 : 12833 – 12838 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1016496108PMID : 21768364 28 . Phong M - C , Gutwein P , Kadel S , Hexel K , Altevogt P , Linderkamp O , et al . Molecularmechanismsof L - selectin - induced co - localization rafts and shedding . BiochemBiophys Res Commun . 2003 ; 300 : 563 – 569 . PMID : 12504120 29 . Thelen M , Stein JV . How chemokines invite leukocytes to dance . Nat Immunol . 2008 ; 9 : 953 – 959 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ni . f . 207 PMID : 18711432 Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 25 / 30 30 . BoulkrounS , Guenin - Mace´L , Thoulouze M - I , Monot M , Merckx A , LangsleyG , et al . Mycolactone sup - presses T Cell responsiveness by alteringboth early signalingand posttranslationalevents . J Immu - nol . 2010 ; 184 : 1436 – 1444 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 0902854PMID : 20042571 31 . Chini B , Parenti M . G - protein coupledreceptors in lipid rafts and caveolae : how , when and why do they go there ? J Mol Endocrinol . 2004 ; 32 : 325 – 338 . PMID : 15072542 32 . Barnett - Norris J , Lynch D , ReggioPH . Lipids , lipid rafts and caveolae : Their importance for GPCR sig - nalingand their centrality to the endocannabinoidsystem . Life Sci . 2005 ; 77 : 1625 – 1639 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . lfs . 2005 . 05 . 040 PMID : 15993425 33 . Lc Dupre´ , Aiuti A , Trifari S , Martino S , Saracco P , BordignonC , et al . Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Pro - tein regulateslipid raft dynamicsduringimmunological synapse formation . Immunity . 2002 ; 17 : 157 – 166 . PMID : 12196287 34 . Ogbechi J , Ruf M - T , Hall BS , Bodman - Smith K , Vogel M , Wu H - L , et al . Mycolactone - dependent depletionof endothelialcell thrombomodulinis strongly associatedwith fibrin depositionin Buruli ulcer lesions . PLoS Pathog . 2015 ; 11 : e1005011 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1005011PMID : 26181660 35 . Bae J - S , Yang L , RezaieAR . Receptors of the protein C activationand activated protein C signaling pathways are colocalizedin lipid rafts of endothelialcells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2007 ; 104 : 2867 – 2872 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0611493104PMID : 17299037 36 . Bae JS , Yang L , RezaieAR . Lipid raft localization regulatesthe cleavagespecificity of protease acti - vated receptor1 in endothelial cells . J Thromb Haemost . 2008 ; 6 : 954 – 961 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1538 - 7836 . 2008 . 02924 . x PMID : 18284602 37 . Hall BS , Hill K , McKennaM , Ogbechi J , High S , Willis AE , et al . The pathogenic mechanismof the Mycobacterium ulcerans virulence factor , mycolactone , dependson blockadeof protein translocation into the ER . PLoS Pathog . 2014 ; 10 : e1004061 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1004061PMID : 24699819 38 . Baron L , Paatero AO , Morel J - D , Impens F , Guenin - Mace´ L , Saint - Auret S , et al . Mycolactone sub - verts immunity by selectivelyblockingthe Sec61 translocon . J Exp Med . 2016 ; 213 : 2885 – 2896 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 20160662 PMID : 27821549 39 . McKennaM , Simmonds RE , High S . Mechanisticinsights into the inhibitionof Sec61 - dependent co - and post - translationaltranslocation by mycolactone . J Cell Sci . 2016 ; 129 : 1404 – 1415 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 182352PMID : 26869228 40 . GreenfieldJJ , High S . The Sec61 complex is locatedin both the ER and the ER - Golgi intermediate compartment . J Cell Sci . 1999 ; 112 : 1477 – 1486 . PMID : 10212142 41 . Alberts B , JohnsonA , Lewis J , Raff M , Roberts K , Walter P . Molecularbiologyof the cell . 4th ed . New York : GarlandScience ; 2002 . 42 . BrowmanDT , Resek ME , Zajchowski LD , RobbinsSM . Erlin - 1 and erlin - 2are novel members of the prohibitinfamily of proteins that definelipid - raft - likedomainsof the ER . J Cell Sci . 2006 ; 119 : 3149 – 3160 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 03060PMID : 16835267 43 . Bravo R , Parra V , Gatica D , Rodriguez AE , TorrealbaN , Paredes F , et al . Endoplasmic reticulumand the unfoldedprotein response : Dynamics and metabolicintegration . Int Rev Cell Mol Biol . 2013 ; 301 : 215 – 290 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 407704 - 1 . 00005 - 1PMID : 23317820 44 . Sakai K , Hamanaka R , Yuki H , Watanabe M . A novel fractionation method of the rough ER integral membraneproteins ; Residentproteins versus exported proteins ? Proteomics . 2009 ; 9 : 3036 – 3046 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / pmic . 200800803 PMID : 19526556 45 . McKennaM , Simmonds RE , High S . Mycolactone reveals the substrate - driven complexity of Sec61 - dependenttransmembrane proteinbiogenesis . J Cell Sci . 2017 ; 130 : 1307 – 1320 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 198655 PMID : 28219954 46 . Brockman H . Lipid monolayers : why use half a membraneto characterize protein - membraneinterac - tions ? Curr Opin Struct Biol . 1999 ; 9 : 438 – 443 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0959 - 440X ( 99 ) 80061 - X PMID : 10449364 47 . Maget - DanaR . The monolayertechnique : a potent tool for studyingthe interfacial propertiesof antimi - crobial and membrane - lytic peptides and their interactions with lipid membranes . BiochimBiophys Acta Biomembr . 1999 ; 1462 : 109 – 140 . 48 . Castano S , Desbat B . Structure and orientationstudy of fusion peptideFP23 of gp41 from HIV - 1 alone or insertedinto variouslipid membranemodels ( mono - , bi - and multibi - layers ) by FT - IR spectrosco - pies and Brewster angle microscopy . BiochimBiophys Acta Biomembr . 2005 ; 1715 : 81 – 95 . 49 . Ishitsuka Y , Pham DS , Waring AJ , Lehrer RI , Lee KYC . Insertion selectivity of antimicrobial peptide protegrin - 1into lipid monolayers : Effect of head group electrostatics and tail group packing . Biochim Biophys Acta Biomembr . 2006 ; 1758 : 1450 – 1460 . Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 26 / 30 50 . Calvez P , Bussi è res S , Demers E , SalesseC . Parameters modulating the maximum insertionpres - sure of proteins and peptides in lipid monolayers . Biochimie . 2009 ; 91 : 718 – 733 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . biochi . 2009 . 03 . 018PMID : 19345719 51 . Ta HP , Berthelot K , Coulary - SalinB , Desbat B , Gean J , Servant L , et al . Comparativestudies of non - toxic and toxic amyloidsinteractingwith membranemodels at the air - water interface . Langmuir . 2011 ; 27 : 4797 – 4807 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la103788r PMID : 21405042 52 . Redon S , Massin J , PouvreauS , De Meulenaere E , Clays K , QueneauY , et al . Red emitting neutral fluorescentglycoconjugates for membraneopticalimaging . Bioconjug Chem . 2014 ; 25 : 773 – 787 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / bc500047rPMID : 24528385 53 . Girard - Egrot A , Chauvet J - P , Gillet G , Moradi - Ame´li M . Specific interactionof the antiapoptoticprotein Nr - 13 with phospholipidmonolayers is prevented by the BH3 Domainof Bax . J Mol Biol . 2004 ; 335 : 321 – 331 . PMID : 14659760 54 . Maniti O , LecompteM - F , MarcillatO , Desbat B , Buchet R , Vial C , et al . Mitochondrial Creatine Kinase bindingto phospholipidmonolayers inducescardiolipinsegregation . BiophysJ . 2009 ; 96 : 2428 – 2438 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2008 . 12 . 3911 PMID : 19289067 55 . GuilleminY , Lopez J , Gimenez D , Fuertes G , Valero JG , Blum L , et al . Active fragments from pro - and antiapoptoticBCL - 2 proteins have distinct membranebehaviorreflecting their functionaldivergence . PLoS One . 2010 ; 5 : e9066 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0009066 PMID : 20140092 56 . BoisselierE´ , Calvez P , Demers E´ , Cantin L , Salesse C . Influenceof the physicalstate of phospholipid monolayerson protein binding . Langmuir . 2012 ; 28 : 9680 – 9688 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la301135z PMID : 22686284 57 . Francois - Moutal L , Maniti O , Marcillat O , GranjonT . New insights into lipid - NucleosideDiphosphate Kinase - D interaction mechanism : Protein structural changesand membrane reorganisation . Biochim Biophys Acta Biomembr . 2013 ; 1828 : 906 – 915 . 58 . Be´naroucheA , Point V , ParsieglaG , Carri è reF , Cavalier J - F . New insights into the pH - dependent interfacialadsorption of dog gastric lipaseusing the monolayertechnique . ColloidsSurf , B . 2013 ; 111 : 306 – 312 . 59 . RebaudS , Wang CK , Sarkis J , Mason L , Simon A , Blum LJ , et al . Specific interactionto PIP 2 increasesthe kinetic rate of membranebindingof VILIPs , a subfamily of Neuronal Calcium Sensors ( NCS ) proteins . BiochimBiophys Acta Biomembr . 2014 ; 1838 : 2698 – 2707 . 60 . Sarkis J , Rocha J , Maniti O , Jouhet J , Vie´ V , Block MA , et al . The influenceof lipids on MGD1 mem - brane bindinghighlightsnovel mechanismsfor galactolipidbiosynthesis regulationin chloroplasts . FASEB J . 2014 ; 28 : 3114 – 3123 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1096 / fj . 14 - 250415 PMID : 24692595 61 . Be´naroucheA , PointV , Carri è reF , CavalierJ - F . An interfacialandcomparative in vitro study of gastro - intestinal lipasesand Yarrowialipolytica LIP2 lipase , a candidatefor enzyme replacementtherapy . Biochimie . 2014 ; 102 : 145 – 153 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . biochi . 2014 . 03 . 004 PMID : 24650780 62 . He´non S , MeunierJ . Microscope at the Brewster angle : Direct observation of first - order phase transi - tions in monolayers . Rev Sci Instrum . 1991 ; 62 : 936 – 939 . 63 . He´non S , MeunierJ . Observation of first order phasetransitions in monolayers without fluorescent probes . Thin Solid Films . 1992 ; 210 : 121 – 123 . 64 . VollhardtD . Morphology and phasebehaviorof monolayers . Adv ColloidInterface Sci . 1996 ; 64 : 143 – 171 . 65 . Marsh D . Cholesterol - inducedfluid membranedomains : A compendium of lipid - raft ternary phasedia - grams . BiochimBiophysActa Biomembr . 2009 ; 1788 : 2114 – 2123 . 66 . van Meer G , de Kroon AIPM . Lipid map of the mammaliancell . J Cell Sci . 2011 ; 124 : 5 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 071233PMID : 21172818 67 . Sarkis J , Hubert JF , LegrandB , Robert E , Cheron A , Jardin J , et al . Spectrin - like repeats 11 – 15 of human dystrophinshow adaptations to a lipidicenvironment . J Biol Chem . 2011 ; 286 : 30481 – 30491 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M111 . 243881 PMID : 21712383 68 . Larios C , Mi ñ onesJ , Haro I , Alsina MA , Busquets MA , Mi ñ onesTrillo J . Study of adsorptionand pene - tration of E2 ( 279 − 298 ) peptideinto Langmuirphospholipid monolayers . J Phys Chem B . 2006 ; 110 : 23292 – 23299 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / jp0628582PMID : 17107178 69 . Eirı´ksdo´ttir E , KonateK , LangelU¨ , Divita G , Deshayes S . Secondary structure of cell - penetrating pep - tides controls membraneinteractionand insertion . BiochimBiophys Acta Biomembr . 2010 ; 1798 : 1119 – 1128 . 70 . ChangH - C , Lin Y - Y , Chern C - S , Lin S - Y . Determination of critical micelleconcentration of macroemul - sions and miniemulsions . Langmuir . 1998 ; 14 : 6632 – 6638 . Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 27 / 30 71 . Hait SK , Moulik SP . Determination of critical micelleconcentration ( CMC ) of nonionicsurfactants by donor - acceptorinteraction with lodineand correlationof CMC with hydrophile - lipophilebalanceand other parameters of the surfactants . J Surfactants Deterg . 2001 ; 4 : 303 – 309 . 72 . Gray GM , Yardley HJ . Lipid compositions of cells isolated from pig , human , and rat epidermis . J Lipid Res . 1975 ; 16 : 434 – 440 . PMID : 1194786 73 . Pankov R , Markovska T , Antonov P , Ivanova L , Momchilova A . The plasma membranelipid composi - tion affects fusion between cells and model membranes . Chem Biol Interact . 2006 ; 164 : 167 – 173 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cbi . 2006 . 09 . 010 PMID : 17098217 74 . VirtanenJA , ChengKH , Somerharju P . Phospholipidcompositionof the mammalianred cell mem - brane can be rationalizedby a superlattice model . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 1998 ; 95 : 4964 – 4969 . PMID : 9560211 75 . Spector AA , Yorek MA . Membranelipid composition and cellularfunction . J Lipid Res . 1985 ; 26 : 1015 – 1035 . PMID : 3906008 76 . Nagle JF , WilkinsonDA . Lecithin bilayers . Density measurement and molecularinteractions . Biophys J . 1978 ; 23 : 159 – 175 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0006 - 3495 ( 78 ) 85441 - 1 PMID : 687759 77 . M’Baye G , Me´ly Y , DuportailG , KlymchenkoAS . LiquidOrdered and Gel Phases of Lipid Bilayers : Fluorescent Probes RevealClose Fluidity but Different Hydration . Biophys J . 2008 ; 95 : 1217 – 1225 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 107 . 127480PMID : 18390604 78 . MarshD . Lateralpressurein membranes . BiochimBiophysActa . 1996 ; 1286 : 183 – 223 . PMID : 8982283 79 . Sakamoto S , NakaharaH , Uto T , ShoyamaY , Shibata O . Investigationof interfacial behavior of glycyr - rhizin with a lipid raft model via a Langmuir monolayerstudy . BiochimBiophysActa Biomembr . 2013 ; 1828 : 1271 – 1283 . 80 . Ibdah JA , PhillipsMC . Effects of lipid compositionand packingon the adsorption of apolipoprotein A - I to lipid monolayers . Biochemistry . 1988 ; 27 : 7155 – 7162 . PMID : 3143410 81 . McMullenTPW , Lewis RNAH , McElhaney RN . Cholesterol – phospholipidinteractions , the liquid - ordered phaseand lipid rafts in model and biologicalmembranes . Curr Opin ColloidInterface Sci . 2004 ; 8 : 459 – 468 . 82 . Sankaram MB , ThompsonTE . Interaction of cholesterol with various glycerophospholipids and sphin - gomyelin . Biochemistry . 1990 ; 29 : 10670 – 10675 . PMID : 2176878 83 . RatajczakMK , Chi EY , Frey SL , Cao KD , Luther LM , LeeKYC , et al . Orderednanoclusters in lipid - cho - lesterol membranes . Phys Rev Lett . 2009 ; 103 : 028103 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 103 . 028103PMID : 19659249 84 . Maxfield FR , van Meer G . Cholesterol , the central lipid of mammaliancells . Curr Opin Cell Biol . 2010 ; 22 : 422 – 429 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2010 . 05 . 004 PMID : 20627678 85 . Jurak M . Thermodynamic aspects of cholesterol effect on propertiesof phospholipid monolayers : Langmuirand Langmuir – Blodgettmonolayerstudy . J Phys Chem B . 2013 ; 117 : 3496 – 3502 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / jp401182c PMID : 23470025 86 . Fritzsching KJ , Kim J , HollandGP . Probing lipid – cholesterolinteractions in DOPC / eSM / Chol and DOPC / DPPC / Chol model lipid rafts with DSC and 13C solid - stateNMR . Biochim BiophysActa Bio - membr . 2013 ; 1828 : 1889 – 1898 . 87 . Radhakrishnan A , McConnell H . Condensedcomplexes in vesicles containing cholesterol and phos - pholipids . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2005 ; 102 : 12662 – 12666 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0506043102PMID : 16120676 88 . Go ñ i FM , AlonsoA , BagatolliLA , Brown RE , Marsh D , Prieto M , et al . Phase diagrams of lipid mixtures relevant to the study of membrane rafts . BiochimBiophys Acta Mol Cell Biol Lipids . 2008 ; 1781 : 665 – 684 . 89 . de AlmeidaRFM , LouraLMS , Prieto M . Membranelipid domainsand rafts : current applications of fluo - rescencelifetime spectroscopy and imaging . Chem Phys Lipids . 2009 ; 157 : 61 – 77 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chemphyslip . 2008 . 07 . 011 PMID : 18723009 90 . FeigensonGW . Phase diagramsand lipid domainsin multicomponent lipid bilayer mixtures . Biochim Biophys Acta Biomembr . 2009 ; 1788 : 47 – 52 . 91 . Eeman M , Deleu M . From biological membranes to biomimeticmodel membranes . BiotechnolAgron Soc . 2010 ; 14 : 719 – 736 . 92 . Quinn PJ . A lipid matrix model of membraneraft structure . Prog Lipid Res . 2010 ; 49 : 390 – 406 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . plipres . 2010 . 05 . 002PMID : 20478335 93 . Calvez P , Schmidt TF , Cantin L , Klinker K , SalesseC . PhosphatidylserineAllows Observationof the Calcium – Myristoyl Switch of Recoverinand Its Preferential Binding . J Am Chem Soc . 2016 ; 138 : 13533 – 13540 . Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 28 / 30 94 . CalvezP , Demers E , Boisselier E , SalesseC . Analysisof the contribution of saturatedand polyunsatu - rated phospholipidmonolayers to the bindingof proteins . Langmuir . 2011 ; 27 : 1373 – 1379 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la104097nPMID : 21210634 95 . Ha¨dicke A , Blume A . Bindingof the cationic peptide ( KL ) 4K to lipid monolayers at the air – waterinter - face : Effect of lipid headgroupcharge , acyl chain length , and acyl chain saturation . J Phys Chem B . 2016 ; 120 : 3880 – 3887 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acs . jpcb . 6b01558 PMID : 27049846 96 . SolankoLukasz M , HonigmannA , Midtiby Henrik S , Lund Frederik W , Brewer JonathanR , Dekaris V , et al . Membraneorientationand lateral diffusionof BODIPY - Cholesterolas a function of probe struc - ture . Biophys J . 2013 ; 105 : 2082 – 2092 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2013 . 09 . 031 PMID : 24209853 97 . Mattei B , Franc¸a ADC , Riske KA . Solubilization of binary lipid mixtures by the detergentTriton X - 100 : The role of cholesterol . Langmuir . 2015 ; 31 : 378 – 386 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la504004rPMID : 25474726 98 . JohnsonM . Detergents : Triton X - 100 , Tween - 20 , and More . Mater Methods . 2013 ; 3 : 163 . 99 . CasadeiBruna R , DominguesCleyton C , de Paula E , Riske Karin A . Direct visualizationof the action of Triton X - 100 on giant vesicles of erythrocyte membranelipids . BiophysJ . 2014 ; 106 : 2417 – 2425 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2014 . 04 . 039 PMID : 24896120 100 . Abi - Rizk G , Besson F . Interactionsof Triton X - 100 with sphingomyelin and phosphatidylcholinemono - layers : Influenceof the cholesterol content . ColloidsSurf , B . 2008 ; 66 : 163 – 167 . 101 . HeleniusA , Simons K . Solubilization of membranes by detergents . BiochimBiophysActa . 1975 ; 415 : 29 – 79 . PMID : 1091302 102 . MahmoodME , Al - KoofeeDAF . Effect of temperature changeson critical micelleconcentration for Tween series surfactant . Global J Sci Frontier Res Chem . 2013 ; 13 : 1 – 7 . 103 . Sudbrack TP , ArchilhaNL , Itri R , Riske KA . Observing the solubilization of lipid bilayers by detergents with opticalmicroscopyof GUVs . J Phys Chem B . 2011 ; 115 : 269 – 277 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / jp108653ePMID : 21171656 104 . Sarfo FS , PhillipsRO , Zhang J , Abass MK , Abotsi J , Amoako YA , et al . Kinetics of mycolactone in humansubcutaneous tissue duringantibiotictherapy for Mycobacterium ulcerans disease . BMC Infect Dis . 2014 ; 14 : 1 – 10 . 105 . Sarfo FS , Le ChevalierF , Aka NG , PhillipsRO , Amoako Y , BonecaIG , et al . Mycolactone diffuses into the peripheral blood of Buruli ulcer patients—Implications for diagnosisand diseasemonitoring . PLoS Negl Trop Dis . 2011 ; 5 : e1237 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pntd . 0001237 PMID : 21811642 106 . Sarfo FS , ConversePJ , Almeida DV , Zhang J , Robinson C , Wansbrough - JonesM , et al . Microbiolog - ical , histological , immunological , and toxin responseto antibiotictreatment in the mouse model of Mycobacterium ulcerans Disease . PLoS Negl Trop Dis . 2013 ; 7 : e2101 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pntd . 0002101PMID : 23516649 107 . Wydro P , KnapczykS , Łapczy ń ska M . Variationsin the condensing effect of cholesterol on saturated versus unsaturatedphosphatidylcholines at low and high sterol concentration . Langmuir . 2011 ; 27 : 5433 – 5444 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / la105142wPMID : 21452813 108 . Goh Shih L , Amazon JonathanJ , FeigensonGerald W . Toward a better raft model : Modulated phases in the four - component bilayer , DSPC / DOPC / POPC / CHOL . BiophysJ . 2013 ; 104 : 853 – 862 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2013 . 01 . 003PMID : 23442964 109 . Radhakrishnan A , AndersonTG , McConnellHM . Condensedcomplexes , rafts , and the chemical activity of cholesterol in membranes . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2000 ; 97 : 12422 – 12427 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 220418097 PMID : 11050164 110 . LindnerR , Naim HY . Domains in biological membranes . Exp Cell Res . 2009 ; 315 : 2871 – 2878 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . yexcr . 2009 . 07 . 020PMID : 19632223 111 . LingwoodD , Simons K . Lipid rafts as a membrane - organizingprinciple . Science . 2010 ; 327 : 46 – 50 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1174621 PMID : 20044567 112 . Simons K , Gerl MJ . Revitalizingmembranerafts : new tools and insights . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . 2010 ; 11 : 688 – 699 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm2977PMID : 20861879 113 . Simons K , Ikonen E . Functional rafts in cell membranes . Nature . 1997 ; 387 : 569 – 572 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 42408PMID : 9177342 114 . Lamazi è reA , Chassaing G , Trugnan G , Ayala - Sanmartin J . Tubular structures in heterogeneous membranes inducedby the cell penetrating peptidepenetratin . CommunIntegr Biol . 2009 ; 2 : 223 – 224 . PMID : 19641736 115 . RozelleAL , Machesky LM , Yamamoto M , DriessensMHE , Insall RH , Roth MG , et al . Phosphatidylino - sitol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate inducesactin - based movement of raft - enrichedvesicles through WASP - Arp2 / 3 . Curr Biol . 2000 ; 10 : 311 – 320 . PMID : 10744973 Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 29 / 30 116 . RohatgiR , Ho H - yH , Kirschner MW . Mechanismof N - Wasp activationby CDC42and phosphatidylino - sitol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . J Cell Biol . 2000 ; 150 : 1299 – 1310 . PMID : 10995436 117 . Golde TE , ZwizinskiC , Nyborg A . SignalPeptide Peptidases . In : Hooper NM , LendeckelU , editors . Intramembrane - Cleaving Proteases ( I - CLiPs ) . The Netherlands : Springer ; 2007 . pp . 17 – 30 . 118 . Golde TE , Wolfe MS , Greenbaum DC . Signalpeptidepeptidases : A family of intramembrane - cleaving proteases that cleave type 2 transmembrane proteins . Semin Cell Dev Biol . 2009 ; 20 : 225 – 230 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . semcdb . 2009 . 02 . 003 PMID : 19429495 119 . Hayashi T , Su T - P . Cholesterol at the endoplasmic reticulum : Roles of the sigma - 1receptor chaper - one and implications thereof in humandiseases . Subcell Biochem . 2010 ; 51 : 381 – 398 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 90 - 481 - 8622 - 8 _ 13PMID : 20213551 120 . Gajate C , Mollinedo F . Lipid rafts , endoplasmic reticulumand mitochondria in the antitumor action of the alkylphospholipidanalogedelfosine . Anti - Cancer Agents Med Chem . 2014 ; 14 : 509 – 527 . 121 . Boslem E , Weir JM , MacIntosh G , Sue N , Cantley J , Meikle PJ , et al . Alterationof endoplasmic reticu - lum lipid rafts contributes to lipotoxicityin pancreatic β - cells . J Biol Chem . 2013 ; 288 : 26569 – 26582 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M113 . 489310 PMID : 23897822 122 . Diaz O , Me´barek - Azzam S , Benzaria A , DuboisM , LagardeM , Ne´moz G , et al . Disruptionof lipid rafts stimulates phospholipase D activity in human lymphocytes : Implicationin the regulationof immune function . J Immunol . 2005 ; 175 : 8077 – 8086 . PMID : 16339545 123 . Kuech E - M , ShammasH , MaaloufKE , von Koeckritz - Blickwede M , Das AM , Naim HY . Lipid raft abnormalitiesand subsequent protein trafficking effects in Niemann - Pick type C1 ( LB158 ) . FASEB J . 2014 ; 28 : Supplement LB158 . 124 . Amiri M , Kuech E - M , Shammas H , Wetzel G , Naim HY . The pathobiochemistry of gastrointestinal symptoms in a patient with Niemann - Pick type C disease . In : Morava E , BaumgartnerM , Patterson M , RahmanS , Zschocke J et al . , editors . JIMD Reports , Volume 25 . Berlin , Heidelberg : Springer Berlin Heidelberg ; 2016 . pp . 25 – 29 . 125 . Nieto - Miguel T , Fonteriz RI , Vay L , Gajate C , Lo´pez - Herna´ndez S , Mollinedo F . Endoplasmic reticu - lum stress in the proapoptotic action of edelfosinein solid tumor cells . Cancer Res . 2007 ; 67 : 10368 – 10378 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 07 - 0278 PMID : 17974980 126 . MollinedoF , Ferna´ndez M , HornillosV , DelgadoJ , Amat - Guerri F , Acu ñ aAU , et al . Involvement of lipid rafts in the localization and dysfunction effect of the antitumor ether phospholipid edelfosine in mitochondria . Cell Death Dis . 2011 ; 2 : e158 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / cddis . 2011 . 41 PMID : 21593790 127 . Marion E , Prado S , Cano C , BabonneauJ , Ghamrawi S , MarsollierL . Photodegradationof the Myco - bacteriumulcerans toxin , mycolactones : Considerations for handlingand storage . PLoS One . 2012 ; 7 : e33600 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0033600PMID : 22514607 Membraneeffect of mycolactone PLOS Pathogens | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . ppat . 1006814 January10 , 2018 30 / 30