Bradford W . . Hesse , Lee S . Sproull , Sara B . Kiesler , and John P Walsh R E T U R N S T O S C I E N C E : ¢ O I N I P U T E R N E T W O R K S I N O C E A N O G R A P H Y ecent developments in network com - munication and scientific computa - tion have led to calls for a massive increase in computer network sup - port for science 22 . Computer science has benefitted from network - ing technology since the Arpanet began in the late 1960s 16 . Other scientific disciplines began using net - works in a more or less organized Pfashion by the early 1980s : High - energy physicists use Hepnet , and molecular biologists use Bionet . Yet network support for science has been raainly an ad hoc enterprise . One vision of the future is the Collaboratory : a " combination of technology , tools , and infrastructure that allows scientists to work with remote facilities ( co - laboratory ) and one another ( collaboratory ) as if they were colocated and effec - tively interfaced " 17 . In this article we examine the alternative theories of the returns to science from networking , present early results from one group of networked research scientists , and discuss some implications for policy and technical development . The ! general case is familiar : benefits to science from net - work technology derive from scientists ' increased access to remote scientific resources . These resources include scarce and expensive technology such as the space telescope or supercomputers , large databases such as those for DNA sequences or satellite weather images , or scientific - literature databases such as Chemical Abstracts . They include services such as " mail - order " fulfillment of requests for reprints , algorithms , or even experimental - chip fabrica - tion . They also include the time and attention of other scientists , accessible through elec - tronic mail , b - boards , and telecon - ferences . Increasing ease of access to these resources should lead to a con - comitant increase in scientific productivity . This argument has gone unchal - lenged even though , generally speak - ing , computer technologies have not had empirically strong effects on pro - ductivity in any industry . In his wide - ranging review of sectoral , industrial , and organizational studies , Attewell 2 shows that these studies fail to demonstrate a positive association of investments in computer technologies with productivity . For instance , P . Weill 27 divided computer invest - ments of 33 strategic business units into " strategic systems " ( e . g . , an inventory system allowing sales staff to give accurate delivery time estimates ) , " transactional systems " ( e . g . , accounts payable , order entry ) , and information systems ( e . g . , email , networked databases ) . Transactional - system investments ( 23 % of the total ) were related to better performance as measured by improved Return on Assets ( ROA ) and lower nonproduc - tion labor costs adjusted for sales . But strategic - systems investments ( which had a negative effect in the short run ) and information systems were unrelated to any performance measure . Scientists who use computer net - works extensively claim that those networks have already enhanced their productivity and changed the nature of their work 16 , 20 , 21 , 24 . Despite such claims and confident predictions for the future , there has been no systematic empirical research on how computer network support for science is related to important scientific out - comes , including productivity 4 , 8 , 9 , 11 . 1 We therefore decided to do such a study and collected data from (cid:127)O August 1993 / Vol . 36 , No . 8 ¢O | | MUN | CATION ~ OFTHli ACM ocean scientists who use SCIENCEnet : " Research cannot prove that network use causes productivity to increase . Experimental control through random assignment of scientists to network and no - network conditions is infeasible . Longitudinal observations track a moving target because networks and resources available for them are chang - ing while populations of users are changing . Nonetheless we were able to document the association between net - work use and scientific productivity . We also documented how one scientific network operates in science today : Our research suggests technical and policy issues that are important for the future . To investigate the benefits of net - work support in any science we must ask : what kind of access to what kind of resources ? From the scientist ' s point of view , resources can be appa - ratus , databases , services , or col - leagues . Access can vary in the de - gree to which it is direct , readily available , and free . Access is direct if not mediated through third parties such as service bureaus ( or even graduate students ) . It is readily avail - able if the scientist has access from any location . It is " free " if the costs are subsidized or not charged to the scientist . Computer scientists at re - search institutions who use the Inter - net typify one scientific user profile : usually direct , available , " free " access to colleagues and modest access to special apparatus or services ( e . g . , special processors or fabrication ) . Computer scientists make relatively little use of network - based scientific or bibliographic databases and ser - vices . Other scientific disciplines have different profiles . We also must ask which scientists benefit . The case for a benefit to sci - ence from networking rests on two premises . The foremost is an effi - ciency premise . Networks can de - crease the time scientists spend in unproductive activities such as tray - 1Previous research has addressed what kinds of scientific information flow across different communication channels including email 4 ; how electronic communication affects the for - mation of interpersonal ties among scientists 8 ; and how electronic communication affects scientific group interaction and collaboration 9 . Hiltz 11 examined scientists ' impressions of how their work was affected by participation in a scientific teleconference . Alternative versions of differential benefits . > 0 t ~ o 60 2 " o £ o E q ) co High Low High Low Less Less scientists Amount of network access to resources Core scientists scientists Amount of network access to resources More More cling to special apparatus or data analysis centers , searching databases by hand , or tracking down library references . With a constant research time budget , the time saved could be Figure 1 . The equivalent and dif - ferential benefits arguments for returns to science from network - ing COMIWUNICATlaNS Oil fllll ACll Augu _ st 1993 / Vol . 36 , No . 8 gl put to more productive use . Access to new technology also permits scien - tists to use new techniques and study new problems . The efficiency prem - ise implies that different scientists would benefit equally from network access to resources . Statistically , curves expressing the relationship between network access to resources and scientific outcomes for two dif - ferent groups of scientists would have the same positive slope , though their intercepts might differ ( see the top graph in Figure 1 ) . The second premise , a more con - troversial one , is that network access to resources confers differential ben - efits to different scientists . The scien - tific manpower version of this argu - ment observes that a substantial fraction of the nation ' s Ph . D . ' s have little or no access to good research resources because they are outside the mainstream or core of research activity . Some scientists , tor instance , are located in four - year colleges and other teaching institutions . Network access to instruments , data , and re - search colleagues for these institu - tionally or geographically peripheral scientists would lead to a step func - tion increase in their scientific pro - ductivity , an increase greater than that for core research scientists . ( Pre - sumably those in the core , particu - larly senior investigators at Ph . D . - granting universities and top re - search centers , already have ready access to instruments , data , and re - search colleagues . ) Statistically , the curve for peripheral scientists would have a steeper slope than that for core scientists . An alternative view of differential benefits is that scientists who are already highly productive will be be , lt able to take advantage of network - based resources : this is a " rich - get - richer " process . Statisti - cally , the slope for core scientists would be steeper than that for pe - ripheral scientists ( see the middle and bottom graphs of Figure 1 ) . Here we examine the relationship between computer network support and scientific outcomes - - whether generally positive and whether equivalent or differential - - in one scientific community , a large group of ocean scientists . This scientific community differs somewhat from the computer science research com - munity . For computer science , stud - ies of other scientific groups contrib - ute an empirically grounded " users ' view , " that is demand - side informa - tion on issues in connectivity , ser - vices , usability , bandwidth , applica - tions , and science policy . Our particular examination of potentially differential benefits brings attention to questions of leverage , that is , of who will reap returns from network - ing . Oceanography and Network SupPort In all scientific disciplines , the phe - nomena that scientists study influ - ence how their work is organized and carried out . Physical oceanographers study fluxes in the world ' s oceans - - for example , in temperature , salinity , and dissolved CO 2 over time and place . These phenomena require in situ measurement from research ves - sels , commercial ships , moored and drifting buoys , airplanes , and satel - lites . Many research questions re - quire data from extremely remote locations , such as the polar ice caps and the equatorial Pacific . Many re - search questions require coordinated data collection across long distances and thus depend on large - scale proj - ects involving scientists from differ - ent countries . For example , in one such study , the World Ocean Circu - lation Experiment , hundreds of ocean researchers from many coun - tries are conducting a decade - long observational program to determine the general circulation of mass and heat in the world ' s oceans . Oceanography is an empirical data - dense science . Large databases , for instance , on surface currents , upwelling and downwelling , prevail - ing winds , salinity , and biological ac - tivity are common . Terabyte - sized databases are becoming familiar . Modelers and theoreticians rely on supercomputers for data analysis , primarily those at the National Cen - ter for Atmospheric Research in Boulder , Colorado , Florida State University , and Princeton University . Many oceanographers , however , maintain small datasets and do their computing locally . A recent report on data management for oceanogra - phy noted that in one large project , despite international data centers , data coordinators , and approved data formats , " scientists have their own data on personal computers in their favorite spreadsheet database " 26 . Network support for research oceanographers is provide d through Bitnet , the Internet , and largely by SCIENCEnet , which currently has about 4 , 000 subscribers . SCIEN - CEnet is operated by Omnet TM , a firm established by a physical ocean - ographer in 1980 . SCIENCEnet pro - vides value - added services over com - mercial networks for access to scientific resources . The nature of oceanography re - search influences the character of SCIENCEnet . Oceanography is a global science , so SCIENCEnet sup - ports mailboxes in 45 countries and distant locations such as Kuwait and Antarctica . Mailboxes are accessible on board ship via satellite links . Oceanographers coordinate large projects , so SCIENCEnet maintains over 200 group project distribution lists . ( See Figure 2 for examples . ) Oceanography is data dense , so SCIENCEnet provides access to database indices and infrastructure for large datasets . Oceanographers depend on access to distant phenom - ena and colleagues , so the commu - nity is willing to pay for special net - work support tailored to these needs . Subscribers pay a monthly fee and usage charges to access SCIENCEnet resources . Most subscriptions are supported by scientists ' research grants or by their departments or institutes . SCIENCEnet provides mediated , readily available , fee - for - service ac - cess to database indices , services , and colleagues . It does not provide access to apparatus such as data sensors or supercomputers . Oceanographers use the Internet for remote access to supercomputers . A Survey of Network Usage and Scientific Outcomes To describe what sorts of ocean sci - entists use SCIENCEnet for what purposes and to examine hypotheses about the relationships between net - work usage and scientific outcomes , 92 August 1993 / Vol . 36 , No . 8 COMMUNIGATIONSOFTHEA¢III Apparatus a Alvin . Planning Ship . Sched92 Ocean Databases and Oataboards Raw data b OCEANIC Metadata TOGA . Subsurface Quake . Alarm Melvyl Infrastructure data Seafood . Safety Services Omnet . Fax Paper Mail OCE . review Sabre Directory OCEANIC ECS Research Colleagues Email Groups ~ Projects TOGA WOCE JGOFS CEES ERS - 1 Bulletin Boards Ocean Jobs ENSO . Info I . Witness Grad . Students Expedition plans and submersible time for the Alvin deep submersible . Research vessel time . Cray time proposal reminders and deadlines . Ship schedules , oceanographic software , sea surface temperature maps . Meta - data on subsurface in - situ data . Data reports from the National Earthquake Information Center . The Scripps Library catalog system . Information and bibliographies on seafood contaminants . To send a fax anywhere in the world . To have hard copy mailed in the US or Canada . To submit a proposal review to the NSF Ocean Division . Airline schedules . Subscriber directory . Gateway to data services at Ocean Network Information Center . Gateway to satellite data services at National Climatic Data Center . Tropical Ocean / Global Atmosphere program . World Ocean Circulation Experiment . Joint Global Ocean Flux Experiment . Committee on Earth and Environmental Sciences . Environmental Research Satellite ( Joint NASA / European Space Agency ) . A general disciplinarybboard ; also some meta - data . Openings and availability . Discussions of the El Nifio phenomenon . First - hand accounts from Antarctica , Leningrad . Information for oceanography graduate students . aSClENCEnet does not provide direct access to apparatus - buoys , supercomputers , etc . bSCIENCEnet does not maintain raw scientific data on - line because of their size . we collected survey data from a strat - ified sample of 338 SCIENCEnet users . This sample had three groups : 150 scientists randomly selected from individual subscribers whose network usage was above the median usage rate , 150 scientists randomly selected from subscribers whose net - work usage was below the median usage rate , and the 38 of the 50 most active users remaining after the ran - dom sample was drawn . ( Our pur - pose in oversampling top users was to bolster our descriptive data on sci - entists whose usage was heaviest . ) Omnet posted notices of the survey on the OCEAN b - board , and we sent the survey by email to every sample member ' s SCIENCEnet mailbox . Respondents either completed and returned the survey electronically , or they asked for a hard copy and re - turned it by postal mail . The 93 - item survey asked respondents about their professional background , research activities , and network use . ( See Appendix for details of the method . ) Respondents provided informa - tion about their use of email , remote databases , programs run remotely , bibliographic databases , and remote data transfers . Because these data are more fine - grained than aggre - gate network usage data , we used these answers to define our primary independent variable . The self - reports correlate 0 . 50 ( p < 0 . 001 ) with actual usage rates over the three - Figure 2 . Examples of scientific resources for oceanographers accessed through SCIENCEnet month period used to draw the sam - ple . Based on our interviews , we used three other independent variables to examine whether returns from net - work use to core and peripheral sci - entists are the same or different : se - niority , subfield , and geographic location . We assumed that core scien - tists have had more years since their Ph . D . ' s than peripheral scientists . Since the oceanographic community served by SCIENCEnet consists pri - marily of physical oceanographers , we assumed core scientists are more likely to be physical oceanographers ¢OMMUN | IGATION $ OII THII A¢lm August _ 1993 / Vol . 36 , No . 8 ~ ( the majority ) than scientists from other fields such as marine biology . Given the phenomena studied and resources needed ( such as ocean - going vessels ) , we assumed that core scientists are more likely to be em - ployed by institutions located on a coast than inland . Our dependent vari ~ . bles were three kinds of scientific outcomes : scientific publication , professional recognition , , and social integration . We measured publicatiov ~ using the number of papers publis ~ ed in ref - ereed journals in the previous year . Table 1 . sample characteristics We measured professional recogni - tion using the sum of four questions about the past five years : if respon - dents had won a scientific award , served on a major professional com - mittee , served on an editorial board , or served on a national advisory com - mittee . We measured social integra - tion using the number of physical oceanographers known by the re - spondent . ( Table 1 lists other vari - ables used to describe the sample ; see the Appendix . ) Response Rate We received 257 completed surveys from our sample , a total response rate of 76 % . Response rates by group were 84 % for the top usage group ( 32 of 38 ) , 84 % for the above - median usage group ( 126 of 150 ) , and 66 % for the below - median usage group 99 of 150 . The below - median group , took longer to respond and answered more often using postal mail rather than email ( X2 ( 2 ) - - = 9 . 77 , p < 0 . 01 ) . 2 Who Uses This Network ? SCIENCEnet users are active and productive scientists . ( See Table 1 . ) Approximately three - quarters of the Usage groups Top Above Below Statistical median median significance ( n = 32 ) ( n = 126 ) ( n = 99 ) ( p level ) a Personal characteristics Ph . D . 75 % Seniority ( years since Ph . D . ) 16 . 3 Principal Investigator 68 % Researcher ( < 50 % administration ) 57 % Gender ( percent male ) 74 % Institutional characterisllies Miles from coast 151 Foreign ( % non - U . S . ) 16 % Prestige ( 1 = low to 3 = high ) 1 . 8 Research characteristics Type of research ( % of time ) Collect / analyze data 32 % Nualeric modeling 7 % Theoretical work 3 % Dew . qopment of tools 10 % Planning / administration 43 % Source of data ( % of , data ) Shipboard instruments 35 % Unattended instruments 10 % Remote sensors & satellites 29 % Scientific outcomes Articles published last year 1 . 5 Recognition ( 1 = low to 4 = high ) 2 . 0 Oceanographers known 145 Network history and usage Years on SCIENCEnet 4 . 8 Resources used ( 1 = low to 4 = high ) 2 . 0 Messages / day SCIENCEnet 14 . 3 Messages / day other networks 1 . 1 Use of email b Disciplinary commi ' : tees 64 % Inte . ractions with sponsors 78 % Submit articles and proposals 43 % Browsing : new ideas and people 56 % Facilitate collaboration 94 % Contact with home 51 % 81 % 70 % n . s . 15 . 5 13 . 7 n . s . 79 % 69 % n . s . 83 % 82 % < . 01 91 % 91 % < . 01 76 92 n . s . 14 % 10 % n . s . 2 . 0 1 . 6 < . 01 37 % 36 % n . s . 10 % 16 % < . 05 9 % 12 % < . 05 15 % 13 % n . s . 27 % 22 % < . 01 38 % 37 % n . s . 22 % 23 % n . s . 20 % 14 % < . 05 2 . 7 1 . 8 < . 01 1 . 7 1 . 1 < . 01 72 46 < . 01 3 . 7 2 . 5 < . 01 1 . 8 1 . 8 n . s . 4 . 8 1 . 9 < . 01 1 . 0 2 . 9 < . 01 64 % 44 % < . 01 68 % 50 % < . 01 43 % 40 % n . s . 47 % 44 % < . 05 90 % 83 % < . 01 40 % 40 % < . 05 aThe ( probability ) levels for statistical significance beyond chance ( at . 05 ) are derived from statistical tests comparing mean scale values across the three usage ~ weOUpS . When possible , we list percentages of respondents instead of scale values . show the percentage of each g , roup that used email for these purposes . 4 August 1993 / Vol . 36 , No . 8 ¢OWlI ~ IUHiCATIONS OF Tile ACId1 respondents reported having earned a Ph . D . ; more than three - quarters do research at least half - time , and more than half work at academic or non - profit research institutions . Almost three - quarters said that they were currently the principal investigator on a research project . They reported publishing an average of 2 . 3 papers in refereed journals within the previ - ous year . More than half had served on a major professional committee within the past five years ; more than a third had served on national advi - sory boards ; a fourth had served on editorial boards ; and almost a fifth had received one or more scientific awards . Respondents on average reported sending and receiving 3 . 5 messages per day on SCIENCEnet and an ad - ditional 1 . 8 messages on other net - works . During the previous year , 77 % used networks for data transfer ; 39 % accessed remote scientific data - bases ; 37 % searched a remote biblio - graphic database ; and , 24 % ran re - mote programs . Frequent users ( that is , sample re - spondents in the top and above - median usage groups ) are the more active , productive scientists . As com - pared with infrequent users , they work at more prestigious institutions , have received more professional rec - ognition , have published more , and know more oceanographers . Fre - quent users also show a different pat - tern of network use than infrequent users . They have subscribed to SCIENCEnet longer , send and re - ceive more email messages per day on SCIENCEnet , collect more data from remote sensing satellites , and spend more time doing research administration . In contrast , infre - quent users tend to use other net - works more and spend more time on numeric modeling and theoretical work . Because we sampled network users and not oceanographers gener - ally , we must ask how network users compare with scientists from the larger oceanographic community . To make these comparisons , we used data from a 1987 sample survey of more than 5 , 700 ocean scientists and engineers conducted by the Ameri - can Geophysical Union ( AGU ) . Our sample contained more physical oceanographers than exist in the general population of ocean scien - tists ( 61 % vs . 21 % ; X2 ( 1 ) = 156 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Using weighted data , we found no difference in the ratio of males to females , but our sample contained more Ph . D . ' s ( X2 ( 1 ) = 24 , p < 0 . 01 ) , more researchers ( X2 ( 2 ) = 32 , p < 0 . 01 ) , and more oceanogra - phers at academic or nonprofit re - search institutions ( X2 ( 3 ) = 43 , p < 0 . 01 ) . Thus , our sample of net - worked oceanographers differed from the general population of ocean scientists . The network sample better represents the subfield of physical oceanography and also is more research intensive . Network Usage and Scientific Outcomes We used multivariate regression techniques to examine the statistical relationships between network usage and scientific outcomes . Regression techniques evaluate the association between an observed dependent variable - - in this case scientific out - comes - - and one or more indepen - dent variables while controlling for the influence of extraneous vari - ables . We controlled for personal characteristics such as number of years since a Ph . D . and institutional characteristics such as the prestige of the scientist ' s institution , which could influence measured scientific out - comes independent of any network use . Our equations are a tool for as - sessing the statistical significance as - sociated with the slopes of the lines in Figure 1 while statistically controlling for the influence of variables unre - lated to the hypotheses we want to test . To obtain a representative sam - ple of scientists , these analyses used only data from Ph . D . ' s in the above - median and below - median usage groups . 3 We conducted the analyses as si - multaneous solutions in which inde - pendent variables were evaluated as if they had been entered last in the equations . The explanatory value of each table is indicated by the R ~ ( vari - ance accounted for ) and a positive F test with a p level at 0 . 05 or better . Within the tables , the beta coeffi - cients show the magnitude of each I III independent variable ' s association with the dependent variable . Statisti - cally significant coefficients for the variables in any equation can be in - terpreted as evidence of equivalent positive benefit ( or negative effect , if there is a minus sign ) . A statistically significant coefficient for any charac - teristic and the statistical interaction between network usage can be inter - preted as evidence of differential benefit . The signs of the interaction coefficients signify the direction of apparent differential benefit . In our analyses , where the sign is negative , the benefit is greater to peripheral scientists ( e . g . , young Ph . D . ' s ) . We found that network usage is positively associated with all three scientific outcomes . ( See Table 2 . ) Scientists who use the network more also produce more papers , receive more professional recognition from their peers , and know more physical oceanographers . 4 In Table 2 , eight of the nine interaction terms are neg - ative , which is consistent with differ - ential benefit for peripheral scientists even though only two interaction coefficients are statistically signifi - cant . One of the statistically signifi - ~ Besides these responses from the stratified de - liberate sample , we received an unexpected re - turn of completed surveys from 104 persons who were not in the sample . We assume they saw the b - board announcement of the survey ; they requested a copy and sent it to us by email . We report our analysis comparing the deliber - ate sample to these " volunteers " elsewhere 25 . SThese restrictions omit two groups : non - Ph . D . ' s and those in the top user group who were not in the stratified random sample . By restricting the analyses to Ph . D . scientists , we neglect mainly support staff and technicians . Support staff are crucial in the production of science , but their inclusion in our analyses would have muddied examination of equivalent and differential benefits . Furthermore , we wished to represent patterns of behavior and outcomes among those who most influence the direction of science , that is , Ph . D . scientists . By restricting our analyses to those in the stratified random sample , we obtain results that can be generalized to the ( Ph . D . , networks ) population as a whole . Such restriction is common in sociol - ogy ; the stratified random sample represents the most conservative estimate of the target population . If we had included the other 32 top users in our analyses , we would have overrepre - sented outlying observations relative to the ran - dom sample , thereby threatening interpreta - tion and assumptions of linearity . 4This pattern held when each outcome was re - gressed separately and when combined in a general multivariate regression ( Wilks ' Lambda = 0 . 66 , F ( 10 , 130 ) = 6 . 71 , p < 0 . 001 ) . COIAII4UllICAI ' IOII | OIl ? HI AClll August 1993 / Vol . 36 , No . 8 9S Tnble 2 . Relationships between Network usage and scientific outcome ( . ; Independent variable Dependent variable : Articles published R 2 = . 24 ; Adjusted R 2 = . 19 F ( 10 . 152 ) = 4 . 9 . p < . 001 Staffs . significance Beta ( p level ) Researcher ( more than 50 % time ) . 07 Seniority ( years since Ph . D . ) . 00 Subfield is physical oceanography - . 09 Prestige of institution . 07 Location of institution on coast . 10 Seniorky squared ( curvilinearity ) - . 19 SCIENCEnet usage ( log ) . 28 Seniority X SCIENCEnet interaction - . 05 Subfieh : l X SCIENCEnet interaction . 05 Coastal location X SCIENCEnet interaction - . 14 . 001 n . s . n . s . n . s . n . s . . 025 . 001 n . s . n . s . . 07 Independent variable Dependent variable : Professional recognition R 2 = . 26 ; Adjusted R 2 = . 21 F ( 10 . 151 ) = 5 . 2 . p < . 001 Staffs . significance Beta ( p level ) Researcher ( more than 50 % time ) . 11 Senioriity ( years since Ph . D . ) . 36 Subfield is physical oceanography - . 05 Prestige of institution - . 02 Location of institution on coast - . 04 Seniority squared ( curvilinearity ) . 01 SCIENCEnet usage ( log ) . 27 Seniority X SCIENCEnet interaction - . 14 Subfield X SCIENCEnet interaction - . 05 Coastal location X SCIENCEnet interaction - . 05 n . S . . 001 n , s , n . s , n . s . n . s . . 001 . 07 n . s . n . s . Indepeudent variable Dependent variable : Oceanographers known R 2 = . 35 ; Adjusted R 2 = . 30 F ( 10 . 142 ) = 47 . 5 . p < . 001 Staffs . significance Beta ( p level ) Researcher ( more than 50 % time ) . 04 Seniority ( years since Ph . D . ) . 02 Subfield is physical oceanography . 48 Prestige of institution . 07 Locati ~ on of institution on coast . 02 Seniority squared ( curvilinearity ) . 04 SCIENCEnet usage ( Log ) . 31 Seniority X SCIENCEnet interaction - . 03 Subfield X SCIENCI ; . net interaction - . 05 Coastal location X SCIENCEnet interaction - . 01 n . s . n . s . . 001 n . s . n . s . n . s . . 001 n . s . n . s . n . s . Note . - - In this and the following tables , the explauatovy value of the table is indicated by the R e ( variance accounted for ) and a positive F t ~ st with a p level at about . 05 or less . Within the tables , the beta coefficients indicate the magnitude of each independent variable ' s association with the dependent variable , Statistical significance of a single variable or interaction in any table is tested using a t test . Statistically significant cmfficients for the variables in any equation can be interpreted as evidence of equivalent positive benefit ( or negative effect , if there is a minus sign ) . A statistically sigrdficant coefficient for any characteristic X network usage in ~ eraction term can be interpreted as evidence of differential benefit . The signs of the interaction terms signify the direction of apparent differential benefit . In our analyses , where the sign is negative , the benefit is greater to peripheral scientists ( e . g . , young Ph . D . ' s ) . cant coefficients shows the relation - ship between SCIENCEnet usage and publication is stronger ( i . e . , has a steeper slope ) for scientists at inland institutions than for scientists at insti - tutions on a coast . Traditionally , oceanography has been a discipline dominated by institutions located on the coasts . Others 7 , 10 , 12 have noted that network communication can help overcome disadvantages of geographic distance . Our results sug - gest that this process may be particu - larly important for geographically peripheral ocean scientists . The other statistically significant coeffi - cient shows that the relationship be - tween SCIENCEnet usage and pro - fessional recognition is stronger for younger scientists than for more sen - ior scientists , another finding consis - tent with differential benefit for pe - ripheral scientists . Other statistical effects unrelated to network use are unsurprising . Being primarily a researcher rather than administrator is associated with the number of papers published in the previous year . Seniority ( years since Ph . D ) . has a curvilinear rela - tionship with publication . ( This find - ing accords with much other re - search showing that successful scientists often hit their peak produc - tion 5 to 15 years after the Ph . D . and then gradually slow down . ) Seniority also predicts professional recogni - tion . Being a physical oceanographer rather than in some other subfield of oceanography predicts the number of physical oceanographers known . Because communicating with col - leagues ( email , b - boards , groups , projects ) was the most used and re - portedly useful feature of SCIEN - CEnet , we wanted to know more about the purposes of this communi - cation and how these purposes might be associated with more or less posi - tive scientific outcomes . We evalu - ated six categories of uses for com - munication : interaction with sponsors ( such as negotiating an NSF grant ) , professional committee work in the discipline ( such as work on a graduate standards committee ) , sub - mitting manuscripts or proposals electronically , browsing to learn about new techniques or what people are doing , collaboration in groups and projects , and contact with home ( or office ) while traveling . ( See Ap - pendix for a description of how the categories were measured and con - structed into six factors . ) Taken to - gether the results suggest that net - work communication within active work groups and work relationships ( committees , projects , coauthors , sponsor - PIs ) shows a positive return to the scientific outcomes we mea - sured , whereas more individualistic networking , such as browsing b - boards and contacting home , has no or negative relationships with those scientific outcomes . ( An excep - tion : browsing b - boards is associated with knowing more oceanogra - phers . ) Network Usage and Scientific Work Although most of our analyses con - cerned the relationship between net - work use and scientific outcomes , we also studied how scientific methods and techniques are changing . In oceanography , computing advances have enabled satellite data collection and have encouraged more scientists to do theoretical and modeling work . Networks also have given oceanogra - phers access to new techniques , most notably , remote sensing of geophysi - cal phenomena . We found that network usage was associated with remote sensing , but networks other than SCIENCEnet play a more important role than SCIENCEnet does . ( See Table 4 ) . The Ph . D . years / SCIENCEnet inter - action is statistically significant , again suggesting differential benefit . The positive sign of the interaction coeffi - cient shows that senior scientists , in - stead of younger ones , are differen - tially benefitted by networking . Studies of scientific innovation sug - gest that older scientists , on average , adopt new techniques and ideas after younger ones and thus are at a disad - vantage compared with younger sci - entists when these innovations are productive 6 , 15 , 19 . Therefore these results can be taken as consis - tent with differential benefit for pe - ripheral scientists . Other predictors of remote sens - ing are as expected . Being primarily a researcher rather than an adminis - Table 3 . Relationships between kinds of email use and scientific outcomes III Independent variable Dependent variable : Articles published R 2 = . 22 ; Adjusted R ~ = . 16 F ( 10 . 143 ) = 3 . 9 . p < . 001 Statis . significance Beta ( p level ) Researcher ( more than 50 % time ) Seniority ( years since Ph . D . ) Prestige of institution Seniority squared ( curvilinearity ) Email for discipline committee work Email for interactions with sponsors Email for document submission Email to facilitate collaboration Email for browsing : new ideas and people Email to contact home . 22 . 01 - . 01 n . s . . 08 n . s . - . 13 n . s . . 28 . 001 . 09 n . s . - . 09 n . s . . 06 n . s . - . 11 n . s . - . 00 n . s . Independent variable Dependent variable : Professional recognition R z = . 31 ; Adjusted R z = . 26 F ( 10 . 142 ) = 6 . 3 . p < . 001 Statis . significance Beta ( p level ) Researcher ( more than 50 % time ) Seniority ( years since Ph . D . ) Prestige of institution Seniority squared ( curvilinearity ) Email for discipline committee work Email for interactions with sponsors Email for document submission Email to facilitate collaboration Email for browsing : new ideas and people Email to contact home . 04 n . s . . 31 . 001 - . 06 n . s . . 05 n . s . . 35 . 001 . 03 n . s . - . 12 . 09 . 03 n . s . - . 16 . 05 - . 04 n . s . Independent variable Dependent variable : Oceanographers known R ~ = . 14 ; Adjusted R ~ = . 08 F ( 10 , 136 ) = 2 . 3 p < . 02 Statis . significance Beta ( p level ) Researcher ( more than 50 % time ) Seniority ( years since Ph . D . ) Prestige of institution Seniority squared ( curvilinearity ) Email for discipline committee work Email for interactions with sponsors Email for document submission Email to facilitate collaboration Email for browsing : new ideas and people Email to contact home . 02 n . s . . 09 n . s . . 11 n . s . . 10 n . s . . 16 . 08 . 14 n . s . . 07 n . s . . 07 n . s . . 18 0 . 5 - . 05 n . s . COMMUNICATIONII Oil THII AIIM August 1993 / Vol . 36 , No . 8 97 trator , being a physical oceanogra - pher rather than in another subfield , and working at an inland geographic location ( mainly in facilities of NASA and the U . S . Navy , for example ) pre - dicts the use of remote - sensing tech - niques . DISCUSSlOtl This article reports the first system - atic assessment of the value of com - puter networking for a scientific community ' . In contrast with the numerous failures to document empirically the benefits of computer technology for productivity in indus - try , we found evidence consistent with such benefit in science . Within the SCIENCEnet community of oceanographers , network usage is consistently associated with desirable scientific outcomes . Tke observed associations do not prove causality , but they do demonstrw : e that pro - ductive scientists use the network more often and for more purposes than unproductive scientists do . SCIENCEnet has becorae a critical part of the infrastructure of doing ocean science . Our study also suggests that the benefits of computer networks for science are not predictable from a simple efficiency model of technol - ogy . Networks may have differential payoffs for peripheral and core sci - entists . " Peripheral " in our study did not mean unimportant , but removed from ( or facing barriers to ) those re - sources necessary for doing good oceanography - - remote instruments , geophysical data , global projects , dis - ciplinary committees , important re - search programs , and colleagues . To test for differential benefits we cate - gorized oceanographers as to their position within the social and work structure of the SCIENCEnet com - munity . In oceanography , to be more rather than less peripheral is to be young , to be landlocked , or to have been trained before the development of new methods such as remote sens - ing . We found some evidence that , at the margin , peripheral oceanogra - phers benefit more from network usage than core oceanographers do . This lends credence to the theoreti - cal pattern described in the middle graph of Figure 1 . This argument presumes that core scientists already have relatively reliable and abundant access to scientific resources and therefore do not profit from network connections as much as peripheral scientists do . We observed that SCIENCEnet has been developed for a subset of specialized activities - - those tasks not shared with other sciences and not supported by more general - purpose networks such as the Internet . One of these stands out in our data : long - distance group management . Ocean - ography , like physics , is " big science . " Doing oceanography demands coor - Table 4 . Relationship between Network usage and remote sensing Independent variable Dependent variable : Remote sensing R z = . 34 ; Adjusted R 2 = . 28 F ( 10 . 152 ) = 4 . 9 . p < . 001 Statis . significance Beta ( p level ) Researcher ( more than 50 % time ) - . 24 Senic , rity ( years since Ph . D . ) - . 08 Subfield is physical oceanography . 25 Prestige of institution . 10 Location of institutic , n on coast - . 21 SCIENCEnet usage ( log ) . 15 Usage on other networks . 37 Seniority X SCIENCEnet interaction . 21 Subfiield X SCIENCEnet interaction . 05 Coastal location X SCIENCEnet interaction - . 09 . 01 n , s . . 01 n . s . . 01 . 09 . 001 0 . 5 n . s . n , s , dination , participation of diverse re - searchers , and collaborative groups . Yet the movement , dispersion , and distance of researchers from one another is greater than in physics . SCIENCEnet supports a continuing infrastructure for communication within groups and projects , such as keeping directories and member - ships up to date and helping group members keep in touch with their groups when traveling to remote lo - cations . SCIENCEnet also supports data retrieval . Oceanography , as physics , evaluates large datasets generated from large streams of noisy , unpre - dictable observations and technical uncertainty surrounding their acqui - sition . To evaluate such data requires considerable infrastructure - - raw - data repositories , software de - velopment and maintenance , services for putting datasets on tape or on - line , programs to process the data . SCIENCEnet ' s on - line services for aiding data retrieval range from subsciber b - boards to indices , pro - cessing algorithms , schedules , and special metadatabases . SCIENCEnet does not store the raw data though . In other disci - plines , efforts are underway to pro - vide network access to nationally shared databases . Such is the model for GenBank , the national repository for nucleic acid sequence data in bi - ology 5 . Biologists are required to send sequences to GenBank when they publish the sequences in jour - nals . This procedure allows other biologists to examine and copy the sequences and also lets journals print summaries instead of entire se - quences . The situation in oceanogra - phy is very different because of the difference in the size of the data - bases . Ten gigabits ( Gb ) is not un - common in a dataset , so oceanogra - phers will look interactively only at summaries or metadata . Even metadatasets ( such as velocities ) typi - cally are too large to retrieve effi - ciently through the network . To compound the problem , many scien - tists in oceanography would prefer pictures . Picture transmission , al - though likely to be in popular de - mand , will not become a common feature of most networks until prob - 8 August 1993 / Vol . 36 , No . 8 ¢OlilMUHICATION | OF THE ACN lems of bandwidth and standards are solved . Finally , what SCIENCEnet offers beyond computer network technol - ogy is the social and human factors element of usability . Omnet ' s philos - ophy is that oceanographers are busy doing oceanography and have no interest in computing itself . There - fore SCIENCEnet must offer usable facilities for doing science . With b - board posts , a newsletter , and sub - scriber survey , Omnet draws heavily on subscriber participation to im - prove SCIENCEnet over time . When a new program is introduced , Omnet gives subscribers personal as well as on - line and printed help . Omnet encourages subscribers to ask for and try new applications , but never pushes them to spend time learning programs , applications , or com - mands . To improve usability , SCIEN - CEnet has many interactive help files on - line that also are easy to use ( e . g , find out how to send a fax and then actually do it ) . Nevertheless , many scientists would rather send messages to Omnet . Service and wait for a per - son ' s reply than use instant on - line help . This is true even for directory information . The on - line directory of subscribers is easy to use and well advertised , but subscribers often send email to Omnet . The heavy traffic between subscribers and Omnet staff at first look seems ineffi - cient , but there are some positive side effects . First , many subscribers do not know what their problem is , as indicated by the following response to our survey : They think they have a binary file trans - fer protocol problem , and will waste their time on the intricacies of Kermit . Actually they just need to capture their session as ASCII text . A human can listen and help them solve their problem , not just stream out text at them . One of the subscribers ' most fre - quent requests is to have bulletin board prompts set by Omnet staff . Subscribers could do this themselves , but Omnet knows more : For instance , a subscriber asks , " Please prompt me for JGOFS . Data . " Our answer is , " OK but JGOFS . Data has been kind of inactive lately . It looks like a lot of the dis - cussion is happening on JGOFS . News . Tell you what , I ' ll give you both . " Finally , Omnet can learn about its subscribers : Please prompt me for ENSO . Info . Will do . Are you working on ENSO ? Yes , several of us are in a subgroup for ENSO instrumentation . But our discus - sions get kind of acrimonious . Just how private is the board ? Not private at all . Would a mailing list be best for your subgroup ? All these findings should be inter - preted very cautiously . For instance , our results do not show whether or not network resources would best be used for peripheral members of the greater scientific community . We studied just one discipline and within that , a cohesive community with a " critical mass " of people with like in - terests and aims . Our analyses of the AGU sample survey , which included many nonresearchers , technicians , and college teachers , suggests that the SCIENCEnet population is more elite and more narrowly research - oriented than the AGU - Ocean Sec - tion membership . The exclusivity of our sample suggests that the " periph - erality " of its " peripheral scientists " is relative ; in comparison with the aver - age member of AGU , the entire SCIENCEnet membership would be considered members of oceanogra - phy ' s core . The productive use these scientists make of SCIENCEnet is likely to depend on their deep prior commitment to doing science . A pe - ripheral member of the larger ocean - ographer community such as a col - lege or high school teacher of ocean science might not have much use or time for b - boards that provide re - search vessel schedules and algo - rithms for interpreting satellite data . Our results do suggest strongly that a generic scientist / user model is too simple to describe network needs and success . If a more differentiated view of scientists is necessary , then more attention should be paid to how scientists in the disciplines actually work - - what their social structure looks like and what kinds of access they need to access what kinds of re - sources . Choices surrounding the development and support of net - working resources should be based on grounded knowledge of scientific disciplines and scientists . Appendix Sample Frame and Sample With the help of Omnet ' s adminis - trators , we collected network usage data for the three - month period pre - ceding our survey on the 1 , 356 active personal mailboxes ( excluding group and institutional mailboxes ) within Ocean , the largest division of SCIENCEnet ( which also includes divisions for meteorologists , seismol - ogists , and so forth ) . We selected ran - dom samples of 150 mailboxes each from the above - median usage and below - median usage strata . We also selected the 50 most frequently used mailboxes except for 12 , which al - ready had been included in the ran - dom sample . The result was a strati - fied random sample of 300 mailboxes , with an additional group of 38 top users . The survey Instrument and Its Administration On September 15 , 1988 , we sent a 93 - item electronic questionnaire to the 338 sample network mailboxes . Recipients were given the choice of answering the survey on - line , down - loading it for completion at a later time , or requesting that a hard copy be sent to them by postal mail . Mean - while , a general announcement of the survey was broadcast publicly over the network on the Ocean gen - eral - interest electronic bulletin board . Emaii and b - board announce - ments described its purpose and noted that respondents would be entered in a $ 250 lottery . After two weeks , a prompt was mailed to sam - ple nonrespondents by conventional mail , for those who had not checked their network accounts , or by email . Also , an announcement was posted again to the Ocean bulletin board . A second and final prompt to nonre - spondents , following the same proce - dure , was sent one month later . Data collection terminated during the early months of 1989 . ¢OMMUHICATION | OIRTHIACM August 1993 / Vol . 36 , No . 8 99 variables The measures of network usage and scientific outcomes are described in the body of the article . We also wished to measure various aspects of " peripherality " or centrality in the production of science . Using demo - graphic information in the survey and working with a member of the oceanographic communiLy , we coded respondents ' seniority , research fields ( physical oceanographer or other ) , gender , and job types ( re - searcher or administrator ) . Respon - dents who estimated the ) , spent more than 50 % of their time on research activities were coded as researchers ; those who spent 50 % or more of their time on administra ~ five activities were coded as administrators . For each respondent ' s institution or employer we recorded the num - ber of miles from the nearest coast , whether the institution was contigu - ous or noncontiguous U . S . , whether it was U . S . or international , and its type - - academic , nonprofit , govern - ment , commercial , other . We rated each institution ' s prestige as low , medium , or high , basedL on expert - informant information . These vari - ables were intended to measure vari - ous aspects of peripherality or cen - trality of scientists ' institutions . A factor analysis of 17 questions related to the use of email produced a coherent six - factor solution . Three factors described different kinds of audiences for electronic communica - tion : ( 1 ) sponsors and government agencies , ( 2 ) professional committees in the discipline , ( 3 ) editorial and agency offices to which scientists sent manuscripts and proposals . Three additional factors described the util - ity of email for ( 4 ) brov ~ sing and en - countering new research informa - tion and people , ( 5 ) conducting joint work , and ( 6 ) staying in touch with home ( and office ) whi ~ le traveling . Sum scores for components , rather than factor scores , were used in anal - yses 14 . Analysis of Response BI : 3s Although the overall response rate of 76 % was quite good , the rate dif - fered across sample subgroups . The above - median group had a higher representation than the below - median group ( 84 % for above - median group ; 66 % for below - median group ) . With differential responding , inferences from the sample to the general network com - munity may need to be adjusted to avoid bias . Weighting techniques work well in most situations but as - sume that nonrespondents across groups are similar to each other on critical dimensions 3 . Our nonre - spondents did not meet that assump - tion . For example , nonrespondents in the above - median group were at the top of the above - median network usage distribution ( typically the most active electronically ) , but nonre - spondents in the below - median group were at the bottom of the below - median network usage distri - bution ( the least active electroni - cally ) , F ( 1 , 298 ) = 4 . 88 , p < 0 . 05 . Therefore , conventional weighting techniques are suspect . We used existing information on nonrespondents to impute missing information through multiple - regression techniques 18 . Imputa - tion is especially useful for portray - ing mean population values and underlying distributions , but the in - crease it brings in power is often pur - chased at the expense of Type I error rates 13 . Based on imputation anal - ysis , the differential response rate decreased the representativeness of the sample dataset very little , chang - ing the value of a variable more than 10 % in only 3 out of 129 cases ( 3 groups x 43 variables ) . Our sample dataset underrepresents oceanogra - phers employed by business and commercial organizations ( actual re - spondents = 8 % ; imputed respon - dents = 31 % ) and overrepresents oceanographers employed by the government , either in labs or fund - ing agencies ( actual respondents = 29 % ; imputed respondents = 10 % ) . Our dataset also underrepresents oceanographers who use networks to run remote programs ( actual respon - dent = 24 % ; imputed respon - dents = 47 % ) . We used multiple - regression anal - yses to investigate the relationships between network usage and scientific outcomes . Control variables ( covari - ates ) and peripherality measures were included in the analyses based on previous research and on their a priori potential for covariance with outcomes . Number of years since Ph . D . was included because it is known to predict scientific outcomes ( thus , should be used as a covariate ) and because it can be used as an indi - cator of peripherality . Other control variables included geographic loca - tion , institutional prestige , job type , and subfield of research . The small numbers of female and international respondents ( 3 % and 8 % respec - tively ) precluded using these catego - ries in analyses . Regression analyses are suitable for continuous variables . To use cate - gorical data in the regressions , we created dichotomous dummy vari - ables 23 . Geographic peripherality was defined as working at an institu - tion that was located more than five miles inland ( the median value for miles from the coast ) or that was lo - cated outside of the contiguous U . S . Subfield peripherality was defined as any field or subfield other than phys - ical oceanography . Log transforma - tions were applied to skewed vari - ables , that is , number of papers published in previous year and num - ber of oceanographers known . Fol - lowing Allison ' s 1 suggestions , all models were specified to include controls and single - order effects , and quadratic terms were included when interactions were statistically signifi - cant in order to test for cur - vilinearity . References 1 . Allison , P . D . Testing for interaction with multiple regression . Am . J . Soc . 83 ( 1977 ) , 144 - 153 . 2 . Attewell , P . Information technology and the productivity paradox . In the National Research Council , Panel on Linkages Between Individual and Orga - nizational Productivity , Committee on Human Factors . Washington , D . C . To be published . 3 . Aziz , F . and Scheuren , F . Imputation and Editing of Faulty or Missing Survey Data . U . S . Department of Commerce , Washington , D . C . , 1978 . 4 . Carley , K . and Wendt , K . Electronic mail and scientific communication : The study of SOAR and its dominant users . Knowledge 12 ( 1991 ) , 406 - 440 . 5 . Cinkosky , M . J . , Ficket , J . W . , Gilna , P . and Burks , C . Electronic data pub - lishing and GenBank . Science 31 ( 1991 ) , 1273 - 1277 . 1OO August 1993 / Vol . 36 , No . 8 ¢¢DMMUNICATlaNS OFYHE ACM 6 . Coleman J . et al . Medicallnnovation : A Diffusion Study . Bobbs - Merrill , New York , 1966 . 7 . Eveland , J . D . and Bikson , T . K . Work group structures and computer support : A field experiment . ACM Trans . Off . Inf . Sys . 6 , 4 ( 1988 ) , 354 - 379 . 8 . Freeman , L . The impact of computer based communication on the social structure of an emerging scientific specialty . Soc . Networks 6 ( 1984 ) , 201 - 221 . 9 . Harasim , L . M . and Winkelmans , T . Computer - mediated scholarly collab - oration . Knowledge 11 ( 1990 ) , 382 - 409 . 10 . Hesse , B . W . , Werner , C . M . and Alt - man , I . Temporal qualities of com - puter - mediated communication . Comput . Hum . Behav . 4 ( 1988 ) , 1 - 19 . 11 . Hiltz . S . R . Online Communities : A Case Study of the Office of the Future . Ablex , Norwood , N . J . , 1984 . 12 . Huff , C . , Sproull , L . and Kiesler , S . Computer communication and orga - nizational commitment : Tracing the relationship in a city government . J . Appl . Soc . Psychol . 19 , 6 ( 1989 ) , 1371 - 1391 . 13 . Jinn , J . H , and Sedransk , J . Effect on secondary data analysis of common imputation methods . Soc . Methods 19 ( 1989 ) , 213 - 241 . 14 . Kim , J . and Mueller , C . W . Factor Analysis : Statistical Methods and Practi - cal Issues . Sage University Paper Se - ries on Quantitative Applications in the Social Sciences , vol . 07 - 0124 . Sage University , Beverly Hills , Calif . , 1978 . 15 . Kuhn , T . S . The Structure of Scientific Revolutions . University of Chicago Press , Chicago , 1970 . 16 . Lederberg , J . Digital communications and the conduct of science : The new literacy . IEEE Proceedings 66 , 11 ( 1978 ) , 1314 - 1319 . 17 . Lederberg , J . and Uncapher , K . To - ward a national collaboratory : Report of an invitational workshop . Rockefeller University , New York , 1989 . 18 . McLaughlin . D . and Wyse , L . Guide - book for imputation of missing data , contract No . 300 - 78 - 150 . The Na - tional Center for Education Statistics , Washington , D . C . , 1980 . 19 . Messeri , P . Social Change and the Life Course . Vol . 1 . Sage , Newbury Park , Calif . , 1988 . 20 . National Research Council , Panel on Information Technology and the Conduct of Research , Committee on Science , Engineering , and Public Pol - icy . Information Technology and the Con - duct of Research : The User ' s View . Na - tional Academy Press , Washington , D . C . , 1989 . 21 . Newell , A . and Sproull , R . Computer networks : Prospects for scientists . Sci - ence 215 ( 1982 ) , 843 - 852 . 22 . Palco , J . Getting together bit by bit . Science 248 ( 1990 ) , 160 - 162 . 23 . Pedhazur , E . Multiple Regression in Behavioral Research : Explanation and Prediction . Holt , Rinehart , and Win - ston , New York , 1982 . 24 . Steele , G . COMMONLisp The lan - guage . Digital Press , Bedford , Mass . , 1983 . 25 . Walsh , . l - P - , Kiesler , S . , Sproull , L . and Hesse , B . W . Self - selected and randomly - selected respondents in a computer network survey . Pub . Opin . Q . 56 ( 1992 ) , 241 - 244 . 26 . Webster , F . Data management for global ocean observing systems . Univ . of Delaware , Newark , Del . , 1990 . 27 . Weill , P . Ph . D . thesis , Stern School of Business Administration , New York Univ . , 1988 . CR Categories and Subject Descrip - tors : H . 4 . 3 Information Systems Appli - cations : Communications Applications - - bulletin boards , electronic mail ; H . 5 . 3 Infor - mation Interfaces and Presentation : Group and Organization Interfaces - - evaluation ~ methodology , organizational de - sign ; K . 4 . 3 Computers and Society : Organizational Impacts General Terms : Economics , Human Factors , Management Additional Key Words and Phrases : Productivity , science and engineering networks , scientific computing , scientists as users About the Authors : BRADFORD W . HESSE is a research sci - entist at the American Institutes for Re - search in Palo Alto , Calif . He codirects AIR ' s Center for Research on Technol - ogy , where his current research includes investigations into the personal and orga - nizational impact of electronically distrib - uted work communities , evaluations of computerized information systems within complex organizations , assessments of usability needs ( i . e . , human factors ) , and the development of applications in artifi - cial intelligence . Author ' s Present Ad - dress : American Institutes for Research , P . O . Box 1113 , 1791 Arastradero Rd . , Palo Alto , CA 94302 ; email : bhesse @ forsythe . stanford . edu LEE S . SPROULL is professor of man - agement at Boston University and head of the Information Systems department . She has done extensive research in infor - mation behavior in organizations , social aspects of computing , and computer net - works in organizations . Author ' s Present Address : Room 402 , School of Manage - ment , Boston , Univ . , 704 Commonwealth Ave . , Boston MA 02215 ; email : lsproull @ bu - pub . bu . edu SARA B . KIESLER is professor of social sciences and social psychology at Carne - gie Mellon University . She has conducted numerous experimental behavioral stud - ies of computer - based communication and has participated in national policy committees on the social implications of technology . Author ' s Present Address : Department of Social and Decision Sci - ences Carnegie Mellon University Pitts - burgh , PA 15213 ; email : sara . kiesler @ andrew . cmu . edu JOHN P . WALSH is an assistant profes - sor of sociology at the University of Illi - nois at Chicago . His current research in - volves studying the uses of computer - mediated communication tech - nology by scientists in several disciplines . Author ' s Present Address : Department of Sociology ( M / C 312 ) University of Illi - nois at Chicago , Chicago , IL 60680 ; email : u33695 @ uicvm . bimet Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage , the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publi - cation and its date appear , and notice is give that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery . To copy otherwise , or to republish , requires a fee and / or specific permission . © ACM 0002 - 0782 / 93 / 0800 - 090 $ 1 . 50 ¢OMMUNICATIOHIi OF THII ACM AugusL 199 ~ Vo , ~ 6 ~ No , 8 10 ~