Measuring the semantic integrity of scientiﬁc ﬁelds : a method and a study of sociology , economics and biophysics Attila V . Varga Received : 27 October 2010 / Published online : 29 January 2011 (cid:2) Akade´miai Kiado´ , Budapest , Hungary 2011 Abstract The paper introduces a concept for measuring the interpretive fragmentation of scientiﬁc ﬁelds by the analysis of their citation networks . Transitive closure in two - mode networks is the basis of the proposed measurement . To test the validity of the concept two analyses are presented . One compares the integrity of two social sciences , sociology and economics , and a natural science , biophysics . The results are in line with the widely held opinion , that because of the lack in cumulative and consensual knowledge production mechanisms the social sciences are more disintegrated . Sociology is considerably more fragmented then economics , as the different paradigm structure of these disciplines would predict . As a second test , the fragmentation of scholarly communication inside and between the sub - ﬁelds of sociology is measured . The results correctly indicate that meaning making processes are taking place inside invisible colleges . Keywords Network analysis (cid:2) Paradigms (cid:2) Citation analysis (cid:2) Meaning (cid:2) Ambiguity (cid:2) Integration Introduction Quantitative investigations of the integration of scientiﬁc discourse are currently very much on the agenda of research on interdisciplinary and innovation studies . Both of these areas are focusing on the boundary crossings and recombinatory processes of science . Two analytically distinct momentums are important in both ﬁelds : knowledge diversiﬁcation and knowledge cohesion ( Rafols and Meyer 2009 ) , referring to the combination of ele - ments in a way that they are bridging separate parts of the network or diverse types of A . V . Varga ( & ) Institute of Sociology and Social Policy , Corvinus University of Budapest , 1093 Ko¨zrakta´r utca 4 - 6 , Budapest , Hungary e - mail : vargaati @ gmail . com A . V . Varga Sociological Doctoral School , Eo ¨ tvo ¨ s Lora ´ nd University , 1117 Pa ´ zma ´ ny Pe ´ ter se ´ ta ´ ny 1 / a , Budapest , Hungary 123 Scientometrics ( 2011 ) 88 : 163 – 177 DOI 10 . 1007 / s11192 - 011 - 0342 - 9 elements from a network ( keywords , words , citations ) . In this way innovators or cross - disciplinary researchers are ﬁlling structural holes and integrating different ﬁelds . The focus is not on the simple transgression of boundaries , but on the integration across boundaries ( Porter et al . 2006 ) . Conceptualizations of the latter usually involve some form of connectivity : either clustering of edges and path lengths between sets of nodes if the study emphasizes cohesion ( Egghe and Rousseau 2003 ) or heterogeneity of knowledge elements or disciplinary afﬁliations if the study emphasizes diversity ( Frigotto and Riccaboni 2010 ) . 1 However these investigations do not conceptualize directly the semantic fragmentation of the resulting constellations , which is another aspect of integration . If we consider scientiﬁc discourse as a communicative system , the respective metaphoric characters of all discursive systems emerge as new aspects of integration . Polysemy and metaphors are inherent in all human communication , and science is not an exception . ‘‘Polysemy’’ is the notion of semiotics , and it concerns poetic ﬁgures or the multiple meaning of words . In semiotics , polysemy is the inherent property of words ; however , in science this is prob - lematic because it indicates a lack of conceptual clarity , or from another point of view the openness of the ﬁeld for diverse inﬂuences . The proposed measurement concept aims to grasp this aspect of integration , more speciﬁcally , the interpretative diameter of the pub - lications of a ﬁeld by the analysis of the citation network . The most fundamental problem which could be addressed directly by this measure is the consensus on concepts in a given ﬁeld . Consensus , or more speciﬁcally , the consensual use of knowledge elements by agents or documents implies that communication takes place between them . This implication makes the proposed concept also able to detect self - organizing communicative systems . The question of consensus and interpretation has to be separated from the problema - tization of knowledge diversity on the ﬁelds of innovation studies and interdisciplinary research . Heterogeneity in knowledge elements can be integrative and consensual . Typical scientiﬁc innovation ( not which engender paradigm shift ) built on a consensual knowledge basis and results in cumulative development . Diversity as innovative recombination and semantic fragmentation can correlate , but not necessarily because they are distinct con - cepts . Similarly , a multidisciplinary ﬁeld with its own identity and journals may cite external knowledge elements and journals in considerable proportion , but this does not mean that this ﬁeld is not mature according to the coherency of its fundaments . On the contrary , citing the same set of articles or books by a research domain does not necessarily mean that a ﬁeld is developed . For instance sociology was institutionalized for one hundred years ago , but the fundamental questions of the discipline are still debated ( see more about these debates in the followings ) . The concept of fragmentation in this paper is close to the scientometrical theory and methodology of Leydesdorff ( 2001 ) , in which uncertainty is a central notion and a mea - surement tool based on information theory . Although the methodology of the latter is founded on entropy measures , the notion of a ‘‘potential - interpretative - horizon - for - docu - ments’’ in this study is compatible with Leydesdorff’s multidimensional framework for scientometrics , in which independent but mutually contingent systems interact . Although Harrison White’s structural theory of social action ( 2008 ) is not a theory of scientometrics per se , it has the same assumptions in some respect as Leydesdorff’s theory . The con - tingency of distinct spheres of social action in this theory was explicated as uncertainty in the cultural rules ( ambiguity ) and in the social standing or network position of social entities ( ambage ) , resulting from the endless idiosynratic manipluations of identities . 1 Leahey and Moody ( 2007 ) . 164 A . V . Varga 123 For this phenomenon sheer connectivity is not an adequate tool of conceptualization . In this paper a graph - theoretic concept— transitive closure in two - mode networks —will be introduced as a bibliometric measure of this type of fragmentation in citation networks . Not the problems of interdisciplinarity or innovation provide the research questions for testing the validity measure but the long - standing dispute on the integrity of social and natural sciences , and particularly the fragmentation of sociology . It is a recurring theme in sociology that the profession lacks the theoretical and social coherence that many other sciences—mainly natural sciences—have ( Turner and Turner 1990 ; Abbott 2001 ; Stinchcombe 2001 ) . For the representative of natural sciences biophysics was chosen . The third discipline , economics was chosen for the analysis because it is represent a more integrated social science in comparison to sociology . The paper is organized as follows . The ﬁrst section introduces a theory of references as traces of arguments of documents , and reference - contexts as cognitive frameworks of a ﬁeld . Then the fragmentation / integration of communication will be operationalized as transitive closure in citation networks . The followings will explicate the reasons of the expected differences among the sampled disciplines regarding their semantic fragmenta - tion . In order to test its validity and distinctiveness , this concept will then be used to measure the fragmentation of the citation network of sociology compared to economics and biophysics in parallel with the connectedness of these disciplines . As a second test to prove the adequacy of the proposed concept , the inner coherence of sociology will be measured by mapping the bibliographical couplings in a sample of sociological publica - tions ; the structure of the sub - ﬁelds of the discipline makes it possible to measure where ‘‘meaning making’’ takes place . The article will be closed by some conclusions and sug - gestions for further investigations . The integrity of reference context : concept and measurement Citations can be regarded as communicative acts : an author uses citations at different parts of a text as expressions of his or her argument . A citation activates some part of the cited text because the actual reference to the text by the referring article gives some interpre - tation of the document by situating it in the context of its argument . So citations can be regarded as interpretations , and by the act of interpretation they ‘‘condense’’ the meaning of the cited document for the purposes of argumentation . Because of this expressive function Small ( 1978 ) called citations ‘‘concept symbols’’ . Consider now all the references of a document . In one sense this list of references is the imprint of the content and logic of the argument . The text does the interpretative work through which the cited documents are integrated into one whole and the reference list is also the imprint of this interpretative work . In other words , citing one document is an interpretation of it : it accentuates one aspect of its content by integrating it into the whole of the current document . The cited items thus interact through the text . However it is crucial to appreciate that the interpre - tation of one cited text depends on the reference context in which it appears , because in order to write a coherent article or book the ﬁelds of the possible interpretations of the cited documents must overlap . What happens if the focus is changed from the level of the citing document to the corpus of texts over a certain time period and their citations ? In the context of all citing and cited documents each new citation ( the hypothetical appearance of one citation in a current document ) integrates one document ( the cited ) into the corpus by the interpretative work of the citing article . The author ( s ) of an article construct a train of thought from their Measuring the semantic integrity of scientiﬁc ﬁelds 165 123 interaction within an ‘‘actor network’’ ( research activity ) in order to integrate the results of the past . To put this in simpler terms , they pick some relevant literature from the corpus of past publications and carry out a hermeneutic process to establish a new coherence . This single act of citation is happening in a network because other documents also cite this particular document , and the citing document cites many documents . Scholars reading the text with the citations interact with one part of this web and this has an impact on their particular cognitive framework and on their scientiﬁc ﬁeld . The question of fragmentation can now be considered . If one document is cited by many documents that do not cite from each other’s reference list the coherent interpretation of this document is in danger . This particular work is interpreted with other works the con - nections of which were not established . To put it in another way , if the ‘‘meaning con - densation’’ act of citation depends on the whole text which is citing , and the cited document appears together with different documents each time it is cited , its interpretative spectrum becomes very wide in the whole literature . The interpretation in the context of the whole corpus is certainly hypothetical ; however , from the point of view of a scholar of one specialty , who holds the ‘‘map’’ of one part of this ﬁeld , such incoherence could exist . There is a certain duality here : the duality of the cited and the citing documents . Concepts of measurement have to represent that duality and two - mode networks can express such a duality ( Breiger 1974 ) . In order to ﬁnd the two - mode network represen - tation of the fragmentation concept , let an extreme situation of the most conservative citation behavior be supposed : the texts of a particular ﬁeld are citing the same set of documents constantly . There is a ﬁxed relationship between the documents throughout all the literature and the semantic diameter for all of them is the narrowest . Then if one document in this specialty cites from the corpus of another specialty this bridge then refracts the coherence of the ﬁeld . Because of this new citation , the interpretative horizon of all the other citations ( i . e . the act of citing one document by a particular document ) becomes broader for the reader . At the level of each citing document a local coherence is reached , but at the level of ﬁelds of specialty these local interpretations are in tension : the ﬁxed interpretative relationship between the originally cited documents needs to be rein - tegrated because of their new interpretative constellation with this new document . To sum up this point , the text which makes the new citation integrates it within the original corpus , and this new local coherence is in tension with the others ( which are all the same ) . It can be said that the potential interpretative horizon of all cited documents has become wider because of this new citation and it has to be ﬁlled . The extreme situation of total closure of citations into each ﬁeld can be represented as a set of fully connected components in a two - mode network . The fracture of this component structure of ‘‘cliques’’ happens if a citation bridges some components . If a transitive closure happens— namely , the two cliques start to be interconnected—the fragmentation is reduced . This closure is complete when the total density reached in that component . In this case it is totally integrated . For the purpose of measurement , the statistics of those network motifs ( or fragments ) are feasible which measure transitive closure in a two - mode network ; this is in the same way as triangles are used to measure the clustering ( the clustering coefﬁcient ) . These four - rings are shown in Fig . 1 . Other motifs are also relevant if we deviate from the present assumption that only two sets of vertices exist : the current corpus , in which the nodes are not able to refer to each other and the earlier contributions , the citations of which are irrelevant . If citing documents can be cited , i . e . the citation network is constituted by many time periods , more complicated patterns are also needed for measurement . For the limited purposes of the present article , however these motifs are not taken into consideration . 166 A . V . Varga 123 A ﬁctional example for the illustration of the concept is on Fig . 2 . Four articles from the ﬁelds of feminism , gender studies , discourse analysis and philosophy are citing the works of four authors . The interpretive diameter of the work of Judith Butler is the narrowest possible on Fig . 2a , since it is co - cited with the work of Amartya Sen by both articles that are citing the work of Judith Butler . This work—like Jacques Derridas’s in the example— has a very speciﬁc semantic function in the network in relation to Sen . In contrast , the reference to Amartya Sen by the article from the ﬁeld of gender studies has a wider interpretative diameter . Sen’s work is co - cited with John Austin’s , however the feminist article do not establish an interpretation which connect Sen’s and Austin’s work . Therefore there is a possible interpretative gap between Sen’s and Austin’s work . The open four - ring constituted by the gender article which cite Butler and Sen , and the discourse analysis article also affect Sen’s work . In Fig . 2b the article on feminism cite Derrida instead of Sen . This example illustrates the changing of the global fragmentation of a network . In both cases the nodes have the same degree distribution . The fragmentation is higher on Fig . 2b because the interpretation of Judith Butler’s work is disintegrated , since the article Fig . 1 A closed ( genealogical ) and an opened two - mode network 4 - ring Fig . 2 Illustration of semantic fragmentation in two citation networks Measuring the semantic integrity of scientiﬁc ﬁelds 167 123 on feminism is now citing Derrida and there is no co - citation between the feminist and the philosophical article except Butler . The ratio of the motifs on Fig . 1 in a network yields the global index for the measurement : C ¼ number of closed 4 (cid:3) rings number of all 4 - rings This ratio varies between 0 and 1 . In the second part of the demonstrative section of the article the local integration of the citation network will be measured . For a ﬂexible local index one should measure the ratio of these motifs for each act of citations , i . e . for each edge in the network . C i ¼ number of closed 4 (cid:3) rings involve edge i number of all 4 - rings involve edge i This measure is structural and does not relate to the content , and is decoupled from the problem of the actual interpretative coherence at the level of the article written or what is in the mind of the scholar using a particular citation . Certainly , there is no citation network in which the global index is even near to one ( as we will see in the following ) . In fact , scientiﬁc endeavor could be integrated with a very low transitive closure index . Science is a dynamic system . The citation network has been built up over time , and one cannot ﬁnd one part of its cross - section where scholars of one ﬁeld are working in the same phase of research . More important is the fact that publications contain different types of information that could be relevant in very different contexts . For example , the author of paper ‘‘A’’ might be interested in the theoretical section of paper ‘‘B’’ , while the author of paper ‘‘C’’ is interested in the methodological section of paper ‘‘B’’ , and as a result they cite paper ‘‘B’’ in very different contexts . However , this causes no problem for our hypothetical scholar when determining the clear function of paper ‘‘B’’ in the literature , since the theoretical and the methodological content can be decoupled from each other . Finally , high indexes are presumably rare because the constant progress of science means that knowledge of the past must be recombined endlessly ( beside generative creativity ) to reach better conclusions regarding ( present ) reality . The sample of disciplines An old issue of the philosophy of science is whether the social sciences and the natural sciences have or should employ the same methods . To this is related the question of whether cumulative progress and consensus on primary facts are possible in the social sciences . The most common approach to this problem is that the social sciences are multi - paradigm sciences , so they develop in distinct , incommensurable schools of thought ( Kuhn 1996 ) . These schools are therefore offer differing cognitive schemes for empirical inves - tigations . In the case of sociology the fragmentation of the discipline or the profession is a widely disputed issue ( Gouldner 1970 ; Abbott 2001 ; Cole 2001a ; Fuchs 2001 ) . Socio - logical inquiries are governed by very different approaches or , put in another way , ‘‘Kuhnian paradigms’’ . Furthermore , the debates between these paradigms are prevalent and may engender opposition between scholars of the same substantive ﬁeld . Some scholars have already analyzed the problems of the cognitive foundations of the discipline . For example , according to Cole’s argument ( 2001b ) sociology has no conceptual basis and has no ﬁrm and integrated theoretical foundation on which competing research 168 A . V . Varga 123 questions can be raised , explicated and their answers evaluated . This causes a lack of con - sensus and hinders cumulative knowledge production . It seems that Cole attributes this state of affairs mainly to the fact that sociology has an idiosyncratic research subject which is approached largely with a quasi - nomothetic research design . The motivation of sociologists to deﬁne standard concepts for research is against the effort to unfold a particular contextual complexity of the case under investigation , and this tension corrodes both endeavors . Abbott ( 2001 ) is also of the opinion that sociology lacks a ﬁrm conceptual basis . However , he sees a recurring pattern in the development of social theories which not only hinders commutative knowledge production , but also destabilizes factional opposition . He claims that theoretical dichotomies ( e . g . agency vs . structure or micro vs . macro ) always bring opposition into scholarly communities when one circle of scholars radicalizes one side of the dichotomy and then secedes from the general approach . If one scholarly group is integrated by the advocacy of one idea and by the common opposition against the counter - idea of it , then this group will split up after a while on the basis of the same dichotomy that integrated them before , because a sub - group will radicalizes their opinion . Thus knowledge develops in ‘‘fractal circles’’ , where ideas and intellectual circles are in a constant process of splitting and recombination . From another perspective fragmentation is related to external social factors : political ideologies , debates on social reform , needs of welfare systems , and social emancipatory movements . These distract sociology form cognitively and theoretically deﬁned research problems . Independently , applied issues have a great impact on intellectual and scientiﬁc motivation through the founding environment . Turner and Turner ( 1990 ) described this problem in connection with the case of the history of sociology in the United States . These concerns also demand the attachment of different roles and motivations , together with standards of evaluation ; this tends to corrode the professional power of sociologists ( Stinchcombe 2001 ) . In contrast to sociology , economics is a relatively succefull discipline , and as a correlate is less fragmented as a profession . As with sociology , economics also has many paradigms , but in a cyclical manner mainstream orthodoxy emerges and dominates the discipline , while heterodoxy is crowded out to the periphery ( Davis 2008 ) . This recurrent center - periphery structure does not justify that economics is more consensual discipline , as the simple fact that a discipline has many paradigms does not rule out the possibility that these schools form strong boundaries and become coherent knowledge bases . The fundamental difference is that it seems that economics lacks the discourse on the crisis of the discipline like sociology . Generally economics has a greater inﬂuence , which also indicates , hat it has well established and effectively communicated knowledge claims . The model of rational choice is very strong not only in the context of economics but also in the social sciences in general ; it inspires research in other disciplines in a considerable extent . Outside science , economic thinking inﬂuences political decision - makers all over the world and economists are able to represent their knowledge globally in consort ( Bockman and Eyal 2002 ; Fourcade 2006 ) . It is not an issue for the present study as to whether the dominant Kuhnian or any other theory is more valid for explaining the differences between the natural and social sciences or what is the cause of the fragmented character of sociology as a profession . However , disputes focusing on this issue do indicate that the social and natural sciences—and that includes sociology and economics—respectively have differing conceptual integrities as communicative systems ; thus it can be expected that this pattern of difference will be conﬁrmed by the proposed global index . In this study the ﬁeld of biophysics has been chosen as the representative of the natural sciences . It is an established discipline and it has its own departments at a university’s faculty of science . Two considerations are relevant in Measuring the semantic integrity of scientiﬁc ﬁelds 169 123 this choice . First , this is a discipline with an interdisciplinary character and this is also a feature of sociology , as demonstrated by Moody and Light ( 2006 ) ; furthermore , this interdisciplinary character could affect their morphology considerably . So this variable will be controlled in the comparison . Second , it is a relatively small ﬁeld and this makes it easier to handle ; this is an important factor , given the highly complex computation time of measures used in this study . Data and methods 2 Although sociological research is coupled to many interdisciplinary ﬁelds the investigation here has been limited to core journals with a clear sociological focus . The citation data was downloaded from the Social Science Citation Index ( SSCI ) . The SSCI includes biblio - graphic information on 105 journals which are classiﬁed as ‘‘sociological’’ . The time period under investigation is 2006 - 2008 . A total of 67 journals was selected from the 105 . Journals , dealing mainly with reviews were ignored , as were those which were not clas - siﬁed as ‘‘core journals’’ by the Sociological Abstracts ( 5852 articles ) . 3 The cause for the latter selection was to ﬁlter out the effect of interdisciplinarity ( which can reduce integrity ) . The samples of economics ( 41924 articles ) and biophysics ( 33416 articles ) cover the same period ( i . e . 2006 – 2008 ) , and include all the journals that are classiﬁed under these disci - plines in the SSCI and Science Citation Index ( SCI ) journal classiﬁcation . The samples consisted of research articles alone . Only English language articles were included because references to translated editions of books would have resulted in a biased structure . In order to map the subﬁelds of sociology in the citation network the bibliographical couplings were clustered . Bibliographical couplings are weighted connections between articles representing how many co - citations they have . For example , if two articles cited the same book or article they have a connection with weight one ; if they cited two identical publications their edges have a value of two and so on . For the purpose of clustering , the Blondel et al . algorithm was used ( 2008 ) , which is based on modularity optimization . To calculate a detailed mapping , weekly embedded couplings were removed ( see the Appendix for the details of this methodology and the results ) . Combined with this method the algorithm produced a sensible clustering solution , where both the level of current research topics ( 583 clusters ) , and the sub - disciplinary level became visible ( 52 clusters ) . This two - level solution was easy to calculate because the clustering method has a hier - archical logic by re - clustering the previously resulted solutions . In order to control the results for size effect such as differences in degree distribution ( number of citations , or number of citations received ) and density between networks , observed values was compared to those measured in random networks . It is a common approach in network analysis to generate random networks , following Erd } os & Re´nyi , which is then used to decide whether the measured network characteristic is signiﬁcantly different in the observed network . For each citation network , randomized networks were generated with the same size ( number of vertices and edges ) and degree distribution . 2 Unless stated otherwise , the analysis was made with Pajek ( Batagelj and Mrvar 1998 ) . Ttwo - mode network transformation was made with R package , t - net ( Opsahl 2009 ) . Motif counts were calculated with FANMOD ( Wernicke and Rasche 2006 ) . 3 ‘‘Core journals are published by sociological associations , groups , faculties , and institutions , and / or have the term (cid:4) sociology (cid:5) in their titles . All substantive articles appearing in these journals are abstracted and indexed , and citations are provided to the book reviews published therein . ’’ Source : http : / / www . csa . com / factsheets / socioabs - set - c . php , downloaded 10 - 20 - 2009 . 170 A . V . Varga 123 As a consequence of the transformation of the raw citation network into a two - mode network some citations ( edges ) have disappeared . This loss is between 2 and 5 % of the total citation relationships in the three networks . A more considerable problem arises from the fact that SSCI is not indexing books , which is an important form of publishing among social scientists . This missing data may bias the analysis . However , if we assume that citations of books and book chapters are not fundamentally different regarding their position in the citation network , there is no bias due to their absence . To be more speciﬁc , if the citations from books are not special in the one hand that they bridge separately clustered citations ( and as a consequence decreasing transitive closure ) , or on the other hand that they close opened 4 - rings ( and as a consequence rising transitive closure ) , they simply do not affect the crucial structural features . The absence of books may affect the density of the network , and maybe these publications cite less or more , but these properties are not important if we compare the results with the randomly expected ones . Comparing disciplines I analyzed the connectedness of the three disciplines , because from the Khunian per - spective it is probable that the citation networks of the social sciences are less connected . It is also important to see whether connectivity interfere with the proposed measure . To test integrity with the connectivity approach of the citation networks , the component structure of the network of bibliographical couplings ( deﬁned above ) was analyzed and the mean geodesics ( shortest path - lengths ) were calculated . With respect to the latter there are no signiﬁcant differences ( Table 1 ) . In all networks the average path length is around 2 and 3 , which means in this case that an article can , on average , reach all other articles through 2 or 3 co - citations in the network . These values are close to the randomly expected ones . The networks of bibliographical couplings have been integrated into big components in each case , only a few articles were separated from the big components ( below 2 to 5 % ) . To investigate the component structure more deeply the least weighted edges were succes - sively removed from the whole network . In this way it could be expected that highly connected parts will rise at a given weight as components . In each case it occurred that higher weights are distributed concentrically around a core , so at a given line weight only one component stands out , and most of the articles are separated without any connection ( Fig . 3 ) . Communities in neither discipline are salient this way . It can be concluded from these results that , when compared with each other , from the connectivity perspective all three sciences are integrated to the same extent . With regard to the integrity of the reference context , the differences are more signiﬁcant and conﬁrmed the pattern described in the introduction . The statistics of network motifs are presented in Table 2 . The global transitive closure index in a random network ( with the same degree distribution as the network under analysis ) is in the second column of Table 2 . As the results show , in biophysics citations are more often allocated into coherent citation contexts than ineconomics andsociology , andin thecase ofsociology thecitationpatterns aretheleast transitive . This is the pattern if we compare both the observed transitive closure and the ratio Table 1 Means of geodesics Means of geodesics in random networks with the same degree distribution are in brackets Sociology 2 . 3 ( 2 . 03 ) Economics 2 . 6 ( 2 . 24 ) Biophysics 3 ( 2 . 9 ) Measuring the semantic integrity of scientiﬁc ﬁelds 171 123 of the observed and randomly expected values . According to the latter , the integrity measure of both biophysics and economics is more than double of that of sociology . The inner constitution of sociology In the last analysis the local fragmentation indexes are presented . These were calculated in order to verify that the integration of the citation pattern is higher inside the ‘‘invisible Table 3 Statistics of internal and external local indexes and bibliographical couplings and the randomly expected values for the given bibliographical coupling weights Internal External Bibliographical couplings Mean 1 . 79 1 . 24 S . dev . 1 . 78 0 . 71 Local transitivity Mean 0 . 0122 0 . 0066 S . dev . 0 . 0115 0 . 0054 Randomly expected 0 . 0013 0 . 00089 Observed / random 9 . 24 7 . 44 0 % 10 % 20 % 30 % 40 % 50 % 60 % 70 % 80 % 90 % 100 % 2 3 4 5 2 3 4 5 2 3 4 5 % of isolated nodes % of nodes in components except the largest one % of nodes in the largest component Sociology Economics Biophysic Fig . 3 Distribution of nodes ( articles ) in components and in isolation after the removal of the edges ( bibliographical couplings ) with the given weights Table 2 4 - Ring motifs statistics Transitiveclosure ( % ) Randomlyexpected ( % ) Observed / random Sociology 0 . 4917 0 . 0261 18 . 82 Economics 0 . 627 0 . 0147 42 . 67 Biophysics 1 . 0736 0 . 0216 49 . 59 172 A . V . Varga 123 colleges’’ of sociology than between them . This is the expected situation if the measure is meaningful . In terms of network analysis it means that the citations inside the ﬁelds are more embedded into transitive 4 - rings . The ﬁrst clustering step with 52 clusters was used for the analysis ( Table 4 ) . The average local index upon the cluster structure is calculated in the following way . After the indexes are calculated on the raw citation network for each edge , this network is transformed—like a two - mode network—into a one - mode network as is the case with the transformation into a network of bibliographical couplings . However , in that case the weight of the couplings is the average of the local transitivity index between two articles . Then , by using the cluster structure of sub - ﬁelds the mean of the line weights was calculated for the couplings inside and outside the clusters . Because the delineating of the borders of clusters is based on the strength of the bibliographical couplings , and the fragmentation index is also correlated with the biblio - graphical couplings ( on bibliographical couplings with higher weights , more transitive 4 - rings are countable ) , a baseline model was constructed in order to control for this relationship . This baseline model is the random correlation between the strength of the bibliographical couplings and the fragmentation index of edges . The local index was calculated on the randomized two - mode network of sociology ( keeping degree distribu - tion ) , and a regression line was deﬁned that included the bibliographical couplings as a dependent variable . Using this regression line it is possible to extrapolate the random correlation between these two values . Internal transitivity is higher then external , even if it is controlled for the baseline model ( Table 3 ) : external transitivity is 7 times bigger than the randomly expected value for a bibliographical coupling with the value 1 . 24 , while the internal transitivity is 9 times bigger then the randomly expected 0 . 0013 local transitivity value predicted by the regression model for the 1 . 79 coupling weight . It is important to note that the observed / random ratio is higher inside clusters , since it shows that the difference between the inside an outside measured indexes is not the result of the random effect . The measure correctly indicates that citation behavior is more focused inside invisible colleges of sociology , than between them . Conclusions This study conceptualized and operationalized semantic fragmentation in citation networks within the methodological framework of social network analysis . Fragmentation was equated with the broad interpretive potential of the cited document in the context of the whole corpus through the eyes of a hypothetical onlooker . The proposed measure assumes that if a cited book or article is co - cited with many other documents it causes problems for the delineation of the interpretive boundaries for all the given documents . Both local and global measures were introduced for the diameter of the interpretive potential for citations based on the counts of network motifs ( or network fragments ) . As a test for the measure the global indexes were compared for three disciplines : sociology , economics and biophysics . The motivation to include these disciplines in the analysis was the hypothesized differences between the consensual nature of these scientiﬁc endeavors . It is widely debated among sociologists that sociology has problematic con - ceptual foundations , while it seems that economics is a well - integrated discipline—com - pared to other social sciences—with a strong inﬂuence inside and outside the sciences , and without a constant questioning of its foundations as in the case of sociology . Beside these differences it is a primary assumption in the philosophy of science that natural sciences Measuring the semantic integrity of scientiﬁc ﬁelds 173 123 have generally ﬁrmer conceptual base than social sciences . The results correlated with these differences : biophysics has more transitive 4 - rings than economics and sociology , and sociology has the least in their citation network . As a second test for the measure , in the citation network the average local indexes inside the subﬁelds in sociology were compared to the average between them . The indexes were considerably higher inside the ﬁelds than between them . This implies that , according to the assumptions of the measure , the citation activity follows a relatively consistent line of research . From these results it seems that the proposed measure is meaningful , and it is able to identify a systematic pattern in citation networks . It can be useful for investigations which focus on the crystallization of the research activity and scholarly communication of dif - ferent ﬁelds , as in the case of cross - disciplinary science , or innovation research . The concept could also help to elaborate the concept of disciplinary incoherency , and to understand the speciﬁc ways of innovation in the social and the natural sciences . The above introduced concept in its current state is however limited because it assumes a two - mode network structure , which cause some information loss during measurement . Deﬁning new types of motifs can help to overcome this limitation . Another drawback of the present concept is that it is too strict . For measuring indirect relationship between cited documents , motifs such as 4 - paths in two - mode networks ( Opsahl 2009 ) are a plausible choice . Acknowledgments I thank Ro´bert Tardos , Bala´zs Vedres , Vladimir Batagelj , Andrew Abbott , Erzse´bet Forczek , Attila Gulya´s , La´szlo´ Baraba´si , Zolta´n Kmetty and the participants of the 9th EUSOC seminar and XIX SUNBELT for their ideas , help and suggestions . This work was supported in part by the program ‘‘Increasing the Innovational , Research and Development Output of the Corvinus University of Budapest by the Establishment of Five Interdisciplinary Centres of Excellence’’ / TA´MOP - 4 . 2 . 1 / B - 09 / 1 / KMR - 2010 - 0005 . Appendix : Clustering methodology For the purpose of clustering of the bibliographical coupling network modularity optimi - zation algorithm of Blondel et al . ( 2008 ) was used . This method hierarchically clusters all previous cluster structures by integrating nodes in the same cluster . This made it possible to develop a two - level solution for the sub - disciplinary structure . This feature of the algorithm is important , because in this way the inherent dual structure of disciplines ( invisible colleges and research topics ) can be revealed . The results on the raw network were not satisfactory : the distribution of the clusters was too skewed ( the ratio of the ﬁrst and second largest clusters was around two ) . In order to gain a detailed picture of the network communities some transformations were implemented . First , the line weights were normalized ; it in other words , the proportional strength of ties was calculated . 4 In this way all nodes of the network have a strength ( sum of line weights ) of one . The algorithm yielded a clustering solution on this network with a modularity index of 0 . 406 at the ﬁrst clustering step . The distribution of the cluster sizes were skewed because just 24 clusters from the resulting 220 were over 10 . This means that the discursive ﬁelds below the specialties and paradigms were unobservable . At a second sequence of transformations an attempt was made to ﬁnd the ﬁrm structure behind this abstract clustering . The weaker ties were successively removed between articles . 4 That is , the line weights were divided by the degree of the article ( the number of bibliographical couplings an article has ) . 174 A . V . Varga 123 This approach was based on the assumption that strong ties resulting from normalization are more clustered , and that weak ties are not so important or are caused by perfunctory citations . 5 With this method the degree distribution also became less unequal ; this fact also indicated the likelihood of a more balanced cluster distribution . To test the assumption that removing weak ties calculated by normalization results in a more clustered network , clustering coefﬁcients were computed . These coefﬁcients were computed above a given normalized line weight in a consecutive way . The coefﬁcients were decreased as the line weights increased . The higher the line weights were , obviously the lesser the number of ties were in the network . However , these lessening ties connected the whole network together , because the network remained as one big component . Random networks were generated in order to make the clustering coefﬁcients of each network comparable . 100 random networks with the same degree distribution were generated for each . The ratio of the clustering coefﬁcients of the random and the real networks clearly indicates that the stronger the ties are , the more clustered patterns they form ( Fig . 4 ) . The weakest 90 % percent of all the bibliographical couplings were removed . On this network the clustering algorithm resulted in a two - step solution with the highest modu - larity index in the second step 0 . 553 . The cluster structure which resulted from the second clustering step was used in the analysis . The second cluster structure represents the sub - ﬁelds or invisible colleges of Sociology ( Table 4 ) . 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 0 0 , 01 0 , 02 0 , 03 0 , 04 0 , 05 0 , 06 0 , 07 line weights r a ndo m / ob se r ve d c l u s t e r i ng c o e ff i c i e n t r a t i o s Fig . 4 Average clustering coefﬁcient at different proportional strengths of bibliographical couplings 5 This idea is based on the same assumptions as the concept of the ambiguity of citations with a large semantic diameter . Measuring the semantic integrity of scientiﬁc ﬁelds 175 123 References Abbott , A . ( 2001 ) . Chaos of disciplines . Chicago : University Of Chicago Press . Batagelj , V . , & Mrvar , A . ( 1998 ) . PAJEK—program for large network analysis . http : / / citeseerx . ist . psu . edu / viewdoc / summary ? doi = 10 . 1 . 1 . 27 . 9156 . Accessed 25 October 2010 . Blondel , V . D . , Guillaume , J . , Lambiotte , R . , & Lefebvre , E . ( 2008 ) . Fast unfolding of communities in large networks . Journal of Statistical Mechanics : Theroy and Experiment . doi : 10 . 1088 / 1742 - 5468 / 2008 / 10 / P10008 http : / / sites . google . com / site / ﬁndcommunities / . Accessed 25 October 2010 . Bockman , J . , & Eyal , G . ( 2002 ) . Eastern Europe as a laboratory for economic knowledge : The transnational roots of neoliberalism . The American Journal of Sociology , 108 ( 2 ) , 310 – 352 . Breiger , R . L . ( 1974 ) . The duality of persons and groups . Social Forces , 53 ( 2 ) , 181 – 190 . Cole , S . ( 2001a ) . What’s wrong with sociology ? New Brunswick & London : Transaction Publishers . Cole , S . ( 2001b ) . Why sociology doesn’t make progress like the natural sciences . In S . Cole ( Ed . ) , What’s wrong with sociology ? ( pp . 37 – 60 ) New Brunswick & London : Transaction Publishers . Davis , J . B . ( 2008 ) . The turn in recent economics and return of orthodoxy . Cambridge Journal of Eco - nomics , 32 ( 3 ) , 349 – 366 . Egghe , L . , & Rousseau , R . ( 2003 ) . A measure for the cohesion of weighted networks . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 54 ( 3 ) , 193 – 202 . doi : 10 . 1002 / asi . 10155 . Fourcade , M . ( 2006 ) . The construction of a global profession : The transnationalization of economics . The American Journal of Sociology , 112 ( 1 ) , 145 – 194 . Frigotto , L . & Riccaboni , M . ( 2010 ) . A few special cases : Scientiﬁc creativity and network dynamics in the ﬁeld of rare diseases . Proceedings from Sunbelt XXX . Riva del Garda Fierecongressi . Italy : Trento . Fuchs , S . ( 2001 ) . What makes sciences ‘Scientiﬁc’ . In J . S . Turner ( Ed . ) , Handbook of sociological theory . New York : Springer . Gouldner , A . W . ( 1970 ) . The coming crisis of Western sociology . New York : Basic Books . Kuhn , T . S . ( 1996 ) . The structure of scientiﬁc revolutions . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Leahey , E . , & Moody J . ( 2007 ) . Sociological Innovation through Subﬁeld Integration . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Sociological Association , New York . 10 August , Manuscript Table 4 Results of the second clustering step Cluster labels Frequency Frequency ( % ) Social constructionism 621 10 . 81 Dimensions of social identity 614 10 . 69 Religion and morality 507 8 . 82 Sociology of family 408 7 . 10 Well - being and welfare systems 359 6 . 25 Political sociology 324 5 . 64 Sociology of work 273 4 . 75 Social structure 268 4 . 66 Social control and deviance 236 4 . 10 Social , economic and scientiﬁc technologies 201 3 . 49 Sociology of media 185 3 . 22 Healthcare systems 181 3 . 15 Social network analysis 146 2 . 54 Time management in daily life 129 2 . 24 Sociology of space and urbanism 122 2 . 12 Environmental sociology and questions of globalization 113 1 . 96 Armed forces in civil contexts 102 1 . 77 Rational choice theory 100 1 . 74 Other 1146 19 . 95 176 A . V . Varga 123 http : / / www . allacademic . com / meta / p _ mla _ apa _ research _ citation / 1 / 8 / 4 / 1 / 1 / p184115 _ index . html . Accessed 25 October 2010 . Leydesdorff , L . ( 2001 ) . The challenge of scientometrics : The development , measurement , and self - orga - nization of scientiﬁc communications . Parkland : Universal Publishers . Moody , J . , & Light , R . ( 2006 ) . A view from above : The evolving sociological landscape . The American Sociologist , 37 ( 2 ) , 67 – 86 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s12108 - 006 - 1006 - 8 . Opsahl , T . ( 2009 ) . Structure and evolution of weighted networks . http : / / opsahl . co . uk / tnet / content / view / 15 / 27 / . Accessed 25 October 2010 . Porter , A . L . , Roessner , J . D . , Cohen , A . S . , & Perreault , M . ( 2006 ) . Interdiscipinary research : Meaning , metrics and nurture . Research Evaulation , 15 ( 3 ) , 187 – 195 . Rafols , I . , & Meyer , M . ( 2009 ) . Diversity and network coherence as indicators of interdisciplinarity : Case studies in bionanoscience . Scientometrics , 82 ( 2 ) , 263 – 287 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11192 - 009 - 0041 - y . Small , H . G . ( 1978 ) . Cited documents as concept symbols . Social Studies of Science , 8 ( 3 ) , 327 – 340 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 030631277800800305 . Stinchcombe , A . ( 2001 ) . Disintegrated disciplines and the future of sociology . In S . Cole ( Ed . ) , What’s wrong with sociology ? ( pp . 37 – 60 ) New Brunswick & London : Transaction Publishers . Turner , S . P . , & Turner , J . H . ( 1990 ) . The impossible science : An institutional analysis of American sociology . Newbury : Sage . Wernicke , S . , & Rasche , F . ( 2006 ) . FANMOD : A tool for fast network motif detection . Bioinformatics ( Oxford , England ) , 22 ( 9 ) , 1152 – 1153 . doi : 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btl038 . http : / / theinf1 . informatik . uni - jena . de / * wernicke / motifs / index . html . Accessed 25 October 2010 . White , H . C . ( 2008 ) . Identity and control : How social formations emerge ( 2nd ed . ) . Princetion : Princeton University Press . Measuring the semantic integrity of scientiﬁc ﬁelds 177 123