1 Jamshid Beheshti & Andrew Large Graduate School of Library & Information Studies McGill University , Montreal , Quebec , Canada Kevin Kee Brock University St . Catharines , Ontario , Canada Charles Cole Graduate School of Library & Information Studies McGill University , Montreal , Quebec , Canada Designing Virtual Environments in an Educational Context Abstract : Virtual environments in which users can navigate freely through spatial representations , pick up and examine objects , and “converse” with virtual characters , can play a role in transferring information and knowledge for both training and education . This paper discusses design issues encountered when creating such an environment for grade - five primary school students . Résumé : Les environnements numériques dans lesquels les individus peuvent naviguer librement à travers des représentations spatiales , obtenir et examiner des objets , et « faire la conversation » avec des personnages virtuels , peuvent jouer un rôle dans le transfert de l’information et des connaissances , aussi bien au niveau de la formation que de l’enseignement . Cet article présente les problèmes de conception rencontrés lors de la création de tels environnements pour des élèves de cinquième année de l’école primaire . 1 . Introduction Advances in technology and software engineering in the last decade have resulted in the development of engaging games , in which the user is immersed in a virtual environment . A study of some 2000 children between the ages of 8 and 18 reported that 83 % have at least one video game player in their home ( Roberts , Foeher & Rideout , 2005 ) . While these games are marketed as entertainment , they can also be educational . A MediaWise report , summarizing the findings of a number of research studies , states : Video games are natural teachers . Children find them highly motivating ; by virtue of their interactive nature , children are actively engaged with them ; they provide repeated practice ; and they include rewards for skillful play . These facts make it likely that video games could have large effects , some of which are intended by game designers , and some of which may not be intended . ( Walsh et al , 2004 ) Educational computer games have been on the market for many years , and potentially they are capable of replacing or supplementing traditional lessons in a wide variety of contexts . They can provide an interactive , stimulating learning environment , which benefit students in the classrooms ( Virvou , Katsionis , and Manos , 2005 ) . Yet few games are used in classrooms , for several reasons : some teachers and parents are reluctant to 2 accept games as having educational value ; information and communication technology infrastructure is often of poor quality ; the traditional class schedule is not conducive to learning through gaming ; there is a limited number of games that successfully combine attractive characteristics with genuine educational objectives . The goal of the project discussed in this paper was to design and develop a highly interactive and engaging educational computer environment for children , drawing on computer gaming metaphors to augment history lesson plans in elementary school classrooms . More specifically , the goal was to inform elementary school students about various aspects of life in rural Quebec in the 1890s , and to enable the students to draw comparisons with their own lives . The product introduces students in grade five to visual arts as a gateway to history . A virtual environment was created , in which children can freely move around and interact with virtual characters and objects . 2 . Virtual Reality and Virtual Environments The first use of virtual reality ( VR ) can be traced back to the Sensorama Simulator in the 1950s ( Sutherland , 1965 ) , and in the flight simulator industry . Today , VR is used in a wide variety of applications , including the visualization of engineering concepts in early development stages , training astronauts ( Jukka Rönkkö et al , 2006 ) , training in specific domains such as astronomy ( Loftin , 1994 ) , and in archaeology ( e . g . , Kantner , 2000 ) . Although the gaming industry began using VR technology in the 1980s , the id software company ( http : / / www . idsoftware . com ) was the main catalyst in advancing VR games by creating the hugely popular first - person shooter ( FPS ) games , Wolfenstein and Doom , in the early 1990s . While designing fully immersive virtual reality remains prohibitively expensive , desk - top VR products are thriving . Definitions of the terms VR and virtual environments ( VE ) are constantly evolving ( Wilson , 2006 ) , and at times these two terms have been used interchangeably . We use the clarification proposed by Wilson & D’Cruz ( 2006 ) : VR refers to a technical system set - up , its hardware and software , whilst VE “is the computer - generated experience of a participant , obtained by and through an interface which engages one or more of our senses but almost always includes the visual sense . ” In general , a VE experience consists of a sense of being within a three - dimensional space , where the user is involved by interacting with objects , and controlling his / her movements . ( Wilson & D’Cruz , 2006 ) . The application of VR / VE in the educational context has been controversial , and debated in the literature . There remains objections from some educators and developmental psychologists regarding the appropriateness of " virtual " experiences for children ( Cuban , 1986 ; Brooks , 1998 ) . Some researchers have also suggested that there are no clear evidence that VR adds value to children’s learning , and experience with other media does not demonstrate any significant effects on learning ( Clark , 1994 ) . More recent research , however , may suggest the contrary and that virtual environments may have interesting applications for children . Roussos et al ( 1999 ) point to some evidence that demonstrate immersion and presence can have strong motivational impact . VR technologies present opportunities “to experience environments which , for reasons of time , distance , scale , and 3 safety , would not otherwise be available to many young children , especially those with disabilities” ( Roussos , 1999 , 247 ) . It has been also shown that students who performed poorly in the classroom benefited most from VR games ( Virvou , Katsionis , and Manos , 2005 ) . Champion ( 2004 ) argues that the application of VR to cultural heritage can benefit from elements that make 3D games engaging such as “embodiment , cultural embedding , personalised maps , interactive artifacts , dynamic environments , mood , and contextual tasks” ( p . 7 ) . 3 . ENVI The Intelligent Virtual Environment : Paintings as Virtual Gateways to Social and Cultural History / Environnement Virtuel Intelligent : l’art comme point d’accès virtuel sur l’histoire culturelle et sociale ( ENVI ) is a Heritage Canada funded project designed to introduce primary school children in grade 5 to Canadian cultural history . The virtual environment comprises a representation of a real village , St Hilaire ( located about 100 km north east of Montreal , Quebec ) in the late nineteenth century , in which a number of “scenes” , including a kitchen , a dance , and a farmyard , can be explored interactively by users . The scenes are based on two of the drawings by the Quebec artist , Ozias Leduc 1 , that appeared in Claude Paysan , a book authored by Ernest Choquette and published in 1899 2 . A secondary goal of the project is to engage students in discourse on art as a historical tool or a gateway to the past . The two drawings were chosen to represent an indoor and outdoor scene of the village . The Dance is set in an inn during the religious festival of Mardi Gras or “Fat Tuesday” , the last opportunity for indulgence in food and drink before the season of fasting ( Lent ) . The Road to the Church , represents the main thoroughfare in St Hilaire . Virtual environments were constructed based on these two drawings , and developed in monochrome ( reminiscent of Leduc’s original illustrations , which were drawn in black and white ) . Figures 1 , 2 , and 3 show the road to the village and the church , a barn and a house typical of the era , and the dance hall , respectively . The user can move freely in the VEs , although the transition from the outdoor scenes to the dance hall requires an intermediary step . The dance hall is set within an inn , or a Auberge , a two - storey building with several rooms , a dining hall , and a kitchen . The virtual village comprises several buildings , including a church , some of which can be explored by the user , whilst others are simple two dimensional drawings . Several animated characters 3 were developed to create a more engaging experience for users . These characters include a guide to help the user with various tasks , two farmers , a cook , and a maid . The VEs are linked to web sites that can provide additional educational information about life in rural Quebec in the 1890s . The information can be accessed through simple binary menus such as do you want to know more about this topic : yes / no . The menus appear on the screen in response to the characters , who can ‘speak’ to the user in either English or French with a click of the mouse . Although ENVI was designed primarily for grade - five students , these “conversations” can differ according to the grade level of the user ( elementary or secondary level ) . The application delivers a desk - top VE , accessible readily and easily via the Web . 4 Figure 1 . The road to the village Figure 2 . A barn and a house Figure 3 . The dance hall 5 4 . Development and Challenges In this project , VE is used as an alternative medium to a textbook , a movie , a play , or other media that may be used in an educational context . As such , provides students with information upon which they can construct knowledge . This objective poses several major design challenges . A fundamental challenge is to create a learning object that is interesting , even enticing , for students to explore but at the same time remains focused upon its ultimate educational goals . A second challenge concerns conveying abstract ideas to students . The visual richness of the environment effectively communicates the architecture , tools and utensils , costumes , et cetera that were commonplace at that time in St Hilaire . It is more problematic to present abstract concepts such as women’s rights , the role of religion , and child labour laws in this environment without resorting to long monologues delivered by characters that would undermine the interactive , explorative strengths of virtual environments . While producing a text to meet the pedagogical objectives and competencies is relatively straightforward , developing any type of VE , particularly an educational one , is a complex undertaking . The development cycle of VE production , and best practices used in the industry have been the subject of recent research studies ( Wilson , Eastgate , and C’Cruz , 2002 ) , but none has focused specifically on design parameters for children . Creating a VE product such as ENVI involves several steps and includes many components . 1 . At the outset pedagogical goals and objectives should be established . These should relate directly to the curriculum of instruction , and to the levels of competencies that are required in a specific domain . We consulted three educators from both elementary and secondary schools to arrive at educational goals . 2 . In any project involving human - computer interaction , a user need analysis and an application task analysis should be performed , and alternative technologies should be explored . While preferably children should have been consulted for this project , as in our previous projects ( e . g . , Large et al , 2006 ) , the lack of time in this twelve - month project coupled with a sense that we had sufficient knowledge of their needs through teachers and the curriculum caused us to forgo this step . During the course of development , we investigated alternative technologies such as animation , digital video , and two - dimensional drawings , for specific tasks , which were then incorporated into the project . 3 . Prior to the construction of a VE , a script or a storyline must be developed , similar to that used in creating a motion picture , upon which scenarios then are built . An important step in the production of VEs comprises historical research to ensure the accuracy and authenticity of the final product . 4 . The storyline should only be written after all the historical research has been completed . Each scenario in the storyline is related to a specific educational objective , and may consist of scenes , characters , dialogues , and educational content in a text form . 5 . With the aid of an artist , each scene is developed into many sketches , forming a storyboard , to depict a precise outline of the environment , and to organize and illustrate the flow of the movements ( e . g . , Figure 4 ) . More than 200 sketches were produced for ENVI , of which only about a dozen were used in the production of the VEs . 6 6 . Professional writers are employed to write the dialogues for the characters , which are then used by actors to record the actual dialogues . 7 . The VEs are derived from the storyboards , and constructed . Various tools are utilized to create realistic 3D environments . 8 . Digital characters are developed and their movements are determined based on the sketches from the storyboards . The characters’ mouth movements are synchronized with the recorded dialogues . To facilitate accessibility for users with hearing disabilities , subtitles for dialogues are presented at the bottom of the screen as transcripts . 9 . Multimedia information , i . e . , video and music , are developed and then integrated in VEs to enhance and enrich the environments , and facilitate efficient and effective flow of information . 10 . Supplemental materials , including website and PDFs , are produced for teachers to provide background historical information as well as suggestions on how ENVI might be used in classroom instruction . 11 . All the information , including the dialogues , are translated into French for developing a bilingual product . Figure 4 : Storyboard 7 We faced many challenges and obstacles in designing , developing , and producing ENVI . Challenge I : Pedagogy One of the objectives of a cultural heritage online application is to efficiently deliver historical information to users . Motivation will undoubtedly have impact on the effectiveness of the application . How does one deliver linear narrative content without boring the user ? This issue becomes critical when children are the intended users . A combination of different methods of information delivery was used in ENVI to address this issue . First , the VEs are designed to be enticing and to encourage students to move through the scenes at their own pace with the aim of exploration ( Cobb et al , 2002 ) . On the road to the village , children can investigate various buildings , and the geographical features of this village , and view these from different perspectives . While exploring , they encounter characters representing a spectrum of people , who tell the children about aspects of life in the village . Second , the VEs are interactive . Roussou ( 2004 ) argues for a strong link between interactivity , learning and engagement , and states that virtual reality offers interactivity as one of its essential properties . We embedded in one ENVI scene a highly interactive environment for children , when they enter a typical kitchen and interact with the cook . She has a specific set of tasks for the user to accomplish to help her prepare the supper . The tasks involve in this specific sequence include : ( a ) picking up a wooden log , ( b ) carrying the log to the stove , ( c ) lighting the wood in the stove , ( d ) closing the stove’s doors to prevent smoke from entering the kitchen , ( e ) fetching a bucket , ( f ) filling the bucket with water from a pump , ( g ) carrying the bucket to the stove , ( h ) and filling the pot on the stove with the water . During this operation , a young maid is working in the kitchen , who with a click of the mouse is able to provide further instructions for the user . The interaction allows children to engage more actively with the environment , and to learn about lack of amenities in the nineteenth century . In another scene users must identify from a range of objects in a room those which genuinely belong in this late nineteenth - century setting and those which are historically misplaced . Third , supplemental materials are provided for the teachers that can be used in the classroom . These include tasks and questions that children have to complete , with the overall goal of creating a pedagogically sound environment . The tasks and questions also facilitate inquiry - based learning , and the transfer of abstract knowledge without resorting to long texts or monologues by the digital characters . Challenge II : Technology 4 When designing a VE to be accessed via the Web , technical constraints stem from hardware and / or bandwidth limitations . The former is usually exemplified by low image fluidity ( inadequate refresh rate ) when navigating within the virtual scene . Limited bandwidth results in overly long download times and unresponsive applications . In 8 practice , these force designers to reduce the number of objects and digital characters that users can interact with and the level of photo - realism . A VE scene is made up of objects ( mesh ) and their covering skins ( texture ) . Data storage and transfer requirements are proportional to the number of individual objects / skins and their complexity . The original kitchen scene in ENVI , for example , consisted of many objects ( Figure 4 ) , which collectively required substantial hardware capacity and bandwidth . The complexity of virtual objects is defined by the number of polygons they require ; more complexity requires more data storage and transfer . For example , a realistic digital character such as those seen in motion pictures ( Final Fantasy IV , Golem in Lord of the Rings ) may use up to thirty thousand ( 30 , 000 ) polygons while a cartoon like character may require only two thousand ( 2 , 000 ) . The digital characters in ENVI , were more cartoon like and at the lower end of the spectrum , comprising of a few thousand polygons The original ENVI storyline required many animated characters , which would have necessitated a significant amount of computing power as well as bandwidth , not to mention an enormous amount of time for development . In the “dance” scene , the original storyline demanded a minimum of eight digital characters simultaneously moving together in dance steps and synchronized with music . We investigated various technologies to arrive at the most efficient and effective solution . In the end we decided to make a professional digital video employing eight actors ( four couples ) who wore 1890s costumes and performed the dance , with historically authentic music found in the Bibliothèque nationale du Québec . Approximately 45 minutes of video was shot , of which about one minute actually was used in the dance scene . The video was transferred to monochrome to match the VE scene . In addition , rather than rendering digital characters for the opening scene and to save time and accelerate the production , a Flash program was developed to introduce the user to ENVI through a series of scenes comprising animated characters . Transferring data from a server , across the Internet to the client machine is still much slower that accessing data from a local storage medium . Hence , compromises were essential to complete the project : the number and complexity of objects , including the characters , were reduced . While ideally we strived for producing realistic scenes that children normally prefer ( Beheshti et al , 2005 ; Hanna , Neapolitan , and Risden , 2004 ) , we also recognized that people’s physiological response is the same for a cartoon or realistic objects and characters ( Rothbaum , et al . 1996 ) . Challenge III : Time Our over - arching challenge was time . Due to a variety of unforeseen factors and external constraints , the VEs had to be developed in less than eight months , which meant concurrent implementation of procedures and processes . The work on the VEs began before the specific educational objectives were fully developed , breaching one of the first principals of design . Given that construction of animated characters was extremely time consuming , this stage of production was well underway before the scenarios were entirely written . In order to rush through the scenarios , during one phase of the production more than a dozen research assistants were involved in historical research , scenario writing , drawings , music research , movie and sound production . 9 5 . Conclusion This is the first phase of the ENVI project . Developing VEs for educational purposes is an iterative process ( Wilson , Eastgate , D’Cruz , 2002 ) , where the product has to be tested , modified , tested , and so on . In the second phase of the project , still to be completed , ENVI will be tested with children . Nonetheless , we believe that the product can meet the challenge of delivering cultural and historical information using VR technology . With the assistance of several teachers , pedagogical lessons have been embedded in the virtual environments , that can be used to teach cultural history in elementary schools . The virtual experience is supplemented with background information from websites linked from ENVI , multimedia information embedded in the VEs , and educational tasks provided in downloadable PDFs . This is a constructivist model , where students “actively build their own internal models of the world rather than passively accepting data . ” ( Moshell and Hughes , 2002 , p . 896 ) . The model includes five main features : contextualized learning , individualized learning ; authentic tasks ; situated cognition , and non - prespecified content ( Cobb et al , 2002 ) . Although these features may not all be equally applicable to every learning situation , the model provides a framework , upon which VEs can be constructed , and evaluation and testing of the product can be based . In building ENVI , we faced a number of challenges , which can be categorised as Pedagogy , Technology , and Time . Developing appropriate pedagogical VEs within a constructivist framework is plausible . However , relying solely on VR technologies may not be sufficient , and the use of other media in the VEs should be considered . We integrated digital video , music , animation , websites , and PDFs to create an environment that may include the elements of the constructivist model . Technology proved to be another challenge in developing ENVI . Compromises had to be made between high resolution , realistic - looking digital characters , on one hand , and throughput , bandwidth limitations , and resource allocation on the other hand . The final product seems to be a reasonable balance between these factors . Time proved to be the biggest challenge for the project . Designing and developing VEs require a considerable amount of time , which we did not have . Efficient and effective project management , under these conditions is of paramount importance , as many stages of the project had to be completed concurrently , and without delay . Finally , we developed a product that may pave the way for future applications of virtual environments in the classrooms . Acknowledgements : We are grateful to all our research assistants . Particular thanks to Dr . Claude Frasson , Orly Benchetrit , Marie - France Frasson , and the programmer and designer , Stephane Payette and Felipe Quinzanos , all at Virtuel Age International for their invaluable contributions . The research was made possible by funding from Canadian Heritage . 10 References Beheshti , J . , Large , A . , Julian , C . A . 2005 . Designing a virtual reality interface for children’s web portals . Data , Information , and Knowledge in a Networked World . Canadian Association for Information Science 2005 Annual Conference , June 2 - 4 , 2005 . Http : / / www . cais - acsi . ca / proceedings / 2005 / beheshti _ 2005 . pdf Brooks , F . 1998 . Virtual Reality in Education : Promise and Reality panel statement . Proceedings IEEE Virtual Reality Annual International Symposium ( VRAIS ' 98 ) . 208 . Champion , E . 2004 . Heritage Role Playing - History as an interactive digital game . Proceedings of Australian Workshop on Interactive Entertainment . Clark , R . E . 1994 . Media will never influence learning . Educational Technology Research and Development 42 ( 2 ) , 21 - 29 . Cobb , S . , Neale , H . , Crosier , J . , Wilson , J . R . 2002 . Development and evaluation of virtual environments for education . In : Handbook of Virtual Environments : Design , Implementation , and Applications ed . Kay M . Stanney . Mahwah , New Jersey : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Publishers . 911 - 936 . Cuban , L . 1986 . Teachers and Machines : The Classroom Use of Technology Since 1920 . New York : Teachers College Press . Hanna , L . , Neapolitan , D . , Risden , K . 2004 . Evaluating Computer Game Concepts With Children . Proceedings of IDC 2004 . New York : ACM Press . 49 - 56 . Kantner , J . 2000 . Realism vs . Reality : creating virtual reconstructions of prehistoric architecture . Virtual Reality in Archeology . Ed . J . A . Barcelo , M . Forte , and D . H . SandersOxford : Archaepress . Large , A . , Nesset , V . , Beheshti , J . , and Bowler , L . 2006 . “Bonded design” : A novel approach to intergenerational information technology design . Library & Information Science Research 28 ( 1 ) : 64 - 82 . Loftin , R . Bowen and Kenny , Patrick J . 1994 . The use of virtual environments for training the Hubble space telescope flight team . Web page . Available at http : / / www . vetl . uk / edu / Hubble / virtel . html . Moshell , J . M . & Hughes , C . E . 2002 . Virtual environments as a tool for academic learning . In : Handbook of Virtual Environments : Design , Implementation , and Applications . Ed . Kay M . Stanney . Mahwah , New Jersey : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Publishers . 893 - 910 . Roberts , Donald F . , Foeher , Ulla G . , and Rideout , Victoria . 2005 . Kaiser Family Foundation : Generation M : Media in the lives of 8 - 18 year olds . Accessed at : www . kff . org / entmedia / upload / Generation - M - Media - in - the - Lives - of - 8 - 18 - Year - olds - Report . pdf . 11 Rönkkö , J . , Markkanen , J . , Launonen , R . , Ferrino , M . , Gaia , E . , Basso , V . , Patel , H . , D’Cruz , M . , and Laukkanen , S . 2006 . Multimodal astronaut virtual training prototype . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 64 : 182 - 191 . Rothbaum , B . O . , Hodges , L . F . , Watson , B . A . 1996 . Virtual reality exposure therapy in the treatment of fear of flying . Behavior Research and Therapy 34 : 477 - 481 . Roussos , M . , Johnson , A . , Moher , T . , Leigh , J . , Vasilakis , C . , Barnes , C . 1999 . Learning and Building Together in an Immersive Virtual World . In Presence 8 ( 3 ) : 247 - 263 . Roussou , Maria . 2004 . Learning by Doing and Learning Through Play : An Exploration of Interactivity in Virtual Environments for Children . ACM Computers in Entertainment 2 ( 1 ) : 1 - 23 . Sutherland , I . 1965 . The Ultimate Display . Proceedings of the International Federation of Information Processing Congress , Volume 2 . pp . 506 - 508 . Virvou , M . , Katsionis , G . , & Manos , K . 2005 . Combining Software Games with Education : Evaluation of its Educational Effectiveness . Educational Technology & Society 8 ( 2 ) : 54 - 65 . Walsh , David ; Gentile , Douglas ; Gieske , Jeremy ; Walsh , Monica ; Chasco , Emily . 2004 . Ninth Annual MediWise Video Game Report Card . Accessed at : http : / / www . mediafamily . org / research / report _ vgrc _ 2004 . shtml Wilson , J . R . , Eastgate , R . M . , and D’Cruz , M . 2002 . Structured Development of Virtual Environments . In : Handbook of Virtual Environments : Design , Implementation , and Applications . Ed . Kay M . Stanney . Mahwah , New Jersey : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Publishers . 353 - 378 . Wilson , J . R . 2006 . Editorial : Interaction with virtual environments . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 64 : 157 . Wilson , J . R . & D’Cruz , M . 2006 . Virtual and interactive environments for work of the future . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 64 : 158 – 169 . 1 The Dance , and the Road to the Church . http : / / cybermuse . gallery . ca / cybermuse / search / artist _ work _ e . jsp ? iartistid = 3195 2 http : / / jydupuis . apinc . org / pdf / choquette1 . pdf 3 The terms animated characters and digital characters have been used interchangeably throughout this article . 4 The technology was developed by Virtuel Age International ( VAI ) , a Montreal based company specializing in the application of virtual reality in training . ( http : / / www . virtuelage . com )