Socratrees : Making Discussions Great Again (cid:63) The design and evaluation of a website for large - scale argumentative discussion Steven Jeuris [ 0000 − 0001 − 9645 − 8275 ] Technical University of Denmark , Richard Petersens Plads , Kgs . Lyngby , DK - 2800 , Denmark sjeu @ dtu . dk Abstract . Terms like ‘misinformation’ , ‘fake news’ , and ‘echo cham - bers’ permeate current discussions on the state of the Internet . We be - lieve a lack of technological support to evaluate , contest , and reason about information online—as opposed to merely disseminating it—lies at the root of these problems . Several argument technologies support such functionality , but have seen limited use outside of niche communi - ties . Most research systems overemphasize argument analysis , standing in stark contrast with the informal dialectical nature of everyday argu - mentation . Conversely , non - academic systems overlook important impli - cations for design which can be derived from theory . In this paper , we present the design of a system aiming to strike a balance between the two . Socratrees is a website for collaborative argumentative discussion targeting layman users , but includes sophisticated community guidelines and novel features inspired by informal logic ; we argue these are key to scaling up argumentation . Based on a six - week - long evaluation and subsequent survey sent out to all active users , we conclude that while contributing to arguments remains a complex task , most users learned to do so eﬀectively with minimal guidance and all recognized that structure improves online discussion and results in a clearer overview of arguments . Keywords : Computer - supported argumentation · argument technolo - gies · computational argumentation . 1 Introduction There currently is an unprecedented amount of information available online . This can be used by decision - makers , the civically - engaged , journalists , and re - searchers alike , to inform themselves . However , doing so requires navigating and parsing a complicated web of disparate resources ( such as news reports , scien - tiﬁc articles , and social media ) , which can make it hard to ‘see the forest for the trees’ . Although we have made great advances in how information can be dis - seminated , there is a lack of technological support to integrate , evaluate , contest , and reason about it [ 38 ] . (cid:63) This is in reference to the campaign slogan “Make America Great Again” used by Donald Trump , a fervent adopter of social media , during the presidential elections of the USA in 2016 . a r X i v : 1812 . 04478v2 [ c s . H C ] 31 M a r 2019 2 Steven Jeuris Argumentation online is certainly possible—and commonplace , but typically only adds to the ever - growing torrent of information , leaving behind lengthy disorganized threads , interspersed with random Internet banter . Since anyone can contribute , verifying the validity of statements found online is extremely time - consuming—time most people do not have or are simply unwilling to give up leisure time for [ 26 ] . Instead , most people decide on a select few news sources ( e . g . , based on political predispositions [ 46 ] or attitudes towards speciﬁc issues of interest [ 24 ] ) in which to place their trust and based on which their opinions are formed . As a result , many information sources act like ‘echo chambers’ : dis - cussions of opposing views are inconveniently segregated , and ill - founded ideas can propagate freely as they remain unopposed [ 29 , 35 , 46 ] . It is no surprise then , that terms like ‘misinformation’ , ‘fake news’ , and ‘ﬁlter bubbles’ permeate cur - rent discussions on the state of the Internet [ 12 ] . Inspired by argumentation theory [ 49 , 50 ] , research on the border of logic , philosophy , and computer science has taken up the challenge to create better tools to disseminate , structure , and analyze rational thought , collectively called argument technologies . These target a wide variety of application areas , includ - ing conﬂict resolution , legal argumentation in law , discussing and documenting design rationale , and sensemaking [ 28 , 40 , 42 ] . In this paper , we focus on col - laborative , publicly available , web - based technologies with explicit support for interlocutors to view and contribute to argumentative discourse . While several such technologies exist [ 42 ] , they remain a niche outside of research ; support for argumentation on mainstream social networks is limited to basic functionality such as up or down voting and conversation threading . Some researchers argue that the primary obstacle to more widespread adoption is a mismatch between the informal nature of online discussions and the highly formal ( structured ) functionality current argument technologies provide , i . e . , usability [ 37 , 42 ] . We introduce the design of a website for collaborative argumentative discus - sion ( named Socratrees ) , exploring the delicate balance between structure—an integral part of argumentation—and usability . Prior argument technologies typ - ically rely on complex ontologies to represent claims and relationships between them ( e . g . , issue , position , challenge , justiﬁcation , agreement , etc . ) . In contrast , the user interface introduced in this paper reduces argumentation to but three core concepts for the user to understand : ( 1 ) statements , that can ( 2 ) support and ( 3 ) oppose one another . Our primary goal is to allow users to form their own opinions by collaboratively aggregating all information relevant to a given statement in one location . As opposed to prior work ( e . g . , [ 41 , 45 ] ) , our focus is less on analyzing a single argument in great detail and more on providing the necessary structure to represent many ( competing ) arguments side by side , without forming judgment as to which one is sound . Over the course of six weeks , we engaged 18 users in argumentation by re - sponding to the 128 statements they posted on Socratrees . A concluding survey was ﬁlled out by 14 users . Based on these results , we present an evaluation of how well our introduced structure supports users to collaboratively integrate , evaluate , contest , and reason about information online . Socratrees : Making Discussions Great Again 3 2 Argumentation theory Formal deductive logic falls short when trying to evaluate the quality of argu - ments expressed in ordinary everyday language ( such as political discourse ) [ 49 , 50 ] . Practitioners and teachers of logic started challenging the traditional ideals of va - lidity and soundness and it was soon recognized that “ [ formal logic ] had in mind one important subset of arguments , but the realm of argumentation was much broader” [ 15 ] . Essentially , the logic of argumentation must be distinguished from formal logic which concerns itself solely with inference / implication ; instead , ar - gumentation must be seen as dialectical—a process with arguments as a product of which both sides need to be investigated ( for and against ) to see how they interact [ 15 ] . Today , argumentation theory is an umbrella term for studying the “produc - tion , analysis and evaluation of argumentation” by adopting both descriptive and normative methods , i . e . , by evaluating argumentative discourse empirically ( as it occurs ) as well as reﬂecting on the necessary criteria for reasonable argumenta - tion [ 49 ] . Given our focus on providing technological support for argumentative discourse , we are particularly interested in a normative approach since it can prescribe the necessary functionality to enable more eﬀective argumentation . Therefore , informal logic —deﬁned as “the normative study of argument” [ 16 ] — became a logical choice as the main driving force behind our design . Walton [ 50 ] provides a short introduction to informal logic and presents the following mini - mal deﬁnition of an argument : An argument is a set of statements ( propositions ) , made up of three parts , a conclusion , a set of premises , and an inference from the premises to the conclusion . An argument can be supported by other arguments , or it can be attacked by other arguments , and by raising critical questions about it . Adequacy of premises and inferences in informal logic is less strict than in formal logic . Rather than validity and soundness , Blair and Johnson [ 15 ] argue for : ( 1 ) acceptability ( start with premises the audience is willing to accept ) , ( 2 ) relevance ( premises ought to be relevant to the conclusion ) , and ( 3 ) suﬃciency ( premises ought to provide suﬃcient support for the conclusion ) . Premises can either work together to form a linked argument or contribute to the conclusion independently , whereby they form a convergent argument . Argumentation schemes prescribe commonly used forms of linked arguments in which each premise plays a speciﬁc role , e . g . , an argument ‘from expert opinion’ or ‘from analogy’ . With these ‘rules’ of informal logic in mind , there are several ways of at - tacking an argument [ 50 ] . First , argumentation schemes have associated crit - ical questions , e . g . , of an argument from expert opinion you can ask , “Is the premise consistent with what other experts in the ﬁeld assert ? ” Considering the acceptability criteria , you can either question one of the premises or form a counter - argument which concludes the opposite ( refutation ) . It is worth noting that arguments may attack one another . Lastly , you can argue that a premise is not relevant to the given conclusion , or point out logical fallacies in reasoning . 4 Steven Jeuris Based on multiple studies in argumentation theory there is a commonly held belief that humans are inherently bad at reasoning and argumentation , high - lighting the need to make ‘critical thinking’ and similar topics part of the core curriculum in education [ 40 ] . However , more recent work sketches a less bleak picture of the ‘layman’ arguer [ 35 , 37 ] . When people are suﬃciently motivated , i . e . , when argumentation occurs in a dialogical context as opposed to a decontex - tualized and abstract task ( as frequently employed in studies ) , they can evaluate arguments quite accurately . Furthermore , in contrast to studies that show that people are bad at producing arguments ( e . g . , by succumbing to conﬁrmation bias ) , they form good arguments when challenged and evidence is made avail - able to them . In other words , people are better at evaluating others’ arguments than producing their own . Therefore , argumentation is most eﬀective in groups with heterogeneous views [ 35 ] . 3 Argument technologies Part of the roots of argument technologies can be traced back to some of the earliest work in computer science [ 43 ] : . . . [ the ] ‘founding fathers’ of today’s interactive computing such as Bush and Engelbart envisaged argument construction and analysis as a key objective for the intellectual technologies they were conceiving . Engelbart’s NLS [ 22 ] ( introducing many concepts of personal computing ) was designed to ‘augment human intellect’ and Bush’s Memex ( frequently cited as an - ticipating the Internet ) was introduced ‘as we may think’ [ 17 ] . In later research— still predating the World Wide Web , the essence of hypertext was described as “a computer - based medium for thinking and communication” [ 19 ] , embodied by systems such as TEXTNET [ 48 ] and SYNVIEW [ 32 ] . However , given the ex - tensive scope of technologies supporting reasoning that followed [ 40 ] , we limit ourselves to reviewing those that are publicly available , web - based , collabora - tive , and include explicit support for argumentation . Schneider et al . [ 42 ] have conveniently reviewed exactly such systems ( 37 in total ) and furthermore in - clude a broader discussion of argument technologies . We direct the reader to this excellent review for a complete description of related work . Here , we provide an overview of the most relevant systems related to Socra - trees , while omitting others which might overlap in functionality but target dif - ferent use cases ( e . g . , ‘IBIS - like’ decision - support systems [ 20 ] , knowledge maps , and public opinion polling tools like Opinion Space [ 23 ] ) . Speciﬁcally , we focus on systems that target ‘information seeking’ dialogues in which the goal is to ﬁnd or share arguments related to a common topic of interest [ 50 ] . Common functionality in such systems is to break up arguments into smaller pieces ( going by various names , such as statements , premises , claims , and ideas ) and specifying connections between them which describe their relationship ( e . g . , ‘supports’ , ‘attacks’ , or ‘is similar to’ ) . Relations which denote inferences con - struct the argument . The resulting underlying data structure is a graph of state - ments which provides an argumentative overview of a speciﬁc discussion . Socratrees : Making Discussions Great Again 5 3 . 1 Representation and structure Although arguments essentially form a graph , they can be visualized in a num - ber of diﬀerent ways ; systems have been classiﬁed as linear , threaded , container , graph , matrix , or a combination thereof [ 40 ] . Matrix views are extremely uncom - mon and therefore will not be discussed here . Linear and threaded representations are most in line with those used in tradi - tional social media , e . g . , blogs , and sites supporting conversation threading such as Reddit [ 1 ] respectively . Argument technologies extend on this . For example , Rich Trellis [ 18 ] allows a mixture of arbitrary free text with the ability to anno - tate relations , resulting in a linear but formalized overview of an argument . Rich Trellis was later extended ( yet simpliﬁed ) to Tree Trellis by reducing the possible types of connections to pro and con and by supporting threading . Videolyzer [ 21 ] supports threaded discussions by adding and responding to time - anchored an - notations in online informational videos ( e . g . , mark part of the transcript as a claim , express agreement , or indicate quality ) . Container - and graph - based representations are the two most popular ap - proaches in argument technologies . They diﬀer primarily in how connections between statements are visualized . Containers group statements with similar connections to a common ‘root’ statement in a demarcated area , whereas graphs show each connection separately ( Fig . 1 ) . Statement B Statement A Statement D + - Statement C + Statement A Statement B Statement C Supporting Statement D Opposing Graph Container Fig . 1 . Most argument technologies represent arguments as ‘graphs’ or ‘containers’ . An example of a container - based representation is Debatepedia [ 3 ] , a wiki - based site on which pro and con arguments are grouped together per question on a speciﬁc topic . Most recently , Kialo [ 11 ] ( likely the most popular argument tech - nology at the time of writing ) was introduced . Kialo displays all claims in support of / attacking another claim on opposing sides , and frames them in context of an overarching conversation topic . Although discrete connections are common , some systems provide more granularity . ConsiderIt [ 30 ] ( now a commercial site [ 10 ] ) aggregates comments on political issues by asking users to register their degree of support on a sliding scale and adding pros / cons to motivate their position . As a result , users can ﬁlter pros and cons by degree of support . Container representations provide a clearer , more concise , overview than graphs , at the cost of reducing the types of connections which can be repre - sented . Therefore , argument analysis tools ( with their primary focus on for - malizing arguments ) typically rely on graph representations . For example , OVA 6 Steven Jeuris ( Online Visualization of Argument ) [ 45 ] loads text ( or a web page ) side - by - side with a canvas displaying an associated argument map ( Fig . 2 ) . Arguments are mapped by highlighting statements and drawing connections in between them on the canvas . Similar systems are Argunet [ 41 ] ( a desktop tool that supports sharing argument maps online ) and the open - source project Arguman [ 9 ] . Com - mon functionality is to allow specifying connections in more detail . For example , OVA supports common argumentation schemes such as ‘practical reasoning’ and ‘expert opinion’ ( relied upon in Fig . 2 ) . A distinction can thus be made between argument technologies that primarily focus on argument analysis ( favoring graph views ) and those that focus on information seeking ( favoring container views ) . Fig . 2 . Walton’s ‘smoking dialog’ example [ 50 ] mapped in OVA [ 45 ] . This argument is available on AIFdb : http : / / www . arg - tech . org / AIFdb / argview / 13903 In addition to the classiﬁcation by Scheuer et al . [ 40 ] , we identify an addi - tional important attribute of argument representation : whether or not a view can be traversed recursively , i . e . , whether a statement can be made the center of attention by selecting it , thereby hiding all statements that are not directly connected to the selected statement and showing new ones that are . In con - trast to displaying a complete argument map ( which can typically be panned and zoomed ) , only a subset of statements are shown at any given time . Such views are necessary when considering large discussions which may contain cycli - cal connections and statements that are reused in multiple arguments—a full graph would soon become unintelligible . Most prior work represents single ar - guments with limited reuse of statements , thereby making recursive views sur - prisingly uncommon . However , Debategraph [ 4 , 33 ] is a graph - based system that supports traversing arguments recursively and Kialo [ 11 ] supports decomposing arguments into nested hierarchies of pros and cons . Arguments can be explored in great detail by ‘drilling down’ into underlying claims . Socratrees : Making Discussions Great Again 7 3 . 2 Social interaction Most argument analysis tools provide limited support for social interaction , other than editing arguments collaboratively . Conversely , systems with a reduced fo - cus on analysis generally incorporate additional support for collaboration . For example , Cohere [ 44 ] , TruthMapping [ 2 ] , and REASON [ 27 ] target a more gen - eral audience and allow users to express agreement with statements . Similarly , Kialo lets users assess the impact of claims on a 5 - point scale . Such feedback is incorporated to indicate the strength of statements . Similar to modern so - cial media , argument technologies can trigger notiﬁcations when new content is added to arguments a user has contributed to , and content can be moderated ( e . g . , reported as spam ) . Kialo seems the most advanced argument technology in regards to supporting social interactions . 3 . 3 Infrastructure and integration Several ontologies have been introduced to deﬁne the structure of arguments [ 28 , 42 ] , of which the most promising , still in active development , is the Argument In - terchange Format ( AIF ) [ 39 ] . AIF enables sharing of arguments across diﬀerent online services for argumentation , collectively called the ‘Argument Web’ [ 13 ] . For example , AIFdb [ 5 , 31 ] is a public database for arguments , to which the ‘smoking dialog’ represented in Fig . 2 was uploaded . ArguBlogging [ 8 , 14 ] is a browser plugin through which agreement or disagreement can be expressed any - where online by highlighting text and posting a response to your personal blog and AIFdb . Similar systems ( unrelated to the Argument Web ) are rbutr [ 6 ] and hypothes . is [ 7 ] , providing a comparable infrastructure to support ‘open annota - tion’ anywhere on the web . Ontologies are key to automating argument mining , integration , and evaluation [ 28 , 39 ] ( e . g . , through the use of artiﬁcial intelligence ) , all of which are considered outside of scope in this paper . 4 Design principles Before presenting Socratrees , we will introduce key design principles which have inﬂuenced our design and contrast them with prior work . Transparency ﬁrst—inspire critical thinking Technology should augment rather than replace human judgment [ 26 ] . In line with this recommendation , our goal is not to prescribe what is true or false ( i . e . , to become a fact ﬁnder ) , but to provide transparency to arguments and to inspire critical thinking . Rather than presenting single arguments in great detail , we aim to provide an easily digestible overview of all relevant information in relation to a speciﬁc statement . Compet - ing arguments thus live side - by - side and it is up to users to interpret them and draw their own conclusions . In other words , our main goal is not supporting ‘ar - gumentation’ per se , but providing a record of the collaborative thought process in order to aid individual human reasoning . Such overviews facilitate distributed 8 Steven Jeuris sensemaking [ 25 ] , and group reasoning in which argumentation theory predicts truth to win out [ 35 ] . Help ﬁnding common ground Argumentation theory describes diﬀerent types of dialog with diﬀering goals : e . g . , in a persuasion dialog the goal is to convince the other party , and in a deliberation dialog the goal is to decide on the best available course of action [ 50 ] . Argument analysis systems ( as discussed in related work ) primarily target persuasion dialogs . In contrast , Socratrees tar - gets information - seeking and inquiry dialogs , in which the goal is to exchange information and ﬁnd and verify evidence respectively . By sharing statements in relation to one another ( as supporting or opposing ) and allowing users to ex - press agreement with each , an overview becomes available of how well - supported statements are , the diﬀerent reasons for believing or not believing in them , and how popular these are . Strong arguments on either side of a discussion indicate ‘common ground’ , whereas statements on which opinions are divided reveal true points of contention . Inclusiveness Prior academic work has mostly enforced argument structure , requiring knowledge of argument analysis , at the cost of usability [ 37 , 42 ] . We believe that given a suitable medium , anyone can contribute meaningfully to argumentation online [ 35 , 37 ] . Users should not be expected to know argumenta - tion theory in order to start using argument technologies . Similar to Cohere [ 44 ] and the non - academic systems TruthMapping [ 2 ] and Kialo [ 11 ] , we target a more general audience . Our goal is to ﬁnd a suitable balance between impos - ing structure and allowing for free form argumentation . In addition , we aim to be non - discriminatory ; it should always be possible for minorities and repressed groups to share unpopular or controversial beliefs . Conducive to large - scale discussions Information - seeking and inquiry di - alogs are cooperative in nature , as opposed to persuasion dialogs which tend to be adversarial , as summarized by the philosopher Neurath [ 36 ] : Debaters on comprehensive scientiﬁc problems are . . . like lawyers who have to take a side . Each of them intends to strengthen his own argu - ments and to weaken the arguments of the aggressor—but no judge is in the chair . . . . Finally we ﬁnd ourselves all together in the same ship and are co - operating even when we think we are ﬁghting one another . To better support the cooperative nature of argumentation , we explore inter - action techniques for large groups of users to collaboratively contribute to dis - cussions comprising numerous statements , without hindering one another , and while retaining a suitable overview for people arriving later to , or having missed part of , the discussion . Based on our review of web - based argument technologies , we identify three core challenges to supporting large - scale discussions online : ( 1 ) dealing with Socratrees : Making Discussions Great Again 9 digressions in order to ensure focused argumentation , ( 2 ) supporting users to explore arguments at their own pace —without being overwhelmed by expert accounts , and ( 3 ) enabling / encouraging statement reuse in order to eliminate redundant discussions and to capitalize on prior knowledge . TruthMapping [ 2 ] has a built - in mechanism to deal with digressions , and Kialo supports focused exploration of arguments by breaking them up into concise claims . However , statement reuse in prior systems is rare or simply unsupported . Kialo [ 11 ] sup - ports reusing claims through the use of ‘symlinks’ , but in practice this feature is hardly used . We observe that for statements to be reused , it is essential that they are ‘free of context’ , i . e . , that they can be interpreted outside of the context in which they were introduced . Prior systems do not enforce this . 5 Socratrees A B C D E F J I H G K L M A ­ Show negated form of statement B ­ Comments C ­ Navigation history D ­ Statements this statement are used in E ­ Search for or add new statement F ­ Search for or add new related statement G ­ Express belief in statement H ­ Hyperlink to statement relation I ­ Discuss statement on Reddit J ­ Unapproved ' draft ' statement K ­ Express belief in statement relation and underlying statement count L ­ Belief expressed in the inverse form M ­ Personal account , received droplets , and approved statements Fig . 3 . The main user interface of Socratrees , presenting part of the ‘smoking dialog’ also displayed in Fig . 2 . Socratrees 1 ( Fig . 3 ) is a collaborative , web - based , argument technology , tar - geting a general ( non - expert ) audience . The main user interface supports outlin - ing arguments into hierarchies of supporting and opposing statements and relies on a container representation which can be traversed recursively to navigate 1 The system name is anonymized for review . 10 Steven Jeuris between statements ( as described in Section 3 . 1 ) . This supports focused argu - mentation and helps dealing with digressions . Kialo [ 11 ] is the only other sys - tem combining a container representation with recursive navigation . In addition , Socratrees introduces two novel features to structure arguments : ( 1 ) statements can be represented both in a normal and negated form , and ( 2 ) statement re - lations ( one statement supporting / opposing another ) are considered statements themselves which further supporting / opposing statements can be added to . First , we present the structure of Socratrees and our motivation behind it in more detail , including how navigation is supported . Second , we explain the chosen visual metaphor and how we intend to evolve it over time . Lastly , we present community features and how we believe they can be used to inspire and scale up argumentation . 5 . 1 Structure and navigation We have chosen to only support two types of relations between statements— supporting and opposing —similar to earlier argument technologies targeting a layman audience . We ﬁnd this to be a suitable balance between structure and ease of use . Additional semantics are implicit and we trust users to be able to infer more concrete relations based on context . For example : “Pineapple does not belong on pizza” is supported by “Italians don’t put pineapple on pizza” and opposed by “Hawaiian pizza is very popular in Australia” . An explicit anal - ysis of these arguments is unnecessary to understand the two points made . We have opted to label relations as ‘supporting / opposing’ , in contrast to the more common ‘pro / contra’ and ‘supporting / attacking’ . Early feedback indicated this alternative wording inspired animosity and one - sided thinking , counter to our design principles ( ‘ﬁnding common ground’ ) . For the very same reason , support - ing and opposing statements are depicted using the same color , in contrast to prior work which mostly relies on green and red respectively . Although diﬀering colors make sense in light of the ‘redundancy gain’ principle in HCI , we ﬁnd it more important to highlight what statements have in common rather than what sets them apart ; all statements contribute to the discussion in a meaningful way . This similarity is further emphasized by the following observation : when con - sidering the negated form ( inverse ) of a statement , all supporting statements be - come opposing statements , and vice versa . For example : “Governments should defend freedom of choice of its citizens” ( as highlighted in Fig . 3 . H ) becomes a supporting statement when considering that “Governments should not ban smoking” instead of “Governments should ban smoking” . Socratrees exploits this fact by supporting both a normal and negated form for statements . By clicking the ‘inverse’ icon ( Fig . 3 . A ) , a negated form of the statement is shown and the supporting and opposing statements are swapped . A default “ ( not ) ” is prepended to the normal form of statements , but users can specify custom ( more suitable ) text for the negated form . This has two major advantages which reinforce our underlying design principles : ( 1 ) better statement reuse since the normal and inverted form of statements are structurally identical , and ( 2 ) dis - cussions on unpopular or controversial ideas ( e . g . , holocaust denial ) are directly Socratrees : Making Discussions Great Again 11 linked to the arguments against . This makes suppressing them nonsensical as it would eliminate the arguments in support of what the majority of society be - lieves to be factual or ‘true’ ( inclusiveness ) . To our knowledge , Socratrees is the ﬁrst system supporting both a normal and negated form for statements . The last mechanism available in Socratrees to structure arguments is re - lated to the requirement of relevance . Arguing whether a statement is relevant is an essential , common , part of argumentation , supported in traditional ar - gument analysis tools by applying argumentation schemes and ‘warrants’ to statement relations . Systems targeting a more general audience like Kialo [ 11 ] , Consider . it [ 10 ] , and TruthMapping [ 2 ] do not provide support for this , pre - sumably to sidestep the additional complexity . We try to ﬁnd middle ground by repurposing the basic building block of argumentation—the statement—to represent statement relations as well . Concretely , when adding a statement A as a supporting / opposing statement to statement B , the system introduces this relation as the statement “ A supports / opposes B ” with the inverse form “ A does not support / oppose B ” ( Fig . 4 ) . The newly created statement thus acts as the starting point for a discussion on whether or not the given statement is rele - vant in relation to the other , reusing concepts the user is already familiar with . It can also be used to construct certain linked arguments ( statements working together to reach a conclusion ) . Similar to how underlying statements can be ac - cessed recursively , the ‘statement relation’ can be accessed by clicking the stalk which connects the statement to the argument ‘tree’ . Further branches within the statement relation are hidden since reasoning about them becomes overly complicated and the need to discuss them has not arisen during early testing . Fig . 4 . The statement relation which is shown when following the branch of the high - lighted statement in Fig . 3 . 12 Steven Jeuris For these structural features to work as intended , we introduce three require - ments statements need to comply with : Be concise : Keeping statements concise keeps discussions focused , makes state - ments more likely to be reused , and makes interpreting their negations easier . When possible , conjuncts should be avoided by splitting statements into two . As argued in the design of Tree Trellis [ 18 ] , this comes at the expense of ex - pressiveness , but also improves the ability to elaborate on arguments without restructuring them , and ensures ancillary points are not mixed with more cen - tral ones . To enforce this , statements have a maximum of 120 characters ; a limit which did not inhibit us from expressing our own arguments during early testing . Aim to be free of context : It should be possible to interpret a statement outside of the context within which it was introduced . For example : “Wind turbines are more eﬀective” makes sense in relation to a statement about solar panels , but takes on a diﬀerent meaning when used in the context of nuclear energy . To ensure eﬀective reuse of statements , statements should thus be able to stand on their own and eliminate indexical references ( e . g . , ‘I’ , ‘also’ , ‘this’ , and ‘that’ ) . Not be phrased as questions : Questions do not contribute concrete infor - mation to the structure of arguments , and rather indicate speciﬁc information is lacking or missing . In essence , the answers to questions are what constitute valid statements on Socratrees . This last requirement is controversial due to the unmistaken value of critical questions in discussions . However , critical questions can still be posted as comments on statements ( Fig . 3 . B ) . Navigating arguments is supported by traversing statements recursively . At any given time , only a single statement with its supporting and opposing state - ments is displayed . Opening a diﬀerent statement ( or statement relation ) is done by clicking on it . While this ensures focus and allows users to explore parts of an argument most relevant to them ( in line with our design principles ) , this becomes disorienting when following many links . To see which statements you followed to reach your current position in a tree , a ‘current branch’ section is displayed in the sidebar ( Fig . 3 . C ) . Previously visited statements can be revis - ited by clicking on them , without erasing the stored navigation path . E . g . , Fig . 3 shows the path followed to reach the previously visited statement “Nicotine is an addictive drug” . Only when diverging from the presented path , the stored navigation path is overridden . The sidebar also shows which other statements the current statement is used in ( Fig . 3 . D ) . New statements can be added after having searched for existing statements ﬁrst ( Fig . 3 . E ) . An intermediate screen shows search results and an option to proceed with adding the statement in case the desired one is not found . Adding supporting and opposing statements works in a similar way ( Fig . 3 . F ) . Impor - tantly , the search results page also allows users to view and select the normal or negated form of statements . Enforcing ‘search ﬁrst’ further encourages state - ment reuse . Statements are anonymous in order not to discourage people from expressing unpopular beliefs . Socratrees : Making Discussions Great Again 13 5 . 2 Visual metaphor After considering other visual metaphors ( ‘branching rivers’ and ‘neural net - works’ ) , we eventually chose to represent statements and their supporting and opposing arguments as leaves on a tree . This is a visually rich metaphor that everyone can relate to and evokes a sense of tranquility which might counteract the adverse nature of argumentation . When you agree with ( or believe in ) a statement you can ‘give it water’ , represented as droplets ( Fig . 3 . G ) . Although our current exploitation of this metaphor is limited , we chose to represent state - ments as leaves since the physical properties of a leaf correlate nicely with those we need to represent . Statement relevance ( the statement relation ) is presented by the stalk leading up to the leaf . The stalk might be ‘broken’ when a statement is deemed irrelevant as determined by underlying statements . Leaves in turn can have diﬀerent colors depending on their ‘health’ . Once we have explored the properties of what makes a good or bad statement in more detail ( during an extended evaluation ) we intend to include such visualizations . 5 . 3 Community features Although our primary focus in this ﬁrst iteration of Socratrees was to explore an alternative structure for argumentative discourse , we implemented basic commu - nication , notiﬁcation , statistics , and moderation features which provide a strong basis for future work . We recognize that the potential of Socratrees lies not in replacing existing discussion platforms , but augmenting them . Therefore—by design—we provide limited support for unstructured argumentation ; free form comments can be added to each statement ( Fig . 3 . B ) to add unstructured thoughts , but their primary purpose is to question , clarify , and add related resources . Lengthy dis - cussions are discouraged 2 . We count on external websites , less restrictive in form and embodying richer communities , to link to content created on Socratrees and extend on discussions there . To enable this , each statement has a representative URL ( e . g . , “ / statement / 657 / governments - should - ban - smoking” ) , and users can link to individual comments and statement relations ( Fig . 3 . H ) . Furthermore , for our study we integrated with a Reddit discussion board . Clicking a Reddit icon linked to the creation of a new Reddit post with a matching title and a link back to the speciﬁc content on Socratrees ( Fig . 3 . I ) . The ﬁrst few statements new users post are posted as drafts ( Fig . 3 . J ) . Draft statements are under review and cannot be added to or used as related state - ments until they are approved . We implemented this feature so that moderators can provide feedback to new users in case their statements do not comply with site guidelines ( in comments ) . Moderators can also turn problematic statements into drafts . For now , moderators are predetermined , but we intend to adopt a reputation - based distributed moderation model similar to Stack Exchange [ 34 ] . 2 This is inspired by comments on Stack Exchange ( https : / / stackexchange . com / ) which are seen as transient . Valuable comments should be incorporated in the main content of the site ( questions and answers ) . 14 Steven Jeuris Users can add ‘droplets’ to both leafs and stalks ( statement relations ) they believe in . The accuracy of statements can thus be judged independently of their relevance . A leaf icon next to droplets indicates the total number of underlying statements ( Fig . 3 . K ) . To express belief in the negated form of a statement the inverse view needs to be loaded ﬁrst . This forces users to view underlying statements prior to expressing their disbelief ( the equivalent of ‘down voting’ in traditional social media ) . We hope this may inspire users to clarify their disagreement , which we deem more constructive than mere down voting . You can only express belief in one form of a statement at a time . An icon indicates whether you have expressed belief in the inverse form of the currently shown statement ( Fig . 3 . L ) . The result is an overview of all the statements you have formed an opinion on . Adding droplets also acts as a subscribe mechanism ; users receive notiﬁ - cations about changes to any of the statements they have expressed belief or disbelief in . We feel expressing your opinion should go hand in hand with a willingness to participate in a discussion about it , and have therefore opted to combine these two features into one . Lastly , a top bar shows an inbox for notiﬁcations , in addition to a link to the user’s account , the number of times people have expressed agreement with statements added by the user ( regardless of form ) , and the number of approved statements posted by the user ( Fig . 3 . M ) . 6 Evaluation We evaluated Socratrees during a six - week - long exploratory study 3 involving 32 users . Our main research question was : how to strike the right balance between introducing functionality for structured argumentation and usability in order to obtain more widespread adoption of argument technologies ? The Socratrees website was announced to friends and colleagues in person , on social media , and several public websites ( e . g . , subreddits dedicated to argu - mentation and critical thinking ) . 238 unique users visited the site , out of which 59 signed up to participate in private beta and were granted access . Only users with access could view statements and contribute to the site . 27 users did not visit the site after having received access , based on which we conclude that 32 users in total participated ( to some degree ) in private beta . This includes the author of this paper who acted as a moderator on the site , in addition to acting as an ever - present ‘active’ community member ( lacking a larger community ) who engaged new users in discussion . During private beta , 19 users added 374 statements and 371 statement rela - tions ( so 13 users only browsed the site ) . However , the majority of statements were added by the author of this paper : 246 statements and 286 relations . Thus , the remaining 18 users added 128 statements and 85 relations . Fig . 5 shows an overview of all connections between statements , laid out so that individ - ual arguments and connections between them can be recognized . 45 statements 3 Preregistration for this study , explaining the purpose and method used , is available on AsPredicted : https : / / aspredicted . org / blind . php ? x = 7p26xn Socratrees : Making Discussions Great Again 15 ( 12 % ) were used more than once ( as supporting / opposing ) . Negated forms of statements contributed to statement reuse and lead to a particularly interest - ing use case : at times , both forms of a statement were added to opposing sides of an argument , thereby highlighting key points of disagreement ( e . g . , “Global warming is / is not man - made” supports / opposes “Climate change is man - made” in Fig . 5 . A ) . The average text of approved statements was 58 characters long ( N = 367 , SD = 24 . 0 , Min = 16 , Max = 119 ) . A Fig . 5 . Overview of all statements ( green ) and statement relations ( brown ) during the study , indicating a variety of argument topologies with diﬀering complexity . All active users received an online survey at the end of the study , which was ﬁlled out by 14 . Our survey data shows a wide variety of users : the median age was 28 . 5 ( SD = 11 . 3 , Min = 23 , Max = 64 ) , 8 male and 6 female , with back - grounds such as data science , HR consulting , IT , and project management . On a 5 - point Likert scale , nobody speciﬁed familiarity with argumentation theory higher than ‘Neutral’ ( µ = 2 . 1 , meaning ‘Not familiar’ ) . The median number of hours users reported having used the site was 2 ( SD = 2 . 8 , Min = 0 . 3 , Max = 10 ) . Five central survey items made claims about the potential of Socra - trees and had to be rated on a 5 - point Likert scale with the option to provide op - tional free form feedback : Socratrees ( Q1 ) “can help understanding arguments” ; ( Q2 ) “can help ﬁnding common ground” ; ( Q3 ) “is non - discriminatory” ; ( Q4 ) “can host conducive , non - inﬂammatory , discussions” ; and ( Q5 ) “inspires criti - cal thinking” . The distribution of responses ( Fig . 6 ) indicates most users believe Socratrees has the potential to achieve the goals we originally laid out in our 16 Steven Jeuris design principles . Multiple other users provided feedback via private communi - cation channels and on the Reddit discussion board , which we also include in our ﬁndings . 0 % 0 % 0 % 14 % 21 % 100 % 93 % 79 % 64 % 50 % 0 % 7 % 21 % 21 % 29 % Q1 Understand Q2 Common Q3 Inclusive Q4 Conducive Q5 Thinking 100 50 0 50 100 Percentage Response Strongly disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Strongly agree Fig . 6 . Survey results assessing design goals success . ( Q1 ) 11 users elaborated that the division of supporting / opposing state - ments provides a “convenient” and “quick overview” which “makes it easier to understand arguments” and “ﬁgure out why two opinions diﬀer . ” However , one user noted that “the writer’s deﬁnition of a term [ might be ] inconsistent with the reader’s” , potentially leading to conﬂicts in understanding . ( Q2 ) Most users indicated that “ [ b ] y separating arguments into small and separate discussions , it becomes easier to see where you agree / disagree” and you “are more likely to read both sides” . They noted that you are more likely to agree on a single statement than on a whole argument ; “people can agree on having diﬀerent value - sets . ” ( Q3 ) A common concern was Socratrees requires a “special skill set only com - mon in people with higher educations” , e . g . , having a “sense of how important details can be in a [ statement ] ” . And , while it “allows for expressing [ anony - mous ] opinions , regardless of their popularity” , two users expressed concerns about “counterfactual” statements . Allowing widespread , uncontrolled , discrim - inating statements “would run counter to the goal of being non - discriminatory . ” ( Q4 ) Four users shared the belief that “ [ t ] he structure of the platform leaves little room for personal attacks and puts the topic at hand at the core of any discussion . ” Three others argued that discussions are inherently “emotional” and will always elicit “strong reactions” . Socratrees can “temper [ this ] but can’t eliminate it” . ( Q5 ) Users overwhelmingly agreed that “ [ s ] tructured argumenta - tion encourages . . . users to understand the relationship between statements . ” Socratrees “forces” users to “think before [ they ] write” , make the implicit ex - plicit , and “to be very precise in the relation between [ statements ] ” . However , you “have to spend a tremendous amount of energy to molding your statements to this structure and all its rules” . Lastly , we asked users what would encourage them to contribute more to a site like Socratrees . Their primary request was a “larger community” with “top - ics that are relevant to current issues . ” Users want to see that “ [ their ] statements are making a diﬀerence” and to this end envisioned features such as sharing state - Socratrees : Making Discussions Great Again 17 ments from external websites ( supporting “evidence - based links” ) , enhanced re - ward mechanisms ( gamiﬁcation ) , and identifying like - minded individuals based on tags for “ideologies and beliefs” . The lack of such features left some users wanting for a “purpose” and “clear goal” . 7 Discussion—challenges The results of our study indicate that the design of Socratrees shows much promise . Even though argumentation remains a complex task ( compared to how it currently takes place on social media ) , users learned to appreciate and un - derstood the trade - oﬀs made , as indicated by our survey results . When asked what would encourage users to contribute more , they did not request a simpli - ﬁed design . Rather , they envisioned scenarios in which a broader community would adopt the given technology . However , much work still needs to be done . The author of this paper used Socratrees extensively to structure his own argu - ments and moderated all content added to the site , based on which a thorough understanding of limitations to the current design arose . First , comments were underused and not fully understood by users . Even though they were designed as a staging ground for thoughts that could not yet be phrased as concrete statements , some users ( unaware of this feature ) initially expressed a desire to add less - structured argumentation . Comments thus need more exposure and additional mechanisms need to be put in place to go from unstructured to fully - structured argumentation . Second , adding statements to statement relations ( in order to discuss rele - vance ) is confusing and particularly error - prone ( Figure 4 ) . While we maintain this is an essential feature , it requires keeping track of three statements and two statement relations in parallel , which can be cognitively demanding . Fur - thermore , it is not always clear whether two statements should be added as one arguing for the relevance of the other , vice versa , or both . For example , “All questions seek knowledge” supports “There are no stupid questions” , which is relevant because “Seeking knowledge cannot be stupid” . But , an alternate phras - ing would be “Seeking knowledge cannot be stupid” , which is relevant because “All questions seek knowledge” . We see no immediate harm in statements ‘rein - forcing’ one another like this and adding both forms , but these ﬁndings indicate the need for further ( usability ) testing and trying out alternate visualizations . Third , very similar statements require entirely diﬀerent arguments . Yet , by adding arguments , some users were implicitly changing the speciﬁcity of the statement they were contributing to . For example , statements regarding second - hand smoke were being raised in a discussion on whether “Governments should ban smoking” . This is more relevant in a discussion on whether “Governments should ban smoking in public spaces ” . Such related yet disparate statements need better support to keep discussions more focused . Lastly , writing statements that are ‘free of context’ is unintuitive and hard . Many of the ﬁrst statements added by new users were not living up to this guideline . Suchman argues that “the communicative signiﬁcance of a linguistic 18 Steven Jeuris expression is always dependent on the circumstances of its use” [ 47 ] , making it impossible to remove all dependencies on external context . However , in practice it is possible to elaborate on meaning to such a degree that the likelihood of misunderstandings arising due to diﬀerences in interpretation becomes minimal . The problem is this requires excessive reiteration of context in each supporting and opposing statement , which becomes longer and longer as statements relate to more speciﬁc situations . To resolve this , we envision ‘context tags’ which can be added to statements to introduce implicit context ( with an associated deﬁnition ) . When adding a related statement they are inherited by default , but can be removed by users in case they feel a statement can be made more generic . 8 Conclusion Overall , we conclude that the structure imposed on argumentation by Socratrees accomplishes our goals to make arguments transparent , inspire critical thinking , help ﬁnd common ground , and be conducive to discussion—at the cost of making it harder to contribute to arguments . However , the observation that structuring one’s thoughts in ‘network structures’ is challenging is nothing new [ 43 ] : . . . argument mapping initially feels like learning a new foreign language , and the temptation is to lapse back into more familiar languages ( con - versational patterns and modes of writing ) . The tools can be made user friendly , and the notations lightweight and informal , but the human el - ement of the system must co - evolve as well . While users should not have to know argumentation theory ( none of our respon - dents did ) in order to participate in argumentation , it would be overly optimistic to hope to eliminate the ‘hard work’ that goes into formulating an eﬀective ar - gument . The very act of identifying statements and relationships between them is what deﬁnes critical thinking . Therefore , we can only hope to inspire users to engage in and learn this alternate form of literacy by providing better support and making the work more rewarding and fun . However , this does not mean we intend to replace traditional writing or be - lieve that all arguments should be constructed as argument maps . Socratrees is designed to augment linear text . Our long - term goal is to be able to highlight statements anywhere on the web ( relying on an ‘open annotation’ infrastruc - ture similar to hypothes . is [ 7 ] and rbutr [ 6 ] ) and linking them to structured argumentation . We feel this could eﬀectively replace traditional comment sec - tions on news articles , blog posts , or even scientiﬁc papers , and provide better support for people to critically evaluate , contest , and reason about information online . At a glance , the popularity of statements and how well - supported or controversial they are could be assessed , and more advanced statistics might be able to indicate how objective or biased an article is . Looking even further ahead , making arguments more focused and open to falsiﬁcation has the potential of scaling up governance and by extension the democratic process [ 38 ] . Socratrees : Making Discussions Great Again 19 References 1 . Reddit . https : / / reddit . com ( 2005 ) 2 . Truthmapping . http : / / www . truthmapping . com ( 2006 ) 3 . Debatepedia . http : / / www . debatepedia . org ( 2007 ) 4 . Debategraph . https : / / debategraph . org / ( 2008 ) 5 . Aifdb . http : / / www . aifdb . org ( 2012 ) 6 . rbutr . http : / / rbutr . com ( 2012 ) 7 . hypothes . is . https : / / web . hypothes . is ( 2013 ) 8 . Argublogging . http : / / argublogging . com ( 2014 ) 9 . Arguman . http : / / arguman . org ( 2014 ) 10 . Consider . it . https : / / consider . it ( 2016 ) 11 . Kialo . https : / / www . kialo . com ( 2017 , August ) 12 . Baker , D . : The internet is broken ( 2017 ) , https : / / www . wired . co . uk / article / is - the - internet - broken - how - to - fix - it 13 . Bex , F . , Lawrence , J . , Snaith , M . , Reed , C . : Implementing the argument web . Communications of the ACM 56 ( 10 ) , 66 – 73 ( 2013 ) 14 . Bex , F . , Snaith , M . , Lawrence , J . , Reed , C . : Argublogging : An application for the argument web . Web Semantics : Science , Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 25 , 9 – 15 ( 2014 ) 15 . Blair , J . A . , Johnson , R . H . : Argumentation as dialectical . Argumentation 1 ( 1 ) , 41 – 56 ( 1987 ) 16 . Blair , J . A . , Johnson , R . H . : The current state of informal logic . Informal Logic 9 ( 2 ) ( 1987 ) 17 . Bush , V . : As we may think . The atlantic monthly 176 ( 1 ) , 101 – 108 ( 1945 ) 18 . Chklovski , T . , Ratnakar , V . , Gil , Y . : User interfaces with semi - formal representa - tions : a study of designing argumentation structures . In : Proceedings of the 10th international conference on Intelligent user interfaces . pp . 130 – 136 . ACM ( 2005 ) 19 . Conklin , J . : Hypertext : An introduction and survey . Computer 20 ( 9 ) , 17 – 41 ( Sep 1987 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MC . 1987 . 1663693 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MC . 1987 . 1663693 20 . Conklin , J . , Begeman , M . L . : gibis : A hypertext tool for exploratory policy discus - sion . ACM Transactions on Information Systems ( TOIS ) 6 ( 4 ) , 303 – 331 ( 1988 ) 21 . Diakopoulos , N . , Goldenberg , S . , Essa , I . : Videolyzer : quality analysis of online informational video for bloggers and journalists . In : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . pp . 799 – 808 . ACM ( 2009 ) 22 . Engelbart , D . C . , English , W . K . : A research center for augmenting human intellect . In : Proceedings of the December 9 - 11 , 1968 , fall joint computer conference , part I . pp . 395 – 410 . ACM ( 1968 ) 23 . Faridani , S . , Bitton , E . , Ryokai , K . , Goldberg , K . : Opinion space : a scalable tool for browsing online comments . In : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . pp . 1175 – 1184 . ACM ( 2010 ) 24 . Feldman , L . , Wojcieszak , M . , Stroud , N . J . , Bimber , B . : Explaining media choice : The role of issue - speciﬁc engagement in predicting interest - based and partisan selectivity . Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media 62 ( 1 ) , 109 – 130 ( 2018 ) 25 . Fisher , K . , Counts , S . , Kittur , A . : Distributed sensemaking : improving sensemak - ing by leveraging the eﬀorts of previous users . In : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . pp . 247 – 256 . ACM ( 2012 ) 20 Steven Jeuris 26 . Flintham , M . , Karner , C . , Bachour , K . , Creswick , H . , Gupta , N . , Moran , S . : Falling for fake news : Investigating the consumption of news via social media . In : Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . pp . 376 : 1 – 376 : 10 . CHI ’18 , ACM , New York , NY , USA ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173950 , http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173950 27 . Introne , J . E . : Supporting group decisions by mediating deliberation to improve information pooling . In : Proceedings of the ACM 2009 international conference on Supporting group work . pp . 189 – 198 . ACM ( 2009 ) 28 . Janjua , N . K . , Hussain , O . K . , Hussain , F . K . , Chang , E . : Philosophical and logic - based argumentation - driven reasoning approaches and their realiza - tion on the www : A survey . The Computer Journal 58 ( 9 ) , 1967 – 1999 ( 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / comjnl / bxu057 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / comjnl / bxu057 29 . Kou , Y . , Nardi , B . : Complex mediation in the formation of political opin - ions . In : Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . pp . 636 : 1 – 636 : 15 . CHI ’18 , ACM , New York , NY , USA ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174210 , http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174210 30 . Kriplean , T . , Morgan , J . , Freelon , D . , Borning , A . , Bennett , L . : Supporting reﬂec - tive public thought with considerit . In : Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . pp . 265 – 274 . ACM ( 2012 ) 31 . Lawrence , J . , Bex , F . , Reed , C . , Snaith , M . : Aifdb : Infrastructure for the argument web . In : COMMA . pp . 515 – 516 ( 2012 ) 32 . Lowe , D . G . : Synview : The design of a system for cooperative structuring of information . In : Proceedings of the 1986 ACM Conference on Computer - supported Cooperative Work . pp . 376 – 385 . CSCW ’86 , ACM , New York , NY , USA ( 1986 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 637069 . 637116 , http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 637069 . 637116 33 . Macintosh , A . : Moving toward intelligent policy development ? IEEE Intelligent Systems 24 ( 5 ) , 79 – 82 ( 2009 ) 34 . Mamykina , L . , Manoim , B . , Mittal , M . , Hripcsak , G . , Hartmann , B . : Design lessons from the fastest q & a site in the west . In : Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . pp . 2857 – 2866 . ACM ( 2011 ) 35 . Mercier , H . , Sperber , D . : Why do humans reason ? arguments for an argumentative theory . Behavioral and brain sciences 34 ( 2 ) , 57 – 74 ( 2011 ) 36 . Neurath , O . : Universal jargon and terminology . In : Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society . vol . 41 , pp . 127 – 148 . JSTOR ( 1940 ) 37 . Paglieri , F . : A plea for ecological argument technologies . Philosophy & Technology 30 ( 2 ) , 209 – 238 ( 2017 ) 38 . Rahwan , I . : Towards scalable governance : Sensemaking and cooperation in the age of social media . Philosophy & Technology 30 ( 2 ) , 161 – 178 ( 2017 ) 39 . Reed , C . , Budzynska , K . , Duthie , R . , Janier , M . , Konat , B . , Lawrence , J . , Pease , A . , Snaith , M . : The argument web : An online ecosystem of tools , systems and services for argumentation . Philosophy & Technology 30 ( 2 ) , 137 – 160 ( 2017 ) 40 . Scheuer , O . , Loll , F . , Pinkwart , N . , McLaren , B . M . : Computer - supported argu - mentation : A review of the state of the art . International Journal of Computer - supported collaborative learning 5 ( 1 ) , 43 – 102 ( 2010 ) 41 . Schneider , D . C . , Voigt , C . , Betz , G . : Argunet - a software tool for collaborative argumentation analysis and research . In : 7th Workshop on Computational Models of Natural Argument ( CMNA VII ) ( 2007 ) Socratrees : Making Discussions Great Again 21 42 . Schneider , J . , Groza , T . , Passant , A . : A review of argumentation for the social semantic web . Semantic Web 4 ( 2 ) , 159 – 218 ( 2013 ) 43 . Shum , S . B . : The roots of computer supported argument visualization . In : Visual - izing argumentation , pp . 3 – 24 . Springer ( 2003 ) 44 . Shum , S . B . , et al . : Cohere : Towards web 2 . 0 argumentation . COMMA 8 , 97 – 108 ( 2008 ) 45 . Snaith , M . , Lawrence , J . , Reed , C . : Mixed initiative argument in public delibera - tion . Online Deliberation p . 2 ( 2010 ) 46 . Stroud , N . J . : Media use and political predispositions : Revisiting the concept of selective exposure . Political Behavior 30 ( 3 ) , 341 – 366 ( 2008 ) 47 . Suchman , L . A . : Plans and situated actions : The problem of human - machine com - munication . Cambridge university press ( 1987 ) 48 . Trigg , R . H . , Weiser , M . : Textnet : A network - based approach to text handling . ACM Trans . Inf . Syst . 4 ( 1 ) , 1 – 23 ( Jan 1986 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 5401 . 5402 , http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 5401 . 5402 49 . Van Eemeren , F . H . , Grootendorst , R . , et al . : Developments in argumentation the - ory ( 1999 ) 50 . Walton , D . : Argumentation theory : A very short introduction . In : Argumentation in artiﬁcial intelligence , pp . 1 – 22 . Springer ( 2009 )