Ordering Systems : Coordinative Practices and Artifacts in Architectural Design and Planning * KJELD SCHMIDT 1 & INA WAGNER 2 1 IT University of Copenhagen , Denmark ( E - mail : schmidt @ itu . dk ) ; 2 Vienna University of Technology , Austria ( E - mail : iwagner @ pop . tuwien . ac . at ) Abstract . In their cooperative eﬀort , architects depend critically on elaborate coordinative practices and artifacts . The article presents , on the basis of an in - depth study of architectural work , an analysis of these practices and artifacts and shows that they are multilaterally interrelated and form complexes of interrelated practices and artifacts which we have dubbed ‘ordering systems’ . In doing so , the article outlines an approach to investigating and con - ceiving of such practices . Key words : architectural work , classiﬁcation , coordinative artifacts , common information spaces , indexation , nomenclatures , notations 1 . Introduction For years , mainstream CSCW research has been focusing on understanding and developing technologies that can support the immediate interaction in small groups . In fact , the ﬁeld has often been deﬁned in terms of ‘group work’ ( e . g . , Greif , 1988 ) or even ‘small groups’ ( e . g . , Grudin , 1994 , 1999 ) . Face - to - face conversation is implicitly taken as the paradigm of human interaction , and in comparison all other forms of human interaction are seen as impov - erished . The motivation for this focus has generally been the putative need for technologies that can help cooperating actors to emulate such immediate interaction over physical distance . Hence CSCW’s perennial obsession with various brands of the conversation paradigm such as ‘media spaces’ , ‘col - laborative virtual environments’ , ‘virtual rooms’ , ‘virtual work spaces’ , ‘in - stant messaging’ , etc . Because of this , however , mainstream CSCW has been and remains pre - occupied with issues that may not be strikingly relevant to the bulk of real - world cooperative work settings . As pointed out already in 1989 , 15 years ago , ‘the concepts of ‘‘group’’ and ‘‘group work’’ designate speciﬁc types of cooperative relations char - acterized by shared responsibilities . ’ It was furthermore argued that ‘we * This article draws on ﬁndings and analyses presented in articles published over the last couple of years ( Schmidt and Wagner , 2002a ; Schmidt and Wagner , 2002b ; Schmidt and Wagner , 2003 ) . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( 2004 ) 13 : 349 – 408 (cid:1) Springer 2005 certainly do not want to restrict the scope of CSCW to those cases where the responsibility of performing a task has been allocated to or assumed by a relatively closed and ﬁxed collective [ . . . ] . Cooperative work comprises indirect as well as direct and distributed as well as collective modes of interaction . ’ ( Bannon and Schmidt , 1989 , pp . 361 f . ) . 1 Teamwork is a fairly common phenomenon , of course . But in the con - temporary world of work , teamwork is not the typical form of work orga - nization , and it is , in any event , almost always embedded in wider cooperative work arrangements . The fact of the matter is that contemporary cooperative work is generally characterized by heterogeneous and often widely ramiﬁed arrangements of actors immersed in complex interdepen - dencies of varying scope , intensity , and degrees of coupling . Ample proof of that has been provided , over the years , by the continuous trickle of ethno - graphic studies of actual cooperative work , ‘in the wild’ , i . e . , in domains such as air traﬃc control , hospitals , manufacturing , aircraft maintenance , soft - ware engineering , etc . Ordinary discursive interactions such as conversations over the telephone , in hallways , or on the shop ﬂoor , in scheduled meetings , or in the form of email exchanges , and so forth , are of course an integral part of cooperative work . But in the larger scheme of things , cooperative work is characterized by an inﬁnite variety of non - discursive interactions . That is , for example , in doing his or her individual work one actor changes the state of an object ( a machine part , a drawing , a piece of software code ) , not for the purpose of conveying a message , but for the purpose of simply doing the job ; noticing the result of this , another actor , perhaps at an other location , perhaps at a later stage , makes other changes to the state of the object or other objects , and so on . All kinds of variation of this pattern are at play . Parts , materials , documents , etc . may pass from actor to actor , in the sequential pattern of a ‘work ﬂow’ ; or the responsibility of undertaking certain tasks may pass on from actor to actor , in a sequential ‘task ﬂow’ . The cooperative interaction may be strictly sequential , but it may also take the form of reciprocal interaction , just as it may be interspersed with stretches of concurrent activities . In fact , cooperative work may involve any mixture of concurrent , sequential , and reciprocal action and interaction . In some cases the actors know each other , but often they do not . In some cases the interaction may involve conversation , but often it does not . More than that . It is typical of cooperative work in modern work settings that multiple actors so to speak interact ‘through’ a collection of artifacts of various kinds . An actor may for example place a document in a location where others can see it and use it . The actor may place it there for his or her own later use , but at the same time others may access it too , or the actor may place it there deliberately for the beneﬁt of others . Perhaps the identity of the others cannot be known in advance , perhaps it can . Anyway , whatever the KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 350 reason for putting it there , since other actors have access to the document , those others may retrieve and use it at some point in time , perhaps for purposes or in contexts that are quite diﬀerent from those of its origination . It may also be the case that another actor may change the content of the document , change its location , rename it , trash it , etc . Such practices are ubiquitous in contemporary cooperative work . Again , the location of the collection may be a particular shelf , rack , room , or building , or the collection may be distributed over a number of shelves , racks , rooms , and buildings . The collection may comprise digital documents as well as paper and other tangible artifacts . The items in the collection may be docu - ments such as books , reprints of scientiﬁc articles , technical reports , invoices , design speciﬁcations , software code , blueprints , etc . Or the collection may contain parts and sub - assemblies , zoological or geological samples , works of art , forensic evidence , etc . Or the collection may be a heterogeneous assembly of such artifacts . Anyway , however distributed and heterogeneous the collec - tion may be , in their cooperative activities actors will ( in some ways ) interact and coordinate their activities through this collection , by changing its state . The salient characteristic of contemporary cooperative work is that the actors generally interact ‘at arm’s length’ . As soon as we remove the blinders of the ‘group work’ paradigm and look at cooperative work in its rich diversity and complexity , it also becomes abundantly clear that contemporary cooperative ensembles would fail – completely and utterly — in their collaborative eﬀort if they could only coordinate and integrate their activities by means of ordinary discursive practices , whether face - to - face or remote , oral or written . In fact , contempo - rary cooperative ensembles depend heavily on a range of highly specialized , standardized coordinative practices involving a concomitant repertoire of equally specialized coordinative artifacts . It is such practices we are investi - gating here . We are of course not the ﬁrst to address the crucial role of inscription and material artifacts in cooperative work . A number of interesting studies have been published over the years ( e . g . , Haas , 1996 ; Henderson , 1999 ) and some very insightful analyses have been made as well ( e . g . , Nardi , 1993 ; Sellen and Harper , 2001 ) . Our work builds on this work and can be seen as an attempt to take the issue a bit further by adopting a both more comprehensive and more systematic stance . Nor are we , of course , the ﬁrst to address specialized , standardized coordinative practices . Recognizing the critical importance of such coordi - native practices , a number of CSCW researchers from diﬀerent research traditions have developed a range of more or less elaborate and more or less successful frameworks that address speciﬁc types or aspects of coordinative practice such as , to take some examples , ‘organizational memory’ ( Conklin and Begeman , 1988 ; Conklin , 1989 ; Ackerman and Malone , 1990 ; Conklin , ORDERING SYSTEMS 351 1993 ; Ackerman , 1994 ) ; ‘common information spaces’ ( Schmidt and Bannon , 1992 ; Bannon and Bødker , 1997 ) ; ‘workﬂow systems’ ( Grinter , 1996 ; Bardram , 1997 ) ; ‘coordination mechanisms’ ( Carstensen and Sørensen , 1996 ; Divitini et al . , 1996 ; Schmidt and Simone , 1996 ; Simone and Divitini , 1997 ) ; ‘boundary objects’ ( Star , 1989 ; Star and Griesemer , 1989 ; Bowker and Star , 1999 ; Lutters and Ackerman , 2002 ) , and so forth . None of these frameworks tells the whole story ; nor does any of them claim to . They are also of rather diﬀerent status . Where ‘common informa - tion spaces’ and ‘organizational memory’ are metaphorical rather than conceptual constructs , others like ‘coordination mechanisms’ aim to oﬀer more concise conceptual frameworks for analysis and design . Moreover , the diﬀerent frameworks highlight and express diﬀerent aspects of coordinative practices . For example , while the concepts of ‘workﬂow’ and ‘coordination mechanism’ focus on coordinative practices of accomplishing temporal order ( schedule , sequence ) , concepts such as ‘common information spaces’ and ‘organizational memory’ focus on coordinative practices of managing col - lections of discrete items or artifacts , whereas the concept of ‘boundary ob - jects’ , in turn , highlights practices in which activities in distinct local settings are partially concerted by ‘objects’ on the ‘boundary’ between the settings . This is all well and ﬁne but cannot hide the fact that this array of frame - works , when taken together as a conceptual foundation for CSCW , is defective . The picture they together let us see and conceive of is not only incomplete but in fact rather patchy and incoherent . Not only do each of them suﬀer from a variety of ambiguities and shortcomings . The diﬀerent conceptualizations they oﬀer are not orthogonal . And , worse , how the con - ceptualizations ( workﬂow , procedure , object , collection , classiﬁcation , etc . ) underlying the diﬀerent frameworks might be interrelated has not been speciﬁed or investigated . Consequently , by virtue of their partial character , the various frameworks treat as separate what is logically interconnected . Since the distinctions they impose are largely arbitrary , no rigorous systems architecture can be built on this as a basis . This state of aﬀairs is obviously unsatisfactory . Based on an in - depth ethnographic study of coordinative practices and artifacts in architectural design and planning , the present article is intended as a ﬁrst attempt at a systematic and comprehensive analysis of coordinative practices in their complex interconnectedness . We do not oﬀer a conceptual framework , not to mention a theory , but we hope to be able to outline a substantiated approach . Our article is based on systematic ﬁeldwork carried out in the course of ﬁve years in an architectural oﬃce . 2 In this period , the planning of several large buildings was studied . One of them , Pleasure Dome , an entertainment center in the Gasometer area in Vienna , houses a cinema center with several movie theatres , a shopping mall , and a garage complex ( Figure 1 ) . KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 352 In addition to this project , an urban planning project as well as the preparation of a variety of design proposals for various competitions were studied . A combination of participant observation with interviews was used . A large number of cooperative work situations was observed . The ﬁeld work included collecting ( scanning , taking screenshots or photographs of ) artifacts used and produced by the architects . 2 . The complexity of architectural work Architectural planning and building today face increasingly complex de - mands . Modern architects have to deal with issues and interdependencies which previous generations of architects did not have to handle . In the course of the industrial revolution , the needs of industry led to the introduction of facilities for heating , ventilation and sanitation , which began to be applied to domestic architecture as well . Central heating in the form of steam - heating systems appeared in the early nineteenth century ; cold - and hot - water sys - tems and sanitary plumbing developed rapidly in the second half of the same century . Gas lighting came to London in 1809 and , in the words of a his - torian of architecture , by the 1880s electric light was ‘available to those who could aﬀord it and were prepared to take the risk of using it . ’ Elevators , telephones , and mechanical ventilation were introduced in the last decades of the nineteenth century . These developments of course impacted on the work of architects . As the historian puts it , ‘However much people may have regretted or been frightened by the scale and rapidity of the changes , what had been produced in a hundred years was a whole new range of possibilities , and therefore a new aesthetic and a new challenge to the designer . How was he to cope with change and express architectural qualities in such a revolu - tionary milieu ? ’ ( Nuttgens , 1997 , p . 245 ) . Figure 1 . Pleasure Dome : Patchwork fac¸ade ( left ) and interior view . ORDERING SYSTEMS 353 In the course of the last century , the ‘range of possibilities’ was further extended by the introduction of air - conditioning systems , facilities for tele - communications , security , safety , ﬁreﬁghting , etc . Moreover , architec - ture has grown into an important marketing instrument , for business and politics alike , and architects are expected to create images and develop novel visual strategies . The ecology of materials and techniques is of growing importance and is connected to requirements such as energy eﬃciency and renewable building materials . A whole new range of building materials and methods of pre - fabrication has been developed , requiring planners to select , combine , and assemble diﬀerent materials and construction packages in innovative ways . Using the example of a fac¸ade , Pietroforte argues : ‘The representational fragmentation of its components , such as granite veneer panels , supporting steel trusses , windows , insulation , water drainage system and caulking , makes the overall assessment and the achievement of the system’s functional continuity more diﬃcult . This problem is coupled with the fragmentation of the fac¸ade engineering knowledge as it is reﬂected in the iterative development of the shop drawings , their lengthy review process with hundreds of notes and corrections , many coordination meetings and , above all , in a time consuming testing of full - size fac¸ade mockups’ ( Pietroforte , 1997 , p . 77 ) . In addition to the technical complexity of buildings and their construc - tion , the increasing cost - consciousness of clients forces planners to consider maintenance costs , special services for users , and changing social uses from an early stage on . The challenge to architects is not only an aesthetic one , but an immensely practical one , as the vastly increased ‘range of possibilities’ implies a vastly increased number of structural and functional elements of the building to be integrated in the design and in the construction plans . As a result , the work of modern architects is intensely collaborative . It is a ﬁne example of what we in the introduction described as a mixture of concurrent , sequential , and reciprocal action , partly co - located and partly spatially distributed , sometimes involving conversation and more often not . In a typical large building project various actors work on diﬀerent sections of the building and they may be responsible for particular design tasks . Typical of a normal workday within an architectural oﬃce is that work proceeds quietly , with little movement , a pattern now and then interrupted by bursts of conversation and discussion . People will occasionally convene for an internal project meeting or for a meeting with an external consultant . At intervals , too , scheduled coordination meetings are held in which all team members participate ; they here assess the progress of work , settle dates , conﬁrm responsibilities , redistribute work ( if required ) , and talk about common issues such as , e . g . , design changes . Participants leave the meeting with personal notes of what to do and what to be aware of in their work , with KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 354 some common understanding of the progress of the work , open issues , dates , and deadlines . Beyond the project team , a building project engages many external actors : technical consultants ( for construction , electricity , heating and ventilation , the lighting concept , the fac¸ade , etc . ) , a client and perhaps one or several users , numerous authorities , building companies , contractors , and sometimes , depending on the size of the project and the contract , a general contractor . Enlisting these many professional competencies , mobilizing their support , and integrating their perspectives is a major task that requires careful preparations and ongoing communication . The planning process is a ‘collective problem - solving process in which diﬀerent parties tend to inﬂuence the process at diﬀerent stages’ ( Pietroforte , 1997 , p . 79 ) . There is also a critical time aspect involved in planning . Negotiations with relevant parties not only involve multiple complex issues but also engaging in time - consuming procedures , e . g . , those of local authorities that follow their own logic of bureaucratic functioning and political compromising . The total time span from preliminary design to construction may be several years , and it may happen that well thought - out design decisions eventually turn out to be too costly or no longer technically feasible . As some of these external parties have the power to legally approve or not approve the design , recur - rent negotiations have to be conducted ( Table I ) . Table I . Example of a network for a large building project U SERS C LIENT G ENERAL CONTRACTOR L OCAL AUTHORITIES Bring in their ‘Corporate Identity . ’ Deﬁne requirements . Formulates ‘room program . ’ May contract architect and technical consultants . Moderates and controls the planning and implementation process . For diﬀerent aspects of the building Control , authorize . J URY Sets criteria , evaluates , authorizes . C ONSULTANTS A RCHITECTURAL OFFICE Construction engineer , heating and venti - lation specialist , building engineer , traﬃc specialist , specialist for fac¸ades , lighting designer , etc . Give technical advice . Cooperate in design of details and call for tender . Formally approve of design details . ‘Artistic director’ - responsible for overall design Coordinates planning process . P ARTNER OFFICE Supports costing and call for tender , surveys implementation at construction site . V ENDORS and other building professionals Provide components , materials , skills etc . ORDERING SYSTEMS 355 The planning process is organized into legally deﬁned stages with deﬁned products : pre - design , design , construction planning , and implementation . The ways these stages and the roles of diﬀerent participants in the process are deﬁned vary from country to country . Each stage results in a corresponding set of CAD plans for submission , construction , municipal trade license , etc . In practice , stages overlap a great deal , and investors increasingly seek to install fast - track delivery processes in order to meet the need for shorter building delivery cycles ( Sabbagh , 1989 ; Pietroforte , 1997 ) . 3 . A plethora of representational artifacts When one enters the ﬁeld site , one is in an oﬃce consisting of several interconnected large rooms , each with several desks , each of these with a workstation . As in virtually any modern work place , the oﬃce is replete with all sorts of representational artifacts . But what is perhaps particularly striking , is the absolute abundance of them . Most of the desks are covered with various artifacts : plans , sketches , notes , photographs , faxes , books , samples . On shelves are large collections of binders for each of the current projects ; in the entrance area a collection of scale models is on display , and on the walls are 3D visualizations , sketches , photographs , and newspaper clippings from previous and current work . The walls close to the architects’ workspaces too are used as an exhibition space and decorated with materials from current work . Sketches play a large role in conceptualizing the design , drafting solu - tions , explaining an idea or working out design changes . A series of scale models will be built for diﬀerent purposes , each model visualizing diﬀerent aspects of the design . Print - outs of plans will be made , photocopied in A3 format , discussed , and modiﬁed ( on layers of transparent paper ) . Spread - sheet and word processing documents will be created for the host of information that is accrued in the process and needs to be organized , dis - tributed , held in evidence . Copies of material will be sent by fax to a consultant for commenting and returned with suggestions and calculations , to be discussed and further annotated . Files will be exchanged via email . Consultants will extract the layers from a CAD plan that matter for their work , do their own drafting , and send the ﬁle back to the architects’ oﬃce for approval and re - incorporation into the CAD plan . Meanwhile , the architects talk on the phone , call for an ad hoc meeting , send an email , etc . What is remarkable is not just the diversity of artifacts but the intricacy of the workﬂow : the ways in which actors align these diﬀerent materials and perspectives into highly detailed and well coordinated set of plans ( Figure 2 ) . KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 356 3 . 1 . CONCEPTUAL VISUALIZATIONS While some of the architects’ design artifacts , such as CAD drawings , are precise and highly detailed , others , among them sketches , hand - written notes , images , and models , are informal , imaginative , and open . They may , how - ever , assume a high degree of conceptual clarity and coordinative eﬃciency . Diﬀerent architects have diﬀerent preferences and styles in this regard . While some architects use sketches and pictorial material for generating and expressing their ideas , others prefer poetry and metaphorical text ; whereas others build their designs on ( historical ) research , the assembling of facts or ‘datascapes’ ( Maas and Van Rijs , 1998 ) , and others again work with scale models from the start of a project , working out their ideas by experimenting with diﬀerent spatial conﬁgurations . 3 One particularly beautiful and rich example is the loose ad hoc assembly of sketches , metaphorical text , association images , physical models , and Figure 2 . The architects’ workplaces and artifacts . ORDERING SYSTEMS 357 photographic material in Figure 3 . The collage represents some of the central features of the initial design concept for Pleasure Dome . The 3D visualization and the image of a wall in the cathedral of Chartres express the idea of a ‘big wall , impregnated with color and light’ . The sketch and the metaphorical text capture the evolving idea of the building’s fac¸ade as a ‘cutting edge’ between the rough quality of the concrete on the one hand and the lucidity and colorfulness of the glass skin on the other hand : the movie theatres as ‘stones that dip into water’ . A scale model was built at the very beginning of the project and was used within the oﬃce as well as in meetings with external specialists for visualizing the complex roof structure and the internal space of the building . Later , a much more elaborate version of this model was used in convincing the key user of the architects’ color concept for the movie theaters , that they be painted ‘silver , gold , ruby , emerald’ ( Figure 4 ) . Altogether , more than 30 models of Pleasure Dome were built , made from Figure 3 . A collage of a 3D visualization , an ‘association image’ ( Chartres ) , a sketch , and a metaphorical text . The 3D visualization was generated from a ﬁrst , rough scale model . KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 358 diﬀerent materials in diﬀerent sizes , each visualizing diﬀerent aspects and qualities of the building - in - design . Characteristic of these artifacts is their conceptual and metaphorical character . To architects , their sketchy and informal representations cap - ture the mixture of symbolic richness and abstraction which allows them to express qualities of space , light , atmosphere , and materials . Similarly , abstract 3D visualizations of spaces , places , and artifacts may be used for conveying a concept , metaphor , or some symbolism . In this context , ‘abstract’ does not mean the striving for purity , as in an abstract painting ; on the contrary , visualizations like the 3D images produced for Pleasure Dome are highly theatrical ; they use the language of ‘artistic impurity , hybridity , and heterogeneity’ ( Mitchell , 1994 ) for communicating certain ideas and qualities of an object . Another feature of these informal rep - resentational artifacts is their openness to extensions , modiﬁcations , and novel interpretations . A diﬀerent example of an informal representational artifact is the sketch , in Figure 5 , of a work plan for an urban planning study . It reﬂects the particular style of the principal architect , who produced it as part of a ﬁrst planning session while discussing the project . The architects use this type of artifact in various ways . In this particular project , members of the project team placed copies of the sheet on their desks , using it as a reminder of design principles and the overall work to do . It served as a template for project meetings . In one of those meetings the sheet was annotated and enriched . The sketches are pointers to a series of more detailed drawings exemplifying ‘rules’ . Finally , the sheet also represents the structure of the deliverable – a project report with diﬀerent types of visualizations of the urban design . Although informal , incomplete , and not Figure 4 . A model visualizing the colored movie theatres . ORDERING SYSTEMS 359 very detailed , this work plan served a powerful integrative function in the project , providing a vision for and cohesion within the designer team . 3 . 2 . THE SYSTEM OF CAD PLANS AND DRAWINGS In a modern architectural oﬃce , the central representational artifact is the system of CAD plans . They incorporate , as an ensemble , a project’s trajec - tory from draft to implementation ; they absorb and reﬂect all decisions taken and changes made , as plans are gradually detailed and modiﬁed . Typically , the CAD model of a large building is divided into 15 – 20 sec - tions . Altogether about 30 plans , including 11 – 12 ﬂoor plans , have to be drafted and coordinated . Each plan in turn is decomposed into a large number of layers , often more than 100 , each devoted to the representation of one speciﬁc feature or set of features of the building ( one for brickwork , one for concrete structures , one for windows , one for ventilation systems , etc . ) . All plans are stored on the central server , using a structured ﬁle system with diﬀerent subdirectories for each project period and with predeﬁned ﬁle - naming conventions . Print - outs of the CAD plan in A3 format are used for discussing design details and working out design changes ( Figure 6 ) . This is either done directly on the plan copy or on a blank transparent sheet of tracing paper that is placed over the printed plan and ‘anchored’ by positional markers . The tracing paper is then used for experimenting with design ideas . Figure 7 , for The sketch to the left contains , inter alia : • A ﬁrst work plan – things to do , phases , how to proceed . • Speciﬁcation of visual material that should be collected or created ( pictures , collages , association images , shadow plans , etc . ) – how to represent the design of the urban area . • Metaphors – how to talk about the urban area . • A speciﬁcation of methods – to deﬁne spatial qualities , to ‘intensify rules’ , etc . • Explanatory sketches . • References to material to look for . • Names of responsible actors . Figure 5 . Initial sketch for an urban planning project . KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 360 example , shows one of the many representations that were produced when the architects were looking for another way of guiding visitors entering the Pleasure Dome through the interior space of the building . It was realized that , to achieve this , the interior path as well as the spatial distribution and positioning of the movie theaters and the ticket booths had to be changed . The principal architect produced a ﬁrst sketch on top of the print - out of the CAD plan , including a list of to - dos at the margin . One of the project team members used transparent paper over the original plan to mark the new conﬁguration in orange . Figure 7 . Working out design changes on top of a CAD drawing ( right ) . On the bottom margin of the amended drawing is a yellow post - it with some annotations . Figure 6 . A CAD plan with multiple layers collapsed into one representation . ORDERING SYSTEMS 361 As planning progresses , more and more details have to be speciﬁed and ﬁlled in . A large building contains hundreds of details , which can either be left open , to be decided upon later by the construction company or craftspeople , or they can be carefully designed up front . Much of the aesthetic quality and individual character of a building depends on the design of these details ( Figure 8 ) . However , detail drawings are of a scale of 1 : 5 or even 1 : 1 and therefore cannot be ﬁtted into the central CAD construction drawing . There are diﬀerent types of detail . For example , a building such as Pleasure Dome involves a large number of recurring components such as inner and outer walls , ceilings , ﬂoors , roofs , stairs , balustrades , etc . For this particular building with its 200 diﬀerent types of doors , also simple com - ponents such as doors had to be speciﬁed . 3 . 3 . AND SO ON . . . As construction of the Pleasure Dome began , the architects’ workspace became populated with photographs from the construction site . They visualized the progress of work on the one hand , acted as reminders of problems to be solved on the other hand , like the photo of a certain problem on the site which the building company forwarded to the architects via email ( Figure 9 , bottom ) . Documenting the progress of work is a legal requirement , and the photos are archived and kept after the completion of the building in case a liability issue arises . Figure 8 . A detail drawing . KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 362 3 . 4 . REPRESENTATIONAL ARTIFACTS AS OBJECTIFICATIONS In order to understand this plethora of representational artifacts , one should take into account that architectural work is diﬀerent from many other types of work insofar as the ‘ﬁeld of work’ does not exist , that is , does not exist objectively , in advance , but is constructed in and through the process of design and planning and , ultimately , construction . Architectural work pro - ceeds through the architects’ producing successive objectiﬁcations of the design and interacting with them in a variety of ways , inspecting them , comparing them , assessing them , etc . That is , the conspicuous display of representational artifacts can be seen as the fundamental means of making the not - yet - existing and in - the - process - of - becoming ﬁeld of work immedi - ately visible , at - hand , tangible . A comparison with radically diﬀerent work domains such as process control may help to clarify the point . As far as the operators of , say , a power Figure 9 . Photographs from the construction site . ORDERING SYSTEMS 363 plant are concerned , the plant as a whole , the diﬀerent functional parts , the valves and pumps , the energy transformation processes , the mass ﬂows , the power grid to which it is connected , etc . can be conceived of as their common ﬁeld of work . It is there , in an important sense , before they start their shift , and it is still there when they clock out . However , due to the sheer scale of the plant as well as due to the intangibility of the processes , various represen - tations of the plant and processes are generated and made available in the control room , and the operators there take them to stand proxy for the plant and processes beyond the control room . For all practical purposes , the operators work with these representations . By contrast , the ﬁeld of work of architects is notional . The building does not exist prior to their work but only as a result of their work . More than that , the representational artifacts do not exist prior to their work either . This is of course an exaggeration . Architects do reuse previous designs and have a vast array of preexisting resources at hand , such as catalogues of materials , parts , etc . readily available on the market . Anyway , the point we are trying to make is that the motley collection of representational artifacts plays a role quite similar to the nuclear power plant and the representations of it to the operators in control room . For architects , in the absence of an objective , material ﬁeld of work , the representational artifacts constitute the ﬁeld of work . They serve as objectiﬁcations of the construction - in - the - making and are , as such , the immediate object of their work , they are what is looked upon , inspected , gestured at , discussed , modiﬁed , annotated , etc . 4 These similarities notwithstanding , the fact that the ﬁeld of work of architects is notional and that they thus are required to work with repre - sentational artifacts as objectiﬁcations of things - to - come , has important implications . Representations are not the real thing , of course ; they are fundamentally ‘under - speciﬁed’ with respect to that which is represented ( Suchman , 1987 ) ; they are local and temporary constructs ( Gerson and Star , 1986 ) . More than that , representations are essentially conventional con - structs based on rules of mapping and translation between representation and the object that is represented . Consequently , the inﬁnity of aﬀordances and cues oﬀered by the pre - existing material ﬁeld of work of plant operators is not available but has to be painstakingly emulated by a rich variety of sign systems , notations , and other conventional practices . 3 . 5 . NOTATIONS : STANDARD AND AD HOC Architectural plans are extremely complex artifacts , based on highly sophisticated notations and drawing conventions that have developed over centuries and are systematically taught at educational institutions . They ﬁgure prominently in any introduction to architectural drawing and KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 364 planning ( for elementary English textbooks cf . , e . g . , Wakati and Linde , 1994 ; Reekie , 1995 ; Styles , 1995 ) . To a large extent these notations and conventions are reﬂected as standard primitives in the CAD application , others are speciﬁc for the particular oﬃce or even for the particular project . For example , CAD drawings use a color code for line thickness . This code originates in the technology preceding CAD . Prior to CAD technology , line thickness had developed as a standard way of denoting diﬀerent structural elements of a building ( diﬀerent line thicknesses rep - resenting outer wall , inner walls , windows , etc . ) , and for these purposes architects used a repertoire of pens of diﬀerent caliber ( ‘Rotring’ drawing pens ) . For obvious usability reasons , a standard color coding for line thickness had been established , with , e . g . , a white ring on a pen denoting 0 . 25 mm line thickness , yellow 0 . 35 mm , green 0 . 50 . Early CAD systems adopted this color code and used it to represent line thickness and , by implication , structural element . Later on , free choice of color became an option and one can now choose between 30 – 40 colors and the respective line thicknesses . In view of this and to maintain general internal agreement about the color code in the oﬃce , line thickness codes have been deﬁned in a separate ﬁle , which is also normally forwarded together with CAD ﬁles to those external consultants that need to plot out and work directly on the ﬁle . While a general norm ( O¨NORM ) concerning the submission of CAD drawings is being developed in Austria , each architectural oﬃce still has its own in - house color coding standard , whereas other professions ( e . g . , geometers ) use diﬀerent conventions . In addition to the standardized notations and drawing conventions , architects use a variety of more or less conventionalized techniques for highlighting items that need to be checked or changed . Among those are : making annotations on a document , e . g . , putting a red circle around a problem , adding details ( correct measures , materials ) , marking a part of a drawing with a post - it note with some instructions for changes , corrections ( e . g . , in pencil directly on a plan ) , sketching either directly on a plan copy or on transparent tracing paper . At times , new notations are established on an ad hoc basis . Take for instance the plan in Figure 10 . It is an A3 copy of a CAD plan showing the upper level of the shopping mall in Pleasure Dome . This drawing was used in a meeting of the architect with the lighting designer . During the meeting , the lighting designer got to know the building by ‘walking through’ it , pointing to particular places and elements , while the architect was thinking aloud , describing the space , listening to questions and suggestions , simultaneously sketching the lighting concept . While talking , the architect developed a notation , using diﬀerent colors for diﬀerent types of lighting . This notation was then , subsequently , used in all documents concerning lighting . Colored ORDERING SYSTEMS 365 photocopies of the lighting design were , for example , used as part of pre - sentations to diﬀerent audiences . Architects’ ‘conceptual visualizations’ as well as their CAD drawings de - scribe the building - in - design on multiple levels of detail , completeness , and ‘technicality’ , using diﬀerent notations , according to scale , materials , con - struction stage , etc . The plethora of artifacts compensates for the ‘abstract - ness’ of the various representational artifacts and of their limited scope . To architects this ‘under - speciﬁcation’ of representational artifacts is of particular relevance , as one can see from ‘conceptual visualizations’ such as sketches and ‘association images’ . Connected with this is the ‘openness’ of Figure 10 . Ad hoc notations . KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 366 such artifacts : ‘open’ in the sense that they facilitate and accommodate contributions from others ; they serve to stimulate their imagination and to make them perceive the novel within the familiar , discover relations between seemingly incongruent objects and notions , relate the ‘unrelatable’ – and to jointly take a step further in the design process ( Wagner and Lainer , 2001 ) . 4 . Coordinative practices and artifacts ‘List making is foundational for coordinating activity distributed in time and space . ’ ( Bowker and Star , 1999 , p . 138 ) Embedded in this web of architectural artifacts and practices , there is obvi - ously a ﬂow . There are stages in the life of a project , even legally prescribed ones , a schedule deﬁned by deadlines . But the progression is overall one of ongoing reﬁnement and increased speciﬁcity . From time to time , of course , what has been done is undone , decisions are revised , progression reversed . That is , the overall process is an iterative one . Moreover , the actors not only interact by changing the state of some part of the world ( which is characteristic of cooperative work in general ) , they interact in a highly distributed manner by changing the state of discrete items in vast heterogeneous and physically distributed collections : sketches , mod - els , plans , drawings , calculations , speciﬁcations , etc . What is most striking is that they manage to interact in this highly distributed and mediated manner without succumbing to disorder and utter chaos . How do they do that ? The simple answer is that this is accomplished by means of a large variety of mundane coordinative practices and concomitant coordinative artifacts that are not simple at all . In fact , they typically form complexes of interrelated coordinative practices and artifacts . In this section we will brieﬂy discuss the most important ones . 4 . 1 . PLAN IDENTIFICATION A range of ‘generic’ coordinative practices will be found wherever large collections are handled in a distributed manner . The ‘title block’ is a good example for illustrating these practices . It is a template ‘stamped’ onto each plan at the bottom ( Figure 11 ) . This simple artifact illustrates a feature which we ﬁnd in all of the coor - dinative artifacts and also in the key representational artifacts ( CAD plans , detail drawings , etc . ) , namely that they have what in CSCW has been termed a standardized format ( Harper et al . , 1989 , p . 15f . ) . For others to be able to easily identify and make sense of the items in a collection , their form must be standardized according to certain criteria . If the artifact is a text , the docu - ORDERING SYSTEMS 367 ment may be formatted according to a genre ( e . g . , the diﬀerent standards for formatting scientiﬁc articles in the diﬀerent disciplines , or the conventions for formatting agendas or minutes of meetings ) . The title block is , graphically , a bounded space divided into ﬁelds of diﬀerent sizes . Each ﬁeld is dedicated to display a speciﬁc category of information . Thus , if a ﬁeld is left blank , this is immediately obvious to whom it may concern . The spatial arrangement does not reﬂect a systematical grammar . Read from top to bottom it rather loosely reﬂects a certain order of priority ( in conjunction with font sizes , styles , and colors ) : the name and address of the oﬃce , the name and objective of the project name , the type of plan , the cross section represented in the plan , the name of the client , the authority con - cerned , and at the very bottom a set of identiﬁcation codes . So far , the arrangement is quite similar to the title page and the colophon in a book , and like these , artifacts such as the title block serve what could be called practices of identiﬁcation and validation . Practices of identiﬁcation : When accessing an artifact produced and sub - mitted by somebody else , the actor who may need to retrieve it must be able to establish its type and particular identity . The item thus has to be named or Figure 11 . The title block ( ‘Plankopf’ ) . KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 368 otherwise identiﬁed so that a potential user will know ‘what’ and ‘which’ it is . This may involve a more or less elaborate convention for naming items , from the usual way of doing it to a nomenclature , to a ‘system of designation’ ( Harris , 1986 , p . 130 ) . In our case , the architects’ practices of naming plans are based on a systematic system of designation , namely the ‘plan identiﬁ - cation code’ found at the bottom , which will be discussed in more detail in the next section . Here , in the title block , the ‘plan identiﬁcation code’ has two parts , the ﬁle name ( PB _ 1 _ o _ E1 ) and the ‘plan number’ ( 102BA ) . Practices of validation : When accessing an artifact produced by somebody else , the actor retrieving it will also need to somehow assess its relevance , validity , veracity , etc . Actors will here , among many other factors , rely on their knowledge of the evaluation procedures , that is , the approbation pro - cedures according to which items have been assessed and approved ( e . g . , the editorial review procedures of scientiﬁc journals , the acquisition procedures of museums , etc . ) . Also , in some domains of work , more or less sophisticated procedures of validation are developed and enforced ( e . g . , journalism , accounting , criminal investigation , experimental science , historiography ) . In the case at hand , the title block reﬂects a variety of validation procedures . It contains a date as well as information about author ( e . g . , the architect ) , the client , the owner of the plot , the object ( name , address ) , the authority to which the plan is to be submitted , and the legal authority to be addressed in case of a complaint . The title block also speciﬁes the type of plan at hand , in this case a ‘application for trade license , ﬂoor - plan , level 1’ . In addition , however , in the middle section ( in the left hand side of the header ) , the title block also deﬁnes a notation for structural elements ( the set of color codes used in the plan to designate parts made of concrete , steel , brick , etc . ) . The line drawing ( to the right ) introduces a speciﬁc alphabetic code for the cross sections of the building , which are both visualized and named ( using the letters of the alphabet from A to I as codes ) . 4 . 2 . THE PLAN IDENTIFICATION CODE AND CIRCULATION LIST The plan identiﬁcation code reﬂects the cooperative and highly distributed nature of the planning process . In a large building project , diﬀerent actors work on planning diﬀerent parts of the building and on diﬀerent problems . There are diﬀerent plans for diﬀerent stages of a project , for diﬀerent parts and levels of the building , and for diﬀerent purposes . Each of the about 30 plans that have to be drafted and coordinated has a particular trajectory . The ﬁrst version of ﬂoor - plans and cross sections is usually produced at an early stage ( ‘pre - design’ ) . Then , over time , the plans become more and more detailed and also specialized , with diﬀerent specialists contributing their expertise . This is a procedure in many loops , involving numerous design ORDERING SYSTEMS 369 changes . Many versions of each plan are produced ; in a large project such as Pleasure Dome altogether 580 plan versions were plotted out and distributed , 20 - 30 versions of each plan on average . To ensure some kind of order in all this , each plan is identiﬁed by a unique alpha - numerical code ( e . g . , ‘PW - 1 - M - E1 - 103 - V1’ ) . Parsed from left to right , the code identiﬁes the plan in terms of a set of attribute types : Fragment 1 . Plan identiﬁcation attribute types . project _ acronym / stage _ of _ the building _ project { pre - design , submission , construction , etc . } / author { architect , construction engineer , building engineer , etc . } / section _ of _ building { garage , mall , cinema , bridge } / level _ of _ building / type _ of _ plan { ground floor , cross section , front , escape routes , etc . } , < number > / version < number > . The identiﬁcation code ‘PW - 1 - M - E1 - 103 - V1’ thus reads : Pleasure Dome / design / architect / mall / level 1 / ground plan no . 3 / ﬁrst pre - plot . On closer inspection , however , the technicalities of this identiﬁcation scheme are rather intricate . Since we will meet many examples of the same kind of identiﬁcation scheme , an analysis of the logic of the scheme is in place . The identiﬁcation scheme belongs to a category of nomenclature that in theories of classiﬁcation is sometimes termed ‘polynomial nomenclature’ , i . e . , a system of names consisting of multiple terms ( cf . , e . g . , Mayr and Ashlock , 1991 ) . For each position in the code ( apart from version number , of course ) , valid values are selected from a pre - deﬁned and ﬁnite list , as indicated in Fragment 1 . The values for author , for example , are restricted to a list of options ( architect , construction engineer , building engineer , etc . ) . Each of these ‘supporting’ lists can be considered a notation , ‘a set of graphic units with its own structure’ ( Harris , 2000 , p . 114 ) . 5 That is , the system of designation underlying the plan identiﬁcation scheme can be seen as a sequentially ordered set of attributes , for each of which is attached a speciﬁc notation in the form of a list . Graphically , the whole construct can be depicted as the shaft - and - barb structure of a feather . Now , polynomial nomenclatures are notoriously cumbersome . 6 To avoid the unwieldy names that would result from using words or phrases for each attribute , the architects code attributes by single digit signs : for author , a set of numerals ( 1 , 2 , 3 , . . . ) , for section . . . , simple abbreviations ( ‘g’ for garage , ‘m’ for mall , etc . ) . For the same purpose of parsimony , probably , the particular nature of the relationship between the terms for which the hyphen stands proxy is not expressed at all . But in fact , the hyphens implicitly denote diﬀerent kinds of KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 370 relationship , determined by the categories to which the preceding and sub - sequent attributes belong . If we replace the hyphens with explicit relationship markers , the code ‘PW - 1 - M - E1 - 103 - V1’ would read : [ this plan pertains to project : ] Pleasure Dome ; [ concerns project stage : ] design ; [ produced by : ] architect ; [ concerns building section : ] the mall ; [ concerns level of building ] : level 1 ; [ for which this plan is a ] ground plan no . 3 ; [ of which this is the : ] ﬁrst pre - plot . That is , the plan identiﬁcation scheme does not designate plans uniformly in terms of a consistent principle of ordering . This heterogeneity notwith - standing , there is a practical logic to this identiﬁcation scheme . It identiﬁes plans , not just by a set of arbitrary signs , but in terms of attributes that are taken to be signiﬁcant . Hence , this system of designation and identiﬁcation is also an expression of a classiﬁcation scheme of sorts . It is a classiﬁcation scheme in that related plans are grouped together : All plans for the Pleasure Dome project are named ‘P . . . ’ ; all plans for the mall are named ‘P . . . - . . . - M . . . ’ It is not a strict hierarchy , however , in so far as plans are not classiﬁed according to a tree structure ( a ‘dendrogram’ ) . The point is that a speciﬁc attribute ( e . g . , Section . . . ) may be subordinate to more than one superor - dinate attribute ( e . g . , Author ) . That is , ‘P . . . - 1 - M . . . ’ and ‘P . . . - 2 - M . . . ’ are both valid codes . The ‘syntax’ of the plan identiﬁcation code rather reﬂects an ‘unprincipled hierarchy’ , beginning with the most ‘weighty’ attributes , the code for project and stage , shifting to the features of the building , and eventually back to the process , in a sort of progressive exclusion strategy . As a result , in spite of its lack of rigor as a graph , the classiﬁcation scheme not only provides a procedure for producing a unique name for each plan ; it also tells the architects what kind of plan this is , where in the process it belongs , what it is about , and so on . The apparent lack of rigor is accidental , however . The logic underlying the architects’ system of designation is similar to that of the chess notation , where the ‘algebraic’ system assigns a letter of the alphabet to each ﬁle and a number to each rank on the chess board , and as a result , each square on the board is identiﬁed by means of a letter - numeral combination ( f3 , b4 , etc . ) . In the words of Roy Harris , the ‘algebraic system superimposes a structure of its own upon the distinctions required for an adequate notation’ ( Harris , 1986 , p . 130 ) . In our case , the classiﬁcation scheme is the ‘structurally superim - posed’ system . There is a strong rationale underneath the combined identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation scheme . To make the point of this clear , consider alternative forms of systems of designation for the purpose of providing unique names for the myriad plans and drawings . One could , for instance , by giving each plan and detail drawing an arbitrary name ( Peter , Paul , and Mary , say ) , arrive at an equally unequivocal system of designation . After all , streets , buildings , lecture rooms , hotel suites , etc . are often named that ORDERING SYSTEMS 371 way . But such a system of designation implies housekeeping activities that may become forbidding when the number of items becomes very high . On one hand , one would need to maintain an inventory of names already assigned or an inventory of available names ( i . e . , a nomenclature ) , so as to prevent duplication and confusion . On the other hand , to be able to locate any particular object , one would also need a system of matching the names and the particular items ( indexed maps , ﬂoor plans , etc . ) . With a systematic system of designation , these housekeeping activities become superﬂuous . In a typical system of systematic designation of rooms in a large building complex , a room identiﬁed as ‘3 . 2 . 36’ would , for instance , be room 36 on the 2nd ﬂoor in building 3 . If one knows the system and has been issued with the room code , ﬁnding room 3 . 2 . 36 is straightforward . Such systems of designation also allow actors to detect inconsistencies or omissions in the application of the scheme ( such as the omission of ﬂoor 13 ) . As a system of designation the plan identiﬁcation code is open - ended . While the values for each position in the code are selected from a pre - deﬁned list , a notation , one can add another valid value to the notation , if that is deemed appropriate . The architects do not strive for timeless consistency . To the contrary . The coding scheme varies from project to project . Thus , at the beginning of each project the architects discuss the plan designation system and adapt it to the exigencies of the project at hand . Such modiﬁcations may even occur during a project . Very pragmatic considerations are at play here , such as the complexity of the building and of the division of labor . For example , as the division of labor in the Pleasure Dome project became established and it became obvious that actors had become permanently assigned to diﬀerent sections of the building , the plans for the building were split into two sub - collections ( cinema and mall / garage , respectively ) , and to handle that the attribute type section … was introduced and used as an additional criterion for identifying plans . The same pragmatism is exhibited in the application of the coding scheme for other purposes than simply giving unique names to plans . As mentioned , layers of the CAD plans are extracted and sent to external stakeholders for their contribution or comment . To keep track of plans as they traverse the network of consultants , local authorities , and of course the client , and thus ensure accountability , another coordinative artifact , the ‘plan circulation list’ , is used ( Figure 12 ) . The graphical format is that of a matrix ( using a spreadsheet as a template ) . The ‘plan circulation list’ itemizes vertically all plans with their identiﬁcation code , and horizontally it records data about who received and returned which plan at which date . For practical reasons , the syntax has been modiﬁed to : type _ of _ plan / file _ name / plan _ number / , and the ﬁle name is here composed of : project _ acronym / stage … / level … / . KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 372 The modiﬁed syntax reﬂects the pragmatic fact that the circulation of plans is anchored in the division of labor in terms of sections of the building . The diﬀerent sections and hence groupings within the team are simply and pragmatically taken to be represented by the type of plan ( the particular cross section , the particular fac¸ade , etc . ) which is therefore the deciding attribute type . 4 . 3 . THE CAD LAYER ORGANIZATION In a large building project , diﬀerent actors work on planning diﬀerent parts of the building and on diﬀerent kinds of problem . As mentioned earlier , the central CAD plan is the representational nexus of a project . The CAD plan is the artifact in which all the design decisions that have been worked out in various forms – sketches , calculations , technical descriptions , product spec - iﬁcations , etc . – are recorded and speciﬁed . CAD plans assume this central coordinating role in the process of planning , because modern CAD appli - cations support the cumulative representation of the design within one and the same ‘document’ , i . e . , an integrated ﬁle structure , organized in layers , each of which addresses a particular aspect of the design . The division of labor within the oﬃce is facilitated by the subdivision of the system of CAD plans into partial plans ( section , ﬂoor ) and layers . Someone responsible for speciﬁc tasks such as , say , ‘ﬁre escapes’ may work on building parts or layers simultaneously used by others . That is , the sub - division and layered organization of the CAD plans enable the actors , for long or short periods , to proceed concurrently , with only occasional com - munication , while still acting concertedly . The layer organization is furthermore crucial for maintaining the ﬁt between the contributions of the diﬀerent external specialists to the detailed planning of a building . All information pertaining to a particular task and Figure 12 . The plan circulation list ( fragment ) . ORDERING SYSTEMS 373 purpose , such as ﬁre protection , escape routes , ventilation system or struc - tural elements , can be extracted from the ﬁle by copying the relevant set of layers . The construction engineer or the heating and ventilation specialists will for instance receive a copy of the relevant layers from the central CAD plan , work on them , and return them to the architects for re - integration into the system . Other external specialists may receive a print - out and produce their own drawings , which the architects will inspect , possibly discussing modiﬁcations and alternatives . They then may copy these drawings into their CAD plans or draft their version of the specialist’s suggestion . Again others will receive a photocopy of one of the plans and return it with comments , calculations , sketches , etc . It is the architects who monitor and control this process of viewing , detailing , and adding to . The layer organization ﬁnally provides a ( collective or individual ) space for experimentation and change . An architect who is experimenting with how to carry a shaft through an open space may not only produce a series of sketches ( some of them on tracing paper ) but may deﬁne a special layer for the drawing ( e . g . , ‘Mike’s layer’ ) . This example also shows that layers may be deﬁned in terms of ownership and / or professional competence ( e . g . , the construction engineer’s ) . The CAD plan is an integrated representation of the design , as opposed to the collection of separate hand - drawn plans that had to be produced before the advent of this technology . That is , the central CAD plan is a ﬁne example of a boundary object ( Star , 1989 ; Star and Griesemer , 1989 ) in as much as it is an integrated system of representations that provides an infrastructure which enables distributed actors to make their individual contributions to the overall design in a distributed , incremental , and yet concerted manner . Essential for coordinating the successive detailing of plans is a uniform layer organization . However , layer structures vary widely , between the involved professions as well as from oﬃce to oﬃce ( Laiserin , 2002 ) . They also reﬂect the speciﬁc features of a building and they are organized in groups . Each of the 30 plans for Pleasure Dome contains up to 160 layers . The layer organization primarily expresses the temporal - spatial logic of the construction process . Most of the layers describe spatial relationships within a building , which can be mapped , assembled and dissembled . The ﬁrst versions of a CAD plan will contain the layers representing basic structural elements . For each subsequent step of detailing , new layers will be added , such as layers for the heating and ventilation system , the escape routes , or the exact positioning of stairs and elevators . This means that the CAD plan’s layer organization not only supports the cooperative nature of work , with diﬀerent professions ‘owning’ particular sets of layers . It also takes care of the incremental nature of the design process . Finally , in addition to spatial elements and their relationships , the layer organization incorporates ‘housekeeping’ aspects , with speciﬁc layers reserved for comments , such as KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 374 text ( in diﬀerent scales ) , measurements , ordering elements , special signs , – all in accordance with the architects’ drafting conventions . Fragment 2 . Notation for generating CAD layer codes . 0 - 1 Auxiliary layers 2 Planes / solids / hatches of different materials ( e . g . , concrete , plaster , brick ) 3 Special signs ( e . g . , for fire sections , escape lines , lines of the plot ) A Completion ( e . g . , windows , intermediate walls , stairs , sanitary equipment ) B Existing structures I Infrastructure ( electrical ; sanitary , etc . ) O Ordering elements ( axes , cross sections ) R Rough ( brick ) work SC Cross sections / views T Text ‘labels’ U Environment V Various The naming of layers builds on a pragmatic mix of codes ( see Fragment 2 ) . A layer name consists of four parts : the layer group , a text describing the content , the building element , and the scale . ‘At - f100’ means : ‘Ausbau < Text > Fenster im Maßstab 1 : 100’ ( that is , ‘completion stage < text > windows in scale 1 : 100’ ) . Similarly ‘R FLUCHT 200’ means : ‘Rohbau , Flucht im Maßstab 1 : 200’ ( that is , ‘rough brick work , escape routes in scale 1 : 200’ ) . Developing a standard notation for layers and their sequencing is a recur - rent concern within the oﬃce . It is an issue which is taken up at the beginning of each new project , with actors looking through and discussing practices and experiences from previous work . These discussions are consolidated in two documents deﬁning the layer organization – a Word document and an Auto - CAD prototype drawing – which are accessible to the team members and also forwarded to those specialists who need to work directly on the architects’ ﬁles . However , the development and maintenance of the convention is not supported by systems such as AutoCAD . This is a problem , since maintaining the disci - plined use of the notation – with up to 20 actors working on the CAD plans in parallel and a number of external specialists involved as well – turns out to be extremely diﬃcult . Not surprisingly , in the course of a project the layer lists tend to grow in non - systematic ways . Several reasons can be identiﬁed : • Parts drafted by an external professional , e . g . , the heating specialist , are copied into the current plan , although based on a diﬀerent layer structure ( which then is added to the one in use in the oﬃce ) . • Details that can be imported from another project ( e . g . , a glass railing ) or have been drafted separately because of their complexity ( e . g . , the bridge ORDERING SYSTEMS 375 between Pleasure Dome and the Gasometers ) are also copied and inserted ( or cross referenced ) . • There may be good reasons to preserve the history of some detail ( e . g . , the new seat arrangement for the movie theatres has been drafted on the appropriate layer while the previous arrangement is preserved , in another color ) . 4 . 4 . THE COMPONENT CATALOGUE As already noted , a building such as Pleasure Dome involves a large number of recurring components such as , for instance , 200 diﬀerent types of door , that have to be speciﬁed and indexed . The standard components are deﬁned in the component catalogue . It provides the data for mass and cost calcu - lations and needs to be prepared before the call for tender is due . The component catalogue serves purposes of economy in the planning and construction process . Components used in many places in a building are only speciﬁed once and can then be referred to by their identiﬁcation codes within the CAD plans . Also , components are typically re - used in other projects , possibly in a modiﬁed version . The component catalogue for Pleasure Dome , which contains hundreds of items , went through several cycles of discussion and annotations . The architect in charge prepared a ﬁrst listing of all components , which was ﬁrst reviewed by the principal architect , who scribbled a number of remarks on the list , including small sketches , and then by the project manager , who also added handwritten comments . Later , the building engineer and construction engineer made cor - rections , added comments , and cross - checked . The architects worked on each item , adding to them and modifying them according to their notes . The architects use yet another notation and syntax for naming compo - nents . In Figure 13 , the nested list ( on the right hand side ) contains the construction speciﬁcations for three components , all of them ﬂoor elements for the cinema . The top one reads : ‘K - FB 08 / Projektionsraum gegen Foyer ( F90 Stahlkonstruktion ) / Aufbau 12 cm / ’ ( that is , ‘ ‘K - FB 08 / projection room towards foyer ( F90 steel construction ) / 12 cm construction work’ ) . The scheme for naming the component uses a quite simple notation . In this instance , ‘K’ stands for ‘ Kino ’ ( ‘cinema’ ) , ‘FB’ for ‘ Fussbodenaufbauten ’ ( ‘ﬂoor components’ ) , and ‘08’ is a consecutive ( and thus arbitrary ) number , followed by a textual description and a measurement . As it happens , ‘K - FB 08’ is a component for which a detail drawing has been produced , and the identiﬁcation code of the detail drawing – ‘K - 1 . 10 . 1’ – is given as a reference in the lower , right - hand corner of the segment of the fragment in Figure 13 . Important remarks are highlighted in red color , such as ‘ Neu ’ ( ‘new’ ) . The detailed speciﬁcation of each component in the catalogue is process - oriented and anticipates the division of labor in the construction process . KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 376 The diﬀerent parts of the component are listed ( from bottom up ) in the order in which they will be assembled , each preceded by a measurement , e . g . , ‘ 0 . 5 cm Linoleum ’ . Some parts are standard elements , others designed for the current project ; some will be pre - fabricated , others will be con - structed on the site . This is the reason why some parts are also brieﬂy described : for some detail drawings have been produced ; for others instructions are added , such as ‘ 2 cm in Wand eingefra¨st ’ ( ‘ milled 2 cm into wall ’ ) , and for other parts again the architects use product names ( e . g . , ‘ Heralan TP T 30 / 30 ’ ) , while sometimes adding references to standards , such as ‘B1’ , ‘Q1 , or ‘TR1’ . Although the notation and the syntax are homegrown , the architects make use of reference catalogues , including standard tender speciﬁcations of components , many of which are also available on the Internet . As the architects adapt many of these speciﬁcations to the requirements of their design , they use them as ‘templates’ for constructing project - speciﬁc cata - logues , sometimes without modiﬁcations , sometimes in a modiﬁed form . 4 . 5 . THE DETAIL DRAWINGS : THE IDENTIFICATION CODE AND LIST As we saw , the component catalogue may have references to design details . A large building has hundreds of such details . Figure 13 . The list of components : A page of the ﬁrst draft ( left ) and a fragment of the ﬁnal document . ORDERING SYSTEMS 377 The detail drawings ( Figure 8 ) , are inventoried in the ‘list of detail drawings’ , an Excel sheet ( Figure 14 ) . Similar to the plan circulation list , it contains completion and modiﬁcation dates and helps maintain an overview of the circulation of drawings within the network of actors involved in planning and construction . Architects can see from the list which detail drawings have been sent to whom , for comments or for approval . As with plans and components , detail drawings are given unique names , in this case based on a three - digit numerical notation . The identiﬁcation code for detail drawings is loosely organized by the ‘function’ of the object , starting with ﬂoors and ceilings ( for which the ﬁrst digit is given the code ‘1’ ) , walls ( ‘2’ ) , roofs and terraces ( ‘3’ ) , interior stairs and ramps ( ‘4’ ) , etc . , alto - gether 32 categories . In the identiﬁcation code ‘8 11’ , for example , the value of the ﬁrst digit ( ‘8’ ) denotes ‘interior doors’ while the value of the second digit ( ‘1’ ) denotes parts made of ‘wood’ . However , the last digit ( ‘1’ ) is an arbitrary number in the sense that its meaning is not determined by any superimposed structure . That is , the last digit expresses local variations of diﬀerent kinds . In this case , the value of the third digit ( ‘1’ ) means ‘rest - rooms’ . In short then , ‘8 11’ reads ‘ interior doors / wood / restrooms ’ . However , the second digit may also be arbitrary . While the second digit , in some cases ( such as doors ) , denotes materials ( ‘1’ for wood , ‘2’ for steel , ‘3’ for glass , etc . ) , other types of distinction may be made in other cases . An Figure 14 . The list of detail drawings . KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 378 example is ‘roofs and terraces’ , were ‘3 1’ means terraces , ‘3 2’ green roofs , ‘3 3’ cinema roofs , and ‘3 4’ roofs of projection cabins . That is , the system of designation for detail drawings is not overall orga - nized by a superimposed classiﬁcation scheme . The result is more a notation than a classiﬁcation . Its main function is to provide some kind of order in the repository of 300 detail drawings and a code for making references to the drawings within the CAD plans . Asked about this , the project manager pointed to the ‘impossibility of classifying everything’ . He described how the classiﬁcation of details broke down , as more and more distinctions had to be accounted for . For some particular details solutions were worked out as late as in the implementation phase on the construction site together with a crafts - man . These details were not ‘classiﬁed’ at all but simply documented by the sketch that was produced during that conversation . This creates no problem , the project manager argued , as long as it is possible to maintain an overview . After all , the detail identiﬁcation code does not allow one to identify the particular nature , the signiﬁcant attributes , of the detail , anyway . The required overview is maintained by collating all detail drawings in a special binder in A3 format . It contains the list of detail drawings as well as all detail drawings arranged by the three - digit identiﬁcation code . The list and the drawings are used together , with the list providing an index to the drawings . The binder also contains the component catalogue . The binder is located centrally on a table by the window in a room shared by the architects working on the construction plans . Whenever someone needs information about details , he or she walks over to the table , looks up a particular ‘class’ , e . g . , ‘interior doors’ , and browses through the items in the list and / or through the detail drawings , takes the relevant documents out for photocopying , and places them back in the binder . The ways in which the architects compose the detail identiﬁcation code is inﬂuenced by a standard classiﬁcation of ‘deliverables’ that has been developed for the building trade and which provides the agencies who produce or deliver building elements with a coherent notation for naming those elements . The architects use the same syntax but change the notation according the local exigencies of the particular project . The notation the architects developed for the Pleasure Dome project is based on one they used in a previous project . However , it turned out that they needed more categories , such as , for example , for diﬀerent types of door made of diﬀerent materials and for balustrades that include glass . Also , since the building was decomposed into sections – cinema , mall , garage , bridge – they wanted to preserve this as a signiﬁcant attribute . This again reﬂects the internal division of labor according to which diﬀerent actors are responsible for diﬀerent details . Thus , a detail that has been developed as part of the planning of the cinema section gets a ‘K’ , even though it may also be used in other sections of the building . This is a way of ensuring internal accountability for speciﬁc tasks . The code for the section ORDERING SYSTEMS 379 of the building appears as a preﬁx to the identiﬁcation code . In the list of detail drawings , one will ﬁnd that the code ‘8 11’ is actually ‘K 8 11’ . The preﬁx does not aﬀect the order of the list , however . It is merely an annota - tion that is given this protruding position because of its importance in the division of labor . As already mentioned , the list of details provides a code for referencing details in the CAD plans . Apart from the fact that details are drawn in scale 1 : 5 or even 1 : 1 and therefore cannot be included in the CAD drawings ( which are drawn in scale 1 : 100 or 1 : 50 ) , referencing to details , instead of integrating them , greatly simpliﬁes the CAD plan . Furthermore , changes at the detail level , which are often made rather late in the process , do not have to be taken care of in the CAD plan itself . That is , making references to details , com - ponents , and product speciﬁcations increases the robustness of the CAD drawing . To indicate references in the CAD plan , the architects use simple symbols such as ‘circle’ for details , ‘rectangle’ for components , and ‘square’ for product speciﬁcations , or they invent symbols on the ﬂy , for instance for diﬀerent types of lighting ( Figure 15 ) . 4 . 6 . THE BINDER SYSTEM At the beginning of each project a project archive organized in binders is constructed . This ‘binder system’ is a heterogeneous collection of docu - ments ranging from plans , drawings , sketches , correspondence ( faxes , letters ) , to minutes , contractual information , legal documents , and product speciﬁcations , often arranged in chronological order within each binder . Binders for diﬀerent projects have diﬀerent colors ( ‘blue’ for the more than 150 binders for Pleasure Dome ) . Standard labels are printed out and adapted to the nature of the project . In the course of a project additional Figure 15 . References to detail drawings ( in circles ) in a CAD plan . KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 380 labels will be generated , for example to take care of unforeseen types of archival material , or when the need to reorganize some of the material arises ( Figure 16 ) . The subdivisions of the ﬁling system reﬂects the architects’ interactions with diﬀerent professions – consultants , client , local authorities , and com - panies – and the domains these represent . The binder label refers to : role type { internal ( coded : 1 ) ; client ( 2 ) ; authority ( 3 ) ; consultant ( 4 ) ; vendor ( 5 ) } / area of expertise / . Thus , for example , the inscription ‘4 . 1’ on a binder label reads ‘ consultant / building engineer ’ , whereas the inscription ‘5 . 6’ reads ‘ vendor / escalators ’ . While plan versions that move across organizational boundaries , say to the heating and ventilation specialist , are ﬁled in binder 4 . 3 ( ‘ consultant / heating , ventilation , and sanitary ’ ) , the ﬁnal versions of the central CAD plans are ﬁled in separate binders , as are the detail drawings . Depending on the diversity and quantity of documents , additional criteria may be introduced The binder coded ‘3 . 4’ ( ‘ authority / trade law ’ ) , for exam - ple , contains extracts from particular laws , hand - written notes , sketches Figure 16 . The binders for Pleasure Dome . The two pictures below show that many binders are created and labeled ad - hoc on the one hand , and that there are always things that remain outside the classiﬁcation in use . ORDERING SYSTEMS 381 representing things that have been negotiated , and project - related decrees . The print - outs of important emails – up to more than a hundred pieces of correspondence may go out on a single day – are kept in a particular binder . Practically all written ( textual , graphical ) material that is generated in a project is ﬁled in the binders . The most common way for the architects to retrieve a paper document is by remembering with whom and ( approxi - mately ) when they talked about a problem that is related to this document . The chances of ﬁnding a copy of the document , often with annotations , are high . The closing down of a project requires looking through the binders and deciding which ones to keep and archive . There are some general rules for this in the oﬃce concerning material that needs to be kept by law . Still , decisions have to be made about which of the material to archive for possible re - use in the future . 5 . The clustering of coordinative practices The diversity of coordinative artifacts reﬂects the fact that the planning of a building involves a number of concerns and issues : the division of labor among architects and the other participants in the process ; the multiplicity and interrelatedness of representational artifacts ; the diﬀerent competencies and ordering preferences of diﬀerent types of actor ; the incremental and iterative nature of the process ; the diﬀerent priorities of diﬀerent contributing activities , stages , etc . ; the separation and partial overlapping of planning and construction ; the diﬀerent stages of evaluation and approbation ; the multi - farious types of component and material ; and the diﬀerent critical temporal orders . The diverse specialized artifacts are designed to address speciﬁc issues and concerns . They represent diﬀerent ‘local’ principles of ordering . But the de - sign and planning process is not a loose assemblage of fragmentary practices . To the contrary . The coordinative practices and artifacts at the architects’ oﬃce are used in conjunction with each other , and together they are instrumental in ensuring and maintaining a workable degree of order in a variety of respects : • achieving some degree of consistency in the graphical expressions and objectiﬁcations of vague notions , mere ideas , concepts , speciﬁcations ; • identifying and validating individual artifacts and versions of artifacts ; • maintaining a practical degree of consistency across the local activities as constituted by division of labor and specialization , over time , etc . • keeping track of and providing access to the vast and perpetually changing collection of representational artifacts ; • ensuring timely progression across the myriad local activities ; KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 382 • documenting that actors , including external partners and authorities , meet agreed - to or statutory deadlines ; • recording and ﬁling evidence of due process ; • and so forth . In addition to the speciﬁc purposes they serve , but at another level of abstraction , the coordinative practices and artifacts we ﬁnd in architectural design and planning provide what one could call ‘interoperability’ among hundreds of plans and drawings ; they objectify – in the form of pointers , references , indices , lists , classiﬁcations , etc . – the relationships between the myriad building elements and details in the plans and drawings and between plans and drawings as well . And at yet another level of abstraction , by mapping plans and drawings onto scheduled transactions , and vice versa , the coordinative practices and artifacts provide means for ensuring that the incremental and iterative aggregation and speciﬁcation of the collection of plans and drawings on one hand are integrated with the scheduled progression of the endeavor as a whole and of the various milestones and deadlines on the other hand . In this multifarious web of interdependent artifacts and practices , schemes and notations , we can identify clusters of coordinative artifacts , each of which supports a set of interrelated practices . Figure 17 gives a schematic overview of the coordinative artifacts we have described and their interre - lationships . Centered around key representational artifacts such as the cen - tral CAD plan and the two collections of drawings ( detail and component drawings , respectively ) , we ﬁnd amassed something like a planetary system of coordinative artifacts devoted to maintaining order in and with respect to those central collections . The CAD plan system comprises the CAD plans with layers , the layer list , color codes , and connected to this , in an outer orbit , the plan number doc - ument , the plan identiﬁcation code , the title block , and the plan circulation list . A major function of this cluster ( the CAD plans , the layer organization , and the layer organization document ) is to facilitate the division of labor in the planning process . The layer organization also reduces the complexity of the overall work by modularizing the planning document . It is a device that to a signiﬁcant degree allows activities to be decoupled . Extracting sets of layers makes it possible for diﬀerent views to be brought to bear on the design . Similarly , making references ( pointers ) to detail drawings , compo - nents , or standard products from within a CAD drawing , shifts some of the work of detailing and accounting for the numerous design changes to other workplaces and actors . The plan number document , the plan identiﬁcation code , and the title block together ensure that there is a unique identiﬁcation code for each CAD plan . Lists such as the plan circulation list serve as indexation devices . They ORDERING SYSTEMS 383 also help actors in keeping track of the exchanges of plans with external stakeholders . The drawing systems . The component catalogue as well as the detail drawings together with the list of detail drawings , are used for specifying components and design details , for keeping order in the repository of detail drawings , and for reference and retrieval . All of the artifacts comprising this ordering system are assembled and kept in a large binder . The component catalogue provides a detailed description of components and how to assemble them ( and sometimes component drawings ) . It also contains ref - erences to standard speciﬁcations and requirements . It maintains evidence of the relationships between components and detail drawings , which are referred to in the catalogue by their identiﬁcation code . Both , the catalogue as well as the list , also serve as a kind of checklist , with empty spots attracting Figure 17 . Key ordering systems in architectural practice and associated coordinative artifacts and schemes . ( Highly simpliﬁed ) . KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 384 attention to components or details that have not yet been speciﬁed . The architects can see at a glance from the lists how far work has progressed . With many actors working on diﬀerent sections of the building and on dif - ferent problems , and speciﬁc actors responsible for the drawing of details or components , such an overview of process and status supports the scheduling and coordination of activities . Like the plan circulation list , the list of detail drawings helps actors to keep track of the exchanges of drawings with external stakeholders . The binder system . The binder system with the associated labels , have been designed for documenting and maintaining an overview of the architects’ interactions with external specialists . The binders contain an almost complete documentation of these transactions . We call these clusters of practices and artifacts ordering systems . Orderings systems are not restricted to the handling of collections . Some ordering systems are ubiquitous in the modern world , such as ordering systems for organizing meetings ( a complex of calendars , clocks , agendas , minutes , mailing lists , room IDs , etc . ) or for ensuring due process and administrative accountability ( ﬁles and folders , archives , standards operat - ing procedures , organizational charts , circulation lists , schedules ) , etc . In fact , they are not only ubiquitous ; their development and widespread use are preconditions for modern industrial society ( Yates , 1989 ; Olson , 1994 ; Crosby , 1997 ) . Other ordering systems are highly domain speciﬁc , such as those used in the production industries where one will ﬁnd speciﬁc com - plexes comprising drawings , bills of materials , process cards , routing schemes , etc . Now , whatever their speciﬁc purpose , ordering systems are based upon the combination of specialized coordinative practices and concomitant artifacts . These specialized practices are elaborate literate practices involving stan - dardized inscribed artifacts . That is , to coordinative practices the role of coordinative artifacts is essential and indispensable . This proposition is not uncontroversial . In fact , the underlying distinction between the concept of conduct and the concept of artifact , between the mental and the material , is generally confused and even seen as meaningless by schools of thought that play a central role in CSCW ( not to mention HCI and cognitive science ) . Therefore , in order to begin to understand coordi - native practices , we have to clarify the concept of artifact , in particular in - scribed artifact , and analyze the role of such artifacts in human activity . That is , we need to digress from our analysis of ordering systems in architectural practices for a brief interlude . The challenge is to understand these coordinative practices and artifacts in their speciﬁcity and complex interrelationships . ORDERING SYSTEMS 385 6 . Interlude : The speciﬁcity of coordinative practices ‘Hunger is hunger , but the hunger gratiﬁed by cooked meat eaten with a knife and fork is a diﬀerent hunger from that which bolts down raw meat with the aid of hand , nail and tooth . ’ ( Marx , 1857 ) ‘Hegel seems to me to be always wanting to say that things which look diﬀerent are really the same . Whereas my interest is in showing that things which look the same are really diﬀerent . ’ ( Wittgenstein to Drury , 1948 ) Coordinative practices are historically speciﬁc practices , grounded in the use of material artifacts . The practices of architectural design and planning – while exhibiting a host of local idiosyncrasies , particular to the country and oﬃce in question – incorporate standardized domain - speciﬁc practices of drafting , not least the array of representational conventions , notations , etc . , that are partly embodied in the standard ‘tools of the trade’ ( tech - nical pens and pencils , drafting implements such as rulers and curves , CAD tools , etc . ) . These practices of drafting in turn build upon and are specializations of more generic genres and techniques of visualization and annotation . Going deeper into this formation of practices , architectural design and planning also incorporate relatively common conventional practices of naming and validating artifacts and items ; standard practices of classiﬁcation and of ordering classiﬁcation schemes ; standard practices of expressing and organizing hierarchies , matrices , and lists ; and , deep down in the baggage of civilization , standard practices of measurement , mapping , calculating , coding , writing , counting ; uses of emblems and to - kens . All of this , the formation of superimposed and interlaced practices , deposited historically , as it were , as layer upon layer of sedimented practices , is eﬀaced by in the tradition which we , following Ryle ( 1949 ) , call the ‘in - tellectualist legend . ’ 6 . 1 . THE INTELLECTUALIST LEGEND ‘Intellectualism is inscribed in the fact of introducing into the object the intellectual relation to the object , of substituting the observer’s relation to the object for the practical relation to practice . ’ ( Bourdieu , 1980 , p . 58 ) The intellectualist legend works this way . In the various appellations of the intellectualist legend ( Lockean empiricism , Cartesianism , mentalism , cogni - tive science , etc . ) human mentality is ascribed properties , ways of function - ing , that are , really , modeled on historically speciﬁc practices such as the procedures of scientiﬁc investigation and intellectual discourse . Learning KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 386 something , the story normally goes , consists in formulating hypotheses , testing them , making inductions , debating alternative accounts , articulating rules , etc . , and when we then act in a rational manner , we are applying these ‘rules’ . When we recognize something , the story goes on , the mind is com - paring the data it receives from the sensory organs with what is stored in the form of , say , ‘chunks’ , ‘schemes’ , ‘representations’ , or ‘mental models . ’ Again , when we speak , we encode what we have ‘on mind’ , the message , which is then transmitted to the listener who then , in turn , decodes it and thus retrieves the message . – What this amounts to is not only the ascription of the characteristics of propositional reasoning and knowledge onto the immensely variegated practices of pre - propositional rational conduct , but the hypostatization of historically speciﬁc cultural forms of rational conduct that involve and completely depend upon the use of physical signs : writing , cal - culating , listing , etc . Activity theory is an excellent example of this confusion and its conse - quences , precisely because of its laudable aspirations and achievements . Activity theory emerged in opposition to and as a break with the funda - mental presumption of behaviorist psychology , viz . that human cognition is to be understood in terms of generic abilities . Against these presumptions , the Russian psychologist L . S . Vygotsky suggested a conception of human action that was heavily inﬂuenced by Marxian theory , arguing that cognitive phenomena such as logical reasoning are grounded in historically evolving and culturally speciﬁc material practices . Thus , to Vygotsky and his fol - lowers , the skills involved in the production and use of tools , in the tech - niques of reading and writing , arithmetic , etc . are of central concern to psychology . Vygotsky’s laudable ambition was undermined , however , by his concept of ‘psychological tools’ : ‘1 . In the behavior of man we encounter quite a number of artiﬁcial devices for mastering his own mental processes . By analogy with technical devices these devices can justiﬁably and conventionally be called psychological tools or instruments [ . . . ] . 3 . Psychological tools are artiﬁcial formations . By their nature they are social and not organic or individual devices . They are directed toward the mastery of [ mental ] processes – one’s own or someone else’s – just as technical devices are directed toward the mastery of processes of nature . [ . . . ] 4 . The following may serve as examples of psychological tools and their complex systems : language , diﬀerent forms of numeration and counting , mnemotechnic techniques , algebraic symbolism , works of art , writing , schemes , diagrams , maps , blueprints , all sorts of conventional signs , etc . 5 . By being included in the process of behavior , the psychological tool modiﬁes the entire course and structure of mental functions by determining the structure of the new ORDERING SYSTEMS 387 instrumental act , just as the technical tool modiﬁes the process of natural adaptation by determining the form of labor operations . ’ ( Vygotsky , 1930 ) One should , of course , grant Vygotsky the right to use metaphor and ( ignoring his insistence that his choice of words is ‘justiﬁable’ ) simply take his notion of ‘psychological tools’ as a somewhat awkward term for what we now would call sign systems . However , on closer inspection his analysis turns out to be quite equivocal , as it conﬂates techniques , practices , skills , signs , notations , with their material counterparts such as diagrams , maps , and blueprints . That is , his understanding of sign systems is rooted in mentalist preconceptions ( Goody , 1987 , p . 216 ) . Not only does the concept of ‘psy - chological tools’ reify the skills involved in speech , writing , numeration , counting , etc . , in that it suggests that skillful action is somehow ‘determined’ by some putative mental structures . More than that , by subsuming mental as well as material phenomena under the category of ‘tool’ , any notion of materiality is eradicated from the concept of tool as well . ‘Mental processes’ are reiﬁed while material artifacts are spiritualized . In short , no sooner had the use of artifacts been made a central issue ( and rightly so ) , before the materialist notion of artifact was conceptually dissolved . 7 This de - materialization of the concept of artifact has been continued uncritically in the subsequent activity theory tradition . Not only is the term ‘psychological tools’ in continued use ( cf . , e . g . , Wertsch , 1985 ; Wertsch , 1991 ) . But it is also evident that activity theory , as an intellectual tradition and as a conceptual framework , makes it diﬃcult to systematically address the role of material artifacts in work . In an introductory article , Kuutti for instance , mentions ‘instruments , signs , procedures , machines , methods , laws , forms of work organization’ as examples of ‘artifacts’ ( Kuutti , 1997 , pp . 26 ) . Similarly , following Engestro¨m . Kuutti mentions in passing , without further arguments , that ‘An object can be a material thing , but it can also be less tangible ( such as a plan ) or totally intangible ( such as a common idea ) as long as it can be shared for manipulation and transformation by the participants of the activity . ’ ( Kuutti , 1997 , pp . 27 ) . At this stage , the concept of artifact has become utterly vacuous , as it simply denotes anything we can give a name , a point Kaptelinin brings home , unwittingly , by stating that ‘Activity theory itself is a special kind of artifact’ ( Kaptelinin , 1997 , p . 36 ) . The ‘distributed cognition’ framework developed by Hutchins and asso - ciates can be seen as a further development of the activity theory framework , in that it insists on studying human cognition in terms of historically and culturally localized practices . As opposed to activity theory , however , Hutchins pays detailed attention to trajectories of action ‘distributed’ over actors and artifacts in what he terms ‘a system of distributed cognition . ’ ( Hutchins and Klausen , 1996 , pp . 16 – 17 ) . In doing so , Hutchins directs attention to the speciﬁc format of the artifact and its role in human action . 8 KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 388 In spite of this , Hutchins de - materializes artifacts no less than Vygotsky , albeit in a diﬀerent way . While Vygotsky talked about ‘psychological tools’ and thus only indirectly dissolved the concept of artifact , Hutchins does it directly , by conceiving of artifacts merely as vehicles of so - called ‘represen - tations’ and ‘representational states’ on par with ‘internal memories’ . Thus , when summarizing their analysis of cooperative work in an airline cockpit , Hutchins and Klausen state : ‘We can see that the information moved through the system as a sequence of representational states in representational media . From speech channels to internal memories , back to speech channels , to the physical setting of a device . Its representation in each medium is a transformation of the representation in other media . ’ ( Hutchins and Klausen , 1996 , pp . 27 ) 9 The notion that an invariant and immaterial being , ‘the information’ , migrates from mind to artifact to mind is extremely problematic . The notion of a ghostlike entity that in turn takes residence in people and artifacts and yet somehow manages to maintain its unity and identity , is not just a men - talist notion , as Vygotsky’s notion of ‘psychological tools’ ; it is what Taylor and Harris have aptly termed ‘telementational’ ( Taylor , 1992 ; Harris , 1995 ; Harris , 2000 ) : the transfer of invariant entities from mind to mind or even , according to Hutchins , from ‘medium’ to ‘medium’ . In short , the intellectualist tradition , of which ‘activity theory’ and ‘dis - tributed cognition’ are important branches , is painting a picture of ‘the mind’ as something like a scientiﬁc laboratory equipped with tools and artifacts , a repository of representations , and – concomitantly – a world populated with ghostlike artifacts , little more than transitory incarnations of ‘the informa - tion’ ; a picture of the mind as a collection of immaterial things and the world as a collection of disembodied inscriptions . Now , the fact that the various ‘representational media’ are of a diﬀerent nature and have diﬀerent characteristics is far from ignored by Hutchins , of course . In fact , it is one of his key concerns : ‘In the cockpit , some of the relevant representational media are located within the individual p [ i ] lots . Others , such as speech , are located between the pilots , and still others are in the physical structure of the cockpit . Every representational medium has physical properties that determine the availability of representations through space and time and constrain the sorts of cognitive processes required to propagate the representational state into or out of that medium . ’ ( Hutchins and Klausen , 1996 , pp . 27 , 32 ) But this recognition of the diﬀerent characteristics of minds and dials brings us nowhere , as long as the telementational notion of the infallible reincarnation of a mystical unitary being , ‘the information’ , is presumed . ORDERING SYSTEMS 389 By presuming ‘the information’ as a unitary entity that propagates in the system while retaining its integrity , Hutchins and associates elide the practices of producing this continuity and integrity . The orderly alignment of activities is simply taken for granted , like an invisible hand that some - how , quite mysteriously , creates order behind the back of the actors . Moreover , by tacitly presuming that artifacts are mere successive repre - sentational incarnations of ‘the information’ , the ‘distributed cognition’ framework implicitly treat the materiality of the artifact as immaterial , so to speak . The proponents of distributed cognition rightly criticize the Cartesian version of mentalism for construing the mind as an inner stage , ontologically separated from the social and material world . But they do so by construing the social and material setting as the carrier of some mysterious ‘distributed cognition’ , a rather spooky place . Instead of Cartesian dualism’ we have been oﬀered distributed mentalism . The mind is not a place . The mental is not an entity at all and cannot be ‘inside’ or ‘external’ ; nor can it be ‘distributed . ’ ‘Cognition’ is neither a ‘mental process’ nor ‘socially distributed . ’ When we talk of ‘the mind’ we are not referring to a place nor an ability but to the mindfulness exhibited by actors when they sometimes perform competently , smartly , vigilantly , wittily , etc . ( Ryle , 1949 ; Coulter , 1983 ; Shanker , 1998 ) . The purpose of this argument is not to belittle , across the board , the value of the contribution of ‘activity theory’ or ‘distributed cognition’ to CSCW , but simply to point out that while the central role of artifacts in cooperative work has been recognized and applauded , the concept of artifact as used in CSCW is murky , ripe with all sorts of mentalist and cognitivist precepts that impede and confuse the investigation of the inﬁnitely variegated array of actual material practices . When we have liberated representations , notations , etc . from the mentalist House of Usher we can begin to see them as and investigate them as a range of very speciﬁc conventionalized material practices involving the production and use of inscribed artifacts . The practices of classiﬁcation are the case in point . 6 . 2 . PRACTICES OF CATEGORIZATION AND CLASSIFICATION ‘the appropriate criteria for deciding whether two people are engaged in the same kind of activity [ . . . ] belong to that activity [ . . . ] itself . ’ ( Sharrock and Read , 2002 , p . 136 ) As concepts of practices , the concepts of classiﬁcation and categorization are victims of enormous confusion . KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 390 On the prevailing intellectualistic notion of cognition , the categorical diﬀerences between practices such as the practical categorizations inherent in everyday speech or the systematic and coherent classiﬁcation systems based on writing systems are elided or denied . Even authors as conceptually incisive as Bowker and Star , whose seminal studies of practices of categorization and classiﬁcation have served us as a guide , do not distinguish such practices ( Bowker and Star , 1999 ) . 10 But , surely , there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence be - tween the practice of saying something like ‘That’s not a seagull , it’s an albatross’ , and the practice of , for instance , composing a plan identiﬁcation code such as ‘PW - 1 - M - E1 - 103 - V1’ by consulting various supporting lists and written instructions to obtain the respective codes for stage , section , type of plan , previously issued plan and version numbers , etc . The practices are to be considered diﬀerent because diﬀerent ‘rules’ are involved ( cf . , Winch , 1958 ) , i . e . , discrimination criteria , principles of ordering and deciding , procedures of designation and validation , etc . With respect to practices of categorization and classiﬁcation we should therefore observe the following very subtle but categorical distinctions : ( 1 ) When you look out the window and see sky , clouds , trees , birds , and so forth , you do not thereby categorize or classify these phenomena as sky , clouds , trees , birds and so forth . You just see them . This does not imply that ‘seeing’ does not involve culturally speciﬁc skills . Seeing a house for what it is , i . e . , as a house , is of course not an innate ability . You may have learned to discriminate a cottage from a mansion ( what Ryle calls ‘thick description’ ( 1946 ) ) , but merely discriminating is not categorizing but merely the exercise of the skill of noticing speciﬁc features that to the ‘untrained eye’ are of no consequence . Seeing is not the same as recognizing , either . When you see birds in the sky , you do not recognize them as birds , unless , of course , doubt was pos - sible . 11 If you for a brief moment took the black shape in the grass for , say , a kitten , and then see that it is indeed a bird , then you have recognized a bird . When you open your eyes in the morning and see the same old wall , you do not recognize the wall , for doubt was not an option . Categorization , by contrast , is a linguistic operation of ascribing a cate - gory or concept to a particular phenomenon by the means of signs . Merely talking about phenomena , however , is not necessarily categorizing them , although talking involves the application of concepts . To categorize is to make a conceptual proposition ( ‘red is a color’ ) . In categorizing what you see as trees and birds you emphasize certain aspects of the world while abstracting from others , for instance that the trees and birds may all have green colors or that clouds and leaves may all be moved by the wind . An act of categorization cuts the world into pieces in that it emphasizes certain features at the expense of others ( ‘ x belongs to category C’ ) . ORDERING SYSTEMS 391 ( In themselves acts of separating objects are not acts of categorization , as they are not necessarily linguistic operations . Peeling onions or removing dirt from one’s body by means of soap and water are acts of separation but not acts of categorization , although they may be subjected to acts of categori - zation , for instance when one is instructing children in how to do it . Simi - larly , when sorting the garbage ( putting paper in this container , potato peels in that container ) one may , or may not , be following instructions involving categorizations . ) ( 2 ) Classiﬁcation , in turn , is a special practice of categorization , involving pre - established and systematic systems of signs . That is , classiﬁcation is a linguistic operation of applying a classiﬁcation scheme , i . e . , an ordered set of signs that is pre - established according to ( a ) some general principles and criteria of ordering and ( b ) some procedures of identiﬁcation and naming . In short , an act of classiﬁcation is an application of a classiﬁcation scheme . Classiﬁcation systems ( such as thesauri ) can thus be seen as instantiations of classiﬁcation schemes . ( 3 ) Classiﬁcations and categorizations are both convention - based practices and equally so . But classiﬁcations are convention - based in a quite speciﬁc sense . In the case of categorization there are no pre - established principles and criteria for determining the correctness of an act of categorization . With acts of classiﬁcation , however , such pre - established principles and criteria exist , in that they specify relationships between items in terms of , for example , class / membership , part / whole , composition , cause / eﬀect , origin / fate , function , ownership , value / risk , location , or state . Accordingly , an actor applying a classiﬁcation scheme in a particular case can be held accountable in terms of the principles , criteria , and procedures of the classiﬁcation scheme . 12 The point we want to make is that we have to be quite speciﬁc in distin - guishing diﬀerent types of discriminative practice : seeing something , seeing something for what it is as opposed to something else ( reﬂecting on what one is seeing ) , physically separating things in some regular way , saying that x is C ( ‘categorizing’ x as C ) , and classifying x as C according to an inscribed , publicly available classiﬁcation system . These are radically diﬀerent practices , involving radically diﬀerent forms of convention , principles of abstraction , etc . ( Just like following a rule is radically diﬀerent from acting according to a rule ) . We are here , of course , following Wittgenstein , for instance when he in Zettel observes that ‘We do not see facial contortions and make inferences from them ( like a doctor framing a diagnosis ) to joy , grief , boredom . We describe a face immediately as sad , radiant , bored , even when we are unable to give any other description of the features . - Grief , one would like to say , is personiﬁed in the face . ’ In short , ‘an interpretation is something that is given in signs’ ( Wittgenstein , 1945 – 48 , § § 225 , 229 ) . KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 392 ( 4 ) Classiﬁcation schemes diﬀer according to forms and procedures of abstraction , systematization , and accountability . They may , as in the case of certain scientiﬁc classiﬁcation systems , be sophisticated and rigorous theo - retical constructs ( e . g . , cladistic classiﬁcation in biology ( Hull , 1988 ; Mayr and Ashlock , 1991 ) ) . Other professions such as architects use classiﬁcation schemes that , although not strictly speaking theory - based , draw upon engi - neering and aesthetic frameworks and methodologies and yet , at the same time , have strong elements of practical sense . ( 5 ) Classiﬁcation schemes are institutionalized conceptual , linguistic , and procedural constructs that are part of the practices of professional commu - nities ( accountants , biologists , engineers , architects , etc . ) . Classiﬁcation schemes are developed by and for these communities , and members typically learn how to use them competently at schools and universities or in the course of their practical training . ( 6 ) A speciﬁc classiﬁcation scheme is often superimposed on a system of designation and is thereby expressed in a particular notation . As a result , the classiﬁcation of an item as expressed in the notation is identical to the name of the item , and vice versa : the name is a direct expression of the classiﬁca - tion . There are , as we have seen , signiﬁcant economic advantages of this dual function , in that one does not have to maintain two distinct systems and , more importantly , does not have to institute a procedure for maintaining consistent mapping between them . ( 7 ) Classiﬁcation systems are often used as indexation systems but again the two concepts are not coextensive . An indexing system is a special kind of ordering system that gives the location of an item . The obvious example is the index in a book : an alpha - betical list of selected names or terms with associated page numbers . Indexes may be more or less elaborate . The primitive form of index is a simple pointer , as can be found in the form of links in millions of web sites : ‘To read more about x , click here’ . The meaning of the pointer is here given by the sentence in which it is situated . In database systems , indexes are based on sets of keywords , sometimes just a simple list of terms . Sometimes , however , the index is organized as a classiﬁcation system , that is , as a set of terms ordered according to some semantically meaningful principle . While indexes are not necessarily based on classiﬁcation systems , classi - ﬁcation systems may be devised and used for other purposes than indexation , as in the cases of the systems of classiﬁcation of stars , elementary particles , and biological species . On the other hand , however , classiﬁcation systems developed for other purposes than indexation may of course be applied as indexation systems in the organization of artifacts of interest to the related communities ( photos , papers , samples ) . In any event , for a classiﬁcation system to serve as an indexation system in the handling of a large collection of artifacts in cooperative ORDERING SYSTEMS 393 work , it must be inscribed upon some artifact or system of artifacts ( sheets , cards , binders , rolodex , catalogue , shelves , doors ) with an asso - ciated ‘syntax’ ( list , matrix , hierarchy , map ) . Without inscription and the ‘technologies of the intellect’ ( Goody , 2000 ) based on inscription , the classiﬁcation system will decay , unnoticeably and unstoppably ( Goody , 1977 ; Goody , 1986 ) . 6 . 3 . TECHNOLOGIES OF THE INTELLECT What coordinative artifacts aﬀord , as inscribed artifacts , goes beyond mere retention , storage . They certainly do enable actors to express items of coordinative relevance in a durable and yet mobile form and they , hence , make it possible for others to revisit these items at a later stage . But they do far more than that . Their format evidently betrays that they are not just somebody’s memoirs or a pad of letters . Coordinative artifacts concatenate and conﬁgure items in certain spatio - graphical ways . Jack Goody’s observations on the aﬀordances of lists are most pertinent to this discussion : ‘The list relies on discontinuity rather than continuity ; it depends on physical placement , on location ; it can be read in diﬀerent directions , both sideways and downwards , up and down , as well as left and right ; it has a clear - cut beginning and a precise end , that is , a boundary , an edge , like a piece of cloth . Most importantly it encourages the ordering of the items , by number , by initial sound , by category , etc . And the existence of boundaries , external and internal , brings greater visibility to categories , at the same time as making them more abstract . ’ ( Goody , 1977 , p . 81 ) Similarly , ‘the formalized graphic arrangements in matrices’ provide precise spatial locations for items . ‘they not only extract , codify and summarize a great deal of information otherwise embedded in the ﬂux of experience , but they also make it possible to manipulate , reorganize and reformulate this information in a manner that is virtually inconceivable in the purely oral context . ’ ( Goody , 1987 , p . 276 ) More speciﬁcally , the formalized graphic arrangements in matrices high - light omissions and inconsistencies : ‘The table abhors a vacuum’ in the sense that ‘anyone composing a matrix is almost forced to ﬁll all the gaps , to leave no ‘‘empty box’’’ . ( Goody , 1987 , p . 275 f ) . As a result , due to their speciﬁc graphic format , matrices are instrumental in maintaining consistency and completeness in what would otherwise be a chaotic assemblage of items . KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 394 They also , as in the cases of the lists of components and detail drawings and the plan circulation list , represent in what Cournot aptly calls a ‘synoptic’ format what is otherwise spatially and temporally disjoint and distributed thus suspending and canceling time and space : ‘We try to correct [ the imperfections inherent in discourse ] by constructing synoptic tables , trees , and historical atlases : types of tables of double entry , in the outlining of which we are more or less successful in representing two dimensions of an extended surface , so as to indicate systematically relations which are diﬃcult to disentangle within the concatenation of discourse . ’ ( Cournot , 1851 , § 243 , p . 357 ) That is , as Bourdieu , invoking Cournot’s observations , puts it , ‘the synoptic diagram enables one to apprehend simultaneously and in a single glance , [ . . . ] meanings that are produced and used polythetically , i . e . , not only one after the other , but one by one , step by step . ’ ( Bourdieu , 1980 , p . 140 ) . 13 Now , consider again the various representational and coordinative arti - facts presented earlier in this article . The contrast between the graphical format of the representational artifacts and the coordinative ones is remarkable . The coordinative artifacts exhibit a striking graphical frugality . As a rule , they all employ what Goody calls ‘crude written techniques’ such as lists or hierarchical lists , and matrices . Compared to the expressiveness of the representational artifacts , the appearance of the various coordinative artifacts is boringly monotonous . Even an artifact as rigorously standardized as the CAD plan , appears almost frivolous in comparison . Although they all invoke and incorporate various conventional practices and , in the case of the CAD plan , at times even highly formalized ways of graphical communication , representational artifacts are subservient to their function ; namely , to represent . They show , in terms of certain conventionally established criteria , how the eventual building will look like , its internal structure and outward appearance , the materials of which it will be composed , etc . Representational artifacts are in the service of depicting the inﬁnitely multifarious material world . The coordinative artifacts , by contrast , are not in the service of depicting the material world or , indeed , of depicting anything . They are in the service of imposing order . The graphic techniques employed in coordinative artifacts serve the purposes of coordinating distributed activities , not in spite of but exactly because of their excessive formality . In making this point , we are stepping into a methodological controversy in sociology , a veritable hornets’ nest . The tricky issue arises from the fact that practitioners such as the architects in this case use representations of their own work to achieve workable order in their own work . We thus need to ORDERING SYSTEMS 395 carefully sort out the relationship between actual practice and representa - tions of practice . 6 . 4 . ‘ CRUDE WRITTEN TECHNIQUES’ AS MEMBERS’ PRACTICES The historical speciﬁcity of practice , and of the ‘technologies of the intellect’ in particular , is not only ignored by psychologists of the various mentalist orientations but also by anthropologists and sociologists when they , in their analysis of social practices such as kinship systems or mythologies , presume that their models of these systems somehow exist ‘out there’ ( e . g . , Le´vi - Strauss , 1962 ) . In Jack Goody’s words : ‘The trouble arises from applying a crude written technique ( the table ) to a complex oral process , then claiming one has the key to a culture , to a symbolic system . ’ He goes on to say that ‘this simpliﬁcation produces a superﬁcial order that reﬂects the structure of a matrix more obviously than the structure of the ( or a ) human mind’ ( as claimed by Le´vi - Strauss ) , and thus ‘produces gross general similarities in all this type of construct’ ( Goody , 1977 , pp . 67 f . ) . Goody’s astute observation has later been developed signiﬁcantly by Bourdieu : ‘It [ . . . ] took me a long time to understand that the logic of practice can only be grasped through constructs which destroy it as such , so long as one fails to consider the nature , or rather the eﬀects , of instruments of objectiﬁcation such as genealogies , diagrams , synoptic tables , maps , etc . , among which , thanks to the recent work of Jack Goody ( 1977 ) , I would now include mere transcription in writing’ ( Bourdieu , 1980 , p . 24 ) . Taking the anthropologists’ construction of models of kinship systems as his example , Bourdieu argues that the status of such models of relations with respect to members’ ‘practical’ relations ( ‘practical because continuously practiced , kept up and cultivated’ ) ‘is identical to the status of the geometrical space of a map , a representation of all possible routes for all possible subjects , with respect to the network of pathways that are actually main - tained and used , ‘‘beaten tracks’’ that are really practicable for a particular agent . ’ ( Bourdieu , 1980 , pp . 58 f . ) In line with Schutz’ concept of ‘the natural attitude’ , Bourdieu points out that practitioners do not quest for certainty and infallible consistency . To practitioners , he claims , the application of the same general schemes to dif - ferent local practices is ‘highly economical but necessarily approximate’ . This necessarily gives rise to inconsistencies that , however , ‘pass unnoticed’ be - cause ‘the successively performed practices are only apprehended succes - sively’ . It is ‘very unlikely that two contradictory applications of the same scheme will collide’ in the same local practice , and , accordingly , practitioners KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 396 do not take ‘the trouble to systematically record and compare the successive products of the application of the generative schemes . ’ ( Bourdieu , 1980 , p . 145 ) These distinctions and methodological observations are crucial to any study of practice , because ‘Practice unfolds in time [ . . . ] . Its temporal structure , that is , its rhythm , its tempo , and above all its directionality , is constitutive of its meaning’ . Only for the analyst , who is external to ‘the urgency , the appeals , the threats , the steps to be taken’ of actual practice , ‘can the temporal succession be seen as a pure discontinuity’ ( Bourdieu , 1980 , p . 137 f . ) But these insights should not be applied a historically . In our investiga - tions of ordering systems in architectural work as well as in other areas of cooperative work in modern economies , we are dealing not only with ‘complex oral processes’ but also , and most importantly , with members’ using various ‘crude written techniques’ to organize their work . Bourdieu sometimes argues as if literate practices are not genuine practices and as if the characteristics of practices are not historically speciﬁc . But this is evidently erroneous , as copiously demonstrated by Goody and many others scholars . If we conceive of the analyst’s model of members’ ( oral ) categorizations and members’ own use of standardized ( written ) constructs as identical phenomena , we are in the same kind of trouble than the anthropologists and sociologists so appropriately criticized by Goody and Bourdieu . A community’s own , inscribed classiﬁcation systems surely involve completely diﬀerent practices than the categorization practices of an oral culture ( of which an analyst may build a model in the form of an inscribed classi - ﬁcation system ) . In fact , in architectural planning as well as in other complex cooperative work settings we ﬁnd practices in which it is of critical importance to members to be able to see ‘temporal succession’ as a ‘pure discontinuity . ’ The ‘crude written techniques’ such as lists and tables are not just something that belong to the practices of anthropologists but are also , massively , part of the everyday practices of ordinary cooperative work in modern economies . The point is that to the architects the purpose of producing and using classiﬁcation schemes ( and ordering systems in general ) , is to integrate distributed activities and thus , in certain respects , serve to regulate ( curtail , contain , suppress , harmonize , standardize , interrelate , synchronize , etc . ) local activities and thereby align or unite what would otherwise be intolerably inconsistent local practices . In a cooperative work setting such as the architects’ oﬃce the whole purpose of the application of ordering systems is exactly to do what practi - tioners , according to Bourdieu , do not do . The architects own point of applying these ‘crude written techniques’ , is to ‘systematically record and compare the successive products of the application of the generative schemes’ . ORDERING SYSTEMS 397 What goes on in this setting is not just any kind of practice ; it is cooperative work , massively technically constrained work . The individual activities and local practices of the cooperative eﬀort are not ‘discrete , self - suﬃcient units’ ; to the contrary , the individual activities and local practices are complexly interdependent . Hence , in a setting like this ‘two contradictory applications of the same schemes’ are likely to ‘collide’ . Members therefore actually do ‘take the trouble to systematically record and compare’ how schemes and procedures are applied . Their highly elaborate literate practices have been painstakingly developed and are being meticulously applied for exactly this reason . 7 . The economy of ordering systems ‘The economy of logic [ . . . ] dictates that no more logic is mobilized than is required by the needs of practice’ ( Bourdieu , 1980 , p . 145 ) As we have tried to show , the architects’ ordering systems are instrumental in producing and maintaining a workable degree of order in a variety of re - spects . They are assemblies of specialized practices and artifacts , each of which have been designed to address very speciﬁc coordinative issues and concerns . We have also tried to show that their specialized coordinative artifacts are used in conjunction , in a set of interrelated practices ; they form clusters , ordering systems . The integrative role of the entire assemblage of coordinative artifacts and practices is facilitated by their underlying uniformity . ( 1 ) One can conceive of a speciﬁc coordinative artifact as a speciﬁc con - ﬁguration of a set of elementary and general ordering techniques : notations that restrict the valid code to a ﬁnite set of signs ; systems of designation that produce a unique name for items and artifacts ; synoptic arrangements of items in matrices and nested lists ; classiﬁcation schemes that concatenate items and artifacts in an certain systematic order ; classiﬁcation systems that enumerate the entire collection of items and artifacts ; identiﬁers that certify the validity of particular artifacts ; time series that prescribe and record transactions in sequential order . These elementary techniques are combined and recombined inﬁnitely in the various artifacts . ( 2 ) The diﬀerent ordering techniques are used recursively : notations are deﬁned by means of lists and the construction of lists is regulated by nota - tions , lists are used for the construction of codes for the ordering of lists , etc . There is an obvious economy in keeping the repertoire of ordering techniques and schemes at a minimum . KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 398 ( 3 ) The principle of structural superimposition is used ubiquitously . Classiﬁcation systems are superimposed upon systems of designation . The result of this is the practical integration of classiﬁcation scheme , system of designation , and coding notation . From the identiﬁcation code of an item , architects can determine how it is related to other items , who is responsible , how it is located in the general ﬂow of work , etc . ( 4 ) The classiﬁcation schemes incorporated in the diﬀerent ordering sys - tems show certain family resemblances ; they are obviously based on the same general principles ; e . g . : Plan identification code : ‘PW – 1 – M – E1 – M2 – 103 – V1’ Component catalogue : ‘K - FD 01 < tex t > ‘ ( ‘cinema / flat roof , to be walked upon’ ) List of detail drawings : ‘K 8 11 < text > ‘ ( ‘cinema / interior doors / wood / restrooms’ ) . Binder system : ‘4 . 3’ ( ‘consultant / heating , ventilation , and sanitary’ ) The general format , which is that of a ‘polynomial nomenclature’ , is very simple and can be expressed this way : < attribute a > / < attribute b > . . . / . . . < attribute n > There are several reason for this uniformity . First of all , the positional syntax has obvious pragmatic advantages . It is open to additions and amendments ; new positions and hence attribute types can be added , and for each position the set of valid values can be amended as well . Moreover , the sequence in which the attributes are itemized , and hence the resulting sorting order , can be changed to reﬂect the varying weight attributed in practice to diﬀerent attribute types at diﬀerent stages of the project and in diﬀerent types of activity . The order in which diﬀerent attribute types are listed can also be modiﬁed to accommodate for local and temporary exigencies . It is , in short , a quite ﬂexible syntax . The uniformity is of course an expression of the availability of instanti - ations of classiﬁcation systems from the architects’ previous projects , but it is also an expression of the presence of ‘wider’ classiﬁcation schemes , inherent in modern architectural and related professional and industrial domains . They are inculcated as part of the training of architects and are applied in handbooks , product catalogues , and thesauri . The commercial databases in the area of architecture and construction use particular classiﬁcation systems which in turn are based on thesauri in the ﬁeld . Furthermore , each CAD system comes with its predeﬁned layer organization which then can be adapted to practices within the oﬃce . In addition , these classiﬁcation ORDERING SYSTEMS 399 schemes reﬂect standard classiﬁcations of ‘deliverables’ in the building trades as well as municipal etc . standards for tender speciﬁcations . In short , the regularity is a manifestation of a speciﬁc professional culture . 14 Underlying the manifest uniformity of the architects’ coordinative arti - facts and practices is ﬁnally the fact that architectural work , like any other practice , is subjected to the economical logic of practice . Techniques that have proved eﬀective are reused , to keep the repertoire of techniques to be learned and mastered small and widely . Hence the tedious monotony of instance after instance of identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation schemes of the same format , with only slight variations . It is the ‘openness’ of the schemes and formats , their ﬂexibility , that af - fords these obvious economical advantages . We have emphasized this aspect repeatedly . However , what we have also found is that the ordering systems at the oﬃce are exposed to dissipating forces , so to speak . Their individual scope is limited in that each of them only apply to certain stages in the project or to a certain scale or level of detail . Furthermore , classiﬁcation systems are sub - verted by the particularities of the planned building ( diﬀerent structural elements imply diﬀerent classiﬁcatory concerns and principles ) . Multiple professions and other stakeholders are involved in diﬀerent capacities , all of them introducing extraneous principles of classiﬁcation into the ordering systems of the oﬃce . Finally , for obvious reasons , the architects reuse part designs from previous projects and thereby introduce other sources of dis - integration . To the architects , this poses a practical challenge . The challenge is a particularly hard one in their eﬀort to maintain order in the CAD level organization and in the CAD notations , because CAD plans cross organi - zational and professional boundaries . But in any case , the challenge is a real one . The diﬀerent identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation systems , and the underly - ing schemes and notations , are constructed and maintained manually . It is not only a labor - intensive task but an error - prone one as well . The requisite consistency in the practical application of the schemes and notations is accomplished through scrupulous attention to deadening details . More than that , while the syntax is open - ended , the cost of changes to the schemes increases as the project evolves , since the number of aﬀected documents then is higher . This especially applies to changes to attribute types pertaining to the entire population of documents , such as , for example , the inclusion of the attribute type section _ of _ building in the plan identiﬁcation scheme for the Pleasure Dome project . Integrating plans and drawings from previous projects or from external collaborators using a deviating system of desig - nation may be even more costly , and in face of this it may be decided to live with inconsistency and tolerate the ‘alien’ code as a local dialect . KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 400 In the case at hand , the incremental disintegration of the ordering systems is not a major concern to the architects , for the simple practical reason that work is organized in projects and that the projects normally only last a few years . After that , when the building has been constructed and handed over , the entire collection of carefully indexed and cross - referenced collection of plans , drawings , lists , emails , letters , photographs , and so forth is put in boxes and stored in the basement , together with all the inconsistencies and irregu - larities that have crept in . At that stage , practitioners certainly do not take ‘the trouble to systematically record and compare the successive products of the application of the generative schemes’ . That is , at the level of granularity of the history of the oﬃce , spanning a succession of projects , Bourdieu is right . At this level of granularity , in the great scheme of things , inconsistencies in the application of the general schemes ‘pass unnoticed’ because ‘the successively performed practices are only apprehended successively’ . But in the long run we’re all dead anyway . The study shows that coordi - nation and integration of interdependent activities across local practices is crucial and part of architects’ work practice and that ordering systems , al - though they tend to decay over time , play a key part in this eﬀort . In other areas of architectural work and civil engineering , in the planning and con - struction of much larger and more complex buildings ( oﬃce towers , industrial plants , urban infrastructure ) , the incremental decay that can be tolerated here , in this case , would pose serious problems . In other domains still , where the design life cycle is very long ( airplane manufacturing , for example ) , the observed incremental decay of the ordering systems would be intolerable . There is , of course , no way that ordering systems could be made immune to decay . They are , to reiterate , local and temporary closures . There is an ines - capable ‘permanent tension’ between the need for global ordering systems and the enduring or emerging local concerns and issues ( Bowker and Star , 1999 , p . 139 ) . Local interests , local practices , and local issues and concerns will con - tinually undermine the ordering systems ( Bowker and Star , 1991 ; Bowker and Star , 1999 ) . The issue is not that of achieving infallibility , but to reduce the cost of maintaining a tolerable degree of order in the cooperative eﬀort . Here lies a major challenge for CSCW . 8 . The challenge of ordering systems for CSCW Coordinative practices and the coordinative artifacts upon which they rely obviously form complexes of interrelated practices and artifacts . We have proposed to call these complexes ordering systems . To members these complex practices are instrumental in managing inter - dependencies that transcend local interactions . They are deliberately and carefully devised in a cooperative process to regulate and align local practices and are being used that way , that is , to enforce requisite consistency , keep ORDERING SYSTEMS 401 track of potential repercussions , ensure accountability , etc . Moreover , to handle the inevitable contingencies of work , ordering systems are open ended . Classiﬁcation schemes are amended or extended to deal with speciﬁc features of particular projects ; classes are added and deleted , promoted or demoted , as needed ; new notations are invented and introduced as required , and so forth . The major challenge to CSCW emerging from this is the very fact that ordering systems are constructed and maintained in a cooperative process . How do we reduce the cost and increase the reliability of the distributed cooperative processes of producing and maintaining classiﬁcation systems , notations , nomenclatures , procedures , etc . ? Furthermore , ordering systems are immensely composite practices , con - sisting of interrelated artifacts , classiﬁcation schemes , notations , nomencla - tures , standard formats , validation procedures , schedules , routing schemes , etc . This of course raises non - trivial technical issues of interoperability , as digital artifacts such as CAD systems , Excel sheets , lists , photos and email messages are incorporated in these complexes . How do we support the orderly interoperability of these artifacts , formats , schemes ? More importantly , however , how do we support the ( practically consistent ) expression of the heterogeneous schemes of classiﬁcation , designation , scheduling , routing , etc . ? Ordering systems are ﬁnally multi - level constructs in the sense that identi - ﬁcation and classiﬁcation schemes are expressed at diﬀerent levels of abstraction . They are like generative schemes , ﬂexibly instantiated in diﬀerent forms as required . Thus we can observe that the schemes underlying diﬀerent ordering systems have strong family resemblances . On the other hand , multiple schemes may be expressed in one particular ordering system . How do we support the ﬂexible and recursive expression of schemes at diﬀerent levels of abstraction and for diﬀerent purposes ? And conversely , how do we support the combination and recombination of diﬀerent schemes for a particular purpose ? Acknowledgements We are indebted to the staﬀ of Architekturbu¨ro Ru¨diger Lainer in Vienna for giving us access to their work . — The ﬁeld work was carried out in the context of several research projects , among them EU Esprit - LTR Project no . 31 . 870 Desarte and ‘Flexible Standardization’ ( funded by the Austrian Federal Ministry of Research and Transportation ) . In addition , the research has been supported by the Danish National Centre for Multimedia Research under the DMM project and by the Danish Research Councils’ Program on Information Technology under the DIWA project . — The article builds on ideas expressed and discussed at the CISCPH workshops , held in Copen - hagen in August 2000 and in August 2001 . The contributions of the partic - ipants in these workshops are gratefully acknowledged . The very ﬁrst version of the article was presented at the Second Workshop on Distributed Col - KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 402 lective Practices , San Diego , 6 – 9 February 2002 , organized by G . Bowker , L . Gasser , and B . Turner . We would like to thank the sponsors , organizers , and participants of that workshop for the occasion to have our ideas dis - cussed in a broader forum . We would , ﬁnally , like to thank Geof Bowker , Jens Pedersen , Dave Randall , and Carla Simone for valuable comments . Notes 1 Schmidt and Bannon presented a more thorough version of this argument in a later article ( Schmidt and Bannon , 1992 ) . 2 The ﬁeld work was carried out at Architekturbu¨ro Ru¨diger Lainer in Vienna . When we , in the following , use the term ‘the architects’ we are referring to the architects in this oﬃce . In addition , however , a series of interviews were made with architects in other Austrian oﬃces so as to corroborate that , with variations , the practices we observed are common practices . We have ﬁnally also , for purposes of comparative analysis , used ﬁndings from Danish studies of coordinative practices in rather diﬀerent domains such as pharmaceu - tical product development and manufacturing . 3 Frank O . Gehry’s handmade models , for example , are digitized and then rationalized , to achieve repetition without sacriﬁcing form . In the case of the Walt Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles , the curved outer surface is covered by a ‘skin’ of Italian lime sandstone . The most economic way of cutting and producing the complex curvatures was calculated by computer , and a physical model was milled . The model was then compared to the original cardboard model and adjusted when necessary ( LeCuyer , 1995 ) . 4 Marx famously stated that ‘what distinguishes the worst architect from the best of bees is that he has built the cell in his head before he builds it in wax . At the end of the labor process , emerges a result that , at its commencement , already was present in the worker’s imagination , that is , ideally ’ ( Marx , 1867 , p . 129 ) . Although this careless statement prob - ably should not be taken too seriously as an empirical proposition , it is nonetheless worth noticing that it is simply wrong . Architects do not work like that and never have . Worse , this unfortunate aphorism has been taken as a deﬁnition of ‘human nature’ and thus paved the way for endless mentalist speculation . Marx should have kept to his previous position , namely , that ‘human nature is no abstraction inherent in each single individual . In reality , it is the ensemble of the social relations’ ( Marx , 1845 , § 6 ) . 5 ‘Notations exemplify a type of structure which , far from being conﬁned to writing , is one of the most basic structures in the domain of signs . It is the structure characteristic of any set of items fulﬁlling the following conditions . ( 1 ) Each member of the set has a speciﬁc form which sets it apart from all others in the set . ( 2 ) Between any two members there is either a relation of equivalence or a relation of priority . Thus every member has a determinate position with respect to all other members in the set . ( 3 ) Membership of the set is closed . Such a structure constitutes what in integrationist terms is an emblematic frame . The very simplest emblematic frames comprise just two members : examples are an on - oﬀ switch with only two possible positions and a red - green traﬃc light where the two colours alternate but never show simultaneously . ’ ( Harris , 2000 , p . 106 ) 6 This is the reason why Linnaeus ( 1735 – 77 ) proposed a binomial nomenclature ( based on genus and species ) to replace the then current polynomial nomenclature . Thus , what had previously been named Mentha ﬂoribus capitatus foliis lanceolatis serratis subpetiolatis ( which reads : ‘mint plant / ﬂowers arranged in a head / lance - shaped serrated leaves with short petioles’ ) would henceforth be simply named Mentha piperita . ORDERING SYSTEMS 403 7 Our immediate concern here is with Vygotsky’s use of the concept of ‘tool’ , but it should be pointed out in passing that his use of the term ‘psychological’ is equally problematic . Are for instance diagrams , maps , and blueprints ‘devices for mastering [ . . . ] mental pro - cesses’ ? One would rather think that diagrams are devices for specifying analytical dis - tinctions , that maps were devices for navigating , and blueprints devices for construction processes . After all , what is particularly ‘psychological’ about these artifacts ? If maps and algebraic symbolism are to be taken as ‘psychological tools’ , should we then also think of , say , money and marriage licenses as other instances of this category ? 8 This attention to the speciﬁc format is especially pronounced in Hutchins’ earlier work ( e . g . , Hutchins , 1986 , pp . 47 f . ) 9 The same kind of analysis can be found in Hutchins’ study of maritime navigation : ‘The representations of the position of the ship take diﬀerent forms in the diﬀerent media as they make their way from the sighting telescopes of the alidades to the chart . [ . . . ] Rep - resentational states are propagated from one medium to another by bringing the states of the media into coordination with one another . ’ ( Hutchins , 1995 , p . 117 ) . 10 The purpose of the work of Bowker and Star is also somewhat diﬀerent from ours , in that their overriding concern is that of identifying the tacit ideological presumptions and values they ﬁnd at work in classiﬁcatory practices . To this ‘moral and ethical agenda’ ( Bowker and Star , 1999 , p . 5 ) , the distinctions we ﬁnd critically important might be seen as of little or no consequence . 11 ‘Doesn’t one need grounds for doubt ? ’ ( Wittgenstein , 1949 – 50 , § 123 ) 12 This does not , of course , prevent technical terms derived from the application of a clas - siﬁcation system from becoming part of vernacular vocabulary , for example as a result of ordinary education and popular science . It goes without saying that the use of a term such as Homo sapiens by a lay person is not an indication that the person has applied the classiﬁcation scheme of systematic zoology . 13 Harris ( 1995 ) provides detailed and incisive analysis of the semiology of tables and charts . 14 In fact , it would seem as if the ‘polynomial nomenclature’ format of architectural iden - tiﬁcation and classiﬁcation systems has been adopted from engineering practices . At any rate , one will ﬁnd schemes of the exactly identical format at work in manufacturing design and in engineering in general , where these practices began to develop after the Second World War ( Mitrofanov , 1959 ; Opitz et al . , 1969 ; Opitz , 1970 ) . References Ackerman , Mark S . ( 1994 ) : Augmenting the Organizational Memory : A Field Study of Answer Garden . In T . Malone ( ed . ) : CSCW’94 : Proceedings of the Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , Chapel Hill , North Carolina , October 24 – 26 , 1994 . New York , N . Y . : ACM Press , pp . 243 – 252 . Ackerman , Mark S . and Thomas W . Malone ( 1990 ) : Answer Garden : A Tool for Growing Organizational Memory . Proceedings of the Conference on Oﬃce Information Systems , Cambridge , Mass . , April 1990 . ACM , New York , pp . 31 – 39 . Bannon , Liam J . and Susanne Bødker ( 1997 ) : Constructing Common Information Spaces . In J . A . Hughes , W . Prinz , T . A . Rodden and K . Schmidt ( eds ) : ECSCW’97 : Proceedings of the Fifth European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , 7 – 11 September 1997 , Lancaster , U . K . Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic Publishers , pp . 81 – 96 . Bannon , Liam J . and Kjeld Schmidt ( 1989 ) : CSCW : Four Characters in Search of a Context . ECSCW’89 : Proceedings of the First European Conference on Computer Supported Coop - erative Work , Gatwick , London , 13 – 15 September , 1989 , pp . 358 – 372 . – Reprinted in Studies KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 404 in Computer Supported Cooperative Work . Theory , Practice and Design , Bowers , John M . and S . D . Benford , Eds . North - Holland , Amsterdam etc . , 1991 , pp . 3 – 16 . Bardram , Jakob E . ( 1997 ) : Plans as Situated Action : An Activity Theory Approach to Workﬂow Systems . In J . A . Hughes , W . Prinz , T . A . Rodden and K . Schmidt ( eds ) : ECSCW’97 : Proceedings of the Fifth European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , 7 – 11 September 1997 , Lancaster , U . K . Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic Publishers , pp . 17 – 32 . Bourdieu , Pierre ( 1980 ) : Le sens pratique . Paris : Les E´ditions de Minuit . — English transla - tion : The Logic of Practice , translated by Richard Nice , Cambridge : Polity Press , 1990 . Bowker , Geoﬀrey C . and Susan Leigh Star ( 1991 ) : Situations vs . Standards in Long - term , Wide - scale Decision - making : The Case of the International Classiﬁcation of Diseases . In J . F . Nunamaker , Jr . and R . H . Sprague , Jr . ( eds ) : Proceedings of the Twenty - Fourth Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , Kauai , Hawaii , January 7 – 11 , 1991 , vol . IV . IEEE Computer Society Press , pp . 73 – 81 . Bowker , Geoﬀrey C . and Susan Leigh Star ( 1999 ) : Sorting Things Out : Classiﬁcation and Its Consequences . Cambridge , Mass . : MIT Press . Carstensen , Peter H . and Carsten Sørensen ( 1996 ) : From the Social to the Systematic : Mechanisms Supporting Coordination in Design . Computer Supported Cooperative Work . The Journal of Collaborative Computing , vol . 5 , no . 4 pp . 387 – 413 . Conklin , Jeﬀ ( 1989 ) : Design Rationale and Maintainability . In B . Shriver ( ed . ) : Proceedings of 22nd Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , vol . II , IEEE Computer Society , pp . 533 – 539 . Conklin , Jeﬀ ( 1993 ) : Capturing Organizational Knowledge . In R . M . Baecker ( ed . ) : Readings in Groupware and Computer - Supported Cooperative Work : Assisting Human - Human Collaboration . San Mateo , Calif . : Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , pp . 561 – 565 . – Originally published in D . Coleman ( ed . ) : Proceedings of Groupware ’92 , Morgan Kaufmann , 1992 , pp . 133 – 137 . Conklin , Jeﬀ and Michael L . Begeman ( 1988 ) : gIBIS : A Hypertext Tool for Exploratory Policy Discussion . CSCW’88 : Proceedings of the Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work , Portland , Oregon , September 26 – 28 , 1988 . New York , N . Y . : ACM Press , pp . 140 – 152 . Coulter , Jeﬀ ( 1983 ) : Rethinking Cognitive Theory . London : Macmillan . Cournot , Antoine Augustin ( 1851 ) : An Essay on the Foundations of our Knowledge , The Liberal Arts Press , New York , 1956 . Originally published as : Essai sur les fondements de nos connaissance et sur les caracte ` res de la critique philosophique , Hachette , Paris . Translated by M . H . Moore . Crosby , Alfred W . ( 1997 ) : The Measure of Reality : Quantiﬁcation and Western Society , 1250 – 1600 . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Divitini , Monica , Carla Simone and Kjeld Schmidt ( 1996 ) : ABACO : Coordination Mecha - nisms in A Multi - agent Perspective . COOP’96 : Second International Conference on the Design of Cooperative Systems , Antibes - Juan - les - Pins , France , 12 – 14 June , 1996 . France : INRIA Sophia Antipolis pp . 103 – 122 . Drury , Maurice O’C . ( 1974 ) : Conversations with Wittgenstein . In R . Rhees : Ludwig Wittgen - stein : PersonalRecollections . TotowaNewJersey : RowmanandLittleﬁeld , 1981 , pp . 112 – 189 . Gerson , Elihu M . and Susan Leigh Star ( 1986 ) : Analyzing due process in the workplace . ACM Transactions on Oﬃce Information Systems , vol . 4 , no . 3 , pp . 257 – 270 . Goody , Jack ( 1977 ) : The Domestication of the Savage Mind . Cambridge : Cambridge Uni - versity Press . Goody , Jack ( 1986 ) : The Logic of Writing and the Organization of Society . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . ORDERING SYSTEMS 405 Goody , Jack ( 1987 ) : The Interface Between the Written and the Oral . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Goody , Jack ( 2000 ) : The Power of the Written Tradition . Washington D . C . : Smithsonian Institution Press . Greif , Irene ( 1988 ) : Overview . In I . Greif ( ed . ) : Computer - Supported Cooperative Work : A Book of Readings . San Mateo , Calif . : Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , pp . 5 – 12 . Grinter , Rebecca E . ( 1996 ) : Supporting Articulation Work using Software Conﬁguration Management Systems . Computer Supported Cooperative Work . The Journal of Collaborative Computing , vol . 5 , no . 4 pp . 447 – 465 . Grudin , Jonathan ( 1994 ) : Computer - Supported Cooperative Work : History and Focus . Computer , vol . 27 , no . 5 , pp . 19 – 26 . Grudin , Jonathan ( 1999 ) : CSCW and Groupware : Their History and Trajectory . In Y . Matsushita ( ed . ) : Designing Communication and Collaboration Support Systems , Am - sterdam : Gordon and Breach Science , pp . 1 – 15 . Haas , Christina ( 1996 ) : Writing Technology : Studies on the Materiality of Literacy . Mahwah , New Jersey : Lawrence Erlbaum . Harper , Richard H . R . , John A . Hughes and Dan Z . Shapiro ( 1989 ) : The Functionality of Flight Strips in ATC Work : The report for the Civil Aviation Authority . Lancaster Socio - technics Group , Department of Sociology , Lancaster University , January , 1989 . Harris , Roy ( 1986 ) : The Origin of Writing . London : Duckworth . Harris , Roy ( 1995 ) : Signs of Writing . London and New York : Routledge . Harris , Roy ( 2000 ) : Rethinking Writing . Bloomington and Indianapolis : Indiana University Press . Henderson , Kathryn ( 1999 ) : On Line and On Paper : Visual Representations , Visual Culture , and Computer Graphics in Design Engineering . Cambridge , Mass . , and London : MIT Press . Hull , David L . ( 1988 ) : Science as a Process : An Evolutionary Account of the Social and Con - ceptual Development of Science . Chicago : The University of Chicago Press . Hutchins , Edwin L . ( 1986 ) : Mediation and Automatization . Quarterly Newsletter of the Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition [ University of California , San Diego ] , vol . 8 , no . 2 , pp . 47 – 58 . Hutchins , Edwin L . ( 1995 ) : Cognition in the Wild . Cambridge , Mass . , and London , England : The MIT Press . Hutchins , Edwin L . and Tove Klausen ( 1996 ) : Distributed Cognition in an Airline Cockpit . In Y . Engestro¨m and D . Middleton ( eds ) : Cognition and Communication at Work . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , pp . 15 – 34 . Kaptelinin , Victor ( 1997 ) : Computer - mediated activity : Functional Organs in Social and Developmental Contexts . In B . A . Nardi ( ed . ) : Context and Consciousness : Activity Theory and Human – Computer Interaction . Cambridge , Mass . : The MIT Press , pp . 45 – 68 . Kuutti , Kari ( 1997 ) : Activity Theory as a potential framework for Human – Computer Inter - action Research . In B . A . Nardi ( ed . ) : Context and Consciousness : Activity Theory and Human – Computer Interaction . Cambridge , Mass . : The MIT Press , pp . 17 – 44 . Laiserin , Jerry ( 2002 ) : The Convergence of CAD Standards . Digital Architect , April 2002 . LeCuyer , A . ( 1995 ) : Design on the Computer : Frank O . Gehry und Peter Eisenman . ARCH + , no . 128 , September 1995 , pp . 26 – 29 . Le´vi - Strauss , Claude ( 1962 ) : La pense´e sauvage . Paris : Librairie Plon [ Reprint published by Plon , Paris , 1990 ] . Lutters , Wayne G . and Mark S . Ackerman ( 2002 ) : Achieving Safety : A Field Study of Boundary Objects in Aircraft Technical Support CSCW 2002 : ACM Conference on Com - puter Supported Cooperative Work , New Orleans , Louisiana , 16 – 20 November 2002 . New York : ACM Press , pp . 266 – 275 . Maas , W . and J . Van Rijs ( 1998 ) : FRANAX : Excursions on Density . Rotterdam : O10 Publishers . KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 406 Marx , Karl ( 1845 ) : Thesen u¨ber Feuerbach . ( Spring 1845 ) . In K . Marx and F . Engels ( eds ) : Werke , vol . 3 . Berlin : Dietz Verlag , 1962 , pp . 5 – 7 . Marx , Karl ( 1857 ) : Einleitung . In K . Marx and F . Engels ( eds ) : Gesamtausgabe ( MEGA ) , vol . II / 1 . 1 . Berlin : Dietz Verlag , 1976 , pp . 21 – 45 . – English transl . by Nicolaus , in Marx : Grundrisse , Pelican , Harmondsworth , 1973 . Marx , Karl ( 1867 ) : Das Kapital . Zur Kritik der politischen O¨konomie . Erster Band . ( Hamburg , 1867 ) . In K . Marx and F . Engels ( eds ) : Gesamtausgabe ( MEGA ) , vol . II / 5 . Berlin : Dietz Verlag , 1983 . Mayr , Ernst and Peter D . Ashlock ( 1991 ) : Principles of Systematic Zoology , 2nd edn . New York : McGraw - Hill ( 1st edn . 1969 ) . Mitchell , W . J . ( 1994 ) : Picture Theory : Essays on Verbal and Visual Representation . Chicago : The University of Chicago Press . Mitrofanov , Sergei Petrovich ( 1959 ) : Scientiﬁc Principles of Group Technology , National Lending Library for Science and Technology , Boston Spa , Yorkshire , England . Originally published as : Nauchnye osnovy gruppovoi tekhnologii , Leningrad , 1959 . Translated by E . Harris . Edited by T . J . Grayson , 1966 . Nardi , Bonnie A . ( 1993 ) : A Small Matter of Programming : Perspectives on End User Com - puting . Cambridge , Mass . : The MIT Press . Nuttgens , Patrick ( 1997 ) : The Story of Architecture , 2nd edn . London : Phaidon Press ( ﬁrst edition 1983 ) . Olson , David R . ( 1994 ) : The World on Paper : The Conceptual and Cognitive Implications of Writing and Reading . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Opitz , H . ( 1970 ) : A Classiﬁcation System to Describe Workpieces . Translated by R . A . A . Taylor . Oxford : Pergamon Press . Opitz , H . , W . Eversheim and H . P . Wiendahl ( 1969 ) : Workpiece Classiﬁcation and its Industrial Application . International Journal of Machine Tool Design Research , vol . 9 , 1969 , pp . 39 – 50 . Pietroforte , Roberto ( 1997 ) : Communication and Governance in the Building Process . Con - struction Management and Economics , vol . 15 , 1997 , pp . 71 – 82 . Reekie , Fraser ( 1995 ) : Reekie’s Architectural Drawing , 4th edn . Amsterdam etc . : Architectural Press ( 1st edn . 1946 ) . Ryle , Gilbert ( 1946 ) : Knowing how and knowing that . ( Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society , 1946 ) . In G . Ryle ( ed . ) : Collected Papers . Volume II : Collected Essays , 1929 – 1968 . London : Hutchinson & Co , 1971 , pp . 212 – 225 . Ryle , Gilbert ( 1949 ) : The Concept of Mind . London : Hutchinson’s University Library . Sabbagh , Karl ( 1989 ) : Skyscraper : The Making of a Building . London : Macmillan [ Reprint published by Penguin Books , New York , 1991 ] . Schmidt , Kjeld and Liam J . Bannon ( 1992 ) : Taking CSCW Seriously : Supporting Articulation Work . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) : An International Journal , vol . 1 , no . 1 – 2 , 1992 , pp . 7 – 40 . Schmidt , Kjeld and Carla Simone ( 1996 ) : Coordination Mechanisms : Towards a Conceptual Foundation of CSCW Systems Design . Computer Supported Cooperative Work . The Journal of Collaborative Computing , vol . 5 , no . 2 – 3 , 1996 , pp . 155 – 200 . Schmidt , Kjeld and Ina Wagner ( 2002a ) : Coordinative Artifacts in Architectural Practice . In M . Blay - Fornarino , A . - M . Pinna - Dery , K . Schmidt and P . Zarate´ ( eds ) : Cooperative Systems Design : A Challenge of the Mobility Age . [ Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on the Design of Cooperative Systems ( COOP 2002 ) , Saint Raphae¨l , France , 4 – 7 June 2002 ] . Amsterdam etc . : IOS Press , pp . 257 – 274 . Schmidt , Kjeld and Ina Wagner ( 2002b ) : Ordering Systems : A Conceptual Framework for the Analysis ofComplex Coordinative Practices in Cooperative Work . In E . Subrahmanian ( ed . ) : ORDERING SYSTEMS 407 Workshop on the Role of Empirical Studies in Engineering Design , National Institute of Stan - dards and Technology ( NIST ) , Gaithersburg , Maryland ( Washington DC ) , 4 – 5 April 2002 . Schmidt , Kjeld and Ina Wagner ( 2003 ) : Ordering Systems : Coordinative Practices in Archi - tectural Design and Planning . In M . Pendergast , K . Schmidt , C . Simone and M . Tremaine ( eds ) : GROUP’03 : International Conference on Supporting Group Work , Sanibel Island , Florida , 9 – 12 November 2003 . New York : ACM Press , pp . 274 – 283 . Sellen , Abigail and Richard H . R . Harper ( 2001 ) : The Myth of the Paperless Oﬃce . Cam - bridge , Mass . : MIT Press . Shanker , Stuart G . ( 1998 ) : Wittgenstein’s Remarks on the Foundation of AI . London : Routledge . Sharrock , Wes W . and Rupert Read ( 2002 ) : Kuhn : Philosopher of Scientiﬁc Revolution . Cambridge : Polity Press . Simone , Carla and Monica Divitini ( 1997 ) : Ariadne : Supporting Coordination through a Flexible Use of the Knowledge on Work Processes . Journal of Universal Computer Science , vol . 3 , no . 8 , 1997 , pp . 865 – 898 . Star , Susan Leigh ( 1989 ) : The Structure of Ill - structured Solutions : Boundary Objects and Heterogeneous Distributed Problem Solving . In L . Gasser and M . Huhns ( eds ) : Distributed Artiﬁcial Intelligence , vol . 2 . London : Pitman , pp . 37 – 54 . Star , Susan Leigh and James R . Griesemer ( 1989 ) : Institutional Ecology , ‘‘translations’’ and Boundary Objects : Amateurs and professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology , 1907 – 39 . Social Studies of Science , vol . 19 , pp . 387 – 420 . Styles , Keith ( 1995 ) : Working Drawings Handbook , 3rd edn . Amsterdam etc . : Architectural Press ( 1st edn . 1982 ) . Suchman , Lucy A . ( 1987 ) : Plans and Situated Actions : The Problem of Human – Machine Communication . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Taylor , Talbot J . ( 1992 ) : Mutual Misunderstanding : Scepticism and the Theorizing of Language and Interpretation . Durham and London : Duke University Press . Vygotsky , Lev Semonovich ( 1930 ) : The Instrumental Method in Psychology . In L . S . Vygot - sky : The Collected Works of L . S . Vygotsky . Vol . 3 : Problems of the Theory and History of Psychology . New York and London : Plenum Press , 1997 , pp . 85 – 89 . – Theses of a talk read in 1930 at the N . K . Krupskaya Academy of Communist Education . Wagner , Ina and Rainer Lainer ( 2001 ) : Open Planning : Inspirational Objects , Themes , Placeholders , and Persuasive Artefacts . Proceedings Colloque Architecture des syste ` mes urbains , Universite´ de Technologie de Compie ` gne , 5 July 2001 . Wakati , Osamu A . and Richard M . Linde ( 1994 ) : Study Guide for the Professional Practice of Architectural Working Drawings . New York : John Wiley & Sons ( Second edition , Student edition ) . Wertsch , James V . ( 1985 ) : Vygotsky and the Social Formation of Mind . Cambridge , Mass . , and London : Harvard University Press . Wertsch , James V . ( 1991 ) : Voices of the Mind : A Sociocultural Approach to Mediated Action . Cambridge , Mass . : Harvard University Press . Winch , Peter ( 1958 ) : The Idea of a Social Science and its Relation to Philosophy . London : Routledge & Kegan Paul ( Second edition , 1990 ) . Wittgenstein , Ludwig ( 1945 – 48 ) : Zettel . Oxford : Basil Blackwell Publishers , 1967 , 2nd edition 1981 . Wittgenstein , Ludwig ( 1949 – 50 ) : On Certainty . Oxford : Basil Blackwell Publishers , 1967 , 2nd edition 1981 . Yates , JoAnne ( 1989 ) : Control through Communication : The Rise of System in American Management . Baltimore and London : Johns Hopkins University Press . KJELD SCHMIDT & INA WAGNER 408