QCue : Queries and Cues for Computer - Facilitated Mind - Mapping Leave Authors Anonymous for Submission City , Country e - mail address Leave Authors Anonymous for Submission City , Country e - mail address Leave Authors Anonymous for Submission City , Country e - mail address ABSTRACT We introduce a novel workﬂow , QCue , for providing textual stimulation during mind - mapping . Mind - mapping is a power - ful tool whose intent is to allow one to externalize ideas and their relationships surrounding a central problem . The key challenge in mind - mapping is the difﬁculty in balancing the exploration of different aspects of the problem ( breadth ) with a detailed exploration of each of those aspects ( depth ) . Our idea behind QCue is based on two mechanisms : ( 1 ) computer - generated automatic cues to stimulate the user to explore the breadth of topics based on the temporal and topological evolu - tion of a mind - map and ( 2 ) user - elicited queries for helping the user explore the depth for a given topic . We present a two - phase study wherein the ﬁrst phase provided insights that led to the development of our work - ﬂow for stimulating the user through cues and queries . In the second phase , we present a between - subjects evaluation comparing QCue with a digital mind - mapping work - ﬂow without computer intervention . Fi - nally , we present an expert rater evaluation of the mind - maps created by users in conjunction with user feedback . Author Keywords Mind - mapping ; Computer - supported creativity tools ; Idea generation ; ConceptNet CCS Concepts • Human - centered computing → User studies ; Empiri - cal studies in interaction design ; Web - based interaction ; • Computing methodologies → Semantic networks ; INTRODUCTION Mind - maps are widely used for quick visual externalization of one’s mental model around a central idea or problem . The underlying principle behind mind - mapping is to provide a means for associative thinking so as to foster the development of concepts that both explore different aspects around a given problem ( breadth ) and explore each of those aspects in a detail - oriented manner ( depth ) [ 48 ] . The ideas in a mind - map spread out in a hierarchical / tree - like manner [ 35 ] , which allows for Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspeciﬁcpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . GI’20 , May 21 – 22 , 2020 , Toronto , Canada © 2020 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6708 - 0 / 20 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . XXXXXXX the integration of diverse knowledge elements into a coherent pattern [ 8 ] to enable critical thinking and learning through making synaptic connections and divergent exploration [ 55 , 74 , 75 , 41 ] . As a result , mind - maps are uniquely suitable for problem understanding / exploration prior to design conceptu - alization [ 8 ] . Problem exploration is critical in helping designers develop new perspectives and driving the search for solutions within the iterative process of identifying features / needs and re - framing the scope [ 52 ] . Generally , it requires a combina - tion of two distinct and often conﬂicted modes of thinking : ( 1 ) logical , analytical , and detail - oriented , and ( 2 ) lateral , systems - level , breadth - oriented [ 40 ] . Most current efforts in computer - facilitated exploratory tasks focus exclusively on one of these cognitive mechanisms . As a result , there is currently a lim - ited understanding of how this breadth - depth conﬂict can be addressed . Maintaining the balance between the breadth and depth of exploration can be challenging , especially for ﬁrst - time users . For atypical and open - ended problem statements ( that are commonplace in design problems ) , this issue is fur - ther pronounced ultimately leading to creative inhibition and lack of engagement . Effective and quick thinking is closely tied to the individual’s imagination and ability to create associations between various information chunks [ 44 ] . Incidentally , this is also a skill that takes time to develop and manifest in novices . We draw from existing works [ 59 , 71 , 17 , 29 , 76 , 22 , 27 , 38 ] that emphasize on stimulating reﬂection during exploration tasks . Quayle et al . [ 59 ] and Wetzstein et al . [ 71 ] indicate that the act of re - sponding to questions can create several avenues for designers to reﬂect on their their assumptions and expand their ﬁeld of view about a given idea . Adler et al . [ 3 ] found asking ques - tions in sketching activity keeps the participants engaged and reﬂecting on ambiguities . Asking of one question leads to the asking of further questions thereby bringing forward al - ready held ideas in one’s mind [ 17 ] . Goldschmidt [ 29 ] further demonstrated that exposing designers to text can lead to higher originality during idea generation . Our approach is informed by the notion of reﬂection - in - design [ 71 , 59 ] , that takes an almost Socratic approach to reason about the design problem space through question - based verbalization . We apply this tenet in a digital setting where the user has access to vast knowledge databases , the cognitive processes underlying mind - mapping can be enriched to enable an iterative cycle between exploration , inquiry , and reﬂection . Our key idea is to explore two different ways in which such textual stimuli can be provided . The ﬁrst is through a simple mechanism for query expansion ( i . e . asking for suggestions ) and followed by means for responding to computer - generated stimuli ( i . e . answering questions ) . Based on this , we present a workﬂow for mind - mapping wherein the user , while adding and connecting concepts ( exploration ) , can also query a seman - tic database to explore related concepts ( inquiry ) and build upon those concepts by answering questions posed by the mind - mapping tool itself ( reﬂection ) . Our approach is pow - ered by ConceptNet [ 63 ] , a semantic network that contains a graph - based representation with nodes representing real - word concepts as natural language phrases ( e . g . bring to a potluck , provide comfort , etc . ) , and edges representing semantic rela - tionships . Using related entries to a given concept and also the types of relationships , our work investigates methods for textual stimulation for mind - mapping . Contributions We make three contributions . First , we present a novel work - ﬂow — QCue — that uses the relational ontology offered by ConceptNet [ 63 ] to create mechanisms for cognitive stimulus through automated questioning with idea expansion and proac - tive user query . Second , we present an adaptive algorithm to facilitate the breadth - depth balance in a mind - mapping task . This algorithm analyzes the temporal and topological evolu - tion of a given mind - map and generates questions ( cues ) for the user to respond to . Finally , to showcase the reﬂection - in - design approach , we conduct a between - subjects user study and present a comparative evaluation of QCue with a digital mind - mapping workﬂow without our algorithm ( henceforth in the paper , we will refer to this as traditional mind - mapping or TMM ) . The inter - rater analysis of user - generated mind - maps and the user feedback demonstrates the efﬁcacy of our approach and also reveals new directions for future digital mind - mapping tools . RELATED WORKS Problem Exploration in Design Problem exploration is the process that leads to discovery of opportunities and insights that drives the innovation of products , services and systems [ 18 ] . Silver et al . [ 31 ] un - derscore the importance of problem - based learning for stu - dents to identify what they need to learn in order to solve a problem . Most current methods in early design are gener - ally focused on increasing the probability of coming up with creative solutions by promoting divergent thinking . For in - stance , brainstorming speciﬁcally focuses on the quantity of ideas without judgment [ 6 , 56 , 47 ] . There are many other popular techniques such as SCAMPER [ 50 ] , C - Sketch [ 62 ] , morphological matrix [ 77 ] , etc that support the formation of new concepts through modiﬁcation and re - interpretation of rough initial ideas . This however , also leads to ﬁxation on a type of particular concept and limit the exploration process . In contrast , mind - mapping is a ﬂexible technique that can help investigate problem from multiple points of view . In this pa - per , we use mind - mapping as means for problem exploration , which has been proven to be useful for reﬂection , communi - cation , and synthesis during idea generation process [ 49 , 33 ] . The structure of mind - maps thus facilitates a wide - range of activities ranging from note - taking to information integration in areas [ 20 ] by highlighting the relationships between vari - ous concepts and the organization of topic - oriented ﬂow of thoughts [ 54 , 60 ] . Computer - Based Cognitive Support There have been signiﬁcant efforts to engage and facilitate ones’ critical thinking and learning by using digital workﬂows through pictorial stimuli [ 68 , 30 , 32 ] , heuristic - based feedback generation [ 69 ] , textual - mining [ 64 ] and speech - based inter - faces [ 19 ] . Some works [ 26 , 13 ] have also used gamiﬁcation as a means to engage the user in the idea generation process . Speciﬁcally in engineering design and systems engineering , there are a number of computer systems that support user’s cre - ativity during conceptual stage [ 67 , 57 , 4 ] . These are , however , targeted toward highly technical and domain - speciﬁc contexts . While there are works [ 2 , 24 , 43 , 70 ] that have explored the possibility of automatic generation of mind - maps from speech and texts , little is known in terms of how additional computer support will affect the process of creating mind - maps . Few works that have considered this idea [ 7 , 25 ] have evaluated numerous existing mind - mapping software applications and found that pen - and - paper and digital mind - mapping proves to have different levels of speed and efﬁciency analyzing various factors like user’s intent , ethnography , nature of collabora - tion . Of particular relevance are works by Kerne’s group on curation [ 34 , 46 , 36 ] and web - semantics [ 58 , 73 ] for informa - tion based - ideation . While these works are not particularly aimed at mind - mapping as a mode of exploration , they share our premise of using information to support free - form visual exploration of ideas . Recent work by Chen et al . [ 12 ] studies collaboration in mind - mapping and offer some insight regarding how mind - maps evolve during collaboration . They further proposed a computer as a partner approach [ 13 ] , where they demonstrate human - AI partnership by posing mind - mapping as a two - player game where the human and the AI ( intelligent agent ) take turns to add ideas to a mind - map . While an exciting prospect , we note that there is currently little information regarding how intelligent systems could be used for augmenting the user’s cognitive capabilities for free - form mind - mapping without constraining the process . Recent work by Koch et al . [ 38 ] proposed cooperative contextual bandits ( CCB ) that provides cognitive support in forms of suggestions ( visual materials ) and explanations ( questions to justify the categories of de - signers’ selections from search engine ) to users during mood board design tasks . While CCB treats questions as means to justify designers’ focus and adapt the system accordingly , we emphasize the associative thinking capability brought by questions formed with semantic relations . Digital Mind - Mapping Several digital tools [ 72 ] have been proposed to facilitate mind - mapping activity . However , to our knowledge , these tools contribute little in computer - supported cognitive assis - tance and idea generation during such thinking and learning process . They focus on making the operations of constructing maps easier by providing features to users such as quickly ex - pand the conceptual domain through web - search , link concepts to on - line resources via URLs ( uniform resource locators ) and interactive map construction . Even though those tools have demonstrated advantages over traditional mind - mapping tasks [ 25 ] , mind - map creators can still ﬁnd it challenging due to several following reasons : inability to recall concepts re - lated to a given problem , inherent ambiguity in the central problem , and difﬁculty in building relationships between dif - ferent concepts [ 65 , 5 ] . These difﬁculties often result in an unbalanced idea exploration resulting in either too broad or too detail - oriented mind - maps . In this work , we aim to investigate computational mechanisms to address this issue . PHASE I : PRELIMINARY STUDY Our ﬁrst step was to investigate the effect of query expansion ( the process of reformulating a given query to improve retrieval of information ) and to observe how users react to conditions where suggestions are actively provided during mind - mapping . For this , we implemented an preliminary interface to record the usage of suggestions retrieved from ConceptNet [ 42 ] and conducted a preliminary study using this interface . Query - Expansion Interface The idea behind our interface is based on query expansion enabled by ConceptNet . In comparison to content - retrieval analysis ( Wiki ) or lexical - semantic databases such as Word - Net [ 51 ] , ConceptNet allows for leveraging the vast organi - zation of related concepts based on a diverse set of relations resulting in a broader scope of queries . Using this feature of ConceptNet , we developed a simple web - based tool for query - expansion mind - mapping ( QEM ) wherein users could add nodes ( words / phrases ) and link them together to create a map . For every new word or phrase , we used the top 50 query results as suggestions that the users could use as alternatives or additional nodes in the map . Our hypothesis was that Con - ceptNet suggestions would help users create richer mind - maps in comparison to pen - paper mind - mapping . Evaluation Tasks We designed our tasks for ( a ) comparing pen - paper mind - mapping and QEMs with respect to user performance , prefer - ence , and completion time and ( b ) to explore how the addition of query - based search affects the spanning of ideas in a typ - ical mind - map creation task . Each participant was asked to create two mind - maps , one for each of the following problem statements : • Discuss the problem of different forms of pollution , and suggest solutions to minimize them : This problem statement was kept generic and conclusive , and something that would be typically familiar to the target participants , to compare the creation modalities for simple problem statements . • Modes of human transportation in the year 2118 : The intent behind this open - ended problem statement was to encourage users to explore a variety of ideas through both modalities , and observe the utility of query based mind map tools for such problem statements . The topics for the problem statements were selected to pro - vide users with familiar domains while also leaving scope for encouraging new ideas from the participants . Participants We recruited 18 students ( 8 females ) from engineering majors between 18 to 32 years of age . Of these , 6 participants were familiar with the concept of mind - maps ( with a self - reported score of 4 on a scale of 10 ) . We conducted a between subjects study , where 9 participants created mind - maps for a given problem statement using QEM . Procedure The total time taken during the experiment varied between 30 to 35 minutes . Participants in the QEM group were ﬁrst introduced to the interfaces and were encouraged explore the interface . Subsequently , the participants created the mind - map for the assigned problem . They were allowed a maximum of 10 minutes for one problem statement . Finally , on completion , each participant answered a series of questions in terms of ease of use , intuitiveness , and effectiveness of the assigned mind - map creation modality . Key Findings User Feedback We did not ﬁnd consensus regarding self - reported satisfac - tion with the mind - maps created by participants in pen - paper mind - mapping . Moreover , while pen - paper mind - mapping participants agreed that the time for map creation was sufﬁ - cient , nearly 50 % did not agree with being able to span their ideas properly . On the other hand , 90 % QEM participants reported that they were satisﬁed with their results . Over 80 % of the QEM participants agreed to be able to easily search for related words and ideas , and add them to the mind - map . In the post study survey , QEM users suggested adding features such as randomizing the order of words searched for , ability to query multiple phrases at the same time , and ability to search for images . One participant mentioned : “ The interface wasn’t able to do the query if put a pair of words together or search for somebody’s name viz . Elon Musk ” . Users’ Over - dependency on Query - Expansion As compared to pen - paper mind - mapping , we observed two main limitations in our query - expansion workﬂow . First , the addition of a new idea required the query of the word . While we had implemented this to simplify the interactions , this re - sulted in a break in the user’s ﬂow of thought further inhibiting diversity ( especially when the digital tool is able to search cross - domain and provide a big database for exploring ) . Sec - ond , we observed that users relied heavily on search and query rather than externalizing their personal views on a subject . Users simply continued searching for the right keyword in - stead of adding more ideas to the map . This also increased the overall time taken for creating maps using query - expansion . This was also reported by users with statements such as : “I relied a lot on the search results the interface gave me " and “I did not brainstorm a lot while creating the mind map , I spent a lot of time in ﬁnding proper terms in the search results to put onto the mind map” . Car garage vehicle travel travel Car garage vehicle brake tire boot city brake crash… brake Car garage vehicle Capable of ? Car garage vehicle take damage take damage ( a ) Direct user input ( b ) Input based on suggestions ( c ) Input based on response to cue Figure 1 . Illustration of three mechanisms to create a new node . ( a ) user double - clicks a node and enters a text entry to create a new child node . ( b ) single right - clicking an existing node allows the user to use top suggestions from ConceptNet to create a new child node . ( c ) user double - clicks a cue node to response for a new node addition . Yellow shade denotes selected node ; red shade denotes newly created node . PHASE II : QCUE Motivated by our preliminary study , the design goal behind QCue is to strike a balance between idea expansion workﬂow and cognitive support during digital mind - mapping . We aim to provide computer support in a manner that stimulated the user to think in new directions but did not intrude in the user’s own line of thinking . The algorithm of generating computer support in QCue was developed based on the evolution of the structure of the user - generated map over time to balance the breadth and depth of exploration . Workﬂow Design QCue was designed primarily to support divergent idea ex - ploration in ideation processes . This requires an interface that would allow for simple yet fast interactions that are typi - cally natural in a traditional pen - paper setting . We formulate process of mind - mapping as an iterative two - mode sequence : generating as many ideas as possible on a topic ( breadth - ﬁrst exploration ) , and choosing a smaller subset to reﬁne and detail ( depth - ﬁrst exploration ) . We further assume our mind - maps to be strictly acyclic graphs ( trees ) . The design of our workﬂow is based on the following guiding principles : • In the initial phases of mind - mapping , asking questions to the user can help them externalize their assumptions regarding the topic , stimulate indirect relationships across concepts ( latent relations ) . • For exploring ideas in depth during later stages , suggest - ing alternatives to the use helps maintain the rate of idea addition . Here , questions can further help the user look for appropriate suggestions . Idea Expansion Workﬂow We provided the following interactions to users for creating a mind - map using QCue : Direct user input : This is the default mode of adding ideas to the map wherein users simply double - click on an existing node ( n i ) to add content for its child node ( n j ) using an input dialog box in the editor workspace . A link is created automatically between n i and n j ( Figure 1 ( a ) ) . This offers users minimal manipulation in the construction of a tree type structure . Asking for suggestions : In situations where a user is unclear about a given direction of exploration from a node in the mind - map , the user can explicitly query ConceptNet with the concerned node ( right - click on a node to be queried ) . Subse - quently , we extract top 10 related concepts ( words and phrases ) from ConceptNet and allow users to add any related concept they see ﬁt . Users can continuously explore and expand their search ( right - clicking on any existing node ) and add the result of the query ( Figure 1 ( b ) ) . Responding to cues : QCue evaluates the nodes in the map and detects nodes that need further exploration . Once identiﬁed , QCue automatically generates and adds a question as cue to user . The user can react to this cue node ( double - click ) and choose to either answer , ignore , or delete it . Once a valid answer recorded , the interface replaces the clicked node with the answer ( Figure 1 ( c ) ) . Breadth - vs - depth exploration : Two sliders are provided on the QCue interface to allow adjustment of exploratory directions guided by the cues ( Figure 2 ( a ) ) . Speciﬁcally , users can use the sliders to control the position of newly generated cues to be either breadth or depth - ﬁrst anytime during mind - mapping . Cue Generation Rationale There are three aspects that we considered to design our cue - generation mechanism . Given the current state of a mind - map our challenge was to determine ( 1 ) where to generate a cue ( which nodes in the mind - map need exploration ) , ( 2 ) when a cue should be generated ( so as to provide a meaningful but non - intrusive intervention ) and ( 3 ) the what to ask the user ( in terms of the actual content of cue ) . To ﬁnd out where and when to add cues , we draw from the recent work by Chen et al . [ 13 ] that explored several algorithms for computer - generated ideas . One of their algorithmic iterations — which is of particular interest to us — involves using the temporal and topological evolution of the mind - map to determine which nodes to target . However , this approach is rendered weak in their work because they modeled the mind - mapping process as a sequential game with each player ( human and computer ) takes turns . In our case , however , this is a powerful idea since the human and the intelligent agent ( AI ) are not bound by sequential activity — - both work asynchronously . This also reﬂects from our core take damage Car repair garage travel vehicle 0 . 84 , 0 0 . 68 , 0 . 6 1 , 1 1 , 0 . 8 0 . 68 , 1 0 . 52 , 1 x t x l T , L time ( T ) & lineage ( L ) penalty for each node threshold sliders vehicle travel UsedFor MannerOfSynonym PrerequisiteRelatedToSubevent IsA Synonym RelatedTo Derived TypeOf CapableOf ●●● ●●● 2 × 25 Relation types Q u e r i e s Max sum ( Query + Relation type ) take damage travel vehicle Types of travel ? Form cue based on the query & relationship type garage Car ( a ) Scouting ( T < x t , L < x l ) ( b ) Find weighted relations from ConceptNet & categorize them ( c ) Generate a cue node Figure 2 . Illustration of the cue generation algorithm using retrieved weighted relations through ConceptNet Open Data API [ 63 ] . Yellow shade denotes computer selected potential node ; red shade denotes computer generated cue . This algorithm is executed at regular intervals of 2 seconds . idea of using computer as a facilitator rather than a collaborator . Based on these observations we designed our algorithm to utilize the topological and temporal evolution of a given mind - map in order to determine the potential nodes where we want the user to explore further . For this , we use a strategy similar to the one proposed by Chen et al . [ 13 ] that uses two penalty terms based on the time elapsed since a node was added to the mind - map and it’s relative topological position ( or lineage ) with respect to the central problem . Tesnière et al [ 66 ] note that continuous thoughts can only be expressed with built connections . This is our driving guideline for composing the content of a cue . Speciﬁcally , we observe that the basic issue faced by users is not the inability to create individual concepts but the difﬁculty in contextualizing broad categories or topics that link speciﬁc concepts . Here , we draw from works that identify semantic relations / connections be - tween concepts to build human - like computer systems [ 53 ] and perform design synthesis [ 39 ] . We further note that the most important characteristic of mind - maps is their linked structure that allows users to associate and understand a group of concepts in a short amount of time . Therefore , our strategy for generating cue content is to simply make use of semantic relationship types already provided in ConceptNet . Our ratio - nale is that providing relationship instead of concept - instances will assist the user in two ways : ( 1 ) help them think broadly about the problem thereby assisting them in generating much higher number of instances , and ( 2 ) keeping a continuous ﬂow of thoughts throughout the creation process . Speciﬁcally , we developed our approach by taking the provided 25 rela - tionship categories along with the weighted assertions from ConceptNet into consideration . Note that we did not take all relations from ConceptNet ( 34 in total ) because some may be too ambiguous to users such as RelatedTo , Etymologically - DerivedFrom , ExternalURL , etc . The algorithm is detailed in the following sections . Time Penalty Time penalty ( T ) is a measure of the inactivity of a given node in the map . It is deﬁned as the time elapsed since last activity ( linked to a parent or added a child ) . For a newly added node , the time penalty is initialized to 1 and reduced by a constant value ( c ) at regular intervals of the computational cycle . Once the value reaches 0 , it remains constantly at 0 thereafter . Therefore , at any given instance , time penalty ranges from 0 to 1 . A default threshold for time penalty was set and adjustable for users by using the provided slider on the QCue interface . Users can perform breadth - ﬁrst exploration on ideas that have been recently visited by increasing the threshold value . Given the initial condition T ( n i ) = 1 . 0 , we compute the time penalty of any node n i ∈ N M at every interval ∆ t as T ( n i ) → max ( T ( n i ) − c , 0 ) . Lineage Penalty Lineage penalty ( L ) is a measure of the relative depth of nodes in a given mind - map . It is deﬁned as the normalized total count of children of a given node . Each node has a lineage weight ( x i ) that equals to 0 upon addition . For every additional child node that added to a given node , this weight is increased by 1 ( x i ← number of children of n i ) . To compute the lineage penalty for every node , all these weights are normalized ( ranges from 0 to 1 ) and then subtracted by one ( L ( n i ) = 1 − x i / max ( x i ) ) . Therefore , lineage penalty is 1 for leaf nodes and 0 for the root node , and ranges from 0 to 1 for the others . QCue ’s support based on this can help exploration towards leaf nodes . Cue Generation using ConceptNet Given any state of a mind - map , there are three primary algo - rithm steps that are needed for generating cues in the form of questions using ConceptNet semantic network . First , QCue scouts out a good location ( node ) to facilitate exploration using the two penalties . Subsequently , the spotted nodes are queried from ConceptNet to retrieve corresponding weighted relations for content determination . Finally , based on the determined content , QCue generates a cue node to ultimately guide the user and help expand the idea space during mind - map creation . Scouting : For every node in the current state of a mind - map , we compute its time penalty and lineage penalty . Then , based on the current adjusted thresholds ( x t , x l ) where x t and x l denote thresholds for time and lineage penalty respectively , QCue spots potential nodes ( N E ) for exploration . Speciﬁcally , if T ( n i ) < x t or L ( n i ) < x l then N E ← N E ∪ { n i } ( Figure 2 ( a ) ) . If no node is within the thresholds , all nodes in the current mind - map are considered as potential nodes . Content determination : In this step , we further query the spot - ted nodes ( N E ) from ConceptNet . A list of query results con - taining weighted relations is retrieved for each potential node ( Figure 2 ( b ) ) . In order to ﬁnd the node which has the maxi - mum potential of associative capability , we subdivide each list categorically based on the 25 relationship types provided by ConceptNet . Subsequently , we select one subdivision which has the highest sum of relation weights and use it as basis for a new cue’s content ( Figure 2 ( b ) ) . Note that if a subdivision has been used to generate a cue node , it will be removed from future selection pool . Cue generation : Using the selected subdivision from content determination , QCue formulates a new cue based on ﬁxed templates ( Figure 2 ( c ) ) . To avoid repetition of cues generated during mind - map creation , we speciﬁcally construct at least three templates ( combinations of query + verb + relationship type ) for each relationship category provided by ConceptNet . Example cues based on a query — knife — and a relationship type — CapableOf — are as follows : “What can knife do ? ” , “What is knife capable of doing ? ” and “Which task is knife capable of performing ? ” . Implementation Our QCue interface is a Javascript web application that runs entirely on the browser using NodeJS and D3JS . We incor - porated JSON - LD API ( Linked Data structure ) offered by ConceptNet in our interface . The nodes of ConceptNet are words and phrases of natural language . Each node contains an edge list which has all the relations such as UsedFor stored in rel with its corresponding weight stored in weight , and a human - readable label stored in start and end . As user queries a word or phrase in natural language ( as one node ) , we look for all the relations in this node , ﬁlter them with English - only , and then extract the non - repetitive human - readable labels out . On the QCue interface , users can spatially organize ideas in the mind - map by dragging ideas with forced - links around the editor workspace . Such force - directed layout produces an aesthetically pleasing graph while maintaining comprehensi - bility , even with large dataset . Users are also allowed to adjust sliders to shape their exploration preferences by either wider or deeper . QCue employs a listener function to run the cue generation algorithm at ﬁxed intervals of 2 seconds . We also developed an web - based interface for TMM which is essen - tially the same as QCue but without any computer support ( cues and queries ) . Data format and storage : Each mind - map is stored in a local folder with a distinct user ID . To store the structure of a mind - map , we deﬁned a JavaScript prototype containing nodes , links , timestamps and other appearance data ( e . g . color , size , font etc . ) . We can regenerate a mind - map by importing the ﬁle data into QCue . Videos of the mind - maps are also stored within the respective folders to be used in further analysis . Choice of penalty and threshold : To ﬁnd an appropriate de - fault value for the constant c in time penalty and the thresholds for the two penalties , we conducted several pilot studies ( Sec - tion 5 . 1 ) to observe how people mind - map in a regular setting ( TMM ) and how people get acquainted with QCue . The ﬁnal assignments are : c = 0 . 08 , x t & x l = 0 . 6 when t = 0 . EVALUATION METHODOLOGY Pilot Study We conducted a pilot study with 12 participants where our intention was to observe ( 1 ) how users react to the cue - query workﬂow , ( 2 ) determine ideas and problem statements that could serve as our evaluation tasks , and ( 3 ) determine appro - priate initial parameters ( such as lineage and time thresholds ) . In order to observe user’s thinking process while creating a mind - map , we designed four different problem statements namely , pollution , toys in the future , camping underwater , and wedding on space station . We encouraged the users to explore the basic idea , cause , effect and potential solutions of the given problem statement . Participants were both surprised as well as interested in topics such as weddings on space station and underwater camping . Speciﬁcally , they indicated need for time to prepare themselves before beginning the mind - mapping task . On the other hand for topics such as pollution and toy , they showed immediate inclination toward starting the session . Since we wanted to test the robustness of our algorithm with respect to the topic given , we decided to conduct the user study with two topics of opposite extremes . Namely , pollution ( T1 ) - a seemingly familiar topic and underwater camping ( T2 ) - rather a more abstract topic . Participants In the user study , we recruited 24 undergraduate and graduate students from all across a university campus . Our participants came from engineering , architecture , and science backgrounds and were within the age range of 19 - 30 years . 6 of these participants had prior experience with creating mind - maps . We conducted a between - subjects study , where 12 participants created mind - maps for a given central topic using TMM , and the remaining 12 using QCue . Tasks In total , across the two experimental conditions , 24 partici - pants created 48 mind - maps — one for each central topic . The total time taken during the experiment varied between 30 and 40 minutes and the two central topics were randomized across the participants . After describing the setup and the purpose of the study , we described the features of the assigned interface and practically demonstrated its usage . For each participant and task M , we recorded a video of the task , the completion time , and the time - stamped ideas generated by the users for each mind - map . Each participant performed the following tasks : Condition Structure ( 1 - 4 ) Exploratory ( 1 - 4 ) Communication ( 1 - 4 ) Extent of coverage ( 1 - 4 ) Quantity ( raw ) Variety ( 0 - 1 ) Novelty ( 0 - 1 ) TMM T1 2 . 29 2 . 42 2 . 38 2 . 25 31 0 . 5 0 . 125 TMM T2 2 . 54 2 . 5 2 . 25 2 . 5 34 0 . 48 0 . 12 QCue T1 3 . 29 3 . 29 2 . 75 2 . 79 38 0 . 66 0 . 19 QCue T2 2 . 63 2 . 54 2 . 29 2 . 58 41 0 . 61 0 . 17 Average TMM 2 . 42 2 . 46 2 . 31 2 . 38 32 . 5 0 . 49 0 . 12 Average QCue 2 . 96 2 . 92 2 . 52 2 . 69 39 . 5 0 . 63 0 . 18 Figure 3 . Table of average ratings for each metric by four user conditions : TMM , QCue with T 1 and T 2 . P Practice : To familiarize themselves with the interaction of the assigned interface , the participants were given a brief demonstration of the software and its function . They are allowed to practice the interface for 5 to 10 minutes , with guidance when required . M Mind - mapping with T1 & T2 : Participants were asked to create mind - map using the assigned interface . The duration of mind - mapping session was 10 minutes for each central topic . Participants were encouraged to explore the central topic as fulﬁll as they could . The workspace was cleared after completion of each mind - map . Q Questionnaire : Finally , each participant answered a series of questions regarding their exploration of central topic before and after the creation of each mind - map , perception of each of the interfaces in terms of ease of use , intuitiveness , and assistance . We also conducted post - study interviews to collect open - ended feedback regarding the experience . Metrics Mind - maps recorded during the study were de - identiﬁed . The designed metrics assessed all ideas generated in each mind - map based on four primary aspects : quantity , quality , nov - elty and variety [ 61 , 45 ] . The quantity metric is directly measured as the total number of nodes is a given mind - map . The variety of each mind - map is given by the number of idea categories that raters ﬁnd in the mind - map and the novelty score is a measure of how unique are the ideas represented in a given mind - map [ 45 , 12 ] . For a fair assessment of the quality of mind - maps for both central topics , we adapted the mind - map assessment rubric [ 1 , 12 ] and the raters evaluated the mind - maps based on the four major criteria : structure , exploratory , communication and extent of coverage 1 . These metrics are commonly used to evaluate ideation success in open - ended design tasks [ 10 ] . Here , we would like to point out to similar metrics that have been used in HCI literature on creativity support . For instance , Kerne’s elemental metrics [ 37 ] for information - based ideation ( IBI ) are adapted from Shah’s metrics [ 61 ] . While the metrics we chose have been used in previous mind - mapping studies , they also have some connection with creativity - support index ( CSI ) [ 9 , 14 ] and ideational ﬂuency [ 37 ] ( for example , holistic 1 Please refer to the literature for detailed explanation of these metrics IBI metrics are similar to the “structure” metric and our post study questions are functionally similar to CSI tailored for mind - mapping ) . Raters Two raters were recruited for assessing the mind - maps created by the users . These raters were senior designers in the mechan - ical engineering design domain , having had multiple design experiences during their coursework and research life . The raters selected were unaware of the study design and tasks , and were not furnished with information related to the general study hypotheses . The 48 mind - maps created across both in - terfaces were presented to each rater in a randomized order . For every mind - map assessed , the raters evaluate them on a scale of 1 - 4 based for each criteria discussed above . Every created mind - map is then assigned a score from a total of 16 points , which is used further for comparing the quality with respect to other mind - maps . For a given central topic , the evaluation depends on knowledge of the raters and their interpretation of what the metrics mean . In our study , two inter - raters independently perform subjective ratings of every idea / concept in a mind - map . This evaluation technique has the advantage of capturing aspects of creative work that are subjectively recognized by raters , but are difﬁcult to deﬁne objectively . After the independent evaluation by the two raters , the ratings from the two raters were checked for consensus . RESULTS Ratings for User - Generated Mind - Maps For metrics admitting integer values ( structure , exploratory , communication and extent of coverage ) , we calculated the Co - hen’s kappa for ensuring inter - rater agreement . The Cohen’s kappa value was found to be between the range of 0 . 4 − 0 . 6 showing a moderate inter - rater agreement level [ 15 ] . For metrics admitting real / scalar values ( variety and novelty ) , we calculated the Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient to ﬁnd the de - gree of correlation between the raters’ ratings . This correlation coefﬁcient was found to be close to 0 . 8 which indicates an acceptable range of agreement [ 15 ] . Overall , the ratings for QCue were relatively higher than TMM across all metrics ( Figure 3 ) . Two - way ANOVA was con - ducted with two factors of comparison : ( 1 ) the choice of topic 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 TMM Qmap N u m b e r o f N od e A dd e d 8 6 4 2 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Time ( min ) 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Series1 Series3 8 6 4 2 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 N u m b e r o f N od e A dd e d Time ( min ) ( a ) Pollution ( b ) Underwater camping TMM QCue TMM QCue Figure 4 . General trends on how users generating ideas towards differ - ent topics ( T 1 and T 2 ) during TMM and QCue . Each bar represents an average count of the total nodes in the given time frame ( per 1 minute ) . ( pollution or underwater camping ) and ( 2 ) the choice of inter - face ( QCue or TMM ) . Although the data for certain metrics were non - normal , we proceeded with ANOVA since it is resis - tant to moderate deviation from normality . The mean ratings for structure were higher for QCue ( 2 . 96 ) in comparison to TMM ( 2 . 42 , p - value 0 . 007 ) . Similarly the mean scores for the exploratory metric is also higher for QCue ( 2 . 92 ) with respect to TMM ( 2 . 46 , p - value 0 . 008 ) . This suggests that the mind - maps created using QCue were relatively more balanced ( in depth and breadth ) and more comprehensively explored . Further , we recorded a better variety score in QCue ( 0 . 49 ) rel - ative to TMM ( 0 . 63 , p - value 0 . 009 ) . Finally , we also recorded a larger number of nodes added in QCue ( 39 . 5 ) relative to TMM ( 32 . 5 , p - value 0 . 048 ) . These observations indicate that the cue - query mechanism assisted the users in ( 1 ) exploring diverse aspects of the given topic and ( 2 ) making non - obvious relationships across ideas . We also carried out a main effect analysis ( one - way ANOVA ) between pollution and underwater camping independently for TMM and QCue . While the difference in the outcome was not pronounced in TMM , a signiﬁcant difference was found across topics in the structure ( p = 0 . 01 ) and exploratory ( p = 0 . 002 ) metrics for QCue . This suggests that the QCue workﬂow is dependent on the type of the central topic explored . The overall ratings are higher in QCue for pollution ( for example in Figure 3 , mean structure value increases to 3 . 29 from 2 . 29 in pollution ) . Temporal Trend for Node Addition In general , the rate of node addition decreased over time in the TMM workﬂow regardless of the topics . For QCue , the node addition rate was comparatively steady indicating that cues 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 ( a ) Pollution 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 6 3 0 Time ( min ) F r e qu e n c y User direct input Cue Query 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Time ( min ) ( b ) Underwater camping 6 3 0 F r e qu e n c y Figure 5 . Comparison of trends on how users generating ideas towards T 1 and T 2 using the three modes ( user direct input , cue node response and query ) . and queries helped sustain user engagement for exploration during even later stages of the tasks ( Figure 4 ) . While there are three modes for node addition using QCue , as expected , the number of cues and queries used depended on users’ familiarity with the central topic in the tasks . Overall , we observed that the users tended to ask for queries in the ﬁrst few minutes of mind - mapping , and proceed with the usage of cue nodes in the middle stages of the given time ( Figure 5 ) . For pollution , the number of answered cue nodes increases with time . Speciﬁcally , users appreciated cues between the 5 and 6 minutes mark for pollution . For underwater camping , we noticed an increasing amount of the cue nodes answered speciﬁcally in the 2 and 6 to 7 minutes mark . This indicates two primary usage of cues . First , when the users have explored their prior knowledge of the topic and reach an impasse during the middle stages of mind - mapping ( 5 to 7 minutes mark in our case ) , cues help them reﬂect on the existing concepts and discover new relationships to generate ideas further . Second , for open - ended problems such as underwater camping , cues helped users in exploring different directions of exploration around the central idea in the beginning . This impacted the exploration of ideas in the later stages of the task . On the other hand , surprisingly , we found that the percentage of the number of nodes added from query mode is lower than the cue mode . This suggests that users were generally more engaged when they were actively involved in the cycle of exploration and reﬂection based on cues in comparison to receiving direct answers provided by query . User Feedback : Cue vs Query To help us evaluate the effectiveness of our algorithm , the participants ﬁlled out a questionnaire after creation of one mind - map . We also encouraged the participants to give open - ended feedback to support their rating . Camping Under Water build the tent cook rock live supply water source entertianment transportation oxygen waterpoof clean cook underwater cold outdoor activity higher dynamic damping ( resistance ) than air campfire polution visibility devices diving ship underwater vehicle rain ice melted from mountain ocean breath shell crabs hiking survive in the wild environment fishing swiming biking whole body motion rehabilitation get fish walking in the natural environment camera smart phone lighting source keep body temperature bike eat heater fluid sun temperature 7 : 29 7 : 15 7 : 13 7 : 07 4 : 31 4 : 25 9 : 26 5 : 50 2 : 29 6 : 07 1 : 10 0 : 19 2 : 57 0 : 05 4 : 19 0 : 52 2 : 11 2 : 17 2 : 24 2 : 44 2 : 41 0 : 30 4 : 55 5 : 27 5 : 19 1 : 26 1 : 36 6 : 23 3 : 45 4 : 49 6 : 35 6 : 46 6 : 49 9 : 52 10 : 03 9 : 47 1 : 31 3 : 20 3 : 09 8 : 56 7 : 41 7 : 45 8 : 01 4 : 40 direct user input query result addition cue response addition 8 : 04 ( a ) User created mind - map using TMM ( b ) User created mind - map using QCue 1 : 58 Camping Under Water oxygen supply adventure sport Need for light Food supply risks underwater studies Spying enemies , or attacking enemies High pressure Lack of oxygen Lethal animals Poisonous plants Sea life viewing Oxygen cylinders Finding dead creatures Archeology Searching for minerals Life forms Collecting soil content Quality of water and effect of pollution 3 : 19 5 : 27 4 : 46 6 : 55 4 : 13 4 : 23 4 : 03 3 : 37 0 : 33 1 : 02 0 : 23 10 : 08 direct user input 0 : 41 1 : 24 7 : 24 7 : 36 3 : 50 1 : 47 8 : 18 Figure 6 . Two user created mind - maps with underwater camping ( T 2 ) as central topic using ( a ) TMM and ( b ) QCue . The label represents timestamp upon node addition and type of addition . There was a mixed response from the users for asking whether the cues were useful in the process of mind - mapping . Around 60 % of the users agreed that the cues helped them to develop new lines of thoughts at the right time . One user stated , “Ques - tions ( or cues ) were helpful at the point when you get ﬁxated . They give you other dimensions / ideas to expand your thought” . The remaining stated that they do not ﬁnd the cues helpful because they already had ideas on how to develop the mind - map . “I felt like the questions ( or cues ) would make me lose my train of thought” . Users who found it difﬁcult to add to existing ideas in the mind - map , used the cues and queries extensively to build and visualize new dimensions to the cen - tral idea . These users felt that the cues helped them to reach unexplored avenues : “I started with a particular topic , and ended at a completely unrelated topic . It enabled me to push my creativity limits further” . For the usage of queries , above 80 % of users agreed that queries were useful regardless of the topics . For underwater camping , 20 % of the users who disagreed , suggested that the system should include queries that were more closely linked to the context of the central idea . Speciﬁcally , a user stated : “Some suggestions ( or queries ) under certain context might not be straight forward” . What is interesting to note here is that while we received mixed responses in the cues and overly positive responses on queries , we also recorded higher number of user interactions with cues than queries . The likely explanation for this seeming contradiction is that it is easy to answer a cue than looking for a suggestion that ﬁts the user’s need at a given instance . Second , querying a suggestion also would mean that the user was clear in what they wanted to add . However , this clarity ultimately resulted in users directly adding the node manually . Therefore , we believe that the users tacitly inclined toward answering to the cues generated by our system . User Feedback : QCue as a Workﬂow In comparison to TMM , users who used QCue performed more consistently during creation of mind - maps — the frequency of generating new nodes was comparatively steady throughout the process . As one user stated : “the questions helped me to create new chain of thoughts . I might not have the answer for the question ( or cues ) directly , but it provided new aspects to the given idea . Especially for underwater camping” . One user with negligible experience in brainstorming , shared her excitement : “I was fully engaged in the creation process . I was expecting questions from all different angles” . On the other hand , we also found that QCue users kept generating new directions of ideas respected to the central topics even after the initial creation phase , where TMM users tended to focus on ﬁxed number of directions ( Figure 6 ) . This indicates the capa - bility of QCue — problems co - evolved with the development of the idea space during the mind - mapping process . DISCUSSIONS Limitations There are two main limitations in this work . First , a majority of the recruited users had little to no experience in mind - mapping . While this allowed us to demonstrate the capability of QCue in guiding novices to explore problem spaces , we believe that including expert users in our future studies can help us ( 1 ) understand how differently they perform using this workﬂow and ( 2 ) lead to a richer discussion on how expertise can be transferred to our system toward better facilitation . Second , one of the key challenges we faced was the lack of robust methodology for determining the effect of cue - based stimulus during mind - mapping ( how users may have used cues and queries without explicitly using them to add nodes ) . While we characterize it on the basis of the number of cues answered and the number of suggestions assimilated directly in the mind - map , we believe that a deeper qualitative study on the mind - mapping process can reveal valuable insights . We plan to conduct such an analysis as our immediate next step . Cue & Query Formulation One of the challenges we faced in our implementation of cue generation was grammatically and semantically effective formulation of the questions themselves . Recently , Gilon et al . [ 28 ] demonstrated a design - by - analogy workﬂow using ConcpetNet noting the lack of domain speciﬁcity to be an issue . In this regard , there is scope for further investigation of natural language processing methods as well as new databases for construction of cues in speciﬁc domains such as engineer - ing design . More importantly , users frequently suggested for context - dependent queries . For problems such as underwater camping , this is a challenging task that may need techno - logical advancements in artiﬁcial intelligence approaches for generating suggestions and cues based on real - time synthe - sis of ideas from the information retrieved from a knowledge database . We did preliminary exploration in this direction using a markov chain based question generation method [ 16 ] . However , the cues generated were not well - phrased indicating further studies into other generative language models [ 23 ] . Cue Representation The rationale behind cue comes from being able to stimu - late the user to generate and add ideas . We believe there is a richer space of representations , both textual and graphical , that can potentially enhance cognitive stimulation particularly for open - ended problems . For instance , textual stimuli can be pro - duced through simple unsolicited suggestions from Concept - Net ( example : “ concept ? ” ) or advanced mechanisms based on higher level contextual interpretation ( e . g . questioning based on second - order neighbors in the ConceptNet graph ) . From a graphical perspective , the use of visual content databases such as ShapeNet [ 11 ] and ImageNet [ 21 ] may lead to novel ways for providing stimuli to users . There are several avenues that need to be investigated in terms of colors , images , arrows , and dimension to reﬂect personal interest and individuality [ 8 ] . CONCLUSION Our intention in this research was to augment users’ capability to discover more about a given problem during mind - mapping . For this , we introduced and investigated a new digital work - ﬂow ( QCue ) that provides cues to users based on the current state of the mind - map and also allows them to query sugges - tions . While our experiments demonstrated the potential of such mechanisms in stimulating idea exploration , the funda - mental take - away is that such stimulation requires a balancing act between intervening the user’s own line of thought with computer - generated cues and providing suggestions to the user’s queries . Furthermore , our work shows the impact of computer - facilitated textual stimuli particularly for those with little practice in brainstorming - type tasks . We believe that QCue is only a step toward a much richer set of research directions in the domain of intelligent cognitive assistants . REFERENCES [ 1 ] 2008 . Scoring Rubric for Mind Maps . https : / / www . claytonschools . net / cms / lib / MO01000419 / Centricity / Domain / 206 / Mind % 20Map % 20Rubric . pdf . ( 2008 ) . [ 2 ] M . Abdeen , R . El - Sahan , A . Ismaeil , S . El - Harouny , M . Shalaby , and M . C . E . Yagoub . 2009 . Direct automatic generation of mind maps from text with M2Gen . In 2009 IEEE Toronto International Conference Science and Technology for Humanity ( TIC - STH ) . 95 – 99 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TIC - STH . 2009 . 5444360 [ 3 ] Aaron Adler and Randall Davis . 2007 . Speech and sketching : An empirical study of multimodal interaction . In Proceedings of the 4th Eurographics workshop on Sketch - based interfaces and modeling . ACM , 83 – 90 . [ 4 ] Oscar Barros . 1990 . A pragmatic approach to computer assisted system building . 613 – 622 vol . 3 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / HICSS . 1990 . 205399 [ 5 ] Ann Bleakley . 1994 . Resource - based learning activities : Information literacy for high school students . American Library Association . [ 6 ] Henning Breuer , Martin Hewing , and Fee Steinhoff . 2009 . Divergent innovation : Fostering and managing the fuzzy front end of innovation . In PICMET’09 - 2009 Portland International Conference on Management of Engineering & Technology . IEEE , 754 – 761 . [ 7 ] Stéphanie Buisine , Guillaume Besacier , Marianne Najm , Améziane Aoussat , and Frédéric Vernier . 2007 . Computer - supported Creativity : Evaluation of a Tabletop Mind - map Application . In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Engineering Psychology and Cognitive Ergonomics ( EPCE’07 ) . Springer - Verlag , Berlin , Heidelberg , 22 – 31 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 1784197 . 1784201 [ 8 ] Tony Buzan . 2006 . The ultimate book of mind maps : unlock your creativity , boost your memory , change your life . HarperCollins UK . [ 9 ] Erin A Carroll , Celine Latulipe , Richard Fung , and Michael Terry . 2009 . Creativity factor evaluation : towards a standardized survey metric for creativity support . In Proceedings of the seventh ACM conference on Creativity and cognition . ACM , 127 – 136 . [ 10 ] Joel Chan , Katherine Fu , Christian Schunn , Jonathan Cagan , Kristin Wood , and Kenneth Kotovsky . 2011 . On the beneﬁts and pitfalls of analogies for innovative design : Ideation performance based on analogical distance , commonness , and modality of examples . Journal of mechanical design 133 , 8 ( 2011 ) , 081004 . [ 11 ] Angel X . Chang , Thomas A . Funkhouser , Leonidas J . Guibas , Pat Hanrahan , Qi - Xing Huang , Zimo Li , Silvio Savarese , Manolis Savva , Shuran Song , Hao Su , Jianxiong Xiao , Li Yi , and Fisher Yu . 2015 . ShapeNet : An Information - Rich 3D Model Repository . CoRR abs / 1512 . 03012 ( 2015 ) . http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 1512 . 03012 [ 12 ] Ting - Ju Chen , Ronak R . Mohanty , Miguel A . Hoffmann Rodriguez , and Vinayak R . Krishnamurthy . 2019a . Collaborative mind - mapping : A study of patterns , strategies , and evolution of maps created by peer - pairs . In ASME 2019 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference . American Society of Mechanical Engineers . [ 13 ] Ting - Ju Chen , Sai Ganesh Subramanian , and Vinayak R Krishnamurthy . 2019b . Mini - Map : Mixed - initiative mind - mapping via contextual query expansion . In AIAA Scitech 2019 Forum . 2347 . [ 14 ] Erin Cherry and Celine Latulipe . 2014 . Quantifying the creativity support of digital tools through the creativity support index . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 21 , 4 ( 2014 ) , 21 . [ 15 ] D . Clark - Carter . 1997 . Doing Quantitative Psychological Research : From Design to Report . Taylor & Francis , Inc . , UK . [ 16 ] John M . Conroy and Dianne P . O’leary . 2001 . Text Summarization via Hidden Markov Models . In Proceedings of the 24th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval ( SIGIR ’01 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 406 – 407 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 383952 . 384042 [ 17 ] Matt Copeland . 2005 . Socratic circles : Fostering critical and creative thinking in middle and high school . Stenhouse Publishers . [ 18 ] Nigel Cross . 2008 . Engineering design methods : strategies for product design . Wiley . [ 19 ] Anthony V D’Antoni and Genevieve Pinto Zipp . 2006 . Applications of the mind map learning technique in chiropractic education : A pilot study and literature review . Journal of Chiropractic Humanities 13 ( 2006 ) , 2 – 11 . [ 20 ] Anthony V D’Antoni , Genevieve Pinto Zipp , and Valerie G Olson . 2009 . Interrater reliability of the mind map assessment rubric in a cohort of medical students . BMC Medical Education 9 , 1 ( 2009 ) , 19 . [ 21 ] J . Deng , W . Dong , R . Socher , L . - J . Li , K . Li , and L . Fei - Fei . 2009 . ImageNet : A Large - Scale Hierarchical Image Database . In CVPR09 . [ 22 ] Alan R . Dennis , Randall K . Minas , and Akshay P . Bhagwatwar . 2013 . Sparking Creativity : Improving Electronic Brainstorming with Individual Cognitive Priming . Journal of Management Information Systems 29 , 4 ( 2013 ) , 195 – 216 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2753 / MIS0742 - 1222290407 [ 23 ] Xinya Du , Junru Shao , and Claire Cardie . 2017 . Learning to ask : Neural question generation for reading comprehension . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1705 . 00106 ( 2017 ) . [ 24 ] Mohamed Elhoseiny and Ahmed Elgammal . 2016 . Text to multi - level MindMaps . Multimedia Tools and Applications 75 , 8 ( 01 Apr 2016 ) , 4217 – 4244 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11042 - 015 - 2467 - y [ 25 ] Haakon Faste and Honray Lin . 2012 . The Untapped Promise of Digital Mind Maps . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1017 – 1026 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208548 [ 26 ] Hiroaki Furukawa , Takaya Yuizono , and Akira Sakai . 2016 . A design of distributed brainstorming support tool with gamiﬁcation elements . In 2016 11th International Conference on Knowledge , Information and Creativity Support Systems ( KICSS ) . IEEE , 1 – 6 . [ 27 ] M . Ghajargar and M . Wiberg . 2018 . Thinking with Interactive Artifacts : Reﬂection as a Concept in Design Outcomes . Design Issues 34 , 2 ( April 2018 ) , 48 – 63 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1162 / DESI _ a _ 00485 [ 28 ] Karni Gilon , Joel Chan , Felicia Y . Ng , Hila Liifshitz - Assaf , Aniket Kittur , and Dafna Shahaf . 2018 . Analogy Mining for Speciﬁc Design Needs . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 121 , 11 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173695 [ 29 ] Gabriela Goldschmidt and Anat Litan Sever . 2011 . Inspiring design ideas with texts . Design Studies 32 , 2 ( 2011 ) , 139 – 155 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2010 . 09 . 006 [ 30 ] Ji Han , Feng Shi , Liuqing Chen , and Peter RN Childs . 2018 . The Combinator – a computer - based tool for creative idea generation based on a simulation approach . Design Science 4 ( 2018 ) . [ 31 ] Cindy Hmelo - Silver . 2004 . Problem - Based Learning : What and How Do Students Learn ? Educational Psychology Review 16 ( 01 2004 ) , 235 – 266 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1023 / B : EDPR . 0000034022 . 16470 . f3 [ 32 ] Bipin Indurkhya . 2016 . On the Role of Computers in Creativity - Support Systems . 213 – 227 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 19090 - 7 _ 17 [ 33 ] Scott G Isaksen , K Brian Dorval , and Donald J Trefﬁnger . 2000 . Creative approaches to problem solving : A framework for change . Kendall Hunt Publishing Company . [ 34 ] Ajit Jain , Nic Lupfer , Yin Qu , Rhema Linder , Andruid Kerne , and Steven M . Smith . 2015 . Evaluating TweetBubble with Ideation Metrics of Exploratory Browsing . In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition - C & C ’15 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , 53 – 62 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2757226 . 2757239 [ 35 ] David H Jonassen , Katherine Beissner , and Michael Yacci . 1993 . Structural knowledge : Techniques for representing , conveying , and acquiring structural knowledge . Psychology Press . [ 36 ] Andruid Kerne , Andrew Billingsley , Nic Lupfer , Rhema Linder , Yin Qu , Alyssa Valdez , Ajit Jain , Kade Keith , Matthew Carrasco , and Jorge Vanegas . 2017 . Strategies of Free - Form Web Curation . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition - C & C ’17 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , 380 – 392 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3059454 . 3059471 [ 37 ] Andruid Kerne , Andrew M . Webb , Steven M . Smith , Rhema Linder , Nic Lupfer , Yin Qu , Jon Moeller , and Sashikanth Damaraju . 2014 . Using Metrics of Curation to Evaluate Information - Based Ideation . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 21 , 3 , Article 14 ( June 2014 ) , 48 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2591677 [ 38 ] Janin Koch , Andrés Lucero , Lena Hegemann , and Antti Oulasvirta . 2019 . May AI ? : Design Ideation with Cooperative Contextual Bandits . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 633 , 12 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300863 [ 39 ] Jon Kolko . 2010 . Abductive thinking and sensemaking : The drivers of design synthesis . Design issues 26 , 1 ( 2010 ) , 15 – 28 . [ 40 ] Jon Kolko . 2018 . The divisiveness of design thinking . interactions 25 , 3 ( 2018 ) , 28 – 34 . [ 41 ] Piet Kommers and Jan Lanzing . 1997 . Students’ Concept Mapping for Hypermedia Design : Navigation Through World Wide Web ( WWW ) Space and Self - assessment . J . Interact . Learn . Res . 8 , 3 - 4 ( Dec . 1997 ) , 421 – 455 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 313722 . 313732 [ 42 ] Alexander Kotov and ChengXiang Zhai . 2012 . Tapping into Knowledge Base for Concept Feedback : Leveraging Conceptnet to Improve Search Results for Difﬁcult Queries . In Proceedings of the Fifth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining ( WSDM ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 403 – 412 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2124295 . 2124344 [ 43 ] R . Kudeli ´ c , M . Konecki , and M . Malekovi ´ c . 2011 . Mind map generator software model with text mining algorithm . In Proceedings of the ITI 2011 , 33rd International Conference on Information Technology Interfaces . 487 – 494 . [ 44 ] Barry Matthew Kudrowitz . 2010 . Haha and aha ! : Creativity , idea generation , improvisational humor , and product design . Ph . D . Dissertation . Massachusetts Institute of Technology . [ 45 ] Julie S Linsey , EF Clauss , Tolga Kurtoglu , JT Murphy , KL Wood , and AB Markman . 2011 . An experimental study of group idea generation techniques : understanding the roles of idea representation and viewing methods . Journal of Mechanical Design 133 , 3 ( 2011 ) , 031008 . [ 46 ] Nic Lupfer , Andruid Kerne , Andrew M . Webb , and Rhema Linder . 2016 . Patterns of Free - form Curation . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM on Multimedia Conference - MM ’16 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , 12 – 21 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2964284 . 2964303 [ 47 ] Emmanuel M . Kalargiros and Michael Manning . 2015 . Divergent Thinking and Brainstorming in Perspective : Implications for Organization Change and Innovation . Research in Organizational Change and Development 23 ( 06 2015 ) , 293 – 327 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1108 / S0897 - 301620150000023007 [ 48 ] Charlotte P Malycha and Günter W Maier . 2017 . The random - map technique : Enhancing mind - mapping with a conceptual combination technique to foster creative potential . Creativity Research Journal 29 , 2 ( 2017 ) , 114 – 124 . [ 49 ] K Scott Marshall , Richard Crawford , and Daniel Jensen . 2016 . Analogy seeded mind - maps : A comparison of verbal and pictorial representation of analogies in the concept generation process . In ASME 2016 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference . American Society of Mechanical Engineers . [ 50 ] Michael Michalko . 2010 . Thinkertoys : A handbook of creative - thinking techniques . Ten Speed Press . [ 51 ] George A Miller . 1995 . WordNet : a lexical database for English . Commun . ACM 38 , 11 ( 1995 ) , 39 – 41 . [ 52 ] Jaclyn K Murray , Jaryn A Studer , Shanna R Daly , Seda McKilligan , and Colleen M Seifert . 2019 . Design by taking perspectives : How engineers explore problems . Journal of Engineering Education ( 2019 ) . [ 53 ] Vivi Nastase , Preslav Nakov , Diarmuid O Seaghdha , and Stan Szpakowicz . 2013 . Semantic relations between nominals . Synthesis lectures on human language technologies 6 , 1 ( 2013 ) , 1 – 119 . [ 54 ] John C Nesbit and Olusola O Adesope . 2006 . Learning with concept and knowledge maps : A meta - analysis . Review of educational research 76 , 3 ( 2006 ) , 413 – 448 . [ 55 ] R . M . O’Connell . 2014 . Mind mapping for critical thinking . ( 01 2014 ) , 354 – 386 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4018 / 978 - 1 - 4666 - 5816 - 5 . ch014 [ 56 ] Alex F Osborne . 1963 . Applied imagination . New York : Scribner ( 1963 ) . [ 57 ] Burak Pak , Ozan Onder Ozener , and Erdem Arzu . 2006 . Utilizing customizable generative design tools in digital design studio : Xp - GEN experimental form generator . international journal of architectural computing 4 ( 12 2006 ) , 21 – 33 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1260 / 147807706779398962 [ 58 ] Yin Qu , Andruid Kerne , Nic Lupfer , Rhema Linder , and Ajit Jain . 2014 . Metadata type system . In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM SIGCHI symposium on Engineering interactive computing systems - EICS ’14 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , 107 – 116 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2607023 . 2607030 [ 59 ] Moura Quayle and Douglas Paterson . 1989 . Techniques for Encouraging Reﬂection in Design . Journal of Architectural Education ( 1984 - ) 42 , 2 ( 1989 ) , 30 – 42 . http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 1425089 [ 60 ] Maria Araceli Ruiz - Primo , Susan E Schultz , Min Li , and Richard J Shavelson . 2001 . Comparison of the reliability and validity of scores from two concept - mapping techniques . Journal of Research in Science Teaching : The Ofﬁcial Journal of the National Association for Research in Science Teaching 38 , 2 ( 2001 ) , 260 – 278 . [ 61 ] Jami J Shah , Steve M Smith , and Noe Vargas - Hernandez . 2003 . Metrics for measuring ideation effectiveness . Design studies 24 , 2 ( 2003 ) , 111 – 134 . [ 62 ] Jami J Shah , NOE Vargas - Hernandez , Joshua D Summers , and Santosh Kulkarni . 2001 . Collaborative Sketching ( C - Sketch ) – An idea generation technique for engineering design . The Journal of Creative Behavior 35 , 3 ( 2001 ) , 168 – 198 . [ 63 ] Robyn Speer , Joshua Chin , and Catherine Havasi . 2017 . ConceptNet 5 . 5 : An Open Multilingual Graph of General Knowledge . In Proceedings of the Thirty - First AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( AAAI’17 ) . AAAI Press , 4444 – 4451 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 3298023 . 3298212 [ 64 ] Xijin Tang , Yijun Liu , and Wen Zhang . 2005 . Computerized Support for Idea Generation During Knowledge Creating Process . 437 – 443 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 11554028 _ 61 [ 65 ] Sigmar - Olaf Tergan . 2005 . Digital Concept Maps for Managing Knowledge and Information . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , Berlin , Heidelberg , 185 – 204 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 11510154 _ 10 [ 66 ] Lucien Tesnière . 1965 . Éléments de syntaxe structurale ( 1959 ) . Paris : Klincksieck ( 1965 ) . [ 67 ] Regine Vroom , Ernesr van Breemen , and Wilhelm van der Vegte . 2004 . Developing a conceptual design engineering toolbox and its tools . Acta Polytechnica 44 ( 01 2004 ) , 2004 . [ 68 ] Haochuan Wang , Dan Cosley , and Susan R . Fussell . 2010 . Idea expander : Supporting group brainstorming with conversationally triggered visual thinking stimuli . 103 – 106 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1718918 . 1718938 [ 69 ] Hao - Chuan Wang , Tsai - Yen Li , Carolyn P Rosé , Chun - Chieh Huang , and Chun - Yen Chang . 2006 . VIBRANT : A brainstorming agent for computer supported creative problem solving . In International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems . Springer , 787 – 789 . [ 70 ] Yang Wei , Honglei Guo , Jinmao Wei , and Zhong Su . 2019 . Revealing Semantic Structures of Texts : Multi - grained Framework for Automatic Mind - map Generation . ( 2019 ) . [ 71 ] Annekatrin Wetzstein and Winfried Hacker . 2004 . Reﬂective verbalization improves solutions – the effects of question - based reﬂection in design problem solving . Applied Cognitive Psychology 18 , 2 ( 2004 ) , 145 – 156 . [ 72 ] Wikipedia contributors . 2019 . List of mind - mapping software — Wikipedia , The Free Encyclopedia . ( 2019 ) . https : / / en . wikipedia . org / w / index . php ? title = List _ of _ concept - _ and _ mind - mapping _ software & oldid = 927307981 [ Online ; accessed 20 - December - 2019 ] . [ 73 ] Jason Wilkins , Jaakko Järvi , Ajit Jain , Gaurav Kejriwal , Andruid Kerne , and Vijay Gumudavelly . 2015 . EvolutionWorks . Springer , Cham , 213 – 230 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 22723 - 8 { _ } 17 [ 74 ] Cheryl L . Willis and Susan L . Miertschin . 2005 . Mind Tools for Enhancing Thinking and Learning Skills . In Proceedings of the 6th Conference on Information Technology Education ( SIGITE ’05 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 249 – 254 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1095714 . 1095772 [ 75 ] Cheryl L . Willis and Susan L . Miertschin . 2006 . Mind Maps As Active Learning Tools . J . Comput . Sci . Coll . 21 , 4 ( April 2006 ) , 266 – 272 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 1127389 . 1127438 [ 76 ] Ali Reza Zolfaghari , Davood Fathi , and Masoud Hashemi . 2011 . Role of Creative Questioning in the Process of Learning and Teaching . Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 30 ( 2011 ) , 2079 – 2082 . [ 77 ] Fritz Zwicky . 1969 . Discovery , invention , research through the morphological approach . ( 1969 ) .