INTERACTIONS . ACM . ORG JULY – AUGUST 2016 INTERACTIONS 65 times . We started in February 2015 and began recruiting as soon as we received approval in May 2015 . Initially we wanted to run a summer program to get the children well versed in co - design before the school year . However , due to the delay in IRB and children already having a busy summer , we had to cancel plans for the summer training . Running the early sessions . Because we were unable to run a summer session , we spent most of Fall 2015 trying to develop relationships and co - design skills with the children . We highly recommend running summer sessions to avoid some of our initial startup problems . Early sessions of KidsTeam UW in Fall 2015 were very difficult because we had four inexperienced parties : the children , their parents , the researchers , and the director . First , as with many new PD participants , none of the children had any idea what co - design was . Even though we explained it in detail to children and parents , some children thought co - design was a computer programming course . Until they had direct experience with the techniques , it was extremely hard for them to grasp the ideas we presented . The children’s lack of familiarity with co - design combined with a group of unfamiliar adults and children made early collaborative efforts tough for all involved . In the early weeks , we had to reacquaint the children and the adults , as well as reintroduce the design techniques and routines . Since KidsTeam UW is different than home or school , we also had to provide constant reminders about our expectations . For instance , adult P articipatory design ( PD ) with children is not a new method within design research ; it has been used with children of all ages ( e . g . , [ 1 ] ) , abilities ( e . g . , [ 2 ] ) , and contexts ( e . g . , [ 3 ] ) to create new designs for children . A lot of great designs , from Nick . com’s Do Not Touch Button to the International Digital Children’s Library ( childrenslibrary . org ) , have relied on bringing children to the forefront of design . However , there is often a hidden unglamorous process in starting and running these teams . Researchers have studied some of the difficulties of co - design [ 4 ] , but there is a lot that isn’t covered about the heavy and messy startup costs . Knudtzon et al . outlined a case study of starting the first three months of an intergenerational co - design group at the University of Maryland ( UMD ) [ 5 ] , but there are a lot of nitty gritty details that need further elaboration . Here , we will provide advice , tips , frustrations , strategies , and revelations on what it’s like to start your own co - design group with children . Jason ( lead author ) started at the University of Maryland’s ( UMD ) KidsTeam group as a doctoral student . After apprenticing from 2010 to 2014 at UMD , he brought his insight and experience to the University of Washington to create KidsTeam UW . KidsTeam UW focuses on co - designing with children ( ages 6 to 12 ) new technologies for children [ 1 ] . From October 2015 to February 2016 , we engaged in 25 after - school design sessions ( 90 minutes each ) , twice a week . KidsTeam UW is currently made up of undergraduates , master’s students , doctoral students , post - doctoral scholars , and professors . We spent our afternoons with four boys and six girls co - designing numerous projects , meticulously documenting the process . Internal review boards , recruitment , and the summer months . The early months of a project can be a major scramble to make sure everything is in order . For any U . S . institution interested in publishing findings in co - design , an institutional review board ( IRB ) must approve the design and ethics of the research . We cannot stress enough the arduous nature of this process , especially since the project required frequent close contact between children and adults on our campus , without parental oversight . We recommend working very closely and early with your ethics boards to make sure issues such as child safety , privacy , legal copyright , and recruitment are in order . We had many extensive back - and - forth correspondences with IRB . The time it takes to get IRB approval can greatly impact your research timeline , particularly recruitment Insights → Building an intergenerational co - design group is hard and messy work . → In new intergenerational co - design groups , both children , parents , researchers , and even the director are learning and adjusting to this new group . This affects how collaborations and design occur . Jason C . Yip , Lindsey Arnold , Alysse Gallo , Kung Jin Lee , Caroline Pitt , Kiley Sobel , and Sijin Chen , University of Washington , Seattle How to Survive Creating an Intergenerational Co - design Group In this forum we celebrate research that helps to successfully bring the benefits of computing technologies to children , older adults , people with disabilities , and other populations that are often ignored in the design of mass - marketed products . — Juan Pablo Hourcade , Editor F O R U M U N I V E R S A L I N T E R A C T I O N S INTERACTIONS . ACM . ORG 66 INTERACTIONS JULY – AUGUST 2016 F O R U M U N I V E R S A L I N T E R A C T I O N S The first sessions of KidsTeam UW were both messy and a learning experience for all . facilitators are not teachers ; we had to remind children that they too had the authority to create new ideas . We are also not direct peers , so on various occasions we asked the children not to be so playful with us ( e . g . , touching our hair , grabbing onto us ) . During this adjustment period , parents are also learning about KidsTeam UW , as well as figuring out how to carpool and get their children to the university . The adult researchers also varied in how much experience they had working with children . Because every adult was new to co - design , we were not always sure how to approach challenging situations with the children . In our field notes , many volunteers indicated feeling conflicted about developing equal partnerships with children , but still needing to implement rules while respecting us and the space . For instance , in the early weeks the children tested boundaries , such as taking snacks from each other and causing mischief ( e . g . , roughhousing , kicking others ) . We quickly realized the need to institute firm guidelines to control the room , but without being overly restrictive . We also learned that aspects of the room decoration were simply too distracting ; for example , having colorful mats on the ground provided too much distraction for the children . They would grab the mats and use them to hit each other . We had to quickly shift our process to not include mats on the ground anymore . On the opposite end of the spectrum , some activities made the children withdrawn and shy . We needed to help children present their ideas to the group . In the beginning , a significant amount of scaffolding and prompting was necessary to get the children to open up and share their thoughts . Children were learning how to give a presentation , and their inexperience showed , with some speaking too long while others were very shy and said only one or two sentences . Here , too , rules must be enforced to make sure everyone gets a chance to speak and to contribute . Finally , though the lead author ( director ) had co - design experience , there was subtle overarching knowledge he was in the process of learning . For example , figuring out the flow of a design technique and managing the progression of a co - design activity is very different when you learn and assist with the process as a graduate student compared with when you have to oversee everything as a head researcher . Overall , the best advice we can give is that in the early weeks a lot of patience must be developed and a lot of grace must be given . Every team has a different flow and different personalities . You may have to try a variety of things to see what works best for your group . It also takes time to develop personal relationships with the children . Issues with collaboration and risk - taking . Collaboration is the single most challenging aspect of running KidsTeam UW . At the outset , we needed to spend time getting to know the children and understanding their group dynamics . This was an important process for determining co - design activity groups because randomly pairing children together does not ensure they will work well together . For instance , our youngest child was a six - year - old girl and our oldest was a tween girl who just turned 12 . Their co - design pairing did not always work well since the oldest child often became irritated with the younger one ' s behavior . Two children ( boy , age 7 ; girl , age 7 ) in our group were friends prior to KidsTeam UW . We had hoped their prior relationship might encourage collaboration . However , both children would be rambunctious , often playing around together rather than focusing on the co - design task . In fact , this pairing caused the normally shy girl to become somewhat more outgoing and distracted . Collaboration with adults is tricky too . Some of the adults focused more on asking the children to design but forgot that they too have a role in the design process . It can be difficult to get out of the authoritative mindset and treat the children as collaborators . The adults needed to stop trying so hard to get the children to focus and instead start developing their own designs . The children would often see what the adults were doing and get interested and refocus on the task at hand , adding ideas to what the adults started in the prototypes . This type of scaffolding can be incredibly helpful once the team gets used to it . Last , even though co - design is meant to encourage risk - taking , some children have trouble extending their imaginations . In one case , a child ( boy , age 9 ) continuously made cubes for his designs ( e . g . , paper prototypes as cubes , INTERACTIONS . ACM . ORG JULY – AUGUST 2016 INTERACTIONS 67 Proc . of the International Conference on Interaction Design and Children . ACM , New York , 2003 , 51 – 58 . Jason Yip is an assistant professor at the Information School in the University of Washington . He is a senior research fellow at the Joan Ganz Cooney Center at Sesame Workshop . His research examines how technologies can support parents and children learning together . → jcyip @ uw . edu Lindsey Arnold is a graduate student and researcher with KidsTeam UW . She holds an M . A . in counseling psychology and is enrolled in the University of Washington’s human centered design and engineering master’s program . She is passionate about making a positive impact in children’s lives via psychology , user - centered design , and social robotics . → lindseya @ uw . edu Alysse Gallo is a master ' s student in the human centered design and engineering program at the University of Washington and a researcher with KidsTeam UW . She holds a B . A . in practice of art from UC Berkeley and has a background in animation . She is fascinated by the intersection of human - centered design and technology . → angallo02 @ gmail . com Kung Jin Lee is a graduate student in library and information science at the University of Washington . As a member of KidsTeam UW , she has researched in designing new technology for children . Currently her focus is on implementing new technology for children in the library . She has also been doing research in emergency information management and metadata . → kjl26 @ uw . edu Caroline Pitt is a Ph . D . student at the University of Washington Information School . Her current research interests focus on how technology can be used in informal educational experiences to engage communities and connect to broader contexts . → pittc @ uw . edu Kiley Sobel is a Ph . D . student in human centered design and engineering at the University of Washington . She is interested in human - computer interaction , child - computer interaction , families and media , and inclusion . Her current research focuses on understanding technology’s role in helping kids with and without disabilities play together . → ksobel @ uw . edu Sijin Chen is an undergraduate in the informatics program with a concentration in HCI at the University of Washington . She is interested in research related to user experience , mainly focused on the younger generation . → sijinc @ uw . edu drawings as cubes ) because this is something he was already comfortable making . He talked about other very interesting concepts but did not build upon them . For this child , it may take a longer period with the co - design group before he feels comfortable taking risks and building prototypes using new and different ideas . Impact of design on children . Older , more established co - design teams may be able to show the changes in the prototypes quickly ; and children more experienced in co - design may recall the impact they had on a prior design project and share their enthusiasm with others . However , early co - design teams are often in the beginning stages of the design process and thus may be unable to show off the influence the children have on a product design . In our case , because both KidsTeam UW and our projects ( and collaborators’ projects ) are brand new , it was difficult for us to show the direct impact children were making on our designs and get them excited about the influence they had . It was not until February 2016 ( four months after the first KidsTeam UW ) that we were able to show changes to a particular design based on children ' s feedback . Needless to say , having the children see the direct changes they influenced eventually did help to support and excite the team . Some tips and advice . Overall , starting a new co - design group is difficult , but it is worth the effort . We conclude with some brief advice and tips from our early implementation experience . First , the learning curve is very steep , and every stakeholder is involved in this curve . New collaborators will also experience these growing pains . We highly recommend recording everything in field notes and videos for later reflection . Doing this allowed us to have concrete data to review and learn from . We found it is also necessary to debrief quickly after every session to gather thoughts and lessons learned . Second , every co - design group has its own dynamics , so pay close attention to how the children interact , not only with each other but with the adults as well . Not every adult can be paired with every child initially . Some children may have to be paired with adults who can handle stronger personalities and defuse difficult situations . Adults also provide scaffolding that can help children reach new heights of design understanding . Third , always remember that children are intelligent and surprisingly astute . They both want to impress you and push the limits of the rules and boundaries . Even though it is a design partnership , clear rules and boundaries must be set to establish routines and culture quickly . Children will pick up on your emotions and reactions , so confidence and clarity are key for good communication and collaboration . Finally , things will go wrong all the time in completely unpredictable ways ! Everyone will have bad days . The key is to be incredibly flexible and patient . Though we explained that routines should be established quickly , rapid changes are also necessary to adapt to surprises . These changes may include alterations to how the room is laid out , changes to logistics in the flow of activities , and even tweaks to established design techniques . Endnotes 1 . Druin , A . The role of children in the design of new technology . Behaviour and Information Technology 21 , 1 ( 2002 ) , 1 – 25 . 2 . Foss , E . , Guha , M . L . , Papadatos , P . , Clegg , T . , Yip , J . , and Walsh , G . Cooperative inquiry extended : Creating technology with middle school students with learning differences . Journal of Special Education Technology 28 , 3 ( 2013 ) , 33 – 46 . 3 . Yip , J . C . , Clegg , T . , Bonsignore , E . , Gelderblom , H . , Rhodes , E . , and Druin , A . Brownies or bags of stuff : Domain expertise in cooperative inquiry with children . Proc . of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children . ACM , New York , 2013 , 201 – 210 . 4 . Van Mechelen , M . , Zaman , B . , Laenen , A . , and Vanden Abeele , V . Challenging group dynamics in participatory design with children : Lessons from social interdependence theory . Proc . of the 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children . ACM , New York , 2015 , 219 – 228 . 5 . Knudtzon , K . , Druin , A . , Kaplan , N . , Summers , K . , Chisik , Y . , Kulkarni , R . , Moulthrop , S . , Weeks , H . , and Bederson , B . B . Starting an intergenerational technology design team : A case study . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 2933395 © 2016 ACM 1072 - 5520 / 16 / 07 $ 15 . 00